I 


GOVERNMENT OF D’DIA 
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY* OF INDIA 


CENTRAL 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 


ACCESSION NO. 7-4 S56 
CALL No. 854 1 Ccrm 






A i 

COMPREHENSIVE 
HISTORY OF INDIA 

IN TWELVE VOLUMES 


VOLUME TWO 

The Maury as & Satavahanas 

325 b.c. — a d. 300 




'A 

COMPREHENSIVE 
HISTORY OF INDIA 

VOLUME TWO 

The Mauryas & Satavahanas 

325 b.c. — a.d. 300 


Edited by 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 


Published under the auspices of 

THE INDIAN HISTORY CONGRESS 
and 

THE BHARATIYA IIIHAS PAR1SHAD 

ORIENT LONGMANS 


BOMBAY 


CALCUTTA 


MADRAS 



< 

/ 

ORIENT LONGMANS PRIVATE LTD. 

17 CHITTARANJAlf AVENUE, CALCUTTA 13 
NJCOL ROAD, BALLARD ESTATE, BOMBAY 1 
36 a MOUNT ROAD, MADRAS 2 
KANSON HOUSE, 24/1 ASAF ALI ROAD, NEW DELHI 1 
OUNFOUNDRY ROAD. HYDERABAD 1. 

17 NAZIMUDDIN ROAD, DACCA 

LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO. LTD. 

6 & 7 CLIFFORD STREET, LONDON W. 1 
AND AT 

NEW YORK, TORONTO, CAPETOWN AND MELBOURNE 


First published December, 1957 







PRINTED IN INDIA 

BY S. C. GHOSE AT CALCUTTA PRESS PRIVATE LTD. 
1 WELLINGTON SQUARE, CALCUTTA 13 
AND BY THE SWASTIKA PRESS LTD. 
CALCUTTA 13 



EDITOR’S PREFACE 


'T'HE scope of this volume and the main features of its content have 
-*• been described in the Introduction. This Preface is meant primarily 
to serve as a grateful acknowledgement of the invaluable help I have 
received from many sources in the preparation of this work. 

I must first mention the different learned contributors of chapters who 
not only sent their chapters in time and revised them as and when 
necessary, but have waited patiently for some years to see their contribu- 
tions in print; Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar, Dr. P. C. Bagchi and Prof. 
S. Vaiyapuri Pillai, it is my sad duty to record, have passed away in the 
interval, and the further work of revision and preparation of their 
chapters for the press therefore fell on me. 

The sources of the illustrations are indicated in detail on the Plates. 
The Ministry of Education and the Archaeological Department of the 
Union have earned our deepest thanks by the supply of the largest num- 
bers of these illustrations; other Archaeological Departments of the 
different States and the Museums of the country have also been very 
helpful. The Cambridge University Press has sanctioned the reproduc- 
tion of two maps from Tarn’s The Greeks in Bactria and India ; 
Mr. C. Sivaramamurti of the Indian Museum (Calcutta) has given 
unstinted help in the choice and reproduction of coins. I am greatly 
indebted to all of them for their co-operation without which the produc- 
tion of the volume would not have been possible. 

I owe also more than I can find words to express to the advice I have 
received from the publishing staff of Orient Longmans and particularly 
to the invaluable academic guidance given by Mr. R. A. Dutch, o.b.e., 
i.c.s. (Rtd). 


Madras, 3 December, 1956 


K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 




CONTENTS 



INTRODUCTION 



Prof. K. A. N. Sastri 

xv 

I 

THE FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYAN EMPIRE 



Dr. R. K. Mookerji 

1 

II 

ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 



Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar 

20 

III 

GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART OF THE MAURYAN EMPIRE 


Prof. K. A. N. Sastri and Dr. P. C. Bagchi 

50 

IV 

POST-MAURY AN DYNASTIES (184 B.C. TO A.D. 200) 



Prof. Jagannath 

94 

V 

MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH, MONARCHICAL AND 
NON-MONARCHICAL 



Prof. K.A.N. Sastri 

116 

VI 

THE BACTR1AN GREEKS IN INDIA 



Dr. J. N. Banerjea 

138 

VII 

THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 



Dr. J. N. Banerjea 

186 

VIII 

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE KUSHANA POWER 



Dr. J. N. Banerjea and Prof. Jagannath 

222 

IX 

THE SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 



Dr. J.N. Banerjea 

263 

X 

THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 



Dr. K. Gopalachari t 

293 

XI 

THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS ( C . A.D. 200-300) 



Dr. D. C. Sircar 

328 

XII 

POLITICAL ORGANISATION (POST-MAURYAN) 



Dr. U. N. Ghoshal 

339 

XIII 

RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 



Prof. K. A. N. Sastri, Prof. R. B. Joshi, Dr. P. C. 
Bagchi, Dr. J. N. Banerjea and 
Prof. M. Yamunachariar 

355 

XIV 

ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (POST-MAURYAN) 



Dr. U.N. Ghoshal 

430 

XV 

SOCIAL LIFE 



Dr. u. N. Ghoshal 

458 



CONTENTS 


XVI SOUTH INDIA — PART I 

Prof. K.A.N. Sastri 


XX LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

Dr. P. C. Bagchi and Dr. V. Raghavan 

XXI HISTORY OF THE TAMIL LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

Prof. Vaiyapuri Pillai 

XXII ART AND ARCHITECTURE — NORTHERN INDIA 

Mr. S. K. Saraswati 

XXIII ART AND ARCHITECTURE — SOUTHERN INDIA 

Mr. K. R. Srinivasan 

XXIV CULTURAL AND COLONIAL EXPANSION: CENTRAL ASIA 
CHINA & THE FAR EAST 

Dr. P. C. Bagchi 

XXV COINAGE 

Dr. J. N. Banerjea 


page 29, folio heading for Administrations 

168, line 5 for Indo-Scythans 

306, line 3 from bottom „ nad 

336, f.n. 7 line 5 after p. insert 311 

399, f.n. 1 for L.A. XII 

509, line 5 before fully insert is 

514, line 6 for adddnad 

565, line 20 „ peals 

751, line 25 „ trace 

761, line 9 „ panels 


read Administration 
„ Indo-Scythians 

„ LA. xli 


addressed 



ILLUSTRATIONS 
The plates follow page 844 


I— VIII. 

IX. 

X. 
XL 
XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 
XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 
XXII. 
XXIII. 

XXIV. 


XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 


Bactrian and Indo-Greek coins 
Monograms 

Bharhut. Railing sculptures 

Bharhut. 1. Sirima Devata. 2. Sudarsana Yakshini 
Bharhut. Medallion 
Bodh Gaya. Square railing 
Bodh Gaya. Railing pillars 
Mathura. Architrave support 
Barabar near Gaya. Facade of Lomasa Rishi cave 
1. Bulandibagh. 2. Kumrahar. Pillar sites of palace 
Taxila. 1. Dharmarajika stupa. 2. Kunala Monastery 
Taxila. 1. Plan of Pippala Monastery. 2. Plan of Jaulian 
Monastery 

Sanchi. Stupa II. l.A general view. 2. An inner view of the 
outer railing 

Sanchi. Stupa I. View from north-east 
Sanchi. Stupa I. Northern gateway, front view 
Sanchi. Stupa I. Northern gateway. 1. Architrave. 2. Back 
of middle section 

Sanchi. Stupa I. 1. Eastern gateway, front. 2. Northern 
gateway, eastern jamb, Yaksha. 3. Eastern gateway, 
front middle lintel 

Sanchi. Stupa I. Eastern gateway, front and back view of 
bracket figure 

Sanchi. Stupa I. 1. Middle section, architrave. 2. South efn 
gateway 

Sanchi Stupa I. Western gateway 

Sanchi Stupa I. Western gateway, back view. 1. Top and 
middle lintels. 2. Middle and bottom lintels 
Dhauli. Elephant 

Udayagiri. 1. General view. 2. Sculptural frieze 
Udayagiri. Ranl-gumpha plans 

1. Kolhua. Lion pillar. 2. Lauriya Nandangarh. Lion 
pillar 

1. Sanchi. Lion capital. 2. Rampurva. Bull capital 
Rampurva. Lion capital. 2. Sankisa. Elephant capital 
Sarnith. Lion capital, elephant and bull on abacus 
Sarnath. Lion capital, horse and lion on abacus 
1. Parkham. Yaksha. 2. Patna. Yaksha 



ILLUSTRATIONS 


XXXVIII. 
XXXIX. 
XL. 
XLI. 
XLII. 
XLIII. 
XLIV. 
XLV. 
XLVI. 
XL VII. 

XLVIII. 

XLIX. 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

Lin. 

LIV. 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXIT. 

LXIII. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

LXVIII. 

LXIX. 


1. Besnagar. Yakihinl. 2. Lohanipur. Jina 
Besnagar. Yakshini, front and back views 
Pawaya. Yaksha, front and back views 
Didarganj. Yakshini 
Samath. Bodhisattva image 

Mathura. 1 . Inscribed Buddha Statue. 2. Slab from Holi gate 
Mathura. Ayagapata 

Mathura. 1. Bacchanalian scene. 2. Yaksha 
Bhuteswar. Yakshiriis 

Mathura. Inscribed Kanishka image. Lauriyan-Tangai 
headless inscribed Buddha 

Mathura. 1. Yakshini, Curzon Museum. 2. Gandhara. 

Miniature votive Stupa 
Pataliputra. Terracotta figurines 
1. Tamluk. 2. Dinajpur. Terracotta figurines 
Ghantasala. Plan and section of the Stupa 
Nagarjunakonfia. The Maha Stupa and its plan 
Ramatlrtham. Plan and section of Buddhist monastery 
Guntupalle. Plan and elevation of the stone built Stupa 
Pathardi (Nasik), Pandulena. 1. Decoration on Chaitya 
window. 2. Miniature bhuta ganas bearing the abacus 
1. Bhaja. Facade of Chaitya cave. 2. Kondane. Facade 
of Chaitya hall 

1. Bedsa. Facade of Chaitya cave showing pillar. 2 Junnar. 
Manmoda Chaitya cave 

1. Junnar. Cave No. 48, The Stupa inside the Chaitya. 

2. Karle Facade of the Chaitya 
Karle. Chaitya cave, interior of the hall 

Karle. Chaitya cave, 1. Sculptured panels on south wall of 
verandah. 2. Details of pillars 

1 . Bhaja. The SOrya and the Indra panels of the doorway of 
the Vihara. 2. Kanheri. Details of pillars 
1. Kanheri. Chaitya cave showing the huge lion pillars. 

2. Karle. Chaitya cave, details of sculptures on outer wall 
Karle. 1. Sculpture and inscribed panels. 2. Dancing 
couple in Chaitya cave 
Kanheri. Sculptured panels of couples 
1. Gudimallam. Therioanthropic sculpture of Linga. 

2. Amaravati. Vihara round a Vriksha Chaitya 
1. Amaravati. Man and boy. 2. Jaggayyapeta. Chaitya 
(temple) type bas-relief 

1. Jagayyapeta. Chakravarti Mandhata. 2. Amaravati. 

Casing slab depicting Buddha 
Amaravati. 1. The story of Kavi Kumara. 2. Terraced 
building 

Amaravati. The Mahila-mukha Jataka 



ILLUSTRATIONS 


xi 


LXX. 

LXXI. 

LXXII. 

LXXIII. 

LXXIV. 

LXXV. 

LXXVI. 

LXXVII. 

LXXVIII. 

LXXIX. 

LXXX. 

LXXXI. 

LXXXII. 

LXXXIII. 

LXXXIV. 

LXXXV. 

LXXXVI. 

LXXXVII. 

LXXXVIII. 


Amaravati. The Mittavindaka Jataka 
Amaravati. Division of Buddha’s relics 
Amaravati. 1. The Nalagiri Jataka. 2. Court scene 
Amaravati. 1. The story of Udayana and his queens. 
2. Chaitya slab 

Nagarjunakonda. The gift of earth 
Nagarjunakonda. The Mandhata Jataka 
Nagarjunakonda. 1. Pillar showing battle scene. 2. The 
Andhrasundari 

1. The carved moon-stone. 2. Goli. Two last scenes from 
Vessantra Jataka 

Nagarjunakonda. 1. Scythian soldier. Kanehuki. 2. Figure 
of Dionysus 

Ajanta. Cave No. 9, a group of votaries (Nagas) 

Ajanta. The Buddha and a group of votaries (Nagas) 

Ajanta. A group of votaries approaching the Stupa 

Ajanta. Cave No. 9, the Stupa 

Mihintale. Kantaka Chaitya 

Mihintale. Eastern V ahalkaqla 

Mihintale. Stele of Kantaka Chaitya 

Mihintale. Stele of Kantaka Chaitya 

Abhayagiri. Dagaba 

1. Abhayagiri. Dagaba Stele (broken). 2. Anuradhapura, 
Stele of the Southern Vahalkada, Jetavanarama Dagaba 


MAPS 


The Mauryan Empire facing page 

Minor States of the North 
Western Asia in the Hellenistic age 
Gandhara and Paropamisadae 
Foreign Kingdoms: Sakas, Kushapas, Northern 
and Western Satraps 

The Dominions of the Andhras and Western 
Kshatrapas c. A.D. 150 
Ceylon 


48 

136 

184 , 

248 

288 

320 

600 




ABBREVIATIONS 


ASIA. 

ABORI. 

AHD. 

AO. 

AIHT. 

Ait. Br. 

AI. 

ASCAR. 

ASIAR. 

ASWI. 

BDCRl. 

BEFEO. 

BG. 

Bhag 

Bhandarkar or 
Bh. List 
BMC A WK. 


BMCCAI. 

BMQ. 

Breloer 

Br. Up. 

BSOS. 

CA. 

CCIM. 

CJS. 

CHI. 

CII. 

DKA. 

EC. 


FUF. 

GOS. 

HAR. 

HAS. 
HC. 
H&F 

Hultzsch 


IHQ. 

JA. 


JAHRS. 

JAOS. 

JASB. 

JBBRAS. 

JB(0)RS. 

Jr. Dept. Lett. 

or J.D.L. 
JGIS. 


Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology, (Kern Institute, 
Leyden). 

Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 
Ancient History of Deccan by G. Jouveau-Dubreuil 
Acta Orientalia 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition (Pargiter) 

Aitareya Brdhmana 

Ancient India. ( Bulletin of the Archaeological Survey of India) 
Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of Ceylon 
Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India 
Archaeological Survey of Western India 
Bulletin of the Deccan College Research Institute 
Bulletin de I'EcoIe Francaise d’ Extreme Orient 
Bombay Gazetteer 
Bhagavati Vaijahapannati 

List of Inscriptions in Northern India ( App . to EL XIX— XXIII) 
British Museum Catalogue of the Coins of the Andhra Dynasty, 
Western Kshatrapa Dynasty, the Traiku(aka Dynasty, and the 
Bodhi Dynasty (Rapson) 

Catalogue of Coins of Ancient India in British Museum (Allan) 
British Museum Quarterly 
Breloer: Kautilya Studien 
Bfihaddranyaka Upanishad 

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, London. 
Ceylon Antiquary. 

Catalogue of Coins in Indian Museum, Calcutta, Vol. I (Smith). 

Ceylon Journal of Science 

Cambridge History of India 

Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum 

Dynasties of the Kali Age (Pargiter) 

Epigraphica Carnatica 

Early Dynasties of Andhradeia (B. V. Krishna Rao) 

Early History of the Andhra Country (K. Gopalachari). 
Epigraphia Indica 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics 

Epigraphia Zeylanica • 

Forschungen und Fortschritte 

Gaikwad Oriental Series * 

Annual Report of the Archaeological Department of Hyderabad 
State 

Hyderabad Archaeological Series 
Harsha Charitra 

Hamilton and Falconer’s translation of Strabo’s Geography 

CII. Vol. I (New Edition) Inscriptions of Asoka, (ed.) Hultzsch. 

Indian Antiquary 

Indian Culture 

Indian Historical Quarterly 

Journal Asiatique 

Journal of the Andhra Historical Research Society 

Journal of the American Oriental Society 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 

Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 

Journal of the Bihar ( and Orissa) Research Society 

Journal of the Department of Letters, Calcutta University 
Journal of the Greater India Society 



/ 


xiv 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


JIH. 

JISOA. 

JNSI. 

JRAS. 

JRASB. 

JRAS. CB. 

JUPHS. 

KA. 


M. 

Malavika 

MAR. 

MASI. 

Mbh. 

Mil(J)n. 

MV. 

Raya. 

NC. 

NHIP. 

NIA. 


Per. 

PAIOC. 

PASB. 

PHAI. 

PIHC. 

PTS. 

PMC. 

RAA. 

RE. 

Records 
Sat. Br. 
SB A tV. 
SBE. 


Journal of Indian History 

Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art 

Journal of the Numismatic Society of India 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal 

Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 

Journal of the United Provinces Historical Society 

Kautiliiya Arthasastra 

Kautiyla Studien (Breloer) 

La Legende de VEmpereur A (oka (Pryluski) 

List of Brahmi Inscriptions 

Manusmyiti (Manava Dharma Sastra. Manu Samhita) 
Malavikagnimitram 

Annual Report of the Mysore Archaeological Department 
Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India 
Mahabhdrata 
Milindapanha 

Mahavarhsa, (ed.) Geiger; also Eng. tr. by the same 

Raya Dhammakahaya 

Numismatic Chronicle 

New History of the Indian People 

New Indian Antiquary 

Paikuli, Monument and the Inscription of the early History of the 
Sassanian Empire (Herzfeld) 

Periplus of the Erythrean Sea 
Proceedings of the All-India Oriental Conference 
Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 
Political History of Ancient India (Raychaudhury) 

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress 
Pali Text Society 

Catalogue of Coins in the Panjab Museum, Lahore. 

Revue des Arts Asiatiques , Annales du Musee Guimet, Paris. 
Rock Edicts of Asoka. 

Southern Buddhist Records (I-tsing) 

Satapatha Brahmana 

Sitzungberichte der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschaften 
Sacred Books of the East 
Select Inscriptions (Sircar) 

Taittriya Samhita 
University of Ceylon Review 
Yajnavalkya Smyiti 

Year-Book of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 
Zeitschrift der Morgenlandischen Gesselschaft 
Zeitschrift fur Indologie und Iranis tik 



INTRODUCTION 


'The six centuries covered by this volume witnessed vast and momentous 
A changes in the fortunes of this ancient land. At the commencement of 
the period, the aryanization of the whole of India and Ceylon had been 
completed and the norm of Indo-Aryan civilization discovered in all 
its essentials. The impulse of aryanization was, however, not exhausted; 
it was preparing to extend over fresh lands across the seas. Meanwhile 
India had undergone a new experience. Alexander had come and gone; 
his stay in India followed by his early death was far too brief to produce 
any permanent results. But the blows which he stiuck left the martial 
republics of North-Western and Western India weak and exhausted, and 
to that extent rendered easy the fulfilment of che imperial career on which 
Magadha had entered under the Nandas. 

The expansion and consolidation of the empire of Magadha by the 
Mauryas dominates the scene for a century in the beginning, and the long 
cherished dream of universal monarchy ( sdmrajya ) becomes a reality. 
The genius of Kautilya, a master in the fields of political theory and 
action, builds up a new system of imperial administration at once bureau- 
cratic and paternal, efficient and adequate to the growing needs of the 
rapidly changing conditions of life. The towering moral personality of 
Aioka hastens the spread of Buddhism and earns the respect of the civi- 
lized world for India. The live contact maintained by India in this age 
with foreign lands, particularly in the west, is unmistakably reflected in 
Mauryan architecture and sculpture as well as in court ceremonial and 
the machinery of government. 

Then the Mauryan empire rapidly declines undej the weak successors 
of Asoka. In Northern India the Sungas become heirs to an attenuate 
empire and their sway is contested by Greek invaders from across the 
Hindukush whose inroads cut deep into the Ganges valley for a time, 
and who soon carve out kingdoms for themselves in the North-West. 
By the side of the Sungas or in subordination to them many smaller 
states, some of them republics, continue to lead a more or less separate 
existence and the history of these states, though full of gaps, is not without 
interest. On the east coast Kalinga declares its independence. In the 
Deccan the empire of the fsatavahanas which rises soon after the 
demise of Asoka maintains its political unity almost to ihe end of our 
period. 

In the wake of the Greeks followed other foreigners — the Sakas, 
Pahlavas, and Kushanas. The Kushanas built up a dominion which 
lasted for a considerable time and stretched from Central Asia to the 
heart of Hindusthan, and Kanishka’s reign is second in importance only 
to that of Asoka in the history of Buddhism and of the spread of Indian 



xvi 


A COMPREHENSIVE HISTORY OF INDIA 


influences abroad. The downfall of the Kushana empire is brought about 
by a resurgence of indigenous rule in the third century; once more 
republican states come to the fore, and it is out of the political conditions 
brought into existence by this revival that the Gupta empire takes its shape 
in the fourth century a.d. 

In the Deccan, the Satavahanas had to wage long and exhausting wars 
with the Saka satraps of Western India who established one of the most 
enduring foreign kingdoms in India which was terminated only in the 
reign of the Gupta emperor Chandragupta II. Saka and Kushana rulers, 
however, soon developed a love for the gods and the language of the land 
of their adoption, and it may not be quite correct to look upon their rule 
as alien in its character throughout the period of its existence. The 
earliest Sanskrit inscriptions are those of the Western Satraps, and good 
reason has been shown for holding that the classical Sanskrit drama as 
we know it gained much from their patronage. The apparent social 
breakdown due to the foreign inroads in fact contained the seeds of a 
great renewal of literature, religion and art. The disruption of the 
Satavahana empire in the third century a.d. led to the rise of a number 
of minor dynasties, and the Deccan does not regain the political unity 
it thus lost until the time of the Chalukyas of Badami three centuries 
later. 

The Tamil country and Ceylon constituted more or less separate and 
self-contained worlds; their history and culture are, however, important 
in many ways and have received more detailed attention than is usual. 

The political vicissitudes that followed the fall of the Mauryan empire, 
and have been briefly sketched above, appear to have had little effect on 
the cultural life of the people. Religion, always a dominant interest in 
ancient Indian life, adapted itself to the changing conditions. Though 
for various reasons Buddhism attracts more notice, Jainism and Hinduism 
flourished by its side, and the code of mutual respect among the different 
cjeeds set forth so eloquently by Asoka in his twelfth Rock Edict may be 
said to have been largely followed in practice. The dominant notes in 
the religious movements of the time were the revival of the Vedic religion 
of sacrifice after Asoka, the emergence of the worship of Siva and Vishnu 
as the foremost deities of the Hindu pantheon, the assimilation of Hindu- 
ism and Buddhism in ritual, theology and philosophy, and the exaltation 
of bhakti which led to the creation of artistic cult images and suitable 
receptacles for them. The rise of theistic devotional cults has been plau- 
sibly held to represent (at least in part) the emergence of pre- Aryan reli- 
gious modes and practices, though these were transformed a great deal 
under the influence of Brahmanical religion and philosophy. 

Agriculture and industry prospered, and there was brisk trade along 
several well-established routes within the country. Foreign trade, over- 
land and maritime, at first with the Hellenistic world, and later with the 
Roman Empire and the Far East, brought much gain to the people and 
contributed to a greater knowledge of India in other lands. Cities grew 



INTRODUCTION 


xvii 


in size and number all over the country, city life became more diversified 
and colourful under the touch of varied influences, and port towns on the 
coast attracted to themselves people of different nationalities and deve- 
loped into vast emporia of a cosmopolitan character. The transition 
from a natural economy to a money economy was helped by the large- 
scale issue of punch-marked coins at first, and later by more or less close 
imitations of Greek and Roman models, and sometimes by the active use 
of the Roman imperial currency itself, particularly in the South. The 
admixture of foreign elements in the population, and the exchanges in 
dress, manners and outlook that flowed from it, are reflected in the epigra- 
phy and literature of the period, and it seems that on the whole the social 
exclusiveness so characteristic of the ‘caste-system’ as we find it in later 
times was less in evidence in our period. The language of the people was 
undergoing changes under the influence of local causes and the impact 
of foreign nationalities, and the literary idiom both in the classical Sans- 
krit and Prakrit languages was tending to become different from everyday 
speech. In the extreme south Tamil literature had its first flowering under 
the assiduous patronage of princes and chieftains and a literary Academy 
set up by the Pandyan rulers of Madurai. Thanks to the general economic 
prosperity, and the currency of high ideals regarding the use of wealth 
accepted by the flourishing princes, nobles and merchants of the period, 
there was a remarkable output of noble architectural monuments and 
figural and decorative sculpture, and despite the ravages of time and man, 
enough of it has survived to enable the critical student to form a fairly 
close estimate of its quality and of the influences that played upon it from 
time to time. As already indicated, the movement which spread Indian 
civilization in Central and South-Eastern Asia had its beginnings in this 
period, and though our knowledge of the subject is still in its formative 
stages, a tentative account of the movement has been given as a necessary 
complement to the history of the period. * 

The writers of the different chapters have aimed at laying greater stress 
on cultural movements in preference to, though not to the exclusion of, 
the annals of politics. Dry discussions of chronology and revival or 
review of forgotten controversies have been generally eschewed. There 
is also no attempt to gloze over the difficulties of problems in the history 
of the period and the possibility of different views being held about them, 
though such differences have been narrowed down as much as possible. 
The attention of the reader may be invited to the following points in 
particular. The writings of contemporary Greek authors, particularly 
Megasthenes, which have survived mostly in extracts by later writers, 
and the synchronism of Asoka with five Greek rulers whom he mentions 
by name, still form the ‘sheet-anchor’ of the chronology of the Mauryan 
epoch ; they enable us to fix the accession of Chandragupta Maurya within 
a narrow limit of four or five years at the most. Widely divergent views 
have been taken of the date of the commencement of Satavahana rule 
in the Deccan and of the Hathlgumpha inscription of Kharavela. The 


/ 


xviii A COMPREHENSIVE HISTORY OF INDIA 

chronological scheme of the present volume accepts the longer list of the 
Satavahana (Andhra) rulers given in the Matsya Purana as essentially 
valid, and makes the fullest possible use of the data from the same source 
for the duration of individual reigns, correcting them in the light of epi- 
graphy and numismatics. Likewise the Kharavela inscription has been 
assigned to the first half of the second century b.c . 1 The Satakarni whose 
presence in the west Kharavela disregarded when he sent an expedition in 
that direction, may have been, accordingto Dr. Gopalachari (Ch. x), either 
the first or the second king of that name, while Prof. Jagannath would 
definitely identify the rival of Kharavela with Satakarni I (Ch. iv, section 
on Kharavela). Another vexed problem is the question of Nahapana’s 
date. By following the Puranic data closely, Dr. Gopalachari arrives at 
a.d. 72—95 as the period of Gautamiputra’s reign and considers that the 
dates in Nahapana’s inscriptions represent his regnal years. Dr. J. N. 
Banerjea, on the other hand, following Rapson, refers the dates to the 
Saka era, holds that Nahapana began to rule first as a Satrap of Kanishka 
and became independent later (Ch. viii), and discusses at some length 
(Ch. ix) the position taken up by Gopalachari. It would seem, however, 
that the eulogium on Gautamiputra’s conquests recorded in the Nasik 
inscription of the nineteenth year of his son and successor Pulumayi II, 
about twenty-five years after they were effected, goes to show that the 
results of Gautamiputra’s success were not so short-lived as they must 
be held to have been if Nahapana’s dates are referred to the Saka era. 
The date of Kanishka himself is another moot point. But the excavations 
at Begram have not yielded results as decisive as Ghirshman is inclined to 
think, and the fact that an independent and exhaustive study of the ques- 
tion has led one of the latest writers on the subject to the same conclusion 
as that upheld by Dr. J. N. Banerjea, viz. that Kanishka was the founder 
of the Saka era, may be welcomed as confirmation of the correctness of 
yie scheme followed in this volume. 2 Lastly in the chronology of the early 
history of Ceylon, the adjustment between the two reckonings starting 
with 543 and 483 B.c. as the date of the Buddha-Nirvana is effected dif- 
ferently by Geiger and by Dr. Mendis who contributes the chapters on 
Ceylon to this volume. The latter has argued for his position at some 
length in his article on the ‘Chronology of the Early Pali chronicles of 
Ceylon’ in the University of Ceylon Review, but the chronology of Early 
Tamil history and literature in Chapters xvi and xxi is built on Geiger’s 
system which assigns Gajabahu I to a.d. 171 — 93 whereas Mendis given 
for him the period a.d. 114 — 36. 


1 See note at end of Ch. xxii 

2 Van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, The ‘Scythian' Period, especially pp. 65 and 319-20. 


NOTE ON THE VOLUME 

Tt has taken seventeen years from the inception of the scheme to produce 
A this volume ; an explanation is therefore necessary. 

The Indian History Congress decided at its Lahore session in 1940 
to prepare and publish an up-to-date Comprehensive History of India 
in twelve volumes based on the latest researches. Subsequently the work 
was planned in detail, a Board of Editors was appointed and contributors 
were selected, but no substantial progress was made. A work of this 
character and size, meant primarily for scholars, demands funds and funds 
were not quick in coming. Thanks to the labours of Dr. Tarachand this 
initial hurdle was overcome, but a more serious and difficult problem 
remained to be tackled. The Bharatiya Itihas Parishad had also launched 
a similar scheme, though on a smaller scale, and the Editors and writers 
expected to see the two schemes through were almost identical. It was 
felt that it would be unwise and improper to incur avoidable expense of 
money, labour and time; but it was not until 1946 that the two sponsoring 
bodies came to terms and the Bharatiya Itihas Parishad decided to merge 
their scheme in that of the Indian History Congress. Meanwhile death 
removed several Editors and contributors and partition of the country 
created conditions not congenial for scholarly labours. Nonetheless the 
Congress did not relax its efforts and materials for three volumes were 
ready by 1951. The present volume went to the press in September 1951, 
butit was then discovered that the press copy needed much improvement. 
Mr. R.A. Dutch of Orient Longmans took upon himself the necessary 
technical work. But misfortune still hounded our footsteps and when the 
complete text was set in type and the first few formes had been printed 
off, the press was involved in litigation. The publishers, however, found 
a new press, but still difficulties were not over. To prepare an index’of a 
learned volume demands special knowledge and an expert index-maker is 
not always available. Fortunately Dr. S.R. Das of Calcutta University 
came to our rescue and volunteered to undertake this onerous task. But 
for his labours the publication of this volume might still be held up. 
Anxious as the Congress was to place before the public at least one 
volume of the projected history it has taken seventeen years to show 
some tangible results of its labours. 

The Comprehensive History has not been designed to cater to popular 
taste and the average reader may findit too technical; butthemoreserious 
student, it is hoped, will find it useful. An attempt has been made to give 
a clear and accurate account of the social institutions and cultural achieve- 
ments of ancient India against the perspective of its political history. 
But as the chapters went to the printers some years back and were 
prepared still earlier, it has not been possible in some cases to incorporate 
the results and assess the value of a few recent investigations. This is 



XX 


PREFACE 


an unfortunate but unavoidable shortcoming which is to be deplored but 
cannot be helped. The chronology of ancient India is a subject of in- 
conclusive controversy and it is no wonder that Mr. S.K, Saraswati found 
it impractical to follow in his chapters on Indian Art the chronology 
adopted by the Board of Editors. 

I avail myself of this opportunity to record here our deep obligations 
to our donors and benefactors, editors and contributors, but for whose 
generosity and labours the Comprehensive History of India might still 
remain a cherished but unfulfilled ambition. 

Surendra Nath Sen, 
Chairman, 

22 September, 1957 History of India Publication Committee, 

Indian History Congress 



Chapter 


THE FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYA EMPIRE 

T he foundation of the Maurya empire is a unique event in Indian 
History. Its glory is enhanced by the circumstances in which it was 
achieved. It was achieved against formidable difficulties created by the 
establishment of a foreign rule in the country as a consequence of Alex- 
ander’s victorious campaigns in the Panjab during a period of two years, 
327-325 B.c. When Alexander left India in 325 B.C., he was careful, with 
his methodical Greek mind, to consolidate the conquests he had won in 
the Panjab by means of proper administrative arrangements whereby the 
Greeks could hold the country. Greek India was governed by satraps 
appointed by Alexander in charge of the six regions into which it was divided. 
In the territory lying to the west of the Indus Alexander posted three Greek 
satraps, viz., Peithon as governor of Sind ; Nicanor, who was placed in 
charge of the province called ‘India-west-of-the-Indus’, comprising the 
lower Kabul valley and the hill tracts up to the Hindukush, with its capital 
at Pushkalavatl (Peucelaotis, modern Charsadda) and Oxyartes, who was 
appointed governor of the Kabul valley (Paropamisadae). 

It appears that Alexander first tried Persian satraps, but they were not 
successful. According to Curtius (ix. 8) there were charges of extortion 
and tyranny proved against the Persian satrap Tyriespes, by the people 
of the Paropamisadae. This was about 326 b.c. Alexander had to replace 
Tyriespes by Oxyartes, an Iranian noble who was his own father-in-law. 

But there was a weak point in this Greek rule of the Panjab. Alexander 
could not post Greek viceroys in the country to the east of the Indus. 
Here he had to depend upon and appoint Indians as his satraps, viz., 
Ambhi, king of Taxila, to rule from the Indus to the Hydaspes (Jhelunr); 
Porus (Paurava) to rule from the Hydaspes to the Hyphasis (Beas); 
the king of the Abhisara country (Kashmir) to rule over the remainder. 

The task of liberating the country from the yoke of foreign rule was 
beset with tremendous difficulty. The country had hardly recovered from 
the shock of Alexander’s victorious march through it — a march which had 
dislocated its indigenous political organisation. It had already passed 
under the grip and stranglehold of foreign rule. The atmosphere was full 
of frustration and depression. The battle of India’s independence against 
these heavy odds called for a leader of exceptional ability and vision who 
could infuse new life and enthusiasm into the drooping spirits of a defea- 
ted people, and organise a fresh national resistance against alien domina- 
tion. Fortunately, the country produced such a leader in young Chandra- 
gupta who had already been prepared in advance for his great mission in 
life by the Brahmin Chanakya, better known as Kautilya. Chanakya’s 



2 


FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


superior vision and insight led him to discover in this youth the disciple 
who would be able, under his direction, to free the fatherland of foreign 
rule. Kautilya infected his pupil with his hatred of foreign rule. In his 
Arthasastra, Kautilya gives vent to his feeling against foreign rule as an 
unmitigated evil. He condemns foreign rule ( vairajya ) as the worst form 
of exploitation, where the conqueror, who subdues the country by violence 
( parasyachchhidya ), never counts it as his own dear country ( naitat mama 
iti manyamanah), oppresses it by over-taxation and exactions ( karshayati ), 
and drains it of its wealth (apavahayati). (viii. 2). 

We owe to Buddhist texts and traditions some details of the early life 
of Chandragupta and the circumstances which led Kautilya to discover 
Chandragupta in a village as the adopted son of a cowherd, from whom, 
seeing in him the sure promise of his future greatness, he bought the boy 
by paying on the spot 1000 karshapanas. Kautilya then took the boy with 
him to his native city of Takshasila (Taxila), then the most renowned seat 
of learning in India, and had him educated there for a period of seven 
or eight years in the humanities and the practical arts and crafts of the 
time ( silpa ) including the military arts. 1 

This tradition is curiously confirmed by Plutarch’s statement that 
Chandragupta as a youth had met Alexander during his campaigns in 
the Panjab. This was possible because Chandragupta was already living 
in that locality with Kautilya. 

Other interesting details of this episode are found in some classical works 
dealing with Alexander’s campaigns. These refer to Chandragupta as the 
hero and leader of this ‘First War of Indian Independence’. For instance, 
Justin (xv. 4) says : ‘India, after the death of Alexander, had shaken off 
as it were the yoke of servitude from its neck and put his governors to 
death. The author of this liberation was Sandrocottus [Chandragupta]. 
This man was of humble origin but was stimulated to aspire to regal power 
by supernatural encouragement; for, having offended Alexander by his 
boldness of speech, and having been ordered by that king to be put to death, 
hff saved himself by swiftness of foot; and, while he was lying asleep, after 
his exertion, a lion of great size, having come to him, licked off with his 
tongue the sweat that was running, and after gently waking him, left him. 
Being first prompted by this prodigy to conceive hopes of royal dignity, 
he drew together a band of robbers and instigated the Indians to overthrow 
the existing Greek government. Some time after, as he was going to war 
with the generals of Alexander, a wild elephant of great bulk presented 
itself before him of its own accord and, as tamed down to gentleness, took 
him on his back and became his guide in the war and conspicuous in fields 
of battle. Sandrocottus, having thus acquired a throne, was in possession 
of India when Seleucus was laying the foundations of his future greatness.’ 

The points to be noted in this statement are : that Chandragupta, 
who was of humble origin, came to be the author of India’s liberation,’ 


Mookerji, Chandragupta Maurya and his Times, pp, 25-6 



chandragupta’s forces 


that he saw Alexander face to face; that he organised an army of 
liberation out of the lawless and violent elements of society whom Justin 
calls ‘robbers’; that his strategy was first to dispose of Alexander’s 
generals who, as already stated, had been appointed satraps, in different 
regions and that he was successful in overthrowing Greek rule and 
faced Seleucus as the ruler of India. 

Now who were these ‘robbers’ whom Chandragupta considered lit for 
enlistment in his army? They were, as pointed out by McCrindle, 1 * 3 the 
republican peoples of the Panjab who played such a prominent part in 
resisting Alexander’s invasion. They were the Arattas or Arashtrakas, i.e., 
kingless peoples, not living under a rashtra or state, of which the normal 
type was the kingship. Baudhayana in his Dharmasutra 2 (c. 400 b.c.) des- 
cribes the Panjab as the country of Arattas. The Mahdbharata 3 calls the 
Arattas the Pahchanadas, ‘natives of the land of five rivers’, and also 
Vahikas, ‘people of the land of rivers’, comprising the Prasthalas, Madras, 
Gandharas, Khasas, Vasatis, Sindhus and Sauvlras. 

It is also interesting to note that Kautilya mentions as the sources of 
recruitment for the army : the choras, or pratirodhakas of the day, 
robbers and outlaws; the Chora-ganas, organised gangs of brigands; 
the mlechchha tribes like the kirata highlanders; the atavikas, fores- 
ters; and the warrior clans called sastropajmsrenis. Kautilya 4 counts the 
soldiery recruited from these clans as most heroic ( pravira ). The Panjab 
in those days had an abundance of this type of military material. 
Alexander himself had great difficulty in facing the heroic resistance of 
some of these ‘free’ peoples in his campaigns. 

Before Chandragupta Maurya’s time, these republican peoples were 
known to Panini who describes them as ayudhajivisamghas. Pariini also 
mentions about eighty of these communities, some of whom figure as 
defenders of their freedom against Alexander, e.g., the Kshudrakas and 
Malavas. Panini even mentions the pooling of their military resources 
in a joint or federal army known in his time by the name of Kshudraka- 
Malavl-sena. Curtius calls them ‘fierce nations resisting Alexander v^ith 
their blood.’ * 

Thus the main strength of Chandragupta’s army was derived from these 
heroic republican military clans. But his forces were not confined to local 
recruits. He went far afield for his army, recruiting it from all possible 
sources so as to fit it for his great undertaking. According to tradition 5 
he began by strengthening his position by an alliance with the Himalayan 
chief Parvataka, as stated in both the Sanskrit and Jaina texts, Mudrarak- 
shasa and Parisishtaparvan. A Buddhist account also mentions a Parvata 
as a close associate of Chanakya. F.W. Thomas suggests that this Parva- 


1 Invasion of India by Alexander p. 406 

3 i 2, 13-15 

3 Mbit, viii 44. 2060-20701; 45. 2110 

* KA. vji 14 

5 The Mahavamsa Tika tells us how 


both Kautilya and Chandragupta set 
out to collect recruits ( balam sarhgan- 
hitva ) from different places (tato tato 
balam sannipatetvd ) pp. 178-87. (See 
Mookerjee, op. cit., app. i. p. 369) 



4 


FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


taka might be the same as king Porus. The Mudrarakshasa further 1 informs 
us that his Himalayan alliance gave Chandragupta a composite army 
recruited from a variety of peoples. Among these are mentioned the fol- 
lowing : Sakas, Yavanas (probably Greeks), Kiratas, Kambojas, Paraslkas 
and Bahlikas. Chandragupta was opposed by a coalition of five kings, 
viz., Chitravarma of Kuluta, Simhanada of Malaya, Pushkaraksha of 
Kasmlra, the Saindhava prince Sindhushena, and the king of the Paraslkas, 
Megha by name, who joined with a large force of cavalry (prithu-turaga 
balah). 2 The army of Malayaketu (Parvataka) comprised recruits from the 
following peoples : Khasa, Magadha, Gandhara, Yavana, Saka, Chedi and 
Huna. 3 Thus these various peoples, mostly from the Panjab and the frontier 
highlands, were engaged in the great war waged by Chandragupta against 
his enemies. This list unfortunately affects the value of the Mudrarakshasa 
as a source of history. Some of the peoples named in it, e.g., the Sakas 
or the Hunas, first appear in Indian history much later than the time 
of Chandragupta. 

Thus Chandragupta was in command of large forces drawn from differ- 
ent places and peoples, ofwhich the heroicand martial elements were mobi- 
lised to form a composite army. But his mission was forwarded by more 
than military might. It was aided materially by the internal conditions 
of Greek rule in India. Alexander’s invasion of India was not very popular 
with his own followers. Rebellions both of Greeks and Indians threatened 
his rear. The Greek colonies and garrisons established in his new east- 
ern cities were not very happy in their new homes. A rumour of his death 
led three thousand of these Greek colonists to leave for their homeland. 
The Indians were full of the spirit of revolt against foreign rule. An Indian 
chief named Damaraxus had instigated rebellion at Kandahar even while 
Alexander was at Taxila. 4 The Greek satrap Nicanor was killed by the 
ASvakayanas when Alexander was campaigning in the Panjab. The Asva- 
kayanas threatened their Greek governor, an Indian who had sided with 
the Greeks, named Sisikottus (Sasigupta), and Alexander had to send him 
help from his other satrapies. The situation vastly deteriorated after 
Alexander’4 retreat from India. It was marked by the murder of Philip, 
the satrap of the province between the Hydaspes and the Hindukush, 
in 325 b.c., when Alexander was still alive. This was a direct challenge* 
to his authority, which he could not meet. He asked his Indian 
governor, the king of Taxila, to take the place of Philip. This meant 
that an Indian king came to rule beyond the Indus and the frontier up 
to the Kabul valley and the Hindukush. 

We have already seen that Chandragupta was leading this movement of 
liberation and have described the military preparations by which he achiev- 
ed the success of his mission. We do not definitely know the date of his 


1 Mudrarakshasa ii 12 

* Ibid, i 20 

* Ibid, v 11 


* ™ US ^o 13 ’ t as emended by Hedicke 
\Ci 2 i, I 369 rt. 2) 



CHANDRA GUPTA’S CONQUESTS 


5 


success and accession to sovereignty. But some light is thrown on it by 
Greek history. Alexander died in 323 b.c. and his generals divided 
his empire among themselves. A second partition took place in 321 b.c. 
This time no part of India to the east of the Indus was included in it. 
Peithon, the Greek governor of Sind, was removed and posted to the 
province between the Indus and the Paropamisus. It is therefore assumed 
that Chandragupta carried on his war of independence during the two 
years 325-323 b.c. that intervened between the death of Philip and 
that of Philip’s master, Alexander. Thus Chandragupta’s accession to 
sovereignty may be dated 323 b.c. 

After the overthrow of Greek rule, Chandragupta turned his attention 
to the second part of his mission, the overthrow of Nanda rule. It was 
not, however, an easy task. Nanda was very strong in military power 
and financial resources. Curtius estimates his army at 600,000 infantry, 
20,000 cavalry, 2,000 four-horsed chariots and 3,000 elephants. His riches 
gave him the title of Dhana Nanda mentioned in Pali works. But the 
Puranas call him Maha-padma-Nanda or Mahapadma-pati, the ‘sovereign 
of an infinite host’ or ‘sovereign of untold wealth.’ The Kathasaritsagara 
mentions Nanda’s ‘990 millions of gold pieces’ which he buried in a rock 
in the bed of the Ganges. He used his power to win a large empire by con- 
quest, and he made himself the sole sovereign ( ekraf ) of numerous states. 

These states are referred to as Aikshvakus, Panchalas, Kasis, Haihayas, 
Kalingas, Asmakas, Kurus, Maithilas, Surasenas and Vltihotras. Thus 
Nanda figured as ‘a second Parasurama or Bhargava’. The Greeks call 
him the king of ‘the Gangaridae and the Prasii’. The former were the peo- 
ple occupying the delta of the Ganges, while the Prasii were the Prachyas 
or Easterns, people living to the east of the ‘Middle Country’, like the 
Panchalas, Surasenas, Kosalas and others. Thus Chandragupta had to 
deal with a most powerful emperor, whose power, however, was weakened 
by the extreme unpopularity engendered by his avarice and evil ways; 
the Puranas call the Nandas irreligious rulers (adharmikaft). His unpopu- 
larity was reported to Alexander by the Indian chief Bhagala and^ confirmed 
by king Paurava who stated that he ‘was a man of quite worthless charac- 
ter and held in no respect as the son of a barber’ (Diodorus). According to 
Plutarch young Chandragupta also reported to Alexander that the Nanda 
king was ‘hated and despised by his subjects for the wickedness of his 
disposition and the meanness of his origin.’ Much of his unpopularity 
was also due to the excessive taxation by which he amassed his fabulous 
wealth, computed at 80 ko(is (crores) by the Buddhist sources which state 
that he ‘levied taxes even on skins, gums, trees and stones.’ 

Details of Chandragupta’s conquests of the Nanda empire are lacking. 
We get some glimpses of them in tradition, both Buddhist and Jaina. There 
are some popular stories about the strategy he followed and his mistakes. 
He first started by invading the regions on the frontiers ( antajanapadam ) 
and plundering their villages. It was thus a movement from the frontier 
towards the interior. But when he reached the heart of the empire, he 



6 


FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


was defeated because he did not secure his rear. It was like a child eating 
a chapathy by throwing away its edges and eating only its centre. ‘So 
Chandragupta in his ambition to be a monarch, without beginning from 
the frontiers, and taking the towns in order as he passed, has invaded the 
heart of the country . . . and his army is surrounded and destroyed.’ 1 Then 
he followed the correct strategy by posting garrisons to hold the rashtras 
and janapadas he was conquering in his march from the frontiers. With 
his rear thus protected, he with his victorious army besieged Pataliputra 
and killed Dhana-Nanda. The same story is related differently in a Jaina 
work, Parisishtaparvan , 2 which states : ‘Like a child burning his finger 
which he greedily puts in the middle of the dish, instead of eating from 
the outer part which is cool, Chanakya [Kautilya] had been defeated, 
because he had not secured the surrounding country before attacking the 
stronghold of the enemy. Profiting by this advice, Chanakya went to 
Himavatkuta and entered into an alliance with Parvataka the king of that 
place. . . They opened the campaign by reducing the provinces.’ The same 
text further states that after besieging Pataliputra, Kautilya and Chandra- 
gupta forced king Nanda to capitulate when he had reduced his strength 
in every way, his wealth, his army, his prowess and even his mental capacity 
(dhlh). Nanda was, however, spared his life and permitted by Kautilya 
to leave Pataliputra with his two wives and one daughter and as much 
luggage as h'e could carry off in a single chariot. 3 

According to tradition, it was a bloody battle fought between the two. 
It seems that Chandragupta had to employ against Nanda all the military 
strength he could gather, including even Greek mercenaries from the 
Panjab. 4 5 A passage in the Milindapanha 5 states that TOO ko(is of soldiers, 
10,000 elephants, 1 lac of horses and 5,000 charioteers’ were killed in 
action and that Bhaddasala was the commander of Nanda’s army. 

By his conquest of Nanda’s realm, Chandragupta made himself the 
master of a large empire in which were joined the land of the five rivers of 
t(je Panjab and the valleys of the Jumna (Yamuna) and Ganga. As we 
have seen, king Nanda was known to the Greeks as the ruler of peoples 
called the’Gangaridae, and the Prasii, i.e., the peoples of the Ganges valley, 
and the Prachyas or Easterners. The Nanda empire also extended up to 
Kalinga as we know from the Hathlgumpha inscription of Kharavela 
mentioning ‘Nandaraja’ as the king associated with an old aqueduct and as 
having carried away to Magadha as trophies the statue or footprints of the 
first Jina and the treasures of the royal house. Some Mysore inscriptions of 
a much later date, about the twelfth century A.D., even state that the empire 
of Nanda extended to the province of Kuntala to the north of Mysore. 
Thus the conquest of the Nanda empire brought a very large part of India 
under Chandragupta’s sovereignty. He also enlarged his empire by fresh 
conquests, of which only a glimpse is given in the following statement 

3 Ibid. 301-17 

4 CHI. i p. 430 

5 SBE. xxxvi p. 147 


1 Mahavaihsa Tika p. 186. (See Mookerjee, 
op. cit., app. i p. 369) 

* viii 291-301 



REPULSE OF SELEUCUS 


1 


of Plutarch. 1 ‘Not long afterwards, Androcottus, who had by that time 
mounted the throne, presented Seleucus with 500 elephants and overran 
and subdued the whole of India with an army of 600,000.’ The throne 
here refers to the throne or sovereignty of the Panjab and the Nanda 
empire which Chandragupta had acquired by his conquests. As to the 
present of 500 elephants to Seleucus, its full account is given in Greek 
history. Alexander’s death was followed by a struggle for supremacy 
among his generals, of whom Seleucus emerged as the ruler of Babylon 
with a field for further conquests open towards the east. He conquered 
Bactria after hard fighting and about 305 or 304 B.c. was fired by an 
ambition to recover the last conquests of Alexander in India. Taking the 
route along the Kabul river he crossed the Indus. 2 The expedition proved 
abortive and ended in a somewhat humiliating treaty by which Seleucus 
had to cede to the Indian king valuable territories, the satrapies of 
Arachosia (Kandahar), the Paropamisadae (Kabul) and Gandhara 
together with portions of Aria (Herat) and Gedrosia (Baluchistan). 3 In 
embarking upon this Indian expedition, Seleucus thought that it would 
be as easy as Alexander’s, not suspecting that India had in the 
meanwhile completely changed under its new king Chandragupta, who 
was able to present a united front and a powerful national opposition 
to the foreign invader. It was no longer an India divided into numerous 
petty states which Alexander could conquer one by one. Thus Seleucus 
was decisively beaten in this trial of strength with the Indian king who was 
able to extend his empire up to the borders of Persia by these annexations 
of new territory and to rule over a Greater India beyond India’s natural 
borders. That is why his grandson, the great Asoka, mentions in his Rock 
Edicts II and XIII the Syrian emperor Antiochus ( Amtiyako Yona-raja) as 
his ‘immediate neighbour’, one of his ‘frontagers’ (an anta or pratyanta 
king, a king on his border). Chandragupta on his part offered the Greek 
king a gesture of friendship by sending him a valuable present of 500 
elephants which stood him in good stead at the time. For these turned 
the scale of victory for his allies against their common enemy Antigonus 
on the battlefield of Ipsus where the elephants arrived in time. Indian 
elephants were in great request in some later battles in the European field. 
At the battle of Raphia 4 Ptolemy’s Libyan elephants were no 
match for Antiochus’ Indian elephants. But the clash between the 
Greek and the Indian king merely ended in more than an honourable 
and stable peace between them. It led to interesting social consequences 
which strengthened their good relations. According to Appian, 5 there 
was a matrimonial alliance between the two kings so that Seleucus 
became either the father-in-law or son-in-law of Chandragupta ; Strabo, 

1 Lives , ch. Ixii (McCrindle, ceded the Paropamisadae, still less 

Invasion, p. 310) Aria.’ Taxila i p. 20 n. 2 

2 Appian, Syr. 55 4 Warmington, Commerce between Roman 

•Marshall says: ‘There are no grounds Empire and India, p. 151 

whatever for supposing that Seleucus 6 Syr. 55 



FOUNDATION OF THE MAUR.VA EMPIRE 


in fact, suggests that there was a convention establishing a jus connubii 
between the two royal houses. But ‘in that land of caste [i.e. India], a 
jus connubii between the two peoples [Greeks and Indians] is unthink- 
able’. 1 There were also a few other friendly gestures between these kings. 
Athenaeus states that the Indian king sent to Seleucus a present of 
some Indian drugs, 2 while Seleucus made a still more friendly advance 
by sending to the Mauryan court an ambassador named Megasthenes 
who was originally serving as his ambassador at the court of his 
provincial satrap named Sibyrtius in Arachosia. Megasthenes must have 
lived at Pataliputra between 304 and 299 b.c., the date of Chandra- 
gupta’s death. 

According to Plutarch, Chandragupta, after achieving all these conquests 
in Northern India, did not rest on his oars but employed his vast military 
forces to ‘overrun and subdue the whole of India with an army of 600,000.’ 
He does not record any facts or details in support of his general statement. 
Some glimpses of these can, however, be gathered from Indian sources, 
certain traditions, texts, and inscriptions. The Gimar Rock Inscription of 
Rudradaman I of about a.d. 150 tells of a dam constructed to produce a 
reservoir or lake ‘of beautiful sight’ (sudarsana) for irrigation under the 
administration of the provincial governor ( rashtriya ) ruling the rashtra, 
then known by the names of Anarta and Surashtra, as a province of the 
empire of Chandragupta. The governor’s name is Pushyagupta, as men- 
tioned in the inscription. Thus this part of Western India was included 
in the Maurya empire though there is no further evidence to show how it 
was annexed. That it was an integral part of the Maurya empire explains 
the location of an ASoka Rock Edict in the place called Sopara (Surparaka 
of Pali texts) in the modem district of Thana in Bombay State. It also 
shows that Chandragupta’s conquest of Western India extended beyond 
the boundaries of Surashtra into Konkan, in which Sopara was located. 

It is worth remarking that Surashtra as a province under Maurya 
imperial rule gave full scope to the development of local democracies and 
tof the growth of group life, or self-government of the group, as the foun- 
dation of democracy. For instance, no less an authority than Kautilya, to 
whom Chandragupta owed his imperial status and sovereignty, refers in 
his Arthasastra to the characteristic feature in the politics of the Surashtra 
Province, that it was known for its srenis or guilds into which its Kshatriya 
and Vaisya population was organised. There were both economic guilds, 
for the promotion of agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade, denoted by the 
technical term varta and, what is more interesting, military guilds of pro- 
fessional soldiers who lived by the practice of arms ( Surdshtra-kshatriya - 
vaisya-srenyadayo varta-sastropajivinah). 

The references to Mauryas in early Tamil literature are rather late and 
of doubtful import. They do not support the view that a Mauryan 
invasion of South India reached the Podiya hills, a view which was ur^ed 


1 CHI. i p. 431 


* Ibid. 432 



END OF CHANDRAGUPTA 


at one time with much apparent force . 1 These references will be discussed 
in some detail elsewhere. 

Next we have Jaina traditions regarding Chandragupta’s association with 
the South. According to these, Chandragupta in his old age renounced 
the throne under the influence of his teacher, the Jaina saint Bhadrabahu, 
whom he followed towards the South till both teacher and pupil settled 
down at a place in Mysore known as Sravana Belgola. Bhadrabahu is 
stated to have led this Jaina migration towards the South to escape from 
Magadha, then in the grip of a severe famine. Some local inscriptions 
and monuments also refer to the same tradition. An inscription of about 
a.d.600 mentions ‘the pair (yugma), Bhadrabahu along with Chandragupta 
muni’. Their association is also repeated in a few other local inscriptions. 
One inscription deifies both. A small hill at Sravana Belgoja is called 
Chandragiri, because Chandragupta lived and performed his penance 
there. On the same hill is a temple called Chandragupta basti, believed 
to have been erected by Chandragupta. 

It may be noted that the separation of the Digambara Jainas from the 
Svetambara dates from this migration. It also explains the mystery of 
the sudden disappearance from his capital of such an emperor as Chandra- 
gupta at the height of his power and position. It was due to the fact 
that he became a Jaina saint as stated in all Jaina texts. Jainism was then 
also a popular religion at Pataliputra. The Nanda kings had Jaina leanings 
and Jaina ministers. This is why the later drama Mudrarakshasa gives a 
prominent position to the Jainas at the court of Pataliputra and makes 
Kautilya employ a Jaina as one of his chief emissaries. 

We may thus conclude that Chandragupta, as a Jaina renouncing the 
world, turned ascetic and settled down to practise penance at a place which 
must have been situated within the limits of his vast empire. This also is 
why we find three of Asoka’s Minor Rock Edicts at places not very far 
from Sravana Belgola, namely at Siddapura, Brahmagiri and the Jatinga 
Ramesvara hill in the Chitaldrug district of Mysore. 

The Maurya conquest of the South is also attested by several inscriptions 
of ASoka, viz., the Gavlmath and Palkigundu inscriptions in the Kopbal 
taluq, the Maski inscription in Hyderabad State, and the Yarragudi 
inscriptions in the Kumool district. Asoka further indicates the southern 
limi ts of his empire by mentioning its neighbours on that front, such as 
the Cholas and Pandyas, Satyaputras and Keralaputras, and also the exten- 
sion of his influence as far as Tamraparni, the old name of Ceylon. At 
the same time it is to be noted that Asoka states in his Rock Edict XIII 
that the conquest of Kalinga was his only conquest, after which he banned 
all such conquests achieved by violence. Thenceforth he stood for Dharma- 
vijaya or cultural conquest (as against Asura-vijaya and Lobha-vijaya, 
forcible and bloody conquests instigated by desire for territory or wealth), 
and for the religion of Non-Violence, for Universal Peace, peace between 

1 S. K. Aiyangar, The Beginnings of South Indian History , pp. 98-103. See ch. xvipost. 



10 FOUNDATION OF THE MAURY A EMPIRE 

man and man and between man and every sentient creature. 

We have thus to conclude that the extension of the Maurya empire 
towards the South was the work of Asoka’s grandfather Chandragupta 
Maurya. We may form a rough idea of the period of Chandragupta’s reign. 
As already explained, it may be taken to have begun in about 323 b.c. 
His defeat of the Greek king Seleucus in 304 B.c. was achieved at the 
height of his power. According to the Puranas he reigned for 24 years, 
i.e., up to the year 299 b.c. They give to his successor Bindusara a reign 
of 25 years i.e., to the year 274 b.c. which was the year of Asoka’s accession 
to sovereignty as established by other evidence available for Asoka’s life 
and reign. According to other accounts Bindusara ruled up to c. 272 B.c. 

The efficient government of such a vast empire stretching from the 
borders of Persia up to those of the Cholas and Pandyas in Southern 
India was no easy task in those ancient times when transport or commu- 
nication between distant parts was so difficult and dilatory in the 
absence of mechanical facilities. Administration could not be centra- 
lised in a single capital like Pataliputra, situated in a corner of the 
empire. It had to be carried on from different centres and by a 
number of local administrations under viceroys and provincial 
governors. For the reign of Chandragupta we know of only one 
such provincial governor from the later inscription of the §aka king 
Rudradaman 1 already cited. He was called Pushyagupta, the 
rashpiva or governor of the Surashtra Province. Fuller and more 
complete evidence of the system of Maurya imperial administration is 
found in the inscriptions of his grandson Asoka. These will be 
discussed in the account of his reign. We may only note here that 
the following cities were the capitals of some of the different 
provinces of the Maurya empire, viz., Taxila, KausambI, UjjayinI, 
Suvarnagiri, and Tosall. 

For the administration of Chandragupta we have, however, the 
unique evidence recorded, on the basis of his personal observation of 
its working, by a foreigner, the Greek ambassador Megasthenes, who 
was deputed to his court at Pataliputra. His evidence is foriunatel) 
substantially supplemented and confirmed by evidence from an indige- 
nous source, the Arthasastra of Kautilya. This work, though not 
definitely dated, may be taken generally as a document of Maurya 
history. It is so regarded by Professor F. W. Thomas 1 who states that 
the work ‘clearly falls within or near the Maurya period.’ 

The head of the administration was of course the king, who was not 
an unqualified autocrat. Pure autocracy is not contemplated in Hindu 
polity and theory of sovereignty. The supreme sovereign of the State 
was Dharma or Law while the king was the Danda or the Supreme 
Executive, upholding and enforcing Dharma. 


1 CHI. 1 p. 467 



THE KING AND THE CAPITAL 


Megasthenes represents the king, as a most hard-working official 
and gives a time-table of his daily duties. He did not sleep in the 
daytime. He had to attend court as the Chief Justice of the realm. 
He remained in court for the whole day without attending to his 
personal comforts. ‘The palace is open to all comers even when the 
king is having his hair combed and dressed, ft is then that he gives 
audience to ambassadors and administers justice to his subjects.’ 1 
It is interesting to note that Kautilya (i. 19) also has a similar time-table 
for the king. Barring a few hours’ sleep, all his hours are occupied. 
The day begins with the despatch of secret emissaries, worship, inter- 
views with the physicians, kitchen officials and astronomers, followed by 
attendance at the Hall of Audience ( upasthana ) where he receives the 
reports of his military and financial advisers. Between 9 and 10.30 
a.m. he has his bath and a meal followed by the study of religious 
texts. After that he sees the heads of the departments and assigns 
to them their duties. Next he has correspondence with his councillors 
and ministers. He has a little rest between 1.30 and 3 p.m. After 3 p.m. 
he reviews his army, cavalry, elephants and arsenals, and consults with 
his commander-in-chief. After 6 p.m. he holds confidential interviews 
with his secret emissaries. Then follows his second bath and meal 
and religious meditation. He goes to bed to the sound of music. 

Kautilya puts the following ideal before the king : ‘For a king, his 
vrata (religious vow) is constant activity in the cause of his people 
(utthanam); his best religious ceremony is the work of administration 
(karyanusasemam ) ; his highest charity (tlaksliina) is equality ot treatment 
meted out to all.’ It is interesting to note that Asoka also adhered to 
this royal time-table. In his Rock Edict VI he states how he held him- 
self ready for public work at all hours and places, even ‘when he b 
dining or in his hareni or at the place of worship.' 

With all this heavy programme of duties, the king also had his pro- 
gramme of sports such as hunting, races and animal-fights. Aeliaji 
says that fights were arranged between wild bulls, tamed rams and 
rhinos and also between elephant tuskers.- 
The king had a bodyguard of armed women. They followed him at 
the hunt on horses and elephants or in chariots. Kautilya also mention'- 
that the king was attended by women armed with bows. 3 He had also 
a guard of 24 elephants, as seen by Megasthenes. 

The Mauryapalace w'as unequalled in splendour, with its gilded pillars, 
extensive park full of evergreen trees, birds of every variety, parrots nock- 
ing round the king, tanks full of the largest fish. 

The capital at Pataliputra, as described by Megasthenes, was being 
built at the confluence of two rivers, the Son and the Ganges, 91 miles 


Curlius viii 9, cited by McCrindle, ‘ McCrindle, Im-iciu Imlia, p. 145 

Ancient India, p. 58 n. 2 * * - l 



12 


FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


long and a mile and a half broad, protected by a moat 60 feet deep, 
and 600 feet wide; further protected by a massive timber palisade, 
pierced by loopholes through which archers could shoot; and provided 
with 64 gates and 570 towers. The city was mainly built of wood as 
a protection against floods. 

The king’s autocracy had some check in his mantriparishad or 
Council of Ministers, whom he had to consult on important matters of 
policy and administration. The number of the council varied according 
to need, and is differently stated in different texts, Manu fixing it at 
twelve. That the council was a source of strength to the king’s position 
and power is indicated by Papini who calls the king parishad-bala,' 
while Kautilya calls the king who has a strong council akshudrapari- 
shatka 3 The grammarian Patanjali in his Mahabhashya mentions 
Chandragupta’s council, called Chandragupta sabha. It had also a 
secretary whom Kautilya calls mantri-parishad adhyaksha. 3 The Greek 
writers refer to its members as councillors and assessors who advised 
the king ‘in the management of public affairs'. They also state that the 
council had wide powers such as ‘choosing governors, chiefs of 
provinces, deputy governors, superintendents of the treasury, generals 
of the army, admirals of the navy, controllers, and commissioners 
who superintend agriculture ' 4 Megasthenes testifies to a highly orga- 
nised bureaucracy in charge of the administration. They were of three 
kinds : Agronomoi, ‘district officials’; Astynomoi, ‘town officials’; and 
members of the War Office. 

‘The duties of the first kind were to supervise irrigation and land mea- 
surement: hunting; the various industries connected with agriculture, 
forestry, work in timber, metal-foundries, and mines; and lastly to 
maintain the roads and see that every ten stadia ( 1J miles) there 
was a milestone indicating the distances (this is the passage which 
proves that Megasthenes did not mean to assert a general ignorance 
of the art of writing in India). 

‘The second kind, the town officials (who were in charge of the muni- 
cipal administration of cities like Pataliputra) were divided into six 
Boards of Five. Their respective functions were the supervision of 
factories; the care of strangers, including the control of inns, provision 
of assistants, taking charge of sick persons, and burying the dead; 
the registration of births and deaths; the control of the market and 
the inspection of weights and measures; the inspection of manufactured 
goods, provision for their sale, with accurate distinction between 
new and second-hand articles; the collection of the tax of 10 per 
cent, charged on sales. The six Boards acting together exercised a 
general superintendence over public works, prices, harbours and 
temples.’ 5 


McCrindle. Meg. & 
CHI. i pp. 417-8 


Arr., p. 212 



ADMINISTRATION 


13 


Besides these officers of the general, civil and municipal adminis- 
tration, the Greek writers mention some special officers of the Intelli- 
gence Department whose duty was to ‘enquire into and superintend 
all that goes on in India and make report to the king.’ 1 They even 
inspected the working of the municipal administration and of the 
army. 

The Greek writers also mention other officers, e.g., king’s advisers, 
treasurers of the state and arbiters (judges) both civil and criminal, the 
generals of the army and the chief magistrates who are really the 
chief executive officers or heads of departments. There are the arma- 
ment manufacturers and ship builders who are exclusively government 
servants. There are also officers ‘who superintend the rivers, measure 
the lands as is done in Egypt and inspect the sluices by which water is 
let out from the main canals into their branches, so that every one may 
have an equal supply of it.’ 

There are again ‘officers who collect the taxes and superintend the 
occupations connected with land as those of the woodcutters, the 
carpenters, the blacksmiths and the miners : officers in charge of the 
royal stables for horses and elephants and also the royal magazine for 
arms.’ It is to be noted that ‘a private person is not allowed to 
keep either a horse or an elephant. These animals are held to be the 
special property of the king.’ 

Megasthenes gives also an account of Mauryan military adminis- 
tration. According to him the army was controlled by a War Office 
consisting of thirty members distributed among six Boards who were 
in charge of the following departments of the army, viz., (1) the 
infantry; (2) the cavalry; (3) the war chariots; (4) the elephants of war; 
(5) transport, commissariat and army service including the provision of 
drummers, grooms, merchants, and grass-cutters ; (6) the Board ‘to 
co-operate with the admiral of the fleet’. 

The duties of Board (5) are thus described : they arrange ‘for 
bullock trains which are used for transporting engines of war, fobd 
for the soldiers, provender for the cattle, and other military* requisites. 
They supply servants who beat the drum and others who carry gongs; 
grooms also for the horses and mechanists and their assistants. To the 
sound of the gong they send out foragers to bring in grass, and by 
a system of rewards and punishments ensure the work being done with 
despatch and safety.’ 

Greek writers give some account of the equipment of the army. 
Arrian states, 2 ‘the foot-soldiers carry a bow equal in length to the man 
who bears it. There is nothing which can resist an Indian archer's 
shot.’ ‘Some are equipped with javelins instead of bows, but all wear 
a sword which is broad in the blade.’ 

1 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr., p. 43; also pp. 86-90 for this ami the following citations. 

1 Ibid. pp. 220-1 



14 


FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


The administrative details given by Megasthenes are unfortunately 
not presented as parts of a general plan or system, but this omission is 
supplied in a full measure by Kautilya who has described the functions 
of various officers in connection with the working of the different depart- 
ments to which they were assigned. A detailed description of the working 
of these departments would not be suitable here, but a general idea of 
these can given. 

Administration is based on revenue of which all possible sources, 
urban or rural, agriculture, forests, mines or trade are described in 
detail. 

Kautilya's administrative scheme provides for a large amount of 
nationalisation of industries. The state possessed vast estates and forests 
as its own property. It had also a monopoly of mines and engaged in 
trade in its products. It established factories for working up raw materials 
of various kinds into finished products. Besides, as revenue was 
payable in kind, large establishments had to be maintained all over the 
country for dealing with vast quantities of agricultural produce tendered 
in payment of taxes, as well as the produce of the crown estates. The 
state also maintained a central store at headquarters for its current 
needs and also as a reserve against famine. 

In agriculture the state aided cultivation, when necessary, with the sup- 
ply of seeds, bullocks, labour, and implements like ploughs, ropes, sickles, 
and also by supplementary services such as that of artisans. It was 
also responsible for irrigation facilities by means of canals, lakes and wells 
worked by pumps. There are provisions for the agricultural department 
to have special gardens for the cultivation of medicinal plants. 

The department of mines had to prospect new mines. The following 
minerals w'ere worked in those days, viz., gold, silver, copper, lead, tin, 
iron and bitumen. The trade in mineral products was centralised because 
of the state monopoly already mentioned. But mines requiring a heavy 
capital outlay and much enterprise were leased out to private persons in 
return for a share of the output or a fixed royalty. 

The Master of the Mint had to manufacture the different classes of coins, 
viz., silver coins made up of 1 1 parts of silver, 4 of copper and 1 of iron, 
tin, or other metal ; copper coins formed of 4 parts of silver, 1 1 parts of 
copper and 1 of iron or auy other metal. Copper coins, known as mashakas 
were issued in four denominations 1, A, j, 1/8. Coins had to bear mint 
charges, such as 8 per cent seignorage and 5 per cent profit derived from 
the use of special weights and measures. 1 

Salt was the monopoly of the state. It was worked on a system of 
licence on payment of a fixed fee or a share of the output, which the 
state sold at full market price. Imported salt was more heavilv 
taxed. 



ROLE OF THE STATE 


15 


Forests were carefully conserved and classified. There were forests of 
timber, forests producing creepers and canes, those producing fibres 
of different kinds such as hemp and material for ropery, those producing 
leaves (palm and birch) for writing, flowers for dyeing and sources of 
medicines in herbs, roots and fruits. Among forest produce are also 
mentioned the hides, skins, sinews (sndyu), bones, teeth, horns, hoofs and 
tails of many creatures including crocodiles, leopards, tigers, lions, ele- 
phants. buffaloes, yaks and porcupines. Birds and snakes are also men- 
tioned. There were certain forests which were treated as sanctuaries 
for the protection of wild life from hunters. Deer, rhinos, bisons and 
buffaloes, peacocks and fishes were protected in this way . 1 * 

The milch-cow, the calf and the stud-bull were not to be killed. The 
state controlled the sale of meat and confined it to licensed slaughter- 
houses.® 

The livestock of the country was the special care of the state. It included 
cows, buffaloes, goats, asses, mules, sheep, pigs and dogs. The state pro- 
vided pastures for gracing.* These pastures were supplied with water from 
wells, tanks or reservoirs enclosed within dams and were protected by 
hunters who with their hounds chased wild animals away. :i 

The state exercised control over trade by waterway, river or ocean, 
and policed the rivers and the sea shore, restricting all traffic to state 
boats and ships, and receiv ed the fares charged to passengers and the 
tolls levied on the goods carried. Crossing the rivers at forbidden 
places and times was punished by fine. Suspected offenders against 
these regulations were arrested. Free passage was allowed in the public 
interest to fishermen, carriers of firewood, policemen in pursuit of 
criminals, spies, and to suppliers of rations for the army and also to 
Brahmin ascetics, children, the old and afflicted, and pregnant women. 
Ships that were weather-bound or had lost their way were given protec- 
tion by the Superintendent of Shipping. Piratical or hostile ships and 
all craft violating harbour regulations were captured or impounded.* 

The state controlled the supply, price, purchase and sale of commo- 
dities through the Superintendent of Commerce. Traders’ stocks were 
regulated by licences. Sales were controlled through a centralised 
market. Prices were controlled by fixing a wholesale price and adding 
a profit of five per cent, or ten per cent in the case of foreign goods, to 
arrive at the retail price. Profiteering or the charging of prices in excess 
of the fixed scale was heavily fined. The necessaries of life such as milk 
and vegetables could be sold at any time and place. Such free sales 
were not confined to the centralised market . 3 

A partial measure of Prohibition was enforced through the Superin- 
tendent of Excise who controlled the sale of liquor and fixed its time, 


1 Ibid, ii 2, 17 

! Ibid, ii 26 

3 Ibid, ii 29, 34 


4 Ibid, ii 28 
* Ibid, ii 16 



16 


FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


place and quantity by licence. Only sealed liquor was to be sold, 
and it could be drunk only at licensed taverns, except during festivals, 
social or religious, and then only for a limited period of four days. 1 
Megasthenes states that the Indians drank wine only at sacrifices. 

The Intelligence Department was very well organised and employed 
a variety of secret agents. Recruits to this service were chosen for 
their good character. Spies were quartered on different classes in the 
guise of students, householders, merchants, recluses or ascetics. 
Touring spies were chosen from palmists, because they had opportu- 
nities of mixing with people ; from desperadoes who could be employed 
as menials of high officials ; and from those who knew how to administer 
drugs. There were also women spies quartered on ministers. 2 These 
informers the Greek writers call ‘overseers’. 

As in the case of general civil administration, Kautilya gives a 
detailed scheme of the administration of cities and towns. 3 The mayor 
of the city is called Nagaraka. There were regulations for the 
supervision of inns, factories, shops, and restaurants, which were 
asked to report the arrival of doubtful or suspected characters as an 
aid to the detection of crime. There was even a guests’ control 
order requiring masters of households to report the movements of 
their guests. Surgeons had to report patients suffering from 
suspicious wounds. Suspects of all kinds were to be watched and 
reported on by any citizens who saw them. Curfew was enforced 
between 9 p.m. and 3.30 a.m. A trumpet announced its beginning 
and end, but it was waived in the case of physicians, carriers of corpses, 
persons proceeding on public duty or visiting theatres approved by 
censors. There was a general exemption for festal nights. Protective 
measures against fire were prescribed and enforced in every house- 
hold. There were elaborate sanitary regulations, the violation of which 
was punished. It was an offence to foul the road by depositing filth 
or carcasses. Building regulations provided for sanitation and 
especially drainage. During epidemics physicians went round and 
distributed medicines. The same attention was given to outbreaks 
of cattle disease. Rats, as carriers of plague, were to be destroyed by 
poison or by cats and mongooses who were let loose upon them. If the 
plague was rampant, a sort of a rat-cess was imposed, which required 
every householder to trap a fixed number of rats per day. The practice 
of medicine was controlled. Dangerous diseases had to be reported. 
Errors of treatment causing death were severely punished. The medical 
profession included the following classes' : physicians, midwives, surgeons 
(equipped with surgical instruments and appliances, oils and bandages), 
nurses in charge of food and beverages, and veterinary surgeons. The 
municipality maintained hospitals with medical stores which were 
punctually replenished. 

»Ibid.ii25 ! Ibid, ill, 12 3 Ibid. ii 36; iv 1, 3 



TOWNS. 


SOCIETY. 


17 


Washermen had to work in fixed places. They were fined if they used 
for themselves their customers’ clothes or let them out on hire. Delays 
in washing were fined. Four nights were allowed for the best washing 
and one night only for simple washing. 

The mayor had to inspect daily the sources of the city’s water supply, 
the state of its roads and paths and its defences. Adulteration of food 
was punished. 

In these ancient cities public amusement was provided by actors 
(natas), dancers ( nartakas ), musicians and artists giving instrumental music 
( vadaka ), story-tellers ( vagjivana ), nautch-girls (kusilavah nartakipradha- 
nah), experts in physical exercises, magicians (saubhikd), minstrels 
( char ana ), and pimps. 

India, especially in the Panjab, had then an abundance of towns, as 
Greek writers did not fail to notice. 

It will be observed that the accounts of both Megasthenes and 
Kautilya agree in many points. 

The Greek writers have described the different castes, classes and 
occupations of Hindu society, though not very accurately, sometimes 
confusing caste with occupation. Megasthenes mentions seven classes 
of Indian society. His first class is that of ‘philosophers’ comprising 
Brahmanas and Sramanas (ascetics). It was numerically the smallest 
but highest in rank. This was due to their spirituality and self-denial, 
as some of them went naked or clothed only in skins. Their only diet 
was fruit. On New Year’s Day these philosophers assembled at the 
king’s court and made predictions as to weather, crops and politics. 
The second class comprised the cultivators or agriculturists who 
formed the majority of the Indian people then as they do now. They 
paid a quarter of the produce as rent to the landlord. Even battles 
in their neighbourhood did not interrupt their work of cultivation. 
The third class consisted of herdsmen and hunters. The fourth 
comprised traders, artisans and boatmen. The fifth were the soldiers, 
who were employed by the state. The sixth and seventh classes (super- 
intendents or overseers and councillors and assessors) noticed by 
Megasthenes were only the classes of officials already referred to and 
were not castes as now understood. Megasthenes and other Greek 
writers following him have given very full accounts of the highest 
caste of Hindu society, viz., the Brahmins, as they represented Indian 
culture at its best, and the highest knowledge and philosophy that 
could be conceived. These accounts are worth noticing for the light 
they throw upon the civilization of India in the fourth century b.c. 
Without knowing it they refer to the asramas or stages into which life 
was divided in the Hindu system. 

Strabo refers to the first caste as comprising both Brahmins and 
Sramanas. Asoka inscriptions mention the same two groups, of whom 
the latter were doubtless Buddhists. But the ‘Brahmins are the best 
esteemed for they have a more consistent dogmatic system.’ 



18 


FOUNDATION OF THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


As students or Brahmacharis, 'they live in simple style, lie on beds 
of rushes or (deer) skins and abstain from animal food.’ Studentship is 
followed by the life of the householder, during which they live in 
luxury, wearing fine muslin and trinkets of gold, eating flesh (not 
forbidden) but abstaining from hot and highly seasoned food . 1 

The occupations of the Brahmins are also indicated. They served as 
priests and met on New Year’s Day at the great synod of philosophers 
where those who had committed their discoveries to writing or had 
any thin g to suggest for the improvement of crops and cattle for the 
promotion of the public interest declared it publicly . 2 

Diodorus further says in his epitome of Megasthenes that at this 
annual meeting of philosophers they gave forecasts of drought and rain, 
winds and diseases . 3 

According to Arrian, these Brahmins, whom he calls sophists, 
received the highest honour because they did not work for their liveli- 
hood and so were exempt from taxation . 4 

As to sramanas , according to Strabo some of them were Hylobioi or 
forest-dwellers, where they lived on the leaves of trees and on wild fruit. 
They clothed themselves in bark and remained unmarried throughout 
their life as perpetual or naishthika Brahmacharis. 

These sramanas were not necessarily Buddhists. They might be Brahmins 
in the third asrama of life. They were consulted by the kings on matters 
of worship and religion . 5 They trained themselves to endurance and 
could remain for a whole day motionless in one fixed attitude.* 

Some again were physicians who effected cures by regulating diet rather 
than by physic, preferring medicines like ointments and plasters, which 
could be externally applied, to drugs. 

Besides Brahmins and sramanas, Strabo mentions a third class of philoso- 
phers whom he calls pramani ( pramanika ), who are rationalists and ‘fond of 
argument’. Some of them lived on mountains and others went about naked 
and were called gymnetai . 7 According to Arrian these sophists or ascetics 
fcould come from any caste . 8 The life of a sanyasi was indeed open to all 
castes. The Greek interest in the Indian ascetics also affected Alexander 
who wanted to see them. Some of them were discovered at a place about 
ten miles from the city of Taxila, practising meditation. When told that 
the Yavana king wanted to learn theirwisdom, their leader answered that 
no one coming in the bravery of European clothes, hat and top-boots 
could learn their wisdom. To do that he must strip naked . 9 Another 
saint whom the Greeks called Dandamis did not care to see Alexander 
even on pain of death, but said, ‘God alone is the object of my homage, 
Alexander is not God, since he must taste of death. I have no fear or 

1 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr., pp. 98-9 * Ibid. p. 102 

• Ibid. p. 83 ’ McCrindle, Ancient India, p. 76 

• Ibid. p. 41 * Meg. & Arr., p. 213 

• Ibid. p. 209 * CHI. i p. 358 

‘ Ibid. p. 102 



BINDUSARA 


19 


favour to ask. What Alexander can offer is utterly useless. The Brahmins 
neither love gold nor fear death.’ 1 

Chandragupta Maurya was succeeded in 299 b.c. by his son Bindusara 
He was known by his title Amitraghata, slayer of foes. The title must 
have been earned by him by virtue of some of his conquests. But details, 
of such conquests are lacking. A vague hint is given by the author of 
Xrya-Manjusri Mula-kalpa, and by Hemachandra and Taranatha who 
state that that apostle of violence, Chanakya, outlived Chandragupta and 
continued a minister of Bindusara as ‘one of his great lords’. Taranatha 
states 2 that Chanakya accomplished the destruction of the kings and 
ministers of sixteen towns and made Bindusara master of all the territory 
between the eastern and western sea. Some take this passage to indicate 
Bindusara’s conquest of the Deccan; but from Rudradaman’s inscription 
already cited we know that a large part of Western India was already a part 
of his father’s empire. At the same time his rule was challenged by a revolt 
at Taxila which he had to depute his son Asoka to quell. The utmost that 
can be said for him is that he was able to keep intact the very large 
empire that he inherited, but he can hardly be credited with any addition 
to it by his own conquests. At the same time we have evidence to show' that 
he was of a happy-go-lucky disposition, given to ease and luxury. Taking 
advantage of his father’s friendly relations with the Greek king Seleucus, 
he asked that king’s son Antiochus I Soter to favour him with a supply 
of ‘sweet wine, figs and a philosopher’. Antiochus sent Daimachus to 
his court as ambassador. Pliny mentions that another Greek king, Ptolemy 
Philadelphus of Egypt (285-247 b.c.), sent Dionysius as ambassador to 
India. The dates of Ptolemy’s reign are consistent with the conjecture that 
Dionysius may have been accredited to Bindusara’s court. 

Not much evidence is available about the facts of Bindusara’s reign or 
administration. We have already mentioned that Bindusara deputed 
ASoka, his ablest son, to quell a rebellion at Taxila, the capital of the 
north-western province. Asoka also served as his viceroy at Ujjain, the 
capital of the AvantirSshtra or the province of Avanti. It appears that 
Bindusara first appointed his eldest son Sumana (also named Suslma) 
viceroy at Taxila and ASoka at Ujjain. ASoka’s deputation to Taxila was 
arranged when the revolt at that place got out of his brother’s control. 

Bindusara is said to have had a ‘privy council’ ( mantriparishat ) of 500 
members. His prime minister (agramStya) was a person named Khallataka 
who, according to the DivySvadSm, was ASoka’s supporter in his 
supposed contest for the throne. 

Asoka’s mother was named Subhadrang! and also Dharmd. Sumana 
was his step-brother, while Tishya was Asoka’s youngest brother. 


Meg. & An., pp. 123-9 



Chapter II 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 

B indusara was succeeded by his son Asoka on the Mauryan throne. 

As many as thirty-four different inscriptions of this monarch have been 
found all over India, throwing light not only on his administration, religious 
faith and missionary activities but also on his family and private life. It 
is true that there are some Buddhist works which set forth his life and 
work, but their trustworthy character has been rightly called in question. 
Their one aim seems to be to eulogize Buddhism by showing how cruel 
and tyrannical Asoka was before he became a Buddhist and how pious 
and exemplary a king he became after his conversion. This casts a strong 
suspicion on the correctness of their account. Such is not the case with 
his inscriptions which, being engraved by his orders and thus being con- 
temporary records, are of undoubted veracity. The following account 
is therefore based on these epigraphic records, and we may be sure that 
it is not fiction but history. 

The edicts of Asoka are concerned with Dhamma (Skt. Dharma) and 
the measures he adopted to disseminate it. It is no wonder that they 
throw a flood of light on his life after he became a Buddhist. Incidentally 
they tell us something about his earlier life and also his family. The 
Ceylon chronicles say that after the death of his father, Asoka seized the 
throne by massacring ninety-nine of his brothers, and sparing only one, 
the youngest, namely, Tishya . 1 This story is refuted by his inscriptions 
which speak, not of one brother, but of several, living in the thirteenth 
year of his reign not only in Pataliputra, his capital, but also in various 
to t wns of his empire. They speak also of his sisters living both in Patali- 
putra and the mofussil towns. Similarly, he speaks of his queens and his 
axarodharta or harem. Of the former he had at least two. In one place 
he refers to his second queen , 2 showing that even then it was customary 
to fix the relative rank of the queens. The name of this second queen 
was KaruvakI, who was the mother of his son TIvara. Again, the mem- 
bers of Asoka’s avarodhana were living not only at his capital but also 
in the provinces, and in one place 3 he distinguishes them from his queens 
C devis ). This means that some inmates of his harem were his left-handed 
wives of a status lower than that of a queen. This reminds us of the 
Ceylonese tradition that when Asoka during his father’s lifetime was 
viceroy at Ujjain, he formed a connection with a lady of the Setthi class 


MV. v 19-20 ; MV. V 40, however, the first of Bindusara’s sons, 

says that he did away with only 1 Hultzsch, p. 159 

one elder brother, Sumana, * Ibid. p. 131, CC. 



ASOKA 


21 


at Vedisagiri (Besnagar) who however continued to reside there even when 
Asoka seized the throne and was permanently settled at Pataliputra . 1 
Asoka speaks also of his sons (kumaras) distinguishing these from the 
Devl-kumaras who probably were his step-brothers— and of his brothers, 
sisters and other relatives . 2 How many sons Asoka had we do not know. 
One of these was surely TTvara whom we have just noticed. His records 
refer to three of the Kumaras as being in charge of the three viceroyalties 
of Takshasila, Ujjayini and Tosall, and one Aryaputra or heir-apparent as 
vicegerent at Suvarnagiri. This shows that Asoka had at least four sons. 

There is one edict of Asoka which sheds some light upon his private 
life. When he was at Pataliputra and was free from his official routine 
work, he was to be found, we are told , 3 either regaling in the dining half 
or engaged with the inmates of his harem, either retired to his inner 
chamber or inspecting the royal stud, either enjoying a horse ride or begui- 
ling his time in the royal orchards. Or sometimes when Asoka went 
out of Pataliputra on pleasure excursions ( vihara-yatra ), he enjoyed the 
chase and other diversions. That the chase has been a passion with Indian 
princes, both in modern and ancient times, is very well known. That 
the chase again formed the principal feature of Asoka’s pleasure tours 
is clear from the fact that he does not think it necessary to tell us what 
his other diversions were on such occasions. We do, however, know 
from the Sanskrit literature 4 5 that musical concerts, dainty dishes and 
conjurer’s tricks played an important role on such pleasure trips. Further, 
we know what articles of food gratified his palate, for one inscription 
of his tells us that immediately before Asoka became a staunch vegetarian, 
three animals were killed for the royal table, two peacocks daily and one 
deer occasionally.* As the animal regularly killed for his food was not 
the deer, but the peacock, it seems that he was particularly fond of pea- 
fowl; and we know from Buddhaghosha, a Buddhist writer of the fourth 
century, that pea-fowl were a most favoured dish with the people of 
Madhyadesa, or Middle Country, to which Asoka no doubt belonged * 6 * 

The fullest appellation whereby the king styles himself is Qevanam- 
priya Priyadarsi RdjS. It is curious that he does not call himself by his 
personal name, viz., Asoka, in any inscription excepting one from Maski.’ 
The name by which he is generally known in his records is Priyadarsi. 
which was his epithet. Raja was, of course, his title; and so also Deva- 
nampriya, as in the case of his grandfather who must have borne the 
same titles . 8 Wherever dates are mentioned in his records, they are 
counted from the year of his coronation. This has led some scholars 
to believe the Sinhalese tradition that Asoka was crowned four years 


1 MV. xiii 8-11 

' Hultzsch, p. 136 

s RE. VI (d), Hultzsch p. 11 

* A/Wi.(Kumbakonam edn.) xv 1,18-19 

5 RE. I, Hultzsch, p. 2 

* Saratthappak&sini (Ceylon, 1898) p. 

105 f. PTS. I p. 151 


7 Hultzsch, p. 174 
4 Cf. Shah., viii 17(a); Hultzsch, 
p. 59. The word was an honorific 
at least till the days of Patanjali 
and had not the derogatory mean- 
ing which attached to it later. 
JBBRAS. xxi p. 339 f. 



22 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


after his accession to the throne . 1 But this tradition also tells us in 
the same breath that on his father’s death he seized the throne by massacr- 
ing ninety-nine of his brothers, a story refuted by his inscriptions, as 
we have seen. If this part of the tradition is found to be a fiction, there 
is no reason why any credence should be given to the other part. Besides, 
to count dates from the year of coronation seems to have been the prac- 
tice of the Mauryan court. Thus in the caves of the Nagarjunf Hill there 
are at least three inscriptions of Dasaratha, grandson of Asoka, which 
are dated by reference to his coronation.* Are we to suppose here also 
that some period elapsed between Dasaratha’s coronation and his acces- 
sion to the throne? Further it appears that ASoka was in the habit 
of celebrating the anniversary of his coronation by the release of prisoners. 
Thus one edict of his which is dated in the twenty-sixth year of his reign, 
says that it was the twenty-fifth time of his setting the prisoners free . 3 
This also shows that the twenty-sixth was the current year of his reign, 
and it seems that wherever he has specified dates in his monuments, they 
are to be taken as current, not expired, regnal years. Now, it is worthy 
of note that according to Kautilya’s Arthasastra the king shall stop certain 
activities of his capital town on Nakshatra days of the ruler and the 
country. And, curiously enough, Asoka specifies only two Nakshatras 
in his inscriptions, namely, Tishya and Punarvasu . 4 Of these, greater 
importance is attached to the former. It is not unreasonable to infer that 
Tishya was the Nakshatra of the king. Punarvasu thus becomes the 
Nakshatra of the country, that is, we suppose, of Magadha. 

Let us now see how Asoka behaved himself as king before he became 
an ardent missionary of Buddhism. He seems to have done what the 
ancient kings of India did— he feasted and amused his subjects. The mode 
of public entertainment that he followed was the celebration of the 
samdja .* This samdja was of two kinds. In one the people were treated 
to a banquet where meat played a most important part. This no doubt 
gratified the palate of the people. In the other they were entertained with 
dancing, /nusic, wrestling and other performances in an amphitheatre. 
This doubtless feasted both the eye and the ear of the subject. The 
celebration of a samdja was unquestionably a diplomatic move to keep 
the people pleased and satisfied, which was welcomed and availed of by 
the rulers of ancient India. We know that Kharavela, king of Kalinga. 
and Gautamlputra Satakarni, king of the Deccan, amused their capitals 
with samdjas and utsavas. In fact, the Arthasastra itself lays down that 
a king shall actively participate in the celebration of the samdja or utsava 
of his country or its tutelary deity.® Both kinds of samdja were for a 
long time celebrated by Asoka. But when he began to preach Dhamma 
he naturally tabooed that kind where animals were slaughtered to provide 


‘Ibid, (k) and n. $ 

4 RE. I, Hultzsch, p. 2 and n 4 
* KA. xiii ch. 5 (p 4074 


1 MV. v 22 
8 1A. xx pp. 364 ff. 

•PE. V(l), Hultzsch, p. 128 



CONQUEST OF KALINGA 


23 


meat. As there was nothing in the other samlja for him to object to, 
he continued to celebrate it, imparting, however, a slightly different turn 
to it, because the spectacles that he now exhibited were not of the usual 
kind but were designed not only to entertain his subjects but also to create 
and foster in their minds a longing for Dhamma. The kind of spectacle 
he now introduced for the amusement and the edification of the people 
will be considered in the sequel. 

Reasons of state seem also to have led this king to take another step 
in the same direction. The record which speaks of his celebration of the 
samaja also speaks of the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of animals 
that went on every day in the royal kitchen before this edict was promul- 
gated. The case is exactly analogous to that mentioned in the Maha- 
bharata , 1 where we are told that two thousand cows and two thousand 
other cattle were slain daily in the kitchen of king Rantideva to be doled 
out as meat to his subjects. This practice of doling out food daily to the 
people was preserved till recently in some of the ‘Native States’ of India. 
Like Rantideva, Asoka must have distributed meat freely among the 
indigent and needy with doubtless the same object in view, namely, to 
make himself popular. But he discontinued this practice and stopped 
animal slaughter in his kitchen the moment his conscience was aroused 
and he turned preacher. 

The earliest event of ASoka’s reign that we find recorded in his inscrip- 
tions is his conquest of Kalinga, which roughly corresponds to modern 
Orissa and the Ganjam district of Madras, combined. Why, instead of 
invading the Chola and Papaya countries of the south, which his 
father Bindusara tried to subdue, he conquered and annexed Kalinga 
to his empire is not quite clear. Possibly Kalinga was a thorn in the 
body politic of his dominions. Andhra, which lay to the south of Kalinga 
and comprised inter alia the modern Krishna and Godavari districts, was 
conquered by Bindusara. Thus on one side of the Maurya kingdom 
was Chola and on the other Kalinga. According to Hindu political 
theory, Kalinga and Chola were natural enemies of the Maurya povter 
and therefore natural friends of each other. It is not unreasonable to 
suppose that in Bindusara’s war on Chola and Pandya, Kalinga was an 
ally of the latter, attacked the Maurya forces from the rear and was thus 
chiefly instrumental in its ending in failure. It was therefore perhaps 
supremely imperative to reduce Kalinga to complete subjection. 2 To 
this task Asoka must have set himself as soon as he felt he was securely 
established on the throne. The opportunity, however, did not present 
itself before the eighth year of his reign. It was not an easy task to subju- 
gate Kalinga. Asoka vividly describes the horrors and miseries of this 


Mbh., iii 212, 8-10 ; vii 67, 16-18 ; 
xii 29, 127 

'This highly speculative reasoning is 
left as the late Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar 
wrote it, though it has not been possi- 


ble to find any tangible authority in 
favour of it. Dr. Bhandarkar himself 
passed away before he could answer 
the letter requesting him to state his 
authority. — Ed. 



24 ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 

war. Oaa hundred and fifty thousand, he says, ‘ware carried away [as 
captives]; 103,033 were slain, and many times as many died.’ 1 These 
are the figures for Kalinga only, and do not include the casualties in the 
king’s army. These are appalling figures for a tiny state like Kalinga. 
For Pliny, on the authority of Megasthenes, thus describes the military 
strength of this country such as it was half a century before the time of 
ASoka. ‘The royal city of the Calinga,’ he says, ‘is called Parthalis. 
Over their king 60,000 foot-soldiers, 1000 horsemen, 700 elephants keep 
watch and ward in “procinct of war”.’ 2 This is, however, one-fourth 
of the casualties of Kalinga in her struggle with Asoka. And it is not 
at all impossible to assume that Kalinga received reinforcement from 
her allies Chola and Pandya, by sea. Be that as it may, Kalinga was laid 
low, and the Maurya power was now enabled to promote its policy of 
expansion by turning its arms against the Dravidian states in the penin- 
sula and complete the conquest of the whole of India. But soon after 
his conquest of Kalinga, Asoka became a Buddhist. It is true that for 
about a year he was lukewarm, but thereafter he was so strenuous 
in his exertions for the Dhamma that his mind was fired with the enno- 
bling aspiration of becoming the supreme ruler of the earth, not through 
territorial, but through spiritual, conquest. Thenceforward the very 
remembrance of the war struck him with extreme shame and remorse. 
When an unconquered province, he says, is being conquered, some of the 
combatants are slaughtered on the field, some afterwards die of wounds 
and a good many are carried away captive. This is regrettable enough. 
What is more regrettable is that most of the men who meet with one 
or another of these contingencies are really good souls devoted to the 
practice of Dhamma. And what is still more regrettable is that the 
miseries of war do not end here, but the slaughter, death, or captivity 
of any one of the combatants means disaster and affliction to his numerous 
friends, acquaintances and relatives who, though they themselves are 
safe and well-protected, yet feel unbounded affliction for him. Anybody 
who reads in the original 3 this unsurpassable description of the atrocities 
of war capnot but be struck with the language of this rajarshi, so instinct 
with personal feeling, and we feel that we still hear the rocks echoing 
across the ages, clearly and distinctly, the heart-rending wail of a penitent 
soul. 

So the province of Kalinga was added to the already extensive empire 
of the imperial Maurya dynasty. Let us now consider other questions 
connected with this empire. We have already had a fairly good idea 
of its limits, but Asoka’s inscriptions enable us to determine them more 
accurately. The very location of his monuments throws a most welcome 
light on the subject. Of these monuments, what are called the Fourteen 


» RE. XIII, Hultzsch, p. 47 

‘IA. vi p. 338 (McCrindle, Meg. <4 Arr.. pp. 135-6) 

•RE. XIII 



EXTENT OF EMPIRE 


25 


Rock Edicts are of the highest importance to us. We shall begin with 
the east, and move westwards. Two copies of these edicts have been 
found near the Bay of Bengal, one at Dhauli in Orissa and the other at 
Jaugada in the Ganjam district of Madras. Both these versions, it will 
be seen, were situated in the newly conquered province of Kalinga. 
Turning northwards we find a third copy at Kalsi in the Himalayas in 
the Dehra Dun district of Uttar Pradesh. Proceeding westwards we 
notice two versions, one at Mansehra and the other at Shahbazgarhl, 
both situated in the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan. It may 
also be mentioned that in Laghman, old Lampaka, on the north bank 
of the Kabul river, fragments have been found of the Rock and Pillar 
Edicts of Asoka in Aramaic characters . 1 Another Aramaic inscription 
from Taxila containing the form Priyadarsi may also belong to Asoka’s 
time . 2 Coming down from here to the south and moving along the 
western coast, we may take note first of a seventh copy near Junagadh 
in Kathiawar and an eighth at Sopara in the Thana district of Bombay 
State. A ninth version of the same Fourteen Rock Edicts has recently 
been discovered in South India at Yarragudi in the Kurnool district of 
Andhra State. Side by side with these has been traced also a Minor 
Rock Edict of Asoka. Three copies of this and another Minor Rock 
Edict are known to exist at three different places, but all close to one 
another in the north of Mysore. Thus the locations of these Edicts are 
by themselves enough to give us an accurate idea of the wide expanse of 
Asoka’s territory. 

The same story is told by the inscriptions also. Edicts II, V and XIII 
of the Fourteen Rock Edicts, just noted, mention peoples in some of the 
outlying provinces of Asoka’s kingdom. They are the Yonas, Kambojas, 
Gandharas, Nabhaka-Nabhapanktis, Rashtrikas, Bhojas, Andhras, and 
Parimdas. It is easy to locate them all except the Nabhapanktis and 
Parimdas . 3 The Yonas are to be identified with the Greek colony of 
Nysa, between the rivers Kopen (Kabul) and Indus. They met Alexander 
as he was marching into India . 4 The Kambojas have to be located in 
the province neighbouring Rajaori to the south of Kashmir. Gandhara 
in Asoka’s time was the country having Takshasila for its capital. The 
Rashtrikas must have occupied the Nasik and Poona districts, and the 
Bhojas, the Thana and Kolaba districts of Bombay together with some 
conterminous parts of Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad State. The 
French scholar, Senart, seems to be right in supposing that these out- 
lying provinces have been enumerated in a definite order. In that case 
it may be surmised that the Nabhaka-Nabhapanktis were somewhere 
in Baluchistan, and the Parimdas, as they are mentioned last and after 
the Andhras, are to be tentatively placed somewhere in the easternmost 


1 BSOS. xih p. 80 f. 
s El. xix p. 253 

s Bhandarkar, Asoka, pp. 29-38 


4 Carmichael Lectures (1921), pp. 25 ff. 
Tam, The Greeks in Bactria and India, 
p. 101 



26 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


part of Asoka’s empire. Possibly the Pariiiidas may have survived in 
the modern Barendra, the north division of Bengal . 1 

The same conclusion is confirmed by what Asoka says about the antas 
or the kings of the bordering dominions. They fall into two groups 
according as their kingdoms were in India or outside. The rulers consti- 
tuting the first group are the Chodas, Pandyas, Keralaputra, Satiyaputra 
and Tamraparni. As Keralaputra and Satiyaputra have been mentioned 
distinctly in the singular, the inference is that individual rulers are meant 
in either case. And as Chodas and Pandyas have been mentioned in the 
plural, the further inference is that in Asoka’s time there were more than 
one Choda and one Pandya king. Of these, one Choda king was the 
ruler of Orthoura, mentioned by Ptolemy as the capital of the Sornagas 
(Choda-Nagas). The name occurs in Soretai (Chodatra). Orthoura 
has been identified by Cunningham with Uraiyur near Trichinopoly. 
This was therefore the southern Chola kingdom, the northern being 
probably identical with the territory round about Arkatos (Arcot), also 
mentioned by Ptolemy as the capital of the Sorai (Chodas). The clue 
to one Pandya kingdom is certainly furnished by Ptolemy when he speaks 
of ‘Modoura’ as ‘the royal city of Pandion.’ This Modoura is obvious- 
ly the Madurai of Madras State. Thus one Pandya kingdom, the 
southern, comprised Madurai, Tirunelveli and the adjoining districts; 
and the other, the northern, was probably located in the modern Mysore 
State. Keralaputra must have held South Canara, Coorg, Malabar 
north-west Mysore and northernmost Travancore. And the kingdom 
of Satiyaputra must have comprised the greater portion of modern Tra- 
vancore . 2 Such were approximately the boundaries of the southern states 
which met those of the Mauryan empire. The southern boundary of this 
empire is marked roughly by a line drawn from Pulicat near Madras 
in the east, to Venkatagiri (Tirupati), Gutti, Kurnool and Chitaldrug, right 
up to the northern point of the South Canara district on the west . 3 
• The anta or ‘frontier king’ whose dominions were conterminous with 
those of Asoka on the north-west was Amtiyoka, who is doubtless Antio- 
chus II, 'grandson of Seleucus, who was the Greek king contemporary 
with Chandragupta, grandfather of Asoka. On the further side of Antio- 
chus’s kingdom, we are told, were ruling the four Greek princes Turamaya, 
Amtekina, Maga and Alikasumdara. All the five Greek kings may easily 
be recognised to be : Antiochus II Theos of Syria (261-246 b.c.) ; 
Ptolemy II Philadelphus of Egypt (285-247) ; Antigonus Gonatas of 
Macedonia (276-239) ; Magas of Cyrene ( c . 300-C.250) and Alexander 
of Epirus (272-C.255) or more probably of Corinth (252-C.244). These 
five Greek princes were all living between 252-250 b.c. ASoka could 
thus not have promulgated Rock Edict XIII, the edict in which he men- 

1 Hultzsch (xxxtx) locates Nabhakas and Nabha- 2 See ch. xvi, for another sugges- 

pahktis at the Nepalese frontier, and observes tion. 

that the Pariiiidas were an eastern tribe. — Ed. 3 Bhandarkar, Asoka, pp. 38-45 



INTERCOURSE WITH THE WEST 27 

tions all these names, earlier than 252 B.c. — that is, earlier than the twen- 
tieth year of his reign. 1 

It is worthy of note that Rock Edict XIII clearly implies that Asoka 
dispatched official legations to the courts of all the antas, whether in 
India or outside. This means that he sent envoys to the courts of all 
the Greek kings mentioned above. So far as we know, Chandragupta 
had diplomatic relations with the court of Syria, and Bindusara with that 
of Egypt also. If these persisted in the time of Asoka, it is just what might 
be expected. But from the records of Asoka we learn that during his 
reign at least, the diplomatic relations extended to three more Greek 
states. In short, India at this time was closely knit up with the whole 
of the civilised world of the day which was held by these Greek rulers. 
These diplomatic relations must have been based on a solid foundation 
of mutual commercial interest. This means that during the Mauryan 
period India carried on a brisk commercial intercourse as far as Egypt 
and Greece. T his conclusion is supported by what Asoka says about 
the humanitarian measures which he adopted for the physical weal and 
comfort of man and beast. Thus Rock Edict II says that he imported 
and planted rare medicinal herbs everywhere in the world, both in his 
kingdom and in those of the antas, not only the antas who were in India 
but also those outside — in other words, in the dominions of the Yavana 
or Greek kings. This is not a mere exchange of occasional civilities 
between one king and another, but rather a well-planned and far-reaching 
philanthropic work, sedulously and systematically carried out in the differ- 
ent parts of the Greek world. This would not have been possible unless 
a busy life was throbbing on both sides of the north-west frontier of India 
about this time regarding which history knows practically nothing, and 
caravans were moving to and fro, trafficking in all sorts of merchandise. 

This account is enough to give us a fairly good idea of the extent of 
Asoka’s dominions and also of the foreign states with which he exchanged 
embassies. We shall now try and see how his kingdom was administered. 
Asoka speaks of this kingdom generally as vijita 2 which literally me£ns 
‘a conquered (territory).’ Once only he refers to it as raju-vishaya, 3 
‘the royal territory.’ The kingdom was divided into a number of jana- 
padas or provinces, each janapada into pradesas or divisions, each pradesa 
into aharas or districts, and each ahara into vishayas or taluks. The 


Ibid. pp. 45-8. Or taking 250 b.c. 
the latest date, when these five Greek 
kings were all living and assuming 
that probably two years were required 
in those days for tidings coming to 
Pataliputra from the remotest of these 
Greek kingdoms, we may suppose 
that Rock Edict XIII was promul- 
gated in 248 b.c. On the other hand, 
I have elsewhere pointed out that this 
edict could not have been promul- 


gated prior to Pillar Edict VII, which is 
dated in the 27th year of Asoka's 
reign (D. R. B. loc. cit. p. 47 & rt. 1). 
Asoka thus came to the throne c. 275 
b.c. instead of 272, as appears to be 
the case if the reign periods specified 
in the Mah&vamsa are correct. Possibly 
Bindusara reigned not for 28 but for 
25 years only. 

1 RE. 11(a), Hultzsch, p. 3 ; also V (n), p. 32 
RE. XIII (R), Hultzsch, p. 46 



28 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


principal town of each taluk or subdivision was called kot(a, probably 
because it was a fortified place . 1 The heads of the divisions were desig- 
nated pradesikas', and those of the districts, the rajukas. Below the 
rajukas came the purushas who were in charge of the subdivisions. How 
the officers administering the provinces were designated we do not know. 
In somewhat later times they were known as rashtriyas or provincial 
governors corresponding to the subadars of the Mughal period. Thus 
the celebrated Junagadh inscription of Rudradaman 2 tells us that the 
province of Surashtra or Kathiawar was governed by the Rashtriya 
Pushyagupta in Chandragupta’s time, and by the Yavana 3 king Tushaspa 
when Asoka was king. It is thus clear that during the regime of Asoka 
one provincial governor or rashtriya was Tushaspa who was placed in 
charge of Surashtra. That a chief, and above all a Yavana ruler, could 
be a provincial governor need not surprise us. In the Gupta period some 
of the provincial governors were chiefs as they were designated maharajas. 
And the case is not at all unlike Raja Man Singh who, though a Rajput 
chief, was appointed by the Mussalman emperor Akbar to govern the 
province of Bengal. In the Gupta epoch, again, some of the provinces 
were administered by princes of the royal blood designated kumaras. 
The same was the case in the time of Asoka. Three instances of such 
kumara governorship are known from his edicts. Thus one kumara 
was stationed at Takshasila to govern the frontier province of Gandhara, 
and another at Tosall in charge of the newly conquered country of Kalinga. 
The third kumara held the province with its capital at Ujjayinl. There 
must have been many other provinces in the empire of Asoka which 
were governed by princes of the royal blood or by personages who, 
though they were not related to the royal family, were at least of the rank 
of a chief. 

The three kumara governors just referred to have been mentioned by 
Asoka in his separate Kalinga Edicts. And we notice some difference 
in^ regard to the degree of authority they exercised in their provinces. 
For, whereas the kumaras of Ujjayini and Takshasila have been asked 
to dispatch a mahamatra and make sure that there is no maladministra- 
tion in their jurisdiction, the same measure is intended to be taken in the 
Kalinga province, not by the kumara posted at Tosall, but by Asoka 
from Pataliputra. Again, while the kumara of Tosall is associated with 
mahamatras, the kumaras of Ujjayinl and Takshasila are mentioned by 
themselves . 4 It seems that the latter were invested with unfettered 
authority so far as their provinces were concerned, but Kalinga was 
placed under the joint rule of the kumara and the mahamatras, subject 
further to the control of the king himself. There is yet a fourth prince 
whom we have to take note of. He is mentioned in the Mysore copies 


1 RE. III(c), Hultzsch, p. 4 (Rajukas and 
Pradesikas) ; Samath (i) p. 162 for 
ahara ; ibid, (j) for kotta. 

* EL vra pp. 64-5 


cy ravana we have to understand 
here not a Greek but a Persian. 

4 Hultzsch, p. 97 



asoka’s administrations 


29 


of Minor Rock Edict I . 1 There we are introduced to an aryaputra 
and mahamatras who are stationed at Suvarnagiri and who communicate 
certain orders of Asoka to an officer at Isila. It is true that the term 
aryaputra denotes ‘a prince’. But if this is taken to be a fourth instance 
of a kumara governorship, it is curious that the same dignitary is designated 
once as kumara and another time as aryaputra. Besides, aryaputra does 
not always mean ‘a prince’. And we shall not be far from the truth 
if we suppose that aryaputra in the present instance stands for yuvaraja 
or ‘crown-prince’ who was vicegerent during Asoka’s temporary cessation 
of rule, possibly when he went on pilgrimage to Bodh Gaya where the 
Buddha obtained enlightenment, as we shall see. In that case, it seems 
that this yuvaraja was stationed at Suvarnagiri in Rajagriha, the old 
capital of Magadha, from where apparently he administered the Mauryan 
empire for some time . 2 

Below the provincial governor came a number of officials in a regular 
hierarchy. The first of these were the pradesikas who were each in 
charge of a division (pradesa ). They correspond evidently to the Divi- 
sonal Commissioner of the present day. Below them were placed the 
rajiikas who were apparently the magistrates and heads of the districts. 
In Asoka’s reign they were certainly entrusted with the power of giving 
awards and punishments, showing that they exercised magisterial powers. 
They also initiated and executed works of public utility, such as the digging 
of wells on roads, and thus contributed to the material welfare of the 
people. They were appointed over hundreds of thousands of men, and 
what a nurse is to the children of a man, they were, we are told , 3 to the 
subjects of Asoka, showing clearly again that they were in direct charge 
of the people of the province. They thus seem to be the heads of the 
districts and to have come into direct contact with the people. Below 
the rajiikas came the purushas, who were of three ranks in a descending 
order, high, middle and low . 4 It is very difficult to decide which of 
these purushas belonged to which of these ranks. We have not sufficient 
material bearing on this point. Perhaps to the high rank belonged the 
yuktas, nagara-vyavaharakas, and dharma-mahamdtras. The yuktas were 
district officers who received and kept accounts of revenue. They also 
managed the king’s property and had power to spend, where expense 
was likely to lead to an increase of revenue. Kautilya speaks not only 
of the yuktas but also of their assistants, the upayuktas. Curiously 
enough the designations, yukta and upayukta, survived to a late period, 
even to the tenth century. And sometimes instead of yukta and upayukta 
we meet with the slightly different forms, dyukta and viniyukta. It 


1 Hultzsch, p. 177 

* Ibid. n. 5, where Hultzsch gives 
this identification of Fleet, but suggests 
also Kanakagiri, south of Maski and 
north of the ruins of Vijayanagara as 
another probability according to H. 
Krishna Sastri. Jonnagiri near Yarra- 


gudi in the Kurnool Dt. where a com- 
plete set of the Rock Edicts has been 
found must also be taken into consi- 
deration — Ed. 

3 Hultzsch, p. 124 

4 PE. I (e), Hultzsch, p. 119 



30 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


seems that the yuktas and the upayuktas were both purushas and that 
whereas the former were the district officers, the latter were the sub-divi- 
sional officers. As regards the nagara-vyavaharikas, they were doubtless the 
same as the paura-vyavaharikas of the Arthasastra . 1 They are mentioned 
in one inscription as being appointed over many thousands of men . 2 
They were thus inferior to the rajukas who ruled over many hundreds 
of thousands. While the latter were district magistrates and heads, 
the former were merely city magistrates. Who the dharma-mahamatras 
were we shall see later. Suffice it to note here that they also were most 
probably district officials engaged upon the municipal work of seeing that 
no arbitrary imprisonment or arbitrary harassment was inflicted upon 
the people anywhere in the district and that there was perfect amity and 
concord between one religious sect and another. 

The Asoka inscriptions speak of two or three other classes of officials, 
such as stryadhyaksha-mahamatras, vachabhumikas ( vrajabhiimikas ) and 
anta-mahamatras . 3 The first of these are no doubt superintendents of 
women. Anybody who has studied the Arthasastra knows full well what 
different and complicated questions connected with woman, such as her 
maintenance, transgression, elopement and so forth, had to be tackled by 
the state. The state also recognised its duty of providing subsistence to 
helpless women when they were with child and also to the children they 
gave birth to. It is quite conceivable that there was appointed an officer 
especially for this purpose who was called stryadhyaksha. It is, however, 
somewhat difficult to understand who the vrajabhiimikas were. The 
term vraja, according to the Arthasastra , 4 denotes herds of cows and 
buffaloes, goats and sheep, asses and camels, or horses and mules. It 
seems there were different castes and tribes which reared different herds 
of cattle, that they were settled on grounds ( vraja-bhumi ) round about 
towns and villages, and that the state realised some revenue by levying 
light taxes on them. It seems that every district had some vraja-bhumi 
ynder its jurisdiction for supervision and assessment, and that the officer 
who was in charge of this duty was designated vrajabhiimika. The anta- 
mahamdiras alone now remain to be accounted for. Wherever Asoka 
uses the word anta, he takes it in the sense of ‘a frontier kingdom or 
people’ or the ruler thereof. They therefore appear to be the high officials 
who accompanied his envoys to foreign countries. 

ASOKA’ S CONVERSION TO BUDDHISM 

Asoka became a Buddhist in the ninth year of his reign, that is, about 
a year after his conquest of Kalinga. For one year he did not exert 
himself strenuously on behalf of his new religion. But thereafter a change 


‘Separate RE. I (b), Hultzsch, p. Ill ; 
KA. pp. 20, 245 
1 Separate RE. I (e) 


3 RE. XII (m), Hultzsch, p. 20 
and 22, n. 5 
*ii 6 



asoka’s conversion to buddhism 31 

came over him, and he was seized with an unflagging zeal. From about 
the middle of the tenth year he began to live with a Buddhist sangha and 
continued to do so for more than a year . 1 While he was thus with the 
sangha, it seems that he temporarily entrusted the reins of the government 
to the crown-prince, or aryaputra as he has been called, who was then 
stationed at Suvarnagiri, presumably the well-known hill of that name 
at Rajgir. And it further seems that as soon as he joined the sangha 
he went on pilgrimage with them and visited first the sambodhi( Bodh Gaya), 
the very place where Buddha became sambuddha or enlightened , 2 and 
later, in the twentieth year after his coronation, Lumbinigrama, the place 
of the Buddha’s birth, and the stupa of Buddha Kanakamuni which he 
had enlarged six years earlier. What with the elevating intercourse with 
the sangha and the enthralling sanctity attaching to this place, he became 
completely transformed and forthwith developed into a zealot. To 
such an extent, indeed, did he display his religious fervour during the 
year or so of his sojourn with the sangha, brief as it was, that he could 
impartially and fearlessly say about his work that ‘men who were so 
long unmixed with gods were now mixed with them throughout Jambu 
dvipa .’ 3 

What Asoka doubtless means is that through his missionary activity 
men became so good and virtuous that gods came down and mingled 
with them. Instances are not wanting, in the literature of any Indian 
religion, of men being worshipped by gods in this world as soon as their 
spiritual elevation was complete. And knowing as we do how miracles 
spring and cluster round the name of a saint even in India of the modern 
day, it is no wonder if some men following the Dhamma of Asoka became 
so holy and pure that they were believed to be visited by gods. 

This seems to be the real history of the initial period of his missionary 
career. This is just what we know from a critical study of his own records. 
It is worthy of note that they make absolutely no mention of any Buddhist 
saint or teacher who first converted him or who afterwards permanently 
influenced his later life. The Buddhist stories, on the other hand, tell 
us a number of things about his conversion which conflict with one 
another. Thus the Ceylonese chronicles say that he was first converted 
to Buddhism by Nigrodha, a boy monk who was just seven years old, 
and that he afterwards came in contact with Moggali-putta Tissa, the 
Head of the Buddhist sangha, who produced such a deep impression on 
his mind that he sent his son Mahinda (Mahendra) and his daughter 
Sanghamitta (Sanghamitra) to Ceylon to spread Buddhism there . 4 Nor- 
thern Buddhism, however, credits one Upagupta, a Buddhist teacher, 
with the conversion of the king and further tells us that Mahendra who 
converted Ceylon to Buddhism was not his son but rather his younger 


1 Rupnath inscr., Hultzsch, p. 166-7 

* RE. VIII (c), Hultzsch, pp. 36-7; Rumnundei 

and Nigali Sagar pillars, ibid. pp. 164, 165 


Rupnath 
MV. v 



32 ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 

brother . 1 It will be seen that there is a discrepancy in the monkish 
legends, not only in regard to the teacher who made Asoka a Buddhist, 
but also about his relationship with the princely monk who first implanted 
Buddhism in Ceylon. And what is most strange is that in his inscriptions 
Asoka makes no mention at all of the Buddhist saint who was his spiritual 
preceptor, though he played such a prominent part in his life. Knowing 
as we do what profound reverence the Indians have for their guru, whether 
they are private individuals or royal personages, it is indeed inexplicable 
that Asoka should make no mention of his, at least when he gives an 
account of his conversion or when he describes his multifarious missionary 
activities. The only inference that seems natural in these circumstances 
is that no Buddhist teacher of his day played any important role in the 
matter of his conversion. Indian kings in ancient times were fond of 
doing honour and showing liberality to the various religious sects, and it 
seems that in the cause of the study of religious truth, Asoka found 
Buddha’s doctrines and sayings to be the most soul-enthralling of his 
age, and therefore declared himself an adherent of Buddha’s Dhamma. 

That Asoka was a man of individuality in the matter of religion is amply 
proved by his Bhabru Edict. It opens with an expression of his faith 
in the Buddha’s Dhamma and Sahgha, and his declaration that the utter- 
ances of the Buddha are the gospel truth. It is thus impossible to dispute 
the sectarian character of this record. But its real object is to enumerate 
certain canonical texts and inculcate the paramount necessity of their 
study on the minds not only of the laity but of the clergy. In the first 
place the scriptural texts selected by him clearly show that he was fasci- 
nated not by the ritualistic or metaphysical intricacies of Buddhism, not 
by any set of rigid rules and regulations to be observed externally and 
mechanically, but rather by the fundamentals of that religion which 
conduce to real inner growth and help and guide in the path of spiritual 
elevation. This is a most important point to remember about Asoka. 
^ mere monk's life has no glamour for him. His mind is perforce attracted 
to the constituents of lofty and sublime character which are beneficial 
as much' to a layman as to a monk. Secondly, we have to notice that 
he inculcates the contemplation of these canonical texts not only on the 
laity but also on the monks and nuns. The king was himself a layman 
and not a monk, and was certainly never the head of the sahgha. Yet 
he impresses upon the monks and nuns the supreme necessity of pondering 
over his favourite religious texts. Such a wish emanating from a king 
might well be executed by the Buddhist sahgha, and certainly no Buddhist 
king who had any awe and reverence for the teacher who has converted 
him would ever venture to issue such a mandate to the sahgha except 
through him. But the very fact that Asoka does so shows that, when he 
became a Buddhist, he must have converted himself to that faith as the 
consequence of an impartial quest for religious truth, and that he 


Divyavadana, xxvi ; also Przyluski, La Legende. 



RELIGIOUS POLICY 


33 


felt an irresistible inner urge to play the role of a preacher not only to the 
Buddhist laity and clergy but to the whole world. 

That Asoka was a man of individuality in the sphere of religion is 
further proved by the extreme catholicity of mind he has displayed in 
various places in his edicts. Thus in Rock Edict XIII he admits that 
the practices of Dhamma, which he is never weary of exhorting his subjects 
to follow and which we shall soon consider in detail, are common to all 
sects, whether Brahmanic or Sramanic. It is therefore quite intelligible 
if in Rock Edict VII he expresses the wish that ‘all sects may dwell at 
all places in my kingdom, because they all desire self-restraint and puri- 
fication of heart.’ And further it is no wonder that he showered gifts 
and honours on men of all sects, whether recluses or householders, as 
he clearly informs us in Rock Edict XII. It is in this edict that his pene- 
trating insight into the sphere of religion reaches its highest pitch. For 
he proceeds further to say that although he has lavished gifts and honours 
upon all sects without any distinction, that does not give him satisfaction. 
What he hankers after is the growth of the essentials, sara-vadhl amongst 
them. But how is this growth of the essentials to be accomplished? 
‘The root of it,’ says he, ‘is restraint of speech. One should not do reve- 
rence to one’s own sect or disparage that of another without reason. Or 
it may be for specific reasons only. On the contrary, the sects of the 
others deserve reverence for one reason or another. By doing otherwise 
one hurts one’s own sect and does disservice to another’s sect. He 
who shows reverence to his own sect and condemns that of another, 
because he is attached to his own sect and wants to glorify it, inflicts, 
most assuredly, a severe injury on it.’ What course of action then is 
commendable ? Asoka replies ‘people shall hear and desire to hear one 
another’s Dhamma in order that all sects may be well-informed and 
conducive of good.’ ‘The fruit of it is this, namely, the exaltation of 
one’s own sect and the illumination of Dhamma .’ These extracts from 
the edict are enough to give an idea of the message of Asoka which is 
for all climes and for all ages. He seems to have carefully studied the 
doctrines of all the religious sects of his time, and the impartial conclusion 
at which he arrived seems to have been this: so far as the ethical side of 
religions is concerned, there is perfect unanimity and no divergence, 
because they all aim at self-restraint and purification of heart and inculcate 
the same moral virtues and the same moral practices. In fact, this is the 
essence of all religions. This should be seen clearly, and with every 
individual this should be the object of his life and the subject of his conduct, 
to whatever sect he belongs. Dissent and conflict arise apparently when 
the intellectual side alone of a religion is considered. This is the reason 
why there is so much diversity of view, acrimony of debate, in regard 
to the articles of belief and details of ritual, between one sect and another. 
It is this which tempts people to eulogise their own sect and run down 
that of others, thus rendering disservice to both the sects, whereas, as 
a matter of fact, they are in perfect union so far as the essence of religion 



34 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


is concerned. Asoka therefore insists upon the peoples listening to the 
Dhamma of one another’s sects. In this way their minds will become well- 
informed, and their narrow sectarianism put under proper control. This 
will enable them to perceive the essence of religion which has so long 
remained in the background. The consequence would be that they 
would not only exalt their own sect but also illuminate Dhamma which 
had so long remained hidden under a thick crust of ritual and doctrine. 
Anybody who critically studies the utterances of Asoka cannot but come 
to the conclusion that this Mauryan emperor, though he was a Buddhist, 
had yet brought an unbiased, unobsessed mind to bear upon the subject of 
religious truth and, like a true seer, distinguished the essential from the non- 
essential element of a religion and fearlessly proclaimed it to the world. 

Before, however, we describe the career of Asoka as missionary, it 
is essential to understand, what he meant by Dhamma. He not only 
enumerates the attributes that fall under Dhamma but also mentions the 
specific practices thereof. According to him Dhamma consists of : x 
sadhave or bahu-kayane, much good ; apasinave, freedom from depra- 
vity; day a, mercy ; dane, liberality ; sache, truthfulness ; sochaye, 

purity and madave, gentleness. Asoka also tells us how to translate 
these virtues into action. Thus daya means ‘non-slaughter of animate 
beings’ and ‘non-injury to creatures’, dane is ‘liberality towards 
friends, acquaintances and relatives and liberality to Brahman and 
Sramana ascetics;’ madave is to be manifested by ‘hearkening to father 
and mother’, ‘hearkening to the elders’, ‘seemly behaviour towards friends 
acquaintances and relatives’, ‘seemly behaviour towards Brahman and 
Sramapa ascetics’, and so on. By sadhava or kayana he evidently means 
works of public utility such as he carried out himself, and such as he 
describes in the following passages . 1 2 ‘On the roads I planted the banyan 
trees. They will offer shade to man and beast. I have grown mango 
orchards. I have caused wells to be dug at every eight kosas, and I have 
made many watering sheds at different places for the enjoyment of man 
&nd beast.’ He winds up this enumeration of charities by remarking that 
he has mentioned them in order that men may follow in this practice of 
Dhamma. The qualities and practices just specified form the positive 
character of Dhamma. But Asoka’s Dhamma has also a negative side 
which may be summed up in the word apasinava, ‘freedom from asinava' 
Asoka explains asinava by placing it side-by-side with papa 3 ‘sin’ and 
specifying the malevolent affections that lead to asinava, such as violence, 
cruelty, anger, conceit and envy. Thus not only the performance of 
moral duties and charities enumerated by him, but also freedom from 
the passions just mentioned, are necessary for the full and adequate fulfil- 
ment of Dhamma. 

No account of Asoka’s Dhamma can be complete unless we know with 

1 PE. II (c), Hultzsch, p. 120; 2 PE. VII, I. 23, Hultzsch, p. 130 

VII (ee), ibid. p. 131 2 PE. Ill, Hultzsch, p. 121 



asoka’s dhamma 


35 


what ultimate end this Dhamma was to be practised. Did Asoka believe 
in the next world? This question has, of course, to be answered in the 
affirmative, because he often contrasts this world with the next, hidata 
with palata, hida-lokika with pala-lokika, and so on. But what is it in 
the next world that a man secures through Dhamma ? Asoka replies: 1 
svarga, ‘heaven’. In one place, he tells us that the performance of 
Dhamma ‘begets endless merit ( punya ) in the next world,’ 2 and thus 
enables a man to attain to svarga. 

It will be seen that the Dhamma which Asoka preached is of a simple 
character. It is no wonder if it has much puzzled the scholars. Its 
Buddhist affiliation many have questioned, because here there is no mention 
at all of the Four Grand Truths ( arya-satyani ), the Eightfold Path (ash- 
tdhgika-mdrga), the chain of causation or the Nirvana, so intimately 
associated with the Dhamma enunciated by the Buddha. It is however 
forgotten that Buddhism has always been of a twofold character : (1) 
Dhamma for the monks and nuns for whom alone the Four Grand Truths, 
the Eightfold Path, and Nirvana exist, and (2) Dhamma for the househol- 
ders which alone Asoka, as a lay-follower of Buddhism, preached. And 
further it will be seen that whereas the qualities that go to form his Dhamma 
have been taken mostly from the ‘Lakkhana-suttanta’ of the Digha- 
Nikaya, the courses of conduct enumerated by him are exactly those 
prescribed for the Buddhist laity in the ‘Sigalovada-sutta’ of the same 
Nikaya which for that reason has been designated gihi-vinaya, ‘Institute 
for the house-men.’ Similarly the Buddha holds up svarga as the reward 
of Dhamma to a layman in the next life, the goal of Nirvana being reserved 
for a bhikshu. It is thus impossible to doubt that the Dhamma preached 
by Asoka is Buddhism, such Buddhism, indeed, as is practised by a lay- 
Buddhist. Again, it is true that Asoka’s Dhamma contains nothing 
that will not be assented to by other religious sects, such as Jainism, 
Ajlvikism and so forth. But so far as the courses of conduct laid down 
by Asoka are concerned, it is impossible to find them mentioned in that* 
specific group in any Jaina or Ajivika scriptures or, for the matter of that, 
anywhere except in the Buddhist ‘Sigalovada-sutta’ which is rightly styled 
gihi-vinaya as stated above. 

We thus see that Asoka was a Buddhist and also that the Dhamma 
he preached was not that simple piety which is common to all religions, 
but the specific code of moral duties laid down for a lay-follower of Bud- 
dhism. Let us now see what means he adopted for the promotion and 
propagation of Dhamma. In Rock Edict VIII he tells us that up to the 
tenth year of his reign he, like the previous kings, used to find recreation 
in vihara-yatra or tours of pleasure, where he indulged chiefly in hunting. 
In that year, however, he ceased going to the vihara-yatra and started 
instead the dhamma-yatra. And what relaxation did he find here ? 

1 Cf. e.g., RE. VI (L>. Hult7sch, p. It 

2 RE. IX (M), Hultzsch, p. 37 



36 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


Here first he paid visits and made gifts to the Brahmana and Sramana 
ascetics, and made visits and largesses of gold to the aged. He thus 
developed Dhamma in himself. Secondly, during these religious tours 
he came in contact with the provincials, delivered instruction in Dhamma 
to them and also held discussions about Dhamma with them. In other 
words, Asoka turned preacher in the right sense of the term. 

In Pillar Edict VII Asoka tells us that the question of propagating 
Dhamma amongst men was for a long time revolving in his mind. He 
admits that he was not the first king who thought of diffusing Dhamma 
far and wide. But the efforts of the past kings were not crowned with 
success. He therefore gave this matter all the serious and careful thought 
that it deserved, and hit upon a line of action for carrying out what 
earlier kings were unable to achieve. He knew that howsoever hard he 
worked as a missionary he was but a single individual, and it was not 
possible for him to approach all people. He therefore wisely thought 
of ordering his representatives, the officers, to follow in his footsteps 
and become missionaries like him. Thus Rock Edict III informs us that 
in the twelfth year of his reign he commanded the district officials, the 
yuktas, the rajukas and the pradesikas, whenever they were going on 
their circuit tour every five years, to deliver instruction in Dhamma to the 
people in that district in the discharge of their official duties. These 
district officers of the highest rank were thus not only officers but prea- 
chers too. This was a novel and ingenious mode of reaching all his 
subjects and propagating Dhamma amongst them. The idea was certainly 
Asoka’s own and is not known to have been put into practice before 
his time nor even after him until the time of Portuguese rule in India, 
when the highest officials combined the work of preachers with their 
ordinary duties. 

But mere preaching by a royal personage and his official hierarchy 
could not have gone very far if Asoka had not hit upon another ingenious 
jiode of impressing his religious instruction upon the minds of the 
people. Here he took his cue apparently from a Buddhist work called 
the Vimanavatthu. It describes the various rewards which are in store 
for a virtuous man in his next life as he becomes one kind of Deva or 
another according to the degree of his merit. One of the rewards is the 
vimana or column-supported palace, which is a centre of supreme bliss 
and which could be moved at the will of its divine owner. Another 
such reward is the hastin, or well-caparisoned, all-white, celestial elephant. 
These gods, again, are described as possessed of a resplendent complexion 
which is compared to lightning, a star, or fire. He thus seems to have 
begun his missionary career with the exhibition of the different orders 
of gods, their varying resplendent complexions, their heavenly palaces, 
celestial elephants, and so forth. These spectacles he must have exhibited 
in the samajas, not the samajas or feasts where the people were treated 
to meat and drink and which Asoka condemned, but the samajas or 
amphitheatres where the people were entertained with shows, music 



PROPAGATION OF DHAMMA 


37 


and dancing, and which he regarded with favour. The graphic represen- 
tations of the various classes of gods and the felicities they enjoyed, showing 
vividly what practice of virtue in this life ensured what heaven in the 
next, must certainly have produced a profound impression on the minds 
of the people. And there is nothing surprising if in the space of one 
year or so there was wide increase of D/tamma, such, indeed, as had never 
been accomplished ever before, as Asoka assures us. 

In Pillar Edict VIII Asoka further says, ‘The same [object] being in 
view, I have set up dhamma-stambhas, appointed dhamma-mahamatras 
and made dhamma-sravanas.' The last of these, namely, dhamma-sra- 
vanas or proclamations of Dhamma, is the same thing as dhamma-mdasti 
or instruction in Dhamma , which we have just seen were carried out by 
himself and the superior district officers personally preaching to the people. 
The dhamma-stambhas do not denote any material pillars as one is apt 
to suppose, but rather works of public utility which have been described 
above, in explaining the term sadhave or kalyaria an activity which accord- 
ing to Asoka is the first of the virtues constituting Dhamma. Even here 
he admits that he was not the first to provide man and beast with these 
comforts and that many kings preceding him carried out these works 
of benevolence. ‘But I have done this,’ he says ‘with the intent that men 
may follow these practices of Dhamma.' In other words he says he had 
done so, so that others might follow his example and perform similar chari- 
ties. There can be no doubt that this was Asoka’s real motive, for 
a little further on in the same edict he says : ‘Whatever charitable works 
1 have performed, these have been conformed to among men, and these 
they will perform [in future].’ So we may take it that the gentry and 
moneyed classes in his kingdom were thus induced to tread in the foot- 
steps of the king and perform similar works of public benevolence. 

The third measure which Asoka adopted for promoting Dhamma was 
the creation of the dhamma-mahamatras. They had to look to the spiritual 
as well as to the temporal good of the people. One of the duties with 
which these officers were entrusted was to occupy themselves with *all 
religious sects, especially the Buddhist, the AjTvikas and the Nijgranthas. 
By this we have most probably to understand that they were to bring 
about amity and concord between one sect and another, by emphasizing 
the points of agreement and putting an end to all acrimony and animosity 
so that every sect would thereby exalt itself, and Dhamma would shine 
more effulgently. There was also another duty assigned to them, con- 
nected with the organisation of charities just mentioned. He wished 
that in his philanthropic activity the members of his royal family should 
heartily co-operate. He therefore instructed the dhamma-mahamatras 
to approach them and elicit money grants from them for charitable 
purposes. In fact, they were to concern themselves with anybody who 
might be found to be ‘leaning on Dhamma, to be an abode of Dhamma , 
or be devoted to alms-giving.’ 

No accurate estimate of Asoka's work as a missionary can be formed 



38 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


unless we take into account what he did for the animal world. His work 
in that connection falls under two heads : firstly the means he took for 
the prevention of injury and slaughter of living creatures, and secondly, 
the steps he adopted to augment their physical happiness. Some light 
is thrown on the first of these points by Pillar Edict V, from which it 
appears that he first laid an embargo on the killing of any living creature 
that was neither eaten nor required apparently for any decorative or 
medicinal purpose. With that object in view he gives a long list of the 
fishes, birds and quadrupeds whose killing was prohibited. He also stops 
some of the brutal practices that were prevalent in his time. Thus he 
says : ‘Cocks shall not be caponed. Husks containing life shall not 
be burnt. Forests shall not be set on fire for mischief or injury [to life]. 
One living being shall not be fed with another living being.’ He further 
proceeds to state on what days of the month no fish shall be killed, and 
no animal shall be castrated or even branded. It is, however, worthy 
of note that these restrictions on the injury and destruction of life are not 
Asoka’s own invention but are practically the same as those specified 
in the Artha- or Dharma-sastra. But these restrictions sanctioned by 
Polity and Law, however rigorously they may have been enforced, could 
not have amounted to much. In fact, Asoka himself admits this in Pillar 
Edict VII, and says that he was able to achieve his real object, not by 
restrictions, but by nijhati that is, by exhortations . 1 The latter, we have 
seen, were carried on by his superior district officers, and two of the ethical 
practices they inculcated were anarambho-prananam, ‘non-slaughter of 
animate beings,’ and avihisa bhutanam, ‘non-injury to creatures .’ 2 Here 
his object is not merely to curtail injury and slaughter of life, but 
to prevent it altogether if he can. Pari passu with instructions on ahimsa, 
he himself set an example to the people in this respect. First, he stopped 
those samajas where he treated his subjects to a feast, and where many 
animals must have been killed to provide meat. Secondly, he discontinued 
the time-honoured custom he had been observing of doling out meat 
to the people from the royal kitchen. Thirdly, he did not spare even 
himself, and placed restrictions on the meat served at his own table. 
And finally he must have given up eating meat altogether, even the pea- 
fowl dish which was considered to be the finest dainty in Madhyadesa. 

So much in regard to the prevention of injury and slaughter of creatures 
in general. Let us now see briefly what measures he adopted for the 
promotion of their physical happiness. One of these consisted in the 
execution of charitable works for the enjoyment not only of man but 
also of beast. They have been described in Pillar Edict VII, and we 
have seen what they are. Practically the same works of benevolence 
have been enumerated in Rock Edict II. But the latter mentions addi- 
tional works which he executed and which are of great importance. 

1 Huitzsch (p. 137) renders the word ‘Consersion’, n. 1 — Ed. 

2 RE. IV (c), Huitzsch, p. 6 



DHAMMA-VIJAYA 


39 


Here Asoka says that he has established two kinds of chikitsa or curative 
arrangements, one relating to men and the other to animals. What he 
actually did in this connection had better be described in his own language. 
Thus : ‘Where medicinal herbs, wholesome for men and wholesome for 
animals, are not found, they have everywhere been imported and planted ; 
roots and fruits, wherever they are not found, have been imported and 
planted.’ What we have further to note here is that he carried out this 
work not only in his dominions but also in those of all the antas or the 
neighbouring independent kings. We have seen who they were. Well 
may Asoka therefore say, as he does in Pillar Edict II, that he conferred 
various benefits ‘on bipeds and quadrupeds, on birds and aquatic animals 
even to the boon of fife V 

This in brief is how Asoka managed to promote Dhamma. It will be 
seen that it was not simply within the boundaries, of his own empire, 
extensive as it was, but also in the realms of the independent kings far 
and near, that Asoka claims to have spread his Dhamma : ‘But this conquest 
is considered to be the chiefest by the Beloved of the gods, which is con- 
quest through dhamma- vijaya. And that again, has been achieved by the 
Beloved of the gods here and in the bordering dominions, even as far 
as six hundred yojanas. n We have thus to note that Asoka disseminated 
his Dhamma not only over the whole of India and Ceylon, but also over 
those parts of Syria, Egypt, Macedonia, Epirus and Cyrene which were 
under Greek domination. But this is not all. For, ‘even where the 
envoys ( dutas ) of the Beloved of the gods do not go’, says the Buddhist 
monarch, the people, ‘on hearing the utterances, the ordinances and 
the teaching of Dhamma by the Beloved of the gods, practise Dhamma 
and will so practise .’ 2 This may perhaps refer to China and Burma 
where his religious propaganda was not carried on. What is worthy 
of note here is that everywhere he pushed forward his mission work 
through his own officials, through the rajiikas, yuktas, pradesikas and 
dhamma-mahamatras so far as his own territory was concerned, and 
through dittos and anta-mahamatras in the foreign countries. 

Asoka, it must be admitted, assures us that he achieved his dhamma- 
vijaya not only over the whole of India and Ceylon but also over the 
independent Greek states holding Western Asia, Eastern Europe and 
Northern Africa. Is it ‘mere royal rodomontade,’ as the late Prof. Rhys 
Davids remarked? Or is there any foundation of truth in it? If Dhamma 
or Buddha’s doctrine was spread in those regions as Asoka claims to have 
spread it, the question arises whether Buddhism exercised any influence 
over the religions prevalent there. The most prominent of these was 
Christianity which, it is worthy of note, possesses some important features 
in common with Buddhism, such as confessions, fasting, rosaries and 
so on. Above all, there is Mara, the tempter, who was to Buddha what 

1 RE. XIII, (P) and (Q), Hultrsch, pp. 69-70 

2 Ibid, (sj 


Of < 

Qmtettttr* U;ut 



40 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


Satan was to Christ. The Buddhist books nowhere say that Buddhism 
was preached in those regions by the Buddhist monks. On the other 
hand, Asoka distinctly says that he had employed his official legations 
to the courts of contemporary Greek princes as much to propagate 
Buddha’s Dhamma as to carry out his humanitarian purposes. It is 
possible that the missions of Asoka to the West indirectly contributed 
something to the shaping of the tenets and practices of Christianity. But 
questions of cultural origins seldom admit of simple answers and often 
we lack the evidence for supporting confident assertions. The apparent 
analogy between Satan and Mara may well be due to both the concepts 
resting upon an earlier background of religious beliefs common to the 
whole of Western Asia and India, and the influence of Zoroastrianism 
should not be ignored. There were, however, at least two orders of 
pre-Christian Judaism namely, the Essenes and the Therapeutae (Thera- 
putra ?), in whose precepts and modes of life scholars have recognised 
the influence of Buddhism . 1 

From this discussion of Asoka’s Dhamma it is quite clear that first, 
the Buddhist emperor felt that he was concerned not simply with his 
subjects but the whole of mankind, not again merely with mankind but 
with the whole animate world; and that, secondly, he felt that his supreme 
duty was to secure the temporal weal of them all, and further of mankind 
the spiritual good also. He makes his position quite clear in Ropk Edict 
VI, where he says : ‘There is no higher duty than the welfare of the whole 
world. And what little effort I make is in order that I may be free from 
debt to the creatures, that I may render them happy here and they may 
gain heaven in the next world.’ The question that now arises is to what 
source was he indebted for this grand and noble ideal. Evidently A§oka 
is here aspiring to be a chakravarti dharmika dharmaraja who is defined 
in a Buddhist Pali-sutta as conquering ‘this earth to its ocean bounds, 
not by the chastising rod, not by the sword, but by righteousness ( dhamma ) 
and living supreme over it .’ 2 And as a matter of fact, one such chakra- 
varti we find actually described in the sutta, where he is asked not only 
to care 1 for men but also for beasts and birds and where he is represented 
to follow the progress of the Celestial Wheel and to go on, conquering, 
to the east, south, west and north. This chakravarti does not receive 
any political homage from enemy kings but preaches to them about 
ethical virtues and practices. Anybody who reads this story carefully 
will be convinced that we have here a case not of terrestrial, but of spiri- 
tual, conquest, and that the chakravarti is a supreme ruler of the earth 
not by physical might, but by moral and spiritual power. Evidently he' 
becomes a chakravarti, not by vira-vijaya, but by dhamma-vijaya. There 

l%8^ d 7l-£rf etr ‘ e in Man iyw) ' 

* ‘Chakkavatti Sihanada SuUanta’ of 
Digha Nikdya, 


Mention is made at p. 875 of JRAS. 1898 
of some Ptolemaic grave-stones with 
the Buddhist symbols of the wheel and 
triratna on them ; evidence of an 
Indian colony in Memphis c. 200 b.c. is 



effects of asoka's POLICY 


41 


can hardly be any doubt that Asoka took his cue for dhamma-vijaya from 
Buddhist suttas and aspired to become a chakravarti dharmika dharmaraja. 

Let us now see how the missionary activity of Asoka affected India 
politically. Even in the reign of Chandragupta, the Mauryan empire 
extended from the Hindukush to the frontiers of the Dravidian kingdoms 
occupying the apex of the peninsula. Asoka himself had for a time aided 
this centripetal force that had originated with Bindusara by conquering 
Kalinga. And if the vision of the chakravarti dharmika dharmaraja 
had not possessed and absorbed his mind, the empire of Magadha in the 
first instance would have extended over the whole of this country, making 
India one nation and afterwards might also have spread even beyond, 
making Pataliputra, like Rome, the capital of a world power. But in 
consequence of the foreign policy of dhamma-vijaya inaugurated by Asoka, 
India was lost to nationalism and political greatness. Nevertheless, she 
has doubtless gained in cosmopolitanism and humanitarianism which 
have now become the basic principles of Hindu society. 

Another result of the missionary activity of Asoka was the immense 
stimulus it imparted to Indian art. The architecture up to his time was 
mostly of wood. It was he who made it lithic. Megasthenes says, as 
we have seen, that Pataliputra was ‘surrounded by a wooden wall.’ In 
the Buddhist Pali Jatakas which throw light upon the Mauryan period, 
we find copious references to wooden buildings, a few to brick structures. 
This does not mean that the art of the stone-cutter was unknown, as 
reference to it is not wanting in the Jatakas themselves. Again, actual 
specimens of this art are preserved in a statue found at Parkham in Bihar, 
in a cyclopean enclosure-wall of a shrine at Nagari in Rajputana, and in 
a stone structure known as Jardsandh ki baithak existing at Rajgir also in 
Bihar. The first two are of about Asoka’s time and the last, of a some- 
what earlier period. Perhaps the best specimen of the stone art is the 
massive stone coffer which was exhumed from the Piprahwa stupa and 
which enshrined some relics of the Buddha. It is of the pre-Mauryan a^e, 
and betokens the highest quality of craftsmanship. Now, in his Edicts 
Asoka often says that one of his objects in inscribing them on rocks and 
columns is that they may endure permanently. When this idea dawned 
upon his mind, he availed himself of the stone-cutter’s art which was 
already in a highly evolved state. The effect of it was the inscribing of big 
rocks, the construction of huge monolithic pillars, and the excavation of 
rock-cut dwellings. The idea of engraving religious edicts on rocks may 
have been suggested to the Mauryan emperor by the decrees of the Achac- 
menian monarch Darius, one of which at least contains ‘the last solemn 
admonition of Darius to his countrymen with respect to their future 
conduct in policy, morals and religion.’ If, again, big rocks have been 
polished and inscribed, Asoka’s workmen probably did not show any 
superiority over the Persian craftsmen. The Mauryan emperor, how- 
ever, carried the idea one step further by bringing the columns into 
requisition, Pillars were not unknown to Persian architecture, but the 
6 



42 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


erection of pillars which were independent and did not form part of any 
edifices, seems to have originated in India, and is not traceable in Western 
Asia or Europe before the rise of the Roman empire. 

The reign of Asoka forms one of the brightest pages in the history 
of India. Lapse of time has not dimmed its lustre, nor has an increasingly 
minute study of its records revealed any reason for detraction. Asoka 
was one of the master minds of the world. Inheritor of a wide and highly 
organised empire, he proved fully worthy of his heritage. His greatness 
lay in his early and clear-eyed recognition of the true scale of human 
values, and in his steady endeavour thereafter to rouse India to listen to 
the call to a high moral effort which she received through him. A man of 
unbounded energy, he gave himself without stint to the tasks of perfecting 
the administration of his empire and ensuring the happiness of his subjects. 
The range of his sympathies was wide, and included in its sweep not only 
the lowly and the lost in the land of his birth, but the physical and moral 
well-being of the peoples of neighbouring lands and even of remote coun- 
tries, not to speak of his compassion for our fellow creatures of the animal 
kingdom. He displayed both his mental power and aesthetic taste when, 
without the least hesitation, he accepted whatever was best in foreign 
models in making his government more effective and in the erection of 
lasting monuments of strength and beauty. At his accession Buddhism 
was a struggling creed hardly different from any of its rivals. But he 
found solace in the company of its votaries when smitten with remorse 
for his military conquest of Kalinga. In return, after actively aiding the 
sarigha to put its house in order, he set the Buddha’s creed on the road 
to become a world religion. His memory has been kept green through the 
ages in all the vast lands where the Buddhist tradition has prevailed to 
this day. At the close of the thirteenth century a.d. the Burmese recog- 
nised an old chaitya in Bodh Gaya as one of the 84,000 chaityas built 
by Siri Dhammasoka when 218 years of the era of Lord Buddha had 
passed away. 1 Today India accepts his Samath lion-capital and the 
£)harma-chakra as the symbols of her new life. 

ASoka is the one conspicuous instance of a great monarch renouncing 
war as an instrument of policy in the hour of victory; he exhorted his 
successors to follow his example and ‘display the same zeal for the welfare 
of all men,’ but he also knew and said : ‘It is difficult to accomplish this 
without great zeal’ (RE. VI). There is no evidence that he neglected 
the defences of his empire or directed any of his numerous regulations 
against Brahmanas, whom he always mentions before the Sramanas and 
speaks of with high regard. His figure, like that of all heroes of nations 
was soon decked by legend with rainbow hues and the sculptors of Sanchl 
visualized parts of the growing saga. But much more alive and imposing 
than any legend is the real king as he emerges from his words and his 
work. He makes us think of Marcus Aurelius, of Constantine, of Charle- 


El, xi p, 119 



THE SUCCESSORS OF ASORA 


43 


magne, of St. Louis; but detailed comparisons are only likely to mislead, 
because for Asoka there was no question of a state religion or of persecu- 
tion or war even for a holy cause. He was indeed a great monarch whose 
reign constitutes one of those ‘rare and lightning epochs’ in the annals 
of nations when a people is vouchsafed a glimpse of happiness, perceived, 
if not possessed. 


THE SUCCESSORS OF A$OKA 


Asoka died about 236 b.c. The genealogical lists, given in the Brahman 
or the Buddhisf works, are after him hopelessly confused and discrepant. 
The Puranas, however, in spite of the luxuriant growth of recensions, 
agree in one most important fact, namely, the duration of the Maurya 
rule for 137 years. Another important fact in which they very nearly 
agree is the number of Maurya kings who ruled, this number being either 
nine or ten. If we now stick to the regnal period assigned by the Puranas 
to each prince, the Maurya order of succession may be arranged as follows, 
so as to satisfy the above conditions ; 


1. Chandragupta 

2. Bindusara, son of 1 

3. Asoka, son of 2 

4. Dasaratha 

5. Samprati, son of 4 

6. Salisuka 

7. Devadharman 

8. Satadhanvan, son of 7 

9. Brihadratha 


24 years. 

25 „ 

36 „ 

8 „ 

9 „ 

13 „ 

7 „ 

8 „ 

7 „ 


It will thus be seen that the immediate successor of Asoka was Dasaratha 
who, according to some Puranas, was his grandson. His father’s name 
given is Suyasas, 1 which is known neither to epigraphy nor to Buddhist 
tradition. Suyasas was possibly an epithet of Kunala or, what is more 
probable, his personal name. Buddhist legends say that Kunala was 
the heir apparent of Asoka but that he tore out his eyes and made himself 
blind on account of the intrigues of his step-mother Tishyarakshita. He 
could not thus have succeeded Asoka to the throne. Kunala’s son, 
Dasaratha, was consequently the immediate successor of A§oka. On 
the other hand, the Puranas apparently speak of another Mauryan line 
springing up from Kunala. We are thus told that Kunala’s son, Ban- 
dhupalita, was king for eight years and Bandhupalita’s successor, Indra- 
palita, reigned for ten years. It seems likely that this was a branch line 
of the Mauryan dynasty set up at the instance of Dasaratha himself for 
the administration of the Maurya empire. The case is not unlike that 
of Govinda III of the main Rashtrakuta family of Manyakheta who placed 


Pargiter, DKA. p. 28 n. 30 



44 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


his elder brother, Indra, in charge of the Lata province. Indra thus became 
the originator of a branch feudatory line of the Rashtrakutas holding 
South Gujarat. 

Fortunately for us Dasaratha is known not from the Puranas alone. 
That he was a historical person is clearly proved by the fact that three 
inscriptions of his are on the walls of caves in the NagaijunI Hills in 
Bihar, which he dedicated to the Ajlvikas, just as Asoka did in the Barabar 
Hills not far distant. He too, like Asoka, styled himself Devanam-priya, 
— a title which in India, at any rate, is found associated with the Mauryas. 
The language and alphabet, again, of these records leave no doubt as 
to Dasaratha’s being separated from Asoka only by a short interval. 
These cave dwellings were bestowed upon the Ajlvikas by Dasaratha 
immediately after his coronation. We know of no other event of his 
reign, which seems to have been of a brief duration, the Puranas allotting 
him only eight years. 

Dasaratha was, according to the Puranas, succeeded by his son, 
Samprati. In the matter of the propagation of the Jaina faith, Jaina 
records speak as highly of him as Buddhist works do of Asoka in respect 
of Buddhism. In his Pd(aliputra-kalpa Jinaprabhasuri, the well-known 
Jaina Acharya and author of the Tirtha-kalpa, says : ‘In Pataliputra 
flourished the great king Samprati, son of Kunala, lord of Bharata with 
its continents, the great Arhanta who established vihards for Sramanas 
even in non-Aryan countries.’ Samprati is said to have raised thousands 
of temples to Tirthamkaras just as Asoka is reported to have erected 
thousands of Buddhist stupas. He was converted to Jainism, we are 
told, by Suhastin who was separated by about seventy years from the 
patriarch Bhadrabahu, the guru of Chandragupta who also was separated 
from Samprati by practically the same period, if our chronology is accep- 
ted. According to the Jaina traditions, Samprati had two capitals, one 
at Pataliputra and the other at Ujjain. Besides, the fact that all the Jaina 
njonuments in Gujarat, Kathiawar and Rajputana, whose builder is not 
known, are attributed to Samprati, shows that he ruled over Western 
India. There is nothing therefore to support the surmise that after the 
death of Asoka the Mauryan empire was partitioned among his two grand- 
sons, Dasaratha and Samprati, the former holding the eastern and the 
latter the western division of the dominions. Moreover, such a surmise 
rims counter to the concurrent testimony of the Puranas that Samprati 
was a son of Dasaratha, and, therefore, not a grandson, but a great- 
grandson, of Asoka. 

Samprati was succeeded by Salisuka, which is a rather curious name. 
It seems to be an Indian form of the Greek Seleucus. Just as sons of the 
Indian princes are sometimes given, out of friendly feeling, the names of 
the royal dynasty of England, Salisuka may have been named by his father, 
out of affection, after Seleucus III (226-223 b.c.) who was his contemporary 
and whose dynasty and the Mauryan were always on intimate terms. 
SaliSiika is mentioned not only in the Puranas but also in the historical 



SUBHAGASENA. ANTIOCHUS III 


45 


chapter of the Garga-samhita entitled the ‘Yuga-purana’ or ‘the History 
of the yugas.’ The text is corrupt. Nevertheless, what it tells us is that 
in Pushpapura (Pataliputra) there will be a king called Salisuka who will 
be ‘devoted to the work of abolishing sacrifices,’ who will be ‘irreligious 
though talking about religion,’ and who ‘will establish conquest by Dhcirma 
( vijayam nama dharmikam ) and will raise a memorial to [his] virtuous 
eldest brother, famous through good qualities.’ This reminds us of Rock 
Edict XIII of Asoka where he speaks of the dhamma-vijaya achieved by 
him and calls upon his descendants to follow in his footsteps. Whether 
and how many of his successors actually carried out a similar spiritual 
conquest is a matter of doubt. But on the testimony of the ‘Yuga-purana’ 
it seems that Salisuka was at least one of them. There can be no mistaking 
the meaning of this Purana. It distinctly speaks of dharmika-vijaya 
and associates it with Salisuka. He is also reviled for trying to suppress 
the performance of sacrifices. No doubt can therefore be reasonably 
entertained as to Salisuka being at least one descendant of Asoka who, 
like him, dedicated his energies to dhamma-vijaya. 

It was about the close of Salisuka’s reign, that is, about 206 B.c., that 
the . Seleucid army for the second time crossed the frontiers of India. 
Antiochus III was, like his predecessors, too much occupied with political 
tensions in the west to maintain an effective control over the eastern 
part of his empire. And it was not till 212 b.c. that he appeared in the 
east at the head of an army to reassert the Seleucid supremacy over the 
revolting kingdoms. He vanquished the Parthian rebel, Arsaces III, 
in 208, and thereafter turned his arms against Bactria. After a siege 
of about two years, a formal alliance was concluded between him and 
Euthydemus of Bactria, that is, about 206 B.c. And it was in the same 
year that Antiochus crossed the Hindukush, marched down the Kabul 
Valley and found himself in the kingdom of a prince whom Polybius 
styles ‘Sophagasenus, King of the Indians.’ The passage referring to 
this king runs as follows : ‘He [Antiochus III] crossed the Caucasus and 
descended into India; renewed his friendship with Sophagasenus, the 
King of the Indians; received more elephants, until he had 150 altogether, 
and having once more provisioned his troops, set out again personally 
with his army, leaving to Androsthenes of Cyzicus the duty of taking home 
the treasure which this king had agreed to hand over to him.’ Sopha- 
gasenus obviously corresponds to the Sanskrit Subhagasena. But who 
was Subhagasena? V. A. Smith conjectures that he was some local 
cliief who had taken advantage of the decay of the Maurya empire to 
establish himself in the Kabul Valley. But as Dr. Raychaudhury has 
pointed out, Subhagasena is here called ‘King of the Indians’ a title which 
was applied by Greek writers to great kings like Chandragupta and 
Demetrius. Subhagasena must therefore be taken to be an epithet of the 
Maurya emperor Salisuka who was reigning in 206 b.c. Again, Dr. 
George Macdonald in this connection remarks that Subhagasena ‘was 
quite unfit to offer an effective resistance to the seasoned troops of his 



46 


ASOKA AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


adversary,’ Antiochus III, who therefore inflicted ‘a heavy indemnity’ 
upon him. 1 It is not clear upon what grounds exactly he has based this 
conclusion. Possibly he has taken his stand on the statement of Polybius 
that Subhagasena agreed to hand over some treasure to Antiochus and 
that the duty of taking it home was assigned by him to Androsthenes of 
Cyzicus. But this treasure does not mean an indemnity and refers appa- 
rently to the elephants made over to the Seleucid emperor. Macdonald’s 
conclusion is controverted by the further statement of Polybius that 
Antiochus ‘renewed his friendship with Sophagasenus, the king of the 
Indians,’ which means, as Dr. Thomas rightly understood it, that they 
renewed their ancestral friendship 2 — an inference supported by the 
fact that Salisuka was probably so named after Seleucus, father of Anti- 
ochus III. This renewal of friendship, with the present of elephants, 
reminds us of the classic meeting of Seleucus I and Chandragupta on the 
Indian frontier more than a century before, which developed into an 
alliance, bringing the two imperial families so intimately together. If 
the whole passage of Polybius is interpreted dispassionately, it clearly 
shows that relations of perfect amity and concord persisted between the 
Mauryan and Seleucid dynasties up to 206 b.c. 

The Rajatarangini speaks of one Jalauka as the son and successor of 
ASoka in Kashmir. He is described as a great warrior who cleared the 
land of the oppressing mlechchhas. He was a bigoted Saiva and was 
an opponent of Buddhist worship. Sir Aurel Stein rightly points out 
that this account of Jalauka bears in its main part a manifestly legendary 
character. Possibly, this Jalauka was no other than Saliguka as both 
the names partially correspond in sound; and his defeat of the mlech- 
chhas probably refers to his meeting with Antiochus III. The Kashmir 
tradition has doubtless reversed his religious attitude. It should have 
stated that Salisuka was a bigoted Buddhist and an opponent of Saivism 
and not vice versa as it has done. 

• According to the Puranas, Salisuka was succeeded by Devadharman 
or Somasarman, and the latter by his son Satadhanvan. The last prince 
of the ftlaurya dynasty was Brihadratha. Their combined reigns covered 
twenty-two years. The Maurya rule thus came to a close about 184 b.c. ! 
We know nothing about any of these princes except the last who, accord- I 
ing to the Puranas, was put to death by his commander-in-chief, Pushya- ? 
mitra, the founder of the Sunga family. Bana further informs us that '* 
it was on the occasion of a grand review of the army that Pushyamitra 
overthrew and slew his master. This, however, could not have been the 
only cause of the destruction of the Maurya power. At least a dozen 
years before this event, dark clouds were gathering on the north-west 
horizon of India. Bactria had already declared her independence about 
197 b.c. under Euthydemus and his son Demetrius, and the latter expanded 


1 CHI. i p. 442 

1 Ibid. p. 512 



47 


FALL OF THE MAURYAN EMPIRE 

the original limits of Bactria by making himself master of the Indus Valley. 
It must have been this Greek invasion which in the first instance demora- 
lised and disjointed the Maurya empire, and the military coup d'etat of 
Pushyamitra seems to have been prompted and facilitated by the disastrous 
effects which this foreign incursion was producing in the morale of the 
Maurya government. 

Thus came to an end the rule of the Maurya dynasty. There is good 
reason to suppose that India gained considerably during the supremacy 
of the Mauryas. They constituted an imperial power, and consequently 
India must have enjoyed all the advantages that accrue from an imperial 
power. The different parts of India must have been more closely and 
effectively knit together. The country must have been overspread with 
a network of roads which were traversed by armies in war, and by mer- 
chants and pilgrims in peace. All roads must have led to Pataliputra 
as they did to Rome three centuries later. And perhaps ‘the ports of the 
west coast were connected with Pataliputra through UjjayinI, the great 
emporium of the period.’ Communication must thus have been brisk 
and frequent between the various provinces, and it is not difficult to 
visualise a busy life throbbing through the whole body politic of India. 
As all barriers that detached provinces from one another were thus 
being gradually broken, it is no wonder if the necessity of a common 
language for the whole country was keenly felt. At first, no doubt, the 
court language of Magadha was being foisted upon the neighbouring 
provinces, as is evidenced by the Rock and Pillar Edicts of Asoka found 
in the Madhyadesa and in Kalinga, which were conterminous with 
Magadha. But it soon gave way to a language which is called Monumen- 
tal Prakrit and bears the closest affinity to the Pali of the Southern Buddhist 
scriptures. It seems to be the parent of the Prakrit which in later times 
came to be known as Maharashtrl. Perhaps it was this province which 
supplied its dialect to meet the new demand, how we do not at present 
know. What was originally a provincial dialect began to rise to thg 
eminence of a universal language and became, as a matter of fact, the 
Hindustani of Ancient India from c. 200 B.c. to a.d. 450. It became not 
only the official or political language of the country, but also the language 
of the scriptures and religious benefactions. Thus the royal charters 
issued by Gautamiputra Satakarni and Vasishthiputra Pulumavi, the 
Vaishnava inscription on the Besnagar Pillar of Heliodorus, as well 
as the Nanaghat cave epigraph of Satakarni describing his numerous 
Brahmanical sacrifices, have all been couched in the Monumental Prakrit. 
Nay, the scriptures of the Buddhists which must originally have been 
composed in the MagadhI were now recast in this lingua franca of Ancient 
India, afterwards known as Pali. When exactly this all-India language 
sprang into existence is not known. It may not have been in the reign 
of Asoka, but it was certainly during the supremacy of the Mauryas and 
as a result of their imperial rule. 

As the Mauryas held sway over practically the whole of India and for 



48 


ASoka AND HIS SUCCESSORS 


no less than 137 years, it is natural to expect some references to them 
in contemporaneous or semi-contemporaneous writings or to find some 
traces of the clan in some parts of India even in later times. Thus Patan- 
jali, who flourished during the reign of Pushyamitra, the destroyer of the 
Mauryan power, speaks of Chandragupta-sabha side by side with Pushya- 
mitra-sabha. Here, of course, ‘Chandragupta’ must stand for the founder 
of the Maurya family. Nor is reference wanting to the Mauryas in 
general in Patanjali’s Mahabhashya. This occurs in his exposition of 
Panini v. 3.99. It seems that there were images of Siva, Skanda and 
Visakha which the Maurya kings were compelled to bring into requisition, 
to yield them gold. How exactly this was done is by no means clear. 
Nor is it easy to explain the financial straits which drove the Mauryas 
to raise money by such methods. Wars were being constantly waged 
during the reigns of Chandragupta and Bindusara. We do not know 
whether there were any after the conversion of Asoka to Buddhism. 
The only wars that really mattered in the later Maurya period were the 
wars of the Bactrian Greeks. But their incursions synchronised with the 
overthrow of the Maurya dynasty. Wars, however, could not have 
been the only cause of the drain on the Mauryan exchequer. In this 
connection may be noted two plaque inscriptions in Mauryan Brahmi, 
one found at Sohgaura in the Gorakhpur district, U.P., and the other at 
Mahasthangarh in the Bogra district, Bengal. 1 Both speak of the state 
granaries instituted to combat the ravages of famine, wherever and when- 
ever such a contingency arose. This means that the Mauryan empire 
had already been confronted with the devastations of a long-standing 
famine, as a fortification against which these granaries and store-houses 
were being put up at various important places in the kingdom. While 
speaking of Bhadrabahu, the Jaina guru of Chandragupta, we have already 
referred to the tradition that this Jaina teacher predicted that a famine 
would rage in Northern India for a period of twelve years. As tradition, 
4ike the Puranas, sometimes makes mention of an event after it has come 
off and has become well known, we may take it that this continuous 
famine began somewhere about the close of Chandragupta’s reign and lasted 
for some years thereafter. We may further assume that the Mauryan 
state left no stone unturned, not only to combat this serious menace to 
prosperity but also to protect itself against a recurrence of the calamity. 
In Kautilya’s Arthasastra there is a. chapter called kosabhi-samharanam 
which suggests ways and means, fair and foul, to enable kings in financial 
embarrassment to replenish their treasury and tide over a monetary crisis. 
The images mentioned by Patanjali were probably in state shrines and 
were a source of income to the state. 

Though the imperial Maurya dynasty to which Chandragupta and 
Asoka belonged came to an end about 184 b.c. scions of this family were 
not unknown in mediaeval times. Thus Hiuan Tsang who came to 

xxv pp. 261-6 ; JRAS. 1907, p. 509 f. ; Mahasthan, El, xxn pp. 1-3 


1 Sohgaura, I A. 








R ,Mathura\ M — -ILalitapatan 

Ba.ratx \% L ^-Rampurwa 

^ ^Nf^Vaisali < $T V ' 

-/!__ _ ._ .aL 

r li ^ I ) # J^4!3ah asram^y^^tpT 

. - - Jr^f s /— ... i^pnath 

^ //Jo^s 3 

I L?.. A [ K ■—4' 'V.. r^ Famralipti ,0\ 1 V I!/ 

\pirnar) R “ J ''‘ /> I UU-tf 


\i '^rr^ 

\N?*v 

^ G avima^MA~Y^ rra g ud |, 


fiM K of BEN GVU 


1. THE MAURYAN EMPIRE 





LATER MAURYAS 


49 


1 ndia in the first half of the seventh century a.d. says that some time before 
his visit to this country there was a king of Magadha, called Purnavarman 
who restored the Bodhi Tree, destroyed by Sasanka, king of Karnasuvarna 
(Bengal). And it is worthy of note that this Chinese pilgrim speaks of 
Purnavarman as ‘the last of the race of Asoka-raja.’ As Purnavarman 
was the last descendant of Asoka, it seems that his kingdom of Magadha, 
which must have shrunk considerably in dimension, was conquered by 
Harsha Vardhana and incorporated into his dominions. 

Though there was probably no ruler after Purnavarman who claimed 
to belong to the family of Chandragupta or Asoka, there can be no doubt 
that there were Maurya kings holding different parts of India, especially 
Western India. Thus two inscriptions 1 have been found in Rajputana 
which show that there was a king named Dhavala or Dhavalappadeva 
who was a supreme ruler of that country, of the Maurya lineage, and 
lived in v.s. 795 (a.d. 738). The celebrated Aihoje inscription of Pula- 
keSin II, again, speaks of the Mauryas as being defeated by this Chalukya 
king. As this record is dated Saka 556 (a.d. 634-35) it shows that the 
Mauryas had a petty principality somewhere in the Konkan about the 
middle of the seventh century. A fourth inscription, which was found 
at Waghll, in Khandesh, 2 Bombay, mentions a Maurya chief Govindaraja, 
with the date Saka 991 (a.d. 1069), as a subordinate of theYadava Maha- 
mandalesvara Seupachandra II, and further informs us that his family 
came to this part of the country from Valabhl in Surashtra. It will thus 
be seen that the rulers of the Maurya race are known to history up to 
the eleventh century a.d., but nowadays they are merged among the 
Rajputs as Moris, and also among the Marathas with the surname More. 

1 Kanaswa inscr., I A. xix p. 56 and Dabok (Mewar) inscr., El. xn p. 1 1, also xx p. 122 

* El. H p. 221 



Chapter III 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART OF THE 
MAURYAN EMPIRE 

T he main features of the organization of the Mauryan Empire and its 
administration have been sketched in the last two chapters. It is the 
purpose of this chapter to complete the picture by filling in the details, 
and to give an account of the social, religious and economic conditions 
in the empire; finally, to describe the monuments of the period and discuss 
the problems connected with them. 

SOURCES 

The Arthasastra of Kautilya, the observations of Megasthenes, and the 
inscriptions of ASoka have provided us with a large volume of valuable 
information calculated to give a more complete picture of this epoch than 
of any other till we reach the time of Akbar and the Aln-i-Akbari. The 
three ‘sources’, however, differ a good deal in their nature and outlook, 
and their apparent contradictions have puzzled scholars and led them to 
question the date and authorship of the Arthasastra, the most compre- 
hensive and systematic among them. The evidence, internal and external, 
in favour of the work being accepted as a genuine production of Kautilya, 
the celebrated chancellor of Chandragupta Maurya, was set forth by Dr. 
Shama Sastri in his introductions to his first edition of the book (1909) 
and to its English translation (1915). That evidence is strong and remains 
unshaken by the vague objections raised and surmises put forward in the 
long debates 1 to which the book gave rise for well over two decades after 
*lts publication. The polity of the Arthasastra, it has been said, is a small 
state surrounded by other small kingdoms, and its rules ‘do not provide 
for the needs of an extensive consolidated empire.’ 2 This is a rather hasty 
inference from the mandala theory of inter-state relations (vi, 2) which 
Kautilya mentions, evidently in conformity with an established tradition. 
Indian imperialism moreover was seldom given to the centralization and 
consolidation characteristic of western imperialism; the conquered states 
generally retained their identity, and to some extent their relations with 
the suzerain power as well as to their fellow feudatories were regulated 
by considerations of inter-state policy. We know that in later times rulers 
of extensive kingdoms like the Rashtrakutas maintained sandhi-vigrahis 
for different parts of their realm to act as liaison officers and smooth over 
conflicts in the relations of the different units included in the empire. In 

1 For a brief critical review of many of Early History of India, pp. 160-1 
them see K. P. Jayaswal, Hindu Polity 1 Smith, op. cit„ p. 146; also Monahan, 
Part i, pp. 203-14; also Vincent Smith, The Early History of Bengal, p. 31 



THE ARTHASASTRA 


51 


any event, the author of a complete and systematic treatise on polity could 
not omit the subject of inter-state relations. On the other hand Kautilya’ s 
work exhibits some unique features unknown to other works on Indian 
polity; and these are best explained in the light of the historical conditions 
of the Mauryan empire. His definition of the term Chakra vartikshetram 
(ix, 1) as applicable to the whole of India from the Himalayas to Cape 
Comorin is obviously based on the extent of the empire of Magadha 
under the Nandas and Chandragupta Maurya. The elaborate adminis- 
trative regulations detailed in the adhyakshaprachara (Bk. ii) compare 
not unfavourably with a modern manual of administration issued by the 
government of a large state. They could have no application to a small 
state, and they are not found in any Indian political work before or after 
Kautilya. Some of these regulations have been reviewed under the reign 
of Chandragupta, and others will be noticed further on. Again, the 
kanfakasodhana courts, the composition and duties of which are treated 
at great length in the thirteen chapters of Book iv, are clearly an innova- 
tion of the Mauryan epoch designed to control and guide the administra- 
tion of a growing body of state regulations on almost every aspect of social 
and economic life, and at once to keep the growing and powerful bureau- 
cracy in check, safeguard the freedom of individuals and groups from 
official encroachment, and protect social well-being. The expression 
kanfakasodhana (removal of thorns) is repeated in later treatises on polity, 
but, except in the Manu-smfiti, parts of which are clearly not far removed 
from Kautilya in age, 1 the phrase is employed, not in the urgent and con- 
crete sense in which we find it used in the Arthasastra, but much more 
vaguely, until at last it merges in the general expression dushfatiigraha 
sishfa paripalana (suppression of the wicked and protection of the good) 
which is the general function of the political power. The kanfakasodhana 
courts of Kautilya were doubtless administrative courts which followed 
a more summary procedure than the ordinary ( dharmasthlya ) courts and 
which were rendered necessary by the almost revolutionary changes in 
the art of government that came in with Chandragupta and his chancellor. 

Another notable feature of the Arthasastra is its exaltation of tjie royal 
power in a manner unknown to Indian tradition. Kautilya says: 8 
‘Dharma, contract, custom, and royal decree are the four legs of law 
(determinants of litigation). Of these, each later item is of superior vali- 
dity to its predecessor.’ The royal decree is thus exalted above all other 
sources of law in >ts superior validity. With the solitary exception of 
Narada, later law-books allowed this un-Indian exaltation of royal autho- 
rity to fall into oblivion. The usual rule was that the king was bound 
by Dharma— an elastic term which included revealed law, local and 
group custom, and every traditional practice— but not royal decrees. 
Kautilya, let us note, expressly states that in writing his treatise he followed 
not only the tradition of Indian writers who preceded him, but the usages 


1 Kane, Historv of Dharmasastra, i pp. 95-6 



52 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


obtaining in the contemporary world. 1 The reference to usages occurs 
at the end of the chapter on sasana (royal writs, as Shama Sastri renders 
it), a chapter which, as it stands at present, shows, in the opinion of a 
shrewd critic, signs of having been remodelled in the light of the Roman 
imperial letters of a later time. 2 However that may be, the age when 
Kautilya wrote was an age of great monarchies in which the large Hellenis- 
tic kingdoms, particularly Syria and Egypt, were perfecting the traditions 
and institutions of royal absolutism which they inherited from the Persian 
empire of the Achaemenids. In these states we find the same exaltation 
of the royal edict above all other forms of law and convention, and the 
growth of a new and uniform civil law promoted by the exercise of royal 
authority either directly in royal decrees, or indirectly by the decisions 
and awards of the king's officers acting in his name. The position is well 
summed up by Rostovtzeff who says : 3 ‘It is evident that a royal law, 
order, or regulation if it conflicted with other laws, was always regarded 
as overriding them, and that the royal verdict in law suits was final.’ 
The Mauryan state was in active touch with its western neighbours, and 
the probability is great that the developments taking place under the 
Seleucids and Ptolemies were not altogether unknown to Kautilya. 

A comparison in detail of data from Kautilya with those from Megas- 
thenes, it has been held, goes to show that the two writers could not have 
belonged to one and the same epoch. 4 This opinion rests on rather mecha- 
nical and superficial comparisons of little value and has not stood the test 
of informed criticism. 5 Many points of substantial agreement between 
Kautilya and Megasthenes have been mentioned already in the study 
of the institutions of Chandragupta’s reign. Megasthenes’ distinction 
between the astynomoi (town officers) and agronomoi{rmz.\ officials) corres- 
ponds fairly closely to Kautilya’s account of durga and rash{ra and the 
duties assigned by him to the nagaraka and san aharta respectively. 6 The 
creation of Boards in charge of specific administrative duties in the city 
and in the army, far from being unknown to Kautilya as has been stated, 7 
iS in fact advocated by him with particular reference to the elephant corps, 
cavalry^ chariots and infantry on the ground that a number of officials 
acting together would be a check on one another and less liable to cor- 
ruption by enemy intrigues. 8 Let us remember that the Arthasastra is, 
as its name implies, a general normative manual of polity laying down 
arrangements suitable for any independent kingdom at any time and that 
Megasthenes recorded the impression he derived by observing institutions 
in their actual working round about 300 b.c. The Greek writer moreover 
had perhaps his own prepossessions natural to a high official of a large 
Hellenistic state, and it is obvious that some of his statements included 


1 i 1 ; ii 10 (final verse) 

1 O. Stein in 277. vi (1928), pp. 45-71 

* Social and Economic History of the 

Hellenistic World, pp. 1067-8 

1 O. Stein, Megasthenes und Kautilya. 


* Breloer, Kautilya-Studien. 

‘Cf. Monahan, pp. 160-1 
7 Smith, op. cit., pp. 148-9 
•ii 4. Cf. H. G. Rawlinson, India 
and the Western World, pp. 67-8 



MEGASTHENES AND KAUTILYA 


53 


an argument criticising or correcting what had been stated before him 
by other Greek writers who came to India in the company of Alexander. 
If we bear in mind the differences in the equipment and outlook of the 
Brahmin chancellor and the Greek ambassador, and interpret their state- 
ments making due allowances for them, we shall find that on important 
subjects like the ownership of the soil, slavery, social organization, legal 
procedure and administrative arrangements, the apparent differences 
are easily explained, and a much closer agreement discovered than Stein 
considered possible. 

The Indika of Megasthenes is now available only in fragments preserved 
in citations by later writers, and of the nature of these citations Schwan- 
beck, who collected and annotated them, observes r 1 ‘Since Strabo, 
Arrian and Diodorus have directed their attention to relate nearly the 
same things, it has resulted that the greatest part of the Indika has been 
completely lost, and that of many passages, singularly enough, three 
epitomes are extant, to which occasionally a fourth is added by Plinius.’ 
The Arthasastra on the other hand has had a fairly correct and continuous 
text tradition. Its length is indicated as 6,000 slokas in the text itself 
and by Dandin, and our text, according to Shama Sastri, 2 ‘is of about 
the same extent.’ This does not, however, preclude the possibility of 
scribal errors particularly in the transcription of unfamiliar geographical 
names and occasional interpolations or even rehandling of parts of the 
text like the sasanadhikara (ii, 10). 


GOVERNMENT 

Even under the Nandas, Magadha had grown to be a large imperial state. 
The reports of the strength of its defences that reached the generals of 
Alexander fixed them in their resolve not to face an encounter with a foe 
far more powerful than Porus, and thus compelled Alexander to abandon 
his plan of marching further into India. The prestige of the Nanda 
empire, the failure of the tribal republics of the North-West to hold their 
own against the Greek invader, and the example of the empire of the 
Seleucids, doubtless favoured the tendency already at work towards the 
formation of an all-India empire and the materialization of the agelong 
dreams associated with the names of many legendary heroes like Prithu, 
Bharata, Rama, and other monarchs whose names adorned the traditional 
lists of the performers of imperial sacrifices like the rajasuya and asvamedha. 
Accordingly we find that with Kautilya for the first time the ideal of 
chakravartin comes down to earth from the cloud-land of religious myth 
and legend. As already indicated, he defines the chakravarti-kshetram, 
the sphere of the emperor’s rule, as the whole of India extending from the 

1 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr., p. 19 n. 

* English translation, p. vii 



54 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


Himalayas to the Indian Ocean and a thousand yojanas across . 1 Half 
a century later Asoka, as has been pointed out above by Bhandarkar, 
once more linked up the conception with the Buddhist ideal of chakravarti- 
dharmika dharmaraja who conquers the world not by strength of arms 
but by the force of his moral personality. 

The Mauryan empire thus marks the definite triumph of the monarchical 
state over other forms, particularly the tribal republic which was a common 
and highly respected form from the days of the Buddha to the period of 
Alexander’s campaigns in India. There is reason to hold that Chandra- 
gupta and Kautilya were not friendly to the non-monarchical states, and 
not unwilling to take advantage of their weak and impoverished condi- 
tion after the Greek war. The short section (Bk. xi) of the Arthasastra 
on the sanghas names the important republics still in existence 
and adumbrates ways of sowing dissensions among them open to a 
monarch who seeks to dominate them. In conformity with the scientific 
nature of the treatise, however, the section concludes with advice to the 
sanghas on methods of counteracting the machinations of a neighbouring 
monarch. Kautilya mentions two groups of sanghas: one devoted to 
economic pursuits or to warfare like the Kambhojas, Surashtras, Ksha- 
triya-sreni (Kathoi of the Greek writers) and others; the other used the 
title of Raja, apparently to indicate the status of the members of the 
executive body, examples being 'Lichchhavis, Vrijis, Mallas, Madras, 
Kurus, Panchalas and others. The inscriptions of Asoka mention Kam- 
bhojas and some other tribes noticed already. Some of the republics 
retained their individuality and survived the Mauryan empire, though all 
of them were subject to strong monarchical influences and tended to 
give up election in favour of hereditary office. 

The age of the Mauryan empire was the age of the large monarchical 
state not only in India but in all the lands that had for a brief period 
formed the empire of Alexander. The monarchies of Western Asia and 
Egypt naturally inherited the imperial tradition of the Achaemenids, and 
India too was by no means outside the sphere of influence of that tradition. 
The establishment and early break-up of Alexander’s empire and the wars 
among his successors initiated several political and economic changes on 
a vast scale. A large increase in the volume of trade owing to the multi- 
plication of armed camps, the accumulation of great fortunes by some and 
the rise of a proletariat (particularly in the cities), the dispersal of the 
hoarded gold of Persia and the quickening transition from a rural to a 
money economy, were some of the chief features of the new epoch. India 
was drawn more and more into this welter, and Chandragupta and his 
teacher Kautilya grew up in this atmosphere of rapid change and new 


KA. ix 1. Dr. Raychaudhuri’s limitation 
of the passage to Northern India 
seems to be unwarranted by the text 
(reading tiryak for aliryak) or by the 
interpretations of other commentators. 


ancient and modern. See Politico! 
History of Ancient India, p. 220 n . ; 
Jayaswal, Hindu Polity sec. 365, and 
Rangaswamy Aiyangar Comm. Vol 
pp. 81 ff. 



MAURYAN MONARCHY 


55 


formations. War, trade, diplomacy and travel opened up channels of 
contact with the outer world, and India felt the stress of new ideas and 
influences pressing their way into the political and administrative system 
of the newly founded empire of the Mauryas. Rostovtzeff, the learned 
historian of Hellenism has observed: ‘If one believes in the historical 
character and the early date of the kernel of the Arthasastra of Kautilya 
and in the radical centralization of Indian government effected by Chandra- 
gupta on “Hellenistic” lines, one may say that Chandragupta did more 
to hellenize India than Demetrius or Menander.’ Mauryan monarchy 
was, however, by no means a mere copy of a foreign institution any more 
than Mauryan art was a mechanical reproduction of alien models ; in either 
case there was borrowing, but what was borrowed was integrated with 
indigenous institutions and ideas so as to produce a harmonious whole. 

The place of the monarch in the constitution and his daily routine of 
duties have already been described. In the traditional political theory 
of ancient India the royal power ( kshatra ) was sustained by the sacerdotal 
power {brahma). From the observations of Megasthenes on the pre- 
eminent rank of philosphers and their role in the polity, and the relation 
of Kautilya himself to Chandragupta, we may infer that the Mauryan 
state conformed to the theory. Kautilya himself states the position con- 
cisely and says: ‘Royal power ( kshatra ) triumphs even without arms, and 
ever remains invincible when it is upheld by the Brahmanas, is sanctified 
by the counsels of ministers, and follows the (precepts of) sastras .’ 1 
However, it deserves to be noted that in Kautilya we do not find the stress 
laid in early law-books like Baudhayana, and repeated in the Manu-smriti 
and later works, on the king’s exclusive dependence on the counsels of a 
single Brahmin, the purohita . 2 Kautilya wants the king to be guided 
by the opinion of the majority in the cabinet, even absentee members 
being consulted by letter on important questions. 

The Arthasastra fully bears out the observations of Megasthenes on the 
precautions taken to ensure the safety of the king’s person within his 
palace . 3 All personal services were performed by women whose trust- 
worthiness and efficiency had been tested in advance, and the procession 
for the royal hunt {vihara-ydtra of the Asoka inscriptions) was marked 
by elaborate dispositions. ‘Crowds of women surround the king, and 
outside of this circle spearmen are ranged. The road is marked off with 
ropes, and it is death, for man or woman alike, to pass within the ropes. 
Men with drums and gongs lead the procession. The king hunts in the 
enclosures and shoots arrows from a platform. At his side stand two or 
three armed women. If he hunts in the open grounds he shoots from the 
back of an elephant. Of the women some are in chariots, some on horses, 
and some even on elephants, and they are equipped with weapons of 
every kind as if they were going on a campaign .’ 4 

3 i 20-1 

4 Meg. Fr. xxvii (pp. 71-3)= 

Strabo, xv 1, 53 


1 i 9 (final verse) 

3 Bau. i 10, 7-8; M. vii 58-9 



56 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


The princes were given careful training and employed in offices suited 
to their attainments and tastes. Kautilya (i, 17) discusses several ingenious 
views of his predecessors regarding the rearing of princes, always a trouble- 
some question for polygamous kings, but dismisses all of them, and himself 
lays down a procedure dictated alike by common sense, propriety and 
public welfare. He is very clear that never should an ill-disciplined prince 
be installed on the throne even if he happens to be the only son of the king ; 
his son, or a daughter’s son should be preferred to him. Ill-natured 
princes were to be put under restraint and kept out of harm’s way. 

The question whether the ownership of land vests in the king or the 
cultivator, whether in modern phraseology the state’s revenue from land is 
rent or tax, has often been debated, and support has been found for either 
view both in theory and practice. The locus classicus for the traditional 
view is the commentary of Sabarasvamin on Jaimini (vi, 7, 3) where it 
is clearly laid down that the king is the lord not of the land itself but only 
of a sixth part of its produce which he earns by the protection he offers 
to it. This is in keeping with the practice attested by inscriptions in 
relatively late historical times which state that kings often purchased land 
from its owners before giving it away (as dana, gift) to individuals or 
institutions. There are, however, other texts like Manu’s declaration 
bhumer-adhipatir-hi sah and the anonymous verse quoted by Bhattas- 
vamin in his commentary on Kautilya (ii, 24) declaring the king’s owner- 
ship in land and water, which have been taken to support the opposite 
view. 1 But perhaps these texts are best interpreted as implying not 
absolute ownership for the king in contradiction to the Mimamsd doctrine 
set forth by Sahara, but a prerogative of eminent domain, a meaning that 
may well attach to terms like pati, adhipati and even svami. Greek evi- 
dence for the age of the Mauryas, as also Kautilya’s regulations, go to 
show that the royal prerogative was stretched to its utmost limit. Arrian 
says simply: ‘they cultivate the soil and pay tribute to the kings and the 
independent cities.’ Diodorus is more elaborate: ‘They pay a land- 
tiibute to the king, because all India is the property of the crown, and 
no private person is permitted to own land. Besides the land-tribute, 
they pay into the royal treasury a fourth part of the produce of the soil.’ 
Lastly Strabo says : ‘The whole of the land belongs to the crown and the 
husbandmen till it on condition of receiving as wages one-fourth of the 
produce.’ 2 The last statement of Strabo apparently reverses by mistake 
the true fact given by Diodorus. Though all the three writers base their 
statements on Megasthenes, none of them seems to reproduce his exact 
words. In the Hellenistic world to which Megasthenes belonged ‘absolute 
rule meant the ownership of the state, of soil and subsoil, and ultimately 
of the products of the soil and the subsoil. The state was the house 


1 U. N. Goshal, The Beginnings of Indian pp. 89-91 ; Early History, pp. 137-8 n . 

Historiography and other Essays, 8 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr., pp. 210 42 
pp. 158-66; Smith, Oxford History , 84. See also Monahan, op. cit.', p. 153.’ 



CENTRALIZATION 


57 


( oikos ) of the king, and its territory his estate. So the king managed the 
state as a plain Macedonian or Greek would manage his own household’. 1 
This view of polity never obtained in India. But the close regulation of 
agricultural and marketing operations contemplated in the Arthasdstra 
when put into actual practice might well have produced the impression of 
state-ownership of land on the mind of an observer quite used to the 
idea. The first two chapters of Book ii sketch a development plan for 
the foundation of new villages and disposal of uncultivable waste and 
forest land; land prepared for cultivation was to be given over to cultivators 
for their lifetime provided they paid taxes regularly; failure to cultivate 
meant forfeiture of the holding. The duties of the superintendent of 
agriculture ( sitadhyaksha , ii, 24) are calculated to make all agriculture 
a vast state-regulated enterprise, and the scheme of warehouses maintained 
by the state and controlled by a superintendent ( koshthaguradhyaksha , 
ii, 15) shows that this plan of regulation included extensive market opera- 
tions on the part of government. The evidence of the Sohgaura and 
Mahasthan records already mentioned in the chapter on Asoka makes 
it clear that the policy adumbrated by Kautilya was actually put into force 
during the reigns of the first three Mauryan emperors. Thus though 
he nowhere expressly asserts the king’s ownership of the soil, Kautilya 
advocates, and doubtless introduced into the administration, all the 
detailed supervision and control of agricultural production and marketing 
that would have flowed from such ownership. 

What applied to land and its uses applied to almost every other aspect 
of the nation’s economic life. Kautilya’s treatise, particularly the adhya- 
ksha-prachara (Book ii), gives a detailed description of town-planning, 
fortifications and financial administration together with the duties of about 
thirty adhyalcshas, heads of departments as we should call them now. 
It contemplates a vast bureaucracy busying itself over the study, regulation, 
and control of the entire field of the nation’s social and economic activities 
with a measure of centralization not attained in India again till the period 
of British rule. The volume of authentic and up-to-date information at 
the disposal of the state regarding each city and village, the number of 
its inhabitants and their occupations, its resources in land, cattle and so 
on, must have been very considerable. The speedy and successful creation 
of an army of officials and their organisation into an orderly bureaucracy 
was no easy task, and the efficient performance of this task was perhaps 
another point of resemblance between the Mauryan state and the contem- 
porary Hellenistic monarchies. Both doubtless followed the model set 
by the Persian empire of the Achaemer.ids. The Persian administration 
is known to have maintained itineraries containing descriptions of the 
roads in the empire with a record of distances and halts, besides a reliable 
census of the towns and villages, their inhabitants and resources, as an 
aid to taxation and preparation for war. Like its Hellenistic contem- 


Rostovtzeff, op. cit., p. 269 



58 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


poraries, the Mauryan state thus departed from the usual rule of the 
Indian state of not interfering actively in the daily avocations of the people, 
but limiting itself to the task of preventing hindrances to their lawful 
pursuits. Mauryan administration was a living, growing system subject 
to constant change under the stress of new conditions and problems. 
The trend towards centralised regulation and control had to respect 
the deep-rooted principle of local and sectional autonomy as is shown 
by the multiplicity of metayage arrangements contemplated in Kautilya’s 
chapter on agriculture (ii, 24). The additions and alterations that 
came into the system with Asoka, and the moral tone imparted to 
government by that monarch’s example and precept, have been noticed 
already. 

The machinery of government described in the Arthasdstra may well 
be accepted as a representation of what obtained in Chandragupta’s 
reign and that of Bindusara. The samdharta (collector-general) and 
sannidhata (lit. one who is near or close at hand) were the most important 
officials at the centre. The former supervised the collection of revenue in 
the whole kingdom. He had to give his attention to all fortified towns 
(durga), rural areas (rashtra), mines ( khani ), irrigation works (setu), forests 
( vana ), cattle and other useful quadrupeds ( vraja ), and trade-routes (vanik- 
patha) by land and water. 1 The chief sources of revenue in towns are 
enumerated as tolls, fines, fees for assaying weights and measures, police, 
currency, passports, liquor, slaughterhouses ; the manufacture of yarn, 
oil, ghee and sugar ; goldsmiths, warehouses, prostitutes, gambling, build- 
ings, guilds of carpenters and artisans, temples, and dues collected at the 
entrance from troupes of performers ( bahirikas ). Land and agriculture, 
trade, ferries, river and road traffic, and pastures formed, among others, 
the chief sources of revenue from rural areas. The samdharta had control 
of expenditure also. The chief items of expenditure were religious worship 
and gifts, the royal family and royal kitchens, embassies, warehouses, 
armouries, factories, and free labour, the divisions of the army, cattle 
farms and menageries, besides the civil establishment. A wise samdharta 
should bring about an increase of revenue and a decrease of expenditure. 
The duties of the sannidhata 8 are not so clearly defined. He evidently 
did the work of a chamberlain and a treasurer, having charge of the cons- 
truction of treasuries, warehouses, armouries and prisons according to 
requirements in different localities. He was also responsible for the 
erection of royal trading houses, courts of justice and offices of ministers 
and secretaries ( mahamatriya ). All these buildings were to be equipped 
with wells, bathrooms, fire-fighting appliances and other accessories, 
besides cats and mongooses to keep down rats and snakes. A rain gauge 
was to be installed in the storehouse of agricultural produce. The sanni- 
dhata was the custodian of all revenue realized in cash or kind. He cut 



BUREAUCRACY 


59 


counterfeit coins (to disable them from further circulation), and received 
for custody only articles of approved quality. 

The accounts branch had an elaborate organisation, and the accounting 
year began with Ashadha (July-August) as it does even now with indige- 
nous firms and banks. Expenditure was classified into current, recurring, 
occasional and so on. A number of registers was prescribed to facilitate 
checking, and detailed instructions laid down for the detection of embez- 
zlement. Evasion of detection by clever officials was looked upon as an 
ever present possibility, and frequent transfers were considered a means 
of preventing fraud. The central accounts office was also a general record 
office ( akshapatala ) which contained books well arranged according to 
departments, ‘relating not only to accounts but also to the history of cus- 
toms, professions, and transactions of countries, villages, families, and 
corporations, titles to possession of land and remission of taxes, and treaties 
with, or ultimata issued to, friendly or hostile kings .’ 1 

Each administrative department was under an adhyaksha (superinten- 
dent). No fewer than thirty-two of these adhyakshas are named in the 
Arthasastra, and there might have been others, their number and the 
division of duties among them being liable to variation from time to time. 
They were all subordinate to the samahartd and their duties were not 
confined to the exploitation of crown property 2 as has sometimes 
been stated, but covered the entire range of the social and eco- 
nomic life of the community. The departments mentioned specifically 
by Kautilya are : treasury ( kosa ), mines (akara khani ), metals ( loha ), 
mint ( lakshana ), salt (lavana), gold (smarm), storehouse (kosh(ha- 
gara), trade (panya), forest produce ( kupya ), armoury (ayudhagara), 
weights and measures of capacity (pautava ), measurement of space and 
time (mana), tolls (sulka), spinning and weaving (sutra), agriculture 
(sit a), intoxicating liquor (sura), slaughterhouses (suna), courtesans 
(ganika), shipping (mu), cattle (go), horses (asva), elephants (hasti), 
chariots (ratha), infantry (patti), passports (mudra), pastures (vivita), 
elephant-forests (nagavana), spies (sariistha), religious institutions (devata), 
jails (bandlianagara), and ports (pat tana). The duties of some of 
these officials have been noticed already, as also the fact that some 
of them were assisted in their work, as Megasthenes saw, by Boards. It 
is not possible, nor perhaps necessary, to enter further into the adminis- 
trative details found in Kautilya’s work. But we must note that the 
government displayed an uncommon energy and undertook even such 
delicate tasks as the regulation of the rates charged by courtesans and 
their relations with their paramours, the punishment of householders 
who turned ascetics without making adequate provision for their depen- 


1 Monahan, op. cit., p. 45 

3 Monahan (op. cit., pp. 37, 65) renders 
panya and si Id into ‘Royal trade’ and 
‘Crown lands’ and thus limits the sense 
of the terms in an unwarranted manner. 


It may be noted also that svabhiimau in 
ii 24, 2 has been interpreted by Ganapati 
Sastri as ‘in land suited to particular 
crops’ ( tattaddhanyanugunayam bltiimau ) 
and not as ‘Crown lands’ (Shama Sastri). 



60 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY 


ART 


dents, and of controlling the visits to villages of peripatetic parties of 
musicians, dancers, and acrobats so as not to interfere with the productive 
activity of the villagers. The village elders took care of the property 
of minor orphans till they attained majority, and of the property of 
temples . 1 Traders had to tell the village headman the nature and the 
value of their merchandise when they entered the village, and the headman 
made good any loss incurred by them during their stay in the village . 2 
Prisoners who were young, old, sickly or helpless, and those who were 
ransomed by charitable persons were released from jail on the king’s 
birthday and on full-moon days. There were gaol-deliveries of prisoners 
who by their work, by payment of fines, or by undergoing corporal punish- 
ment had earned their freedom; this happened once in five days if not 
every day. When a new country was conquered, or the heir-apparent 
installed on the throne, or a prince bom to the king, prisoners were usually 
set free . 3 Practices and regulations like these provide the background 
against which similar rules set forth by Asoka in his inscriptions must 
be viewed. That great monarch continued unimpaired the efficient system 
he inherited; only he imparted a deeper moral tinge to its working, and 
employed it for the propagation of the Buddhist gospel by persuasive 
means. An instance of the moral tone of Asoka’s government is seen 
in his dhamma-mahamatras being occupied ‘in supporting prisoners 
[with money], in causing [their] fetters to be taken off, and in setting 
[them] free, if one has children, or is bewitched, or aged respectively ’ 4 
and thus exercising revisory judicial powers in suitable cases. 

The provincial administration was doubtless a replica of the arrange- 
ments at the centre, but exact details are not forthcoming, and we have 
no certain knowledge even of the number of provinces into which the 
empire was divided. What we do know from inscriptions and literature 
has been set forth under the reigns of Chandragupta and ASoka. The 
revenue and general administration in rural areas was entrusted to stha- 
nikas and gopas who had their own subordinate staff. The gopa had 
Charge of five to ten villages where he supervised the maintenance of 
boundaries, registered gifts, sales and mortgages, and kept an accurate 
census of the people and their material resources. The sthanikas super- 
vised the work of a number of gopas, and were responsible to the sama- 
harta who commanded the services of the pradeshtris, doubtless the same 
as the pradesikas of the Asoka inscriptions, for regulating the details of 
local administration . 5 The towns were administered by nagarakas on 
similar lines, the gopas having charge of the details of a fixed number of 
families in the city instead of a number of villages as in rural areas. The 
villages were as ever in ancient India semi-autonomous and regulated land 
and water rights in their area, though central control doubtless became 
stricter under Mauryan rule, and the gramani an official of the central 

■ii 1 
s iv 13 
8 ii 36 (end) 


4 RE. V (L), Hultzsch, p. 33 
5 ii 35; iv 6 



REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 61 

government. Village elders (grama-vriddhas) are often mentioned by 
Kautilya, and they must have played a considerable part in guiding the 
people in their daily affairs and assisting officials of government in dis- 
posing of petty disputes arising in the village. Cultivable land was 
divided into individual estates, but pasture and forest were held in com- 
mon. The work of officials was controlled not only by the inspection, 
audit and report of higher officials like the pradeshtris, but by the regular 
employment of spies and agents provocateurs. The role of spies is doubt- 
less greatly exaggerated in the Mudrarakshasa which purports to dramatize 
the political revolution by which Chandragupta was enabled by Kautilya 
to displace the Nandas; but the constant employment of secret means 
in administration, diplomacy, and war was taken for granted as it still 
is to a very large extent. 

‘All undertakings’, says Kautilya, ‘depend on finance; hence the first 
attention should be paid to the Treasury.’ The chief items of revenue 
and expenditure were briefly indicated under the duties of the samaharta, 
and the subject may now be considered in a little more detail. The main 
head of income was land-revenue, a share in the produce of land, a sixth 
part in theory, but in practice generally a higher proportion varying with 
local and economic conditions. There were also other dues and cesses 
laid on land including a water-rate, and a tax on houses in towns. Income 
from crown lands and from forests, then much more extensive than now, 
was another important source besides mines and manufactures, some 
of which, like salt, were monopolies. Profits of coinage and gains from 
trade operations carried on by government, fees for licences to be taken 
out by artisans, craftsmen, professional men and traders, and fines levied 
in law-courts, were the other items, besides miscellaneous receipts of the 
nature of windfalls like escheat of ownerless property, presents and share 
in treasure troves. In times of emergency ‘benevolences’ {pranaya ) were 
resorted to, and the rich were forced to contribute considerable amounts 
under one pretext .or another. Patanjali hints at one method of raising 
money adopted by the Mauryas by means of images and says : Maury a fr- 
hirariyarthibhir-archah prakalpitah, ‘in their eagerness to get gold the 
Mauryas made (or invented) images’. The exact import of this statement 
is not clear. Perhaps images were installed in large public temples 
throughout the empire and contributions levied from its different parts 
towards this purpose, a good part of the amount raised being annexed 
to the royal fisc . 1 Even at this early period, the practice of granting 
exemptions from land-revenue to learned persons and religious institutions 
had come into vogue, as also that of making assignments of revenue in 
whole or in part in favour of state officials either in lieu of or in addition 
to their salaries; and a careful record was kept of such exemptions and 
assignments. The village of Lumbini, for instance, received from Asoka 
a partial remission of its revenue dues when he visited the place ‘because 


1 Cf. Bhandarkar, ante, p. 48 



62 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


the Buddha Sakyamuni was born here,’ and it was required to pay only 
an eighth share of its produce ( athabhagiye ) to the royal fisc instead of the 
usual fourth. 1 

The monarch and his court, the maintenance of the members of the 
royal family in due pomp, and the salaries of ministers and other officials, 
high and low, formed the first charges on the revenues of the realm. The 
allowances to members of the household and the salaries of officials are 
detailed in the Arthasastra (v, 3), but neither the unit of currency nor the 
period, month or year, to which the figures relate is expressly mentioned, 
and there is no reliable means of deciding between the rival interpretations 
offered by scholars. Public works including buildings, roads and irriga- 
tion works, the demands of the vast army in its various sections, the 
erection and equipment of forts and arsenals, grants to religious institu- 
tions of all denominations, the maintenance of the families of soldiers 
and civil servants dying in state service, the care of the unemployed and 
the indigent, are other heads that figure prominently in the Arthasastra. 
In providing for the care of the sick, the unemployed and the destitute 
as well as of widows and orphans, Kautilya only systematized and amplified 
administrative duties which had been accepted in principle by earlier 
Indian writers. There must have been considerable outlay on industrial, 
mining and other enterprises directly worked by the state which recognized 
a special responsibility towards skilled artisans. Herdsmen and hunters 
were encouraged by allowances granted to them to check the ravages of 
wild beasts and secure the safety of the roads. Asoka spent large sums 
in establishing hospitals for men and animals and in raising gardens of 
medicinal herbs within his vast empire 'and even outside it. 

As already indicated, there were two sets of courts, besides the village 
tribunals, for the administration of justice. They were styled respectively 
dharmasthiya and kantakasodhana. At the top of the entire system stood 
the king who could no longer assume personal responsibility for adminis- 
tering justice as in the smaller kingdoms of earlier times reflected in the 
cXiarma-sutras, but he was ever ready to hear important cases on appeal 
and dispose of them without undue delay. The regular dharmasthiya 
courts ’were presided over by three dharmasthas (jurists) learned in the 
law and three amatyas, and were held in all important cities and other 
convenient centres. 2 There were rules about circumstances which ren- 
dered agreements void and about stages in judicial proceedings — plea, 
counter-plea, and rejoinder. The main heads of civil law according to 
Kautilya were : marriage and dowry including divorce ( moksha ); labour 
and contract; sale; violence; abuse; assault; gaming and miscellanea. 
The law as laid down by Kautilya alters and liberalises the precepts of the 
ancient texts in some ways, and his exposition of the whole subject strikes 


1 Hultzsch, pp. 164-5 sangrahanas, dronamukhas, and sthaniyas 

a iii 1. At places where districts which commanded respectively 10, 400, 
meet (janpada-sandhi ) and in all and 800 villages (ii 1). 



KANTAKASODHANA, MANDALA 63 

one as rational and progressive rather than as orthodox and conservative. 
Punishments were graded carefully and executed by royal authority. 
They included fines, imprisonment, whipping and death with or without 
torture. Panchayats of castes and guilds doubtless functioned alongside 
the king’s courts and village panchayats , and they must have regulated 
the affairs of communities and professions and settled disputes among 
them in the first instance. 

Three pradeshtris or amatyas constituted a kantakasodhana court. How 
exactly this differed from the dharmasthlya is nowhere explained, and we 
have to make our own inferences from the procedure and duties laid down 
for this type of court. Mahamahopadhyaya Kane has suggested that 
while the Dharma courts disposed of disputes brought before them by the 
parties themselves, action in the other type of courts started on the initia- 
tive of the executive . 1 Plausible as the suggestion is in the light of modern 
juristic ideas, it may well be doubted if the distinction between the two 
sets of courts was so simple and clear-cut. The nature of the kantakaso- 
dhana courts and the need for their organization in the Maurya epoch 
have been indicated already. The topics dealt with by Kautilya in the 
section dealing with these courts relate mostly to the police power of the 
state and concern the safeguarding of society against anti-social acts by 
officials, private individuals, and corporations. Their functions were 
only quasi-judicial, and their methods were more akin to those of a police 
force than of a judiciary. They employed spies to detect and forestall 
crime, and torture to extort confessions. The use of short measure or 
false weights, an artisan’s failure to keep his contract with an employer, 
the death of a patient from the incompetence of a medical man, swindling 
or corruption on the part of officials, and treasonable conspiracy against 
the king, came under the purview of these courts. Theft, murder, bur- 
glary, combinations to raise or depress prices, rape, defiant violation of 
caste rules and so on, were also brought before them. 

In the sphere of foreign policy Kautilya conformed to the tradition of 
his predecessors which was concerned more with systematic theory than 
with political realities. It is often true that neighbouring states a*e not 
friendly to each other; but the theory of the maridala erects this into a 
principle, and makes the unvarying assumption that the neighbour is 
ipso facto an enemy and the state next after that an ally, and works out 
the implications in tedious detail. The concepts of vijigishu (a king intent 
on conquests), the four upayas (instruments of policy), shcidgunya (six- 
fold policy) and others, Kautilya shares with other writers on polity through 
the centuries. These concepts had little validity in the best days of the 
Mauryan empire when practically the whole of India acknowledged its 
sway. Modern writers have often remarked on the ‘Machiavellian’ nature 
of many of these precepts; but will the practice of modern foreign and war 
offices, if described with a due regard not to their professions but to their 


History of Dharmasastra, in p. 257 



64 


Government, society and art 


actual performance, be seen to evince a better regard for moral principles ? 
On the other hand the ascertained facts bearing on the relations of the 
first three Mauryan emperors, particularly of Asoka, with the few inde- 
pendent states of India and the Hellenistic monarchies outside, constitute 
by no means an ignoble record. 

Speaking of the Prasii, and most probably basing himself on Megas- 
thenes, Pliny says : ‘Their king has in his pay a standing army of 600,000 
foot-soldiers, 30,000 cavalry, and 9,000 elephants. Whence may be 
formed some conjecture as to the vastness of his resources.’ 1 He does 
not mention chariots, but their number was placed at 2,000 by Diodorus 
and Curtius, and at 8,000 by Plutarch, all recording reports that reached 
Alexander about the army of the king of the Prasii, that is, the Nanda 
predecessor of Chandragupta. Chariots of different types are mentioned 
in the Arthasastra, war chariots and chariots used for assaulting fortresses 
among them. 2 There are references, not all equally clear, to the war 
chariots of the Mauryas in early Tamil literature. 3 There were adhyak- 
shas (superintendents) for each of the four sections of the army, and Kauti- 
lya’s description of their duties has much in common with Megasthenes’ 
account of the military administration cited already. Stress is laid by 
Kautilya on the importance of the elephant corps, which one scholar has 
compared to the tanks of modern warfare, and great attention was devoted 
to the proper maintenance of elephant-forests ( ndgavana ). Kautilya 
distinguishes different types among the foot-soldiers. 4 They were, in 
order of importance, the hereditary troops ( maula ), doubtless the same 
as the fighting class ( kshatriyas ) whom Megasthenes placed next to the 
cultivators in numbers and importance; hired troops ( bhjita ) who drew 
a regular salary from the state, and apparently formed part of the standing 
army like the hereditary troops; troops maintained by guilds (sreni) and 
corporations ( sanghas ), and available to the state at need; and lastly, 
forest tribes who furnished troops to the king in time of war. A corps 
,pf camels and asses supported the cavalry in operations in very dry 
country. 5 The array of the army in the field was an elaborate affair, 
and there are discussions in the Arthasastra of the value of different forma- 
tions based on clear distinctions between vanguard, centre, rear, wings, 
reserves and so on, and between the necessities of march, attack and 
defence. The appropriate occasions for the use of different types of 
weapons are also discussed, and these weapons included a variety of 
stationary and mobile engines, one of them being known as the hundred- 
slayer ( sataghni ). The art of fortification was well understood and the 
forts of the time were designed systematically with ditches, ramparts, 
battlements and other appurtenances; mining, counter-mining and the 
flooding of mines were known and practised as methods of attack and 


1 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr., p. 139 

* KA. ii 33 


3 Ch. xvi. post 
* ii 33 
5 ix 1 



PATERNAL GOVERNMENT 


65 


defence. Other details on the equipment of troops and their mode of 
fighting given by Greek writers have been noted already. The superin- 
tendents of the ditferent military arms functioned alone or with the assis- 
tance of boards and were probably subject to the general control of the 
senapati (commander-in-chief) who ranked among the most important 
officials of the state. Below the senapati were different grades of officers 
of the army like prasastri, nayaka, and mukhya. There were periodical 
inspections of all the troops by the senapati and the emperor, and it was 
at one of these military reviews that, according to Bana, Pushyamitra 
contrived to do away with the last Maurya emperor, the weak and shift- 
less Brihadratha. Kautilya mentions a navadhyaksha, superintendent 
of ships, which may have included fighting units besides merchantmen 
and ferries, as he is required to destroy pirate vessels. In the battlefield 
surgeons with instruments, medicines and bandages, and nurses with 
prepared foods and beverages were in constant attendance behind the 
lines . 1 The soldiers were encouraged to fight by suitable and timely 
addresses from the king, his ministers and purohita, and by rewards and 
honours for distinction in the field. 

The picture which the Arthasastra presents is that of a paternal govern- 
ment tempered by respect for religion and custom, and limited by the 
privileges of guilds and corporations. In some respects it was charac- 
terised by wise borrowings and adaptations from contemporary foreign 
models, immediately Hellenistic, but ultimately traceable to the Achae- 
menid empire of Persia; but the alien part of the system failed to take 
root and evidently disappeared with the Mauryan empire. In some of 
its essentials the Mauryan administrative system, like Mauryan art, was 
a parenthesis that broke the course of normal development; but both 
were splendid efforts marked by a great measure of success in their time. 
Though in some places the Arthasastra advocates methods and expedients 
repugnant to our ideas of public morality, its general spirit is enlightened 
and humane. The welfare of the people claimed the first place in all* 
considerations of policy, and the dominating aim of government was the 
maintenance of law and order, the punishment of the wicked and the 
protection of the peaceable citizen. Kautilya does not overlook the 
supreme importance of the presence of an able, energetic and good mo- 
narch for the proper functioning of his system; that such monarchs were 
not forthcoming after Asoka was the tragedy of the Mauryan empire, 
as of all hereditary monarchies. Kautilya’s ideal of good government is 
best seen in his exhortation to the king to place the happiness of the people 
above his own personal comfort, and feel that his happiness consists in 
their well-being. 

Praja-sukhe sukham rajnah prajanam cha hite hitarh 

natmapriyam hitarh rajnah prajanam tu priyam hitarii 
‘The happiness of the subjects is the happiness of the king; their well-being, 



66 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


his. The King’s welfare lies not in his own pleasure but in that of his 
subjects.’ 


SOCIETY 

Megasthenes’ statement on the population of India being organised in 
seven classes has been cited above. Diodorus concludes his summary 
of this class-organization thus : ‘Such, then, are about the parts into which 
the body politic in India is divided. No one is allowed to marry outside 
of his own caste, or to exercise any calling or art except his own; for 
instance a soldier cannot become a husbandman, or an artisan a philo- 
sopher .’ 1 Arrian adds: ‘It is permitted that the sophist only be from any 
class; for the life of the sophist is not an easy one, but the hardest of all .’ 2 
By sophist is meant an ascetic. Strabo also gives these restrictions re- 
garding marriage and occupation, but adds that the philosophers are 
exempt from them on account of their superior merit . 3 By philosophers 
doubtless Brahmins are meant. The emphasis laid on endogamy and 
hereditary occupation clearly implies that Megasthenes did mean to des- 
cribe the ‘caste-system’. Either he did not hear of the theory of the four 
vamas and of mixed castes which looms so large in our smriti works, or 
he was carried away by a desire, natural in a Hellenistic Greek, to establish 
a similarity between Egypt and India in social organization. ‘The 
Egyptians,’ says Herodotus, ‘are divided into seven distinct classes — 
these are the priests, the warriors, the cowherds, the swineherds, the 
tradesmen, the interpreters, and the boatmen .’ 4 

The agriculturists formed the bulk of the population, and Megasthenes 
observed that their avocation was so clearly defined (by the rules of caste) 
that they were seen pursuing it peacefully within sight of contending armies. 
The account of the conquest of Kalihga given by Asoka in his Rock 
Edict XIII is sufficient proof that war did sometimes involve much misery 
to the non-combatant population; but there must have been some founda- 
« tion in practice for the statement of Megasthenes which is supported by 
a simile in a Buddhist work, Abhidharmakosavyakhya 5 that philosophers 
while destroying the opinions of their adversaries must carefully respect 
the principles of logic which are useful to all, just as kings while destroying 
the soldiers of their enemies respect the field-labourer who is the common 
help of both the armies. 

The intellectual class, the ‘philosophers’ of the Greek writers, com- 
manded respect in the court and society by their learning, integrity, and 
readiness to serve the king and the people in various ways. They were 
entitled for their maintenance to a definite portion of the revenue allotted 
to them in one way or another. They were the custodians of the educa- 
tion and culture of the community. A Brahmin who committed a crime 


1 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr., pp. 43-4 

a Ibid. 213 

s Ibid. pp. 85-6 


*ii 164 

5 Breloer, KS. i p, 1J8« 



SOCIAL CLASSES 


67 


was exempt from torture; he was branded on his forehead with a sign 
that proclaimed the nature of his crime and then either banished from the 
kingdom or sent to the mines for the rest of his life . 1 Kautilya who headed 
the national reaction that led to the establishment of the Mauryan empire 
did not look with favour on the inroads made into the social and religious 
order by the multiplication of proselytizing sects of extempore origin and 
the growth of ascetic orders with large claims upon the livelihood of the 
people. He forbade the practice of abandoning domestic life haphazard 
and made it a rule that only old men could become ascetics, and then 
only after making adequate provision for their dependents and getting 
sanction from the dharmasthas . 2 But we cannot be sure that the policy 
was strictly enforced as a permanent measure, and the emphasis laid by 
Asoka in his inscriptions on seemly conduct towards Brahmana and 
Sramana ascetics and the cultivation of tolerance among the different sects 
( pashandas ) produces the impression that the evils of sectarian asceticism 
had by no means abated. Perhaps the real remedy for this state of affairs 
did not come until ‘the great doctrine of the Bhagavadgita, gained general 
acceptance ‘that salvation is attainable not by the rejection of civil duty, 
but in and above the performance of it .’ 3 

The Kshatriyas or fighting class, who were ‘second in point of numbers 
to the husbandmen’, led, according to Arrian , 4 ‘a life of supreme freedom 
and enjoyment. They have only military duties to perform. Others 
make their arms, and others supply them with horses, and they have 
others to attend on them in the camp, who take care of their horses, clean 
their arms, drive their elephants, prepare their chariots, and act as their 
charioteers. As long as they are required to fight they fight, and when 
peace returns they abandon themselves to enjoyment— the pay which they 
receive from the state being so liberal that they can with ease maintain 
themselves and others besides.’ 

The common people including cultivators, artisans and traders were 
exempt from military service and lived in villages in the country, seldorr^ 
going to towns ‘either to take part in its tumults or for any other purpose.’ 
There were, besides, hunters and herdsmen who led no settled life, buMived 
in tents and were always on the move. In totally denying the existence 
of slavery in India , 5 Megasthenes apparently went too far. Strabo points 
out that in saying this Megasthenes extended to the whole of India what 
Onesicritus noted as a custom peculiar to the country of Musicanus . 6 
Arrian’s summary of Megasthenes shows further that Megasthenes criti- 
cised his predecessor for stating that the Spartans and Indians were at 
one in this respect, and pointed out that the former held Helots as slaves 
and employed them in servile labour while the Indians did not use even 
aliens as slaves, much less their own countrymen. It is clear that Megas- 
thenes was thinking of slavery in its full legal sense as it obtained in the 

1 KA. iv 8 4 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr ., p. 211 

1 ii 1 5 Ibid. pp. 40, 68-9, and 206-8 

3 CHI. i p. 484-5 • McCrindle, Ancient India, p. 58 



68 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


West, according to which the slave was the chattel of the master with no 
rights of any kind whatsoever. The dasas of India were not slaves in 
that sense; for they could not be employed in unclean work — ‘servile 
labour’ as Megastkenes puts it — and they could hold and transmit pro- 
perty and under certain conditions regain their freedom as a matter of 
right. It is laid down that no arya (freeman, including Sudra ) could be 
made a dasa . 1 In times of distress a man might agree to become a dasa 
of another or provide for his children in that manner; but dasas usually 
came from the class of mlechchhas and captives in war. When correctly 
understood, Megasthenes, it is clear, was neither misled by the mildness 
of Indian slavery into denying its existence, nor did he idealise Indian 
conditions for the edification of the Greeks, but simply stated a fact as 
he saw and understood it in the light of his own prepossessions, comment- 
ing incidentally on the view of Onesicritus . 2 

It is worth a passing mention that the orthodox terms for the four 
varnas are not found in the Asoka inscriptions. They speak of Brahmanas 
and Sramapas but not of Kshatriyas, Vaisyas or Sudras, terms which, 
it has been suggested, were employed only in theoretical discussions and 
did not correspond to definite social groups. The ibhyas of the inscrip- 
tions are often equated with the Vaisyas. But the Buddhist texts explain 
the term by gahapati, householder, and there is much to be said for the 
view that they were ‘an aristocratic class always ranking after the Kshatri- 
yas and Brahmanas.’ The common folk seem to be included under the 
heads of bhfitakas, hired labourers, and dasas, serfs, kindness to whom 
is inculcated in the inscriptions. Buddhist works furnish several examples 
of Brahmanas and householders ( gahapatis ) engaging themselves in agri- 
culture and hiring themselves out as cowherds, goatherds, and otherwise . 3 

In domestic life the joint family system prevailed, but it could be dis- 
solved at the will of the parties. A girl was deemed to attain majority 
at the age of twelve and a boy at sixteen. Eight kinds of marriage arc 
enumerated, of which only four are regular, though Kautilya adds that 
there is no prohibition against any form of marriage that produces satis- 
faction to all concerned . 4 Marriage could be dissolved by mutual consent 
or prolonged absence. A married woman had property of her own in 
the form of bride-gift ( stridhana ) and jewels, and this was to some extent 
at her disposal in case of widowhood. If she remarried a relative of her 
deceased husband with her father-in-law’s consent she retained properties 
given her by her father-in-law or her first husband. Cruelty by either 
party to a marriage to the other was punishable. In the absence of male 
issue, a man was free to marry another wife without paying compensation 
to his first wife. 

The terms asuryampasya (one who does not see the sun), avarodhana 
(secluded one), and antahpura (inner apartments), applied to the women 


* A A. Ill u 

8 Breloer, KS. ii (i), pp. 11-69; see 
also Z1I. vii pp. 194-204 and 205-32 


til 2 and 3 



SATI, FOOD AND DRESS 


69 


of the royal household, imply the practice of a certain amount of seclusion 
among royal women certainly, and probably among women of the upper 
classes as well. Sati noticed by Greek writers was rarely practised and 
would appear to have been limited to the women of the higher classes. 
There is frequent mention of women of the commonalty moving about 
with freedom and engaging themselves in gainful occupations. Offences 
against women of all kinds were severely punished, and Kautilya lays down 
penalties against officials in charge of workshops and prisons who mis- 
behave towards them. 1 Concerning ganikas or public women and 
their role in the palace and in social life, both Kautilya and the Greek 
writers have a good deal to say. The class included actresses, dancers, 
musicians and other artists, besides educated women corresponding to 
the Greek hetaerae. 

There is clear Greek testimony to the high state of civilization prevalent 
in Mauryan India. ‘The Indians’, says Strabo, 2 ‘all live frugally, espe- 
cially when in camp. They dislike a great undisciplined multitude, and 
consequently they observe good order. Theft is of very rare occurrence. 
Megaslhenes says that those who were in the camp of Sandrocottus, 
wherein lay 400,000 men, found that the thefts reported on any one day 
did not exceed the value of two hundred drachmae [about 120 rupees]. . . 
They live happily enough being simple in their manners and frugal. They 
never drink wine except at sacrifices. Their beverage is a liquor composed 
from rice instead of barley, and their food is principally a rice pottage. 
. .Their houses and property they generally leave unguarded. These 
things indicate that they possess good, sober sense.’ ‘Truth and virtue 
they hold alike in esteem’. Strabo then goes on to notice what must 
have struck the Greeks as strange though Indian religious law and social 
practice made the custom obligatory. He says : ‘But other things they 
do which one cannot approve : for instance, that they eat always alone, 
and have no fixed hours when meals are to be taken by all in 
common, but each one eats when inclined. The contrary custom 
would be better for the ends of social and civil life,’ an observation often 
repeated by later observers. ‘Megasthenes,’ writes Athenaeus, 3 ‘in the 
second book of his Indika says that when the Indians are at supper a table 
is placed before each person, this being like a tripod. There is placed 
upon it a golden bowl, into which they first put rice, boiled as one would 
boil barley, and then they add many dainties prepared according to 
Indian receipts.’ In the cities inns, eating-houses, serais and gaming- 
houses were numerous; sects and crafts had their separate meeting- 
places and establishments. 4 Luxury was displayed chiefly in dress, 
though ordinary folk wore only a pair of simple cotton garments as 
noted by Arrian. ‘Their favourite mode of exercising the body is by 
friction, applied in various ways, but especially by passing smooth 


1 KA. ii 23 and 36 ; iv, 12 3 Ibid. p. 74 

2 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr., pp. 69-70 4 KA. ii 36 



70 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


ebony rollers over the skin. . . In contrast to the general simplicity of 
their style, they love finery and ornament. Their robes are worked in 
gold and ornamented with precious stones, and they also wear flowered 
garments made of the finest muslin. Attendants walking behind hold up 
umbrellas over them : for they have a high regard for beauty, and avail 
themselves of every device to improve their looks.’ ‘Their tombs are 
plain, and the mounds raised over the dead lowly .’ 1 

INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

In the organization of industry and trade the Mauryan empire was 
marked by an all-round advance on the conditions of an earlier age re- 
flected in Pali Buddhist literature, and the government, as already observed, 
played a much larger part than ever in the economic sector of national 
life. The establishment of a large empire with a strong and fairly centra- 
lized government doubtless created a new sense of security which acted 
as a stimulus to production and exchange. The increased attention paid 
to the laying out and maintenance of roads and waterways facilitated the 
movement of goods and promoted the growth of trade, internal and 
foreign. Kautilya mentions different types of roads and pathways such 
as the king’s highway, the merchants’ road, rural roads, paths to fields, 
forests, and so on, and prescribes their respective width and the arrange- 
ments for their proper maintenance , 2 and the creation of market towns in 
State colonization schemes in rural areas. The villagers everywhere had a 
large measure of collective responsibility for the maintenance of roads 
and other works of public utility and they were liable to be fined if they 
failed to co-operate in an enterprise for the common good . 3 Several im- 
portant roads are mentioned by the Greek writers as well as by Kautilya 
and the Buddhist works. Megasthenes was struck by the Royal Road 
leading from the Indus to Pataliputra which was continued from there 
tfc the mouth of the Ganges, and Pliny has noted its different stages with 
the distances in Roman miles in a difficult and much discussed passage ; 4 
the Sutlej near its junction with the Beas, the Jamuna near the present 
Bureah, the Ganges somewhere near Hastinapura, Dabhai about twelve 
miles south of Anupshahr, Kanauj or some smaller place in its vicinity, 
and Prayaga at the confluence of the Ganges and the Jamuna, formed,' 
according to McCrindle, the principal stages in the road to the capital. 
The road was marked by mile-stones indicating distances and cross-roads. 
A road from Sravastl to Rajagriha is mentioned in the Jatakas , 5 and up 
to Kusinara this must have passed along the foot of the Himalayas where 
the rivers were more easily crossed; from Kusinara to Rajagriha there 
were twelve halts including one at Vaisali, with a single crossing of the 

1 McCrindle, op. cit., p. 70 4 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr., pp. I29ff 

* KA. ii 4; vi 12 and notes. 

5 Ibid, iii 10 s Text i 92 



TRADE ROUTES 


1 1 


Ganges at Patna, as we learn from the itinerary of the Buddha recorded 
in the Digha Nikaya. 1 Another route from Sravasti to the ‘Borders’ is 
mentioned in the Jatakas 2 This, taken along with Panini’s reference to 
a north-west route ( uttarapatha ), 3 may mean that there was another 
road from Sravasti to the north-west across the land of the Five Rivers 
linking it up with the great highways of central and western Asia; or 
possibly the road joined the Royal Road at some point. Another road 
led from Sravasti to the south-west by way of Kausambi, Vidisa and 
Pratishthana on the Godavari. There was also a road to Sind, the home 
of horses and asses, and Sauvira with its capital at Roruva or Roruka. 
Seaports like Tamralipti in the east, Bharukachchha and Surparaka 
(Sopara) in the west, were connected with the main trade-routes. The 
road to Sind led across the deserts of Rajputana which took several days 
to traverse, and caravans going east and west by that route marched in 
the cool of the night guided by stars and land-pilots 4 ( thalaniyamaka ). 
Bridges were not known, but only fords and ferries. The roads, parti- 
cularly through forests, were infested by robbers against whom the mer- 
chants protected themselves by hiring the services of forest guards and 
maintaining their own armed forces. 

In spite of the cheapness and ease of transport by water, Kautilya 
prefers land routes as less risky and because they were open to use in all 
weather. 5 He prefers coastal trade to oceanic trade as the former touches 
many port towns and brings in more profit. River traffic he considers 
very good as it is uninterrupted and its risks are easily avoided or endured. 
The Ganges was the most important inland waterway ; from Champa 
boats sailed up to Benares, the great industrial and trading centre of the 
time. Thence they went further up as far as Sahajati and up the Jamuna 
to Kausambi. The Jatakas have preserved the memory of daring sea- 
voyages to Baveru (Babylon) in the west and Suvarnabhumi, perhaps a 
generic name for Burma and Malaysia, in the east. Merchants from 
Bharukachchha who traded with Suvarnabhumi must have found a con- 
venient half-way house in Ceylon. The Jatakas mention also ‘short- 
sighting birds’ which were used in locating the nearest land when the 
ship’s position became doubtful. 

India maintained connection with Egypt by the Red Sea route and with 
the Seleucid empire by the Persian Gulf. Both these routes were control- 
led by powerful Arab tribes engaged in highly developed and lucrative 
trade. 6 Strabo has preserved an interesting reminiscence of the Indian 
share in the western trade. In the reign of Ptolemy Eurgetes II (145-116 
b.c.), an Indian who was stranded on the shore of the Arabian Gulf (Red 
Sea) was brought to Alexandria. Having learnt Greek there, he gave 
the king information of the sea-route to India. Then Ptolemy sent two 
expeditions under Eudoxus of Cyzicus, both of which made successful 


1 n Sutt. xvi pp. 81 ff, 

* I p. 377 f. 

• v 1, 77 


4 Jat. i pp. 98 and 107 
6 vii 12 


• Rostovtzeff, op, cit., p. 457 



11 


government, society and art 


voyages to India and returned laden with goods. 1 Besides these sea- 
routes, India was connected with the West on land by three roads. The 
northernmost was along the Kabul river across the narrow section of the 
mountains of Afghanistan where only the Hindukush separates the basins 
of the Oxus and the Indus; the second lay about five hundred miles to the 
south-west where the Afghan mountains end and open up an easy way 
across 400 miles of plateau from Kandahar to Herat, and another way 
from the south-east of Kandahar through the Bolan pass into the lower 
Indus valley; lastly a third route led across the deserts of Makran or along 
the coast of Baluchistan. 2 

Production was in the main governed by the demands of the local market, 
only precious articles of small bulk and rare commodities entering into 
long-distance trade. Agriculture was the most important and universal 
industry. From a fiscal point of viewKautilya classifies villages as revenue- 
free, and paying the revenue in the form of military service, in grain, 
cattle, cash, forest produce, or labour. In the villages, except where the 
working of mines or other enterprises created special conditions, husband- 
men, cowherds and shepherds must have formed the bulk of the popula- 
tion. The village servants ( gramabhfitakas ) such as the potter, blacksmith, 
carpenter, barber and washerman were paid in cash, but were liable to be 
called upon to cultivate holdings which were left fallow. 3 Among the 
crops grown are mentioned : rice of different varieties, coarse grain 
(, kodrava ), sesamum, millet, varieties of pulses, barley, wheat, linseed, 
mustard, vegetables and tubers, fruits like pumpkins, gourds, plantains 
and grapes, safflower and sugar-cane. 4 Government had its own farms 
and gardens, undertook the cultivation of commercial crops like cotton 
and flax ( kshauma ), and marketed the produce along with other producers. 
Besides peasant proprietors there were day labourers ( Icarmakaras ) and 
serfs ( dasas ) to provide labour in the fields, farms and gardens. The 
owner of land of even a small extent commanded a higher status in society 
than the landless labourer. The livestock on the farms included cows, 
buffaloes, goats and sheep besides poultry; there were also asses, camels, 
pigs and dogs. 5 The state maintained cattle, dairy and stud-farms with 
the necessary staff and engaged hunters and their hounds to keep pastures 
clear of wild animals. 6 

In the towns, which were numerous, we hear of labourers, craftsmen, 
traders, inspectors and officials. The crafts were varied, particularly 
those dealing with textiles and precious metals and gems. The doctor, 
actor, singer, dancer and soothsayer are mentioned among the professions. 
Trade was partly in the hands of officials and partly in those of shop- 
keepers or travelling merchants. The sreshfhin or rich merchant was an 
important social figure. 


Ibid. pp. 926-9 ; also McCrindle, 
Ancient India, pp. 97-8 
E. H. Warmington, Commerce between 
the Roman Empire and India, p. 21 


*KA. ii 1, 3 
‘Ibid, ii 24 
6 Ibid, v 2 
•Ibid, ii 29,34 



Natural resources, textiles 


73 


Greek observers were struck by the richness of India’s natural resources 
and the skill of her population in exploiting them, and the Arthasastra 
confirms their impressions. ‘India,’ says Diodorus (ii, 35-37) epitomizing 
Megasthenes, 1 ‘has many huge mountains which abound in fruit trees of 
every kind, and many vast plains of great fertility, more or less beautiful, 
but all alike intersected by a multitude of rivers. The greater part of the 
soil, moreover, is under irrigation, and consequently bears two crops in 
the course of the year.’ He then mentions that Indian elephants exceed 
those of Libya in strength, and being caught in great numbers and trained 
for war, they turn the scale of victory. ‘The inhabitants,’ he continues, 
‘in like manner having abundant means of subsistence, exceed in conse- 
quence the ordinary stature, and are distinguished by their proud bearing. 
They are also found to be well skilled in the arts, as might be expected of 
men who inhale a pure air and drink the very finest water. And while 
the soil bears on its surface all kinds of fruits which are known to cultiva- 
tion, it has also underground numerous veins of all sorts of metals, for it 
contains much gold and silver, and copper and iron in no small quantity, 
and even tin and other metals, which are employed in making articles of 
use and ornament, as well as implements and accoutrements of war.’ 
His description of the agricultural produce is very similar to that of Kau- 
tilya reproduced above. He affirms that famine has never visited India 
because the soil is never ravaged even during war — statements which must 
be accepted with reservation in the light of the Sohgaura and Mahasthan 
inscriptions which contain provisions against famine, and the Jaina legend 
regarding the twelve years’ famine at the close of Chandragupta’s reign. 
Diodorus adds: ‘India, again, possesses many rivers both large and 
navigable.’ 

Cotton manufacture held the first place among textile industries from 
very ancient times. Early Buddhist texts speak with high praise of cloth 
from Benares and the Sivi country. Arrian cites Nearchus and says 
that the cotton cloth worn by Indians had a brighter white colour than 
any cotton found elsewhere. 2 The Malavas and their allies presented 
a large quantity of cotton cloth to Alexander when they made peacg with 
him after a severe fight. Kautilya gives a full account of the industry 
and notes that Madhura (Madurai), the Pandyan capital, Aparanta 
(Konkan), Kalinga, Kasi, Vanga, Vatsa (KausambI region), and Mahisha, 
produced the finest cotton fabrics. 3 In the same context he distinguishes 
three varieties of dukula (an unidentified, but fine fibrous fabric) : those 
from Vanga (E. Bengal) being white, from Pundra (N. Bengal) black, and 
from Suvarnakudya ruddy like the rising sun. Linen fabrics ( kshauma ) from 
Kasi and Pundra, and fabrics made of fibres of specified trees ( patrorna , 
lit. leaf-wool) from Magadha, Pundra and Suvarnakudya also find specific 
mention. Among costlier textiles silk and silk cloth are frequently referred 


1 McCrindle, Meg . & Arr ., pp. 30 ff. 

io 


1 Ibid. p. 219 
Mi 11 (p. 81) 



74 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


to in the Buddhist books. 1 Greek testimony on the dress of the rich has 
been cited already, and Kautilya mentions kauseya from the Chinabhumi 
which seems to mean not China but the land of the Shin tribe of Gilgit and 
its neighbourhood. 2 He also describes woollen blankets from Nepal called 
bhingisi and apasaraka, made of eight pieces, black in colour and rain- 
proof ( varsha-varariam ). Many other varieties of fabrics of sheep’s wool 
are distinguished by their colour, manufacturing processes and their uses, 
besides other fabrics made from the hair of wild animals. A wide variety 
of the skins of animals are likewise distinguished by their colour, size, 
place of origin and uses, and various Himalayan regions played a large 
part in the trade in skins and furs. A casual allusion to the skill of 
the Indian leather-worker occurs in Arrian’s statement that Indians wear 
shoes made of white leather and these are elaborately trimmed, while 
the soles are variegated, and of great thickness to make the wearer seem 
taller. 3 

Carpentry was a long-established trade, and the Jatakas make many 
references to woodwork, including shipbuilding, house-building, and the 
making of carts, chariots and machines of various types. The extraordi- 
nary perfection of the craft in Mauryan times is attested by the seven 
large but mysterious wooden platforms that have been dug up at Kumrahar 
in the neighbourhood of Patna, 4 and probably belong to the reign of 
Chandragupta. Each of the platforms is 30 feet in length, 5 feet 4 inches 
in width and 4 feet 3 inches in height from the base. ‘The platform,’ 
says Dr. Spooner who made the discovery, ‘was found to be merely a 
solid accumulation of logs. But the neatness and accuracy with which 
it has been put together, as well as the preservation of the ancient wood, 
whose edges were so perfect that the very lines of jointure were indistin- 
guishable, evoked the admiration of all who witnessed the experiment. 
The whole was built up with a precision and a reasoned care that could 
not possibly be excelled to-day, and which I fancy is only rarely, if ever, 
equalled in India.’ Again, ‘in short, the construction was the absolute 
perfection of such work. The builders who erected those platforms would 
find little indeed to learn in the field of their own art, could they return 
to earth to-day.’ The excellent sculpture of Asoka’s day presupposes 
a long tradition of carving in wood and ivory. The use of ivory ear-rings 
by wealthy Indians was noted by Arrian. 

Stone-cutting was another highly developed art and the stone-cutter 
(pasana-kof(aka) figures often in the Jatakas. Even the Harappa people 
are known to have used stone for sculpture to a limited extent. A stone 
structure known as Jarasandhka baithak existing at Rajglr in Bihar may 
well belong to a time earlier than that of the Mauryas. The Cyclopean 
enclosure-wall of a shrine at Nagari in Rajputana may be of the Mauryan 

1 See s. v. Koseyya in P. T. S. Dictionary. a misprint for ii, 11 . 

* Jayaswal, Hindu Polity, i 212 n.\ 3 McCrindle, Meg & Arr n 220 

where xi ii in the reference to KA. is * ASIAR. 1912-13, pp 73 ff 



STONE-CUTTING, MINING AND METALLURGY 75 

period, if not earlier. One of the best specimens of the stone art of the 
pre-Asokan period is the massive stone coffer exhumed from the Piprahwa 
stupa ; it contained a relic casket bearing a Brahml inscription meaning : 
‘This receptacle of the relics of the blessed Buddha of the Zakiyas [is the 
pious gift of] the brothers of Sukirti, jointly with their sisters, their sons, 
and their wives.’ 1 It is a large monolith in grey sandstone of superior 
quality measuring 4 ' 4" x 2 ' 8| " x 2 ' 2i" and hollowed at vast labour and 
expense from a block of solid rock. And the relic casket of rock crystal 
with a hollow fish-shaped handle which it contained, and another casket 
of beryl from Bhattiprolu 2 of somewhat later date, constitute two of the 
most beautiful examples of the stone-cutter’s art. In fact so far as is 
known at present the Indian craftsman of the early Mauryan epoch 
found his highest aptitude not so much in the plastic treatment of form for 
which he had to go to school elsewhere, but in his technical competence 
in the cutting and polishing of refractory stones, and, let us add, in the 
application of delicate designs to metal objects. The perfect execution 
of some of the Asoka inscriptions on stone also deserves particular mention 
here. The stone monuments of the reign of Asoka will engage our atten- 
tion at a later stage. 

India has always been famous for its fragrant woods, and Kautilya 
mentions five kinds, namely chandana, agaru, taila-parnika, bhadrasrl 
and kaleyaka, each including varieties distinguished by their place of 
origin, colour or other characteristics. Kamarupa, the Himalayan regions, 
and Ceylon and South India furnished most of these varieties according 
to the commentator on Kautilya. 

There is much in the Arthasastra (ii, 12) on the technique of mining 
and metallurgy. The characteristics of ores and methods of smelting and 
purification of ores are discussed; the metals noticed include gold, silver, 
copper, lead, tin, iron and vaikfintaka (unidentified). The manufacture 
of copper, lead, tin, bronze, brass, iron, and other wares is detailed, the 
qualities of varieties of gold and silver, the methods of purifying them, 
and the processes of their manufacture, are specially noticed (ii, 13 and 
14). Greek testimony confirms all this. The Malavas offered to Alexan- 
der, among other things, a hundred talents of ‘white iron’ (Jerrum Candi- 
durri), usually taken to refer to steel.® Strabo observes that during the 
festival observed when the king washed his hair, ‘each person sought to 
outrival his neighbour in displaying his wealth’ in the presents he sent 
to the king. Further, ‘in the processions at their festivals, many elephants 
adorned with gold and silver are in the train, as well as four-horsed chariots 


KIRAS. 1898, p. 574-5; 14. 1907, pp. 
117-24. ‘Notwithstanding the fracture 
(of the cover)’ says Peppe, ‘the coffer 
remained perfectly closed. The lid or 
cover was provided with a deep groove 
which fitted perfectly into the flange 
of the sides of the coffer, and the pieces 
of the lid were thus firmly held together. 


and were removed without injury to the 
contents of the box.’ The lid weighs 408 
pounds, the whole coffer (lid included) 
about 1,537 pounds in weight. 

2 Rea, S. Indian Buddhist Antiquities 
’ McCrindle, The Invasion of India, p. 
252 (Curtius) and n. 1 



76 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


and yokes of oxen. Then comes a great host of attendants in their holi- 
day attire, with vessels of gold, such as large basins and goblets, 6 feet 
in breadth, tables, chairs of state, drinking cups and lavers, all made of 
Indian copper and many of them set with precious stones — emeralds, 
beryl, and Indian garnets.’ 1 Similarly, according to Curtius, ‘when 
the king condescends to show himself in public his attendants carry in 
their hands silver censers, and perfume with incense all the roads by which 
it is his pleasure to be conveyed. He lolls in a golden palanquin, garnished 
with pearls, which dangle all round it, and he is robed in fine muslin 
embroidered with purple and gold.’ ‘The palace is adorned with gilded 
pillars clasped all round by a vine embossed in gold, while silver images 
of those birds which most charm the eye diversify the workmanship.’ 2 

Kautilya (ii, 1 1) shows acquaintance with pearls ( muktika ), jewels ( mani ), 
diamonds ( vajra ), and coral (jpravala ), Indian and foreign. He notes the 
qualities of good and bad pearls, as well as the colours and qualities of 
various types of ruby, beryl, sapphire, crystal, diamond and coral. The 
complexity of the taste that prevailed in the jeweller’s art can be surmised 
from his mention of five varieties of pearl necklaces ( yash(i ), which are 
again subdivided into other classes. The same varieties are said to apply 
also to the ornaments for the head, arms, feet and waist. 

It is not necessary to go into the details of other industries mentioned 
in the literary works of the time, such as the manufacture of dyes, gupis, 
drugs, perfumes and so on, as well as of pottery. But a word may be 
said on the making of implements and weapons of war. The Arthasastra 
(ii, 18) notices bows, bow-strings, and arrows and arrowheads, of different 
materials such as palmyra, bamboo, bone, and horn. Swords of different 
types with handles made of the horn of the rhinoceros or buffalo, and 
of wood, ivory or the root of the bamboo ; axes, discuses and other sharp- 
edged razor-like ( kshura-kalpah ) weapons; armour of different varieties 
made of iron, skins, or other material, and much other equipment of 
which the details need not be reproduced here, are mentioned besides 
‘machines ( yantrani ) of different descriptions which include nine varieties 
of the fixed and sixteen varieties of the movable type. It is interesting to 
note that among the movable machines is one for use against attacking 
elephants (hasti-varaka), which, according to the commentator, was a 
big rod with two or three points. The Greek accounts of the military 
equipment of the Indians, cited already, agree with much that is found 
on the same subject in Kautilya’s work. 

As has been already indicated, the improving conditions of trade in 
the Mauryan empire are reflected in the pages of the Arthasastra. This 
is seen not only in the greater attention devoted to roads and market 
towns, but in the intelligent appreciation of the relative value of different 
trade-routes. According to an unnamed teacher quoted by Kautilya 


xv 1. 69; McCrindle, Ancient India, 
p. 75 

viii 9, Invasion , pp. 188-9. The descrip- 


tion has been confirmed by the exca- 
vations at Kumrahar where gold vines 
have been found. 



TRADE POLICY 


77 


(vii, 12) the costlier merchandise consisting of elephants, horses, fragrant 
products, tusks, skins, gold and silver were plentiful in the Himalayas, 
and consequently the routes leading to the Himalayas were better than 
those leading to Daskshinapatha. ‘Not so/ says Kautilya, ‘for with the 
exception of blankets, skins and horses, other articles of merchandise 
such as conch-shells, diamonds, precious stones, pearls and gold, are 
plentiful in the South. And of routes leading to the South, that which 
traverses a large number of mines, along which valuable articles are moved, 
and which is frequented by traders because of its easy nature, is to be 
preferred; as also that by following which an abundance of merchandise 
of various kinds can be obtained/ It is quite probable that the first view 
was the older one, valid when trade with the South had not developed 
so much as under the Mauryas, and Northern India found trade with the 
Himalayan regions more worth while. With the establishment and 
spread of Mauryan power, the balance shifted in favour of the South 
as more routes leading to that part of the country were opened up and the 
volume of trade increased. The remarkable list (ii, 11-12) of agricultural, 
manufacturing and other products of the different regions of India which 
Kautilya mentions and which has been reviewed above, gives an idea of 
the extent of internal trade and the objects which entered into it. 

The Mauryan empire controlled not only all the internal trade-routes, 
but most of the land and sea routes leading outside the country to the 
West and East. The liberation of the Indus valley and the territorial 
gains arising from the repulse of Seleucus and the treaty with him gave 
Chandragupta Maurya control over the north-western and western land 
routes which linked India to the Mediterranean lands. The conquest 
of the Deccan brought some of the most important ports into the empire, 
and the conquest of Kalinga by Asoka completed the process by elimi- 
nating the only possible rival for the mastery of the eastern trade. The 
wise policy of friendship with the Hellenistic states which was maintained 
throughout the best days of the Mauryan empire was another important 
factor that favoured the expansion of India’s trade with Western Asia 
and Egypt. Prof. Rostovtzeff has made a masterly study of these develop- 
ments and no apology is needed for citing him at some length. ‘India 
supplied Egypt with ivory, tortoise-shell, pearls, pigments and dyes (espe- 
cially indigo), rice, and various spices, e.g., pepper, nard, costum, mala- 
bathron, some rare woods, various medicinal substances, and cotton and 
silk.’ 1 ‘The routes of immemorial antiquity which connected India 
with Babylonia were, for the most part, far more frequented, more impor- 
tant and better developed [than the more northerly route]. They con- 
verged on Seleuceia on the Tigris, the great political and commercial city 
of Seleucus I, the eastern capital of that king and his successors, the 
inheritor of Babylon’s pre-eminence/ ‘A channel of Indian trade not less 
important than that by the Persian Gulf was provided by the ancient 


Rostovtzeff, op. cit., pp. 386-7, 456-7, 459, 461 



78 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


roads across the Iranian plateau to Seleuceia . . . Transport by these 
routes, long and difficult as it was, was nevertheless safer and perhaps 
cheaper than by the Persian Gulf, since their whole course lay in Seleucid 
territory. It was probably to secure the safety of these routes that Seleucus 
gave up his claims to part of India and preferred peaceful traffic with 
Chandragupta and his empire of Magadha to continuous and ruinous 
war. Through cordial relations and repeated embassies (such as those 
of Megasthenes and later of Daimachus) the Seleucids ensured a steady 
supply of war elephants and of Indian wares. When the communications 
with India were endangered by the secession of Bactria and Parthia, Antio- 
chus III launched his famous expedition, which led to an entente cordiale 
with Bactria and a temporary withdrawal of the Parthians, and re-establi- 
shed for some time the supremacy of the Seleucids along the routes in 
question.’ ‘In order to facilitate Bactrian trade with India, Antiochus I 
at the time of his joint rule with Seleucus (285-280 b.c.) made a special 
issue of coins of the Indian instead of the Attic standard.’ The existence 
of a brisk commercial intercourse with foreign lands along various routes 
doubtless had a large part in suggesting to Asoka the great idea of sending 
his missions to these lands to spread the gospel of Buddhism. 

Guilds known as srenis or sanghas played a large part in the conduct 
of crafts and trades, and even the growing centralization of the Mauryan 
government had to respect their constitutions and privileges. Gautama, 
who is counted among the earliest writers on polity, declares (xi, 21-2) 
that traders and artisans, among others, had the authority to lay down 
rules for their respective classes. Greek evidence and the Jatakas show 
that occupations were generally hereditary, and the Jatakas mention ‘the 
eighteen guilds’, several instances of industries localized in particular 
towns and villages, of the separate crafts each having a pamukha (president) 
or jettha (alderman) presiding over it, and of a judge from among them- 
selves settling disputes among the guilds. 1 We hear also of satthavahas 
(caravan leaders) whose directions were obeyed by caravans along the 
flade-routes. Of the sanghas described by Kautilya (Bk. xi) as ruled 
by mykhyas, some adopted vartta (agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade) 
as their profession. He also wants the customs and regulations of srenis 
to be ascertained and recorded in official registers (ii, 7). But at no time 
did the guilds so completely cover the field of industry as to leave no scope 
for hired labour ( karmakara of Kautilya) or the labour of serfs ( dasas ). 
That the two classes last named formed an important element in society 
is seen from Asoka’s repeated stress on their being treated with kindness 
and consideration. 

The role of the State in the sphere of industry and trade was important 
and has been referred to incidentally in the course of the preceding account 
of the social and economic conditions of the Mauryan empire. The 


1 Jat. (Text) in 281 for kammaragama, and jetthakammara ; vj 22 for attharasa 
seniyo ; also Index to Eng. Tr. s. v. Guilds, Caravans. 



ROLE OF THE STATE IN TRADE AND ARTS 19 

foundation of market-towns in rural areas; the making and maintenance 
of roads and the ensuring of safety on them, were accepted as among 
the primary duties of government. The king is enjoined to prevent 
obstruction on trade-routes from his favourites ( vallabhas ), officers, and 
frontier-guards ( antapalas ) as well as from thieves and animal herds (ii, 1). 
The intimate association of the industrial and commercial classes with the 
court becomes clear from the rules (ii, 4) relating to the planned settlement 
of the fortified capital. This description also conveys an idea of the 
relative social status of the different groups among them. Dealers in 
scents, garlands, grains and liquids, and expert artisans had their habita- 
tions to the east of the royal palace along with members of the Kshatriya 
caste. Dealers in cooked food, liquor, and flesh lived on the southern 
side along with Vaisyas, prostitutes and musicians. The western side 
was allotted to the Sudras, the makers of woollen and cotton goods and 
armourers. Workers in base metals and precious stones lived on the 
north along with Brahmanas. The State’s direct share in the extractive 
and manufacturing industries and in trade has been noticed already. The 
value of natural resources and the need for efficient exploitation of them 
were well understood. Among the qualities of a good country ( janapada 
sampat, vi, 1) are mentioned the possession of fertile agricultural tracts, 
mines and forests of different types, easy land routes and waterways. 
Towards his neighbours (vii, 1) the king is advised to pursue a policy 
which would conduce to the exploitation of his own resources and obstruct 
that of his neighbours’. There is evidence (vii, 11-12) of much academic 
discussion among writers on polity on the relative advantages of tracts rich 
in mines and in food-grains, of mines yielding a precious and small output 
and those with an inferior but large output and, as already noticed, of 
different types of trade-routes; such discussions must have proceeded at 
least to some extent on the basis of known facts. 

Another aspect of State policy was the more or less strict control of 
artisans and traders, to which is devoted a good part of the section pn 
kan\akasodhana (Bk. iv). Artisans and merchants are looked upon 
with suspicion, as likely to act against the public interest, and once’Kauti- 
lya roundly characterises them as thieves in fact though not in name 
(iv, 1). There was a general attempt at regulating prices, wages and 
profits; penalties were laid down against mixing up old goods with new, 
and the sale of old wares required the permission of the market superin- 
tendent. 1 Kautilya holds oppression by traders to be worse than even 
that caused by the antapalas (viii, 4). On the other hand, both artisans 
and merchants enjoyed the special protection of the State, and offences 
against their person or property were severely dealt with. 2 According 
to Strabo, if a person caused the loss of a hand or an eye to a craftsman, 
he was put to death.® The economic policy of the Mauryan State is thus 

1 KA iv 6; Strabo xv (1) 51 (McCrindle, a iv 10 and 13 

Ancient India, p, 54) * xv (1) 54 



GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


seen to have aimed at a systematic control of the evils of a free competitive 
economy, partly by direct participation in industry and trade, and partly 
by bureaucratic paternalism. 


RELIGION 

The Vedic religion. Jainism and Buddhism appear to have been the 
important religions prevalent at the time, besides a number of minor 
religious orders including that of the Ajlvikas, of which we have little 
definite knowledge, though their presence is indirectly attested by our 
sources. Chandragupta doubtless began as an orthodox follower of 
the Vedic religion as is seen from his association with Kautilya. The 
Jaina tradition that he embraced that faith later in life may well be true, 
and may have had something to do with his rather abrupt exit from the 
stage of history. According to the Mahavamsa 1 ‘Asoka’s father had 
shown hospitality to sixty thousand Brahmanas, versed in the Brahma- 
doctrine and in like manner he himself nourished them for three years.’ 
The Arthasastra lays it down that ‘in the centre of the capital city ( pura-mad - 
hya) should be situated the temples (kosh(hakas) of Aparajita, Apratihata, 
Jayanta and Vaijayanta, as well as the abodes (griha) of Siva, Vaisravana, 
Alvins, Sri and Madira (Durga).’ 2 Elsewhere in detailing the magic 
formulae used for different purposes, the same work mentions Aditi, 
Anumati, Sarasvatl, Savita, Agni, Soma, Krishna, and Pauloml. 3 The 
pantheon, it will be noted, stands fairly close to that of the later Vedic 
age, and does not yet show signs either of the strongly marked Puranic 
associations or of the development of emotional devotion ( bhakti ) that 
still lay in the future. The Brahmins practised the Vedic religion of sacri- 
fice, and they were encouraged in the practice of learning and spiritual 
pursuits by the endowment of Brahmadeya lands yielding sufficient pro- 
duce and exempted from taxes and fines (adandakarani). 4 Near the royal 
palace a sacrificial hall ( ijyasthanam ) was provided (ii, 4). Tapovanas, 
forest retreats for ascetics, are mentioned; but Kautilya did not look with 
favour on ascetics who were not vanaprasthas (i.e. followers of the Vedic 
religion in the third stage of their life), and forbade their entry into the 
villages of the kingdom. 5 The tendency to adopt the life of a homeless, 
wandering ascetic was evidently still rather pronounced. Though in an 
age of religious stir this life was often adopted from sincere religious 
motives, it was perhaps as often due to a mere love of vagrancy and dislike 
of honest work. It was not limited to any particular class of people and 
seems to have been more prevalent among the lower classes. The attempt to 
check this by the scheme of regulated asramas (stages of life) had evidently 


* ii 4. Shama Sastri’s rendering of 
srimadiragriham as ‘the honourable 
liquor house’ is obviously wrong in 
the context, Monier-Williams (Dic- 


tionary) notes that Madira is 
of Durga in the Harivamsa. 
3 xiv 1, 3 



POPULAR CULTS, JAINISM 


81 


not produced satisfactory results, and Kautilya advocates the exercise 
of the power of the State towards this end. Government was required 
to stop persons from taking to asceticism until they had discharged their 
legitimate social duties, including provision for their dependents, to 
prevent the vagrants of non-vaidic sects from disturbing the life of the 
villagers, and to forbid the entertainment of Sakyas, Ajlvikas and Sudra 
ascetics at religious ceremonies (iii, 20). 

Asoka’s Rock Edict I forbade the killing or sacrifice of animals in all 
his territory. This has sometimes been understood as a measure directed 
particularly against the Brahmins and their religion, and the suggestion 
has been made that it led to a reaction which culminated in the Brahmin 
empire of the Sungas. But for every animal sacrificed in a Vedic ritual, 
there must have been hundreds killed to propitiate popular deities of 
various sorts in the villages and towns, and there is no reason to hold 
that Asoka was actuated by any motives other than humanitarian. That 
there ensued in course of time a marked reaction in favour of the Vedic 
religion, as against Buddhism which enjoyed great patronage from Asoka, 
was quite another matter. 

Popular faith was then as ever manifold in its trends. Besides worship 
at the temples of the deities already named, it included adoration of the 
deities of vastu (site) and dik (quarters). Fire, rivers, Indra, Ganga, and the 
sea-shore (iv, 3) were worshipped with offerings, oblations, and incanta- 
tions to ward off natural calamities and invite natural benefits. Forests, 
mountains, and chaityas were sacrificed to, with the rituals of the Atharva- 
veda to ward off danger from demons (iv, 3). Pilgrimages to sacred 
shrines ( punyasthanas ) and tirthas were common (ii 35-6; iii, 9-10). Images 
of snakes ( nagapratimas ), and flagstafifs standing for particular deities 
were also worshipped. Those who practised black magic invoked Bali, 
Sambara, Vairochana, and a host of minor godlings to aid them in achie- 
ving their ends. Astrologers and fortune-tellers, interpreters of dreams 
and birds’ voices, and medicine-men who pretended to heal by magic 
more than by drugs, seem to have flourished on the credulity of the masses.’ 

Our knowledge of Jainism in the Mauryan epoch is very limited. ,The 
legends relating to Chandragupta and Bhadrabahu, their migration to 
Mysore to escape the consequences of a twelve years’ famine in the North, 
an event which is said ultimately to have given rise to the division between 
the Digambaras and Svetambaras, have been already noticed. The 
strongholds of Jainism seem to have lain more in Western India than 
in its original home where the rival creeds of the Buddha and the Ajlvikas 
seem to have prevailed. The Ajlvikas received gifts of cave-dwellings 
in the hills near Gaya both from ASoka and his grandson Dasaratha. 
They were the followers of Gosala Mamkhaliputta, a contemporary of 
Mahavira, whose disciple he had been for some years, before he developed 
antinomian proclivities and cut away from him; he then claimed to have 
attained enlightenment two years earlier than Mahavira himself, and 
founded a new sect. Sometimes the Ajlvikas are identified with Digam- 



82 GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 

bara Jainas, and it has been held that ‘the terms Nigamtha and Ajivika 
denote the two Jaina Orders which are known to us as the Svetambaras 
and Digambaras’. 1 But this view is not correct, though some South- 
Indian Ajlvikas seem to have merged with Digambara Jainas in later times, 
while others drew close to Vaishnavism. And it is remarkable that in 
his Pillar Edicts Asoka states that his dhamma-mahamatras were ‘occupied 
with the affairs of the Buddhist Order ( Saiigha ) as well as with Brahmanas 
(ascetics), the Ajlvikas, the Nigamthas, and in fact with all the various 
sects (pashanfay. But then there were other groups of ascetics of a dubious 
character who also bore the name of Ajlvikas and lived apart under 
separate leaders, of whom two are known by name from the Buddhist 
scriptures, viz., Kissa Samkichcha and Nanda Vachcha, who are represented 
as the friends of Gosala. Of the followers of all the three leaders it is 
said that they discarded all clothing ( achelaka ), dispensed with all decent 
habits ( muttachara ), and that they licked their food out of their hands 
(hatthapalekhana). We have no means of deciding to which of these 
groups belonged the Ajlvikas who got the caves from ASoka and Dasa- 
ratha; most probably they were the followers of Gosala who had a long 
history as a regular Order in later times. Samprati, as has already been 
noticed, was a great patron of Jainism who occupies in the history of the 
Jaina religion a place similar to that of Asoka in Buddhism. 

Buddhism 2 was, for all we know, one of several rival faiths struggling 
for ascendancy till ASoka adopted it. During the first two centuries 
after the Buddha’s nirvana, his creed could hardly be distinguished from 
other Sramapa or ascetic movements. It was evidently in the Mauryan 
period that it emerged as a distinct religion with great potentiality for 
expansion. Even then its activities were at first mainly confined to Maga- 
dha and Kosala. Small communities of brethren may have come into 
existence also in the West in Mathura and Ujjayinl. At the time of the 
Second Council which was held at Vaisall about 100 years after the nirvana, 
invitation was sent to communities in distant places like Patheya, Avanti, 
‘KosambI, Sankasya and Kanauj. Monks of the western countries, which 
probably included Mathura, were known as Patheya. Mathura had be- 
come an important centre of Buddhism in the early years of the Mauryas. 
The Asokan legends of the North attach great importance to the monastery 
of Natabhata on the Urumunda hill at Mathura. Sanavasin and his 
disciple Upagupta who, according to these accounts, later became the 
spiritual guide of emperor ASoka, were of that monastery. 

ASoka was the first Mauryan monarch to be associated with Buddhism 
as its imperial patron. The most important events in the history of the 
Buddhist church were the two Councils, the Second and the Third, both 
of which seem to be connected with Asoka in spite of chronological diffi- 
culties. The traditions say that the Second Council was held at VaisalT, 

1 ERE. I 267 n. Contra: A. L. Basham, 'The sketch of Buddhism that follows 
History and Doctrines of the Ajlvikas, has been contributed by Prof. P. C. 

p. 277 (London, 1951). Bagchi. 



BUDDHIST COUNCILS 


83 


one hundred years after the nirvana of the Buddha. This council was 
called to decide on certain doctrinal issues. The monks of Vaisall had 
introduced a number of minor innovations in the rules of discipline. 1 
Others were of opinion that they were contrary to the teachings of the 
Buddha. The Council appointed a committee of eight monks, four from 
the east and four from the west to decide the issue. The eastern group 
was headed by Sabbakami, an Elder of VaiSalT, who had received upa- 
sampada (ordination) 120 years earlier, and the western group by Sapa- 
vasin, the same as the teacher of Upagupta. The committee declared 
against the monks of Vaisall. The Vinaya was then recited in the plenary 
session, and the monks of Vaisall were excommunicated. These monks, 
however, convened another meeting which was a great council ( mafia - 
sangiti ) and decided to form a separate school which came to be known 
as the Mahasanghika school. 

This story, apparently reliable, raises difficulty in point of chronology. 
The Council is said to have been held in the time of KalaSoka, the son of 
Susunaga (Sisunaga). But the traditions on this king do not agree. Some 
call him Kakavarni. He may even be the same as Asoka in his earlier 
days. Some of the Pali and Sanskrit Buddhist sources, however, place 
Asoka about 117 years after nirvana, that is about the time when the 
Second Council is said to have been held. They say further that Asoka 
before his conversion to Buddhism was living a life of black deeds and 
was then a Chandasoka or Kamasoka. He became a DharmaSoka only 
after his conversion to Buddhism. The name Kalasoka seems meant 
to remind us of the earlier stage of his life. Whether Kalasoka was the 
son of Sisunaga or was ASoka himself, the Second Council could not have 
been held much earlier than the time of Asoka. 

The account of the Third Council is still more confused. It was held, 
according to tradition, eighteen years after the coronation of Asoka at 
Pataliputra. Asoka’s inscriptions, however, are silent about it. It was 
a meeting of the Theravadins as distinguished from the Mahasahghikas. , 
It was therefore not a general session of all Buddhists but a sectarian 
meeting. The Pali accounts give the following story : ‘When 236 years 
had elapsed after the nirvana, sixty thousand monks dwelt in Asokarama. 
Sectarians of different descriptions, all of them wearing the kashaya, ruined 
the Doctrine of the Jina. It was then that Tissa Moggaliputta convoked 
a Council, attended by one thousand monks. Having destroyed the false 
doctrines and subdued many shameless people, he restored the true faith, 
and propounded the Abhidhamma treatise Kathavatthu. It was from him 
that Mahinda, the future apostle of Ceylon, learnt the five nikayas, the 
seven books of the Abhidhamma and the whole Vinaya.’ This account 
has a pronounced sectarian tendency and is evidently of Theravada inspi- 
ration. The meeting was in all likelihood a party meeting. Its historicity 
may not be disputed, but the story of the compilation of the 


Geiger, MV. (Trans.) p. 19 it. 3 



84 GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 

Kathavatthu which presupposes the existence of the entire Pali canon 
is improbable. 

The history of the Buddhist church in this period in all appearance 
was not an undisturbed one. On account of the gradual expansion of 
Buddhism and for want of regular communications between the distant 
communities the church was gradually losing its unity. Local influence 
was slowly affecting the conduct of the various communities and shaping 
them in different ways. This ultimately gave rise to various schools. 
The Vaisall community must have formed a school either before the time 
of Asoka or at least at a time when Asoka had not yet taken up the cause 
of Buddhism. This was the first schism in the church giving rise to two 
schools, the Theravada and the Mahasanghika. 

Under Asoka’s patronage the Buddhist community of Pataliputra, 
which claimed to be more loyal to the teachings of the Buddha, became 
rich in its endowments and revenues, and attracted the adherents of the 
relatively neglected creeds, Ajivikas and sectarians of different descrip- 
tions, who began to wear the yellow robe and disturb the life of the Asoka- 
rama, proclaiming their own heresies as the doctrine of the Buddha. The 
Third Council was the occasion when the community reorganized itself 
and tried to check corruption and schism in the church. It was probably 
under the instruction of the elders ( theras ) that Asoka appointed dhamma- 
mahamatras who were not only to look after the Sangha but to foster the 
preservation of unity in the Sangha as well. The Sarnath Pillar Edict 
which is addressed to the mahamatras of Pataliputra says: 1 ‘..The 
Sangha cannot be divided by anyone. But indeed that monk or nun who 
shall break up the Sangha, should be caused to put on white robes and 
to reside in non-residence.’ This meant expulsion from the community. 
The same instruction was also issued to the mahamatras of KausambI, 
and in the Safichl version it is preceded by the declaration: 2 ‘The 
Sangha both of monks and of nuns is made united as long as [my] sons 
and great-grandsons [shall reign] and as long as the moon and the sun 
[shall shine].’ 

•The greatest event in the history of Buddhism in this period was the 
conversion of Asoka. The Asokan cycle of legends in the Pah and Sanskrit 
canons make exaggerated claims on his behalf; but there is no doubt that 
he was not only a patron of Buddhism but a Buddhist himself. In the 
edicts he calls himself a Sakya, a Buddha-Sakya. The Divyavadana tells 
us that after his conversion to Buddhism he undertook to build 84,000 
stupas. It was under the influence of Upagupta that he started on a pil- 
. grimage to places hallowed by the memory of the Buddha such as Lumbini, 
Kapilavastu, Gaya, Sankasya, and Kusinagara. He also visited the 
stupas erected in memory of Sariputra, Maudgalyayana, Mahakasyapa, 
Vakkula and Ananda. He besides convoked a council at Gaya, the 


1 Hultzsch, p. 162 

* Ibid. p. 161 



ASOKA AND BUDDHISM 


85 


place where the Buddha attained his Bodhi. The edicts more or less con- 
firm the account of some of his religious activities, and the extent to which 
they do this has been discussed in the account of Asoka’s reign. We 
may note further that Asoka placed great emphasis on the higher aspect 
of the moral law. While speaking of the many works for the good of 
humanity he says : Lahuke chu esa patibhoge nama, 1 ‘but this so-called 
enjoyment is of little consequence.’ The most important point in the 
practice of the law was according to him to give up want of perseverance 
C asulopena ), cruelty (ni(huliyena), hastiness ( tulanaye ), want of application 
(anavutiya), laziness ( alasiyena ), and weariness ( kilamathena ). 3 By doing 
so, Asoka says, one attains endless heavenly bliss (yipule svage). He 
then tells us how he realized it in his own life through exertion (pakame ). 
Through much exertion he made the gods ‘mix with men in Jambudvlpa, 
gods who were formerly unmixed with men.’ Elsewhere 3 he says that 
through exertion it is not only for the great ( mahatpa ) but also for the 
small ( khudaka ) to make others attain the endless happiness of heaven. 
He also tells us that whatever exertion he made was for the other world 
and to make others free from demerit ( apumna ). 4 

It may be mentioned that the virtues necessary for spiritual progress 
as mentioned by Asoka such as dana, sochave, madave, pakame etc. are 
the same as the six paramitas of Buddha: dana, sila, kshanti, virya etc. 
While speaking of various degrees of spiritual progress, Asoka distinguishes 
khudaka or small men from mahatpa or the more elevated. According 
to Asoka it was one of the natural qualities of the great ( mahatpa ) to attain 
the heavenly bliss not only for himself but also for others by his exertion 
(pakame). He was thus placing himself in the position of the latter when 
he says that he had succeeded through his exertion in causing gods formerly 
unmixed with men to mix with men. He also claims such powers as 
causing others to attain heavenly bliss, showing the people such super- 
natural spectacles as the celestial chariots, elephant and fiery bodies 
(vimana dasana ca hastidasana ca agikhamdani ca ahani ca divyani rupani). 
These were claims to riddhi or magical powers which were usual for hn 
uttaramanushya — a man endowed with supranormal powers according 
to Buddhist literature. So as a Buddhist, Asoka, although a common 
upasaka or lay-follower at the beginning, laid claims to the qualities of 
a mahatpa or uttaramanushya probably at an advanced age. 

Asoka for the first time in the history of Buddhism seems to have been 
responsible for directing missionary activities both in and outside India. 
The first step towards this was to circulate instructions on Dhamma and 
inscribe them on rocks and pillars overlooking the highroads. Officials 
were asked to encourage and afford facilities to those who wanted to follow 
the Dhamma. His despatch of officials to distant countries beyond the 
frontiers of his empire was probably characterised by a missionary zeal. 

The Buddhist literature further tells us that on the conclusion of the 

1 PE. VII (u), Hultzsch, pp. 132, 135 * Brahmagiri (g),(h), Hultzsch, p. 175 

2 Dhauli l Sep., Hultzsch, p. 92 4 RE. X, Hultzsch, p. 17 



86 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


Third Council, Tissa Moggaliputta sent missionaries to various countries. 
Thus Majjhantika was sent to Kasmlra-Gandhara, Mahadeva to Mahisha- 
mandala, Rak k hita to Vanavasa, the Greek (Yona) Dhammarakkhita 
to Aparantaka, Mahadhammarakkhita to Maharattha, Maharakkhita 
to the Greek (Yona) country, Majjhima to the Himalayan zone, and 
Soija and Uttara to Suvamjabhumi. Mahinda and Sanghamitta were 
sent to Ceylon. Nepal also claims that Atoka himself went to Nepal 
and founded four stupas which are still shown around the city of Lalita- 
pattana. Besides, a spurious Chinese Buddhist tradition claims that 
seventeen Buddhist missionaries were sent by the emperor to the capital 
of China during the reign of Ts’in She-huang (246-209 b.c.). 

Some of this information is confirmed by epigraphy. Atoka himself 
speaks of his mission to Tambapanni (Ceylon) and to such countries as 
Kamboja, Nabhaka, Nabhiti, Bhoja, Pitinika, Andhra and Pulinda, and 
border regions. Kamboja and the border countries included the Hima- 
layan zone, Bhojas and Pitinikas probably lived in Maharashtra and some 
of the countries like Andhra and Satiyaputra belonged to the South. 
While speaking of the mission to the Himalayan zone, the Mahavariisa 
mentions only Majjhima, but the Dipavamsa mentions Kassapagota, 
Majjhima and Dundubhisara. This is unexpectedly confirmed by the 
inscriptions of Sanchl. In one inscription Kassapagota is mentioned 
as the apostle of all Himalayan Buddhists. Another inscription mentions 
Majjhima and Dundubhisara. 

To whomsoever the initiative might have been due, whether to Tissa 
Moggaliputta or to Atoka himself, it seems clear that efforts to carry 
Buddhism to distant countries were made after the reorganisation of the 
Magadhan church under the patronage of Atoka. These efforts were 
crowned with success within the Mauryan empire. This is abundantly 
proved by the records and monuments of the subsequent period. The 
independent fraternities of Buddhist monks, in spite of their diversities, 
formed a definite brotherhood." The sons of Sakya constituted one family. 
The doctrine was perhaps not yet clear in all respects, nor the discipline 
quite definite; the canon was still in its formative stages. But worship 
of relics and the cult of earlier Buddhas was already well known. 


ART 

In architecture and art, as in other spheres of national life, the age of 
the Mauryas constituted a notable epoch. Most of the surviving monu- 
ments of the period belong to the reign of Atoka whose striking individua- 
lity is borne out by his works of art no less than by his administrative 
and religious policy. The use of stone in art production was rare, though 
not altogether unknown, in the centuries that immediately preceded his 
reign, but with him not only did it become common, but there sprang up 
suddenly and in full panoply a school of art which drew its inspiration 



PRE-ASOKAN ART 


87 


from many sources and whose achievements take a very high place in the 
art history not merely of India, but of the world. This magnificent art 
which flourished for about fifty years had no precedent and left no long- 
standing tradition as it failed to strike root. It was a parenthesis in the 
development of the indigenous art of India, just as the Mauryan polity 
with its bureaucratic and pervasive paternalism was an exception to the 
norm of the ancient Indian state. 

There are no striking examples of architecture or sculpture that can 
definitely be called pre-Mauryan, with the exception of some walls and 
remains of dwellings of cyclopean masonry in the site of the old city of 
Rajagriha. In the ancient world, art was generally the handmaid of reli- 
gion, and R. P. Chanda 1 has argued that the Vedic religion of sacrifice 
which needed only a simple sacrificial hall or fire-chapel offered little 
scope for architecture or the development of the decorator’s art; the 
beginnings of art must be traced to more popular cults dating from very 
early times which embraced the worship of sacred trees, chaityas and 
animal standards. On this view the order issued by Asoka fairly early 
in his reign (Rupnath and Sahasram edicts) that his inscriptions were to 
be engraved wherever stone pillars were found in existence gains signi- 
ficance, and the Kolhua (Basarh-Bakhira) pillar and that at Rampurva 
with the bull-capital may well be assigned to Bindusara’s reign as suggested 
by Chanda; the former is a rather heavy and ungainly column and the 
abacus of its lion-capital is square and plain; of the latter, the crowning 
bull fails to harmonize with the capital on which it stands and the honey- 
suckle ornament on the abacus is rather stiff . 2 The two columns bearing 
the lion of Durga and the bull of Siva may well have been the precursors 
of the more finished columns of Asoka’s time, marking a stage in the 
evolution of their magnificent forms from relatively simple animal standards 
of an earlier time. The pillar of Sankisa bearing the elephant of Indra, 
and that at Lauriya Araraj with the Garuda of Vishnu may also belong 
to the same group. The fragmentary capital with four addorsed bulls 
from Salempur are, however, perhaps not pre-ASokan. * 

Mud or mud-bricks, bamboo, timber and thatch were the materials 
employed in the construction of dwelling-houses and palaces. But the 
use of such material, while it led to the almost total disappearance of the 
structures, evidently implies no deficiency in the size, grandeur or comfort 
of the buildings, and at a time when the true arch was not much employed 
in structures, wood must have come in handy for roofing in wide spaces. 
The imperial palace at Pataliputra was as already noted, described by 
Greek writers as excelling in splendour the Achaemenid palaces at Susa 
and Ecbatana, and we may assume that the palace and the public offices 
in the capital of the Mauryan empire were quite worthy of its power and 
prosperity. Indian art doubtless had an earlier history, and the influence 

1 MASI. no. 30 

2 JR AS. 1908, p. 1088; N. R. Ray, Matirya and Snnga Art, p. 27 



GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


of lost works and wooden prototypes can be traced in the stone work 
of Asoka’s time. Percy Brown points out that Megasthenes’ slight account 
of the architecture of Pataliputra may be eked out by pictures of towns 
carved in bas relief on Buddhist monuments of a slightly later age as 
backgrounds to battles and processions, particularly on the Sanchl gate- 
ways. All towns seem to have been surrounded by high walls with battle- 
ments and a moat with water bearing lotuses and other aquatic plants, 
the whole being surrounded by a railing palisade. Only fragments of 
the wooden ramparts of Pataliputra have been unearthed at Bulandi 
Bagh near Patna, but the size of the beams is enough to show that the 
account of Megasthenes was by no means exaggerated. Timbers of twelve 
to thirteen feet in length were laid in parallel lines corresponding to the 
thickness of the rampart at its base, and upright parts were tenoned on 
them. A part of the upper portion of the stockade preserved in the 
Calcutta Museum comprises huge teak posts connected by transverse 
bars. Another survival of the woodwork of those days has already been 
mentioned, the huge platforms found buried deep in the silt. They 
formed, according to Brown, a kind of raft to support the foundations 
of the facade or propylaeum of the palace. 

In his forty years’ rule, Asoka must have improved the wooden walls 
and buildings of the capital city, and partly replaced them by more subs- 
tantial edifices. Literary sources attribute to him the construction of 
hundreds of structures in masonry and stone throughout the empire, 
and the palace of Pataliputra, as he had left it, was, in later times, consi- 
dered the work of spirits as Fa-hien attests; so astonishing was his work 
as a builder. The palace seems to have been destroyed by fire soon after 
as may be inferred from the ashes found in the site of Kumrahar in the 
neighbourhood of Bulandi Bagh. An immense pillared hall in three 
stories covering a square of 250 feet side seems to have formed an impor- 
tant structure within the palace enclosure. The remains of this hall were 
discovered by Dr. Spooner at a depth of seventeen feet and over to the 
fiorth of the wooden platforms already mentioned. The lower part of 
the shaft of only one stone column measuring 14 feet 3 inches was found 
in almost perfect condition, and the existence of others could only be 
inferred ‘from heaps of fragments of polished sandstone and ash pits in 
which they had sunk being regularly at a distance of 15 feet from centre to 
centre of the heaps and the underlying ash circles.’ The hall had a wooden 
floor; the pillars stood on wooden bases and supported a wooden super- 
structure. A belt of silt about eight feet thick shows that the hall was 
flooded once before it was burnt down by the fire which, besides reducing 
to ashes the wooden superstructure and roof, cracked off innumerable 
fragments from the part of the stone columns above the silt and ‘by ex- 
panding the metal bolts which fitted into their socket holes caused the 
vertical cleavage which the larger fragments show.’ The arrangement 
of pillars in square bays over the whole floor of the hall and their finely 
polished surface were traced by Dr. Spooner to the example of the Achae- 



ROCK-CUT HALLS, PILLARS 


menian Hall of a Hundred Columns, and there is good reason to believe 
that Asoka consciously adopted the plan of the Achaemenian hall of 
public audience to proclaim the glory of his empire to his subjects. The 
hall, according to Percy Brown, was reared in three stories on a high stylo- 
bate, and contained fifteen rows of fifteen pillars each; colossal stone 
caryatid figures supported the ceiling of one of the stories, and polished 
stone was used for a variety of purposes in the structure; the single shaft 
that has survived is some twenty inches in diameter, tapers like a pine 
trunk with no sign of base or capital, and bears a mason’s mark similar 
to a symbol used at Behistun in Persia. 

Seven rock-cut sanctuaries in the hills less than twenty miles to the 
north of Gaya, four on the Barabar bill, and three on the NagarjunI hill 
half a mile to the north-east, also belong to the time of Asoka and his 
successors. Another at Sitamarhi, thirteen miles south of Rajagriha 
and twenty-five miles east of Gaya, may also be of the same period. These 
form the earliest known examples of the rock-cut method, and some of 
them are faithful copies in stone of structures in wood and thatch, parti- 
cularly the facade and the doorway with sloping jambs of the Lomas 
Ijtishi cave in Barabar, which bears no inscription and is apparently un- 
finished, and so perhaps is the latest in the series, not excavated till after 
Dasaratha’s reign. The GopI cave excavated in the reign of Dasaratha 
is a plain tunnel-like excavation with an apse at either end, 44 feet long, 
19 feet wide, and 10 feet high to the apex of the vaulted roof— -itself a 
relic of the early use of bamboos in roof construction. The caves are 
chaste and severe, and their interiors polished in the Asokan fashion. 

The most striking monuments of Asokan art, however, are the celebra- 
ted dharma-stambhas, free-standing pillars with sculptured capitals of 
which both shaft and capital strike one by their size and finish. Perhaps 
not all these columns were set up by Asoka or meant to honour Buddhism; 
we know definitely that the caves already mentioned were dedicated to 
Ajivikas. Besides the monuments themselves, there are the inscriptions 
on some of the pillars and elsewhere, which are models of careful anfl 
accurate engraving and therefore entitled to a place in the art of the^age; 
the perfect execution of the brief record on the Rummindel pillar is unri- 
valled. Likewise the finely polished surface of the monolithic columns 
and their capitals and of the interiors of the cave-dwellings are the high- 
water mark of the mason’s and stone-cutter’s skill, ‘The art of polishing 
hard stone,’ says Smith, 1 ‘was carried to such perfection that it is said to 
have become a lost art beyond modem powers. The sides of the Barabar 
caves excavated in most refractory gneiss rock, are polished like glass 
mirrors. The burnishing of Firoz Shah’s Lat, the column from Topra, 
now at Delhi, is so exquisite that several observers have believed the column 
to be metallic. Quaint Tom Coryate in the seventeenth century described 
the monument as “a brazen pillar” and even Bishop Heber, early in the 


The Oxford History of India, p. 113 



90 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


nineteenth century, received the impression that it was “a high black 
pillar of cast metal”.’ 

The original number of such columns was at least thirty. 1 Ten of 
those that have survived in a more or less perfect state bear the inscriptions 
of Asoka. Two with lion-capitals are still in situ and in a fair state of 
preservation — these at Kolhua (Basarh-Bakhira) and Lauriya Nandan- 
garh. The latter has been described as ‘the most graceful of all the Asoka 
columns’ on account of the proportions of its shaft which is 32 feet 9| 
inches high, and diminishes from a base with a diameter of 35J inches to 
only 21\ inches at the top. Percy Brown suggests that some of the notable 
pillars mark the stages of Asoka’s pilgrimage especially in Champaran 
and Muzaffarpur districts, Rampurva, Lauriya Araraj, Lauriya Nandan- 
garh and Kolhua lying on the route from Bihar to the holy land of Bud- 
dhism bordering Nepal. Sanchl may have belonged to a series on a more 
westerly line of approach. The remains of stupas and other buildings 
near some of the pillars indicate extensive Buddhist settlements that once 
flourished at the spots. Each of these columns is a plain monolithic 
shaft of circular section, thirty to forty feet in height, rising straight from 
the ground without a base, and tapering like the trunk of a palm or pine 
tree. Above this is a bell-shaped capital, also monolithic, crowned by 
an abacus which serves as a support for a large sculpture, an animal in 
the round, or a group of animals supporting a Buddhist symbol, the latter 
most undoubtedly due to Asoka. Shaft and capital together attain 
sometimes a height of fifty feet. The design and execution of the capitals 
and the sculptures on them received the utmost attention of the artists, 
and give clear evidence of their superior taste. The shaft and the capital 
were joined by a copper bolt fitting into the tenons with no cement or 
other binding material. A bolt from Rampurva which has survived is 
barrel-shaped and over two feet in length, an excellent specimen of the 
coppersmith’s art. ‘Those who employed this copper dowel were quite 
aware of the destructive action of iron and other metals in such circums- 
tances.’ 2 

The art of ASoka’s time as seen in these pillars and capitals is a mature 
art, in some respects ‘more mature than the Greek art of the time’ in the 
opinion of Percy Gardner. The sudden introduction of stone on a large 
scale as a medium was due to Graeco-Persian influence. Like the hall 
of Pataliputra, these columns owed much to Achaemenid models. Achae- 
menid art was itself a choice blend of characteristics drawn from several 
sources — Assyria and Babylonia for the representation of animals, Egypt 
for the employment of columns, and Ionia for the technique of bas relief. 
As in the work of the contemporary Seleucids, the filtered Hellenism 
which underlies the sculpture of Asoka owes much indirectly to these 
sources. This definite and distinct school of sculpture is to a large though 
uncertain extent un-Indian, quite distinct from all other Indian work 

1 Smith, ZDMG. 1911 

2 Percy Brown, Indian Architecture t Buddhist and Hindu Periods), p. 10 



THE SARNATH CAPITAL 


91 


before and after. In spite of the highly stylized character of these sculp- 
tures, they are marked by a striking naturalism seldom rivalled in Indian 
art. 

The columns themselves, unlike the Persepolitan pillars, are monoliths 
of enormous size. The quarrying, fabrication, transport and erection of 
such huge masses — the heaviest column weighs about fifty tons — are 
sufficient proof that the stone-cutters and engineers of Asoka’s time ‘were 
not inferior in skill and resource to those of any time or country.’ 1 
All the columns came from the celebrated sandstone quarry at Chunar 
in Bihar which seems to have attracted a small group of workmen from 
outside India assured of Asoka’s patronage and engaged to collaborate 
with the best craftsmen from within the country. 

The capital of each pillar, as already indicated, comprised three mem- 
bers, which are most clearly marked in the Sarnath capital which crowned 
the column raised in the deer-park where the Buddha delivered his first 
sermon, and which has been adopted as the emblem of the Indian Republic. 
This magnificent capital, discovered in 1905, is the best extant specimen of 
Asokan sculpture executed late in the reign. The lowest member of this 
richly decorated capital is an inverted lotus, bell-shaped, with its petals 
indicated by bold fluting of its entire surface. Above it is an entablature 
with a frieze bearing sculptures in very high relief with the plastic qualities 
of sculptures in the round; they comprise four animals, an elephant, a 
galloping horse, a humped bull, and a lion, representing respectively the 
east, south, west and north, a symbolism traceable to Vedic sources. The 
four animals are separated by as many wheels {chakras) in the interspaces. 
At the summit of the capital there are four lions, or rather the forequarters 
of four lions, standing addorsed, which carried on their backs, to crown 
all, a stone wheel, 2 feet 9 inches in diameter, of which only fragments 
remain. ‘It is difficult to find in any country’, says Smith, ‘an example 
of ancient animal sculpture superior or even equal to this beautiful work 
of art which successfully combines realistic modelling with idealistic 
dignity, and is finished in every detail with perfect accuracy. The has 
reliefs on the abacus are as good in their way as the noble lions in*the 
round.’ 

Within the limits of the general scheme, the artists enjoyed considerable 
freedom, and this accounts for wide differences in detail among the capitals, 
the abacus being rectangular or circular to suit the sculpture above it. 
Nearly as beautiful as the Sarnath capital is that of one of the Rampurva 
pillars, with its base equally campaniform, its entablature decorated by 
a delicious floral frieze of lotus and palmettes, and, to crown all, its ad- 
mirable statue of a humped bull in the round. Another pillar from 
Rampurva carries a seated lion, not so well executed as the Sarnath lions. 
It is also a lion which surmounts the columns at Kolhua (Besarh-Bakhira), 
and at Lauriya Nandangarh. The terminal statue is an elephant at 


‘Smith, History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon, p. 18 



92 


GOVERNMENT, SOCIETY AND ART 


Sankisa, a horse at Rummindei (Lumbini), the site of the Buddha’s birth. 
The elephant at Sankisa is well modelled, but unfortunately badly muti- 
lated. The frieze of the abacus also varies with the pillars; at Lauriya 
Nandangarh and Sanchi, the frieze is a row of sacred flying geese in low 
relief; the lotus and palmette or honeysuckle recurs at Allahabad and 
Sankisa. 

The perfection of the lion-capital of Sarnath and its replica at Sanchi 
was doubtless the result of sustained and progressive effort. Indeed the 
animal sculptures of Asoka’s reign constitute an epoch in art-history. 
‘These animaliers,’ says Grousset, ‘at one stroke produced masterpieces. 
They were doubtless masters who knew the Achaemenid technique. The 
treatment of the muscles of the face and paws of the lions of Sarnath 
directly recalls Khorasabad and Persepolis. But here the vigour and 
dignity of the Assyro-Persians combine with elements truly indigenous. 
The poesy of the Jataka, the Buddhist tenderness towards our brothers, 
the animals, have transformed the importations from Anterior Asia. 
They have quieted the Assyrian violence as they have restored to the 
dryness of the Achaemenid forms a plenitude of life and a new freshness. 
The hard realism of Ashur has become a liberal naturalism of marvel- 
lous suppleness; and Indian art is born. Look at the elephant of the 
Sarnath capital, the easy gait of this enormous mass, the life which 
circulates in this quivering trunk. All the art of Ellora and Mavalipuram 
is already contained in this short relief.’ The forepart of an elephant, 
about life-size, modelled in the round and cut out of the live rock 
that bears the well-known Kalinga Edicts at Dhauli in Orissa, also 
deserves mention in the same class of animal sculptures. A century or 
so later, an attempt to imitate the lions of the lion-capital on the pillars 
of the southern gateway at Sanchi was a failure. 

Though clearly inspired by foreign models, Asokan art is as clearly 
different from them, and in some respects much their superior. In the 
age of Asoka the chief schools of Greek sculpture flourished, not in Greece, 
'but in Asia Minor at Pergamum, Ephesus and other places. Greek or 
rather Hellenistic art had absorbed much from Asian and African 
traditions, and as has already been indicated more than once, it is not easy 
to distinguish the Greek from Western Asian influences in Mauryan 
art. The acanthus leaves, palmettes and other motifs are as much Asian 
as Greek. The design and style of the Asokan monuments owed some- 
thing to alien models, and foreign artists may have been employed to 
plan them at large; but the details of decoration and execution were in 
Indian hands and the substantial originality of Indian art was maintained 
even on these monuments. The magnificent use of the free-standing 
column so characteristic of Mauryan art was unknown to Persia and the 
Hellenistic countries. The borrowings that can be definitely proved are 
confined to details such as honeysuckle and palmette, the bead and 
fillet, and the cable moulding and other decorative elements, some of 
which continued in use for many centuries. The fact remains, however. 



POST-MAURYAN STATUES 


93 


that Mauryan art as a whole exhibits enough un-Indian features in its 
make-up to place it outside the main line of Indian artistic tradition. 

Besides the monuments already noticed, a small rail at Sarnath and 
a throne in the interior of the temple at Bodh Gaya can surely be ascribed 
to the reign of Asoka. They are devoid of ornament, and each is a mono- 
lith cut with exquisite precision. Other relics have been assigned to the 
Mauryan period on account of the use of Chunar sandstone and the bril- 
liant polish imparted to its surface. Notable among them are two yaksha 
statues from Patna, fragments of a ribbed stone umbrella from Sanchl, 
a chauri-bearing yakshi statue from Didarganj, a more than life-size 
statue from Parkham and two mutilated stone images of Tirthahkaras 
from Lohanipur, besides the torso of a yaksha or a king from Baroda 
(near Mathura). The two yaksha statues bear Brahmi inscriptions of about 
the beginning of the Christian era and the Parkham yaksha bears an 
inscription which Vogel assigns to the second century b.c. The yakshi 
from Didarganj is perhaps artistically the best of these statues, and may 
be said, by the beautiful modelling of the torso, the abdomen and the 
neck, to anticipate some of the aesthetic traits of Indian women as they 
developed at Bharhut and Sanchl. But to treat these figures as of the same 
period as the magnificent sculptures of Asoka’s reign is not easy, though 
the argument has been advanced by Grousset that the human sculpture 
of the Mauryan epoch fell far short of its animal sculpture, because the 
artists still clung to the old indigenous technique involved in cutting the 
human form in a shaft of wood. Nihar Ranjan Ray has argued with 
much force that the art of polishing stone once learnt would have persisted 
for a time after the end of Mauryan rule, and that ‘these life-size, plasti- 
cally round statues belong to different aspects and phases of Indian art. 
They are all Indian in form and appearance, in style and treatment, and 
they have hardly any relation with the court art of the Mauryas .’ 1 The 
same writer casts a doubt on the correctness of treating some sandstone 
heads, several terra-cottas from Sarnath, Basarh, Bulandi Bagh, Kum- 
rahar and elsewhere as Mauryan on merely stylistic grounds. Some o*f 
them show occasionally foreign facial types and Greek motifs in their 
head-dress; but Hellenistic contacts were potent and effective after the end 
of Mauryan rule when Hellenistic provincial art penetrated far into the 
Ganges Valley . 2 

1 Maurya and Sunga Art, p. 53. See ch. xxii post for a further discussion of these 
statues. 

Ibid. pp. 53-5 



Chapter IV 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 
(184 b.c. to A.D. 200) 

T hanks to the Puranic chroniclers the continuity of Indian history after 
the break-up of the Maurya empire is preserved up to the last quarter 
of the first century b.c. The narrative then begins to lose itself in the 
darkness of uncertainty which is occasionally dispelled by the light thrown 
by coins and inscriptions. The Puranic narrative can be verified and 
supplemented by other literary references, as well as numismatic and 
epigraphic evidence. For the period immediately following the over- 
throw of the Mauryas, the Gargi Samhita, the Mahabhashya of Patanjali, 
the Divyavadana, the Malavikagnimitra of Kalidasa and the Harshacharita 
of Bana supply interesting and important details. Direct epigraphic 
and numismatic evidence is altogether lacking for the earliest part of this 
period. 1 Some glimpses of later Sunga history are afforded by the ins- 
criptions 2 from Ayodhya, Vidisa (modem Bhilsa) and Bharhut, and the 
coins found at KauSambI (modern Kosam), Ayodhya, Ahichhatra, and 
Mathura. For the third century a.d. coins constitute our main source 
of information. But the numismatic evidence is often insufficient, incon- 
clusive and difficult to interpret. Therefore in weaving these stray items 
of information into a continuous narrative, we cannot claim finality for 
the solutions we have proposed of the problems that confront us. 


, THE SVtiGAS 

According to the Puranas the suzerainty of Magadha passed from the 
Mauryas to the Sungas by the murder of the last Maurya emperor, Briha- 
dratha, at the hands of his own commander-in-chief, Pushyamitra. 3 
This statement is confirmed by Bana, the celebrated Sanskrit prose writer 
and court poet of Harshavardhana of Kanauj. Bana tells us that the 
wicked commander-in-chief Pushyamitra, having paraded the entire army 
under the pretext of a military display, killed his master Brihadratha of 


The coin attributed to Pushyamitra by 
K. P. Jayaswal ( JBORS . xx pp. 
291-2) has been shown to be of king 
Pushpasri by A. S. Altekar ( JNSI . 
iv pp. 136 ff). The coins with the legend 
agimita are not unanimously attributed 
to the Sunga king of that name. 


*EI. xx p. 54; ASIAR. 1908-9, p. 126; 
1913-14, p. 190. Luders, List no. 687, 
688, Barua and Sinha, Barhut Inscrip- 
tions. Altekar has published a 
coin bearing the legend Sungarajas. 
JNSI. iv pp. 14-15 
3 DKA. pp. 30-1 



RISE OF SUNGAS 


95 


the Maurya family, who was weak of intellect. 1 The murder of Brihad- 
ratha may be placed in 184 b.c. 

The success of Pushyamitra’s coup d’etat was in no small measure due 
to the general feeling of dissatisfaction against the weak Maurya rulers 
for their failure to protect the realm against the adventurous Greek 
invaders who seem to have advanced without let or hindrance to the very 
outskirts of the imperial capital, Pataliputra. We learn from the ‘Yuga- 
purana’ (a section of Gargi Samhitd) that ‘the viciously valiant Greeks over- 
ran Saketa or Oudh, Panchala, Mathura, and reached Pataliputra.’ 
There was a complete breakdown of the administration. Fortunately for 
India the invader was unable to reap the fruits of his military successes, 
as he had to hasten back to his home on account of ‘a dreadful war having 
broken out amongst themselves.’ It is not certain who the invader was, 
but most probably he was Demetrius, 2 * who, we know, was compelled to 
withdraw from his Indian campaign on account of the successful advance 
of Eucratides. The memory of the Greek .invasion was still green when 
Pushyamitra’s sacrificial priest, Patanjali, was writing his Mahabhashya 
on the grammar of Panini, and illustrated the use of the imperfect 
tense in Sanskrit by referring to an event of recent occurrence and 
gave the following examples : arunad- Yavanah Saketam ; arunad- Yavanah 
Madhyamikarii .* The Greek invasion had created chaotic conditions in 
Northern India, and as Demetrius beat a hasty retreat withdrawing all 
his forces which he urgently needed to meet his formidable foe, Eucratides, 
the field in India was open for an adventurous leader. Pushyamitra 
seized the opportunity and laid the foundations of a new ruling house. 

The new dynasty was known as the Sunga 4 — a name of considerable 


1 Prajhadurbalam cha baladarSanavyapa- 

deSadarsitaSesha-sainyah senttniranaryo 
Mauryam Brihadratham pipesha Pnshya- 
mitrah svaminam. Harshacharita, ed. 
Fiihrer, p. 269. In this passage an- 
arya does not mean ‘low bom’ as 
Cowell and Thomas have translated it. 
Bana calls him andrya (ignoble) because 
of the treacherous act. Jayaswal has 

effectively demonstrated that the act 
was perfectly justified. See JBORS. 
1918, p. 260 f. 

1 According to W. W. Tam (The Greeks 
in Bactria and India pp. 132-3) the 
invasion took place c.180 b. c. after 
Pushyamitra’s accession. He places the 
retreat twelve years later in 168 b.c. 
when Eucratides arrived on the scene. 
It is, however, extremely unlikely that 
the Greek forces advanced with the 
swiftness of lightning up to the very 
walls of the imperial capital, when 
Pushyamitra was holding the reins of 
power. There is no definite evidence 
to place Demetrius’s retreat in 168 b.c. 
What we know for certain is that 


Demetrius was in a position to under- 
take the invasion in c.187 b.c. and he 
must have retreated some time before 
168 b.c. 

3 iii 2. Ill, ed. Kielhom u, p. 119 

4 The lineage of Pushyamitra has beer, 
a subject of controversy in recent 
years. H. C. Raychaudhuri, (IC. iii 
p. 739 thinks that the name of the 
family was Baimbika. He draws atten- 
tion to a verse in the Malavikagni- 
mitra (iv 14) where Agnimitra calls 
himself a Baimbika. In the Baudhaya- 
naSrautasutra, ‘ Bairhbikayah’ are men- 
tioned amongst the Kasyapas, and 
Raychaudhuri connects this with the 
mention of a KaSyapa Senani in the 
Harivamla (Bhavishyat Parva, ch. 
ii 40). It should however be noted 
that the form in the Malavikagnimitra 
is Baimbika whereas in Baudhayana- 
srautasutra it is Baimbiki. Ray- 
chaudhuri further remarks, ‘It may be 
remembered in this connection that 
the dynastic designation Suriga is ap- 
plied to Pushyamitra and his progeny 



96 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


antiquity which occurs in the Vamsa Brahmana, the Asvalayana-srautasutra, 
and the grammar of Panini . 1 The association of the Sungas in Vedic 
literature, cited above, with ancient priestly families, shows that they 
were Brahmins . 2 

Although opposition to Pushyamitra’s accession seems to have been 
negligible, that astute statesman took adequate measures to ensure against 
all eventualities. It was obviously as a part of such a scheme that a 
minister of the late Maurya king Brihadratha was imprisoned . 3 This 
minister, we learn from Kalidasa, was the brother-in-law of the ruler of 
Vidarbha, Yajhasena, who was a usurper. The rightful heir was Madha- 
vasena who had been put in prison by Yajnasena, while the former was 
crossing the frontier of Vidarbha along with his younger sister Malavika 
who had been betrothed to Pushyamitra’s son Agnimitra, viceroy of Vidisfi. 
Yajnasena’s action naturally necessitated the intervention of Agnimitra 
who called upon Yajnasena to release Madhavasena. Yajhasena curtly 
replied that he had adopted the right course of action against a 
collateral and a rival claimant to the kingdom; and Agnimitra should 
remain neutral in this affair. However, he offered to set Madhavasena 
free on condition that his brother-in-law, the ex-minister of the late Maurya 
Brihadratha, was released by the Sunga. The imposition of this condition 
was taken as an affront by Agnimitra who ordered an invasion of Vidarbha. 
The Sunga army advanced as far as the river Varada (modern Wardha), 
and Yajhasena submitted. Vidarbha was divided between the two claim- 
ants Yajhasena and Madhavasena — the river Varada forming the boun- 
dary between the two parts. This extended the sphere of influence of the 
Sungas to the south of the river Narmada. There is no evidence to support 
Dr. Barnet’s view that Yajnasena was a feudatory of the Andhras. Even 
if he had any hopes of help from that side, it is clear that the Andhra 
sovereign was not yet in a position to intervene effectively in the interests 
of Yajhasena. 


only in the Puranas. It is not used in 
reference to the SenanI and his son in 
tht Divyavadana, the Malavikdgnimitra 
or even in the Harshacharita which 
mentions the dynastic revolution in- 
volving the overthrow of the last of 
the Imperial Mauryas.’ (/C. vi p. 
410). He concludes, ‘the possibility 
is therefore not precluded that the 
Puranas may have included under the 
name Sutiga, two distinct groups of 
kings, viz. the line of Pushyamitra 
which is styled Baimbika by Kalidasa 
and the real Sungas who succeeded 
this line and are referred to by Bana 
and the Bharhut inscription of Dhana- 
bhuti’ (ibid. p. 411). In spite of these 
forceful arguments we have preferred 
to designate Pushyamitra as a Sunga 
for two reasons. Firstly, the word 
baimbika in the Malavikagnimitra has 


been translated as ‘a gallant lover’ by 
Apte, and there is nothing to show 
that it was a proper name. Secondly, 
Dhanadeva of the Ayodhya inscription 
who is a descendant of the senapati, is 
apparently a Sunga as he is closely 
associated with the Sunga branch of 
Kosala, founded by Muladeva. 

1 Madragara chchhaungayaner Madra- 
sah Saungdyanib , Vamsa Brahmana, 

Bhdradvdj dgniveiy Arkshd Sungdh 
Saisirayah Katah Asva. srau. su. Pari- 


Vikarna-Suhga Chhagaldd Vatsa- 
Bharadvdj-Atrishu Pan. iv 1, 117 
a For a contrary view see J. C. Ghosh, 
IHO. xv p. 629. He argues, though 
unconvincingly, that the Sungas were 
Kshatriyas. 

3 Malavikagnimitra i 7 



PUSHYAMITRA 


97 


Pushyamitra was now the undisputed master of Northern India. In 
order to proclaim his sovereignty, he undertook the performance of the 
asvamedha (horse-sacrifice), the time-honoured Vedic rite which was 
regarded as the symbol of royal glory. There is a reference to the perfor- 
mance in the Mahabhashya. While commenting on Panini, iii, 2, 123, 
Patanjali, giving an example of an act that has begun but is not yet finished, 
says iha Pushyamitram yajaydmah (here we are performing the sacrifice 
for Pushyamitra). Although there is no record of any military activity 
undertaken by Pushyamitra as a condition precedent to the performance 
of the sacrifice, it may be safely inferred that he had thoroughly consoli- 
dated his position. No monarch could have let loose the sacrificial horse 
without making sure of its safe return. The act therefore must have been 
preceded by military campaigns in the approved fashion of the digvijaya 
(conquest of the quarters) and may be taken as a proof of Pushyamitra’s 
secure hold over his dominions. 

In the Ayodhya inscription of Dhanadeva, Pushyamitra is credited with 
the performance of two horse-sacrifices. This indicates a period of conti- 
nuous peace, prosperity, and success. The second of the two sacrifices, 
appears to be the one mentioned in the Malavikagnimitra and was per- 
formed at an advanced age, since Pushyamitra’s grandson was already a 
grown-up youth at this time. The sacrificial horse let loose for this 
sacrifice was guarded by one hundred princes, and prince Vasumitra, son 
of Agnimitra, commanded the escorting force. While wandering on the 
right bank of the Indus, 1 this horse was seized by a squadron of Greek 
cavalry, probably an advance column of Menander’s forces. 2 After a hotly 
contested battle the Greeks were routed and the horse was brought back 
to Pataliputra, and the sacrifice successfully concluded. 

Pushyamitra is supposed to have met with two reverses. Firstly, Prof. 
Rapson thinks that he lost Ujjain to the Andhra monarch Satakarpi I 3 . 
Prof. Rapson places reliance on the Andhra coins bearing the name Sata. 
He identifies, Sata with Satakarni I and since these coins are of the ‘Malwa 
fabric’ they indicate Satakarni’s possession of Avanti. Recent discoveries*, 
however, have taken away the very basis of Prof. Rapson’s suggestion. 
That Sata is an abbreviation of Satavahana and does not stand for Sata- 


1 There is a sharp difference of opinion 
on the identification of the river Sindhu 
mentioned in the Malavikagnimitra. 
According to Prof. Rapson, ‘the choice 
seems to be between Kali Sindhu a 
tributary of the Charmanvatl (Chambel) 
flowing within a hundred miles of 
Madhyamika (near Chitor) which 
was besieged by the Yavanas, and the 
Sindhu, a tributary of the Jumna.’ 
CHI. i p. 520. But Dr. R. C. Majum- 
dar has refuted the suggestion by 
adducing very strong arguments and 
has conclusively proved that the river 
meant is the Indus ( IHQ . i p. 214). 
i3 


To his arguments it may be added that 
Kalidasa also speaks of the dakshina 
bank of the Varada which also flows 
from north to south. Evidently Kali- 
dasa is using the word in the sense 
of ‘right’ and not ‘southern.’ 

•After the death of Eucratides, Menan- 
der, who was in possession of Gandhara 
since the retreat of Demetrius, renewed 
the attempt to conquer India beyond 
the Indus. The Greeks suffered this 
defeat at the initial stage, but ultimately 
succeeded in occupying the Panjab 
up to the Ravi. 

3 CHI. i p. 532 



98 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


karni is proved by the coins bearing the full legend ratio siri Sadavaha- 
nas. 1 Moreover the conquest of Avanti, is not attributed to Satakarni I 
in the inscription of his queen Nayanika. Further, Jaina tradition as 
preserved by Merutunga counts Pushyamitra amongst the rulers of Avanti 
and assigns to him a reign of 30 years in this region. The Jaina gathas 
quoted by Merutunga do not mention the Satavahanas even as the succes- 
sors of Pushyamitra in Avanti; but instead mention Balamitta and Bhanu- 
mitta, who are apparently some Sunga kings with variant names. As 
a matter of fact an Andhra-Sunga conflict at this stage was out of the 
question. We have seen above that the Sunga armies triumphantly 
marched across the Narmada and not only forced the ruler of Vidarbha to 
submit, but to agree to a partition of his kingdom without a word of 
protest from the Andhras, who were the natural leaders of the South. 
The inference is clear that Satavahana suzerainty had not yet been 
established even over Vidarbha. .. 

Equally unconvincing is the suggestion based on a statement in the ’ 
HathlgumpHiT inscription that Kharavela, king of Kalinga, attacked ! ; 
Magadha and defeated its king Bahasatimita, who is identified with ! j 
Pushyamitra.* R. P. Chanda and Allan have demonstrated that the .' 
suggestion is untenable on epigraphical and philological grounds. 3 They 
point out that the reading Bahasatimita is impossible. According to Allan, 
‘the word in question begins with bahu, the certain elements in it seem to be 
bahu ( su — ) idita; it is very probably not a proper name at all, for the sug- 
gested reading of the preceding words as magadham cha rajdnam is extre- 
mely improbable, philologically as well as palaeographically.’ The use of 
synonyms in the case of proper names is absurd and the equation Pushya 
=Bjihaspati, must be dismissed as ridiculous. 

Professor Rapson has suggested that Sakala was wrested by Menander, 
perhaps during Pushyamitra’s lifetime. 4 It is rather difficult to estimate 
the extent of the Greek conquests in the Panjab during the reign of Pushya- 
mitra. But one thing is certain. As stated above, the references to the 
Greek invasion in the Mahabhashya and the ‘Yugapurana’ must be 
connected with the invasion of Demetrius during the reign of the last of 
the Mauryas. Moreover it must not be overlooked that these Sanskrit 
texts refer to a Greek invasion or siege and not to a Greek conquest. We 
must not confuse arunat with ajayat. As regards the reference in the 
Mdlavikagnimitra of Kalidasa, to the clash between the Greek and Sunga 
armies, it should be noted that the Greeks were still to the west of the 
Indus when Pushyamitra was performing an asvamedha for the second time. 
He was at least sixty years old at that time. It is, however, possible that 
soon after the defeat of Menander’s advance columns on the Indus, he 
launched a vigorous attack and pushed on to the banks of the Ravi. 


JNSI. vii p. 1; BDCRI. vi No. 3. 
See however ch. x under Satakarni I. 
CHI. i p. 537; JBORS. 1918, pp. 257 
flf.; AO. i p. 29 


’ IHQ. 1929 p. 393 f„ 595; 
BMCCAI. p. xcviii 
* CHI. i p. 519 



BUDDHISM UNDER THE SUNGAS 


99 


According to the text of the ‘Yugapurana’ as amended by K. H. Dhruva, 
Pushyamitra is said to have waged war against the Greek ruler of Sakala, 
for the sake of a beautiful damsel and died fighting . 1 That is the only 
piece of evidence from Indian sources which may be construed as support- 
ing Rapson’s suggestion. 

Buddhist tradition as preserved in the Divyavadana and in the work 
of the Buddhist historian Taranatha, depicts Pushyamitra as a great 
persecutor of Buddhism. According to the former source, Pushyamitra, 
acting on the advice of his Brahmin chaplain, resolved to annihilate 
the teachings of the Buddha. He went out to destroy the great monas- 
tery known as Kukkutarama, at Pataliputra, but was frightened by 
a roar and came back. He then marched out with a fourfold army 
destroying stupas, burning monasteries and killing the monks, as far as 
Sakala. At Sakala he is said to have announced a reward of one hundred 
dinaras for killing one bhikshu. In view of the fact that religious persecu- 
tion in ancient India was an exception rather than the rule, and keeping 
in mind the tendency of the Buddhist writers to distort facts and invent 
imaginary accounts of the evil deeds of non-Buddhists — even Asoka 
has not been spared — we cannot give the same credence to these accounts 
as has been accorded by some writers. While it may be conceded that 
some Buddhists, particularly the monks, may have suffered from certain 
disabilities, the story of a general persecution of all and sundry is evidently 
the invention of frustrated minds which found that the state patronage 
was rapidly being shifted to the Brahmins, and were aghast at the revival 
of the ancient Vedic ritual of the asvamedha. It is not even unlikely that 
the hardships of the Buddhists were in many cases due to political reasons 
and were of their own inviting. The Buddhist population may not have 
readily reconciled itself to Pushyamitra’s action in overthrowing a dynasty 
which had come to be looked upon as the bulwark of Buddhism. In 
the Panjab, Buddhism seems to have openly allied itself with the Greek 
invaders, and this must have given Pushyamitra sufficient cause for meting 
out to them the treatment which all traitors deserve . 2 The Buddhist 
religion as such appears to have escaped quite unscathed from the sangui- 
nary fury of Pushyamitra. Some of the noblest Buddhist monuments 
— the stupas of Safich! and Bharhut — were not only spared, but continued 
to receive both private and royal support. A number of additions to the 
beautifully sculptured railings of these monuments were made during the 
Sunga regime, and there is a definite mention of a donation to the stupa 
at Bharhut during the rule of the Sungas . 3 


1 JBORS. xvi pp. 18 ff. 

1 Cf. K. P. Jayaswal, ‘The political psy- 
chology explains the pitiless policy of 
the Sunga against Buddhism in the 
North. It is significant that it was at 
Sakala, the town and base of Menander, 
that Pushyamitra made his notorious 

declaration setting a price of 100 gold 


pieces on the head of every Buddhist 
monk. Buddhism was dealt with severely 
for having allied itself with the Greeks.’ 
JBORS. 1918 p. 263 
Shri N. N. Ghosh has argued (Early 
History of India, pp. 163-5) that the 
Bharhut inscription of Dhanabhuti 
cannot exonerate Pushyamitra from 



100 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


The Puranas assign a reign of 36 years to Pushyamitra. According to 
the generally accepted chronology his rule ended in 148 b.c. 1 

Pushyamitra was succeeded by his son Agnimitra in 148 b.c. From 
Kalidasa’s drama Malavikagnimitra we learn that Agnimitra had been 
governing the province of Vidisa or eastern Malava during Pushyamitra’s 
reign. The title of raja given to him in the play is only a courtesy title, 
and does not indicate his independent rule, although his father seems to 
have left in his hands a great deal of initiative in matters concerning the 
administration. He waged a war, for example, against the ruler of Vidar- 
bha without referring the matter to his father. Agnimitra ruled for eight 
years. No events of this period of his rule are known. There are no 
inscriptions or coins of his reign, unless the copper coins bearing the 
legend Agimitrasa in Brahml characters of about the second century b.c. 
discovered from various places in Panchala, can be attributed to him. 2 
Agnimitra was succeeded by Sujyeshtha 3 who ruled for seven years. 
Numismatists are not inclined to assign to him the KausambI coins bearing 
the legend Jefhamita. No other information is available about him. He 
was succeeded by Sumitra 4 in 133 B.c. Sumitra as a prince had won 
laurels in the battle against the Greeks when commanding the force escort- 
ing the sacrificial horse let loose by his grandfather Pushyamitra. After 
his accession to the throne he does not seem to have kept up the martial 
spirit and vigour of his youthful days. He gave himself up to a life of 
ease and pleasure. This afforded a welcome opportunity to the forces 
of disruption, and the disintegration of the empire set in. We are told 
by Bana that Sumitra, who was very fond of music and dancing, was 
killed by Muladeva while enjoying a concert. 5 This Muladeva is in all 
probability identical with the king whose coins have been found at 
Ayodhya and may be regarded as a predecessor of Dhanadeva described 


the blame attributed to him by the 
Divyavadana as this inscription does 

« not belong to the reign of Pushyamitra. 
But he ignores the fact that the evidence 
o£ the Divyavadana is partial and 
stands uncorroborated. 

1 The Vdyu and the Brahmanda Puranas 
assign a rule of 60 years to Pushyamitra. 
R. C. Majumdar thinks that this 
total may be made up by, two distinct 
periods— first when Pushyamitra was 
a governor of Vidisa under the Mauryas, 
but de facto ruler of the whole empire, 
and the second when he became the 
de jure emperor after overthrowing 
Brihadratha (IHQ. i p. 91 ff.) Sten 
Konow also has split up Pushyamitra’s 
reign into two parts — 30 years of 
rule in Malava and 6 years in Magadha. 
(AO. i). 

a Numismatists are generally reluctant 
to attribute these coins to Agnimitra. 
Cf. J. Allan, BMCCAI. pp. cxx, cxxi. 


3 This appears to be the correct form of 
the name, the variant Vasujyeshtha 
being due to the confusion between 
ch and v which are alike in the Gupta 
script. 


4 This form of the name is given by Bana 
and some MSS. of the Puranas and is 
preferable on palaeographic grounds. 
Kalidasa and the majority of Purana 
MSS. have Vasumitra, which, however, 
appears to be a scribal error— a Gupta 
ch having been mistaken for a v and 
tagged on to the name. 


tic . 269. audayita-ldsyasya cha sailu- 
sha-madhyamadhyasya murdhanam-asi- 
lataya mrindiam-iva alunad-Agni- 
mitratmajasya Sumitraiya Miiladevah 
While the Kashmir MSS. read the name 
of the assassin as Mitradeva, three out 
of the four MSS. belonging to the same 
family and derived from one Indian 
codex archetypus and one of the MSS. 



FALL OF THE SUNGAS 


101 


as ‘Lord of Kosala’ in the Ayodhya inscription. 1 Muladeva, may therefore 
be regarded as the founder of the independent principality of Kosala. This 
was the first secession from the empire. With the defection of Kosala, the 
Sunga hold over the territories to the west of Magadha must have been lost. 
It was most probably about this time that the independent lines of rulers 
made known to us by their coins came into existence in Panchala, Kau- 
samb! and Mathura. These kingdoms were founded by their erstwhile 
governors or scions of the Sunga family who ceased to recognise the 
authority of the imperial head. As a token of their absolute independence, 
they began to mint their own coinage. The Sunga empire now consisted 
of Magadha and the central Indian territories only. The Puranas assign 
a rule of ten years to Sumitra. His reign therefore came to a close in 
123 b.c. 

The next three names in the Puranic list, namely those of Andhraka, 2 
Pulindaka, and Ghosha, do not appear to belong to the Sunga family and 
have crept into the Purana texts on account of some confusion on the part 
of the editor of these texts. Taking advantage of the turmoil consequent 
on the murder of Sumitra, the Andhras appear to have raided Magadha. 
It may be on account of this unrecorded raid resulting in a temporary occu- 
pation of Pataliputra that the two names Andhraka and Pulindaka got 
into the list of Sunga kings. Ghosha of the Purapic list may be identified 
with the ruler of Panchala whose copper coins are known. That these 
three names are extraneous to the Sunga dynasty is clearly indicated by the 
fact that their inclusion creates a chronological anomaly. The Puranas 
assign a total duration of 1 12 years to the Sunga dynasty. But if we : add 
up the period of the rule of each king, including these three kings— Andh- 
raka, Pulindaka and Ghosha — the total for the whole dynasty comes to 
120. 3 By excluding them we can arrive at the true figure of 112 years as 
their reigns together cover a period of 8 years only. Sumitra was, there- 
fore, succeeded by Vajramitra in 123 b.c., not by Andhraka. No events 
have been recorded of Vajramitra’s reign of nine years. He was succeeded 
by Bhagavata, in 114 b.c. 

An inscription in early Brahml characters dated in the twelfth ypar 


of Sankara’s commentary collated by 
Fiihrer, give the name as Muladeva 
whose historicity is established by 
the copper coins from Kosala. The 
variant Mitradeva, does not appear 
to be the proper name but it is a scribal 
substitute on the analogy of expres- 
sions like Gautjadhipapt Magadhan&tha 
meaning the Mitra= Sunga king.’ 

’£/. xx p. 54 

2 The variant Odraka for Andhraka is 
a scribal error. Its identification with 
Udaka of the Pabhosa inscription spon- 
sored by K. P. Jayaswal and endorsed 
by Rapson lacks plausibility. Odaka 


does not appear to be the name of a 
reigning sovereign as it is unaccom- 
panied by any honorific like mahar&jd- 
dhiraja. B. M. Barua has suggested that 
it is a place-name (I HQ. 1930, p. 23). 

1 The lengths of individual reigns are as 
follows : Pushymitra 36, Agnimitra 8, 
Sujyeshtha 7, Sumitra 10, Andhraka 2, 
Pulindaka 3, Ghosha 3, Vajramitra 9, 
Bhagavata 32, Devabhuti 10, total 
= 120. But the total is categorically 
stated to be 112 ; cf. das-aite suriga- 
rajano bhokshyant=imdm vasundharam 
satam piirnam dasa dve cha tatah 
Kanvan gamishyati DKA. p. 33 



102 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


of king Bhagavata has been discovered on a fragment of a stone pillar 
at Bhilsa in Madhya Bharat. 1 It records the setting up of a flag-staff 
in honour of the god Vishnu in the most important temple at Bhilsa, by 
a private individual named Gautamlputra. There seems to be no valid 
reason for doubting the identity of this king with Bhagavata Sunga of the 
Puraqas. There is another inscription on the Garuda Pillar at Besnagar 
two miles from Bhilsa which is dated in the fourteenth year of king Bhaga- 
bhadra. It records the setting up of this pillar in honour of the god 
Vishnu by Heliodorus, an ambassador from the Greek king of Taxila, 
Antialcidas. In spite of the slight variation in the form of the two names 
there can be no doubt that Bhagabhadra of the Besnagar record is identical 
with Bhagavata Sunga, 2 3 for the simple reason that their dates almost 
coincide — Bhagavata of the Puranas ruled from 114 b.c.; and that is 
approximately the time of Antialcidas and therefore of Bhagabhadra. 
The Besnagar inscription of the Greek plenipotentiary is of great historical 
interest. Not only does it show that there was a close friendship between 
the Indo-Greek kings in the Panjab and the Sungas, but it also demons- 
trates the vitality of the Indian culture which was influencing a highly 
civilised people like the Greeks who became devotees of Indian gods. 
Bhagavata enjoyed a long reign of 32 years. He was succeeded by Deva- 
bhQti* in 82 b.c. 

Baija tells us that a Sunga king who was overfond of women’s company 
lost his life at the hands of the daughter of his female attendant disguised 
as a queen. The murder was committed at the instance of the king’s 
minister Vasudeva. 4 Since the Puranas speak of the overthrow of the 
last Sunga monarch Devabhuti, whom they describe as dissolute, at the 
hands of his Brahmin minister Vasudeva, it is reasonable to infer that 
Baca’s account relates to Devabhuti. After contriving the murder of 
his master, Vasudeva himself ascended the throne. The Puranas assign 
to Devabhuti a rule of ten years which came to a close in 72 b.c. and 
with him ended the dynasty founded by Pushyamitra. The suzerainty 
of Magadha was lost by the descendants of Pushyamitra mainly because 
of .their moral depravity. However, though the Sungas lost Magadha 
they did not altogether disappear from the stage of Indian history. The 
Puranas state that Vasudeva Kanva shall be king along with (lit. among) 
the Sungas and that ‘the Andhras will destroy the Kanvas and whatever 
is left of the Sunga power.’ 5 Presumably, the reference is to the 
continuance of the Sunga rule in Vidisa until that region passed into the 
hands of the Andhras. 


1 AS1AR. 1913-14, p. 190 

*Cf. CHI. i pp. 521-2; and 'Scythian 
Period', p. 341 

3 The variant form Devabhumi also 
occurs. 

4 Cf. ati-stri-sahga-ratam anahga-param- 
iam Surigam amatyo Vasudevo Deva- 

bhuti dasi-duhitra devi vyahjanaya 


vitajivitam-akarayat HC. p. 269 
5 Amatyo Vasudevas tu balyad vyasa- 
ninam nripam Devabhumim tath 
otpatya Suhgeshu bhavita nripah and, 
Kdnvayanam athoddhritya Susarmanam 
prasahya tam Simganam chapi yach- 
chhishtam kshapayitva balam tada 
DKA. pp. 33-4, 38 



THE KANVAYANAS 


103 


THE KANVAYANAS' 

The dynasty founded by Vasudeva is known as the Kanva or Kanvayana 
dynasty. Like their predecessors, the Sungas, the Kanvas were also Brah- 
mins, and figure amongst ancient priestly families of Vedic times. 1 The 
Pur anas designate the kings of this line also as Sungabhrityas or servants 
of the Sungas presumably because they had been in the service of the 
Sunga kings as ministers. 

The kingdom to which the Kanva Vasudeva succeeded was much dimi- 
nished in extent. The Panjab had been already occupied by the Greeks. 
The greater part of the Gangetic plain to the west of Magadha had been 
parcelled out amongst the various ‘Mitra’ kings, and Vidisa was still held 
by the Sungas. The jurisdiction of the Kanvas was probably confined to 
Magadha alone, although the Puranas speak of them as ‘enjoying the 
allegiance of the feudatories.’ 2 This may be only a ‘conventional’ 
compliment to a dynasty ruling over Magadha. 

The first ruler Vasudeva, who usurped his master’s throne, reigned for 
nine years from 72 to 63 b.c. He was succeeded by his son Bhumimitra. 

Coins bearing the legend Bhumimitra have been discovered from several 
places in Panchala. However, the numismatists are not inclined to attribute 
these to the Kanva king of this name and regard them as local issues. 
Bhumimitra is assigned a rule of fourteen years in the Puranas, the limits 
of which may be put between 63 and 49 b.c. He was succeeded by his 
son Narayana. His identity with Vishnumitra of the coins has been sug- 
gested, 3 without much plausibility. Narayana ruled for twelve years from 
49 b.c. to 37 b.c. and was succeeded by his son Susarman. The attempt 
to identify him with SuSarman, the founder of the Parivrajaka dynasty 
is fantastic. 4 The chronological gap between the two is so wide that the 
identification has to be rejected on this consideration alone. Susarman 
was the last ruler in the Kanva family. On the expiry of his ten-years 
rule, the Andhras conquered Magadha in 27 b.c. and the Kanvayana 
dynasty came to an end after 45 years of existence. ‘ 

According to the Puranas the Andhra monarch who overthrew Susarman 
Kanva was Simuka, the first member of the Andhra dynasty. There 
seems to be some error on the part of the ancient editors of the Purana 
texts, as the Andhra dynasty had been founded about two centuries before 
the overthrow of the Kanvas. Simuka and Susarman could not therefore 


1 Cf. Vedic Index, i p. 147. The form 

Kanvayana meaning a descendant of 
Kanva occurs in R V. vii 55, 4 

3 Cf. ete pranata-samanta bhaxishyS 
dharmikaicha ye. DKA. p. 35. But 
who could be these feudatories ? The 
states in Northern India all appear to 
be independent. The Suhgas in Vidisa 

could not be expected to acknowledge 
the overlordship of their erstwhile ser- 
vants. H. C. Raychaudhuri has stated : 


‘It is not improbable that the later 
Kanvas succeeded in extending their 
frontier to the Godavari and even fur- 
ther to the south.’ IC. vi p. 412. But 
the Puranas never mention a single 
Kanva king among the rulers of Vidisa, 
not to speak of any territory to the 
south of the Narmada. 

3 PAIOC. (Madras 1924) p. 412 

1 ABRORI. xix p. 83 



104 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


have been contemporaries. The Andhra ruler who conquered Magadha 
from the Kanvas must have been a king who ruled much later; his identity 
cannot be ascertained now. 

The Andhra conquest of Magadha does not seem to have resulted in 
a permanent occupation. No coins or inscriptions of a single Andhra 
king have so far been discovered from any archaeological site in Magadha. 
Not one of the later great Andhras claims the overlordship of Magadha. 
The great Gautamlputra Satakarni is described only as ‘lord of the Deccan’ 
— dakshinapathapati. It seems likely, therefore, that after a brief period 
of occupation, the Andhras left Magadha to its fate. After the Andhras 
withdrew it was ruled by petty kings whom every powerful neighbour 
tried to humiliate. 

Very little is known of the history of Magadha during the first three 
centuries of the Christian era. The evidence from both literary and 
archaeological sources is very scanty. A clay seal 1 discovered from Basarh 
shows that the ruler of Magadha in the beginning of the third century a.d. 
had matrimonial alliances with the Western Kshatrapas. The seal belongs 
to MahadevI Prabhudama, daughter of Mahakshatrapa Svami Rudra- 
sirhha and the sister of Mahakshatrapa Svami Rudrasena (a.d. 200-222). 
It was during this obscure period that the Gupta and Lichchhavi dynasties 
came into existence. Their amalgamation led to the foundation of the 
imperial power of the Guptas in the beginning of the fourth century of 
the Christian era. 


LOCAL DYNASTIES OF THE WESTERN GANGETIC PLAIN 
c. 123 B.c. to A.D. 200 

The unification of India which had been accomplished by the Maurya 
emperor Chandragupta was seriously threatened under the weak successors 
of Asoka, and though the process of disintegration was held up for the 
time being by the prompt action of Pushyamitra who snatched the sceptre 
from the weak hands of Brihadratha, disruption proceeded apace after 
the death of the founder of the &unga empire. The centrifugal forces 
appear to have received a fillip from the incursions of the Greeks. Me- 
nander, who had already served as a lieutenant of Demetrius and was now 
ruling over the territories immediately to the west of the Indus, encouraged 
by the reported hostility of the Buddhists to the Sunga rule, crossed the 
Indus and occupied the Panjab as far as the river Ravi. The Greek success 
must have dealt a shattering blow to the prestige of the imperial Sunga 
power and encouraged the provincial governors, some of whom appear 
to have been scions of the blood royal, to secede from the central authority. 
Numismatic evidence indicates that independent principalities came into 
existence at Ayodhya, KausambI, Mathura and Ahichhatra almost simul- 


1 ASIAR. 1913-14, p. 136. pi. xlvii, no. 248 



KOSALA 


105 


taneously. As most of the names supplied by the coins end in mitra, 
they seem to suggest a connection with the imperial Sunga house. How- 
ever, there is no definite evidence to establish the Sunga descent of these 
‘Mitra’ kings. It is noteworthy that the names of the rulers of Ayodhya 
who are definitely descended from Pushyamitra end in deva and not 
mitra. We shall now state the few known facts about these principalities. 

1. Kosala 

According to the evidence of the Harshacharita noticed above, Muladeva 
murdered the Sunga emperor Sumitra. Since the coins of Muladeva have 
been found at Ayodhya it may be reasonably inferred that after murdering 
Sumitra, Muladeva declared himself the independent ruler of Kosala and 
became the founder of the line of kings to which Vayudeva, Visakhadeva 
and Dhanadeva certainly belonged, as their coins form a uniform series 
with those of Muladeva. King Dhanadeva of the coins may be identified 
with Kausikiputra Dhana..(the concluding portion of the name is 
lost) of the Ayodhya inscription. 1 This Dhanadeva calls himself ‘the 
sixth in descent from senapati Pushyamitra.’ This inscription records 
the building of a sepulchral monument by him in honour of his father, 
king Phalgudeva. The inscription thus adds a new name to the list of 
kings of Kosala known from the coins. It is tempting to attribute to 
Phalgudeva the Panchala coins bearing the name Phagunimita, but the 
numismatists are emphatically opposed to such a suggestion, as in their 
opinion the coins of Phagunimitra belong to a purely local series of the 
Panchala dynasty. As four generations intervened between Pushyamitra 
and Dhanadeva, we may place the latter c. 68 b.c. That date is quite 
in accord with the period indicated by the script of his coins. Dhanadeva’s 
coins have been found at KausambI also, but that is not a proof of his 
rule over that region, for coins very often travel far beyond the limits of 
the country of their origin. 

King Indragnimitra, known from the Bodh Gaya inscription recording 
a gift of his queen Kurangi, is also called Kausikiputra. He may be re* 
garded as an elder or younger brother of Dhanadeva. 2 

Naradatta and Sivadatta, whose coins have been found in Kosala, 'do 
not appear to belong to the Sunga line of Ayodhya, but have to be assigned 
in all probability to Mathura. 

The early Kosala coinage beginning with Muladeva ceases from the close 
of the first century B.c., and we have no coins of any indigenous ruler till 


1 There is considerable difference of 
opinion as regards the nature of Dhana- 
deva’s relationship with Pushyamitra. 
D. R. Sahni has summarised and dis- 
cussed all the important views in El. 
xx p. 57. Among the clay seals dis- 

covered at Rajghat, Benares, a large 
number belong to Dhanadeva, cf. 
Summaries of papers IHC. 1950, p. 3. 

14 


'It is not necessary to regard Indragni- 
mitra as a king of the Magadha or 
Gaya region, since the inscription does 
not speak of his rule, but simply records 
the donation of his queen who appears 
to have gone on a pilgrimage to the 
sacred shrine at Bodh Gaya, Contra: 
Barua, IHQ. 1930, p. 13 



106 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


towards the end of the second century a.d. Apparently Kosala had 
passed into the hands of the Kushanas in the first century a.d. and they 
ruled over it for at least a century or so. Towards the close of the second 
century a.d. the indigenous coinage reappears. Coins bearing legends 
in Brahml of about the close of the second century a.d. furnish the follow- 
ing names of rulers : Satyamitra, Aryamitra, Sanghamitra, Vijayamitra, 
Devamitra, and Ajavarman. There is no possibility of a link between 
the Sungas and these ‘Mitra’ kings, as the Suhga line of Ayodhya became 
extinct with the advent of the Kushapas. They may be in some manner 
connected with the Patumitras and Pushyamitras of Mekala and Kosala 
mentioned in the Puranic accounts of the dynasties of the pre-Gupta 
age. The rule of these kings may have lasted for about a century or a 
little less. Since Saketa, or Kosala, figures amongst the earliest posses- 
sions of the Guptas, it is evident that these later Mitras were swept away 
by the Guptas. 


2. Panchala 


The existence of an independent dynasty ruling over the ancient kingdom 
of Panchala, with its capital at Ahichhatra, during the first century b.c. 
or even earlier and lasting till the first century a.d. is indicated by a large 
number of coins discovered from Ramnagar, Anola, Basti and Budaun. 
The coins supply the following names : Bhadraghosha, Bhanumitra, 
Bhumimitra, Dhruvamitra, Indramitra, Jayamitra, Phalgunimitra, Surya- 
mitra, Vishnumitra, Varunamitra, and Prajapatimitra. The cave inscrip- 
tions of Pabhosa near KausambI in the Allahabad district, supply three 
more names of the kings of Ahichhatra, viz. Vahgapala, Bhagavata and 
Ashadhasena who had the cave constructed. Professor Rapson assigned 
the Pabhosa inscriptions to _the second century b.c. on palaeographic 
grounds. According to him Ashadhasena was a feudatory of the furigas. 
The Pabhosa inscriptions are not, however, so early as Rapson considered 
them to be. They are now generally assigned to the close of the first 
ccentury b.c. 1 In both of these inscriptions Ashadhasena is described 
as the maternal uncle of Bahasatimita (Brihaspatimitra) presumably 
identical with the king whose coins in characters of about the first century 
b.c. have been found at KausambI. The royal houses of Ahichhatra and 
KausambI were connected by matrimonial alliances. We know the names 
of two predecessors of Ashadhasena, that of his grandfather Sonakayanl- 
putra 2 Vahgapala and his father Tevaniputra Bhagavata who are both 
styled kings >n the Pabhosa inscription. Originally Vahgapala may have 
been a provincial governor under the Sungas and become independent 
as the Sunga empire declined. Whether the ‘Mitra’ kings known from the 
coins are in any way connected with Ashadhasena, it is not possible to 
determine at present. No information is available about the ‘Mitra’ 


1 Cf. D. C. Sircar, SI. p. 97, n. 1 
* Rapson regarded it as a patronymic. 
In his opinion Vahgapala was a 


descendant of Sonaka. But D. C. Sircar 
prefers to read SonakayanI and take 
it as a metronymic. SI. p. 98 n. 4 



KAUSAMBI 


107 


kings of Panchala. This ‘Mitra’ dynasty probably came to an end with the 
eastward expansion of the Kushana power under Kanishka. 


Kausambi constituted a province of the Maurya empire under Asoka 
and continued to form part of the empire of the early Sungas. It appears 
to have slipped from the grasp of the Sungas some time during the second 
century b.c. Coins bearing the legend Bahasatimitasa in ‘Asokan 
Brahml ’ 1 have been found at Kausambi. This king Bahasatimita cannot 
be Pushyamitra Sunga. Apart from the improbability of the use of 
synonyms in official records, these coins belong to a series exclusively 
associated with the local rulers of Kausambi. This Brihaspatimitra is 
evidently a different ruler who founded the independent kingdom of 
Kausambi. We may call him Brihaspatimitra I in order to distinguish 
him from a later ruler of Kausariibl who issued ‘struck’ coins which have 
been assigned by Allan to ‘the late second century b.c.,’ but may be slightly 
later, as dating by palaeography is only approximate and not precise. 
Brihaspatimitra I may be identified with the king of that name mentioned 
in the Mora brick inscription 2 whose daughter Yasomatl was married 
to the king of Mathura. Nothing more is known about him. 

The next ruler known from the coins is Brihaspatimitra II . 3 He is 
probably identical with the king mentioned in the Pabhosa inscription of ' 
his maternal uncle Ashadhasena, king of Ahichhatra. The ruling houses 
of Kausambi and Ahichchatra appear to have been connected by matri- 
monial ties, as Ashadhasena is described in the Pabhosa epigraph as the 1 
maternal uncle of Brihaspatimitra. Rapson held that king Brihaspati- 
mitra II of Kausambi was a feudatory of the Sunga emperor Cdaka 
mentioned in the Pabhosa record. But the absence of any honorific ) 
title before the name of Odaka makes it highly unlikely that it is the name ' 
of a sovereign ruler. B. M. Barua has pointed out that it was most 
probably a place name . 4 Moreover, as a feudatory, Brihaspatimitra , 
could not have issued coins in his name alone; hence he must be regarded 
as an independent ruler of Kausambi. » 

Other kings of Kausambi known from their coins are : Jyeshthamitra, 
Praushthamitra, Varunamitra and Pushpasri. Varurtamitra of the coins 
may be identical with Gotlputra Varunamitra of a Kausambi inscription 5 
of his son whose name is lost. 

Coins of two more kings, Asvaghosha and Pavata (Parvata), have 
been found at Kausambi. There is a short inscription on the Asoka 


The palaeographic evidence, however, 
does not necessarily indicate that 
Bahasatimita was ruling contempora- 
neously either with some of the Mauryas 
or the early Sungas. That the script 
hardly shows any appreciable variations 
during the course of a century or even 
more can be demonstrated from the ins- 
criptions of any period. For instance. 


one finds little difference between the 
characters of the Allahabad Pillar 
inscription of Samudragupta and those 
of the Nalanda sealings of Kumara- 
gupta II. 

*JRAS. 1912, p. 120 
3 BMCCAl. p. 151f. 

*IHQ. 1930. 23; ante p. 101, n. 2 
5 A. Ghosh, IC. i p. 694-5 



10S 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


pillar at Sarnath in Brahml characters resembling those on the Saka 
coinage dated in the fourteenth year of Asvaghosha. If the inscription 
and the coins belong to the same monarch it would indicate that Benares 
was included in the kingdom of Kausambi. This Asvaghosha may have 
been the last ruler of Kausambi which soon after passed into the hands 
of Kanishka. 1 


4. Mathura 

The existence of two local dynasties of kings at Mathura is vouchsafed 
by coins belonging to a uniform series which on palaeographic grounds 
may be assigned to the period extending from the second to the middle 
of the first century b.c. The first dynasty consisted of the following 
kings : Brahmamitra, Dn'dhamitra, Suryamitra and Vishnumitra. We 
may call it the ‘Mitra’ dynasty as the names of all the kings end in mitra. 
A king named Brahmamitra is known from a Gaya inscription in early 
Brahml characters, but it is difficult to say whether he is identical with the 
ruler of Mathura. At any rate this is certain, that the Gaya inscription 
cannot indicate that the rule of Brahmamitra of Mathura extended up to 
Gaya, for between these two places lay the kingdom of Kausambi. No 
other information is available about these kings, except that one of them 
may have been the husband of Yasomatl, the daughter of king Brihaspati- 
mitra of Kausambi. 

The second dynasty consisted of the following kings : Purushadatta, 
Uttamadatta, Ramadatta, Seshadatta and Bhavadatta. They are known 
only from their coins and no details are available about them. Jayaswal 
has described some of them as Nagas, 2 but there is little evidence in support 
of his view. His emendation of the name-ending datta to data is quite 
unwarranted. Rapson thinks that these rulers were the feudatories of 
the Sungas, since their names have not been independently mentioned 
in the Puranjc lists. This view has been endorsed by Allan. However, 
it is to be noted that these rulers belong to the period when the Sunga 
empire was breaking up under pressure of the Greek invasion on the 
one hand and family feuds on the other. Soon after Agnimitra there 
was no ‘Sunga empire.’ The minting of their own coinage by these 
kings is a very strong proof of their independent status. 3 

Mathura was conquered by the Sakas c. 75 B.c. and remained 
subject to foreign rule for the next 250 years, until the overthrow of the 
Kushanas. 


For coins of Asvaghosha, JNSI. iv p. 
14; JBORS. xx p. 8; for his inscriptions 
El. viii pp. 171-2. 

! History of India (a.d. 150-350) pp. 12-13 
1 W. W. Tam has twice referred to the 
suzerainty of Menander over Mathura 
0 Greeks in Bactria and India, pp. 227, 
259); but he has not given any evidence 


to support his view. Of course he 
mentions the discovery of Menander’s 
coins in ‘mint condition’ from Mathura, 
but how does that prove the Greek 
suzerainty ? We have a large number 
of coins of Roman emperors from the 
west coast, but these do not prove 
Roman rule over those parts of India. 



THE PANJAB 


109 


5. The Arjunayana Republic 

To the south-west of Mathura lay the tribal republic of the Arjunayanas 
who are known to us from their coins bearing legends in Brahml characters 
of the second and first centuries b.c. The find spots of the coins show 
that the territory of the Arjunayanas extended up to Agra in the east and 
Jaipur in the west, roughly covering the region known as Matsyadesa. 
The Arjunayanas were a martial tribe of great antiquity. They were 
known to Panini as professional soldiers. Later Indian tradition regards 
them as the descendants of the epic hero Arjuna. No details are available 
of their early history. The script used on their coins clearly shows that 
they established their independence during the later Sunga period. As 
their coinage ceases after the first century b.c., they seem to have been 
subdued by the Sakas who had occupied the neighbouring region of 
Mathura by 75 b.c. 

6. The Sibis 

Coins discovered from Chitor and Tambavati Nagari and inscribed in 
Brahml script of about the second century b.c. reveal the existence of 
yet another republican state, that of the Sibis (see ch. v). 

THE PANJAB , c. 140-75 b.c. 

The Panjab was included in the Sunga empire during Pushyamitra’s 
reign, but his successors lost it. The Greeks under Menander occupied 
the country as far as the Ravi. Taking advantage of the weakness of the 
later Sungas who were unable to exercise effective control over the out- 
lying provinces, some of the Kshatriya tribes living between the Ravi 
and the Jamuna (Jumna) asserted their independence. All of these were 
known to Panini as groups of professional warriors. They seem to have 
merged themselves in the Mauryan empire. Their reappearance as 
independent political powers in the first two centuries b.c. is attested by 
their coinage. We shall refer to these states briefly. » 

1. The Audumbaras / • 

The Audumbaras occupied the land betwen the upper courses of the 
Ravi and the Beas. Their coins have been found at Pathankot in the 
Gurdaspur district, and from Jvalamukhi and Hamirpur in the Kangra 
district. Some coins have been found from the neighbouring district of 
Hoshiarpur also, but Hoshiarpur was included in the territory of the 
Kunindas. The Audumbara coins bear legends both in Brahml and 
KharoshthI of about the first century b.c. The following names of rulers 
occur on the coins : Sivadasa, Rudradasa, Mahadeva, Dharaghosha, 
and Rudravarma. Of these Mahadeva appears to have been a powerful 
king who led a successful expedition against Uttamadatta of Mathura. 
This is revealed by a coin of Uttamadatta which has been counter-struck 
by Mahadeva. 



110 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


2. The Kunindas 

The territory between the upper courses of the Beas and the Jamuna 
along the foot of the Siwalik hills formed the kingdom of the Kunindas. 
Their coins have been found at Tappa Mewa in the Hamirpur tehsil of 
Kangra, at Jvalamukhi in the same district, and from Sunet in the Ludhiana 
district. The Kunindas are mentioned in the Brihatsamhita, the Vishnu- 
purdna , and in the Mahabharata which places them in the same region 
where their coins have been found. The Kuninda coinage bears 
legends in Prakrit. On the silver coins the Brahmi script is used on the 
obverse and the Kharoshthl on the reverse. The copper coins mostly 
have legends in Brahmi only. As the copper coinage was mainly intended 
for local circulation, the exclusive use of the Brahmi script on it shows 
that the prevalent script in the Kuninda kingdom was Brahmi. The 
silver coins, which were likely to travel beyond the home territories, were 
inscribed with Kharoshthl also, as the latter script was current in the 
neighbouring region of north-western Panjab. Allan has remarked 
that the silver coins have been modelled after the hemidrachms of the 
later Greek kings. It may be suggested that the Greek standard seems to 
have been adopted to facilitate exchange with western neighbours. 

The coins furnish only one name, Amoghabhuti who was ruling during 
the later half of the first century b.c. Soon after him the Kuninda 
coinage ceases. It may be inferred that the Kunindas were subdued by 
the §akas advancing from Mathura. The Kuninda coinage reappears 
after the end of the second century a.d. when the Kushana empire broke 
up. 

3. The Trigartas 

The plain country between the rivers Ravi and Sutlej, now comprised 
in the Jullundur division of the Panjab, was known in ancient times as 
Trigarta. The Trigarta people were noted warriors and are known as 
such to Panini (v. 3, 116). The existence of Trigarta as an independent 
republic in the second century B.c. is indicated by a coin bearing the 
legend Trakatajanapadasa in Brahmi characters. 

4. The Yaudheyas 

The country between the Sutlej and the Jamuna, comprising the districts 
of Ludhiana, Ambala, Karnal, Rohtak and Hissar, was held by the Yau- 
dheyas, a Kshatriya tribe of great antiquity who are mentioned in Panini’s 
grammatical treatise, the Ashtadhyayi. 1 They were famous as profes- 
sional warriors. Their coins have been discovered from various sites 
in the districts named above. The earliest known specimens may be 
assigned to the late second or first century b.c. They furnish proof of the 
independence of the Yaudheyas during this period. Some of these coins 
bear the significant legend bahudhahake, which indicates that the Yau- 
1 iv 1, 176 and v 3, 117 



KALINGA 


111 


dheyas were in possession of territory exceptionally rich and prosperous. 
As their coinage does not cease after this period, but continues, the Yaud- 
heyas must have withstood the attacks of the Sakas and held their own. 
Numismatic evidence is clear on this point. From Khokhrakot, near 
Rohtak, moulds of Yaudheya coins of the beginning of the Christian era 
have been discovered and show that Rohtak was an important centre of 
the Yaudheya power in the first century a.d. The later history of this 
brave republican tribe will be treated further on, and we shall refer to the 
glorious part they played in overthrowing the Kushana power. 

5. The Agastyas 

Adjacent to the Yaudheya republic of Rohtak and situated on the 
west, was another republic state having its capital at Agrodaka. This 
place has been identified with Agroha in the Hissar district of the Panjab 
(I). The name of the ruling tribe as given on the coins is Agacha and 
may be equated with Sanskrit Agatya or Agastya, for Sanskrit tya becomes 
cha in Prakrit, and the preceding vowel is lengthened. There seems to 
be little justification for taking Agacha to represent Sanskrit Agreya as 
some writers have done. 1 


THE MAHlMEGHAVAHANAS OF KALlftGA 


The province of Kaliriga 2 had been annexed to the Maurya empire 
by Asoka in the eighth year of his reign after much hard fighting in which 
the casualties on both sides appear to have been unusually heavy. While 
his successors retained hold of the Gangetic plain for about half a century 
after his death, the outlying provinces slipped from their hands very soon. , 
An inscription in post-Asokan characters, engraved inside the Elephant • 
Cave (Hathigumpha) in the Udayagiri hill three miles from Bhuvanesvar ; 
in the Puri district, describes the achievements of Maharaja Kharavela,’ , 
a descendant of Mahameghavahana, who seems to have wrested Kalihga 
from the Mauryas soon after Asoka’s death, and founded an independent 
line of kings. This dynasty is described as the royal house of Cheti, j.e. 
Chedi, and Kharavela is styled a scion of the Lunar race ( aira ) and a 
descendant of the royal sage Vasu, who is evidently the famous epic king 


BMCCAI. pp. clvii ff. Barnet in 
BSOS. x; IHQ. xvii p. 198; JNSI. 
iv p. 51. 

'Kalihga is sometimes loosely used to 
designate the entire coastal region from 
the mouths of the Ganges to that of 
the Godavari. Its political extent has 
varied from time to time. In the 
days of Asoka the Ganjam district 
appears to have been its central portion 
as Jaugada, where Asoka’s Kalihga 


edicts have been found, is situated in 
that district. In Kharavela’s time it 
included the districts of Puri and 
Cuttack, and possibly a portion of the 
Vizagapatam district, besides Ganjam. 
Kalidasa in his Raghuvamsa distin- 
guishes Utkala, that is, the districts of 
Cuttack and Puri, from Kalihga the 
ruler of which is styled as lord of 
Mahendra mountain in the Ganjam 
district. 



112 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


Vasu Chaicfyoparichara — the conqueror of the Chedi country, and fourth 
in descent from Sudhanvan, son of Kuru. 1 Whether any kings intervened 
between Mahameghavahana and Kharavela, it is impossible to determine. 
Maharaja Kudepa, lord of Kalinga, and a descendant of Mahameghava- 
hana, mentioned in the Patalpura cave inscription seems to have been a 
successor of Kharavela, rather than a predecessor. 

It is now admitted on all hands that the Hathigumpha inscription does 
not bear any date, although the sharp controversy regarding the date 
of Kharavela still continues. The late K. P. Jayaswal and Sten Konow 
assigned him to the first half of the second century b.c., whereas H. C. 
Raychaudhuri, and the late R. P. Chanda and B. M. Barua, preferred to 
place him c. 25 b.c. On palaeographic grounds the inscription cannot 
be placed earlier than the beginning of the second century b.c. nor later 
than the first century b.c.* A consideration of the historical events 
narrated in the inscription can help us in fixing the date within narrower 
limits. The inscription mentions three invasions of Northern India 
by Kharavela. During one of these he overran Southern Magadha, 
striking at the Barabar hills and the city of Rajagriha. On a second 
occasion, he compelled the king of Magadha to fall at his feet and brought 
much booty from Magadha and Anga. It is out of the question that these 
events happened during the hey-day of Sunga glory, i.e. 184 to 123 b.c. 
Kharavela’s repeated inroads over the plains of Northern India could 
only have been possible either immediately before the accession of Pushya- 
mitra or after the collapse of the Sunga power. The most decisive piece 
of evidence is the mention of the Greek invader who hastily retreated to 
Mathura on learning of the advance of Kharavela’s armies to Rajagriha. 
It was only once that the Greek armies marched into the Ganges valley 
and penetrated as far as the metropolis of Pataliputra. This invasion is 
referred to in the Mahabhashya as an event of the recent past, i.e. before 
the rule of Pushyamitra commenced. From the ‘Yugapurana’ also we 
learn that the ‘viciously valiant’ Greeks had to beat a hasty retreat on 
account of a deadly war having broken out amongst them. There can be 
rfo doubt that the reference is to the invasion of India by Demetrius, who 
had to hasten back on account of the appearance of his rival Eucratides. 
The invasion of Demetrius has to be placed before the accession of 
Pushyamitra, i.e. 184 b.c. As the last invasion of Northern India by 
Kharavela took place in his twelfth regnal year, he must have ascended 
the throne a little more than twelve years before Pushyamitra’s rise to 
power, i.e. between 200-196 b.c. The mention of the Rathikas and 
Bhojakas as independent ruling powers also indicates a proximity to the 


Cf. Pargiter, A1HT. p. 118. The sug- 
gestion of B. M. Barua (IHQ. 
xiv p. 471) that the Mahameghava- 
hanas are the same as the Meghas of 
the Puranas is not plausible in as much 
as the Puranas place the Meghas in 


Kosala, whereas the Mahameghava- 
hanas are definitely described in their 
own records as lords of Kalinga. 

* R- D- Banerji, El. xx p. 74 ■ D C 
Sircar, SI. p. 206 n. 1 



KHARAVELA 


113 


Asokan times rather than to any later period when these powers ceased 
to exist as separate political entities. Thus everything seems to point 
to the beginning of the second century b.c. as the date of Kharavela’s 
accession to the throne. 

We learn from the Hathlgumpha inscription that as a boy Kharavela 
received thorough instruction in all the branches of learning which a prince 
ought to study, such as law, currency and finance, and royal correspon- 
dence. At the age of fifteen he was appointed heir-apparent ( yuvaraja ) 
and shared the responsibilities of administration for nine years in that 
capacity. He was anointed king at the age of twenty-four. His chief 
queen was the daughter of a king Lalaka Hatthisimha . 1 

In the first year of his reign he carried out repairs to the gates and 
ramparts of his capital Kalinganagara which had been hit by a cyclone. 
It was in fact the first step taken in pursuit of his plans of extensive military 
operations which followed. In his second regnal year he sent out a huge 
army to the west without caring for Satakarni. The phraseology of the 
inscription implies that this expedition was intended to be a challenge 
to the Satavahana monarch. The armies of Kalinga advanced up to the 
river Kannabemna and struck terror into the city of Musikanagara. The 
limits of this advance cannot be exactly determined as opinions differ 
regarding the identity of the river and the city. According to Rapson and 
Barua, the Kannabemna of the inscription is the Wainganga with its 
tributary the Kanhan, and the city was the capital of the Assikas in the 
valley of the Godavari. K. P. Jayaswal, however, identifies the 
Kannabemna with the modern Krishna, and Musikanagara in his opinion 
was a city near the junction of the Krishna and Musi at the border 
of Nalgonda district. This expedition does not seem to have produced 
any concrete results. There is no mention of any actual fighting between 
the armies of Kharavela and those of Satakarni, who may be identified 
with the first monarch of that name in the Puranic list of Andhra kings. 
However, in the capital of Kalinga, the venture was represented as a 
great success. The victory was celebrated by an elaborate program- 
me of festivites including dancing, musical concerts, and dramatic 
performances. 

The next year was marked by an expedition against the Bhojakas — the 
ruling chiefs of Berar, and the Rathikas of the adjoining Marathi-speaking 
districts of East Khandesh and Ahmednagar, who were defeated and 
compelled to do homage. The mention in this connection of an ‘abode 
of Vidyadharas’,* established by the former kings of Kalinga, seems to 
suggest that the immediate cause of this war was the violation of this place. 


1 K. P. Jayaswal finds in line 7 of 
the Hathlgumpha inscription a refer- 
ence to a wife of Kharavela who came 
from Vajiraghara (£7. xx p. 87). 
But as pointed out by B. M. Barua, 
Jayaswal’s reading of the text 
and his interpretation of it are most 


improbable (see IHQ. xiv p. 477 
n. 176). 

•This appears to be a place sacred to 
the Jainas. Vidyadhari sakha of the 
Jainas is mentioned in the Mathura 
inscription of the reign of Kumara- 
gupta, dated Gupta year 113. 



114 


POST-MAURYAN DYNASTIES 


the protection of which was regarded by Kharavela as his special responsi- 
bility. Kharavela’s repeated incursions into the territory contiguous to 
the Satavahana dominions show that he was militarily strong enough 
to harass the Satavahanas. 

In the fifth year of his reign he brought the waters of a canal from 
Tanasuli to his capital. This canal is said to have been constructed by 
king Nanda, 300 years earlier; or according to another interpretation of 
the text, in the year 103 of the era of king Nanda. Whether this Nanda 
was the well-known ruler Mahapadma of Magadna, or a local king of 
Kalinga, is difficult to determine. Kharavela appears to have striven hard 
to keep his people happy in every way. While he provided amenities 
for the residents of the capital, he sought to win the goodwill of the urban 
and rural populace alike by remitting taxes. This demonstration of his 
wealth and prosperity 1 cost several lacs to the royal exchequer. In the 
eighth year of his reign Kharavela undertook his first expedition against 
the North. His armies marched past the Barabar hills in the Gaya district, 
destroying its fortifications, 2 and laid siege to the city of Rajagriha. The 
news of the arrival of Kharavela’s armies created panic in the ranks of the 
Greek invader, who beat a hasty retreat to Mathura. As stated before, 
this Greek invader was Demetrius, who was compelled to withdraw his 
armies hastily on the appearance of a rival, Eucratides, who had seized 
Bactria. But the panegyrist of Kharavela has attributed the Greek with- 
drawal to the advance of the Kalinga armies. 

In the ninth year Kharavela built a ‘Palace of Great Victory’ {maharijaya- 
prasada) on both the banks of the river Prachl, evidently to commemorate 
his victories in the North. In the tenth year, Kharavela again invaded 
Bharatavarsha, i.e. the Ganges valley, but perhaps without achieving any 
substantial success. Next year it was the turn of the southern people to 
bear the brunt of Kharavela’s arms. His armies sacked Pithumda, 
which is believed to be the same as Pitundra mentioned by Ptolemy; and 
overran the Tamil country as far south as the Pandya kingdom, whose 
monarch is said to have sent a tribute of pearls. 

,Kharavela’s ambition to despoil the North was unsated even after two 
expeditions. In the twelfth year he again led his armies into the northern 
plains, 3 and watered his horses and elephants in the river Ganges. 4 The 
king of Magadha, whose name has been read as Bahasatimita (Brihaspati- 
mitra) by Jayaswal and Barua, was compelled to fall at the feet of Khara- 
vela. Opinion is, however, divided as to the name of the king of Mnga- 


i According to K. P. Jayaswal’s 

reading, rhe text contains a reference 

to the performance of the rajasfiya 
sacrifice (El. xx p. 87). But B. M. 
Barua’s reading 'rajaseyam samdarn- 
sayamto displaying royal prosperity’ is 
definitely preferable. 

•Principal V. H. Jackson has noticed 
•immense fortifications’ on the top of 
the Barabar hill. JBORS. iii p. 469. 


3 The term Uttarapatha seems to have 
been used in a general way for Northern 
India, and not in the special sense 
of the ’country to the north of Prithu- 
daka,’ i.e. north-western Panjab. 

4 K. P. Jayaswal’s interpretation 
seeking to find a refuer.ee to the 
Maurya palace named Suganga is 
rather far-fetched. 



PATRON OF JAINISM 


115 


dha 1 defeated by Kharavela. But whether the name be Brihaspatimitra 
or not, it is definite that he cannot be identified with Pushyamitra Sunga; 
and Jayaswal’s equation of Brihaspati with Pushya on the ground that 
the former is the regent of the zodiacal asterism ( nakshatra ) Pushya must, 
as already noted, be dismissed as fantastic. This expedition of Kharavela 
was singularly successful and he is said to have returned to Kalinga with 
immense booty . 2 The enormous wealth looted from Magadha and 
Anga was spent on building a magnificent temple adorned with beautiful 
towers. In the opinion of B. M. Barua this temple was built most probably 
at Bhuvanesvar. This is supported by a statement in an Oriya manus- 
cript of the Brahmanda Purdna which credits Kharavela with the building 
of a temple at Bhuvanesvar. The statement of the same Purana regarding 
Kharavela’s expedi’ion to Nepal remains unconfirmed. 

Kharavela was a follower of Jainism. Both he and his chief queen 
liberally patronised the Jaina ascetics by making munificent provision for 
their maintenance, offering gifts of silk clothes and constructing comfor- 
table dweliing-places for them. The very purpose of the HathTgumpha 
inscription is to record the construction of such residential chambers 
(jiradehas; ay ike) on the top of the Udayagiri hill, and the setting up of 
magnificent columns in a grand hall for the congregation of Jaina monks. 
This grand building was adorned with sixty-four panels of sculptures , 3 
and had cost a sum of seventy-five hundred thousands of the current coin. 
Though an ardent Jaina, Kharavela was by no means a bigot. He is said 
to have repaired the temples of all the gods and, what is still more signi- 
ficant, emulated Asoka by showing equal honour to all the sects. 

Kharavela’s career appears to have been meteoric. His achievements 
dazzle u? like a flash of lightning, which soon disappears. That he claimed 
to be a great conqueror in his own day is indicated by the epithet chakra- 
vartin given to him in the inscription of his queen. Although there is 
perhaps some exaggeration in the account of his achievements as narrated 
in the HathTgumpha inscription, it cannot be denied that Kharavela was 
a military leader of rare ability and under him Kalinga reached a pinnacle 
of glory which it failed to regain for several centuries after his death. , 


! The reading Bahasatimita is challenged 
by R. C. Majumdar (1A. 1919, p. 189), 
R. P. Chanda (IHQ. 1929, p. 594) 
and Ailan ( BMCCAI. p. xcviii), who 
think it to be impossible. 
'According to K. P. Jayaswal’s 
version of the Ha.higumpha . text, 
the booty included an image cf Sltala- 
natha, the Jina of Kalinga, which 
had been carried away by king Nanda. 
However, the correct reading according 
to Barua is Kalinga-jana, the people of 
Kalinga, not Katinga-Jina. It is likely 
that king Nanda subdued certain por- 


tions of Kalinga contiguous to the 
realm of the Nandas, and these parts 
were recovered by Kharavela. 

’According to K. P. Jayasvval the last 
line of the HathTgumpha inscription 
contains the statement that Kharavela 
convened a council of Jaina monks 
and caused to be compiled an authentic 
version of the Jaina canonical texts 
— ‘the sevenfold Angas of sixty-four 
letters.’ The text is obscure. B. M. 
Barua’s interpretation (IHQ. xiv 
pp. 481) has been followed. 



Chapter V 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH, MONARCHICAL 
AND NON-MONARCHICAL 

T he establishment of an Indian empire was often little more than the 
assertion on one side and the acceptance on the other of the hegemonic 
position of the conquering state. Instances are not lacking of ruling 
dynasties being uprooted as in the Gupta conquests in Northern India. 
But manuals of polity lay it down that the conqueror had a duty to respect 
the constitution and polity of the conquered territories, and even Kautilya 
recognized the distinction between dharma-vijaya (to be distinguished from 
Asoka’s dhamma-vijaya) which is satisfied with an acknowledgement of 
suzerainty, and lobha-vijaya and asura-vijaya which deprive the conquered 
ruler of land and wealth, and even of his wife, children and life . 1 As 
few monarchs liked to be classed in the category of greedy or demoniacal 
conquerors, the conquered states generally continued to retain their 
identity, and were ready to emerge into independence at a suitable oppor- 
tunity. But the annals of these minor states, particularly during the period 
of their submergence, are not easily got, and we have often to base our 
inferences on indirect evidence culled from different sources. 

In a scholium on one of Panini’s sutras , 2 Katyayana (fourth century 
B.c.) remarks that the word Kshatriya is used in the singular to denote 
that the rule has no application to cases where there is no single ruler, 
but a sangha enjoys political power. Panini himself, who lived probably 
two centuries before Katyayana, knows of many republics ( sanghas ) which 
he locates in the Vahika country, which has been rightly explained as the 
land of rivers, the Panjab . 3 It is well known that Pali books in their des- 
cription of the political condition of Northern India in the age of Buddha 
re£er to all states, monarchical and republican, by mentioning their names 
in the plural, meaning the people or the country inhabited by them. 

Megasthenes knew clearly of the existence of republics in his day; he 
says of the Overseers or Superintendents (the sixth of the seven classes 
into which he divides India’s population) that they report everything to 
the king where the people have a king, or where there is not a king, to 
the magistrates . 4 The Greek writers and generals who accompanied 
Alexander on his Indian campaigns and whose writings formed the basis 
of the accounts of these campaigns by later writers like Arrian, Curtius 
and Diodorus, have much to say on the political condition of North- 
West India immediately before the rise of the Mauryan empire. Though 


1 KA. xii 1 

* iv 1, 168 

3 Jayaswal, Hindu Polity, sec. 34 


1 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr 
pp. 43 and 212, Diod. ii 41, 
Arr. xii 



GREEK CITIES 


117 


we are not in a position to judge exactly how the rise of that empire affected 
each of these states individually, it would be instructive to follow the 
guidance of these foreign observers and gain some idea of the conditions 
that prevailed in the last quarter of the fourth century b.c. 

According to these writers Alexander entered India as soon as he crossed 
the Caucasus, a name which they apply to the mountain range now known 
as the Central Hindukush, which forms the northern frontier of Kabul. 1 2 
The first place he touched was Alexandria, founded by him in 329 b.c. 
before he crossed into Bactria, whence he returned two years later. The 
city must have been somewhere near Charikar at the northern edge of the 
valley of Koh-Daman. The ruler whom Alexander had set over the place 
was removed, as he had not proved satisfactory, and Nicanor was put in 
charge. The city is mentioned in the Mahavamsa as Alasanda of the 
Yonas whence the thera Yonamahadhammarakkhita is said to have gone 
to Ceylon with 30,000 bhikkus on the occasion of the foundation of the 
Great Thupa.* It must be taken to have been included by Asoka in his 
references to the Yonas in his inscriptions, and it was most probably the 
birthplace of Menander, the celebrated Graeco-Bactrian king, the Milinda 
of Buddhist literature. The next city mentioned is Nicaea which, accord- 
ing to Wilson, occupied the site of Begram. Others have held that the 
name may have been a Greek translation of some original name like 
Jayapura, and have identified it with Kabul itself, an important place 
which would remain otherwise without mention by Alexander’s historians. 

Another city that claimed a Greek connection long ante-dating Alexan- 
der’s time was Nysa, most probably identical with Ptolemy’s Nagara or 
Dionysopolis and the Nagarahara and Udyanapura of Indian literature, 
which has been located at a place full of Buddhist ruins at a distance of 
four or five miles to the west of Jalalabad. The city was founded, so 
its inhabitants told Alexander, by Dionysus on his return from his conquest 
of the Indian nation, who called the city Nysa after his nurse, and the 
mountain in its neighbourhood Meros (thigh), because he grew, before 
his birth, in the thigh of Zeus. Nysa was a free city from its foundation,* 
governed by its own laws, and the growth of ivy on the mountain was 
cited as proof of Dionysus having founded the city. Arrian remark?: 
‘It gratified Alexander to hear all this and to allow his war-worn soldiers 
a happy holiday in a distant land. Nysa had a governing body of 300 
members with Akouphis as its president. When Alexander asked for 
100 of the best from among them, Akouphis offered 200 of their worst, 
and Alexander showed his appreciation of the answer by waiving his 
demand.’ Arrian is frankly sceptical of all these stories and says : 
‘Anyone who hears these stories is free to believe or disbelieve them as 
he chooses.’ Nysa was doubtless also part of the Yona land in the 
North-West mentioned by Asoka. Then we hear of Astes (Hasti or 

1 Unless otherwise stated, the locations and identifications of places are those 
found in McCrindle’s The Invasion of India. 

2 MV. xxix 39 



118 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


Ashtaka), a prince of the land of Peucelaotis (PushkalavatT, modern 
Charsadda to the north of the Kabul river) who declined to submit to the 
two generals of Alexander, Hephaestion and Perdiccas, and persisted in 
resisting them, his place being taken by Sangaios (Sanjaya ?), an enemy 
of his and friend of Ambhi of Taxila. PushkalavatT, ‘city of lotuses’ 
was the capital of Western Gandhara; a gold coin with the city goddess 
holding a lotus in her right hand and an appropriate KharoshthI legend 
on the obverse, and a bull and a Greek legend on the reverse is known. 1 

Before advancing into India, Alexander marched against the Aspasians, 
Gouraians and Assakenians. The Gouraians, whose territory lay between 
the lands of the two other tribes, got their name from the river of their 
country, viz. the Gauri (Panjkora) a tributary of the Swat, itself a large 
affluent of the Kabul river. The Aspasioi, who are called Hippasioi 
by Strabo, are easily seen to be the Asvakas mentioned by the Maha- 
bharata among the wild inhabitants of the far distant regions in the north. 
The name of the tribe means ‘cavaliers’, and even now then country is 
renowned for its superior breed of horses. The old name of the tribe 
still survives in Asip or Isap, the Pushtu name of the Yusufzais. Their 
capital lay on the river Euaspla, generally taken to be another name of 
the Choaspes or the Kunar, a large river nearly as important as the 
Kophen (Kabul) itself. The Aspasians offered a stout resistance to 
Alexander, and after the fall of their capital, Alexander is said to have 
captured more than 230,000 oxen from which he chose the best in size 
and beauty and sent them to Macedonia to be employed in agriculture. 
The Assakenoi of Arrian (Strabo transcribes the name more correctly 
as Assakanoi) bore a name identical in meaning with Aspasioi, the 
Iranian aspa being the same as Sanskrit asva which becomes ossa in popular 
speech. The two tribes must have had much in common, though they 
appear to have formed two different states divided by the Gouraians. 
The chief city of the Asvakas, as we may call the Assakenoi, is called 
Massaga which was, according to Arrian, ‘the greatest city in these parts’. 
•It was doubtless the Masakavatl of Panini and Mashanagar of Babar 
on the river Swat. The city resisted for four days the most vigorous 
onslaughts of the Greeks, and surrendered after its leader, called Assake- 
nos by Arrian, had been killed in the fight. The defence of the city was 
aided by 7,000 Indian mercenary soldiers, who were spared by Alexander 
on condition that they agreed to enter his service; unwilling to take up 
arms for a foreigner against their own countrymen, they sought to get to 
their homes under cover of night, but were intercepted by the vigilance 
of Alexander and cut to pieces. The queen of the Asvakas and her 
daughter were captmed. Curlius says that the queen owed her ‘indulgent 
treatment’ ‘rather to the charms of her person than to pity for her mis- 
fortunes. At all events she afterwards gave birth to a son who received 
the name of Alexander.’ Several chiefs of the neighbouring states of 


1 CHI. i p. 335 n. 1, pp. 557, 587 



TAKSHASILA 


119 


Chitral and Badakhshan are said even now to boast of a lineal descent from 
Alexander. It may be doubted if the Asvakas were the same as the 
homonymous tribe connected with the Mulakas of Patitthana (Paithan) 
in the Deccan on the one hand and Avanti on the other. 1 Bazira, identi- 
fied by Cunningham with Bazar, a large village on the Kalipani river, and 
Aornos, located by Sir Aurcl Seem on the Pir Sar on the upper Indus, 
were other important strongholds of the Asvakas that gave no small 
trouble to Alexander before being taken. Coins showing a close resemb- 
lance to certain coins from Taxila and bearing the legend Vatdsvaka in 
Brahml characters of the early second century b.c. seem to give evidence 
of a place name which preserved the memory of the Asvakas. The place 
must have been in the territory of Taxila or sufficiently near it to be in 
close commercial relation with it. 2 

The first place reached by Alexander on crossing the Indus was Taxila, 
ruled by a Ling whose personal name is given by the Greek writers as 
Omphis, which corresponds to Aihbhi, a name known to Panini. Kauti- 
lya mentions a school of political thinkers called Ariibhlyas. In Indian 
literature the city is called Takshasila, and Buddhist legends explain the 
name by the legend of the Buddha as a Bodhisattva giving away his head 
in charity — taksha-sira, meaning severed head, faithfully rendered into 
Chinese Chu-ch’a-shi-lo? The city is well known in Sanskrit literature, 
including the two epics, and was celebrated for many centuries as a famous 
seat of learning in all the known arts and sciences of the time, whither 
pupils came from all parts of India. Alexander first heard of Indian 
ascetics and philosophers in the precincts of Taxila. The kingdom of 
Takshasila embraced a fertile territory between the Indus and the Jhelum, 
and its ruler was at feud with his neighbour, a Paurava, the Porus of the 
Greek writers. This was perhaps the reason why he sent an embassy to 
Alexander seeking his alliance while he was yet in Bactria. Ambhi, who 
had succeeded to the throne on the death of his father in the interval, 
entertained Alexander and his army with the most liberal hospitality, and 
valuable presents were exchanged. According to Curtius, Ambhi’s 
presents comprised 56 elephants, a great many sheep of an extraordinary 
size, 3,000 bulls of valuable breed besides golden crowns for every one 
of Alexander’s friends and eighty talents of coined silver (signati argenti) 
by which was doubtless meant the put ana or karshapana coins of ancient 
Indian literature. Exceedingly gratified by Ambhi’s generosity, Alexander 
sent back to him the presents he had given, adding a thousand talents 
and many banqueting vessels of gold and silver and a vast quantity of 
drapery from his Persian spoils, besides thirty chargers caparisoned as 
when ridden by himself. Alexander’s liberality on this occasion, we 
read, gave the deepest offence to his friends. After the battle of the 


1 Contra: Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, 2 Allan, BMCCAl. (1936), Intr. sec. 175 

pp. 27-8 and B.C. Law, Tribes in Ancient 3 Beal, Bud. Records, p. xxxii ; Legge, 

India, pp. 180-3 Fa-hien, p. 32 



120 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


Jhelum, Alexander effected a reconciliation between Ambhi and Porus. 
Ambhi helped Alexander in the construction and equipment of the fleet 
for his return voyage, a service for which he gained the accession of some 
territory. He was associated with Eudamus in the administration of the 
satrapy of Philip after his murder, and he retained his power for some time 
after the death of Alexander. What happened ultimately to this friend 
of the Greek invader during the nationalist movement headed by Chandra- 
gupta and Chanakya is by no means clear. Takshasila became the seat 
of a Mauryan governor, and its people complained of the ways of high 
officers ( amatyas ) set in their midst in the reign of Bindusara, who sent 
Asoka to deal with the matter. After the decline of the Mauryan empire 
it passed under foreign rule for some centuries, and then lost its importance. 
Near the middle of the first century a.d. Apollonius of Tyana and his 
companion Damis are said to have visited it, and described it as being 
about the size of Nineveh, walled like a Greek city, and as the residence 
of a sovereign who ruled over what of old was the kingdom of Porus. 
Its streets were narrow, but well arranged, and such altogether as reminded 
travellers of Athens. Outside the walls was a beautiful temple of por- 
phyry, wherein was a shrine hung round with pictures on copper tablets 
representing the feats of Alexander and Porus . 1 Fa-hien and Hiuan 
Tsang visited the city in later times. Modern excavations have done 
much to elucidate the history of the city in its various stages. Taxila 
has yielded a large number of coins, inscribed and uninscribed, which are 
best ascribed to the early second century b.c. and some of which bear 
inscriptions like nagara-nigama-janapada and grama-nagara-nigama 
showing that nigama was perhaps a market-district larger than a town . 8 

We may now mention some other kings of the north-west who are 
mentioned in the Greek accounts and, like Ambhi, cease to be heard of 
subsequently. There was Abisares, the ruler of Abhisara, the moun- 
tainous country from which flows the river Soanus (Sohan), and which 
is defined by Stein* as the area between the Jhelum and the Chenab 
‘corresponding to the Punch and Naoshera districts in Kashmir; but as 
Strabo says that the kingdom was situated in the mountains above Taxila , 4 
and as Abisares had close contact with the Assakenoi, it is probable that 
it extended further west right up to the Indus. Arrian calls Abisares 
king of the Indian mountaineers. He was unfriendly to Ambhi and 
Alexander, and sent troops acrosS the Indus to aid the Assakenoi after 
the fall of Massaga, and promised to join Porus at Jhelum to resist the 
invader; but Alexander forced the battle with Porus before he carried out 
his intention. At the same time, he sent embassies to Alexander when 
he sojourned at Takshasila before his battle with Porus, and again later 
when he was camping on the Chenab and preparing for the return voyage. 
On both occasions a brother of Abisares led the embassy. Alexander 
evidently knew the nature of the double game Abisares was playing, and 

1 McCrindle, Ptolemy, pp. 119-20 s Rajatarangini, tr. i. 180 n 

* Allan, op. cit., Intr. sec. 144-64, esp. 151 * H. and F. in p. 90 p. 



PORUS AND OTHERS 


121 


sent his own ambassadors to him. When they confirmed the statement 
of the relations of Abisares that illness prevented him from coming to 
meet Alexander in person, ‘Alexander,’ says Arrian, ‘readily believing that 
such was the case, made Abisares satrap of his own dominions, and 
moreover placed Arsakes under his jurisdiction.’ Curtius adds that when 
Abisares died, Alexander allowed his son to succeed him. Arsakes, as 
his name indicates, was the ruler of a small territory called Urasa, roughly 
corresponding to the modern Hazara district. But Porus was the most 
powerful king in the Panjab who ruled the territory between the Jhelum 
and the Chenab, a fertile country which, according to Strabo, contained 
nearly 300 cities. 1 According to Diodorus, Porus had an army of 50,000 
foot, about 3,000 horses, above 1,000 chariots, and 130 elephants. He 
was an ally of Abisares of Kashmir, who had an army little inferior to his 
own. Alexander attacked Porus before his ally could reach him, and 
yet Porus’s resistance in the battle of Jhelum was so magnificent as to 
extort the admiration of Alexander. He became a valued friend of the 
conqueror and his territory was extended by fresh additions to it. Another 
Porus, a nephew but no friend of the great Porus, ruled a small kingdom 
to the east of the Chenab. When he heard of the esteem in which his 
uncle was held by Alexander, he quitted his kingdom and fled to the nation 
of the Gandaridai, whose identity is not free from doubt, though the 
people of the Ganges region called Gangaridae elsewhere may have been 
meant. 2 The younger Porus’s territory lay round about Sakala and it 
was annexed to the territory of his relation and rival, the elder Porus. 
It may be noted that the kingdom of the elder Porus included the Kekaya 
country while that of the younger Porus comprised the country of the 
Madras who are mentioned in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (c. 600 B.c.) 
and in the epics. Soon after Alexander’s death the elder Porus came into 
conflict with Eudamus who had him slain treacherously before 317 b.c., 
seized his war-elephants and withdrew to the west to take part in the 
struggles that were developing there among the generals of Alexander. 3 , 
The name Paurava is derived from Puru, and the Rigveda locates the Purus, 
a great and powerful people, on the Sarasvatl. It has been suggested 
that either the Jhelum was the earlier home of the Purus, where some 
remained after the others had migrated east, or the later Paurava represents 
a successful attack upon the west from the east. 4 

Two other princes remain to be mentioned : one was Phegelas (Bhagala 
of Panini’s ganapatha), 5 the chief of a territory between the Ravi and the 
Beas. He made his submission to Alexander and was allowed to retain 
his kingdom. He entertained Alexander and h's army for two days, 
described to him the power and prosperity of the Prasioi and the Gandari- 
dai, whose king, Xandrames (or Agrammes) had an army of 20,000 horses, 
200,000 infantry, 2,000 chariots and 4,000 elephants trained and equipped 

'Ibid. p. 91 1 Vedic Index, ii. 

* Diod. xviii 91 ; CHI. i. p. 370 n. 4 pp. 12-13 

3 CHI. i p. 429 5 iv 1, 96 — b&hvadi. 

16 



122 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


for war. Porus confirmed the correctness of the report which doubtless 
related to the empire of the Nandas, but added that the king ‘was a man 
of quite worthless character, and held in no respect, as he was thought 
to be the son of a barber .’ 1 The other prince was named Sopheites, 
or Sopithes. The location of his territory is given differently by different 
writers, Curtius and Diodorus locating it to the west of the Hyphasis 
(Beas), while Arrian puts it along the banks of the Hydaspes (Jhelum), 
which seems to be supported by Strabo who says that his territory included 
the Salt Range which stretches from the Jhelum to the Indus. The silver 
drachma with the Greek legend Sophytou (ZQ&Y rOY ) doubtless belongs 
to him, and his name is thus seen to be Saubhuti, another name known 
to Panini’s ganapa(ha . 2 The people of his country excelled in wisdom 
and lived under good laws and customs. They esteemed beauty highly 
and did away with deformed and defective children at their birth. Cur- 
tius’s description of the meeting between Saubhuti and Alexander will 
bear quotation . 3 

Alexander had brought up his army before the capital of this 
nation where Sopithes was himself resident. The gates were shut, 
but as no men-at-arms showed themselves either on the walls or 
towers, the Macedonians were in doubt whether the inhabitants 
had deserted the city, or were hiding themselves to fall upon the 
enemy by surprise. The gate, however, was on a sudden thrown 
open, and the Indian king with two grown-up sons issued from it 
to meet Alexander. He was distinguished above all the others by 
his tall and handsome figure. His royal robe, which flowed down 
to hip very feet, was all inwrought with gold and purple. His sandals 
were of gold and studded with precious stones and even his arms 
and wrists were curiously adorned with pearls. At his ears he wore 
pendants of precious stones which from their magnitude and lustre 
were of an inestimable value. His sceptre too was made of gold 
and set with beryls, and this he delivered up to Alexander with an 
expression of his wish that it might bring him good luck, and be 
accepted as a token that he surrendered into his hands his children 
and his kingdom. 

Curtius and Strabo record the high praise bestowed by earlier writers 


McCrindle, Invasion, p. 282. We have 
followed Sylvain L6vi in referring to 
Bhagala in the bahvadi gana. Jayaswal 
( Hindu Polity sec. 78) refers to the 
arihanadi-gana under iv 2, 80 where 
the form Bhalaga with a variant reading 
Bhagala occurs together with Traigar- 
tayana, and suggests that, like the 
Traigartas, the Bhagalas may have been a 
republican clan and says : 'Alexander’s 
Phegelas occupied the same region’ 
(as the Traigartas). 


iv 275, samkaladi. This long-established 
view has, however, been called into 
question recently by R. B. Whitehead— 
The Eastern Satrap Sophy tes’ (NC. 1943, 
pp.60-72) — who suggests that Sophytes 
was not the Indian king, but a local 
satrap of the Oxus region who asserted 
his independence after the fall of the 
Persian empire, his coins being pro- 
bably earlier than 200 b.c. See ch 
vi below and JNSI. vn (1945) pp. 23-6.’ 
9 McCrindle, Invasion , pp. 219-20 



THE ARATTA 


123 


on the strength and mettle of the dogs of the country whose chief game 
was the lion. Saubhuti was left in possession of his kingdom. 

Turning to the republican states of the Panjab, the Aratta (kingless 
peoples) as they are sometimes called, they seem to have had a fairly 
long history before the date of Alexander’s invasion, and linguists like 
Przyluski are inclined to trace the admixture of pre-Aryan as well as 
foreign Saka or Scythian elements in their polity and culture. They 
seem to have commanded little sympathy from the Indian writers of the 
epics, law-books and manuals of polity, and Justin’s description of the 
followers of Chandragupta Maurya, mostly drawn from the Panjab in the 
first instance, as robbers appears to be only a repetition of similar Indian 
descriptions of these tribal states. With the advent of Alexander they 
seem to have fallen on evil days. Their strenuous fights with one of the 
greatest soldiers of history decimated their ranks perceptibly, and though 
Chandragupta Maurya found much use for their support before he 
established his empire, neither he nor his equally celebrated chancellor 
Kautilya appears to have taken kindly to the republics. Most of the 
republics of the north-west that fought Alexander seem to have entered 
on a period of suspended animation for the duration of the Mauryan 
empire, and emerged under new combinations in a later age. 

One of the first tribes that Alexander met after the battle with Porus 
is called Glauganicae by Aristobulus and Glausae by Ptolemy. Their 
country lay next to the dominion of Porus, to the north between the 
upper courses of the Jhelum and the Chenab. In this region Alexander 
took no fewer than ‘seven-and-thirty cities, the smallest of which contained 
not fewer than 5,000 inhabitants, while many contained upwards of 10,000. 
He took also a great many villages which were not less populous; and 
this country he gave to Porus to rule.’ 1 The anika ending of the name 
of the tribe means an army in Sanskrit and recalls the ayudhajivisanghas 
of the Vahika country mentioned by Panini, 2 besides being similar to the 
name Sanakanikas met with in the Gupta period; 3 Jayaswal identified 
the Glauganicae with the Glauchukayanakas of the Kasika, a rather la^s 
commentary on Panini. 4 The next tribe that faced Alexander were the 
Kathaians who lived to the east of the Hydraotes (Ravi) in the modarn 
districts of Lahore and Amritsar. Some writers place them, however, 
as Strabo says, between the Jhelum and the Chenab, 5 but this is manifestly 
wrong. ‘Lassen has pointed out that their name is connected with that 
of the Kattia, a nomadic race scattered at intervals through the plains of 
the Panjab, but supposed to be aborigines of the country and of Kolarian 
descent.’ 6 They were most probably the Katha people of Upanishadic 
fame rather than Kshatriyas as has been suggested. Their strongly forti- 
fied capital, called Sangala by Arrian, recalls Samkala of the ganapatha 
which begins the group containing the name Subhuta also. It was 

1 Arrian v 20 ( Invasion , p. 112). 4 Hindu Polity, sec. 78 

2 v3, 114 5 xvl, 30 

8 CII. iii Index, s.v. • McCrindle, Invasion, p. 347 



124 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


certainly different from the ancient Sakala, but must have been somewhere 
in Gurdaspur according to Vincent Smith, or in the neighbourhood of 
Amritsar according to others. ‘The Kathaians themselves,’ says Arrian, 
‘enjoyed the highest reputation for courage,’ and in the company of the 
Oxydraci and Malli, they had successfully defied the combined strength 
of Porus and Abisares, shortly before Alexander entered upon the scene. 
The Greek invader is said to have reduced ‘all the independent tribes,’ 
not named, ‘bordering on the banks of the Hydraotes (Ravi)’ and placed 
them under the rule of Porus . 1 He also received the submission of many 
villages, and subjugated others after crossing the Ravi and before en- 
countering the Kathaians. One of the tribes in this region was called 
Adrestai, identified by some with Aratta, but more plausibly with Panini’s 
Arishtas by Jayaswal . 2 Their capital Pimprama ‘which surrendered on 
terms of capitulation’ to the invader has not been satisfactorily identified. 
Both Arrian and Curtius state that the Kathaians and the neighbouring 
tribes who had joined them entrenched themselves behind wagons, the 
latter stating expressly that ‘they were in the habit of leaping nimbly from 
wagon to wagon if they saw their friends hard pressed and wished to help 
them,’ a mode of fighting which at first alarmed the Macedonians. Jayas- 
wal makes the ingenious suggestion that they formed a sakata-vyiiha or 
the ‘wagon formation’ of Hindu military theory. In any case the resis- 
tance of the Kathaians provoked Alexander into razing their capital 
city to the ground when he captured it after Porus had joined him with 
reinforcements. The land of the Kathaians was made over by Alexander 
to ‘those Indians who had formerly been independent but who had volun- 
tarily submitted to him .’ 3 Strabo mentions that the Kathaians attached 
uncommon value to beauty in men, as well as in horses and dogs, and 
notes that ‘Onesicritus tells us that the handsomest man is chosen as 
king,’ observations which McCrindle thinks more applicable to the subjects 
of Saubhuti than to their neighbours, the Kathaians, whose institutions 
were republican . 4 The Kathaians were frugal, but fond of ornaments; 
their men and women married by choice, and the wives practised satl. 

Alexander heard ‘that the country beyond the Hyphasis (Beas) was 
exceedingly fertile, and that the inhabitants were good agriculturists, 
brave in war, and living under an excellent system of internal government ; 
for the multitude was governed by the aristocracy, who exercised their 
authority with justice and moderation .’ 8 The people there were said to 
have more and better elephants than other Indians. Strabo gives the 
information that their government consisted of five thousand councillors, 
each of whom furnished the state with an elephant . 6 Jayaswal has 
pointed out that this description tallies with Kautilya’s account of some 
ganas as varttasastropajJvinah, those given to industry and trade, and 

1 Ibid. pp. 114-5 (Arr. v 21) 

2 Op. cit., sec. 62. Others suggest Adhrish- 
tas (CHI. i p. 371). 

3 Arr. v 24 


4 Anc. Ind., p. 38, 1 

5 Invasion, p. 121 n. (Arr. v 25) 
•Anc. Ind., p. 45 (xv 37) 



YAUDHEYAS, SIVAS 


125 


warfare. He also surmises with great plausibility that the unnamed 
republic adjoining the Beas was that of the Yaudheyas. 1 Though Alexan- 
der was eager to meet them, his army was by no means ready for the 
encounter, and he had to turn back without crossing the Yaudheya frontier. 
This celebrated tribe survived the Mauryas and the Kushanas. Their 
numerous coins and the inscriptions of contemporaries testify to their 
great power and prosperity. By a.d. 150, the time of the Girnar inscrip- 
tion of Rudradaman, they had either moved from their original seat or 
extended their sway towards western Rajputana where they must have 
encountered Rudradaman whose dominions included Maru. Evidently 
the Yaudheya territory W'as large and the evidence of coin finds shows 
that they occupied an area w-hich may be roughly described as the Eastern 
Panjab. The coins range from the Suriga period to the fourth century 
of the Christian era, and reflect the vicissitudes of their history. Allan, 
who has classified the coins and studied them closely, has recognised in 
them a period of independence from the fall of the Mauryas to the coming 
of the Kushanas, a period of poor currency reflecting the effects of their 
wars w*th Rudradaman and the Sakas, and lastly a period of revival when 
the fine coins and seals of the tribe, revealing strong Kushana influence, 
show them well established again in the third and fourth century. 2 Their 
constitution seems to have been quasi-monarchical. An inscription 
from Bijayagadh (Bharatpur) mentions a maharaja-mahasenapati who 
was made their leader by the gana of Yaudheyas, ( Yaudheya-gana-puras - 
krila). 3 One of their seals bears a bull like some of their coins, as well 
as the legend, Yodheyanam Jayamcintradharanam meaning ‘of the Yaudheya 
councillors of victory.’ The tribe worshipped Karttikeya, the commander 
of divine hosts, whose figure and name they put on some of their coins. 
The Johiya Rajputs, on the banks of the Sutlej along the Bahawalpur 
frontier, are taken to be the modern representatives of this ancient tribe. 

According to Diodorus, 4 when Alexander reached the place where 
the Akesines (Chenab) and Hydaspes (Jhelum) join each other, he led 
his troops against a people called Siboi, probably the same as the people* 
who, according to Arrian, 5 refused their submission and were prevented 
from sending succour to the Malli by Alexander’s inroad into their terri- 
tories. All the Greek writers agree that they claimed descent from the 
soldiers of Hercules, dressed themselves with the skins of wild beasts and 
had clubs for their weapons. They branded on their oxen also a repre- 
sentation of a club. They are doubtless the same as the Sivas of the 
Rigveda, who were defeated by Sudas along with several other tribes, 6 
and the Sivis, whom the Jatakas connect with Sovira, practically the 
same locality as where the Greeks met them. Patanjali once mentions 
Sibayah and Vasatayah together as names of countries, and Sivapura 


1 Op. cit., sec. 64, also 142-4. Contra 
Allan, ‘They do not seem to be men- 
tioned in connection with Alexander,’ 
BMC CAI. p. clii 

2 Op. cit., Intr. sec. 184 


3 CII. in p.252 
1 Invasion, p. 285 (xvii, 96) 
5 Ibid. p. 139 (vi, 5) 

* Vedic Index, u pp. 381-2 



126 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


again as a township in the North. 1 Sibipura is mentioned in an inscrip- 
tion (a.d. 403) from Shorkot which, according to Vogel, may be taken 
to mark the site of the Sibi Capital in the Jhang district below the con- 
fluence of the Jhelum and the Chenab. 2 In later times they seem to have 
migrated together with their allies, the Malavas, into Rajputana where 
their coins are found at Nagari near Chitor, celebrated in antiquity as 
Madhyamika; the coins bear the legend Majhimikaya Sibi Janapadasa 
and belong to the second century B.c. If it is not a case of migration, 
two branches of the same tribe must be distinguished. A king of the 
Sibis is mentioned in the Aitareya Brahmana. A Sibi king became the 
ideal of self-sacrifice in Hindu and Buddhist legend,* and the Cholas in 
the distant Tamil country counted him among their ancestors. Another 
tribe that lived very near the Sibi to the east is named Agalassi by Diodorus. 
They mustered an army of 40,000 foot and 3,000 horses for the fight against 
Alexander, who lost ‘not a few Macedonians’ in pressing the attack 
against their city. McCrindle thinks that Agalassi corresponds to the 
original name Aijunayana; Jayaswal suggests the form Agra-Srenis, 
contracted into Srenis by Kautilya. The Arjundyanas whose known coins 
belong to about 100 b.c. and who were tributary to Samudragupta 
seem to have occupied lands which lay within the triangle Delhi-Jaipur- 
Agra,* and it does not seem likely that they were the Agalassi of Diodorus. 

The Malli and Oxydraci, ‘the most numerous and warlike of all the 
Indian tribes in those parts’ (Arrian), were doubtless the Malavas and 
Kshudrakas of Indian literature. They are found mentioned together 
both in the Mahabh&rata and by Patanjali. The territory of the Malli 
was of great extent, including part of the doab between the Chenab and 
the RSvi, and extending, according to Arrian,* to the confluence of the 
Chenab with the Indus. The location of the Kshudrakas is more uncer- 
tain; Arrian places them on the Jhelum above its confluence with the 
Chenab, but modern research locates them either on the east or left bank 
of the Sutlej (the region of Bahawalpur), possibly extending as far as the 
♦ junction of the Sutlej and the Indus and the neighbourhood of Uchh, 
or better, in the doab between the Ravi and the Beas, 6 near the Malli 
Across the Ravi. Diodorus states that these two nations who had been 
at feud with each other settled their differences at the approach of Alexan- 
der, ‘and cemented an alliance by intermarriage, each nation taking 
and giving in exchange 10,000 of their young women for wives. They 
did not, however, combine their forces and take the field, for as a dispute 
had arisen about leadership, they had drawn off into the adjoining towns.' 7 
Curdus says, on the other hand, that a brave warrior of the Oxydraci 
was chosen for the command. In besieging the capital of the Malli 
(Diodorus and Curtius assign the city wrongly to the Oxydraci) Alexander 

* Invasion, pp. 350-1; CHI. i 
p. 375 

7 Invasion, pp. 287 (xvii 98), 236 


* iv. z, 51 1U4 

s Bhandarkar, List 2035; El xvi p. 15 
3 Allan, op. cit., Intr. sect. 142-3 
‘ Ibid. sec. 92 



MALAVAS AND KSHUDRAKAS 


127 


was dangerously wounded and nearly lost his life. In the midst of 
the operations against the Malli, Alexander led his army against a city 
of the Brahmins to which many of the Malli had fled for refuge, and in 
the hard struggle that followed, about 5,000 Brahmins laid down their 
lives, and ‘as they were men of spirit, a few only were taken prisoners’. 1 
Curtius puts the strength of the army of the confederated tribes at 90,000 
foot-soldiers, 10,000 cavalry and 900 war chariots, and says that at the 
prospect of facing them, the European soldiers ‘were struck with an 
unexpected terror and began again to upbraid the King [Alexander] in 
the language of sedition.’ 2 It was with a view to keep up their spirit 
that Alexander exposed himself to unwonted risks. According to Arrian, 
after putting up a strenuous resistance, the Malli who still survived ‘sent 
their envoys to Alexander to offer submission;’ ‘and from the Oxydraci 
came the leading men of their cities and their provincial governors, besides 
150 of their most eminent men, entrusted with full powers to conclude a 
treaty.’ They pleaded that they had preserved their freedom from time 
immemorial, and their attachment to it was their only fault. ‘The gods, 
they said,’ adds Curtius, ‘were the authors of their submission and not 
fear, seeing that they had submitted to his yoke while their strength was 
quite unbroken.’ 3 Alexander demanded a thousand hostages and five 
hundred chariots, and when they were sent, kept the chariots but sent back 
the men. Curtius gives picturesque details of the embassy to Alexander 
and of the manner in which he received them. The envoys ‘all rode in 
chariots and were men of uncommon stature and of a very dignified 
bearing. Their robes were of linen and embroidered with inwrought 
gold and purple.’ Alexander treated them to ‘a splendid banquet to 
which he invited the petty kings of the neighbouring tribes. Here a 
hundred couches of gold had been placed at a small distance from each 
other, and these were hung round with tapestry curtains which glittered 
with gold and purple.’ After the ambassadors were sent back to their 
homes, they returned in a few days ‘with presents for Alexander which 
consisted of 300 horsemen, 1,030 chariots each drawn by four horses,* 
1,000 Indian bucklers, a great quantity of linen cloth, 100 talents of steel 
( ferrum candidum), some tame lions and tigers of extraordinary size, the 
skins also of very large lizards, and a quantity of tortoise shells’. 

The league of Kshudrakas and Malavas is mentioned by Katyayana 
and Patanjali who speak of Kshaudraka-Malavi send, the combined army 
of the Kshudrakas and Malavas. 4 Patanjali also mentions that the 
Kshudrakas conquered unaided — ekakibhih Kshudrakair jitam—a statement 
which Jayaswal 5 holds has reference to their war with Alexander, although 
there is nothing to indicate it. After this the Kshudrakas are not heard 
of. Possibly they were fully amalgamated with the Malavas when they 
migrated from the Panjab to Eastern Rajputana where their presence 


1 Ibid. pp. 143-4 
1 Ibid. p. 234 
'Ibid. pp. 154, 248-9 


1 Under Panini iv 2, 45 ; 

and v3, 52' 

' Op. cit., sec. 66 



128 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


in the second century b.c. is attested by the earliest type of their coins 
(150-100 b.c.) from Karkota Nagar (Jaipur State). The coins bear 
legends in Brahml: Malavavanam jaya or Malava-gana and many varia- 
tions of these. The Malavas may have migrated by way of Bhatinda 
where their name seems to survive in the Malawai dialect extending from 
Ferozepur to Bhatinda. 1 They are found besieging the Uttamabhadras 
to the west of Ajmer and retreating before the forces of Nahapana led 
by Ushavadata. 2 The famous Vikrama or Krita era beginning 58-57 b.c. 
of which the origin has not been satisfactorily explained was closely asso- 
ciated with the Malavas, at least according to some late inscriptions. 
‘The provenance and epigraphy of the coins of the Malavas,’ says Allan, 3 
‘show them occupying a limited area in Eastern Rajputana from the second 
to the fourth century a.d. This agrees with the reference to them in the 
Allahabad inscription of Samudragupta. The later Malava (Mo-la-po) 
of Hiuan Tsang seems to be farther west than the find spots of the coins.’ 
But there can be little doubt that they covered the whole of the area to the 
south of Nagar, which permanently came to bear their name. At the 
same time, ‘the similarity of the coin-legends to those of the Arjunayanas 
and Yaudheyas suggests that these were not very remote from them and 
were probably their neighbours on the north while the resemblance of 
their coins to those of the Nagas suggests that the latter were their neigh- 
bours on the east.’ 

Another tribe who dwelt on the lower Akesines (Chenab) is called 
Abastanoi by Arrian, Sabarcae by Curtius, and Sambastai by Diodorus. 
Patanjali gives Ambashtha as the name of a country whose people were 
called Ambashthyas. 4 The Puranas describe them as a monarchical 
people, but Curtius and Diodorus say that their government was democ- 
ratic and not regal, and that they assembled 60,000 foot-soldiers, 6,000 
horse and 500 chariots under three generals renowned for their valour 
and military skill; but the sight of the large armada of the Macedonians 
on their river cowed them into sending fifty of their foremost citizens to 
negotiate terms with the invader who received their submission with 
alacrity. The republican tribe of the Ambashthas is mentioned in the 
Mahabharata and was obviously quite different from the mixed caste of 
Ambashthas of the Manusmfiti and other law-books. The Aitareya 
Brahmana knows of Ambashthya, a king whose purohita was Narada; 
presumably the name is local, meaning ‘king of the Ambashthas’. 5 
Arrian next mentions the Xathri and Ossadii, two independent tribes 
who sent envoys in their turn to Alexander offering peaceful submission. 
The Xathri, Kshatriyas, appear to be mentioned by Kautilya in his list 
of tribes living by trade and arms. The Ossadii must be the Vasatis who 
are mentioned together with Sibis by Patanjali, figure in the ganapafha 


1 Ibid. sec. 147 

* El. viii p. 79. Uttamabhadra has been 

held to be a king, not a tribe, and iden- 

tified with Uttamadatta of Mathura. 

JNSI. vii pp. 27-8 


3 BMCCAI. Intr., sec. 121 
4 iv 1, 170. The country is also named 
in the Barhaspatya Arthasastra, ed. 
F. W. Thomas, p. 21 
5 Ve die Index, i pp. 59-60 



TRIBES AND KINGS IN SIND 


129 


in the group beginning with rajanya, and are known to the Mahdbhdrata. 
Not much is known about these two tribes. 1 * * Rajanya, we may note, 
is not to be taken as a synonym of Kshatriya, but formed the name of a 
separate tribe (unknown to the Greek writers) whose coins of the second 
and first century b.c. bearing the legend rajafia-janapadasa have been found 
in the Hoshiarpur district of the Panjab, the probable seat of the janapada} 
The tribes on the lower course of the Indus are even more difficult to 
trace and locate because the Greek accounts of Alexander’s progress 
through the four hundred miles from the great confluence at Uchh to 
Patala where the Indus bifurcates to form the delta are much more sum- 
mary and divergent; further, the change in the course of the Indus here 
is much more marked since Alexander’s time than in the case of the streams 
of the Panjab. The people of Sind seem to have had a decided preference 
for kingly government and allowed Brahmins to exercise a decisive in- 
fluence over their public life. The first tribe in Sind to meet Alexander 
were the Sogdi as Arrian puts it, or Sodrae and Massani according to 
Diodorus. The name Massani has been connected with Musarni of 
Ptolemy, a town in Gedrosia or Karmania.* Sodrae may well be Sudra, 
the Zydri of Ptolemy identified by Zimmer with the Brahui. The sugges- 
tion has been made that Sudra was originally the name of some pro- 
minent Dasa tribe; 4 if this is accepted, it is not unlikely that they survived 
in some strength to the days of Alexander. Next we hear of three kings 
of Sind, Musicanus and Sambus standing in the same relation to each other 
as Porus and Taxiles of the Panjab, and Oxycanus or Porticanus, besides 
a ‘city of the Brahmanas’. The realm of Musicanus was reported to be 
the most opulent in India. The name of the king appears to be a territo- 
rial title since Curtius designates the people Musicani, who have been 
identified by Lassen with the Mushikas, a dynasty known to have ruled 
only on the west coast of South India. The suggestion has, however, 
been made that the great tribe of the Moghasis of Kach Gandara, a region 
bordering on the territories of the ancient Musicani, still represents the • 
Mushikas in that region. 5 Strabo cites Onesicritus whose description 
of the country and its people is obviously an idealised account meant for ’* 
the edification of his Greek readers : 

He expatiates [says Strabo] In praises of the country of Mousi- 
canus, and notices these characteristics which its inhabitants share 
with other Indians, that they are long-lived and that the term of life 
extends to 130 years (the Seres, however, according to some writers, 
are still longer-lived), that they live sparingly and are healthy, even 
though their country produces everything in abundance. The fol- 
lowing customs, however, are peculiar to them : to have a common 


1 Jayaswal, op. cit., sec. 74, 75 

* Allan, op. cit., Intr. sec. 141 ; Jayaswal, 

sec. 160 

* McCrindle, Ptolemy, p. 322 

* Vedic Index, n pp. 391-2; CHI. i p. 86 

* 7 


Jayaswal (op. cit., sec. 154) prefers to 
identify Sodrae with Saudras (Saudra- 
yanas) of the GanapHtha, iv 2, 54 
1 Invasion , p. 157, n 2. Jayaswal suggests 
the form Muchukarria, op. cit., sec. 76 



130 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


meal which they eat in public as did the Lacedemonians, their food 
consisting of the produce of the chase; to use neither gold nor silver 
though they have mines of these metals; to employ instead of slaves 
young men in the flower of their age, as the Cretans employ the 
Aphamiotae and the Lacedemonians the Helots; to study no science 
with attention except that of medicine, for they regard the excessive 
pursuit of any art, as war for instance and the like, as wickedness; 
to have no actions at law but for murder and outrage, to escape 
these evils does not lie in one’s own power, but it is otherwise in 
the case of contracts where each one can protect his own interests, 
so that if one of the parties violates his faith, the other must endure 
the wrong, for a man must be cautious whom he trusts, and not en- 
gross the attention of the city with law-suits . 1 

Musicanus was at first slow to make his submission to Alexander, 
while Sambus, who was unfriendly to Musicanus, hastened to offer his 
submission. The swiftness of Alexander’s movements overwhelmed 
Musicanus, who offered his submission too, making the choicest presents 
to Alexander including ‘all his elephants.’ Musicanus was left his former 
state and authority, though a European garrison was posted in his capital 
city, most probably Alor. Sambus (Sambhu or Samba) ruled a moun- 
tainous country adjoining the territory of Musicanus, and had his capital 
at Sindimana (unidentified), which threw open its gates to the invader 
though its ruler had fled on hearing that Alexander had made friends 
with Musicanus. While the operations against Sambus were still going 
on, Alexander had to attack a city called Harmatelia by Diodorus, which 
belonged to the Brahmanas, Alexander’s most implacable enemies who 
had induced Musicanus to throw off his allegiance. Arrian says that 
Alexander ‘put to death all those Brahmins who had instigated the revolt’ 
together with Musicanus himself. Patanjali mentions the ‘country of the 
Brahmanas,’ Brahmanako nama janapada, a form found in Panini as 
c well in the sense of a country where Brahmins live by bearing arms.® 
As Panini’s definition is general, the term should be taken to apply to all 
‘countries where Brahmins fought as soldiers, and not as the name of a 
particular state; another city of the Brahmins has been mentioned already 
in relation to the Malavas. Porticanus, whose subjects are called Praesti 
(Proshthas ?) by Curtius, ruled, according to Cunningham, the level 
country around Larkhana, that lay about forty miles to the west of the 
Indus in Alexander's time, though now quite close to it. Lastly there was 
the ruler of the delta country which took its name from the capital 
Patala, near modern Hyderabad. Diodorus calls the city Tauala and 
says that it had a political constitution similar to that of Sparta ; ‘for 
in this community the command in war was vested in two hereditary kings 
of two different houses, while a council of elders ruled the whole state 
with paramount authority .’ 3 One of the kings went up the river to meet 

1 McCrindle, Anc. Ind., p. 41 * Invasion, p. 296 

* Patafijali, ed. Kielhom, ii 298; Pap. v 2, 71 



REPUBLICS IN THE ARTHASASTRA 


131 


Alexander to make an offer of surrender, but this was only a device to 
gain time, for when Alexander actually reached Patala, he ‘found that 
both the city itself and the cultivated lands which lay around it had been 
deserted by the inhabitants.’ 1 But some of the fugitives were caught 
and employed to persuade the others to come back, inhabit the city and 
cultivate their lands as before. 

We may next mention the notice of several sanghas (republics) in the 
Arthasastra of Kautilya. 2 He states that the Kambhojas, Surashtras, 
Kshatriyas, Srenis and others practised vartta (agriculture, cattle-rearing, 
and trade); the Lichchhavikas, Vrijjikas, Mallakas, Madrakas, Kukuras, 
Kurus, Panchalas and others employed the term raja ( rajasabdopajivinah ). 
Here only the Kambhojas and Surashfras are new in the first group. 
The Kambhojas seem to be mentioned by Yaska and Panini as Kambojas, 
the former implying the presence of Iranian influences in their speech; 
they are placed in the Asoka inscriptions (RE. V) between the Yonas 
and Gandharas, and are therefore best located somewhere in Eastern 
Afghanistan. 3 The Surashtras were in Kathiawar, and are mentioned 
by name in the Nasik inscription of Gautami Balasri and the Junagadh 
inscription of Rudradaman (a.d. 150). The last-mentioned record says 
that the Vaisya Pushyagupta was the rashtriya of Chaqdragupta Maurya 
in this region, the Yavanaraja Tushaspa of Asoka Maurya, 4 and that 
under Rudradaman himself, Surashtras and Anartas were under the pro- 
tection (palana) of the Pahlava Suvisakha. We must assume that the 
republican institutions of the Surashtras were allowed to continue to 
function under the general supervision of the royal representative imposed 
upon the province whenever it formed part of a larger political unit. We 
may also believe that by virtue of their geographical situation they were 
more given to trade than to war. 

The tribes mentioned in the second group by Kautilya are all well 
known for their great antiquity. In the days of the Buddha the Lichchha- 
vis are found with Videhas and others to have formed a confederacy^ 
known as the Vajjians (Vfijjikas), though several kings of Videha are known 
to Yedic and epic literature, the most celebrated among them being Janakfv, 
the great philosopher of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad and foster-father 
of Slta. As Kautilya mentions the Lichchhavis and Vrijjikas separately 
it is possible that by the latter he means the Videhans. The Lichchhavis 
are among the most celebrated Kshatriya tribes, and the suggestion that 
they were of Mongolian extraction has really no evidence in its favour. 
The legendary genealogy of the Lichchhavis of Nepal says that there was 
a Lichclihavi borp in the solar line of Ikshvaku eight generations after 
Dasaratha, the father of Rama, 8 and explains the name as very white 
or very pure. ‘According to the Jainas,’ says Jacobi, ‘the Lichchhavis 

'Ibid. p. 161 at the end of 1. 8 suggested by Barua 

2 xi seems to be no improvement on 

3 Jayaswal, op. cit., sec. 56, 130 Kielhom’s krile. 

1 El. viii p. 43. The reading mauryasyamte 5 Levi, Le Nepal, ii p. 85 



132 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


and Mallakis were the chiefs of K5si and Kosala. They seem to 
have succeeded the Aikshvakas who ruled there in the time of the Rama- 
yarn.’ 1 The Lichchhavis continued to exist as a powerful independent 
state, though their constitution seems to have become monarchical. 
KumaradevI, whose marriage with the Gupta king Chandragupta I merged 
the Lichchhavi state in the Gupta empire, seems to have been the last ruler 
of the Lichchhavis. The Mallas or Mallakas and Kurus seem to disappear 
soon after Kautilya’s time as separate entities. The Panchalas are men- 
tioned by Patanjali and are represented by the coins of a local dynasty 
of rulers with names ending in mitra and covering a period of from about 
200 b.c. to the end of the first century b.c. Their capital was most 
probably Ahichhatra. 2 The Kukuras were a branch of the Yadu race 
and their country must be sought in Western or Central India. Kukura 
is mentioned in the inscriptions of the Satavahanas among Gautamiputra's 
conquests and is included among the territories ruled over by Rudrada- 
man. The Madras or Madrakas are known to later Vedic literature. 3 
The Uttara Madras, northern Madras, are referred to in the Aitareya 
Brahmana as living beyond the Himalaya in the neighbourhood of Uttara 
Kurus, probably, as Zimmer conjectures, in the land of Kashmir. The 
Madras mentioned in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad were probably the 
southern Madras whose territory lay in the region of Sialkot (Sakala) 
which still had the name Madra-desa in the time of Guru Govind Singh. 
Przyluski suggests a Bactrian origin for them and holds that they repre- 
sented the penetration of Iranian peoples into north-western India long 
before the time of Alexander, their name Balhika being changed to Bahika, 
meaning ‘outsiders, those beyond the pale,’ to signify the aversion of the 
orthodox Indo-Aryans to them. 4 But the references in the Upanishads 
and elsewhere in early Indian literature show that they were regarded as 
a Kshatriya tribe particularly noted for their learning and scholarship 
in the Brahmana period.® Sakala became later the capital of Menander, 
and the Milinda-pahha contains a long and vivid description of the city.* 
* Not much is known of the later history of the Madras. They are counted 
among peoples tributary to Samudragupta in the Allahabad inscription. 
The name of the Madra country figures in the copper-plates of Dharmapala 
of Bengal as among the powers that agreed to his replacing Indrayudha 
of Kanauj by Chakrayudha, but it may be legitimately doubted if this 
list of kingdoms is genuinely historical or merely traditional. How 
and when exactly the Madras ceased to be a separate political entity is 
not easy to decide. 

The tribal names mentioned in the Asoka inscriptions have been dis- 
cussed earlier. We may now mention briefly the tribal states represented 
by their coins which we have had no occasion to mention so far, a detailed 

1 Jaina Sutras, ii p. 321, n. 3 1 JA. ccviii (1926) p. 13 

•Allan, op. cit., Intr. sec. 131-8 ‘Br. Up. iii 3, 1; 7, 1 

. * Vedic Index, ii p. 123 ‘ SBE. 35 (i) pp. 1-3 



NAMES ON COINS 


133 


discussion of the types of these and other coins of the period being reserved 
for a separate chapter at the end of this volume. Eran, now a village 
in the Saugor district of Madhya Pradesh at the confluence of the Bina 
and Reuta, was a place of great importance in ancient times. Its site 
has yielded the earliest inscribed Indian coin, the legend being Dha(r)ma- 
palasa read round the coin from right to left in Brahmi characters anterior 
to those of Asoka’s time. Two other coins inscribed Erakanya and 
several fine copper coins with strong affinities with the punch-marked 
coins also come from the same place. 1 From Kausambi, modern Kosam, 
thirty miles south-west of Allahabad, there come bronze coins falling 
into two classes like those of Ayodhya and the Audumbaras — an earlier 
set of round cast pieces purely Indian in type, and a later one of struck 
coins, a bull and a tree in railing being the characteristic type which prevails 
throughout. The earlier set is mostly uninscribed, though two coins bear 
the legends Sudevasa and (Baha) satimitasa, i.e. of Sudeva and of Brihas- 
patimitra, in characters which may be of the third century B.c. or the 
first half of the second. The struck coins reveal the names of Asvaghosha, 
Parvata, a second Brihaspatimitra, Agnimitra and Jyeshthamitra, and 
are of the end of the second century b.c. as well as of the first. Still 
later is the coin inscribed in Sanskrit Raja Dhanadevasya. A Brihasvati- 
mitra whose name occurs on inscribed bricks from Mora, seven miles west 
of Mathura, commemorating the erection of a temple by his daughter, 
may have been the same as Brihaspatimitra I of the coins whose daughter 
married the king of Mathura. Likewise Bahasatimitra of one of the 
inscriptions at Pabhosa near Kosam may be identified with Bfihaspati- 
mitra II of the coins, perhaps a contemporary of Udaka (Odraka), the 
fifth king of the Suriga dynasty (c. 125-100 b.c.) whose tenth regnal year 
is mentioned in the Pabhosa inscription. Brihaspatimitra is not mentioned 
in the Hathlgumpha inscription and cannot be identified with Pushyamitra 
Sunga. 2 Ayodhya, the capital of ancient Kosala, furnishes three classes 
of coins — the earliest being a few rare cast pieces of the third century 
B.c. Of the later coins one class reveals the names of six rulers of one 
dynasty whose names are inscribed on the coins in Prakrit — Muladeva, 
Vayudeva, Visakhadeva, Dhanadeva, Sivadatta, and Naradatta; there 
is probably one more, Pathadeva. They cannot be put in chronological 
order as no other references to them are known, and they may 
be taken to cover the second century b.c. Of a later dynasty, pro- 
bably of the first two centuries a.d., were Kumudasena, Ajavarman, 
Samghamitra, and Vijayamitra, besides Satyamitra and Aryamitra (Ayya- 
mita) ; only the first-named ruler calls himself raja. 3 From Ujjayini, 
which was the seat of Asoka’s viceroyalty, we get six classes of uninscribed 
coins and one of inscribed, the former belonging to the third and second 
centuries b.c. when this region was a Mauryan province. They were 

1 Allan, BMCCAI. Intr. sec. 101-2 Udaka see p. 101 , n. 2 ante.) 

* Ibid. sec. 105-1 10. (For another 3 Ibid. sec. 98-100 

view of the Pabhosa inscr. and 



134 


MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 


probably local issues of the time of the Maurya governors. The inscribed 
variety bears the legend Ujeni in characters of the first half of the second 
century B.c . 1 1 Struck coins bearing the name Tripuri in Brahmi charac- 
ters of the late third or early second century b.c., which are rare, may 
be attributed to the ancient city of that name (modern Tewar on the 
Narmada), the capital of the Kaluchuris in mediaeval times.* } To the 
second century b.c. also belong the rare coins bearing the inscription 
Udehaki recalling the Auddehikas mentioned by Varahamihira (xiv, 3) 
and located in the Middle Country. One of these coins reveals the name 
of king Suyamita (Suryamitra), the absence of the royal title being evidence 
of its early date. 3 The Trigartas, closely connected with the Yaudheyas, 
are counted by Panini among ‘the republics living by fighting,’ and are 
known along with other tribes of the Panjab to the Mahabharata and the 
Brihatsamhita. A coin bears the legend Trakata-janapadasa ‘of the tribe 
of Trigarta’ in Brahmi characters of the first half of the second century 
b.c.; traces of the same inscription in Kharoshthl on the obverse are 
visible, and the coin is square in shape. The Trigarta country corres- 
ponded to the modern Jullundur between the Ravi and the Sutlej. Ac- 
cording to the Abhidhanachintamani of Hemachandra, Jalandhara and 
Trigarta were synonymous. 4 

From Almora, in the Kumaun division of Uttar Pradesh, we get coins 
inscribed in large Brahmi characters of the second century b.c. giving 
the names of three kings, Sivadatta, Sivapalita and Haridatta. 5 Coins, 
bearing a legend which in its full form reads maharajasa Apalatasa, must 
by reason of their fabric be attributed to an ancient king of Mathura 
Aparanta by name. 6 Mathura, ‘one of the most prolific fields in Nor- 
thern India’, is the source of many other coins of local Hindu dynasties 
of the first and second century b.c. who preceded the Saka satraps that 
came immediately after them. These coins are singularly uniform and 
represent a Lakshm! holding a lotus in her uplifted hand on the obverse, 
and three elephants facing, each with a rider, on the reverse. The names 
revealed by these coins are Gomitra I and II, Brahmamitra, Dridhamitra, 
Suryamitra, Vishnumitra, Purushadatta, Uttamadatta and Ramadatta. 
These are followed by another set of rulers whose names are preceded 
by the rajan title : Ramadatta II, Kamadatta, Seshadatta, Bhavadatta 
(also Bhavadatta), Uttamadatta II, and Balabhuti. With the exception 
of Brahmamitra, who seems to be mentioned in an inscription at Bodh 
Gaya, none of these rulers is known otherwise from inscriptions or litera- 
ture. They may have been vassals of Sunga kings and so did not find 
a place in the Puranic lists. 7 The coins of the Saka satraps are discussed 
elsewhere in this volume. From Panchala we have coins ranging from 


1 Ibid. sec. 168-72 
•Ibid. sec. 166 
•Ibid. sec. 167 
‘Ibid. sec. 165 
•Ibid. sec. 90 


* Ibid. sec. 91 

7 Ibid. sec. 123-30; see n. 2, p. 128 on 
Uttamadatta. For another view that the 
kings were independent see p. 108 ante. 



AUDUMBARAS 


135 


about 200 to the end of the first century b.c. and yielding the names : Agni- 
mitra, Bhadraghosha, Bhanumitra, Dhruvamitra, Indramitra, Jayagupta, 
Jayamitra, Phalgunimitra, Rudragupta, Suryamitra, Vishnumitra, and 
Visvapala. We may add to these the name Brihaspatimitra from a coin 
in the Lucknow Museum. Though the coins come from a fairly wide 
area, there is no doubt that the main source for them was Ahichhatra, the 
old capital of this region. These kings were clearly different from the 
rulers of the Sunga and Kanva dynasties bearing some of these names. 1 
From Kanauj and its neighbourhood come coins bearing on the reverse 
a horse before a yiipa, perhaps commemorating a horse sacrifice, and 
bearing legends in Prakrit containing the names of three kings — Brahma- 
mitra, Suryamitra and Vishnudeva. 2 

Mention must next be made of the well-known tribe of the Audumbaras, 
whose coins fall into three classes— square copper pieces bearing the name 
of the tribe, and some rare silver coins, besides a group of round copper 
and billon pieces. The square copper coins are the earliest and are 
distinctly Indian in type. The obverse inscription is in Kharoshthi 
characters and the reverse in Brahmi. The names of four kings occur 
on these pieces — Sivadasa, Rudradasa, Mahadeva, and Dharaghosha. But 
Mahadeva occurs also as a regal title on these coins, and some of the coins 
attributed to him may be those of other kings with incomplete inscriptions. 
A silver coin affords unmistakable proof of the existence of a king of this 
name who is described as a bhagavata. Epigraphy points to the first 
century b.c., and it seems probable that these Auduihbara rulers preceded 
Zoilus, Vonones, and Gondophares as well as Kanishka and Huvishka 
whose coins have been found with theirs. The rare silver coins bear 
a bearded figure on the obverse labelled ViSpamitra, i.e. the sage Visva- 
mitra whose connection with the Audumbaras is not otherwise known. 
Silver coins of the same type as Mahadeva’s reveal also the name of 
Rudravarman; the marginal legends on both sides are in Prakrit written 
in Brahmi and Kharoshthi; the king is described as ‘victorious king’ and 
a Vemaki, perhaps the name of an otherwise unknown Audumbara family.# 
The silver coins bear a close resemblance to those of Kuninda Amogha- 
bhuti, and one of them was found with three of the latter and twenty-eighf 
hemidrachms of Apollodotus at Jvalamukhi in the Panjab. There are 
other coins, perhaps also of the Audumbaras, which bear a male deity, 
possibly Karttikeya, on the obverse. These are inscribed in Brahmi and 
Kharoshthi and reveal the names of some kings whose names end in 
mitra. They are Aryamitra (Ajamita), Mahimitra, Bhanumitra, and 
Mahabhutimitra. From the find-spots of their coins ‘the Audumbaras 
should be located in the area formed by the eastern part of the modem 
Kangra district, the Gurdaspur district and the Hoshiarpur district, that 
is to say, the valley of the Beas, or perhaps the wider region between the 
upper Sutlej and the Ravi’. Pliny’s Odeonbares whom he locates in Kutch 


Ibid. sec. 131-8 


' Ibid. sec. 104 



136 MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 

were another people. The ganapalha on Panini iv, 2, 53 places the 
Audumbaras near the people of Jalandhara, quite in accord with the finds 
of coins. 1 The Mahabharata mentions the Audumbaras with the people 
of the north, while the Brihatsamhita puts them in the Middle Country. 
Przyluski has shown that the coins and Buddhist texts agree about 
the location of the Audumbaras and the high material prosperity they 
had attained before the commencement of the Christian era. They were 
established on the great trade-route which led to Taxila from the valley 
of the Ganges by way of Sakala, Agrodaka and Rohitaka; they were 
also the intermediaries between the peoples of the Himalayan mountains 
and the plains. They accepted Buddhism and became great champions 
of that faith in their neighbourhood. Though not named by the Greek 
writers they must have been one of the many independent tribes of the 
upper Panjab whom Porus and Abisares had failed to subjugate at the 
time of Alexander’s invasion. Besides trade, local industries formed 
another source of the prosperity of the Audumbaras, for the Himalayan 
plateaus have always nourished flocks of sheep the conversion of whose 
fine wool (pashmina ) into the most precious fabrics still continues to 
be a widespread cottage industry in the area.* 

. Close to the Audumbaras were the Kulutas of the Kulu valley of the 
Kangra district, and the Kunindas or Kulindas who ‘occupied a narrow 
strip of land at the foot of the Siwalik hills between the Jumna and the 
Sutlej and the territory between the upper courses of the Beas and Sutlej.’ 
The only known coin of the former bears the legend VIrayasasya rajna 
Kulutasya, of the Kuluta king Virayasa (i.e. Vlrayasas); the practically 
Sanskrit form of the inscription and the survival of the Prakrit rafia in 
Kharoshthi on the reverse render a date about a.d. 100 very probable. 8 
Vlrayasas was clearly later than Amoghabhuti, to judge from the language 
forms on their coins. The coins of the Kunindas fall into two groups, 
one about the end of the first century b.c. and the other about three cen- 
turies later. The former bear the name of Amoghabhuti; the latter are 
anonymous, with only the titles of Siva. The first group contains both 
silver and copper coins similar in type. The legends are in Prakrit, in- 
scribed in Brahmi on the obverse and in Kharoshthi on the reverse, the 
former legend being closer to Sanskrit than the latter. The full legend 
reads, rajhah Kunindasya Amoghabhutisya maharajasya. ‘Economically 
the silver coins of the Kunindas represent an attempt of an Indian ruler 
to issue a native silver coinage which would compete in the market with 
the later Indo-Greek silver.’ Amoghabhuti perhaps founded a short- 
lived kingdom at the close of the Greek dominion in the Panjab in the latter 
half of the first century b.c., which was soon swept away by the Saka and 
Kushana invaders. We find coins issued by a Kuninda republic again 
at the end of the second century a.d. or the beginning of the third. These 


‘Ibid. sec. 83-97 

•JA. ccviii (1926) pp. 19-21 


* A later date, third century, is held more 
likely by Prof. Jagannath (ch. viii post). 




2. MINOR STATES OF THE NORTH 

Kingdoms and Republics mentioned by classical writers 

1. Aspasioi (Asvakas) 7. Abastanoi (Ambashthyas) 12. Kingdom of younger Porus 

2. Gauraians 8. Siboi (Sibis, Sivis) (including Madra) 

3. Assakenoi (Asvakas) 9. Kingdom of Porus 13. Malli (Malavas) 

4. Astes (Hasti or Ashtaka) (including Kekaya) 14. Phagelas (Bhagala) 

5. Kingdom of Takshasila (Ambhi) 10. Glauganicae 15. Kathaians 

6. Kingdom of Sophytes (Saubhuti) 11. Abisares of Kashmir 16. Yaudheyas 

17. Oxydraci (Kshudrakas) 





KUSHANA IMITATIONS 


137 


are large pieces resembling Kushana copper coins. The obverse bears 
a figure of Siva holding a trident and the legend : bhagavata-Chatresvara- 
mahatmanah. Ptolemy mentions the name Kulindrine for the country 
in which the Beas, Sutlej and Jamuna arise . 1 Crude imitations of 
Kushana copper coins also come from Bihar and Orissa ; they were found 
with coins of Kanishka and Huvishka. These pieces, which belong to the 
end of the third or early fourth century a.d., show that when the supply 
of Kushana copper coins began to fail them, the people of this region 
took to copying them, having plenty of copper available from the copper 
mines of their country . 2 

1 Allan, BMCCAI. Intr. sec. 111-5 2 Ibid. sec. 139-40 



Chapter VI 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 
INTRODUCTION 

T he Macedonian Greek invasion of India under Alexander the Great was 
a passing phase in her history, leaving no direct results of a far-reaching 
character. But its indirect consequences were many, and one of them 
played an important part in partially moulding her destiny in the few cen- 
turies before the Christian era. Her first real and enduring contact with the 
Greeks began with the infiltrations and incursions of the Bactrian Greeks 
in the extreme north-west and north during the decline of the Maurya 
rule. The great Maurya experiment in empire-building had been success- 
fully made by the founder of the dynasty and his immediate successors, 
but the empire had now broken to pieces, and the last few rulers of the 
dynasty and the Sungas could exercise their sway only over a portion of 
it. It was in this period, when the Mauryas had fallen on evil days and 
the Sungas were coming into power, that the north-western and northern 
parts of India were conquered one after another by a band of Greek rulers 
who were the virtual successors of Alexander in the extreme eastern 
parts of his empire. The account of this second conquest by the Greeks, 
of their gradual spread over a substantial part of Northern India, and 
of their subsequent decline occupies an important place in the ancient 
history of India and is one of the fascinating phases of that history. The 
foreign conquest brought in its train other alien races to India, who held 
sway successively over the greater part of Northern and Western India 
in the last century before the Christian era and the first few centuries after 
jt. These bands of foreigners, however, were not mere conquerors from 
outside; they identified themselves in course of time with the children of 
the soil of the country they had conquered. Though they are generally 
referred to in Indian epic literature as outsiders under such specific names 
as Yavanas, Sakas, Pahlavas, and Kushanas, their gradual amalgamation 
with the original inhabitants was so complete that they lost their separate 
identity and came to constitute an important and virile section of the 
Indian people in the subsequent period. Of these foreigners, only the 
Greeks were inheritors of a great culture which could be compared with 
that of the Indians; the others not so advanced were deeply influenced 
by the two superior trends of culture — the Hellenic or rather Hellenistic 
and the Indian, which again had mutual reactions upon each other. 

BACTRIA — ITS EARLY GREEK SETTLERS 
To study the history of this and other subsequent conquests of Northern 
India, it is necessary to know something about Bactria and its surroundings 



BACTRIA 


139 


from which the successors of Alexander came to Indie, and the story of 
their early settlement in it. It was not the Greeks only who made Bactria 
their spring-board for the invasion of India; other foreign conquerors 
used it after them for the same purpose. Bactria, or Bactriana as the 
classical writers called it, denoted the vast tract of land which was bounded 
on the south and the east by the Hindukush mountains, on the north by 
the Oxus river and on the west by Aria and Margiana (the modern regions 
of Herat and Merv). It thus comprised the greater part of northern Afgha- 
nistan of the present time, having on its south and south-west the ancient 
satrapies of Paropamisus, hard on the southern side of the Hindukush, 
and Aria. Along with Arachosia and Gedrosia which lay further to the 
south, the four satrapies were situated on the extreme north-western and 
northern borders of India, and had imbibed the culture of India to a 
very great extent. The rocky region of Sogdiana on the other side of the 
Oxus up to the Jaxartes river on the north separated Bactria from the 
central Asian steppes, the haunt of the nomadic Scythians who, with other 
barbarian hordes living beyond them, were destined to play a great part 
in the history of Bactria and India. The desert sands of Carmania 
far to the west and south-west piled by high winds, were raised into innu- 
merable sand-dunes on its western borders and served as a formidable 
check to invaders from the west. The fertile plain of Bactria, called by 
Strabo ‘the pride of Ariana,’ was drained by the Oxus, the Arius and a 
few other less known rivers, and was noted for its products such as olive, 
silphium and other medicinal herbs, fine crops of corn and varieties of 
fruit trees, and its excellent breeds of sheep and horses. The land was 
not unknown to the indigenous writers of ancient India, who in their 
epic and Puranic literature described it as Bahlika ( Bahll ), derived evidently 
like its Greek counterpart from the Persian Bakhtri ( Balchdi being an earlier 
form found in the Zend Avesta ). 1 The region was inhabited from a very 
early period by an aboriginal race who were most likely of the Scythian 
stock; but its contact with Iran, its western neighbour, was intimate, 
even before it was conquered by Persian arms, when it became one of tlie 
most easterly components of the Persian empire. Large numbers <jf 
Iranians settled in Bactria, and 'after its conquest by the Persians the 
province was usually placed in the charge of a satrap of the Achaemenid 
imperial line, because of its strategic importance. During the long and 
prosperous period of Persian rule this system of government was followed 
in the country, most of the local satraps being connected with the royal 
dynasty. When Alexander broke the mighty Persian power, he did not 
do away with the Achaemenid method of binding the units of the far- 
flung empire, but chose the ablest and most valiant among his men to 
govern Bactria and its largely Iranian population. The Iranians gave 

1 Rawlinson, Bactria, p. 1, n. 1. The modern form 'Balkh’ is based on the 

Vendidad describes it as ‘Bactra, the Pehlevi variant of the Old Persian 

beautiful, crowned with banners ( Bakli - Bakhdhi, which is Bdkhal or Bakhli. 

dhim sriram eredhvo drafshdm)\ The 



140 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


him not a little trouble, and by a judicious mixture of coercion and 
conciliation he tried to strengthen his hold upon Bactria, for this country 
was to serve him as a base of operations for his designs on India. Alexan- 
der married Roxane, the daughter of Oxyartes, a brother of Darius III 
according to Plutarch, who is described by Diodorus as ‘King of Bactria’. 
This marriage with the daughter of a defeated Iranian chief of Bactria 
was no doubt a political move; for by this measure he wished not only 
to conciliate the proud and turbulent Iranians of the country, but also to 
encourage his veterans to take native wives, settle in the country and 
thus secure his conquests permanently. Seleucus, one of his ablest 
generals, who was to succeed him in the eastern part of his empire after 
his death, married Apama, the daughter of Spitamenes, one of the Sogdia- 
nian confederates of Bessus. Many of Alexander’s followers were induced 
to settle in Bactria and they formed a powerful bloc of the Bactrian people. 
This mixed population of Scythians, Iranians and Greeks lived under 
the rule of the Greek Satrap, an officer who came to wield great power 
and influence in the administrative machinery of the Macedonian empire. 
The social customs and religion of this composite people gradually grew 
into an amalgam mainly of the Iranian and the Greek elements. One 
striking example of this admixture of religious beliefs is to be seen in the 
recognition by the Greeks of their own Artemis and Venus in Anahid, the 
great Bactrian goddess. 1 

BACTRIA UNDER THE SELEUCIDS 

The mingling of Greek race and culture with that of the native popula- 
tion of Bactria did not take place in Alexander’s lifetime but was the 
result of a good many years of Greek contact. Alexander’s sudden death 
at Babylon in 323 b.c. jeopardised the imperial structure which he had 
built up so laboriously and within so short a time, and the struggles for 
supremacy which soon after ensued among his generals spelt disaster 
to the newly established empire. The conference of Triparadisus between 
the several warring factions after the death of Perdiccas (321 b.c.), who 
acted as the regent of the empire, brought some order out of the turmoil 
and two eminent personalities now emerged in western Asia, Seleucus 
and Antigonus. The former was a great general entrusted with the task 
of governing the eastern part of Alexander’s empire with headquarters 
at Babylon, and the latter, another of the most brilliant of Alexander’s 
generals, had secured for himself a large slice of the Asiatic dominions. 
These two generals worked together for a time against their common 
enemies, but their alliance was only short-lived. Seleucus was in fact 
put to great straits for a while and had to flee to Egypt with a handful of 

* Rawlinson recognizes in a coin-device little doubt that the Bactrian goddess 

of the Bactrian Greek king, Demetrius, is shown here in the garb of Artemis 

the figure of Anahid, in her eight-rayed with her special cognizances of a bow 
crown ; op. cit., p. 10. But there is and an arrow. 



SELEUCID SATRAPS 


141 


followers owing to the hostile action of his rival. He managed, however, 
to overcome his difficulties and was well established in 312 B.c. (the initial 
year of the Seleucidan era marking the assumption of his full sovereignty) 
on his throne at Babylon where he entrenched and aggrandised his power 
as a measure of defence against the attacks of Antigonus. In the great 
battle of Ipsus in 301 b.c. Seleucus, with four other confederate kings of 
the west, overwhelmed Antigonus and gradually extended his empire 
until by 282 b.c. it stretched from the Aegean to India. The fierce contest 
which Seleucus maintained with Antigonus, and his other preoccupations, 
especially his clash with the Indian Chandragupta Maurya, were blessings 
in disguise for the remote province of Bactria— now a loosely bound unit 
of the Seleucidan empire in the east. Bactria continued to lead a com- 
paratively untroubled existence under the suzerainty of Seleucus and his 
immediate successors, whose control was for all practical purposes nomi- 
nal. The satrapal form of government so successfully introduced by the 
Achaemenids in the administration of Bactria and other units of the 
empire was adhered to, and Stasanor, Oxyartes and other satraps in these 
regions owed only nominal allegiance to the suzerain ruler. Neverthe- 
less, they offered substantial, though occasional, help to their master 
Seleucus I in his multifarious struggles of expansion and conquest. Both 
the Bactrian cavalry and the five hundred Indian elephants for which he 
bartered the provinces of Paropamisus, Aria, Arachosia and Gedrosia 
to Chandragupta Maurya, were formidable arms of war and stood him 
in good stead in the battle of Ipsus and on other occasions. The value 
which was attached to these instruments of war by the early Seleucids 
seems to be emphasised by some of their coin-devices. Among the earliest 
issues of the Seleucid mint of Antioch were some rare tetradrachms of 
Seleucus I with the head of a horned horse on the obverse and an Indian 
elephant on the reverse; and these two, along with the anchor, became the 
dynastic devices of the Seleucidae. 1 Among the considerable Greek 
and Macedonian population left behind in Bactria by Alexander, the 
head of a horned horse as a reverse device was very popular, and the* 
Bactrian imitations of the Antiochid issues were made in large numbers, 
by the local satraps during the rule of Seleucus and his successors. On 
some Bactrian staters and tetradrachms issued in the name of Seleucus, 
the horse’s head appears as usual on the reverse, but the obverse is occupied 
by the diademed head of the king with a bull’s horn over the ear, the horn 
being a favourite symbol of royalty in the East. 2 On another issue of 


Macdonald remarks, ‘the device of a 
horse’s head would be peculiarly ap- 
propriate to Bactria, with its famous 
cavalry, or to Sogdiana’; CHI. i p.436. 
Seltman, however, would find in it 
a possible reference to Bucephalus 
(‘Bull-head’), the famous charger of 
Alexander: Greek Coins, 228. Seleucus 
adopted an anchor as his special seal- 
device, for he had on his thigh an 


anchor-shaped birth-mark; ibid. p. 227. 

! The Book of Daniel (ch. viii) symbo- 
lises the Persian empire as a horned 
ram, Alexander as ‘the terrible he-goat 
from the west from whom spring 
four notable horns, the kings of Mace- 
don, Thrace, Egypt and Syria, until 
out of the last came the little horn, Anti- 
ochus Epiphanes IV the persecutor of 
Jerusalem.’ C. Seltman, op. cit., p. 228 



142 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


Seleucus I’s coins, though it is not particularly connected with Bactria, 
the royal head on the obverse, shown in a close-fitting Attic helmet with 
cheek-plates, is adorned with a wing and a bull’s horn. This feature is 
exactly matched by the splendid portrait-head of Sophytes on his very 
interesting drachms of lighter Attic weight. This Sophytes was hitherto 
unanimously identified with Sopeithes who, according to Arrian and 
Strabo, was a contemporary of Alexander ruling in the extreme north-west 
of India. The name Sopeithes was regarded by Sylvain Levi as the Greek 
form of Saubhuti, an Indian king of Subhuta Janapada. It is true that 
there is mention of Subhuta as one of the Janapadas of India in the gana- 
patha of Panini, but no reference to Saubhuti has as yet been found in 
Indian literature. This and various other considerations, specially of a 
numismatic character, led R. B. Whitehead recently to challenge the 
almost universally accepted view about the identity of Sopeithes of the 
classical writers with Sophytes of the coins, the latter according to him 
being an eastern satrap of Alexander’s time in the Oxus region . 1 What- 
ever may be the truth about Sophytes, there can be no doubt that the 
obverses, both of the issue of Seleucus last mentioned and of Sophytes’s 
coins, as well as the reverse of the latter (cock and caduceus with Greek 
legend Sophytou), were based on the imitations of the Athenian ‘owls’ 
which had long circulated in parts of western Asia, taking the place of the 
original ‘owls’ which ceased to be minted when Athens lost her indepen- 
dence. The imitations, like the originals, showed the head of Pallas 
Athene on the obverse and the figure of an owl, the special cognizance 
of the Greek goddess with the legend Athe on the reverse; on some speci- 
mens of the former the head of Athena was decorated with a helmet and 
a cheek-plate. The reverse device of the type of Seleucus’s coins under 
discussion was quite different from that of the ‘imitations’; it showed 
Nike crowning a trophy in evident imitation of a Syracusan coin-type. 
On the other hand that of Sophytes’s coinage — the figure of a cock— -was 
undoubtedly an adaptation of the owl. The imitations of the Athenian 
4 ‘owls’ also influenced some of the coins issued in the name of Alexander 
.in Bactria and the adjoining regions, which showed the laureate head of 
Zeus to right inside a border of dots on the obverse, and an eagle standing 
on a thunderbolt, its head reverted, with a satrapal tiara in front on 
the reverse . 2 

The other dynastic device of the Seleucids, the elephant, is very often 
adopted in different ways in their early gold and silver money as minted 
in the eastern dominions. A large number of silver coins of various 
denominations conforming to Attic weight bear on their obverse a laureate 
head of Zeus and on their reverse a fighting Athena in a chariot drawn by 


1 NC. 1943, pp.” 60-72; cf. also J. N. 
Banerjea, ‘Sophytes-Saubhuti’ in JNSI. 
vu pp. 23-6 

2 Macdonald thinks that these coins were 
probably struck by Seleucus I before 


yni. i p. 462. But the 
----- al tiara in the field on the reverse 
shows that they were struck by some 
satrap under him in the eastern part of 
Seleucus s kingdom, probably Bactria. 



ANTIOCHUS X 


143 


two or four horned elephants; these coins have either the name of Seleucus 
only, or his name with that of his son Antiochus. These pieces were 
mostly minted during the latter’s rule as his father’s representative in the 
east (which included Bactria), and many of them differ from the Attic 
system, for their weight, according to many scholars, was similar to that of 
the Indian dharana or purana standard as described in the texts of Manu 
and Yajnavalkya. This particular weight seems also to have been adopted 
in the issues of many of the imitations of the Athenian owls, the coins of 
Sophytes and some other money of the eastern parts of the Seleucidan 
empire. Macdonald is of opinion that the weight had nothing to do with 
India, the resemblance to the 32 rati (58 grains) standard of some series 
of silver punch-marked coins of India being accidental; he regards this 
coinage as a lighter Attic system current in this part of Asia in which the 
weight of a drachm rose only to 58 grains (3.75 grammes) in place of 
the full Attic drachm of 67.5 grains (4.37 grammes!. 1 The special interest, 
however, attaching to these particular varieties of the early Seleucid money 
showing one or other of the dynastic devices — the head of a horned horse 
and an elephant — is that many of them contain in some part of their field 
on the reverse a monogram which is a combination of the Greek letters 
‘delta’, ‘iota’ and ‘omicron’. The implication of this will be discussed 
presently ; but the extensive coinage current in the western part of central 
Asia during the rule of the early Seleucidan emperors distinctly proves 
that trade and commerce was in a flourishing state in this part of Asia, 
including Bactria. In fact much of the wealth and prosperity of the 
Bactrians at this period and shortly afterwards was due to their position 
as one of the major intermediaries in the trade between central Asia and 
India on the one hand and western Asia and eastern Europe on the other. 
The above brief consideration of some types of early Seleucid coins 
circulating in the eastern dominions of their empire will throw light on the 
coinage of the independent Greek rulers of Bactria, whose coins are one of 
the principal sources for the reconstruction of their history and are no 
less important for the history of their successors whose rule was mostly* 
confined to parts of the extreme north of India. , 

SELEUCUS’ S SUCCESSORS: INDEPENDENCE 
OF BACTRIA: DIODOTUS I AND II 

Antiochus I became joint king with his father Seleucus in 293 b.c., the 
eastern provinces of the empire, Bactria among them, being placed in his 
charge; two years afterwards he became sole king. In his western domi- 
nions much of the bewildering diversity of his father’s coinage was simpli- 
fied, though the variety of types current in Bactria and other imperial 
provinces in the east were continued by the satraps. In the west the coins 
of Antiochus I usually bore the diademed head of the emperor on the 


1 CHI. I pp. 387, 389 



144 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


obverse and Apollo seated on an omphalos with a bow and an arrow in 
his hands on the reverse. He won a great victory over the Gauls in Asia 
Minor and adopted the title of ‘Soter’ (Saviour). His son Antiochus II 
came to be associated with him as a joint ruler in 266 b.c. and became the 
sole king a few years afterwards with the title ‘Theos’ (God). Both of 
them issued in some parts of Asia Minor a number of tetradrachms which 
showed on the reverse Heracles naked, instead of Apollo, seated with a 
long club in his right hand resting on the ground. In Bactria, however, 
coins were struck by the local satrap during the time of Antiochus II 
Theos, which bore the imperial head inside a dotted border on the obverse, 
but the figure of naked Zeus standing to the left with an aegis spread over 
his outstretched left arm, his right hand hurling a thunderbolt; an eagle, 
placed near the left foot of the god, was shown on the reverse. This 
striking reverse device is interesting, for it was the principal one to be 
adopted by the first two independent rulers of Bactria. On the field of 
some coins is found a monogram between the legs of Zeus, which 
is a combination of several Greek letters, either an indistinct letter and 
an ‘omicron’, or ‘delta’, ‘iota’ and ‘omicron’. 1 It has already been shown 
that the latter group of letters also constituted the monogram which 
appeared on the reverse sides of many of the coins issued in the names 
of Seleucus I, Seleucus I and Antiochus I, and Antiochus I in the eastern 
part of their dominions. If the interpretation suggested by Macdonald 
and after him by Tarn is accepted, we are to assume that all the coins 
with the monogram ‘Dio’ were being issued by one Diodotus who 
was at first a satrap of Bactria and afterwards its independent ruler. 
Monograms are usually regarded now as standing for the moneyers’ or 
the mint-magistrates’ names; Cunningham, however, was of opinion that 
though some on the coins of the Indo-Bactrian Greek rulers were so, 
many more could be interpreted as containing the names of the cities in 
which the respective coins were minted. Tam remarks about this early 
Bactrian money, ‘a theory that Dio stands for Diodotus might be supported 
‘by a reference to those ambitious governors, Aspeisas, satrap of Susiana, 
.and Nicocles, king of Paphos, who put their names on the Alexander- 
coinage with results disastrous to themselves.’ 2 * * If this view be correct, 
one has to assume that Diodotus was serving through a long period as 
the satrap of Bactria and probably also of part of Sogdiana during the 
successive reigns of Seleucus I, Antiochus I and Antiochus II. 

This assumption is not a priori unlikely, for the principal literary source 
recording some details about Bactrian independence seems to support it in 
a way. The Roman historian Justin, who flourished some time before a.d. 


1 CHI. i p. 464, pi. ii, fig. 12. Macdonald’s 

reproduction of the monogram in the 
text does not seem to tally always with 

its actual form in his plate. But the 

latter can also be analysed into the 

letters making up ‘Dio’. The monogram 
seems to have had its variants. One of 


tne letters 


omitted. 

1 W. W. Tam, The Greeks in Bactria 
and India, p. 73. Macdonald drew the 
attention of scholars to this particular 
monogram and interpreted it as standing 
for Diodotus s name; CHI. i p. 437 S 



DIODOTUS COINS 


145 


500, states, after recording the revolt of Parthia from the Seleucidan rule, 
that at the same time Diodotus, governor of the thousand cities of Bactria, 
rebelled and had himself proclaimed king. He further adds that Diodotus 
soon died, and was succeeded by his son, also named Diodotus, who 
made a treaty of alliance with Arsaces, the first Parthian king (xli, 4). 
Most texts of Justin write the name of the first independent ruler of Bac- 
tria as ‘Theodotus’; but Trogus Pompeius, who flourished some time 
before Justin, puts the name correctly as ‘Diodotus’. 1 Gardner, while 
comparing the above statements of Justin with the available numismatic 
data, pointed out that all coins bearing the name of Diodotus were issued 
by one king. This seems to disagree with Justin’s record, and three alter- 
natives were suggested by Gardner in order to explain this discrepancy; 
first, that ‘Justin was wrong in duplicating a single monarch, secondly 
that the younger Diodotus continued the issue of his father’s money 
unchanged, or finally that the elder Diodotus continued during his life- 
time to issue money in the name of Antiochus of Syria and that our coins 
with the name of Diodotus were issued by his son, who first ventured to 
introduce his own name and portrait on the coin.’ 2 Gardner did not 
definitely decide between these alternatives, but lent his support to the 
last one on the basis of the fact that the portrait of Diodotus on his coins 
is that of a man of not more than middle age. 3 There is some inconsis- 
tency between this and his description of all the coins bearing the name 
Diodotus in the body of the Catalogue as the issues of Diodotus I, king 
of Bactria. This doubt is further intensified by his other explicit statement 
that Diodotus ‘seems to have prepared his subjects for a change of masters 
by issuing coins bearing the types of Antiochus II of Syria, but with his 
own portrait. After his establishment in the kingdom he continued this 
issue unchanged, only substituting his own name, besides his portrait, for 
that of the Seleucid king.’ 4 The generally accepted view about the 
Diodotus coins, however, is that all of them which are genuine were 
issued by Diodotus II, Diodotus I resting content with introducing his* 
own portrait only on some of the coins issued by him with the name and , 
type of Antiochus II, his erstwhile overlord. 5 This is probably the 


Trogus Pompeius, Justinus, Plutarch and 
many other late writers seem to have 
used profusely an authoritative history 
of the Greek and Parthian East written 
by some historian whose name, place 
of origin, and even his very existence 
have been forgotten. Tarn refers to 
him throughout in his book The Greeks 
in Bactria and India as the ‘Trogus 
source’, ‘meaning the source used by 
Trogus Pompeius for Parthia and the 
Farther East’; Tam, op. cit., pp. 45 ff. 

1 P. Gardner, British Museum Catalogue of 
the Coins of the Greek and Scythic kings 
of Bactria and India, Introduction, p. xxi 

‘ Some gold coins bearing an elderly head 
of Diodotus on the obverse and the 
19 


figure of Zeus Promachos with the 
symbols of wreath and spear-head on 
the reverse, are regarded as forgeries; 
they are very common and all struck 
from one die. 

1 P. Gardner, op. cit., Intro, p. xx. 

1 There is a great deal of confusion in the 
minds of some modem authors re- 
garding this point. Gardner’s indeci- 
sion is apparent in Macdonald’s state- 
ments; CHI. i pp. 436-7. V. A. Smith 
and H. G. Rawlinson are definite that 
the whole series bearing the name of 
Diodotus belongs to the younger of 
the two. W. W. Tam accepts this 
view, but his chronological scheme 
regarding the two is open to objection. 



146 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


correct view and it confirms the surmise mentioned above that Diodotus 
was a comparatively elderly man when he formally declared his indepen- 
dence of Syrian sovereignty after a long period of service as a satrap under 
the early Seleucids. 

There might not have been an actual rebellion as stated by Justin on 
the authority of Trogus, for the Seleucid coinage during the time of 
Antiochus Theos seems to prove that the assumption of full sovereign 
powers by Diodotus was gradual. He does not seem to have enjoyed his 
independence for long, and his rule appears to have been confined to his 
own province of Bactria-Sogdiana. There hardly is any justification for 
the view that he also held sway over Arachosia-Seistan, for no evidence 
is forthcoming to prove that his sovereignty ever extended beyond the 
Hindukush mountains. Very few facts about his reign as an independent 
king are on record, and the date when it began is uncertain. Justin simply 
tells us that it was nearly contemporaneous with that of Arsaces’s revolt 
from Syria; but the several events by which the Roman historian seeks 
to date the Parthian outbreak are spread over a period of not less than ten 
years. Scholars are generally of opinion that the formal assumption of 
sovereignty by Diodotus happened about 250 b.c. when Antiochus Theos 
was seriously distracted by his western preoccupations. Tarn thinks that 
he was still a Seleucid satrap in 246 b.c., when Seleucus II succeeded his 
father Antiochus II on the throne but his reasons for this assumption are 
not conclusive. He is of opinion that Seleucus II gave one of his sisters 
in marriage to Diodotus I to secure his help when his very existence was 
imperilled by Ptolemy III, the Egyptian monarch. But the texts are not 
explicit as regards this supposed matrimonial connection and even 
granting that there was one, it did not necessarily mean that Diodotus was 
still a satrap; the alliance may have been between one independent ruler 
and the other. That his son was on the throne of Bactria when Seleucus 
II made his eastern expedition for the reconquest of Parthia is practically 
* certain. Seleucus II could hardly have plunged into it before the battle 
<. of Ancyra (240 B.c.) in which he was severely defeated by the Gauls. 
From Justin we know’ that the Parthians under Arsaces were not on good 
terms with Diodotus I for fear of whom they kept a great army in a 
prepared state after his conquest of Hyrcania. Diodotus II, however, 
reversed the policy of his father, and an alliance was formed between 
the Bactrian and Parthian kings which enabled Arsaces to foil completely 
the Syrian emperor’s designs for the reconquest of the eastern satrapy. 
These facts, which can be gleaned from the pages of Justin, prove that 
Diodotus II was reigning over Bactria some time after 240 B.c. and 
it is very likely that he had succeeded his father several years before. 
His portrait on the coins shows that he was a comparatively young man 
when he was ruling over Bactria, and his rule does not seem to have 
been a long one, for none of his coins shows the portrait of an 
elderly man. The principal reverse device on the gold and silver coins 
of Diodotus II was the naked Zeus hurling a thunderbolt, with an eagle 



EUTHYDEMUS I AND ANTIOCHUS III 


147 


a fillet, a crescent or a monogram on the left field. A bronze coin-type, 
however, of the same ruler bears on its reverse the figure of Artemis holding 
a torch in her hands with a dog near her legs; its obverse has a laureate 
head of Zeus in place of the usual diademed head of the king. A few 
other bronze coins in the collection of the Panjab Museum have on the 
obverse the head of a king to right wearing a flat Macedonian cap ( kausia ) 
and on the reverse Pallas facing with a spear in her right hand and in 
her left a buckler resting on the ground. All the above types of coins 
bear the Greek legend Basileds Diodotou on the reverse; but there is 
a tetradrachm with the usual obverse and reverse devices in the collection 
of the British Museum, which has a' novel legend, Diodotou Soteros. 
It was suggested by previous scholars on the basis of this numis- 
matic datum that he assumed the title of ‘Saviour’ (Soter) on account 
of his success in checking the Turanian hordes. Macdonald, however, finds 
fault with this view and suggests that this coin was not minted by Diodotus 
during his lifetime but was a commemorative piece issued later by one 
of the indo-Greek kings. 1 Diodotus II’s reign must have ended some 
time before 212 b.c. when Seleucus Ill’s successor Antiochus III Magnus 
made his appearance in the east with a large army for the reassertion of 
the Syrian suzerainty over the revolted satrapies. Polybius informs 
us that one Euthydemus, a native of Magnesia, was at that time on the 
Bactrian throne. Nothing definite is known about the exact date before 
212 b.c. when Diodotus’s rule came to an end, but it can be inferred from 
the historian’s testimony that he was not simply removed from the throne 
by Euthydemus, but was probably killed after his dethronement. 

EUTHYDEMUS I : HIS COINS 

With the period of the next two Bactrian kings, Euthydemus I and his 
son Demetrius, begins an era of expansion for the Bactrian power, about 
which some stray facts can be gathered from literary and archaeological 
sources. It was late in the reign of the former and in the beginning of 
that of the latter, that India felt the weight of Greek arms for the second, 
time, and parts of her extreme north were annexed by her north-western 
neighbour. Polybius incidentally informs us about Euthydemus’s seizure 
of the throne of Bactria while recounting the events of Antiochus III 
Magnus’s expedition towards the East. Euthydemus was getting the 
worst of it in his encounter with Antiochus and he was besieged in his 
capital city, Bactra, and hard pressed. Finding his very existence at 
stake he sent one Teleas, a fellow-countryman of his, to the camp of the 
besieging king to negotiate terms for an honourable peace. It was pointed 
out to the invader through this intermediary that Euthydemus ‘was not 
a rebel. Others no doubt had rebelled. He had put the children of the 
rebels to death, and that was how he happened to be king.’ It was further 

1 CHI. i p. 451 ; according to Macdonald this may have been issued by Demetrius I, 



148 


THE BACTR1AN GREEKS IN INDIA 


emphasised that the Scythian barbarians on the other side of the Sogdi- 
anian mountains were ever alert to meddle in the affairs of their civilized 
southern neighbour; if he would call in their aid in his sorry plight, that 
would spell disaster not only for Bactria but Syria as well; the existence 
of a strong and independent Bactria as a buffer state between Syria and 
the lands inhabited by the barbarians was far more advantageous to 
Antiochus’s real interests than that of a weak vassal Syrian province. 
Antiochus appears to have been convinced of the soundness of these 
reasons, and he was further deeply impressed by the noble bearing, royal 
demeanour and handsome appearance of Demetrius, the son of Euthyde- 
mus, who had also been sent to the besieger’s camp as a fully accredited 
envoy of his father in the course of the informal negotiations carried 
on through Teleas. Such was the good impression made by the royal 
youth on the mind of the Syrian emperor that he not only formally 
acknowledged the independence of Demetrius’s father but also promised 
one of his daughters in marriage to the young prince of Bactria. A 
formal alliance was thus made between Syria and Bactria, and Antiochus 
raised the siege and turned his attention to India, being fully replenished 
by his Bactrian ally who gave him all his war elephants. It may be men- 
tioned here in passing that his expedition to India some time about 206 
b.c. was of no great importance. Polybius informs us that, crossing the 
Hindukush, Antiochus marched down the Kabul valley and encountered 
one ‘Sophagasenus, king of the Indians’. Who this Subhagasena was, 
is not known from Indian sources, but if we accept the authenticity 
of Taranath, a mediaeval Tibetan historian of Buddhism, he may have 
been connected with Virasena, the king of Gandhara, who was the great- 
grandson of Asoka. Antiochus was now hard pressed for time, for he 
had already spent much of it in his not very decisive wars with Parthia 
and Bactria, and his presence was urgently needed in the west on account 
of the expanding Roman power. He accepted the token submission of 
the Indian king who gave him ample supplies for his forces, made over 
Vo him a number of war elephants and promised him a large amount of 
^money which, however, could not be collected by the Syrian emperor for 
want of time. Antiochus went back to Syria with his dreams of the re- 
conquest of the lost provinces of the Seleucid empire unrealised, leaving 
the strong Bactrian power now endowed with a fresh lease of independence 
free to extend its sway southwards and probably eastwards. 1 It is not 
known from any literary source whether Bactria under Euthydemus 
carried her arms towards the south beyond the Hindukush, but numismatic 
evidence seems to prove that parts of Arachosia and necessarily the pro- 
vinces to its north, Paropamisus and Aria, were conquered during this 
king’s rule. Cunningham observes that his silver money ‘is very common 


l Tam infers from certain statements of 
Apollodorus that Euthydemus first made 
an expedition from Ferghana to the 
Lake Issy-kul country and not attaining 


mucn success there turned eastward to 
the Tarim basin in quest of precious 
metals like gold, silver and nickel: 
Tam, op. cit., pp. 109-12 



BACTRIA UNDER EUTHYDEMUS I 


149 


in Balkh and Bokhara, to the north of the Caucasus, and less common in 
Kabul, Kandahar and Seistan,’ but his bronze coins, ‘which are perhaps 
less numerous than the silver, are found in about equal numbers in Seistan 
and Kandahar, and throughout the Kabul valley.’ 1 It has been suggested 
by Gardner that the Bactrian Greek conquests in these regions were made 
under the auspices of the young and valiant Demetrius who was probably 
his father’s colleague during the last years of the latter’s rule. But nothing 
can be said with certainty about the Greek expansion beyond the Hindu- 
kush during Euthydemus’s lifetime. The Bactrian king who was first 
undoubtedly connected with India was his son and successor Demetrius. 2 
We do not know when Euthydemus died, but it is presumable that his 
long and eventful reign came to an end about the year 190 b.c. It was 
under the able guidance of this energetic and powerful ruler that Bactria 
rose to the height of her glory, feared and respected by her neighbours, 
including Parthia. This strong position was retained during the first 
part of his son’s rule, when Demetrius carried Greek arms far into the 
interior of India. But she was destined soon to lose her strong position 
owing to the outbreak of internecine rivalry and strife. 

The great prosperity of Bactria under Euthydemus is strongly attested 
by the large number of coins of different metals, gold, silver and copper, 
bearing his name and devices, which have been discovered in the regions 
just mentioned. It will presently be shown that not all the varieties of 
coins having the name of Euthydemus can be attributed to him; clear 
numismatic considerations enable us to attribute at least some of them 
definitely to a second Euthydemus who was most probably his grandson. 
Many of the coins of this strong and efficient Bactrian king can justly be 
regarded as masterpieces of numismatic art and technique, and the numer- 
ous subsequent imitations of his principal type made by his barbarous 
neighbours, the Scythians and others, are an unqualified tribute to the 
skill of his die-cutters and moneyers. The portraits on some of his finely 
preserved gold and silver coins prove that he was a well-built man of 
mature age with sparkling vivacious eyes and pursed up lips indicating 
strong individuality and firmness of character. A fine bust of him, perhaps^ 
originally set up in his native town, Magnesia, and once an exhibit in the* 
Torlonia Museum in Rome, in spite of its portrayal of the strength of the 
man towards the end of his life, cannot stand comparison with ‘the wonder- 
ful coin-portrait of him taken in old age’. 3 A great variety is clearly 


NC. 1869, p. 138. Macdonald remarks 
about this evidence, ‘As bronze was 
much less likely to travel outside the 
area of its actual currency than gold 
or silver, the significance of these facts 
is unmistakable’ ; CHI. i p. 443 
'Tam is definitely of opinion that the 
southward expansion of the Bactrian 
power happened in the early years of 
Demetrius’s reign; op. cit., pp. 92-3 
Tarn, op. cit., p. 75. Tam uses some 


of the portraits on early Bactrian coins 
as data enough for determining the 
Euthydemid relationships of the earlier 
period. Three of them, that of Euthy- 
demus in his old age, of Demetrius 
wearing elephant-scalp and of Anti 
machus Theos wearing a kausia are the 
finest of portrait-heads on the coins 
of all ages and all places. These have 
been regarded by him as the work of 
one master artist. 



150 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


discernible in these coin figures, some showing the head of a comparatively 
young man, others that of a more elderly person. This additional proof 
of the length of his reign is further substantiated by the abundance of his 
coins, though there is no great diversity in their types. Their usual obverse 
device is the diademed bust of the king to the right, inside a dotted border; 
the reverse of his gold and silver coins invariably shows Heracles naked 
with a club in his right hand, seated on rocks ; the club sometimes resting 
on a slender piece of stone in front of him or on his right knee; in the 
latter variety the skin of a lion is shown spread over the rocks. This 
is the device which, as we have already shown, was adopted by the first 
two Antiochi of the Seleucid dynasty in Western Asia Minor. Its adop- 
tion by Euthydemus further corroborates the fact mentioned in the texts 
that he hailed from the west. His copper coins usually contain on the 
obverse the bare head of a bearded Heracles to the right and the figure of a 
prancing horse to the right, on the reverse ; Wilson’s reference to an Apolline 
type of copper coin may show that Apollo was also, though very rarely, 
adopted by him as a reverse device . 1 The prancing horse which also 
appears on the reverse of some of the copper coins of Euthydemus II has 
rightly been declared to have been the original from which the reverse 
device of some of the double-die copper coins of Taxila were derived . 2 
The legend on the reverse side of all the coins of Euthydemus is invari- 
ably Basileds Euthydemou ; in the commemorative coins of some of 
his successors the attributive epithet Theos is added to his name, but 
we are not at all sure whether he himself ever adopted this title. 

One interesting fact to be recorded about the various types of Euthyde- 
mus’s coins is that the use of monograms, so common in the case of the 
money of his successors and the host of other Indo-Greek rulers, was first 
systematically introduced by this king. Macdonald describes these mono- 
grams as ‘a new phenomenon on the Bactrian coinage, persisting through a 
long series of years,’ and accepts Cunningham’s suggestion that they stand 
for the names of mints, ‘a view which is confirmed by occasional minor varia- 
tions of type and by certain subtle peculiarities of style .’ 3 This increase 


■‘R. B. Whitehead, PMC. i p. 12 
2 These are the varieties / and g of the 
second class of the uninscribed copper 
coins of Taxila; the horse there has a 
star above it and replaces the lion 
usual on the reverse of the other varie- 
ties of this class of coins; J. Allan, 
BMCCA1. pp. cxxxv, 226-71 
* CHI. i p. 443. The interpretation of 
these numerous monograms on Indo- 
Greek, Indo-Scythic and Indo-Parthian 
coins is a much debated problem which 
has not yet been definitely solved. 
Cunningham, who was the first to study 
them thoroughly, made some concrete 
suggestions as regards many of these mo- 
nograms, for which he was vehemently 


criticised by many. It must be said in 
all fairness to Cunningham that he 
did not claim any finality for his solu- 
tion of the problem, several of the 
marks according to him containing the 
names of the mint-magistrates. White- 
head lends some support to Cunning- 
ham’s hypothesis in his article in 
NC. 1923, p. 28 f., as well as other 
writings; Macdonald and Rapson are 
critical, though the former seems to 
support Cunningham’s view on very 
rare occasions. Tarn ‘sees no reason 
to suppose that they ever denote mint- 
cities’, and he is definite that they are 
the monograms of ‘continuing mint- 
masters and changing city magistrates’ - 
op. cit., pp. 437-41 



DEMETRIUS 


151 


in the number of royal mints is according to him another proof of the 
wider extent of the dominions of Euthydemus over that of his predecessor. 
It is very likely that he held sway over some of the ancient satrapies south 
of the Hindukush; but it seems highly improbable that his forces actually 
crossed the Indus and conquered any portions of the land of the five rivers. 
The Graeco-Roman tradition does not connect his name with India at 
all, and we shall presently see that it was his son Demetrius whose name 
was intimately associated with India both in the ancient and the mediaeval 
tradition of Europe. 


GREEK INVASION AND OCCUPATION OF THE PANJAB 
AND SIND 


The young Bactrian prince about whom Polybius speaks in glowing 
terms in his chronicle, and who made such a deep impression on the mind 
of Antiochus the Great, was destined to play a prominent part in the 
contemporary history of Bactria and India. It was he who was principally 
responsible after Alexander for carrying Greek arms into the interior of 
India, and his Indian expedition became the first of a series of subsequent 
Bactrian Greek invasions of Indian soil, the cumulative effect of which 
was that a substantial portion of the north and north-west of India came 
to be permanently settled by these foreign invaders. India’s real, pro- 
longed and intimate Greek contact began with the career of Demetrius 
who was remembered as late as the days of the mediaeval English poet 
Chaucer in whose Knight’s Tale a picturesque description is given of ‘the 
grete Emetreus, the king of Inde’. Much earlier Graeco-Roman chroni- 
clers devote pages to his career, of whom mention may be made of Poly- 
bius, Strabo and Justin, the last two drawing a great deal from Apollodorus 
of Artemita and the ‘Trogus source’ respectively. The Indian tradition 
about him is not at all clear, though a probable reference to his name is 
seen in a scholion to the grammarian Patanjali and in the Mahabharata 9 
both of which mention one Dattamitra, king of the Yavanas . 1 A large 
number of coins in silver and copper showing a variety of devices corro-* 
borate to a great extent much of the information gleaned about him from 
different literary sources. Some of them bearing legends in two languages, 
Greek and Indian Prakrit, written in Greek and Kharoshthi characters, 
distinctly prove that they were meant for circulation in his Indian posses- 
sions. 

Demetrius appears to have become the sole ruler of Bactria in the 
flower of his life, perhaps when he was about thirty-five years old, for that 
would be his age had he been a young man of seventeen or eighteen when 


Tarn, op. cit., pp. 142, 458. Jayaswal’s 
proposed reading of Demetrius’s name 
in the Hathlgumpha inscription of the 
Cheta king Kharavela is extremely 
problematical. ‘Devamantiya’ men- 
tioned in the Milindapanha has been 


taken by some to refer to Demetrius. 
P.C. Bagchi hassuggested that the story 
of Knmisha, the Yaksha, as narrated 
in the Divyavadana may contain an 
allusion to Demetrius’s conquests in 
India, IHQ. xxn, 1946, pp. 81-91 



152 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


Antiochus III laid siege to Bactria (c. 206 B.C.). When he ascended the 
throne, Bactria had already been much benefited by the long and pros- 
perous rule of his father who, after his encounter with Antiochus and the 
latter’s formal recognition of his independence, had been steadily building 
up the resources of his kingdom for bold adventures of expansion and 
conquest. Political conditions in the extreme north of India at that time 
were precisely of a kind to attract the attention of her powerful neighbour, 
and it is no wonder that Demetrius crossed the Hindukush mountains 
with a large force some time in the early part of his reign. It is to be 
presumed that his passage through the lands between the Hindukush 
and the Indus was conducted through friendly and dependent countries 
many of which may have already been annexed to the Bactrian empire 
during the latter part of his father’s reign. He conquered portions of the 
Panjab and Sind, and probably founded cities there for the purpose of 
effective administration of the newly acquired territories. Two passages 
in the works of Arrian and Ptolemy, if slightly emended, may contain 
a reference to one of the cities founded by Demetrius. The Saggala 
of Arrian (v. 22) and Sagala when Ptolemy (vii. 1, 46) speaks of ‘Sagala 
and Euthymedia’, may denote the same locality and may be iden- 
tical with the ancient town of Sakala (Pali Sagala), modern Sialkot 
in the Panjab. Bayer conjeetured long ago that the Euthymedia of Pto- 
lemy is a mistake for Euthydemia (the latter form occurring also in some 
texts), and that the town was founded by Demetrius to commemorate 
his father. This suggestion of Bayer was accepted by most modern 
scholars dealing with the history of the period, though Macdonald was 
somewhat critical about it. Tarn, however, completely rejects it and 
thinks that it is unjustified on both historical and textual grounds. 1 He 
finds, however, a sure mention of one such town named after Demetrius 
in the word ‘Dattamitri’ which, according to a commentator of Patanjali, 
was a town among the Sauviras founded by Dattamitra (Demetrius), 
,king of the Yavanas. Occasional references to several towns named 
Demetrias after Demetrius, occur in classical texts, one of them being 
‘Demetrias in Arachosia; but no explicit mention of any Demetrias in 
Sindhu-Sauvira is made by the Graeco-Roman writers, and this is one 
of the reasons which led Johnston to doubt Tarn’s suggestion. 2 Thus 
though nothing definite can be said on this point, there is every reason to 
believe that Demetrius, like Alexander, must have settled Greek garrisons 
in particular localities to protect his flank and rear during his Indian 
advance, and these became the nuclei of several later settlements of the 
Bactrian Greeks when their rule was confined to their Indian territories 
only. 

The exact limit of Demetrius’s advance into the interior of India is 
a controversial point and the testmony of both the classical and Indian 


trias in Sind’, JRAS. 1939, pp. 217-40- 
^Tarns re pIy and Johnston’s note’ 
cf. JRAS. 1940, pp. 179-93 ’ 


1 CHI. I p. 446. Tam, op. cit., pp. 247-8, 
486-7 

2 Tam, op. cit., p. 142; Johnston, ‘Deme- 



GREEK CONQUESTS IN INDIA 


153 


texts on the subject is open to different interpretations. The chief foreign 
authority on the question is Strabo who, drawing the attention of his 
readers to the remarkable expansion of the Bactrian kingdom, quotes 
from Apollodorus of Artemita to the effect that the kings chiefly respon- 
sible for this were Demetrius and Menander. Apollodorus, as quoted 
by Strabo, enumerates a number of localities in the Indian interior which 
were annexed by the Bactrian Greeks, and it is difficult to apportion 
correctly the credit of these conquests to either of the Yavana rulers. In 
one passage of Strabo (xv, 698), it is stated that ‘those who came after 
Alexander advanced beyond the Hypanis to the Ganges and Palibothra 
(Pataliputra)’; here also no mention is made of the particular Bactrian 
Greek king who was responsible for the invasion of India as far as Patna. 
Some Indian texts also mention the incursions of the Yavanas into the 
interior of India, and places like Saketa, Madhyamika and Kusumadhvaja 
(Kusumahvaya, the same as Pataliputra) in the Madhyadesa are said to 
have been besieged by the Yavanas. Patanjali, who is dated usually 
about 150 b.c., is the earliest Indian writer to refer to the siege of the two 
cities, Saketa and Madhyamika, by the Greeks while giving examples for 
the correct use of one of the past tenses (fan) in Sanskrit grammar. The 
exact passages are, arunat Yavanah Saketam and aruriat Yavanah Madhya- 
milcam, and if these are not mere stock examples taken from previous 
grammarians (murdhabhishikta), there is every possibility that these events 
took place during the lifetime of Patanjali. His contemporaneity with 
Pushyamitra is also suggested by some scholars on the basis of a few 
other passages in his great commentary. The site of ancient Saketa is 
located not very far from modern Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh, and that 
of Madhyamika was correctly identified by Cunningham on the authority 
of unmistakable numismatic data with modern Nagarl, a village eight 
miles to the north of Chitorgadh in Udaipur territory, Rajasthan. Another 
clear piece of evidence in Indian literature for the Yavana invasion of the 
interior is found in Kalidasa’s drama Malavikagnimitra, in which th$ 
author refers to a conflict between Vasumitra, the grandson and general 
of Pushyamitra, the founder of the Sunga dynasty, and a Yavana horde' 
on the right bank of the Sindhu. The name of the river may denote 
some part of the lower reaches of the Indus or preferably one of the streams 
of the same name, probably Kali Sindh, a tributary of the Chambal, in 
Central India, for the Sunga arms could hardly have reached as far west 
as the Indus. 1 It is unfortunate that neither the grammarian nor the 
poet gives us the name or names of the Yavana commanders who came to 
invade the very heart of India. A further explicit mention of the military 
expedition of the Yavanas into the MadhyadeSa and their shortlived 
conquest and occupation of part of the country is made in some verses 
of the ‘Yugapurana’, a chapter of the { Gargi Samhita, an astrological work 
of a date earlier than that of the Malavikagnimitra. It is a Sanskrit work 


■For another view see 


p. 97. 



154 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


and if the view is accepted that all Puranas had a Prakrit original of much 
earlier date, the information of a historical character which can be gleaned 
from it may go back to a period as early as the beginning of the Christian 
era. Barnett’s translation of verse 5 of the ‘Yugapurana’, the original of 
which was quoted by Kern in the introduction to his edition of the Bfihat- 
samhita supplies us with some important facts relevant to the present 
topic. It reads : ‘thereupon advancing to Saketa, the Panchalas, and 
Mathura, the Yavanas, wickedly valiant, will win Kusumadhvaja; thereon, 
when the goodly (?) Pushpapura has been gained . . . , all regions 

will become disturbed, without doubt.’ 1 It is interesting to note that 
the testimony of this extract agrees in a remarkable manner with that of 
the passage of Strabo already quoted regarding the south-eastern limit 
of the Yavana expansion. But here also there is no mention of the name 
of the Greek king who was responsible for this; if, however, the 
suggestions of Jayaswal and Tarn are accepted, we may find a reference to 
the Bactrian Greek king Demetrius in ‘Dharmamita’ occurring in verse 
7 of the same text, dealing with the exactions committed upon the people 
of Pataliputra by his officials. 2 

The Bactrian Greek conquest of parts of the Madhyadesa was previously 
attributed by many scholars to Menander, but subsequent researches 
have tended to show that it was Demetrius who was strong enough to 
carry Greek arms far into the interior of India. Strabo or his principal 
source Apollodorus of Artemita has mentioned both the names in this 
context; Trogus Pompeius, or rather the original source from which he 
was quoting, gives us the names of Apollodotus and Menander as per- 
sons responsible for the farthest expansion of Greek power in India. It 
appears to have been a fact that all these three men co-operated in the 
conquest, and Apollodotus and Menander, about whom more will be 
said presently, were younger contemporaries of Demetrius. Tarn makes 
an elaborate suggestion that it was under Demetrius that the other two 
^Greek kings advanced into the interior of India, along either side of the 
Indian desert : Menander ‘south-eastward by the great road across the 
r Panjab and the Delhi passage to the Ganges and the Mauryan capital 
Pataliputra,’ and Apollodotus ‘southward (at first south-westward) down 
the Indus to its mouth and whatever might lie beyond.’ These two con- 
quering forces were intended to converge on the centre of India, ‘settle 
with Pushyamitra Suhga and complete the Greek circuit round Northern 
India.’ Demetrius was the chief guiding factor in the enterprise, and was 


1 Tam, op. cit., p. 454; JBORS. xiv p. 
402; the original verses read : tatah 
Saketamakramya Pahcltdldn- Mathurath 
lathd i Yavana Jushtavikrdntd ( h ) prdps- 
yanli Kn sumadh i ajam n tatah Pushpap /re 
prdpte karttam •> prathite lute I ak.iht vis- 
haydh sane hhavisltvanti na samiayah. 

•There is some difficulty in the accep- 
tance of this suggestion. The name 


Dharmamita does no' occur in Kern’s 
extracts. For the views of Jayaswal and 
Tarn. cf. JBORS. \iv 1928, p 397 - 
Tarn, op. cit.. pp. 452-5 The verse in 
question can be quoted from Jayaswal’* 
extracts born Yugapurana’; Dhar- 
mimita-ramd \nddhd janam bhokshvanti 
mrbiayah t Yavana jndpavishyamti 
(naive ran) cha pdrtlmdh. 



END OF DEMETRIUS 


155 


helped by the other two who at first acted as his sub-kings in India but 
later succeeded to the different parts of his extensive Indian conquests. 
The suggestion is no doubt very intriguing, but there are no clear and 
explicit literary data in its support. 1 What is apparent from the avail- 
able evidence, textual as well as archaeological, is the fact that of the 
three, Demetrius alone held Bactria as well as India, whereas the 
other two held sway in India only; their respective coin-types leave no 
doubt about this. Demetrius’s hold over Bactria was, however, soon 
jeopardised, and it became very difficult for him to exercise his authority 
effectively over the vast and unwieldy empire which he had built up. 
Communications were not easy to maintain, and the longer the chain 
became, the more it was prone to snap from the extraneous pressure which 
was not slow' in appearing. His remarkable Indian victories, indeed 
proved detrimental to his Bactrian interests, for the heart of his empire 
was now situated far beyond the southern borders of his original kingdom 
which could hardly accept a secondary position and which was ever prone 
to assert its importance. It is highly probable that when Demetrius left 
Bactria on his Indian adventure, he left there one or more persons in autho- 
rity to look after the interests of the dynasty. Most probably they were 
his own relations who were later to succeed him in Bactria as well as in 
India. But the measures adopted by Demetrius for the safety and security 
of his home possessions were soon found inadequate when Eucratides 
appeared on the scene and successfully wrested the Bactrian sceptre from 
his hands and those of his nominees. To accomplish this cost Eucratides 
a protracted and bitter struggle, the memory of which is still preserved in 
fragments of classical texts and a series of interesting coins, as well as in 
commemorative medallions issued by one or other of the combatants 
in the strife. 

Eucratides, about whose antecedents little is known, is described 
by Justin as a leader of great vigour and ability who organised the 
Bactrian rebellion against Demetrius, put himself at the head of thf 
rebels and made himself their king. It is presumable that the news of 
this revolt in his home kingdom reached Demetrius in India, who hastened* 
with all the forces that he could muster to measure swords with his enemy. 
Justin mentions an interesting episode in the struggle of the rivals; how 
at one time Eucratides with a small force of 300 was besieged by Demetrius 
with 60,000 men and how the former not only endured the siege for more 
than four months but so much harassed Demetrius from time to time that 
he had to raise the siege at last. Tarn however doubts the truth of this 
story. Nothing is known about the last days of Demetrius. He may 
have been killed in the fighting in Bactria or ended his days in India after 
his unsuccessful attempts to overthrow the usurper. Justin informs us 
casually that Demetrius’s last years were nearly contemporaneous with 
those of Eucratides whose Indian conquests belonged to the end of h ; s 
reign; but this is not substantiated by numismatic evidence. There is 
1 Tarn, op. cit., ch. iv, pp. 140, 155-6, 200 



156 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


every reason to believe that Eucratides carried on the strife with the 
successors of Demetrius both in Bactria and India for some time after 
Demetrius’s death. Indian literature of a fairly early date carries some 
faint memory of the internecine strife among the rival parties of the Yava- 
nas, from which we gather that their occupation of the Madhyadesa was 
of a transitory character and was cut short not only by their own inter- 
nal quarrels but probably also by whatever resistance was offered them 
by the rising power of the Sungas. The ‘Yugapurana’ of the Gargl 
Samhita expressly tells us that ‘the Yavanas furious in battle will not 
stay in the Middle Country; there will be without doubt mutual 
conflicts; out of their own circles will arise an awful and supremely 
lamentable strife.’ 1 

Many silver and copper coins that were issued by Demetrius substantiate 
as well as check to a very great extent whatever is known about him from 
the meagre literary data. His principal coin-device was Heracles. The 
god, however, is not shown seated, as on his father’s coins, but appears on 
the reverse of his principal issues standing to the front with club and lion’s 
skin under his left arm and crowning himself with a laurel-wreath with 
his right hand. Such a reorientation of the original type might bear a 
significant reference to his victories in India, his partial conquest of 
which is also corroborated by a few bilingual silver and copper coins 
which he struck. A unique bilingual tetradrachm discovered not very 
long ago and now in the collection of the British Museum shows on 
the obverse the diademed bust of the king to right wearing a flat 
kausia, and the legend Basileds Aniketou Demetriou ; its reverse 
has the figure of Zeus standing facing with thunderbolt and long 
sceptre in both hands, and the KharoshthI legend maharajasa aparajitasa 
Demetriyasa. The obverse and reverse legends are exactly similar 
to those of his square copper coins which bear the diademed head of 
the king adorned with elephant’s scalp on one side and a winged thunder- 
bolt on the other. These were presumably the Indian issues of Demetrius 
and are somewhat different from his many Bactrian ones. The com- 
*parative paucity of his bilingual Indian money shows that his own personal 
hold over India could not have been of long duration. Eucratides seems to 
have followed close on the heels of Demetrius to India and wrested part 
of his Indian possessions from some of Demetrius’s successors. The 
elephant’s scalp which commonly adorns Demetrius’s busts on the obverse, 
and the elephant’s head on some, of his round copper coins which have 
a caduceus on their reverse, probably also emphasise his association with 
India. It should be noted that none of his Bactrian money has the 
additional epithet Aniketou (unconquered) which thus certainly refers to 
his Indian conquests. The principal reverse device of his silver money, 
as has been shown above, is a standing Heracles ; but there are tetradrachms 
1 ‘Yugapurana,’ v. 7 : Madhyadese na sambhava in many texts) bhavishyanti na 

sthasyanti Yavana yuddha-durmadah i samsayah i atmachakrotthitam ghorqm 

Tesham anyonya-samgrama (in lieu of yuddham paramadarunam. 



EUTHYDEMUS II. PANTALEON. AGATHOCLES 


157 


in the British Museum which replace Heracles by a Zeus or a Pallas with 
shield and spear . 1 

DEMETRIUS'S IMMEDIATE SUCCESSORS IN BACTRIA 
AND INDIA 

It is time now to refer to a group of Bactrian kings, some of whom had 
undoubted associations with India, whose very existence would otherwise 
have been unknown to us had their coins not been discovered. That 
they were not far removed in point of time from one another is proved 
by their close numismatic affinities which alone have helped scholars to 
put them together. Gardner had long ago inferred on purely numismatic 
considerations that there was a second Euthydemus who came after Deme- 
trius. This king ruled only in Bactria for a short time, for all his silver 
coins show on the obverse a very youthful bust; the diadem ends are 
here arranged in a manner different from that shown on the money of 
Euthydemus I, and his shoulders are draped, a custom which was intro- 
duced in the Bactrian coinage from the time of Demetrius. The reverse 
of these Euthydemus coins bears the figure of a standing Heracles which 
seems to have been based on the principal reverse device of Demetrius. 
Euthydemus II also issued some round nickel and copper money with 
the bust of Apollo and tripod-lebes on either side, and he also seems to 
have copied some of the copper money of Euthydemus I with the head 
of a bearded Heracles and a prancing horse; all the above coins of 
Euthydemus II bear only the Greek legend Basileos Euthydemou and 
this fact is sufficient to prove that he had no connections with India. 
The next two Bactrian and Indo-Greek kings, whose coins are of out- 
standing interest, are Pantaleon and Agathocles whose classification 
with the second Euthydemus is supported by their use of nickel in some 
of their coins. That Pantaleon and Agathocles were closely related to 
each other is conclusively proved by some almost identical types of coin^ 
issued by them, and both of them must have ruled in Bactria as well as 
India. The Bactrian silver coins (tetradrachms and obols) of Panta- ■ 
leon bear the diademed bust of king to right on the obverse and en- 
throned Zeus with long sceptre in the left hand, and the torch-bearing 
three-headed Hecate in the outstretched right hand with the legend 
Basileos Pantaleontos on the! reverse. The silver coins (usually drachms) 
other than commemorative medallions, which were issued by Aga- 
thocles in Bactria, were very similar to those of Pantaleon from the point 
of view of the device, Zeus, however, being shown here as standing. 

Both these kings issued identical nickel and copper money in Bactria, 
bearing on one side the bust of Dionysus, and a leopard standing to the right 

1 The bilingual silver coin is attributed by this ruler to whom he would attribute 
Tam to a second Demetrius, probably the British Museum tetradrachm with 

a son of Demetrius I; Macdonald was Pallas on the reverse; Tarn, op. cit., 

the first to suggest the existence of pp.77-8; Macdonald. CHI. i p. 448 



158 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


touching a vine with raised paw on the other. The copper coins issued 
by both in their Indian territories, probably in the regions round about 
Taxila, are of great interest. They appear to have been based on certain 
indigenous double-die coins of Taxila and are characterised by the devices 
of a dancing girl or Lakshml, the Indian goddess of fortune, and a maneless 
lion or leopard, the legends bearing their respective names and titles in 
the Greek and Brahml scripts. Brahml is never used in the bilingual coins 
by any other early foreign ruler of India and this fact also very closely 
associates the two. Agathocles issued a few other copper coins which 
from their shape and device were undoubtedly imitated from the indi- 
genous money of Taxila. An interesting feature about these is that the 
legend on either side is written in the Kharoshthi script, one being Aka- 
thukreyasa and the other hiranyasrame (at one time read as hitajasame 
and understood to be a literal Prakrit translation of the king's name 
Agathocles). 

Of outstanding importance from the historical point of view, are 
the commemorative medallions that were issued by Agathocles; for 
these, together with a few of the same kind, issued by another Bactrian 
ruler of this period, Antimachus, seem to throw some light on the com- 
plicated history of contemporary Bactria. The medallions were issued 
by Agathocles in Bactria in the names of previous rulers such as Alexander 
the Great, Antiochus Nicator, Diodotus, Euthydemus I and Demetrius; 
they bear the busts and reverse devices of these predecessors of Aga- 
thocles with such obverse Greek legends as Alexandrou tou Philippou (‘of 
Alexander, the son of Philip’), Antiochou Nikatoros (‘of Antiochus 
the Conqueror’, presumably referring to Antiochus II whose usual 
title is ‘Theos’), Diodotou Soteros ( ‘of Diodotus the Saviour’), 
Euthydemou Theou (‘of Euthydemus the Divine’) and Demetriou Ani- 
ketou (‘of Demetrius the Unconquered’). All these commemorative 
pieces invariably bear on the reverse side the legend Basileuontos 
Agathokleous Dikaiou, i.e., ‘in the reign of Agathocles the Just.’ 
Similar issues of Antimachus Theos, however, bear only the busts and 
• devices of Diodotus and Euthydemus. These medallions show the efforts 
which both Agathocles and Antimachus made to associate themselves 
with the memories of past rulers of Bactria and other countries, although 
these rulers did not all belong to the same line. Both Agathocles and 
Antimachus could have been connected with Euthydemus I and Deme- 
trius, and it was suggested that all of them (Euthydemus II, Pantaleon, 
Agathocles and Antimachus) were closely related to Demetrius; but they 
could hardly have been at the same time the descendants of Diodotus, 
Antiochus II and Alexander the Great . 1 It was further suggested by 

1 Macdonald, CHI. i pp. 449-52; Euthyde- of Bactria by Demetrius I when he was 

mus II and Demetrius II were almost cer- engaged in his Inman conquests. Tarn, 

tainly the sons of Demetrius I according however, thinks that Euthydemus II, 

to him, and the other three, Pantaleon, Demetrius II, Pantaleon and Agathocles’ 

Agathocles and Antimachus, were close were all sons of Demetrius I, and Anti- 

relations who were recognized as kings machus Theos was a brother of the 



ANTIMACHUS 


159 


previous scholars that the above coins ‘reproducing in medallic fashion 
the issues of the earlier kings of Bactria’ were struck by two of the princes 
of Euthydemus 1’s line not only for the purpose of currency, but also to 
serve as political manifestoes. Reference has already been made to the 
struggles of Demetrius and Eucratides, and there is no doubt that the 
quarrel was prosecuted in Bactria and in India by the latter and his 
successors with the descendants of the former. We shall presently have to 
refer to certain coins which were issued by Eucratides as a sort of counter- 
propaganda against this series of coins. Both these groups of medallic 
pieces may have been issued as an appeal (mainly to the Greek citizens 
of Bactria) to enlist their sympathy and active support in favour of the 
various rivals in their struggle for political supremacy. 

Another coin-type bearing the Greek legend Diodotou Sotero 
(already described in connection with Diodotus), has been placed by 
Macdonald along with these pedigree coins. This was hitherto regarded 
as a variety of Diodotus’s money which showed that he received the title 
of ‘Saviour’ during his lifetime. Its style and fabric, however, according 
to Macdonald, separate it from Diodotus’s regular coinage; he is of 
opinion that it is a commemorative piece issued probably by Demetrius I. 
He would also postulate the existence of a second Demetrius on the basis 
of numismatic data alone and ascribe to him the few known tetradrachms 
and drachms already referred to; showing a comparatively youthful 
bust on the obverse and the figure of Pallas Athene standing to the front 
with spear and shield and the legend Basileos Demetriou on 
the reverse. If the above two suggestions of Macdonald be accepted, then 
it would seem that the practice of issuing medallic money was already 
introduced by Demetrius, son of Euthydemus I, and the name of Deme- 
trius II would have to be added to the list of four other sons of the earlier 
Demetrius, viz., Euthydemus II, Pantaleon, Agathocles and Antimachus. 
The coins are here our only guide and many conclusions of a necessarily 
hypothetical character have been made after a careful scrutiny of the 
respective portraits of their issuers : the arrangements of the diadenf- 
ends on the heads, the presence of particular monograms, as well as the . 
difference in the adjustment of the dies when the individual coins were 
struck. At best such views can only be regarded as suggestions with a great 
measure of probability underlying them, and one would have to think twice 
before accepting them as established historical facts. In fact, as we shall 
presently see, much that can be said about the other successors of Deme- 
trius and the descendants of Eucratides, on the basis of numismatic consi- 
derations alone, falls under the description of possibilities and probabilities 
and not under that of definite historical truths. 

Antimachus Theos’s medallic coins have already been alluded to; his 
regular coins consisted of some tetradrachms, drachms and obols with 

latter; cf also op. cit., App. 3, where coins. Tarn sets out his conclusions in 

Tarn tries to explain the reason for the the genealogical table showing the pedi- 

fiction underlying Agathocles’s pedigree greeof the Euthydemidsand Eucratidids. 



160 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


his singularly individualistic and well-executed bust, wearing kausia on the 
obverse and the trident and palm-branch-bearing Poseidon on the reverse. 
On certain bronze pieces issued by him Nike, the Greek goddess of 
victory, stands on the aplustre of a ship. On the basis of these types 
Gardner inferred that this Bactrian king won a naval victory on the Indus 
or one of its great tributaries. But over whom was this victory gained ? 
Presumably over one of his rivals belonging to the Eucratides group. 
Again, did the rule of Antimachus Theos extend over India? His coins 
are no doubt found both on the north and the south of the Hindukush, 
but never south of the Panjab; and this would not justify us in describing 
Antimachus Theos as king of India after Gardner, for Antimachus Theos 
issued coins bearing legends in the Greek language only. The difficulty is 
obviated if we ascribe the bilingual silver and bronze money issued by 
one Antimachus with the title ‘Nikephoros’ to the other Antimachus with 
the title ‘Theos’ as Rapson has done. Gardner and others distinguished 
between these two, but Rapson thinks it more probable that the coins 
assigned to both are merely the Bactrian and the Indian issues of the 
same monarch, the difference between the two groups being local rather 
than chronological; the change of titles might be regarded as having 
special reference to Antimachus’s Indian conquests, ‘Nikephoros’ mean- 
ing ‘wielder of victory’. The obverse device of the second group of coins 
is a winged Nike holding palm and fillet in her hands with the legend 
Basileds Nikephorou Antimachou and the reverse shows the king riding 
on a prancing horse, probably referring to his Indian expedition, with 
the Prakrit legend maharajasa jayadharasa Amtimakhasa in KharoshthI 
script. The above inference of Rapson based on careful observation 
of the coins is highly probable but unfortunately there is a complete lack 
of literary support. 


EUCRATIDES— THE RULER OF BACTRIA AND INDIA 

Literary evidence of a partial and indeterminate character, however, does 
not help us at all to gain a complete picture of the events. This is proved 
in the case of Eucratides. There are stray references to his career chiefly 
in the works of Strabo and Justin. It has already been shown that the 
former was indebted to Apollodorus of Artemita for many of its details, 
while the latter was principally exploiting a work on which the history 
of Trogus Pompeius was based. But these two later writers utilised the 
information extracted from their respective authorities according to 
their own ideas of its importance, and it very often happens that they 
leave out many details of interest. Strabo thrice refers to Eucratides, the 
king of the Bactrians, the last mention of him being in connection with 
his having a thousand cities under him. It is not expressly stated whether 
all these cities were in Bactria or India, but the context in which it 
occurs leaves no doubt that a large number were in India. Some facts 



END OF EUCRATIDES 


161 


about Eucratides gathered from these sources we have already mentioned 
while outlining tne nistory of Demetrius. We have seen that Justin 
attributes much importance to the wars between these two rivals; he tells 
us that the Indian conquests of Eucratides belong to the end of his reign 
and that Demetrius ruled until nearly the same date. But the evidence 
of the coins led Gardner to challenge this statement, for the discovery of 
a fairly large number of bilingual coins minted by Eucratides proves that 
this monarch was ruling over parts of India for a substantial period of 
his reign. Again, Justin's way of recording the manner in which Eucra- 
tides met bis doom, though dramatically graphic, omits important details, 
We learn from him that while the king was returning home after one of 
his conquering expeditions in India, he was attacked and murdered by 
his son whom he had previously made his own associate in his rule over 
Bactria. Such was the callousness of this parricide that he drove his 
chariot over the blood of nis father and ordered that the corpse should 
be cast away unburied. Tne historian fails to tell, us the name of the 
murderer — the one important detail in this bloodcurdling episode. It 
was at first suggested by Cunningham that this parricide was Apollodotus ; 
but later researches have fully proved that Apollodotus could not have 
been a son of Eucratides; in fact he belonged to the Euttiydemus group 
of kings, and we shall presently see that he was a rival and contemporary 
of Eucratides. It is generally assumed now that the unnatural son of 
Eucratides was none other than Heliocles who was the last Greek 
ruler of Bactria and of India. Tarn, however, puts quite a different 
interpretation on the story narrated by Justin in a chapter (xli, 6, 5) — 
characterized by him as ‘one of the most confused and worst excerpted’ 
chapters in his whole work. Tarn reconstructs the whole episode in a very 
ingenious manner and suggests that Justin has misunderstood and con- 
fused the facts, and that ‘this son’ was none other than Demetrius II, one 
of the sons of Demetrius I, who was primarily responsible for this callous 
murder. The intrinsic probability of Tarn’s suggestion is proved by a 
tradition current in mediaeval Europe noted by Bivar. 1 * 

Nothing is known for certain about the antecedents of Eucratides. A . 
few of his medallic coins, however, may give us his parents' names. These 
coins are teradrachms and drachms which bear on one side the diademed 
and helmet ed bust of Eucratides with the legend Basileus Megas 
Eukratides and on the other side jugate busts of Heliocles with 
bare head and Laodice diademed, with the legend Heliokleous 
kai Laodikes. The identity of Heliocles and Laodice of the coin 
legend was differently fixed by different scholars — Cunningham, 
Gardner and others suggesting that the two were the parents of Eucra- 
tides, while Von Sallet was of opinion that they were his son and 
daughter-in-law. The problem was discussed thoroughly by Macdonald 
who upheld Gardner’s line of argument. The principal point of 


1 Tarn, op. cit., pp. 220-2; JRAS. 1950, pp. 7-13 



162 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


Gardner was that the very collocation of legends of the two sides 
of the coins would lead one to understand the word uids in between 
them, and thus the complete inscription would simply mean ‘Eucratides 
the Great, (son) of Heliocles and Laodice’; the case-endings alone of 
the respective proper names would support this view. It is far more 
acceptable than that of Droysen and Von Sallet who suggested that 
these coins were struck by Eucratides in commemoration of the marriage 
of his son Heliocles with Laodice, a daughter of Demetrius by the Seleu- 
cidan princess betrothed to him by Antiochus III. This view presupposed 
some sort of reconciliation between Eucratides and his defeated rival 
of which no evidence eitner literary or numismatic is forthcoming. A 
third suggestion was put forward by some scholars wno tried to reconcile 
these two views to some extent by suggesting that Laodice, the mother of 
Eucratides, was the daughter of Demetrius; this, however, would lead 
to the absurd position that Eucratides was the giandson of his rival. 
Macdonald rightly thinks that the side of the coins which bear the jugate 
busts is really the obverse, while that bearing Eucratides’s head is the 
reverse; previous scholars usually describing them in just the reverse way. 
This interpretation would thus bring tnem in the same line with the com- 
memorative medallions of Agathocles and Antimachus, the only differ- 
ence being that the reverse of Eucratides’s pieces instead of bearing any 
other device carries the portrait-head of the issuer himself. He had to use 
his head on the reverse for the simple reason that Heliocles, being a com- 
moner — his head does not bear any diadem — could not issue any coin and 
thus had no device to be adopted by his son in medallic types of coins. It 
is true Laodice wears a diadem on her head, but this may show simply 
that she was an heiress in her own right and need not imply that she issued 
any coins herself. Whatever claim to the Bactrian throne Eucratides 
could have put forward against those of his rival’s immediate successors 
seems therefore to have been derived from his mother. A careful consi- 
deration of these particular coins of Eucratides would justify us in advanc- 
ing so far, without indulging in arguments of a highly speculative charac- 
ter. But could this Bactrian king have been in any way connected with the 
imperial house of Syria? Laodice was a name common to many Syrian 
princesses, and could he have had any relation with Antiochus Epiphanes 
(IV) now seated upon the throne of Syria (175-164 B.c.) through his 
mother, and could he have been acting in the interests of his relation, the 
Syrian king? It is a fact that Antiochus IV, the son of Antiochus III, who 
succeeded to his brother Ssk-ucus IV, tiied seriously to resuscitate the 
Seleucidan influence in Central Asia as compensation for the losses of his 
house in the west at the hands of the Romans. Was Eucratides acting 
in the interest of Antiochus IV in the east? Seveial features of his coins 
such as the reel and bead border, the ear and horn of a bull adorning the 
helmet on his head etc. are characteristically Seleucid devices, the adop- 
tion of which would seem to support such a hypothesis. Tarn, on the basis 
of these and other details, some of a very minute character, has tried to 



COINS OF EUCRATIDES 


163 


establish that Eucratides was really the first cousin of Antiochus IV whose 
cause ne was upholding at first in the east; but the Syrian emperor’s death 
in 164 b.c. left him free to work on his own behalf as an independent 
king of his eastern kingdom. 1 But here also we must raise a note of 
caution and say, with Macdonald, that we are now moving in the field 
of conjecture. 

A careful study of the copious silver and copper, and the few gold, coins 
of Eucratides enables us to deduce some interesting details about his reign. 
A statement of Justin (xli, 6) to the effect that the usurper’s rise to power 
was more or less contemporaneous with the accession of Mithridates I 
of Parthia, gets partial confirmation from the fact that the great Parthian 
emperor Arasaces VI, Mithridates I, copied his types and titles. The 
usual obverse device of his coins is his bust, either diademed or both 
diademed and helmet ed, inside an astragalus border, the crested helmet 
being adorned with the ear and hora of a bull. This sort of a diademed 
and helmeted bust is not only copied by the Parthian monarch, but also 
imitated by Timarchus, king of Babylon, and one Plato, probably an 
ephemeral ruler of Bactria. A reference to the only known coin-type 
of the last, otherwise unknown, ruler will be of interest here, for it seems 
to bear something of a date on its reverse. The obverse shows a bust, 
a very near copy of the diademed and helmeted head of Eucratides in- 
side an astragalus border, while the reverse bears Helios radiate driving 
in a quadriga with the legend Basileds Epiphanous Platonos, the letters 
PMI appear in exergue, but the reading of the first is not very clear. 
If Gardnei’s suggestion is accepted, then PMI should be interpreted 
as the year 147 of the Seleucid era, whose Christian equivalent would 
be 165 b.c. This would support the hypothesis that Eucratides’s career 
in Bactria began some time before that date, though we need not carry 
it as far back as 190 b.c. as Cunningham did. The reverse device usually 
adopted in his gold, silver and a few of his copper coins is the Dios- 
curi — the two divine warriors Castor and Pollux — charging on horseback 
with lances at rest, or more rarely, they are shown holding long lances, 
their heads adorned with the conical caps known as ‘pilos’ ; sometimes * 
two of these caps only, alternating with palm-branches, take the place 
of the common device. 

Certain tetradrachms in the collection of the British Museum and 
the Cabinet de France show his diademed and helmeted bust thrusting 
a javelin — an attitude which is rather common in the case of the busts 
of Menander on his coins. A few tetradiachms and drachms showing 
the diademed king to the right inside an astragalus or dotted circle on 
the obverse and Apollo standing to the left holding a bow and arrow 
on the reverse with the legend Basileds Eukratidou, usually believed to 
be his earliest issues, have been tentatively assigned by Macdonald to 
a second Eucratides, the younger son of Eucratides I, the elder son being 
Heliocles. His main reason for this is that ‘it would be unusual for a 
1 Ibid, ch. V. 



164 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


Bactrian king to use more than one distinctive type for his Attic silver, 
and Eucratides’s distinctive type was the Dioscuri’; but it should be 
borne in mind that certain copper coins of this king which were meant 
for circulation in Bactria have the laureate head of Apollo on their 
obverse. Very few gold coins of Eucratides are known; of these one is a 
stater and the other a tv/enty stater piece which weighs as much as 259-35 
grains (168-05 grammes). Macdonald rightly observes about the latter 
that ‘no other king or city of ancient times was ever responsible for so 
ostentatious a display of opulence.’ These gold coins are characterised 
by the usual device of Eucratides, helmeted bust and mounted Dioscuri, 
but, like the second series of his silvei money, have the legend Basileos 
Megalou Eukratidou, whereas the fust series of his silver and copper 
money omit the distinctive epithet Megalou. 

One interesting type of drachms issued by this kings is bilingual, the 
reverse Kharoshthi legend maharajasa mahatakasa Evukratitasa being an 
exact translation of the obverse Greek one; on one specimen of this class 
it is rajasa maharajasa mahatakasa Evukratitasa. This reminds us of the 
reverse legend of a rare square copper type of Eucratides with Nike device, 
which is maharajasa rajatirajasa Evukratitasa ; the attributive epithet 
rajatiraja is the Prakrit translation of Greek Basileos Basileon occmring 
on the coins of the Scythian and Parthian rulers of India, and its solitary 
appearance on the coin of an ualy Indo-Greek king is interesting. It 
should be noted, however, that the Greek legend on its obveise is the usual 
one of the second series of Eucratides’s coins. Most of his copper coins 
are square in shape (this is a distinctive Indian feature) and are bilingual, 
the Prakrit legend omitting the translation of the Greek Megalou. One 
type of his square copper money is of unique interest, for its reverse shows 
an enthroned deity, identified by Rapson as Zeus, holding a wreath and a 
palm with the forepart of an elephant in front and a conical object behind; 
the reverse legend, however, is not a translation of the usual Greek legend 
qn the second series of Eucratides’s coins, but a novel one which has been 
correctly read as Kavisiye nagara devata (‘the city-deity of Kavisi'). This 
‘type is sometimes re-struck on the square copper money of Apollodotus 
with Apollo and tripod-lebes devices. It should be noted here that some 
silver coins of Eucratides show a distinct departure from the Attic system 
of weight usually adopted in the Bactrian Greek coins of this and earlier 
periods. The change in the metrology of the Indo-Greek silver coins is 
moie marked in the coins of his successor, Heliocles, and thenceforward 
came to be the norm of the Greek silver money in India. 

A few more likely facts about Euciatides’s reign can be deduced from 
a collective study of his coinage briefly summarised above. The change 
in the Greek legend undoubtedly indicated an accretion of power, and it 
was connected mostly with his conquests in India which aTe further em- 
phasised by a good many types of bilingual coins. He stayed in his Indian 
dominions for some time, engaged as he was in conquering more terri- 
tories from the kings of the rival line. His re-striking the coins of 



EUCRATIDES IN INDIA 


165 


Apollodotus seems to prove this and by a fortunate chance w; know the 
exact locality which was conquered by him from Apollodotus. It was 
Kapisa as the Prakrit legend on the re-struck coins shows, and the city- 
deity of Kapisa was identified with Zeus. From the evidence recorded 
by a Chinese traveller during his Indian tour centuries afterwards, we 
know that this deity was none other than Indra. Hiuan Tsang informs 
us that there was a mountain named Pi-lo-sko-lo to the south-west of the 
capital city of the country of Kapisa, whose presiding deity had the form 
of an elephant, the mountain being named after him ( Pllusara — ‘Pilu’ 
means an elephant). Now Indra, the king of the gods (Devaraja) in 
Indian mythology, had an elephant for his mount, which is tantamount 
to saying that when represented theriomorphically, he bore the form of 
an elephant. The Greeks could well recognise in Indra their Zeus, 
the king of the Olympian gods, and the particular coin-type of Eucratides 
shows Zeus-Indra enthroned with the elephant-deity and the mountain 
over which he presided, represented schematically. We shall see that this 
local type is possibly recognisable on the coins not only of several other 
Indo-Greek rulers but also on those of some Indo-Scythic kings, and this 
fact may denote that the region was in their occupation. 1 Then, so early 
an adoption of the Indian equivalent of the Parthian title ( Basileds 
Basileun, rajasa maharajasa or simply rcijatirajasa) on some of his silver 
and copper money by Eucratides would show that he had contact with 
the Parthians. This is further proved by Mithridates I’s imitation of some 
of his coins already referred to. Justin gives us an account of the bitter 
antagonism that existed between the Bactriani, i.e. the Bactrian Greeks 
and the Parthians, and adds that the former were finally crushed by the 
weaker Parthians. Strabo is more explicit, for he writes in one passage 
(xi. 515) that the Parthians annexed a portion of Bactria after first defeat- 
ing Eucratides and then the Scythians; in another (xi, 517) he informs us 
that the Parthians wrested from Eucratides two Bactiian satrapies of 
uncertain identity, which have been conjecturally identified by Macdonald 
as Aria and Arachosia. The numismatic data bear out in a way the textual • 
evidence about Bactrian and Parthian contact, and it is presumable that 
Mithridates imitated Eucratides's coin-device after his conquest of 
portions of the latter’s empiie, while Eucratides used the Parthian title in 
its Indian version in some part of his Indian possessions during one 
phase of the struggle. 

Eucratides's doom was hastened not only by the Parthians and the 
internal dissensions among his own people, but also by the constant 


The view given above is mainly based 
on that of Rapson as finalised in CHI. 
i pp. 555-7. But R. B. Whitehead has 
challenged Rapson's interpretation. The 
enthroned deity, according to him, is 
not Zeus-Indra, but a city-goddess; he 
says that only one coin of this type so 
far known to him was te-struck on 


Apollodotus’s coin, and this alone 
would not prove that the city of Kapisa 
was conquered by Eucratides from 
Apollodotus. Neither does he find any 
parallelism between the Kavisiye nagara 
ilevata type coins of Eucratides and 
some coins of a few Indo-Scythian 
rulers; NC. 1947, pp. 23-32 



166 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


menace of the Scythian barbarians who were now occupying regions 
beyond the northern borders of Bactiia. Strabo’s mention of the Scy- 
thians as one of the powers by defeating whom the Parthians could annex 
a portion of Bactria is significant. It is not certain whether the Scythians 
actually penetrated into Bactria during the lifetime of Eucratides, but 
there is no doubt that early in the reign of his son and successor they had 
overrun that country, and the helpless Bactrian king had no other alter- 
native but to relinquish all his claims to the lands on the other side of the 
Hindukush and to rule only over his Indian possessions. Eucratides no 
doubt began his career with great promise and in his earlier days achieved 
success in his many enterprises. This is borne out by the number and 
variety of his coins, some of which were exceedingly well executed. But 
he seems to have attempted too much; for had he made the Elindukush the 
southern limit of his kingdom and, without following bis Greek rivals 
into India, devoted his entire energies to the consolidation of his gains 
against his semi-barbaric and barbaric neighbours, the Parthians and the 
Scythians, his dynasty’s hold upon Bactria might have endured longer. 
But this was not to be; he was harassed not only by these alien fees, but 
by his own people, and we have already seen how his very death was preci- 
pitated by this internal struggle. The exact date of his murder is not 
known, but it is usually believed to be some time about 155 b.c. Tarn 
is inclined to place it about three or four years earlier. 


HELIOCLES 


Heliocles has been almost unanimously regarded by scholars as the imme- 
diate successor of Eucratides, and it is presumed by many that he was the 
parricide whose heinous act is recorded so graphically in the annals of 
Justin. His name is not mentioned in the works of any of the classical 
writers, and not the faintest echo of it, nor that of his more illustrious 
father, is found in Indian literature. Whatever points of historical cha- 
racter are known about him have been gained from the study of his coins 
and these being our only source, we can have only the haziest notion of 
the outline of his reign. Only silver and copper coins of his are known, 
of which the former can be divided into two distinct groups principally 
on the basis of the two separate metric systems according to which they 
were struck. One group follows the Attic standard of weight, the legend 
there being only in the Greek language, while the other, which is bilingual, 
is struck according to a system differently described by different scholars 
— Indian by Von Sallet and Whitehead, and Persian, or Indo-Persic, by 
Gardner and Rapson. 1 There cannot be the least doubt that the coins 
of the former group were meant for circulation in Bactria; these are 


The coins of this changed standard 
weighing up to 36-39 grains were regard- 
ed by Gardner as hemidrachms intended 
to come up to the weight of half-siglos 


oi rne Acnaemcmd Persian coinage that 
were also struck in India before the ad- 
vent of Alexander. Von Sallet on the 
other hand suggests that such coins 



HELIOCLES 


167 


tetradrachms and drachms showing on the obverse either a diademed or 
diademed and helmeted bust of a king within astragalus border to the 
right and on the reverse either sceptre and thunderbolt-bearing Zeus 
standing to front or enthroned Zeus Nikephorus witti the legend Basileds 
Dikaiou Heliokleous. Many crude imitations of some of this Bactrian 
coinage of Heliocles have been found, on which Zeus is sometimes re- 
placed by a horse, and the legend is almost illegible. Coins of the Indian 
or Indo-Persic standard intended to be current in India bear the two 
different types of Heliocles’s bust with the above Greek legend on the 
obverse, their reverse showing Zeus standing with thunderbolt and 
sceptre in his hands, and the Kharoshthi legend maharajasa dhramikasa 
Heliyakreyasa ; the helmeted and diademed bust of the king on the 
obveise in this group is shown thrusting a javelin. The copper coins of 
Heliocles aie all bilingual and square in shape, and bear types such as 
the king’s bust and elephant, or elephant and bull, with the usual Greek 
and Prakrit legends; there cannot be the least doubt that none of them 
was issued in Bactria. Another interesting numismatic detail about this 
king is that he re-struck some of the copper coins which were issued in 
the joint names of Agathocleia and Strato, or were struck by Strato alone. 

A careful scrutiny of numismatic facts enables us to deduce several 
conclusions of interest with regard to Heliocles. The formal renuncia- 
tion of the Attic standard of weight and the adoption of one which was 
already tentatively introduced in some Indian silver issues of his father 
would justify us in maintaining that Heliocles had to relinquish his hold 
on Bactria and confine his attention to his Indian possessions. Most 
probably, if not certainly, he w’as the last of the Greek kings to rule over 
Bactria and India; for the two other Indo-Greek rulers, Apollodotus and 
Antialcidas, who are known to have used this standard only in a very 
few of their coins, could not have ruled at all in Bactria. It is possible 
that Antialcidas may have ruled for a short period only on the - north 
of the Hindukush mountains, but we shall presently show that he was 
for all practical purposes a king in India. It is generally believed that * 
the Scythians were chiefly responsible for driving Heliocles out of Bactria. 
The Scythians, who had long been the neighbours of Bactria on the north, 
were themselves driven out of their Sogdianian habitat by another noma- 
dic tribe, the Ytie-chi. The incursions and conquests of these barbarians 
will be narrated at some length in the next chapter. It will suffice now to 
refer to the Scythian imitations of Heliocles’s coins, as these confirm 
our conclusion. The elephant and bull devices on the copper coins of 
Heliocles may indicate the locality in which they were minted. The ele- 
phant, as we have shown, probably stands for the presiding deity of 
the suburb of Kapisa and the bull (no other than the Indian god Siva in 

were really drachms of a reduced stan- silver coins — the dharanas or the pu- 

dard and were issued by the Indo-Greek ranas ; cf. R. B. Whitehead, ‘Notes on 

rulers, from Heliocles onwards, in India Indo-Greek Numismatics’, NC. 1923, 
whose people were used to light-weight ' p. 294 f. 



168 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


his theriomoiphic form), may point to the Gandhara region whose deity 
par excellence, according to the testimony of Hesychius, was a bull. 
Interesting corroboration that the bull, along with Lakshml or Uma, 
was the deity of Gandhara is found in the unique gold piece which was 
classed by Gardner with the coins of the Indio-Scythians. It shows on 
one side the figure of the Indian humped bull with legends Tauros (bull) 
and ushabhe (Prakrit for vrishabha, written in Kharoshthi), and on 
the other side a goddess, probably a Hellenistic Lakshmi (it may also 
be Uma, for that would be more suitable in conjunction with Siva on the 
obverse) holding a lotus flower (or a mirror?) in her hand with the 
Kharoshthi legend Pakhalavati devata by her side; Pakhalavati is without 
doubt the Prakrit of Pushkalavati which was the old capital of Gandhara 
and is referred to by classical writers under such names as Peucelaotis, 
Peucelas and Proclais. The bull (Siva) and Lakshmi or Uma were thus 
the particular deities of Gandhara, and it is probable, if not certain, that 
he was the master of the Kapisa-Gandhara region. Heliocles's re-striking 
of some coins of Agathocleia and Strato, or Strato alone, affords further 
numismatic corroboration of the quarrels between the two rival groups ; 
for there are good grounds for believing that Agathocleia and Strato 
belonged to the house of Euthydemus. We have no means of ascertaining 
the exact date of the end of Heliocles’s reign. From the Chinese sources 
which will be discussed at length in the next chapter, it can be inferred 
that Bactria was occupied by the barbarians by c. 135 c.c. Heliocles’s 
rule in India undoubtedly continued for some more years after that date. 

THE INDO-GREEK RULERS 

It is extremely difficult to group chronologically and dynastically the 
host of other Bactrian Greek rulers of India, who had lost direct contact 
with their original homeland. Von Sallet despaired of any chronological 
arrangement of these kings and classified them alphabetically. The 
r difficulty arises mainly from the fact that barring three among them, 
(Apollodotus, Menander and Antialcidas, the first two of whom are 
casually mentioned by name in classical and Indian literature, while the 
names of the last two occur also in two Indian inscriptions), their very 
existence is proved only by their coins. It was at first thought impossible 
to put them in their proper places on the basis of their coin-types and 
legends. Gardner prophesied that ‘any attempt finally to arrange the 
kings in dynastic lists by means of the types and legends is destined to 
failure.’ But the researches of subsequent scholars, principally Rapson, 
have shown that the task though very difficult is not completely hopeless! 
The very types and legends on the coins if carefully scrutinised and studied 
in proper perspective, will enable us to thiow partial light on the history 
of these little-known alien ruleis of India. Classical writers refer to the 
struggles of the two rivals, Demetrius and Eucratides; Indian tradition 
also, as we have seen, records the internecine strife among the Yavanas. 



EARLY INDO-GREEIC KINGS 


169 


This unanimity among the sources about the internal war leaves little 
doubt that the conflict was carried on also in India by the kings of the 
rival houses — the house of Euthydemus and the house of Eucratides. The 
Bactrian phase of the struggle has already been alluded to in connection 
with Agathocles, Antimachus and others, probably the sons of Demetrius ; 
its Indian phase is indicated by the re-strikings of coins just mentioned. 
Most of the Indo-Greek rulers can thus be classified under one or other 
of these rival houses, on the basis chiefly of the devices which were used 
by them, and by other numismatic features. It has been shown that the 
principal device of Euthydemus I and Demetrius was Heracles, though 
Pallas, Apollo, Artemis and Zeus also were not unknown. The major 
device of Eucratides, on the other hand, was the Dioscuri or the palms 
and piloi of the Dioscuri, while that of Heliocles was Zeus, a device 
which was once used by Eucratides in the copper money which he 
struck at Kapisa. The Indo-Greek rulers who used one or other of these 
major types can be roughly regarded as falling under any one of these 
dynasties, though it does not necessarily mean that all were lineal des- 
cendants of either. The study of ceitain other numismatic traits of the 
kings again have led to plausible hypotheses on the part of Rapson and 
others. Rapson has also made some interesting inferences about the 
local character of many of the devices which have been associated with 
one or other of the cities situated on this side of the Hindukush and 
has thus tried to localise many of these little-known foreign kings. To 
refer only to a few of his deductions : the lotus-carrying figure and its 
Hellenistic counterpart Artemis, especially in association with a bull, 
should indicate Pushkalavatl ; the enthroned Zeus-like divinity with the 
forepart of an elephant in the field should be regarded as the local type 
of Kapisa (but it has recently been identified by Whitehead as a city- 
goddess ). 1 The Nike and bull’s head devices should signify the cities of 
Nicaea and Bucephala, said to have been founded by Alexander to com- 
memorate the incidents of the battle of the Hydaspes; the piloi of the 
Dioscuri probably have a subtle allusion to Takshasila ( taksha , cut, 
and sir a, another form of siia, meaning head) and should be presumed 
to be the particular device of the city, and so on. 

APOLLO DOTUS AND MENANDER 

Two of the most important of the early Indo-Greek rulers who belonged 
to the period of Yavana expansion in India, were Apollodotus and 
Menander, whose names have already been mentioned in connection 
with Demetrius’s Indian conquests. They ruled only to the south of the 
Hindukush and appear to have been connected with the house of Euthy- 
demus. The classical authors twice mention Apollodotus, in association 
with Menander; his name is put first on each occasion, and it seems that 

1 NC. 1947, pp. 28-32 

22 



170 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


he was an elder contemporary of the latter. That he may have been a 
contemporary of Eucratides is possibly indicated by the re-struck coins 
already alluded to, which seem to show that be lost his hold on Kapisa 
owing to the warlike actions of his enemy, and that be may have been an 
associate of Demetrius. There is no means of ascertaining definitely the 
nature of this connection, and it has been supposed that he may have been 
a younger brother of Demetrius who employed him as well as Menander 
in the conquest of vast tracts of India. The principal basis for this 
hypothesis is that he could not have been far removed in point of time 
from the great son of Euthydemus, and that the period of his reign coin- 
cided for some time with the last years of Eucratides in India. Again, 
it has already been shown that the classical writers regarded him as one 
of the three who were responsible for the Bactrian Greek conquests in 
India. We are not certain about the exact extent of his kingdom, but his 
coin-types as well as a statement of the Greek author of the Periplus of the 
Erythrean Sea may show that his rule extended over the region from 
Kapisa and Gandhara, along the western and southern sides of the Panjab 
to Sind and possibly beyond to the ancient port of Barygaza, modem 
Broach. The author of the Periplus writes that his coins along with those 
of Menander were still current at Barygaza in his time, i.e. in the last 
quarter of the first century a.d. Kapisa of course was soon wrested from 
him by Eucratides. His memory perhaps faintly lingered in the minds 
of the Indians, and a possible proof of this is to be found in the name of 
Bhagadatta, a king of the Yavanas, mentioned in the Mahdbhdrata. 
Bhagadatta, it may be said, is an exact Indian translation of Apollo- 
dotus, ‘Bbaga’ one of the Indian solar deities (Adityas) being mythologi- 
cally similar to ‘Apollo’, a Greek solar divinity . 1 The extensive silver 
and copper coinage of Apollodotus, still extant, proves that he ruled over 
a vast kingdom. His coins bear a number of interesting devices, the com- 
monest among which are Apollo :Tripod-lebes, and elephant :bull. 
Most of the coins bearing the device of Athene Promachus (Athene 
‘hurling thunderbolt) are usually ascribed to a second Apollodotus. Some 
round silver coins with elephant moving to the right and the Greek 
legend Basileds Apollodotou Soteros on their obverse, and a humped 
bull with the KharoshthI legend maharajasa Apaladatasa tratarasa on the 
reverse, seem to have been issued according to the Attic system of weight, 
but this does not prove that they were struck on the othei side of the 
Hindukush; their bilingual character shows that the case was just the 
reverse. Similar devices are adopted on other silver coins minted on the 
Indian or Indo-Persic weight standard, which are square, a shape charac- 
teristic of many of the early indigenous coins of India. The elephant and 


1 JRAS. 1939, pp. 219-22; Johnston argues 
about the equation of the epic Bhaga- 
datta, king of the Yavanas, and the 
Indo-Greek king Apollodotus. He is 
not at all sure about it, but finds in 


such epic stories ‘the earliest refer- 
ences to the still current legends by 
which some of the hill princes 
trace, their descent to Greek ances- 



MENANDER 


171 


bull may have symbolised the tutelary divinities of cities, and these devices 
continued to be adopted in many copper coins of Heliocles, probably 
showing that the hold over the lower Kabul valley was transferred from 
Apollodotus to Heliocles, whose father had possibly already dispossessed 
the former of the Upper Kabul valley (Kapisa, the modern Kafiristan 
region). The case for a second Apollodotus, whose chronological position 
is uncertain, is made to rest principally on the use of the additional attribu- 
tive epithet of Philopater (‘the beloved of his father’) on the obverse of 
some coins, the Prakrit equivalent of which is, however, absent on the 
reverse; it is also based on their comparatively indifferent style and execu- 
tion. The silver coins among them with this additional obverse legend, 
kai Philopatoros and the reverse device of Athene Promachus bear 
the royal bust which is conspicuous by its absence on the silver as well 
as the copper coins which are commonly attributed to Apollodotus I. 
But it should be borne in mind that there are a number of silver coins 
with the king’s bust and Athene Promachus devices where the royal title 
is only ‘Soter’ and not ‘Soter and Philopator’. Nothing can be said with 
certainty and the case for a second Apollodotus would seem to rest prin- 
cipally on the debased style of the coins bearing his name. 

Menander appears to have been a great personality of ancient times, 
for he is not only mentioned by several classical writers like Strabo, 
Plutarch, Trogus, and Justin, but is also a person of eminence in the 
early Buddhist tradition. The Pali work ‘Milindapanha’ (‘Questions of 
Milinda’) is in the form of a dialogue between Milinda, the mighty Yavana 
king of Sakala (modern Sialkot in the Panjab), and an erudite Buddhist 
monk, Nagasena by name, where high problems of Buddhist metaphysics 
and philosophy are discussed. Milinda is an acute questioner whose 
intelligent and discerning queries are answered to his satisfaction by the 
Buddhist cleric, and in the end the king is said to have become a convert 
to the creed. It is beyond doubt that this Milinda is none other than 
the Indo-Greek king Menander, of whom contemporary Buddhists held 
a high opinion. Thus writes the author of the Pali treatise, t 

As a disputant he was hard to equal, harder still to overcome, 
the acknowledged superior of all the founders of the various schools 
of thought. As in wisdom so in strength of body, swiftness and 
valour there was found none equal to Milinda in India. He was 
rich, too, mighty in wealth and prosperity, and the number of his 
armed hosts knew no end. 

This is high praise indeed, and it echoes to a very great extent the admira- 
tion and esteem which this alien king of India inspired in the minds of the 
Indians. It is now futile to argue that Menander, being a member of the 
ruling race, could not have adopted the religion of the conquered, as 
Tarn has done, and it is far better to accept the tradition at its face value. 
Cases are on record where foreigners, even Greeks, accepted an Indian 
creed, and it is highly probable that Menander did actually become a 
Buddhist. It is he alone of all the Indo-Greek rulers, who was remembered 



172 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


in India with great honour and respect long after his day, for Kshemendra 
(eleventh century a.d.) makes a respectful mention of him in his 
A vadanakalpalata. This is borne out in a way by Plutarch, who flourished 
about two centuries after Menander and narrates the story, which he 
undoubtedly got from some Buddhist source, that when Menander died 
in camp, ‘the cities of his realm contended for the honour of preserving 
his ashes and agreed on a division among themselves, in order that the 
memory of his reign should not be lost.’ The Pali work supplies us with 
a few other interesting details about Menander, some of which appear 
to have been based on fact. According to this the village of Kalasi in 
the dvlpa of Alasanda was his birthplace, which was 200 yojanas distant 
from Sakala, his capital. Kalasi cannot be definitely located, but there 
is little doubt that the dvlpa of Alasanda is to be identified with Alexandria 
beneath the Indian Caucasus which was one of the Alexandrias founded 
by Alexander during his Indian expedition; the Mahavamsa refers to it 
as Alasanda of the Yonas. This Alexandria or Alasanda-dvipa was long 
ago tentatively identified by Cunningham with modern Charikar, a place 
strategically situated in the land between the two rivers Panjshir and 
Kabul, thus conforming to the literal meaning of the description ( dvlpa 
literally meant ‘a land between two rivers’). Further, as Rapson has 
shown, the recorded distance of 200 yojanas between Sakala and Kalasi 
in Alasanda would roughly correspond to the 500 miles that separate 
Sialkot in the Panjab from Charikar in the extreme north-west of India; 
this works out at the rate of 2\ miles to a yojana (the shorter measure 
mentioned in many Buddhist texts). The Milindapanha informs us that 
the king used to be attended by a large number of his Yonaka (Greek) 
courtiers (the number is roundly fixed at 500) when he met Nagasena, 
and the names of some of the chief among them are given as Devamantriya 
and Anantakaya, evident Indian adaptations of Demetrius and Antiochus. 
It says that Menander flourished about 500 years after the Parinirvarta 
of Buddha and, if we are to credit this statement, he is to be given a very 
^ate date which would fit ill with the date ascribable to him on the basis 
of other, especially numismatic, data. 

We have no means of ascertaining definitely the exact nature of Menan- 
der’s connection with the house of Euthydemus. He appears to have 
been a commoner, in spite of what we know from the Questions of Milinda 
about his royal ancestry, and it is highly probable that he was matrimo- 
nially connected with the Euthydemids. It was long ago suggested by 
Rapson, practically solely on the basis of numismatic data, that Menander 
married Agathocleia, the daughter of Demetrius and the sister of Aga- 
thocles and others. His son was Strato I who was a minor when Menander 
died, and his queen Agathocleia served as the royal regent during the 
minority of her son. This conclusion is based on a careful study of cer- 
tain coin-types of Menander, Agathocleia and Strato I, and Strato I ; a brief 
reference to the relevant types here will be necessary to follow Rapson’s 
findings. Some square copper coins of Menander bear on the obverse 



MENANDER’S RELATION TO DEMETRIUS 


173 


a helmeted female bust and on the reverse a winged Nike holding a 
wreath and a palm-branch. The bust was previously identified as that 
of Pallas Athene, but Rapson thought that in association with Nike, 
which might indicate Nicaea as the locality where the coins were minted, 
it might be described better as the bust of the queen herself. He compared 
this bust with the undoubted head of queen Agathocleia on certain 
hemidrachms in the collections of the British and Indian Museums, 
which bear the legend Basilisses Theotropou Agathokleias ‘of the 
godlike Queen Agathocleia.’ It should be noted that though her head 
is only diademed here, it is helmeted but not diademed on the obverse of 
some square copper coins issued in the joint names of herself and her 
minor son like that of the so-called bust of Pallas on Menander’s square 
copper coins just mentioned. The reverse device of these hemidrachms, 
usually described by numismatists as ‘a male figure with shield and spear’ 
was identified by Rapson with some justification as the late king Menander 
in his full war dress, and compared by him with the obverse device of some 
of his square copper coins in the collection of the Lahore and British 
Museums, which shows the king walking to the right in full war panoply. 
The square copper coins of Agathocleia and Strato just referred to bear 
the device of a naked Heracles seated on a rock with his club resting on 
his knee, and this points unmistakably to her Euthydemid connection. 
Strato’s bust does not appear here; his name and titles — maharajasa 
tratarasa dhramikasa Stratasa — occurring only on the reverse, show 
that he was very much of a minor when these coins were struck. The 
remarkable didrachm in the collection of the British Museum bearing the 
conjugate busts of Strato and Agathocleia with the legend Basileos 
Soteros Stratonos kai Agathokleias on the obverse, and the figure 
of Pallas Athene with the legend maharajasa tratarasa dhramikasa 
Stratasa on the reverse, shows that though Strato had become older, yet 
he had still the need of his mother as regent to look after the royal affairs. 
A comparison of this didrachm with the one in the Lahore Museum, 
which bears the youthful bust of the king with the Greek legend Basileos 
Soteros Dikaiou Stratonos on the obverse and Athene Promachus 
with the usual Prakrit legend on the reverse, shows that Strato had 
now come of age, and that the regency of his mother was no longer 
needed. 

This detailed discussion of the above coin-types was necessary in order 
to follow Rapson’s line of argument supporting his suggestion about 
Menander’s connection with Demetrius, which he propounded long 
ago . 1 But Whitehead has challenged of late this apparently well-reasoned 
hypothesis of Rapson ; he is of opinion that there are no clear indications 
that Agathocleia was Menander’s queen and Strato I their son . 2 Rap- 
son’s view about the relationship between Strato I and Agathocleia, 
however, has been ably supported by H.L. Haughton on the basis of 

I Corolla Numismatica, (Oxford, 1906), pp. 245-58 

II NC. 1947, pp. 33-4 



174 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


numismatic data. Haughton rightly says that numismatic discoveries since 
the publication of Rapson’s paper do not modify in any way the con- 
clusions reached by him; they really confirm them and ‘throw additional 
light upon conditions of Greek rule in the north of India between the 
end of Menander’s strong and prosperous reign and the final establish- 
ment of Saka sovereignty .’ 1 One thus cannot accept the views of 
those historians who place Menander long after Strato I. In placing 
Menander near about the middle of the first century b.c. they argue that 
no room can be found for this long and prosperous reign within the 
period of successive kings of one group, Demetrius, Apollodotus, Agatho- 
cleia and Strato I, Strato I, and Strato I and Strato II, or in that of the 
other group, Eucratides, Heliocles and Antialcidas; according to them 
Menander can only be placed after Strato II . 2 But there are unmistak- 
able indications that the Indo-Greek rule after Strato II had become very 
effete and we shall presently see that the Greek rulers were being ousted 
at that time from many of their territories by both Saka and Indian poten- 
tates. To place Menander in this period is impossible, and he must 
necessarily be found a place not long after Apollodotus and Eucratides. 
It should be remembered that a vast area was under the occupation of 
the early Indo-Greeks in Northern India and some among them were 
ruling contemporaneously. It is possible that the rule of Menander 
was at one time confined to the greater part of the Panjab including a 
little to the south of it; but it was shortly to extend over portions of 
Gandhara (modern Peshawar district) and the tribal territory beyond 
on the north-west, and possibly to parts of Sind and the adjoining regions 
to the south-west. These accretions probably took place after the death 
of his elder contemporary Apollodotus who was presumably of the same 
group of kings to which Menander belonged. He must have governed 
this vast kingdom with the help of subordinate rulers owing allegiance 
to him. This is probably proved by the Bajaur relic casket inscription 
which records that one Viyakamitra (Sanskrit Vlryakamitra) enshrined 
•some relics of Buddha during the reign of Menander; he describes him- 
self as an apracha-raja, perhaps corresponding to Sanskrit a-pratyag-raja, 
meaning ‘one who has no royal adversary.’ This was perhaps a subordi- 
nate title adopted by Viyakamitra, a vassal chief under king Menander 
on the extreme north-western frontier of India. The inscription conclu- 
sively proves further that Bajaur in the tribal territory was included within 
Menander’s dominions . 3 

No other Indo-Greek king except Menander issued such a great variety 
of coins, and these are distributed over a wide area extending from Kabul 
to Mathura. This fact alone testifies to the wide limits of his kingdom 
and its flourishing commerce. He coined mostly in silver and copper, 
and more than thirty varieties and sub-varieties can be recognised among 
them. His principal reverse device is Athene Promachus, while the 


1 NC. 1948, pp. 134-41, pis. 

« Chaudhuri, PHA1 1 . p. 323 


EL xxiv pp. 5-6 



DEATH OF MENANDER 


t 175 


obverse of many of his silver and copper coins bears his bust, either 
diademed or diademed and helmeted, sometimes shown thrusting a 
javelin; the usual Greek and Prakrit legends are Basileos Soteros 
Menandrou and maharajasa tratarasa Menadrasa. A few silver and 
copper coins, however, replace Soteros by Dikaiou on the obverse 
with its Prakrit equivalent dhramikasa in place of tratarasa on the 
reverse. The royal bust on these silver coins is that of an aged man, 
and it would appear that the king adopted this title towards the end of 
his long reign. Some scholars suggest that here is a numismatic corro- 
boration of the statement made in the Milindapanha that Milinda became 
a convert to Buddhism; but Dikaiou also occurs on the commemora- 
tive issues of Agathocles, and on the coins of Heliocles, Archebius and 
others. An eight-spoked wheel on the obverse of a few square copper 
pieces of Menander has been taken by some to represent the Buddhist 
Dharmachakra indicative of the creed of his choice; but they have 
the usual epithet Soteros. Tarn thinks that in association with the 
reverse device of a palm-branch it signifies the wheel of the Chakravartin 
or the paramount sovereign; but it may simply be a variant of the solar 
symbol which frequently appears on the punch-marked and other indi- 
genous coins of India. Indeed as Rapson observes, the numismatic record 
of Menander is extraordinarily difficult to interpret, and ‘the striking 
menagerie of animals on his coins is quite obscure’ (Tarn). Such animals 
as the owl, dolphin, two-humped Bactrian camel, ox-head, boar’s head, 
elephant’s head, Gorgon’s head, horse etc. occur sometimes as obverse 
and at other times as reverse devices. A few of these, e.g. the ox-head, 
elephant’s head and Gorgon’s head, are copied by him from the same 
device of Demetrius. Rapson's view that the ox-head may point to Buce- 
phala as the mint-city has already been referred to, but this does not 
explain the other devices. Nike on some of his coins may indicate Nicaea 
as the city in which they were minted. 

MENANDER'S SUCCESSORS * 

If Plutarch’s record of Menander’s death is believed, then it appears 
that he was engaged in some warlike activity when he died. It is not 
known who his rival was, but one thing which is proved by his extensive 
coinage is that his rivals, whoever they may have been, could hardly have 
wrested any territories from him; none of his coins was re-struck by any 
other ruler. His rule may have ended a few years after the middle of the 
second century b.c. We have seen that there is every reason to believe 
that his son Strato I was a minor at the time of his death, and during 
the period of his minority the kingdom was governed by his mother 
Agathocleia as the royal regent. The death of the strong and able 
Menander must have adversely affected the fortunes of his line and there 
was some loss of territory; the re-striking by Heliocles of a few of the 
joint issues of Agathocleia and Strato, and of Strato ruling alone clearly 



176 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


proves this. The re-struck coins of Strato contain the figure of Nike, 
indicating perhaps that the region about Nicaea on the Jhelum changed 
hands. Strato appears to have had a long rule, in the beginning of which 
he was associated with his mother and at the end, when he was an old man 
in his dotage, with his grandson Strato II. His independent rule in the 
interval is marked by a fairly large number of silver and copper coins, 
the predominating device of which is his father’s principal device, Athene 
Promachus. Like his father he introduced variety in his copper coins, 
adopting such types as Apollo, Tripod, Heracles, Nike, and a quiver with 
straps. The obverse of all his known silver coins and a few of his copper 
coins bears the usual portrait-head diademed, very rarely helmeted. One 
type of his obverse and reverse legends has already been referred to ; 
another type to be found on some of his silver and copper coins 
is Stratonos Basileds Epiphanous Soteros with its Prakrit equivalent 
maharajasa prachakskasa tratarasa Stratasa. The gradually aging bust 
on the coins of Strato I culminates in that of the toothless and 
senile king on the obverse of the silver coins issued in the joint 
names of himself and his grandson, Strato II; the obverse legend, 
partially legible, contains the names of the two Stratos, while the 
full Prakrit inscription, as deciphered by Pvapson, reads maharajasa 
tratarasa Stratasa potrasa chasa priyapita Stratasa, ‘(the coin) of king 
Strato Soter, and of his grandson Strato Philopater.’ That the Greeks 
had fallen on evil days when these coins were issued is proved not 
only by their indifferent style and execution, but also by the fact that the 
joint rulers had to issue coins of lead, a few of which are still preserved. 
Much of their possessions had been wrested from the weak and effete 
hands of Strato I and his associates, not only by the kings of the rival 
group, but also by rulers of other nationalities. The Athene Promachus 
type continues to be used as a coin device, but the issuers of these coins 
are no longer Greek but Indian and Scythian; the names which can 
be read on some coins are those of Bhadrayasa and Ranjubula, while 
others are barbarous imitations. 

SOME EUTHY DEMID INDO-GREEK RULERS 

The host of other Indo-Greek rulers, some of whom may have been 
connected with the house of Euthydemus as the types and legends used 
by them indicate, have practically no history at all. Many were local 
princelings ruling in different parts of Northern and North-Western India, 
several of them perhaps contemporaneously. There is unmistakable 
numismatic evidence to show that some of them were ruling as late as 
the Scythian conquest and consolidation of Northern India. One of them, 
Hippostratus, was undoubtedly contemporary with Azes I who re-strikes 
his coins. A characteristic reverse device of this ruler is the king riding 
on a prancing horse, which also appears on the reverse of some coins of 
Antimachus Nicephoros, perhaps the same as Antimachus Theos, whose 



MINOR EUTHYDEMIDS 


177 


connection with the house of Euthydemus is demonstrable. The same 
device occurs also on the coins of Philoxenus and Nicias who appear to 
have intervened between Antimachus and Hippostratus in the government 
of the lower Kabul valley where these coins were issued. The other de- 
vices which are used on the coins of these three rulers do not necessarily 
connect them, however, with the Euthydemids, though Hippostratus 
makes sparing use of the Apollo : Tripod-lebes adopted by Apollodotus 
and Strato I. Philoxenus has the characteristic title Aniketou first used 
by Demetrius ; but, as on the coins of Lysias, it is translated in Prakrit 
as apadihata ( apratihata , unchecked) and not aparajita (unconquered) 
as on the coins of Demetrius. The same title is used by one Arte- 
midorus, one of whose types, Artemis : Bull, probably shows that he 
was ruling over the region of Pushkalavatl; Philoxenus and Artemi- 
dorus are to be placed earlier in point of time than Nicias and Hippo- 
stratus, some of whose coins bear undoubtedly late forms of certain 
Greek letters (see Appendix) for the usual sigma, omega and omicron. 
Lysias, using Aniketos as his title, must certainly have preceded them all, 
and his connection with Demetrius’s line can be clearly demonstrated 
with the help of his coins. Not only do several of his coins show his 
bust with an elephant’s scalp, but the device of Heracles crowning him- 
self on their reverse is almost an exact copy of the characteristic device 
of Demetrius. On some coins his head is adorned with a low flat kausia 
similar to that which is shown on the head of Antimachus Theos ; the 
obverse of a few coins in the British Museum having his diademed and 
helmeted bust thrusting javelin reminds us of the similar obverse type 
of certain coins of Menander. Rapson was not sure about the dynastic 
connection of Lysias, and he was definite that there is nothing to show 
clearly to which of the two Yavana royal houses Lysias belonged. His 
doubt was mainly due to the incidence of some square copper coins jointly 
issued in the names of Lysias and Antialcidas. These bear on the obverse 
the bearded bust of Heracles with club on his shoulder and the legend 
Basileos Aniketou Lysiou, and on the reverse the palms and pilot 
of the Dioscuri with the Prakrit legend maharajasa jayadharasa Am- 
tialkidasa. Antialcidas, as will be shown presently, undoubtedly be- 
longed to the house of Eucratides, and so his associate ruler, according 
to Rapson, may not justifiably be connected with the rival house. But 
the only joint type known of these two kings might suggest some sort of 
rapprochement, presumably of a temporary character, between the two 
rival houses, in which Lysias’s role was probably more important. It is 
his major type, Heracles, and his name with his usual title, that appear 
on the obverse, while Antialcidas’s name and type occupy the reverse side. 

Of the several other kings, such as Zoilus, Apollophanes, Dionysius, 
Theophilus, and Telephus, some of whom can be grouped under the 
house of Euthydemus on numismatic grounds, Zoilus seems to have been 
a ruler of comparative importance. Several varieties of coin-types issued 
by this ruler have been discovered, and the style and execution of some 
23 



178 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


of them, though inferior to that of Lysias and Antialcidas, are not very 
much worse. He not only uses the Heracles device — one common to 
Euthydemus and to several of his immediate successors — but also Apollo : 
Tripod and Pallas Athene, the devices so frequently adopted on the coins 
of Apollodotus and Menander. Both the titles Dikaios and Soter are used 
by him, the latter more frequently than the former as on Menander’s 
coins. Tarn distinguishes between Zoilus Dikaios and Zoilus Soter, the 
latter being probably a grandson of the former. There seems to be some 
difference in style between the two series of coins with the two different 
titles, the Dikaios coins being as a class better executed than the Soter coins. 
Zoilus Dikaios uses the Heracles device while Zoilus Soter adopts the Pallas 
type. Tarn would describe the latter as the grandson of the former who 
according to him was probably a sub-king of Menander in the Gandhara 
region . 1 But this is problematical and there may not have been such 
a marked interval between the two Zoiluses ; moreover the conjecture 
does not account for certain square copper coins of Zoilus Dikaios, which 
have the head of a bearded Heracles with lion’s skin on the obverse, and 
a bow in case and the club of Heracles inside an ivy wreath on the reverse. 
The bow-in-case device distinctly reminds us of the Arsacid type of Maues, 
which also has a similar reverse type. This shows that Zoilus Dikaios 
may not have been far removed in point of time from Maues, and in that 
case duplication of Zoilus is hardly justifiable . 2 Nothing can be said 
with certainty, but it is better not to dogmatise. Very few coin-types 
of Dionysius, Apollophanes, Theophilus and Telephus are known, and 
their dynastic association is very obscure. It is almost certain that they 
were ruling in the eastern Panjab at a time when many parts of the Greek 
kingdom in the western Panjab and north-western India were being 
gradually annexed by the advancing §akas. Dionysius and Apollophanes 
adopt the title Soter, the former using Apollo :Tripod-lebes, and 
Apollo : diadem types of Apollodotus and the latter on his only one 
silver coin-type known, Athene Promachus; Dionysius from his type 
knd Apollophanes from his name may be associated with Apollodotus, 
and it is likely that these ephemeral rulers succeeded to the eastern 
parts of the Indo-Greek dominions. H. L. Haughton draws our point- 
ed attention to the crudity of design and corruptness of legend displayed 
by the drachms of Zoilus Soter, Apollophanes and Apollodotus Philo- 
pater. In these respects, the coins ‘display a marked similarity to that 
of the aged Strato, and it is of interest to remark that all these coins come 
from the vicinity of Akhnoor, north of Jummoo and Sialkot, in which area 
they most frequently occur.’ He rightly observes: ‘it therefore seems 
possible that the once extensive kingdom of Menander, with its thriving 
capital at Sakala (Sialkot), was by this time breaking up into small hill- 
states ruled by petty kinglets, each of whom maintained or shared a mint 
of sorts where no one but . . . inexpert mintmasters and workmen were 

1 Tam, op. cit., pp. 319-20 

2 Gardner, op. cit., pi. xxxn, 2, 12; Whitehead, PMC. i pi. x, 35 



TELEPHUS 


179 


available .’ 1 Theophilus and Telephus are obscure kings; their coins 
are very scarce and are characterised by some rare devices. The square 
copper coins of the former invariably show the bust of Heracles either 
with club over left shoulder, or shoulders draped without club, and 
the legend Basileos Dikaiou Theophilou on the obverse, and Heracles’s 
club or cornucopia with the corresponding Kharoshthi legend on the 
reverse. A unique silver coin, a hemidrachm according to the view of 
Gardner and Rapson, in the collection of the British Museum, shows 
the diademed bust of the king on the obverse and Heracles crowning 
himself on the reverse; the legends are the usual ones. Thus his devices 
appear to associate him with the Euthydemids. 

Telephus’s connection with either of these houses cannot be suggested ; 
it seems that he was an ephemeral ruler, perhaps ruling in the Kapisa 
region about the period of the Scythian conquest of the Punjab. His 
types as well as his title separate him from most of the known later 
Indo-Greek kings. Some of his square copper coins have Zeus enthroned 
with the legend Basileos Euergetou Telephou on the obverse, and an 
unidentified male figure walking to the right holding a long spear over 
his left shoulder with the Prakrit legend maharajasa kalanakramasa 
Teliphasa on the reverse. There is in the lower right corner of the reverse 
a tiny representation of a mountain as on the Kapisa coins of Eucratides. 
This feature in association with the enthroned Zeus has led numismatists 
to localise this king at Kapisa, and this seems to be correct. The unique 
hemidrachm of this king in the collection of the British Museum, of 
which only a few specimens are known, is of outstanding interest on 
account of its devices. These are a serpent-footed giant (Skythes?) on 
the obverse and two standing male figures, presumably sun and moon, 
the head of the former being radiate, that of the latter having a crescent 
attached to it. On the reverse of another square copper coin of his, an 
apparently naked male figure is seen squatting on a lotus ( ?) which has 
been described by Tam as ‘an Indian fakir squatting’. Tarn rightly says # 
that the imagination of the Greek die-cutters appears to have run riot on 
the few known coin-types of tnis obscure king. Another point of great 
interest with regard to his coins is that their only two peculiar monograms, 
which are extremely rare on Indo-Greek coinage, seem to place him very 
near the Indo-Scythic king Maues, on whose coins they occur. If these 
refer to the names of the mint-magistrates, then Telephus and Maues 
could not have been far removed in point of time, and it is likely that the 
latter annexed the Kapisa region from the former. The Greek legends 
on Telephus’s coins never contain late forms of letters like those on the 
coins of Hippostratus, Nicias and others, and we have already seen that 
there are good numismatic data which show that Hippostratus and 
Azes I were contemporaries. A careful and comparative study of the 
coin-types of many of these later Indo-Greek kings and those of the 


■NC. 1948, p. 141 



THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


early Scythic kings of the Panjab leaves little doubt about the gradual 
transference of the sovereignty over the northern and north-western 
regions of India from the hands of the Indo-Greeks to those of the Indo- 
Scythians. 

RULERS OF EUCRATIDES’S HOUSE AND OTHERS 

Several of the remaining Indo-Greek kings whose coins have been found 
and whose chronological position has not yet been discussed can be con- 
nected with the house of Eucratides on the basis of their coin-types and 
legends. One of the first and foremost in the series who seems to have 
immediately followed Heliocles is Antialcidas. The memoiy of this king 
is preserved in an interesting Brahmi inscription which was found en- 
graved on the side of a votive column of the second century B. c., still 
in situ in modem Besnagar (ancient Vidisa) in Bhopal, Madhya Bharat. 
It records that ‘the Garuda-dhvaja was erected here by Heliodorus, a 
Bbagavata, the son of Dion, and an inhabitant of Takshasila, (Takhkha- 
silakena), who came as Greek ambassador fiom maharaja (the great 
king) Antialcidas to king Kasiputra Bhagabhadra, the Saviour ( tratara 
—Soter), then reigning prosperously in the fourteenth year of his king- 
ship.’ Though the importance of this Brahmi inscription is very great 
in the history of Indian religion, its interest in the political history of 
India is not less. It synchronises the Indo-Greek ruler Antialcidas with 
one of the Suiiga kings of Madhya Bharat who to the eyes of a Greek 
convert to Bhagavatism was a Soter, and it clearly proves that diplomatic 
relations existed between the Yavanaking of the north-west and the Indian 
king of Central India. It is certain that Heliodorus's homeland, Taksha- 
sila, was included in the dominions of Antialcidas, the Yona king, whose 
ambassador ( Yonadiita ) he was. Antialcidas was not only ruling over 
Taxila, on the eastern side of the Indus, but on unmistakable numismatic 
evidence, held sway also over the Kapisa region. If we accept Rapson’s 
'localisation of the device of the pilot of the Dioscuri at Taxila, its frequent 
use on the copper coins of Antialcidas corroborates his sovereignty over 
this region which is suggested by the Brahmi inscription. His hold over 
Kapisa and its environs seems to be substantiated by his major coin-type, 
possibly an elaborate adaptation of Eucratides’s Kapisa coins described 
above. Here we may have the city-deity of Kapisa with Zeus who holds 
Nike in his extended right hand, and the elephant in front of the enthroned 
deity is snatching away the wreath from the goddess. On one rare silver 
tetradrachm the elephant-god, Indra, and his elephant with its trunk 
at the salute, are marching, but here also his identification with Zeus is 
clear from the goddess of victory hovering above. The coins of Antial- 
cidas, with two exceptions, a drachm and a tetradrachm of the Attic 
standard of weight, are all bilingual, the Greek legend being Basileos 
Nikephorou Antialkidou and its Prakrit equivalent, maharajasa jayadha- 
rasa Amtialikitasa. His unique coin with the above Greek legend only 



ANTIALCIDAS, ARCHEBIUS AND OTHERS 


181 


on the reverse does not necessarily prove that this was struck in Bactria, 
but it shows his contiguity to Heliocles, the last Greek ruler over Bactria 
and India, and its Kapisa device indicates that it was minted also some- 
where in the same region. Thus epigraphic and numismatic data seem 
to prove that he was holding sway over Taxila, Kapisa-Gandhara and the 
Paropamisadae just after Heliocles. His synchronism with Bhagabhadra, 
who has been identified with Bhagavata in the Puranic list of the Sunga 
kings, may show that he flourished till the beginning of the first century 
b. c., and the commencement of his reign may be carried back to the last 
quarter of the second century b. c., if not a little earlier. 

The continuance of the piloi type on the coins of Archebius alone, pro- 
bably proves that Antialcidas was succeeded in the Taxila region by 
Archebius and it should be noted that the piloi device is no longer found on 
the coins of any otherYavana ruler after him. The type next appears on the 
coins of Liaka Kusuluka who was the father of Mahakshatrapa Patika. 
Here also numismatic evidence points to the transference of sovereignty 
over one part of the extreme north-west of India from the Yavanas to the 
Sakas. Liaka Kusuluka was no other than a viceregal ruler enjoying the 
right of coinage under the paramount Saka sovereign Maues-Moga. The 
major device of Archebius is a standing Zeus and his titles are, in addition 
to the royal one, Dikaios and Nikephoros, which connected him with 
Heliocles and Antialcidas. His bust on the obverse is sometimes shown as 
wearing chain armour and thrusting a javelin with his right hand. The only 
device which is adopted on the reverse of all the silver and most of the 
copper coins of Diomedes is the Dioscuri, sometimes charging and at 
other times standing; on certain square copper coins of this king standing 
Dioscuri serve as the obverse type and the reverse is occupied by the hump- 
ed bull. It is presumable that he succeeded Archebius in the Gandhara 
region, and his rule was short-lived. Another ephemeral ruler in this re- 
gion was Epander, very few of his silver and copper coins being extant 
and, though his only known silver type shows the Athene Alkis, the princi- 
pal device of Menander and the members of his line, it is not possible t« 
connect him definitely with them. He uses the title Nikephoros, a title 
frequently adopted by Antialcidas and others of his group. Peucolaus, 
an obscure king, who was at first placed late along with Hippostratus, was 
known previously from a few copper coins having Artemis on the obverse 
and a crowned city-goddess on the reverse; his name as well as his device 
connects him with the city of Pushkalavati, the old capital of Gandhara. 
His association with Archebius was, however, demonstrated by the dis- 
covery of a tetradrachm of the reduced standard (Von Sallet and White- 
head) showing the diademed bust of the king with the legend Basileos 
Dikaiou kai Soteros Peukolaou on the obverse and standing Zeus with 
the Prakrit translation of the Greek legend on the reverse. The discovery 
of this silver coin shows that Peucolaus was a king of the Upper Kabul 
valley and closely allied to Archebius. Another late Indo-Greek king 
who appears to have ruled in this region, but whose dynastic association 



182 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


is not certain, is Amyntas. His major type is an enthroned Zeus Nicepho- 
rus. Whitehead sees some facia] similarity, especially characterised by 
the same type of portentous nose, between the portrait of Amyntas and 
those of Archebius and Peucolaus; but this would not carry us far, espe- 
cially if we bear in min d the now degenerate art of the die-cutters. Amyn- 
tas’s connection with Hermaeus, the last of the Indo-Greek kings in the 
Kabul valley, seems to be suggested by the close similarity of the types of 
bust on some of their square copper coins ; the radiate busts of the respec- 
tive kings are shown adorned with a Phrygian cap. Amyntas’s possible 
connection with Hermaeus was long ago suggested by Whitehead on the 
basis of the identical monograms appearing on their drachms. Tarn ad- 
vances a step further and on account of the similarity of the busts and the 
identity of the monograms observes that Hermaeus was the son of 
Amyntas. On some square copper coins of the latter, Pallas appears on 
the reverse; the Greek legend on the obverse of his coins is invariably 
Basileds Ntkephorou Amyntou its Prakrit equivalent on the reverse 
being maharajasa jayadharasa Amitasa. 

HERMAEUS 

The fact that many of the kings discussed above were ruling almost con- 
temporaneously over different parts of the extreme north and north-west 
of India and fighting for their very existence against the ever-increasing 
power of the barbarians was an ominous portent for the Bactrian Greek 
rule in India. Tt is possible that the growing Saka menace may have in- 
duced a few among them to come together temporarily, but an occasional 
coalition, if it occurred, was not a strong and effective check. The Sakas 
seem to have gradually absorbed the whole of the Panjab, Sind, and the 
older satrapies of Arachosia and Gedrosia and to have been advancing 
further yet into the interior of India. It was at this time that Hermaeus, 
the last of the Indo-Greek rulers, was maintaining his precarious hold 
qver the Kabul valley. It is presumable that he belonged to the house 
of Eucratides, as his major coin-type indicates, and Amyntas might have 
been his immediate predecessor; but we cannot go further than that and 
suggest like Tarn that Hermaeus was the son of Amyntas. He had 
not only to guard against the powerful Sakas on his eastern and southern 
border, but he had also to protect the kingdom from his new enemies, 
the Parthians on the south-west and the Yjie-chi on the north. It was 
practically hemmed in on all sides by the barbarians, and the task which 
Hermaeus had to face in maintaining the integrity of his small kingdom 
was a formidable one. It was perhaps in order to stem the advance 
of the foes who encompassed him that a final unification of the interests 
of the rival houses was made in his time. This unification is indicated by 
the joint coins issued in the names of himself and his queen Calliope, 
who must have been a princess in her own right. The obverse of 
these coins shows their jugate busts, both diademed, with the legend 



HERMAEUS AND THE KUSHANAS 


183 


Basileos Soteros Hermaiou kai Kalliopes and the reverse, the king 
on a prancing horse with the legend maharajasa tratarasa Hera- 
mayasa Kaliyapaya. The reverse device may suggest that Calliope 
was related to Hippostratus. But all this was of no avail to Herma- 
eus; the end was not long in coming, and it was from one or other 
of his barbarian neighbours that the last blow to his rule must 
have descended. It was at first generally held by scholars on the basis 
of numismatic evidence which will be discussed in fuller detail in 
Chapter viii of this volume, that the Kushan emperor Kujula Kadphises 
was responsible for the final destruction of Hermaeus’s kingdom. Some 
coins which bear the bust, name, and titles of the last Yavana king on the 
obverse and the name and titles of Kujula Kadphises on the reverse, were 
regarded as clear testimony for this conclusion. It was further suggested 
by some scholars that Hermaeus sought the aid of the Kushan chief to 
ward off the Parthian attack and in the end was destroyed by his helper. 
But a careful consideration of the coins of Hermaeus which bear his name 
alone, as well as of those issued in the joint names of Hermaeus and Kujula 
Kadphises, has led Rapson to suggest that the last of thelndo-Greek kings 
had long before been overwhelmed by one of his bitterest foes, the Parthi- 
ians, who were continuing his currency in a debased form in the conquered 
regions. This suggestion seems to find support in the writings of Justin 
who states that the Bactrian Greeks were finally oppressed by the Parthians. 
The Chinese annalists who refer to their realm as An-si say that it was 
the Parthians who were conquered by Kieu-tsiu-khi-o (Kujula Kadphi- 
ses) in this region. The probable sequence of events was this : Hermaeus, 
despite all his efforts could not survive the onslaughts of his hostile neigh- 
bours and succumbed to the Parthians or the Pahlavas of the Kandahar 
region some time in the beginning of the second half of the first century 
b. c. That it was these Pahlavas, and not the Kushanas, v/ho overthrew 
him seems to be indicated by the evidence of the coins which were struck 
by Spalirises with the characteristic type of the Yavana kings of Kabul, 
‘Zeus enthroned’. The victors, however, continued the currency of the 
last Indo-Greek ruler in his dominions which they conquered; but natural- 
ly the coins which they issued with the name and types of Hermaeus were 
very much debased. It was the final overthrow of the supplant ers of the 
Yavana king in gradual stages by the Kushan Yabgu Kujula Kadphises 
that is shown by the so-called joint issues of Hermaeus and Kujula 
Kadphises, and it is probable that a little more than half a century inter- 
vened between the last date of the Yavana rule in the Kabul region and 
the beginning of the Kushana. 

The comparative prosperity of the early part of Hermaeus’s rule is 
proved by his earliest coins, for these were of good style and execution. 
Silver with little alloy is the metal that was used. They bear the diademed 
bust of the king with the legend Basileos Soteros Hermaiou on the obverse 
and enthroned Zeus and the Prakrit equivalent of the Greek on the 
reverse ; early forms of the Greek letters occur on them. On other coins 



184 


THE BACTRIAN GREEKS IN INDIA 


of the same type, the round form of omicron, gives place to the square 
form, □ ; their metal is now much alloyed, and the execution, indif- 
ferent, and they appear to indicate the beginning of his troubles. 
The alloyed coins in their turn are succeeded by barbarous copper 
issues in some of which the word Soteros is written as Sterossu 
and rendered in Prakrit as mahatasa on the reverse. These last seem 
to have been issued by the Parthians, and were gradually replaced 
by the successive coin-types of Kujula Kadphises. This is Rapson's inter- 
pretation of the numismatic data of this period and there is little doubt 
that it is a sound one . 1 These series of coins are the principal mute evi- 
dence of the drama that was being enacted on the other side of the Indus. 

Thus ended the second Greek conquest of India. It was far more im- 
portant for India than Alexander’s. The cultural contact between the 
conquerors and the conquered for nearly two centuries of Greek rule was 
considerable and both parties reacted upon each other. It was not merely 
a case of the Greeks influencing the already well-developed civilisation 
of the Indians or vice versa. That the religious ideals and ideologies of 
the Indians were adopted by some of the great men of the ruling race is 
proved by the evidence of the Milindapanha and the Besnagar inscription. 
There were certainly many more Greek converts to the different religious 
systems of India. One case is that of a Greek officer, a certain Meridarkh 
Theodorus, who enshrined the relics of Bhagavan Buddha in the ancient 
country of Udyana (Swat valley) in the second century b.c. It asks for no 
imagination to suppose that he was a Buddhist convert, even though he 
was a Greek, and an important member of the ruling race. Another Meri- 
darkh of a little later date, whose name has unfortunately been lost, erected 
a stQpa evidently over some relics of Buddha in the vicinity of ancient Tak- 
shasila ‘in honour of his mother and father, for the presentation of a res- 
pectful offering,’ and he was associated with his wife in this pious act. 
The Greeks again adopted gradually the Indian way of living and identi- 
fied themselves to a great extent with the children of the soil. A second 
"Theodorus, about a century after the Meridarkh of the same name men- 
tioned above and possibly a descendant of the latter, caused a tank to 
be made in Udyana, in honour of all beings. A low stone relief showing 
two wrestlers, below whom appears the Kharoshthi inscription, Minarii- 
drasa (of Menander) in the collection of the Peshawar Museum, is probab- 
ly an ex voto offering of a Greek wrestler named Menander. This gives 
us a glimpse of the Graeco Indian secular life of the remote past . 2 In 
the realm of art, it was the Bactrian Greeks who made a notable contri- 
bution. The die-cutter’s art attained perfection in Bactria and some of 
the coins of her early independent rulers can vie in point of style and 


1 CHI. i pp. 561-2. But Van Lohuizen-de 
Leeuw is of definite opinion that 
‘Kujula Kadphises struck coins with 
Hermaeus.’ The ‘•Scythian’ Period of 
Indian History, pp. 362 ff. 

1 For the two Meridarkh inscriptions. 


cf. CII. ti (i) pp. 1-5 ; a sea i found 
in the Bajaur region contains the 
name of one Theodamas, a Greek chief 
who ‘lived in the Kabul valley at the 
time when the Greek dominion was 
overthrown by the Parthians and 






HELLENISM IN INDIA 


185 


execution, especially in the skill with which the individualistic portraits were 
made, with tne finest coins of the world. This degree of excellence no 
doubt deteiiorated when these Greeks settled in India, but the moneyer’s 
art remained potent enough to remodel some of her indigenous tribal 
currency. Many of the coins of the ancient tubes of the Kunindas and the 
Audumbaras were undoubtedly modelled on the money of Apollodotus 
and others, as regards the manufacturing technique, though the devices 
adopted by them were mainly indigenous. The Greeks themselves pos- 
sessed highly receptive minds and they did not hesitate to experiment 
sometimes on the lines of Indian monetary technique, as is shown by 
the very interesting group of copper coins issued by certain early Indo- 
Bactrian rulers like Pantaleon and Agathocles. Some silver, but much 
more the copper money, of most of the Indo-Greek kings shows distinct 
evidence of the adaptation of the indigenous methods of India. Nume- 
rous Kharoshthi letters and monograms, found on almost all the coins 
from Apollodotus and Menander to the last king Hermaeus, may contain 
the names of Indian die-cutters whose services were being more and more 
requisitioned by these alien rulers. It was during the time of the Bactrian 
Greek occupation of India that the foundations of the Hellenistic school 
of Gandharan art weie laid, which attained its zenith in the bands of the 
local Greek artists and their pupils during the period of the Scytho-Far- 
thian and early Kushana supremacy in India. 


subsequently, by the Kushanas’; ibid. p. 6. 
For the Peshawar Museum relief, cf. 


Hargreaves, Handbook to the Sculptures 
in the Peshawar Museum, pp. 106-7 


24 



Chapter VII 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 
INTRODUCTION 

T'HE Greek suzerainty over Bactria was destroyed by the nomad 
hordes of Central Asia. They were presumably the Sakas and the 
Yiie-chi; the former are variously named in classical literature as Sacae, 
Sacarauli, Sacaraucae, etc., or mentioned as Sai-wang in the early 
Chinese texts. It was the Sakas again who were forced by the Yiie-chi 
to quit their habitat on the Bactrian border and follow the Greeks 
into India; they gradually spread their supremacy over the northern 
and north-western regions of India at the expense of the local Indo- 
Greek rulers. Some phases of the struggle between the Sakas and the 
Indo-Greeks have already been discussed in the last chapter. The 
fortunes of these nomadic peoples in their migrations and conquests and 
their final overthrow in India at the hands of the Parthians will be traced 
now. The main sources for the reconstruction of this history 
are references to these peoples in Greek and Graeco-Roman annals 
and in the early Chinese accounts. The Scythian and Parthian invaders 
of India find occasional mention in many of the old Indian texts and they 
are often coupled in the memory of the Indian writers with their imme- 
diate predecessors here, the Yavanas, the compound Saka- Yavana-Pahlava 
occurring often enough in early epic and other literature. These allu- 
sions are usually of a general character, and do not supply us with any 
connected account of their Indian career. The classical and Chinese 
accounts, are far more helpful; but they, too, mostly deal with the early 
( history of the people as a whole and throw little light on the details of the 
Saka-Pahlava occupation of parts of India through successive generations 
An apocryphal Christian legend refers to the Indo-Parthian king Gondo- 
phares and his brother Gad; and archaeological discoveries have sub- 
stantiated the existence of this king Gondophares in India during the first 
part of the first century a.d. It is mainly the archaeological sources 
however, that have enabled us to reconstruct, though partially, the history 
of the Saka-Pahlava occupation of India. Epigraphic and numismatic 
data have helped scholars to throw light on this comparatively dark 
period of Indian history. 


THE SCYTHIANS 

One of the oldest references to the Sakas or the Scythians is found in the 
cuneiform inscriptions of Darius I, where as many as three different 



SCYTHIAN MIGRATIONS 


187 


branches of these people are enumerated. The Saka and Maka are inclu- 
ded in the Persepolis inscriptions among the various countries that were 
conquered by the Achaemenian emperor, and the Nakshi Rustam epi- 
graphs contain the names of three types of Saka peoples who were num- 
bered among his vassals; these are Saka Somavargaft (Haumavarka), 
Saka Tigraxauda (wearers of pointed helmets) and lastly Saka tyetiro- 
jraya 1 (Taradraya i.e. the Sakas beyond the sea). Herodotus, while des- 
cribing the various national contingents of Xerxes’s expeditionary force 
mustered for the invasion of Greece, also mentions some of these Sakas, 
and his ‘Amyrgian Scythians’ seem to include the first two branches men- 
tioned in Darius’s inscriptions. This historian tells us that ‘the Sacae or 
Scyths, clad in trousers, had on their heads tall stiff caps rising to a point. 
They bore the bow of their country and the dagger; besides which they 
carried the battle-axe, or sagaris. They were in truth Amyrgian Scythians, 
but the Persians called them Sacae, since that is the name which they give 
to all Scythians .’ 2 The wearers of the pointed helmets and the Amyrgian 
Sakas have been located by some scholars in widely distant regions such 
as the country of the river Jazartes (the Syr Daria) and the Persian pro- 
vince of Drangiana, the country of the river Helmand, which came to be 
known afterwards as Sakasthana, i.e. the abode of the Sakas, the later 
Persian Sijistan and modern Seistan . 3 But in the face of the above ex- 
plicit description of Herodotus, it seems likely that these two branches of 
the Scythian people lived in contiguous regions, if not in the same pro- 
vince, which appears to have been the Drangiana-Seistan territory. They 
may have spread in course of time over far distant regions and there is 
reason to believe that smaller migrations of these peoples in countries 
south of the Hindukush were taking place from comparatively early times. 
The third branch of the Scythians has been justifiably identified by Rap- 
son with those of Europe who dwelt in the Russian steppes on the north of 
the Black Sea. The Sakas on the borders of the Achaemenid Persian em- 
pire were the descendants of the older immigrants in these regions, whose 
migrations from Central Asia probably began as early as the eighth cen- 1 
tury b. c. The rise of the strong Persian power, and the might of the Mace- 
donian, Syrian and Bactrian Greeks, rising to greatness after the destruc- 
tion of the Persian empire kept these turbulent people in check for a long 
time; and it was only the internal weakness of the Bactrian Greeks, occa- 
sioned by their chronic internecine strife, and the preoccupations of the 
Syrian emperors, that enabled the Sakas of Sogdiana and other lands to 
conquer portions of the Bactrian empire, in India, Drangiana and other 
adjacent territories. The premonition of Euthydemus I of Bactria was not 
unfounded, and subsequent history proved the justice of the case he 


1 S. Sen, Old Persian Inscriptions, (Cal. 
Univ.) pp. 93, 98 

a G. Rawlinson ,The History of Herodotus, 

Bk. vii, ch. 64. ‘According to Hellanicus, 
the word “Amyrgian” was strictly a 


geographical title, Amyrgium being the 
name of the plain in which these Scyth- 
ians dwelt’; ibid. n. 5 
E. J. Rapson, CHI. i pp. 564-5 



188 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


presented through his son Demetrius and his countryman Teleas to his 
besieger, Antiochus III (Magnus), the Syrian emperor. 

The Sakas of Sogdiana, however, were compelled to move south and 
south-eastwards under pressure from other nomadic hordes of Central 
Asia and Western China, in the second century b. c. These wholesale 
migrations of the barbarian tribes were in the nature of gigantic uphea- 
vals, of which we find an account, not altogether disconnected but at the 
same time somewhat compressed and confused, in surviving Chinese 
annals more or less contemporary. The various peoples who played a pro- 
minent part in these events were the Hiung-nu, the Wu-sun, the Yue-chi, 
the Saiwang and the people of Ta-hia, with the last three of which we are 
here directly concerned. The principal Chinese texts which supply us with 
relevant information about these tribal wanderings are, according to chro- 
nological sequence, the Shi-Ki (ch. 123) of Ssu-ma Chien (c. 90 b. c.) con- 
taining the report of the Chinese ambassador Chang-Kien's embassy 
(c. 126 B.c.) to the west in search of prospective allies for the Chinese em- 
peror; the Ts'ien-Han-shu of Pan-ku (died a.d. 92) containing the annals 
of the Earlier Han Dynasty, covering the period from 206 b.c. to a.d. 24; 
and lastly, the Ho-Han-shu of Fan Ye, recording the annals of the Later 
Han dynasty, spread over the period from a.d. 25 to 220. The information 
about these tribal migrations that can be gleaned from translations by 
eminent Sinologists of the relevant passages in the above works is as 
follows: ‘In 176 b.c., Mao-tun, king of the Hiung-nu, sent a message to 
the Chinese emperor, and stated that he had defeated the Yue-chi. The 
latter had formerly been living between Tun Huang and Ki’-lien. After 
their defeat, they went westwards and drove another people whom the 
Chinese call Sai-wang, i.e. the Saka-kings, out of their country, but were 
subsequently themselves driven out by the Wu-sun. We further hear that 
the Ytie-chi in the west made themselves masters of the Ta-hia, while the 
Sai-wang went southwards and made themselves masters of Ki-pin. 
About 126 b.c., the Chinese envoy Chang-Kien found the Yiie-chi to the 
north of the Oxus, while the Ta-hia had their capital to the south of the 
river.’ 1 We need not follow here the account any further in connection 
with the early history of the Scythians who later invaded India. It is appa- 
rent that events spread over a considerable period, about half a century 
or so, are compressed in this bare statement, and the fortunes of the Sai- 
wang in the Ta-hia region are not explicitly mentioned. The Sai-wang of 
the Chinese extracts evidently denotes Saka-lord, for it is accepted that the 
word wang is a Chinese translation of the Saka word murrnda which 
occurs in Brahmi and Kharoshthi inscriptions of the early centuries of the 
Christian era, in the sense of ‘lord’ or ‘king’. The Indian equivalent of the 
word is svami which was attached to the names of some of the Indian Saka 
chiefs in Western India. It was the thrust of the Yue-chi which drove the 
Sakas from Sogdiana, as can be inferred from the Shi-ki passage to the 

* Sten Konow, ‘Notes on Indo-Scythian Chronology,’ flH. xu pp. 5-6 



3AKAS ENTER INDIA 


189 


effect that the Yue-chi, when defeated by the Hiung-nu, moved westwards 
from their original homeland in the region between the Great Wall built 
by the Chinese emperors as a protective measure against the Huns (Hiung- 
nu) and the mountainous part of the Kan-su province of China. They 
passed Ta-wan (modern Ferghana) and attacked and subjugated the people 
of Ta-hia. 1 In their westward march, after they had passed through 
Ferghana, they fell upon the Sakas of Sogdiana who in their turn passed 
through the western borders of Bactria. The main branch of the Yue-chi 
came in course of time to conquer Ki-pin (Kapisa). The Ta-hia have been 
generally identified by many scholars with the local people of Bactria 
which contained primitive, Iranian, and some Greek elements in their 
composition. After the destruction of the Greek ruling power in Bactria, 
the peace-loving commercial^ people of the country, at the end of the 
short period of presumably Saka overlordship, came under the sway of 
the powerful Yiie-chi tribe, an important section of which was destined to 
play a great part in the history of Northern India in subsequent times. 2 It 
was, however, only one of the two branches of the Yiie-chi into which they 
divided themselves in the region round Issy-kul lake during their west- 
ward march, that was responsible for driving the Sakas of Sogdiana south- 
wards and subsequently occupying the country of the Ta-hia. This divi- 
sion was known by the name of the Great Yiie-chi; the other group was 
designated as the Little Yue-chi which went southwards from the Issy-kul 
region and settled in the Tibetan borders. The division and dispersal of 
the tribes of the Sai is also mentioned in the concise summary given in the 
Chinese encyclopaedia of Ma-twan-lin, who refers not only to the occu- 
pation of Ki-pin by the king of the Sai and his followers but also to the 
formation of different Saka kingdoms here and there. 

The association of the Sakas with India proper may have begun long 
before the time when one of their main branches accompanied their king 
into Ki-pin. References to them occur in the texts of the pre-Christian 
period, the earliest certain mention being found in the Mahabhashya. Pat- 
anjali’s comment on Panini’s Sutra, siidranam aniravasitanam (ii. 4.10) 
leaves little doubt that the Sakas at the time of the commentator were living 
with the Yavanas outside the limits of Aryavarta. Saka infiltration into 
the extreme north-western and western borders of India some con- 
siderable time before the beginning of the Christian era is extremely 
likely, — perhaps even when the Bactrian Greeks were ruling in these 
regions. That they had early settlements on the far eastern borders 
of the Persian and Parthian empires has long been conjectured by scholars. 
In fact, sometimes large hordes of these barbarians menaced their stability. 
The Indians must have acquired their first knowledge of the Scythians 


1 Ta-hia has been taken by scholars like 
Marquart, Chavannes, Konow and 
others to stand for the Tochari, which 
name, according to Tam, signified part 
of the Yiie-chi. Tam, op.cit., pp. 295-6 

* G. Haloun is of opinion that there was 


no conquest of Bactria by the Sakas. 
It was conquered from the Greeks 
by the Yiie-chi who were there when 
Chang Ch’ien came; ZDMG. 91, 1937, 
pp. 825-8; cf. also JAOS. 65,1945, 
pp. 71-2 



190 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


from these border settlements, and comparatively old epic and Puranic 
texts as well as Jaina literature occasionally refer to these people. The 
Ramayana places the settlements of the Sakas ( Sakanam pattanani) along 
with the Kambojas and the Yavanas in the extreme north beyond the Sura- 
senas, Prasthalas, Bharatas, Kurus and Madrakas, while the Mahabharata 
locates them along with the Pahlavas, Barbaras, Kiratas and Yavanas in the 
extreme north-west beyond Sakala, the capital of the Madras . 1 The Han- 
vamsa gives us a characteristic description of the Sakas who used to shave 
half of their heads . 2 The mediaeval Jaina work Kalakacharya-Kathanaka 
(the story of the Jaina spiritual teacher Kalaka) informs us that Kalaka, 
who had a grudge against the Malava king Gardabhilla, went to Sagakula 
and induced the §aka chiefs called Shahis, owning allegiance to an overlord 
called the Shahanu Shah! (king of kings), to accompany him to Hindu- 
kadesa. Crossing the Indus they proceeded to Surashtravishaya (Kathia- 
war) and divided that country among themselves. Then Kalaka led them 
to Ujjayini, Gardabhilla’s capital. Gardabhilla was defeated and impri- 
soned, and a line of Saka kings was established in Malwa. Konow finds 
here a reference to an early Scythic conquest of Kathiawar and Malwa, 
which must have happened during the first half of the first century b. c., 
for the Jaina text informs us later that this Saka dynasty was uprooted 
by Vikramaditya, who then established the Vikrama era . 3 It is not certain 
whether the above account should be accepted in its entirety, because we 
have no other source to corroborate it, but it may contain a genuine tradi- 
tion of an early Scythic settlement in parts of Western and Central India. 
Similar such settlements in Northern India are also alluded to in some in- 
differently preserved KharoshthI inscriptions found in the extreme north. 
The explicit mention in most of the Chinese sources of the occupation of 
Ki-pin by the Saka king and his followers after they were driven from their 
previous habitat is apparently corroborated by these epigraphic sources. 
The early Chinese writers seem to have had a vague idea about the geogra- 
phical position of Ki-pin, but in the period we are speaking of, it appears 
to have denoted ancient Kapisa country, the Kafiristan of the modern 
rftaps . 4 The provenance of the few inscriptions is no doubt far to the 
east and south-east of Kapisa, but they unquestionably refer to the further 
expansion of this alien power resulting from the Saka movements in the 
north and also from their incursions from the south-west. 


1 Ram. iv 43, 12; Mbh. H 32, 17 

2 Hariramsa, xiv, 16; according to the 
author of this text, the Yavanas and 
the Kambojas used to shave their heads 
fully, the Paradas used to wear their 
hair loose and the Pahlavas had mous- 
taches and beards. All these peoples 
are described as allied ones and 
fallen from their original (Kshatriya) 
dharma. 

3 J1H. xn, 1933, pp. 17-18; Cll. a (i)pp. 


* Levi and Chavannes identified Ki-pin 
with Kashmir ; the latter suggested 
that it meant Kashmir from the period 
of the Han and down to that of nor- 
thern Wei, and was only in the Tang 
period identified with the country about 
the northern affluents of the Kabul 
river, the present Kafiristan (Cll n (i), 
p. xxin). Tarn accepts Lassen’s and 
Gutschmid’s view that Ki-pin imports 
a Greek place name Kophene (op. cit 
469) ; cf. also P. C. Bagchi’s Presidential 
Address, sec. I, PIHC. VI Session. 



ROUTE TAKEN BY TttE SAKAS 


191 


SAKA MOVEMENTS FROM THE SOUTH-WEST AND 
THE NORTH 

The fact that there remained in the Kabul valley a Greek dynasty ruling 
over the adjoining territories long after portions of the extreme north and 
west of India came under the occupation of different lines of Scythian 
chiefs has led scholars to conclude, not without reason, that the bulk of 
these invaders entered India proper by an indirect route. Their principal 
path of invasion did not lie through the Khyber Pass, the usual highway 
into India. After crossing the Hindukush, they outflanked the Greek 
pocket of resistance and passing through the western fringe of Aria into 
Arachosia entered the northern borders of Gedrosia and thence crossed 
into the Indus valley through the Bolan Pass. It is the numismatic data 
which have helped scholars to come to this conclusion, for coins of the 
early Saka rulers of India were found in Arachosia and northern Gedrosia 
on the one hand and the Panjab on the other, while they were conspicuous 
by their absence among the hoards discovered in the upper Kabul valley. 
Many of the early Saka kings again were undoubtedly contemporaries of 
later Indo-Greek rulers like Hippostratus. The types that were being 
issued by the Indo-Greeks in Arachosia and the Panjab were being copied 
by the 3akas, some of whom also were re-striking the issues of several 
Indo-Greek kings. The evidence of the contemporary coins thus shows 
that the main branch of the Sakas could not have utilised the principal 
highway in their immigration into India, and it has been rightly presumed 
that their direct entry was checked by the Greek principality under Her- 
maeus and his immediate predecessors in the Kabul valley. The Saka in- 
flux after the Yfle-chi occupation of Bactria, and even before, was mainly 
flowing in a southerly and south-westerly direction, receiving checks in the 
east and the west from the Indo-Greeks and the Parthians respectively. It 
then made its way into the lower Indus valley, later known as Indo-Scy- 
thia. This was the view held by Cunningham and others; an alternative 
suggestion was put forward by P. Gardner, who maintained that the Sakas* 
entered first into Kashmir and the Panjab through the Karakoram Pass 
and then spread over the Indus valley region and other parts of Northern 
India. This hypothesis, however, is wholly untenable because the extreme 
difficulty of the terrain is quite ill-suited to the migration of an entire peo- 
ple. This route, in fact, is used chiefly by pilgrims and caravans. The 
Ts'ien-Han-shu, however, writing about the southward march of the Sai- 
wang into Ki-pin refeis to their crossing of the Hien-tu (the hanging pas- 
sage) also described in the Wei-lio, the history of the Wei dynasty (a.d. 
220-64). According to Chavannes’s interpretation, this is the Bolor route 
through the Yasin valley, used by travellers en route from Wakhan to 
the Indus and further to Kashmir and Udyana; Fa-hien entered India 
along this route. 1 The Chinese evidence thus shows that a branch of the 
1 Tam observes that Pan-ku’s reference over the ‘hanging passage’ is a mistaken 

to the entry of the Sakas into Ki-pin one; for in the second century b.c.. 



192 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


Sai-wang with their chief, came *o India by this direct route and gradually 
spread over the northerly regions. In all probability there were two 
ways, indirect and direct, taken by the Saka immigration into India 
vouchsafed by numismatic and literary data respectively. Early epigraphic 
evidence also appeals to support the theory that, the Seistan region was 
the original homeland of a large body of the Indian Sakas. The Mathura 
Lion Capital inscription No. P contains the passage sarvasa Sak(r)asta- 
nasa puyae which was translated by Bixhler as "in honour of the whole 
Sakastana’. The word Sakastana here (the intervocalic r attached to k is 
redundant, as has been shown by Konow) has been taken by many scho- 
lars to be the same as modern Seistan in eastern Iran. The reading of the 
passage is beyond doubt, and though different interpretations have been 
suggested by other scholars, yet Buhler’s explanation is the most accept- 
able one. 1 

DIFFERENT BRANCHES OF THE SAKA IN V A DERS— THEIR 
NATIONALITY 

Two or more lines of Saka kings and potentates ruling over the northern, 
the north-western and western parts of India, have been recognised by 
scholars chiefly on the basis of the abundant numismatic data. Some 
of these chiefs again are known from a few Kharoshthi and fewer Brahml 
inscription; but it is interesting to note that none of them seems to have 
been mentioned clearly in any known Indian or foreign literature. If we 
leave aside the various branches of the Saka Satraps of Northern and 
Western India whose history will be discussed separately, (ch ix) the two 
main royal lines of the Scythians known from their coins, are those of 
Maues in the Panjab and its adjoining lands, and of Vonones and his 
associates in Kandahar (Arachosia) and Baluchistan (Gedrosia and 
Drangiana) regions. Maues and probably his immediate successor Azes 
are mentioned in a few Kharoshthi records, but neither Vonones nor any 
■of his direct associates are known to have been alluded to in any inscrip- 
tion either Brahmi or Kharoshthi. It is presumable that Maues and 
Vonones were roughly contemporary rulers, the former, perhaps, being 
the earlier of the two. Ceitain numismatic and other features of these 
rulers led V. A. Smith to question their Scythian nationality; he maintain- 
ed that tnese chiefs and their successors were Parthians by race. There is 
no doubt that some Parthian elements are distinctly associated with these 
rulers. The name Vonones, for example, is unmistakably a Parthian one, 
the imperial dynasty of Parthia claiming two rulers of this name, Vonones 
I (a.d. 8-12) and Vonones II (about a.d. 51). The peculiar title Basileos 
Basiledn (i.e. ‘of the King of Kings’), which is prefixed to the names of 
both the Vonones and Maues group of kings, is clearly Parthian and can 

the Chinese term Ki-pin had no definite op. cit., pn. 227-8 
localised meaning, and the pass was 1 CII. n (i) pp. 46-7 
impracticable for a tribal migration: 



SAKA AND PARTHIAN 


193 


be traced back to the Achaemenid imperial title Kshayathiyanam Kshaya- 
thiya. The title in this form seems to have been introduced first either by 
Arsaces VI (Mithridates I, 171-136 B.c.), or by his nephew Mithridates II, 
the Great (123-88 b.c.). Smith suggested that the conquests of Mithridates 
I extended as far as the river Hydaspes (Jhelum) in the east as is known 
from the statement of the historian Orosius (c. a. d. 400). Taking advan- 
tage of a temporary eclipse of this foreign power some time after 
Mithridates’s death c. 136 b. c., a Parthian chieftain Maues made himself 
king in the Panjab sector, and another such, Vonones, in the Drangiana 
sector of the Parthian empire, and both began to extend their sway. Vono- 
nes, owning perhaps a nominal suzerainty to the imperial Parthian power, 
ruled over parts of Seistan, southern Afganistan and northern Baluchistan 
employing some of his relations as viceregal chiefs. At a later stage in 
their history, the lines of Maues and Vonones coalesced and thus formed a 
strong Indo-Parthian block in the extreme north and west of India. The 
Parthian character of Maues though not so self-evident as that of Vonones 
can be clearly demonstrated, according to Smith, with the help of one 
particular type of Maues’s coins in which the distinctively Parthian de- 
vices, a ‘horse’ and a ‘bow in case’, appear on the obverse and reverse sides 
respectively. 1 

Vincent Smith’s hypothesis based on the above premises is hardly 
tenable. The statement of Orosius in connection with the history of 
Parthia (‘ Omnes praeterea gentes quae inter Hydaspen fluvium et Indum 
jacent subegit,’ i.e. he, Mithridates I, ‘conquered all the peoples between 
the rivers Hydaspes and the Indus’) would not justify us in identifying the 
Hydaspes of the passage with the Indian Hydaspes, i.e. the Jhelum. It 
would rather indicate that the Indus was the eastern limit of the Parthian 
expansion under Mithridates I, and the Hydaspes in this context should be 
sought for somewhere in the western parts of the Parthian empire. Rapson 
refuted Smith’s main hypothesis in this manner and suggested that the 
river was identical with the Medus Hydaspes of Virgil ( Georgies , iv, 21 1). 
He observed that ‘the theory of a conquest of North-Western India by* 
Mithridates I would seem to be founded on a misunderstanding of the his- 
torian’s statement.’ The undoubted Parthian features of Vonones and 
Maues, on the other hand, were explained by him as due to the long con- 
tact of the Sakas with the Parthians in eastern Iran. Wroth, and after him 
Rapson, were of the opinion that the distinctive title Basileos Basiledn was 
first introduced in the Parthian coinage by Mithridates II, in whose reign, 


1 Smith elaborated his views in ZDMG. 
1906, pp. 49-72. In his CCIM. i, he 
describes the dynasties of Maues and 
Vonones as Indo-Parthian. It should 
be noted that in ZDMG. 1907, he 
distinctly asserts that ‘Sakas did invade 
the Panjab in the second century b.c.’ 
and that ‘Saka chiefs ruled in the 
Panjab until the Ytie-chi conquest in 
25 


the latter part of the second century 
a.d.’ ‘The Sakas would then naturally 
have become merged in the cognate 
Ytie-chi, known to Sanskrit literature 
as Tusharas, Tukharas, Turushkas.’ But 
still he holds, ‘the evidence, as it now 
stands, does not warrant us in affirming 
as a fact that Maues and his successors 
were Sakas’ (p. 421). 



194 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHLANS IN INDIA 


according to Rapson, ‘the struggle between the kings of Parthia and their 
Scythian subjects in eastern Iran was brought to a close and the suzerainty 
over the ruling powers of Seistan and Kandahar confirmed.’ 1 The names 
of Maues and his successors, as well as those of the associates of Vonones, 
appear to contain definite Saka elements. Arrian names an Asiatic Saka 
ruler as Mauakes, while Meuakos and Moaphernes are the names of 
European Scythians; the names of Azes, Azilises, Spalirises and others 
contain either Scythic or Iranian elements. 2 Sten Konow while accepting 
the Scythian origin of Maues would, however, describe the Azes group of 
kings as Parthian, and regard Vonones as identical with Vonones I of the 
imperial Parthian dynasty, ruling in the Drangiana and Arachosia regions 
with the imperial titles some time before 10 B.c., about two decades before 
his short-lived career as the Parthian emperor. 3 But this view of Konow, 
also, can hardly be accepted, for it rests on data which are very largely 
hypothetical. Nothing can be said with absolute certainty about the career 
and character of these early foreign chiefs of India, mainly for the reason 
that whatever we know about them is gleaned from archaeological data 
unsupported by any literary evidence of an explicit and illuminating kind. 
In their rule over the middle and lower Indus valley and Drangiana and 
Arachosia, the Parthians (Pahlavas) and the Scythians (Sakas) were so 
closely associated, according to Rapson, that ‘it is not always possible to 
distinguish between them’, the same family including both Pahlava and 
Saka names. Rapson observes further, ‘it is little more than a convenient 
nomenclature which labels the princes of the family of Maues, who invad- 
ed the lower Indus valley, as Sakas, and those of the family of Vonones, 
who ruled over Drangiana and Arachosia as Pahlavas.’ 4 F. W. Thomas 
also, after a close linguistic survey of the various names of the early fore- 
ign chiefs, both royal and satrapal, known from their coins and inscrip- 
tions came some time before Rapson to an almost identical conclusion. 
The close association of the Sakas and Pahlavas in this period is 
demonstrable from various sources, and it is highly probable that the 
tribes from eastern Iran invading India contained diverse elements. There 
is no clear mention of any regular Parthian invasion of India; on the 
other hand, there were inroads by adventurers of various origin such as 
Maues or Vonones and his associates. 5 

MAUES-MOGA 


Maues, one of these successful adventurers, is only known from a series 
of coins; and probably also from inscriptions, one of which contains 
a date. The dated copper-plate inscription discovered in Taxila records 
the establishment of the relics of Buddha in a stupa and the building of 


E. J. Rapson, CHI. i pp. 567-8; Indian 
Coins, p. 8, sec. 30. 

JRAS. 1906, pp. 208 ff. ; F. W. Thomas 
has made a careful analysis of these 


names. 

3 CII. n (i) pp. xl-xliii; J1H. 1933, p. 20 

4 CHI. i p. 568 

5 JRAS. 1906, p. 215 



MAUES 


195 


a sangharama by one Patika, the son of Liaka Kusuluka, in the 78th. 
year, during the reign of the great king, the great Moga. Another ex- 
tremely fragmentary Kharoshth! record recovered from a well in a small 
village called Maira in the Salt Range, Jhelum district, may contain the 
word moasa (‘of Moa or Moga’) and the date 58; but on account of its 
most indifferent state of preservation, the reading of the name and date 
is extremely uncertain. The great king Moga of the Taxila copper-plate 
has been identified almost unanimously by scholars with Maues-Moga 
of the coins, though Fleet would differentiate between the two. The 
date 78 in the Taxila plate, like most, if not all, other dates in Indian 
inscriptions of the pre-Gupta and even early Gupta periods, is not speci- 
fied according to any known era, and this is why there is so much difference 
of opinion with regard to the time of Maues. Fleet was of opinion that 
the year 78 was referable to the Vikrama Samvat whose first year fell in 
58-57 b.c. Thus, according to his view, Moga flourished in a.d. 20-21, 
and he would under no circumstances place Maues of the coins at such 
a late period. Numismatic evidence is clear that Maues must have flou- 
rished much earlier. Some of his round copper coins bear on the obverse 
an elephant’s head with a bell round its neck to the right inside an astra- 
galus border and a caduceus with a monogram on the left field and 
the legend Basileos Mauou. This is almost an exact replica of the 
‘elephant’s head : caduceus’ copper-type coins of Demetrius, the mono- 
gram and the legend being necessarily different. Moreover, Maues 
directly imitates some of the coin types of other early Indo-Greek kings 
like Apollodotus and Antimachus, and some of these evidently earlier 
issues of his bear the above-mentioned Greek legend with its Kharoshth! 
equivalent maharajasa Moasa. These coins were regarded as not far 
removed in date from their prototypes, and at first their issue was placed 
as early as 120 to 95 b.c. This was the main reason for Fleet’s difficulty 
in identifying Maues with Moga, and he did not try to obviate it by sup- 
posing that the Taxila plate was not dated in the reign of the great king 
Moga, but in the year 78 of an era which was inaugurated during hi* 
time. 1 

Those who would identify the two, would not place Maues as early 
as the last quarter of the second century or the first decade of the first 
century b.c. The era of the Moga copper-plate had been the subject of 
a great controversy among Indologists, some describing it as of Parthian 
and others as of Scythic origin, a third group referring it to the Vikrama 
Samvat of 58-57 b.c. The last view is untenable if Moga and Maues 
are to be considered identical, for that would place the great king in 
a.d. 20, when another great king, Gondophares, was flourishing in the 
same region. Even if we differentiate between Moga and Maues as Fleet 
has done, there will be no justification for assuming the simultaneous 
existence of two great kings in Taxila-Gandhara in the first quarter 
of the first century a.d. Rapson would place the beginning of the era 
1 JRAS. 1914, pp. 994 ff.; Fleet has also emphasised his view in several other papers. 



196 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


c. 150 b.c. which ‘may possibly mark the establishment of the new 
kingdom in Seistan after its incorporation into the empire by Mithridates 

I. ’ The Sakas may have brought this era into India from Seistan and 
the name of the month (Panemos) in the inscription being Parthian, 
Rapson infers that the era itself is probably of Parthian origin. Accord- 
ing to this assumption, Moga-Maues was ruling in c. 72 b.c., a date which 
would very well suit the chronological scheme of the Saka-Pahlava period 
of Indian history usually advocated by scholars. Both Marshall and 
Konow, who at first held views different from that of Rapson, later became 
advocates of this theory, especially since the discovery of such dated Kha- 
roshthi inscriptions as the Taxila silver scroll and the Kalawan copper- 
plate. Sten Konow in his elaborate but now partly discarded chrono- 
logical scheme, adopted in the Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. ii, 
surmised the institution of an era by the Sakas of Seistan to celebrate 
their independence shortly after the death of Mithridates II in 88 b.c. 
He described this era as the Old Saka era with reference to the later one 
which undoubtedly commenced from a.d. 78. He fixed the initial year 
some time in 84 b.c., and dated the Moga plate and many other Kharoshthi 
records on this basis. The Kalawan copper-plate, however, largely 
upset his chronology and therefore he accepted Rapson’s dating of 
Maues-Moga. 1 Reference may be made here to a few other suggestions 
about the date of the Saka chief, all of them hypothetical. K. P. Jayaswal, 
assuming an era commencing c. 120 b.c. to mark the revolt of the Sakas 
of Seistan against Mithridates II, and referring 78 of the Taxila plate 
to it, would place Moga-Maues in c. 42 b.c. Herzfeld carefully con- 
sidered the various theories and showed them to rest on no firm ground; 
whereupon he added one himself. Computing the probable period of 
the coins issued by the rulers intervening between Maues and Gondo- 
phares, and assuming the identity of Maues and Moga, he dated the 
copper-plate about 32 b.c., the year mentioned there being thus referable 
to an era starting from 110 B.c. H.C. Raychaudhuri argued the impos- 
^bility of placing Maues (Moga) anywhere between 129 and 33 B.c. and 
suggested that he ruled over the Panjab and Gandhara after 33 b.c. 
but before the second half of the first century a.d. Raychaudhuri’s state- 
ment, however, that the era to which the year 187 of the Khalatse inscrip- 
tion of Uvima Kavthisa (?), the year 191 of the Taxila silver vase inscrip- 
tion of Jihonika, and presumably the 78 of Moga’s copper-plate all refer 
began much earlier than 58 b.c., shows that he himself is not sure about 
his own dating of the earliest of the Saka kings of the Panjab ; but he has 
rightly pointed out the untenability of the view suggested by one or two 
scholars that Maues flourished not only after Azes I, but also after Azes 

II, both of whom, as will be shown presently, came after Maues. 2 Tarn 


l JRAS. 1932, pp. 949 ff.; El. xxi pp. 
251 ff. In his Corpus, n(i), he dated 
Maues-Moga in 6 b.c. (84-78). 

2 For Jayaswal’s view, cf. JBORS , xvi, 


1930, pp. 231 & 240; for Herzfeld’s 
theory, cf. Sakastan, pp. 98-100 ; for 
H. C. Raychaudhuri’s opinion cf 
PHAI. 1 pp. 364-5 



TYPES OF SAKA COINS 


197 


accepted the identity of Maues with Moga on the ground that the full 
form of the name Maues sounded Mauakes to Greek and Mu-ku’a to 
Chinese ears, and this would be transliterated in north-western Prakrit 
as Moga. He was further of the opinion that the era of the copper-plate 
must be a Saka one which began in c. 155 B.c. to commemorate the inde- 
pendent settlement of some Saka allies or mercenaries of Mithridates I 
in Sakastan (Seistan — ancient Drangiana), one of the richest and safest 
districts of the Parthian empire. The era might not have been instituted 
by the intruding Sakas themselves, but might have been founded by their 
descendants. 1 Whatever may be the force of Tarn’s reasoning, his hypo- 
thetical era falls very close to Rapson’s, and the year 77 b.c. comes 
within the reign of Maues-Moga. Lohuizen-de Leeuw accepts the iden- 
tity of Maues and Moga, and places him about this period; but she is 
definitely of opinion that Maues belonged to the Parthian stock. 2 

COINS OF MAUES 

The above discussion proceeding on the basis of the only available 
epigraphic evidence about the time of Moga or Maues, and assuming 
the two to be identical, shows how the date on the inscription has compli- 
cated the issue. A few other Saka-Pahlava and one or two indeterminate 
Kushana inscriptions bearing dates, as will be shown presently, have added 
to the difficulty of outlining the chronology of this period. We shall 
see now how far the coins of Maues as well as other numismatic data 
help us. Maues issued a large number of coins mostly in copper, and 
a few in silver. Of the different varieties of his coins, those that have the 
closest affinities to the earlier Indo-Greek rulers were presumably his first 
issues. On some of his copper coins, one type of which bears the Greek 
legend only on the reverse, there being no corresponding KharoshthI 
legend, the obverse bears Basileds Mauou and the reverse maharajasa 
Moasa. It should be noted that the attributive epithet of Maues on these 
coins and of Moga on the copper-plate are not exactly similar; MogsJ 
is described in the inscription as maharaya mahamta, ‘the great king, 
the great,’ which is nothing but an exact Prakrit translation of the 
title Basileds Megalou adopted by several Indo-Greek kings beginning 
from Eucra tides. But in all the other bilingual coin-types of Maues, 
two only of which are in silver, the legend on the obverse is Basileds 
Basileon Megalou Mauou, its corresponding Prakrit version in Kharo- 
shthI being rajatirajasa mahatasa Moasa. Such fuller and more high- 
sounding legends are invariably to be found on the coins of the other 
Saka rulers of the Panjab— Azes I, Azilises and Azes II, all of which 
are bilingual; the attributive epithets in Greek on the obverse are the 
same, but there is a slight change of the Prakrit equivalent on the reverse, 

1 W W Tam, op. cit., pp. 496, 499-500 the arguments of some of the previous 

2 J. E. Lohuizen-de Leeuw, The ' Scythian' exponents of this view, such as V. A. 

Period, pp. 337 ff. She reiterates mostly Smith and others. 



THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


maharajasa rajarajasa being substituted for rajatirajasa. An intermediate 
form of these two Prakrit legends ( maharajasa rajatirajasa), as has already 
been shown (p. 164), occurs for the first time on some rare square copper 
coins of Eucratides. Chronologically speaking the types of coins with 
a legend of lesser magnitude should be regarded as the earlier issues 
of Maues; this is supported by the fact that their devices closely 
resemble those adopted by earlier Indo-Greek rulers. 

Reference has already been made to the ‘elephant’s head : caduceus’ 
device, common only to Demetrius and Maues. Another coin-type, 
presumably earlier, bears on its obverse a standing Apollo with bow and 
arrow in his hands and on the reverse a ‘tripod-lebes’ within dotted border, 
a type which is first introduced by Apollodotus I, and continued later by 
Strato I. It should be noted that these coins of Maues stamped with less 
high-sounding legends in Greek and Prakrit are square copper pieces 
of smaller denomination, and their weight does not usually exceed 35 
grains ; but similar coins of Maues, heavier in weight and larger in size 
with the fuller bilingual legends noted above, are also not unknown, 
one such being in the collection of the British Museum. R. B. Whitehead 
has rightly observed that this last is imitated from one type of square 
copper coins of Strato I. 

The numismatic data discussed above, taken collectively, leave little 
doubt about two things: first, Maues was the earliest among the known 
§aka rulers of the Panjab, and secondly, though his date was fairly early, 
he could never have flourished as early as 120-95 b.c. The first point 
is further corroborated by the fact that Azes I and Azilises not only con- 
tinue most of the coin-types issued by Maues, but borrow many others 
from the issues of the Indo-Greek rulers not copied by Maues. This 
also bears out the usually accepted view of the gradual expansion of the 
!§aka power in the north and north-west. Maues must have come after 
Strato I, and thus a date in the second quarter of the first century b.c. 
will not be improbable for him. Taking the first year of Gondophares, 
Who succeeded Azes II, to be a.d. 19 as will be shown presently, we have 
to fit in the fairly long-reign periods of Azes I, Azilises and Azes II between 
that date and the last year of Maues. If we assume a period of seventy 
years to cover the collective reign of the three rulers, the last year of Maues 
would fall roughly at about 51 B.c. and so a date in the early seventies 
of the first century b.c. will not be probably far off the mark. Thus 
we see that numismatic considerations also seem to support the chrono- 
logy adopted by Rapson on the basis of the Taxila copper-plate, in spite 
of the objections that have been raised against his hypothetical Parthian 
era of 1 50 b.c. 


OTHER COIN-TYPES OF MAUES 

Maues’s coins as well as the Taxila copper-plate clearly prove that his 
rule extended on both sides of the Indus, from Pushkalavatl on the west 



MAUES’S COINS 


199 


to Takshasila on the east, the great plain of Chach, ancient Chukhsa, 
being then governed by Liaka Kusuluka, a satrap subordinate to him. 
His dominion may have extended a little further in the east and the south, 
but there is no clear evidence of this. That he held sway also over Kapisa 
to the north of Gandhara is borne out by his issue of the local coin-type 
with some re-orientation. It has already been shown (p. 179) that Maues’s 
immediate predecessor in Kapisa may have been the obscure Indo-Greek 
king Telephus between whom and Maues a close bond in time and place 
was first suggested by R. B. Whitehead, the territory associated with both, 
according to him, being Taxila and Kapisa. 1 A large square copper coin 
in the collection of the British Museum shows the Kapisa device (en- 
throned Zeus Nicephorus, the forepart of an elephant with upraised trunk 
before him) on the obverse, but Heracles with his attributes crowning 
himself on the reverse. 2 Similar copper pieces having an enthroned 
Zeus holding a sceptre in the left hand and the right hand resting on a 
thunderbolt personified on the obverse, and Tyche (?) on the reverse 
may also be localised at Kapisa. A unique, round, silver piece of smaller 
denomination (36 grs.) in the Panjab Museum may also belong to the 
same region; the obverse shows an enthroned deity with a long sceptre 
in the left hand and an outstretched right arm (probably Indra of Sveta- 
vatalaya near Kapisa), and a standing Zeus Nicephorus on the reverse. 
The ‘Artemis and bull’ round copper coins of Maues may have been issued 
at Pushkalavatl, the old capital of Gandhara. They are modified adapta- 
tions of similar coins of Artemidorus, which, however, are square. All 
these coins, possibly to be localised in Kapisa and Gandhara, bear Maues’s 
usual high-sounding Greek and Prakrit legends. The local character 
of many of the early foreign coin-types was emphasised by Rapson, and 
reference has already been made to his findings (p. 169). As these locali- 
ties were being gradually absorbed into the empire of the Indo-Scythians, 
the types formerly used by the preceding Indo-Bactrian Greek kings 
were copied with some slight modifications by the new rulers. 

The obverse sides of Maues’s coins do not usually bear his figure but, 
instead a large number of deities, many of which are no doubt Greek, but 
some no less certainly non-Greek in character. Among the latter can 
be recognised one or two Indian deities such as Siva, undoubtedly, 
and Buddha, possibly. 3 The few silver and copper coin-types of Maues 
which bear his figure either on horseback or riding in a two-horsed chariot 
with the driver in front, are interesting. The British Museum possesses 
‘the biga type of silver coins known in the didrachm, hemidrachm, and 
square hemidrachm sizes’ (Whitehead); they are thus important for more 
than one reason (the square hemidrachm is not usually met with in the 
Indo-Scythic series). They are bilingual with the fuller legends and have 
on the obverse ‘King radiate, standing in biga (a chariot drawn by two 

1 NC. 1923, pp. 337-8 but a goddess ; NC. 1947, pp. 29-31 

2 R. B. Whitehead now thinks that the 3 Contra Leeuw, op. cit., pp. 97-8 

city deity of Kapisa was not Zeus, 



200 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


horses) to right, holding spear in right hand, with charioteer in front’ 
and on the reverse, ‘enthroned Zeus to front, right arm extended to 
right, holding an indistinct object ( hasta pura according to Cunning- 
ham) in his left hand.’ Though the reverse device is undoubtedly bor- 
rowed from Indo-Greek money, the obverse shows great originality, for 
no Indo-Greek king appears to have adopted any such device. The ephe- 
meral Bactrian king Plato shows on the reverse of his tetradrachms a deity, 
most probably Helios, driving in a quadriga i.e. a four-horsed chariot, 
but the device can in no circumstances be taken as the prototype of this 
particular kind of obverse. This unique type of Maues’s silver coins may 
be localised also at Kapisa on the basis of its reverse. Several other 
coin-types of Maues, having distinct associations with some previous 
Indo-Greek ones, very often appear in a new setting. Thus, the Posei- 
don device on the obverse of certain square copper coins of Maues 
is not an exact copy of the same appearing on the reverse of the 
coins of Antimachus Theos; in the former the deity is shown either 
trampling on a river god or hurling a thunderbolt at him, the corres- 
ponding reverse design being a Maenad (or a Bacchante) within two 
vine stems. Now this is undoubtedly a re-orientation of an old device, 
and it is not at all certain whether it points to a successful passage of 
the Indus by Maues . 1 In any case we find an exact copy of its obverse 
and reverse in one type of the numerous coins of his successor Azes I; 
‘coins of this type of Azes I seem commonly to have been re-struck on 
suitable issues of the Greek kings .’ 2 Two things are clear from the extant 
coins of Maues : first, mat Maues did not re-strike any of the coins 
of the Indo-Greek Kings, some of whom were undoubtedly his 
contemporaries; and, second, that he was never, like many Scythian and 
Parthian rulers of India, associated with any other person during his fairly 
long reign. Another interesting feature to be noted about his coin-types 
is ‘the wealth of most remarkable and original barbaro-Hellenic figures.’ 
This was pointed out long ago by Gardner who observed that ‘by some 
gieans or other Maues and his race secured the services of the artists who 
had been instructed by Greeks, but were not restricted by Greek tradi- 
tions .’ 3 We have a rough idea about the length of his rule from the large 
number of coins with some borrowed and many original devices that 


This view was first suggested by Raoul 
Rochette and endorsed by Cunningham, 
Coins of the Indo-Scythians, Part n. 
3-4 (Reprinted from the NC. xm series, 
pp. 104-5). Tarn finds in this device 
a definite allusion to Maues’s decisive 
victory over a Greek fleet on the Indus, 
‘which gave him control of the river 
and opened the way to Taxila’; op. 
cit., p. 322 

R. B. Whitehead, PMC. i p. 122, n. 1; 
the Panjab Museum, Lahore, has two 
such types re-struck on coins of Apollo- 
dotus and Hippostratus, and the British 


Museum, one such re-struck on a large 
Hippostratus copper coin. 

' P. Gardner, British Museum Catalogue of 
Coins of the Greek and Scythic Kings 
of Bactria and India, p. Iviii; besides 
the well-known Greek types of Zeus 
Poseidon, Nike, Heracles etc. with some’ 
re-orientation of others such as ‘a figure 
resembling Tyche holding in one hand a 
patera, in the other a wheel’, ‘a radiate 
Artemis, with veil flying round her 
head’, ‘a draped goddess, bearing a cres- 
cent on her head and standing between 
two stars’ etc. occur on his coins. 



VONONES 


201 


were struck by him. It is highly probable that he enjoyed a pretty long 
reign which may have ended by the middle of the first century b.c., or a 
few years earlier. But nothing can be said with certainty, and the sug- 
gestion now hazarded about the period of Maues is, at best, a hypothesis 
which will fit in well with the chronology of the Saka-Pahlava kings adopt- 
ed here. 


VONONES AND HIS ASSOCIATES 

There are clear numismatic data which prove that one Azes succeeded 
Maues in the Panjab, Gandhara, and Kapisa regions. But before we take 
up the history of the immediate successors of Maues we must say some- 
thing about the other branch of foreign rulers which was almost simultane- 
ously holding sway in Arachosia and other regions on the western border 
of India. The first member of this line was Vonones about whose exact 
nationality there is very little doubt. His name is undoubtedly Parthian 
and the names of his associates such as Spalahora (Greek Spalyris), Spala- 
gadama, and Spalirisha (Greek Spalirises), are pan-Iranic according to 
Thomas 1 , and Scythian according to Rapson . 2 On account of the 
predominance of the Parthian and Iranic elements in it, the dynasty has 
usually been described as Parthian or Pahlava, and it is most probable that 
one of its later members (perhaps Spalirises) was responsible for the final 
destruction of the last remnant of the Bactrian Greek power in the Kabul 
valley. Some of the classical writers, Justin for instance, clearly say that 
it was the Parthians (the old Chinese name for their realm is An-si) who 
destroyed the Greek sovereignty in the Kabul and Herat region, and the 
discovery there of coins of some of Vonones’s associates along with those 
of the local Indo-Greek rulers appears to bear out this statement. Vono- 
nes’s coins are comparatively few in number and in each of them he asso- 
ciates with himself one or other of his relations. Only two types of round 
silver coins and two types of square copper coins of this king are known, 
in which joint but at the same time subordinate rulers are his brothej 
Spalahores and his nephew Spalagadames, son of Spalahores. The Greek 
legend on the obverse of all of them is Basileds Basileon Megalou 
Ononou, the Prakrit reverse in one set being maharajabhrata dhrami- 
kasa Spalahorasa and in the other, Spalahoraputrasa dhramiasa Spala- 
gadamasa. The devices on the silver coins are ‘king on horseback to 
right with couched spear’ on the obverse and ‘Zeus standing with 
long sceptre and thunderbolt’ on the reverse; while those of the copper 
coins are ‘standing Heracles crowning himself’ on the obverse and ‘Pallas 
Athene standing to left with shield and spear’ on the reverse. They are 
the original devices of Heliocles and his successors on the one hand, and 
of Demetrius, Apollodotus and their followers on the other, and were 
presumably being used by the previous Indo-Greek rulers in theArachosian 

KIRAS. 1906, p. 209 - CHI. l p. 574 

26 



202 THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 

region. Numismatic evidence proves that the rule of Vonones could not 
have lasted long. Most probably it began some time after the last year 
of Mithridates II (88 b.c.), otherwise he could not have adopted the 
high-sounding titles in his coins issued in the borders of eastern Iran, 
for these were used by Mithridates himself during his lifetime. It cannot 
be satisfactorily determined at present at what precise date after Mith- 
ridates II he began to rule. The use of the round form of omicron on 
his coin legends may suggest a date for him earlier than c. 40 b.c. ; Rapson 
first pointed out that the square form of the letter appeared side by side 
with the round form on the coins of the later Yavana kings such as Hip- 
postratus, and on those of Azes I. He also noted the change in the form 
of this letter from round to square in the coins of the Parthian king Oro- 
des I (57-38 B.c.); he thinks, however, that this palaeographical test, though 
possibly applicable in some cases, cannot be applied justifiably in the case 
of Vonones and his associates, ‘since the square form seems not to occur 
in connection with these types until much later ,’ 1 Nevertheless, we find 
the square form on the joint copper coins of Spalyris (Spalahora) and 
Spalagadames, and these must have been issued not much later than, and 
probably immediately after, Vonones’s date. The coins of Spalirises, 
however, give us some tangible clue about the date of Vonones, if the king 
alluded to in the legends thereon be none other than the latter. These 
round silver coins have the riding king with the Greek legend Basileds 
Adelphou Spalirisou on the obverse, and standing Zeus with the 
Kharoshthi legend maharajabhrata dhramiasa Spalirisasa on the reverse. 
Spalirises was probably one brother of Vonones, and Spalahora, the father 
of Spalagadama, another brother. Reference to the joint issues of Spaly- 
ris and Spalagadames has just been made; they bear on the obverse the 
figure of the king on horseback in square frame with the legend Spalvrios 
Dikaiou Adelphou tou Basileds, and Heracles seated on rock with 
Kharoshthi legend Spalahoraputrasa dhramiasa Spalagadamasa on the 
reverse. It is to be presumed that ‘Spalyris’ (‘Spalyrios’ is its genitive) 
4 the Greek form of the Scythian-Persian name Spalahores, and that 
the person bearing this name ruled with his son Spalagadames as the 
viceregal ruler, for a short time only, since only one type of his square 
and round copper coins is known, in the interval between Vonones and 
Spalirises. Spalirises issued four other types of coins, two alone and two 
others jointly with a certain Azes. Of the coins issued by him as sole king, 
a few are square copper ones with an obverse device of some originality! 
showing in a square frame a king walking to the left with a battle- 
axe and a bow. The imperfectly preserved legend is probably to be 
read as Basileon Basileds Megalou Spalirisou - , the reverse shows an 
enthroned Zeus and the Kharoshthi legend maharajasa mahatakasa 
Spalirisasa. The other coin-type issued solely by him consists of a 
few silver pieces almost similar to the silver coins issued jointly by him 


Ibid. p. 573 



PERIOD OF VONONES’S RULE 


203 


and Azes, with the difference that the reverse legend is maharajasa maham- 
takasa Spalirisasa. Here the king’s name in Greek begins with a Doric 
sigma . 1 The next two types, one silver and one copper, are the joint 
issues of Spalirises and Azes, the silver type having the usual ‘riding 
king and standing Zeus’s devices, while the copper one has the same 
obverse, its reverse showing the original device, ‘a strung bow’ with an 
arrow to left and a discus to right.’ The legends in these joint issues 
are Basilevs Megabit Spalirisou and maharajasa niahatakasa Ayasa. 
The use of the Doric sigma in the initial letter alone of the king’s 
name at such an early date as well as the apparently equal status of 
the joint rulers, as proved by the legends, is of special interest in these 
coins. The coins also forcibly suggest that Spalirises was the last member 
of the Vonones group, and that it was in his time that the houses of 
Vonones and Maues (on the assumption that Azes belonged to the Maues 
group) were united. If we identify this Azes with Azes I who succeeded 
Maues, then Vonones can be regarded as a younger contemporary of 
Maues, and thus a date for him near about the sixties of the first century 
B.c. will probably be near the mark. The direct connection between 
Vonones and Azes I which was presumed at first on the basis of certain 
coins supposed to have been issued jointly by the two has no basis in fact, 
for it was pointed out correctly that these so-called joint coins of Vonones 
and Azes were really the issues of Maues . 2 

This brief summary of the coin-types of Vonones and his associates does 
not afford us any clear idea about the period during which they were 
ruling on the borders of India. All we get is the bare skeleton of a history, 
which it may be useful to sum up here again. Vonones, probably a 
younger contemporary of Maues. was ruling in the eastern Iran bordei 
country and Arachosia in association with his brother Spalahores and his 
nephew Spalagadames. His rule was presumably of short duration, and 
was followed for a brief spell by the joint rule of Spalyris (the Greek form 
of Spalahora) and his son Spalagadames. Then began the reign of Spa- 
lirises, first as the brother of the king (most probably Vonones), then later 
as the sole ruler, and lastly conjointly with one Azes, whose relationship 
with Spalirises is nowhere even hinted at. It is likely that, during the life- 
time of Spalirises a substantial extension of this foreign power took place, 
spreading its sway from Arachosia to the Paropamisadae. This ruler may 
be regarded as the last of his line, for there is no direct evidence to suggest 
that his co-ruler Azes was his son . 3 Whatever other conclusions are made 


1 NC. 1923, p. 341, pi 1. xvii 14 

2 Cunningham, op. cit., pp. 5, 36, pi. 
iv, 8. Thomas’s description of this so- 

called joint type in JASB. 1858, p. 
252 and in his edition of Prinsep’s Ant. 
II p. 203 was accepted by Cunningham; 
but Rapson and Smith correctlv identi- 
fied it as one of Maues’s coins (CCIM. 
i p. 39, n. 1) 


Rapson inadvertently suggested that 
this Azes was Azes II, the son of Soali- 
rises (CHI. i p. 573); but in p. 572. 
he says that Azes II was the son of Azi- 
lises. Tam says that he was Azes 
I and Spalirises’s son, who came to 
conquer the Panjab and Gandhara 
some time after the death of Maues; 
op. cit., pp. 348-9 



204 THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 

about this group of kings, (and several have been drawn by scholars from 
numismatic no less than literary data of an indirect character), they are 
all highly problematical. One such theory which has been worked out 
elaborately by Tarn may here be briefly mentioned. The Ts’ien-Han-shu 
tells us that Wou-ti-lao, king of Ki-pin, killed certain Chinese envoys; 
after his death his son sent an envoy to China with presents and Wen- 
chung, the Chinese general at the Barrier (the limes west of Kan-su), was 
instructed by the Chinese emperor to escort the envoy back to his home. 
Wou-ti-lao’s son conspired to kill Wen-chung, but the latter got scent 
of the plot and allying himself with Yin-mo-fu, son of the king of Yung- 
kiu, attacked Ki-pin and killed the conspirator. Yin-mo-fu was then in- 
stalled by Wen-chung king of Ki-pin as a vassal of China. Afterwards, 
in the reign of the Chinese emperor Yuan-ti (48-33 B.c.), Yin-mo-fu 
killed the escort of a Chinese envoy and sent his apologies to the emperor 
who felt little concern for such a distant country. Von Gutschmid 
suggested long ago that the Yin-mo-fu of this story was Hermaeus. 
Wou-ti-lao a Saka king, Ki-pin, Kophene (Kabul), and Yung-kiu, Yon- 
aki. According to Wylie and after him Tarn. Wou-ti-lao, could very well 
be the Chinese transliteration of the Greek epithet Acielphou on the coins 
of Spalyris. Tarn deduces the following facts principally from the above 
data: Wou-ti-lao was Spalyris, the Saka governor of Ki-pin (Kabul) and 
of as much of the Paropamisadae as the Sakas of Kabul held; his son 
and successor was Spalagadames. Yin-mo-fu, son of the king of Yung- 
kiu (Inonake, Greek) was Hermaeus, son of Amyntas, king of (Indian) 
Alexandria; Hermaeus was installed as a vassal king of Kabul by Chinese 
help after it was conquered from Spalagadames by Wen-chung. The 
Chinese general had no force of his own, but the whole prestige of the 
Han emperors was behind him; he might have got some help from one of 
the Yiie-chi princes who could be none other than the Kushan chief Mia os. 
ruling between Chitral and Panjshir. We are not here concerned with Tarn’s 
further deductions fcom these and other data about Hermaeus. Miaos (or 
Heraos), Kujula Kadphises and others. His conclusions about Spalyris- 
Spalahora and Spalagadama, however, may appear plausible to' some: 
but they can on no account be regarded as ascertained historical truth. 1 

THE AZES GROUP OF KINGS 

The exact nature of the connection between Azes, the first member of 
this group of kings, with either of his two predecessors, Maues and Spali- 
rises, cannot, in the present state of our knowledge, be determined with 
certainty. Was this Azes, sometime co-ruler of equal importance with 
Spalirises, Azes I or Azes II ? What is the evidence to prove that there were 
two rulers of this name? Is there anything on record to show in what 
relation Azes I, Azilises, and Azes II stood to one another? What was 


1 Tam, op. cit., pp. 339-41 



AZES-AZILISES 


205 


the chronological position of this group of kings ? These questions have 
long engaged the attention of Indologists and as in Maues’s case, as well 
as that of the Vonones group of kings, there is no unanimity in the opinions 
of scholars. The coins are almost our only guide, and they are clear on 
one point only, that the Azes group of kings came after Manes and Spali- 
rises. An unusually large number of coins with a multiple variety of 
types has been discovered, bearing the name of Azes-Aya; and the number 
and variety of coins issued by Azilises-Ayilisha, though not so plentiful, 
is also considerable. 

Certain types of coins issued in the joint names of Azes-Ayilisha and 
Azilises-Aya led scholars like V. A. Smith and D. R. Bhandarkar to suggest 
that there were two Azeses, Azes I and Azes II, the latter succeeding 
Azilises, who came after Azes 1. A few silver coins with the usual “king on 
horseback’ device on one side and ‘a goddess with palm" on the other 
have the legends Basileos Basileon Megalou Azou on the obverse and 
mahcirajasci rajarajasa mahatasa Ayilishasa on the reverse. Several other 
silver didrachms and hemidrachms and a few copper pieces, with 
such devices as, ‘king on horseback’ or ‘Heracles with wreath, club 
and lion’s skin’ on the obverse, and ‘Athene Promachus’ or ‘Zeus 
Nikephorus' or 'horse' on the reverse bear almost similar legends 
with this noteworthy difference that, Azilisou replaces Azou and Ayasa , 
Ayilishasa. Smith and Bhandarkar postulate that these two joint types, 
when considered together, prove that Azilises, before his accession 
to independent power, was the subordinate viceregal colleague of an 
Azes, and that an Azes, similarly, was subsequently the subordinate vice- 
regal colleague of Azilises. The two princes named Azes cannot be identi- 
cal, and they must be distinguished as Azes I and Azes II. A careful scru- 
tiny of the considerable number of coins bearing the name of Azes alone 
appears to support the suggestion; they can be divided into two groups, one 
well executed with good Greek legends, the other semi-barbarous, with 
debased and often corrupt Greek inscriptions. The finer coins were attri- 
buted by Smith and others to Azes I, the cruder ones to Azes II. This 
view, though usually accepted by scholars, has had its critics in Whitehead 
and Konow; the former thought that the evidence cited above lacked suffi- 
cient weight to justify such an important conclusion. Whitehead observed 
that the coins being our only source of information, the priority of Azilises 
to Azes can be as well presumed on the basis of some finer types of Azili- 
ses’s silver coins as the usually accepted view that Azes came before Azili- 
ses, and following the line of Smith’s argument one could as well dupli- 
cate Azilises, as Azes. But Whitehead did not suggest that there were 
two kings with the name of Azilises in place of two Azeses; he explained 
away the differences in type and style observed in the abundant coins of 
Azes as due to their being issued in various parts of a large empire during 
his long reign. Nor did he offer any explanation of the joint issues of 
Azes-Azilises on the one hand and of Azilises-Azes on the other, but 
merely referred to the theory of G. Hoffmann, propounded as early as 1880, 



206 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


which he described as erroneous, that the names of the issuers are the 
same, one being a contraction of the other . 1 F. W. Thomas also explained 
the name Azes as a shorter form of Azilises . 2 Sten Konow at first agreed 
with Whitehead’s criticism, remarking that Thomas’s explanation ‘leads 
us to the conclusion that Azes and Azilises were one and the same person, 
that we have neither two kings of the name Azes nor two kings of the name 
Azilises, a conclusion which seems to follow necessarily from a consi- 
deration of the coin legends discussed by Smith ... the use of the im- 
perial title on both sides of the so-called joint issues raises a strong pre- 
sumption in favour of identifying the two names.’ But Konow gave up 
this opinion afterwards and observed that ‘the coins bearing the names 
Azes and Azilises are so numerous, and seem to cover such a long period, 
that most scholars think that there were more than one ruler of that name, 
and I now accept that conclusion .’ 3 He does not explicitly tell us in his 
last statement whether he endorses the generally accepted view that there 
were two Azeses, but archaeological evidence, both stratigraphic and 
palaeographic, seems to support the theory of Smith and Bhandarkar. 
Marshall pointed out that in the course of his excavations on the Sirkap 
site at Taxila, the coins usually attributed by numismatists to Azes I 
on the ground of their better style and execution were unearthed, almost 
invariably, from strata lower than those ascribed to Azes II. N. G. Majum- 
dar also showed that the former group of coins had an earlier variety of 
dental j in the reverse KharoshthI legend, than the type of the same 
in the latter group where the letter had the much later form adopted in 
the KharoshthI inscriptions of the Kushan period . 4 Other considerations 
also appear to prove that there was a second Azes who came after Azili- 
ses; for one Aspavarma, son of Indravarma, about whom more will be 
said presently, served first as the strategos under Azes II, and transferred 
his allegiance later to Gondophares. Azes, the overlord of Aspavarma, 
could hardly have been Azes I who preceded Azilises. The existence of 
two rulers Azes I and Azes II being thus almost certain, the question may 
\}Q asked which of them was the co-ruler of Spalirises ? Rapson was labour- 
ing under some confusion when he suggested that Azes, the associate ruler 
of Spalirises, was his son Azes II, for while discussing the joint issues 
of Azes-Ayilisha and of Azilises-Aya respectively, he had already referred 

to the inference that ‘Azilises was associated with two kings named Azes 

possibly with his father and predecessor at the beginning of his reign and 


For the view of Smith and Bhandarkar, 
cf. ZDMG. 1906, pp. 62 ff. and JBBRAS. 
1903, ‘A Kushan Stone Inscription’. For 
Whitehead’s criticism of the above, cf. 
PMC. i p. 93, and criticism of Hoff- 
man’s suggestion, ibid. p. 132, n. 1. But 
Hoffman’s view was supported by Herz- 
feld, and has recently found an advocate 
in Lohuizen-de Leeuw, op. cit., p. 348 
1 JRAS. 1906, p. 208. Here Thomas 
follows the authority of Justi. 


3 For Konow’s earlier view, cf. CII. 
n (i) Intro, p. xl; for his subsequent 
opinion, cf.JlH. xii, 1933, p. 24. Lohu- 
lzen-de Leeuw has not noticed that 
Konow partly withdrew his support 
of Hoffman and Thomas’s view after- 
wards. 

1 For Marshall's and Majumdar’s obser- 
vations, cf. JRAS. 1914, p. 979, and 
ASIAR. 1928-9. pp. 169-74 



DATE OF AZES I 


207 


with his son and successor at its close f 1 but as has already been observed, 
it is highly probable, nay almost certain, that Spalirises’s co-ruler was 
Azes I and not Azes II. 

The relationship between Maues and Azes I cannot be determined satis- 
factorily at present. It has been suggested by some that the two belonged 
to different racial stocks. Konow has consistently held the view that 
Maues was a Saka and Azes a Pahlava who succeeded the Saka king Moga 
(Maues) in Taxila and was the oldest of the three Pahlava rulers named 
Azes, Azilises and Gondophares . 3 Tarn is of opinion that Azes I was 
Spalirises’s son, but thinks that these two kings were Sakas by race. 3 
Rapson describes Maues, Azes I and Azilises as the first three Saka kings 
of India, and this seems to be correct, for the close numismatic affinity 
between the three places them in one and the same class. It is possible 
that the last two, if not all the three, were in the same line of descent. 4 A 
careful consideration of the numerous varieties of coins issued by them 
leaves little doubt that the empire which was founded by the first was being 
gradually extended by his two successors. Under Azes II, who might have 
been the son of Azilises, the empire seems to have fallen on evil days, 
and it was in his time that the Parthian chief Gondophares asserted his 
supremacy in the Panjab, Gandhara and Kabul regions. 

There is a wide difference of opinion among scholars about the exact 
date of Azes I. If the period assigned here to Maues-Moga on the basis 
of numismatic as well as epigraphic data be correct, then his successor 
would have flourished very near the middle of the first century B.c. The re- 
strikings of coins as well as the use of the same monograms on them show 
that Azes I and Hippostratus, one of the later Indo-Greek kings, were 
contemporaries, and Hippostratus's date probably falls about the same 
time. The second Shahdaur inscription of Sivarakshita possibly contains 
the name of Azes in its first line which may also contain a date; but it 
is so damaged that nothing certain can be inferred from it. Two other 
inscriptions, a copper-plate and a silver scroll of a much later period, 
the former found at Kalawan near Taxila and the latter in Taxila itself 
have in their first lines the words samvatsaraye 134 ajasa and sa 136 ayasa 
respectively. The Taxila silver scroll was incised during the reign of an 
unnamed Kushana king whose titles alone are given on it. The aja and 
ay a of the two records have been taken by Marshall, and after him many 
other scholars, as different ways of transliterating the foreign name Azes 
into the north-western Prakrit. The years of the two inscriptions were 
assumed by Marshall to refer to an era which was started by Azes I, and 
he further suggested that the reckoning which dated from 58-57 B.c. and 
which subsequently came to be variously designated as Krita, Malava 
and commonly Vikrama Samvat, was really this era of Azes. More about 
these inscriptions and the dates will be said in the next chapter; but it may 
be observed here that if Marshall’s theory is accepted, then Azes I’s date, 

1 CHI. i PP- 572-3 3 Tam, op. cit., pp. 346, n. 3, 347 

2 J1H. xn, 1933, p. 24 4 Cf. Leeuw, op. cit., pp. 345-6 



208 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


perhaps his initial year, falls in 58-57 b.c. The theory has many critics, 
but though no satisfactory reason has been assigned for associating the 
Vikrama Samvat, one of the earliest and most important eras, still current 
in India, with Azes, the period assigned by Marshall on this basis to Azes 
I falls within a decade of what was probably his actual age. Reference 
has already been made to Aspavarma, the son of Indravarma, who served 
as strategos under both Azes II and Gondophares. Gondophares’s first 
regnal year was most probably a.d. 19. Starting backwards from this 
date, as in the case of dating Maues-Moga, we arrive as before at a period 
somewhere near the middle of the first century b.c. for the probable time 
of the rule of Azes I in India. 

Some facts about the coins of the Azes group of kings have already been 
noted in the course of the discussion of the chronology of Maues, Azes 
I and others. Gardner and Whitehead do not distinguish between the 
coins of Azes I and Azes II, and all the coins bearing the name of Azes- 
Aya are placed under one head in their respective catalogues of coins 
in the British and Panjab Museums. V. A. Smith differentiates between the 
two groups in the Indian Museum Catalogue of Coins, Vol. i, and those 
coins which are better in style and execution are ascribed by him to Azes 
I. This king not only used most of the devices that are found on Maues’s 
coins, but also introduced others some of which were being used by the 
Indo-Greek rulers. The implication of this has already been noted; but 
it may be further emphasised here that the adoption of Pallas Athene as 
the reverse device of a large number of Azes I’s coins probably proves 
the extension of his sway into the eastern Panjab, a region probably not 
included in the empire of Maues who did not use this device on any of his 
coins. Azes also introduced a few strikingly novel devices as ‘the king 
riding on a two-humped camel’, ‘an Indian goddess with the forepart 
of a lion by her side’ (probably Uma), ‘Hermes striding to the left’ etc. 
Drachms and tetradrachms (hemidrachms and didrachms according to 
Gardner) in various states of preservation, and round and square copper 
eoins, were issued by him in large numbers. The forms of the Greek 
and Kharoshthi letters in his coin legends, Basileos Basileon Megalou 
Azou and maharajasa rajarajasa mahatasa Ayasa, are generally early, 
and square omicrons are seldom used ; the dental s in the Prakrit 
reverse is almost invariably of the closed variety which indicates a com- 
paratively early date. Stylistically the silver coins of Azilises are hardly 
inferior to those of Azes I, and some individual specimens are even supe- 
rior. It is noteworthy that tetradrachms of Azilises have several times 
been found in association with those of Hippostratus. Whitehead refers 
to one splendid find made in Kashmir (probably Punch) about half a 
century ago, from which came all the fine tetradrachms of Azilises and 
Hippostratus described in the Panjab Museum Catalogue of Coins. They 
were all practically in mint condition. Another find of 32 tetradrachms of 
Azilises along with seven tetradrachms of Hippostratus was made in Hazara 
valley, which is ancient Urasa. These discoveries probably prove that 



AZILISES. AZES II 


209 


Aziiises's dominions extended far within the borders of Kashmir, if not 
into the valley proper. Many of the devices previously used by his two pre- 
decessors were, as usual, adopted by Azilises. This ruler, however, intro- 
duced some strikingly original ones. One of them is the typically Indian 
deity, Abhisheka-Lakshmi, i.e. ‘Lakshmi standing facing on a lotus-flower 
with twin stalks and leaves, on each leaf stands a small eiephant sprink- 
ling water on the head of the deity.’ This device is well known in ancient 
and mediaeval Indian art and was adopted in their coins by several other 
indigenous and foreign rulers of India from very early times. A few more 
divinities, of both sexes, appear on Aziiises’s coins, who are difficult to 
identify. Some of them seem to be Indian, and their adoption shows a 
growing contact of the foreign ruler with Indian culture . 1 

The presence of the mounted Dioscuri or standing Dioscuri, the for- 
mer in association with an enthroned or standing Zeus, on the silver 
money of Azilises distinctly shows that the territories previously in the 
possession of the later members of Eucratides’s dynasty, e.g. Diomedes, 
Archebius and others were being annexed to the dominions of this 
Scythian king. The use of such a device as Hephaestus with sceptre, tongs 
and hammer in his hands anticipates the occurrence of a similar one on 
the later issues of Kanishka and Huvishka. The much debased silver and 
copper coins, some of them being apparently billon (a compound of silver 
and copper), attributed to Azes II, bear few of the usual designs found on 
the coins of his predecessors. The comparatively few varieties of this 
ruler’s issues may indicate that his dominion was much restricted. In 
all probability it was confined to Central and Western Panjab. He was 
associated in the western areas of his domains with his strategos Aspa- 
varma; a large number of round billon coins of the ‘king on horseback 
and rudely designed Pallas’ type with the usual legend in ‘debased and 
often corrupt’ Greek script on the obverse testify to the above fact. It is 
interesting to note, however, that the reverse Prakrit legend Indravarma- 
putrasa aspavarmasa strategasa javatasa meaning ‘of the victorious 
strategos Aspavarma, son of Indravarma’, is written in very well-formed • 
but late Kharoshthi script. Aspavarma served as the connecting link 
between Azes II and Gondophares, and his father Indravarma. as will be 
shown in a subsequent chapter, was probably Itravarma, son of Vijaya- 
mitra, a coin of whom has been found . 2 Vijayamitra again may be the 
same as Vijayamitra apracha-raja, a successor of Viyakamitra apracha- 
raja. a contemporary vassal ruler of Menander. 

ORTH AGNES AND GONDOPHARES. THE IN DO-PA RTHIA N 
RULERS. 

Azes II was undoubtedly succeeded by one Gondophares whose name 

1 Siva on the coins of Mauses, Abhishc- prove this statement. 
ka-Laksbmi on those of the Mathura * NC. 1944, np. °9-I04 
satraps, Urna on Azcs’s coins, etc. 



210 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


indicates that he was Parthian by race. Numismatic evidence further 
shows that Gondophares with one Guda or Gudana (his brother?) was 
ruling, probably somewhere in Arachosia, as the viceregal associate of 
Orthagnes, before he became the Great King. Thus Orthagnes seems 
to have won part of the possessions of Azes II in the Arachosian region 
where he issued a few round copper coins, conjointly at first with Gudu- 
phara or Gondophares and Gudana, and then with Gud(r)ana alone. The 
first series of Orthagnes’s money shows the Parthian type of the diadem- 
ed bust of the king to the left with a partially preserved but corrupt 
Greek legend Basileus Basileon Megas Orthagnes on the obverse, and a 
winged Nike on the reverse holding a palm branch and a wreath with 
portions of a Prakrit legend in KharoshthI script, which in full might be 
Maharajasa rajatirajasa Gudupharasagudana. Cunningham once read 
the latter part of the reverse legend as Gudupharasagarbha, meaning 
‘brother of Gondophares’, and taking this as an attributive epithet of 
Orthagnes, suggested that Orthagnes was the same as Gad, the brother 
of Gondophares according to the Christian tradition. More will be said 
presently about the tradition concerning Gondophares, but there can be 
no doubt that both Cunningham’s reading of the Prakrit legend and 
its interpretation were wrong. The other set of coins is very similar to 
the first, but the fragmentary legend on the reverse reads rajasa maha- 
tasa gudrana. Various interpretations have been suggested of the word 
gadapa-gudrana, either as an epithet, or monetary denomination, or 
again as the designation of a tribe to which Gondophares belonged. 
Whitehead’s suggestion that it is a personal name is perhaps correct, 
and it may correspond to the traditional Gad; for an intaglio acquired 
by the Panjab Museum from the North-west Frontier Province bears 
the KharoshthI inscription Gadasa, which name may also occur on 
a pedestal excavated at Palatu Dheri near Charsadda (ancient Pushkala- 
vati ). 1 Rapson observes that ‘the coin on which Orthagnes still appears 
as chief ruler, but with Gudana as his subordinate, must no doubt be 
•assigned to the period after Gondophares had succeeded Azes II in the 
sovereignty of North-Western India .’ 2 Another inference is possible from 
the joint coins of Orthagnes and Gondophares: the latter seems to have 
had no dynastic connection with Azes II. At first an associate ruler of 
Orthagnes, a Parthian king of Arachosia, he took advantage of the weak- 
ness of the last of the Saka kings of North-Western India and conquered 
his kingdom. The Satrapal ruler Aspavarma was not long in transferring 
his allegiance to his new master, after his old master Azes II was ovei- 
thrown. Orthagnes is a Parthian name, being the Greek equivalent of 
the Persian Verethragna meaning ‘victorious’, and therefore the king’s 
reverse device Nike, might have some reference to his name . 2 Nike, 
however, was such a common device on the coins of the Indo-Greeks 
and, later, on those of the Indo-Scythians, that Orthagnes might have 


Whitehead, PMC. i pp. 155-6 


CHI. i p. 578 



GONDOPHARES 


211 


simply borrowed it from his predecessors. His Parthian nationality 
is also fully established by the type of royal bust appearing on the 
obverse of his coins. 

Gondophares is not only known from his coins, but also from a very 
interesting Kharoshth! epigraph now in the collection of the Panjab 
Museum, and from the apocryphal legend of Saint Thomas. In fact Gondo- 
phares, described variously in the Syriac, Greek and Latin versions of the 
apocryphal Acts o) Judas Thomas the Apostle, as Gudnaphar, Gounda- 
phoros, Gundaforus, and Gundoforus, was first known from these Chris- 
tian tracts, and no historicity was at the time attached to him by scholars. 
But the discovery in North-Western India of his coins and the solitary 
inscription bearing his name proved that the Christian mythologists were 
building their account around some real historical persons. The Syriac 
version of the Acts, perhaps the earliest, dating from before the middle 
of the third century a.d., begins the story in this way : ‘And when all the 
Apostles had been for a time in Jerusalem . . . they divided the countries 
among them, in order that each one of them might preach in the region 
which fell to him and in the place to which his Lord sent him. And India 
fell by lot and division to Judas Thomas (or the Twin) the Apostle. And 
he was not willing to go, saying : “ I have not strength enough for this, 
because I am weak. And I am a Hebrew : How can I teach the Indians ?” 
And whilst Judas was reasoning thus, our Lord appeared to him in a vision 
in the night, and said to him : “Fear not, Thomas, because My grace is 
with thee.” But he would not be persuaded at all, saying : “ Whither- 
soever Thou wilt, our Lord, send me ; only to India I will not go.” And 
as Judas was reasoning thus, a certain merchant, an Indian, happened 
(to come) into the south country from — (the name, not legible here, is 
absent in the other versions), whose name was Habban; and he was sent 
by the king Gudnaphar ( Goundophoros in the Greek version ), that he 
might bring to him a skilful carpenter.’ 1 The narrative then goes on 
to say that in order to induce Thomas to obey His mandate, the Lord 
appeared to him in person, and sold him to Habban. Thomas was thus 
compelled to accompany the merchant to India where he was introduced 
to the king, who employed him to build the royal palace. He was given 
a large sum of money for this task, which he spent in acts of charity on 
behalf of the king. No temporal palace was thus constructed and the irate 
king imprisoned Thomas and the merchant. Meanwhile Gad, the king’s 
brother, died, and the angels while taking h im to heaven showed him the 
heavenly palace which Thomas had built by his good deeds. Gad was 
restored to life, and both he and his brother were converted. 2 The credit 
of first drawing the attention of scholars to the connection between the 
Gondophares of the coins and the Indian king of this account is due to 
M. Reinaud (1848). Cunningham, apparently unaware of the earlier 
discovery of the French savant, also suggested the same thing a few years 

1 Apocryphal Acts of the Apostles, translated by Wright, n pp. 146-7 
> CHI. i p. 579 



212 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


afterwards. The views of Reinaud and Cunningham have been unani- 
mously accepted by subsequent scholars, some of whom have gone even 
further. Rapson has no doubt that Gudnaphar, definitely called ‘the 
king of India’ is Gondophares of the coins, and suggests that the king’s 
brother Gad in the texts may possibly be the Guda or Gudana of the coins. 
Von Gutschmid finds a still more distant echo of the name Gondophares, 
transmitted through its Armenian form Gathaspar, in Gaspar, ‘the 
traditional name of the first of the three wise men who, according to the 
Gospel story, came from the East to worship Christ at His nativity.’ 
Another apocryphal text, the Evangelium loannh de obitu Mariae refers 
to one Labdanes as the sister’s son of a king to whom Thomas went, who 
was also converted to Christianity. Labdanes may be a copyist’s mistake 
for Abdagases who, as we shall presently see, was a relation of Gondo- 
phares. There is no certainty about this identification, for two reasons. 
The king in this passage is not named, and he might either be Gondophares 
or another Indian king, probably of the South, named Mazdai who was 
also visited by Thomas, and in whose kingdom he met a martyr’s death; 
again, Abdagases was the son of Gondophares’s brother and not of his 
sister. 1 Whatever may be the truth regarding this, there can be no doubt 
that part of the legendary account of St. Thomas’s association with 
India had a clear historical background. Medlycott may be right when 
he says that ‘the Apostle Thomas had entered king Gondophares’s domi- 
nions in the course of his apostolic career.’ 2 
The only KharoshthI inscription in which Gondophares is mentioned 
is usually described as originating from Takht-i-Bahi, a few miles to the 
west of Mardan among the Yusufzai. Its first two lines record two dates, 
26 and 103, during the reign of the great king Guduvhara ( maharayasa 
Guduvharasa vashe 2014/11 sambatsarave tisatimae 1/100/111). Gudu- 
vhara of this inscription has been unanimously identified with the Gondo- 
phares of the coins and Christian mythology, but there has been some 
difference of opinion among scholars regarding the two dates mentioned 
^ibove. Konow was the principal dissentient from the usually accepted 
view that the year 26 refers to the regnal year of Gondophares and the 
year 103 possibly to the Vikrama Samvat of 58-57 b.c. Konow later 
abandoned his former theory, and accepted the current explanation that 
the first date denoted the Indo-Parthian king’s regnal year while the second 
one was associated with the Vikrama era. 3 Taking this explanation to be 
the correct one we derive two facts about Gondophares from the inscrip- 
tion: first, his reign began in a.d. 19 and second, he was ruling over ancient 


1 Ibid. pp. 580-1 

* A. E. Medlycott, India and the Apostle 

Thomas, p. 16. He is also of opinion 
that there may be some truth in the 
tradition of Thomas’s meeting Gon- 
dophares. Lohuizen-de Leeuw does 
not attach any historical value to this 
tradition (op. cit., pp. 353-4): but much 


— n ce saia m support ot the usually 
accepted view. Her placing Gondo- 
phares in the second half of the first 
century b.c. is unacceptable. 

*JIH. xii, 1933, p. 25. Konow’s earlier 
view was worked out in his Introduc- 
tion to ClI ii (i); where he suggested 
that the date 103 referred to the old 



ECONOMIC CONDITION UNDER INDO-PARTHIANS 


213 


Gandhara even as late as a.d. 45-6. Thus, this inscription proves that 
he enjoyed a fairly long reign; and this inference is also attested by the 
large number of coins in billon and copper, some issued by him alone 
and others jointly with a few associate rulers. His dynasty does not 
seem to have continued for long after his last date, which must have 
been very near a.d. 46. It will be shown in the next chapter that the 
Kushanas were soon to be the masters of North-Western India whence 
they spread their sway far into the interior. 

The almost total absence of silver money of Gondophares or of his few 
immediate successors, may testify to the indifferent economic condition 
of the Indo-Parthian empire. It is not unlikely that the large number of 
silver coins that were issued in these regions by their predecessors the 
Indo-Scythians, and before them by the lndo-Greeks, served the needs of 
the higher currency of the Parthian state in India, and that they supple- 
mented the coins of lesser vaiue which were more commonly used and in 
greater demand, by token coinage in inferior metal such as billon (a com- 
pound metal in which the proportion of mixture is four-fifths of copper 
to one-fifth of silver) and copper. Support for this suggestion is found in 
the fact that the Kushana kings issued practically no silver money, though 
Wima Kadphises and his successors coined in gold. The billon and cop- 
per coins that were issued solely by Gondophares and his only known 
silver coin, are characterised by several peculiaiities worth noticing. The 
solitary silver coin in the collection of the British Museum shows the Par- 
thian type bust of the king to left wearing the Arsacid tiara and diadem 
on the obverse, and the enthroned king holding a sceptre, and Nike 
crowning him from behind, v/ith ihe legend Basileos Basileon Meg(a)s 
(G)unc!opheres AiUokrato(r) arranged as on the Arsacid coins, on the 
reverse. This distinctly Parthian type of coin was most probably issued 
by Gondophares in his dominions in eastern Iran in the early part of his 
rule, and the unusual title autocrator adopted here is very interesting. 
Cunningham thought that the type and title show'ed that Gondophares 
must have belonged to a powerful Parthian family. This reminds us «f 
the title adopted by Miaos or Eracs on his coins, which is that of a tyrant 
( turannountos — ‘in the reign of the tyrant’), but where the epithet did not 
necessarily denote an independent ruler of great power. A few square 
copper coins v/ith the king on horseback and a corrupt Greek legend 
bearing part of the king’s name on the obverse have the Gondopharian 
symbol and the KharoshthI legend . . . dhramikasa apratihatasa 
devav(r)atasa Guduvharasa. The title apratihata which was first used 
by lesser known Indo-Greek kings like Lysius, Artemidorus and Philo- 
xenus, is of great interest in association with this Indo-Parthian king. 
Philostratus. a writer of the third century a.d., in his life of Apollonius 

§aka era of 84 b.c. and 26 to the Pahlava not necessarily be his first year, and 

era started by Azes. On the basis of Azes’s date will correspond to 7-6 b.c. 

this calculation also, a.d. 19 will fall Lohuizen-de Leeuw had noted the chan- 

in Gondophares’s reign, though it will ges in Konow’s view; op. cit., p. 14 ff. 



214 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


of Tyana, says that when the latter came to Taxila, (c.a.d. 44) it was 
governed by one Phraotes; Herzfeld had shown very ingeniously that this 
Parthian name was nothing but an adaptation of the epithet apartihata 
of Gondophares who was the Parthian king ruling in this region at that 
time. 1 Of the other single issues of this Indo-Parthian ruler, mention 
may be made of the generally well-executed round billon coins presenting 
the king on horseback wearing a diadem and the three peaked Arsacid 
tiara, with a mostly well-formed Greek legend Basileds Basileon Megalou 
(G)undopherou on the obverse, and Zeus holding long sceptre and 
standing to right with the fairly well-preserved Kharoshth! legend 
maharaja rajatiraja tratara devavrata Gudupharasa on the reverse. It 
should be noted that the Prakrit version of the royal titles differs some- 
what from the Greek one. Indeed, the epithet devavrata used almost 
invariably (it is absent on some small-size round copper coins with 
the diademed bust of the king and Pallas devices) on the other Indian 
money of this king is of unique interest. It is perhaps explained by 
those round billon coins issued solely by this king, which have the 
trident-bearing Siva on the reverse. This Indian deity, who appears 
in his anthropomorphic form for the first time in the foreign money 
on a few coins of Maues, is very often described in early Indian and 
foreign literature as Deva, and it is possible that when Gondophares 
describes himself in most of his coins issued either singly or jointly as 
devavrata, ‘vowed or devoted to deva,' he refers indirectly to his §aiva 
affiliation. 2 The Nike on the other coins of this king is nothing but a 
continuation of Orthagnes’s type, the devices Zeus, Nike and Pallas being 
adaptations from the Indo-Scythic money. Of the coins that were issued 
by him jointly with others, mention has already been made of Gondo- 
phares-Aspavarma pieces and the historical conclusion that has been de- 
duced therefrom. The Greek legend on the obverse of these coins is 
corrupt and illegible, but the nature of the type as well as the particular 
symbol, invariably associated with Gondophares from whom it was 
edopted by his nephew Abdagases, leave no doubt that it also bore his 
name. The other joint-type coins which were certainly issued later bear the 
‘king on horseback’ device with a quite corrupt and illegible Greek legend 
on the obverse, and either a standing Zeus or a standing Zeus Nicephorus 
with two types of legends, maharajasa mahatasa tratarasa devavratasa 
Gudupharasa Sasasa or maharajasa rajatirajasa devavratasa Gudupharasa 
Sasasa on the reverse. Cunningham called these ‘the coins of Sasan,’ 
which name, according to him, was undoubtedly a Persian one, being also 
the name of the father of Ardeshir, founder of the Sasanian (Sassanian) 
dynasty. Smith at one time was quite certain that sasasa on these 


Sakastan, p. 113; Lohuizen-de Leeuw 
does not accept Herzfeld’s suggestion 
which would not fit in with the date 
assigned to Gondophares by her; op. 
cit., p. 363 


J. N. Banerjea, Development of Hindi 
Iconography, p. 133. Wima Kadphises 
was a Saiva, as is evident from the legend 
and device on his coins. 



GONDOPHARES’S CONQUESTS 


215 


coins like the jayatasa on the Aspavarma coins was an attributive 
epithet. But Cunningham, though not quite correct in describing these 
as the coins of Sasan alone, for they are undoubtedly the joint issues 
of Gondophares and Sasan, was quite justified in taking sasasa to be 
the Prakrit genitive of a proper name. This has been proved beyond 
doubt by Marshall’s discovery of a few small silver coins which have 
the portrait of Pacores, or the bust of conventional Indo-Parthian type 
representing Sasan himself, and the Gondopharian symbol on the 
obverse and a Nike on the reverse; the obverse Greek legend is illegible, 
but the Prakrit legend on the reverse reads maharajasa Aspabhrata- 
putrasa tratarasa Sasasa. The interesting additional information we get 
from these coins is that Sasan, a former associate of Gondophares 
and afterwards one of his successors in the Taxila region, was the son 
of Aspa’s brother, evidently Aspavarma, the son of Indravarma. The 
coins further show that Sasan, who was at first a subordinate ruler 
under Gondophares, subsequently assumed independent or quasi- 
independent status. There are some billon coins in the British Museum 
which bear the name of Gondophares and his nephew (brother’s son) 
Abdagases. These exhibit ‘king on horseback’ and ‘standing Zeus’ 
devices; the obverse legend is [Gu]ndiphero Adelphi[deds] the reverse 
being Gudupharabhratapatrasa maharajasa tratarasa Avadagasasa. 1 These 
coins have been described by Rapson as the joint issues of Gondophares 
and Abdagases. The peculiar symbol of Gondophares on these Indo- 
Parthian coins is found counterstruck on some coins of the Parthian kings 
Orodes I (57-38 B.c.) and Artabanus III (a.d. 10-40). Rapson infers 
from this that Gondophares may have conquered some outlying Parthian 
dominions ; this would explain the incidence of his symbol on some pre- 
existing Parthian coins. He observes, ‘There can be little doubt that under 
his sway the Pahlava power attained its height; and it appears probable 
that this power was now controlled by a single suzerain who reigned 
supreme over both eastern Iran and North-Western India; for the coins 
of Gondophares bear the types both of Orthagnes and of Azes II, aad 
seem to show therefore that he had succeeded to the dominions of both 
these suzerains.’ 2 

THE END OF THE PAHLAVA RULE IN N. W. INDIA 

Abdagases seems to have been the immediate successor of Gondophares. 
He was for some time the subordinate ruler under his uncle, as the 
joint issues of both, referred to above, establish. His independent issues 
are few in number and are also countermarked by his uncle's symbol, 
and, in nearly all cases express in the Prakrit reverse his relationship 
with Gondophares. The exception occurs in the case of a few copper 
coins which bear the ‘Parthian royal bust’ and Nike devices with the 

1 Tam says that the Greek legend on cit., p. 354) but it is not so. 
these coins is basileus basileion (op. ’ CHI. i p. 578 



216 THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 

partially preserved legends Basileds Sdteros A[bdag]asou and tratarasa 
maharajasa Avadagasasa, for these coins do not bear the particular 
symbol. The other coins of Abdagases which are almost all in billon have 
‘the horseman and standing Zeus’ devices with the Gondopharian mark ; 
but it is interesting to note that the Greek and Kharoshthi legends, 
Basileuntos Basileonu Abaagasou and Gudupharabhrataputrasa maha- 
rajasa tratarasa Avadagasasa, are comparatively well preserved and 
the Greek is far more legible here than on the majority of Gondo- 
phares’s own coins. The meaning of the somewhat corrupt Greek legend 
is ‘during the reign of king Abdagases’: and it can also be presumed from 
this that the coins were issued when Abdagases was ruling in his own 
right. The coins of this king having as devices the mounted king and 
standing Zeus Nikephoros bear more high-sounding titles such as maha- 
rajasa rajatirajasa etc. These features seem to invalidate Rapson’s obser- 
vation that ‘as none of the coin-legends of Abdagases bears the imperial 
title, there is no evidence that he reigned independently at any time .’ 1 
The types suggest that he ruled in Seistan and Kandahar, but not always 
as the viceroy of his uncle. His independent rule, like that of Pacores, 
was a short one. 

Pacores appears to have come after the ephemeral reign of Abdagases, 
and the only type of round copper coin that can be ascribed to 
him shows that his reign was very short. The ‘king’s bust’ and the 
Nike devices on this type show that it was meant for circulation in Seistan. 
The Greek and Kharoshthi legends containing full imperial titles, 
Basileus Basileon M'rgas Pakores and maharajasa rajatirajasa mahatasa 
Pakurasa, prove that, however short his reign might have been, he 
enjoyed full imperial sovereignty throughout. The peculiar cursive 
Kharoshthi script in which the Prakrit legend is written is also found in 
the Sui Vihar inscription of Kanishka, suggesting that the interval between 
this Indo-Parthian ruler and Kanishka was comparatively short. Paco- 
res’s bust on the coins of Sasan found in Taxila, if it is not of Sasan himself 
w suggested by Whitehead, may indicate some sort of nominal suzerainty 
exercised by this ephemeral ruler over the far distant Indian territory. 
There is no hint of the relationship between Gondophares and Abdagases 
on the one hand and Pacores on the other. 

The coins of another king, Sanabares, prove that he too had no real 
connection with India proper and the three types, one in silver and two 
in copper, must have all been issued in the far remote parts of Seistan. 
On these coins the customary Prakrit legend in Kharoshthi script is cons- 
picuous by its absence, and the devices on this king’s silver and copper 
money are typically Parthian (head of king wearing tiara of late Parthian 
form: king dressed in Parthian style seated on throne holding bow); his 
association, however remote, with the Indo-Parthian group seems to be 
indicated by the Nike reverse on one copper type. The Greek legend. 


Ibid. p. 580 



END OF PARTHIAN RULE IN INDIA 


217 


hardly complete in any single specimen, is Basileus Megas Sanabares. 
Rapson rightly says that ‘there is no evidence of his rule either 
in Kandahar or India.’ Coins of another Parthian ruler having no 
clear affiliation with any known Indo-Parthian king were long ago noticed 
by Von Sallet and Cunningham. He was called Arsaces, a name which 
was borne by the founder of the imperial dynasty of Parthia, to which 
Mithridates I belonged. But this Arsaces may have to be placed in the first 
century a.d. on the basis of numismatic data. All his coins are of copper, 
of which the square type is similar to the square copper coins of Maues 
with ‘horse, and bow in case’ devices ; the legend on the obverse is 
Basileos Theou Arsakou, there being no corresponding Prakrit legend. 
Two other round copper coins of this nondescript ruler noticed by Cun- 
ningham are closely associated with the money of Gondophares and 
Abdagases on account of their type (king on horseback and standing 
Zeus Nicephorus) and are bilingual; the Greek legend Basileuontos 
Basileon Dikaiou Arsakou, closely resembles that on one of the varie- 
ties of Abdagases’s coins noticed above, and the Prakrit legend is maha- 
rajasa rajarajasa mahatasa Arshakasa tratarasa. Cunningham says that 
none of Arsaces’s coins was found in the Panjab; but the type and the 
Prakrit legend of the latter group prove Arsaces’s association with the 
Indian border-land, perhaps Arachosia. There is no means, however, 
of ascertaining his exact position in the order of the Indo-Parthian rulers. 

The end of the Parthian rule in India is marked by several groups of 
small silver coins that were unearthed by Marshall in the course of exca- 
vations at the Sirkap site of Taxila. One of these groups with the name 
of Sasan, the son of Aspa’s brother, has already been noticed. Two other 
classes contain the conventional Parthian bust either standing for that 
of Gondophares or of the actual issuers themselves with the Gondopha- 
rian symbol on the obverse, and Nike on the reverse, bearing the names 
respectively of Sapedana and Satavastra; traces of a corrupt Greek legend 
are visible on one side, while the reverse has either maharajasa rajarajasa 
tratarasa dhramiasa Sapedanasa or maharajasa rajarajasa tratarasa Sata- 
vastrasa. Marshall is doubtful whether they reigned in the Taxila region; 
he thinks that ‘they were probably contemporaries of Kujula or Wima 
Kadphises and ruled over small states further west, acknowledging the 
supremacy of the Kushana overlord, who had established his capital at 
Taxila .’ 1 Rapson’s suggestion, however, that the Taxila region was 
administered successively by the two kings, probably under the supreme 
control of Gondophares, is more acceptable. Their short rule was 
followed by that of Sasan, the sometime associate of the suzerain, 
who took charge of the administration of the Taxila region during 
the reign of Pacores, the immediate successor of Abdagases. If the view 
of Whitehead that the bust on Sasan’s own coins is that of Sasan himself 
be accepted, then he should be placed before Sapedana and Satavastra. 

1 ASIAR. 1912-13, p. 44. Also Taxila i p. 60 n. 7 and p. 161 where Sapedenes is identi- 
fied with Sandanes of the Periplus. 

28 



218 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


Whitehead believes that ‘Aspavarma was strategos successively of Azes II 
and Gondophares, then a maharaja under the latter, while Sasan, starting 
where his uncle Aspavarma left off, was first maharaja under Gondophares 
and then colleague as supreme suzerain.’ 1 These transient rulers did 
not long enjoy their eminence. The control of Taxila, slipping from their 
hands, soon passed to the Kushanas. Their end is told in a fourth class 
of coins. These are characterised by the bust of the Kushana conqueror, 
Wima Kadphises, with his distinctive conical headdress ; the reverse type 
is the same (a winged Nike) and the legend reads maharajasa rajatirajasa 
Kushanasa Yavugasa, ‘of the great king, supreme king of kings, the Kushana 
chief.’ 2 It is likely that Wima had already wrested from the last of the 
Indo-Parthians the regions to the west of the Indus, and that the conquest 
of the Taxila region marked a stage in his advance east and south-eastward. 
The exact chronological limits of these events cannot be determined with 
certainty. Rapson however says: ‘Gondophares was reigning in the 

year a.d. 45 and Wima Kadphises was reigning in the year a.d. 78. Within 
these thirty-three years must be included the latter part of the reign of 
Gondophares, the reign of Pacores, and some portion of the reign of Wifna 
Kadphises.’ 3 His dating of Wima on the basis of the Taxila silver scroll 
is not universally accepted, and there is a strong opinion among some 
scholars that Kanishka’s rule began in a.d. 78, the initial date of the Saka 
era. But all this will be discussed in the next chapter; it need only be 
observed here that the rule of the Parthians in India certainly did not con- 
tinue for long after a.d. 45-46, the last known date of Gondophares. 
It may have come to its end within a decade at the utmost. 

ADMINISTRATION : SUBORDINATE RULERS 

The foreign domination over the northern and north-western parts of 
India did not end with the extinction of the Parthians. Parthian rule merely 
gave place to the paramountcy of another foreign race — the Kushanas 
' of Central Asia, whose hold on India was destined to be far more extensive 
and of much longer duration. The Scythians and Parthians together 
could have held sway over portions of India for little over a century 
and a quarter only. The Kushana suzerainty, on the other hand, was to last 
for more than two hundred years, and it undoubtedly spread over a much 
larger part of Northern and Western India. When considering the extent 
of the Scythian occupation, hov/ever, it must be allowed that rulers of 
lesser rank, under the aegis of the suzerain power, appear to have pene- 
trated far into the interior regions of India, Mathura for instance. The 
Sakas, and after them the Pahlavas, used to govern many of their Indian 
possessions through strategoi and satraps, one or two of whom have 

1 NC. 1944, pp. 99-104 it will be commented on in the next 

2 The simultaneous use of the terms _ chapter. 
maharaja rajatiraja and verruga in one “CHI. i p. 581 

and the same legend is interesting ; 



SATRAPAL ADMINISTRATION 


219 


already been incidentally mentioned. They ruled in the extreme north and 
north-west, in parts of the Panjab, in Mathura and the adjoining regions 
and later over the north-western Deccan and Western India. The last group 
of these were independent rulers for all practical purposes, owning only 
nominal allegiance to the Kushanas. Evidence recorded in the last chapter 
shows that the system of governing through subordinate rulers had already 
been introduced under the Indo-Greeks; the Bajaur relic casket inscription 
mentions one Viyakamitra, who was an apracharaja, evidently a ruler 
enjoying lesser rank, probably under Menander. This system was cer- 
tainly continued throughout the Scytho-Parthian period and adopted 
by the Kushanas. The method of administering districts and other smaller 
units of the country with the help of such officials as meridarkhs and others, 
which was introduced under the Indo-Greeks, was maintained by the Sakas 
and still more by the Pahlavas. The Swat relic vase inscription of Meri- 
darkh Theodorus has been now dated, by Konow, in the middle of the 
second century B.C., during the time of Menander; a copper-plate inscrip- 
tion from Taxila belonging to* a period when the Greek rule in Taxila had 
come to an end mentions another meridarkh whose name has unfortunately 
been lost. Part of the Bajaur relic casket inscription was written by one 
Vispila who was either a Saka or a Pahlava and was the anamkaya (Greek 
anankaios — royal adviser, an honorific title) of Vijayamitra . 1 

Epigraphic as well as numismatic data supply us with the names of 
a large number of Kshatrapas and Mahakshatrapas whose history will 
be treated at greater length in chapter ix. Reference may be made here, 
however, to two only, one hardly known, and the other much better known 
from his inscriptions and coins, who flourished during the Saka-Pahlava 
domination. Marshall unearthed six coins of Idharasa and twenty-eight 
of Raj uvula from different parts of Sirkap, the intermediate city site of 
Taxila which was in occupation during most of this period. Very few 
coins of Azilises were found there, and from this he surmised that Azilises 
might have been represented at Taxila by some local colleague, perhaps 
by Rajuvula or Idharasa. In point of style, Idharasa’s coins with ‘king* 
on horseback’ and Pallas devices are as closely allied with the coins of 
Azilises and Azes II as they are with those of Gondophares. Idharasa 
styles himself maharaja and apparently apratihata, which shows that during 
the latter part of the Saka-Pahlava rule he was enjoying a quasi-indepen- 
dent position at Taxila. It is hardly to be doubted, however, that his power 
was localised there ; he certainly did not extend his power far beyond. 
But Rajuvula, as we shall see, though he was for some time during the Saka 
regime ruling as satrap in Taxila, as seems likely from the coins just men- 
tioned, was destined to reign over Mathura presumably at a later period 
of his career. The most probable inference from this is that, these subor- 
dinate rulers were the principal agents in the expansion of the Saka 
power into the interior regions of India. A few other such rulers appear 


NIA. 1940, p. 646 



220 


THE SCYTHIANS AND PARTHIANS IN INDIA 


to have been known equally well in North-Western and in Central 
India. Kharaosta and Patika, the son of Liaka Kusuluka, are two examples 
who are known from coins and the Mathura Lion Capital inscriptions. 
Zeionises, the son of Manigula, a Kshatrapa of Chukhsa, the great plain 
of Chach, is also known from coins and one inscription in the Taxila 
region. 


SAKA-PAHLAVA CULTURE 


It has been briefly shown in the last chapter how the Bactrian Greeks 
and the Indians, both inheritors of ancient culture and civilisation of a high 
order, reacted upon each other. The Sakas as well as the Pahlavas were 
people culturally inferior and thus were prone to be influenced by both. 
That they were so influenced is fully proved by the remains they have left 
to us. The coins are the most important tangible remains, and they vouch 
for the truth in a remarkable manner. The Saka coins are in many cases 
mere adaptations of those of the Indo-Greeks, though striking originali- 
ties are occasionally met with. The decadence which had set in, in the die- 
cutter’s and moneyer’s technique, during the latter part of the Bactrian 
Greek rule in India continued throughout the period of the Saka-Pahlava 
domination though in its early stages the gradual decay seems to have 
been temporarily arrested. The continued use of the Greek and Kharo- 
shth! monograms on the coins probably shows that the services of both 
Hellenistic and Indian die-cutters were requisitioned by the rulers. The 
Sakas, like most of the Indo-Greeks, did not strike gold, their coins being 
mostly in silver and copper ; the Pahlavas also had no gold coins but struck 
billon, ccpper and, in rare instances, silver money . 1 Copper and billon 
as media for the moneyer’s art were comparatively unsatisfactory and this 
is one of the reasons, for the further deterioration in monetary technique 
during the Pahlava rule. However, the art of the sculptor and the architect 
does not seem to have suffered much and the Hellenistic art of Gandhara 
* which had perhaps taken its origin from the Indo-Greeks seems to have 
continued to progress during this period, attaining its apogee with the 
imperial Kushanas. Excavations at Taxila and many other sites of ancient 
Gandhara have brought to light a large number of sculptural and archi- 
tectural remains belonging to this period, which testify to this fact . 2 The 
general tenor of life seems to have been rather simple and unsophis- 
ticated. The remains of the royal palace uncovered in the Sirkap site, 
the oldest parts of which date from the Scytho-Parthian epoch, reveal 
that though the palace was ‘considerably larger and built more subs- 
tantially than the private houses, there was nothing at all pretentious 


A very small gold piece (weighing 3 to 
4 grains) with ‘king on horseback ’ and 
faint traces of a corrupt Greek legend 
on the obverse has a monogram with 
the Kharosh(hI legend Athamasa on its 


the dynasty of Azes and Azilises° 
(PMC. 145, n. 1) 

1 See. also Ch. xxn post. 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


221 


in its planning or sumptuous in its adornment.’ 1 Philostratus, the 
biographer of Apollonius, writing of the palace says that Apollonius 
‘saw no magnificent architecture there, and the men’s chambers and the 
porticoes and the whole of the vestibule were very chaste in style.’ The 
religious establishments were perhaps a little more elaborate, and the 
basements of many Buddhist stupas excavated in the north-west appear 
to substantiate this supposition. The massive remains of the Jandial 
Fire Temple at Taxila which was originally constructed mainly according 
to Greek style during the Scytho-Parthian epoch leave little doubt that it 
was a very imposing structure in its day. Philostratus is probably des- 
cribing this very temple when he writes that Apollonius and his companion 
Damis ‘saw a temple in front of the wall, about 100 feet in length and 
built of shell-like stone. And in it was a shrine which, considering that 
the temple was so large and provided with a peristyle, was disproportion- 
ately small, but nevertheless worthy of admiration; for nailed to each of 
its walls were brazen tablets on which were portrayed the deeds of Porus 
and Alexander.’ 

The Yavanas who were undoubtedly people with a highly developed 
culture of their own could not resist the environment of India, and had 
been and still were under process of absorption into Indian society; that 
‘they became adherents of Indian religious systems is clearly to be seen 
from their own confession.’ Their successors were naturally even more 
prone to be influenced by the manners, customs and religious beliefs of 
the people over whom they ruled. The names of these alien kings of India 
are no doubt Scythian or Parthian in character ; but many persons of lesser 
rank were adopting Indian names as early as the first century b.c., as is 
demonstrated by archaeological evidence. The names of Aspavarman 
and his nephew Sasan are not Indian; but those of Aspa’s father and grand- 
father had hardly any foreign element in them. Whitehead rightly obser- 
ves, ‘The names Vijayamitra and Indravarma are Indian, while Sasan is 
Iranian; the line could not have been Hindu by race. These Saka military 
chiefs had adopted high-sounding Indian names ; they had become Hindu- 
ised and claimed to be Kshatriyas.’ 2 Numerous Brahmi and Kharoshtlii 
inscriptions of the period discovered in various parts of Northern India 
prove that these new recruits to the Hindu fold became ardent followers 
of different Indian religious creeds. 

1 Marshall, Guide to Taxila, 1918, p. 68 Kharoshthi script. Itravarma and 

1 Whitehead has published a coin with Indravarma, Aspa’s father, are taken by 

the legend Vijayamitraputrasa Itravar- Thomas and Whitehead as identical; 
masa apracharajasa, 'of the son of Vij- NC. 1944, pp. 99-104 
ayamitra, Itravarma, the apracharaja’ in 



Chapter VIII 


THE RISE AND FALL OF THE KUSHANA POWER 
INTRODUCTION 


T he foreign domination over parts of Northern India did not end wit'. 

the downfall of the Pahlavas. Pahlava rule gave place to that of the 
Kushanas whose hold over Northern and Western India was far more exten- 
sive and complete than that of their predecessors. The Kushanas ousted 
the Pahlavas in the extreme north-west and spread their arms by successive 
stages in the regions of Northern India which had hitherto escaped the 
evils of alien rule. The early imperial Kushanas possessed territories extend- 
ing far beyond the Indian border. The vast empire which they controlled 
in and beyond India, betokened their aptitude for conquest and consoli- 
dation. Although it only endured for a century, or a little more, it was 
no mean achievement for a people of partially nomadic habits, who were 
indebted for much of their culture to their civilised neighbours. Even after 
their empire was destroyed by the Sassanians on the one hand, and the 
Indian powers on the other, there still existed powerful scions of this stock 
enjoying sovereignty over its different parts, many of whom were ultimately 
subdued by the great Indian monarch Samudragupta. The long connec- 
tion of this race with India left a deep impression on the Indian mind as 
is evident from many references to them in epic, Puranic, and other lite- 
rature. The part which the rulers of this race played in the complex his- 
tory of India at the period was of great importance. They served the 
purpose of intermediaries, as it were, between India and the peoples over 
the north-western and north-eastern borders. The extreme eastern limits 
of the Roman empire touched the fringe of their extensive empire, and the 
western outskirts of the vast domains of the divine rulers of China march- 
ed with its north-eastern boundaries. The Kushanas freely imbibed the 
culture of their conquered subjects and imported into the land of their 
conquest and adoption some interesting features of its composite civili- 
sation. The story of their rise and fall in India is thus of unique interest 
and importance, and it is unfortunate that even now there are many gaps 
in our knowledge of it. Nevertheless they are better known to history 
than their immediate predecessors, the Pahlavas and the Sakas. Literary 
evidence, partly indigenous but mostly foreign, is not wanting, and to this 
may be added a wealth of archaeological data in the shape of coins and 
inscriptions, likewise sculptural and architectural remains. In order to 
draw even an approximately accurate picture of the Kushanas and their 
achievements in India, the historian must painfully sift and analyse all this 
material, and read, where necessary, between the lines— for the very wealth 



MIGRATIONS 


223 


of data at his disposal is liable to baffle the scholar when, as sometimes 
happens, the testimony is conflicting. The effort to reconcile apparent 
contradictions has propagated a multitude of divergent views. 

THE YU E-CHI AND THE KUSHANAS 


It has long been held by scholars that the Kushanas were a branch of the 
Y tie-chi who were principally responsible for conquering Bucii ia and ex- 
pelling the Sakas from the Bactrian borderland towards the south. The 
original homeland of the Yiie-chi and the causes of their migrations have 
already been touched upon in the last chapter, but for an understanding 
of the origin and early history of the Kushanas, it will be useful to give 
here a brief resume of the annals of the Yiie-chi. The facts are mostly 
gleaned from Chinese sources. 

In the early part of the second century b.c. the YUe-chi were living in 
Kan-su and Ning-hsia, west of the Huang-ho river, between Tun Huang 
and Ki-’lian. Here they were defeated by the Hiung-nu about (170 b.c.), 
and driven from their home. They divided themselves into two unequal 
branches in their flight westwards ; the lesser horde went towards the eas- 
tern Altyntagh and the Richtofen mountains and came to be known as 
the Little Yiie-chi. The larger group, trekking westward, vanquished 
a number of §aka tribes in the northern Tien-shan on the upper Ili, Chu 
and Naryn, and settled there for about three decades. Between 133 and 
129 b.c., a part of this section of the YUe-chi was subjugated by the Wu- 
sun, while the rest withdrew farther west. When Chang-Kien came to 
Bactria in his mission to find prospective allies for the Chinese emperor 
(c. 126 b.c.), he found these people dominant in the rich and fertile country 
on the north of the Oxus, with their capital established at Kian-she. 
The Ta-hia, whose capital was Lan-shi (modern Badakshan), seem to 
have been subject to their rule, and the Yue-chi subsequently transferred 
their royal seat to the Ta-hia capital. 1 The Ta-hia have been identified 
with the local people of Bactria which was conquered, according to the aa- 
cient classical writers, by various tribes, among which were the Tochari. 
There is now hardly any doubt that the Tochari of the classical authors 
were identical with the Yiie-chi of the Chinese annals. It was generally 
inferred that the Kushanas were a section of the Yue-chi, and the inference 
was principally based on a study of the annals of the earlier and later Han 
Dynasties, the Tsien Han-shu and the Hou Honshu. There seems, however, 
to be a discrepancy between the relevant statements of these two Chinese 
records, which are of different date, and this has led some scholars to suggest 
that the Kushanas did not belong to Yue-chi stock, but were of Saka 


Konow thinks that the country of the 
Ta-hia, i.e., Bactria, was not fully con- 
quered when Chang-Kien came there, 
the full conquest dating between Chang- 
Kien’s departure and a.d. 25 (C/7. n 
(i)s p. liv). But Maenchen-Helfen asserts 


that this view of the gradual expansion 
of the Yiie-chi power from the country 
north of the Oxus, to the ‘real’ Ta-hia 
south of the river is unfounded; JAOS. 
65, 1945, pp. 71-2. n. 7 



224 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


origin. It is necessary to refer to the extracts in question which have led 
scholars to hold divergent views about Kushana affiliations. The Tsien 
Han-shu says : ‘The Ta Yiie-chi were originally a nomadic nation, which 
moved along following their cattle . . . The Ta-hia originally had no 
great rulers or chiefs, the various cities and towns put up small chiefs. 
The people are weak and fear war. Therefore, when the Yue-chi came 
migrating, they subjugated them all. There are five hi-hous, viz., Hiu- 
mi with its capital Ho-mo; Shuang-mi with its capital Shuang-mi; Kuei- 
Shuang with its capital Hu-tsao, Hi-tun with its capital Po-mao, and Kao- 
fu with its capital Kao-fu. At that time they were all dependent on the 
Great Yue-chi.’ Konow says: ‘The remark about the five hi-hous can 
hardly mean anything else than that these principalities existed, as part 
of the Ta-hia realm, when the Yue-chi transferred their headquarters to 
Kien-shi=Lanshi (according to Konow these two are variants of the same 
word), and that the Yue-chi now assumed suzerainty over them. This 
seems to imply that the Yue-chi brought the former §aka chiefs into subjec- 
tion.’ The Hou Han-shu (ch. 118) records : ‘Originally, when (the king- 
dom of ) the Yue-chi was annihilated by the Hiung-nu, they migrated to 
the Ta-hia and divided their kingdom into the five district hi-hous, Hiu- 
mi, Shuang-mi, Kuei-shuang, Hi-tun, Tu-mi.’ Karlgren comments thus 
on the above passage: ‘the Hou Han-shu, much later than the Tsien Han- 
shu, has altered the account. When the Tsien Han-shu says simply “there 
were five hi-hous ”, the Hou Han-shu says, “the Yiie-chi divided the land 
into five hi-hous .” This innovation is not to be trusted. The earliest 
accounts indicate that the Ta Yiie-chi found a country divided into five 
parts, the “small chiefs” of which were of Sai (S£K) origin.’ The theory 
that the Kushanas did not belong to the YUe-chi stock, here supported by 
Karlgren and Konow, was first put forward by a Japanese scholar, Kuwa- 
bara Jitzuzo, and his interpretation was accepted by other scholars, e.g. 
Haneda Toru and Paul Pelliot, besides Karlgren and Konow. Tarn vehe- 
mently rejects this theory and sticks to the older one that the Kushanas 
represented the Asii or the dominant element among the Yiie-chi whether 
they were a tribe or sept or whether Kushana was not a tribal name but 
a family or dynastic title. The older view that the Kushanas belonged 
to Yiie-chi stock has much to commend itself, for the simple reason that 
both the annals seem to refer to the power of the Ta Yiie-chi in the Ta-hia 
region, and it was the Yiie-chi power which was subsequently aggrandised 
as the later Han records inform us. 

Maenchen-Helfen after a careful consideration of the extracts from the 
two Chinese annals in question avers that the alleged discrepancy between 
the two texts does not exist in reality, and the five hi-hous, the Kushanas 
among them, were great feudatories of the Yiie-chi king. He further 
suggests that the term Kushana was a derivative of a short form Kusha 
( Kushi ), a point first argued by Von Stael-Holstein from evidence which 
has since become obsolete. Maenchen-Helfen argues on the basis of the 
names of some early Kusha towns in Sogdiana and Chinese Turkestan 



INTERPRETATION OF CHINESE ACCOUNTS 


225 


that ‘since Kutsi, Ku-shih, and Kao-ch’ang (K. chan) were known to the 
Chinese already in the early Han period, Kusha must have settled in the 
northern Tarim long before the Kushana empire was founded.’ 
He then tries to prove on the authority of the classical and Chinese texts 
that the term Yiie-chi, the Tochari of the classical writers, is another Chi- 
nese transcription of Kusha. The language spoken by the Kushanas 
seems to have been Saka, and we shall presently see that the legends on 
most of the coins of the imperial Kushana rulers like Kanishka, Huvishka, 
and Vasudeva were in pure Khotani Saka, as has been proved by Sten 
Konow . 1 Ludwig Bachhofer after a careful investigation of Kushana 
costumes and weapons from their coins concluded that the Sakas and the 
Kushanas wore the same dress and fought with the same weapons . 2 
These facts to some degree support the theory of the §aka origin of the 
Kushanas advocated by Konow and others, but they can be explained by 
the theory that the Kushanas came under §aka influence at a very early 
period of their history. Maenchen-Helfen’s reconstruction of the early 
history of the Kushanas long anterior to their descent on India is thus 
along the following lines : ‘Since the fourth century b.c. at the latest, the 
Chinese knew barbarians in the north-west under the name Kusha 
Yiie-chi. The Kusha were the dominant group. The tribal name was 
Togar (or the like). At an undetermined time the Kusha-Togar came 
under Saka rule. The usage of two names, Kusha and Arsi, for designat- 
ing the rulers, can best be explained by assuming that Kusha was the 
Tokharian term for “nobles”, while the Saka called themselves Arsi. 
The composite horde migrated west. One group, the Little Yiie-chi, stayed 
in the Nan-shan region; others settled in the oases of the Tarim basin; 
still others, after a prolonged stay in the northern Tien-shan, conquered 
Bactria. There at the end of the first century b.c. the Kusha gained final 
and decisive ascendancy over the whole horde .’ 3 


Yt)E- CHI-KUSHANA S IN THE INDIAN BORDER 


The theory of the American scholar Maenchen-Helfen described in tfie 
foregoing section is one of the latest attempts to unravel the problem of 
Yiie-chi and Kushana nationality, and his proposed solution, though partly 
conjectural, rests on a skilful appraisal of all available historical and lin- 
guistic data affecting this ancient composite tribe. The Yiie-chi seem not 
only to have imbibed many cultural traits of the !§akas, but also to have 
absorbed a large Saka ethnic element in much the same way as the Sakas 
of another region appear to have incorporated an appreciable quantity 
of Parthian traits during their long sojourn in eastern Iran, before they 
invaded India. Their early career in the borderland of India is thus 


1 Konow, Norske Tidskrift for Sprog 
videnskap, 1939, p. 10 

1 L. Bachhofer ‘On Greeks and Sakas 
in India,’ JAOS. 61, 1941, pp. 247-50 

29 


Otto Maenchen-Helfen, ‘The Yiie-chi 
Problem Re-examined,’ JAOS. 65, 1945, 
pp. 71-81. For Konow’s case, cf. JIH. 
xu, 1933, pp. 10-13 



226 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


briefly recounted by the Hou Han-shu, a work written by Fan Ye (d. a.d. 
445) : After referring to the division of the Yiie-chi into the five district 
hi-hous, Hiu-mi, Shuang-mi, Kuei-shuang, Hi-tun and Tu-mi, it says 1 
that ‘more than a hundred years afterwards the hi-hou of Kuei-shuang, 
K’iu-tsiu-k’io, attacked and annihilated the other four hi-hous and made 
himself king. The kingdom was called “the Kuei-shuang kings” (kuo 
hao Kuei-shuang-wang). He invaded An-si and seized Kao-fu; further 
he triumphed over P’u-ta and Ki-pin and entirely possessed those king- 
doms. K’iu-tsiu-k’io died more than eighty years old. His son Yen-kao- 
chen became king in his stead. He conquered T’ien-chu (India) and 
appointed a general there for the administration. From this moment the 
Yiie-chi became extremely powerful. All the countries designate them calling 
(their king) the Kuei-shuang king, but the Han call them Great Yiie-chi, pre- 
serving their old appellation’. This extract contains some definite infor- 
mation about the expansion of the Kushana power. It should be noted 
that the names of the first four of the five principalities are common to 
this account as well as that given in the Tsien Han-shu, but the fifth one 
is called in it Tu-mi, in place of Kao-fu of the earlier Han record. Mar- 
quart in his Eransahr 2 has suggested that Hiu-mi corresponds to present 
Wakhan, Shuang-mi to Chitral, Kuei-shuang, to the country north 
of Gandhara, or Gandhara itself (modern Peshawar district), Hi-tun, 
to Parwan on the Panjshir, and Kao-fu close to, but distinct from 
Kabul. It has been shown in the last chapter that Kao-fu, or the 
Kabul region, was in the possession of the Indo-Parthian ruler Gondo- 
phares at a not much earlier date, and it could hardly have been 
one of the principalities of Ta-hia under the Yiie-chi. Further it 
is expressly stated by Fan-Ye that K’iu-tsiu-k’io invaded An-si, i.e. 
the Parthians, evidently under Gondophares himself or his ephemeral 
successors, and conquered P’u-ta and Ki-pin, the geographical limits 
of which are extremely uncertain. Thus Fan-Ye’s substitution of 
Tu-mi for Kao-fu of the older Han annals seems to be correct, though 
we have no idea of its exact position. It is apparent, however, that some 
of the principalities of the Yiie-chi were situated far outside the bounda- 
ries of Bactria. Thus the later Han account of the division of the Ta-hia 
empire or kingdom between five hi-hous seems to present the actual facts 
correctly. It also presents the early stages of the gradual spread of the Ku- 
shana power which ended in the conquest of India. We can attempt a 
rough chronology and sequence of these events. Hou Han-shu covers 
the period between a.d. 25 and 125, and Fan-Ye derived his account of the 
Kushana expansion from the report compiled by Pan- Young at the end 
of the reign of the Chinese emperor, Ngan (a.d. 107-125). K’iu-tsiu- 
k’io could thus not have begun his career before a.d. 25 ; and the whole of 
his career, as well as Yen-kao-chen’s conquest of India, must have taken 

1 JIH. xn, 1933, pp. 13-14 

! Pp. 242 ff. cited by Kennedy, JRAS. 1912, p. 669 n. 



KADPHISES 


227 


place before a.d. 125. 1 This date must be the later limit for the occurrence 
of these events, and the beginning of K’iu-tsiu-k’io’s career may also be 
fixed approximately. It has been shown in the last chapter that the Indo- 
Parthian king Gondophares was ruling in India about a.d. 46, and it is 
certain that Yen-kao-chen conquered it after that date. The subsequent 
rule of Gondophares and the total regnal period of his associates and suc- 
cessors could hardly have lasted for more than ten years after a.d. 46, 
for it is a fact that the Indo-Parthians had already been deprived of a large 
part of their possessions by the first Kushana chief. Thus Yen-kao-chen’s 
conquest of India may be placed some time after a.d. 56, and his father’s 
acquisition of the extra Indian territories of the An-si, i.e. the Parthian s 
in India, and of the borders of India, may have been completed several 
years before a.d. 46. 


THE KADPHISES GROUP OF KINGS 


K’iu-tsiu-k'io and Yen-kao-chen of the records of the later Han dynasty 
have unanimously been identified by scholars with Kujula Kadphises 
and Wima Kadphises of the coins. Mention has already been made in 
chapter vi of this volume, of the so-called joint issues of Hermaeus and 
Kujula Kadphises. It was at first suggested that the Indo-Greek king who 
sought the aid of this Kushana chief against the Parthians who were 
harassing his kingdom in the Kabul valley, allowed some position of ad- 
ministrative importance and power to his barbarian ally. The latter, 
after giving him effective help against his enemies, shared his power, 
and coins began to be issued in their joint names. Some time thereafter 
Hermaeus disappeared from the scene, either by natural death or forcible 
removal, and the Kushana chief became paramount in the Kabul region. 
The untenability of this view has long been demonstrated by Rapson and 
others. In fact, Kujula does not seem to have been the immediate succes- 
sor of Hermaeus. The coins in this case are our principal guide, and a care- 
ful scrutiny of the relevant groups justifies Rapson’s conclusion that th» 
last of the Indo-Greek rulers and the Kushana chief were separated from 
each other by a fairly long interval. The copper coins with the bust of 
Hermaeus and his name and titles in corrupt Greek on the obverse, and 
Heracles and the KharoshthI legend Kujula Kasasa Kushana Yavugasa dhra- 
mafhidasa on the reverse, were not their joint issues. These were really 
the continuation of the Parthian imitations of Hermaeus’s money by the 
Kushana chief who destroyed the Parthian domination in the Kabul 


Fan-Ye states, ‘The notes which Pan 
ku has written on the configuration and 
the manner of the various (Western) 
Countries are detailed in the book of 
the older (Han) ; now I have chosen 
what in the events of the period Kien- 
wu (a.d. 25-55) or later was different 
from what has already been said for- 
merly and I have compared the chapters 


on the Western Countries on that; all 
the facts have been related by Pan 
Young, at the end of the emperor Ngan 
(a.d. 107-25)’; CII. it (i) p. liv. Pan 
Ku was the author of the Tsien Hon- 
shu which dealt with the period 206 
b.c.-a.d. 24; the work was completed 
by his sister after his death in a.d. 92. 



228 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


valley . 1 2 They were shortly replaced by the coins which, though still con- 
taining the bust of Hermaeus on the obverse, bore the name of Kujula 
Kadphises in somewhat corrupt Greek, varying on different issues 
( Kozoulou Kadphizou Koshsonou ), with the Heracles device and the 
Kharoshthi legend, mentioned a few lines above, on the reverse. There 
are some other types of copper coins usually attributed to this Kushana 
ruler where we find several other variants of his name. These are Kuyula 
Kara Kapa, Kuyula Kaphsa and Kuyula Kaii in Prakrit, and Kadaphes 
in Greek. The Bactrian association of Kuyula is interestingly illustrated 
by a group of copper coins with a bull and a corrupt and illegible 
Greek legend on the obverse, and a two-humped Bactrian camel with the 
Kharoshthi legend maharajasa rajadirajasa Kuyula Kara Kapasa on the 
reverse. It seems that he issued these coins after acquiring much of the 
territories of the An-si or the Parthians; for his attributive epithets were 
derived from the Scytho-Parthian ones. Rapson would ascribe these 
coins to a second Kushana chief , 3 but there is hardly any justification for 
making this distinction. Similarly Kadaphes of the coins with the dia- 
demed head (possibly an imitation of the image of the Roman emperor 
Augustus on his coins) and the Greek legend Khoshansu Zaoou Kozola 
Kadaphes on the obverse, and the enthroned king with the Kha- 
roshthi legend, .... Kaphsasa sachadhramathitasa Khushanasa Yaiiasa, on 
the reverse, cannot be differentiated from Kujula Kadphises. The iden- 
tity of Kujula Kadphises and Wima Kadphises of the coins with K’iu- 
tsiu-k’io and Yen-kao-chen of the Chinese text, once accepted, forcibly 
suggests that each of these names really comprises many ways of designa- 
ting one and the same person. This is rendered still more probable by the 
fact that the tribal name Kushana, the epithet Kujula, and the title Yavuga 
are likewise spelt variously in the Greek and in the Kharoshthi coin legends . 3 
The etymology of the word Kushana has already been briefly dealt with, 
and it is likely that Kuci-Kucha, Kusha and Yue-chi were all derived from 
a Tocharian word which meant ‘white, bright’ (moon), as has been sug- 
gested by Bailey . 4 A variant of the epithet Kujula is to be found in that 
of Patika’s father Liaka, the Saka satrap of Chukhsa (the great plain of 
Chach), who is called Kusulua or Kusuluka, about whom more will be 
said in the next chapter. The title Yavuga- Yarn (Greek Zaoos) is trans- 
literated into Chinese as hi-hou, which may also have been a derivative 
of a Tocharian word. It is almost certain that all these three attributes 
belonged to one person, called by the Chinese K’iu-tsiu-k’io. 

A few Kharoshthi inscriptions of the extreme north-west of India have 
been assumed by some scholars to contain implicit reference to the first 
Kushana chief. The so-called Takht-i-Bahi inscription of the time of Gon- 
dophares would, according to Konow, be the earliest of these. In the 

1 Lohuizen-de Leeuw, however, supports shana, Khushana (Gushana in some 
the older view; op. cit., pp. 362-4 inscriptions); Kujula, Kuyula; Yabuga 

2 CHI. i p. 582 n. Yafia. 

3 Kushana, Koshsanu, Khoshansu. Ku- 1 BSOS. 1937, pp. 900-1 



early career of kadphises i 229 

last line but one, of that very ill-preserved record he reads, erjhuna Kapasa 
puyae, meaning ‘in honour of prince Kapa.’ The epithet erjhuna is the 
Prakrit transliteration of the old Saka term alysanai, e'ysanai used to 
translate the Sanskrit word kumara, and, according to him, the ‘prince 
Kapa’ was no other than Kujula Kadphises, one of the variants of whose 
name was Kapa, as his coins show. Thus Kujula Kadphises, Konow says, 
had not risen to the rank of a hi-hou, far less to that of the accredited head 
of all the other hi-hous of the Yiie-chi tribe, at this time (c a.d. 45). The 
Chinese accounts of the aggrandisement of the power of K’iu-tsiu-k’io 
seem to be corroborated by the Panjtar inscription bearing the date 122 
(a.d. 64) ‘where a maharaya Gushana is mentioned, who cannot well be 
anybody else than Kujula Kadphises. It was he, and not his son and 
successor, who conquered Ki-pin, and his son’s name has never been found 
associated with the designation Kushana.’ Konow further suggests 
that the Kushana conquest of India did not stop at the Indus in Kujula 
Kadphises’s time but must have progressed as far as Taxila, for his coins 
have been unearthed in the Pahlava strata of the Sirkap site. Another 
interesting document of the early Kushana period recovered from the 
‘Chir tope’ ( Dharmarajika stupa, as we know from the inscription) a few 
furlongs distant from the city site of Sirkap, is the Taxila silver scroll ins- 
cription of the year 136 (a.d. 78), which mentions a maharaja rajatiraja 
devaputra Kushana. This potentate also (according to Konow) is none 
other than the first of the Kushana chiefs. After a hypothetical calculation 
in a similar vein about Kujula’s probable date of birth, the date of his 
conquest of Kao-fu (Kabul) and that of his death, tentatively fixed by him 
c. a.d. 15, some time after a.d. 45, and c. a.d. 95 respectively, Konow avers: 
‘With the conquest of Taxila the Saka empire in North-Western India had 
been restored. But the old Saka country in the Indus valley was still under 
Pahlava rule. It would be intelligible if the Kusharias had directed their 
attention towards it. The old king did not, however, lead his army to Sind.’ 1 
The views of Konow on this question deserve to be discussed at some 
length, for he made a comprehensive study of the Kushana problems, 
though subsequently he changed some of his opinions. We must observe, 
however, that he has based far-reaching conclusions on premises that 
will not bear scrutiny. Thus, his reading of the partially preserved fifth 
line of the Takht-i-Bahi inscription has been challenged by competent 
scholars like Rapson, and it is his own interpretation of it which is the main 
prop of his theory. 2 It is implausible to suggest, as he has done at first, 


J1H. xii, 1933, pp. 30-3. The Kusha- 
nas in Konow’s opinion were Sakas 
by race. According to him the earli- 
est Saka conquest of the Sind region 
in the first half of the first century b.c. 
is alluded to in the story of the Jaina 
teacher Kalaka, in a comparatively 
late Jaina work, Kalakacharya Katha- 


* Plate xii, no. 1 in CII. ii (i) shows that 
the line begins with an V the next letter 
is a ligature read by Boyer as jhsu', 
the third one is undoubtedly a ‘na’, the 
fourth and the fifth are without doubt 
'ka' and ‘pa’, but then follows a long 
blank in which nine or more letters 
might have been originally written, after 
which comes ‘sa puyae'. To connect 



230 


FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


half-heartedly and then confidently, that Kujula Kadphises was only a 
prince in a.d. 45. It is on the contrary very likely that he had risen to power 
and predominance much earlier. It is also highly probable that part of 
the territorial possessions of the Parthians on the other side of the Indus 
had already come under the rule of Kujula before the date of the Takht- 
i-Bahi inscription. Marquart has located the principality of Kuei-shuang 
in the country to the north of Gandhara, or Gandhara itself. The first 
suggestion is more likely, for Takht-i-Bahi, which is situated in modern 
Peshawar district, the ancient Gandhara, was still in Parthian occupation. 
But Gandhara itself, and possibly all the territories on the western side of 
the Indus originally held by Gondophares and his associates, were shortly 
to fall into the hands of the Kushana chief. It is unlikely that he could 
have carried his conquests across the Indus to Taxila, for it is expressly 
written in the later Han annals that India was conquered by K’iu-tsiu- 
k’io’s son Yen-kao-chen. Konow on the other hand suggests that India 
was simply reconquered by the latter, on the basis of Karlgren’s note 
to him 'that the text unmistakably has “again”, “anew”, extinguished 
“T’ien-chu (India)”, and not “in his turn”.’ But by whom was she con- 
quered before ? In his introduction to the Corpus Inscriptionum Indica- 
rum, vol. it, Konow remarks ‘since we know that there had been a pre- 
vious conquest by kindred tribes, so that the Kushanas may here be con- 
sidered as repeating the deeds of their Saka cousins’ (p. lxvii). But how 
does this interpretation of the Chinese text help us in asserting that it was 
Kujula Kadphises, and not his son, who conquered the Taxila region, 
i.e. India, for the first time ? The Panjtar inscription, mentioned earlier, 
may refer to the first Kushana ruler, but it lay far to the other side 
of the Indus, very near the old principality of the tribe. If the 
year 12 2 which it bears is assigned to the Vikrama Samvat, as is usually 
done, then we may presume that this record belongs to the latest, if not 
the last, date of Kujula. He was by then an octogenerian, and his son’s 
rule must have been comparatively short, and to the latter may have to be 
attributed the Taxila silver scroll. Marshall assigns the few silver Kushana 
coins which he has unearthed from the Parthian strata to Wima Kadphi- 
ses, and not, like Konow, to Kujula. It is thus possible on this reading 
of the relevant data that Kujula Kadphises’s career closed some time about 
a.d. 64. He coined no gold. This was once accounted for (by Kennedy) 
on the ground that being a mere Yavuga (chief) and not an emperor, he 
had no authority to strike gold coins; but this explanation is untenable, 
because such imperial titles as maharaja, mahanta, maharajadhiraja etc. were 
also used by him. Cunningham reads the title ‘devaputra’ on two of the 
‘Bull : Bactrian camel’ type coins with the name ‘Kujula Kara Kaphsa’ ; 
but the word devaputra cannot be read at all on the two specimens he 

the genitive suffix 'sa' with ‘kapa’ is for centuries, for the grinding of spices,and 

unjustifiable; the record of the discovery ‘all the middle part of the inscription has 

of the inscribed stone shows that it was suffered and become indistinct, and some 
being used for many years, perhaps portions have been obliterated altogether ’ 



KADPHISES II 


231 


reproduces. No other coins of this king are known bearing the title deva- 
putra and it is worth noting here that none of the other Kushana coins, 
whether belonging to the Kadphises or to the Kanishka groups of kings, 
bear this term; it is in fact used only in a few of their inscriptions. 1 The 
two epithets dhramathida ( dharmasthita ) and sachadhramathida (satya- 
dharmasthita ) meaning ‘established in faith or true faith* may prove that 
Kujula was either a Buddhist or a Saiva by creed. One of the coin devices 
assignable to Kadaphes, a variant of Kadphises, has been explained by 
some numismatists as ‘Buddha seated in conventional attitude’; but it 
may as well be identified as Siva. A coin of the same king shows Roman 
influence ; it bears on its obverse a diademed head which is an imitation 
of that of the emperor Augustus or his successor Tiberius. 

Wima Kadphises, Yen-kao-chen (pronounced iam kau t'ien in the sixth 
century a.d.) of the Hou Han-shu, appears to have succeeded his father 
at a fairly mature age some time about a.d. 64, and to have ruled until the 
early part of a.d. 78. The later limit of his reign is probably fixed by the 
Taxila silver scroll inscription of the year 136, which records the enshrine- 
ment of the relics of Buddha by one Urasaka, a native of Bactria, for 
the bestowal of perfect health on ‘the great king, king of kings, the son of 
God, the Kushana’ ( maharaja rajatiraja devaputra Kushana). Scholars 
differ about the identity of this unnamed king, but it is likely that he was 
Wima Kadphises. The fact that Wima did not use his tribal designation 
Kushana on his coins while it is used in the scroll, would not justify us in 
distinguishing him from the maharaja rajatiraja of the inscription; no 
one doubts his Kushana nationality. The title devaputra, probably an 
adaptation of one of the epithets of the Chinese emperors, first used for 
him here and continued in some inscriptions of his immediate successors, 
also had its basis in the divine character of the king. Wima Kadphises was 
the first to emphasise this character in his coins and was followed in this 
practice by the later Kushana kings. Devaputra also occurs in a BrahmT 
inscription, between the feet of a colossal stone statue seated on a lion 
throne, in the collection of the Mathura Museum (No. 215). The statu* 
was discovered in the devakula at Mat, nine miles north of Mathura. The 
inscription reads maharaja rajatiraja devaputra Kushanaputra shdhi Verna 
takshama; takshama is an old Persian word meaning ‘strong,’ and it is 
highly probable that this ‘Verna, the strong, the scion of the Kushana 
race’ was Wima Kadphises. 2 The year 136 of the Taxila scroll is refer- 
red by some scholars to the Vikrama Samvat (though there are many 
dissentients), and may thus be the equivalent of a.d. 78. If so, this was 
his last year, for we shall see presently that his successor Kanishka most 
probably began his rule in the same year. In a fragmentary stone ins- 
cription found by Franke at Khalatse in Ladakh, 52 miles below Leh, 
bearing the date 187 (or 184), Konow has read maharajasa Uvima Kavthi- 
sasa. But the reading of the king’s name is not clear and we really have 

1 JNSI. ix pp. 78-81 1 JBORS. vi pp. 12-22 



232 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


no other ground for supposing that Wima extended his rule into this 
corner of Tibet. 

Wima may have been associated with his father in the latter part of his 
reign, and have materially helped him in his conquests and annexations. 
From the time of his formal accession to the throne until his death, his 
comparatively short reign seems to have been absorbed by his efforts to 
advance the Kushana power into the interior of India. Taxila and the 
Panjab were annexed to his empire in the first years of his reign, and if 
the evidence of the inscribed statue, previously mentioned, in the collec- 
tion of the Mathura Museum is to be interpreted as has been done by 
Jayaswal, the Kushana empire perhaps reached Mathura during his reign. 
The later Han records tell us that Yen-kao-chen governed his Indian 
empire through a viceroy. We hold this to be likely, not only because 
the capital of his vast empire probably lay far to the west of the Indus, 
but also, because he was intensely busy with expeditions of conquest and 
annexation. 

His association with India was at the same time very intimate. This 
is proved by the fact that he was one of the few early foreign rulers who 
found time among his various activities, to become an avowed adherent 
of an Indian creed. As the Indo-Greek king Menander became an ardent 
Buddhist, so this semi-barbarous Kushana emperor became a zealous 
convert to the Pasupata or Mahesvara creed. His conversion appears 
to have occurred some time before his formal accession, for all his coins, 
whether in gold or copper show unmistakable signs of his Saiva affiliation. 
The reverse device of his coins, almost invariably, consists of Siva with 
his long trident, sometimes accompanied by his bull and sometimes not, 
or of a trident-battle-axe, undoubtedly a Saiva emblem. The obverse 
presents the king in various attitudes either seated on a couch, or stand- 
ing sacrificing at an altar, or even riding in a chariot drawn by two horses; 
sometimes his bust or full figure seated cross-legged is represented as 
rising from the clouds. The latter device, as well as such other traits as the 
fiame issuing from his shoulders, distinctly emphasise his claim to divine 
nature. The obverse legends of his coins in Greek are either Basileus 
Ooemo Kadphises or Basileus Basileon Soter Megas Ooemo Kadphises and the 
Kharoshthi legend on the reverse is either simply maharaja rajadiraja Vima 
Kathphisasa or, in a more elaborate style, maharajasa rajadirajasa sarvaloga 
isvarasa mahisvarasa Vima Kathphisasa tradara. The latter not only indi- 
cates the nature of the creed of his choice ( mahisvara , i.e. Mahesvara, 
another name for a Pasupata devotee), but also describes him as the Lord 
of all the Worlds and the Great King, King of Kings, the Saviour. This 
illustrates in a very striking manner his accession to great power, much 
more effectively than the Chinese source. The king’s figure on the coins 
probably something in the nature of a portrait, portrays an elderly man 
of strong character and powerful personality. His association with a 
viceregal ruler in the administration of the Indian portion of his empire 
appears to be corroborated by numismatic evidence. A unique copper 



PROSPERITY OF KUSHANA EMPIRE 


233 


coin bears on one side a Janiform bust; the bearded face evidently 
belonging to Wima Kadphises himself, has his peculiar symbol before it, 
while the beardless face, presumably his viceroy’s, has the latter’s own 
mark placed in front. This subordinate ruler is usually described by 
numismatists as the ‘Nameless King’ because none of his coins bears the 
name of the issuer. Most of these have simply the Greek titles Basileus 
Basileon Soter Megas, or the same together with their Prakrit equiva- 
lents, maharajasa rajatirajasa mahatasa tratarasa. The close similarity 
of the lay-out of his attributive epithets in Greek with that of the 
Greek titles of Wima Kadphises should be noted. Cunningham has 
observed that ‘the coins of both kings are common in the Kabul valley, 
throughout the Panjab, and in North-Western India, as far east as 
Benares amd Ghazipur.’ All the above numismatic data seem to prove 
the contemporaneity of these two rulers, one suzerain and the other 
subordinate, the latter issuing no coins except in copper. 

The prosperity of the Kushana empire under Wima Kadphises is 
attested by the large number of gold and copper coins that were issued 
in his reign. His empire lay between the two other great empires of the 
time, the Chinese and the Roman, and a brisk trade in silk, spices, gems 
and other articles was carried on by traders of Indian and other nationa- 
lities. Pliny refers to the flourishing commerce between the Indian and 
the Roman empires in the first century a.d., and deplores the heavy drain 
of specie from Rome to India to pay for luxuries imported for the 
use of Roman nobles. The gold coins of the Roman emperors, that 
poured into India appear to have been melted down and recoined by 
Wima Kadphises and his successors, for their own use and the use of the 
traders and commercial magnates in their empire. This connection be- 
tween the Roman and the Kushana money seems to have influenced the 
gold coinage of the imperial Kushanas, especially in their metrology. 1 
The numismatic data thus indirectly prove that the progress of the tribe 
to power and prosperity, beginning with the aggrandisement of the first 
Kushana chief, was immensely developed during the comparatively short 
period of his son’s reign. It was maintained in full during the reigns of 
their immediate successors. 

Wima Kadphises was succeeded by Kanishka, the greatest of the 
Kushana rulers in India. According to the chronological scheme adopted 
here, he ascended the throne in the latter part of a.d. 78. His name 
has been surrounded with a halo in the traditions of northern Buddhism, 
but only a small measure of clear and connected information about his 
reign can be gleaned from literature, whether Indian or foreign. We 
have his numerous gold and copper coins and a number of inscriptions 
in Brahmi and KharoshthI, but they do not materially help us to fix 
the exact date of his accession to the throne. Scholars have variously 

1 Cunningham, Coins of the Indo-Scy- of the Kushana gold coins has been 

t hians, Pt. i p. 20. But a somewhat given by J. Kennedy in JRAS. 1912, 

different explanation of the metrology pp. 987 ff. 

30 



234 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


interpreted the literary and archaeological evidence, and different histori- 
ans have differently determined his chronology. One certain fact about 
him to be gathered from his own inscriptions and those of his successors 
Vasishka, Huvishka, Kanishka II and Vasudeva, is that an era began 
from his first regnal year and continued to be current throughout the 
reigns of his successors, and probably endured thereafter. Several dates, 
ranging from the year 1 (?) to the year 98 of this era are read in these ins- 
criptions, and opinions differ about the exact time of its commencement. 
Fleet, and after him Kennedy, support the view once sponsored and 
subsequently given up by Cunningham, that Kanishka’s era started from 
58 b.c., and that it was this era which came to be known afterwards as the 
Vikrama Samvat. A corollary of the above is that the Kadphises group 
of kings succeeded the Kanishka group, for neither Kujula nor Wima 
can be placed in the first half of the first century B.c. Marshall, Konow, 
Smith and a few other scholars suggest that Kanishka began to rule in the 
beginning of the second quarter of the second century a.d. (c. 125-128), 
and that his reign lasted for about a quarter of a century. 1 Fergusson 
urged long ago the theory that Kanishka was the inaugurator of the era 
of a.d. 78, which became known afterwards as the Saka era ( Sakabda ) 
still current in different parts of India. This view found support with such 
scholars as Oldenberg, Thomas, Banerji, Raychaudhuri and others. 
Several other views have been aired, but these three are most generally 
discussed by the Indologists interested in the subject. One of the latest 
writers to give an opinion on this subject is J. E. Van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, 
and she has supported the theory of Kanishka’s association with the era 
of A.D. 78, starting from his first regnal year. 2 

To appraise the several theories about Kanishka’s date, the evidence 
supplied by the archaeological data should be carefully studied and ana- 
lysed. Among those the coins and inscriptions are the most important, 
and though they help us little towards fixing a definite date for him, they 
hardly leave any scope for doubt that the Kanishka group of kings is later 
-than the Kadphises group. Fleet and Kennedy’s view is thus a priori 
untenable, for major numismatic considerations alone would prevent our 
placing Kanishka or his successors before the Kadphises kings. If we 
carefully study the series of coins issued successively by the alien rulers of 
India up to Vasudeva I, it becomes quite clear that the Kadphises coins 
were issued immediately after those of the Sakas and the Pahlavas. The 
coins of Kanishka and Huvishka, though they differ in some respects from 
those of Wima Kadphises, can be shown to have for their prototypes the 
money of the latter. The practice of issuing bilingual and biscriptural 


1 Konow has changed his views several 
times. His latest opinion about the 
date of Kanishka is that he began 
to rule in a.d. 200 which is impossible; 
India Antiqua, p. 195 
? Lohuizen-de Leeuw, op. cit., p. 65; 
she holds that before the accession 


of Kanishka only one era was in 
use which began in 129 b.c., not 
long after the year 200 of which, i.e 
shortly after a.d. 71 and before a.d. 
86, Kanishka ascended the throne; 
op. cit., p. 64 



THE DATE OF KANISHKA 


235 


coins, introduced by the Indo-Greek kings, was continued throughout the 
Saka-Pahlava period up to the time of Wima Kadphises. Kanishka 
discontinued it, the legends of his coins being written only in Greek script 
though the language of most of them was not Greek; Huvishka and 
Vasudeva mainly followed Kanishka’s mode of issuing coins. The obverse 
devices of Wima Kadphises’s money clearly i nfl uenced those of the coins 
of Kanishka and his successors. Thus it can be conclusively demonstra- 
ted with the help of the coins that the Kadphises group of kings preceded 
the Kanishka group, whatever might have been their respective dates; 
and it necessarily follows from this that Kanishka could never have ascen- 
ded the throne in 58 b.c. and founded the Vikrama Samvat era. Those 
who believe that he became the king of the Kushanas some time between 
a.d. 125 and 128 stand on firmer ground; but the literary and the archaeo- 
logical considerations which they adduce can be differently interpreted. 
The Chinese texts indicate no sure date for Kanishka, though a few of them 
purport to record some events of his reign. The Hou Han-shu says nothing 
about him, and it is inferred that as the report of Pan-Young (c. a.d. 125) 
was the principal authority of its author Fan-Ye, Kanishka’s epoch 
was later than a.d. 125. Now, Fan-Ye’s work records events which 
happened in countries near China long after the reign of Emperor Ngan 
(a.d. 107-125); and Kanishka’s name and career might have been acci- 
dentally omitted from these later chronicles. The stories about him 
which have been preserved are mostly gleaned from several works ori- 
ginally written in Sanskrit, but translated into Chinese in the sixth century 
a.d. ; these were the Sutralamkara by the great Buddhist theologian Asva- 
ghosha, the Samyuktaratnapitaka and the Dharmapitakanidana Sutra, 
whose originals are now lost. 1 There is nothing in these works to suggest 
a definite date for Kanishka, though some vague statements that he 
reigned 700 years after the Nirvana occur in some of them. The archaeo- 
logical evidence, likewise, affords no conclusive support for a second 
century date for Kanishka. 

The view of Fergusson, Oldenberg and others who suggest that Kanishka* 
was the inaugurator of the Saka era of a.d. 78 has much in its favour. 
It is true we cannot be absolutely certain of it, but it certainly harmonizes 
with one major probability, viz., the association of Kanishka with a conti- 
nuous reckoning. The era which started from the first regnal year of this 
great Kushana emperor remained in force ever after, and there is no era 
except this, the well-known Sakabda, (still current in parts of India), which 
could have had its origin in the first or the second century a.d. The objec- 
tion previously urged against this theory, that Kanishka as a Kushana could 
not be associated with it, has lost its force; even if we do not fully sub- 
scribe to the view held by many scholars that the Kushanas were a branch 
of the Sakas, it is beyond cavil that they imbibed many Saka characteristics 
in the course of their long association with that people. Again, the era of 


1 IA. xxxn, 1903, pp. 382-9 



236 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


a.d. 78 first began to be described as the Sakakala or Sakanripakala in 
inscriptions from the fifth century a.d. onwards. This appellation was 
probably chosen because the era was in continuous use throughout the 
reigns of the Saka Kshatrapas of Western India who owned allegiance 
to the Kushanas. It may be presumed that the earliest of these Satraps 
and Great Satraps belonged to a period when the Kushana supremacy 
was well established in the greater part of Northern India, and was even 
perhaps already on the wane in the outlying parts of the empire. This 
would explain the almost supreme power enjoyed by these nominally subor- 
dinate rulers. The great Kshaharata satrap Nahapana, may have begun 
his career early in the reign of Kanishka, but the control of the imperial 
Kushana power over this remote comer of the empire probably grew less 
and less strict in course of time, until Nahapana came to enjoy a virtually 
sovereign authority including the right of issuing silver coins with the royal 
bust. Chashtana and his grandson Rudradaman after him, were for all 
practical purposes, sovereign rulers of parts of Western India, and their 
reigns can hardly be equated with the early years of the mighty Kushana 
monarch Kanishka. Kanishka had probably passed from the stage long 
before, and no doubt Huvishka, who came after Vasishka, the immediate 
successor of Kanishka, had already sat on the imperial throne for a fairly 
long time. These and various other considerations lend a great deal of 
weight to the views of Fergusson, Oldenberg and others. The objections 
raised by Konow, Dubreuil and others are not irrefutable. 

KANISHKA l 

There is hardly any doubt now about the existence of more than one ruler 
named Kanishka. The difficulty of dating the first (and most important) 
Kanishka, is mainly due to the confusion made by the Indian writers of 
Buddhist texts and their Chinese translators concerning the kings of this 
name. Taranath, the Tibetan historian, distinguishes two Kanishkas, 
' and, presumably, the Kanishka who reigned in the second century a.d., 
on the evidence of some Tibetan and Chinese texts, was a later Kanishka 
whose existence is attested by the Ara inscription of the year 41. The 
Chinese tianslation of Kumaralata’s Kalpanamanditika (probably written 
some time in the second or third century a.d.), says : In the family 
of the Kiu-sha there was a king called Chen-t’an Kia-ni-ch‘a (Kani- 
shka). He conquered Tung T’ien-chu and pacified the country. His 
power spread fear; his good fortune was complete.’s Similar information 
is derived from the Chinese versions of such work as the Sutralamkara 
of Asvaghosha, and others. Levi at first thought that ‘Chen-t’an’ or 
‘Tchen-tan’, the base of the form ‘Chandana’, associated with Kanishka 
in the Tibetan account of the Kushana king, denoted China-sthana (Chin- 
than) or Kashgaria ; thus ‘Tchen-t‘an Kanishka’ according to this view 
would be Kanishka, king of Khotan, and Levi believed that the cradle 
of the power of the Tukhara-Turushkas lay in that region of Central Asia 



INSCRIPTIONS AND TRADITIONS OF KANISHKA 237 

But in his posthumous article, unfortunately incomplete, ‘Kanishka et 
Satavahana’, 1 he explained the word and its variants in a different manner: 
these forms transcribed the Indian word Chanda (Chandra-moon) which 
was also probably the basic sense of the term Yue-chi, ‘the moon people’. 
Now, Chandana Kanishka was most probably the first Kanishka, the 
immediate successor of Wima Kadphises, and his association with Kash- 
gar and Khotan, though not necessarily proved by this attributive epithet, 
is demonstrable from data available from several other Chinese texts, 
mainly translations from Sanskrit works. Chandana probably appears 
as Sandanes in the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea which was composed in 
the latter part of the first century a.d. The ‘Tung T’ien-chu’ of the extract 
from Kalpanamanditika quoted above denoted, according to most scholars, 
some part of Eastern India, and Kanishka I’s conquests in this region are 
proved by the inscriptions and coins. The Buddhist image inscriptions 
of Samath (Benares) and Sravasti (Saheth-Maheth in the Gonda and Bha- 
raich district of Uttar Pradesh) bear the year of maharaja Kanishka, and 
there can hardly be any doubt that these places were incorporated into the 
vast Kushana empire early in his rule. The year 3 in the first of the two 
inscriptions shows that Samath was conquered early in his reign, unless 
it had already been annexed in the latter part of his predecessor’s rule. 
The Saheth-Maheth record, though fragmentary, may also belong to the 
early part of his time, because the donor of this image was Bhikshu Bala, 
also the donor of the Sarnath image. 

The KharoshthI inscriptions of Kanishka bearing different dates, 1 
(? Peshawar relic-casket inscriptions), 11 (Sue-Vihar copper-plate 
and Zeda stone inscriptions) and 18 (Manikyala stone box lid 
inscription), show that his sway extended far to the north and north-west 
of India, the distant Panjab, Gandhara and upper Sind. The Chinese 
translations of he Sanskrit texts already mentioned, though their account 
is somewhat garbled and confused, seem to refer to the wide extent of the 
Kushana empire. The Tibetan and Chinese writings contain the traditions 
of his conflict with the kings of Soked (Saketa) and Pataliputra. TJie 
king of Pataliputra, the suzerain of Eastern India, was vanquished by the 
Yue-chi; he offered nine hundred thousand pieces of gold to purchase 
peace, and being unable to amass this huge sum, he gave his Yiie-chi con- 
queror the alms-bowl of Buddha, Asvaghosha and a miraculous cock. The 
annalists further tell us that Kanishka after making himself master of the 
south and east, turned his attention to .he west and the north. The king of 
the Parthians wished to close the west to him, but in vain. Only the north 
still remained unsubdued. ‘Kanishka organised a great expedition, and got 
as far as the passes of T’sung-ling; but he announced his projects of conquest 
too soon and his people, tired of always waging war, smothered him when 
he was lying ill.’ We need not accept the evidence of these late texts in full, 
but they contain some allusions to his reverses in the north and north-east 


1 JA. 1936, pp. 61-121 



238 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


in the latter part of his reign. The victories in the south-west, of Pan-chao, 
a general of the Chinese emperor Ho-ti (a.d. 89-105), may be placed in this 
period of Kanishka’s reverses, and Kanishka may be regarded as parti- 
ally contemporaneous with him. This Kushana contemporary of Pan- 
chao has been identified by some scholars with Wima Kadphises, for the 
reason that, had Kanishka been the contemporary of the Chinese general, 
the annalists would have explicitly recorded the fact: for Kanishka was 
certainly a famous personality. But little stress can be laid on this line of 
argument. The early Chinese historians knew of Wima Kadphises as 
Yen-kao-chen; had he been really the adversary of Pan-chao, his name 
would in all probability have been mentioned in this context. In fact, the 
omission of the name of Pan-chao’s Kushana adversary is immaterial. We 
know from the inscriptions tha . Kanishka enjoyed a reign of about twenty- 
three years. The first part of his reign was crowned with glorious suc- 
cesses ; in his wars in the north and north-east of his Indian empire, he may 
have gained some initial victories. Hiuan Tsang records the traditions 
that 'Kanishka Raja of Gandhara in old days having subdued all the 
neighbouring provinces and brought into obedience the people of distant 
countries, governed by his army a wide territory, even to the east of the 
T’sung-ling mountains.’ He also mentions that hostages were sent to 
Kanishka by the tribes occupying the western districts of the Yellow 
River; the king treated these hostages with singular care and assigned sepa- 
rate establishments for them during summer and winter in different parts 
of his empire. All these events may be assigned to the first part of his 
reign when his sway extended far beyond the borders of India. But it is 
not unlikely that in its latter years, especially in the regions outside India 
towards the north and east his power underwent some diminution. It was 
probably in this time that the victories of the Chinese general Pan-chao 
spread far and wide across the western borders of China. It must be 
noted however, that there was no diminution of the Kushana empire in 
India during the lifetime of Kanishka. The Buddhist tradition and his 
inscriptions in Kharoshth! and Brahml afford ample testimony to the wide 
extent of his Indian possessions. 

KANISHKA’S CAPITAL : FOURTH BUDDHIST COUNCIL 

Hiuan Tsang tells us that Purushapura (modern Peshawar) was the capi- 
tal of the vast Kushana empire. The situation of the royal seat far to the 
west of the Indus, indicates that the imperial possessions spread far towards 
the west and north. The Chinese pilgrim refers to the construction of a 
many storied relic-tower at Purushapura in which some relics of Buddha 
were enshrined. The Indian Archaelogical Survey while conducting ex- 
cavations in two large mounds at Peshawar, known now as Shahjl-kl dheri, 
lit. ‘the mound of the king’, unearthed a gilt relic-casket, the Kharoshth! 
inscriptions on which purport to record a religious gift (probably the 
enshrinement of the relic itself) ‘in Kanishka’s Vihara, in Mahasena’s 



FOURTH BUDDHIST COUNCIL 


239 


Saiigharama’ in the reign of the great king Kanishka. Konow reads in 
it the date of the endowment, which according to him is the first 
regnal year of Kanishka. But the reading of the date is doubtful. 
Two interesting facts can be deduced from these somewhat disjointed 
inscriptions : one is the truthfulness of the tradition recorded by Hiuan 
Tsang that Kanishka caused a big relic-tower to be built in his capital, and 
the other that the works-manager ( navakarmika ) of the establishment was 
a Greek slave Agisala (Agesilaos) by name. The tower and the monastery 
attached to it, which were erected under the orders of the great king drew 
the admiration of Chinese and Arab travellers. 

During Kanishka’ s rule the momentous Fourth Council of the Buddhist 
congregation was held in the Kundalavana Vihara in Kashmir, probably 
under the presidency of the great Buddhist theologian Vasumitra. Ano- 
ther tradition records that the council was held at Jalandhara in Eastern 
Panjab. It was in this council that a great re-orientation of Buddhism 
took place. Hiuan Tsang tells us that the convocation of 500 Buddhist 
elders was the direct outcome of the great interest which was taken by the 
foreign monarch in the Buddhist scriptures. Kanishka found the different 
views of the several schools regarding Buddha’s teachings so contradictory, 
that he desired to have them all systematised and codified according to 
the respective schools. Then with the aid of the venerable Parsva, one 
of the great Buddhist theologians of the time who lived in his court, he 
caused the more prominent Buddhist elders to be summoned from all 
parts of his empire, and set a select body among them the task of col- 
lecting the variant texts of the Tripitaka and of writing expository com- 
mentaries on them. The council collected the different texts and composed 
a vast number of explanatory treatises, displaying in their task an extra- 
ordinary acquaintance not only with Buddhist learning of various kinds, 
but also with the different branches of Brahmanical learning. Hiuan 
Tsang further tells us that Kanishka had this extensive literature engraved 
on copper plates, enclosed in stone coffers and deposited in a stupa 
specially built for the purpose. Hiuan Tsang is our principal informant 
on Kanishka’s council and the nature of its work, though some lat*er 
Tibetan books seem to afford partial confirmation of what we learn 
from him. 

It is to be presumed that this council gave a new impetus to the develop- 
ment of Buddhism, and that the adoption of Sanskrit as the medium 
through which the initiated were instructed in the various branches of the 
developed creed was chiefly responsible for the remarkable transformation 
which the Buddhist creed underwent. The previous belief in the ways of 
the Sravakas (the listeners to the precepts of the elders and the Buddhas), 
the Arhats (those who deserved Nirvana) and the Pratyeka-Buddhas 
(the individuals who had attained Buddhatvam by their personal efforts) 
gradually gave place to a faith in the attainment of Bodhisattvahood, a 
condition which the aspirant claimed to be of the greatest good to 
the greatest number of living beings. The Bodhisattva-yana, or the way. 



240 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


the vehicle of the Bodhisattvas, came to be described afterwards as the 
Mahay ana or the ‘great vehicle’ the followers of which would dub in 
derision the earlier ways of the Sravakas, the Arhats and the Pratyeka- 
Buddhas ( Sravakayana , Arhatyana and Pratyeka-Buddha-yana) as the 
H may ana or the ‘lesser vehicle’ of a selfish nature. There is no doubt 
that the transformation was already in progress long before Kanishka, but 
it is the ‘Fourth Council’ of the Buddhist elders, held under his auspices, 
that seems to have regularised and systematised many of these changes. 
The changes in the creed found concrete expression in the Buddhist art 
of his time. The representation in human form of the present (Sakya- 
muni) Buddha and the previous Buddhas who used to be shown by such 
symbols as footprints, the Bodhi-tree with the vajrasana beneath it, the 
stupa etc., as well as the figures of several Bodhisattvas in the contempo- 
rary art of Gandhara and Mathura, testify to the revolution in the religious 
outlook which had meanwhile taken place. One of the earliest figures of 
Buddha is to be found on the top of the lid of the Peshawer relic-casket 
described above, and several gold and copper coins of Kanishka bear 
Buddha figures in the usual standing or sitting attitudes with descrip- 
tive legends ( Sakaumo Boddo, i.e., Sakyamuni Buddha or simply 
Boddo) beside them. Kanishka’s great zeal for Buddhism did not, how- 
ever, make him intolerant of the other creeds followed by his numerous 
subjects all over his empire. This fact is characteristically proved by 
the large number of deities appertaining mainly to the Zoroastrian but 
partly to the Hindu, Greek and Roman religions which he used as the 
reverse devices of his gold and copper coins. While we cannot infer 
from the style of these coins a strictly eclectic frame of mind in the 
Kushana emperor, for these deities have been regarded as objects of 
worship in various parts of his dominions, they establish beyond doubt 
his remarkable toleration and benevolence towards different creeds. 

ADMINISTRATION OF KANISHKA’S EMPIRE AND THE 
END OF HIS RULE 

Kanishka ruled his vast empire through subordinate rulers enjoying the 
status of satraps and great satraps. This was the practice followed by 
the immediate predecessors of the Kushanas, viz., the Pahlavas and the 
Sakas. The Sarnath Buddhist image inscription dated in the third regnal 
year of Kanishka (a.d. 81) records the installation of Friar Bala’s image 
of the Bodhisattva at Benares by Mahakshatrapa Kharapallana and Ksha- 
trapa Vanaspara. It is possible that Vanaspara was the son of Khara- 
pallana, and that both were governing the eastern part of Kanishka’s empire 
as subordinate rulers under the imperial suzerain. The northernmost 
part of India, which fell presumably under the direct supervision of the 
emperor was also administered by satraps, as it is proved by several Kharo- 
shthl inscriptions. The Zeda inscription (named after a village near Und 
in the ancient Gandhara region) of the year 11 of Kanishka (a.d. 89) 



ADMINISTRATION. CURRENCY 


241 


refers to one Kshatrapa Liaka possibly a descendant of Liaka Kusuluka, 
the satrap of Chukhsa under the great king Moga mentioned in the Taxila 
copper plate. Another such Kshatrapa, Vespasi, apparently belonging 
to Khudacha or Khudachi, is mentioned in the record (dated in the 18th 
year of Kanishka) found at Manikyala in the Rawalpindi district. West 
Panjab. The same inscription mentions the name of Lala, ‘the increaser 
of the G (K)ushana race’ described as the general ( dandanayaka ), evidently 
of the great Kushana emperor. The above epigraphic data and a few 
others of the same nature tempt one to suggest that Kshaharata Nahapana 
of Western India, if he be the same as Mambaros (almost universally 
emended by scholars to Nambanos) of the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, 
was a satrap under Kanishka in the early part of his satrapal rule. 1 It, 
cannot be doubted, however, that ruling as he did in regions far removed 
from the imperial capital, Nahapana enjoyed more of the royal preroga- 
tive (cf. the title of raha on his coins) than Kanishka’s other Kshatrapas 
whom we have previously had occasion to mention. He was virtually 
independent and he coined money in his own name, a privilege evidently 
denied to the others. 

The prosperity of the Kusharia empire, so remarkably attested by the fine 
gold pieces struck by Wima Kadphises, appears to have increased under 
his successor. The many beautiful gold coins issued by Kanishka furnish 
direct evidence of this. The times of Wima Kadphises and his immediate 
successors thus offer a strong contrast to those of the Parthians, their 
predecessors. The Parthian coins were in the compound metal billon 
consisting of one-fifth silver to four-fifths copper. This mixture, probably 
the sign of a debased coinage, incidentally emphasises the weaker econo- 
mic condition of the Indo-Parthian power. The gold and copper coins 
of Kanishka bear the figure of the king usually shown standing and 
sacrificing at altar on the obverse, and deities belonging to different 
pantheons on the reverse, with the legend written in Greek script; the 
language, however, is not Greek. The obverse legend is Shaonano Shdo 
Kaneshki Koshano, the reverse containing only the names of the various • 
deities shown thereon. The epithet Shaonano Shdo from which the 
later Shahanu Shahi or Shahan Shah is derived, is undoubtedly a 
Kushana adaptation of the Parthian title Basileds Basileon, in itself the 
old Persian Kshayathianam Kshdyathiya in Greek garb. The language 
according to Konow is Khotanese Saka. These gold coins, like those of 
Huvishka and Vasudeva, indirectly prove Roman contact with the imperial 


The Periplus is dated by some scholars 
in the last quarter of the first century 
a.d. , while others date it between a.d. 
41-72. It is probable, however, that part 
of the work, especially the earlier por- 
tion mentioning Malichas, king of the 
Nabataeans (Malichas n, a.d. 41-72), 
was written in the latter period; to it was 
added the other part which contains 
a reference to Mambaros-Nambanos, 
31 


no other than Nahapina, the Ksha- 
harata Kshatrapa of Western India. 
As the work was of the nature of a 
log book of a Greek mariner, there 
is no inherent improbability in its sec- 
tions being composed in two different 
periods. For a slightly different view 
which places NahapSna some decades 
earlier, see ch. x. 



242 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


Kushanas, and their weight system seems to have affinities with the 
denarius aureus (gold dinara ) of the early Roman emperors. The author 
of the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea reckons gold and silver specie as one 
of the imports of Barygaza (modern Broach), a port on the western sea- 
board of India. Sewell has referred to huge hoards of Roman coins found in 
‘Madras Presidency’ which were generally the issues of the first five Roman 
emperors. 1 They appear to have constituted the hoarded wealth of the 
rich South Indian magnates and traders. But the large number which 
found their way to the North were recoined by the Kushana emperors 
from the time of Wima Kadphises and Kanishka. The Kushana emperors, 
however, hardly struck any silver money (very few Kushana silver coins 
are known) and it is logical to suppose that the imported silver specie was 
used for purposes other than monetary. The name denarius came to be 
adopted in the Sanskritic languages as dinara usually in the sense of a gold 
coin, as dramma was also adopted by the Indians normally in the sense of 
a silver coin from the Greek coin denomination drachma. The large 
numbers of silver coins that were issued by the earlier foreign rulers of India 
may have served the purpose of an intermediate currency in the Kushana 
empire. Numerous copper coins were issued by the Kanishka group 
of kings- as a token coinage mostly meant for everyday use. 

Nothing certain is known about the time or manner in which the rule 
of the great Kushana emperor came to its end. The tradition of his 
death preserved in the Chinese translations of Sanskrit Buddhist texts has 
already been briefly referred to. It records that his greed, cruelty and insa- 
tiable lust for power raised grave discontent among his subjects. His sol- 
diers grew tired of his constant wars, and a rebellion seems to have broken 
out against him. His death was brought about in a peculiar manner; 
when he was lying ill, ‘they covered him with a quilt, a man sat on top of 
him, and the king died on the spot.’ It is not known how far the tradition 
is true, but it certainly indicates a very undignified end for a great emperor. 
Kanishka seems to have ruled for about 23 years, for a Brahml inscription 
found in a mound at the village of Sonk, Mathura tahsil, mentions ‘the 
establishment of an image of the Bodhisattva in her own convent by one 
Pusyadata in the first month of the summer season of the year 23 in the 
reign of Maharaja Kanishka.’ This may have been his last year, for an 
inscription of Maharaja Devaputra Shahi Vasishka of the year 24 was 
discovered at Isapur, a village near Mathura. Here we may recall that 
the Sanchl inscription of a king Vaskushana of the Kushana year 22 
records the installation of an image of Buddha by one Vidyamati. It 
is not at all certain who this king Vaskushana was, and as the prince does 
not bear any of the Kushana titles, e.g. devaputra, and as he is simply 
styled Rajan, it has been suggested that he v/as a local prince of Kushana 
extraction. 2 The year 22 falls within the reign of Kanishka I and 
if the name Vaskushana be another form of Vasishka who succeeded 
1 JRAS. 1904, pp. 590 ff. 

1 Marshall, Monuments of Sanchi, i pp. 278, 386 



SUCCESSORS OF KANISHKA 


243 


Kanishka, then it is likely that Kanishka was associated with Vasishka 
in the last part of his rule in the south-western part of his empire. Many 
of the alien rulers who preceded Kanishka are known to have associated 
viceregal kings with themselves and Kanishka may have followed the 
common practice. 

VASISKHA, HUVISHKA AND KANISHKA II 

Vasishka, possibly identical with the Vaskushana already mentioned, 
seems to have been entrusted during the lifetime of Kanishka with the 
administration of parts of Central India. We do not know the relationship 
between the two, but probably they were father and son. Vasishka ruled for 
a few years only over an empire confined mostly to the interior of India. 
The isapur yupa inscription referred to above shows that Mathura and 
its surrounding regions were in his possession. Another Brahmi ins- 
cription of the year 28 engraved on the pedestal of a Bodhisattva image, 
now in the Sanchl Museum, refers to the erection of a shrine and the 
establishment of an image of Buddha in the Dharmaaeva monastery by 
one Madhurika, the daughter of Vera, in the year 28 during the reign of 
the 'maharaja rajatiraja devaputra shah; Vasashka’ (Vasishka). This 
proves that he held sway in the Sanchl region also. The year 28 was the 
last of Vasishka’ s rule; for there is definite evidence to show tiiat it was 
also the first regnal year of Huvishka, his successor. No inscription of 
Vasishka has so far been discovered in any other part of India and we 
must conclude that he lost control over the distant corners of the Kushana 
empire. If Juslika, one of the three Turushka kings Mashka, Jushka and 
Kanishka referred to by Kalhana in his Rajatarahgim (i. 168 fif.), is identi- 
cal with Vasishka, then the latter probably still held Kashmir. The 
Kashmir chronicler informs us that Jushka founded the city of Jushka- 
pura with its monastery, and that he was also the founder of Jayasvami- 
pura; Jushkapura has been identified by Stein with modern Zakar in the 
valley. Possibly Vasishka was the same as Vajheshka, the father of* 
Kanishka II who is named in the Ara inscription. He does not seem 
to have issued any coins, either gold or copper, in his own name, and 
this fact also might indicate a temporary eclipse of the Kushana power 
during his rule. No certain reason for such an eclipse can be discovered in 
the present slate of our knowledge, but there is little doubt that during the 
time of his immediate successor the Kushanas recovered their former glory. 

Huvishka succeeded Vasishka in the year 28. The Mathura inscrip- 
tion of the same year 1 records several endowments made by one Prachl- 
nika (?) who describes himself as the son of Sarukamana and lord of 
Kharasa'lera and Vakana (perhaps the same as Bakana of the Mat inscrip- 
tion) in the month of Gourppiya (Indian Praushthapada, English August) 
during the rule of Devaputra Shahi Huvishka. The date of the Sanchl 

1 El, XX! PP-55 ff. ; JBORS. xvui, 1932, p. 6 



244 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


inscription of Vasishka falls in the third Hemanta month (i.e. Pausha) 
of the year 28, and thus we see that Huvishka succeeded him within less 
than eight months of the date of this inscription. Huvishka is designated 
in the inscription merely as ‘devaputra Shahi’, and as the imperial titles 
maharaja rajatiraja are not assigned to him in any inscription before the 
year 41, Konow has suggested that another Kushana might have been at 
that time the real suzerain at the centre of Kushana power, in Badakhshan. 
But not much stress need be laid on the absence of the imperial titles, for 
it is a fact that in these Kushana records, which are not really official 
in character, there is no uniformity in the use of these epithets. It is 
evident that Prachinika at whose request the record was drawn up in 
Mathura belonged to a region beyond the north-west of India and owed 
allegiance to Huvishka. Brahml and Kharoshthi inscriptions of Hu- 
vishka have been found in the Mathura region and the North-West 
Frontier of India and in eastern Afghanistan. The Wardak vase 
Kharoshthi inscription of the year 51 shows that the region lying about 
thirty miles to the west of Kabul was included in the empire of Huvishka 
who is described as ‘ maharaja rajatiraja Huvishka.’ It should be noted 
that though he is endowed with the full imperial titles, the epithet deva- 
putra is omitted. In the Mathura Museum Buddhist image inscription 
of the same year (51), however, he is called simply maharaja devaputra , 
which seems to be the norm in the Brahml inscriptions of Huvishka de- 
rived from this vicinity. The Kashmir chronicler further informs us 
that the kings Hushka, Jushka and Kanishka, though descended from the 
Turushka race were given to acts of piety, and built at Sushkaletra (?) 
and other places mafhas, chaityas and similar structures. 

During the reign of these powerful rulers, Kashmir was mostly a land 
of the Bauddhas who by practising the law of religious mendicancy had 
acquired great renown. ‘And a Bodhisattva lived then in this country 
as the sole lord (spiritual) of the land; namely the glorious Nagarjuna, 
who resided at Shadarhadvana.’ Huvishka appears to have enjoyed 

long and prosperous rule, because the inscriptions prove that both the 
years 28 and 60 fall within his reign. We have no knowledge of any of 
the incidents of his reign. The Indian and Chinese records contain hardly 
any reference to him. Kalhana alone tells us that the town of Hushkapura 
was founded by Hushka, i.e. Huvishka, in Kashmir; its present site has 
been located by Stein in the modern village of Ushkur, a position of 
strategic importance inside the valley, beyond the Baramula Pass, its 
western gate. Hiuan Tsang informs us that there was a Buddhist monas- 
tery at Hushkapura when he visited India, and the inmates of the 
establishment were very hospitable to him before he proceeded to the 
capital city. The ruins of a stupa, probably to be associated with the 
ancient Hushkapura vihdra, are still to be found at Ushkur, the Oshkara 
of Alberuni. 

The prosperity of Huvishka’s rule is attested by the large number of 
gold and copper coins that were issued in his name. The obverse of the 



HUVISHKA AND KANISHKA II 


245 


gold coins usually bears the imperial bust wearing garments decked with 
jewels, and a high or a flat topped ornamental head-dress, with the imperial 
sceptre in his hand. The obverse of his copper coins which are indiffer- 
ently preserved shows him in various attitudes, such as riding on an 
elephant, reclining on a couch etc. ; of these the former emblem is the most 
common. The reverse contains, like Kanishka’s coins, the figures of 
deities belonging to various pantheons, but many new deities not present 
on Kanishka’s coins make their appearance here. Thus, Indian divini- 
ties like Skarida-Kumara, Visakha, Mahasena and Uma, the Alexandrian 
Serapis (Sarapo), personified Rome (Riom-Roma), the Greek Heracles, 
several Zoroastrian deities like Shariar, Luhrasp, Orlagno, Ouron, Oaninda 
(resembling the Greek goddess Nike) and others can be recognised among 
the numerous reverse devices of Huvishka’s coins with the help of the 
descriptive legends by their side. The die-cutters appear to have blun- 
dered sometimes, giving a wrong description of the figure or making 
a mess of the Greek letters. Huvishka is almost invariably described on 
the obverse as Shaonano Slido Ooeshki Koshano , i.e. Shahan Shah 
Huvishka the Kushana. These numismatic peculiarities present Huvishka 
to us as a powerful monarch of barbaric splendour with an appreciable 
amount of religious liberalism. Cunningham has recognised his figure 
on a nicolo seal where an alien chief wearing one of the typical head- 
dresses attributed to Huvishka is shown standing in a suppliant attitude 
before the four-armed Brahmanical god Vishnu; on a few other seals 
reproduced by Cunningham probably the same monarch is seen as a 
suppliant before the Syrian goddess Nana. But the nicolo seal device 
has been differently identified by Ghirshman w'ho finds in the suppliant 
figure a Hephtalite Huna chief, and a combination of Visnu, Siva 
and Mihira in the deity. Huvishka’s portrait on a few well-preserved 
gold coins reveals a man with regular features, aquiline nose, large 
deep-set eyes, and a look of firm determination. 

It is of interest to note here that within the long reign of Huvishka falls 
the period of another Kushana emperor, Kanishka, the son of Vajheshky,. 
The existence of this second Kanishka (for he could not have been the first, 
the last year of whose rule, as we have seen, was the year 23), is proved 
by a KharoshthI inscription discovered at Ara, a village near Attock in 
the North-West Frontier Province now in Western Pakistan. It bears 
the year 41 and describes Vajheshka’s son, Kanishka as ‘ maharaja rajatiraja 
devaputra kai'sara.’ Vajheshka has almost unanimously been identified 
with Vasishka, the immediate successor, and possibly the sometime 
colleague of Kanishka I. Huvishka the immediate successor of Vasishka 
was ruling from the year 28 to the year 60. How then can another im- 
perial ruler, Kanishka II, be accommodated within this period ? From 
his titles Kanishka II appears at first sight to have been a sovereign inde- 
pendent ruler. Ltiders first pointed out that the attributive epithets of 
this Kushana monarch form a kind of commentary on the ancient notion 
of four emperors, ‘the sons of Heaven’, of India, Iran, China and Rome. 



246 RISE AND PALL OF KUSHANA POWER 

Pelliot examines this tradition and shows that it was well known at an 
early date over a large area. Konow remarks, ‘If it is of Indian origin, 
we should expect the arrangement of the four kingdoms to be India, 
Iran, China and the Roman empire, and such an arrangement is clearly 
reflected in the titles of our inscription, where maharaja is the Indian, 
rajatiraja the Iranian, devaputra the Chinese, and Kaisara the Roman 
title.’ 1 R. D. Banerji, who first edited the Ara inscription but could not 
read the title Kaisara in it, assumed that this Kanishka was the same as 
the founder of the Kanishka era; the usually accepted view, however, 
that the two Kanishkas were different persons is the correct one. But 
the overlapping of Huvishka and Kanishka II at one period of their rule 
has to be satisfactorily explained. Liiders suggested that the Kushana 
empire was divided after Vasishka’s death, Kanishka II, the son of 
Vasishka, ruling in the north, Huvishka holding sway in the Indian 
interior; Huvishka, however, subsequently made himself master of the 
north also, as the Wardak vase inscription proves. As to this there is 
no positive proof of the division of the Kushana empire after Vasishka 
— Vajheshka’s death, and the fact of his hold on the extreme north-west 
is, as has been shown above, very uncertain. The only probable expla- 
nation is that Huvishka was associated with Kanishka II in that region 
for a brief period. Kanishka II appears to have died before Huvishka, 
for no other record of his reign has so far been discovered. The attri- 
bution to him of high sounding imperial titles may go against this theory, 
but it should be remembered that at that epoch the associate rulers some- 
times enjoyed full imperial titles and privileges. Azes I and Azilises, and 
Azilises and Azes II, as has been shown in the last chapter, used the same 
titles on their joint coins. The Sassanian viceregal rulers in the east were 
endowed with lofty designations on their coins such as mazdes’n bage 
perdze vazurg KuSan Sah, i.e. ‘the mazda-worshipping lord Peroz Great 
Kushan shah,’ or mazdes'n bage ohormizde vazurg Kusan Sdkun Salt, i.e.‘ the 
mazda-worshipping lord Hormizd, Great Kushan king of kings,’ during 
the lifetime of the Sassanid suzerain rulers. If this erstwhile associate 
ruler of Huvishka be identified with Kanishka of ICalhana’s Rajata- 
rahginT, then he may be the founder of the city of Kanishkapura in the 
Kashmir valley. The name of the city still persists in the modern 
village of Kauispur. We do not know whether Kanishka II issued any 
coins in his own name. If he did so, their extant specimens should be 
sought among those assigned to the great Kanishka. The attribution to 
him by some numismatists of some indifferently executed coins of de- 
based gold bearing the name and titles of Kaneshko is hardly justifiable 
for the deterioration in the monetary art and technique of the Kushanas 
had not set in as early as the year 41 of Kanishka’s era. The coins of 
Huvishka and even of Vasudeva fully prove that it remained at a fairly 
high level for several decades thereafter. 


1 CIl. u (i) p. 163 



DECLINE 


247 


VASUDEVA I: DECLINE OF THE KUSH AN A POWER 

We do not know when the long and apparently prosperous rule of 
Huvishka came to a close. But it must have been some time between the 
year 60, his last known date, and the year 74, the earliest date of his suc- 
cessor, Vasudeva. The new Kushana emperor bears a purely Indian 
name, a name associated with the holy memory of the founder of the 
bhakti school of Bhagavatism. This fact speaks eloquently of the gra- 
dual process of the indianisation of the foreigners. Though his dress 
and accoutrements as discerned in the royal effigy on his coins still have 
a foreign cast, Vasudeva’s name, and probably his religious affiliation, 
were Indian. It is true that two other non-Indian deities, Nana and 
Ardochso, appear, though rarely, on the reverse side of his coins, but 
the device par excellence is the Indian god Siva. His name alone might 
not sufficiently attest his Saiva association, but the trident battle-axe 
standard, on the obverse, almost invariably placed beside the figure of the 
king sacrificing at altar, and the frequent appearance of Siva (sometimes 
polycephalous) accompanied by the bull Nandin on the reverse of his 
coins are conclusive as to the nature of his creed. Admittedly the inscrip- 
tions bearing his name are all associated either with Jainism or Buddhism ; 
but these are the records of his Jaina or Bauddha subjects and their pious 
endowments. A fragmentary relief of the Kushana period in the collec- 
tion of the Mathura Musuem depicts a royal personage with a companion 
reverently approaching a Siva linga, the emblem par excellence of the god. 
Each of these persons wears Kushana dress and the first of the two may 
represent Vasudeva himself. 1 

There is no clear evidence of the bounds of Vasudeva’s empire. Pro- 
bably his rule did not extend much beyond a part of modern Uttar 
Pradesh. No Kharoshthi inscription bearing the name of this Kushana 
monarch has been discovered in the north-west, and almost all his Brahml 
inscriptions were found in Mathura and its environs. This probably shows 
that the imperial Kushanas of India had by this time lost their hold ov-fr 
the extreme northern and north-western parts of India. We are quite in 
the dark about the events that contributed to the decline of the power of 
the Indian Kushanas in the north-west, but it is likely that the local Kusha- 
na and other chiefs took advantage of the weakness of the central power, 
and made themselves independent. The last known date of Vasudeva 
is the year 98 of the era of Kanishka corresponding to c. a. d. 176-7. 
Vasudeva’s rule seems to have come to an end shortly after this, and the 
mighty Kushana empire melted away. The gold and copper coins that 
were issued in the name of Vasudeva tell an interesting tale. Some of the 
former are well-executed and fully maintain the monetary standard and 
technique of his predecessors; others, especially the copper coins, show 
unmistakable signs of deterioration. Many of the latter, bearing only 


JISOA. iv, 1936, p. 130, pi. xxiii, fig. 1 



248 RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 

traces of the full legend usual on the obverse of Vasudeva’s coins, Shaonano 
Shao Bazodeo Koshano, are rudely executed, and there is little doubt 
that they were mere imitations of his coins issued by his successors, not 
necessarily of Kushana lineage. The indigenous supplanters of Vasude- 
va’s line in parts of Northern India may have continued these issues for 
some time, till they began to strike coins in their own name. 

SUCCESSORS OF VASUDEVA l 

It is difficult, in fact impossible in the present state of our knowledge, 
to offer an orderly reconstruction of the history of the Kushapas after the 
death of Vasudeva I. There are no certain literary and archaeological 
data to help us in this task. Coins are our only guidance, and they by 
themselves, hardly afford clear and definite historical clues in this case. 
We may, however, recognise in the names of the issuers of coins undoubted- 
ly minted after the time of Vasudeva I, a third Kanishka and a second 
Vasudeva. The existence of Kanishka II has already been established with 
the help of the Ara inscription. Some coins of not much debased gold 
in the collection of the Indian Museum, Calcutta, bear the usual obverse 
of Vasudeva’s coins, but the legend, never fully preserved, is Shaonano 
Shao Kaneshko with different stray Brahm! characters in the field ; their 
reverse is the Siva and Bull device also familiar in Vasudeva’s coins. 
These can with some justification be attributed to Kanishka 111, though 
it would be hazardous to fix his date. He has been placed by some scho- 
lars immediately after Vasudeva I, with a reign of 30 years (c. a.d. 180- 
c. 210) ; but all we can really say is that he was later than Vasudeva. Nor 
can we assert on the basis of a few stray finds of his coins that his sway 
extended over such vast and widely separated regions as the Panjab, Seis- 
tan, Afganistan, Kashmir and Bactria. Stray Brahm! letters on the ob- 
verse of these coins were taken by Banerji to stand for the initial of 
the issuer’s name, the name of the mint and the name of the province. 
Altekar has suggested that some of these letters contain the initials 
of the names of the Satraps or governors through whose agency Kani- 
shka III ruled his far-flung empire. 1 But the explanation of these stray 
letters is still a mystery, and it is to be noted that they are usually found 
on the later issues of such groups of rulers as the Indo-Greeks and the 
Kushanas ; they also appear occasionally on some coins of the later 
Guptas. 

Vasudeva II’s coins are characterised by the same obverse device of the 
standing king sacrificing at an altar ; but the reverse, instead of the Siva 
and Bull, contains a seated Ardochso device occasionally used as the 
reverse type on the coins of Vasudeva I. These coins exhibit undoubted 
Chinese influence inasmuch as the name Vasu is written vertically under 
the king’s left arm in well-formed Brahm! characters of the late Kushapa 


NH1P. VI p. 14 





RISE OF INDIAN STATES 


249 


period. On a unique copper coin the whole of the obverse side is occu- 
pied by the legend Vasu written vertically, while the reverse is filled up by 
the peculiar symbol usually found on the coins of Vasudeva I. Cun- 
ningham attributed this coin to that ruler, but the Brahmi script seems to 
prove its later date. It is not unlikely that this coin was issued by Vasu- 
deva II. His gold coins show that the Greek script was still being used 
both on the obverse and on the reverse; but the legend, especially on the 
obverse, is mostly a jumble of ill-formed characters which indicates that 
the die-cutter was really ignorant of the proper letter-values. The parti- 
ally debased gold which was used in the issue of these coins indirectly 
points to the indifferent economic condition of his kingdom. It is likely 
that Vasudeva II followed Kanishka III, but nothing can be affirmed con- 
cerning the relationship between the two; nor have we any clear idea as 
to the regions over which they ruled. It is possible that they were asso- 
ciated with the extreme northern and north-western parts of India. The 
use of Brahmi on some of their coins shows that they had Indian associa- 
tions, but the mode of writing the king’s name in Brahmi points to a re- 
gion which was susceptible to Chinese influence. Altekar has assigned 
an approximate length of twenty years to the rule of Vasudeva II, from 
c. a.d. 210 to 230, but there are no definite facts to go on. 

The final break-up of the mighty Kushana power seems to have been 
completed by the time of these successors of Vasudeva I. Most of the 
territories in the interior of India were now lost to Indian chiefs who 
had grown powerful. Probably though, it was the Nagas and the Yau- 
dheyas who stepped into the shoes of the effete Kushanas in this region. 
There are clear epigraphic data which indicate that the Nagas attained 
prominence a century or more before the reign of Chandragupta II. The 
early Nagas holding sway over Padmavati (Pol Pawaya in Gwalior) and 
Mathura, regions previously in the Kushanas’ possession, performed ten 
asyamedha sacrifices and must therefore have thrown off the Kushana 
yoke. The Puranas also tell us that seven kings had already ruled at Ma- 
thura and nine at Padmavati when the Guptas came to power. These ' 
earlier Naga kings may have aggrandised themselves at the expense of the 
Indian Kushanas. Another Indian power which appears to have had a 
hand in destroying Kushana dominion, according to Altekar, was the 
Yaudheyas, the martial tribe whose rule, from the beginning of the third 
century a.d., lasted for a century or more over territory lying on the banks 
of the Sutlej as far as the borders of Bahawalpur State. This region is 
still known by their name (Johiya bar). 1 A variety of the Yaudheya 
copper coins shows clear affinity with the Kushana money, and we may 
safely surmise that these coins were struck by the Yaudheyas some time 
after they had shaken off Kushana sway. Not only the Nagas and the 
Yaudheyas, but a few other tribes also like the Malavas and the Kunindas 
may have regained their political importance at this time and portioned 

1 Ibid. pp. 28-9 
32 



250 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


out among themselves territories formerly held by the Kushanas. 
The political condition of parts of Northern India in the second and third 
century a.d. was not unlike that of the Panjab and North-Western India 
on the eve of Alexander’s invasion, a time when the Achaemenid autho- 
rity over these regions was virtually dissolved. Just as the mighty Maur- 
yas of the earlier times erected their empire on the ruins of these autono- 
mous states, so the Guptas asserted their paramountcy at the expense of 
the majority of these tribal groups which had raised their heads for a spell 
while the Kushanas’ Indian empire was sinking. 

It has already been shown that under Kanishka III and Vasudeva II 
the Kushana power was still of some importance in the north-west and 
the neighbouring border regions. They seem to have lost their hold on 
their territories in the interior of India; these passed into the hands of 
indigenous tribes or chiefs. Nothing can be said with certainty about the 
successors of Kanishka III and Vasudeva II in North-Western India, but 
it seems that the western, perhaps also the central, Panjab and tracts on 
the other side of the Indus were subject to two or more tribes some of 
whose names have been read on coins as the Shakas and Shiladas. R. D. 
Banerji places the dynasty of the Shakas in Gandhara, inasmuch as a large 
hoard of Shaka coins was discovered near Peshawar; to the Shiladas he 
would assign territory to the east of the Indus. The names of such Shaka 
chiefs as Sayatha, Sita and Sana have been read in the coin legends while 
those of Bhadra, Bacharna and Pasaka occur among the coins of the 
Shilada tribe. Smith describes these rulers as sundry chiefs ruling in the 
Panjab and the neighbouring countries in the third and fourth centuries 
a.d. We know nothing of their connection with the later Kushanas, but it 
is apparent that they were closely imitating Kushana coin types. The ob- 
verse of their coins shows the Kushana device of ‘the king sacrificing at an 
altar’ with Brahmi legends containing the names of the tribe and the tribal 
chief, while the reverse has the goddess Ardochso on a throne with traces 
of her name in a corrupt Greek script. The metal is debased gold, and 
the execution is sometimes rude and barbarous. The poor quality of the 
metal and the uncouthness of the style hint at the gradual decline of their 
political power. How long their rule lasted and how it ended cannot now 
be determined with certainty. If they are placed in the second half of the 
third century a.d. their downfall can be tentatively accounted for by the 
expansion of the Sassanian power towards the east. Such of them as 
perhaps were spared by the Sassanids on this side of the Indus felt the 
might of the rising Gupta power in the first half of the fourth century a.d. 

THE SASSANIAN PO WER AND THE DOWNFALL OF THE 
KUSHANA EMPIRE 

The expansion of the early Sassanian empire to the east is veiled in ob- 
scurity, but there is reason to believe that from the very date of its founda- 
tion under Ardeshir I, the son of Papak, in a.d. 225-26, the Sassanid rulers 



RISE OF THE SASSANIANS 


251 


turned their attention eastwards. After establishing his power over the 
whole of the west and south of Iran, Ardeshir turned eastwards as far as 
Khorasan. The Kushana Shah and the kings of Turan and Makuran 
sent envoys to him acknowledging his suzerainty. Turan is not a vague 
term in this context, but denotes the modern district of Suzdar, to the 
south of Quetta, while Makuran indicates the coastal region of the Gulf 
of Oman and the neighbouring stretch of land. From these regions the 
Sassanian power gradually extended towards Seistan (Sakastana, modern 
Sijistan) from where it spread in course of time over parts of Western and 
Central India and over the north-western regions and the borderlands of 
India. It will be shown in the next chapter that the Sassanian drive towards 
Western and Central^ India was executed at the expense of the Western 
Kshatrapas and the Satavahanas. All doubt of this has now been dis- 
pelled by Herzfeld who has successfully deciphered the Paikuli inscription. 
A systematic study of the ‘Sassanian Kushan’ coins (inaccurately descri- 
bed as Scytho-Sassanian by previous authors) supplemented by other 
literary and archaeological data have enabled the same scholar to assert 
that not only Bactria, where unknown Kushana chiefs were ruling for a 
long time, but also the whole north-west of India became important pro- 
vinces in the eastern division of the Sassanian empire. The unique silver 
drachma of the prince-governor Peroz I, son of Ardeshir, on the reverse 
of which this Mazda-worshipping prince is presented as a worshipper of 
Buddha, endows him with the titles, mazdesn bage Perdze vazurg Kusan 
§ah (‘the Mazda-worshipping lord Peroz Great Kushan King’). Not 
very long afterwards we find on the scyphate gold coins of Hormizd I, 
son of Shapur I, that the prince-governor is described as ‘ Mazdesn bage 
Ohormizde vazurg Kusan Sahan Sah ’ (‘the Mazda-worshipping lord Hor- 
mizd, Great Kushan King of Kings’). The titles are certainly more pre- 
tentious than those of Peroz, and they imply according to Herzfeld ‘not 
only the actual dominion over Khorasan and hence, over great parts of the 
ancient Kushan empire, but also the claim to the suzerainty over the whole 
of that empire, including the hitherto independent parts, the Kabul valley 
and the Panjab.’ 1 The Sassanian Emperor Varhran II (276-93), the nephew 
and predecessor of Narseh (the short rule of four months cf Varhran 
III, son of Varhran II intervened between their reigns) had to encounter 
the rebellion of his brother Hormizd (Ormies), in which the Sakas, the 
Kushanas and the Gelans sided with the rebels. In this event we trace 
the effort made by these vassal nations to free themselves from the Sassa- 
nian yoke when that power was menaced by the Romans. Varhran II 
had to come to terms with the Roman Emperor Diocletian, by ceding 
Armenia and Mesopotamia in order to concentrate his entire energies on 
quelling this insurrection. Herein he was successful, and he appears to 
have strengthened his hold over the vast eastern possessions of the Sassa- 
nids. Narseh (293-302), the uncle of Varhran II and the usurper of the 


E. Herzfeld, Paikuli , i p. 47 



252 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


throne of his son Varhran III, in spite of his apparent failures in the west, 
seems to have retained many of these territories as is proved by the inscrip- 
tions, especially the Paikuli inscriptions. V. A. Smith long ago pointed 
out that the disappearance of two great paramount dynasties of India, 
the Kushana and the Andhra, coincided with the supersession of the Arsa- 
cidan dynasty of Persia by the Sassanids, and he shrewdly conjectured some 
connection between these three events. He surmised on the basis of the 
persianisation of the Kushana coinage of Northern India that some un- 
recorded Persian invasion took place at that time. The information gleaned 
from the Paikuli and other inscriptions, as well as from the Kushano- 
Sassanian coins, leaves little doubt that Smith was correct in his surmise. 
The rising Persian power undoubtedly dealt a severe blow to the declin- 
ing strength of the Kushanas in the northern and western parts of India 
and beyond. But even in their decay the Kushana chiefs seem to have 
enjoyed some amount of political consideration under the aegis of the 
Sassanian monarchs. In the Paikuli inscriptions, the Kushana Shah is 
mentioned only once, but even then he is included in the list of the inde- 
pendent allies of Narseh. An Iranian tradition records the marriage of 
Narseh’s son Hormizd II with a daughter of the Kabul Shah. The power 
of the Sassanians and of the Kushanas under them appears to have been 
held in check in the east by the Chionites who invaded Bactria in a.d. 356 
when Shapur II (309-379) was occupying the throne of Iran. 

The Kushanas on the border of India and probably also in the Panjab 
appear by now to have thoroughly intermingled with various other tribes. 
They continued their chequered existence even up to the time of Samu- 
dragupta. That great Gupta emperor compelled them to allegiance ; 
and they are styled in the Allahabad Pillar inscription as daivaputra shahi 
shahanushahi. These epithets clearly remind us of the titles so frequent 
on the inscriptions of the early imperial Kushanas. ‘ Shahi shahanushahi ’ 
is moreover nothing but the indianised version of Shaonano Shao, a 
part of their coin-legend, as it was also the base of ‘shahan shah’, a part of 
the title of the practically independent Sassanian prince-governors of 
Khorasan. The Kushanas in the latter part of the fourth or early in the 
fifth century a.d. came to acquire a new designation, viz., Kidara, and these 
Kidara Kushanas are usually referred to by scholars as the Little Yue-chi. 
Their existence in parts of the Panjab, North-West Frontier Province 
and Kashmir in the fifth century a.d. and a little later is vouched for only 
by the discovery of a large number of coins in pale and much debased gold. 
R. D. Banerji rightly says that it is impossible to arrange these chrono- 
logically, but the names of the issuing chiefs read on them by him and some 
other numismatists require consideration. These are all Indian names 
like Kritavirya, Sarvayasa, Bhasvan, Siladitya, Prakasa and Kusala. We 
have no means of ascertaining the exact periods of their rule, their order of 
succession or even the limits of the territories over which they ruled. 
Their coins are crude copies of the ‘sacrificing king and enthroned Ardochso’ 
type of the late Kushanas as are those of the ‘Gadahara’ or ‘Gadakhara’ 



KUSHANA CULTURE 


253 


tribe which also belong to this period. The ‘Gadahara’ (‘Gadakhara’) 
tribe should also be grouped with the Little Yiie-chi, for almost all 
the extant coins issued by the chiefs of this tribe bear the syllable 
Kshuna so common on the Kidara Kushana coins. Three types of Gada- 
hara coinage have been distinguished by R.D. Banerji on the basis of the 
coin-legends, such as Peraya, Kirada and Samudra. The last two names 
should be specially noted in this connection, for one of them occurs as a 
variant on the coins of the Kidara Kushanas, while the other is evidently 
based on the name of the imperial Gupta monarch. Banerji inferred from 
the resemblance between the ‘Samudra’ type of the Gadahara coin with 
the ‘standard’ type coin of Samudragupta that ‘the Gadahara tribe at last 
acknowledged the suzerainty of the great conqueror and placed his name 
on their coins .’ 1 This inference is not likely, for the Gadahara coins, 
as Banerji himself says, could not have been issued earlier than the fifth 
century a.d., by which time Samudragupta must have long been dead. 
The likely explanation is that the die-cutter in the employ of the tribal 
chief merely copied one of the commonest types of Samudragupta’s coins 
which had found its way to the Gadahara territory. It is beyond our 
power at present to assign the limits of the tribal territory; but it is possi- 
ble that they mastered part of the dominions of the Kidara Kushanas 
when the power of the latter was on the wane. Both the Kidaras and the 
Gadaharas, however, appear to have succumbed to the fierce onslaught 
of the Hunas who poured into India like an avalanche in the middle of 
the fifth century a.d. 

Thus faded the last remnant of the great Kushana power, Undoubtedly 
it was vastly changed in the later part of its career by admixture with 
different stocks, both Indian and non-Indian. The barbarian Yiie-chi 
race with its partly nomadic habits, and its principal constituent, the 
Kushanas, was from the very first prone to be influenced by peoples of 
superior culture, wherever in their wanderings they came in contact with 
them. When they settled in India and on her borders, they did not take a 
long time to succumb to the cultural impact of the Hellenistic Greeks and 
of the Indians. The coins which they issued, the epigraphic and monu- 
mental remains which we associate with their name, all tell the tale of 
their cultural discipleship; but they were vigorous and sturdy rulers and 
had gifts to impart which enriched the stock of that composite Indian 
civilization which was taking shape in their times and continued to grow 
when they were gone. Vast regions of Northern India, ravaged by the 
rivalries and wars of the Indo-Greeks, Indo-Scythians and Indo-Parthians, 
now felt the healing effects of a strong and well-organized government. 
An era of political stability favoured an efflorescence of Indian culture. 
The Kushanas were great patrons of art and literature; their early empe- 
rors fostered the Hellenistic art of Gandhara and the indigenous art of 
Mathura, so that both in the north-west and in the mid-India region art 


JASB. Ns. iv, 1908, p. 93 



254 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


reached a memorable climax. The making of images and the building 
of temples had certainly not been neglected in earlier days, but 
under the new regime these activities developed a higher scale of energy 
as artists, both indigenous and foreign, found never-failing scope for their 
skill and industry in the religious needs and piety of the times. Among the 
many religions establishments which later tradition ascribes to Kanishka 
I, none was of more importance than the Chaitya, said to have been four 
hundred storeys high, which he raised up in his capital Purushapura, 
modern Peshawar. Passing through Gandhara in the fifth century, Fa- 
hien saw numbers of huge Buddhist chaityas and viharas which, from 
his glowing account, had evidently lost nothing of their original splen- 
dour. He praises the images of Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and numerous 
other deities, the finely carved reliefs and the admirable architecture of 
these majestic piles, a good many of which must have been erected during 
the period of Kushana ascendancy. A school of art flourished at Mathura 
which sent its products as far afield as SravastI and Sarnath. We have 
the name of one sculptor, Bhikshu Bala, and images from his workshop 
were dedicated in both the places. In the minor arts, the achievements 
of the die-engravers employed by the Kushanas were far from negligible. 
Certain devices adopted on Kushana coins, blending influences derived 
from Hellenistic, Roman and Indian monetary technique, became the 
prototypes of many varieties of coinage, foreign as well as indigenous, 
which circulated for more than half a millennium over wide areas of Nor- 
thern India and even beyond. Among these we must note the obverse 
and reverse devices of certain coins of the Yaudheyas, the imperial 
Guptas, one or two Kashmirian kings, some kings of Nepal, and several 
Chedi kings, and lastly a particular type of coinage issued by the Sassa- 
nian rulers. These devices are unmistakable adaptations, some better and 
some worse, of such familiar Kushana types as ‘a king sacrificing at an 
altar’, ‘the seated Ardochso’ and ‘the Siva and Bull’. Of the applied 
sciences there is one, medicine, which was highly developed in Kushana 
times. Charaka, the great systematizer and expounder of that science, 
is traditionally said to have resided at Kanishka’s court. For religion too 
these were stirring times. Not only did Buddhism take a new direction 
at this period, but there is also proof that many Brahmanical sects now 
underwent re-shaping and re-modelling. In this age likewise the Sanskrit 
language felt the impusle of a new intensity of cultivation which brought 
it to a culminating pitch of achievement in the succeeding period of the 
Guptas. Taken altogether, the abundance and quality of cultural achieve- 
ment under the Kushanas distinguish the age as one of the most interest- 
ing and important in Indian history. 



REVIVAL : YAUDHEYAS 


255 


THE REVIVAL OF INDIGENOUS RULE IN NORTHERN 

INDIA c. A.D. 200-300 

Although the Kushanas had become completely indianised — they had 
adopted Indian religions, Indian languages and Indian social customs — ■ 
it appears that the indigenous population in general, and the ruling houses 
which had been dispossessed, in particular, were not reconciled to the 
Kushana rule. The location of their capital at Purushapura (Peshawar) 
on the very outskirts of Bharatavarsha and the inclusion of the non-Indian 
provinces of Bactria and Sogdiana in their empire, perpetuated the popular 
notions of their barbarian descent. As soon as the Kushana rulers showed 
signs of weakness, the Indians rose in revolt simultaneously in several parts 
of the country. The record of this struggle for freedom has not been pre- 
served in literature, but the numismatic and epigraphic evidence recently 
examined and interpreted by Indian scholars has thrown a flood of light 
on this obscure chapter of Indian history and has enabled us to visualise 
how the Yaudheyas, the Kunindas, the Madras, the Arjunayanas, the 
Nagas of Mathura, Padmavatl, Adiichhatra and Kantipurl, and the 
Maghas of KausambI pulled down the mighty edifice of the Kusharia 
empire. It is not possible to ascertain who initiated the assault nor can 
we compute the exact proportion of the credit that each of these powers 
may claim in the feat of expelling the Kushanas. We shall therefore be 
content to narrate the simple facts of the establishment of these states, 
as the Kushana empire gradually crumbled. 

1. THE YAUDHEYAS 

We have seen above that the Yaudheyas were ruling in south-eastern 
Panjab during the first century a.d. Evidently they had successfully with- 
stood the Saka onslaught and had emerged victorious from the struggle. 
In the middle of the second century a.d. we find them still strong and pros- 
perous, firmly upholding their independence. In the Girnar Rock ins- 
cription of Rudradaman dated Saka year 72 (a.d. 150) they are described 
as a proud people who had proclaimed their title of heroes amongst all 
Kshatriyas. 1 Rudradaman’s claim to have annihilated them appears 
to be a vain boast ; for the continued existence of the Yaudheya republic 
in the late second century a.d. is proved by their coinage. Rudradaman 
may have defeated them, but evidently he could not destroy their power. 
According to Allan, the struggle with the Sakas and the war with Rudra- 
daman put a great strain on the financial resources of the Yaudheyas, and 
this accounts for the poor state of their currency of the late second century. 
After a brief period of strain they recovered their strength and played a 
still more glorious role. The legends Yaudheyaganasya jaya on their coins 
and Yaudheyanam jayamantra-dharanarii on the clay seals discovered 

1 Sarva-kshatranshkrita-vira-sabdajatot- pp. 42 ff. Kshatra may have a covert 
sekavidheyanam Yaudheyanam EL vra reference to the Kshatrapas of Mathura. 



256 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


from Sunet near Ludhiana 1 show that they had won a great victory to 
commemorate which a special series of coins and memorial medals were 
struck. Altekar has rightly concluded that this evidence points to a victory 
over the Kushanas. 2 It was the Yaudheyas who dealt the first great 
blow at the Kushanas and turned them out of the eastern Panjab. 

The Yaudheyas ruled independently throughout the third and early 
fourth centuries. Their coinage of this period bears the proud legend 
jaya yaudheya, and the figure of Karttikeya, god of war, and his consort 
Shashthi. The Yaudheyas were finally subdued by Samudragupta, in the 
middle of the fourth century. Thereafter their coinage ceases. 

2. THE KUNINDAS, KULUTAS AND MADRAKAS 

We have noticed above that the Kunindas lost their independence when 
the Sakas advanced into the Panjab. The re-appearance of their coinage 
in the third century A.D. shows that they reasserted their independence as 
the Kushana empire declined. It is likely that the Kunindas joined hands 
with the Yaudheyas, and that these two peoples jointly expelled the Kusha- 
pas from the eastern Panjab. The Kuninda revival seems to have been 
short-lived. They disappeared from the political map some time before 
a.d. 350, for they are not mentioned in the Allahabad stone pillar inscrip- 
tion of Samudragupta, nor is there any other evidence of the continuation 
of their rule. 

In the neighbourhood of the Kunindas, in the territory now known as 
the Kulu valley, there came into existence another independent principa- 
lity. We have coins of king Vlrayasa of Kuluta, bearing Sanskrit legends 
in both KharoshthI and Brahmi scripts. These coins may be assigned to 
the third century a.d. The Kulutas as a separate political entity, were 
known to the author of the play Mudrarakshasa, and are also mentioned 
in the Mahabharata. But these references afford us no help in exploring 
the early history of these people, and the coins of Virayasa still remain the 
only definite evidence for the history of the Kulutas. 

The mention of Madrakas in the Allahabad stone pillar inscription 
of Samudragupta, shows that they too had established their independence 
some time before the middle of the fourth century a.d. The country 
between the rivers Ravi and Chenab was known as Madradesa. In all 
likelihood the Madrakas of Samudragupta’s epigraph have to be placed 
in this region. No inscriptions or coins of the Madrakas have so far 
been found, and it is not possible to give any details of their history. 

3. THE ARJUNA YANAS 

As noticed above the Arjunayanas wielded political power during the 
second and first centuries b.c. Their coinage ceased towards the close 
of the first century b.c.— an indication probably that they were subdued by 

1 JASB. 1884, pp. 134 ff. a PAIOC. xn, Benares 1943, pp. 513 g- 



MALAVAS. NAGAS 


257 


the ^akas. No coins or inscriptions of the Aijunayanas of the subse- 
quent period have yet been brought to light, but we find this people men- 
tioned in the Allahabad inscription of Samudragupta. It is apparent 
therefore that they regained independence after the collapse of the Kushana 
power. It is likely that they helped the Yaudheyas in the war against the 
Kushanas and shared the fruits of victory with the other allies. 

4. THE MlLAVAS 

The Malavas had, as we have seen, along and glorious record as a ruling 
people. They have been identified with the Malli who at the time of 
Alexander’s invasion were occupying the territory below the confluence 
of the Jhelum and the Chenab extending towards the Ravi. They had 
put up brave resistance against Alexander. They are known to Pataii- 
jali, the author of the Mahabhashya. In the first and second centuries 
a.d. we find them in the territory of what is now Jaipur (Rajasthan) as 
evidenced by their coins discovered at Karkotnagar and other sites. 
We do not know at what time and under what circumstances they migrated 
from the Panjab southwards. What we do know is that they came to 
occupy the whole of the Vindhyan plateau which was later known by their 
name as the Malava country. During the Saka-Kushana ascendancy, 
the Malava power was eclipsed but in the second century a.d. they seem 
to have won a great victory — evidently over the Kushanas. The coins 
bearing the significant legend ‘victory of the Malavas’ in characters of the 
second or third century a.d. appear to commemorate this victory, not 
elsewhere recorded. During the third century the Malava power reached 
the zenith of its glory, and this people ruled independently till the middle 
of the next century when they accepted the overlordship of Samudragupta. 

5. THE NAGAS 

In the dynastic lists of the Puranas the Nagas appear immediately before 
the Guptas. The existence of several Naga principalities in the early 
fourth century is attested by Samudragupta’s Allahabad Stone Pillar in- 
scription which enumerates Nagadatta, Nagasena,, Ganapatinaga and 
Achyutanandi amongst the rulers of Northern India uprooted by the Gupta 
conqueror. The Vayu and the Brahmanda Puranas mention two families 
of Nagas, one comprising nine kings ruling at Padmavatl and another 
of seven kings holding sway at Mathura. 1 Naga coins have been dis- 
covered in large numbers both at Padmavatl, modem Padama-Pawaya 
in the Narwar district of Gwalior ("Madhya Bharat), and at Mathura. 
The Vishnu Burma 2 adds a third Naga dynasty ruling at Kantipuri which 

1 Nava Nakastu bhokshyanti purim Pad- ’ Nava Nagah Padmavatyam Kantipuryam 
mavatim ntipah I Mathuram cha purim MathurSyam DKA. p. 53 n. 2. 
ramyam Naga bhokshyanti sapta vai. 

33 



258 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


has been identified by Jayaswal with modern Kantit near Mirzapur in 
Uttar Pradesh. Although Kantit may be an ancient town as indicated 
by the remains of its mud fort, no antiquities of Naga rule have been dis- 
covered there. Jayaswal propounded the theory that the Nagas of Kanti- 
puri are identical with the Bharasivas mentioned in the copper-plate grants 
of the Vakatakas. In these inscriptions the royal house of the Bharasivas 
is stated to have been founded by the favour of Siva whom they had 
propitiated by carrying a Sivalinga on their shoulders, and further the 
Bharasivas are said to have been consecrated to the throne by the holy 
waters of the Ganges which they had obtained by the prowess of their arms. 
From the last statement Jayaswal has inferred that the Bharasivas ousted 
the Kushanas from the eastern districts of Uttar Pradesh. According 
to him the kings named Nava, Virasena, Hayanaga, Trayanaga and Achar- 
janaga all known from coins, belonged to this dynasty of the Bharasivas 
of Kantipurl . 1 However it is to be noted that no coins of these kings 
have been found at Kantit, nor have any other traces of Bharasiva rule 
come to light at or near Kantit . 2 Moreover there is no evidence to prove 
that these kings were Nagas. With the exception of Virasena even the 
reading of the names is doubtful. The modern place-names Nagod and 
Bharhut may well point to Naga and Bharasiva associations with this part 
of Baghelkhand, but this evidence is not sufficient to support Jayaswal’s 
theory . 3 On the other hand the coins of a king Bhavanaga found at Padam- 
Pawaya exhibit all the characteristics of the Naga coinage found there. 
Altekar has given very sound reasons for identifying Bhavanaga of the 
coins with the Bharasiva maharaja Bhavanaga of the Vakataka grants . 4 
That the Padmavatl Nagas were worshippers of Siva is abundantly clear 
from the occurrence of Saiva symbols — the bull and the trident-on their 
coins, and the discovery of the platform of the famous Sivalinga called 
svarnabindu at Padam-Pawaya . 5 We may therefore agree with Altekar 
in regarding the Naga kings of Padmavatl as Bharasivas. It is possible 
that the Bharasivas originally belonged to Baghelkhand from where they 
made successful raids into the Kushana territory and temporarily occu- 
pied a part of the Ganges valley. 

The following Naga fcings of Padmavatl are known from the coins: 
Bhlma-naga, Prabljakafra-naga, Vibumaga, Skanda-naga, Vyaghra-naga, 
Va-u-naga, Devamaga, Brihaspati-naga and Bhava-naga. Coins of 
* Ganapati-naga have also been discovered at Padam-Pawaya, but pro- 
bably he belongs to Mathura where his coins are more numerous. Batia 
in his Harshacharita mentions a Naga king of Padmavatl, named Naga- 
sena, who lost his kingdom as his secret counsel was divulged by a 


K. P. Jayaswal, History of India 
(a. d. 150-350), pp. 7 ff. 

1 A white sand-stone torso of a man 
carrying an object like a Sivalifiga 
on his shoulders in the Bharata-Kala- 
Bhavana, Benares, seems to answer 
the description of a Bharasiva wor- 


shipper of Siva, but nothing is known 
about its find-spot. 

* Cf. A.S. Altekar, PAIOC. 1943-44, Bena- 
res, p. 513, and Karuna Kana GuDta. 
IC. i pp. 635 ff. P ’ 

*JNSI. v pp. 21-7 
‘ AS1AR. 1915-16, p. 100 f. 



MAGHAS 


259 


starling. Sankararya, the commentator of Harshacharita explains that 
it was a minister of Nagasena, who killed his master and usurped the king- 
dom. This Nagasena is apparently not the same as he who was over- 
thrown by Samudragupta. From the coins of Bhavanaga, who was 
a contemporary of the Vakataka emperor Pravarasena I it can be inferred 
that the Naga house of Padmavati continued to rule up to the middle of 
the fourth century a.d., when the kingdom came under the sway of the 
Guptas. The excavations carried out at Padam-Pawaya show that Padma- 
vati was a very flourishing city. It retained its importance and splendour 
in much later times, as is proved by a description in the Khajuraho in- 
scription. 1 

Regarding the Naga dynasty of Mathura our information is very scanty. 
The Puranas simply state that ‘seven kings will rule over Mathura’. They 
do not give the names. Ganapati-naga whose coins are very common 
at Mathura and who was overthrown by Samudragupta may be regarded 
as the last among them. The Naga house of Mathura may thus be said 
to have been founded c. a.d. 200 allowing an average reign of twenty years 
to its seven kings and assuming that Ganapati-naga was overthrown by 
Samudragupta in c. a.d. 340. 2 Virasena whose coins have been found all 
over Uttar Pradesh, and who is also known from an inscription discovered 
at Jankhat 3 in the Farrukhabad district of U.P., may have been a Naga 
ruler of Mathura. 


6. THE MAGHAS OF KAUSIMBl 


Inscriptions, seals and coins have supplied the following names of rulers 
— Bhlmasena, Pothasri, Bhadramagha, Sivamagha, Vaisravana, Bhlma- 
varman, Satamagha and Vijayamagha, who seem to constitute a dynasty 
which has been named as the Magha 4 dynasty. Originally they seem to 
have belonged to Bandhogarh in Rewa, in Vindhya Pradesh, but in course 
of time they extended their sway over Kausambi and the neighbouring 
region. 

An unpublished Bandhogarh inscription supplies the earliest date, 51, 
for Bhlmasena who therefore may be regarded as the first member of the 


1 EL i p. 149 

* K. P. Jayaswal’s view that Kirtishena 
of the play Kaumudi-mahotsava was 
a Naga king has not been accepted by 
any scholar. As a matter of fact the 
historicity of the play itself has been 
questioned by many writers including 
Prof. K. C. Chattopadhyaya (IHQ. 
xrv p. 582), D. C. Sirkar (JAHRS. 
ix p. 63), and the present writer ( Thomas 
Festschrift). 

* Ed. Pargiter, El. xi p. 85 


The dynastic appellation Magha does 
not occur in any of the records of 
these kings, but has been coined by 


modem historians on the basis of the 
name-endings of two of the rulers 
Bhadramagha and Sivamagha whose 
Kosam inscription brought the dynasty 
into prominence. The name-ending 
is clearly Magha on the inscriptions, 
and not Magha as taken by K. P. 
Jayaswal, nor Megha as suggested by 
D. R. Sahni (EL xvm p. 159). Certain- 
ly the Puranas mention nine powerful 
and wise rulers called Meghas who 
ruled over Kosala, but we cannot identi- 
fy them with the Maghas. Apart from 
the discrepancy in the name, no evidence 
has so far come to light which can 
connect the Maghas with Kosala. 



260 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


dynasty. He is in all likelihood identical with king Vasishthiputra Bhl- 
masena of the Bhita seal No. 27, 1 and Maharaja Bhimasena of the painted 
inscription dated 52, discovered at Ginja, 40 miles south-west of Allaha- 
bad. Bhimasena was therefore ruling over the territory now represented 
partly by a portion of Rewa and partly by the Allahabad district of U.P. 2 
By referring the dates of Bhimasena to the Saka era, 3 we find that he was 
ruling about a.d. 129-130. No coins of Bhimasena have been discovered 
so far. Probably he issued none. His dates fall in the period of the impe- 
rial Kushanas, Huvishka and Kanishka II, and he must have been their 
feudatory. Naturally therefore he could not have minted his own coins. 

Bhimasena was succeeded by his son Kautsiputra Pothasri. For him 
we have the dates 86, 87, 88, all from the unpublished Bandhogarh epi- 
graphs. The Bhita coins. 4 with the blurred legend Prashthasriya, in all 
probability belong to him. The striking of coins by Pothasri indicates 
that he asserted his independence and ceased to acknowledge the over- 
lordship of the Kushana emperor Vasudeva, who appears to have been 


1 ASIAR. 1911-12, p. 51 

* A. S. Altekar thinks that the dis- 
covery of the Bhita seal does not prove 
Bhimasena’s rule over the Allahabad 
region ( NH1P . vi p. 42). But, Ginja 
where we have Bhlmasena’s inscription, 
is only 40 miles from Allahabad. 
This inscription definitely indicates 
that Bhlmasena’s authority extended 
over parts of Allahabad and evidently 
we can include Bhita. 

* There is a sharp difference of opinion 
on the identification of the era used 
in the records of the Maghas. D. R. 
Sahni held that the dates should be 
referred to the Gupta era (EL xvm 
p. 160). K. P. Jayaswal thought the 
Maghas used the Vakataka era of a.d. 
248 ( History of India a.d. 150-350, 
p. 229). N. G. Majumdar and Krishna 
Dev refer the dates to the Kalachuri 
era, whereas Sir John Marshall, Sten 
Konow, A. S. Altekar and Motichan- 
dra regard it as the Saka era. On 
palaeographic considerations the ins- 
criptions of Bhadramagha and Siva- 
magha are post-Kushapa and pre- 
Gupta. Further the mention of the 
season as part of the date is clearly 
a pre-Gupta practice. In spite of 
A. Ghosh’s contention to the contrary 
( IC . m pp. 181f) it may still be 
maintained that this mode of dating 
is not to be found in any Gupta record. 
The omission of any reference to the 
Gupta sovereignty in the Magha inscrip- 
tions shows that they were not Gupta 
feudatories. The discovery of the 
Fatehpur hoard of the Magha coins 


definitely rules out the possibility of 
the Maghas being regarded as the 
governors or vassals of the Guptas, 
as no governor or vassal of the Guptas 
ever minted his own coinage. Lastly, 
as pointed out by Sten Konow, the 
transitional character of the language 
employed in the Kosam inscriptions 
reveals the tendency of progressive 
Sanskritisation without altogether eli- 
minating Prakrit. The weight of 
evidence is decidedly in favour 
of a pre-Gupta date for this dynasty. 
For the same reason we cannot refer 
these dates to an era starting from 
a.d. 248, for that will make all the 
Maghas from Pothasri onwards contem- 
poraneous with the imperial Guptas. 
Therefore we must assign these dates 
to an epoch which gives us pre-Gupta 
dates for the Maghas. The only well- 
known era which can meet this require- 
ment is the Saka era. As the Maghas 
were originally the subordinates of the 
Kushanas it is only natural that they 
should have adopted the era used by 
their overlords. It may be urged that 
by referring the dates to the Saka era 
we make the independent Magha kings’ 
Pothasri and Bhadramagha, contem- 
porary with Vasudeva, the imperial 
Kushana, whose dates range from 74 
to 98. But this does not constitute 
an obstacle. The inscriptions of Vasu- 
deva have been found in the Mathura 
regain ^ only. He seems to have lost 
his hold over the far-eastern districts, 
which were being snatched away by 
the indigenous ruling houses. 

4 ASIAR. 1911-12, p. 66, nos. 43-71 



LATER MAGHAS 


261 


unable to exercise an effective control over the eastern portion of the 
empire and whose sovereignty, on the basis of epigraphic evidence, seems 
to have been confined to the Mathura region. 

Curiously enough, we have almost the same dates for Pothasrf s son and 
successor Bhadramagha as for Pothasri himself, viz. 81, 87, 88, 89 and 90. 
This can be explained only by the assumption that Bhadramagha had been 
appointed yuvaraja by his father and placed in charge of the Kausambi area. 
This will explain the assumption of the title maharaja by Bhadramagha 
during the lifetime of his father. We have other instances of heirs appa- 
rent issuing inscriptions in their own name, for example the Pallava prince 
Vishnugopavarman. The Gupta heir apparent, Govindagupta, also had 
the title of maharaja while he was governing Vaisall. We may therefore 
conclude that while Pothasri was ruling at Bandhogarh, Bhadramagha 
was administering the northern part of the kingdom from Kausambi. This 
kind of arrangement was doubtless best calculated to preserve the nascent 
independence of the state. After the death of Pothasri, Bhadramagha 
ruled over the whole kingdom. Coins of Bhadramagha occur in the 
Fatehpur hoard. 1 

The next ruler was most probably Sivamagha. The date in his Kosam 
inscription is lost, and there is no other dated record of his reign. There- 
fore his exact place in the order of succession is somewhat uncertain. 
The Bhita seal bearing the legend maharaja Gautamlputra Sivamaghasya 
can be assigned to him. 2 His coins have been found in the Fatehpur 
hoard. 

6ivamagha was succeeded by Vaisravana for whom we have the date 
107 (a.d. 185) from his Kosam inscription. 3 He does not seem to be a 
direct descendant in the royal line as his father Bhadrabala is styled a 
mahasenapati. This Bhadrabala is evidently different from Bhadramagha, 
for whom we have the variants Bhadradeva and Bhattadeva, as Bhadra- 
magha is always styled maharaja. 

It cannot be supposed that in an inscription of Vaisravana, his father 
would have been styled a mahasenapati while he was in reality a ruler. 
The coins of Vaisravana occur in the Fatehpur hoard. His reign came 
to a close some time before a.d. 208, the earliest known date of the next 
ruler. 

Vaisravana seems to have been succeeded by Bhimavarman for whom 
we have the date 130 from the Buddha stone image inscription from 
Kosam. 4 We get Bhimavarman’s coins from the Fatehpur hoard, and 
this evidence definitely connects him with the Magha dynasty. He seems 


Published by Motichandra, JNSI 
n pp. 95-108 

K. P. Jayaswal’s view that Siva- 
magha was a Vakajaka viceroy is quite 
implausible. Sivamagha issued coin- 
age in his own name and bore the 
title of maharaja. It is impossible 
to admit that the Vakajakas could 
have permitted their viceroy to mint 


coins and adopt the title which 
they themselves used. Moreover, the 
Vakajakas are not known to have 
issued any coins at all. The coins 
of Sivamagha form a uniform series 
with those of the other Magha kings 
of Kausambi. 

' Ed. N. G. Majumdar, El. xxrv p. 146 
1 Ed. A. Ghosh, /C. hi 177ff. 



262 


RISE AND FALL OF KUSHANA POWER 


to be different from Bhimavarman whose Kosam inscription dated 139 
has been published by Fleet. 1 

Two more names of Magha rulers are supplied by coins discovered at 
Kausambl. 2 These are Satamagha and Vijayamagha. As we have no 
dates for these rulers it is difficult to determine their position in the order 
of succession. Probably they were the latest members of the Magha dy- 
nasty. 

According to Altekar, 3 numismatic evidence favours the likelihood that 
a king named Nava, whose copper coins are exactly of the same type 
as those of the Maghas, succeeded them at Kausambl. We know nothing 
more about Nava. Other rulers may have followed him until Kausambl 
was annexed by Samudragupta in the first half of the fourth century a.d. 


CII. m pp. 266-7, plate xxxix c. 
This inscription dated 139 differs 
from the Kosam inscription dated 130 
both in respect of characters and of 
style of dating. It has the fully deve- 
loped Gupta forms, particularly those 
of s and tj which distinguish it from 
earlier records. The mention of the 
summer season in the Kosam inscrip- 
tion dated 130 shows that it is much 
earlier than the Gupta period when 
this mode of dating had become quite 
obsolete. The inscription dated 139 


does not contain any reference to the 
season, although Ghosh holds that 
the season was mentioned in the por- 
tion now broken away and lost (IC. 
hi p. 181). However, in spite of his 
able reasoning it must be maintained 
that the definite survival of this prac- 
tice in the Gupta period has yet to 
be proved. 

•Published by A. S. Altekar, JNSI. 
rv pp. 101-11 

’ NHIP. vi p. 46 



Chapter IX 


THE SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 
INTRODUCTION 

T he Achaemenid conquerors of Northern and North-Western India were 
the first to introduce into the country the satrapal system of govern- 
ment. The satraps were a kind of subordinate rulers with a varying degree 
of political importance. The term ‘Satrap’ is the hellenised form of the 
old Persian Kshathra-pavan (meaning ‘protector of the realm’) indianised 
into Kshatrapa. The Medo-Persian emperors Cyrus and Cambyses or- 
ganised the newly conquered provinces of their vast empire and appointed 
these officers to govern them. The Achaemenid emperor Darius I comple- 
ted this organisation, changed the limits of a few of the satrapies, — there 
were as many as twenty in his empire, — and modified the functions of the 
satraps. These governors were recruited from men of very high social 
standing and in some cases were even members of the royal family by 
birth or marriage. The appointment was for indefinite periods; in some 
provinces, however, the office became at times practically hereditary, 
though in theory the emperor had the power to terminate it at will. 
In matters of civil administration the powers and functions of the satrap 
were far too extensive, and his authority was great in military matters also. 
As the highest judicial authority in the province, the satrap used to receive 
envoys from neighbouring states, and decide on lines of action to be follow- 
ed regarding them, only the larger matters of policy being referred to Susa. 
Further he enforced law and order inside his own territories. These 
powerful administrators evinced, even from the time of Darius I, a tendency 
towards independence and it had been hard for the court in Babylon 
from the early days of Persian rule, to keep a perfect control over its own 
satraps in Asia Minor . 1 During the time of Darius’s effete successors, 
the satrapal system of government hastened the break-up of the Achae- 
menid Persian empire. Alexander the Great virtually destroyed it, but 
even so he maintained much of the previous administrative organisation. 
The government by satraps, of the far-flung parts of the empire, was con- 
tinued by him, though he abolished it in some provinces, e.g. in Egypt. 
But the measures which he introduced during the short span of his 
life showed that he meant to introduce reforms in the administration. 
He greatly restricted the powers of his satraps, in order that they might 
not be a menace to the newly founded Macedonian empire. His premature 
end, however, prevented him from putting into effect whatever schemes of 
centralisation he had in mind, and his successors in the East were much too 


1 E. R. Bevan, The House of Seleucus, i p. 89 



264 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


engrossed in their mutual wars to bother about administrative reform. 
It was two of the satraps of the early Seleucids that were responsible for 
the independence of Bactria and Parthia, and it was their descendants, 
as shown in two of the previous chapters, who played such an important 
part in the history of Northern and North-Western India in the centuries 
immediately preceding and succeeding the Christian era. 

THE SATRAPS OF CHUKHSA AND PUSHPAPURA 


The powerful Bactrian and Indo-Greek rulers undoubtedly governed 
their territories through subordinate and associate kings. Menander is 
known to have had a viceregal ruler under him governing in the Bajaur re- 
gion, who described himself as an apracharaja (probably Sans, apratyag- 
raja, meaning ‘one who has no royal adversary’). He was Viyakamitra 
(Sans. Vlryakamitra) who may have been an Indian, but more likely a fore- 
igner bearing an Indian name. Though his title euphemistically describes 
him as having no royal rival, there is every reason to believe that he enjoyed 
a subordinate position, perhaps similar to that of a satrap, under the great 
Yavana King. The fragmentary relic-casket inscription found at Shinkot 
(Bajaur territory) records that this sub-prince enshrined some relics of Bud- 
dha; in course of time the relic-shrine fell into disrepair and was again 
xenovated and the relics re-established by one Vijayamitra, also an ‘ apra- 
charaja Numismatic evidence proves that Vijayamitra’s son Itravarma 
(probably a variant of Indravarma) also enjoyed the same rank, as the 
legend on a few of his coins can be read as Vijayamitra-putrasa Itravarmasa 
apracharajasa, ‘(of) the son of Vijayamitra, Itravarma, the apracharaja . n 
It is evident from these epigraphic and numismatic records that the insti- 
tution was maintained intact years after Menander . 1 2 If this Itravarma 
is the same as Indravarma, the father of Aspavarma, as confidently sug- 
gested by F. W. Thomas, then his son Aspa who was the uncle of Sasan, 
sometime associate ruler of Gondophares, does not appear to have held 
the office of ‘ apracharaja ’ like his father and grandfather. Aspavarma, 
both as an associate ruler of Azes II and of Gondophares was known 
by his official title of the Strategos. His coins issued jointly with the 
two Saka-Pahlava rulers describe him as their ‘victorious Strategos’ 
(strategasa jayatasa). The title ‘Strategos autocrator’ was often adopted 
in earlier days by the Macedonian kings to describe their overlordship of 
the free states of Greece, but during the Saka-Pahlava rule in India the 
office of the Strategos must have signified the position of a subordinate 
ruler, more or less the same as that of an ‘ apracharaja ’ or a ‘ Kshatrapa ’. 
Other powerful Indo-Greek rulers probably governed their territories 
through such subordinate kings, of whom no record has been discovered 
up till now. 


1 NC. 1944, p. 102; El. xxiv pp. 1-8; 
cf. supra pp. 209, 221 

* Konow thinks that Viyakamitra and 


Vijayamitra were one and 
person; NIA. n 1939-40, p. 
also supra p. 174 


the same 
642; cf. 



MANIGULA. JIHUNIA 


265 


But it was during and after the Saka supremacy over parts of Northern 
India that the institution of Satraps seems to have grown most prevalent. 
It has been briefly shown in ch. vii that the various satraps of the 
Sakas were the active agents in the gradual spread of Saka rule. 
One of these, Liaka Kusuluka by name, was administering the province 
of Chukhsa, the great plain of Chach, during the sovereignty of Maha- 
raja Mahanta Moga (cf. the Greek epithets Basileos Megalou Mauou 
of the coin legends of Maues). Liaka seems to have enjoyed enough 
political power and importance to strike a few silver coins in his 
own name. These coins can be assigned on the basis of their types to the 
Taxila region inside the Chach plain. The coins are obol pieces, bearing 
on their obverse an exact copy of the diademed and helmeted bust of 
Eucratides, with the legend Liako Kozoulo partly legible. Numis- 
matic evidence thus appears to corroborate the early dating of this 
satrap which has been suggested on the basis of the Taxila copper-plate 
inscription, and he appears to have been ruling in some corner of the great 
plain probably in the first half of the first century b.c. Rapson describes 
him as the Satrap of Chhahara and Chukhsa, unidentified districts pre- 
sumably to be located in the neighbourhood of Takshasila; but this sug- 
gestion is based on Cunningham’s reading of the KharoshthI inscription 
mentioned above, another reading and interpretation by Pandit Bhagwan- 
lal Indraji and Konow possibly indicating that he was the Kshaharata 
Kshatrapa of Chukhsa (chach). His son Patika who made the deposit of 
the relics of Buddha, mentioned in the inscription, did not hold any 
greater rank at that time than that of mahadanapati (the great gift-lord), 
a title especially appropriate to the enshrinement of the relics and the acts 
of charity associated with that ceremony. Nevertheless, he certainly 
succeeded his father in his satrapy and even attained the higher rank of 
the Mahakshatrapa (Great Satrap) later, as is evident from the Mathura 
Lion Capital inscriptions. 

These inscriptions, which will be presently discussed in detail, appa- 
rently refer to the satraps of different regions of Northern India, not all of 
whom were contemporaries. It is now accepted by scholars, that in the 
Chukhsa region the line of Liaka was followed by another line of satrapal 
rulers, of which the existence of one member is vouched for by numismatic 
as well as epigraphic data. A number of comparatively well-executed silver 
and copper coins, discovered long ago and now in different museums in 
and outside India, have a partially preserved legend in corrupt Greek on 
one side and a fairly legible Prakrit legend written in KharoshthI script 
on the other. These inscriptions describe the issuer as ‘Kshatrapa 
Jihunia, son of Kshatrapa Manigula’ Mannolou. . . Satrapu Zeionisou 
— Manigulasa Kshatrapasa putrasa Kshatrapasa Jihuniasa). Some of these 
coins are characterised by such novel reverse devices as ‘King (here 
Satrap) standing to the left, facing a female figure with a modius on 
her head and a cornucopia in her left hand, who is crowning him with a 
wreath.’ Cunningham thought long ago that the female figure stood for a 
34 



266 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


city. Rapson went one step further and suggested that she was none other 
than the city-deity of Pushkalavati (modern Charsadda in the district of 
Peshawar). He was also of the opinion that Zeionises, the Satrap, was suc- 
ceeded in the kingdom of Pushkalavati, by Kujula Kara Kadphises, a pro- 
bable contemporary of Wima Kadphises. But it has already been shown 
that Kujula Kara Kadphises was almost certainly the same as Kujula 
Kadphises, the predecessor of Wima, and it is now certain after the dis- 
covery of a silver vase inscription in Kharoshthi characters at Sirkap, in 
the year 1926-7 that Zeionises was ruling as the Satrap of Chach in the 
year 191 of an unspecified era. The record describes him as the son of 
Manigula, the brother of an unnamed maharaja and the Satrap of Chukh- 
sa ( maharajabhrata Mariigulasa putrasa Chukhsasa Kshatrapasa cha 
Jihuniasa). When Rapson wrote about Zeionises in the Cambridge History 
of India, vol. i, this inscription was unknown; but now after its discovery 
it can hardly be contended that Zeionises was also the Kshatrapa over 
Pushkalavati in the far western corner of Gandhara. That another satrap 
was governing this region near about that time, is proved by a dated 
Kharoshthi inscription now in the collection of the Dar-ul-Aman Mu- 
seum, Kabul. The inscription records that a tank was caused to be made 
by one Maiashua, the Chobuva of Pushpapura, in the year 83, under 
Tiravharna, the Kshatrapa of Pushpapura. It was found somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of Jalalabad; and Konow has suggested that the 
Pushpapura of the record was another variant of Poshapura of the Ara 
inscription, both being the earlier forms of Purushapura (modern Pesha- 
war). The year most probably belongs to the era according to which the 
year 103 in the Takht-i-Bahi inscription of Gondophares is dated, and that 
reckoning, in the opinion of most scholars, is the Malava-Vikrama Sam- 
vat of 58-7 B.c. This would place Tiravharna, the Kshatrapa of Pushpa- 
pura, in a.d. 25, when the Indo-Parthian king Gondophares was the 
suzerain ruler in that region. Under Tiravharna, the subordinate ruler 
was Maiashua, the Chobuva, the actual donor of the record. It should be 
observed here that the office of Chobuva probably corresponded to that 
of Chozbo, Chozboa, the commonest of all the local titles found in 
Chinese Turkestan. Konow has justifiably suggested that ‘Kshatrapas and 
Chobuvas belonged to the administrative system which the Parthians in 
India took over from their Saka predecessors’. 1 With regard to the equa- 
tion Chobuva-Chozbo, it may be observed that like the division of the 
administrative officers of higher rank in Northern and Western India, into 
the Kshatrapas and the Mahakshatrapas, the office of the Chozbo was 
also divided into Chozbo and Mahachozbo in Chinese Turkestan. 2 


AO. xvi pp. 234-40. Konow obser- 
ves that the ‘form Tiravharna as com- 
pared with Guduvhara of the Takht- 
i-Bahi stone is the older one, vharna, 
i.e. probably vharna, corresponding 
to Avestan Xvaranah; and the Greek 
rendering femes' 


* Kharoshthi Inscriptions (discovered by 
Sir Aurel Stein in Chinese Turkestan), 
transcribed and edited by Boyer, Rapson 
& Senart, pp. Iff., 98 106, 143, etc. 
The forms Mahata and Mahamta 
chozbo are also found in these Niya 
documents; cf. ibid. pp. 64-5, 219, etc. 



LIAKA KUSULUKA 


267 


The dated silver vase inscription of Zeionises has given rise to one 
interesting problem of chronology. Zeionises’s date 191, if it is referred 
to the Vikrama Samvat, places him near about a.d. 133; but according 
to the chronological scheme adopted in the preceding chapter he cannot 
be given such a late date. His comparatively well-executed silver coins 
also would assign him to a much earlier period, and a date for him some 
time in the first half of the first century a.d. may not be far off the mark. 
This seems to support the view of the scholars who hold that at least two 
different reckonings were current in this part of India, one later known 
as the Vikrama era, and the other starting sofne time near the middle of 
the second century b.c., probably associated with the greatest expansion 
of the Parthian power, as was originally suggested by Rapson. Tiravharna 
and Zeionises, thus, may have been contemporaries, or very near so, one 
ruling in the T axila region and the other in the western corner of Gandhara. 

OTHER KSHATRAPAS OF THE EXTREME NORTH 

That there were many other Kshatrapas in the different parts of the ex- 
treme north of India during the rule of the Saka-Pahlavas and early Kush- 
anas is proved by a number of extant coins and Kharoshthi inscriptions. 
Kharahostes was such a one known from a few copper coins assigned by 
Cunningham to the north-western Panjab. The Greek and Kharoshthi 
legends on his coins describe him as the son of Arta ( Kharahostei Satrapei 
Artauou, Kshatrapasa pra Kharaostasa Artasa putrasa). This Satrap 
has been identified by most scholars with the yuvaraja (heir apparent) 
Kharaosta of the Mathura Lion Capital inscriptions, about whom more 
will be said later. A copper seal-ring discovered long ago by Bayley in 
the Panjab region, since lost trace of, contained a Kharoshthi inscription 
which mentions the name of one Kshatrapa Sivasena in the town of 
Abhisaraprastha. Stein identified Abhisara (Abisares of the annalists 
of Alexander) with the hilly region between the Jhelum and the Chenab, 
sometimes comprising the neighbouring districts of Hazara. 1 No date 
can be assigned, with certainty, to this Kshatrapa with an Indian name, 
but he may have belonged to the early Kushana age. From Zeda, 
a village near Und (ancient Udabhandapura) was recovered an 
inscribed stone which contains the name of Kshatrapa Liaka in 
whose honour certain gifts were made, by one Hipea Dhia during the 
eleventh year of the reign of Kanishka I. Konow remarks, ‘The 
Kshatrapa Liaka must be different from the Kshatrapa of Chukhsa, 
Liaka Kusuluka, but may have been a descendant of his and have held 
sway in Chukhsa, which must then have included Zeda.’ 2 The Manikyala 
(Rawalpindi District, Panjab) stone inscription of the year 18 of Kanishka 
I refers to the enshrinement of some relics of Buddha by the general 
Lala, the increaser of the Kushana race, and the donation-master of 

1 Konow, CIJ. n (i) p. 103 * Ibid. pp. 144-5 



268 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


the Kshatrapa Vespasi. Vespasi was then ruling as Kshatrapa under 
Kanishka I. A bronze relic-casket unearthed from the same stupa at 
Manikyala contains an inscription which records the gift of an unnamed 
Kshatrapa of Kapisa, who was the son of the Kshatrapa Granavhryaka. 
This furnishes us with further proof that the office of the satrap was in 
many cases hereditary, and there is little doubt, that Granavhryaka as well 
as his son were holding a subordinate position in this region under the 
great Kushana emperor. 

THE SATRAPS OF MATHURA-. THE PRIORITY 
OF THE RAJUVULA GROUP 

The satrapal system of government had been well established long before 
in the Mathura region in the interior of India. Most of the Kshatrapas 
and the Mahakshatrapas of Mathura were undoubtedly Saka by race, 
but they were soon to adopt Indian manners and customs; some of them 
seem also to have borne Indian names. The coins issued by these rulers, 
as well as inscriptions in Kharoshth! and Brahmi bearing some of their 
names, are our principal data for the partial reconstruction of their 
histroy. The Mathura region was apparently under the rule of a long line 
of local Hindu potentates from the last days of the Maurya empire, 
most of whose names ended in either mitra or datta; they are known 
only from the large number of copper coins issued by them. Their favour- 
ite coin-type was ‘standing Lakshml’ and ‘three elephants’, though a few 
other devices are not unknown. The later members of this line use the 
royal title with their names (cf. the legends: Rajna Balabhutisa, Rajna 
Ramadatasa, Rajna Kamdatasa etc.); but they were soon to be supplanted, 
perhaps about the middle of the first century b.c., by a line of satrapal 
rulers. Allan thinks that the last two of these rulers were Mahakshatrapa 
Rajuvula and his son and successor Sodasa, other rulers like Kshatrapa 
Sivadatta, Kshatrapa Sivaghosha, Kshatrapa Hagamasha and Kshatra- 
pas Hagana and Hagamasha (jointly) being the earlier satraps of Mathura. 
Rapson also is of this opinion, for he observes that ‘Ranjubula appears 
to have been the successor of satraps who are known only from their coins, 
Hagamasha and Hagana ruling conjointly with Hagamasha .’ 1 But a 
careful consideration of the coin-types and the absence of any mention 
of Hagamasha and Hagana in the Mathura Lion Capital inscriptions 
would justify us in assigning them a place after Rajuvula and his son 
Sodasa. The earliest coins of Rajuvula are of base silver and characterised 
by the royal bust and a somewhat corrupt Greek legend ( Basileis Basiled 
Soteros Razu) on the obverse, and Pallas hurling thunderbolt with the 
partially legible Kharoshth! legend apratihatachakrasa kshatrapasa Raju- 
vulasa on the reverse. The next are his lead issues having the lion device 
with traces of illegible Greek legends on the obverse, and a standing Hera- 
cles with the partially legible Kharoshth! inscription mahakhatapasa 
1 CHI. i p. 527 



MATHURA KSHATRAPAS 


269 


aprati-chakrasa Rajulasa on the reverse. These seem to have been succeeded 
by another class of his lead coins having ‘standing Lakshmfi with the Bra- 
hml legend mahakhatapasa Rajuvulasa on the obverse, and ‘Abhisheka 
Lakshmf on the reverse. His son Sodasa uses his father’s last coin-type, 
in his lead and copper money, the legends, always in Brahml script, only 
varying in the different specimens. The latter show that Sodasa was 
at first a Kshatrapa, and afterwards a Mahakshatrapa (mahakhatapasa 
putasa Khatapasa Sodasasa, Rajuvulaputasa Khatapasa Sodasasa and 
mahakhatapasa Sodasasa.) The copper coins of the other group of Mathura 
satraps, Sivadatta, Sivaghosha, Hagamasha and both Hagamasha and 
Hagana, on the other hand, invariably bear legends in Brahmi script, and 
this fact alone would indicate their later position. They use the ‘standing 
Lakshml and Horse’ device on all their coins, and it is presumable from 
the paucity and somewhat indifferent execution of their coin-types that 
they ruled for a comparatively short period after Sodasa. Either Siva- 
datta and Sivaghosha were Indians bearing the foreign title, or, as is more 
probable, foreigners using Indian names. 1 The gradual indianisation of 
the names would also indicate a date for the Kshatrapas Sivadatta and 
Sivaghosha, later even than Hagamasha and Hagana. 

MATHURA LION CAPITAL INSCRIPTIONS 


A remarkable piece of sculpture, part of the capital of a votive column, 
that must have originally stood by the gateway of a Buddhist stupa, has 
given us some useful information about the complicated history of the 
Mathura Kshatrapas. It was discovered in 1869 by the great Indologist 
of the nineteenth century, Pandit Bhagwanlal Indraji, who found it built 
into the steps of a local shrine of Sltala, the goddess of small-pox. The 
capital consists of two lions shown as joined together back to back, standing 
on a pedestal of a square block of red sandstone. The bodies of the lions, 
and the top, back and bottom of the square block are covered with 
inscriptions in comparatively early Kharoshthi script, which were studied 
by various scholars including the learned discoverer himself. The inscrip- 
tions record the enshrinement of some relics of Buddha and other necessary 
endowments by the chief queen of the Mahakshatrapa Rajula. She is 
associated in her pious acts with her various relations whose names are 
given, and all this is done in honour of the Mahakshatrapa Kusuluka 
Patika, the Kshatrapa Mevaki Miyika, the Kshatrapa Khardaa and others, 
in fact the whole of Sakastana. There is little doubt that many persons 
of rank who are named here, belonged to the far-distant corners of the 
Saka empire, and Sakastana (modern Seistan, Sijistan in eastern Iran) was 


For a full description of the coins of the 
Mathura Satraps, cf. Cunningham, 
CAI. pp. 85-7, pi. viii; V. A. Smith, 
CCIM. i pp. 190-1, 195-7; J. Allan, 
BMCAI. pp. cxi-cxvi, 183-91. Cun- 
ningham seems to place Rajuvula and 


Sodasa before the others, for he men- 
tions Rajuvula and Sodasa first, and 
then Hagamasha and his contemporary 
(perhaps brother) Hagana; in his time 
the coins of Sivaghosha and Sivadatta 
were unknown. 



270 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


the region from which the Sakas spread themselves over the greater part 
of Northern India. Mahakshatrapa Kusuluka Patika was undoubtedly 
the mahadanapati Patika, son of the Kshatrapa Liaka Kusuluka, of the 
Taxila copper-plate already referred to on several occasions. Patika seems 
to have been at this period the Mahakshatrapa in the Taxila region (old 
Chukhsa), possibly having Mevaki Miyika as his subordinate. He must also 
have been held in high esteem, being perhaps of a venerable old age, in the 
contemporary Saka world in India, or else his name would not have been 
given the first place in the record of the pious endowments made by the 
chief queen of the Mahakshatrapa of Mathura. One other interesting 
name which occurs twice in the epigraph is that of yuvaraja Kharaosta. 
Rajula’s son Sudasa is also twice mentioned there as Kshatrapa. Rajula 
and Sudasa in this context are no other than Rajuvula and Sodasa of the 
coins, and yuvaraja Kharaosta has almost unanimously been identified 
with Arta’s son Kshatrapa Kharaosta known from his coins. 

The first five lines of the inscriptions (A lines 1-5) have been interpreted 
by Konow in a sense different from that usually adopted by Indologists. 
According to the older view the principal donor was Nada Di (or Si)aka, 
the chief queen of Mahakshatrapa Rajula, the daughter of Ayasi Kamudha 
(or Kamusa) and mother of yuvaraja Kharaosta. If the yuvaraja Khara- 
osta is identical with the Kshatrapa Kharaosta of the coins, as is almost 
unanimously agreed by scholars, it follows that Arta, the father of Khara- 
osta, was the first husband of Rajula’s chief queen who married Rajula, 
after Arta’s death. According to Konow, however, the name of the princi- 
pal donor, Rajula’s chief queen, was Ayasi Kamuia (Kambujaka belong- 
ing to the Kambuja tribe) who was the daughter of yuvaraja Kharaosta, 
also a Kambujaka and the mother of Nada Di(Si)aka. 1 It is difficult to 
be sure about the correct interpretation now, but one fact deducible from 
these lines is that it was the chief queen of the Mahakshatrapa who was 
responsible for the endowments, and we must presume that she was a Bud- 
dhist. These religious endowments (dharma-dana) were made by the queen 
in the ‘cave monastery’ ( guha-vihara ) as the records tell us. The guha 
vihara was seen in the seventh century a.d. by the Chinese pilgrim, Hiuan 
Tsang, who gives an interesting description of it. Sudasa (Sodasa) is 
described as enjoying the position of Kshatrapa, at that time under his 
father, the Great Satrap Rajula. The inscriptions refer to the Buddhist 
Acharyas, Buddhadeva and Budhila, the last of whom hailed from 
Nagara (identified by Cunningham with Begram in Afghanistan) far 
to the west of the Indus. The Buddhist sects of the Sarvastivadins and the 
Mahasanghikas are mentioned in them, the former being assigned a 
more important position. 

These epigraphs do not bear any date, and any inference about the time 
of the principal personalities mentioned in them must be indirect, and 


Konow, op. cit., pp. 34-6; for the older 
view, cf. JRAS. 1894, pp. 541 ff.; El. 
IX pp. 135 ff. H. K. Deb has recently 


studied tnese inscriptions and offered 
his own views on the problem in 
JRASB. x 1944, pp. 122-37 



RAJUVULA 


271 


derived from other available data. The Brahml inscription on a votive 
tablet ( ayagapata ) found at Mathura recording some endowments by one 
AmohinI, a Jaina devotee, gives us a possible clue. The tablet bears the 
name of Mahakshatrapa Sodasa and a date which has been read differently 
by scholars, either as 42 or 72. Whichever is the correct reading, the view 
generally accepted is that the year belongs to the Vikrama Samvat. If 
it is 72, which is the opinion of most scholars, Sodasa would then be ruling 
as the Mahakshatrapa at Mathura c. a.d. 15. This, however, would 
imply a wide gap between the time of Kshatrapa Liaka Kusuluka and the 
Mahakshatrapaship of his son Mahadanapati Patika of the Taxila copper- 
plate, whose date 78 has been referred to an era beginning from about 
the middle of the second century b.c. The period of Mahadanapati 
Patika would then fall roughly in the last quarter of the first century b.c., 
for the Mathura Lion Capital inscriptions, which mention him as holding 
the position of the Great Satrap, refer to Sudasa as a Kshatrapa. This 
would place the inscriptions also in the last quarter of the first century 
b.c., which is not an unlikely date. Liaka Kusuluka would then have to be 
assigned a comparatively long rule, first as Kshatrapa and then probably 
as Mahakshatrapa, from near about the middle of the second quarter of 
the first century b.c. to the beginning of its last quarter. This was perhaps 
one of the reasons which led Rapson to support Biihler’s alternative reading 
of the date in the AmohinI votive tablet as 42, which would abridge by 
30 years the interval between the Kshatrapaship of Liaka Kusuluka and 
the Mahakashatrapaship of his son Patika. It may be said on behalf 
of Rapson that the sign which has been read by many epigraphists as 70 
in the AmohinI tablet, is very similar to the one read as 40 in the Junnar 
inscription of Ayama, the minister of Nahapana, by many of the same 
epigraphists. __ Konow, however, consistently reads this sign as 70. Like 
many other Saka-Pahlava and Kushana problems of a similar character 
this chronological puzzle is not yet fully solved. 1 

Raj uvula seems to have enjoyed a long reign, ruling over a far wider area 
than the Mathura region. The coins bear witness to this, for they are 
found all over the country from the Panjab to the Gangetic Doab. The 
variety of types has already been touched upon, the commonest being 
‘the drachmas of light weight and very base metal copied from the coins 
of Strato I and II,’ the bust on their obverse resembling a typical Saka por- 
trait found on the coins of Heraus or Miaus. It is certain that Rajuvula 
came to Mathura from the north-west ; he may have conquered it from the 
last of the local Hindu kings, Balabhuti, Ramadatta or Kamadatta, and 
probably he was already invested with the satrapal office in the regions to 
the north, under the later Sakas. It is the latest group of his coins which 
bears on the obverse the device of the local kings of Mathura, viz. the stand- 
ing Lakshml, 2 the tree and other symbols, which is the rarest among 
his issues. This fact has led Allan to suggest that Rajuvula occupied 

1 See also H. C. Raychaudhuri, PHAI . 4 2 Not the god Krishna, as was previ- 

pp. 371-3 ously supposed; CHI. i p. 526 



272 SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 

M athura late in his reign . 1 We need not follow him in this conclusion. 
Allan himself observed that Rajula’s (Rajuvula’s) coins of class I (royal 
bust and Pallas type with Greek and KharoshthI legends) were found with 
the coins of Strato at Mathura and in the eastern Panjab, which suggests 
that during the early years of his occupation of Mathura, he continued to 
issue the Indo-Greek type of money, so that it was only late in his reign 
that he imitated the local coins. This practice, once begun, became the 
norm of his successors, and Sodasa, Hagamasha and others followed it, 
though the last few in the line such as Hagamasha, Hagana, Sivadatta 
and Sivaghosha changed the Abhisheka-Lakshmi reverse type of the last 
class of Rajuvula’s and of all Sodasa’s money. 

The rule of Sodasa must have been confined to Mathura and the sur- 
rounding regions, for his coins were found along with those of his father 
at Mathura, Padham and Sankisa, all in this belt of the U. P. His Ksha- 
trapa successors, as has been suggested above, must have ruled in Mathura 
only for a comparatively short time, until, perhaps after a brief interregnum 
this region was conquered by the Kushanas. That the Kushana suzerains 
continued the satrapal system of government in this region is proved by the 
Sarnath inscriptions dated in the third regnal year of the great Kanishka. 
The first of these, carved on the front of the plain pedestal of a Buddhist 
image (described as Bodhisattva in the inscription), records that the image, 
a gift of Friar Bala, was erected under the orders of the Great Satrap Khara- 
pallana jointly with Kshatrapa Vanashpara; the other, incised on the sides 
of the staff of the stone umbrella which once sheltered the image, mentions 
the same two rulers, Kshatrapa Vanashpara’s name being put first, followed 
by the name of Kharapallana without his official title. It is probable that 
Mahakshatrapa Kharapallana was the father of Kshatrapa Vanashpara, 
and from their connection with Bhikshu Bala of Mathura, it can be presum- 
ed that Mathura was the seat of their government. Vogel has surmised 
that Kharapallana’s son Vanashpara, ‘who in the umbrella inscription is 
mentioned before Kharapallana, resided at Benares and ruled the eastern 
portion of the province governed by his father .’ 2 No coins have as 
yet been found bearing the names of these two satrapal rulers; perhaps 
they will never be, for during the zenith of the Kushana power these satraps 
may not have been allpwed by their suzerain the prerogative of issuing 
coins in their own name. Nothing is known of the subsequent history of 
the Saka Kshatrapas of Mathura. A fragmentary Brahml inscription on a 
rounded piece of red sandstone found at Ganeshra, some three miles west 
of Mathura, contains the name of one Kshaharata Ghataka who is other- 
wise unknown to us. There is no date, but the palaeography of the record 
places it in the reign of Kanishka. Ghataka like Kharapallana and 
Vanashpara was a foreigner, but he belonged to the Kshaharata tribe. 
Whether he also enjoyed the office of a Kshatrapa is by no means certain 
though Vogel has suggested ‘that the word immediately preceding 


’Allan, op. cit., p. cxv 


2 EL vm p. 174 



KSHAHARATAS 


273 


haratasa was Kshatrapasa ’ in the inscription ; but the usual order of the 
two epithets, one tribal and the other official, is 1 Kshaharatasa Kshatrapasa 
and not Kshatrapasa Kshaharatasa . 1 

THE KSHATRAPAS OF WESTERN INDIA 

Certain regions of Western and Central India long remained under the 
sway of the Kshatrapas and the Mahakshatrapas in the early centuries of 
the Christian era. __ The satrapal rule seems to have been introduced in these 
parts during the Saka-Pahlava suzerainty, though no names of individual 
satraps of the period are preserved to us. It was, however, not until the 
Kushana overlordship that this system of government was well established 
here. Two principal groups of satraps can be distinguished among the 
large number of names recovered mainly from inscriptions and coins 
associated with them. The earlier group consists of two persons only. 
Bhumaka and Nahapana belonging to the Kshaharata race, as is proved from 
their coin-legends and inscriptions, while the later group comprises a 
large number of satraps most of whom were lineal descendants of Chash- 
tana, the son of one Ghsamotika. Their foreign origin is indicated by the 
non-Indian names of the earlier members, though Indian names were soon 
adopted. That their original home was in the north is proved by the use of 
KharoshthI, the alphabet of the extreme north-west and north of India, 
in the coin-legends of the first few of these rulers. KharoshthI, however, 
soon fell into disuse, and no successor of Chashtana used it on his coins. 
Rapson argues that the family of the Kshaharatas and that of Chashtana 
may have belonged to different races, the former probably being ofPah- 
lava, and the latter of Saka origin. Thomas has shown that the name 
Nahapana is Persian, while the name of Ghsamotika. Chashtana’s father, 
is Scythic. 2 The stages in the gradual indianisation of the names of 
Chashtana’s successors are clearly marked by such names as Rudradaman 
and Damasena, which contain both Iranian and Indian elements. Rudra- 
simha, Rudrasena, Vijayasena, Visvasimha and Sirhhasena are typically 
Indian names, though the Iranian particle daman is still found in such later 
compounds as Bhartridaman and Svami Rudradaman (II), the names of 
the Mahakshatrapas, 16th and 17th in order from Nahapana. The prefix 
svami is the Indian equivalent of the Saka title it ang or murunda found 
in Chinese texts and Indian inscriptions respectively, the latter being the 
Indian translation of a Chinese word. The foreign origin of these satra- 
pal rulers, however, was never forgotten by the indigenous writers of India, 
and in some inscriptions and texts of the Gupta period and afterwards, 
they are described as Sakas. The unnamed era which is so often used in 
their coins and inscriptions came to be known as the ‘ sakabda *, for ‘it 

1 For Vogel’s view,cf. JR AS. 1912, pp. vadata (Rishabhadatta), was probably 

121-2 a Saka with a Hinduised name; BM 

1 JRAS. 1906, p. 211. Rapson observes CA WK. p. civ. n. i 
that Nahapana’s son-in-law, >Usha- 
35 



274 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


became best known in Northern India as the era which was used for so long 
a period by these Saka kings ( Saka-nripa-Kala )’ (Rapson). 

THE KSHAHARATA DYNASTY: BHOMAKA 
AND NAHAPANA 

The first satrap of the Kshaharata family in Western India appears to 
have been one Bhumaka known only from a few of his extant copper coins. 
Bhagwanlal Indraji observed that they were usually found in the coastal 
regions of Gujarat and Kathiawar and also sometimes in Malwa. An arrow, 
discus and thunderbolt appear on their obverse side, and a lion capital 
flanked by a wheel ( dharma-chakra ) on their reverse, the partially legible 
KharoshthI and Brahrnl legends on the two sides being Kshaharatasa 
Kshatrapa Bhumaka (‘coin of Kshaharata Kshtrapa Bhumaka’). The 
obverse device of Bhumaka’s coins figures invariably on the reverse of all 
known silver and copper coins of Nahapana, and it reminds one of the 
‘discus, bow and arrow’ reverse of some copper coins jointly issued by 
Spalirises and Azes (p. 203). The ' Dharmachakra and Lion Capital’ device 
of his coins, however, may associate Bhumaka with Mathura, where the 
inscribed Lion Capital is an interesting memento of the Saka occupation 
of that region. It is likely that during the Kushana overlordship of Nor- 
thern and Western India, Bhumaka was entrusted with the task of adminis- 
tering the westernmost conquests of the Kushanas. On the other hand 
he may have been already ruling there as the satrap of the Pahlavas when 
the Kushanas made themselves masters of this region. He issued coins 
as a Kshatrapa, never using the title of raja or mahakshatrapa, the first 
of which was adopted by Nahapana on his coins. Rapson has rightly 
observed that ‘considerations of the type and fabric of the coins, and of 
the nature of the coin-legends, leave no room for doubting that Bhumaka 
preceded Nahapana, but there is no evidence to show the relationship 
between them.’ 1 Sylvain Levi has suggested that ‘Bhumaka’ is the Indian 
form of the Saka ‘ Ysamotika ; Ysama being the Saka word for ‘earth’. 
If Ysamotika (Ghsamotika), the father of Chashtana, and Bhumaka be 
identical (as would follow according to this view), Bhumaka’s place would 
more plausibly be found between Nahapana and Chashtana; but this 
on other grounds is unlikely. Konow accepts Levi’s suggestion but does 
not explain this point satisfactorily. He surmised that Nahapana might 
have been Chashtana’ s uncle ruling before him with the title of rajan Ksha- 
trapa as Bhumaka’s successor up to the year 45 (a.d. 123), and after Chash- 
tana, as Mahakshatrapa, in the year 76 (a.d. 154 i.e., four years after Ru- 
dradaman’s Junagadh record), reading 76 instead of 46 in the Junnar in- 
scription of Nahapana’s minister Ayama. Another suggestion of Konow is 
that the Mahakshatrapa Nahapana of the year 76 was a second Nahapana 
who might have been Mahakshatrapa after Rudradaman. On Konow’s 
view there is no dynastic distinction between the Kshaharata satraps 
1 BMCAWK, Intro, p, cviii 



NAHAPANA 


275 


Bhumaka and Nahapana, on the one hand, and the satraps of the line of 
Chashtana on the other, the word Kshaharata being an official title and 
not the name of a family or a clan as is usually held. 1 

Bhumaka’s successor Nahapana is known not only from his many silver 
and his few copper coins, but also from several inscriptions recording 
the pious endowments and benefactions of his son-in-law Ushavadata, 
and one of his ministers Ayama. A possible reference to him is found by 
some scholars in the name of Mambarus (emended Nambanos) 
mentioned in the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea. Though Nahapana is 
not an obscure figure in the annals of ancient India, a difference 
of opinion exists among scholars about his chronological position. 
A few of the inscriptions bearing his name contain dates ranging 
between 41 and 46 of an unspecified era. His coins do not bear any 
date, but a large number of his extant silver coins show clearly that they 
were restruck by the Satavahana ruler Gautamiputra Satakarni with the 
latter's own devices, and this alone might be proof that the two were con- 
temporaries. A large hoard of silver coins bearing the name, titles and de- 
vices of Nahapana was accidentally discovered long ago at a village called 
Jogalthembhi in the Nasik District of the Bombay State, of which as many 
as two-thirds (numbering 9270 or more) showed distinct traces of re- 
striking. Numismatic evidence thus demonstrates that Gautamiputra 
Satakarni defeated the Kshaharata ruler at some time in his reign and an- 
nexed a part of the satrapal dominions. This conclusion seems to be 
corroborated by the epigraphic data, for the Nasik inscription of GotamI 
BalaSri, the mother of Gautamiputra Satakarni, engraved in the 19th reg- 
nal year of her grandson, Vasithiputa Puluma3i, records that the great 
Satavahana monarch not only destroyed the Sakas, the Yavanas and the 
Pahlavas but also uprooted the ‘Khakharatas’ ( Saka-Yavana-Pahlara-nis - 
udanasa. . . .Khakharatavasaniravaseshakarasa). Another Nasik cave ins- 
cription of Gautamiputra Satakarni himself, bearing the regnal date 
18, confirms the Satavahana’s acquisition of territory from the Khakha- 
ratas, for it records the grant of nearly 150 acres of land in a village pre- 
viously in the possession of Ushavadata (evidently the same as the Saka 
son-in-law of Nahapana) to the Tekirasi ascetics. Rapson observes that 
‘it indicates the recent transfer of the government in the Nasik district from 
the Kshaharatas to the Andhras.’ It proves that the Satavahana ruler 
and Ushavadata were contemporaries, and the contemporaneity of the 
latter’s father-in-law Nahapana with the Andhra king can also be in- 
ferred on the basis of this evidence. Now the dates in inscriptions 
containing Nahapana’s name, are referred by many scholars to the Saka 
era, and the last known date of Nahapana in one of them recording the 


For Levi's suggestion, cf. JA. xn, 1933, 
pp. 37-8, 45. Rapson has shown sound 
reasons for finding in the decimal sign 
of the date in the Junnar cave inscrip- 
tion, roughly resembling a Maltese 


Cross and somewhat different from the 
usual sign for 40, a variant of 40 : 
Konow would prefer to recognise in 
it the sign for 70 and read the date 
as 76. 



276 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


benefactions of his minister Ayama is the year 46. 1 He could not have 
been ruling long after that date, for the Andhau inscriptions of the year 
52 refer to the joint rule of Chashtana and his grandson Rudradaman in 
the region of Cutch. Gautamlputra Satakarni, thus appears to have 
conquered Nahapana in or about 46 (a.d. 124, if we refer the date to the 
Saka era) which year probably corresponded to the 18ih regnal year of 
Gautamlputra. Rapson thus arrived at the following equation: Gau- 
tamlputra’s year 18=a.d. 124, or a.d. 124 -- x, this x or unknown period 
being necessarily of a very short duration. 

This line of argument adopted for the most part by Rapson, has been 
challenged by several scholars who would place some interval between 
the ICshaharata ruler and Gautamlputra Satakarni. Their main objec- 
tion to Rapson’s view is based on the evidence supplied by the Andhau 
inscriptions. These inscriptions were discovered long after Rapson had 
propounded his conclusions on the date of Nahapana and the contem- 
porary Satavahana king, and the critics of Rapson mostly took their stand 
on the inordinately short interval (about six years only, taking 46 as posi- 
tively the last date of Nahapana recorded in the Saka era) between Naha- 
pana and the Western Kshatrapa rulers Chashtana and Rudradaman. 
They argue that if the known dates of Nahapana refer to the Saka era, 
as is usually the case with the dates recorded for Chashtana and his des- 
cendants, then the following events would have to be crowded into the 
fateful six years from 46 to 52. These were. (1) the end of Nahapana’s 
reign, (2) the final destruction of the Kshaharatas, (3) the accession of 
Chashtana as Kshatrapa, his reign as Kshatrapa, his accession and rule 
as a Mahakshatrapa, (4) :he accession and reign of Chashtana’s son Jaya- 
daman as Kshatrapa, and perhaps also his rule as Great Satrap, and 
(5) Rudradaman’s accession and the beginning of his reign. We are not 
bound, however, to regard these events as successive, and some of them 
can easily be presumed to have been concurrent. The acceptance of the 
year 46 as the the last date of Nahapana is highly probable, and Chashtana 
might have been entrusted immediately by the central power with the task 
of retrieving the fallen fortunes of the foreigners. Unlike Nahapana’s, 
his rule as Kshatrapa could have been very short so that he stepped into 
the office of Mahakshatrapa soon after his accession. During his rule 
as Mahakshatrapa, he might have been associated first with his son Jaya- 
daman dnd then with his grandson Rudradaman. W'e have no dated 
coins of Chashtana, and the year 52 is the only known date for him. The 
Andhau records which contain this date refer to the joint rule of Chash- 
tana and Rudradaman, the former presumably as Mahakshatrapa and 


Konow now reads it as 76. Konow’s 
reading would further complicate the 
chronology of Nahapana; it has led him 
to suggest that ‘there were for sometime 
two Mahakshatrapas’, Mahakshatrapa 
Rudradaman and Mahakshatrapa Na- 


hapana, and the latter was the uncle of 
Chashtana, Rudradaman’s grandfather. 
This would necessitate the assumption 
that Rudradaman was ruling contem- 
poraneously with the uncle of his grand- 
father which is absurd. 



nahapana’s date 


277 


the latter as Kshatrapa. Andhau (a place in Cutch) was certainly in 
the possession of these two in the year 52, but this does not prove that 
Chashtana and his associate had made themselves masters of the bulk 
of the lost dominions of the Kshaharatas at so early a date . This was 
only possible for Rudradaman at a later period, as we learn from his 
Junagadh inscription of the year 72 (a.d. 150) ; and it was between the 
years 52 and 72 (a.d. 130-150) that these reconquests were made. Jaya- 
daman, sometime Kshatrapa associate of his father must have prede- 
ceased Chashtana, a fact to be inferred not only from the Andhau inscrip- 
tions, but also from the consideration that the coins issued by him were 
all of copper, none containing his bust. Had he intervened as Maha- 
kshatrapa between his father andhisson, we should have expected to find 
that he issued silver coins, and that too, with his bust and the 
higher title. The Gunda and Jasdhan inscriptions of the later Maha- 
kshatrapas, Rudrasirhha I and Rudrasena I describe him simply as a 
Kshatrapa, though Chashtana and Rudradaman are both described as 
Mahakshatrapa and Bhadramukha. Again, the title raja which occurs on 
Jayadaman’s coins (Rdjtio Kshatrapasa Svami Jayadamasa) is denied him in 
the Andhau inscriptions which do not fail to associate it with the names 
of his father and his son {rajha Chashtanasa Y samotikaputrasa rajna 
Rudradamasa Jayadamaputrasa). If Rudradaman did not inherit the title 
Mahakshatrapa from his father (because the latter never ruled in that 
capacity), this is likely to be one of the reasons why he is described in the 
Junagadh inscription as ‘having obtained Mahakshatrapaship by himself’ 
(. svayamadhigatamahakshatrapanama ). On this line of reasoning we may 
obviate most of the difficulties raised by critics against the view that the 
dates in the inscriptions which mention the name of Nahapana are to be 
referred to the &aka era. These critics would refer the dates in the Naha- 
pana records either to the Vikrama era or to Nahapana’s regnal years, 
Nahapana having enjoyed a long rule; or alternatively they take refuge 
in the supposition that there was more than one Nahapana, and that the 
large number of silver coins bearing this name are to be divided between 
the first Nahapana and his supposed descendants owning the same 
name. 3 

It was suggested by K. Gopalachari not long ago that on Rapson’s 
view an interval of more than three years betweeh Nahapana and Cha- 
shtana cannot be postulated and ‘even taking for granted that Nahapana 
was defeated in the year 46 itself (a.d. 124-25), we are led to the paradoxi- 
cal conclusion that a year after the rooting out of the Khakharata race 
and the destruction of the Sakas, Pahlavas and Yavanas, Chashtana was 


For Rapson’s view, cf. BMC A WK. pp. 
xxvi-xxvii. For D. R. Bhandarkar’s 
view, cf. IA. 1918, pp. 76-8; Bhandar- 
kar maintained that Nahapana was a 
viceroy not only of Kadphises II, 
but also of Kadphises I. For the 
criticism of Rapson’s and Bhandar- 


kar’s views, cf. R. D. Banerjee, JRAS. 
1917, pp. 273-89; JRAS. 1925, pp. 
1-19; G Jouveau-Dubreuil, Ancient 
History of the Deccan, pp. 20-5; K. 
A. N. Sastri, JRAS. 1926, pp. 643-65. 
For Raychaudhuri’s views in support 
of Rapson, cf. PH A if pp- 405-9 



278 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


on the scene avenging the Saka defeat.’ But there is no inherent im- 
probability in an immediate attempt by the foreign rulers to reassert their 
power, and it may be assumed that they began the reconquest of their 
dominions from the west. In the case of Chashtana and Rudradaman 
it was presumably an expansion of their power from the west to the east, 
and by a.d. 140 they might have conquered up to the western parts of 
Malwa where Ujjain was situated. Ptolemy (c. a.d. 140) refers to Tia- 
stenes, king of Ozene, as a contemporary of Siro-Ptolemaios whose capi- 
tal was Baithana (Paithan, ancient Pratishthana, on the Godavari). 
These two have been identified with Chashtana and Siri Pujumayi, the 
son of Gautamlputra Satakarni. It is likely that the northern parts of 
the Satavahana conquests were gradually lost by Pujumayi to Chashtana 
and Rudradaman and that by ad 150, the date of the Junagadh inscrip- 
tion of Rudradaman, most, if not all, of the northern conquests of the 
Satavahanas had been recovered by the Western Kshatrapas. A critical 
study of the place-names recorded in the inscriptions of UshavadSta 
(Nasik), Gotami Balasrl (Nasik) and Rudradaman (Junagadh) would 
show at once that Rudradaman could certainly not have recovered the 
entire dominions of Nahapana; for the ahara of Govardhana which was 
in the possession of Nahapana, as is clear from the Nasik inscription 
of his son-in-law. never came into the hands of Rudradaman. Moreover, 
Aparanta (Northern Konkan) which was reconquered by Rudradaman 
seems to have been lost again shortly afterwards, for Gautamlputra Yajnasri 
Satakarni, on the evidence of his Sopara coins, can be presumed to have 
made himself master of that region. One more point to be noted is that 
Gotami Balasri’s enumeration of her son’s conquests was made in the 
19th regnal year of her grandson Vasishthlputra Pujumayi, and is not 
proof in itself that all these conquests were still in Vasishthlputra’s full 
possession. It is likely enough that Gautamlputra had already been dead 
for some time, and that his mother was recounting the glorious achieve- 
ments of her departed son. There is certainly no reason to suppose that 
Gautamlputra Satakarni was still alive at that time and was ruling con- 
jointly with his son Vasishthlputra Pujumayi, as has been supposed by 
R. G. Bhandarkar and D. R. Bhandarkar. 

Nahapana by all appearances enjoyed quite a long reign which proba- 
bly commenced some time in the last quarter of the first century a.d. and 
continued up to a.d. 124, though it could not have extended much beyond 
that year. 1 The coins and most of the inscriptions show that he enjoyed 
the titles Raja and Kshatrapa for the major part of his royal career, adop- 
ting the higher title of Mahakshatrapa only in his last years . The pros- 
perity of his reign is proved by the large number of silver coins issued 
by him and the apparently wide extent of his kingdom. 2 The inscriptions 

1 See, however, ch. x below. ety’s Journal suggested that the heads 

2 The coins are characterised by the were imitations of the heads of some 

variegated nature of the royal bust. Roman emperors on their coins from 30 

The Editor of the Royal Asiatic Soci- B.c.toA.D. 150 (JRAS. 1908, p. 551). 



N'AHAPANA AND SATAVAHANAS 


279 


of his son-in-law and general, Ushavadata, record the latter’s bene- 
factions in places which were presumably included in Nahapana’s realm. 
Not only did Southern Gujarat, Northern Konkan from Broach to 
Sopara, and the Nasik and Poona districts form parts of his dominion; 
but it must have stretched much farther norths Surashtra (Kathiawar), 
Kukura a region in the south of Rajputana) Akara (East Malwa) and 
Avanti (Western Malwa) and even Pushkara in Ajmer in Central Rajputa- 
na were also incorporated in his kingdom. Many of these places were 
wrested from him afterwards by the grdat Satavahana ruler, Gautamlputra 
Satakarni. It is probable that at the zenith of his power, just before 
his defeat, portions of Southern Maharashtra (originally in the posses- 
sion of the Satavahanas) had to be reconquered by Gautamlputra. 
The author of the Periplus expressly says that Ariake (really Apa- 
ratike, the Greek equivalent of Aparanta, i.e., Northern Konkan) was in- 
cluded in Nambanus’s realm and that ‘the Greek ships entering the 
Satavahana port of Kalyan were diverted to Barygaza.’ 1 The writer also 
tells us the name of the capital of Nambanus (Nahapana). It was one of the 
two cities named Minnagara, one situated in the delta of the Indus in Sind, 
and the other an inland Minnagara, evidently the capital of Nambanus, 
situated according to Ptolemy two degrees east and two degrees north of 
Barygaza. It has been variously identified by scholars; Bhandar- 
kar’s suggestion that it is modern Mandasor (ancient Dasapura) is proba- 
ble, though later Jaina tradition, as has been shown by Jayaswal, describes 
Bharukachchha as the metropolis of the Kshaharata king. 2 D. R. Bhandar- 
kar says that the other three cities of the north-western Deccan, Sorparaga 
(modern Sopara), Govardhana (near Nasik) and Bharukachchha (modem 
Broach, classical Barygaza) must have been each the headquarters of a 
district in Nahapana’s empire. Other headquarters of divisions in his 
empire may have been Junnar, Ujjain and Chikhalapadra of the ahara 
(division) of Kapur; the last is probably modern Chikhali, the principal 
town of a taluk in the Surat District. Traditions of the immense wealth of 
Nahapana were current in the seventh century a.d., for Jinadasagani, while 
commenting on a gat ha of the Jaina work Avasyakasiitraniryukti said to 
have been composed by Bhadrabahu (between 58 b.c. and a.d. 150), says 
that ‘Nahavahana (in the original gatha the form is Nahavana, which is 
evidently correct) ruling at Bharukachchha possessed immense treasure; 
he was a contemporary of Salavahana who ruled at Paithana (ancient Pra- 
tishthana, modern Paithan on the Godavari) and possessed an immense 
army.’ The Jaina commentator also refers to the frequent attacks made 
by Satavahana on Nahavana’s capital, Bharukachchha, which Satava- 
hana conquered in the end. 3 

1 K. Gopalachari, Early History of the 1912, p. 788; Jayaswal suggests Broach. 

Andhra Country , p. 50 ancient Bhrigukachchha, as the more 

a IA. 1918, p. 78. Fleet identifies Minna- likely site of the capital of Nahapana 

gara with the present township of 3 JBORS. xvt, 1930, p. 288 

Dohad in the Panch Mahals, JRAS. 



280 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


SATRAPS OF UJJAYINI 

CHASHTANA AND HIS IMMEDIATE SUCCESSORS 

Much has already been said about Chashtana, his son Jayadaman and 
his grandson Rudradaman, while discussing the chronology of Nahapana. 
It seems that immediately after the defeat, and probably the death, of 
Nahapana, Chashtana, the son of Ysamotika, was authorised by the cen- 
tral power to recover the lost satrapal possessions. He may have been as- 
sociated in this task from the very first with Jayadaman and Rudradaman. 
His son predeceased him while holding the office of Kshatrapa under his 
father; but his grandson’s association with him, most probably as Ksha- 
trapa, up to the year a.d. 130 and for some time after is proved by the An- 
dhau inscriptions and other data. Chashtana probably won early success 
in his struggle with the Satavahanas, if we may judge by his adoption of 
the three-arched symbol with the crescent on top (supposed to stand for 
a chaitya or a mountain), which was one of the characteristic coin devices 
of the Andhras. This initial success probably came to him when he was 
still a Kshatrapa, for the symbol first makes its appearance on the 
variety of silver coins which he issued in that capacity. The same sym- 
bol appears not only on all the silver coins which were issued by him as 
a Mahakshatrapa, but also on the silver money of the subsequent genera- 
tions of the Western Kshatrapas ; it stands invariably on the reverse, 
in addition to the star and crescent. The obverse of Chashtana’s coins 
bears his bust which may be a portrait ; the headgear resembles that 
shown on the coins of Nahapana. Chashtana alone among the members 
of his line uses the three scripts, Greek, KharoshthI and Brahml in his coin 
legends, though the first two very soon lost their importance. Kharosh- 
thI is used merely to transcribe the name of the satrap, while the Greek or 
Graeco-Roman legend is corrupt and fragmentary. KharoshthI soon 
disappeared completely from the coin legends of his successors, while 
the lingering traces of the Graeco-Roman legends, before long, took the 
appearance of ornamental scrolls around the margin. These numismatic 
features are further proof of the gradual indianisation of the foreign 
rulers. 

Chashtana established a royal and at the same time satrapal line which 
continued without interruption up to the beginning of the fourth century' 
a.d. (c. 304). The legend on the coins of each of his successors records 
the name and official title (Kshatrapa or Mahakshatrapa) of the father 
of the issuer, and this feature alone enables us to fix the succession with 
some precision. Each successor of Chashtana up to this date (a.d. 304), 
as Rapson remarks, ‘was the son of a prince who had ruled before him 
either as Mahakshatrapa or Kshatrapa.’ Chashtana and his descendants 
ruled over parts of Western India for about 175 years, at the end of which 
period there occurred a temporary eclipse of the satrapal power. As re- 
gards the duration of Chashtana’s rule, nothing can be said with certainty, 
but the end must be placed somewhere between a.d. 140 and 150. That 



RUDRADAMAN 


281 


he was reigning c. a.d. 140 is proved by the reference to Tiastenes 
and his capital Ozene in Ptolemy’s Geography. 

Jayadaman predeceased his father, having ruled for a little while under 
him in the capacity of a Kshatrapa. He issued no silver coins, and this 
itself is a proof of the ephemeral character of his satrapal dignity. His 
career must have closed before a.d. 130, by which date we see his son 
Rudradaman associated most probably as a Kshatrapa with his grand- 
father Chashtana. Chashtana and Rudradaman seem to have ruled 
conjointly for some time; recovering many of the territories conquered 
by the Satavahanas, until this contest became the sole responsibility of the 
Great Satrap Rudradaman. He was not unequal to it, for, as we know 
from his Junagadh inscription of the S. E. 72 (a.d. 150), he twice defeated 
Satakarni, Lord of the Deccan ( Dakshinapathapati ) but did not destroy 
him completely for the reason of the ‘not remote’ relationship existing 
between them. There is some doubt about the identity of this vanquished 
rival and relation of Rudradaman. Rapson identifies him with Vasish- 
thiputra Pujumayi, and further says that the VasishthTputra Sri Satakarni 
recorded in one of the Kanheri inscriptions (where his queen is described 
as the daughter of the Mahakshatrapa Rudra and as descended from the 
family of the Karddamaka kings), was also identical with this Satavahana 
monarch. On this view, VasishthTputra Pujumayi would be the son-in- 
law of Rudradaman arid at the same time his enemy. D. R. Bhandarkar, 
however, suggests that Rudradaman’s rival was no other than Gau- 
tamlputra Satakarni himself, one of whose sons, VasishthTputra Siva Sri 
Satakarni, was the son-in-law of the Great Satrap Rudra mentioned in 
the Kanheri records; this would explain why the relationship is called 
‘not remote’ ( sambandhavidurata ). K. Gopalachari, on the other hand, 
identifies the Satakarni of the Junagadh inscription with one of the suc- 
cessors of Siva Sri Satakarni mentioned in the Puranic lists, namely Siva- 
maka (Sivaskanda) Satakarni, probably a brother or a nephew of Siva 
Sri Satakarni. 1 The question of the identity of Rudradaman’s son-in-law, 
as well as that of his rival cannot be said to have been satisfactorily 
answered as yet; but with regard to Rapson’s suggestion that VasishthTputra 
Pujumayi was the son-in-law of the Great Satrap, it may be pointed out, 
with K. A. Nilakanta Sastri,‘that it is improbable that Pujumayi, who accor- 
ding to Ptolemy was a contemporary of Chashtana, married the latter’s 
great-grand-daughter.’ The Satakarpi of the Junagadh record need not 
be the same as the VasishthTputra Srl-Satakarni of the Kanheri inscrip- 
tion; he was more probably a son of Gautamlputra Satakarni, perhaps 
much younger than his more important brother VasishthTputra Pujumayi. 

The Junagadh inscription of Rudradaman records the substantial re- 
pair of the dam of the Sudarsana lake which had burst during a violent 
storm. The lake was originally constructed under the orders of the 

1 For Rapson’s view cf. BMCA WK. achari’s observations, cf. Early History 

p. xxxviii: for Bhandarkar’s opinion, of the Andhra Country, p. 54 
cf. IA. 1918, pp. 154-5; for K. Gopal- 
36 



282 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


Vaisya Pushyagupta, the provincial governor of the Maurya king Chan- 
dragupta. It was afterwards furnished with conduits, for better facility of 
irrigation, by the Yavanaraja Tushaspha, the governor of the province 
during the time of Asoka. During Rudradaman’s rule it was heavily da- 
maged by a storm and thought to be beyond repair by some of his 
counsellors. Nevertheless, under his orders the repairs were very suc- 
cessfully carried out ‘by the minister Suvisakha, the son of Kulaipa, a 
Pahlava, who . . . had been appointed by the king in this government 
to rule the whole of Anarta and Surashtra.’ The place-names occurring 
in this inscription, in spite of some difficulties of identification, show that 
Rudradaman’s rule ‘extended over (1 and 2) Eastern and Western Malwa, 
(3) a district on the upper Narmada south of Malwa and on the other side 
of the Vindhya range, probably the region round ancient Mahishmatl, 
modem Mandhata, (4 and 5) the country around the Gulf of Cambay and 
Kathiawar, (6) Northern Gujarat, (7) a portion of Marwar in Rajputana, 
(8) Cutch, (9 and 10) Sind and some adjacent portion of Western Rajpu- 
tana (S. W. Marwar), (11) Northern Konkan, and (12) Nishada (uncer- 
tain).’ 1 This list shows that most of the provinces ruled over by the 
Kshaharata Nahapana had been recovered by Rudradaman. It is also 
likely that many of the subordinate rulers once ruling under Nahapana 
and dispossessed of their respective territories by Gautamiputra Sata- 
karni were reinstated by Rudradaman; for he is described in the record 
as ‘the restorer of kings who had been deprived of their kingdoms’ (bhra- 
shta-rajapratishthapaka). He also conquered the Yaudheyas who are 
described in the inscriptions as ‘loath to submit, rendered proud as they 
were by having manifested their title of heroes among all Kshatriyas’; 
he evidently regarded his conquest of this martial tribe of ancient India 
as a great feat of valour. He is described as ‘having won for himself the 
title of the Mahakshatrapa' (svayamadhigatamahakshatrapanama). This 
and the other fact mentioned in the inscription that ‘he was resorted to by 
all castes and chosen as their lord to protect them ( sarvva-varnair-abhi - 
gamya rakshan-artham-patitve vritena ) might indicate, as H. C. Raychau- 
dhuri has suggested, ‘that the power of his house had been shaken by some 
enemy (possibly Gautamiputra), and he had to restore the supreme sa- 
trapal dignity by his own prowess.’ 2 Another reason for describing 
his superior title as self-won might have been that he did not inherit it from 
his father. 

He coined extensively in silver, and the legends on these coins invari- 
ably denote him as Mahakshatrapa, no coins issued by him in the satrapal 
capacity being known. He had two sons, Damaghsada and Rudra- 
simha, and one daughter who was marridd to a Satavahana prince. The 


Rapson, op. cit., p. cxix. The line 
11 of the inscription gives us all the 
names: 1 &2 .Purw-apar-Akaravanti; 3. 
Anupariivrid; 4 & 5. Anarta-Sura- 

shfra; 6. Sva(bh)ra; 7. ( Ma)ru ; 8. 


C Kac)cha ; 9 & 10. (S)i(n)dhu-S(au)- 
v{J)ra-Kukura; 11. Aparamta; 12. Nisha- 
da Kielhorn, El. vm p. 44 
•PHAI* p.424 



JIVADAMAN 


283 


royal busts on his coins, if they are portraits, show a man of vivacious 
and cheerful disposition, marked with a strong stamp of individuality and 
vigour. The Junagadh inscription attributes to him a beautiful body charac- 
terised by the most excellent marks and signs ( paramalakshana-vycmjanair 
upeta-kantamurti). It also informs us that the Mahakshatrapa had earn- 
ed great fame by the study of the various sciences, grammar, polity, music, 
logic etc. He was not an exacting ruler, and the vast amount of money 
spent in works of public utility such as the repair of the Sudarsana embank- 
ment was drawn from his own treasury ‘without oppressing the people 
of the town and of the province by exacting taxes (kara), forced labour 
( yishti ), benevolences ( pranaya ) and the like.’ This enlightened ruler who 
was chosen by men of all castes as their protector, was assisted by an able 
band of ministers of two orders — matisachivas (counsellors) and karmasa- 
chivas (executive officers) — in the work of administration. Rudradaman 
was thus one of the most outstanding personalities of ancient India. 
Like Nahapana, he seems to have had a long rule, for there is reason to 
believe that he lived for a good many years after a.d. 150. 

RUDRADlMAN’S SUCCESSORS 

Damaghsada appears to have been associated with his father during the 
latter period of his rule, and served as a Kshatrapa for some time before 
he succeeded him as Mahakshatrapa. A good many silver coins issued by 
him in the subordinate capacity have been found; these are usually divi- 
ded into three varieties on the basis of their legends. The legends show 
distinct attempts at sanskritising the Prakrit language in which they were 
written, and the outlandish name of the issuer is partially indianised into 
Damajada-sri. His place in the Western Kshatrapa genealogy is known 
only from his silver coins, for like his sons JIvadaman and Satyadaman, 
he finds no place in the genealogical tables recited in the inscriptions of his 
brother Rudrasimha I and of his nephew Rudrasena I. This omission 
may have no special significance; these tables often put down only the 
direct descent from father to son. But Rapson thinks that the name of 
Damaghsada as well as those of his two sons were purposely omitted in 
the Gunda and Jasdhan inscriptions of the years 103 and 127, recorded 
by Rudrasimha I and his grandson Rudrasena I respectively. He supposes 
that there was a war of succession for the Mahakshatrapaship, after 
Damaghsada’s death, between his son JIvadaman and his brother Rudra- 
simha I. We shall see presently that there are no sure grounds for this sup- 
position. Very little is known about this Great Satrap; but it is probable 
that his rule as Mahakshatrapa extended to as late a period as the year 
103 (a.d. 181), when his brother Rudrasimha I was a Kshatrapa. 

RUDRASIMHA I AS KSHATRAPA AND MAHAKSHATRAPA 
THE ABHIRA MAHAKSHATRAPA ISVARADATTA 
JIVADAMAN AS MAHAKSHATRAPA 
Rapson suggests that Damaghsada was succeeded as Mahakshatrapa, 



284 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


by his son Jivadaman who ruled in that capacity for a little while and was 
soon deprived of this office by his uncle Rudrasimha I. It is known that 
the latter was Kshatrapa in the years 102 and 103 (a.d. 180-181) (cf. his 
silver coins dated 102 and the Gunda inscription dated 103). Two other 
groups of his dated silver coins show that he was ruling as Mahakshatrapa 
from 103 (presumably the latter part ) to 110 S.E. (a.d. 181-88) for (he 
first time, and for the second time from 113 to 118 or 119 (a.d. 191-196 
or 197). During the period extending from a part of 110 to 112 (a.d. 
188-190), he held the rank of Kshatrapa for the second time. We have 
clear numismatic data to show that his nephew Jivadaman was Mahaksha- 
trapa during S.E. 1 19-120 (a.d. 197-198). The only evidence of Jivadaman 
being Mahakshatrapa before his uncle’s first tenure of this office is fur- 
nished, according to Rapson, by a single silver coin of Jivadaman, which 
contains a date behind the royal head where the hundred figure is distinct, 
and which seems stylistically earlier in point of date than Jlvadaman’s 
second group of coins. On this numismatic datum alone Rapson surmised 
that there was a struggle for succession between Jivadaman and Rudrasimha 
I after Damaghsada’s death in which fortune favoured the rivals intermit- 
tently. According to Rapson’s view, Rudrasimha became Mahaksha- 
trapa for the first time after he had deprived his nephew of the office. 
It was his nephew again who presumably reduced him to the rank of lower 
dignity during the years 110 to 112, himself assuming the superior office. 
Then Rudrasimha managed to oust his rival and make himself Maha- 
kshatrapa for the second time in the year 113, retaining the title until 118 
or the early part of 119. 

This hypothesis thus principally rests upon a single coin of Jivadaman 
issued in the capacity of Mahakshatrapa and bearing a date in which 
the hundred figure alone is legible. Rapson places this coin very near the 
issues of his father on account of its partially Sanskrit legend; but the same 
feature is also to be found on variety b of the coins which Rudrasimha I 
issued as Mahakshatrapa for the second time. Thus it is not at all 
certain that this coin of Jivadaman was issued before 103, the date when 
Rudrasimha I became Mahakshatrapa for the first time. The only ground 
for that suggestion is that the bust on it resembles that of a youthful per- 
son and differs somewhat from the bust on the other coins issued by Ji- 
vadaman as Mahakshatrapa during the years 119 and 120. It is a long 
gap between 102 or 103 and 1 19, but not a single coin issued by Jivadaman 
as Mahakshatrapa dated in the years 1 1 1 and 1 12 has as yet been dis- 
covered. If Jivadaman had been responsible for thrusting his uncle to 
the position of lower dignity during those two years, he must have issued 
coins in the capacity of a Mahakshatrapa during that period. We have no 
evidence that Jivadaman ruled as a Kshatrapa during his uncle’s two 
tenures of the higher office. These and other considerations must make us 
sceptical of Rapson’s theory. D. R. Bhandarkar long ago suggested that 
the lowering of Rudrasimha’s position during these two years was 
due to the temporary usurpation of the higher office by the Abhlra 



ABHIRAS 


285 


Mahakshatrapa Isvaradatta who ruled exactly for two years. That the 
Abhlras were enjoying some political power and importance in the time of 
Rudrasimha I is proved by the Gunda inscription, which records a dona- 
tion made at the village of Rasopadra by the general Rudrabhuti, son of 
the Abhira general Bahaka. Bahaka might have been serving as a general 
during the time of Damaghsada and his son Rudrabhuti was also employ- 
ed in the same rank. It is very likely that Isvaradatta was another im- 
portant person in the court, and was scheming and ambitious; that he 
managed to manipulate affairs in such a way as to keep his master away 
from the throne for at least two years, who, however, later managed to 
recover it. This view is made more likely by the absence of any suitable 
gap occurring after Rudrasimha I where the two years’ rule of the 
Abhira usurper can be made to fit in. Rapson placed Isvaradatta between 
the Mahakshatrapaship of Damasena whose last known date is 158, and 
that of Yasodaman, his son, whose only date in his Mahakshatrapa 
coins known in Rapson’s time was 161. Thus Rapson assigned the two 
years 159 and 160 to Isvaradatta. But among the hoard of Kshatrapa 
coins found by D. R. Bhandarkar at Sarvania (Banswara State, Rajpu- 
tana), there was a coin of Mahakshatrapa Yasodaman dated in the year 
160. Bhandarkar has shown good reasons, palaeographical and stylistic, 
for grouping Isvaradatta’s coins with those of Rudrasimha I. Isvaradatta 
has been described by every scholar as an Abhira. The existence of 
another Abhira king Isvarasena, son of Sivadatta, in the Nasik region at 
about the same or a slightly later period, is established by an inscription 
in cave x at Nasik, and this is another proof of the great predominance 
of the Abhlras at this epoch. 1 

The custom by which, on the death of a Mahakshatrapa the deceased’s 
brother succeeded to the office, became quite common for a while after 
the reign of Rudrasena I. This is plain from a study of the genealogical 
table of several of the Western Satraps. The custom may well have been 
adopted as early as the time of Rudrasimha I. Rudrasimha I’s only bro- 
ther was Damaghsada who had already held the office; so after the death 
of Rudrasimha, his nephew JIvadaman ascended the throne in 119 (a.d. 
197). No Kshatrapa coins of JIvadaman have as yet been discovered ; 
probably he never ruled as Kshatrapa. He had a brother, most likely 
older than himself, Satyadaman by name, who may have served as a Ksha- 
trapa under their father Damaghsada. If so, the early date of Satyada- 
man’s Satrapy is rendered likely by the fact that the legend on his unique 
silver coin is in almost perfect Sanskrit (rajfio mahakshatrapasya Dama- 
jadasriyaputrasya rajfio kshatrapasya Satyadamna ), like the legends on 
several of the coins issued by his father, when Kshatrapa or Mahaksha- 
trapa. His tenure of office seems to have been very short ; possibly he 
predeceased his father. JIvadaman may have had no son of his own, 
and his cousin Rudrasena I, son of Rudrasimha I, succeeded him with the 


ASIAR. 1913-14, pp. 227-45, Bhandarkar, ‘Kshatrapa Coins from Sarvania’. 



286 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


rank of Mahakshatrapa. 1 Rudrasena served as Kshatrapa in the year 
121 (a.d. 199) and possibly also during the early part of 122, from which 
date up to the year 144 (a.d. 222) he enjoyed the superior office. In an 
inscription dated in the year 122, found beside a tank at Mufwasar (Mula- 
vasara), a village in the Baroda territory of Okhamandal, Rudrasena 
is given the epithets raja mahakshatrapa svami. Thus, he had become 
Mahakshatrapa, as early as 122 (a.d. 200), though the earliest dated coins 
issued by him as Mahakshatrapa belong to the year 125 (a.d. 203). The 
other inscription mentioning the name of this Great Satrap found at Jas- 
dan in the north of Kathiawar bears a date either 126 or 127. It exhibits 
the longest genealogical table known of the Western Kshatrapas, though 
mentioning only the names of the Mahakshatrapas in direct descent. 
It is interesting that the title Bhadramukha (‘gracious’) is applied in it to 
all Rudrasena’s ancestors except Jayadaman who never attained the rank 
of Great Satrap, having predeceased his father. 

Rudrasena’s reign was spread over a period of 22 years (a.d. 200-22). 
He issued silver coins as a Kshatrapa, in the early part of his career, pos- 
sibly under his cousin the Mahakshatrapa Jivadaman, in the year 121, 
but from the year 122 to 144, his coins describe him as Mahakshatrapa. 
Some potin coins found in Mahva, bearing the dates 131 and 135 but 
without any name, appear to have been his issues. The provenances of the 
inscriptions and of his coins seem to show that Malwa, Gujarat, Kathia- 
war and parts of Western Rajputana owed allegiance to him; but as 
regards Northern Konkan, there is numismatic evidence to show that 
it was wrested from the grip of the Great Satraps, probably during Dama- 
ghsada’s time, by the great Satavahana monarch Gautamlputra Srl-Yajna 
Satakarni, several of whose silver coins found at Sopara are plainly an 
imitation of the style of the Western Satraps. It has already been shown 
that the Nasik region (Northern Maharashtra), once in the occupation 
of the royal Satrap, the Kshaharata Nahapana, was conquered by the 
Satavahana monarch Gautamlputra Satakarni and could not be recovered 
either by Chashtana or by Rudradaman. __ At the beginning of the third 
century a.d., or slightly earlier, when the Satavahana power was fast de- 
clining, it was held by an Abhlra king, Isvarasena, son of the Abhlra Siva- 
datta. The previous Saka occupation had nevertheless left a strong Saka 
impress, as we see from the inscription (in cave No. x at Nasik) where the 
name of the Abhlra king occurs and the donor is described as ‘the female 
lay- worshipper Vishnudatta, daughter of the Saka Agnivarman, wife of 
the Ganapaka Rebhila and mother of the Ganapaka Visvavarman.’ 2 


’A. S. Altekar presents the chronology 
of this period of the Western Kshatra- 
pa rule in a different manner. Ac- 
cording to him, Jivadaman succeeded 
his father Damaghsada as Mahaksha- 
trapa c. a.d. 175 immediately after the 
latter’s death. Altekar supports Rap- 
son’s hypothesis of a civil war between 
Jivadaman and his ambitious uncle 


Rudrasimha I, but endorses D. R. 
Bhandarkar’s view, that the degrada- 
tion of Rudrasimha I in the years 
110 and _1 1 1 (a.d. 178-179) was due 
to the Abhira usurper Isvaradatta: 
cf. NHIP. vi pp. 47-9 
ASWl. iv p. 104; Liiders, List 1137. 
Biihler takes Ganapaka in the sense 
of a ‘protector or leader of a gana 



SANGHADAMAN 


287 


Rudrasena appears to have ruled over his vast realm from UjjayinI in Western 
Malwa (Avanti), which was also the royal seat of Chashtana. The poli- 
tical influence of the Western Satraps was still very high in his time and 
matrimonial alliances with them were sought by chiefs and rulers far and 
near. A red clay sealing, the impress of an oval seal (1 1/8" Xl"), unear- 
thed at Basarh (ancient Vaisall) by D. B. Spooner, has a Brahml inscrip- 
tion which means ‘(the seal) of the great queen Prabhudama, sister of the 
king, the Mahakshatrapa Svami Rudrasena, and daughter of the king, 
the Mahakshatrapa Svami Rudrasimha’ ( rajiio mahakshatrapasya svami 
Rudrasiriihasya duhitu rajiio mahakshatrapasya svami Rudrascnasya bha- 
ginya mahadevya Prabhudamayah). 1 It is not known whose Maha- 
devl (chief queen) this Prabhudama, sister of Rudrasena I and daughter 
of Rudrasimha I, was, for her husband’s name is omitted in the seal. 
A. S. Altekar says, ‘It is not unlikely that he was either a hitherto unknown 
Hindu ruler of Eastern India, who had married a Scythian princess, or a 
Hinduised Kushan chief, ruling over a small principality in Magadha, which 
had survived the collapse of the Kushan empire.’ 2 Whoever he was, in 
political importance he certainly compared unfavourably with Rudrasena 
and Rudrasimha, for his chief queen preferred to recite her paternal con- 
nection and not her husband’s name. An inscription of the sixth regnal 
year of the Ikshvaku monarch Vlrapurushadatta (c. 3rd century a.d.) re- 
cords the gift of a stone pillar in the mahachaitva at Nagarjunakonda by 
MahadevI Rudradharabhattarika who is described as Uj(e)nika mahara- 
( ja)balika (a royal princess from UjjayinI). Virapurushadatta had five 
queens, and the donor of the record was one of them; she appears to have 
been related either to Rudrasena I or Rudrasena II, both of whom flourish- 
ed in the third century a.d . 3 

SUCCESSORS OF RUDRASENA 1 

SANGHADAMAN AND DAMASENA 

The mode of succession, a brother stepping into the office on the death 
of the ruling Mahakshatrapa, which seems to have been tentatively adopted 
after the death of Damaghsada, became the established practice for a while 
with the Western Satraps from Rudrasena's time. He had two sons, 
Prithivlsena and DamajadasrI by name, but neither of them succeeded to 
his office. It was his brother Sanghadaman who became the next Maha- 
kshatrapa. Sanghadaman enjoyed this office for two years only or even 
less, for his silver coins are all dated in the years (S.E.) 144 or 145. He 
could not have held the office after the expiry of a few months of the latter 
year, for coins of the next Mahakshatrapa Damasena, another brother 
of Rudrasena I, bearing the date 145 have been discovered. Altekar 

which consists of three gulmas or 1 ASIAR. 1913-14, p. 136 

battalions, and may be taken as an 2 NHIP. vi p. 51 & n. 

equivalent of colonel or brigadier- 3 El. xx p. 4; D. C. Sircar, Successors 
general.’ of the Sdtavahanas, p. 23 



288 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


supposes that Sanghadaman may have met a premature death while fighting 
against the Malavas of the Ajmer-Udaipur region. His hypothesis rests 
on the YQpa inscriptions found at Nandsa in Udaipur territory, Rajpu- 
tana, which record the performance of an important sacrifice by the Malava 
chief Soma to celebrate the liberation of his country. An inscription of 
the same chief, dated in a.d. 226, refers to his many exploits and though his 
enemies are not mentioned there by name, Altekar thinks that these could 
have been no other than the Western Kshatrapas. It is doubtful whether 
Sanghadaman himself was the enemy of this Malava chief whose vanquish- 
ed enemies might have been some other adversaries nearer to the Udai- 
pur region. 1 Prithivisena, probably the elder son of Rudrasena I, enjoyed 
the subordinate office for a little while either during the last year of his 
father or the first year of his uncle Sanghadaman, and not under Dama- 
sena as Altekar supposes. His coins are extremely rare and bear the date 
144 only. Damasena, who succeeded his brother Sanghadaman as Maha- 
kshatrapa in the year 145, held the office for a longer period, the dates 
on his coins falling between 145 and 158. Damajada II, presumably the 
second son of Damasena’s eldest brother Rudrasena I, was a Kshatrapa 
during the first part of Damasena's rule as Mahakshatrapa; his silver coins 
dated in the years 154 and 155 are known. During Damasena’s last few 
years as Mahakshatrapa the lower office was held by the eldest of his sons, 
Viradaman, who issued silver coins in that capacity during the years 156 
to 160. But he was not to succeed Damasena to the higher office. This 
passed instead to Yasodaman, the next son of Damasena. We may 
presume that Damasena continued to rule as Mahakshatrapa until the 
beginning of the year 160, when two of his sons Viradaman and Yasoda- 
man I, held successively the office of Kshatrapa. But no coins issued 
during these two years by Damasena as a Mahakshatrapa have yet been 
discovered. 


DAMASENA'S SUCCESSORS 

Damasena had four sons, Viradaman, Yasodaman I, Vijayasena and 
DamajadasrI III. Of these Viradaman was the eldest, but he did not reach 
the higher office. Probably he died prematurely. His next brother Yaso- 
daman succeeded to the lower office in the year 160, as some silver coins 
of that date issued by him when Kshatrapa (presumably under his father 
Damasena) sufficiently prove. Yasodaman became Mahakshatrapa in 
the same year, probably on the death of his father; for the Sarvania hoard 
of coins already referred to includes two silver coins dated 160 (a.d. 238) 
a date not previously read on any other of his Mahakshatrapa coins. This 
discovery was one of the several reasons which led D. R. Bhandarkar to 

1 Altekar, op. cit., p. 52. D. R. Bhandarkar p. 232). But there must be some 

refers to a coin of Sanghadaman mistake in the reading of the date here, 

as Mahakshatrapa with the date 149 for Damasena was holding the office 

in the collection of the Watson at that time. 

Museum, Rajkot ( ASIAR . 1913-14, 





VIJAYASENA AND DAMAJADASRI 


289 


question Rapson’s placing of the Abhlra intruder, the Mahakshatrapa 
Isvaradatta who ruled exactly for two years, and who has been very rea- 
sonably assigned to a period about half a century before Yasodaman I. 
Yasodaman I had a very short rule, roughly about two years (part of 160 
and the earlier part of 161) during which his next brother Yijayasena was 
the Kshatrapa. Yasodaman I must have ceased to be a Mahakshatrapa 
in the year 161. None of the silver coins which he issued as Mahaksha- 
trapa, so far known, bears a date later than 161, and it is certain that 
one of his brothers, Vijayasena, held the higher rank in the year 161. 
Vijayasena (as may be inferred from the Sarvania hoard) continued as 
Mahakshatrapa until the year 172 (a.d. 250), and each of his eleven years 
of rule in that capacity is represented by his silver coins. Rapson says 
that ‘the series of Vijayasena’s coins is the most satisfactory in this 
dynasty, alike as regards dates, style and distinctness in the coin-legends.’ 
A critical study of his coins led Rapson to detect the first symptoms of a 
decline in their technique about the year 167 or 168. A process of continu- 
ous degradation followed until the end of the dynasty ‘varied occasionally 
by short-lived attempts to restore a higher standard.’ 

The coinage of a dynasty was in ancient times a sure index to its poli- 
tical power, and we may fairly surmise that from after the time of Vijaya- 
sena the prosperity of the Western Satraps, already somewhat crippled, 
gradually declined. Vijayasena’s coins have been found in large numbers 
throughout Gujarat and Kathiawar and in a part of south-western Raj- 
putana (Banswara) as well. The Sarvania hoard contained more than a 
hundred coins of this ruler, generally in good preservation, and a few of 
them prove that he rose from the rank of Kshatrapa to that of Mahaksha- 
trapa in the year 161. 

Vijayasena was succeeded in the latter part of 172 or else early in 173 
by his brother Damajadasri III (the youngest of Damasena’s sons) who 
ruled for only five years. His latest certain date, furnished by the Sar- 
vania hoard is the year 177, and his rule must have ended in that year. 
He was succeeded by his nephew Rudrasena II, the son of Viradaman, 
Damasena’s eldest son. Rudrasena II’s accession must have taken place 
in year 177, for D. R. Bhandarkar found a coin of his dated in that year 
during his excavations at Besnagar. Rudrasena II ruled for 21 or 22 years, 
from 177 to 198 or 199 (a.d. 225-276 or 277). He issued numerous coins 
but their style and execution are indifferent. The Sarvania hoard alone 
contained as many as 392, but a large number of these are undated or 
illegibly dated. 

It may be noted here that throughout the reign (as Mahakshatrapas) of 
Vijayasena and Damajadasri, and for a part of that of Rudrasena II, there 
were no Kshatrapas. We have found no coins issued by any chief holding 
the lesser office during these years. Towards the end of Rudrasena’s 
rule as Mahakshatrapa, the rank of Kshatrapa was revived. Visva- 
simha, the elder of his sons, was Kshatrapa from the year 197 to the year 
200. Thus no Kshatrapa was associated with the ruling Mahakshatrapa 

37 



290 


SATRAPS OF NORTHERN AND WESTERN INDIA 


for a period of about 35 years (161-196). No reason can be assigned for 
this administrative change in the history of the Western Kshatrapas. 
Another interesting fact is that the potin coins which were issued by the 
Mahakshatrapas from the time of Jivadaman onwards, some bearing the 
name of the issuer and others not, finally ceased to be struck after Dama- 
sena. Rapson has shown that this currency of the Western Kshatrapas 
is attributable to Malwa, and its final disappearance at about that time 
may indicate that that part of Malwa, where these coins were current, fell 
from the control of the Mahakshatrapas who succeeded Damasena, or 
that this currency was suspended by the more widely-used silver coinage 
of the dynasty. Rapson favours the latter explanation though the former 
is not unlikely either. There is no doubt that the power of the Mahaksha- 
trapas was already on the wane and that they were being gradually dis- 
possessed of their outlying possessions by many local chiefs. Altekar 
suggests that Vindhyasakti, the founder of the Vakataka kingdom who 
ruled for about 20 years from c. A.D. 255 to 275, may have annexed a part 
of Eastern Malwa. 

LAST YEARS OF THE MAIN HOUSE OF CHASHTANA 


Visvasimha, the son of Rudrasena II, was Kshatrapa under his father 
from the year 197 to the year 199. According to Rapson, he held the lower 
office till 200 or probably 201 (S.E.). Rapson could not read the date on 
any of the coins struck by Visvasimha as Mahakshatrapa. D. R. Bhandar- 
kar, however, read 200 on one such coin now in the collection of the 
Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay. This shows that Visvasimha could 
not have been a Kshatrapa for long after 199, for he was in possession of 
the higher office in 200. His rule as Mahakshatrapa was short-lived. The 
Sarvania hoard contains a few coins issued by his brother and successor 
Bhartridaman with the date 204. Thus, it seems that Visvasimha ruled as 
a Mahakshatrapa only for three or four years. 1 Large numbers of coins 
were issued by him both as a Kshatrapa and as a Mahakshatrapa, but the 
majority of them were badly struck. Bhartridaman held at first the lower 
office under Visvasimha, during the years 200 to 204 (a.d. 278-282). He 
then succeeded his brother in the year 204 (a.d. 282) and ruled as Maha- 
kshatrapa till 217 (a.d. 295). This is his last known year, though it is not 
unlikely that he ruled for a few years longer. It is certain that his son and 
successor Visvasena never attained the rank of Mahakshatrapa. The 
coins of Visvasena show that he ruled as Kshatrapa from 215 
to 226 (a.d. 293-304). Thus in the early part of his reign (215-17) 
he was the junior partner of his father. It is not known why he failed to 


G. V. Acharya reads the date 211 on 
a coin of Visvasimha as Mahaksha- 
trapa in the hoard of 520 coins in the 
Junagadh State treasury. This would 
indicate that Visvasimha ruled in that 
capacity till 211 (a.d. 289). But it 


would go against the evidence gleaned 
from the Sarvania hoard by D. R. 
Bhandarkar. Acharya may not have 
con-ectly read the date on the Junagadh 
coin; Num. Supplement xlvu ( JRASB . 
1937, pp. 97-8) 



ROLE OF SASSANIAN POWER 


291 


assume the higher title after his father’s death. There is no doubt, how- 
ever, that he was the last member of the main line of Chashtana, for as 
will be seen in the next volume, the person who succeeded him in the last 
year of his rule came from a line that had no direct connection with that 
of Chashtana, the retriever of the satrapal fortunes. That great 
dynasty had ruled in Western India and parts of Central India and 
the north-western Deccan for nearly two centuries with varying success. 
It undoubtedly weakened during its latter years; nor does the fact 
that large numbers of the coins of Bhartridaman and Visvasena have 
been found justify the assumption that the last two members of 
Chashtana's line ‘succeeded in retrieving the fortunes of their family 
to a large extent’ (Altekar). The last member failed even to rise above 
the rank of Kshatrapa. 

The decline of the satrapal power at this time may be attributed in part 
to the great expansion of the Sassanian power towards the East. Varhran 
II, the Sassanian emperor from a.d. 276 to 293, though hard pressed in the 
West by the Roman emperors, Marcus Aurelius, Carus and Diocletian, was 
able to put down the rebellion of his brother Hormizd (Ormies) in the East. 
He conquered Sakastan and possibly also parts of the dominions of the 
Saka Kshatrapas. The Paikuli inscriptions are in perfect agreement with 
the Armenian chronicler Agathias who reveals to us that the Saka Kshatra- 
pas from remote parts of India and the prince of Avanti too, were at first 
the retainers of Varhran III, son of Varhran II, and hostile to his uncle 
Narseh. When Narseh vanquished his nephew in 293, ‘all kinds of satraps 
{satrap gonak gonak), a long list of Saka Kshatrapas besides some princes 
of higher rank, came to congratulate the new King of Kings.’ In the last 
group of princes were included the satraps of Western India. One of them 
called Mitrasena reminds us of Visvasena, the son of Bhartridaman. The 
way in which the Paikuli inscriptions refer to the Saka satraps leaves little 
doubt that the satrapal power at that time was much divided. It is true, 
however, that in the last passage of the inscription all these Saka Ksha- 
trapas and chiefs are enumerated as independent princes. From this 
Herzfeld infers that Sassanian sovereignty over the Indian parts of Sakastan 
was lost in a.d. 293 during the war between Varhran III and Narseh, and 
these small principalities gained their independence about this time. 1 
Numismatic evidence, however, shows that it was only after a.d. 295 or 
even later that the office of Mahakshatrapa was kept in abeyance for 
several decades. Bhartridaman was Mahakshatrapa at the time of Nar- 
seh’s victory over his nephew, and it was only his son who did not rise to 
that office. Thus it appears that whatever independence Visvasena and 
his successors enjoyed in the first part of the fourth century a.d. was of a 
circumscribed character. Narseh’s recognition of an independent sta- 
tus in the satraps was perhaps a politic concession made with the aim of 
gaining their moral support in his struggle with his nephew. 


E. Herzfeld, Paikuli, pp. 41 ff. 



292 


Genealogical Table of the Kshaharatas, and of the Western Kshatrapas 
up to the end of Chashtana’s line. 


Kshaharata line : — 

Bhtimaka 

I Nahapana (dates from inscriptions:, 

| 41 and 46, probably in Saka era) 

Dakshamitra + Rishavadatta (son of Dinika) 


Western Kshatrapa line ; — 

Ghsamotika 

I 

II Chashtana (yr. 52 from the Andhau inscriptions) 
Jayadaman 

III Rudradaman (yr. 52 from the Andhau inscriptions 
,, 72 „ „ Junagadh „ ) 


IV Damaghsada V Rudrasimha I Daughter (married to a 

(DamajadasrI I) Ksh. 1st time— yrs. 102-3 Satavahana ruler) 

| Mksh. „ „ „ 103-10 

| | Ksh. 2nd „ „ 1 10-2 

Satyadaman VII JIvadaman Mksh. „ „ „ 113-8 or 9 

Ksh. (yr. 100 Mksh. (year lxx uncertain ' 

—uncertain) —years 119-20) j VI. Isvaradatta 

(Regnal yrs. 1 and 2. These 
two years probably fall be- 
tween Saka years 1 10 and 112). 


VIII Rudrasena I IX Sanghadaman 

Ksh. (yrs. 121, 122?) Mksh. (yrs. 144-5) 

Mksh. (yrs. 122-44) 


Prithivisena DamajadasrI II 

Ksh. (yr. 144) Ksh. (yrs. 154-5) 


Viradaman XI Yasodaman I XII Vijayasena XIII DamajadasrI III 

Ksh- (yrs. 156-60) Ksh. (yr. 160) Ksh. (yr. 160) Mksh. (yrs. 172 ?, 173-7) 

j Mksh. (yrs. 160-1) Mksh. (yrs. 161-72) 

X3V Rudrasena II 

Mksh. (yrs. 178 ?-96) 


X Damasena 
Mksh. (yrs. 145-58) 


XV 


Visvasiriiha 
Ksh. (yr. 197-200) 
Mksh. (200- 1) 


XVI Bhartridaman 
Ksh. (yrs. 200-4) 
Mksh. (yrs. 204-17) 

Visvasena 
Ksh. (yrs. 215-26) 



Chapter X 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 
INTRODUCTION 

/"AF the attempts in Ancient India to crown cultural unity with political 
unity, the vast and well-organized Mauryan empire is the earliest 
and the most impressive. The Satavahana empire, the next great attempt, 
wears contradictory aspects. In more senses than one it is the heir to the 
Mauryan empire in the Deccan. But it is also part of the general Jaina and 
Hindu reaction to the Buddhist State of Asoka. The Chetas of Kalinga 
were Jainas, and the Sungas or Baimbikas who held sway in the heart of 
the Mauryan empire, were Brahmins. Unlike these two dynasties, how- 
ever, the Satavahanas established their power about half a century before 
the final disappearance of the Mauryan empire. Theirs is also the oldest 
and largest South Indian empire. In sharp and pleasing contrast to the 
kaleidoscopic changes of dynasties in the North (the Mauryas, the Sungas, 
the Kanvas and the Kushanas), the Satavahana empire endured for 460 
years in unbroken continuity, both in the dynastic line and administrative 
traditions. No doubt it experienced great changes of fortune; a long 
period of steady expansion was followed by a stormy one of foreign in- 
vasions which cast the empire into the lowest pit of tribulation; soon it 
emerged brilliantly victorious, only to meet the inevitable end three 
quarters of a century later. 

The few peepholes we have into the period give us a picture of its 
unique achievements in all branches of activity. The empire extended into 
Northern India; if the Puranic statement can be believed, it included 
Magadha, stretched farther south than its predecessors, and extended 
from sea to sea. It welded into an enduring state the diverse tribes of 
Southern and Northern India the Malavas, the Bhojas, the Petenikas, the 
Rathikas, the Andhras, the Parindas and Dravidas and, though less in 
extent, was more compact than the Mauryan. Its epic contest with the 
Kshatrapas, the Lords Marchers under the Kushanas, a contest which 
lasted with intermissions for about a century, finally checked the advance 
of a foreign power from the North into the South. Thanks to the peace of 
the Satavahanas, art and architecture rose to great heights in the western 
rock-cut caves and the structural stupa complexes on the east coast. 
Trade and industry received a great stimulus and burst the boundaries of 
town and village. Prakrit literature attracted a measure of kingly atten- 
tion. Under the protecting wings of a Hindu dynasty. Buddhism flouri- 
shed as never before or after. The climax was reached in the maritime and 
colonial activities of the people which read like romance. In short, the 



294 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


spirit of the Satavahana period was not static, but dynamic. We should 
not conceive it as a motionless picture in a Morris tapestry but as a series 
of shifting scenes, some brilliant, some terrible, some common, and all 
full of life and passion. No wonder the faint memories of these great 
achievements were in later times enshrined in tradition and legend 
(Brahmanical Buddhistic, and Jaina) and led to the rechristening of the 
Saka era as the Salivahana era . 1 


SOURCES 


The sources for the period are scanty. Epigraphs are limited in number 
and details. Seven inscriptions from Eastern Deccan, and nineteen from 
Western Deccan (most of them short non-official records), for a long and 
imposing line of thirty kings who held sway over the greater part of the 
peninsula for well over four and a half centuries, are a disappointing 
number. Even these, recording for the most part Buddhistic donations, 
answer only a few of the many questions that rise in our minds. A great 
part of the Satavahana dominions (modern Hyderabad) remains practi- 
cally unexplored. Recently the archaeological department of the Hyde- 
rabad State has conducted excavations at Paithan, Maski and Kondapur. 
But no startling discovery seems to have been made . 2 The data of epi- 
graphy may be eked out with the aid of numismatics, which has probably 
more to contribute to Satavahana history than to that of any other South 
Indian dynasty. Numerous coins have been picked up in Western 
Deccan and sackfuls in Madhya Pradesh and Eastern Deccan; many of 
these are much defaced or are duplicated. Here and there new coins of 
the kings of the main line as also those of branch lines and feudatories 
have come to light — Siri-Satavahana, Apilaka and Vijaya Satakani. 
Skilled numismatists like Cunningham, Bhagwanlal Indraji, H. R. Scott, 
F. W. Thomas and Rapson have extracted all the information that the 
coins have to yield. The literary sources are, if anything, disappointing. 
The chronological and genealogical framework in the Puranas was per- 
haps originally accurate, but in the long process of transmission by means 
of manuscripts of perishable materials which necessitated frequent rene- 
wals, they have become much corrupted. They are therefore not quite 
trustworthy, unless supported by epigraphic and numismatic testimony. 
Gunadhya’s Brihatkatha, said to have been written at the court of a Sata- 
vahana king, is not available except in minute fragments in a later work 
and in late versions, whose relation to the oiiginal is estimated differently 
by different writers. Lllaval, which purports to tieat of the military exploits 


Salivahana is a later and corrupt 
form of Satavahana or Satavahana. 
The excavations at Paithan have 
brought to light, among other things, 
beads of precious stones, ivory 
objects, conch bangles and terra-cotta 
beads and figurines. The most interest- 


ing discovery is a lump of 10 square 
(f ' ) Satavahana copper coins. Their 
obverse device, tree within railing, 
resembles closely that on the square 
coins of Satakapi II (Rapson, BMC- 
AWK. pp. 3-4) 



STARTING POINT 


295 


of Hala’s reign, obviously contains few facts of a trustworthy nature. 
Worse still, the twilight of early Satavahana history is succeeded by a long 
historical night which envelops kings Nos. 9 to 16 and 18 to 22, in the 
Puranic lists. The historian has still to call lively imagination to his aid 
to solve the Chinese puzzle of which so many pieces are missing. Only 
the recovery of more pieces can place the results of his labours on sure 
foundations. 


CHRONOLOGY (235 B.C.-A.D. 225). 


The chronological scheme for the Satavahana dynasty rests upon the twin 
foundations of the Puranic regnai periods and the identification of the 
‘Satakarni’ of the Girnar inscription of Rudradaman dated Saka 72 (a.d. 
150). The Satavahana inscriptions are dated only in regnal years, though 
eras were not wanting at least for the later kings. The Puranic regnal 
periods and the total for the whole dynasty are vitiated by internal discre- 
pancies, and do not always square with epigraphic testimony; and Sata- 
karni is a title borne with or without the personal name by many a king 
of the line. For reasons set forth below, the ‘Satakarni’ of the Girnar 
inscription must be identified with king No. 26 (Siva-Siri-Pulumayi) and 
not king No. 24 (Vasithiputa Siri-Pulumayi), as Rapson thought. The 
total period for the dynasty being 460 years, its end falls about a.d. 225, 
if we take it that the double defeat of Satakarni mentioned in the Girnar 
inscription took place at the beginning of Siva-Siri-Pulumayi’s seven-year 
reign. The starting point of the dynasty would then be about 235 b.c., 
soon after Asoka’s death. 1 


The Puranic discrepancies in chrono- 
logy have given rise to conflicting 
theories. The duration of the dynasty 
is 460 years according to the Matsya, 
456 according to the Brahmanda, 411 
according to Vayu, and 300 according 
to Vishnu. R. G. Bhandarkar attri- 
butes this difference to some Puranas 
treating concurrent reigns from differ- 
ent capitals as successive. According 
to Smith the discrepancy arises from 
some Puranas treating the duration of 
the Satavahana dynasty from its be- 
ginning and others reckoning it from 
the close of the Kanva rule. The ex- 
tirpation of the Kanva dynasty by a 
later Satavahana king has been attri- 
buted to the first Satavahana ruler 
{ZD MG. 1902, pp. 656-8). According 
to Raychaudhuri the inclusion of 
branch lines, the existence of which is 
attested by names like Kuntala Sata- 
kani, is responsible for the huge total. 
He' says: ‘That there were several fami- 
lies of Satakarnis, distinct from the 
main line cannot be denied ... If the 
main line of Satavahana kings consis- 


ted of about only nineteen princes, and 
if the duration of their rule (therefore) 
be three centuries, there is no difficulty 
in accepting the Puranic statement that 
Simuka flourished in the time of the 
later Kanvas, that is to say, in the 
first century b.c. . . .’ He adds. ‘Scho- 
lars who place the Nanaghat record in 
the first half of the second century and 
the epigraphs of the time of Gautaml- 
putra Satakarni in the second century 
a.d. will have to account for the pau- 
city of Satavahana records during a 
period of about 300 years.’ (PHAI.* 
pp. 337 n. 2, 339 & 340) 

The discrepancy arises only from the 
omission of certain names of the main 
line in Vayu and Vishnu, and V. Smith 
has shown that ‘so far as concerns the 
Andhra dynasty the statements con- 
tained in the Matsya Pur ana are remar- 
kably in accordance with the facts 
known from other sources both as 
regards the names of kings and the 
duration of their reigns.’ (ZDMG. 
1902) 

Relying upon a supposed date in 



296 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


ORIGINS 

There has been much controversy over the original home of the Sata- 
vahanas and the meaning of their dynastic name and the title Satakarni. 
The kings called Satavahanas_and Satakanis in inscriptions and on coins 
are styled by the Puranas as Andhras, Andhrajatlyah and Andhra-bhrityah. 
Scholars therefore identified the Satavahana-Satakanis with the Andhras. 
The earliest references to the Andhras enabled them to fix the home of this 
people in the country, the heart of which comprised roughly the present 
Godavari, Krishna and Guntur districts . 1 Rapson, Smith and Bhandarkar 
found no difficulty in building on these postulates the theory of an eastern 
origin, namely in the Andhradesa. While Smith located the capital at 
Srl-Kaku]am, Bhandarkar preferred Dhannakataka. The objections to 
this theory were first formulated by Sukthankar . 2 

Epigraphic, numismatic and literary evidences unmistakably point to 
a western origin, the region around Pratishthana (mod. Paithan, in the 
Aurangabad district of Hyderabad State). A rilievo figure of the founder 
of the dynasty and an inscription of his daughter-in-law come from Nana- 
ghat, a pass in the Western Ghats only a hundred miles, as the crow flies, 
from Paithan. From Nasik we have two inscriptions one mentioning the 
second king and the other the great grand-daughter of the third king . 3 
The Amaravatl stupa inscriptions extending over five centuries from the 
third century B.C., do not mention a single early Satavahana king while 
inscriptions of the second century a.d. mention two later Satavahanas . 4 
A record of the penultimate king of the dynasty is found in Kalinga . 5 The 


the Maurya era in the Hathigumpha 
inscription of Kharavela and looking 
upon Kharavela as the third member 
of the Cheta dynasty of Kalinga like 
Siri-Satakapi of the Satavahana dy- 
nasty, Rapson would place the begin- 
ning of the dynasty somewhere be- 
tween 220 and 211 b.c. (BMC A WK. 
xvn & xvin) 

1 Andhra is both a tribal and a territo- 
rial name. Andhras as a people are 
mentioned as early as the fifth century 
b.c. The Aitareya Brahmana speaks of 
them as the exiled and degenerate sons 
of Visvamitra. The elder Pliny refers 
to the Andarae as a powerful race 
which possessed numerous villages 
and 30 towns defended by walls and 
towers. They supplied the king with 
an army of 100,000 infantry and 2,000 
cavalry and 1,000 elephants. The 
Jatakas speak of Andhakas (Cowell 
and Thomas, v, pp. 10,138) and An- 
dhra country (i, no, 80, p. 203). The 
inscriptions of Asoka mention the 
Andhras along with the Parimdas as 
border peoples. The Puranas Speak of 


Andhrajatiyas. Epigraphical reference 
to the Andhra country first occurs in 
the Mayidavolu plates of the Pallava 
Sivaskandavarman (3rd century a.d.). 
Here Dhannakataka is spoken of as 
the headquarters of the Pallava pro- 
vince of Arhdhapatha (Andhrapatha). 
The Andhradesa of our period was 
limited in the north by Kalinga and in 
the east by the sea; in the south it did 
not extend far beyond the northern 
part of the Nellore district (the Pallava 
Karmarashtra), in the west it extended 
far into the'interior. In the Srirangarh 
plates dated a.d. 1358, it is said that 
the Tilinga country (the Andhradesa) 
is bounded in the north by Kanya- 
kubja, on the west by Maharashtra, 
on the east by Kalinga and on the 
south by Pandyaka (EL xiv p. 90-5). 
This description is certainly remini- 
scent of the old empire of the Satava- 
hanas. 

2 ABORI. 1918-19, pp. 21 ff 

3 El. vra nos. 8, 22. 

4 El. x, Liiders List nos. 1248, 1279 

5 Ibid. 1341. (Kodavolu). 



ORIGIN IN WESTERN DECCAN 


297 


close association of the early Satavahanas with the Maharathis, a class of 
officers who are mentioned only in the western cave inscriptions and coins, 
is corroborative evidence. The Bhattiprolu inscriptions, only a few de- 
cades later than Asoka’s, mention a non-Satavahana ruler like Khubirako. 
Even the mention of the Mahendra and Chakora mountains as the eastern 
boundary of Gotamlputa Siri-Satakani’s empire can only prove that 
Kalinga and the Andhradesa were included in the dominions of king no. 
23 in the Puranic lists. The inscription of Kharavela speaks of his des- 
truction of Pithuda (Ptolemy’s Pityndra), which has to be looked for in 
the Andhra country. If the early Satavahanas had been ruling over this 
region, such an attack would have evoked great hostilities. Kharavela 
also speaks of an expedition to the west, disregarding Satakamni. 1 It 
may be argued that as later inscriptions refer to Kalinga as the eastern re- 
gion, the ‘west’ of Kharavela’s inscription might well have been the An- 
dhrades_a. 2 But Musikanagara which the army captured cannot be located 
in the Andhradesa. And if the reading ‘Asikanagara’ be accepted in the 
place of Musikanagara, it must certainly be looked for in Central or 
Western Deccan near Asmaka and Mulaka. Above all, the ‘Satakamni’ 
of Kharavela’s inscription is the sixth or a later king. 

Numismatics tells the same story. Two coins which, on palaeographical 
grounds, must be ascribed to king no. 3 in the Puranic lists and eight coins 
not far removed from these in date, have been picked up in Western India. 
A well-executed and well-preserved rectangular piece belonging to a king 
earlier than Apllaka (king no. 8) was bought in Aurangabad, the headquar- 
ters of the district in which Paithan is situated. Stupas in the Andhradesa 
built or enlarged in the second century a.d. have yielded numerous coins 
of Pulumayi II and his successors, while the stupas of the earlier period 
(third century b.c. to first century B.c.) have not yielded contemporary 
Satavahana coins. The title Dakh.inapathapati ( Dakshinapathapati ) borne 
by the third king presents no serious obstacle. 3 As late as the time of the 
Periplus (first century a.d.) Dakshinapatha meant only Western Deccan. 
The personal names of the early Satavahanas are frequently met with in 
the western cave inscriptions, while some of these names occur in Eas- 
tern Deccan only in the second century a.d. Jaina literature makes Pra- 
tishthana (modern Paithan) the Satavahana capital from the beginning. 
Bhandarkar’s theory of two capitals, one in Western Deccan at Paithan and 
the other in Eastern Deccan at Dharanikota, rests upon a conjectural 
emendation of a compound in a Nasik inscription and a wrong equation. 4 


Dutiye cha vase achitayita Sdtakariinirii 
pachima-disam haya-gaja-nara-radha- 
bahulam darhdam pathCipdyati kanha- 
berima-gataya cha senaya ritasitam 
Musikandgaram for Asikanagaram) 
El. xx 79. 1. 4; IHQ. xiv, 1938, 463. 
Polamuru plates of Madhavavarman I, 
The Journal of the Department of Letters, 
Calcutta, xi p. 40 


1 Nanaghat inscriptions, ASWI. v pp. 

60 and 80 and Liiders, List, no. 1112. 
1 R. G. Bhandarkar (JBBRAS. xxxm; 
I A. 1918; BG. i (ii) 151) takes the com- 
pound Dhanakatasamanehi in a Nasik 
inscription of Pulumayi II (3 in EL 
viii no. 8) as Dhanakatasaminehi. 
He also takes it for granted that the 
donation recorded in this inscription 



298 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


The view held by Burgess and followed by Smith, that Sri-Kakulam 
in the Andhradesa was the capital, is based upon a Telugu work of the 
twelfth century a.d . 1 Lastly the old theory would involve a rapid 
expansion of the empire from the plains to the table-land during the first 
two reigns. With a powerful and jealous neighbour in Kalinga, a rapid 
and vast westward expansion would at this time have been well-nigh im- 
possible. In short, all available evidence points to some place in the west, 
most likely Paithan, as the original seat of Satav ahana power. 

The chief problem then is one of correlating the Puranic with the epi- 
graphic and numismatic testimony. Sukthankar and Raychaudhuri cut 
the Gordian knot by challenging the Andhra affinities of the Satavahanas. 
The latter has made the ingenious suggestion that the Puranas, which were 
redacted at a time when the Satavahanas were ruling over the Andhradesa 
mistakenly called them Andhras . 2 Sukthankar treats the Puranic Andhra- 
bhritya as a tatpurusha compound (servants of the Andhras) and locates 
their home in the Bellary district on the strength of a single regional name . 3 
But the words Andhrajdtlyah and Kdnvdycmdiiix tato bhritydh Susarmdnah 
prasahya tarii make the compound a karmadharaya (Andhras v ho were 
servants). The evidences are then not conflicting but complementary. 
Andhra is the tribal name, Satavahana the dynastic name, and Satakani 
(Satakarni) the surname. The omission of tribal names in inscriptions 
and on coins is not uncommon in Indian history. There is thus no reason 
to doubt the statement of the Puranas, that the Satavahanas sprang 
from the Andhra country. 

is identical with that recorded in Bala- 
siri’s Nasik inscription. Obsessed by 
the unproven and improbable theory 
of the conjoint rule of Gotamlputa 
Siri-Satakani from Dhahhakataka and 
of Pulumayi II from Paithaii he looks 
upon Dhanakatasami (Lord of Dha- 
nakaja (ka) as a title of Gotamlputa 
Siri-Satakani. To crown it all he 
reads ‘ Benakatakasami' of the Nasik 
inscription of Gotamlputa Siri-Sata- 
kani (EL vm no. 8, no. 4) as Dhana- 
katakasami, and identifies Dhana- 
kata with Dhannakataka (either modern 
Dliaranikot in the Guntur district or 
a place near it). In his valuable paper 
on the Nasik inscriptions, Senart has 
pointed out the objection to the iden- 
tification of Dhanakata with Dhanna- 
kataka. D. R. Bhandarkar rejoins - 
‘What is read as Dhanakata can also 
be read as Dhamnakataka (Dha- 
nnakata) and as in the Nasik inscrip- 
tions n is used instead of « (compare 
e.g., anapayati of some Nasik inscrip- 
tions ), Dhamnakataka can very well 
be taken to be equivalent to Dhamna- 
kataka’. To draw a parallel between 


the change of na in a Prakrit word into 
a ha in its Sanskrit equivalent ( ajhapa - 
yati) and the change of na into ha in 
different forms of Prakrit is misleading. 
Moteover, the literary Pali form, which 
occurs in the Nasik inscription also 
is ‘ anapayati ’ and not ' iinapayati’. 
The instance cited by Bhandarkar is 
one of the change of na into ha. There 
is not one clear instance of na used for 
ha in the Prakrit of our penod. In the 
Mayidavolu inscription of the Pallava 
Sivaskandavarman (EL \i p. 84) we 
have ana (anna) the literary Pali form 
of which is ‘anna’. But the inscription 
belongs to a much later period and a 
different area. 

1 A passage in the Trilingar.it sasanam 
translated and quoted by Campbell 
in his Telugu Grammar (Intro, p. ii) 

2 THAI* p. 343. But even the last three 
rulers of the line ruled not only 
Andhradesa hut also parts of Western 
Deccan. 

3 ‘Satavahani-hara’ of the Jungligundu 
inscription of Pulumayi IV (EL xiv 



MEANING OF SATAVAHANA 


299 


The presence of the ‘servant Andhras’ in Western Deccan can only be 
explained by a dynastic drift so common in ancient India. Asoka’s edicts 
and the Girnar inscription of Rudradaman furnish links in the chain of 
evidence, and suggest that the Mauryan dominion in Southern India was 
the medium through which the drift took place. Asoka’s edicts prove be- 
yond doubt that the Andhra country was included in his empire, though 
from the way in which the Andhras are mentioned they would seem to 
have enjoyed a fair degree of local autonomy. Asoka’s inscriptions place 
the Yavanas in north-western India; and yet we learn from the Girnar 
inscription that Yavana Tushaspha was ruler of Surashtra under Asoka. 
In the days of their vassaldom under the Mauryas, scions of the Andhra 
royal or noble families may have passed into the service of the Mauryan 
kings, moved up to Western Deccan and got the Puranic appellation of 
Andhrabhritya. When the Mauryan empire passed from the hands of the 
watchful and vigorous Asoka into those of his weak successors, the 
shrewd and fortunate Andhrabhrityas felt that their hour had come. 
The scene of their political activity was however not the land of their 
birth the Andhradesa which was far away, but the land of their adoption 
(Western Deccan ). 1 

The meanings of the names ‘Satavahana’ and ‘Satakani’ (Sans. Satakarni) 
are as much the subjects of controversy as the origins of Satavahana power. 
The explanations of the dynastic name ‘Satavahana’ by ancient and modern 
writers are for the most part legendary and fanciful. To Somadeva, ‘Sata- 
vahana’ means ‘one who rode ayakshaby name Sata;’ to Jinaprabhasuri, 
‘one by whom were given ( satani ) conveyances (vahandm)’; 2 Adiyarkku- 
nallar, the commentator of Silappadikdram, equates ‘Satavahana’ with 
'Sattaii 1 = a village deity . 3 Przyluski wouldderiveit from the Munda words 
‘sodam’ =horse, and 'hapan = son . 4 To him Satavahana denotes ‘son 
of the performer of an asramedha.’ Barnett and Jayaswal would con- 
nect the word with the Satiyaputa of Asoka’s inscriptions. 

For one thing the spelling is ‘Satavahana’ as given by Somadeva. Bana 
and Hemachandra, and not ‘Satavahana’, as it appears in Vatsyayana’s 
Kamasutra and in many modern works (Rapson’s and Raychaudhuri’s). 
The form beginning with the dental sa alone yields a simple and probable 
meaning. ‘Satavahana’ ( sattavdhana in literary Prakrit) is a Prakrit form 
of ‘Saptavdhana’. In the Kasikhanda ( Skanda Purdtia) ‘ saptavdhana ’ 


Recently S. A. Joglekar ha_s questioned 
the connection of the Andhra-Sata- 
vahanas with the Andhradesa. He 
points out that the Puranas refer to 
the Satavahanas as belonging to the 
Andhrajati and not the Andhradesa. 
He concludes: ‘I believe the Andhras 
were so called not because they be- 
longed to_ the territory now known 
as the Andhradesa _ but because they 
belonged to the Andhra valley in 
Poona Dt.’ ( ABORI . xxvii pp. 237-8) 


But the name ‘Andhra valley’ like 
‘SStahani-hara’ may be merely re- 
miniscent of the Andhra rule over 
Western Deccan. 

2 Kathasaritsagara ("translation) i p. 37; 
JBBRAS. x p. 132. 

3 T . - . re f ers tQ p ura . 

and pasanda 
1 ' A 1 5). The commen- 
tator explains purambanaiyan by Ma- 
sattan and Satavahanan. 

1 JRAS. 1929, p. 273 



300 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


means the Sun, for he is borne in a chariot drawn by seven horses, sym- 
bolizing the seven days of the week. ‘Satavahana’ as a dynastic name 
may well denote a king of the solar line. 

‘Saptavahana’ is also one of the 1,000 names of Vishnu, who is closely 
associated with the Sun in the Mahabharata — ‘ sahasrdrchis saptajihva 
saptaidhas saptavahanah'' . The commentator adds sapta asvah vahana- 
nyasya saptavahanah', yadi va saptanama cko svo vdtianasyeti vd eko ’ 
svo vahati sapta namd iti sruteh.’ The later forms of ‘Satavahana’ in lite- 
rature are ‘Salivahana’, ‘Sataliana’, Salahana’ and ‘Hala.’ 

Satakani is a surname borne by the Satavahanas and the feudatories 
and officials under them. The Satavahanas bore it with or without perso- 
nal names and metronymics. The Girnar inscription of Rudradaman, a 
Kanheri inscription, and the Talagunda inscription of Santivarman, 
establish beyond doubt that the name is to be spelt with the dental sa and 
not with the palatal sa. 1 Even so the meaning is still obscure. Przyluski's 
derivation of the word from the Munda ‘Ao/i=son. and 'saddm'= of the 
horse, is too far-fetched and speculative. The spelling excludes the mean- 
ing given in the Silappadikaram {nurruvar kannar = hundred-eared). 2 
Far-fetched also is S. A. Joglekar’s explanation, ‘seven arrows’ or ‘seven 
rays of the Sun’, though in the Rig Veda there is a reference to the seven 
rays of the Sun. 3 In the Taittirlya Aranyaka of the Yajur Veda , ‘Sapta- 
karna’ is the name of a devotee of the Sun. 4 But even this information 
carries us no farther. All that can be said is that it is very likely that ‘Sata- 
karni’ is, in some way now unascertainable, connected with ‘Satavahana’, 
because it is a general name among the Satavahanas. and because they are 
referred to as Satakarnis in the inscripdpns of other dynasties. 

The interpretation of ‘Satavahana’ adopted in these pages, if correct, 
would set at rest the controversy regarding the caste of the Satavahanas. 
Raychaudhuri looks upon them as Brahmins. The Dvatrimsatputtalika 
represents Salivahana as of mixed Brahmana and Naga origin. In the 
Nasik inscription of Balasirl, Gotamiputa Siri-Satakani is styled ekabam- 
hana and khatiya-dapa-mana-madana. But these reasons are by no means 
conclusive. R. G. Bhandarkar translates ekabamhana as ‘the only pro- 
tector of the Brahmins 5 ’ The epithet ekabrdhmanyasya, applied to Pal- 
lava Viravarman in the Pikira grant and to Vishnukundin Madhavavar- 
man in the Polamuru grant, supports this interpretation. Gotamlputa’s 
mother styles herself a rajarshi's wife. ‘Khatiya’ may well refer to Kshat- 
riya princes deposed by Gotamiputa after his reconquest of Satavahana 
dominions from the Western Kshatrapas. 


a) Dakshinapathapates-Satakarner dvir 
api ... the Giranar inscription of Ru- 
dradaman EL vm p. 44, /. 12 

b) Vuishthiputrasya Sdtakarnisya, Kan- 
heri inscription of the daughter of 
Mahakshatrapa Rudra (daman) ASiVI. 
v.p. 78. pi. 1) 

c) . . . presubhis-Satakarnyadibhis ... ; 


Talagunda inscription of Santivarman 
U'd. vm p. 33, /. 14) 

2 Ca.ito xxvi Kalkotkadai, 

3 Vedic Index, Macdonell and Keith, 
s. v. Surya. 

1 i, 7 

5 BG. i (ii) p. 173 



EARLY KINGS 


301 


EARLY SATA V AH AN AS— ERA OF EXPANSION 
AND PROSPERITY c. b.c. 235-a.d. 50. 

Simuka — c. 235-213 b.c. : The long roll of Satavahana kings opens with 
rajaii or rely a Simuka (Srlmukha) Satavahana. Of him the Puranas say, 
‘the Andhra Simuka with his fellow tribesmen, the servants of Susarman, 
will assail the Kanvayanas and him (Susarman), and destroy the remains 
of the Suiigas’ power and will obtain this earth.’ 1 A proper chronolo- 
gical scheme would make Andhra Simuka the immediate successor of 
Asoka (and not of the Kanvas), and therefore an erstwhile servant of the 
Mauryas. 2 In his coup d'etat against the Mauryan empire, Simuka en- 
listed the support of the other ‘servant Andhras’ as also that of the powerful 
Rathikas and Bhojas of the west. In the end he assumed the regal title 
(ray a) and rewarded the leading Rathikas with the feudatory title of mahei- 
rathi, and entered into matrimonial alliance with them. Some centuries 
later, in a similar situation, the early Pallavas are known to have entered 
into a dynastic alliance with the Chutus of Kuntala and secured ascen- 
dancy in the south. The Puranas are agreed that Simuka ruled for twenty- 
three years. According to Jaina legends he built Jaina and Buddhist temples, 
in order perhaps to win the support of these powerful communities in the 
west. In the closing years of his reign he is said to have turned wicked, 
perhaps in the sense of favouring Buddhists more than Jainas, and to have 
been dethroned and killed. His figure was included in a group of sculp- 
tured rilievo portraits, of which only the labels and the feet have survived, 
and even these not in all cases. 

Kanha — c. 212-195. b.c. : Simuka was succeeded by his younger brother 
Kanha (Sans. Krishna). Evidently Simuka’s son and the future Satakani I 
was too young to weather the storms of the new-born kingdom. During 
his reign of 18 years, Kanha continued his brother's policy of conquest. 
The empire was extended to the west at least as far as Nasik. Evidence 
of the survival of Mauryan forms in the Satavahana administration is fur- 
nished by an inscription of the reign w'hich mentions a mahamdtra in charge 
of the Buddhist monks at Nasik. 

Satakani I—c. 194-185 b.c. : The greatest of the early Satavahana? was 
Siri-Satakani (SrI-Saiakarni), the first to bear this favourite Satavahana 
name, as also the invariable Satavahana honorific prefix ‘siri’. According 
to the Puranas he was the son of Kanha. But the omission of Kanha in the 
Nanaghat rilievo group, taken along with the inclusion of Simuka in it, 
leaves no doubt that Simuka was the father of Satakani I. 


1 4 Kamdyanams tato bhritvali Susar- 
tnanah prasahya tain, Sungandm chan a 
yach chhesham Kshapitvd tu ballyasak, 
Sisitko 'niliirah sa-jatlyah prdpsy atttnum 
xasundhardiii, Trayo-umsat sama rdjci 
Simukas tu bhaxishyatV , Pargiter, DKA . 
pp. 38 & 71 

! After a detailed examination of the 


Nan-ighat record of Nayanika, queen 
of the third king, Biihler came to the 
conclusion that, according to the epigra- 
phical evidence, this document may he 
placed a little and not much later than 
Asoka’s and Dasaratha’s edicts. R. P. 
Chanda's objections to this view do 
not seem to be well taken ( M.4S1 . i). 



302 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


A study of the rilievo labels, alongside the sacrificial inscription at Nana- 
ghat, throws welcome light on Satakani I’s reign. 1 His queen (devl) was 
Nayanika (Naganika), the daughter of Maharathi Tranakayiro; of their 
five sons (kumdras) Bhaya — , Vedisiri 3 , Satisiri, Hakusiri and Satavahana, 
only two, Vedisiri and Satisiri survived the father. Satakani I attained 
imperial status by conquering, from the Mauryas, Western Malwa and the 
territory immediately to the south of it — Anupa (the_ Narmada valley) 
and Vidarbha (Berar). The Puranic assertion that the Andhras ruled over 
Magadha perhaps indicates this disintegration of the Mauryan empire. 
Satakani I was greatly helped in his task by the political confusion in Nor- 
thern India consequent upon Greek incursions. To celebrate his resounding 
victories and valuable conquests the king performed two asvamedhas and 
one rajasuya and thus established for himself the position of a samrat; 
he also assumed the sonorous titles of Dakhindpathapati ( Dakshinapa - 
thapati ) and apratihatachakra, and performed numerous other sacrifices 
like agnyadheya, anxarambhanlya, gaxamayana, angirasatirdtra, aptoryama, 
angirasamayana, gargatiratra, chhcindoga-paxaman-atiratra, trayodasa- 
ratra, dasaratra and others. These sacrifices mark a sharp revival of the 
Vedic religion in the Deccan after a long spell of Buddhist ascendancy. 
The dakshinas given included, among other things, 42,700 cows, 10 ele- 
phants, 1,000 horses, 17 silver pots, one horse-chariot, and 68,000 karsha- 
panas. The very large issue of coins was the result not only of numerous 
military campaigns, but also of a great material prosperity ushered in by 
an era of conquests. Biihler’s theory that the sacrifices were performed 
by Nayanika to celebrate posthumously her husband’s victories, is 


Owing to the lacunae in the Naniighat 
sacrificial inscription neither the name 
of Satakapi I, nor the names of his 
queen and’ her father are to be found. 
The names of two kumciras found in 
the inscription cannot be identified 
with the three names in the extant 
rilievo inscriptions; Biihler and Rap- 
son, however, identify Kumara Satisiri- 
mat of the sacrificial record with Ku- 
mara Hakusiri of the rilie\o labels, 
and so come to the conclusion that the 
sacrificial record is that of Nayanika, 
mother of Hakusiri. But it is not 
possible to accept the first identifi- 
cation. In the Dravidian Prakrit of 
the Satavahana epigraphs ha sometimes 
takes the place of sa, and ru of W. 
But nowhere is ku or ka used for ti 
or ta. Moreover, one would expect 
Hakuhiru rather than Hakusiri. After 
the representation of Kumara Bhaya, 
two statues and their inscriptions have 
disappeared; it would seem that V'e- 
disiri and Satisiri of the sacrificial in- 
scription were represented in the lost 
rilievo figures. 

Once the identification of Hakusiri 


with Satisiri is abandoned, the task 
of finding out the absent name in the 
sacrificfial record becomes all the more 
difficult. But there is no doubt that 
the author of the record is a queen- 
mother. Between the passages in 
which she calls herself mother of Kuma- 
ra Vedisiri and queen of a king Siri 
comes in a mention of a Maharathi; 
even if the restoration (bala)va before 
Maharathi is objected to, the context 
leaves no doubt that the Maharathi 
is her father. From the rilievo group 
we can infer that Maharathi Tranaka- 
yiro is the father of Nayanika, queen of 
Siri-Satakani I. -So the king whose 
epithets, but not name, are found in 
the sacrificial inscription, is Siri-Sata- 
kapi. The queen-mother is Nayani- 
ka. The Maharathi is Tranakayiro. 

3 The name has been read as Khada- 
Siri (Sircar, SI. p. 187). But the read- 
ing is wrong as the letter read as Kha, 
has the rounded bottom of in- it is also 
quite unlike kha in ‘ Dak'hinapatha- 
panne? (/. 2); ‘ dikha * (/. 5), ‘ dakhina ’ 
(/.6) and ‘ dakhinayo ’ (7.7): above all the 
i sign over da is very clear in /. 4. 



SATAKANI I 


303 


negatived by the sastraic injunction against a woman performing sacrifices. 
The great number of sacrifices performed, the numerous epithets applied 
to Satakani I and the words ‘rdyasa - (ya)nehi vitkam’ make it more pro- 
bable that both Satakani I and his queen performed the sacrifices. 

On palaeographical grounds two coins from Western Deccan are to 
be ascribed to Satakani I. They are a large lead coin and a small potin 
coin connected by the common type — elephant and the symbolical represen- 
tation of a river with fish. The legend is ‘Ratio Siri-Sdtasa’ ( Sdtakanisa ). 
Rapson remarks: ‘The very striking similarity between the characters of 
the coin legend . . . and the inscri. Dcvi-Nuyanikaya Ratio cha Siri-Sdtaka- 
nino over the rilievo figures of the king and queen in the Nanaghat cave 
can scarcely be explained except by supposing that they belong to the same 
period and refer to the same king.' 1 

The synchronism of Kharavela with Satakani I is not as certain as Rap- 
son supposed it to be. 2 Kharavela’s date cannot be determined more 
precisely than within the limits of half a century 190-140 b. c. and only a 
few years separate Satakani I from Satakani II. 

The brilliant reign of Satakani I was short. Perhaps he fell in battle. 
During the minority of his two surviving sons Vedisiri and Satisiri, the 
queen-mother governed the kingdom with the help of her father Mahara- 
thi Tranakayiro, and had the long Nanaghat record cut in a cave which 
served as a rest-house for caravan traders from Paithan to Kalyan. The 
sculptured rilievo figures of Sirnuka, Satakani I, Nayanika, the five princes 
and Maharathi Tranakayiro, had probably been cut in the previous reign. 

Vedisiri would seem to have died in minority as not a single Purana 
mentions him. I ikumdra Satisiri is the Saktikumara of the Jaina legends, 
he would seem to have been the successor. But with great unanimity the 
Puranas place Purnotsanga after Satakani I. If the spelling Purnotsantu 
of Vayu is correct and ‘santu’ is a mis-sanskritization of ‘Sati’, Purnot- 
santu and Satisiri may be identical. 

Whoever may have been the fourth king, his reign witnessed great events 
in Northern India. Pushyamitra delivered the coup de grace to the totter- 
ing Mauryan empire, and started the Suriga dynasty on its imperial career. 
Skandastarhbhi mentioned as the fifth king in some versions of the Matsya 
Purana is perhaps an imaginary name. 

Satakani 11 — c. 166-111 b. c. : If the unanimous testimony of the Puranas 
can be relied upon, Satakani II had the longest reign in the annals of the 
Satavahana dynasty. He is in all probability the Satakamni of the Hathl- 
gumpha and Bhilsa inscriptions. 3 The latter records a donation made 
by Vasithiputa Ananda, foreman of the artisans under Siri-Satakani. 


1 BMC A WK. p. xciii 

2 According to K.P. Jayaswal, Kharavela 
belongs to the early years of the second 
century b.c. According to Raychau- 
dhuri, he belongs to the first century 
b.c. El. xx 75; PH Aik pp. 338, 348 

3 Bhilsa va with the short neck andround- 


ed body, the ornate i sign and the 
angular ta with the vertical atthe centre, 
stamp the Bhilsa inscription as later than 
the Nanaghat inscription, say perhaps 
of the period between 75 and 20 b c 
(MASI. no. 1 pp. 5,21) 



304 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


Certain copper and potin coins of Eastern Mahva fabric picked up in 
Western Deccan bear partially the legends Radio Satakcdimha: they carry 
the devices of the springing lion or that of an elephant with upraised trunk. 1 
On palaeographical grounds these coins can be ascribed to Satakuni II. 
If indeed they belong to his reign. Eastern Malwa would seem to have been 
wrested some time during this reign from a successor of Pushyamitra. 
A late and distorted echo of this Satavahana-Sunga conflict is preserved 
in the Malavikdgnimitra where Vidarbha (Berar). a part of the Satav ahana 
empire, is referred to as a newly established kingdom. 2 

According to the Puranas, Satakani IPs successor was Laritbodara. 
In all probability he is the striker of the two Siri-Satavahana coins. They 
are square pieces of cast copper. On the obverse is an elephant with up- 
raised trunk and the well-preserved legend Siri-Sdclavalm ( nasa ); on the re- 
verse is the usual Ujjain symbol. 3 4 Larhbodara’s son and successor 
Apllaka is something more than a mere Puranic name. A copper coin of 
his, recently discovered in Madhya Pradesh, attests the extension of Sa- 
tavahana power in the north-east in or before his reign. It is a large piece, 
blank on the reverse; on the obverse is a well-eeeeuted elephant with a 
goad before it. What is above the elephant may be a mndipacla. The 
legend is ratio Siva Siris = ApV.akasa} The Puranas are agreed that 
Apllaka ruled for 12 years. 

From Apllaka to Hala (eighth and seventeenth respectively in the 
Puranic lists) there stretches a long period of darkness relieved only by a 
single point of light. But it is probable that fresh evidence, like the Apllaka 
coin, may not only confirm the order in the Puranic lists, but also open 
a vista into the period. The exception referred to is Kuntala Satakarni. 
In his Kdmasiitra, Vatsyayana relates cryptically that Kuntala Satakarni 
struck his chief queen Malayavatl with fingers held like a pair of scissors. 
The commentator adds that the king did so w'hile engaged in amorous 
sport, and that his act brought about the queen’s death; the name Kun- 
tala Satakarni is explained as Satakarni born in the province of Kuntala 
( Kuntala vishaye jatatvat tat sameikhyah). 5 It may be that he was bom 
there while his father was governor of Kuntala. The Kavyamimamsa 


1 Square pieces with double line border, 
fish, and svast'ka symbol. 

2 Achiradkishthitu i, 8 (Malaviku.) 

3 The two pieces are in the coin-collection 
of S. A. Joglekar of Poona and were 
bought in Aurangabad. 

4 K. N. Dikshit remarks: "On numis- 
matic grounds the place of this ruler 

is more with the later kings of this dy- 
nasty than with the earlier ones as in- 
dicated in the Puranas.’ (YB. of ASB. 
i 1935, p. 28). But the blank reverse 
of the coin certainly attests its early 
age. The early forms of sa and ra 
which are only slightly developed forms 
of those of the Siri-Sata coins, and the 


primitive i sign (a shed curve), stamp 
the coin as an early one in the series. 
No doubt the elephant is better exe- 
cuted than those on the later coins 
The hon on Siri-Satakani J[' s coins is 
also better executed than that on the 
coins of Sakasena, a much later king. 

5 kartarya Kv.ntaloh Sa'akarnih S-ltciva- 
lmno mahadevthi Mclaynvanm (jaghand). 
Tue commentator adds, ‘sa hi maha- 
clevttn Aialaym atl inachiraprafivihita- 
mandyum-ajata Laldmapi madanotsene 
grihitmesham dmhnd jatardgastama- 
onigacluhhaii-riigrikshiptachetdh iirasi 
kartaryciiibula-prayuktayd jaghmcC —(n 
7 bitkntaprakaranam) 



LITERARY ACTIVITY 


305 


of Rajasekhara reveals that Kuntala Satavahana ordered the use of Pra- 
krit, to the exclusion of every other language, by the ladies of his inner 
apartments. 

Hala — c. a.d. 20-24. If the greatest among the early Satavahanas in war 
was Satakani I, the greatest in peace was Hala, the poet-king. His short 
reign of five years falls in the beginning of the Christian era. He is men- 
tioned in the Puranas, the SaptasatJ, LilavaJ, Abhidhana Chintdmani and 
Desmamamala. Hemachandra considers Hala as a variation of Satavahana. 
It is equally probable that it is a variation of Satakani. 1 

The reign introduces us to an epoch of lively literary activity. The use 
of Prakrit in Asokan inscriptions and its continuance under the Satavaha- 
nas as the official language raised Maharashtrl Prakrit from the level 
of a patois to that of a literary idiom. 2 This brilliant flowering was the 
result of three centuries of victory, conquest, and commercial prosperity. 
A splendid court attracted poets and kept them within its glittering orbit. 
The joy of the period found expression in light and profane literature. 
The most important work is Sattasai or Gathasaptasati. It is an antho- 
logy of 700 erotic verses in Maharashtrl Prakrit and in the Arya metre. 
The language is well adapted to singing, and the stanzas produce the 
effect of something light and airy. The collection presents a great 
diversity. Some verses are frivolous, others witty, and yet others are sad 
and sentimental. Some breathe high philosophy, while others describe 
love episodes of all sorts. 

It is said that the king himself compiled these verses. He evidently 
worked on the basis of an earlier anthology by a certain Kavivatsala, 
and unified and embellished it considerably. It seems to have undergone 
numerous changes at the hands of subsequent editors. But there is no 
doubt that its kernel dates from the first century a.d. The work also 
points to the previous existence of a considerable body of lyrical litera- 
ture in Maharashtrl Prakrit. Bana evidently refers to this work when he 
says that Satavahana made an immortal and refined treasure ( kosa ) of 
song adorned with fine expressions of character like jewels. Merutunga 
in his Prabandhachintamani states that Satavahana of Pratishthana devo- 
ted himself to collecting the compositions of all great poets and wise men; 
he bought four gathas for 40 million pieces of gold. The Saptasati had 
a great influence not only on Prakrit but also on Sanskrit authors. 

Very probably Gunadhya’s Brihatkatha (Great Romance) belongs 
to the same period. An inscription of the ninth century a.d. tells us only 
that Gunadhya was a friend of the Prakrit language, while tradition of 
the eleventh century makes him a minister of a Satavahana king. The 
great work which set the model for later collections of literary stories is 
unfortunately lost. We have only minute fragments, a few verses, inserted 


1 On coins ‘Satakani is abbreviated into 
‘Sata’ or ‘Sada’; and ‘Hala’ is a varia- 
tion of ‘Sata’. 

2 It is however to be noted that the Nana- 
ghat record is not in pure Prakrit as has 

39 


often been imagined. It is in mixed 
dialect, e.g., ‘prajapatino’ (/. 1), apra- 
tihatachakrasa (/. 2), bhariya (/. 4) and 
charitabrahmacliariyaya (/. 5) 



306 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


in the Prakrit Grammar of Hemachandra. It is said to have been written 
in the Paisachl language. Keith refers the dialect of the work to the 
Yindhya region, while Grierson connects it with Kashmir. According 
to some, the geography of the work coupled with the mention of Greek 
craftsmen and artists, suggests North-Western India. But as early as the 
first century b.c. we meet with a crowd of Yavanas in Western Deccan. 

Three works which are said to owe their origin to the Brihatkatha are 
the Brihatkatha-sloka-samgraha of Budhasvamin, Brihatkatha manjarj 
of Kshemendra, and the Kathasaritsdgara of Somadeva. The first-men- 
tioned compilation (eighth century a.d.) is an abridgement in verse of the 
Nepalese recension of the Brihatkatha. The Kashmir version was made 
use of by Kshemendra and Somadeva (eleventh century a.d.). A measure 
of the importance of Gunadhya’s work is revealed by the reverence with 
which writers like Dandin, Subandhu and Bana speak of him. 

The short reign of Hala is marked by military events too. They form 
the theme of a Prakrit work entitled Lilavai. Hala’s commander-in- 
chief Vijayanamda served the king in a successful campaign in Ceylon, 
and on his way back encamped at Sapta Godavari Bhlmam, which is iden- 
tified with the modern Draksharama. There he learnt all about Lllava- 
tl, daughter of the king of Ceylon by his Gandharva wife; and the princess 
lived near Draksharama. On his return to the capital, the general narrated 
the whole story to the king. Hala then proceeded to the place, killed the 
demon Bhishanana, and married Lilavatl. The substratum of history 
in all this legendary matter would seem to be certain military campaigns 
undertaken in Eastern Deccan, a part of which had probably already 
come under Satavahana sway; but some scholars doubt even this. 

Three centuries of imperial expansion and consolidation were crowned 
by achievements not only in the literary but also in the economic field. 
It was an epoch of great industrial and commercial activity. There was 
developed an amazing city life. Old towns were expanded and glorified 
and new towns sprang up. Great merchants out-topped many a feuda- 
tory, and spent a part of their wealth in costly Buddhist donations. In- 
scriptions reveal to us various classes of workers: dharimikas (corn dea- 
lers), mdlakaras (florists), kolikas (weavers), tilapishakas (oil-pressers), 
odyantrikas (fabricators of hydraulic engines), kasakaras (braziers), tesa- 
kdras (polishers), kamaras (iron-workers), lohavdniyas (ironmongers), 
avesanis (artisans), lekhakas (writers), chammakdras (leather-workers), 
gadhikas (perfumers), suvanakaras (goldsmiths), manikaras (jewellers), 
mithikas (stone-polishers), selavadhakis (stone-masons), and vadhakis 
(carpenters). Some or perhaps most of these crafts and trades were or- 
ganized in guilds. Each guild had an alderman called setliin, and had 
its office in the nigamasabha (town-hall). Most of the craftsmen were as 
well-to-do as those of Europe in the Middle Ages. It is to their artistio 
taste nad munificence that we owe some of the costliest Buddhist monu- 
ments of the period. 

The great inland market-towns were Pratishthana (Paithan), Tagara 



Maritime Trade 


307 


(Ter), Juntiar, Karahakataka (Karadh), Nasik, Govardhana (near Nasik), 
and VejayantI (Banavasi). The market-towns in Eastern Deccan, of which 
the most important was Dhannakataka (modern Dharanikota), seem to 
have been fewer in number than in Western Deccan. 

Of maritime trade with the West we get a direct, accurate, and full ac- 
count from such foreign sources as Pliny, Strabo and the author of the 
Periplus ; and these notices are corroborated by inscriptions from Nasik, 
Kanheri, Karla, Kuda, Bhaja, and Bedsa, The active trade with the West 
was as much due to the prosperity of the Hellenistic world (330-160.B. c.) 
and of the Roman empire, as to the peace and progress of the Deccan. 
The factors which quickened commerce and industry in the Hellenistic 
world were the dispersion of the enormous wealth of the Persian monar- 
chy by Alexander, the urbanizing policy of his successors, the rise of Alex- 
andria and her direct contact with India through the Nile- Red Sea-canal 
which had been opened in 190 b. c. Thanks to the Roman preference for 
the sea route and the discovery of the monsoon by Hippalus (a.d. 45), 
trade between the Roman empire and India increased twenty-fold. The 
discovery of the monsoon not only shortened the voyage, but by enabling 
ships to cut across the open sea, greatly reduced the danger from the pi- 
rates who infested the coastal waters. This enormous growth of trade 
drained the Roman empire of its gold; after which, and partly as a direct 
consequence, the trade came to a stop. 

The west coast of the peninsula was studded with many ports. The 
northernmost port was Bharukachchha (the Barygaza of the Periplus, and 
modern Broach) which commanded the widest markets in northern and 
western India. There were 'brought down to Barygaza ... by wagons 
and through great tracts without roads, from Paethana (Paithan) carne- 
Han in great quantity, and from Tagara (Ter) much common cloth, all 
kinds of muslins and mallow cloth.’ From Ujjain came agate, carne- 
lian, Indian muslins and all things needed for the welfare of the country 
about Barygaza. From Kashmir, the Hindu Kush and Kabul came costus, 
bdellium and spikenard. The imports into Broach were ‘wine (Italian 
preferred, but also Laodicean and Arabian); copper, tin, and lead; coral 
and topaz; thin clothing and inferior sorts of all kinds; bright-coloured 
girdles a cubit wide; storax, sweet clover, flint glass, realgar, antimony, 
gold and silver coins (Roman aureus and denarius) on which there is a pro- 
fit when exchanged for the money of the country; and ointment, but not 
very costly and not much. And for the king there are brought into those 
places very costly vessels of silver, singing boys, beautiful maidens for the 
harem, fine wines, thin clothing of the finest weaves and the choicest 
ointments.’ 

Below Barygaza stood the ancient port of Soparaka (modern Sopara, 
eight miles north of Bombay). The early Buddhist tale of Purnamaitra 
speaks of it as a great seaport and the residence of a wealthy merchant 
by name Purna, who had made several successful voyages in the Great 
Ocean (the Erythrean Sea). The Buddha is said to have visited the town. 



THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


and many western cave inscriptions refer to the visit. The greatest Sata- 
vahana port in Western Deccan and the natural terminus of the Ter- 
Paithan route was Kalyan on the eastern shore of the Bombay harbour 
(the Kaliana of inscriptions and the Calliena of the Periplus). The for- 
tunes of this port were bound up with those of the Satavahana and Ksha- 
trapa dynasties. One of the early Satakanis made it a great port and 
cleared the waters of pirates. But in the period of Kshatrapa occupation, 
it was almost closed and its trade diverted to Barygaza by a longer and 
more tedious route running through Nasik. The other ports were Semylla 
(modern Chaul about 25 miles south of Bombay), Mandagora (perhaps 
Bankot, now a fishing village of no importance), Palaepatmae (modern 
Dabhol), Melizigara (Malayagiri, modern Rajapur near which the Kuda 
caves are situated), Byzantium (corruption for Vizadrog or Vijayadurga), 
Togarum (Devgarh), and Aurannoboas (Malvan). The southernmost 
ports in the Satavahana empire were the islands of Sesecrienae ( Vengurla 
rocks), the Aegidii (Goa), Chersonesus (Karwar, an active port as late as 
the sixteenth century exporting fine muslins, pepper, cardamoms, cassia 
and coarse blue dungari cloth) and White Island (Pigeon Island). 

It is curious that of the large volume of Satavahana coins which this 
trade, during four centuries, must have called into being there are now 
only faint traces. We have not a single Satavahana coin of the period 
from the first century b.c. to the end of the first century a.d. 

KSHATRAPA INVASION— A SET-BACK c. a.d. 35-90 

The course of history does not run smooth for long. The steady growth 
of the Satavahana empire during three centuries and the rapidly mounting 
prosperity which reached its culmination in literary and maritime acti- 
vities came to an end with the reign of Mandalaka or Purlndrasena in the 
second quarter of the first century a.d. There followed half a century of 
great crisis in Satavahana history. It looked as though the whole empire 
would be overwhelmed and ruined by the invasions of foreigners, the Wes- 
tern Kshatrapas. This was also the period of Kushana advance in Northern 
India. The Western Kshatrapas of the Kshaharata line (vamsa), certainly 
foreigners from the north and probably Pahlavas (Parthians), first establish- 
ed themselves in Western Rajaputana, Gujarat and __ Kathiawar. They 
then tore away Eastern and Western Malwa from the Satavahana empire ; 
and advancing south they overwhelmed Northern Konkan (Aparanta), 
Northern Maharashtra which was the heart of the Satavahana empire, and 
even Southern Maharashtra as far as Banavasi (VaijayantI). Long before 
these invasions, the Yavanas had entered Surashtra and Aparanta; and 
in the first century b. c. we come across a crowd of Buddhist Yavanas, 
thoroughly indianized, in the inscriptions at Karla (Poona district). 
Very probably these Yavanas did something more than welcome the Ksha- 
trapa invaders, or else Gotamlputa, the retriever of Satavahana fortunes 
would have had no reason to direct his attacks against the Yavanas also. 



SAKA INROADS 


309 


The Kshaharata inroads were probably the result of the advance of the 
Kushan power in Northern India. This advance drove the Saka princes of 
the north in search of new lands either on their own account or on behalf 
of the Kushans. According to the Periplus the Saka invasions were the 
result of quarrels among the Parthian princes in Indo-Scythia (the lands 
from the Indus delta to Kathiawar). Commercial, cultural and racial 
antipathy, deepened and prolonged the Satavahana-Kshatrapa struggle. 
The earliest known member of the Kshaharata dynasty was Bhumaka, 
known to us from coins only; and they are found on the coastal regions 
of Gujarat and Kathiawar, and sometimes in Malwa. His successor, 
immediate or after an interval, was Nahapana, known from numerous 
coins and a few inscriptions. On coins he bears the title rcljan, and in 
inscriptions Kshatrapa and Mahakshatrapa. His inscriptions in Nasik, 
Karla and Junnar (Northern Maharashtra), his numerous coins, and his 
son-in-law’s charities at many places in Northern and Southern India, prove 
a great extension of the Kshaharata empire at the expense of the Satava- 
hana. The Periplus faintly echoes this struggle in the statements that the 
kingdom of Mambanes (Nahapana) began with Ariake (Aparanta), and that 
Greek ships sailing for the port of Kalyan were diverted to Barygaza. 
According to the same work the capital of Nahapana was Minnagara 
(Min means Scythian) in Ariake. Jayaswal refers to a Jaina work which 
mentions Bharukachchha as the capital of Nahapana. 

Nahapana’s inscriptions bear the dates 41, 42, and 46. Whether these 
are the regnal years of Nahapana or have to be referred to the Vikrama 
or Saka era has been a point of controversy. 1 The synchronism of 


Cunningham and Nilakanta Sastii 
refer the dates to the Vikrama era; 
Rapson refers them to the Saka era 
and R. D. Banerji to the regnal jears 
of Nahapana. Bhagwanlal Indraji 
supposed that the representations of 
Nahapana’s head on his silver coins 
were portraits, and that a long reign 
can be infened from the extraordinary 
diversity the portiaits exhibit. Rap- 
son remarks; ‘. . . now that a vast num- 
ber of specimens are available for com- 
parison it is clear that no such conclu- 
sion can safely be drawn from these 
representations of the king's head . . . 
They cannot possibly have been por- 
traits, in the true sense of the word, 
of any single individual. And it is 
evident that, however this diversity 
may be explained, any indication of 
the difference of age they may afford 
cannot be trusted to determine the 
length of Nahapana’s reign’ (BMC- 
A IVK.cx.). 

Banerji has pointed out that the 
Pattcixuti GiithCis and Jinasena’s 
Harivatiiia assign a period of 40 and 
42 years respectively to Naravahana 


(Nahapana). But these are late tra- 
dition. 

The Andhau inscriptions of Chashtana 
(Mahakshatrapa) and Rudradaman 
(Kshatiapa) Saka 52 (a.d. 130) shat- 
ter Rapson’s theory. Chash|ana was 
Kshatrapa for some time, and then 
Mahakshatrapa with his son Jayadaman 
and later on with his grandson Budio- 
daman as Kshatrapas under him. So 
Chashtana’s reconquest of the Ksha- 
trapa dominions could not have taken 
place before Saka 49 (a.d. 127). Even 
taking for granted that Nahapana was 
defeated in the last known year of his 
reign 46 and according to Rapson 
(a.d. 124), we are led to the parado- 
xical conclusions that two years after 
the much boasted rooting cut of the 
Kshaharata race and of the destruction 
of Sakas, Pahlavas andYavanas by Go- 
tamiputa, Chashtana was on the scene 
avenging the Kshatrapa defeat; and the 
exploits of Gotamiputa aie described 
in glowing terms twenty-four years 
after his death. There is nothing in 
the inscriptions of Pujumayi IPs reign, 
at least up to his 19th regnal year (a.d. 



310 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


Nahapana with GotamTputa Siri-Satakani, whose reign falls between a.d, 
72 and 95 according to the scheme of chronology adopted here, makes a 
discussion of the dates in Nahapana’s inscriptions not as necessary as it 
might otherwise have been. If GotamTputa had defeated a successor 
of Nahapana, we should certainly have found in the Jogelthembi hoard 
of 13,250 coins some coins, ofNahapana's successors, for no Western 
Ksbatrapa failed to strike coins and all the 9,000 coins re-struck by Gota- 
miputa belong to Nahapana. There is more point in re-striking the coins 
of a vanquished ruler than those of his predecessor. A Nasik inscription 
of GotamTputa records the grant of a field which ‘till some time before 
the grant’ ( ajakalakiyam ) belonged to Ushavadata (Rishabhadatta), the 
son-in-law of Nahapana. The Karla inscription of GotamTputa is cut 
just below that of Ushavadata. Commentaries on a gatha in a Jaina 
work (as we shall see) speak ofNahapana's defeat and death at the hands 
of a Satavahana. The striking similarity between the script of the Nasik 
and Karla inscriptions of GotamTputa and Ushavadata, as well as its quick 
and distinctive development from GotamTputa to Pulumayi II, and from 
Pulumayi II to Siri-Yana, shatters the theory of an interval between Gota- 
mTputa and Nahapana. In fine, the dates in Nahapana's inscriptions can- 
not be referred to the Vikrama or Saka era. They represent most probably 
the regnal years of Nahapana. 

The Saka advance into the Satavahana dominions seems to have begun 
at least five years before the final defeat and death of Nahapana. The 
Kshatrapa armies ably led by his son-in-law, the Saka Ushavadata, 
overwhelmed Malwa, the Narmada valley. Northern Konkan, the western 
part of modern Berar, and Northern and Southern Maharashtra. The inva- 
ders effected a permanent lodgement in these countries, and almost oblite- 
rated Satavahana power in Western Deccan. But it is not certain whether 
the capital (Paithan) was lost or not. The Satavahana kings who suffered 
would seem to have been Sundara Satakani, Chakora Satakani and Siva 
Sati ; and of these, the first two had very short reigns (one year, and six 
months respectively). The conquerors brought in new ideas and institu- 
tions— silver coinage, a free use of Sanskrit in Prakrit inscriptions, a 


1 1 5), to show that the Satavahana em- 
pire had suffered diminution. Ac- 
cording to Raychaudhuri ( PHAl. i 
p. 407) the Andhau inscriptions do 
not require a revision of Rapson’s 
theory. In his opinion there is nothing 
to show that Chashtana’s family came 
to power after the destruction of 
the kshaharalas. It may have been 
ruling in Cutch and some adjacent 
territories as the Andhau inscrip- 
tions suggest, while the Kshaharatas 
were ruling in Malwa and parts 
of Maharashtra. The absence of any 
title for Ghsamotika, father of Chash- 
tana, makes the latter the first ruler of 
ihe dynasty. As Pulumayi II does 


not seem to have lost any part of his 
dominions before his nineteenth >ear 
(the year of the Nasik inscription of 
Balasiri), even supposing that Naha- 
pana v as defeated in 46 (the eighte- 
enth year of Gotamiputa's twenty-four 
year reign), Chashtana's advance could 
not have taken place before 46+6-! 19 
=Saka71; and Rudradaman was then 
on the scene as Mahakshatrapa. 
Above all the Periplus (1st century 
a.d.) mentions Nahapana, but not 
Chashtana: and Ptolemy (2nd century 
a.d.) who mentions Chashtana does 
not mention Nahapana. See ch ix 
where the later date for Nahapana is 
upheld. 



NAHAPANA 


311 


practice altogether absent in the inscriptions of the Satavahanas ; and 
a more vigorous patronage of Buddhists and Brahmins, a patronage 
inspired as much by political as by religious motives. 

Soon after his great and resounding triumphs, and perhaps in conse- 
quence of them, Nahapana assumed the title of Mahakshatrapa, and made 
Ushavadata the ruler of the newly won territory. The latter, though a 
Saka, bore a Hindu name and was a staunch adherent of Puranic Hinduism. 
What is more interesting, of his eight inscriptions seven are full, not of 
his military exploits, but of his religious benefactions. He made gifts of 
money and cows on the river Barnasa, possibly modern Banas, a tribu- 
tary of the Chambal; gave 16 villages to gods and Brahmins, fed 100,000 
Brahmins all the year round, built rest-houses at Bharukachchha, Dasa- 
pura (Mandasor in Western Malwa), Govardhana,andSorparaga (Sopara), 
and established free ferries by boats on the Iba, Parada, Damana (near 
Daman), Tapi (Tapti), Karabena, and Dahanuka (the creek south of 
Dahanu in the Thana collectorate). He also bathed in the Pokhara tank 
(Pushkar, seven miles west of Ajmer) and gave cows to Brahmins. To the 
Charakas, members of a school of the Black Yajur Veda, lie gave 32,000 
stems of coconut trees. Statesmanship impelled the orthodox Ushava- 
data to patronize the Buddhists also. To the monks on the Trira-'mi hills 
(Nasik) he donated a large cave, cisterns, lands and perpetual endowments 
of 72,000 kcirslidpanas. To the monks at Valuraka (Karla) he gave 
a village. These are clearly efforts at consolidating Kshatrapa power 
in the newly conquered territories. But of administrative consolidation, 
the division of the country into districts each under an officer, there is 
no clear evidence. 

Money, which has always been a great power in human affairs, became 
plentiful during this epoch. Ushavadata’s large endowments of money, 
the Jogelthembi hoard, and the Jaina tradition that Nahapana was known 
for his wealth, prove this fact. For his wide dominions, stretching from 
Ajmer to VaijayantI, Nahapana struck numerous silver coins. “They are 
apparently imitated as regards size, weight, and fabric, from the hemi- 
drachms of the Graeco-Indian kings.’ They set the standard followed 
by the later Western Kshatrapas, and some of the later Satavahanas for 
nearly 300 years, and afterwards by the Guptas and the Vakaiakas. The 
silver required was imported either in the form of ingots or Roman coins. 
The remark in the Pcriplus that there was a profit when Roman coins were 
exchanged for Indian money perhaps refers to this great and sudden rise 
in the demand for bullion. 

The chronology adopted here makes Nahapana a feudatory of the 
Kushanas. D. R. Bhandarkar arrives at the same conclusion on the 
strength of the mention of svama (according to him the Kushan gold 
coin) and Kushanamula (value of Kushanas, coins named after the great 
Kushanas) in Ushavadata’s inscription at Nasik. 1 The last known year 

1 Carmichael Lee. 1921, pp. 199-200 a form of Kushana. In line 2 kitsa- 

"Kusana’ cannot however be considered namula and chhanka are mentioned 



312 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


of Nahapana (46) may have been the last year of his reign as well as of his 
dynasty. 


SATAVAHANA RECOVERY, c. a.d. 90-150 


Gotamiputa Siri-Satakani—c. a.d. 72-95 : After half a century of great 
tribulation and obscure existence under the foreign heel, the Satavahana 
power made a sharp and total recovery in the reign of Gotamiputa Siri- 
Satakani (Gautamiputra Sri Satakarni), the greatest of the Satavahanas. 
His exploits, which inaugurated a happy century, and but for which Sata- 
vahana history might have worn a very different aspect, form the theme 
of the Nasik pmsasti of his mother den Balasiri; it was incised twenty 
years after the hero’s death, ‘the funeral oration of a disconsolate mother.’ 
The occasion for the inscription was the donation to the monks of the 
Bhadayanlya sect of a cave begun by Gotamiputa and completed by his 
mother. 

The first sixteen years of Gotamiputa’s reign would seem to have been 
spent in great preparations for an all-out attack on the well-entrenched 
Kshaharata power. We see the king campaigning in Mamalahara (Poona 
district) in the seventeenth year and in Southern Maharashtra the next 
year. 1 The conquest of territories in the north would seem to have taken 
place later. Ushavadata and Nahapana were defeated and killed, and the 
Kshaharata dynasty was rooted out. The Saka, Yavana and Pahlava set- 
tlers in Western Deccan were either put to the sword or driven out. The 
feudatories of the Kshaharatas and other petty princes were subdued. 2 
A gathd in the Niryukti, a commentary on the Avasyakasutra, contains 
a legend which preserves the memory of these occurrences. Nahapana’s 
capital was Bharukachchha. The commentaries on the gathd say that 
Nahapana had amassed great wealth and his adversary, Satavahana of 
Paithan, had mustered a powerful army. The latter was unable to cap- 
ture Bharukachchha even after a siege of two years. He then resorted to 
a stratagem and induced Nahapana, through one of his ministers, to spend 
all his money on charities ; when Nahapana’s treasury became depleted, 
Satavahana attacked the capital and easily captured it. The Kshatrapa 
fell fighting; his empire was wiped off the map, a triumph beyond the 
utmost dreams of Satavahana ambition. 

After his great victories, Gotamiputa recovered not only the Satavahana 
provinces of Akara (Eastern Malwa), Avan tl( Western Mahva), Anupa(the 
Narmada valley), Vidarbha (Berar), Asika, Asaka and Mulaka (Northern 
Maharashtra), and Aparanta (Northern Konkan); he also annexed the 
Kshatrapa provinces of Kukura (Western Rajaputana), and Suratha 


together as the purpose for the invest- 
ment of money. Senart translates kuid- 
namula as ‘cloth money’ and D. C. 
Sircar as ‘money for minor necessities.’ 
Nasik No. 4 (El. vm p. 71), speaks of 


the VejayantI armv. 

2 Khakharuta \aso. niraxau sake, rasa; Saka 
Pah.la\a-Ya\am nisudanasa Khatixa- 
dapa-muna-madana\u ; anekasamaraxc. - 
jiia-satu saghasa. 



GAUTAM1PUTRA SATAKARNI 


313 


(Surashtra) ; and though_they are not mentioned in the Nasik prasasti, the 
Kshatrapa provinces of Anarta, Svabhra and Maru lying between Kukura, 
Suratha and AvantI were apparently also annexed. Gotamlputa is also 
called lord of Vijha (Eastern Vindhya), Achhavata (Rikshavat or the 
Satpura hills or the Vindhyas running south of the Narmada through Berar 
nearly into Western Bengal), Parichata (the Pariyatra or the western 
portion of the Vindhya range and the Aravalli range running north 
through Ajmer), Sahya,Kanhagiri(Kanheri in Aparanta), Macha, Siritana, 
Malaya (southern portion of the Western Ghats), Mahida (Mahendra, 
the Eastern Ghats between the Mahanadx and Godavari), Setagiri 
and Chakora (southern portion of the Eastern Ghats). The mention 
of Chakora and Mahendra proves the inclusion of Kalinga and 
Andhradela in Gotamlputa’s empire. 

In his solicitude for the welfare of the flourishing Buddhist community, 
the Satavahana conqueror outdid his Kshatrapa adversaries. To the 
monks of the Valuraka caves he renewed Ushavadata’s grant of the village 
of Karajaka. To the Tekirasi (Nasik) monks, he donated lands and a 
cave equal to that of Ushavadata. But while the Saka had made donations 
to monks of all sects ( chatudisa bhikhusagha), Gotamlputa favoured the 
Mahasamghikas at Karla, and Bhadayaniyas at Nasik. His patronage 
of the followers of the Vedic religion is revealed by the epithet ‘ ekabamhana ’ 
applied to him in the Nasik prasasti. 

Gotamlputa signalised his epoch-making victories not only by renewing 
the donations of Ushavadata, but also by building the town of Benakataka 
in the Govardhana district (Nasik), and re-striking the coins of Maha- 
kshatrapa Nahapana. He also assumed the pompous titles of raja-raja and 
maharaja , and took over the Kshaharata prefix ‘svami’. It is symptomatic 
of the changed times that no sacrifices were performed to celebrate these 
victories. In the record of Balasirl the victor is described in conventional 
phrases like ‘one who had won numerous battles ; whose victorious banner 
was unvanquished ; whose capital was unassailable to his foes ; who 
was in prowess equal to Rama, Kesava, Arjuna and Bhlmasena; not 
inferior in lustre to Nabhaga, Nahusha, Janamejaya, Sagara, Yayati and 
Ambarlsha; who, vanquishing his enemies in a way as constant as in- 
exhaustible, unthinkable and marvellous in battles fought by the Wind, 
Garuda, the Siddhas, the Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Charanas, the 
Moon, the Sun, the Asterisms and the Planets, appeared to be himself 
plunging into the sky from the shoulder of his choice elephant.’ Not so 
conventional would seem to be the words ‘his chargers had drunk the 
waters of the three oceans’ ( tisamuda-toya-pita-vahana ), for Bana refers 
to a later Satavahana, probably Yana, as trisamudradhipati and the Sata- 
vahana empire extended from sea to sea ever since Gotamlputa’s time, if 
not earlier. 

If Gotamlputa was great in war, he was greater still in peace. His 
brilliance as a soldier was supported by gifts of statesmanship and a reso- 
lute sense of public duty. He had been instructed in all the branches 

4° 



314 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


of learning then thought to be necessary for the formation of the princely 
mind. The administration was based upon the twin foundations of 
Sastraic injunctions and humanism. The poor, weak, and suffering came 
in for special kingly attention. A fine balance was struck between 
the triple fountain-heads of human activity. Varnasramadharma was 
maintained ; but the rapid formation of sub-castes on a vocational 
basis was not checked. Taxes were not levied except in conformity with 
justice. As fast as the country was conquered it was divided into aharas, 
each under an amaclia. Towards the close of the reign either illness 
or military preoccupations made the king associate his mother with him- 
self in the administration of the country. 

GotamTputa is the first known Satavahana king to bear a metronymic, 
so common among his successors. The Satavahana metronymics are deri- 
ved from three Vedic gotras only (Vasishtha, Mathara and Gautama). 
This limitation would seem to have been the result of a system of cross- 
cousin marriages. The Ikshvaku records at Nagarjunakonda and 
Jagayyapeta unmistakably show that marriage was one of the channels 
through which metronymics were transmitted. Early inscriptions from 
Malvva have yielded a crop of metronymics derived from Vedic gotras, 
clan names, and localities. So it is permissible to infer that marriage with 
noble families in Malwa brought metronymics into the Satavahana family. 
The epithet ‘ ekabamhana ’ applied to GotamTputa may also contain a veiled 
reference to the Brahmanical origin of his mother. If so metronymics 
would seem to have entered the Kshatriya Satavahana family through 
a pratiloma marriage . 1 

Rapson’s view that GotamTputa Siri-Satakani bore the title of Viliva- 
yakura in the district of Kolhapur is untenable . 2 It is a name borne 
by a line of feudatory princes of Southern Maharashtra. And the gotra 
metronymics they bore were acquired by marriage with Satavahana 


1 While on their coins in Western 
and Eastern Deccan many of the 
later kings use their metronymics, not 
one of them does so on his coins minted 
for his northern provinces (the southern 
part of modern Madhya Pradesh). 

* A number of copper and lead coins 
from the Brahmapuri mound at 
Kolhapur excavated by Dr. H. D. 
Sankalia in 1945 have revealed the 
names of three princes. On the evi- 
dence of re-struck coins their order 
would be as follows :- 

Vasithiputa Vi jivayakura 
Madhariputa Sivalakura 
Gotamiputa Vi Jivayakura. 

Ptolemy mentions Baleokuros (Vili- 
vayakura) as a contemporary of Puhi- 
mayi II. Rapson remarks that Ptolemy 
might be excused for not knowing that 
Pujumayi and Vi jivayakura were one 
and the same person and quotes a 


rather far-fetched analogy. He says: 
’A foreigner might be excused for not 
knowing that in our own country, the 
Prince of Wales, the Earl of Chester 
and the Duke of Cornwall were the 
same person,’ (BMCA H'A'. p. xl.,n.l). 
Rapson’s identification upsets the 
order in the Puramc lists and leaves 
unexplained the absence on the Kolha- 
pur coins of the Ujjain svrnbol em- 
ployed by all the later Satavahanas 
on their coins. Moreover, as Rapson 
himself points out, nowhere do the 
Satavahanas employ the Kolhapur coin 
device (the bow and arrow) which is 
nearer to the arrow and thunderbolt 
of Nahapana’s coins. Przyluski 
(JRAS. 1929) explains ‘Vilivayakura’ 
as horse-town’. To him ‘Vijivaya’ 
is a form of Valava=horse, and ‘Kura’ 
is a non-Aryan word meaning ‘town’. 



ZENITH 


315 


princesses. Equally unsound is the theory of the Bhandarkars that Gota- 
mlputa and his son Pulumayi II ruled conjointly. 1 Gotamiputa’s reign 
would not seem to have extended much beyond his last known year. 

Pulumayi II— c. A. D. 96-119 : Gotamlputa the Great, bequeathed 
his empire to his son VasithTputa Sami-Siri-Pu}umayi. His reign marks 
the zenith of Satavahana monarchy. The name Pulumayi also spelt as 
Pulumavi and Pulumal, would, like those of Vilivayakura, Adavi, Rulu 
and Ehuvula, seem to be of Dravidian origin. The new ruler, not only 
kept his father’s empire undiminished but even augmented it. His ‘ship 
with double mast’ coins picked up on the Coromandel Coast between 
Madras and Cuddalore prove an extension of the empire in the south. 2 
They also prove the attention paid by the Satavahanas to naval power, 
maritime trade and overseas colonisation. It is perhaps to commemorate 
his conquests that Pujumayi II founded the town of Navana(ga)ra, and 
assumed the title of Navana{ga)rasami. In addition to the old title of 
Dakshinapathesvara, he bore also the title of Maharaja. He is mentioned 
in the largest number of Satavahana inscriptions and is the first to be men- 
tioned in an inscription from Eastern Deccan. Two Nasik inscriptions 
of the second and sixth years of his reign are fragmentary. A Karla inscrip- 
tion of the seventh year records the donation of a village by the Maha- 
rathi Vasithiputa Somadeva of the Okhalakiyas to the monks of the 
Valuraka caves. The Nasik inscription of Balasirl was incised in the nine- 
teenth year. That of year 22 is a royal order to Sivakhadila, the governor 
of Govadhana, to the effect that the village of Sudasana given in the 
nineteenth year, for the embellishment of the Queen’s Cave ( Devileria ) 
shall be exchanged for the village of Samalipada. The great number, 


The theory of conjoint rule has been 
built on very shaky foundations. 
According to D. R. Bhandarkar such 
a theory alone can save us from a chro- 
nological absurdity. He refers the 
Andhau inscriptions of Saka 52 (a.d. 
130) to the reign of Rudradaman, suc- 
cessor of Chashtana. According to 
him Gotamlputa’ Siri-Satakani’s reign 
falls between a.d. 106 and 130, for he 
defeated Nahapana in his eighteenth 
regnal year and Saka 46 of Nahapana's 
inscription. No theory other than 
that of conjoint rule by Gotamlputa 
and his son Pujumayi II can reconcile 
these conclusions with Ptolemy’s 
statements that Pulumayi II was a 
contemporary of Chashjana. But 
Bhandarkar himself has, later on, 
referred the Andhau inscriptions to 
the conjoint rule of Chashtana and 
Rudradaman (IA. xlvii p. 154, n. 26) 
Another argument is that cave no. 
3 at Nasik is granted in the twenty- 
fourth year of Gotamlputa and the 


nineteenth year of Pujumayi. But 
the Nasik inscription of Pujumayi is 
a non-official grant. Then the question 
arises, how can one cave be granted 
by two persons, at two different times, 
in two different ways? Very probably 
Gotamlputa could not complete the 
cave ; and it was left to his mother to 
complete and embellish it 25 years later. 
As she then had no part in the govern- 
ment of the country, her grant is non- 
official. If Gotamlputa and Pujumayi 
had ruled conjointly, we would have 
found at least one inscription men- 
tioning them together. And Nasik 
No. 5 (£7. viii 8) mentions the queen- 
mother and Gotamlputa as ruling 
conjointly. Professor N. Sastri has 
pointed out ( JRAS . 1926, 'Later 
Satavahanas and Sakas’) that Naha- 
pana’s coins re-struck by Gotamlputa 
are sufficient to shatter Bhandarkar’* 

2 Rapson, BMC A WK. 22-3 



316 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


wide distribution, and pleasing variety of Pulumayi’s coins, which set the 
standard for his successors, indicate military campaigns and a great econo- 
mic prosperity consequent upon a revival and extension of Satavahana 
power. And during his reign, the stupa at Amaravatl, which is as old as 
the third century b. c., was enlarged and encased in richly sculptured 
marble slabs and surrounded by a railing. 

The fame of Pulumayi, as well as the likeness of the name to that of 
Ptolemy (Ptolemaios) when corrupted in the mouths of the Egyptians, 
induced Ptolemy the Geographer to refer to Baithana-Basileion ( Siro ) 
Ptolemaios or Polemaios, (Paithan, the capital of Siri-Pulumayi). Another 
statement of the same writer reveals the contemporaneity of Pulumayi 
with Chashtana ( Ozene Basileion Tiastanes). 

The official records of Gotamiputa Siri-Satakani and Pulumayi, taken 
along with a few private Buddhist records, throw welcome light on the 
polity of the vast empire. Unfortunately there is no literary source to 
corroborate or supplement this information. Unlike the secular and 
militarist government of Chandragupta Maurya and the Buddhist state 
under Asoka, the Satavahana administration was very simple, and confor- 
med to the injunctions laid down in the Dharma Sastras. Though the 
later Satavahanas bore metronymics and do not mention their fathers, 
monarchy was throughout hereditary in the male line ; and metronymics 
were only an institution for the regulation of marriages. It is remarkable 
that though polygamy seems to have been the rule, there is no ev idence 
of disputed successions, fratricidal wars, or partitions of the empire. 
Though they were the authors of great victories and vast conquests, the 
Satavahanas, like their Mauryan predecessors, weie content for the most 
part with the modest title of rajan. They laid no claim to Divine Right. 
They had absolute power in theory, but it was checked in practice by cus- 
tom and the Sastras. The king was the commander in war, led his armies 
in person to the battle-field, and often threw himself into the thickest 
of the fray. All princes were styled kumaras. The Cheta practice of 
styling the crown-prince yuvaraja and associating him in the administra- 
tion of the country is absent among the Satavahanas. But the Mauryan 
practice of appointing princes as viceroys was followed. During the 
minority of the crown prince, either the queen-mother or the brother of 
the late king governed the country. 

In an age of simple and undifferentiated administrative machinery, feu- 
datories of different grades played an important part. The highest class 
consisted of petty princes bearing the kingly title raja and striking coins 
in their own names. Such princes existed in the Kolhapur and North 
Kanara regions. Next in rank to petty princes came the maharathis 
and mahabhojas. On the analogy of senapati and mahasenapati 
these titles are certainly to be derived from Rathika and Bhoja which 
also appear as ethnic names ; and they would seem to have been created 
in order to reward the Rathikas and Bhojas for the help they rendered to 
the Satavahanas in their wars. Both titles were from the beginning 



FEUDATORIES 


317 


hereditary and restricted to a few families and localities (Thana and Kolaba 
districts of Bombay State and North Mysore). The wives of the officers 
concerned assumed the corresponding feminine title. But the status 
of a mahabhoja was apparently higher than that of maharathi, for 
whilst maharathi inscriptions are dated in Satavahana regnal years, not 
a singie mahabhoja inscription is so dated; and one Kuda inscription 
comes very near to being dated in the years of a mahabhoja {mahabhoje 
Mamdave Kochipute velidate). While the title of maharathi is coeval with 
the Satavahana dynasty (third century b. c.), that of mahabhoja would 
seem to have come into existence in the first half of the first century a.d., 
in the wake of an extension of Satavahana power in which the Bhojas 
would seem to have played an important pait. 

The mahabhojas were feudatories of Satavahanas, as that part of 
Western Deccan where mahabhoja inscriptions are found (Kuda) was 
included in the Satavahana empire. Moreover they were related by blood 
to the feudatory maharathis and were feudatories of the Chutus, the succes- 
sors of the Satavahanas in the southern parts of Bombay State and 
the northern parts of Mysore. What is more certain is that the maha- 
rathis were feudatories of the Satavahanas. They date their inscriptions 
in Satavahana regnal years. Whilst ordinary governors of provinces 
make grants of land and villages to religious bodies under the explicit and 
detailed commands of the sovereign, the maharathis grant in their own 
names villages with the fiscal immunities attached to them. Either from 
the beginning or during the days of Satavahana decline, the maharathis 
of the Chitaldrug region enjoyed the additional privilege of issuing coins 
in their own names. The Nanaghat and Kanheri inscriptions show that 
the maharathis had marriage relations with the ruling family, much in 
the same way as the mahatalavaras had with the Ikshvaku dynasty in 
Eastern Deccan c.a.d. 235-287). Rapson remarks : ‘That they were . . . 
closely connected with the Andhra kings by family or by caste seems to 
be showm, as Pandit Bhagwanlal observed, by the use of metronymics 
which they have in common with them.’ But the metronymics of the period 
under review are not peculiar to a caste or family. They are borne 
by Brahmins, artisans, and even Buddhists, monks as well as laymen. 
And unlike the Satavahanas, some maharathis bear metronymics not deri- 
ved from Vedic gotras and give their fathers’ names in their inscriptions. 
It is a really striking fact that, unlike the feudatory inscriptions of later 
times, the maharathi and mahabhoja inscriptions should be as short as 
the votive inscriptions of ordinary persons. We miss in them the lauda- 
tory epithets applied to the feudatories of the succeeding age. 

Two more feudatory titles were created towards the close of the Suta- 
vahana period. They were those of mahasenapati and makatalavara. 
Their origin is to be sought in the difficulties of governance inherent in a 
rapid expansion of the empire in all direciions. The first known epigra- 
phic record to mention the office of mahasenapati is the Nasik inscription 
of the twenty-second year of Pulumayi Il’s reign. In the records of his 



318 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


successors it is mentioned twice. The mahasenapati under Pulumayi II 
holds a civil function, namely the charge of the records (lekha) depart- 
ment. Under the last of the Satavahanas (Pulumayi IV), a mahasenapati 
was governor of a janapada, a division consisting of several districts 
(aharas). The Alluru inscription (Nandigama taluk Krishna district) men- 
tioning a mahatalavara belongs, on paleographical grounds, to the Satava- 
hana period. Talaxara would seem to have been an old official title in the 
Andhradesa; and the Satavahanas apparently created out of it a feudatory 
title much as they had done in Western Deccan. Regarding the meaning 
of mahatalavara, Vogel says: ‘The second member of the compound is not 
a Sanskrit word but seems to be a term borrowed from some Dravidian 
language. . . . We must leave this question to the decision of the student 
of South Indian languages. Can the word have any connection with the 
Tamil talaiyari (a village watchman)?’ The title of mahasenapati borne 
by mahatalavaras excludes the derivation from talavay (commander) 
which is, however, a very late term. The Kanarese tajavara (a watchman) 
very nearly corresponds to our talavara; the Tamil talaiyari also means 
watchman. Possibly all these terms are related. 

Barring the districts controlled by feudatories, the empire was divided 
into janapadas and aharas. A janapada which under Asoka was a part 
of a division under the rajjuka, consists in this period of a number of 
aharas. An ahara corresponds to the Pallava ‘ rashtra ’, Salankayana 
‘ vishaya ’ and modern ‘district’. Each ahara derived its name from its 
headquarters. The division below that of ahara was gama. Amachas 
who were in charge of aharas were non-hereditary governors subject to 
periodical transfers; and both the division and the office were inherited 
from Mauryan times. The officer in charge of a gama was gamika. The 
other functionaries known to us are mahatarakas (Great Chamberlains), 
maha-aryakas, bhandagarikas (store-keepers), heranikas (treasurers), 
mahamatras, nibamdhakaras (officers in charge of registration of docu- 
ments, the akshapatalikas of later times), dutakas who carried royal 
orders, and pratihdras. 

The government lived from hand to mouth. In a police state with a 
simple administrative machinery the taxes were neither heavy nor many. 
The sources of income were : proceeds from the royal domain, the sait 
monopoly, ordinary and extraordinary taxes on land, and income from 
court-fees and fines. Many taxes, including the assignments to soldiers 
and officials, would seem to have been paid in kind. 

The period from Pulumayi II to the reign of Siri-Yana witnessed com- 
mercial intercourse with, and the colonisation of, the Far East. It was also 
the most glorious epoch of Buddhism in the Deccan. On the question 
of the age and causes of the colonising movement as also about what parts 
of India participated in it, there is less general agreement than one would 
wish. It is, however, safe to assert that the entire coastal tract from Kaveri- 
pattinam to Tamralipti took part in this movement, while South India 
had the preponderating share. All scholars are agreed that the lively 



TRADE AND COLONISATION 


319 


maritime commerce between India and the Far East in articles of luxury 
preceded the Hindu colonisation of Sumatra, Java, Indo-China and Malaya. 
While Ferrand would refer both the movements to the last two centuries 
B c.. Coedes prefers the second century a.d. We are sure that 
maritime trade existed in the first century of the Christian era, and that 
colonies had been established by the following century. Pliny the Elder 
and the author of the Periplus know of Chryse, the land of gold i.e. Far- 
ther India. And the latter refers to very large ships called colandia which 
made the voyages to Chryse and the Ganges. According to the Chinese 
annals we have as early as the second century A. d. a Hindu ruler in Java. 
By the time of Ptolemy (second century A. D.) the trade with the Far 
East had assumed great proportions. He mentions Jabadiou, ‘the Island of 
Barley’ and the names and locations of many places in Malaya and Indo- 
China as also many ports in Eastern Deccan and the Chola country. 
The great ports in Eastern Deccan were Kantakossyla (Kantakasela of 
epigraphic records), Koddura (modern Gvdur in the Bandar taluk of the 
Krishna district), and Allosynge. North of Allosynge was apheterion 
the great starting-point of ships bound for Golden Chryse. A stupa 
pillar fragment hearing an inscription of the time of Siri-Yaiia Satakani 
was found at Chinna Ganjam (Repalle taluq, Guntur district) near the 
sea-shore. A fragment of a stupa pillar was also found at Kollitippa, a 
few miles to the north of Chinna Ganjam. In the vicinity of Chinna 
Ganjam, Rea found the remains of three stupas. As Jouveau-Dubreuil 
has pointed out, an inscription dated Saka 1166 (a.d. 1244) mentions 
Motupalle as a port, and Motupalle is only three miles to the north-east 
of Chinna Ganjam. It is therefore highly probable that Motupalle or its 
vicinity contained a port or ports through which flowed a part of the 
trade of the Maisolia region between two great navigable rivers. Below the 
Maisolia region also, there would seem to have been ports though their 
names have not been preserved. As already stated coins bearing the device 
of a ship with masts and the legend saniica s(i)r(ri) have been picked up 
on the Coromandel Coast between Madras and Cuddalore. 

The causes of the twin movements of trade and colonisation were many 
and varied. The peace and progress, and the royal encouragement of 
trade and colonial activities which followed the extension of the Satavahana 
power to Eastern Deccan, was a very potent cause. The inner impulse 
of the Aryan culture to spread far and wide, the Roman need for articles 
of luxury like spices, fragrant woods, and resins, sandals, aloes, camphor 
and benzoin, and the desire for gold, a commodity which had grown 
scarce when the disturbed conditions in the north had stopped the flow 
of that metal from Siberia, were some of the other causes. 

Buddhism flourished throughout the period of the Hindu Satavahanas 
who first tolerated and later actively patronised it. It made great strides 
in the last two centuries b. c., as the Buddhist caves and epigraphs at 
Pitalkhora, Nasik, Bhaja, Bedsa, Kondane and Kuda (in Western 
Deccan), and the stupas at Bhattiprolu, AmaravatT, Goli, Ghantasala and 



320 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


Gummadidurru testify. The Karla Chaitya- cave, ‘the most excellent in 
Jambudvlpa’, belongs to the first century b. c. But it is the first two centuries 
of the Christian era, especially the period of Satavahana recovery a. d. 
90-180, that constitute the most glorious epoch of Buddhism in the Deccan. 
In Western Deccan the Kshaharatas and their rivals the Satavuhanas vied 
with one another in scooping out viharas (monasteries) at Nasik and in 
making grants of villages, lands and money to the monks keeping the 
vassa in the caves at Nasik and Karla. The royal example was followed 
by feudatories and officials. Trade with the West which had by now 
reached its climax, and trade with the East which was fast expanding, 
made it possible for crowds of merchants, craftsmen, women, and even 
monks and nuns to vie with one another in making costly donations to 
the Buddhist Church. In Western Deccan these donations include, among 
other things, rock-cut chaityas and viharas ; and in time came bhojana- 
ma{apas (refectory), and upathanasala (hall of reception), both attached 
to viharas. In Eastern Deccan as already noted, the Amaravatl and many 
other stupa complexes were either built or enlarged and embellished. But 
here it was all the fruit of private effort. 

The objects of worship were stupas in the open or chaityas, the sacred 
tree with the empty throne, the footprints oftheMaster, the trisfda emblem, 
the Dkcmn:achakka onapillar, and relics of the Buddha and of other great 
teachers. The common ways of worship were the circuimmbulution of 
the stupa and kneeling before the sacred object with joined hands, or falling 
fiat on the ground. The offerings made were cloth, flowers and liquids. 
Pile-images to Buddhist centres seem to have been the order of the 
day. Towards the close of the Satavahana period there supervened 
Mahayana Buddhism and worship of figures of the Buddha. 

The Buddhist church teemed with sects. The Bhadayaniyas flourished 
at Nasik and Kanheri, the Dhammottariyas at Sopara, and the Mahasan- 
ghikas at Karla and its vicinity. But there was no undue rivalry amongst 
these sects, and monks of different sects kept the vassa in the same vihdra ; 
and a preacher of the Dhammottariya sect donates a pillar of the Karla 
Chetiyayhara which was the special property of Mahasahghikas. The 
chief sects in Eastern Deccan were the Chetikiya, Pubbaseliya, Avaraseliya, 
Utayipabhahi and Mahavinaseliya. The Buddhist world abounded in 
great teachers. In Western Deccan Mahasthaviras, Sthaviras, Charakas, 
and Tevijas (those who knew the Tripitaka) walked the land, enlightening 
the faithful on the Law of the Master. In Eastern Deccan, monks 
nuns, and laymen, flocked to teachers versed in the Vinaya and Dhamma. 
Even nuns were teachers ( upajhiyayini ) and had scores of female 
pupils ( atevasiiii ) under their tuition. 

The Siitavahanas were followers of the Vedic religion. The third king 
performed numerous sacrifices, named one of his sons Vedisiri, and 
worshipped Sariikarshana, Vasudeva, Indra, the Sun and the Moon. 
Later kings bear such names as Yana and Sivaskanda. The Saptasati 
refers to the worship of Indra, Krishna, Pasupati and Gaurl. Names 



B. 320) 


6. THE DOMINIONS OF THE ANDHRAS AND WESTERN KSHATRAPAS c . a.d. 150 






SAKA REVIVAL 


321 


like Sivapalita, Sivakhadila, Sivadatta, Kumara etc., point to the worship 
of Siva and Skanda, while Vishnupalita, Venhu and Lachinika attest the 
worship of Vishnu. In the Saptasati, Hari or Trivikrama is said to be 
superior to other gods. The Krishna cycle of legends was already fully 
developed, but the Vedic religion would seem to have flourished better in 
the Kshatrapa dominions (Gujarat, Kathiawar and Malwa). 

The closing years of Pulumayi’s reign witnessed a revival of Western 
Kshatrapa power under Chashtana son of Ghsamotika, of the Kardda- 
maka line. This Kshatrapa rally was probably initiated and supported 
by the Kushanas. Chashtana first established himself in those Ksha- 
trapa provinces which had not been overrun by Gotamiputa — Cutch and 
Sindhu-Sauvlra. He then recovered the lost Kshatrapa provinces of 
Kukura, Suratha, Maru, Svabhra, Avanti and Akara and celebrated these 
great victories by the assumption of the title of Mahakshatrapa. To cope 
with the administration of these vast and newly conquered provinces, he 
associated first his son, and then his grandson in the administration of 
the country as Kshatrapa. According to Ptolemy his capital was Ujjain. 

Rapson’s view that Pulumayi II was the son-in-law of Rudradaman, 
the grandson of Chashtana, is based on the assumptions that the dates 
in Nahapana’s inscriptions belong to the Saka era, and that Satakarni 
is sometimes used distinctively and sometimes generally. So according 
to him the ‘Satakarni’ of the Girnar inscription of Rudradaman said to 
have been related to, and twice defeated by, the latter, is Pujumayi II. 1 
Therefore the Vasishthlputra Sri-Satakarni of the Kanheri inscription, 
wherein he is mentioned as the son-in-law of Mahakshatrapa Rudra 
(daman), must also be Pulumayi. Even granting that the Kshatrapa- 
Satavahana matrimonial alliance as revealed by the Kanheri inscription 
was purely political, it is highly improbable that Pulumayi, who accord- 
ing to Ptolemy was a contemporary of Chashtana, married the latter’s 
great-grand-daughter. Again, Rudradaman is said to have defeated 
‘a Satakarni not distantly related to him.’ Once Rapson’s reference of 
the dates in Nahapana’s inscriptions to the Saka era is abandoned, his 
identification ceases to be valid. 

Siri-Satakani— c. a. d. 120-149 : Vasithiputa Siri-Pulumayi’s successor 
was Vasithiputa Siri-Satakani, probably the former’s brother or grand- 
son. He is mentioned only in the Vayu-puraria which gives him a long 
reign of 29 years. His 600 coins from the Akola hoard presenting three 
types of alphabet corroborate the Puranic regnal period. He is 
the Siri-Satakani of the Chanda coins, the Vasithiputa Siva-Siri Sata- 
kani of the lead coins from the Godavari and Krishna districts, the Vasi- 
thiputa Hiru-Hatakani of a silver coin in the Prince of Wales Museum, 
Bombay, 2 the Vasishthlputra Sri-Satakarni of the Kanheri inscription, 

1 Dakshinapathapates Sdtakarner dvir ’The silver coin is modelled as regards 
api mrvyajam-arajity-arajiiya sarii- type, size, and weight on the Ksha- 

ba;hddhav(i)dura{ta)y a anutsiidanat trapa coinage. On the obverse it 

praptayasasa. bears the legend Vdsithiputasa and the 

4i 



322 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


and very probably also the Vasithiputa Chatarapana Siri-Satakani of a 
Nanaghat inscription. 1 His silver coin modelled on that of the Western 
Kshatrapas goes far to prove that he was the son-in-law of Rudradaman. 

Siva-Siri-Pulumayi — c. A. d. 150-56 : The Kshatrapa- Satavahana con- 
flict was reopened in the reign of the next king Siva-Siri-Pulumayi. 2 He 
would seem to be a grandson of Pulumayi II and is most probably the 
‘Satakarni’, lord of Dakshinapatha, defeated by Rudradaman. The 
Girnar inscription states that Rudradaman ‘obtained good report because 
he in spite of having twice in fair fight completely defeated Satakarni, lord 
of the Deccan, on account of their not distant connection {saihbandha 
avidura(ta)ya ) did not destroy him.’ The cause of the renewal of conflict 
can be easily guessed. Rudradaman was bent on avenging the defeat of 
Nahapana and recovering the lost Kshatrapa provinces. Though 
Anupa and Aparanta, the jewels of the Satavahana crown, were recover- 
ed, Asika, Asaka, Mulaka and Kuntala eluded his grasp. The words in 
the Girnar inscription ‘did not destroy him (Satakarni)’ are perhaps a 
veiled admission of this fact. 

Siri-Sivakhada-Satakani — c. a.d. 157-159 : Siva Siri Pulumayi III was 
succeeded by his son Siri-Sivakhada Satakani (the Sivaskanda of the 
Puranas). We cannot identify him with the raj an Sivamaka Sada 
(Satakani) of an Amaravat! inscription; 3 but he is certainly the Khada 
Satakani of three coins from the Akola hoard. 

DECLINE 


Siri- Yana— (a. d. 160-1 89) : The Satavahana empire was worn out by 
age, long wars and centrifugal tendencies. The decline set in towards 
the later part of the long reign of Siri-Yana, the successor of Khada-Sata- 
kani. His two Kanheri inscriptions dated in the seventh and tenth regnal 


head of the king (the first known coin 
portrait of a Satavahana monarch) 
and on the obverse the Ujjain symbol, 
the chaitya of two tiers and the legends 
*( . . . ) Hatakanisha Arakh (itasha).’ 
The peculiar ha is either the Kharoshthi 
ha inverted or is connected with the 
cursive ha on Kshatrapa coins. The use 
of two varieties of the Brahmi alphabet 
and two different dialects on coins is 
perhaps reminiscent of the use of the 
Brahmi, KharoshthI and Greek on the 
coins of the Western Kshatrapas. 

1 It may be suggested tentatively that 
‘Chatrapa’ can be a form of ‘Chha- 
trapa’ on the analogy of ‘Chula’ for 
‘Chhula’ and ‘Chamtamula’for ‘Chham- 
tamiila’. ‘Chhatarapa’ is a form of 
‘Chhatrapa’ Sans. ‘Kshatrapa’. ‘Cha- 
tarapana 1 is a form of ‘Chatarapanaka’ 
for sometimes the ‘anaka’ ending in 


names is snortenea into ana e.g. Vira- 
mna for Viramnaka. The ’name 
Chatarapapa could have been borne 
only by the Satavahana son-in-law 
or grandson of Rudradaman. It is 
difficult to insert another name in the 
later Satavahana list. 

8 The Puranic words Sivd-sri-xai-Puloma 
tu saptaiva bhavita nyipah were also 
translated by Pargiter as : After Pulu- 
mayi there will be Siva Sri.’ (DKA. 
p. 71 n. 18) Siva and Sri are honorific 
prefixes. Moreover after Pulumayi 
II we have a Satakani. Above all. 
4 coins of Siva-Siri-Pu lumavi come 
from the Akola hoard. The Vishnu 
Parana has Satakarnih Sna Srih,' 
473° ^tokorni * : Wilson’s tr. p. 


8 Luders, List no. 1279 



ABHIRAS AND OTHERS 


323 


years, the Nasik inscription of the seventh year, and the two inscriptions 
from the Guntur district, one of which is dated in the twenty-seventh year 
of his reign, show that he ruled over both Eastern and Western Deccan. 
His silver coin from Sopara, like that of Vasithiputa Siri-Satakani is mo- 
delled on Western Kshatrapa coinage; and if it was issued for a newly 
conquered province, we could infer that he recovered Aparanta, a pro- 
vince which had been lost to the Western Kshatrapas a few decades 
earlier. It was the last episode in a long and tragic conflict. The other 
two silver coins of Siri-Yana were obtained in Amreli (Kathiawar) and 
Baroda. Rapson says : ‘It would be hazardous to conclude from the 
provenance of these two specimens that the Andhra power was extended 
northwards of Aparanta into the domains of the Western Kshatrapas 
during the reign of Sri-Yajna.’ 1 His coins with the horse device show that 
the victory was celebrated by an asvamedha sacrifice. 

Pargiter has shown that some of the Puranas were redacted during 
Siri- Yana’s reign. He is perhaps the Satavahana whom Bana refers to as 
trisamudradhipati and as friend of a mendicant by name Nagarjuna. 
Hiuan Tsang also refers to Nagarjuna P’usa as a contemporary of king 
Sha-to-p’o-ha (Satavahana) or Leading Light (Yin Leng). The latter 
quarried a monastery for him on the mountain Po-lo-mo-lo-ki-li, 300 li 
to the south-west of the capital of Kosala. According to Tibetan tradi- 
tion a monk Nagarjuna expounded Madhyamika philosophy, and sur- 
rounded the stupa at Dhanyakataka (Amaravati) with a railing. 

The numerous coins of the reign are as varied in type and denomi- 
nation as they are widely distributed. They come from Gujarat, Kathia- 
war, Sopara and the districts of Chanda, Akola (Madhya Pradesh), 
Godavari and Krishna (Andhradesa). The Chanda potin coins bear the 
elephant device, and those of the Sopara fabric bear the portrait head of 
the king. From Eastern Deccan come sackfuls of lead and copper coins 
bearing horse, elephant and chaitya devices. In additionto 1/16, 1/4, 3/8, 
1/2, 3/4, 7/8 and 1 kdrshdpanas (issued by Pulumayi II also), Siri-Yana 
issued 1-1/8 and 1-3/4 kdrshdpanas. Wars in the west and a great commer- 
cial prosperity in the east explain this plentiful issue of currency. 

The closing years of Siri-Yana’s reign were clouded by a disaster. The 
Abhiras broke the political unity of the Deccan by slicing off the territory 
around Nasik. The Traikutakas cannot be included in_the dynasty of ten 
Abhiras, as they existed for over two centuries, while Abhiras, according 
to the Puranas, lasted only for 67 years. The Traikutakas (whose era 
starts with a.d. 249) were therefore successors of the ten Abhiras men- 
tioned by the Puranas as being the successors of the Satavahanas; the 
Abhira power would therefore have been established in the Nasik region 
about a.d. 183. 2 The earliest mention of this people is in the Mahabha- 
shya of Patanjali. 3 Ptolemy refers to their country (Abiria) and places 


1 BMCAWK. p. xc 5 Kielhom’s ed. i p. 252 

* For another view see ch. xi 



324 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


it between the Indus delta and Kathiawar. They first sprang into promi- 
nence as hereditary officers under the Western Kshatrapas. Abhira 
Rudrabhuti was a general ( sendpati ) under Rudrasiritha I (Saka 103, 
i.e., a.d. 181). The founder and the only member of the Abhira dynasty 
known from epigraphs is rajan Madhariputra Isvarasena, son of the 
Abhira Sivadatta. The Nasik inscription dated in tlm ninth year of his 
reign is in perfect Sanskrit, but the mode of dating is Satavahana. 

Svami-Sakasena: The successor of Siri-Yana was Madhariputa Svami 
Sakasena. But for the find of the lion coins from the Andhradesa 
(Krishna and Godavari districts) bearing the legends Siri-Saka Sada 
and elephant coins in the Akola hoard with the legends Saka Satakani, 
the inclusion Madhariputa Svami Sakasena’s name in the Satavahana 
line w ould have been difficult ; for the name, while foreign to the restrict- 
ed and peculiar nomenclature of the Satavahanas, is nearer to that of the 
Abhira king just mentioned, and though the dating of the Kanheri inscrip- 
tions 1 is in the Satavahana style, the usual Satavahana honorific prefix 
siri is absent. 

Vijaya, whose reign was very short (six years), is known to us only from 
the Puranas and from four coins in the Akola hoard. His son and suc- 
cessor Vasithiputa Siri Chada Satakani reigned for ten years. An inscrip- 
tion dated in the second year of his reign comes from Kalihga (Kodavolu 
near Pithapuram in the Godavari district). 2 It records a donation by an 
amacha named Bbumika. Lead coins of this king bearing horse and chai- 
tya devices have been picked up in the Godavari and Krishna districts. 
Though no coin of Siri-Chada has been found in the Akola and Chanda 
hoards, it is certain that he ruled over the northern provinces (in Madhya 
Pradesh); for his immediate successor and the last of the main line, Pulu- 
mayi IV was still ruling over them. Though no trace of Pulumayi’s rule is 
found in Andhradesa, it undoubtedly formed part of his dominions, seeing 
that an inscription appertaining to him has been found as far south as the 
Bellary district,® and his coins are included in the Akola hoard. The 
inscription, dated in the eighth year of his reign, is found in a place 
between Myakadoni and Chinnakadaburu in the Adoni Taluq of Bellarv 
district. It records the construction of a tank by a certain householder, 
resident in Vepura, under gamika Kumaradatta. The village is said to 
have been situated in the Satavahani-hara which was a part of the Jana- 
pada under Mahasenapati Khamdanaga. On the coins in the Akola 
hoard the king’s name is spelt as Pulahamavi. 

FALL 

The story of the fall of the empire is much better documented now than 
it was three decades ago. We now have the Akola hoard of Satavahana 
coins and numerous inscriptions of the Ikshvakus from Nagarjunakonda. 


1 Luders, List nos, 1001-2 

2 Ibid. 1341; correction in Early History 


of the Andhra Country p. 71 n 107 
EL xiv p. 151 



THE END 


325 


In the light of these finds the disruption of the empire can be traced in 
some detail throughout its parts. It seems to have been partitioned 
among the five minor dynasties. A collateral line came to hold sway 
over the northern provinces. In the west the Abhiras very early appro- 
priated the territory around Nasik; the Ikshvakus carved out for them- 
selves a kingdom in the eastern (Krishna-Guntur) region; the Chutus 
took possession of the south-western parts and extended their power in 
the north and east; and the Pallavas filled the political vacuum in the 
south-eastern tracts. The Puranas, even in their present distorted and 
sketchy form, corroborate and supplement the picture drawn from ins- 
criptions and coins. They say: ‘When the kingdom of the Andhras has 
come to an end there will be kings belonging to the lineage of their ser- 
vants: 7 Andhras, and 10 Abhira kings; also 7 Gardabhins and 18 Sakas 
. . . The Srlparvatlya Andhras will endure 52 years, the 10 Abhira kings 
67 years, the 7 Gardabhins will enjoy the earth for 72 years, the 18 Sakas 
183 years’. 1 

Coins have disclosed the names of three kings of the Vidarbha line of 
Satavahanas. They succeeded the imperial Satavahanas in their northern 
provinces which roughly corresponded to the southern part of modern 
Madhya Pradesh. The three kings are Karna (or Kanha), Kuihbha, 
and Ruda Satakani. As Ruda Satakani seems to have ruled over the 
northern provinces and parts of Andhradesa, it is better to consider him 
as preceding Karna and Kumbha Satakarpi ; and the long verticals and the 
reascent of the letters on the Kumbha coin place its striker below Karna. 

In the Krishna-Guntur region Pujumayi IV was succeeded by Sivamaka 
Sada. But even this tattered remnant of Satavahana power was swept 
away by the Sriparvatiya Andhras (or Ikshvakus), whose ancestors 
had been feudatories ( mahatalavaras and mahasenapatis) under the Sata- 
vahanas. 

The Chutus of Banavasi (capital of Kuntala) were the most powerful 
of the immediate successors of the Satavahanas. Some scholars consider 
Chutu-kula to be a branch of the Satavahana-kula merely on the strength 
of a common surname. But the Satakani surname is borne even by a 
maharathi in the Chitaldrug region (Sadakana Kalalaya maharathi). 
It is, however, certain that the Chutu and Satavahana families were connec- 
ted by matrimonial ties, and that the ancestors of the Chutu kings were 
feudatories of the Satavahanas ( maharathis and mahabhojas). Large 
lead coins from Karwar bearing the legends rano Chutukulanamdasa are 
doubtless to be referred to the earlier and feudatory members of this 
dynasty. On the basis of certain identifications, which are by no means 
beyond doubt, Rapson makes out three generations and two reigns of the 
Chutus. ‘The two members of this family who are known to have reigned 
are Haritlputra Vishnukada Chutukulananda Satakarni and his grand- 
son Haritiputra Siva (skanda)-varman.’ 2 If the donors of the Kanheri 


DKA. p. 72 


BMCAWK. p. xliii 



326 


THE SATAVAHANA EMPIRE 


and the Banavasi inscriptions of Haritxputra Vishnukada Chutukulananda 
Satakarni are the same, we may surmise that the Chutu power reached as 
far north as Kanheri; and if the large lead coins from the Cuddappah 
and Anantapur districts bearing the legends Hariri 1 can be attributed 
to the Chutus, their kingdom may be supposed to have extended far 
towards the east as well. 


THE PURAlsJIC LIST OF ANDHRA (SATAVAHAN A) KINGS 


Modified in the light of Inscriptions and Coins 


No. Name 


1. Andhra Simuka 

2. Krishna 

3. Sri Satakarni 

4. Purnotsanga 

5. Skandastambhi 

6. Satakarni 

7. Lariibodara 

8. Apilaka 

9. Meghasvati 

10. Svati 

11. Skanda Svati 

12. Mrigendra Satakarni 

13. Kun tala Satakarni 

14. Satakarni 

15. Pujumayi (Pulomavi) 

16. Arishtakarna 

17. Hala 

18. Mandalaka 

19. Purindrasena 

20. Sundara Satakarni 

21. Chakora Satakarni 

22. Siva Svati 

23. Gautamiputra 

24. Pujumayi (Puloma) 

25. Sri Satakarni 

26. Siva Sri (Pujumayi) 

27. Sivaskanda Satakarni 

28. Sri Yajna Satakarni 

29. (Madharlputra Sakasena) 


Regnal 
period 

I.L. 23 

1 18 

I. C. 10 

18 
18 

I. C. 56 

C(?) 18 

C 12 

18 
18 
7 
3 

L 8 

1 

36 

25 

L 5 

5 
5 

L 1 

6 months 
28 

I. C. L. 21 

I. C. L. 28 

I. C. 29 

I.C. 7 

3 

I. C. L. 29 

I- C. (not in any Purana) [10] 


Mentioned 
also in 


1 Ibid. pp. Iiii, lxxxi, 25 



PURANIC LIST OF KINGS 


327 


No. 

Name 

Mentioned 

Regnal 



also in 

period 

30. 

Vijaya 

C. 

6 

31. 

Sri Chanda Satakarni 

I. C. 

10 

32. 

Pulumayi 

I. c. 

7 


I=Inscription 

C=Coins L=Literature 



As the Puranas tell us that there were thirty kings, two names have to be 
deleted from this list of early Satavahana kings. No. 5 bears a name 
unfamiliar to the peculiar and restricted nomenclature of the Satavahanas 
and Svati (no. 10) appears to be a repetition made simply in order to fill 
a gap. 



Chapter XI 


THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS. c. A. D. 200-300 
1. THE EARLY VlKATAKAS 

'T’he decline and dismemberment of the Satavahana empire followed 
the death of Yajna Satakarni which took place about the beginning 
of the third century a.d. Scions of the imperial family were ruling in 
different parts of the empire in the early part of that century; but these 
branches were gradually extirpated by new powers, many of which had 
originally owed allegiance to the Satavahanas. Wide regions of Madhya 
Pradesh, that appear to have been under a branch of the imperial 
family in the early half of the third century, came later under the occupa- 
tion of the Vakatakas who were the dominant power holding sway over 
considerable parts of the Deccan, often with portions of Central India, 
in the period between the fall of the Satavahanas and the rise of the 
Chalukyas. 

The ancestry and original home of Vindhyasakti, founder of the Vaka- 
taka dynasty, are wrapped in obscurity. His name appears to associate 
him with the Vindhyan region, while the name of his family is possibly 
derived from that of a locality or person called Vakata or Vakata. The 
Vayu Parana 1 refers to Vindhyasakti, his son Pravlra (Pravarasena I of the 
inscriptions) and the latter’s four sons who are said to have become kings. 
Reference is also made to the end of Vindhyaka rule possibly pointing to 
the extirpation of the Vakatakas from Central India by the Guptas. 
Pravlra or Pravarasena I is further said to have ruled for sixty years at 
the city of Kanchanaka (or at Purika and at Chanaka) and to have 
performed a number of vajapeya or vajimedha ( asvamedha ) sacrifices. 
The Vakatakas are mentioned in association with the Kailakilas, who are 
called Yavanas or Vrishas in the Puranas and may have been foreigners 
related to the Sakas of Western India and possibly also to the Nagas of 
Vidisa. While, however, Vindhyasakti is placed after the Kailakilas, 
the Nagas are mentioned between Vindhyasakti and his son Pravlra, and 
the relation between Pravlra and king Sisuka of Purika, mentioned 
immediately before him, is not specified. 

It is not easy to determine the value of most of the Puranic details about 
the Vakatakas that have been quoted above. It may be suggested on 
their basis that the founder of the Vakataka dynasty flourished in the 
country about Eastern Malwa when the authority of the Sakas of Western 
India was declining in that region owing to the rise of powers like the Nagas 
of Vidisa and semi-independent Saka chiefs such as Srldharavarman of 
1 Ch. 99, v. 364ff; cf. Pargiter, DKA. p. 49 



ORIGIN OF THE VAKATAKAS 


329 


the Sanchi inscription. 1 He rnay be supposed to have later extended his 
power across the Vindhyas at the expense of the later Satavahanas. It 
must, however, be remembered that most of the records of his descendants 
have been discovered in Madhya Pradesh and Berar in the Dcccan, while 
only a few epigraphs .of one of their feudatories have been found in 
Bundelkhund in Central India. 2 Epigraphic evidence shows that the 
Vakatakas had their headquarters in the Nagpur district of Madhya Pra- 
desh and the Akola district of Berar, and that Bundelkhand was governed 
through a viceroy or feudatory. 3 This may suggest that Vindhyasalcti 
was a feudatory of the later Satavahanas of Vidarbha, becoming power- 
ful with the decline of his masters, and that he and his son extended Va- 
le a taka power o\ or Central India. One cannot, however, be definite on 
this point as the possibility of the transference of the Vakataka capital to 
the Deccan with the advance of the Guptas in Central India in the fourth 
century is not entirely precluded. 

It is sometimes suggested that the origin of the Vakataka dynasty should 
be traced in the Deccan, because Vakataka occurs in one of the Amaravatl 
inscriptions as the name of a pilgrim who visited the Buddhist establish- 
ments at Am: avini about the third century a.d . 4 But there is no evidence 
to show that the personal name of this pilgrim had anything to do with 
the dynastic appellation of the Vakatakas and that the home of the pil- 
grim was actually in the Deccan. There is likewise little evidence to sup- 
port the conjecture that the Vakatakas derived their name from Bljnaur- 
Eagat in Bundelkhand and that the Puranic Kailakilas lived near the 
modern Kilakila river in the Panna State. 5 * 

The charters of the Vakataka kings are dated in regnal years and not 
according to any era. The theory that the era of a.d. 248-49 was founded 
by them is not supported by any evidence. 8 The date of the foundation 
of the dynasty has therefore to be determined from other evidences. 7 
The historical sections of the Paninas are usually ascribed to the second 
quarter of the fourth century, as they speak of no Gupta king by name and 
refer to Gupta rule only over Prayaga-on-the-Ganges, Saketa, and Maga- 
dha, indicating a date earlier than the subjugation of wide areas of northern 
India by Samndragupta about the third quarter of the same century. 
The same Puranic accounts, as already observed, not only refer to Vindhya- 
sakti, his son and grandsons, but possibly also to the end of Vakataka 
rule over parts of Central India. This seems to indicate that Vindhya- 
sakti and his son ended their rule considerably before the middle of the 


1 Cf. SI. pp. ISOff. Pargiter, DKA. 
p. 49; Raychaudhuri. PUAI.' p. 460 

2 Bhandarkar, List, Nos. 1709. 1710 etc. 

2 El. xxvi p. 137; xvii pp. i3 ff; Cll. 

iii p. 234 

El. xv no. 13 (27) p. 267. The palaeo- 

graphy of this record resembles that of 

the inscriptions of the Ikshvakus of 

the Krishna-Guntur region, who ruled 
in the third century. It seems, however. 


that the pilgrim bore the same name as 
the founder of the Vakataka dynasty, 
if it was named actually after a person 
and not a locality. 

5 Cf. Jayaswal. Hist, [mi pp, 66-68; 
see vol. ill ch. \iii of this history for 
further discussion of the origin. 
“Jayaswal, op. cit., pp. 108-11 
7 Cf. Successors of the Sdtaxahanas, pp. 
87-SO and notes 


4* 



330 


THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 


fourth century, and that the former possibly reigned in the second half 
of the third century. It is further known that Prithivlshena I, great-great- 
grandson of Vindhyasakti, was more or less a contemporary of Samudra- 
gupta whose son Chandragupta II was the father-in-law of Rudrasena II, 
son of Prithivlshena I . 1 The reign of the Vakataka king Prithivlshena I 
may therefore be assigned roughly to the third quarter of the fourth century 
and counting, according to the usual practice, twenty-five years to a gene- 
ration, his great-great-grandfather Vindhyasakti may be assigned to the 
corresponding quarter of the previous century. A late reference to the 
Vakatakas is noticed in the Vishnukunqlin records according to which , 
Madhavavarman I of that dynasty, who ruled in the sixth century, mar- 
ried a Vakataka princess * It is also to be noted that the Chalukyas who 
began to extend their power in the later half of the sixth century did not 
encounter Vakataka opposition. The Vakatakas are therefore known 
to have ruled from the third to the middle of the sixth century. 

Vindhyasakti, founder of the Vakataka family, was a Brahmana of the 
Vishnuvriddha gotta. No record of his reign has so far been discovered 
although he is described in the Ajanta inscription 3 of Harishena as a 
dvija and as a banner of the Vakataka family. No royal title is used in 
connection with his name in the Ajanta record; but its fragmentary cha- 
racter renders it uncertain whether he ruled without royal tides like Pushya- 
mitra Sunga. Little is known about the extent of Vindhyasakti’s domi- 
nions; but he seems to have been a powerful king who extended his sway 
at the expense of his neighbours. 

Vindhyasakti was succeeded by his son Pravarasena I, whose long reign 
seems to have begun in the third century. None of his own inscriptions 
has so far been discovered; but his achievements have been described in 
most of the records of his descendants. He was the real founder of the 
family’s greatness. He is styled samrat, or universal monarch, in some 
records. The Puranic account assigning to him a reign of sixty years and 
the performance of Vedic sacrifices seems to be based on fact. He is 
described in the records of the family as a performer of numerous sacrifices 
including four asvamedhas * The celebration of the asvamedhas was pro- 
bably in commemoration of the recent foundation of the Vakataka empire 
on the ruins of the earlier sovereignty of the Satavahanas. There is no 
doubt that Pravarasena I was a great champion of the Brahmanical reli- 
gion. He secured his position in the north by contracting a matrimonial 
alliance with the powerful Naga king Bhavanaga of the Bharasiva family 
of Central India. Bhavanaga’s daughter is known to have been married to 
Gautamlputra, a son of Pravarasena I . 5 It is not improbable that Pravara- 
sena extended his power in Central India at the expense of the Bharasivas 
whom he had defeated and that his celebration of the asvamedha 


Loc. cit.; El. xv. pp. 41 ff. 

Sue. Sat., p. 135; El. iv pp. 196-7. Some 
scholars assign the Vishnukun<fin King 
to the fifth century. 


a HAS. xiv 

4 Basim PI. El. xxvi pp. 1 37 ff 
CII. m p. 237 



ISVARADATTA 


831 


was in imitation of the ten asvamedhas performed by the Bharasivas 
who had conquered the whole land from Malwa to the Bhagirathi. 
Pravarasena I probably died in the first quarter of the fourth century, 
In regard to his reign it may be pointed out that theories 1 attributing to the 
early Vakatakas an all-India empire and representing them as the succes- 
sors of the Kushanas are based on little evidence. The history of 
Pravarasena’ s successors, who at least from the days of Rudrasena II 
became subordinate allies of the Guptas, will be treated in the next 
volume. 


2. THE ABHlRAS 

The Abhiras were possibly a foreign people who entered India in the 
train of the Sakas from a region in the neighbourhood of eastern Iran. 
Their name reminds one of Abiravan 2 between Herat and Kandahar. 
There were different Abhira settlements in many parts of Western and 
Central India. Although there is an Ahirwar 3 * or Abhiravata in Eastern 
Malwa, literaiy evidence usually locates the Abhiras in the Aparanta or 
western division of India. They are associated with the Sudras (placed 
by the Greeks in Northern Sind) 1 and both the peoples are often located 
about the place wnere the river Sarasvati lost itself in the Rajputana de- 
sert. 5 Aberia or Abiria, i.e. the Abhira country, has been placed by the 
Periplus of the Erythrean Sea (sec. 41) and Ptolemy’s Geography (vii, 
1,55) about South-Western Rajputana, between the lower Indus valley 
and Kathiawar. The kingdom of the Abhiras, mentioned in the Furanas 
among the successors of the Satavahanas, lay in the north-western re- 
gion of the Deccan possibly including Northern Konkan, i.e. Aparanta 
in the narrow sense of the term. 

The Abhiras are sometimes found to have been officers of the Saka 
rulers of Western India. An inscription 6 of a.d. _18 1 found at Gunda 
in Northern Kathiawar speaks of a tank dug by the Abhira general Rudra- 
bhuti, son of the general Bapaka, during the reign of Mahakshatrapa 
Rudrasimha I. Coins 7 of a Mahakshatrapa named Isvaradatta, dated in 
his first and second regnal years, show that he was an adventurer who was 
in temporary possession of the major part of the Saka territories for about 
two years. This Mahakshatrapa’s name which does not resemble any 
in the Saka genealogy, and the independent way of dating the coins show 
that he was not a Saka, though the suggestion that he was an Abhira is 
not supported by evidence. His rule of about two years is assigned by 
Rapson to the period a.d. 237-39 but by Bhandarkar, more plausibly, 
to a.d. 188-90. 8 


1 Cf. Jayaswal, op. cit., pp. 82-94 

* Cf. JNSI. vi p. 94 

* PHAIS p. 45S; JRAS. 1897, p 891 

* PHAI* p. 208 

* Sue. Sat., p. 242 


• EL xvi p. 235 

’ Rapson, BMC A WK. pp. cxxiv ff. 
« ASIAR. 1913, pp 227-30 



332 


THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 


Only one Abhira king is known, who may be regarded as a successor 
of the Satavahanas and the Sakas of Western India. This is Raja Ma- 
thariputra Isvarasena, son of Sivadatta, mentioned in a Nasik inscription 1 
of the ninth year of his reign. The record speaks of two investments of 
1000 and 500 karskapanas in the trade-guilds of Gevardhana (old Nasik) 
for the purpose of providing medicines for the sick among the Buddhist 
monks residing at the monastery on Mount Trirasmi. Tire benefactress 
was the Sakani Vishnudatta, daughter of Saka Agnivarman, wife of the 
Gcnapaka Rebhila, and mother of the Gcmpaka Vilvuvarman. From 
the fact that Sivadatta, father cf king Isvarasena, is credited with no royal 
title, Isvarasena appears to have been the founder of the Abhira royal 
family in the north-western part of the Deccan. He flourished some time 
after the death of Yajna Satakarni probably about the midcle cf the third 
century. It is thus possible to think that he was the founder of the so- 
called Kalachuri or Chedi era of a.d. 2-13-49. Little is known about 
Isvarasena’s successors, although the Puranas appear to speak of ten 
Abhira kings ruling for about sixty-seven years. 2 

The Nasik region in Northern Maharashtra certainly formed a part of 
the dominions of Abhira Isvarasena; but the actual extent of his kingdom 
cannot be determined. If the era of a.d. 248-49 was really founded by 
this king, the Abhiras may be supposed to have extended their power over 
Aparanta (Northern Konkan) and Lata (Broach-Nausari region of Gu- 
jarat) where the era is known to have been in use in the fifth cer.turv. 
The Kalachuris, originally of the Mahishmati region on the Nannada, 3 
possibly used the era after their conquest of areas foimerlv belonging to 
the Abhira kingdom. 

The Abhira kings continued to reign as late as the middle c f the fourth 
century when they came into conflict with Mayurasarman lour.dcr of the 
Kadamba family of Banavasi. The reference in the Chandr-ov alii inscrip- 
tion 4 to Mayurasarman's fight with the Abhlras and the Ttaikutakos 
points to the separate existence of the principality of the latter people, 
who possibly carved out a kingdom, at the expense of the Abhiras, in 
Northern Konkan. The Traikutakas, whose name is derived from that of 
the Trikuta hill in Aparanta, were possibly a branch of the Abhlras. They 
appear to have later appropriated most of the territories of the Abhiras. 
It is uncertain whether the Abhiras mentioned in the Allahabad pillar 
inscription 5 as a people subdued by Samudragupta about the middle of 
the fourth century, were those of the North-Western Deccan. The re- 
ference in this case may be to some other principality c-f the Abhiras of 
Central or Western India. 


1 Rapson, op. cit., pp. lxii-iii; EL vm 

p. 88 

* DKA. p. 45 

8 The Kalachuris were probably foreign- 
ers who entered India in the train of 
the Hunas. Their claim to descent 

from the ancient Haihayas of the dis- 


trict round Mahishmati in the Nar- 
mada valley seems to point to the area 
where they settled. 


record has been questioned,’ (NhTp. ’ 
p 238), but we have no doubt about il 
6 ClI. m pp. 1 ff. 



SANTAMULA 


333 


It is often believed 1 that the so-called Kalachuri or Chedi era was in 
use in different parts of India even in early times. There is, however, no 
evidence to prove its use in_the early period anywhere outside the terri- 
tories originally held by the Abhiras and the Traikutakas. The Kalachuris 
carried its use to Central India at a later date. 

3. THE BODHIS 

Coins* bearing the hill symbol like the issues of the Sakas of Western 
India, prove that there ruled certain kings of the Bodhi dynasty about 
the third century a.d. probably somewhere in the north-western part 
of the Deccan. Some coins bear the name of Bodhi or Sribodhi who 
may have been the founder of the dynasty. It is possible that the name 
indicates the Bodhi tree, and this would suggest that the Eodhis were Bud- 
dhists in faith. Other rulers of the family were Sivabcdhi, Chandrabodhi 
(Srichandrabcdhi) and Virabcdhi (Vrrabodhidatta). The Bodhis may 
have been successors of the Sakas and the Satavahanas; but nothing is 
known either about their relation to their contemporaries or about the 
end of the dynasty. 


4. THE IKSHVAKUS 

The main branch of the Satavahana family was ruling in the country 
round about the mouths of the river Krishna as late as the end of the 
first quarter of the thiid century, at which date it was ousted from that 
region by the Ikshvakus who must originally have been feudatories of 
the Satavahanas. Whether these Ikshvakus were a branch of the cele- 
brated Ikshvaku family of Ayodliya cannot be determined in the present 
state of cur knowledge. 3 

The founder of the Ikshvaku dynasty of the Andhra country was king 
Santamula (Chamtamula) who appears to have ruled in the second 
quarter of the third century. He performed the asvamedha sacrifice possib- 
ly to signalise the establishment of Ikshvaku sovereignty in the heart of 
the Andhra country and the overthrow of the Satavahanas. Little is 
known of the events of the reign of Santamula or of the extent of his domi- 
nions. The Ikshvakus, who are probably called Sriparvatiya Andhras 
in the Puranas, appear to have ruled from the city of Vijayapuri in the 
Nagurjnnakonda valley of the Nallamalai range which was known in early 
times as Srlparvata. Santamula was a staunch follower of the Brahma- 
nical faith and was specially devoted to Svami-Mahasena i.e. Skanda- 
Karttikeya. Besides the asvamedha, he performed some other Vedic 
sacrifices including the vajapeya. The revival of Brahmanism under San- 
tamula after the fall of the later Satavahanas, who probably had Buddhist 

1 Cf. Jayaswal, loc cit; B'nandarkar, 2 Cf. Sue. Sat., pp. 9 ff.; NHIP. vi pp. 

List, pp. 1 59 tf. 64 ff. 

2 Rapson, BMC A WK. pp 207 ff. 



334 


THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 


leanings, was short-lived, for his immediate successors repudiated his 
religious policy and again leaned towards Buddhism. 

A sister of Santamula was married to a mahasenapati-mahadandanayaka 
of the Pukiya family which possibly flourished in the Pungi district on the 
banks of the Gundlakamma river. 1 The king’s daughter Atavi-Santisri 
was given in marriage to a mahasendpati-mahadandanayaka of the 
Dhanaka family. The Ikshvakus were also matrimonially related to the 
Hiranyakas, who possibly came from the Hiranyarashtra correspond- 
ing roughly to the Jammalamadugu taluk of the Cuddapah district. 

King Santamula I was succeeded by his son Vlrapurushadatta who 
ruled at least up to his twentieth regnal year about the third quarter of 
the third century. The Ikshvakus favoured cross-cousin marriages, a 
practice which is prescribed for the people of the Deccan by such an early 
authority as Baudhayana ( circa fifth century b.c .) 2 and is still prevalent in 
the Deccan to-day. No less than three of Virapurushadatta’s queens 
were the daughters of his father’s sisters. Another queen of this king 
was possibly Rudradhara-bhattarika who was the daughter of the 
Maharaja of Ujjain. The ruler of Ujjain thus related to Virapurusha- 
datta was probably the contemporary Saka Mahakshatrapa Rudrasena 
II (c. A. D. 255-77) of Western India. A daughter of the Ikshvaku 
king was given in marriage to the Maharaja of Vanavasa, probably a 
ruler of the Chutu-Satakarni family of Banavasi. The position of the 
Ikshvaku ruling house was certainly strengthened by these matrimonial 
alliances. 

No official record of Vlrapurushadatta has so far been discovered. 
Some private votive records of the pious men and women who visited the 
Buddhist establishments at Amaravati, Nagarjunakonda and Jagayyapeta 
during Virapurushadatta’s reign have been found. Most of the Nagar- 
junakonda inscriptions record the donations made by certain ladies of the 
king’s family in favour of the Great Monastery near Vijayapuri. These 
ladies were all Buddhists; but whether Vlrapurushadatta and his son, 
another king mentioned in these records, were themselves followers of 
the Buddhist faith cannot be determined. It should be noted, however, 
that neither of these two kings claims, like Santamula, to have been fa- 
voured by the god Mahasena or to have celebrated any Vedic sacrifice. 

Vlrapurushadatta was succeeded by his son Ehuvula-Santamula who 
ruled at least for eleven years. The Gurzala inscription 3 speaks of a 
king named Rulupurushadatta whose name as well as the findspot and 
palaeography of the record appears to connect him with the Ikshvaku 
king Vlrapurushadatta. It is not implausible to suppose that Rulupuru- 
sadatta was the successor of Ehuvula-Santamula; but the independent 
rule of the Ikshvakus in the Krishna-Guntur region appears to have been 
extirpated by the Pallavas of Kanchi about the end of the third century. 
The reigns of both Ehuvula-Santamula and Rulupurushadatta may thus 

1 Rrishnarao, EDA. p. 45 * El. xxvi pp.l 23 ff; NHIP. vi d 67-n 3 

* Sue. Sat., p. 13. 



JAYAVARMAN 


335 


be roughly assigned to the last quarter of that century. The Mayidavolu 
grant 1 of the Pallava crownprince Sivaskanda-varman records his order 
to the Pallava viceroy of Andhrapatha stationed at the city of Dhanya- 
kataka in the present Amaravati-Dharanikota area in the Guntur district. 
The opinions of scholars differ about the date of Sivaskanda-varman 
and his father, whose name is not definitely known' 2 but during whose 
reign the Mayidavolu charter seems to have been issued. The present 
writer, however, thinks it reasonable to assign Sivaskanda-varman to 
about the first quarter of the fourth century and the Pallava occupation 
of the heart of the Andhra country to about the end of the previous cen- 
tury. 3 It is not impossible that the Pallava king Simhavarman recently 
known from an early inscription 4 discovered in the Guntur district, was 
really the father of Sivaskanda-varman. 

The Ikshvakus continued to flourish as local rulers, possibly of the 
Guntur region, for centuries after. They are mentioned in a record 5 of 
the Kekayas of Mysore who claim to have contracted a matrimonial 
alliance with the Ikshvakus at some time in the fifth century. Vague 
references to these Ikshvakus of the Andhra country may be traced here 
and there in a late Kannada poem entitled Dharmamrita . 6 

5. THE BRIHATPHALlYANAS 

About the middle of the second century a.d., when the Greek geogra- 
pher Ptolemy wrote his Geography, the people called Maisoloi, apparently 
inhabiting the present Masulipatam area of the Krishna district, had 
for their metropolis the city of Pitundra. 7 The city seems to be the same 
as the Pithuda mentioned in the Hathigumpha inscription 8 as having been 
devastated by king Kharavela of Kalinga in the first century B. c. 
Towards the end of the third century a.d. the same region is found to 
have been held by rulers of the Brihatphalayana dynasty, who probably 
had their headquarters at the old city of Pitundra-Pithuda. 

A Raja or Maharaja named Jayavarman is the only known member of 
the Brihatphalayana royal family. He issued the Kondamudi grant 8 
in his tenth regnal year from his camp at Kudura in the form of an order 
to the governor of the Kudura district to give a piece of land to certain 
Brahmanas. The city of Kudura, which is believed by some scholars to 
have been the capital of Jayavarman Brihatphalayana, 10 is usually identi- 
fied with Guduru near Masulipatam, although its identification with 


1 El. vi pp. 86 ff. 

* Sue. Sat., pp. 183-4; cf. pp. 166-7; 
cf. however NHIP. vi pp. 229-35. I 
take Sivaskanda as the name (cf. modem 
Tamil names like Sivashanmukham) 
and cannot accept the theory that 
Siva at the beginning of the name is an 
honorific. 

3 Sue. Sat., loc. cit. 


• JAHC . n pp. 68-9 

5 Sue. Sat., p. 15; EC. xi Davapagere 161 

• Krishnarao, op. cit., p. 122 

7 Sue. Sat., p. 46 ff. 

8 El. xx pp. 72 ff. 

• El. vi p. 315 

18 Cf. Dubreuil, AND. pp. 84-5; El. vi 
p. 315. 



336 


THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 


Koduru near Ghantasala (ancient Kantakasaila or Kantakakaula; Greek 
Kan tak assulos) has also been suggested. 1 

The history of the Brihatphalayanas before and after the reign of Jay a- 
varman is quite dark and nothing is known about their relations with the 
Satavahanas, Ikshvakus and Pallavas. We may surmise that the earlier 
members of the family acknowledged the suzerainty of the later Saar, a- 
hanas and their Ikshvaku successors. Towards the end of the third century, 
Jayavarman Brihatphalayana appears to have ruled for some time as an 
independent monarch after shaking off the yoke of the Ikshvakus. Very 
scon the Ikshvakus and possibly also the Brihatphalayans were subdued 
by the Pallavas of Kanchi who are known to have extended their power 
about that time over Andhrapatha and Kuntala. 

6. THE SATA V AH AN AS AND THEIR FEUDATORIES IN KUNTALA 

Indian literary traditions appear to sp'-ah of a branch of the Satavahana 
family ruling in the Kuntala country which comprised the N erct Kanara 
district and parts cf Mysore, Belgaum, and Dharwar. - A king of Kun- 
tala named Satavahana is mentioned in the Kavyanmumtsa by Rajasekha- 
ra, while the same ruler or a second of the same name is oissibly called 
Kuntala-Satakarni in the Puranas as wed as in Vatsvayana's Kdr-yrtfnra. 3 
The Puranic lists 4 make Kuntala-Satakarni a predecessor of Gautami- 
putra Satakarni, while a commentary on the Kdi:i:;.:utra explains the name 
as being due tc the king's birth in the Kuntala country. 5 The name of 
Hala, who is called ‘Kuntala’ or ‘the lord of Kuntala' in literary traditions 
and is credited with the authorship of the celebrated Prakrit anthology 
entitled Gdthdsaptasati, is a Prakrit corruption of Sat a ; cf. Satavahana 
taking the Prakrit from Saldhana. Hala is sometimes identified with 
Kuntala-Satakarni although the two are separately mentioned in the 
Puranas. 6 

When precisely the ^atavahans extended their power over Kuntala is 
difficult to determine. The Nasik prasasli shows that this territory formed 
no part of the Satavahana dominions even during the reign of the great 
Gautamiputra Satakarni. 7 The earliest Satavahana record to (he south 
of the Krishna belongs to the time of the next king Vasishthipulra Pulu- 
mavi. 8 It was probably this ruler who conquered the trans-Krishna 
districts. It is not impossible that Pulumavi’s lieutenants established 
themselves in Kuntala in the heart of the Kanarese country in the wake 
of his southern expeditions. 

7 El. vdi pp. 60 ff. No. 2. There is no 
reason to believe that VaijayantI (Bana- 
vasi) formed a part of Guatamlputra’s 
dominions (SI. p. 191 n. 3). Contra 

* Sue. Sat., pr . 142 ff. 


1 Krishnarao, op. rit., pp 320-1 
7 Sue. Sat., pp 215 ff IHQ. xxiu pp 
65-3 

3 PHAI* pp. 339-40 

4 Rapson, op. cit., p. Ixvi 

* PHAI * loc. cit. 

* Cf. Rapson, loc. cit.. 



RULERS OF KUNTALA 


337 


There is epigraphic evidence of the rule of kings who called themselves 
‘delighters of the Chutukula’ in South-Western Deccan before the 
rise of the Kadambas. 1 They were closely connected with the Maha- 
rathis or Maharashtrins ( rashtrikas of the earlier epoch) and the Maha- 
bhojas ( bhojakas of the earlier period) who appear to have been feuda- 
tories of the Satavahanas, although they may have claimed Satavahana 
blood. Coins bearing the designations Chutukadananda and Mudananda 
have been discovered at Karwar 2 and are connected by their type with 
those of Sadakana (Satakarni) Kalalaya Maharathi who was probably 
a semi-independent governor of the Satavahanas in the Mysore region. 
Chutukadananda, which seems to mean ‘delighter of a place called Chutu- 
kata’ may be the same as or at least associated with Chutukulananda of 
the inscriptions. 3 It is not impossible to think that the semi-independent 
Satavahana governors of the Kuntala region were overthrown by the 
Mudanandas when the power of the Satavahanas declined after Yajfta 
Satakarni and that the Mudanandas were ousted by the Chutukulanandas. 

The Banavasi inscription 4 of king Haritlputra Vishnukada-Chutuku- 
lananda Satakarni has been palaeographically assigned to the age of Yajna 
Satakarni, i. e. to about A. d. 200. It is better, however, to refer it to 
the first half of the third century, as its palaeography resembles that of 
the Ikshvaku inscriptions. The word Vishnukada or Vishnukata like 
Chutukata, may have indicated a locality. It is, however, not possible 
to determine whether Vishnukata-Chujukula actually means the Vishnukata 
branch of the Chutu family and whether the Chutus had their head- 
quarters first at Chutukata and later at Vishnukata. The above record 
speaks of a MahabhojI (i. e. a Mahabhoja’s wife), who was a 
Maharaja’s daughter, and of her son Sivaskandanagasri. Rapson 
identifies the lady and her son with Nagamula (Nagamulanika) who 
was the wife of a Maharathi and the daughter of a MahabhojI and a 
Maharaja, and her son Skandanaga Sataka 5 of a Kanheri inscription. 6 
It is further supposed that the name of Vishnukada-Chutukulananda 
Satakarni occupied the damaged initial portion of the Kanheri inscription 
just as in the Banavasi epigraph. But the identification of the two 
entirely different names, Sivaskandanagasri and Skandanaga Sataka, is 
extremely doubtful. Even if it be suggested that they were two sons of 
the daughter of Vishnukada-Chutukulananda Satakarni, the Chutu occu- 
pation of the Kanheri region is not thereby proved, for the connection 
of the queen and prince with Kanheri can be differently explained. The 
identification of either of these two persons with king Sivaskanda-varman 
of VaijayantI (Banavasi), capital of Kuntala, as suggested by Rapson, 


1 Rapson. op. cit., pp. liii-iv; Sue. Sat., 
pp. 219 ff. 

* Rapson, op. cit., pp. 59-60; also lxxxiii 

ff. 

8 The reading intended for Rapson’s 
chutukadananda may have actually been 
chutukudananda (for chutukulananda). 


Cf. notes on Prak. Prak. ii, 23 in 
Sircar, Gram. Prak Lang p. 18 



5 kata or Sataka is a contraction either 
of Satakarni or of Satavahana. 

6 ASWI. v p. 86; Rapson, loc. cit. 



338 THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 

is. also unwarranted. King Sivaskanda-varman and his predecessor 
(father ?) Vishnukadda-Chutu-Satakarni of the Malavalli inscription 1 
flourished shortly before the Kadamba occupation of the Kuntala capital 
under Mayurasarman, about the middle of the fourth century. Thus 
the Chutu ruler who issued the Malavalli record in his first regnal year 
possibly reigned about half a century after his namesake of the Banavasi 
inscription. King Vishnukadda-Chutu-Satakarni II may have been a 
feudatory of the Pallava king Sivaskanda-varman and have named his 
successor after his overlord. This possibility is suggested by the practice 
of naming the heir after a ruler's suzerain as noticed in other families, 3 
and by the fact that Mayurasarman, founder of the Kadamba dynasty, 
is said to have obtained the feudatory state bounded by the Arabian Sea 
and the Prehara (i. e. the Malaprabha or Malaprahara. or the Ghata- 
prabha or Ghatapraharal from the Pallava monarch of Kcinchl. 3 

7. THE KURAS OF KOLHAPUR 

An interesting group of kings known from their coins found at Kolha- 
pur are Vasishthiputra Vilivayakura, his successor Madhariputra Sivala- 
kura, and the latter's successor Gautamlputra Vilivayakura. 1 Rapson 
is inclined to take the expression Kura as a Prakrit form of the Sanskrit 
kula ; but it seems to be the name of the family to which the three kings 
belonged. Some writers think that the kings known from the Kolhapur 
coins represent a branch of the Satavahana family, white others have 
made attempts to identify them with certain known members of that 
family. 5 There is, however, no evidence as yet to connect the Kolhapur 
kings with the Satavahanas. They appear to have been local rulers 
of the Kolhapur region and may perhaps be designated the Kuras of 
Kolhapur. 

1 Ibid. pi. .liv; EC. vn, sh. 263 p. 251 4 Rapson. op. cit., pp. lxxxvi ff. 

* Cf. Sue. Sat., pp. 176-7, 248 5 Ibid. p. lxxxviii; see also p. 314 ante. 

* SI. i p. 453 n. 1. 



Chapter XII 


POLITICAL ORGANISATION (POST-MAURYAN) 


NORTH INDIA 

TThe government of the Suhgas (or Baimbikas), who were political heirs 
of the Imperial Mauryas in the sovereignty of North India, was a 
continuation (as far as the scanty materials allow us to judge) of that 
of their predecessors, but with a much looser organisation. Pushyamitra, 
the founder of the dynasty, indeed continued unaccountably to call him- 
self by his old official title of senapati, although he twice asserted his claim 
to paramount sovereignty by the ancient Vedic token of performance 
of the horse-sacrifice. But his heirs and successors styled themselves 
raj an like the emperor Asoka, although they gave up the honorific title 
devanam priya adopted by the great Maurya . 1 If (as is indicated by a late 
literary tradition) Agnimitra acted as viceroy at Vidisa in his father's life- 
time, it would follow that the Maurya imperial practice of appointing 
Prince-Viceroys was still in vogue, with the significant addition of the 
royal title to their names. The viceroy at the provincial capital (and no 
doubt the king at his headquarters as well) was assisted by the tradi- 
tional council of ministers known to Asoka’s time. It would further 
appear that the council under such a masterful ruler as Agnimitra helped 
mainly to register the king's decrees and carry them into effect . 2 We know , 
the name of at least one Sunga feudatory, namely Dhanabhuti, who is 
commemorated in some votive inscriptions on the Bharhut stupa pillars 
and railings. As a characteristic feature of Sunga dominion it may be 
mentioned that local dynasties ruled in the great centres of Ayodhya, 
Kausariibi, Ahichchhatra and Mathura. These rulers struck coins in 
their own names and sometimes took the royal title. They must, there- i 
fore, have enjoyed a position little short of independence of the para- 
mount power. Some of the kings are known to have been related by blood 
to the Suhgas. This kinship probably resulted in an allied group of 
Sunga kings so that Dhanabhuti, the feudatoy named above, could 

1 Senapati Pushyamitra performer of 1929, p. 405). Raja Bhagabhadra (.4 57- 

double horse-sacrifice (EL xx p. 54 AR. 1908-09, p. 129 where by contrast 

f.); Pushyamitra’s horse-sacrifice (Pa- the Greek king is styled maharaja), 

tanjali on Panini m. 2. 123); senapati For continuation of devanam priva as 

Pushyamitra writing to his son Agni- honorific title see Patanjali on Pan. 

mitra on completion of horse-sacrifice v 3. 14. 

(Malav. Act. v); senapati Pushyamitra 2 Agnimitra as Pushyamitra’s viceroy at 

ruling the kingdom as king (Pargiter, Vidisa with the title of king, Agnimi- 
DKA. p. 70); scnani Pushyamitra tra’s amatya-parishat or mantri-parishat 

( HC . vi); perhaps also Harivamsa (Malav., passim). The sabha of Pushya- 

iii. 192. 40-1 (with emendation of Kasy- mitra referred to by Patanjali on Pan. 1 . 1. 

apa into Sunga, as suggested in IHQ. 68 may have been merely his court. 



340 


POLITICAL ORGANISATION 


properly date his record ‘during the sovereignty of the Suhgas ’. 1 

In their system of central and provincial administration the Greek 
kings in India borrowed, with a few innovations, the practice of contem- 
porary Hellenistic dynasties and especially of the Seleucids of Western 
Asia, of whom indeed they were an offshoot. The kings as a rule took 
the usual Greek royal title ( basileus ), but some of them chose to style 
themselves ‘Great King’, a title first assumed among Hellenistic kings 
by the Seleucid Antiochus III. The kings of the house of Euthydemus 
followed the Seleucid practice of sometimes appointing the heir-apparent 
as joint-king of the whole realm. Euthydemus, however, introduced a 
newer state-form in which the younger son of a king ruled a definite part 
of the kingdom as sub-king with the right of coining in his own name . 2 
From a few references in the well-known Pali work Milindapahha, it 
has been plausibly argued that king Menander had his council of ministers 
of the traditional Hellenistic type. Among other officials were the Greek 
moneyers whose monograms appeared on the coins . 3 It has recently 
been inferred from an analysis of the name-endings in Ptolemy's list of 
Indian provinces east of the Paropamisadae (Hindukush) that the Greeks 
in India organised their conquests in imitation of the Seleucidan eparchies 
(sub-divisions of satrapies), the only difference being that the provinces 
were not eparchies but full satrapies with governors responsible only 
to the king. These governors must have sometimes borne the Greek 
designations of strategus (‘general’) and meridarkh (governor of part of 
a satrapy), which were handed down to §aka and Pahlava times. From 
figures of city-goddesses with mural crowns and titles in Prakrit found 
on some of the coins it has been inferred that certain cities enjoyed a sort 
of quasi-autonomy under the rule of the Indo-Greek kings . 4 The Greek 


■ Liiders, List, nos. 687, 882 (inscrs. 
of Dhanabhuti and his wife). Ayo- 
dhya : square cast coins with names 
of rulers, 2nd century b.c. (Allan, 
BMCCAI. pp. lxxxviii, 130-5), Kausam- 
bl : die-struck coins with rulers’ names, 
2nd and 1st centuries b.c. (Allan, 
ibid. pp. xcvi 150 f.). Panchala (Ahich- 
chhatra) : struck coins with rulers’ 
names from end of 3rd to end of 1st 
century b.c. (Allan, ibid. pp. cxvi-cxxi, 
192-204). To the above we may add 
Dharmadeva, king of Kosala, sixth 
descendant of Pushyamitra {El. xx 
p. 54 f. and IHQ. 1929, pp. 604-7), 
king Bahasatimitra in inscr. of the 
time of Udaka (Liiders, List, no. 904). 
The proposed identification of the 
‘Mitra’ kings of Panchala with the 
Puranic list of Suriga kings is untenable 
(Allan, ibid. pp. cxx, cxxi) 

1 Examples of kings with the title ‘Great 
king’ : Eucratides and Hippostratus. 
Examples of joint reigns : Euthydemus 
II and afterwards Demetrius II, joint- 


king with their father Demetrius I; 
queen Agathocleia jointly with her 
son Strato I; Strato I jointly with his 
grandson Strato II (Tarn, Greeks in 
Bactria and India, pp. 37, 157-8 etc.). 
Examples of sub-kings; Antimachus 
sub-king under his father Euthydemus 
and subsequently under his brother 
Demetrius I; Demetrius II, Pantaleon, 
Agathocles and Apollodotus, sub-kings 
under Demetrius I; Antimachus II and 
others, sub-kings under Menander: sub- 
kings under Strato I (Tarn, op. cit„ 
pp. 90, 157-8, 162, 230, 317, 319) 

3 Council of m in is ter. s (MilindapaHha, pp. 4, 
19,20 with Tarn’s interpretation, op. cit., 
pp. 418-9). Monograms of Greek mo- 
neyers (Tarn, op. cit., App. i. pp. 437-41). 

1 Organisation of eparchies (Ptolemy 
vn 1. 42 & 55 with expln. by Tam. 
op. cit., pp. 230-41). City-goddesses 
on coins {CHI. p. 575 and pi. vi. 
10, pp. 590-1 and pi. vii. 36 etc.). For 
refs, to strategus and meridarkh of 
Sakas and Pahlavas see below. 



INDO-GREEKS 


341 


kings in India, however, unlike the Seleucids of Western Asia, failed to 
establish large settlements of their countrymen in cities and military colo- 
nies. Inscriptions and coins, on the other hand, introduce us to Indian or 
Indianised feudatory dynasties ruling in Mathura and the Swat region. 
The great city of Ujjayini, former seat of a Maurya viceroyalty, continued 
to strike a remarkably varied series of coins, although the coinage of 
its sister-city Taxila was stopped with the Greek conquest . 1 

As regards the policy of the Greek kings towards their Indian subjects 
it has recently been argued that Demetrius l’s kingdom was a partnership 
of Greek ancl Indian, and that Menander’s empire was essentially Indian 
with a small Greek ruling caste. But the arguments, set forth with much 
ingenuity and originality, tend only to prove that in contrast with the 
attitude of other Hellenistic kings towards their Asiatic subjects, the 
Greek kings in India conceded a qualified equality to Indians. It is true 
that Demetrius I, contrary to the practice of all Seleucid and Ptolemaic 
kings, introduced a bilingual coinage which was continued by his suc- 
cessors, while he, as well as his great successor Menander, selected Indian 
cities as their capitals. From the simultaneous occurrence of Greek and 
Indian devices on a series of Pantaleon’s and Agathocles’s coins it may 
further be inferred that they treated the Greek and Indian communities 
in their capital cities on the same level. But exception has rightly been 
taken to the inference drawn from the names of a few Yavana donors 
commemorated in West Indian cave inscriptions, namely that Demetrius, 
contrary to the corresponding Seleucid practice, admitted Indians to 
citizenship in his own city. The Kharoshthi letters on Greek coins might 
be the initials of Indian moneyers who were, as such, citizens of Greek 
cities. But these are admittedly limited to the coins of the Greek kings 
east of the Jhelum after the time of Menander and his contemporaries. 
Again it is significant that the four chief councillors of Menander were 
all foreigners, while of the two meridarkhs known to Indian history, one 
who ruled the Swat Valley in the later period of Greek rule was a Greek, 
and the other who was probably an Indian belonged to the early §aka 
epoch . 2 


■ Mathura : a few square but mostly round 
coins with names of rulers, one group 
with the tilte of rajan, from the end of 
3rd to the middle of 1st century b.c. 
(Allan, BNCCAI. pp. cix-cxi, 170-82). 
Shorkot inscr. of the reign of Menander 
mentioning his feudatories VIryakamitra 
and Vijayamitra {El. xxiv p. 7). Ujja- 
yini: uninscribed coins (6 classes), 3rd 
and 2nd centuries b.c.; inscribed coins 
with name of city (1 class), 1st half of 
2nd century b.c. (Allan, op. cit., pp. 
cxli-cxlv, 241-62). To the abo\e we 
may add Traigartas of Trigarta (Jalan- 
dhara, mod. Jullundur district in the 
Panjab), whose coins mention their 
janapada in characters of 1st and 2nd 


centuries b.c. (Allan, op. cit.,pp. cxxxix- 
cxl, 212). On coins of Taxila, see 
Allan, op. cit. pp. cxxv-cxxxix, 214-38 
Indian partnership in the kingdoms of 
Demetrius and Menander (Tarn, op. 
cit., pp. 118, 260, 358, 410). Signifi- 
cance of bilingual coinage (ibid. p. 
(181). Demetrius's capital at Taxila and 
Menander's capital at Sagala (ibid. pp. 
179, 247-8). Devices of panther, the 
emblem of Dionysus and Yakshi the 
presiding deity of Nagarahara on one 
series of Pantaleon’s and Agathocles's 
coins (ibid. pp. 159-60). Yavana donors 
in West-Indian insers. (ibid. pp. 254-7, 
criticised by Johnston, JRAS. 1939, 
pp. 217-40, Keith in D. R. Bhandarkar 



342 


POLITICAL ORGANISATION 


The decline and fall of the Greek kingdom in India gave the opportu- 
nity to a number of ancient peoples in eastern Panjab and the Upper 
Ganges basin to establish kingdoms or republics which in some cases 
lasted far down into the third and even fourth centuries a.d. In the 
second half of the first century b.c. the Kunindas (of the tract at the 
foot of the Siwalik hills and between the upper courses of the Beas and 
the Sutlej) founded a short-lived kingdom under a ruler called Amogha- 
bhuti who took the titles of raja and maharaja. The Audumbaras (of the 
tract between the upper Sutlej and the Ravi) set up an independent state 
in the first century b.c. under kings whose names appear on their coins 
with the title of rajan : one of their kings Mahadeva has the unusual 
title of rajaraja. The Yaudheyas of eastern Panjab, true to their 
description by Panini as a fighting community founded an exceptionally 
long-lived republic. In the first phase of their independent existence 
extending over the late second and the first centuries b.c., they proudly 
asserted their success in war in the legends of the coins which were 
issued in their names. Another republican people of this period were 
the Arjunayanas (of the Delhi- Jaipur- Agra region) who similarly asserted 
their martial triumphs in their coins of the late second century b.c. (The 
Rajanyas (of the modern Hoshiarpur district in the Panjab) struck coins 
in the name of their state ( janapada ) in the second and first centuries b.c., 
while the Sibis (of western Rajputana) did the same in the first century 
B.c. A revival of republics in the regions above named took place, as 
we shall presently see, in the second and following centuries a.d. Coins 
attest to the existence of a number of other kingdoms and republics in 
the North-West during the second and first centuries b.c., but they 
are mere names. Such are the Agrodaka-janapada (second eentury b.c.), 
the garia of the Vrishni-kshatriyas (first century b.c.), the Agrodaka- 
Agacha-janapada, as well as the kings Jyeshthadatta and Mahasena 
(second century b.c.). Of the constitution of the republics such as can be 
traced from the scanty records of the centuries immediately before and 
after Christ we shall speak elsewhere . 1 


Vol.pp. 218-30). KharoshthI letters on 
Greek coins (Tarn. op. cit., pp. 356-8). 
Of four Yonaku ministers of Menander 
(Milin. p. 29 etc.) two were Greeks, one a 
Bactrian or Sogdian and the fourth 
probably an Anatolian (Tam, op. cit., 
pp. 422-3) 

1 Kunindas: silver and copper coins with 
name and titles of Amoghabhuti the 
Kuijinda king, last half of 1st century 
b.c. (Allan, BMCCAl. pp. ci-ciii, 159- 
(67). Audumbaras: square copper coins 
with name and titles of Audumbara, 
kings, 2nd to 1st century b.c. (ibid, 
pp. lxxxiii-lxxxvi, 122-8). Yaudheyas: 
coins of classes 21 , and 5 (classes 2 and 
5 with name of the republic), late 
2nd and 1st centuries B.c. (ibid. pp. 
cxlvii-cxlix, 265f.). Arjunayanas: coins 


with name of republic and ref. to its 
military success, c. 100 b.c. (ibid. pp. 
lxxxii-lxxxiii, 121). Rajanyas: 2 classes 
of coins with name of republic and its 
janapada 2nd and 1st centuries b.c. 
(ibid. pp. cxxiii, 210-2). Sibis: coins 
with name of republic as well as state 
( janapada ) and capital, 2nd century b.c. 
(ibid. pp. cxxiii-cxxv, 213, nos. 21-2). 
Agrodaka-janapada etc. (ibid. pp. cliii 
f, 279-81). Allan’s tr. of the Sibi coin- 
legend is untenable. The view (Jaya- 
swal, Hindu Polity, p. 82 n.) that Amo- 
ghabhuti was an official title appearing 
for centuries is incorrect (Allan, op cit., 
p. ciii). So also is the view (Jayaswal, 
op. cit., i p. 161) that the Audumbaras, 
if a republic, had an elected king. 



SAKAS AND PAHLAVAS 


343 


The rule of the Sakas and Pahlavas in Northern India was essentially 
a continuation of that of their Greek predecessors with some features 
borrowed from the administration of the powerful Parthian dynasty of 
the west. A historical tradition embodied in the Jaina tale, the Kala- 
kacharya-Kathanakc, of unknown date and authorship, credits the Sakas 
with living in the ‘Indus Country’ in the first century b. c. under an over- 
lord called sahanusahi (king of kings) whose feudatories bore the title 
of sahi (chief). But the account lacks corroboration. The earliest known 
Saka king in India, Maues, at first adopted the usual Greek title of 
‘King’ or ‘Great King’. But after he had conquered Gandhara from 
the Greeks he took the Parthian imperial title of ‘Great King of Kings’ 
like the famous king Mithridates II (the Great) ruling at Ctesiphon. This 
last title (or its equivalent) was adopted not only by Maues's Saka suc- 
cessors (Azes I, Azilises and Azes II), but also by the Parthian ‘kings’ who 
ruled north-west India and the adjoining borderland (Vonones, Spalirises, 
Orthagnes, Gondophares and Pacores ). 1 

Like the Seleucids of Western Asia, the Saka kings frequently associated 
their heirs with themselves as joint kings, the former’s name in Greek 
occupying the place of honour on the obverse and the name of the latter 
in Prakrit appearing on the reverse of their coins. Greek moneyers 
continued to operate the city mints in the reigns of Azes I and his dynasty 
as also in the reign of Gondophares, as we know from the Greek mono- 
grams on their coins. The survival of quasi-autonomous cities is proved 
by the representation of city-goddesses of the Indo-Greek type on the 
coins of Maues, Azes I and Zeionises . 2 

In their organisation of the provincial administration (as in their central 
government) the Saka and Pahlava kings of North India were indebt- 
ed mainly to their Greek forerunners. From an analysis of Ptolemy’s 
list of provinces in Indo-Scythia it has plausibly been argued that the 
the Sakas in Sind and Kathiawar retained the Greek eparchies with their 
characteristic name-endings. In the north-west the Sakas and Pahlavas 
had officers called strategus (military governor) and meridavkh (governor 
of a provincial sub-division) dating no doubt from Greek times. The most 
characteristic designation of a provincial governor under Saka-Pahlava 
rule was kshatrapa, a Sanskritised form of the Old Persian kshatra- 
pavan through Greek satrapes. From it was derived (in imitation of the 


Saka Sahanusahi and Sahis (Kalaka- 
charya-kathanaka , ed. H. Jacobi, 247 /, 
quoted Konow, CII. n ( 1 ) pp. xxvi-xxvii). 
Coin-legends of Maues with the title of 
‘King’ or ‘Great King’, Smith, CCIM. 
p. 38 ; Whitehead, PMC. p. 98. Coin- 
legends of Maues, Azes I, Azilises, 
Azes II, Vonones etc. with full imperial 
titles, Smith CCIM. pp. 39-58, White- 
head op. cit. pp. 98-142, 145. Mithri- 
dates II or the Great was the first Par- 
thian Emperor to assume the title of 
‘Great King of Kings’, and Maues in- 


vaded India after his death (Rapson 
in CHI. i pp. 567, 570). Vonones was 
the Suren or rather the ruler of the 
Suren’s realm for the time being: 
Gondophares was the Suren in his 
time (Tarn, Greeks, p. 344) 

! Coins of Spalires and Azes I (both sty- 
led ‘Great King’ as well as ‘Great King 
of Kings’: Azes I and Azilises, Azilises 
and Azes II (both styled ‘Great King 
of Kings’). For Seleucid practice see 
Tarn, Greeks, pp. 347-8. City-goddesses 
on Saka coins, Tam, Greeks, p. 353 



344 


POLITICAL ORGANISATION 


current Indian official idiom) the higher title of mahakshatrapa. From the 
first the Saka-Pahlava governors and feudatories held a position of high 
authority bordering upon independence. On the coins the names and 
full imperial titles of the suzerain are recorded in Greek on the obverse, 
while the feudatory’s name and title are given in Prakrit on the reverse. 
The feudatories regularly transmit their office to their descendants . 1 The 
kshatrapa, sometimes jointly with a colleague, strikes coins in his own 
name. With the end of a united Saka empire after the death of Maiies, 
there arose a number of kshatrapa dynasties, often with the reigning king 
taking the title of mahakshatrapa and his heir adopting the lower title . 2 
Finally it would seem that the Sakas first put into practice what may 
have been the aim of the Indo-Greek kings, namely that of taking 
Indians into partnership. It is under their rule that we first hear of 
Indians occupying the office of treasurer and probably also that of 
governor . 3 

The imperial Kushanas who rivalled, if they did not surpass, the great- 
est of the Greek, §aka and Pahlava kings in the extent of their dominion, 
introduced an exalted conception of monarchy. Kadphises I at the 
beginning of his long reign took the humble title of yahgu or yaua (chief), 
while modestly placing the effigy of the Greek king Hermaeus or of the 
Roman Emperor Augustus on the obverse of his coins. But he assumed 
the lofty title of maharaja apparently after his invasion of Parthia and 
conquest of Taxila. Kadphises II (Wima Kadphises), to whom belongs 
the credit of conquering the Indus country, adopted the imperial title of 
‘Great King of Kings’ or ‘King of Kings, Saviour’ in Greek on the obverse 
of his coins and their equivalents with some additions in Prakrit on the 
reverse. Kanishka I, the conqueror of eastern India, while taking the 
imperial title in Greek on one series of his coins adopted the bold inno- 
vation of transcribing its Iranian or Sakan equivalent on other coins. 
The same tendency to replace the outworn Greek tradition by the indi- 
genous one is manifested in Kanishka’s discontinuance of the Greek 


Greek eparchies under §aka rule, Tarn, 
Greeks , pp. 232-40. Strategus Aspa- 
varman associated with Azes 11 and 
Gondophares on coins. Smith CCIM; 
Whitehead, op. cit. Meridarkh Theo- 
dorus in Swat relic-vase inscr., 2nd 
half of 1st century b.c,, C1I. n (0 PP- 
1, 4. Association of suzerain and 
provincial governor on coins." Vonones 
and ‘king’s brother’ Spalahora, Vonones 
and Spalahora’s son Spalagadama, 
Azes II and Strategus Aspavarman, 
Gondophares and Aspavarman, Gondo- 
phares and Sasa, Pacores and maha- 
raja Sasa, ‘brother’s son’ of Aspavar- 
man. ‘King’s brother’ was a title ql 
honour well known to Hellenistic 
courts, (Tarn, Greeks , p. 345 n. 7.) 

2 Coins of Kshatrapas : (a) Liaka Kusu- 
luka, (b) Hagana and Hagamasha, 


(c) Rajuvula, (d) Sodasa, (e) Jihonika. 
Kshatrapa dynasties: (a) Liaka Kusu- 
luka and liis son Patika, (b) Rajuvula 
and his son Sodasa, (c) Granavhryaka 
and his unnamed son. (d) Manigula 
and his son Jihoiiika. Of these Patika 
was at first without title t Cll. n (i) p. 
28)and aftervv ards mahakshatrapa (ibid, 
p. 48). Rajuv ula and Sodasa were at 
first kshatrapas and afterwards maha- 
kshatrapas (Coins and CII. n (i) p. 48), 
while the rest had no other designation 
than kshatrapa. Sodasa had also the 
title svuniin (Ltiders, List, nos. 59, 82). 
1 El. ix p. 247 (Brahmana treasurer of 
mahakshatrapa Sodasa; Cll. II (i) p. 4 
[meridarkh, probably an Indian); 
ibid, p.103 (kshatrapa Sivasena, pro- 
bably an Indian, in the town of Abhi- 
saraprastha). 



KUSHANAS 


345 


monograms which had appeared on the coins of the first two Kushan. 
emperors. The Prakrit equivalent of Kanishka’s imperial title ( maharaja 
rdjatiraja devaptura ) which occurs on the pedestal of his statue was conti- 
nued by his successors Vasishka and Huvishka. To this Kanishka II 
added the striking title which has been read as a transliteration of Roman 
Caesar. To revert to the older titles, maharaja rdjatiraja was evidently 
borrowed by the Kushanas from their Saka and Pahlava predecessors. 
The epithet devaputra was accepted till recently as a literal rendering of the 
Chinese imperial title fien-tzu (Son of Heaven). But cogent reasons have 
now been given for the view that devaputra was not adopted by the 
Kushanas as an official title, but was a complimentary epithet current 
among their Indian subjects and meaning a class of divinities with distinc- 
tive functions . 1 

The tendency towards the exaltation of the king’s office noticed above 
led to the conception of his quasi-divinity. ‘On the gold pieces of 
Kadphises II the shoidders of the king are surrounded by luminous rays 
or flames, and his bust appears to issue from the clouds like the gods 
of Greece. . . Nimbus appears only on some pieces of Kanishka: on 
certain gold pieces of Huvishka the sovereign is at once ornamented with 
nimbus, flames and clouds . . . Vasudeva had simply the nimbus round 
his head which is itself surmounted by a pointed tiara. This last type 
remained that of Indo-Scythian Kushan kings called the later Kushans .’ 2 

Our knowledge of the administrative machinery of the Great Kushanas 
is very scanty. If the so-called ‘nameless king’ of the coins was a local 
ruler governing the Indian kingdom on behalf of his suzerain, it would 
follow that the Kushanas conceded the right of striking coinage along 
with the imperial title to their viceroys. In their provincial adminis- 
tration the Kushanas continued the government of mahakshatrapa and 
kshatrapa brought into vogue by the Sakas. They also introduced two 


Unnamed maharaja gushana of Panj- 
tar inscr. of year 122 identified with 
Kadphises l (Marshall in JRAS. 1914, 
pp. 977-8; Konow in CII. n (i) p. lxv). 
On the other hand the unnamed maha- 
raja rdjdtiruja devaputra of the Taxila 
silver scroll inscr. of the year 136 iden- 
tified by Marshall and Konow (loc. cit.) 
with Kadphises 1 might well be Ka- 
nishka I (F. W. Thomas in B.C. Law 
Vot. it p. 312). Kanishka I called by 
Iranian titles of muroda (Saka murunda 
i.e. lord) and marjhaka (Saka for gri- 
hapati, the 6th ratna of the Chakra- 
varti according to Buddhist legends 
(Konow in CII. it (i) p. 145). Absence 
of Greek monograms on Kaniskha’s 
coins (Tam, Greeks, p. 353). Title of 
Kanishka II in Ara inscr. of year 4 
read as kaisara by Liiders, I A. 1913, 
p. 132 f, and Konow CII. ii (i) p. 165. 
Devaputra a complimentary epithet 


and not an official title (F.W. Thomas 
in B.C. Law n pp. 305-20). The 
reading of devaputra on a coin of 
Kadphises I is an error (ibid. p. 
307 it.) 

The above is a quotation from Drouin, 
Rev. Num. 1901, pp. 154-6, tr. IA. 
xxxn, 1903, pp. 427-32. On the other 
hand neither the devakula of Huvishka’s 
paternal grandfather referred to in a 
Mathura inscr. (JRAS. 1924, p. 402), 
nor the well-known statues of Kanish- 
ka I and other Kushana kings or princes 
need necessarily imply the king's divi- 
nity. Devakula means ‘a royal gallery 
of portrait-statues’ such as is mentioned 
in Bhasa’s Pratima uataka (Jayaswal, 
JBORS. 1918-19. Statues of a Saka 
mahadandandyaka and other foreigners 
which are identifiable by inscriptions 
are known (LUders in El. xxm pp. 
206-7, ix, 241-6 



POLITICAL ORGANISATION 


grades of military (or judicial) office known by their Indian titles of 
rnahadandanayaka and daiujanayaka. Significant of the policy of the 
Kushana rulers is the fact that the high offices in all known instances 
were held by foreigners. Again we find that the citv-goddess type of coins 
known e\en to Saka and Pahlava rulers is conspicuous by its absence 
under the Kushanas. This has been taken to mean that the quasi-auto- 
nonioas type of cities of earlier times was no longer in existence. On 
the other hand the villages were in charge of the traditional headmen 
whose office was usually hereditary . 1 

The downfall of the Kushana empire in India was followed by the rise 
of a few minor republics in the Panjab and Raj put an a. In the late second 
and the third centuries a.d. the Kunindas who lived (as we have seen) 
under kings in the second and first centuries b.c. were a republican people. 
To judge from the device and the legend of their coins they probably 
dedicated their state to the god Siva. In the late second century a.d. and 
again in the third and early fourth centuries a.d. the Yaudheyas, whose 
dominion probably extended at this time from Dehra Dun district to 
western Rajputana, stood forth as an independent republic; they issued 
coins, characteristically enough, with the inscribed device of the rod Kart- 
tikeya and the goddess Lakshmi. The coins of the former period seem to 
testify, what is also hinted at in a Mahabharata passage, that the state of 
the Yaudheyas was dedicated to Karttikeya; those of the latter period 
show their republic (swiff) proudly proclaiming its military success. From 
the joint evidence of coins and seals we know that the Yaudheyas in 
the latter pciicd had a (probably elected) civil and military head called 
maharaja mahasenapati. while their councillors had a common seal pro- 
claiming their victory. The Malavas of eastern Rajputana were an inde- 
pendent republic from the second to the early fourth century a.d. The 
coins issued in the name of their republic (gam) or state ( janapada) pro- 
claimed their military success . 2 

1 Coins of "nameless king’ or Soter Megas 
(CIl. ll (i) p. lxix). Konow thinks 
(ibid. p. Ixxxi) that Huvishka ruled 
the eastern provinces as viceroy with 
the title of maharaja devaputra before 
assuming the full imperial title. Mahci- 
kshatrapa Kharapallana and kshatra- 
pa Vanaspara (£7. vm p. 179). Danda- 
nayaka (CIL ii (i) n. 149), Mahd- 
dandanavaka Ulana (El. xxm p. 199). 

Do.' Vaiana (EL ix p. 242), cf. JRAS. 

1924. p. 402. Absence of city-goddesses 
on Kushana coins (Tam, Greeks, 
p. 353). Grdmika in Kushana inscrs. 

(Ltlders, List. nos. 48, 69a) 

- Coins of Kunindas with figure of Siva 
and dedicatory legend (Allan, BMCCAI. 
pp. cii, 167-8). Coins of Yaudheyas: 
class 3 with figures and dedicatory 
legend, later 2nd century a.d.: class 6 
with figure and legend, 3rd and early 4th 


centuries a.d. (ibid. pp. e\liv ■!m 
270-80). Rohitaka, modern Rohtak 
facially favoured by Kjrttikc>a 
(Mbh nr 32, 45). Cf. Banerjea, The 
Development of Hindu Iconography, 
pp. 15.-7. Clay-seal referring Yau- 
dheya councillois of viciorv* 

1884 pp ,37-41). Insert rc£rrbfg 
^„ Yaudhcya maharaja mahwenCinati 
if 11 * -'" P- .252). Allan’s location of 
Yaudheyas m eastern Punjab and 

hv S thT u ajputanu has becn confirmed 
by the discovery of Yaudheya coin- 
Rohuik uupH s. Xu pp. 
8--5) and of a new hoard of Yaudheta 
coins . rom Dhera Dun district (JNSt 
", PP- 109-12). Coins of Mfilavas 
Lidis A, _nd to early 4th century a D 
one senes referring to their remihfii- 
(gana) (Allan, op. cit pp civ -vii ) 
So-called names of chiefs of Maiavi 



REPUBLICAN CONSTITUTIONS 


347 


We may pause here to notice such features of the constitution of the 
Indian republics of the centuries immediately before and after Christ as 
may be traced from the descriptions of the characteristics of sang his and 
ganas (in the technical sense of republics) in the contemporary literary 
works. The sahghas, according to Kautilya (XI, 1) were of two classes, 
namely the military-cum-agricultural and industrial type, and the poli- 
tical type. Both types had high executive officers ( mukhyas ), princelings 
( kumarakas ) and the indeterminate assembly. Apparently in the case 
of the latter type the mukhya and kumaraka were called raja and rajputra 
respectively. The smgha could try and punish the nuikhyas for offences, 
and it owned property in common. It was easy for unscrupulous royal 
politicians (as Kautilya shows by numerous examples) to weaken the 
sanghas by the methods of secret diplomacy and assassination with 
ultimate object of making the king sole monarch over them. In the 
Mahahharata (XII. 107, 6-32) we are told that ganas had their nuikhyas 
as well as their general assembly. It was to the interest of the ganas that the 
authority of the mukhyas should be respected, and that they should secret- 
ly take counsel among themselves and act together for the collective good. 

EAST AND WEST INDIA 


For our knowledge of the government of Kalihga in the second or first 
century b.c. we have to depend upon the obscure and much discussed 
Hathigumpha cate inscription of king Kharavela, supplemented by 
a few short contemporary inscriptions from the same locality. The kings 
who belonged to the Mahameghavahana family and the Ciieta or Cheti 
(Chedi) dynasty bore the lofty titles of drya and maharaja unknown to 
the imperial Mauryas, but their princes were still called kumdras. It would 
seem that kingship was transmitted in the usual lineal succession. To 
judge from a minor votive inscription, the Cheti kings continued the sys- 
tem of municipal administration represented by the office of the town- 
judge. In the Hathigumpha inscription we have a glimpse of the princi- 
ples of Kharavela’ s administration as well as his aims and ideals as a ruler. 
As has been rightly pointed out, Kharavela, unlike the reformist emperor 
Asoka. chose to follow the traditional methods of his forefathers, and. 
though a Jama by faith, adopted the Brahmanical principles of govern- 
ment. His religious toleration, unlike that of Asoka, was of the ordinary 
Indian type involving non-interference with others’ religion and nothing 
more. Again, the string of panegyrics showered upon Kharavela in his 
record seems to bear out the conclusion that he aspired to become a 


coins (Smith, CCIM. pp. 174-8, Jaya- 
swal, Hindu Polity, i p. 218, Allan, 
op. cit., p. evi class B) are probablv 
not names at all, but meaningless 
attempts to reproduce the usual coin- 
legend (Allan, op. cit., pp. evi-evii). 
Lead seal from Rairh referring to Ma- 


lava janapada (IC. N. Puri. Excavations 
at Rairh p. 54). Allan’s location of 
Malava in eastern Rajputana (evii) has 
been confirmed by the recent discovery 
of over 300 Malava coins at Rairh 
(Puri. op. cit.. pp. 49-50) 



348 


POLITICAL ORGANISATION 


chakravarti (‘king-overlord’). Kharaveia is actually hailed with this 
latter title in the votive inscription of his chief queen . 1 

Of the two Saka ruling houses of Western India (those of Bhumaka 
and Chashtana), and particularly of the second, it may be said that while 
retaining to the last the titles indicative of their foreign origin, they bor- 
rowed or adopted wholesale the indigenous nomenclature as w ell as the 
methods and principles of administration. To the older Saka titles of 
mahakshatrapa and kshatrapa they added almost from the first the Indian 
royal designation of rajan. Other titles adopted by them namely svamin 
(regularly from Nahapana onwards), bhadramukha and sugrihitandman 
(occasionally thereafter), became fixed in the Indian dramatic tradition as 
honorific designations of specific characters. In the organisation of their 
administrative machinery they adopted the old Indian official designations 
of amatyas and sachivas. As in the Arthasastra and Jataka tradition, and 
no less in the contemporary Satavahana administration, the amatyas were 
a generic class of officials from whose ranks were selected high ministers, 
provincial governors and the like. From a reference in Rudradaman' s 
Girnar rock inscription it appears that, like the mantris of Kautilya, the 
sachivas were entrusted with the execution of great public works. From 
the same record we learn that the sachivas were of two classes, namely, 
matisachivas (councillors) and karmasachivas (executive officers). Other 
high officers known to the Saka administration were the sendpati (general) 
and the mahadapdanayaka (commander-in-chief). Though the high offices 
were usually held by foreigners, we have an instance of an Indian serving 
as an amatya . 2 


Ayira in insers. of Kharaveia and 
Kudepa. Pali ayira. Skt. arya {I HQ. 
1938, p. 470 «.). Kingship in regular 
lineal succession (B. M. Barua’s tr. 
in /HQ. 1938, p. 473, superseding 
his earlier interpretation in Old Brahmi 
lasers., pp. 41, 235-9 indicating con- 
joint rule by two kings). Negara akkha- 
damsa (Liiders, List, no. 1351), Skt. 
nagarakshadarsa corresponding to 
Asokan nogaravyavahdraka mahamdtra 
(Kalinga RE. I). On the other hand 
mahamada (Liiders, List, no. 1352) 
is not an equivalent of mahdmatra 
but is probably a proper name (B. M. 
Barua in IHQ. 1938, p. 164 superseding 
his earlier interpretation in Old Brahmi 
Insert. On Kharavela’s methods of 
government and his equivalence to 
a Chakravarti see Barua, Old Brahmi 
laser., pp. 232 f„ 258-9, 263, 265. 
Kalinga chakravarti Kharaveia in inscr. 
of his chief queen fLiiders, List, no. 1346) 
Kshah.ardta Kshatrapa Bhumaka on 
coin, but raja Kshaharata Nahapana 
on coins, raja Kshaharata Kshatrapa 
Nahapana and raja mahakshatrapa 
Svami-Nahapana in insers. (Liiders, 


List, nos. 1099. 1131-5, 1174). Raja 
Chashtana and raja Rudradaman in 
inscr. (ibid. no. 964a— EL xvt p. 23). 
Raja mahakshatrapa (or kshatrapa) 
sugrihitammd svami applied to Chash- 
tana, Jayadaman, Rudradaman, Ru- 
drasimha (Liiders, List. nos. 963, 965): 
raja bhadramukha svami Chashtana 
(ibid. no. 967). Kshaharata usually 
held to be a family or clan name is an 
Iranian title meaning 'regent' or \ice- 
roy’ according to Konow (IHQ. 1938, 

р. 140). On transliteration of Western 
kshatrapa coin-legends, see Rapson 
BMCA WK. pp. chili f. On use of titles 
svami etc. in Indian works on drama- 
turgy, see S. Lc\i, Stir qtielques termes 

с, c - 1902, pp. 95 f. tr. I A. 1904, 

pp. 16 j f. Amatyas etc.: Ayama of 
vatsagotra, amatya of Nahapana (Lu- 
ders. List, no. 1174); Suvisakha, a 
Pahlava amatya of Rudradaman in 
charge of Anartta and Surashtra; mati- 
sachivas and karmasachivas of Rudra- 
daman (EI. viii p. 44, I. 17); Abhira 
Bapaka sendpati of Rudrasimha 
(Luders, List, no. 963); Saka Sridhara- 
varman, a dandanayaka (EI. xvi p 232) 



SAKAS 


349 


We get a few glimpses of the administrative methods of the Saka rulers 
of Western India from the contemporary records. In the second half of 
the first century a.d., according to the valuable testimony of the author 
of the Periplus, the king maintained a regular pilot-service for negotiating 
the dangerous navigation at the great port of Barygaza (Bharukachchha, 
mod. Broach). Large boats of two varieties in the king's service sailed 
up the coast as far as Syrastrene (Kathiawar) to meet incoming vessels : 
steering the vessels safely between dangerous shoals, the pilot-boats towed 
them to fixed stations along the whole route; at these stations the vessels 
could lie safely at anchor or in deep basins during ebb-tide. The same 
care for their valuable commercial interests led the Saka rulers (or more 
probably their Kushana overlord) to obstruct the trade of the port of 
Kalyana belonging to their Satavahana rivals. This obstruction was so 
intensive that foreign ships touching at Kalyana were in danger of being 
seized and taken to Barygaza. The success of this selfish policy may be 
gauged from the fact, noted by the author of the Periplus , that the vast 
trade from the rich marts of Pratishthana and Tagara in the interior, 
instead of finding its natural outlet in Kalyana harbour, was diverted 
across a long and difficult mountainous country to Barygaza. 

The evidence of a well-established administrative procedure in the reign 
of Nahapana is provided by a reference in one of the Niisik cave records of 
his son-in-law Ushavadata. From this we learn that it was customary for 
charitable endowments in kind and in cash to be proclaimed at the local 
town hall ( nigamasabha ) and registered at the record office (pha/akavara). 
The Saka rulers, again, seem to have worthily maintained the Maurya 
tradition of the care of public works. In the time of Rudradaman the 
famous artificial lake Sudarsana originally constructed by the provincial 
governor of Chandragupta Maurya was restored at heavy cost out of the 
mahakshatrapa ' s private funds by the governor of Anartta and Surashtra . 1 

What distinguished the Saka rulers of Western India from other foreign 
dynasties of or before their time was the completeness with which they 
identified themselves with the traditions as well as the interests and 
sentiments of their Indian subjects. The earlier kshatrapas, true to their 
northern origin, continued to inscribe their names and titles on their coin- 
legends in Graeco-Roman and Kharoshthi characters. But their suc- 
cessors changed the former into something like an ornamental border 
and substituted for the latter the Brahmi script of the Indian interior. 
What is more, in place of the undiluted Prakrit employed by all other 
contemporary powers in their official records, the Sakas introduced for 
the same purpose a Prakrit strongly influenced by Sanskrit. Thus they 


Pilot service at Barygaza ( Periplus , 
secs. 44, 48, 52). Saraganus .of Peri- 
plus sec. 52 identified with Satakarpi 
T ( PHAI. i p. 404). Sandanes with 
Sunandana Satakarni (I HQ. 1932, p. 
234 and PHAI.* p. 404), with Kanish- 


ka (S Levi in JA. 1936, pp. 75, 84), 
with Wima Kadphises (Konow in IHQ. 
1938, p. 150). Nigamasabha and 
phalakavara {El. viii pp. 82 f. with 
Senart’s tr.). Other expins, of phalaka- 
vara in D. C. Sircar, SI. 160. 



350 


POLITICAL ORGANISATION 


gave an immense impetus to the movement which ended in making Sans- 
krit the official language of northern and western India for centuries 
afterwards. In Ushavadata, the son-in-law of Nahapana, w'as represented 
the traditional Indian type of princely patron of religion at his best. His 
numerous charities were bestowed impartially upon the Bralimana laity 
as well as the Buddhist monks, and in each case in accordance with the 
approved canonical methods. Again the long panegyric of Rudradaman 
embodied in his famous inscription at Girnar may properly be taken to 
reflect his own aims and ideals as a ruler. From this we can infer that Ru- 
dradaman chose to be remembered as a model king combining in himself 
the best qualities of a ruler known to Indian tradition. His name was 
repeated by the venerable, meaning (as S. Levi points out, 1 ) that for them it 
was like another Veda demanding assiduous study and devout veneration 
and yielding the most precious fruit. Gifted with a beautiful physical 
frame and auspicious bodily marks, he acquired, we are told, complete 
mastery over the whole Indian lore of the humanities no less than of the 
military sciences. Rudradaman’s administration was modelled on the best 
traditional standards. All rarijas looked to him for protection and sought 
him as their lord in an emphatic way of illustrating the Smriti dictum 
enjoining protection of all creatures upon the king. He adhered to his 
vow of not taking life except in battle and he re-instated deposed kings, 
thus conforming to the Indian type of a righteous conqueror. He earned the 
strong attachment of dharma by rightly raising his hand (during the dis- 
pensation of justice as directed by Smriti authority); he daily bestowed 
presents and honours; he filled his treasury by lawful collection of the 
recognised sources of revenue; his kingdom was free from all human and 
providential calamities; for benefiting cows and Brahmanas and others, he 
met the heavy cost of repairing the embankment of Sudarsana lake not by 
recourse to the known devices of taxes, benevolences and forced labour, 
but by magnanimously drawing upon his treasury . 2 

THE DECCAN AND SOUTHERN INDIA 


The administration of the Salavahanas who founded the first historical 
empire in the Deccan was developed on the Indian traditional lines, but 
there were some striking innovations. To the ancient title of rajan usually 
borne by them in their coin-legends, these kings in their inscriptions some- 
times added that of svamin brought into vogue by their' SakaTrivals. In 


1 JA. 1902, xix p. 100 

2 Coin-legends of Western kshatrapas 
(Rapson BMCAWK. p. clxxxvii). 
Girnar rock inscr. of Rudradaman 
(EL vm pp. 42-5). Expln. of recognised 
sources of revenue (jbhdga, bali and 
sulk a) and known oppressive devices 
(kara, vishti and pranaya ) in the 
writer’s Hindu Revenue System, p. 


toy. Jtty.isndi s interpretation ( Hindu 
Polity, n pp. 52, 89, 120-1), of this 
inscr. as referring to the theory of 
elective kingship, to paurajdnapada's 
right of sanctioning the king’s demand 
for money grants and to constitutional 
laws enabling ministers to accept or 
refuse the king’s demand for expendi- 
ture, is far-fetched and untenable. 



SATAVAHANA 


351 


the panegyric of the queen-mother Balasri, by way of exception, Gautaml- 
putra Satakarni is styled rajaraja and both he and his son are called maha- 
raja. The queens used the title of deri known to Asoka’s inscriptions, 
but Balasri as an exception styled herself mahddevi. Though the kings 
almost always distinguished themselves by their metronymics, the succes- 
sion was usually in the male line. There is no reason to think that the 
practice of conjoint reign by the reigning king and his heir was known to 
this dynasty. As a striking and original feature of Satavahana polity, 
it may be mentioned that two queens Nayanika and Balasri took a con- 
spicuous part in the public life of their times. The former acted as regent 
on behalf of her son Vedasri, while the latter jointly with her son Gautami- 
putra Satakarni issued orders to a district officer to make a charitable 
endowment. These ladies showed their independence in relation to the 
reigning sovereign in other ways that are mentioned below. The Satavu- 
hanas were served by officers of the type known to Indian political tradi- 
tion. In place of the Mauryan mahamatras they employed amdtyas as 
a generic class of officials. One of the early Satavahanas created a new 
higher grade of these officials called rdjamatyas. The amdtyas were em- 
ployed on executive, financial, and other business and as district officers. 
A rajamatya is mentioned as treasury officer. It is probable that Sa- 
tavahana administration knew military offices of the type of sendgopa 
(commander) a.r\d asvavdraka (horse-trooper) which are mentioned in other 
contemporary records. To Gautamiputra Satakarni or his son Vasishthi- 
putra Pulumavi belongs the credit of creating the higher office of maka- 
sendpati about whose military duties, however, our records are strangely 
silent. It seems likely that the office of the mahasenapati was regarded 
as a patent of nobility, for the wives of these officers took the titles of their 
husbands. The administration of the districts called by the old Maurya 
title of dhdra was entrusted to amdtyas. The villages were in charge of the 
traditional headmen. We can make out the burdens to which villages 
in Western India were ordinarily liable from the list of immunities and pri- 
vileges granted by the kings to the Buddhist monks in a number of their 
charters. The villages could be freely entered by the king’s troops, could 
be requisitioned for the king’s necessities, could be dug up for salt (which 
was evidently a royal monopoly) and could be interfered with by the 
district police . 1 


Raja on Satavahana coins (Rapson, 
BMC A WK. pp. cci-ccii, 1-45; JNSt. 
iv pp. 26-8). Raja svatnin in inscrs. 
(El. vii p. 6, vui p. 94, also vm p. 65 
and p. 71 with D. C. Sircar’s expin., Sf. 
p. 191 n. 4) Rajaraja Gautamiputra, 
mahddevi GautamI (El. vm p. 60 f.). 
K. P. Chattopadhyay’s view (JRASB. 
1927, p. 503 f.) of rule by sister’s son 
of the reigning king is not borne out 
by facts (PH A IP pp. 341-2). The theory 
of conjoint rule by Gautamiputra Sata- 
karni and Vasish(hlputra Pulumavi is 


untenable (Ibid. pp. 412-4, Gopala- 
chari, EH AC. pp. 64-6). Nayanika’s 
name (and status), preceding that of 
her husband king Satakarni 1 (Liiders, 
List. no. 1114). Deed granting endow- 
ment of Balasri and Gautamiputra 
written by (the queen’s) female door- 
keeper (El. viii p. 73). Solitary refer- 
ence to mahamatra in inscr. of Krishna 
1’s time (Liiders, List, no. 1144, El. vm 
p. 93). Amatya as district officer, writer 
of royal charter, messenger for convey- 
ing king's order, superintendent of work 



352 


POLITICAL ORGANISATION 


The West Indian cave inscriptions containing records of donations 
made by the Satavahana kings give us an insight into the working of the 
state administration. Following the Asokan tradition the king issued a 
verbal order which was expected to be conveyed duly to the district 
officer. The order specified the locality and extent of the gift, the name of 
the donee, as well as the immunities and privileges conferred upon the 
latter, with directions to have them registered. The names and desig- 
nations of the officers (or of others) who drew up the deed and those who 
verified it were duly recorded as also the date of its delivery, the name of its 
engraver and (in the fuller examples) the date of depositing the duplicate 
copy in the royal archives and the name of the officer conveying the docu- 
ment to the donee . 1 

The feudatories of the Sdtaviihanas who ruled the western and southern 
parts of their dominion held a position of high authority bordering upon 
independence. If the two groups of contemporary rulers whose coins 
have been found at Karwar (in northern Kanara) and Kolhapur (in the 
Southern Maratha country) have been rightly identified as Satavahana 
feudatories, they must have ruled as kings with the right of coining in their 
own names. Inscriptions and coins refer to other officers called mahci- 
rathis and mahabhojcis who were definitely feudatories. These offices 
were held by a few families enjoying the distinction of intermarriage with 
the royal house. Again, the titles were held to be such a patent of nobi- 
lity that the wives regularly took the titles of their husbands . 2 

In the panegyric of Gautamiputra Sfitakarni recorded by the queen- 
mother Balasri we find reflected as a sort of posthumous political mani- 
festo the high personality of the greatest of the Satavahanas and a state- 
ment of his aims and conceptions as a ruler. He was, we are told, a model 
hero rivalling the achievements of the greatest kings known to history and 
legend. Above all, he was the ideal king granting the boon of fearlessness 
to others, refraining from all injury to life, even that of an offending 
enemy, identifying himself with the joys and sorrows of his subjects, 
levying and spending taxes justly and (as enjoined by the Smritis) checking 
the contamination of the four varnas. 


(Lttders, List, nos. 1124-6). Rdjdmatya 
as treasurer (ibid. no. 1141). Send- 
gopa and asvavaraka (ibid. nos. 381, 
728, 1266). Mahdsendpati (ibid, no 
1124, El. vm p. 65 and EL xx p. 6). 
Mahasenapatini (Luders, List, no. 1146, 
EI. vn p. 93 f.). Gramika ( EL xiv p. 
155 with corr. by Gopalachari, EHAC. 
p. 87, n. 66). Expln. of immunities 
and privileges of gifted lands in EL 
vii pp. 65-66 

1 Formulary of donation in Luders, 
List, nos. 1124-5-6. For the Asokan 
parallel see RE. vi(with B.M. Barua's 
note. Inscriptions of Asoka, n pp. 285-6). 

2 Kings Chutukadananda and Muda- 


nanda of Karwar coins provisionally 
classed as Satavahana feudatories 
(Rapson, BMCAWK. pp. xxii, 59-60) 
.Vasishthiputra Vihvayakura, 
Madhanputra Sivalakura and Gau- 
tamiputra Vilivayakura of Kolhapur 
coins identified by Rapson, (ibid. pp. 
xxvn-xxvm, 5-16) with three kings of 
the Puramc list, but held by other 
^holars (PHAIA p. 421; Gopalachari, 
7:> ^ to feudatories. 
Maharatlus and mahdhhojas as feuda- 
tories (I.uders, List, no. 1100, 1116 
Rapson BMC A WK. pp. xx-xxii 57-8 
Oopalachari, op. eit., pp. 78-83) ’ 



IKSHVAKUS 


353 


The Ikshvakus and other dynasties who seized the inheritance of the 
Satavahanas in Eastern Deccan continued the same type of administration 
with slight changes. The Ikshvaku kings styled themselves indifferently 
rajas and maharajas, while their chief queens assumed the title of maha- 
devi. The higher titles were probably justified by the successful perfor- 
mance of the asvamedha and vajapeya, the ancient tokens of paramount 
sovereignty, by the first king Santamula I. The Ikshvakus retained the 
high offices of mahasenapati and mahadandanayaka known to us from 
the Satavahana and the Kushana records respectively. To these they 
added the office of mahatalavara which has been recently rendered by 
‘Lord Chief Justice’. The holders of these offices intermarried with the 
ruling family, while their wives regularly took the titles of their husbands. 
The kingdom was divided into districts called rashtras, but the title of the 
officers in charge of them is unknown . 1 

Following the Ikshvaku precedent, king Jayavarman of the Brihatpha- 
layana clan indifferently styled himself raja and maharaja. A mahadanda- 
navaka holding likewise the office of mahatalavara is mentioned as one 
of his high officials. To judge from the list of immunities granted to some 
Brahmana donees in Jayavarman’s charter, it may be gathered that 
villages in his time were subject to the same financial administrative and 
other burdens as under the Satavahanas. Jayavarman seems to have 
substantially followed the old Satavahana administrative procedure in 
making his charitable endowment. In his record named above he issued 
orders specifying the donee’s name, the nature and extent of the gift, and 
the list of immunities conferred by him. The order was conveyed to the 
local officer in charge of the district ( ahara ) and was signed by the king 
himself. The district officer, however, is no longer called amatya, but has 
the designation of v yapfita.- 

The kings of the Chutu branch of the Satavahanas, who ruled Aparanta 
and Banavasi after the downfall of the main line, took the usual royal 
title of rdjan. Their officers of state were called, as before amatyas. 
The feudatories bore the familiar names of maharathi and mahabhoja, 
and their wives used the same titles in the feminine gender. The villages 
(as we learn from the immunities granted by the king to some donees) 
were usually liable to burdens of the type known to the Satavahana times. 


1 Maharaja (Ssntamflla), raja and 
maharaja (VIrapurushadatta), raja 
(Ehuvula), mahadevi, mahasenapati, 
mahatalavara, mahdtalavarl (Liiders, 
List, nos. 1202 3-4 ; El. xx pp. 16, 19, 
21, 22, 24; xxi, p. 62). Division into 
rashtras (Liiders, List, no. 1202). 
Mahatalavara rendered ‘Lord Chief 
Justice' (B. V. Krishnarao, EDA. p. 
43); earlier expins. in Vogel, EL xx 
p. 6, Sircar, The Successors of the 
Satavahanas, p. 19 etc. 

45 


- RajS and mahOraja (Jayavarman), 
mafiatagivara, vyaprita (Liiders, List, 
no. 1328). Mahatagivara is said to 
be a variant of mahatalavara, not a 
mistake for it (El. xx p. 7 ,n. 1 . ; B. V. 
Krishnarao, EDA. p. 44, correcting 
Vogel and Hultzsch EI. vi 315 who 
is followed by Sircar, The Successors 
of the Satavahanas, 44-5). Gopala- 
chari EH AC. p. 160 n. reads it as 
mahatalavara, for which see EI. 
xxiv p. 281 



354 


POLITICAL ORGANISATION 


The kingdom was divided in the usual fashion into aharas, but there is 
some doubt about the designation of the officers in charge of them . 1 


For refs, see Liiders, List, nos. 1021, 
1186, 1195-6 and Rapson, BMC A WK. 
p. xlvii. B. V. Krishnarao, EDA. pp. 
150 f. The district officer’s title (Lii- 


ders. List, no. 1 195) is given as rajjukci 
by Liiders and as mahdvallabha by 
Krishnarao, EDA. p. 152, both terms 
occurring in the inscriptions. 



Chapter XIII 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 
(A) JAINISM 

the six centuries of Jainism forming the subject of this section, the 
'-"'first half was comparatively more eventful and admits of a little more 
systematic treatment than the second, for which we have little guidance 
outside the Mathura inscriptions. For the earlier period we have the 
rather late Sravana Belgola inscriptions and the Hathigumpha inscription 
besides the Kdlakdcharya-Kathanakam in its different versions, and other 
legends of a quasi-historical character. The Rajavali-Kathe, a compen- 
dium of the nineteenth century, and the Pattavalis are also valuable. 

During this period Jainism prospered in different centres, some being 
more prominent than others when circumstances favoured them. In the 
third century b.c. Magadha, the home of Jainism, was apparently the most 
important area; Kalinga, and perhaps South India 1 also come into view 
during the second century B.C., while Ujjavini claims attention during the 
first, mainly on account of traditions that have gathered round the name 
of Vikramaditya Sakari and his reputed father Gardhabhilla and the Jaina 
saint Kalaka. In the early centuries of the Christian era Mathura became 
the best known centre of Jainism in the North. 

As already noticed, the Jainas claim that Chandragupta Maurya and his 
descendant Samprati professed and patronized their faith. The history 
of Jainism is very largely the story of the relations of the Jaina monks with 
their royal patrons on the one side and with the growing numbers of their 
lay followers on the other. To follow the history of the Jaina church from 
the time of Bhadrabahu, the contemporary of Chandragupta Maurya, 
a summary account of the church from the time of Mahavira to that of 
Sambhutivijaya, the predecessor of Bhadrabahu, will furnish the necessary 
background. 

In his lifetime Mahavira was head of the entire Jaina community com- 
prising the four orders ( tirthas ) of the monks, nuns, laymen and lay- 
women. After his death, according to some authorities, Gautama Indra- 
bhuti became the spiritual leader for twelve years, though other accounts 
say that having become a kevalin he never held office . 2 The next was 
Sudharman, the only other ganadhara (leader of a group, gana, of pupils) 

1 Sec. ch. xvi. It may be noted that the canasdra, translated by Faddegon & 

early date once assigned to Kundakunda Thomas, Intrn. p. xix. Contra A.N. 

on the basis of the Pattavalis and his Upadhye, Intrn. to his edn. of Prava- 
authorship of the Rural have both since chanaiara, Bombay, 1935, pp. x-xiii, 
become very doubtful. See Studies in 2 Mrs. Stevenson, Heart of Jainism, p. 68 
South Indian Jainism, pp. 40 f. and Pram- 



356 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


out of the original eleven, who survived Mahavira. 1 Sudharman held 
office for twelve years and was followed by his pupil Jambusvami who led 
the community for twenty-four years. He was the last of the kevalins, 
for after him both moksha and omniscience were closed to men. The six 
leaders who followed him came to be known as srutakevalins-, they lacked 
the omniscience of the kevalins, but had complete knowledge of the 
scripture. They were followed by dasapurvis, leaders who knew the ten 
Purvas of the twelfth Ariga. 2 Jambusvami attained moksha according to 
one reckoning in 403 b.c. It should be observed, by the way, that the 
dates given for events in the history of Jainism are only approximations, 
as there are numerous discrepancies among different accounts and a 
discussion of them here would be out of place, and perhaps profitless in a 
general history. Prabhava, who had figured earlier in the roles of prince, 
robber and magician, succeeded Jambusvami. Finding no one among the 
Jainas fit to succeed him, and impressed by the spiritual qualities of a 
staunch Brahmin by name Sayambhava, Prabhava decided to win him 
over to Jainism and succeeded in converting him just after he had com- 
pleted a great sacrifice. Sayambhava became leader in 397 after Prabha- 
va’s death, and was followed by Yasobhadra who died in 319. The next 
leader was Sambhutvijaya who acted in that capacity for only two years 
and was succeeded by the celebrated Bhadrabahu in 317 b.c. 

For about twenty years Bhadrabahu, the last of the srutakevalins, re- 
mained the leader. Born of a Brahmin family at Kotikapra in Pundra- 
vardhana, 3 he was a great scholar and one of the most revered teachers 
of the Jainas. He was the last to possess knowledge of the fourteen Purvas 
which contained the canon in the ancient text. His pontificate is remark- 
able for events which led ultimately to the definite crystallization of the 
long-standing differences between two sections of the Jainas who came 
ultimately to be known as Svetambaras (white-robed) and Digambaras 
(sky-clad). The story is told in the Bhadrabahucharita of Ratnanandin, a 
work of the fifteenth century a.d., which may be accepted, according to 
Jacobi, as preserving a fairly correct tradition. 4 Bhadrabahu who had the 
power of divining the future predicted that a famine of twelve years’ 
duration would ravage Northern India, and decided to migrate to the 
South with his followers. Leaving his colleague Sthulabhadra in charge of 
the monks who did not wish to follow him, he left Magadha for Southern 
India where there was no famine. Sthulabhadra was the son of Sakatala. 
the prime minister of the last Nanda king. The numbers of Jainas who 
left for the South and those who stayed behind are alike stated to have 
been 12,000, the former including the Mauryan emperor Chandragupta. 
When he reached Sravana Bejgola in Mysore, Bhadrabahu felt his end 
approaching, and after designating Visakha as his successor, he ended his 


1 A. Guerinot, La Religion Djaina, pp. 

.42-3 

a Stevenson, op. cit., pp. 68, 72 

8 Rajdvalikathe, l A. xxi p. 157 


ZDMG. xxxvin, 1884, pp. 1-42; Gueri- 
not, op. cit., p. 50; Stevenson, op. cit., 
pp. 70-2 



357 


life by starvation. The famine raged in the North, and in those hard 
days, the monks who had stayed behind, who were probably the older 
and more infirm section of the Sangha, adopted several modifications in 
the rules of their conduct. Among other things, they wore white robes 
(s\ cta-ambara) as also a peculiar head-dress known as ardhaphalaka. When 
the famine ended and normal conditions returned, some of the monks 
who had migrated to the South and remained faithful to the law of nudity 
returned and disapproved of the new modes introduced by their brethren 
in the North. Despite the efforts of Visakha and Sthulabhadra to bring 
the two groups closer, the separatist tendencies proved too strong and in 
course of time led to a definitive schism in a.d. 79, the most important of 
the many schisms that marked the history of the Jaina church. One sect 
became known at first as Ardhaphalakas and later as Svetambaras : and the 
other Digambaras. Though many legendary details obscure its outlines 
somewhat, the narrative of Ratnanandin appears coherent and probable. 

The Svetambara tradition places this schism somewhat later in- a.d. 
82 or 609 years after the demise of Mahavira (527 B.c. according to this 
tradition). According to this account, there was in Rathavirapura a 
teacher called Sivabhuti, also known as Sahasramalla and Botika. He 
had been converted by the monk Aryarakshita, and had a sister named 
Uttara. One day Sivabhuti received a costly garment from the king and 
his guru Aryarakshita tore it to tatters. Sivabhuti understood the master’s 
meaning, resolved to wear no clothes thereafter and began to preach 
nudity. When his sister Uttara wished to follow his example, he dissuaded 
her saying that women could not attain final deliverance on any account. 
Thus was founded the Botika or Nagnata sect which grew into the order 
of Digambaras. 1 Thus according to this tradition which dates from the 
twelfth century a.d. Sivabhuti was himself the author of the two funda- 
mental dogmas of the Digambaras, vi nudity and the ineligibility of 
woman for tire attainment of nirvana. 

Some date about a.d. 80 may thus be taken to mark the definitive 
rupture between the Svetambaras and Digambaras. Before this, they had 
lived side by side without any apparent discord. Some followers of the 
leaders Parsva and Mahavira, like Kesi and Gautama, strove to bring 
about the unity of the faith soon after the death of Mahavira. 2 But their 
object was not attained, and differences which had been persisting for 
several generations ended in a final definitive breach, in the drift towards 
which the migration to the South under Bhadrabahu formed a well- 
marked stage. 

Another cause for the division also came up in the lifetime of Bhadra- 
bahu, 3 according to some accounts. A council was summoned at 


1 Guerinot, op. cit., p. 49; Stevenson, 
op. cit., p. 79 

2 Uttaradhyayana, xxii,; SBE. 45 

3 There are different accounts of the 
end of Bhadrabahu’s life. One that he 
died of starvation in the South, a 


version supported by some late Kan- 
nada inscriptions in Sravana Belgola 
(EC. ii) has been mentioned already. 
Another is that he returned from South 
India at the end of the famine to be 
the head of the whole community 



358 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


Pataliputra to fix the canon under the lead of Sthulabhadra. The council 
fixed it as eleven Angas and fourteen Purvas. The books were not com- 
mitted to writing at the time but were orally transmitted. The work of 
the council, however, was repudiated by the followers of Bhadrabahu, and 
therefore did not carry much weight. The differences with regard to the 
content of the canon and its authoritative text exemplified in stories like 
this became another marked point of difference between the two great sects. 

Besides the Kalpasutra (the lives of the Jinas) attributed to him, Bha- 
drabahu is said to have composed commentaries ( niryuktis ) on ten canoni- 
cal books and another work Upasarga Harastotra in praise of Parsva 
which the Svetambaras hold to be their holiest book. A work on astro- 
nomy, the Bhadrabahvi Samkitd is ascribed to him also. But it is obvi- 
ously a work of a later time than that of Varahamihira, and the story 
of rivalry between the two brothers of Pratishthana, Bhadrabahu and 
Varahamihira, narrated by late Jaina writers, but not by Hemachandra, 
is clearly a late invention. 1 All Jaina authors from Hemachandra on- 
wards place the death of Ehadrabahu at the age of seventy-six in the year 
170 after the Vlranirvana i.e., in 297 b.c. Bhadrabahu preached in differ- 
ent parts of India and four of his disciples attained some celebrity viz., 
Agnidatta, Jinadatta, Somadatta and Godasa. At his death, none of 
these disciples succeeded, but Sthulabhadra. the most celebrated among 
the disciples of Sambhutivijaya. As already stated, the Council of Patali- 
putra was summoned by him in Bhadrabahu’s lifetime according to some 
accounts. He consecrated Mahagiri and Suhastin, the two sons of his 
sister; but discords grew up between them and each founded a separate 
line of masters. Sthulabhadra died in 252 b.c., and Mahagiri became the 
head of the community. He is said to have revived the ideal practice of 
nudity which had fallen into disuse. Two famous Jaina works were writ- 
ten in his time ; they were the Tattvartha-sutra of Umasvati and Pannavaria 
siitra (one of the upangas) by Syamacharya a pupil of Umasvati. Mahagiri, 
a true ascetic, recognized that under his predecessor many abuses had 
crept into the order, and strove to bring the community back to its 
primitive faith and practice. The result was that many drifted away from 
it under leaders of schisms, in fulfilment of a prophecy that after Sthula- 
bhadra the monks would become less strenuous in their lives. Mahagiri’s 
reforming efforts were frustrated by another factor. That was the con- 
version of Samprati and the disastrous effect of the liberal royal patronage 


and that his party declined to 
accept the work of the Council of 
Pataliputra summoned by Sthulabhadra 
during Bhadrabahu’s absence. (Ste- 
venson, op. cit., pp. 11, 72, 73). A 
third account says that Bhadrabahu 
resigned his position as leader to Sthu- 
labhadra and retired to Nepal for the 
rest of his life. When Sthulabhadra 
went to Nepal to consult him on the 
canon and its preservation by the 


Council of Pataliputra. he learnt from 
his predecessor all the fourteen Punas, 
but was forbidden to reveal to others 
more than the first ten of them, so that 
the canon established by the Council was 
a fragmentary one (CHI. i pp. 165-6) 
halapasutra, ed. Jacobi, Intr. pp. 12-14 
ms’ h °r WCVer ’ Anekanta It!, 12 pp. 

ch 5 ;“j£ ya , ) ” 0,her v ~ »>■ M ™« 



PROGRESS 


359 


that followed it. The Svetambara account of the conversion of Samprati 
says that Suhastin once met the emperor in Ujjain. In a previous birth 
Samprati had been a beggar who had accepted the Jaina faith to get a 
share of the sweets carried by the disciples of Suhastin and died of surfeit. 
At the sight of Suhastin, Samprati recollected the incident of his former 
birth, and again became a convert to Jainism. He then tried to spread 
Jainism by all means in his power, and did everything for that religion 
which Asoka had done for Buddhism. Hemachandra 1 says of Samprati: 
‘He showed his zeal by causing Jaina temples to be erected over the whole 
of Jambudvipa. During Suhastin’s stay at Ujjain, and under his guidance, 
splendid religious festivals and processions in honour of the Arhat were 
celebrated, and great was the devotion manifested by the king and his 
subjects on this occasion. The example and advice of Samprati induced 
his vassals to embrace and patronise his creed so that not only in his 
kingdom but also in adjacent countries the monks could practise their 
religion.’ He sent missionaries as far as Afghanistan and the Andhra and 
Tamil countries, the first known contact of Svetambaras with the South. 
He showered rich food and other good things on the members of the 
Sangha. Even Suhastin could not refuse them for fear of irritating the 
monarch. Mahagiri found it useless to remonstrate with him, and there- 
fore left him and retired to Dasarnabhadra where he died of voluntary 
starvation. Of the eight pupils he left behind, the two principal ones, Uttara 
and Balissaha, founded a school designated by their joint names. A third 
Rohagupta also attained fame. In those days a school was called gana 
and was made up of branches or sakhas comprising families or spiritual 
lines known as kulas or sambhogas, the latter term implying regional 
groups . 2 Suhastin who had become de facto leader before the death of 
Mahagiri now became the de jure leader and had a happier career than his 
brother, thanks to his readiness to accept royal patronage and protection. 
He set himself to repair the weakness that had befallen the community as 
a result of the reforming zeal of Mahagiri and the differences betv/een the 
two brothers; he gained new disciples and created new branches of the 
order. Possibly new recruits were received too readily. At any rate it was 
under Suhastin that Avantikumara, the son of a rich man who had been 
brought up in luxury, was allowed to join the order only to discover that 
the ascetic’s life was a hard one, and not venturing to return to the world, 
he put an end to his intolerable position by starving himself to death. A 
magnificent temple was built by his relatives on the spot where he died. 
The Jainas claim that this was no other than the famous temple of Maha- 
kala in Ujjain, now one of the most famous shrines of Saivism. Avanti- 
kumara’s story is still remembered as a warning against a rash entrance 
into the order; he is called Avanti Sukumara, Avanti the Delicate . 3 

Suhastin left eight disciples, many of whom became well known for the 

1 Parisishtaparvan, ed. Jacobi, p. 69, 2 Guerinot, op. cit., p. 44 

cited by C. J. Shah, Jainism in North 3 Stevenson, op. cit., p. 75 

India, p. 145. 



360 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


flourishing schools they founded. Rohana became the chief of the Ud- 
dehagana of four sakhas and six kulas. Bhadrayasas placed himself at the 
head of the Uduvatika gana with its four sakhas and three kulas. Ka- 
marddhi founded the Vesavafika garia, a curious name, composed of four 
sakhas and as many kulas. Srigupta directed the Charana gana which 
included four sakhas and seven kulas. Rishigupta created the Manava 
gana subdivided into four sakhas and three kulas. Lastly, Susthita, 
surnamed Kotika and Supratibuddha, formed the Kautika gana com- 
prising four sakhas and four kulas. 1 They collected five disciples all of 
whom founded branches and families. The chief among them was Indra- 
datta (Indradinna) who continued their work and was succeeded by Arva- 
dinna (Dinnasuri) and Simhagiri. 

Susthita became the head of the entire community after Suhastin (177 
b.c.), and under him the name of the Jainas is said to have been changed 
from Nirgrantha-gachchha to Kalika-gachchha in honour of the teacher 
Kalika, who taught him a secret mantra which he repeated crores of times. 
Susthita was followed in the high office by Indradinna in whose time the 
celebrated Kalakacharya continued to flourish. The story of Kalaka is 
told in many versions that have formed the subject of critical study by 
modern scholars. 2 Gardabhilla, king of Ujjain, insulted Kalakacharya by 
the abduction of his sister who had joined the order with him and become 
a nun. The monk then approached one of the Scythian kings in Sakastana 
for help. But that king was afraid of attacking Gardabhilla, a powerful 
ruler enjoying the protection of the goddess Rasabhi, who by the spell of 
her voice made it impossible for an enemy to approach within fourteen 
miles of the king. On his part Kalaka had magic powers and could pro- 
duce wealth at will. He persuaded the Saka to raise an army and march 
against Ujjain. When it encamped at a distance of fourteen miles from 
Ujjain, the goddess began to raise her voice for the protection of Garda- 
bhilla, but the Saka army stopped her mouth with their arrows, and she 
became unable to utter a sound. Then Gardabhilla was easily made 
captive and Kalaka’s sister released (61 b.c.). When he was forgiven and 
set at liberty, he retired to a neighbouring forest where he was finally 
devoured by a tiger. 3 Some years afterwards, the son of Gardabhilla, 
according to some accounts the glorious Vikramaditya, came up from 
Pratishthdna with an army, expelled the invaders from Ujjain, and ruled 
there for many years in great splendour and established the era that goes 
by his name (58/7 b.c.). Though the exact historical foundation for this 
story is not easily ascertained, the setting of the story fits the first century 
B.c. very well, as it was clearly a period of Saka inroads into India and 
of the attempts of Indian rulers, particularly the Satavahanas, to resist 
them, while the Puranas count the Gardabhillas among the feudatories 
(bhrityas) of the Andhras. The Kalaka story is valued for its moral lesson 
that whoever labours for the eminence of the faith obtains glory, an idea 

1 Gudrinot, ibid. 3 Stevenson, op. cit., pp. 75-6 

1 Norman Brown, The Story of Kalaka 



KALAKA AND VIKRAMADITYA 


361 


which is sometimes stretched to cover actions otherwise not easy to 
justify. The magic power due to yoga by which Kalaka was enabled to 
punish Gardabhilla is also held in admiration; but in many of the texts 
Kalaka has to expiate his vengefulness against Gardabhilla as it was at 
variance with the true ethics of Jainism. 

Kalaka is, however, specially remembered for the dispute which seems 
to have started with him on the day for the commencement of Pajjusana 
or Paryushana, the sacred festival which closes the Jaina year, some hold- 
ing that the fast begins on the fourth day of the month of Bhadrapada, 
others that it starts on the fifth day. Kalaka, it is said, once visited the 
king of Pentha (in the Deccan) and asked him to come and listen to the 
discourses he was delivering at Pajjusana. The king said he would attend 
if it was on any day but the fifth, the day of a special festival of Indra 
which he was bound to keep, and requested the saint to postpone his 
discourse till the sixth day. The ascetic offered instead to hold his dis- 
course a day earlier, on the fourth day, as postponement was not possible, 
and since then ‘some sects have begun the fast on the fourth and some on 
the fifth’, 1 though occasionally differences among astrologers led to all 
sects beginning it on the same day. 

Vikramaditya himself, according to Jaina sources, was a patron of 
Jainism. He is reputed to have owed his conversion to Siddhasena 
Divakara, the son of a Brahmin minister and a learned Jaina ascetic. 
Siddhasena is said to have met Vriddhavadi in debate in the midst of a 
jungle where they had only ignorant cowherds for their judges; they could 
not follow Siddhasena’ s learned discourse in Sanskrit and gave the palm 
to Vriddhavadi who spoke the language of the people. Siddhasena who 
wanted to translate the Jaina scriptures into Sanskrit was persuaded by 
his guru to abandon the idea of making them inaccessible to the common 
people, and even to expiate his sinful thought by wandering about for 
twelve years without uttering a word. Evidently the legend represents 
some attempt on the part of the saint to Sanskritize the Jaina canon 
and his failure in the attempt. Two other events assigned to about this 
time by the Jainas are a defeat of the Buddhists in argument by an ascetic 
called Arya Khaputa who lived in Broach, and the foundation of Satrun- 
jaya, the holiest of the Jaina tirthas, in Palitana, by a monk who nad the 
power of rising through the air aided by a disciple who commanded the 
power of creating gold. Despite all these and many other stories that have 
gathered round the name and times of Vikramaditya, that monarch re- 
mains a shadowy figure. Some are inclined to deny his existence altoge- 
ther, while others, perhaps more reasonably, hold that though there may 
have been a ruler of Ujjain of that name in the first century b.c., legend 
has beyond doubt confused him with other and better known Vikrama- 
dityas of later times, particularly the Gupta emperor Chandragupta II 
Vikramaditya. As for Siddhasena, modern scholars are generally in- 
clined to assign him to a date in the seventh or eighth century a.d . 2 
1 Ibid. 2 Jacobi, Intrn. to Samaraichcha Kaha 

46 



362 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


After Indradinna, the church was headed successively by Dinnasuri, 
Simhagiri and Vajrasvami, the last being reputed a great scholar who 
preached principally at Pataliputra and its neighbourhood and won 
numerous converts to the faith. 1 The Jainas believe that Vajrasvami was 
able to call up at will a magic carpet that could transport any number of 
persons to any distance by air; a tradition similar to that which found an 
early place in Tamil literature, referring to pandu-kambalam, lit. the 
white blanket, the seat of Indra which by its agitation invited his attention 
to any extraordinary occurrences on earth. 2 To Vajrasvami’s time the 
Jainas assign the sixth and seventh schism in the church, 3 while the eighth 
and the most serious schism, already mentioned, between the Digambaras 
and Svetambaras occurred soon after his death about the middle of the 
first century A.D. 

Vajrasvami was followed by Vajrasena in whose time came the definite 
breach in the church and the Digambaras hived off to form a totally 
distinct organization. ‘Differing dates are given for the separation; the 
Svetambaras believe it to have taken place in a.d. 142, the Sthanakavasi 
in A.D. 83, whilst Dr. Hoernle places the date about a.d. 79 or 82.’ 4 
Of the successors of Vajrasena there are only edifying legends attesting 
their piety and devotion, of little historical interest. 

In the second century b.c. Kalinga under Kharavela appears to have 
ranked as an important seat of Jainism, which seems to have been early 
introduced into the country. Jaina tradition mentions the visit of Maha- 
vira to Orissa and the inscription of Kharavela (1. 141 implies that Kumari 
hill (Udayagiri) was the place where he preached and propagated his 
faith. 5 Kharavela, whose inscription begins with an invocation of the 
Jinas, was himself a Jaina layman of a pious disposition. He says he 
offered ‘respectfully royal maintenances, China clothes (silks) and white 
clothes to the monks who by their austerities have extinguished the round 
of lives, the preachers on the religious life and conduct at the Relic 
memorial.’ He also brought about a council of ascetics and sages from 
all quarters and ‘caused to be compiled expeditiously the text of the seven- 
fold ahgas of the sixty-four letters.’ Earlier, he brought back and set 
up the image of the Jina of Kalinga which had been carried away by king 
Nanda of Magadha. Though he patronised Jainism particularly, he was 
‘a respecter of every sect, and the repairer of all temples’ as he proclaims 
in his inscription. The Jaina accounts, however, have nothing to say 
about this royal patron of their creed, and the inscription which is all we 


p. iii; P. L. Vaidya, ed. Nyaydvatara, 
Lntm. p. 20; etc. 

Guerinot, op. cit., p. 44 
Manimekalai, 14 II. 28-9; 29 //. 21-2 
The first schism was led by Jamali, the 
nephew and son-in-law of Mahavlra, 
and occurred in the Master’s lifetime, 
four years after his enlightenment; the 
second by Tishya-gupta at Rajagriha; 


the third by Ashadha c. 313 b.c. ‘the 
ftfurth in 307 b.c. by Asvamitra ; the 
fifth in 299 by Ganga; the sixth in a.d. 
18 by RohaguDta ; the seventh by 
Gotthamahila in a.d. 57. Guerinot, op. 
cit., pp. 46-8 

4 Stevenson, op. cit , p 79 

5 Jayaswal, JBORS. xm pp. 223, 245-6; 
EL xx p. 89 and n. 11 



JAINISM IN MATHURA 


363 


have to rely on for a knowledge of his deeds is by no means an easy 
record, as the long and varied history of its study and interpretation 
shows . 1 

An important landmark in the history of Jainism in North India in 
our period is formed by the numerous Jaina inscriptions of Mathura, 
some of them undated, and others bearing dates most probably in the 
Saka era marking the accession of Kanishka. The general purport of the 
inscriptions is to record gifts of individuals for the honour of their religion 
and for the benefit of themselves and their parents. When they mention 
the names of reigning kings and the period of their rule when the gift was 
made, they help to reconstruct the history of the period. They belong 
to the period just before and just after the commencement of the Christian 
era, and show clearly the permanent hold that Jainism no less than 
Buddhism had acquired on Mathura and its neighbourhood during this 
period. They bear testimony to a firmly established Jaina community, 
strongly supported by the pious lay devotees of all classes and ranks 
who gave presents of dwellings, clothes and soon, and erected ayagapatas, 
stupas and images, some with faces on all sides ( saravatobhadrika ), and 
temples for worship. ‘The inscriptions,’ says Smith , 2 ‘are replete with 
information as to the organization of the Jaina church in sections known 
as gana. kula and sakha, and supply excellent illustrations of the Jaina 
books. Both inscriptions and sculptures give interesting details proving 
the existence of Jaina nuns, and the influential position in the Jain church 
occupied by women.’ Among the donors figure bankers, jewellers 
(manikdra) caravan-leaders, dyers, perfumers, village headmen ( gamika ), 
dealers in metals (loha-vaniya), and so on, and mostly their wives, daugh- 
ters, sisters or daughters-in-law, all of them lay disciples of the faith, and 
pupils ( sisini ) of some preacher or other at whose instance they make the 
gifts . 3 Most of the inscriptions come from Kankall-tila (mound) occupied 
by a large Jaina stupa and at least two Jaina temples. 

The period of six centuries covered in this summary of Jainism was 
thus marked by many important developments. The unity of the commu- 
nity was broken once and for all when the Svetambaras and Digambaras 
developed into rival sects. The canon of the sacred literature was fixed 
though not as yet perhaps committed to writing. Jainism, lastly expanded 
beyond Bihar, the land of its birth, and overflowed the rest of India 
including the Far South. In some respects this was the period which 
witnessed the greatest activity of the church and marked the heyday of 
the faith, though it may be doubted if it ever attained a position equal in 
influence to that of Buddhism. 


1 C. J. Shah, op. cit., n. 1 on pp. 160-1 3 Liiders, List 

2 The Jain Stupa, p. 6 



364 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


(B) BUDDHISM 
(200 b. c.— a. d. 300) 


I 

With the advent of the Sungas Buddhism suffered a check. The Bud- 
dhist accounts 1 are unanimous in representing Pushyamitra Sunga as a 
persecutor of Buddhism. His persecution started in Magadha where it 
is said he tried unsuccessfully to destroy the famous Kukkutarama 
monastery in Pataliputra. He went up to Sakala to execute his policy of 
persecution. There he offered a reward of 100 dlnaras for the head of 
every Buddhist monk. The Buddhist accounts further tell us that this 
policy involved him in a war with a Yaksha named Krimisa 2 and ulti- 
mately brought about his death at a place called Sthulakoshtha. This 
evidence cannot be completely discarded. The Buddhist accounts refer to 
the dissatisfaction felt by the ministers of Asoka as well as by his grand- 
son Samprati at the extravagance with which Asoka was emptying the 
treasury on the Buddhist establishments. 3 The state was impoverished 
and weakened and this led to the downfall of the Mauryas. Pushyamitra 
started with a reactionary policy, performed asvameclha sacrifices and 
did his best to revive the Brahmanical religion. If his policy of perse- 
cution was followed with greater vigour from Sakala it was because the 
Greeks had become the protagonists of this religion and had declared 
war against him in its defence. 4 Demetrius and Menander became the 
champions of the cause of Buddhism and overran the whole of Northern 
India. Pushyamitra disappeared and his successors ruled not from Maga- 
dha but from Vidisa. 

The temporary persecution of Buddhism at the hands of Pushyamitra 
was ineffective. The people had espoused the cause of Buddhism. It 
was probably this popular feeling that dissuaded Pushyamitra from des- 
troying the Kukkutarama at Pataliputra. The same popular sentiment 
prepared the way for the great progress made by Buddhism during the 
Sunga- Kanva period. This is made amply clear by the very large number 
of private donations recorded on Buddhist monuments at this time. 
A number of famous Buddhist establishments like the Bharhut Stupa, 


1 Divyavadaua, xxix pp. 429-434; Przy- 
luski. La Legends de I’Empereur Acoka, 
pp. 256 f. where he deals with the 
Chinese versions of the story; Man- 
jusrimulakalpa, ed. Ganapati Sastri, ch. 
53, vv. 530-7. For the Tibetan version 
of the story Bu-ston, trans. Obermiller, 
p. 199 

2 For the identification of Krmisa with 
Demetrius see my Krmisa and Deme- 
trius, IHQ. xxii pp. 81 f 

3 Divyavaddna, loc. cit., p. 430. The 


text says that Asoka appointed Sam- 
prati, the son of Kunala, heir apparent 
to the throne. As Asoka was emptying 
the whole treasury on the Buddhists, 
Samprati, on the advice of his ministers 
made Asoka a virtual prisoner and’ 
strained hint from this policy 
While describing the causes of the Greek 
invasion the Puranas say that they came 
or .f" 6 sake of religion, cupidity or 
(dhannatah kamato rthatah'y 
IHQ. xxii pp. 89-90 ■' 



GREEKS AND BUDDHISM 


365 


the Karle Caves, and the Sanchl Stupa belong to the Sunga-Kanva period 
and testify to the great prosperity which Buddhism was then enjoying. 
Buddhism had developed from a monastic into a popular religion. It 
had become a theistic religion with Buddha and his relics as the objects 
of the cult. The stupas contained the ashes of the Great Master. Mere 
circumambulation and worship of these stupas came to be considered by 
the ordinary laity as an act of great piety. The sanctity of Buddha’s person 
was still held in the highest estimation and it was a sacrilege to make an 
image of him for the purpose of worship. The Bodhi tree or the sacred 
wheel were considered to be sufficiently representative of the divine aspect 
of the Lord. 

It was in this period that Buddhism was adopted by the Greeks in the 
North . 1 King Menander was a great champion of the faith. The story 
of his conversion by Nagasena is related in the Milindapanha and seems 
to have a historical basis. He was probably instrumental in inviting 
Demetrius to defend the cause of Buddhism against the persecution of 
Pushyamitra. After establishing his capital at Sakala he began to do 
many acts of piety. In these he seems to have emulated the example of 
Asoka. He is said to have been charitable, attached to the Law and a 
builder of monasteries, gardens, chaityas, wells etc. Some of his coins 
bear the emblem of the wheel, and he calls himself a trata and a dhramia. 
Buddhist tradition represents him as a saviour of Buddhism. The Greeks 
carried the story of his pious acts very far. Plutarch 2 tells us that after 
his death, the large cities within his empire contended for the honour of 
preserving his ashes and ultimately divided them among themselves just 
as was done with the ashes of Buddha. Another Greek ruler, Agatho- 
cles, uses the emblems of the Buddhist stupa and Bodhi tree on his coins, 
and he takes pride in calling himself a Hirtduja, i.e. an Indian by birth. 

From the time of Menander the Greeks in India adopted Buddhism 
as the religion of their faith. Henceforth they play the part of donors 
to Buddhist establishments. One Irila builds two cisterns for the monks 
at his own expense at Junnar, Chita builds a meeting-hall for the sangha 
at the same place. Indragnidata excavates a cave at Nasik, and Dhenu- 
kakata builds a temple at Karle. There were doubtless many other 
donations elsewhere, but the examples mentioned were made at the most 
important institutions of the period. 

The Pali texts represent the Greeks as taking part even in missionary 
activities. We are told that after the conversion of the Yavana (Greek) 
country to Buddhism, Moggaliputta Tissa went there and selected a Greek 
elder Dharmarakshita for missionary work. Dharmarakshita was then 
sent to Aparantaka where he successfully preached the law of Buddha 


S. Levi. 'Le Bouddhisme et les Grecs,' 
Revue de VHistoire de Religions, xxm 
1891, pp. 436-49, leprinted in Memorial 
S ylvain Levi, pp. 204 ft. ; Rhys Davids, 


The Questions of King Milinda, SBE. 
xxxv ; P. Demieville Les Versions Chi- 
noises de Milindapanha, BEFEO xxiv. 
CHI. i p. 551 



366 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


and converted thousands, including women and nobles . 1 The Ceylonese 
chronicle 2 further tells us that when Dutthagamani founded the Great 
Stupa (Mahathupa) in Ceylon in the middle of the second century b.c. 
Buddhist teachers came from various countries. The Greeks were repre- 
sented by the Greek elder Mahadharmarakshita who came from the 
city of Alasando (Alexandria ad Caucasum). 

The Greeks in India were also responsible for developing a new style 
of Buddhist art which is usually known as Indo-Greek and which flourish- 
ed mostly in the Panjab and North-Western India. It also exercised a 
great influence on the Buddhist art flourishing in other parts of India 
and abroad, in later days. The Greeks were perhaps responsible for the 
first plastic representation of Buddha, and this indicated a great change 
in Buddhist ideology from purely ethical to theistic concepts. 

The rapid extension of Buddhism after the time of Asoka to various 
parts of India resulted in the rise of Buddhist sects of which the number 
is given as eighteen . 3 These sects arose not from doctrinal differences 
except in certain cases, but from the geographical conditions. With the 
spread of Buddhism, communities were founded in various parts of the 
country and as there was no co-ordinating organisation many of them 
developed their own traditions respecting the ancient teachings. The 
differences between many of these schools were so small that a number 
of them died out or merged in a short time with others. 

The first schism in the church, we have seen, took place at the time 
of the second council, and split the church in two, one section being 
called Mahasanghika and the other Sthaviravada (Pali Theravada). 
Various traditions both northern and southern would have us believe that 
from the time of the first schism for nearly one century the Sthaviravada 
Church remained undivided, while the Mahasanghika during the same 
period (the second century after Nirvana) gave rise to eight different 
schools: Ekavyavaharika, Lokottaravada, Kaukkutika, Bahusrutiya, 
Prajnaptivada, Chaityasaila, Aparasaila and Uttarasaila. 

Divisions started in the Sthaviravada camp a century later (third cen- 
tury after Nirvana). The first gave rise to two schools: Sarvastivada 
and Mula-Sthaviravada (also called Haimavata). From the Sarvastivada 
arose the Vatsiputriya which gave rise to four schools called Dharmotta- 
riya, Bhadrayaniya, Sammatiya and Chhannagarika. Later on two 
other schools also arose from the Sarvastivada: Kasyaplya and Mahisa- 
saka, and the latter was parent of the Dharmaguptaka school. The last 
school to originate from the Sarvastivada came into existence a century 


1 Mahavamsa, Dipavamsa, and Sutta- 
vibhahga — texts discussed by Levi, op. 

2 Geiger, Mahavamsa, p. 194 

3 A complete account of the schools and 
their doctrines is found in Vasumitra’s 
‘History of Eighteen Schools’ which 


is preserved in Chinese and Tibetan 
translations. For the Tibetan transla- 
tion Vassilief, Bouddisme , ses Dogmes 
etc Paris, 1865, pp. 222 ff; for the 
Chinese translation— J. Masuda, Asia 
Major, ii pp. 1 ff; for the Pali sources — 
Geiger, Mahavamsa, App. 2 



BUDDHIST SCHOOLS 


367 


later, and it was known as Samkrantivada (also called Sautrantika). 

The Mahasanghika since its inception in Yaisali was mostly confined 
to the east from where it spread specially to the south. The followers 
of this school probably did not form a strong community in the north 
as they are mentioned only in two inscriptions: 1 the Wardak vase 
inscription of the 51st year of Kanishka and the Mathura Lion Pillar. 
The first refers to a vihara being built by one Vagramarega for the Maha- 
sanghikas, but the reference in the second inscription is not very clear. 
It probably speaks of the interest that was being taken by one Buddhila, 
a Sarvastivada teacher, in the literature of the Mahasanghika school. 
The Mahasanghika and its sects had a larger following in the South. A 
Karle cave inscription of the 24th year of the reign of Vasishthlputra 
Pu]umayi 2 records the gift of a nine-celled hall to the Mahasanghikas. 
The gift was important and shows that the school was held in high esteem 
in that region. The Mahasanghika and some of its branches also flouri- 
shed in the region of Amaravati and Dhanyakataka, but some of its 
earlier sects, such as the Ekavyavaharika, Lokottaravada and Kukku- 
tika probably disappeared very early as they are not mentioned in any 
inscription. 

The Mahasanghika developed a literature of its own. In fact it claim- 
ed to have preserved the most authentic tradition of early Buddhism 
in so far as it traced its lineage from Mahakasyapa who was responsible 
for convening the first Buddhist council in which, according to tradition, 
the canon was recited for the first time. The Tibetan accounts 3 say that 
the literature of the school was written in a Prakrit language but no ori- 
ginal text of the school having come down to us we do not know what 
sort of Prakrit it was. The Vinayapitaka of this school 4 has, however, 
survived in its entirety in a Chinese translation made by Fa-hien and 
Buddhabhadra in a.d. 424. Fa-hien discovered a manuscript of this text 
on his Indian travels in a Mahayana monastery in Magadha. The story as 
told by Fa-hien is interesting and throws some light on the antiquity of the 
Mahasaiighika-Vinaya: 5 ‘Fa-hien’s original object had been to search 
for the Vinaya. In the various kingdoms of North India, however, he 
had found one master transmitting orally the rules to another but no 
written copies which he could transcribe. He had travelled far and come 
on to Central India. Here in the Mahayana monastery he found a copy 
of the Yinaya containing the Mahasanghika rules — those which were 
observed in the first great council while Buddha was still in the world. 
The original copy was handed down in the Jetavanavihara.’ Fa-hien’s 
testimony proves that the Mahasanghika-Vinaya was written down quite 
early at a time when manuscript copies of the Vinaya of other schools 
were not yet available. Fa-hien also refers to the Abhidharma 6 of 


1 Konow, CII. II (i) p. 165 & p. 30 

2 Ltiders, List, 1106; El. vu p. 71 

3 Vassilief, op. cit., p. 271 


4 P. C. Bagchi, India and China, p. 136 

5 Legge, Travels of Fa-hien, p. 98 

6 Ibid. p. 99 



368 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


the Mahasanghika school, a copy of which he got in Magadha, but it 
has not been preserved. We do not know if the school had a Sutrapi- 
taka of its own. No trace of any such collection has come down to us. 
Of the three early branches of the Mahasanghika there are no vestiges 
except in the literature of one school, the Lokottaravada. The Mahavastu 
is declared to be a portion of the Vinayapitaka of this school. The 
Mahavastu itself declares that it is ‘the portion called Mahavastu of 
the Vinayapitaka of the Lokottaravada of Madhyadesa— a branch of 
the Mahasanghika.’ 1 

The Mahasanghika, along with its three branches — the Ekavyavaha- 
rilca, Lokottaravada and Kaukkutika — believed in the supramundane 
Qokottara) character of Buddha. Buddha was thus considered to be 
infallible. Every word uttered by a Buddha has a deep religious signi- 
ficance. He is omniscient and not subject to human failings. The 
historical Buddha had no place in this theory. The Mahasanghika also 
formulated the theory of mulavijnana , ‘original consciousness', v. hich was 
of great consequence. It is this subtle consciousness from which the five 
skandhas originate. Thus regarded, the skandhas do not transmigrate; 
it is the mulavijnana which is the real subject of transmigration. 2 

The other branches of the Mahasanghika, viz., the Bahusrutlva, Pra- 
jnaptivada, Chaityasaila, Aparasaila and Uttarasaila, have also left defi- 
nite traces in the history of the Buddhist Church. In addition to the last 
three schools, the Pali sources mention a few others including them under 
the general heading Andhaka (Andbraka). The additional names are: 
Rajagiriya, Siddhatthika, Pubbaselia and Vajiriya. The schools are 
also generally known as Chetiya or Chaitya (ka). These schools flouri- 
shed in the region of Dhanyakataka near Amaravati and played an impor- 
tant part in the history of Buddhism during the first few centuries of the 
Christian era. 3 Some of them continued to exist till the seventh century, 
when Hiuan Tsang visited the place. 

The Chaityakas are already mentioned in a Nasik cave inscription. 4 
A number of inscriptions discovered at Amaravati 5 mention the Chetiya 
school and its chief place of worship— the Mahachaitya at Dhanyaka- 
taka. 6 A number of inscriptions discovered at Nagarjunakonda, a place 
near ancient Dhanyakataka refer to the following Andhraka schools: 7 

1. Chetiyavadaka 

2. Rajagirinivasika (the same as Rajagiriya mentioned by Pali 

sources) 

3. Puvasele (Purvasaila) 

4. Mahavanseliya (this may be one of two other seliya schools: 

Apara — and Uttara — ) 

5. Siddhatthika. 


1 Mahavastu ed. Senart, i p. 2 

2 Masuda, !oc. cit., 68, rt. 1 

2 El. xx CD: IHQ. vii m. 633 f 

4 Ltidcrs, List, no. 1130 


= Ibid. no. 1225 

6 Ibid. no. 1225 

7 IHQ. vii p. 646 



THE SCHOOLS IN INSCRIPTIONS AND LITERATURE 


369 


The inscriptions also speak of the Airiya Hagha or Arya-Sangha by 
which probably the Mahasaiigha is meant. The Nagarjunakonda inscrip- 
tions mention another school of the Mahasanghika, the Bahusrutlya. 
The existence in the region of Dhanyakataka of practically all the bran- 
ches of the Mahasanghika mentioned in literature shows that this area 
had become the most important stronghold of the Mahasanghikas under 
the patronage of the Satavahanas and their successors in the Krishna 
valley. These schools continued to prosper till the third or fourth 
century A.D. This place, as we know from one of the inscriptions, had 
attracted monks and nuns from various lands: Kasmlra, Gandhara, 
China, Kirata, Tosali, Aparanta, Vanga, Vanavasi, Yavana, Damila and 
Tambapanni (Ceylon). 1 

The Andhraka schools had no literature of their own and seem not 
to have differed from the parent community, the Mahasanghika, on any 
important doctrinal point. They evidently shared with other Mahasan- 
ghika sects the principal views of the school on Buddhalogy and trans- 
migration. 

The schools arising from the other camp, the Sthaviravada, have also 
left their definite mark in literature and epigraphy, from the Sunga right 
up to the Kushan period, and may be said to have flourished from 200 
B.c. to a.d. 200. The Sarvastivada and its branches flourished mostly 
in the north, being recorded in a number of inscriptions 2 of the Kushan 
period e.g., the Zeda Inscription, the Kurram valley relic casket, the 
Mathura Lion Pillar Inscription. One inscription records the gift to the 
Sarvastivada monks of the famous Kanishka-Vihara of Purushapura. 
These inscriptions clearly show that the Sarvastivada school was esteemed 
in the entire region from Mathura to Nagara (hara) and from Taxila to 
Kasmlra. The Haimavata school had its stronghold in Vidisa. 3 The 
Sonar! stupa inscriptions of Bhilsa refer to this school and its apostle 
Dundubhisara. Other inscriptions of the same region record the names 
of two other teachers of the same school, Kasyapagotra and Gauptiputra 
(Gotiputa). The Ceylonese chronicles as well as the Samantapasadika 
make special reference to Dundubhisara and Kassapagotta as the apo- 
stles of Buddhism in the Himalayan zone. The Haimavata school, as 
the name indicates, probably originated in the Himalayan region, per- 
haps in Kasmlra. 

A number of inscriptions of the Kanheri cave mention the Bhadra- 
yanika school, and the Sarnath Pillar Inscription 4 refers to the Sammi- 
tiya and Vatslputrika schools. We have seen that the Sammitlya 
was a branch of the Vatslputrika, and hence they were intimately asso- 
ciated with each other. The Vatslputrikas are also found in a Bharhut 
inscription under the name Vacchiputra. The Kasyaplya, another 
important branch of the Sarvastivada, is recorded in the inscriptions of 

1 IHQ. vn p.651 ;EI. xx pp. 22-3; I accept 3 Ltiders, List, no. 156; Przyluski, Le 

Vogel’s interpretation. • Concile de Rajagrha, pp. 317 f 

2 Konow, op cit., pp. 30, 142, 152 1 Ltiders, List, no. 923 

47 



370 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


the period. The oldest reference to them is in the Pabhosa Buddhist cave 
inscription 1 which records the excavation of the cave for the use of the 
Kassaplya monks, by one Ashadhasena, the maternal uncle of king Baha- 
satimitra. The Bedali inscription (Kazara district) and the Taxi la Copper 
Ladle inscription, both of which 2 belong to the Kushan period refer to 
them as Kasavia or Kasyaviya. Inscriptions are silent about the Dhar- 
maguptaka school but there are other evidences to show that this was a 
very important school of the period. Although the Mahisasaku was a 
branch of the Sarvastivada and an important school, it is not mentioned 
in any inscription of North India. It does, however, find a place along 
with the Andhraka schools in one of the inscriptions of Nagarjunakonda. 3 

Many of these branches of the Sthaviravada have left their own litera- 
tures. The Pali canon according to its own tradition is the sacred litera- 
ture of the Theravada (Sthaviravada). The iiterature of the Sarvas- 
tivada 4 has, however, been preserved only in Chinese and Tibetan tran- 
slations. The complete Vinayapitaka of the school was translated into 
Chinese in a.d. 404 by Kumarajiva and Punyatrata. Only the Praiimoksha 
of this school has been discovered in its original Sanskrit, from Central 
Asia. 5 The Sutraphaka, consisting of four Agamas, translated into 
Chinese between 397 and 427. in ail likelihood belongs to the same school. 
Of the seven Abhidharma texts of the Sarvastivadas, the Jnanaprasthana- 
sastra is preserved in a Chinese translation of 383. The other six are in 
Chinese translations made by Hiuan Tsang between 651 and 660. 

The Vinayapitakas of the Dharmaguptaka and Mahisasaka schools 6 
are also preserved in Chinese translations of the beginning of the fifth 
century. The literatures of the other schools, viz. Haimavata, Kasya- 
piya and Sammitiya, have come down to us in the fragments preserved 
in Chinese translations. A small text called Vinayanidtrakd-sdstra , 7 
which was translated into Chinese between 385 and 431, is a fragment 
of the Vinaya of the Haimavata school as stated by a colophon of the text 
itself. It has a close resemblance to the corresponding section of the 
Dharmaguptaka- vinaya. A fragment of the Vinaya of the Kasyapiya 
school is the Vimukti-sila-sutra 8 translated by Gautama Prajnaruchi at 
the beginning of the sixth century. A small section of the Vinaya of the 
Sammitiya school is the Liu eul she eul tiling leao lun (22 explanations of 
the Vinaya) 9 which was translated by Paramartha in the middle of the 
sixth century. A Sastra or Abhidharma of the same school entitled Sam- 
mitiya-nikaya-sdstra 10 was translated into Chinese much earlier. It looks 
like an abridgement of a longer work giving the essential doctrines of the 
school. It is not impossible that some of these schools at least had more 

1 Ibid. no. 904 

2 Konow, op. cit., pp. 87-8 

3 IHQ. vu p. 647; EL xx p. 24 

4 India and China , p. 137 

6 Finot, "Pratimoksa du Sarvastivada 

JA. 1913 


6 India and China , p. 137 

7 T ‘ iisho Edition of the Chinese Tripi- 

taka, no. 1463 1 

8 Ibid. no. 1460 

9 Ibid. no. 1461 
10 Ibid. no. 1649 



DIFFERENCES OF DOCTRINE 


371 


extensive literatures which have been lost. We know at least that Hiuan 
Tsang took 17 texts of the Sammitiya school from India to China, but 
translated none of them and the texts were ultimately lost. 

This is not the place to enter into a discussion of the doctrines held 
by the various schools of the Sthaviravada group. However, some of 
their important differences with the Mahasanghika may be pointed out. 
The Sarvastivadas, as the name indicates, were realists. They believed 
in the existence of both material and mental elements. They held 
Buddha, in opposition to the Mahasanghikas, to be a historical figure 
who was not infallible. Not all that he said was the Law, and not all 
the siitras that he delivered were perfect. The fundamental doctrines 
arc embodied only in the eightfold Aryan path ( arya-ashtahgika-mdrga ). 

The Dharmaguptaka school, although a branch of the Sthaviravada, 
had a near doctrinal affinity with the Mahasanghika. It attached a sanc- 
tity to the person of Buddha and placed him higher than the Sangha. 
It also maintained that great merit could be acquired by worshipping 
the stupa. 

The Mahisasaka too differed on some important doctrinal matters 
from its parent body, the Sarvastivada. While the latter maintained that 
the things ( dharmas ), present, past and future exist, the Mahisasakas 
propunded the view that the past and the future do not exist. It is said, 
however, that the Mahisasakas later on modified this position. 

We know something more definite on the special doctrines of the Sam- 
mitiya school. The Sammitiya was a branch of the Vatsiputriya. The 
most important view held by them in common was a modification of the 
Iheory of transmigration. While most of the Buddhist sects believed 
that the pudgala (ego) was either identical with the skandhas or different 
from them, the Vatsiputriya and the Sammitiya maintained that the ego 
was neither the skandhas nor different from them. This ego, they main- 
tained, contrary to the views of others, could transmigrate. The concep- 
tion of this ego was more or less like the Brahmanical conception of 
atman and similar to the conception of mulavijndna of the Mahasanghika. 
They were therefore accused of heresy by some schools. They also 
held another revolutionary view in common with the Sarvastivada that 
non-Buddhists also were capable of obtaining the supernormal powers 
( riddhi ) and attaining to the position of Arhatship. 

The last of the eighteen schools, which is called Samkrantivada by 
some sources and Sautrantika by others, and which originated in the 
fourth century after Nirvana requires to be noted. They were 
called Samkrahtika because they believed in the transmigration of the 
skandhas. But by these skandhas they mean something different from 
its ordinary conception. It is called ekarasa-skandha , an entity similar 
to the pudgala theory of the Sammitiyas and mulavijndna of the Maha- 
sanghikas. On this point the school seems to have been the precursor 
of the later Sautrantikas, but on another point they maintained a doctrine 
quite contrary to that of the Sautrantikas of later times. They shared 



372 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


with the Sarvastivada the view that the sutras delivered by Buddha were 
not all authoritative. The later Sautrantika school, however, considered 
the sutras alone to be authoritative. The Samkrantivada therefore 
should be distinguished from the Sautrantika school of later times, 
although in certain respects the former may be considered a precursor 
of the later. 1 

It is thus clear that apart from some of the most important schools 
which developed their own literatures, the rest were local sects which as 
Fa-hien says ‘agree in general meaning but they have small and trivial 
differences as when one opens and another shuts’. 

II. 

Kanishka’s reign is a landmark in the history of Buddhism. Tradi- 
tion not only represents him as a great patron of the religion but also 
associates him with a galaxy of Buddhist masters who were responsible for 
shaping the Buddhism of later times. Only a few coins of Kanishka con- 
tain Buddhist emblems, but a very large number of inscriptions of his 
reign as well as of that of his successors clearly bear out that it was a period 
of great Buddhist activity. It was in this period that the Indo-Greek 
school of Buddhist art which originated earlier had its greatest develop- 
ment. Buddha for the first time began to be represented by images. 
Buddhist monks from India carried Buddhism to Central Asia and China. 
Buddhist philosophical schools came into existence and a new form of 
Buddhism, the Mahayana, of far-reaching consequence came to be 
evolved in this period. The Buddhist sects mentioned above assumed 
their definite position in the doctrinal and literary history of Buddhism. 

Kanishka must have contributed a good deal to this progress of Budd- 
hism. Buddhist legends tell us that he became the sovereign of all 
Jambudvipa 400 years after the death of Buddha. He at first treated 
Buddhism with contempt, but later on became a great champion of it. 
The story runs that while out hunting he met a cowherd-boy who inspired 
him with faith in Buddha by communicating to him a prophecy of the 
Lord that 400 years after him a king called Kanishka would build a great 
stupa in his honour. This led to his conversion to Buddhism and the 
emperor in fulfilment of the prophecy built a great tope at Purushapura. 
This was the famous Kanishka-Mahavihara of Peshawar which became 
an object of admiration to all foreign travellers for centuries. 2 The 
Chinese sources give the name Tsiao-li to this vihara. The Sanskrit name 
seems to have been something like Ascharya-vihara. 3 

We do not know how far the story of Kanishka’s conversion to Budd- 
hism is authentic. The date at least seems to be wrong for Kanishka did 
not flourish before the end of the first century, i.e. about 500 years after 


1 Masuda, op. cit., p. 68 n. 1 

2 Watters On Yuan Chwang, I pp. 203-4 


^ h3v “ nes . ‘Voyage de Song-yun’, 
BEFEO. hi p. 422 n. 



THIRD BUDDHIST COUNCIL 


373 


Nirvana, but the Mahavihara built by him is mentioned not only in litera- 
ture but also in inscriptions. It was the abode of Parsva, the venerable 
patriarch of the Sarvastivada school, who was a contemporary of 
the emperor and probably his preceptor. He presided over a general 
Buddhist council convoked by Kanishka. 1 This is traditionally known 
as the Third Buddhist Council, evidently by the exclusion of the Council 
of Patallputra, which we have seen was only a party meeting. The 
Council was necessitated by the dissensions that had been raging in 
the Church. The Tibetan accounts tell us that the principal parti- 
cipants were Parsva with 500 Arhats under him and Vasumitra with 
500 Bodhisattvas under him. This really means that the points of view 
which we usually call Hinayana and Mahayana were both represented in 
the Council. According to one source, the Council acknowledged that 
all the eighteen schools preserved the genuine doctrine of Buddhism, it 
also put into writing the Vinaya as well as those parts of the Sutra and 
Abhidharma that had not been written down before. The Chinese account 
as given by Hiuan Tsang tells us that the elders in this Council were con- 
cerned with the compilation of the commentaries ( Vibhasha ) of the Sutra-, 
Vinaya- and the Abhidharma-pitakas each containing 100,000 slokas. 
These Vibhashas were considered to be the authoritative interpretations of 
the canon, and by the order of Kanishka were engraved on copper-plates 
and enclosed in a stupa. The venue of the Council, according to one 
source, was the Kundalavana-vihara of Kasmlra, according to the other, 
the Kuvana in Jalandhara. 

Besides Parsva, a number of other famous teachers was associated with 
Kanishka. Of these the foremost was Asvaghosha. 2 Asvaghosha, 
originally a Brahmin, was converted to Buddhism by Parsva. His acti- 
vities were confined to Magadha, but his fame soon reached the frontiers. 
He was brought to Purushapura by Kanishka after his military expedition 
to the east. Asvaghosha is famous for his literary works, Buddhacharita, 
Sutralariikara, Sariputraprakarana — a drama of which only fragments 
have been discovered from Central Asia, Samdarananda, etc. His great 
literary genius has been recognised but in all probability he also originated 
a system of philosophy. This philosophy is sometimes called the Tathata 
philosophy in which the ultimate reality is stated to be indefinable, attain- 
able only by intuition. The phenomenal world is declared to be unreal. A 
systematic book of Mahayana philosophy called Sraddhotpada-sdstra, 
which is found in Chinese and declared to be the translation of the Sans- 
krit original, is attributed to him. Some scholars, however, doubt the 
authenticity of this book. Other sources attribute to him a drama called 
Rdshtrapala-ndtaka which is now lost and must have treated of philoso- 
phical topics. An account of this work as preserved in Chinese says : ‘In 
the city of Patallputra Asvaghosha had been going about to preach his 

1 Watters, op. cit., i pp. 209 f.; Obermiller, 2 Watters, op. cit., i p. 209; Vassilief, 

Bu-ston, p. 97; Kern. Manual of op. cit., p. 210; Levi, ‘Encore Asvaghosa’, 
Buddhism, pp. 121 f. JA. 1928, pp. 193 f. 



374 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


religion and to convert others to it. Inspired by the desire to save the 
residents of the city he composed a beautiful piece of song called Pdshtrci- 
pala. Its tune was pure and elegant, and beauty and sadness perfectly 
harmonised in it. It dealt with sorrow, vacuity, essence of impersonality 
( duhlcha , sunyata, aiiatma) that is to say all that constitute the illusory 
world. The three worlds or the dhatus are the prisons for imprisoning the 
people and it is impossible to be happy in any of these places . . .all is 
impermanent . . . the body is empty and vain . . .’ . This is not quite a new 
philosophy ; it is rather a fundamental thesis of Buddhism. It is therefore 
likely, as the tradition asserts, that Asvaghosha was also an exponent of 
the Buddhist philosophy in some of his works. 

Vasumitra , 1 we have seen, was also a contemporary of Kanishka. 
There are different personages of this name, and some confusion about 
them in the Chinese and Tibetan accounts. We are told that there were 
three Vasumitras in the early period; one lived three hundred years after 
Nirvana and was the author of the two Abhidharma works of the Sarvas- 
tivada, viz., Prakaranapada and Dhatukdya; the second Vasumitra lived 
four hundred years after Nirvana and assisted Parsva in the compilation 
of the Mahavibhasha ; the third was a Sautrantika teacher. In spite of the 
tradition, it is possible to suppose that the first and the second were iden- 
tical. There is no doubt that the Sarvastivada canon was rehearsed in the 
Third Council before the compilation of a comprehensive Vibliasha could 
be undertaken. So Vasumitra may have been responsible for putting 
together the two Abhidharma texts mentioned before which pass under 
his name. He played that part of an editor, not of an author, in resard 
to the two texts. A few other works attributed to him such as the History 
of Eighteen Schools, Sahgiti-sutra etc. show that Vasumitra was interested 
in putting the traditional lore in order. This was also the main purpose 
of the Third Council — to take stock of the canonical books, to put them 
in order, to write them down, to fix the correct interpretation and to judge 
the value of the traditions as recorded by various schools. Vasumitra 
worked to that end. 

Three more names are associated with him. Taranath says, ‘Bhadanta 
Dharmatrata, Ghoshaka, Vasumitra and Buddhadeva are the four great 
teachers of the Vaibhashika school .’ 2 Dharmatrata 3 was the maternal 
uncle of Vasumitra. He may have been one of the collaboratqrs in the 
compilation of the Vibhashd. A great and important compilation, the 
Vdanavarga. which is the Sanskrit version of the Dhammapada, is attri- 
buted to him. It contains many more verses than are found in' the Pali 
Dhammapada, and as a collection has greater importance than the Pali 
text in the history of the Buddhist canon. 

Ghoshaka 4 was a Tukhara and thus belonged to the same nationality 


Minayeff, Recherches sur Bouddhisme, 
pp. 195 f.; Masuda, op. cit., p. 7; La 
Vallee Poussin, L'Abhidharmakosa de 
Vasubandhu, Intro, p. xliii 


’ Kern. Manual, p. 128 
« I L bid V p aU xlvi P ° USSin ’ 0P ‘ C,t ’ p - Xivii 



VAIBHASHIKA AND SAUTRANTIKA 375 

as Kanishka. The tradition says that after the council and death of 
Kanishka, both Vasumitra and Ghoshaka were invited by the king of As- 
maparanta, a country to the west of Kasmlra and near the country of 
Tukhara. He is often quoted in the Vibhasha, a fact which shows that he 
took part in the compilation of that great work. A separate work, the 
Abhidharmamritc-sastra , is attributed to him. It is a very clear presenta- 
tion cf the fundamental doctrines cf the Sarvastivada Abhidharriia. 

Buddhadeva 1 is mentioned in the Vibhasha. He is in all probability 
the person referred to in the Mathura Lion Pillar Inscription along with 
another Sarvastivada teacher named Budhila. Both Buddhadeva and 
Dharmatrata are said to have held the doctrine that ‘everything exists’. 
Buddhadeva further maintained that the various conditions of the mind 
( chaitta ) are only the various modes of thought (vijhdna). This was some- 
what similar to the Sautrantika view of ekarasaskandha and the Maha- 
sanghika doctrine of mulavijiiana. Both Dharmatrata and Buddhadeva 
seem to have been elder contemporaries of Kanishka. 

The reign of Kanishka saw the rise of the two philosophical schools 
which originated from the Sarvastivada . 2 The Afahavibhasha which 
was compiled in the Third Council with the object of supplying the most 
authoritative interpretation of the Sarvastivada Abhidharma was taken 
as the basis of the Vaibhashika movement. The followers of this school 
explained the fundamental doctrines of Buddhism with the help of the 
Abhidharma of the Sarvastivada school. Hence they are also known as 
the Abhidharmikas. The four teachers mentioned above, Vasumitra, 
Ghoshaka, Dharmatrata and Buddhadeva. are considered to be the 
pioneers of the Vaibhashika movement. This, however, is not literally 
true. The Vaibhashika was not constituted as a full-fledged school until 
later, when their opponents, the Sautrantikas, came to be organised as 
a school. We have seen that the Sautrantika doctrine of an original con- 
sciousness of which the mental conditions are only expressions can be 
traced also to the works of the two Vaibhashika teachers: Dharmatrata 
and Buddhadeva. As a school Sautrantika originated slightly later, and 
the Vaibhashika then only assumed the form of an independent school. 

The Sautrantikas 3 rejected the authority of the Abhidharma and the 
Vibhasha and maintained that the siitras were the only reliable source of 
the teachings of Buddha. We have seen that some old schools like the 
Mahasarighika and the Sankrantivada considered the sutras as the perfect 
utterances of Buddha, whereas the Sarvastivada maintained the contrary 
view that there are also imperfect siitras. The Sautrantika tendency at 
the beginning was known as Darshtantika as it explained the doctrines by 
drishtanta ‘comparison’. The Darshtantikas are mentioned in the Maha- 
vibhashd. The Sautrantika, however, was constituted as a fully fledged 
school by Kumaralata who seems to have flourished soon after Kanishka. 


1 Ibid. p. xlviii cit., pp. 263 f 

2 Kern, Manual, pp. 126; Vassilief, op. 3 La Valle Poussin, op. cit., p. lii 



376 RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 

Tradition speaks of him as one of the four luminaries along with Asva- 
ghosha, Nagarjuna, and Aryadeva. He was thus either a younger contem- 
* porary of Kanishka or lived in the time of his immediate successor. We 
hear of two disciples of Kumaralata: Srilata and Harivarman. A work 
of Harivarman, the Tattvasiddhi-sastra has come down to us in the Chinese 
translation of Kumarajiva (end of the fourth century). The most funda- 
mental view of the Sautrantikas was that objects are nothing but images 
of a subtle consciousness. 

The Kushana period also witnessed the rise of a new way in Buddhism, 
called Mahayana which has two philosophical schools : 1 Madhyamaka 
and Yogachara. Mahayana was incipient even in the earlier Buddhism. 
We have seen that the Mahasanghikas propounded the theory of lokotta- 
ravada, and considered the historical Buddha to be nothing but an incar- 
nation ( nirmariakdya ) of a supra-mundane Buddha ( sariibhogakaya ). 
This theory led to the formulation of the new Buddhalogy with trikaya or 
‘three bodies’: Nirmanakaya, Sambhogakaya and Dharmakaya, in which 
Dharmakaya is identical with the ultimate reality. This trikaya theory 
is one of the most important doctrines of Mahayana. 

We have also noted that Buddhism was slowly developing into a theistic 
religion with Buddha as the object of the cult. Asoka, we have seen, does 
not speak of Nirvana as the highest goal but of heaven (svarga). His belief 
in the supernormal powers and in the possibility of leading others to the 
attainment of heavenly bliss through his own efforts is more a Mahayana 
than a Hinayana tendency. In fact, the new ideal which is extolled in 
Mahayana insists on active compassion for the weal of our fellow crea- 
tures and decries the egoistic ideal of the Arhats as advocated by the 
earlier schools which go under the general name of Hinayana. These new 
ways or ideals were being developed in an extensive literature which 
forms the canon of the Mahayana. Some of the works: Prajndpdramita- 
sutra, Saddharmapundarika, Lankavatara, Suvarnaprabhdsa and others 
seem to have come into existence at this period. 

The Mahayana philosophy as a new school of interpretation of Bud- 
dha’s original doctrines was developed in the two idealistic systems known 
as the Madhyamaka and the Yogachara. The exponents of the Madhya- 
maka were Nagarjuna and his disciple Aryadeva. Nagarjuna seems to 
have been a younger _contemporary of Kanishka and flourished in the 
second century A.D. Aryadeva belonged to a later generation. Both of 
them came from the South — Nagarjuna from Southern Kosala, and Arya- 
deva from Ceylon. They appear to have worked in the South, probably at 
Dhanyakataka. Tradition says 2 that Nagarjuna was born in a Brahma- 
nical family, had at first a thorough Brahmanical training and became a 
Buddhist in consequence of a misadventure. He was a personal friend of 
the great Satavahana king Gautamiputra Satakarni to whom he addressed 
an epistle (called suhrillekha) that has been preserved in the Buddhist 


1 Kern, Manual, pp. 127 f. 


2 Vassilief, op. cit., p. 211 



MADHYAMAKA AND YOGACHARA 


377 


collections. Nagarjuna, therefore, worked under the patronage of the 
Satavahana king. A Buddhist tradition credits the Satavahanas with the 
propagation of Mahayana . 1 It is recorded in the form of a prediction of 
Buddha which says: ‘There will be a king named Satavahana in South 

India. When the Law is on the point of extinction he will appear and 

propagate the Vaipulya-sutra of the Mahayana and will save the Law 
from extinction.’ In fact, we know from other sources that the Satava- 
hanas were great patrons of Buddhism. Dhanyakataka and its neigh- 
bourhood became the centre of the Mahasanghika sects under this 
dynasty. A number of Buddhist cave temples, Karle, Nasik and the 
earlier caves of Ajanfa belong to this period. 

The Mahasanghika sects with their theory of lokottaravada, and the 
theory of kaya and mulavijiidna, supplied a propitious ground for the 
growth of Mahayana in the South. Although Mahayana was incipient in 
earlier Buddhism, and some of the texts which are admitted to be a part 
of the canon of the Mahayana originated earlier, Mahayana was recog- 
nised as a developed system only with the formulation of the Madhya- 
maka philosophy by Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna, therefore, is legitimately 
considered to be its founder. A number of works is attributed to him, the 
most important being a stupendous commentary on the Prajndparamitd. 
He also composed an independent work — the Mahyamaka-karikd in 
which he formulates the new philosophy. Aryadeva 2 wrote a commen- 
tary on the work. Aryadeva expatiated on the new philosophy further in 
his Chatuhsataka, Scitasastra and a number of other works. The new 
philosophy is commonly characterised as Sunyavada — the philosophy 
of relativism. It is a logical outcome of the principles of ancient Buddhism, 
according to which the phenomenal world is a mere illusion from the 
point of view of ultimate truth. There are two kinds of truths : Pdramar- 
thika (ultimate) and Samvritika (relative or conventional). Viewed from 
the ultimate standpoint, ‘All is delusion, dreamlike. There is no existence, 
there is no cessation of being, there is no birth, there is no Nirvana, there 
is no difference between those who have attained Nirvana and those who 
have not. All conditions, in fact, are like dreams.’ 

The other school, Yogachara, is of a slightly later origin. Two brothers 
Asanga and Vasubandhu, natives of Purushapura, are generally believed 
to have been the first exponents of this system. They lived, however, in 
the fourth century whereas Yogachara doctrines were already being for- 
mulated in the Kushana period. It has been suggested by a number of 
scholars that the first exponent of this system was Bodhisattva Maitreya — 
or rather Maitreyanatha, who was the teacher of Asanga and lived in the 
third century . 3 In fact, the story runs that Asanga while writing his books 
had often to go to Bodhisattva Maitreya in the Tushita heaven for the 

1 Watters, On Yuan Chwang, n pp. 120 3 Yamaguchi, Madhyantavibhagatika, p. x; 

f.; Levi, ‘Kaniska et Satavahana’, Tucci, Doctrine of Maitreyanath and 
JA. 1936, p. 116 Asanga. 

* Vassilief, op. cit., p. 213 
48 



378 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


solution of his difficulties. If the supernatural element is eliminated from 
the story, Bodhisattva Maitreya would be only a human teacher. What- 
ever that may be, it is quite likely that Yogachara philosophy was for- 
mulated in some form or other before the time of Asanga and Vasuban- 
dhu. In fact, the fundamental doctrine of alayavijndna, which is consi- 
dered to be the basis of phenomenality by this school, cannot be dissocia- 
ted from the doctrine of ekarasaskanclha of the Sautrantika and the theory 
of mulavijnana of the Mahasanghikas. Yogachara doctrines are also 
found in the Lankavatara Sutra, which is quite old. The Yogachara like 
the Madhyamaka is an idealist school and formulates two kinds of truths — 
the ultimate and the relative, and looks upon the phenomenal world as an 
illusion. It asserts, however, that this illusion is a mental illusion and 
hence considers vijnana or consciousness as real. 

(C) VAISHNA VISM, $AIVISM, AND MINOR SECTS 
Introduction 

Far-reaching changes were being introduced in the religious outlook of 
the Indo- Aryans some centuries before the beginning of the Christian era. 
The Vedic religion was no doubt held in honour, but its character was 
being gradually transformed. Sacrifices were still being performed with zest 
by kings and by common men with the help of the priests for particular 
ends in view, but many of the intellectuals of the day were getting more 
and more interested in the solution of problems connected with know- 
ledge about the Absolute. The Aranyaka and the Upanishad literature, an 
authoritative and substantial part of which was associated with one or 
other of the different branches ( sakha ) of the principal Vedas, was mainly 
conversant with such topics as the interpretation ( arthavada ) of the nature 
of the various sacrifices, and the mystery of the Brahman and Atman, and 
not with the actual ritualism of the Vedas and the Brahmanas. A dim per- 
ception of the one unifying principle pervading and at the same time 
transcending the Universe can be traced in some of the late Vedic texts 
and in some Brahmana passages, but it is only in the Upanishads, the 
Vedanta, i.e. the end or acme of the Vedas, that one finds the ardent 
efforts of thinkers to throw light on the nature of the Universe and the 
Universal Principle. Here also are found the fundamental doctrines of 
Hinduism, the law of Karma and its necessary concomitants, the belief in 
the transmigration of souls and in the misery inherent in mortal existence 
caused by the continuous chain of births and rebirths. Later religious 
reformers and founders of creeds like the Sakyamuni Buddha and 
Vardhamana Mahavira, though severe critics of sacrifices and ritualism, 
were compelled to assign an important position to some of these newly 
introduced theories of the Brahmanical seers. The religious outlook of the 
times when these reformers flourished, and even long before them was 
thus of a nature indicative of a critical frame of mind in different classes 



BHAKTI CULTS 


379 


of Indians with whom the old orthodox form of sacrificial religion of the 
Vedas was not much in favour. When Buddha and Mahavira flourished 
there were religious leaders like Kasyapa, Katyayana, Sanjaya, Maskari 
Gosala and others, many of whom seem to have been severe critics of Vedic 
sacrificialism. Side by side with the followers of these independent 
leaders and reformers there were many among the general mass of the 
people, some of whom were animists, while others were worshippers of 
particular gods and goddesses. 

It is against this background of religious ferment that the origin of some 
of the principal Brahmanical sects can be traced. The most important 
element that operated to bring these sects about is Bhakti, primarily the 
loving adoration of some persons by others, but secondarily the deep 
affectionate and mystic devotion for some personal deity who is the prin- 
cipal object of worship to his devotees ( bhaktas ). These exclusive wor- 
shippers of particular deities were grouped under different heads which 
came gradually to be described as one or other of the sects. The divinities 
round whom the sects developed were not recruited from the orthodox 
Vedic pantheon, but from quite a different source. Indra, Prajapati, Mitra, 
Varuna, Yama, Agni and a host of others could not serve the purpose of 
sectarian deities, and many of them were relegated to the minor position 
of the guardians of quarters ( dikpalas ). Some of the Vedic gods, again, like 
Vishnu, Surya and Rudra, and Brahmanic deities like the cosmic god 
Narayana, came to be merged in the composite cult-deities of different 
sects. In some cases this merger was important for the sects themselves, 
and some of the latter came to be designated, optionally at first, but 
more constantly at a later period, by the names of the Vedic counter- 
parts of their cult pictures (cf. the part played by Vishnu in the Bha- 
gavata or Pancharatra cult, later known as Vaishnavism). The originals 
of the sectarian gods were either human heroes like Vasudeva Krishna, 
the son of Devakl, Sakyamuni Buddha and Mahavira, or mythological 
beings like Siva (Rudra-Siva), or the Yakshas and Nagas e.g. Manibha- 
dra, Purnabhadra, Dadhikarna, Takshaka and others, and such goddesses 
as Uraa, Haimavati, Ambika, Durga-Parvatl and Vindhyavasinl. The 
early Buddhist works on many occasions refer to the various kinds of 
worship prevailing in India, especially in its central and eastern parts, at 
the time when Buddha was living. The Niddesa, a work probably of the 
third century b.c., gives us a curious record of some religious systems and 
superstitions . 1 According to the author, there were not only worshippers 
of such deities as Vasudeva, Baladeva, Purnabhadra, Manibhadra and 
others, but also animists who adored an elephant, a horse, a cow, a dog 
or a crow. Asoka significantly remarks in his Rock Edict XII that men 
are usually associated with one or other of the sects, and that a tolerant 
monarch inveighs against the extolling of one’s own sect to the disparage- 
ment of others ( atmapashamda-puja parapashamdagaraha)] he observes 

1 R. G. Bhandarkar, Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious Systems, p. 3 



380 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


that ‘that there is no country where these two classes, the Brahmanas and 
the Sramanas do not exist, except among the Yonas, and there is no 
(place) in any country where men are not indeed attached to some 
sect .’ 1 


THE BEGINNINGS OF THE BHAKTI SCHOOL 
CENTRING ON VASUDEVA KRISHNA 


One of the earliest religious schools centering upon a personal god who 
seems to have been originally a human hero was that of the Bhagavatas 
or the Pancharatras. It was this school which later came to be designated 
as Vaishnava and became one of the foremost Brahmanical creeds of 
India. It will be shown later on that the Vedic Aditya-Vishnu had very 
little to do with it in its early formative stage. According to the epic and 
puranic traditions the Bhagavatas worshipped Vasudeva Krishna, the 
Satvata or Vrishni chief and some of his relations. The historicity of 
Vasudeva Krishna has been doubted by some scholars who explain him 
as a mythical figure evolved out of a solar deity, a tribal god, or even a 
vegetation spirit euhemeristically represented in the epics and some of the 
Puranas. These views, however, rest on insufficient data, and other scho- 
lars have suggested on good grounds that Vasudeva Krishna was a great 
human hero, who was deified by his followers at an uncertain date, and 
who became the nucleus of a great Bhakti cult subsequently prevalent 
throughout the length and breadth of India . 2 It is true that innumerable 
myths of a supernatural character were associated with him in course of 
time, and these have largely obscured his origin and raised grave doubts 
about his historicity. But if we separate all the later adventitious matter 
from his personality and only take into account the references to him 
found in comparatively early literature and inscriptions, we can 
reasonably assume that he was a human being who was apotheosised for 
certain ideal traits in his character and for his achievements. His case is 
similar to that of Gautama Buddha who in the early days of Indological 
research was regarded by some not as a great man but as a god of infinite 
light (cf. one of his attributive epithets, Amitabha). 

VASUDEVA KRISHNA IN THE CHHANDOGYA UPANISHAD 
AND IN SOME EARLY BUDDHIST AND JAIN A TEXTS : 

One of the earliest references to Krishna is to be found in the Chhando- 
gya Upanishad, a major and earlier prose Upanishad attributable to an 
age previous to that of Buddha. In this work he is represented as a pupil 


1 Hultzsch, CII. i: Kalsi R. E. XII (D); 
xm (J). 

1 H. C. Raychaudhuri, Materials for 
the Study of the Early History of the 
Vaishnava Sect, second edition, p. 39/f. 


«ann, Hopkins and Keith raise these 
doubts while R. G. Bhandarkar, Grier- 
son, Garbe, Raychaudhuri, Chanda 
and others accept his historical charac- 



KRISHNA VASUDEVA 


381 


of Ghora, a sage of the Angirasa gotra. 1 Krishna is described here as the 
son of Devaki (Devakiputra) who learns several precepts concerning the 
real nature of man’s life from his teacher. That this Krishna is the same 
as the Vasudeva Krishna of the epics and the Puranas is clear from the fact 
that both are described as the ‘son of Devak!.’ In the 16th prapathaka 
of the Chhandogya Upanishad, Book III, some facts are stated about one 
Mahidasa, son of Itara (Mahidasa Aitareya) and the next prapathaka 
deals with Krishna Devakiputra, and this also appears to demonstrate the 
original human character of the latter. Some early Buddhist and Jaina 
texts too show that Vasudeva was a man. The Gha{a Jataka mentions 
Vasudeva as belonging to the royal family of Upper Madhura (Mathura); 
and though the name of the family is not given, there can be little doubt 
that it is the Vrishni one. The Jataka gives us a garbled version of a tra- 
dition about him current among the Buddhists in early times, and repre- 
sents him and his brothers as the sons of Devagabbha and Upasagara. 
They were handed over to a man of the name of Andhakavenhu and his 
wife Nandagopa, an attendant of Devagabbha. The names of the allied 
tribes, Andhakas and Vrishnis, and those of Krishna’s mother and 
foster-father are thus found in this account. 2 The Jaina text Uttaradhya- 
yana Sutra also refers in an interesting manner to Vasudeva, also named 
Kesava, who was a contemporary of Arishtanemi, the 22nd Jina, both 
princes of the town of Soriyapura (Sauryapura). 3 Kesava was the son of 
Devaki and king Vasudeva, while Arishtanemi was born to king Samudra- 
vijaya and Siva. The story narrated in the text is a confused one in which 
the principal hero is, of course, the Jina Arishtanemi, but Kesava’s (Va- 
sudeva Krishna’s) dynastic association is correctly reported. Though the 
references to Krishna- Vasudeva in these passages from the Buddhist and 
Jaina texts are much later in point of date than the Chhandogya Upa- 
nishad, or, for that matter, are far later than the allusions to him which we 
find in early grammatical texts to be noticed now, their special interest 
lies in the fact that in their own way they establish the human character 
of the principal cult-picture of the Bhagavata or the Pancharatra cult. 

VASUDEVA IN PANINI, PATANJALI AND THE 
TAITTIRlYA A RAN Y AKA 

The earliest reference to the deification of the human hero, Vasudeva, 
however, is found in one of the sutras of Panini’s Ashtadhyayi. It is in 
the sutra IV.3.98 that Vasudeva and Aijuna are mentioned side by side, 
in connection with the rule for the derivation of the words denoting 
their devotees. The affix vun comes in the sense of ‘this is his object of 
veneration’ after the words Vasudeva and Arjuna’ ( Vasudevarjunabhyam 
vun). Now, according to the sutra immediately following it, the word 

1 Chhandogya Upanishad, iii. 17 Charpentier, pp. 164-9; SBE. XLV pp. 

2 The Jatakas, Cowell’s trans. rv p. 50 ff. 122-9 

8 The Uttaradhyayanasutram, ed. Jarl 



382 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


denoting a worshipper of Vasudeva could have been derived if the latter 
was simply a Kshatriya hero of eminence. This sutra lays down that to 
denote admirers of eminent Kshatriyas ( gotrakshatriya ), vuh should be 
affixed to the names of such persons. Patanjali in commenting on the 
former aphorism raises this question and answers it by observing that 
Vasudeva in this context is not the name of a Kshatriya, but that of the 
worshipful one, a god. 1 In one manuscript of the Mahabhashya, R. G. 
Bhandarkar found tatra bhagavatah in place of tatrabhavatah occurring 
in Kielhorn’s edition, and suggested that here is an undoubted reference to 
the god Vasudeva. In any case, the expression tatrabhavatah also denotes 
the idea of great veneration present in the mind of the commentator. 
That the word Vasudeva was the more honoured of the two (Vasudeva 
and Arjuna), is proved by the first place given to it in the compound 
Vasudevarjuna for according to Panini’s sutras (II. 2.33-34) the compound 
form should have been Arjuna-Vasudeva. 2 But the fact that here it is 
not so indicates the existence of some rule even in the time of Panini, ‘that 
a word denoting an object of more reverence is to be placed first in a com- 
pound.’ 3 It is also of interest here to note that Panini refers to the allied 
tribes of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis in his sutra IV. 1, 114 ( Rishyan - 
dhaka vrishnikurubhyascha), and Patanjali after quoting the varttika on it 
mentions the names of Svaphalka, Chaitraka and Ugrasena as belonging 
to the Andhaka, and those of Vasudeva, Baladeva and Vishvaksena, to 
the Vrishni group. The same commentator again alluding to varttika 1 1 
on sutra IV. 2,104 ( avyayattyap ) refers to the followers of Akrura and 
Vasudeva ( Akruravargyah Vasudevavargyah). The story of the fight be- 
tween Vasudeva and his maternal uncle Kamsa and of the latter’s death at 
the hands of his nephew is also referred to in the Mahabhashya, and was 
the subject of pantomimic performances in the commentator’s time. On 
these occasions the performers formed themselves into two rival groups 
representing the Vasudevabhaktas and the Kamsabhaktas, the former 
overcoming the latter. Patanjali also knew that Vasudeva Krishna was 
the younger brother of Samkarshana (another name of Baladeva), for 
referring to varttika 22 on sutra II. 2,24 ianekamanyapadarthe) he cites a 
verse which means, ‘may the strength of Krishna, the second to Samkar- 
shana, increase’ (Samkarshanadvitiyasya balam Krishriasya vardhatam). 
Two other epithets of Samkarshana-Baladeva, viz. Rama and Rauhineya, 
as well as another epithet of Vasudeva-Krishna, i.e. Kesava, were also 
known to Patanjali. 4 Thus it is clear that part of the tradition concern- 
ing Vasudeva-Krishna and some of his relations and the clans to which 
they belonged were well known from the late Vedic period onwards. 


Kielhom’s edition of Pataftjali’s Maha- 
bhashya, n p. 314 

The sutras are ajadyadantam and 
alpachtaram ; the former lays down that 
in a dvandva samasa, that which begins 
with a vowel and ends with a short a 
should be placed first, while the latter 


says that the word-form containing 
» f^r jowds is to be placed first. 

Ci. the Varttika abhyarhitam cha on ii 
ed 3 i 4 p 4 U 3°6) ed by Patafijali (^elhom’s 
4 ^^155^° ^‘ e ^ orn ’ s ed- i P- 436; 



KRISHNA IN GREEK ACCOUNTS 


383 


His apotheosis incidentally referred to by the grammarians just mentioned 
was already complete when the tenth book of the Taittiriya Aranyaka 
was composed, for there among the various gayatri-rnantras for the wor- 
ship of different gods and goddesses we find his special litany in which he 
is identified with the Vedic Vishnu and the Brahmanic Narayana . 1 

REFERENCES TO THE WORSHIPPERS OF VASUDEVA 
IN THE CLASSICAL LITERATURE 

That the worship of Vasudeva was well established among some sections 
of Indians is proved by a few passages in the works of Megasthenes, 
Quintus Curtius, Strabo and other classical writers of ancient times. 
Arrian quoting from Megasthenes’s Indica says that ‘Heracles is held in 
especial esteem by the Sourasenoi, an Indian tribe possessing two large 
cities, Methora and Cleisobora, the river Jobares flowing through their 
country.’ R. G. Bhandarkar long ago identified the Sourasenoi with the 
Satvatas, and Heracles with Vasudeva. The two cities of the Sourasenoi 
are no doubt Mathura and Krishnapura, so intimately associated with the 
Krishna tradition . 2 The Greek form of the tribal name is evidently derived 
from the word Surasena, the land of which tribe was located according to 
the ancient Indian writers round about Mathura. Though the Uttaradhya- 
yana sutra account of Vasudeva is somewhat confused, we may find in the 
city named Sauryapura a reference to this form of the tribal designation. 
The Greek writers had some reason to identify their divine hero Heracles 
with Vasudeva, for this Indian Heracles, according to Arrian, had a very 
numerous progeny of male children born to him by his many wives. 
The Indian Heracles is also called Dorsanes, who according to Arrian 
was the father of Pandaia. Quintus Curtius records that an image of 
Hercules (Herakles) was carried in front of the infantry of Porus in 
his battle with Alexander, and that it acted as the strongest of all incen- 
tives to make the soldiers fight well. To desert the bearers of this image 
was in itself a disgraceful military offence and the offenders were punish- 
able with death. Coomaraswamy thinks that this image may have been 
one of Siva or of a Yaksha. But ‘Hercules’ in this passage seems to have 
designated Krishna, like ‘Herakles’ of the other extract, and if Curtius 
is correct in his statement, Porus and an appreciable section of his 
soldiers might have been worshippers of Vasudeva Krishna . 3 


The tenth prapathaka of the Taittiriya 
Aranyaka is a later addition. These 
gayatris also occur in the Maha-Nara- 
yaria Upanishad, comprised in the tenth 
book of the Aranyaka, which has been 
dated by scholars in the third century 
B.c. The gayatri mantra is : Naraya- 
ijaya vidmahe Vasudevaya dhimahi 
tanno Vishnuh prachodayat. 
Krishpapura has been identified by 
some scholars with the present village 


of Gokul on the other side of the river 
Yamuna, evidently the Jobares of the 
Greek texts. 

McCrindle, The Invasion of India by 
Alexander the Great, pp. 208-9. A. K. 
Coomaraswamy, History of Indian 
and Indonesian Art, p. 42 n. 5. Vasu- 
deva-Krishna as the inspirer of soldiers 
in Porus’s army reminds one of the 
same god inspiring the unwilling 
Arjuna to fight for victory (cf. the 



384 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


THE WORSHIP OF THE VlRAS 

The passages quoted above from the early texts, both indigenous and 
foreign, leave little doubt about the existence of Vasudeva’s cult even 
some time before Alexander’s invasion of India. Panini’s reference to 
the worshippers of Vasudeva and Arjuna brings out another interesting 
point in connection with it. The manner in which the great grammarian 
puts these names in his sutra, proves, it is true, that the former was the 
more honoured of the two. But it is possible that the latter also had some 
cult importance at his time, for his worshippers are also mentioned. In 
the Bhagavadgita, Arjuna, the interlocutor, appears in the role of the 
greatest devotee of Vasudeva, and there is no evidence here to suggest 
the existence of an associate cult centring upon him. But did such a 
cult ever exist ? If it did, its growth must have been arrested by the pheno- 
menal rise of that of his relation, Krishna- Vasudeva. Traces, however, 
of the worship of Arjuna seem to be preserved in some epic passages, 
where Arjuna and Vasudeva are described as Nara and Narayana, who 
along with Hari and Krishna are represented as the sons of Dharma and 
Ahimsa. It is said in one of them that ‘the two heroes, Vasudeva and 
Arjuna, who are great warriors, are the old gods Nara and Narayana; 
this is the tradition.’ 1 Nara and Narayana were also great divine sages, 
mahapurushas practising austerities in the holy Badarikasrama. 8 In the 
list of the 39 avatars given in the Satvata, one of the oldest and most 
authoritative of the Pancharatra Samhitas, they are described as the 31st 
and 32nd incarnations of Vishnu. Thus, the epic tradition shows that 
Nara and Narayana, or for the matter of that Arjuna and Vasudeva, 
were great heroes as well as sages; the sage-like character of one of them 
at least may be traced to the Vedic tradition about the Ftishi Narayana, 
the seer of the Purushasukta. Now, hero worship was certainly at the 
root of the development of the Vasudeva cult, as it was also the basis of 
some other cults of India, like those of Buddha and Mahavira. It can 
be demonstrated with the help of some early texts and inscriptions 
that the worship of Vasudeva Krishna and some of his relations as hero- 
gods ( Viras) was prevalent some time before and even some time after 
the tenets of the Pancharatra cult were formulated and systematised. 

The worship of the divine heroes (Viras) was at first one of the most 
important features of the cult, and the number of them came to be some- 
what stereotyped at one of its early evolutionary stages. Arjuna who 
was a Kaurava found no place in this list though it contained the names 
of Samkarshana or Baladeva, Vasudeva-Krishna, Pradyumna, Samba, 
and Aniruddha, all of whom belonged to the Vrishni clan and were closely 
related to one another. Both Samkarshana and Vasudeva were the sons 


conception of Krishna Parthasarathi 2 Ibid. Santiparva, Narayaniya Parva- 
in the Bhagavadgita). dhyaya ch. 344 f. 

Mahabharata, Udyogaparvan, 49, 19. 



PANCHARATRA 


385 


of Vasudeva by different wives (Rohini and DevakI), Pradyumna and 
and Samba were the two sons of Vasudeva, Pradyumna born to RukminI 
and Samba to Jambavati, while Aniruddha was the son of Pradyumna. 
The epic and puranic tradition proves clearly that they were originally 
human beings who were raised to the position of gods. The Vayu Purana, 
one of the oldest of the Puranas, says that the gods who were human by 
nature {manushyaprakriti) were Samkarshana and the four others just 
mentioned, and that they ‘were celebrated as the five heroes of the clan,’ 
evidently the Vrishni clan (panchaite vamsavirah prakirtitah). This list 
of the divine Panchavlras should not be confused with the other epic lists 
of Vrishni heroes, atirathas, maharathas etc., sometimes including a few 
of the above five, who were primarily great warriors. Thus, Rauhineya 
(Samkarshana-Baladeva), Krishna- Vasudeva and Samba who is like 
Sauri in battle, along with Charudeshna, his brother, Chakradeva, and 
Satyaki are the seven atirathas among the Vrishnis, while the seven maha- 
rathas of the same clan are Kritavarman, Anadhrishti, Samlka, Samitin- 
jaya, Kanka, Sanku and Kunti. Most of these heroes had none of the 
cult significance which the aforesaid five Vrishnivlras undoubtedly 
possessed. This is fully borne out by earlier epigraphic data, one of which 
refers to their images. The Mora Well inscription of the time of 
Mahakshatrapa Sodasa (early first century A. d.) refers to the enshrinement 
in a stone temple by a lady' named Tosha, of foreign extraction, of the 
images of the five holy Vrishnivlras ( bhagavatam Vrishninam pahchaviranahi 
pratima). It will be presently shown that with the exception of Samba, the 
fourth in this list, they constitute the four primary Vyuhas or emanatory 
forms of the highest god (Para Vasudeva ). 1 

THE ESSENTIAL TENETS OF THE BHAGAVATA CULT 

To understand the nature of the hero worship ( viravada ) in the early 
Bhagavata cult in its relation to the developed tenets, some idea is 
necessary of the essentials of the latter as adumbrated in a few of the 
authoritative Pancharatra Samhitas. The earliest of these treatises seem 
to have been composed in the first centuries of the Christian era when 
the bulk of the Mahabharata along with its ‘Narayanlya’ section must 
have taken its present shape. The one God Vasudeva, the highest 
object of worship to a bhagavata, was conceived in his five fold aspects, 
Para, Vyiiha, Vibhava, Antaryamin, and Archa. Para is the highest aspect 
of the Lord, the next two being his emanatory and incarnatoiy forms res- 
pectively ; his antaryamin aspect characterises him as the inner controller 
of the actions of every individual, the archa form referring to his con- 
crete images regarded by the Pancharatrins as his auspicious bodies ( sri - 
vigrahas). Much of this can be traced in the Bhagavadgita which gives 


49 


JISOA. x pp. 65-8 



386 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


the first systematic exposition of the ekdntika dharma centring on Krishna- 
Vasudeva. Vasudeva-Krishna, the one object of devotion to Arjuna, 
corresponds to his para aspect while the vibhava and antaryamin aspects 
are also described in its several sections . 1 But the vyuha concept of the 
Lord does not seem to have been developed when this work was composed. 
The ideology underlying the vyuhavada mainly centred upon the topic 
of ‘pure creation’ ( suddha-srishti ) i. e. the creation of the six ideal gunas, 
jnana, aisvarya, sakti, bala, vlrya and tejas. According to this notion 
Lord Vasudeva as the highest god wills his consort Sri Lakshmi in her 
dual aspects of being and acting (bhuti and kriya ) to create the ideal gunas ; 
thus from the Lord’s will ( ichchhasakti or the efficient cause), and Lakshmf s 
twofold forms ( bhutisakti and kriyasakti, i. e. the material and instrumen- 
tal causes) originate the sixfold ideal qualities which are at the root 
of all creation, pure or subtle and gross or material, in all the later 
stages. The gunas come under two principal groups of three each, the 
first three ( jnana or knowledge, aisvarya or lordship and sakti or potency) 
forming the first group of visrama bhiimayah (stages of rest), and the 
second three ( bala or strength, virya or virility and tejas or splendour), 
the second group of sramabhumayah (stages of action). When the indi- 
vidual qualities of opposite groups pair together as jnana with bala, ais- 
varya with virya, and sakti with tejas, a further advance is made in the 
process of creation; they are thus divided into three separate pairs (the 
word vyuha is derived from the root vi-uh meaning to separate or pull asun- 
der). Regarded in their totality as well as by pairs, they are materials or 
instruments of suddha-sfishfi, (the body of the highest god Para Vasudeva, 
constituting all the gunas), and in the bodies of the three vyuhas, Sarh- 
karshana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, each of the three pairs of qualities 
are manifest. From Para Vasudeva is supposed to emanate Vyuha 
Vasudeva, who possesses the full measure of all the six qualities ( shad - 
gunyavigraham devam ); Samkarshana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha then 
emanating each one from its immediate predecessor. Though in each 
of these three primary emanations, two qualities apiece are pre-eminently 
manifest, they participate in the four other qualities also, but only in an 
incipient manner. It will not be necessary here to trace the develop- 
ment of this ideology further, but it is interesting to note that even at 
this stage Samba was left out of the list of emanatory forms. It should 
also be noted that in the vyuha doctrine, Vasudeva was invariably given 
the order of precedence, his elder brother enjoying only a secondary 
position as an emanatory aspect of his younger brother. 

THE INTRODUCTION OF VYUHA DOCTRINE IN THE CULT ■ 
THE ELIMINATION OF THE WORSHIP OF SAMBA 

The question may now be asked, at what period was the vyuha worship 

1 Bhagavadgita chh. x & xi (Vibhuti- characterise in a very interesting wav 

yoga and Visvarupadarsanayoga) his para form; vv. 5-9 in ch. iv may 



HISTORY OF VYUHA DOCTRINE 


387 


introduced in the Bhagavata cult? The earliest reference to the vyuha 
doctrine is found by some scholars in the Brahmasiitra passage (II, 2, 42), 
but it must be noted that it is only in the commentaries thereupon of 
Sankaracharya and Ramanuja that the tenet is clearly mentioned. In 
Patanjali’s time it may have reached an early formative stage, for that 
great commentator perhaps refers to it in his note on Panini’s sutra, VI. 
3, 5; in explaining the form atmachaturtha (not atmana chaturtha), he 
cites the passage Janardanastvatma-chaturtha eva (‘with Janardana himself 
as the fourth') and takes it as a bahuvrihi compound ( atma chaturtho'sva). 
R. G. Bhandarkar, however, who was the first to draw the attention of 
scholars to the passage, was not sure about it. 1 In any case Patanjali uses 
the compound Rama-Kesava in his commentary on Panini, II. 2. 34; 
and elsewhere in his bhdshya he describes Krishna as second to Samkar- 
shana. It thus appears that Patanjali was more aware of the worship of 
the Virus, than of the vyuhas. The extant inscriptions also prove that in 
the second to the first century b.c., and even as late as the beginning of the 
first century a.d., the Viravada was the more prominent. The Besnagar 
inscription ( c . 2nd century b.c.) of Heliodorus. the ambassador of 
Antialcidas. the Ir.do-Greek king of Taxila, to the Sunga king Kasiputra 
Bhagabhadra of Vidisa, refers only to Devadeva Vasudeva, the chosen 
god of Heliodorus — a convert to the Bhagavata creed — and makes no 
mention of other personal deities of the cult. But the Nagari inscription 
of king Sarvatata (also of the same period) tells of his erecton of stone 
walls round the shrines of Samkarshana and Vasudeva. The order in 
which the two names are placed in the last record probably shows that 
in this context, they are not two of the vyuhas, but two of the promi- 
nent Vrishni-viras. Had they belonged to the category of the former, 
the form of the compound in the inscription should have been bhagava- 
(d)bhyam Vdsudeva-Samkarshandbhyarii in place of bhagava[d)bhyam 
Samkarshana Vasudevabhyam, for (as has been shown above) according 
to the Pancharatra vyuhavada, Samkarshana was an emanatory form of 
Vasudeva. The vyuha doctrine may have been only of recent growth in 
the second century b.c., and thus not stereotyped at that time when the 
practice of Vira worship was more in vogue. This seems to be borne out 
by the absence of any reference to itinthe Bhagavadgfta, a work which com- 
paratively recent scholarship dates in the third to the second century b.c. 
This view seems to be further corroborated by the Nanaghat cave inscrip- 
tion of Nayanika, queen of Sri Satakarni, the third in the puranic list 
of the Satavahana kings. Among the various gods invoked, there occur 
the names of Samkarshana and Vasudeva in the correct dynastic order. 
When, however, even a law book like the Vishnusariihita of a much later 


be regarded as the first systematic ac- 
count of the Hindu idea of axatara 
(viMavo-incamation), and v. 61 in ch. 
xviii defines the Lord as the internal 
controller ( antaryamin ) of every being 


( Is varassar vabhutanam hriddesSrjuna 

tishthati, bhramayan-sarvab'mdni yan- 
trarudhani mayava.) 

R. G. Bhandarkar, op. cit., p. 13 



388 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


date refers to the chaturvyuhas (67.2), Vasudeva is named first, and 
Samkarshana, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha are mentioned after ( Vdsude - 
vaya Samkarshanaya Pradyumnay-Aniruddhaya). It should be noted 
that there is no place for Samba in this list; it is clear that along with the 
growing importance of the doctrine of the chaturvyuhas, he gradually 
lost favour with the Bhagavatas, and all sorts of opprobrium were heaped 
on him. But, as has been already shown. Samba’s image was still being 
enshrined in the first century A.D. along with those of the four other 
Vrishni-viras. Varahamihira when he gives us a description of the image 
of Samba in these words — Sambascha gadahastah, is evidently following 
the early tradition by which this Vrishni hero was an object of worship. 
Very few other, comparatively late, extant iconographic texts furnish 
details of the image of the forgotten hero-god. The elimination of the 
worship of Samba from the Pancharatra cult may be ascribed to his my- 
thical association with the Iranian sun-cult and its introduction into India, 
and to the story of his having been born to Jambavati, the non-Aryan 
wife of Krishna-Vasudeva, for according to the epic and puranic tradi- 
tion she was the daughter of the Riksha king (the Mahaummaga Jataka 
says that she was a Chandala woman), and that, too, through the grace 
of Siva, the principal deity of a rival cult. It is also possible that his 
identity was gradually merged in the cult picture of the north Indian 
sun-worship which owed much of its reorientation to Iranian influence. 1 

The above-mentioned inscriptions of a comparatively early date 
testify to the existence of the Vasudeva-Krishna cult in different parts 
of India. More evidence of the same kind must have been lost, and 
had all the inscriptions been extant they would have presented us with 
a more complete picture of the wide prevalence of the cult. The regions 
of India which were more intimately associated with it were Mathura, 
the Surasena country and Vidisa in Central India. Several fragmentary 
inscriptions of the first century b.c. have been discovered at modern 
Besnagar (ancient Vidisa) in Bhopal, which refer to the excellent temple 
of the Bhagavat ( bhagavato pdsadottama). The structure thus defined 
evidently denotes a Vasudeva shrine, and it is presumable that many such 
temples were in the locality from a period much earlier than the first cen- 
tury B.c. It was evidently in front of such a one that the Yavana duta 
Heliodorus, himself a bhagavata by faith, erected that noble column, 
the Garuda-dhvaja. The Garuda capital of the inscribed columns is miss- 
ing, but another Garuda-shaped capital of a shaft has been discovered 
there. Two other crowning pieces of columns whose shafts are missing, 
found at the same place, show its association with the Bhagavata cult. 
These are shaped, one as a tala (fan-palm) and the other as a makara 
(crocodile), and these tala and makara-dhvajas were undoubtedly 
dedicated to two of Krishna’s kinsmen (also his emanatory forms), 
Samkarshana and Pradyumna, whose separate shrines may have 


1 PJHC. 1944, Madras, pp. 82-90 



ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 


389 


stood there. It may be mentioned incidentally that a second tala-dhvaja 
capital was found at Pol Pawaya (ancient Padmavatl) in Gwalior, 
probably indicating the existence of another Samkarshana shrine in the 
locality. Two other massive stone sculptures of the third to the second 
century b.c., discovered by Cunningham at Besnagar within sixty yards 
of each other, may be described, one as an image of the goddess 
SrI-Lakshml intimately associated with the Bhagavata cult, and the 
other as a banyan capital containing the ashtanidhis over which she 
was the presiding deity; they should not be regarded as a Yakshini 
and a Kalpadrum capital . 1 The traditional association of Mathura 
with Vasudeva-Krishna, is well known from early indigenous and foreign 
texts; archaeological finds also significantly corroborate the fact. One 
of the earliest images of Samkarshana (Balarama), now in the Lucknow 
Museum collection comes from Mathura, and has been dated in 
the second century B.c. The number of snakehoods of the deity with 
the drinking vessel and ploughshare in his hands shows his associa- 
tion with the Naga cult as well (Balarama is sometimes regarded as an in- 
carnation of Ananta Naga, a Parshada or companion of Vasudeva- 
Vishnu) and likewise his bucolic character. It was perhaps this aspect of 
the god which commended his separate worship to a certain section of 
people who are described by Kautilya in his Arthasdstra as a class of 
ascetics ‘with shaved head or braided hair’. More than one inscription of 
the first century a.d. have been found in the Mathura region, connected 
with the Vasudeva cult. One has already been mentioned and its impor- 
tance in the history of the cult has been shown. Another of the same 
period, i.e. the time of Mahakshatrapa Sodasa, records the erection of a 
torai.ia (gateway), vedika (railing) and chatuhsala (quadrangle) at the 
mahasthana (‘great or very sacred place’) of Bhagavan Vasudeva . 2 It was 
again at the same place that one of the earliest reliefs illustrating the story 
of Krishna-Janmashtami and dating back to the second century a.d. was 
discovered. It is true that in the early centuries of the Christian era the 
Mathura region was full of the adherents of other creeds like Buddhism, 
Jainism, and of the Naga cult, as proved by the numerous inscriptions and 
sculptures of the Saka-Kushana period which have been found there ; but 
the cult of Vasudeva-Krishna also throve there, and was to prove much 
stronger in later times. The Puranic story of the subjugation of Kaliya 
Naga by Krishna may indicate the preponderance of his cult over the 
Naga cult. A few other archaeological finds also demonstrate that it 
spread to other parts of India from the first century b.c. to the third 
century a.d. The coins (copper) of Vishnumitra (c. first century b.c.) 
of the enigmatic Mitra dynasty of Panchala (modern Rohilkhand region) 
with the figure of Vasudeva- Vishnu on them, a nicolo seal-matrix, 
the device on which shows a foreign king standing with folded 

1 J. N. Banerea, Development of Hindu 1 R. P. Chanda, Archaeology and the 

Inconograph , a pp. 104-5; JISOA. ix Vaishnaw Tradition, ( MASI . no. 5) 
1941, pp. 141-6 p. 171 



390 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


hands before a four-armed composite god made up of Vishnu, Siva and 
Surya, and the Nanaghat and the Chinna Ganjam inscriptions of the time 
of Sri-Satakarni and Gautamlputra Sriyajna Satakarni, show that the 
cult reached the far distant corners of India. 1 

GROWTH OF THE BHAGAVATA CULT: WAS IT INFLUENCED 
BY CHRISTIANITY ? 

The cult of the Bhagavatas or the Pancharatras had thus come to 
enjoy high recognition all over India by the end_of the third century a.d. 
It had to contend with many rival creeds like Ajivikism, Jainism, Budd- 
hism, Saivism, and different forms of animism before it was able to 
overshadow them. From its predominating position, it actually influenced 
the religious thought or speculations of some of its rivals in one way 
or another. It was at one time held by scholars like Kern and Buhler 
that the Ajivikas were a sub-division of the Bhagavatas. Their views, 
however, were based on inaccurate interpretation of literary data, and 
D. R. Bhandarkar has proved that the two sects were widely different 
and had nothing in common. 2 The Jainas, nevertheless, had a great 
respect for the founder of Bhagavatism, for they held Vasudeva to be a 
near relation of Arishtanemi, the twenty-second Tirthamkara 3 and 
included Vasudeva and Baladeva among the 63 Salaka-Purushas, or emi- 
nent personalities, who had influenced the history of the world in various 
ways. Such was the respect paid by the Nirgranthas to the two Vrishni 
heroes that they multiplied their number, and in the list of these 63 
great men they counted nine Vasudevas, nine Baladevas and nine Prati- 
Vasudevas. The Jaina Aupapdtika Sutra also mentions Baladeva and 
Vasudeva, and characterises the former as one of the eight great Ksha- 
triya teachers. It should be noted that according to the epic tradition, 
‘the Sattvatavidhi (the tenets of the Sattvatas or the Bhagavatas) were 
sung by Samkarshana at the end of the Dvapara and the beginning 
of the Kali Yuga.’ 4 In many of their texts, both early and late, the 
Jaina authors refer collectively to ‘the five great heroes (of the Vrishni 
clan) with Baladeva at their head’ ( Baladevapamokkha panchamahavird), 
and it has already been shown that these were none other than Sam- 
karshana, Vasudeva, Pradyumna, Samba and Aniruddha. 5 The Jainas, 


1 Banerjea, op. cit., pp. 143-4 (for some 

Bhagavata emblems on early coins, cf. 
ibid. pp. 144-6); for the Nanaghat and 
Chinna Ganjam inscriptions, cf. D. C. 
Sarkar, SI. i pp. 1 86, Raychaudhuri, 
op. cit. p. 161 

* IA. 1912, pp. 286-90 

* Uttaradhyayana Sutra ch. xxii 

* Mahabharata vi. 66, 40; Dvaparasya 
yugasyante adau Kaliyugasya cha ; 
sattvatam vidhimasthdya git ah Sam- 


karshanena vai. 

Luders wrongly identified these five 
Vrishni heroes with Baladeva, Akrura 
Anadhrishti, Sarana and Viduratha’ 
on the information supplied to him by 
Alsdrof ; El. xxiv pp. 94 f. The error 
was corrected by the present writer in 
JISOA. x pp. 65-8 



BHAGAVATISM AND OTHER CREEDS 


391 


again, insisted on the doctrine of Ahimsa (non-violence) which had been 
one of the cardinal maxims of the Bhagavatas, for it was one of the 
great moral principles taught by Ghora Ahgirasa to Krishna Devakiputra, 
and it was included in the list of the divine qualities (ilaivi sampad) enu- 
merated by the author of the Bhagavadgita. It is no wonder that 
Keith has remarked 'the (Jaina) faith is deeply permeated with Hindu 
influences, and especially with influences of Krishna worship .’ 1 There 
is also every reason to believe that early Bhagavatism exercised a great 
influence on Buddhism. The same tenet of non-violence was one of the 
most prominent injunctions of the Buddhist faith. The Saddhcirma- 
pundarika, one of the most characteristic Buddhist works of the early 
period (c. first century a.d.), contains a good many passages that have 
parallels in the Gita, a much earlier work. The Mahaydna-sraddhot- 
pada , ascribed to Asvaghosha, a contemporary of Kanishka according 
to the Buddhist tradition, also contains definite traces of the influence 
of the Bhagavadgita . 2 Various scholars like Macnicol, Senart and 
Poussin have held the view that the Bhagavatas influenced the Buddhist 
tenets to a great extent from a very early period. These creeds other 
than Bhagavatism, were non-Brahmanical. The relation of Bhagava- 
tism, however, with Saivism, one of the already evolved creeds of Brah- 
manical origin, was at first not very friendly, and this feeling of rivalry, 
though never bitter at any time, endured until a very late date. The 
different redactions of the Great Epic, and many mythological stories 
narrated in the epic and puranic literature are distinctly reminiscent 
of this sectarian rivalry and antagonism. Nevertheless texts are not 
wanting which show definite attempts at a rapprochement. The author 
of the Gita , in a very characteristic manner, says that Vasudeva was 
the same as Sankara, the best of the Rudras ( Rudranam Sahkaraschasmi ) 
and this attitude persisted to quite a late period. 

The problem whether Christianity, one of the most important bhakti 
cults originating in Asia, had anything to do with the origin and develop- 
ment of Bhagavatism in India was at one time debated with a great deal 
of earnestness by many eminent scholars, both European and Indian. 
Many scholars of the nineteenth century held the view that the great 
bhakti cult of India was born of the early contact of India with 
Christianity; but it must be said that their approach to the question was 
not altogether scientific, for most of them were relying on inconclusive 
and ambiguous textual data belonging to a much later period, and very 
few of the earlier authoritative archaeological data were utilised. The 
latter definitely prove, as has been briefly shown above, that the cult was 
of indigenous origin, and in its earlier stages had nothing to do with 
Christianity. R. G. Bhandarkar, however, was of opinion that the 
conception of the cowherd (Gopala) Krishna in Bhagavatism, and especi- 
ally the stories connected with the childhood of Krishna, were directly 


JRAS. 1915, pp. 842-3 


2 Raychaudhuri, op. cit., pp. 124-7 



392 


Religious movements 


inspired by the contact of the early Bkagavatas with foreign Christian 
immigrants into India, like the Abhiras. But the analogy of the concept 
of Gopala Krishna with that of Christ the Shepherd, and the resem- 
blance (only partial) of stories connected with the childhood days of 
Krishna (as narrated in the interpolated and other later sections of the 
Great Epic), with those associated with the early life of Jesus Christ can 
be explained otherwise, without assuming that this element in the com- 
posite character of the cult-god was in any sense a borrowing from 
Christianity. 1 

The central cult-deity of the Bhagavatas, however, had acquired a de- 
finitely composite character by the beginning of the Christian era. This 
can be demonstrated with the help of early literary as well as archaeo- 
logical data. The cult began, as we have seen with the deification of 
a human hero, Vasudeva-Krishna, and a few of his kinsmen, but in 
course of time it absorbed the veneration rendered to a few other Vedic 
and Brahmanical deities like the solar god Vishnu of the Vedas and the 
cosmic god Narayana of the Brahmanas. This absorption was one of 
the most potent factors contributing to the growth of Bhagavatism. 
The Vedic Vishnu, one of the Adityas, famed for his ‘three steps’ 

( tri-vikrama ) was associated with an act of deliverance and grace (accor- 
ding to the Satapatha Brahmaria story he was instrumental in recovering 
the universe from the Asuras for the gods). Thus he could be easily 
merged into the Bhagavata cult which may, indeed, have already imbibed 
indirectly some solar elements. Lord Krishna says that he had in 
ancient times imparted the Yoga, which he was then expounding to 
Arjuna, to Vivasvan (the sun god) himself from whom it reached the 
mortals by stages (Gita, IV, 1-4). The Rishi Ghora Angirasa, from 
whom Krishna Devakiputra learnt some doctrines, was himself a priest 
of the Sun. This sage, after explaining the Purusha- Yajhavidya (in which 
certain actions and stages in the life of man are compared with the various 
parts of a Vedic sacrifice) went on to tell Krishna of the imperishable 
and unchangeable deity, the true essence of life. Finally Ghora quoted 
two Rigvedic verses which extol the greatness of the sun in the following 
terms, ‘having beheld the glory of the First Cause— that exquisite light, 
high above all darkness — and having beheld it also in our own hearts' 
we attain to that god of gods and noblest of all lights, the noblest of all 
lights.’ 2 Thus the identification of Aditya Vishnu with Vasudeva-Krishna 
was a necessary step in the development of the cult. Narayana, the 
other prominent god-concept to be taken over is found mentioned for the 
first time in the Satapatha Brahmana 3 where he is credited with the 


1 Raychaudhuri has successfully re- 
futed the views of scholars advoca- 

ting the influence of Christianity on 

the origin and development of Bhaga- 


■C&2AT& «>• '*» 

3 xii, 3, 4, 1 ; xii, 6, i. 



NARAYANA 


393 


performance of a PancharatraSattra (a sacrifice continued for five nights) 
which won for him not only superiority over all beings but also enabled 
him to pervade all the world (cf. the Vaishnavite idea of divine immanence 
and transcendance). It may be suggested en passant that the Pancha- 
ratra, one of the early names of the Bhakti cult, had its origin in this 
Brahmanical story. The Taittiriya Aranyaka (X. n, 1) refers to Narayana, 
as Hari, ‘the Deity Eternal, Supreme and Lord’. The Mahabharata 
records a number of myths about this god, which illustrate various traits 
present in the ideology centering upon him. R. G. Bhandarkar traces 
the principal idea underlying Narayana to two Rigvedic verses (X, 82, 5 
and 6) which mention the great unborn ‘on whose navel stood something 
in which all beings stood’. This idea of Narayana was developed in the 
period of the Brahmanas and the Aranyakas, and was identified with the 
Supreme soul itself during the epic period. 1 It was, therefore, quite 
appropriate that this great god should be identified with the Lord Krishna 
of the Gita , who was the greatest of the great, the resort and shelter of 
all. Moreover, as Raychaudhuri has surmised, Narayana and his vota- 
ries may well have had some solar associations. Thus, the amalgama- 
tion of Narayana’s worship with the worship of Vasudeva-Krishna 
was also a necessary stage in the development of the Bhagavata cult. 
This non-Vedic cult was not at all deprecated by orthodox believers in 
Vedic rites; in fact, it is possible that they encouraged and strengthened 
it as an ally against such heterodox cults as Buddhism and Jainism, 
whose widening influence had already grown to be a menace, The 
doctrine of incarnation which, as has been shown above, was first syste- 
matically though briefly expounded by the Bhagavadgita , was helpful in 
this process of amalgamation, and these allied god-concepts were regar- 
ded as so many avatars (incarnations) of Vishnu-Vasudeva. It should 
also be noted that many of the early bhagavatas like Sarvatrata, performed 
Vedic sacrifices like the asvamedha. The cults of Vasudeva, Vishnu, 
and Narayana seem to have been amalgamated some time before the 
Christian era, as both early literary and the early archaeological data 
agree in indicating. In the Gita, Krishna is several times addressed by 
Arjuna as Vishnu and the association of Devadeva Vasudeva with the 
sun-bird Garuda is alluded to in the Heliodorus inscription. This shows 
that the identification of the two gods was already well established by 
that time. The Nagari inscriptions also suggest that Narayana worship 
was merged with the cult of the Bhagavatas by the second century b.c. 

SAIVISM 

RUDRA-SIVA, THE CENTRAL CULT-PICTURE OF SAIVISM 

The cult centring upon Siva, or better still Rudra-Siva, had also evolved 
long before the Christian era. Unlike the original cult-picture of 

1 R. G. Bhandarkar, op. cit., pp. 30-1 
50 



394 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


Vaishnavism, this god-concept (or the amalgam of such concepts) was 
mythical in character. The Vedic god Rudra with his dual nature of 
a terrific and at the same time pacific deity was identified with the pre- 
Vedic divinity who came to be known chiefly as Siva to the late Vedic and 
subsequent ages. Tire worship of some such god conveniently described 
as the prototype of Siva-Pasupati, seems to have been well established 
among the Indus valley people. It is highly probable that from the 
amalgamation of this and allied god-concepts of the pre-Vedic, Vedic 
and post-Vedic ages, the Saiva cult gradually emerged. ‘Siva’, as the 
name of the cult-god, however, was somewhat late in making its appear- 
ance in literature; the word itself is originally found in the sense of 
‘auspicious’ in several early Vedic texts, being mainly used as one of the 
attributive epithets of various Vedic divinities. It is only in the later 
Vedic literature that Siva is occasionally used as a proper name. For 
instance the Svetasvatara Upanishad uses it several times as one of the 
various names of the god Rudra whose glory is extolled in that work. 
Siva, or again Rudra-Siva, is also the Great God, Mahadeva or Mahes- 
vara, forms which occur in the Sahkhyayana, Kaushitaki and other Brah- 
manas; the same forms are also found in the Svetasvatara, a treatise 
which mixes many theistic elements with the older pantheism of the Upa- 
nishads. The Kaushitaki Brahmana, again, ascribes the name Isana along 
with the epithet Mahan Deva to the god. Weber pointed out long ago that 
this attribution ‘involves quite a special prominence of the deity as com- 
pared with the other gods and indeed indicates a sectarian worship.’ 1 
Aufrecht also declared on the basis of myths concerning the origin and 
growth of Rudra- worship that ‘the period of the Brahmanas was one when 
the old polytheism was in a condition of decline and the new faith, which 
presents itself in Indian religious history as Saivism, was gaining ground.’ 2 
It may be noted here that Rudra’s rise to the position of the supreme 
god had already been effected in the Atharva Veda where various epithets 
such as Bhava, Sarva, Pasupati, Ugra, Mahadeva and Isana are attribut- 
ed to him. With the addition of the name of Asani in the Satapatha and 
Kaushitaki Brahmanas to the other seven, we get Rudra’s eight names, 
each four of which typify his two aspects, destructive and benign. The 
theistic Upanishad Svetasvatara calls Rudra sometimes ‘Eka Deva’, the 
‘One God’, another sign of his great prominence. These references, 
however, do not necessarily imply the existence of an exclusive sectarian 
worship of Rudra or Rudra-Siva. It will be interesting to take into 
account here the evidence of the early Buddhist works which also con- 
tain the same information. Siva is mentioned as a deva or devaputta in 
the Chullavagga and the Samyutta Nikaya, though there is no reference 
here to his worshippers. The passage in the Niddesa already quoted 
referring to the various religious systems prevailing in the centuries before 
the Christian era speaks of the worshippers of Deva along with those 

* Jndische Studien, n p. 302 * A. B. Keith, Rigveda Brahmanas , p. 26 



RUDRA-SIVA 


395 


of Vasudeva, Baladeva, Surya, Indra, Brahma and others. The adorers 
of Rudra-Siva, though not specifically named in the text, seem to be 
described as those who paid their exclusive homage to the ‘Deva’. ‘Deva’ 
sometimes denoted the god Rudra-Siva alone, both in early and later 
periods, and it can be presumed that the Deva-worshippers of the 
Niddesa passage were the same as the worshippers of Rudra-Siva. 

THE ‘SI BAFT OF THE ANNALISTS OF ALEXANDER'S INVASION 
SIVAPURA OF THE MAHABHASHYA AND MAH AM A YURI 

The annalists of Alexander’s invasion refer to a people called the Sibae 
who lived in the Panjab near the confluence of the Hydaspes and the Ace- 
sines (Jhelum and the Chenab). Lassen justifiably suggested that they 
were the same as the Sibis or the Usinaras so frequently mentioned in 
Indian literature. The Sibae are described by Curtius, Diodorus and 
other classical writers as dressed in the skins of wild beasts, having 
clubs for their weapons, and branding with the mark of a club their 
oxen and mules; the Macedonian Greeks took them to be the descen- 
dants of Heracles and his companions, who invaded India in the remote 
past. Strabo rightly discountenances this connection. The Panjab tribe 
from the way in which it is described may possibly be associated with 
Siva. The existence of the Sibis or the Sivas in this region some centuries 
before the Christian era is also attested by Patanjali who while comment- 
ing on the first and the third varttikas on Panini’s siitra, IV, 2, 104 
( avyayattyap ) refers to the udlchyagrama (northern village) Sivapura 
or Saivapura. 1 The Mahamayuri , one of the five great mantra-formu- 
las of northern Buddhism, composed before the fourth century a.d. (it 
was translated into Chinese four times between the fourth and the eighth 
centuries a.d.), refers to the tutelary deity Siva, who was the principal 
object of worship in the ahara (province) of Sivapura; Levi long ago 
connected this Sivapura with the one just quoted from the Mahabhashya . 2 
The evidence of the Buddhist text thus shows that the Sibae or the 
Sibis, the inhabitants of the Sivapura-Sibipura region, were mainly the 
worshippers of Siva. The alternative form ‘Saivapura’ in the Maha- 
bhashya may also be noted in this connection. 

RUDRA AND SlVA IN THE ASHTlDHYAYl AND 
THE MAHABHASHYA 

Panini records several names of Rudra such as Bhava, Sarva, Rudra 
and Mrida in one of his sutras (IV. 1, 49). Though Siva is not included 
here, Panini’s sutra sivadibhyo'n (IV. 1, 11 2) refers indirectly to his follow- 
ers or worshippers. The aphorism means that ‘the affix an comes in the 
sense of a descendant, after the words Siva etc.’ The form Saiva thus 


Kielhom’s edition, n. 293 


a JA. v, 1915, pp. 37, 70 



396 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


derived means a descendant of Siva, but also denotes, secondarily, a wor- 
shipper of Siva. Patanjali refers to Siva as well as Rudra several times 
in his commentary. Rudra is twice described as the god who is offered 
animals in sacrifice for which animals are procured ; in two other passa- 
ges, the medicinal herbs of Rudra are called auspicious {Siva Rudrasya 
bheshaji). 1 These characteristics clearly remind us of the Vedic Rudra, 
the dire god for whom animals were sacrificed and who was at the same 
time the healer of diseases, as Panini’s Rudra, Bhava, Sarva and Mrida 
invoke the god of the Satarudriya, the later Vedas and the Brahmanas. 
The god Siva, however, is twice mentioned by the same commentator. 
Once, while commenting on Varttika No. 2 on Sutra, VI, 3, 26 ( devata - 
dvandve cha\ varttika 2, Brahmaprajapatyddinam cha), he refers to such 
compounds as Brahma-Prajapatl, Siva-Vaisravanau and Skanda-Visa- 
khau and incidentally mentions that these compounds of divine names 
are not to be found in the Vedas. All these gods, with the exception of 
Prajapati are non-Vedic and thus are naturally not to be found in the 
Vedas. The second time that Siva is named by Patanjali is in referring 
to the images of the gods Siva, Skanda and Visakha. 2 The association 
of Skanda and Visakha with Siva in this passage is probably because 
his mythology was already much developed and his worship a common 
practice; for his images and those of his sons (Skanda and Visakha were 
perhaps at that time two entities, later merged into one) were in great 
demand. 

PATANJALI’ S REFERENCE TO THE $1VA-BHAGA VAT AS 


Patanjali’s reference to the Siva-bhagavatas is of unique interest, for it 
is the first unambiguous mention of a Saiva sect. Panini’s sutra, V. 2, 76 
(ayahsuladanddjinabhydrii thakthahau) lays down that the affixes thak and 
than come respectively after ayahsula and dandajina (in the sense of ‘one 
who strives to gain something by that’). Patanjali says that a Siva-bhaga- 
vata was an ayahsulikahi i.e. ‘one who carried an iron lance'. He observes 
that because this type of sectary seeks to obtain his end by violence, 
which should be got by mildness, he is called ‘ ayahsulikah \ 3 Though he 
makes no observation on the word dandajina it is apparent that a 
shaft ( danda ) and a hide (ajina) were also the characteristic marks of 
a Siva-bhagavata who was both an ayahsulika and a danddjinika. 
The carrying of an iron lance and a staff and the wearing of a hide 


Kielhom, ibid. I, pp. 331, 424; m pp. 
14, 403. The Grihyasutras refer to the 
iSiilagava sacrifice, in which a bull 
was pierced with a spear, his vapa 
(omentum) was offered to Rudra in the 
outskirts of the village. One character- 
istic of the Vedic Rudra was that of 
‘a healer of diseases’ by means of vari- 
ous medicinal plants. The epic and 
puranic Siva was also a healer, and 


uic same tradition also refers to human 
sacrifices in honour of the god Rudra- 
Siva (cf. the story of Jarasandha). 
Commentary on sutra, V. 3, 99 (jht- 
karthe chapanye). Patanjali here refers 
to the Mauryas using the images of 
P°“ s t °. < ? tort money from their sub- 
jects; Kielhom, ibid, u p. 429 
Kielhom, ibid. n. pp. 387-8 ~ 



PASUPATAS 


397 


were the sectary’s outward badges of devotion, and these characteristics 
seem to have been deprecated by orthodox people so that dandajinika 
came to be explained as dambhika, i. e. ‘a proud hypocrite’ by later com- 
mentators. Patanjali appears to have had a poor opinion of these sectaries 
because they were prone to use violent means where peaceful measures 
would have served. 1 The violence ( rabhasa ) by which a Sivabhagavata, 
according to Patanjali, sought to gain his end distinctly reminds us of 
the fourth topic, i. e. the vidhi or means by which a Pasupata pursued his 
goal of duhkhdnta (cessation of misery). Madhavacharya gives us a 
glimpse of the system in his Sar vadarsanasa mgr aha, and its study clearly 
shows some of its features were violent. 2 

THE PASUPATAS— THEIR ORIGIN AS DETERMINED BY 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND LITERARY DATA— A LATER 
PHASE OF THE S1VA-BHAGA VAT AS 


Now the question arises — were the Sivabhagavatas the same as the 
Pasupatas? The Mahabhdrata (Narayaniya section) includes the Pasu- 
pata school among the five systems, namely Sankhya, Yoga, Pancharatra, 
Veda and the Pasupata; referring to their founders, it says ‘Siva-Srlkan- 
tha, the consort of Uma, the lord of spirits and the son of Brahmadeva, 
taught the Pasupatajnana’ (Santiparvan, chs. 64-7). This statement may 
or may not contain a reference to a human founder of the religious 
system centering upon Siva; but as D. R. Bhandarkar pointed out long 
ago on the basis of textual (puranic) and epigraphic data, the Pasupata 
system was founded by Lakulisa, the 28th or the last incarnation of 
Siva. 3 The Mathura Pillar inscription of Chandragupta II, dated Gupta 
Era 61 (a. d. 381), the importance of which for the history of the Saivas 
will be further discussed in the next volume, helps us to ascertain the 
approximate date of Lakulisa in a very interesting manner. It records 
the erection of two images called Kapilesvara and Upamitesvara (really 
two Sivalingas named after Kapila and Upamita, the teacher and the 
teacher’s teacher of the donor), in the gurvvayatana (abode of the teachers), 
by one Uditacharya, the Mahesvara (Pasupata) teacher; the latter is 
described in the record as tenth in the apostolic succession from Kusika 
(Kusikad-dasama). Now this Kusika was no other than the first of the 
four immediate disciples of Lakulisa (Kusika, Mitra, Garga and Kauru- 
shya), who, according to epigraphic and puranic data, were the founders 


Patafijali’s comment on the preceding 
aphorism (V. 2, 15-Parsvendmichclihati 
should be considered in this connec- 
tion. He observes that a Rajapurusha 
(a royal officer is a parsvaka, i.e. ‘one 
who endeavours to obtain anything 
by devious means which should be 
sought by straight measures’ ( Ya rw- 
nopayenameshtavyanarthan - anyijunopay 


enamichchati sa uchyate parsvakah). 
Tne tenets of the Pasupata school and 
its various offshoots like the Kapa- 
lika, Kalamukha etc. which are des- 
cribed as 'atimargika' or ‘schools that 
are away from the path or go astray’, 
will be discussed in the next volume. 
JBBRAS. xxn p. 151; cf. ASIAR. 
1906-7 



398 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


of four lines among the Pasupatas. Allowing, say, twenty-five years to 
each of Udita’s ten apostolic predecessors including Lakulisa, we get 
a date for the latter in the first half (probably the early part) of the second 
century a. d. 1 In that case, Lakulisa could not have been the founder of the 
school of the Siva-bhagavatas alluded to by Patanjali, for the simple 
reason that the latter is almost unanimously assigned a date in the middle 
of the second century b. c. But the affinity of the Siva-bhagavatas with 
the Pasupatas does not necessarily imply that the originators of the two 
Saiva orders were one and the same. It might show, on the other hand, 
that an order not dissimilar to the Pasupata in some of its religious 
practices was in existence long before the time of Lakulisa, the reputed 
founder of the Pasupata sect. It is also probable that what Lakulisa really 
did was to systematise an already existent Saiva order, much as Basava 
at a much later date organised the VIrasaivas, a sect existing in some form 
long before his time. This is suggested by the puranic description of him 
as the 28th or last incarnation of Siva. In this avatar Siva incarnated 
himself as a Brahmacharin, entering a dead body lying in a cremation 
ground of Kayavatara or Kayavarohana (modern Karvan in the Kathia- 
war peninsula). Lakulisa composed a work called Pancharthavidya, now 
lost but quoted by Madhavacharya, as follows : ‘He (a Pasupata) should 
bathe thrice a day, he should lie upon dust (or ashes). Oblation is an 
observance divided into six members.’ 2 The Pasupata vow is summarily 
described in the Atharvasiras Upanishad, a sectarian work devoted to the 
exaltation of Rudra’s glory. It describes the Pasupata vrata, which 
consists of besmearing the initiate’s body with ashes simultaneously with 
the muttering of the mantra, ‘Agni is ashes, Vayu is ashes, water is ashes, 
dry land is ashes, the sky is ashes, all this is ashes, the mind, these eyes 
are ashes.’ By the performance of this vrata, the devotee of Pasupati or 
Rudra-Siva has his bonds loosened and is delivered from the fetters of 
his individual existence. This is pasu-pasa- vimokshana and it is one of 
the principal characteristics of the Pasupata sect. 3 It is possible that this 
sectarian Upanishad was later than the time of Lakulisa who also 
enjoined on his followers the besmearing of their bodies with ashes. 

One of the principal characteristics of the Siva-bhagavatas was, as 
has been shown above, the carrying of an iron lance. Mendicant monks 
carrying a bamboo staff are mentioned by Panini in his aphorism, VI. 
1, 154 ( maskaramaskarinau venuparivrajakayoh). In the course of his 
comment thereon Patanjali observes that a mendicant carrying a 
bamboo (staff) always says, ‘No works are to be done by you men, for it 
is peace which is your highest end’ ( ma krita karmani, ma krita karmani 


1 EL xxi pp. 1-9 

* Sarvadarsanasamgraha, Cowell’s Trans, 
p. 108 

• J. Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, iv 
p. 358. ‘Agnir’ityadind bhasma grihitva 
nimrjya angdni samspriset tasmad 


vratametat pasupatam pasu-pasa vimo- 
kshaya . Muir was not quite correct 
in translating the last word as ‘for the 
removal of animal bonds’; R G 
Bhandarkar’s translation (op. cit.’ 
p. 122) has been adopted here. 



AJIVIKAS 


399 


santirvah sreyasityahato maskari parivrajakah). The Maskari-Parivra- 
jakas described by Panini and his commentator have been identified by 
scholars with the Ajivikas, one of the early exponents of whose tenets 
was Mankhali or Makkhali (Maskari) Gosala, the third of their celebrated 
teachers, the first two being Nanda Vachchha and Kisa Samkichchha. 
The Ajivikas, as a sect, thus existed some time before the sixth century 
b. c., and their beliefs and practices were peculiar. Their true affiliation 
to any of the known sects had been in doubt even from a very early period. 
They were sometimes associated with the Jainas and sometimes with a 
particular section of the Buddhists. It is not a fact that the Ajivikas were 
wholly merged in the Jainas some time after the beginning of the Christian 
era, for their separate existence in Southern India as late as the thirteenth 
or the fourteenth century A. d. is clearly proved by epigraphic data. It is 
interesting to note that neither the Buddhists, nor the Jainas, were inclined 
to associate themselves with this order. Both equally looked down upon 
it. It is highly probable that some sections of the Ajivikas were originally 
associated with one of the Brahmanical sects. Reference has already 
been made to Kern and Buhler’s suggestion that they were worshippers 
of Narayana, a suggestion shown by D. R. Bhandarkar to be untenable. 
Bhandarkar surmised that the Ajivikas were neither Buddhists nor Jainas 
even in later times, but formed a distinct sect. 1 The same scholar has 
suggested in one of his latest works that the expression babhanesu ajmkesu 
in the Pillar Edict VII of Asoka means ‘Brahmanical Ajivikas’ who were 
not simply 3ramanic but also Brahmanic. The non-Brahmaiiical Ajivikas 
were probably connected in some way or other with the Jainas, and the 
Brahmanical Ajivikas were represented by the Maskari-Parivrajakas. 
The latter seem to have been the more important, and most probably 
they represent the Ajivikas for whom Asoka excavated the rock cut- 
caves at Barabar. 2 It may be conjectured here .that these Brahmanical 
Ajivikas, or rather a section of them, were the predecessors of the 
Lakullsa Pasupatas, or for the matter of that of the Siva-bhagavatas 
of Patanjali. Maskari Gosala, is said to have indulged in shameless 
words and actions, like holding a mango in his hand, drinking, dancing, 
improperly soliciting the potter-woman Halahala (at whose residence 
at Sravasti he was living for some time just before his death), and sprink- 
ling himself with the cool muddy water from a potter’s vessel. All 
these deeds were committed by him, according to the Jaina Bhagavati- 
sutra, in the delirium of fever which put an end to his life. But these 
apparently insane and indecent acts characteristically remind us of several 
measures included in the Pasupata-vidhi to bring about righteousness. 
Among these are enumerated dancing, showing oneself to be in love by 
means of amorous gestures at the sight of a beautiful young woman 
(. sringarana ), doing a thing condemned by all ( avitatkarana ), and 
speaking nonsensical and absurd things ( avitadbhashana ). The 


1 L.A. xn, 1912, p. 289 


* D. R. Bhandarkar, Asoka, 2nd ed., pp 177-8 



400 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


carrying of an iron lance and the wearing of an animal's skin, the pecu- 
liar sign of a Siva-bhagavata, and the recourse to violent means ( rabhasa ), 
as briefly hinted by Patanjali, are perhaps other indications of practices 
which were all atimdrgika, i. e. ‘away from the path’ or ‘going astray’ 
in the opinion of the other sections of Indians who thought them- 
selves sane. Thus, Utpala, while commenting on v. 19 of Ch. 59 of the 
Brihatsamhita says that the images of Sambhu (Siva) are to be installed 
by the ash-besmeared Pasupatas according to the rites mentioned in 
the Vatulatantra, i. e. the ‘code of lunatics’. The practice of besmearing 
their bodies with dust and ashes was also one of the peculiar customs 
of the Ajivikas who according to the evidence of the Jatakas (I, 390 
and 493) covered their bodies with dust and did such things as ‘eating 
the ordure of a calf’, ‘painful squatting on the heels’, ‘swinging in the 
air like bats’, ‘reclining on thorns’ and ‘scorching themselves with five 
fires’. The far earlier Majjhima Nikaya (II, Tevijja-vacchagottasutta) 
also refers to the Ajivikas, describing them as a particular class of reli- 
gious householders, who indulged in many other difficult ascetic practices. 
Buddhaghosha, in his Samantapasadika (I, p. 44), speaks of the ‘ash- 
besmeared’ parivrajakas and other Brahmanical ascetics (Bahmaiidnancha 
Bahmana-jatlyapashandanancha pandaranga paribbajakadindm ). x In 
these pandaranga parivrajakas one might perhaps recognise the 
Ajivikas. These similarities in practice between a class of ancient Ajivikas 
and the Siva-bhagavatas and the Pasupatas seem to support the sugges- 
tion made above. Jarl Charpentier, arguing on different lines, came to 
an almost identical conclusion when he observed, ‘that Ajivikas originally 
had nothing to do with Gosala especially, but was a much older name 
designating a sect to which he originally belonged and afterwards trans- 
ferred to his disciples.’ This sect flourished in Eastern India in pre- 
Buddhistic times and was Saiva in character, Gosala’s father Mankhali 
also belonged to it. 1 2 

Siva- worshippers in different parts of 

NORTHERN INDIA 

It has already been shown that the annalists of Alexander’s invasion pro- 
bably refer to a class of Jsiva-worshippers in the Panjab when they mention 
the ‘Sibae’ and a few of their characteristic traits. Thus it may be argued 
that the Saiva sect was not only flourishing in Eastern India in the pre- 
Christian period, but also existed in the extreme north of India. That 
it also flourished in the north-western region is indirectly proved by a 
statement of the Greek author Hesychius, who says that ‘the bull 
was the god of Gandhara’. The coins of many Indo-Greek rulers, 

1 I am indebted to Sri Sailendranath tation of the Pillar Edict passage and 
Mitra, M. A., of the Pali Department to Samantapasadika. 
of the Calcutta University, for these * For Charpentier’s data and his conclu- 

references to Bhandarkar’s interpre- ston, cf. JR AS. 1913, pp. 669-74 



FOREIGNERS AS SAIVAS 


401 


specially of the later period, bear the figure of a bull on one side, and this 
bull was no other than Siva in his theriomorphic form. This theriomorphic 
divinity was one of the tutelary divinities of Pushkalavati (lit., ‘the city of 
lotuses’), the old capital of Gandhara, as is proved by a gold coin of the 
Indo-Scythian series, which contains the figure of a bull with the legend 
tauros and ushabhe beside it in Greek and Kharoshthi characters. The 
long-continued worship of Siva in this locality, right up to the seventh 
century, is proved by Hiuan Tsang’s statement that ‘outside the west gate 
of the city of Pushkalavati was a Deva-temple and a marvel-working 
image of the Deva’; the ‘Deva’ here undoubtedly refers to Siva. The 
prevalence of Siva-worship in Gandhara, the Panjab, and several other 
parts of Northern India in the centuries immediately preceding and suc- 
ceeding the Christian era is also supported by further archaeological and 
literary data. The Mahamayiiri, a Sanskrit Buddhist text which seems to 
have been composed before the fourth century a. d., refers to several loca- 
lities in the extreme north of India where Siva was the principal object 
of worship. Numismatic evidence also clearly shows that Siva in his 
anthropomorphic, theriomorphic, phallic, and other symbolic forms was 
highly venerated by a large number of people in these regions. 1 The 
Panjtar (Silimpur) inscription bearing the date 122 (c. A. D. 64), probably 
refers to the existence of a Saiva sanctuary (Sivathala-Sivasthala) below 
the Mahaban range in North-Western India. A bronze seal of the first 
century B. c. unearthed by Marshall in the course of excavations on the 
Sirkap site of ancient Takshasila contains the figure of Siva, and the 
Brahmi and Kharoshthi legends ( Sivarakshitasa ) beside it declare that it 
was the personal seal of one Sivarakshita; thus its owner was a devout 
worshipper of Siva, as his name ‘one protected by 3iva’ alone would 
suffice to indicate. We do not know who this Sivarakshita was; he might 
have been an Indian or a foreigner adopting an Indian name. But the 
popularity of Saivism among a section of the foreign immigrants into 
India is revealed by other archaeological data. Gondophares, the Indo- 
Parthian ruler, (c. first half of the first century a. d.), very often describes 
himself in his coin-legends as devavrata or sudevarrata , — one vowed to 
‘deva’ or ‘sudeva’ ; I have shown elsewhere that the ‘deva’ and ‘sudeva’ of 
these coin-legends would be no other than the god ‘Siva’. 2 The word 
vrata here again reminds us of the Pasupatavrata and Mahavrata of the 
sectarian Saivas. That a great Kushana monarch reigning shortly after 
this Indo-Parthian king was a devoted Saiva sectary has been recognised 
by all. He was Wima Kadphises, whose coins bear either Siva, Siva and 
bull, or one of the emblems of Siva, a trident-battle-axe. This unusual 
constancy of reverse device undoubtedly proves his credal affiliation 
which is further substantiated by the characteristic epithet of mahisvara in 
his fuller coin-legend — Maharajasa rajadirajasa sarvaloga isvarasa mahis- 
varasa Vima Kathphisasa tratara, ‘(Coin) of the great king, the king of 


Banerjea, op. tit., pp. 125-41 


Banerjea, op. cit., p. 133 



402 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


kings, lord of all the worlds, the Mahisvara, Vima Kathphisa, the 
saviour.’ Long ago R. G. Bhandarkar found in it a reference to the name 
of the sect, Mahesvara, which was a synonym of the Pasupata . 1 That 
other foreign chiefs or potentates were also devout worshippers of Siva 
is very interestingly proved by a fragmentary relief of the first century 
A. D. in the collection of the Curzon Museum, Mathura, which shows 
two foreigners dressed in the long coat, tall headgear and heavy boots 
of the Kushanas, reverently approaching the phallic emblem of Siva 
with vine wreaths in their hands . 2 The vine-motif reveals the connection 
of the foreigners with the north-western region, and the partly realistic 
Siva-linga disproves R. G. Bhandarkar’s contention that the worship of 
the phallic emblem of Siva was unknown even in the time of Wima 
Kadphises. Again, D. R. Bhandarkar’s view that "up to the time of the 
Kushana king Vasudeva, Siva worship had not come to be identified 
with Linga worship’ is contradicted by this relief as well as by other 
archaeological data shortly to be discussed. 

ASSOCIATION OF PHALLICISM WITH THE CULT OF SIVA- 

ITS PREVALENCE IN CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN INDIA 

R. G. Bhandarkar is partly correct, however, in saying that the element 
of phallicism ‘must have crept in early enough among ordinary people 
who were in closer communication with the uncivilised tribes, and gradu- 
ally made its way to the higher classes, of whose creed it subsequently 
became an article.’ Relying on references to the worship of Siva-linga ap- 
pearing comparatively late in the epic literature,— it is only in the ‘Kri- 
shna-Upamanyu-samvada parvadhyaya’ of the Anusasanaparva of the 
Mahabharata that a clear reference to phallicism in association with Sai- 
vism is found, — he surmised that linga-worship became a part of Siva- 
worship at a comparatively late period. There is, however, unmistakable 
archaeological evidence to show that this element had long been connected 
with the cult of Siva, or the prototype of Siva, in the Vedic and even pre- 
Vedic period. The terra-cotta and faience phalli, some of which are very 
realistic in character, found in some quantity in the Indus-valley sites of 
Mohenjo-daro and Harappa, have been explained by Marshall and others 
as cult objects, and the ithyphallic feature (urddhvalinga— penis erectus ). 
of the prototype of Siva-Pasupati on the Mohenjo-Daro faience seal 
shows that it was the cult of this father-god with which they were asso- 
ciated. It may be mentioned en passant that it is probably these very 
people of the Indus having such cult objects for their ritual worship who 
were the originals of the sisnadevas reviled in some of the Rigvedic verses. 
Coming to the historic period, reference may be made to some uninscri- 
bed cast coins (provenance unknown) and several die-struck coins hail- 
ing from Ujjain and Taxila, all belonging to the pre-Christian period 

1 R. G. Bhandarkar, op. cit., p. 117 2 JISOA. iv 1936, p. 130 pi. xxiii fig. 1 



PHALLICISM. SAKTISM 


403 


(third to second century b.c.). The Ujjain coins are specially interesting 
in this connection, for some of them portray Siva in human form with 
bull in front of him on one side and his phallic emblem in front of a tree 
(, sthala-vriksha ) on the other. These coins prove beyond doubt that Siva 
was being worshipped in that region as early as the third to the second 
century b.c. in his anthropomorphic, theriomorphic as well as phallic 
forms . 1 An interesting sculpture of the first century b.c. discovered by 
Gopinath Rao still worshipped in a remote village of the Madras Presi- 
dency (Gudimallam a few miles from Renigunta in the North Arcot 
district) lends support to the view that the association of phallicism and 
Siva worship had long been well established. The very large and beauti- 
fully carved, but extremely realistic, Siva-linga has a well proportioned 
two-armed figure of Siva carved on its surface just below the nut. The sex 
mark is distinct behind the diaphanous loin-cloth of the god who carries 
in his two arms a parcisu (battle-axe) and a mriga (an animal, here a goat or 
a ram), and stands on a malformed dwarf, evidently the Apasmara- 
purusha of the later texts . 2 Many realistic Siva-lingas of the first to the 
third century a.d. have been seen by the present writer, and they demon- 
strate the continued association of phallicism with Siva worship in these 
centuries . 3 It will be shown in the next volume how this feature established 
itself as one of the most important aspects of Gupta and post-Gupta 
Saivism, till it became the convention of the Saivas to instal invariably a 
Siva-linga in the main sanctum of a Siva temple. It is true that reference 
to the connection of linga worship with Siva worship is found only in the 
latest sections of the Great Epic, but this can be explained by the supposi- 
tion that the formal recognition of the practice by an orthodox section 
of the people was a little tardy. The extreme realism of the early Siva- 
lingas was possibly the reason for this apparent aversion in some quarters, 
and may also explain the gradual conventionalisation of these cult 
objects. 


OTHER RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS : SAKTISM 

The evidence available for the beginnings of the other Brahmanical 
creeds is certainly not of the same nature and importance as what has 
been collected and discussed above. The five well-known Brahmanical 
sects ( Pahchopasakas ) were the Vaishnava, Saiva, Sakta, Saura and 
Ganapatya. They centred respectively on the worship of Vishnu (Vasu- 
deva-Vishnu-Narayana), Siva (Rudra-Siva), Sakti (the female principle, 
conveniently called Durga-Parvati), Surya, the sun god, and Gana- 
pati, the elephant-headed and pot-bellied divinity, ‘the lord of 
obstacles’. There was also another band of devotees in ancient India 

1 Banerjea, op. cit., pp. 167-8, pi. i, figs. 3 JISOA. m pp. 36-44, pi. vii, figs. 1-9; 

9, 10, 13, 14 Banerjea, ‘The Phallic Emblem in early 

2 T. A. G. Rao, Elements of Hindu and mediaeval India’. 

Iconography, ii (i) pp. 65-8, pi. n. 



404 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


whose special object of veneration was the war-god Subrahmanya or 
Karttikeya, but who were curiously enough not included in the ortho- 
dox list of the five sects. It is probable that the exclusive worship of 
this god, confined perhaps only to a few war-like Indian tribes, had been 
largely discontinued by the time that the list of the five Brahmanical sects 
was compiled, being gradually merged with the cults of Sakti and Siva. 
There is also reason to believe that most of these sects, barring the two 
discussed above, were comparatively late in their evolution and systema- 
tisation, though the worship of their cult pictures in a general way had 
been current among Indians for a long time. 

Saktism was one of such cults. The worship of the mother-goddess 
must have been in vogue in India from a very early date. The Indus- 
valley remains in the shape of ring-stones and terra-cotta figurines probab- 
ly symbolising the female principle seem to indicate that it enjoyed some 
prominence among the early Indian settlers. But the evidence of the 
Vedas confronts us with the fact that sacrifices were performed mostly in 
honour of the different gods, the names of comparatively few goddesses 
being mentioned in the hymns. The female deities are sometimes collec- 
tively named as the ‘wives of the gods’ (e.g. in the passage dev an am patnin 
yajati), but the two goddesses that stand out prominent in the hymns of 
the Rigveda are Ushas, the goddess of the dawn, and Vak, the goddess 
of speech. The former evokes in a very interesting way the poetic fervour 
of the Vedic seers, while the latter, in the famous ‘Devi Sukta’ (R. V. x. 
125) personalises the goddess of speech in a sublime manner. Vak des- 
cribed as the author of the hymn appears in it as an object of love and 
adoration to the Vedic seers. But still we do not find in the curly stra- 
tum of the Vedic literature the names of such goddesses as Durga, Kali, 
Ambika, Uma, and others who singly as well as collectively became 
afterwards the central deity of the Sakta cult. It is only in the late Vedic 
literature that we find stray mention of these deities and these only in 
contexts which do not prove that they were of any great importance to the 
higher sections of the Indians. 1 Many of these texts again are of deci- 
dedly late date, probably not before the third century b.c. The two 
Durga stotras of the Mcihabharata, however, undoubtedly testify to 
the importance of the goddess-worship which certainly by the time 
they were composed had come to enjoy a very prominent position in 
the social order. An analysis of these eulogies, one occurring in the 
Virataparva and the other in the Bhishmaparva, reveals that Various 
elements went to the composition of the cult-goddess, some of which 


Vajasaneyi Samhita (iii, 57) describes 
Ambika as Rudra’s sister: the Taitti- 
riya Brahmana (i. 6, 10, 4-5) also 

does the same. The Taittiriya Aran- 
yaka (x. 18) calls her the consort 
of Rudra. The latter work (x.I) invokes 
Durga, also styled Vairochanl, the 
daughter of the sun or fire; in the 
same work (x. 1, 7), the goddess is 


_° cal,etl Katyayanl and Kanyaku- 
man. The Kena Upanishad (iii. 25) 
refers to Uma, the daughter of Himavat 
(Haimayati) as the personified Brah- 
mavidya. In the Mundaka Upanishad 
U- 2, 4) occur Kali and Karall two of 
the names of Durga as the names of 
two ot the seven tongues of Agni. 



OTHER SECTS 


405 


were decidedly non-Aryan in character, as was the case also with her 
mythical consort Siva. These sections of the Great Epic were presum- 
ably composed after the beginning of the Christian era, and it was pro- 
bably at that time that the Sakta cult was standardised and systematised. 
It is in the Gupta and post-Gupta inscriptions that we find a clear men- 
tion of the cult and allusions to its sectaries, though its shadowy begin- 
nings can be traced to a far remoter period. The history of the evolu- 
tion of this cult should thus find a proper place in the next volume. 

THE SAURAS— THE SUN- WORSHIPPERS 

The sun, the celestial luminary, was an object of great veneration to 
numerous Indians from a very early time. The Vedic hymns are replete 
with references to his various aspects, and one of the Upanishadic pas- 
sages identified him with Brahma, ( asavadityo Brahma), the highest 
religious entity of the time. But these glorifications of the sun-god and 
his various aspects do not mean that his worshippers adored him exclu- 
sively. The Niddesa passage quoted above in connection with the early 
history of the two major cults may refer to a body of Indians whose special 
objects of worship were the sun and the moon (Surya and Chandra). The 
Digha Nikdya (Mahasamaya Suttanta, p. 288) mentions the goddess 
Suryavarchchasa, the daughter of Timburu, who may be the same as 
Suvarchchasa, one of the wives of Surya, named in the Brahmanical 
texts. It has already been shown that some elements of sun-worship must 
have been present in the evolution of Vasudevism, and there is reason to 
believe that sun-worship of a universal character had influenced many of 
the orthodox and even the heterodox cults of India in their origin and 
evolution. But here again clear and definite proofs are wanting for the 
existence of the Sauras in India before the Christian era. There can be no 
doubt, however, that bands of exclusive worshippers of the sun -god 
flourished in different parts of India in the Gupta and post-Gupta periods, 
as is clearly proved both by epigraphic and literary data. The sun-cult 
that flourished in parts of Northern and Western India bore distinct traces 
of an alien influence which must have infiltrated from Eastern Iran in 
company with the Saka-Pahlava invaders of these Indian regions. The 
sect of the exclusive sun-worshippers that flourished in the south, however, 
were remarkably free from any exotic impress, their cult being a natural 
outgrowth of the general worship of Surya prevalent among most of the 
Indian people even from the prehistoric period. But the story of the 
growth and development of the sect or sects of the Sauras must also be 
discussed in its proper place in the next volume. 

WORSHIPPERS OF KARTTIKEYA AND GAN AP ATI 

In the epic and puranic mythology, Karttikeya and Ganapati are usually 
described as the two sons of Siva and Parvatl, though there are different 



406 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


versions of their origin. The association of Karttikeya with Siva was per- 
haps known even in the time of Patanjali, for images of Skanda and Visa- 
kha, which are his two other names or the names of his two aspects, are 
mentioned by the great grammarian along with those of Siva. But Patan- 
jali never alludes to any sect centring its worship upon him. There is, 
however, some reason to believe, that certain warlike tribes of ancient 
India, e.g. the Yaudheyas, a Kshatriya tribe ‘living by their weapons’ 
( ayudhajm ), exclusively worshipped this god. The Yaudheyas were a very 
old tribe whose separate existence in parts of Southern Panjab from the 
fourth century b.c. to the early fourth century a.d. is avouched both by 
literary and archaeological evidence. The earliest coins of this tribe pro- 
bably refer to the Sulagava sacrifice performed in honour of Rudra for 
the possession of wealth and prosperity ( bahudhana , bcihudhanya) ; but the 
coins that they issued in the first century B.c. or the first century a.d. con- 
tain the figure of the six-headed Brahmanyadeva (Subrahmanya-Kartti- 
keya) and his principal cognisance, a cock or a peacock ( barhiketu ), and 
a legend which states that they were the issues of ‘Brahmanya also called 
Kumara the divine lord of the Yaudheyas’ ( bhagavato svamino Brahman- 
yadevasya Kumarasya). They appear to indicate that the Yaudheyas had 
dedicated their state to the god of their choice and that they regarded him 
not only as their spiritual but also as their temporal ruler. It may be men- 
tioned in support of this view that the seal of a ruling chief of the third or 
early fourth century a.d. found by Marshall in the course of his excava- 
tions at Bhita contains the significant legend which he translated as ‘of 
the illustrious Maharaja Gautamiputra Vrishadhvaja, the penetrator of 
the Vindhyas, who had made over his kingdom to the great lord Mahasena 
i.e. Karttikeya’ (Sri Vindhyabheda mciharajasya Mahesvara-Mahasenatisri- 
shtarajyasya Vfishadhvajasya Gautamiputrasya). The Mahabharata inci- 
dentally refers to the principal town of the Yaudheyas, also known as 
the Mattamayurakas, which was the specially favoured residence of Kartti- 
keya (Sabhaparva, 32, 45); Rohitaka is described here as full of great 
treasure, 'beautiful, rich in cattle and paddy ( bahudhanam ramyam gavadh- 
yam dhanadhanyvat), and beloved of Karttikeya, ( Karttikeycisyci day- 
itam). The late Professor Birbal Sahni during his explorations in modern 
Rohtak (ancient Rohitaka) in Southern Panjab found a large number of 
coin moulds of the Yaudheyas, the legend on which described them as 
‘ bahudhanyaka Yaudheya'. The figures of Karttikeya or his different 
aspects described variously as Skanda, Kumara, Visakha and Mahasena 
found on the coins of Huvishka show that this god was held in great 
veneration by a section of Indians in the second century a.d. A red sand- 
stone pillar of the same period found at Laha Bhagat near Kanpur (U.P.) 
with its detatched cock capital as well as the cock-crested pillar devices on 
certain Ayodhya coins of the first or second century a.d. also show that 
his worship was in full vogue in parts of Northern India at the iime. 1 
1 ASIAR. 1929-30, pp. 132-3, pi. xxxi inscription Kumara vara. ..in characters 
figs, b — g\ the pillarbears a fragmentary of the second century a.d. 



JAINA THOUGHT 


407 


It will be recounted in the next volume how the cult of Karttikeya was 
merged in that of Siva. 

The cult of Ganapati, the elephant-headed and pot-bellied divinity, 
undoubtedly came into being sometime after a. d. 300, and thus the 
history of its evolution is reserved for the chapter on the Brahmanical 
sects in the next volume. 

(D) RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL THOUGHT 
A. JAINISM 

Early Jainism was par excellence an ethical religion. It was a search 
for the means to a salvation which consisted in this — to free oneself 
from bondage to Karma by the fullest unfolding of the perfection in- 
herent in man. The way propounded was the famous Tri-ratna, ‘the 
Three Jewels’ of Jainism — right faith ( samyag-darsana ), right knowledge 
( samyag jhana) and right conduct ( samyag charitra ). 

By the commencement of our period Jainism has developed into an 
influential epistemological and metaphysical system. Jaina philosophers 
emerge whose task it is to strengthen Jainism by logical argumentation. 
The ablest of them is Umasvati (or Umasvami as he is known in orthodox 
Jaina circles) whose Tattvarthadhigama Sutra has been described as ‘the 
fountain-head of Jaina philosophy’. 1 Umasvati is regarded by J. L. 
Jaini as the most famous disciple of Kundakunda who flourished pro- 
bably ‘at the beginning of the Christian era’. 2 The Tattvarthadhigama 
Sfhra is equally highly revered both by the Digambara and Svetambara 
sections of the Jaina community. ‘It is deservedly the text-book of the 
religion of Tirthankaras par excellence. How great and authoritative it is 
recognised to be, will be further evident from the fact that it is perhaps 
the most commented-upon book in Jaina literature. No less than 31 
commentaries of it are known to be extant now.’ 3 We may therefore hold 
the Jaina religious and philosophical thought as expounded in Umasvati’s 
writings to be representative of the age we are considering. 

The philosophy expounded in this work may be best understood by a 
reference to the climate of thought that prevailed at the time. The spirit 
of vairagya (non-attachment) and the ideal of aliimsa (non-injury) 
practised by the Niganthas must have endeared them to the people. The 
quality of the lives of these unfettered souls was largely responsible for 
the spread of Jainism among the populace. 

Vedic ritualism and the cult of sacrifice divorced from purity of moral 
conduct had created a revulsion and a moral weariness among certain 
sections of the people. A feeling of revolt, within the Brahmanical fold 
itself, against such a cult was largely responsible for the defection of 


1 J. N. Farquhar, Outline of the Religious dacarya’s Pravacanasdra, p. xxii 

Literature of India, p. 136. 3 J. L. Jaini, The Sacred Books of the 

3 A. N. Upadheye, Intro, to Kundakun- Jainas, n p. viii 



RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


several Brahmins who went over to Buddhism and Jainism. That this 
was the general feeling of the age is attested by the Vasishtha Dharma 
Sutra (vi. 3, c. 300-100 B. c.) 1 which states that the Vedas do not purify 
one who is devoid of good conduct achdrahinarii na punanti vedah. Thus 
the trend of thought in the period commencing about 300 b. c. did not 
favour the perpetuation of a religion of punctilious ritualism divested of 
ethical content. The Yajnavalkya smriti ‘composed during the first two 
centuries of the Christian era or even a little earlier’ (Kane) mentions 
(i. 122) that non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing, cleanliness, self-res- 
traint, charity, discipline, kindliness and tranquillity are the sole means of 
attaining Dharma for one and all ( sarvesham ). Here the stress is laid 
entirely on qualities of personal character and not on ritualistic 
punctilio. 

From the fifth century B. c. to the first century A. D. the propagators of 
Jainism seem to have contented themselves with preaching and delivering 
discourses to whoever cared to listen. Their discourses, however, seem 
to have been collected in a work known as Arhat-pravachana-sangraha- 
paramagama-sdra. Agania is knowledge derived through the words of 
one who is trustworthy, and one who is interested in our welfare, an dpta , 
an absolutely reliable person. Knowledge thus derived is also called 
sruta jndna. This is the source of knowledge known as Testimony ( sabda ) 
and great importance is attached to it in Jainism. In Jaina logic, Agama, 
Sabda and Sruta Jndna are used as synonymous terms and refer to one 
and the same source of transcendental knowledge. 

Another collection of works embracing ancient Jaina sacred literature 
is known as ‘Dvadasanga Sutra’ in Prakrit. One of these works, the 
Sutrakritdnga, mentions twelve Angas in all as the canon of the Jainas 
‘taught, produced and declared by the sramanas and the nirgranthas , 2 
The constant refrain of the Angas is the excellence of ascetic life, the 
means to be employed for its full realisation, and the obstacles which 
beset the path and which need to be overcome. 

Jaina asceticism is uncompromisingly antithetical to Charvaka hedo- 
nism and materialism. The Charvaka’s denial of validity to any pramdna 
other than pratyaksha drew vehement criticism from the Jainas. The 
Jaina philosopher laboured hard at his logic in order to vindicate anumdna 
and sabda as valid and valuable sources of knowledge. That the soul of 
man was more than the tabernacle of the body in which it was temporarily 
housed had to be vindicated against the lokayata (Charvaka) onslaught. 
Curiously enough Jainism had to fight also on another front. Buddhism 
had many things in common with Jainism, particularly concerning man’s 
moral perfection; but on the metaphysical side Jainism had to defend 
the Atma doctrine as against the Anatma doctrine. The Buddhist 
doctrine of Nirvana, the extinction of the skandha (the self of other 
systems) was met by the Jaina doctrine of the limitless expansion of the 

1 Kane, History of Dharmasastra, i p. 59 a SBE. xlv, Jaina Sutras, p. 345 



JAINA COSMOLOGY 


409 


self. But in both there was an undercurrent of spiritual isolationism or 
loneliness of the soul on its upward journey. The Mahayana Buddhism 
found a cure for this in the Bodhisattva ideal, but the Jaina was content 
to contemplate the Kevalin in all his solitary grandeur. The Kevalin is 
a characteristic concept of Jainism. 

The Tlrthankaras or the path-finders were those who attained kevala 
jhana or absolute knowledge. Hence they were called kevalins. Heinrich 
Zimmer gives a very accurate explanation of this important concept. 1 
‘The noun kevalin, furthermore, is a term used specially to denote the 
Jaina saint or Tirthankara. Cleansed of karmic matter, and thereby 
detached from bondage, this perfect one ascends in complete isolation to 
the summit of the universe. Yet, though isolated, he is all-pervading and 
endowed with omniscience; for since his essence has been relieved of 
qualifying individualizing features, it is absolutely unlimited. Referring 
to the Tirthankara and his condition, the word kevalin thus expresses the 
two meanings of “isolated, exclusive, alone”, and “whole, entire, abso- 
lute”, both being ideas pertainingto the sphere of beatitude in perfection. 
This is strongly suggestive of the mystic teaching of Plotinus that the 
final stage in the mystic way is “the flight of the Alone to the Alone”.’ 

According to Umasvati’s Tattvartha Sutra 29, kevala jnana is the full 
perfect knowledge which is the soul’s characteristic in its pure and un- 
defiled condition. It characterises the soul when entirely liberated from 
the bondage of matter. On its upward path, the liberated soul is said 
to rise upward and upward like a balloon. 2 It rises and rises and ever 
rises. The psychic point or the life monad, called the soul, continuously 
expands in ever widening circles until it reaches infinite knowledge, power 
and bliss. 

In Jaina cosmology, we have the picture of a universe which is crammed 
with a multiplicity of things ( dravya ), all of them undergoing constant 
modification ( paryaya ). Being and Becoming are aspects of one and the 
same thing. Here we have the co-existence of change and changelessness, 
both predicates capable of being ascribed to the same substance. Things 
are called dravya owing to their very susceptibility to modification 
( paryaya ) — ‘dravanti gachchhanti' is the formula. The modification is 
called paryaya because of the vicissitudes of being and non-being happen- 
ing to one and the same object — paryeti prapnoti utpatti-vinasau. To take 
an example : gold retains its goldness but cannot remain without taking 
some form or the other, in the condition of the ore, smelted or shaped 
into bangle, ring, goblet, crown and an infinite number of other things. 
Its ‘goldness’ does not perish, however, in the midst of all this 
metamorphosis. 

The substances in the universe that are undergoing modification fall 
into two main categories: the jiva and ajiva — animate substances and 


1 H. Zimmer, Philosophies of India, ed. a See Zimmer, op cit., p. 258 for the tra- 

J. Campbell, pp. 305 f. ditional illustration of an empty gourd. 

52 



410 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


inanimate substances. The jiva is the enjoyer and the ajiva is the enjoy- 
ed. The jiva is the actor and the ajiva is that which is acted upon. Ajiva 
is of two main classes, those devoid of form ( cirupa ) as motion, rest, space, 
time, and those having form as pudgala or maffer. It is the concourse of 
the jiva and the ajiva that sets the world going and keeps it going. The 
enslavement of the jiva by the ajiva and the consequent contamination 
or defilement is the curse of existence. Owing to this association with 
matter, what was refined becomes gross, what was light becomes weighed 
down, what was free becomes bound. To remain eternally bound to 
pudgala is inherently impossible to the jiva. it has an inherent dynamism 
which makes it struggle to recover its original freedom. The process by 
which the inert ajiva dravya insidiously creeps into the jiva is called 
asrava, the influx or accretion of karma. The jiva attracts to itself parti- 
cles which settle down on it as wet cloth attracts dirt which settles upon it. 
Whether the karmic particles are of the meritorious ( punya pudgala ) or 
sinful ( papa pudgala) kind depends on the nature of karma embarked 
upon. The more the evil deeds we commit the deeper do we get entangled 
in the ajiva dravya and the good deeds that we perform lead to the 
progressive thinning and refinement of gross matter that enwraps man’s 
personality until it becomes rarefied and fine and as subtle as the jiva 
dravya itself (sukshma sukshma). 

The world of Becoming ( samsara ) in Jainism is looked upon as a vale 
of tears and consequently a vale of soul-making. It involves suffering, 
struggle, anxiety, despair, fresh endeavour, heroic fortitude and final 
achievement. The journey’s end is reached when the soul of man wren- 
ches itself away from all the karmic fetters and is able to soar up on its 
heavenward journey in sublime solitariness ( kevali ). This vein of thought 
is expressed in the words of the Chhandogya Upanishad : smritilariibhe 
sarvagranthinam vipramokshah(l . 26.2) — the unloosening of allknots will 
be there then. To become a nirgranthi is the acme of human existence. 
This results from karma kshaya, i.e. when the agglutinated karma is 
washed out by a strenuous life of physical and moral purity. 

The distinctive doctrine of Jaina logic is known as syadvada, also as 
saptahhahgi naya or the seven forms of predication about Reality. It 
attained a crystallized shape in this period. Kundakunda mentions 
syadvada in his Pahchastikaya and Pravachanasara, and Umasvati men- 
tions the nayas in his Tattvartha sutra. Evaluating syadvada Prof. Dhruva 
says: ‘ Syadvada js not a doctrine of mere speculative interest, one inten- 
ded to solve a mere ontological problem, but has bearing upon man’s 
psychological and spiritual life.’ 1 The chief purpose here is to arrive at 
right belief and right belief is only a means to the attainment of liberation. 
Sutra 2 of Tattvartha Sutra says that belief or conviction in things ascer- 
tained as they are, is right belief. Tattva means ‘thatness’, a thing as it 
is. Artha is that which is ascertained. The first sutra of Umasvati’s 


1 Dhruva, Syadvada manjari, with Intro, and notes. 



SYADVADA. ASRAVA 


411 


work lays it down that ‘Right belief, right knowledge, right conduct, 
these constitute the path to liberation — samyagdarsana jhana charitrani 
moksamargah.’ 1 

According to syadvada or anekantavada no one can claim absolute 
incontrovertible knowledge of reality. Each one knows reality from 
his own perspective or angle of vision. It is right so far as it goes. But 
fallacy creeps in the moment one claims for it the character of ‘indispu- 
table’ and ‘unassailable’. One must recognize that it is not the whole 
truth, and will have to be on guard therefore against claiming absolute 
certitude for one’s partial knowledge of things. When a man realises 
that Truth has several faces not all of which are known to him, he is 
apt to grow tolerant of other points of view. As Jaini says ‘two seem- 
ingly contrary statements may be found to be both true, if we take 
the trouble of finding out the two points of view from which the state- 
ments are made.’ 2 3 

The Jaina system of philosophy and religion is predominantly prag- 
matic and humanistic. It is regarded by many as an anthropocentric 
philosophy of life. The test of truth in Jainism as in modern pragmatism 
is in its workability and feasibility in action. Vardhamana Mahavira’s 
Kriya Vada 3 is perhaps the matrix out of which was born the later doc- 
trine of arthakriyakdritva (leading to useful activities), the earliest men- 
tion of which in Jaina literature seems to have been made by Akalarika- 
deva (a.d. 750) in his commentary Ashtasati on the Aptamimamsa of 
Samantabhadra. 4 

Knowledge, according to the Jaina point of view, is not to be pursued 
for its own sake but for the sake of life and liberation. ‘The whole of 
Jainism,’ says Jaini, ‘follows the maxim: Do not live to know, but know 
to live.’ 5 The mind will have to be cleared of its cobwebs before it is 
able to perceive clearly and distinctly the goal of human life. The fac- 
tors that becloud the mind are frequently emotive in character ( kashaya ). 
They arise out of cur passions and prejudices: attachment ( raga ), aver- 
sion ( dvesha ), ahection (rati), and infatuations ( moha ); the four passions: 
anger, pride, deception, and greed affect the soul and then the soul 
is in a state to receive karmic matter. The attraction of karmic matter 
thus brought about is asrava. The mind must be disciplined to see 
things clearly and in the right perspective. The mind is associated with 
a body which acts as a drag on its free spontaneous activity. The Tatt- 
vartha Sutra states 8 that ‘the soul, owing to its being with passion, assi- 
milates matter which is fit to form karmas. This is bandha, bondage.’ 
While the seventh chapter of this work expounds ethics in the light 
of psychology, the ninth expounds Jaina asceticism in the light of 


1 Umasvati, Tattvarthadhigama Sutra , 
Eng. trans. J. L. Jaini, SBJ. n 

2 Outlines of Jainism , p. 117 

3 B. C. Law, Mahavira: His Life and 

Teachings, p. 8. 


4 H. M. Bhattacharya, ‘The Jaina con- 
ception of Truth and Reality,’ in his. 
Studies in Philosophy (1st. Ser.) p. 28 

5 Outlines of Jainism, p. 112 
• Ch. viii, Sutra 2 



412 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


psychology and psycho-physiology. Perfect knowledge ( kevala jhana ), 
says the last and tenth chapter of the work, is gained by destroying the 
mohaniya, deluding karmas. Moksha or liberation is described as free- 
dom from all karmic matter, owing to the non-existence of bondage 
and to the shedding of all the karmas. The purpose of the entire work 
of Umasvati is to delineate in the clearest possible terms the goal ( mo - 
ksha, liberation) of human life and the path ( marga ) that leads to it cons- 
tituted of the holy trinity of Right Belief, Knowledge and Conduct. 
Bodily discipline, dietetic regulations, rules of routine, fasting and 
penance are all preparatory to the mastery of the soul over the body. 
This is the rationale of Jaina asceticism. The pampered body is the least 
fitted to carry us across the stream of samsara. The Tirthahkaras or the 
pathfinders who have shown us the way have crossed the ocean of 
samsara by the only boat that is available to man, namely, conquest over 
the lusts of the flesh. 

The chastening of man, his journey through the world and his final 
liberation are the theme of Jaina philosophical and religious thought. 
The Jainas hold that ‘Man is the measure of all things’ in a far more pro- 
found sense than Protagoras, the great sophist. There is no extra-cosmic 
deity in Jainism to be worshipped. A man has only to turn inwards in 
order to discover that he is himself the deity in the making. Perfection 
lies inherent in him waiting to be made manifest. The obscuration of 
this is due to the jiva’s association with pudgala. The perfectibility of 
man is the melioristic gospel that saves Jainism from falling a prey to 
undiluted pessimism. Evil exists and is very real but can be overcome by 
soul-force. This is the hope that springs eternal in the human breast. 
Ethical sordidness in any form is entirely alien to the spirit of Jainism. 
The true Jaina would rather be a ‘Socrates dissatisfied’ than a ‘pig satis- 
fied’. To spurn pleasure, to eschew bodily comfort, and to withstand the 
tempestuous lusts of the flesh do not come easily to any man. But the 
greatness of man lies in his capacity to overcome the limitations of bodily 
nature by the aspirations of his spiritual nature. He is a denizen of two 
worlds. His body belongs to the realm of matter and his soul belongs 
to the realm of the spirit. When the karmic body is shuffled off, he 
reaches the home of his spirit. 

A word may be said about the position of Jainism in the evolution of 
Indian religio-philosophical thought. Common points have been dis- 
covered between Jainism, Samkhya and Buddhism; common differences, 
also, with the Vedic religion. In view of some of the peculiar tenets of 
Jainism the postulate has been advanced 1 of a ‘great Magadhan religion, 
indigenous in its essential traits, that must have flourished on the banks of 
the Ganges in Eastern India long before the advent of the Aryans into 
Central India.’ The influence of pre- Aryan religious beliefs and practices 


1 A. N. Upadheye, Intro, to Kundakundacarya, Pravacanasara, p. 



BUDDHIST SCHOOLS 


413 


on later Vedic thought and on subsequent religious and artistic deve- 
lopments is generally admitted and has been increasingly stressed in recent 
years. But the criteria for differentiating Aryan and pre- Aryan elements 
are by no means clear or settled, and so far as Jaina thought is concerned, 
the suggestion of Charpentier 1 still seems to mark the furthest limit of 
what we may affirm, viz. that ‘it represents, probably, in its fundamental 
tenets one of the oldest modes of thought known to us, the idea that all 
nature, even that which seems to be most inanimate, possesses life and the 
capability of reanimation; and this doctrine the Jainas have, with in- 
flexible conservatism, kept until modern times.’ 

B. BUDDHISM 

The period of our study marks the heyday of Buddhist philosophy. 
The words of the Buddha now begin to be conned carefully and to receive 
elaborate comment. Varied interpretations of the words of the Master 
give rise to various schools of thought. The first great schism in original 
Buddhism is said to have taken place about one hundred years after the 
parinirvaw of the Buddha. It was a schism of Buddhism into the Maha- 
sanghika and Sthavira schools. These schools subdivided themselves into 
a number of minor sections. Twenty of them are mentioned by Vasumitra 
in his ‘ Treatise on the points of contention by the different schools of 
Buddhism ’ referred to by Suzuki in his Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism'. 
The main schism arose out of a controversy regarding the theory and 
practice of vinaya, or rules for the order. The conservative party came to 
be called ‘Sthaviras’ or Elders, and the dissenters Mahasanghikas or 
members of the great congregation . 2 

This reference to the early schools is here introduced merely to under- 
line the fact that the later divisions of Buddhism known as Hinayana and 
Mahayana are only a development of the incipient division of doctrine 
first manifested among the Mahasanghikas and Sthaviravadins. The 
Sthaviravada school developed into Hinayana and the Mahasanghika 
school into Mahayana . 3 

Apart from his words, the personality of Buddha himself is now made 
the subject of varied interpretation . 4 Was he a man among men or was 
he a superhuman being entering the world of men to save souls, erring 
and suffering souls, out of compassion? Being the Lord of Compassion, 
the solicitude he feels for erring humanity endears him to mankind. Hu- 
manity in its helpless condition lifts up its hands in prayer to the Buddha. 
Buddha is the refuge. Self-surrender ( saranagamana ) and adoration (pani- 
pdta ) mark the attitude of the upasaka. Buddha, whose very essence is 

1 CHI. i p. 161 of the terms Hinayana and Mahayana 

2 See Yamakami Sogen, Systems of and the origin of Mahayana Buddhism. 

Buddhistic Thought, p. 99 4 The Doctrine of Trikaya in Mahayana 

3 For a full treatment of the subject see Buddhism. 

Ryukan Kimura, A Historical Study 



414 RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 

wisdom and love, becomes the saviour of mankind, a Bodhisattva, and a 
pattern for all to follow who strive to attain Buddhahood. The Bodhi- 
sattva waits and watches patiently for every man to approach him in a 
spirit of humility and self-surrender. ‘ Buddham saranam gachchhamV — 
‘I resort to the Buddha’, becomes the cry of every soul longing for libera- 
tion from pain and sorrow. Buddha is the healer and the consoler and 
takes up the burden of man’s salvation on himself. A religion that had 
forsworn a personal god makes of Buddha a god and places him on the 
throne which had lain vacant for nearly two centuries. The metaphysical 
agnosticism professed by the Buddha now yields to a theistic cult known 
as the Mahayana Buddhism which was elaborated by some of the best 
minds that India ever produced. 

Speaking of the emergence of Mahayana as a new development in Bud- 
dhism, Radhakrishnan says: ‘The Hinayana protests against the Maha- 
yana as an accommodation of the pure teaching to the necessities of 
human nature. Anyway, while it stands as an example to the world of 
realising the highest through knowledge, the Mahayana requires us to take 
part in the world, evolving new social and religious ideals. The absence of 
the supernatural and the consequent lack of any scope for imagination, 
the morbid way of solving the central problems of life, the reduction of 
Nirvana to extinction and ethical life to a monastic asceticism, made the 
Hinayana a religion for the thinking and the strong in spirit, while a new 
development had to arise for the emotional and the worshipful .' 1 

It is mainly on points of religious doctrine that Buddhism divided into 
the two schools of Hinayana and Mahayana. This fission brought about a 
further explication in the light of a fresh interpretation of some of the 
basic concepts of Buddhism, of which the concept of Nirvana was one. 

The death of the Buddha is called Nirvana. The term ‘Nirvana’ literally 
means ‘the state of a fire blown out’. It connotes the extinction of 
something. When a fire is blown out, nothing is left to be seen. What 
is it that is extinguished? It is perhaps the ego, the ‘I’ which is the source 
of the possessive ‘mine’ — the source of lust (rdga), wrath (dosa) and greed 
(, moha ) — that is finally extinguished. With this, all dukkha will cease. 
Such a simple interpretation as this is in consonance with the ‘four noble 
truths’ (chatvari ary a satyani) of original Buddhism. The four principles 
as paraphrased by Stcherbatsky are: life is a disquieting struggle, its 
origin is in the evil passions, eternal quiescence is the final goal, and 
there is a path by which all the energies co-operating in the formation of 
life become gradually extinct . 2 But a further question arises now. Is 
the individual to be concerned with the extinction of his own misery, that 
is only his salvation or is it also his obligatory duty to help others to find 
their salvation too? The Hinayana interpreted the words of the Master 
‘Be a lamp unto yourselves’ to mean that each individual is the architect 
of his own deliverance. Nirvana is to be sought for in order to put an end 


1 Indian Philosophy, i p. 592 



BUDDHIST METAPHYSICS 


415 


to the individual’s own miseries. The Mahayana school, however, held 
that the condition of one’s own salvation was to work for the salvation 
of others. The object of Nirvana, in this school of thought, is to obtain 
perfect wisdom (prajha paramita) with which the liberated can strive for the 
salvation of all, beings in misery. It is very difficult to say which view 
truly represents the view of the Buddha. As Suzuki suggests, ‘The pro- 
bability is that Buddha himself did not have any stereotyped conception 
of Nirvana, and, as most great minds do, expressed his ideas outright as 
formed under various circumstances, though of course they could not 
be in contradiction with his central beliefs, which must have remained the 
same throughout the course of his religious life .’ 1 

The unintentional ambiguity of the original verbal gospel of the Buddha 
occasioned one striking result deeply significant for the development of 
philosophical thought in India. Some of the most acute thinkers, mainly 
in the interest of religion, applied themselves to investigations into the 
realm of mind which yielded a Logic, a Psychology and a Metaphysic of 
no mean order. Out of the Hinayana arose the metaphysical schools of 
Buddhism known as the Sautrantika and the Vaibhashika schools, and 
out of the Mahayana the Madhyamika or Sunyavada school and the 
Yogachara or Vijnanavada school. Sautrantika, Vaibhashika, Madhya- 
mika and Yogachara are thus the most prominent of the systems of Bud- 
dhistic thought. In the chronological order the Vaibhashikas arose in the 
third century after the parinirvana, the Sautrantikas in the fourth. The 
Madhyamika school came into existence five hundred years after the 
parinirvana, while Asahga, the founder of the Yogachara school, is as 
late as the third century of the Christian era . 2 

Both the Sautrantika and the Vaibhashika schools are regarded as 
Sarvastivada schools, i.e. schools of Buddhist Realism. They maintain 
that all things mental and non-mental are real. Our perception of 
external objects depends on the actual existence of those objects outside 
of us. If it were not so, we could perceive anything at any place at 
will. The difference between the two schools is expressed by the terms 
bahyanumeya vdda and bahya pratyaksha vdda. Bahyanumeya vdda, 
which is the Sautrantika view, maintains that we infer the existence of 
an external object through the idea or representation of it we have 
in our minds. This view may be called Representationism. Bdhya- 
pratyaksha-vada of the Vaibhashika school is the view that external 
objects are directly perceived by us as they are. If objects are not capable 
of being directly perceived by us, to infer their existence through the 
ideas that we have of them would not be possible. This view may be 
described as Naive Realism. 

As Stcherbatsky sums it up ‘the standpoint of the Hinayana is thoroughly 

1 D. T. Suzuki, Outlines of Mahayana schools here accepted is based on 

Buddhism, pp. 49-50 Yamakami Sogen’s Systems of Bud- 

2 The historical order of the rise of these dhistic Thought. 



416 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


realistic’ and ‘roughly speaking a real external world is assumed in 
Hinayana, denied in Mahayana and partly reassumed in the logical 
school.’ 1 Stcherbatsky suggests, following the Buddhists themselves, that 
the history of Buddhism in India may be divided into three periods, and 
the period under review here being the second one, the philosophy of the 
Mahayana school must occupy the central place. 2 This is the period of 
Buddhistic Idealism. The foremost thinkers belonging to this school are 
Asvaghosha, Nagarjuna, Asanga and Vasubandhu. Of them Zimmer says, 
‘Nagarjuna (c. a.d. 200), the founder of the Madhyamika school of Bud- 
dhist philosophy, which is the supreme statement of the Mahayana view, 
was by no means a vulgarizer but one of the subtlest metaphysicians the 
human race has yet produced. While Asanga and his brother V asubandhu 
(c. a.d. 300), the developers of the Yogachara school of the Mahayana, 
likewise merit the respect of whatever thinker sets himself the task of really 
comprehending their rationalization of Nagarjuna’ s doctrine of the Void. 
And Asvaghosha, the haughty contemporary of Kanishka (c. a.d. 100), 
can have been no truckler to barbarians even though his epic of the life 
of the Buddha, Buddhacharita, is graced with many unmonkish charms.’ 3 
The Madhyamika or Sunyavada (Doctrine of the Void) school is illu- 
sionism pure and simple. According to this school everything is unreal. 
Both mental and non-mental phenomena are illusory and unreal. Accord- 
ing to Nagarjuna, ‘There is neither being, nor cessation of it ; there is nei- 
ther bondage nor escape from it.’ The Yogachara or Vijnanavada school 
resembles the subjective idealism of the West. Berkeley's formula esse 
est percipi, to exist is to be perceived, would find ready assent among the 
Yogacharas. Reality of an external world apart from its being perceived 
is unthinkable. The only thing real is mind. The so-called external world 
is an idea of the mind. While the existence of the external world can be 
denied, it is impossible to deny the existence of mind. It would lead to 
self-contradiction. The very existence of thought as an activity of mind 
proves the existence of mind. Nagarjuna’s doctrine of the Void ( sunya ) 
is paradoxically stated by him thus: ‘It cannot be called void or not 
void or both or neither, but in order to indicate it, it is called the Void.’ 
Nagarjuna’s notion of the Void was not the end of the whole story. 
He had a deep metaphysical purpose concealed in it. This was an attempt 
to discover the nature of Ultimate Reality. The phenomenal world as we 
know it cannot be real. It is riddled with self-contradictions. What- 
ever is real must be free from self-contradiction. The categories known 
to our frame of thinking as space, time and causality and the division of 
subject and object of knowledge appear to be self-stultifying. They may 
serve a pragmatic purpose. The business of transitory life may require 
it. Samsara has only an empirical reality and cannot be ultimately real. 
Subject to constant flux the world of our pragmatic need is and yet is not. 

1 Buddhist Logic, i p. 525 3 H. Zimmer, Philosophies of India 

2 Ibid. p. 7 p. 510 * 



BUDDHIST MYSTICISM AND THEISM 


417 


Nothing is there permanent to which one can hold. To perish perennially 
is of its very texture, if ‘texture’ could be ascribed to it all. This is 
samsara. Nirvana is an escape from this momentariness. It is a quies- 
cence where the fret and fever of life will cease. But it can only be des- 
cribed in negative terms. We can only go to it by the via negativa. As 
no positive description can be given of it, it is for all practical purposes 
void, sheer emptiness. But when one attains it, what seemed unreal so 
long would come to be the real of reals. It is an ineffable and incommuni- 
cable state. That is why Buddha remained silent. His silence was not 
the silence of ignorance, but the silence where no speech can possibly in- 
trude. This is the experience that Buddha received under the Bodhi tree. 
He was the awakened, for he woke up from the slumber of samsara. 
This is a state that everyone can reach provided he treads the path of the 
Buddha. Discipline of the senses and discipline of the mind are the 
stepping stones to it. He who is attached to Nirvana must detach 
himself from everything else. Nirvana is a jealous mistress. All earthly 
fetters must be shaken off before one can embrace her. 

This line of thought, which has continued in the later philosophers who 
started with the premises of Nagarjuna, landed Buddhism in mysticism. 
Logic became futile in the face of this. Discursive Reason showed its 
feet of clay. To quote Stcherbatsky : ‘The only source of true knowledge 
is the mystic intuition of the Saint and the revelation of the new Buddhist 
scriptures in which the monistic view of the universe is the unique subject. 
This is a further outstanding feature of the new Buddhism, its merciless 
condemnation of all logic, and the predominance given to mysticism and 
revelation.’ 1 

On the side of religion, Mahayana Buddhism led to a theistic system 
very similar to the theistic systems of Saivism and Vaishnavism, preaching 
a loving devotion to a personal god whom the devotee loves with all his 
heart and whose spontaneous grace he awaits. On the metaphysical side 
it led to a school of thought closely akin to the conception of an Absolute 
with regard to which all determination would prove to be negation. The 
mind is unable to grasp it and words fail to express it. Reason and 
language only apply to the finite and nothing can be said of the infinite. 

Personal verification alone can convince one of the reality of such a Nir- 
vana. ‘Come and See’ ( chipassiko ) is the motto of this philosophy. This 
interpretation of Nirvana is borne out by a passage from Netti Pakarana 
quoted by B. C. Law in his Concepts of Buddhism (pp. 76-7). ‘Well ex- 
pounded by the Master is the doctrine which bears the desired fruit here 
and now which has “come and see” for its motto, which assuredly leads 
to the goal, the truth whereof is to be experienced by the wise, each 
individually for himself, namely, the one which consists essentially in 
subduing the haughty spirit, the perfect control of thirst, the upsetting 
of the very storage of creative energy, the arrest of the course of 

1 Buddhist Logic, p. 10 
53 



418 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


samsara as regards the fate of an individual, the rare attainment of the 
state of the void, the waning out of desire, the dispassionate state, the 
cessation of all sense of discordance, the ribband,.’ 

As to this condition the Buddha speaks the language of all the mystics 
of the world when he says : ‘This condition is indeed reached by me which 
is deep, difficult to see, difficult to understand, tranquil, excellent, beyond 
the reach of mere logic, subtle and to be realized only by the wise (each 
individually for himself).’ 1 

In the Buddhism of this period. Reality acquires a new definition. 
This definition is expressed in the concept known as pratitya samutpada 
or Dependent Origination. The very interdependence of elements in this 
universe is a denial of the ultimate reality of the elements accepted by 
common sense as real. But as Stcherbatsky states: ‘the new Buddhism 
did not repudiate the reality of the empirical world absolutely, it only 
maintained that the empirical reality was not the ultimate one. There 
were thus two realities, one on the surface, the other under the surface. 
One is the illusive aspect of reality, the other is reality as it ultimately is.’ 2 

Nagarjuna confesses in the Madhyamika Sastra that ‘the teaching of the 
Buddha relates to two kinds of truth, the relative, conditional truth, and 
the transcendent, absolute truth.’ 3 

Another characteristic feature of the Buddhist philosophy of this period 
is the concept of alaya-vijnana or the ‘store-house consciousness’. It is 
a Yogachara doctrine. Asahga and Vasubandhu attempted to evolve a 
complete system out of it. The concept of alaya vijnana opens up a realm 
of Buddhist depth-psychology. It has much in common with the Freu- 
dian ‘unconscious’ and represents the ‘fantasy-making’ and the projec- 
tion of one’s own subjectivity into an external world. According to this 
view what we call an objective world is really a projection or illusive mani- 
festation of the mind called alaya-vijnana. The concept of alaya-vijnana 
is based on a study in the inner workings of the human mind calculated 
to help us to realize the forces and conditions that lie within us, that either 
favour or retard our progress towards the final goal of Nirvana. 

The Buddhism of this period is an intertwining of the strands of reli- 
gion, philosophy, psychology and ethics. Anagarika B. Govinda well 
puts it: ‘If, therefore, we speak of Buddhist philosophy, we should be con- 
scious that this is only the theoretical side of Buddhism, not the whole of it. 
And just as it is impossible to speak about Buddhism as a religion without 
touching upon the philosophical aspect, in the same way it is impossible 
to understand Buddhist philosophy without seeing its connection with the 
religious side. The religious side is the way which has been established 
by experience (just as a path is formed by the process of walking), the 
philosophy is the definition of its direction, while the psychology consists 


1 B. C. Law, Concepts of Buddhism, 3 Quoted by Radltakrahnan Indian 

p. 77 Philosophy, i p. 658 

1 Buddhist Logic, I p. 9 



DEVELOPMENTS IN HINDUISM 419 

in the analysis of the forces and conditions that favour or hinder the 
progress on that way .’ 1 


C. HINDUISM 

Contemporaneous with the development of theistic Buddhism we come 
across varieties of theistic thought in Hinduism emerging in this period. 
The notion of a personal God with whom most intimate relations could 
be established by the devotee is at the focus of religious consciousness. 
The deities, Vishnu and Siva, come to the forefront and Brahma the 
Creator is thrust into the background. He becomes so subordinated, for 
example, to Vishnu that he springs from his navel and is reared up on a 
lotus stalk. 

The most important epics — the Ramayaria and Mahabharata — glorify 
the heroes Rama and Krishna and treat them as the incarnations of 
Vishnu, the benignant and merciful God. He is not only the God of mercy 
but also the God of beauty. The notion of soundarya strikes the new note. 
This ravishes the heart of the devotees. Of Rama it is said that the Rishis 
wished they had been born women to react to this god of beauty as only 
women can do. The aesthetic aspect of Rama is kept in proportion by the 
idea of Rama as a morally perfect hero. He is said to be gurtavan and 
vfryavan, full of excellence and valour. He is dharmajha, knows what 
dharma is. He is satyavakya and dridhavrata, always truthful in speech 
and firm to carry out his resolves. The idea of God the beautiful, the 
ravisher of hearts, finds its acme in the Bhagavata purana. 

So far as the religious philosophy of the Mahabharata is concerned, we 
observe the gradual relaxation of the idea of Non-duality, of an indeter- 
minable Absolute which had been propounded by Yajnavalkya. A certain 
dualism becomes inevitable for the generation of bhakti or loving devotion 
to God. The world as a process of evolution in which the unmanifest 
becomes manifested takes the place of a crude theory of creation de novo 
which is altogether given up. Yoga which meant physico-psychological 
discipline leading to the stilling of all mental activity now becomes a 
method of setting oneself en rapport with the Divine who is the Inner 
Ruler, Immortal, both in the soul of man and in the universe outside 
of him. The concept of Antaryami or immanent deity comes to be 
reconciled with the notion of a transcendent deity. God is in the 
universe but yet transcends it in the sense that the universe does not 
exhaust his content. He is always ten inches ahead ( dasangulam ). Yoga 
becomes a way of life, a method of communion with God but is not, 
however, a mere ‘ascesis’ or repression of desires or the forcible ex- 
pulsion of disturbing thoughts. Desires have full play here; only they 
have to tend Godward. Out of such ideas arose the schools of 
the Bhagavatas who believed in the chastening of emotions and the 


1 The Psychological Attitude of Early Buddhist Philosophy, p. 12 



420 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


sublimation of desires. All the warmth of deep human affection is 
imported into the relation between God and man. 

Vasudeva-Krishna becomes the Bhagavan, a deity who possesses six 
beatific qualities, 1 jnana, sakti, bala, aisvarya, virya and tejas. 

The new aspects of this religion are love and grace, reconciliation of the 
immanence and transcendence of God and finally the avowal that the path 
of deliverance lies through the heart’s devotion rather than through the 
laborious travail of cerebration. Bhakti is an easier path of deliverance 
than jnana. These terms acquire a new connotation in this context not 
excepting ‘karma’ which has its meaning happily stretched to compass 
all the activities of man, ‘the daily round, the common task’. These are 
discharged in a spirit of dedication to the Lord, in a spirit of disinterested 
devotion ( nishkama karma) which does not barter or hanker after a requi- 
tal of the love that pours out of the heart of the devotee. No reciprocity 
is demanded for there can be no barter in true love. Life regulated in the 
light of this ideal becomes consecrated, and every little act is elevated 
to an act of worship . 1 2 This is the philosophy of Bhakti that finds the 
most majestic expression in the treatise, the Bhagavadgita , sandwiched in 
the Mahabharata. Karma, thus rendered becomes kaihkarya (service), 
a term and an ideal that played an important part in the later development 
of South Indian Vaishnavism. 

To fortify this position from the attacks of other Vedantins who were 
absolutists, there sprang up currents of philosophic thought out of which 
sprang the famous Vedantic systems of Visishtadvaita and Dvaita. 

The cults of Vishnu and Siva had a common content so far as the Bhakti 
element was concerned and even on the side of philosophy they tended to 
be more dvaitic than advaitic. The Bhagavadgita, which probably was 
composed at this time, was a wonderful confluence of currents of philoso- 
phic and religious thought. Samkhya, Yoga and Purva Mimamsa con- 
ceptions are translated here into a different world which has a close 
bearing on man’s need for a personal God. The Purusha and the Prakriti 
here become the kshetra and the kshetrajha. Dharma ceases to be merely 
the punctilious performance of religiously prescribed duties aiming at 
the attainment of perishable results. It is discarded ( sarvadharman pari- 
tyajya) in favour of an act of self-surrender or self-abnegation when the 
entire burden of obtaining deliverance for the individual soul rests on 
God himself. The worshipper casts his burden as it were on God himself 
(bharanyasa). 

Another interesting departure from the accustomed sense of a term is 
that illustrated by the term samnyasa. This ceases in the Gita to be 
‘ascesis’ but becomes not renunciation of action or mere meditation or 
contemplativeness, but the inculcation of a spirit of renunciation in action 

1 See articles on the Bhagavatas by 2 Svakarmana tam abhyarchya siddhim 
G. Grierson in l A., 1908, xxxvu Sept. vindanti mdnavah ( Bh . Gita) 

& Dec. 



SYSTEMS OF HINDU PHILOSOPHY 


421 


reminiscent of the Upanishadic injunction ‘tena tyaktena bhuhjithah ’, 
participation in renunciation. It presupposes a detached enjoyment of 
life and not an abandonment of life. When Arjuna asks Krishna ‘samnya- 
sasya mahabaho tatvamichchhami veditum ’ (I desire to know the meaning 
of the principle of sanyasa or renunciation) Krishna clinches the whole 
issue by replying ‘ Kdmyanam karmanam nyasam samnyasam kavayo viduli 
i.e. sanyasa is the laying aside of action the object of which is to covet 
a perishable result. This asserts the Gita doctrine of the categorical 
imperative and the abandonment of the hypothetical imperative both in 
religion and morals. This marks the culmination of religious and ethical 
thought during this period. 

PHILOSOPHICAL SUTRAS 

The spontaneous flow of fresh religious and philosophical thought was, 
it might be said, dammed and canalised in several ways in order to irrigate 
varied fields of philosophical speculation; and this process gave rise to the 
sutra or aphoristic style of writing. As Farquhar remarks, the sutra ‘was 
little more than an index of topics which, committed to memory, enabled 
the student to carry the instructions of his teacher in his mind .’ 1 

Vedic authoritarianism hastened to crystallise concepts in two sets of 
sutras or aphorisms, one trying to preserve the concepts of Vedic ritua- 
lism and the other tending to cherish the Upanishadic teachings. The 
former gave rise to the sutras of the Purva Mimamsa school and the 
latter to the Uttara Mimamsa or Vedanta sutras which later received 
elaborate comment from Sankara, Ramanuja and Madhvacharya, the 
propounders respectively of the later Vedantic schools of Advaita, 
Visishjadvaita and Dvaita. 

The period under review saw the emergence of sutras of the other four 
systems of Indian Philosophy as well, namely Nyaya, Vaiseshika, San- 
khya and Yoga. These were the rationalistic, though orthodox, systems 
of Indian Philosophy which accepted Sabda only as a confirmatory 
pramana and not as originative in its character. They began with an 
empirical endeavour to study the facts of experience with a view to dis- 
cover principles of coherence which gave meaning to these facts. The 
sutras presuppose a period of discussion and deliberation long anterior 
to their definite formulation. The authors are known just by their names. 
Zimmer says: ‘The founders, actual or supposed — Kapila, Patanjali, 
Jaimini, Vyasa, Gautama and Kanada — should probably be regarded 
as schools rather than as individuals. Nothing is known of them 
but their names. Their sutras stand at the beginning of a copious 
literature of commentators, yet are themselves but the last terms of a long 
foregoing period of discussion, each of them including arguments against 
all others. Moreover, without the commentaries the texts would be 


1 Outline of the Religious Literature of India, p. 124 



422 RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 

unintelligible. They are not the self-sufficient works of independent 
thinkers, but mnemonic “threads” ( sutras ) for the guidance of oral 
teaching in the ancient Indian style of the guru and his adhikarin.’ 1 

The range of the period during which the original sutras of the six 
systems ( shaddarsana ) were formulated has been taken to be as wide as 
from 500 B.c. to a.d. 500. A historical survey of the thought contained 
in these sutras may now be attempted, the sutras being considered in then- 
logical order for convenience. 

The two important logical systems of thought that are closely related 
to each other and supplement each other are the Nyaya and Vaiseshika 
darsanas, expounded respectively in the Nyayasutras of Gautama and the 
Vaiseshika sutras of Kanada. The Nyayasutras consist of five books 
of two chapters each, and the Vaiseshika sutras of ten books of two chap- 
ters each. The philosophy of the Nyayasutras may be summarised thus : 
the goal of individual life is salvation. Salvation is liberation or final 
deliverance from all that hampers its right to a joyous existence. Salvation 
can only result from a knowledge of the things that really matter. There 
are sixteen topics about which full knowledge must be obtained. This 
is the knowledge that liberates. Nyaya is so called because it ‘goes into’ 
these topics and investigates thoroughly their nature. Incidentally, Nyaya 
developed a technique of controversy ( vada vidyd) which was adopted by 
all the later philosophical thinkers. Nyaya studies the tools of think- 
ing and of the attainment of truth. It lays bare the obstacles to thinking 
and distinguishes carefully straight thinking from crooked thinking 
( hetvabhasa ). The Nyaya accepts four means of proof, viz. perception, 
inference, comparison (or analogy) and scripture. It also gives a place 
to the intuition of seers (yogi-pratyaksha ) which has the same characteris- 
tic of immediacy as that of sense perception. The existence of God, 
however, is proved by the following argument: from effects we infer 
causes. Anything that produces an effect must exist. ‘The choir of 
heaven and the furniture of the earth’ and the multifarious products we 
witness around us must have an omniscient Being as the cause of their 
creation. They are produced effects in the same way as pots are produced 
effects. It is thus that the Creator of the world is inferred. A characteris- 
tic of a produced effect is that it is made up of component parts. Any- 
thing that is formed of component parts must have an agency for its for- 
mation. The existence of a creator is inferred here merely on the ground 
that the world is a produced effect. 

According to the Nyaya school, the function of logical reasoning is 
to support right knowledge. Logic is like a fence or a hedge reared up 
to protect the seedlings of great truths. The Nyaya dialectic takes into 
account three processes with which logical reasoning is closely associated. 
They are discussion (vada), controversy ( jalpa ) and cavil (vitaif^d). Dis- 
cussion is that carried on by a student with his teacher with the object of 


1 Philosophies of India, p. 605 



NYAYA VAISESHIKA 


423 


discovering truth. Neither victory nor defeat is the aim here. These 
motives, however, arise as aims in controversy and cavil which are 
sophistical practices pure and simple. 

The discovery of right answers to our honest questions ought to be 
the work of the intellect. Having discovered these answers and having 
attained sincere conviction about the goal of deliverance and the means 
to it, one should prepare oneself to sail to the unknown. When the 
enquirer reaches the other shore, the shore of final release, he experiences 
nan-sensuous eternal bliss. This state is also described as cessa- 
tion of consciousness and a release from pain without any presence of 
positive pleasure, for there can be no pleasure without pain. These two 
descriptions imply a schism in the Nyaya school itself as to the nature 
of moksha or apavarga. The Nyaya philosophers are of the view that 
this controversy cannot be settled by mere logic. 

The authorship of the Vaiseshika sutras is ascribed to Kanada who 
is also called Kasyapa. Kanada means ‘atom-eater’. He was perhaps 
so nicknamed because he was so totally absorbed in his atomic theory that 
it was considered to be his daily food. The philosophy of the Vaiseshika 
sutras is substantially the same as the philosophy of the Nyaya. The logic 
of the Vaiseshika is the logic of the Nyaya, but while Nyaya developed 
the epistemological side of this compound philosophy, Vaiseshika deve- 
loped its cosmological side. 

The Vaiseshika sutras consider that the beatitude of final release 
{moksha) results from a clear knowledge of six categories ( shatpadartha ) 
within which God, individual souls and the whole of this cosmos are 
comprised. The six categories are substance ( dravya ), quality (gun a), 
action (karma), generality (samanya), particularity (visesha) and co-inher- 
ence (samavaya). Of substance again nine classes (nava dravyani) are 
enumerated: earth (prithivi), water (ap), light ( tejas ), air (vdyii), ether 
(akasa), space (dik), time (kala), soul ( atma ) and mind (mams). Earth 
possesses the quality of smell ( gandha ), water has taste (rasa), light has 
illumination (prabha), air has touch (sparsa) and ether has sound ( sabda ), 
as its appropriate quality (guria). Space is indicated by ideas of ‘here’ and 
‘there’ and time by means of the ideas of ‘now’ and ‘then’. The existence 
of soul is proved by self-consciousness or the ‘I-idea’. Manas is the inter- 
nal organ (antahkarana) of the soul. Qualities inhere in substances, so that 
they are never perceived apart from them. Samavaya is the category that 
indicates the fact of intimate and internal relation of substances and 
qualities. These six categories of things comprise all the objects of know- 
ledge. The whole world is made up of them. The realisation of their 
likenesses and differences (visesha) is the means of attaining salvation. 

The atman (self) is located within material substances. It is of two 
different kinds. One is the individual soul and the other is the supreme 
soul. The gods, men and the lower animals are all individual souls, and 
the great God is the other kind of atman. 

The individual who faithfully performs the duties enjoined on him by 



424 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


the Deity is freed from the bondage of samsara. He who shirks these 
duties will ever be tethered to human bondage. The scriptures are the 
revelations of the commandments of God which man is enjoined to 
obey. 

In the state of moksha the instruments and the earthly habiliments of the 
soul will cease to function. All pain is destroyed. When a person grows 
weary and disgusted with his life of samsara, he longs for final liberation 
and in proportion to the intensity with which he longs for it and the efforts 
he puts forth in that direction, he approaches nearer and nearer to the 
goal of final beatitude. 

The doctrines of the Sankhya are ascribed to Kapila. The oldest 
account of the Sankhya is found in the Sahhkyapra xachana sutra which 
consists of six chapters. Kapila teaches that the final liberation of the 
individual soul is attainable only through knowledge of ultimate princi- 
ples. This knowledge consists of a discrimination ( viveka ) of the mani- 
fest ( vyakta ) and tHe unmanifest (avyakta). This discrimination yields 
the knowledge of the individual soul ( purusha ). The knowledge of the 
individual soul leads to the cessation of the three miseries ( duhkhatraya 
nivritti). The three miseries are adhyatmika , adhibhautika and adhidai- 
vika. The adhyatmika misery consists of bodily and mental ailments. 
The adhibhautika is caused by external agents e.g. germs, insects and 
other pests. The adhidaivika is that which is caused by cataclysmic 
natural phenomena like floods, earthquake, volcanic eruption, heat waves, 
cold waves and other disturbances of the kind over which we have 
no control. 

By obtaining the knowledge of the atman or the individual soul, the 
above-mentioned miseries cease to afflict us. The freedom which results 
to the soul from other means than the knowledge of atman is illusory 
freedom. The attainment of heaven by ritualistic merit is not to be 
accounted real freedom, for it is tainted by the three strands ( gunas ) that 
constitute the warp and woof of human existence sattva, rajas and tamas. 

Knowledge of the twenty-five principles enumerated by Sankhya is said 
to lead to the knowledge of the atman or self. The twenty-five principles 
are the Purusha (individual soul), Prakriti or primordial nature, the 
great principle of intellect ( mahat ), the principle of egoity ( ahamkara ). 
To these are added the sensations of sound, touch, colour, taste and smell, 
and the sense organs — the ear, the skin, the eye, the tongue, the nose, and 
again speech, hands, feet, the organ of evacuation, the organ of reproduc- 
tion, and manas; and finally earth and water, light, air and ether. This 
world is made up of the principles enumerated above. 

Everything in the world is a product of Prakriti. Prakriti is one, eternal 
and non-intelligent. The atman is characterised by passivity and indiffer- 
ence, but somehow comes to be influenced by the three qualities of Pra- 
kriti. Through the association of Prakriti with Atman possessed of 
consciousness, there arises creation. Prakriti (Nature) is blind without 
Atman (Spirit), and Atman (Spirit) is inactive without Prakriti (Nature). 



SANKHYA PLURALISM 


425 


It is only by the co-operation of the blind Prakriti and the lame Purusha 
that life’s road becomes visible and passable. The taciturn and tranquil 
Purusha becomes restless and active under the operation of Prakriti. 
Creation starts out of this primal interaction. Prakriti is characterised by 
the equilibrium of the three qualities of sattva, rajas, and tamas. When 
sattva predominates it gives rise to happiness and love, tranquillity and 
modesty, health and lightness of body, patience and forgiveness, courage, 
magnanimity, self-restraint and the illumination of knowledge. When 
rajas is chief, there flares up wrath, greed, egotism, worldly activity and 
boastfulness. When tamas lifts up its dark heavy hood, it produces 
drowsiness, sloth, stupidity, ignorance and carelessness. 

The mahat or the great principle of intellect is produced out of the 
Prakriti. Out of mahat emerges the principle of egoity ( ahamkara ). 
Out of these are produced the five redumentary principles ( tanmatras ). 
These are subtle elements out of which are produced the five cognitive 
senses ( jhanendriya ) and five conative senses ( karmendriya ) and the five 
elements ( pahchabhutas ). The mams is regarded as the eleventh organ. 
Out of other things derived from the quality of tamas the elements, namely 
earth, water, light, air and ether have been generated. 

This account of the manifested universe is known as Parinamavada in 
Sankhya philosophy. The essence of it is, in the words of Dr. Radha- 
krishnan, that ‘ Prakriti , which contains within itself the possibilities of 
all things, develops into the apparatus of thought as well as the objects 
of thought ’. 1 

The Sankhya regards the world as also subject to periodical dissolu- 
tion. At such times, the individual souls are absorbed into Prakriti and 
become possessed of subtle bodies. Under the influence of the quali- 
ties of Prakriti and of their own karma the individual souls assume 
various physical forms at the time of creation. In fact, the whole of 
this cosmos exists in a subtle ( sukshma ) form in Prakriti and becomes 
manifest in creation. There is no creation de novo. It is only the un- 
manifest becoming manifest, the avyakta becoming vyakta. Sankhya 
repudiates the asatkarya vada, i.e. things coming into existence out of 
nothing. ‘Ex nihilo nihil fit ’ is the essential Sahkhyan creed of causality. 
If it is possible for an entity to come into existence out of non-entity, any- 
thing can come out of anything. Even things like horns on a hare would 
become possible. If the oil pressed out of sesamum seeds does not already 
exist in the sesamum, then it must be possible to squeeze it out of a hand- 
ful of sand. This is how Sankhya refutes the asatkarya vada. 

Sankhya philosophy is pluralistic in character and admits of a plura- 
lity of individual souls. If the soul of all beings, it argues, is the same 
and only one, then all would have to die at the same time or be born at 
the same time. Or when one man saw anything, all would have to see 
the same thing at the same time. Hence the plurality follows as a logical 

1 Indian Philosophy, n p. 266 
54 



426 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


consequence, and the idea of non-duality in regard to atman becomes 
inadmissible. 

So far as man’s activity in the world is concerned the Sankhya specifies 
two kinds of injunctions in accordance with which he has to act. The 
first are injunctions inculcating such duties as tend to turn men away from 
worldly activity and bestow on them the final freedom of the soul. 
The other kind of prescribed duties leads men to worldly activity. The 
ritualistic sacrifices, enjoined in scripture are all intended for the axtain- 
ment of certain desired objects. The ritualistic duties pertain to active 
worldly life in as much as they impel men to live the life of worldly 
activity. 

By righteousness men rise high; by unrighteousness they sink down. 
The final release of the soul results exclusively from knowledge. It is 
by ignorance that man incurs the bondage of samsara. 

The Sankhya system of Kapila is regarded as non-theistic or nirisvara 
Sankhya. It took a theistic form in the philosophy of the Yoga surras , 
which is also termed sesvara Sankhya, to which we shall now turn. 

The Yoga sutras, as is well known, are ascribed 10 Patanjali. He is 
looked upon as the promulgator of the science of Yoga. The knowledge 
of the twenty-five principles of the Sankhya is the metaphysical founda- 
tion of the Yoga system. The Yoga repudiates the view that mere theo- 
retical knowledge of the principles will bring about the emancipation 
of the soul. It is only by the practice of the technique of Yoga that one 
can attain to that condition. It is by Yoga only that one can cleanse one- 
self of the stain of evil that clings to the body. The mind also can be 
cleansed by following the path of Yoga— a path which leads to freedom 
from attachment to worldly objects. Man’s life is subject to five afflictions 
(pahchakleMh), — ignorance, desire, aversion, egoiiy and anxious attach- 
ment. Ignorance is practically at the root of the other afflictions. Tt is 
the superimposition of the idea of the self on the body which is non-self 
( anatmanyatmabuddhi ). 

The body is composed of the five elements of nature. But the owner 
of the body is the self that is different from it. The sense of proprietor- 
ship of progeny and property— the sense of ‘mine’— is wholly due 
to the lack of knowledge that the self is different from the body. When 
this ignorance is destroyed and when a man is freed from the desire and 
aversion which are due to that ignorance, he becomes fit for the practice 
of Yoga to attain the final freedom of the soul. Yoga is that self-abiding 

of the soul consequent upon the controlling of the activities of the mind 

( Yogah chitta-vritti-nirodhah). When the mind is controlled, the self abides 
in its native condition. In life, man should apnly himself practically to 
such work as leads him to the practice of Yoga.The practical application 
consists in tapas (penance), in the silent repetition of mantras (prayer 
formulas), and in firm love and devotion to God. Sloth and sickness, 
vacillation of mind and want of faith, deluded perception, cheerlessness 
of mind, ardent attachment to the objects of the senses, defects in 



YOGA 


427 


breathing and other functions of the body, these and similar evils can be 
destroyed by earnest devotion to God {isvarapranidhana). The puri- 
fication of the mind as a means to the successful practice of Yoga is 
accomplished through the continued exercise of friendliness and right 
feelings generally. The feeling of friendliness must be exercised in relation 
to the virtuous and that of pity in relation to persons in distress. One 
must cultivate indifference in relation to those that are sinful. 

Devoted service, association with the good, the repeated endeavour 
to live the life of holiness, the mental comprehension of the inner soul — 
by means of these and other similar endeavours the mind of the yogin 
becomes purified and is enabled to conceive correctly the nature of things 
in the world. 

When that which is harmful to the practice of Yoga is removed, there 
arises the illumination of knowledge. The constituents of Yoga are 
eight in number ( ashtangci yoga). They are internal self-control ( yama ), 
external regulation ( niyama ), bodily postures ( asana ), control of breath 
( pranayama ), withdrawal of the senses from outside objects ( pratyahara ), 
fixity of attention ( dharana ), meditative concentration ( dhyana ) and 
attentive self-realisation ( samadhi ). 

The five elements of internal self-control {yama) are: to abstain from 
inflicting injury {ahimsa), truthfulness (satya), abstention from stealing 
(asteya), celibacy {brahmacharya) and freedom from acquisitive cove- 
tousness {aparigraha). The elements of external regulation {niyama) 
are : cleanliness {saucha), happy contentment {santosha), austerity {tapas), 
the repetition of religious hymns and the worship of the Lord. Celibacy 
leads to the acquisition of energy and physical and mental purity and 
strength. The whole constitution becomes purified. By the successful 
practice of samyama or restraint the yogin attains the expansion of the 
vision of wisdom. 

Before the lower steps have been achieved no attempt should be made 
on the higher. The Yoga technique insists on the principle of gradual- 
ness in the acquisition of yogic self-realisation. The ascent is slow, 
and difficult, and each step must be firmly secured before setting foot 
on the next. By the constant practice of Yoga, the colour of the yogin' s 
body acquires a beautiful hue. He gradually wins to the possession 
of many extraordinary powers and perfections. The perfect yogin gains 
release from the debility of old age. Soon after, with the aid of renun- 
ciation, freedom from the recurrence of rebirths {samsara) results to the 
yogin. He is then liberated. The last sutra states; ‘The dissolution of 
qualities in their source, when nothing remains to be achieved, is 
liberation; the revelation of the power of self, the foundation of the 
beauty of self.’ 1 

The author of the Mimamsasutras was Jaimini. His date is uncertain, 
and is put somewhere between 600 and 200 b.c., (this period being 

1 iv. sutra 37 — Patanjali, Aphorisms of Yoga, Eng. trans. Purohit Swami. 



428 


RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS 


generally known as the sutra period). The word Mimamsa is derived from 
the root man which means to consider, examine or investigate. The 
examination that is undertaken here is the examination of the Vedas. 
The Mimamsasutras concern themselves with the correct interpretation 
of Vedic ritual and texts. The philosophy of the Mimamsasutras 
is summarised in the following paragraphs. 

The contents of the Vedas are divisible into four kinds: vidhis (or 
mandatory injunctions), arthavadas (or explanatory disquisitions), man- 
tras (metrical hymns) and namadheyas (or names of sacrifices etc.). 
Man becomes subject to bondage if he performs karmas that are prohibi- 
ted in the scriptures. The Vedas teach us what our duties are and what 
they are not. They also teach us that the atman or self is different from 
the intellect, the senses, and the body, and is all-pervading and unchang- 
ing. The Vedas are not personal productions. They are possessed 
of an intrinsic authoritativeness. Sacrifices are to be performed as they 
are enjoined by the mandatory injunctions in the Vedas. What duty is 
and what it is not fall exclusively within the scope of the authority of the 
Vedas. The karma which is enjoined exclusively by the Vedas yields the 
salvation of final deliverance. One should perform the daily obliga- 
tory (nitya) and the occasionally obligatory ( naimittika ) works to avoid 
the sinfulness that will otherwise arise. Those who solely and faithfully 
adhere to them, will also attain unsurpassable good at last. The ritua- 
listic act leaves behind its own invisible result called apurva which will 
come to maturity in this or another life, without the intervention of an 
extra-cosmic Deity. 

Finally we have the Vedanta sutras the authorship of which is ascribed 
to Badarayana who is regarded as identical with Vyasa (‘compiler'). Of 
all the sutras, the Vedanta sutras have exercised the greatest influence on 
the course of Indian philosophic thought. The predominant influence 
of the Vedanta sutras has overshadowed the sutras of other systems of 
Indian philosophy. As the very first sutra indicates ( athatho Brahma- 
jijhasd), the enquiry into Brahman, (i.e. ultimate reality) constitutes the 
subject matter of the Vedanta sutras. The sutras are mostly based on 
Upanishadic texts the import of which is Brahman. 

The self (atman) is different from the intellect, the senses and the body. 
The true knowledge of Ultimate Reality cannot be obtained by means of 
mere works. Works, by means of their inherent power, impart an 
inward leaning to the mind (chittasuddhi). Having fulfilled their purpose, 
they disappear like clouds at the end of the rainy season. Nescience 
(avidya) in respect of the self (atman) is a view of things contrary to 
the true knowledge of the nature of the self revealed in the Vedanta texts. 

According to the view of those who truly know the self, the self is what 
remains untouched by any qualities such as that of being an agent. On 
the other hand, those who take their stand on the sections of the scriptures 
which deal with ritualistic works, karamakanda, as well as those who rely 
upon the sections which deal with deities, devatdkdnda, cannot avoid 



VEDANTA 


429 


treating the self as an agent or doer. The soul does not possess the 
characteristic of Brahminhood and of other such class distinctions. 

That which shines forth after all the five sheaths ( panchamayakoia ) 
of the soul are one after another declared to be ‘not this, not this’, is the 
supreme Brahman. 

The body is merely annamaya (made up of food) and cannot be the 
atman as the Lokayatas declare. The prana (or the principal vital air) 
also cannot be the atman, because it is aerial and non-intelligent like 
the external air of the atmosphere. The senses also cannot be the 
atman because, like a lamp, they are mere instruments of knowledge. 
The manas (faculty of attention) is not the atman because it is unsteady 
and does not exist during dreamless sleep. Since dreamless sleep 
culminates in happiness, this happiness alone constitutes the essential 
nature of the self (atman). The prana supports the sheath of the self 
which is made up of food ; the manas supports the sheath of the self 
which consists of prana ; and the Supreme Self who is Existence-Know- 
ledge-Bliss (sachchidananda) supports the sheath made up of the manas. 
When the atman abides in the manas, which is itself swallowed up by 
the darkness of ignorance, then the self is known to be in the state of 
dreamless sleep, which is called prajna and is indicated by the charac- 
teristic of ananda (bliss). 

The self in its essence consists solely of intelligence ( chidghana ). Only 
characterised by limiting conditions (e.g. when abiding in the body) 
does it become the doer and the enjoyer, affected by desires and tainted 
in its nature by egoity and the like. Hampered by these limiting conditions 
and enveloped in bondage, the atman nose-led by its karma wanders 
about from body to body and attains different worlds such as the world 
of pitris. Through the performance of prohibited works it goes to hell 
and similar unpleasant places. Through the acquisition of philosophic 
wisdom, it attains union with Brahman. 

As the self can be known only by intuitive experience and is incapable 
of being realised by study, logic, or by any similar discipline, it transcends 
speech and thought. The path marked out by the Vedanta sutras is the 
path of religious discipline to be followed by those who have renounced 
all worldly attachments. 

The sutra period is the seed-bed for the full flowering of systems 
nourished and trimmed by hosts of commentators whose genius for 
system-making evokes our admiration. The systems of philosophy 
surveyed here have the common aim — to find a remedy for the ills of life 
and to secure eternal peace by the eradication of ignorance and suffering. 



Chapter XIV 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (POST-MAURYAN) 
AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL-REARING 

T he conditions of agricultural production in the Maurya age seem to 
have continued, unchanged, in the centuries immediately following. 
As before, the bounties of nature were reinforced by the efforts of man. 
‘A double rainfall in the course of each year’ had been noted by Megas- 
thenes; the Milindapanha (1 14) tells us that there were three regular rains in 
the year besides others which were occasional. This abundance did not, 
however, prevail everywhere. In a Mahabharata passage (n, 5, 76-78) the 
construction of large and full tanks at proper distances, so as to make 
agriculture independent of rainfall, finds mention among the duties of the 
righteous king ; the allowance of seeds and provisions and the grant of 
agricultural loans at low rates of interest to the cultivators are also 
enjoined on him. The process of cultivation was well understood. From 
the Milindapanha (416) we learn that rice-fields were provided with water- 
courses as well as embankments for storing water and bringing the crops 
to maturity. Another passage in the book (360) describes the successive 
agricultural operations as consisting of removing weeds, thorns and 
stones from the soil, ploughing, sowing, irrigating, fencing, ■ watching, 
reaping and threshing. The records of this period bear ample testimony 
to the richness and variety of India’s agricultural products. The crops 
mentioned in contemporary Indian works include a remarkably large 
variety of cereals and other produce. What is more, the medical works 
of Charaka and Susruta contain elaborate classifications of cereals, 
fruits, and vegetables accompanied by descriptions of the characteristic 
qualities of each of them. Among India’s agricultural crops Pliny(xii 
4, xviii 10, 13) mentions rice, barley and sesamum ; he also refers 
to cotton and other fibrous plants (‘trees which bear wool' and ‘trees from 
which they make a kind of linen cloth’) as well as sugar, the last being more 
esteemed than the Arabian product. Indian authors refer to a fine variety 
of rice (sail) fit for use by kings. They also tell us how sugarcane was 
passed through presses to extract the much prized juice. The attention 
given to the rearing of garden produce in this period is illustrated by other 
facts. Among the duties of the wife of a city-bred man of fashion, the 
author of the Kamasutra mentions (iv 1, 29) that of collecting the seeds 
of vegetables and of medicinal herbs, and planting them in the proper 
season. The growth of mangoes in parks and of sugarcane in plantations 
is incidentally mentioned in the Jaina Acharahga Siitra (ii 7. 2. 2). 1 

1 Lists of agricultural products: — (i) Rice, etc. : Mbh. xiii 111. 71 ; (ii) Fine rice 

barley, sesamum, beans, mustard, wheat, (Soli) ordinary rice (rrihi), barley, millet. 



PLANT PRODUCTS 


431 


Aromatics, spices and other plant products known to the earlier times 
were grown extensively during this period. In a list of the precious 
articles with which the earth is filled, the Milindapanha (382) includes 
camphor, aloes, tagara ( a perfumed shrub), sandal-wood and saffron. 
Red sandal-wood, of which several varieties including gosirsha (‘cow’s 
head’) are known to Kautilya, is singled out for praise in a number of 
texts. In Pliny's list of Indian plant-products (xii 41, xxiv 14) are 
included pepper, costus, lycium, bdellium, the macair (bark) and 
cardamom. In the Ramayana and Mahabharata as in Kautilya, the 
Malaya hill (the Western Ghats below the Kaveri) is directly mentioned 
as a source of sandal-wood. Again, the sandal-wood of Banaras finds 
special mention in the Milindapanha. Indirect references in the Maha- 
bliarata suggest that Kamarupa (the Brahmaputra valley) supplied 
sandal-wood as well as aloe-wood, while kaleyaka (a variety of fragrant 
wood) as obtained from the north-eastern Himalayas. The gosirsha 
and other varieties of sandal-wood are said to be the products of 
Rishabha hill in the southern direction in the parallel topographical 
lists of the Rdmayanta and the Buddhist Saddharma-snnityupasthana- 
siitra. On the other hand we learn from a story in the Divyavadana that 
gosirsha sandal-wood had to be imported into Western India where it was 
sold at a fancy price as a curative for fever. 1 To judge from the list of 
India’s exports in the Periplus. a large number of aromatic and other 
plants was cultivated extensively (no doubt in their natural habitats) to 
meet the heavy Roman demand at the ports. It would thus appear that 
costus, lycium and spikenard were extracted from the slopes of the high 
Himalayas, while r.ard and bdellium were found in the north-western 
plains of India. Pepper, according to the Periplus, was grown in the 
district of Cottonara (Kottanadu, the territory around Quilon and Kotta- 
yam), while cinnamon was cultivated in the interior of the Malabar ports. 
The fertile district of Ariaca (Kathiawar and the adjoining mainland), 
according to the same authority, produced wheat, rice, sugarcane and 


kudrusa grain, beans, wheat, sesamum, 
vetch: Mi In. p. 267; (Hi) Fine rice, 
ordinary rice, barley, husked rice, 
sesamum, beans, peas etc.: ibid. pp. 
106-7. Cf. Sutra, i 263 etc. Classifica- 
tions of plant-products etc.: Charaka. 
Sutrasthana, xxvii 5-10, 26-33; Sui- 
ruta, Sutrasthana, xlvi 5-52, 142-297, 
312-44. 370-1. Red salt, food for 
kings (Miln. 252). Sali rice, fit food for 
kings unlike the kiimudabhandika var- 
iety of Aparanta which is fit only for 
hired labourers and slaves: ibid. 292. 
Sali, chief of all foodgrains: ibid. 166. 
Sugar-cane presses: Susruta. Sutras- 
thana, xlv 157-8, Miln. p. 166, Utt. Sti. 
xix 53. Sugar-cane juice, the best of 
juices: Siitra, i 6. 20. 

Gold jars filled with sandal-juice from 
the Malaya and Dardura hills presented 


by Chola and Pandya kings: Mbh, 
ii 52, 33. Malaya and Dardura as 
sources of sweet-scents: Ram. ii 91. 
24. Anointing with Kasi sandal-wood 
in enumeration of layman's toilet; 
Miln. pp. 243-348. Sandal-weod and 
aloe-wood (from Kamarupa?) given as 
tribute by mlechchha kings of the Bengal 
sea-coast: Mbh. ii 30, 28, Sandal- wood, 
aloe-wood and Kaliyaka (kaleyaka) 
(from the Himalayan country 9 ) given 
as tribute by Kirata chiefs: ibid, ii 52, 
10. For Kautilya’s refs, see KA. ii 11. 
with commr’s identifications. Gosir- 
sha etc. found in Rishabha hill: Ram, 
iv, 41, 39-40 and Saddharma-smrityu- 
pasthana-siitra, quoted JA. 1918, ii p, 
54. Story of gosirsha being imported into 
Supparaka and sold for the king’s 
treatment: Divy. pp. 30-1 



432 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


sesame oil. Cardamom, then as now, was cultivated in Malabar and 
Travancore, while the macair tree grew on the slopes of the lower Hima- 
layas and on the hills of Southern India. 1 

The rearing of animals, like the cultivation of land, is included among 
the traditional occupations of the Vaisya in the Smritis. From the 
Periplus we know that in the latter half of the first century a.d. Ariaca 
pastured huge herds of cattle, and obtained dairy products in sufficient 
quantities for export to East Africa. Of other domestic animals, horses 
of the best breeds were imported, as in Maurya times, from the North- 
West and the adjoining regions. But an important local breed appears 
to have been known to Eastern India. Stud bulls are referred to by 
Manu (ix 150) in connexion with his rules for division of a father’s 
property among his sons. 2 


INDUSTRY 


It is a curious fact that the occupations of the artisan and the crafts- 
man are assigned in the Manu-Smriti to Sudras only in times of distress. 3 
Nevertheless, various industries were pursued in this period as before with 
conspicuous success. 

Indirect references in the Mahabharata suggest that the preparation 
of costly skins and furs was, as in the time of Kautilya, a valued industry 
in the north-western Himalayas as well as Eastern India. 4 In the 
Mahabharata ivory products of Eastern India are also mentioned. At 
the time of the Periplus, Dasarna (Eastern Malwa) gave its name to a 
species of ivory well known to the Greek traders of the west coast. 
Earlier, the ivory- workers of Vidisa, the capital of East Malwa. recorded 
their donation on a gateway of the Great Stupa at Sanchi. Ivory was 
used for making hair-combs, dice, and other small objects as well as 


1 For the sources of bdellium, costus, 
lycium, nard and spikenard, cinnamon, 
cardamom, Indian copal and macair, 
see Schoff, Per. tr. pp. 80, 84, 164, 
168, 169, 170, 188, 216. Costus is 
the cut-root of a tall perennial of a 
mountain species, nard is a root of 
gingej-grass, spikenard is a leaf or 
flower of a tree of a mountain species, 
while lycium and bdellium are gum- 
resins (ibid.). 

2 Cattle of Ariaca and their products: 
Per. secs. 14, 41. Horses of fancy 
colours and distinguished breeds obtain- 
ed as tribute from Rishikas, neigh- 
bours of Kamboja as well as north- 
western kings: Mbh. ii 27. 27-8. Horses 
presented by the king of Pragjyotisha 
and other eastern kings: ibid, ii 51, 
15, 34 

3 Industrial occupations of Sudras: 

M. x. 99-100 


Skins of heavenly origin’, presented by 
people of North Harivarsha or trans- 
Himalaya: Mbh. ii 28, 16. Skins of 
the kadali variety of deer in fancy 
colours presented by the king of Kam- 
boja: Mbh. ii 49, 19. Blankets made 
of the soft fur of animals living in 
holes, and of the hair of cats (all inlaid 
with gold-thread) among presents of 
the king of Kamboja: ibid, ii 51, 37. 
Skins of rahku deer and sheepskins 
3inoi !§ | h e presents of Bahllkas: ibid. 
51, 27-8. Valuable skins presented 
by the Kiratas. The Kiratas (Kirr- 
hadoi) are located by Ptolemy between 
the mouths of the Ganges and the 
Tokasanna (i.e. Naaf river, S. Levi) 
But Ram. iv 40, 25f. places them in 
the east beyond the Lauhitya (Brahma- 
putra) river and on Mt. Mandara (Mt. 
Maindros of Ptolemy, the modern Yoma 
mountain to the east of Arakan.) 



TEXTILES 


433 


ornamental sword-hilts, armour and the like . 1 

The manufacture of textiles seems to have been in the same flourishing 
condition as under the Mauryas. The enumeration of textile fabrics in 
the Brahmanical, Buddhist and Jaina works of this period is almost as 
extensive as in Kautilya’s Arthasastra. The list comprises stuffs of cotton, 
linen ( kshauma ), dukula (made from the fibres of that plant), silk (from the 
cocoons of silkworms), patrorna (washed silk?), of sheep’s wool and the 
hair of other animals, as well as cloths embroidered with patterns or with 
gold-thread. We even hear of cloth woven wholly of gold-thread. Very 
fine varieties of cottons, linens and woollens are mentioned. A pair 
of cotton garments worth one thousand karshapanas is mentioned in a 
story. In the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and other works, linen and 
woollen garments often figure as highly prized objects, while hemp 
held the lowest place in the list of textiles . 2 In Kautilya’s time Vanga 
(East Bengal) was famous for its fabrics of dukula, linen and cotton, 
Pundra (North Bengal) for dukula and patrorna, Banaras for linen and 
cotton, and Magadha for patronia; while Madhura (the capital of the Pan- 
dya kingdom), Aparanta (Konkan), Kalinga, Vatsa (the territory around 
KausambI) and Mahisha (Mysore?) were other renowned centres of the 
cotton industry. Kautilya likewise mentions two varieties of rain-proof 
woollens as products of Nepal, while the Jatakas refer to the wool of Ko- 
tumbara in the Panjab. References in the Mahabharata, the Milindapanha 
the Divyavadana and other works prove that the lower Ganges basin, 


Swords with hilts of purest ivory pre- 
sented by the king of Pragjyotisha 
(Mbh. ii 51. 16). Armour of ivory 
presented by eastern kings (ibid. 51, 
32). Ivory of Dossarene (Dasarna or 
Eastern Malwa) called by the same 
name {Per. sec. 62). Donation by the 
Vidisa ivory-workers (Luders, List. no. 
345; EL ii 278). Ivory play-dice, 
hairpins etc. at Sirkap Taxila ( ASIAR . 
1928-29, p. 57 ; 1929-30, p. 95). Ivory 
dice and decorated piece at Rairh 
(Excavs. at Rairh, p. 43). Indian ivory 
statuette (handle of metal mirror ?) 
discovered at Pompeii in 1938 (AB1A. 
1938, Intro, pp. 1-5) 

Enumerations of textile fabrics : — 
Patrorna, silk, in two varieties dukula, 
cotton, wool, linen etc.: Mbh. xiii 111, 
104-6 ; woollen and cotton yams of 
three grades, embroidered cloth, cloth 
made of hair, silk cloth and cloth made 
of bark : T. ii 179-80; cloth of hemp, 
linen, silk and wool : M. x 87; Y. iii 
36, 38 ; fabrics made of camel-hair, 
linen, hemp, cotton etc. : Bpihatkalpa- 
Sii. iv ; silk in three varieties ( paftam - 
suka, kauseya, dhautapafta), linen, 
a fabric of mixed wool and dukula, 
fabric woven from the fibre of the 


phalaka plant, cloth woven from gold- 
thread, upper garments inlaid with gems 
and gold: Divy. p. 316. Fabrics of wool, 
silk, hemp, cotton and arkatula as ex- 
amples of cloth begged for by monk or 
nun ; stuffs of blue-cotton and two other 
varieties of coton, of fibres of various 
plants, of silk (in two varieties), of 
goats’ hair and the fur of animals, of 
deerskin (in three colours) as well as 
the skins of tigers and panthers, em- 
broidered fabrics and those woven of 
gold-thread mentioned as examples of 
very expensive clothes forbidden to 
monks and nuns : Achara. Su. ii 5, 1 . 
1-5). Very fine varieties of cotton, linen 
and woollen stuffs : Mi In. p. 105. The 
story of a pair of cotton garments 
worth 1000 karshapanas: Divy. p. 276. 
Woollen and linen fabrics presented 
by king Janaka to his daughters at their 
marriage : Ram. i. 74, 4. Queens of 
Ayodhya dressed in linen for receiving 
brides on their arrival : ibid, i 77, 12. 
Linens taken as tribute by people of 
North Harivarsha : Mbh. ii 28. 16. 
‘Hempen cloth will be regarded as the 
best in the Kali Age’ : ibid, iii 190. 19. 
Hempen cloth worn by weavers at 
work: Divy. p. 83. 


55 



434 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


Banaras, Kotumbara, and Aparanta, as also the Tamil kingdoms in the 
far south were still famous for the production of textiles of different kinds. 
The Periplus mentions several seats of cotton manufactures which agree 
in part with Kautilya’s list. Thus we learn that muslins of the finest 
sort (of Vanga and Pundra?) were called Gangetic. Muslins in large 
quantities were produced in the region of Masalia (Kalinga ? ). Argaru 
(Uraiyur, the old Chola capital) gave its name to a local variety of muslin. 
Muslins, coarse dyed cloth (‘molochine’ or ‘mallow cloth’) and much or- 
dinary cloth (for stuffing) were carried to the great marts of UjjayinI (from 
Vatsa?) and Tagara (from Mahisha?) for export abroad. Ariaca pro- 
duced great quantities of cotton cloth out of its coarse variety of raw cotton, 
also for foreign export. Some cotton cloth appears to have been manufac- 
tured in the Upper Indus basin for export by way of the Indus. 1 

Compared to the wealth of material available in the Arthasastra, 
we have only the scantiest information about the condition of the 
mining and metallurgical industries during this period. Still Pliny ob- 
served (xxiv 17) that India had neither brass nor lead, but exchanged 
precious stones and pearls for them. It was no doubt because of 
this scarcity that copper, tin and lead had to be imported into 
Barygaza and the Malabar ports in the latter half of the first century 
a.d. On the other hand, according to the testimony of the Periplus, 
the manufacture of Indian iron and steel was so advanced in quality and 
quantity that they were exported from Ariaca (Kathiawar and the 
adjoining inland country) to East Africa. Indian gold was almost as 
scarce as copper, tin and lead. The ant-gold said in a Mahabharata 
passage (ii 52. 2-4) to have been presented by the Khasas and other tribes 
(living by the Sailoda river between the mountains Meru and Mandara) 
is no doubt identical with that which, according to the equally absurd story 
of Megasthenes (Strabo xv 1. 44), was obtained by the Derdai (Daradas). 
Following Tarn’s plausible interpretation of the parallel passage from 
Megasthenes, 2 we may suppose that the ant-gold of the epic was likewise 
nothing but Siberian gold, of which the source was concealed by the middle- 
men engaged in the trade. The existence of a second source of gold supply 
from Eastern India is suggested by certain references in the Mahabharata 
and an equally vague statement in the Periplus. Almost certainly this 
supply was obtained from the countries beyond India’s eastern frontier 
(Burma, the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra etc.) which were significantly 
known by the titles of Suvarnadvipa and Suvarnabhumi. Some gold, 


Seats of textile manufactures : KA. ii 
1 1 . Cloths and woollens taken as 
tribute from mlechchha kings of the 
Bengal seaboard : Mbh. ii 30, 28. 

Fine cloth inlaid with gems presented by 
Cholas and Pajjdyas : ibid, ii 52. 34. 
Shops at Sagala stored with Kasi and 
Kotumbara cloth : Miln. p. 2. Shops 
at Supparaka stored with Kasi cloth : 


Miln. p. 222. Kasi silk and cloth 
of Aparanta in enumeration of texti- 
les : Divy. p. 316 above quoted. For 
Kotumbara as place-name, see Miln. 
P- 331. ‘Gangetic muslins’, muslins of 
Masalia, ‘Argaritic muslins’, muslins 
from Ujiayini, muslins of Upper India 
Per. secs. 38, 39, 49, 51, 59, 62, 63 
1 Greeks, pp. 106-8 



METAL AND PEARL INDUSTRIES 


435 


however, may have been obtained then, as in later times, from the river- 
washings of the Chota Nagpur plateau and Assam. In the light of these 
facts we may easily explain the huge imports of gold coins in the first and 
second centuries a.d., attested alike by the contemporary Roman writers 
and the surviving specimens, especially those from South India. Gold 
bullion was exported, according to the Periplus, from the Persian Gulf 
by way of Eastern Arabia to Western India . 1 Metal-work of all types in- 
cluding the manufacture of precious metals was pursued during these times 
with energy and success. Tongue-scrapers, as we learn from the medical 
work of Charaka, were made of gold, silver, lead, copper and bronze or 
bell-metal; surgical instruments, says Susruta, should be of damasked 
steel ( saikyayasa ). The Acharanga Sutra mentions bowls made of iron, 
tin, lead and brass. The manufacture of metals, was according to the 
Smritis of this period, as in Kautilya’s Arthasastra, the subject of State 
regulation . 2 In the descriptions of cities, the literary works of this period 
invariably mention goldsmiths, silversmiths and other workers in metals 
as an element of the population . 3 Contemporary specimens of metalware 
intended for everyday use and of ornaments have been recovered from 
various sites, the former usually being made of iron, copper, brass, and the 
latter of bronze, gold, and silver . 4 

In the first centuries after Christ the phenomenal increase in the Roman 
demand for India’s pearls and gems was facilitated by the direct voyages 
of the western merchants to India. In the first century a.d. according to 
the author of the Periplus , pearl-fisheries were operated off ‘Colchi’ (Korkai 
on the TamraparnI river in the Pandya kingdom) and off the ‘Coast country’ 
(i.e. Cholamandalam), which correspond respectively to the Gulf of Manar 
and the Palk Strait. Both were evidently State monopolies, for while the 


Imports of copper, lead and tin : 
Per. secs. 49, 56. Export of Indian 
iron and steel : ibid. 6. Gold given 
as tribute by mlechchha kings of the 
Bengal seaboard : Mbh. ii 30, 27. 

Gold presented by Kiratas : ibid. 52. 
12. Gold mines said to exist in lower 
Ganges : Per. sec. 63. Gold exported 
from the Persian Gulf to Barygaza : 
Per. sec. 36. On Suvarnabhumi etc. 
and on Roman gold coins : see below. 
On the Sailoda river : see Levi, Etudes 
Asialiques, ii pp. 40-3 
Instruments etc. in Charaka-samhitd : 
Sutrasthana, v. 71 ; Susruta, Sutra sthana 
viii 29. Bowls etc. : Achard, Sit. ii 6, 1. 
Legal rates of decrease in smelting of 
metals : M. vi 71, Y. ii 178 
Workers in gold, silver, lead, tin, 
copper, brass and iron among the 
population of typical city : Miln. p. 
331. Goldsmiths among the popu- 
lation of Ayodhya : Ram. ii 83, 12f- 


4 The following may serve as examples : 
(a) Bhita : Copper, brass, iron and 
gold objects : AS1AR. 1911-12, pp. 
89-92 ; ( b ) Rairh: Bronze bangles, lead 
and bronze ear-pendants, bronze and 
gold finger-rings, bronze containers 
of unguents, bronze mirror, gold 
beads etc. : Excavations at Rairh, 
pp. 41-3 with pis.; (c) Taxila : Gold- 
ear-ring with pearls, gold beads etc’ 
at Dharmarajika Stupa site ; gold and 
silver ornaments, silver vessels, iron 
vessels and utensils, bronze and copper 
vessels etc. at Sirkap ; gold ear-rings, 
ear-pendants, bangles, medallions as 
well as silver anklets, goblets, cups, 
bowls, plates and saucers at Sirkap; 
gold and bronze ornaments, iron im- 
plements etc. at the Bhir mound (Mar-, 
shall. Guide to Taxila. 3rd ed., pp. 
50 93-4, 97, 146). The gold work from 
the Bhir mound is remarkable for the 
fine finish and delicately granulated 
and filigree designs (ibid.). 



436 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


former was worked by condemned criminals, the output of the latter was 
required to be sold only at the State capital. Another site of pearl-fisher- 
ies mentioned in the Periplus lay in the lower Ganges. Pearls, we are told 
were brought down the Ganges river through a great port on its banks to 
the south. Corroborative references to the pearl-fisheries of the extreme 
south are found in Ptolemy and in Tamil works of the period. The lower 
Ganges fisheries are suggested by indirect references in the Mahabharata. 
A third fishery is located by Pliny at Perimula (Semylla, modern Chaul 
on the west coast). Pliny also gives a long list of Indian precious stones 
and calls India the great producer of the most costly gems. This fist, 
of which several items are obscure or ambiguous, includes diamond, 
beryl (and its imitation), opal, sardonyx, onyx, carbuncle, carnelian, 
amethyst, hyacinth, and agate. Beryls, says Pliny, were rarely found 
outside India, while Ptolemy in the following century specifically mentions 
Pounnata, an inland city in the South, as their source. Diamonds, accord- 
ing to Ptolemy, were obtained from the town of Kosa, from the territory 
of the Sabarai and from the mouth of the river Adamas. These places have 
been respectively identified with the Berar territory extending to the river 
Varada, the region of Sambalpur and the Sank branch of the VaitaranI 
river. According to the Periplus, agate and carnelian were worked from 
the rocks of the Deccan trap for export to the West. Ptolemy records 
that Mt. Sardonyx (i.e. the Satpura range) was the place where the pre- 
cious stone of that name was found . 1 While so many gems were of Indian 
origin, it was natural that the gem industry should reach a high level. 
Indeed the enumeration of gems in the works of this period is remarkably 
long and varied. The list of beads and other articles of precious and semi- 
precious stones found on sites belonging to this period is equally varied. 
The science of testing gems is recognised in a Divyavadana story as part 
of the regular training of merchants’ sons, and included by Vatsyayana 
in a list of sixty-four fine arts ( afigavidyas ). The skill of the Indian gem- 
cutter is exhibited in the surviving specimens of purely Indian art belong- 
ing to the Kushana and later periods. The Tamil literature of the Sangam 
age bears witness to the flourishing condition of the gem industry and 
the jeweller’s trade in South India at this time. This was doubtless partly 
due to the great stimulus imparted by the foreign demand in the early cen- 
turies of the Christian era. Not without reason did Pliny give the epi- 
thet ‘gem-bearing’ to India and her rivers . 2 


Pearl-fisheries off Colchi and the 
‘Coast country’; Per., sec. 59. Pearls 
in lower Ganges ; ibid. 63. Pearl- 
fisheries in the Kolkhic Gulf : Ptolemy, 
vii 1. 10. Pearls given as tribute by 
mlechchha kings of the Bengal coast : 
Mbh. ii 30, 39. Pearls at Perimula : 
Pliny, vi 54. Indian gems : Pliny, 
xxxvii. Beryl at Pounnata ; Ptolemy, 
vii I. 86. Diamonds at Kosa etc.: 
Ptolemy, vii 1. 17; 65; 71; 76; 80; 


Agate and carnelian : Per., secs. 48, 49, 
51. Mt. Sardonyx ; Ptolemy, vii 1. 20 
2 Sapphires (two varieties), wishing- 
stone, beryl, sun-stone, moon-stone, 
diamonds, topaz, ruby and five other 
stones which cannot be identified : 
i 18 - Shorter list repeating 
Km m 238 : Miln. p. 267. Similar lists 
m Kalpa-Sutra, Lives of the Jinas, 45 
90 ; Achar. Su. ii 15. 10; Uttara. Su. 
36, 75. Examples of jewellery found 



INLAND TRADE 


437 


INLAND AND COASTAL TRADE 


Money-lending and trade, along with agriculture and animal-rearing, 
are declared to be the occupations of the Vaisya by Manu (i 90, ix 326-7), 
and Yajnavalkya (i 119). In this context Manu acquaints us (ix 329-33) 
with the technical knowledge that was expected from the Vaisyas. Trade 
relations form the subject of some well-known titles of law in the Smritis, 
such as ‘rescission of sale and purchase’, ‘sale without ownership’ and 
‘partnership’. The policy of state-control of trade recommended in the 
Smritis of this period is in line with that of Chandragupta Maurya’s 
administration described by Megasthenes and treated with remarkable 
completeness in Kautilya’s Arthasastra. Prices of commodities, we are 
told (M. viii 401-3; Y. ii 251), are to be fixed by the king at stated 
intervals after considering all the relevant factors : he is also to arrange 
for the stamping and periodical inspection of weights and measures. 
Combinations of merchants for purchase at a lower price or sale at a 
higher price are to be punished with a heavy fine ( Y. ii 250). In the com- 
pleter account of Kautilya these functions are entrusted to a number of 
officials called pariyadhyaksha, sulkadhyaksha, and pautavadhyaksha. 

Early Buddhist literature shows that India had developed an extensive 
system of inland trade borne along recognised routes. These were 
marked by successive stages, and helped to link up the different parts of 
the country. Two of these routes were of outstanding importance. 
They were, firstly, the SW-NE. route joining Pratishthana by way of 
Mahishmati, Ujjayini, Vidisa and KauSambi with Saketa; and, secondly 
the E-NW. route which ran mostly by river from Champa by way of 
Banaras to fixed stations up the Ganges and Jumna, whence land tracks 
led to the north-west frontier and to the lower Indus. Another route 
led eastwards from Saketa to Raj agriha by way of Vaisali and Patali- 
putra. A route from Champa must have led to the mouths of the Ganges, 
for we hear of merchants journeying from Champa and even Banaras to 
Suvarnadvipa (or Suvarnabhumi), ‘the El Dorado of the East’, evidently 
trans-shipping at a convenient port down the river. By the time of 
Chandragupta Maurya, a great ‘Royal road’ had been built, linking 
Pushkalavati beyond the Indus with Pataliputra, the imperial capital, and 
thence leading to the mouths of the Ganges. This first Indian Grand 
Trunk Road is recalled in the itineraries recorded in the Ramayavta 


on ancient sites: — Beads and gems 
of ruby, crystal, banded agate, jacinth, 
sardonyx, garnet, amethyst, camelian, 
aquamarine, green jasper, onyx, mother 
of pearl, yellow quartz in relic chamber 
of stupa B (temp. Maues and Azes I) 
around Dharmarajika Stupa at Taxila 
(Marshall, Guide to Taxila, 3rd ed. 
p. 43): Beads of gold, camelian, rock 
crystal, chalcedony, amethyst, turqu- 
oise, lapis lazuli, bep'l, aquamarine on 
site of Rairh (c. third century b.c. to 


second century a.d.) (K. N. Puri, 
Excavations at Rairh, p. 41 and pi. 
xxiii), Rupyaratnapariksha included in 
the list of 64 ahgavidyas (Kama, i 3.16). 
Training of merchants’ sons : Divy. 
pp. 26, 100. Indian types of gems 
inscribed (in KharoshthI characters) 
and uninscribed, of Kushana and later 
periods, in Pearse collection (ASIAR. 
1928-9, pp. 137-8 with pis.). Gem- 
bearing India: Pliny, xxvii 76. 



438 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


and other works. More precise indications are found in the Periplus. 
In the first place, two trade-routes from the north-west frontier, the ter- 
minus of the old Maurya Royal Road, are mentioned; one led down the 
Indus to ‘Minnagara’, capital of Indo-Scythia and its port of Barbaricum, 
and another joined the ‘Caspapyrene’ (Kashmir), ‘Paropanisene’ (sub- 
Hindukush), and ‘Cabolitic’ (Kabul) countries by way of ‘Poclais’ (Push- 
kalavati) to the famous emporium of Barygaza. In the second place 
UjjayinI, the focal point of the great SW-NE. route mentioned above, 
was linked with Barygaza. To the same famous port went the routes from 
the great Deccan marts of Tagara (Ter in Naldrug district of Hyderabad) 
and Paethana (Pratishthana), which were themselves connected with other 
routes reaching eastwards to the Krishna-Godavari delta. A great 
trade was borne simultaneously along the western and the eastern coasts. 
From the Chola ports, as the Periplus tells us, country craft sailed up to 
Malabar, while very large vessels made the voyage to the mouths of the 
Ganges, the terminus of the E-NW. route above mentioned. 1 We can 
make up a complete list of the great marts on or near the coast from the 
authentic accounts in the Periplus and the Geography of Ptolemy. The 
chief names in this list beginning from the mouths of the Indus, are Bar- 
baricum (in Scythia ruled by Parthian princes), Barygaza (in ‘Ariaca’), 
Supara, Calliena and Semylla (further south), Naura, Tyndisand Muziris 
(in ‘Keralabothra’ or the Chera kingdom), Nelcynda with its port-town 
Bacare (in the Pandya kingdom), Colchi, Camara, Poduca and Sopatma 
(in the Chola kingdom), Kontakassyla and Pityndra (in the Krishna- 
Godavari delta), Paloura (in Kalinga), Gange and Tamalites (on the lower 
Ganges). Some of these names may be identified in Indian lists of what 
were evidently regarded by the authors as the most famous ports or naval 
stations of the then known world. In an enumeration of typical naval 
stations likely to be visited by a successful ship’s captain, the Milindapahha 
(359) includes Sovira (Barbaricum?), Surattha (Barygaza?), Kolapatta- 
nam (Kaveripattinam?) and Vanga (Gange or Tamalites?). In a typical 
list of places visited by merchants in ships across the mighty ocean the 
Mahaniddesa, a commentary on the Sutta Nipata, mentions (154, 414) 
Suppara, Bharukachchha and Surattha. 2 


Journey of Vasishtha’s messengers from 
Ayodhya to Rajagfiha, capital of 
Kekaya, to fetch Prince Bharata: Ram. 
ii 68, 12-22. Bharata’s journey from 
Rajagfiha to Ayodhya; ibid. 71. 1-18. 
Journey of a setthi from a hermitage 
in the North-West Himalayas to Patali- 
putra: Miln. p. 17. Trade of Minna- 
gara etc. Per., secs. 38-9. Route via 
Poclais: ibid. 48. Ujjayinl-Barygaza and 
Tagara-Pratishthana-Barygaza routes : 
ibid. 48,51. Coastal routes from Chola 
ports: ibid. 60 

1 Barygaza is Bharukachchha, modem 
Broach; Soupara is Surparaka, modem 
Sopara; Calliena is modem Kalyan 


on the east shore of the harbour of 
Bombay; Semylla is modern Chaul 
about 25 miles south of Bombay; 
Naura is modem Cannanore (Schoff) 
or Mangalore (Yule and S. K. Aiyan- 
gar); Tyndis is modem Ponnani 
(Schoff) or Kadalundi near Beypore 
(Burnell and S. K. Aiyangar); Muziris 
is Muyirikotta, modern Cranganore; 
Nelcynda was very near Kottayam; 
Bacare is modem Porakad; Colchi 
is modern Kolkei or Korkei. 
Camara is Kaveripattinam; Poduca 
is Pondicherry (or more probably 
Arikamedu); Kantakasola is Ghan- 
tasala; Pityndra is Pihumda; Paloura 



TRADE WITH THE WEST 


439 


FOREIGN TRADE 

1. Trade with Western Asia and Africa 

The extreme antiquity of India’s trade with the Western world is an 
established fact. The wise policy of friendship with the Hellenistic powers 
begun by Chandragupta Maurya after his repulse of Seleucus and follow- 
ed by his son and grandson must have favoured the expansion of Indian 
trade with the West. The continuance of these favourable conditions 
was ensured by the establishment of Greek dominion in India in the 
second and first centuries b.c. The trade between India and the Seleucid 
empire was conducted both by land and sea. The northern and more 
important land-route led from Taxila by way of Kapisa, Bactria, Heka- 
tompylos and Ecbatana to Seleuceia, while the southern route connected 
the lower Indus valley through Seistan and Carmania with the same 
terminus. The sea-route connected west-Indian ports with Seleuceia 
through the Persian Gulf, and with Egypt through the ports of South 
Arabia. The list of India’s exports to Egypt comprised ivory, trotoise- 
shell, pearls, unguents and dyes (especially indigo), nard, costus, ‘mala- 
bathrum’, iron and wood. This trade suffered a set-back when Ptolemy 
II poured enough African ivory into the market to secure the traffic in 
this important commodity for himself. But this loss was more than 
made up by the increase of trade with Seleuceia. Indian ivory and spices 
were exhibited in phenomenal quantities by Antiochus IV in his triumph 
at Daphne in 166 b.c . 1 

In the closing years of Greek rule and the opening phase of the Saka- 
Pahlava dominion occurred an event which was destined to revolutionise 
India’s trade with the West. Greek mariners from Egypt, making progres- 
sive use of their momentous discovery of the monsoons, undertook 
direct voyages successively to the Indus delta, the Gujarat coast and the 
Malabar ports ( c . 100/80 b.c. — a.d. 40/50 or more probably a.d. 30). 
When Pliny wrote his work ( c . a.d. 77), Western merchants sailing from 
the Egyptian coast with a favourable wind could reach Muziris (Cranga- 
nore) in forty days, and complete the journey both ways in one year. 

is Dantapura; Gange is unidentified; Kolkhoi and Khabari respectively. 

Tamalites is Tamralipti. Refs. Schoff 1 India’s western trade-routes: Ros- 

( Per . tr.) ; McCrindle (Ptolemy tr.) ; tovtzeff. Social and Economic Conditions, 

S. K. Aiyangar (Beginnings of South p. 457; Tarn, Hellenistic Civilisation, 

Indian History ); BEFEO. 1940, p.449 pp. 211-13; Tarn, Greeks, pp. 61, 260-1, 

(for Poduca); Ancient India no. 5. 362 with map. The supposed northern 

p. 53 (for Kantakasola); JA. 1925, route from India to the West by way 

p. 57 (for Pityndra); JA. 1925, of the Oxus and the Caspian Sea is 

p. 46 f. (for Paloura). Recently discover- due to a misreading of the texts (Tarn, 
ed inscrs, at Ghan(asala not only Greeks, App. 14, pp. 488-90). Indian 

refer to the ancient name of Kanta- exports to Egypt; Rostovtzeff, op. cit., 

kasola, but also to a great sea-captain pp. 386-7; Tarn, Hellenistic Civilisa- 

( Ancient India, loc. cit.). For Soupara, tion, p. 226. Indian ivory and spices 

Naura, Colchi and Camara of the at Daphne: Tarn, Greeks, p. 362 

Periplus, Ptolemy reads Souppara, Nitra, 



440 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


Accompanied as it was with a large increase in the Roman demand for 
Indian luxuries, this shortening of the voyage was immediately attended 
with an immense expansion of maritime trade between India and the 
Roman Empire. This trade reached its peak in the century following 
the accession of Emperor Augustus (29 B.c.) and suffered a gradual 
decline in the course of the following centuries. Meanwhile the old 
overland route across Western Asia was in use under Parthian rule. In 
his work Parthian Stations (beginning of the Christian era) Isidore of 
Charax gave an itinerary of the caravan-route from Antioch in the west 
to the valley of the Helmund river on India’s border, and recounted in 
order the supply-stations maintained along that route by the Parthian 
government for the convenience of merchants. From other sources we 
learn that a separate route led from the Helmund valley through Car- 
mania and Persis to the head of the Persian Gulf whence merchandise 
was sent by ships sailing round Arabia to the Levant. 1 

Of the active part played by Roman merchants in the maritime trade 
with India in the early centuries A. D. we have ample evidence. Large 
ships from Egypt are said by the author of the Periplus and by Strabo to 
have visited India in their times. The Tamil works of the Sangam Age 
mention colonies of Yavana merchants in the coastal cities. Recent 
excavations at Arikamedu, (near Pondicherry) have revealed the re- 
mains of a Roman trading station (the first of its kind discovered 
in India) with numerous fragments of Roman pottery of the first two 
centuries a.d. Hoards of Roman imperial coins have been found on 
other Indian sites, especially in the South. In the first century a.d., 
moreover, Arab merchants are directly mentioned in the Periplus as 
making voyages in their own ships to Indian ports. That Indians, also 
took part in this trade is seen clearly from the Periplus. In the first cen- 
tury a.d. Indian ships sailed regularly with cargoes from ‘Ariaca’ {soil. 
its chief port Barygaza) to the Persian Gulf, the south coast of Arabia 
and the Red Sea coast of Africa. Beyond Ocelis at the mouth of the Red 
Sea, Indians were prevented from proceeding by the selfish policy of Arab 
merchants who maintained their ancient trade monopoly. But Indian 
traders had already settled in the large island of Dioscordia (Socotra). 
This island was occasionally visited by Indian ships starting from Bary- 
gaza and the Malabar ports for East Africa. In the second century the 
Mahaniddesa includes Yona and Paramayona (Hellenistic countries) as 
well as Alasanda (Alexandria) and Marukantara (unidentified) among 
places beyond the ocean visited by ships. The name of Alasanda occurs 


Direct voyage of Greek merchants with 
dating of successive stages: Pliny, 

vi 23, and Tam, Greeks, pp. 368-9. 
Recently R. E. Mortimer Wheeler, on 
the basis of his discovery of Roman 
pottery- types at Arikamedu m 1945 
{Ancient India no. 2, p. 19), has conclu- 
ded that regular monsoon trade bet- 
ween the Mediterranean and W. India 


with a coastwise or overland extension 
to the Coromandel coast had been es- 
tablished at least as early as c. a. d. 
30. Parthian route with supply-sta- 
tions: Parthian Stations by Isidore 
of Charax, ed. with tr., commy. and 
map by Schoff. Alternative route 
through Carmania and Persis; ibid. 

p. 18 



ARTICLES OF TRADE 


441 


also in a list of naval stations in the Milindapanha passage already quoted. 
This work (261,377) shows acquaintance with ocean-going ships, freighted 
with hundreds of thousands of packages, and others carrying numerous 
passengers and provided with masts, anchors, straps, sails and ropes. 
The great overland route across Parthia to the West was likewise used by 
Indians in the centuries immediately before and after Christ. We have 
the history of an Indian colony in Armenia which was in existence from 
c. 130 b.c. to the time of its forcible conversion to Christianity 
c. a. D. 300. 1 

Literary references as well as surviving remains enable us to make out 
a list of the objects of trade between India and the Roman world in the 
first century a. d. The exports were of a varied character comprising 
agricultural, animal, manufacturing and mineral products. Among 
agricultural products, rice and wheat (in spite of their bulk), clarified 
butter (notwithstanding the climate and the distance), sesame-oil and 
sugar (honey from the reed called sacchari) were carried from Ariaca 
in Indian ships to the market-towns of East Africa. Rice and wheat 
were also sold at Socotra by merchants carrying cargoes from Bary- 
gaza and Malabar and occasionally calling at that island. Indian 
sandal-wood, teakwood, timbers and logs of blackwood ( sisam ) and 
ebony were regularly shipped from Barygaza to the Persian Gulf ports. 
Among Indian animals, lions and tigers, apes and monkeys, and especially 
parrots, found a ready market among Roman subjects. For obvious 
reasons they must have been carried largely along land-routes. The 
testimony of Roman writers and of extant mosaics and gems show a 
knowledge of at least three species of Indian parrots. Indian ivory 
which was exported to Western Asia and Egypt in Hellenistic times was 
in great demand in Rome during the first century a.d. At the time of 
the Periplus ivory was shipped from Barygaza, Muziris and Nelcynda. 
Tortoise-shell obtained from the Hawk's Bill turtles of Indian waters came 
into general use in the Roman world in the first century a.d. It was 
used especially for decorating bedsteads made of ivory. According to 
the Periplus the best variety was brought from Chryse (Malay Peninsula ?), 
and this along with the supplies obtained nearer home from Ceylon 
and the smaller islands was sent to the Malabar ports for export to the 


1 Large ships sent to Malabar ports for 
carrying great quantities of pepper and 
‘malabathrum’ : Per. sec. 56. Large 
ships sent out from Egypt as far as 
India for valuable cargoes: Strabo, 
ii 5. 12; xvii 1. 13. A large colony 
of foreign merchants at Puhar: 
Pattinappdlai, U. 213-7 quoted, K.A.N. 
Sastri, The Colas, i 99. Antiquarian 
remains at Arikamedu: Excavations at 
Arikamedu by R. E. Mortimer Wheeler, 
Ancient India no. 2 with maps, charts 
and illus. The antiquities comprise 
the remains of a supposed warehouse 
56 


as well as of a courtyard and tanks for 
preparation of muslin, imported pot- 
tery in 3 varieties and so forth (ibid). 
For a comprehensive list of Roman 
coins from the first century B. c. to 
the fourth century a. d. found in India 
and Ceylon with accompanying map, 
see now ibid. App. i 116-121. Arab 
trade with Barygaza and Damirica: 
Per. secs. 21, 27, 57. Indian ships from 
Ariaca to South Arabia etc.: ibid, secs. 
6, 14, 36. Indian settlers at Dioscordia; 
ibid. sec. 30. Indian colony in Arme- 
nia: JRAS. 1904, pp. 309-14 



442 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


West. Skin-coats and coloured lac were exported from Ariaca to the 
Somali coast. Pearls came into general use in Rome, according to Pliny, 
after the capture of Alexandria by Augustus. The same writer assigns 
to pearls the first rank among valuables, and tells us how Roman ladies 
not only wore them as finger-and ear-ornaments, but also put them on 
their shoes. In the time of the Periplus, as we have seen, pearl-fisheries 
were worked off the coasts of the Pandya and Chola kingdoms. These 
pearls with others from Ceylon found their way into the Malabar ports 
where they were found by Greek merchants. Silk was at first woven by 
the Romans into linen or woollen fabrics, but afterwards the use of silken 
garments became common. Pliny included silk in his list of the most 
valuable commodities, while Emperor Aurelian declared it to be worth 
its weight in gold. Indians acted as intermediaries in the Chinese silk 
trade with the West. Silk sent from China was diverted (partially at 
least) from the Great West-Asian route southwards to the mouths of 
the Indus and the Gulf of Cambay for export to the West. 

The traffic in Indian aromatics, spices and other plant-products in- 
creased enormously in the first century a.d. to meet the heavy Roman 
demand. Among these products pepper held the chief place. It was 
used very much in Rome in expensive cookery, and as a medicine. 
An old Tamil poem called it ‘the passion of the Yavanas’. In the 
time of the Periplus black and white pepper from the district of 
Cottonara was brought down to the ports of Muziris and Nelcynda 
whence they were transported by Greek merchants in very large vessels. 
We hear also in ancient Tamil works of Yavanas carrying away large 
sacks of pepper in exchange for gold. Long pepper, which was a more 
expensive variety, was shipped from Barygaza. Among other spices cinna- 
mon was in high demand among Romans ‘as a perfume, as an incense, 
as a condiment and as a medicine’. Cinnamon-leaf, which was called 
‘malabathrum’ by the Greeks and Romans was found by them in India. 
But they never knew that it was cinnamon-leaf and wrongly believed that 
the bark, root and wood of the plant (called casia) and its tender shoots 
and flowers (known as cinnamomum ) had their source in Arabia or Soma- 
liland. Evidently the real source of the true cinnamon was kept a 
well-guarded secret from the Romans by the middlemen. At the time 
of the Periplus great quantities of ‘malabathrum’ were carried away 
from Malabar ports by the foreign merchants in ships chartered for the 
purpose. Supplies were brought down (from the trans-Gangetic coun- 
tries) by way of the Ganges river, and these were supplemented by the 
local product. Cardamom, another Indian product found in Malabar 
and Travancore, commanded a ready market in the Roman world for 
its use as a medicine and a funerary perfume. It was sent almost wholly 
by the land-routes, for while the Periplus is silent about it, other writers 
signify it by various epithets indicating the routes along which it was 
carried or the places where the ointments were prepared. Costus was 
used by the Romans in unguents and perfumes, in medicines in 



EXPORTS 


443 


seasoning of food and wine, and in sacrifices. Root-nard produced an 
oil which was used by the Romans as a perfume and ointment, while 
leaf-nard (‘spikenard’), according to Pliny, held the first place among 
unguents. The costly spikenard oil was in high demand among the 
Romans as an ingredient in cookery and drugs, and rich ladies of 
Rome used to anoint guests at banquets with it. In the time of the 
Periplus costus and nard were exported from Barbaricum, while the 
spikenard was brought down partly by way of Poclais (Pushkalavati) to 
Barygaza, and partly by way of the Ganges to the Malabar ports. A 
variety of Indian gum-resin, called ‘bdellium’ by the Greeks and Romans, 
was exported from Barygaza and Barbaricum, but this was merely supple- 
mentary to the supplies from South Arabia and East Africa which 
produced the famous frankincense and myrrh. Among non-resinous 
products much in demand among the Romans was indigo, valued both 
for colouring and for medicine. A similar product called ‘lycium’ pro- 
vided a yellow dye, an astringent for the eyes, a face cosmetic, a dressing 
for sores and wounds, and a cure for diseases of the throat. It was export- 
ed from Barygaza and, together with indigo, from Barbaricum. The 
gum or resin called ‘Indian copal’ was used by the Romans mainly for 
making varnishes, and the bark called ‘macir’ as a specific for dysentery. 
Both were exported from the Somali entrepots after being brought from 
India, their place of origin. 

As to textiles, cotton-cloth of very fine quality (monache), as well as 
coarser varieties ( sagmagtogene and molochine ) from the great centres 
of the industry in the Deccan, together with other coarser cloth of local 
origin, was exported from Ariaca to Arabia, East Africa and Egypt. 
From the Malabar ports were exported muslins of Ceylon, the Chola 
country and the Krishna-Godavarl delta and the finest of all, the muslins 
of the lower Ganges. As regards metal-ware, Indian iron and steel were 
exported from Ariaca to the Somali coast no doubt en route to Egypt. 
Indian steel is included in a list of dutiable articles at Alexandria in a 
Digest of Roman law. As regards semi-precious and precious stones, 
murrhine vases and other articles, according to Pliny, were highly prized 
in Rome from the time of Pompey’s Asiatic conquests. The stone (agate 
and carnelian) was found by Roman merchants at Barygaza where it 
was brought down in large quantities from various sources in the Deccan 
trap, in the Rajmahal traps of Bihar and in Jubbalpore by way of the 
marts of Pratishthana and Ujjayinl. A great export trade in precious 
stones of all kinds including diamonds, sapphires and beryl was carried 
on from the Malabar ports, the supplies being obtained probably from 
the interior and from Ceylon . 1 


• The above is based upon the able 
survey in Warmington, The Commerce 
between the Roman Empire and India, 
Pt. i. ch. n. which gives full refs. Sum- 
ming up the Roman evidence, the 
author observes, (ibid. p. 40): ‘We 


find (in the Augustan literature) Indian 
lions, tigers, rhinoceroses, elephants 
and serpents already brought for exhibi- 
tion, though rarely; Indian parrots 
kept as pets; Indian ivory and tor- 
toise-shell employed for all kinds of 



444 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


We now come to India’s imports from the West. Because of the 
comparatively small Indian demand for the products of the Roman 
empire, the latter suffered a perpetually adverse balance of trade so that 
Roman gold and silver coin in large quantities was transferred to India 
to make up the deficit. Writing to the Senate in A. D. 22 the emperor 
Tiberius complained that the empire was being drained of its treasure 
which was being sent to foreign lands in exchange for baubles. At the time 
of the Periplus, Barygaza and, still more, the Malabar ports imported 
Roman gold and silver coins. Pliny (vi 25) complained a little later of 
the drain amounting to no less than 550,000,000 sesterces every year to 
India to pay for Indian products which were sold at fully one hundred 
times their original cost. Roman gold coins in North India were re -struck 
by the Kushana emperors with the same weight and fineness 
as their originals. In the South, where hoards of them have been found, 
they probably circulated as currency. As regards other imports, slaves, 
according to the Periplus, were exported from the Persian Gulf to Bary- 
gaza. Singing boys and good-looking virgins for the king’s harem are 
mentioned by the same authority among regular imports brought to 
Barygaza. This suggests, as has been well remarked, 1 a ‘standing order’ 
in that market for the classes of slaves above mentioned. How far this 
traffic in human beings became a permanent feature is shown by the 
regular reference to Yavani attendants on the king in the dramatic works 
of Bhasa and his successors. Female slaves belonging to a number of 
foreign lands (Pahlava, Yavana, Murunda and the like) are referred to 
in some Jaina texts of this period. 2 

Among animal products of western origin, coral held the chief place. 
It occurs repeatedly in Indian lists of gems, and its high value in the eyes 
of Indians is referred to by Pliny who says (xxxi 7 ; xxxii 2) that it was no 
less appreciated by the men of India than Indian pearls by Roman women. 
In the first century a.d. coral was brought to the great ports of Barbaricum 
and Barygaza. It was probably the red variety of the western Mediterra- 
nean and not the black which is abundant in the Red Sea and along 


ornaments; oriental pearls and Chinese 
silk worn by women; again, Celsus 
and Scribonius Largus reveal the use 
of Indian plant-products in Graeco- 
Roman medicine . . . We find aromatic 
spices and juices such as Indian pepper, 
spikenard, cinnamon (Indian and 
Chinese), costus, and cardamom in 
common use . . . and in medicine; 
besides these, Indian ginger, bdellium- 
myrrh, sugar and aloes; again, we 
find gingelly oil as a food, indigo, 
as a paint, cotton used for clothing, 
ebony for furniture, rice as a cereal, 
and citrons, peaches and apricots as 
table-fruits or medicines. Again, in 
Augustan literature, Pliny’s accounts 
and extant collections shew the 


already wide use of Indian precious 
stones— diamond, onyx, sardonyx, 
agate, sard, carnelian, crystal, ame- 
thyst, opal, beryl, sapphire, ruby, 
turquoise, garnet and others.’ Refs, 
to exports from Indian ports in Per. 
passim. ‘Monache’ etc. may be 
Greek corruptions of some Indian 
trade-names for different grades or 
dyes of cloth (Schoff, Per. tr. p. 72). 
‘ Moloch ine’, otherwise called ‘mallow 
cloth, is a coarse fabric dyed with 
a preparation of the Indian hibiscus 
(ibid. p. 73). Indian steel is in the list 
of articles subject to duty at Alexandria 
m Digest of Roman law (ibid. p. 289) 
1 Tam, Greeks, p. 374 
* Bhag, 9. 6. Naya, i 21 



IMPORTS 


445 


the Arabian coast. Pearls of inferior quality were brought from the 
Persian Gulf to Barygaza. Other articles in this category are purple dye 
shipped from the Persian Gulf, and tortoise-shell brought from Chryse 
to the Malabar ports for re-export to the West. Part of this purple dye 
probably came from Tyre, which produced the best variety in Asia, accord- 
ing to Pliny (ix 60). The tortoise-shell from Chryse, according to the 
Periplus, was the best variety obtainable from the Indian Ocean. 

As to agricultural products, large quantities of dates were exported to 
Barygaza from the Persian Gulf, still the principal source of their supply. 
Italian, Laodicaean and Arabian wines came to Barygaza, the first being 
the most prized. Much wine came to the Malabar ports, and a little 
wine to Barbaricum. We learn from Strabo (vi 13, xvi 2. 9) that Italian 
wine produced in Campania was the most highly prized by the Romans, 
while the Laodicaean wine produced on the Syrian coast mostly supplied 
the needs of the Alexandrines. Arabian wine, it has been held, was 
probably in part the grape-wine of Yemen, but mostly date-wine from the 
Persian Gulf. Among aromatic, medicinal and other plant-products, 
Barbaricum imported storax and frankincense, and Barygaza storax and 
sweet clover. Storax, which was probably derived from the sap of a tree 
native to Asia Minor, was used for medicinal puposes. Sweet clover, 
probably acquired at second or third hand from Campania, Crete or 
the Greek mainland, was used for the same purpose. A Turkish variety 
of black aloe is referred to in the Jaina Kalpa Sutra ( Lives of the Jinas, 
p. 32,) while Turkish and Yavana perfumes mentioned as constituents 
of a perfume of four ingredients in a few Jataka texts 1 are likewise 
stated in the Milindapahha (354), but we have no means of tracing the 
sources of these products. 

Under the head ‘manufactures’, imports consisted mainly of varieties 
of cloth and glass. The embroidered fabrics (figured linens) which came 
to Barbaricum have been identified with the stuffs of that kind manu- 
factured, according to Pliny (viii 74), in Babylon and Alexandria. Clothing 
after the local fashion was sent from the Persian Gulf to Barygaza which 
also imported some thin clothing of which the source is unknown. Glass 
vessels came to Barbaricum, flint glass to Barygaza, and crude glass to 
Malabar. As regards minerals, realgar and orpiment (the red and yellow 
sulphides of arsenic) were imported into the Malabar ports, and realgar 
into Barygaza. These were shipped from the Persian Gulf where mines 
of arsenic were worked in Carmania according to Pliny (vi 26). Anti- 
mony (sulphide ore) came to Barygaza probably from East Arabia and 
Carmania. While realgar and orpiment were principally used as mineral 
paints, antimony was made into ointments and eye-tinctures. As for 
metals, copper, tin, and lead were imported into Barygaza and the Mala- 
bar ports, copper being obtained probably from Carmania, and tin from 
Spain by way of Egypt. Some copper which was exported from Barygaza 


I p. 265, m p. 291, v p. 79 etc. 



446 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


to the Persian Gulf was probably western copper obtained from Arabian 
ports and reshipped for export. Gold and silver plate (of unknown 
source) were imported into Barbaricum, while Barygaza obtained gold 
bullion from the Persian Gulf (probably from mines in East Arabia). 
Very costly silver vessels were imported into Barygaza for the king’s use. 
As for precious stones, the topaz which came to Barbaricum was the true 
variety found in the Red Sea islands, according to Pliny and Strabo, the 
latter stating that it was a transparent stone that sparkled with a golden 
lustre. Emerald was exported to India from Berenice, the great Egyptian 
port on the Red Sea, although the Periplus itself is silent about it. 1 

2. Trade with Ceylon and South-East Asia 

References in the Mahabharata suggest that Ceylon in its time was 
renowned for its production of gems and pearls. Pearls and ‘transparent 
stones’, muslins and tortoise-shells are definitely mentioned as products 
of the island in the Periplus. From Pliny we learn that rice and ginger, 
beryl and hyacinth were included among its products, while it had mines 
of gold, silver and other minerals. It is reasonable to hold that some of 
the pearls and ‘transparent stones of all kinds’ including sapphires export- 
ed from the Malabar ports in the time of the Periplus were derived from 
Ceylon. Tambapanni (Ceylon) is included by the writer of the Mahanid- 
desa commentary in the passages cited earlier as one of the places across 
the mighty ocean that were visited by merchants in their ships. 2 

The beginnings of India’s commercial relations with South-East Asia 
go back to times long before Christ. While, in the West, Indians had to 
meet the powerful competition of Arab and Roman merchants, the field 
lay practically open to them in the East. In the latter half of the first 
century A. D. very large ships are mentioned 3 as sailing from the Chola 
ports not only to the Ganges but also to Chryse (the exact equivalent 
of the Indian ‘Suvaniabhumi or Suvarnadvipa’, a generic designation 
for Burma, the Malay Peninsula and the neighbouring islands). These 
ships were probably of the two-masted type represented on some coins 
of king Yajnasri Satakarni which are chiefly found along the Coromandel 
coast between Madras and Cuddalore. In the second century a.d. a 
regular sea-route was in operation from the seaboard of Eastern India 
to the opposite coast. 4 Ships, according to Ptolemy’s account (i 13, 7), 
sailed from a point of departure (‘apheterion’) near modern Chicacole, 
and striking right across the sea called at Sada and Tamale in the Silver 


The amount of Roman specie mention- 
ed by Pliny is $ 22,000,000, accord- 
ing to Schoff’s calculation {Per. tr. 
p. 219). For sources and uses of 
coral, purple, Arabian wine, storax, 
sweet-clover, figured linens, realgar, 
orpiment, antimony, copper, gold bul- 


lion, topaz and emerald, see ibid, passim 
Beryls, pearls, coverlets for elephants 
presented by Simhalas: Mbh. ii 52. 
36. Products of Ceylon: Per., sec. 
61; Pliny vi 24 

3 Per., sec. 60 

4 Ptolemy vii 1. 15 



EASTERN TRADE 


447 


Country (Aracan ?) on the way to the Chryse Chersonese (Malay Penin- 
sula). Another route connected the upper Ganges region with Suvarna- 
bhumi or Suvarnadvipa (evidently by way of the great ports ‘Ganges’ 
and ‘Tamalites’ at the mouth of the river.) Direct voyages even from 
Bharukachchha were not unknown. Witness to these last-named routes 
is borne by the stories of the voyages of daring Indian merchants to 
Suvarnabhumi and Suvarnadvipa in the Jatakas ( ante Christ) and the 
Avadanasataka (second century a.d.) as well as in the great collections 
of folklore ( Brihatkathamanjari , Brihatkatha-sloka-samgraha and the 
Kathasariisagara) going back to the lost work of Gunadhya. Voyages 
of Indian merchants to the Malay Peninsula and Cambodia in the third 
century a.d. are recorded by the Chinese writers. In the Mahaniddesa 
passage quoted above Takkola, Tamalin, Java, Vahga, Suvarnakuta 
and Suvarnabhumi are included among the places across the high seas 
visited by merchants. Meanwhile Indian kingdoms had begun to be 
formed in the Malay Peninsula, Cambodia and Champa from the first 
century a.d. onwards. The resulting friendly intercourse between the 
Indian colonies and the mother-country could not but lead to increased 
commercial relations between them. 1 

We now come to the objects of trade. In the parallel topographical 
lists of the Ramayana, the Ramayana-manjari of Kshemendra, and the 
Harivariisa, as well as the Buddhist Saddharma-smrityupasthana-sutra, 
reference is made to a land called Suvarna-rupyakadvipa (island of 
gold and silver) or alternately Suvarnakudyaka (‘wall of gold’). Also 
a silver-country and a gold-country containing many silver and gold 
mines are located by Ptolemy (vii 2. 17) in trans-Gangetic India just 
beyond the territory of the Kiratas (in the Malay Peninsula?). It is 
probably to these that the author of the Periplus refers when he says 
(sec. 63) that gold mines are said to exist near the lower Ganges region. 
Ptolemy (vii 2. 5, 29) again not only mentions the Golden Chersonese 
(Malay Peninsula), but describes the Island of Iabidios, ‘the Island of 


1 A two-masted coin type of Yajna Sata- 
karni: JNSl. hi pp. 42-5 supplementing 
Rapson, BMCAWK. pp. lxxxi-lxxii, 
22-3. The voyage of a caravan-leader 
of Sravasti to Ratnadvlpa, of merchants 
of Sravasti and Rajagriha on the high 
seas: Avadanasataka i p. 23 f., 129 f., n 
p. 60 f.. Voyages of merchants from 
Mahakosall (Kosala?) and Tamra- 
lipti to Suvarnadvipa: Mahakarma- 
vibhanga, ed. S. Levi, p. 50 f. Voyage 
of a merchant of West India to Fu- 
nan (Cambodia with Cochin-China) 
in the reign of King Fan-Chan (c. a. d. 
225) followed by the latter’s embassy 
to India and the return embassy of 
the Indian king to Fu-nan: BEFEO. m 
pp. 277-8. Yue-chi merchants (Indian 
subjects of the Kushana emperor ?) 
regularly sending horses in large 


numbers (from the mouths of the 
Ganges?) to the kingdom of Kia-ying 
(southern part of the Malay Penin- 
sula) in the third century a. d. : Pelliot 
in Etudes Asiatiques n p. 250. Identi- 
fications suggested by Levi are as 
follows: Takkola is on the western 
coast of the Malay Peninsula to the 
south of the Isthmus of Kra; ‘aphete- 
rion’ is Charitra of Hiuan Tsang and 
Samudraprasthana of Gandavyiiha; 
Java (in the present context) is Sumatra 
Vahga (as above) is the island of Banka 
off Sumatra; Suvannabhumi is the 
generic name for countries east of the 
Bay of Bengal; Suvanrtakuta (or Suvanna 
kudya) is in the direction of Java 
( Etudes Asiatiques ii pp. 4, 18, 21, 25, 
28, 29, 36) 



448 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


Barley’, (identified with Sumatra or Java), as producing very much gold, 
its capital being called ‘Silver-town’ (Argyre). However that may be, 
the names given in the Indian works and after them in the Greek and 
Arab writings, prove that it was the quest for gold that first and mainly 
drew the Indian merchants across the seas to Indo-China and Indonesia. 
Another country in trans-Gangetic India called Khalkitis, according to 
Ptolemy (vii 2, 20), contained many copper mines, but it is not easy to 
identify it. It is possible, as S. Levi thinks, that a vague reference to the 
Indian trade in tin from the Malay Peninsula and in black pepper from 
the neighbouring islands is contained in a text of Patanjali. Long pepper 
at any rate, as well as the ordinary kind, is mentioned among the products 
of Java, in a Buddhist text quoted by Levi. Besides the metals and spices 
just mentioned tortoise-shell formed an article of export to India from 
South-East Asia. In the time of the Periplus the best tortoise-shell 
procurable in the Indian Ocean was found in the Chryse island, i.e. the 
Malay Peninsula or Sumatra (sec. 63). This was shipped to the Malabar 
ports for export to the Western lands. 1 

3. Maritime and Overland Trade with China 


A work of the Chinese historian Pan-ku (written not later than the 
first century a.d.) mentions a number of distant lands (including the 
kingdom of Huang-che) beyond Tonkin, to which Chinese traders travell- 
ed in foreign ships for buying pearls, glass (or beiyl), rare stones and the 
like in exchange for gold and silks. All these lands, we are told, had 
been ‘sending tribute’ since the time of Emperor Wu (140-86 b.c.). If 
the identification of Huang-che with Kanchi suggested by Ferrand were 
to be accepted as correct, it would follow that South India had commer- 
cial relations with China as early as the latter half of the second century 
B.c. In the second half of the first century a.d. the sea-route to China 
was known, though vaguely, even to the author of the Periplus whose 
trading activities extended only to the west coast of India. From the 
second century a.d. onwards we have more than one line of evidence 
pointing to the use of the sea-route to Tonkin by Indians as well as 
others voyaging from India’s shores. 2 


1 Suvarnaruoyakadvlpa and Suvarna- 
kudyaka in parallel versions (Levi in 
JA. 1918, p. 80 f; Etudes Asiatiques 
n p. 30). Allusion to the tin and black 
pepper of the Malay Peninsula etc. 
in madhukamarichayor an sthalat of 
Pat. on Pan. v. 1. 77 (Levi in 
Etudes Asiatiques n p. 46). Ref. to 
long pepper etc. produced in Cho-ye 
(Jaya or Java) in Sutra of Twelve 
Steps of Buddia, tr. into Chinese in 
a. d. 392 (Levi in JA. 1918, pp. 83-5) 

’■ Passage in Pan-Ku’s work: Pelliot in 
T'oung Pao, 1912, 460. Identification 


of Huang-che with Kanchi: Ferrand; 
K. A. N Sastri, IHQ. 1938, p. 386. After 
Chryse ‘the sea (navigation) outside 
ending in a land called This': Per., sec. 
64. Indian ambassadors coming to 
China in Annals of Liang dynasty : 
BEFEO. hi pp. 271-2. Sea-traffic of 
Kattigara (Tonkin?) with the West: 
Ptolemy i II, 1 ; & 14. The father of 
K’ang Seng-hui long settled in India 
migrated to Tonkin for commerce 
m the beginning of the third century 
a. r*. (P. C. Bagchi, Le Canon Boud- 



TRADE WITH CENTRAL ASIA 


449 


As early as the second century b.c. trade relations existed between 
East India and South-West China by way of Upper Burma and Yunnan. 
The Chinese ambassador Chang-k’ien, while visiting Bactria c. 128 B.C., 
was surprised to come across bamboos and textiles from the provinces 
of Yunnan and Sze-chuan, which he was assured had been carried right 
across northern India. In the first century a.d. there was a regular 
overland trade in Chinese raw silk as well as silk yarn and silk 
cloth from This (the State of Tsin in North-West China) to the Malabar 
ports by way of the lower Ganges. The extensive trade in these articles 
led to the issue of a gold coin (caltis) in the lower Ganges region. The 
rise of a chain of Indian kingdoms extending from the Assam frontier 
across the upper valleys of the Chindwin, the Irrawaddy, the Salween, 
the Mekong and the Red rivers up to and including Yunnan could not 
but vastly facilitate Indian commercial enterprise in those lands. But we 
have no direct evidence to this effect. 1 

We have seen how India served as an intermediary in the trade between 
Yunnan and Bactria as early as the second century b.c. The rise of the 
Greek kingdom of Bactria, and still more the formation of the Kushana 
empire, combined with the persistent efforts of the Chinese from the 
second century B.c. onwards to extend their political influence west- 
wards across the Tarim basin, led to the growth of conditions favou- 
rable to the fostering of Indian trade with Central Asia and beyond. 
Before the third century a.d. (in the time of Asoka according to the local 
traditions) a powerful stream of colonies from north-west India flowed 
into Khotan where they established the north-western Prakrit (in the 
Kharoshthi script) as the language of administration and daily life. 
Meanwhile Buddhist missionaries from India and outside carried Indian 
religion and culture through Central Asia into China. The path trodden 
by Indian colonists and missionaries was naturally followed by Indian 
merchants. In the latter half ©f the first century A.D., furs (‘Seric skins') 
and silks from China were being sent by way of Bactria to Bar’oaricum, 
silks being carried to Barygaza as well for export to the West. As we 
have observed before, this trade must have been diverted from the usual 
silk-route from China to the West probably because of the antagonism 
between the Parthian and the Roman empires. The ‘Seric skins’ are 
praised by Pliny for their high excellence. In the early centuries of the 
Christian era, north-western India was connected with China by some 
famous routes. Proceeding from the north-west frontier, the road ran 
by way of Kapisa and Bamiyan across the Hindukush to Bactria where 
it joined the great silk-routes from China to the western world. Of 
these the northern route passed north of the Taklamakan desert across 
Kucha and Karashar, while the southern one marched south of the 
desert through Khotan and Yarkand, both converging on the Chinese 

1 Chang-kien on bamboos and textiles coin of lower Ganges: Per., sec. 63, 

from Yunnan: Peiliot in BEFEO. 64, and SchofTs map. 

iv p. 143 f. Trade from This and gold 
57 



450 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


frontier near Tunhuang. A shorter and more difficult route led by way 
of the upper Indus through Gilgit and Yasin to Kashgar and thence 
onward to China. 1 

ATTITUDE OF THE CANON LAW TOWARDS ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT 


No account of the progress of agriculture, industry and trade in this 
period will be complete without some reference to the attitude of the 
contemporary canon law towards economic occupations. The Brah- 
mancial Smritis looked upon agriculture and industry, and to a less 
extent trade, with high disfavour.- This attitude is reflected in Manu’s 
dictum (iv 5-6) that agriculture is pramrita (‘what causes many deaths’), 
and trade is satyanrita (‘a mixture of truth and falsehood'). In conso- 
nance with this is Manu’s view (x 80, 84) that trade is the best of occu- 
pations for a Vaisya, while a Brahmana or a Kshatriya even in distress 
must avoid agriculture which causes injury to many beings. Elsewhere 
(iii 64), however, Manu includes crafts and trade along with agriculture 
among the causes leading to the degradation of families. Again, a large 
number of agricultural, pastoral, industrial and commercial occupations 
are placed under social, religious and even legal disabilities under the 
Smriti law. A person making a sea-voyage, for instance, is excluded from 
iarddhas, thus being placed under a social ban. While allowing a 
Brahmana in extreme distress to live by the Vaisya’s occupation, the 
Smritis expressly debar him not only from agriculture, but from various 
specified branches of industry and trade. The Buddhist and Jaina canons 
were hardly more favourable to economic progress. By a fundamental 
law of their order, Buddhist monks are forbidden to cultivate land. The 
Jaina canon goes so far as to forbid laymen to engage in agricultural 
operations or a certain number of trades and industries. 2 


1 Prakfit documents on wood and lea- 
ther written in north-western Prakrit 
and Kharoshthi script from the Niya 
site to the east of Khotan confirm 
the local tradition of a large influx 
of immigrants into Khotan from the 
Taxila region (Stein, Ancient Khotan, 

1 pp. 163, 368-9; Serindia, i pp. 
242-3). The first Buddhist text was 
sent to China by the Chinese ambas- 
sador at the court of Yiie-chi, in 

2 b. c. The first Indian missionaries, 
Kasyapa Matanga and Dharmaratna 
reached China from the Yiie-chi 
kingdom, in a. d. 68. The Arsacidan 
prince Ngan-She-Kao reached China 
in a. d. 144 and was assisted by 
Sogdian and Parthian missionaries. 
‘Seric skins’ were exported from Bar- 
baricum; raw silk, silk yams and silk 
cloth were brought on foot from 


Thmae (capital of This) through 
Bactria to Barygaza (Per., secs. 39, 
64). Praise of ‘Seric skins’: Pliny 

xxxiv 41, xxxv iii 77. ‘Seric skins’ 
are equivalent to Chirese furs: Schoff, 
Per., tr. p. 171; Warmington, Com- 
merce, p. 158 

2 The shopkeeper, oilman, maker of 
bows and arrows, agriculturist, shep- 
herd and keeper of buffaloes are exclud- 
ed from sraddhas ; M. iii 152, 159, 165 
166. A similar but shorter list is found 
m Mbh. xiii 90, 6 f. Food given by 
a carpenter, tailor, blacksmith, basket- 
maker, dealer in weapons, washer- 
man, dyer, leather-cutter, artisan is not 
to be eaten by snataka; M. iv 210, 
2.H.215 216, 218, 219. Similar 

lists in Mbh. xii 36, 27 f; Y. i 161-5 
Superintending mines of all sorts and 
executing great mechanical works 



GUILDS 


451 


In so far as the above rules were observed in practice, their tendencies 
and consequences are sufficiently obvious. The canon law, by condem- 
ning agriculture and a number of basic occupations, must have retarded 
the application of capital and enterprise to their development. The 
free movement of labour and capital was restricted by the association 
of specific trades and industries with particular castes and sub-castes. 
The canon law of the Buddhists and Jainas, unlike the Brahmanical, habi- 
tually exalted the houseless state above that of the householder, thus 
discouraging all attempts to improve the material condition of the people. 
On the other hand it must be admitted that both Mani: and Yajnavaikya 
recognise at least as a secondary alternative the Sudra’s right to pursue 
the productive occupations, a right which was conceded fully by later 
authorities. 1 

THE ORGANISATION OF INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

The organisation of industrial guilds with executive officers (jetthakas) 
at their head may be distinctly traced back to the period of the early 
Buddhist literature. The Jatakas in fact refer to eighteen srenis, four 
of them being mentioned by name. In Kautilya’s Arthasastra we notice 
on the whole a strong tendency to exploit in the king’s interest the types 
of industrial and other associations called sangha and srenl which obvi- 
ously had become rich and powerful bodies. The Smriti law of this 
period by contrast betrays a generous desire to foster the growth of such 
associations (called generally sanuihas). In Manu (viii 41) and Yajna- 
vaikya (i 361) the customs of srenis and associated bodies are put on 
the same level with regional, caste, and family customs which had gained 
the force of law even in the early Dharmasutras. An agreement en- 
tered into by a member with a sangha or gana has such binding autho- 
rity that to break it is punishable with confiscation and banish- 
ment, or else a heavy fine and imprisonment or banishment. 2 This 
penalty it may be observed, offers a sharp contrast with the money- 
fine 'imposed by Kautilya for a similar breach. The theft of property 
owned by a gana according to Yajnavaikya (ii 187) is to be punished 


are included among the smaller sins: 
M. xi 63; Y. iii 240. Brahmanas who 
rear cattle or are traders or mechanics 
are to be treated as Sudras in the law- 
courts: M. viii 102. Presents from oil- 
manufacturers are not to be accepted; 
M. iv 84. Seafaring Brahmanas are ex- 
cluded from sraddhas: M. iii 158; Mbh. 
xiii 90. 7. Agriculture and other occu- 
pations are forbidden to Brahmanas 
and Kshatriyas ; M. x 83; Y. ii 35-39 
Buddhist monastic prohibition of 
agriculture in Pratimoksha : SBE. iii 33. 
Fifteen ways of earning a livelihood 
are lorbidden to laymen, including 


those concerned with making and 
selling charcoal and plants, hoeing 
and ploughing fields, digging wells, 
draining for preparation of agricultural 
land, crushing by machinery, traffic 
in ivory, lac and juice: Uvasagadasao 

i 51 expanded in Haribhadra's Yoga- 
sastra iii 98 f. 

1 Sudras unable to live by personal 
service are permitted to practise handi- 
crafts: M. x 99-100 and trade; Y. i 
120. Among the ‘mixed castes’ some 
are assigned the minor crafts by 
Manu. 

1 Y. ii 187; M. viii 219-20. 



452 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


likewise with confiscation and banishment. The orders of their executive 
officers (corresponding to the jetthakas of Pali literature and the mukhyas 
of the Arthasastra) are to be obeyed on pain of a money-fine (ibid. 188, 
191). The representatives of the samuha calling upon the king on its busi- 
ness are to be honoured and presented with gifts (ibid. 189). On the other 
hand all presents received by them are to be made over to the samuha , 
failure being visited with a fine of eleven times the value (ibid. 190). Refe- 
rences in the Mahabharata show that the good opinion of the executive 
officers of srenis counted with the king, and their support was canvassed 
by his enemies (iii 248, 16, xii 59, 49). What is more, the obligation to 
follow the custom of one’s own sreni is invested with a high moral 
sanction, and to violate it is declared to be an inexpiable sin (xii 36. 19). 

The inscriptions of the first two centuries a.d. in Northern and Western 
India show that the srenis played a new role in the capacity of trustees for 
various pious and charitable endowments. Cash sums or real property 
were deposited in perpetuity by pious donors with the guilds: the rate of 
interest on the deposit was sometimes but not always specified in the 
record: out of the annual income the guild was required to meet the 
charges for specified objects such as clothing and medical provision for a 
fixed number of monks, entertainment of a specified number of guests 
once a month, planting of trees and so forth. It is remarkable that the 
donors in these instances are foreigners. On the other hand the charitable 
endowments made by Indians in the same locality and period are given 
directly to the saiigha. Possibly the distrust of artisans receiving deposits 
hinted at in the Arthasastra was still felt to some extent. The guilds were 
both industrial and commercial; the industrial type included guilds of 
weavers, potters, makers of hydraulic engines, oil-millers, braziers and 
bamboo-workers. 1 

Another type of industrial and commercial organisation mentioned 
by the Smriti works of this period is ‘partnership’. Under the head of 
law called ‘business in partnership’ ( sambhuyasamutthana ) Manu extends 
the rule relating to shares of fees payable to priests officiating jointly at 
a sacrifice to all those who similarly perform their work jointly (viii 206- 
1 1). By a reverse process, Yajnavalkya first declares the law relating to 
partnership in trade, and then applies it to sacrificial priests, husbandmen 


1 Two sums of 550 pure pcs each deposi- 
ted by a foreign nobleman with two 
guilds as a perpetual endowment for 
feeding 100 Brahmanas once a month 
at punyascilc 5: El. xxi p. 60. 2000 karsha- 
panas deposited with one guild of wea- 
vers and 1000 with another at 1 per cent, 
and 'l per cent, interest per mensem res- 
pectively by Ushavadata; cloth-money 
of 12 karshapanas to be supplied every 
year to each of 20 resident monks out 
of the former endowment and money 
for kusana (unexplained) to be supplied 
out of the latter endowment: (Liiders, 


Ust no. 1133; 2000, 1000 and 500 
kurshuporias and another sum depo- 
sited by a Saka lady with guilds "of 
potters, manufacturers of hydraulic 
engines, and oil-millers for providing 
medicines for sick resident monks; 
ibid. no. 1137 . An investment of 20 
and 9 nivartanas of land with a local 
guild by a Saka donor for plantin'' 
trees: ibid. no. 1162. An investment 
ot a sum of money with a guild of 
bamboo-workers and a guild of brazi- 

Tfd f ° r I** bCnefit ° f local monks; 



INDUSTRIAL LAW 


453 


and artisans (ii 259-65). The clauses of the law are on the whole fair to 
both the joint concern and its partners. Thus while, according to Manu, 
the priest’s share is to be proportioned to his work except when it is allot- 
ted specifically, Yajnavalkya divides profit and loss among partners in the 
trade in proportion to their share in the business or according to agree- 
ment. A partner who does work that is forbidden, continues Yajnaval- 
kya, or causes harm through negligence, is to make good the loss, but he 
who preserves the property from a calamity is to get one-tenth as his re- 
ward. A partner unable to do the work himself may get it done by his 
agent, but if he is a man of crooked ways he is to be deprived of his profit 
and expelled. 


INTEREST, PROFITS AND WAGES 

The Smriti law of this period deals with the topics of interest, profits 
and wages which are characteristic of an advanced economy. Loans were 
either secured or unsecured by pledges, and were given either in cash or 
in kind, while the debtors included merchants traversing forests or the 
high seas for gain. The law relating to interest shows an interesting deve- 
lopment. Manu, while repeating the legal rate cf 1J per cent, per month 
allowed by Gautama and Vasisntha, alternatively sanctions 2 per cent, 
in general or 2, 3. 4, and 5 per cent, for Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaisyaand 
Sudra debtors respectively. Yajnavalkya repeats Manu’s schedule of 
rates and reconciles their patent inconsistency by confining the 1 1 per cent, 
rate to loans secured by pledges. The legal rates of interest thus 
reach the high figure of 24 per cent, per annum without counting the 
(probably hypothetical) increased rates in the case of non-Brahmanas. 
To the above moreover Yajnavalkya adds still higher rates of interest to 
cover specific risks viz. 10 per cent, and 20 per cent, (per mensem) for 
debtors (merchants) traversing forests and the high seas respectively. 
Again, he sanctions, despite Mann's distinct prohibition, interest by agree- 
ment in excess of the legal rate. Theseclauses point io the relatively short 
supply of capital in comparison with the demand. However, Manu, like 
Gautama and Vishnu, forbids interest on loans secured by a pledge that 
is being used by the creditor. The scarcity cf capital is also reflected 
in the laws against usury. In accord with Gautama and Vishnu, Manu 
lays down the general rule that the interest accruing at any time must not 
exceed the principal. But this is subject to the provision for maximum 
interest at special rates in the case of selected articles. The maxima 
are declared to be five times the principal amount in case of grain, fruit, 
wool and beasts of burden (Manu), or twice, thrice, four and eight times 
for gold, grains, clothes and fluids respectively (Yajnavalkya). We have 
no confirmation cf these rules in the historical records of our period. On 
the contrary we learn from the inscription of the SakaUshavadata (above, 
p.452, n 1 ) that two weavers' guilds at Govardhana (Nasik) stipulated to 
pay interest at only 1 per cent, and f per cent, per morthfi.e. 12 per cent. 



454 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


and 9 per cent, per annum) instead of the standard rates of 15 per cent, and 
24 per cent, even in respect of two permanent investments. This perhaps 
illustrates the fact that the capital position in Western India in the time 
of Nahapana was much easier than that contemplated by the Smriti 
authorities. 1 

According to the Smritis of this period, 2 as we have seen, the prices 
of merchandise are to be fixed by the king after taking into account the 
relevant factors. Manu is silent about the rates of profit to be allowed. 
This omission is made good by Yajnavalkya who sanctions (ii 252) a 
profit of five and ten per cent, on internal and foreign merchandise respec- 
tively. These figures, which agree with Kautilya (iv 2), are modest enough 
compared with the legal rates of interest cited above. 

Hired labour was employed during this period in agriculture, pasturage, 
industry, and trade and also for domestic service. Wages were paid in 
cash or kind or in both ways, and by the day or month, or else at longer 
intervals determined by contract. The labour laws, as they may be called, 
are laid down in the Smritis under the titles ‘non-payment of wages’ and 
‘masters and herdsmen’. In contrast with the high rates of interest on 
capital allowed by the law, the rates of wages are surprisingly low. First, 
as regards domestic labour, according to Manu (vii 125-26), women and 
male servants in the royal service were to get a daily allowance propor- 
tioned to their position and work, while for others the rates were to be one 
and six pciyas per diem for the lowest and highest servants respectively in 
addition to one drona measure of grain every month and clothes every 
six months. These figures seem to indicate a low scale of wages, though we 
have not the means to estimate what they represented in real money to find 
out the value. As toother kinds of labour, Yajnavalkya (ii 194) lays down 
the general rule that when the work is performed without prior settlement 
of the wages, the labourer is to get one-tenth of the profits of trade, the 
rearing of domestic animals, or crop-growing as the case may be. More 
generous is the general rule in the Mahabhdrata (xii 60. 25-26) which 
awards one-seventh of the whole year’s crops and the proceeds of trade to 
the agricultural labourer and the trader’s assistant respectively. In the 
same context the milk of one cow is mentioned as the wage of a cowherd 
tending six cows, and a cow with a bull as the wage of one tending a hun- 
dred cows. With the former clause may be compared the less liberal rule of 
Manu (viii 231) awarding the milk of one cow to a cowherd tending ten 
cows. 


While such are the rules for the payment of labourers, default in the 
performance of their work is visited with forfeiture of their wages or with 
fines or with both. A workman failing to do his work according to speci- 
fication through pride and without the excuse of illness is to lose his wages 


Legal rates of interest: M. viii 140- 
2; Y. ii 37; cf. Oaut. xii 26, Vos. it 51. 
Interest forbidden on beneficial pledge: 
M. viii 143; cf. Gaut. ii 32, vi 5. Laws 
against usury: M. viii 151; cf. Gaut. 


xii 31, 35 and Vi. vi 11-15. 
interest at soecial rates' 

Y. ii 39 

M. viii 401 ; Y. ii 253 


Maximum 
M. viii 151 



WAGE-LAW 


455 


and pay a fine according to Manu (viii 215) : one abandoning work before 
or after receiving wages, says Yajnavalkya (ii 193), is to forfeit the same or 
pay twice the amount as the case may be. According to Manu (viii 217), 
a workman, whether well or ill, not performing work according to specifi- 
cation, is to lose his wages though his work may remain only slightly 
incomplete. One not performing work at the proper time and place, says 
Yajnavalkya (ii 195), or otherwise causing loss in profit, is to get just as 
much as the master pleases to give him. A carrier, Yajnavalkya (ii 197- 
8) continues, who creates difficulty at the start of a journey is to forfeit 
twice his wages, while one who gives up his charge after starting or deserts 
on the way is to forfeit a proportionately heavy portion of the same. A 
carrier allowing his load to perish otherwise than through the act of God 
or man is to make good the loss. A herdsman who lets an animal be lost, 
killed or maimed through his negligence is to compensate his’ master or to 
pay him a heavy fine. 1 A herdsman causing mischief to enclosed fields is 
to pay a heavy fine, and to other fields a small fine, in addition to making 
good the loss of crops. 2 The Smritis, moreover, lay strict injunctions, 
enforced by fines, upon different trades and professions. Thus a washer- 
man is not to wear or sell or hire or pledge his employer's clothes. 3 
Weavers are to conform to standard rates of increase or decrease in their 
material in the process of weaving, and metal workers are to observe 
similar rates of increase in the process of smelting. 4 

Other clauses of the law are favourable to the workman, exempting 
him from liability in the case of accident and requiring the master to pay 
the stipulated wages for a task not done at the proper time or place and 
even for work which the workman was prevented from doing. Thus 
a herdsman is not responsible if the cattle are stolen by thieves in spite 
of his raising an alarm, or if the goats or sheep are suddenly devoured by 
wolves, nor is he liable for damage done to unfenced crops on the public 
pastures. 5 When a workman does his work according to specification 
even belatedly after recovering from an illness, he is to receive full pay- 
ment. 6 If an assistant makes an extra profit as the result of disregarding 
time and place, he is to receive additional payment. 7 A master causing a 
carrier to abandon his work at the beginning or on the way is to pay 
him a proportionately heavy share of his wages in addition. 8 

CONCLUSION 

Towards the close of the fourth and the beginning of the third century 
b.c. contemporary Greek observers were struck with the abundance of 
India’s agricultural and mineral resources, the skill and industry of its 
inhabitants, and the number of its flourishing cities. It was on cogent 

1 M. viii 232; Y. ii 165 5 M. viii 233, 235, 238 

2 M. viii 240-1 « M. viii 216 

“ M. viii 396; Y. ii 238 ■ Y. ii 195 

4 M. viii 397; Y. ii 178-80 * Y. ii 198 



456 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


grounds that Megasthenes based his well-known and oft-quoted statement 
that famine had never visited India. The political convulsions of the 
subsequent period would seem to have caused a set-back in the economy. 
With the dissolution of the Mauryan dominion the country lost its 
political unity, and even the large kingdoms that arose thereafter were 
inadequate substitutes for the vanished empire. The succession of foreign 
invasions dislocated trade and industry at least temporarily. And yet 
according to all accounts, the country soon recovered and advanced 
towards economic progress. In the first century a.d. the expansion of 
India’s trade with the Roman world which followed the discovery of the 
monsoons brought about a marked development of India's agricultural 
and industrial production. The immediate consequence was the influx of 
vast quantities of Roman specie with effects comparable to what happened 
in western Europe during the sixteenth century when gold poured in from 
the New World. Simultaneously the rich lands of South-East Asia were 
opened up by the enterprise of Indian merchants and colonists. What 
beneficial results flowed from these changes are seen in the numbers of 
Indian sea-ports and other market-towns noticed in the Periplus and in 
the Geography of Ptolemy. The high prosperity of the Indian cities of this 
peripd is attested by contemporary descriptions in Sanskrit, Pali and 
Tamil literature. They present us with pictures of humming industry and 
commerce in cities bright with richly stocked bazars and palatial residen- 
ces, well laid-out streets, parks and gardens, and alive with a teemin'* and 
varied population . 1 These are confirmed in essential respects by the 
clear testimony of extant archaeological remains . 2 

Of the material condition of the different classes of people we draw 
little direct knowledge from contemporary sources. The Jaina Kalpa- 
sutra, while recounting the early life of Mahavira, paints a picture of extra- 
ordinary luxury existing in the royal palace and this in its main outline 
may have been taken from life . 3 We have a hint of the highly 


1 Descriptions of Sagala: Miln. pp. 1-2; 
Puhar Pattinappalai, II. 142-58 (quoted 
by K. A. N. Sastri, The Colas, 
I 96); Madurai in Maduraikkahji. Alsocf. 
descriptions of Ayodhya (Ram. i. 6. 5-28, 

ii 83. 12-18), Mathura (ibid, vii 83, 
10-14), Takshasila and Pushkalavati 
(ibid, vii 114. 12-15). Mithila (A/M. 

iii 206. 6-9) etc. Cf. also the simile 
of a town built according to plan by 
an architect (Miln. pp. 330-31) 

2 Remains at Taxila: (1) Inner city at 
Sirkap built (by Azes I?) with stone 
wall and rectangular bastions; remains 
of buildings extending north to south 
on either side of High Street: remains 
of ‘palace’ with frontage of more than 
350 ft. and depth of over 400 ft. as well 
as house with 4 courts and more than 
30 rooms on ground-floor; (2) city 
at Sirsukh built (by Kanishka I?) 


wnn stone-wall and semi-circular bas- 
tions and covering an area of not less 
than 3 miles: remains of complex of 
buildings consisting of 2 courts with 
series of chambers disposed around 
tnem and a connecting passage in 
between (Marshall. Guide to Taxila 
3rd ed. pp. 4, 6, 80, 86, 113) 

When Queen Trisa. la told her husband, 
tne Kshairiya Siddhaitha, the story 
ot her dream, he arranged for its inter- 
pretation by Brahmanas the next 
morning in open coart. Going to 
the hall of gymnastic exercises at 

“Vf-es £ rf0,min * a ™mber 

or excises he was anointed with 
He Shampo , oed , b y attendants, 
which w S f t T d the , bathing-room 
wmen W'as decorated with Dearl 
°™ n ] ems and a mosaic floor. Having 
bathed m scented water from a stool 



LUXURY 


457 


luxurious tastes of contemporary kings in the Periplus. 1 Indirect proof 
of the immense wealth of kings and their families is supplied by the recor- 
ded instances of magnificent buildings, munificent charities and the 
colossal fees disbursed at sacrifices . 2 That a high level of economic 
prosperity was fairly general in the middle class is proved by other facts. 
The life of the city-bred man of fashion described with such vividness 
in Vatsyayana’s Kamasutra is one of luxurious ease and indulgence. 
Again, the use of perfumes, unguents and other cosmetics is seen to have 
been very extensive. On the other hand the lot of the hired labourer 
may well have been a relatively hard one. 


inlaid with jewels, he arranged his 
elaborate toilet: he first rubbed his 
limbs with sandal of an excellent 
goiirsha variety and then put on jewel- 
led ornaments of various kinds: 
his attendants held an umbrella over 
his head and he was fanned with chow- 
ries. Thus attired and attended, 
he entered the audience hall and took 
his seat on an ornamented throne. 
His wife sat behind a richly decora- 
ted curtain on a state-chair inlaid with 
gems ( Kalpasutra , Lives of the Jinas, 
pp. 59f). 

1 Very costly vessels of silver, singing 
boys and good-looking virgins for 
the king’s harem, fine wines, thin cloth- 
ing of the finest weaves and the choi- 
cest ointments brought to Barygaza 


for the king’s use (Per., sec. 49). Pro- 
bably the thin clothing and the wines 
imported at Barbaricum as well as 
at the Malabar ports (ibid. secs. 39, 
56) were also intended for the use of 
local kings 

! Kanishka’s stupa and monastery, ‘one 
of the wonders of the world’, at his 
capital Purushapura. Ushavadata’s 
charities : Luders, List, nos. 1131, 
1133, 1135. Restoration of Sudar- 

sana lake by Rudradaman out of his 
own treasury : ibid. no. 965. Gift 
of caves, lands and villages by Sata- 
vahanas : ibid., 1123-6. Sacrifices 

performed by Satavahanas with a 
list of fees: ibid. 1112. Charities and 
sacrificial performances of Ikshvakus : 
EI. xx pp. 19, 21, 22, 24 ; xxi p. 62 



Chapter XV 


SOCIAL LIFE 
INTRODUCTORY 

T he period intervening between the downfall of the Imperial Mauryas 
and the rise of the Gupta Emperors marks a crisis in India’s social 
history. The impetus which Asoka’s imperial propaganda had given to 
Buddhism was continued in the centuries immediately before and after 
Christ by other royal patrons and by the zeal of pious missionaries. Hence 
followed both the firm establishment of the faith within India and its 
expansion into the regions of East and South-East Asia. Buddhism thus 
became definitely a world religion, while Jainism under similar influences 
was transformed into an all-India cult. In the course of these great 
movements within the fold of Indian society, the situation was somewhat 
complicated by the influx of large hordes of foreigners with altogether 
alien social and cultural standards. The first reactions to these changes are 
seen in the gloomy prophecies of universal decay and dissolution that 
are met with in contemporary Brahmanical works. And yet in this 
age of seeming social collapse were sown the seeds of a great revival. 
Brahmanism, to begin with, so far from being engulfed by the onrushing 
waves of the rival faiths, girded itself for a fresh struggle and an eventual 
triumph. While its body of social and religious laws was systematised 
in the great Smritis of Manu and Yajnavalkya, its extensive circle of 
myths, legends and fables, and its entire code of individual and social 
ethics, were incorporated into the epic story of the Mahabharata so as 
to give that work in its present form an authority rivalling that of the 
Veda. Brahmanism, again, found in some of the ruling houses of 
Northern India and the Deccan zealous patrons who upheld its social 
and religious practices, while in the South it won for itself an honoured 
place in contemporary society. Thus it prepared itself for its crowning 
triumph in the Age of the Imperial Guptas. At the same time, therefore 
that the reform movements of Buddhism and Jainism during this age 
reached their culmination, the Brahmanical counter-reformation streng- 
thened itself to meet its two rivals with success. Simultaneously the 
problem created by the settlement of foreigners en masse was solved by 
the rapidity and completeness with which they were assimilated into 
the Indian social system. There was yet another development which 
like those just mentioned, stamps this age with the seal of creativity’ 
Though the rise of towns on an extensive scale may be traced back long 
before this period, a new social type, viz. the city-bred man of "fashion 
portrayed in the Kdmasutra of Vatsyayana, seems only now to have come 
on the scene. 



DUTIES OF BRAHMANAS 


459 


SOCIAL DIVISIONS AND SUB-DIVISIONS 
A. BRAHMANAS 

The division of society into four varnas with their distinctive duties, 
occupations and status, and the rules relating to their intermarriage 
and so forth, is the bed-rock of the Brahmanical social fabric. By virtue 
of their origin the Brahmanas, it was held, take the first place in the 
order of castes. It is on this and similar grounds that Manu (i 96, x 3) 
and Yajnavalkya (i 198-9) assert the doctrine of the pre-eminence of the 
Brahmanas not only over all other varnas but over all created beings. Along 
with this went an amplification of the rules governing the sacraments 
and the domestic and other sacrifices that were incumbent upon the 
Brahmanas. As before, while the duties ( dharma ) of Vedic study, of 
sacrificing for himself and of making gifts, are shared by the Brahmana 
with the two other upper castes, to the Brahmana alone fall the distinc- 
tive occupations ( vritti ) of teaching, sacrificing for others, and accepting 
gifts ( M . x 75-6; Y. i 118). In Manu (x 77-8, 95-6) not only are the other 
castes expressly forbidden to adopt any of these occupations, but a man 
of low caste accepting through greed the occupation of a higher one 
is punished with confiscation of property and imprisonment. The 
constant and assiduous study of the Veda is the Brahmana’s highest 
duty according to Manu (iv 147-9), while Yajnavalkya (i 198) stresses 
the Brahmana’s God-given duties of preserving the Veda, satisfying the 
gods and the manes, and protecting dharma. As to his occupations, 
teaching the Veda (without stipulating a fee) is the peculiar privilege of 
the Brahmana which the other two castes did not share (M. i 103 ; x 1). 
A Brahmana in distress may learn the Veda from a non-Brahmana, but 
the perpetual student must not reside with such a teacher or even with a 
Brahmana who cannot expound the Veda (ibid, ii 241-2). A Brahmana 
without the means of subsistence may in the last resort accept gifts from 
any person’s hand, but the acceptance of gifts from a low man is worse 
than teaching or sacrificing for him ; a Brahmana had better maintain 
himself by gleaning grain or preferably picking up single grains from 
the fields ( M . x 102-12). It is indeed the king’s duty to support a Brah- 
mana and especially a Srotriya who has no means of livelihood, but 
the Brahmana who solicits gifts from an unrighteous or low-born king, 
or from kings in general, or, again, from certain disreputable classes, 
makes himself liabie to severe spiritual penalties (M. iv 84-91 ; Y. i 140-1). 
A Brahmana, though entitled to accept gifts, should not cultivate that 
habit too much for danger of losing the divine light in himself (M. iv 186). 
A Brahmana accepting gifts from a Sudra to perform a sacrifice for him 
deserves the strongest censure (M. xi 42-3 ; Y. i. 127). In general a Brah- 
mana is to follow those occupations that cause the least pain to others ; 
he may live by gleaning corn, taking what is given unasked, by begging, 
agriculture or trade, but never by service, ‘a dog’s occupation’; he may 



460 


SOCIAL LIFE 


accumulate as much grain as will fill a granary or a grain-jar, or 
suffice for three days, or for one day, or he may live by picking up 
ears of corn from the fields, each succeeding practice among these being 
a superior alternative to the preceding (M. iv 1-9 ; Y. i 128). Though 
this is the strict law prescribing a Brahmana’s occupation, both Manu 
(x 80-94) and Yajnavalkya (iii 35) feel constrained to allow Brahmanas 
when reduced to distress to live by the occupations of the lower castes. 
This concession is subject, as in the older law, to numerous exceptions 
touching various objectionable trades and professions. Moreover, 
having recovered from his distress the Brahmana must purify himself by 
performing a penance, and surrendering the wealth thus acquired, and so 
forth (M. xi 193-4 ; and Y iii 35, 289). Manu (viii 348-9), again, amplifying 
the older law, expressly permits Brahmanas as well as Kshatriyas and 
Vaisyas to take up arms in self-defence, or in defence of women and 
Brahmanas, or to prevent the violation of their own duties and to ward 
off destruction from the three upper classes. Even killing in such cir- 
cumstances, Manu emphatically declares, is no sin. 

It follows from this severe code of discipline that deviations from 
the ordained standard brought deep discredit and disgrace upon the 
defaulting Brahmana. In Manu (iii 150-82) and Yajnavalkya (i 222-4), 
as in the older Smritis, we have long lists of persons not eligible for invi- 
tation to sraddhas. Among these are included one not studying the 
Veda, one teaching for a stipulated fee, and one teaching Sudra pupils. 
Not infrequently such degraded Brahmanas are equated with Sudras 
(M. ii 168 ; viii 102). When a Brahmana who neither performs austerities 
nor studies the Veda accepts gifts, he drags both himself and the 
donor down into hell (M. iv 190 ; Y. i 202). And yet we find already at 
work a tendency to exalt the Brahmana irrespective of his qualifications, 
and even in disregard of his unfitness. In strikingly emphatic language 
we are told ( Mbh . xiii 151, 21-3 ; M. ix 317-9) that a Brahmana, whether 
learned or not, is a great deity like fire, whether consecrated or not ; 
that like fire which is not contaminated even in a cremation-ground, a 
Brahmana employed in the meanest occupations must be honoured as a 
great deity. After this it is no surprise to learn (M. iii 149 ; Mbh. xiii 90, 2) 
that the merits of the invited Brahmana need not be closely scrutinised 
at rites in honour of the gods, though such scrutiny is necessary for 
rites in honour of the manes. The only exceptions which Manu allows 
in the former case are a number of notoriously bad characters (iii 150). 

It remains to notice the immunities and privileges belonging to the 
Brahmapas in the old Smriti law which are repeated in our present texts. 
Among the persons entitled to the right of way, the snataka (a Brahmana 
who has performed his ceremonial bath after completing his education) 
has precedence even over the king (M. ii 138-9; Y. i. 117). A Brahmana 
offender is not to be sentenced to death on any account, but he is liable 
to banishment without confiscation of property, to shaving of the head 
to branding or to fines (M. viii 123, 378-81, 383-5 ; Y. ii 270). As a rule 



THEORY AND PRACTICE 


461 


the Brahmana’s punishments are less severe than those of the other 
classes. On the other hand offences against Brahmanas are punished with 
more severity than those committed against the other classes. As in the 
older law Brahmana-murder heads the list of mortal sins ( mahapatakas ) 
to be expiated by particularly severe penances (M. ix 237; xi 55, 102; Y, 
iii 227, 257), and it is visited with other fearful punishments in the 
next life (M. xi 49; xii 55; Y. iii 20). According to Manu (iv 162; xi 90), 
no injury may be done to a Brahmana, and intentional slaying of a Brah- 
mana is an inexpiable sin. But elsewhere (viii 350) Manu himself per- 
mits the slaying even of a learned Brahmana in self-defence. The 
Brahmana offender’s property is exempt from confiscation while the 
theft of a Brahmana’s gold ranks among the mortal sins ( M . viii 380; xi 
55; Y. iii 227). The heirless property of a Brahmana is distributed 
among his fellow-Brahmanas, while that of other castes is escheated to 
the king (M. ix 188-9). The seizure of a Brahmana’s property, as of a 
god’s, is visited with severe penalties in the next life ( M . xi 26). Not 
only are learned Brahmanas exempt from taxes (M. vii 133), but the king 
is bound to support them after proper examination of their family, learn- 
ing and character ( M . vii 135; Y. iii 44). A learned Brahmana is to act 
where necessary as the king’s substitute for the trial of cases {M. viii 9; 
Y. ii 3). 

This description of the Brahmana’s status according to the Smritis may 
now be checked by the evidence of other contemporary sources. In the 
enumeration of castes in the Milindapanha (5, 122, 331), as in the older 
Pali canonical texts, the Kshatriyas invariably precede the Brahmanas. 
The superior status of the Kshatriya is pointedly brought out in the Pali 
Nidanakatha (i 49) and the Sanskrit Lalitaxistara (i 20) : here we are told 
in the story of Buddha’s early life that while the Brahmana and the 
Kshatriya are the two highest classes, the Kshatriyas are now admitted 
to hold the topmost rank. This tendency to glorify the Kshatriya may 
have been due partly to the desire of the authors to exalt the order to 
which the founder of their faith belonged, and partly to the strength of 
the ancient tradition. In any case the purohita in the Milindapanha (164), 
as in the Jatakas, is found to combine with his proper office of domestic 
priest the function of a teacher of the king in early youth. In the story of 
Nagasena’s early life (Miln. 9-10) we find that having been born in a Brah- 
mana household and reached his seventh year Nagasena was told by his 
father that the study of the sciences (scil. the Vedas) was compulsory 
in his family; he was thereupon taken to a Brahmana teacher ( achdrva ) 
who received a substantial fee for teaching him the three Vedas. From 
this we see that Brahmana boys went at a tender age, as required by the 
Canon, to live in residence with a teacher for learning the Vedas, and that 
it was customary to pay the teacher his fee in advance notwithstanding 
the denunciation of this practice in the Smritis. 

In the story of the Buddha referred to above, the circle of Brahmana- 
lore is said to comprise the three Vedas with their auxiliaries (as known 



462 


SOCIAL LIFE 


to stock lists in the Jatakas), and knowledge of ‘the signs of great men’. 
More diversified is the curriculum of studies of the Brahmana mentioned 
in the Milindapanha (1 78) enumerating the duties of a prince, a Brahmana 
youth, a Vaisya and a JSudra. It comprises not only the Vedic group 
(Rigveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda, Atharvaveda, Itihasa, Purana, lexico- 
graphy, ritual, phonetics and grammar), but also astronomy, astro- 
logy and natural philosophy ( lokdyatika ), as well as the interpretation 
of dreams, omens and portents, of solar and lunar eclipses, of the beha- 
viour of stars and planets, of thunder and the fall of meteors, of earth- 
quakes and conflagrations, and of omens to be drawn from the sight of 
dogs and deer, the cries of birds, and so on. It is evident that a vast 
store of sciences and pseudo-sciences had by this time been added to 
the Vedas in the compass of a Brahmana’s studies. Probably the non- 
Vedic lore was studied for their livelihood by worldly Brahmanas 
such as those described so vividly in the Jatakas. Of the type of the true 
Brahmana known likewise to the Jatakas, we have a striking reminiscence 
in a Milindapanha passage (225-6) explaining the description of the 
Buddha as ‘an open-handed Brahmana’. The Brahmana, we are told, 
is one who has passed beyond hesitation, perplexity, and doubt, who 
has escaped from every sort of becoming and is entirely free from 
evil, who cultivates excellent conditions of heart, who follows the tradi- 
tional regulations relating to study and teaching, making and receiving 
gifts, self-control and performance of duties, who enjoys the supreme 
bliss of ecstatic meditation, and who knows the course of births and all 
forms of existence. Here we have evidently a picture of the Brahmana 
at his best according to the standards of the contemporary Smritis. As 
to the Brahmana’s regular occupations, we have historical instances of 
Brahmanas, notwithstanding the strict Smriti injunctions to the contrary, 
engaged in royal service, and even rising to be founders of ruling houses. 
Brahmanas are also known to have not only performed sacrifices for 
themselves, but also officiated as priests at sacrifices celebrated by royalty. 
Brahmanas, again, are mentioned not only as making gifts, but also 
as accepting gifts in cash and kind from kings and princes who delighted 
to honour them. 1 


B. KSHATRIYAS 


In Manu and Yajnavalkya as in the older Smritis, the Kshatriyas, 


For descriptions of pure and worldly 
Brahmanas in Jatakas, see Fick, The 
Social Organisation in North-East India, 
Eng. tr. pp. 193-250. Examples of 
Brahmana high officials etc. : sena- 
pati Pushyamitra, founder of the Sunga 
dynasty, amatya Vasudeva, founder of 
the Kanva dynasty,,Brahmana treasurer 
of mahakshatrapa Sodasa (Lttders, List, 
no. 82), Refs, to Brahmanas making 


guts: ibid. nos. 82, 1035, 1050. Brah- 
maijas performing Vedic sacrifices : 
Pushyamitra Suriga, Ltiders, List, no. 
149a, ASIAR. 1910-11, p. 41; Brah- 
^ a v^ Ceivm § S‘ fts: L <iders, List, nos. 
‘ 34 ’ 109 VJ 31 ’ 1133 ’ 1135, 1328; El. xxt 
p. ou. Vedic sacrifices performed and 
heavy fees paid to officiating priests : 
Luders, List, no. 1112, EL xx pp. 19, 
-1, 62; xxm p. 52; xxiv pp. 250, 253 



TRAINING OF A KSHATRIYA 


463 


while sharing with the Brahmanas and the Vaisyas the duties of Vedic 
study, sacrificing for themselves, and making gifts, are assigned the sole 
occupation of ruling and fighting : only in times of distress is a Kshat- 
riya allowed to live by the occupation of a Vaisya (M. i 89; x 77-89, 95, 
117; Y. i 119; iii 42). This is confirmed in part and partly corrected 
and supplemented by references in other works. The list of duties and 
occupations laid down for the Kshatriyas in the Smritis is reflected in 
the Mahabharata (xii 60, 13 f. etc.). But as Hopkins 1 justly remarks, the 
essence of the king’s duty according to the oft-repeated axiom and motto 
of the caste in the Great Epic is fighting : for him to die of disease in a 
house is declared to be a sin, while death in battle is most commended. 
Repeated references in the Mahabharata again lead Hopkins 2 to conclude 
that there were three fundamental rules forming the Kshatriya’s code of 
conduct towards his fellows : the first was the ‘guest-law’, every guest 
being regarded as inviolable ; the second was the law of not forget- 
ting kindness, and the third and last was the sacredness of a ‘refugee’, 
i.e. a person who threw himself (even in battle) upon one’s mercy. The 
education of the Kshatriya as described in the Epic is somewhat different 
from that prescribed in the Smritis. As Hopkins 3 observes, the descrip- 
tions of the early lives of the heroes in the Rdmayaria and the Mahabharata 
prove that the Kshatriyas were trained principally in the art of fighting 
(i dhanurveda ), and that they passed out of boyhood in their sixteenth year. 
The same discrepancy with the Smriti law is found in the description 
of a prince’s duties in the Milindapahha (178). Here we read that a 
prince is to learn the arts of managing horses, elephants, and chariots, 
as well as those of writing and accounts, and of waging war. In this 
severely practical training, it will be observed, there is no mention of 
Vedic study such as is attributed in the same context to the Brahmana 
youth. Two other slight references in the same work illustrate the current 
view of the Kshatriya’s status. From a simile (190) we learn that the 
‘Khattiya-secret formula’ was current, as in the Jataka tales, among 
this order alone. Another and a more striking simile (357-8) shows that 
a man of low caste presuming to consecrate himself after the Kshatriya 
fashion was punished with mutilation and torture for usurping a position 
of authority to which low castes were not entitled. It seems, therefore, 
that the Kshatriyas were held as in the early Buddhist times, to be an 
exclusive caste, and that the privilege of ruling was regarded as the mono- 
poly of a member of this order receiving the proper consecration. Other 
evidence seems to show that the Kshatriyas performed various sacrifices 
as enjoined by the Smriti law. The contemporary inscriptions have 
preserved the memory not only of kings, but also of private individuals 
(apparently of the Kshatriya caste) who performed Vedic sacrifices accom- 
panied with the gift of magnificent fees to the officiating priests. 4 

1 JAOS. xni pp. 186-7 1 Probable refs, to Kshatriyas perfor- 

2 Ibid. p. 104 ming Vedic sacrifices : El. xx pp. 19, 

3 Ibid. pp. 109-10 31, 62; xxni p. 52; xxiv pp. 250, 253 



464 


SOCIAL LIFE 


C. GRIHAPATIS ETC. 

Repeating the old Smriti rule Manu (i 90; viii 410, 418; ix 326-33; 
x 79-80) and Yajnavalkya (i 119) enjoin upon the Vaisyas. the third in the 
order of castes, the three-fold duty of Vedic study, performing sacrifices 
and making gifts, while fixing for them the occupations of agriculture, 
cattle-rearing, money-lending, and trade. The same three-fold list of 
duties is laid down for the Vaisya in the Mahabharata (xii 60, 21 f.) 
which, however, declares his special occupation to be cattle-rearing. 
As in the contemporary Smriti law, the Vaisya is entitled to take 
up arms for self-defence, for the defence of cows and Brahmanas, 
and for preventing the mixture of castes (ibid. 165. 33). In other 
passages, however (ibid, i 126, 13-14, 164; 20; iii 4, 15 etc.), Hop- 
kins 1 detects a tendency to equate the Vaisya's status with that of 
the Sudra. When we turn to the Milindapanha (178), we find it assign- 
ing, in the fashion of the Smritis, the duties of agiiculture and trade to 
the Vessa (Skt. Vaisya). In their actual pictures of social life, however, 
the records of this period make no mention of the Vaisyas as a separate 
caste. We are introduced instead to a class well known to the early 
Buddhist literature, viz. grihapatis (Pali gahapati. Jaina Prakrit gaha- 
vai). Of the ten stories of pious Jaina laymen in the Uvasagadasao , as 
many as nine deal with the lives of grihapatis described in the stock phrase 
as men possessed of vast stores of hoarded wealth and money lent out 
at interest, enjoying great estates and herds of cattle, who are consulted 
on all sorts of business by kings, princes and merchants. The tenth story 
deals with the life of a potter who is described by contrast as owning 
only one-fourth of the possessions of the grihapati. The grihapati, 
therefore, we may surmise, formed the rich capitalist class consisting of 
big land owners, money-lenders and ranchers, and they enjoyed high 
social prestige and were distinguished from the humbler class of artisans. 
Some light is also thrown upon the status of the grihapatis by references in 
the votive inscriptions of the centuries immediately before and after 
Christ. The grihapatis are here referred to as following the avocations of a 
merchant, farmer, caravan-leader or treasurer. In a few instances the 
donors introduce themselves as relations (son, grandson, mother, wife 
daughter, or daughter-in-law) of individual grihapatis. Apparently.’there- 
fore, the grihapatis followed miscellaneous occupations and formed 
a special class or rank with high distinctions, but not a rigid caste. Along 
with the grihapatis the votive inscriptions commemorate a number of 
kutumbikas who likewise appear in the Jatakas in the role of men of pro- 
perty at the head of a household. Lastly and most important the 
votive inscriptions and other records of this period speak of the sefthiv/bo 
is likewise a familiar figure in the early Buddhist literature. In the story 
of Nagasena’s early life, the Milindapanha (17) tells the tale of a setthi of 
Pataliputra who journeyed at the head of his caravan from North-Western 
1 Op. cit., pp. 92-4 



STATUS OF SUDRAS 


465 


India to his own city. In the votive inscriptions of this period while 
there are instances of setthis who themselves make the donations, 
other donors introduce themselves as their relatives. In a few instances 
a setthi is referred to simply by his native village or town and without 
his personal name. Clearly then the setthi was, as in the Jatakas, a rich 
and influential merchant-prince occupying a special position of honour 
among members of his profession. A few inscriptions mentioning 
setthis who were also grihapatis or sons of grihapatis suggest that, as in 
the Jatakas, the setthi was the most important and aristocratic represen- 
tative of this class. 1 

D. SODRA castes, mixed castes and 

ABORIGINAL TRIBES 


The disabilities imposed by the old Smriti Law upon the fourth and 
lowest caste, che Sudras, are emphasised by our present authorities. 
According to Manu (i 91 ; x 123-5) and Yajnavalkya (i 120) the Sudra 
because of his low origin has only one duty and one occupation, viz. 
to serve the upper classes and especially the Brahmanas who in their 
turn are bound to feed, clothe and maintain him. Only in times of distress 
is a Sudra allowed to live by practising various arts and crafts or by serving 
a Kshatriya or a rich Vaisya (M. x 99-100, 121), or alternatively by enga- 
ging in trades and crafts of various kinds ( Y . i 120). According to Manu 
(viii 413-14 ; 416-17) the Brahmana can compel a Sudra, whether purcha- 
sed or not, to do servile work, and can without hesitation appropriate 
his possessions. For a Sudra, so runs the argument, is not released from 
his inherent servitude even after emancipation, and he has no property 
of his own. Of the same nature is the clause in Manu (viii 418) enjoining 
the king to compel the Sudra to perform his work. That these extreme 
clauses belonged to times long past is proved by the internal evidence of 
the works themselves. A verse common to Manu (ix 157) and the Maha- 
bharata (xiii 47, 56), and therefore of respectable antiquity, recognises 
the Sudra’s right of bequeathing his property in equal shares among his 


1 Stock description of gahavai : Uvasaga. 
i 4-5; ii 92; iii 127; iv 145; v 155; 
vi 163; viii 232; ix 268; x 273. Descrip- 
tion of a potter: ibid, vii 182. Refs, 
to gahapati in votive inscrs.: Ltiders, 
List, nos. 193, 201, 202, 449, 450 etc. 
(at Sanchl); no. 725 (at Bharhut); no. 
1120 (at Nanaghat); nos. 1170, 1157 
(at Junnar); nos. 1206, 1209, 1211, 
1220 etc. (at Amaravatl). Ref. to 
kutumbika, ibid. nos. 976, 1121, 1127. 
For the status of gahapati and kutum- 
bika in the Jatakas, see Fick, op. cit. 
pp. 253-7. Fick’s description (ibid, 
p. 256) of gahapatis as a special class 
and rank and not a caste is borne out 
by the votive inscrs. which however do 
59 


not support his somewhat narrow identi- 
fication of them (ibid. p. 253) with the 
lower landowning nobility and the 
rich middle-class families in big 
cities. Refs, to sreshthis and their 
relatives as donors in votive inscrs.: 
Liiders, List, nos. 24, 41 (at Mathura); 
nos. 184, 206, 246, 248, 255, 283, 339, 
348 etc. (at Sanchi) ; no. 1087 (at Karle). 
Refs, to village sreshthis : ibid. nos. 
422, 423. Refs, to sreshthi as gahapati 
or as gahapati s son : ibid. nos. 1056, 
1073, 1075. Setthis are habitually refe- 
rred to as gahapatis in Avadanasataka. 
On the status of setthis in the Jatakas, 
see Fick, op. cit. pp. 257-66 



466 


SOCIAL LIFE 


sons. Another clause ( M . ix 179 ; Y. ii 133) refers to the same right when 
it allows the Sudra’s son by his female slave to take a share at the Sudra’s 
discretion. Again, the very clauses (M. xi 42-3 ; Y. i 127) declaring a 
Sudra’s gift to be unlawful for Brahmanas imply the Sudra’s right 
of giving away his property. The rules (M. viii 142 ; Y. ii 38) relating 
to the legal rates of interest payable by Sudras presuppose the Sudra’s 
capacity to follow an independent vocation. In other respects the Sudra 
enjoys, as in the Dharmasutras, limited social, religious and political 
rights. Thus while the Sudra’s food is unfit to be eaten, specific excep- 
tions are made to this rule ( M . iv 211, 218, 253 ; Y. i 160, 166). According 
to Manu (iv. 80 repeating Vas. xviii 14) the Sudra is unfit for sacraments 
and should not be given advice or religious instruction or made to per- 
form vows. Nevertheless Manu’s rule (ii 32) recommending a name con- 
nected with service for a Sudra implies the Sudra’s right to perform the 
namakarana ceremony. Elsewhere (x 126-7) Manu says that the Sudra, 
though not entitled to the (whole) dharma, can fulfil (some portions of) it, 
and that he who imitates the practice of virtuous men without reciting 
the sacred texts is praiseworthy. More explicitly Yajnavalkya (i 121) 
allows the Sudra the right to perform the sraddha and the vows as well as 
the five daily sacrifices with repetition of namah only. The privilege of 
Vedic study and the performance of Vedic sacrifices is jealously guarded 
against the Sudra ( M . iv 80, 99 ; Y. i. 148). When, however, we read (M. 
iii 156, 178) that one who is a teacher or a pupil of a Sudra or sacrifices 
for him is excluded from sraddhas, we can infer that such practices were 
not altogether unknown. Finally, the discrimination made against the 
Sudra in the branches of civil and criminal law as well as the law of 
penances, at least implies that he was not without his rights. 

In the Mahabharata the status of the Sudra is much the same as in the 
Smritis. The Sudra’s divinely ordained duty, we are told, is the service 
of the other three classes especially of the Brahmanas ; the latter have to 
feed and clothe him, to support him in old age and disease, nay, even 
offer funeral cakes for him it he dies sonless (Mbh. xii 60, 27-35 ; xiii 59, 
32-3). The Sudra, however, if without this occupation, can live by trade] 
animal-rearing, and industry (ibid, xii 293, 1 f. ; 294, 12 f.). As in Manu' 
the Sudra is without property, he cannot commit acts causing loss of 
caste, and he is not entitled to sacraments, vows, and prayers • but he 
can perform the smaller sacrifices ( pakayajfias ) and other sacrifices with- 
out Vedic texts and, though not entitled to perform the dharma laid down 
in the Vedas, is not forbidden to practise other dharma (ibid, xii 60. 37- 
46 ; 296. 26-7 ; 327. 49). Only in one extreme text (ibid, xiii 59, 33) do we 
have a hint of the Sudras being denied the right of touching a Brahmana 
or appearing in his presence. 

We may now consider the status of the so-called mixed castes derived 
in the Smriti theory from proper ( anuloma ) or improper ( pratiloma ) 
unions between men and women of the four basic varnas. To the number 
of these derivative castes enumerated by the older authors, Manu (x. 6-56) 



MIXED CASTES 


467 


and Yajnavalkya (i. 90-5) add a few more, which are all supposed to have 
been formed from unions of anuloma and pratiloma castes with the four 
original varnas or with one another. Inasmuch as Manu assigns them their 
respective occupations, we may suppose that they were living profes- 
sional castes or sub-castes formed in the natural course of social develop- 
ment. As for the social status of these castes, Manu (x. 6, 13, 28, 41) says 
that anuloma castes are slightly inferior to their fathers, but are entitled to 
all the rights belonging to the three upper classes. According to the 
Mahabharata, however (xiii 48. 4), a Brahmana’s son by a Brahmana or a 
Kshatriya wife has the same status as the father, while a Brahmana’s 
son born of a Vaisya or a Sudra wife has a lower status determined by the 
mother’s caste. 

According to all accounts the pratiloma castes have the status of Sudras. 
But a specially low rank is assigned to the Chandalas who are known 
even in Vedic times as a despised caste. As the lowest of mortals, the 
Chandalas are often bracketed together with dogs and crows (M. iii 92, 
239 ; x 26). They are excluded from all rights ( Y. i 93). Their touch is 
impure (M. v 85). They are to take their food from broken dishes, and 
vessels used by them are to be thrown away ( M . x 51, 52, 54). They have 
to wear distinctive dress, ornaments and other outward marks : they are 
to live outside villages and towns in studiously mean surroundings ; their 
occupations are those concerned with the execution of criminals, the dis- 
posal of unclaimed bodies and so forth ( M . x 51-2 ; 55-6). 

Let us next turn to references in other contemporary works to check 
the testimony of the Smritis. From an important extract in Patanjali’s 
Mahabhashya (on Pan. ii 4, 10) we learn that the Sudras, instead of for- 
ming a single caste, really consisted, even so early, of various professional 
and ethnic groups occupying different social grades. Among the Sudras, 
we are told, the lowest place belongs to the Chandalas and Mritapas who, 
while living in Aryavarta and within Aryan settlements, are excluded from 
sacrificial performances, and from eating food on the same plate with 
an Aryan. Higher in the scale are the carpenters, washermen, black- 
smiths and weavers. For while excluded from performance of sacri- 
fices, they can take food from an Aryan’s dish without polluting it 
permanently. Above them are those who, while living outside Arya- 
varta but within Aryan settlements, are entitled to perform sacri- 
fices and to eat from an Aryan’s plate without making it permanently 
unclean. In this list are included, besides the Sakas and the Yavanas to 
be noticed presently, several groups (Kishkindhas, Gandhikas, Sauryas 
and Kraunchas) who cannot be identified at present. In connection with 
the foregoing classification it is interesting to observe that blacksmiths, 
washermen, and carpenters, who could take food from an Aryan’s dish 
according to Patanjali, are included by Manu (iv 210-20) and Yajnavalkya 
(i 161-5) among those whose food is unfit to be eaten. In contrast with 
this detailed and apparently realistic account of the status of the Sudra 
group of castes, we have a general and evidently formal statement after 



468 


SOCIAL LIFE 


the Smriti fashion in the Milindapahha (178) ; here we read that the Sudra 
like the Vaisya is to live by agriculture and trade. As to the ‘mixed castes’, 
lists of their names and occupations are given in the Mahabharata (xiii 48), 
the Chandalas and the Pukkasas being described in much the same terms 
as in the Smritis. Similarly the Lalitavistara (i 20) mentions the Chandalas 
and the Pukkasas along with bamboo-workers and chariot-makers as 
typical examples of low castes. Of the Svapakas (allied to the Chandalas) 
we are told in the Uttaradhyayana Sutra (xiii 18-19) that they are the 
lowest of castes, who are loathed by all people and doomed to live in 
their own hamlets. In the historical inscriptions of this period reference is 
made to a large number of humble professions, but we have no means of 
knowing their status. 1 

In the Brahmanical law of this period an attempt is made for the first 
time to give a recognised status to a number of aboriginal tribes within 
the orthodox social system. The Paundrakas, the Chodas, the Dravidas, 
the Kambojas and the Kiratas (M. x 44), or the Kambojas, the Dravidas, 
the Kalingas, the Pulindas and the Uslnaras (Mbh. xiii 33, 22-3), or the 
Mekalas, the Dravidas, the Latas, the Paundras, the Daradas and the 
Kiratas (ibid. 35, 17-18), we are told, were originally Kshatriyas, but they 
sank to the level of Sudras by failing to perform the sacred rites and to 
consult the Brahmanas. This remarkable theory of aboriginal status 
is laid down in the Mahabharata in the context of a grand eulogy on the 
greatness of the Brahmanas ; but at any rate it shows that the tribes con- 
cerned were held to be Sudras of a fairly high grade. The relatively high 
status of these tribes is indicated more clearly in the Great Epic (xii 65, 
13-22). Here the question is asked how the Andhras, Madrakas, the 
Paundras, the Kalingas, and the Kambojas, among others, are to perform 
their duties. In reply it is declared that they should pay respectful atten- 
tion to parents, teachers, preceptors, kings, and those living in hermitages : 
they should practise the virtues of non-injury (ahimsa), truthfulness, purity 
and forbearance : they should dig wells and construct places for the'supply 
of drinking water : they should perform (and this is most significant) 
the minor sacrifices ( pakayajhas ): they should make rich gifts to 
priests at sacrifices. 

In so far as the Dravidian peoples of the far South are concerned 
their social divisions are revealed to us in the valuable works of the 
Sangam Age. Among these peoples while the immigrant Brahmanas had 
an honoured place in society, the classes in order of descending impor- 
tance were the sages ( arivar ), landowners (velMar), herdsmen, hunters, 
artisans and soldiers and, lastly, fishermen and scavengers. 2 


! Such are the professions of the gard- 
ener, perfumer, labourer, blacksmith, 
brazier, ironmonger, goldsmith, dyer, 
polisher, carpenter and so forth. See 


, LMers, List Index of Misc. Terms, 
i Pp A i06 N ‘l l3 anta SaStri ’ The C ° laS ’ 



CHANGE IN CASTE STATUS 


469 


THE MONASTIC ORDERS 

The organisation of the orthodox orders of the forest-dwelling hermits 
( vanaprastha or vaikhanasa) and ascetics (yati or parivrajaka) with special 
rules of life relating to their food, dress, and manner of living, is as 
old as the Dharmastitras. These rules are repeated and amplified by 
Manu (vi 1-85) and Yajnavalkya (iii 45-65). Mention must be made 
also of members of the Buddhist and Jaina monastic orders of whose 
fruitful activities we have ample evidence in the history of contemporary 
literature and missionary enterprise. Testimony to the pious zeal of 
Buddhist and Jaina monks and nuns in humbler walks of life is borne 
by the votive inscriptions, and yet the literary records point to the 
spread of corruption and immorality among these classes. The 
Arthasastra of Kautilya mentions the employment as spies of 
pseudo-ascetics, hermits, and mendicant women belonging to Brah- 
manical as well as non-Brahmanical orders as a well-established 
institution. What is worse, in pre-Vatsyayana works on Erotics, 
Buddhist and Jaina nuns as well as Brahmanical female ascetics are found 
to be employed in the unworthy r61e of go-betweens among lovers. The 
low esteem in which female ascetics in general were held in contemporary 
society may be illustrated by two examples. While adulterous conver- 
sation with a married woman made the offender liable to a heavy fine, 
the penalty for secret conversation with a female ascetic is only nominal 
according to Manu (viii 361-3) and Yajnavalkya (iii 285, 293). Again 
Vatsyayana warns the nagaraka's wife (iv 1, 9) not to associate with 
female ascetics belonging to Brahmanical, Buddhist, and Jaina orders. 
Of the sectarian ill-feeling of Brahmanas towards the heretical faiths we 
have a few examples. Among those for whom no funeral libations are to 
be offered, Manu (v 89-90) includes monks belonging to heretical orders 
as well as women joining a heretical sect. Elsewhere (ix 225) he goes 
so far as to ask for the immediate banishment from the town of the 
adherents of heretical sects. 1 

RISE AND FALL IN CASTE STATUS 


It is desirable in this connection to notice the doctrine of rise and fall 
in caste status ( jatyutkarsha and jatyapakarsha) advocated by Manu 
and Yajnavalkya after Gautama. ‘According to Manu (x 64) when a 
Brahmana marries a Sudra woman, the daughter born is parasava and 


For reference to Buddhist and Jaina 
monks and nuns in votive inscrs., see 
Ltiders, List, Index on Misc. Terms, 
■s. v. muni, tapasa, tapasvin, bhikshu, 
bhikshuni, sramana, sramanikd, bhadanta, 
bhadanti, etc. Hermit and ascetic (with 
shaven head or matted hair) as chiefs 
of stationary spies : KA. ill. Female 
mendicants of Brahmana, shaven-headed 


and Sudra classes as itinerant spies : 
ibid, i 12. Residences of Buddhist and 
Jaina nuns and Brahmanical female 
ascetics as convenient rendezvous for 
unchaste wives and their paramours : 
Gonikaputra quoted in Kamasutra v. 4, 
42. Mendicant women included among 
female messengers of love : ibid, v. 
4, 62 



470 


SOCIAL LIFB 


if this parasava daughter marries a Brahmana and the daughter of this 
latter union marries a Brahmana and this continues for seven generations, 
then the seventh generation will be a Brahmana . . . Conversely if a 
Brahmana marries a Sudra woman and a son is born, he is a parasava, 
and if that son marries a Sudra woman, and their son again marries a 
3udra woman, and this goes on for seven generations, the seventh genera- 
tion becomes a mere Sudra.’ ‘Manu (x 65) extends the same rules to the 
offspring of the marriage of a Kshatriya with a Vaisya woman and of a 
Vaisya with a Sudra woman.’ ‘Yajnavalkya (i 96) speaks of two kinds 
of jatyutkarsha and jatyapakarsha, viz. one due to marriage and 
another due to the avocation followed.’ If these rules were observed in 
practice, they would have done much to soften the rigour of caste distinc- 
tions. Such was actually the case according to D. R. Bhandarkar who 
thinks 1 that the Smriti rules above mentioned actually recorded regional 
customs. But good grounds have recently been given for the view that 
the doctrine of Manu and Yajnavalkya was in fact only an hypothesis 
and an ideal. 2 


THE STATUS OF SLAVES 


Slavery in India is as old as the Vedas. The Buddhist canonical texts men- 
tion various classes of slaves, viz. slaves by birth, by purchase, by capture 
in war and by self-choice. In Kautilya (iii 13) we have for the first time 
a body of laws governing their status. Manu (viii 415) distinguishes 
seven kinds of slaves, viz. one captured in war, one accepting slavery 
for food, one born in the master’s household, one purchased, one given, 
one acquired by inheritance from ancestors, and one enslaved by way of 
punishment. This list is confirmed and supplemented by other contem- 
porary literary references. Manu himself, while laying down the prime- 
val law of warriors, says (vii 96) that one who singly gains a woman in 
battle becomes her owner. The custom of the temporary enslavement 
of a defeated foe is well known to the Mahabharata. 3 Selling one’s 
own self or wife or child is condemned as a sin of the second degree 
(upapataka) in Manu (xi 60, 62) and Yajnavalkya (iii 236, 240, 242). 
In the Milindapanha (279), however, the sale as well as the pledge of a 
son by a father involved in debt or without his livelihood figures as an 
acknowledged custom. The sale of wives and children is mentioned in the 
Mahabharata (viii 45, 40) as a reprehensible custom prevalent among 
the Angas. The gift of slaves is referred to in the same epic (ii 52, 11; 57, 
8), while the Milindapanha (278) includes women in a list of ten condem- 


3 JA. 1911, p. 11 

3 The above quotations are from Kane. 
History of Dharmasastra, n Part i. pp. 
63-4. The method of rise and fall 
in caste status was an hypothesis and an 
ideal (ibid. p. 65) 

3 In Mbh. iii 272, 11; iv 33, 50; we 


are told that according to the law 
of warfare a foe defeated in battle 
can save his life by publicly proclaim- 
ing himself the victor’s slave, but after a 
year he is acknowledged as the victor’s 
son and set free. 



SLAVERY 


471 


ned gifts. In the notorious story of the servitude of the Pandava brothers 
along with Draupadi as the price of defeat at dice, we have an example of 
slavery for a wager. Enslavement as a punishment is illustrated by 
Yajnavalkya (ii 186) who condemns an apostate from asceticism to be 
the king’s slave for life. The enslavement of an adulterous wife caught 
flagrante delicto by her husband as an alternative to other forms of punish- 
ment is mentioned in the Milindapanha (158) as a prevailing practice. 
It would appear that slaves in these times were articles of sale, gift, mort- 
gage, and inheritance, their ranks being swelled by capture in war, the 
sale of minors by their guardians, the voluntary surrender of freedom, 
and also by punishment for indebtedness, apostasy and adultery. As to 
the general attitude towards slaves, their humane treatment is enjoined in 
the sacred texts ( M . iv 184-5, Mbh. xii 242, 20-1). Manu (viii 299-300), 
however, allows the same limited power of correction over the slave as 
over the wife and the son to the head of the household. As regards 
personal rights, Yajnavalkya (ii 183) lays down that slavery ( dasya ) shall 
be in the descending order of castes ( varrias ) and not in the ascending 
order. With this may be contrasted the far more liberal law of Kautilya 
forbidding an Aryan in any circumstances to be reduced to slavery. As 
for the slave’s rights of property, a dictum common to Manu (viii 416) 
and the Mahdbharata (i 82, 28; v33, 68), and evidently of high antiquity, 
categorically denies the slave’s right to acquire wealth for himself, though 
a slight exception is made in favour of a son begotten by a Sudra on a 
female slave. Such a son takes a share of his father’s property at the 
latter’s choice ( M . ix 179. Y. ii 136) after the father’s death; he takes a 
half share if there are brothers and the whole share if there are no brothers 
or daughter’s sons (Y. ii 137). The Smritis, however, are silent about 
the right of slaves in general to acquire, inherit and bequeath property 
such as is allowed by Kautilya under certain circumstances. As regards 
the right of emancipation Yajnavalkya (ii 185) declares the forcible 
reduction to slavery, like any sale by robbers, to be void. Emancipation, 
continues the same authority, is the reward for a slave who saves his 
master’s life, while one who accepts slavery for his keep is released on 
payment of the expenses of his maintenance, and one enslaved for debt 
is freed when he repays it. We miss, however, in Manu and Yajnavalkya 
the equivalents of Kautilya’s law entitling a self-sold slave and a slave by 
capture in war to emancipation on payment of a ransom. On the other 
hand Yajnavalkya, as we have seen, condemns an apostate from asceti- 
cism to be the king’s slave for life. We learn, however, from an incidental 
reference in the Divyavadana (25) that (as in the Kautilyan law) a female 
slave bearing a child to her master was at once freed with her offspring. 

FOREIGN SETTLEMENTS 

A Yavana or Yona settlement beyond India’s north-western frontier 
and alongside the territories of the Kambojas and the Gandharas was 



472 


SOCIAL LIFE 


established sufficiently early to be mentioned in Asoka’s Edicts and 
endured long enough to be remembered repeatedly in the epic and 
Puranic tradition. In the age of the Mauryas, Yavanas and other forei- 
gners visited the imperial capital in such numbers as to require the care 
of a special committee of the municipal council. A Yavana-raja rose to 
the high position of a provincial governor under Asoka. It was, however, 
only with the conquests of the Bactrian Greeks that there occurred large- 
scale settlements of the Yavanas in India. The subsequent invasions of the 
Sakas and their successors partook of the nature of mass migrations of 
peoples. The foreign settlers brought with them not only a new social 
order but also what were held to be repulsive standards of conduct. The 
havoc wrought by these barbarian invasions and settlements in Indian 
society is brought home, in the first place, by the pointed testimony of the 
‘Yugapurana’ section of the Garglsamhita, a work which has been 
plausibly held to belong to the first century b.c. The author’s statements, 
couched in the form of prophecies in true Puranic style, are made in the 
course of an historical account of the invasions of the Bactrian Greeks 
and the Sakas. At the end of the Kali Age, so runs his brief but 
lurid description, all distinctions between the non- Aryans and the 
Aryans, between Brahmanas, Kshatriyas,^ Vaisyas and Sudras, between 
orthodoxy and heresy, will disappear: Sudra mendicants will appear 
in the guise of Brahmanas: Sudras will usurp the social and religious 
privileges of the Brahmanas. The fearful carnage caused by the foreign 
invasions led to the break-up of family life. Because of the wholesale 
slaughter of men, we are told in the usual prophetic style, ten or twenty 
women will marry one husband: women will work in the fields and 
in business and even serve as soldiers. A twelve years’ drought accom- 
panied by famine and plague will be the fitting climax of this series of 
disasters. We have a more comprehensive account, in the context of the 
list of evils overtaking the world at the end of the Kali Age, in the Maha- 
bharata (iii 188. 30-64, 190. 12-88). The picture is one of wholesale degene- 
ration and decay, of complete reversal of the social order, of non-Aryan 
and barbarian rule, and of the predominance of heresy, as a prelude to 
the destruction of the world by Kalki. 1 There occurs probably another 
hint of the evil consequences of the large foreign settlements in the 
contemporary accounts of social manners among the peoples that lived 
longest under alien rule. Thus the Mahabharata (viii 40, 20-40’ 44 
6-44; 45, 5-38) contains a long and vigorous indictment of the customs 
and practices of the people living in the land of the Five Rivers. Reference 


• Yavanas, Kambojas, Gandharas men- 
tioned together (RE. V. XIII; Ram. 
iv 43, 12 etc.). Yavanas are the only 
people without Brahmanas and Sra- 
manas (RE. XIII). Yavanas, Kambo- 
jas etc. are fierce barbarians ( Mbh . 
vi 9. 65). Yavanas, Kambojas, Gan- 
dharas etc. reckoned among sinful 
peoples having the nature of svapakas 


and vultures {Mbh. xii 207, 43-5) 
^iras are sinful and greedy dasyus 
{Mbh. xvi 7, 47-9). Text and tr. of 
rnripc u!S cts from the Yugapurana in 
JBORS 1928, pp. 402, 408, 410, 413-14. 
Revised text, ibid. 1930, p. 18 f On 
“ lbii 



INDIANISED FOREIGNERS 


473 


is made particularly to the general immorality and the laxity concerning 
food and drink that prevailed among the Madraka and the Vahlka men 
and women. The impure practices of women in this region and in Saura- 
shtra too regarding matters of sex are mentioned by Vatsyayana (ii 5, 25). 

Nevertheless, it is an undeniable fact that the Yavanas and other forei- 
gners, so far from upsetting the traditional social order and destroying 
its accepted canons of morality and conduct, were themselves completely 
and swiftly absorbed within the indigenous -social system. Quite unmis- 
takably, captive India captured her captdt. For the Greeks the process 
of indianisation started as early as the second quarter of the second century 
b. c. when Demetrius, contrary to the practice of all other Hellenistic 
kings, introduced a bilingual coinage (in Greek, and in Indian Prakrit 
speech with the KharoshthI script). The series ot Greek votive inscrip- 
tions in Prakrit, which date from about the beginning of the first century 
B. c. and are likewise without a parallel in the Hellenistic world, signal- 
ised a considerable acceleration of the indianising tendency. What lends 
significance to these inscriptions is that they belong as much to the regions 
of the North-West which lay longest within the Greek zone as to those 
of the interior. With the use of the Indian language and script went 
the adoption of Indian religions. The object of the inscriptions is fre- 
quently to record dedications of Buddhist relics and the like by pious 
Greek donors. In one instance we find that the donor, Heliodorus, who 
was the Greek ambassador at the court of Vidisa, recorded his erection of 
a Garuda column in honour of Vasudeva, ‘the god of gods’, and devoutly 
styled himself a bhagavata. It is also probable that he was versed in the 
Mahabharata, for an ethical text quoted in the inscription closely cor- 
responds to a couple of verses in the Great Epic. Some of the Indo- 
Greek kings appear to have figured hellenised forms of Indian divinities 
on their coins. At a later period a number of Yavana donors with Indian 
names, whose nationality however is still a disputed point, dedicated caves 
(or their constituent portions) in Western India for the use of Buddhist 
monks. When Kanishka dropped the Greek monograms on his coins 
towards the latter part of the first century A. d. this change signalised 
the loss of all trace of the Greek language and of the Greeks generally. 1 

Where the Greeks with their notorious contempt for barbarians had 


1 The unique significance of Indo-Greek 
bilingual coins and of votive inscrs. 
written in Prakrit is explained by Tam, 
Greeks, pp. 387, 388-90. On the 
other hand the account in Miln. of 
Menander’s conversion to Buddhism is 
unconvincing (Tarn, op. cit., pp. 262-4, 
267-8). The same remarks apply to the 
statement (D. R. Bhandarkar, ASIAR. 
1914-15, p. 78) that a clay-sealing dis- 
covered at Besnagar refers to a Greek 
called Demetrius who was the yajamana 
at a Brahmana sacrifice. For refs, to 
Greek votive inscrs. in Prakrit and 
6o 


KharoshthI, see CII. n (i) pp. 4, 8, 65-6, 
114 etc. On Besnagar Dillar inscr. 
in Brahml, see ASIAR. 1908-9, p. 126. 
For representations of Indra on coins 
of Eucratides and Antialcidas and of 
Lakshmi on those of Agathocles and 
Pantaleon, see J. N. Banerjea, The 
Development of Hindu Iconography, pp. 
123, 163. Inscr. of Yavana donors at 
Karle Nasik and lunnar in Luders, 
List, nos. 1093, 1096, 1140, 1156, 1182, 
On end of Greek language etc. see Tarn, 
op. cit. 



474 


SOCIAL LIFE 


led the way, it was easy enough for the less sophisticated Sakas and other 
foreigners to follow. The Greeks had been content to adopt the Indian 
forms of their names. The Sakas, Abhlras, and others, however, almost 
from the first took purely Indian names (in a few cases with Kshatriya 
terminals and in one remarkable instance with the gotra-narae of the 
mother). On their coins the Saka, Pahlava, and Kushana kings adopted 
from the first the system of bilingual legends (in Greek and in Indian 
Prakrit) brought into vogue -by their Greek forerunners. Going a step 
further the Saka kshatrapas of Gujarat and Malwa after the time of Chash- 
tana converted the Greek inscriptions on their coins into an ornamental 
border, while substituting a Sanskritised Prakrit in Brahm! script for the 
old pure Prakrit in KharoshthI letters. 1 Interesting reminiscences of the 
period of transition when the foreign settlers had partially adopted varie- 
ties of Aryan speech are preserved in Manu (x 45) and Sutrakritanga 
(i 22, 15-16). With the adoption of the Indian Prakrit by the Sakas went 
their official use of a calendar which has been justly characterised by 
Konow as Indo-Macedonian. Again, the devices and symbols of divi- 
nities on the coins of Saka and Kushana rulers suggest that while some 
of them were only patrons of Indian religions, others openly accepted 
them as their faith. We have more definite evidence of the conversion 
of the foreign settlers to Indian religions in their inscriptions. For we 
find them frequently recording their benefactions for the Buddhist faith 
with formulas associating their relatives (and sometimes even the reign- 
ing king or his representative) with the pious act. The Saka Ushava- 
data distributed his charities and acts of piety among the Brahmana laity 
as well as the Buddhist monks according to the canonical rules. 2 


For Indian forms of Greek names, cf. 
CII. ii (i) pp. 6, 98 ; ASIAR. 1908-9, p. 
126 etc. Names of Yavana donors in 
West Indian cave inscr. are purely 
Indian, but their nationality is still 
disputed. Examples of Sakas etc. 
with Indian names : (a) VIryakamitra 
and Vijayamitra (El. xxiv p. 7), 
Vijayamitra, his son Indravarman 
and his nephew Aspavarman (coins); 
(b) Jayadaman, Rudradaman etc. of 
the Kshatrapa dynasty of Western India 
(Inscr. and coins); (c) Vudhika, son 
of Vishnudata (Liiders, List, nos. 
1148, 1149) ; (d) Vishnudata, , the 

Sakanika, daughter of the Saka 
Agnivarman and mother of Visva- 
varma, temp. King Madhariputra 
Isvarasena, the Abhlra, son of Siva- 
datta the Abhlra (ibid. no. 1137). 
On the other hand Ushavadata, 
usually taken to correspond to Skt. 
Rishabhadatta, has probably an 
Iranian name-ending (Liiders in 
SB AW. 1913, p. 414) or perhaps was 
a purely Iranian name (Konow in 
IHQ. xiv p. 139). For Kshatriya 


name-ending varman see Par. Gri. 
Su. i 17; Bandh. Gr. Su. i 11, 9 etc. 
On coin-legends of the Kshatrapas of 
Western India, see Rapson, BMC A WK. 
p. lxxxvn f. 

* F°r epithet Indo-Macedonian applied 
to Saka calendar, see Konow, CII. 
'! W P. xc. In the KharoshthI records 
dated both according to the old Saka 
era and the era of Kanishka the month- 
names are mostly Indian, but occa- 
sionally Macedonian, while the days 
are mentioned without the Indian 
division into pakshas : on the other 

band, the records in the Saka era used 
by the Western Kshatrapas refer not 
only to the year, month and date, but 
aiso to the pakshas (Konow, op. cit. pp. 
lxxxvili-xc). On the devices and symbols 
of Indian deities on Saka and Kushan 
coins, see Banerjea, op. cit p. 122 f. The 
evidence seems to suggest that while 
the Saka and Parthian rulers divided 
anH r h M evotio , n between Greek gods 
and hellemzed forms of Indian deities 
Undra, Lakshmi and probably Buddha), 
Kadphises n was by faith a Saivi 



PLACE OF WOMAN IN SOCIETY 


475 


While the Yavanas, Sakas and other foreigners were thus being 
thoroughly indianised, the orthodox authors of social and religious laws 
were taking steps to meet them half-way. Already in the time of 
Patanjali, as we learn from the extract (on Pan. ii 4, 10) above quoted, 
the Sakas and Yavanas who were still living outside Aryavarta were recog- 
nised as Sudras of the higher grade with the right to perform sacrifices 
and the use of the Aryan’s dish. In Manu (x 44) and the Mahabharata 
(xiii 33, 21 ; ibid. 35, 18) the Sakas and Yavanas are included in a list of 
Kshatriya peoples who had gradually sunk to the level of Sudras. Going 
beyond this point the Milindapahha (329) refers to the Kshatriya lineage 
of king Milinda (Menander) and his Kshatriya antecedents. In the second 
and third centuries A. D. princesses belonging to the Kshatrapa ruling 
house of Western India were accepted in marriage by orthodox kings 
of the Satavahana and Ikshvaku dynasties. 1 The Abhiras, according 
to Patanjali (on Pan. i 2, 72), were a caste separate from the Sudras. 
But in the Mahabharata (xiv 29, 15-16) they are included among peoples 
who were originally Kshatriyas but had sunk to the level of Sudras. 
Above all in the Epic (xii 65, 13-22 cited above) Sakas, Yavanas, Tusharas 
and Pahlavas along with various aboriginal tribes are declared to be eligi- 
ble for the performance of Vedic religious acts and certain minor sacri- 
fices (pakayajnas). 


WOMAN'S POSITION IN SOCIETY 
A. General Remarks 


The Smritis of this period repeat the anti-feminist doctrines and princi- 
ples of the older law. But these are subject in practice, as before, to impor- 
tant exceptions. Thus the ancient doctrine of perpetual dependence of a 
woman (her father, husband, and son protecting her in childhood, youth, 
and old age respectively) is repeated and amplified by Manu (ix 2-3) and 
is paraphrased by Yajnavalkya (i 85-6). Emphasising this principle, 
they declare (M. iv 213; Y i 163) the food of a woman without male 
relatives ( avira ) to be unfit for eating. Nevertheless, as in the earlier 
law, marriage by mutual choice ( gandharva ) is not only recognised but 
approved in a qualified degree both by Manu and Yajnavalkya. Again, 


and Vasudeva predominantly so. On 
the other hand Kanishka and Huvishka 
were eclectic in their religious inclina- 
tions which were centered mainly on 
Zoroastrian and Indian deities. The 
epithets dhramika etc. borne by Maues 
and his successors need not necessarily 
imply, as D. R. Bhandarkar (I A. 1911) p. 
13; thinks, their conversion to Buddhism. 
For refs, to dedications of Buddhist 
relics etc. by Sakas in Northern India 
cf. CIl ii (i) nos. 28, 48, 137, 145, 150, 
151, 170; in Western India, cf. Ltiders, 


List, nos. 1137, 1148, 1149; in Eastern 
India cf. EL xx p. 37. For Jaina benefac- 
tions by Iranians with Greek names see 
Luders ‘The Era of the Matraraja and 
the Maharaja Rajatiraja’ in D. R. Bhan- 
darkar Vol. pp. 281-9 
1 These are the queen of Vasishthiputra 
Satakarpi of the Karddamaka royal 
family and daughter of mahakshatrapa 
Rudradaman (Luders, List, no. 994); 
and Rudrabhattarika, chief queen of 
VIrapurushadatta and daughter of the 
Saka king of UjjayinI (EL xx p. 4) 



476 


SOCIAL LIFE 


a girl who is without guardians or whose guardians have neglected 
to give her in marriage is allowed as by the older authorities to select her 
own husband ( M . ix 91). According to an old dictum quoted by Manu 
(viii 416 and Mbh. v 33, 64) the wife, like the slave and the son, has no 
right of property. And yet according to Manu (viii 28-9) the property 
of wives, faithful widows, as well as barren and diseased women, is to be 
specially protected by the king, and its misappropriation by their relatives 
is to be punished like theft. Brothers are bound to give a share of their 
inheritance to their unmarried sister (ix, 118). Above all the mother, 
according to Manu (ix 217) and Yajnavalkya (ii 135), and for the first 
time, the widow in the latter’s opinion, have the right to inherit a man’s 
property in the absence of his sons. Women again are entitled to 
own and bequeath their special property or strldhana (A/, ix 194-8; Y. 
ii 146-8). Concerning religious status, the disabilities imposed upon 
women by the older law are repeated in our present texts. In Manu 
(ii 67) a woman’s ineligibility for Vedic study and the worship of the 
sacred fire is masked by the declaration that after her marriage her 
service to her husband and her performance of household duties are their 
substitutes. Not by performance of sacrifices nor by offerings to the 
manes, nor by religious fasts, says the Mahabharata (iii 204) more clearly, 
but by serving her husband, does a woman attain heaven. In parti- 
cular we are told ( M . ii 6; Y. i 13) that women’s sacraments are to 
be performed without recitation of sacred texts, Yajnavalkya making an 
exception in favour of the marriage ceremony. A married or un- 
married girl is categorically forbidden to make offerings of oblations 
to the sacred fires ( M . xi 36-7; Mbh. xii 165, 21-2). As to general treat- 
ment of women, both Manu (iii 55-62) and Yajnavalkya (i 82) enjoin in 
the strongest terms that women should be honoured by their male rela- 
tives. As in the older law women have the right of precedence along the 
road in the same way as the king and the snataka (M. ii 138; Y. i 117). 
Newly married and pregnant women are fed even before guests while the 
householder and his wife take their meals last ( M . iii 114-16; Y. i 105). 
In the penal law of Manu and Yajnavalkya, as in the older Smritis, women 
are liable to capital punishment for a number of serious crimes' such as 
adultery (AT. viii 371), breaking reservoirs, killing the husband, preceptor, 
or child, poisoning or arson (Y. ii 281-2). But elsewhere (xi 177-8) Manu 
himself prescribes simply confinement by the husband and the compul- 
sory performance of appropriate penances even for the very corrupt 
wife and for one who has repeated the offence with a man of equal caste. 
According to Yajnavalkya (i 70, 72-3) a woman guilty of adultery should 
be disgraced (till the performance of the penance, according to the comm- 
entator) and in cases of a very provocative nature, abandoned. Manu (ix 
230), it may be noted, prescribes a light mode of corporal punishment for 
woman as for infants, the aged, the poor, and the sick. The penance for 
killing a wife is the same as for Brahmana-murder (M. xi 88), but for kill- 
ing an adulterous woman it is, as before, only nominal (AT. xi 139). While 



RESPECT FOR WOMAN 


477 


such is the law relating to women in general, special consideration is reser- 
ved for female relatives. The respectful treatment of paternal and mater- 
nal aunts' the elder sister and the mother is enjoined by Manu (ii 131-3). 
The mother, the wife (‘one’s own body’), the daughter (‘the object of the 
highest tenderness’) and other female relations are persons whose faults 
should be borne without resentment ( M . iv 179-80; 184-5; Y. i 157-8). 
Again and again the mo ther, the father and the teacher are mentioned 
as entitled to the highest reverence, the place of honour being frequently, 
though not uniformly, reserved for the mother (M. ii 145-9, 225-37 ; iv 
162; Y. i 35; Mbh. iii 312, 60; xiii 105, 15; xii 109, 17-8). Defaming 
mother or wife is punishable with an appreciable fine (M. viii 275) and 
casting them off except for loss of caste is visited with a still heavier fine 
(M. viii 389; Y. ii 237). The legal penalties are supplemented by reli- 
gious and social punishments. Casting off the mother is included among 
the sins of the second degree (M. xi 60) and it excludes the offender from 
sraddhas ( M . iii 157). 

We may supplement this evidence relating to a woman’s general status 
from other data. The honourable treatment of women enjoined by Manu 
is inculcated almost in the same terms in the Mahabharata (xiii 46, 2-12). 
With this is combined in the same context the familiar doctrine of the 
perpetual tutelage of women and of the wife’s sole duty of serving her 
husband. The epics repeat (Ram. ii 78, 21; Mbh. i 155, 2; 158, 31; 
217, 4; 219, 7; ii 41, 13) the ancient chivalrous doctrine (not accepted 
in the Smriti law), to the effect that women are immune from capital 
punishment. An adulterous wife, says the Mahabharata (xii 159, 58) is 
to be confined, to be reduced to scanty food and clothing, and made 
to perform penances. The mother, as in the Smriti law, is the object of 
the highest veneration : she is equivalent to ten fathers and is more vene- 
rable than the earth (Mbh. i 196, 16; iii 312, 60; xiii 105, 15). The 
daughter, however, is a source of woe (ibid, i 159, 11-2; v 96, 15-7). 
In fine, the stories of DraupadI, Damayanti, Savitri and others in the 
Mahabharata and of Sita in the Ramayana have preserved for us pictures 
of heroic women who are inspired by a high ideal of duty and often by 
supreme wisdom and goodness. It remains to mention that in the histo- 
rical records of this period we often find not only queens and princesses 
but also women in ordinary life making donations of various kinds 
evidently out of their own property for pious purposes. 1 Naganika and 
Balasrl were two queens of the Satavahana line who ruled as regents on 
behalf of their minor sons. 

B. The Status of the Wife 

Regarding the position of the wife in the Smriti law of this period, 
some facts have already been mentioned, but the subject requires a 

1 The votive inscrs. commemorate dona- female lay-worshippers but also 

tions not only by Buddhist and Jaina by a housewife and the wives of a 



478 


SOCIAL LIFE 


fuller treatment. Referring to older texts Manu (ix 45) lays down the 
doctrine of the complete identity of husband and wife, and deduces 
therefrom (ix 46) the corollary of the indissoluble union of both. Accor- 
dingly, to forsake the wife except when she has fallen from caste is held 
to be a penal offence (M. viii 389; Y. ii 237). A faithful wife, says Manu 
(ix 95), is the gift of the gods, and must be constantly cherished by the 
husband who seeks to please them. According to Yajnavalkya (i 76) 
a man forsaking his gentle and devoted wife who has given him sons 
must surrender one-third of his property to her, and if he is without pro- 
perty, he must maintain her. A diseased or a vicious wife or one who 
bears no son (the last being held to be indispensable for repaying a man’s 
debt to his father) may be abandoned or superseded; but a superseded 
wife must be maintained (M. ix 80-2; Y. i 72-4). 

As in the older law, the husband has powers of correction over his 
wife for a number of faults : these extend to beating strictly regulated by 
law, non-association and depriving her of ornaments, confinement, and 
imposition of penance ( M . viii 299-300; ix 77-8; xi 177-8), or a temporary 
disgrace and loss of authority ( Y. i 70). According to a dictum of Manu 
(v 152) the wife by virtue of betrothal by her guardian becomes subject 
to the dominion of her husband, But the sale of the wife is held to be 
a sin of the second degree, and the gift of the wife is altogether forbidden 
(M. x 162; 7. ii 125). The husband’s strict duty alike for his own sake and 
his family’s is to guard his wife (M. ix 6-7 ; T. i 81), though it is recognised 
(M. ix 12) that only those women who keep guard over themselves are 
well guarded. In particular a wife drinking spirituous liquor at festivals, 
or goes to shows or assemblies though forbidden, is liable to a fine ( M . 
ix 84). As a means of guarding the wife the husband should employ her 
on household duties (M. ix 1 1). The wife shares in her husband’s religious 
acts, this privilege being reserved for the wife of equal caste where 
there are others ( M . ix 86, 87 ; Y. i 88). The wife, however, is forbidden 
(no doubt in accordance with the ancient doctrine of a woman’s per- 
petual dependence) to perform sacrifices, fasts or vows independently of 
her husband (M. v. 155). The law of husband and wife, according to 
Manu (ix 101-2), consists in mutual fidelity till death. In the Brahmanical 
sacred works of this period, however, the duty of absolute obedience and 
devotion to the husband is strictly enjoined, as never before, upon the 
wife. The husband is the wife’s supreme deity: by serving him she wins 
heaven, though she may not honour the gods; unlike her other relations 
and friends, the husband is the wife’s sole refuge in this and the next 
world; unlike her male relatives, the husband gives her immeasurable 
happiness (Ram. ii 24, 20; 26-7; 27,6; 39, 30; 117, 24; Mbh. xiii 146 
34 /; xii 144, 6-7; v 151; 153-4; Y. i 77). Hyperbolical descrip- 
tions of the spiritual powers of the faithful wife ( pativratd ) occur 
not only in the Mahabharata (iii 63, 32-9; ix 63, 62 etc.), but also in 

cloth-dyer, a merchant, a caravan-leader of Misc. terms s. v.) 
and the like (refs, in Ltiders. List, Index 



DUTIES OF THE WIFE 


479 


Tamil works like the Rural and the Silappadikaram. When the husband 
is gone abroad, his wife is required to live a life of studied restraint (M. 
ix 75 ; Y. i 84 ; Mbh. xiii 123, 17). The stories of Slta in the Ramayana, 
of Gandhari, Draupadi, Savitri, and Damayanti in the Mahabharata, of 
Kannagi in the Silappadikaram enshrine imperishable examples of a wife’s 
deathless devotion to her husband. 

We now pass on to the description of the life of the wife of a city- 
bred man of fashion by Vatsyayana ( Kamasutra iv 1, 1-55 ; 2, 1-38). 
This may rightly be regarded as a commentary, drawn no doubt from 
life, on the Smriti code of a wife’s duties. The picture exhibits those 
qualities of devotion and self-restraint combined with sound household 
management which have remained the possession of Hindu wives to the 
present day. Where a woman is the sole wife, says the author, she is to 
devote herself to her husband as to a deity. She is personally to minister 
to his comforts when he eats his meals or enters the house. She shares 
in her husband’s vows and fasts, brooking no refusal. She attends festi- 
vities, social gatherings, sacrifices, and religious processions, with his 
permission. That the husband may find no fault with her she avoids the 
company of disreputable women, she shows him no signs of displeasure, 
and she does not loiter about on the door-step or in solitary places for 
a long time. She remonstrates with her husband in secret against his 
improvident or improper expenditure. She serves her father-in-law and 
mother-in-law and honours their commands. She receives her husband’s 
friends according to their deserts. When the husband goes abroad, she 
leads a life of self-denial and self-restraint. Besides attending to her 
husband and his relations and friends, she has complete charge of 
the household. She engages servants in their work and rewards 
them on festive occasions. She keeps the house absolutely clean. She 
looks after the worship of the gods at the household shrine, and 
makes the religious offering of food thrice a day. In the garden atta- 
ched to the house she plants various vegetables, herbs, and trees. She 
frames an annual budget of the family income and regulates her expenses 
accordingly. She keeps the daily accounts and makes up the total at 
the end of the day. During her husband’s absence she exerts 
herself so that his affairs may not suffer, and she increases the income 
and diminishes the expenditure to the best of her power. Where the woman 
has a co-wife, she looks upon the latter as a younger sister or as 
a mother according as she is younger or older. 

C. The Widow’s Status 

The status of the widow in the Smriti law of this period is a reflex of its 
strong emphasis upon the wife’s supreme duty of serving her husband. 
It is true that Manu (ix 175, 184) and Yajnavalkya (ii 130, 132) recognise, 
as of old, the son of the remarried woman among those who are enti- 
tled to inherit the father’s property in the absence of more respectable 



SOCIAL LIFE 


classes of sons. Again Manu (ix 176), following the older precedent, 
permits a virgin widow to perform a fresh sacrament of marriage. Never- 
theless we are expressly told (M. v 162 ; ix 65) that remarriage of widows 
is not in accordance with the prescribed rule. The widow is recommen- 
ded instead (M. v 156-61 ; Y. i 75) to live a life of strict chastity. On 
the other hand the Smriti law is as yet completely silent about the burn- 
ing of widows on the funeral pyres of their husbands. Yajnavalkya 
(ii 135-6), moreover, introduces us for the first time to a very important 
right of the widow, viz. that of inheriting the husband’s property in 
the absence of sons. When we turn to the other literary works of this 
period, we find that the dreadful rite of sati is already supported by a 
Mahabharata text (i 74, 46). It is referred to, Hopkins 1 thinks, in a 
number of other passages (Ram. v 26, 24-5 ; vi 15, 27; Mbh. xvi 5, 4 ; 
xii 148, 9). We have again a few examples (Mbh. i 95, 65 ; xvi 7, 18) of 
Kshatriya queens and even one example (Ram. vii 17, 14) of a Brahman! 
voluntarily submitting to this rite. But the evidence shows, as has been 
rightly argued, 2 that the practice as yet was rare and confined to 
royal families. On the whole the widow’s lot in this as in the earlier 
and later periods was hard; her helplessness and misery are vividly brought 
out in the Mahabharata (i 158, 12; xii 148, 2). Not without reason does 
the widow head a list of persons who are despised and contemned in 
this world. (Milindapahha 288). 

In the far South, as far as the scanty evidence enables us to judge, the 
widow’s lot was essentially similar. From the works of the Sangam Age 
we learn that ordinarily widows were expected to lead a life of self-denial 
and that the custom of sati was already known and extolled as a high 
ideal. 3 


D. The Status of the Demi-monde 


It remains to notice the social status of some classes of women not 
included in the above categories. Female ascetics of the Brahmanical 
order, and Buddhist and Jaina nuns were evidently numerous in these 
times. We have already discussed their status in the light of contemporary 
records. On the other hand, the class of female temple-attendants 
(devadasi), so very common in the following centuries, are as yet of minor 
importance : only one record 4 refers to a devadasi during this period. 
Harlots are condemned in strong terms by Manu (ix 259-62). Even the 
accomplished courtesan ( ganika ), who held a recognised position in city 
life during early Buddhist times, is included (M. iv 209, 219 and Y. 
i 161) among those whose food is unfit to be eaten. But the realistic 
account in Vatsyayana’s Kamasiitra shows that the ganika still occupied 
an honoured place in society. A fallen woman of good looks and proper 


JAOS. xm p. 173 n. 

Hopkins, loc. cit; Kane, Hist, of 
Dharma. n (i) pp. 626-7 


3 m 13 N ' Sastri - r/,e Colas > 1 pp- 

4 Luders, List, no. 921 



MARRIAGE 


481 


conduct who has mastered the arts ( kala ), says that author (i 3, 20-1), 
acquires the title of a ganika ; as such she is honoured by kings, praised 
by the discerning, sought after by pupils, and accepted by pleasure-seekers. 
A Mathura inscription 1 has preserved the memory of a pious Jaina 
ganika. The vivid description of the life of the courtesan in theTamil 
works of the Sangam Age amplifies the much shorter notice in Vatsya- 
yana’s work. 2 


E. Seclusion of Women 

The custom of the seclusion of royal women was well established during 
this period. Queens and princesses, we are told in picturesque lan- 
guage, could not see the sun or creatures flying in the sky, and 
could not be touched by the wind: for them to be seen in public 
was their greatest misfortune {Ram. ii 33, 8; Mbh. ii 69, 6; ix 71 
etc.). That queens attended sittings of the royal court only when 
concealed from the public gaze is shown by an incidental reference in the 
Jaina Kalpasutra. Here we read (iv 62-3) that when the Kshatriya Sidd- 
hartha summoned his ministers and courtiers for the interpretation of 
the queen’s dream, he took his seat on a throne in the hall of audience, 
but the queen was seated behind a curtain. From a passage in Lalita- 
vistara (157) we learn that it was customary for a newly married girl to 
wear a veil in the presence of her father-in-law, mother-in-law and other 
elders. 


MARRIAGE RULES AND PRACTICES : 


A. In the Smptis 


The Smriti rules of this period relating to marriage appear to have been 
in the same fluid state as before. Following the older authorities Manu 
(iii 13) and Yajnavalkya (i 57) permit the marriage of a Brahmana, a 
Kshatriya, and a Vaisya with four, three and two wives respectively in 
the proper ( anuloma ) order; but marriage of the three upper classes, and 
especially of the Brahmanas, with Sudra girls is condemned in the stron- 
gest terms ( M . iii 14-19; Y. i 56). Nevertheless, both Manu (iii 43-4) 
and Yajnavalkya (i 62) lay down what rites are to be performed by a 
Brahmana, a Kshatriya, a Vaisya and a Sudra girl when marrying a 
Brahmana. Again, the respective shares of a Brahmana’s property obtain- 


1 Ltiders, List, no 102 

2 Seven years training received by a cour- 
tesan girl from her fifth year under 
expert dancing-masters, music-teachers 
(skilled in playing tabor, flute and 
lute respectively) and a composer of 
songs; her performance after the train- 
ing before the king and his whole 

61 


court, and her receipt of the king’s 
prize of 1008 gold coins: ( Silapp . tr. 
pp. 97-104. Mansions of courtesans 
in Madura: ibid. p. 205. Training 
of courtesans in royal dances, popular 
dances, singing, lute-playing, flute- 
playing etc.: Marti, ii, quoted, K. A. N. 
Sastri, The Colas, i. p. 93 



482 


SOCIAL LIFE 


able by his sons born of wives of the four castes are defined by Manu (ix 
149-54) and Yajnavalkya (ii 128), although Manu in the same context 
(ix 155, 160) disqualifies the son of a Brahmana, a Kshatriya, and a 
Vaisya by a §udra wife for any share of the inheritance. It would seem, 
therefore, that marriages of Brahmanas, not to speak of Kshatriyas and 
Vaisyas, with Sudra girls, though denounced by the Smritis, continued to 
be performed. The rules relating to prohibited degrees of marriage 
follow the older lines. Manu (iii 5) excludes those who are blood- 
relations ( sapinda ) on the mother’s side and of the same gotra on the 
father’s. Yajnavalkya (i 53) narrows down the restriction to sapinda 
relations up to the seventh degree on the father’s side and the fifth degree 
on that of the mother. In connection with a custom noted as peculiar 
to the South by such an early authority as Baudhayana ( Dharmasutra 
i 1, 2-3), it is worth remarking that Manu (xi 172-3) denounces marriage 
with the daughter of a paternal or maternal aunt or with the daughter 
of a maternal uncle. The eight forms of marriage known to the older 
Smritis, are repeated by Manu (iii 27-34) and Yajnavalkya (i 58-61). 
The list consists of brahma, arsha, prajapatya and daiva (each invol- 
ving the gift of a maiden by her father or other guardian), gandharva 
(marriage by mutual choice), dsura (marriage by purchase), rakshasa 
(marriage by capture) and paisacha (marriage by stealth). The views 
of Manu and Yajnavalkya as to the admissibility of these various forms 
are as flexible as those of the older authorities. Manu (iii 36-42) and 
Yajnavalkya (i 39-41) agree in praising the first four forms and condemn- 
ing the last four. In the same context, however, Manu mentions (iii 23-6) 
other views declaring prajapatya, gandharva and rakshasa to be lawful, 
and paisacha and dsura alone to be unlawful, and he also recommends 
different forms for different castes. 1 With regard to marriage by purchase 
in particular, Manu (iii 51-3) and the Mahabharata (xiii 45, 18-19) repeat 
the old law which forbids the father to accept a fee, however small, for his 
daughter, and condemns even drsha marriage as involving such accep- 
tance. We may suppose that, notwithstanding the disapproval of the 
lawgivers, marriages by mutual choice, by purchase, by capture, and even 
by stealth, were performed, as before, by the different castes. 

It will appear from the above that the gift of a girl ( kanya-dana ) by her 
parent or other guardian is the form of marriage generally approved in 
the Smritis. In fact, it is the right and the duty of the father (or of other 
guardians in a fixed order of succession) to bestow the girl in marriage 
(M. ix 88; Y. i 63). As to the age of marriage, a young man of the first 
three classes could marry under the Smriti law only after the completion 
of his studies (i. e. at least after twelve years from his investiture with 
the sacred thread). If he chose, he might remain a perpetual student 


Approved forms of marriage for dif- 
ferent castes, acc. to Manu Ioc. cit., 
are as follows: (a) First four forms 

as well as dsura and gandharva for 
Brahmapas; (b) dsura, gandharva, rak- 


shasa and paisacha, or else gandharva, 
rakshasa or a mixture of both, or 
anally rakshasa alone for Kshatriyas; 
(c) dsura, gandharva and paisacha, or else 
asura alone for Vaisyas and SQdras. 



LAWS OF MARRIAGE 


483 


in residence with his teacher. The girl, on the other hand, in accordance 
with the strong Smriti tradition, was to be married at an early age. As 
Manu says (ix 88), a girl should be given in marriage even before attain- 
ing the proper age, if a very desirable bridegroom of equal caste is avail- 
able. Going much further than this, Yajnavalkya, like some of his pre- 
decessors, says (i 64) that the guardian incurs the guilt of periodically 
killing an embryo as long as the girl remains unmarried. In the result 
the relative ages of bridegroom and bride as approved by Manu (ix 94) 
are remarkably disproportionate, being thirty years to twelve or twenty- 
four years to eight. 

When the guardian fails to give a girl in marriage or she is without 
a guardian, she is entitled as in the old Smriti law to select a suitable 
husband (M. ix 90-1 ; Y. i 64 ; Mbh. xiii 44, 16). Manu and the Mafia- 
bharata repeat the clause of Vasishtha (xvii 67-8) and Baudhayana (iv 1, 
14) that she should wait lor three years after attaining puberty. This 
rule, like the one relating to gandharva marriages already mentioned, 
proves that late marriages of girls were still approved by the Smriti autho- 
rities in special circumstances, notwithstanding their strong advocacy 
of early marriages. 

On the subject of the remarriage of women, as of marriage itself, the 
Smriti rules are still in a fluid state. The remarriage of widows, as we 
have seen, is expressly declared by Manu (v 162, ix 65) to be unautho- 
rised by the sacred law. He (viii 226) emphatically declares that only 
marriage with a virgin is contemplated by the nuptial texts, a non-virgin 
being excluded from religious ceremonies. Manu (ix 47) and Yajnavalkya 
(i 65) also declare that a maiden is given once only in marriage. Never- 
theless, both (M. ix 158 f. ; Y. ii 130 f.) recognise, as of old, the title of the 
son of a remarried woman (pamarbhava) to inherit his father’s property 
in the absence of respectable classes of sons. The definition of the 
paunarbhava in Manu (ix 175) shows that his mother might be a woman 
abandoned by her first husband or a widow contracting a second marriage 
at her free will. Yajnavalkya's definition (ii 130) proves that she might 
or might not have been a virgin at the time of the second marriage. What 
is more, a virgin widow and a woman returning to her first husband after 
living with another man, are entitled to perform a fresh sacrament of 
marriage (M. ix 176). From Yajnavalkya’s definition of pimarbhu (i 67) 
it appears that whether she was a virgin or not, the sacrament of marriage 
was again performed on her. A woman whose husband has gone abroad, 
says Manu (ix 76), is to wait for three, six, or eight years according to 
the object of his journey. In the parallel texts of Kautilya and Narada 
she is expressly allowed thereafter to select another husband. 


B. In Other Sources 

Let us now turn to other evidence touching the rules and practices of 
marriage in vogue during this period. The Smriti rules above-mentioned 



484 


SOCIAL LIFE 


relating to inter-caste marriages, prohibited degrees of marriage, the eight 
forms of marriage, the guardian’s duty of giving away the girl, and the 
girl’s right of self-choice in its default, are repeated in the Mahabharata 
(i 73, 12 f. ; 102, 12 f. ; xiii 44-7), and it is unnecessary to quote them 
here. It may, however, be noticed that the Epic (xiii 44, 14), slightly 
varying Manu’s rule on this point, gives the relative ages of bride- 
groom and bride as thirty years to ten or twenty-one to seven. The evil 
of disproportionate ages of marriage is brought vividly before our eyes 
in the twice-repeated simile (ibid, ii 64, 14 ; iii 5, 15) of a young 
girl disliking her sixty-year old husband. Again, the injunction making 
marriage compulsory for girls is set forth in the Epic (ix 52) in the 
story of an ascetic’s daughter. When after devoting her whole life to 
ascetic practices, she sought salvation in death, she was told by a 
sage that she could not be saved since she had not been sanctified 
by the marriage sacrament. In the epics, marriages in Kshatriya fami- 
lies are performed by purchase, capture, or self-choice, followed in 
each case by the performance of the appropriate religious ceremony. 
At the ceremony of self-choice, the bride sometimes selected the victor at 
a great tournament, having (as the story of Draupadi’s marriage shows) 
the right to refuse a low-bom man. Similarly in Lalitavistara (136-57) 
the Bodhisattva as the son of king Suddhodana wins his bride by exhibi- 
ting his superior skill in all arts in competition with other Sakya youths 
at a great tournament. 1 We have more faithful pictures of contemporary 
marriage practices in other works of this perod. A simile in the Milin- 
dapahha (47-8) introduces us to the hypothetical case of a man selecting 
his bride of a tender age by paying the fee, and of another man taking 
her away in marriage after she is grown up on payment of the same fee, 
thus giving rise to a dispute triable by the king. It follows that marriage 
by purchase of girls both before and after puberty was known at this 


Examples of Kshatriya marriages 
by capture etc. in the epics are as 
follows: — (a) Daughters of the king 
of Kasi carried off by Bhishma for 
marriage with his stepbrother : Mhh. 
i 102; (b) Subhadra carried off by 
Arjuna in accordance with the pre- 
cept of Krishna that in the case 
of Kshatriyas when the chances of 
self-choice are uncertain, carrying 
off by force is also commended: 
ibid, i 219-21; (c) Madri purchased 
from her father for marriage with 
Pandu in acc. with family custom of 
the Madra ruling house: ibid, i 113 ; 
(d) self-choice of Draupadi, DamayantI 
Savitri: ibid, i 185 ; iii 57, 292-4 ; and 
of SIta : Ram. i 66-73. Mbh. i 102, 12 
condemns a father’s disposal of 
daughter for a fee, but elsewhere (i 113, 
9 ; 193, 23 etc.) this is mentioned as 
a recognised custom. That the re- 


marriage of Kshatriya princesses was 
not thought to be impossible is shown 
by the trick of DamayantI in announ- 
cing her second svayamvara to fin d 
out the whereabouts of her absent 
husband : ibid, iii 70, 24-6. On the 
whole subject see Hopkins, JAOS. 
xiu pp. 167-9, 356-8. In the Lalita- 
vistara story when Suddhodana sent a 
proposal for marriage between the 
Bodhisattva and Gopa to her father 
Dandapani, the latter at first withheld 
his assent, for his family custom requi- 
red the prospective bridegroom to be 
an expert in the arts, and the Bodhi- 
sattva had not yet shown his skill. Then 
a great tournament was held at which 
Gopa was announced to be the victor’s 
prize. It was only when the Bodhi- 
sattva had exhibited his superiority 
to other Sakya youths in all arts 
that Dapdapapi gave the girl to him. 



SVAYAMVARA 


485 


time. In the stories of the Avadanasataka reference is made to procuring 
a bride from an equal family by a sreshthi (1, 36), a Brahmana (19), a 
Sakya noble (14), a grihapati (67), and a caravan-leader (60, 83). And 
yet we are told how the grown-up daughter of a sreshthi was sought after 
in marriage by princes as well as sons of ministers and of sreshthis (2, 37), 
while a Sakya noble’s daughter was desired in marriage only by princes 
and minister’s sons (16), and a princess by neighbouring kings alone (32). 
This proves that, as in the Smriti law, while marriages within equal castes 
were usual, those of men of higher castes with women of lower ones 
were also known. 1 The Avadanasataka, moreover, contains valuable 
evidence of the independence which girls of the upper classes still posse- 
ssed in the matter of wedlock. The stories frequently tell us how, when 
the girls were grown-up and sought after by young men of different ranks, 
their fathers were plunged in anxiety for fear of displeasing the disappoin- 
ted suitors. To relieve them of this anxiety, the girls arranged a self- 
choice ceremony ( svayamvara ) at which they dramatically announced 
their resolve to become nuns (2, 32), or else they entered the Buddhist 
Order outright with the parent’s permission (16), or finally made it a 
condition with the bridegroom to embrace the monastic life jointly at the 
proper time (37). In one story (45 f.) we read how two kings engaged 
to marry their son and daughter born on the same days as a means o. 
ending their hostilities, how when the two were grown-up and the prince 
sent presents to his future wife she told her father of her resolve to enter 
the Buddhist Order, how when the king did not heed her request and 
the bridegroom arrived for the marriage, she obtained the pardon of all 
assembled on the occasion by exhibiting miraculous powers and there- 
after became a Buddhist nun. It remains to mention that in the stories 
above-named, while the princess was able to arrange at once for her 
svayamvara, this became possible for the sreshthi’ s daughter only when 
her father had obtained the permission of the king. Svayamvara evi- 
dently, as in the Mahdbharata story of Draupadi’s marriage, was held to 
be the peculiar privilege of Kshatriya girls. 

The most complete account of marriage rules and practices prevailing 
in contemporary society is preserved in the Kamasutra of Vatsyayana. 
Firstly, as regards inter-caste marriages the author tells us (iii 1, 1) that 
both the secular and spiritual objects of marriage are best secured by 
union with a virgin of equal caste performed according to canonical rites. 
Elsewhere (i 5, 1) he observes that the contrary practice of making love 
to women of higher castes or to other men’s wives is forbidden. Making 
love, the author continues, to women of a caste lower than one’s own but 
still sufficiently pure not to have their dishes cast away after meals, as 
well as with harlots and punarbhus is neither approved nor condemned, 

1 So also in Divy. the bride is said to tionally handsome daughter is sought 

be procured from an equal family for in marriage by princes as well as 

by a Brahmana (p. 483) and by gfiha- sons of ministers, gjihapatis, sresh- 

patis (pp. 1, 24, 87, 167, 262). Again (his and caravan-leaders, 

in Divy. (pp. 1 67-8), a grihapati ' s excep- 



486 


SOCIAL LIFE 


as its object is simply pleasure. Love may even be offered without vio- 
lation of dharma to a woman of higher caste who is a notorious wanton. 
It will be observed that while marriages within the castes are held alone 
to be lawful and desirable, and pratiloma marriages are condemned out- 
right, even anuloma marriages are tolerated but not approved. In contrast 
with this increased rigidity of caste restrictions in the matter of marriage 
is the author’s avowed sanction of irregular unions with loose women 
even of higher castes 

In Vatsyayana, as in the Smriti law, marriage is arranged as a rule 
by the parents or other guardians of the parties. To Vatsyayana, 
however, we owe the first detailed and evidently realistic account (iii 
1, 4-21) of the way in which the marriage arrangements were made on 
both sides. For the selection ( varana ) of the bride, the parents and other 
kinsmen of the bridegroom are to bestir themselves. ‘Those charged 
with varana should exaggerate the defects, present and prospective, of 
other suitors, and should expatiate on the qualifications of their candidate 
0 nayaka ) both personal and hereditary. Besides, they should enlarge 
upon such advantages possessed by him at the time or likely to accrue 
to him later, as would commend themselves to the girl’s mother.’ The 
parents and other relatives of the girl are advised to dress her smartly 
at the time of giving her away and to allow her to be shown to advantage 
on festive and similar occasions. ‘When the men come to propose marri- 
age, the parents of the girl should receive them hospitably and on some 
pretext or other show the girl in all her ornaments. They should come 
to no decision as to giving away the girl before they have consulted the 
oracles.’ ‘The varana is to fructify in one of the four approved forms of 
marriage, viz. brahma, prajapatya, arsha and daiva or according to the 
forms in vogue in one’s own country.’ 

When a young man is unable for several reasons to prefer his suit in 
the ways above mentioned, continues Vatsyayana (iii 3, 1-44), he should 
himself woo the girl on whom his heart has been set from childhood. In 
the Southern Country (Dakshinapatha) a young man separated from his 
mother in childhood and living in the family of his maternal uncle may 
try to win the daughter of that uncle, a clear reference to an ancient South 
Indian custom. Or else he may pay his court to another girl from her 
childhood, since courting a girl lrom childhood in righteous ways is praise- 
worthy. He should begin his advances by collecting flowers, making 
garlands and joining in suitable sports. He should, besides, propitiate her 
with presents. He should seek the good offices of her trusted friends (and 
specially the daughter of her nurse), for these are very likely to promote 
his suit. When the outward signs of love appear in her, he should try to 
win her over gradually and completely by various tricks and devices In 
fine we are told that the mere child should be wooed by sharing in her 
games, the young girl by exhibiting knowledge of the arts (kola), and an 
older woman through her trusted friends. 

Like the young man forced to press his suit in person, a girl may be com- 



VATSYAYANA ON COURTSHIP 


487 


pelled by circumstances to pay court to a prospective husband (iii 4, 
36-59). When a girl though possessing excellent qualities is born in a 
humble family, or though well-born is poor and so is not sought after by 
equals, or when she has lost her parents and is dependent on her kinsmen, 
she may try to arrange for her own marriage. This is evidently reminiscent 
of the Smriti rule mentioned above. But the detailed account which 
follows is peculiar to Vatsyayana. A girl so situated, says the author, 
may fix her attention on a young man of ability, good qualities, and hand- 
some appearance, whose affection she has shared from childhood. Or 
again, when she finds a young man so much smitten with love for her as to 
be ready to marry her even against his parents’ wishes, she may try to win 
him over by acts of service and frequent meetings with him. But she 
should never, though smitten with love, make the first overtures, for there- 
by she would ruin her fortune ( saubhdgyam jahati). 

As Vatsyayana gives us the first known accounts of courtship as a 
preliminary to marriage, so also we owe to him (iii 5, 1-30) some concrete 
descriptions of different forms of marriage which are mentioned with or 
without approval in the Smritis. In the gandharva marriage, the lovers 
are to meet by appointment at a secret time and place. Then ‘the sacred 
fire should be brought from the house of a Srotriya, kusa grass should 
be spread before it upon the earth, oblations offered to the fire 
in accordance with the prescriptions of the sacred law, and then they 
should go round the fire; and after this is completed, the parents should 
be informed.’ For a marriage performed before the fire, as the precep- 
tors concur, can never be annulled. After the marriage is consummated, 
the relatives should be informed by and by, and they should be persuaded 
to give away the girl formally to her lover for fear of social obloquy 
and punishment by the king. The two other forms of marriage corres- 
ponding to paisdcha and rakshasa as being unrighteous, do not require 
to be confirmed by religious rites. In these cases after the girl has been 
raped when asleep or when unconscious under the influence of an into- 
xicating drug ( paisdcha marriage), or else when she has been abducted 
after the slaughter or intimidation of her guards ( rakshasa marriage), her 
relations are informed and induced to consent to the formal marriage. 
Vatsyayana ends by declaring that the gandharva is the most respected of 
the forms of marriage, since it is attended with happiness, unaccompanied 
with troubles and negotiations, and is the firuit of mutual preference. 

Vatsyayana’s rules as to the age of marriage agree in part with those 
of the Smritis. According to him a man should observe celibacy till the 
completion of his education (i 2, 6), and one who has finished his educa- 
tion should enter upon the life of a householder (i 4, 1). With regard to the 
age of the girl, Vatsyayana, while describing the ceremony of selection of 
the bride, says that a girl who has just reached puberty should be rejected 
(iii 1, 12). Nevertheless his rules of marriage and courtship given above 
are sufficiently comprehensive to apply to girls before and even long after 
puberty. This confirms the conclusion, hinted at in the Smritis, that 



SOCIAL LIFE 


both early and late marriages of girls were known and practised during 
this period. It remains to add that Vatsyayana (iii 1, 2) recommends the 
bridegroom to marry a girl younger than himself by three years or more. 

The description (iv 2, 39 f.) of the remarried woman ( punarbhu ) in Vats- 
yayana’s work gives us a fuller picture of this type than the meagre re- 
ferences in the Smritis. The punarbhu, we are told, is a widow who being 
unable to control her passions unites herself for the second time with a 
man of good qualities and addicted to pleasure. The punarbhu's whole 
course of conduct is quite unlike that of the married wife who has, as 
we have seen, to live a life of restraint and seclusion, to manage her house- 
hold economically, to share in her husband’s religious acts, and to be 
indissolubly bound with him. ‘When the punarbhu seeks her lover’s house, 
she assumes the role of a mistress, patronises his wives, is generous to his 
servants and treats his friends with familiarity; she chides the lover her- 
self if he gives any cause for quarrel. She shows greater knowledge of 
the arts than his wedded wives, and seeks to please the lover with the 
sixty-four kdmakalas. She takes part in sports and festivities, drinking 
parties, garden picnics and other games and amusements. She might 
leave her lover, but if she did so of her own accord she had to restore to 
him all presents given by him; if she is driven out, she does not give 
back anything.’ 1 


NIYOGA 


On the subject of niyoga (the appointment of a sonless widow by her 
guardians to have one or at most two sons by her brother-in-law or other 
near relative), the Smriti law of this period reflects the contradictions of 
the older authorities. Directions for niyoga are given under the usual 
stringent restrictions by Manu (ix 59-63) and Yajnavalkya (i 68-9). Again, 
the son born according to the custom of niyoga is allowed (M. ix 167,' 
184; Y. i 68-9; ii 128, 131) to inherit, as before, his father’s property in the 
absence of better classes of sons. Nevertheless we find Manu in the above 
context (ix 57-8 ; 64-8) condemning niyoga itself in the strongest terms. 
Evidently Manu, while condoning niyoga as a practice approved by some 
earlier authorities, was himself opposed to it. The Great Epic while 
narrating the stories of the birth of Dhritarashtra and his brother (i 103- 
15) and of the five Pandava heroes (ibid. 120-4) refers to or quotes the 
Smriti rule of niyoga above mentioned. But the practice actually recom- 
mended and in part followed in the stories illustrates an altogether diffe- 
rent custom, viz. that of appointing a Brahmana to raise sons on sonless 
Kshatriya widows. As Winternitz has well remarked, 2 the Smriti rule 
has its parallel in the widespread custom of levirate, while the Maha- 
bharata rule, like similar rights claimed by priests, chiefs, or landlords 
had its origin in the law of might. 


In the above paragraphs the quota- 
tions are from H. C. Chakladar, 



A nagaraka’s life 


489 


TOWN LIFE 

The rise of rich and flourishing cities goes back in India to a time long 
anterior to the Christian era, and called into being a new social type 
called the nagaraka (the city-bred man of fashion) as early as Panini’s 
time (iv 2, 128). In Vatsyayana’s Kamasutra (i 4, 1 f.) the nagaraka's 
way of life is described for the first time with considerable fulness and held 
up as a model for others to follow. The picture is one of indulgence in 
a refined epicureanism by an accomplished young man with ample wealth 
and leisure. When a man has finished his education, says the author, 
and entered the life of a householder, he has to betake himself to a large 
or small town or the abode of many good men and adopt the life of a 
nagaraka. He first builds a house and furnishes it with elegance and 
taste. The house consists of two parts, an outer section reserved for his 
amorous enjoyment, and an inner meant for the residence of his wife. 
The garden round the house has a swing shaded by trees and raised seats 
strewn with flowers. The outer house is fitted with a pair of couches pro- 
vided with soft pillows and white sheets. At the head of the couch is a 
stand for a divine image and a raised seat containing the requisites of the 
nagaraka' s morning toilette (unguents, garlands, small pots of beeswax 
and scents, the peel of citron, and betel-leaves). On a bracket on the wall 
are deposited his lute, picture-board, and box of paint-brushes, besides a 
book and a garland of the yellow amaranth. On the floor, not far from 
his couch, is spread a carpet with pillows and boards for chess and dice. 
Outside the room are the cages of his sporting birds and in a secluded 
place is found the spot where he recreates himself with the lathe, the chisel 
and so forth. 

The daily life of the nagaraka is described as follows: Rising in the 
morning and attending to his physical needs, he arranges his toilette. He 
uses unguents moderately, perfumes his clothes with the smoke of burnt 
incense, and wears a garland. He applies collyrium to his eyelids and lac- 
dye to his lips. He finishes with a glance in the mirror, and then chews 
perfumed betel-leaves. After despatching his business, he takes his daily 
bath, having his limbs massaged every second day, and cleansed with 
soap-lather every third day. He shaves his face every fourth day. He 
takes two meals a day, one in the forenoon and the other in the afternoon 
(or according to an old authority, in the evening). After his midday 
meal he amuses himself in various ways such as listening to the talk of 
parrots, watching the fights of quails, cocks and rams, engaging in ex- 
hibitions of artistic skill, and conversing with his companions, or else he 
enjoys a siesta. In the afternoon he goes out fully dressed to attend 
social gatherings ( goshthl ), and in the evening he enjoys music. Then 
while his room is being cleaned and charged with the smell of sweet 
incense, he awaits the arrival of his mistresses. In the alternative 
he sends female messengers to bring them, or goes out himself 
to seek them. 

62 



490 


SOCIAL LIFE 


Besides his daily round of pleasures, the nagaraka has his periodical 
entertainments. Such are the samaja and the ghat a (assemblies connected 
with worship of deities), the goshthi (social gathering), the apanaka (drink- 
ing party), the udyanayatra (garden party) and the samasya-krida (public 
games). The samaja takes place on an appointed day every fortnight or 
every month when the actors and others employed by the nagaraka gather 
together for performances at a temple of the goddess Sarasvatl, the presi- 
ding deity of learning and the arts. On such occasions other actors coming 
from outside also exhibit their skill and receive their rewards. On special 
occasions actors of both classes co-operate with one another and the gana 
(guild or club) to which the nagaraka belongs entertains the guests. The 
ghatas of different kinds were held in a similar fashion in honour of vari- 
ous deities according to the local custom. The goshthi takes place when 
the nagaraka and his associates of the same age, wealth, learning, and 
character, meet together for pleasant talk at the house of a courtezan, or in 
a public hall, or at the residence of one of their number. There they engage 
in the discussion of poetical compositions, and talk about the arts; they 
conclude by presenting one another with fine dresses. At the goshthi, says 
the author, one should not speak too much in Sanskrit or in the verna- 
cular. One should, he continues, avoid goshthis which are hated by the 
people, or are harmful to them, or are given over to license. Goshthis 
which are meant only to amuse and divert the people should be patronised. 
The ndgarakas also met at one another’s houses to hold drinking parties 
where the courtezans would give them liquor of various kinds which they 
themselves afterwards drank. Similar scenes took place at the garden par- 
ties and in bathing parties during summer. On these occasions the ndgara- 
kas wore rich ornaments and went out in the forenoon mounted on horses 
in the company of courtezans and attendants, and having spent the day in 
various diversions, returned home in the evening bringing with them some 
token of the entertainment. Lastly, the ndgarakas joined with the com- 
mon folk in the various festivals celebrated in different parts of the country 
and on such occasions they attempted to attract the greatest notice. 

A characteristic feature of town life during this period were goshthis 
of fashionable citizens organised not only for intellectual diversion but 
also for more objectionable purposes. A story in the A vadanasataka (ii 52 
f.) narrates how members of the goshthi in the town of Sravasti assembling 
on a festive day made an agreement to bring their wives with them to 
a meeting in a garden, non-attendance involving the penalty of a heavy 
fine. In this case, it will be noticed, the goshthi partakes of the nature 
of a garden party, and it is attended not only by the members but also by 
their wives, and the attendance is enforced by a voluntary fine for default. 

Another aspect of the goshthis of this period is exhibited by the historical 
inscriptions. Among the names inscribed on the three relic caskets of the 
Bhattiprolu stupa ( c . 150 b.c.) are those of a goshthi with its members, 
the monk ( sramana ) of a goshthi, and the goshthi of a certain Arahadina! 
Referring these goshthis to the neighbouring town, we find that unlike the 



FOOD RULES 


491 


goshthis described above, they were purely sectarian associations and that 
one of them apparently had a monk permanently in its employ. We 
find also that while one goshthi was sufficiently aristocratic to be known 
by the name of its leader, another chose to be remembered by the list 
of its members. So also among the names of donors commemorated by 
inscriptions of the stupas at Sanchl are those of the Barulamisa-goshthi 
from Vidisa and the Buddha-goshthI from Dharmavardhana. The former 
probably was a goshthi of the aristocratic type just mentioned, while the 
latter had its sectarian character stamped on its very name. 1 

FOOD AND DRINK 


A. In the Smritis 


Already in the period of the Vedic Samhitas and the Brahmanas we find 
a tendency to regard certain kinds of meat and even vegetables as unfit 
for eating. 2 The Dharmasutras give us for the first time systematic lists 
of lawful and forbidden food in respect of the flesh of birds and beasts 
as well as fish and vegetables. Along with this the Dharmasutras permit or 
even enjoin the partaking of meat on a number of prescribed occasions. 
The eating of meat even by Brahmanas on ordinary occasions is condoned 
by them in other passages. 3 These rules are reproduced and amplified in 
the Smriti law of our period. Thus the lists of lawful and forbidden food 
given by Manu (v 5-25) and Yajnavalkya (i 169-78) agree on the whole 
with those presented by the Dharmasutras. According to Manu (v 41 re- 
peating Vas. iv 6) the occasions when animals might be killed are limited to 
sacrifices, the honey-mixture ceremony, and the rites for the gods and 
manes. To this Manu (v27) and Yajnavalkya (i 179) add that the use of meat 
is permitted when one’s life is in danger, when the Brahmanas so desire, 
and when the meat has been sanctified ( prokshita ). As for the occasions 
justifying the slaughter of animals Manu (v 35 like Vas. xi 34) makes it 
compulsory for the priest engaged in a sacred rite to partake of meat. Like 
the older authorities, again, Manu(iii 267-70) and Yajnavalkya (i 257-9) 
hold different kinds of meat to be acceptable to the manes in an ascending 
order of preference. In the honey-mixture ceremony ( madhuparka ), the 
offering of a cow to a student just after the completion of his studies 
is enjoined by Manu (iii 3), and that of a big bull or goat to a learned Brah- 
mana is prescribed by Yajnavalkya (i 109). The rules relating to forbidden 


1 The translation of goshthi in the 
inscrs. as ‘trustees in charge of temple 
or charitable endowment,’ (Biihler in 
El. ii followed by Atindranath Bose, 
Social and Rural Economy of Northern 
India, c. 600 b. c. to a. d. 200, i p. 
53) or as a ‘committee’ (Luders in 

List, loc. cit., followed by N. G. 
Majumdar in Monuments of Sahchi 

I, votive inscrs. of stupas I, 2, 3 etc. 


nos. 96-8, 178, 793); cannot be 

maintained in view of the refs, in 
Kamasiitra and Avadanasataka above 

2 Cf. TS. ii 5, 1. 1; AB. ii 1, 8; SB. i 
2, 3, 9. 

3 On the rules about eating vegetables 
and the flesh of birds, beasts and fishes 
in the Dharmasutras see Kane, op. cit. 
u part 2 pp. 777, 781-3 



492 


SOCIAL LIFE 


meat are enforced by stringent penances imposed upon the person parta- 
king of it (M. v 20; xi 157; Y. i 176). With this denunciation of the un- 
lawful killing of animals is joined a eulogy of complete abstention from 
meat-eating ( M . v 31, 33, 34, 38, 43-5, 47-55 and Y. i 180-1). It would 
seem, however, that the practice of meat-eating not only when enjoined 
by the law but on other occasions also prevailed extensively. This is 
virtually admitted by Manu (v 56) who concludes his account of the rules 
touching lawful and forbidden food, with the observation: ‘eating meat 
and drinking wine are natural to human beings, and there is no sin in 
these acts, but abstention is attended with high rewards.’ 

In so far as eating the meat of cattle is concerned, we find that even in 
the period of the Yedic Samhitas and the Brahmanas there was a distinct 
tendency to sanctify the cow and make her immune from slaughter, al- 
though it was usual to slay bulls and cows at sacrifices. From the time of 
the Grihyasutras, drinking the five products of a cow (panchagavya) has 
been prescribed as a means of purification from various sins. Coming to 
our period, we find that in Manu (v 18), as in the earlier law, animals with 
teeth in the upper jaw, with the sole exception of camels, are declared fit 
to be eaten. This implies (as pointed out by the commentators Medhatithi 
and Raghavananda) that the flesh of cattle was recognised as lawful food. 
Again, it is true that the slaughter of cows is still reckoned (M. xi 60 and 
Y. iii 234), as in Gautama (xxi 1 1 etc.), among the sins of the second 
degree ( upapatakas ), and not as yet among the mortal sins ( mahapatakas ). 
Nevertheless the penances for killing a cow are particularly severe. They 
involve for instance a very restricted diet with constant attendance on 
cows and so forth for three months (M. xi 109-17), or continence for 
one month as well as living on ‘the five products of the cow’, constant 
attendance on cows, residence in cow-pens etc. ( Y. iii 264-5). Again, 
it is very significant that giving up one’s life for the sake of cows or 
otherwise preserving them is now mentioned for the first time (M. 
xi 80 and Y. iii 244-5) as an alternative penance for the murder of a 
Brahmana. 1 

Like the offering of meat at sacrifices, the ritual use of intoxicating soma 
juice and to a much less extent the use of liquor (surd) are known to the 
Vedic period. But already in one of the Upanishads we find the drinking 
of surd branded as a grave sin. In the Dharmasutras, drinking surd ranks 
second in the list of mortal sins coming just after Brahmana-murder, while 
the penances of expiation range from death by drinking hot liquor to the 
performance of severe fasts and a fresh initiation. Even to drink water 
from a wine vessel requires a slight penance. 2 These rules are repeated 
in Manu (xi 91-3; 147-9) and Yajnavalkya (iii 253-5). For omitting to 


On the sanctity of the cow in the Vedic 
Samhitas and Brahmanas, see Kane, 
op. cit., pp. 772-3. On panchagavyas, 
see ibid. pp. 773-4. The significance of 
the alternative penance for Brahmana- 
murder in M. and Y. quoted above is 


missed by D. R. Bhandarkar, Some 
Aspects of Ancient Indian Culture, pp. 77-8 
On the drinking of soma and sura and 
the tendency to restrict the latter in 
the ™~ dlc period » see Kane, op. cit., 



MEAT AND DRINK 


493 


perform the penance, Manu adds (ix 236-40), the offender is to be puni- 
shed by the king with branding on the forehead and must be completely 
cast off by his relatives. The strongest condemnation is reserved for a 
Brahmana drinking surd ( M . xi 95-8). Again, in Manu (vii 50-2) drun- 
kenness heads the list in the group of the king’s traditional vices. A drun- 
kard wife is liable to immediate supersession, according to Manu (ix 80), 
and Yajnavalkya (i 73). In particular it is said that a Brahmana wife drink- 
ing wine is reborn in the next life in lower existences forfeiting the world 
of her husband (Y. iii 256 repeating Vas. xxi 11). 

Yet we notice in these works a tendency to condone the vice of drinking — 
doubtless, as elsewhere, under pressure of circumstances. Manu (xi 94-8), 
while strongly condemning the drinking of sura in any of its three forms 
by Brahmanas, implies that the varieties obtained from molasses and from 
madhuka flowers were allowable to Kshatriyas and Vaisyas. Again, the 
severity of Manu’s denunciation quoted above (xi 91-3) is mitigated by the 
statement that a man unintentionally drinking the varuni varieties of 
liquor ( M . xi 147), or surd generally ( Y . iii 255) is purified by a fresh initia- 
tion. To this Manu adds that even intentional drinking is exempted from 
penances involving death. A similar tendency may be traced in Manu 
(ix 84), where a fine only is imposed upon a wife who drinks liquor 
at festive shows. 


B. In Other Sources 

In the didactic portions of the Epics the eating of meat and the drink- 
ing of liquor are condemned as strongly as in the Smritis. The Maha- 
bharata (xiii 114-5) preserves a long discourse in praise of abstention from 
meat-eating, subject to the exceptional occasions where it is permitted in 
the Smritis. Abstention is particularly recommended during the tour 
months of the rainy season and more specially in the month of Kartika. 
According to the Great Epic (xii 35, 20, amplifying the rules of Manu 
and Yajnavalkya quoted above), he who drinks liquor unintentionally 
or when his life is in danger is purified by a fresh initiation. Else- 
where, however, (xii 159, 32) we are told that drinking wine is a 
sin expiable only with death. The strongest censure is reserved, as 
usual, for Brahmana drunkards. Once (i 76, 67-8) the sage Sukra is 
said to have established a rule that a Brahmana drinking wine should 
thenceforth be held to be guilty of Brahmana-murder. But in the narra- 
tives of the two epics even Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, not to speak of 
other classes, freely indulge in meat-eating. Wine-drinking is also men- 
tioned there as the habitual practice of Kshatriyas. In the Mahabharata 
(iii 207-8) we have a remarkable seiies of arguments justifying the slaughter 
of animals not only for sacrifice also for other occasions. 1 

1 Brahmanas entertained with the flesh Deer killed by the Pandavas and their 

of boars and deer and other delicacies flesh first offered to Brahmanas 

by Yudhishlhira (Mbh. ii 4, 1-2). and then eaten by themselves (ibid. 



494 


SOCIAL LIFE 


When we turn to the Buddhist and Jaina monastic rules, we find the 
same tendency to modify the fundamental principle of ahimsa in the 
light of the widespread practice of meat-eating. Abstention from taking 
life and from drinking liquor, as is well known, is included among the 
vows that are binding alike upon Buddhist and Jaina monks and laymen. 
In the actual rules of the Buddhist Order, however, a monk is permitted 
to partake of meat, provided it is pure in three respects, viz. unseen, un- 
heard, and unsuspected. Again it is laid down that a monk partaking 
of meat except when he is sick is guilty of a grave sin. According to the 
Jaina Acharanga Sutra (ii 1, 10, 5 f.) a monk or a nun on a begging tour 
should not accept from laymen meat or fish with many bones. 

We find frequent references in other literature to wine-bibbing and meat- 
eating as prevalent practices. The Milindapafiha (278) includes the gift 
of liquor in a list of ten condemned gilts. But in Vatsyayana’s Kamasutra 
(ii 10, 1-22) we read that the nagaraka when being entertained by his mis- 
tress is to regale her with liquor as well as varieties of roasted and dried 
meat and other delicacies. Nagarakas, again, are described in the 
same work, as we have seen, as indulging in various kinds of spirituous 
liquor at their drinking parties, garden picnics, and water sports. In 
the Divyavadana (136-7) we are told how a big bull was led away for 
slaughter outside Vaisall city by a butcher, and a great crowd followed 
him hoping to share in the meat. The custom of killing animals for 
food at wedding feasts is referred to in the story of prince Arishtanemi's 
renunciation in the Uttaradhyayana Sutra (xxii 14-7), and that of fattening 
a ram for slaughter at a guest’s entertainment is mentioned in a simile in 
the same work (vii 1-4). In the stoiy of a pious Jaina layman, the Uvasa- 
gadasao tells us (i 39) that, while limiting himself to a number of stringent 
restrictions under the householder’s vows, he made an exception in favour 
of a particular kind of liquor. This limitation, with the same exception, 
is repeated (viii 235) in the tale of another equally pious Jaina layman. 
The principal wife of the latter, however, because of her habitual indul- 
gence in meat and drink of all kinds, is said to have ended her life miserably 
under her husband’s curse (ibid. 240 f.). 

A scientific classification of birds and beasts with an analysis of the 
characteristic qualities of the flesh of each kind is found in a famous medical 
work of this period, viz. the Charaka-samhita (Sfltrasthana xxvii 11-29, 
37 f.). The list includes some animals like camels whose flesh is condemnd 
as forbidden food in the Smritis. 


iii 50, 4). King Jayadratha and 
Ms attendants entertained by Drau- 
padi with the flesh of deer etc. (ibid, 
iii 266, 13-14). Krishna and Arjuna 
intoxicated by drinking liquor (ibid, 
v. 57, 35), Deer and boar killed for 
food by Rama and Lakshmana 
wandering in the forest (Ram. ii 52, 


102). Meat of goats, sheep, boars, 
deer etc. and liquor of different 
varieties provided for prince Bharata’s 
host by the sage Bharadvaja (ibid, 
ii 91, 51f). Wine and meat abjured 
by Rama out of grief for Slta (ibid . 
v. 36, 41). 



FASHIONS OF LIFE 


495 


TOILETTE AND PERSONAL HYGIENE 

Rules relating to the daily purification of the body, brushing the teeth 
and bathing are laid down for householders ( grihasthas ) and intending 
householders ( sndtakas ) in the Dharmasutras. These rules are reproduced 
with some additions in Manu (iv) and Yajnavalkya (i 97-166). A verse 
common to Manu (iv 152) and the Mahabharaia (xiii 104, 23) neatly sums 
up the morning routine of the snataka. This consists in answering the 
calls of nature, toilette, bathing, brushing the teeth, applying collyrium 
to the eyes, and worshipping the gods. The snataka is required to 
be clean in his dress and appearance. To quote Manu (iv 34-6) and 
Yajnavalkya (i 131, 133), the snataka should not wear old and dirty clothes 
but should be dressed in white garments and should keep his hair, nails, 
and beard clipped; he should also wear two gold ear-rings. According 
to Manu (ii 209) the student in residence with his teacher is to render him 
such service as shampooing his limbs and attending on him while bathing. 
Similar services (anointing the limbs with oil, rubbing or shampooing 
them with powder and so forth) may be performed for Jaina mendicants 
by laymen. 1 In the well-known medical work called the Susrutasariihita , 2 
a complete course of personal hygiene is laid down with full directions 
for its practice. This includes the application of the tooth-brush, eye and 
mouth- washes and collyrium, chewing betel-leaves with the proper spices, 
anointing the head and the limbs with oil, combing the hair, physical 
exercise, rubbing and friction, bathing, using scented pastes, wearing 
gems, flowers and clean clothes, washing and anointing the feet, shaving, 
paring the nails and shampooing. 

From the texts, legal and medical, quoted above we turn to those 
more clearly reflecting contemporary fashions of life. In Vatsyayana’s 
description of the daily life of a migaraka , the morning toilette, as we have 
seen, plays a very important part. What elaborate fashions of hairdres- 
sing were known among laymen is indicated by a text in the Milindapanha 
(11). From this we learn that laymen used to adorn their hair and beard, 
smear them with oil, wash them, apply garlands, scents, myrobalans and 
dyes to them, making use also of ribbons and combs. Women used to 
paint their bodies yellow with different substances. 3 They also adorned 
their bodies with ornamental designs ( viseshakas ). 4 Dressing in white 
garments, using sandal, garlands, perfumes, and unguents and so forth, 
were the distinctive features of the layman’s toilette. 5 Even children 
were anointed with perfumes and used to be rubbed, bathed, and sham- 
pooed by their parents. 6 Flowers and perfumes as well as betel-leaves 
were frequently exchanged between lovers. 7 Perfuming the limbs of a 
mendicant and fumigating them with incense were permitted to Jaina 

1 Achara. Su. ii 13, 1 f. * Miln. pp. 243, 338, 248 

2 Chikitsasthana xxiv 1-65 6 Miln. p. 241 

2 Buddhacharita iv 46; Gathd-sapta sati 7 Vatsyayana v 1, 10; 21, 35; vi 1, 20; 

i 22, 58, 80 3, 4, etc. 

4 Saundarananda iv 1 3-6 



496 


SOCIAL LIFE 


laymen. 1 The scenting of clothes was a common fashion. 2 Laymen 
having bought clothes used to wash, dye, brush, rub, clean, and perfume 
them. 3 A perfume compounded of several substances (saffron, aloe, 
‘Turkish’ and ‘Yavana’ scents among others) was known. 4 

We may next refere to a few texts illustrating the toilette appliances 
known in this period. The Ramayana (iv 91, 51 f.) narrative of the enter- 
tainment of prince Bharata’s host by the sage Bharadvaja at his hermitage, 
is full of miraculous elements, but the amenities provided by the sage 
for his guests include a reliable list of toilette articles known to the com- 
mon folk. It enumerates tooth-sticks, sandal and other pastes, mirrors, 
combs, brushes and collyrium-boxes. In Uvasagadasao (i 22-42) we have 
the story of a pious Jaina grihapati who, while voluntarily submitting to a 
whole set of householder’s vows restricting him in various ways, expressly 
reserved for his use a number of toilette articles. Among these are inclu- 
ded fragrant red-tinted cloth, a green tooth-stick of sweet taste, the milky 
pulp of the amalaka fruit (perhaps for cleansing the hair), a specially 
expensive variety of unguents, powder of scented wheat flour, perfumes 
made of aloes, saffron, sandal, and other substances, the white lotus and 
a garland of jasmine flowers, incense made of aloes and other substances, 
and betel with five spices. This inventory may be fairly taken to include 
articles ordinarily used by members of the rich capitalist class. Lastly 
the Sutrakritanga (i 4, 2) in a comic sketch of the woes of a monk seduced 
from his vows by a woman, acquaints us with the toilette outfit of 
women in ordinary life. We learn that they used tooth-brushes, combs 
ribbons to bind their hair, mirrors, myrobalans, collyrium-boxes with 
pins attached, sticks to paint marks on their foreheads, oil for the face 
lip-salves, powders made of sandal, and other substances. 

At the date of the early Buddhist literature a number of professions 
had arisen to cater for the public taste in toilette. Such professional 
attendants are mentioned in works of this period when describing city 
life. A list in Vatsyayana (vi 1, 9) mentions garland-makers, perfumers, 
dyers and cleaners of clothes and barbers. In Madhyadesa gardeners 
hawked lotuses in the streets ( Avadanasataka , I 124). Garland-makers 
made variegated bouquets from all sorts of flowers, according to the 
Milindapanha (347). In the Mahabharata (iv 9, 19-20) we have the storv 
of Draupadi in disguise seeking employment with the queen of Virata as 
her attendant. She knew, we are told, the arts of dressing the hair, pre- 
paring unguents, and making garlands of wondrous designs; here we' have 
a list of the qualifications expected from a queen’s maid in real life 
Among the amenities provided for Bharata’s host in the Ramayana story 
quoted earlier (ii 9) female bathing-attendants are enumerated. Even the 
luxury of a shaving saloon is mentioned in a few Jaina canonical texts 5 


1 Achara Sii. ii 13, 8 

2 Bhasa’s Charudatta i 26 f.; Saunda- 
rananda iv 26 

3 Achara, Su ii 5, 1, 3 
* Miln. p. 267 


T", — u “niuig-ciuenuants, florists, 
aeaiers in perfumes among residents 
of a city; Miln. p. 331. Bathing- 
attendants, toilette-attendants, perfu- 
mers, flonsts, hairdressers among the 



TOILETTE APPLIANCES 


497 


The rich development of toilette-fashions during this period was 
marked by the elevation of some of them to the rank of technical arts 
(kalas). In Vatsyayana’s list of sixty-four supplementary arts found in 
the Kdmasutra are included the preparation of cut-designs from leaves, 
the weaving of garlands, and the manufacture of perfumes. Among 
the seventy-two arts (kalas) known to the Jaina canonical texts are those 
concerned with the arrangement of dress, the fabrication of unguents, the 
preparation of powders, the cutting of ornamental leaf-designs, and the 
beautification of young ladies’ complexions. The manufacture of scents 
and the preparation of leaf-designs are included among the kalas in 
Lalitavistara (156). 1 

The evidence of archaeology confirms and supplements that ot the 
literary texts quoted above. Among the professions commemorated 
in the contemporary votive inscriptions, that of the perfumers is the one 
most often mentioned. Again, the excavations of contemporary ancient 
sites (especially at Taxila) have yielded toilette appliances of various 
kinds. In the figure sculptures of this period we have more unequivocal 
testimony to the variety of toilette fashions known at this time. The 
types of coiffure both of men and women depicted in these sculptures 
are too varied for detailed notice here. On the bodies of women sculp- 
tured in the railing around the Bharhut stupa are found designs of the sun, 
the moon, the stars and so forth. Among the sculptures of the Mathura 
and the Amaravatl school, figures of women are found wearing flowers 
or garlands or else in the act of arranging their toilette.* 


inhabitants of Ayodhya ; Ram. ii 83, 
12-28. For alankdriyasaha (shaving 
saloon) see Abhidhanarajendra; s. v. 
For refs, to perfumers in votive inscrs. 
see Liiders, List, Index of Misc. Terms 
s. v. gandhika. 

1 On the list of 64 ahgavidyas, see Vat- 
syayana, i 3, 16. For the list of 72 
kalas in Jaina Samavdyahga Sutra, 
see Abhidhanarajendra, s. v. kala. 

’ Examples of toilette appliances from 
ancient sites : — (a) incense burners, 
flesh rubbers, perfume sprinklers, cop- 
per mirror,, ivory handle (for mirror) 
at Sirkap Taxila: ASIAR. 1914-15, 

pp. 16, 22 ; 1915-16, pp. 17, 20, 29, 52 ; 
decorated ivory comb, ordinary ivory 
and bone combs at Taxila : ibid. 


1926-7, p. 119; 1928-9, p. 51 ; (b) anti- 
mony rods at Dharmarajika stupa, 
Taxila: ibid. 1915-16, p. 10 ; at Sirkap, 
Taxila : ibid. 1914-15, pp. 17, 23 ; 
at Besnagar : ibid. 1913-14, p. 218 ; 
(c) flesh rubbers of pottery, antimony 
rods of bronze, bronze mirror, conch- 
shell, cosmetic holders in form of 
fish, miniature bronze bottles (as 
unguent holders ?) at Rairh : K. N. 
Puri, Excavations, pp. 42-3. For ex- 
haustive accounts of styles of coiffure, 
see Moti Chandra, J1SOA. vm pp. 
89-90. For figures of women with 
flowers or in act of arranging toilette, 
see C. Sivaramamurti, Amaravatl 
Sculptures, pi. vi fig. 9, pi. viii figs. 
21, 23, pi. ix figs. 2, 10, 11, 13, 17 etc. 


63 



Chapter XVI 


SOUTH INDIA 
1. Early Historical Period 

T he extreme south of India from the Tirupati hill (Vengadam) to 
Cape Comorin (Kumari), bounded by the sea on the east and west, 
was known as Tamilagam, the Tamil realm. By the fourth century b. c. 
it had become subject to strong Aryan or Northern influences, though 
the pre-Aryan (Tamil) culture and language continued to flourish here in 
much greater strength than in the rest of India. Our knowledge of the 
history of the country before the Christian era is, however, rather vague 
and indirect. A scholium of Katyayana on Panini (iv 1, 168) which 
derives the word Parnjya from Pandu, thus relating the royal family of 
the extreme south with the Pandavas of the Great Epic, and the re- 
ferences to the Pandya country in Megasthenes and Kautilya are among 
the earliest data now accessible to us. Megasthenes knew that Ceylon 
was an island separated from the mainland of India and that it was more 
productive than India of gold and large pearls ; a good part of the island 
was forest inhabited by wild beasts including a large breed of elephants. 
He gives a quaint account of the Pandyan kingdom making little difference 
between fact and fable. He says that Heracles had a daughter Pandaia 
to whom he assigned the southernmost portion of India including 365 
villages, whose people brought by turns their daily tribute to the royal 
palace, ‘so that the queen might always have the assistance of those men 
whose turn it was to pay the tribute in coercing those who for the time 
being were defaulters in their payments.’ 1 What is described as tribute 
here seems to have been the supply of the daily provisions needed for the 
royal household ; the Silappadikaram, written nearly a thousand years 
after the date of Megasthenes, contains a reference to the shepherds in 
the suburbs of Madurai supplying ghee every day to the palace by turns. 2 
Kautilya’s references to the fine cloth from Madurai and the trade routes 
to the South have been noticed already (p. 73). 

Late inscriptions and legends recall events long past, and mention the 
rule of the Nandas in the Deccan, and the migration of Chandragupta 
Maurya with the Jaina Patriarch Bhadrabahu to Sravana Belgola in 
Mysore. But perhaps the oldest and most tangible evidence that there was 
contact between North and South leading to a certain uniformity of culture 
throughout India is to be found in the ‘punch-marked’ coins of copper and 
silver, rectangular to start with, but later round also, ‘which long served 
as the co mm on currency of most of the states of ancient India, and were 

1 McCrindle, Meg. & Arr. pp. 62-3; 158-9 * xvii, /. 7 



THREE TAMIL KINGDOMS 


499 


wonderfully uniform in weight and general style from the Himalayas to 
Cape Comorin.’ Cunningham was disposed to date the most ancient coins 
of the class as early as 1000 b. c. though others think the estimate ‘much 
in excess of the truth’. In Ihe South they were used ‘from the most remote 
times down to about a. d. 300’. 1 

The second and thirteenth Rock Edicts of Asoka mention the southern 
kingdoms and Ceylon ; the list in the second Edict, which is longei , com- 
prises by name the Chodas, Pandyas, Satiyaputa and Keralaputra, besides 
Tambraparnl. These countries lay outside the empire of Asoka, but they 
were so friendly to the emperor that he could arrange for the medical 
treatment of men and animals in all these lands, and for the importation 
and planting of useful medicinal herbs and roots wherever they were 
needed. The diitas (emissaries) of Asoka also visited these countries for 
preaching Dhamma there. The bare mention of such facts is enough to 
warrant the inference that there existed in these parts a settled life with 
an ordered polity and a fairly high level of civilization. The Tamils 
believed in fact that the three monarchies of the Cheras, Cholas, and 
Pandyas were of immemorial antiquity, ‘dating from the time of creation’ 
as a mediaeval commentator quaintly puts it. 2 A late Pallava charter 
counts Asokavarma among the earliest rulers of Kafichl, and this may 
well be a relic of Mauryan rule in the South. 

Of the three Tamil monarchies the Pandya country occupied the extreme 
south and included the modern districts of Tirunelveli, Madurai, and 
Ramnad, besides South Travancore, often called Nanjilnad, plough-land. 

Its capital was Madurai, the city on the Vaigai river, and Korkai on the 
east coast at the mouth of the Tambraparnl river was its main seaport, 
though we hear of another port further north by name Saliyur ; there must 
have been some port or ports on the west coast as well round about modern y 
Trivandrum. The Chola country comprised the lower Kaverl valley,'*^ 
the coastal plain between two rivers both bearing the name Vellar, the 
north Vedar entering the sea near Porto Novo, and the smaller south- 
ern stream passing through Pudukkottai territory. The Chola kingdom 
thus roughly corresponded to modern Tanjore and Trichinopoly districts; 
its inland capital was Uraiyur, and Puhar or Kaveripattanam (the 
Khaberis of Ptolemy) at the mouth of the Kaverl was its main port. The 
Chera or Kerala kingdom was the western coastal strip above the northern 
limit of the Pandyan kingdom. It had a number of good ports, Tondi 
and MuSiri being the best known. The capital of the Chera kingdom 
was called Vanji, and its location has been the subject of an inconclusive 
debate, some identifying it with some place on the Periyar river or at its 
mouth, others locating it inland in Karur or Karuvur, the centre of the 
westernmost taluq of the Trichinopoly district. The mention of Karu-ur 
in a Brahm! record of the third century b. c. from the neighbourhood, 
and of Karuvur alias Vanjimanagaram in a much later inscription, 3 may 

1 Smith, CC/M. I p. 135. * ARE. 1927-8, ii 1. 

! Parimel-Alagar on Kural, 955 



500 


SOOTH INDIA 


be taken to support the inland location of the Chera capital. Ptolemy’s 
reference to Korura as the Chera capital and the discovery of Roman coins 
near Karur lend further support to this view. If it is correct, the Chera 
country was not confined to the western coastal strip but had a notable 
inward extension by way of the Palghat gap. The identity and location 
of Satiyaputa are uncertain. The best view now seems to be that first 
put forward by K. G. Sesha Aiyer ( Cera Kings, page 18) and confirmed 
by Burrow on what appear to be sound philological grounds ( BSOAS . 
xii, 1948, pp. 136-7, 146-7). Satiya corresponds, not to skt. Satya, but 
later Tamil Atiya ; and puta becomes magan later man in Tamil, so 
that Satiyaputa was the Tamil chieftain Adigaman (of Tagadtir)— who was 
quite prominent in the Sangam period and may have risen into impor- 
tance earlier. This is a much more satisfactory identification than that of 
Satiyaputa with Kosar which was accepted by some scholars till recently. 
Old Tamil was the only language that prevailed in the whole area, possibly 1 
with dialectical variations, which, slight at first, developed in the course 
of centuries into the separate languages of Malayalam and Kannada. 
The Gulf of Mannar was famous for its pearl fisheries which were shared 
by the Pandyas, Cholas, and the rulers of Ceylon. 

Among the earliest monuments of the Tamil country to which we may 
assign a date with some confidence are the Brahmi inscriptions found in 
natural caverns in hills, which have many features in common with the hun- 
dreds of similar records found in Ceylon. The script of these inscriptions 
resembles closely that of the brief inscriptions from Bhattiprolu, and may 
well be assigned to the third and second century b. c. These inscriptions 
from caverns have not been fully elucidated, but they are clearly either 
brief donative records, or only give the names of persons who made the 
caverns fit for habitation, or of the monks who occupied them thereafter 
Kajugumalai (Tamil for Gridhrakuta) is the name of one of the hills 
containing these caverns. The name Pancha Pandavamalai often applied 
to them ‘strongly reminds us of the Pandava-pabbata at whose foot the 
Buddha after his renunciation took his first meal which he had obtained 
by begging.’ One of the caves bears the name ‘ undankal ’, ‘the rock of 
the man who took the meal’. The caverns of South India resemble 
one another and the similar monuments of Ceylon which are assuredly 
Buddhistic. For these reasons it has been suggested that these caves 
‘were the abodes of Buddhist monks to the exclusion of the other sects’ 2 
It is, however, premature to formulate such a definitive conclusion 
Some of these caverns are called Samanar-kudagu, cave of the Jainas- 
new caverns are still being discovered from time to time throughout 
South India, e.g. the natural cavern at Malakonda in Nellore district 
And tradition is strong that Jainism came to South India at the same time 
as Buddhism, if not earlier. e 


1 For other views see (p. 26) ante and 
Barua, Asoka and his inscriptions, 

pp. 111-2, Also Age of the Nandas and 


K ' A - N - *■«. 0952) 
' PAIOC. (m 1924) p. 278 



MAURYAS AND THE TAMIL COUNTRY 


501 


Though the script of the inscriptions is Brahmi of the southern variety, 
their language is seen to be Tamil still in its formative stages. The script 
was alphabetic and already included signs for the peculiarly Dravidian 
sounds like r, l, l, and n. Vocalized consonants were represented by two 
symbols, that for the consonant being followed by the complete vowel 
sign, yu being written as ya u. There is no doubt that these peculiarities 
were the result of a pretty long process of trial and error that had by no 
means come to a stop in the second century b.c., a fact often overlooked 
by some ardent Tamilists who would carry back the date of the literature 
oftneSangam to the third century b.c. or even earlier. Tentative studies 
of these records have provided a glimpse into their contents. Polalaiyan, 
a kutumpikan (i. e. peasant or householder) from Ila (Ceylon) figures as 
a donor; and a woman, some members of the Karani caste, and merchants 
( vanikan ) also figure in the same capacity. The ascetics pursuing their 
life divine in solitude were thus already enjoying the support of all classes 
of laymen. 

Much has been written about a Maurya invasion of South India, and 
the Podyil hill adjoining the Tirunelveli and Madurai districts to the west 
has been fixed as the farthest limit of this invasion which is supposed to 
have occurred in the period between Chandragupta’s treaty with Seleucus 
and the thirteenth year Asoka . 1 This theory rests on references to 
Mauryas in the Sangam poems which have been interpreted by others 
as a reference to a branch of the Konkani Mauryas . 2 The view last 
mentioned would place the Sangam poems in the sixth or seventh century 
A.D. which is far too late for any of them. The references to the Mauryas 
occur in five poems, three by Mamulanar, and one each by two other 
poets. The relative chronology of the poets is not clear, but the whole 
body of Sangam literature clearly belongs to the first three centuries 
of the Christian era. Therefore the mention of Nandas and Mauryas in 
these poems can only be a reference to events long past, but somehow 
preserved in the popular memory. There is good reason to doubt whether 
the two poets other than Mamulanar were actually referring to the Maur- 
yas of history or to some aspects of an obscure mythology. That they both 
refer to the same fact or myth is evident. The expressions used are identi- 
cal, though one of them, Kallil Attiraiyanar , 3 gives more details than 
the other, Parangorranar . 4 The more detailed account mentions the 
Moriyar, their victorious lance, their skyscraping umbrella, and their 
chariots bearing banners. It then states that their strong bright-rayed 
wheel cut across a mountain at the end of the earth and rolled past it, and 
past the broad disc of the sun fixed near the pass so made. The com- 
mentator amplifies the sense by additions of his own; he states that 
the Moriyar ruled the whole world, and that the mountain severed by 
their discuss was the silver mountain which separated the earth from 
another world, and that the Moriyar were the Chakravala emperors or 

1 The Beginnings of South Indian History, ch. ii 3 Puram 175 

* CHI. i p. 596 1 Aham 69 



502 


SOUTH INDIA 


Vidyadharas and Nagas, an interpretation which would suit the alter- 
native reading ‘Oriyar’ much better than ‘Moriyar’ (Mauryas). Stress 
need not, however, be laid on the alternative reading ‘oriyar’, for the 
cutting of the hill and the rolling of the wheel are features that recur in 
the unmistakable references of Mamulanar to the Mauryas. But these 
other poets, if indeed they were thinking of the Mauryas, had but the 
vaguest notions about them and their achievements, and were ready to 
class them with the superhuman beings whose deeds, according to the 
Puranas, fill the annals of the universe for many ages after the dawn of 
creation. 

Mamulanar exhibits better historical knowledge, and his statements 
are much more precise, though he too retains the quasi-legendary feature 
which is all that is known to the other poets concerning the Mauryas. 
He mentions the Nandas and the enormous treasure which they accumu- 
lated. ‘What is it,’ asks a lovelorn lady, ‘that has attracted my lover 
better than my charms ?’ ; and among the alternatives postulated by her 
occurs this : 1 ‘Is it the treasure accumulated in prosperous Pataliputra 
and hidden in the waters of the Ganges by the Nandas of great renown, 
victorious in war ?’ Here we find much that is known of the Nundas from 
other sources, and one fact that is new — the manner in which they kept 
the treasure hidden under the waters of the Ganges, which reminds one 
of a similar practice attributed to the Maharajas of Zabag by Arab travel- 
lers of the eighth century a.d. Mamulanar’s mention of the Mauryas 
is accompanied by equally clear and precise indications of historical 
events. There are two passages for consideration, both from the Ahana- 
nuru. One 2 starts by saying that the lover would not stay behind even if he 
got the wealth of the Nanda for doing so — a second reference to this topic 
by the poet; it then proceeds to say that the Kosar of the victorious ban- 
ner started operations against their foes and gained several victories; but 
as Mohur did not submit to them, the Moriyas who had a large army led 
an expedition in which their chariots rolled across a cutting made in the 
mountain for that purpose. The Mauryas were so friendly to the Kosar 
as to aid them in war. This active intervention in the politics of the Tamil 
country brings to our view a phase of Mauryan imperialism that has so far 
escaped notice. The last reference in Mamulanar 3 adds some more details. It 
says that when the Moriyar turned to the south, the warlike Vadugar 
preceded them in the van, and the mountain which was cut to make 
a way for the chariots is on this occasion described as the large snow 
mountain reaching up to the skies, obviously the Himalayas. This 
last detail betrays that Mamulanar also is by no means free of legendary 
notions about the Mauryas; only he managed to convey some facts besides 
the legend. Vadugar is a rather vague term in Tamil literature; it means 
literally northerners, and was generally applied to the Kannada-Telugu 
peoples cf Southern and Eastern Deccan together. They were included 
in the Mauryan empire, and they may have been called upon 
1 Aham 265 * Ibid. 251 3 2gj 



STUDY OF SANGAM WORKS 


503 


to take the lead in any movement further south. One last reference to the 
Nandas in the Kurundogai 1 is simple and clear; it refers to the abundance 
of gold in Pataliputra and to the elephants bathing in the Son river near 
the city. These Tamil texts, three to five centuries later than the age of 
the Mauryas, thus indicate that the Tamil states were within the sphere 
of Mauryan influence, a fact already attested by the Asoka inscriptions, 
and that at least on one occasion the Mauryas went to the assistance of 
the Kosar to enable them to subdue the rebellious chieftain of Mohur; 
the Vadugar took a hand in this expedition. 

II. The Age of the Sangam 


Introduction 

The serious study of the earliest strata of Tamil literature known as 
the Sangam literature was inaugurated towards the close of the last 
century by the publication of texts from the hand of scholars like Damo- 
daram Pillai and Swaminatha Aiyer. P. Sundaram Pillai began the 
critical use of these classics for purposes of historical reconstruction 
with his articles on Nedunalvadai and Maduraikkahji in the Madras 
Christian College Magazine. But he did not attempt any systematic 
chronology, and the first scholar to take this in hand was Kanakasabhai 
Pillai. In his Tamils 1800 years ago (Madras, 1904) he accepted the 
Silappadikaram as a Sangam classic and made it the sheet-anchor of his 
chronological scheme, though he consulted in manuscript many poems 
that were still unpublished. But it has since become clear that the Silap- 
padikaram in its present form and the stories and legends of Karikala 
Chola recorded in it cannot claim such high antiquity; even a cursory 
study of the word-forms and grammatical endings and the complex 
system of prosody known to this work would be enough to show that it 
could not be assigned to a time much earlier than the sixth century A. D. ; 
and this conclusion is reinforced by some other features such as borrow- 
ings traceable to other works and verbal citations from them, besides 
the social and political traits of a relatively late age which may be discern- 
ed in the text. The relation of Ilango, the reputed author of the Silap- 
padikaram, to Senguttuvan, the Chera king, who is said to have been his 
elder brother, is not heard of in the Padirruppattu which makes no 
mention of the brother of the monarch. Neither the poet Ilango nor 
his work finds a place among the authors and works Qf the Sangam listed 
in the commentary to the Iraiyanar Ahapporul — our main source for the 
traditions relating to the Sangam; though that commentary cites the 
Silappadikaram and knows of Nakklrar, but not of Manimekalai which 
is said to have been composed at the same time as the Silappadikdram. 
It should be added that the commentary is sometimes ascribed to Nakklrar 


No. 75 by Padumarattu MOsiklranar 



504 


SOUTH INDIA 


himself. M. Srinivasa Aiyangar in his essays on the Tamil Academies 
and the Ten Tens 1 reviewed the legends of the lraiyanar Ahapporul and 
the work of Kanakasabhai in so tar as it concerned the Cheras. Pandit 
M. Raghava Aiyangar’s work on Seran Senguttuvan (1915) and the 
discussion it gave rise to mark the next important stage in the study of 
the subject. Raghava Aiyangar argued for a date in the fifth century a. d. 
for the Sangam; but his arguments were subjected to devastating criticism 
by K. S. Srinivasa Pillai in his contributions to the Sen Tamil 
and in his History of Tamil Literature , 2 and Raghava Aiyangar 
withdrew the chronological argument from his book in its second 
edition (1929). 

The most comprehensive of all the efforts so far made to determine the 
chronology of the Sangam period from a study of the internal evidence 
available is that of K. N. Sivaraja Pillai in his Chronology of the Tamils 
(1932). But this work starts with wide a priori assumptions, accepts only 
selected works like the Purandnuru, Ahananuru, Narrinai and Kurundogai 
as of primal y value, and discards the evidence of the Padirrupattu and 
Pattuppaftu when it conflicts with that of the four favoured collections 
(p. 41); moreover the author interprets many texts in a forced way to 
suit his theories, and, in an extremity, rejects particular lines and passages 
as interpolations, claiming in some matters to know more of the authentic 
tradition than the redactors of the collections as we have them now. 
His work is therefore not as conclusive or convincing as it might other- 
wise have been. 

The most recent discussion of the subject is that of K. G. Sesha Aiyer 
in his Cera Kings of the Sangam Period (1937). His primary concern 
is with the Chera monarchs, and naturally he bases his work on the 
Padirruppattu, though he takes account of other poems mention- 
ing the monarchs. He also briefly reviews the controversies about 
the age of the Sangam and himself advocates a date in the second 
century a. d. 

Sources and Chronology 

The comprehensive study of the political history of the Sangam period 
cannot be undertaken without a full and unbiased sifting of the data in 
all the authentic poems that have been preserved. The Silappadikaram 
and Manimekalai must be left on one side for reasons already indicated • 
but the synchronism suggested by the first work between Senguttuvan 
and Gajabahu of Ceylon may be accepted as historical, because it fits 
in very well with the other lines of evidence derived from the general proba- 
bilities of history in North and South India, besides Greek and Latin 
authors on the one side, and the Sangam poems and archaeology on the 
other; and without it there is no means of importing any exactitude into 

1 Tamil Studies, ix and x (1914) 

2 Tamil Varalatu (Kumbakonam, 1st ed. 1922, 2nd ed. 1924) 



CHERA GENEALOGY 


505 


the chronological system derived from a study of the internal evidence. 

Let us begin by trying to determine the number of generations of 
monarchs and authors that are reflected in these poems, accepting as 
genuine the traditions, recorded in the colophons and padigams (epilo- 
gues) to them . 1 The Padirruppattu, Aingurunuru and Pattuppattu are com- 
pact groups with a manageable number of kings and poets; and the 
padigams in the Padirruppattu give the genealogical relations in the Chera 
line that go far to simplify our task. The Narrinai and Kurundogai may for 
the most part be left alone, because the number of poets involved is 
numerous and many of them are obscure; the theme of these poems 
moreover is love, and they contain little of political interest; but political 
references wherever found in them will be taken into account and accom- 
modated in the scheme as they should be. Paripadal, a collection devoted 
to love and religion and belonging to the class isaittamil (Tamil set to 
music), will be treated in the same manner. Kalittogai raises a problem of 
its own; it is not settled if Nallanduvanar was the author of the whole col- 
lection or its compiler. In any event, it too is a collection of love poems 
with few facts of history coming in anywhere. There is indeed a reference 
to the flooding of the South Pandya country by the sea for which the 
Pandya ruler compensated himself by overthrowing the Chera and the 
Chola ; 2 but who can decide if this is legend or history? The 
Silappadikaram too has a similar tale, and there the compensatory con- 
quest reaches the Himalayas. Lastly, the collections known as the 
Ahandnuru and Purananuru are important and will come in for a good 
deal of discussion, particularly the latter, for the sake of the numerous 
events of political history which they contain. 

We shall begin by setting forth the genealogical data for the Cheras 
from the padigams to the Padirruppattu ( Ten Tens), the only collection 
which yields such data in any considerable measure. While all writers 
have recognised the existence of two branches of the Chera royal line, 
they are not agreed about the details of the arrangement, and some, 
particularly Kanakasabhai, have combined in their tables data from the 
Ten Tens and Mappadikaram. It would be tedious to state in detail 
the reasons for our differences with these writers, it is enough to give the 
genealogy as it is made out from the padigams, stating authority for each 
link, and drawing attention to difficulties and weak spots where they 
occur. The first and last Tens have not been recovered, and the kings 
celebrated in the remaining eight groups of poems are indicated by the 
numbers in Roman numerals placed after their names in the table. The 
particular padigam on which each link in the table rests is set forth in 
separate footnotes under the two tables. 


1 See essay i on Purananuru in Studies 
in Cola History and Administration 
by K. A. N. Sastri for a discussion 
of the authenticity of the colophons. 
The padigams of Padirrupattu are of 

64 


course late, but may well be taken to 
embody a correct tradition. See p. 4-5 
intro, to Swaminatha Iyer’s edition 
(1920) 

* Kali. 104, //. 1-4. cf. Silap. xi. II. 18-22 



506 


SOUTH INDIA 


A 

Udiyanjeral m. Veliyan Venmal Nallini 
1 ' | 2 


lmayavaramban Nedunjeral Adan (ii) Palyanaiselkelu 
Kuttuvan (iii) 

3 By Velavikkoman 

Padumandevi 5 By Solan Manakkilli 4 


Kalangayakkanni Adukotpattuchcheral Kadalpirakkottiya 

Narmudichcheral (iv) Adan (vi) Senguttuvan (v) 

f 

Ku(tuvanjeral 

1. Padigam ii 

2. Padigam iii 

3. Padigam iv 

4. Padigam v 

5. Padigam vi 


The name of the Chola princess who was the second queen of Imaya- 
varamban Nedunjeral is given as Narchonai by Adiyarkkunallar in his 
commentary on the Padigam to the Silappadikaram which mentions for 
the first time Ilango, the brother of Senguttuvan and the reputed author 
of the Silappadikaram. These facts are of course less authentic than the 
rest. Note also that we have assumed the identity of lmayavaramban 
Nedunjeral Adan with Kudakko Nedunjeral Adan(vi) and Serai Adan (iv). 


Anduvan m. Poraiyan Perundevi 

~l 


6 Selvakkadungo Vali Adan (vii) 
m. Velavikkoman Padumandevi 

7 Tagadur-erinda Perunjeral 

Irumporai (viii) 


Anduvaiijellai m. Kuttuvan 
Irumporai. 

8 Kudakko Ijanjeral 

Irumporai (ix); 


6. Padigam vii 

7. Padigam viii 

8. Padigam ix 



SYNCHRONISMS 


507 


Padigam ix on which Kudakko’s position rests calls for some notice. 
It reads : Kuttuvan Irumporaikku Maiyur kilan venmal Anduvanjellai inra 
magan Ilanjeral Irumporai i. e. I]anjeral Irumporai, the son born of 
Anduvanjellai, the daughter ( venmal ) of the lord of Maiyur. The name 
Anduvanjellai naturally means Sellai, the daughter of Anduvan; Anduvan 
is a name which occurs in this form in padigam vii also. He was also the 
lord of Maiyur. 

Can we connect the two lines chronologically? A hint is given by the 
occurrence of a common name, that of Velavikkoman Padumandevi 
in both the tables. Devi, like venmal, may be understood to express 
the relation of daughter, though possibly these different designations 
indicate some difference in the status of the ladies concerned. The 
occurrence of this common name, Padumandevi, in the two lists can best 
be explained by our supposing that it refers to two sisters married to 
two Chera princes, and if this view is correct, we get the important result 
that Imayavaramban Nedunjeral and Selvakkaduhgo Vali Adan who 
married the sisters must have belonged to one and the same generation. 
It would follow further that our tables A and B include three generations 
of two contemporary branches of the Chera royal family. There were 
doubtless other Chera princes e.g. Kuttuvan Irumporai, the husband of 
Sellai; and our present list is by no means exhaustive. 

In the Silappadikaram (xxviii. 11. 135-48) we find a list of the kings of 
the Chera line, but it is so confused and mixed up with legend as to be 
of little value. 

Let us now turn to the Pattuppattu, its poets and heroes, as well as some 
other poems to establish other synchronisms. Paranar, the author of the 
Fifth Ten on Senguttuvan, celebrates Ilanjejchenni, and father of Kari- 
kala in Puram 4, while Karikala himself is referred to by Nakkirar in 
terms which imply that his reign ended some time earlier ( Aham 141). We 
may assume (1) that Kapilar, author of the vuth decad, was a younger 
contemporary of Paranar, because the Padumandevi who married Vali 
Adan was a younger sister of Nedunjeral Adan’s queen, and (2) that the 
second generation of table B was more or less contemporary with the 
third of table A, so that the two together will give us not three but four 
generations of rulers. However that may be, we seem to get an extension 
of time by way of Uruvappahrer Ilanjetchenni and his son Karikala, and 
one further generation appears to be added in an unmistakable manner ; 
but these results are tentative. 

Now Karikala is celebrated in Porunararruppadai by Mudattamakkan- 
niyar and in Pattinappalai by Kadiyalur Uruttirangannanar (Rudraksha) 
who also celebrated Tondaiman Ilandiraiyan in the Perumbanarruppa- 
dai. Here then is a bunch of contemporaries of the generation of Kari- 
kala, and some hint of the relative age of three out of the ten poems in the 
Pattuppattu. Kapilar’s Kurinjippattu, another poem in the same collec- 
tion, must also belong to about the same time. 

We get the next link from a reference of Nakkirar to Kapilar and Pari 



508 


SOUTH INDIA 


in Aham 78; Nakkirar sang the Nedunahadai on Talaiyalanganattuch- 
cheruvenra Nedunjeliyan, on whom there is another poem in the Pattup- 
pat\u — the Madv.raikka.hji of Mangudi Marudan. Here is the next bunch 
of poets and kings of the generation after Karikala. To this we may 
add as a prefix Nannan, son of Nannan, celebrated in the Malaipaduka- 
dam of Perungausikan (great Kausika), because Mangudi Marudan men- 
tions this Nannan, the son of another Nannan, and in a manner that 
invites comparison with some lines of the Malaipadukadam. 1 

The Mullaippattu has no hero; but its name resembles that of Kuri- 
hjippattu and it mentions mlechchhas and yavanas like the Nedunahadai', 
its poet Nappudanar may be assigned therefore to the same period, more 
or less, as Nakkirar. 

Lastly, the Sirupan-arruppadai is a poem on Nalliyakkodan by Natta- 
ttanar; it refers to all the seven vallals — chieftains noted for charity, as 
dead and gone, and obviously belongs to the closing period of the Sarigam 
age. There remains the Tirumurugarruppadai , a quasi-religious poem, 
which passes under the name of Nakkirar and has found entry into the 
anthology called Pattuppattu (Ten Idylls). The contents of this poem 
are vastly different from those of the others in the collection, and by a 
careful study of its diction and language, Vaiyapuri 2 has demonstrated 
that it cannot be of the same age as the other pieces we assign to the 
Sangam, but must be the product of a much later time. We have therefore 
to postulate a Nakkirar II. 

The foregoing consideration lead us to the following grouping of the 
poems of the Pattuppattu with reference to their relative age : 

Group I (1) Porunar-arruppadai-Mudattamakkanniyar on Karikala. 

(2) Pattinappalai— Kadiyalur Uruttirangannanar on 

Karikala. 

(3) Perumbap-arruppadai — Do. on Tondaiman Ilandi- 

raiyan. 

(4) Kurinjippattu — Kapilar to the Arya king Pirahatta 

(Prahasta). 

Group II (1) Malaipadukadam — Perungausikan on Nanna’s son 

Nannan. 

(2) Maduraikkanji— Mangudi Marudan on Talaiyalan- 

ganattuchcheruvenra Nedunjeliyan. 

(3) Nedunalvadai — Nakkirar I on do. 

(4) Mullaippattu — Nappudanar (no hero). 

Group III Sirupan-arruppadai— Nattattanar on Nalliyakkodan. 

And the much later Tirumurugarruppadai— Nakkirar II. 

This arrangement receives confirmation from a verse ( Puram 53) in which 
Sey of the Elephant-look, a Chera prince, is said to have regretted that 
Kapilan was no longer there to celebrate his victories in a suitable 


1 Maduraik. II. 618-9 and Malai. II. 70-2 

2 Tirumurugarruppadai ed. S. Vaiyapuri 
Pillai, 1943, Madurai. For a further 


discussion of the chronology of the 
Pattuppattu see ch. xxi post. 



POETS AND KINGS 


509 


manner; and this Chera was a contemporary of Nedunjeliyan of Talai- 
yalanganam as we see from another poem ( Puram 17) addressed to Sey 
after he had escaped from the Pandya’s prison and occupied the Chera 
throne by force; thus our assignment of the Kurinjippattu to the first and 
earlier group which preceded that of the Maduraikkanji fully borne out 
by these references. 

The Ainguruniiru (The Five Short Hundreds) was compiled by Yanai- 
kkatchey Mandaranjeral Irumporai and comprises poems by five poets, 
viz. Orambogi, Ammuvanar, Kapilar, Odalandai, and Peyanar. The 
compiler, Sey of the Elephant-look, is seen from Puram 17, 20 and 22 to 
have been a contemporary and enemy of Nedunjeliyan, victor of Talai- 
yalanganam. The inclusion of a hundred short pieces of Kapilar in an 
almost contemporary anthology by a prince of the Chera royal line is 
noteworthy for at least two reasons ; the practice of literature and literary 
criticism transcended the boundaries and passions of politics and united 
the whole Tamil country in a common bond; secondly, criticism was 
briskly at work, collecting, assessing and clarifying and grouping poems 
as they were composed from time to time — proper work for an Academy. 
This anthology while it does not add much to the stock of information 
except the names of four poets, goes some way to confirm the relative 
chronology reached from a study of the other collections especially as 
regards Kapilar and Nedunjeliyan. 

Next we may consider the names of other kings and chieftains men- 
tioned by the poets so far named; this would enable us to check and revise 
our tentative conclusions in the light of the new data and thus strengthen 
the links in the internal chronology of the age. Only important and out- 
standing names will be considered, and no attempt made at an exhaus- 
tive enumeration of all, as that would be both tedious and futile. 

The authors of the Second and Third Tens in the Padirruppattu refer 
to no important contemporaries other than their heroes. Kappiyarru- 
kkappiyanar, the author of the Fourth Ten, mentions Nannan as the foe 
vanquished by his hero Kajangaykkanni Narmudichcheral ( Padirr ■ 40); 
we have seen that there were two Nannans, father and son, and that the 
son is mentioned by Mangudi Marudan, the contemporary of Nedun- 
jeliyan of Talaiyalahganam; Narmudichcheral belonged definitely to 
an earlier generation and we may assume that the Nannan whom he 
vanquished was the father. 

Paranar, the author of the Fifth Ten on Senguttuvan, mentions a num- 
ber of rulers, great and small, and we must consider their relative positions 
with some care. Most important among these is Karikala Chola whose 
victories at Vahaipparandalai (Aham 125) and Venni (ibid. 246) are known 
to Paranar, and who is mentioned once again in another poem along 
with Marandai, a town belonging to Kujtuvan (ibid. 376). We have 
noted before that Paranar belauded Karikala’s father also. Karikala 
should be treated therefore not as altogether of the generation succeeding 
that of Senguttuvan, but as his younger contemporary. The tradition 



510 


SOUTH INDIA 


preserved in the Silappadikaram that Senguttuvan and Karikala were 
contemporaries is thus confirmed by the evidence of these early poems. 
Paranar also sang of another Chola prince Verpahradakkaip-Peruvirar- 
kilji who fought against a Chera Kudakko Nedunjeral Adan ( Puram 63) 
in the battle of Por; both the princes laid down their lives on the field. 
The latter may be identical with the father of Senguttuvan as already 
noted. The incident is the subject of two poems by Kajattalaiyar (Puram 
62, 368). Alisi of Arkkadu on the banks of the Kaveri, father of Sendan, 
is another prince mentioned by Paranar, but not as a contemporary 
( Kurundogai 258); at the latest he may have been of the same age as Kari- 
kala’s father; perhaps he belonged to an earlier time. Perumbutporai- 
yan (Kurun. 89) was another Chera of whom Paranar sang as in the past; 
also Mandaram Poraiyan Kadungo (Aham 142) who may have been con- 
temporary. Mavan Tittanof Urandai (Uraiyur) ( Aham 6, 122 and Puram 
352) and his daughter Aiyai (Aham 6) are mentioned by Paranar in a 
manner that leaves no room for any doubt about their contemporaneiiy. 
Not so his references to Seliyan, Pasumputpandiyan and Evvi, all of 
whom appear definitely to have belonged to earlier generations. Seliyan 
is said to have once upon a time put to flight the two great monarchs 
(Chera and Chola) in a battle at Kudalparandalai in the neighbourhood 
of Madurai (Aham 116); the identity of the Pandyan victor in this battle 
can be ascertained, if at all, only with more definite evidence from other 
sources. Again Pasumputpandiyan is stated to have commanded the 
services of Adigan in a battle against the Kongar at Vahaipparandalai 
(Aham 162), but apparently he himself fell in this battle together with 
Adigan’s elephant on which he was riding (Kurun. 393); the incident is 
also mentioned as a past event by the later poet Nakkirar who says that 
the Kongar were driven off the field by Pasumputpandiyan who took many 
lands (Aham 253) in consequence of his victory (also Narririai 358). 

Paranar makes two references to Evvi, the chieftain of Nidur; Evvi 
ordered extensive feeling ( perunjoru ) at Urattur in Arimanavayil (Aham) 
266), and the death of Evvi caused distress to minstrels by the loss of a 
very liberal patron of their class (Kurun. 19). But the name Evvi is famous 
in the literature of the age and occurs in many other poems; Mangudi 
Kilar (Mangudi Marudan) relates that the great Vel Evvi lost the divi- 
sions of Milalai and Mutturu to the Pandya Nedunjeliyan, victor of Talai- 
yalanganam (Puram 24); Kapilar says that Irungovel belonged to the 
ancient line of Evvi (ibid. 202); Vellerukkilaiyar laments the death 
of Evvi in two short poems in the Puram (233-4), and Nakkirar and 
Mamulanar mention Ewi in the past in Aham 126 and 115 respectively 
the latter making a pointed reference to his death in battle. Was Ewi 
a dynastic name like Ay and Adigan, and borne by all the chieftains of 
Nidur? If that was so, the references to Ewi will cease to have much im- 
portance for the construction of our chronological scheme. It seems more 
probable, however, that Ewi was a personal name, and that there were 
two Ewis, grandfather and grandson, the former being a contemporary 



DATA FROM PARANAR 


511 


of Paranar, the latter of Nedufijeliyan. IrungoveJ, the contempo- 
rary of Kapilar and Karikala, belonged to the same line as the two Evvis. 

Paranar has references, none of them necessarily contemporaneous to 
Ori, one of the valjals (patrons), and to his Kollimalai and forest ( kanam ) 
{Aham 208, Kurun. 199, Narrinai 6 and 265). That Ori was killed by 
Kari and his Kollimalai transferred to the Cheras thereby is mentioned 
by Kalladanar {Aham 209). Paranar’s reference to the flight of Katti 
from the darbar ( nalavai ) of Tittan Veliyan at Urandai ( Aham 226) 
obviously recalls a past occurrence ; but there must have been more Kattis 
than one, for a Kangan Katti is mentioned as having fallen in battle with 
the Chola commander Palaiyan before the battle of Kalumalam ( Aham 
44 by Kudavayir Kirattanar); and Parnar himself names this Chola 
commander in two poems ( Aham 186 and 326). Mamulanar speaks of the 
region beyond the good country of Katti with the strong spear — valver 
Katti nannattumbar {Kurun. 11), where a different language begins to be 
spoken. Nalli, another vallal, was certainly the contemporary of Paranar 
{Aham 152) for both Kakkaipadiniyar Nachcheljaiyar and Kapilar 
also sing of him. Paranar refers to Nannan in a number of poems; he 
was the chieftain of Pali and of Param {Aham 142, 152); a friend of his 
is Ay Eyinan, said to have fallen in the battle of Pali fighting his 
foe Minili {Aham 208, 396). This Nannan, so often referred to by Para- 
par, must.be taken to be the father of Nannan, the hero of Malaipadu- 
ka$am. Paranar knows also of another Nannan who attained ill fame as 
a woman-killer for having sentenced to death a woman whose only fault 
was that she ate a fruit that came to her floating down the stream in which 
she was bathing {Kurun. 292); he refused to commute the death sentence 
even though he was offered eighty-one tusker elephants and a gold image 
of the woman as recompense. Whether this incident is fact or legend, it 
belongs to the time of a still earlier Nannan ; how much earlier we have 
no means of deciding. Yet another Nannan is mentioned by Para- 
nar {Aham 258) as a celebrity of the past; in his town of Pali, the ancient 
Velir {tonmudir velir) had kept much gold; he is called Nannan Udiyan, 
and certainly belonged to a time earlier than that of Nannan, the father 
of Nannan of Malaipadukadam; possibly even to the age of Udiyan of 
Perunjoru fame. The Nannans were a line of Vejs. Pehan, another vaflal, 
and his liberal gifts form the subject of three poems by Paranar {Aham 
262, Puram 141 and 142); when some difference arose between Pehan 
and his wife, they were reconciled by the intercession of poets, Paranar 
being among them {Puram 144, 145) as also Kapilar (ibid. 143), Arisil 
Kilar (ibid. 146), and Perungunrur Kilar (ibid. 147). Perungunrur 
Kilar was younger than Kapilar, the junior contemporary of Paranar. 
Yet another vallal, named Tervanmalaiyan (also Kari) was known to 
Paranar {Narrinai 100), and this chieftain was celebrated also 
by Kapilar who has many references to him, by Kalladanar, and by 
Ammuvanar, one of the poets of Aihgurunuru. Lastly, there was Palai- 
yan of Mohur, a chieftain of the Pandya country, who was defeated in 



512 


SOUTH INDIA 


battle by Kuttuvan ( Padirru . 44) who went to the aid of his friend Aruhai ; 
there were aiso other velir fighting on the side of Palaiyan on that occa- 
sion (ibid. 49 and padigam v). 

Paranar also names Agudai more than once ( Aham 76, 208 ere.) and the 
same chieftain seems to be mentioned as the lord of Kudal by Kapilar 
{Puram 347) ; we have already noticed other connecting links between the 
generations of Paranar and Kapilar which were close to each other. 
Kapilar refers to Irungovel alias Pulikadimal ( Puram 201 and 202) to 
whom he offers Pari’s daughters in marriage; as we have seen, he belonged 
to the line of Ewi. Irungovel seems to have been a common name or 
title, as Nachchinarkkiniyar explains ( Pattinappdlai , /. 282). Among 
the vaUals, Kapilar had Pari for his patron and naturally speaks of him 
very often in his poems; Ori of Kollimalai ( Kurun . 100) was killed by 
Kari ( Narrinai 320). Kapilar also records the legends of the rise of the 
Agnikula kings from a sacrificial fire-pit of the northern sage Vasishtha 
in connection with Pulikadimal ( Puram 201). 

Arisil Kijar, the author of the Eighth Ten, mentions Adigaman of 
Tagadur, the enemy of his Chera patron Peruiijeral Irumporai ( padigam 
viii) and Elini, a commander who fell in the sack of Tagadur {Puram 230). 

Perurigunrur Kilar has two poems on Kudakko Ilanjeral Irumporai 
{Puram 210 and 211) besides the Ninth Ten; he gives him the title 
Nilandaru-tiruvin-nediyon, an expression which is applied to the Pandya 
in the Maduraikkanji, — and this should warn us of the need for caution in 
using these titles as marks of identity. A Mandaran is mentioned by the 
poet in Padirzupattu 90 in a way which implies that he was a remote 
ancestor of the Cheras, anterior to Anduvan— viral Mandaran viral 
maruga. The Kilar addressed a poem to Uruvapahrer Ilanjetchenni, the 
father of Karikala {Puram 266)— a fact which goes far to confirm our 
scheme of synchronisms. There is mention also of an 11am Palaiyan 
Maran as the enemy of Kudakko {padigam ix); his relation to Palaiyan 
Maran of Maduraikkanji is a problem. The number of towns received 
by Kapilar as presents from his patron is referred to as a past event in 
Padirruppattu 85. 

Turning now to the poets of Pattuppattu, Mangudi Marudan and 
Nakkirar I are the most prolific in their references to other contempora- 
ries besides their heroes. Mangudi Marudan refers to Palaiyan Maran 
and his capital Mohur {Maduraik. II. 508 and 772); Nakkirar mentions 
{Aham 346) as a past event the combat of this chieftain with Killi Valavan 
on the outskirts of Kudal (Madurai); Mamulanar {Aham 251) has a 
reference to Mohur which seems to recall a state of affairs long anterior 
to the times of Mangudi Marudan and belonging to the Mauryan epoch 
as already noted (p. 502). The Kosar and the chieftain of Mohur were clearly 
friendly in the days of Mangudi Marudan who says that the sabha of 
Mohur was adorned by the Kosar {Maduraik. //. 508-9). We have noted 
already that the relation between Palaiyan Maran and the enemy of Ku- 
dakko is not apparent; the latter is called Ham (Junior) Palaiyan Maran. 



DATA FROM NAKKIRAR 


513 


Was Palaiyan Maran then a hereditary dynastic title, there being two per- 
sons bearing the title at any time — the ruling chieftain and the heir- 
apparent? This assumption seems best to satisfy all the data at hand. 
If, as seems likely, Mangudi Kilar was _only another name for Mangudi 
Marudan, we must assume that Elini Adan of Vattaru, celebrated in a 
poem {Puram 396), was a contemporary of his. In the Maduraikkafiji 
{11. 203-4) the poet makes a mysterious reference to the vast wealth with 
which Vanan filled the mountains of the southern region ; the annotator 
glosses Vanan with Vanan ennum siiran, thus suggesting a legendary ori- 
gin to the idea ; at any rate the Vanan of this passage has nothing to do 
with the minor chieftain of the same name who is associated with 
Sirukudi in the Pandya country by Nakklrar {Narrinai 340) and two other 
poets — Madurai Kamakkani Nappalattanar (A ham 204) and the anony- 
mous author of Aham 117. 

The most notable reference in Nakklrar’s poems is the list of the ene- 
mies whom Nedunjeliyan faced and defeated at Talaiyalanganam ( Aham 
36); they were Serai, Sembiyan (Chola), Titiyan, Elini, Erumaiyuran, 
Irungovenman, and Porunan, seven in all. His reference to Karikala’s 
{Aham 141) settlement of wandering tribes is in the past, as may be expec- 
ted. In another poem ( Aham 346) Nakklrar mentions the joy of Kodai- 
marban at the defeat of Palaiyan Maran near Madurai at the hands of 
Killi Valavan who captured a great number of horses and elephants on 
that occasion; by itself this need not be a contemporary reference. Nor 
can we be sure if this Killi Valavan was the same as the homonymous Chola 
prince who is said to have died at Kulamurram and concerning whom a 
number of songs by several poets are found in the Purananuru. But 
Nakklrar has another reference to Kodai, strong in his elephants and 
chariots, and ruler of Karuvur {Aham 93); he is perhaps the same ruler 
whom Mangudi Marudan mentions in Maduraikkafiji (/. 524), and who is 
said to be the protector of Vanji {Aham 263) by the poet Kannambalanar 
of Karuvur; he is celebrated in two songs by Poygaiyar {Puram 48, 49), 
and possibly also in a song by Erichchalur Madalan Maduraikkumaran 
{Puram 54), though this is somewhat doubtful as the colophon describes 
the prince as Seraman Kuttuvan Kodai. Considering the number and 
nature ot these references it is not unlikely that the combat between Killi 
Valavan and Palaiyan Maran which turned out to the satisfaction of 
Kodai was an event of the time ol Nakklrar and Mangudi Marudan. 
Nakklrar’s reference to Kuttuvan and Tondi {Aham 290) has no chrono- 
logical significance, nor has his mention of Vanavaramban {Aham 389). 
Pari and Kapilar are also referred to as belonging to the past {Aham 78). 
The Pandya prince Nanmaran who died in Ilavandigaippalli is praised 
in high terms by Nakklrar {Puram 56) and was obviously his contempo- 
rary; the poet Madurai Marudan Ijanaganar who also celebrates this 
prince (ibid. 55) must have been contemporary too. 

Idaikkahnattu Nallur Nattattanar, author of Sirupanarruppadai on 
Nalliyakkodan, clearly declares himself to be among the last of the Sangam 
65 



514 


SOUTH INDIA 


poets when he mentions Kuttuvan of Imayam fame, the seven vallals, 
and the story of Auvai getting a myrobalan fruit from Adigaman Aiiji 
(/. 101), all events of past history. 

Before proceeding further, we may consider briefly the relativ e positions 
of two major poets, Kalladanar and Mamulanar. Kalladanar was a 
contemporary of Talaiyalanganattu Nedunjeliyan for he adddanad poems 
to him ( Puram 23, 371 and A ham 25); he also refers to Ambar Kilan 
Aruvandai ( Puram 385) as a contemporary besides the minor chieftain 
Poraiyarru Kilavon ( Puram 391). He mentions as a past event a fight 
between Kalangayakkanni Narmudichcheral and Nannan, — possibly 
the father (A ham 199). The author of KaUddam must be regarded 
as another and much later writer of the same name. Mamulanar must 
have been among the last poets of the Sangam age, coming almost at 
the close of it ; he knows all the major events and persons of the entire 
period and his numerous poems contain valuable references to occurren- 
ces in the Tamil countiy and even in the rest of India, from the age of the 
Nandas and Mauryas to the very end of the Sangam period. Yet there 
occurs not a single reference in all these poems that gives a direct clue to 
his exact age. 

We have so far discussed the data bearing on the relative chronology 
of the events and the number of generations of rulers and poets reflected 
in the anthologies of the Sangam; we have seen that the extant poems 
appear to contain the transactions of four or at the most five generations; 
a period extending ovei a century or a little more. We may now consider 
the means of determining where to place this period in the Christian era. 
The only concrete evidence that aids us here is the synchronism between 
Seriguttuvan and Gajabahu of Ceylon attested by the Silappadikaram ; 
and this evidence has been treated with suspicion by several scholars. 
They argue that the chronology of early Ceylonese history is far from sett- 
led and can hardly be expected to throw light on South Indian history; and 
that, the Silappadikaram being a relatively late work, its testimony can have 
no value for the history of a time preceding it by several centuries. 
There is force in these objections ; but there are not wanting strong considera- 
tions on the other side. Though late in its present form and mingled 
with much that is palpably legendary, the Mahavariisa, as Geiger has 
demonstrated, is based on a genuine tradition and may well be accep- 
ted as history except for its opening chapters. Its chronology has been 
subjected to acute and exhaustive discussion by the same scholar 
and we might well do worse than accept his date for Gajabahu I as a. d' 
173-195, the only Gajabahu known in Ceylonese history before the twelfth 
century A. D. As for the Silappadikaram, in its extant foim it certainly 
belongs to an age much later than that of the Sangam, but theie is reason 
to hold that this work too preserves the elements of a correct tradition 
for its historical setting. Its testimony to the contemporaneity of Sengu- 
ttuvan and Karikala is borne out by the earlier poems of their own time It 
is true that its evidence to the fact of Gajabahu’ s being the contemporary 



CHRONOLOGY 


515 


of both these rulers lacks corroboration from any other source; but 
there is nothing improbable in the synchronism, and we shall see that the 
general historical trend strongly favours its acceptance. The Pattini 
(Kannagi) cult found a congenial home in Ceylon, and Gajabahu may 
have been its founder. We get of course no hint of this possibility in 
the Dlpavamsa or the Mahavamsa — both being works written from an 
exclusively Buddhist point of view . 1 The Gajabahu synchronism thus 
rests on a slender foundation and involves an assumption regarding Gaja- 
bahu’s religious persuasion which finds no support in the only chro- 
nicle of his reign accessible to us. Or it may be that the Kannagi cult 
was a late institution and in the classic account of its origin, the Silappa- 
dikdram, the real names of contemporaneous kings were correctly 
employed. 

Normally we should feel justified in refusing to base any firm conclu- 
sions regarding the general history of South India on such insecure 
evidence; but the position improves considerably when we turn to the 
general probabilities. That Ceylon and South India had much to do 
with each other in those remote days becomes apparent in many ways. 
They are first mentioned together in the inscriptions of the great Mauryan 
emperor Asoka who maintained an active and friendly intercourse with 
these two countries throughout his long reign in the third century B.c. 
According to the Mahavamsa the island of Ceylon began to fall under 
powerful Chola influences very early in its history. The relations between 
the Damilas (Tamils) and the natives of Ceylon form one of the main 
strands in its narrative, and the distinction between the Pandya and Chola 
divisions of the Tamil country is well recognized in it. Towards the middle 
of the second century B.c., a Damija of noble descent, Elara by name, 
came to Ceylon from the Chola country, overpowered Asela for forty- 
four years, administering even justice towards friends and foe . 2 Many 
stories are told to illustrate the justice of his rule, and among them is the 
tale of how the king sentenced his only son to death for his having unwitt- 
ingly killed a young calf by driving the wheel of his chariot over its neck 
— a typical Chola legend. Though not a Buddhist, the king was on friendly 
terms with the bhikkus. Dutthagamani led the native opposition against 
him and put him to death in a battle fought at the gates of Anuradha- 
pura. Also worth noticing are the names of some Tamil chieftains men- 
tioned in the Mahavamsa e.g. Panaya Maraka, Palaya Maraka which seem 
to be obvious variants of names known to us from the Purandnuru and 
Pattuppattu ; and these chieftains are placed by the chronicle in the latter 
half of the first century B.c. There is also a poet from Ceylon among the 
Sahgam authors Ilattu Pudan Devanar. If we remember that the Maha- 
vamsa was composed in the fifth century A.D. with the aid of earlier 
chronicles, we shall see that the somewhat confused account of the 
Tamil invasions of the island in this early period are not bottomless 

DV. XXII vv. 14, 28; MV. xxxv vv. 2 MV. chh. xxi-xxv. 

115-22 



516 


SOUTH INDIA 


fabrications, but preserve the faded memory of real events, and the dates 
assigned to these events cease to be altogether valueless for Tamil chro- 
nology. The similarity of Brahml inscriptions found in natural caverns 
in Ceylon and the Madurai and Tirunelveli districts, all of which may 
be dated between the second century b.c. and the first century a.d. must 
also be allowed some significance. 

Another line of evidence strongly confirms the chronology indicated by 
these facts. There is perfect agreement between the Sangam anthologies, 
the notices of South India in the works of European writers of the early 
centuries of the Christian era, such as the Periplus and Ptolemy’s Geogra- 
phy, and the numerous finds of Roman coins of the early empire in several 
places in South India. 1 The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea is the interes- 
ting handbook of an Alexandrian merchant ‘which was written in the 
time of Domitian (a.d. 81-96) and by the evidence furnished by Pliny 
the Elder’. 2 Ptolemy wrote half a century later and his work marks 
a decided advance in the regularity and volume of trade between the 
Roman Empire and India. Ptolemy’s account shows that the Roman trade 
with the East which began some time in the reign of Augustus had by the 
first quarter of the second century a.d. reached beyond India to Indo- 
china and Sumatra. The recent discovery of a ‘Roman factory’ of the 
first century A.D. in the proximity of Pondicherry deserves particular 
mention. 3 Relatively few Roman merchants visited the lands of the Far 
East themselves; Southern India obviously acted as the intermediary in 
the trade between China and the West. The direct trade between Rome 
and Southern India did not long survive the second century a.d. ; it dec- 
lined and died out in the period of military anarchy which distracted the 
Roman Empire of the third century. Practically no Roman coins of the 
third century have been found in India, and business relations were not 
resumed till order and a stable gold currency had been re-established in 
the Byzantine period, and then mostly through intermediaries. 

The first and second centuries a.d. formed the period when Roman 
trade with India was brisk and the Tamil countries had many opportu- 
nities of contact with the Yavanas (Graeco- Romans) and their wares of 
which precious wines formed no small part. Musiri and Tondi on the 
west coast of South India, Korkai and Kaveripattanam on the east were 
among the chief ports of the Tamil land where these foreigners crowded, 
and sometimes they found their way into the interior in various capa- 
cities — as palace guards, doorkeepers and so on. All this is vouched 
for by references in the Tamil poems of the period, and it is difficult to 
assign these poems to any other age. And the merit of the Gajabahu 
synchronism lies in its fitting in so exactly with the data gathered from 
the classical authors, the Tamil poems, and the coin-finds. 

Attempts to settle the age of the Sangam with the aid of astronomical 

1 For details and references see Colas 1 3 Ancient India , no. 2 (July 1946) pp. 

1 Rostovtzeff, Social and Economic History 17-124, esp. 22-4 

of the Roman Empire, p. 91 



ASTRONOMICAL EVIDENCE 


517 


data found in a few of the poems have led to no conclusive or satisfactory 
results. Paripadal No. 1 1 is the most crucial piece. L. D. Swamikkannu 
Pillai discusses it at length 1 and, with many reservations, suggests 
two dates, one in a.d. 17 and the other in a.d. 634, the first as satisfying 
the data of the poem as interpreted by its annotator Parimelalagar 
and the second as closer to the text. In the course of the discussion he 
makes a statement which is most valuable from our point of view; it is 
that the Paripadal ‘horoscope’ which describes the planetary positions 
at the time of the flood in the Vaigai river, is just what it might be expected 
to be if the Tamils derived their knowledge of astronomy direct from 
Babylon. 2 So that the astronomical lore exhibited in the eleventh 
Paripadal and in such poems as Puram 229 on the death of Yanaikkat- 
chey Mandaranjeral Irumporai, cannot by any means be held incom- 
patible with our holding the early centuries of the Christian era to be 
the age of the §angam. We shall do well to grasp the general position 
quite firmly as it seems to be the one certainty that emerges from the intri- 
cate and many-sided discussions of the astronomy of the poems by differ- 
ent writers. 

As for the dates suggested above, Swamikkannu considered a.d. 634 
more satisfactory than a.d. 17 both astronomically and historically. We 
may accept his statement without question on the astronomical aspect; 
moreover A.D. 17 does appear too early a date for the poem in the light 
of the general scheme of chronology relative and absolute, advocated 
here. On the other hand A.D. 634 is equally clearly too late. The date 
brings us well into the period of the Pallavas of the Simhavishnu line and 
the age of Nayanars and Alvars; and no student of the history of the 
Tamil language and literature can fail to note that the Paripadal must 
have preceded the hymns of Sambandar by about a couple of centuries, 
if not more. 

Accepting thus the Gajabahu synchronism as valid evidence, we may 
assign fSenguttuvan to c. A. D. 180 and work backwards and forwards 
allowing roughly twenty-five years to a generation. The result so far as 
it concerns the outstanding figures among kings and chieftains is as 
follows, the dates suggested being approximations : 

Mandaran 
140. Anduvan 

165. Selvakkadungo Vali Adan 
Kuttuvan Irumporai 
165. Uruvapahrer Ilanjetchenni 
(Mandaram Poraiyan Kadungo) 
190. Karikala 

190. Tagadur erinda Perunjeral 
Irumporai. 

Kudakko Ilanjeral Irumporai 
•Ibid. pp. 100-1 


130. Udiyanjeral 

155. Im. Nedu nj eral Ad an 

Palyanai Selkelukuttuvan 

180. Senguttuvan 

Adukotpattuch-cheral Adan 
Kalangaykkanni Narmudi 


1 Ind. Eph. I. (i) 



518 


SOUTH INDIA 


Gajabahu 173-195 (Ez- m p.9) 

215. Sey of Elepbant-look ; 

Kodaimarpan 210. Nannan (son) 

215. Talaiyalanganattu Nedun- 215. Tondaiman IJandiraiyan 

jeliyan 235. Nalliyakkodan 

It is thus seen that the poems we have so far considered, and they form 
a good part and perhaps the most significant part of the Sangam antholo- 
gies, reflect the history of the period ranging from a.d. 130 to about 230. 
We have indeed some casual references to earlier events and persons, 
but for the most part we lack the means of assigning any precise dates to 
them. One thing is certain. We have before us only a segment of the Tamil 
history of the early centuries a.d.; the beginnings are lost and the antho- 
logies seem to start rather late. And the end is also equally abrupt. The 
transition to the conditions of the next great epoch, that of the Pallavas 
and the Pandyas, is also hidden from view, and we have very little direct 
evidence on the period of three centuries intervening (c. A. d. 250-550). 

HISTORY : THE CHERAS 


Udiyafijeral: c. A. D. 130. His queen was Nallini, the daughter of Veliyan, 
and he had two sons by her— Imayavaramban Nedunjeral Adaii and 
Palyanaiselkelu Kuttuvan. 1 2 Vejiyan must not be confused with his 
namesake who came much later and was the son of Tittan of Uraiyur, 
the contemporary of Parapar (Aham 152, 226). 2 There is every reason to 
think that Udiyafijeral was the hero of the missing first decad of the Ten 
Tens. The titles Vanavaramban and Perufijorru Udiyan are applied to 
him by the poet Murifijiyur Mudinagarayar in Puram 2. The first title 
was borne by other kings also who came later in the line; it means ‘sky- 
bounded’. Another poet, a Chera prince Makkodai, who died at Kottam- 
balam 3 speaks of Udiyan’s celebrated kitchen (attil) at Kulumur (Aham 
168) and thus confirms his title to fame as a great distributor of food. 
Mamulanar also mentions the age of Udiyanjeral, who had a great 
regard for his ancestors and indulged in extensive feeding— mudiyar 
peniya Udiyafijeral perunjoru kodutta Mnrai ( Aham 233). 4 The author 
of Puram 2 roundly asserts that Udiyanjeral got his title of a great dis- 
penser of viands by feeding both the armies engaged in the great battle 
of the Mahabharata war. Literally understood, this statement would 
make the poet and the king contemporaries of the heroes of the Maha- 
bharata; and this is obviously impossible. Some writers explain it as 
a memorial feeding on the anniversary of the war,® but there is really no 


1 ii and padigam iii. 

2 Contra : K. G. Sesha Aiyar’s Cera 
Kings, p. 10 evidently based on com. 
to Puram 80. 

3 His only other poem ( Puram 254) is 

a short and poignant lament on the 


loss ot his wife. 

55 and Kaii " 8attu 
ppararp v 181 and notes in Gopala 
Aiyar’s edition. p 

5 Sesha Aiyar, op. tit., p. 7 



NEDUNJERAL ADAN 


519 


warrant for the supposition. Perhaps the best way is to look upon it as 
a legend attributing this role of playing the host to the armies of the Great 
War to some remote ancestor of the Cheras and here employed by a well- 
known poetic convention in praise of Udiyanjeral. The same honour 
is claimed by the Pandyas and Cholas as well, and it is a feature common 
to royal familes all the world over to claim some connection, direct or 
remote, with well-known heroes famed in war and song. The inclusion of 
the poet of Puram 2 among the authors of the first Sangam in the Irai- 
yanar Ahapporul Urai is the natural consequence of a literal understanding 
of the poem! The relatively late poet Mamulanar has a vague reference 
to Udiyanjeral expanding the Chera country — nadu kan agarriya ( Aham 
65) ; but as no details are forthcoming from contemporary authors, this 
can be only treated as conventional praise. 

Imayavaratnban Neduiijeral Adan c. a.d. 155, son of Udiyanjeral, is 
said to have ruled for fifty-eight years. He married two queens and had, 
as already noted, three sons by them. His achievements form the subject 
of the Second Ten by Kumatttir Kannanar, who is said to have obtained 
from the monarch in reward for his composition 500 villages of Umbar- 
kadu as brahmadaya and a share in the revenues of the southern country 
( tennadu ) for thirty-eight years! Letters have seldom been so lucrative 
an occupation, and the staggering statements that occur in the epilogues 
( padigcim ) to the decads must be accepted with much reserve. In the 
body of the ten poems, the one concrete achievement ascribed to the king 
is the overthrow of the Kadambu tree which was situated on. an island 
( iru munnirtturutti, //. 1-2 of 20) and was the palladium of some hostile 
power; the king crossed the sea, defeated the enemy, uprooted his guar- 
dian tree and made a war-drum out of its trunk (vv. 11, 12, 17, 20). The 
enemy with the Kadambu emblem has been regarded as a class of pirates 
by one modern writer 1 and identified with Nannan by another. 2 The 
first view rests on the references to piracy on the Kanara coast occur- 
ing in classical authors, and the second lacks all basis. Whether the 
Kadamba dynasty who ruled some centuries later in Vanavasi and other 
places had any connexion with this enemy of 6 era l Adan is not clear. 
Whoever he was, the overthrow of this enemy and the destruction of his 
guardian tree was a great achievement of the Chera monarch, and he won 
much praise by it. 

Another achievement of the monarch finds a place only in the epilogue ; 
on one occasion he captured several Yavanas, bound their hands behind 
them and poured oil on their heads, and did not release them until he 
received a heavy ransom in the form of diamonds and other precious 
stones and many utensils of fine workmanship. These Yavanas were 
doubtless Graeco-RomiCn merchants and sailors; how they offended 
the Chera monarch is not explained but they were well punished for 

1 S. K. Aiyangar, The Beginning of S. 2 Sesha Aiyar, op. cit., p. 1 1 

Indian History, pp. 231-2 



520 


SOUTH INDIA 


their contumacy. This was evidently no more than an episode of tran- 
sient importance. 

The king’s title Imayavaramban (who had the Himalayas as boundary) 
is explained by the round assertion that he conquered the whole of 
India from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin (v. 11, //. 23-5) and carved his 
emblem of the bow on the face of the great mountain after subjugating 
the kings of the North (epilogue). In the same way his ancestors are said 
to have ruled the entire world (v. 12, //. 19-20). These statements can 
only be treated as fond poetic exaggerations, possibly founded on success- 
ful military raids or even quasi-religious, quasi-military pilgrimages. 
Less incredible are the verses which describe the effects of his good rule 
and the ruin of the countries which pitted themselves against him (13), 
the wars he waged for many years spent in camps parted from the 
company of his queen (15, 16), and his liberality to poets and others 
who sought his patronage (18, 20). In war, the king rode on an elephant 
adorned with garlands and lace ornament (11, //. 17-20). He wore a gar- 
land of the seven crowns of enemy kings whom he had conquered and 
subjugated (14, /. 11. and 16, /. 17). This feature, however, tends to become 
conventional at least for the later monarchs of the Ten Tens. 

In two poems ( Aham 127, 347) Mamulanar mentions the war against 
the Kadambu and the carving of the bow on the Himalayas by Serai Adan 
as past events; he also states that his capital Marandai ( Aham 127) was 
thronged with enemy kings who, vanquished in war, had come to the city 
bearing tribute. 

We have already noted the identity of this monarch with Kudakko 
Nedunjeral Adan; there are two poems, one each by Kalattalaiyar 
( Puram 62) and Paranar (ibid. 63), in which the poets lament the death on 
the battle-field of Por of this monarch together with his Chola opponent 
Verpahradakkaip-Peruvirar Kijji; the queens of both the fallen monarchs 
are said to have performed sati with their husbands. We have no informa- 
tion of the cause of the conflict. 1 


Palyanaiselkelu Kuttuvan, younger brother of Imayavaramban, ruled 
for twenty-five years. The decad concerning him was composed by 
Palaik Kautamanar, a Brahmin poet, who, as the reward for his literary 


effort, desired the king to help him and his wife to attain heaven ; the 
king is said to have consulted learned Brahmins and resolved to help the 
poet to perform ten Vedic sacrifices at the end of which the poet and his 
wife became invisible, evidently attaining the object of their desire. The 
intrusion of the miraculous and supernatural into ostensible historical 
narratives is common in all early literature, and we can only set down 
the data as we find them, leaving the reader ^to interpret them as he 
may. The name of the poet, his reward, the' duration of the king’s 
1 The word mandana occurs in /. 27 brity. Here is a textual nrnhlpm- 

of V. 19 in the sense of ‘died’, ‘ceased but an easy solution for Tt Is toTuS 

to exist’. In the Sangam works this that the word is a mistake for mdvn 

word is usually employed in another dana which will suit the context and 

and better sense, viz. attained cele- the metre very well 



NARMUDI 


521 


reign and some other facts not known to the text of the poems in the 
decads are given only in the padigam in every case. 

In the text of the decad, the specific achievements attributed to the king 
are the conquest of Kongu (22, /. 15) and the capture of the fortress of 
Agappa (ibid. /. 26) and more generally the expansion of the Chera power 
and the ruin of enemy countries. He is also called the lord of the Puliyar 
of the Seruppu mountain (21. /. 23), lord of Aiyirai mountain (ibid. /. 29), 
and the armour of armed soldiers (ibid. /. 24). He is styled once the 
Kuttuvan of many great elephants (29. /. 14) and he is also said to have 
sumptuously fed his entire army on the eve of his battles by beat of drum 
{perunjoru). 

In the epilogue the king is said to have established his rule in Umbar- 
kadu; but as this country was already under Chera rule, we must suppose 
that some rising in the land was suppressed, and Chera rule firmly re-esta- 
blished in it. Next, the destruction of the Agappa fort is mentioned, 
and this is followed by the distribution of conquered territory among the 
senior kinsmen of the monarch. He is said to have caused the water of 
the western and eastern oceans to be brought at the same time for his 
abhisheka by a system of relays of elephants detached for the purpose — an 
indication of the extent and splendour of his royal power. He worshipped 
the goddess of Victory on the Ayirai mountain; finally, led by his learned 
Brahmin purohit Nedumparadayanar (Bharadvaja) he relinquished the 
monarchy, to enter the forest and turn ascetic. 

The Silappadikaram has a reference to the king’s enabling Kautamanar 
to perform the sacrifices and reach heaven ( Sil . xxiii //. 62-6). 

Kalangaykkanni Narmudichcheral : c. A.D. 175. One of the two sons 
of Imayavaramban by his senior queen, the daughter of Velavikkoman 
Paduman. He ruled for twenty-five years, and was the hero of the 
fourth decad sung by Kappiyarruk-Kappiyanar who was rewarded by a 
gift in gold of four million kapam and a share of the kingdom. 

In the text of the decad (38, /. 4) the king is accorded his full title as 
given above; the title means that his crown was made of palmyra fibre 
and the festoon upon it was made of kalangay, a small dark berry; why 
he had to wear these insignia is nowhere explained; we have only the 
annotator’s surmise that somehow the proper crown and festoon were 
not on hand at the time of his coronation— which explains nothing. 1 
We learn from the next poem in the decad" (39) that the crown was 
really not made entirely of fibre, but had a golden frame and festoons 
of precious pearls calculated to mitigate the shortcomings of the fibre 
crown. There must have been some real reason for the king choosing 
such an extraordinary tiara, but we have no means of getting at it now. 
The king is also called Vanavaramban (38, /. 12). 

Narmudi was a brave warrior, and he waged wars with success against 
Nedumidal (32, /. 10) who according to the commentator bore the personal 

1 M. Raghava Aiyangar improves on this enemies had carried them off, a state- 

and says {Seran Senguttman, p. 13) that ment for which there is no support. 

66 



522 


SOUTH INDIA 


name of Afiji ; if this is correct, he must be distinguished from the more 
famous Adigaman Neduman Anji, the opponent of a later Chera mo- 
narch. Nedumidal’s country is said to have been occupied by the Chera 
conqueror (32, /. 14). The other achievement of Narmudi was his victory 
against Nannan I and the destruction of his guardian tree of vahai (40, 
II. 14-16). Kalladanar refers to this event as a past occurrence in a 
poem ( Aham 199) which says that the king recovered some lost territory 
after a battle with Nannan, and he locates the scene of battle at Vahai- 
pperundurai — a name that might have had something to do with the 
guardian tree of Nannan. The padigam to the decad describes Nannan’s 
city at Kadambin-peruvayil and states that Nannan was decapitated 
by the victor who also uprooted his tree. An expedition into Puli-nadu 
is placed at the head of these operations against Nannan, and it seems 
probable that this was the name of the territory intervening between 
the Chera country proper and Nannan’s land which was probably the 
Tulu country. The title of lord of Puliyar was borne by Palyanai 
Kuttuvan. 

Narmudi is said generally to have waged many wars, worn the garland 
of seven crowns (40, /. 13), and attended personally to all matters of admi- 
nistration, and thus rendered it impossible for his enemies to get the better 
of him (34). He lived for others rather than for himself (38, 39). 

This decad (iv) is an andadi, the closing words of one poem occurring 
also at the beginning of the next. It contains details regarding Vishnu 
worship, mentions the tulasi (basil) garland of Vishnu and the practice 
of fasting in the temple to obtain the grace of the deity, and alludes to 
the story of the burning of Tripura (32). 1 

Senguttuvan: c. a.d. 180. The hero of the fifth decad by Paranar, one 
of the most celebrated and longest-lived of the poets of the Sangam age. 
Sengu(tavan is said to have rewarded Paranar with the gift of the entire 
income (vdri) from Umbarkadu and of his son Kuttuvan Serai. What 
the gift of the son means is hard to say. 

Seriguttuvan was the son of Imayavaramban Nedunjeral Adan by 
his junior queen, a Chola princess whose name seems to figure as 
Manakkilli in the padigam to our decad, while Adiyarkkunallar, the 
commentator of the Silappadikaram, calls her Narehonai and states that 
she had a second son after Senguttuvan. In fact the life and achieve- 
ments of Senguttuvan have generally been viewed in the light of the late 
and legendary data of the Silappadikdram, and it takes a mental effort to 
view them in their proper perspective. We shall do well to follow the 
story step by step. 

It is remarkable that there is no other contemporary poem on this 
monarch except one by Paranar himself (Puram 3691 nor even clear allu- 
sions to him and his work in the later poems gathered in the anthologies 
accessible to us. In the decad of Paranar the only definite martial achieve- 


It also contains the verbal form 
adirpattu-mulahgi (39, /. 6) which sounds 


ra£er unusual for the age of the 



SENGUTTUVAN 


523 


ment attributed to Senguttuvan is a war with the chieftain of Mohur, the 
fierce foe of Aruhai, a friend of Senguttuvan in a distant country ; from 
this war the Chera monarch emerged victorious, destroying the guardian 
margosa tree of the Mohur princeling from the stem of which a war-drum 
was made (44, //. 11-16); in this conflict Mohur commanded the support 
of other kings and velir (49, //. 4-7) but without avail; and many warriors 
lost their lives in the fierce battle (ibid. //. 8-16). Mohur must clearly be 
the seat of the Palaiyans in the Pandyan kingdom, famous in many other 
contexts. Of Aruhai we have no further information. Paranar also says 
that Senguttuvan exerted himself greatly on the sea (41, /. 27 ; 42, //. 21-3), 
but it is not certain if this was a separate historical event of the nature of 
a sea-fight, or has reference only to a quasi-legendary achievement attri- 
buted to him elsewhere in the decad (45, //. 18-23; 46, //. 11-13), viz. to 
have secured the retreat of the ocean by throwing a spear against it from 
which the monarch got the title kadal pirakknttiya, ‘who drove back the 
sea’. The commentator explains even this as meaning that Senguttuvan 
destroyed the efficacy of the sea as a protection for his enemies who relied 
upon it. If this is correct, Senguttuvan must be credited with a naval 
victory, his own, or his ancestors’ e.g. the war against Kadambu. For 
the rest we learn little more from Paranar except that Senguttuvan was 
a skilful horseman, presented a vast number of horses to troupes of actors, 
rode a war-elephant, conquered many kings between the Himalayas and 
Cape Comorin (43), wore the garland of seven crowns (45, /. 6), was adept 
in the siege of fortresses (46), supplied unlimited toddy in his darbar 
(ibid.), and loved war better than women (50). 

The epilogue to the decad adds a number of new particulars, the most 
important of them relating to the establishment of the Pattini cult. It 
says that to get the stone on which the image of the divine Pattini was 
to be made, Senguttuvan crossed forests, killed an Aryan chieftain, bathed 
the stone in the Ganges, and captured numberless cows of good breed 
with their calves. This brief sketch of the monarch’s action regarding 
Pattini is in striking contrast with the very elaborate story in the Silappa- 
dikarum, of which more presently. The next event mentioned in the 
padigam is his camping by the forest of Idumbil for an attack on Viyalur in 
which many tiger-like warriors fell; we learn from a poem of Mamulanar 
( Aham 97) that Viyalur belonged to Nannan, so that this section of the 
padigam is a reference to the war against that chieftain, of which we have 
no further particulars ; possibly it was a case of rebellion suppressed by the 
suzerain. Senguttuvan is said then to have reached Akkarai, overthrown 
the fortress of Kodukur, cut into pieces the hard trunk of the dark- 
boughed margosa tree guarded by Pajaiyan, and had the logs drawn 
in a cart by elephants yoked with ropes made of the hair shorn fiom 
the heads of Pajaiyan’s womenfolk. The location of Kodukur has been 
sought in the south Mysore country 1 and its destruction treated as part of 


M. Raghava Aiyangar, op. tit., p. 29 citing I A. xvin p. 367 



524 


SOUTH INDIA 


Senguttuvan’s war against the Kongar mentioned in the Silappadikaram 
but nowhere else. This may be so, though the evidence cited is late and 
inconclusive. The refinement of barbarity in the treatment of the women- 
folk of Palaiyan is, one hopes, no more than an exaggeration born of the 
acceptance of false conventions by the poets of the age. The last event 
mentioned in the epilogue is a battle at Vayil in a war of Chola succession 
in which nine Chola claimants to the throne are said to have lost their 
lives; this encounter is located at Nerivayil, a village to the south of 
Uraiyur, by the commentator of the Silappadikaram. 1 This work states 
in detail that the ruling Chola monarch Kijli was related to Sehguttuvan 
as maittuna (wife’s brother?), that he had trouble from nine princes of 
the blood royal, who would not accept subordinate positions and began 
to fill the country with their quarrels and were likely to ruin it; this into- 
lerable situation was brought to an end by Senguttuvan’s intervention 
which restored the unity of Kijli’s rule after the destruction of his nine 
rivals at Nerivayil. 

Not in connection with this battle only, but in many other respects the 
Silappadikaram embellishes the life story of Sehguttuvan ; the one Aryan 
chief conquered by him in his northern expedition becomes a thousand 
kings, and the expedition itself takes place not once but twice, once to 
bathe his mother in the Ganges and again to win the stone for the Pattini 
image. Regarding the maternal bath in the Ganges, the commentator 
himself entertains doubts and says that it is a story, 2 possibly because 
according to Puram 62, the king’s mother committed sati on the pyre of 
her husband when he fell in combat with a Chola. The Silappadikaram 
says further that Sehguttuvan engaged in constant war for at least fifty 
years, but no fresh details are forthcoming. The work purports to be that 
of a younger brother of the monarch. 

The estimate of Sehguttuvan will vary according as we base it on con- 
temporary poems only or on the Silappadikaram also. The general 
tendency has been to follow the second course and to make a very great 
hero of him. In reality he was just like any other monarch of the age. 
He may have taken a leading part in the institution of the Pattini cult, 
unless indeed that cult was a later institution which was ascribed to 
Sehguttuvan by the Silappadikaram, the saga of the cult. How far again 
the incidents in the story of Kovalan and Kannagi are to be treated as 
historical is another vexed question on which no confident opinion can be 
expressed. The Pandyan contemporary of Sehguttuvan was Nedunjeliyan 
known as Ariyappadai-Kadanda, who conquered the Arya forces. 3 He is 
the author of one poem ( Puram 183). 

The antiquity and popularity of the Kannagi story is well attested by 
other evidence. A song in the Narrinai (216) by Marudan Ilanaganar 
of Madurai contains a casual and all the more valuable reference, to 
Kannagi tearing olf one of her breasts from grief for her husband and her 

1 Sil. xxv, 11. 115-9; xxvii, //. 118-23; M. 3 S/7, xxv. //. 160-1 

Raghava Aiyangar, op. cit pp. 32-3 3 S/7. Madurai, Katturai 



CHERAL AD AN 


525 


appearance under a vengai tree where the gods came to her in response 
to her wish ; both these elements are found woven into the story of the 
Silappadikaram as we have it now. Again a verse cited in the commen- 
tary of the Yapparungalavirutti 1 is obviously part of the lament of 
Kannagi after the murder of her husband; the verse is cited as an instance 
of metrical irregularity to be treated as arsha ; here we have proof of the 
existence of other works, now lost, on the Kannagi saga. 

Paranar had many notable contemporaries among the monarchs and 
poets of the age — Karikala’s father and Karikala himself among the 
Cholas; Nalli, Evvi, Ori, Kari, Nannan I, Pehan, and Palaiyan, among 
chieftains ; and all the authors of the sixth to the ninth decads of the Ten 
Tens among the poets. Facts like these must be firmly kept in view when 
determining the duration_of the age depicted in the Sangam literature. 

Adukotpattuch-cheral Adan : c. a.d. 180, half-brother of Senguttuvan, 
and brother of Narmudi, is said to have held sway for thirty-eight years. 
He is the hero of the sixth decad by the poetess Kakkaipadiniyar Nach- 
chellaiyar whom he rewarded with gold, weighing 9 ka for making jewels 
and 100,000 kanam in cash, besides entertaining her in his court perma- 
nently thereafter. 

The poetess acquired her title from having introduced a crow as a leading 
feature in a song in the Kurundogai (210) in which Nalli and Tondi are also 
mentioned — the song being to the effect that even the fine rice of Tondi 
mixed with the ghee yielded by the cows of Nalli’s shepherds would not 
be adequate recompense ( bali , offering) for the crow that by its cawing 
announced the return of the lover to his love! Nalli is mentioned also 
by Kapilar, the author of the next decad, in a poem in Aham (238) where 
Nalli’s mountain and his liberality are selected for particular praise. 

In the body of the sixth decad there is little history; Adan’s good rule 
is praised in general terms, as also his heroism in war and his liberality. 
He is said to have indulged in mixed dances ( turiarigai ) and roused the 
jealousy of his queen (52). He had the title Vanavaramban (58, /. 12, 
also Aham 389 Nakkirar) and Naravu on the sea-shore was one of the 
towns belonging to him (60, /. 12). 

In the epilogue the king’s title is accounted for by the statement that 
he compelled his enemies who had carried off into the Dandaranya a flock 
of varudai (mountain sheep) belonging to the Cheras to return them safe 
to Tondi. He is said further to have given a village in Kudanadu with 
cows to Brahmins and thereby caused his name Vanavaramban to shine 
forth. This seems to imply that we have to understand the title as a meta- 
phor suggesting the conquest of heaven by pious deeds, an idea known 
to the Gupta coin-legends. Lastly, the king defeated the Malavar in battle 
and routed monarchs and ruled his subjects as parents guard their 
children with a loving mind. 

This monarch may well have been the famous Karikala’s Chera 


1 Ed. Bhavanandam (1916), p. 351 



526 


SOUTH INDIA 


opponent, who received a wound in his back in the battle of Venni and 
expiated the disgrace by starving to death on the battle-field sword in 
hand — as we learn from three poems ( Puram 65, 66 and Aham 55). 1 One 
of them, by Mamulanar ( Aham 55), states that many eminent men gave 
up their lives when they heard of the Chera monarch’s demise and the 
reason for it. 

From the next decad, the seventh, the collection proceeds to treat of 
monarchs of another branch of Cheras, and before taking up their study, 
we may stop to consider the nature of the Chera monarchy implicit in 
the data yielded by the epilogues. In them the five monarchs of the line 
of Udiyanjeral whose reigns we have so far studied are said altogether 
to have reigned for over two centuries (58+254-25+55+38=201); and 
we shall see further that the monarchs of the seventh, eighth and ninth 
decads respectively are assigned periods of 25, 17 and 16 years, giving a 
total of another 58 years. Surely we cannot consider these periods as 
successively running one after another; we must necessarily postulate a 
very considerable degree of overlapping. How exactly the rule of the 
kingdom was shared among the different princes of the blood royal, and 
the rules of precedence, if any, that prevailed among them, we have no 
means of ascertaining now. The Chera kingdom must have been a sort 
of family estate in which all the adult males of the line had a share 
and interest — what Kautilya has called kulasanghci, a family-group. 
Kaulilya attributed great merit to this type of state organisation, saying 
that a kulasahgha was invincible — kulasangho hi durjayah . 2 A similar 
clan-rule might have prevailed in the Chola and Pandya kingdoms as well ; 
in the case of the Cholas such an assumption would be the best means of 
explaining the occasion for Senguttuvan to intervene in a war of succes- 
sion in which nine Chola princes laid down their lives; it would also 
furnish a natural explanation for the occurrence of so many names 
of kings— all necessarily to be accommodated within a space of three, 
four or at most five generations for the reasons already stated. Our 
knowledge of the genealogy of the royal families being so limited, the 
dates we assign to different persons and incidents can only be rough 
approximations. The kings of the last three decads of the Ten Tens as 
well as their ancestors must be taken to have ruled contemporaneously 
with the kings of the house of Udiyanjeral. Let us now see what the poems 
have to tell us about these monarchs. ' 

Anduran : c. a.d. 140, was the father of Selvakkadungo Vaji Adan; 
his wife was the daughter of a certain Orutandai. Her name figures only 
as Poraiyan Perundevi, the great queen of Poraiyan (Chera). Andu- 
van is said to have had a stout heart and taken his enemies captive- 
he was also celebrated for his wide and accurate scholarship ( padigam 
vii). He was the lord of Maiyur {pad. ix). Doubtless also he was the 
monarch addressed by the poet Enichcheri Mudamosiyar of Uraiyur 

1 Sesha Aiyar, op. cit., pp. 29-32 1 KA. i 17 



ay 527 

( Pur am 13); the occasion was furnished by a Chola prince Mudittalaikko 
Perunarkilli who was carried into the precincts of Karuvur by the uncon- 
trollable must elephant on which he was riding; the poet explains the 
situation to Anduvan in order to assure him that it was no act of hostility 
on the part of the Chola thus to ride into the Chera capital, and prays for 
the safety of the Chola prince. We get no other information about Anduvan. 

The poet of Uraiyur just mentioned is celebrated as a Brahmin protege 1 
of the chieftain Ay; many of his poems celebrating his patron are found 
in the Puram besides poems of other poets on the same chieftain. Ay 
was thus clearly a contemporary of Anduvan, and we may stop to consider 
the information to be gathered about him from the poems before we 
proceed to the decad dealing with Anduvan’s son, Selvakkadungo Vali 
Adan. Further, as Kapilar, the author of that decad, declares at the 
outset (61) that he went to the Chera monarch after the demise of his 
former patron Pari, we may also discuss the incidents of Pari’s life and his 
relations with Kapilar at this stage. 

Ay, a vel chieftain, is mentioned in two poems by Paranar ; in one ( Aham 
152) his name occurs with the names of other chieftains — Nannan, Nalli. 
Pindan, and Tittan Veliyan, and he is said to have owned numerous 
elephants and presented them liberally to his favourites; in the other 
(ibid. 198) mention is made of Ay’s good country in the south. In fact 
Ay appears to have held sway in the mountainous marches of the south- 
ernmost section of the Western Ghats which divided the Pandya and 
Chola countries on the east from the Kerala on the west. The region 
abounds in elephants even at the present day and it is no surprise to find 
these noble animals figuring so largely in the poetry that celebrates Ay 
and his country. In fact Mosi Kiran, a somewhat later poet who was con- 
temporary with Perunjeral Irumporai who won Tagadur ( Puram 50), says 
clearly that the Podiyil mountain belonged to Ay ( Kurun . 84). Another 
poet Karikkannanar of Kavirippumpattinam, compares the rain clouds 
gathering in the sky to the crowd of elephants that Ay Andiran ever kept 
ready for presentation to the bards and minstrels who visited him 
(Narrinai 237). There is a reference to Ay’s forest ( kanam ) in the only 
poem ( Aham 69) of Parangorranar, son of Umattur Kilar ; and another 
poet also, Turaiyur Odai Kilar, is only known by the single poem which 
he addresses to Ay soliciting a present ( Puram 136). A quasi-legendary 
reference to Ay occurs in the rather late poem, Sirupanarruppadai (//. 
96-9), in which he is said to have presented to God Siva a very fine cloth 
given to him by a Naga (i mla-nagan ). 

It is to Mudamosiyar that we owe many songs of great literary finish 
and intense personal feeling celebrating the virtues and eminence of Ay. 
In one poem {Puram 127) he describes the luxurious palace of Ay deple- 
ted of all its wealth after the visit of panars (minstrels); in another (ibid. 
128) he says that the mountain Podiyil was accessible only to dancing-girls 


Tol. Marapu 74 urai. 



528 


SOUTH INDIA 


( padinis ) coming to look for Ay’s patronage; but not to enemy kings, 
however strong their forces. Several poems attest the ingenious striv- 
ings of the poet to convey to us the richness of Ay’s country in elephants 
and Ay’s great liberality in parting with them as presents to his guests — 
thus, the stars must fill the entire sky to equal the number of elephants 
given away by Ay Andiran (ibid. 129); such elephants were more numer- 
ous than the spears employed on the field where the Kongar were driven 
to the western sea by Ay — £dmost the only martial achievement of Ay to be 
mentioned — and the poet questions Ay if in his country one she-elephant 
brought forth ten calves at a time (ibid. 130) ; again did the mountains sing 
the praises of Ay and win presents from him, that they should harbour 
so many elephants (ibid. 131)? Ay’s kanni (the festoon on his crown), 
was of valai ( ochrocarpus congifolius ) (ibid.). In one poem the poet laments 
that at one time he thought of others before Ay, and maintains that Ay 
in the south balances the Himalayas in the north of India (ibid. 132), thus 
recalling the cycle of legends centring round Agastya and his residence in 
the Podiyil mountain. Another poem (ibid. 133) is an exhortation to a 
dancing-girl (viVo/i) to resort to Ay in all haste if she wanted to meet the 
embodiment of fame. Ay was no trader in dharma, seeking the reward 
of comfort in the other world for the good he did here, but only sought 
to be an example to others (ibid. 134). The poet says in another poem 
(ibid. 135) that he went with the dancing-girl with her lute behind him just 
to meet Ay, not to apply for any presents, but adds slyly: ‘May Ay ever 
be in a position to dispense with the things coveted by his visitors.’ Two 
other poems conclude the theme of Ay’s liberality, one by contrasting the 
sun unfavourably with him (ibid. 374) and the other by lauding his appre- 
ciation of literature (ibid. 375). Finally the poet mentions the death 
of Ay and the welcome he received in the abode of the gods in heaven 
saying that the drum in Indra’s palace reverberated at the arrival of Ay 
( Puram 241). The death of Ay Andiran is mentioned also by Kuttu- 
van KIranar who is known only by a single poem ( Puram 240) which 
records the event, recalls the presents of elephants, horses, and chariots 
that Ay gave to poets in his lifetime, and mentions the fact that the wives 
of Ay immolated themselves on his funeral pyre, performing satl Ay 
appears to have been a dynastic name, while Andiran may be the Sanskrit 
word meaning hero. Ptolemy knew of Ay and his mountain country. 

Pari was another vel chieftain, the friend and patron of Kapilar who 
found his way to the Chera court only after Pari’s death. Of the origin 
of the vels there is a legend recorded by Kapilar himself ( Puram 201) 
according to which they belonged to a line of kings who appeared from 
the sacred fire-pit of a northern sage and ruled in Tuvarai for forty-nine 
generations. Tuvarai may stand for either Dvaraka or Dvarasamudra 
It is perhaps better identified with the latter, because in the same poem 
Kapilar describes Irungd-veJ as puli-kadi-mal the great man who drove 
offthe tiger, an attribute that anticipates by centuries the Kannada legend 
regarding the origin of the dynastic name Hoysala. 



PARI 


529 


Many minor chieftains of the Tamil country in this period claimed to 
be of vel origin, and Pari is one of the best known among them. His 
principality lay in the Pandya country round about the hillock known 
as Kodungunram or Piranmalai, where there is a temple of Parisvara 
commemorating perhaps the ancient connection of Pari with the shrine. 1 
The fame of Pari’s liberality finds an echo in later ages in Sundaramurti’s 
lament : ‘there is no one ready to give, even if an illiberal patron is add- 
ressed by the name of Pari.’ 

Kapilar was not a mere bard who sought to win the favour of Pari by 
celebrating him in song, but his lifelong friend and adviser. He stood 
by the chieftain through thick and thin, and devised ways of prolonging 
resistance when Pari’s hill was completely surrounded by ‘the three crow- 
ned kings’ of the Tamil country; after Pari’s death, Kapilar took charge 
of his two unmarried daughters and did his best, apparently without 
success, to get them suitably married. 

The story of Pari and his daughters and Kapilar grew into a popular 
saga, embellished from time to time by the addition of fresh details ; all 
these later accretions have found their lodgement in the compilation of 
literary legends known as Tamil Navalar Charitai, hardly two centuries 
old. Leaving these late legends alone, we shall confine ourselves to the 
data from the Sahgam anthologies. 

In a song in the Narriijai (253) Kapilar describes the strongly guarded 
hill of Pari. A number of his poems on Pari figure in the Puram collec- 
tion. One of them (105) is a viraliyarruppadai in the conventional style 
exhorting a virali (dancing-girl) to go to Pari and seek his patronage; 
Pari’s gendeness and liberality to visitors, she is told, are more refreshing 
than the cool waters of the springs for which his hill was famous. The 
next poem (106) says that Pari’s liberality was so universal that even 
bad poets returned from him not empty-handed. In another short poem 
(107) Kapilar says that poets praise only Pari, and seem to forget that the 
rain has also a part in ensuring the well-being of the world. The fertile 
land of Pari with its sandal-wooded hillsides was really the property of 
those who praised him in song (108). The riches of Pari’s hill in forest 
produce is described in detail by the poet in a song (109) which concludes 
on the note that access to them is easier to mins f rels and dancers, than 
to kings who seek to enter by force. The next song (110) begins with a 
brief repetition of the same idea, and dissuades kings from resorting to 
Pari even as minstrels, declaring that all the three hundred villages of 
his fine country have been distributed as presents and there remains only 
the poet Kapilar, Pari, and the hill. Kings will find it hard, repeats 
Kapilar in another song (111), to take Pari’s hill by the force of their 
lance, but a virali may win it if she approaches with a song to the 
accompaniment of a lute. 

Then comes a short poem of five lines attributed to Pari’s daughters; 

1 M. Raghava Aiyangar, Velir Varalaru, pp. 63-4 
67 



530 


SOUTH INDIA 


it is a direct and simple statement, full of pathos, of the change in their 
fortunes due to their father’s death. ‘In those days, we enjoyed the moon- 
light happily with father, and the foe could not take our hill; now this 
day, in this bright moonlight, kings with victorious resounding war- 
drums have won the hill, and we have lost our father.’ The annotator 
explains in his gloss that the first half of the verse refers to the period 
when the three kings were besieging Pari’s hill for a long time without 
success, and that the reference to their victorious war-drums is ironical, 
as they killed Pari not in open fight, but by treachery. Considering 
how often Kapilar asserts the impossibility of reducing the hill by force, 
the commentator’s statement may well be accepted as the record of a 
correct tradition. According to one of the early legends that grew round 
this celebrated siege, Kapilar trained a large number of birds to fly out 
from Pari’s fortress into the open country behind the besieging troops 
and bring in enough corn to feed the city and the army for several days 
and months; thus he helped to stave off an early surrender. Kapilai him- 
self has nothing to say on this; but poets who came very soon after him 
make pointed references to it. Auvaiyar has ( Aham 303) a poem which 
speaks of Pari’s gifts to poets of elephants and jewels besides the story 
of the sparrows flying out in the morning to fetch grain in the evening 
for provisioning the beleaguered fortress; Nakkirar ( Aham 78) mentions 
the same incident and names Kapilar as the inventor of the ruse which 
prolonged the siege for years; and roundly asserts that Pari triumphed 
in the end, which is not borne out by the earlier series of poems. We may 
mention here two other poets who speak of Pari and his munificence as 
belonging to the past — Mijaikkandan ( Kurun . 196) and Nannaganar 
(Puram 176). 

To return to Kapilar’s poems. They continue the story after Pari’s 
death and give hints of some things that Kapilar did thereafter. Two 
songs ( Puram 113. 114) are touching farewells to Pari’s hill and country 
pronounced on the eve of Kapilar’s departure from that land with Pari’s 
daughters to find in search husbands for them; they recall the plenty and 
splendour of the past and contrast them with the penury to which the poet 
and his proteges had sunk after Pari’s death. Another poem (ibid. 115) 
is also reminiscent of the feast and song of Pari’s lifetime, while others 
(ibid. 116, 117 and 119) draw a poignant contrast between the condition 
of Pari’s hill and its city in his life and after his death, one poem (ibid. 
118) laying particular stress on the neglect of irrigation, and another (ibid. 
120) on that of agriculture. 

Three poems bear on Kapilar’s attempts to marry off Pari’s daughters. 
One of them ( Puram 200) is addressed to Vichchikkon, a minor chieftain; 
it praises Vichchikkon and his valour, describes the noble descent of Pari’s 
daughters, and ends with a request that the chieftain should accept them 
as his brides. Incidentally the poem alludes to Pari’s gift of a chariot to a 
creeper of the mullai flower, an act which sounds absurd in modern ears, 
but was held up by many old Tamil poets as the leading instance of Pari’s 



KARI 531 

liberality. The suit to Vichchikkon was apparently unsuccessful, for the 
next two poems (ibid. 201 & 202) record that Kapilar took the girls to 
another chieftain Irungovel with the same result. The first opens with 
the statements that the girls were the daughters of the famous Pari who 
had been Kapilar’s great friend and that consequently he, a Brahmin poet, 
looked upon them as his own daughters; it then adverts to the legends of 
the origin of the vels already noticed, and exhorts Irungovel to accept 
the girls as brides. The other poem is the utterance of the poet of 
his distress at his second failure, he prophesies the destruction of 
Araiyam, the capital of Irungovel, but attributes it to the curse of the 
poet Kalattalaiyar whom one of the chieftain’s ancestors had insulted; 
and apologies for having spoken to him at all about Par i’s daughters! 

The colophon to one of Kapilar’s poems in the Puram (236) records that 
the poet failed in all his efforts to marry off the girls, and that he left 
them finally in the charge of Brahmins and starved himself to death. 
The poem itself is only poignant expression of the poet’s grief at the death 
of Pari and of his desire that they should be united again as friends in ano- 
ther birth. But the tradition recorded in a late Chola inscription 1 at Kilur 
(Tirukoyilur tq., S. Arcot) is very different; it mentions only one daughter 
of Pari and states that Kapilar had given her in marriage to the Malaiyan 
before he entered the fire to attain heaven, a fact commemorated by a 
stone set up on the spot. We have no means of deciding between the 
rival stories. There are, however, four songs in the Puram (121-4) in which 
Kapilar celebrates Malaiyaman Tirumudikkari of MuJJur, the excellence 
and defensibility of his country, the desire of each of the crowned kings 
of the Tamil land to have him as his friend, and his liberal patronage of 
poets and minstrels. This renders probable the story of the marriage of 
Pari’s daughter recorded in the Kilur inscription, though our literary 
sources seem to know nothing of it. Kapilar has other poems on Kari 
in the other anthologies. He mentions the sandal-wood of Kari’s 
mountain and the Mullurkkanam of Kari in two poems in the Kurundogai 
(198 & 312); he also refers to Kari’s victorious combat against Ori of 
Kollimalai in which Ori lost his life, and his mountain was thereupon 
transferred to the Cheras by Kari {Narrinai 320); this incident, as 
already noted, is mentioned in some detail ( Aham 209) by the somewhat 
later poet Kalladanar, the contemporary of Pandya Nedunjeliyan of 
Talaiyalanganam. Another poem of Kapilar {Narrirtai 291) mentions 
(Kari) the king of Mullur, riding on horseback to lift the cattle from his 
enemies’ herds. Kari’s heroism is mentioned by Kapilar in another poem 
{Narrinai 77). 

Kari is also celebrated in songs by apoetess Marokkattu Nappasalaiyar. 
In one song {Puram 126) she states that Kapilar has praised Kari so well 
that there is no room for others to essay the task; yet she made the effort 
to overcome her poverty. In another (ibid. 174) she makes a further 


1 SII. vn 863, /. 2 



532 


SOUTH INDIA 


reference to Kapilar’s praise of Kari, to the death of Kari himself who 
went to the other world to enjoy the results of his good deeds here, and 
then celebrates his successor Malaiyaman Tirukkannan, who was the 
younger brother of Kari (/. 18 nummun) and a commander ( enadi ) of the 
Chola monarch. 

The poetess has yet another song (ibid 226) in which she wittily says 
that Death must have gone to a certain Chola prince as a beggar to have 
got away with the life of that prince, for it could have been taken in no 
other way. The name of the Chola is Killi Valavan who died in Kula- 
murram and we have to find him a place near this generation. A song 
of Kovur Kilar ( Puram 46) addressed to this Chola prince is said to 
have resulted in his commuting the sentence of death passed on the 
youthful sons of Malaiyaman (Kari) in the sabha of Uraivur; the reason 
for the sentence is not mentioned; but the young men were about to be 
thrown to an elephant, when the poet interceded with the song in which 
he recalled the charity of Sibi, a mythical ancestor of the Cholas, to the 
dove, and pointed out that the line of Malaiyaman had patronised 
learning and was entitled to mercy; the sentence was not executed and 
Malaiyaman’s sons were saved. Another Chola prince who was of the 
same generation was Rajasuyam-vetta Perunarkilli who was aided bv Kari, 
called Tervanmalaiyan (Puram 125) in a war against Mandaranjeral 
lrumporai; the poet Vadamavannakkan Peri Sattanar says that by his act 
Kari earned the praise of both sides in the war, the victor being grateful 
for help received, and the vanquished attributing his defeat" more to 
Kari’s aid than to the strength of his Chola opponent. 

Lastly Kapilar is said to have composed the Kurinjippdttu, one of the 
Ten Idylls ( Pattuppattu ) in order to convey an idea of Tamil culture (ideals 
of marriage) to the Arya king Pirahattan (Prahasta^) of whom we 
know nothing else. The fame of Kapilar’s poetry and his relative chro- 
nological position are made clear by a poem of Porundil llaiigiranar 
(Puram 53) in which he says that Kapilar ought to have been alive to do 
justice to the great qualities of Mandaranjeral lrumporai. 



Chapter XVII 


SOUTH INDIA II 
THE CHERAS ( Contd .) 

§ elvakkadungo Vali Adan, c. A. D. 165, the hero of the seventh decad, 
was the son of Anduvan and held sway for twenty-five years. The illus- 
trious poet Kapilar repaired to his court after the death of his dear friend 
Pari, because he found in this monarch all the great qualities for which 
Pari had been celebrated (61). Nothing is known of the position of Pari’s 
daughters during Kapilar's sojourn in the Chera court. Kapilar’ s reward 
for the seventh decad was a cash gift of 100,000 kaycim, and all the land 
that could be seen from the top of a hill called Nanra; in fact the number 
of villages which Kapilar earned on this occasion became proverbial, and 
the author of the ninth decad specified the multitude of spears abandoned 
by the defeated Cholas by the statement that they outnumbered the 
villages which Kapilar got from ^elvakkadungo ! (85) 

The decad is full of eloquent praise of the monarch’s heroism, liberality 
and other qualities, but mentions no historical incident. The kings who 
submitted to him kept their country entire and prosperous, and in a condi- 
tion that evoked poets’ praises (62). The monarch is called Selvar-ko, 
the opulent lord, and his bright sword is said once to have put to flight 
two kings — the Pandya and Chola (63), but with no details. Another song 
(64) states that the king bestowed gifts onlearned Brahmins with libations 
of water and mentions, in passing, the scissors used to shear the mane of 
the war-horses. The king’s daily darbar and the free flow of toddy, music 
and presents to visitors form the theme of one poem (65), and gifts of 
unlimited quantities of paddy and many elephants from the spoils of 
the battle-field furnish the subject-matter of another (66). Yet another 
poem (67) devoted to the inexhaustible theme of the king's munificence 
calls him Selvakkoman (the dear lord) and lord of the Neri mountain, 
hints at the rich trade in pearls from Bandar and in rare jewels from Kodu- 
manam (both places unidentified), and celebrates the king’s heroism in the 
field in a conventional way by referring to the dance of headless trunks, 
which was supposed to occur only after a specified large number of sol- 
diers had fallen in battle. That the king and his soldiers loved the hard- 
ships of the field better than the pleasant company of women is the theme 
of a poem (68) which refers to the northern country as the land of uninter- 
rupted enjoyment— the Uttara Kurus, as the commentator explains. 
The penultimate poem (69) in the decad praises the glory of the monarch’s 
ancestors who ruled with credit and made their subjects happy. The 
final poem (70) is a valttu, an expression of the poet’s good wishes for 



534 


SOUTH INDIA H 


the king; it recites the Vedic sacrifices he performed and the doctrine of 
the three debts to gods, sages, and ancestors, well known to the code of 
Hindu social ethics. 

The padigam vaguely affirms that the king fought many battles and 
conquered several countries, that he fulfilled dharma by performing sacri- 
fices, that he won the grace of Vishnu by worshipping him with devotion, 
that he presented the village of Okandur yielding fine paddy to that deity, 
and that by his conduct he excelled his purohita in righteousness. 

Kapilar has two other songs on this monarch in the Puram collection ; 
in one (8) he compares the sun unfavourably with the king, and in the 
other (14) he contrasts the rough strong arm of the monarch with the soft 
tender hand of the poet who seeks his patronage. The king died at a place 
called ChikkarpaJJi {Puram 387, colophon). 

The queen of Selvakkadungo Vali Adan was the sister of a queen of 
Imayavaramban Nedunjeral Adan of the other line — both the ladies being 
described in identical terms as the devi (daughter) of Velavikkoman Padu- 
man. By her he had a son. This son was 

Tagadur-erinda Peruhjeral Irumporai, (c. a.d. 190), the hero of the eighth 
decad by Arisil Kilar. He ruled for seventeen years. He offered Arisil 
Kilar a cash reward of 900,000 kariam and everything in his palace includ- 
ing the throne, excepting only himself and his queen. The poet is said, 
in his turn, to have requested the king to continue to rule as before, ac- 
cepting for himself the place of minister. 

This monarch overthrew Kajuvul, a rebellious shepherd chieftain, and 
captured his stronghold (71); as a result of Irumporai’s attack Kajuvul 
was subjugated, his city was ruined, and his subjects were forced to mi- 
grate to other lands. There are two other references to Kaluvuj, one by 
Madurai Marudan Ilanaganar ( Aham 365) which mentions his chief city 
called Kamur; the other {Aham 135) by Paranar is more important as it 
states that Kaluvul was very famous, and that his city of Kamur was once 
invested and captured by the chieftains of fourteen velir families acting 
together. Whether the war of the velir against Kaluvul had any 
connection with Irumporai’s war we cannot say; the location of Kamur 
(var. Kalur) is also unknown. 

Other rulers feared Irumporai as a hostile deity ( ariaiigu ) and from them 
he gathered tribute {ball) before he left their country; those who came 
to disturb him did not escape with their lives unless he treated them with 
discriminating mercy (71). 

The next stanza (72) extolls the king’s diplomatic methods and his mar- 
tial strength. He is next described (73) as a great monarch. Lord of Puhar 
rich in ricefields spreading on the banks of the Kaviri, the defensive 
armour of Puliyar, the lord of Kolli mountain bearing the clouds on its 
tall peaks, and Poraiyan who owned many pennoned chariots; his immea- 
surable prosperity, heroism, and liberality the poet despairs of ever being 
able to convey adequately to others. The king was very learned, performed 
many sacrifices, and begot heroic sons worthy to succeed him; the poet 



PERUNJERAL. ADIGAMAN 


535 


says, however, that he was not impressed by these things so much as by the 
fact that by the excellence of his wise and ethical conduct the king made 
his purohit withdraw from family life and attachment to worldly things 
and retire into a life of renunciation and asceticism (74). 

Three stanzas (75-77) are general praise of the monarch’s heroism in 
war, his conquests and his liberality, as also the strength and excellence of 
his troops, particularly his elephant corps. The next (78) mentions the 
overthrow of the strongly fortified city of Tagadur, an incident to be pre- 
sently considered in some detail; it also describes the great fertility of the 
Chera country in elaborate, but conventional, detail implying that all 
possible varieties of soil and landscape ( tiijais ) were closely intermingled 
and stating that horses and elephants were as numerous as sheep and cows 
in the country of Irumporai. In the penultimate poem (79) of the decad, 
the king is said to have offered ball in due form to the goddess of Victory 
on the Ayirai mountain, himself being seated on a throne made of ivory 
of the most superior class of elephants ( arasuva ); the poem concludes 
with the poet’s wish for the fame of the king to last for ever. In the same 
strain the concluding poem (80) affirms that as all the kings, his neigh- 
bours, are ready to pay tribute and acknowledge his superior military po- 
wer, there is none left to show himself as an enemy before his capital city. 

The padigam assigns the conquest of Tagadur to the particular achieve- 
ment of this monarch and gives details not found in the body of the 
decad. The enemy against whom the Chera marched on this occasion 
was Adigaman who maintained a large army of spearmen; his stronghold 
Tagadur stood on a hillock situated in a well-watered country. Adigaman 
was aided by the two other crowned kings (Chola and Pandya) whose 
only reward was to share the defeat of Adigaman; the victorious Chera 
captured the war-drums, umbrellas, and jewels of his enemies, and became 
the master of the fortress of Tagadur. Tagadur-erinda Perunjeral Irum- 
porai had a friend in another poet Mosi Kiran. On one occasion, 
the poet lay down and slept on the cot meant for the king’s war-drum, 
the drum having been taken out to be washed; the king happened to 
notice this, and instead of losing his temper as any other patron would 
have done, he fanned the poet with a chauri until he awoke. The grateful 
poet has recorded the incident in a simple and graceful song ( Puram 50). 
He sings also of a Nannan who by sorties raised the siege of his fortress 
( Aham 392), and speaks also of a Konkanangilan (lord of Konkanam, 
Puram 154-6). The former is described as Nannan dwelling in Kanam and 
the latter is called the lord of the mountain Konkanam (Konperunganam) 
uniformly in all the three stanzas, and it seems probable that all these 
poems refer to the same chieftain and that he was different from the 
Nannans, father and son, of Pali and other places. 

Adigaman, also known as Neduman Anji, the opponent of the Chera 
monarch and lord of Tagadur, was one of the celebrated group of ‘Seven 
Minor Patrons’ ( kadaiyelu-vallalgal ). The poetess Auvaiyar has left many 
songs on him, besides some on his son Poguttelini. Only one of 



536 


SOUTH INDIA II 


these songs ( Puram 206) is somewhat disparaging, as it is the expression 
of the poetess’s vexation at having been long kept waiting for her 
present ; this must have happened at a time when the chieftain and the 
poetess had not come to understand each other well. All the other poems 
resound with praise of Adigaman’s characteristics. The towns threatened 
by Aflji spent sleepless nights ( Kurun . 91). The dark rain cloud is likened 
to Anji when ready to bestow chariots on his visitors. The strength and 
speed of Anji in action were like those of a chariot wheel on which an 
entire month’s labour had been spent by an expert carpenter capable of 
building eight complete chariots in one day ( Puram 87). Anji was the 
leader of Majavar against whom no enemy could prevail (ibid. 88). His 
ardour for battle and heroism in war form the themes of two poems 
(ibid. 89, 90). He once got a rare myrobalan fruit — a specific against the 
ailments of old age which assured longevity; without eating it himself he 
presented the fruit to the poetess, and the grateful bard celebrates the 
event in a song (ibid. 91) expressing the wish that her patron, ‘the chief of 
Adiyar, Anji, should remain stable like the god with the beautiful dark 
throat’, i.e. !§iva who swallowed poison to save the Universe. Another 
poem describes Adigan’s skill in the capture of enemy fortresses (ibid. 92). 
Yet another (ibid. 93) mentions the custom of the corpses of kings, who 
died of sickness or otherwise than in battle, being laid on a bed of sacred 
grass and being cut to pieces to the accompaniment of mantras to secure 
them the place in heaven to which w'ent heroes killed in fair fight; and then 
it says that Adigan’s enemies escaped this fate, as he summoned them 
to battle and bestowed on them the heroes’ heaven; the song marks 
the occasion when Adigan had himself been slightly wounded in 
battle. Adigan was sweet to friends and quite the reverse to his foes 
(ibid. 94). 

Auvaiyar once went on an embassy to Tondaiman (Ilandiraiyan?) on 
behalf of Adigaman; that chieftain showed her round his arsenal which 
was well stocked with shining weapons of war ready for use, and the 
poetess has a song (ibid. 95) in which she contrasts the burnished state of 
Tondaiman’s weapons with Adigan’s, which are ever soiled by use on 
the battle-field and call for constant repair and reconditioning at the 
hands of blacksmiths. In two other poems (ibid. 97, 98) Auvai describes 
Anji’s arms and their power at some length, — swords, spears, elephants 
and infantry, and advises his foes to submit and pay tribute if they hope 
to escape disaster. Adigan is said (ibid. 99) to have been born in a family 
which was devoted to the gods whom they honoured with pitjd and sacri- 
fice, which introduced into the world the sweet sugar-cane from heaven 
and which ruled the world for long ages with great ability; the poem 
then describes the arms and personal valour of Adigan who fought with 
success against seven kings at a time and destroyed the rebellious fortress 
of Kovalur along with other strongholds; Auvai adds that only Paranar 
was able to do justice to his great feat of strength, the capture of Kovalur 
We shall presently review Paranar’s songs on Adigan; but they contain 



ADIGAMAN 


537 


no reference to the capture of Kovalur, which must have belonged to 
Malaiyaman Tirumudik-Kari. 

When roused, Adigan’s anger against his foes burnt so strong that it 
subsided not even at the sight of his own little son (ibid. 100) ; but however 
often a visitor returned to him, his liberality showed no sign of flagging 
(ibid. 101). One verse (ibid. 103) is a conventional virali-yarruppadai, 
directing a danseuse to seek Adigan’s patronage, while another (ibid. 
104) advises his enemies not to despise Adigan as a youth, for he was as 
strong as a crocodile. There are two more poems of Auvai ; one (ibid. 
315) contrasts Adigan raging like fire when roused with Adigan in his 
calm moments, when he resembled the fire-stick slumbering on the 
thatch of the cottage ; and the other (ibid. 390) is general praise of his fame 
and liberality. 

In all these songs Auvai makes no mention of the war waged on Tagadur 
by Perunjeral Irumporai or indeed any reference at all to Adigan's relations 
with the Chera monarch. In three more songs in the Puram collection 
she laments the death of Adigan ; one of them ( Puram 231), a short piece, 
says that though Adigan’s physical body may die and be burnt, his fame 
will be everlasting ; in another (ibid. 232) the theme is the desolation 
of the days that remained to her after Adigan had earned the title to 
a hero-stone ( nadukal ), the engraved stone erected to the memory of 
heroes fallen in battle ; and lastly a somewhat longer poem (ibid. 235) 
recalls the many genial little acts of friendship with which Adigan had 
enlivened the company of his friends whether at the festive board or 
in the field of battle. But she says nothing of the way Adigan met his 
death; that he did not die in the Chera war against Tagadur we may 
infer from the fact that the Padirrupattu and padigam viii only claim 
the capture of the fortress of Tagadur and not the death of Adigan 
as the Chera’s achievement. We may note, incidentally, that a 
poem on the Chera conquest of Tagadur bearing the name of Tagadur- 
yattirai is known, though only from some citations in later works ; this 
work is mentioned by Perasiriyar as an instance of some past incident 
being made the subject-matter of a poem, from which we see that it was 
not contemporary ; we do not know how much later it was composed. 1 

Adigan’s death is actually touched on by Paranar who has three poems 
in the A ham collection and a fourth in the Kurundogai. One song 
(Aham 162) mentions that Adigan’s hill was thronged with the elephant 
corps of Pasumputpandiyan, a sign of their friendship. We have seen 
that in his war against Tagadur, the Chera is said to have fought two crown- 
ed kings besides Adigan, and this Pandyan army may have gone to 
Adigan’s aid on that occasion. Paranar refers once more ( Kurun . 393) 
to the friendship of Pasumputpandiya with Adigan and their co-operation 
against the Kongar in a pitched battle at Vahaipparandalai ; in this battle 
Pasumputpandiyan was riding an elephant presented by Adigan, but the 

1 Purattirattu , p. xlv 

68 



538 


SOUTH INDIA II 


Kongar attacked and killed both the Pandya and the elephant and raised 
a great shout of joy thereafter. 1 In a song of the relatively late poet 
Nakklrar ( Aham 253) the same Pandya king is said to have won a victory 
over the Kongar and occupied much of their territory ; we may assume 
that the late poem recalled only the bright side of a war that began well, 
but ended fatally for the victor. Paranar says also (Aham 372) that the 
Kudirai mountain belonged to Anji and his strong bowmen, who shone 
in the front of many battles. Lastly he mentions the death of Adigan 
(ibid. 142) the only reference to the event; he invaded Pali of Nannan 
with a large force, and fell in battle, slain by Nimili, the commander 
(of Nannan), who had won fame by putting to the sword vast numbers 
of enemy troops. Nimili was also called Minili and there are other 
poems of Paranar ( Aham 148, 181, 208 and 396) in which Nimili is 
said to have put to death Ay Eyinan, also in^a fight at Pali. Probably 
Adigan and Eyinan both fought against Nimili at Pali and fell on 
the field on one and the same occasion. We may also surmise that 
this war against Nannan was waged by these chieftains on behalf of the 
Chera monarch against whom Nannan was more or less in a state of 
perpetual rebellion. If this view is correct, we may further assume 
that Adigan made his peace with the Chera after the Tagadur war of 
Perunjeral Irumporai and became his loyal feudatory, and that Ay 
Eyinan was another feudatory of the Chera or at least his ally. 

We may notice incidentally the other persons and events mentioned 
by Auvaiyar in her poems. Her reference to the story of sparrows fet- 
ching grain for feeding the beleaguered garrison of Pari (Aham 303) 
has been noted above ; the same poem contains a reference to the Kolli 
mountain belonging to Pasumputporaiyan. In another poem (Kurun. 15) 
she mentions the Kosar of Nalur and Venni belonging to Kaivan KiHi, 
and refers to a certain Mudiyan also in yet another poem (Narrinai 390). 
When Auvaiyar asked for some rice from Nanjil Valluvan, he gave her 
an elephant, and the poetess commemorates the extravagance of his 
liberality ( Puram 140). This chieftain, who was the lord of the Nanjil 
mountain, is celebrated by two or three other poets for his liberal 
patronage of bards and minstrels. Auvaiyar refers to a poetess Velfivl- 
diyar (Aham 47) who lost her husband and went in search of him. This 
is mentioned by VeHividiyar herself in a poem (Aham 45). 

Lastly, Auvaiyar describes (Puram 367) the three Tamil kings together 
and compares them to the three sacred fires in a sacrificial hall. The 
monarchs concerned were Serman Mari Venko, Pandya Kanappertanda 


1 The words are : Kugaik-KoH Vahaip- 


ko.g i peii.v. They 

are generally understood to mean that 
Adigan and his elephant fell fighting on 
behalf of the Pandya, and that seems to 
be the meaning on the face of it. But 


Aham 142 (also by Paranar) con- 
tains a definite statement that Adigan 
was killed at Pah in a duel by Nimili; 
we have to suppose either that there 
were two Adigans, and Paranar men- 
tioned the occasions of the death of 
both, or in deference to Aham 142 
interpret Kurun. 393 as suggested here. 



ILANJERAL 


539 


Ukkirapperuvaludi, and iSolan Rajasuyam Vetta Perunarkilli. The 
poem is a tribute to the liberality of the princes; it states also that nothing 
avails a man after his death except his good deeds done in this life, parti- 
cularly in the form of danas, and it ends with the poetess’s prayer for the 
long life of the three monarchs. We find no clue to the occasion that 
brought these princes together, nor do we hear of the Chera Mari Venko 
in any other connection. We have noted already that the Chola Perunar- 
killi who performed the Rajasuya fought against Mandaranjeral Irumpo- 
rai and that in this war he was assisted by Kari (Pur am 125). Of the 
Pandyan member of this triad we learn from a poem of Aiyur Mulangilar 
(Puram 21) — the only extant poem of this author — that he was victorious 
against a chieftain named Vengai-marpan of Kanapper, a fortress situa- 
ted, according to Dr. V. Swaminatha Aiyar, in modern Kalaiyar Kovil. 
The strong main fortress was surrounded by a dense forest and many 
smaller forts, and was supposed to be impregnable ; hence the glory of Uk- 
kirapperuvaludi’s success and his title commemorating the achievement. 

Kudakko Ilaiijeral Irumporai (c. a.d. 190), the hero of the ninth decad, 
was of the same generation as his cousin Tagadur-erinda Perunjeral Irum- 
porai. The place of Kudakko in the genealogy of the line has been 
explained sufficiently before, (p. 507) and need not be repeated here. The 
author of the decad was Perungunrtir Kilar. The king reigned for sixteen 
years. The relations between him and the poet did not run a smooth 
course at first, and there are two songs (Puram 210, 21 1) in which the poet 
gives strong expression to his keen disappointment at the monarch’s 
niggardliness in the matter of presents to visitors. But the king seems to 
have made amends later, and the poet received for the ninth decad 
32,000 kaifam, besides houses, lands, and jewels and vessels, which the 
king bestowed on him without his knowledge. 

Few achievements of this king are recorded in the body of the decad, 
for it devotes itself in part to a recital of the deeds of Ilanjeral’s ancestors, 
historical as well as legendary (88, 90); a remote ancestor named Manda- 
ran and a generalised account of his heroism in war find a place in the 
second of these recitals (90, //. 1-13). For the rest, the poems are varia- 
tions on well-worn themes, the heroism and liberality of the patron. Thus 
he is advised to abstain from war for the good of his sleepless enemies, 
his queen, and himself (81); the poet goes to see him in camp and praises 
his victories saluting him with the high-sounding title Nilandaru-tiruvin- 
Nediyon which identifies him with Vishnu (82); the king’s friends are 
happy when he marches forth to war, but not his enemies (83) ; he was the 
Lord of Puhyar, and Poraiyan of the golden chariot (84). He fought the 
Chola forces once with great success; we learn (85) that the abandoned 
spears of his enemies outnumbered the villages presented to Kapilar by 
Selvakkadurigd — another eulogy of IlanjeraFs ancestors. The poet says 
(86) that having heard of his prowess in war, he once thought that the king 
was a fierce hot-tempered lord, but found him in fact cooler than the 
waters of the river Vani, i.e. the Anporundam flowing near Karuvur, 



540 


SOUTH INDIA II 


according to the old lexicon Pingalandai ; again, he exhorts a songstress to 
go to the king who, being sweeter than the sugar-cane carried by the 
freshets of the river, would bestow rich jewels on her (87) ; when recount- 
ing the achievements of the line, praising the liberality and the luxurious 
life of the monarch, and wishing him a long life (88) the poet addresses 
him as the Lord of the Kongar, and war-leader of the people of Tondi. 
The excellence and justice of his rule, its beneficent results, and the regula- 
rity of the seasons form the theme of the penultimate poem (89) ; in the 
last poem (90), one of the longest in the whole collection, not only are 
Mandaran of ancient fame and several achievements of the other kings 
of the line recalled, but Ilanjeral himself is addressed as Lord of Kongar, 
chief of the Kuttuvar, armour of the Puliyar, war-leader of the people of 
Marandai, and so on; the poet institutes a comparison between the quali- 
ties of his queen and the excellences of the Chola country watered by the 
Kaviri, and one wonders if she was indeed a Chola princess. 

In the padigam occur some new facts. The king fought a battle against 
‘the two big kings’, i.e. Pandya and Chola, and against Vichchi; he mas- 
tered five stone fortresses surrounded by dense forests, defeated the ‘big 
Chola’ who ruled at Potti and the young Palaiyan Maran, and brought 
to the ancient city of Vanji much booty captured in these campaigns. 
Vichchi and Palaiyan Maran are names we have already met; and the 
epithet ‘young {ilamy applied to the latter clearly implies that a son and 
heir apparent of an elder Palaiyan Maran is signified, and this may 
be true of Vichchi also. But the occasions on which Ijanjeral fought 
these wars and how he won the victory he claims against the Pandya 
and the Chola are by no means clear. Ilanjeral worshipped the gods 
with proper mantras, and made his minister Maiyur Kilan excel his puro- 
hit in righteous conduct; he also consecrated in his capital the strong 
bhutas that were the guardians of the big squares of the city, performed 
a proper santi (propitiation) for them and thus benefited his people. 
It may be recalled that Ilanjeral’s maternal grandfather, Anduvan, was 
a Maiyur Kilan, and it seems possible that the righteous minister of 
Ilanjeral was an otherwise unknown maternal uncle of his. 

The mention of the Vani river (86) in this decad may perhaps be regar- 
ded as indicating that Karuvur was the real Chera capital, Vanji. The 
discovery of Roman coins in considerable numbers in the neighbourhood, 
and the evidence of Ptolemy that Korura was the Chera capital confirm 
this identification. This is also supported by the verse ( Puram 13) stating 
that the Chola prince of Uraiyur was carried into Karur (Vanji) by an 
elephant which had run amok. The location of Vanji has been the subject 
of much debate, and some have argued for its location on the west coast 
in the Cochin part of Travancore-Cochin State. 

We have now completed the review of the Chera monarchs of the 
Padirruppattu, their achievements and their chief contemporaries, princes, 
as well as poets. One more prominent Chera ruler remains to be noti- 
ced, and it has been plausibly surmised that he may well have been the 



KARIKALA 


541 


hero of the missing last decad of the Ten Tens. He was a contemporary 
of Talaiy Siangan ttu-chcheru-venra Nedunjeliyan, who is said to have 
taken him captive in a battle, and hence we may assign to him 
a date round about a.d. 210. His full name was Kochcheraman Yanai- 
kkatchey Mandaranjeral Irumporai, and this expression is explained by 
Parimelalagar (on Rural 355) as comprising five members — Ko indicating 
the royal caste, Cheraman the dynasty, Yanaikkan (elephant -look) a 
description of a personal feature, Sey the personal name ( iyarpeyar ), and 
Mandaranjeral Irumporai, a special title. Porundil Ilangiranar ( Puram 53) 
refers to this king’s victories, and regrets the absence of a poet of Kapilar’s 
calibre at his court. Kurungoliyur Kilar has three poems on this Chera ; 
in one {Puram 17) the poet expressly refers to the imprisonment of the 
king by the Pandya, the intrigues of his foes at home, and his final 
success in regaining his throne by force after his escape from the hostile 
prison ; the two other poems (ibid. 20, 22) are in general praise of 
Sey’s good rule and liberality. One other poet, Kudalur Kilar, has four 
songs referring to this monarch, three in Kurundogai (166, 167 and 214), 
one of which says that Marandai belonged to him, and the fourth in 
Purananuru (229) lamenting the demise of the monarch and recounting 
the omens that foreboded it. 

CHOLAS, P ANDY AS AND OTHERS 

Karikala Chola, c. a. d. 190, is the next prominent figure to claim our 
attention, and our study of the relative chronology of the age has led us 
to suggest for him a date towards the close of the second century A. d. 
We learn from Porunar-arruppadai (/. 130) that he was the son of Ilanjet- 
chenni, (owner) of many beautiful chariots ( uruvappahrer ) ; to whom we 
may assign a date about a. d. 165. IJanjetchenni has been celebrated in 
song by Paranar who vividly describes the sufferings of the lands and 
rulers that turned hostile to him {Puram 4), and by Perungunrur Kilar 
{Puram 266). 

Karikala means ‘the man with the charred leg’, and the name perpetua- 
ted the memory of an accident in the early years of the prince’s life. 1 Other 
explanations were invented for the name later, and it was taken to be a 
compound word in Sanskrit meaning ‘Death to Kali’ or ‘Death to the 
(enemies’) elephants’ ! As a youth he was deprived of his birthright and 
imprisoned by his enemies. The daring manner in which he effected his 
escape and established himself on the throne is well portrayed by the 
author of Pattinappalai {II. 220-8). One of Karikala’s early achievements 
was his victory in a great battle at Venni, modern Kovil Venni, 
fifteen miles to the east of Tanjore. Paranar says that in this battle 
eleven velir and kings lost their war-drums. Mudattamakkanniyar 
{Porunar. 1. 146) records that the two great Pandya and Chera kings lost 
their glory in this fight. Kalattalaiyar has a poem {Puram 65) addressed 
to Perunjeral Adan, the Chera opponent of Karikala, who was wounded 
1 Verse 3 at the end of Poriuwarruppadai 



542 


SOUTH INDIA H 


in the back and out of shame starved himself to death sword in hand ; 
and the poetess Vennikkuyattiyar, who was a native of Venni and a friend 
of Karikala, sings {Puram 66) that the king who committed suicide 
out of shame for the wound in his back was in no way inferior to the 
glorious victor of Vennipparandalai. In this poem Karikala is addressed 
as the descendant of the king (not named) who compelled the wind to serve 
him when he sailed his ships on the wide ocean, a legend significant of 
the early maritime enterprise of the Cholas. Lastly, Serai Adan’s sui- 
cide so moved the hearts of many learned men ( sanror ) that they made up 
their minds to follow him in his death ( Aham 55). Venni was thus a great 
battle and the turning-point in the career of Karikala ; he succeeded in 
breaking up a widespread confederacy raised against him. 

Another battle was fought by Karikala at Vahaipparandalai, meaning 
field of Victory, in which, according to Parartar ( Aham 125), nine minor 
chieftains lost their umbrellas and had to submit to Karikala. Neither 
the cause of this battle nor the identity of the enemies can be traced now. 
The poet of the Pattinappalai fully describes (//. 228-82) the destruction 
carried by Karikala’s forces into his enemies’ territory and the awe inspi- 
red by his deeds of valour. He sums up the results of his campaigns 
thus : ‘the numerous Oliyar submitted to him, the ancient Aruvalar 
carried out his behests, the northerners lost splendour, and the wester- 
ners were depressed ; conscious of the might of his large army ready 
to shatter the fortresses of enemy kings, Karikala turned his flushed look 
of anger against the Pandya, whose strength gave way ; the line of low 
herdsmen was brought to an end, and the family of Irungovel uprooted.’ 
The Aruvalar were the people of Aruvanad, the lower valiey of the Pennar, 
just north ot the Kaver! delta country. 1 Nakkirar {Aham 141) speaks 
of Idaiyaru of Karikala, victorious in war, who prevented a migration 
of population from his land by offering them inducements to stay (selkutii 
nirutta). 

Karikala’s wars thus secured him a sort of hegemony among the 
crowned kings of the Tamil country and a slight extension of the terri- 
tory under his direct rule. The description of Kavirippumpattinam and 
its foreshore, which takes up much of the Pattinappalai, gives a vivid idea 
of the state of industry and commerce under Karikala, who also promoted 
the reclamation and settlement of forest land, and added to the prospe- 
rity of the country by multiplying irrigation tanks. That the king was 
a good liver and enjoyed the fine things of life including the society of 
women and children, and that he was a follower of the Vedic religion and 
performed sacrifices, are seen clearly from the poems. Karungulal 
Adanar {Puram 7) vividly portrays Karikala’s destruction of enemy 


The significance of Aruva evidently 
varied at different times ; and once 
the name applied to the east 
coast districts of S. Arcot, Chingle- 
put, N. Arcot and probably Nellore. 
It then bordered on the Telugu 


country and hence the Telugus called 
the Tamils ‘Aruvar'. It was also the 
Dravida of northern writers and Hiuan 
Tsang. — P.T. Srinivasa Iyengar, History 
of the Tamils, pp. 151, 318; N. Venkata- 
ramanayya, Andhrulu Charitra, pp. 9-10- 



ILANDIRAIYAN 


543 


territory; and (ibid. 224) laments his death, recalling his heroism, love and 
liberality, and his performance of Vedic sacrifices, particularly the garu- 
dachayana, and mentions that his queens shed their jewels and ornaments 
after the demise of their lord. 

In later times Karikala became the centre of many legends found recor- 
ded in the Silappadikaram and in inscriptions and literary works of the 
eleventh and twelfth centuries. They attribute to him the conquest of 
the whole of India up to the Himalayas, and the raising of the flood banks 
of the Kaveri with the aid of subordinate kings and feudatories, among 
whom was a Trinetra punished for his contumacy by Karikala ; but we 
need not pursue the legends here in detail. 1 The celebrated scholiast Nach- 
chinarkkiniyar has recorded what is probably a correct tradition, that 
Karikala married a velir girl from Nangur, 2 a place celebrated in the 
hymns of Tirumangai Alvar for the heroism of its warriors. More open to 
suspicion is the story about Karikala’s daughter Adi Mandi which appears 
in its full-fledged form first in the Silappadikaram ; 3 according to this 
account she lost her husband, a Chera prince named Attan Atti, who was 
drowned in the Kaveri, but subsequently, by the power of her chastity, 
she brought him back to life. The facts recorded in earlier poems are, 
however, altogether different. In one poem ( Aham 376) Paranar states that 
while Atti was bathing in the port of Kalar, his ornaments and clothes 
(ani) were carried away by the stream of the river Kaveri, and this occur- 
red before the eyes of Karikala ; in another poem (ibid. 222) the same poet 
states that the Kaveri carried off Attan Atti himself as he was bathing in 
Kalar, and that Marudi, a friend of his wife Adi Mandi, entered the sea to 
rescue him, but was drowned and thereby attained fame; in a third poem 
(ibid. 236) Paranar describes the lament of Adi Mandi for Attan Atti after 
she lost him, and says that she went about asking for her husband in every 
country and town she visited in the course of her quest ; the same subject 
is mentioned again briefly in two other poems of Paranar (ibid. 396 and 76). 
In the last of these (76) Adi Mandi's husband is called suriyalamporunan 
i.e. a dancer. Vellivldi, a poetess who too had the misfortune to 
lose her husband, refers to the similar case of Adi Mandi in a poem of 
hers (ibid. 45). And in the Kurundogai there is a song of Adi Mandi her- 
self ( Kurun . 31) in which she calls herself a dancing-girl ( adukalamagal ) 
and her husband likewise a dancer ( adukala magari). There can be little 
doubt that as Dr. Swaminatha Aiyar has observed both these early poems 
and the Silappadikaram refer to one and the same incident ; but how a 
dancing-girl and her husband, who afforded entertainment to Karikala 
became metamorphosed into his daughter and her Chera spouse is much 
more than history can explain ! 

Tondaiman llandiraiyan , c. a. d. 190, who ruled at Kanchl, was a contem- 
porary of Karikala as he is also celebrated in the Perumbanarruppadai by 

1 K. A. N. Sastri, Studies in Cola 2 Tolkappiyam, Poru], Ahat. 30 

History ii 3 xxi. //. 11 /. and n. 



544 


SOUTH INDIA II 


the poet of the Pattinappalai, Kadiyalur Uruttirangannanar. Ilandiraiyan 
was a descendant of Vishnu in the family given by the waves of the sea, i.e. 
the tiraiyar {ll . 28-31). There is no hint anywhere of his relation to Karikala 
or of his political subordination to the Chola power. Neither can we say 
if it was to him or to some other member of his family that Auvaiyar went 
as Adigaman’s ambassador. Ilandiraiyan was himself a poet, and there are 
extant four of his songs, one ( Puram 185) being on the important role of 
the personal character of the king in the promotion of good rule, harmony, 
and happiness in the kingdom. The three other songs are in the Narrinai 
(94, 99 and 106). 

Talaiyalanganattu-chcheru-venra Nedunjeliyan : c. a.d. 215. The long 
attribute standing before the name of the king means ‘who won the vic- 
tory in the battle of Talaiyalanganam’, and that battle occupies in the career 
of Nedunjeliyan the same place as Venni in the life of Karikala Chola. 
This Pandya king, himself a poet, was celebrated, among others, by the 
two great poets Mangudi Marudan alias Mangudi Kilar, and Nakkirar, 
each contributing a poem to the Pattuppattu besides minor pieces in the 
Puram and A ham collections. 

In the Maduraikkahji of Mangudi Marudan are mentioned two kings 
among the predecessors of Nedunjeliyan. These are: first, Nediyon (/.61) 
identified by Nachchinarkkiniyar with Vadimbalamba Ninravan, almost 
a mythical figure whose achievements find a place in the ‘Sacred Sports’ 
of Siva at Madurai and among the traditions of Pandyan kings enumerated 
in the Velvikudi and Sinnamanur plates. He is said to have brought the 
Pahruli river into existence ( Puram 9) and organised the worship of the 
sea. The other is Palsalai Mudukudumi (/. 759), no doubt the same as 
the earliest Pandya king mentioned in the Velvikudi grant. He is a more 
tangible figure than Nediyon, being praised in five short poems by three 
poets. 1 One of them ( Puram 12) refers to his foreign conquests as the 
foundation for his liberality, and another (ibid. 15) contains a shocking 
description of the way he treated conquered territory by ploughing it with 
white-mouthed asses, and mentions the many sacrifices he performed. 
The king was known as Palyagasalai-Mudukudumip-Peruvaludi i.e. the 
great Pandya Mudukudumi of the many sacrificial halls. It is not possi- 
ble to say what distance in time separated these two kings from each other 
or from their successors. 

We may note in passing another Nedunjeliyan distinguished by the 
epithet Ariyappadaikadanda, ‘who won a victory against an Aryan (North 
Indian) army.’ He must also have been among the predecessors of the 
victor of Talaiyalanganam; in his reign occurred the tragedy of Kovalan’s 
death at Madurai, and he died of a broken heart when the innocence of 
Kovalan whom he had rashly sentenced to death was proved up to the 
hilt by Kannagi. There is a short poem ascribed to him {Puram 183) 
which puts learning above birth and caste. 

1 Nepimaiyar, Puram 9, 12, 15; Nedumpalliyattanar, ibid. 64, and Kari Kilar, ibid 6. 



NEDUNJELIYAN 


545 


Nedunjeliyan, victor of Talaiyalanganam, ascended the throne as a 
youth, and soon after his accession, proved himself more than equal to a 
hostile combination consisting of his two neighbouring monarchs and 
several minor chieftains. There exists a simple poem ( Puram 72) of great 
force and beauty in which the young monarch swears an oath of heroism 
and victory in the ensuing fight. Four songs of Idaikkunrur Kilar, which 
are all of that poet’s known work, throw some light on the course of 
events ; one of them ( Puram 76) extols the unique victory the king achieved 
single-handed against the combination of the two great kings and the five 
great chieftains ( velir ); the next (ibid. 77) praises the calmness and steadi- 
ness of the youthful monarch, and his freedom from exultation at his 
successes in the field; the third poem (ibid. 78) declares that the enemy 
invaded his kingdom despising his tender years and expecting an easy 
victory and large booty; but he drove them into their own country and 
inflicted a signal defeat on them; lastly (ibid. 79) the enemies of the 
Pandya appeared on the field and the Pandya went out readily to meet 
them, but the number of the enemy was large and the day was short, and 
possibly so some escaped with their lives. Another poet, Podumbil Kilar 
maganar Venkanniyar, mentions ( Narrinai 387) the camp of the Pandya 
at Alanganam, and compares his drawn sword to the streak of lighting 
before rainfall. Nakkirar ( Aham 36) gives a list of the seven opponents 
of the Pandya at Talaiyalanganam; they were Chera, Chola, Titiyan, 
Elini, Erumaiyuran, Irungovejman and Porunan. His Nedunahadai is 
also addressed to Nedunjeliyan. 

Talaiyalanganam, the scene of the decisive battle which secured his 
throne for Nedunjeliyan, has been identified with a village of almost the 
same name, Talai-yalam-kadu, eight miles north-west of Tiruvalur in the 
Tanjore District. 1 It was in this battle that Sey of the Elephant-look, the 
Chera opponent of the Pandya, was captured and imprisoned, as already 
noticed. Apart from this great victory, the only other achievement attri- 
buted to Nedunjeliyan is the conquest of the Milalaik-kurram from Evvi 
and of Mutturruk-kurram (belonging to an ancient family of velir), men- 
tioned in a poem by Mangudi Kilar ( Puram 24); in another poem 
(ibid. 26), which anticipates (//. 8-1 1) some features of the conventional 
parani of later times, the same poet describes the king’s battles as sacrifices 
of heroism in the field and refers to the real Yedic sacrifices performed by 
him, ending with the boast that even his foes were fortunate, for their 
names would ever be associated with his; in yet another poem (ibid. 372) 
he reverts to the same theme of the king’s heroism on the battle-field. 
The Maduraikkanji is of course the poet’s full-length description of Madu- 
rai and the Pandyan country under Nedunjeliyan’s rule. Here the poet 
gives expression to his wish that his patron should spread the benefits of 
his good rule over all India (//. 190-6, also 70-4), and makes particular 
mention of the farmers and traders of a place called Muduvejlilai as 

1 Madras Christian College Magazine, IX p. 117 
69 



546 


SOUTH INDIA n 


numbered among his most loyal subjects for many generations (116-24); he 
then refers to the battle of Alanganam (125-30), calls him lord of Korkai 
(/. 138) and the war-lord of the Southern Paradavar (/. 1441 — hinting that 
the people of the fishery coast formed an important section of the army, 
describes in general terms the destruction wrought by Nedunjeliyan in hos- 
tile lands, enumerates his wars of conquest (152-89), and praises his great 
qualities of loyalty to friends, heroism in war, liberality, and love of fame 
(197-206). He gives also a full description of the Madurai country and its 
products, its ports and trade, and the streets and fortifications of the capital 
city of Madurai. Mangudi Kilar also sings of a minor chieftain ( Puram 
396) Vattarru Elini Adan whom he calls liberal and famous; this chief is, 
however, not heard of elsewhere though the poet says (/. 29) that others 
besides himself have praised him. 

The poet Kalladanar addresses a poem ( Puram 23) to Nedunjeliyan 
in which he recounts the victory of Talaiyalanganam; another poem 
(ibid. 25) of his mentions the fierce fights in which the king captured the 
drums of his defeated enemies to the utter distress of their women who 
had to cut off the hair of their head, while his own spear remained victo- 
rious. Kalladanar mentions two minor chieftains as his contemporaries, 
viz. Ambar Kilan Aruvandai ( Puram 385) and Poraiyarru-Kilan (ibid. 
391). 

Another Pandyan prince celebrated by Nakkirar as a contemporary 
(Puram 56) was llavandigaippallit-tunjiya Nanmaran; the epithet means 
‘who died at IlavandigaippaHi’, perhaps a bathing-room in the palace. 
Avtir Mulangilar was a poet from the Chola country as is seen from his 
eloquent song on the sacrifices performed in that land by a learned Brah- 
min of the Kaundinya gotra, Vinnandayan of Punjarrur ( Puram 166). 
This poet once went on a visit to Nanmaran who was slow in his attentions 
to the visitor; the poet has vented his anger in a somewhat outspoken 
song of great power ( Puram 196). More fortunate was Vadamavanna- 
kkan Peri Sattan who expresses his gratitude in a song wishing that the 
king’s children may follow in his footsteps, that the king should live to 
see the growth and prosperity of his children's children, and that the poet 
himself should ever continue to be his admiring client (ibid. 198). A fine 
poem (ibid. 55) by Marudan Ilanaganar celebrates this king as the noblest 
of the three kings of the Tamil country and pronounces a benediction on 
him, after laying down some excellent precepts on the relative value of the 
use of force and justice in the administration of the state. This poet 
(ibid 52) as well as Aiyur Mudavanar (ibid. 51) sings also of the heroism 
in war of another Pandya by name Maran Vahidi, who died at Kuda- 
garam. Karikkannanar of Kavirippumpattinam has a poem exhorting 
Nanmaran to spare the guardian tree of his enemies though he might 
inflict other injuries on their lands by destroying their crops and burning 
their towns and villages (ibid. 57). This poet also celebrates (ibid. 
58) another Pandya prince Peruvaludi who died at the silver palace 
(velliyambalam) and a Chola Perundiruma Valavan who died at 



KILLI VALAVAN 


547 


Kurappajli; he compares them to Krishna and Balarama and exhorts 
them to remain firm friends, not heeding the mischief-makers who might 
seek to sow dissension between them. 

The last mentioned Chola, Kurappallittunjiya Perundiruma Valvan, 
is celebrated by a number of other poets. Maruttuvan Damodaranar 
of Uraiyur says that he and the dancing-girl accompanying him wor- 
shipped the moon many times on account of its resemblance to the white 
State umbrella of the Chola, and pays a high compliment to his ability 
as a ruler ( Puram 60). Another poet, Madalan Maduraikkumaran of 
Erichchalur, in Konadu, on the other hand, castigates him in a poem 
(ibid. 197) for his delay in honouring the visiting poet; he declares that 
it is his rule to judge of the worth of kings not by the strength of their 
forces, but by the uses to which they put their wealth and by the way 
they treat him ; he also avers that he thinks nothing of the wealth in the 
hands of the unwise as it is of no use to any one. Lastly Kovur Kilar 
(ibid. 373) states that the Chola (here called Kijli Valavan) conquered 
the Koiigar and captured Vanji after a battle fought in its precincts (/. 24). 

Now, Kovur Kilar sings of quite a number of other Chola princes 
besides some other chieftains. Kijli Valavan who died at Kulamurram is 
one of these Chola princes; the song with which Kovur Kilar interce- 
ded with the prince to save the lives of the sons of Malaiyaman Kari who 
were about to be thrown to the elephants ( Puram 46) has been noticed 
already. In another song (ibid. 41) the poet describes the unhappy and 
restless days spent by Killi’s enemies with much picturesque and imagi- 
native detail; another (ibid. 70) is a panan-arruppadai (exhortation to a 
songster to go and seek the king’s patronage) which incidentally mentions 
the town of Sirukudi belonging to the chieftain Pannan; on this chieftain 
the Chola prince himself has a song (ibid. 173) in praise of his unexampled 
liberality. 1 Lastly in yet another poem (ibid. 386) Kovur Kijar says that 
he praised the king because he prevailed even against the malign influences 
of planets like Venus. Many other poets have celebrated this king. Thus, 
Masattanar of Aduturai ( Puram 227) rebukes Death for having removed 
Killi Valavan who was feeding him so profusely (by the slaughter of troops 
in battle) and asks him who would feed him on the same scale in future. 
Alattur Kilar has three songs on the king; one (ibid. 34) is a mere expre- 
ssion of gratitude for favours received concluding with a wish for the 
king’s long life ; another (ibid. 36) refers to his siege of Karuvur, mentions 
the river An Porunai, and mildly censures the king for waging war with a 
cowardly foe who shuts himself in and does not sally forth to fight even 
when he hears the sound of axes felling his guardian tree; the last (ibid. 69) 
is a panan-arruppadai in which Urandai is said to have belonged to the 
king who gave golden flowers to the bards ( pdnar ) who visited him. Avur 


Other references to Pannan are A ham 
54 by Korrahgorranar saying that 
Pannan lived not for himself but for 
others — tanakkena vdlap-pirarkuriydlan; 


Aham 177 by Seyalur Ilampon Sattan 
Korranar on the heroism of the chief, 
and Puram 388 by Alakkar Nalar ma- 
ganar Mallanar — an obscure fragment. 



548 


SOUTH INDIA II 


Mulangilar expresses (ibid. 38) his profound gratification at being born 
and bred in the country of the Chola prince which provides all the ameni- 
tes that gods find in heaven and is superior to heaven both in the scope 
offered to the poor to approach the rich, and in the liberality of the rich, 
particularly the kings, towards visitors; in another poem (ibid. 40) he 
praises the heroism of the monarch and the fertility of his country and 
exhorts the king to be ever kind and accessible to visitors. Aiyur Muda- 
vanar has a curious song (ibid. 228) asking the potter how he could make 
an urn large enough to contain the relics of the dead king unless he had 
the earth for his wheel, and the big mountain (Meru) for mud. Tayangan- 
nanar of Erukkattur praises the liberality of the monarch and the flouri- 
shing state of Brahmanism and the performance of many Vedic sacrifices 
in his country (ibid. 397). 1 Nalliraiyanar is a poet known by only one song 
(ibid. 393) by which he solicits presents from KiJJi Valavan. The poetess 
Marokkattu Nappasalaiyar has other songs on this monarch besides 
the one (ibid. 226) already noticed in our study of Kari and his sons; she 
expatiates on his ruthlessness towards hostile countries (ibid. 37) and avers 
that he waged successful war against the Chera (ibid. 39). Lastly VeJJaik- 
kudi Naganar bestows high praise on the king’s generosity (ibid. 35) and 
has his reward in the remission of the tax-dues from some of his lands. 

Next, Kovur Kilar has a number of poems on Nalangijli, also called 
Setchenni. In one of them ( Puram 31) he says that the king was ever bent 
on war, that the Pandya and Chera followed him, and that the kings of 
Northern India were always anxious about his impending digvijaya — a 
clockwise tour of conquest round India ( valamurai ) ; in another (ibid. 32) 
the poet says ‘Let us sing his praises, for he will then give us Vanji and 
Madurai’, i.e. the wealth of the enemy capitals captured in war; and a third 
song (ibid. 33) celebrates the glory of his conquests and makes particular 
mention of the strong door of the fortresses of the Pandya country, which 
is interesting in view of references in the Ramayana and elsewhere to the 
Kapafa (door) of the Pandyas, usually regarded as the name of a city. 
Other songs of Kovur Kilar bear on a civil war between Nalangijli and 
another Chola prince NedungiJJi, possibly the same as the homonymous 
prince reputed to have died at Kariyaru; thus one song (ibid. 44) rebukes 
Nedungijli for shutting himself up in Avur while it was besieged by Mava- 
Jattan, the younger brother of Nalangijli. The poet says that NedungiJJi 
must open the gates of the fort if he claims to be virtuous ( dharmik ) or 
come into the open and fight if he claims to be brave; it was shameful that 
he did neither, but instead caused untold misery to the people of the besie- 
ged city by hiding like a coward behind the walls. Another poem (ibid. 45) 
on the siege of Uraiyur by Nalangflji himself, NedungiJJi being again the 


The same poet mentions ( Aham 149) 
a Pandya siege of Musiri followed by 
the seizure of an image; also the pepper 
trade of that port which attracted 
foreign ships that came with gold and 


returned with cargoes of pepper. In 
another song (ibid. 213) he refers to 
Vengadam of Tondafiar, bevond which 
lay the country of Vacjugar. 



SENGANAN 


549 


besieged, is more considerate and less partial ; it is addressed to both the 
princes and exhorts them to cease from so destructive a war, for whoever 
was the loser he would still be a Chola, and a war to the finish must end 
in the defeat of one side. Another poem (ibid. 47) relates to a somewhat 
piquant situation. A poet Ilandattan by name entered Uraiyur from 
Nalangilji, and was suspected by Nedungilli of being an enemy spy; 
Nedungilji was about to kill the poet when Kovur Kilar interceded wiih 
this song on the harmless and upright nature of poets, and thus saved the 
poet from Nedungijli’s wrath. Even a conventional pdnarruppadai (ibid. 
68) contains a hint of the internal dissensions which divided the royal 
family and vexed Nalangilji of Uraiyur, inducing his soldiers to rush to 
war when the occasion arose in utter disregard of omens. Two songs 
(ibid. 382 and 400) are tributes of Kovur Kilar to the liberality and the 
sacrifices of Nalangilji. 

Other poets who have celebrated Nalangilji are: Alattur Kilar who 
recalls his marches in the course of his digvijaya ( Puram 225) ; and Uraiyur 
Mudukanrian Sattanar who has four songs on him, and is not known by 
any others. In one of them (ibid. 27) he dwells on the mutability of human 
fortune and the reward for good deeds in another life, and prays that 
Nalangilli may practise liberality while his enemies may not; another 
poem (ibid. 28) contrasts his condition with that of his enemies, and a 
third song (ibid. 29) is an expression of the poet’s fervent hopes for the 
king’s wellbeing, affording incidentally some idea of his daily routine 
including his darbar ( nanmagiljrukkai ); lastly the poet describes the 
might of Nalangilli which is hidden and immeasurable, and mentions 
the lucrative maritime trade of Puhar carried on by large ships which 
entered the mouth of the river without slacking sail (ibid. 30) 

Another Chola prince, by name Ilanjetchenni, of Neydalanganal, with 
the attributes Seruppaliyerinda (conqueror of Seruppaji) and Pamujur- 
erinda (conqueror of Pamujur) is celebrated in four songs ( Puram 10, 203, 
370, 378) by a single poet who praises his good rule, liberality and heroism, 
and mentions the conquest of the two places which gave him the titles 
noted above ; one of the poems (378) contains a humorous reference to the 
monkeys sporting with the jewels dropped by SIta when she was abducted 
by Ravana. 

Senganan, the Chola monarch famed in legend for his devotion to Siva, 
figures as the victor in the battle of Por against the Chera Kanaikkal 
Irumporai; the Chera was taken prisoner and asked for drinking water 
when he was in prison, but got it rather late, and died without drinking it 
after confessing the shame of his condition in a song ( Puram 74). But 
perhaps tunjiya in the colophon to this poem should be taken to mean 
‘slept’ (or fell into a swoon) and not died, if we are to trust the colophon 
to the Kalavali, a poem of forty stanzas, in which Poygaiyar, a poet 
and a friend of the Chera, is said to have secured his release from the Chola 
prison. According to this poem, the battle was fought at Kalumalam, 
near Karuvur, the Chera capital. In later times Senganan became the 



550 


SOUTH INDIA II 


theme of many pious legends which need not be detailed here. 1 It is 
probable that Seriganan lived later than the Sangam age strictly so called. 

The last prince to be noticed is Oyman Nalliyakkodan (perhaps Oyman 
Villi Adan also belonged to his family), the ruler of Perumavilangai. He 
is the hero of the Sirupan-arruppadai by Nattattanar, one of the poems 
in the Pattuppatlu. He is also celebrated by Purattinai Nannaganar in 
three poems which are a pleasing expression of the gratitude of the poet 
to his patron and a fine exposition of the mutual relations that should 
obtain between patron and protege ( Puram 176; also 376, 379). Nalli- 
yakkodan, as already stated, may be taken to stand almost at the end of 
the Sangam age. In his day charity had dried up in the capitals of the three 
Tamil kingdoms, and all the ancient patrons of learning and the arts were 
no more ; — such at least is the testimony of Nattattanar who also says that 
Gidangil, a village near Tindivanam, Eyirpattinam — modern Markan- 
am, and Amur and Velur, also places in the South Arcot district, all lay in 
Nalliyakkodan’s territory. We may assign him to a date about a.d. 275. 

After the Sangam age, a long historical night descends on the Tamil 
country and when a new day dawns after the lapse of nearly three cen- 
turies, we find the land recovering from the disorders caused by the in- 
trusion of an obscure tribe or dynasty known by the name of Kalabhras ; 
the Pallavas and the Pandyas take the lead in the revival ; but the Cholas 
have sunk into insignificance in the Tamil land, though they have esta- 
blished flourishing branches in the Telugu country. 

A Greek farce found in a papyrus from Oxyrhynchus is supposed to 
mention the capture of a Greek lady by a chief of Malpi, a harbour near 
Udipi in S. Kanara, and to contain a bilingual dialogue, part Greek and 
part old Kannada of about the second century a.d. It is very doubtful 
if the rise of Kannada as a separate language can be dated so early and the 
suggestion has been made that the so-called Kannada words are at least 
in part Greek words deliberately distorted to produce the impression of a 
foreign speech. The question is too complicated to be pursued further 
here. 2 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIETY 


Though the literature of the Sangam age does not enable us to trace 
a connected political history of the time, it portrays the social and eco- 
nomic conditions with remarkable vividness and we shall do well to dwell 
on them a little. The first thing that strikes us is the pronounced fusion 
that had occurred between the northern or Sanskrit and the southern or 
Tamil cultures. The Tamil poets are quite at home in the entire gamut 
of the mythological, religious and philosophical notions of the Indo- 


See Colas, i, pp. 63 ff. An old commen- 
tary says that the Kalamli was addres- 
sed to Vijayalaya; if this is correct, 
the poem loses its contemporary charac- 
ter. It contains no clear reference 


to Seriganan. 

* MAR iJ? 26 ’ pp ‘ 11_21 ; JR AS. 1904, 
pp. 399-405; Journal of Egyptian 
Archaeology, xu, 1926, pp. 13-15; 
Indologica Pragensia i pp. 41-2 



CULTURAL FUSION 


551 


Aryans, and the social framework has also been considerably influenced 
by the same conceptions. The claim of the Tamil monarchs to have fed 
the armies of both sides in the Mahabharata war and the concept of the 
three-fold debt ( rinatraya ) to gods, sages and ancestors have been noticed 
already . 1 The overthrow of the hundred brothers in battle by the five, 
and the heroism and liberality of Akkura (Akrura), attached to the for- 
mer, are likewise mentioned ; 2 so also the burning of the Khandava forest 
by Arjuna and the skill of his elder brother Bhima in cookery . 3 There is 
reference to Rama’s council (of war?) held under a banyan tree in Dhanu- 
shkoti of the Pandyas and a humorous allusion to monkeys sporting with 
the jewels of Sita which she dropped when being carried off by Ravana . 4 
The sage Agastya is said to have enchanted Ravana by his music and per- 
suaded him to quit South India and put an end to his depredations there ; 
this sage was also the purohit of the Pandyas . 5 The burning of the triple 
flying fortresses of the Rakshasas by Siva; Arundhatl, the ideally chaste 
woman; the Uttarakurus, the land of perpetual enjoyment are all known 
to the authors of the Padirruppattu , 6 as also the submarine fire to which 
is compared an army laying siege to a fortress. The practice of accom- 
panying the parting guest for some distance, conventionally described as 
seven steps, is mentioned in a poem in the Ten Idylls. 7 The appearance 
of Brahma, the Creator, in the lotus springing from the navel of Vishrui 
is known . 8 Other Sanskrit ideas found in the Ten Idylls are : the growth 
of Vamana into Trivikrama ; 9 the singing of siitas and magadhas and 
vaitdlikas in royal palaces in the morning and the announcement of the 
hours of the day by persons appointed for it ; 10 the painting of the sun, 
moon and Rohini with the signs of the zodiac on canopies of oil cloth, 
the sight of which excites a woman separated from her lover ; 11 the thou- 
sand-rayed sun traversing the sky every day in a chariot drawn by seven 
horses and setting behind the astagiri ; 12 and the comparison of the moon 
and the Makha-nakshatra to a temple on a tank bund . 13 We have ins- 
tances of Sanskrit expressions being accurately rendered into Tamil. Thus 
leather sandals are described in one context as adi-pudai-aranam, obviously 
a translation of padaraksha; 14 the phrase dana-dhuram-dhara seems to be 
translated in igaich-chennugam-tangiya ; 15 to the notion of omens being 
read in the flight of birds must be traced the curious expression vayp-pul, 
lit. mouth-bird, used to indicate words of food augury ; 16 and lastly, 
Jambunada, the name of gold of the best quality, is rendered by ndvcil-odu 
peyariya pon i.e. gold which has naval ( Jambu ) in its name . 17 The evidence 
of the Purananuru is no less decisive on the fusion of cultures. Some leading 


1 Pur. 2; Padirr. 70 ll. 18-23 

2 Perumban. II. 415-7; Padirr. 14 II. 5-7 
8 Sirupdn. II. 238-41 

1 Aham 70: Pur. 378 
6 Maduraik ll. 40-2 Sinnamaniir plates 

6 31 11. 18-19; 89 l. 19; 68, 62, ll. 4-8. 

7 Porunar. 1. 166. 

8 Perumban. ll. 402-4 
s Mullai. ll. 2-3 


10 Maduraik. ll. 670-1 

11 Nedu. ll. 159-63 

12 Kurinji. ll. 215-6 

13 Pat tin. ll. 35-6 

11 Perumban. I. 69. also Pattina. 1. 265 
15 Sirupdn. ll. 113-5 
18 Mullai. 1. 18 
17 Tirumur. 1. 18 



552 


SOUTH INDIA II 


instances like Auvaiyar’s comparison of the three Tamil kings seated 
together to the three fires in a sacrificial hall have been noted already. 
Others may now be briefly mentioned. The snake is said to dread a peal 
of thunder to which the sound of the war-drum is compared . 1 Artha 
( porul ) and Kama ( inbam ) are said to follow Dharma ( aram ). 2 The story 
of Sibi rescuing a bird from a hawk by the sacrifice of his own flesh is often 
alluded to . 3 The role of the Valakhilya sages who surround the chariot 
of the sun and prevent his heat from troubling the inhabitants of the earth 
is mentioned ; 4 the idea occurs first in the Taittiriya Aranyaka. The gods 
wear garlands which do not fade, they do not wink, .and they feed on the 
flavour of viands . 5 A long arm reaching to the knee is recognized as the 
sign of a heroic warrior . 6 Krishna is said to have contended with the 
Asuras, with Kamsa in particular according to the Mahdbhashya, for the 
possession of the sun . 7 Yama with his pasa for binding dead souls , 8 the 
chakora bird with its longing for raindrops — its only food , 9 the sacri- 
ficial altar in the shape of a bird ( garuda ) for the syena sacrifice and the 
sacrificial post under the name of yupa 10 and the transformation of the 
raindrop into a pearl 11 are other ideas borrowed from Sanskrit sources. 
The employment of the mote seen in sunlight as a measure of size , 12 and of 
the terms ambal ( kumuda ) and vellam ( samudra ) to indicate very large 
arithmetical numbers 13 may also be noticed. The whole tenor of this liter- 
ature thus affords unmistakable evidence of the most friendly reception 
accorded in the Tamil country to the richand varied culture of the North 
which not only contributed to the cultural advancement of the peninsula 
of India, butcrossedthe seas to civilize and humanize the Eastern lands. 

Land, which was already measured by the ma and veli, li was abundant 
and the necessities of life plentiful. The poets are proud of their respec- 
tive countries and celebrate their fertility and excellence. The Chera 
country was noted for its buffaloes, jack-fruit trees and turmeric . 15 The 
fertility of the lands watered by the Kaveri is a recurring theme, and one 
poet affirms that the produce of the small area on which a female elephant 
could lie down was enough to feed seven tuskers . 16 The natural forest 
produce of Pari’s principality included bamboo-rice, jack-fruit, the valli 
root and honey . 17 The cultivation of millets in the same principality is 
described at some length in one poem . 18 As regards wild beasts, there are 
two references to the lion in the Padirruppattu, one to the dread of other 
animals in mountain slopes haunted by lions, and the other to the lion 
killing the tiger and fighting the elephant ; 19 but it may be doubted if they 

1 Pur. 17 end 

2 Ibid. 31 //. 1-2. 

3 Ibid. 37 ll. 5-6; 39 //. 1-3; 43 //. 4-8 

4 Ibid. 43 ll. 1-4 

5 Ibid. 62 /. 16 

6 Ibid. 90 l. 10 

7 Ibid. 174 II. 1-5 ,JRAS. 1915; pp. 840-1 

8 Ibid. 195 ll. 4-5 

9 Ibid. 198 I. 25; and Fattin. II. 3-4 

19 Ibid. 224 ll. 8-9; also 400 /. 19 


11 Ibid. 380 /. 6 

12 Padirr. 20 l. 6 

13 Ibid. 63 ll. 19-20 

14 Porunar. II. 180, 246; ma is 1/20 of a 
veli of 6. 74 acres 

15 Sirupan. ll. 41-6 
13 Pur. 40 ll. 10-11 

17 Ibid. 109 

18 Ibid. 120 ll. l-io 

18 Padirr. 12 ll. 4-6; 75 ll. 1-2 



CASTES 


553 


are based on the personal knowledge of the poets or are a mere literary 
tradition. More realistic is the reference to the sound made in the morning 
by the tiger, bear, and other animals caged in the menagerie of the royal 
palace . 1 The tiger is said to dwell in mountain caverns at a great height . 2 
The method of capturing wild elephants by trapping them in deep pits is 
mentioned . 3 Even in shallow water the crocodile is said to prevail against 
an elephant , 4 and there is a charming pen-portrait of a rabbit in three 
short lines . 5 6 

Society was organized in castes with habits and tradition of their own, 
but the population of large cities and port towns tended to be cosmopo- 
litan in its constitution. The language spoken by the people changed 
from Tamil to Vadugu in the region of the Tirupati hill, which was recog- 
nized as the boundary and called moU-peyar-tem (region where the lan- 
guage changes ). 8 A curious statement in the Purananiini seems to have 
reference to the state of society before it was aryanized; it says that there 
are no other kudis (tribes) than ‘the four’, viz. tucliyan, panan, paraiyan, 
and kadamban, and no god worthy of worship with the offering of paddy 
but the memorial stones set up in honour of heroes who fell fighting be- 
fore the tuskers of fierce enemies . 7 Elsewhere there is reference to unlet- 
tered hunters who spend the day in hunting for food and are aided by 
low-caste pulaiyar who beat their drums so hard that their strong dark 
arms turn red . 8 The shepherd with his garland of green leaves, dust- 
laden clothing, and curved lip's, and his small-headed flock of sheep are 
neatly sketched in a few lines . 9 Realistic pen-pictures of the residences 
of hunters, shepherds, and Brahmins are found in one of the Ten Idylls. 
The hunters lived in fortresses surrounded by thorny hedges ; their residen- 
ces were thatched sheds of grass, guarded by fierce dogs, and well stocked 
with bows, arrows, spears and other implements of war and of the chase . 10 
The dwellings of shepherds with their flocks of sheep, cows and buffaloes, 
their beds of straw and leather, their womenfolk engaged in churning the 
curd early in the morning and the sale of ghee and buttermilk for grain in 
the course of the day are also vividly portrayed . 11 The houses of Brah- 
mins were marked by a small shed in front where a calf was tied to one of 
the posts, and the threshold was smeared with cow-dung; they had idols 
for worship inside, and were not approached by cocks or dogs ; parrots were 
brought up as pets and repeated the Vedic chants ; the ladies of the house 
cooked fine food for offerings to the gods and to guests . 12 The Brahmins 
cultivated the Veda, performed twenty-one kinds of sacrifices, and wore 
deer-skin on such occasions. They had a relish for the meat and toddy 
served to them at the feasts held by the chieftains and princes of the land . 13 


1 Maduraik. II. 676-7 

! Pur. 52 //. 1-4, 135 ll. 21- 

3 Ibid. 17 II. 14 f. 

4 Ibid. 104 ll. 3-4 

6 Ibid. 333 ll. 1-3 

6 Aham 127 

7 Pur. 335 ll. 7-12 

70 


8 Ibid. 170 ll. 3-6 

9 Ibid. 54 ll. 10-12 

10 Perumban. II. 117-29 

11 Ibid. ll. 147-66 
19 Ibid. 297-310 

13 Pur. 166, 113 



554 


SOUTH INDIA H 


Learning was held to transcend caste, and in a song of Pandya Ariyappa- 
dai Kadanda Nedunjeliyan occurs the statement that a man of higher 
caste would gladly take lessons from a learned person even of a lower 
caste . 1 We hear of public disputations among scholars, one of them chal- 
lenging others to a discussion by hoisting a flag indicating his purpose; 
these disputations were conducted with much gesticulation of the hands . 2 
Elsewhere the life of the fishermen ( paradavar ) of Puhar or Kaveripatti- 
nam, their fishing excursions into the sea, their worship of fish-bone as 
their deity, the style of their huts and of their pastimes on the foreshore are 
described in considerable detail . 3 The large numbers of wandering 
minstrels ( panar , not the tribe mentioned earlier) and their womenfolk 
( yiralis ), who accompanied their songs with appropriate dances attended 
with gestures, formed a notable feature of social life at the courts of kings 
and chieftains ; there are numerous references to these minstrels and dan- 
seuses, their musical instruments and their ineradicable poverty which 
attracted presents — food, clothing, ornaments including flowers of gold 
and what not, from the patrons whom they visited. Worth mentioning 
is a fine little sketch by the poetess Auvaiyar of a virali with her padalai 
and her mula (types of drums), her few bangles, and, above all, her beg- 
ging-bowl which remained inverted for want of persons who would drop 
things into it . 4 Equally notable are the references to yavanas, doubtless 
Graeco-Roman merchants, sailors and others, with perhaps an admixture 
of Arabs. They are described as fierce in their appearance, wearing 
armour, whip in hand, while guarding the palace and its bedrooms 
along with other mlechchhas who wore coats and could only express them- 
selves by signs made with eyes and hands, not knowing the language of 
the country . 5 They exhilarated themselves with toddy and served as 
watchmen at night in the broad streets of Madurai . 6 A swan-shaped 
lamp shone at the mast-head of their ships; other ornamental lamps held 
by finely wrought female figures of yavana manufacture are also men- 
tioned . 7 The foreign wines imported in bottles of yavana make were 
served to kings in golden goblets by bright-looking young women . 8 

A word may be said about the poets of the period and their relations 
to their patrons. If the padigams to the Padirruppattu (already summa- 
rised) may be trusted, letters must have formed a lucrative profession; 
but the tradition recorded in these epilogues is doubtless late and exaggera- 
ted. Many of the other poems show that though the poets were frequently 
rewarded for their labours with food, drink, and raiment, besides gold, 
and sometimes even with elephants (what the poets did with these unwieldy 
animals is nowhere explained), the vast majority were evidently not 
very well off. Instances have been given already of poets venting their 
anger in song against patrons who kept them waiting too long for a present 


1 Ibid. 183 //. 8-10 

2 Pattin. 11. 169-71; Malaipadu. 1. 112 

3 Pattin. 11. 77-105 

4 Pur. 103 //. 1-4 


5 Mullai. II. 59-66 
* Nedu. 11. 29-35 

l Perumddn. 316-7; Nedu. 1. 101-3 
8 Pur. 56 11. 18-20 



THE KING 


555 


or gave a niggardly guerdon. One poet declines to accept a present offered 
to him without an interview with the patron, 1 saying that he was not 
a mercenary ( vanigap-parisilan ). Another, Peruiigunrur Kilar, has left 
a song of bitter irony against a Chera monarch who tantalized him with 
the offer of a gift that did not materialize; the poet expatiates on his penury 
and mentions the many rat-holes in the old walls of his house and the 
famished condition of his wife which unfitted her for nursing her child. 2 
Another poet, as already noted (p. 549), entered Uraiyur during a siege, and 
being suspected as an enemy spy, was about to be put to death, when 
Kovur Kilar interceded and saved him. Kovur Kilar says that, like birds 
seeking a tree with ripe fruit, poets as a rule went long distances over 
difficult country in search of generous patrons, sang their praises, and 
were pleased with any presents they got, being enabled thereby not only 
to maintain themselves but to feed their relations and friends ; their lives 
knew no fault except a little pride in the victories they won by their 
learning. 3 Some poets on the other hand became the intimate and respec- 
ted friends of their kings and patrons; of such relationships the friendship 
between Kapil ar and Pari, between Pisir Andai and Kopperunjolan, and 
between Auvaiyar and Adigaman Afiji are conspicuous instances. 

Monarchy was the prevalent form of government, and there is no hint, 
even in passing, of the non-monarchical ( aratta ) form of government fami- 
liar to many tribal states of the North. The king’s qualities are compared 
to those of the five elements-he is said to be patient like the earth, his plans 
are broadly laid like the sky, he is strong and destructive in his anger like 
the wind and fire, and cool and merciful as water to his friends. 4 He is 
asked to look after his country like a nurse tending the child in her charge 5 
— an idea put before his officers by Asoka. Strict impartiality should 
mark his conduct to his subjects. 6 He was to hold daily darbars and be 
always alert to put down the wicked and to raise up the good. 7 His duties 
were necessarily heavy, and are compared to the labour of the strong bull 
dragging salt-laden carts from the plains to the uplands; 8 he is likened 
to an expert carter, and extolled as the very life of the world, even more 
than rice and water. 9 The world follows the king in its ways, and the 
king’s life is prolonged by the good deeds of his subjects. 10 Anger, fear, 
love, lying, partiality, hastiness, and other qualities of the kind are counted 
among hindrances to good rule; good rule is promoted by knowledge of 
correct speech, economics, astrology and the Veda, and by the control of 
the senses, 11 and owes much to the assistance of the sabha. The king is 
required to maintain secrecy in counsel, to devote the day to the execution 
of his plans, and the night to a calm consideration of them 12 He is to 
make gifts with gold flowers and water, entertain guests with rich foods 

1 Ibid. 208 7 Ibid. 29 //. 5, 9; and 54 l. 3 

2 Ibid. 211. See also Sirupdn. II. 129-40 8 Ibid. 60 //. 6-9 

3 Pur. 47 » Ibid. 185; 186 

4 Pur. 2 //. 1-8, also Padir. 14 10 Padirr. 24 U. 8-9; 63 II. 18-21 

6 Pur. 5 1.1 ii Ibid. 22 It. 1-3; 21 II. 1-2 

8 Ibid. 6 l. 9. i 2 Pur. 366 //. 9-12 



556 


SOUTH INDIA II 


and fine dresses, and perform sacrifices . 1 Good rule is somehow bound 
up with the cosmic order; the rain obeys the call of a righteous king, and 
his subjects blame his government if the rain does not fall in time or water 
grows scarce or if any unnatural occurrences take place ; 2 and the agri- 
culture which depends so much on the king’s righteousness is at once the 
basis of the state and its martial strength. The traditional ideal of a 
chakravartin ruling all India as its emperor (whose golden jewelled wheel 
rolls unhindered on its aerial route in all directions) is clearly adumbrated, 
and the earth-maiden is said to lament her destiny of subjection to many 
masters like a harlot, and to long for the day when she will be the sole 
queen of a matchless emperor . 3 The same idea is treated as a fact of 
forgotten history when a poet refers to the universal rule of some unnamed 
and remote ancestors of the Chera ‘king of the elephant-look .’ 4 The 
canons of economy and convenience in tax-collection are vividly brought 
home to a king by a striking analogy : if an elephant is fed on grain reaped 
and carefully stored in advance, it will last for many days; if he is turned 
loose on a ripe corn-field, he will trample and destroy more grain than he 
manages to eat . 5 The Brahmins aided the king in the performance of 
sacrifices and the conduct of state affairs, particularly the administration 
of justice. The mark of a good king was to do nothing that would scanda- 
lize the feelings of Brahmins . 6 It was the duty of the king to prevent 
the emigration of his people by making life attractive to them, and to re- 
habilitate the subjects of defeated countries who had suffered in wais of 
conquest . 7 The obligation to ensure an abundance of grain, and to 
promote irrigation was fully realised, and a poet goes so far as to say that 
a king who brings water and land together may well be deemed the creator 
of the bodies and lives of his subjects . 8 

Justice was administered in the king’s sabha where even ancient animo- 
sities were appeased by a just award as soon as the disputants entered it . 9 
The Chola sabha of Uraiyur finds conspicuous mention as the abode of 
justice; the cancellation of the death-sentence, passed by that sabha on the 
sons of Kari, at the intercession of poet Kovur Kilar, has already been men- 
tioned . 10 Internal security was maintained, and the rule of Tondaiman 
IJandiraiyan is praised because his country was free from the robbers who 
assailed wayfarers and stripped them of their possessions ; but the factual 
value of this statement suffers much from what follows, viz. that even 
thunder, snakes, and wild animals do no harm to people . 11 More credible 
is the reference to the Maravar (robbers) who killed travellers with one 
shot from their bows and heaped stones on their dead bodies along the 
roads of the Pandya country . 12 There is a detailed description in the Ma- 
duraikkanji of the nocturnal activities of burglars in the city of Madurai 


1 Ibid. 367, 397 

2 Ibid. 35; 117 //. 6-7 

3 Ibid. 365 

1 Ibid. !7 II. 1-8 ; also Maduraik. II. 70-4 

5 Pur. 184 

6 Ibid. 26 II. 12-3 ; 43 II. 13-14 


7 Aham 141 /. 22 ; Paditr 69 /. 10 

8 Pur. 18 ll. 22-3 

9 Porunar. ll. 187-8 

10 Pur. 39 ll. 8-9 ; 46 

11 Perumban. ll. 39-44 
19 Pur. 3 li. 17 f. 



FORTIFICATION 


557 


and the rounds of the night-watch ( ur-kappalar , lit. guardians of the town) 
designed to forestall them . 1 The tiger-emblem of the Cholas is said to 
have been stuck on the front doors of the great mansions in Kaveri- 
pattinam, and on the merchandise that had passed the examination of the 
customs-officials in its port . 2 The roads were guarded by soldiers told 
off to detect the smuggling of contraband, particularly donkey-loads of 
pepper which were liable to octroi duties . 3 

Interstate relations formed the most unsatisfactory feature of ancient 
Indian politics. The acceptance of the ideal of the vijigishu, a king bent 
on aggrandizement, was its bane. It made lasting peace an utter impossi- 
bility. In one poem a Pandyan king is praised for keeping his country 
free from the foreign invader, but, at the same time for waging war against 
his two neighbours in order to secure the means of rewarding the many 
poets who sought his patronage ; 4 this may be just conventional praise, 
but the line it takes must have had some relation to facts. The notion that 
a king established his hegemony by victories won against seven neigh- 
bouring rulers and wearing a garland of their crowns has been mentioned 
in our review of Chera history; it is also mentioned in relation to 
Adigaman Afiji . 5 There is a reference, doubtless exaggerated, to the 
kings of the North living in dread of a possible expedition by the Chola 
monarch in the course of his digvijaya . 6 Two of the most recurring 
causes of warfare were cattle-lifting and the refusal to give princesses in 
marriage . 7 There are scores of inscribed stones erected in later times 
to the memory of rustic heroes who were killed in the defence of the cattle 
of the village. These are proof that the traditional method of opening 
hostilities by driving off the enemy’s cattle, was kept up in South India 
for many centuries after the Sangam age. We learn that sometimes a 
Brahmin messenger was despatched to announce the declaration of war 
to an enemy, and it was usual to make presents to Brahmins evidently to 
secure their blessings on the enterprise, before the army marched out to 
war . 8 

In the art of warfare, methods of fortification, and of assaulting and 
defending fortresses appear to have been fairly well developed. The high 
battlemented walls of fortresses, their heavy wooden doors and cross- 
bars are alluded to, as also different types like mountain-forts and sea- 
forts . 9 The walls, ditch and the towered gates of the large Pandyan 
capital Madurai, its tall mansions and broad streets and its bazaars bright 
with flags of various kinds, are described in the Maduraikkafiji . 10 The 
fortress of Kanapper had an additional fence of impenetrable forest . 11 
The sufferings of a beleaguered fortress form the subject of a poem by 


1 Maduraik. II. 635-52 also Pur. 37 /. 9 

2 Pattin. 11. 40, 120-35 

3 Perumban. 11. 80-2 

4 Pur. 42. also 201 1. 14 

5 Ibid. 99 /. 7 

6 Ibid. 31 11. 14-17; 225 //. 4-5 


7 Ibid. 257-8; 336 f. 

8 Ibid. 305 and 362. 

9 Padirr. 16 //. 1-11; 20 //. 17-19; 
22 li. 21-5; 50 11. 12-13 

10 Also Pur. 18 //. 10-12 
» Ibid. 21 'll. 1-6 



558 


SOUTH INDIA n 


Kovur Kilar . 1 The traditional four-fold army comprising chariots, 
elephants, cavalry and infantry is often mentioned , 2 and the importance 
of elephant and horse is regularly stressed . 3 Chariots were drawn by 
oxen or horses. Sword and shield were used in close combat , 4 and the 
tomaram is mentioned , 5 evidently as a missile to be thrown at the enemy 
from a distance. Body-armour made of tiger-skin for the protection of 
the body, and a cover of leather for the forearm were in use . 6 The drum 
and the conch were sounded on the battle-field . 7 

Young soldiers, particularly among the Kosar, learnt the use of weapons 
in peace-time by target-practice . 8 The summons to arms was usually 
by beat of drum , 9 and in the army the van (tusi) and the rear ( kulai ) 
were distinguished besides the flanks ( pakkam ). 10 Sometimes kings took 
vows invoking many imprecations if they should fail to secure the victory ; 
these vows incidentally throw welcome light on the ideals of good rule . 11 
Aged soldiers sometimes turned ascetics . 12 Soldiers in the field drank 
toddy, (sometimes heated), and wore garlands of flowers . 13 The war-drum 
was worshipped as a deity with loudly uttered mantras ; it was occasionally 
bathed in water, and when out of use laid on a special cot ., 14 If crows 
and kites ate the bali offered to the war-drum on the eve of battle, and if 
the tree called unnam faded, these were considered good omens of vic- 
tory . 15 Instruments of war made of steel were put in covers of tiger-skin . 16 
On the anklets worn by soldiers were pictured the scenes of their heroic 
deeds in the field . 17 The stitching of the wounds on the battle-field is 
mentioned 18 and the slain were believed to attain the ‘heaven of heroes’ 
( virasvarga ) 19 and were often honoured by the erection of memorial stones 
( nadukal ) inscribed with the details of their warlike achievements . 20 
Camp-fires were kindled to keep off the cold at night, and the posting of 
sentries in the camp at night is fully described . 21 

A military camp (kaffur i.e. an artificial town) often contained soldiers 
speaking a variety of languages , 22 and was in any case apparently an ela- 
borate affair. There is a long description of such a camp in the Mullai- 
ppattu . 23 It is said to have been as wide as the ocean; it was erected on 
enemy territory cleared from the hunters who originally occupied it. 
It was surrounded by a thorny hedge and was laid out in streets, with ele- 
phants to guard the important junctions; there were many tents, of which 
the most conspicuous was the royal pavilion decked with gaily coloured 


1 Ibid. 44 

2 Maduraik. II. 43-54; Pur. 55 II. 7-9; 63 

3 Pur. 3 ll. 7 f„ 299 //. 1-2 

4 Ibid. 4. 

5 Padirr. 54 l. 14 

6 Pur. 13 /. 2; Padirr. 19 /. 9 

7 Pur. 158 /. 1 

8 Ibid. 169 ll. 9-11 

8 Ibid. 89 ll. 7-9; 270 ll. 8-9; 279 /. 7 

10 Ibid. 88, 275 & nn. 

Ibid. 71, 72 

12 Ibid. 251-2 


13 Pur. 304//. 1-2 Padirr. ll. 1. 15 
‘‘ Padirr. 19 I. 6; 30' /. 33; Pur. 50 
15 Padirr. 30 ll. 36-9; 40 /. 17 
18 Ibid. 19 /. 4; 24. /. 2 

17 Ibid. 34 /. 2. (Commentary). 

18 Ibid. 42 ll. 1-4 
18 Ibid. 52/. 9 

10 Mdlaipcuju. ll. 384-9; Pur. 260 ll. 25 
f. ; 263-5 etc. 

!1 Padirr. 82/. 9; 84/. 5 

!S Padirr. 90 /. 30 

13 ll. 24 f. See also Pur. 22 ll. 1-25 



559 


curtains and spears' and shields, and guarded by armed women who pa- 
trolled with lights at night; there were also male guards and time-keepers 
who tended water-clocks and announced the correct time. Elsewhere 
we hear of the drum being beaten in camp at early morning and of a gno- 
mon to fix the exact time of midday . 1 The king is said to grieve at the 
thought of the war-elephants and horses wounded in fight and of the 
brave soldiers who fought to the death in loyalty to their lord . 2 Soldiers 
were rewarded by the grant of maraya (military honour or fief) and the 
enadi title for particular acts of heroism such as ‘stemming the advance of 
enemy forces single-handed like a stone dam arresting the onrush of the 
river’s flood .’ 3 Women captured in war were reduced to slavery and 
employed in places of public worship, where they were expected to bathe 
every evening and light the lamps besides sweeping the threshold and 
adorning it with flowers . 4 In a righteous war women were spared along 
with cows, Brahmins and the sick . 5 The enemy’s cattle as well as the gates 
of his fortresses were often carried off by the victor as trophies ; 6 his guar- 
dian tree was cut down and its stem converted into a war-drum , 7 the gold 
from the face-ornament ( odai ) of his elephants converted into lotus- 
flowers as a present for minstrels , 8 and his crown made into an anklet , 9 
or worn as part of a garland by the victor, as already noted. Further, the 
conquered country often suffered great destruction in the course of the 
war, not even the corn-fields being spared, and a particularly hated spot 
was ploughed with asses, and coarse grain and gram were sown on it . 10 
Death on the battle-field was considered to be the only proper end for 
kings and soldiers ; the bodies of those who died in their bed were laid on a 
couch of grass and cut with the sword by Brahmins and this was supposed 
to secure for them a place in the heaven of heroes . 11 There are many 
references to heroic mothers, proud of the warlike deeds of their sons and 
more elated on the day they fell in battle fighting the enemy’s elephants 
than on the day of their birth . 12 

Clothing usually comprised two pieces of cloth . 13 Women in high 
society used corsets and hair-paste . 14 Scissors for clipping the hair of 
the head were made of steel, and the finger-holes in them are said to have 
had the shape of a pretty woman’s ear . 15 The use of starch for stiffen- 
ing clothes was known . 18 Ornaments were worn by both sexes when they 
could afford it, and the hara of pearls on the chest, and kanaka on the 
forearm are specially alluded to . 17 Children wore a necklace of tiger’s 
teeth . 18 Grain, flesh, and fish formed the chief articles of food, with 


1 Maduraik. II. 230-32; Nedu. 11. 72-5 

8 Mullai. 11. 67-76 

3 Maduraik. II. 725-6 & rt. 

4 Pattin. 11. 246-9 

6 Pur. 9 It. 1-3 

3 Maduraik. II. 690-4 

7 A ham 347, Padirr 11 11. 12-14 

8 Pur. 126 //. 1-2 

9 Ibid. 40 11. 1-4 

10 Ibid. 15; 16; 52 11. 9-11; 57 11. 5 ff. 


392 d. 9-10 
11 Pur. 74, 93. 

“ Ibid. 86 11. 4-5; 277-9; 295; 312 

13 Ibid. 189 /. 5 

14 Aham 150 11. 2-3 ; Padirr 89 /. 16 

15 Padirr. 64 /. 9; Porunar ll. 29-30 
18 Maduraik. 1. 721 

17 Pur. 150 U. 20-1 

18 Ibid. 374 /. 9 



560 


SOUTH INDIA II 


vegetables, milk, and milk products. Grain was husked in hollows mad 
in the ground ( nila-ural ), and converted into flakes {aval)} The tender 
ness of the cooked meat is compared to the softness of carded cotton . 1 2 
Appam {apupa) or rice-cake soaked in milk was a luxury ; 3 so too was 
the flesh of tortoises and ol pigs, the latter when fattened and kept away 
from their females for a long time; so also the cooked oral fish when 
piping hot . 4 An animal roasted whole was valued for its taste . 5 Many 
references occur to toddy kept in jars and wines imported in green bottles. 
A bite of raw ginger during a potation is said to add to the enjoyment of 
the toper . 6 Toddy when kept long underground in bamboo barrels 
perceptibly improved in taste . 7 A ‘cocktail’ of toddy mixed with the 
juice of sugar-cane and cocoanut-water was known as munnir (triple- 
liquid) and was much appreciated . 8 This sketch of the food and drink 
of the age may be concluded with a poet’s account of the days he spent 
with the great Chola king Karikala : 9 

‘In his palace beautiful women decked in fine jewels and sweet smiles, 
often poured, out and filled the ever-ready goblet of gold with intoxi- 
cating liquor, unstinted as rain; thus drinking my fill, and expelling 
my fatigue and great distress, I experienced a new elation. . . In good 
time, he plied me with soft boiled legs of sheep fed on sweet grass, 
and hot meat cooked on the points of spits, in large chops which were 
cooled by being turned in the mouth from one side to the other. When 
I said I would have no more of these, he made me keep on, and gave 
me to eat sweets fashioned in varied shapes and of excellent taste. 
In this wise, entertained by the music of the sweet drum and the well- 
tuned lute of the bright-faced viraliyar, I spent many pleasant days. On 
occasions, he entreated me to eat food prepared from rice ; then I ate 
fine cooked rice which, with unbroken edges and erect like fingers, resem- 
bled the buds of the mullai (flower), together with curries sweetened 
with milk, in such quantities that they filled me up to the neck. So I stay- 
ed happily with him, and by chewing flesh day and night, the edges of my 
teeth were blunted like a ploughshare after ploughing dry land.’ 

The habit of eating betel leaves with nuts and lime was well known . Women 
are said to cease from eating betel and bathing in cold water when their 
husbands fall in battle . 10 

In summer, princes resorted to shady groves in the riverside in the com- 
pany of their friends and relatives, and they sought refuge from the heat of 
the day which was felt more intensely under a roof . 11 Boys and girls enjoy- 
ed bathing and playing together in the water, and sometimes they jumped 
into the water from the overhanging branches of trees . 1 2 In winter on the 


1 Perumban. II. 96 and 226. 

2 Pur. 125 /. 1; 393 II. 11-12 

3 Perumban. II. 377-8 

4 Ibid. II. '342-5 ; Pur 212 II. 3-4. 

5 Pur. 320 /. 13 

* Padirr 42 //. 10-12 

7 Pur.' 120 /. 12 ; 129 II. 1-2 


8 Ibid. 24 II. 10-6 

8 Porunar . II. 84-9; 102-21-trans!ated 
in Colas, i pp. 89-90 

10 Pur. 62 /. 14 

11 Padirr. 48 II. 14-8 

12 Pur. 243 



PASTIMES 


561 


other hand people shut themselves indoors, making the windows fast to 
keep out the cold wind; women used flowers sparingly, and warmed 
themselves at fires fed with fragrant wood and resin; even the strings of 
musical instruments had to be warmed against their bodies before they 
would sound the correct notes . 1 Among the fine arts there is clear 
mention of mural painting . 2 Music and dancing filled a good part of the 
spare time of men and women. Travelling troupes of dancers carried 
their yal (lute), padalai (one-sided drum), and other stringed and per- 
cussion instruments in specially made bags . 3 The dances of viralis, 
(professional dancing-girls), took place at night, and lamps with large 
flames and big oil-containers carried on stands illuminated the perfor- 
mances . 4 Different kinds of lutes like periyal, palai-yal, and sengottiyal 
are described in detail in different contexts . 5 The flute is quaintly 
called ‘a tube with dark holes made by red fire ’. 6 There is a full-length 
description of a padini, a singing woman of the panar caste, in the Porunar- 
armppadai in which Karikala is himself described as the master of the seven 
notes (of music ). 7 There were well-established conventions regarding 
the time and place proper for particular tunes . 8 The dancers made 
gestures with their hands to represent the meaning of their songs, or some- 
times simply to beat the time ( tdlam ). 9 There were mixed dances known 
as tunangai and alliyam ( halllsa ) which, as may be expected, did not fail 
to arouse misunderstandings between lovers . 10 The dancing-girls of 
Madurai are said to exert their wiles on the rich young men of the city 
making them unfaithful to their wives but to discard them when they had 
no more money to spend . 11 Mixed bathing parties are mentioned . 12 
Country women delighted to wear girdles of flowers and leaves . 13 The 
terraces of the houses of the well-to-do were used by girls for ball games, 
and games with Molucca-beans and so on . 14 Children played in the 
manram of the village either beneath a shady tree or possibly in a simple 
open shed where the village-assembly met for the transaction of public 
business . 16 The children of hunters played with toy bows and 
arrows . 16 The procession of elephants in the sheets of large cities such 
as Madurai on festive occasions was a great source of diversion to the 
citizens . 17 Old men are said to while away their time with dice . 18 Wrest- 
ling and hunting were among the more manly pastimes. There is a short 
but vivid description of a wrestling match in which a Chola prince who 
won a striking success against a professional wrestler from Amur is com- 
pared to a hungry elephant tearing down the leafy bamboo . 19 Wrestling 


1 Nedu. 11. 45-72 

2 Maduraik 1. 723 

3 Padirr. 41 11. 1-5 ; Malaipadu. 11. 1-13 

4 Padirr. 47 11. 5-6 

5 Malaipadu. II. 21-37 ; Porunar. II. 4-22 

6 Perumban. 1. 179 

7 Porunar. 11. 25-47 ; 63 

8 Pur. 149. 

9 Padirr. 61 1. 17 

10 Padirr. 52; Pur. 33 /. 17 

7 1 


11 Maduraik. 11 559-89 

12 Ibid. //. 263-6 ; Pari. 6, 20 
11 Pur. 116 //. 1-3 

14 Perumban. 11. 333-5 ; Pur. 53 11. 1-3 

15 Pur. 325 

45 bid. 324 //. 5-6 
17 Maduraik. II. 590-9 
15 Pur. 52 l. 14 
19 Ibid. 80 



562 


SOUTH INDIA n 


matches between soldiers and the open comment of partisan spectators 
on the course and issue of the contest form the subjects of other poems . 1 
The hunting of the pig and the hare with dogs and nets, and the laying of 
stone traps for tigers are also alluded to . 2 

Kings’ palaces and the mansions of rich merchants and nobles were 
built of brick and mortar, and were sometimes several storeys high. The 
Nedunalvadai gives a minute account of the building of a palace, begun 
in an auspicious hour fixed beforehand according to sastraic rules, and 
describes the luxurious style of the finished interior, including the women’s 
apartments and bedrooms. The palace was usually well guarded, open to 
friends and seekers of patronage, but unapproachable by enemies . 3 The 
dwellings of the common people were much humbler though by no means 
devoid of gaiety and happiness. We have a charming description of a 
small hut on the roadside with its live fence and open yard, from which 
the house-wives watched the salt-laden carts as they passed along the 
road . 4 Beds were made of hides or mats, and rope cots were made by 
pulaiyar who handled their needles with deftness . 5 Mills for crushing sugar- 
cane and making jaggery were common in the countryside . 6 The rich 
fed the poor in large numbers in long sheds erected for the purpose, and 
rice was spread in front of palaces 7 for crows to feed on. Silver plate 
was laid out in great profusion in royal palaces for the children of visitors 
to eat from, the visitors themselves being provided with golden dishes, 
according to the annotator . 8 Ruts were made in the thoroughfares of 
large cities by the constant running of chariots . 9 

The common people had many quaint beliefs of their own. They made 
little children wear as an amulet small necklaces consisting of replicas of 
the five weapons of Vishnu . 10 They had an elaborate procedure includ- 
ing the sticking of margosa leaves on the roof, singing songs, and applying 
collyrium and white mustard to the child, for warding off the evil machi- 
nations of pey (goblins ). 11 They read omens in the movements of birds 
( sakuna ). 12 A woman with dishevelled hair was a bad omen, to be coun- 
teracted by prayer . 13 The crow was believed to announce in advance the 
return of the absent husband to his wife . 14 The banyan tree was the 
abode of a deity, and the eclipse of the moon was the result of a snake 
eating her up . 15 The Kuravas believed that they could bring down rain 
by offering bali to their deity . 18 There is reference to a magic stick with 
which fortune-tellers were enabled to ply their trade . 17 Astrology was 
much in vogue, and people were ready to make empirical deductions from 


1 Ibid. 84, 85 

2 Perumban. 11. 106-17; Pur. 19 11. 5-6 

3 Pur. 177//. 1-5; 67//. 8-10 

1 Ibid. 116 //. 1-7 

5 Ibid. 317/. 3; 82 

6 Ibid. 322/. 7; Pattin. 11. 9-10; 
Perumban. //. 261-2 

7 Pur. 331 11. 7-9; 11-12 

8 Perumban. II. 477-8 


• Ibid. /. 397 

0 Pur 77 /. 7 

1 Ibid. 281 

2 Ibid. 20./. 18; 68/. 11 

3 Pur. 260 //. 4-5 

* Kurun. 210 



ETHICS 


563 


exceptional natural phenomena . 1 A whole poem is devoted to an account 
of the astrological portents that foreboded the death of ‘Sey of the elephant- 
look’ within seven days . 2 

Women enjoyed much freedom of movement in society and the number 
of women poets of the age is sufficient indication that they were not ex- 
cluded from the best education then available. Satl was common, parti- 
cularly among the higher martial classes, and the ideal wife was held to be 
she who mounted the funeral pyre of her husband with no more concern 
than if she was entering a tank of cool water for a bath . 3 If she was 
with child, satl was forbidden . 4 A widow’s lot was rather hard. The 
beating of the breast in mourning for the deceased, the shaving of the head, 
and the breaking of bangles are mentioned. The widow had to discard 
all ornaments including the tali, the one thing that no woman could give 
away in the lifetime of her husband . 5 She had to abstain from good 
food and to lead a life of austerity . 6 The references to widowhood in the 
poems, taken together, leave no doubt that sensitive women must have 
seen very good reason to follow their husbands in death as in life, rather 
than face the hardships and social contempt which was the widow’s fate. 

The general code of ethics was of a high standard. One poem 7 in the 
Purananuru gives sharp expression to a detached and fatalistic outlook 
on life ; but the bulk of the poems evince a keen enjoyment of life and its 
opportunities. It was the duty of householders to entertain guests, and the 
man who hides himself at the sight of a guest is held to lead a fruitless 
existence . 8 Attention is drawn to the uncertainties of fortune, and men 
are exhorted to pursue the path of good leading to abiding happiness . 9 
Even if one is unable to do active good, one should abstain from evil, as 
being the only way to win the approval of society and happiness hereafter . 10 
A true friend will stand by you in adversity, though he may be indifferent 
to you in your prosperity . 11 Patience, sympathy with the poor and in- 
digent, the employment of armed strength so as not to rouse hatred, and 
noble speech and conduct in the sabha of the king are upheld as worthy 
ideals . 12 Ingratitude, the worst sin, can never be expiated; it was deemed 
worse than even the mutilation of the udder of a cow, the destruction of a 
foetus, or the injuring of a Brahmin . 13 Family life was held in high honour 
and the wife is described as the light of the household . 14 The sanctity 
of virginity may be inferred from a quaint simile which compares an 
impregnable thorn fence round a military camp to the hair on the head 
of a virgin which no man may touch . 15 


1 Ibid. 30 II. 1-5 

2 Ibid. 229 

3 Ibid. 246 

4 Ibid. 222 

5 Ibid. 127 /. 5 

6 Ibid. 25; 62 /. 14; 224 It. 13-17; 

237 U. 10-11; 238 /. 6; 246 It. 4-9 ; 

250 It. 4-5; 253 ; 261 //. 17-9; 280 

//. 11-4 


7 Ibid. 192 

8 Ibid. 266 /. 11 

9 Ibid. 194 
19 Ibid. 195 

11 Ibid. 215 

12 Ibid. 157 

13 Ibid. 34 It. 1-6 
11 Ibid. 314 /. 1 

15 Ibid. 301 II. 2-4 



564 


SOUTH INDIA II 


Next to agriculture m all its forms including the raising of sugar-cane, 
cotton and pepper, the most important industry of the land was the pro- 
duction of cloth. Early European writers and Sanskrit sources confirm 
the truthfulness of the numerous references to the fine quality of the 
textiles produced in the Tamil country at this period. They are compared 
to the slough of the snake and to a cloud of steam; yet these muslins 
carried much fine floral work and were of different colours . 1 Silk, wool 
and other fabrics are referred to as cloth not spun by any one ( nulak - 
kalingam ). 2 Production was generally for local consumption, and only 
articles of great value in small bulk, or necessities like salt which could not 
be made everywhere, entered into trade. Much trade was carried on by 
barter; examples occur of honey and roots being exchanged for fish-oil 
and toddy, and of sugar-cane and corn-flakes (aval) for venison and 
toddy . 3 Salt merchants moved about with their families in trains of carts; 
the roads were hard, and often the merchants had to negotiate ups and 
downs and thought it necessary to carry a spare axle ( semav-achchu ) for 
every cart . 4 Pepper was carried from place to place by caravans of asses . 5 
The bazaar in big cities was a busy place with many flags (hoisted over the 
shops), plenty of cash (gold), and a number of taverns . 6 References to the 
different aspects of maritime trade are many and important. An elephant 
running amok is compared to a storm-tossed ship, and there are other re- 
ferences to shipwrecks in storms . 7 Salt, dried fish, and processed tamarind 
were conveyed in boats, evidently a reference to the coastal trade of the 
country. Foreign ships came laden with horses in the company of mer- 
chants who were eager to take the precious products of the T amil country 
in exchange for them . 8 Saliyur was an important port on the Madurai 
coast, often visited by great ships . 9 Nlrpeyarru, probably somewhere near 
Mamallapuram, was another seaport to which were brought horses from 
the west and other products from the north; this was in the territory of 
Tondaiman Ilandiraiyan . 10 Near the port was a tall lighthouse in which a 
bright lamp burnt all night. Access to the lamp was by means of a steep 
ladder not easy to climb . 11 In between Saliyur and Nlrpeyarru, lay the still 
larger emporium of Puhar or Kaverippattinam, the Khaberis of Ptolemy, 
which is described at great length in the Pattinappdlai. Large boats had 
carried white salt and returned laden with paddy in exchange, and when 
lying in harbour, they resembled a row of horses tethered in a garden . 12 
Great ships sailed straight into the harbour of Puhar without slacking 
sail , 13 a description that cannot apply at the present day to any place in the 


1 Slough of snake Porunar. II. 82-3; 
slough-like and flowered Pur. 383 II. 
9-11; like steam Perumban. 1. 469; 
red flowered muslin, Maduraik. II. 
432-3 

2 Padirr. 12 /. 21 

3 Porunar. II. 214-7 

4 Pur. 102 //. 4-5; also ibid. 84 /. 6; Siru- 
pap. 1. 55; Perumban. II. 51-65 

5 Perumban. II. 78-80 


6 Padirr. 151. 19; 68/. 10 

7 Maduraik. II. 377-9; Pur 238 II 14-5 - 

368 /. 9 ’ 

8 Maduraik. II . 317-25 

9 Ibid. II. 75-88 

19 Perumban. II. 319-21 

11 Ibid. //. 346-51 

12 Panin . II. 29-32 

13 Pur. 30 II. 10-12 



RELIGION 


565 


Tanjore delta on account of changes in the course of the Kaveri river and 
in the shape of the seaboard. The merchandise brought to the port of 
Puhar included war-horses that came by sea, bags of black pepper brought 
overland by cart, gems and gold from the northern mountain, sandal and 
agil woods from the western mountain, pearls of the southern and coral 
of the eastern sea, the produce of the Ganges basin and the Kaveri valley, 
foodstuffs from Ceylon and luxuries from Kadaram besides other rare and 
precious products . 1 Puhar was a cosmopolitan city where people from 
different countries speaking various languages lived amicably together 
and contributed to its vast and increasing wealth and prosperity . 2 Its 
merchants were not greedy cheats, but honest dealers who were content 
with a modest profit, feared wrong, spoke the truth, and gave the same 
consideration to the interests of their customers as to their own . 3 The 
ports were even more numerous on the west coast than on the east and in 
closer contact with the traders of the Roman empire. Musiri was perhaps 
the leading emporium; a song in the Purananuru 4 speaks of the sale of 
fish for paddy, of bales of pepper, and of the transport of a variety of mer- 
chandise in small boats from the large ships to the shore. Bandar and 
Kodumanam were other ports with a wealth of sea-borne imports, Bandar 
being noted for its peals, and Kodumanam for rare jewels , 5 Mention is 
made of the abundance of quartzite precious stones in the hills of the 
Chera country, and we find allusions to artisans skilled in the repair and 
refitting of ships, called here ‘the timber that swims the great ocean 
( perungadal nindiya mar am ).’ 6 

In the sphere of religion we find a mixture of practices and beliefs of 
diverse origin often jointly observed and held by the same sections of the 
people. The Vedic religion of sacrifice was followed by kings and chief- 
tains, and as we have seen, references are not lacking to the performance 
of Vedic sacrifices and to the sacrificial posts, the yupas, those of the Pan- 
dya king Mudukudumi Peruvaludi being the best known . 7 Individual Brah- 
mins maintained and regularly worshipped the three sacred fires in their 
houses, and made sacrifices and feasts for gods and guests respectively , 8 
rice, ghee and meat figuring prominently in both. Rice mixed with flesh 
was offered to crows daily in the thresholds of houses . 9 Gifts made to 
Brahmins were always accompanied by a libation of water . 10 A pantheon 
of many gods honoured with temples where public worship was offered 
to them had arisen. The worship of Vishnu with tulasi (basil) leaves, 
bells and other accompaniments is mentioned, as also the custom of de- 
votional fasting in the precincts of the temple with the object of obtaining 
the grace of Vishnu . 11 Vishnu sleeping on the coils of Ananta in Kanchi- 
puram is mentioned in the Perumbanarruppadai. 1 2 Siva as ardhanarisvara 

1 Pattin. It. 185-93 7 Pur. 15 II. 16-21 

2 Ibid. II. 216-8 8 Ibid. 2 ll. 22-3; Padirr. 21 . ll. 1-15 

3 Ibid. ll. 206-12 9 Ponmar. II. 182-4 " 

4 Pur. 343 It. 1-9 4 « Padirr. 64 1.5 

5 Padirr. 55 II. 3-4; 67 ll. 1-2; 74 ll. 5-6 11 Ibid. 31 ll. 1-10 

8 Ibid. 66 l. 18; 76 /. 4 12 Perumba/i. 1. 373 



566 


SOUTH INDIA n 


(half-man half-woman), his bull Nandi, his ganas, in fact the whole gamut 
of Saivite legends are found together in the invocatory verse of the Pura- 
nanuru. 1 Siva, Balarama, Krishna and Subrahmanya are mentioned 
together in one poem . 2 The birth of Subrahmanya from Kali, and his 
warlike achievements like the destruction of the asura called Sura are favou- 
rite themes with the poets . 3 The worship of this deity, better known as 
Murugan in Tamil, was attended by primitive dances known as velan- 
adal , 4 possibly a survival of an ancient Tamil religious fashion like the 
dances connected with the worship of Krishna as a shepherd hero. The 
reference to the worship of the deity of the forest ( kaduraikadavul ) often 
identified with Durga, may be another survival of a similar nature . 5 
Though Buddhism and Jainism must have found a footing in the land, 
there are few references to them in this literature. The mention of sra- 
vakas, the lay followers of Jainism, and of Jain monasteries in Madurai 
and of Indras in the plural are the more noteworthy pieces of evidence 
pointing to the presence of Jainism . 6 Ascetics wearing orange robes and 
carrying a tridanda ( mukkol ) are referred to . 7 The enjoyment of the plea- 
sures of life is compared to the performers of tapas (austerities) reaping 
their fruit even in this world . 8 We hear relatively little of domes- 
tic ritual. There is, however, a detailed account of pre-natal rites designed 
to ensure that the unborn child will excel in the desired directions after its 
birth . 9 There are references both to cremation and burial urns , 10 and 
to judge only from the trend of these references, cremation and burial appear 
to have been alternative modes of diposal, and the Manimekalai furnishes 
evidence that both these and other methods of disposal survived together 
up to a relatively late age, say the sixth or seventh century a.d. Archaeo- 
logical evidence points to burials of cremated remains as well as of de- 
carnated bodies. Some light on the funerary rites of the time is got from the 
references to the wife offering a pindam (rice-ball) to her dead husband 
who was supposed to eat it at the instance of a pulaiyan, before his pyre 
was kindled . 11 

In this picture of Tamil social life there are some inevitable gaps. For ins- 
tance we should like to know rather more about the institution of marriage 
than we are able to gather from the Sangam anthologies. There is in fact 
little definite information on this subject barring a reference to the tali; 
two Aham poems 12 indeed refer to the feasting of relations at a meal of rice 
mixed with black gram and flesh before the marriage, the bathing of the 
bride by four women who had their husbands and children living, the mar- 
riage pandal strewn with fresh sand, the music of the marriage drum, the 

1 Pur. 1 and the notes to it by Dr. V. S. 

Aiyar. 

2 Ibid. 56 

3 Padirr. 11 //. 4-6; Perumban II. 457-9 

4 Maduraik. ll. 611-20 

5 Porunar. ll. 52-5 

“ Maduraik. II. 475-87 ; Pur 182 ll. 1-2 

' Mullai. 11. 37-8 


9 Padirr. 74 ll. 4-17 
10 Cremation, Pur. 231, 246 ; urns ibid. 
228, 256, 364 l. 13; Padirr. 44 11. 18-23 
Pur 360 ll. 17-20 ; 363 II. 10-16 ; 249 11. 
10-14 ; 234 
19 68 ; 136 



SOCIAL HARMONY 


567 


worship of gods, and the preference for the celebration of marriage on a 
day in the bright half of the month when the moon was with Rohiru. 
The marriage was consummated the same night. We hear nothing of the 
ritual if there was any. Later works like the Tolkappiyam and the 
Kalaviyal indeed say that the Aryans introduced the ritual and ceremony of 
marriage ( karanam ); but there is no clue to the date when this happened. 
These works also mention the spontaneous coming-together of the sexes 
( kamak-kuttam ); they distinguish secret marriage ( kalavu ) from the open 
alliance contracted with the consent of parents ( karpu ); they mention also 
unrequited or unilateral love ( kaikkilai ) and improper love ( perundinai ) 
as between a youth and a woman older than himself, or a woman of differ- 
ent caste, or one otherwise unfit to marry him according to the code; 
lastly they refer to the eight forms of marriage known to the Sanskrit 
Dhcirmasastra and show great ingenuity in fitting them into the framework 
of the Tamil scheme. Though the gandharva form of marriage is easily 
equated to kalavu , the other Aryan forms do not fall into line so easily. 
And we have no data to decide how far these developments may be 
assigned to the earlier period, the Sahgam age proper with which we are 
concerned in this chapter. In spite of these lacunae in the picture of 
social life, its main features stand out clearly enough. Society consisted of 
a fairly gay crew of kings, chieftains, and nobles at the top befriended by 
Brahmins and entertained by poets, musicians, and dancers, and indulging 
in war, the chase, and the company of women. The life of the masses was 
simple but by no means devoid of joy and amusement. There was an 
abundance of the necessities of life and a reasonably brisk inland and 
maritime trade. The level of material culture was fairly high and in the 
spiritual sphere there was occurring a progressive integration of the new 
Aryan with the old pre-Aryan forms and conventions. The general 
impression left on the mind by this early Tamil literature is one of social 
harmony, general contentment, and happiness. 



Chapter XVIII 


CEYLON 
The Sources 

N o part of India has such an uninterrupted historical tradition as Ceylon 
for the period prior to the fourth century a.d. This tradition is found in 
two Pali Chronicles, the Dlpavamsa and the Mahavamsa, which give the 
story from the settlement of the Aryans to about a.d. 302, and in the Intro- 
duction to the Pali Commentary on the Vinaya Pitaka, the Samantapa- 
sadika, while other Pali commentaries based on earlier Sinhalese works 
provide evidence for a study of social conditions. There are in addition 
nearly two thousand inscriptions, many ruins of buildings, some works 
of sculpture, and a large number of coins that shed considerable light 
on the history of the island in these times. 

All this evidence, however, is insufficient to give an accurate and com- 
prehensive history of this period, showing changes in its political, insti- 
tutional, economic and social conditions. The Pali chronicles are essen- 
tially religious narratives. Unlike the Puranas they do not offer any infor- 
mation derived from royal courts or from secular sources. The Dlpa- 
vamsa is a sketchy account of the story of Theravada Buddhism with a 
sprinkling of other legends. It is a compilation of Pali verses, containing 
sometimes more than one version of the same episode, and some of its 
early chapters may go as far back as the first century b.c. The Introduc- 
tion to the Samantapasadika, which gives the story of Theravada Buddhism 
up to its arrival in Ceylon, is mainly valuable as representing an inter- 
mediate stage in the development of the tradition. It is more or less a 
translation of the Introduction to the Sinhalese commentary on the Vinaya 
Pitaka (no longer extant) which was compiled probably in the Maha- 
vihara about the first half of the first century a.d. The Mahavamsa is 
an expanded account of the story in the Dlpavamsa and is to a great extent 
the story of the Mahavihara, the most famous of the ancient Buddhist 
viharas of Anuradhapura. It was similarly based on a Sinhalese chro- 
nicle, and its early portion up to the introduction of Buddhism was probably 
written about the second half of the first century a.d. From the first cen- 
tury a.d., when the Sinhalese commentaries to the Pali canon began to 
be written down, records of important religious events in Ceylon seem to 
have been kept. The evidence in the Dlpavamsa and in the Mahavamsa 
on the whole is reliable from about the same time. 1 
Both these chronicles are set in a framework of political history. They 

1 G. C. Mendis, ‘The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon’, UCR. iv p. 1 



THE SOURCES 


569 


provide a list of kings with their regnal years, an account of their religious 
activities, and refer briefly to invasions, rebellions and usurpations. Their 
chief value, however, is to the student of social history or rather of 
Buddhism, for the main narrative deals with the story of Theravada 
Buddhism as represented by the bhikshus (monks) of that sect. 

The inscriptions with one exception 1 are lithic records, most of which 
were inscribed below the drip-ledges of caves inhabited by Buddhist 
bhikshus, and cover the period from the third century b.c. to the third 
century a.d. The cave inscriptions, with a few exceptions, can be assigned 
palaeographically to the period from the middle of the third century b.c. 
to the middle of the first century a.d. The last cave inscription that can 
be dated regnally belongs to the reign of Amandagamani (a.d. 19-29). 
The inscriptions that record grants of tanks and fields and other gifts are 
generally late, but a few may go back to the second century B.c. Though 
the number of all these inscriptions is considerable, their value is limited. 
Not one of them is dated according to any era. Nor does a single one from 
the third century B.c. to the first century a.d. give even the regnal year of 
a king. The changes of script noticeable in later times are not clearly 
marked in these four centuries. These inscriptions cannot therefore be 
definitely assigned to any time within these centuries, except for a few 
which contain the names of kings and sometimes their genealogy, and, 
with the help ol the Pali chronicles, can be placed in their appropriate 
chronological position. 

These are not the only drawbacks of epigraphical evidence. The ins- 
criptions give little material for history. Those inscribed on caves record 
briefly their donation in a sentence or two in a stereotyped form. Those 
granting lands, tanks and gifts, though they afford some idea of the 
economic conditions of the time, do not add considerably to our 
knowledge of the period. The donees in these inscriptions are always the 
Sahgha, in general, or the bhikshus of a particular vihara. The descrip- 
tions of the donors, some of which trace their genealogy up to two or three 
generations, with their titles, and their occupations, incidentally shed some 
light on the society of the day. A few of these inscriptions also contain 
information on dynastic history, kingship, its probable origin and 
growth, rules of succession and royal revenues. But they refer mainly 
to the religious activities of a few kings, such as the grants of caves, or 
endowments made to viharas. Only five inscriptions differ from these. 
Three of them are connected with events in Buddhism. The fourth refers 
to a council of Tamils. The fifth records the death of some lapidaries 
of King Mahachuli Mahatissa. 2 


1 EZ. iv p. 229 

2 1 am much indebted to Dr. L. S. Perera 
who allowed me the use of his Thesis 
on The Institutions of Ancient Ceylon 
from Inscriptions submitted for the 
Ph. D. degree of the University of 
72 


Ceylon in 1949. I am similarly in- 
debted to Mr. C. W. Nicholas who 
placed at my disposal his classified 
collection of the ancient inscriptions 
of Ceylon. 



570 


CEYLON 


Ancient monuments of this period are found in various parts of the 
island. There are innumerable caves with and without inscriptions. 
Throughout the Dry Zone are dagabas and other Buddhist buildings either 
restored or still in ruins. Some of them have inscriptions while others 
contain bricks with Sinhalese characters from which they can be roughly 
dated. The monuments are an index of the cultural attainments of the 
people. They reveal their standard of art, architecture, and sculpture 
as well as the foreign influences that affected their development. A large 
number of the tanks and canals of this period are still extant. They 
reveal the remarkable knowledge and skill attained by the ancient peoples 
and point to the extent of economic development reached at the time. 
Improvements and extensions of the monuments effected in later times 
cannot always be distinguished; it is at times difficult to fix their dates as 
new materials have been used in restoring old buildings while old material 
taken from ruined buildings has been embodied in later works. 1 

The coins that have been discovered in the island give some indication 
of the trade of Ceylon. The best known of these are the kahapanas 
mentioned in the Mahavamsa 2 and the early inscriptions. Kahapanas, 
called purapas in Sanskrit, are punch-marked coins of thin silver cut from 
a hammered sheet and clipped to the proper weight, and appear to have 
been issued by goldsmiths, merchants, or guilds. They were in use in 
North India in pre-Christian times, and some of those found in Ceylon 
may have been brought by traders who made voyages along the coast 
from the west and the east of India. But the majority seem to have come 
from South India with which Ceylon had a common coinage in ancient 
times. The puranas, though they ceased to be current in North India by 
the beginning of the Christian era, were in circulation in the South till 
about the end of the second century a.d. or even later. 3 

Another class of coins that were current in Ceylon in the early centuries 
of the Christian era were those of the Roman empire. Up to the second 
century A.D., these coins, like the kahaparias, seem to have filtered down 
from South India where they were current in large numbers. Very few 
Roman coins of the time before Nero have been found in Ceylon. Even 
those of his successors before the second century a.d. are not many. 
Not all the coins found in Ceylon were, however, imported. Some seem 
to have been minted in Ceylon as they contain the same symbols as some 
of the ancient inscriptions. Another type which cannot be traced to India 
is that containing the stamp of a maneless lion on one side and was in 
circulation under Mahasena (274-302). 4 


The chief sources for a study of the 
ancient monuments are the Memoirs 
and Reports of the Archaeological Sur- 
vey of Ceylon and The Ceylon Journal 
of Science , Sec. G. Of the Memoirs, the 
most valuable is The Stupa in Ceylon 


by S. Paranavitana. 

2 MV. xxi. 26; xxv. 99, 100; xxvii. 21; 
XXX. 18; xxxvi. 125. 

3 H. W. Codrington, Ceylon Coins and 
Currency, Colombo 1924. 

4 Ibid. p. 25 



YAKSHAS AND NAGAS 


571 


THE EARLY INHABITANTS 
1. The Vdddas 


All the early settlers of Ceylon came from India. Of these the Vaddas 
were the earliest people of whose settlement we have some definite evidence. 
A few of them still live by hunting in the jungles in the interior of the island, 
and it is most probably these primitive hunters that the Mahavamsa meant 
by the term Pulinda. 1 The other early inhabitants of Ceylon recognized 
the Pulindas to be a race distinct from themselves and they traced the 
descent of these folk to Vijaya, the leader of the Sihalas, and the yakshini 
Kuveni who is said to have been his first wife. 

Ethnological studies have shown that the Vaddas are of the same 
racial stock as the Irulas, the Malavedans, the Sholagas, and other hunting 
tribes of India. They are classed among the proto-Australoids, the doli- 
chocephalic type, but they also reveal, like the Indian tribes referred to, 
traces of a Negroid blend in their frizzly hair and low stature. The earliest 
settlers of India are said to have been negritos, who were followed by the 
proto-Australoids. There is no evidence to show whether the admixture 
in the Vaddas took place in Ceylon or in India before their arrival in this 
Island. 2 

It has been suggested that there is further evidence of the ancestors of the 
Vaddas in the considerable number of stone implements, consisting of 
chert and quartz of the Palaeolithic or Mesolithic Age, discovered in 
various parts of the island. 3 * The implements reveal that there existed in 
Ceylon in prehistoric times one oi the most highly developed quartz 
and crystal industries so far discovered. But there is no evidence to 
show when it came into existence or when it came to an end. 1 Even the 
people who used these implements probably came from India; for similar 
tools have been discovered around the valley of the Narmada and in other 
parts of Peninsular India. 5 It is possible.that the Vaddas spread over the 
Dry Zone and retreated to the mountainous districts in the south-west with 
the arrival of the later immigrants. But there is neither skeletal nor any 
other evidence to connect these implements with them. 6 

It is sometimes assumed that it was not the Vaddas but the yakshas, 
whom the Buddha is said to have expelled during his first visit, and the 
nagas, whose war he is said to have prevented during his second visit, who 
were the original inhabitants of the island. The legend of the war of Vijaya 
with the yakshas recalls a struggle between the Aryan immigrants and the 
aborigines while Pandukabhaya’s union with Chetiya before his final 


1 MV. vn. 68 

2 CJS. Sec. G. iii Parts 1 & 2; Census 

of India, i p. 444 

8 There are also some paintings in caves 
at Tantrimalai and in other parts of 

the island, but it is not certain they are 

prehistoric. See ‘ Tantrimalai ’ by John 


Still, JRASCB. xxii p. 73 ; Seligmann 
The Veddas, p. 319 
1 N. A. and H. V. V. Noone ‘The Stone 
Implements of Bandarawela’, CJS. 
m p. 1 

' PIHC. 1947, p. 179 
CJS. i p. 27 ; m p. 21 



572 


CEYLON 


struggle with his uncles tells of an alliance with a native princess. The 
nagas, it is claimed, were the ancestors of the Tamils who formed a Dravi- 
dian kingdom in the north. 1 

Such interpretations, however, will not hear criticism. The Pali com- 
mentaries of this period class yakkhas, nagas, gandhabbas and kumbhan- 
das together and refer to them as non-human beings ( amanussa ). 2 These 
represent them as beings of the first of the upper worlds while the nagas 
at times are said to inhabit also the first of the lower worlds. In any case 
the yakshas who appear in the later legends could not have played any 
part in the history of the island if the earlier story that they were expelled 
by the Buddha is accepted. Of a people called the nagas no trace has been 
found in the later chapters of the chronicles or in other records. Further, 
the early place-names of the island mentioned in the chronicles do not 
point to the existence of any civilized or semi-civilized races who spoke 
a tongue different from that of the Aryans. 3 

The remaining evidence of prehistoric settlements consists of a dol- 
men and some cists. The dolmen lies at Padavigampola in the Western 
Province, three miles to the north-west of Rambukkana. It is a stone 
chamber constructed with three upright slabs and a covering stone placed 
horizontally on them. The two longer upright slabs measure roughly 
12' by 5£' while the third is 3£' by 5£'. The covering stone measures 17' 
by 15' while the room measures 11J' by 6J'. The cists are to be seen in 
the North-Central and the Eastern Provinces, and consist of square stone 
slabs, four on the four sides and one on top. It is probable that they were 
altars connected with early yaksha cults. 4 It is not known who constructed 
these lithic chambers any more than who used the stone implements. 
Whoever built them probably came from India as similar megalithic 
tombs have been discovered in South India as well. 5 


The visits of the Buddha have no his- 
torical basis. The activities of the 
Buddha, according to the Pali Canon, 
were confined to the eastern part of 
North India. It is doubtful if the unme- 
diate followers of the Buddha even 
knew of Ceylon, as the name Tamba- 
panni by which Ceylon was first known 
in India occurs only in the later Pali 
works, the Mahciniddesa (i p. 155) 
and the Jataka (The Valahassa Jataka, 
no. 196). The stories of the subdu- 
ing of nagas on such occasions and 
the predictions made about shrines 
that would arise in the places visited 
are not peculiar to Ceylon. Like some 
Purapic legends, they seem to have 
grown around or later become asso- 
ciated with the shrines referred to 
in them (the first visit — the Mahi- 


yangana Chetiya; the second visit — 
the Rajayatana Chetiya; and the third 
visit the Kalyaiji Chetiya and others). 
I hey are the creative work of persons 
who believed in the supernormal powers 
ot the Buddha especially his power 
to see into the future and to visit any 
r l&ed. See also the ‘History 
th ~ Sangha’ by D. B. Jayatilaka in 
‘he Buddhist, Oct. 1. 1921. 

2 V ,D^fA^ nciem Ceylon, PP- 12-14, 26 
JRASCB. xxi pp. 302-28. 

In contrast to this a number of place- 
names in the Jaffna Peninsula occu- 
pied mainly by the Tamils show that 

54 167 e ° f Aryan 0dgin ' CAm 11 PP ‘ 
1 CAS. up. 96 
5 Ibid. p. 95 



LEGEND OF VIJAYA 


573 


2. The Aryans 

The next people of whose arrival we have definite evidence are the Aryans 
whose dialect developed into the modern Sinhalese language. It is not 
known to what ethnic stock they belonged, from which part of India they 
came, and what forces drove them from their homeland. Nor is there any 
definite evidence to indicate when these people first arrived in Ceylon, in 
which districts they first settled, and how they spread over it. 

To judge from the language of the early inscriptions, these people must 
have come from North India, but researches into this dialect have not 
progressed sufficiently to trace it to any definite region or even to ascertain 
with any degree of certainty whether it came from the west or the east of 
India or from both. Nor is it possible to draw any firm conclusion from 
the place-names found in the early chapters of the chronicles. The names 
are undoubtedly Aryan, but names like Ujjenl, Upatissagama and Uru- 
vela may not have been adopted until after the introduction of Buddhism. 
The society and civilization represented in the early chapters of the chro- 
nicles and in the pre-Christian inscriptions is that of North India, but 
once more we cannot fix upon any definite part of North India as the 
region whence the Aryans came to Ceylon. 

The Pali chronicles in no way help the solution of these problems. The 
coming of the Aryans is represented in them by the story of Vijaya. 
The account of Vijaya’ s father, Sihabahu, is clearly an attempt to explain 
the origin of the name Sihala and is to a great extent an adaptation of the 
Padakusalamanava Jataka. 1 Similarly the story of Vijaya’s union with 
Kuveni owes a great deal to the Valahassa Jataka, 2 which also influenced 
the story of Siihhala in the Divyavadana. 3 Many of the other details in 
these stories too can be traced to other Jatakas. 1 The story of Kuveni 
does not occur in the Dipavamsa, and the author of the Mahavamsa in 
introducing it ignored the earlier tradition that the Buddha on his first 
visit expelled all the yakshas from Ceylon and placed them on another 
island. 

The influence of the Jatakas is not the only evidence that these stories 
came into existence after the introduction of Buddhism into the island. 
Buddha, according to the Mahavamsa, prophesied the coming of Vijaya 
and entrusted him and his followers to the care of Sakka. Vijaya himself 
landed on the day of the Parinibbana (Buddha’s death). Other details, 
such as the statement that the arrow aimed at the lion’s forehead by Siha- 
bahu thrice rebounded and fell because of the affection the lion had for 
his offspring, also show the influence of Buddhist ideas. 

The date of the arrival of Vijaya was no doubt fixed on the day of the 
Parinibbana in order to connect the beginning of the history of Ceylon 


1 No. 432 

2 No. 196 

3 Ed. E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil, 


Cambridge 1886, p. 526 
* Nos. 360, 398, 422, 454, 463, 465, 546 



574 


CEYLON 


with Buddhism. No more importance can be attached to the view that 
this event took place 218 years before the accession of Asoka. This reckon- 
ing is based on the regnal years of a list of Magadha kings which, even if 
the years allotted to each king are accurately given (this is doubtful as the 
numbeis are mainly multiples of four and six), is open to serious objection 
as it places the Susunaga kings after Bimbisara, contrary to all the Indian 
evidence. 1 

The region mentioned as the original home of Vijaya and his followers 
by each of the chronicles seems to be derived from the knowledge of the 
geography and of the routes from India existing at the time the traditions 
came into being. The Dlpavamsa story, which may go as far back as the 
first century b.c., suggests, probably following the Jatakas, that they came 
from the west of India, while the Mahavamsa story, which perhaps is not 
earlier than the first century A.D., is definite that they came from the east. 

This composite legend of Vijaya is thus nothing more than the conjec- 
tures of people of a later age about their early history. It reflects the con- 
ditions of the days of early Buddhism rather than of the age of the migra- 
tion of the people whose descendants accepted Buddhism, and it is not 
safe to draw from such stories any conclusions as to the origin or the move- 
ments of the early Aryan settlers. 

It has been assumed that the Slhalas came from the west on the ground 
that they were a totemistic tribe, who must have known the lion at some 
stage, and so could have come only from the west of India. But this assump- 
tion can hardly be justified for the available evidence suggests that 
Slhala was first the name of the island and was only later applied to the 
people. In fact Slhala does not seem to have been a popular name for the 
island of for the people in pre-Christian times. The name used by One- 
sicritus, Megasthenes and the other Greeks was Taprobane, the Indian form 
of which was Tamraparni. Aioka in his inscriptions refers to Ceylon as 
Tambapamni. The name by which the island was next popularly known 
was Lanka. The term Slhala occurs in the Mahavamsa only in the story 
of Vijaya and the account of the flight of Vattagamani Abhaya. 2 

According to the chronicles the first settlements of the Aryans were made 
on the north-western coast of the island,and this may be correct This 
was the coast at which ships sailing round the coast of India would 
touch in order to take in fuel and water. 3 It was also the region near which 
pearls were obtained, and Ceylon, as attested by Megasthenes, was famous 
for pearls from very early times. It is likely that the Aryans from the north- 
west spread over the northern plain and then over the regions lying on either 
side of the hills till they reached the Wet Zone of the island. The 
inscriptions in the Aryan dialect show that in the three centuries before the 


1 G. C. Mendis, ‘The Chronology of 

the Early Pali Chronicles of Ceylon, 
UCR. v p. 39 ; E.J. Thomas, ‘Thera- 

vadin and Sarvastivadin Dates of the 


Nirvana , B. C. Law Volume i pp. 18-22 
* P1HC . Eleventh Session, 1948. p. 84 
3 Adikaram, EHB. p. 1 12 



vijaya’s successors 


575 


Christian era the northern plain, the eastern and south-eastern parts as far 
south as the Valave Ganga and the western parts as far south as the 
Kalani Ganga were inhabited, whereas the south-western region 
between these two rivers watered by the Kalani, the Gin, and the Nilvala 
Gangas and the central highlands were hardly occupied . 1 

Geographically Ceylon is a continuation of South India, the south-west 
being a projection of the Malabar region and the rest of the island of 
Coromandel. The south-west, being subject to the South-West Monsoon, 
must have been thickly wooded and more difficult to open up, while owing 
to its mountainous nature, unlike the northern and the eastern parts, it 
was less suitable for the cultivation of rice which was the chief occupation 
of the Aryan settlers. 

There is also the possibility that there were independent settlements 
from India in the east and the south-east. The symbol of the fish used by 
the early rulers of these regions (found in inscriptions at Bovattagala and 
Kottadamuhela near Kataragama, Henannegala in the Batticaloa 
district, and Kandegamakanda in eastern Tamankaduva in the North- 
Central Province) probably indicates that at first they had no connection 
with the early Anuradhapura kings . 2 They may have descended from 
leaders of independent settlers in these areas. 

The Pali chronicles give a continuous story from Vijaya to Devanam- 
piya Tissa, in whose reign Buddhism was introduced into Ceylon. But 
a critical examination of the chapters dealing with this interesting period 
reveals that they are no more historical than the story of Vijaya and that 
they owe as much to the Jatakas for their main themes as well as for their 
details. 

The story of Panduvasudeva, Abhaya, and Pandukabhaya, the rulers 
who are said to have followed Vijaya, resembles too closely the Ghata 
Jataka 3 to be considered independent of it. The account of the attempt 
of Pandukabhaya’s uncles to put him to death by killing the children of 
the place and later by killing the shepherds, of which no trace is found 
either in the Jataka or in the Dipavariisa , is reminiscent of the stories of 
Krishna. The details remind one also of other Jatakas . 4 It is probable 
that the stories grew around the shrines of Chittaraja, Kalavela, and 
Valavamukhi mentioned in the story of Pandukabhaya as they explain 
their origin. The influence of the Jatakas and the attempt to connect 
the Sinhalese royal dynasty with the Sakya clan of the Buddha show that 
these stories too arose after the introduction of Buddhism. 

The chronology of this period is of no greater value than the legends. 
As stated already, Vijaya’s arrival is placed on the day of Buddha’s death. 
The accession of Devanampiya Tissa is fixed in some accounts after the 


C. W. Nicholas: Epigraphical Map of 
Ceylon, UCR. vn p. 142 
C. W. Nicholas, ‘The Titles of Sinha- 
lese Kings as recorded in the Inscrip- 
tions of the 3rd Century b.c. to the 


3rd Century a. d.’ UCR. vn p. 239 
No. 454 

Nos. 276, 309, 398, 432, 465, 510, 
531, 539 



576 


CEYLON 


seventeenth year and in others after the eighteenth year of Asoka, a year 
before Buddhism was introduced into Ceylon. The date of the accession 
was probably fixed when the date of the introduction of Buddhism had 
already been reckoned from the date of Mahinda who is said to have 
entered the Sahgha six years after Asoka’s accession and come to Ceylon 
twelve years later. The years allotted to each reign are obviously made 
up to cover the regnal years of the Magadha kings referred to above. The 
reigns of all the kings except Vijaya are given in round numbers. Pandu- 
kabhaya is made to reign 70 years, thus living to an age of 107. Mutasiva, 
his son, who was considerably old at his accession, rules tor another 60 years. 1 2 

Thus of the kings who played an important part in Ceylon before the 
introduction of Buddhism we know nothing for certain, or we possess 
only names with which the imagination of later generations has dealt at 
will. All that we can do is to draw whatever inferences seem legitimate 
about these times from the literary works and the inscriptions of the 
subsequent period. 

The Aryans who came from India seem to have settled in Ceylon under 
the leadership of gamanis? According to two inscriptions, princes (aya) 
who were rulers of districts trace their genealogy through a king {raja) 
to a gamani. It is likely that even the rulers of Anuradhapura as well as 
those of Magama were originally gamanis, _as some of them like Uttiya, 
Dutthagamani, Saddha Tissa, Vattagamani, Amandagamani and Gajabahu 
continued to use this title even in later times. Further the form of succes- 
sion in the Sinhalese royal family (from brother to brother instead of from 
father to son) as well as the names of early kings such as Abhaya, Tissa, 
Naga, Uttiya and Asela, used also by people of higher ranks, strengthens 
the view that the kings of Ceylon rose from among these gamanis. 

After some time many of these gamanis seem to have assumed the title 
of raja. The early inscriptions of rulers, other than those of the kings 
of Anuradhapura, belong mainly to ayas who lived in various parts of 
the Island. Many of these ayas of the east and south-east trace their imme- 
diate descent to rajas. It is likely that some time before the introduction 
of Buddhism the ruler of Anuradhapura, taking advantage of his central 
position on the northern plain, extended his lordship over the kings of this 
region and then over those of the east and south-east and called himself 
maharaja. Thus by the third century B.c. the government of Ceylon by 
independent rulers had yielded to a government under a maharaja who 


1 UCR. v p. 39 

2 In the Rigveda, grama appears to have 
meant at first a horde, a wandering 
tribe or clan and gramam a leader of 
such a body. At times gramam also 
meant a ruler and was used as an epi- 
thet forManu (Rigveda x 107, 5 ; 62, 11). 
In the Brahmanas, gramam is an impor- 
tant official associated with royal cere- 
monies. In Buddhist books, as in 


Ceylon inscriptions, the term for a vil- 
lage chief is gamika. In Ceylon inscrip- 
tions gamani never occurs in this sense. 
The explanation in the Mahavamsa 
that Dutthagamani was so called becau- 
sehewas to be the chief of Magama was 
probably thought of at a time when the 
original significance of the word had 
been forgotten. See also UCR. vtt 
p. 244 



ARYAN SETTLEMENTS 


577 


continued to allow kings and princes who were once independent to con- 
trol the districts over which they claimed a right to rule . 1 

Next to the ruling class came the parumakas, several hundreds of whom 
are referred to in inscriptions found in all the inhabited parts of the island. 
They undoubtedly had a high status. One of them had a king’s daughter 
for his wife. This title was used by Brahmins as well as by high officials 
of all ranks. In a few cases women who were either wives or daughters 
of parumakas also held this title. Parumakas owned tanks and some are 
said to have enjoyed the revenues of villages, and they made gifts of tanks 
and viharas to bhikshus. They seem to have formed an upper grade of 
society and were probably a sort of landed gentry . 2 

The early inscriptions also show that there were Brahmins scattered 
over all the occupied parts of the island . 3 As in North India, they not 
only performed the duties of purohitas or ministers but also functions of 
physicians and merchants, and played an important part in the life of the 
people. The existence of Brahmins and the use in later times of names 
connected with Brahmanism show that at least a few among the early set- 
tlers followed their religion. The early settlers apparently introduced 
also other religious cults, including the cult of the yakshas. The Yaksha 
Chittaraja and the Yakshini Valavamukhi 1 referred to in the story of 
Pandukabhaya, were worshipped in North India in ancient times. 

Thus Ceylon appears to have attained a fair stage of development be- 
fore the introduction of Buddhism. The Aryans had opened up the Dry 
Zone and made their settlements in villages in almost every part of this 
area. Unlike the earlier inhabitants, these adventurers had mastered their 
environment. They had cleared the forest, opened up the country, and 
developed paddy cultivation. They had no doubt introduced the use of 
iron which was well known in North India at the time, and extracted it in 
Ceylon from ore found not far below the surface in various parts of the 
island. 

The Aryans had developed a system of government which satisfied their 
needs. The maharaja who ruled the country had his capital at Anura- 
dhapura, which was no doubt chosen because of its central position on the 
northern plain and its strategic situation on the Malvatu Oya, a river 
which flowed into the sea near the fine harbour of Mantai near Mannar. 
The most important of the princes and chiefs was the ruler of Ruhuna who 
had his capital at Magama, situated in the midst of the four rivers in the 
south-east, the Valave Ganga, the Kirinda Oya, the Manik Ganga and the 
Kumbukkan Oya. 

The people of the northern plain and of Ruhuna, linked geographically 
by the Mahavali Ganga, maintained a close contact while the common 
Aryan dialect used by all bound them further into one society. This society 


UCR. vn p. 235; See also S. Parana- 
vitana, ‘Two Royal Titles of the Early 
Sinhalese’, JRAS. 1936, p. 443 
C. W. Nicholas, ‘Some Offices and Titles 
in the F.arly Sinhalese Kingdom’, UCR. 


vn p. 121 

1 C. W. Nicholas, ‘Brahmanas in the 
Early Sinhalese Kingdom’, UCR. vni p. 
259 

‘ Jataka, 276, 432 (Assamukhi) 


73 



578 


CEYLON 


was well graded and consisted of a ruling class, an aristocracy, and the 
common people who either cultivated the land or carried on useful crafts. 

THE EARLY KINGS 

Devanampiya Tissa, according to the Pali chronicles, succeeded Muta- 
siva. The accounts of him furnished in the Mahdramsa, though not very 
different from those of the earlier kings, contain much more historical 
matter. Fortunately for a study of this period, there are a number of ins- 
criptions and ancient monuments as well as foreign literary and epigraphi- 
cal evidence with which the narratives in the chronicles can to some extent 
be checked. The chronicles lay stress upon Devanampiya Tissa’s friend- 
ship with the Mauryan emperor Asoka. Though Tissa had been just con- 
secrated king, the two monarchs are said to have been friends for a long 
time though they had not seen each other. The correspondence between 
them was begun by Devanampiya Tissa, who sent to Asoka gems and 
other precious objects which rose to the surface of the earth at his conse- 
cration owing to his merit. Asoka who had no such precious stones sent 
some gifts in return which included unguents brought by the ndgas at his 
own consecration as well as other objects (some of these are referred to in 
Jataka verses ) 1 necessary for the consecration of a king, and requested the 
ambassadors from Ceylon to consecrate Tissa once more. At the same time 
he sent also the gift of Dhamma saying that he had taken refuge in the 
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha and asking Tissa to do likewise. 

The historicity of Devanampiya Tissa there is no reason to impugn. 
He was probably the Devanampiya maharaja whose wife, according to an 
inscription at Mihintale, presented a cave to the Buddhist Sangha . 2 It 
is most likely that Asoka and Tissa were contemporaries, and that Tissa 
adopted the title of Devanampiya from Asoka. There is definite evidence 
that about this time there was communication between India and Ceylon. 
According to the Rock Edicts II and XIII of Asoka, Tambapamni was am- 
ong the countries in which Asoka arranged for the care cf men and beasts, 
the planting of medicinal herbs and the spread of the dhamma , 3 But what 
is said beyond this in the Mahavamsa it is difficult to accept. The inscrip- 
tions of Asoka do not suggest that he was concerned in any king's recon- 
secration. This seems to be one of the many attempts made in the Maha- 
vamsa to connect persons of importance in Theravada Buddhism and in 
Ceylon either with the Buddha or Asoka. The details of the Ceylon legend 
appear to show that the story grew at a time when the nature of the cor- 


1 530 Gatha 4; 538 Gatha 72 

2 UCR. vii p. 241 

3 V. A. Smith (Asoka, 3rd Ed. p. 162) ex- 
pressed the view that Tambapamni in 
Asoka’s inscriptions meant the river 
in Tirunelveli. As Prof. Rayachau- 


dhuri has shown Kualapulo a Tamba- 
pamni could not have meant ‘Ketala- 
putra as far as the river Tamraparni’, 
as this river is in Pandya which too is 
mentioned. PHAI. p. 273. 



ASELA 


579 


respondence between Asoka and Devanampiya Tissa was no longei re- 
membered. The story itself appears to have been influenced by, if not 
modelled on, a story in the Sutta Nipata commentary . 1 

According to the Mahavamsa, Devanampiya Tissa was followed by three 
of his brothers. The first of these, Uttiya, is mentioned in three inscriptions 
at Mihintale as maharaja Uti . 2 The two other kings, Mahasiva and Sura 
Tissa, are probably the princes referred to in the inscriptions discovered 
to the east and south-east of Polonnaruva. An inscription at Mutugala, 
twelve miles north-east of Dimbulagala on the other side of the Mahavali 
Ganga, refers to an Aya Siva and an inscription at Dimbulagala to an Aya 
Sura Tisa . 3 Mahasiva was probably no other than this Aya Siva as the 
Dlpavamsa too calls him Siva. With regard to Sura Tissa, the Mahavamsa 
says that before his accession to the throne he was called Suvannapinda 
Tissa and was named Sura Tissa only after he became king. It refers at 
the same time to the viharas he built on the other side of the Mahavali 
Ganga before he became king; the inscription at Dimbulagala recording 
a donation by his wife, however, refers to him as Aya Sura Tisa. Two 
other inscriptions about eight miles south-east of Mahiyangana refer to 
Raja Siva. In the second of these he is the father of an Aya Siva and 
grandfather of another. 

Sura Tissa was put to death by two Tamils, Sena and Guttaka, who ac- 
cording to the Mahavamsa were the sons of the captain of a ship trading 
in horses ( assanavika ). An inscription, in old Sinhalese in the oldest type 
of Brahmi characters, refers to a building of the Tamils in Anuradhapura, 
which seems to have been their assembly-hall . 4 The names of these men, 
engraved on the rock, like those of Sena and Guttaka, are not Tamil. 
One of them was the captain of a ship ( navika ), and it may be that he was 
the father of Sena and Guttaka. Further, the Pali chronicles do not 
ascribe this change of rulers to an invasion from without. 

The two usurpers were put to death by Asela, another brother of De- 
vanampiya Tissa. It is doubtful if so many brothers could have ruled in 
succession. Besides, if Asela were a brother of Devanampiya Tissa, it is 
not likely that Dutthagamani who killed Elara, the murderer of Asela, 
could have been the great-grandson of Asela’s brother, Mahanaga. An 
inscription at Mihintale refers to an Aya Asali, a son of Damaraja , 5 and if 


1 The righteous king Katthavahana of 
the north and the king of Benares 
were friends though they had not seen 
each other. King Kattahavahana once 
sent through his ministers some pri- 
celess garments or rugs that came into 
existence in his country. The king 

of Benares finding no such precious 
gifts in his own country sent instead 

the gifts of the dhamma saying that 

the Buddha (Kassapa), the Dhamma 

and the Sangha had appeared in the 


world. Paramattha Jotika, Vol n. 
Ed. Helmer Smith, PTS. 1917, 
p. 575. See also Rahula : Some As- 
pects of the Early History of Buddhism 
in Ceylon , (an unpublished thesis). 

2 ASCAR. 1933, paras 53 & 54 

3 CA. in pp. 4 and 211 

l JRASCB. xxv pp. 54-6. ‘Tamil House- 
holder’s Terrace, Anuradhapura’, by 
S. Paranavitana. 

5 Parker, Ancient Ceylon, p. 444 



580 


CEYLON 


Asela is the same as this Aya Asali, he could not have been a brother of 
Devanampiya Tissa. 

Elara, who put Asela to death and became king at Anuradhapura, was 
probably another Tamil of Ceylon like Sena and Guttaka. Even, if Sena 
and Guttaka ruled for twelve, and not twenty-two years , 1 2 they must have 
had a sufficiently large following to maintain themselves in power. But 
according to the Mahavaritsa, Elara was a prince from Chola. Both the 
Dipavaritsa, which does not support this statement, and the Mahavamsa, 
mention stories which show Ejara’s high sense of justice. According to 
one of the stories, he put to death his own son for killing a calf. This 
story is related also of a Chola king in the Periya-puranarii 2 and referred 
to earlier in the Tamil epics Silappadikaram and Manimekalai ; perhaps it 
got attached to Elara somehow, so that subsequently he came to be 
regarded as a Tamil from Chola. Sena and Guttaka as well as Elara seem 
to have ruled only over the northern plain. Apparently they exercised no 
control even over the region around Kalaniya, as the story of Dutthaga- 
mani assumes that there was an independent king residing there. Among 
Dutthagamani’s ancestors, Gothabhaya and Kakavanna Tissa, who were 
probably the contemporaries of the Tamil kings, are called rajas, unlike 
Mahanaga who was styled uparaja. 

Dutthagamani seems to have claimed his descent from the Anuradha- 
pura royal family. The Mahavamsa traces his descent through Kakavan- 
na Tissa, Gothabhaya, and Yatthalaya Tissa to uparaja Mahanaga, the 
brother of Devanampiya Tissa. An inscription at Kusalanakanda, a few 
miles west of Batticaloa, mentions Tisa, son of Raja Abaya, son of Uparaja 
Naga . 3 If this Tisa is Kakavanna Tissa, the father of Dutthagamani, Yatt- 
halaya Tissa has to be omitted from the list, unless he was an elder brother 
of Gothabhaya. According to the Pujavaliva, Yatthalaya Tissa ruled at 
Kalaniya and built the Kalaniya Vihara . 4 The Mahavaritsa also states that 
Dutthagamani’s mother, Viharadevi, was a daughter of King Tissa. Ac- 
cording to the Variisatthappakasini, Tissa was a grandson of Uttiya . 5 
His historicity is further supported by an unpublished inscription at Man- 
dagala in the Yala district which refers to the family of Kalaniya Tissa. 

According to the Mahavaritsa, Dutthagamani, while a young man, 
was not permitted to wage war against the Tamils. Thereupon, having 
charged his father with cowardice, he left Magama in anger, and took 
refuge in Kottamalaya, gaining for himself the name of Dutthagamani, 
the wicked Gamani. When Kakavanna Tissa died, he returned to 
Magama, but his younger brother, Tissa, who ruled over the district of 


1 Geiger, MV. (tr.) p. xxxvii 

2 JRAS. 1913, p. 529 

3 UCR. vii p. 240 

* The Piijavaliya is a religious work in 
Sinhalese prose written by the Thera 

Buddhaputta in the reign of Parakra- 
mabahu II (1234-1269). Its last chap- 


ter contains an outline of the main 
religions and historical events in Cey- 
lon. See Gunasekara, A Contribution to 
the History of Ceylon, Colombo 1895, 
p. 15 



DUTTHAGAMANI 


581 


Dighavapi, refused to acknowledge his supremacy. This led to a war 
between the two brothers, and Tissa was finally defeated. 

After this victory over his brother, Dutthagamani collected troops and 
marched from Magama to wage war against the Tamils. Passing through 
Buttala he reached Mahiyangana where he was opposed. After defeating 
his enemies he advanced, vanquishing a number of petty rulers, and then 
having crossed the Mahavali Ganga occupied Yijitanagara, which was 
near Polonnaruva. From there he marched to Anuradhapura, defeated 
Elara, and became the sole ruler of Ceylon. 

These accounts of Dutthagamani are not very much more historical 
than the account of Devanampiya Tissa. The cause of his estrangement 
from his father is not in harmony either with the story of the longings 
of Viharadevi, which definitely showed that Dutthagamani would fight 
the Tamils, or with what happened at the name-giving ceremony where 
Kakavanna Tissa took the war for granted. Besides, the explanation given 
for the name Dutthagamani cannot be taken seriously. The early inscrip- 
tions refer to Dutthagamani as Gamani Abhaya, the name given by his 
father, but one three centuries later calls him Dutakagamani . 1 This name 
is not peculiar to him, as Dutaga, another form of the same name, was 
borne by a brother of Vankanasika Tissa . 2 The Dipavamsa makes no 
reference either to the story of the exile or to the war between the two 
brothers. This probably is not an accident, as the story of the rice-feeding 
ceremony, which seems to reflect later events, takes no note of this war. 
There the two brothers took the oath that they would be friendly with 
each other for ever. 

The war with the Tamils by which he became sole ruler of Lanka is the 
chief event which stands out clearly in the account in the Mahavamsa 
and is without doubt an historical occurrence. This war is also mentioned 
in the Dipavamsa. In fact, in its main account, it refers only to this act of 
his life : ‘King Abhaya, the son of Kakavanna, who had a retinue of ten 
warriors and an elephant called Kandula, put thirty-two kings to death 
and ruled alone for twenty-four years .' 3 A Pali commentary too takes the 
war for granted and refers to it as a war against the Tamils . 4 Inscriptions 
refer to three of the warriors, Nandhimitta (Senapati Mita), Velusumana 
(Paramata Velusumana), and Phussade vaf Senapati Parumaka Pusadeva ). 5 
The stories of the warriors and of the war, unlike the legends of Vijaya and 
Pandukabhaya, are of popular origin. They show scarcely a trace of the 
influence of the Jatakas and do not seem to have been transformed much 
by the bhikshus. Thus the people too seem to have accepted the war as 
a fact and then to have created their own stories about the war and the 
warriors. 

It is not possible, however, to be certain about the details of the war. 


1 UCR. vn p. 247 

2 EZ. iv p. 215 
2 xviii 53-54 


4 Adikaram, EHB. p. 65 

5 ASCAR. 1934, para 71 (ii); 1940-45, 
p. 149 



582 


CEYLON 


The Mahavamsa, for instance, unlike the Dipavamsa, says that Dutthaga- 
mani fought against thirty-two Tamil kings, but in ieferring to them indi- 
vidually names only four besides Elara as Tamils. Also there is no reason 
why Elara should have replaced every Sinhalese chief by a Tamil when 
he had a Sinhalese general by the name of Mitta. Thus it appears that 
Dutthagamani first defeated a number of Sinhalese and Tamil chiefs (raja) 
and then fought Etara and made himself the sole ruler of the island. 

Saddha Tissa (137-119 b.c.) succeeded Dutthagamani and reigned for 
eighteen years. He was probably the Devanapiya Gamani Tisa of the 
inscriptions. 1 According to the Mahavamsa he succeeded because Duttha- 
gamani’s son, Sali, took to wife a Chandala woman. The Dipavamsa 
makes no reference to Sali, but in any case this could not har e been the 
reason , seeing that the succession in the Sinhalese royal family was from 
brother to brother and only subsequently to the sons. This legend too 
probably shows the influence of the Jatakas where the royal succession 
is from father to son. 

Saddha Tissa was lollowed by his second son Thulathana, who was 
with him at Anuradhapura. His eldest son Lanja Tissa, called Lajaka 
Tisa in inscriptions, 2 was at the time in Ruhuna, and the ministers ( amach - 
cha) with the consent of the bhikkhu-sangha at the Thuparama consecrated 
his younger brother as king. The Mahavamsa does not explain why the 
ministers acted against custom. Lanja Tissa, however, seems to have had 
others to support him, for after a month and ten days he put Thulathana 
to death and secured the throne for himself. 

Lanja Tissa (119-109 b.c.) was succeeded by the third son of Saddha 
Tissa, Khallatanaga (109-103 b.c.), His reign too was no peaceful one. 
His step-sister’s three sons plotted to kill him, but failed. 3 Later he 
was put to death by his senapati Maharattaka. A king in those days 
depended ultimately on his army for the maintenance ot his throne. Hence 
the senapati who controlled the army exercised considerable power. 
Maharattaka sought to take advantage of his position to secure the throne 
for himself, but fajjed to achieve his ambition. He was himself slain by 
Vattagamani Abhaya, the fourth son of Saddha Tissa. 

According to the Mahavamsa, Vattagamani on his accession made his 
brother’s wife Anula his queen, and adopted his brother’s son Maha- 
chulika. 4 Within six months of his accession, a Brahmin named Tissa 
rose in arms against him in Ruhuna, and with the large numbers that follow- 
ed him plundered the country. It is not known whether this rebellion had 
any connection with the events that preceded his accession. But before 
Vattagamani could deal with Tissa, seven Tamils landed with troops at 
Matota (Mantai), and according to the Mahavamsa he surrendered the 
kingship to Tissa and left him to fight the Tamils. The Tamils conquered 


l ASCAR. 1934, s. 71.iiip. ] 
Ancient Ceylon, p. 445 


1 EZ. i p. 144 

2 EZ. t p, 148 

3 Variisotthappakusini, p. 612 



ANULA 


583 


Tissa and finally defeated Vattagamani at Kolambahalaka, north of Anu- 
radhapura. Vattagamani thereupon fled to Vessagiriya forest, probably 
near modern Galgiriyava, south west of Kalavava, and then took refuge 
in the neighbouring hill-country of Malaya for fourteen years. 

In the mean time two of the Tamils returned to India. The remaining 
five ruled at Anuradhapura, each one being killed by his successor whom 
he had made his senapati. Pulahattha reigned for three years, Bahiya for 
two, Panayamara for seven years, Pilayamara for seven months and 
Dathika for two years,. It is likely that these Tamils also ruled only over 
the northern plain, for at the end of fourteen years Vattagamani left 
Malaya for Ruhuna, collected troops and marched against Dathika. He 
defeated him and reigned for another twelve years. 

The Dipavarhsa likewise alludes to the rule of the five Tamils. The 
name mara borne by two of them may indicate that they were in some 
way connected with- the Pandya royal family. A poem of Nakkirar of the 
Sangam Age refers to a Chola king who was defeated at the hands of a 
Pandya commander-in-chief called Palaiyan Maran. 1 2 Possibly there was 
some connection between him and the invaders of Ceylon. 

It is striking that the Pali commentaries ignore this Tamil invasion and 
state that Vattagamani defeated Tissa and re-ascended the throne. 8 This 
omission and the statement that Tissa was defeated by Vattagamani are 
probably due to the fact that the commentaries were written at least three 
or four generations later when these events had been partly forgotten. 
It is equally striking that the Mahavaiiisa makes no reference to the famine 
that followed the rebellion of Tissa and lasted for twelve years. Neverthe- 
less, it was doubtless due to this famine that Vattagamani lived for four- 
teen years in Malaya, where food was available, before he went to Ruhuna 
and raised troops to fight the Tamils. 

Mahachuli Mahatissa (77-63 b.c.) according to the Pali chronicles suc- 
ceeded Vattagamani, though an inscription appears to refer to a son of 
Lanja Tissa who was a maharaja . 3 During his rule Mahanaga, the son 
of Vattagamani, lived as a rebel and received the name of Choranaga 
(63-51 b.c.). He may be identified with the Mahanaga who according 
to a commentary, went abroad with his brother and became king after his 
return. 4 At Mahachuli’s death he became king and reigned for twelve 
years. 

Choranaga’s wife, Anula, receives more attention in the Mahavaiiisa 
than her husband. She had a career which was different but no less re- 
markable. She poisoned her husband as well as the next king, Tissa, after 
he had reigned for three years. She then kept Tissa’s brother Kutakanna 
from the throne, and made four of her paramours king in turn, whom she 
destroyed by poison, one by one. The first of these was Siva, a military 


1 K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, The Cojas i. 3 EZ. i p. 148 

p. 53 4 Samantapasadika u p. 473 

2 Adikaram, EHB. pp. 73-6 



584 


CEYLON 


official who was the chief guard of the palace gate. He reigned for a year 
and two months. The second was Vatuka, a Tamil craftsman of Anura- 
dhapura, who ruled also for fourteen months. The third was a wood- 
carrier, Tissa, who lasted for a year and a month. The last was a Tamil 
Brahmin, her purohita, Niliya, who enjoyed his throne for only six months. 
After Anula had reigned alone for four months, Kutakanna Tissa, who 
had fled and joined the Sarigha, returned with the forces he had collected, 
slew her, and ascended the throne. 

Kutakanna Tissa, usually called Kutakana Abaya in his inscriptions, 1 
was followed by his two sons, Bhatikabhaya (22 B.c.-A.D. 7) and Mahada- 
thika Mahanaga (a.d. 7-19). According to inscriptions the latter was 
yuvaraja during his brother’s reign and ruled over Ruhuna. 2 

Mahadathika Mahanaga was followed by his son Amanda Gamani 
Abhaya (19-29). Once more there was dissension in the royal family and 
after he had reigned for nine years and eight months he was put to death 
by his younger brother, Kanirajanu Tissa. Kanirajanu Tissa (29-32) 
after his accession settled a dispute at the uposatha house at Chetiya- 
pabbata and the bhikshus who were displeased with his decision plotted 
to kill him. Thereupon he ordered sixty bhikshus guilty of high treason 
to be seized and flung down the precipice called Kanira at Mihintale. 3 

On the death of Kanirajanu Tissa the succession passed to the children 
of Amandagamani. Chulabhaya died after a year’s reign and was succee- 
ded by his sister SIvali. But after four months she, the second queen to 
rule over Ceylon, was dethroned by Ilanaga (36-43), the son of Amanda- 
gamani’s elder sister. 

It was natural that whenever a ruler was killed or dethroned a section 
of his subjects disapproved of the usurper. Soon after Ilanaga’ s accession, 
the Lambakarnas began to treat him with less respect than was his due, 
and so he humiliated them by setting them to work as labourers on the 
construction of a road and by appointing Chandalas as their overseers. 
The enraged Lambakarnas thereupon captured and imprisoned Ilanaga 
and carried on the government themselves. But IJanaga escaped from 
prison, fled to Mantai and sailed to South India. At the end of three years 
he returned with an army and landed at Sakkharasobbha in Ruhuna. 
After making further preparations there he marched against the Lariib- 
bakarnas and defeated them at Kapallakhanda in Hankarapitthi which 
probably lay to the south of Anuradhapura. 

Ilanaga was followed by two of his sons, Chandamukhasiva (43-52) who 
reigned for eight years and seven months, and Yasalalaka Tissa (52-60) 
who reigned for seven years and eight months. Like Kanirajanu Tissa, 
Yasalalaka Tissa too made himself king by killing his elder brother, and 
he in turn was slain by Subha (Saba), a military official who guarded the 
palace gate. 


UCR. vn p. 253 
JRASCB. xxxvi p. 63 


Vamsatthappakasini, n p. 640 



GAJABAHU 


585 


Thus came to an end a royal line which has been traced back to Deva- 
nampiya Tissa. This dynasty, according to an inscription of Kutakanna, 
regarded itself as belonging to the Devanapiyakula. 1 Later it was iden- 
tified with the Moriya clan, but there is no evidence that it bore such a 
name during this period. For want of another name this dynasty will be 
referred to henceforth as the Devanapiyakula. 

According to the Mahavamsa, Subha killed Yasalalaka Tissa by taking 
advantage of an occasion when they had exchanged their places for sport. 
Even if this story is true, the chronicle does not explain how Subha main- 
tained his power after his accession. It is probable that he secured the 
throne with the help of the Lambakarnas since he employed one of them 
as his senapati. These very Lambakarnas, however, put an end to his 
rule. Subha, who in his inscriptions does not assume the title of maha- 
raja, probably never gained control of Ruhuna; for Vasabha who served 
under his uncle, Subha’s senapati, went to Ruhuna and established himself 
there. After two years he marched to Anuradhapura with his army, and 
putting Subha to death, founded a new dynasty. 

It is not known who these Lambakarnas were. It is possible that they 
were of totemistic origin ; the name implies a hare or a goat. The high 
offices some of them held show that they were of noble birth. Also, they 
were powerful enough in the first century a.d. to imprison Ilanaga and 
carry on the government for three years. Later legends credit them with 
a nobler and more ancient origin, but these stories grew after the Lamba- 
karnas became the rulers of Ceylon. The change of dynasty made no 
difference to the system of government or to its aims and methods. It 
led only to a change of kings and perhaps of some of the high officials. 

Vasabha (67-111) was succeeded by his son Vankanasika Tissa (111- 
1 14) who had been married to a daughter of Subha by his father, probably 
to strengthen his position on the throne. According to the Pali chroni- 
cles he was succeeded by his son Gajabahukagamani (114-136). But ac- 
cording to epigraphical evidence Vankanasika Tissa had two brothers, 
Utara and Dutaga, who were both maharajas. Dutaga has left an inscrip- 
tion about twenty miles away from Anuradhapura, and it is likely he made 
this city his capital. There is no evidence of any kind to explain why they 
are not mentioned in the chronicles. If they succeeded Vankanasika 
Tissa they probably reigned for very short periods, as Vasabha himself 
reigned for forty-four years. 2 

According to the Pujavaliya, Gajabahu, learning that in his father’s 
reign some people of Ceylon had been taken captive and made to work 
on the Kaveri bund, invaded the Chola country and brought back twice 
as many captives as had been taken fron Ceylon. 3 But neither in the Pali 
chronicles nor in the inscriptions of Vankanasika Tissa or of Gajabahu 
nor in early Tamil literature is there any reference either to the invasion of 

1 EZ. m p. 156 n. 5 *B. Gunasekera, A Contribution to the 

2 EZ. iv pp. 214, 215 History of Cevlon. p. 21 

74 



586 


CEYLON 


Ceylon or to the counter-invasion. The first reference to the erection of 
the Kaveri bund by Karikala appears in a seventh or eighth century ins- 
cription. This legend grows, and records of the tenth or eleventh century 
state that the bund was constructed by enemy kings. 1 The Ceylon legend 
seems to be a further expansion of this story. 

The Tamil epic Silappadikaram written about the sixth century a.d. 
gives further information about Gajabahu. It relates that Gajabahu, 
hearing how a sacrifice to the goddess Kannagi (Pattini) brought rain 
to the famine-stricken Pandya country, built a shrine in Ceylon to this 
goddess for the performances of daily sacrifices to her. He also went to 
Chera and attended the consecration of a temple to her by Senguttuvan. 2 
This epic is clearly not an historical work and contains many impossible 
legends such as invasions of North India by each of the three South 
Indian kings of Chola, Chera and Pandya. No reliable evidence of the 
existence of Pattini worship in Ceylon before the fourteenth century has 
been so far discovered. 

Gajabahu was succeeded by his brother-in-law Mahallaka Naga (136- 
143), who as uvaraja ruled over Ruhuna. An inscription makes it clear 
that he was the next heir to the throne as he was a son of maharaja Utara. 3 
Mahallaka Naga was succeeded by his two sons, Bhatika Tissa (143-167) 
and Kanittha Tissa (167-186), both of whom are mentioned in inscriptions. 

Khujjanaga (186-188), the elder son of Kanittha Tissa, next became 
king. After a reign of one year he was slain and supplanted by his 
younger brother, Kuiichanaga (188-189) who had married a daughter 
of Bhatika Tissa. But when he had reigned for two years his senapati 
Sirinaga rose in rebellion and drove Kuiichanaga from the throne. Ac- 
cording to an inscription Sirinaga (189-209) was a son of Bhatika Tissa 
and thus had a better claim to the throne than either Khujjanaga or Kun- 
chanaga. Thus Khujjanaga came to be slain and Kuiichanaga was 
dethroned because they were usurpers. 

Sirinaga was succeeded by his son Voharika Tissa (209-231). He was 
given this name for his knowledge of law and custom, and is said to have 
abolished the punishment of mutilation. The next king was his brother 
Abhayanaga (231-240). Fearing the penalty of his friendship with the 
queen, he had escaped to South India, but returned after some time with 
a Tamil army, like Ilanaga, pursued the king to Malaya and put him 
to death. He then married the queen and reigned for eight years. 

Sirinaga II, the son of Voharika Tissa, succeeded Abhayanaga. He 
ruled for a short time and was followed by his son Vijaya (242-243). Vijaya 
too had a short reign. According to the Mdhavariisa his senapati Sangha 
Tissa (243-247) assisted by two friends Sirisanghabodhi and Gothabhaya 
(all of them Lambakarnas) put him to death. Sangha Tissa died by poison 


1 K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, Studies in Cola 2 Silappadikaram Eng. Trans. Oxford 

History and Administration, p. 29; The University Press 1939 nn 81 343 

Colas i p. 44 3 EZ. rv pp. 215-6 ’ 



FACTORS IN POLITICS 


587 


and was succeeded by his senapati Sirisanghabodhi. The Mahavamsa 
represents Sirisanghabodhi (247-249) as a saintly king and later legends 
make him a popular figure. His career was brought to an end by a rebel- 
lion raised against him by his friend Gothabhaya who held the post of 
treasurer ( bhandagarika ). According to an inscription Gothabhaya was 
a brother of Vijaya. Thus he and not Sanghatissa or Sirisanghabodhi 
was the heir to the throne. 1 Gothabhaya was succeeded by his son Jettha 
Tissa (263-274). He appears to have been resisted at once by certain 
ministers whom he slew and impaled around his father’s funeral pyre. 

The last king of this period was his brother Mahasena (274-302) who 
built the largest tank and the largest dagaba known up to that time and 
later came to be worshipped as a god. But politically Mahasena did not 
show much wisdom. Sinhalese kings were usually tolerant in religious 
matters and helped all sects alike, until Voharika Tissa and Gothabhaya 
took the side of the Mahavihara and suppressed the Vaitulyakas in the 
Abhayagiri Vihara. Mahasena, on the other hand, influenced by a 
bhikshu from Chola called Sanghamitta, forbade the people to give alms 
to the bhikshus of the Theravada sect on the ground that they did not 
follow the correct rules of discipline. The bhikshus of the Mahavihara 
then left for Malaya and Ruhuna, and Mahasena allowed his minister 
Sona to destroy the Lohapasada and other buildings of the Mahavihara 
and to use the material for new constructions in the Abhayagiri Vihara. 
This spoliation of the most important vihara in Anuradhapura infuriated 
the people and they put Sona to death. A carpenter, instigated by a 
queen, killed Sanghamitta as he came to destroy the Thuparama. In the 
meantime a minister, Meghavannabhaya, who disapproved of the king’s 
acts turned rebel. He collected an army in Malaya and marched towards 
Anuradhapura. There Mahasena met him with his forces, but without 
fighting agreed to withdraw his order against the Theravadins. There- 
upon Meghavannabhaya restored some of the cells that were destroyed 
and the bhikshus of the Mahavihara returned after nine years. Mahasena’s 
intolerance was not limited to the bhikshus of the Theravada sect. He is 
said to have destroyed three Hindu devales and probably the shrines of 
Yaksha Kalavela and erected Buddhist buildings in their places. 

From what has been stated it will be seen that the political history of 
this period was governed by four main factors. The form of succession 
passing from brother to brother and then to their sons not only generally 
permitted a change from king to king peacefully but also prevented the 
accession of minors and the usurpation of power by one or more of the 
ministers. At the same time the fact that to maintain his power the king 
depended on his own abilities, on his influence over the landed gentry and 
ultimately on the army, and not on the people, led occasionally to inter- 
ruptions of the normal mode of succession. The next heir to the throne 
or some other member of the royal family sometimes got rid of the reign- 
ing monarch and seized the throne. So did adventurers from India or 
* £Z.lvp. 223 



588 


CEYLON 


within the island itself when they could muster sufficient forces to 
displace the king. So also did the senapatis who had sufficient influence 
with the army. 

Another important factor in the politics of the day was Ruhuna. Geo- 
graphical and economic conditions, in which must be included its large 
size, the distance of its capital Magama from Anuradhapura, and the lack 
of communications, added to the personal form of government, and the 
absence of any stable organization prevented the ruler of Anuradha- 
pura from exercising effective control over this region. The result was 
that usually a usurper failed to extend his lordship over this region, and 
rebels found it a convenient place in which to build up their power until 
they were in a position to use its resources for their fight with the reigning 
monarch at Anuradhapura. 

Lastly, what mattered most in politics was the landed gentry who con- 
trolled the resources of the country and supplied the chief officials of 
government. Thus the usurpers who, though not of royal stock, seized 
the throne from time to time, seem always, when they were natives of 
Ceylon, to have belonged to this class, if we except two of the paramours 
of Anula. Among this class the two most powerful clans were the Deva- 
napiya and the Lambakarna. In the early part of this period anyone 
outside the Devanapiyakula who became king was unable to maintain his 
power for long. In the latter part only a Lambakarna could be king. 

The bhikshus on the whole seem to have kept outside politics. Their 
rules of discipline and the absence of a country-wide organization probab- 
ly contributed to this. There were, however, two or three instances where 
they departed from their normal practice. Once they joined in prevent- 
ing the rightful heir from ascending the throne. On another occasion 
some of them were found guilty of an attempt to kill the king and had 
to suffer the supreme penalty. It is also possible that they turned against 
Mahasena when he persecuted them. But on the whole their influence 
seems to have been passive rather than active. 

THE SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT 

There is no record available which describes the system of government 
that prevailed during this period. A system can, however, be reconstruc- 
ted to some extent from the chronicles and the inscriptions. 

The form of government was a sort of proto-feudal tributary state 
where a maharaja ruled directly over the northern plain and exercised an 
overlordship over Ruhuna. This title of maharaja appears to have been 
first used by Devanampiya Tissa. After that most kings whose names 
appear in inscriptions were called maharajas. ', Some of these used the titles 
maharaja and raja indiscriminately, while Amandagamani, Subha and 
Gothabhaya used only the title raja . 1 It is probable that the title 

1 C. W. Nicholas, ‘The Titles of Sinhalese etc’. UCR. vu p. 235 

Kings as recorded in the inscriptions 



DISTRICT GOVERNMENT 


589 


raja was taken by the Anuradhapura kings after it had ceased to be used 
by subordinate rulers. It is also possible that Subha and the Tamil 
usurpers failed to extend their power over Ruhuna. 

All the maharajas ruled from Anuradhapura. This title was assumed 
also by two sons of Vasabha, Utara and Dutaga, and probably by a son 
of Lanja Tissa, who are not mentioned in the Mahavariisa. It is not 
known from what centre Utara and Dutaga ruled or whether they preced- 
ed, or ruled contemporaneously with, Gajabahu. Yatalaka Tisa and 
Kakavanna Tisa are also called maharajas but in inscriptions inscribed 
centuries after their death. 

The government of Ruhuna was generally entrusted to a member of 
the royal family, a brother or son of the reigning monarch or the next heir 
to the throne. According to the Mahavariisa Devanampiya Tissa’s brother 
Mahanaga, who ruled over Ruhuna, was an uparaja, and an ancient ins- 
cription at Kusalanakanda, mentioned already, refers to an uparaja Naga. 
Two other inscriptions in Ruhuna at Kirinda and Tissamaharama refer 
to Uvaraja Naka, the later king Mahadathika Mahanaga (a.d. 7-19). 1 
Another unpublished inscription of the first century a.d. at Situlpahuva 
in Ruhuna refers to a Uvaraja Aya Tisa and still another of the same pro- 
vince to Uvaraja Naka, 2 who later as king was called Mahallaka Naga 
(136-143). It is possible that at times Ruhuna was also ruled by minis- 
ters; for a second century inscription refers to a minister ( amati ) who 
enjoyed the revenues of Rohana (Rohanbojika). 3 

Each district in turn had a ruler subordinate to the maharaja or the 
uparaja. At this time the country was covered with forest except where 
it had been cleared for cultivation or occupation. The villages were 
self-sufficient and had little contact with other parts of the country. Thus 
no means of communication were developed and no form of organized 
government came into existence. The administration under such con- 
ditions could only be personal, and since the maharaja and the uparaja 
could not deal directly with the people, they had to delegate their duties 
to others. According to early inscriptions found in various parts of the 
Dry Zone, the district rulers were kings (raja) or princes (aya). The 
wives of ayas bore the title of abi. Inscriptions also give the titles mahaya 
and mahabi. These princes were not necessarily connected with the royal 
family of Anuradhapura. Most of them were descendants of local kings 
who in turn were descended from gamanis. 

Another term used for a district ruler is ratika or ratiya 4 (Skt.-rashtrika) 
which occurs in inscriptions from the beginning of the first century a.d. 
when this official probably replaced the aya. Sometimes the district over 
which he ruled is mentioned. Ratikas, like ayas, donated thupas as well 
as tanks, fields, revenues from water-rates, paddy and money to the 

1 S. Paranavitana: ‘Brahml Inscriptions 2 EZ. rv p. 217 

in Sinhalese Verse’, JRASCB. xxxvi 3 CJS. n p. 18 

p. 63 * UCR. vra p. 127 



590 


CEYLON 


safigha. Ministers also at times ruled districts, and they made similar 
gifts. According to inscriptions they are said to have enjoyed the reve- 
nues of the areas ( bujameni bojika) 1 over which they ruled. 

Lowest in these grades of officials came the chiefs of towns and villages. 
The Mahavamsa refers to a nagaraguttika of Anuradhapura while an ins- 
cription mentions a nakaravudika. 2 Inscriptions also refer to gamikas, 
village headmen. This office seems to have been hereditary as no less 
than twenty-one cases have been found in extant inscriptions where the 
son succeeded the father. 

Another term found in inscriptions and the Mahavamsa is gapati 
( gahapati ). 3 It probably referred to an elder in a market-town 
(, nigama ) or a warden or official of a guild. The Tamils of Anura- 
dhapura who formed an assembly are given this title. There seems to be 
also a reference to a sculptor who bore this title. It is not clear whether 
all villages were governed by gamikas. The parumakas probably ruled 
over the villages from which they drew their revenues, but they never bore 
the title gamika. It is also not known how villages gifted to viharas 
were governed at this time. Nor is there evidence of any form of self- 
government in the self-contained villages, unless the term puga, found in 
a few inscriptions, connoted village assemblies too. But it is more likely 
that puga meant only a guild. One of them had a jete and an anujete , 
a chief and a deputy. 4 

Besides these, the king had a number of officials at his court as is seen 
from the Mahavamsa and the inscriptions. The most important was 
the senapati, 5 the commander of the army, who was usually a close relative 
or a friend of the king. He exercised considerable influence for the king 
ultimately based his power on the army. In a number of instances send- 
pads did away with kings and seized the throne themselves ; anyone, other 
than a senapati, who wanted to seize the throne, had either to win him 
over or raise a sufficiently large force to achieve his object. There 
were a number of ministers ( amati ), 6 the chief of whom was called maha- 
mata or Maha ameti (Pali mahamachcha). This office, like most others, 
was generally hereditary. An inscription refers to five generations of 
ministers. Ministers held a variety of posts. One of them was bhanda- 
garika (badakarika), 1 store-keeper or treasurer. Another official was 
a ganaka, an accountant. A nagaragaitaka, according to an inscription, 
exchanged a grant for dakapati (water-rate) of the Nakaravavi (Nuvara- 
vava). 8 

There were also officials of the palace. One was the guardian of the 
palace gate who was no doubt responsible for the personal safety of the 
king. Subha was one of these and put the king to death and mounted 
the throne himself, while Siva who held this post in the time of Anula was 

1 EZ. IV p. 237 5 VCR. vm p. 116 

a UCR. VII p. 118 ‘ Ibid. p. 118 

> Gapati rupadaka. CJS. n 214 7 Ibid. p. 124 

‘ ASCAR. 1931-2 p. 59 8 EZ. m p. 116 



EXTENT OF ROYAL POWER 


591 


a military official. Another official was the purohita who was the priest 
and adviser of the king. Two others, the sword-bearer and the parasol- 
bearer, are mentioned in connection with later kings. But from the legends 
of this period as well as other evidence, one may infer their existence even 
in this period . 1 There are references to one scribe ( lekhaka ) whose 
daughter was a wife of Mahasena and to another employed by 
Dutthagamani. 

The chief duty of a king at this time was to maintain peace and order — 
the conditions most essential for an agricultural people. He protected 
the kingdom against enemies from without and suppressed rebels and 
robbers within. He was normally not a law-maker and his duty was to 
see that the customs of the country were maintained. He therefore acted 
as a judge and punished offenders. He also considered it his duty to 
construct irrigation works which brought him revenue as well as merit, 
and to serve the sangha by building viharas and providing the bhikshus 
with food and other necessities. 

The district rulers performed similar duties both executive and judicial 
within their areas. They had officials of their own to assist them. An 
early inscription at Pichchandiyava near Puttalam refers to a minister 
of an uparaja . 2 Other inscriptions refer to badakarikas (bhandagarikas) 
of ministers and gamikas. There appear to have been gayakas also of 
villages and guilds . 3 

The king derived his power partly from his right of succession and 
partly from his army. The king’s power was absolute, but in practice 
its exercise was limited by the economic and social conditions of the time. 
He could not exert much control over his district chiefs nor the district 
chiefs over the village chiefs. Their posts were usually hereditary, and 
as a result they commanded local influence. Besides, they enjoyed 
the revenues of the area, performed judicial duties, and unlike the king 
came into personal contact with the people. To the people in fact they 
were the rulers and not the more revered but more remote king. 

It is difficult to assess the extent of power the king derived from his 
army as neither its size nor its method of recruitment is known. It 
consisted of elephant-riders, archers and foot-soldiers. Inscriptions 
refer to an elephant-trainer (ati achariya ) 4 and archers ( dhanuga ). There 
is no evidence to show whether there was any direct recruitment by the 
king. It is likely that the troops were supplied by the district rulers and 
the parumakas who enjoyed revenues from land. Otherwise it would 
not have been so easy for dispossessed rulers or others aiming at power 
to collect troops and fight the reigning king. 

In any case the king of Anuradhapura seems to have strengthened his 
position during this period. By the first century a.d. or earlier the des- 
cendants of earlier local kings disappear and their places as district rulers 

1 Samantapasadika i p. 58. Mahavamsa Inscriptions of Ceylon, no. 84. 

xxv 56 * VCR. vra p. 126 

! ASCAR. 1935, para 42; MOller, Ancient 4 JRAS. 1936,Jp. 446 



592 


CEYLON 


are taken by officials called ratiyas who owed their position to royal 
appointment. The main changes probably took place either in the reign 
of Dutthagamani or that of Vattagamani, each of whom fought his way 
to the mastery of the whole country. 

The evidence is not always clear with regard to the king's revenues. 
Ceylon was at first ruled not by one king but by many. These kings and 
their descendants, the ayas, and later the ratikas, no doubt claimed the 
revenues of the areas they ruled . 1 It is likely that the parumakas too drew 
revenues from the villages they owned. There is no doubt that all these 
received a share of the production of craftsmen too. All this local revenue 
is indicated by the term bojikapati in the inscriptions. When the king 
of Anuradhapura asserted his power over the rest of the island, he appears 
to have further obtained a tax ( bojikapati kara) from those who received 
bojikapati. When tanks and canals came to be constructed, those who 
made them levied a water-rate ( dakapati ) from the cultivators. The 
king, as soon as he began to build tanks and canals, collected this water- 
rate himself. In addition he charged a tax ( dakapati kara ) from other 
owners of tanks and canals. Other sources of revenue included a share 
of the fines realized in courts 2 and of customs duties collected at the 
ports . 3 

The king was not held to be the owner of all the land. Only unoccu- 
pied lands belonged to him . 4 Two inscriptions record that Subha and 
Gajabahu bought tanks for money . 5 According to the Mahavamsa the 
king seems to have had a right to the labour of the people, which made 
it possible for him to build gigantic dagabas and large tanks. Never- 
theless, both Subha and Gajabahu are said to have paid money to get 
tanks dredged. This shows that either his right to exact labour was 
restricted or else that the services he could command were not gratuitous. 

There is not much evidence of the political ideas that prevailed at this 
time. The accounts of the Mahavamsa and other Pali literary works 
indicate that the people of Ceylon did not endow their kings with the divine 
attributes and character usually ascribed to them by most ancient peoples. 
The kings themselves in their inscriptions do not trace their descent to 
the Sun or the Moon nor use any titles which suggest divine qualities. 
The title Devanapiya, probably adopted from Asoka by Devanampiya 
Tissa and used by his successors up to Yasalalaka Tissa, would have 
suggested, if anything, that the king held himself responsible to the gods 
and not to the people. But according to the inscription of Kutakanna 
the title seems to have been adopted later as a family name. The title 
maparumaka, first used by Kanittha Tissa, signified only that he was the 
chief parumaka, just as earlier the title maharaja meant simply the chief raja. 

A popular, instead ot a divine, conception ot the kingly office seems to 
have been inculcated by Buddhism. According to the Pali Canon the 

1 MV. X. 29 4 MV. xxxvii. 9 

2 ASCAR. 1934, p. 18 5 EZ. m p. 165; i p. 203 

8 CJS. n no. 586, p. 197 



VILLAGES AND TOWNS 


593 


mythical first king, Mahasammata, was raised to this position and pro- 
mised a share of their paddy by his subjects, but only on his undertaking 
to perform certain duties to their satisfaction. 

But it is perhaps not proper to treat Buddhist and Hindu ideas of 
monarchy as quite divorced from each other. In the Mahavamsa there 
is evidence to show that kings were conseciated as among Hindus though 
certain parts of the ceremony stressed the king’s obligations to the people 
and the punishment that would follow if they were not fulfilled. Also the 
kings were served by Brahmins who acted as purohitas, teachers, physi- 
cians, and ministers, and these perhaps stressed the divine attributes of 
kingship. 

Thus Ceylon had a system of government suited to an agrarian society. 
A graded system of officials with the king at the head maintained peace 
and order and made economic and cultural development possible. The 
king’s control may not have been strong enough to restrain such 
misgovernment as occurred in distant provinces, but there was the 
compensation that semi-independent chiefs functioned satisfactorily 
even when the central government was disorganized by court intrigues, 
rebellions and wars, or by the weakness of an ineffective ruler. 

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 

Ceylon at the beginning of this period was mainly a land of villages 
generally surrounded by forest. The Aryans did not open up the whole 
country but only those parts near the banks of rivers and streams where 
they settled and formed villages. The chief feature of the village was 
the field in which paddy was cultivated. Near it was a cluster of huts 
where the people lived. The highland around was partly used as grazing 
ground for cattle and partly cultivated with dry crops such as beans, 
undu, sesame, turmeric, pepper, betel and such trees as the coconut, the 
jack, the palmyra, the arecanut and the mango. The surrounding land 
remained under forest supplying firewood and timber for the building 
of huts until another village arose close by. 

There were, however, a few towns, — the seats of rulers, or seaports at 
which foreign vessels called or places where trade and crafts were carried 
on. These too were generally situated by tanks or canals which furnished 
the inhabitants with water enabling them to carry on agriculture in addi- 
tion to their own crafts. Perhaps there were only two large towns during 
this period, Anuradhapura and Magama. Of Magama hardly anything 
is known. Anuradhapura was a large town with many thoroughfares 
and side streets. It was divided into four quarters and had market-places 
at the four gates. Its numerous shrines made it a place of pilgrimage 
and the residence of thousands of bhikshus. The tanks provided the 
water necessary for agriculture, which supported its large population. 

Rice was produced throughout the Dry Zone, favoured by the warm 
climate and the fertile soil. Its cultivation was carried on without much 
75 



594 


CEYLON 


interruption, Ceylon being surrounded by sea and not often disturbed by 
invaders. But there were other drawbacks far more serious than inva- 
sions against which the people had to contend. Rice needs a good deal 
of water. In the Dry Zone rain fell only during the north-east monsoon, 
from November to February. Even then it was not heavy enough to 
produce more than one crop in a year. In years of drought even this crop 
failed and the people had to exist with insufficient food. Such condi- 
tions compelled them to find ways of improving the supply of water in the 
villages, and they constructed tanks and canals to irrigate their fields. 
Early inscriptions contain references to such constructions by parumakas, 
who probably took the lead in developing agriculture in order to increase 
their income. 

Whenever a drought was intense or lasted long, even these village tanks 
dried up. Then the people were unable to cultivate either paddy or 
the dry crops which required less water. At such times they suffered 
from famine, and it is likely that even the cattle died in large numbers for 
lack of grass or water. When the rains came again the people were 
without buffaloes to plough their fields. 

A famine is referred to incidentally in the Mahavamsa in the narrative 
of Dutthagamani’s reign (161-137 B.c.). It was so severe that people 
were reduced to a diet of akkha nuts ( Terminalia bellericci ) which at other 
times were used as dice, and the famine itself came to be called Akkha- 
khayika famine. 

There occurred a famine even more devastating in the reign of Vatta- 
gamani (103-89 B.c.), According to many commentaries of the Pali 
Canon this famine followed the rebellion of the Brahmin Tissa and lasted 
for twelve years. During this time bhikkhus from all quarters assembled 
at Jambukolapattana in the Northern Peninsula and crossed over to India. 
The Mahavihara was deserted, and castor plants grew in its grounds. 
The chetiya was covered with moss and half-buried by bushes. The 
bhikshus who remained behind in Ceylon had a most difficult time. Two 
of them fed for a whole week on the skins of the madhu fruit, the kernels 
of which the people had eaten. On other occasions they had to live on 
the stalk of the water-lily and the outer sheaths of plantain trees. Some 
other bhikshus in south Malaya existed on roots and leaves. The people 
suffered equally if not more, though there is little evidence of their 
case. It is said that near the Daduru Oya they had nothing but leaves 
for food. In another place the famine had grown so acute that people 
maddened by hunger resorted to human flesh for food and devoured even 
an aged bhikshu who fell into their hands. Those who died of starvation, 
both bhikshus and laity, in the northern plain and in Ruhuna could not 
be counted. 1 

Drought led to two other famines in the reigns of Kunchanaga 
(a.d. 188-189) and of Sirisanghabodhi (247-249). During the former the 


Adikaram, EHB. p. 74-5 



IRRIGATION WORKS 


595 


measure of food available for each person was so small that it was called 
the Ekcmalika famine. 1 

At such times people could obtain no food from the Wet Zone and the 
highlands which received their water mainly from the south-west mon- 
soon; for during this period these areas were hardly developed. 2 They 
had therefore either to starve and perhaps die or else remove to the high- 
lands and the South-West and live on fruits and leaves, or go to some part 
of India where food was available. To meet this recurrent scourge the 
only remedy was to construct irrigation works on a much larger scale, 
tapping the rivers and converting large streams into tanks. Work of 
this magnitude was gradually undertaken by kings with the labour of the 
people, both to increase their revenue, and earn merit by their services to 
the people. 

The Mahavamsa and the inscriptions mention a number of tanks and 
canals built during this period. But the evidence of these sources does 
not suffice to trace their development or to describe the way they were 
constructed. It is not always possible, even when names are given, to 
locate them owing to subsequent changes of nomenclature. 

It is likely that the need for large tanks first arose at Anuradhapura 
where the population increased faster than elsewhere under the impulse 
of the activities of the kings and the rise of the viharas. The Abhayavava 
(now called Basavakkulam), the Tisavava, and the Gamanivapi (probably 
Perimiyankulam) 3 are referred to in the earliest legends related in the 
Mahavamsa. A second century inscription mentions the large tank 
Nuvaravava. 4 There are references to the construction of other tanks 
in other parts of the island as well. Kutakanna Tissa (44-22 B. c.) 
constructed the Ambadugga and the Bhayoluppala tanks and the Vari- 
naka canal in the region between the Mahavali Ganga and the Maduru 
Oya. Amandagamani (a.d. 19-29) built the Mahagamendi tank to the 
south of Anuradhapura. Ilanaga (a.d. 36-43), whose association with 
Ruhuna has already been noted, built in this region the Tissamaharama 
and the Dhura tanks. His son Chandamukhasiva is said to have built 
a tank near Manikargama, 5 which was situated in the western division of 
the northern plain. 

Greater interest was taken in irrigation by Vasabha (67-111) during 
his long reign. He is said to have built eleven tanks and twelve canals. 
One of the tanks is believed to be either the Nachchaduva tank or the 
Eruvava, to the south-east of Anuradhapura. It is not known whether 
one of the canals was the Alahara canal which taps the waters of the 
Amban Ganga. According to the Mahavamsa it was in existence during 
his reign. Of his successors, Gajabahu (114-136) is said to have built 
the Gamanitissa tank, Bhatika Tissa (143-167) the Randhakandaka 

1 Mali is a measure equal to four handfuls. 3 CJS. i p. 52 

2 C. W. Nicholas, ‘Epigraphical Map of 4 EZ. m p. 116 

Ceylon, 3rd. cen. b.c. to 3rd. cen. a.c.’, 5 MV. xxxv. 47; EZ. iv p. 222 

UCR. vu p. 142 



596 


CEYLON 


tank and the Mahamani tank in the Maminiya Korale in the North-Cen- 
tral Province; and Jettha Tissa 1 (263-274) the Alarhbagama tank. But 
according to an inscription Malu Tisa (Kanittha Tissa) built the Gamani- 
tisa tank as well as the Nilarajiya tank. 1 

The greatest of the tank-builders during this period was Mahasena 
(274-302) who constructed sixteen tanks and one canal. One of these 
tanks appears to be the Kavduluvava which lies to the south of Kantalai 
tank and another the Magalavava near Nikavaratiya. The best known 
of his works is the Minneriya tank which lies to the north-west of 
Polonnaruva. The canal he built is called the Pabbatanta canal, a name 
which probably implies that it came from the mountains. 

The only tank in Ruhuna besides those built by Ilanaga of which there 
is mention in the Mahavamsa is the Dikvava (Dlghavapi) which lies about 
twelve miles to the west of Kalmunai. It is likely that few tanks were built 
in the south-east during this period as the four ri\ers. Valave Ganga, the 
Kirindi Oya, the Manik Ganga, and the Kumbukkan Oya, which had 
their sources in or near the central highlands, could be tapped for irri- 
gation purposes. 

The larger irrigation works of the period indicate the extent to which 
rice cultivation expanded. They probably reduced to a minimum the 
type of suffering that droughts had inflicted in the early part of this period. 
At such times the large tanks stored with water must have rendered the 
cultivation of rice possible at least to a small extent. In normal times 
they must have enabled the production of rice even during the dry part 
of the year. An inscription of Siri Meghavanna. the son of Mahasena, 
shows that by the end of this period there were fields which yielded as 
many as three harvests a year. The names Pitadada, Akala, Mada, seem 
to correspond to the present Maha, Yala and Mada harvests. 2 

It is reasonable to infer that this construction of tanks and canals not 
only served to exorcise the spectre of recurrent famine and to pave the way 
for a more intensive cultivation than the single annual crop, but that it 
also led to a considerable extension of the area under cultivation. 

There is little evidence with regard to clothing. Much cloth no doubt 
went to supply the innumerable bhikshus who were clad with an ample 
outer robe and inner garments even if the mass of the people living in a 
tropical climate needed little clothing. It is reasonable to infer from the 
references to weavers in the Mahavamsa , in the commentaries, and in the 
inscriptions, that a considerable amount of the cloth used during this 
period was woven within the island. 

As for shelter there is even less evidence. The Mahavamsa refers to 
palaces built by kings. There were besides innumerable residences for 
bhikshus. In the earliest times bhikshus lived in caves for which walls 
were built to cover the openings and drip-ledges cut to prevent the rain 
water flowing into them. Many others no doubt lived in huts made of 

1 EZ. i p. 256 1 EZ. m p. 184 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


597 


leaves as the word pahsala (parnasala), used even today for a vihara, 
suggests. These, of course, have disappeared. In the larger viharas pari- 
venas (cells) of mud or brick were constructed for the bhikshus within 
the vihara premises. 

No remains are left of houses occupied by chiefs or ordinary people. 
Nor can their survival be expected seeing that they were made of the 
timber so readily available or of mud or of both. The Mahavamsa relates 
how mud, collected from the Abhayavava when it was dry, was used for 
building the Thuparama chetiya. A foreign writer states that houses in 
Ceylon were of wood or reeds . 1 

The people, in addition to clothing, used pots and pans as well as iron 
tools — knives, hammers and axes, for agricultural purposes. Thus there 
must have been potters and smiths at least in the larger villages. 

There are also references in the Mahavathsa and the inscriptions to 
other craftsmen such as sculptors (rupada(sa)ka) and jewellers (man ik dr a) as 
well as bricklayers (itthakavaddhaki) and carpenters ( vaddhaki ). The 
richer classes no doubt used a considerable amount of jewellery and ac- 
cording to foreign accounts pearls and gems were exported from Ceylon. 
The Mahavamsa refers to a village of jewellers ( manikdragdma ) 2 the 
revenues of which were allotted to the queen. The sculptors embellished 
Buddhist and probably royal buildings. The early Buddhist buildings had 
stone for their foundations and for their pillars. The Mahavamsa refers also 
to bricklayers and to the village they inhabited . 3 For the construction of 
the larger dagabas millions of bricks were needed. Carpenters too must 
have found plenty of work as the buildings, apart from foundations and 
pillars, appear to have been of wood. 

These craftsmen were organized into guilds probably in order to safe- 
guard their business as well as their other interests. The guilds also carried 
on a primitive form of banking. Certain persons are said to have depo- 
sited with these guilds grain and money so that the interest therefrom 
might be utilized for religious purposes . 4 

In contrast to the agriculture and crafts carried on in villages, trade 
seems to have played a much less important part in the life of the people. 
The Pali chronicles make a few references to trade. There were some 
well-known routes. The account of Dutthagamani shows that there was 
one from Magama to Anuradhapura and thence to Mantai (Mahatittha) 
and another from Anuradhapura in the direction of Kurunagala. 
There was a third from Anuradhapura to Jambukola, probably modern 
Sambulturai. There are also references to the wagons used by merchants. 
But this trade could not have been large and was probably confined to 
the towns. In the absence of roads there could not have been much 
internal trade between villages situated far apart. Under the condi- 
tions then existing, it would have been expensive to carry anything in 

1 K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notice 3 MV. xxx. 5, 8, 30; xxxv. 48, 101, 109 

of South India, p. 42 4 EZ m p. 177 

3 MV. xxxv. 47 



598 


CEYLON 


bulk, and heavy articles so conveyed would have been beyond the means 
of village purchasers. 

Foreign trade too would not have been extensive. It was carried on 
with India and the countries to the west of Ceylon, especially those within 
the Roman empire, not by the people of Ceylon but by foreigners. 

The evidence for this foreign trade apart from coins that have been 
discovered in Ceylon, is rather meagre. Very little can be gleaned from 
the Mahdvamsa except references to coins, seaports and voyages to India. 
An inscription refers to customs duties charged at a seaport . 1 Reference 
has already been made to a guild of Tamils, probably merchants, presided 
over by a ship’s captain who lived in Anuradhapura in pre-Christian 
times. A Tamil poem of the Sangam Age enumerates among articles im- 
ported into Choja from various countries edible things that came from 
Ceylon, but it does not explain what they were . 2 The developments in 
Buddhist architecture and sculpture show that there was much communi- 
cation by sea between Ceylon and Andhradesa, and this probably implies 
a certain amount of trade between the two countries. 

It is likely that the traders who came to Ceylon during this early period 
were from South India and that their merchandise was taken by sea to 
South Arabia and East Africa from where they were carried along the 
Red Sea to Alexandria and the countries of the Mediterranean. This 
is supported by the fact that the names for spices used by Greek and Ro- 
man writers are of Dra vidian origin . 3 

There is also a certain amount of Greek and Roman literary evidence 
concerning this trade. It tends to show that the Greeks began to trade 
directly with Ceylon only in the second century a.d. There is, it is true, 
a reference to a garden occupied probably by Greeks ( yonasabhdgavatthu ) 
in the Mahdvamsa in the chapter on Pandukabhaya, but it cannot be 
stated definitely when this account came to be written. 

The early Greek writers seem to have obtained their information about 
Ceylon from Indians. Onesicritus, the follower of Alexander the Great, 
knew the ancient name of Ceylon, Tamraparni, which he calls Taprobanei 
and says that it possessed elephants larger than those of India . 4 To 
Megasthenes, who visited India about the end ofthe fourth century b.c., 
has been attributed much the same information with a few additional 
details. Ceylon according to him was also known for its pearls and ex- 
ported gold. He calls the people of Ceylon Palaigoni which is perhaps 
a corrupt form of the Sanskrit pdrajana, the people on the other side of 
the sea. Megasthenes, however, seems to have held the impression that 
Ceylon was separated from India by a river . 5 

After this there is no fresh information about Ceylon till the first century 
a.d. Then it comes from men interested in the eastern trade who received 


1 CJS. n p. 197 no. 586 

2 K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, The Colas, i 

p. 100 

3 CHI. i p. 594 n. 2 


K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, Foreign Notices 
oj South India, p. 49 
6 Ibid. p. 41 



WESTERN TRADE 


599 


their information at second hand. In the first century b.c. when the wes- 
tern world, united firmly under Rome, and Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt 
came under Roman control, merchants of the Roman empire, backed 
by the power of Rome and Roman capital, began to push eastwards by 
land and sea. 1 The desert routes from Alexandria to the Red Sea were 
carefully guarded in the time of Augustus, and in his reign, about 25 b.c., 
an expedition was sent under Aelius Gallus to explore South Arabia and 
Ethiopia. Soon after a fleet was stationed in the Red Sea; and Aden, 
the only safe and shoal-free harbour between Suez and India, was occu- 
pied. Thenceforth about one hundred and twenty ships visited India 
every year, making the voyage along the coast of South Arabia and India. 

A further advance was made in the reign of Claudius (a.d. 41-54) 
when the Greek and Egyptian subjects of Rome discovered that they 
could utilize the monsoons, as the Indians did, in travelling to India and 
back again. By a.d. 50 they began to make the direct voyage from the 
Gulf of Aden to the Malabar Coast, no longer worried by the pirates 
who infested the coastal waters of the Arabian coast. Roman ships sailed 
in increasing numbers. On an average one ship a day is said to have left 
the Egyptian ports for the East. 

In the reign of Claudius, according to Pliny, a freedman named Annius 
Plocamus who had farmed the collection of the Red Sea revenues, while 
sailing round Arabia, was blown off his course as far as Hippuri, a port 
in Taprobane. The king of that place entertained him and despatched 
with him an embassy of four led by Rachia. 

The new details supplied by Plocamus and the ambassadors are not 
such as would have been given by people well acquainted with Ceylon. 
Ceylon, according to them, had a river called Palaesimundu which was 
also the name of their capital. Such a name was unknown in Ceylon. 
It is perhaps a corrupt form of Sanskrit Parasamudra, the land across the 
sea, by which Ceylon was referred to in India. 2 

The author of the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea (c. a.d. 80), probably 
a merchant of Berenice, the African port on the Red Sea, also had no 
first-hand knowledge of Ceylon. He probably did not travel beyond 
the Malabar Coast. The Periplus is a merchant’s practical guide-book 
for Indian seas containing details of harbours, marts, anchorages, 
tides, prevailing winds, local tribes, rulers, imports, etc. Like the accounts 
that immediately preceded it, this work calls Ceylon Palaesimundu, exa- 
ggerates its size tenfold, and makes it almost touch the Azanian district 
of the east coast of Africa; it mentions no ports or marts of Ceylon. 
The exports of Ceylon are stated to be pearls, precious stones, muslins 
and tortoise-shell. Muslins at this time were manufactured in south-east 
India, and were probably imported to Ceylon. There is no evidence that 
they were woven in Ceylon. 

1 E. H. Warmington The Commerce Roman empire is based mainly on this 
between the Roman Empire and India. work. 

This summary of the trade with the 2 Raychaudhuri, PHAI. p. 273 



600 


CEYLON 


The Geography based on material collected by Claudius Ptolemaeus, 
mathematician, astronomer, and geographer, who lived in Alexandria 
about the first half of the second century a.d., on the other hand, shows 
a closer acquaintance with Ceylon. Unlike the descriptions ot other 
places, it gives a detailed account of Ceylon probably because new infor- 
mation derived from contemporary merchants, who had begun to visit 
the island, was now available. 

This work, though professedly scientific, was not based on scientific 
observations, and is, therefore, not free from error. Though it does not 
make the island extend close to Africa, it continues to overestimate its 
size. According to it, the island was called Salica and its inhabitants 
Salai. It is said to possess mines of gold and silver and other metals ; 
to produce rice, honey, ginger, beryl, and hyacinth; and breed elephants 
and tigers. As Ceylon did not possess tigers, perhaps the leopard was 
meant. There is no evidence to show that it had mines of gold and silver 
either. This work either confused the new data with the old or the mer- 
chants who supplied the information included objects that came from 
farther east. 

The account, nevertheless, reveals a better knowledge of the island. 
It names its two chief cities, Anuradhagama and Magama, though the 
latter is located too far to the north. It is possible that Anuradhapura 
was still called Anuradhagama, the form given in the Bipavamsa. Of the 
two marts it mentions, Modottou may be Matota (Mantai) though its 
geographical position too is incorrect. Margana may be identified with 
Magana of the early inscriptions. 1 Nagadouba may be Nagatuba (Naga- 
thupa) of Magama. Of the two mountain ranges Malaya is marked cor- 
rectly, but Ganges (Ganga as the Mahavali was called at this time) is not 
traced to it. The names of tribes are derived from towns and districts. 
Nagadlpa (Nagadiboi), the name for Jaffna Peninsula in ancient times, is 
made to extend up to the Ganges, but Rohana (Rhogandonoi) is located 
more correctly. The other places mentioned have not yet been success- 
fully identified. 

All these details clearly show that the Greeks of Egypt had reached 
Ceylon in quest of trade by the beginning of the second century a.d. 
The Roman coins found in Ceylon in increasing numbers from the time 
of Hadrian (117-138) are further evidence of this direct trade between 
Ceylon and the Roman empire. But the overseas traffic began to dwindle 
by the end of the second century a.d. and the latest Roman coins actually 
found in Ceylon are those of Caracalla (211-217). Nevertheless, even 
after the direct connection had ceased, the trade was continued by 
middlemen — the Africans and the Arabs. 

The most striking fact, however, is that no account, not even the Geo- 
graphy of Ptolemy, refers to the cinnamon of Ceylon. At this time cin- 
namon and pepper were the two chief spices consumed in the Roman 


JRASCB. xxvm no. 73 p. 54 




7. CEYLON 





SOCIAL DIVISIONS 


601 


empire, and cinnamon was brought exclusively by sea. The Romans 
knew that malabathrum, a hellenized form of tamalapatra, came from 
India, but did not know that it was a species of the cinnamon leaf. The 
earliest name by which they knew Ceylon was Tamraparni which means 
•that which possesses the copper-coloured leaf’. The cinnamon shoots 
are copper-coloured. So are its roots and bark when dried. But the 
Greeks wrongly believed that cinnamon was produced in Arabia and 
Africa. It is possible that cinnamon was taken from Ceylon and Malabar, 
to Africa and Arabia, and this fact was kept a secret from the Greeks by 
the Africans and the Arabs. 

This trade with the West, as stated already, was not very large. Its 
significance was for the future, the time when this little stream gradually 
grew in size and asuraed such proportions as to become a major factor in 
Ceylon history. What really affected the progress of the country during 
this period was the development of irrigation works. These enabled the 
peopie to produce food not only for their own subsistence but also for the 
maintenance ol the king and his household, the landed gentry, the hier- 
archy of officials at the court and in the country who maintained peace and 
order, innumerable Buddhist bkikshus who helped the development of a 
higher standard of civilization and culture, and the thousands ol crafts- 
men who constructed ddgahas and vikclms as well as the tanks and canals 
that fostered the cultivation of the fields. An improved technique in the 
production of the basic necessity, in short, rendered possible a greater 
differentiation of social functions, and further elevated the ruling class 
which doubtless existed from the earliest historical times. 

Economic conditions naturally determined social divisions, and society 
can be classified somewhat simply into persons of noble families and the 
common people while a monastic order was in the process of evolving into 
a third class recruited from both, but in most ways apart. 

The two principal noble clans, the Devanapiya and the Lambakarna, 
have already been mentioned. An account of the po s u>n /G/v, based on 
the inscriptions, has also been given. The word panonaka never occuis 
in the Ma'iavamsa, but there are many references to persons who enjoyed 
the revenues of villages and towns. The kuianagara of Brahmin Ticsa, 
according to the reading accepted by Geiger, appears to have been such 
a town. The villages of the Brahmins, Tivakka and ikalanda, probably 
belonged to them in this sense. According to the Chulavamsa . 1 in the 
fourth century (immediately following this period) men ol noble family 
who joined the enemy were deprived of their villages. The terms used 
for such persons are kulinl and kulagamakd, though the term kulu often 
connoted nothing more than a family. 

The references to parumakas, the term apparently corresponding to 
kulinl in the chronicles, disappear in the insciiptions after the first century 
a.d. But this class of persons no doubt continued to exist. Just as when 

1 xxxviii. 28 
76 



602 


CEYLON 


a number of rajas lived in Ceylon the king of Anuradhapura called himsell 
maharaja, Kanittha Tissa in the second century a.d. called himself 
maparumaka (the great parumaka) and Kitti Siri Meghavanna referred to 
his father, Mahasena, by this title . 1 This suggests that the king con- 
sidered himself one among the parumakas, only having the distinction that 
he was their chief. 

The common people were mostly either farmers or craftsmen. The 
craftsmen lived side by side with the cultivators, or sometimes in separate 
villages. When they had villages of their own they probably practised 
agriculture too. 

The Mahavamsa also distinguishes people as countryfolk and towns- 
folk . 2 The great majority of the people no doubt lived in villages whether 
as cultivators or as craftsmen. Both in the Mahavamsa and in the inscrip- 
tions a man is often distinguished by reference to his village as were the 
fields and tanks. There are a few references to towns which were either 
market-places or centres of trade, probably inhabited by craftsmen and 
traders. These men seem to have been used to a money economy, for 
in two towns, according to an inscription, fines levied in courts appear to 
have been paid in money. 

The towns in these times had a rural aspect. Both craftsmen and traders 
probably practised agriculture too and presumably they had lands of their 
own. As noted already even a city like Anuradhapura had a number 
of tanks to irrigate the surrounding fields. 

Apart from the nobility and the common people stood the safigha, the 
community of Buddhist bhikshus numbering thousands, drawing their 
recruits from both these classes. At first they seem to have been mainly 
persons devoted to meditation who dwelt in caves, parks and woods away 
from the people, but yet not too far for the people to provide them with 
alms. The rest who dwelt in villages and cities seem to have been more 
concerned with learning and teaching. But with the development of the 
country those of the second class seem to have increased in numbers. The 
bhikshus probably found it more convenient to live in villages where they 
could more easily obtain their alms and minister to the people by their 
preachings. 

This was not the only adjustment to take place in the economic and so- 
cial conditions. From about the second century b.c. the practice of 
endowing viharas began, and the bhikshus who were so far provided with 
shelters and alms, now began to receive a regular source of income for 
maintaining buildings and providing themselves with food, clothing and 
other necessities. The bhikshus of the viharas so endowed no doubt 
now commanded influence not only by the sanctity of the life they led but 
by reason also of the landed property attaching to their viharas. It is 
reasonable to suppose that they now took greater interest in the affairs of 
t he world and that situations arose when they counted politically, 

1 UCR. vn p. 246 a xvii, 63 



NO CASTE SYSTEM 


603 


It is not clear whether at this time there was in Ceylon anything like 
the caste system of India. There are references on the other hand to Brah- 
mins who lived in various parts of the island, as well as to Chandalas 1 
who lived separately from other townfolk and performed menial work. 
The story of Dutthagamani’s son Sali clearly shows that people of the 
upper classes did not associate with the latter. But in neither case do 
the numbers appear to have been large. 

Society as a whole could not have been based on caste, for the story 
of queen Anula does not suggest that she was confronted with any of the 
difficulties that under a strict caste system she would have had to face by 
marrying a Tamil craftsman and a wood-carrier in turn. 

This does not mean that no importance was attached to birth. The 
Buddha himself, it was taught, attained Buddhahood by his good actions 
and efforts in numerous births. But the acceptance of a lineage for the 
Buddha tracing his descent from Mahasammata and Okkaka, the great 
king ot the Solar dynasty, is significant of the ideas of the time . 2 And under 
the static economic conditions prevalent when a son naturally and almost 
invariably followed the occupation of his father, such emphasis on birth 
was alike inevitable and natural. 


1 MV. x. 89, 93 2 Adikaram, EHB. p. 126 



Chapter XIX 


CEYLON II 

RELIGION AND CULTURE 

T'HE main influence on the society of this period was religion, but the 
sources do not provide a correct perspective of the part played by the 
different religions and cults that prevailed in Ceylon. 

Reference has already been made to the existence of Brahmanism among 
the early inhabitants. The chronicles and the inscriptions refer to Bral> 
mins found in parts so widely scattered as the present Northern and North- 
Central Provinces and the Puttalam. Kurunagala, Matale, Kandy, Batti- 
caloa and Hambantota districts. They also show that, though few in 
number, the Brahmins exercised influence at court as purohitcis, officials, 
teachers and physicians and held a privileged position in the country. We 
do not know how many of them were priests. The Dipavamsa refers to a 
purohiui of Kakavanna and the Mahtivamsa to a purohita of Anula. The 
names of two early queens, Varunadata and Ramadata 1 as well as the 
names of kings and princes, e.g. Siva, show the influence of Brahmanism 
at least in the upper circles. According to two inscriptions, Maiiadathika 
Mahanaga, when he was uvaraja in Rohana, abandoned false beliefs (mi- 
chchhaditthi) and accepted the doctrines of Buddhism. This is probably 
another reference to Brahmanism . 2 Oneof the figures carved on the Kantaka 
chetiya is that of a gana with an elephant’s head, which is no doubt a 
prototype of the Hindu god, Ganesa. Mahasena. according to the Mahdva- 
riisa. destroyed three devales, which, the Vamsatthappakasini says, were 
those of the Hindu god, Siva. One of these was in the village of Brahmin 
Kalanda . 3 There is further evidence in the Mahavamsa in a description of 
Anuradhapura in the chapter on Pandukabhaya . 4 But the account is not 
likely to be earlier than the first century a.d. when the Buddhist commen- 
taries also came to be written down. Moreover, it refers to a Nigantba 
named Giri who lived in the first century b.c, as well as to a garden of the 
Yonas who, if the term meant Greeks, are not likely to have come to 
Ceylon for trade before the first century a.d. The reference is to a resi- 
dence of Brahmins in Anuradhapura. and they were probably priests, for 
it occurs in an account of the religions that existed in Anuradhapura! In 
the same passage also is found a reference to a Sotthisdld, and a sivakasdld 
which the Vamsatthappakasini defines respectively as a hall where Brah- 
mins recited svasti vachana and a hall where a Siva linga was set up 5 

1 VCR. vn p. 241 4 JRASCB. xxxi p 302 

2 JRASCB. xxxvi p. 63 " Vamsatthappakasini. I p 296 

* Ibid. p. 685 ' 



RELIGIOUS SECTS 


605 


This evidence is undoubtedly scanty and sketchy. It shows, however, 
that Brahmanism existed in Ceylon throughout this period, though its 
influence may not have been widespread. 

The account of Pandukabhaya shows further that the yaksha cults re- 
ferred to earlier were widespread in Anuradhapura. Below the Abhaya- 
vapi there was the shrine of Chittaraja. To the west of Thuparama was 
that of Maheja (or Pabheja or Pamoja). At the eastern gate of the city 
near the Naka Vehera was that of Kalavela. Vaisravana was believed 
to have had his abode in a banyan-tree near the western gate. Near the 
same gate was also a shrine of Pachcbhimarajim, who appears to have 
been a yakshini. Another yakshini was worshipped at the southern gate 
while the yakshini Valavamukbi had her shrine within the precincts of the 
royal palace. 

It is likely that yaksha cults were even more widespread in the rural 
areas. In times of drought and pestilence, of disease and suffering, peo- 
ple no doubt made offerings to appease them or win their favour. It is 
a striking fact that when there was a plague in the time of Siri Sangha- 
bodhi, this saintly king did not resort to the Buddhist practice of reciting 
the Paritta, but ordered offerings to be made at the entrances of villages 
to the yaksha Ratakkhi, in order to put an end to this scourge. 

The account of Pandukabhaya refers also to the worship of gods. 
Near the western gate of the city was worshipped the god of huntsmen 
who was believed to inhabit the palmyra palm that grew there. In a later 
chapter there is a reference to a shrine of the god of the city ( puradeva ) 
which stood outside the boundary of the Mahavihara . 1 

According to this account there were also a number of other religions 
in Anuradhapura at this time. Two buildings are said to have been the 
abodes of the Jains (Nigaplhas) Jotiya and Giri. while a temple (devakula) 
belonged to another Jain, Kumbhanda. Another building was occupied 
by members of -the Ajhika sect. Besides the residence of Brahmins re- 
ferred to earlier, there were an asrama (hermitage) for ascetics ( tapasa ) 
and an drama for mendicant monks ( parihbajaka ). There were also other 
heretics ( pasandika ) and five hundred families who followed these heretical 
beliefs ( miehehhaditthikuld ). 

The Mahavamsa contains no other references to these religious sects 
apart from the mention of Nighantha Giri who lived in the time of Vatta- 
gamani. The inscriptions do not refer to them at all. Probably none of 
their members lived in caves. And since the last mention of them is dated 
before the famine that followed the Brahmin Tissa’s rebellion, it is pro- 
bable that they disappeared with it. 

But while it has been necessary to begin by drawing attention to these 
non-Buddhist elements of which one is apt to lose sight in an exclusive 
reliance upon the Mahavamsa narrative, it remains definitely true that the 
chief feature in the religious history of Ceylon during this period is the 


xxv. 87. See also CJS. i p. 147 



606 


CEYLON II 


growth of Buddhism. What is most striking is its quick expansion into all 
parts of the inhabited area, the Dry Zone. Before the beginning of the 
Christian era, innumerable persons joined the Sahgha and the number 
of occupants of caves alone far exceeded a thousand. Others lived in 
parks, either in huts or under trees. Persons of all ranks, who had the 
means, sought merit either individually or in groups by presenting caves 
to the Sahgha. According to the inscriptions thirty-three were presented 
by queens and princesses, twenty-eight by princes and seven by kings . 1 
Others were presented by ministers. Brahmins, parumakas, gamikas, 
upasakas and upasikas, craftsmen and others. 

Before long kings, ministers, and district rulers went further and built 
innumerable dag abas, uposatha - houses and other buildings such as re- 
fectories and halls as well as cells (parivetja ). They also endowed many 
of these viharas with the revenues from lands, tanks and canals, and other 
sources of income such as customs duties and fines realized in the law- 
courts, for their maintenance and for the provision of clothing and food 
for the bhikshus, and the expenses of special ceremonies such as the reci- 
tal of the Ariyavamsa and the Giribhanda offering. 

It is likely that Buddhism came to Ceylon from abroad like Brahma- 
nism and Jainism, and that its more rapid diffusion was due to natural 
causes. But the accounts in the chronicles and in the Samantapasadika, 
which devote a considerable amount of space to the introduction and 
spread of Buddhism, present a rather different picture, and though they 
are more historical than the earlier stories, they appear to have been 
fashioned, as Oldenberg suggested some decades ago . 2 with the object of 
connecting Ceylon with Asoka and to make ordinary events great and 
spectacular. 

According to the Mahavamsa Asoka sent a message back by the ambas- 
sadors of Devanampiya Tissa asking him to accept the dhamma of the 
Buddha . 8 A year later, after the Third Buddhist Council had been held 
under Asoka’s patronage, Moggaliputta Tissa, his friend, sent ten mis- 
sions to different parts of India and other countries. One of these came to 
Ceylon led by Mahinda, a son of Asoka. These missionaries were wel- 
comed by king Devanampiya Tissa who treated them with due respect and 
gave them every assistance. Devanampiya Tissa, directed by a deva, met 
Mahinda and his companions, who came by aii . at Mihintale, then called 
Missakapabbata. The next day, on his invitation, they came to Anuradha- 
pura. The day after, they were presented with the Mahameghavana where 
they had spent the previous night. Devanampiya Tissa built sixty-eight 
rock cells at Missakapabbata and gave them to Mahinda and the other 


Vinaya, ed. H. Oldenberg, London, 
1879-83, Intro, to Vinaya Pitakam p. 4 
The story of the relations between 
Asoka and Devanampiya Tissa appears 
to have been influenced by, if not mode- 
lled on, a story in the Sutta Nipata 


y on Kctanavahana, king 
ot ®? nares > an d Buddha Kassapa. — Un- 
published thesis of Dr. W. Rahula on 
Some Aspects of the Early History of 
Bu i™ sn l 1,1 Ce y lon > and Dhammapada 
v. 190. Ante p. 579 n. I 



INTRODUCTION OF WRITING 


607 


members of the sahgha for their residence during the rainy season 
( vassa ). After this Buddha’s alms-bowl and relics were obtained from 
Asoka and his right collar-bone from the god Sakka. The king then built 
the Thuparama chetiya and enshrined the right collar-bone within it. 
Thousands of devotees including princes and noblemen entered the sahgha 
within a short time. Anula, the wife of uparaja Mahanaga, desired to be- 
come a bhikshuni, and Mahinda sent for his sister Sanghamitta, and at the 
same time Asoka was asked to send by her a branch of the Bo-tree at 
Uruvela under which Buddha had attained enlightenment. Sanghamitta 
arrived with the Bo-branch, and it was planted in the Mahameghavana. 
Further, the Mahavamsa records that Devanampiya Tissa erected for the 
advancement of Buddhism a number of other buildings in Anuradhapura 
and elsewhere in the island. 

It is difficult to extract the kernel of truth embedded in these legends, 
which seem most probably to have grown around the shrines mentioned 
in them, after the actual events had been forgotten. A comparison of this 
account with the Dipavamsa and the Samantapasadika reveals that the 
story developed by different stages. 

The legends of Asoka and Moggaliputta Tissa in the Mahavariisa, apart 
from those based on the Jatakas or referring directly to Ceylon, seem to 
have been derived from Indian sources. Some of the stories of Asoka can 
be traced to the Asokavadana and other Buddhist works. Many accounts 
concerning Moggaliputta Tissa are similar even in detail to those related of 
Nagasena in the Milindapanha (p. 7) and of Upagupta and Yasa in Nor- 
thern Buddhist accounts. 1 

The Mahavariisa story of Asoka’s connection with the introduction of 
Buddhism into Ceylon is not confirmed by his inscriptions any more than 
the account of the second consecration of Devanampiya Tissa. The 
Mahavamsa too does not state that Asoka sent any bhikshus to spread 
Buddhism. All that it says is that Asoka summoned the Third Buddhist 
Council and at the end of it Moggaliputta Tissa sent ten Buddhist Missions. 
The places to which Moggaliputta sent missionaries do not coincide with 
the countries to which Asoka in his inscriptions claims to have sent his 
messengers. The Pali chronicles make no mention of missions to Chola, 
to Pandya, and to Kerala, or to the Greek kingdoms, but say that one went 
to Suvannabhumi, a country not mentioned by Asoka. 

The early script of Ceylon does not suggest that the Buddhist mission- 
aries to Ceylon were so closely connected with Asoka. Though it is in- 
deed possible that the art of writing came to Ceylon with the Brahmins 
before the introduction of Buddhism, the earliest extant specimens of wri- 
ting are all associated with Buddhism. It is true that the characters of these 
earliest inscriptions are similar to those of Asoka’s inscriptions and are 
in the same stage ol development, but they show greater similarity to those 
in the west and the south of India than to those in the north and the east. 
The forms of the letters i and ma found in Ceylon do not occur in Asoka’s 
1 Przyluski, LaLegende de VEmpereur Asoka, pp. 60, 64-6, 103 



608 


CEYLON II 


inscriptions while the Ceylon letter e is more primitive. Further, the long 
vowels and the conjunct consonants common in Asoka’s inscriptions do 
not occur in Ceylon. On the other hand the i and ma have been found 
inscribed on ancient caves in South India and a more developed form of 
/ in Sanchl and Amaravatl some centuries later. The conclusion which 
this comparison points to is that the Buddhist missionaries came not from 
the centre of Asoka’s realm but from the west of India, from the region 
of Vidisa and Sanchl, and, probably, that while one party went to South 
India another section came to Ceylon . 1 

It is no longer questioned that Buddhist missions went to different coun- 
tries. The mission to the Himalayas is confirmed by inscriptions found 
at Sanchl . 2 What is doubtful is that these missions were all despatched 
about the same time and that they were organized by Moggaliputta Tissa. 
Geiger doubted whether a mission went so early to Suvannabhumi . 3 
Could Moggaliputta Tissa have sent the mission to Kashmir led by Ma- 
dhyantika who belonged to the Sarvastivada sect ? Further, the Ceylon 
legends credit Moggaliputta Tissa with a status and with achievements 
that may be questioned. 

It has been pointed out already that some of the acts attributed to Mo- 
ggaliputta Tissa also belong to Nagasena, Upagupta, and Yasa, according 
to northern Buddhist accounts. 

But whether Moggaliputta Tissa sent the Buddhist missions or not, it 
is quite probable that Buddhism was introduced into Ceylon by a bhikshu 
called Mahinda and his four companions, Itthiya, Uttiya, Bhaddasala 
and Sambala as recorded in the Dlpavamsa, the Scimantapasadika and the 
Mahdvariisad It is also likely that a bhikshuni called Sanghamitta came 
some time later with others and established an order of bhikshunls. 
Inscriptions show that there were bhikshunls in Ceylon in the first century 
B.c . 5 It is also likely that Buddhism was introduced into Ceylon in the 
time of Devanampiya Tissa. Even if the Devanampiya-maharaja of the 
Mihintale inscriptions was not Devanampiya Tissa, it is known for 
certain from other inscriptions that in his successor Uttiya’s time Buddhist 
bhikshus lived in Ceylon. 

It is unlikely that Mahinda and Sanghamitta were children of Asoka, 
and that Asoka sent relics and a branch of the Bo-tree to Ceylon. 
The only writing outside Ceylon which connects Mahinda with Asoka and 
which has led to a controversy as to whether Mahinda was a son or brother 
of Asoka is a statement of Hiuan Tsang . 6 Fa-hien in his Travels referred 
to a brother of Asoka 7 who was no other than Vltasoka of the northern 
Buddhist accounts and Tissa of the Mahavamsa. Hiuan Tsang confused 


P. E. E. Fernando, ‘ Palaeographical 
Development of the Brahml Script in 
Ceylon from the 3rd century b.c. to the 
7ih century a.d’., UCR. vu p. 282; 
see also C. W. Nicholas’s article on the 
same topic in UCR. vn p. 60 
‘ MV. Eng. trans., p. xix 


4 An inscription of about the first century 
re J er T s T . to Mahinda, Bhadrasala, 
a I ™ 3nd Ut T but leaves out Sambala. 
££?V vn P- 240 ; CJS. n no. 516 p. 124 
My. Eng. trans., p. xviii 
7 Giles’s Eng. Trans, p. 45 



CRITIQUE OF LEGENDS 


609 


this person with Mahinda of the Ceylon legends and called him Mahen- 
dra, the brother of Asoka. V. A. Smith rejected the Ceylon legend and, 
preferring the statement of Hiuan Tsang, expressed the view that the 
legend which ascribed the conversion of Ceylon to the younger brother 
of Asoka had probably a basis of fact. 1 Thus arose the myth that Mahinda 
was a brother of Asoka. 

It is only the Ceylon legends that make Mahinda and Sanghamitta 
children of Asoka. The Asokavadana gives an account of the festival of the 
dramas, but does not bring Mahinda and Sanghamitta into the story, 
as the Mahavamsa does. 2 It was once believed that the story of the com- 
ing of the Bo-branch to Ceylon received confirmation in India. Grtin- 
wedel in Buddhist Kunst in Indien (p. 72) expressed the view that the sculp- 
tures of the lower and middle architraves of the east gate of the Sanchl 
stupa may represent the bringing of the Bo-branch to Ceylon, and this 
view was accepted by Rhys Davids and Geiger. 3 In the revised edition 
(1932) of Grunwedel’s work Ernst Waldschmidt has pointed out that these 
sculptures represent the abandonment of the worldly life by the Buddha 
and Asoka’ s visit to the Bo-tree as described in the Divyavadana. 

Nor does the circumstantial evidence in Ceylon favour the Ceylon tra- 
dition. In fact, this is not the only story of this type found in the Pali 
chronicles. The Buddha, a member of the Sakya clan, is called a descen- 
dant of Mahasammata and Okkaka, and is made to visit Ceylon and sanc- 
tify its holy places. Vijaya is made to land on the day of the Parinibbaria. 
The royal dynasty of Anuradhapura is connected with the Sakya clan 
through the union of Panduvasudeva and Bhaddakachchana. Moggali- 
putta Tissa, the great Elder of the Theravada sect, is made the special 
friend of Asoka, just as other sects connect their Elders with him. Thus 
the connection of the Bo-tree in Ceylon with the Bo-tree at Uruvela and of 
Mahinda and Sanghamitta with Asoka along with the story of the second 
consecration of Devanampiya Tissa by Asoka seems to be in the same 
strain as these traditions. 

Perhaps the same is the case with the stories that so closely associate 
the introduction of Buddhism with king Devanampiya Tissa. According 
to the Mahavamsa it was Devanampiya Tissa who constructed the caves 
around Kantaka chetiya so that Mahinda and his followers might spend 
the vassa there. Though this is repeated in the Samantapasadika it is not 
supported by the Dipavamsa. Inscriptions show that they were built at 
various times by a number of persons in a period ranging over much more 
than a century. 4 In fact there is no inscription that records the grant of any 
of these caves by Devanampiya Tissa himself ; only his wife is mentioned 
as the donor of one. The story of the acceptance of the Mahameghavana 
appears to be an attempt to connect the Mahavihara both with Mahinda 
and with Devanampiya Tissa. Mahinda and his companions, who are 

1 Asoka , p. 45 p. xx 

2 Legende de PEmpereur Asoka, p. 103 4 UCR. vn p. 234 

3 Buddhist India, p. 302; MV. Eng. trans., 

77 



610 


CEYLON II 


said to have come by air from India to Ceylon and from Mihintale to 
Anuradhapura, are obliged to stay at the Mahameghavana for the night 
as Mihintale was far and it was getting dark! It is also noteworthy that 
the Samantapasadikd, a work of the Mahavihara, omits most of the le- 
gends connected with the acceptance of the Mahameghavana. These 
stories no doubt came into existence after this commentary was written 
down and only when the Mahavihara had become important. The Maha- 
variisa itself shows that even immediately after the death of Saddha Tissa 
the Thuparama was recognised as the chief vihara in Anuradhapura. 

According to the chronicles the only important thupa built at first was 
that of the Thuparama. This may have been built by Devanampiya Tissa; 
but it is possible that it was attributed to him later in the same way as the 
construction of the caves. The other buildings attributed to him in the 
Mahavamsa may also have been built in later times. Many of them find 
no mention either in the Dipavamsa or in the Samantapasadikd. One of 
them is the pillar on which is said to have been inscribed the prophecy 
that Dutthagamani would build the Mahathupa. Hence the list of the 
buildings constructed by him is later not only than the building of the 
Mahathupa but also than the growth of the legends about its construction. 

It is doubtful whether the Mahavamsa delivers a correct account even 
of the religious activities of the immediate successors of Devanampiya 
Tissa. There are four inscriptions that mention the grant of caves by 
Uttiya and his wife , 1 but the Mahavamsa does not mention any viharas 
as built by him. On the other hand the Mahavamsa credits Mahasiva with 
a vihara in Anuradhapura and Sura Tissa with eight viharas in Anuradha- 
pura and elsewhere. It adds that in all he built five hundred viharas in- 
cluding those erected before he ascended the throne. 

Viharas, according to the Mahavamsa, were also built by the rulers of 
Ruhuna. Uparaja Mahanaga built the Nagamahavihara and others, 
and Kakavanna Tissa the Tissamahavihara, the Chittalapabbata-vihara 
and others. These viharas no doubt existed in early times, but there is 
not sufficient evidence to test whether the ascriptions are correct in each 
case. Inscriptions tell us only that Siva gifted a cave before he became 
king. According to a later chapter of the Mahavamsa itself, Ilanaga built 
the Nagamahavihara and enlarged a thupa that had been built earlier. 

The spread of Buddhism in Ceylon was due to many causes. It was 
essentially a missionary religion. The Buddha himself preached to all 
classes of people, and his followers, the Sangha, followed his example 
wherever they went. In this respect Buddhism differed from Brahmanism 
to which only a section of the people adhered. The only recorded aspect 
of Brahmanism in Ceylon at this period is the sacrificial. Consequently 
one may suppose that it had no reason to come into conflict with a monas- 
tic religion like Buddhism. In fact Brahmins joined others in providing 
caves for the bhikshus. Buddhism also exerted a wider appeal than Jainism 


1 ASCAR. 1933, paras. 53 & 54, p. 14 



BUDDHIST COSMOLOGY 


611 


as it did not demand the practice of severe austerities but pursued a middle 
path in asceticism. 

Nor would the worship of local gods, tree-deities, and yakshas, be an 
obstacle to the acceptance of Buddhism. Such deities could only reduce 
or avert suffering in this world. They would not satisfy an agricultural 
people who led a settled life and enjoyed considerable leisure. These 
people probably had already heard something of Brahmin ideas of life ancf 
the universe from their ancestors who came from North India, and so 
would require a religion which took account of the whole universe, ex- 
plained the meaning of life, and enlightened them about future existences. 

The Buddhist conception of the universe was almost the same as the 
Brahmin which is adopted with a few modifications, and thus it was not 
something entirely new. According to Buddhism six heavens existed 
above the human world (Manussaloka). The one immediately above was 
the Chatumaharajika, the Realm of the Four Great Kings called the 
Guardians of the World (Lokapala) viz. Dhatarattha, Virulha, Virupa- 
kkha and Yessavana, the rulers of the gandhabbas, kumbharidas, nagas, 
and yakkhas. The next was Tavatimsa ruled by Sakka whose attendant 
was Vissakamma, the god of craftsmen. The third was Yama, and the 
fourth Tusita, where Metteyya who was to be the next Buddha lived as a 
deva. The fifth was Nimmanarati, and the last, Parinimmitavasavatti, the 
Realm of Mara. Above all these came the Rupaloka, the abode of the 
Brahmas who have material body, and the Arupaloka, the abode of 
Brahmas who possess no material body. 

Below the Manussaloka was the Underworld or Apaya. These consis- 
ted of the Animal Kingdom {tirachchhanayoni) where the nagas lived, the 
hells ( niraya or naraka), the world of departed beings (petaloka ), and 
the world of the asuras {asuraloka). The hells had each eight divisions 
one of which was avichi, and each of these had further subdivisions. 
Apart from these were the lokantarika hells of eternal darkness each of 
which was situated between each of the three world-systems like the space 
between three bowls placed touching each other. 

According to Buddhist ideas the dwellers in these worlds were not 
beings who had to be propitiated. Some of them such as Brahma Saham- 
pati and Sakka were followers of the Buddha. The yakshas were not consi- 
dered as necessarily harmful beings. They were called bhummadevas, and 
some stories relate that they accepted the teachings of the Buddha . 1 

Buddhism took over other ideas also from Brahmins, the theory of 
cycles ( kalpas ) and the doctrines of karma and rebirth. The belief in 
birth and rebirth made people realize the brevity of this life compared with 
eternity, and so the problem of future existences became a matter of 
supreme importance to them. Again, this life was subject not only to 
mental suffering ( dukkha ) but to physical affliction as well. Government 
at this time lacked the means to afford sufficient security from violence 


Adikaram, EHB. p. 145 



612 


CEYLON n 


and robbery. Wild beasts, birds, and insects often destroyed the crops. 
These disasters presented a lurking danger to life itself of which they were 
instinctively aware. They often suffered also from droughts which led 
to famines, and from pestilences which they had not the knowledge to 
control. The aftermath of such disasters might well produce a sense, 
among the survivors, of the futility of the acquisition of wealth and other 
material goods of the world and even of nobler earthly endeavour. Hence 
large numbers entered the Sangha in order to put an end to this cycle of 
birth and rebirth and to attain Nirvana. 

Buddhism had a way also for those who were not prepared to follow 
the arduous path of asceticism. It showed, as was never done before, 
a way of morality by which people could avoid the sufferings of hell and 
attain a happier state of life in the next birth. The lay followers, however, 
were not provided with any organisation or definite and obligatory rules 
of conduct; they were free to carry on in addition any other religious 
practices they liked. Buddhism, unlike most other religions, made no 
serious attempt in Ceylon to incorporate existing cults. The only instances 
on record in the Mahavamsa are the worship of the god Saman (Sumana) 
of Adam’s Peak and of the rajayatana tree in the Northern Peninsula. In 
the result the laity followed Buddhism without abjuring sacrificial Brah- 
manism and the worship of gods and spirits to which they were already 
accustomed. 

When Buddhism came to Ceylon it had already assumed a popular 
form. The chief emphasis at this time was not on the Dhamma but on the 
Buddha himself. He was no longer looked upon merely as a teacher who 
showed a way of life but also as a saviour who possessed supernormal 
powers, knew what happened in the past, and saw into the future. He 
travelled by air, subdued yakshas and nagas and other evil spirits, and 
saved people from disasters and pestilences. The commentaries show 
that he was now credited with divine attributes. It was accepted at this 
time that when alive he was not liable to disease or decay . 1 

The Buddhist scriptures provided a literature wide and varied enough 
to satisfy the needs both of bhikshus and laymen. Buddhism at this time 
also had ceremonies able to attract the laity. There was the veneration of 
chetiyas containing relics which were regarded as a substitute for the 
Buddha, and of Bo-trees under one of which he attained enlightenment. 
According to the Atthakatha it was believed during this period that merit 
could be acquired by venerating a relic, while one who destroyed a 
dagaba or a Bo-tree forfeited a great deal of it. Buddhism also provided 
a substitute for charms; a certain Buddhist text when recited was believed 
to protect people against ill-disposed human beings, yakkhas, gandhab- 
bas, kumbhanfas and nagas. It was believed that the Paritta ceremony, in 
which these verses were recited as well as other texts, which were really 
meant as a code of ethics to be practised, could protect people even from 


1 Adikaram, EHB. pp. 96-7 



INFLUENCE OF BUDDHISM 


613 


plague. It was also believed that by chanting these verses evil spirits who 
had taken possession of human beings could be exorcised . 1 

The Buddhist missionaries found it easy to convey their message to the 
people of Ceylon. As the inscriptions show, the language of the people, 
unlike the South Indian languages, was in many respects similar to their 
own. Nor did it vary much in the different parts of the island. Early 
Sinhalese was in some respects akin to Vedic (OIA.). The chief difference 
lay in the shortening of long vowels, the de-aspiration of consonants (Skt. 
bharya, Sinh. bariya ), the reduction of double consonants into single ones 
(Skt. sangha, Sinh. saga), and the change of s into h . 2 These differences 
could not have troubled the Indian missionaries much, as similar though 
slighter changes were taking place in their own spoken dialects. 

Further the civilization of Ceylon was akin to that of North India where 
Buddhism arose. Hence the missionaries had no need to present the 
Buddhist doctrines in a new garb in order to make them intelligible to 
the people. 

The Buddhist bhikshus who came to Ceylon as well as those who imme- 
diately joined the Sangha in the island seem to have been persons who 
devoted themselves mainly to meditation. They occupied caves in Mihin- 
tale, Isurumuniya which included the so-called Vessagiriya, Situlpahuva 
(Chittalapabbata) and other numerous caves throughout the Dry Zone. 
Mahinda appears to have lived in Mihintale, where he landed and was 
met by Devanampiya Tissa, and where ultimately he died; Mahinda-guha 
was situated there. Others seem to have lived in parks such as the Nanda- 
navana and the Mahameghavana, where the Thuparama and the Maha- 
vihara came to be established, and the Tissamaharama near Magama. 

Very early, chetiyas appear to have been built and Bo-trees planted for 
purposes of worship. The chetiyas were at first small in size, and of these 
probably the largest were the chetiya at the Thuparama in Anuradhapura 
and those at Magama and Kalaniya. Even these could not have been 
large, for what we see today are probably enlargements made in later 
times. 

Buddhism probably became a powerful influence only from about the 
time of Dutthagamani orSaddha Tissa. It is even possible that Devanam- 
piya Tissa and his immediate successors did not specially favour any one 
religion. They had Br ahmin s as purohitas, teachers, ministers, and 
physicians, and it was the custom in India for kings to treat all religions 
alike. Probably by the time Dutthagamani became king over the whole 
island. Buddhism had gained such a hold over the country that kings 
began to identify themselves more closely with it and extend to it a special 
patronage. 

The Mahavamsa, however, is not a reliable source even for the 
reigns of Dutthagamani and Saddha Tissa. It is mainly a story of the 
Mahavihara, and just as it tried earlier to associate it with Devanampiya 


Adikaram, EHB. p. 143 


EZ. i p. 16 



614 


CEYLON II 


Tissa and Mahinda, it now seeks to connect Dutthagamani with its 
establishment. According to the Mahavamsa, Dutthagamani built the 
Marichavatti dagaba and vihara as well as the Mahathupa and the 
Lohapasada, the uposatha- house of the Mahavihara. He also performed 
many other meritorious deeds, and as a reward, the chronicle concludes, 
he went to the Tusita Heaven at his death, to be reborn as the first 
disciple of Metteyya, the next Buddha. 

It is not necessary to read far into this story of Dutthagamani in order 
to note that the Buddhist bhikshus have transformed it to serve religious 
ends. This accords with Indian practice at this time, evident in the Pura- 
nas, and also later in such stories as those of Karikala and Kochchenga- 
nan. In some respects the story is similar to that of Asoka in the Asoka- 
vadana with the difference that Asoka was a good man who did much for 
Buddhism and the people, but is represented as having been wicked in his 
early days until he was converted to Buddhism, whereas Dutthagamani, 
a warrior who became the sole ruler of Ceylon through the blood of 
innumerable men, is represented as the builder of the Mahathupa and the 
Lohapasada of the Mahavihara. 

Buddhist bhikshus were not expected to indulge in tales of kings, wars, 
robbers, and ministers, ( rajakatha , yuddhakatha, chorakatha, mahamach- 
chakatha) as these were deemed unsuited for bhikshus {tirachchhana). 1 
They were, however, according to the Pali commentary, allowed to deal 
with such persons or events if their object was to show the impermanence 
of such persons of great power ( mahanubhava ). 2 Therefore it is possi- 
ble, as Geiger suggests, that priestly tradition seized the figure of the 
popular warrior who united the Kingdom of Lanka and made him a hero 
whose chief object was the advancement of the Buddhist faith and the 
service of the Buddhist Sangha . 3 

The Dipavamsa, as already stated, makes no reference in its main 
account to the Marichavatti vihara and credits Saddha Tissa, not Duttha- 
gamani, with the building of the Mahathupa and the Lohapasada. 
According to the Mahavamsa, Saddha Tissa merely gave the finishing 
touches to the Mahathupa by completing the work on the parasol, doing 
the plaster work and building the elephant-wall. As the Lohapasada was 
burnt down accidentally, be is said to have built it anew seven storeys 
high. 

The Marichavatti vihara is undoubtedly an ancient vihara, as many' 
Pali commentaries refer to an incident that occurred at the festival of the 
vihara ;* but there is no other evidence to show that it was built by Dut- 
thagamani. 

It is doubtful if Dutthagamani built a Lohapasada. The description 
of the building ascribed to him seems to have been derived from the 

1 Digha Nikaya : Sacred Books of the 

Buddhists x p. 13 

3 Sumahgalavilasini I Ed. T. W. Rhys 

Davids & J.E. Carpenter, p. 89 


Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa, Eng. trans., 

p. 21 

1 Adikaram, EHB. p. 63 



MAHATHUPA AND LOHAPASADA 


615 


vimanas described in the Vimanavatthu such as the Serisaka vimana. 1 
The story of Birani as given in the account is derived from the Nimi 
Jataka. 2 Further, this chapter seems to belong to a later age than the rest 
of the story of Dutthagamani. The Mahathupa elsewhere in the Maha- 
varhsa is called the Hemamali chetiya. In this account it is called the 
Sonnamali. 3 

The story of the Mahathupa, though earlier than that of the Lohapa- 
sada, is also clearly late and probably arose when the actual course of 
events had been forgotten. Its lateness is evident from the reference to 
images of the Buddha, of the existence of which we have no reliable evi- 
dence until the reign of Vasabha. The Pali commentaries based on the 
Sinhalese written down at the beginning of the first century a.d. have 
only one reference to images and this is held to be an interpolation. 4 

The account contains many mythical and contradictory stories. The 
relics are brought from the naga-world in a miraculous way. This story, 
it is clear, is based not on the account of the distribution of relics in the 
Pali canon, but on the later version that became current in India and 
reached Ceylon. 5 According to the Mahavamsa (xxxiii.5) Dutthagamani 
died before the Mahathupa was completed; but this is contrary to the 
earlier statement (xxix. 52) that the far-seeing ara/tat Siddhattha prevented 
Dutthagamani from designing a much larger thupa lest he might not 
complete it in his lifetime. 

The Pali commentaries make little mention of the religious activities 
of Dutthagamani. 6 Two of them refer to his practice of offering food to 
bhikshus before partaking of meals. Inscriptions make no reference to 
any at all. 

Thus the older tradition of the Dipavamsa, which is silent on the reli- 
gious activities of Dutthagamani and is supported partly by the indirect 
evidence of the Mahavamsa, may be correct. It is also possible that 
the Mahavamsa story is an attempt to reconcile the Dipavamsa narrative 
with another tradition which attributed the Mahathupa and the Lohapa- 
sada to Dutthagamani, by making Saddha Tissa complete the Mahathupa 


1 Paramattha dipani iv. Ed. E. Hardy, 

P.T.S. London, 1901 p. 331; Vimana- 
\atthu, no. 77, pp. 69-70 

3 No. 541 ' 

3 xv. 167; xvii. 51; xxxiii. 31. Accord- 
ing to xv 173 a stone pillar was set up 
by Devanampiya Tissa recording the 
prediction of Mahinda about the build- 
ing of the Mahathupa, and this pillar 
is again referred to in xxviii 2. Mahinda 
according to xv 172 did not predict 
that Dutthagamani would build the 
Lohapasada, and v 205 of the same 

chapter ascribes this building to Deva- 
narnpiya Tissa. Thus in the early 

part of the Mahavamsa there is no 
indication that Dutthagamani was to 
build the Lohapasada. But according to 


this chapter there was a golden plate 
in the palace in which was inscribed the 
prediction of Mahinda that Duttha- 
gamani would build both the Sonriamali 
chetiya and the Lohapasada. The 
earliest evidence we have of the use of 
gold plate for inscriptions is in the reign 
of Vasabha, and it is likely that this 
legend is much later than the other 
tales of Dutthagamani. Hence the 
negative evidence of the Dipavamsa 
is not without some support in the 
Mahavamsa itself. 

8 Adikaram, EHB. p. 135 

5 E. J. Thomas, The Life of the Buddha, 
p. 158 

8 Adikaram, EHB. p. 62 



616 


CEYLON H 


which Dutthagamani had begun, and accounting for his building the 
Lohapasada by saying that the one built by Dutthagamani had been burnt 
down. 

It is, however, of no great consequence whether Dutthagamani or 
Saddha Tissa built the Mahavihara. The important point is that is was 
built about this time, and that within one and a half centuries it began 
to play an important part in the history of Buddhism in Ceylon. 

The Pali chronicles and the inscriptions show that Buddhism continued 
to flourish from the time of Saddha Tissa. The accounts in the Maha- 
vamsa which are the most complete seem to be accurate, on the whole ; 
and we need not compile a complete list of the buildings constructed, 
the improvements and additions made to them, and the endowments 
granted by kings and others. Kings built dagabas, thupagharas or 
houses for thupas, uposatha-houses, refectories and other buildings, and 
endowed many of them with lands, tanks, and other revenues. Of the 
more important examples, the Ritigala vihara was built by Lajaka Tissa, 
the Kurundavasoka vihara by Khallatanaga, the Abhayagiri vihara 
by Vattagamani Abhaya, the Dakkhina vihara by a minister of Vattaga- 
mani, the Ridi vihara (Rajatalena) by Amandagamani, and the Jetava- 
narama by Mahasena. Kutakanna Tissa built the Silachetiya and 
Mahadathika Mahanaga the Ambatthala Mahathupa (mahasaya). Gaja- 
bahu made the Abhayagiri dagaba larger than the Ruvanvali Saya, and 
Kanittha Tissa built the Ratanapasada, the uposatha- house of the 
Abhayagiri vihara. 

A vihara at this time consisted of a dagaba, a Bo-tree, an uposatha-house 
and cells or huts in which the bhikshus lived. The Mahavamsa has 
a few references to images of bronze and stone, but the image house had 
not yet become such a feature of a vihara as it is to-day. The larger 
viharas like the Mahavihara, the Abhayagiri and Jetavanarama had refec- 
tories and many other buildings. These covered a wide area and accom- 
modated a very large number of bhikshus. The grounds of the Mahavi- 
hara, for instance, extended from the boundary of the Thuparama to 
that of the Dakkhina vihara in the south. 

The only king who worked against Buddhism during this period was 
Choranaga who destroyed eighteen viharas which had not supported him 
when he was a rebel. In other ways too all did not go well with Buddhism. 
Reference has already been made to the famine that followed the rebellion 
of Brahmin Tissa ; when the Mahavihara was abandoned, many bhikshus 
left for India, while those who remained died or suffered great hardships. 
The bhikshus then feared that parts of their scriptures might be lost. The 
Pali canon at this time was handed down orally, its different sections being 
memorized by different bhikshus who recited them and taught them in 
pupillary succession. For instance the Dighabhanakas knew the Digha 
Nikaya and the Majjhimabhaiiakas the Majjhima Nikaya. The bhikshus, 
therefore, made sure that every part should be known by more than one 
person. After the famine was over, those who remained in Ceylon 



REDACTION OF THE CANON 


617 


checked their versions with those of the bhikshus who had returned from 
India. 1 

The danger to which the Pali canon became exposed had two important 
results. After the famine the bhikshus of the Theravada sect who hitherto 
emphasized the Vinaya more than the Dhamma began to lay greater stress 
on the learning of the texts (pariyatti ) than on living a good life (pati- 
patti ). In a controversy on this subject the Dhammakathikas who atta- 
ched greater importance to the learning of the texts are said to have won 
the day against the Pamsukulikas who placed greater emphasis on a life of 
discipline. 2 

The second consequence was that the bhikshus put into writing the Pali 
canon and the commentaries, though not immediately despite what the 
Pali chronicles say. This event is recorded both in the Dipavamsa and 
the Mahavariisa in two verses which are identical. ‘The text of the Tipi- 
taka and the Atthakatha thereon did most wise bhikshus hand down in 
former times orally, but since they saw the decay of people they came 
together and in order that the doctrine might endure they wrote it down 
in books.’ 

As Geiger suggests, these have the stamp of traditional couplets, 3 4 and 
in both chronicles they appear to be an interpolation inserted in the sec- 
tion dealing with the reign of Vattagamani Abhaya. 

The Nikaya Sahgraha 4 states that when Vattagamani Abhaya was in 
hiding five hundred arahants assembled at Alulena (modern Aluvihara) 
in the district of Matale under the patronage of a chief, and recited and 
reduced to writing the Tipitaka which had been handed down from Upali 
to Chulabhaya, Tissa, Chuiadeva and Siva. 5 But these last three Elders, as 
Adikaram has shown, lived about the time of Bhatikabhaya (22 b. c.- 
a.d. 7). 6 Therefore the Tipitaka could not have been put into writing 
at the time when Vattagamani was in hiding in Malaya (103-89 B.C.). 
Besides, Adikaram has shown that the Theras up to the time of Bhatika- 
bhaya are referred to in the commentaries while those who lived later are 
hardly mentioned. It seems safe, therefore, to conclude that the commen- 
taries could not have been put into writing before the first century a.d. 

The commentaries themselves do not indicate where they were written 
down. According to the Samantapasadika, Chulabhaya was a teacher 
of the Vinaya at the Mahavihara. It is most likely that they were 
transcribed in that monastery, where they were found in later times. 
Adikaram has assumed, 7 however, that the Tipitaka was put into writing 
in the time of Vattagamani Abhaya though not the commentaries. If 


1 Adikaram, EHB. pp. 73, 77 

2 Ibid. p. 78 

3 Dipavamsa and Mahavamsa Eng. trans., 
p. 16; MK.pp. xxxiii, 100-1 

4 The Nikaya Sahgraha was written by the 

Thera Devarakkhita Jayabahu (Dhar- 

maklrti II) in the reign^of VIrabahu 

II (1391-1397). It gives a summary 

78 


of the history of Theravada Buddhism 
in India and Ceylon up to the fifteenth 
year of Bhuvanaikabahu V (1372- 
1405). 

Nikaya Sahgraha, p. 10 
Adikaram, EHB. p. 87 
Ibid. p. 79 



618 


CEYLON n 


such an event took place, it is strange that there is no indication in the 
co m mentaries that this happened. 

The changes in the Sinhalese script, however, do not coincide in time 
with the writing down of the commentaries. This is not surprising, for 
these changes are not a natural evolution from the early Brahmi script 
of Ceylon but follow deviations that took place in Andhradesa at about 
this time. The probable explanation is that these more developed forms 
of the script, along with the practice of commencing an inscription 
with the auspicious word siddham as in Andhradesa, were introduced by 
the bhikshus who went to South India and lived there during the famine 
that followed the rebellion of Brahmin Tissa . 1 

Buddhism also suffered from schisms during this period. Up to the 
time of Vattagamani there was only one Buddhist sect in Ceylon— the 
Theravada, and during his reign the first schism in the Ceylon sangha 
took place. Vattagamani while in exile in Malaya was assisted by the 
Thera Kupikkala Mahatissa. In recognition of his services he allotted 
to his vihara certain lands, recording the grant on a ketaka leaf. Later 
when he built the Abhayagiri vihara he presented it to the same Thera. 
According to the Nikaya Sahgraha the bhikshus of the Mahavihara expel- 
led him from the Sangha for breaking the rule which prohibited bhikshus 
from frequenting the homes of lay folk. Mahadaliya Tissa (Bahala- 
massu Tissa), his pupil, tried to prevent this expulsion, and for his obstruc- 
tion he too was expelled. Thereupon Mahadaliya Tissa followed by 
a large number of bhikshus went to the Abhayagiri vihara and there cons- 
tituted themselves into a separate group refusing to acknowledge the 
authority of the Mahavihara. 

This story which is similar to the account given in the Mahavamsa is 
the version of the bhikshus of the Mahavihara. The Uttara-vihdra Attha- 
katha, which probably gave the Abhayagiri vihara version, is not extant. 
In any case the Mahavamsa story appears to be a simplification of a 
complex situation; for this split in the sangha led to far-reaching conse- 
quences. 

Like all schismatics who are prone to view new doctrines with favour, 
Mahadaliya Tissa shortly afterwards accepted the teaching of some follo- 
wers of the Dhammaruchi Achariya of the Vajjiputtaka sect who had 
come from India and assumed that title, thus bringing into existence the 
Dhammaruchi Sect in Ceylon. 

It is not clear in what respects this new sect differed from the Therava- 
dins. The only evidence available is that in the reign of Bhatikabhaya 
there was a dispute between the Mahavihara and the Abhayagiri vihara 
over a vinaya rule. It was finally settled by the king’s minister, the 
Brahmin Dighakarayana . 2 

In the meantime the Mahavihara continued to grow in importance, 
and in the same reign Thera Godha of the Mahavihara whom the king 


1 UCR. vn p. 294 


Adikaram, EHB. 



VAITULYAVADA 


619 


held in high esteem heard in appeal a case of theft first tried at 
the Chetiyapabbata vihara at Mihintale. 1 

The Sangha had no organization to control its entire body. The 
community of bhikshus in each vihara or in each area managed its own 
affairs. Being an educated body they had a democratic form of govern- 
ment. They decided their affairs in a general assembly, punished offen- 
ders and expelled those who committed serious crimes. If they failed 
to settle a dispute they appealed to the king, who either dealt with it 
in person or appointed one of his ministers to inquire into it. The appeal 
from the decision of the Chetiyapabbata vihara was probably of this 
nature and did not imply that the Mahavihara had any control over the 
Chetiyapabbata vihara', for a dispute over the uposatha-housc at Thupa- 
rama was settled by Kanirajanu Tissa. It shows, however, that at this 
time the Mahavihara was beginning to be accepted as the chief vihara 
of the Theravada sect. 

The disputes between the Mahavihara and the Abhayagiri vihara once 
more became acute in the reign of Voharika Tissa. According to the 
Theravada tradition embodied in the Nikaya Sahgraha (p. 12) the bhikshus 
of the Dhammaruchi sect at the Abhayagiri vihara accepted the Vaitulya 
Pitaka and proclaimed it as the true doctrine, but the bhikshus of the 
Theravada sect rejected its teaching. Voharika Tissa thereupon got his 
minister Kapila to inquire into this dispute, and on his decision suppressed 
the new doctrine. The Dipavamsa calls this new doctrine Vitandavada, 
and according to the commentaries the Vitandavadins accepted the main 
canonical texts but differed only in their interpretation. 

In spite of this action of Voharika Tissa, according to the Nikaya 
Sahgraha, in the fifth year of Gothabhaya, the bhikshus of the Dhamma- 
ruchi sect once more proclaimed the Vaitulyavada. The king then sum- 
moned the bhikshus of the five great viharas, doubtless those of the Maha- 
vihara persuasion, and finding on their advice that the Vaitulyavada was 
not the true teaching of the Buddha, purified the Sangha by banishing 
from the island sixty of the bhikshus of the Abhayagiri vihara. 

The situation, however, changed with the accession of Mahasena, 
and the conflict came to a head. Mahasena, when a boy, came under 
the influence of a Vaitulyaka called Sanghamitta and accepted his teach- 
ing. When he became king, he was still under the influence of this 
bhikshu and worked against the Theravadins. According to an inscrip- 
tion, which is unfortunately mutilated, he appears to have rebuked 
the bhikshus of the five great viharas and ordered them to study the Vaitu- 
lyavada. 2 According to the Mahavamsa the point at issue were the rules 
of the Vinaya. According to the Dipavamsa the Vaitulyakas held 
that the computation of the twenty years required for the upasampadd 
ordination from the date of conception was not allowable and that the 

1 Ibid. p. 86 forms of writing found in inscriptions 

2 EZ. xv p. 229. The script of this ins- at Nagarjunakonda, in Andhradesa. 

cription shows the influence of the (pi. opp. p. 237). 



620 


CEYLON II 


practice of using ivory fans was allowable . 1 Mahasena took the view 
that the Vaitulyakas were in the right and punished the bhikshus of the 
Mahavihara for not observing these rules . 2 

Even though Mahasena withdrew this decree, he did not give up his 
opposition to the Mahavihara altogether. He built for the Thera Kohon 
Tissa of the Dakkhina vihdra the Jetavanarama in the Nandana- 
vana park within the precincts of the Mahavihara, and asked the bhi- 
kshus of the Mahavihara to do away with their boundary. But rather 
than do this, they abandoned the Mahavihara for the second time and 
did not return for nine months. 

In the meantime the Thera Kohon Tissa was charged with a serious 
offence. The king’s minister who inquired into the matter ordered him 
to be excommunicated from the sahgha. But the Jetavanarama, 
the ddgdba of which was now the largest in Anuradhapura, was not aban- 
doned. When the Dhammaruchi sect in the Abhayagiri vihdra adopted 
the Vaitulyavada in the reign of Gothabhaya, a Thera, Ussiliya Tissa by 
name, refused to join them and departed with his followers to the 
Dakkhina vihdra. There they came to be called the Sagalikas because 
they followed a teacher named Sagala. These now occupied the Jetava- 
narama though Kohon Tissa was excommunicated. Thus the Jetava- 
narama came to be associated with the third most important Buddhist 
sect of ancient Ceylon. 

For want of evidence it is not possible to estimate the effect of these 
controversies on the people. It is likely that in the main they were con- 
fined to the bhikshus. As stated already. Buddhism in Ceylon at 
this time was essentially a monastic religion. It had no organization 
which comprehended the laity. In fact the sahgha itself, though it had 
an organization, could not enforce discipline on any of its members who 
refused to follow its rules. In such cases it had to appeal to the king or 
the district ruler. Thus it was in no position to direct the lives of the 
people except in an indirect way; and it is not likely that the laity would 
have taken much interest in these internal quarrels. 

It is not improbable, however, that, though the points of dispute arose 
on matters of discipline, these sects differed in other ways too. It is 
true that in fundamentals they differed very little and practically all 
followed in the main the first four nikayas. But in matters of interpre- 
tation they held different views, and one sect developed the ideas of the 
Pali canon to such an extent as to replace the ideal of the attainment of the 
state of an arahat with that of the attainment of Buddhahood. This sect, 
called the Mahayanists, and in Ceylon Vaitulyakas, further developed 
a cult of bodhisattvas, emphasised the bhakti marga or the way of devotion, 
and evolved much further the simple ritual and ceremonies of the Thera- 
vada sect. These ideas and practices were soon to influence not only 
the laity but a large section of the bhikshus of the Theravada sect itself . 3 


1 Dipavamsa xx 67 
8 Nikaya Sangraha, p. 12 


S. Paranavitana, ‘Mahayanism in Cey- 
lon’, CJS. u p. 35 



COMMENTARIES. CHRONOLOGY 621 

Buddhism was also mainly responsible for the cultural development 
that occurred during this period. Reference has already been made to the 
writing down of the Pali canon and the Sinhalese Atthakatha in the first 
century a.d. This act preserved for future generations not only the 
Theravada canon but also the Pali language which was to be the vehicle 
of much literature in Ceylon, Burma and other countries. 

The writing down of the commentaries on the Pali texts was the begin- 
ning of Sinhalese literature. These commentaries probably formed the 
Mahatthakatha or the Mulatthakatha of the Mahavihara which gave 
expositions of the entire Pali Canon. They elucidated difficult words and 
abstruse points of doctrine, and preserved amplifications of, and additions 
to, the texts, besides numerous anecdotes and stories dealing with Ceylon. 

In course of time other commentaries came to be written. Separate 
commentaries were made on each of the texts, such as Vinaya Atthakatha. 
Another compilation was the Pordnafthakathd which included an account 
of the historical tradition of Ceylon on which the Mahavamsa was based. 

The writing of commentaries was not confined to the Mahavihara. 
The Kurundi Atthakatha, which belongs to this period, was compiled pro- 
bably at the Kurundavasoka vihara. The Abhayagiri vihara probably 
preserved the canons of one or more of the other sects and its own com- 
mentaries. The Vamsatthappakasini refers to an Uttaravihara (Abhaya- 
giri) Atthakatha which contained legends of early Ceylon . 1 

The Thuparama probably had its own traditions. The Sinhalese com- 
mentaries often quoted Pali verses, and it is likely that verse composition 
in Pali began to be practised even before the Sinhalese commentaries were 
written down. The Pali verses strung together in the early part of the 
Dipavamsa, which seem to be earlier than the Sinhalese Vinaya Atthak- 
atha, were probably composed at the Thuparama, as this work places its 
emphasis on this vihara. 

Verses were also composed in Sinhalese. A few of them, in yagi, udgiti 
and upagiti metres as well as in the variety of arya metre called pathya, 
have been found in inscriptions . 2 

The Dipavamsa and the Mahavamsa also show that Buddhist bhikshus, 
probably about the first century a.d. or a little earlier, attempted to cons- 
truct a chronology for the history of Ceylon from the year of the Parini- 
bbaria up to their time. They appear to have begun by fixing the intro- 
duction of Buddhism into Ceylon after the eighteenth or the nineteenth 
year of Asoka’s consecration, and then the accession of Devanampiya Tissa 
a year earlier and Vijaya’s arrival on the day of the Parinibbana. Reckon- 
ing by a list of the regnal years of the Magadha kings they allotted two 
hundred and thirty-six years for the interval from Vijaya to Mutasiva. 
Actually this period was too long, for it included the Susunaga kings who 
preceded Bimbisara, the contemporary of the Buddha. For the period from 
Devanampiya Tissa to Saddha Tissa they had no such list to go upon, and 


1 Adikaram, EHB. pp. 1-23 


JRASCB., xxxvi p. 58 



622 


CEYLON 11 


their dates for these kings have, it seems, been fixed arbitrarily. The 
result was that in later times when the reigns of the kings were totalled, 
the reigns of Asoka and Devanampiya Tissa were placed sixty years too 
early. Hence in order to correct the chronology of the Mahavamsa sixty 
years have to be deducted from the span assigned to these kings to make 
it correspond with the accepted Indian chronology of today . 1 2 

Developments in art and architecture also took place during this period. 
Though Buddhist bhikshus contributed little in these spheres, the inspi- 
ration for these arts was mainly derived from Buddhism. It has been 
noted already that bhikshus at first lived mainly in rock-caves and leaf- 
huts. According to the Mahavamsa, kings and chiefs are said to have be- 
gun constructing parivenas (cells) for the bhikshus very early. These were 
probably built of brick since some of them seem to have continued for 
centuries. The other buildings such as uposatha- houses and refectories pro- 
bably had foundations of stone, the rest being of wood. The chief struc- 
tures of this period which required skill and a knowledge of architecture 
were the dag abas. 2 According to the Mahavamsa the earliest dagciba was 
built in Nandanavana, called later the Thuparama chetiya. This was 
built of dried mud from the Abhayavava. Its shape was then like a heap 
of paddy and its construction could not have been difficult. There is no 
evidence to indicate its original size, and even to-day its diameter is only 
fifty-nine feet. 

The next important dagciba to be built was perhaps the Kantaka chetiya 
which occupies the summit of one of the chief spurs of the main hill at 
Mihintale. It is earlier than the time of Lanja Tissa, for according to the 
Mahavamsa he enveloped it in stone. The Katttaka chetiya as it is to-day 
has three terraces stone-faced at the base, and the stone-facing continues 
for two feet up the hemispherical dome. The vahalkadas or the four sides 
resembling the ayakas or platforms at Amaravatl and Nagarjunakonda 
were probably added in the second century as in the case of the Abhaya- 
giri dagciba. This thupa is four hundred and twenty-five feet in circum- 
ference at the base and could not have been less than one hundred feet 
in height. 

The Mahavamsa refers to the Kalaniya chetiya but gives no details 
about its founder or its size. Therefore it is not possible to state 
whether it was originally a large dagciba as it is today. The Mahanaga 
dagciba attributed to Uparaja Mahanaga is said to have been enlarged 
by Ilanaga, and therefore it too is not likely to have been very large 
when originally constructed. 

The Mahathupa was probably the first really gigantic chetiya to be 
built in Ceylon. Its diameter at the base is two hundred and ninety-eight 
feet, and it had a dome three hundred feet in height. The relic chamber 
stood on a level with the uppermost of the three terraces on which the dome 

1 UCR. v p. 39 Colombo, 1947. This section is mainly 

2 S. Paranavitana, The Stupa in Ceylon, based on the contents of this work. 



DAGABAS. PALACES 


623 


rose. These terraces at first were of brick but they were stone-faced by 
Lafija Tissa. Bhatikabhaya built a railing round the uppermost terrace 
and Mahadathika Mahanaga paved the floor round the lowest terrace. On 
the top of the dome was a cubical structure ( chaturassa ), and it was sur- 
rounded in later times by a railing, probably of wood. Through the centre 
of this cubical structure a pillar rose from the dome and upon it rested a 
stone umbrella ( chhatra ). The vahalkadas were probably added in the 
second century a.d. Once the dagaba was built it was covered with lime 
plaster. It was next adorned with flags and garlands and the latter no 
doubt gave it the names of Hemamali, Sonnamali, and Ruvanmali. 

The Mahathupa as it stood originally was similar to the thupas at 
Sanchi near Vidisa from where Mahinda is said to have come and to 
which region the early Sinhalese script too has to be traced. 

The Abhayagiri dagaba built by Vattagamani Abhaya and enlarged 
by Gajabahu, though similar in structure, is larger in size. Its base has a 
diameter of three hundred and fifty-five feet and it rises to a height of three 
hundred and fifty feet. Its foundation of stepped brick-work starts from 
a depth of twenty-six feet with a concrete layer below it. The bricks in 
the upper parts are laid end to end but each course runs transversely to that 
immediately above or below. In the Mahathupa this precaution had not 
been taken with the result that several vertical joints are continuous. 
According to an inscription its vahalkadas were built in the reign of Kani- 
ttha Tissa (167-186). • 

The Jetavanarama dagaba built by Mahasena was the largest of this 
period. Its diameter at the base is three hundred and seventy feet and its 
height was four hundred feet. Its construction marks a further develop- 
ment in the art of building for it presents the earliest indisputable instance 
of the use of lime mortar for binding bricks together in the main body of 
a dagaba. 

Another type of building constructed during this period was the thupa- 
ghara. These were erected over the smaller thupas, probably a steep roof 
resting on pillars, similar to the steep towers in the early Kandyan viharas. 

Of the secular buildings there are few traces. According to the Maha- 
variisa new palaces were built by Kutakanna Tissa, Vasabha and Gotha- 
bhaya. No remains of these have yet been discovered. Like the larger 
religious buildings, they probably had foundations of stone and a super- 
structure of wood. Kutakanna Tissa is said to have laid out a park called 
Padumassaravanuyyana to adorn the city, around which he built a wall 
seven cubits (seventeen and a half feet) high and surrounded it with a 
moat. Vasabha who forcibly seized the throne raised this wall to about 
twenty-five feet, constructing towers at the city-gates. 

We have already noted that many of the buildings in the early centuries 
had foundations of stone. By the first century A.D. stone pillars with a 
smooth surface also came into use. The terraces of the Mahathupa which 
were stone-faced had moulded cornices as well as bases while the base 
mouldings of stone of the Abhayagiri dagaba were ornamented with a 
design of lotus petals. 



624 


CEYLON n 


The earliest examples of sculpture discovered in Ceylon are probably 
not earlier than the second century a.d. So far no examples of the types 
found at Bharhut and Sarichl have been discovered unless the pillars with 
figures of animals resting on top are imitations of Asoka pillars. What 
has been found is of the style of Amaravatl. Two of these carved on the 
limestone peculiar to Andhradesa are representations of the Annuncia- 
tion of the Buddha and probably of the Great Miracle of Sravastl. Sculp- 
tures of a similar style have been found also on the vahalkadas of the 
Abhayagiri and Jetavana dagabas. Those at the Jetavana represent in 
low relief the figures of a bodhisattva in the posture of preaching, a cobra- 
king and a seven-hooded cobra. 

Thus Buddhism played an important part in the history of Ceylon 
during this period. It quickly spread into all the inhabited parts of the 
island and became the chief religion of Ceylon before the end of the second 
century B.c. It provided religious doctrines and practices well suited to 
an agricultural people and at the same time civilized and humanized them. 
It was the chief source of inspiration for the development of literature, ar- 
chitecture, and sculpture. It kept Ceylon in touch with important parts 
of India from which new developments in Buddhism were introduced into 
this land and led to the rise of new sects and an expansion of the Bud- 
dhist way of life. 

The most useful, if not the most important, constructions of this period 
were the tanks and canals which a modern writer has called the pulsing 
hearts and the arteries which carried life and nourishment to the wide 
cultivated fields extending over the Dry Zone. It is likely that the early 
Aryan immigrants settled along the large rivers and by ponds and streams, 
using their water to grow their vegetables and dry grain, but depending 
mainly on rain for the cultivation of rice. Before long, as the inscriptions 
show, they found other methods to obtain water for the production of rice 
in the villages. They built low artificial embankments across the valleys 
down which flowed seasonal streams, and doled out the water thus stored 
through sluices made of stone or brick into channels leading to the fields 
below. Later they built longer and higher bunds across larger streams 
and the tributaries of rivers to increase the water supply. Of such a type 
were the tanks built in Anuradhapura. The Abhayavava, called Basava- 
kkulam to-day, according to Parker, has a dam twenty-eight feet in 
height and covers two hundred and fifty-five acres. The Tisavava has a 
dam twenty-eight feet in height and covers three hundred and ninety-six 
acres. The Nuvaravava is a much larger structure covering between 
2160 and 3180 acres. In Magama the Tissa Tank built by Ilanaga has a 
dam eighteen and a half feet high and extends over six hundred and fifty- 
two acres. The largest of the tanks built during this period was the 
Minneriya. Its dam was 6,200 feet long and 40 to 50 feet high. Its area 
is 4,560 acres at full sluice level, and its capacity 70,730 acre feet, an acre 
foot being equal to 272,140 gallons. 1 

1 CJS. i p. 158 



SECULAR LIFE 


625 


When the larger tanks were under construction steps were taken also to 
dam the rivers with massive causeways and to turn the water into excava- 
ted channels which brought it into the larger tanks or to the fields direct. 
It is still not possible to identify most of the canals built during this period. 
The Alahara, as it is to-day, is about twenty-five miles in length, and it 
carried the waters of the Amban Ganga which came from the Matale hills. 

The construction of buildings and tanks on this scale testifies to the 
existence of master-craftsmen who possessed considerable skill, know- 
ledge of architecture, a sense of topography with the capacity both to 
construct embankments strong enough to retain the water, and to site 
them correctly so as to store the largest possible quantity of water. All 
these works no doubt were carefully designed; references exist to plans 
drawn on cloth with red arsenic, and to measurements carefully taken for 
the construction of a dagaba ; next the articles needed for the constructions 
were collected, and finally labour was organized and the progress of the 
work checked. The Buddhist sahgha, however learned, did not as a rule 
indulge in such work, and there must have existed a professional class who 
made it their business. 

Another class of people, nakatikas or astrologers, seem to have kept 
chronological records. The reckoning was based mainly on the move- 
ments of the moon. The year was divided into twelve months many of 
which were named from those stars ( nakshatra ) which are in conjunction 
with the moon on the full-moon day of the month. Probably a month 
was intercalated as it was the practice later, to bring the calculations into 
line with the solar reckoning. Months were further divided into two parts, 
the dark fortnight and the bright fortnight, representing the waxing and 
the waning moon, and these into two weeks of seven days each. 

The early inscriptions, however, do not show that any era was used 
during this period. All that was attempted at first was to place an event in 
the reign of a king or prince. From the second century a.d., however, 
dates are given more precisely by stating in which regnal year of the king 
an event took place. If the Mahavamsa is any indication, a record of the 
dates of the reigns of kings seems to have been kept from about the time 
of Thulathana, the first king whose reign is given in months and days. 

All this tends to show that there existed throughout a secular civilized 
life independent of Buddhism, and this life was to reach its highest mani- 
festation in the fifth century at Sigiriya. The Mahavamsa and the inscrip- 
tions give sufficient evidence in proof of this. There we find references 
to amusements in the royal palace, to musicians, musical instruments, 
dancers, and dancing-girls and dramatic shows, all of which fell outside 
the purview of the bhikshus. 

Considerable progress had thus been made in many directions by the 
end of the third century a.d. A good portion of the forest in the Dry 
Zone was cleared and the land adapted to cultivation and habitation. 
The irrigation works enabled the people to produce food not only for their 
own subsistence but for the maintenance of innumerable other persons 
79 



626 


CEYLON II 


who could devote themselves to other duties. The king assisted by officials 
of various grades was able to maintain the peace and order indispensable 
for an agrarian people, and fostered the development of irrigation and the 
spread of Buddhism. Thousands of craftsmen were enabled to produce 
weapons of war, agricultural implements and domestic utensils and to 
construct tanks, canals and religious buildings. Innumerable bhikshus 
by precept and example brought a civilized and cultural life within the 
reach of the people. 



Chapter XX 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

(A) LANGUAGES OF INDIA (300 b.c.-a.d. 300) 

"Oven before the advent of the Mauryas the linguistic tableau of India 
had assumed an extremely varied aspect. With the aryanisation of the 
whole of Northern India and the Deccan plateau, the Old Indo-Aryan 
(Vedic) had undergone great changes in contact with the native languages 
of the Austro-Asiatic (Munda) and Dravidian families. The aryanisation 
was only superficial ; the native language groups still formed islands within 
the conquered territory and were bound to react on the language of the 
conquering class. The effect of this reaction cannot yet be exactly mea- 
sured but there is no doubt that it led to the loss of certain Old Indo- 
Iranian sounds (z, z) and the creation of the cerebrals. With the gradual 
adoption of the Aryan tongue by sections of the conquered people, the 
spoken language became different from the literary language and under its 
impact, the Old Indo-Aryan imbibed new phonetic tendencies, adopted 
new words and modified its grammar. It was at this stage that the language 
of the cultured classes ( dikshita ) stood aloof from the language of the 
common people. A statement in the Panchavimsa Brahmana (xvii, 4) 
clearly brings out this difference between the two: a-durukta-vakyam 
duruktam ahuh a-dikshita dikshita-vacham vadanti — ‘the Vratyas (the 
uninitiated) call a sentence difficult to utter when a sentence is not difficult 
to utter, the uninitiated speak the language of the initiated.’ Eastern India 
was inhabited by a very large number of the ‘uninitiated’ and it was there 
that the spoken language became markedly different from the literary 
form of the Old Indo-Aryan. 

There were at the first stage at least three dialects-Northern or North- 
Western (Udichya) which still retained many of the archaisms of the Vedic 
as it was spoken in the land of the Vedic culture; Mid-Indian which was 
the language of the Madhyadesa; and the Eastern which was the language 
of the Prachya countries. The language of the Vedic poetry (Chhandasa) 
had grown obsolete and was cultivated only by the priests. A new form 
of it, however, had come into existence, by way of compromise, by the in- 
corporation of dialectal elements which had already crept into the langu- 
age. This is Samskrita, described by Panini as bhasha which, though an 
artificial vehicle of expression, became the polished language of inter- 
course and instruction in the Brahmanical schools. It was certainly not 
the spoken language of the Udichya country where Panini was born. The 
spoken language had already started on an independent course. The 
language thus regularised by Panini was gradually accepted by the whole 



628 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Brahmanical world as the language of culture and became a powerful 
instrument of expression. Thus a language already obsolete in form 
became a living language for all time among the elite. 

This did not interfere with the progressive evolution of the dialects 
which are grouped under the name Middle Indo-Aryan. The Middle 
Indo-Aryan had different stages of evolution. The first stage, which 
may be called Old Middle-Indo-Aryan, had commenced before the 
advent of the Mauryas and continued up to about a.d. 200. It is repre- 
sented mainly in the inscriptions of the Maurya and Kushana periods, in 
the language of the early Buddhist and Jaina canonical works, and in the 
dialects used in such old dramas as the Sariputra-prakarana of Asva- 
ghosha and those of Bhasa. It should, however, be noted that although 
different dialects are found in these plays, they were not exactly the spoken 
languages of the time, but already normalised forms suitable for literary 
purposes. The second stage must have commenced towards the end of 
the period under consideration, that is about the third century. It is 
represented by the literary Prakrits used in the dramas and described by 
the grammarians of later times. These Prakrits were the following: 
MagadhI, Sauraseni, Maharashtrl, Avanti, Paisachi and some others, the 
first three being the most important. It is now admitted that these literary 
Prakrits do not all represent regional languages but are ‘imitation dialects’ 
meant for the stage. 

The general characteristics of the Old Middle-Indo-Aryan were in pho- 
nology: the assimilation of consonants due to the loss of root-sense, 
the tendency to pronounce open syllables, loss of some of the old sounds 
(r, ai, au ) and loss of the final consonants. There was also a develop- 

ment of spirant pronunciation at a stage when the stops had become 
voiced but had not yet disappeared (soka>soya>soa, nadi>na§i>nai). 
These spirants must have been in force between 200 b.c. and a.d. 200. 
So far as the morphology of the Old Middle-Indo-Aryan is concerned the 
dual had disappeared in declension and the number of cases had been 
reduced. The dative was merged in the genitive. The elaborate moods 
and tenses of the Old Indo-Aryan were gradually lost — thus the dual, the 
atmanepada, perfect, imperfect, and aorist were all lost. The past tense 
was expressed by a participle with or without an auxiliary verb. The 
present indicative, imperative, optative, the future both active and passive, 
the participles, infinitive and gerund alone survived. 

The inscriptions of Asoka for the first time present a varied picture of 
the dialects. It is almost certain that his edicts were written in the official 
language of the empire which was the dialect of Magadha. However, in 
the more remote provinces in the north-west, west and the south, the edicts 
were either translated into the local dialects or modified under the local 
influences. Linguistically the edicts are divided into four classes: (i) the 
inscriptions which are found in the Ganges-Jumna basin and in Orissa. 
Their language is the Eastern dialect (MagadhI) — the language of the 
Magadhan court and understood in a very large part of the empire. In 



DIALECTS 


629 


this dialect we have l for r (laja, pulisa. .)> ~ e instead of a final -o (piye, 
dane, soche . . ) and locative singular in -as ( s)i . But we have dental s 
instead of the palatal s found in the Magadhi of later times, (ii) The Rock 
Edicts of Girnar in the west represent a dialect which may be called 
Western. It retains r, has 5 and the final -o. The locative of nouns is in 
-e and -amhi. The influence of the Eastern dialect is found in certain 
cases - e.g. priye, jane, mule, (iii) A North-Western variety is found in 
the edicts of Mansehra and Shahbazgarhi. The language of these edicts 
is certainly more archaic than the other dialects. It retains r, s, and s 
and also some conjunct consonants. The locative is in -e and -aspi. 
Some traces exist of the influence of the Eastern dialect on the language 
of the Mansehra edict. Thus it has -e in the nominative singular whereas 
the Shahbazgarhi has -o. (iv) A fourth variety is found in the inscrip- 
tions of Rupnath, Sanchl, Bhabra and further south in the Deccan at 
Maski, Siddapura and Yerragudi. The language of these inscriptions is 
almost the same as that of the Eastern dialect except that it retains both 
r and / (usually / between vowels and r in conjuncts). 

Thus the dominant language of Maurya times was the Eastern dialect, 
the Magadhi, which, however, deviates from the later Magadhi in the use 
of the dental 5 instead of the palatal. This characteristic (palatal instead 
of dental s) is found in some of the inscriptions of the east which are al- 
most contemporaneous with Asoka (the Ramgarh inscription has suta- 

nuka ). This important delation in the dialect of Asoka’ s eastern 

inscriptions is best explained as an archaism. The language of the court 
was already removed from the spoken language. Ltiders, however, would 
explain it as the characteristic of Ardha-Magadhi and take the Eastern 
dialect not as Magadhi proper but as Ardha-Magadhi, the dialect spoken 
in the region between Magadha and Mathura. In fact Ardha-Magadhi 
agrees with Magadhi except in its retention of r and s. It should not, 
however, be forgotten that the Eastern dialect of Asoka has / instead of r. 

The inscriptions of post-Asokan times in Middle Indo- Aryan are numer- 
ous, but usually they are too fragmentary to give a clear picture of the dia- 
lects in which they are written. The Hathigumpha inscription of Khara- 4 
vela which is found in Orissa and is placed in the second century b.c. is- 1 
markedly similar to the Western dialect of the Asokan edicts. The . 
language of the inscriptions of the Sanchl and Bharhut stupas also has { 
the same western character (final -0 instead of -e). The Kharoshthi ins- 
criptions of the Kushana period, mostly found in the North-West, present 
not a unified language but a variety of tendencies. They preserve all the 
three sibilants of Sanskrit (5, i, sh) and retain the r. For the nominative 
singular of words we have both -o ( aramo , patiko, putro) and -e ( kue , 
deya - . dharme). It has been pointed out that forms in -e are mostly 
found in the inscriptions to the west of the Indus, while those in o occur 
to the north and the south of the Indus. The inscriptions of the Deccan 
(those of the Satavahanas and Ikshvakus) are also written in a 
Middle Indo-Aryan dialect of the Western variety, retaining r, and using 



630 LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

s throughout, while the -a bases have -o (Nasik-rano, Nagarjunakonda- 
ramho). They contain other characteristics also which might be owing 
to the influence of the cultural traditions of the donors cf. Nagarjuna- 
konda - g >k (kothakarika, pukiya also pugiya),gh>kh (sukhaya) and s>h 
( hamghdna ). 

Two literary dialects came into existence in this period and were used 
by the Buddhists and the Jainas as the vehicles of their canonical literature. 
One is the Magadhi of the Buddhist texts and the other the Ardha-Magadhi 
of the Jaina texts. So far as this Magadhi of the earliest Buddhist canon 
is concerned there is no doubt that it was similar to the Eastern dialect 
used in the inscriptions of Asoka. In the Bhabra edict some of the texts 
belonging to this canon are named in their original forms as : Vinayasa- 
mukase, Aliyavasani, Anagatabhayani, Munigatha, Moneyasute, Upati- 
sapasine and Laghulovade. The relics of this canon and its language 
are found as survivals in later Buddhist literature. 

In the post-Asokan period Pali came to be used as an important literary 
language among the Buddhists. Although the Ceylonese tradition would 
identify it with Magadhi, it is clear that it cannot be Magadhi. The 
main characteristics of Magadhi, as we have seen, are : mutation of every 
r into l and every s into s, the ending -e in the nominative singular mascu- 
line and neuter of -a stems and the consonantal stems inflected like them. 
Pali, however, retains the r as a general rule, possesses only s, and ends 
the nominal forms mentioned above with -o and -am. These are 
features of the Western Prakrit as found to some extent in the Girnar 
version of Asokan edicts. Pali, however, represents a somewhat later 
stage. There are also traces of other dialects, especially of Magadhi and 
Ardha-Magadhi in Pali. 

The Jainas make use of the Ardha-Magadhi in their oldest canonical 
texts. This dialect retains r and 5, and ends the nominative singular of 
masculine nouns in -e, like Magadhi. The Jaina Ardha-Magadhi, how- 
ever, is younger than the Magadhi of the oldest Buddhist texts. Later on, 
when the centre of Jainism was shifted to the west, it came under the 
influence of Western dialects and the language, now much altered, came 
to be regarded as a form of Maharashfri. 

In the Buddhist texts we find the trace of another Middle Indo-Aryan 
dialect. It is found in the fragments of Dhammapada which were dis- 
covered in Khotan. It is written in a Kharoshthi script of about the second 
century a.d. In this language a surd following a nasal changes into a 
sonant (alagido, paga, saga’i), a sonant following a nasal loses its articula- 
tion (paga, athagi'o, saga ) and a nasal group with sonant cerebral is re- 
duced to a nasal ( kunala , dana). The final vowels -e and -o are often 
reduced to -i and -u. These characteristics connect it with the dialect 
spoken in the north-western frontier provinces in that period. 

In the Buddhist literature we find still another language which is usually 
called Mixed Sanskrit. It is found in such texts as the Mahavastu and the 
Lalitavistara. It is also found in some inscriptions of Mathura of about 



CENTRAL ASIA 


631 


the beginning of the Christian era. We find in it side by side dialectical 
and Sanskrit forms of the same word and also dialectical and Sanskrit 
inflections. The language is not, as is usually supposed, a corrupt 
Sanskrit. It represents an ill-regulated attempt to give literary form to 
a Middle Indo-Aryan dialect. 

A trace of the Old Middle-Indo-Aryan is also found in some of the 
dramas of Asvaghosha and Bhasa. The fragment of a drama of Asva- 
ghosha entitled Sariputraprakarana was discovered from Central Asia. 
There are traces in it of three old dialects: Magadhi, in which s and r 
are replaced by s and / ; Old SaurasenI, in which intervocalic conso- 
nants are retained, n is not cerebralised and y is not replaced by j; some 
traces of the Ardha-Magadhi. These dialects are more archaic than the 
literary Prakrits of later times. The dialects used in the dramas of Bhasa 
represent a stage later than the Prakrit of Asvaghosha but earlier than the 
literary Prakrits. They may belong to the third century. Three different 
dialects,— SaurasenI, Magadhi and Ardha-Magadhi, are used in these 
dramas. Some of the peculiarities of the SaurasenI of these dramas are : 
/>/, jn^>nn (nn), ny^>nn, udy^uyy, ry>yy. In some cases they show 
agreement with Pali rather than with the later literary Prakrits. 

Tradition would place the composition at this time of an epic, the 
Brihatkatha in a dialect called Paisachl. The author Gunadhya was a 
contemporary of King Satavahana and lived in the South. He chose 
to write in the dialect spoken by the Pisachas (Paisachl). As the original 
work has not come down to us we do not know what this language was 
like. But there is no doubt that the work did exist, for its Sanskrit 
adaptations, the Brihatkathaslokasariigraha, Brihatkatha-manjarl etc., 
have been preserved. The name of the author also has been recorded by 
many writers. Paisachl as described by the grammarians of later times 
(g>k, gh>kh,j>c, d>t, dhyth, v>b, p) agrees to some extent with the 
dialects of the North-West and hence Grierson located it in that region. 
This location, however, is not beyond doubt and conflicts with a number 
of traditions — some of the grammarians placing this dialect in the South. 
The language of the inscriptions of Nagarjunakonda also presents some 
similar characteristics. We are in no position, in fact, to make a precise 
geographical location. 

The domain of the Middle Indo-Aryan extended very far in this period. 
It is found in a large number of documents of Chinese Turkestan. These 
documents, written in the KharoshthI script of about the third centu.y 
a.d., were discovered at Niya and Endere near Khotan and at Lou-lan 
(Kroraina) near Lob-nor. It had spread therefore along the southern king- 
doms of Eastern Turkestan up to the frontier of China. As the largest 
number of documents came from Lou-lan (Kroraina), this language also 
has been named Krorainic. As the documents in which it is found are 
official papers, it is certain that the language was understood by the people 
and was not very different from the spoken language of the period. Its 
characteristics to some extent agree with those of the language of the Kha- 



632 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


roshthi Dhammapada and to a large degree with those of the language of 
the inscriptions of the Kushana period found in the North-West. Its home 
therefore must have been in the north-western part of India. As it was 
not a literary language but one of practical use, it indicates a more advan- 
ced stage of evolution than many of the literary Prakrits. 

In the South and the North-West, Middle Indo-Aryan continued to 
be the language of the inscriptions up to the third century. But classical 
Sanskrit also was slowly establishing itself in certain regions. Since the 
time of Panini, Sanskrit was being cultivated in the Brahmanical schools 
and other grammarians — Katyayana, who belonged to the Maurya, and 
Pataiijali, who belonged to the Sunga period, — tried to maintain its high 
standard. But the impact of the Middle Indo-Aryan on this language 
was great, and is discernible in the language of the epics, Dharmasastras 
and the older Puranas, which belonged to this age. The impact of the 
Middle Indo-Aryan led to the simplification of the grammar and the 
enrichment of the vocabulary by the inclusion of dialectal words in Sans- 
kritised forms. Borrowings were also made from the pre-Aryan langu- 
ages, Austric and Dravidian. Sanskrit began to be used as medium of a 
new literature from the beginning of the Christian era. 

ASvaghosha was probably the first to use Sanskrit for the composi- 
tion of dramas and a new type of epic, which strictly belongs to what is 
known as Classical Sanskrit literature. Some of the Buddhist schools 
(Sarvastivada, Mula-Sarvastivada) adopted it and wrote their canonical 
literature in it. From the middle of the second century a.d. the Sakas 
of Western India became great patrons of this language and of the new 
literature written in it. They were the first to introduce Sanskrit in 
inscriptions. Rudradaman and his successors issued their charters in 
this language. Rudradaman himself boasts of having composed literary 
works in Sanskrit ( sphuta-laghu-madhura-chitrakanta-sabda-samavoddra - 
lamkrita-gadya-padya-). The rulers of this dynasty use titles like svamin, 
bhadramukha, sugrihitanaman and rashtriya for the first time, and these 
titles are found in Classical Sanskrit dramas. As such titles are not found 
in earlier literature, it is possible that it was under the patronage of these 
foreign rulers that Sanskrit drama was originated and the Classical Sans- 
krit shaped for fine literary works. 

These foreign adventurers were also responsible for carrying Sanskrit 
to foreign lands. The first Hindu colonists in Indo-China and Indonesia 
were in all likelihood these Sakas; this being the reason why Sanskrit 
was adopted in the very first royal charters in the Far East. 

The Buddhist schools which adopted Sanskrit as their sacred language 
also carried Sanskrit to Eastern Turkestan in this period, and in the prin- 
cipal kingdoms of that region (Khotan, Kucha etc.) Sanskrit began to 
be cultivated in the Buddhist monasteries and became a subject for higher 
education. 

Thus during the first three centuries of the Christian era classical Sans- 
krit firmly established itself in India and also conquered new lands in the 



LITERARY DEVELOPMENTS 


633 


Far East and Central Asia. The Sakas had shown the way by using 
Sanskrit in their inscriptions, and the Guptas only perpetuated the tradi- 
tion when they came to power. 

(B) LITERATURE 
INTRODUCTION 

The period 325 b. c. to a. d. 300 is remarkable in several respects to 
a student of Indian literature and culture. Popular dialects had deve- 
loped from the Vedic language and the efforts of the great Sanskrit gram- 
marians from the fifteenth to the second century b. c. fixed, once for all, 
for classical Sanskrit a norm which it has maintained ever afterwards. 
Sanskrit poetry and drama as well as Prakrit lyrics flowered in this period. 
The efforts to spread Buddhism and Jainism through the medium of popu- 
lar speech had failed, and this failure reaffirmed the efficacy of Sanskrit. 
It was during this period that all the Brahmanical philosophical systems 
formed their basic mnemonic texts (Sutras) and compiled the primary 
scholia on them. The same period saw also three noteworthy develop- 
ments in Buddhism, the blooming of Buddhist sculpture, the emanation 
of the Mahayana, and the spread of the faith in Tibet, Central Asia, and 
China. In its effort to capture the Brahmanical imagination, Mahayana 
Buddhism, to which erstwhile Brahmins had made paramount contri- 
butions, succumbed to its adversary, when its metaphysics and its devo- 
tion to the transcendental personality of the Buddha were influenced by 
Vedanta and Bhakti. According to Jennings, 1 the ‘hinduization’ of the 
Buddha had started very soon after the Buddha’s death. ‘The parallel 
between Vedantic absolutism and Mahayana tenets’, says Keith, ‘is strik- 
ing and undeniable.’ 2 ‘Even as this side ( Buddhabhakti ) was already 
prepared in Hinayana, but found its further development under the in- 
fluence of Hinduism ; in the same way the philosophical side of the 
Mahayana is merely an elaboration of the Hinayana doctrines under the 
influence of Brahmanical philosophy.’ 3 This vital assimilative power 
of the Brahmanic culture was never more evident than in this period 
when Indian society absorbed all the foreign settlers and made them zea- 
lous sponsors of Indian literature, religion, and philosophy. How far 
this foreign contact, particularly with the Greeks, affected Indian thought 
has been a favourite subject of study. Greek influence on Indian sculp- 
ture has indeed been proved; but on the question of the reality and extent 
of Greek influence on Indian drama and logic and philosophy (atomism) 
there is difference of opinion. Indian literature of this period in these 
branches contains no such express mention of indebtedness to Greece and 
Rome as is found in the astronomy and astrology of the fifth and sixth 

1 The Vedantic Buddhism of the Buddha. p. 260 

a Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon, 3 Winternitz, HIL. H p. 230 

So 



634 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


centuries a.d. All we can say is, as Keith puts it, that ‘we may regard 
such influences as reasonable, but we must admit that real proof is want- 
ing.’ 1 The question of Indian influence on Greek thought is likewise not 
easy to settle. Here again we can only say that the influence, as Macdonell, 
for instance, observes with regard to Samkhya and Greek philosophy, ‘is 
possible and even probable.’ 2 

SANSKRIT LANGUAGE AND LEARNING 

The Sanskrit that Panini defined and described in his grammar is called 
Bhasha as contrasted with the language of the Veda. The meaning is 
obviously that it was the vehicle of expression, and on no other hypothesis 
could many rules in Panini be understood. This language had under- 
gone considerable simplification in conjugation and declension, vocabu- 
lary and accent, a process clearly discernible in the Brahmanas and Upani- 
shads. Side by side with this correct speech, Samskrita. employed by the 
learned ( sishtas ) particularly on ceremonial occasions, popular dialects, 
sprung from the Vedic language itself, must have been developing, and the 
colloquial forms of these must have been mixing with and influencing to 
some extent the Sanskrit language itself. 3 A literary form of Sanskrit, 
couched in popular style and freely embodying colloquial solecisms and 
constructions appears to have been used for the early Itihasa-Puranas; 
and it is this language to which the Gatha or Buddhist Sanskrit is to 
be related. 

In the fourth century B.C., Taxila was still a great centre of learning 
in the North-West; but soon its reputation was shared by the eastern 
capital city Pataliputra to which the intellectuals of the day migrated. 
The North-West retained its intellectual position which was indeed revi- 
vified by the local settlement of Greek rulers. Vidisa attracted art and 
letters under the 6ungas, and the Sakas rejuvenated the splendour of 
Ujjain. The glorious rule of the Satavahanas at Paithan created in the 
whole of the Deccan an efflorescence of poetry and sculpture. 

SANSKRIT GRAMMAR , LEXICOGRAPHY AND PROSODY 

In Sanskrit grammar, Panini had already composed the Ashtadhvayi. 
His compact aphorisms stood in this period in need both of exposition 
and adjustment to take account of subsequent changes in language. The 
Nanda-Maurya-Sunga period witnessed a great deal of activity in both 
these departments. Two of the most important expositors were Vyadi 
and Patanjali, and the two leading writers to add their critical dicta to 
Panini’s sutras were Katya and Katyayana. Vaydi, a descendant of 
Panini on his mother’s side, produced a voluminous exposition in 100,000 
verses of Panini’s sutras, called rather ironically Samgraha ; this work 

1 HSL. p. 501 3 Keith, HSL. p. xxvi 

3 India’s Past, p. 159 



PATANJALI 


635 


presupposed by Katyayana and described as ‘beautiful’ by Patanjali and 
stated by Bhartrihari to have discussed 14,000 topics, formed the main 
basis of Patanjali’s great scholium. That the interpretation of Panini owed 
much to Vyadi is borne out by the ascription of the paribhashds to him. 
Katya’s importance is sufficiently indicated by the reverential way in which 
Patanjali mentions him as Bhagavan Katya (iii 2, 3) and his observations 
as Mahavarttikas (iv, 2, 65). Katyayana alias Vararuchi was a versatile 
figure of the Nanda-Maurya epoch. Literary tradition associates him 
with Pataliputra as a minister of the Nandas. Patanjali calls him a 
southerner. In his Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya, he had already submitted 
several sutras of Panini to criticism, and the additions and corrections 
that he made directly with reference to Panini’ s sutras made him the 
v arttika-kara par excellence of the school of Panini. Katya and Katya- 
yana were followed by many lesser varttika-karas: on the model of 
some of Katyayana’ s own metrical dicta, described by Patanjali as 
bhrajah slokdh, a whole work known as Sloka-varttika was written; 
Bharadvaja, Sunaga, Kroshta, Kunaravadava and Surya who was venera- 
ted as Bhagavan were the other varttika-karas; and a Mathurivritti, also 
arose. 1 Like the Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya of Katyayana, the Rigveda 
Pratisakhya ascribed to Saunaka was also a product of this period. 

When Panini, and, to a greater extent Vyadi, were almost submerged 
in this overgrowth of varttika literature, there arose the illustrious Patan- 
jali, who strove with fervour to restore them both to their place of honour. 
Patanjali was an admirer of Vyadi of whose ‘wonderful’ ( sobhana ) work 
his own magnificent commentary, the Mahabhashya, was but a recast, 
as Bhartrihari says ( samgraha-pratikanchuka ). While Patanjali defend- 
ed Panini against Katyayana, he himself criticised some and omitted 
others of Panini’s sutras, and wherever necessary added his own dicta 
called ishtis. Of all the larger commentaries known as bhashyas written 
in the different branches of knowledge, Patanjali’s alone gained the 
epithet ‘great’, mahat. The saying that ‘one should teach or learn the 
Mahabhashya or rule a great kingdom’ forms an appropriate tribute to 
the beauty of its style and the wealth of its contents. The work is a veri- 
table book of culture, throwing light on the state of contemporary society, 
religion, philosophy, literature, and art. Patanjali completes the trinity 
of sages ( muni-traya ) constituting the basic authorities of Sanskrit gram- 
mar, and, according to the exegetical dictum, yathottaram muninam pra- 
manyam, his authority stands supreme on questions of grammar. From his 
own references ‘here we perform the sacrifice for Pushyamitra’ {ilia Push: 
yamitram yajayamah) and ‘the Yavana (Menander) besieged Saketa as well 
as Madhyamika,’ Patanjali is definitely known to have flourished in the 

1 It probably belonged to the class of Patanjali. The Kasika mentions Kuni 

explanatory dicta that preceded the among the early acharyas used widely 

composition of Varttikas, Bana refers by Patanjali, and his work, a Vritti, was, 

separately to the Vritti before Vakya, in all likelihood, available to the Kasika 

and a Vrittisutra is mentioned by I-tsing too. 

as having been commented upon by 



636 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


first half of the second century b. c. In all probability he was the most 
honoured priest and literary figure of Pushyamitra’s court ; the tradi- 
tion associating him with Pataliputra is supported by the numerous refer- 
ences to that capital in the Mahabhashya. 

The history of Sanskrit grammar and of Panini’s school is a blank after 
Patanjali’s time. On one side, we have evidence of activity in the 
field of Prakrit, and on the other, we know from Kalhana and Bhar- 
trihari, that Patanjali’s work, as well as the traditional exegesis of grammar, 
sank into oblivion. The Rajatarangim mentions 1 that at the instance of 
king Abhimanyu, Chandracharya revived the study of the Mahabhashya 
in Kashmir ; and in the Vakyapadlya 2 , we are told that Patanjali’s work 
was all but lost, that authors likeBaija, Saubhava and Haryaksha were fol- 
lowing their own lights and making a mess of the sastra, and that the 
threads of the grammatical tradition, surviving to some extent in the South, 
were gathered together by Chandracharya and, according to Bhartrihari’s 
commentator, by Vasurata also. If we suppose that Chandra and his 
colleagues were busy resuscitating Patanjali in the fourth century a. d. 
as appears probable, we may take it that the grammatical ventures of Baija, 
Saubhava and Haryaksha belong to the first three centuries of the Chris- 
tian era. 

Sanskrit had by this time progressed considerably in the South. Katya- ■ 
yana is, no doubt, referred to as a native of the South by Patanjali, but 
it is not clear whether we are justified in taking this to be the region south 
of the Vindhyas, though Katyayana refers to the Pandyas (on iv. 1. 166). 
The early centuries of the Christian era show a clear shift of the literary 
centre to the Deccan. Pratishthana, where Hala Satavahana was ruling, 
was a Prakrit region. The popularisation of Sanskrit in these regions 
required a fresh effort on the part of its teachers, and the most outstanding 
event in the field of Sanskrit grammar of this period is the rise of the 
Katantra school in the first century a. d. The story as handed down in the 
opening book of the Brihatkatha in its Sanskrit versions, tells us that 
King Satavahana, probably Hala, the Prakrit enthusiast, unable to under- 
stand correctly a remark in Sanskrit of one of his learned queens, 3 asked 
his Brahmin courtier Sarvavarman to teach him Sanskrit in the shortest 
time possible ; Sarvavarman promised to do it in six months and produ- 
ced, by the grace of God Kumara, the grammar Katantra, meaning the 
‘Short or handy work.’ The Katantra, called also Kalapa after the peacock- 
vehicle of God Kumara, 4 (later inflated by the addition of krit etc.,) con- 
fined itself to three main sections, sandhi, naman and akhyata, and managed 
to cover the whole subject in a fifth of the number of Panini’s sutras. The 
circulation of this work to other parts of the country including Tibet was 
rapid and fragments of it have been discovered in Central Asia also 


1 i. 176 

2 ii. 484-90 

3 It is interesting in this connection to 

note that in an inscription at Kanheri, 


4 “ queen uses Sanskrit. 

Aa/qpa, hke Katantra meaning the 
short course’, may mean also ‘the brief 
or quicker aid to speech’. 



EARLY SANSKRIT POETRY 


637 


The rise of Katantra and the story associated with it are significant. The 
Katantra was no new fabrication ; going behind Panini, who, for the 
sake of packing his system into the smallest number of sutras, forged 
several new conventional technical terms, special devices, sequences, and 
rules of interpretation, the Katantra took from the Pratisakhyas the 
natural order of sounds, the natural names of vowels and consonants 
and the natural topical divisions and arrangements, all of which relieved 
considerably the strain on the average learner. The Katantra was really 
a revival of the pre-Paniniyan Aindra system ; 1 the Pali grammar of 
Kachchayana follows its plan, and the Tamil Tolkappiyam, the earliest 
extant grammar of a Dravidian language, is, it is wellknown, ‘full of 
Aindra’ ( aindiram nirainda) ; and the Dravidian affinities of the Paisacha, 
in which Sarvavarman’s friend Gurtadhya wrote, are also wellknown . 2 

Early lexicography seems to have gone hand in hand with grammar; from 
quotations preserved in later lexicons and commentaries thereon, we are 
led to think that three of the grammarians noticed above, Vyadi, Katya, 
and Katyayana had compiled, probably as accessories to their grammati- 
cal writings, lists of words ; Vyadi’s lexicon, which exhibits a knowledge 
of Buddhism, is remembered as Utpalini, and Katyavana’s as Namamala. 

POETRY AND DRAMA 


Reference has already been made to Vararuchi’s versatility. From 
Patanjali, we know' definitely of Vararuchi’s poem 3 which, if reliance may 
be placed on the eulogies of Rajasekhara, may have been known as Kan- 
fhabharana. In the prefatory book of the Brihatkatha versions, Vara- 
ruchi, who is introduced as an incarnation of Pushpadanta, is mentioned 
as having narrated first the seven main stories in seven lacs of verses, which 
Gunadhya retold later in Paisacm . 4 

Patanjali indeed opens our eyes to the existence at this time of a deeply 
and widely cultivated art of poetry. Besides a large number of lyric, 
gnomic, and erotic veises, and poetic as well as grammatical lines in a 
large variety of classical metres which he quotes, we have also the express 
mention in his Mahabhashya of akhyanas and akhydyikas on Yayati, 
Yavakrlta, Priyahgu, Sumanottara and Bhlmaratha, on the popular 
theme of Vasavadatta, the queen of Udayana, and on the wars oi gods and 
demons . 5 The variety of metres presupposes also the existence of pro- 
sodical treatises. Literary tradition, Brahmanical and Buddhistic, con- 
nects Pingala, author of chhandas, with Pataliputra, and with Bindusara 


1 The ‘southerner’ Katyayana-Vararuchi 
himself, according to the story in the 
Kathasaritsagara, was first a student of 
Aindra, and traces of its influence can 
be seen in his use in some cases of the 
pre-Paniniyan samjiias, svara, vyanjana 
etc. 

2 S. Konow, ZDMG. lxiv. pp. 107-112 


See also Grierson, ‘The Eastern School 
of Prakrit Grammarians and Paisachi 
Prakrit’, Ashutosh Mookerji Silver Jubi- 
lee Volume, Orientalia, pt. 2, pp. 119- 
141. 

3 Vararucham Kavyam, iv 3. 101 

M. 2. 26 

5 iv. 2. 60; iv. 3.87-8 



638 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


and Asoka. The Niddna Sutra (of the Sama Veda) dealing with metres 
is ascribed to Patanjali. 

The art of acting had already been codified by Panini’s time in the 
Natasutras of Silalin and Krisasva. 1 Brahmanical, Buddhistic and Jaina, 
literatures mention a Subandhu, poet and minister of the Nandas and 
the first two Mauryas. Apparently he wrote a unique play in which 
each succeeding act was emboxed in the earlier, and there was an episode 
featuring Bindusara and others in the romance of Udayana and Vasava- 
datta. 2 That the dramatic arts were developed and popular in the 
Mauryan age is borne out by the many references in Kautilya to natas, 
nartakas, natya-rangopajivins and preksha, or a show witnessed by the 
king. Music in all its departments, gita, vadya, gdyana, vadana, vina, venu 
and mridanga, is also often mentioned by Kautilya. References to the 
actor nata are not less frequent in Patanjali; listening to the actor, has- 
tening to the theatre to listen to him, singing by the actor, his make-up, 
his hunger, and his wife who partners persons according to the exigencies 
of the calling, are mentioned in the Mahdbhashya. z The sobhanikas who 
represented, probably without speech, the killing of Kamsa and the sub- 
jugation of Bali and the granthikas who presented the same themes in 
a graphic recital, probably devoid 'of action, are also met with in the 
Mahdbhashya .* When we take into consideration Patanjali’s citation of 
the actor as a l rasika' b we may suppose that we are no longer in the crude 
beginnings of the histrionic art, but in a stage when the theory and aes- 
thetics of it had already been formulated. 

Such a developed theory of poetics and dramaturgy is seen in Bharata’s 
Ndtyasastra, a text which reached its present form in the second or third 
century a.d. On the evidence of its Prakrits and its mention of Yavanas, 
Sakas and Pahlavas, it is reasonable to suppose that this text took shape 
during the period between 200 b. c. and a. d. 200. Kalidasa and 
Asvaghosha presuppose Bharata’s Ndtyasastra-, the Saptasati of Hala 
mentions not only the dance with instrumental accompaniment 6 but also 
the stage ( ranga ), the actress who has painted her face with yellow 
haritala 7 and above all the nataka and its prologue and preliminaries 
called technically purvara/iga-, 8 representations of some of the dance- 
poses of the Ndtyasastra by dancers singly and in groups are to be seen in 
the Amaravati sculptures. In fact a pose described in the Ndtyasastra as 
lalata-tilaka, is figured in a terra cotta from Taxila dug up in the Bhir- 
Mound site by Marshall in 1913, and assigned to a pre-Maurya date 
c 5th century B.c. It is clear from express mention by Bharata as well as 
from the composite form of his text that the Ndtyasastra has incorpora- 
ted into itself parts of earlier treatises on the subject, ascribed to Brahma 


1 iv. 3.110,111 

2 See V. Raghavan, IHQ. xix, 1943, 
pp. 69-71 

3 i. 4. 29; ii. 1. 69; ii. 3. 67; ii. 4. 77; iv. 
1. 114; vi. 1. 2 

4 iii. 1. 26. See also V. Raghavan, JOR. 



NO GREEK INFLUENCE ON DRAMA 639 

and Sadasiva ; some of these in sutra form may go back to the Nata sutras 
mentioned by Panini. 

On the analogy of the Greek influence on Indian sculpture evident 
in the north-western regions in the personal representation of the Buddha, 
it has been suggested that Sanskrit drama also developed in this period 
under the same foreign influence. The presence of yavanis in the royal 
retinue on the stage shows only the popularity of Greek women in the 
royal household; otherwise the Greek theory hangs by the word yava- 
nika, meaning the curtain, the significance of which can hardly be great 
in the face of indigenous words for the curtain like pati or apatl, tiras- 
karirii etc. The absence from Indian drama of tragedies in the Greek 
manner and of the chorus and the unities of time and place, also suggest 
dissimilarity rather than resemblance. Equally untenable is Levi’s theory 
that Sanskrit drama developed under the Saka settlers in Ujjaia in the 
first and second centuries of the Christian era. The character Sakara, 
the modes of address and names of offices laid down by Bharata, which 
occur in Kshatrapa inscriptions, the provenance of the early drama- 
Prakrits, chiefly the Sauraseni, and the general Sanskrit enthusiasm of 
the Kshatrapa chiefs have been taken as indications of the Saka contri- 
bution to the growth of Sanskrit drama. As Levi himself says , 1 the modes 
of address pertain to life and are taken therefrom; aryaputra, for example, 
is a form of address in the Natyasastra, and occurs often in the Ramayaria; 
in the well-known dialogue in the Mahabhashya, the suta addresses the 
Brahmin as Bhadramukha. Sanskrit enthusiasts and patrons of Brah- 
manic modes as these Sakas were, they would have naturally adopted the 
exalted forms in their inscriptions from current Sanskrit. To go beyond 
this would be justified only if it is proved that these expressions are used 
in the inscriptions in exactly the same sense as in Bharata’s text; but this 
Levi, for all his efforts, can hardly do, Bharata’s directions for the use of 
‘Svamin’ and ‘Bhadramukha’ being different; and Rudradaman’s 
rashtriya is different from the character of the same name in Sudraka and 
Kalidasa. What point Levi makes with the character Sakara is not clear; 
if anything, this character shows great antipathy to the Saka. Above all, 
as Keith says, the development seen in Asvaghosha’s plays precludes the 
plausibility of the Sanskrit drama having had its origin only in the time 
of the Saka Satraps or a little earlier. While it cannot be denied that 
Indian culture, particularly in this period, was absorbent and assimilative, 
it must be granted that no proof of substantial foreign influence exerted 
on Sanskrit drama has been offered. 

The chronological position of the celebrated Sanskrit dramatists and 
dramas is, however, involved in such great confusion that we cannot safely 
assign any specimen definitely to this period. Nevertheless, a school of 
Indian scholars contends that the cream of Sanskrit dramatic literature 
belongs to it. Making Asvaghosha the borrower of the much discussed 


1 I A. xxxni p. 169 



640 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


common verses, they would place Kalidasa, the prince of Indian poets and 
dramatists, either under the glorious but yet nebulous Vikramaditya, the 
founder of the Vikrama era in the middle of the first century b.c., or under 
Sunga Agnimitia whom Kalidasa portrays as the hero of one ol his plays 
and whose Vidisa Kalidasa mentions as a renowned royal capital in his 
Meghasandesa. Such a view would naturally push Stidraka and his Mri- 
chchhakatika to an earlier date ; theories are not wanting which identify 
Stidraka with a hero of the Saka-Satavahana period or with the very 
founder of the Andhra-bhritya dynasty. 1 Similarly, Bhasa, whom 
Kalidasa expressly refers to as an illustrious predecessor, is assigned to 
the pre-Mauryan epoch by Dr. T. Ganapati Sastri, who discovered the 
so-called Bhasa plays, and by others following him. 2 There are few 
authors on whom so widely divergent opinions have been held, some 
accepting the authenticity of these plays but placing them about a.d. 300, 3 
and others questioning their authenticity and holding them to be late 
productions of the Kerala theatre. 

Fortunately we are on surer ground with Asvaghosha, though his per- 
sonality too becomes multiple and legendary, and though controversies 
still exist about the exact date of his patron Kanishka. If we go by the 
widely accepted view of the date of Kalidasa, a.d. 400, we may suppose 
that the plays of Bhasa and Stidraka fall between Asvaghosha in the first 
century a.d. and Kalidasa in the fifth. 

Asvaghosha, son of Suvarnaksht, and originally a learned Brahmin 
of Saketa, became a convert to Buddhism and turned all the literary forms 
of Sanskrit to the service of his new faith. Fragments of his plays, a 
prakarana and a prototype of the later allegorical Prabodha Chandrodaya 
have been recovered from Turfan and edited by Liiders. The former 
in nine acts, called Sariputra or Saradvatiputra prakarana deals with the 
conversion of Sariputra and Maudgalyayana by the Buddha; it is signi- 
ficant that this work not only accords well with the prakarana-type as 
defined by Bharata, but actually bears that type-name. In another frag- 
ment, allegorical characters. Wisdom, Fame and the like are featured; 
a third presents a courtesan, clown etc., in the proper milieu of the praka- 
rana or the prahasana. It has also been held on the basis of a Chinese 
translation and two references in Dharmaklrti and Jayanta Bhatta that 
Asvaghosha also composed a musical play on the story of the conversion 
of Rashtrapala by the Buddha. 

Of Saumilla and Kaviputra whom Kalidasa extols along with Bhasa 
as his renowned precursors in drama, we have nothing beyond stray ver- 
ses and such bits of information as that which ascribes a biography of 
Sudraka to the twin poets Ramila-Somila. Bhasa has been remembered 
as the author of the Svapnavasavadatta and othei plays, but except in the 
case of the Svapnavasavadatta which contains a truncated version of the 

iE g„ Jayaswd./fiORS. xvtpp. 2 65 -6, A. D. Pusalkar, Bhasa : A Sudy 

27 6 . , Lahore, pp. 61-81 

1 For a comprehensive summary see 3 Keith, Sanskrit Drama, pp. 94-5 



THE EPICS 


641 


original, the authenticity of the so-called Bhasa plays from Trivandrum 
is open to doubt. The Svapnavasavadatta based on the story of Udayana, 
even in its present form, reveals an artist whose dramatic sense had not 
been smothered by poetic exuberance, one who can, with simplicity and 
skill, arrange scenes of emotional delicacy and poignancy. A traditional 
verse pays a well-deserved tribute to this play and says that the Svapna- 
vasavadatta alone survived the test to which connoisseurs submitted Bha- 
sa’s plays. An example of how research can fall into a rut is the oft-repeat- 
ed view that the abrupt fragment called Charudatta jn this series is the 
original of the brilliant Mriclichhakatika ascribed to Sudraka. The social 
drama of Sudraka, indeed the most variegated from the point of view of 
interest and the most stageworthy from the modern point of view, depicts a 
love story of LFjjain with which are woven events ot a political coup perhaps 
belonging to the fifth century b.c. In the whole field of Sanskrit drama, this 
prakarana in ten acts, blending idealism and realism, poetry and humour, 
is unparalleled for the fullness with which it holds the mirror up to life. 

The continuity of the Kavya literature, of which we have so many glimp- 
ses in the Mahabhashya, in the two centuries before and after Christ 
is no longer doubted by scholars. Of both the Ramayana and the Maha- 
bharata the nucleus goes to earlier ages; 1 the former is generally held to 
have assumed its present form and size in the period between 400 and 
200 b.c. and the latter between 400 b.c. and a.d. 400. The Ramayana, 
called the adikavya, served as the model for Asvaghosha, who does not 
hide his admiration for Valmiki. Asvaghosha’s poems presuppose the 
Mahdbhdrata including the Bhagavadgita; earlier still, Patanjali cites 
literary works on Mahabharata themes, and the Heliodorus column at 
Besnagar shows knowledge of a Mahabharata text; and the Bhagavadgita 
also influenced Mahayana and its literary expression in such works as the 
Saddhannapundanka. 2 The public recitation of the Ramayana is referred 
to in the Buddhistic Kalpanamanditika of the end of the second century 
a.d., and Buddhist and Jaina adaptations of this epic in this period bear 
out its hold over the people. That the ideas set forth in these two itihasas 
animated the whole people, high and low, is seen clearly in the Satavahana 
inscriptions where Gautamiputra Sri Satakarni 3 * is described as emulating 
epic and puranic heroes like Rama, Kesava, Arjuna, Bhimasena, Nabhaga, 
Nahusha, Janamejaya, Sagara, Yayati and Ambarlsha; and their popular 
influence is visible in the Prakrit Saptasatl of the same age which contains a 
gatha 1 in which a young lady wards off the amorous attentions of her hus- 
band’s younger brother by describing to him the conduct of Lakshmana 
and his devotion to his elder brother Rama as depicted in the drawings 
on the walls of the house. The Buddha’s interdiction 5 against listening 
and succumbing to the influence of the sweet poetry of another school 

3 El. vm p. 60 

* i. 35 

5 Anguttara Nikaya (in p. 107) and 
Samyutta Nikaya (ii p. 267) 


1 Keith HSL. p. 43; Winternitz MIL. 
i p. 457 

3 Keith, Buddhist Philosophy in India and 
Ceylon, p. 220 
8i 



642 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


also confirms the strong sway that Brahmanical epic poetry had over the 
people. 

The two epics have influenced Indian life in an intense and persistent 
manner to which we have perhaps no parallel in the history of any 
other literature. Every Indian child knows their stories, and every 
Indian language has its own versions of them. All subsequent Sanskrit 
literature has turned to the Ramayana and the Mahabhdrata for models 
of form and content. The Ramayana, celebrated as the first poem (adi- 
kavya), appears to be earlier than the Mahabhdrata in its present foim; 
it does not know the Mahabhdrata, but the latter incorporates the story 
of Rama and even quotes from the sister epic. The early history of the 
epics and the mutual chronological relation of their original kernels have 
been discussed in the previous volume. Here we are concerned with their 
developed form. Traces of the Ramayana are indeed not seen in Panini 
or Patanjali, but Kautilya’s Arthasastra and the DasarathaJataka preclude 
sweeping deductions from the silence of the grammarians. Early Bud- 
dhistic literature draws upon the Mahabhdrata for its gnomic and didac- 
tic verses ; Buddhist Sanskrit literature of the Avadana type portrays the 
personality of the Buddha, often in the phraseology ot the Ramayana about 
Rama and always with the same warmth of devotion. 

Compared with the Mahabhdrata, the Ramayana exhibits a remarkable 
unity of theme and authorship. Its author, Vaimiki, was, like Vyasa, 
the author of the other epic, a contemporary of the heroes, and though, 
unlike Vyasa, he was not their kinsman, the incidents which according to 
tradition gave birth to the epic bring him into a poignant relationship to 
them. Rama as king, in order to propitiate his subjects, banished his 
beloved queen, SIta, to the forest when she was with child. Vaimiki found 
her and took her under his care into his hermitage. The thought of 
Rama's act brought grief to Valmlki’s heart, though he had heard of his 
infinite virtues from the sage Narada. Then he saw a hunter shoot down 
the male of a pair of sportive Krauncha birds; spontaneously the sage’s 
heart poured out its sympathy in a verse framed in the heroic measure. 
At this Brahma appeared and congratulated Vaimiki on becoming the 
first poet, and at his bidding, and in the same measure, Vaimiki composed 
the entire story of Rama. He then taught the poem to the twin sons of 
Rama, Kusa and Lava, born and bred in his hermitage, and made them 
recite it before Rama himself. 

King Dasaiatha of Ayodhya of the solar race of Ikshvakus had at first 
no progeny; as the result of an elaborate sacrifice, his three queens Kau- 
salya, Kaike>i and Sumitra gave birth to four sons, Rama, Bharata, Lak- 
shmana and Satrughna. Rama was the best endowed of them all, and 
Lakshmana attached himself to him; Bharata and Satrughna formed a 
similar pair. At the time when Dasaratha was considering the marriage 
of the young princes, the sage Visvamitra came upon the scene and took 
away Rama and Lakshmana, ostensibly in order to protect his sacrifice 
by their valour against the Rakshasa brothers Marietta and Subahu. 



THE RAMAYANA 


643 


Visvamitra went on to complete Rama’s education. He took him through 
inspiring scenes of nature, taught him much spiritual lore and rendered 
him invincible with the gift of miraculous weapons. Finally, Visvamitra 
brought the Ikshvakus and the Janakas together by arranging the marria- 
ges of Rama and Lakshmana with Sita and Urmila, daughters of Janaka, 
and of Bharata and Satrughna with Mandavx and Srutakirti, daughters 
of Janaka’s brother Kusadhvaja. 

Bharata, accompanied by Satrughna, departed on a visit to his mater- 
nal uncle in Kekaya. Dasaratha now resolved to celebrate Rama’s ins- 
tallation as Crown Prince. He had, however, promised the kingdom to 
Kaikeyi’s issue at the time of her marriage and had also promised her two 
boons to be claimed at her pleasure. A hunchback maid of Kaikeyi in- 
cited her to claim the two boons now and demand the coronation for her 
son Bharata and fourteen years of exile for Rama. Rama, too magna- 
nimous to protest, resolved that his father should keep his promise and 
left for the forest with Sita. The faithful Lakshmana followed him. 

Soon after this Dasaratha died. The raja-kartris (king-makers) of Ayo- 
dhya met, and brought Bharata from Kekaya to mount the throne, but 
Bharata, next to none in his love for Rama, frustrated his mother’s design, 
and with his whole court and harem and the representatives of the people, 
repaired to the forest to urge Rama to return and take the kingdom that 
was his. But Rama would not return until his father’s promise had been 
fulfilled to the letter. As a compromise, Bharata set up Rama's sandals 
as regent to rule the kingdom. Living a hermit’s life like Rama himself 
outside the city, Bharata governed as Rama’s minister. 

As Rama entered deeper into the southern forests, sages and hermits 
flocked to him to beg protection from the Rakshasas, the enemies of their 
sacrifices and their lives. Rama promised his protection. The first demon 
to show himself was Viradha, and he convinced Sita and Rama of the 
soundness of Rama’s resolve. At Panchavali on the Godavari, where the 
brothers and Sita had taken their abode for the final year cf their sylvan 
life, the demoness Surpanakha appeared. Here was the frontier of the 
king of the Rakshasas, Ravana of Lanka, and near by at his outpost of 
Janasthana, his brothers Khara, Dushana and others, fourteen thousand 
in all, were holding sway. 

Surpanakha was Ravana’ s sister. She desired Rama or Lakshmana for 
her husband, and was punished for her temerity by the mutilation of her 
nose and ears ; so she brought her fourteen thousand brothers from Janas- 
thana, but in vain; they all perished in their assault on Rama. When he 
heard of the destruction of Janasthana and of the great beauty of Sita, 
Ravana was inflamed with fury and lust ; with the aid of Maricha, who, 
disguised as a golden gazelle, flashed before Sita like lightning, he contrived 
to isolate Sita in her hermitage, and appearing before her in the guise of 
a recluse, carried her off to Lanka where he kept her confined in the asoka- 
grove under the strict guard of frightful demonesses. 

Desolate with grief, Rama, supported by Lakshmana, roamed south 



644 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


in search of his beloved, and in the vicinity of lake Pampa met the monkey 
Hanuman, minister of the monkey-chief Sugrlva. Sugriva, dispossessed 
by his elder brother Valin, had taken shelter in a hill near by and was look- 
ing for a strong ally. Rama made friends with Sugrlva and killed Valin, 
thus enabling Sugriva to recover the kingdom of the monkeys and bears ; 
in return for this help, Sugriva promised his aid for the recovery of Slta. 

At Sugriva’s behest, parties of monkeys set out in all directions sear- 
ching for the whereabouts of Rama’s lost queen. Hanuman was in the 
south-bound party and enjoyed the confidence of both Sugriva and Rama. 
He flew over the sea, reached Ravana’s Lanka and found Sitain the asoka- 
grove. Hunuman gave her Rama’s signet ring, assured her that Rama 
would soon come to her rescue, and after gauging Ravana’s strength and 
setting his city on fire, returned to Rama with the glad tidings. 

Followed by the huge army of Sugriva’s monkeys and bears, Rama and 
Lakshmana proceeded to invest the island of Ravana. There Vibhi- 
shana, Ravana’s righteous and wise younger brother, urged his brother 
to restore Slta and make friends with Rama. His persuasions were in 
vain, whereupon he left his evil brother and took refuge with Rama on the 
opposite shore. A bridge was thrown across the sea, on which the army 
crossed over and laid siege to Lanka. In the great battle that followed, 
Ravana’s champions fell one after another, and finally Ravana himself 
was killed. Rama made Vibhishana king of Lanka, took back Slta after 
a purificatory ordeal by fire and flew back to Ayodhya in the miraculous 
aerial car Pushpaka. 

Rama was now crowned king, and his reign bequeathed to later ages 
the ideal of Ramarajya, a kingdom of love and non-violence. Rama, 
however, could not escape his destiny of a life of tragic suffering; unable to 
endure the people’s suspicious murmurings about SIta’s enforced stay 
in Ravana’s custody, he submitted himself to the second and longer 
travail of separation. Later, when the two princes, Lava and Kusa, 
brought up as hermit boys, sang the sweet epic of Valmiki to the music of 
the lute before him, he yearned to see the sage, who thereupon came to 
him with Slta. Slta then asserted her chastity before her lord and begged 
Mother Earth to open her bosom and receive her. The earth gaped open 
and Sita disappeared. 

The story of the Ramayaria is now spread over seven books and modern 
criticism considers the first and last bocks to be later additions. It can- 
not, however, be gainsaid that in the first book there are portions which 
are genuinely old; likewise a few cantos of the last book, which depict the 
climax of the story of the second separation, are in a truly elevated style; 
from Kalidasa downwards the epic was known with this tragic end, though 
religious readings and expositions always stopped with the six books. 
While on the one hand the personality of Rama as the embodiment of 
Dharma (righteousness) has remained a never-ending inspiration to the 
nation, the adoration of Rama ramified into an elaborate Rama-cult and 
the epic itself was deemed as a scripture on which the doctrine of 



THE MAHABHARATA 


645 


Sarandgati or surrender unto the Lord and his Abliaya or assurance of 
protection were founded. 

The old heroic narratives ( dkhydms ) of the bards (Sedas') were gradually 
assimilated into the second of the two great sagas (itihasa), the Bharata. 
The growth of the Bharata, a heroic lay on the feud of the Bharata cou- 
sins, the Pandavas and the Kauravas, into a thesaurus containing one 
hundred thousand verses of old Indian narratives and moral, religious and 
philosophical teachings, may be clearly traced in its different stages : The 
Asvalayana Srautasutra mentions the Bharata and the Mahabharata , and 
at the very outset the epic itself states that it has three beginnings, and that 
without the subsidiary stories, subsequently added, it originally compri- 
sed only 24,000 verses. No such clear indication, however, is available 
for the transformations which the main original Bharata story is supposed 
to have undergone; on the other hand, from Panini onwards, it has been 
known only as a Pandava epic. The first stage of further expansion would 
cover the increasing part that Krishna came to play as the guide, philo- 
sopher and friend of the Pandava brothers, and Hopkins would mark this 
period at a.d. 200, assigning the further accretions of didactic matter, 
teachings and illustrative episodes, to a period extending to a.d. 400. 1 

The didactic value of the epic is not confined to the later amplifications; 
the main story itself exerts an inestimable appeal by virtue of its grandeur, 
its forceful characterization, and its vivid dramatic quality. In the Bharata 
race arose Santanu, king of Hastinapura; Ganga bore him a son Deva- 
vrata, later celebrated as Bhishma for the terrible vow of celibacy he 
took to enable his father to marry Satyavatl. Of this second marriage of 
Santanu were born Chitrangada who died early, and Vichitravirya who 
succeeded to the throne. Bhishma was looking after his young step- 
brother, and when he died without children, Vyasa, an earlier-born son of 
Satyavatl, and later the author of the Great Epic, begot by niyoga the 
three sons, Dhritarashtra, who was born blind, and Pandu, and their 
half-brother Vidura who became famous for his wisdom. 

Pandu succeeded to the kingdom; by the grace of the gods, five sons, 
Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva, were born to his two 
wives, Kunti and Madri. Dhritarashtra had a hundred sons, Duryodhana 
(the eldest), Dussasana and others, and a daughter Dussala by his wife 
Gundhari. Pandu met with premature death, and the blind Dhritarashtra 
succeeded him. Bhishma placed the hundred and five princes under the 
great Brahmin teacher of military science, Drona. The five Pandavas al- 
ways proved superior, especially Arjuna with his archery and Bhima with 
his extraordinary physical strength; thus they excited the jealousy of their 
hundred cousins who hatched many plots to do away with the Pandavas. 
Soon Duryodhana discovered a staunch ally in Kama, who was in fact 
the eldest born son of Kunti by the Sun-god, but, being abandoned by his 
virgin mother, grew up as the son of a charioteer; the equal of Arjuna in 
archery, Kama, who developed a deep animosity to the Pandavas, proved 
1 The Great Epic of India, p. 398 



646 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


along with Sakuni, Duryodhana’s maternal uncle, an evil genius on the 
side of Duryodhana in all his manoeuvres against the Pandavas. On their 
side, the Pandavas had a powerful ally in their cousin Krishna of the Yada- 
vas, a brother’s son of Kunti. The Pandavas headed by Yudhishthira, 
known for his righteousness, endeared themselves to the people, and Dhri- 
tarashtra could hardly ignore Yudhishthira’ s claim to be installed as 
crown-prince. Duryodhana could not endure this and attempted to burn 
the Pandavas in a lac-mansion ( jatn-griha ). Forewarned by their uncle 
Vidura, the Pandavas escaped by an underground passage and reached in- 
cognito the Panchala capital where King Drupada was offering his daugh- 
ter Draupadi in svayaritvara. Arjuna was victor in the contest and won 
DraupadI, but in accordance with their mother’s word, the five brothers 
took her as their common wife. Dhritarashtra heard of the prosperous do- 
ings of his brother’s sons, and brought them back to Hastinapura, ceding 
to Yudhishthira one half of the kingdom. The Pandavas built their capital 
at Indraprastha. Arjuna then married Krishna’s sister Subhadra and 
begot Abhimanyu; Draupadi also bore five princes to the five brothers. 

The Pandavas built a superb palace with the help of the divine archi- 
tect Maya, vanquished all rival kings, filled their coffers with tribute and 
performed a Rajasuya sacrifice. The magnificence of the sacrifice made 
Duryodhana burn with jealousy and, instigated by his uncle Sakuni, 
Duryodhana forced his elders to permit hirfi to challenge Yudhishthira to 
a game of dice. Yudhishthira had a fatal predilection for this game though 
he had little skill in it. But Sakuni was an adept; the plot was to make 
Yudhishthira stake and lose his all and thus reduce him to destitution. 
Yudhishthira did in fact lose all he had to Sakuni who was playing for 
Duryodhana; his brothers also Yudhishthira staked and lost. Finally 
he agreed to wager his queen Draupadi, and lost again. The legal objec- 
tion that a slave could have no property to gamble with was over-ruled, 
and Draupadi was dragged by the hair to the open hall and publicly dis- 
honoured by Dussasana, the brother of Duryodhana. Evil portents now 
disturbed the old and weak Dhritarashtra who, by boons granted to Drau- 
padi, restored the Pandavas to liberty. But Duryodhana, much vexed at 
this, contrived to lure Yudhishthira to play again for the stake of twelve 
years’ banishment to the forest and a thirteenth year to be passed incog- 
nito, exposure during that year involving a further twelve years of exile. 
The Pandavas lost the game again, and departed to the forest clad in deer- 
skin, the garb of recluses. The four younger brothers, seething with in- 
dignation, swore to kill Duryodhana and his associates for the insults they 
had heaped upon them. 

In the forests, the sages consoled the brothers with stories of kings and 
queens of old who had suffered like them. On the advice of Vyasa, 
Arjuna propitiated Siva with a penance and got from Him a miraculous 
weapon with which to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra. In the thirteenth 
year, they lived in disguise in the court of the Virata king. Here the queen’s 
brother made improper advances to Draupadi, and Bhlma killed him to 



THE FIFTH VEDA 


647 


save Draupadi’s honour. Towards the end of the year, the sons of Dhri- 
tarashtra guessed the existence of the Pandavas in Viiata’s city, and exe- 
cuted a cattle-raid in Virata’s dominions with the object of discovering the 
Pandavas. Arjuna took the field still in disguise and routed their forces. 

Soon the Pandavas disclosed themselves to the Virata king, called Vi- 
rata, Drupada and Krishna into council, and decided first to try peaceful 
negotiations with Duryodhana for a small share in the kingdom. While 
messengers of peace were being exchanged, preparations for war went on 
apace and allies were gathering on both sides. The failure of Krishna’s 
own mission to Duryodhana set the stage for the great contest. 

On the battlefield of Kurukshetra when Arjuna saw before him his own 
elders and kinsmen arranged against him for the fight, he was smitten with 
distress, and nearly resolved to renounce contest and retire. In order to 
strengthen his will to fight, Krishna, who had consented to be his chario- 
teer, delivered to him the message of disinterested performance of duty. 
This famous passage constitutes the Bhagavad-gita. 

The battle then began and raged for eighteen days, denuding the earth 
of the flower of its heroic races. Bhlshma, Drorta, Kama and Salya 
who successively commanded on Duryodhana’s side were slain. Drona’s 
son Asvatthaman, entered the Pandava camp by night and slaughtered 
the sons of Draupadi. Young Abhimanyu had already fallen in splendid 
but unequal fight. The Pandavas won the day, but at the end their only 
hope for the future of their line was the child in the womb of Abhimanyu’s 
widow; even that Asvatthaman had endeavoured to destroy, but Krishpa 
miraculously saved the unborn child. 

Coronation and horse-sacrifice followed, but Yudhishthira’s heart was 
overweighed with sorrow. He yielded the throne to Abhimanyu’s son, 
Parlkshit, and started with his brothers and wife on the great journey to 
heaven ( mahaprasthana ). 

This bare outline of the story of the Bharata necessarily fails to reveal the 
heroes in the full light of that character in which they have shone as the beac- 
ons of virtue before the nation. Bhlshma was not only a supreme warrior 
but the repository of all lore, and before he expired he delivered extensive 
discourses on Dharma in all its aspects to Yudhishthira and others. Vidura, 
as his name signifies, was the embodiment of wisdom and his maxims have 
become part of the national treasure. Yudhishthira incarnates the ideal 
of righteousness and friendliness, being known as Dharmaputra and 
Ajatasatru. Kama's name has become proverbial for munificence. The hymn 
of the Thousand Names of Vishnu ( Vishnusahasranama ) and the Bhagavad- 
gita have become the precious jewels of the religious. It is clear that the cen- 
turies immediately before Christ knew the Gita well; along with the Manu- 
smriti it ranks with the finest products of Indian culture in this period. 

In the longer discourses of the Mahabharata hardly anything pertaining 
to man’s endeavour in life will be found that has not been dealt with; 
the epic itself claims that on the principles of religious duty, material wel- 
fare, emotional gratification or spiritual salvation, it is complete and 



648 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


selfsufficing. Its appellation, ‘the Fifth Veda’, represents its true position 
in the national life. 

Together, the two epics have proved inestimable as instruments of po- 
pular adult education, thanks to the popular bards, minstrels and epic 
expounders, the Pauranikas, who, as the literature and epigraphy of India 
as well as of Greater India testify, served as effective interpreters in all 
ages. To this it is due in no small measure that when Independent India 
adopted adult suffrage, the ‘illiteracy’ cf the teeming millions of the coun- 
try proved no great bar to its smooth working; without the stain of ink 
or strain of reading, tradition inducted the people into the essentials of a 
true culture. 

The Buddhists slowly realised the value of the Sanskrit medium; they 
also discovered the didactic value of Sanskrit poetry. Soon the Lokotta- 
ras among the Mahasanghikas made a beginning with the Mahavastu 
in the second century b.c., and the Sarvastivadins among the Sthaviras with 
the Lalitavistara in the first century b.c., both narratives of the story of 
the Buddha written in what is called ‘Buddhistic Sanskrit’. The conver- 
sion of eminent Brahmins quickened the pace of the new movements 
in Buddhism, and in the first century a.d. Asvaghosha, as already noticed, 
actively harnessed Sanskrit poetry and drama to the propagation of Bud- 
dhism. As he avows at the end of his Saundarananda, this poet employ- 
ed the poetic medium for Peace and Deliverance ( vyupasantaye , moksha- 
rtha-). His Buddhacharita, not yet recovered in full, depicts the life of the 
Buddha, and his Saundarananda in eighteen cantos relates how the Buddha 
converted his cousin Nanda when he was immersed in his love for his 
beloved Sundari. The ascription to Asvaghosha of the hymn Gandistotra, 
dealing with the Buddha and the merits of monastic life is not well-founded ; 
and the Sutralamkara in the Chinese language identified with the Kalpana- 
lankritika or Kalpanamanditika, more fully Drishtantapanktih Kalpandman- 
ditika, found in CentralAsia is now considered to be a work of Kumaralata. 
Not only did these and many other works come to be fathered on Asvagho- 
sha, but other contemporary and immediately succeeding writers were in 
course of time confounded with him. The legends and apocrypha that have 
gathered round him and obscure the individuality of his personality and con- 
tribution serve to show what an outstanding literary figure he was, as poet, 
philosopher and teacher of these times who, by the fresh ideas that he intro- 
duced into literature, religion and philosophy, captured the imagination of 
his co-religionists. Contemporary with Asvaghosha, patronised in the same 
court and at times identified with him, was Matricheta, one of whose epistles 
to Kanishka is preserved in Tibetan; his hymns to the Buddha, the Chatu- 
ssatakastotra or the Varnarhavarna-stotra and the Sata-panchasatka-stotra 
or Adhyardha-sataka-stotra recovered from Central Asia and Tibet , 1 were 
still popular in I-tsing’s time. Slightly later than Asvaghosha and influen- 
ced by him was Kumaralata of Taxila whose Sutralamkara or Kalpanaman- 

i JBORS. xxm App. BSOAS. (London) xm pp. 670-701; for the texts etc. of these. 



LITERARY CRITICISM 


649 


ditika, a narrative of Buddhistic tales, has already been mentioned. 
Other Buddhistic narratives in Kavya style produced at this time are the 
Avadana-sataka of about a.d. 100 and the Divyavadana of the second cen- 
tury a.d., both translated into Chinese in the third century a.d. The 
stock cliches and set descriptive formulae that abound in the avadana 
literature, and are also found in the Jaina cononical sutras, lead us to sup- 
pose that this avadana literature, like the Brahmanical epics and Puranas, 
was used by Buddhistic preachers for popular propaganda. 

In literary criticism, we know that as early as Panini and Yaska, the 
simile, its varieties and words expressive of it, were familiar and were dis- 
cussed, and Yaska quotes a Gargya as having defined the simile. The 
fourfold classification of poets in Anguttara 1 into chintakavi, sukta- 
kavi, arthakavi and pratibhanakavi shows that the critical consideration 
of literature had gone some way in the period we are reviewing. The 
excellences and flaws of calligraphy and literary composition, as dealt 
with in the Sasanadhikara of Kautilya’s Arthasastra , bear some resem- 
blance to the gunas and doshas of poetics. The Lalitavistara mentions 
a treatise on the art of poetry, kd vyakaranagran tha, and the Natyasastra, 
a work already noticed, comprehends poetics. The much-cited Rudra- 
daman inscription not only evidences the prevalence of the ornate gadya- 
kavya style, but makes express mention of the classification of literary 
composition into gadya and padya, of writing that is embellished 
(i alamkrita ) and of words that have the character of sphuta, laghu , madhura, 
chitra, kanta and udara, 2 terms some of which can be recognised as the 
technical names of excellences of style (gunas) in poetics. More revealing 
is a gatha in Hala’s Saptasatr l * 3 4 this speaks of the alamkara ( abharana ) of 
kavya and of the now little known lakshartas of poetic expression which 
were partly the precursors of the alamkaras themselves and of which 
thirty-six are enumerated and described by Bharata in his Natyasastra* 

PALI, ARDHAMAGADHI AND PRAKRIT 

Two different Buddhistic traditions associate Upagupta and Moggali- 
putta Tissa with Asoka and make them responsible for the convening of 
a Buddhistic council in the third century b.c. for clearing the Sangha of 
schismatics and arranging for the propagation of Buddhism in distant 
parts of the country and beyond. According to the Ceylonese chronicle 
Mahavamsa, Tissa Moggaliputta sent his pupil Mahinda, Asoka’s son, to 
Ceylon, and the first powerful Sinhalese king Vattagamani had the Bud- 
dhistic texts written down for the first time in the first century b.c . 5 These 
represent the Pali Tripitaka as we know now. Whether we believe these 

l n p.230 karaSastra, ch. i 

* El. vm p. 44 * Mahavamsa , pp. xxxviii, 100-1 ; Dipava- 

8 v. 28 rhsa pp. xx, 20-1 

4 V. Raghavan, Some Concepts of Alan- 



650 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


traditions or not , 1 the more reliable evidence of Asoka’s own edicts and 
the votive inscriptions on the stupas of Safichi and Bharhut 2 show that 
certain canonical texts, which are traceable in the available Pali canon and 
which bear a general resemblance to it were already in existence in the 
first three centuries before Christ. 

That the extant Pali canon, however, does not represent the original 
version is now accepted. In the frequently quoted Chullavagga passage 3 
the Buddha forbids the two bhikkus who suggest making a Sanskrit tran- 
slation of the canon in order to standardise it and save it from distortions 
by different monks speaking different tongues; he expressly permits his 
words to be learnt by every man in his own language. The claim 
of the Ceylonese that their Pali canon represents the MagadhI spoken 
by the Buddha, and the assumption of scholars that this Pali is 
based on Ardhamagadh! are no longer accepted. Pali, an enigmatic 
word, is taken to mean row or text; Dr. Walleser’s clever suggestion 
that Pali is a corruption of Patall, meaning the language of Patali- 
putra (MagadhI) has not found favour . 4 It is not impossible that, as 
in the Chullavagga passage referred to above, the contrast is with Chch- 
handasa (metrical-vedic) language, Pali, whose meaning ‘row’ or Tine’ 
is accepted by all, signified something written or recited in a long run- 
on or non-stop prose style. Evidence has been adduced, from Bud- 
dhaghosha’s use of Pali and Patha as interchangeable words, to show that 
Pali is nothing but Patha corresponding to that of the Veaic Brahmanas 
(cf. padapatha), meaning sacred recited text or recital . 5 But such spe- 
culations would only be called for after we have discovered some early 
use of the word Pali in a linguistic sense. Pali, it is granted, is not a homo- 
geneous language; like the language of the Asokan edicts, it shows local 
variations; and because of its mixed forms, it is proper to treat it not as 
a living dialect, but as a nebulous and composite literary medium. As 
a language, its characteristics show pre-Magadhl traits, which relate it 
more to the Vedic dialects and produce the impression of a degraded or 
colloquial form of Sanskrit, instances of which Patanjali himself cites. 

The three Pali pitakas do not all appear to be of the same antiquity. 
The Kathavatthu part of the Abhidhamma pitaka is, in fact, ascribed to the 
redactor, Tissa Moggaliputta. The Abhidhamma itself must have been 
composed after the rise of sects and existed originally in those formulae 
now embodied in it and called matrikas. The non-canonical Pali literature 
of this period comprises the Netti-prakarana (book of guidance) the 
Petakopadesa, both of about the beginning of the Christian era, the Sutta- 
samgaha, and the Milindapahha called also Nctgasena Bhikshu-sutra , 


Malalasekhara, The Pali Literature 
of Ceylon, pp. 44-7, does not believe 
this tradition wholly and shows evi- 
dences of written literature in the 
pre-Vattagamani period. 

Hultzsch, ZDMG, xl pp. 58-80; 
I A. xxi pp. 225-242; El. np.93 also 


c'- va,es h oi Votive Ins. 

3 St “P™ a J Sane i, pp. 16,18, 2< 

401 47 SSC 3lSO S ’ L6vi JA - 15 
iv pp. 773-5 

Rev R. Siddhartha, Buddhis, 
studies, ch. xxiv pp. 641 f. 


the 

pp. 



THE JAINA CANON 


651 


embodying the questions of Milinda (Menander), and the answers of the 
Thera Nagasena. Winternitz says that the Milindapanha alone was compo- 
sed in the North-West and the rest of these non-canonical Pali texts in 
Ceylon; 1 Geiger, however, opines that probably the Pali Milindapanha 
was also a Ceylonese version of a Sanskrit original of North-West India. 2 
To the first three centuries of the Christian era are also to be assigned the 
Atthakathas used by the great Pali commentator Buddhaghosha, one of 
which, the Andha-attakatha 3 is said to have been used in Kanchipura. 

The Jaina canons, likewise, use the language known as the Ardhama- 
gadhl. According to Svetambara tradition, the Jainas lost their original 
texts or these later fell into disorder, and Devardhigani redacted their 
canon in a.d. 454 at a council at Valabhi. A tradition traces the schism 
into Svetambaras and Digambaras to the growth of different practices 
between those who stayed at Pataliputra and those followers of Bhadra- 
bahu who returned there from South India, and another ascribes the ori- 
gin of the Digambara sect to one Sivabhuti of a.d. 83. 4 We know for 
certain from the Jaina inscriptions at Mathura, 5 as also from the Jaina 
sculptures at the same place that not only these divisions but also other 
sub-divisions (gaqas) were in existence among the Jainas in the first and 
the second centuries A.D. The same inscriptions show in their references 
to Vachakas that some Jaina texts were actually current at this time. 
It will therefore be reasonable to suppose that while the canonical liter- 
ature was given the final form in the time of Devardhigani, the original 
parts of this literature went back as far as the traditional council in 
Chandragupta Maurya’s time. According to the view of some scholars, 
the first century a.d. saw also some poetic activity on the part of Jainas, 
the Jaina adaptation of the Ramayana story in the Paumachariya of Vima- 
lasuri being considered to be a very early work of this class. 6 

While the Magadhi and ArdhamagadhI dialects of the east were being 
used by religious movements, in the west two Prakrits were in a stage of 
active literary cultivation by Brahmanical authors. Sauraseni was being 
used in Sanskrit dramas and Maharashtri in lyric poetry. Maharashtri, 
which Dandin later calls Prakrit par excellence, was not only used in ins- 
criptions but received extensive patronage from the Satavahanas in the 
South. One literary tradition remembers that Salivahana, sometimes re- 
ferred to also as Adhyaraja, ordered that in his household only Prakrit 
should be spoken. 7 Reference has already been made to the Sanskrit- 
speaking queen of the Satavahana and the occasion for the composition of 


1 HIL. p. 174. See Demieville, BEFEO. 
xxrv 1924 for a translation of the 
different Chinese versions of Milinda- 
panha and their comparison with the 
Pali version which Demieville considers 
to be an inflated version produced in 
Ceylon after the 5th century a.d. 

2 Pali Lit. &Lang.p. 27 

3 Samantapasadikd, iv 747 

4 According to the late Pravachana- 


pariksha. 

6 Biihler, EI. i pp. 371-397. K. D. Bajpai, 
‘Three New Kushana Inscriptions from 
Mathura,’ Jain Antiquary, xvi pt. 1. 
June 1950 

‘ Winternitz, HIL. it p. 477 

7 Rajasekhara, Kavyamimamsd, GOS. 
p. 50; Bhoja, Sarasvatikanthabharana, 
ii 15 



652 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


the easy Sanskrit grammar called the Katantra. All this points to a keen 
literary consciousness on the part of the Satavahana ruler himself. Hala 
Satavahana is known to literary history as the author who chose seven 
hundred Prakrit gdthas out of an accumulation of a crore 1 to compile the 
Saptasati. Its influence on love poetry in Sanskrit or Prakrit, or even in 
new Indo-Aryan dialects of the modern period, was considerable. The 
famous Amarusataka borrows from it; Govardhana’s Arya-saptasati is a 
Sanskrit replica of it; the Hindi Satsai of Biharilal (seventeenth century) 
and three more Sanskrit Saptasatis of still later date are inspired by the 
same original of Hala Satavahana. The Gatha SaptasatVs claim that 
Prakrit poetry is nectar itself ( amrita ) and that he who does not know it is 
verily innocent of the subtleties of love is not unjustified. That all its verses 
deal exclusively with love is no more true than the impression of late 
writers that it specialised in clandestine love ( parakiyd ); much of this 
poetry is, no doubt, concerned with love, but there are exquisite cameos 
of natural scenery and observations on aspects of human virtues and 
character, subhashitas on subjects like friendship and poverty seldom 
rivalled elsewhere even in Sanskrit literature. Domestic felicity, deep 
abiding love, and the sorrow of wives parted from husbands absent on 
distant journeys ( proshitapatika ) are the themes that claim the largest 
number of the verses in the Saptasati. In harmony with their language, the 
gdthas revel in depicting facets of the love of the common housewife, the 
farmer, and the hunter, against the background of the village, its border- 
trees, fields of cotton and gram, and forests, rivers, and hills. That this 
poetry flowered in the southern region is also clear from the geographical 
background of the Godavari, the Vindhya, and the Narmada. With its 
references to epic lore, narratives, and popular sayings, architectural 
features, temples, and worship, festivals, ceremonies, and customs, paint- 
ing, music, dance and drama, and to Buddhism, 2 the Saptasati forms a 
rich source-book of the culture of this period. 

The Saptasati is an anthology containing verses by king Hala himself, 
and by the poets he patronised and others. The text has suffered in trans- 
mission, but two-thirds, common to all recensions, can be confidently 
taken as original. One gatha (v. 67) refers to the author himself, Sali- 
vahana, as a saviour of the distressed and a veritable god, and another 
(v. 64) shows that by this time, the fame of Vikramaditya and of his muni- 
ficence had become established. The inclusion here of the verses compo- 
sed by women confirms the impression of the state of women’s education 
derived from the anecdote of the origin of the Katantra. The Saptasati 
refers to the royal compiler as ‘ Kavi-vatsala’ , ‘fond of the poets’ ; and of 
the authors whose names are preserved in some manuscripts of this antho- 
logy, Kumarila, Pottisa, and Palita are known from the Lilavati, the Pra- 
krit romance on Hala, and from Abhinanda’s Ramacharita as having been 
closely associated with Hala. Palita is also remembered as the author of 
the Prakrit katha Tarangavati. 

1 Saptasati i 3 1 iv. 8 



gunadhya’s brihatkatha 


653 


To these distinguished writers of Hala’s court is to be added one whose 
work attained in the entire domain of Indian literature a fundamental 
importance matched only by the Rdmayana and the Mahabharata. 
Gunadhya, whom Govardhana rightly calls an incarnation of Vyasa, pro- 
duced his Brihatkatha, a storehouse of the country’s stories and fables. 
The introductory book of the Sanskrit versions of this ‘Great Story’, 
relates how Gunadhya, in consequence of a wager with Sarvavarman, 
gave up three languages — Sanskrit, Prakrit and the local idiom ( desa - 
bhasha), and wrote in Paisachi or Bhutabhasha. 1 The same introduction 
tells us that the Brihatkatha, basing itself on Vararuchi’s earlier narrative, 
was originally composed with seven main stories in seven hundred thou- 
sand verses, but that in mortification at the neglect with which he was 
received Gunadhya allowed all but one of the main stories to perish. The 
Paisachi original even of this relic is no longer extant. In the sixth century 
a.d. the Ganga king Durvinita translated it into Sanskrit. 2 In Nepal 
Budhasvamin wrote the Brihatkathaslokasamgraha c. eighth century a.d. 
In Kashmir Kshemendra (c. a.d. 1050) produced a short Sanskrit version 
in his Brihatkathamahjari, and Somadeva (a.d. 1063-81) a considerably 
more elaborate Sanskrit version, the famous Kathasaritsagara. Dr. L. 
Alsdorf has shown that in the Vasudevahindi we have a Jaina version of 
Gunadhya’s work, exhibiting differences from the Nepalese and Kashmi- 
rian versions. 3 In Tamil, KonguveUr wrote his Peruhgadai, the frag- 
mentary manuscript of which opens with Udayana’s meeting with Pra- 
dyota and ends with his son Naravahanadatta’s marriage with Madana- 
mafijuka. The extant Kashmiri Sanskrit versions mentioned above in- 
clude: a preface on the origin of the Brihatkatha-, a traditional literary 
history from the Nanda to the Satavahana times; the cycle of Udayana 
stories, which form the prelude; the main cycle of the romances of Uday- 
ana’s son Naravahanadatta, which occupies the bulk of the work; the 
whole series of animal fables, separately related in the Pafichatantra; and 
finally the tales connected with Vikramaditya. The whole cycle of Uday- 
ana-plays, romances like Kadambari, and such dramas as Nagdnanda and 
Mdlatimadhava draw their raw material from the Brihatkatha. 

The work itself terms Paisachi a Bhutabhasha or the language of the gob- 
lins, but Konow and others have shown that Paisachi was a speech widely 
current in different and distant parts of the country, in fact, in North- 
West, North and South all along the fringes of the regions where Sanskrit 
originally and the literary Prakrit later were in use. Pischel and Grierson 
would relate it to the Pisachas, who are referred to as a tribe. 4 Varieties of 
Paisachi such as Chulika- and Kekaya-Paisachi are also known. It has 
also been held that Paisachi, being the popular tongue spoken round about 
educational centres like Taxila, was also probably the original language of 
the so-called Pali canon. 5 According to Lacote, the original Paisachi 


1 i vi. 2, 148 

3 EC. xnTm. 23 ;E4.xnip. 204 
3 BSOAS., London, vinp. 320 


4 ZDMG. Lxrv pp. 95-118; lxvi pp. 
49-86 

5 ZDMG. lxiv pp. 103-4 



654 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


version was amplifiedin Kashmir, and it is from this secondary version that 
the two Kashmiri Sanskrit versions are derived. Hitherto the only relics 
of the Paisachi dialect known were a few stray illustrative words cited in 
Prakrit grammars and two verses quoted by Hemachandra and attempts 
have been made to locate them in some part of the original ; but recently 
a most valuable continuous passage in Paisachi indentifiable with the story 
of the gambler Tintakarala in the Vishamasilalambaka, has been brought 
to light from Bhoja’s Sringaraprakasa ; 1 apart from its linguistic value 
this fragment shows ihat, as Keith rightly surmised, the Paisachi original 
was in prose, and was composed in a simple narrative style. 

The Dravidian affinities of Paisachi and the link between Aindra gram- 
mar and the Tamil Tolkappiyam have already been alluded to. That the 
Prakrit enthusiast Satavahana extended his patronage to Tamil is also 
relevant in this connection. Apart from some Satavahana traditions in 
Tamil literature, in the Nannul Mayilainathan Urai we are told that Sata- 
vahanam is an example of a Tamil work named after the patron of the 
author. 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

By the beginning of the Mauryan epoch, the authority of the three Vedas 
( trayi ) had been completely established. Kautilya’s mention of the Athar- 
van along with Itihasa as additional Vedas , 2 taken with the inclusion by 
Apastamba of all popular arts and lore in the Atharvan , 3 shows that the 
fourth Veda was gaining ground. That this recognition came to it rapidly, 
thanks to its popular status and appeal, is evident from Patanjali's refer- 
ence to the Atharvaveda and its nine schools . 4 

The Itihasa-Purana which is juxtaposed with the Atharvan and whose 
roots go back to the Veda soon became a powerful medium of mass edu- 
cation. Popular as they were in form and purpose, there is no adequate 
proof that they were originally composed in Prakrit ; all that can be con- 
ceded is that the Sanskrit of the Puranas, classified as epic Sanskrit, had 
colloquial solecisms and constructions. Besides popular versions of Vedic 
lore and religion, they gave accounts of the creation of the universe and the 
histories of the primary families of men, sages and kings. From the Pura- 
nic accounts of dynasties of historical times it is clear that this literature 
underwent revision and enlargement up to the Gupta age. But the ori- 
ginals of the Purana literature, with the main features of which the two 
epics also agree, are traceable to great antiquity. The characterisation 
of Itihasa-Purana as the fifth Veda ranks this literature next below the 
Atharvan in importance. The growth of their Buddhistic counterpart in 
the Jatakas, Avadanas, the accounts of the life of the Buddha, and other 
religious and edificatory writings like the Saddharmapundarika, every line 
of which, as Winternitz says, reminds us of the spirit of the Puranas, only 
1 See V. Raghavan, ‘The Original Pai- 2 i. 3 
sachi Brihatkatha’, Bharatakaumudi, 3 ii, 29. 11,12 
pp. 575-88 4 i. 1. 1 



VAISHNAVISM AND SA1VISM 


655 


confirms the existence in this period of the Brahmanical Puranas and the 
strong hold they had upon the people. While Gautama’s Dharma-sutras 
mention the Itihasa and Purana 1 among the constituents of the Brahmin’s 
learning and among the authorities for the regulation of conduct, Apas- 
tamba refers to Puranas, quotes from them and mentions a Bhavishyatpura- 
na f and these two Dharmasutras are assigned to the fifth or fourth century 
b.c. That the recitation of Itihasas and Puranas was in vogue in the Maur- 
yan and Suriga periods is known from Kautilya’s mention of Itihasa-sra- 
vana and Purana as a constituent of education 3 and from Patanjali’s 
allusion to granthikas and their Kamsavadha and Balibcmdha. Poets im- 
provised their new compositions on the material of the Purana narratives 
as is seen from Patanjali again; and that rulers emulated the kings of old 
whose exploits were sung in the Puranas is evident from the Satavahana 
and Kshatrapa inscriptions. 

If Buddhism found patronage among some of the Greeks and Kushanas, 
Brahmanism attracted almost the whole of the §aka settlers. Even among 
the Kushanas, a king in the second century a.d. calls himself Vasudeva. 
Evidence that the Bhagavata religion was not without influence upon the 
Graeco-Bactrians of North-West India is furnished by the Besnagar Garuda 
pillar, raised by Heliodorus of Taxila in the second century b.c. The Greek 
subscribes himself on this column as a bhagavata and proclaims the steps 
to immortality expounded in a text of the Mahabharata', the installation of 
Gaiuda, the vehicle of Vishnu, depicted on the column exhibits the full 
development of Vaishnavite beliefs. The Ghosundi inscription of 200 
B.c. mentions a temple to Samkarshana and Vasudeva, who are again men- 
tioned together under these names as well as under the synonyms of Rama- 
kesava by Patanjali in the same age. Patanjali speaks also of dramatic 
shows protraying the exploits of Krishna. Samkarshana occurs in Kau- 
tilya, and Vasudeva goes back to Panini himself. Megasthenes mentions 
that Krishna was worshipped in the country round Mathura and in the 
regions to the west and south, the territory of the Saurasenas. Clans 
with which Krishna was connected, Abhlras, Vrishnis, Kukuras, Andha- 
kas, and Bhojakas, played an influential part in the culture and history 
of this period. 

The prevalence of Saivism is borne out by a quantity of evidence. 
Patanjali 4 refers to Sivabhagavata, a devotee of Siva, going about with 
Siva’s emblem, a steel lance {ayassula), and this gives some indication of 
the developed iconography of the Siva-form at this time. Equally im- 
portant is Patanjali’s reference to images of Siva, Skanda and Visakha 5 . 
The expounders of the Nyaya-Vaiseshika systems were Saivites in religion ; 
Kanada is said to have received his Vaiseshika from Mahesvara, and 
Uluka, one of Kanada’s names, regularly figures among Siva’s devotees; 
all the later Naiyayikas from Uddyotakara onwards were, by express desig- 


1 8 . 6 ; 
1 if. 9. 



656 LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

nation, Pasupatacharyas; so much so that Jaina writers imply by the terms 
of ‘Pasupatas’ and ‘Saivas,’ Vaiseshikas and Naiyayikas. The Pasupata 
occurs in the Lankavatara Sutra. The names of Skanda, Mahasena, Ku- 
mara, and Visakha occur on some Kanishka coins, and the Kushana 
prince, Wima Kadphises, of the middle of the first century a.d., styles 
himself a Mahesvara and uses Saiva symbols on his coins. D. R. Bhandar- 
kar has shown that Lakulisa, the founder of the historical Saiva sect, gave 
a new impetus to the creed in the first century a.d . 1 

The different schools of Brahmins had each its own book of duties, 
Kalpa-sutra, bearing on Vedic sacrifices, domestic ceremonies and personal 
and social conduct, srauta, grihya and dharma. That the rites described in 
the Srauta and Grihya sutras were in full observance from the Mauryan to 
the Satavahana times is seen from the Arthasastra, the Mahabhashya and 
above all the inscriptions. Despite the patronage of some kings, Buddhism 
evidently could not make much headway against Brahmanism; its trans- 
Indian missionary expansion, among peoples less metaphysically evolved 
and less religiously consolidated, may, in a way, be considered as a diver- 
sion resulting from the failure to register much or easy internal progress. 
The Surigas and Kanvas created a powerful Brahmanic revival ; the Ksha- 
trapas took to Brahmanism zealously, and even the Prakrit-loving Satava- 
hanas performed Vedic sacrifices, called themselves Vedasri and Yajnasri 
and described themselves as Rajarshis and Ekabrahmanas. 

According to Mm. Kane, the Dharma Sutras were already in existence 
in 600 b.c., and to the earliest period of the Dharmasastra literature 600- 
300 b.c. may be assigned the Sutras of Gautama, Baudhayana and Apa- 
stamba, while those of Vasishtha, Vishnu, Harita and Sankha-Likhita 
may be placed between 300 and 100 b.c. Vasishtha’s work has come down 
in widely differing recensions ranging from six to thirty chapters; late 
additions are evident, but some of its views, e.g. that marriage is of only 
six kinds, instead of the usual eight, are decidedly old; it quotes from a 
proto-Manu and has sutras in common with Gautama. The Vishnudhar- 
masutra grew out of an ancient nucleus connected with the Kathaka 
school of the Yajurveda; in its present form in uneven sections, in verse 
and varied prose, it is a Vaishnavite redaction made some time between 
a.d. 300 and 700. It exhibits the influence not only of the Bhagavadgita, 
but of the Vishnusahasranama and the Ramayana. Drawing heavily on 
Manu and Yajnavalkya, this text, purporting to be Vishnu's own reve- 
lation to the Earth-goddess, mentions the holy places of the South, and 
speaks of the week-days; yet its reckoning of the constellations from the 
Krittikas establishes the antiquity of its core. 

Side by side with the Dharma Sutras, metrical Smritis were also written 
even before the fourth century b.c. Yaska quotes a Dharmasastra verse 
recording the view of Manu-Svayambhuva (hi. 4). There was no doubt 
current a large mass of such verses in a rather fluid condition, associated 


1 JBBRAS. xxn pp. 151 ff. 



MANU 


657 


with Svayambhuva-Manu, pertaining to religious and civil laws as well 
as to polity ( Arthasdstra ), on which the present Manusmriti and the Mahd- 
bhdrata alike drew; even Asvaghosha’s citations of Manavadharma in 
the VajrasQchl are only partly found in the present Manusmriti. The 
extant Manusmriti describes itself as the redaction of Bhrigu and Narada, 
and the Bhavishya Purdna acquaints us with four redactions of Manu- 
Svayambhuva by Bhrigu (Sumati), Narada, Brihaspati and Angiras. It 
is clear, however, that the Manusmriti does not go back to any original 
called the Manavadharmasutra. It is accepted on all hands that the Manu- 
smriti was recast in its present form between the second century b.c. and 
the second century a.d. but the attempt 1 to identify it as a definite Sunga 
document can only be considered more ingenious than sound. 

The growth of such metrical Smritis marks a stage in which Dharma 
had ceased to be considered in relation to particular schools and had come 
to be dealt with as applicable to the whole people ; also, this was a stage 
in which the treatment of civil law was growing increasingly important 
and systematic, as can be seen from the gradual advance from Manu to 
Yajnavalkya, and from Yajnavalkya to Narada. The scope of the Manu- 
smriti extends over the whole of human activity and social relations, over 
religious and civil, personal and public law, over the duties of man and 
woman, and of men in each caste (varna) and station of life ( asrama ), over 
principles of righteous conduct {dharma) as well as of polity (art ha), and over 
the philosophical background of human existence and the spiritual salva- 
tion of man. Life as envisaged here is a consecration, and man is not a 
free agent acting under personal impulse but a sishfa governed by the rule 
of law and duty. The acts of life are sacraments that chasten his nature, 
and life here and in the hereafter forms one harmonious synthesis. This 
ideology is in significant contrast to the Buddhistic way of life ; it is not 
the abjuration of life, but the acceptance and sublimation of it; in its 
philosophical conclusion, the Manusmriti, echoing the Bhagavad Gita, 
strikes the balance between pravritti and nivritti advocating the poise and 
peace of detachment in the midst of the active discharge of one’s appointed 
duty. 

To Kumarila, Manu is the law-giver par excellence', and Brihaspati 
declares : ‘Other branches of knowledge, logic and grammar, shine only 
until Manu, the teacher of Dharma, Artha and Moksha, shows himself ; 
that code which runs contrary to Manu is not commendable .’ 2 Ever since 
its appearance, the Manusmriti has determined the manner and mode of 
Indian life; from the time the Taittiriya Samhita declared 3 that whatever 
Manu declared was medicine, Manu, more than even the philosophers, 
has stood as the symbol of Hinduism; ‘in Manu we have the soul of a 
great section of the people ;’ 4 his influence in every department is so com- 
plete that we find on the one hand Kalidasa describing Dillpa’s subjects 

1 K. P. Jayaswal, Manu and Yajnavalkya, 3 ii. 2. 10. 2. 

Calcutta 1930, pp. 32-44 1 Keith, HSL. p. 443 

3 GOS. lxxxv p. 233 
83 



658 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


as not swerving from Manu’s norm even by a line’s breadth, and on the 
other, a distant Tamil king priding himself as Manuniti-Chola. Manu’s 
sway was not confined to India but extended over Burma and Siam, Java 
and Bali. Couched in poetic style, breathing a high fervour, and full 
of sententious observations, Manu’s work is not merely a religious or 
legal code, it occupies a unique place in literature. Comparing it with 
the Bible, Nietzsche finds it an ‘incomparably intellectual and supeiior 
work.’ 1 

Compared with the Manusmriti, the Yajhavalkyasmriti, which definitely 
uses the former and Kautilya, represents a distinct advance in its form 
and legal content ; the classification of the whole subject-matter under 
the three heads of Achara, Vyavahara and Prayaschitta, the more detailed 
treatment of topics of vyavahara like the ordeals, the reference to the pro- 
pitiation of Vinayaka and the planets, the harnessing of music as a spiri- 
tual aid, the enumeration of fourteen branches of learning ( vidyds ) and 
of nineteen authors of Dharma, and the clear statement that on a point 
of conflict between the principles of Dharmasastra and Arthasastra the 
former should prevail, bespeak a stage later than that of Manu, say a 
period between 100 B.c. and A.D. 300. The text takes its name after one of 
the celebrated Vedic sages associated with the promulgation of the Sukla 
Yajurveda as well as of Upanishadic philosophy, and in the Smriti the 
affinity on one hand with the books of the White Yajurveda, the Paraskara 
Grihyasutra and the Katyayana Sraddhakalpa, and on the other with 
Vedanta and Yoga is clear. Indeed, Yajnavalkya’s name invests the text 
with great importance, and the Buddhistic Lahkavatara Sutra too appears 
to refer to it. 

The Institutes of Narada and Brihaspati are two other important 
Smritis of this period. The Naradasmriti is probably the earliest text 
now known to deal exclusively with legal matters. The few untraced 
Narada-citations on topics of religious conduct, expiation etc. found 
only in late digests refer obviously to a different and later text. As a 
vyavahara-text, Naradais known in three recensions, the longer, the shorter, 
and a third resembling the latter but having numberless variants. Narada 
follows Manu and a preface in one version calls the work the ninth section 
ofNarada’s redaction of the extensive original of Manu; 2 more elaborate 
and systematic than Yajnavalkya on judicial procedure and other matters, 
Narada maybe referred to the period a.d. 100-300. Early literary references 
and citations in prose warrant the existence of an older Barhaspatya 
Arthasastra and Dharmasastra. Different from these is a metrical Smriti 
ascribed to Brihaspati which may be placed between a.d. 200 and 
400, some scholars being inclined to place it in the second century B.c. 3 
This text of Brihaspati has not yet been discovered but it has been recons- 

1 Antichrist, sec. 56 with Bhavasvamin’s commentary. 

8 Vide exordium in the longer text, the * K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar, Brihas- 

colophon in the Nepalese MS. and the pati-Smriti,(GOS. lxxxv) Intro, p. 185 

Naradi-ya-manusanihita in TSS. 97, 



THE AGE OF SUTRAS 


659 


tructed 1 to a large extent from copious citations in other works. Not only 
does Brihaspati expressly glorify Manu, but he frames his text as a varttika, 
a gloss and amplification, of Manu; he has much in common with Narada 
too, but on the treatment of justice and procedure, he registers an advance 
over Yajnavalkya and Narada; so that as a legal and juristic authority, 
he would rank very high and compare favourably with modem writers. 

This was indeed the period of Sutras, more particularly the few centuries 
before Christ. In religion and philosophy, the Brahmanical Sutras were 
invoked and looked up to. That the word siitra was the master or magic 
expression of the times is reflected in the Buddhistic movement which 
fashioned all its canon and literature under the caption ‘Sutra’. 

For the Sutras of the six Brahmanical systems of philosophy, Jacobi 
would consider a.d. 200-500 as the proper date. The polemical portions 
of these Sutras and the parts comprehending Buddhistic tenets may have 
to be assigned to a relatively late period, but it must all the same be granted 
that the nuclear Sutras and the leading ideas of these systems go back to an 
early period. The Buddhistic literature of these times shows acquaintance 
with the technical terms and the very names of some of these Brahmanical 
systems. The Avadanasataka mentions the Vaiseshika; Nagarjuna men- 
tions Samkhya and Yoga, and his Vigrahavyavartani presupposes the 
Nyaya-sutras ; the Lalita-vistara mentions Samkhya, Yoga, Vaiseshika, 
and Hetuvidya; the Milindapanha mentions Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, 
and Vaiseshika; Pali texts speak of the Tarkikas, the Kathavatthu (c. 255 
B.c.) mentioning the Nyaya terms, pratijna, upanaya and nigraha. On 
the Brahmanic side, Yajnavalkya-smriti mentions Nyaya and Mlmamsa 
as two of the vidyasthanas. Along with sabdartha and gandharva, Nyaya 
is found as an established vidya in Rudradaman’s inscription (a.d. 150). 
Charaka gives a resume of Samkhya and Nyaya-Vaiseshika tenets. 
Pataiijali 2 presupposes the Nyaya-sutras. Kautilya speaks of Anvlkshiki, 
comprising Samkhya, Yoga and Lokayata. Katyayana’s Varttikas pre- 
suppose Nyaya (logic), and the tantrayuktis dealt with by Kautilya at 
the end of his work contain terms of both Mlmamsa and Nyaya, and 
thus show that the methodology of sastraic exposition was well systema- 
tized by that time. To the Trayl, Gautama Dharma Sutra 3 adds Anvlk- 
shikl and Tarka, Anvlkshiki as an aid to decide questions of Dharma 4 . It 
would therefore appear that while the Sutras of Nyaya and Vaiseshika 
were put into a systematic form between the fourth and second centuries 
B.c., the schools of thought bearing these names were earlier than the 
fourth century, and of the two, the Vaiseshika was the earlier. 

The Vaiseshika, along with Samkhya, figures much in Buddhistic litera- 
ture. These two appear to be the earliest phases of anti-vedic or extra- 
vedic speculations which paved the way for Buddhism ; it is not without 

1 Fiihrer, Leipzig, 1879; Jolly, SBE. 33 ; * iii. 2. 123 

K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar, GOS. 3 xi. 3 

lxxxv 4 xi. 23 



660 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


significance that later philosophical literature stigmatises the Vaiseshika 
as half-Buddhistic, ardha-vainasika. In the Baudhayana Dharma-sutra, 
Kapila is mentioned as the Asura author of the scheme of vanaprastha 
and sannyasa asramas. 1 The view of the world as dominated by three- 
fold misery, the futility of Vedic sacrifices etc. as means of attaining sal- 
vation, and the doctrine of gunas as accounting by themselves and their 
manifold mutations for all activities which are, in essence, not real so far 
as the Purusha is concerned, must have influenced Buddhism ; 2 the last 
especially is parallel to the Buddhistic doctrine of the non-permanent 
dharmas, which explain all that takes place in mind and matter. Sam- 
khya derived from Sam-khya and Anvikshiki from Anu-Iksha alike show 
the dawn of the comparative, critical, and rationalistic outlook; hence 
it is that all rationalistic schools of thought, viz. Samkhya, Yoga and Lo- 
kayata, are included by Kautilya in Anvikshiki; Yoga, it may be remem- 
bered, is an early name of Vaiseshika, and it is by yogachara, that Kanada 
propitiated Siva and got from him the Vaiseshika. The Vaiseshika-sutras 
contain no reference to Buddhism. The expository literature on Nyaya- 
Vaiseshika in the period under review is not known; what we now have, 
viz. Vatsyayana’s Bhashya and Prasastapada’s work fall outside our pe- 
riod. However, it is clear from Vatsyayana’s comments on some sutras 
that he had predecessors. More definitely we know that on the Vaise- 
shika-sutras, an early Bhashya known by the names Ravayabhashya and 
Katandi was current . 3 That the Lahkavatara harnessed the personality 
of Ravana, that Ravana was a reputed Rakshasa and that Vaiseshika 
was, to begin with, outside the pale of Vedic systems, make probable the 
existence in this period of a Vaiseshika work ascribed to Ravana. 

This period must have witnessed much activity in the field of Samkhya 
also. According to Paramartha’s testimony recorded in Chinese, there 
were eighteen schools of Samkhya. From the lineage of teachers preser- 
ved in the Samkhya-karikas, as also from other citations and references, 
many Samkhya authors are known whose writings may be referred to the 
three or four centuries before Christ. Kapila, mentioned by Baudhayana, 
was followed by Asuri, Panchasikha, Varshaganya, and Vindhyavasin! 
The text known as Shashtitantra is, in all likelihood, the work of Varsha- 
ganya; he and Panchasikha represent an earlier phase of Samkhya which 
is seen in Asvaghosha and Charaka. A Samkhya text called Tattvasa- 
masa is known but its antiquity is doubtful; a text like it is presupposed 
by the farce Bhagavadajjukiya (seventh century a.d.). 4 In fact the Sam- 
khya was the most influential school of thought in the early period; it 
permeated the epics and Puranas. The philosophy of detachment, ana- 
sakti, which is one of the central teachings of the Gita, would seem” to be 
a practical and disciplinary corollary of the Samkhya doctrine that the 


■niuu 

2 S. Kuppuswami Sastri, JOR., Madras, 
rapp. 1-5 

• Sehrader, ‘Vedanta and Samkhya in 


4 ,™ ltlve Budd Wsm,’ IC. i pp. 543-52 
JUR. II p. 146; also Sarasvati Bhavan 
Studies, x pp. 30-4 



MIMAMSA 


661 


Purusha is unaffected by the gunas; the idea of andsakti is ascribed, in fact, 
to Panchasikha in the Brihaspatismriti . 1 The Yoga is always considered 
part of Samkhya-pravachana. Scholars usually assign a late date to the 
Yoga-sutras which presuppose Buddhism, but the traditional identifica- 
tion of its author with the author of the Mahabhashya has found accep- 
tance with some. The Yoga as such goes back to the Vedas, if not to an 
earlier date. Yajnavalkya, the author of the Smriti, figures also as the 
author of a treatise on Yoga mentioned in the Smriti itself and quoted by 
authors of works on both Dharmasastra and Yogasastra. The Yogaya- 
jhavalkya is, however, found in two different texts, a shorter one addressed 
by the sage to Gargi, his wife , 2 and a longer one addressed to Janaka and 
the sages at Mithila . 3 It is the latter text that is quoted by the works men- 
tioned above; while both use the Upanishads and the Gita and deal with 
‘ashtangayoga’, the shorter text which uses terms like ‘Kundali(sakti)' and 
‘Jivanmukta’ is decidedly later; the more authentic longer text is notable 
for its advocacy of the early phase of thought which held that the 
joint pursuit of knowledge and action ( jMna-karma-samuchchaya ) is 
efficacious for release ( mukti ), for which even householders are held 
eligible. 

The philosophy of the Upanishads was cultivated in this period both 
in theory and practice. The numerous references to parivrajakas, tapasas, 
munclas, jatilas, vanaprasthas, yatis, asramas, and tapovanas in Kautilya 
show that Brahmanic mendicants were as much in evidence as their Bud- 
dhistic brethren. Even in the early Dharma-sutras we find provision made 
in the last two stages, vanaprastha and samnyasa, for a life of renunciation 
in the forest. While on one side we find Apastamba’s Dharma-sutras 
offering an epitome of Upanishadic philosophy in the Adhyatmapatala, 
on the other we see Panini mentioning the Bhikshu-sutras of Parasarya 
and Karmanda . 4 Karmanda is later remembered as signifying one who 
has given up the performance of Karma; and the sutras of Parasarya may 
as well have been the nucleus of the Brahmasutras of Vyasa, son of Parasa- 
ra. Upavarsha, whom literary tradition in the Brihatkatha and elsewhere 
places in the Nanda-Maurya age, is known to have written a vritti on the 
Brahma-sutras as well as on the Mimamsa-sutras. As the earliest expoun- 
ders took the Purva and Uttara Mimamsas together and commented upon 
both, we may suppose that the Kasakritsna Mimamsa referred to by Pa- 
tanjali may have comprehended the Vedanta also. Apastamba refers to 
Nyaya as the means of decision on disputed points in Vedic exegesis and 
it is well known that Nyaya is an early name of Purva Mimamsa. Fur- 
ther, the whole atmosphere of the work of the major sutrakaras is saturated 
with the spirit of Mimamsa. The Purva-Mimamsa-sutras may therefore be 


GOS.lxxxv p. 231 
Printed in TSS. and elsewhere. 

Edn. Kaivalyadhama, Lonavala, 1951. 
See also P. C. Diwanji’s critical edn. 


BBRAS., Monograph 3, 1954, where he 
says that this is the yoga text of Yajfia- 
valkya mentioned by him in his Smriti. 
iv. 3. 110-1 



662 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


assigned to a period not later than 300 b.c . 1 Besides Upavarsha, there 
was another commentator on Purva Mimamsa, by name Bhavadasa, also 
presupposed by Sabarasvamin in his bhashya on Mimamsa-sutras. From 
the way he handles Nyaya and Vyakarana it has been argued that Sahara 
could be placed in the second or first century b.c ., 2 but the prevailing 
view is that as he knows Patanjali 3 * he should be placed between a.d. 
100 and 500. 

The early discussions on the meaning of Veda and its injunctions ( vakya ) 
were carried on side by side with inquiry into the significance of words 
( pada ). The grammarians developed a philosophy of semantics and 

sound. The theory of sphota, a permanent basis of all the perishable utter- 
ances, was probably there even in Panini’s days for he speaks of a sage- 
grammarian named Sphotayana; 1 this and other grammatico-philosophi- 
cal doctrines were discussed by Vyadi in his Samgraha ; Vyadi held that 
dravya or vyakti, the particular object itself, was the meaning of a word 
( padartha ), as against Vajapyayana who held that akriti or the character- 
istic form or jati, the genus, was the padartha . 5 Patanjali says that the 
Samgraha prominently discussed the question whether sound is eternal 
or perishable; 6 a commentary on the Vakyapadiya cites the Samgraha 
again as holding the view that the word-meaning-relation {sabdartha- 
sambandha) is eternal ( nitya ). The Mahabhashya also goes into similar 
grammatico-philosophical questions. 

JAINISM 


To Bhadrabahu (fourth century b. c.) niryuktis or short glosses on all 
the Jaina canonical texts are attributed. Digambara tradition speaks of 
a second Bhadrabahu in the first century b. c., who may be the author of 
the niryuktis. Tradition, as well as the opinion of some scholars, places 
in the first three centuries of the Christian era some of the earlier Jaina 
philosophers and poets known to us; the chronology of early Jaina literary 
history is in a very unsatisfactory condition ; we may, however, assume 
that at the same time when Nagarjuna was expatiating on his relativism, 
the Jaina writers were also working out their Syadvada or relative plura- 
lism. Kundakunda, whom tradition assigns to the first century b. c. or 
A. D. and whom scholars place at different dates ranging up to a. d. 400 


1 On the Mimamsa contents of the 

Katyayana-Srauta-sutras and their cor- 

respondence to Jaimini’s Sutras, See 

D. V. Garge, Summary of papers, 
AIOC. xv (Bombay) pp. 34-5, and 
Bharatiya Vidyax i iii-iv pp. 21 6-20 

* G. V. Devasthali, ABORI. Silver Jubi- 
lee Vol. pp. 84-97, J.G. Jha Res. Inst. 
vi. 3. pp. 231-40; Jl. Bom. Uni. (New 
Ser.), xx ii pp. 101-6 JOR., Madras, 
xviii ( i) pp 16-24 

* Mm. Kane, ‘A brief sketch of the Purva 


Mimamsa System; Gleanings, from 
Sahara, JBBRAS. xxvi pp 83-9- 
‘The Mahabhashya and the Bhashya 
ot Sahara, Bharatiya Vidva, vi iii-iv 
pp. 43-5; D V. Garge, ABORI. xxx 
pp ; 254-62; ‘Citations in Sahara 
, ^ t ? C t nC ° ILRes - fnst-Poona, 
1952, pp. 23-6; Keith, Karma-mimamsa, 

4 vi. 1. 123 

° 6 Varttikas on i. 2. 64 



BUDDHIST SCHOOLS 


663 


is credited with the composition of eighty prabhritas and ten bhaktis; the 
Pravachanasara and Samayasara are two of his well-known works : from 
the peculiar nature of his name it has been suggested that he probably hail- 
ed from South India. Umasvati, considered as his pupil, is said to have 
written at Pataliputra; his Tattvarthadhigama-sutra is a compendious 
treatise on Jaina religion, philosophy, and beliefs. To him again, tradition 
assigns five hundred Prakaranas. Vattakera and Karttikeyasvamin are 
also assigned to the first century by some scholars. 

BUDDHISM 

The simple teaching of the Buddha did not long survive his Parinirvana ; 
ideas to which he was opposed were introduced; heretical adherents arose, 
a council had to be called to purify the Sangha, and various sects cropped 
up. With their belief in the superhuman and transcendental nature of 
the Buddha, the Mahasanghikas rose against the traditional Sthavirava- 
dins who held the Buddha to be human. The Sthaviras themselves com- 
prised no less than eleven sections; of these Haimavatas were the old ag- 
nostic Sthaviras proper; the Sarvastivadins, known later as the Vaibha- 
shikas, along with the Mahlsasakas, Dharmaguptas and Kasyaplyas 
began to expound a realistic philosophy. The Vaibhashikas, as their 
name indicates, attached importance to the commentaries called Vibha- 
shas; one of their authoritative texts is Katyayanlputra’s Abhidharma- 
jnanaprasthanasdstra of the first century B.c. As against these Vaibhashi- 
kas, the Sautrantikas emphasised the Sutras as the authority. The Maha- 
samghika schismatics themselves fell into nine divisions. 

While the Buddha concentrated on the problem of suffering, the causal 
chain thereof, the rooting out of desire, and renunciation, and displayed 
an agnostic attitude towards higher metaphysics and the existence of an 
Atman, the need in the subsequent times to build up the new faith against 
the Brahmanical philosophers surrounding them, compelled the followers 
of the Buddha to turn their attention to metaphysical questions. They 
developed the doctrine of the impermanence of things to its full length 
and denied the existence of any permanent substratum or reality. Some 
of the sects mentioned above, like the Sarvastivadins, had also, during 
this stage, to evolve their canonical literature in Sanskrit which was the 
vehicle of Brahmanism. Further, as a result of the thought fermenting 
in this period, they not only became unconsciously subject to the impact 
of the philosophies prevailing around them, but also began, with con- 
scious effort, to effect certain adjustments in their ideas. The Sarvasti- 
vadins were particularly concentrated in the North-West; and Sanskrit 
Buddhism which flourished there in Kashmir and Gandhara, spread 
thence to Tibet, Central Asia, and China, a process of expansion probably 
started by Buddhistic missionaries in the first centuryA.D., if not earlier. 
The Sanskrit Buddhistic canon recovered from these places in translations 
and fragments, shows correspondences as well as differences with the 



664 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Pali canon, and demonstrates clearly that it can no longer be claimed that 
the Pali canon was the original. 

This Sanskrit Buddhistic literature arose mostly in the first centuries 
before and after Christ and received a further fillip from two circumstan- 
ces —the rise of the Mahayana sect and the conversion of eminent Brah- 
min scholars. An account preserved in Northern Buddhism speaks of 
the formation of the Sanskrit Tripitaka in the council held by Kanishka. 
Mahayana was not exactly originated by Asvaghosha; it was a natural and 
gradual growth; probably the origin of the terms Mahayana and HInayana 
is to be seen in the feuds between the Sthaviras and the Mahasanghikas, 
and so far as the expression yarn is concerned, we have the Brahmanic 
Devayana and Pitriyana which go back to Vedic times. The Sautran- 
tikas and the Mahasanghikas had already sown the seeds of Mahayana. 
The reservoir-consciousness, alayavijnana of the later Yogachara-vijnana- 
vada, was already foreshadowed in the mw/a-consciousness of the Maha- 
sanghikas and in the belief of the Mahlsasakas in something over and 
above the aggregates; and the HInayana Pudgala, the phenomenal self, 
paved the way for the two orders of reality of the Madhyamikas. A kind 
of absolutism, parallel to that of Vedanta, crept through tathata, vijnana 
and nirvana; the infusion of a fervent devotion, such as is found in the 
Bhagavadgita, to the personality of the Buddha, and the Bodhisattva ideal 
which Mahayana exalted above the personal arhatship of HInayana, and 
which is clearly analogous to the Vedantic jivanmukta, completed the 
picture ; so much so, as Keith points out, 1 that the Lankavatara in a tell- 
tale passage raises the question whether the Tathagatagarbha was not 
the Vedantic Atman and repudiates formally the suggestion of any plagia- 
rism. 2 

About nine works called Vaipulya Sutras constitute the corpus of 
basic Mahayana texts according to the Nepalese tradition. The sect 
took over the earlier accounts of the Buddha, viz. the Mahavastu and 
the Lalitavistara. On the philosophical side, its earliest text seems to be 
the Ashtasahasrika Prajnaparamita which has discussions on Sunyata. One 
of the Paramita-sutras was rendered into Chinese in a. d. 179, and 
another, the Pafichavimsati, between a. d. 261 and 316. Of the other texts, 
the foremost is the Saddharma-pundarika, characterised by Buddha-bhakti 
and permeated in every line, as Wintemitz says, with the Puranic spirit; 3 
it was, in all likelihood, at least in its nucleus, produced in the first century 
A. D., for Nagarjuna quoted it. The next well-known treatise is the Lan- 
kavatarasutra in which the Buddha enlightens Ravana of Ceylon, and 
which, judging by the glosses of Aryadeva on two sections of it (preserved 
in Chinese), goes back in its original form to the second century a. d. The 
Suvarnaprabhasa is said to have gone to China in the first century A. D., 


1 Buddhism, p. 261 

a D. T. Suzuki, Studies in the Lahkava- 
tara Sutra, London 1930, pp. 138, 

388. Also E. H. Johnston, Foreword 


to his edn. of Ratnagotravibhaga, 
p. xm, JBRS. xxxvi i-ii, Supplement. 
HIL. n pp. 301-2 



NAGARJUNA 


665 


and the Dasabhumisvara on the ten steps to Buddhahood was translated 
into Chinese in a. d. 297. Definitely theistic is the Avalokitesvara-guna- 
karandavyuha rendered into Chinese in a. d. 270. Other texts of this school 
are the Gapdavyuha, the Tathagataguhyaka, the Vajrachchhedika, the Sama- 
dhiraja, the Sukhavatlvyiiha (Chinese a. d. 186) and the Kasyapapari- 
varta on the Bodhisattva ideal and sunyata ; the work last mentioned is 
included in the Ratnakiita and was rendered into Chinese in A. D. 178-184. 

To Asvaghosha is ascribed a number of philosophical and quasi-philo- 
sophical works; but these are mostly apocryphal. Nevertheless, scho- 
lars have devoted attention to one of these texts, the Mahayanasraddhot- 
p&da , the awakening of faith in Mahayana, though of even this, R. Kimura 
would identify the author as Asvaghosha II. 1 In this work is expounded 
a philosophy called tathata ( tatha , tathya, real), which, as against the older 
belief that nothing persists, accepts an indescribable or unconditioned 
element at the bottom of the things, a position clearly midway between 
Buddhistic non-essentialness and the Upanishadic Brahman and clearly 
inspired by the earlier Brahmanism of the author. 

With Asvaghosha at Kanishka’s court was Vasumitra to whom we owe 
a description of the eighteen sects of Buddhism ; this writer is believed to 
have taken a leading part in the council said to have been convened under 
Kanishka’s aegis. In Tibetan, there is a Sanskrit Udanavarga which 
corresponds to the Pali Dhammapada and of which fragments have been 
recovered from Central Asia. According to Taranatha, the author of 
this Udana, Dharmatrata, also flourished in Kanishka’s court. Dharma- 
trata, said to have been an uncle of a Vasumitra, 2 wrote also the Sam- 
yukta-abhidharma-hridaya-sastra. A Harivarraan and his Satyasiddhi- 
sastra of c. A. d. 260-280 are also known from the Chinese. 

Of all the Buddhistic authors, the most celebrated is Nagarjuna of the 
second century A. d. Like Asvaghosha, he was originally a Brahmin, 
and so the influence of Vedanta on his thought has naturally to be accept- 
ed. Traditional histories of his life in Tibetan and Chinese describe him 
as a native of a suburb of Kanchl or of Vidarbha, and his connection with 
Sriparvata and Nagarjunakonda in Guntur district shows that his acti- 
vities lay in the South, in the Satavahana territory. He is associated with 
king Satavahana in more than one tradition and literary reference. Accord- 
ing to the Prakrit romance Lilaval ( Lilavati ), Nagarjuna was in Satava- 
hana’s court along with Potjisa and Kumarila, the last two names receiving 
authentication from Hala’s Saptasati. A letter of Nagarjuna, Suhril- 
lekha, to his friend the Satavahana king has been preserved in Tibetan. 
A number of Sanskrit works pertaining to alchemy and magic which make 
him a ‘ siddha ’, and similar Buddhistic legends which reduce him to the level 
of a magician, hardly do justice to the brilliant founder of the Madhya- 

1 See also P. Demieville, ‘Sur l’authenti- might have been written in China, 
cite du TaTch’ eng k’isinlouen’, Bull, de 2 There were several Vasumitras and 
la Mahon Fr. Jap. 11, 2 Tokyo, 1929. Dharmatratas. 

Demieville now thinks that the text 

84 



666 LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

mika metaphysic. Evidently he had other later, and inferior, namesakes 
and it is not possible to accept the authenticity of all the works fathered 
on him. The Dharmasamgraha attributed to him is one such instance, 
and the Aksharasataka has been identified by some as a work of his pupil 
Aryadeva. The chief work of Nagaijuna expounding the Madhyamika 
philosophy is the Madhyamika-karikas with his own gloss called Akuto- 
bhaya. His philosophy takes its name from its advocacy of the middle 
or conditional or relative reality of things ( samvriti-satya ), neither totally 
non-existent nor existent in the real sense. The other works that can be 
accepted as his are Yuktisatika, Sunyatasaptati, Pratltyasamutpadahpi- 
daya, Mahayanavimsika, Vigrahavyavartani, and commentaries on the Pra- 
jhapdramitasastra and Dasabhumi vibhashasastra. In Tibetan, an attack 
on the sixteen Nyaya categories, the Pramariavighatana, and in 
Chinese, a treatise on debate, translated in a.d. 472, the Upayakausalya- 
hfidaya, are also found to be his works. 

Nagaijuna was followed by his pupil Aryadeva who came from Ceylon, 
or from South India according to the Chinese. 1 In his leading work, 
the Chatussataka , he expounds the Madhyamika system of his master and 
defends it against Brahmanical systems and other Buddhist sects. A hand- 
book of his on this system, Hastabalaprakarana or Mushtiprakarana, gives 
in five verses the essential doctrines of the unreality of phenomena and the 
two kinds of reality. A Chittavisuddhiprakararia criticising Brahmanical 
practices like bathing in the Ganges, and making reference to week-days 
and raii is also ascribed to him, but its authenticity is not accepted. 

SECULAR LORE AND TECHNICAL SCIENCES 

Yajnavalkya’s express devaluation of Arthasastra as against Dharma- 
sastra may be taken as an indication of a reaction against the dominant 
position that the greatest treatise on Indian polity, the Arthasastra of Kau- 
tilya, had been enjoying in the field of political thought ever since it was 
composed during the time of Chandragupta Maurya. Kautilya names 
a number of authorities on the subject some of whom appear also in the 
Mahdbhdrata, and his own work is a critical compendium based on 
their writings. Whatever attention polity received during the centuries 
after Kautilya is to be found only in the Rajadharma portions of 
the Dharmasastra works and the original versions of the Puranas of 
this period already referred to. No other exclusive treatise on Arthasastra 
belonging to this period is known. 

In contrast to the Buddhistic view of life, the ideal of the Brahmanic 
Dharmasastra was a balanced life, which man enjoyed without transgres- 
sing the bounds of righteousness. Even Kautilya, who insists that the king 
should practise sense-control ( indriya-nigraha ) lays down that he should 
not deprive himself of pleasures. The rich life of the people, high and low, 

1 Nanjio, Catalogue of the Chinese Tripitaka, p. 370 



667 


is well reflected in the Arthasastra itself. Music, dance and drama have 
already been referred to. At the very capital where Kautilya was writing, 
the art of love was cultivated, and one Dattaka was requested by the 
courtezans, for whom Pataliputra was famous, to prepare a book for their 
guidance. Though the Dattaka-sutras have not yet been recovered, Vat- 
syayana mentions Dattaka’s work, and later works based on it are known. 
Many other writers are mentioned by Vatsyayana as the sources of his 
Kamasutra, Babhravya of Paiichala, Charayana, Suvarnanabha, Ghota- 
kamukha, Gonardiya, Gonikaputra, and Kuchumara. Though some of 
these names occur in other works, nothing is known of the identity or 
the age of these early writers on erotics. The Natyasastra has its own 
chapter on this subject. But the most important and in fact the only 
early text that has come down to us is the Kamasutra of Vatsyayana. It 
is a remarkable production and has influenced life and literature alike 
in subsequent times. The historical data in the work which include a 
reference to a Kuntala Satakarni have led some scholars to assign the 
work to the third century a.d. ; but others have taken it back to the first 
century a.d. or brought it down to a.d. 500. 1 All that we can say is that 
among the subjects of learning mentioned in Buddhistic accounts like the 
Lalitavistara, Kamasastra finds a place, the poet Asvaghosha knows a 
work of this kind, and Kalidasa shows knowledge of Vatsyayana. 

The Arthasastra opens our eyes to an abundance of popular lore and 
technical sciences enjoying a vogue in this period, the reading of omens, 
birds’ voices, telling fortunes, physiognomy, and dreams, magic and sor- 
cery, lapidary art, mineralogy, agriculture, cultivation of plants and trees, 
the preparation of perfumes, garlands etc., shampooing and the arts of 
thought-reading, living by one’s wits, and entertaining people with jokes. 
A list covering a similar variety of subjects is also to be met with in the 
Lalitavistara. 

Two of the technical sciences which were cultivated during this period 
deserve special notice, medicine and astrology. Indian tradition makes 
a subsidiary Veda of the art of healing. Both Buddhistic and Brahmani- 
cal literature of the pre-Christian centuries contain references to medicine 
and surgery. Kautilya speaks of healing, counteracting poison, mater- 
nity, child-care, and veterinary science. The profession of the physician 
and surgeon received attention, and misconduct on their part was punish- 
able under both Dharmasastra and Arthasastra. According to the Cey- 
lonese Mahavamsa Tika, Chanakya devised a graded regimen of poisoned 
food to render Chandragupta’s constitution immune to poison and 
achieved the wonderful obstetric feat of opening the womb of a dead 
queen of Chandragupta, and bringing to full life the foetus of Bindusara 
by rearing it by stages in the wombs of different goats. Chanakya is 
known as a medical author, 2 but we cannot vouch for the authenticity 

1 H. C. Chakladar, Studies in Vatsydyana's 2 The Mahdvamso: G. Tumour (1837), 
Kamasutras, pp. 30-40; Keith, HSL. Intro, p. xlii. 

p. 469 



668 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


of certain medical works that pass under his name. The early history of 
Indian medicine is full of the names of sages, gods, and demons, and it is 
impossible to say anything definite about the authors and their dates in 
this early age. It may, however, be noted that Jivaka, a pupil of Atreya, 
figures in Buddhistic literature as a contemporary of the Buddha. The 
earliest of the extant medical books is the Charakasamhita. While Brah- 
manical tradition ascribes a redaction of the Charakasamhita to Pataii- 
jali, Buddhistic tradition makes Charaka a court-physician of Kanishka. 
Dridhabala of Kashmir may have edited and amplified Charaka again in 
the eighth or ninth century a.d., but we need have no hesitation in plac- 
ing the original Charaka in an early age. Traditionally Susruta, is deem- 
ed a son of the sage Visvamitra, and his Samhita would be earlier than 
Charaka and his work; but there is no evidence to determine the exact 
date of Susruta. 1 To Nagaijuna who figures in our period, a good number 
of medical treatises are assigned. 

While medicine was an Upaveda, astronomy and mathematics were 
a Vedanga. But the chronology of the early works in this branch is extre- 
mely uncertain. Kaye suggests the broadly divided periods : Vedas, Brah- 
manas etc. 1200-400 B.c., Vedanga-jyotisha etc. 400 b.c.-a.d. 200, 2 
Itihasa-Puranas, 400 b.c.-a.d. 400 and so on. According to his scheme, 
the astronomical and mathematical material that would fall in our period 
is represented by Vedanga-jyotisha . portions of the Jaina Suryaprajhapti, 
the Pitamahasiddhanta which mentions §aka 2 (a.d. 80) 3 and portions of 
the Arthasastra and the epics containing references relevant to jyotisha. 
The geometry of the Sulba-sutras, which are also assigned to this period., 
may have, according to some, influenced the Pythagorean theorem. 

1 Filliozat, La Doctrine de la Medicine centuries before Christ. 
indienne, Paris 1949, pp. 12, 18 assigns 2 Kaye, Hindu Astronomy. 

the originals of Charaka to 2nd or 1st 2 Ibid. pp. 8, 31 

century b.c. and of Susruta to the last 



Chapter XXI 


HISTORY OF THE TAMIL LANGUAGE AND 
LITERATURE 

T'He oldest representative of the Dravidian group of languages is 
Tamil. The other languages belonging to this group are Telugu, 
Kannada, Malayalam, Gondi, Kolami, Kui, Kurukh, Malto and Brahui. 
Telugu in the east of the Deccan and Kannada in the west and Tamil and 
Malayalam in the south form one compact block. 

The Tamil language is a composite texture of three elements, viz. the 
Munda, the Dravidian, and the Aryan, the Dravidian element predomi- 
nating. The word dl meaning man is probably of Munda origin, as it 
is found in Oraon. Instances of words of Aryan or Dravidian origin 
easily occur to one’s mind. A comparative vocabulary of the Munda, the 
Dravidian, and the Aryan languages is bound to throw much light on the 
process of distinguishing these several elements. 

The northern groups of people, like the Gonds, speaking the Dravidian 
tongues have a very low culture. They live next to Munda-speaking abo- 
rigines. The Dravidians of the south on the other hand, are highly cul- 
tured and their languages have given rise to refined literatures, under the 
influence of Sanskrit. Telugu literature is not earlier than the year 1000; 
the oldest Kannada text dates from about 500; Tamil literature is doubt- 
less older. All the Dravidian alphabets are derived, according to Bloch, 
from those of Northern India of the fourth or fifth century a.d. The origin 
of the Dravidian alphabets may be accepted, but the date of the script 
as far as Tamil is concerned may well be questioned. The Brahmi inscrip- 
tions found in the Tamil areas (Madurai and Tirunelveli) are in the Tamil 
language and are assignable to the third or second century b.c. In the 
early Sangam period the word ‘nul’ 1 occurs in the sense of ‘technical 
treatise’, and names were inscribed on memorial stones. 2 Moreover, we 
know that the Tamilian civilization was such as to command the res- 
pect of emperor Asoka. Megasthenes and Katyayana may be cited to 
show that the Tamilian dynasties were well known not later than the 
fourth century B.c. We do not know when these dynasties came into 
existence. 3 With such a civilization and with ruling dynasties of such high 
antiquity, we may not perhaps seriously err if we assume that the Brahmi 
script was adopted for literary purposes about the first or second century 
B.c. and assign the beginning of written Tamil literature to the same peri- 
od. Earlier than this, there must have existed oral literature traditionally 
handed down from generation to generation for some centuries. 


1 Neduna.h0.4ai, l. 76; MaduraikkaHji, I. 

646 ; Si[uphn l. 230 


* Pur. 260, 264 

* Cf. Parimelalagar on Kutal 955 



670 


HISTORY OF THE TAMIL LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


But the beginnings of the Tamil language must be placed far earlier. 
Attempts have been made to prove the antiquity of Tamil on linguistic 
grounds. For instance, the Greek physician Ctesias (401 B.c.) describes 
an odorous oil produced from an Indian tree having flowers like the laurel 
which the Greeks called ‘muroroda’, but which in India was called ‘kar- 
pion’. Dr. Caldwell 1 is inclined to identify this Indian word with the 
Tamil-Malayalam karuppa or karuva (cinnamon), and comes to the con- 
clusion that we have here the earliest Dravidian word quoted by the 
Greeks. But karuva is a late word in Tamil and bears a very suspicious 
appearance of being of foreign origin. ‘Karuppa’ is derived by Rev. H. 
Gundert from Ar. quarfah and this seems the most satisfactory derivation. 
Two other words much relied upon by Caldwell are the Hebrew words, 
tuki for peacock and ahalim for aloe occurring respectively in the Hebrew 
Bible in the passages translated ‘For the king (Solomon, c. 1000 b.c.) had 
at sea a navy of Tharshish, with the navy of Hiram: once in three years 
came the navy of Tharshish bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes and 
peacocks’, and ‘I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes and cinna- 
mon.’ 2 'Tuki' has been sought to be identified with the Tamil tokai. 
No doubt the word bears this meaning even in the earliest Tamil liter- 
ature. 3 But it had not this meaning in the first instance. Its earliest mean- 
ing was only ‘tail’ in general. 4 In the sister languages of the Dravidian 
group, the word has the same meaning— ‘tail’. Later it acquired by restric- 
tion of usage the specific sense of ‘peacock’s tail’, and then, by a figure 
of speech, the sense of ‘peacock’, as in Kurundogai 26, and later still by 
constant poetic usage, its meaning was extended to ‘beautiful woman’ as in 
tokaipakarkku. 5 Thus the respective words in Tamil and Hebrew do not 
agree in their original meanings, while the etymology itself is doubtful. The 
Hebrew ahalim is sought to be traced to the Tamil agil. Now, the Tamil 
word is of a later date than Skt. agaru, and Caldwell himself admits the 
possibility of connection between the Hebrew and the Sanskrit word. 
He suggests also that the word might be derived from the Tamil alagu. 
But this again is a late word and only rarely occurs in the earliest works. 
Nor is it found in other Dravidian languages. Apart from geographical 
names adopted by Greek writers, arm (rice) seems to be the only T amil 
word borrowed by the Greeks. But here also we cannot shut our eyes to 
the possibility that arisi or its earlier form ari is of Sanskrit origin ( vrihi). e 
Caldwell’s statement that the Malayalam word ari is a corruption is clearly 
wrong, as it is found in the earliest Tamil literature, 7 and in Kannada 
and Tulu. Even if the Greek word ‘oryza’ is ultimately proved to be of 
Tamil origin, the date of its borrowing is not ascertainable. 

Some scholars have persuaded themselves that the inscribed seals from 


1 A Comparative Grammar of the Dravi- 
dian Language, 1913 edn, pp. 89-91 

2 I Kings 10, 22; Proverbs 7, 17. Are 
these writings contemporaneous with 
Solomon? 

* Aingu[unii[u 297 


* Aham 13, 122 

l Kamban : Tiruvavatara, 10 
Przyluski, ‘Norn du Riz\ in Etudes 
Asiatiques 

' Malaipadu-kadam. 1. 413 



THE TAMIL SCRIPT. SANGAMS 


671 


the Indus valley support the high antiquity of Tamil. But as Patrick Carle- 
ton 1 has observed ‘neither Prof. Langdon nor any other responsible 
authority has ventured to decide in what language the inscriptions are 
written, still less to offer a translation’. 2 

Leaving such speculations on one side, and turning our attention to lite- 
rature, we may note at once that the date of the Brahmi inscriptions gives 
us a limit beyond which it may not be possible to go. It must be borne 
in mind that literature can thrive only when the art of writing has come 
into general practice among the learned. So we have to conclude that 
there was no written Tamil literature in the accepted sense of the term 
before the third century b.c., if the date generally assigned to the Brahmi 
inscriptions is correct. 

As regards the script itself it goes back, according to G. Buhler, to a 
Semitic origin 3 and its characters are found in Phoenician inscriptions. 
Probably it was introduced into India about 800 b.c. by merchants. It 
must have been, for a long time, used entirely for commercial purposes, 
correspondence, calculations etc. Later it began to be used also for state 
proclamations, and epigraphs, and the kings must have employed learned 
persons for such purposes. These men adapted the foreign alphabet more 
and more to the needs of Indian phonetics, and out of the 22 Semitic 
characters, elaborated a complete alphabet of 44 letters (of Sanskrit) as 
the oldest inscriptions already show. In the Buddhist canon completed 
about 240 b.c. there are sufficient proofs of an acquaintance with the art 
of writing and its extensive use at that time. 4 In the South, it was only the 
Buddhists and the Jainas who first used this script for the Tamil language, 
and we may legitimately infer that they introduced it just as they had 
found it in vogue among their communities in the North. With the ex- 
ception of sounds peculiar to southern languages, the alphabetic arrange- 
ment is identical in Sanskrit and Tamil; for the sounds peculiar to Tamil, 
like the short e and o the letters expressing their long sounds are used with 
some modifications. This shows clearly that the alphabetic system from 
which the Tamil language adopted its alphabet must have been lacking in 
short e and o, and this is exactly the case with Sanskrit. Hence we have to 
conclude that the Tamil alphabet is of northern origin. The script was in 
all probability used for recording literary productions (mainly religious) 
in Sanskrit and Pali, about the third or fourth century b.c. For literary 
work in Tamil (mainly secular) it was adopted, as already said, probably 
about the first or second century b.c. 

Tradition says that there existed three Tamil Sangams or Academies 
in which Tamil literary works were ‘heard’ and assessed, the first academy 
lasting for 4440 years, the second for 3,700 and the third for 1850. 


Buried Empires, Edw. Arnold & Co., 
1944, p. 141; Ernest Mackay, Indus 
Civilisations, 2nd. ed. 

Cf. Piggott, Prehistoric India, 1950, 
pp- 178-81 


Available evidence seems to show that 
all the alphabets of the world are tra- 
ceable to one source. Frederick Bodo- 
mer. The Loom of Language, p. 49. 
Wintemitz, HIL. i pp. 31-40 



672 


HISTORY OF THE TAMIL LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Altogether these three Sangams lasted for 9990 years. Since scholars hold 
that the last phase of the third Sangam was coeval with the beginning of 
the Christian era, the first Sangarn, according to this tradition, must have 
come into existence about 10,000 b. c. ! This tradition is recorded in the 
commentary of Iraiyanar Ahapporul, written perhaps about the twelfth 
century A. D. Gods also are said to have participated in the deliberations 
of the first Sangam. We may leave such fables alone and seek for histo- 
rical truth elsewhere. 

In this traditional account, a certain poet, Muranjiyur Mudi Nagarayar, 
is said to have been a member of the first academy. To this poet is ascrib- 
ed the second stanza of Purananuru, (p. 518 ante) in which a Chera king 
is said to have fed impartially both the contending armies in the Maha- 
bharata battle. It is argued from this that the poet, the academy, and the 
king were all contemporaneous with the Great Battle which is believed 
to have taken place at the beginning of the Kaliyuga, i.e. 3102 b. c. Hence 
Tamil literature, the protagonists of this view say, must have had its begin- 
nings anterior to 3102 b. c. But not even the most extensive redaction 
of the Great Epic in Sanskrit contains this story about the Chera 
monarch. The Tamil poem is in fact simply a eulogy of the king’s bene- 
volence and nothing more. A Chola king also claims to have been 
the head of the commissariat department in this Bharata war. 1 The 
Papdyas claimed to be the descendants of the Pandavas, Arjuna marrying 
Chitrangada, the Pandya princess. These stories should not be taken se- 
riously. Winternitz 2 says: ‘Indian Kings were just as fond of tracing their 
ancestry back to those who fought in the Bharata battle as European princes 
were anxious to prove their descent from the heroes of the Trojan war 
(Cf. Rapson, Cambridge History I p. 307). I consider it as entirely con- 
trary to historical criticism to draw chronological conclusions from 

this fiction.’ 

References in Tamil literature have also been pressed into service to 
prove its high antiquity. One such instance occurs in Nachchinarkkiniyar’s 
commentary on nanmarai in the prefatory verse to Tolkappiyam. He 
says that Tolkappiyam was written long before Vyasa shaped the Vedas 
into four great collections ! A second instance is furnished by the stanzas 3 
which refer to the Moriyas and the Nandas as well as to the Kosar 
and Mohur. The references discussed fully elsewhere in this volume (p. 501) 
give no support for a date anterior to the Christian era for the extant 
Sangam literature. 

One other reference has been made much of by some Tamil scholars. 4 
In the prefatory stanza of Tolkappiyam, the oldest extant Tamil grammar, 
Tolkappiyar, its author, is referred to as one thoroughly versed in Aindram. 
As Aindram is deemed to be one of the pre-Paninian systems and as Panini 
is generally assigned to the fifth century b. c., it is argued that Tolkap- 


Kalingattupparani 1 8 1 
1 HIL. i p. 523, it. 2 


Pur. 175; Aham 69, 251, 281 
M. Srinivasa Iyengar, Tamil Studies 



DATE OF SANGAM LITERATURE 


673 


piyar must have composed his great work at least in the fifth century 
B. c. There must have been a considerable body of Tamil literature before 
Tolkappiyar, and this literature must be of far greater antiquity. True, 
but the argument is reared on wrong premises. 1 Aindra was not the name 
of any particular work, but the name of a grammatical system ascribed 
to Indra. 2 The system was pre-Panini ; but the name ‘Aindra’ itself 
is post-Panini and Panini does not mention it. The Aindra system conti- 
nued to exist long after Panini, and it was followed by the Jainas and 
some others. Katantra, variously assigned to the third or fourth century 
a. d. 3 is a representative of the system. Consequently any reference to 
Aindra is no proof for a pre-Paninian date. Even supposing that the name 
Aindra were pre-Panini, there would be nothing to prevent a later author 
from mentioning the Aindra and making use of it in his work. The 
highly technical and artificial system of Panini could not be adopted for 
a language with a different genius. 

Contrary to the above view, a reference in Purananuru has been urged by 
a scholar, in support of a late date, the tenth century a. d., for the earliest 
of the extant works of Tamil literature. In st-201 of this collection, Kapi- 
lar says of Irungo-vel that he is a chieftain of the family of Velir whose 
progenitor, forty-nine generations before, made his advent out of the 
sacrificial pit of a northern sage and ruled Dvaraka. The Divakaram, 
the earliest of the Tamil nighantus, identifies the Velir (Vel-pula-arasar) 
with the Chalukyas and so the above tradition may be taken to refer to 
the Chalukyan origin. But theie are other dynasties who have a similar 
tradition. An inscription of Yuvaraja II of the Kalachuri dynasty men- 
tions a similar tradition, and there are other records of it also. 4 The 
conflicting versions of this widespread tradition render its evidence of 
no historical value. In the same Puram stanza and in the next (202) 
its hero is called '’pulikadimal, meaning ‘the great one who vanquished a 
tiger’. This reminds us of the legendary origin given for the term ‘Hoysala’. 
At best the references would show the existence of such tradition in the 
6th century a.d. In this connection, we might also consider the reference 
to Gangan Katti in Aham (44). All these, however, may affect the anti- 
quity of the compilation of Puram and Aham, and not the antiquity of 
the earliest stratum of Sahgam literature. 

It is only the Greek writers of the first and second century a. d. who 
furnish us with reliable data for deciding the antiquity of Tamil literature. 
Of these, the earliest was Strabo, an Asiatic Greek who wrote his Geography 
in the first quarter of the first century a.d. Strabo mentions an embassy sent 
to Augustus on his accession by an important king, called Porus by some, 
and Pandion by others. 5 Critics incline with good reason to the view that it 


1 For a full discussion see Tamil-chudar- 
manigal, pp. 27-39 

2 Belvalkar, Systems of Sanskrit Grammar, 
p. 11 

3 Keith, Sanskrit Literature, p. 431. See, 


however, p. 636 ante. 

1.4. vii 74; BG. iv p. 339; El. xv p. 106; 
EC. Hassan 65-6 

Rawlinson, India and the Western World, 
pp. 107-8 



674 


HISTORY OF THE TAMIL LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


must be Porus, a generic name with Greek writers for an Indian king. Even 
so, a Pandya embassy to Augustus seems probable. Strabo had to rely for 
his information about India mainly upon previous writers. The few bold 
sailors who went as far as the mouth of the Ganges and who could give 
information were ignorant men, ill qualified to describe what they had 
seen. Pliny the Elder set to work on his encyclopaedic Natural History 
and completed it in the year A. d. 77. The sixth book of this work contains 
a valuable description of Ceylon and an interesting account of a voyage 
to the Indian coast. He also tells us that passengers preferred to embark at 
Barake in the Pandya country rather than at Musiris, on account of 
pirates. 1 Barake was the port for the pepper trade, Kottonara (Kuttanad) 
the centre of the pepper area. To about the same time (c A. D. 80) belongs 
the Periplus Maris Erythraei. 

All these works give us an idea of the trade of the Tamil country with 
the West which agrees substantially with the indications on the same subject 
in the early Tamil poems. There are ten references to Yavanas in this 
early Tamil literature, most of which have been discussed elsewhere 
(chh. xvi, xvii). An Aham stanza (149) mentions the flourishing Musiri 
where the Yavanas 2 come in their finely-shaped vessels loaded with gold 
specie and return freighted with pepper. These vessels entering rapidly 
in good numbers are said to agitate the foaming waters of the great 
river Chulli. Another stanza (57) from the same collection describes 
Musiri as a sea-port. A Puram stanza (343) says that the pepper heaped 
in house-yards in Musiri is put in bags and these bags make the shore 
groan with their weight. Further it says that the gold (specie) which 
the sea-going vessels bring is taken ashore by the small craft plying in 
backwaters. Another port which we find mentioned in these works is 
Tondi (Gk. Tyndis) and there are as many as twenty-four references to 
it. From all these references, however, we gain no historical informa- 
tion except that it was a flourishing sea-port (mun-turai : Kurun. 128) belong- 
ing to the Cheras on the west coast. 

The references to Musiri, it should be noted, are in the present tense, 
and we may legitimately infer that the poets in whose poems they occur 
lived at a period when that famous sea-port was commercially important 
and consequently much frequented by Yavana merchants. The 
southern ports became the centre of commercial activity only after the dis- 
covery of the monsoons by Hippalus c. a. d. 45. The Yavana trade declin- 
ed about the beginning of third century A. d. Considering the fact that 
the literary references to Musiri tally exactly with what the Periplus 
has to say about this ancient port, the conclusion is forced upon us that 
the poets who made these references lived between a. d. 100 and 250. No 
doubt the limits are only approximate, but this is as near the truth as we 

1 Rawlinson, op. cit., p. 111-2 Persian merchants. But the corro- 

2 Some scholars have expressed the view boration from classical sources puts 

that the references to Yavana mer- this view entirely out of court. 

chants might be in regard to Arab or 



BEGINNINGS OF TAMIL LITERATURE 675 

can ever hope to reach. This conclusion is confirmed by other considera- 
tions set forth already. 1 No known poet of the Sangam Age seems to 
be earlier than the second century a. d. This, however, was far from the 
beginning of Tamil literature. 

Its earliest extant strata contain several grammatical terms and also 
several conventionalised literary usages which imply an earlier period when 
linguistic investigations and speculations were rife, and when gramma- 
tical notions and categories were defined. For instance, one of the ear- 
liest poets who has sung about Udiyanjeral mentioned above says that 
Duryodhana and his brothers wore the golden turiibai flower, and fought 
against the Pandavas ( Puram . 2). Here we have evidence of a well- 
established literary convention. This shows that such conventions had 
been settled at a time earlier than the date of the poet. Another instance : 
one early poet, Kapilar, has sung a centum of poems on love-themes of 
Kurinji ( Aingurunuru in) and a long poem Kurinji-p-pattu on the same 
theme. Another poet has sung Mullai-p-pattu. These show ihat the 
five-fold classification and naming of tinais, the particular love-aspect to 
be dealt with in each tinai, and other relevant matters had all been settled 
long prior to Kapilar. These are all conventions. Purely grammatical 
terms also are found used by these early poets. For instance, the term 
uyar tinai occurs in st. 224 of Kurundogai. It is well known that, in Tamil, 
nouns are divided into ‘ class noble and hors classe’ in the phraseology of 
Jules Bloch, answering respectively to uyartinai and ahrinai. 

These instances are sufficient to prove the existence of earlier works 
embodying the conventions and treating of the subject-matter which 
belong properly to the province of grammar. It might be said that the 
Tolkappiyam would answer the purpose. Tolkappiyar’s definition of 
tumbai does not tally with the use of the term in the instance above noted. 
So the author of Purananuru (2) must have had some other grammar in 
view. Moreover Tolkappiyar’s date is rather late as will be shown in the 
next volume, and these poets must have preceded him by about three 
centuries. It may be noted that he himself refers in a general way to several 
grammarians, none of whose works are now extant. Very probably, the 
early Sangam poets had these grammars for their guidance. We must 
allow the time needed for this grammatical literature to spring up and 
develop. About a century would suffice for this. 

These grammatical treatises again imply a considerable amount of liter- 
ature upon which may be based rules and conventions. Even if we grant 
two centuries for this literature to develop, we shall have to place the 
beginnings of Tamil literature about the second century b.c. One other fact 
also must be borne in mind. The style, the diction, and metrical perfection 
of the Sangam poems require for their development a considerable period. 
At a rough computation, we may estimate this period at three or four 
centuries and we reach back to the date of the Brahml Tamil inscriptions. 


1 Ch. xvi (ante). 



676 HISTORY OF THE TAMIL LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

Development in language, script, and literature must have been going 
on at a rapid pace during the period. Contact with the Sanskrit and 
Prakrit languages and literatures, with adjacent countries like Ceylon, and 
with the Buddhist and the Jaina religions must have been largely instru- 
mental in shaping the Tamil mind. The continuous influx of people from 
the North must also have had its influence. Thus the even tenor of the 
ancient Tamilian’s life was ruffled and invigorated, and he felt a craving 
to emulate Sanskrit and Prakrit literature. To the religious and moral 
side of the ancient Tamilian was imparted a new stimulus by the same in- 
fluences ; but secular life, especially in the lower strata of ancient Tamilian 
society, escaped these influences and went on very much as before. The 
earliest literature would have necessarily been deep-rooted in the native 
soil of the Tamils and it must have been in verse, for here, as everywhere, 
poetry is found to precede prose. 

The beginnings of Tamil literature must remain for ever a matter for 
speculation. During the first decade of the present century, a small work 
(about ten pages of demy 16mo) bearing the title Sengonrarai-ch-chelavu 
appeared in print, claiming to be a production of the First Tamil Sangam 
and it was said to have been composed in the tappulippa metre ! These 
spurious pretensions were soon exposed and no responsible scholar now 
takes any serious notice of it. The commentary on Iraiyanar Ahapporul, 
in its description of the literary activities of the first two Sangams, 
mentions a number of works which are mere names. The semi-mythical 
character of the account puts these works beyond the pale of historical 
investigation. Again Adiyarkkunallar in his commentary on Silappa- 
dikaram has handed down the names of a few works. But these are works 
treating of the same subject-matter as Bharata Natya Sastra, and are appa- 
rently of late origin. However, Tolkappiyar is of some help in this connec- 
tion. He mentions certain types of literary composition, of which we have 
no representatives at present. His commentators are hard put to it to 
find examples. Of such genres are ‘ angadam ’, a lampoon, pisi, a riddle- 
poem, and pawatti 1 whose nature is not now known. There must have 
also been a number of works in Ahaval metre ending in consonants like 
n, similar to the Silappadikaram and the Mcmimekalai, works embodying 
stories of ancient times known as ‘tonmai' and works in mixed prose and 
verse. Tolkappiyar speaks of translations also; but we are not vouch- 
safed any information as regards the language from which the translations 
were made. Probably he is referring to the Sanskrit and Prakrit langua- 
ges. Even these types mentioned by Tolkappiyar are of an’ advanced 
nature. Primitive Tamil literature remains as much a mystery as ever 
and our guesses must follow in general the line of the origin and develop- 
ment of literature all over the world. 

The earliest Tamil literature now extant consists of anthologies of short 


1 This may be either Panijatti (Skt. 
prajnapti) or Palnija (Skt. prakirria) 


of the Jaina Prakrit works. 



ANTHOLOGIES 


677 


lyrics and of longer poems. It is usual to count the lyrical anthologies as 
eight, known as Ettut-togai, and it is also usual to count the longer poems 
as ten, collected under the name of Pattup-pattu. These names occur 
in the ancient commentary of Nannul (387) of about the fourteenth 
century. Perasiriyar (c. fourteenth century), one of the commentators on 
Tolkappiyam, refers to these collections simply as Togai and Pattu 1 
respectively. The eight anthologies are : — 


1 . Narrinai 

2. Kurundogai 

3. Ainguru-nuru 

4. Padirrup-pattu 


5. Paripadal 

6. Kalittogai 

7. Ahananuru, and 

8. Purananuru. 


Of these the first three collections, the sixth and the seventh treat of love- 
themes technically known as ‘aham’, in its several aspects. Such love- 
aspects, tinais, have been classified into five sections, viz. kurinji or pre- 
marital love, marudam or post-marital love, mullai or the wife’s patient 
suffering during her lord’s separation, and her eager longing for his 
return, neydal or the lamentations of separated lovers, and palai or the 
separation of lovers and their consequent anguish. The fourth and the eighth 
collections have for their theme subjects other than love, technically called 
‘ puram ,’ which includes martial heroism, liberality, just rule, praises of 
God and of men. The fifth in the series, viz. Paripadal, partakes of the 
nature of both, some songs being in praise of gods, others depicting love. 


The ten longer poems are 

1. Murugarruppadai 

2. Porunar-arruppadai 

3. Sirupan-arruppadai 

4. Perumban-arruppadai 

5. Mullaippattu 


6. Maduraikkanji 

7. Nedunalvadai 

8. Kurinjippattu 

9. Pattinappalai, and 
10. Malaipadu-kadam. 


Of these, the first four and the last poem belong to the class known as ar- 
ruppadai which is described below. The fifth, the seventh, the eighth, 
and the ninth are essentially love-poems. The sixth is a benedictory poem. 

The fifth and the sixth anthologies, Paripadal and Kalittogai, consist 
of poems written at a later period, and Murugarrupadai likewise, the first 
of the longer poems, is a late production. There are very strong grounds 
for this conclusion which will be set forth later. They have no sort of 
claim to be considered among the earliest literature of the Tamils. Though 
the anthologies and the longer poems were compiled at a later period, I 
have listed them all here simply for the purpose of facilitating references 
to them in the standard editions now available. 

These poems are generally called Sangam poems and the collections 


Comm. Seyyujiyal, 50, 80 



678 HISTORY OF THE TAMIL LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


also are called Sangam anthologies. For the sake of convenience we shall 
adopt this nomenclature. But there is a clear distinction between the 
Sangam poems and the anthologies. Chronologically the poems are 
much earlier than the time when the anthologies were compiled. In the 
earliest period, we are concerned only with the Sangam poems and not 
with the anthologies. 

Leaving out of account the poems of the fifth and sixth anthologies, 
the Murugarruppadai, the invocatory stanzas, and the padigams in Padir- 
uppattu which are all of later date, the earliest literature now extant con- 
sists of 2186 poems distributed over six anthologies and one collection 
of longer poems. They contain in all about 26,350 lines. 

The total number of poets who composed these poems can only be 
approximately given. The authors of 98 stanzas (13 in Aham, 10 in 
Kurundogai, 56 in Narrinai, 5 in Padirrup-pattu and 14 in Purananuru ) 
are unknown. Thirty-five poets have been named after some significant 
expression occurring in their stanzas. For instance, a poet bears the 
name Kangul-vellattar (lit. he of the night-flood), and the expression kahgul- 
vellam is found in his poem. This device for naming poets occurs in Sanskrit 
anthologies also. 1 We may also note that Pari-magaUr (Pari's daughters) 
are the authors of stanza 112 of Puram. A parallel instance is found in 
sloka 2227 of Subhashitdvali which is ascribed to Kaviputrau (lit. the two 
sons of a poet). There are also other common features worth studying. 

Having noted these few peculiarities, we may refer to the Samajom 
edition of Sanga-Ilakkiyam which gives the total number as 473. Out 
of these, the authors of the extant Paripadal poems are 13 poets. This 
number has to be deducted, as the work is a late work not belonging 
to the Sangam period at all. For the same reason the poets of the Kalit- 
togai and Murugarruppadai should not be taken into account; but these 
poets occur elsewhere in the collections and have to be necessarily re- 
tained. About 9 poets are identifiable with 9 others whose names differ 
but slightly. Deducting these 22 from the total number, we get 451 
poets. Curiously enough this total comes very near to the traditional 
number of 449 poets mentioned in the commentary on Iraiyanar- 
ahapporul as constituting the third and last Sangam. We must also re- 
member that two sections of Padirruppattu (the first and the last) are 
missing and that two more poets have thus to be added to the total 
number. Probably some more poets have to be accounted for by identi- 
fication and there is room for it. This would show that the traditional 
number (449) is correct and that as the Paripadal poets are not included, 
it is a late work not to be counted among Sangam poems. By the time 
when the commentary on Iraiyanar Ahapporul came to be written, it had 
been included among the Sangam poems. 


Sloka 1255 of Subhashitdvali is ascribed 
to a poet of the name ‘Dagdhamarana’, 
and this phrase occurs in the sloka 


itself. Other instances are ‘Nidra- 
daridra’ ( sloka 1362), Karnikaraman- 
kha ( sioka 1660), etc. 



GROWTH OF VOCABULARY 


679 


A general idea of the Tamil language and its vocabulary at this period 
may now be given. We have mentioned already the several contacts which 
threw the Tamil countries open to the cultural influences of the North 
in an ever increasing measure. We find a detailed description of a yaga 
performance in Puram 166, and frequent references to Yedic gods in 
Puram (e.g 16, 23), Padirruppattu ( e.g. 11), and other early collections. 
The Buddhists 1 were also propagating their religion in the Tamil countries 
among others, and trying to uphold Buddhism in the South, where it was 
originally preached by the missionaries sent by Asoka. Some poets bear 
Buddhist names, e.g. Ilambodhiyar, Teradaran, Siru-ven-teraiyar etc. 
Jainism supplied a new religious force which was for some centuries a 
powerful rival to Hinduism in the South. Jaina mythology is found in 
Puram 175 and in A ham 59. Thus the Tamil land became a fertile nur- 
sery of several religions which throve in friendly rivalry. 

Their adherents brought in their special vocabulary and enriched the 
Tamil language. New tributaries were added to its stream and swelled 
its content. The orthodox Hindus of the age, mainly Brahmins, were res- 
ponsible for words 2 relating to their gods, religion, religious rites, beliefs 
and works, and to ethics, and to their daily habits and customs. Some 
common words 3 relating to the ordinary social life of a people were also 
contributed by them. These two classes of words taken direct from 
Sanskrit flowed into tiie main current of the language and enriched its 
content. Next to Brahmins, the Jainas seem to have contributed most to 
our Tamil language. Their words also fall into the classes mentioned above, 
but with a notable difference. The words were all Prakrit forms and 
were mostly in current colloquial use. 4 

The religious terms of the Jainas did not pass into the main current, 
though they were used in late specialistic works such as Jivakachintdmam, 
Sulamani, etc. The Buddhists also contributed to the Tamil language 
and their words were mainly of Pali origin. It might be that several 
of these were of Prakrit descent also. 5 

Judging from the vocabulary contributed by these several religions, 


‘South India as a centre of Pali Budd- 
hism’ by B. C. Law (Dr. S. K. Aiyangar 
Commemo. Vol. pp. 239-45). Nagar- 
unakonda inscriptions prove that there 
was a mahdvi.'iara for Buddhist recluses 
coming from different countries among 
which Damila is mentioned. These 
Buddhists were TheravSdins. Gan- 
dhavorfna says (JPTS. 1886, pp. 66-7) 
that Kanchlpura was one of the main 
centres of Pali Buddhism of Theravada. 
Madurai also (Madhurasutta pattana) 
is mentioned as the place where Bud- 
dhaghosha and Buddhamitta lived for 
some time, before the former repaired 
to Kanchlpura. Buddhaghosha was 
a native of Tirunelveli region. Uraga- 
pura (modem Uraiyiir in the Trichi- 


nopoly district) was the birthplace 
ofBuddhadatta who lived in the village 
of Bhutamahgala near ‘the flourishing 
inland port of Kaverlputtana.’ Bud- 
dhagosha and Buddhadat’t'a were con- 
temporaries and they flourished in the 
5th century a.d. South India conti- 
nued to be the centre of Pali Buddhism 
as late as the 12th century a.d., a 
date to which Anuruddha (a Buddhist 
teacher of South India, according 
to the Talaing records), the celebra- 
ted author of the Abhidhammattha, is 
assigned 

See note A at the end of this chapter. 

See note B at the end of this chapter. 

See note C at the end of this chapter. 

1 See note D at the end of this chapter. 



680 


HISTORY OF THE TAMIL LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


we may conclude that Brahminism kept a strong hold on the imagination 
of the people and was predominant in every walk of life. Next to 
Brahmanism and not far behind came Jainism. The votaries of this 
religion mixed freely with the people, studied their language and became 
adepts in it. They laid great emphasis on moral principles, and made 
converts to their religion. The Buddhists perhaps led a secluded life 
in caves and did not so freely associate with the people. Hence their reli- 
gion never exerted any great influence in the Tamil country. 

Against this background we must view the several scattered poetic pieces 
of the earliest times. They were secular, a good number of them prais- 
ing kings and chieftains and subtly introducing religious elements to 
attract and influence the nobility of the land ; and the rest dealing with 
love in all its aspects, to appeal to the literate among the masses. 

We shall now try to settle roughly the period when these poems were 
composed and when their authors lived. For this purpose, we shall 
consider the longer poems included in the Pattuppattu and also the two 
anthologies of Padirruppattu and Aihguru-nuru. These two collections 
will receive our attention only on their chronological side. 

Of the longer poems, the first is Murugarruppadai, consisting of 317 
lines. Its author is a certain Nakklrar. It serves perhaps as an invo- 
catory poem for the collection. The second is Porunar-arruppadai, 248 
lines. Its author is Mudattamakkanniyar and the hero of the poem is 
Karikar-peru-valattan. The third is Sirupan-arruppadai, 269 lines. Its 
author is Nallur Nattattanar and its hero is Nalliyakkddan. This poem 
refers to the ‘Seven Vaflals’ (patrons of learning) of the Sangam Age. The 
fourth poem is Perumban-arruppadai, 500 lines. Its author is Kadiyalur- 
uruttiran-gannanar, and its hero Tondaiman-flandiraiyan. The fifth 
in the collection is Mullaippattu consisting of 103 lines. This is the 
shortest of the long poems. The author is Nappudanar and he refers to 
mlechchhas (Yavanas) in lines 60-66. The sixth poem is Maduarikkanji 
of 782 lines. This is the longest poem of the series. The author is Man- 
gudimarudanar and the hero Talaiyalanganattuch-Cheruvenra-Nedun- 
jeliyan. Nannan is mentioned in lines 618 to 619 and the Onam festival 
in 1. 591. The seventh in this collection is Nedunalvadai, 188 lines. Its 
author is Nakklrar. The hero of the poem is Nedunjeliyan just mentioned. 
This poem also refers to mlechchhas (31 to 35). The eighth of the series 
is Kurinjippattu. It consists of 261 lines and its author is Kapilar. The 
colophon says that this poem was written to show the excellence of 
Tamil and Tamilian courtship to an Aryan king Pirahattan (Prahasta) by 
name. It may also be noted that the poet Kapilar is referred to by 
Nakklrar in Aham 78 and 141. The ninth poem is Pattinappalai of 301 
lines. Its author is Kadiyalur Uruttirangannanar and its hero Karikar- 
peru-valattan. It is referred to in Kalihgattupparani (21) and also in an 
inscription of Tiruvellarai. 1 The tenth and last poem is Malaipadukadam 

1 Sen Tamil xli p. 214-16 



POETS OF THE THIRD CENTURY A.D. 


681 


consisting of 583 lines. Its author is Perungausikanar of Perungunrur in 
Iraniya-muttam. The hero of the poem is Nannan, son of Nannan. 

Most of these poems belong to the class of composition known as 
‘arruppadai’. A poet, who has visited a patron and received bounty at 
his hands, meets, on his way back, another poet with his retinue in a very 
poverty-stricken condition. He directs the latter to the patron, describing 
the way to his residence and the reception which the visiting poet will 
be accorded. Tolkappiyar specifically mentions the varieties of this kind of 
poem, in which there is no place for a poem like Murugarruppadai where a 
devotee ( bhakta ) is directed to go to the several shrines of his chosen deity. 

The author of Murugarruppadai, though he bears the name Nakkfrar, 
was different from his namesake of the Sangam and lived far later than any 
of the poets so far mentioned. His date will be dealt with in the next volume. 

The earlier Nakkirar, the author of Nedunalvadai, provides some valu- 
able clues as regards the probable date of his compositions. He refers 
to rasis (zodiacal constellations), and also distinctly says that the Sun 
beginning from Mesha (Aries) travels through the successive rasis, i. e. 
through each successive sign of the zodiac. The passage occurs in 
Nedunalvadai, (11. 160-162). A contemporary poet Kudalur-kilar men- 
tions, in Puram 229, the Mesha-rasi with several other details, such as the 
fact that the nakshatra Piirva-phalguni was on a particular day declining 
from the zenith at mid-night. From the history of Hindu astronomy 
we may gather that the rasis came into practical use only about a.d. 300. 
Mr. L. D. Swamikannu Pillai has examined the whole question in his 
Indian Ephemeris 1 and come to the conclusion that the ‘early Indian 
literature (Sanskrit or Dravidian) before a.d. 300 does not refer to the 
signs of the zodiac, to the movements of the planets or to planetary horos- 
copes, which are, as it were, the tripod of Astrology.’ But on such ques- 
tions the dating can be only approximate. Nakkirar and his contempo- 
raries (poets and kings) may be assigned to about a.d. 300 or a little 
earlier. This is confirmed by several facts emerging from a study of con- 
temporary poems. Nakkirar himself, in the same Nedunalvadai, gives 
details of an auspicious hour for laying the foundation of a palace, 
describing a sort of sun-dial. Architectural details, such as garbha-griha, 
are also mentioned by him. Two contemporary poets Nappudanar and 
Madurai Asiriyar Nallanduvanar (to be distinguished from Asiriyar 
Nallanduvanar of Paripadal and Kalittogai ) refer to a water-clock (under 
the name ‘ Kannal 2 3 ), which was probably a Roman import. Kannal, whose 
origin and derivation can hardly be ascertained now, is perhaps connected 
with the Greek ‘khronos’. So we may take it that the last of the Safigam 
poets, i.e. the poets of the Nakkirar epoch flourished about the end of the 
third century a.d. 9 

Enough has been said already (chh. xvi, xvii) about the Pattupp&ttu and 

1 1. (i) p. 496 Aham 44. Most probably he was an 

2 Mullaippattu, 1.51; Aham 43 ancestor of the Garigas of Mysore, and so 

3 A Gahgan Katti is mentioned in the date given here is not affected. 



682 


HISTORY OF THL TAMIL LANGUAGE AND HfERATURE 


Padirruppattu and the chronology of the kings andposts mentioned in them. 
Aiifgurunuru, was compiled by Pulatturaimurriya-Kudalur-kilar under the 
royal patronage of the ‘Elephant-eyed Chera’ mentioned above. This 
Chera was taken captive by the Pandya king Nedunjeliyan of Talaiyalan- 
ganam fame, and his death is bemoaned by the poet in Puram 229. Thus 
the poets who composed the five centums of Aihgurunuru must all have 
lived round about Nedunjeliyan’s time. These poets are Oram-bdgiyar, 
Ammuvanar, Kapilar, Odal-Andaiyar and Peyanar. As Kapilar is one 
of them, they might be placed between a.d. 200-275. 

Thus we are led to conclude that the poets of the early Sangam litera- 
ture flourished from the second century a.d. to the end of the third century 
a.d. and that this was the genuine Sangam period. 

A word about the Sangam poems. They are all in ahaval metre, the 
first in the long course of development of the Tamil metrical system. It 
is indigenous and has no parallel in Sanskrit, English blank verse being 
its nearest equivalent. The magnificent sweep of the longer poems in 
Pattuppattu is sometimes marred by obscurity of construction. In fact, 
the commentator, a scholiast of a very high order, often takes to devious 
ways for his explanation of several passages. In the shorter poems, how- 
ever, the language is direct and forceful. Conciseness of expression, 
pregnancy of meaning, purity of diction, and unity of thought are their 
main characteristics, and the simplicity of the Tamilian taste deserves 
comparison with that of the ancient Greeks. The frigid conceits and the 
pedantic professional exercises of grammarians which characterise the 
literature of a later period are entirely absent. On the other hand, simple 
humanity is mirrored in these crystal-clear utterances. Where the emo- 
tions are stirred, they are kept well under restraint and the subdued ex- 
pression which such restraint imparts is always the most effective quality 
in literature. Here is art, severe and simple; of artificiality there is hardly 
a trace. 

Claims are sometimes made that the Aham poems, that is poems of 
love, are the sole monopoly of the ancient Tamils. Sanskrit literature, 
however, abounds in such poems and indeed some of them are very an- 
cient. There is the famous Sattasai of Hala, a collection of 700 gathas in 
the Ary a metre in Maharashtri Prakrit. The situations portrayed in these 
gathas are very like the Tamil turais given in the colophons to the Sangam 
poems. But love-poems are not confined to any one clime or country. It 
is said that during the time of Justinian, ‘epigrammatic’ writing especially 
in its amatory department experienced a great revival at the hands of 
Agathias, the historian Paulus Silentiarius and their circle, and their 
ingenious but mannered productions were collected by Agathias into a 
new anthology. The Aham poems in our collections also do not altogether 
escape the charge of being mannered productions. But the ancient Tamil 
poets can take credit for some of the loveliest utterances on erotic themes. 

The value of these ancient poems, especially of Purananuru and Padir- 
ruppattu, can hardly be exaggerated. They portray "the life" of the times. 



INFLUENCE OF SANGAM LITERATURE 


683 


They give us glimpses of political and social conditions. They describe, 
with exactitude, the religion, manners, customs, beliefs, and supersitions 
of the people. They disclose a vivid picture of the esteem in which learn- 
ing, literature, and art were held by our distant ancestors. They teach us 
a noble philosophy of life and conduct. They whisper to us sweetly and 
intimately of the domestic felicity of ancient times. In short, they cons- 
titute a storehouse of facts bearing on ancient manners, customs, and 
ideas and have contributed much to mould the literature of the later 
Tamils. To-day they serve as beacon lights to guide modern writers in 
Tamil. Above all, there is genuine poetry of a very high order which, in 
spite of inevitable changes of outlook and habits, thrills the very core of 


our being and bids us look back with 
ments of the ancient Tamils. 


SPECIAL NOTES 


A. Religious words introduced mainly 
by Brahminns : — 

yupam (Pnr 15), alliyam (halllsa. Pur. 
33), avi (havis, Pur. ’ill), avuti (ahuti. 
Pur. 99), vachchiram (vajrayudha, Pur. 
241), kandam (skandha. Pur. 52), kandu 
(skandha, Pur 57, 93), Kauriyar (Kaura- 
va, Pur. 3), darumam (dharrna, Pur. 
353), Tuvarai (Dvaraka, Pur. 201), tun 
(sthuna, Pur. 86). amarar (Pur. 99), 
vedam, (Pur. 6), padam., (Pur. 2) pindam 
(Pur. 234), mayon (maya, Pur. 57), muttl 
(lit thre e fires, Pur. 2), munivar (Pur. 6, 
43)., bali (Aham 166), deyvam (Aham 
166); tittiyam (chitya, Aham 361), tulay 
(tulasi. Padirr 31), pudam (bhuta, Pur. 
369), sadai (ja(a, Pur. 1), karagam (Pur. 

1) , tavam (tapas, Pur. 1). 

B. Colloquial and other words introdu- 
ced mainly by Brahmins : — 

nir (Pur.' 1), kalam (khala), padam 
(pada), tumbai (turiiba), imayam (Pur. 

2) , nemi, mani, mukam (Pur. 3); kan 
(kanana Pur. 5); kumari, ulagam (Pur. 
6) ; chapam (chapa), tna, vajavan (vallabha) 
(Pur. 7) ; pokam (bhoga), man di lam 
(mandate) (Pur. 8); dapdam (dapda), 
amiltu (amrita), mallar (malla), silai 
(silas) (Pur. 10); kakkai (kaka) (Pur. 
238); padini (patninl, Pur. 1 1). 

C. Colloquial words introduced by the 
Jainas : — 

vannam, uru (rupa), kanan (gana), 
emam (kshema) (Pur. 1); vali (bala), 
pal(payas), andi(sandhi)(A«\ 2);murasam 
(muraja), neem (sneha) sandu (candana), 
ilakkam (lakshya) — (Pur. 3):ombu(av) — 
(Pur. 5); naman, (saman), teem (desa), 
nagar (nagara) (Pur. 6): iravu (ratri),mln 
(mina), payam(prayojana)(P«r. 3); ukkam 
utsaha), tanai (sena), malai (malaya) - 


pride and joy at the literary achieve- 


TAMIL LANGUAGE 


(Pur. 8); parppanar (brahmana), aran 
(sarana) (Pur. 9); pasi (prachi), usi 
(udichl) (Pur. 229.) 

D. Words introduced by the Buddhists : — 
attam (addha, road, Kurun. 307) ; 
ahil (agalu— aloe wood, Kurun. 339);anai 
(ana-order, Maduraik, 761); annai (anna- 
mother, Kurun. 93); pan dam (bhan- 
dam — article, goods, (Pur. 102) ; topi 
(doni, trough-shaped canoe with an 
outrigger to steady it. Pur. 229); sudu 
(juto, gambling); kamugu (kamuko, areca 
palm, Perumban 7); kannan (kanho- 
krishna): kanji (kanjikam, a sour rice- 
gruel); kaitai (ketaki— the tree Pandamus 
Odorattissimus, Kurun. 304); kudam 
(kuto, a sledge-hammer, Perumbaii. 438), 
podu (pothu — ordinary, common, (Pur. 
8); manaivi (manavi, woman, Pur. 250); 
nanjil (nangalam— plough, Pur. 19) ; 
niyamam (nigama, a market-town, Madu- 
raik. 365); oram (oro — below, poste- 
rior, on this side); pakkam (pakkho,— 
a wing, side etc. Kurun. 129); uvamam 
(opamam--simile, comparison, Maduraik. 
516); paopiyam (papyam— ware, commo- 
dity, Maduraik. 506); pahngu (phaliko— 
crystal, quartz - Kurihji. 57); pahal 
(phaggavo — a sort of pot-herb. Pur. 16) 
panju (pichu— cotton, (Pur. 116); pijjai 
(pillako — child, Pur. 380); pulu (pulavo — 
worm, maggot) ; sanam, sanai (sano- 
a grind-stone); seliyan (seliyo — a man 
of self-discipline. Pur. 19); tal (talo — key, 
Nedunal. 63); talam (talam— metal bowl, 
plate, (Pur. 120); tumbu (timbo— a sort of 
water-\essel with a spout, (Pur. 19); tunam 
sthuna— pillar, column, Perumban. 3j6) 
tunnam (tunnam — suture, patch,( Pur. 136); 
varagu (varako, the bean Phaseolus 
tribolus (Pur. 34). 



Chapter XXII 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


A. SCULPTURE 
(a) POST-MAURYAN 

TThe post-Mauryan period is an epoch of great sculptural achievements. 

Freed from the overpowering influence of the court, the art reaches a 
larger section of the people. Under Asoka’s patronage the religion of the 
Buddha had spread far and wide and the zeal for the new religion found 
expression in remarkable artistic achievements distributed throughout the 
country. These represent an indigenous artistic movement — possibly a 
continuation of the ancient heritage of Indus valley art enriched by the 
contributions of the various ethnic and cultural elements that entered the 
complex fabric of Indian civilisation. It is not possible to distinguish 
separately each and every ethnic and cultural element. The frame of the 
indigenous structure was but slightly disturbed and the different foreign 
features were practically integrated with it. The ancient indigenous heri- 
tage, as Dr. Kramrisch puts it, ‘was to withstand, by assimilating, while 
transforming, whatever racial influx touched upon it.’ 

In the history of Indian art the most ancient period, as represented by 
the Indus civilisation, had rendered form in terms of volume. This an- 
cient substratum of earth-bound volume feels a new experience when the 
solid mass unfolds its vitality with the help of other factors, mainly linear 
rhythm. The latter consists of a gliding linear movement’ up and down 
along the surface, and the pliable form acquires a new balance and inte- 
gration thereby. This fluid rendering of volume extends also to depth 
and endows the figures with an animation, dynamic as well as compact. 
This co-ordination between solid volume and its gliding linear movements 
constitutes the plasticity which is an essential element of classical Indian 
art. It is a classical quality not solely confined to sculpture, but equally 
evident in painting. At first, its approach was rather faltering and uneasy, 
but soon co-ordination and balance were achieved. The new factor made 
itself felt by about 200 b.c., and it took a few centuries to reach a com- 
plete and successful integration with the old. Hence this period marks a 
creative and formative eooch in the history of Indian art. 

The artistic movement in the early classical phase spread throughout 
the country, and had prolific centres of activity both in the North and 
in the South. In the North the main activity is recognised in the Madhya- 
desa, at Bharhut, Sanchi, Bodh Gaya, Mathura, etc. In the East there was 
a regional movement in Kalinga (Orissa). Apart from activities at these 



TRAITS OF NARRATIVE SCULPTURE 


685 


places, artistic remains unearthed in other parts of Northern India mark 
a wide and expansive movement representing the development of a com- 
mon plastic tradition with the same inherent and fundamental qualities. 
Local and regional idioms may be recognised, but in spite of such 
differences in expression, all are linked together as parts of the same 
general movement — the classical movement. 

The beginnings of the classical movement may be traced from about 
the end of the Maurya period. A fragmentary relief, dug up at Sarnath 
from a level referred to about the closing years of the Mauryas, is instruc- 
tive in this connection. It shows a female figure with head bent down 
over the gathered-up knees and hands, an attitude that indicates extreme 
dejection. The heaviness of the coiffure, the dress, the girdle and the 
anklets, all merely sketched, and the stiffness of the cylindrical legs mark a 
crude and inexperienced technique to which the sweeping curve of the 
woman’s back in profile stands in significant contrast. Equally signifi- 
cant is the delicate modelling of the pulsating female form. It is this linear 
expressiveness that endows the form with a plastic coherence, in spite of 
the unequal treatment of each single part. The co-ordination between 
the outline and the modelled surface, the touchstone of the classical trend, 
is already there, though rather faltering in accent. 

The art of this early period consists mostly of reliefs, and certain prob- 
lems, connected with the narration of a story, the third dimension, the 
optical perspective, etc., faced the artists. These the early Indian artists 
solved in their own way and according to their own beliefs. In this way 
were evolved certain devices and formulae that do not always follow the 
notions and standards recognised in the West. 

Serving as a vehicle of communication to meet the needs of an expan- 
ding religion, the art in this early phase is mainly narrative and follows the 
usual practice of continuous narration. The detailed manner of depicting 
a particular story or event leads to the presentation of the various inci- 
dents and episodes in one and the same relief composition. The figure of 
the main actor is repeated to indicate the progress of the story, and the 
basis of connectedness is usually the locality in which the event or the 
story is said to have occurred. Irrespective of the time that might have 
separated the various incidents they are grouped into one synthetic unit 
because they all took place on the same spot. The chronological sequence 
is thus intentionally broken in favour of a narration that centres round the 
location of a story or an event. The time factor is thus regarded as of no 
import and is eliminated altogether. For the artist the immovable locality 
is something stationary, and the fact that several incidents happened at the 
same place may thus be regarded as the link between the visualisation of 
the story in the mind of the artist and its delineation with the help of a 
relief composition. This unilocal, i.e. topographical, method of presenta- 
tion is specifically Indian and may be recognised as the most logical 
method of continuous narration with its pivot on something that is solid, 
and not intangible and invisible such as the time element. 



686 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


The problem of the third dimension was also tackled by the early Indian 
artists in their own way. The forms are conceived in terms not of depth 
but of surface. Hence in the relief the figures are presented above each 
other, and not behind, with the result that what according to the laws of 
optical perspective ought to have been hidden, partly or entirely, is shown 
in entirety or only partly covered. Again, objects are large or small, not 
according to their nearness or distance as the optical impression would 
demand, but in accordance with the functional importance of each. The 
visibility of the objects is also similarly determined, irrespective of the per- 
ceiving eye. Whatever exists is a reality to the Indian artist, and not what 
the eyes see. And so he arranges his composition according to the de- 
mands of the story he delineates, regulating the size and visibility of the 
forms, not with the idea of being optically correct, but of being functional- 
ly consistent. On account of these conventions, rational according to the 
logic of the Indian artists, the flat reliefs look like trays packed with all 
kinds of forms. Oversecting and foreshortening are resorted to, some- 
times lending the objects singly a three-dimensional treatment, but such a 
treatment never extends to depth so far as the entire composition is 
concerned. 

(0 SAfiCHl : STOPA No. II. BHARHUT. 


Of the artistic remains of the early classical phase in the Madhyadesa the 
reliefs on the ground balustrade of Sanchi stupa no. II come first in stylistic 
consideration. Executed in very low and flat relief the panels look almost 
like linear patterns, merely sketched, without any differentiation of planes. 
In spite of the remarkable sense of decorative design, better adapted to 
such a purpose, the execution of the human form, packed in an unex- 
pected fertility of vegetation, is primitive in technique. The angular treat- 
ment of the human figures ill-suits the vegetal scheme of the composition 
with its heaving and flowing curves. Occasionally there may be noticed 
an approach to modelling by rounded contours, but the figures are still 
devoid of animation. The main theme of the composition is the flowing 
linear rhythm of the plant, the creeper and other \egetation, and it is not 
without reason that Coomaraswamy describes such reliefs as belonging to 
the ‘plant style’. A more advanced treatment may, however, be recogni- 
zed in a group of reliefs on the balustrade of the same stupa. This group 
exhibits a greater knowledge of form, of spatial relations, and of animated 
and graceful poses and movements. This stylistic advance has been attri- 
buted to contacts with extraneous art traditions, but is more probably to 
be explained as the natural result of the growing consciousness of the 
artists working in an atmosphere ofalivingand progressive art movement. 

The next phase in the movement is supplied by the reliefs on gateways 
and balustrades of the stupa at Bharhut, executed during the reign of the 
Sungas ( Suganam raje) as an inscription states. 1 These reliefs are usually 


An inscription on the eastern gate 
indicates that it had been erected by 


ynanawiuti during the reian of the 
Sungas (IA. 1892, p. 227; also JRAS. 



BHARHUI 


687 


accompanied by descriptive labels that give the titles of the subjects 
depicted. On the gateway posts there are representations of the yakshas, 
the yakshls and other semi-divine beings, while on the balustrades the re- 
liefs depict the Jataka stories and scenes from the life of the Buddha. 
Such narrative panels are oblong, square, round and half-round according 
to the architectonic needs. The coping stone usually shows the wavy and 
flowing creeper design that meanders along the length binding together 
the various reliefs dispersed over the surface. The individual forms within 
a composition are also likewise recognised to be related to one another by 
a gliding linear rhythm. In the scenes of the previous lives (Jatakas) of the 
Master, the Bodhisattva, as he was then called, is represented in human 
forms according to the needs of the stories; but in those of his historical 
life he is never represented as such. His presence, when occasion demands, 
is indicated by symbols, such as the Bodhi tree, the vajrasana, the parasol 
(chhatta, chhatrd), the foot-prints, the wheel ( dhamma-chakka , dharma- 
chakra), the stupa, etc. The inscriptions clearly testify that such symbols 
actually stand for the Master. 

An advance on the plastic diction of the earlier phase may be noticed 
at Bharhut in the relatively greater ease in the attitude of the figures, and 
in the conscious attempt towards rounded and mellifluous contours. But 
in spite of a greater ease and variety in the composition one may recog- 
nize the same aversion to depth, the surface and volumes being more or 
less flatly conceived. The large-size figures of yakshas and yakshls on the 
torana pillars reveal two kinds of modelled shapes, apparently isolated 
from each other. Figures of Sirima devata, Kubera, etc. look almost like 
silhouettes, sharply detached from the background, in which a rigid fron- 
tality and a juxtaposition of modelled shapes one above the other confront 
the spectator. An effort towards modelling is made merely by grading the 
planes of the reliefs in severe and distinctive layers (‘an inane superposition 
of massive forms’ as Kramrisch calls it ) 1 and then rounding off the contours. 
A peculiar abstraction is again recognised in the treatment of the feet or 
of the hands in an attitude of adoration which, irrespective of anatomical 
accuracy, are turned sideways and presented in their broadest aspect. To 
these silhouette-like figures the ample curves and flows and variegated 
attitudes of such figures as Sudarsana yakshl, Chulakoka devata, etc. offer 
a significant contrast. Marshall explains this distinction in the one case 
as the work of indigenous craftsmen and in the other as the result of an 
influence exerted by foreign artists . 2 In spite of the apparent contrast, 
however, there is an underlying and unmistakable current that binds them 

1918, p. 138). The gate and the railing Calcutta. Fragments of architectural 

were erected simultansously as is evident members with relief carvings, probably 

from an inscription on a railing bearing portions of the other gateways and 

the name of Prince Vadha Pala, son of rails, have recently been collected for 

Dhanabhuti (Cunningham, A., Stupa the Allahabad Municipal Museum. 

of Bharhut, no. 54). The eastern gate 1 Kramrisch, Indian Sculpture, p. 28 

and part of the railing are now - Marshall, ‘Monuments of Ancient 

preserved in the Indian Museum, India’, CHI. i p. 625 



ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


together and this is manifest in the conscious attempt to relate the three- 
dimensional extensiveness to the surface and the harsh contours to the 
swaying grace and plastic consistency suitable to the flowing and melli- 
fluous curves of the vegetal scheme which is the chief compositional theme 
of early Indian art. One may trace this effort from the low and flat reliefs 
of the ground balustrade of stupa No. II at Safichi to the large-size yaksha 
and yakshl figures of both the groups at Bharhut in almost undisturbed 
sequence. Here is a conscious and progressive art movement, indigenous 
in technique as well as in spirit, the fundamental idea of which is to endow 
the human form with the same flowing movement as that of the vegetal 
scroll. 

A flowing linear rhythm, although hesitating in some instances, seems 
to actuate the majority of the figures at Bharhut. This rhythm also glides 
from one form to the other within a given composition and appears to bind, 
somewhat loosely though, all isolated objects into one unified whole. On 
the coping stone the lotus creeper meanders along the length in endless 
waves linking the panels into one continuous pattern. Each single figure 
and each composition, including the entire pattern, becomes animated 
thereby. A rhythmical movement, permeating all through, integrates and 
balances every object and composition in one unified organism. 

Another, but subsidiary, trend, is also evident in the art of Bharhut. 
A few of the reliefs, quadrangular in outline, emphasise closely packed 
compositions with schematic rows of harsh figures parallel to the lines of 
the frame. Not swayed by the gentle and mellifluous curves, the figures 
are more or less static in character disturbed only by the sharp contrasts 
of lights and shades. This idiom is best illustrated in the so-called Ajata- 
satru pillar and in some of the frameless figures on the upright tor ana posts. 
This apparent disregard for swaying rhythm and balanced co-ordination, 
which constitute the dominant plastic diction of the period, may appear 
to be puzzling. It is possible that the craftsmen who were responsible for 
these reliefs were not yet fully aware of the scope and vitality of the 
balanced rhythm of flowing curves or of the plastic effect that might be 
achieved thereby. Whatever the case, the idiom plays only a small and sub- 
ordinate part in the art of Bharhut. A fluid linear rhythm, although some- 
times faltering in accent, remains the keynote of the style of Bharhut. 

Bharhut represents an early and primitive phase in classical Indian art. 
In spite of the relation that exists among the different forms within a com- 
position, the single figures, the main actors of the stories, appear to be 
unaware of the parts that they are to play in the scenes, and are hence 
without any expression. They simply exist, and by mere existence they 
fulfil the needs of the stories depicted. It is perhaps owing to this that the 
Bharhut art has been described as modest and restrained in general tone 
But this modesty or restraint, whatever name we give, cannot be said to 
be deliberate, either on the part of the artists or of the actors of the scenes 
In spite of this apparent drawback, the stories are told with exhaustive 
clearness, no single detail pertinent to the story being left out. Added 



SANCHI GATEWAYS 


689 


to these, the descriptive labels leave no doubt about the identification of 
the scenes. Indeed, the artists are so much engrossed with details that 
nothing escapes them, be it the tattoo-mark on a person, the ornamentation 
on a door-frame, the pattern of caparison or upholstery, or the fine veins 
of a leaf. The meticulous care with which the details are exhaustively 
worked out has almost a disturbing effect and it is only with difficulty that 
an impression of the whole can be obtained. 

(ii) BO DH GAYA 

The next important landmark in the history of early Indian art is sup- 
plied by the remnants of the square railing at Bodh Gaya that enclosed the 
early Bodhi shrine. Among the donors appear the names of Kuramgi and 
Nagadeva, wives of the kings Indragnimitra and Brahmamitra , 1 who have 
to be assigned to about the first half of the first century b.c. On the whole, 
the carvings on the Bodh Gaya rail are in the Bharhut style, but more ad- 
vanced in technique as well as in visual and consequently in plastic effect. 
What strikes one at first sight is that the narrative reliefs are freed from all 
unnecessary detail, only the indispensable and essential elements being re- 
tained so as to convey the full import of the stories depicted. A comparison 
of the two versions of the same subject, that of the purchase of Jetavana, 
at Bharhut and Bodh Gaya will bring out this point clearly. Instead of 
being scrupulously exhaustive, as at Bharhut, the Bodh Gaya version is 
more suggestive and aesthetically more appealing. The abbreviated form 
of narration results in less crowded compositions in which the figures 
move freely and with greater ease and clarity. Because of a more organic 
modelling with softer contours and subtler gradation of limbs, the body 
acquires a rhythm, perceptible not only along the surface but also 
extending into the depth. In three-dimensional extensiveness again the 
composition is more advanced than that of Bharhut and results in an 
easier movement of the planes and more harmonious spatial relations. In- 
separably linked with the Bharhut tradition the art of Bodh Gaya repre- 
sents a convincing advance on the previous achievements. For the first 
time the composition begins to vibrate with a charming vitality and the 
body to pulsate with soft, warm flesh. Orderliness, clarity and closer orga- 
nic relation take the place of the unsteady medley of forms and motifs 
characteristic of the Bharhut style. 

(«/) SANCHI : GATEWA YS OF THE GREAT STUPA 

The Great Stupa at SanchT, in Bhopal, is the most stupendous of the 
early Buddhist establishments and supplies in its splendid gateway carvings 
a panorama of contemporary life and civilisation portrayed with great 
vigour and dramatic intensity. The circular balustrade and the four 
toranas, which front the entrances between the four quadrants, are of the 


87 


1 ASIAR. 1908-9, p. 147 



690 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


same technique and design as those at Bharhut. Carvings, however, 
appear only on the gateways, the rails being left severely plain. In spite 
of this limitation on space the wonderful decorative sense of the artists 
with their simple and easy story-telling diction, graphic in content as well 
as in representation, remains unequalled in early Indian Art. 

All the four gateways are of the same design and each extends a little 
from the line of the balustrade. Tectonic, and to some extent, stylistic, 
considerations indicate that they were not all erected at one and the same 
time. The first to be raised was the southern gateway fronting the steps 
leading to the terraced berm of the stupa. On this gateway there appears 
an inscription which olfers a clue to the date of its erection. One of the 
architraves of this gateway owed its origin to the munificence of one 
Anamda who was overseer of the artisans of king Sri Satakarni . 1 This 
Satakarni was apparently the son of Simuka, the founder of the Satava- 
hana dynasty. The southern gate was followed by the northern, the eastern 
and the western and this sequence is established by tectonic experiments 
towards a more harmonious and balanced design of the gateway form. 
But there are indications that no great time intervened between the erec- 
tion of the first and the last of the gateways, the southern and the western. 
This is evident from the name of a patron, Balamitra a pupil of Ayachuda, 
which appears both on the south and the west gates . 2 All the gateways 
thus appear to have been put up within one generation. 

The carvings on the gateways of the Great Stupa at Sanchi belong, on 
the whole, to the same genre as Bharhut, but mark a distinct advance on it. 
They indicate, however, a definite turn from the main Bharhut diction of 
flowing linear rhythm. Some of the panels and a few individual sculp- 
tures are no doubt endowed with the graceful lyricism of mellifluous lines, 
but they are few. The Sanch! trend, again is unthinkable without a refe- 
rence to the earlier plastic achievements at Bharhut. The strenuous effort 
of about a century or so has enabled the artist to master depth and dimen- 
sions and to regulate the contour, and with this new awareness and in its 
scope he visualises his subjects in a manner that is quite different. Of this 
manner we have a few clumsy attempts at Bharhut, as for instance on the 
Ajatasatru pillar. The horizontal and vertical arrangement of the compo- 
sition, as we see on this pillar, completely unfolds its possibilities in the 
torana carvings of the Great Stupa and leads to variegated and almost 
bewildering compositions, rich and dramatic in character and epic in 
quality. The movement is no longer confined to the harsh and schematic 
treatment of the preceding century, but boldly traverses the composition 
diagonally and in intersecting planes. With the increased depth of the relief 
and greater freedom of movement the forms are presented at various angles 

1 ASIAR. 1913-14, pp. 4f; Marshall, Guide Foucher, The Monuments of Sanchi 
to Sanchi, 2nd ed. p. 52; LUders, List, i. pp. 4-5, 277 

Ep.lnd. X no. 346. There have been wide 2 Marshall, Guide to Sanchi, pp. 40, 50, 

differences of opinion about the identi- 79; Luders, List, nos. 347 and 349 
fication of this king — see Marshall and 



ADVANCE IN TECHNIQUE 


691 


and multitudinous attitudes and poses. No longer are the forms and 
figures conceived singly as separate units in the composition, but several 
are grouped together in a well-defined space. In the relief the group now 
serves as the pivot of the composition, all such groups in a given com- 
position being organically related to one another. 

The result of all these developments is a dynamic expansiveness which 
extends not only along the surface but also to depth. The forms burst forth 
from the stone, so to say, and spread over the surface in almost endless 
masses reverberating the entire composition and illumined by the sharp 
passages of darkness. The dark shades give greater relief to the forms 
and accentuate their vigorous onrush over the composition in bewildering 
and tumultuous variety. The chiaroscuro, i.e. the rich interplay of lights 
and shades, and the strong feeling for volume, coupled with clear-cut out- 
lines and multitudinous angles, attitudes and poses, act and react upon one 
another and produce vital and dramatic compositions surging with life 
and energy almost to the point of boisterous frenzy. The scenes of the 
exciting struggle, such as the War of the Relics (south gate and west gate) 
best illustrate the epic quality of Sanchl compositions. In both the scenes 
the compositions are instinct with vigorous actions and movement, and 
they differ only in dramatic intensity. In the more peaceful scenes the 
artists are able to portray successfully the easy, free and frolicsome charac- 
ter of the actors, their buoyancy and joy of existence. 

At Ranchi the distinctive trend characterised by the horizontal and ver- 
tical arrangement of the figures in the composition, first recognised on the 
Ajatasatru pillar at Bharhut, reaches its climax and ultimate fruition. Some 
of the reliefs, however, adhere to the harsh and schematic treatment 
of the older version, perhaps the work of artists less alive to the creative 
urge felt in the majority of the Sanchi carvings. The dynamic energy that 
bursts forth in diagonal and intersecting arrangements, in high lights and 
deep shadows, is absent from the panels executed in the earlier idiom, though 
the qualities in respect of modelling and sense of volume are the same. 

The human figures remain squat and sturdy, but the reserved contours 
gradually acquire softness and flow harmoniously from the shoulders to 
the ankles. The body now appears as a beautiful and integrated union 
of the single parts, the fluid contours with their gliding sinuousness leading 
to a well-constituted whole, no longer shy, hesitating and faltering, but sure 
and agile in movement. With the masterly rendering of volume, the body 
exhibits collective strength, but without being sensuous, as at Bodh Ggaya. 
The guardian figures at the bottom of the gateway posts and the yakshas 
over the architraves, surging with pent-up energy, now stand firm and stretch 
their limbs freely and surely. Theyakshini dryads on the outcarved branches 
of the trees swing overhead with easy grace and agility and emphasise 
the full curves and contours of the female form. In the treatment of the 
drapery, too, a greater energy is noticeable. The stiff and stylised 
treatment with the flat ends spread fan-wise like ironed aprons, that we 
see at Bharhut, now disappears. A greater interest is taken in the 



692 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


weight of the garment and its changing folds, so as to free it from its 
subjection to the body. Though not successful everywhere, the direction 
taken indicates a suggestive advance on the earlier mode. 

The gateway carvings of the Great Stupa portray the contemporary life 
of India in all its varied forms. The rich and aristocratic life at the court, 
the busy and exciting life of the city, the homely and modest country-life, 
and the varied luxuriance of the jungle, have all been treated faithfully and 
exhaustively. Nowhere do any signs of unnaturalness appear, and the 
actions expressed are intensely sincere and dramatic. Though there is a 
glow of religious impulse in the background, the authors of these reliefs 
were men of the world, and it is the worldly life and existence in all its 
varied manifestations that they so eloquently portray with the help of the 
stories of Buddhism told in the simplest and most expressive language. 
The strong sense of simple naturalism and transparent sincerity is a trait 
characteristic of all early Indian art. It is an art of the people, free alike 
from artificiality and idealism, and it is because of this character that it 
has a wide and universal appeal. 

(iv) UDAYAG1RI AND KHANDAGIRI CAVE 
RELIEFS 

The two adjoining hills of Udayagiri and Khandagiri near Bhuvanesvar 
(Orissa) contain a number of caves, all Jaina in affiliation, and a few of 
these have sculptured friezes and panels decorating their facades. The 
approximate period of these excavations may be ascertained from the in- 
scriptions of Kharavela, king of Kalihga, in the Hathlgumpha and that of 
his chief queen in the Maiichapuri nearby. 1 Kharavela flourished in the 
first century b.c. These two caves and possibly a few others were exca- 
vated about that period. But not all the caves, apparently, were produced 
at one and the same time; activity in the two hills, apart from the mediaeval 
excavations in the Khandagiri, was carried on for about a century, the latest 
in the series possibly falling in the first century a.d. 

Carvings in the different caves present fairly wide divergences, but belong 
mainly to the school of Madhyadesa,as represented by Bharhut, Bodh Gaya 
and Sanchl. In spite of this dependence on the Central Indian tradition 
they have a local character. The reliefs in the Maiichapuri cave show an 
advance on Bharhut in the depth of the relief and plastic treatment of the 
figures, though the workmanship is poorer and coarser. With the masses 
modelled in high relief with strong contrasts of lights and shades there is 
a suggestion of vigorous action and intense vitality which appear to link 
these reliefs with the Saficht trend. But technical insufficiency results in 
isolated and compact figures which prevent convincing compositions. 
The carvings in the Anantagumpha (Khandagiri), stylistically and icono- 
graphically, are reminiscent of the Bodh Gaya reliefs. The two-storeyed 


1 LUders, List 


5. 1345-6; Sircar. D. C., SI. pp. 206-11, 213-4 



YAKSHA STATUES 


693 


cave, the Ranigumpha, is the best decorated of all with elaborate friezes 
of sculpture both in the upper and lower storeys. Unfortunately, the sub- 
jects depicted have not been identified beyond doubt. In spite of the dif- 
ferences in quality discernible in the reliefs of the two storeys, there is an 
advance on the earlier achievements, both in technique and in style. The 
compositions are more vital and better integrated, and the conception 
of a theme and its presentation more harmonious. The execution, how- 
ever, remains comparatively coarse and lacks the smooth and clear-cut 
finish of the contemporary Central Indian School. Nevertheless, the 
reliefs represent a mature tradition, a local movement dependent mainly 
on the art of Central India. In the Ganesagumpha are depicted practically 
the same subjects, though in a slightly inferior style. With the signs of 
deterioration already manifest in the Ganesagumpha the movement 
loses itself in the coarse and conglomerated work found in the Jaya Viyaya 
and Alakapuri caves. 


(v) MATHURA. 

Mathura, the home of one of the most important and prolific artistic 
movements in early India, has also supplied stray, though significant 
examples of early plastic art, inspired by the same artistic impulse which 
characterised the production of the Central Indian school and having many 
things in common with it. A few such early sculptures may now be seen 
in the Mathura Museum. The two fragmentary figures of yakshas with 
their hard lines, flattened treatment, exaggerated by large and protruding 
eyes and heaviness of dress and ornaments represent an art perhaps slightly 
more mature than the Bharhut style but less advanced than the easier and 
more refined conceptions at Bodh Gaya. The two toraija architraves in- 
dicate a technical as well as stylistic advance in the increased depth of the 
relief, less heavy appearance and happier grouping of the figures in the 
composition. The figure of a dryad, modelled almost in the round, on an 
architrave support from Kankali-Tila anticipates the charming dryads of 
the Sanchl torarias. The movement at Mathura in this early period runs 
parallel to the Central Indian school and with these significant achievements 
it bursts forth in superb magnificence in the subsequent periods. 

(vr) YAKSHA AND YAKSHl STATUES. 

Several massive and independent sculptures, carved wholly in the round, 
hail from widely separated regions, such as Parkham and Baroda near 
Mathura, Besnagar and Pawaya in Gwalior, Lohanipur, Didarganj and 
Patna in Bihar. They are usually described as yakshas and yakshinis, 
and this description may hold in the absence of any exact identification. 
They are carved out of Chunar sandstone and bear remnants of the polish 
that characterised the finish of the Asokan columns and their sculptured 
capitals. Because of the material and these traces of polish, usually called 



ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


‘theMauryan polish’, these sculptures are tentatively ascribed to the 
Mauryan period. The ascription, however, fails to take note of the wide 
divergences which distinguish them in their technique, style and aesthetic 
expression. The divergences are too manifest to be ignored and are clear 
enough when the statues are placed side by side, particularly the yaksha 
figure from Parkham and the yakshi from Didarganj ; the one in its mas- 
sive burliness and flattened treatment without any co-ordination of the 
parts, and the other in its smooth, rounded and naturalistic features pleas- 
ingly integrated into a complete whole and inspired by the fluid linearism 
of the mature classical tradition. They represent practically two extreme 
plastic conceptions, and the other figures represent different degrees of 
expression. A fresh study of these sculptures on these considerations is 
therefore necessary in order to ascertain their chronological and stylistic 
positions. It should be mentioned that the material and the polish (which 
again is not Mauryan in quality) cannot be regarded as sufficient grounds 
for assigning these sculptures to one particular period when they differ so 
much in technical aptitudes as well as in their plastic and aesthetic 
conceptions. 

«In this analytical study the two sculptures from Baroda and Parkham 
should come first. Of the Baroda sculpture only the upper part remains, 
while the Parkham specimen is more or less well preserved except for the 
missing hands and slight abrasions on the surface. We have here a clear 
expression of massive portliness and volume which may also be found to 
be the essential qualities of the other sculptures of this group. It is strictly 
frontal in treatment, and the modelling suffers from inadequate or insuffi- 
cient technique. The masses appear to be superposed one above the other 
without any organic relation among them. The sides and the back have 
practically no modelling except a slight chamfering. What we find here 
is an archaic stolidity, which again is not convincingly expressed fot the 
lack of harmony and co-ordination in the composition. The drapery 
appears transparent where it clings to the body and has been given flat 
volumes where it is free. The plaits in between the two legs are interesting 
and remind one of similar plaits in Bharhut statuary. 

The burliness and sheer volume, though crudely expressed, connect 
these figures with the ancient indigenous tradition, and gradually this 
primitive quality experiences the trends and fashions of what has been 
described as classical Indian art. In the two Patna statues, almost iden- 
tical in form and conception, and in the yakshi figure from Besnagar we 
have the same archaic heaviness; but the treatment and modelling appear 
to be easier and freer. In the front each of the figures exhibits more roun- 
ded features, including the arms, breasts and abdomen. The linear contour 
at the sides is less harsh and has a smoother movement. The draperies 
are given separate volumes where they do not cling to the body, but are 
indicated merely by parallel ridges of folds where they do. In spite of the 
general heaviness of forms, the more rounded features and the attempt 
at freer linear contours separate these figures from the Parkham image. 



THE DIDARGANJ YAKSHINI 695 

The two torsos, said to be Jaina, from Lohanipur near Patna are analo- 
gous to the Patna yaksha figures, but the heaviness gives place to a stiff 
and flattened modelling in which the fully rounded features are equally 
in evidence. 

The figure of yaksha Manibhadra from Pawaya, though usually classed 
with the Parkham image, exhibits a greater sense of modelling, both front 
and back. It is a well-balanced production, and the artist appears to have 
overcome the conflict between rounded forms and flattened surface which 
is clearly immanent in the other figures discussed above. A greater co- 
ordination of volumes, one naturally flowing into the other, definitely 
shows a mature conception in which one may feel, as it were, the soft, warm 
flesh. There is nothing primitive or archaic in this figure except its heavi- 
ness, but heaviness is a quality inherent in early Indian art and its most 
potent characteristic. 

Equally free from primitiveness is the yakshini figure from Didarganj, 
conspicuous as the most outstanding creation in the entire series. The 
massive body is fully modelled in the round, the sides and back not excep- 
ted. The full and rounded features, including the prominent bust, narrow 
waist, broad hips gradually tapering down the shapely legs, are all kept 
within the compactness of the whole and within a fluid contour that one 
may recognise in the rendering of the front, the back and the sides. The 
plastic treatment of the whole gives a dynamic character to the entire form, 
further emphasised by the easy and slight stoop and forward movement 
of the upper part of the body and by a delicate bend of the right leg. 
No longer is there any sign of the clash between rounded masses and flat 
surface; the masses coalesce and converge into one another in a free and 
fluid linear movement; and seen from whatever angle the composition is 
one of sweeping curves that accentuate and give relief to the volumes and 
masses. In the sensitive rendering of the live flesh, in the treatment of the 
hair, of the drapery and of the ornaments, and lastly in its graceful stance, 
we have here a female pattern, urban and sophisticated and classical in 
its idea and content. 

The extremely flattened treatment of the Parkham yaksha with its inane 
superposition of volume upon volume compressed between two surfaces, 
the front and the back, is allied to, and perhaps more primitive than the 
relief statuary on the Bharhut toranas of the second century b.c. The 
other figures are allied to it, though gradually they begin to feel the 
impress of the trends and fashions of the contemporary art movement 
exemplified by the relief compositions of the Central Indian school. The 
portly statues of yakshas from Patna, conscientious in the rendering of 
earth-bound weight but with greater roundness of features and less harsh 
linear treatment, are found to be essentially identical with the yaksha 
figures crowning the torana architraves of Sanchl. In the rendering of 
these colossal statues, representatives doubtless of the old plastic diction 
of weight and volume, one may recognise the extension of two-dimensional 
treatment to the three-dimensional depth, evident in the relief compositions 



696 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


of the period. The old indigenous plastic diction appears to be inspired 
by the classical idiom of fluid and sensitive lines, and in the Didarganj 
yakshini we have a successful integration of the two dictions, the old and 
the new. In its fully rounded form and flowing lines, in the lively and 
sensitive modelling of the limbs and the almost sensuous touch of soft, 
warm flesh, the physiognomical type is not far removed from that of the 
dainty yakshini forms on the Mathura jambs and is certainly nearer to 
them in date. From the static weight of congested flesh joined in a 
conglomerating manner between two flat surfaces, the front and the back, 
the figure has freed itself to three-dimensional extensivensess, and though 
heavy in form a dynamic movement characterises the entire composition. 

(b) SAKA-KUSHANA. 

The early phase in classical Indian art, outlined above, represents a 
formative age in which the foundations were laid of those trends and ten- 
dencies that were to form the essential and characteristic qualities of later 
Indian sculpture. The further development of artistic movement covers 
the early centuries of the Christian era in which these trends reach their 
maturity and become inherent in Indian plastic art. Artistic activities, 
widespread in the earlier period, become centralised in a few distinct loca- 
lities, particularly Mathura in the North and Amaravatl in the South. 
Apart from these two well-defined centres there flourished a prolific school 
in the north-western part of India, a school that owed its origin to an 
extraneous and eclectic art tradition commissioned to serve an Indian 
religion. After these achievements in the early centuries of the Christian 
era classical Indian art reaches its fruition in the age of the Guptas. 

(/) MATHURA. 

With the disruption of the Mauryan empire, the north-western part 
of India was again a prey to foreign aggression. The Greeks, the Sakas, 
the Pahlavas and the Kushanas entered India. Some of these invaders 
advanced far into the interior, but in spite of constant upheavals the old 
Indian art continued to enjoy an unbroken continuity. There was no 
break or disturbance; and except for certain minor details of ornament and 
presentation, plastic art developed in the Gangetic valley along the lines 
already determined in the early classical phase. Mathura, the converging- 
point of ancient trade routes from all directions, was not only an impor- 
tant and prosperous city, but also grew into a centre of art where the 
history of Indian sculpture can be studied in an unbroken sequence from 
quite early times right up to the mediaeval period. The fame and prestige 
of this great centre spread far, and sculptures of Mathura style and work- 
manship have been found in widely separated regions. For the history of 
Indian art few sites are of greater interest and importance than Mathura. 

The early phase of artistic activity at Mathura, recognised by a few stray 
and isolated finds, is closely linked with the Central Indian school of 



EARLY BUDDHA IMAGES 


697 


Bharhut and Sanchi and has been dealt with already. The great period of 
Mathura art begins with the Christian era, and its most prolific output 
synchronised with the rule of the Kushanas who extended their supre- 
macy over substantial portions of the Ganga-Yamuna doab. So far as 
indigenous artistic activity is concerned, it is at Mathura that we first 
notice the prolific use of images representing the various divinities, and 
with the creation and introduction of the cult image a new direction of 
Indian art comes into existence. The origin of the cult image in India has 
been a matter of much controversy. In the popular religions of the early 
Indians a strong anthropomorphic character was immanent. Though it 
was subdued by the preponderance of the religion of the Vedic Aryans in 
the early days of aryanisation, this tendency received a great impetus on 
the rise and development of theistic devotional cults which may be consi- 
dered as an emergence of the popular non- Aryan and pre- Aryan fashions 
and practices, now recognised, absorbed and systematised in relation to 
Aryan philosophies. It is at Mathura that this innate anthropomorphism 
and iconism was asserted with vigour and found expression in images 
of cult divinities. 

In the new iconography thus occasioned as a result of creations of the 
image, the figure of the Buddha plays a prominent part and conveys the 
contemporary notions underlying the divine image. With the idea of the 
divine image expressed in human form the artist’s conception of the im- 
portance of the human figure and its relation to its surroundings neces- 
sarily changed. The earlier conception of a relief composition is of very 
little import in this new iconography in which the chief interest centres 
upon the human figure boldly carved and set against the plain surface 
of the ground. The earlier concepts of continuous narration and of spatial 
relations are of little use in this art and are discarded. New techniques 
are evolved leading to the development of stereotyped image stelae 
with the ideas of the grouping of the central and accessory figures deter- 
mined by monographic prescriptions. 

The image proper, in its initial stage, is shaped, as it were, in the form 
and content of yaksha primitives and hence to some extent on the older 
indigenous tradition. Indeed, the earliest Buddha figures, called Bodhi- 
sattvas in inscriptions out of deference to old scruples against the figura- 
tion of the Master, are intimately related, formally, psychologically, and 
in treatment, to the colossal figures of yakshas and dvdrapdlas, and, like 
them, are characterised by massive earthliness and robustness of form and 
volume. Several images of the Master, dated in the reign of the Kushana 
emperor Kanishka, are instructive examples of this. One of them comes 
from Kosarn(Kausambi) and was installed in the second year of Kanish- 
ka’s reign . 1 From Sarnath 2 and Saheth-Maheth (Sravastl ) 3 we have two 
such images, both dedicated by Friar Bala in the third year of the reign 

1 Calcutta Review, July 1934; also ABIA. " ASIAR. 1904-05, pp. 78-80; EL vm 
1934, ix p. 10, pi. ii c. For doubts re- p. 173 

garding the date see IHQ. x p. 575 f. 3 JAS3. Lxvn(i) p. 274; EL vill p. 180 



698 ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 

of the same monarch. A second image from Sarnath, closely similar to 
the above, may also be dated about the same period, though some scholars 
ascribe it to a slightly earlier period on account of the incisions of the 
folds of the drapery appearing on the upper torso . 1 In the other figures 
the folds do not appear on this part of the body. All these images are 
executed in the mottled red sandstone of Sikri and were apparently of 
Mathura origin. Each of them represents the Master in a standing pose 
with the left hand held near the hip and the right, wherever preserved, 
raised up to the shoulderin abhava-mudra. Alionis shown on the pedestal 
between the legs, and indicates that the figure port raved in each case is 
that of Sakyasimha, or ‘the lion of the Sakya race', i.e. the historical Gau- 
tama. The head, wherever preserved, is closely shaven and the forehead 
bears no mark of the urna. The upper part of the body is only half cov ered. 
the right shoulder being left free. The drapery, which consists of an upper 
garment and a lower, clings closely to the body, and folds are shown in 
schematic lines over the left arm and in the low-er part. The undergarment 
is fastened to the waist by a knotted girdle, while the upper is wound 
round the left shoulder and drawn diagonally across the body, the ends 
being gathered up over the left lower arm. The hems and ends of the 
drapery are given separate volumes. Though in the round, cacli of these 
sculptures is conceived in strictly frontal aspect and is static in character. 
The broad shoulders, the prominent masculine torso, the heavy and 
massive form firmly planted on the pedestal, the gesture and other features 
are expressive of enormous energy and mundane force belonging to this 
world and not of any transcendental concept or idea. The open eves and 
smiling countenance also make no suggestion of spiiitual introspection. 
In these sculptures the image comes into viev' only in its physical aspect 
as that of a world conqueror; the spiritual form, suggestive of super- 
human divine existence, is yet to come. 

This series of colossal sculptures inaugurates the line of Buddhist ima- 
ges, or for the matter of that of all cult images, extending down to the 
Gupta period. They indicate the primitive and indigenous tradition of 
image-making, already evident in the massive yaksha and yakshi figures 
discussed in a previous section, following the movement of the progressive 
classical idiom. This is clearly noticed in other sculptures from Mathura, 
both standing and seated, in which there may be recognized a conscious 
and gradual progress towards an expressive contour, a distinct articula- 
tion and co-ordination of the different parts and a refined and more 
effective modelling. Some of these figures have spiral ushnhhas, while the 
urna is sometimes indicated by a raised dot between the eves. The halo, 
wherever preserved, is circular and scalloped at the edge. A few are dated 
with reference to the reigns of the Kushana kings, Huvishka and Vasudeva, 
and they exhibit the gradual development of the type chronologically as 
well as stylistically. In the Katra Bodhisattva and a few other analogous 


Bachhofer, L., Early Indian Sculpture, 11 p!. 80 



PORTRAtT STATUES 


699 


figures we have the beginnings of the image stele in which may be recog- 
nized the rudiments of group compositions that become conventional and 
stereotyped in the later images. The heavy and massive form becomes 
relaxed in course of time, grows supple and pliable with a gliding linear 
contour and with smooth and submerged shadows playing all over the 
surface. But in spite of these developments towards refinement and ele- 
gance. the figures remain earthbound, as before with no suggestion of 
spirituality. This is true not only of Buddhist sculptures, but also of other 
cult images. Jaina and Brahmanical. The iconographic details gradually 
reach their fulness, but spiritual grace, the true import of the image of a 
divine being, is found to be lacking. 

The Mathura artists were aware of the contemporary Gandhara art 
tradition of the North-West, and certain Buddha figures and reliefs give 
hints of this awareness. In several figures of the Buddha the drapery hang- 
ing down in semi-circular folds is found to cover both the shoulders, and 
in a few the feet also. The head again is not shaven, but covered with curls. 
The eyes and lips are full and sharply cut, the upper eye-lid being especial- 
ly heavy. These features, unknown in early Indian sculpture and in the 
Mathura type of Bodhisattvas, may be traced to contacts with the Gan- 
dharan tradition. More definite evidence of such contacts is provided by 
certain motifs . such as the woman and the acanthus, the vine with fruits, 
etc. These, however, arc late incidents in the history of the Mathura school 
and constitute a very small fraction of its productions. It may be that the 
popularity of the Gandhara school influenced the Mathura artists on the 
simple grounds of compedtion. Gandharan influence on Mathura art was, 
however, \ery slight. Certain motifs were evidently borrowed, but practi- 
cally nothmg’of technique or style, and whatever influence came from out- 
side was assimilated and drawn into the fabric of Indian plastic tradition. 

Certain groups of Mathura sculptures, all dealing with strong drink and 
inebriation, have been classed as Bacchanalian and their interpretation is 
still a matter of uncertainty in spite of long discussions. In several sculptures 
of this group foreign touches are marked in the treatment of the drapery, 
in stance and in the general features of the composition, and the theory 
that the motif was inspired by foreign subjects is plausible. Similar is the 
case with the so-called ‘Heracles and the lion’ composition. But such 
motifs formed no part of the Indian art movement, nor did the Baccha- 
nalian scenes, in spite of their seeming popularity in this period, survive 
in subsequent Indian art. They are just passing fancies which may have 
touched the imagination of the Mathura artists, but are of very little 
import for the general history of Indian art. 

We must nof omit in this discussion the few large-size portrait statues 
of Kanishka, Wima Kadphises (?), and Chastana (?), which belong to a 
distinct style and class. The statue of Kanishka, King of Kings, represents 
an extremely linear and angular art in which the figure, though free, is 
entirely set into the surface and is frontal in the most rigorous sense of the 
term. The main effect is one of a flat and compressed surface of harsh 



700 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


angles and sharp lines in which the ponderous volume of the early Indian 
tradition and the plastic rhythm of the classical are equally absent. The 
other two statues represent different stages of this style, which is no doubt 
Central Asian or Scythian in inspiration. But this too remains a tran- 
sient phase in the history of Mathura art and of Indian art as a whole. 

A particular kind of Mathura sculpture is represented by votive slabs, 
known as dydgapatas, which were erected in Jaina shrines for the adora- 
tion of the arhats. To this class belong also the so-called ‘Holi’ reliefs. 
These votive slabs are Indian in conception and treatment, the figures and 
other features of the composition following the indigenous art movement 
in all details. Particularly interesting is the Amohini relief . 1 in all probabi- 
lity pre-Kanishka in date, which exhibits all the mass and volume of early 
Indian art as also its character of relief composition. The dydgapata from 
Kankali-Tila 2 showing the seated figure of a Jina in the centre, is a pleas- 
ing study of auspicious symbols and motifs treated with a remarkable 
sense of harmonious and decorative grouping. In the ‘Holi’ relief, now 
in the Mathura Museum, the artist’s venture to represent perspective is 
worth noticing. These slabs are Indian in spirit as well as in technique 
and characterisation, and must be classed with the indigenous art 
movement. 

So far as the Indian art movement is concerned the rigidity of the phy- 
sical mass and volume is softened in course of time to an unprecedented 
elegance in the alto-relievo sculptures on the front sides of the rail pillars 
from various sites of Mathura. At the back there appear the narrative 
relief panels depicting the legends. On the front, however, are represented, 
with very few exceptions, nude or semi-nude female figures — yakshims, 
vrikshakas or apsarasas, and such subjects as toilet scenes, the connota- 
tion and implications of which are anything but religious. Related 
unmistakably to the yakshis and tree-nymphs of Bharhut, Sanchi and 
Bodh Gaya, formally and iconographically, these figures have attained 
greater freedom of movement gestures and attitudes along with an in- 
creased plasticity and refinement of the physical mass. The increased 
plasticity leads to the creation of alluring female forms of which the aim is 
frankly sensual and suggestively erotic, though the figures themselves are 
possibly derived from popular religious beliefs in nymphs and dryads 
connected with vegetal fertility. Contemporary terra-cotta figurines from 
various sites in the Indo-Gangetic plain supply analogies and parallels 
to such figures in miniature. Whatever the purpose, these figures with 
their full, round breasts and hips, attenuated waists, and the smooth 
texture of the warm and living flesh emphasise physical charm as their 
substance, and sensual appeal as their aim, further accentuated by such 
gestures as an outward thrust of the hip, a slight turn of the head or hand, 
and a frankly coquettish countenance. Even in the male figures, very 
few of which appear on such pillars, the smooth and resilient flesh is not 

1 ASIAR. 1922-3, p. 90 pi. V 2 Indonesian Art , p. 37, fig. 71 

2 Coomaraswamy, A. K., Indian and 



GRAECO-BUDDHIST ART 


701 


devoid of sensuous charm. Indian art at this period is found to be unre- 
servedly addicted to everything terrestrial and the entire plastic sense is 
steeped in the physical. The physical and worldly aspect of art, so clearly 
emphasised at Mathura is seen in violent and boisterous frenzy in the 
contemporary art of Vengi in south India. 

The vast repertoire of the Mathura school may be recognised as the 
natural and consistent growth of early Indian art resting its foundations 
on Indian soil and on the indigenous trends and traditions prevalent in the 
closing centuries of the pre-Christian era. The different foreign peoples 
and races who entered India and fought for political power were ultimate- 
ly indianised and absorbed in the vast current of the Indian population. 
Extraneous influences naturally affected Mathura also in her artistic pur- 
suits, but the prevailing and predominant tradition continued to be 
Indian, and no infusion of alien idiom could change its basic character. 
Thus Mathura bequeathed a rich legacy to the development of Indian art 
in subsequent centuries. 

(ii) GANDHARA 

The sculpture of the Gandhara country, embracing the North-Western 
provinces of India and part of Afghanistan, represents a fundamentally 
different art which falls outside the lines of the natural and consistent 
growth of the Indian movement dealt with so far. The soil upon which 
it grew belongs, however, to India, and a brief discussion of the school is 
necessary in a chapter on Indian art. 

Situated close to the north-western gates of India the territory lay ex- 
posed to foreign contacts and influences from time immemorial. The 
Persians, the Greeks, the Sakas, the Pahlavas, and the Kushanas came and 
settled there, and thfresult was the birth of a hybrid culture that found 
expression in an eclectic school of art, prolific in output and more or less 
contemporary with the flourishing period of the indigenous art movement 
at Mathura. The Gandhara movement is usually described as Graeco- 
Buddhist, but it must be borne in mind that the school comes into view 
only when the Greek domination of this part of India has become a thing 
of the past, its principal patrons being the Sakas and the Kushanas from 
Central Asia. The technique employed is unquestionably Hellenistic, 
though modified by Iranian and Scythian contacts, but the themes depic- 
ted are Indian and almost exclusively Buddhist. 

Already in the centuries preceding the Christian era the different peo- 
ples who had settled in the North-West and the Panjab had come under 
the influence of Indian religions. This fact is attested not only by inscrip- 
tions recording religious benefactions, but by the appearance of symbols 
and deities associated with Indian religious cults on the coins cf the fo- 
reign rulers. It is through the influence of such religions as Buddhism and 
Bhagavatism that these foreigners were gradually indianised and absorbed 
in the Indian population. The Gandhara school of art really represents 
a stage of this indianisation and has to be viewed in that light. 



702 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


The Gandhara school is best known from its most prolific productions, 
and important remains have come from Jalalabad, Hadda and Bamiyan 
in Afghanistan, the Swat valley (Udyana), Taxila, (ancient Takshasila). 
Takht-i-Bahi in the Yusufzai country, Bala Hissar at the junction of the 
Swat and the Kabul rivers, Charsadda, Palatu-Dheri, Ghaz-Dheri, etc, 
The material employed is usually a dark grey slate in the early period, 
stucco and terra-cotta becoming the favourite mediums later. 

The dating of Gandhara sculptures is still involved in uncertainty. The 
excavations of Marshall at Taxila, executed with much exactness and cir- 
cumspection, have established a chronology, which, coupled with the 
results of other excavations and finds, appears to indicate that the ruler 
associated with the earliest remains of the Buddhist art of Gandhara was 
Azes I, belonging roughly to the middle of the first century b.c . 1 The 
school thus began to take shape after the decline of Greek power but 
before the Kushanas came upon the scene. The days of its expansion 
coincide with the reign of the great Kushana kings, particularly Kanishka, 
and the school maintains an abundant production in the third’ and fourth 
centuries A.D. 2 

Though derived, technically and stylistically, from an extraneous and 
eclectic plastic standard, the themes were of Indian origin, and according 
to some scholars the importance of the school consists in the revolutionary 
procedure of representing for the first time the image of the Buddha in 
anthropomorphic shape. Independent images either seated or standing, 
occur very frequently, and in the numerous representations of scenes from 
the life of the Master which form the principal repertoire of the Gandhara 
artists, he is depicted, with very few exceptions, in human shape. This 
new orientation in Indian religion and art is held to be the contribution of 
this eclectic school. The point has been touched ofp-in connection with 
the images of Buddha-Bodhisattva from Mathura, based on indigenous 
and plastic and iconographic ideals. The Gandhara Buddha tTelonss 
plastically to an extraneous artistic standard, but ‘follows Indian tradition 
in every essential of its iconography .’ 3 Though bearing all the iconogra- 
phic marks and traits of the Indian tradition, the Gandhara Buddha "is 
rendered in the manner of the divine figures of the Graeco- Roman pantheon 
and with features wholly foreign to Indian notions. Robed in a thick gar- 
ment arranged in the fashion of a Roman toga, with hair arranged in wavy 
curls, with a physiognomy and expression foreign to Indian conceptions, 
and sometimes with a moustache or turban, the Buddha of the Gandhara 
artists is indeed an Apollo, and such representations, however popular 
amongst an eclectic population, failed to satisfy the Indian standard and 
the Indian mind. The reliefs representing scenes from the life of the 
Master, in spite of their minute details, have the appearance of mecha- 
nical reproductions lacking all the spontaneity and emotional warmth 




EARLY BUDDHA IMAGES FROM GANDHARA 


703 


that distinguish the reliefs of early Indian art of Bharhut, Sanchl, Bodh 
Gaya or Amaravatl. Moreover, such representations as those of the Indian 
lotus in the fashion of a prickly artichoke, indicate that the Gandhara 
artists did not always feel themselves at home in translating Indian ideas. 
The Buddha image of the Gandhara school as a whole also conveys the 
same impression. The Mathura Buddha lacked spiritual expression, so 
also the Gandhara image. But the former, based on indigenous standards 
plastically and iconographically, expressed an Indian conception and 
\,:.s true to the Indian ideals psychologically as well as culturally. In 
this respect the Mathura Buddha-Bodhisattva may be described as a more 
successful representation of the Master than the Gandharan which 
employs a foreign style and follows a foreign ideal, though in the ser- 
vice of an Indian religion. ‘Judging from expression, intention, conception 
and artistic mastery of the subject the Buddha-Bodhisattvas from Mathura 
are purely Indian.’ 1 The Gandhara Buddha, though a resourceful adap- 
tation of Indian notions, is foreign in conception and outlook. It is pos- 
sible that so far as extant remains are concerned the Gandhara Buddha 
may have been prior in date, but as Kramrisch significantly observes, 
in no case does priority establish a claim of the Gandharan type as the 
origin of the Buddha image. 2 Bachhofer, by a skilful analysis of the two 
types, has shown that the Buddha-Bodhisattvas of Mathura were anterior 
to the influx of the Gandhara tradition at Mathura. 3 The Gandhara in- 
fluence had nothing to do with the indigenous type which served as the 
model for all Indian images of the subsequent days. 

The earliest specimen of Gandhara art so far discovered is the Bimaran 
reliquary which circumstantially has to be dated to the reign of Azes I. 
The reliquary is adorned all round with figures set in niches between slender 
pilasters supporting semicircular ogee arches. The mobility of the figures 
is striking, and the free and dynamic quality is further accentuated by the 
flowing treatment of the drapery, conceived plastically as a separate volume 
with its own weight and covering the body entirely from the shoulders to 
the ankles. The free-standing Buddha from Loriyan Tangai, dated in the 
year 318 of an unspecified era (probably Seleucid, i.e. a.d. 6), 4 is in a sta- 
tic pose confronting the spectator. In spite of its indifferent preservation, 
the drapery can be recognised to be plastically treated as a separate and 
voluminous mass, though there is a conscious attempt to make the forms 
underneath the garment visible. The movement towards a diaphanous 
treatment of the drapery became gradually prominent and asserted itself 
fully in the third and fourth centuries a.d. It may have been due to con- 
tact with the indigenous Indian tradition of which such a treatment was the 
ideal. The well-known Buddha from Takht-i-Bahi now in Berlin, appears 
also to belong to the same period as the Loriyan Tangai image. In the 
Buddha from Charsadda, dated in the year 384, again in an unspecified 

1 Bachhofer, L. op. eit. i p. 93 3 BacLhofcr, I,., op. cit., i p. 114 

■ Kramrisch, Stella, op. cil. p. 40 4 ASLtR. 1903-4, pp. 254 f. 



704 ART AND ARCHITECTURE ! NORTHERN INDIA 

era (Seleucid in all probability, i.e. a.d 72), 1 the design of the transparent 
drapery has become more pronounced, and in the standing Buddha from 
Takht and the seated Buddha from Sahri-Bahlol it reaches a convincing 
solution. The image of HaritI from Skarah-Dheri bears again a date in 
an unspecified era, 399, i.e. a.d. 87 if referred to the Seleucid era. 2 The 
drapery clings to the body closely with small parallel folds which sup- 
press the transparency to a certain extent. It has a certain rough and rus- 
tic strength which is also noticeable in the figures on the Kanishka reliquary 
from Shah-ji-ki-Dheri; the latter, however, is far superior in execution. 
In these two objects there are signs of a stylisation which becomes charac- 
teristic of the Gandhara art of this period; throughout the second century 
a.d. the style follows a path of progressive schematisation, so that fluted 
drapery with flat parallel folds is the rule. The early group of Buddha 
figures from the latter half of the first century b.c. down to the first century 
a.d., is characterised by clear and impressive heads with long and beauti- 
fully drawn curves outlining the lineaments and showing locks of hair in 
wavy curls overflowing the ushnisha wherever it is marked. The body is 
balanced with clear-cut proportions, and the attitude relaxed. The 
second century a.d. in Gandhara art represents a period of decadence and 
provides a strange contrast to the contemporaneous artistic movements 
in Northern and Southern India. 

Gandhara art thus arises during the period of Saka domination. The 
art of the Greek princely courts, of which specimens are as yet wanting 
except on coins, was a strongly coloured Hellenism, and this under the Saka 
and Kushana patrons assumed a local character in the service of Indian 
religions, particularly Buddhism. The spell of Hellenism, felt in the ear- 
lier productions, gradually fades until schematisation in the second century 
a.d. leads to a degeneration of the earlier artistic forces. 

From the third century onwards a revival of the artistic tendencies of the 
first century a.d. is noticed. Stone sculpture has become rare, and is 
not of high quality, stucco and terra-cotta of easier tractability being the 
favourite materials of this period. The style is much more free than the 
schematic productions of the second century a.d. The drapery again 
tends progressively to the transparent gossamer type, and in the body treat- 
ment the harmony of rhythmic lines, such as we feel in the earlier produc- 
tions, though greatly softened is more in evidence. In the attitudes of the 
figures we observe the same tendency to relax. The two significant cen- 
tres of this late Gandhara art are Mohra Moradu and Jaulian. This art 
was nearer to the work of the first century a.d. than to that of the second. 
The revival of artistic impulse in Gandhara after a period of decadence 
has naturally to feed upon the earlier productions of the first century a.d. 3 
Geographical as well as ethnical reasons probably precluded the possi- 
bility of turning to the Ganga-Yamuna valley for artistic inspiration. It 


1 Ibid. 

2 Ibid. 


3 Bachhofer, L., op. eit. i p. 87 



TWO GROUPS OF TERRA-COTTAS 


705 


is this late Gandhara tradition which was carried to Central Asia and 
China via Afghanistan. 

In the fabric of Indian art as a whole the Gandhara school is nothing 
more than a passing feature. It made only a negligible contribution ex- 
cept for a few motifs, which again were quickly indianised. In aesthetic 
import and significance the products of the school can hardly be compared 
with the spontaneous productions at Bharhut and Sanchi or the work of 
the later schools of the Gupta and Pallava periods with all their emotional 
and spiritual content. This eclectic art is an eastward expansion of 
Hellenism, transformed by strong Iranian and Scythian elements and 
applied to Indian subjects. From the Indian point of view it is a westward 
expansion of Indian culture in a foreign eclectic garb. As Dr. Kramrisch 
rightly observed, ‘Gandhara . . . occupies a position apart. For, if it is 
Indian and colonial from a Hellenistic point of view, it is Hellenistic and 
colonial when viewed from India ’. 1 

(i) TERRA-COTTA. 

Terra-cotta was the medium of artistic expression for the common peo- 
ple and a considerable number of terra-cotta objects have been found 
along the Gangetic plains in various sites and in different levels of occupa- 
tion. The most prolific centres were Ahichchhatra, Mathura, Kausambi 
(Kosam), Bhita and Rajghat in Uttar Pradesh, Pataliputra (Patna), Buxar, 
and Vaisall (Basarh) in Bihar, and Bangarh, Mahasthan, and Tamralipti 
(Tamluk) in Bengal. At Taxila, a flourishing centre of Gandhara art, have 
also been found numerous terra-cotta objects and figurines of different 
periods and of varied style. The movement was thus extensive and wide- 
spread in Northern India and was known also in the South as the recent 
finds from Kondapur (Hyderabad State) show. There were objects in 
terra-cotta intended chiefly for domestic worship and household 
decoration, for children’s toys, for popular religious and magical prac- 
tices. Seals were fashioned out of the same material for purposes of 
documentation and also as personal ornaments for the use of the poo r . 
Apart from its aesthetic significance, the terra-cotta art, in its varied uses 
and purposes, supplies invaluable material for a study of the life and 
culture of the Indian people. 

A study of Indian terra-cottas leads to their division into two well 
defined groups— one exhibiting a primitive form and experience, and the 
other showing the impress and formulations in chronological sequence of 
a stylistic advance, natural to a progressive art movement. What is inter- 
esting is that the primitive type has been found in association with the 
other, and its existence can be traced from the time of the Indus civiliza- 
tion right up to the present day. Hence an eminent scholar describes the 
two groups — one as ‘ageless’ and the other as ‘time-bound ’. 2 The ageless 

1 Kramrisch, op. cit., p. 44 JISO.4. vn pp. 89 f. 

2 Kramrisch, Stella, ‘Indian terra-cottas'. 



706 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


type, whether representing a human figure or an animal is characterised 
by a modelling that reduces the form to a simple description of the main 
volumes corresponding to tne main parts of the body. Eyes, lips, hair, 
navel, etc. are either indicated by mere scratches or by separate strips 
applied to the modelled form. The applique technique is also lesorted to 
for ornaments and head-dresses, and usually the form is heavily burdened 
with them. Most of the human figurines represent females .vith heavy 
bulging hips and prominent rounded breasts, sometimes with the navels 
and lower abdomen clearly marked, and seems to be (associated with the 
primitive conception of a mother or fertility goddess. 

The terra-cottas of the ‘ageless’ type are modelled by hand, but with the 
‘time-bound’ group the mould also comes into use. The earliest in the 
latter series appear to be those in which the faces are found to be impres- 
sions from moulds with the hair, head-dresses and even the ears in appli- 
que. The heads thus fashioned are fixed to bodies modelled by hand. 
Such terra-cottas follow from age to age the stylistic and aesthetic charac- 
teristics marking the progress of the plastic arts in the country. A consi- 
derable number of detached heads have been extracted from different 
sites, and of these a few bearing remarkably individual traits in physiogno- 
my and expression are usually described as Mauryan in date. These are 
followed by miniature plaques, each bearing one or more figures in reliefs, 
entirely produced from moulds. Such plaques have been found in various 
sites in fairly large numbers and are ascribed to the second and first 
centuries b.c. The earlier examples, resembling contemporary work in 
stone, are characterised by flattened reliefs, heavy forms and somewhat 
harsh linear schemes. Soon they give place to pleasing specimens in which 
the reliefs are higher, the forms more refined and sensitively modelled, the 
lines more disciplined, and the contours and gradation of planes better 
regulated. As a rule, the figures are heavily coiffured, and wear elaborate 
apparel and jewellery, sometimes applied, concealing to some extent, the 
loveliness of the delicately modelled body. In the various modes of coif- 
fure, dress and jewellery one may find ample materials for a study of the 
fashions and tastes of the time. 

In the Saka-Kushana period various ethnic types and fashions are 
represented in terra-cotta, a clear reflection of the racial influx characteris- 
tic of the period. Mathura and Taxila represent two prolific centres of 
this art, while Ahichchhatra, Kausambi, Vaisali, Bhita and other places 
supply conspicuous objects also. The repertoire is varied and apart 
from the figures of already known designs various homely scenes and 
popular stories enrich the subject-matter. The terra-cotta art bears the 
impress and stamp of the parallel contemporary style in stone, and is 
likewise no less worldly and physically minded. With their well-modu- 
lated forms and smoothly refined contours, the figures are animated and 
lively, and supply a manifold picture of secular life, rich in social 
content and significance. 



CITY ARCHITECTURE 


707 


B. ARCHITECTURE. 

The earliest remains of the builder’s art in India have been found buried 
in the vast alluvial plain along the course of the lower Indus and its several 
affluents. They represent the ruins of well planned brick-built cities that 
reveal a full-fledged urban civilisation to be dated in a period roughly 
between 3,000 and 2,500 b.c. The principles and technique of building- 
construction are found in a well developed and mature state, resulting no 
doubt from much anteriror experience. 

A long gap separates this early phase of architecture in India from the 
succeeding one. The sixth century b.c. is the next landmark. In that 
century two new religious systems were born, one of which was destined to 
spread far outside the limits of India. Almost contemporaneously we 
find states organised on a vaster scale which, with the accumulation of 
power, prestige, and wealth, permitted, indeed fostered, the development 
of arts and crafts. When Magadha expanded into a great empire in the 
fourth century b.c. this development received an unprecedented impetus, 
and it is from this period that we begin to trace the history of Indian archi- 
tecture in a reasonably assured, and a more or less unbroken, sequence. 
The gulf that separates this period from the Indus Age might suggest that 
the powerful traditions of the earlier epoch had completely died out. 
This cannot be proved by negative evidence. It is just possible that the 
buildings of the intermediate period still lie hidden under the soil or, having 
been made of impermanent materials, like wood, have perished altogether. 
The second supposition becomes more than a probability when we find 
that the earliest lithic architecture bears the clear stamp and impress of 
wooden prototypes and of architectural techniques originally evolved of 
wooden structures 


(a) SECULAR ARCHITECTURE. 


The emergence of bigger state organisations ultimately coalescing into 
a vast empire, and the flourishing state of trade and commerce, as pictured 
in the Jataka tales, led to the growth of big cities. In Buddha’s time there 
were six great cities, namely Rajagriha, Sravasti, Saketa, Kausambi, Vara- 
nasi and Champa. 1 Other cities also rose into prominence, and are men- 
tioned in early Buddhist literature. These cities appear to have been 
surrounded by protecting walls, pierced by gateways and furnished with 
lofty watch-towers. 2 Rajagriha was the old capital of Magadha and a new 


Mahaparinibbana Sutta, SBE. xi p. 99 
1 The Mahajanaka Jataka (No. 539) 
refers to the gate, watch-tower and the 
walls of the city of Champa, capital 
of Ahga, now represented by the site 
of Champanagar, near Bhagalpur, 
in Bihar. The city of Girivraja (old 
Mjagriha), capital of Magadha, has 


been described as an impregnable city 
(puram duradharsham) in the Maha- 
bharata (ii. 20. 30), being surrounded 
by five hills, namely Vaihara, Varaha, 
Vrishabha, Ftishigiri and Chaityaka. 
The walls of the city, constructed of 
cyclopaean masonry, can still be seen. 



ART AND ARCHITECTURE 1 NORTHERN INDIA 


capital city, Pataliputra, was founded between the rivers Ganga and the 
Hiranyavaha or the Son; a picture of this magnificent city and its civic 
organisation has been left to us by Megasthenes. 

Very few vestiges of these early cities have survived. Arrian, who 
based his Indica on the accounts of Megasthenes, states that cities on the 
banks of rivers and in other low lying spots were built of wood ; those in 
more commanding positions, less exposed to floods, of mud or brick . 1 
Wooden structures have a very short span of life and soon fall to pieces. 
Mud buildings are fli ms ier still. Even brick structures cannot withstand 
the disintegrating forces of time and weather for long, and possibly lie 
buried under their own debris. 

But though no remains are forthcoming, a general idea of the plan and 
lay-out of early Indian cities may be obtained from references to cities 
and city organisations in the Buddhist literature, the Kautiliya Arthasastra, 
the Epics and other works. The Milindapanha , 2 or the ‘Questions of 
Menander’, offers us a graphic picture of the city of Sagala (Sakala, modern 
Sialkot in the Panjab). It was a city ‘fine and regular, measured out into 
quarters, with excavated moats and ramparts about it, with stout gate- 
houses and towers, with market places, cross-roads, street comers and 
public squares, with clean and even main roads, with regular lines of 
open shops, well provided with parks, gardens, lakes, lotus-ponds and 
wells, adorned with many kinds of temples of the gods, free from every 
fault, and standing in all its glory.* 

This eloquent description of the city of Sagala appears to hold good for 
the entire period under reference. The standard scheme of an early city 
was thus somewhat as follows. It is surrounded by a moat or moats and 
further protected by a wall ( pakara , prakara ) running all around. The plan 
is rectangular, usually square, with gate or gate-houses ( dvara , dvara-kott- 
halaka ) in the middle of each side, each gateway being approached by a 
bridge across the moat. Four main streets from the four gateways lead to 
the centre of the city which is laid out into quarters ( bhagaso mitam ). 
Within the city lofty buildings of all kinds rise up in orderly rows. The 
moat apart, such a layout, might well suit even a modern city. 

No remains have been found in a sufficient state of preservation to give 
us an idea of what these early cities looked like when entire. But a recon- 
struction, hypothetical but authoritative, may be made from the relief rep- 
resentations of Bharhut, Sanchi, Amaravati, Mathura, etc. in which many 
of the historical cities of ancient India including Rajagriha, Sravasti, 
Varanasi, Kapilavastu and Kusinagara, have been shown, as required by 
the stories and legends that they represent. An outer view of the city 
wall, with imposing gateways and lofty defensive towers, and occasionally 
some glimpse of the buildings inside may be clearly obtained from these 
reliefs. Along the city wall there runs the moat, the water which fills it 
being indicated by wavy ripples, and sometimes with lotuses which add 

I CHI. i p. 617 

I I 34 and 330 f . ; SBE. xxxv p. 53; xxxvi pp. 208-9 



PLAN OF CIVIC BUILDINGS 


709 


to the scenic beauty of the surroundings by contrast with the grim and 
austere aspect of the wall rising high behind the moat. The walls are usu- 
ally shown as built of brick, though wooden palisade construction is 
also resorted to as is evident from a Sanclu relief. Sometimes, the walls 
run in re-entrant angles, the salient corners being provided with project- 
ing bastions. At the top the walls end either in a coping, or, more usually, 
in battlements. The gate-house, boldly projecting from the line of the 
walls, has two lofty towers (dvara-attalaka, gopura-attalaka) at the two 
sides, which are joined together by a gallery hall (said). Soaring high 
above the walls these towers add to the strength and dignity of the entire 
scheme of the massive portal. They rise to several storeys with open 
balconies or verandas and have each a barrel-vaulted roof with gable 
ends at the top. The dimensions of the gate-house are often imposing. 
In some of the reliefs they are shown as large enough to provide passages 
for chariots and horses and elephants with riders. Inside the gateway- 
building accessory defence towers are also occasionally shown. 

Apart from the gate-house and situated at the far end of the bridge 
communicating with the gateway stand ornamental toranas. Such a 
torana is usually made up of two free standing pillars which support one 
or more architraves at the top. The design leaves no doubt of its being 
imitated from wooden constructions, if not actually made of wood. 
Compared with the forbidding aspect of the massive walls and imposing 
portals, the toranas are light in build and in effect, and serve merely as 
ornamental approaches to the city gates. 

The early Indian reliefs are also instructive in the reconstruction of the 
plan, lay-out, elevation and other features of an urban building. It usually 
faced a court, occasionally flanked by other buildings at the sides but left 
open in front (cf. Sanchi, East Gate). This opert court was approached 
by a light torana of wooden technique and construction (Amaravatl). 
The buildings usually rose to several storeys, the uppermost storey being 
covered by a wagon-vaulted roof having gables at either end and crowned 
by pointed finials. Along the front of the upper storeys ran balustraded 
verandahs ( alindas ), while the ground floor was sometimes an open pillared 
pavilion probably intended for an assembly hall. The pillars, either 
square or round, sometimes carried the so-called ‘bell capitals’ at the top. 
The upper floors were reached by stairways supported on a framework of 
beams and rafters resting on plain pillars. A Mathura relief of about 
the second century a.d. supplies us with the view of an external stairway 
which is roofed at the top and provided with railings at the sides. The 
replica of a pleasure palace within a garden is also furnished by the same 
relief. The palace rises up to three storeys, the topmost having probably 
a tiled roof. 

The appearance and other features of the buildings shown in early re- 
lief compositions leave no doubt of their being constructed of impermanent 
materials, like wood, or bamboo. Every essential of wooden technique is 
scrupulously imitated in these reliefs and this strict adherence to a wooden 



710 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


style presumes the existence of an age of wood in the history of Indian 
architecture. The elaborate cave facades are clear and explicit imitations 
of structural modes and patterns in wood , 1 and from their testimony, 
the early urban buildings, in spite of their wooden structure, appear to have 
been large and imposing, beautifully laid out and richly decorated. The 
nature of the material precluded extensive change in the shape and form 
of the buildings, but the simplicity of the shape and form is amply com- 
pensated by the wealth of ornament, the like of which can very seldom 
be seen. With spacious windows, open pavilions, balustraded verandahs 
and shaded overhanging balconies, they were quite comfortable dwellings. 
These buildings when standing must have presented a strong contrast 
to the earliest Indian architecture of the secular order found in the Indus 
cities, which was strictly utilitarian and devoid of any ornament. 

, It will not be irrelevant to recall the interesting description of Pataliputra, 
the foremost city of the time, left to us by the classical writers 2 and the 
Chinese pilgrims. The description tallies in almost all essentials with 
our picture of an early Indian city and its buildings, and has been con- 
firmed by excavations. 

Remains of brick-built cities have been laid bare in excavations at 
various sites e.g. Basarh, Bhita, Ahichchhatra, Taxila, but they are too 
fragmentary to be of any real use for a systematic study of ancient In- 
dian civic architecture. The plan and lay-out as gathered from the sur- 
viving foundations and plinths correspond generally to those of an 
early city as described in literature. Plainly, however, such brick build- 
ings afforded no scope for the ornamental detail and exuberance of wooden 
structures, and were therefore much simpler in appearance. At Ahich- 
chhatra, the capital of the Panchala kingdom, excavation has revealed the 
remains of streets leading from the gateways and converging to the centre 
of the city where stood a lofty temple. The houses are found arranged 
on both sides of the street. 

(b) RELIGIOUS ARCHITECTURE 

Art in its early period flourishes mainly as a handmaid of religion, and 
this is substantially true of architecture. An oriental thinks more of his 
religion and his god than of himself and hence the desire to build a per- 
manent habitation intended for religious purposes is strong in his min d 
It is for this reason that the change from perishable to more durable mate- 
rials occurred much earlier in religious buildings than in those meant 
for domestic and residential purposes. The phenomenal growth of the 
religions of Gautama Buddha and of Mahavlra Jina and the rise of the 
sectarian cults of Hinduism supplied a great impetus to the progress of 
architecture. With Buddhism is particularly associated the stupa which 
represents a domical structure of brick or stone masonry. Shrines, usually 

1 Compare particularly the magnificent Karle etc. in Western India 

facades of the caves at Kondane, ! See Chh. i and iii ante. 



ORIGIN OF THE STUPA 


711 


known as chaitya halls, and monasteries also formed important concomi- 
tants of the Buddhist religious establishments, the extant monuments of the 
early period being mostly of the excavated order. The sanctuaries of the 
Jainas that are known to have been raised have perished, but cave dwellings 
meant for their recluses still exist. The bhakti cult gave a great impetus to 
the worship of images and several devagrihas or ‘houses of gods’, pertain- 
ing to the worship of the different gods of Hinduism, going back to the 
second or first century b.c., have been exposed, though in extremely frag- 
mentary states. Dh vajastambhas or columns bearing the emblems of the gods 
used to be erected in front of such sanctuaries, and several of them, asso- 
ciated with the worship of Vishnu in his v yuha forms, still stand in and 
around Besnagar in the Gwalior region. These no doubt testify to a pro- 
lific architectural activity in the religious buildings of different denomi- 
nations. Our knowledge of the buildings of the structural order, built, 
according to custom, of impermanent materials, is however, very meagre. 
Nevertheless a continuous movement may be traced in respect of the stupa 
and such other architectural forms as are connected with cave excavations. 

(0 STUPA. 

The word stupa (dagoba, tope) is an architectural term and means 
something raised up by accumulation. A variant may be found in the 
word chaitya which, in its restricted sense, is used as a synonym for the 
stupa. Etymologically the term chaitya derives from the root chi to 
collect or pile up, but came to denote anything particularly connected with 
the funerary pile ( chita ), usually tombs raised over the ashes or relics of 
a dead person. In a land of relic and ancestor worship it signifies, in a 
wider sense, all edifices that have the character of sacred monuments, and 
Coomaraswamy rightly applies it to various ‘kinds of sacred objects 
coming under the head of sanctuary or holystead.’ 1 
The custom of erecting stupas as a form of memorial to the dead was 
pre-Buddhistic, as is evident from a passage in the Mahaparinibbana 
suttanta 2 where Buddha enjoins Ananda to erect at the crossing of four 
highways ( chatummahapathe ) a stupa over the remains of his body, after 
it had been burnt on the funeral pyre, in the same manner as the stupa 
of a universal monarch. The custom of erecting this form of memorial 
was also prevalent among the Jainas in the early times. It is the Buddhists, 
however, who especially selected and adapted it to their own use, and gra- 
dually it acquired a special Buddhistic connotation and association as 
enshrining the relics ( dhatu ) of the Buddha or of his chief disciples and as 
the symbol of Mahaparinirvana or the Great Decease of the Master. The 
relics enshrined in the stupa were of three kinds — sarira dhatu (corporeal 
relics), paribhogika dhatu (relics that had been in use), and niddesika dhatu 
(indicative, commemorative or referential relics). In this last aspect it 


1 Coomaraswamy, op. cit. p. 47 


- Digha Nikaya. xvi 5. 11 



712 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


was erected in places specially sacred in the life of the Buddha or in his 
legend. As the container of the relic, which was itself an object of vene- 
ration, and as symbolising the Master himself, a votive and devotional 
aspect is also latent in the stupa from the very beginning, and stupas were 
set up in place of the altar for worship in special shrines known as the 
chaitya halls. They were also raised up in sacred Buddhist sites as pious 
gifts, the gift of a stupa being considered as meritorious as that of an image, 
even when the latter came into prolific use. From the standpoint of archi- 
tectural form, however, there is no distinction of one class from the other, 
and all the classes of stupas, whatever their purpose, must be treated as 
one architecturally. 

Wherever Buddhism has flourished, it has left its visible traces in the 
form of stupa monuments. Varying as they do in detail and elaboration 
according to the period and the country, all these stupas may be seen to have 
evolved out of a simple hemispherical dome-shaped structure on a circular 
base, the form of the earliest Buddhist stupa in India. We need not dis- 
cuss the various theories that have been advanced regarding the origin of 
this hemispherical shape. It may be surmised to have emerged from 
the earthen funerary mounds ( smasanas ) under which according to the 
Vedic ritual, the ashes of the dead were buried. It is relevant to note that 
the Satapatha Brahmana 1 significantly says that the Prachyas make their 
smasanas circular (parimandala) in shape. Apart from an identity in res- 
pective designs and uses, the connection of the Buddhist stupas with the 
Vedic smasana mounds becomes further evident from the regular shafts 
of brick filled with clay that have been discovered in two of the earliest 
stupas known in India, namely those at Piprahwa and Bhattiprolu, such 
shafts being reminiscent of the wooden posts which were erected according 
to Vedic usage in the centre of the funerary mounds. 

Of the stupa monumentsextant now, the earliest presents a plain and sim- 
ple structure, a hemispherical dome ( anda , literally ‘egg’) on a low base- 
ment, surmounted by a square pavilion ( harmika , i.e. the ‘box’) and crown- 
ed by the parasol ( chhatra ), the symbol of universal paramo untcy. The 
principal element in the design and composition was certainly the dome which 
was surrounded by a pradakshina-patha or passage for circumambulation, 
occasionally enclosed by a balustrade or wall. The tendency in evolution, 
however, was towards elongation and height and, as we proceed, we find 
that the circular base is transformed into a solid cylinder (literally known 
as the medhi or the ‘drum’), which gradually increases in height. The 
whole structure again is raised on a square plinth, sometimes with a pro- 
jection, or two, or even more, on each face. The crowning chhatra, 
originally one, gradually increases in number in a tapering row of flat discs, 
the topmost one usually ending in a point. Side by side with these addi- 
tional elements, which certainly constitute an advance on the composition, 
there was a corresponding elevation of each component part. The whole 


1 Satapatha Brahmana, trans. Eggeling, SBE. 


p. 423 n. 



CHANGES IN STUPA FORM 


713 


composition thus gives the stupa an elongated appearance, and the term 
‘tower’, by which the Chinese pilgrims usually designate a stupa, is not far 
from an accurate description. This is clearly evinced by a comparison of 
the early pre-Christian stupas with their mediaeval successors in India and 
outside. In the earliest of the stupa monuments the almost hemispherical 
dome was the principal member, and the base and finials were simply 
accessory parts. But driven by a tendency towards height and elongation, 
the stupa ultimately attained a spire-Uke shape, in which the original 
hemispherical dome loses its importance, being reduced to insignificance 
between the lofty basement and the drum on the one hand, and on the 
other, the tapering series of the chhatravali transformed into a high and 
conical architectural motif. 

The stupas that were raised over the eight portions of the relics of the 
Master just after the parinirvana can no longer be recognised. The other 
early stupas, those that are known to have been erected before the days of 
Asoka, are also mostly level with the ground. The stupas in and around 
Bhilsa, 1 (ranging in size from the Great Stupa at Sanchl, 100 feet in dia- 
meter at the base and with its vast and imposing dome nearly 50 feet high, 
down to miniature examples no more than a foot in height), are important 
and instructive for ascertaining the shape and form of an early stupa. 
Originally built of bricks in the time of Asoka,-’ the Great Stupa was en- 
larged to nearly its present size and encased in stone perhaps a century 
later. As it now stands, it consists of an almost hemispherical dome, 
flattened at the top, and supported on a sloping circular base approached 
by a broad double ramp on the southern side. From relief representations 
of stupas in early Indian art it appears that this basement, along with the 
approach ramp, was enclosed by a balustrade and was formally used 
as an upper procession path (6 feet wide) for pradakshina around the 


The Great Stupa is the principal monu- 
ment among a number of such remains 
at Sanchl and the adjacent region. 
They are collectively known as ‘the 
Bhilsa topes.’ Within an area of about 
10 miles by 6 there may be found 
live or six groups of stupas containing 
nearly sixty individual examples. Of all 
these, the Great Stupa is architecturally 
the most important, while those des- 
cribed as Nos. 2 and 3 at Sanchl are 
interesting as revealing relics of a his- 
torical character. Of the eight exam- 
ples of the Sonar! group two are impor- 
tant structures enclosed within square 
courtyards. Of the Satdhara group 
one nearly approaches the Great Stupa 
at Sanchl in dimensions. A second 
stupa at Satdhara yielded relics of Sari- 
putta and Moggallana like No. 3 at 
Sanchl. The most numerous examples 
are situated at Bhojpur where a number 
of stupas may be found grouped together 
on various platforms, while at Andher 


may be found a group of three very 
small st Upas in a more or less damaged 
condition. None of the examples may 
be dated prior to the time of Asoka, 
and some are distinctly later. 

Tradition credits Asoka with having 
erected 84,000 stupas and other monu- 
ments scattered throughout the length 
and breadth of India. The tradition 
is apparently exaggerated. There can 
be no doubt, however, that several 
important stupas were raised during 
the reign of this illustrious monarch, 
and recent explorations have brought 
to light quite a number of stupas, 
mostly built of ponderous Mauryan 
bricks, e.g., the earliest cores of the 
stupa at Mirpur Khas (Sind), of the 
Dharmarajika stupa at Taxila, of the 
Dharmarajika stupa at Sarnath, etc. 
The stupa which existed at Piparahwa 
and enshrined the relics may belong 
to the same date or to a date slightly 
earlier. 



714 ART AND ARCHITECTURE t NORTHERN INDIA 

monument. On the truncated summit is the square harmika, enclosed 
again by a balustrade surrounding the shaft of the sacred parasol. 

The original brick stupa was in all probability surrounded by a wooden 
fence, which had to be abandoned with the enlargement of the dimensions 
of the original brick monument and its encasement in stone. The massive 
stone balustrade that was erected around the foot of the enlarged monu- 
ment appears to be nothing but a copy, in more permanent stone, of the 
wooden original that had been swept away. This stone balustrade is 
made up of octagonal upright posts ( thabas , from Sanskrit stambhas) and 
capped by a continuous coping stone ( ithnisa , from Sanskrit ushmsha), 
rounded at the top, which is fixed to the upright posts by means of tenons 
socketed to mortice-holes. The posts are further joined to one another 
by three horizontal cross-bars ( suchls ), which are slipped into tire lens- 
shaped mortice-holes on the sides of the upright posts. On tire four car- 
dinal faces are the four imposing gateways ( toranas ) each projecting a 
little from the line of the balustrade. In design and dimension they are 
identical, though, as already mentioned, they were not all erected at the 
same time. Each gateway consists of two square pillars surmounted by 
capitals which in turn support a superstructure of three architraves with 
volute ends ranged horizontally one above the other. The pillar capi- 
tals are adorned by standing dwarfs, or by forefronts of lions or elephants 
set back to back. Caryatid figures of graceful and pleasing outlines act 
as supports to the projecting ends of the lowest architrave and figures of 
men and women, horsemen, elephants and lions are disposed between and 
above the architraves. Crowning the topmost architrave and dominating 
the entire scheme of the gateway is the sacred wheel, the symbol of the law 
of the Buddha, flanked on either side by attendant yakshas and triratna 
emblems. The technique of the construction of the stone balustrade, 
including that of the gateways, is essentially wooden, every joint being 
practically the same as what a carpenter, working in wood, would have 
made. The gatev/ays, in contrast to the balustrade which is kept severely 
plain, are richly carved, both pillars and architraves being covered with 
elaborate bas-reliefs illustrative of the Jataka legends, or scenes from the 
life of the Buddha, or of important events in the subsequent history of the 
religion. The stupa No. 3 at Sanchi is also surrounded by a rail of identi- 
cal design, but with a single gateway on one side. The stupa at Bharhut, 
in Nagod, had also rails and gateways, both richly carved, a portion of 
which may now be seen in the Indian Museum at Calcutta. Carvings of 
analogous but more archaic workmanship also characterised the ground 
balustrade of stupa No. 2 at Sanchi. 

The stupas of mid-India have almost all perished and the evolutions of the 
form presented by the Great Stupa at Sanchi may be studied with reference 
to the stupas of Gandhara, dating mostly from about the beginning of 
the Christian era. Unfortunately, the majority of these monuments are 
in a hopelessly mutilated condition. The few that may be found still 
standing have undergone extensive repairs and renovations in subsequent 



SAKA-KUSHANA STUPAS 


715 


ages, and it is difficult to ascertain their original shapes and forms. The 
Dharmarajika stiipa at Taxila was probably originally constructed by 
Asoka, but underwent several reconstructions at different dates. As now 
excavated, it is circular in plan with a raised berm around its base approa- 
ched by four flights of steps, one at each of the cardinal faces. The dome 
is semicircular in shape, but the berm has already grown in elevation. 
The monument, originally of rough rubble core, is faced with ponderous 
limestone blocks with chiselled kanjur inserted for mouldings and pilasters 
of the niches that contained images of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. This 
ornamentation faced the stitpa above the berm, and as it now stands it can- 
not be dated earlier than the second century a.d. It is apparent that an 
extensive renovation of the original monument took place in the Saka- 
Kushana period when many of the surrounding structures were erected. 1 
In spite of such reconstructions and renovations, the Dharmarajika still 
retains the archaic form and traditional shape of the Great Stupa at Sanchl. 
The archaic form is also recognised in the small stupa at Chakpat in the 
Swat valley and the great stupa at Manikyala in the Panjab. 2 The latter 
experienced a second encasement at a later date which still followed the 
original contour. As it now stands it cannot be earlier than the beginning 
of the Christian era, but in spite of an added elevation and ornamentation 
of pilastered niches, the traditional hemispherical form still remains the 
dominant note of the composition. The characteristic tendency to the 
elongation of the stupa as a whole is also equally evident in the monuments 
of the post-Christian period. This is recognised in the provision of a 
substructure of a tall drum or series of drums raised upon a square plintli 
of one or more terraces approached by stairways in the cardinal faces. 
This substructure supports the hemispherical dome with the square har- 
mika which is crowned by a many-tiered clinatrdvali of conical shape. 
The height and elongation of the structure as a whole are clearly empha- 
sised though the dome itself still retains its position of importance. The 
body of the stitpa, especially of the plinth and of the drum, is richly adorned 
all around with sculplures set in niches between pilasters, and this arrange- 
ment forms the characteristic mode of ornamentation of the Gandhara 
stupas of the Saka-Kushana period. Miniature votive stupas of this dis- 
tinctive shape and form have been found in large numbers in different 
sites throughout Gandhara, and these give us an idea of what the bigger 
monuments of this order, now mostly ruined, looked like in their original 
state. The Kimala stitpa at Taxila 3 is traditionally ascribed to the period 
of Asoka. But as we see it now it represents a monumenfal type that is 
particularly associated with the Saka-Kushana period. 

The Chinese pilgrims furnish us with graphic accounts of the remarkable 
stitpa which the great Kushana king Kanishka erected at Purushapura. 
It consisted of ‘a basement in five stages (150 feet), a superstructure ( stitpa ) 

1 Marshall, Guide to Taxila, 3rd ed. Eastern Architecture, 2nd ed. i pp. 

pp. 38 f. 91-2, f. figs. 23, 25-6 

2 Fergusson, History of Indian and 3 Marshall, Guide to Taxila, pp. 71 f. 



716 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


of carved wood in thirteen storeys (400 feet) surmounted by an iron column 
with from thirteen to twenty-five gilt copper umbrellas (88 feet), making 
a total height of 638 feet.’ 1 Because of its graceful proportions Fa-hien 
describes it to be of incomparable beauty and adds, ‘tradition says that this 
was the highest tower in Jambudvlpa.’ 2 The stupa was already in a decayed 
state in Hiuan Tsang’s time, and gradually every vestige of this colos- 
sal tower was obliterated, mainly because the superstructure was made 
of wood. The site has been identified with Shah-ji-ki-Dheri where 
excavations have revealed a basement that appears to have been 286 feet 
in diameter, and the monument may on this account be considered to have 
been the largest of its kind in India. Coomaraswamy appears to be right 
in holding that the monument represented a transitional form between the 
simple stupa and the Far-Eastern Pagoda. 3 Towers of generally identical 
shape and form may possibly be recognised in the illustrations of storeyed 
towers found on several torana architraves from Mathura, 4 indicating the 
prevalence of the form in the Gangetic region. 

During the post-Christian epoch a distinct advance of the stupa design 
may clearly be recognised in the Gandhara type, not only in the clearly 
emphasised height of the monument as a whole, but also in its rion and 
elegant ornamentation. In both these respects they present a striking 
contrast to the archaic form of the stupa as seen at Sanchl. The highly 
elevated substructure of the plinth and the drum serve as the support to the 
domical anda which still retains its hemispherical shape and also its domi- 
nant position as the principal architectural member. But the original 
hemispherical outline of the stupa as a whole has already been transformed 
and the contour of the monument with all its elements takes a cylindrical 
shape. The entire form is not far removed from that of the subsequent 
Gupta period of which we have a conspicuous example in the Dharnekh 
stupa at Sarnath. 


(//) CHAITYA HALL 

Apart from the stupas few other monuments of the structural order have 
survived, and our knowledge of the other kinds of edifices of this period 
is based on cave excavations. The custom of fashioning shelters and shrines 
out of the rock, either by enlarging a natural cavern or by new excavations, 
appears to have been in vogue in every country, expecially in the primitive 
stages. In India this primitive practice develops into a brilliant movement 
that endures uninterrupted for a period of more than a thousand years. 
This creative movement has bequeathed to us a series of architectural forms 
pertaining to all the principal religious denominations, and these may be 
found to have important bearings in the history of Indian architecture. 
The convenient texture of the rocks made rock-cut forms well suited to 

1 Coomaraswamy, op. cit., p. 53 3 Coomaraswamy, op. cit., p. 53 

2 Beal, Fa-hien, p. 35 4 Ibid. figs. 69 and 69 a 



ROCK-CUT SHRINES 


717 


India, and such forms were further inspired by the desire to endow a god 
with an abode, permanent and indestructible, in conformity with the idea, 
inherent in the Indian mind, of the unchangeable and immutable nature 
of God. In rock-hewn architecture no new architectural forms were 
evolved, instead the forms of structural buildings were adjusted and adapt- 
ed. As the structural buildings of the period were essentially of wooden 
technique and style, the caves were but excavated replicas of wooden 
forms which have not survived except in sculptured representations in early 
Indian art. 

Before the introduction of the image, the stupa, as enshrining the relics 
of the Master and as the most outstanding and ubiquitous symbol of the 
faith, was the centre and focus of the devotion and adoration of the Bud- 
dhists, a sacred object to which the prayers of the faithful were directed. 
In early Indian art the adoration of the stupa was a very frequent theme. 
A stupa having the character of a sacred object is known as chaitya, and 
the chaitya hall represents the shrine chamber in which the votive chaitya 
occupied the place of the altar. Chaityagriha has been referred to in the 
Rumayam 1 and the commentary explains the word as Buddha-ayatana. 
Such shrines, with the chaitya as the sacred object of worship, were cha- 
racteristic of the early days of Buddhism and continued to be so down to a 
period long after the image of the Master had taken its rightful place in the 
devotion and worship of the faithful. 

Chaitya halls appear to have existed from very early times, and at Sanchl, 
SonarT, Sarnath, and elsewhere there have been traced foundations of sanc- 
tuaries that may have belonged to the time of Asoka. In its perfect and 
fully developed form a shrine of this kind consists of a long rectangular 
hall rounded at the rear end and divided in the interior into a central nave 
and two side-aisles by two rows of pillars running along the entire length 
of the hall and meeting at the apsidal end which contains, in place of the 
altar, a chaitya as the votive object. The nave is covered by a barrel-shaped 
vault and the two aisles by two vaults, each half the section of that of the 
nave. The entrance doorway is placed opposite to the votive chaitya and 
over the doorway is placed a huge arched window, shaped like a horse- 
shoe, dominating the entire scheme of the facade. Structural examples 
of a chaitya hall being extremely fragmentary, the development of the type 
and the details of a typical shrine of this kind can be worked out only 
with the help of rock-cut monuments. A series of caves in Western India 
and the Deccan affords the picture of a brilliant and prolific activity in 
monuments of this kind. 

Though the chaitya cave as a clearly established type has to be looked 
for in Western India, its genesis and anterior process of evolution are 
probably to be traced in certain excavations in the east. Perhaps the ear- 
liest excavations in rock, which may have some connection with the chaitya 
hall type of the later days, are the rock-cut caves at Barabar, near Gaya 


/. 12 , 14 . 



718 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


in Bihar. The Sudama (Nyagrodha) cave, excavated in the twelfth year 
of the consecration of Asoka 1 and dedicated to the use of the Ajlvika 
monks, and the Lomas Rishi, undated but certainly Maurya in date, have 
probably some connection architecturally with the evolution of the 
Buddhist chaitya cave type. The former consists of two apartments, a 
rectangular one at the outer end, and, separated from it by a solid wall, 
a circular one at the back. There is a narrow connecting passage between 
the two. The outer chamber is covered by a barrel-shaped vault and the 
circular by a hemispherical dome. The length of the cave runs parallel to the 
face of the rock and hence the entrance doorway is near one end of the 
longer side. Deeply set in the face of the rock the doorway has sloping 
jambs. The Lomas Rishi cave, in plan and other arrangements, is closely 
identical with the Sudama cave, but the inner chamber, instead of being 
circular, is oval. The fagade has been finished with great care and is 
important as reproducing the form of the structural chaityas of the age. The 
entrance consists of a rectangular opening, narrower at the upper end. 
On either side are two posts, sloping internally and supporting ‘two 
longitudinal purlins morticed into their heads’. Over these there rises a 
framework of arched shape with a slight ogee point at the apex, apparently 
copied from wooden prototypes, and over this framework is supported 
a curved roof with a pointed finial at the top. The space between the door- 
way and the roof is occupied by a semi-circular panel with a frieze of ele- 
phants and a latticed screen above it, resembling a wicker-work pattern. 
The entire scheme of the fagade is reminiscent of wooden technique, and 
the doorway with sloping jambs, here as well as in the Sudama, is frankly 
imitated from wooden constructions in which it was necessary to counter- 
act the outward thrust of the roof. The fagade of the Lomas Rishi cave at 
Barabar represents the beginnings of the elaborate scheme of ornamenta- 
tion that characterised the chaitya hall frontages of the later days. 

The plan and arrangements of the Sudama and the Lomas Rishi caves 
are essentially similar and both may be attributed not only to the same 
period but also to an identical religious Zealand fervour. Coomuruswamy 
rightly observes that ‘a ground plan . . . exhibited by a cave of the Sudama 
type corresponds to that of a circular shrine preceded by a hall of assembly 
or approach . . . and that in fact it exactly reproduces that of the Sudhammi 
sabha of the Bharhut relief ’. 2 It is significant that the remarkable 
plan of the Sudama cave is followed in the somewhat later Buddhist 
cave at Kondivte 3 in Salsette, where the circular inner chamber, instead 
of being empty as in the Sudama, is occupied by a votive chaitya that 
leaves a narrow passage of circumambulation all round. In conformity 
with the circular design of the chaitya it is possible that the earliest form of 
a stupa shrine consisted of a circular cella alone containing the votive 
chaitya, and this; suggestion is significantly corroborated by the rem tins 

1 Hultzsch, CIl. iii p. 181 : Sircar, D. C., 2 Coomaraswamy op. cit., p. 19 

SI. p. 78 ;Fergusson and Burgess, op. cit. 3 Fcrgussoii and 3urgas3. op. cit., t p. 

I p. 130; Coomaraswamy, op. cit.,p. 18 131, fig. 54 



EVOLUTION OF THE CHAITYA HALL 


719 


of a structural shrine of this kind laid bare in the excavations at Bairat 
in the Jaipur area. 1 It was constructed of brick and wood and from 
finds in the vicinity may be consideied to be Asokan in date. It is circular in 
plan and the votive chaitya is contained within a peripheral range of twenty- 
six wooden pillars that leave two ambulatories, one within and the other 
outside. The outer ambulatory is covered by a brick screen with an en- 
trance passage in the east. The shrine at Bairat illustrates in all probabi- 
lity, the earliest form of a chaitya sanctuaiy, and rock-cut counterparts are 
recognised in the Tulaja-lena group at Junnar 2 and in a circular shrine at 
Guntupalle, 3 the last, howevei, without the ring of pillars surrounding 
the votive chaitya These caves, though of later date, may be recognised 
to be the survivals of the original form of a chaitya sanctuary as exempli- 
fied by the structural shrine at Bairat. The outer hall comes into view 
later to accommodate the gradually increasing congregation, and a shrine 
of this kind developed into a component of two apartments, as we have 
ev idence in the Sudama and the Lomas Rishi caves of the Ajlvikas and the 
Kondivte cave of the Buddhists. Gradually the two apartments were 
turned into one by eliminating the wall separating the two and the apsidal 
plan of the chaitya hall of the familiar type was obtained. In the cave 
shrines of Western India we are further impressed with the bold move of 
driving the hall axially into the depth of the rock, instead of cutting it 
paiallel to its face. 

Remains of structural sanctuaries of this kind belonging to this period 
are also known, but as already observed they are too fragmentary. A 
few go back to Mauryan days, such as the foundations laid bare of chapels 
beneath later erections at Sanchi, 4 Sarnath, 5 etc. The plan, so far as it 
can be made out, is that of a rectangular hall with the apsidal end charac- 
teristic of this type of shrines. In all probability the pillars and super- 
structure were made of wood and the roof was of curved shape. The shrine 
at the lowest level at Sanchi at the site marked No. 40 is interesting inas- 
much as it shows an entrance in each of its two longer sides, instead of one 
or more in front opposite the apse, as is characteristic of the typical chaitya 
hall plan. In this respect this structural sanctuary at Sanchi recalls the 
arrangement and placement of the doorways in the Sudama and other 
Bara bar hill cave shrines. At Taxila 6 also there have been found apsidal 
shrines which go back to the Saka-Kushana period. Only the foundations 
and insignificant portions of the walls have been preserved. They are of 
the usual plan, but one of them, that to the west of the Dharmarajika stupa, 
presents a singular shape of the interior of the apse which, instead of being 


Sahni, D. R., Archaeological Remains 
and Excavations at Bairat, pp. 28-31; 
pis. vii and viii; Brown, op. cit., p. 15 
Fergusson and Burgess, op. cit., i p. 
158, figs. 79, 80; Wauchope, op. cit. 
p. 32, pi. xxx 

Fergusson and Burgess, op. cit. i p. 
168, fig. 87. The votive stupa was later 


on converted into a liiiga and wor- 
shipped as such. 

1 Marshall, Guide to Sanchi, 2nd. cd. 
pp. 115, 124 

5 Sahni, D. R., Guide to the Buddhist 
Ruins of Sarnath, 5th ed. p. 26 

* Marshall, Guide to Taxila, 3rd ed. 
pp. 58-9, 94-7 



720 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


circular, is octagonal. The apsidal temple at the site of Sirkip was an 
imposing monument and was provided with a porch in front of the entrance 
opposite the apse. 

(/«) SANGHARAMA OR MONASTERY. 

The sangharama or vihara, i.e. the monastery, supplies another impor- 
tant class of early Indian architectural forms. Intended for the residences 
o f the monks, a monastery in India was designed on much the same lines 
as a private house, i.e. with a row of cells on each side of an open inner 
quadrangle. In the earlier period the monasteries were usually built of 
wood on a stylobate of stone or brick. With the growth of the monastic 
organisation they developed into elaborate brick structures with many 
adjuncts. Often they consisted of several storeys and along each side of 
the inner quadrangle there usually ran a corridor with its roof supported 
on pillars. Hence the interior of a large-sized monastery, when entire, 
presented a pleasing spectacle of a many-storeyed peristyle of rare grandeur 
and magnificence. The structural buildings of this order being mostly in 
ruins, the beautiful effect of a monastic form may be recognised in the ele- 
gant interiors of the elaborate monastic caves of Western India and the 
Deccan. A monastic organisation is associated both with Buddhism and 
Jainism, but more particularly with the former, in the early extant examples, 
structural or rock-cut. 

Buddhist monasteries of more or less identical structural pattern were 
being erected in India from a rather early period, one of the earliest being 
traced near the old stupa at Piprahwa. Remains of early structural vi/td- 
ras may also be found at Sanchl, Sarnath, Kasia, Basarh, etc. and Taxila 
and other Gandharan sites. Such remains go back to the centuries pre- 
ceding and succeeding the Christian era. Unfortunately, in most instances, 
it is only the foundations that can be traced now; the characteristic 
type, as deduced from such fragmentary remains, essentially tallies with 
what has been said above. The simple and unpietentious scheme is scru- 
pulously adhered to, and the march of time and consequent development 
of the type as an architectural form may be noticed in the gradual enlarge- 
ment of tire dimensions of the establishment and the addition of more and 
more accessory structures, usually in well defined order and regularity. 

The early structural vihdras being mostly in an extremely fragmentary 
condition do not call for detailed notice. Rock-cut examples of monas- 
teries have been found in abundance, and with the help of these it is possi- 
ble to trace the development of the type from its beginnings as a simple 
dwelling-house, scooped out of the rock, to an elaborate establishment of 
imposing dimensions and rich decorative embellishments. The most perfect 
examples were planned like the structural vihdras with the single, unavoid- 
able difference that the range of apartments on one side of the inner court 
was replaced in the excavated vihdras by an open verandah for the admis- 
sion of light and air into the interior. This conventional plan, however, 



ORISSA CAVES 


721 


was reached only after some time. It will be better therefore to take the 
monuments pertaining to the different religious persuasions together 
in order to trace a consecutive history of the monastic type of 
architecture. 

The Barabar and NagarjunI groups of caves represent perhaps the earliest 
extant remains of cave dwellings ( kubha as they were called in the inscrip- 
tions) for use of the recluses of a particular religious order, the Ajlvikas. 
The Barabar group belongs to the time of the great Asoka 1 2 and the Nagar- 
junI to that of Dasaratha.* The Sudama and the Lomas Rishi caves of 
the former group have already been discussed in connection with the chai- 
tya halls. The remaining caves of the two groups 3 (Karan Chaupar and 
the Visva Jhopri, dated respectively in the 19th and 12th years of the con- 
secration of Asoka, and Gopika, Vahiyaka and Vadathika dated in the 
reign of Dasaratha) were simple rectangular chambers, 4 cut out of the 
rock, each with a barrel-vaulted roof above. The caves, except the un- 
finished ones, are all characterised by a lustrous polish on the interior walls 
resembling that on the Asokan edict pillars. As usual with the early 
caves, every one is excavated with the length parallel to the face of the rock 
and the narrow doorways slope inwards towards the top in an exaggerated 
fashion. Some of the caves are provided with raised platforms at one end. 
The Son Bhandar cave atRajgir agrees essentially with the above, and may 
appear to belong to a date not far removed from them, i.e. considerably 
earlier than that of the inscription of the Jaina monk Vairadeva engraved 
on the front face of the rock. 

The Jaina caves at Udayagiri and Khandagiri 5 near Bhuvanesvar in 
Orissa should next merit our attention. The two groups consist of a little 
over thirty-five excavations, large and small, but only a very few of them are 
of any importance for our discussion. Many of these partake more of the 
nature of natural caverns enlarged by artificial cutting. The approximate 
date of these excavations has already been discussed in connection with 
the relief sculptures of the caves. 

The caves, whether at Udayagiri or at Khandagiri, were not laid out on 
a definite and regular plan, but excavated at convenient places according 
to the configuration of the rock. A few of these consist of single cells 6 
only or of verandahs witli cells opening on to them. There are a number of 
caves, again, each of which consists of several cells together with a portico 
and an open courtyard in front. The largest, comprising four caves only, 
are composed of groups of cells preceded by pillared verandahs in two 


1 Hultzsch, op. cit. pp. 181-2: Sircar 
SI. pp. 78-9 

2 Sircar SI. pp. 79-80 

3 Fergusson and Burgess, op. cit. l p. 
177; Wauchope, op. cit., pp. 21-3. 

4 The Gopika cave consists of a rectan- 

gular chamber, but with both the ends 
semicircular. 

6 Fergusson and Burgess, op. cit. u pp. 
91 


9-18 and relevant figures; CHI. i pp, 
638-42; Wauchope, op. cit. pp. 24-31 
and relevant plates; Brown, op. cit. 
pp. 34-7 and relevant plates. 

1 Of the single cells, one carved in 
imitation of the open mouth of a tiger 
(Vyaghragumpha or Tiger Cave) is 
interesting. 



722 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : NORTHERN INDIA 


storeys overlooking an open quadrangle in front. 1 The pillars of the 
verandah are usually simple square shafts, sometimes changing into an 
octagon in the middle section, with bracket capitals of a crude and primi- 
tive order like the curved branches of a tree. The inner facade, consisting 
of doorways surmounted by semicircular arches above, presents a delight- 
ful system of arcading, the spaces between the arches being linked by bands 
of rail motif. These spaces are also covered by friezes of sculptures, which 
are the most elaborate in the Rani and Ganesa gumphas. 

The Ranl-ka-Nur or the Rani gumpha in the Udayagiri is the largest and 
best preserved of all the caves. It consists of two storeys, each originally 
preceded by a verandah supported on pillars, the upper, longer in dimen- 
sions, opening into four cells and the lower into three. On either side 
there are found remains of irregular chambers which may indicate that this 
double-storeyed production was originally designed with ceiis on three 
sides of an open quadrangle, the fourth being left open for access. It 
presents thus a very near approach to the usual type of monasteries. 

Monastic organisation was particularly characteristic of the Buddhists, 
and it is in the Buddhist caves of Western India that we may notice the 
further advancement and ultimate culmination of the type, seen just in 
its beginnings in these early caves of Eastern India. 

Brahmanical monuments, both in structural and rock-hewn forms are 
known to have existed during the period under discussion. But the re- 
mains are much too fragmentary or insignificant and commonplace to 
offer any real help individually to the study of the early architectural types 
and forms in their chronological and stylistic sequences. 

Editor’s Note : 

The chronology adopted by the author of this chapter differs from that 
of the rest of the book. If the latter were followed, the Satakarni men- 
tioned on page 690, 11. 14-15 would rather be described as ‘apparently 
Satakarni II, 166-1 17 b.c. or a later king of that name’ and 11. 29-30 would 
read ‘the strenuous effort of half a century or more.’ Again on page 692, 
1. 26, the date for Kharavela would be second century and not first 
century b.c. and in 1. 30, the latest in the scries of the Udayagiri and 
Khandagiri caves would fall in the first century b.c., not a.d. 

PLArtS XI TO L HAVE REFERENCE TO THIS CHAPTER. 


In these double-storeyed caves the 
upper of the two floors appears to have 
been excavated first, though the interval 


of time between the two need not 
necessarily have been long. 



Chapter XXIII 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : SOUTH INDIA 
ARCHITECTURE 

tn India south of the Vindhyas the six centuries from 300 b.c. to a.d. 
-*■300 mark an era of great activity in architecture and art. While the lithic 
monuments with their associated objects of art are still extant, those made 
of less permanent material have either totally perished or survived only as 
ruins. The extant remains, material and literary, show that the develop- 
ment of architecture and the associated arts was mainly indigenous and 
regional, and expressive of the religious and emotional life of the people. 
Here, as elsewhere in India, the greatest creations of architecture v/ere 
more religious than secular, and characterised by the harmonious blend- 
ing of plastic decoration with the architectural scheme. 

The active penetration of the three religious faiths, Vedic Brahmanism, 
and the more organised and missionary faiths of Buddhism and Jainism, 
produced its reactions on the cultural life of the South. Religious edi- 
fices of a monumental character began to engross the attention of the peo- 
ple. They gradually began to employ stone, at least in the basement cours- 
es, or as a casing over brick-built structures, e.g. the Stupas, or they carved 
out of the live rock. They kept on, however, much of the technique ori- 
ginally employed in the erection of secular structures of more perishable 
material. 

Besides the impetus derived from these religions, there were commercial 
contacts with the western world and the Far East. These led to the growth 
of prosperous local mercantile communities who vied with kings in their 
benefactions for the founding and enlargement of religious monuments, 
as the inscriptions of the period go to show. The ‘Yavana’ traders estab- 
lished colonies and emporia mostly on the coast to get the natural products 
and manufactured articles of luxury and art in exchange for gold and their 
own products. The hoards of Roman coins found in many places, coastal 
and inland, the references in contemporary literature, Indian and western, 
the mention of 'Yavana’ guards in South Indian palaces, and of ‘Yavana’ 
women in harems, and the few classical-occidental looking sculptures 
standing out from the rest at Nagarjunakonda, and the gifts of Ushavadata, 
the Dharmatma and son-in-law of Nahapana, to the Buddhist monks at 
Nasik mark different phases of this commerce. To a certain extent, this 
contact influenced both the plebeian crafts and the aristocratic arts of the 
country. On the one side we see its effect on a very basic and common 
art of the country, in the local manufactures of pottery imitating the 



724 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : SOUTH INDIA 


characteristic foreign ceramic ware at Arikamedu near Pondicherry as con- 
trasted with the types called ‘Andhra’ and ‘Megalithic’ wares found in 
abundance in different parts of the country. On the other, we have also 
from Arikamedu a few imitation gem-intaglios indicating the extension 
of foreign influence to the more advanced jeweller’s art. We have, besides, 
references to articles of ‘Yavana’ or Sonaka origin or style in the old Tamil 
works . 1 

Manimekalai and Perungadai, though later than our period, aptly sum- 
marise this development. The former says in one context 2 that ‘the 
artisans from Magadha, the metal workers from Maratta. the blacksmiths 
fromAvanti, the Yavana carpenters all worked in unison with the artisans 
of the Tamil country.’ The latter is a little more elaborate : 3 ‘Yavana 
carpenters, the blacksmiths of Avanti, the jewellers (or expert artisans) 
born in Magadha, the workers on fine gold born in Patali (Pataliputra), 
the artists (painters and modellers) who flourished in Kosala, and the 
metal smiths of the Vatsa country.' 

While in the northern half of the peninsula have survived a larger num- 
ber of religious monuments, or their remains, to serve as examples of the art 
and architecture of the period, there are practically none in the southern 
half. But luckily this deficiency is fairly made up by an extensive local lite- 
rature giving a tangible account of the Tamil states, which included Mala- 
bar also, their rulers, polity and culture, the earliest strata of which belong 
to this period. The reasons for the deficiency are not far to seek. As the lite- 
rary evidences in Tamil show ,the buildings and the objects of art belong- 
ing to this part of the country were of perishable material. In the entire 
peninsula no monument of a secular nature has survived and we have 
only to infer their nature from the literary descriptions, sculptural repre- 
sentations, and the architectural types of the surviving religious monu- 
ments. The few extant monuments of this period of Buddhist or Jaina as- 
sociation in the South are the natural caverns with drip ledges in many 
districts, particularly Madurai, Tirunelveli, Ramnad and Pudukkottai, 
South and North Arcot, with polished stone beds and pillow-lofts with 
short inscriptions in Brahmi script, the language often being Tamil. 
Attempts at vaulting of the roofs of these caverns are to be seen in some 
of them as in Kudagumalai (Pudukkottai). The caverns bear resemblance 
to similar ones in Ceylon. 

Megalithic monuments, likewise indicative of human activity and ende- 
avour, are found all over the peninsula. Though varied in type, these are 
essentially one in character and are seen all over the cis-Vindhyan region 
in greater profusion and density than in Central or Northern India. These 
monuments often called ‘Rude Stone Monuments’, constructed of large- 


Swan lamp (ddima- vi/akku) of the Yava- 
nas, beautiful statuettes holding the 
bowl of a lamp of Yavana make, Yavana 
ornaments ( Yavana manjikai), Yavana 
caskets ( Yavancip-pelai ), sonaka orna- 


ment (sdnaka-ch-chidiikku)-Manimekalai. 
Perungadai, Perumbanarrupadai. 

- Manimekalai, xix 11. 107-9 
’ Perungadai. i, ll. 40-44 



MEGALITHS 


725 


sized stones, were constructed both before and after the advent of the more 
artistically wrought stone monuments. Peninsular India seems to have 
been the stronghold of the megalithic culture, and many of these monu- 
ments show a similarity amounting to kinship with megaliths in other parts 
of the world — in the lands bordering upon the Atlantic and Mediterra- 
nean, in the Caucasus, in Iran, 1 in South Africa, and Farther India. 

These megaliths of sepulchral nature or association betraying a cult of 
ancestor-worship or animism, were long considered to be prehistoric or 
proto-historic and of uncertain date. But the physical proximity of these 
megaliths to the oldest historic monuments of South India such as the 
Asokan edicts in Mysore and Hyderabad, the Buddhist stupa sites in the 
Krishna valley 2 , the natural caverns with polished beds with or without 
Brahim inscriptions in the southern half of the peninsula 3 , and the ancient 
city sites 4 may well indicate their proximity also in time. While below 
the foundation of a stupa at Amaravati, an urn burial was noticed, 5 cist 
burials were found to underlie ‘Andhra’ structures or to show relation- 
ship to them in the excavations at Maski in Hyderabad 6 and Brahmagiri 
in Mysore. 7 A more definite stratigraphical correlation was made during 
the recent excavations at Brahmagiri 8 in respect of at least two types of 
these megaliths — the cist and pit burials in the area, with a clearer picture 
of their functional and constructional details and definite data for their 
dating. These monuments represent a full-fledged iron-using culture 
(with a distinctive variety and fabric of pottery among the grave goods as 
found from the megalithic monuments all over South India), which made 
its appearance as an intrusive culture in the Brahmagiri region towards 
the close of the third century B.c., immediately overlying, and unconnected 
by transition elements with, a pre-existing neolithic or stone-axe culture, 
which had its origin about the beginning of the millennium. Available 
evidences indicate that this culture, which thus superseded the earlier po- 
lished stone-axe culture, continued till after the middle of the first century 
a.d. when it was overlapped by a local phase of ‘Andhra’ culture. This 
is corroborated by independent numismatic evidence pointing roughly 
to the same horizon in the find by W. H. Tucker of a coin of the Eran 
type assignable to the third-second century b.c. along with the bones and 
grave goods of a cist in Sulur in the Palladam taluk of the Coimbatore 
district, 9 and a silver coinof Augustus (24 b.c. — a.d. 14) along with several 


1 Ancient India, 1947, No. 4, pp. 1-13 

: Nagarjunakonda, Goli, Mallavaram, 
and near Jagayyapeta. 

3 Sittannavasal, Tenlmalai, Ajuruttimalai, 

Kudagumalai in Pudukkdt?ai, neigh- 

bourhood of caverns in Kuttalam (Ay- 

kkudi) and other caverns in Turunel- 

veli and Madurai districts, and near 

the natural cavern (Jaina) in Tirumalai 

(North Arcot district) — See Sewell’s List 
of Antiquarian Remains in Madras 


Presidency. 

4 Korkai, Kodumbalur, Puhar (Kaveri- 
ppattinam), and Chandravalli and 
Brahmagiri (Mysore). 

5 ASIAR. 1908-9. pp. 90-1 

6 HAR. 1935-36, p. 23 and 1936-7 p. 14 

7 MAR. 1940, p. 67 

8 Ancient India, 1947-8, No. 4, pp. 140 
ff. 

9 ‘India’ Number of Man 1930, No. 13, 
p. 172 



726 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : SOUTH INDIA 


punch-marked coins of the pre-Christian epoch 1 in similar tombs. 
A port-holed cist from Cochin too yielded russet-coloured pottery similar 
to the well-known yellow-painted ‘Andhra’ ware, and excavations at Ari- 
kamedu have revealed the distinctive red-and-black ware of megalithic 
fabric in levels otherwise assignable to the first century a.d. Literary refer- 
ences to contemporary customs and traditions in the old Tamil works 
also indicate the continuance of this practice till about the fifth century 
A.D. 2 

The elaborate construction of these Megalithic monuments involved a 
good deal of plan and method and no little manipulative skill in their 
hoisting and erection. 

The Brahmagiri 3 cists were constructed in pits dug for the purpose with 
four upright slabs or orthostats to form the sides of a box-like cell often 
with a flat floor-slab to form its bottom. The successive lateral edges of 
the orthostats are made to project slightly beyond the corner to form a 
svastika pattern, evidently an expedient to buttress one side by the next 
and prevent the sides from falling inwards. On the outside the cist was 
surrounded by dry stone walling which added further support and prevented 
their falling outwards. The box was covered by a cap-stone slab. On the 
eastern slab of the box was a circular opening or port-hole, approached 
externally by a passage formed by two flank slabs. The entire buried 
structure was marked out on the ground surface by. and included in. a 
circle of roughly trimmed boulders. Besides the pottery, iron weapons 
and other grave goods, were disarticulated skeletal remains indicating post- 
excarnation burial with the port-hole closed by a slab. The adjoining 
pit-burials were large pits of oval or circular section 8 to 10 feet across and 
of about equal depth with a shallow ramp on the eastern side leading to 
the entrance, which on the analogy of the port-hole of the cist, was also 
closed by a thin door-slab. On the floor of the pit lay four stone slabs 
marking out an oblong space about 4 feet by 3 and the funerary deposits 
lay within a height of 2\ to 3 feet from floor level consisting, besides the 
grave goods, of skeletal fragments. It is surmised that on the four floor 
slabs rested the legs of the bier which contained the human body or bodies 
for exposure and excarnation, and in course of time bones of the major 
part of the skeleton were collected for interment in the cists described 
above. 

The megaliths of the Chingleput area 4 are dolmenoii-cists, which too 
are box graves of stone slabs where the orthostats of the buried cist pro- 
ject over ground level to a height of one to two feet. In the southern parts 
of the district, where a number of loose boulders are used for the uprights, 
the grave does not form a compact chamber. Inside these chambers are 
found placed many-legged terracotta coffins or sarcophagi orientated 

1 Madras Journal of Literature & Science, 2 Ancient India , 1946, No. 2 pp 9-16 

1884, p. 214; I A. n, 1873, p. 241; 3 Ancient India, 1947-8, No. 4, pp. 180 ff. 

JBBRAS. I, 1843, p. 293 4 Ancient India, 1949, No. 5, pp. 35-7 



ADICHCHANALLUR 


727 


usually cast to west and containing skeletal remains and grave furniture. 
The cist is surrounded by a circle of stone boulders and the inside of the 
circle packed with a heap of rubble to form a low cairn, — the cairn circle. 

The other class of megaliths in the area are cairn circles which, as the 
name would indicate, are stone circles with a low mound of stone rubble 
inside, covering often one or more buried urns, or sometimes a pottery 
sarcophagus as in the cists and dolmenoid-cists of the area. 

The Pudukkottai cists, or rather dolmenoid-cists , 1 2 are of the transep- 
tea variety. The oblong box of stone slabs orientated east to west, gene- 
rally, is partitioned into two lateral halves, the north and the south half by 
a vertical stone slab or longitudinal septum across the middle line. One 
of the halves is further subdivided into two shelves, an upper and lower, 
by a horizontal slab or transverse septum, resting like a bench- plank on 
two short uprights placed at either end of the floor of the chamber; these 
two shelf chambers are individually connected with the undivided half 
by means of port-holes cut one above the other through the central line cf 
the longitudinal septum. Adjoining the undivided half and usually on the 
east, in a few cases on the west as in Tayinippatti, is a smaller square 
chamber of shorter slabs forming a sort of ante-chamber or entrance com- 
municating with the main cist through a port-hole cut into the slab of that 
side and closed by a thin door-slab. The cist is surrounded by a stone cir- 
cle. which often has a cairn inside it. Where the orthostats project over 
ground level making the cist dolmenoid, the height reached by these huge 
gneissic slabs above ground is often six feet. In no case was a cap-stone in 
position over the orthostats of these dolmenoid-cists, though often large 
slabs, which perhaps were once hoisted on to the orthostats, were found 
lying in their vicinity. These appear to be post-cremation burials; among 
the grave goods are usually found two pyriform urns. 

On the Nilagiri and Pajani hills'- are many free standing dolmens of con- 
siderable size associated with cairns. Besides these montane regions, 
such dolmens are found on the plateaux in Southern Hyderabad , 3 South- 
Eastern Bombay , 4 Mysore and Northern Madras (Anantapur), and the 
high ranges of Travancore. Menhirs and alignments of monolithic ortho- 
static slabs have been discovered in Cochin and Hyderabad (near Maski). 

The urn-burials of Adichchanailur, though standing apart from the 
rest by the absence of lithic elements, are also to bo mentioned here 


1 Manual of the Pudukkdttai State, 
II (i), 1940, pp. 523-4; Admit. Reports 
of the Pudukkottai Museum, faslis 1344, 
1347, 1348. 

2 Breeks, Primitive Tribes and Monuments 
of the Nilgiris, (London, 1873); MASI. 
No. 36 — Anglade and Newton, Dol- 
mens of the Pulney Hills (1928). 

3 Meadows Taylor’s papers on Mega- 
lithic Tombs and other Ancient Remains 
in the Deccan, collected and published 

by the Archaeological Department, 


Hyderabad State 1941 ; E. H. Hunt — 
'Hyderabad Cairns; Journal of the 
Hyderabad Archaeological Society, July 
1916, pp. 180 ff. Hunt records a sug- 
gestion made by Marshall that the 
shape of the cist suggested that it might 
be a ‘horse’, and that the dolmen, 
the unburied house, may have prece- 
ded the buried house, the cist. 
Par.chamukhi R. S. ‘Dolmens & Ca- 
irns of Karnatak’, Journal of Bombay 
University, xtv (iv), 1946, pp. 10-28 



728 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : SOUTH INDIA 


because of their apparent association with the megalithic culture as a whole. 
The urns, which have been placed in largish pits, contained iron imple- 
ments and weapons, funerary vessels, bronze lids crowned with animal 
representations, and personal ornaments of gold and bronze, besides 
human remains indicating fractional burials . 1 2 Elsewhere in South India, 
as in Pudukkottai, the buried urns have a large cap-stone, buried a little 
above them, and overground the burials are marked by stone circles with 
heaped-up cairns inside. 

The ‘Topikal’ and ‘Kudaikal’ familiarly called ‘umbrella or hat stones' 
or “hood stones’ are peculiar to the Malabar coast and are numerous in 
Cochin. The ‘umbrella stone’ proper is conical with a chamfered interior 
resting on four clinostatic slabs, truncate at the top, the clinostats forming 
a rough square on plan, and each facing a cardinal direction. The whole 
structure is from four to seven feet high. The ‘hood stone’ resembles an 
umbrella without the handle, and rests directly on the ground without the 
clinostatic supports. 

These classes of megaliths olfer interesting features of construction and 
manipulative skill — the quarrying of large slabs of gneiss or granite, per- 
haps by the method of firing the surface and tapping, boring port-holes 
through them, the arrangement and assemblage of the slabs and boulders 
of huge dimensions and weight on definite plans, and sometimes of cutting 
the laterite slabs forming the circle in a cupped concavo-convex plane, so 
as to form the arcs of the circle. Even more interesting are the talis* or 
rock-cut tombs of Cochin and Malabar, excavated into the local laterite. 
These differ in technique from the foregoing examples in being excava- 
tions while the others are structural, though the contents entombed are 
essentially similar. 

The surface indication for such acave tomb is generally a large promi- 
nent slab of stone, circular or square, or, sometimes, a rude unshaped 
boulder, covering the top opening. In some cases the stone circle round 
this capstone, as in the case of typical cairns of urn burials and cists, has 
been found to be intact . 3 The cap-stones are of the same material (laterite) 
as in the tomb at Chenaparamba hill near Feroke or of granite as in the 
Parambantaji-tomb . 1 Below the cap-stone in these two cases is the tomb 
proper which is a hemispherical hollow excavated into the core of the late- 
rite, the top of which communicates through a vertical cylindrical opening, 
like a chimney shaft, terminating in a circular opening at the surface below 
the cap-stone. In front of this hollow semi-dome on its eastern or north-eas- 
tern side is a transversely cut entrance passage which connects the inside 
of the tomb to a rectangular pit or ante-chamber in front of it. This 
pit or stair-well has a series of steps cut on one side enabling one to 


1 Archaeology in India, 1950, p. 43. 
See V. Smith, Oxford History. This 
has been treated usually as intrusive due 
to foreign settlers. 

2 For derivation of the name see Ancient 


Indict, 1946, No. 2, pp. 10-11 

3 Babington, Transactions of the Bombay 
Literary Society, 1819 

4 Aiyappan, A., QJMS. Bangalore xxrn, 
1933, No. 3, pp. 299-314 



NATURE AND AGE OF MEGALITHIC CULTURE 


729 


descend to the level of the entrance passage. This passage is found closed by 
a slab of laterite placed against it outside. The size of the passage is such 
that it would permit a man to crawl through to the interior of the dome- 
like tomb which is of sufficient height for a person to stand erect. While 
cutting and levelling the floor of the tomb, a rectangular portion towards 
the left of the centre is left uncut so as to stand out as a bench or platform, 
though it is no more than an elevated portion of the floor. Examples of 
such platforms were discovered by Rea in Perungulam. 1 The tomb near 
Calicut which Longhurst opened was somewhat superior in its design in 
having a circular rock-cut chamber with a domed ceiling supported at the 
centre by a round pillar tapering from the top to the base, the whole of it 
being hewn out of the solid laterite rock. Besides the presence of the cen- 
tral pillar which recalls the central pillar of the Lauriya mound ( smasana ), 
a further difference from the preceding types was the absence of the ante- 
chamber and the orientation of the entrance, the latter being effected by 
an opening cut on the western side of the domical roof and, as usual, closed 
with blocks of stone. Internally the tomb had a diameter of 1\ feet and 
a height of 3 feet 9 inches. Cut into the north-west wall of the chamber close 
to the opening was a small recess, not unlike a little doorway. Perhaps 
this represented the unfinished passage with the ante-chamber seen in the 
other examples. A few rectangular caves with flat ceilings as also a multi- 
chambered one from Kata Kampal in Cochin are also known. The 
latter has a large rectangular central pit, the walls of which are excavated 
beyond to form chambers leading from it. 

The entire group of megalithic complexes show certain mutual affini- 
ties. For example the stone circle is common to the talis and the cairns 
over urn and cist burials, dolmens, and sarcophagi; the cairn covers alike 
cists, urn burials, sarcophagi, and dolmens; the cap-stone is found on the 
tali, kudaikal, and buried urn; the flight of steps leading to the aperture of 
the hollow enclosing the urn is found in the tali and the kudaikal ; the ante- 
chamber is noticeable in the tali as well as in the cists, transepted or not. 
Taking the contents into consideration, pyriform urns are found inside 
talis, kudaikals, urn burials, and cists (Pudukkottai) ; multi-legged sarco- 
phagi inside tabs, cists (Pallavaram, Perumbair and Sanur in Chingleput, 
Kolatur in South Arcot and Gajjalakonda in Kurnool) ; hook-like projections 
inside urns in the tali near Feroke, and burial urns from Puddukkottai and 
Adichchanallur (though some urns from near Bangalore had them out- 
side); the ‘arrow-head’ pottery mark has been found in the p ottery from the 
Feroke tali, and in urn burials from CochinTP^dukkottaT, Pondicherry, 
Coimbatore, No rth Ar cot, and Hyderabad. Above all is the characteristic 
texture and fabric of the ceramic ware, and the find of iron objects in all 
these types including the Adichchanallur urns. In their yield of iron im- 
plements or at least of wheel-made pottery appropriate to the iron age, 
the megaliths of the Indian peninsula are far removed in point of time from 

1 Rea, A., Annual Report Archaeological Survey, Madras, 1910-1 1 
92 



730 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE : SOUTH INDIA 


those of North-Western Europe or of cis-Caucasia 1 which belong to 
earlier periods and are devoid of iron objects or wheel-made pottery. 
In South India these funerary practices and their resulting monuments 
are found amidst a civilised folk of the iron age enjoying a stable and pro- 
gressive society 

From their number and distribution all over the districts of the peninsula, 
it would appear that they were not restricted to a few sections of the people, 
but were almost universal. Tradition as embodied in the comtemporary 
or slightly posterior literature of the Tamils shows that a Chola king, 
a Chera king, a Pandyan queen, some chiefs as well as common folk 2 
were interred in this manner. 

While an older verse 3 is content to mention the three methods of dispo- 
sal viz. exposure, cremation, and burial, the later epic Manimekalai 4 in its 
description of the necropolis of the city of Puhar enumerates cremation, 
exposure, pit burial, interment inside cells in the womb of the earth, urns, 
underground or in rock-chambers, it also mentions that in the same place 
theie were many monumental shrines, big and small, built of burnt brick 
over the burials of saints, kings, satis, and heroes, signifying their varnas, 
asramas, and sex. The persistence of the custom of erecting miniature 
and commemorative megalithic structures even today amongst certain hill 
tribes of South and Central India shows that the tradition is by no means 
totally extinct. 

We get a real glimpse into the metropolitan structures and arts of civil life 
in this age from Tamil literature. While stone was used in funerary monu- 
ments perhaps more by way of tradition and ritual, secular and sacred 
buildings were of brick and mortar, timber and metal. This is clear from 
the fact that the great Pallava Mahendravarman (early seventh century 
a.d.) mentions in his Mandagapattu inscription that he fashioned a tem- 
ple for the Trinity without using any of these materials in its construction. 
Numerous Chola inscriptions (ninth century a.d.) mention the renovation 
of old brick temples as stone structures. 

In the descriptions of cities such as Puhar, Madurai, Uraiyur, Kanchl, 
and Karur 5 we read about temples (kotfam), palaces ( kdyils ), and mansions 
{madam), and high ramparts with one or more imposing gateways ( torana - 
vayil, gopuram) decorated by many painted stucco figures . 6 The ramparts 
of cities were surrounded by deep moats full of water. The outermost 
fortification was a thick forest ( puramilai ). The city of Madurai is itself 


Gordon Childe, ‘Megaliths,’ Ancient 
India, 1947, No. 4, p. 10. Though the 
similarity of the South Indian Mega- 
liths seemingly amounts to a kinship 
with their counterparts in the western 
world, viz. cis-Caucasia and the lands 
bordering the Mediterranean, the At- 
lantic and the North Seas, ‘still between 
the easternmost of the latter and the 
Indian Peninsula remains a vast space, 
not wholly covered with water but un- 
spotted on any dolmen map available. 


There seems also a chronological gap’; 
while the megaliths of South India be- 
long to the Iron Age, the others belong 
to earlier periods, dating about 1500 
b.c. and earlier. 

* Ancient India, 1946, No. 2, pp. 13-14 

3 Puranamiru 239, ll. 20-1 

4 Ch. 6, Sakkaravalakkottam, ll. 66-7 

5 Pattinappalai, Madurai-K-Kanji, Peru- 
mbanarru-p-padai, Ahananuru, Sila- 
ppadikaram etc. in many places. 

6 Ne4unalvci4ai, ll. 76-120 



CIVIL ARCHITECTURE 


731 


referred to often as madakkudal or nan-madakkudal, the city with storeyed 
mansions. The gateway of Madurai was high and broad enough to allow 
three elephants to enter abreast; it had massive wooden doors, and support- 
ed a storeyed watch-tower on top . 1 2 The gateway of the ramparts of Puhar 
which surrounded mansions ‘reaching the sky’ had a makara torana lin- 
tel on which rested a tall sikhara .* While the massive wooden frame of the 
Madurai gate was glistening black with a coat of mustard oil , 3 its double 
doors were armoured with sheet iron painted red, perhaps to prevent rust . 4 

The buildings inside were storeyed mansions , 5 sometimes seven storeys 
high or with flat open terraces 6 or vaulted roofs . 7 A dense aggregation 
of such tall buildings in the city of Kartir is likened to the many peaks of 
a hilly range. A mansion in Puhar is described as having a low enclosing 
wall, a high outer gate with steps and curved pials, an approach path well 
guarded and high storeys . 8 The seven-storeyed mansions were perhaps of 
the type of the Satmahal pasada of Ceylon 9 and the Bhitargaon temple. 
While the walls were of brick and mortar, the beams, doors, doorways, 
and pillars were of some hard wood often carved or covered with embossed 
metal sheeting. The large assembly hall of Uraiyur had such pillars . 10 
The windows or ventilators were sometimes of the shape of the deer’s 
eye 11 and the facade exhibited likenesses of animals such as the lion 
and tiger. 1 * 

The temples ( kotfam ) and religious institutions of the Brahmins, Jainas, 
and Bauddhas ( pallif 3 were likewise brick structures. Shrines were de- 
dicated to the various .Hindu gods — Siva, Vishnu (Mayon), Indra, the Xira- 
vata and the Vajra, Baladeva, Devi, and many minor gods, and some of 
them were of many storeys ( nedu-nilaik-koftam ). The memorial or sepulchral 
shrines of brick in the necropolis of Puhar dedicated to kings, saints, satis, 
and heroes have already been mentioned. 

Other references tell us that palaces and temples were planned and con- 
structed by architects versed in the science in consultation with the elite 
of the artisans . 14 


1 Contemporary sculptures from Ama- 
ravatl depict such gates. One on the 
inside of the outer rail shows a gateway 
with a storeyed facade and side towers 
with a part of the rampart wall on one 
side and seven elephants coming throu- 
gh one after the other carrying relic 
caskets. See Burgess J., Amaravati and 
Jagayyapeta, 1887, pi. xxv, 2 and pp. 
58-9; pi. xxvii, 2 p. 62; Madras Govern- 
ment Museum Bulletin, General Sec- 
tion iv, 1942, plates xi & xliii, 1. 

2 Ahananuru 181, 11. 20-2 

3 Nedunal. II. 79-90 

‘Ibid. //. 80-1 

5 Nirai-nilai-madam or nedu-nilai- 

mSdam or elu-nilai mddam. 

* Veya-madam 

1 Kudam 


* Pattinappalai ll. 142-5 
9 See Coomaraswamy, History of Indian 
& Indonesian Art, 1927, p. 165. This 
scheme of diminishing squares in ascent 
is the key-note of South Indian or ‘Dra- 
vidian’ temple architecture maintained 
throughout in the extant vimanas and 
gopuras from the seventh century a.d.; 
they started as replicas in stone of ear- 
lier examples in brick and timber and 
after some time reverted mostly to the 
original materials. 

19 Purananuru 375, ll. 2-3 
11 Sit. v. 1. 8 
19 Paripadal 10, ll. 46-7 

13 Maduraikkanji, ll. 467 and 474 

14 Nedunalvadai, ll. 76-8 ; also Silappa- 
dikaram on the construction of the 
Pattini temple, xxvm, ll. 222-5 



732 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


While in the South only these word pictures of the Sangam period exist 
to give us an idea of its buildings, arts and crafts, we still have before us 
some of the monuments themselves to the north of the Tamil country. 
These comprise brick stupas and vihdras and rock-cut monuments of the 
Buddhists, the former mostly along the banks of the Krishna and its tri- 
butaries and the latter mostly confined to the north-west part of the Deccan 
in Bombay State. 

The typical Buddhist monuments are the stupa, the vihara and the chaitya. 
Originally sepulchral in nature or association the stupa or the dhatu- 
garbha (dagaba) was styled sarlraka when bodily relics of the great were 
interred, uddesika, when it was commemorative, and paribhogika when it 
contained articles used by the Buddha. The stupas in the South belong 
mostly to the first two categories; and the large stupa forming the nucleus 
of a complex of Buddhist monuments including viharas and chaityas is 
called the mahastupa or mahachaitya. 

The monuments in the eastern part of the Deccan are mainly brick-built 
structures. The important stupa structures now known are those at Bhat- 
tiprolu, Gudivada, Amaravatl, Ghantasala, Jagayyapeta, Nagarjunakonda, 
Goli and Pedda Ganjam. Much skill is exhibited in the plan adopt- 
ed to form the immense masses of unmortared work, so laid (often 
with mud) from base to summit in horizontal courses as to assume the 
shape of domes of semi-spherical or flatter section having no traces of 
true arching. The expedients adopted for providing adequate support 
to the structure and the prevention of fracture at the crown are equally 
remarkable. The exterior in most cases was encased in its lower parts by 
local marble-like lime-stone, often sculptured, a material more chaste from 
the point of view of the builder than the sandstone of the North Indian 
examples; the upper part of the dome was covered by white moulded 
plaster perhaps appropriately painted and with ornaments picked out in 
stucco. 

The large stupas at Bhattiprolu and Gudivada which form the earliest 
examples of the series (third century b.c.) were built of solid brick from base 
to top. The mahastupa of Amaravatl too was similar. In shape the 
Bhattiprolu stupa seems to have been a low hemispherical mound similar 
to the large stupa at Sanchl, but the others had their domes raised up on 
drum-like platforms; evidently the medhi or platform was devised to 
enhance the loftiness and grandeur of the structure and make of what 
would otherwise appear to be of little architectural merit, an imposing 
structure commanding the landscape. This medhi also served to provide 
a second and smaller ambulatory round the anda of the stupa. 

The Bhattiprolu dome had a height of about 132 feet and a diameter of 
148 feet at the base. The corresponding approximate dimensions for Ama- 
ravatl have been computed as 90 to 100 feet and 162 feet. The much 
ruined Gudivada stupa too seems to have approached the dimensions of 
Amaravatl and Bhattiprolu. 

The other great examples were devoid of a solid brick core and were 



TECHNIQUE OF STUPA CONSTRUCTION 


733 


made more or less hollow, evidently in order to save brick and labour with- 
out sacrificing stability. The hollow spaces were filled by different packings. 
The stupa at Garikapad with a basal diameter of 81 feet was constructed of 
an outer brick ring 8 feet thick at the base with alternate layers of lime con- 
crete and earth in its core, probably because of the abundance and avail- 
ability of good limestone. The Jagayyapeta stupa had an outer brick 
casing with an interior packing formed of layers of earth, each about two 
feet thick; between the layers was laid a compact flooring of very large 
bricks closely fitted together, resulting in a series of superposed masonry 
floors of decreasing diameter stretching across the interior at different 
stages with packings of earth in between. The construction of the largest 
of the three stupas at Pedda Ganjam was more or less of this type. As 
economising valuable brick material this style represents a definite advance 
over the solid brick structures. 

The GhantaSala stupa , 122 feet in diameter at the base and 111 feet at 
the wall above it, shows the most scientific construction among these early 
stupas, calculated to conserve brick mateiial while providing the necessary 
strength. There is a core of solid brick 10 feet square in the centre, rising 
to the height of the top of the dome, enclosed by an outer concentric square 
of 22 feet side with a hollow in between divided by cross -walls stretching 
from the inner to the outer square, at the centre of each side. The whole is 
surrounded again by a circular brick wall nearly 56 feet in diameter exter- 
nally, the inner face of which is touched by the projections of the four cross- 
walls referred to above as well as the produced sides of the outer square. 
Beyond this circle and concentric with it at a distance of 1 1£ feet is another 
massive walled circle 18J feet thick, the space between these two circular 
walls being divided into sixteen cells by an equal number of radially dis- 
posed cross-walls connecting the two circles. While the broad outer cir- 
cle formed the basis of the medhi, the inner circle corresponded to the 
vertical base of the dome. The thirty-two hollow chambers — 16 between 
the two circles, 12 inside the inner circle, and 4 inside the outer square — 
were packed firmly with mud. An almost similar arrangement is noti- 
ceable in the plan of the second large stupa in Pedda Ganjam. It is of two 
concentric circular walls of brick, the outer about 39 feet with a gap of five 
feet between them, divided into a series of twelve cells by radially disposed 
cross-walls, four of which form the main radii, penetrating to the centre. 
It would seem to be only a step further to the regular cart-wheel-shaped 
foundation of the later Andhra stupas as in the mahastiipa of Nagarjuna- 
konda. Here the squared axial brickwork column of the Ghantasala 
stupa gives place to a circular one forming the hub from which emerge 
eight radial walls to meet the peripheral circular wall, like the spokes of 
a cart wheel. Thus by a system of three concentric circles and eight radial 
walls at the centre and sixteen each inside the two outer circles there 
were formed forty cells filled with packing material as the stupa was built 
up. One of the peripheral cells however contained the reliquary. The 
diameter at the base was 106 feet while the height of the stupa may have been 



m 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


70-80 feet. This foundation plan must have been adopted in many of the 
other stupas in Nagarjunakonda. 

In the smaller stupas where the sinking of foundations and consequent 
fracture of the masonry are not liable to occur, a simple earth packing 
seems to have been general. The foundations often were of rubble, and 
the superstructure of brick. 

Another characteristic feature of these Andhra stupas, was the embel- 
lishment of their architectural appearance by the addition of a square or 
rectangular projection on the base of the dome at each of the cardinal 
points facing the gateway of the outer entrance. This structural offset 
to the medhi on the same level with it provided a sort of platform or altar 
for the offerings of the perambulating devotee. Each of these platforms 
carried five tall free-standing stelae or ayaka pillars ; hence they are known 
as ayaka platforms. On either side they had short flights of steps, sopana. 
In addition to the stilting up of the otherwise unimposing domical main 
structure, this offsetting of the cardinal faces into projecting platforms 
carrying the slender and graceful pillars was an ornamental attribute which 
imparted artistic distinction to these Andhra stupas. The stelae appear 
to be later additions. As can be judged from the remains of the minor 
stupas in Nagarjunakonda, the lesser ones had the ayaka platform but no 
ayaka pillars. In the earliest stupas such as Bhattiprolu, Jagayyapeta, and 
Garikapad, only the ‘marble’ slabs which encased the basement at the pro- 
jections were sculptured, the rest being covered with more or less plain 
slabs showing little carving except perhaps for a pilaster in low relief rea- 
ching up the edge of each, as in Bhattiprolu and Jagayyapeta, and in 
Amaravati in its first period. In Amaravati these slabs contain the earliest 
sculptures showing animal figures over the bell-shaped capitals of the ed- 
ging pilasters and devotees adoring the symbolic representations of the 
Buddha. Even after the renovations, and in the later stupas covered by the 
sculptured slabs, the ayaka platforms seem to have attracted the greatest 
attention of the sculptor and were clothed with the best sculpture work — 
so that they present indeed a very beautiful and attractive appearance. 
The circumambulatory walk on the top of the medhi in all the stupas— jud- 
ging from the remnants in Ghantasala, Pedda Ganjam, Amaravati, Nagar- 
junakorida and Jagayyapeta — had a parapet or balustrade round its edge, 
formed of rectangular slabs morticed between uprights with a coping on 
top. From the bas-relief reproduction of the stupa details in miniature 
found in the casing slabs (the so-called stupa slabs of Amaravati and Nagar- 
junakonda which have given us the clue for reconstructing the shape of 
these stupas) it would appear that only the inner faces of the balustrade 
slabs were sculptured. 

Apparently the pradakshinapatha round the base of the stupa had origin- 
ally a wooden railing on brick foundations which was perhaps later trans- 
formed into one of stone in some cases. While in Gudivada the railing 
was perhaps of wood, in Bhattiprolu the extant remains show that it was of 
‘marble’ stone piers with laterally cut lenticular mortices into which were 



AMARAVATI AND NAGARJUNAKONDA STUPAS 


735 


fitted the ends of similarly shaped cross-pieces or rails ( suchi ), which like 
those in Amaravati were unsculptured. In Amaravati evidence could be 
traced to show that the original monument, dating about 200 B.c., was 
subsequently reconstructed and that it emerged in its final architectural 
form in the period between a.d. 150-200, when the stone railing was erected 
by the great Nagarjuna. Then followed the last phase of its embellish- 
ment when the slabs which covered the base all round and contained the 
earliest sculptures (referred to earlier), were reversed and large panels 
showing stupas with frieze above were sculptured on them between c. a.d. 
200 and 250. The great stupa of Nagarjunakonda, almost coeval with 
Amaravati, is supposed to have had a wooden railing, the brick platforms 
of which have alone been discovered. This mahachaitya too was renova- 
ted about the same period, according to the inscriptions, by an Ikshvaku 
princess Chamtisiri and other royal ladies of the same line, the ay aka pillars 
were also set up at the same time. This must have been between the third 
and fourth century a.d. 

Of the two well-known examples, the great stupa of Amaravati may be 
said to typify the class of brick stupas encased in stone and sumptuously 
sculptured. In its ultimate form it had a ground balustrade or outer railing 
about 13 feet high composed of a number of uprights (urdhvapafa) planted 
at intervals connected with each other transversely by three lenticular 
cross-bars (suchi) and crowned by a coping (ushrtisha), all so profusely em- 
bellished by sculptural work that the structural framework was hardly 
recognizable. This railing was interrupted at the four cardinal points by 
the gateway openings, which were projected to form an open portico, of 
which the front was flanked by pillars and two pairs of sedent lions on 
their 'Copings. The pradakshinapatha, which this railing enclosed, was 
about 15 feet wide, having free standing pillars at intervals bearing minia- 
ture stupas or similar symbols as their capitals. In the centre rose the drum 
(medhi) of the stupa 20 feet high with its four rectangular offsets— the 
ayaka platforms, ay aka pillars, and the upper processional path surround- 
ed by a parapet about 8 feet high. These upright slabs of the parapet, as 
also those encasing the face of the drum and its offsets, were profusely 
sculptured. The lower portion of the dome (anda) was also thus encased, 
the slabs covering it up to the frieze encircling the middle of the dome 
more or less at a point which marks its springing. Above this line the sur- 
face of the dome was covered by plaster and all the ornaments of the 
festoon or garland round the top were in stucco. The kiosk ( harmika ) on 
top consisted of a square balustrade around a central pillar of imposing 
dimensions flanked and surmounted by parasols. 

In contrast to this the great stupa of Nagarjunakonda and some of the 
lesser ones in the same place may be said to belong to the class of un- 
cased stupas. The external brickwork was simply plastered over from base 
to top, the dome being decorated by the usual large garland ornament. 
Practically no stone was used on it, except for the ayaka pillars which, as 
in Amaravati, were later additions. The drum rose to 5 feet with the four 



736 ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 

usual rectangular offsets 22 feet long and 5 feet broad carrying the ayaka 
pillars. The width of the ambulatory over the drum was about 7 feet. 
The stupa was surrounded by a pradakshinapatha 13 feet wide and en- 
closed by a wooden railing on brick foundations. The gateways were 
formed by forward extensions of the railing, and perhaps resembled those 
at Amaravati in not having a tor ana, usual in the North Indian examples 
like Sanchl. The rails and gates were constructed of carved woodwork. 

Other stupas in Nagaijunakonda were of the cased and sculptured 
variety like Amaravati, and these formed the main source of the extensive 
sculpture collection from the place. 

The chaitya or temple hall and the vihara or monastery too had their 
beginnings and development in the Hinayana and the Mahayana phase 
of this period, and under the Andhras gave rise to two types of construc- 
tion. One was the brick built chaityas and viharas associated with the 
great stupas and Buddhist centres on the east coast in the Godavari and 
Krishna valleys; and the other the rock excavations mostly confined to 
Western Deccan round about Nasik, though two of these exist in the eas- 
tern region, the rock excavations at Guntupalle in West Godavari district 
and Sahkaram in Visakhapatnam. The Guntupalle chaitya and rock-cut 
retreats are dated about 200 b.c. in Hinayana times, while much of the 
remains on the Sankaram hill would belong to a period between a.d. 300 
and 350, in the succeeding Mahayana times, though even amongst them 
the monolithic stupas might have been anterior to the Christian era. 

While the rock-cut examples which are facsimiles in rock of contempo- 
rary structural buildings give us an idea of the total aspect of these monas- 
tic structures, the extant remains of the structural ones show the plan, 
dimensions, and methods of construction employed. 

The Chinese pilgrims have described a many-storeyed vihara, identified 
with the one that dominated the Buddhist establishment at Nagarjuna- 
konda. The great sahghdrama described by Hiuan Tsang with its high 
walls, storeyed towers, and beautiful ornamented balconies, with two 
stone stupas in front, existing in the neighbourhood of Vengila ( P‘ing-k‘i - 
lo), was perhaps the one at Guntupalle. We infer from inscriptions that 
there was a monastery at Bhattiprolu. Hiuan Tsang mentions forty mon- 
asteries in working order in Dhanyakataka (Amaravati), and Taranatha 
says that the great monastery and university at Lhasa in Tibet was built 
after the model of the establishment at Dhanyakataka. 1 Though such 
monastic establishments must have thriven in the stupa sites and Buddhist 
centres described above, yet we are left only with a few extant ruins in 
Guntupalle, Nagarjunakonda, Ramatlrtham, Arugolanu, and Sankaram. 

Besides small rock-cut cells, which still remain, traces of a large vihara 
have been found at Guntupalle. 2 There are also the remains of a large 


1 I A. iv p. 363 

2 ASIAR. 1905-6, p. 166 and Madras 
Archaeological Reports 1888, April 30, 


pp. 11-12; 1889, August 2, pp. 1-3, 
1916-17, pp. 30-7 



NAGARJUNAKONDA VIHARAS 


737 


pillared hall. This sahgharama seems to have consisted of two separate 
groups of chambers forming a large and a small monastery with a brick- 
built chaitya hall and stupas of various sizes, most of them rock-cut. 

Arugolanu in West Godavari seems to have been a Buddhist settlement 
of considerable size and contains the ruins of a large vihara. 

The remains at Ramatlrtham show the extensive ruins of a monastery 
attached to a large stupa of 84 feet diameter; the foundations of at least 
two large viharas, four or five distinct rows of monastic cells and about five 
chaityas and smaller stupas are scattered at different levels on the hill fac- 
ing it. The viharas measure 81 feet by 65, and 91 feet by 39J 1 on plan. The 
excavations at Nagarjunakonda 2 give more information about these viha- 
ras. Among the monastic establishments here each unit was complete and 
self-contained with a vihara or residence for the monks and an apsidal 
chaitya temple, both attached to a stupa. The viharas had a rectangular 
courtyard enclosed by a brick wall, and in the centre was a square stone- 
paved hall with a wooden roof supported by stone or wooden pillars. All 
round the inside of the enclosure and abutting on to the outer walls was a 
row of cells for the monks, often with a verandah in front. Some of these 
cells formed store-rooms, a few others were used as shrines and there was 
usually one large room which served as a refectory. One vihara 3 built by 
Bodhisiri is an irregular square. The square central hall which it enclosed 
was perhaps entirely of wood with wooden columns, since no stone pillars 
were found. The brick walls had plain plaster mouldings along the plinth 
of the cells, surrounding the central hall in the courtyard. Another vihara 
at the northern end of the Nallaraljabodu hill 4 was perhaps more regular 
and complete. The main opening on the south of the rectangular walled 
enclosure led to an open courtyard with two apsidal structures flanking 
the passage immediately inside the entrance. The centre was occupied 
by a square pillared hall and surrounded on the three sides, east, north, 
and west, by rows of small cells, with a larger square cell at the north- 
west corner and a rectangular one with a semicircular (moon-stone) step 
on the north-east. An opening at this north-east corner led to an ad- 
joining rectangular enclosure on the east. This annexe had a large open 
courtyard and a rectangular building abutting on its eastern wall, running 
round which was a stone seat : a big stone table stood outside the doorway 
denoting that it was a refectory. Along the southern wall of this annexe 
were three rooms and along the inside of the western wall was fixed 
another stone bench in the open courtyard. The whole monastery was 
as usual associated with a large stupa. 5 While the two apsidal temples, the 
Buddha- chaitya and stupa-chaitya, must have had barrel-vaulted roofs 
of brick and plaster, the roof over the rest was of wood and, from the 


‘Buddhist Monasteries at Ramatirtham', ■’ Monastery No. 1 of Longhurst. 

’ ASIAR. 1910-11, pp. 78-88 4 Monastery No. 2 of Longhurst. 

Longhurst, A. H., ibid. 5 Stupa. No. 4 of Longhurst. 

93 



738 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


absence of tile fragments, was perhaps thatched. The roof of the central 
hall was supported by stone pillars carrying wooden beams. 

A similar arrangement of a pair of apsidal chaityas, one enshrining a 
structural stupa and the other with a high platform for a standing Buddha 
whose feet alone are extant, is to be found near the great stupa on top of 
the hill at Salihundam on the banks of the Vamsadhara in Visakhapafnam 
district. The foundations of the associated monastery with its viharas 
and cells have however been destroyed. While in the earlier monasteries 
of the Hinayana times the stupa alone was enshrined in a chaitya, in the 
later kind, of about the second century a.d. and after, Buddha images 
came to be enshrined, and then both types of chaityas became common. 

In the absence of any of the earlier structures associated with the stupas, 
the rock-cut examples of viharas and the chaityas at Guntupalle give us 
some further idea of contemporary structural types 1 in this area. Because 
of their proximity to and association with the ancient stupa sites they are 
better considered here instead of with rock-cut examples of Western 
Deccan. The remains of the sahgharama in this place as already mentioned 
consist of two separate rock-cut groups of chambers forming a large and 
a small vihdra, a rock-cut chaityagriha, stupas of different sizes, most of 
them rock-cut and a few structural, and the remains of a big brick-built 
chaitya temple. The rock-cut viharas and the chaityagriha may be assigned 
to about 200 b.c. on stylistic grounds. 

The lower and better preserved of the two rock-cut viharas is near the 
chaityagriha. The facade of this monastery, facing more or less south, was 
fairly recessed on the vertical face of the rock, leaving a narrow terrace 
in front. The overhanging rock above was cut away so as to form a veran- 
dah sheltering the face of the building from sun and rain. The facade 
had three main entrances with doorways, each flanked by a window on 
either side. Each of these three doorways led into some sort of a main 
cell, apparently a hall, rectilinear in shape and of different dimensions. 
The three inner walls of each hall were again pierced by one or more open- 
ings leading into cells excavated into the core of the rock beyond with a 
square annexe on their east, west or north, all disposed in a very hapha- 
zard manner. This would apparently indicate that no co-ordinated plan 
was followed in the arrangement of these cells, which became crowded 
together probably because other chambers were later inserted in the avail- 
able intervening spaces. On the facade both doorways and windows are 
round-arched with a projecting horse-shoe dormer archway above, ending 
in a finial, the space between being filled by the radiating spokes of a blind 
chaitya window. The narrow entrance, the simplicity of design, the ab- 
sence of sculptures or niches for sculptures to rest in, the absence also of 
the usual apsidal temple inside, show that these were not only essentially 
residential in character but were also early in date. Compared with the 
contemporary rock-cut examples of Western Deccan dating from the 

1 Longhurst, Madras Archaeological Report 1916-17, pp. 30-7 



GUNTUPALLE 


739 


Hlnayana times the work here is coarse, betraying execution by unskilled 
hands. The second vihara higher up the hill is in similar style but hope- 
lessly ruined and damaged. 

The rock-cut chaitya, while being similar to the circular chaitya halls of 
curious early type at Junnar and Kondivte in the west, recalls more the in- 
ner cells and facades of the Lomas Rishi and Sudama caves in the Barabar 
hills near Gaya, from which it cannot be far removed in point of time. 
It is a version in stone of a circular hut with a domical or conical roof of 
thatch resting on a wooden framework resembling an inve; ted basket and 
accommodating a stupa in the centre, a circumambulatory all round, 
and a gabled porch in front of its doorway. This temple faces east, the 
circular cell is 18 feet in diameter and 14j feet high inside. The mono- 
lithic stupa inside occupies one half of the internal area leaving a circumam- 
bulatory three feet wide all round. The drum of the stupa is 1 1 feet 8 
inches in diameter and 3 feet 9 inches high, while the hemispherical anda is 
9 feet 2 inches in diameter and 4 feet 9 inches high, thus making the total 
height of the stupa 8£ feet. The harmika was a structural addition on top. 
The ceiling of the dome shows sixteen curved ribs inside, cut in the same 
stone in imitation of a wooden prototype, all meeting at the apical centre 
and connected with one another by circular hoops of decreasing diameter 
from below up. In front of the simple opening of the circular cell, and as if 
it were framing it and showing a part of the simulated overhanging thatch, 
is the fa?ade of the porch, with a round-arched entrance and over it a 
projecting horse-shoe dormer arch showing even the ends of the little lon- 
gitudinal rafters supporting the curved roof-board of the gabb. In pass- 
ing, one may note here the remarkable similarity in essentials of the plan 
of these two Guijtupalle rock-cut viharas on the one hand and the 
sepulchral multi-chambered laterite tali opening into a common rectan- 
gular well at Kattakampal in Cochin on the other. The same similarity 
marks the plan of the rock-cut chaitya here and the domical roofed 
sepulchral tails of Cochin and Malabar described before. 

The manner in which the shape and details of the structural prototype 
are reproduced in this rock-cut monument greatly helps one to imagine 
the nature and methods of construction of contemporary structural forms. 
The circular shrine with a domical roof to accommodate the object of 
worship and the hall in front with a barrel-vaulted roof in which the devo- 
tees would assemble and pray could easily combine into an apsidal struc- 
ture resembling a basilica. 

It is such a type that we see in the structural chaitya of a later date, in 
the same place and those in a few other places in Eastern Deccan, not to 
mention the rock-cut examples of apsidal chaityas in Western Deccan. 

The ruins of the brickwork structural chaitya at Guntupalle of the Ma- 
hayana period assignable to the second century a.d. represented, as 
excavations have revealed, an apsidal structure facing south-west, 53| feet 
long and 14 J feet broad, with side walls about 4J feet thick resting on mas- 
sive footings making for secure foundations. A rather unusual feature 



740 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


here is that internally the semicircular apse portion was cut off by a cross- 
wall from the main building, and a flight of steps passed under this wall 
and followed the curved line of the back wall of the apse and was carried 
all round to the corresponding flight of steps on the other side so as to 
form a circumambulatory passage around the object of worship that was 
installed in the apse; the object of worship was not the usual stupa form, 
but something else, perhaps a Buddha placed on a kind of raised brick 
throne, with a facing of three large niches for the accommodation of other 
sculptures of Buddha or of the donors. The three niches were divided by 
solid brick piers in front of the throne platform, below and round which 
passed the circumambulatory passage. Between the cross-wall containing 
the niches and the two side walls of the building were two little passages, 
one on either side, which gave access to the steps leading into the passage 
at the back of the platform mentioned above. The entrance in front had 
an arch spanning the doorway, and, judging from the point of springing of 
the semicircular brick arch, the height of the interior of the building must 
have been about 15 feet. Probably the entrance had a carved wooden 
door-frame with the usual ornamental fanlight above. The brick door 
jambs were semi- octagonal in plan and were carried up as pilasters to the 
springing of the arch. Flanking these two door jambs, on each side, was a 
tall niche containing a limestone image of Buddha. Projecting basements 
set on either side of the doorway suggest a frontal porch or possibly they 
formed the bases for a couple of stambhas. The front of the building has 
massive plinth mouldings of the usual heavy curved type and with a broad 
band forming a kind of dado decorated with the Buddhist rail ornament 
between the cornice and the plinth. Beyond this there was no other deco- 
ration and presumably the whole structure was plastered over and painted in 
colour. The roof was evidently of the vaulted type made of brick and plas- 
ter, and probably the barrel vault was cribbed inside with wooden ribs and 
cross-pieces on the analogy of the earlier rock-cut chaitya of the place and 
similar examples from Western Deccan. The ridge of the roof was adorned 
by a row of earthenware finials. This would be the largest known chaitya 
hall and there are remains of another at Vidyadharapuram near Bezwada. 1 

In Nagarjunakonda were found the remains of a few chaitya temples 
associated with the viharas. They are long brick buildings with an apse 
at one end and a doorway at the other, the thick walls were high and the 
roof built of brick in the form of a barrel vault. There were no windows, 
other than the arched opening over the doorway, and the interior must 
have been in semi-darkness. The walls inside were plain, plastered and 
washed. The floors and steps in front were of stone, the front step always 
semicircular or half-moon shaped (moon-stone), plain and not ornate as 
in the Ceylon examples, except in one case which had a frieze of lions, hor- 
ses, and bulls along the edge. Outside, the walls were adorned with a few 
rows of simple mouldings along the base and cornice while the summit 

1 Coomaraswamy, History of Indian& Indonesian Art, 1927, p. 28 



STONE BUILT STUPAS 


741 


of the wagon-top roof was crowned by a row of tall pottery finials. The 
orientation of these temples seems to have been dictated by choice. The 
larger ones built by princess Chamtisiri near the great stupa for the Apara- 
maha Vinaseliya sect and by princess Bodhisiri on the Nallarallabodu 
or Lesser Dhammagiri hill were both stupa-chaityas and contained stone 
built stupas inside. The paired chaityas, facing each other inside the en- 
trance of the monastery of the lower end of the same hill, already referred 
to, perhaps constituted a Buddha-chaitya and stupa-chaitya respectively. 

Similarly in the ‘University area’ in the north-east corner of the valley 
was an extensive monastic establishment consisting of three viharas, a 
large stupa and two chaityas in front of it, forming a unit. One of these 
enshrined a small stupa of cut ‘Cuddapah’ stones and the other an image 
of Buddha. 

The remains on the Sankaram hills near Visakhapatnam indicate the 
existence of a large Buddhist monastery there, the monolithic stupas, some 
of the cells, and perhaps the three structural apsidal chaitya halls dating 
from the second century b.c., though the site continued to be in occupa- 
tion up to the Pallava period and some of the constructions are dated after 
a.d. 350. The monolithic stupas here include some of the largest of their 
kind, the main one in front of the monastery having a diameter of 65 feet 
at base. 

The few stupas built of cut stone noticed amidst the numerous brick- 
built examples indicate that construction in stone was not unknown to 
the masons of this period, who were adept at brick-laying; but like rock- 
cut architecture, it took a long time to be adopted on such a large scale in 
Eastern Deccan and South India, where it supplanted brick architecture in 
the seventh-eighth century a.d. and after. 

The earliest stone structural stupa is that found amidst the Buddhist re- 
mains at Guntupalle. 1 This stupa is faced with cut-stone blocks enclosing 
a core of earth and rubble stones like an ordinary cairn. It is a hemi- 
spherical dome of 16 feet diameter, 8i feet high, resting on a cylindrical 
drum 18£ feet in diameter and 5 feet high. The harmika and umbrella 
on top have been dislodged. The stone blocks of the facing are neatly 
cut and accurately fitted in a regular coursed masonry without the use of 
mortar, the outer surfaces of the blocks slightly curved in each case to 
conform with the smooth contours of the drum and dome. The rim of the 
drum is ornamented by two courses of simple mouldings. In style, con- 
struction and dimensions this stupa is similar to some of those discovered 
by Cunningham in Andher near Bhilsa in Bhopal 2 and assigned by him 
to the second century b.c. The style of the relic casket found in this 
stupa and its archaic simplicity would show that it cannot be much later 
than the Andher stupas. 

The stone-built stupa in the first chaitya near the main stupa at Rama- 
tirtham has been referred to. This is 5 feet in diameter at the drum and 

1 Longhurst, op. cit., pp. 35-6 * Cunningham, Bhilsa Topes , pp. 342-50 



742 ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 

7 feet high. The stones are well cut and beautifully fitted. The stone 
stupa is raised on a double-stepped brick-work base. Fragments of the 
stone umbrella which crowned it have been found near the stupa. This 
and the similar cut stone stupas inside chaityas at Nagarjunakonda des- 
cribed above would form the later examples of stone work of the early 
centuries of the Christian era. 

Western Deccan witnessed a different type of activity where chaitya 
temples and viharas were being excavated from the live rock. This 
rock-cut mode was a direct sequel of the types excavated by Asoka and 
Dasaratha in Barabar and NagarjunI hills near Gaya in Bihar for the 
Ajivika ascetics. Its development, primarily in the hills of the Western 
Ghats, in its first phase between the second century b.c. and the second 
century a.d., seems to have been in part dictated by the nature of the ter- 
rain and the material. The horizontal strata of amygdaloid and cognate 
trap formations laid in considerable thickness, and the fact that the edges 
of these strata terminate in perpendicular cliffs providing ideal scarps pre- 
sented most suitable features for excavation. These fine monuments were 
really hewn out of the live rock by means of the pick and finished off by 
the dexterous application of the chisel, as examination suggests. While 
the pick was used for the preliminary work, the cutting and finishing were 
done entirely by chisel and hammer, in the hands apparently of the same 
craftsman who was at once a quarryman and sculptor. 

The fashioning of architectural forms out of live rock which had its 
beginning in Asokan times and endured until after the first millennium 
of the Christian era qccupies a very prominent place in the creative art of 
India, and may be more adequately designated as ‘rock architecture’, 
though in the light of the accepted definition of the term ‘architecture’, 
which is understood as ‘good constiuction truthfully expressed’, the 
technique of these monuments would not strictly conform to such classifi- 
cation. These rock-hewn forms, no doubt expert achievements in them- 
selves, involved no constructional principles, nor do they display in their 
forms any functional properties; their members, such as columns and 
arches, were not adjusted or designed to support load, carry weight or 
counteract thrusts. Thus from a strict point of view this kind of work will 
not be ‘architecture’ but sculpture on a grand and magnificent scale. 1 

The first excavations were Buddhist in character, corresponding to the 
Hlnayana creed, and consist of chaitya halls and viharas forming about 
ten groups, all copies in rock of the structural prototypes of less perma- 
nent material, wood and brick. The noteworthy examples include the 
excavations at Bhaja in Poona district, Kondane in Kolaba district, 
Pitalkhora and Ajanta (Cave Nos. 8, 9, 10 and 12) near Aurangabad in 
Hyderabad, Bedsa in Poona district, Nasik (the cave called Pandulena, 
Gautamlputra, Nahapana and Sri Yajna), Junnar and Karle in Poona 
district and Kanheri in Salsette near Bombay. 

1 Percy Brown, Indian Architecture, Buddhist and Hindu, chh. v and vi 



ROCK-CUT VTHARAS AND CHAITYAS: WESTERN DECCAN 


743 


The Hlnayana viharas or monasteries in these places, though not of such 
‘architectural’ importance as the contemporary chaitya halls, embody 
many interesting features. They are facsimiles in rock of structural viha- 
ras. Though they are not exactly of identical design and present varying 
forms and plans, they yet possess certain common features which 
differentiate them from the later Mahayana products in and around 
the same localities. 

The three viharas (Caves Nos. 8, 12 and 13) at Ajanta associated with 
the contemporary chaityas (Caves Nos. 9 and 10) are probably the earliest 
ones. Vihara No. 12 for instance is an example of a single-storeyed mo- 
nastery which has lost much of its original facade. There is a square central 
hall surrounded by a horse-shoe shaped arcade, with a frieze in its upper 
portion. A similar single-storeyed vihara is to be found in Kondane at- 
tached to the chaitya hall of that place. But here the central hall is not 
plain but pillared. Apparently it had a pillared portico over which a 
massive cornice projected itself, with an entablature, imitating wood- 
work. Behind the portico, a central doorway with a window on either 
side leads through the screen-wall into the courtyard surrounded by a 
peripheral colonnade. Cells opened into this courtyard and were disposed 
on its three sides. The Pitalkhora vihara too has a pillared hall, though only 
a few cells remain, which in contrast to other viharas have vaulted, instead 
of plain roofs and ribs and lattice windows all modelled as if by carpentry. 

The three viharas at Nasik (Cave Nos. 3, 8 and 15) called from their in- 
scriptions Gautamiputra, Nahapana and Sri Yajna are also single storeyed, 
but at the same time highly decorated. They have in common pillared 
porticos, square, unpillared halls and cells on three sides containing cou- 
ches; but show variations in detail, especially in the design of their pillars. 

The plan of the vihara at Bhaja, though irregular, is more or less simi- 
lar to the others. There is an outer verandah separated by a wall pierced 
by two doorways and a barred window from an inner hall, which in this 
case has excavated cells on two sides only. The roof of the verandah is 
barrel-vaulted with gable ends. 

More interesting than these are the chaitya halls consisting of a vaulted 
congregation hall terminating in an apse covered by a semi-dorne at its 
inner end and itself divided longitudinally by two rows of pillars into a 
central hall and wings, very much like the apse, nave, and aisles of a Chris- 
tian church. The centre of the apse contains a stupa , hewn out of the same 
rock or sometimes wholly or partly built of brick and wood. The aisle 
is continued round the apse forming a perambulatory passage round the 
stupa. The chronological sequence of these examples would take us 
first to Bhaja, and successively to Kondane, Pitalkhora, Ajanta (No. 
10), Nasik, Junnar, Karle and Kanheri. The guiding principle involved 
in determining this sequence is that the earlier the example, the closer the 
imitation of the designs and devices peculiar to constructions in wood. 
Other characters are the degree of the inward slant of the pillars and jambs 
copying faithfully, and quite needlessly, the expedient necessary in the case 



744 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


of wooden posts devised to counteract the outward thrust of the heavy 
timber roofing; next, the extent to which free use of timber additions to the 
excavated chaitya was made in the form of ribs, girders, and cross-pieces 
in doorways; lastly, and most of all, the character and form of the arches 
that span the entrances, which incidentally are the most attractive and 
carefully designed part of the fagade, forming the main feature of these 
chaityas. The form of the stupa enshrined might furnish another index 
of relative age. 

The earliest in the series would thus be the chaitya hall at Bhaja (c. 200 
b.c.) enclosing a hall 55 feet long, 26 feet broad and 20 feet high, with side 
aisles 3| feet wide. As an early example, it closely approximates to the 
Lomas FLishi cave near Gaya in its undeveloped ogee-arch window and 
betrays its pioneering character by many other features including a pro- 
nounced slant of its pillars, the closely ranked roof-ribs, and the wooden 
harmika and umbrella of the stupa it enshrined. The stupa itself is of the 
plain type consisting of a cylindrical base supporting a tall domical body 
with a harmika on top. The open frontage of the chaitya originally framed 
a highly finished wooden construction fitted into the rock-cut archway 
and consisting of two uprights held in position by a cross-piece fixed 
at mid-height, the lower half being covered by a carved screen with a cen- 
tral and two side doorways, while the cross-beam carried in the upper half 
a projecting gallery, supported by four pillars. The whole formed an 
elegant balcony. 

The chaitya hall at Kondane which would come next in order is a little 
larger and had a fagade of similar type as at Bhaja with the difference that 
the two uprights were partly of rock and partly of wood. The curvature 
of the fagade archway too displays more finished lines. 

The ruined chaitya halls at Pitalkhora and the similar one at Ajanta 
(No. 10) belong to the same order. They show a slight advance in that the 
roof-ribs of the side aisles are cut out in stone instead of being mere wooden 
attachments. In Pitalkhora, owing to a natural fault in the rock, a few 
of the pillars are finished structurally, and apparently the stupa inside it 
also, now absent, was structural built. This chaitya hall when complete 
must have been 50 feet long and 34| feet wide and 31 feet high. The 
larger Ajanta chaitya measuring 100 feet by 40 feet and 33 feet high, shows 
that these excavators were growing bolder in conception. The stupa 
within is more elaborate with a double tier at the base and a slightly elon- 
gated dome. 

The example at Bedsa shows an elaborate fagade fronted with pillars 
and pilasters carrying ‘Persepolitan’ capitals, as in Pitalkhora, crowned 
by spirited sculpture of human and animal figures. 

The early chaitya at Ajanta (Cave No. 9) and the Pandulena at Nasik 
are alike in that no wooden attachments have been made to their frontage 
the whole being carved out of the rock. The Ajanta fagade is a well- 
balanced work, elaborately designed with a door opening at the centre 
flanked by a window opening on either side and carrying a minstrel 



KARLE CHAITYA 


745 


gallery above supported on a broad ledge. The peculiarity in this is that 
the hall within is rectangular and the ceilings of the aisles, instead of being 
vaulted as in other cases, are flat. The vault of the nave was originally 
braced by wooden ribs, but these were removed at an early date apparently 
as being superfluous. The ornamental facade of the Pandulena chaitya 
is two-storeyed presenting a curved lunette above the doorway and an 
arcade with repeated stupa motif and ‘Persepolitan’ type pillars flank- 
ing the arch-window. The pillars inside it are almost perpendicular, bet- 
ter proportioned, and have received some decorative attention, more at 
the base than at the capital. For the first time the bases become pot-shaped 
while the abacus is square. There was a musician’s gallery of timber im- 
mediately inside the entrance and above the doorway. 

The Manmoda chaitya hall in Junnar shares many features of the Pandu- 
lena e.g. the absence of a wooden frontage and of a portico and the pre- 
sence of ‘Persepolitan’ pillars. It differs, however, in its rock-cut facade, 
where the carved lunette fills the upper space of the archway over the sun- 
window, while in the Pandulena it is over the doorway. In this context, 
among the other excavations at Junnar, the one with a peculiar plan, the 
Tulaja-lena, deserves notice. The plan of this interesting chaitya hall is 
circular (25J feet diameter) recalling the Guntupalle example and indi- 
cating the survival of an archaic type. The central stupa is surrounded 
by a ring of twelve plain octagonal pillars, and the ceiling over the space 
enclosed by the pillars is domed, while the circular ‘aisle’ is half-domed, 
much like the double-roofed circular temple (the Sudhamma Sabha) of 
the well-known Bharhut reliefs. 

Evidently the greatest effort of these architect-sculptors in rock was the 
magnificent chaitya at Karle, the largest and most evolved of its class. It 
certainly deserves to be classed as one of the best and most impressive 
monuments of India where Hlnayana rock-architecture reached its cul- 
mination. The chaitya is 124 feet long, 46| feet broad and 45 feet high. 
The ornate facade consists of two storeys, as at Nasik, with three doorways 
piercing the lower part, and an upper gallery over which is the usual large 
horse-shoe shaped sun-window, in which are still to be seen the remains of 
concentric arches forming a pediment. The intervening spaces between 
the doorways are decorated by sculptures of couples (donors ?) and indif- 
ferent palimpsests of Buddha figures, which are of the later Gupta period. 
The set-back of the entrance provides an outer porch in front, of which 
the sides are filled by the sculptures of architectural storeys, the lowest 
showing a ground frieze of elephants. In front are two free-standing 
lion-pillars with ‘Persepolitan’ capitals carrying addorsed lions which 
supported a dharma chakra like the Asokan columns. The great pillars 
which separate the nave from the aisles within are truly perpendicular with 
pot-bases, octagonal shafts carrying ‘Persepolitan’ capitals, more elabo- 
rate than those in the earlier examples we have mentioned. The top of 
the capital is adorned with beautiful sculpture of paired kneeling elephants 
each bearing a couple in front and caparisoned horses with their riders. 

94 



746 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


The interior stupa is tall and cylindrical, and is surrounded by two rail 
courses ; its original wooden umbrella is still intact. This grand excava- 
tion is datable in the first century b.c. 

The last of the series, dating about a.d. 180 is the chaitya hall at Kan- 
heri. It is 86 feet long, 40 feet wide and 50 feet high, much resembling the 
one at Karle, of which indeed, architecturally, it is nothing but a degene- 
rate copy. The interior roof had wooden rafters, the pegs of which are 
still in situ, and the outer screen is modelled with large figures of the royal 
donors sculptured as in Karle. In front were the lion-pillars, not free- 
standing as at Karle but attached to the rock. 

SCULPTURE 


As already mentioned, there is a wealth of Buddhistic sculptural remains 
in stone associated with the stupas, chaityas, and viharas, both structural 
and rock-cut, existing in the Deccan. Sculptures related to Hinduism or 
Jainism are rare in this region, and these Buddhist relics are all we have 
to exemplify the sculptural art of the period in the South. 

From contemporary literature it would appear that in the South much 
of the plastic art still remained in the hands of the wood and ivory carvers, 
the stucco workers and the terra-cotta makers. Tamil works mention 
' Hindu temples as well as the paUis of the Buddhists and Jainas, which 
were adorned with sculptures and paintings. That iconographic concepts 
of the deities were also in vogue is clear from such descriptions of Siva as 
three-eyed, bearing matted locks, and wearing the crescent on his head, 
or as riding on his bull, as the wielder of the battle-axe, 1 as blue-throated 
( nilakantha ), as Tripurantaka, and as Ardhanari; of Vishnu as dark-hued, 
the holder of the conch and discus, the lord of the Garudadhvaja, and 
Suryanarayana, Trivikrama, Anantasayi reclining on a serpent couch ; as 
having the blossoming lotus stalk issuing from his navel (Padmanabha) with 
Brahma seated on the blossom and also as Krishna 2 (Maydn), and Baladeva 
(Valiyon) wielding the plough and holding the palmyra flag; 3 * Murugan 
(Kumara) as red-hued and riding on the peacock or the elephant, holding 
the peacock flag;* and Surya driving his chariot drawn by seven horses. 5 
The anthropomorphic concept of these gods with their attributes could 
have been expressed only by images, made of wood or stucco 6 by the side 
of many other objects of beauty and amid motifs of decoration inclu- 
ding forms of men and animals. 


1 Purananuru 6, It. 17-18; 55, II. 1-5; 
56, II. 1-2; 91, ll. 5-6; Ahananuru 181, 
ll. 15-18 

2 Mullaippaltu ll. 1-3; Purananuru 56, 
II. 6-7 ; Perumbanarruppadai ll. 373 ; 
402-4; 29-30 

3 Purananuru 56, ll. 3-4 

1 Ibid. ll. 7-8 

5 Km injippattu, ll. 215-6 


The tradition in many ancient shrines, 
m the Varadaraja Templeat Kanchi, 
is that the original image in the mida- 
sthana was of wood, later replaced in 
stone. The Trivikrama-miilavigraha 
in the Vishnu temple at Tirukkoyilur 
u ^ rcot dist.) is of wood, as also 
the Oppiliyappar idol in Uppiliyappan 
Kovil near Kumbakonam; and the 



SCULPTURES IN ROCK-CUT VIHARAS AND CHAJTYAS 


747 


In the northern half of the peninsula, in the Deccan, under the Andhra 
kings and their successors, under the growing influence of Buddhism, 
sculptural activity flourished on a large scale. It is mostly found associa- 
ted with the stupa sites in Eastern Deccan extending from Salihundam in 
Srikakulam (North Visakhapatnam district) near Orissa to Chinna Gan- 
jam in the Guntur district in the south and with the rock-cut chaityas and 
viharas of Western Deccan. In the first group the sculptor wrought the 
soft and easily worked marble-like greenish-grey limestone, in some in- 
stances brought to the site from distant quarries by road and river. In the 
same way, the Mauryan sculptors of North India chose a particular buff- 
coloured sandstone from Chunar, which could take a mirror-like polish, 
while the sculptors of Sanchl and Bharhut affected the darkish-red sand- 
stone from Central India, and those of Mathura the spotted variety of 
Tantpur and Bayana sandstone. But in Western Deccan the architect- 
sculptors who wielded larger masses of materials in situ and excavated and 
embellished the rock-cut monuments, selected suitable places in the rock 
for their work. 

Of these rock-cut viharas and chaityas of the west, including those at 
Guntupalle in the east, some have notable figure sculptures as part of 
their original composition. Instances are found at Bhaja, Nanaghat,Pital- 
khora, Bedsa, Nasik, Karle and Kanheri. In the pillars of these rock-cut 
monuments one can trace an evolution from the earlier examples with 
octagonal shafts and without base or capital, being mainly copies of plain 
and undecorated wooden posts, to the later ones endowed with bases and 
capitals, where each member of the pillar receives its elaborations. It is 
here that a large element of sculptural decoration is to be found. The 


existence of stucco images in the mula- 
sthana of other ancient temples, e.g. 
Anantapadmanabha of the Trivandrum 
temple and Ranganatha at Srirangam 
protected from destruction today by a 
special composition applied annually 
( punuku-chattam ) is well known. 
(See Gopinath Rao, Hindu Iconography 
i, part i, Introduction p. 59). While 
the wooden forms were appropriately 
painted or lacquered (lac and lacquer- 
ing were known in the Sahgam times 
too — Sirupanarruppadai ll. 53-54), the 
stucco forms were painted (as they are 
today on the South Indian Gopuras 
and Vimanas). Such stucco images 
are known from the Andhra Bud- 
dhist sites and many of the stupas were 
finished mostly in stucco. Even after 
the substitution of stone sculptures 
for these wooden or stucco images, 
the practice of applying a thin coat 
of plaster stucco, and painting them 
over in appropriate colours continu- 
ed for a long time till the smearing 


of oil over the mulavighrahams, as on 
the amorphic lihgas, came into vogue. 
There are still some temples where the 
stone sculpture in the sanctum (rmila- 
vigraha) carries the painted stucco as 
the sculptures in the Vishpu cave-lem- 
ple at Malaiyadippatti in Puddukkottai. 
It was evidently because the triula- 
vigrahas or dhruva-beras installed per- 
manently in the shrines were of such 
easily destructible material — wood, 
stucco, or stone covered by stucco 
that additional images (bera) of im- 
perishable metal (or stone) were in- 
stalled in the shrines for the daily bath 
( abhisheka ) and anointment ( kautuka - 
beras or baliberas or snapana beras) 
and metal ones as processional images 
( utsavaberas ) to be easily carried in 
processions. These forms of beras 
came in (perhaps as a result of later 
agamic prescriptions) in South Indian 
temples. For the forms of beras see 
Gopinath Rao, Hindu Iconography, 
i (i) Intro, p. 17 



748 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


pillars of the ‘Persepolitan’ order found in the Pandulena chaitya at Nasik 
and the Manmoda chaitya at Junnar show the introduction of base and 
capital. While the capital takes merely the form of a square abacus, the 
base has already assumed the form of a kalasa or pot. These pillars as 
a whole are better proportioned. In the Bedsa chaitya, however, we notice 
a further advance ; for here the pillars and pilasters are decorated with the 
‘Persepolitan’ capital and surmounted by spirited human and animal 
figures. Karle exhibits the culmination of this development. The vase- 
shaped base and the octagonal shaft persist, but the campaniform capital, 
(a variation of the earlier free standing Asokan columns), supports a 
sculptured group, corresponding to the Buddhist symbols of the original. 
These figures comprise grouped pairs of men and women, lightly clad and 
heavily adorned with jewellery, seated astride kneeling elephants on one 
side and horses on the other. Originally the elephants were provided with 
silver or ivory tusks, and the horses were decked with metal trappings. 
These carved groups on the top of the pillars, though superficially alike, 
show sufficient variation in design to relieve monotony. The execution of 
these men and animals is really free and bold. Cave m at Nasik and the 
chaitya hall at Kanheri are noted for the elaborately decorated railing in 
relief in front, suggestive of the great structural railing at Amaravati. 

In the old vihara at Bhaja are to be found more interesting sculptures. 
The cornice of the barrel-vaulted verandah at the front is supported by 
alternating stupa forms, and male and female caryatid figures with waist- 
cloths, large turbans and heavy ornaments. The statues of the armed 
doorkeepers are also similarly clad. The pillar at the west end of the 
verandah has a capital surmounted by addorsed sphinx-like forms with 
bovine bodies and female busts; on the east side of the hall and the veran- 
dah are five-armed figures seated in niches. Most remarkable are the 
two unique reliefs at the east end of the verandah. That on the left side 
presents an action picture of a royal figure driving in a chariot drawn by 
four spirited horses accompanied by two women holding a parasol and a 
fly whisk, and followed by a mounted escort in which the female rider in the 
inner angle of the verandah is clearly provided with some kind of stirrups, 
perhaps the earliest known instance in the world . 1 The chariot runs 
across the bent backs of grossly proportioned nude female demons who 
seem to be floating face downwards in the air. The more elaborate relief 
on the right side again depicts a princely figure riding an enormous ele- 
phant witha standard-bearer seated behind, while the elephant traverses the 
landscape holding aloft an uprooted tree in its trunk. The elephant and its 
riders stand out more prominently from the background by reason of their 
greater proportions . 2 Another elephant forming part of the background 


Coomaraswamy, op. cit., p. 25 & n. 1 
Coomaraswamy (ibid. p. 25) in agree- 
ment with previous authors identifies 
the first scene as representing Surya 
with his two wives driving through the 


s k y dispelling the powers of darkness, 
and the second as Indra on Airavata, 
hut remarks in the footnote (No. 2) 
that as regards these and other examples, 
it should be observed that not every 



PORTRAIT SCULPTURES 


749 


is no larger than the foot of the principal one. In this landscape below 
the uprooted tree are falling figures and below them comes a chaitya tree 
on which hang three human figures, while still lower there is another 
chaitya tree, both the trees being shaded by parasols held over them. 
Below the main scene and on the left of the second chaitya tree and land- 
scape is a royal court scene. To the right is a more confused jungle scene 
in which appear an armed man and a horse-headed deity. 

These two reliefs are among the earliest of their kind. They are mental 
pictures transplanted without any attempt at the representation of visual 
appearances, though they are realistic in detail and show great knowledge, 
if not study, of nature. The presentation of the various elements succes- 
sively in a half bird’s eye view with the horizon practically out of the pic- 
ture makes obvious to one accustomed to the eastern and Indian convention 
a three dimensional effect; there is no crowding or overlapping of planes, 
while the mutual relations of the parts are unmistakable. The whole 
approach is realistic without idealisation. ‘Both are the creation of a wild 
and fertile, not to say an uncanny, imagination ’. 1 

The great skill of these craftsmen has also produced a number of por- 
trait sculptures in these excavated monuments. At Nanaghat there is a 
portrait gallery — very damaged — of the family of Sri Satakarni, noting the 
names of the members. These are the earliest Indian portrait-sculptures 
that we know of. At Kondane is another portrait-sculpture which, accord- 
ing to the associated inscription in the script of the period, was fashioned 
by the sculptor Balaka, pupil of the master sculptor Kapha (Krishna), a 
significant name as Burgess remarks . 2 This too, perhaps the portrait of 
the donor of the Cave, is mutilated, but the skill of the sculptor is still visi- 
ble in the careful chiselling of the elaborate head-dress. Such portrait 
sculptures of donor couples are to be found also in the chaitya halls of 
Karle and Kanheri. These cave monuments received further attention at 
the hands of the Mahayanists of the subsequent Gupta epoch . 3 

The earliest sculptures, still extant, from the structural stupas of the east 
of India are few. They are the remains of what once adorned the stupas 
of Bhattiprolu, Jagayyapeta and Amaravatl in its first period. More than 
Bhattiprolu the ruins of which contained a number of beautiful relic cas- 
kets with inscriptions, the remains from Jagayyapeta have yielded some 
sculpture fragments. The most noteworthy among these reliefs are the many 
pilasters with campanulate capitals and addorsed winged animals, one 
representing a king surrounded by emblems of royalty and another re- 
presenting a punyasala with worshippers, the form of which is of special 


rider in a four-horsed chariot neces- 
sarily represents the Sun, nor everyone 
on an elephant Indra. 

For a detailed appreciation see Coo- 
maraswamy, ibid. pp. 26-7 
Burgess, J., Report on the Buddhist 
Care temples and their inscriptions, 
ASWI. iv p. 9 (London, 1883); Luder’s 


List, 1071. 

1 For example the sculptures depicting 
paduka worship on the capitalsof some 
of the pillars in Kaijheri, and Nasik 
III, and the palimpsests of Buddha 
figures on the wall of the lower storey 
of the facade between the doorways. 



750 ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 

architectural interest. It is the portrayal of a shrine with a facade of four 
pillars, provided with a flight of steps in front. The central part enshrines 
a Buddha-pada symbolic of the Buddha, protected by a parasol and with 
hanging garlands on either side, while the side compartments between the 
pillars have each a standing woman, one of whom holds a vase of flowers. 
The shrine is surmounted by another storey with an arched roof crowned 
with ornamental finials and chaitya windows at the sides. The Jagayya- 
peta reliefs are characterised by their flatness, spaciousness, and large 
elongated figures. The carving of a kingly figure standing by his horse, 
from Garikapadu is another fine example of this early sculpture. 

The more numerous and well-studied reliefs and sculptures from Ama- 
ravatl and Nagarjunakonda afford a better idea of the great school of sculp- 
ture that evolved and flourished in Andhradesa for nearly six centuries 
commencing from about the close of the third century B.c. Amaravatl 
as the greatest centre attracted the attention of patrons, devotees, and 
sculptors, and underwent great elaborations and remodellings during 
these centuries. Thus its reliefs, supplemented by those from the other 
great centre, Nagarjunakonda, exhibit a continuous series showing the de- 
velopment and richness of this school of sculpture. 

As has been already mentioned, in Amaravatl four periods of construc- 
tion are easily discernible, and to one or other of these periods are related 
the sculptures found from the other stupa sites of this region. The sculp- 
tures of the earliest period bear some resemblance to those of Bharhut, 
but the later examples show more similarity to those of Mathura in the 
Kushana period. Through the successive stages one may observe an 
advance in technique and refinement. 

To the first period dating from 200-100 b.c., to which the above-mention- 
ed sculptures from Jagayyapeta are related in style and age, belong a few 
slabs which decorated the base of the stupa. Many of these were in the 
fourth period reversed and carved on the other side, and similarly almost 
all the pieces from the plinth and a few coping fragments which are from 
an earlier rail. The base slabs, as usual in early stupas, depict pilasters at 
intervals with animals above bell-shaped capitals and devotees adoring 
the Buddha symbolically represented. The human and other figures in 
these sculptures are flat, possessing more strength than proportion, and 
are on a larger scale. The apparel, like the dhoti and the turban, and the 
ornaments are well delineated and being more than conventional adorn- 
ments reflect contemporary modes. The figures of men and boys driving 
bulls, deer, and elephants are nicely done. The human figures are cha- 
racterised by a certain amount of stiffness and by rather awkward poses 
devoid of graceful flexions; the animal forms are rather heavy, powerful, 
and elongate. The makara, which has not yet become the fantastic crea- 
ture of succeeding epochs, and the lotus typical of Indian art are found 
here, and also an excellent example of the swan (hamsa). 

To the second period are to be attributed the casing slabs above the 
platform. These slabs dating from about 100 b.c. to a.d. 100 are broad 



AMARAVATI SCULPTURES 


751 


and of varying heights containing superposed panels depicting in form the 
Buddha preaching, in addition to symbolic representations of the Master, 
e.g. vase or footprints placed on a throne or the dharmachakra or the 
stupa; they bear a frieze of leonine animals and over them a double frieze 
of trisulas. Their form and the inscriptions associated with them clearly 
indicate that they are earlier than the railings of the next period. The 
figures are more graceful and natural than those of the first period, the 
awkward and stiff bearing of the earlier time having disappeared. The 
features and physiognomy are nearer approaches to the sculptures of the 
subsequent periods. The slabs belonging to this period are more nu- 
merous than the fragments of the first period, though scarcer than those of 
the later periods. Taken together they depict successively the principal 
scenes of the Buddha’s life, the Buddha almost always being represented 
by a symbol, though in two or three places he is personified,— the earliest 
cases of his personification on record. He is in human form only when 
shown as preaching and not in other scenes, for his enlightenment is re- 
presented by the Bodhi tree, the scene of his first sermon by the dharma- 
chakra and his death by a stupa. The important remains include the much 
weathered panel showing Asoka watering the Bodhi tree and the attempt 
of Mara's daughters and the gnomes to entice the Buddha. Here the 
feminine forms are cleverly executed and the composition approaches that 
of the later groups of succeeding periods. The sculpture showing Siddha- 
rtha leaving his palace on his journey in search of truth is typical of 
symbolic representation. While the figures of men and women have be- 
come more graceful than in the earlier series, some trace of heaviness still 
cling to them. Worth noting is the fact that the women, as depicted in 
contemporary Mathura sculptures, are draped and yet appear nude. 
That they are clothed is clear from the incised double lines over the legs 
showing the folds and lines of the apparel; but though the thick waist 
bands and loops are there, the arrangement of the small fan-like central 
guehchha to cover the nakedness, as in later sculptures, is sometimes 
absent. 

The railing round the stupa belonging to the third period ( c . a.d. 150), 
carved carefully on either face, was about 13 feet high, formed of uprights 
planted at intervals with three cross-bars interconnecting every two of 
them and surmounted by a continuous coping 2'9" high. The sculptures on 
the outer face of this compound rail were of a uniform and general type. 
On the uprights they consisted of a disc mid-way up, and the lower upper 
halves of a disc respectively near the top and bottom. These were rather 
conventional designs of the full lotus, embellished by beautiful leaves 
and creepers in concentric bands. At the two ends of the pillars above 
and below the half discs were bands depicting animals and flowers, and in 
the spaces between the discs were sculptures of the stupa, the Buddha, the 
naga, the tree etc., showing devotees above and dancing dwarfs below. 
The cross-bars were likewise embellished by discs with leaf-patterns. The 
coping was ornamented with a long wavy roll garland of flowers carried 



752 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


by human figures standing at intervals and holding one or other of the 
Buddhist symbols. On the inner side the rail was filled with a profusion 
of sculptures notable for their great elaboration and beauty of detail, re- 
presenting scenes of sacred legend and of everyday life. The uprights 
bore on their inner sides the central disc and the semi-discs above and 
below and friezes of animals and flowers near the top and bottom, as on 
the outside. On the central discs and in the spaces above and below them 
were delicately carved reliefs depicting scenes from the Jatakas, episodes 
from the Buddha’s life, and varied pictures of domestic and religious life 
often with a vivid local colour. The inner faces of the cross-bars connec- 
ting the pillars were likewise decorated by discs with concentric rings of 
floral and foliage design, the central disc alone in each being a panel of 
figure sculpture. The inner side of the coping too was filled with a variety 
of figure sculptures depicting scenes from life. Thus the inner surface 
of the railing, on the left of the circumambulating devotee, was almost 
entirely covered with sculptures narrating stories of the Buddha, the 
Jatakas, and other lively incidents, alike pleasing to the eye and instructive 
to the mind. This portrayal of the whole popular lore of the Buddhists at 
Amaravati for the edification of the circumambulating pious devotees was 
carried out on a grander scale in Borobudur which owes not a little to 
Amaravati art. 1 

Several converging lines of evidence suggest the conclusion that the rail- 
ing came into existence in the latter half of the second century a.d. These 
are: the palaeography of the inscriptions on the rail; the information 
contained in another inscription 2 that in Vasishthiputra Sri Pulamavi’s 
reign (c. a.d. 150) additions or embellishments were made to the stupa 3 
and the Tibetan tradition associating the Buddhist Acharya Nagarjuna 
with the construction of the rail. 4 This stone railing might have been a 
copy of an earlier wooden railing. Though much of it has been lost, the 
surviving portion is eloquent enough to show how noble and imposing 
a structure the whole must have been, the perfection of the art of the times. 
The sculptures on these railing pieces and components form the high- 
water mark of Andhra art and the most outstanding in the whole of India. 
The delicacy of the figures and the impression of a soft texture in them are 
remarkable. Even in crowded scenes there is still a light feeling in all 
flexions characterising poses, with a complete absence of the meretricious. 
All the figures are marked by a joyous vivacity. Crowded groups are 
arranged with facile mastery, aiming at balance rather than at perfect 
symmetry. Nevertheless, here and there we meet signs of meticulous 
adjustment designed to achieve an obvious symmetry. Even here in spite 
of the correspondence of numbers and positions on either side, the com- 
position is markedly pleasing to the eye. A newfeature, absent in the earlier 


Foucher, Beginnings of Buddhist Art 
ASSI. i p. lvi, no. 1; Burgess, J., 
Buddhist Stupas of Amaravati & Jagga- 
yapeta 


3 ASSI. i p. 100; Liiders’ List, 1248 
El. xv pp. 259, 261 : ASSI. i pp. 5, 11; 
IA. xn p. 88 



AMARAVATI SCULPTURE: LAST PHASE 


753 


sculptures of Amaravatl, is the delineation of different planes, now 
achieved with triumphant ease. The figures of the first plane are carved in 
deep relief, and the depth of cutting gradually diminishes with the successive 
planes so that the figures in the distance are in such low relief as to be 
almost indistinguishable from line sketches. Where the figures are cut 
obliquely this effect of depth is achieved by carving the near side in higher 
relief than the far side of the same figure — for example the shoulders in 
human figures. It is the same with animals; the nearer pairs of their 
legs and feet are cut in higher relief. Most remarkable of all is the skill dis- 
played in the representation of scenes of action. In the story of Udayana 
and his queens sculptured on the uprights, nothing can be more vivid than 
the scene of Udayana’s fierce stand bow in hand, and the frightened ha- 
rem ; or the story of the subjugation of the elephant Nalagiri (depicted on 
the cross-bar medallion), portraying the confusion created by the elephant 
running amok in the streets of Rajagriha; or, though much mutilated, the 
lively battle-scene from the coping. The sculpture of the railing period 
alone supplies us with a wealth of detail covering all aspects of contempo- 
rary life. Another noteworthy feature is that besides the other usual 
symbolic representations of the Buddha, e.g. the empty throne, a pair of 
feet etc., the symbol most often used is a flaming pillar above the paired 
feet resting on a lotus base and crowned by a trisiila. 

The casing slabs of the fourth period, a.d. 200-250 though only six feet 
high, show more rich and elaborate carvings than the rail. These consisted 
of the many chaitya slabs all carved with reliefs of the stupa itself, reveal- 
ing every detail of its construction. These reliefs were obviously inspired by 
the sculptured stupa and its railing, and so would be later in point of time 
than both; the palaeography of the inscriptions found on them confirms 
this. These slabs, along with the chakra pillars and the other slabs, some 
of them terminating in stupas, formed the casing round the base, while the 
whole was surmounted by a continuous frieze. Some if not all the sculp- 
tures of this period are found carved on the original casing slabs which 
formed the first series covering the base of the stupa in the earlier period, 
and which were carved with pilasters at intervals. These slabs were pul- 
led out in the last period and were reset after their reverse sides had been 
re-carved in large panels showing stupas with friezes. The figures in the 
sculptures of this period tend to grow taller and slimmer, though on the 
casing slabs with stupa representation, they are somewhat diminutive 
in size. In this period also one sees the finest miniature sculptures on the 
small circular bosses, in the friezes, and on the casing slabs. 

The statues of the Buddha in the round dating from the third century 
A.D. are magnificent and powerful creations more akin to the Ceylon than 
to the Mathura type. They are severe, but the features are full, and the 
body is far from slender, the expression aristocratic and benign ; the head 
is crowned with short curly hair. 

The various stories illustrated in the reliefs involved the representation 
of abundant architectural detail — circular and rectangular huts, walled 
95 



754 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


and moated cities, turreted city gates, toranas, palace buildings, stupas, 
chapels and an elaborate temple of the Bodhi tree. According to Coo- 
maraswamy 1 it would hardly be possible to exaggerate the luxurious 
beauty and the technical proficiency of the Amaravati reliefs ; ‘this is the 
most voluptuous and the most delicate flower of Indian sculpture.’ 

In the second century a.d. (137-197) the apostle Nagarjuna found a 
congenial place in the Krishna region for the propagation of his faith and 
the preservation of the southern congregations under the Satavahanas, 
who, though not Buddhists, patronised the creed and fostered the arts 
of building, sculpture, and painting; Nagarjuna’s successors found equal- 
ly great patrons in the Ikshvaku rulers who were the contemporaries of the 
later Satavahanas and their heirs in that region. Like many of the Sata- 
vahana kings, they were not Buddhists themselves. Just as Amaravati 
became a great Buddhist centre of Nagarjuna’s association with the ela- 
boration of its famous stupa and by its proximity to Dhanakataka, Nagar- 
junakonda, by similar association with him when he spent his final days 
on Sri Parvata, became another great centre of Buddhism and art, situated 
as it was near Vijayapuri, the Ikshvaku capital. Nowhere else have such 
extensive Buddhist remains been brought to light. It was mostly here that 
after the great age of Amaravati and the Satavahanas Buddhism and Bud- 
dhist art rose to prominence and flourished. The sculpture of Nagar- 
junakonda on the same light-green limestone was thus a sequel to the 
earlier Amaravati school and had its beginnings contemporary with the 
third period of Amaravati art. 

The carved vertical slabs mostly belong to the casing of the drum, about 
2 feet wide and as much in height, and the favourite sculptures on them are 
the representations of the stupa, while those adorning the more important 
ayaka platforms portray some leading event in the life of the Buddha, 
by scenes or symbols such as a wheel, throne, or stupa. Above the drum, 
the slabs encasing the base of the dome are taller (2 ft. wide and 3 to 4 feet 
high) with a graded concavo-convex curvature that fitted on to the rising 
curve of the dome. Their fronts are separated into two or three horizon- 
tal panels, the topmost of which is a frieze ornament running continuously 
round the dome and marking the limit of the stone work, for what was 
beyond was finished in plaster and decorated in stucco. Sometimes the 
top frieze was built separately with smaller horizontal slabs specially cut 
for the purpose. This frieze was composed of a band of yakshas carrying 
an enormous festoon or garland. The slabs covering the base of the dome, 
called torana or frieze-slabs for the above reason, are also carved with 
delightful representations of the purnaghata, the trisula, the stupas, and 
lions in groups of five. The panels in these contained scenes illustrating 
the Jatakas. 

Amongst the events of Buddha’s life, the most popular to be depicted 
are his descent from heaven in the form of a white elephant, queen Maya’s 

1 Coomaraswamy, op. cit., pp. 70-1 



Western influence 


755 


conception, the casting of his horoscope after his birth, the great renun- 
ciation, the transportation of Gautama’s head-dress to heaven, the scene 
of temptation, the Naga-Muchalinda protecting the Buddha from rain 
with his broad hood, the first sermon in the deer-park at Sarnath, and the 
mahaparinirvana represented by the stupa. Besides the vertical slabs of the 
dome, the ayaka cornice stones also portray the Jatakas. The panels of the 
latter, especially, are separated from one another by figures in bas-relief 
of a pair of lovers, yakshas, or nagas, forming purely decorative parts and 
not connected with the story in the panels. The ends of these cornice 
stones projected outside the platform in the form of brackets ornamented 
with makaras having male and female ( yaksha ) riders standing on them, 
the whole resembling woodwork. Below the panels was a row of medal- 
lions in the form of tiny leogryphs extending from end to end. 

Besides the scenes from the Jatakas and the Buddha’s life, there are 
others portraying local life, with incidents which are, perhaps, historical. 
The paneis are permeated with an air of realism, and the attractive and 
spirited figures are marked by elegance, movement and expression. The 
tone and texture of the stone, the plastic quality of the work, and the 
smoothness of the chiselling with lines and shadows combine to stamp the 
impression of supple and living flesh. Among the animals, the elephants 
are sculptured to perfection. 

In Amaru vati, as also in Nagarjunakonda, sculptors showed themselves 
adept not only in the conventional symbolic representation of things and 
events but also in narrative sculpture, a field in which they exercised their 
superb talents with equal effect in the composition of a panel, in balancing 
a group, in the distinction of planes and in the sequence of narrative. They 
excel likewise in the synoptic method of introducing one scene into ano- 
ther and showing the same character in the same piece more than once in 
order to tell the story concisely. As examples, one could quote the wonder- 
ful scene of Nalagiri running amok in the streets of Rajagriha and the sub- 
jugation of the elephant in the same piece on the medallion of the upright, 
and again, the panel depicting the story of Udayanaand his queens, from 
Amaravatl. 

The important sculptures from the Vijayapuri site in Nagarjunakonda 
are on five handsome stone pillars recently excavated. The peculiar orna- 
mentation and the semi-classical portraits carved on these are noteworthy 
because they recall Graeco-Roman and Scythian types. For example, 
the two figures of a bearded soldier (a Scythian warrior — kanchuki — wear- 
ing a Roman helmet, a quilted long-sleeved tunic and trousers with a 
kamarband- like sash of cloth, holding a heavy spear) perhaps indicate 
the figures and accoutrement of exotic elements in the soldiery employed 
by the South Indian kings. This idea gains strength from the example 
of an inscribed Buddha-pada, donated by a Saka lady, discovered in Monas- 
tery n. The other sculpture is a Bacchanalian scene, portraying a male 
figure, nude to the waist, holding a drinking horn (rhyton) in his left hand, 
while standing on the ground near his foot is a wHne jar covered with an 



756 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


inverted cup, the whole supposed to be a crude copy of Dionysus. Such 
instances of classical occidental figures are to be traced to the active sea- 
borne trade between the Roman empire and Southern India in the first 
three centuries after Christ; other examples from Arikamedu near Pondi- 
cherry are known. 

To the last period of Amaravati belong the fine sculptures from the 
stupa near Goli in the Guntur district. Remarkable are the similarity of 
subject matter, finish and pose, the style of grouping of the figures, and the 
resemblance in size and form of the paired couples separating one scene 
from another in the friezes. The costumes of the Buddha closely resem- 
ble those found in the fourth period at Amaravati. 

The sculptures from the Buddhist sites at Chinna Ganjam, Pedda Gan- 
jam, Kanuparti, Alluru, Gummadidurru etc. are mostly akin to the later 
sculptures of Amaravati. Of these the big stupa at Gummadidu r ru (Rami- 
reddipalle) 1 had around its base (when excavated) 34 reliefs encircling the 
stupa mound on the same type of grey limestone as at Amaravati, all 
damaged at the top. These comprise larger slabs with the stupa relief 
alternating with narrower reliefs or steles. The sculptures are excellent 
and well preserved; some of the chaitya slabs (with reliefs of the stupa 
complete) have a seated Buddha in the centre, while others have a symbol 
in his place. The Buddha is curly-haired, full-robed and haloed, often 
seated in the preaching attitude. In one case, the central figure wears a 
head-dress and bangles like the kings of later date. The steles are deco- 
rated with the figure of a pillar or a tree, with a wheel or trident at the 
top, and deer, svastika or the feet of the Buddha below accompanied by 
the usual devotees or donors. One of the reliefs, exceptional in being un- 
damaged at the top, is of much interest. It is a fine sculpture of Buddha 
standing in the preaching attitude; on its right is a deer, and lower 
down a kneeling figure. A long complete frieze depicts in one panel a 
royal court with musicians; in the other, separated by a panel of a pair 
of figures, a royal procession is going to worship the Buddha. Besides 
these fine figures, the lotus, vase, and other ornaments occur in profusion. 
From its inscriptions the stupa and its sculptures are to be assigned to the 
second or third century a.d. 

Besides the bas-relief representation of the Buddha, stone images in the 
round, some of large size, are known from Amaravati and Nagarjuna- 
konda, Pedda Ganjam, Salihundam, Guntupalle, Alluru and Vidyadha- 
rapuram (Bezwada). All of them belong to the fourth period and the 
Mahayana. In the Mahayana period images of the Buddha were set up 
at the cardinal points of the stupa and in the small chapels adjoining it and 
in the chaityas of the monasteries ( Buddha chaitya). The Amaravati, 
Nagarjunakonda, Bezwada and Pedda Ganjam specimens are of the 
marble-like stone. 

Buddha images of large size made of brick and mortar and covered by 

1 ASIAR. 1926-7, pp. 152-6, 189-90 



LITERATURE ON PAINTING 


757 


stucco, representing the earlier mode prior to stone statuary, are 
known from Salihundam. The stucco ornamentation over the uncased 
parts of the stupa has been mentioned before. Even the bas-reliefs seem to 
have been covered originally with thin plaster, coloured and gilt; the 
effect must have been heightened by such colouring . 1 

PAINTING 

Painting on relievos or on plain surfaces developed markedly in the period. 
References to and descriptions of the art of painting are numerous in 
contemporary Tamil literature. The Tamil word for painting was 
dviyam. In a Kalittogai verse a lover describes his love as a picture 
wrought by Manmatha, the son ofNediyon . 2 The colourful pageant of 
the parallel rows of shops and stalls of Madurai is likened to a painted 
scene in a passage in Madurai-k-kahji. The Paripadal remarks in one 
context, ‘if we think of these we are reminded of the charm of a master’s 
painting.’ References to painters and the principles of their art are more 
frequent and detailed in Tamil works of a slightly later period. 

Murals were clearly done on the surface of white lime-plaster laid over 
the walls , 3 and paintings were executed on waxed cloth. Such a painted 
cloth canopy, depicting the twelve rasis of the zodiac, the sun and the 
moon, and the moon with his ever constant consort Rohini spread above 
the cot of the Pandya king, is described in Nedunalvadai. 

The palette seems to have been much restricted and the principal colours 
employed were perhaps only five in number namely red (as the colour 
of Siva or Murugan), black (as that of Krishna), white (as that of Bala- 
deva), green and blue, and possibly tints derived from them during actual 
execution. Three kinds of brushes are mentioned, vattigai, tukiligai or 
thurigai and legal (lekhd). 

Such a well-developed art with an advanced technique produced also 
a treatise on the art of painting called Oviya-ch-chennul referred to in the 
Manimekalai 4 as meant for the use of the danseuse. 

Literary tradition on this art in Sanskrit is older, dating from the time 
of the Vedas, the epics and the Jatakas. Usha’s dream youth and her maid 
Chitralekha’s portraits of all the deities and great men of the time in one 
of which she identified the likeness of her dream companion Aniruddha, 
and her ultimate union with him, is an outstanding instance. The Rama- 
yana describes the painted halls, and the Vinaya Pitaka refers to several 
pleasure-houses of king Pasenadi containing picture halls ( chittdgara ). 
Thus painting both sacred and secular was mostly mural. 

Against this rich literary evidence, the specimen of the art revealed by 
the extant fragments in Jogimara cave in the Ramgarh hills near Sirguja 

1 Coomaraswamy, op. cit., p. 70; Smith, 3 Nedunalvadai I. 10. Manimekalai vi /. 43 
V. A., History of Fine Art in India and ibid, iii /. 130 

Ceylon, pp. 155-6 1 Manimekalai ii //. 30-2 

2 Kalittogai 23 



758 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


dated about the second century B.c. is apt to leave one unconvinced. 
But painting is a form of expression the very materials of which are of ob- 
vious impermanence, and the extant Jogimara frescoes by accident typify 
only a very poor specimen of a rich and developed art. This will be con- 
firmed by an examination of the earlier paintings extant in Ajanta, now 
assigned on stylistic and epigraphic grounds to the same period as Jogi- 
mara — the second and first centuries before Christ, and some to the first 
three centuries after Christ, the only surviving examples of an early art 
of a very rich character. These paintings are confined to Caves x and ix 
and are partially overlaid by later ones. The figures in them bear a great 
resemblance to the sculptures of Sanchi and Bharhut and the contempo- 
rary rock-cut chaityas in the west of the Deccan. These paintings represent 
indigenous types of noble quality, more vigorous and less highly refined 
than those of the Gupta period. A painted inscription in Cave x on the 
left wall behind the third pillar has now been assigned to the second cen- 
tury b.c. while another inscription on the fa?ade is still earlier. The affi- 
nity of the early paintings of this cave with those of Cave ix indicates that 
they are contemporary , 1 their style being one in which the artist depicts 
the story in a plain and direct manner without many decorative embellish- 
ments. The art is well developed, the drawing firm and accurate, showing 
due regard to proportion and the three dimensions. The grouping of the 
figures in the composition of scenes reveals a balanced judgment and a 
refined taste in the choice of poses. The palette is restricted to a few co- 
lours— red and yellow ochre, terre-verte, lamp black, and white of lime . 2 
The figures do not lack expression and grace and show considerable 
religious fervour. 

The painted inscription referred to is the earliest palaeographically and 
is in brown pigment superposed on the painted scene, and is, according 
to Chakra varti , 3 datable to the second century b.c. Though fragmentary, 
it seems to be a label explaining the subject-matter of the painting . 4 
The scene depicts the arrival of a king with his ladies and a child followed 
by a retinue of soldiers, and his worship of the Bodhi tree, an event cele- 
brated by the music and dance of a bevy of maidens on the other side of 
the tree. The king, who is leading and paying homage to the Bodhi tree 
bedecked with flying banners, has a princely appearance and instead of 
a crown wears his hair arranged in a knot encircled by a jewelled fillet and 
rising like the hood of a snake. The five ladies on his left look at his 
face as he worships the tree, while the rest watch from behind. The women 
are scantily dressed but heavily adorned with jewellery bangles, neck- 

laces, and ear ornaments,— their pretty coiffures are varied, and display 
several styles. The group of musicians on the other side, all women, are 
similarly dressed and decked, and while two of them blow trumpets, many 


1 Yazdani, G., Ajanta , Text in, 1946, p. 2 

2 Paramasivan, S., HAR. 1936-37, App. 
A, pp. 25-30 

3 Chakravarti, Dr. N. P., ‘Note on the 


painted inscriptions in the caves’; 
Yazdani, ibid. pp. 86-7 
Ibid. pp. 26-8 pll. xxv a, b, xxvi & xxvii 
a, b, xxiv b, xxviii a & xxiv c. 



AJANTA PAINTINGS 


759 


dance about clapping their hands, in graceful poses, while a few sit on 
wicker stools perhaps watching or singing to the accompaniment of the 
clap-dance ( kummi ). The soldiers in the retinue are interesting. Most of 
them are spearmen, but there is a mace-bearer also, and some are armed 
with bow and arrows or with curved swords or axes. They are bare- 
headed and wear short-sleeved jackets. Their accoutrement portraying 
contemporary style ought to interest a student of the military history of 
India. Behind the musicians are a mango and a banyan tree. 

This painting on the back wall of Cave x is continued on the left wall, 
where the scene shifts and shows the royal party worshipping a stupa, 
which is crowned with a flag and an umbrella with flying apsaras above it. 
Commencing from the left one notices ten votaries in prayerful attitudes 
with hands folded in anjali, and on the other side there remain four figures 
of an originally larger group. There is a mango tree in the background. 
The garments, ornaments, and head-gear of these figures are similar to 
those of the group in Cave ix. On the same left wall, after a gap, the scene 
of the royal visit to the stupa seems to be continued showing the royal 
procession passing through the torana gate of the stupa, which incidentally 
is similar to that of Sanchi. The elephant outside raises its trunk in salute. 
The group in the right half of the fresco, though somewhat confusing, 
seems to portray the arrival and return of the royal procession, the royal 
personages riding on elephants accompanied by umbrella and chauri 
bearers. One elephant carries on its head a purna-kumbha (a full vase), 
cornucopia-like with leaves rising from its mouth. 

The scenes reveal the attempt of the artist to portray human life in all 
its aspects. The entire scene is well conceived and executed, the depiction 
revealing art of a high order that must have been developing for a long 
time. The figures give a good idea of contemporary dress and ornaments. 
The outline of the bodies is in dark red or black, the lines firm and grace- 
ful, the bodies depicted in the round and animated. The colours used are 
yellow ochre, red ochre, terre-verte and lamp black, and there is no 
attempt to show light and shade effects by use of lighter or darker tints 
or mixture as in the later Ajanta paintings. 

The two scenes 1 depicting a Naga king with his attendants from an un- 
identified Jataka story on the inner side of the front wall of Cave ix above 
the left window would be of about the first century b.c. The subject- 
matter in the first panel consists of a mango tree in flower and fruit, 
drawn somewhat conventionally, beneath which are seated two persons 
scantily dressed and wearing loin cloths and turbans formed of a strip of 
silk intertwined with the hair in the form of an apical knob; while the 
headgear of one is shaded by a seven-hooded cobra, the other has a single- 
hooded cobra. In contrast to the dress, the jewellery is profuse — wheel- 
shaped ear ornaments, broad strings of necklaces of pearl with golden 
clasps, ornamented armlets and heavy wristlets. The figures are small and 


1 Ibid. Text, pp. 15-16, pi. 



760 ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 

strong-limbed, with oval faces, short noses and bright eyes. The heads of 
both indicate careful modelling in the original, the outline having been 
marked in dark red which has produced an effect of volume in painting. 
The adjoining panel to the right, separated from the first by the conven- 
tional bands representing hills, or buildings, is much damaged. It shows 
a king and his two attendants, one holding an umbrella, the other a fly 
whisk. Five persons supplicate in front of the king, sitting with their 
hands in anjali, while two more behind them stand and watch. Over all 
these are maidens ( apsarasas ) flying towards the king. The dress and 
ornaments of these figures are similar to those in the adjoining panel. 
The delineation of the bodies of the men is very realistic and indicates 
a variety of poses, natural and graceful. 

Continuous with this on the left wall is the scene showing a group of six- 
teen votaries approaching a stupa . 1 The artist’s love of variety is exhibited 
in the different patterns of head-gear (made up of intertwined strips of 
cloth and hair ending in top knots or forming turbans), the varied decora- 
tion of the waist bands, and the different poses of the hands of the devotees 
in paying homage to the stupa. The artist’s grouping of the figures is en- 
tirely natural and he successfully conveys an idea of movement in the en- 
tire party approaching the stupa. The stupa itself stands inside an enclosing 
wall with two entrances, one with a barrel-vaulted roof as in the chaityas 
of Karle, Bhaja, Bedsa and Kondane, and the other with a torana entrance 
as at Sanchi. The stupa is crowned by a multitude of umbreiias, and on 
the right half of the court in front is a group of musicians with trumpet, 
drum, conch, and discs, one of them, a woman, bending in rhythmic mo- 
vement beating the disc. The other figures are indistinct. Outside the stupa 
enclosure to the right is depicted a monastery with two courts, beyond 
what appear to be two trees, pipal and banyan. The apartments of the 
monastery have barrel-vaulted roofs. Outside the monastery to the right 
are two standing figures with hands in abhayamudra as if in benediction. 
The final scene of the story drawn on the right of this shows the votaries 
assembled in a grove, the five seated persons engaged in animated conver- 
sation with a standing one. Their homeward journey is indicated perhaps 
by the flight of apsarasas towards a house painted at the extreme right in 
which are to be seen four women, one seated on a couch with a maid close 
to her. The other two are in the court of the house, sitting beside afire 
and talking. 

To about the first century b.c. would also belong the powerful delinea- 
tion above the pillars of the nave on the left side of Cave ix of the frieze 
of animals and strong men trying to control them by hugging their necks 
or pulling their tails. This motif of men of herculean strength controlling 
wild animals, for instance a lion which one pulls by its tail, a tiger-like 
mythical animal with the head and horns of an antelope, or a bull whose 
tail is slipping from the man’s hold are all similar to the sculptured friezes 

1 Ibid. Text, pp. 17-19 & pll. xvi b.c, xvii a 



AJANTA JATAKA PAINTINGS 


761 


in Kuda, Nasik and other places. 1 The attitudes of the animals straining 
at the leash are realistically painted, as also the poses and movements of the 
men controlling them. One of the men wears a conical cap, a scarf round 
his arm and back as in a relief on the fagade of the chaitya at Kondane. 2 

The Syama jataka painted in four episodes on the right wall of Cave x, 
behind the pillars 11-15 and the damaged Shad-dantajataka painted on the 
back wall of the right aisle in the same cave behind pillars 2-12 may be 
assigned to the end of our period, viz. the third to fourth century a.d. 
In the Syama jataka the commencing panels shows the king of Kasi 
shooting an arrow. He is followed by five attendants, with head-gear 
like his, and five retainers scantily dressed and in loin cloths, holding spears, 
bows, and arrows like the five attendants, three of whom hold shields of 
hide in addition. The king’s horse stands behind, and, like all the horses 
of Ajanta, is rather badly portrayed. The king in a long coat with short 
sleeves and a girdle round his waist is shown well poised with bent knee 
drawing the bow-string in his right hand to the ear, the left fully outstret- 
ched holding the bow. A spirit in human form on one of the two banana 
trees in front apparently tempts him to release the arrow. The next panel 
shows the dutiful youth Syama, between the two banana trees, carrying 
a pitcher of water on his shoulder, and with the poisoned arrow piercing 
him through his heart from his right side to the left. There also stands 
the repentant king vowing to serve Syama’s blind parents with all the de- 
votion of the son they had lost by his folly. The third episode depicts 
the blind parents in agony feeling the wounded body of Syama before 
making the solemn asseveration along with Bahusodari, the goddess, 
who revived Syama and restored the sight of the blind parents. The re- 
surrected Syama is seen addressing the king who is wonder-struck. The 
deer which were Syama’s companions in the forest are also shown galloping 
towards his cottage as if to inform the parents about his death. The last 
episode depicts Syama sitting on a deer-skin in front of his hut and teaching 
the ‘ten duties of a king and the five precepts’ to the raja, while a buck 
and doe gaze at him with meek affection. This narration is remarkable 
for its rich imagery. 

The episodes of the Shad-danta jataka or the story of the six-tusked ele- 
phant faithfully reproduce all the details of the story; the slight modifi- 
cation of their order was perhaps made purposely by the artist who, for 
the sake of impression, separates the scenes of animal life and the beauty 
of natural scenery from those depicting human feelings wherein ‘the gloom 
of pathos is repelled by the light of religious feelings.’ The narration com- 
mences with the wildlifeof the elephants in dense forest and marshy terrain 
infested by alligators and pythons, and closes with the crowded palace scenes 
and a royal procession marching to worship a stupa and vihara ; in between 

1 See Fergusson and Burgess, Cave 2 Yazdani, ‘Sculpture of the Deccan : 
Temples of India, pi. vii a. The one An Artistic Study’ Silver Jubilee Vol. 

on the outer wall of Cave in at Nasik Bhandarkar Institute, pp. 967-80 

is in slightly modified form. 

96 



762 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE: SOUTH INDIA 


is depicted the bath of the royal elephant in the lake of lotuses and his 
favourite resort under the huge banyan tree. The first panel depicts the 
forest scene with a herd of elephants, one trying to extricate itself from the 
coils of a huge python holding on to its hind legs, the other elephants coming 
to its rescue with their trunks raised as if trumpeting in unison with their 
agonised mate. Another elephant above is triumphantly trampling on an 
alligator laid on its back, whose jaws are gaping with pain. Next comes 
the royal elephant shown in larger proportions than the accompanying 
herd, with six tusks and speckles of pollen on his body. His tail is raised, 
indicative of his having scented danger, and the same feeling is emphasised 
by his mates with their trunks raised as if trumpeting in warning. Fur- 
ther to the right the royal elephant lies prostrate while the hunter Sonut- 
tara hacks out his tusk with a saw. The hunter wears a striped long coat 
with short sleeves. Next comes the panel in which a favourite attendant 
of the Bodhisattva had plucked a lotus flower and presented it to him. 
The incident where the Bodhisattva after sprinkling its pollen on his head 
placed it in the trunk of his wife Maha Subhadda, much to the chagiin of 
his othei wife, the jealous Chulla Subhadda, is shown next. Here the royal 
elephant presents the flower to another elephant (Maha Subhadda) at his 
side, who extends her trunk to receive it. Next is shown the lotus lake 
with lotuses in various stages of bloom in which the Bodhisattva sports 
with his mates and herd. The Bodhisattva is easily recognised among 
the herd by hit six tusks and large size. The delineation of the elephants 
with variously coiled trunks and poses shows the mastery of the artist in 
depicting this favourite and familiar animal. Adjoining this lake scene 
is the sal tree of the jataka story which the Bodhisattva is said to have 
shaken with the result that the flowers and pollen fell on Maha Subhadda 
while only the red ants and dry leaves fell on Chulla Subhadda who was 
standing on the windward side. This was another incident which increased 
the jealousy of Chulla Subhadda and made her pray to be born as the queen 
of the Raja of Kasi in order to wreak vengeance on this faithless elephant. 
The picture here shows the royal elephant standing under his favouiite ban- 
yan tree with his herd beside him, while flowers are falling from the sal. To 
the right of the banyan tree is shown conventionally the golden cliff from 
which a hunter with a bow looks at the Bodhisattva. Below in a niche 
amidst conventional bands is a seated figure of Bodhisattva in human form 
and a woman, Chulla Subhadda in her second life, lying prostrate in front. 
These insets portray the royal elephant, on seeing the hunter coming for 
him, visualising Chulla Subhadda’s whole plot which would culminate in 
her remorse and repentance. At the end of the last scene are two women 
seated on a ledge, probably watching for the return of the hunter with the 
tusks of the elephant. Then comes the picture of the royal palace at Kasi 
where the hunter Sonuttara and his companions have brought the tusks 
and Subhadda, who has asked for them, faints on seeing them, smitten with 
remorse at the injury done to her erstwhile lord. The king’supports the 
fainting queen by putting one arm behind her back and holding her 



PAINTINGS AT BEDSA, BHAJA ETC 


763 


shoulder by the other; a maid nearby fans her, another brings water, a third 
offers her a drink, a fourth sitting at her feet massages them while another 
stands with her hand placed against her mouth in anxiety and sorrow. 
The maid holding the umbrella over the royal couple stands looking at the 
trophy brought, the sight of which seems to have struck the entire court 
with consternation. The entire scene is dramatic, and is heightened in effect 
both by the details and poses and by the skilful grouping. The drawing 
is perfect and the brush work fine. The adjoining scene is again laid in the 
palace showing the king of Kasi and the queen in court issuing orders 
to the hunters to fetch the tusks of the royal elephant. Next to it is the scene 
showing Subhadda’s bedroom, where she sits pensive on a wicker stool 
near her bed with two anxious maids by her side and the king standing 
near the bed soothing her by words. This represents Subhadda’s feigned 
illness, which she said could be cured only by bringing the tusks of the 
royal elephant. The last scene shows the king and queen and her maids 
proceeding to a chaitya for worship . 1 The architectural style of the 
chaitya is a replica of Cave x when its fa?ade was complete. The stupa 
to the left of the chaitya is decked with flags. The artistic conception 
and technical skill of high quality exhibited by this painting makes it an 
important landmark in the art history of Ajanta. 

The fragments of painting extant in the Bedsa, Bhaja, Pitalkhora, Karle 
and Kanheri chaityas await detailed study and dating. The Nasik rock- 
excavations too were apparently painted as at Ajanta though all of it has 
disappeared. That Cave in at Nasik was painted would be clear from 
the inscriptions relating to donations for its painting . 2 There were also 
paintings in Pitalkhora as in Ajanta. Dubreuil discovered a layer of paint- 
ing under a not very old whitewash in the chaitya hall at Bedsa which he 
considered to be of the third-fourth centuries a.d. 3 So far, the picture 
of a seductive young woman has been exposed. The faded figures of Bud- 
dhas and Bodhisattvas in the Bhaja chaitya may belong to the fifth cen- 
tury and later. 

PLATES LI TO LXXXII HAVE REFERENCE TO THIS CHAPTER. 


Yazdani surmises that this refers to 
the worship of the stupa after the wed- 
ding of Subhadda with the king of 
Kasi; after she won his affections, 
she feigned illness and required the 
tusks of the royal elephant to be brought 
as a cure. Others have suggested that 
this scene differs from the original 
jataka version; Subhadda did not die 
but only fainted and as expiation for 
her cruel act ordered the building of 


a chaitya and a stupa over the elephant’s 
remains. The procession according to 
this interpretation represents the king 
and queen going to pay homage to 
the last remains of the Bodhisattva- 
Yazdani, op. cit. m, Text, p. 36 & n. 

1 Gupte, Y. R., Potdar Commem. Vol., 
Poona 1950, p. 292 

3 Aravamuthan T. G., ‘A Fragment 
of Ancient Painting in the Dekhan,’ 
JOR. xiu 



Chapter XXIV 

CULTURAL AND COLONIAL EXPANSION : 
CENTRAL ASIA, CHINA AND THE FAR EAST 

I t is difficult to know precisely how far back the contact of India with 
Central Asia goes. The Asokan inscriptions refer to the Yona, the Bac- 
trian Greeks, and the Kambojas about whose location there is great con- 
troversy. The Arthasastra of Kautilya contains a reference to China-patta, 
Chinese silk, but that also is not regarded as precisely historical evidence . 1 

On the other hand we get different cosmologies in the early Buddhist 
texts as well as in the Ramayaria and the Mahabharata which mention a 
number of nomadic peoples of Central Asia. These cosmologies are not 
dated but some of the notions contained in them certainly go back to the 
third century B.c. The Buddhist texts mention four continents spread 
around the central mount Meru in the following order : in the south Jam- 
budvipa, in the north Uttarakuru, in the west Aparagodana, and in the 
east Purvavideha. Jambudvlpa was generally speaking India according to 
the Buddhists. Uttarakuru, Ottorrogorras of the classical writers, was in 
Chinese Turkestan. Godana was the name by which Khotan was known 
in ancient times. The ancient Chinese transcription of the name as 
Yu-t’ien was in early pronunciation ( g)iu-den , i.e. Godana . 2 

Besides these continents the early Buddhist texts also mention such 
people as China, Kausikam, Khasa, Bahlhi, Tukhara, Pahlava, Parata, 
Saka, Vokkana and Ramatha. The Ramayaria locates to the north of 
Gandhara and Madraka-Yavana, $aka, Parada, Bahlika, Rishika, China, 
Aparachina, Tukhara, Varvara, Kamboja, Darada, Kirata, Tankaija and 
Pasupala. The Mahabharata and the Puranas, which contain information 
of different periods mixed up, mention the same peoples and many others 
in addition. The Saka, Yavana, Parada, Kamboja etc. are more or less 
well known from various other sources. The Tukharas were the people 
of Tokharistan mentioned in the early Chinese records as Ta-hia. Some 
of the people mentioned in the Mahabharata such as Sulika, or Chulika, 
Kusika or Kuchika, Charmakhandika are of known identity. Sulikas 
were the Sogdians, Kusikas — probably the people of Kucha, Charma- 
khandikas — probably the people of Samarkand. The Vokkanas were 
the people of Wakhan region. 

The mention of these people in texts which may be safely placed in the 
third and second centuries b.c. shows that India had already established 
contact with these people either directly or through intermediaries. 

1 See ante ch. iii p. 74 Asian nomads in the history of India’. 

* P. C. Bagchi, ‘On the role of Central JGIS. x pp. 107-11 



KHOTAN LEGENDS 


765 


Trade played an important part in these contacts. The first two lay con- 
verts of Buddha, Trapusa and Bhallika, belonged to the Bahlika country 
and they were the first to build topes in their own city on their return. 
Hiuan Tsang testifies to the existence of these topes in the vicinity of 
Balkh . 1 This may be an old legend but not without significance. The 
first Chinese envoy to Ta-hia (Tokharistan), Chang-K’ien, records the 
presence of Indian merchants in that country who were intermediaries 
between South-West China and the Oxus valley, their caravan routes 
passing through Northern India. 

To the same stock of legends also belongs the story of the colonisation 
of Khotan by Kunala, the son of Asoka. Kunala had been sent as vice- 
roy to Takshasila by Asoka to quell a local rebellion. He did it success- 
fully. He was then blinded during his stay at Takshasila by the agents 
of his step-mother Tishyarakshita. The nobles of the prince’s court, 
indignant at this outrage, left the country in a body, took him with them 
and set him up as king in Khotan. The Buddhist rulers of Khotan claimed 
descent from him . 2 

Another Buddhist legend places 3 the story of the conversion of Khotan 
to Buddhism much earlier and in the time of Buddha. This time also it 
is a merchant who is instrumental in introducing Buddhism in the country. 
The king of Khotan was not a believer in Buddhism. A merchant brought 
with him an Indian monk named Vairochana and having left him under an 
apricot tree to the south of the city went to inform the king with a view 
to bring him to his senses. The king felt annoyed and went to see the monk. 
The monk told him : ‘The Tathagata has sent me to order you to build 
a stupa so that you may enjoy great and eternal prosperity.’ The king 
said : ‘If you can show me your Buddha I will obey you.’ A miracle was 
then performed. Buddha’s son Rahula came there in the form of Buddha 
and left his shadow there. The king was highly impressed and built a 
stupa on the spot. The story is also told by Hiuan Tsang in a slightly dif- 
ferent form and it says that the monk Vairochana came from Kashmir. 

Although the Asokan inscriptions do not recount the details of all the 
Buddhist missionary activity of the period, the Asokan cycle of legends 
speak more of it. It is said that after the Council of Pataliputra, Tissa 
Moggaliputta sent missionaries to various lands. Mahinda, the son of 
Asoka, was sent to Ceylon, Majjhantika to Kashmir and Gandhara, the 
Yona Dhammarakkhita to Aparanta, Mahadhammarakkhita to Maha- 
rashtra, and Maharakkhita to the Yona country. Missionaries were also 
sent to Suvannabhumi (Burma). 

1 Watters, On Yuan Chwang, i pp. 111-3 

8 Stein, Ancient Khotan, pp. 156-60. 

The story is somewhat different in the 
‘Annals of the Li Country’, translated 
by F. W. Thomas, Tibetan Texts and 
Documents, i p. 98. According to this 
work, it was Kustana, an abandoned 
son of Asoka, brought up by the king 


of China, who became king of Khotan. 
He was joined by Yasa, a minister of 
Asoka who went to Khotan with a host 
of other people from India. 

Thomas, ibid. p. 106; Beal, Buddhist 
Records, u p. 312; Chavannes, ‘Voyage 
de Song-yun”, BEFEO. m pp. 388-429 



766 


CULTURAL AND COLONIAL EXPANSION 


Continuous movements of Central Asian tribes towards India after 
the downfall of the Maurya empire show that they already had some con- 
tact with Indians and acquired some knowledge of the country. The 
stories which point to the spread of Indian Buddhism to Central Asia 
either in the time of Asoka or in the pre-Asokan days seem to possess 
a kernel of truth. 

The first official mention of India in the Chinese annals is in connection 
with the mission of Chang-k’ien to Ta-hia (138-126 b.c .) 1 In his report 
to the emperor, he refers to the country of Shen-tu (India) to the south- 
east of the Y tie-chi country. But a connection between India and China 
must have been established earlier in an unofficial way. The story that 
Buddhist missionaries went to the court of the Ts’in emperor She Huang 
(217 b.c.) may be a later Buddhist forgery, but Chang-k’ien’s reference to 
trade relations between South-West China (Sse-chuan and Yunnan) and 
India clearly speaks of a trade route (which might roughly correspond to 
the modem Yunnan road) existing before his time. Moreover, the Chi- 
nese Taoist philosopher Liu-ngan (Huai-nan-tseu) who died in 122 b.c. 
makes use of a cosmology in his book which is clearly of Buddhist in- 
spiration. This cosmology speaks of nine regions (chou, dvipa) spread 
around a central mount which is identified with the Kun-lun. This Kun- 
lun contains the various heavens, the abode of the different kinds of gods 
and culminates in the highest heaven. The disposition of the heavens 
is exactly what we find in the cosmology of the Buddhist texts where the 
central mount is the Meru to the north of the Himavant mountain. Whe- 
ther the identification of the Meru with the Kun-lun is due to Huai-nan- 
tseu or not can hardly be determined now. But all later Chinese Buddhist 
writers accepted the identification without question. Huai-nan-tseu also 
was acquainted with some Buddhist jataka stories and made use of 
them. It is thus probable that relations between China and India had 
been established through different channels before the time of Han Wu- 
ti (140 B.c.) and the interest of the Emperor in the Western countries being 
thus aroused, he despatched the mission of Chang-k’ien. The earliest 
mention of China in Indian literature may go back to the last years of 
the Imperial Ts’in dynasty (209 B.C.). 

Regular communication between India on one hand and China and 
Central Asia on the other was probably not established before the end of 
the second or the beginning of the first century b.c. This was the direct 
result of the foundation of the Ytie-chi empire in the Oxus valley and the 
gradual subjugation of the Hiung-nu in Central Asia after a series of Chi- 
nese military expeditions in that region. After the visit of Chang-k'ien to 
the Ytie-chi court friendly relations were established between the Chinese 
and the Ytie-chi governments. There is official mention of the presenta- 
tion of Buddhist books and relics to the Chinese court by the Ytie-chi in 
the year 2 b.c. Buddhist monks must have accompanied the mission. 

1 Pelliot, ‘Deux Itineraires de Chine en Inde’, BEFEO. tv p. 143 



BUDDHISM IN CENTRAL ASIA 


767 


Buddhism had also penetrated China either by the sea route or the Y un- 
nan route or by both towards the beginning of the Christian era. About 
the middle of the first century a.d. a Chinese prince of the Yang-ts’e valley 
showed a leaning towards this new religion and patronised Buddhist monks. 
Buddhism was put on an officially recognised footing in China about a.d. 
68, when the Emperor Ming received the two Indian Buddhist monks, 
Kasyapa Matanga and Dharmaratna (? Chu-Fa-lan) in Lo-yang, had 
the first Buddhist monastery of Po-ma-sse built for them and encouraged 
the translation of a number of Buddhist texts into Chinese. Thereafter 
Buddhism prospered steadily on Chinese soil. 

India had about this time passed into the hands of the Kushanas, 
a branch of the Yiie-chi. The Kushana empire at this time extended from 
the Oxus valley to Benares, and most probably included Khotan and Kash- 
gar under its greatest ruler Kaniskha. Kanishka was a great champion 
of the Buddhist cause and emulated the example of Asoka in patronising 
the great Buddhist scholars of the period; he called a grand Buddhist 
council, and built the largest and most magnificent Buddhist temple at the 
capital city Purushapura (Peshawar) which became a model for the 
Buddhist architects of Serindia and China in later times. Kanishka also 
encouraged Buddhist missionary activities abroad. Buddhist historical 
tradition bears formal testimony to this and says : ‘He gave patronage to 
and spread the teachings of Buddha in India, Shu-lei (Kashgar), Kuei-tseu 
(Kucha), Ni-pa-lei (Nepala), Chen- tan (Chinasthana, China), Ta-li (Yun- 
nan), Si-hia and other countries.’ 1 

It was in the Kushana period that the southern part of Eastern Turkes- 
tan came under the influence of the Yiie-chi andbecamea sort of cultural 
colony of India. In a number of kingdoms in this part — Shu-lei (Kashgar), 
Khotan, Che-mo-tan (Chalmadana, Cher-chen) up to the very frontier 
of China (Tun-huang), Indian and Yiie-chi settlers were found; an Indian 
dialect akin to the language of the Western Panjab became the official 
language in some of the states, and rulers claiming Indian descent ruled 
the country. This has been amply attested by the KharoshthI records 
in Prakrit which belong to this period and were discovered near the Niya 
region to the east of Khotan. Buddhism was the universally accepted 
religion in this region, as is proved not only by the archaeological finds 
but also from the Chinese sources. 

The Chinese Buddhist sources mention an illustrious Buddhist monk 
of Lo-yang named Chu She-hing who had come to Khotan for his studies 
in the middle of the third century a.d. He studied Buddhism under the 
Indian teachers who were found in numbers in Khotan at this period, and 
collected a number of Buddhist texts which he sent to China either in the 
original or in translation. He himself remained in Khotan till his death. 
Fa-hien also came to Khotan towards the close of the fourth century on 
his way to India. His account of Khotan clearly shows that it had become 

1 P. C. Bagchi, ‘ Jneyaprakasa-Sastra of Saskya Pandita,’ Sino-lndian Studies, ii 

pp. 136-56 



768 


CULTURAL AND COLONIAL EXPANSION 


a great centre of Buddhist studies long before his time. A,ll the inhabi- 
tants of Khotan in his day were Buddhist and the monks numbered several 
myriads, most of whom were students of the Mahayana. There were nu- 
merous monasteries in the capital, but the largest and the most important 
was the Gomatl-mahavihara. It belonged to Mahayana and was inhabited 
by three thousand monks. There was another monastery which Fa-hien 
calls ‘King’s New Monastery’ (Navavihara) ‘the building of which took 
eighty years and extended over three reigns.’ Its construction therefore 
had begun by the beginning of the fourth century. Fa-hien while speaking 
of the wealth and importance of this monastery in Eastern Turkestan says : 
‘Of whatever things of highest value and preciousness the kings in the six 
countries on the east of the (Ts’ong) range (Pamirs) of mountains are pos- 
sessed, they contribute the greater portion (to this monastery), using but 
a small portion of them themselves.’ This clearly shows that the Buddhist 
Church of Khotan was exercising a tremendous influence on all the king- 
doms of Eastern Turkestan. 

The Buddhist scholars who went to China in this period and worked 
for propagation of Buddhism and the translation of Buddhist texts from 
Indian originals mostly came from this region. To mention only a few of 
the names : Lokakshema, the Yiie-chi, who reached Lo-yang in a.d. 147; 
Che-Kien, another Yiie-chi who worked in Lo-yang and Nanking towards 
the end of the second century and beginningof the third ; Che Yao, a Yiie- 
chi scholar who translated a number of works between a.d. 184 and 189; 
Dharmaraksha, bom of Yiie-chi parents at Tun-huang, who worked in 
China and translated more than two hundred works between a.d. 265 and 
284. There were besides Sogdian, Parthian and Indian monks who went 
to China from the southern kingdom of Eastern Turkestan. 

In the northern part of Eastern Turkestan, at least one kingdom, Kucha, 
emerged into importance in this period. Kucha is mentioned in Chinese 
history from the time of the former Hans, but the date is not known when 
the country came under Indian cultural influence and accepted Buddhism. 
In the first century a.d. there was great rivalry between the Chinese em- 
peror and the Hiung-nu concerning the authority over Kucha. Towards 
the middle of the century the people of Kucha ousted the king set up by 
the Chinese emperor. The Hiung-nu then nominated as king one Shen-tu 
(Induk) who was a Kuchean noble and he was accepted by the people. 
The name of the noble seems to indicate that he was of Indian origin. 
A number of Kuchean monks appear in China in the third century as 
translators of Buddhist texts. The first of them, Po Yen, was in China be- 
tween a.d. 256 and 260. The Chinese records tell us that about this period 
‘the Buddhist stupas and temples in Kucha were more than a million.’ 
This shows that Buddhism had been firmly established in the region at 
least a century earlier. 

Further to the east, the kingdom of Wu-yi (Agnidesa, Karasahr) had 
also come within the pale of Buddhist civilisation. About a.d. 399 when 
Fa-hien passed through Wu-yi on his way to India he found there more 



TRANSLATION OF BUDDHIST TEXTS 


769 


than 4000 monks, all students of Hinayana. In the time of Fa-hien, the 
common people of all the kingdoms in Eastern Turkestan as well as the 
monks ‘all practised the rules of India, only the latter did so more exactly, 
and the former more loosely . . . (The monks) however, who had (given up 
worldly life and) quitted their families, were all students of Indian books 
and the Indian language.’ 

We have already seen that the beginnings of the relations between China 
and India are still shrouded in mist. It is, however, likely that contact 
between the two countries had been established before the middle of the 
second century b.c., though it did not become regular before the first 
century a.d. During the first few centuries of the Christian era it centred 
chiefly round the Buddhist religion and literature. Buddhism was given 
an official recognition by the Emperor Ming of the Han dynasty about 
a.d. 68 when the first Buddhist monastery of Po-ma-sse was built in Lo- 
yang for the Indian missionaries Kasyapa Matanga and Dharmaratna. 

Translations of five Buddhist texts are attributed to Kasyapa Matanga 
and his companion. Of these five works only one ‘The Sutra of 42 sec- 
tions’ has come down to us. It does not belong to the canonical literature 
but appears to be a sort of Buddhist catechism for the use of missionaries. 
No information on Buddhist activities is available till the middle of the next 
century. It was in a.d. 144 that a Parthian Buddhist monk named Ngan 
She-kao reached Lo-yang. The Chinese accounts say that he was an 
Arsacidan prince who had abdicated his throne and become a Buddhist 
monk. He travelled in various countries and had most probably been 
to India before going to China. He revived the tradition of the Po-ma-sse 
monastery and founded a strong school of translators. He worked for 
more than forty years in China and nearly two hundred translations are 
attributed to him. Of these only about 55 have come down to us. 

Among the collaborators of Ngan She-kao there were Lokakshema, an 
Indo-Scythian monk, Ngan Hiuan, another Parthian monk, two Sogdian 
monks— K’ang Kiu and K’ang Mong-siang, and three Indian monks— Fo- 
sho (Buddharambha ?), Ta-li (Mahabala) and T’an Ko (Dharmaphala ?). 
There were also Chinese collaborators. The total number of the trans- 
lations of Buddhist texts made in this period was considerable. 

After the fall of the Han dynasty in 220, China was divided among three 
powers. The Wei dynasty had their capital in Lo-yang, the legitimate succes- 
sors of the Han were driven to Sse-chuan, whereas the Wu dynasty became 
rulers of the south. Under the Wei (220-265) the Buddhist church of Lo- 
yang continued its work in spite of the indifference of the new rulers. A 
number of works were translated in this period at the request of the Chinese 
Buddhist monks. Among the translators, Dharmakala, an Indian Buddhist 
monk, translated the Pratimoksha for the first time. Sanghavarman trans- 
lated the Karmavacha of the Dharmaguptaka school, and ‘Dharma-satya 
(?),’ the Pratimoksha of the same school. Besides these three Indian 
monks, there were in Lo-yang a Kuchean monk named Po Yen and a 
Parthian Ngan Fa-hien who also collaborated in the work of translation. 
97 



770 


CULTURAL AND COLONIAL EXPANSION 


In the south Buddhism seems to have spread and developed in an inde- 
pendent way. Che K’ien, the earliest translator in the south, first belonged 
to the Lo-yang school. But Buddhism had reached the south by the Yun- 
nan road and the sea route before Che K’ien’s arrival. During the period 
when Ngan She-kao was working in Lo-yang, Buddhism had made head- 
way in Kiang-su and Shan-tung. The biographer of Ngan She-kao tells us 
that during the political troubles towards the end of the reign of Emperor 
Ling-ti (168-189), Ngan She-kao left Lo-yang and went to Kiang-su where 
there were Buddhist communities. There were also Buddhist communities 
in Kiao-che (Tonkin) in this period. It was there that the Chinese scholar, 
Mou-tseu was converted to Buddhism soon after 189 and wrote a famous 
dissertation in the defence of Buddhism. 

The Wu dynasty ruled at Kien-ye (Nanking) from 222 to 280. There was 
considerable Buddhist activity in Nanking during this period. Che K’ien 
himself was a voluminous translator. He was not a monk but a Buddhist 
layman and as tutor of the prince-royal received much patronage from the 
throne for his work. About 127 translations are attributed to him and of 
them 49 still exist. Che K’ien was followed by a number of Buddhist scho- 
lars, the most notable among whom was a monk named K’ang Seng-hui. 
He was bom of Indian parentage in Kiao-che, became a monk at an early 
age and came to Nanking in a.d. 247. He founded the first Buddhist temple 
there, the Kien-chu-sse. His activities continued till his death in a.d. 280. 

The Wu and Wei dynasties were followed by the Tsin (280-317) who 
succeeded in uniting the three kingdoms for a short period. They were 
great patrons of Buddhism and of Buddhist monks who translated the holy 
texts. The official history tells us that the Emperor Wu, the first of the 
dynasty, built numerous sangh dramas. The Emperor Min (313-316) 
built two monasteries in Ch’ang-ngan : T’ong-hiu-sse and Po-ma-sse. 
During the reign of the last two rulers of the dynasty 180 Buddhist monas- 
teries were built both in Nanking and Ch’ang-ngan. The number of monks 
was 3700. The number of translators who worked at Ch’ang-ngan was 
14 and among them the most important was Dharmaraksha who was bom 
of an Indo-Scythian family but had been educated in Kashmir and had 
visited almost all the kingdoms in Eastern Turkestan. He translated more 
than 200 works between a.d. 284 and 313. The Chinese sources say that 
his superior knowledge of the Indian language enabled him to translate 
the texts more faithfully than his predecessors. His translations are still 
considered good literature for the simplicity and beauty of his style and 
the clarity of his language. He was more successful than his predeces- 
sors in popularising Buddhism through translations. 

Dharmaraksha was followed by a number of translators amongst whom 
there were at least three Indians — Kalaruchi, Mokshala andNarayana. But 
it was due mostly to Dharmaraksha and his Chinese disciples that Bud- 
dhism was firmly established in China by the beginning of the fourth century. 1 

1 The relations between China and India 300 have been fully discussed in India 

from the Han period up to about a.d. and China, a thousand years of 



INDO-CHINA AND INDONESIA 


771 


The expansion of Indian civilisation to Indo-China and Indonesia took 
place by the sea route. At what date this sea route to the East was opened 
for the first time is not precisely known. In view of the close ethnic re- 
lations between the prehistoric races of Further India and India, it has 
been presumed that the sea route was taken by the Austro-Asiatic races 
in very early times. The Aryan invaders after their conquest of the coasts 1 
regions of India simply utilized the technical knowledge of sailing which 
these people possessed. 1 

The Buddhist jatakas, which draw upon a very ancient storehouse of 
folklore, tell many a story of merchants sailing over the high seas to the 
Land of Gold (Suvarnabhumi) for trade. Sea-voyages are also narrated 
in books like the Kathasaritsagara, Brihatkathamanjari, Brihatkathaslo- 
kasamgraha — all of which include stories from a lost work of much ear- 
lier date, the Bjihat-Katha of Gunadhya. We have seen that Buddhist 
accounts would have us believe that Emperor Asoka sent two missiona- 
ries, Sona and Uttara, to Suvarnabhumi with the message of Buddhism. 
The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, a work of the first century a.d., locates 
a Peninsula of Gold in the trans-Gangetic region. It is, however, impos- 
sible to locate this Land of Gold in any definite geographical region as 
with the progress of navigation towards the east the name was gradually 
shifted to other regions. It was not so much a gold-yielding region as an 
Eldorado for merchants from which they returned with fabulous riches. 

The Ramayana which may be placed definitely in the second century 
B.c. reveals a vague knowledge of the eastern region beyond the seas and 
definitely mentions Yavadvlpa, a name usually associated with the island 
of Java. It is likely that the sea route to the east had grown familiar to 
Indian merchants if not in the time of Asoka at least soon after him. 
A detailed itinerary of a sea voyage is found in books of the second 
century a.d. like the Mahaniddesa and the Geography of Ptolemy. This 
itinerary starts from the coast of China and terminates with the Indian 
coast. The principal ports, beginning from the China coast, are mentioned 
thus : Gumba, Takkola, Takkasila, Kalamukha, Maranapara, Vesunga, 
Verapatha, Java, Tamali, Vanga, Elavaddhana, Suvannakuta, Suvanna- 
bhumi, Tambapanni, Suppara, Bharukaccha. Ptolemy knows many of 
these ports — Temala, Besynga, Takola, Iabadiu, etc. Prof. Levi, 2 who was 
the first to discuss these itineraries, was of opinion that they reveal an in- 
timate knowledge of the sea route which could not have been acquired 
before the second century a.d. In fact neither Pliny nor the author of the 
Periplus of the Erythrean Sea shows this familarity with the eastern region 
in the first century a.d. 

Prof. Levi, however, did not utilise the oldest Chinese 3 evidence which 


Sino-Indian Cultural relations. 

1 S. Levi, ‘Pre-Aryan and Pre-Dravidian 
in India’, translated by me in Pre- 
Aryan and Pre-Dravidian in India, p. 
125 

* S. L6vi, ‘Ptolemde, Le Niddesa et la 


Brihatkatha,’ Etudes Asiatiques, n Eng. 
trans. in Sino-Indian Studies, n 2 
Pelliot, Review of the translation of 
Chau Ju-kua by Hirth and Rockhill, 
Toung-Pao, xm p 457 



772 CULTURAL AND COLONIAL EXPANSION 

seems to throw much light on this itinerary. It is contained in the Annals 
of the Former Han Dynasty and gives an itinerary of the second and first 
centuries b.c. starting from the coast of Tonkin and ending with the Indian 
coast. ‘From the frontiers of Je-nan (Tonkin), from Siu-wen and Ho-p’u 
sailing for five months one reaches the kingdom of Tu-yuan. Sailing again 
for four months one reaches the kingdom of Yi-lu-mu. Sailing again for 
more than 20 days one reaches the kingdom of Chen-li. Then going by the 
land route for more than 10 days one reaches the kingdom of Fu-kan-tu-lu. 
From Fu-kan-tu-lu sailing for more than two months one reaches the king- 
dom of Huang-che.' This itinerary relates to the reign of Emperor Wu 
(140-80 b.c.). A reverse itinerary relating to the reign of Wang Mang 
(a.d. 1-6) is given in the same text. ‘From the kingdom of Huang-che 
sailing for 8 months one reaches Pi-tsong. Then again sailing for two 
months one reaches the frontier of Siang-lin (southern part of Tonkin).’ 

The Chinese account therefore describes a connected itinerary : Ho-p’u, 
Pi-tsong, Tu-yuan, Yi-lu-mu, Chen-li, Fu-kan-tu-lu and Huang-che. These 
names were in the old pronunciations : yap-bu, Pi-tsuong, Tue-ngiwan, 
Iu-luo-muSt, DiSm-li, B’iu-kam-tuo-luo and ywang-tsie (g'jie), and seem 
to have stood for Gambu, Visunga, Tangana, Ilavar (dhana), Tamala, 
Pugam-(?) and Ganga. We therefore find here most of the principal names 
of the two itineraries discussed above. This is positive evidence that re- 
gular sailing from the Gangetic valley up to Tonkin was already known 
in the second and first centuries b.c. 

It is therefore likely, as the jataka stories would have us credit, that Indian 
merchants knew and settled down in various places in the trans-Gangetic 
regions, both peninsular and insular, as far as North Annam along the 
coast, much earlier than was hitherto believed. Evidence of regular colo- 
nisation and of the foundation of kingdoms under Indian rulers is not, 
however, available before the first century a.d. when the Kushana con- 
quest of India seems to have compelled the earlier rulers, the Sakas, to 
migrate to other regions. We know that the Sakas being ousted from North- 
West India moved to Western and Southern India where they founded new 
kingdoms. Another branch of the Sakas, the Murundas must have mi- 
grated in this period to Eastern India and founded a kingdom in the re- 
gion of Magadha. These Saka adventurers, great protagonists of the Hindu 
culture at home, seem to have been responsible for the first Hindu kingdoms 
in the Far East. In fact the old Javanese legends say that the first Hindu 
king of Java was Aji Saka. He and his descendants came from Gujarat. 1 
Most of the local traditions agree in attributing to him the first introduc- 
tion of letters, government, and religion. The local legends quoted by the 
Chinese historians place this event in a.d. 56. Apart from the name of the 
ruler which recalls a genuine Saka name (Aji-Azes), the traditional date 
points to a period when the disintegration of the Saka empire in North- 
West India had already begun under the impulse of the Kushana conquest. 


1 R. C. Majumdar, Suvarnadvipa, i pp. 94 ff. 



FU-NAN 


773 


The oldest centres of Hindu kingdoms in the Far East are found both in 
Indo-China and Indonesia. 

The most important of the Indian settlements 1 in Indo-China is men- 
tioned by the Chinese under the name Fu-nan (B’iu-nam) which is generally 
considered to be the transcription of an old Khmer word Bnam ( modern 
Phnom) which means ‘mountain’. 

This kingdom was in the lower valley and the delta region of the Mekong 
but in the most glorious period it included South Annam, the middle 
valley of Mekong, a large part of the valley of Menam and the Malay Penin- 
sula. Its capital was at one time Vyadhapura. This name is connected 
with Chinese To-mu which probably stands for Khmer dmak, dalmak 
having the same meaning as the Sanskrit word. It was situated about the 
rock of Ba Phnom and the village of Banam in the Cambodian province 
of Prei Veng. 

The earliest information on Fu-nan 2 is supplied by the two Chinese 
envoys, K’ang T’ai and Chu Ying, who visited the country in the middle 
of the third century. According to them the first king of Fu-nan was one 
Huen-t’ien (Kaundinya) who came either from India or the Malay Penin- 
sula or from any of the southern islands. The story says that in a dream 
he received a divine mandate to embark on a merchant vessel armed with 
a divine bow. He found the divine bow next morning in a temple and 
started on his voyage. His boat gradually reached Fu-nan. The queen 
of the country, Lieu-ye, attacked the boat but was soon subdued by the 
force of the divine bow. She submitted to Huen-t’ien and became his 
wife. The queen and her people formerly used to go naked. Kaundin- 
ya taught her to cover herself with a cloth. He governed the realm 
according to the laws of his own country and transmitted the sceptre to 
his descendants. In this story has been recognised an Indian legend which 
is narrated more faithfully in a Sanskrit inscription of Champa. Ac- 
cording to the inscription, the Brahmin Kaundinya got a javelin from 
Asvatthaman, the son of Drona, and threw it in order to mark the site 
of his future capital. He then married a daughter of the king of the 
Nagas, named Soma, who gave birth to a line of kings. A mystic rite 
symbolising this event was still found in the Cambodian court in the 
thirteenth century by the Chinese traveller Cheou Ta-kuan. It is also 
mentioned in the Cambodian Chronicle. 

The legend, however, contains a kernel of history which is not later 
than the first century a.d. From the next century we come across his- 
torical personalities in Fu-nan of whom the presence is attested by in- 
scriptions as well as by Chinese accounts which are our principal source. 
One of the descendants of Kaundinya, Huen P’an-huang died when he 
was past ninety years of age. The successor of the latter was ‘his second 
son P’an P’an who entrusted the alfairs of state to his great general Fan 

1 G. Coedes, Histoire anclenne des etats 248-303. All the standard Chinese his- 

hindouises d' Extreme-Orient torical texts relating to Fu-nan have 

2 Pelliot, ‘Le Fou-nan,’ BEFEO, in pp. been translated and discussed there. 



774 


CULTURAL AND COLONIAL EXPANSION 


Man.’ The complete name of the general is stated as Fan She-man. 
After reigning for three years P’an P’an died. The people of the country 
elected Fan She-man to be king. He was a brave and capable ruler. He 
attacked and subjugated the neighbouring kingdoms. All became his 
vassals. He assumed the title of the ‘Great king of Fu-nan’. He built 
great ships, traversed the seas, and attacked more than ‘10 countries in- 
cluding K’iu-tu-k’uen, Kieu-che, Tien-suen.’ 

Fan She-man has been identified with good reason with King Sri Mara 
mentioned in the Sanskrit inscription of Vo-canh. This was for a long 
time taken to be an inscription of the rulers of Champa. It is likely that 
this part of Champa belonged to the territory conquered by Fan She-man, 
and was subject to Fu-nan. If this identification is exact, then the des- 
cendant of Sri Mara, who was responsible for the inscription (which is 
placed in the third century on palaeographical grounds), must be held to 
belong to the line of Fu-nan kings founded by Fan She-man. 

The Chinese texts already quoted show that Fan She-man died in the 
course of an expedition against the Kin-lin or ‘the Frontier of Gold’ which 
seems to correspond to Suvarnabhumi of the Pali texts or rather to Su- 
varnakudya of the Sanskrit texts (Lower Burma or Malay Peninsula). 
A nephew of Fan She-man, Fan Chan put to death the legitimate suc- 
cessor, Kin-sheng and usurped the power. About twenty years later 
Fan Chan was assassinated by Ch’ang, a son of Fan She-man. This was 
followed by the assassination of Ch’ang by his general Fan Siun who de- 
clared himself king. These events happened roughly between 225 and 
250 and it was in this period, during the reign of Fan Chan, that an ex- 
change of envoys between Fu-nan and the Murunda kings of India took 
place. It was again in this period that the first Chinese ambassadors 
K’ang T’ai and Chu Ying came to Fu-nan. 

The Chinese account tells us that a certain Kia-siang-li, a native of the 
kingdom of T’an-yang which is located to the west of India, came to India 
and from there to Fu-nan. It was he who told the king Fan Chan about 
the wonders of that distant country. The journey, he said, was long and 
to go there and to come back might take three years or even four years. 
Probably it was on the advice of Kia-siang-li that the king sent as ambas- 
sador to India a relative named Su-wu. Su-wu embarked at the port 
of T eu-kiu-li (identified with Takkola), after a long voyage reached the 
mouths of a large river (probably the Ganges) and went up the river to 
the capital of the king who belonged to the Meu-luen (Murunda) dynasty. 
The Indian king gave the party facilities to travel in his kingdom and then 
sent them back with a present of four horses of the Indo-Scythian country 
He also sent with them an Indian named Ch’en-song. Su-wu returned 
to Fu-nan after four years of absence. Fan-Chan also sent an embassy 
to China in 243 to present musicians and products of the country 

About 245-250 Fan Siun who usurped the throne of Fan Chan after 
putting the son of Fan She-man to death received the Chinese envoys 
K ang T ai and Chu Ying. They met the Murunda envoy at the Fu-nan 



LIN-YI 


775 


court. This Chinese mission induced Fan Siun to send a number of en- 
voys to the Chinese court between 268 and 287. 

Another kingdom, Lin-yi, according to Chinese sources, was situated to 
the south of the kingdom of Fu-nan in the third century a.d. It was peopled 
by numerous tribes who aided each other and refused to submit to China. 

The most important of these tribes was probably the Cham. Lin-yi 
appears in history towards the end of the second century. The Chinese 
sources place its foundation in 192. They say that a person named K’iu- 
lien taking advantage of the weakness of the Chinese emperors founded 
a kingdom in the province of Je-nan (Tonkin). He proclaimed himself 
king in the southernmost district of Siang-lin which roughly corresponds 
to the modern province of Thua-thien. The name Lin-yi is explained 
in Chinese as an abbreviation of Siang-lin-yi ‘capital of Siang-lin’. The 
creation of this kingdom in 192 was preceded in 137 by the first 
attempt at an invasion of Siang-lin by a band of barbarians from the 
south from the other side of the frontiers of Je-nan. Their name was 
K’iu-lien. The founder of Lin-yi, K’iu-lien, seems to have belonged to 
this tribe. They came probably from modem Quang-nam and may al- 
ready have been hinduised. It is almost certain, nevertheless, that they 
were the Chams. Modem Quang-nam possesses a number of archaeo- 
logical sites : Tra-kieu, Mi-son, Dong-duong etc. which represent the most 
important part of the kingdom later called Champa. 

The Cham country along the coast was divided into a certain number 
of natural provinces. To the south of Amaravatl, the main centres men- 
tioned in the inscriptions were : Vijaya (Binh-dinh), Kauthara (Nhatrang) 
and Panduranga (Phan-rang). The inscriptions show that the Cham 
language was spoken in the seventh centuiy in the southern province. 
In earlier times they belonged to Fu-nan as is proved by the inscription 
of Vo-canh. It is only an inscription of the ninth century which men- 
tions Maharshi Bhrigu, the eponymous ancestor of the Bhargava dynasty, 
from which the kings of Champa claimed descent. The name of Champa 
does not occur in the inscriptions before the beginning of the seventh cen- 
tury, but there is reason to think that it is older. 

The descendants of K’iu-lien may be considered the most ancient kings 
of Champa. Taking advantage of the weakness of the Chinese, they ex- 
tended their territory northwards. Between 220 and 230 a king of Lin- 
yi sent an ambassador to Lu Tai, the governor of Kuang-tong and Kiao- 
che. It is in this connection that the names of Lin-yi and Fu-nan occur 
for the first time. The Armais of the Three Kingdoms say that Lu Tai 
‘sent Ts’ong-she to spread the civilisation of the kingdom and the kings 
of Fu-nan, Lin-yi, T’ang-ming ( ?) each sent ambassadors to offer tributes.’ 
But this is not exactly true as in 248 the army of Lin-yi attacked the Chinese 
territory in the north. Then king Fan Hiong, the grandson of K’iu-lien 
on the daughter’s side, renewed these attacks in 270 aided by the king of 
Fu-nan. T’ao Huang, the governor of Tonkin, took ten years to drive 
them out. 



776 CULTURAL AND COLONIAL EXPANSION 

In 284 Fan Yi, the king of Lin-yi, sent an embassy to China for the first 
time; during the second half of his long reign of 50 years he had for his 
counsellor Wen, a man of Chinese origin who settled in Lin-yi shortly 
after 315. He ultimately became the general and then usurped the throne 
after the death of Fan Yi in 336. 

Although the Chinese evidences of this period are very clear about the 
first Hindu kingdoms in Indo-China they are not so explicit in regard to 
the Malay Peninsula and Java. A considerable part of the peninsula in 
this period belonged to the kingdom of Fu-nan as is proved by the men- 
tion of Takkola as a port of that kingdom. At least three small kingdoms 
had been founded in the Malay Peninsula in this period. The Chinese 
records mention Tien-suen, Lang-ya-sieu and Tan-mei-lieu. Tien-suen 
of which the exact location is not known seems to be the same as Tuen- 
suen which was annexed to the kingdom of Fu-nan by Fan She-man. 
Lang-ya-sieu, mentioned in later Chinese records as Lang-kia-shu i.e. 
Lahkasuka, is located in the upper valley of Perak. According to the evi- 
dence of the Annals of the Leang Dynasty this kingdom was founded 
‘more than 400 years ago,’ i.e. in the beginning of the second century a.d. 
Tan-mei-lieu was the country around modem Ligor. It is also men- 
tioned in the list of countries mentioned in the Mahaniddesa already re- 
ferred to. Probably none of these kingdoms played any independent 
role in this period or were more than vassal states of the powerful empire 
of Fu-nan. 

The early history of the Hindu kingdom of Java is shrouded in mist. 
Most scholars agree in identifying Yavadvipa of the Ramayana with Java. 
They consider it identical with Iabadiu of Ptolemy, These two referen- 
ces suggest that the kingdom had arisen by the beginning of the Christian 
era, if not earlier. The local legends which we have already discussed 
also confirm it. The Annals of the Han Dynasty speak of an embassy in 
a.d. 132 from king Tiao Pien (Devavarman ?) of Ye-tiao. There is no 
doubt that this Ye-tiao is the same as Yavadvipa or Iabadiu. K’ang Tai 
in his account of Fu-nan however refers to this kingdom under a slightly 
different name. He mentions an island called Chu-po situated in the sea 
to the east of Fu-nan and also the island of Ma-wu (corrected to Ma-li) 
to the east of Chu-po. These two islands are identified with Java and Bali. 
Another Chinese text of the same period refers to Chu-po and says that 
the women of that country knew the art of embroidering cotton cloth 
with floral designs. Despite the difficulty of accepting the identifications, 
it may be assumed for the time being that the Chinese knew the earliest 
Hindu kingdom of Java under two different names Ye-tiao (Yavadvipa) 
and Chu-po (Javadvipa). It is the latter name which was preferred by the 
later Chinese writers. Fa-hien, in the beginning of the fifth century calls 
it Chu-po. Our historical information concerning this kingdom as 
far as the third century is extremely meagre. 



Chapter XXV 


COINAGE 


T he political as well as the economic condition of India at the beginning 
of our period was conducive to the growth of metallic currency. Con- 
temporary archaeological and literary sources fully prove that various types 
of coins were current in different parts of the country even before Alexan- 
der’s entry into India. Quintus Curtius tells us that the king of Taksha- 
sila presented to the Macedonian invader eighty talents of ‘coined silver’ 
pieces as a token of his homage and friendship . 1 These have usually been 
regarded as the silver punch-marked coins many varieties of which have 
been found throughout India. They are indigenous in origin according 
to the opinion of many numismatists. Coins were made not only of 
silver, but of metals of lesser value, e.g. copper. Cast copper coins of 
various shapes and sizes have also been discovered, some of which belong 
to the early part of our period. The oldest of the punch-marked silver and 
copper types, as well as the cast copper varieties appear to have been made 
long before the last quarter of the fourth century B.c . 2 Representations 
in plastic form of coins of various shapes (mainly square) in such early 
monuments of the pre-Christian age as Bharhut, Bodhgaya and Bes- 
nagar prove that the local people were quite familiar with their use. The 
words ‘punch-marked’ and ‘cast’ used in describing these coins give us 
an idea about the modes of manufacturing them. Flattened sheets of 
metal (in the case of silver they were comparatively thin) were cut into 
regular or irregular bits of different sizes, adjusted to required weights by 
clipping, and then punched with various symbols on their obverse and re- 
verse sides. These were the ‘punch-marked’ variety. There is little doubt 
that the marks were those of a central authority that guaranteed the genui- 
neness of the metal and the correctness of the weight. A careful study 
of the many hoards of punch-marked coins, the provenance of which is 
known, has enabled scholars to substantiate this view. The earlier view 
that they were private money, the marks being those of individual 
moneyers stamped for their quick recognition on different occasions, is 
not accepted now '. 3 It is very difficult to suggest an authoritative 


1 The term used by Curtius is siguati 
argenti, Cunningham’s interpretation 
of which is correct ; CAL p. 52 

2 Cunningham dates the earliest of them 
in 1000 b.c., op. cit., p. 43. J. Allan 
would not place them earlier than the 
Maurya period, the single-type silver 
coins alone being given an earlier date, 
BMCCAI. pp. xvi-xvii, lvi 

8 V. A. Smith observes, ‘the punch- 
marked coinage was a private coinage 


issued by guilds and silversmiths with 
the permission of the ruling powers’, 
CCIM. i p. 133. But systematic 
studies of the coin-hoards, the prove- 
nances of which are definitely known, 
have led scholars to suggest that they 
were struck by a central authority; 
ci.ASIAR. 1905-06, p. 153 (D. B. Spo- 
oner’s view) ; MASI. No. 59 (The 
Punch marked Coins from Taxila, E. J. 
Walsh’s view), etc. 



778 


COINAGE 


explanation of the coin symbols, though it is probable that some at least 
were religious. But it would be going too far in the present state of our 
knowledge to attempt to associate them definitely with one or other of 
the various creeds of India. 1 

The cast coins were manufactured by pouring molten metal (mainly 
copper) into hollow earthen moulds bearing devices within that were to 
be impressed on the two sides of the coins. Sometimes a single mould 
containing sections (on which devices were marked) was used for casting 
more than one coin at the same time. 2 Another characteristic of the early 
Indian punch-marked and cast coins was that they usually bore no legends 
from which to infer the name and character of their issuers. The Indian 
methods of manufacturing coins in the beginning appear to have had no- 
thing in common with the Lydian, Persian or Greek monetary technique. 
This fact alone lends the greatest weight to the view that this very useful 
invention was thought of in this country quite independently of any fo- 
reign influence. When the Ae’:.'.. :\iP. > : r i, the Greek, the Scythian and 

other early alien rulers of I : , wn money in India, the indi- 

genous pieces, especially the silver ones, came to be designated by old 
Indian writers as purapas (‘eldlings’) in order to distinguish them from 
the new coins, the money of the foreign masters. The Smriti works 
like Manu and Yajnavalkya lay down the weight of these silver purdnas 
(also called dharaijtas) at 32 ratis (about 58 grains troy), and it is of interest 
to note that some of the extant specimens approximate to this standard; 
but it is also true that there are many others which do not, and it may be 
presumed that other weight standards were also current in India. A 
peculiar type of heavy silver coins usually described as ‘bent-bar’ pieces, 
found mainly in Taxila and its environs, weighs as much as 176 grains or 
so. This type appears to have had its lower denominations, for lighter 
classes of such pieces are also found. Some numismatists think that they 
are no other than the ancient satamdnas and their fractions mentioned in 
some Indian texts. The unit of measure ( mana ) being a rati, the weight 
of one hundred such units would be about 175-180 grains (one rati or 
krishnala seed, according to the computation of Cunningham, being equi- 
valent to 1.75 or 1.83 grains troy). Quite a different explanation of these 
coins has been suggested by Allan; he says that they are double ‘siglos’ 
pieces and their lower denominations. The term ‘siglos’ denotes a Per- 
sian silver coin the academic weight of which is about 86.45 grains troy. 3 
Two objections, however, may be raised against this view. The heaviest of 
the bent-bar pieces usually weigh several grains more than the full weight 


Foucher described many of the sym- 
bols as Buddhist in character; cf. 
Beginnings of Buddhist Art, pp. 14, 21, 
pi. i. Durga Prasad recognised in them 
Tantric symbols, Num. Sup. xlv 317 ff. 
Cunningham, op. cit., pi. i, figs. 24, 25 
J. Allan, op. cit., p. xvi, pi. i, figs. 1-3. 
See a somewhat similar view propoun- 


ded earlier by M.J.A. Decourdemanche 
m JA. 1912, pp. 117 ff., refuted by D. 
R. Bhandarkar in CL. 1921, pp. 118- 
22. E. J. Walsh suggested that the hea- 
vy bent-bar silver pieces from Taxila 
and its environs might be the sata- 
manas referred to in the Sat. Br. MASI. 
No. 59, p. 3 



INDIGENOUS ORIGIN OF COINAGE 


779 


of a double ‘siglos’, and no ‘single siglos’ type Indian coin has so far been 
found. Again, genuine ‘siglos’ coins of the Achaemenid Persians which 
have been discovered in northern India weigh less than their academic 
weight, the deficiency being due to natural wear and tear. The silver 
bent-bar coins appear to have been among the earliest coins of India, and 
along with a few other types of silver money, were current in parts of nor- 
thern and north-western India for a time long before Alexander’s inva- 
sion. They have justifiably been described by Allan as ‘various early single- 
type silver’ foi their mode of manufacture seems to have been somewhat 
different from that of the usual punch-marked coins. G. M. Young rightly 
suggests the manner in which the bent-bar coins were made. 1 

Allan believes that the Nandas were the first Indian rulers to introduce 
currency into the countiy, the idea of a coinage originating here ‘in the late 
fifth or early fourth century B. c. from Achaemenid territory, being 
suggested by the “siglos”, although its character is entirely Indian.’ 2 It 
is hard, however, to believe that the eailiest coinage to evolve in India as 
a result of Persian contact would not follow the Persian technique, and 
it is far more probable that such and somewhat similar methods were 
in use in India long before the Achaemenid conquest of her noithern and 
north-western parts. 

The wide distribution of the indigenous coins, especially of the punch- 
marked variety and the apparent sameness of their general features have 
led some scholars to suggest that they were issued when the greater part 
of India was unified under one administiation. This first happened, in 
the historical period, during the rule of the imperial Mauryas and most 
of these coins, both silver and copper, have been ascribed to that dynasty. 3 
There is much to be said in support of this view, but it is possible that the 
part played by the Maurya emperors was to disseminate through the 
length and breadth of their empire, the coinage already current in a res- 
tricted form. The pre-Maurya date of the Bhir Mound (Taxila) find of the 
early indigenous coins has been accepted by all ; this hoard not only con- 
tained the silver bent-bar types, but also real punch-marked coins of 
various shapes and sizes, some of them being very tiny pieces. There is 
every reason to believe that they were current in the Taxila region from a 
date much earlier than Alexander’s invasion, and it is highly probable, 
if not certain, that the great Maurya emperors continued to issue coins on 
the pre-existing model in their vast empire. 

Copper punch-marked coins are comparatively rare. They are thicker 
and also heaviei in weight than their silver counterparts. The heaviest 
of them weigh more than 350 grs. and their weight generally ranges be- 
tween 360 and 160 grains. It is very difficult to fix their denominations 


1 Ancient India, No. 1., pp. 27 ff. Young 
remarks, ‘Experiment has shown that 
the curvature is due to their having 
been struck while hot on a wooden 
anvil . . . The faces of the dies were 
circular and convex, thus producing a 


concave incuse and accentuating the 
curvature at the ends of the coins’. 
(P- 29). 

J. Allan, op. cit., p. lxxi 
J. Allan, op. cit., p. Ivi 



780 


COINAGE 


correctly. It is possible that the term karshdpana denoted them in a general 
way, for Manu and Yajnavalkya lay down that it signified only copper 
coins of the weight of one kdrshd (Kdrshdpanastu vijneyas-tamrikah kar- 
shikah pariah), though it has been shown by some that the term also desig- 
nated coins of other metals e.g. silver or gold. 1 2 The seeds of the kar- 
shdphala (‘phaseolus rhadeolus’) like those of the gunja-berry ( raktika or 
krishnala referred to above) are usually of uniform weight, and the stan- 
dard laid down by the old smtiti writers for a karshdpana is that of 80 
rat is. 2 The weight of a single copper karshdpana thus would be about 
146.4 grains (one rah being the same as 1.83 grains troy), and the recorded 
weights of the extant copper punch-marked coins would show that their 
denominations ranged between 2\ and lj karshapanas. Their standard 
of weight, however, is, like that of their silver counterparts, so variable 
that probably more standards than one were current in different regions. 
The other class of copper coins usually described as ‘uninscribed cast’ 
was also in use in some parts of Northern India from a very early date. 
They were much lighter in weight, over a wide range between 144.5 and 10 
grains; coins above 100 and below 20 grains are very few, the majority 
ranging between 40 and 60, but an appreciable number of light coins 
ranged between 20 and 40 grains. We cannot from these weights fix their 
denominations with certainty; some of them were probably karshapanas 
and theii lower forms. The area of their circulation was much more 
restricted than that of the usual silver punch-marked coins, but it was 
certainly wider than the ‘United Provinces, Rajputana and the Central 
Provinces’ suggested by Allan. There are recorded finds of these coins 
from parts cf eastern India like Bihar and Bengal. 

These several types of indigenous currency were in vogue in various 
parts of the country until the beginning of the Christian era, and perhaps a 
little later. Coins issued by the alien rulers of India were first current in the 
extieme north and north-west, and it is there that we see rapid changes in 
the indigenous methods of coin-making. In the far interior regions of 
Central and Southern India, immune from foreign rule till a compara- 
tively late period, the old technique survived for a long time, and new 
experiments were being made there fairly early on the mode cf punch- 
marking, which led to the local development of the peculiar die-striking 
method. James Prinsep was the first advocate of the view that the Indians 
were indebted to the foreigners for the art of coinage. When Cunning- 
ham confronted him with the completely individualistic traits of the ear- 
liest indigenous money, he modified his view and maintained that the 
Indians learnt the method of die-striking from the Bactrian Greeks. 
We shall see, however, that several types of Central Indian money show 
that the evolution of the latter technique was already well under way in 

1 D. R. Bhandarkar, op. cit., pp. 80 ff. tioned, the measure was: 2 ratis- 1 

2 5 ratis- 1 masha , 16 mashas or 80 ratis masha, 16 mashas or 32 ratis - 1 dha- 

-1 karshapana. In the case of a silver rana or a purana. 

dhararia or a purana already men- 



INDIAN INFLUENCE ON INDO-GREEK COINS 


781 


these localities. The copper coins which were localised by Cunningham 
at Eran (Saugor district, Madhya Pradesh), but which are also found in 
sucE places as Besnagar (ancient Vidiia) in Central India show a distinct 
advance in Indian 'monetary technique. Several symbols that were ac- 
cording to previous practice punched on the coin-blancs separately were 
now collected together in a big ‘punch’ (one may call it a ‘die’ at a stretch) 
and struck at a timi on the square copper bits. This is just a little short 
of the method of die-striking which we have to recognise in the coins ma- 
nufactured in other parts of Central India — Ujjain, Avanti and Malwa. ^ 
The coins issued by the Uddehikas, who appear to have been a Central . 
Indian tribe, also evince this peculiar trait. 1 The same coins again show, 
probably, some of the earliest examples of the use of legends: for we read 
on one Erar. coin Dhamapalasa (evidently the name of its issuer) ; on a few 
more coins from the same place Erakanya; on an Ujjain coin, Ujeniya 
(money issued in the name of the locality), and Udehaki — Suyamitasa (a 
coin issued by a tribal chief). The earliest of these pieces are dated in the - 
third century b.c., if not earlier, and none of them can be held to be later 
than the second century B.c. We shall see later that the earliest native 
currency of South India seems also to have developed along the same lines. 

The coins issued by the first foreign rulers of India in the north and 
north-west seem to have influenced the earlier coinage of these regions. 
But in some varieties of copper coins attributed by Cunningham to Taxila 
and its environs are found peculiar traits not all of which wete foreign 
in origin. They are of the die-struck variety, and can be divided into two 
main classes, inscribed and uninscribed. Of the former the ‘Negaraa’ (nai- 
gama) coins are very interesting, for these oblong pieces bear the legends 
inside a* prominent ’incuse’ on one side, and probably the name of the 
particular naigai.ia (mercantile guild) on the other. The only device usually 
found on their reverse is the ‘steelyard balance’, which probably betrays 
their real character as ‘mercantile guild money’. 2 Other coins of the same 
class bearing the Khaioshthi legend pamchanekaine (‘the five guilds’) with 
several symbols on one side and a wheel and one other symbol on the 
other, might have been the joint issues of the ‘five naigamas, a kind of 
Pentapolis’ (Allan). The legend on the third variety of the inscribed coins, 
though variously read, is probably hirahasrame, perhaps the name of the 
locality in or near Taxila from which they were issued. Some copper 
coins of the Indo-Greek king Agathocles are very similai to these, and had 
his name not been there they could easily have passed as so many speci- 
mens of this variety. A close affinity between some of the copper money 
of this early Indo-Greek king and another named Pantaleon, and several 
uninscribed double-die coins as well as these insciibed coins from Taxila 
has already been pointed out in a pieceding chapter (p. 158). It has been 
1 E. J. Rapson, Indian Coins, p. 11; commerce’, etc., by Cunningham and 

V. A. Smith, op. cit., p. 145 Biihler is usually accepted. D. R. 

* The interpretation of the Negama coins Bhandarkar explained them as the 

as ‘mercantile money tokens issued by money of the respective city-states of 

traders’, ‘trade tokens’, ‘coins of the Taxila region; op. cit., pp. 154-5 



782 


COINAGE 


assumed that in these cases the alien kings borrowed the technique already 
prevalent in Taxila. Allan is not convincing when he says 1 that Panta- 
leon’s and Agathocles’s coins of similar types are earlier than these 
Taxilan issues which he at the same time places in ihe first quarter of the 
second century b.c. The Indian rule of these two kings cannot possibly 
be dated earlier than the last part of the same quarter, and it is unintelli- 
gible how these local traits could have been due to the influence of the 
Taxila coinage issued by these kings. Moreover, single and double-die 
uninscribed oblong copper pieces appear to have been current in the loca- 
lity from an earlier period. They are invariably characterised by the 
‘incuse’ on one side with various animal figures and symbols within; and 
when the coin is of double-die variety the other side has devices in relief. 
There is little doubt that the metal blanks were made hot before they were 
‘struck’ in the ‘hammer and anvil’ process, and the devices engraved on 
the die which was placed on top sank into the obverse side, while the re- 
verse received the impression in relief of those engraved on the anvil. 
The same peculiarities are prominent in the Taxila copper pieces of the 
two Indo-Greek rulers, and probably in some of their Indian issues 
the monetary technique with which their Indian subjects were familiar 
was being adopted. Some other coins of Taxila with or without legends 
should now be mentioned. Among them the inscribed single-die pieces bear 
the legend vatasvaka by the side of the devices sunk into the stamped 
side (‘mountain symbol’, ‘pile of bails’, and standing human figure with 
a raised hand). Btihler finds in the legend a reference to the Assakas, 
the Assakenoi tribe living in the extreme north-west of India during the 
time of Alexander’s invasion. The double-die and some single-die coins 
without legend but having the identical devices have also been ascribed to 
them by some scholars . 2 Allan on the other hand suggests that the term 
vaiasvaka has nothing to do with the Assaka-Assakenoi tribe, but really 
signifies the name of a locality from which these coins were issued . 3 

It will be necessary now to say something more about the currency of 
the foreign rulers of India during our period, before the consideration of 
the other local and tribal coins of northern India is taken up. The ques- 
tion whether Alexander struck any money in India, and the inteipretation 
of the silver coins bearing the legend Sophitou and other allied topics 
have been discussed at length in chapter vi of this volume. It was the 
Bactrian Greeks who during this period remained the first real masters 
in parts of northern and north-western India; and for about a couple of 
centuries they struck money in their dominions. It has been shown in 
the same chapter how the coins of these very interesting people can be 
utilised, with proper caution, for the reconstruction of their history; but 
some general observations about their metals, types, metrology etc. might 
still be profitable. The principal metals used by the B ac trian and Indo- Greek 


1 J. Allan, op. cit., pp. cxxvii-cxxviii 
1 S. K. Chakravarti, A Study of Ancient 
Indian Numismatics, p. 157 



PORTRAITS ON INDO-GRFEK COINS 


783 


kings were silver and copper, though a few gold pieces of Diodo - 
tus XU), Euthydemus I, Eucratides and possibly of Menander are known. 
These gold’ coins, however, were not meant for circulation in India, for 
not one is bilingual. Several nickel coins were issued by Euthydemus 
II, Pantaleon and Agathocles, but these, too, were meant only for Bac- 
trian use. Bimetallism may have been the practice in their Indian domi- , 
nions, for identical devices often appear on the silver and copper coins of 
the same king, but to determine the exact relationship between the two 
series is hardly possible in the present state of our knowledge. The re- 
verse devices used on the numerous coins are varied in character, and some 
of them were undoubtedly taken from the Seleucid money of Syria. Gard- 
ner has rightly emphasised ‘the decidedly Praxitelean character of the 
full length figures of deities’ appearing on the reverse sides of the coins. 
Heracles on the coins of Demetrius and Euthydemus II, Zeus on those of 
Agathocles, Eucratides and Heliocles, Poseidon on the money of Anti- 
machus, Apollo on the coins of Eucratides and Apollodotus are ‘all in 
their attitudes characteristic of the school of Praxiteles’. But even then 
we find some distinctive features in them which are hardly to be found in 
their Hellenistic counterparts : such strange forms as ‘radiate Artemis’, 
‘Zeus carrying the three-headed Hecate in his out-stretched right hand’, 
‘Heracles crowning himself with a wreath’, ‘Pallas in short skirts’ which 
at the same time display some originality in their representation. The 
influence of the local Indian and other beliefs may reasonably be traced 
in some of these changes, and is clearly discernible in the money of the later 
Indo-Greek rulers. We have already met the so-called ‘dancing-girl’ 
wearing long ear-rings (probably Lakshml) on the Indian money of Pan- 
taleon and Agathocles, and the indigenous symbols on the Taxilan issues 
of the latter (p. 158). We find on coins of Philoxenus and Telephus 
‘a radiate figure of a sun god standing and holding a long sceptre, on those 
of Amyntas and Hermaeus the head of a deity (?) wearing a Phrygian 
cap whence issue rays,’ ‘an Indian fakir squatting’ on some copper coins of 
Telephus, and many other oddities clearly indicative of cultural intermix- 
ture. What strikes us most in the obverse devices of the Bactrian and Indo- 
Greek money, especially of the early period, is the remarkable character 
of the royal heads. There is little doubt that the services of the very best 
artists of Bactria were requisitioned in the drawing of the many individua- 
listic portraits of the earlier monarchs, Euthydemus (I and II), Demetrius, 
Antimachus (Theos), Eucratides and others, and the skill of the finished 
work still ranks these heads with the finest ever made. Gardner rightly 
observes: ‘The portraits of Demetrius, of Antimachus, and of Eucratides, 
are among the mist remarkable which have come down to us from 
antiquity, and the effect of them is heightened in each case by the introduc- 
tion of a peculiar and strongly characteristic head-dress which is ren- 
dered with scrupulous exactness of detail.’ 1 This remarkable realism 

1 P. Gardner, The Coins of the Greek India in the British Museum, Intro. 
and Scythic Kings of Bactria and p. lvi 



784 


COINAGE 


largely disappears in the heads of the later rulers, but attempts to distin- 
guish the bust of one king from that of another continued to be made to 
the last. We miss this peculiarity in the coins of the many successors 
of the Indo-Greeks belonging to other foieign “tribes, except when for a 
brief period obvious attempts at portraiture are discernible in the remar- 
kable issues of Wi m a Kadphises and Huvishka. 

Demetrius was the earliest ruler to introduce bilingual coins; andEu- 
cratides, his rival and supplanter in Bactria and India, with a host of other 
rulers stuck to the practice in their Indian money. This feature not only 
became the norm in their coins, but also in the coins of successive foreign 
rulers up to the time of the Kanishka group of the Kushana kings. The 
non-Greek language on their coins was naturally the Prakrit used in these 
parts of India, which was almost invariably written in the Kharoshthi 
script; the Brahml script was only used in a few of the Taxiian issues of 
Pantaleon and Agathocles. The variety of titles or attributive epithets 
other than the usual Basileos adopted by the rulers is of great interest, and 
such normal ones as Soteros, Megalou, Dikaiou, Nikephoros, are supple- 
mented by other unusual ones e.g. Ani/crtou (invincible). Epiphanous 
(prachakshasa, or god manifest), Euergetou ( kalyariakarmasa , doer of bene- 
ficial deeds), Theotropou (true to god or godlike), Philopatoros ( priyapitasa , 
beloved of his father, or loving his father), and others. Two of these 
epithets are sometimes joined to the royal title, and all are almost invari- 
ably rendered in Prakrit on the reverse side. Another peculiar trait of 
these Bactrian and Indo-Greek coins, especially of the latter, is the occur- 
rence of a large number of monograms on them, at first a combination of 
Greek letters, and then single Kharoshthi letters or ligatures. The real 
significance of these marks has greatly exercised the minds of numismatists 
and scholars, and Cunningham was at great pains to elucidate their mys- 
tery. His last word was that not all of these monograms named the city 
in which the coin was minted. Tarn is definitely of opinion that the Bac- 
trian and Indian monograms contained as a general rule the names of the 
mint-masters and city-magistrates, the Kharoshthi letters on the later 
Indo-Greek coins referring to persons of Indian nationality exercising 
these functions. The shape of the coins of the early Bactrian and Indo- 
Greek rulers was usually round, the square shape being introduced in 
copper money by Demetrius, who was the eailiest to make Indian con- 
quests. The normal shape of the later Indo-Greek silver coins is round, 
though square silver pieces are not unknown (cf. such pieces of Apollodo- 
tus and Philoxenus): but the square shape, an Indian trait, was very 
common in their Indian copper money. The style and execution of all 
varieties of coins deteriorated with the passage of time, perhaps because 
they were minted, in many cases, in places far removed from Gandhara, 
which was famed for the skill of its artists and technicians. The evidence 
of the Qunduz treasure to be noted now acquaints us with some unusual 
pieces of a few of the Indo-Greek rulers, as well as with some new coins 
of the little-known Bactrian king Plato. 



THE QUNDUZ HOARD 


785 


The importance of the recent discovery (1948) of a hoard of tetra- 
drachms of Attic weight conforming to the Bactrian style made some- 
where between Qunduz and Khanabad in Northern Afghanistan is very 
great. A large percentage of this hoard (as many as 605 coins) were secured 
for the Kabul Museum, a few coins finding their way to private collections. 
The great interest attaching to this find lies in the fact that in it are repre- 
sented not only such Indo-Greekrulers as Lysius, Theophilus, Antialcidas, 
Archebius, Philoxenus and Hermaeus, but some new types of the ephe- 
meral ruler Plato and five heavy-weight big ‘victory medals’ of Amyntas 
(hitherto recognised as a comparatively late member in the Indo-Greek 
series) are also included in it. The new tetradrachms of Plato show two 
novel modes of representing the sungod on the reverse, to be designated 
here as Mithra; one shows the radiate Mithra riding a quadriga to front 
with the long sceptre in his right hand, while in the other he is shown 
standing to front holding the sceptre. The Greek legend is the same as in 
the single coin of this ruler already known, but no trace of date is to be 
found anywhere here. Plato ruled only in Bactria, and the use of Greek 
alone in these coins is intelligible. But the six other ruleis appear to have 
ruled only in India or Indian border, and all their previous coins are bilin- 
gual (one Bactrian style drachm and one similar tetradrachm only of Anti- 
alcidas being known); thus, their newly discovered Bactrian style Attic 
tetradrachms are very puzzling. The devices and monograms on them are 
not different from those on their previously known coins, the Greek le- 
gends only being transferred to the reverse side, the place of the legend on 
the obverse being occupied invariably by ‘the astragalus border’. One only 
among these six kings, the comparatively little-known Theophilus, bears 
here the title Autocratoros in place of his usual Dikaios. Bivar, who noticed 
this hoard for the first time, thinks that in Northern Afghanistan (Bactria 
of olden times) ‘an enclave survived under Greek rule for many years after 
the capture of Bactra and the western steppe by the Scythians’. He is fur- 
ther of opinion that these Indo-Greek kings ruling at Alexandria ad Cauca- 
sum or Pushkalavati probably minted these coins there for the use of their 
subjects in the Bactrian enclave, and the hoard probably comprised the 
treasure of ‘some Greek official or notable fleeing in the face of the final 
nomadic invasion which brought about the fall of the Greek enclave 
at Qunduz’. 

The five ‘victory medals’ of Amyntas in this hoard are also of great 
interest from another point. Their obverse bears the royal head diademed 
and helmeted (as on Eucratides’s coins), and the reverse of some specimens 
shows enthroned Zeus holding Pallas-Athene in his extended light hand, 
while that of others contains the enthroned Demeter; the Greek legend 
only on the reverse of both the varieties reads — Basileos Nikatoros Amyn- 
tou (‘of king Amyntas, the Victor’). But what is of outstanding interest 
here is their size as well as weight which approximate to the size and weight 
of the Twenty-stater gold piece of Eucratides. The difference is only in 
respect of the metal, and thus they can be denominated as Twenty Attic 


99 



786 


COINAGE 


drachm (really didrachm) pieces. It should be noted in this connection 
that the commemorative medallions of Agathocles and Antimachus 
conform to the Attic standard, but they are never more than tetra- 
drachms in size and weight. These exceptional medallic issues presuppose 
that Amyntas’s sho-t rule was inaugurated by a notable victory over 
some of his rivals at present unknown. The Qunduz treasure is thus of 
exceptional importance for the study of the Indo-Greek coins, and it is 
likely to throw fresh light on the history of these foreign rulers of India 
when a first-hand 1 detailed and critical study of it has been made. 

The Scythians, the immediate successors of the Bactrian Greeks in India, 
and'the 'Pafthians after them mainly adopted the characteristic traits of 
their predecessors’ money in their own issues. ‘Elephant’s head : Caduceus’ 
type round copper coins of Maues were close adaptations of similar proto- 
types issued by Demetrius, and the usual obverse device of ‘king on horse- 
back’ on the Saka and some Pahlava money appears to have been inspired 
by the ‘king on prancing horse’ reverse devices of such Indo-Greek ruleis 
as Antimachus Nikephorus, Philoxenus, Hippostratus and others. This 
device, which became almost constant on the obverse of the Saka money 
from the time of AzesT, is not so common on the coins of his predecessor 
Maues, the obverse of many of whose coins bears Greek or other divini- 
ties. Many of their reverse types showing Zeus, Heracles, Pallas Athene, 
Poseidon and similar Greek deities, or such animal figures as elephant, 
bull, etc. (these latter seem to be Indian gods in their theriomorphic forms) 
were also mainly based on their prototypes in the Indo-Greek series. Ne- 
vertheless many devices on these coins also were characteristic innova- 
tions, and the change in the types of the earlier money from the Hellenistic 
style, though noticeable before, is far more marked now. Some of the new 
devices appearing on these later coins are very composite in character, 
while others are palpably of Indian origin. Gardner described the former 
as ‘most remarkable and original barbaro-Hellenic figures’. Under this 
category he would place ‘a figure resembling Tyche holding in one hand a 
patera, in the other a wheel; a goddess holding in her right hand an object 
resembling a brazier and in left a palm bound with fillet ; a radiate Aitemis 
with veil flying round her head; a draped goddess bearing a crescent on her 
head, and standing between two stars; and several others ’. 2 Other peculiar 
devices such as ‘an enthroned Zeus with his right hand placed on the im- 
personated thunderbolt (Vajrapurusha)’, ‘a female figure standing grasp- 
ing two stems of vine’, etc., also appear on them. As regards the clearly 
recognisable Indian divinities, these are the Siva figures on some copper 
coins of Maues, ‘Gaja-Lakshmi’ on those of Azilises, or ‘Durga-Paivati’ 
(‘Ekanamsa’) on some money of Azesn . 3 In other devices at present 
unrecognisable may also lie a few unfamiliar characterisations of Indian 

1 Amyntas's ‘victory medals’ were noticed same Journal, 1954, col. 187-91 
by A. D. H. Bivar in Numismatic Cir- 2 P. Gardner, op. cit., p. lviii 

cular, 1953, col. 201-2. The ‘Treasure’ 3 J. N. Banerjea, Development of Hindu 

itself has been described by him in the Iconography 2 , ch. iv, pp. 120-1, 111, 135 



INDO-SCYTHIAN COINS 


787 


gods and goddesses. There is little doubt that this coinage presents to us 
‘the sole remaining relics of an interesting school of art, . . . which 
has passed away almost without leaving any memorial; the kings who were 
the patrons of art . . . must have been considerably softened and 
refined by contact with civilized neighbours’. 1 The coins of the Indo- 
Parthian rulers do not show much diversity, and therefore offer little scope 
for originality. The money of Gondophares and his associates and his 
successors, besides bearing some of the Saka or even Greek obverse and 
reverse devices, shows some clear Arsacid features. The Arsacid type of 
the bearded royal bust, the device representing a city crowning the king — 
which frequently occurs on the money of Phraates IV, the great pre- 
ference for Nike, a favourite device of the Parthian money, and other 
peculiarities not only separate these coins partially from the other groups 
just considered, but also suggest the racial affiliation of their issuers. In 
a contrary way the absence of these traits from the coins of the Azes group 
of kings and those of the Vonones group might well be evidence that these 
alien rulers were not of the Parthian stock. The only Indian deity re- 
cognisable on the Indo-Parthian money is Siva, found on some coins of 
Gondophares; the Prakrit legend devavrata or sudevavrata on his coins 
may indicate that Gondophares was a Saiva (p. 214). Another charac- 
teristic trait of some Arsacid type money of Gondophares is the use of 
the unusual Greek legend Autocrator (autocrator — an autocrat). The 
metal mostly used by the same king is billon (a compound of 4/5ths of 
copper and l/5th of silver), while the other coins of the dynasty were of 
copper; their usual shape is round, square being very rare. The style 
and execution of these coins are indifferent in comparison with the money 
of their predecessors. It is also interesting to compare them with the 
money issued by some of the northern Kshatrapas who ruled in the Ma- 
thura region a little earlier, or with that of the Taxila Kshatrapa Zeionises 
and Kharaostes. Though Rajuvula issued some silver hemidrachms after 
those of Strato and other Indo-Greek rulers of his line, a good many of 
his and his son Sodasa’s coins were struck in a baser metal, billon (White- 
head) or lead (Allan). The devices on the latter were, however, purely 
Indian, such as Lakshmi and Abhisheka-Lakshmi, of a kind only rarely 
used earlier by foreigners whether Indo-Greek or Saka. On some indi- 
fferently executed coins of the former crude figures of Heracles and a lion 
are also discernible. The legends on them deserve attention ; Rajuvula’s 
silver coins alone are bilingual, Greek and Kharoshth! scripts being used 
after their prototypes, while the rest of this satrapal group contain legends 
in Brahmi script alone, as was the norm with the native currency of these 
regions. The coins of Kharaostes, the son of Arta and probably an earlier 
contemporary of Rajuvula, ruling in a region far to the north of Mathura, 
are all square copper pieces bearing the usual Saka device ‘king on horse- 
back’ on the obverse and a lion or a standing figure on the reverse; the 


P. Gardner, op. cit.. Intro, p. Iviii 



COINAGE 


Greek and Kharoshthi legends are illegible or partially legible on many 
of them. In marked contrast to these pieces are the comparatively well- 
executed silver coins of the Chukhsa satrap Jihonika, the son of the satrap 
Manigula (Chukhsa is named after the great plain of Chach in a part of 
which Taxila was situated). These coins have the same ‘equestrian figure’ 
device on the obverse, and the somewhat strikingly original reverse device 
of the ‘king (satrap) being either crowned oy a single female figure (a city 
deity as indicated by her mural crown), or by two figures— one male and 
the other female’. The Greek legends are only partially legible on some 
of these coins; the Kharoshthi ones are clearer. The preservation of 
Jihonika copper coins with such devices as ‘bull : lion’ or ‘elephant : bull’ 
is not bad. Whoever he was , he could command the services of the 
more skilful diecutters and technicians to strike his money. 

The coinage of the Kushanas has been fully considered in connection 
with their history in chapter viii; only some general observations need be 
made here. The coins are divisible into several main groups : the coins 
of Kujula (Kara Kapa, Kau) Kadphises — Kadaphes (Kaphsa, Kadapha), 
those of Wima Kadphises, the striking pieces of the Kanishka group of 
kings (Kamshka, Huvishka and Vasudeva), and, lastly, the money of the 
later Kushanas. They have all their distinctive traits, and a simultaneous 
study of these groups indicates that one merges into the other. Though 
the money of Kujula Kadphises — Kadaphes is typologically dissimilar to 
that of his successor Wima, the one bond that unites the two types is found 
in the bilinguality absent from the immediately succeeding group. The 
Greek legend on the first group is generally blundering and illegible, and is 
far clearer and better formed on the second; the same is true of the Pra- 
krit legend written in Kharoshthi script on the reverse sides of both groups. 
It appears also from the style of execution and the use of types that the 
former was the money of a less cultured, in fact comparatively barbaric, 
king. The crude form of a Heracles obviously imitated together with 
some very indifferent busts of Hermaeus copied from the barbarous imi- 
tations of Hermaeus’s money, and the ill-executed head of a nondescript 
Roman emperor, betray the early attempts of a rather barbaric ruler to 
introduce his own currency. The use of the two-humped Bactrian camel 
on one of his types may further suggest the partially nomadic habits of 
his tribe, as also the region from which they poured into India. The coins 
of Wima on the other hand are clearly the product of a far more settled 
state of affairs, for the issuer had evidently had time to assimilate much 
from his Indian environment, and to identify himself exclusively with one 
of the dominant creeds of India. His predecessor may also have been a 
sectary, judging from one of the epithets, satyadharmasthita, in his coin- 
legends; but his successor’s use of the title mahisvara ( Mahesvara — i.e. 
Pasupata) and the constant appearance of the god of his choice and his 
emblems (Siva, bull, trident-battle-axe; sometimes the god is unaccom- 
panied by his mount, very rarely the place of the god and his vehicle is 
occupied by a trident battle-axe) emphatically attest his conversion to the 



KANISHKA COINS 


789 


Saiva cult. Again, the first introduction of a gold currency after a long 
time (one may say for the first time in India for all practical purposes, 
for there is no clear numismatic evidence that gold coins, either indi- 
genous or foreign, were in actual circulation before), the use of high- 
sounding titles like Basileus Basileon Soter Megas and maharaja rajati- 
raja sarvaloka-isvara tratara, the portrait-like figure of the august em- 
peror shown in different attitudes as‘ seated on a low couch in barbarian 
splendour’, ‘standing facing sacrificing at altar’, ‘driving in state in a biga 
drawn either by horses or elephants’, ‘his bust or full squatting figure 
floating through the clouds’, etc., and some undoubted signs of divinity 
attached to his figure — all these facts, taken together, forcibly suggest a 
confirmed and stable administration. These numismatic traits also exhi- 
bit in an interesting way some stages in the gradual indianisation of the 
ruling dynasty. 

The most important mark of the money of Kanishka and Huvishka, 
one that needs to be emphasised, is the varied reverse. It is a remarkable 
thing especially in contrast with the single device feature of the coins of 
their predecessor Wima Kadphises. The large number of their gold and 
copper issues — they do not appear to have coined in silver — bear on the 
reverse the figures of divinities belonging to various creeds, Zoroastrian 
(of a sort), Indian (Brahmanical and Buddhist), and Greek. The most 
and least represented creeds were the first and the last respectively. Even 
when the deities are described by such Greek names as Helios and Salene 
(for Selene), they really belong to the Zoroastrian category. The die- 
cutter was careful enough to engrave the name of each deity by its side. 
Gardner rightly observes that ‘had these coins been anepigraphous, their 
interpretation would have baffled all ingenuity; but fortunately the names 
of the various deities represented are written beside them in Greek charac- 
ters, only somewhat disguised by being crushed into Scythian forms’ (lx). 
The only two Indian deities appearing on Kanishka’s money are Siva (Oeso) 
and Sakyamuni Buddha written Sakaymo Boddo, while no real member of 
the Greek pantheon is clearly ever to be found. Such Greek names as Helios 
and Salene no doubt occur, but the corresponding figures are not at all 
Greek in their iconography. The sungod Helios is usually represented in 
Hellenistic art of the period as driving in a chaiiot drawn by four horses 
(cf.the striking figure of the god onthetetradrachmsoftheGraeco-Bactrian 
king Plato), but here, as well as in Huvishka’s money, he is the same as 
Mihira, his Zoroastrian counterpart. The newly discovered coins of Plato 
near Qunduz in Northern Afghanistan show that the sungod figur- 
ing in them was of the nature of the Iranian Mithra (cf. supra, p. 785). 
Selene, according to Greek mythology, is the moon goddess, while the 
corresponding figure here is that of a male deity in many respects identi- 
cal with the Persian moon god Mao so often represented in the coins of the 
two Kushana kings. Another Greek name, Hephaistos, found by the side 
of some figures on Kanishka’s coins only, is also a misnomer. In fact 
these three ‘are not Greek divinities at all, but popular indigenous 



790 


COINAGE 


divinities under Greek names and a Greek disguise; in other words, these 
Greek gods are coefficients of the indigenous ones, as is the common 
belief of the vulgar ,’ 1 indigenous not with reference to India, but to 
countries far outside her western and north-western borders. 

Huvishka’s coins show at the same time an advance as well as retrogres- 
sion in respect of the variety of their reverse devices. The number of the 
deities is no doubt larger, as new ones are introduced for the first time, 
but carelessness in the representation and description of some of them is 
discernible. Added to such Persian deities as Mihira, Mao, Vata ( Oado ), 
Luhrasp (Lurasp), Veretraghna ( Orlagno ), Atash ( Athso ), Pharro ( Pharro , 
not really a firegod like Atash, but the presiding deity of imperial 
greatness), Bahumana ( Manao Bago), and to such nondescript figures 
as Nana or Nanashao (written Nana, Nanaia, Nanashao, probably the 
Syrian goddess based on the far earlier Anahit of Asia Minor), Ardochso 
( Ardochsho , apparently identical with the Roman goddess of abundance), 
we now find several new names e.g. Shariar ( Shareoro ), Ouranos ( Ur on ), 
the Greek Heracles ( Herakilo ), the Alexandrian Serapis ( Sarapo ), 
goddess depicting personified Rome (Rom, Riom ). The list of Indian 
divinities is also fuller, for to Siva is added the figure of his consort Uma 
(Ommo) and their son or sons, Skanda, Kumara, Visakha, and Mahasena 
(Skando Komar o Vizago Maaseno ). 2 Sometimes a god and his consort 
are shown side by side, as in the case of Siva and Uma, or Siva and Nana 
—this peculiar conjunction of an Indian god with a non-Indian goddess 
should be noted. Sometimes, though rarely, curious single, but at the 
same time composite, deities (most likely belonging to Brahmanic 
pantheon) make an appearance. It is sufficient to mention the ithyphallic 
three-headed four-armed figure holding a goat (antelope ?), a wheel, 
a trident and a thunderbolt . 3 The iconography of Siva and Uma becomes 
varied, the former sometimes appearing as three-headed and bearing 
different combinations of such attributes as ‘vase’, ‘thunderbolt’, ‘trident’, 
‘goat’ or ‘antelope’, ‘club’, ‘wreath’, etc., while his consort is shown either 
with a lotus or a cornucopia in her hand. The Indian features of Hu- 
vishka’s money indicate greater acquaintance with the beliefs of the 
Indian people. At the same time curious blunders such as a sun god being 
described as Onia, or a Nanaia as Onio, are found. The change, 
however, is much more perceptible in the money of his successor 
Vasudeva. The number and variety of the reverse devices are suddenly 
restricted and three deities only appear — Siva, Ardochso, and Nana, the 


1 JRAS. 1912, p- 1005 
3 P. Gardner, op. cit., pis. xxvii, xxviii, 
figs. 16, 22, 24. Two or possibly three 
allied gods are clearly meant by these 
terms; they are Skanda-Kumara, Visa- 
kha, and Mahasena. D. R. Bhandar- 
kar’s view that there are four deities 
is wrong; cf. J. N. Banerjea, op. cit., 
p. 145. For Uma on Huvishka’s coins, 
cf. Banerjea, op. cit., pp. 136-7, pi. 


xi fig. 7 

3 P. Gardner, op. cit., p. 148, pi. xxviii 
fig. 16. Gardner describes it as J§iva 
on account of its affinity to the god, 
but a wheel in Siva’s hand is unusual 
and the faces do not appear to be all, 
human; for another possible explana- 
1 ZM banerjea, op. cit., pp. 



SIGNIFICANCE OF THE COIN DEITIES 


791 


first two being more frequent. These two devices, Siva and Ardochso, 
came to play a very important part in the numismatic history of northern 
and north-western India and its border, for they continued to be used 
in their original or in modified forms on the money of the local dynasts 
and monarchs for more than half a millennium. The Greek legend on 
these coins gradually deteriorated. 

Various explanations have been offered for this marked peculiarity of 
Kanishka and Huvishka’s currency. One is that it emphasises in a charac- 
teristic manner the spirit of eclecticism with which these two Kushana 
emperors were imbued. Rapson who at first accepted this view was subse- 
quently of opinion that it did nothing of the kind, but was simply a sign of 
the vast extent of the contemporary Kushana empire. The coins were 
minted in different parts of it, and the deities shown on their reverse were 
no other than the tutelary gods of the numerous mint-cities. Rapson was 
the greatest advocate of the local character of the Indian coins, and this 
view harmonises with the theory expressed above. J. Kennedy accepted 
none of these suggestions ; according to him the pantheon represented had 
no connection with the religion of the Kushanas or of their emperors who 
in all probability were animists. Its marked Zoroastrian character, so 
ably demonstrated by Stein , 1 was at once popular and old-fashioned, and 
was derived from Babylonia, probably from its lower part — Characene 
and Messene. The syncretism of the motley pantheon marked by its 
Sabaean and astral character and the importance that was given to 
Nanaia or Queen Nana signify, according to him, the regions from which 
many of its individual members were recruited. The coinage of the two 
Kushana emperors ‘was struck not to supply local wants, but for the pur- 
poses of foreign (Chinese silk) trade, and between these Messenian mer- 
chants and the Chinese, the people of Kashmir, Kabul, and Arachosia 
acted as intermediaries.’ It was with the religious beliefs of these Mes- 
senian traders and their intermediaiies that most of the deities appearing 
on the coins were associated . 2 But if the coinage was onlyintendedforthese 
trade transactions between the extreme northern and north-western 
regions of India and countries far beyond her borders, what rational ex- 
planation can be offered for its unimpeded circulation in the innermost re- 
gions of the Indian dominions of the Kushanas ? The vast number of copper 
coins, along with the gold ones, must have supplied local wants, ar d they 
were no less characterised by ‘a varied reverse’. Thus, Kennedy’s hypothe- 
sis is also not wholly satisfactory, though there may be something in his 
views on the localisation of the peculiar Zoroastrian deities. But these 
gods, along with their Indian counterparts, seem to have had a wider ap- 
peal, and it is not unlikely that an appreciable number of Kanishka’s and 
Huvishka’s alien subjects in India were devotees of these non-Indian deities. 
The coins of the two Kushana emperors may or may not signify their 
eclecticism, but they undoubtedly show a liberal spirit in marked contrast 

1 I A. 1888, pp. 89 f. 2 JRAS. 1912, p. 981 ff. 



792 


COINAGE 


to the aggressive sectarianism featured in the money of their predecessor 
Wima Kadphises. 

The coins of the later Kushanas, the successors of Vasudeva, have on 
their reverse either Siva or Ardochso. They were soon to be characteri- 
sed by only a partial bilinguality, differing from the earlier mode. The 
Greek script showed a progressive degradation until the legend almost 
ceased to be intelligible, and the second script, used to write only the king’s 
name in ‘Chinese fashion’, i.e. vertically under his extended arm, was 
Brahmi; the reverse device as usual had the short descriptive label in 
Greek. The obverse side also came to bear one, two or more stray Brahmi 
letters in different parts of the field, the significance of which is not clear. 
R. D. Banerji thinks that the first two may stand for the name of the pro- 
vince, and the name of the particular mint; the third being the initial letter 
of the issuing chief’s name. There can be no certainty about this. Nothing, 
however, can be plainer than the gradual debasement of the gold of these 
coins and the deterioration of their style and fabric. It is true that in a way 
they served as the prototype of the earliest Gupta gold coins, but the 
Gupta die-cutters and coiners were far better technicians and artists. 

It is now necessary to say a few words about the metrology of the fo- 
reign coins in the India of our period. The weight of the silver coins issued 
by the Bactrian Greeks before they were dispossessed of their kingdom on 
the other side of the Hindukush by the Central Asian hordes, followed the 
Attic measure for gold and silver money. This measure was made uni- 
versal in the regions conquered by Alexander, and the Seleucid kings 
maintained it. Reference to a few gold staters of Diodotus II and 
Euthydemus I, as well as to the unusual twenty-stater piece of Eucratides 
has already been made (ch. vi). Tetradrachms, drachms and hemi- 
drachms were commonly struck, though smaller denominations, obols 
for instance, are also known. Heliocles, presumably the last of these ru- 
lers to strike money both in Bactria and India, appears to ha\e adopted 
a different standard in most of his Indian silver coins, though a few even 
of these may have been struck according to the older weight ; his prede- 
cessor Eucratides may also have issued a few silver pieces according to the 
new weight. This changed measure became the norm for the money of 
the host of other Indo-Greek kings, though two of them. Apollodotus and 
Antialcidas, still issued a few pieces in accordance with the older measure. 1 
The change lay in the disuse of the heavier coins, the Attic tetradrachms, 
and the introduction usually of coins of two denominations, in which the' 
normal weight of one was about 148 grains, and that of the other about 
37 grains troy. This was Cunningham’s estimate, but Gardner took the 
weights of the two groups as approximating to 160 and 40 grains respec- 
tively. Different explanations of the nature of these two denominations have 
been hazarded by different numismatists. Cunningham suggested long 


The recently found Qunduz treasure 
noted above shows, however, that a 
few other Indo-Greek kings, even Her- 


maeus (the last among them) struck 
Bactrian style Attic tetradrachms. 



CHANGE IN STANDARD 


793 


ago that the change was due to an increase in the value of gold which oc- 
curred at about the same time, so that the price of gold rose from ten rates 
of silver to eleven rates of silver for one rate of gold. 1 But for all practical 
purposes no gold coins were issued by the Indo-Greek kings, and no ques- 
tion of the relative value of the two metals can really arise. Gardner would 
describe the new standard as identical with one previously current in all 
parts of the Persian empire, ‘notably with that of the sigloi stamped with 
the figure of the Persian king freely circulating in the northern parts of 
India, which paid tribute to the Persians’. He would thus designate ‘the 
heavier pieces which weigh as a maximum 160 grains, didrachms, and the 
smaller pieces which weigh up to 40 grains, hemidrachms’ (lxviii). 
But no such silver coins of the Indo-Greeks weighing 160 grains are 
known; the heaviest weighs a little less than 152 grains, and the academic 
as well as actual weight of a Persian siglos was somewhat more than 80 
grains. Von Sallet’s explanation, already noticed, was different. He regar- 
ded the two denominations as tetradrachms and drachms of a much reduced 
standard. One of his chief suggestions was that the Greeks found that 
their Indian subjects were accustomed to the use of much lighter weight 
silver money, and a marked depreciation in the weightwould not go against 
the prevailing norm. Thus, the two groups of coins which according 
to Gardner were ‘appreciated’ didrachms and hemidrachms were in the 
opinion of the German numismatist ‘depreciated’ drachms and tetra- 
drachms. Gardner objected to this interpretation, arguing that the sudden 
change in the metrology ‘is evidently due not to any sinking of the stand- 
ard, but to the adoption for purposes of convenience of a different weight 
for coins’. Macdonald and Rapson accepted Gardner’s view, and called it 
the Persian or Indo-Persian standard, while R. B. Whitehead, ably sup- 
porting Von Sallet, followed him in calling it the Indian one. 2 Whitehead 
observes, ‘The advantageous course was to strike hybrid coins on an 


1 Cunningham, Coins of the Indo- Scy- 
thians and Kushanas (Reprints of his 
articles in N.C. 1889-92), pp. 18-19. 
Cunningham demonstrates his point 
in the following manner : The full weight 
of a gold stater in Eucratides’s time 
and before was 134.4 grains troy, which 
at 10 rates gave its equivalent silver 
value at 1344 grs. troy. This divided by 
20 gave the weight of the silver drachm 
as 67.2, that of the didrachm as 134.4, 
and hemidrachm as 33.6 grs. After 

Eucratides the average weight of 16 
didrachms has become 146.3 grs, 
while that of 82 hemidrachmas has 
risen to 36.48, i.e. 37 grs., the full weight 
of a didrachm now being as much 
as 148 grs. Thus 1/10 had been added 
to the weight of the silver coins, and 
the rate had changed to 11 silver to 1 
100 


gold. This is his table: 
Grains Troy 
134.4 (the weight 
of an Attic di- 
drachm) 

+ 1/10 
i.e. 13.44 


Grains Troy 
33.6 (the weight 
of an Attic hemi- 
drachm) 

4- 1/10 
i.e. 3.36 


147.84 or 148, 36.96 or 37, 

the weight of a the weight of a 
new didrachm new hemidrachm 

CHI. i pp. 461, 545. R. B. Whitehead 
followed Cunningham’s views in his 
earlier writings, but later changed his 
views, for ‘Cunningham’s theory in- 
volved a complete break in continuity 
between the Bactrian and Indo-Bactrian 
coinages’. Von Sallet’s hypothesis is 
worked out in his Die Nachfolger 
Alexanders des Grossen, (1879). 



794 


COINAGE 


arbitrary standard smaller than either the Bactrian or Indian, and to make 
a profit by this debasement of currency. The reduced scale does not seem 
to be related to any known standard.’ 1 It is hardly possible to confirm or 
refute either of these suggestions, though Sallet and Whitehead appear to 
have given a better explanation of this metrological change. But even 
their theory is marred by a slight misstatement of fact ; it is not wholly 
true that the Indians of these regions were only accustomed to handle 
light weight silver coins. The single type bent-bar silver pieces already 
noticed as current in Taxila and its environs in the pre-Greek times show 
that the local people knew also the use of very heavy pieces. 

The Scytho-Parthian rulers appear to have followed their immediate 
predecessors in India for the weight of their silver money. They did not 
coin gold ; the one tiny gold coin in the Lahore Museum bearing the legend 
athamasa placed by Whitehead along with the Saka-Pahlava coins weighs 
only 3.4. grains, and gives us no idea about its standard. It might not 
have been a coin at all, but some sort of a token of a private individual. 
Similarly the unique medallic gold piece in the British museum collection 
associated with Pushkalavati and weighing 66.7 grains is of no great use 
in this respect; it would be a heavy-weight half stater according to the full 
Attic measure. But its issuer’s name and nationality are unknown, though 
Gardner describes the piece as ‘Indo-Scythic, uncertain’ (162). It need 
not have been a coin meant for currency purposes, but a religious token 
of the city of Pushkalavati in Scythic times. It is practically impossible 
in the present state of our knowledge to say anything certain about the 
standard followed by the Indo-Scythic and Indo-Parthian kings in the 
large number of their copper and billon coins respectively. But as in the 
case of the copper money of the Indo-Greeks so here also the indigenous 
Karshapana standard or its varieties current in Northern India may have 
been followed. The problem of the relationship between the two groups of 
coins— one of silver and other of baser metals— still remains unsolved. 

The practice of the imperial Kushanas in India of striking gold coins 
in large numbers from Wima Kadphises onwards has added much interest 
to the metrological problem of the early foreign coins in this country. 
Cunningham showed long ago that the average weight of the full denomi- 
nation gold pieces of Wima Kadphises, Kanishka, Huvishka, and Vasu- 
deva was about 123 grains. It was thus far below the weight of an Attic 
gold stater (a little over 130 grains troy). He explained this change on the 
basis of the following data. First, a further rise in the value of gold and 
a consequent fall in the price of silver in these times when the weight of a 
didrachm still remained near 148 grains. The traditional relationship 
between the gold and silver coins of the Greeks was that twenty silver 
drachms or ten didrachms were equivalent in value to one gold stater. The 
market price of gold in the early Kushana times being one of gold to twelve 
of silver, 1480 grains of silver (148, the weight of an Indo-Greek 


NC. 1923, p.298 



KUSHANA GOLD COINS 


795 


didrachm multiplied by 10, the number of didrachms making up the full 
value of a stater) would be priced at 123.33 grains of gold, and that is 
exactly the average weight of the imperial Kushana gold pieces. Cunning- 
ham would further bring them in line with the aurei of the Roman 
emperors, Tiberius and Nero. The large number of Roman gold coins 
imported into northern India, the balance of trade being in her favour in 
these times, were recoined by the powerful Kushana monarchs, and it was 
natural that the weight of the early imperial aurei would have an indirect 
influence on that of their gold coins. J. Kennedy saw no direct connection 
between the two groups of gold coins, and definitely stated that ‘Kanishka’s 
coinage shows no sign of Roman influence’. He accepted the first part 
of Cunningham’s suggestion about the relative value of the two metals 
gold and silver being a determining factor in the gold money of the Kusha- 
pas. He surmised, however, that the rise in the value of gold in the 
second to first century B.c. and first century A.D. was principally due to the 
heavy never-ceasing drain of gold from western Asia and south-eastern 
Europe to Rome where vast quantities were stored up in public treasuries 
and private coffers, and thus going out of circulation. He was further of 
opinion that the relation between the weight of Kanishka’s staters and 
that of the Roman aurei was remote and indirect. The gold staters of 
Kanishka, the first year of whose reign he would place in 58 B.c., were 
according to him prior to the aurei of Julius Caesar, and both were the 
remote descendants of Macedonian coinage, their weight being deter- 
mined by the market value of gold. 1 Kennedy’s view placing Kanishka 
before the Kadphises group of kings is no longer tenable, and his numis- 
matic argument so closely bound up with it naturally falls to the ground. 
The second part of Cunningham’s conclusion cannot be brushed aside 
as Kennedy does, and it certainly seems that the weight of the imperial 
Roman aurei from Augustus to the accession of Nero had some connec- 
tion with the gold coins of Wima Kadphises and his successors. In spite of 
the small fluctuations in weight in the Roman aurei of the period, their 
measure (until formally reduced by Nero) was very near 123 grains (122.9 
grs). Another fact to be borne in mind is that the Roman denarius aureus 
(gold dinara — simple denarii were silver coins) gave its name to one mone- 
tary designation in India of the post-Kushana period. The term dinara 
used in the literature and inscriptions of the Gupta period to denote Gupta 
gold coins must have been adopted from the Roman denarii aureii. The 
Kushana gold pieces whose later forms became the prototype of the earli- 
est Gupta gold coins were most probably described by the same name, 
another less frequent designation for them being nanaka. Nanaka, as the 
commentator of Yajnavalkya Smriti tells us, denoted coins which had 
Nana as their cognisance ( nanahka tanka), and the Kushana coins up to 

1 Cunningham’s views on the weight of for Kennedy’s part acceptance and part 

the Kusharia gold coins have been rejection of them, cf. JRAS. 1912, pp. 

fully explained in Coins of the Indo - 999 If. 

Scythians and Kushanas, pp. 20-1; 



796 


COINAGE 


the time of Vasudeva had Nana as one of their devices. The weight of the 
gold coins of Vasudeva’s immediate successors remained very near that of 
the imperial Kushana gold money, but there was a gradual decline in the 
standard as the quality of the metal deteriorated more and more. 

The large number of tribal coins of our period scattered in recognizable 
groups throughout the length and breadth of northern, north-western and 
central India are characterised by bewildering varieties and weights. Some 
account of them has already been given in Chapter V of this volume and 
the peculiar traits of a few have been noticed earlier in this chapter. Cun- 
ningham's vast experience in collecting them and studying them inten- 
sively enabled him to localize these pieces with close precision, and his 
opinions of their localization have been accepted almost universally by 
numismatists. There can be no doubt that these tribal coins were the 
legitimate successors of the early uninscribed punch-marked and cast coins 
of India. Most of them belong to the die-struck group, and have fairly 
legible legends, but some, to be counted among the ‘cast’ variety, are far 
less legible in their legends. There is a third variety numbering compa- 
ratively few pieces, the metal blanks of which were first cast and afterwards 
stamped with devices and legends by the ‘hammer and anvil’ process. 
The cast coins are almost invariably of copper or bronze, and a greater 
percentage of the die-struck coins are also of the same metal. The rest 
of the die-struck variety are of silver, but a few other metals or metal- 
compounds like lead and potin are used though very rarely; for example, 
some lead coins were issued by Rajuvula and Sodasa, the Saka satraps 
of Mathura, and potin was used by the Yaudheyas in their currency. 
Gold was not coined at all by these tribes, and the excessive value as- 
signed even to baser metals is emphasized by the very small size of many 
copper coins. Thus the Malavas had the distinction of striking some of 
the tiniest coins ever seen, and one such in the collection of the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta, weighing only 1.7 grains should doubtless be ranked 
among the lightest and smallest coins in the world. 1 

At the same time heavy-weight coins even of silver are not unknown; 
witness the three unassigned base silver coins of the second to first cen- 
tury b.c. issued by Sivadatta, Sivapalita and Haridatta found near Almora 
in the Himalaya mountains; their respective weights are 327, 282 and 304 
grains. Of the copper heavy-weight coins, we need only mention the in- 
scribed (legend Dhamapalasa in third century Brahmi script already no- 
ticed) and uninscribed coins of Eran, the Kuninda coins with the legend 
Bhagavato Chhatresvara Mahatmanah, the Panchala coins of Phalguni- 
mitra and others, and some of the heavy-weight Yaudheya coins. There 
are perplexing varieties of weight in the same groups and series of coins, 
and it is very difficult, almost impossible, to fix the relationship between 
these coin-groups of various unknown denominations. Silver coins are 
far less numerous and are seldom very heavy; the three coins of base 


V. A. Smith, CCIM. i p. 163 



INDIGENOUS AND FOREIGN TECHNIQUES 


797 


silver noticed above are striking exceptions to the general rule. Among 
the indigenous tribes, the Audumbaras, the Kunindas, the Yaudheyas and 
the Vrishni Rajanyagana (the two last very rarely), are alone known to 
have issued silver money, and to judge by the recorded weight, this silver 
money was probably based on the changed metrological standard of the 
Indo-Greek coins, and not on the indigenous dharana or purana measure. 

It is interesting to note that these groups of silver coins are among those 
indigenous types of money which show unmistakable traces of foreign 
influence. This fact was first hinted by Cunningham who described the 
Audumbara silver coins then known to him as ‘silver hemidracbms’. 1 
Of these Rapson observed that ‘found in the district of Pathankot, they 
are in style like the hemidrachms of the Greek prince Appollodotos and 
are found together with them’. 2 It is highly probable that the name 
Audumbara covered other allied tribes, the name of one of which can be 
distinctly read in the coin legends. This was Vimaka, a few silver coins 
of whose chief Rudravarma are known; they are very similar to those of 
Mahadeva classed along with the Audumbaras by most numismatists. 
Vimakas are mentioned along with many other tribes like Kauluta, Kunin- 
da, Tangana, Kasmira, Darada, Darvabhisara and others of the north- 
west in the extract from Parasara, an authority of Varahamihira, quoted 
by Utpala in his commentary on the Brihatsamhita? The earlier coins 
(these are the silver coins, biscriptural like those of the Audumbara group) 
of the Kunindas, the present day Kunets of the Sutlej valley, ‘show the 
module of the silver coins suggested by the hemidrachms of the later Greek 
kings.’ 4 Allan observes of them, ‘economically the silver coins of the 
Kunindas represent an attempt of an Indian ruler to issue a native silver 
coinage which would compete in the market with the later Indo-Greek 
silver.’ 5 The majority of their copper coins belonging to the same age 
(about the end of the first century b.c. according to Allan) bear similar 
features and possible traces of foreign influence. This cannot be said of 
the Audumbara square copper coins which are earlier than their silver 
money. They were once very rare, but the hoard consisting of such issues 
of the Audumbara chiefs, Rudradasa, Sivadasa and Dharaghosha, found 
at Irippal (Kangra distirct. Panjab) in 1913 and described by R. D 
Banerji 6 has made them well known. They are clearly Indian in type 
without the least trace of foreign influence. 

The same process by which the indigenous mode gradually yields place 
to extraneous technique under the pressure of alien contact can be dis- 
tinctly traced in the coin types of the Yaudheyas, who struck money in 
copper, potin, and very rarely in silver, and many of these groups of coins 
seem to have been issued in the name of their tutelary deity, ‘Bhagavan 
Svami Brahmanya Kumara’. 7 Their earliest issues consist of scyphate 

1 Cunningham, CAL p. 67 5 Ibid. p. ciii 

* E. J. Rapson, Indian Coins, p. 11 ‘ Num. Supplement, xxn pp. 247 ff. 

8 Brihatsamhita, Dvivedi’s ed. ch. 14, 7 J. N. Banerjea, op. cit. pp., 141-2. 

p. 284 The war-god Karttikeya (another name 

4 J. Allan, op. cit., Intro, p. ci of Brahmapya Kumara) was fittingly 



798 


COINAGE 


round potin coins die-struck only on the concave side (their scyphate cha- 
racter seems to have been due to the thinness of the ‘blank’ struck with 
force in a heated state), some with the partially legible legend maharajasa. 
The second class of their coins, some in potin and others in copper, bear- 
ing devices on both sides with portions of partially legible obverse legends 
Yodheyanam or Bahudhanaka ( Bahudhanyaka ) Yodheyanam may be of 
a slightly later date. These two classes, like the somewhat similar copper 
issues of the Arjunayana tribe, were struck in accordance with the deve- 
loped indigenous technique, and show no trace of foreign influence. The 
contrary is the case with the other varieties of Yaudheya money mainly 
struck in copper though a unique silver piece is also known. The silver 
coin, and many other copper coins revealing an unmistakable affinity 
with Kupinda types show foreign features, especially in their module; the 
devices, however, are purely Indian, e.g. the six-headed Karttikeya, Siva, 
Karttikeya’s consort (Kumaridevi), Lakshmx, deer etc. The series of well 


executed round copper coins almost similar in size and weight (the latter 
usually ranges between 160 and 178 grains) with the figures of Karttikeya 
and his consort on either side and the legend Yaudheyaganasya jaya on 
the obverse, the latest in the Yaudheya coinage (struck in the third-fourth 
century A.D.), show undoubted traces of Kushana influence— especially of 
the technique followed in the copper money of the Imperial Kushapas. 
It should be noted that the foreign impress in the cases of the groups of 
indigenous coins noticed above principally consisted of the module or 
technique; the numerous devices were in the main adopted from the vast 
store of symbols known in the country from time immemorial and mytho- 
logical figures like Siva, Lakshmi, Karttikeya. It is true that sometimes, 
though rarely, one or two modes of representations of the latter like ‘Siva- 
Visvamitra’ on Dharaghosha’s unique silver coins may have been based 
on the model of a Greek divinity. 1 A touch of alien influence may also 
be traced in the adoption of such attributive epithets as tratara or rajaraja 
in some of the tribal coins. The unique silver coin of the Vrishni Rajanya- 
gana contains the former epithet, while some silver money of the Au- 
dumbara chief Mahadeva bears the latter. There is little doubt that both 
are respective adaptations of the Prakrit equivalents of the Indo-Greek and 
Indo-Scythic royal titles, Soteros and Basileos Basileon. One of the most 
characteristic and important traits of the foreign coins, however, never 
found favour with the indigenous issuers of the coins of our period. 
Whether tribal chiefs like the Kupinda Amoghabhuti and the Audumbara 
Dharaghosha, or Hindu rulers of Mathura and Ayodhya like ‘Raja 
regarded by this Kshatnya tribe who Bhagavato Chhatresvara mahatmanah 

lived on then weapons ( ayudhajivi ) as found on some groups of Yaudhera 

their patron deity and their monarch as and Kuninda coins 8 * Yaudheya 

well. The Kuijindas in some stage of 1 Cunningham describes the nhverce a* 

their history aught have dedicated their vice as 

state to Lord Siva. This seems to be hand raised to held and leopard's 

the most rational interpretation of such skin over left arm- similar tn fieure 

coin-legends as Bhagavato svamino of Heracles crowning TimLlf ’ & CAI 

Brahmariyade vasya Kumarasya and p. 67 8 mseit. L.AI. 



THE DEVICES ON INDIAN COINS 


799 


Balabhuti’ and ‘Raja Kumudasena,’ none of them ever introduced his 
personal figure on either side of his coins. 

Much has been incidentally said in this chapter about the devices and 
legends on the coin groups of the Indian issues of our period. A few more 
important details about them not properly noticed so far may now be 
mentioned. The majority of the devices engraved on the die or the coin- 
mould appear to have been religious in character. The significance of 
some is obvious. Thus the structure reproduced on the earliest coins of 
the Audumbara tribe undoubtedly stands for a Saiva shrine with double 
domes and multiple pillars, probably one of the earliest representations 
of a well-developed temple-model (it is not a two-storied and pillared stupa 
as Allan would have us believe). The ‘tree in railing’ with or without 
the trident battle-axe standard in front, one of the commonest devices on 
the coins, stands in many cases for the * sthalavj-iksha ’ of the localities 
from which the individual groups of coins were issued. A common sym- 
bol on the Ujjain copper pieces is the phallic emblem of |iva very realisti- 
cally represented. The so-called ‘three-arched’ or ‘six-arched’ chaitya with 
or without a crescent above it is nothing but a conventional represen- 
tation of a mountain, and the wavy line almost invariably shown below 
stands for a river. The river is most clearly and characteristically repre- 
sented in some Eran, Besnagar and other coins with fish and such sacred 
symbols as a swastika or ‘a taurine’ within two parallel wavy lines; the 
sanctity of mountains and rivers in India is well known. Tanks with 
fish are occasionally found on some coins; they may symbolise sacred 
tanks. The very ‘ornate wheel’ on the unique silver pieces of the Vrishni 
Rajanya gana seems to be the ‘Sudarsana chakra’, the weapon par excel- 
lence of Vasudeva- Krishna, the greatest of the Vrishnis. The various types 
of wheels on many other coins of this class are mostly solar in character. 
The standards ( dhvajastambhas ) are sometimes represented; some of their 
capitals consist of a sula (trident), a mina (fish), a tala (fan palm), and a 
chakra (wheel), a kuk/cu(a (cock), and thus they can Be described as Suladh- 
vaja, Minadhvaja, Taladhvaja, Chakradhvaja, Kukkutadhvaja with indivi- 
dual sectarian affiliations. The Arjunayanas and the Yaudheyas in their 
earliest coins seem to have adopted the yupa (sacrificial pillar) as one of 
their devices. The animals that commonly appear on the coins are the 
elephant and bull, but sometimes a horse, a deer, very rarely even a frog 
(on some Ujjain coins) is to be found. The exact significance of many of 
the animals is not discernible. A few, like the bull, may represent the deity 
in his theriomorphic form; but sometimes the bull may stand for the sacri- 
ficial bull, as on the money of the Arjunayanas and the Yaudheyas. The 
human figure found on many coins shown usually in a standing attitude 
and rarely in a sitting posture with recognizable objects like a staff, vase, 
trident, a lotus flower, a spear, a chakra may usually stand for different 
divinities. Thus, ‘the staff and vase carrying figure’ with one face and rarely 
three faces so frequently found on Ujjain coins clearly indicates Siva and 
not Karttikeya as Allan says. Cunningham long ago suggested this on the 



COINAGE 


basis of the legendary association of ‘Siva Mahakala’ with this region. 
The figuie seated in Yogasana underneath a tree on a few coins of the 
locality may in this light represent ‘Siva as Mahayogf, and not ‘a seated 
Buddha’. Karttikeya fittingly appears on the Yaudheya coins with his 
special cognizances, a spear and a cock or a peacock. The goddess 
Lakshml standing carrying a lotus flower, sometimes being bathed by two 
elephants, is a favourite device with these indigenous coiners, and the alien 
rulers of India sometimes adopted it from them. The unique series of 
Panchala mitra coins are very helpful for the study of the iconography of 
the devices. The names of their individual issuers, Agnimitra, Vishnu- 
mitra, Suryamitra, Bhanumitra, Phalgunimitra, Bhumimitra, Indramitra 
perhaps give us a clue to the identity of the different reverse devices on 
their coins. Thus the coins of Suryamitra and Bhanumitra invariably bear 
an enshrined rayed disc symbolising the sun-god; similarly the figures of 
a Vishnu (? four armed), an Agni, an Indra, the goddesses Bhumi and 
PhalgunI are shown on the coins of different issuers bearing their respec- 
tive names . 1 The above account may give the impression that the coin- 
devices were seldom associated with other creeds of India like Buddhism 
and Jainism. But many symbols present on these coins have not been 
satisfactorily explained, and some of them may be associated with these 
and other creeds. The secular character of a few of the symbols is also 
demonstrable e.g. the ‘steel-yard balance’ found on some coins localized 
by Cunningham at Ayodhya. Some of the symbols have a clear affinity 
or identity with those appearing on the punch-marked and cast coins of 
an earlier date. 

A study of the legends on the indigenous coins and their scripts also 
furnishes us with some important and interesting data. The scripts used 
are only two, Brahml and Kharoshthi, the latter being comparatively rare 
and used only on the coins of the extreme north of India. It is found 
on the coins of Taxila and its environs, of the Audumbaras and the allied 
tribes e.g. the Vimakas, the Kunindas, the ‘Rajanya-janapada ’ and the 
‘Vjishni - rajanya-gana’ ; the simultaneous use of Brahml in most of these 
cases is noteworthy. It is true that the coins of the ‘Rajanya-janapada’ were 
localized by Cunningham at Mathura (he could not read the name correct- 
ly), but it is highly probable that their source was further north and that 
Mathura was the region which was infested by foreigners from the north, 
like the Saka Kshatrapas Rajuvula, Sodasa, Hagana and Hagamasha. 
The legends, both in Brahml and Kharoshthi, are usually in the Prakrit 
language, but attempts at Sanskritisation are clearly discernible, especially 
in those of comparatively late date. Thus in the earlier coins of the 
Yaudheyas, we find such Prakrit forms as Bahudhahaka and Yodheyana, 
while in their later issues we find almost complete though not correct 
Sanskrit forms like bhagavat(o) svamino brahmanya-devasya Kumarasya, 
or Yaudheya ganasya jaya. Still Prakritisms sometimes appear in the full 


For a study in detail of this topic, see 
the relevant portions of Chapter iv 


of Banerjea, Development of Hindu 
Iconography. 



COIN LEGENDS 


fledged Sanskrit legends; thus, in the Kuninda issues the Prakrit form 
Amoghabhutisya is used in place of the Sanskrit Amoghabhuteh in the 
otherwise fully Sanskrit legend maharajasya rajnah Kmi ( in)-dasya Amo- 
ghabhutisya. In these bi-scriptural Kuninda coins, however, the same 
legend written in Kharoshthi script on the other side is entirely in Prakrit — 
maharajasa raha kunidasa Amoghabhutisa. The unique copper coin of 
the Kauluta chief Virayasas has on its obverse in mixed Sanskrit 
rajha ko(au)lutasya Virayasasya. The legends further show that the 
coins were issued by authorities of diffeient categories; some of 
them were persons having no royal titles whatever, and these seem to have 
been in the majority. A few names are accompanied by the royal title, 
and rarely by one or two attributive epithets which appear to have been 
adopted from the foreign compatriots of these Indian rulers. Though 
most of the indigenous issuers of coins use no royal titles, the very fact 
that among them there are some who do may indicate that all were 
ruling chiefs possessing authority to issue money in their own name. This 
does not necessarily mean that they were great rulers; most of them were 
doubtless petty local chieftains . 1 Some strikers of coins are careful to 
show their tribal affiliation in the legends, while the legends on a few coins 
also reveal that they were issued by tribal organizations like gapas and 
janapadas in their corporate capacity. Very rarely legends show that the 
particular coins in which they occur were struck in the names of dif- 
ferent localities The Audumbara and allied tribal chiefs suchasSivadasa, 
Rudradasa, Dharaghosha, Mahadeva, the Vaimaka Rudravarma, and the 
Kuninda Amoghabhuti, the Kauluta Virayasas adopt the royal titles, but 
their legends also specify the different tribes whose chiefs they were. 
The legends on the coins of the Arjunayanas, the Uddehikas, the Malavas, 
the Yaudheyas and others were expressly issued in the names of different 
ganas or republican clans. Similarly the coins of the Sivis, the Trigartas, 
the Vrishnis, and the Rajanyas bear inscriptions showing that they were 
issued in the names of the whole janapadas with the aforesaid tribal desig- 
nations. A few coins bear such legends as Erakanya, Tripuri, Ujeniya, 
Kosabi ; these emphasize in a curious manner their association with the 
respective localities, but none of the words indicating place names is in 
the genitive case. Most of the coins usually associated with the Mala- 
vas, it is true, bear such legends as Malavanam jaya, Malavaganasya jaya, 
Malavahna jaya, but some have in place of the tribal name such outlandish 
words as Bhapamyana, Majupa, Mapojaya, Magajasa, Magojaya, Mapa- 
ka. Pacha, Gajava, Maraja, Jamaku. What is their real meaning ? Smith 


1 No royal titles are used on the coins of 
Sivadatta, Sivapalita, Haridatta (Al- 
mora), Muladeva, Visakhadeva and 
others (Ayodhya), Dharmapala (Eran), 
Brihaspatimitra, Parvata, Asvaghosha 
and several others (Kausambi), Gomi- 
tra and many other Hindu rulers of 
101 


Mathura, and the ‘Panchala kings’: 
Kumudasena of the Ayodhya group, 
Dhanadeva in the Kausambi series, 
Ghoshadatta, Balabhuti, Ramadatta, 
and Kamadatta of the Mathura group 
adopt the royal title. 



802 


COINAGE 


thought that most of these names were of foreign origin. Other sugges- 
tions were offered by other scholars. Allan holds that ‘they are not names, 
but in most cases meaningless attempts to reproduce parts of Malavanam 
jayah.’ 1 None of these explanations is fully satisfactory. In any case, 
they remind us in a curious manner of the pseudo-Roman copper coins 
of South India of the second-third centuries A.D., to which period also 
these North Indian coins apparently belong. It would be unwarranted, 
however, to suggest that they had any clear Roman association like the 
other group to which we now turn. 

SOUTH INDIAN COINS 

One of the most important features of the North Indian coins of our 
period is their bewildering variety. The case with their South Indian 
counterparts is quite otherwise. Besides the ubiquitous punch-marked 
coins, the three principal groups of coins that were current in the South 
at this time consist of foreign coins — Roman and pseudo-Roman, the 
Satavahana or Andhra coinage, and the money of the Kshaharatas and 
the Western Kshatrapas. The punch-marked coins, mainly in silver, 
have been found on many sites in the Godavari basin in Kolhapur, Coim- 
batore and Trichinopoly, in the Bimlipatam taluk of the Vizagapatam 
district, Singavaram in the Krishna district, Madurai, and several other 
places. In Kolhapur (the exact find spot was the village of Shinhi in the 
Kurveer Petta) the find of 192 such coins contained an octagonal gold 
ring with the name of the owner engraved upon it in Mauryan Brahmi 
characters, Nadibhagasa (‘of Nandibhaga’). Such symbols as \wo stand- 
ing figures’, ‘elephant’, ‘tree within railing’, ‘horse’, ‘fishes’, ‘deer’, etc., 
which appear on its different facets are commonly found on the punch- 
marked coins. There is little doubt that the money represented the hoarded 
wealth of Nandibhaga, perhaps a South Indian subject of the Maur- 
yas. The numismatic features of this find as well as the others from dif- 
ferent parts of South India hardly differ in any way from those of the same 
class of coins from other parts of India though some of the groups exhibit 
new features. This was one of the principal reasons which led some scho- 
lars to suggest that the punch-marked coins in the main constituted the 
Indian currency in the Maurya times when almost the whole of India came 
under one single administi ative system. 

Two other groups of silver coins belonging to a very early period have 
been found in distant corners of South India. They have been classed 
by Allan as early single-type coins. The first group consists of thick 
slightly scyphate round pieces with plain reverse and a single symbol in the 
incuse on the obverse. They were found in a field near Sultanpur two 
miles north of Wai in Satara district. Allan’s remarks are illuminating: 
‘Their fabric suggests an early date as it recalls that of the early copper 

1 J. Allan, op. cit., pp. evi-evii 



ROMAN SETTLEMENTS AND COINS 


803 


coins of India, whose seal-like appearance suggests that they were made 
by impressing a die on a half-molten piece of metal’ (xviii). The so- 
called Panchala Mhra coins, as well as the single- and double-die coins of 
Taxila noticed earlier in this chapter exhibit the same peculiar trait. The 
weights of these single-type coins of South India show that there were 
three denominations, ‘double, single and half-Karshapanas or whole, 
half and quarter kalanjas’. The other group of much smaller silver coins 
is derived from Konkan in south-west India. They are irregular in shape, 
but almost uniform in weight, ranging between 12 and 15 grains. Their 
obverse device presents a bull surrounded by such symbols as a ‘triskelis’ 
a ‘crescent with a dot’, and a ‘small circle’, all within a shallow ‘incuse’, 
while the reverse, if distinct, shows a combination of four ‘taurine-like’ 
symbols encircled by certain marks similar to those appealing on the ob- 
verse. A hoard of 1138 rectangulai silver punch-marked coins weighing 
between 19 and 25 grains found near Madurai may represent their Pan- 
dyan variety. 1 

There is literary as well as archaeological evidence for an extensive com- 
mercial contact between South India and countries of the Middle East 
and central and eastern Mediterranean Europe during the centuries imme- 
diately preceding and succeeding the Christian era. These countries were 
mostly under political subjection to the Romans, and their inhabitants, 
many of them Greeks, were the direct agents or intermediaries in the con- 
duct of this trade. One of the latter, an unnamed Egyptian Greek of the 
first century A.D., wrote a handy guide-book, the Periplus of the Erythrean 
Sea. for the benefit of these western traders and mariners. We find in it 
the names of many South Indian coastal ports and inland towns and loca- 
lities, with special reference to the imports and exports of the former and 
the produce of the latter. The author makes frequent mention of large im- 
ports of specie in the ports, and the specie mainly consisted of Roman 
coins. Hoards of these of different metals have been unearthed in various 
localities of South India, and they undoubtedly comprised the wealth of 
the rich South Indian magnates, traders, and producers. There were also 
Roman settlements in the country, as excavations at Arikamedu near 
Pondicherry and other places have proved, and Roman coins were in great 
demand there. Sewell in his very lucid account 2 of these hoards refers 
to a large number of Roman copper coins, some among them being of the 
emperors Arcadius and Honorius, mostly collected from Madurai and 
its environs. They were in his opinion imported from Rome as currency 
for purchases of comparatively small value by ‘Romans or persons using 
Roman coins in daily life actually resident at Madurai for a time.’ 
Colonel Tufnell refers to another class of coins found at Madurai, ‘small 
insignificant copper coins scarce the size of a quarter of a farthing, and 
closely resembling the early issues of the native mints,’ but which are at 
the same time Roman in character. On one side they bear the imperial 


* JNSI. vi pp. 1 ff. 


JRAS. 1904, pp. 610-1 



COINAGE 


head, very much worn, sometimes with faint traces of an inscription; 
the other side shews the figures of three Roman soldiers standing, spear 
in hand. This reverse device should not be confused with that of ‘the 
little coins found in South India, probably of Chola or of Chera origin, 
which have devices of Indian figures standing and holding long spears or 
bows in their hands’ (Sewell). The little pseudo-Roman copper pieces 
were struck locally for the purpose of small purchases by the Roman set- 
tleis at or near the place, and they show in a characteristic mannei the 
compromise between the Roman and indigenous methods of coinage. 
They can be compared with the curious bronze imitations of the late 
fourth century Roman coins found occasionally in Ceylon. Concerning the 
latter Mattingly observes : ‘It seems that Roman merchants still carried 
on a lively trade with the distant island and that they actually found it 
convenient to export small change with them which was then multiplied 
by imitations on native soil ’. 1 Another probable result of the influx of 
the Roman coins can be seen in the variegated busts distinguishing Naha- 
pana’s silver money, for these appear to have been modelled on the exam- 
ples of many of the Roman emperors ruling in the first century, and the 
technique of his coins was based on the Indo-Greek mode. This method 
continued to be followed in the money of Chashtana and his successors 
after Nahapana, and by a few rulers of the Satavahana dynasty, especially 
Gautamlputra Sri Yajna Satakarni, who adopted it in their few silver 
issues: 

The kings belonging mainly to the Satavahana dynasty (referred to as 
the Andhra s or Andhrabhrityas in many of the Puranas), and members 
of some other allied dynasties of South India instituted a currency in the 
baser metals,— lead, potin and copper, lead being predominant in their 
dominions. The method of manufacture adopted presumably grew out 
of the earlier practice of issuing punch-struck and single-type coins. 
Rapson who was the first to make a systematic ctudy of the Andhra or 
Satavahana coins grouped them under several heads on the basis of their 
respective provenance. Such local groups consisted of the coinages of 
Malwa, Andhra desa (i.e. the land between the lower reaches of the Goda- 
vari and the Krishna, not the original homeland of the Andhras), the Anan- 
tapur and Cuddapah districts, the region of the Coromandel coast the 
Chitaldrug and the Karwar districts, the Kolhapur district, and the Chanda 
district of the Madhya Pradesh; silver coins of the Andhras he would as- 
sign to Nasik district, found in the. Jogalthembi hoard which constituted 
merely a re-issue by Gautamlputra Satakarni of the coins originally struck 
by Nahapan,a and to the northern Konkan, where the coins were direct 
copies by Sri Yajna Satakarni of the contemporary mintage of the Western 
Kshatiapas. Rapson’s classification of the Andhra coinage on the basis 
of provenance has usually been accepted by other scholars, and disco- 
veries of new hoards like the one from Tarhala (Akola district,’ Berar) have 


J. Mattingly, Roman Coins, p. 255 



SATAVAHANA COINS 


805 


added much to our knowledge. It was the same scholar who first pointed 
out in convincing terms that some of the names appearing on the coins 
agree with names found in the Puranic list of the Andhra kings, but neither 
his chronological arrangement of these different groups nor his attribution 
of them to individual rulers has always been found tenable in the light of 
subsequent researches. New names have been read on coins obtained 
from new finds, a few having affinity with some mentioned in the Puranic 
lists (cf. the names Sivasiri Apilakr and Vijaya, found on coins from Madhya 
Pradesh, with ‘Apllaka’ and ‘Vijaya’ of the Puranas). Some lead and 
potin round and square coins of ‘Malwa fabric’ with a partially legible 
legend Ratio Siri Satasa or Ratio Satakamnisa (the latter in blundering 
and reversed Brahmi script) have been attributed by Rapson to Sri Sata- 
karni, the third ruler of the line. Among his other certain attributions are 
the following : to Vasishthiputra Pulumavi, some lead coins found in the 
Andbradesa, potin coin recovered from Chanda district (M. P.), and some 
lead coins with ‘ship’ symbol from the Coromandel coast (the last group 
is attributed by Smith and Mirashi to Gautamlputra Sri Yajna Satakarni); 
a few groups of lead coins found in the Andhradesa to Vasishthiputia 
Siva-SrI Satakarni, Vasishthiputra Sri Chanda-sati and Gautamlputra Sri 
Yajna Satakarni; a few potin coins found in the Chanda district to Sri 
Krishna Satakarni; and several silver coins of the Suiasbtra fabric to Gau- 
tamlputra Sri Yajna Satakarni. A glance at the list shows that at least 
one of the most important members of the line, Gautamlputra Satakarni, 
is unrepresented, his main numismatic credential being the silver coins, 
originally struck by Nahapana, re-struck by him and found at Jogalthembi 
(Nasik district). But since Rapson’s conclusions were propounded, several 
more coins have been found which have been ascribed to this Satavahana 
monarch. Two groups of large lead coins, one found in Chitaldrug 
district, Mysore, and the other at Karwar in North Canara were issued 
respectively by Sadakana Kajalaya Maharathi (possibly the same as 
Maharathi Tranakayiro, the father-in-law of §ri Satakarni, according to 
Rapson) and kings Chutukajananda and Mulananda ; these chiefs are 
described by Rapson as the feudatories of the Andhras, the Andhrabhri- 
tyas. These assignments are mainly based on the legends fairly well pre- 
served in Brahmi characters of the period. Rapson’s attribution of the 
Kolhapur group of large lead coins bearing the names of kings Vasish- 
thiputra Vilivayakura, Mathariputra Sivalakura and Gotamiputra Vili- 
vayakura is not tenable. He tentatively identified the last with Gautaml- 
putra Satakarni, the second with Mathariputra Svami Sakasena of the 
Kanheri inscriptions, and the first with ‘a predecessor of Mathariputra 
in the Kolhapur district’. This order of succession of the three kings can 
be determined by the evidence of re-strikings, the third re-striking the 
coins of the first two, and the second, those of the first. Against this, 
D. R. Bhandarkar’s suggestion that they were a group of local rulers, 
one of whom is recognisable in ‘Baleokouros’ of Ptolemy, is far more 
acceptable. The Tarhala hoard of about 1600 potin coins discovered as 



806 


COINAGE 


recently as 1940 and very carefully studied by V. V. Mirashi contains not 
only the names of some well-known Satavahana rulers, but some new 
names also e.g. Kumbha Satakarni, Karna Satakarni and Saka Satakarni 
not known from any other source. 1 Among other hitherto unknown 
rulers of the same line brought to light from coin legends, the most import- 
ant is one Satavahana whose name has been read by Mirashi in the legend 
in early Brahml script as Ramho siri-Sadavaha ( ncisa ) in a square copper 
coin. Mirashi ascribes to him a date in the third century b.c., and regards 
him as the founder of the dynasty named after him. 2 

The denominations and the weight-standards of the Andhra coins can- 
not be satisfactorily determined in the present state of our knowledge. 
It is likely that the general designation of all the various groups of coinage 
was ‘Karshapana’, the name occurring in Nanaghat, Kanheri and other 
inscriptions. Rapson is, however, of opinion that in the Nanaghat and Kan- 
heri records, the term denoted only silver coins. On the other hand the 
silver issues of the Satavahanas are comparatively few in number, and it is 
more likely that the term, if it alludes to Andhra money, must have denoted 
their usual currency. Sisa Kahapana, mentioned in some comparatively 
late texts, may also denote a large section of it. 

The commonest devices of the coinage were ‘the three-arched or six- 
arched chaitya (really a mountain or hill symbol) with or without a cres- 
cent at its top’, ‘Ujjain symbol’, ‘tree within railing’, ‘elephant’, ‘horse’, 
‘ship’ etc., particular combinations of which on the obverse and reverse 
sides of the coins marked the distinctive features of the provincial curren- 
cies of the great Andhra empire. Among the commonest of such symbol- 
groupings were ‘ chaitya and Ujjain symbol’ (Andhradesa), ‘multi-arched 
chaitya with tree by its side, a wavy line with dots inside a rectangle and 
bow and arrow’ (Kolhapur), ‘elephant with trunk upraised and Ujjain 
symbol’ (M. P), ‘horse and Ujjain symbol’ (Andhradesa), ‘bull and tree in 
railing with chaitya ’ (Maharathi coins of Chitaldrug district, Mysore), 
‘chaitya and tree in railing with additional symbols’ (Karwar coins of Chu- 
tukajananda and Mulananda), ‘ship and Ujjain symbol’ (Coromandel 
coast) , etc. Rapson has demonstrated not only the local character of these 
devices, but also their dynastic and personal character. 3 It seems that 
‘tree in railing’ in association with chaitya was the common favourite 
device of the Andhrabhrityas. The royal bust appears only on Sri Yajfia 
Satakarni’s silver coins, evidently in imitation of the Western K shatrapas. 
The legends on the Andhra coinage wherever legible are invariably in 
Prakrit and contain the royal title and metronymic both of the tribe (cf. 
sadakana, chutu etc.) and the issuer’s name. The Surashtra fabric silver 
coins of Sri Yajna Satakarni contain according to Rapson the two versions 


1 JNSl. n pp. 83 ff. IHQ. xvi pp. 503 ft. 

1 JNSl. vii pp. 1 ff. A. S. Altekar does 
not assign such an early date to the 

coin; he ascribes it to ‘king Satavahana’ 
mentioned as ‘Kumara Satavahana’ 


in the Nanaghat inscription of Queen 
Nayanika, ibid. 3, n. 1. 

E. J. Rapson, BMCAWK, pp. clxv- 



KSHATRAPA COINS 


807 


of the same legend, one in ‘lena Prakrit’ and the other in a sort of Prakrit 
local to Andhradesa. The latter version he would read as (. . . nasa) 
Gotamaputasa Hiru-yana-Halakanisha. 

The third class of the South and Western Indian coins are those of the 
Kshaharatas and the Kshatrapas of the family of Chashtana and of Rudra- 
simha II. Much has already been said of these in Chapter ix of this volume 
in the discussion of the political history of these satrapal rulers, and only 
a few additional remarks are now called for. The Kshaharata group of 
coins consists of the issues of Bhumaka (only in copper), and one or two 
copper and a large number of silver coins (mostly re-struck by Gautami- 
putra Satakarni) of Nabapana. Bhumaka issued bi-scriptural copper 
coins with the same partially legible legend Kshaharatasa Kshatrapasa 
Bhumakasa in Brahml and KharoshthI scripts on either side, the devices 
used being ‘Arrow, discus, thunderbolt : Lion-capital and dharmachakra’. 
The obverse type of Bhumaka is used by Nahapana as the reverse device 
in his silver coins, their obverse being occupied by the royal bust. They 
are tri-scriptural, and the legend, in blundering mixed Graeco-Roman 
characters on the obverse, is the exact transliteration of the Prakrit legend 
Rajfio (fid) Kshaharatasa Nahapanasa written in Brahml and KharoshthI 
on the reverse. There is no royal bust on his copper money, the obverse 
of which contains ‘thunderbolt and arrow’ and the reverse, ‘tree with large 
leaves within railing’. The weight and module of his silver coins, like those 
of the Kshatrapas and Mahakshatrapas of Chashtana’s line, were based 
on the Indo-Greek silver money. But the various types of busts on Naha- 
pana’s silver pieces, as has been already stated, were adaptations of the 
busts on the Roman imperial coinage of the first century a.d. 

Chashtana and his successors issued coins in silver, copper (very rarely), 
and potin, a few lead pieces being attributable to Svami Rudrasena III 
(son of Svami Rudradaman II) a late ruler in the family of Rudrasimha 
II, possibly a brother of Bhartridaman, the last Mahakshatrapa in the di- 
rect line of Chashtana. The silver coins of all these rulers are characterised 
by a uniformity not usually noticed in any other series of coins. This 
feature began with Chashtana’s second variety which shows the satrapal 
bust with traces of Graeco-Roman legend on the obverse (this legend was 
shortly to be transformed into a partly visible ornamental design due to 
the die-cutter’s ignorance of the script and language), and ‘a three-arched 
chaitya with crescent on its top’ and ‘a waved line’ beneath, flanked by 
‘a crescent’ on the left and ‘a star’ on the right, with partly legible Brahml 
legend (Rajfio Kshatrapasa Ghsamotikaputrasa Chashtanasa) on the reverse. 
In the variety a of his silver coins, the ‘ chaitya ’ is absent, and it has been 
presumed that the inclusion, in Chashtana’s money, of the symbol so fre- 
quently found on the early Satavahana coins indicated some aggrandize- 
ment of the satrapal power at the expense of its rival. This arrangement 
of the obverse and reverse devices became the norm for all the subsequent 
silver issues of the line, allowing only occasional variations and those 
slight. The central chaitya was gradually made more prominent and the 



COINAGE 


‘star and crescent’ was relegated to the position of a mere adjunct. The 
arrangement of the three reverse devices remained almost uniform 
throughout, the position of the two accessory symbols being reversed only 
in the silver coins of the two years when Rudrasimha I was degraded to 
the position of a Kshatrapa, in the middle of his career as Mahakshatrapa. 
The obverse device on the potin and lead coins differs, inasmuch as the 
satrapal bust is replaced by ‘a humped bull standing to right’, but the 
reverse remains almost the same. The square copper coins of Jayadaman 
issued in his capacity of Kshatrapa show a humped bull to right facing 
a combined trident and battle-axe on their obverse ; the chaitya on the 
reverse is six-arched. The titles he adopted were Raja, Kshatrapa and 
Svami. Rapson observes. ‘Although the types of the silver coinage 
remain the same from the beginning to the end of the dynasty— from the 
reign of Chashtana to that of Svami Rudrasimha III, son of Satyasimha, 
a period of about two centuries and a half — slight variations are naturally 
to be observed in the art and workmanship of different periods’ (clxx). 
He has drawn the particular attention of numismatists to ‘the different 
methods of representing the eye and lips in the portraits on the obverse, 
and the various forms assumed by chaitya, star, and crescent on the 
reverse’ a feature already noticed by Newton in 1862. These variations 
were utilised first by Rapson and subsequently by a few other scholars as 
aids to the chronological arrangement of the satraps. The year of issue of 
individual coins, written in the numerical signs of the period, came to be 
introduced behind the satrapal head during the time of Rudrasimha I, 
and it was present in all the subsequent silver and most of the potin 
and lead issues of the satraps. The year invariably refers to the Saka era; 
only in the imitative silver pieces of the usurper Mahakshatrapa Isvara- 
datta the year is a regnal one. The potin series of coins of the family of 
Chashtana has been localized by Rapson at Malwa, its silver series being 
in circulation in Kathiawar, Gujrat (greater Surashtra) and the adjoining 
regions. It is possible that the second group superseded the first in course 
of time. Another important trait of the silver coinage of the Western 
Kshatrapas, so helpful for their systematic arrangement in time and posi- 
tion, is the fully informative Brahmi legend on the reverse, which not only 
gives us the name and the titles (Rajho Kshatrapasa or Rdjho Mahaksha- 
trapasa) of the different issuers, but also the name and titles of their imme- 
diate predecessors or contemporaries (if the particular issuer was a Ksha- 
trapa, then his contemporary Mahakshatrapa) and their exact relationship 
with the latter. This trait reminds us of the Greek and Prakrit coin legends 
(the Prakrit being written in Kharoshthi script) of some' of the north- 
western and northern Kshatrapas, for instance Zeionises, Kharaostes and 
Sodasa; in the case of Sodasa Greek is absent, and the script is Brahmi. 
The language of the legends is mostly a Sanskritised Prakrit but occasion- 
ally it is almost unadulterated Sanskrit [cf.-Rudraddmnah putrasya (— ) 
kshatrapasya Ddma ( ghsa — )] on variety c of the coins of Damaghsada as 
a Kshatrapa. 



KSHATRAPA COINS 


The current denominations of the Western Kshatrapa coins are not de- 
finitely known; but it is presumed that they were generally designated as 
Karshapanas in Indian contexts. The silver coins may also have been 
known in the period as drammas, for, as has been already shown, their 
metrology was mainly based on that of thelndo-Greeksilver money. D.R. 
Bhandarkar supposed that the term kushana in the word kushaiiamula 
in Ushavadata’s Nasik inscription denoted Nahapana’s silver currency. 1 
Interesting references to a part of this coinage can be gleaned from such 
comparatively late Buddhist texts as Samantapasadika of Buddhaghosha, 
Sdratthadipani of Sariputta Thera and Vinayatthamahjusha of Buddha- 
naga Thera. The term Rudradamaka undoubtedly denoted the silver coins 
of Mahakshatrapa Rudradaman I in particular; the other satrapal issues 
in silver after those of the great Mahakshatrapa were denoted by the term 
Rudradamakadi. Another term, nilakahapana probably denotes a weight 
standard (of about 56 grains), the Rudradamakadi being lighter. The 
padas and masakas of nilakahapana are mentioned, and they denoted the 
fourth and twentieth parts respectively. 2 

PLATES I TO IX HAVE REFERENCE TO THIS CHAPTER. 


'CL. 1921, p.200 


102 


JUPHS. VI pp. 157 ff. 




APPENDIX 

SOME SYMBOLS AND GREEK LETTERS 

ON THE COINS OF EARLY FOREIGN RULERS IN INDIA 

( Chapters VI to VIII and XXV ) 

FIRST GROUP 

1 /* These forms are called respectively (1) the ‘lunate sigma’ ; 

'** (2) the large omega; (3) the square omicron. 1 and 2 are 

2 ()j first found on a unique square copper coin of Eucratides 

□ in the British Museum collection. 2 also appears on some 
coins of Zoilus Soter. 1, 2 and 3, and also 4 of the second 
group, are found on some coins of Nicias and Hippostratus. 3 appears 
on Parthian imitations of the coins of Hermaeus in the epithet sterossu. 
Collectively, these forms indicate a late date (cf. ante pp. 177-9). 

SECOND GROUP 


4 1“ 4 and 5 are two varieties of sigma. 4 may be called the 

*" ‘box-bracket’ and 5 the Doric sigma. 4 first occurs on some 

5 p coins of Nicias, and, later, on those of Azilises, Spalirises, 

• Spalahorcs with Spalagadames, and of Athama. With the 

6 M lunate sigma, square omicron and large omega it is often 
X found on coins of the Indo-Parthian rulers and the Northern 
, . , Satraps. The Doric sigma is first found on the joint issues 

7 of Spalirises and Azes and occurs along with the lunate sigma 
on the imperial Kushana coins, where the Doric sigma =sh. 

6 is called the ‘Gondopharian symbol’ because it appears on nearly all 
the coins of Gondophares and on some of his nephew Abdagases. 7 is 
peculiar to the ‘Soter Megas’ coins; a variant, with four vertical projec- 
tions, occurs on some of the coins of Wema Kadphises (see ante 
pp. 202-3, 214-6, 232-3 etc.) 


THIRD GROUP 


r-7 

% 


8-12 are used as symbols on imperial Kushana coins. 8 is 
invariably found on the coins of Wema Kadphises, who was 
a devotee of Siva. It is usually called the Nandipada Trisul, 
being, it is supposed, compounded of the footprint of Siva’s 
mount, the bull Nandi (Nandipada),- and Siva’s trident 
(Trisul). It occurs, though rarely, on some coins of Kujula 
Kara Kadphises and of Zeionises. 9, 10, 11 and 12 (four 
forms of one genetic symbol) occur on the coins of Wema 
Kadphises, Kanishka, Huvishka and Vasudeva, with many 
variants. They may have inspired some Gupta coin symbols 
(cf. ante pp. 232-3, 241-2, 245, 246-8, 265, 267). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


General 


Encyclopaedias 

Balfour, E., Cyclopaedia of India and of Eastern and Southern Asia, 3rd edn., 3 Vols. 
(London, 1885.) 

Grundriss der indo-arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde, (Encyclopaedia of Indo-Aryan 
Research, begrtindet von G. BiiMer, fortgesetzt von F. Kielhorn, herausgegeben 
von. H. Ltiders und I. Wackemagel. (Strassburg, 1896; Berlin and Leipzig, 
1935.) 

Hastings, James, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 12 Vols. (Edinburgh, 1908-25.) 

Histories of Ancient India 

Barnett, L. D., Antiquities of India. (London, 1913.) 

Grousset, Rene, Les Civilisations de VOrient, Tome II, L’lnde. (Paris, 1930.) Eng. 
tr. by C. A. Phillips. (London, 1932.) 

Lassen, Chr., Indische Altertumskunde, 4 Vols., i & ii 2nd edn. (Leipzig, 1858-1874.) 
Masson-Oursell and others, Ancient India. History of Civilization, (London, 1934.) 
Rapson, E. J., The Cambridge History of India, Vol. i. Ancient India. (Cambridge, 1922.) 
Ancient India. (Cambridge, 1914.) 

Raychaudhuri, H. C., Political History of Ancient India, 4th edn. (Calcutta, 1938.) 
Sastri, K. A. N., History of India, Part I, Ancient India. (Madras, 1950.) 

Smith, V. A., The Oxford History of India, 2nd edn. revised by S. M. Edwardes. (Oxford, 
1923.) 

The Early History of India, 4th edn. revised by S. M. Edwardes. (Oxford, 1924.) 

Histories of Literature 

Keith, A. B., Sanskrit Drama. (Oxford, 1928.) 

History of Sanskrit Literature. (Oxford, 1928.) 

Max Muller, F., A History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 2nd edn. (London, 1860.) 
Wintemitz, M., History of Indian Literature, (Eng. tr.) Vols. i & ii. (Calcutta, 1927-33.) 
Geschichte der indischen Litteratur, 3 Vols. (Leipzig, 1909, 1920, 1922.) 

Histories of Philosophy 

Dasgupta, S. N., History of Indian Philosophy, 4 Vols. (Cambridge, 1922-1932 ) 

Keith, A. B., Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon. (Oxford, 1923.) 

Radhakrishnan, S., Indian Philosophy, 2 Vols. (London, 1923.) 


Chapters I to III 

I. The Foundation of the Mauryan Empire. II. Asoka and his Successors 
III. Government, Society and Art of the Mauryan Empire. 


A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 


Arthalastra of Kautilya, with a commentary, (ed.) T. Ganapati Sastri 3 Vols ' 
(Trivandrum, 1924-5). ’ ’ I 

Arthasastra of Kautilya, with a commentary Nayachandrika of Mahadeva Yaiva 2 Vols 
(ed.) Julius Jolly and R. Schmidt. (Lahore, 1923-24.) naaeva ajva > Z Vols ' 
Baudhayana Dharmasutra. (Leipzig, 1884.) 



NOTE TO CHAPTER III 


Besides the common sources which have been checked and verified, 
the author of this Chapter wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to 
Dr. U. N. Ghoshal’s contribution in Chapter VIII ‘Industry, Trade and 
Currency’ of Age of the Nandas and Mauryas upon which pp. 70-80 
are largely based, and regrets the inadvertant omission of this acknow- 
ledgement. 

Also, to the Bibliography to Chapters I-III may be added under B. 
Modern Works (pp. 813-14) the following: 

The Age of Imperial Unity, (ed.) R. C. Majumdar. (Bombay, 1951.) 

Age of the Nandas and Mauryas, (ed.) K. A. Nilakanta Sastri. (Banaras, 
1952.) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


813 


McCrindle, J. W., Ancient India as Described in Classical Literature. (Westminster, 1901 .) 
— Invasion of India by Alexander the Great as Described by Arrian, Q. Curtins, 
Diodorus, Plutarch and Justin, 2nd edn. (Westminster, 1896.) 

Meyer, Jahan Jakob, Das alt-indische Buck vom Welt-und Staatsleben: das Arthalastra 
des Kautilya aus den Sanskrit ubersetzt und mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen versehen. 
(Leipzig, 1926.) 

Primary Inscriptions 

Barth, A., ‘The Inscription of the Piprahwa Vase,’ IA. 1907. 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Epigraphic Notes and Questions, 1. The first two Rock-Edicts of 
Piyadasi,’ JBBRAS. xxi. 

Bloch, Jules, Les Inscriptions d’ Asoka. (Paris, 1950.) 

Btihler, G., ‘The Sohgaura Copper Plate,’ IA. xxv. 

Chakravarti, S. N., ‘The Sohgaura Copper Plate Inscription,’ JRASB. x, 1944. 
Eggermont, P. H. L., ‘The Date of Asoka’s Rock Edict XIII,’ AO. xvui, 1940. 

Fleet, J. F., ‘Inscription on the Sohgaura Plate,’ JRAS. 1907. 

Hultzsch, E., Asokan Inscriptions, CII. i. (Oxford, 1925.) 

Jayaswal, K. P., ‘The Text of the Sohgaura Plate,’ El. xx. 

Sahni, Dayaram, ‘The Ya.fragufii Rock-Edicts of Asoka,’ ASIAR. 1928-9. 

Turner, R.L., ‘The Asokan Edicts of Kopbal (Hyderabad),’ HAS. no. 10 

Secondary Texts 

Appian, Roman History with an English translation by Horace White, 4 Vols. Loeb 
Classical Library.) London and New York, 1912-13.) 

Digha Nikaya. Chakkavatti SIhanada Suttanta. (London, 1890-1911.) 

Divyavadana, (ed.) E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil. (Cambridge, 1886.) 

History of Buddhism by Taranath (Ger. tr.), A. Schiefner. (St. Petersburg, 1869.) (Eng. 
tr.) IHQ. hi (1927.) 

Hiuan Tsang, translation by Th. Watters, On Yuan Chwang's Travels in India A.D., 
629-645, (London, 1904.) 

translation by S. Beal, Si-yu-ki, Buddhist Records of the Western World. 

(London, 1906.) 

Jatakas (Text), (ed.) V. Fausboll, 6 Vols. (London, 1877-97). Eng. tr. by various hands 
(ed.) E. B. Cowell, 6 Vols. (Cambridge, 1895-1907.) 

La Legende de VEmpereur Afoka, J. Przyluski. (Paris, 1923.) 

Mahabhdrata , (Published by ASB. Calcutta, 1837.) 

Mahabharatam, (Kumbakonam edn.). (Bombay, 1907-09.) 

Mahavathsa, (ed.) W. Geiger. (London, 1908). Eng. tr. (London, 1912.) 

Manusmriti, (Bombay, 1886.) 

Milindapahha, (ed.) V. Trenckener and R. Chalmers. (London, 1880.) Bombay (Devana- 
gari), 1940. (Eng. tr.) T. W. Rhys Davids, SBE. 35 and 36. (Oxford, 1890-94.) 
Mudrarakshasa, (ed.) C. R. Devadhar and V. M. Bedkar. (Bombay, 1948.) 
Parisishtaparvan, Hemachandra’s Sthaviravali Charita, (ed.) H. Jacobi. (Calcutta, 1883.) 
Parana Texts of the Dynasties of the Kali Age, (ed.) F. E. Pargiter. (Oxford, 1913.) 
Rajatarangini, Kalhana, (ed.) M. A. Stein. (Bombay, 1892). Eng. tr. by the same. (West- 
minster, 1900). Eng. tr. by R. S. Pandit. (Allahabad, 1935.) 

Saratthappakdsini, (ed.) F. L. Woodward. (Oxford University Press, 1937.) 
Yugapuranam, (ed.) D. R. Mankad. (Vallabhvidyanagar, 1951.) 

Secondary Inscriptions 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Chatsu Inscription of Baladitya,’ EL xn. 

Kielhom, F., ‘Stone Inscriptions at Vaghli in Khandesh,’ El. n. 

‘Junagatjh Inscription of Rudradaman,’ EL vm. 

‘Kapaswa Inscription of Sivaganga,’ IA. xk. 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Aiyangar, S. K., Beginnings of South Indian History. (Madras, 1918.) 

Bachhofer, Ludwig, Early Indian Sculpture, 2 Vols. (Paris, 1929.) 

Basham, A. L., History and Doctrines of the Ajnikas. (London, 1951). 

Bhandarkar, D. R., Asoka. (Calcutta, 1925.) 



814 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Breloer, Kautilya Studien, 3 Parts. (Bonn, 1927-1934.) 

Brown, Percy, Indian Architecture, Hindu and Buddhist. (Bombay, n.d) 

Das, S. K., The Economic History of Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1925.) 

Ghoshal, U. N., The Beginnings of Indian Historiography and other Essays. (Calcutta, 1944.) 
Grousset, Rene, Les Civilizations de 1' Orient. Tome u. L’lnde. (Paris, 1930). Eng. tr. 

by C. A. Phillips. (London, 1932.) 

Jayaswal, K. P., Hindu Polity. (Calcutta, 1924.) 

— History of India (a. d. 150-350). (Lahore, 1933.) 

Kane, P. V., History of the Dharma Sastra, 3 Vols. (Poona, 1930-46.) 

Law, B. C., Buddhist Studies. (Calcutta, 1931.) 

Macphail, J. M., Asoka, Heritage of India. (London, n.d) 

Meyer, J. J., Uber das Wesen der altindischen Rechts-schriften und dir Verhaltnis 
zu Einar.de r und zu Kautilya. (Leipzig, 1927.) 

Monahan, F. J., The Early History of Bengal. (Oxford, 1925.) 

Mookerji, R. K., Asoka. (Calcutta, 1928.) 

Rawlinson, H. G., Intercourse between India and the Western World, 2nd edn. (Cambridge. 
1926.) 

Ray, Nihar Ranjan, Mauryan and Sutiga Art. (Calcutta, 1945.) 

Raychaudhuri, H. C., Political History of Ancient India, 4th edn. (Calcutta, 1938.) 

Rhys Davids, T. W., Buddhist India. (London, 1903.) 

Rostovtzeff.^M., Social and Economic History of the Hellenistic World, 3 Vols. (Oxford, 

Smith, Vincent, A., Early History of India, 4th edn. revised by S. M. Edwardes. (Oxford, 
1924.) 

The Oxford History of India, 2nd edn. revised by S. M. Edwardes. (Oxford, 1923.) 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon, 2nd. edn. revised by K. De. B. Codrington. 

(Oxford, 1930.) 

Stein, M. A., Ancient Khotan. (Oxford, 1907.) 

Stein, Otto, Megasthenes und Kautilya. (Vienna, 1921.) 

Tam, W. W., The Greeks in Bactria and India. (Cambridge, 1938.) 

Thomas, F. W„ ‘Chandragupta, the Founder of the Maurya Empire,’ CHI. i ch. xviii. 

‘Political and Social Organization of the Maurya Empire,' CHI. i ch. xix. 

‘A?oka, the Imperial Patron of Buddhism,’ CHI. t ch. xx. 

Vallee Poussin, Louis de la, Inde aux Temps des Mauryas. (Paris, 1930.) 

Warmington, E. H., The Commerce between the Roman Empire and India. (Cambridge, 


C. MONOGRAPHS, ARTICLES, ETC. 

Archaeological Reports, Memoirs etc. 

Chanda, R. P„ ‘The Beginnings of Art in Eastern India with Special Reference to Sculp- 
tures in the Indian Museum,’ MASI. No. 30. (Calcutta, 1927 ) 

Chandra, G. C., ‘Excavations at Pataliputra,’ ASIAR. 1935-6 (Calcutta) 

Marshall, Sir John, ‘Excavations at Bhita,’ ASIAR. 1911-12 (Calcutta). 

Rea, A., South Indian Buddhist Antiquities. (Madras, 1894.) 

Spooner, D. B., ‘Mr. Ratan Tata’s Excavations at Pataliputra,’ ASIAR 1912-13 
(Calcutta). 

Waddell, L. A., Report of Excavations at Pataliputra. (Calcutta, 1903.) 

Articles in Encyclopaedias, Journals etc. 

Bakshi^K. G.,‘ANew Prc-Mauryan Statue discovered at Bhilsa, Gwalior State,’ PHIC. 
Banerji-Sastri,^' Mauryan ^Sculptures from Lohanipur (near Patna),’ JBORS. xxvi, 

Barua, B. M., ‘The Ajivikas,’ JDL., (Calcutta University, 1920 ) 

Hoemle, A. F. R., ‘Ajivikas,’ ERE. i. 

Majum^R. C-j^Buddhist Councils,’ in Buddhist Studies, (ed.) B. C. Law, pp. 26-72. 

P®PP®> W. C„ ‘Piprahwa Stupa, Containing the Relics of the Buddha,’ JRAS. 1898 
Petrie, Flinders, ‘Peoples of the Persian Empire,’ Man vm no 71 1907 
Przyluski J., ‘Un ancien peuple du penjab-les Udumbara/xE ccvm, 1926 pp 1-59 
Un ancien peuple du penjab — les Salva,’ JA. ccxiv 1929 pp 314ff ’ ' 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


815 


Rao, C. Narayana, ‘A note on Suvannagiri,’ NIA. i. 

Rhys Davids, C. A. F., ‘The So-called Missions of Asoka,’ Aryan Path, ix. 

Sastri, K. A. N., Chakravartikshetra, Rangaswatny Aiyyangar Commemoration Volume. 
(Madras, 1938.) 

Seth, H. C., ‘Some Sidelights on Chanakya, the Great Chancellor,’ NIA. i. 

‘Buddha Nirvana and Some Other Dates in Ancient Indian Chronology,’ 1C. v. 

‘Chronology of Asokan Inscriptions,’ JIH. xvii. 

Sharma, Dasaratha, ‘Is Chandra of the Mehrauli Pillar Inscription Chandragupta of the 
Maurya Dynasty?’ JIH. xvn. 

Stein, O., ‘Round the Mehrauli Inscription,’ NIA. i. 

Smith, V. A., ‘The Monolithic Pillars or Columns of Asoka,’ ZDMG. 191 1, pp. 221-40. 
‘A Note on Piprahwa Stupa,’ JRAS. 1918. 

Vallee Poussin, Louis de la, ‘The Buddhist Councils,' I A. xxxvii, 1908, pp. 1,81. 
Chapters IV anu V 
IV. Post-Mauryan Dynasties 

V. Minor States of North India — Monarchical and Non-monarchical. 


A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

Primary Texts 

Arthasastra (See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii) 

Ayhtadhyayi of Panini, with Vartikas and Ganapdtha. (Madras, 1917.) 

ASvalayana Srauta Sutra , Bib. Ind; also HOS. 25. 

Barhaspatya Arthasastra, (ed.) F. W. Thomas. (Lahore, 1921.) 

Brihaddrariyaka Upanishad, (ed.) Bothlink. (Leipzig, 1889.) 

Divyavadana, (ed.) E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil. (Cambridge, 1886.) 

Puratia Texts of the Dynasties of the Kali Age, ed. F. E. Pargiter. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 
HarivamSa, Bhavishyatparva. (Calcutta, 1834-39.) 

Jain Sutras (Eng. tr.) H. Jacobi, SBE. xxn, xlv. (Oxford, 1884-1895.) 

Mahabhashya (ed.) F. Kielhorn, 3 Vols. (Bombay, 1880-85.) 

Malavikagnimitra of Kalidasa. (Bombay, 1907.) 

McCrindle, Invasion of India by Alexander the Great. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 
Milindapahha. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Rig Veda with Sayaria’s Commentary, 2nd. edn. (ed.) F. Max Muller. (Oxford, 1890-92.) 
Strabo's Geography (Eng. tr.) Hamilton and Falconer, 3 Vols. (London, 1 889-90) 

Variisa Brdhmana, (ed.) A. Weber, Ind. Studien, IV. (Berlin, 1850-98.) 

Inscriptions 

Barua, B. M., ‘Minor Old Brahml Inscriptions in Udayagiri and Khan^agiri Caves,’ Re-' 
vised edn. IHQ, xiv. 

‘Hathigumpha Inscription of Kharavela,’ IHQ, xiv. - 

Barua, B. M. and Sinha, Bharhut Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1926.) 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘List of Inscriptions in Northern India from about 200 a.c.,’ App. 
to El. xix-xxm. 

Fleet, J. F., Gupta Inscriptions, CII. m. (Calcutta, 1888.) 

Ghosh, A., ‘A Fragmentary Inscription from Kosam,’ 1C. I. 

Jayaswal, K. P. and Banerji, R. D., ‘The Hathigumpha Inscription of Kharavela,’ El. xx. 
Luders, H., ‘A List of Brahml Inscriptions from the Earliest Times to about a.d. 400 
with the Exception of Asoka.’ El. x. App. (Calcutta, 1910.) 

Majumdar, R. C., ‘Second Note on the Hathigumpha Inscription of Kharavela,’ l A. 1919. 
Sahni, Dayaram, ‘Sunga Inscription from Ayodhya,’ El. xx. 

Sircar, D. C., Select Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1942.) 

Vogel, J. Ph., ‘Epigraphical Discoveries at Samath,’ El. vrn. 

Coins 

Agarwal, J. K., ‘Some Notes on New Panchala Coins,’ JNSl. m, 1941. 

Agrawala, V. S., ‘A Coin of Yugasena JNSI. v 1943. 

Allan, J., British Museum Catalogue of Coins of Ancient India. (London, 1936). 

Altekar, A. S., ‘New Kings and Interesting Coin Types from KausambI,’ JNSI. i, 1939. 



816 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Altekar, ‘Further New Coins from Kausambi,’ JNSI. iv, 1943. 

‘Panchala Coins,’ JNSI. n, m, v. 

‘Silver Coins of Vishriudatta,’ JNSI. v. 

‘Jyeshthadatta, New King of Ayodhya,’ JNSI. vn. 

Banerjea, J. N., ‘Siva and his Emblems on Early Indian Coins and Seals,’ I HQ. xvi, 1940. 

‘Devices on Some Tribal Coins,’ IHQ. xvi 1940. 

Barnett, L. D., ‘A Note on an Early Indian Coin,’ BSOS. xi. 

Dar, M. B. L„ ‘Some Rare Panchala Coins from the Site of Ancient Ahichchhatra in 
Bareily District,’ JNSI. n, 1940, 

Dikshit K N., ‘A Note on Some Important Coins and Seals found at Rairh in Jaipur 
State,’ JNSI. in, 1941. 

Ghosh, A., ‘Coins of Varunamitra at Ahichchhatra,’ JNSI. v, 1943. 

Ghosh, Bhramar, ‘Some Sunga Coins, hitherto misread,’ IC. v. 

Jayaswal, K. P., ‘Six Unique Silver Coins of the Suiigas,’ JBORS. xx. 

Kar, Rabis C., ‘A Note on the Coins of Rudravarma,’ IHQ. xx 1944. 

Roy, Subhendra Singh, ‘A Silver Coin of Panchala Vishnumitra’, JNSI v, 1943. 

Sohni, S.V., ‘A Note on Audumbara Temple Coins,’ JNSI. iv, 1942. 

Archaeological Reports etc. 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Excavations at Besnagar,’ ASIAR. 1913-14. 

Spooner, D. B., ‘Excavations at Basarh,’ ASIAR. 1913-14. 

Vogel, J. P. ‘Garuda Pillar of Besnagar,’ ASIAR. 1908-9 
‘Archaeological Exploration in India, 1910-11,’ JRAS. 1912. 

Secondary Texts 

Buddhist Records of the Western World, 2 Vols. Samuel, Beal. (London, 1906). 

Fa-hien, Eng. tr. by J. Legge. (Oxford, 1886.) 

Harshacharita of Bana, (ed.) Flihrer. (Bombay, 1909.) 

Mahdvamsa, (ed.) W. Geiger. See Bibl. Chh. i-iii. 

Rdjatarahgim, (ed.) M. A. Stein. (Bombay, 1892.) Eng. tr. by the same. (Westminster, 
1900); by R. S. Pandit, (Allahabad, 1935). 

Yugapurana, (ed.) D. R. Mankad. (Vallabhvidyanagar, 1951.) 


B. MODERN WORKS 
Barua, B. M., Gaya and Buddha Gaya. (Calcutta, 1934.) 

Bharhut. (Calcutta, 1934.) 

Bhandarkar, D. R., The Carmichael Lectures, 1921. (Calcutta, 1923.) 

Dey, N. L., Geographical Dictionary of Ancient India. (Bombay, 1927.) 

Ghosh, N. N„ Early History of Kausambi. (Allahabad Archaeological Society Series, 
No. 1, Allahabad, 1935.) 

* Early History of India. (Calcutta, 1935.) 

/Jayaswal, K. P., Hindu Polity. (Calcutta, 1924.) * 

/ Law, B.C., Tribes in Ancient India. (Poona, 1943.) 

Leeuw, Van Lohuizen-de, The ‘ Scythian ’ Period. (Leiden, 1949.) 

Levi, Sylvain, Le Nepal, 3 Vols. (Paris, 1905-8.) 

Macdonell, A. A. and Keith, A. B., Vedic Index, 2 Vols. (London, 1912.) 

Pargiter, F. E., Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. (London, 1932.) 

Rapson, E. J., ‘Indian Native States after the Period of the Mauryan Empire ’ CHI. i 
Ch. xxxi. (Cambridge, 1922.) 

/ Raychaudhuri, H. C., Political History of Ancient India, 4th edn. (Calcutta 1938.) 

/Rhys Davids, T. W., Buddhist India. (London, 1903.) 

/Tam, W. W., The Greeks in Bactria arid India. (Cambridge, 1938.) 

Vallee Poussin, Louis de la. Dynasties et Histoire de I’lnde, depuis Kanishka jusqaux 
Invasions Musalmanes. (Paris, 1935.) 


C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 
Barnett, L. D„ ‘Another Ancient Tribe of the Panjab,’ BSOS. x, 1939-42 
Barua, B. M., ‘Old Buddhist Shrines at Buddhagaya,’ IHQ. 1930. 

‘Kharavela as King and Builder,’ JISOA. xv, 1947. 

Chanda, R. P., ‘Pushyamitra and the Sunga Empire,’ IHQ.' 1939. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


817 


Dhruva, H. C., ‘Historical Contents of the Yugapurana,’ JBBORS. xvi, 1930, pp. 18-66. 
Ghosh, J. C., ‘The Caste of the Surigas,’ IHQ. xi, 1939. 

Ghosh, N. N., ‘The Parivrajaka and the Kanvayana Kings,’ ABORI. xix. 

— — ‘Did Pushyamitra Sunga Persecute the Buddhists?’ PIHC. 1943 (1944). 

Jackson, V. H., ‘Appendix B to K. P. Jayaswal’s article on Hathigumpha Inscription,’! 
JBORS. in. 

Jayaswal, K. P., ‘Early Signed Coins of India,’ JBORS. xx. 

‘Revised Notes on the Brahmin Empire,’ JBORS. 1918. 

Law, B. C., ‘A Note on Some Ancient Indian Tribes,’ NIA. i. 

Majumdar, R. C„ ‘Some Observations on Pushyamitra Sunga and his Empire,’ IHQ. I. 
Powell-Price, J. C., ‘A Note on the Lineage of Pushyamitra,’ 1C. m. 

‘Observations on Certain Post-Mauryan Dynasties,’ IC. vi. 

Raychaudhuri, H. C., ‘A Note on the Lineage of Pushyamitra,’ IC. ill 

‘Observations on Certain Post-Maurypan Dynasties,’ IC. vi. 

Upadhye, B. C., ‘The River Sindhu of the Malavikagnimitra,’ JUPHS. xiv (i) 1941. 
Venkatesvara, S. V., ‘India in the Second Century b.c.,’ PAOC. 1924 (Madras). 


Chapters. VI to IX 

VI. The Bactrian Greeks in India. VII. The Scythians and Parthians in India. 

VIII. The Rise and Fall of the Kushana Power. 

IX. The Satraps of Northern and Western India. 

A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 


Texts 

Apocryphal Acts of the Apostles n, W. Wright. (London, 1871.) 

Ashtadhyayi. Papini. (Madras, 1917.) 

Bible, The Book of Daniel. 

Brihatsamhita, (ed.) J. H. K. Kern. (Calcutta, 1865.) 

Harivamia. (Calcutta, 1830-35.) 

McCrindle, J. W., Ancient India and Invasion of India. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 
Mahabharata. (Calcutta, 1830-35.) 

Milindapahha. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, Eng. tr. W. H. SchofF. (New York, 1912.) 

Ramayaria. (Calcutta, Bangabasi edn. 1311 b. s.) 

Inscriptions 

Altekar, A. S., ‘Allahabad Municipal Museum Inscription,’ EL xxiv. 

Boyer, Rapson, E. J. and Senart, E., Kharoshthi Inscriptions ( discovered by Sir Aurel 
Stein in Chinese Turkestan), Part I. (Oxford, 1920.) 

Deb, Krishna, ‘Kosam Inscription of Bhadramagha’s Reign,’ EI. xxiv. 

Fleet, J. F„ ‘Taxila Inscription of the year 136 ,' JRAS. 1914. 

Gupta Inscriptions, CII. hi. (Calcutta, 1888.) 

Ghosh, Amalananda, ‘Kosam Stone Image Inscription of Maharaja Bhlmavarman,’ 
IC. m. 

Goswami, K. G., ‘Kosam Inscription of the Reign of Kanishka, the Year 2,’ EI. xxiv. 
Herzfeld, E., Paikuli Inscriptions, 2 Vols. (Berlin, 1924.) 

Kielhom, F., ‘Inscriptions from Khajuraho — V. Stone Inscription of Kokkala, of the 
Year 1058,’ EL i. 

‘Junagacjh Rock Inscription of Rudradaman,’ EI. vm. 

Konow, Sten, ‘Charsadda Kharoshthi Inscription of the Year 303,’ AO. xx, 1947. 

‘Kalawan Copper-plate Inscription of the Year 134,’ JRAS. 1932. 

‘A Greek Term in an Indian Inscription,’ JRAS. 1939. 

‘Kabul Museum Stone Inscription of the Year 83,’ AO. xvi. 

‘Kharoshthi Inscriptions,’ CII. n (i). (Calcutta, 1928.) 

‘Allahabad Museum Inscription of the Year 87,’ EI. xxm, p 245. 

Krishnamacharlu, C. R., ‘King Vaskushana Identified,’ PIHC. 1944 (1946.) 

Majumdar, N. G., ‘The Bajaur Casket Inscription of the Reign of Menander,’ EI. xxiv. 

‘Kosam Inscription of the Reign of Maharaja Vaisravana of the Year 107,’ 

EI. xxiv. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Majumdar, N. G., ‘Inscriptions on two Relic Caskets at Charsadda,’ EI. xxiv. 

Pargiter, F. E., ‘Jankhat Inscription of the Time of Vxrasena,’ EL xx. 

Sahni, Dayaram, ‘Three Brahmi Inscriptions from Kosam,’ EL xvm. 

Sen, S., Old Persian Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1941.) 

Sircar, D. C., ‘A Note on the Bajaur Casket of the Reign of Menander,’ EI. xxvi, 1942. 
Thomas, F. W., ‘The Inscriptions on the Mathura Lion Capital,’ EI. ix. 

Vogel, J. Ph., ‘Epigraphical discoveries at Sarnath— III. Inscription of the third year of 
Kanishka,’ EL vni. 

‘Prakrit Inscriptions from a Buddhist Site at Nagarjunakonda,’ EI. xx. 


Acharya, G. V., ‘Two Notes, on Western Kshatrapa and Valabhi Coins,’ JRASB. Num. 
Suppl. lxvii, pp. 93f. 

Agrawala, J. K., ‘Goddess Shash(hi on Yaudheya Coins,’ JNSI. v, 1943. 

Allan, J., British Museum Catalogue of Coins of Ancient India. (London, 1936.) 

‘Indian Coins, Second Known and Best Preserved Stater of Menander (Gold),’ 

BMQ. xiv, 1940, p. 98, pi. xxxiv. 

Altekar, A. S., ‘New Naga Coins — Coins and Identity of Bhavanaga,’ JNSI. v. 

‘Was King Nava of Coins a Naga Ruler ?’ Bharata Kaumudi i, pp. 1 3-1 8. 

‘Was Jivadaman a Mahakshatrapa more than once?’ JNSI. 1 1939, pp. 18 f. 

‘Some Rare and Interesting Indo-Bactrian and Indo-Scythian Coins,’ JNSI. vi, 

1944 (1945), pp. 11-13. 

‘Two Coins from Mathura,’ JNSI. vi, 1944 (1945), pp. 24-26. 

Banerjea, J. N., ‘Sophytes-Saubhuti,’ JNSI. vn. 

‘The Title “Devaputra” of Kuyula Kara Kadphises Coins,’ JNSI. ix. 

‘Indian Elements on the Coin Devices of Foreign Rulers of India,’ IHO. xiv, 

pp. 293-308. 

Banerji, Rakhal Das, ‘Notes on Indo-Scythian Coinage,’ JASB (Ns) iv, 1908. 
Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Kshatrapa Coins from Sarvania,’ ASIAR. 1913-14. 

Cunningham, A., Coins of Ancient India. (London, 1891.) 

‘Coins of Alexander’s Successors in the East,’ NC. 1869. 

‘Coins of Sakas. Class B. Coins of Sakas for Sacae-Scythians,’ NC. x, Third series. 

Coins of Indo-Scythians and Kusharias, Parts I & II. (London, 1 892-94.) 

Dar, M. B. L., ‘A New Silver Coin of Huvishka,’ JNSI. ii, 1940, p. 113, pi. xa. 

Deb, H. K., ‘New Views in Indo-Greek Numismatics,’ JNSI. i, 1939, pp. 90-93. 
Dikshit, K. N., ‘New Coins of SIta,’ JNSI. vi, 1944 (1945), pp. 52-54, pi. iii. 

Gadre, A. S., ‘Important Coins from the Baroda State (Kshatrapa),’ JNSI. i, 1939, p. 20. 
Gardner, P., British Museum Catalogue of Coins of the Greek and Scythic Kings of Bactria 
and India. (London, 1886.) 

Haughton, H. L., ‘The Bajaur Hoard of 1942,’ JNSI. tv, 1942, p. 61. 

‘Some Rare Indo-Greek Hemidrachmas from the North-Western Frontier ’ 

JNSI. iv, 1942 (1943), pp. 146f. pi. xiii. 

Herzfeld, E., ‘Kushana-Sassanian Coins,’ MASI. No. 38, 1930. 

Martin, M.^P.C., ‘Coins of Kidara and Little Kushanas,’ JRASB. Num. Suppl. xLvn, 

Prayag Dayal, ‘Further Light on the Coinage of the Yaudheyas,’ JUPHS. xm (i), 1940, 


‘A New Hoard of Yaudheya Coins from Dehra Dun District,’ JNSI. n, 1940. 

Rapson, E. J., Catalogue of Coins of the Andhra Dynasty, the Western Kshatrapas, the 
Traikutaka Dynasty, and the Bodhi Dynasty. (London, 1908.) 

Indian Coins. (Strassburg, 1898.) 

Corolla Numismatica. (Oxford, 1908.) 

Sankalia, H. D., ‘A Rare Gold Coin of Huvishka,’ JNSI. i, 1939, pp. 9-10, pi. iii b. 

‘Three New Specimens of a Rare Variety of Eran-Ujjayani ’ Coins,’ JNSI. n, 1940, 


Seltman, Charles, Greek Coins. (London, 1933.) 

Sewell, Robert, ‘Roman Coins found in India,’ JRAS. 1904. 

Smith, V. A., Catalogue of Coins in Indian Museum, Calcutta, i. (Oxford, 1906 ) 
Thomas, E„ ‘Catalogue of Coins in the Cabinet of the Late Col. Stacy with Estimated 
Prices attached,’ JASB. 1858. 

Whinfield, E. H., ‘The Nasik Hoard of Nahapana’s Coins,’ JRAS. 1908. 

Whitehead, R. B., Catalogue of Coins in the Panjab Museum i. (Oxford, 1914.) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


819 


Whitehead, R. B., “The Eastern Satrap Sophytes,’ NC. vi, Series m, 1943. pp, 60-72. 

The Dynasty of the General Aspavarma,’ NC. vi, Series iv, 1944, pp. 99-104. 

‘Notes on the Indo-Greek Numismatics,’ NC. 1923. 

‘Notes on the Indo-Greeks,’ NC. v, Series xx, 1940, pp. 89-122. 

‘Notes on the Indo-Greeks,’ NC. 1947. 

Young, G. M., ‘A new Hoard from Taxila (Bhir mound),’ Ancient India, No. 1, pp. 27-36. 


Archaeology 

Garde, M. B., ‘The Site of Padmavati,’ ASIAR. 1915-16. 

Hargreaves, H., Handbook of Sculptures in the Peshawar Museum Revised edn. (Cal- 
cutta, 1930) 

Marshall, Sir John, ‘Excavations at Bhita,’ ASIAR. 1911-12. 

‘Excavations at Taxila’, ASIAR. 1912-13. 

‘Monuments of Safichi,’ Vols. i-iii. See Bibl. to Ch. xxii 

Siddiqi, A. D., ‘Excavation at Taxila, (at Dharmarajika Stupa)’, ASIAR. 1935-36. 
Spooner, D. B., ‘Excavations at Basrah’, ASIAR. 1913-14. 


B. MODERN WORKS 

Banerjea, J. N., Development of Hindu Inconography. (Calcutta, 1941.) 

Bevan, E. R., The House Seleucus i. (London, 1902.) 

Ghirshman, R„ Recherches Archaeologiques et Historiques sur les Kouchans, Memories 
dela Delegation archaeologique franfaise en Afghanistan, Tome xu. (Cairo, 1946.) 
Gopalachari, K., Early History of the Andhra Country. (Madras, 1941.) 

Jayaswal, K. P., History of India, a.d. 150-350. (Lahore, 1933.) 

Jouveau-Dubreuil, G., Ancient History of the Deccan. (Pondicherry, 1920.) 

Leeuw, Von Lohuizen-de, The 'Scythian' Period. (Leiden, 1949.) 

Majumdar, R. C. and Altekar, A. S., New History of the Indian People vi. (Lahore, 
1946.) 

Medlycott, A. E., India and the Apostle Thomas. (London, 1905.) 

Pargiter, F. E., Dynasties of the Kali Age. See Biblio. to Chh. i-iii. 

Rapson, E. J., CHI. i, Ch. xxii — ‘The Successors of Alexander the Great’; Ch. xxiii — ‘The 
Scythian and Parthian Invaders’. (Cambridge, 1922.) 

Rawlinson, H. G., Bactria. (London, 1912.) 

Rawlinson, G., History of Herodotus, 4 Vols. (London, 1858-60.) 

Raychaudhuri, H. C., Political History of Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1938.) 

Sircar, D. C., Successors of Satavahanas. (Calcutta, 1942.) 

Tam, W. W., The Greeks in Bactria and India. (Cambridge, 1938.) 

Thomas, E. (ed.) Prinsep's Essays on Indian Antiquities, 2 Vols. (London, 1858.) 


C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 

Agrawala, V. S., ‘The Vine Motif in Mathura Art,’ JISOA. iv, 1936. 

Altekar, A. S., ‘Who Overthrew the Kushana Empire? The Bharasivas, the Vaka(akas 
or the Yaudheyas ?’ PAIOC. (Banaras, 1943.) 

Bachhofer, L., ‘On Greeks and Sakas in India,’ JAOS. Vol. 61, 1941. 

Bagchi, P. C., ‘Presidential Address, Sect, i,’ PIHC. vi session. (Aligarh, 1943.) 

‘Krimisa and Demetrius,’ IHQ. xxn, 1946. 

Bailey, H. W., ‘Kanishka (a Khotan legend),’ JRAS. 1942. 

Balasubrahmanya Ayyar, K., ‘The Memorable Message of the Heliodorus Column at 
Besnagar,’ JOR. xv, 1945-46. 

Baneiji, R. D., ‘Nahapana and the Saka Era,’ JRAS. 1917. 

‘Nahapana and the Saka Era, Part II,’ JRAS. 1925. 

Banerji Sastri, A., ‘The Nagas in the 3rd and the 4th Centuries a.d.,’ JRASB. v, 1939. 
Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Indo-Parthian Dynasty of Vonones,’ IC. vm 
Deoras, V.R., ‘New Light on the Date of Nahapana,’ PIHC. iv, 1940. 

Fleet, J. F., ‘ Periplus of the Erythrecm Sea,' a review, JRAS. 1912. 

Gupta, Miss Karuna Kana, ‘Mr. K. P. Jayaswal on the Bharasivas (I),’ IC. i. 

Indraji, Bhagawanlal, 'The Northern Kshatrapas (ed.) E. J. Rapson,’ JRAS. 1894. 
Jayaswal, K.P., ‘Problems of Saka-Satavahana History,’ JBORS. xvi, 1930 



820 


bibliography 


Jayaswal, K. P., ‘The Statue of Wema Kadphises and Kushana Chronology,’ JBORS. vi. 
‘Historical data in the Garga samhita and the Brahmin Empire — The Yugapurapa,’ 

Johnston, E. H., ‘Demetrius in Sind,’ JRAS. 1939. 

Kennedy, J., ‘The Secret of Kanishka,’ JRAS. 1912. 

Khundakar, Habibur Rahman, ‘Pre-Gupta Chronology— On the Chronology of the 
Kushanas,’ IC. iv. 

Konow, Sten, ‘Notes on Indo-Scythian Chronology,’ JIH. xii, 1933. 

‘New Traces of the Greeks in India,’ NIA. 1940 

‘Dr. Banerji on Sakas and Kushanas,’ IHQ. xrv. 

Levi, S., ‘Notes on Indo-Scythians.’ IA. xxxii, 1903. (Extracted and rendered into Eng- 
lish, with the author’s permission from the Journal Asiatique, July-Dee. 1896, pp. 
444-84 and Jan-June 1897, pp. 5-42 by W. R. Phillips). 

‘Le “Tokharien”,’ JA. ccxxii, 1933. 

‘Kanishka et Satavahana,’ JA. 1936. 

Marshall, J. H., ‘Date of Kanishka,’ JRAS. 1914. 

‘Greeks and Sakas,’ JRAS. 1947. 

Maenchen-Helfen, Otto, ‘The YUe-chih Problem Re-examined,’ JAOS. Vol. 65, 1945. 
Pai, M. Govind, ‘Were Hermaeus and Kujula Kadphises Joint Rulers?’ NIA. i. 

Palmer, J. A. B., ‘Periplus Maris Erythrai,’ Classical Quarterly, xli, 1947. 

Puri, Baijnath, ‘Provincial and Local Administration of the Kushana period.’ PIHC. 
viii, 1945 (1947). 

‘Economic Guilds in the Kushana Period,’ IC. vi, 

— — ‘Some Aspects of the Economic Life in the Kushaija Period,’ IC. xii, 1945- 
Sastri, K. A. N., ‘The Later Satavahanas and Sakas,’ JRAS. 1926 
Sen Gupta, P. C., ‘Kanishka’s Era,’ 1C. vn, 1940-41. 

Smith, V. A., ‘The Indo-Parthian Dynasties,’ ZDMG. 1906. 

‘The Sakas in Northern India,’ ZDMG. 1907. 

Tarn, W. W., ‘Demetrius in Sind,’ JRAS. 1940. 

Thomas, F. W„ ‘Sakasthana,VR45. 1906. 

‘Kanishka Year 14,’ India Antigua (Leyden, 1947). 

‘Sandanes, Nahapana, Chas(ana and Kanishka,’ NIA. vii, 1944. 

‘Devaputra,’ B. C. Law Volume ii, (Poona, 1946.) 

Vogel, J. Ph., ‘Archaeological Exploration in India,’ JRAS. 1912. 


Chapters X and XI 

X. The Satavahana Empire. XI. The Deccan after the Satavahanas. 


A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

Primary Texts 

Avasyaka Sutra, JBORS. xvi, p. 290 
Baudhayana Dharmasutra. (Leipzig, 1884.) 

Jatakas. (Eng. tr.) E. B. Cowell, etc. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii 
Kamasutra. (Banaras, 1912.) 

Maiavikdgnimitram. (Bombay, 1907.) 

Matsya Parana. Anandasrama Sanskrit Series, No. 54; Eng. tr. SBH. No. 17 
Vayupurana. Bibl. Ind. 1880-1889; Anandasrama Sanskrit Series, No 49 1905 
Vishrtupurana. (Eng. tr.) H. H. Wilson. (London, 1840.) 

Inscriptions 

Banerji, R. D. and Sukhtankar, V. S., ‘Three Kshatrapa Inscriptions,’ El. xvi. 

Barua, B. M., ‘Hathlgumpha Inscription of Kharavela,’ IHQ. xrv, 1938. 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘List of Inscriptions in Northern India,’ See Bibl. to Chh iv— v 
Biihler, G., ‘The Banavasi Inscription of Haritlputra Satakarni,’ IA. 1885. 

Chanda, R. P., ‘Some Unpublished Amaravati Inscriptions,’ El. xv. 

Haider, R. R., ‘The Barwani Copper-plate Inscription of Maharaja Subandhu ’ El xix 
Hultzsch, E., ‘Koijdamudi Plates Jayavarman,’ EI-, vi. ’ 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


821 


Jayaswal, K. P. and Banerji, R.D., ‘The Hathigumpha Inscription of Kharavela,’ EL xx. 
Kielhom, F., ‘The Chikkulla Plates of Vikramendravarman II,’ El. rv. 

‘The Junagadh Rock Inscription of Rudradaman,’ El. viii. 

‘The Talagunda Pillar Inscription of Kakusthavarman,’ El. vm. 

Krishna, M. H., 'Chandravalli Inscription of Mayurasarman,’ MAR. 1929. 

Lakshman Rao, K. V., ‘The Telugu Academy Plates of Vishnukunijin Madhavavarman 
III,’ JDL. Calcutta University xi. 

Ltiders, H., ‘List of Brahml Inscriptions.’ See Bibl. to Chh. iv and v. 

Mirashi, V. V., ‘Vakataka Inscription in Cave XVI at Ajan{a,’ HAS. xiv. 

Mirashi, V. V. and Mahajan, D. B., ‘Basim Plates of Vakataka Vindhyasakti II,’ El. xxvi. 
Pathak, K. B. and Dikshit, K. N., ‘Poona Plates of the Vakataka Queen Prabhavati 
gupta,’ EL xv. 

Rice, Lewis, ‘Malavalli Pillar Prakrit Inscriptions of Satakariji and the Nameless Kadamba 
King,’ EC. vii. Sk. 263, 264 

— — , ‘Aijaji Stone Inscription (Sivanandavarma of the family of the Kekayas),’ 
EC. xi, Dg. 161. 

Sastri, K. A. N., ‘Gurzala Brahml Inscription of Maharaja Siri Rulupurisadata,’ El. 
xxvi. 

Sastri, Seshadri, P., ‘A New Pallava Prakrit Inscription from Palnad,’ JAHC. n. 

Senart, E., ‘The Inscriptions in the Caves at Nasik,’ El. vm. 

Sircar, D. C., Select Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1942.) 

Suktankar, V. S., ‘A Vakataka Inscription from Ganj,’ EI. xvn. 

Coins 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Kshatrapa Coins from Sravania,’ ASIAR. 1913. 

Bose, Girindrasekhar, ‘Some Remarks on the Coins of the Andhra Period,’ JNSI. I, 1939. 
Bose, Susil, K., ‘A New Type of Andhra Coin,’ IC. v. 

Dikshit, K. N., ‘A New Andhra Coin,’ Year Book of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, i, 1935. 
Gopalachari, K., ‘The Akola Hoard of Satavahana Coins,’ PIHC. 1945 (Madras, 1947.) 
Joglekar, S. A. and Dikshit, M. G., ‘A Unique Copper Coin of King Sri Satavahana,’ 
Bulletin of the Deccan College vi. 

Mirashi, V. V., ‘A Coin of King Satavahana,’ JNSI. vu. 

‘A New Hoard of Satavahana Coins from Tarhala (Akola district, Berar) ’ JNSI. 

ii, 1940. 

‘A Large Hoard of Satavahana Coins,’ IHQ. xvi, 1940. 

‘A Ship-type Coin of Yajna Satakarni,’ JNSI. iii, 1941. 

Pai, M. G„ ‘The Vilivayakura and Sivalakura of Kolhapur Coins,’ ABORI. xxm, 1942. 
Paruck, Furdoonjee D. J., ‘Mint-marks on Sassanian and Arab-Sassanian Coins,’ JNSI. 
vi. no. 28. 

Rapson, E. J„ BMCA WK. (London, 1908). See Bibl. to Chh. vi-ix. 

Archaeology 

Chanda, R. P., ‘Dates of the Votive Inscriptions on the Stupas at Saflchl,’ MASI. i. 

Secondary Texts 

Dharmamrita, (Mysore i, 1924, n, 1926.) " 

Kathasaritsagara i. (Bombay, 1903) 

Kathasaritsagara (tr.) Tawney i. (London, 1923.) 

Lilavai of Kohula, (ed.) A. N. Upadhye. (Bombay, 1949.) 

Silappaidkaram, (Eng. tr.) V. R. R. Dikshitar. (Oxford, 1939.) 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Bhandarkar, R. G., The Early History of the Dekkan. (Bombay, 1895.) 

Bhandarkar, D. R., Carmichael Lectures, 1921. (Calcutta.) 

Dubreuil, G. J., Ancient History of the Deccan. (Pondicherry, 1920.) 

Gopalachari, K., The Early History of the Andhra Country. (Madras, 1942.) 

Jayaswal, K. P., History of India, a. d. 150-350. (Lahore, 1933.) 

Krishna Rao, B. V., Early Dynasties of the Andhradesa. (Madras, 1942.) 

Macdonell, A. and Keith, A. B., Vedic Index, 2 Vols. (London, 1912.) 

Majumdar, R. C. and Altekar, A. S., New History of Indian People, Vol. vi. (Lahore, 1 946.) 



822 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Pargiter, F. E., Dynasties of the Kali Age. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii 
Raychauduri, H. C., Political History of Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1938.) 

Sircar, D. C., Successors of Sat av ah anas. (Calcutta, 1939.) _ 

Subramanian, K. R., Buddhist Remains in Andhra and Andhra History, a.d. 225-610. 
(Madras, 1932.) 

Bombay Gazetteer i. ii (Bombay, 1896.) 

C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 
Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Deccan of the Satavahana Period,’ IA. xlvh, 1918. 

Gangoly, O. C., ‘Who were the Satavahanas ?’ JAHRS. xl 
M andalik, V. N., ‘Salivahana and the Salivahana Saptasatl,’ JBBRAS. x. 

Mirashi, V. V., ‘An Ancient Dynasty of Khandesh,’ PIHC. 1944. 

Przyluski, J., ‘Hippokoura et Satakarni,’ JRAS. 1929. 

Sastri, K. A. N., ‘The Later Satavahanas and Sakas,’ JRAS. 1926. 

Sircar, D. C., ‘Kuntala and Asmaka,’ IHQ. xxm. 

‘Was Berar the Home Province of the Satavahanas?’, JNSI. m, 1941. 

‘Maharajas Svamidasa, Bhulunda and Rudradasa,’ IHQ. xxn. 

Smith, V. A., ‘Samudra Gupta,’ JRAS. 1897. 

‘Andhra History and Coinage,’ ZDMG. 1902. 

Venkataramayya, M., ‘Notes on the ancient Political Geography of South India,’ JOR. xn. 


Chapter XII 

Political Organization (Post-Mauryan) 


A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

Primary Texts 

Harivamsa. (Calcutta, 1834-39.) 

Mahabhashya of Patafijali, Kielhorn’s edn. (Bombay, 1880-85) 
Malavikagnimitra of Kalidasa. (Bombay, 1907.) 

Miiindapahha. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, W. H. Schoff. (New York, 1912 ) 
Ptolemy, Geography (Eng. tr.) J. W. McCrindle. (Calcutta, 1885.) 


Inscriptions 

Baneiji, R. D., ‘Saflchi Inscription of Svami Rudradaman,’ EL xvi. 

‘Andhau Inscription of the Time of Rudradaman,’ El. xvi 

Barua, B. M„ ‘Old Brahml Inscriptions in the Udayagiri and Khap<jagiri Caves,’ IHQ. 


Hultzsch, E., Asokan Inscriptions, CII. i. (Oxford, 1925.) 

Kielhom, F., ‘Junagadh Rock Inscription of Rudradaman,’ El. vin. 

Konow, Sten., Kharoshthi Inscriptions, CII. n (i). (Calcutta, 1928 ) ' 

Ltlders, H., A List of Brahml Inscriptions. See Bibl. to Chh. i’v & v. 

‘Three Early Brahml Inscriptions,’ EL ix. 

‘Seven Brahml Inscriptions from Mathura and its Vicinity ’ El xxiv 

Majumdar, N. G. ‘The Bajaur Casket of the Reign of Menander 'El xxiv 
Sahni, Dayaram, ‘Sunga Inscription from Ayodhya,’ El. xx. 

Sastri, K. A. N. and Gopalachari, K., ‘Epigraphic Notes, ’ El. xxiv 
Senart, E., ‘Nasik Cave Inscriptions,’ El. vn pp. 82 If. 

; ‘Inscriptions in the Caves of Karle,’ EL vn pp. 65-66. 

Sircar, D.C., Select Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1942.) 

Suktankar, V. S., ‘A New Andhra Inscription of Siripulumavi ’ EI. xrv d 155 
Vogel, J. Ph., ‘Epigraphical Discoveries at Samath,’ EI. vm p’ 179 F ’ 

‘Prakrit Inscriptions from a Buddhist Site at Nagarjunakonda,’ EI. xx pp.16-24. 


Coins 

AUan, J^A Catalogue of the Indian Coins in the British Museum: Ancient India. (London, 



bibliography 


823 


Rapson, E. J., BMCA WK. See Bibl. to Chh. vi-ix. 

Smith, V. A., A Catalogue of Coins in Indian Museum, Calcutta, i. (Oxford, 1906.) 

Walsh, E. H. C., ‘A Comparative Study of the Patraha (Pumea) Hoard of Silver Punch- 
marked Coins,’ JNSI. iv p.81. 

Whitehead, R. B., Catalogue of Coins in the Punjab Museum, Lahore. (Oxford, 1914.) 

Archaeological Reports 

Puri, K. N., Excavations at Rairh. (Jaipur, n.d.). 

Secondary Texts 

Harshacharita of Bana. (Bombay, 1912.) 

Silappadikdram, (Eng. tr.) V. R. R. Dikshitar. (Oxford, 1939.) 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Aiyangar, S. K., Hindu Administrative Institutions in South India. (Madras, 1931.) 
Banerjea, J. N., Development of Hindu Iconography. (Calcutta, 1941.) 

Dikshitar, V. R. R., Hindu Administrative Institutions. (Madras, 1932.) 

Ghoshal, U. N., Contributions to the History of the Hindu Revenue System. (Calcutta, 1929.) 
Gopalachari, K., Early History of the Andhra Country. (Madras, 1941.) 

Jayaswal, K. P., Hindu Polity. (Calcutta, 1924.) 

Kanakasabai Pillai, V., The Tamils Eighteen-hundred Years Ago. (Madras, 1904.) 

Krishna Rao, B. V., Early Dynasties of the Andhradesa. (Madras, 1942.) 

Rapson, E. J., CHI. i. See Bibl. to Chh. vi, vii, viii and ix. 

Raychaudhuri, H. C„ Political History of Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1938.) 

Sastri, K. A. N., The Partdyan Kingdom. (London, 1929.) 

The Colas i. (Madras, 1935.) 

Sircar, D. C., Successors of the Satavahanas. (Calcutta, 1939.) 

Tarn, W. W., The Greeks in Bactria and India. (Cambridge, 1938.) 

C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 

Chanda, Ramaprasad, ‘Pushyamitra and the Sunga Empire,’ IHQ. v, 1929. 
Chhattopadhyaya, K. P., ‘Social Organization of the Satakarnis and the Suhgas,’ JRASB. 
1927. 

Drouin, ‘The Nimbus and Signs of Deification on the Coins of the Indo-Scythian Kings,’ 
IA. xxxn, 1903, tr. from Revue Numismatique. lvme Ser, Tome v, 1901. 

Hoemle, A. F. Rudolf, ‘Exhibition of Clay Seals from Ludhiana.’ Proceedings of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1 884. 

Jayaswal, K. P., ‘Statues of two Saisunaka Kings,’ ‘Saisunaka Statues m,’ ‘Another Sais- 
unaka Statue,’ JBORS. v, 1919. pp. 88-106, 516-42, 550-1. 

‘Problems of Saka-Satavahana History,’ JBORS xvhi. Pt. i; a summary in IHQ. 

1932. 

Jhonston, E. H., ‘Demetrius in Sind,’ JRAS. 1939. 

Keith, A. B. ‘Greek Kingdoms and Indian Literature,’ D. R. Bhandarkar Volume. 

Levi, S., ‘On some Terms Employed in the Inscriptions of the Kshatrapas,’ IA. 1904, 
tr. from JA. 1902. I. pp. 95-125. 

Marshall, J. H., ‘The Date of Kanishka,’ JRAS. 1914. 

Sahni, Dayaram, ‘Three Mathura Inscriptions and their Bearing on the Kushana Dynasty,’ 
JRAS. 1924. 

Thomas, F. W. ‘Devaputra,’ B. C. Law Volume n. 


Chapter XIII 
Religious Movements 
A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 


Primary Texts 

Bhagavadgita, Sanskrit Text with English Translation by Annie Besant and Bhagavan Das. 
(Benares, 1905.) 



824 


bibliography 


Chchhandogya Upanishad, (ed. and tr.) O. Bohtlink. (Leipzig, 1889.) 

Chinese Tripitaka, Taisho edn. 

Divyavadana, (ed.) E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil. (Cambridge, 1886.) 

Jatakas. See Bibl. to Chh. i — iii. 

Kalpasutra, (ed.) H. Jacobi. (Leipzig, 1879.) 

Kena Upanishad. (Poona, 1909.) 

L’ Abhidharmakosa de Vasubandhu, 5 Vols. (ed.) La Vallee Poussin. (Paris, 1923-26.) 
LaLegende de I'Empereur Afoka (A(okavadana), 3. Przyluski. (Paris, 1923). 
Madhyantavibhagatika, (ed.) Susumu Yamaguchi. 

Mahabharata. (Calcutta, 1834-39.) 

Mahabhashya Kielhorn’s edn. (Bombay, 1880-85.) 

Maha-Narayana Upanishad (112 Upanishads). (Bombay, 1917.) 

Mahdvamsa, (ed.) W. Geiger. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii 
Mahavastu, (ed.) E. Senart. (Paris, 1882-97.) 

Manimekalai, (ed.) Dr. U. V. Swaminatha Iyer (Madras, 1921.) 

McCrindle, Invasion of India by Alexander the Great. See Bibl. to Chh. i — iii. 

Mundaka Upanishad, (ed.) J. Hertel. (Leipzig, 1924). tr. S. Sitarama Sastri. (Madras, 
" 1898.) 

Original Sanskrit Texts. (5 Vols.), J. Muir. (London, 1858-1872.) 

Pravachanasara. (Bombay, 1904). Eng. tr. by Chakravarti Nayinar, SBJ.ui, (Arra. 1920.) 
Questions of Milinda. See Milindapahha, Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Rig-Veda Brahmanas, A. B. Keith. HOS. 25. (Harvard, 1925.) 

Sthaviravalicharita (Parisishtaparvan of Hemchandra ), (ed.) H. Jacobi. (Calcutta, 1 897.) 
Taittiriya Aranyaka, (ed.) Apte. (Poona, 1898.) 

Uttaradhyayana Sutra ( Jaina Sutras), (ed.) H. Jacobi. SBE. xxn, (Oxford, 1884.) 
Uttaradhyayana Sutra, (ed.) Jarl Charpentier. SBE. xlv. (Oxford, 1895.) 

Vajaseneyi Samhita, (ed.) A. Weber. (London, 1852.) 

Vasumitra’s ‘History of Eighteen Schools’ preserved in Chinese and Tibetan translations. 
Vassileff’s tr. from Tibetan, Buddhisme ses dogmes etc. (Paris, 1865) 

Inscriptions 

Btihler, G., ‘Mathura Inscriptions,’ EL i. 

Hultzsch, E., ‘ Aiokan Inscriptions,’ ClI. I. (Oxford, 1925.) 

Jayaswal, K. P and Banerji, R. D., ‘Hathlgumpha Inscription Kharavela,’ El. xx. 
Konow, Sten, ‘ Kharoshthi Inscriptions,’ ClI. H (i). (Calcutta, 1928.) 

Ltiders, H., List of Brahmi Inscriptions. See Bibl. to Chh. iv-v. ‘Mora Well Inscription,’ 
El. xxiv 

Sircar, D. C., Select Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1942.) 

Secondary Texts 

Bu-Ston, History of Buddhism ( Chos . ftbyung), E. Obermiller, tr. from Tibetan. (Heidel- 
berg, 1931-32.) 

Mahjusrimulakalpa, (ed.) T. Ganapati Sastri. Tss. lxx, and lxxvi, lxxxiv. (Trivandrum 
1920-25.) 

Sarvadarsanasarasamgraha of Madhava, (ed.) E. B. Cowell and A. E. Gough. (London, 

Travels of Fa-hien, (Eng. tr.) J. A. Legge. (Oxford, 1886.) 

Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, T. Watters, 2 Vols. (London, 1908.) 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Agrawala, V. S., ‘Catalogue of Exhibits (revised) in the Curzon Museum of Archaeoloev 
Mathura,’ JUPHS, xxi ff. 

Bagchi, P. C., India and China. (Calcutta, 1944.) 

Banerjea, J. N., Development of Hindu Iconography. (Calcutta, 1941.) 

Bhandarkar, R. G., Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious Systems ( Encyclopcedia 
of Indo-Aryan Research). (Strassburg, 1913.) 

Bhandarkar, D. R., Asoka. (Calcutta, 1925.) 

Brown, Norman, The Story of Kalaka. Smithsonian Institution, Freer Gallerv of Art 
Oriental Studies, No. i, 1933. 

Chanda, R. P., Archaeology and the Vaishnava Tradition. MASI. No. 5. (Calcutta, 1920). 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., Indian and Indonesian Art. (London, 1927.) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


825 


Gopinath Rao, R. A., Elements of Hindu Iconography n. (Madras, 1916.) 

Guerinot, A., La Religion Djaina. (Paris, 1926.) 

Kern, J. H., Manual of Buddhism. (Strassburg, 1896.) 

Masuda, J., Der individualistische Idealismus der Yogachara-schule. (Heidelberg, 1926.) 
Minayeff, I. P., Recherches sur le Bouddhisme. (Paris, 1894.) 

Przyluski, J., Le Confile de Rajagriha. (Paris, 1926-8.) 

Ramaswamy Ayyangar, M. S. and Seshagiri Rao, B., Studies in South Indian Jainism. 
(Madras, 1922.) 

Rapson, E. J., CHI. i. See Biblio to Chh. vi, vii, viii and ix. 

Raychaudhuri, H. C., Materials for the Study of the Early History of the Vaishnavite Sect. 
(Calcutta, 1936.) 

Schubring, Walther, Die Lehre der Jainas ( Encyclopaedia of Indo-Aryan Research). 
(Berlin and Leipzig, 1935.) 

Shah, C. J., Jainism in Northern India. (London and Bombay, 1932.) 

Smith, V. A., The Jaina Stupa and Antiquities of Mathura. (Allahabad, 1901.) 

Stevenson, Mrs. Sinclair, Heart of Jainism ( Religious Quest of India). (London, 1915.) 
Tucci, G., Doctrine of Maitreyanatha and Asahga, On Some Aspects of. (Calcutta, 1930.) 

C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 
Bagchi, P. C., ‘Krimisa and Demetrius,’ IHQ. xxn. 

Banerjea, J. N., ‘Worship of Samba among the Early Paflcharatrins,’ PIHC. 1944 (Madras). 

‘The Holy Pafichavlras of the Vrishnis,’ JISOA. x pp. 65-8. 

‘Sophytes— Saubhuti,’ JNSI. vn, 1945. 

‘The Phallic Emblem in Early and Mediaeval India,’ JISOA. in. 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Ajivikas and Bhagavatas,’ I A. 1912. 

‘An Eklingji Stone Inscription and the Origin of the History of the Lakulisa Sect,’ 

JBBRAS. xxii. 

‘Lakulisa,’ ASIAR. 1906-7. 

‘Mathura Pillar Inscription of Chandragupta II. G. E. 61,’ El. xxi pp. 1-9. 

Charpentier, Jarl, ‘Ajivika,’ JRAS. 1913. 

Chavannes, ‘Voyage de Song-yun,’ BEFEO. in. 

Demieville, P., ‘Les Versions Chinoises de Milindapaftha,’ BEFEO. xxrv. 

Dutt, Nalinaksha, ‘Notes on Nagarjunakonda Inscriptions,’ IHQ. vn. 

Finot, L., ‘Pratimoksha du Sarvastivada,’ JA. 1913. 

Fleet, J. F., ‘Bhadrabahu, Chandragupta and Sravaiia Belgola,’ I A. xxi. 

Hoernle, A. F. R., ‘Two Patfavalis of the Digambaras,’ IA. xx. 

Three further Paftavalis of the Digambaras,’ IA. xxi. 

Jacobi, H., ‘Uber die Entstehung der Svetambara and Digambara Sekten,’ ZDMG. 
xxxvxn, 1884. 

— — Kalakacharya Kathanaka,’ ZDMG. xxxix (1880). 

Keith, A. B., Review of The Heart of Jainism by Sinclair Stevenson, JRAS. 1915. 
Kielhom, F., ‘Junagadh Rock Inscription of Rudradaman,’ El. vm. 

Leumann, Ernst, ‘Zwei Weitere Kalaka-legenden,’ ZDMG. xxvii, 1883. 

Levi, S.. ‘Encore Asvaghosha,’ JA. 1928. 

‘Sivapura in the Mahabhashya,’ JA. v, 1915. 

‘Kanishka et Satavahana,’ JA. 1936. 

‘Le Bouddhisme et les Grecs, Revue de /’ Histoire de Religion, xxm, 1891, 

pp. 36-49. also in Memorial Sylvain Levi 
Senart, E., ‘Nasik Cave Inscriptions,’ EL vm. Art. 8, No. 10,_ 

Vogel, J. Ph., ‘Prakrit Inscriptions from a Buddhist Site Nagarjunakonda,’ El. xx pt. 1. 
Weber, A., ‘On the Ascription of the Names Isana and Mahadeva to Siva,’ Indische 
Studien n p. 302. 


Chapters XIV and XV 

XIV. Economic Conditions (Post-Mauryan) XV. Social Life. 
A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

Primary Texts 

Acharahga Sutra, (latest edn. Rutlam, 1941.) Eng. tr. 

Jaina Sutras, H. Jacobi. SBE. Vol. xxn 
104 



826 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Aitareya^Brahmana. (ed.) Haug, M. (Bombay, 1863.) (tr.) Keith, A.B. (Harvard, 

Arthasastra of Kautilya. See Bibl to Chh. i-iv. 

Avadanasataka, (ed.j J. S. Speyer, 2 Vols. (St. Petersburg, 1906, 1909.) 

Brihatkalpasutra. (Bhavanagar, 1933-38.) 

Buddhacharita, Asvaghosha. (Lahore, 1935-36.) 

Charaka Samhita. (Lahore, 1929.) 

Charudatta of Bhasa. (Oxford, 1930.) 

Dharma Sutras , Baudhayana. (Mysore, 1904.) 

Dharma Sutras, Gautama. (London, 1876.) 

Dharma Sutras, Vasishtha. (Bombay, 1883.) 

Divyavadana, (ed.) E. B. Cowell and R.A. Neil. (Cambridge, 1886.) 

Gat ha Saptasati of Hdla. (Leipzig, 1881.) 

Grihya-Sutras Baudhayana. (Leipzig, 1884.) 

Grihy a- Sutras, Paraskara. (Leipzig, 1876.) SBE. (Eng. cr. H. Jacobi, xxn.) 

Kalpasiitras, Lives of Jinas. Latest edn. (Bombay, 1939.) 

Kdmasiitra of Vdtsvayana. (Banaras, 1912.) 

Lalitavistara, 2 Vo'ls. (Halle, 1902, 1908.) 

Mahabharata. (Calcutta, 1834-39.) 

Mahabhashya, (Patanjali), Kielhom’s edn. (Bombay, 1880-5.) 

Mahakarmavibhahga, (ed.) Sylvain Levi. (Paris, 1932.) 

Manusmriti. (Calcutta 1813; Paris, 1830; Bombay, 1888; London, 18871 
Milindapahha. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii 
A fay a Dhammakahaya (Bombay, 1916.) 

Nidanakatha (Pali), See, Fausboll, Jatakas i. (London, 1877 ) Eng tr T W 
Rhys Davids in Buddhist Birth Stories, 1880. New edn. Mrs. Rhys Davids] 


Parthian Stations by Isidore of Charax, Eng. tr. W. H. SchofF. (Philadelphia, 1914 ) 
Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, Eng. tr. W. H. Schoff. (New York, 1912) 

Pliny, Natural History, Eng. tr. in McCrindle, Ancient India. See Bibl to Chh i-iii 
Ptolemy, Eng. Tr. by McCrindle, see Bibl. to Ch. i-iii 
Ramayana. (Bombay, 1930.) 

Satapatha Brdhmaria, (ed.) A. Weber, (London, 1855.) Eng. tr. J. Eggelins SBE x 
xxvi, xli, xlhi and xliv. (Oxford, 1882-1900.) Sg g ' 

Saundarananda, Asvaghosha. (Calcutta, 1939.) 

Silappadikaram, Eng. tr. V. R. R. Dikshitar. (Oxford, 1939 ) 

Suiruta Samhita. (Bombay, 1938.) 

Sutrakritahga ( Suyagadahga-Sutta ) (Rutlam, 1941.). Eng. tr. H. Jacobi SBE xlv 
Levi, S„ ‘Sutra of the Twelve Steps of the Buddha,’ JA .1918 
Uttaradhyayana Sutra. (Upsala, 1922.). Eng. tr. H. Jacobi. SBE xlv 
Uvasagadasao, (ed.) A.F.R. Hoemle. (Calcutta, 1885-88.) 

Yajnavalkya-Smriti. (Berlin, 1849; Bombay, 1908.) 


Inscriptions 

Altekar, A. S., ‘Three Maukhari Inscriptions on Yupas,’ El xxm 

— st" ,nmip “ o ”- ' (2 > K -™ 

Btthler, G., ‘Further Inscriptions from Saflchl,’ El. n. 

Chanda, Rama Prasada, ‘Some Unpublished Amaravatl Inscriptions ’ El xv 
Hultzsch E„ ‘Rock Edicts V, XIII.’ ASokan Inscriptions. See. Bibl to Chh i-'iii 
Konow, Sten, ‘Mathura Brahml Inscription of the Year 28 ’ El xxi 

Kharoshthi Inscriptions. See Bibl. to Chh. vi-ix. ’ 

Ltiders, H., ‘A List of Brahml Inscriptions’ See Bibl. to Chh iv-v 
Majumdar N. G„ ‘The Bajaur Casket of the Reign of Menander ; El xxiv 
Vogel, J. Ph., ‘The Garuda Pillar of Besnagar,’ ASIAR. 1908-09 

‘The Sacrificial Posts of Isapur,’ ASIAR. 1910-11. 

‘Prakrit Inscriptions from a Buddhist Site at Nagkrjunakonda,’ El. xx 


Coins 


Mirashi, V. V., ‘A Ship-type Coin of Yajiia Satakami,’ JNSI in 
Rapson, E. J., BMCA WK. See Bibl. to Chh. vi, vu, Vin and ix 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


827 


Archaeological Reports, etc., 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Excavations at Besnagar,’ ASIAR. 1913-14, 1914-15 
Marshall, J. H., ‘Excavations at Bhita,’ ASIAR. 1911-12. 

‘Excavations at Taxila,’ ASIAR. 1914-15, 1915-16. 1926-27, 1928-29, 1929-30. 

Marshall, J. H., A Foucher, and N. G. Majumdar, Monuments of Sahchi, I-III, (Calcutta, 
n. d.) 

Puri, K. N., Excavations at Rairh during the Years, 1938-39, 1939-40, (Jayapur, n. d.) 
Sahni, Dayaram, ‘Pre- Muhammadan Monuments of Kashmir,’ ASIAR. 1915-16. 
Sivaramamurti, C., The Amaravati Sculptures in the Madras Government Museum 
(Madras, 1942.) 

B. MODERN WORKS 


Aiyangar, S. K., The Beginnings of South Indian History. (Madras, 1918.) 

Bagchi, P. C., Le Canon Bouddhique en Chine i. (Paris, 1927.) 

Bhandarkar, D. R., Some Aspects of Indian Culture. (Madras, 1940.) 

Bose, Atindranath, Social Life and Rural Economy in N. E. India, 600 b.c.-a.d. 200, 

2 Vols. (Calcutta, 1942-45.) 

Chakaldhar, H. C., Social Life in Ancient India. Studies in Vatsyayana s Kamasutra. 

Fick, Rfchard^Socia/ Organization of North-Eastern India in the Time of the Buddha. Eng. 

tr. by Shishirkumar Mitra. (Calcutta, 1920.) 

Kane, P. V., History of the Dharmasastra, Vol. ii. Part i. (Poona, 1941.) 

Marshall, Sir John, Guide to Taxila. (Calcutta, 1918.) , , 

Rostovtzeff, M., Social and Economic History of the Hellenistic World, 3 Vols. (Oxford, 
1941.) 

Sastri, K. A. N., The Colas i. (Madras, 1935.) 

Stein, Sir M. Aurel, Ancient Khotan i. (Oxford, 1907.) 

Serindia. (Oxford, 1921.) 

Tarn, W. W., The Greeks in Bactria and India. (Cambridge, 1938.) 

Hellenistic Civilization. (London, 1927.) 

Warmington, E. H., The Commerce between the Roman Empire and India. (Cambridge, 
1938.) 


C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘Foreign Elements in Hindu Population,’ IA 1911. 

Chhabra, B Ch., Lakshminarayana Rao, N. and Ashraf Husain, M., Ten Years of Indian 
Epigraphy (1937-46),’ Ancient India. No. 5 (1949) 

Dhruva, K. H„ ‘Historical Contents of the Yugapuraija, JBORS. 1930. 

Hopkins, E. W., ‘The Social and Military Position of the Ruling Caste in Ancient India, 

Jayaswal, K. P^Demetrius, Kharavela and Gargasamhita,’ JBORS. 1928. 
Jouveau-Dubreuil, G„ ‘Les Ruines Romaines de Pondichery,’ BEFEO. 1940. 

Kennedy, J., ‘The Indians in Armenia,’ JRAS. 1904. 

Levi, S., ‘Ptolemee, le Niddesa et la Brihatkatha, Etudes Asiatiques n. (Hanoi, 1925.) 

‘Saddharmasmrityupasthana Sutra,’ JA. 1918. 

‘Pour l’Histoire du Ramayapa,’ JA. 1918. 

‘Notes Indiennes i, Paloura-Dantapura,’ JA. 1925. 

‘Notes Indiennes iii, Pihunda, Pithuda, Pitundra,’X4. 1925. 

Liiders, H. ‘The Era of Maharaja and Maharaja Rajatiraja,’ D. R. Bhandarkar Volume, 
pp. 281-9. (Calcutta, 1940). . , 

Moti Chandra, ‘Cosmetics and Coiffure in Ancient India, JISOA. vm. 

‘The History of Indian Costume from 1st Century a.d. to the Beginning of the 4th 

Century,’ JISOA. 1940. 

Palmer, J. A. B., ‘Periplus Maris Erythrei,’ Classical Quarterly, xli, 1947. 

Pelliot, P., ‘Deux Itineraires de Chine en Inde,* BEFEO. iv. 

‘Le Fou-nan,’ BEFEO m. .... , . , 

‘Chau Ju-kua. His work on the Chinese m the Arab trade in the twelfth and the 

thirteenth centuries, entitled Chu-fan-chi, by Friedrich Hirth and W. W. Rockhill. 
Bulletin critique. T’oung Pao, 1912, 



828 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Pelliot, P., ‘Quelques TextesChiniosconcernantl’IndochineHindouisee,’ Etudes Asiatiques 
n. (Hanoi, 1925). 

Sastri, K. A. N., ‘Beginnings of Intercourse between India and China,’ I HQ. 1938. 

Vogel’ J. Ph., ‘Note on an Ivory Statue from Pompei,’ ASIA. 1938. 

Wheeler, R.E., Mortimer Ghosh, A. and Krishnadeva, ‘Arikamedu, An Indo-Roman 
Trading Station on the East Coast of India,’ Ancient India. No. 2 (1946.) 

Cyclopaedia 

Abhidhanarajendra. 


Chapters XVI and XVII 
XVI. South India Part I XVII. South India Part II 
A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 


Primary Texts 

Ahananiiru, (ed.) V. Rajagopala Iyengar, 2nd edn. (Madras, 1934.) 

Aingurunuru, (ed.) V. S. Iyer, 2nd edn. (Madras, 1920.) 

Arthasastra. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii 

Iraiyanar Ahapporul (With comm, by Nakklrar), Bhavanandam Academy. (Madras, 
1939.) 

Kurundogai, (ed.) V. S. Iyer. (Madras, 1937.) 

Narrinai, (ed.) A. Narayanaswami Iyer. (Madras, 1914.) 

Paiiuppattu, (ed.) V. S. Iyer, 3rd edn. (Madras, 1931.) 

Padirruppattu, (ed.) V. S. Iyer, 2nd edn. (Madras, 1920.) 

Paripadal, (ed.) V. S. Iyer, (Madras, 1918.) 

Purananuru, (ed.) V. S. Iyer, 2nd edn. (Madras, 1923.) 

Sahga Ilakkiyam. (Madras, 1940.) 

Tamil Navalar Charitai, (ed.) T. Kanakasundaram Pillai. (Madras, 1921.) 
Tirumurugarruppadai, (ed.) S. Vaiyapuri Pillai. (Madura, 1943.) 

Tolkappiyam (With comm, of Nachchinarkkiniyar and Perasiriyar) I. (ed.) S. Vaiyapuri 
Pillai. (Madras, 1934.) II. (ed) V. Doraiswamy Iyer. (Madras, 1935.) 

Inscriptions 

‘Pugalur Brahmi Inscription,’ ARE. 1927-8. pt. ti. (i) 

Secondary Texts. 

DipavamSa, (ed. and tr.) H. Oldenberg. (London, 1879.) 

Kalihgattupparani, (ed.) K. Gopala Aiyar. (Madras, 1923.) 

Mahavamsa, (Eng. tr.) W. Geiger. (London, 1912.) 

Manimekalai, (ed.) V. Swaminatha Iyer. (Madras, 1921.) 

Parimel-Alagar (comm, on Kural), Saiva Siddhanta Nurpatippu Kalagam. (Madras, 
Purattirattu, (ed.) S. Vaiyapuri Pillai. (Madras, 1938.) 

Silappadikaram (With comm, of A<Jiyarkkunallar), 2nd edn. (ed.t V. S. Iyer. (Madras, 
1920). ' J 

Yapparuhgala Virutti, (ed.) K. Bhavanandam Pillai. (Madras, 1916.) 

Inscription 

‘ Kilur Inscription of the 27th Year of Rajaraja I,’ S1I. vu 863. 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Aiyangar, S. K., Beginnings of South Indian History. (Madras, 1918.) 

Barua, B. M., Asoka and his Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1946.) 

Barnett, L. D., ‘The Early History of South India,’ CHI. i. ch. xxiv. (Cambridge 1922.) 
Kanakasabai Pillai, V., Tamils 1800 Years Ago. (Madras, 1904.) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


829 


McCrindle, J. W., Megasthenes and Arrian. (Calcutta, 1887.) 

Raghava Aiyangar, M., Velir Varalaru. (Madura, 1913.) 

Seran Senguttuvan, 1st Edn. (Madras, 1915.) 2nd edn. (Madras, 1929.) 

Rostovtzeff, M., Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire. (Oxford, 1926.) 
Sastri, K. A. N., Studies in Cola History and Administration. (Madras, 1932.) 

The Colas i. (Madras, 1935.) 

Sesha Aiyer, K.G., Cera Kings of the Sahgam Period. (London, 1937.) 

Sivaraja Pillai, K. N., Chronology of the Tamils. (Madras, 1932.) 

Srinivasa Aiyangar, M., Tamil Studies. (Madras, 1914.) 

Srinivasa Iyengar, P. T., History of the Tamils. (Madras, 1929.) 

Srinivasa Pillai, K. S., History of Tamil Literature. (Kumbakonam, 1924.) 

Swamikannu Pillai, L. D., Indian Ephemeris i. (Madras, 1922.) 

Venkataramanayya, N., Andhrulu Charitra (Telugu). (Hyderabad, 1950.) 

C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 

Barnett, ‘Remarks on a Papyrus from Oxyrhynchus,’ Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 
xii, (1926) pp. 13-15. Hultzsch, E., ‘Remarks on the Papyrus from Oxyrhynchus,’ 
JRAS. 1904. 

Shama Sastri, R., ‘A Greek Farce with Old Kannada Passage (from Oxyrhynchus),’ MAR. 

1927 pt. I, iii ‘Manuscripts and printed books’, pp. 11-21. 

Stein, O., ‘Remarks on a Papyrus from Oxyrhynchus,’ Indologica Pragensia i pp. 41-2. 
Sundaram Pillai, P., ‘The Ten Tamil Idylls II,’ Madras Christian College Magazine ix. 
Subrahmanya Ayyar, K. V., ‘The Earliest Monuments of the Paridya Country and their 
Inscriptions,’ PAIOC, m, 1924. p. 278. 

Wheeler, R. E. M. and others, ‘Arikamedu: An Indo-Roman Trading Station in the East 
Coast of India,’ Ancient India, No. 2, July 1946, pp. 17-124. 


Chapters XVIII and XIX 
XVIII Ceylon (I) XIX Ceylon (H) 
A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 


Primary Texts 

Chulavamsa, (ed.) W. Geiger. (London, 1925.) 

Dipavamsa, (ed. and tr.) H. Oldenberg. (London, 1879.) 

Mahavariisa, (ed. and tr.) W. Geiger. See Bibl. to Chh i-iii. 

Inscriptions 

Mtiller, E, Ancient Inscriptions of Ceylon. (London, 1883.) 

Paranavitana, S., ‘Brahmi Inscriptions in Sinhalese Verse,’ JRASCB. xxxvi. 

‘Habassa Rock Inscription,’ EZ. iv no. 26 

‘Rock-Inscription of the Time of Got(habhaya at Timbirivane,’ EZ. iv no. 28. 

‘Thuparama Slab Inscription of Gajabahu I,’ EZ. m no. 6 

‘Tonigala Rock-Inscription of Third Year of Srlmeghavarnna,’ EZ. ni no. 17. 

‘Two Rock-Inscriptions at Viharegala,’ EZ. ni no. 15 

‘Two Rock-Inscriptions of Bhatika Abhaya and Mahanaga at Molahitiyavelegala,’ 

EZ. in no. 12. 

‘Vallipuram Gold-Plate Inscription of the Reign of Vasabha,’ EZ. iv no. 29. 

‘Vessagiriya Inscription of Siri Naga II,’ EZ. rv no. 27 

‘Epigraphical Summary,’ CJS. n 17 f., 99 f., 175 f. 

Wikramasinghe, Don Martino De Zilva, ‘Vessagiri Inscriptions,’ EZ. i no. 2 
‘Ritigala Inscriptions,’ EZ. i no. 10. 

Archaeology 

ASCAR. for the years 1932, 1933, 1934, 1935, 1940-45. 

Hocart, A. M., ‘Archaeological Summary,’ CJS. i pp. 143 f. 

‘Archaeological Summary,’ CJS. n pp. 73 f. 



830 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Secondary Texts 

Divyavadana, (ed.) E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil. (Cambridge, 1886.) 

Jatakas, (ed.) V. Fausboll. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

La Legende de VEmpereur Acoka, J. PrzyluskL (Paris, 1923.) 

Nikaya Samgraha, Thera Devarakkhita Jayabahu. (Colombo, 1890.) 

Paramatthadipani, Commentary on Vimanavatthu, (ed.) E. Hardy. PTS. (London, 1901.) 
Samanta Pasadika, (ed.) J. Takakusu. Vol. i. (London, 1924.) n. (London, 1927.) 
Silappadikaram, (Eng. tr.) V. R. R. Dikshitar. (Oxford, 1939.) 

Sumahgalavilasini, (ed.) T. W. Rhys Davids and J. W. Carpenter. (London, 1896.) 
Travels of Fa-hien, (Eng. tr.) H. A. Giles. (Cambridge, 1923.) 

Valahassa Jataka, (ed.) E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil. (Cambridge, 1886.) 
Vamsatthappakasini. (London, 1935.) 

Vinaya, (ed.) H. Oldenberg. (London, 1879-1883.) 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Adikaram, E. W., Early History of Buddhism. (Migoda, Ceylon, 1946.) 

Barnett, L. D., 'The Early History of Ceylon,’ CHI. i ch. xxv. (Cambridge, 1922.) 
Codrington, H. W., Ceylon Coins and Currency. (Colombo, 1924.) 

Gunasekara, B., A Contribution to the History of Ceylon. (Colombo, 1895.) 

Parker, A., Ancient Ceylon. (London, 1909.) 

Parera, L. S., The Institutions of Ancient Ceylon from Inscriptions. (Unpublished). 
Paranavitana, S., The Stupa in Ceylon. (Colombo, 1946.) 

Raychaudhuri H. C., Political History of Ancient India. (Calcutta, 1938.) 

Rhys Davids, T. W., Buddhist India. (London, 1903.) 

Sastri, K. A. N„ Colas i. (Madras, 1935.) 

Studies in Cola History and Administration. (Madras, 1932.) 

Foreign Notices of South India. (Madras, 1939.) 

Seligman, C. G. and B. Z., Veddas. (Cambridge, 1911.) 

Smith, V. A., Asoka, 3rd edn. (Oxford, 1920.) 

Thomas, E. J., The Life of the Buddha as Legend and History. (London, 1927, 1930.) 
Warmington, E. H., The Commerce between the Roman Empire and India. (Cambridge, 


C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 

Bell, H. C. P., ‘Dimbula-gala: Its Caves, Ruins and Inscriptions— I. The “Maravidiye” 
Caves,’ CA. in, pt. i. 

'Archaeological Research in the Egoda Pattuwa, Tamankaduwa,’ CA Pt iii 

Codrington, H. W., ‘Margana,’ JRASCBX. xxvui p. 54. 

Fernandes, P. E., ‘Paleographical Development of Brahmi Script in Ceylon from 3rd 
Century b.c. to the 7th Century a.d.,’ UCR. vn. 

Hill, W. C. C., ‘The Physical Anthropology of the Existing Veddas of Ceylon ’ CJS. nr 
Section. G. 

Hocart, A. M„ ‘The Coronation Ceremony,’ CJS. i. pp. 27-42. 

Hultzsch, E., ‘Contributions to Singhalese Chronology,’ JR AS. 1913. 

Jayatilaka, D. B., ‘A History of the Sahgha in Ceylon,’ The Buddhist. Oct. 1 , 1 921 . 

Mendis, J. C., ‘The Chronology of the Early Pali Chronicles of Ceylon ’ UCR v 
‘The Pali Chronicles of Ceylon,’ UCR. iv. 

Nicholas, C. W., ‘Some Offices and Titles in the Early Sinhalese Kingdom,’ UCR. vn. 

‘Epigraphical Map of Ceylon from 3rd Century b.c. to 3rd Centurv ad’ UCR 

vni p. 142. 

Noone, N. R. and Noone, H. V. V., ‘The Stone Implements of Bandarawela ’ CJS in 
Pandya, A. V., ‘Pre-historic Cultures Discovered on the Narbada,’ PIHC 1947 (Bombay) 
Paranavitana, S., ‘Mahayanism in Ceylon,’ CJS. n. 

‘Pre-Buddhist Religious Beliefs in Ceylon,’ JRASCB. xxxi pp. 302-28. 

‘Tamil Householders’ Terrace, Anuradhapura,’ JRASCB xxxv p 54 

1936 TitIeS ° f EaF,y Sinhalese 311(1 the ° ri8in of Kingship in Ceylon,’ JRAS. 

Still, John, ‘Tantrimalai,’ JRASCB. xxii. 

Thomas, E. J., ‘Theravadin and Sarvastivadin Dates of Nirvana,’ B. C. Law Volume , 
Part ii. (Poona, 1946.) ' * 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


831 


Chapter XX 
Language and Literature 
A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 


Primary Texts 

Ahguttara Nikdya. (London, 1885-1900.) 

Arthasastra. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Ashtadhydyi. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Bhavishyatpurdna. (Bombay, 1897.) 

Chulavagga of the Suttanipata). (London, 1885, 1893 and 1913.) 

Dharmasutras , Apastamba, (ed.) G. Biihler. (Bombay, 1868, 1882, two parts.) 

Baudhayana. (Leipzig, 1 884.) 

Gautama. (London, 1876.) 

Dipavamsa, (ed.) W. Geiger. (Leipzig, 1905). Eng. tr. (Colombo, 1908.) 

Mahabhashya, (ed.) F. Kielhorn. (Bombay, 1880-85.) 

Mahavamsa. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Mahavamso, (Eng. tr.) G. Tumour. (Colombo, 1837.) 

Samantapasadika. (London, 1924-27.) 

Samyutta Nikdya. (London, 1884-1904.) 

Sattasayi, (ed.) Weber. (Leipzig, 1881.) 

Inscriptions 

Bajapai, K. D., ‘Three New Kushana Inscriptions at Madura,’ Jaina Antiquary xvi. pt.i 
Barua, B. M. and Sinha, Bharhut Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1926.) 

Biihler, G., ‘Jain Inscription at Mathura,’ El. i pp. 371-9. 

Hultzsch, E., ‘Bharhut Inscriptions,’ ZDMG. XL pp. 58-80. 

• ‘Votive Inscriptions from the Saftchl Stupas,’ EL ii pp. 87-116. 

Kielhorn, F., ‘The Junnagaijh Inscription ofRudradaman,’ El. vm pp. 36-49. 

Konow, Sten, Kharoshthi Inscriptions. CII. n. (i). (Calcutta, 1928.) 

Secondary Texts 

Kathasaritsagara. (Bombay, 1915.) 

Kdvyamimdmsa, GOS. No. 1. (Baroda, 1934.) 

Pravachana Parikshd. See A. Weber in SB A. 1882, p. 793 f. Ed. and Eng. tr. by J. Hertel 
ZDMG. lxv, 1911. 

Rdjatarahgirii. See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Sarasvati Karithabhararia, Kavyamala 94. (Bombay, 1925.) 

Vakyapadiya. (Benares, 1887.) 

Inscriptions 

Rice, Lewis, ‘Hebbur Plates,* EC. xii. Tm. 23. 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Bloch, Jules, L’Indo-Aryen du Veda aux Temps Modernes. (Paris, 1934.) 

• La Formation du Langue Marathe. (Paris, 1920.) 

Burnell, A. C., The Aindra School of Sanskrit Grammarians. (Mangalore, 1875.) 

Burrow, T., The Languages of Kharoshthi Documents. (Cambridge, 1937.) 

Chakaldhar, H. C., Studies in Vdtsyayana's Kdmasutra. (Calcutta, 1929.) 

Chanda, R. P., Dates of the Votive Inscriptions on the Stupas at Sdiichi. MASI. no. I. 
Chatterji, S. K., Origin and Development of the Bengali Language. (Calcutta, 1926.) 

Indo- Aryan and Hindi. (Ahmadabad, 1942.) 

Dasgupta, S. N., A History of Indian Philosophy, i. (Cambridge, 1922.) 

Datta, B. B., The Science of Sulba. (Calcutta, 1932.) 

Dutt, N., Aspects of Mahdyana Buddhism and its Relation to Hinayana. (Calcutta, 1930.) 
Geiger, W., Pali Literature and Language, Eng. tr. (Calcutta, 1943.) 

Goldstiicker, Th., Pdnini, His Place in Sanskrit Literature. (London, 1861.) 

Grierson, G. A., Pisbcha Language. (London, 1906.) 



832 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Jacobi, H., Studies in Jainism. (Ahmadabad, 1946). 

Johnston, E. H., Early Samkhya. RAS. (London, 1937.) 

Jennings, J. G., The Vedantic Buddhism of the Buddha. (Oxford, 1948.) 

Kane, P. V., History of the Dharmasastra, i. (Poona, 1930.) 

Kaye, G. R., Indian Mathematics. (Calcutta, 1915.) 

Keith, A. B., The Sanskrit Drama in its Origin, Development, etc. (Oxford, 1924.) 

History of Sanskrit Literature. (Oxford, 1928.) 

Karmamimamsa, Heritage of India Series. (Calcutta, 1921.) 

Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon. (Oxford, 1923.) 

Kimura, R., A Historical Study of the Terms Hinayana and Mahay ana, and the Origin 
of the Mahayana Buddhism. (Calcutta, 1927.) 

Kuppuswami Sastri, S., Primer of Indian Logic. (Madras, 1932.) 

Lacote, F., Essai sur Gunadhya et la Brihatkatha. (Paris, 1908.) Eng. tr. by A. M. Tabard. 
(Bangalore, 1923.) 

Law, B. C., Asvaghosha. (Calcutta, 1946.) 

Macdonell, A. A., India's Past. (Oxford, 1927.) 

Malelasekara, G. P., History of the Pali Literature in Ceylon. (London, 1918.) 

Masura, J., Origin and Doctrines of Early Indian Buddhistic Schools. (Leipzig, 
1925.) 

Sogen, Y., Systems of Buddhistic Thought. (Calcutta, 1912.) 

Stcherbatsky, Th., The Central Conception of Buddhism. (London, 1923.) 

Vidyabhusan, S. C., A History of Indian Logic. (Calcutta, 1921.) 

Weber, A., ‘Das Mahabhashya des Patanjali,’ Indische Studien xm, pp. 293-496. 
Winternitz, Maurice, History of Indian Literature, n, Eng. tr. (Calcutta, 1933.) 


C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 


Bapat, P. V., ‘Relation between Pali and ArdhamagadhI,’ I HQ. iv, 1928, pp. 23-30. 

Bhandarkar, D. R., ‘An Eklingji Stone Inscription and the Origin of the History of the 
Lakulisa Sect,’ JBBRAS. xxn pp. 151 f. 

Bloch, Jules, ‘La Dialect des Fragments Dutreuil de Rhins,’ JA. 1912. 

Chakravarti, P. C., ‘Patanjali as he reveals Himself in the Mahabhashya,’ I HQ. ii, 
1926. 

Datta, B. B., ‘Scope and Development of the Hindu Ganita,’ IHQ. v. 

Devasthali, G. V., ‘Sahara and the Nyaya-Vaiseshika Darsanas,’ JOR. xvm. 

‘Some Positive Data for the Date of Sabarasvamin,’ Jl. G. N. Jha Institute, VI 

pt. 3. 

‘On the Date of Sahara,’ ABORI. Silver Jubilee Volume, pp. 84-97. 

Edgerton, F., ‘The Prakrit Underlying Buddhistic Hybrid Sanskrit,’ BSOS. vm. 

Gangoly, O. C., ‘Terra-cotta Found in Bhir Mound, Taxila Site in Lalata-tilaka 
Pose described in the Na(ya Sastra,’ The Hindu, Madras, 22 Feb. 1942 Sunday 
Journal Section. 

Garga, D. V., ‘On the Mimamsa Contents of the Katyayana Srauta Sutras and their 
Correspondence to Jaimini’s Sutras,’ AIOC. xv Session, Bombay, pp. 34-5, Sum- 
mary of papers. 

Grierson, G., ‘Paisach!, Pisachas, and Modem Pisacha,’ ZDMG. lxvi. 

Jayaswal, K. P., ‘Problems of Saka-Satavahana History,’ JBORS. xvi. 

Keith, A. B., ‘Pali Language of the Southern Buddhists,’ IHQ. i, 1925. 

Konow, Sten, ‘Home of Paisach!,’ ZDMG. lxtv. 

Levi, S., ‘Some Terms Employed in the Inscriptions of the Kshatrapas,’ I A. xxxin. 

‘Sur quelques termes dans les inscriptions de Kshatrapas,’ JA. 1902. 

‘Sur une langue pre-canonique du Bouddhisme,’ JA. 1912. 

‘Sur la recitation primitive des textes Bouddhiques,’ JA. 1915 

Ltiders, H., ‘Bruchstticke der buddhistichen Dramen. (Berlin, 1911), Keith, IHQ. i. 

Raghavan, V., ‘Subandhu,’ IHQ. xrx, 1943, pp. 69-71. 

‘The Original Paisach! Brihatkatha, Bharatakaumudi (Lucknow), pp. 575-588. 

‘Sobhanikas and Granthikas in Patanjali’s Mahabhashya,’ JOR. vi p. 364. 

Senart, E., ‘Mixed Classical Sanskrit and Monumental Literary Prakrit,’ (Eng. tr. by 
G. Grierson.) I A. xxi. 

Thomas, E. J., ‘Dr. Walleser on the Meaning of Pali,’ IHQ. iv pp. 773-775. 

Tucci, G., ‘Notes on Lankavatara,’ IHQ. iv. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


833 


Chapter XXI. 

History of the Tamil Language and Literature 


A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 


Primary Texts 

Ahananuru, V. Rajagopala Iyengar, 2nd edn. (Madras. 1934.) 

Rural, with Parimel-alagar’s Commentary. (Saiva Siddhanta Nurpadippu Kalagam, 
1939). 

Narrinai, (ed.) A. Narayanaswamy Aiyar. (Madras, 1914.) 

Padirruppattu, 2nd edn. V. S. Iyer. (Madras, 1920.) 

Sanga-llakkiyam (A collected edition of the entire Sangarn works), (ed.) S. Vaiyapuri 
Pillai. Saiva Siddhanta Samajam. (Madras, 1940.) 

Tolkappiyam (Text), (ed.) C. R. Namassivaya Mudaliar. (Madras, 1922-24.) 
Tolkappiyam, with commentaries of Nachchinarkkiniyar and Perasiriyar, Vol. I, (ed.) 
S. Vaiyapuri Pillai, (Madras, 1934.) Vol. II, (ed.) V. Doraiswamy Iyer, (Madras, 
1935.) 

Inscriptions 

Barnett, L. D., ‘The Sudi Inscription of V ikramaditya VI,’ El. xv, p. 106. 

Secondary Texts 

Bharata Natya Sastram, GOS. 1 and II. (Baroda, 1926.) 

Iraiyanar Ahdpporul, comm, by Nakkirar. (Madras, 1939.) 

Kalihgattuppararii, (ed.) K. Gopala Iyer. (Madras, 1923). 

Ramayatta (Kamban) (Tiruvavatara), (ed.) A. Kumaraswamy Pillai. (Madras, 1919.) 
Sengon-rarai-c-celavu. (Madurai, 1904.) 

Silappadikaram, with the commentary of Adiyarkkunallar. 2nd edn. V. S. Iyer. (Madras, 
1920.) 

Subhdshitavali of Vallabhadeva, (ed.) Peterson and Durgaprasad. (Bombay, 1886.) 


B. MODERN WORKS 

Belvelkar, S. K., Systems of Sanskrit Grammar. (Bombay, 1915.) 

Bloch, J., Structure Grammatical des Langues Dravidiennes. (Paris, 1946.) 

Bodmer, Frederick, The Loom of the Language, 3rd impression. (London, 1945.) 
Caldwell, A Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian Languages. (London, 1913.) 
Carleton, Patric, The Buried Empires. (London, 1944.) 

Keith, A. B., A History of Sanskrit Literature. (Oxford, 1928.) 

Mackay Ernest, The Early Indus Civilizations. (London, 1948.) 

Masson-Oursel and others, History of Civilization: Ancient India and Indian Civilization , 
(Eng. tr.) Dobie. (London, 1934.) 

Piggott, Stuart, Pre-hist oric India. (Harmondsworth, 1950.) 

Przyluski, J., ‘Nom du Riz,’ Etudes Asiatiques n, (Hanoi, 1925.) 

Raghava Iyengar, M., Perundogai. (Madurai, 1935-6.) 

Rawlinson, H. G., Intercourse between India and the Western World. (Cambridge, 1926.) 
Sastri, K. A. N., History of India i. Ancient India. (Madras, 1950.) 

Schoff, W. H., Periplus Maris Erythraei. See Bibl. to Ch. xii 
Srinivasa Iyengar, M., Tamil Studies. (Madras, 1914.) 

Subrahmanyan, T. N., Pandaittamil eluttukkal. (Madras, 1938.) 

Swamikkannu Pillai, L. D., Indian Ephemeris, i. (Madras, 1922.) 

Vaiyapuri Pillai, S., Tamilchchudarmanigal- (Madras, 1949.) 

Wintemitz, M., The History of Indian Literature, (Eng. tr.) Vols. i and it. (Calcutta, 
1927-33.) 


C. PERIODICALS 


Sen Tamil, v. and xli (1944). 
105 



834 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Chapter XXII 

Art and Architecture, Northern India. 


A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

Primary Texts 

Arthasastra. See Bibl. to chh. i-iii. 

Digha Nikaya (ed.) T. W. Rhys Davids and J. E. Carpenter, PTS. (London, 1890-1911.) 
Mahajanaka Jataka (No. 539), V. Fausboll. (London, 1877-97). (tr. by E. B. Cowell, 
Cambridge, 1895-1913.) 

Mahaparinibbana Sutta, SBE xi. (tr. by T. W. Rhys Davids in Dialogues of the Buddha 
II). 

Milindapahha, See Bibl. to Chh. i-iii. 

Satapatha Brahmana. See Bibl. to Chh. xiv-xv. 

Inscriptions 

Hultzsch, E., Asokan Inscriptions, CII. i. (Oxford, 1925.) 

Ltiders, H., List of Brahmi Inscriptions. See Bibl. to Chh. iv-v. 

Sircar, D. C., Select Inscriptions. (Calcutta, 1942.) 

Archaeological Reports and Memoirs 

Bhandarkar, D. R„ ‘Architectural Remains and Excavations at Nagari,’ MASI. No. 4. 
1920. 

‘Excavations at Besnagar,’ ASIAR. 1913-14, 1914-15. 

Bloch, T., ‘Notes on Bodh Gaya,’ ASIAR. 1908-09 

Chanda, R. P., ‘Beginnings of Art in Eastern India,’ MASI. no. 30, 1927. 

‘Mathura School of Sculpture,’ ASIAR. 1922-23. 

Marshall, Sir John, ‘The Monuments of Sanchi,’ ASIAR. 1913-14. 

Sahni, D. R., Archaeological Remains and Excavations at Bairat. (Jaipur, n. d.) 

Spooner, D. B., ‘Ratan Tata’s Excavations at Patahputra,’ ASIAR. 1912-13. 

Vogel, J. Ph, ‘Inscribed Gandhara Sculptures,’ ASIAR. 1903-04. 

‘Mathura School of Sculpture,’ ASIAR. 1906-07. 

‘Explorations at Mathura,’ ASIAR. 1911-12. 


B. MODERN WORKS 

Bachhofer, L., Early Indian Sculpture, 2 Vols. (Paris, 1929.) 

Brown, Percy, Indian Architecture, Buddhist and Hindu. (Bombay, n. d.) 

Codrington, K. de B., Ancient India from the Earliest Time to the Guptas. (London, 1927.) 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., History of Indian and Indonesian Art. (London 1927.) 
Cunningham, A., Stupa ofBharhut. (Calcutta, 1879.) 

Deydier, Henri, Contribution a T Etude de T Art du Gandhara. (Paris, 1951.) 

Fergusson, J. and Burgess, J., Cave Temples of India. (London, 1880.’) 

History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. (London, 1910.) 

Gangoly O. C., Indian Sculpture, an analysis of the characteristic qualities of Indian 
Plastic art, its ideas, motifs and technique, and a subjective estimate of its value and 
contribution to Sculptural art. (Calcutta, 1939.) 

Kramrisch, Stella, Indian Sculpture. (Calcutta, 1933.) 

Leeuw, J. W. Van Lohuizen-de, The Scythian Period. (Leiden, 1949.) 

Marshall, John, andFoucher, Alfred, Monuments of Sanchi, with the texts of the inscrip- 
tions edited, translated and annotated by N. G. Majumdar, 3 Vols (Calcutta 


‘Monuments of Ancient India,’ CHI. i. Ch. xxvi. (Cambridge 1922 ) 

Ray, Nihar Ranjan, Maurya and Sunga Art. (Calcutta, 1945.) 

Sahni, D. R., Guide to the Buddhist Ruins of Sarnath. 5th edn. (Delhi 1933 ) 
Smith, V. A., Jaina Stupa and other Antiquities from Mathura. (Allahabad i901 ) 
History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. (Oxford, 1930.) ’ 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


835 


Waddell, L. A., Report on the Excavations at Pdtalipura. (Calcutta, 1903.) 
Wauchope, R. S., Buddhist Cave Temples of India. (Calcutta, 1933.) 


C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 

Bloch, T., ‘Buddhistic Statue from Sravasti,’ JASB. lxvii, Pt. 1, p. 274. 

‘Two Inscriptions on Buddhist Images,’ El. vni p. 180. 

Buchthal, H., ‘The Western Aspect of Gandhara Sculpture,’ Pro. Brit. Acad. (1945). rev. 
by Sir J. Marshall, JRAS, 1946. 

Chakravarti, S. N., ‘The Origin of the Buddha Image,’ JUPHS. xvt (ii), 1943, pp. 63-75. 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., ‘Early Indian Architecture,’ Eastern Art, n pp. 209-25; m pp. 
181-217. 

Das Gupta, C. C., ‘Some Terra-cottas from Mathura preserved in the Francis Hopp 
Museum of Asiatic Art (Budapest),’ JRASB. rx, 1943, pp. 21 1-20. 

Dickinson, E., ‘Art in Gandhara,’ Introducing India. 1.1947. RASB. pp. 33-50. 

Foucher, A., ‘Sur l’interpretation de quatre reliefs de Bharhut,’ Revue des Arts Asiatiques; 

Annales du Musee Guimet, Tome xm. (i.) (Paris.) 

Gangoly, O. C., ‘The Antiquity of the Buddha Image,’ ‘The Cult of the Buddha,’ OZ. 
1938, 2-3, pp. 41-59. 

Heras, H., ‘The Origin, of the so-called Graeco-Buddhist Sculpture of Gandhara,’ JBBRAS. 
xu pp. 71-97. 

Hultzsch, E., ‘Bharhut Inscription,’ I A. 1892, p. 227. 

‘Inscription of Prince Vadha Pala Son of Dhanabhuti at Bharhut,’ JRAS. 1918 

p. 138. 

Ippel, A., ‘Statueten aus Pompeji,’ Archaeologischer Anzeiger, (Berlin, 1939), pp. 350-75. 

‘Hellenistisches und Indisches aus Pompeji,’ Forschungen und Fortschritte, xv 

pp. 325-7. 

Johnston, E. H., ‘Two Buddhist Scenes at Bhaja,’ JISOA. 1939, pp. 1-7. 

Kramrisch, Stella, ‘Indian Terra -cottas,’ JISOA. vn pp. 89 ff. 

Mookerjee, Radha Kumud, ‘N otes on Early Indian Art,’ JUPHS. xn(i) pp. 49-80 
Nagar, M. M., ‘A New Indo-Scythian Head from Mathura,’ JUPHS xm (i), 1940, 
p. 57. 

‘Some New Terra-cottas from Mathura,’ JUPHS. xvn (ii), 1944, pp. 73-5. 

Spooner, D. B., ‘Zoroastrian Period of Indian History,’ JRAS. 1915. 

Vogel, J. Ph., ‘Inscription of Kanishka’s Time,’ ABIA. ix. 1934, 

Wright, Philip, ‘The Enigma of Graeco-Buddhist Art in India,’ Illustrated London News 
24 Dec. 1938. 


Chapter XXIII 

Art and Architecture: South India 


A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

Primary Texts 

Sahga llakkiyam. See Bibl. to Chh. xvi-xvii. 

Inscriptions 

Chakravarti, N. P., ‘Note on the Painted Inscriptions in the Caves (of Ajanta).’ See 
G. Yazdani’s Ajanta Pt. in. (Oxford, 1946.) 

Chanda, Ramaprasada, ‘Some Unpublished Amaravatl Inscriptions,’ El. xv. 

Sastri, Hirananda, ‘Sanskrit Epigraphy,’ ASIAR. 1926-27. 

Lilders, H., List of Brahmi Inscriptions. See Bibl. to Chh. iv-v. 

Archaeological Reports and Memoirs 

Ahmad, Khwaja Muhammad, ‘Note on the Excavations and Survey of Prehistoric Sites 
in the Raichur District of Hyderabad,’ Annual Report of the Archaeological De- 
partment of H.E.H., Nizam's Dominions, (Hyderabad, 1935-36.) App, D. 
Anglade, Rev., ‘Dolmens of the Nilagiri and Pulney Hill,’ MASI. 1928 No. 36, 



836 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Burgess, J., ‘Notes on Bauddha Rock-cut Temples of Ajanta,’ ASWI. ix. (Bombay, 
1879.) 

‘Report on the Buddhist Cave Temples and their Inscriptions,’ ASWI. iv (London, 

1883). 

Madras Archaeological Reports, 1888. (Rock-cut temples at Bezwada, Mogala- 

razapuram and Undavalli; and Buddhist Stupas at Jelligerigudem and Buddhist 
rock-cut remains at Jelligerigudem.) 

‘The Buddhist Stupas of Amaravati and Jagayyape(a,’ A SSI. i. (London, 1887.) 

Krishna, M. H., ‘Excavations at Brahmagiri,’ MAR. 1940, 1942 (Mysore, 1943.) 

Krishnaswamy, V. D., ‘Megalithic Types in South India,’ Ancient India , 1949. No. 5 

Kuraishi, Muhammad Hamid, ‘Trial Excavations at Alluru, Gummadidurju and Nagar- 
junakopda,’ ASL4.R. 1926-27. 

Longhurst, A. H., ‘Buddhist Monuments at Guntupalle, Kistna District. The Buddhist 
Antiquities of Nagaijunakon^a,’ MASI. No. 54. (Delhi, 1938.) 

Madras Archaeological Reports, 1916-17. 

The Story of the Stupa. (Colombo, 1936.) 

Paramasivan, S., ‘Technique of the Painting Process in the Cave Temples of Ajanta,’ Annual 
Report of the Archaeological Department of H.E.H. Nizam's Dominions. (Hyderabad, 
1936-7.) App. A. 

Ramachandran, T. N., ‘Buddhist Sculptures from a Stupa near Goli,’ Bulletin, Madras 
Government Museum. (Madras, 1929.) 

Rea, A., ‘South Indian Buddhist Antiquities,’ ASI. New Imperial Servies, xv. (Madras, 
1894.) 

‘Excavation: Pre-Historic Caves, Perungulam.’ Annual Report of the Archaeolo- 
gical Survey. (Madras, 1910-11.) 

‘Buddhist Monasteries on the Gurubhaktakopda and Durgakopda at RSmtirtham,’ 

ASIAR. 1910-11, pp. 78-88. 

‘Excavations at Amaravati,’ ASIAR. 1908-09. 

Sewell, Robert., List of the Antiquarian Remains in the Presidency of Madras. (Madras, 
1892.) 

_ Sivaramamurti, C., ‘Amaravati Sculptures in the Madras Government Museum,’ Madras 
Government Museum Bulletin, General Section, iv. (Madras, 1942.) 

Yazdani, G., ‘Excavations: Kadkal and Maski,’ Annual Report of the Archaeological 
Department of H.E.H. Nizam's Dominions, (Hyderabad, 1936-37.) 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Aravamuthan, T. G., South Indian Portraits. (London, 1930.) 

South Indian Portrait Sculpture. (London, 1931.) 

Breeks, J. W., Primitive Monuments of Nilagiris. (London, 1873.) 

Brown, Percy, Indian Architecture, Buddhist and Hindu. (Bombay) 

Indian Painting Heritage of India Series. (Calcutta, 1947.) 

Childe, V., Gordon, Progress of Archaeology. Thinkers’ Library, No. 102. (London 
1944.) 

Coomaraswamy, A. K., History of Indian and Indonesian Art. (London, 1927.) 

Cunningham, A., Bhilsa Topes. (London, 1854.) 

Dubreuil, G. J, Ancient History of the Deccan. Eng. tr. V. S. Swaminatha Dikshitar 
(Pondicherry, 1920.) 

Archaeologie du Sud del'Inde. Tome n. Iconographie. (Paris, 1914) 

Fergusson^J., and Burgess J., A History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. (London, 

Fergusson, J. and Burgess, J., Cave Temples of India. (London, 1880.) 

Foucher, A., Beginnings of the Buddhist Art and Other Essays. Tr. by L. A Thomas and 
F. W. Thomas. (Paris and London, 1917.) 

Gopinatha Rao, T. A., Hindu Iconography i. Pt. i. (Madras, 1914.) 

Gangoly, O. C., Indian Architecture. (Bombay, 1942.) 

Griffiths, J., Paintings in the Buddhist Caves of Ajanta, 2 Vols. (London 1896-97 ) 

Grtinwedel, A ., Buddhist Art in India. Eng. tr. J. Burgess. (London 1901.) 

Havell, E. B., Indian Sculpture and Painting. (London, 1908.) 

Handbook of Indian Art. (London, 1920.) 

Hunt, E. H., Hyderabad Cairns. (Bombay, 1916.) 

Kabir, Humayun (ed.) Archaeology in India. (Delhi, 1950.) 

Kramrisch, St., Indian Sculpture, Heritage of India Series. (Oxford 1933 ) 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


837 


Mehta, N. C., Indian Painting. (Bombay, 1936.) 

Pattabhiraman, P. Z., Les Fouilles d’Arikamedou. (Poduke). (Pondicherry, 1946.) 

Sastri, K. A. N., Dravidian Literatures. (Madras, 1949.) 

History of India, Part I. Ancient India. (Madras, 1950.) 

Smith, V. A., The Oxford History of India. (Oxford, 1920.) 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. (Oxford, 1911.) 

Subrahmanyan, K. R., Buddhist Remains in Andhra and the History of the Andhra, a. d. 
225-610. (Madras, 1932.) 

Srinivasa Iyengar, P. T., History of the Tamils, from the Earliest Times to a.d. 600. (Mad- 
ras, 1929.) 

Taylor, Medows, Papers on The Megalithic Tombs and other Ancient Remains in the 
Deccan. (Hyderabad, 1941.) 

Venkataramanayya, N., Origin of the South Indian Temples. (Madras, 1930.) 

Venkatarama Ayyar, K. R., The Manual of Pudukkottai State II. (Pudukkottai, 1940.) 

Vogel, J. Ph., Buddhist Art in India, Ceylon and Java. (Oxford, 1936.) 

Winstedt, R. (ed.) Indian Art. (London, 1947.) 

Yazdani, G., Ajanta (Text) i-iii. (Oxford, 1930-46.) 

C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 

Aiyappan, A., ‘Rock-cut Cave-Tombs of Feroke, S. Malabar,’ QJMS. xxm. No. 3 
(1933). 

Aravamudan, T. G., ‘A Fragment of Ancient Indian Painting in the Dekhan,’ JOR. xm. 

Bird, James, ‘Observations on the Bactrian and the Mithraic Coins in the Cabinet of 
B.B.R.A.S.,’ JBBRAS. 1843. 

Burgess, J., ‘A Note on Early Roman Intercourse with India,’ IA. ii, 1873. 

‘Asiatic Societies (March, 1883),’ I A. xn. 

Childe, Gordon, ‘Megaliths,’ Ancient India, 1947-48, No. 4, 

Gupte, Y. R., ‘Inscriptional, Architectural and Sculptural Value of Pantfava-LeneCaves 
at Nasik,’ Potdar Commemoration Volume. (Poona, 1950.) 

Hunt, E. H„ ‘Hyderabad Cairns,’ Journal of the Hyderabad Archaeological Society, July 
1916. 

Lyall, Miss E., ‘Taranath’s Account of the Magadha Kings, translated from Vassilief’s 
work on Buddhism,’ IA. iv. 

Myres, John, L., ‘Pre-historic Archaeology and Ethnology in Southern India,’ Man 
xxx, 1930. India No. 1 33 p. 172. 

Naik, A. V., ‘Studies in Nagarjunakonda Sculptures,’ BDCRI. n, 1941, pp. 50-118, 263- 
300. 

Panchamukhi, R. S., ‘Dolmens and Cairns of Karpatak,’ Journal of the Bombay University, 
xiv. Pt. iv. (1946). 

Srinivasan, K. R., ‘Megalithic Burials and Urn-fields of South India in the Light of Tamil 
Literature and Tradition,’ Ancient India, 1946,. No. 2, 

Yazdani, G., ‘Sculpture in the Deccan — An Artistic Study,’ ABORI. Silver Jubilee Volume. 


Chapter XXIV 

Cultural and Colonial Expansion 

A. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

Jheya Prakasa Sastra, Sino-Indian Studies ii. P.C. Bagchi, 

Tibetan Texts and Documents I, F. W. Thomas. (London, 1935.) 

Yuan Chwang's Travels in India, Th. Watters. (London, 1904.) 

B. MODERN WORKS 

Bagchi, P. C., Pre- Aryan and Pre- Dravidian in India. (Calcutta, 1929.) 

India and China. A thousand years of Sino-Indian Cultural Relations. (Calcutta, 

1944). 

Coedes, G., Histoire Ancienne de Etats Hindouises d’Extreme Orient. (Hanoi, 1944.) 
Levi, S., ‘Ptolemee, La Niddesa et la Bphatkatha,’ Etudes Asiatiques ii. (Hanoi, 1925) 
(Eng. tr.) Sino-Indian Studies n. 



838 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Majumdar, R. C., Suvarrtadvipa, 2 Vols. (Calcutta, 1937-39.) 

Stein, Sir Aurel, Ancient Khotan. (Oxford, 1907.) 

C. ARTICLES IN PERIODICALS 

Cutts, Elmer, H., ‘Chinese Indian Contacts Prior to the Latter Half of the First Century,’ 
IHQ. xiv pp. 486-502. 

Pelliot, P., ‘Le Fou-nan,’ BEFEO. ih. 

‘Duex Itineraires de Chine en Inde,’ BEFEO. iv. 

- — ‘Review of the English Translation of Chau Ju Kua by Hirth and Rockhill,’ 
Voting Pao xm. 


Chapter XXV 


Allan, J., British Museum Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India. (London, 1936.) 
Banerjea, J. N., Development of Hindu Iconography. (Calcutta, 1941.) 

Bhandarkar, D. R., Carmichael Lectures, Second Series. (Calcutta, 1921.) 

Bhattacharya, P. N., ‘A Hoard of Silver Punch-marked Coins from Pumea.’ MASI. No. 
62. (Delhi, 1940.) 

Chakravarti, S. K., Studies in Ancient Indian Numismatics. 

Cunningham, A., Coins of the Indo-Scythians and Kushanas, Parts I & n. (London, 
1892-94.) 

Coins of Ancient India. (London, 1891.) 

Foucher, A., Beginnings of Buddhist Art and Other Essays. Eng. tr. L. A. Thomas 
and F. W. Thomas. (Paris and London, 1917.) 

Gardner, P., British Museum Catalogue of Coins of the Greek and the Scvthic Kings of 
Bactria and India. (London, 1886.) 

Mattingly, H., Roman Coins, From the Earliest Times to the Fall of the Western Empire. 
(London, 1928.) 

Rapson, E. J., BMC A WK. See Biblio. to Chh. iv-v. 

‘The Successors of Alexander the Great,’ CHI i. See Bibl. to Chh iv-v 

Indian Coins. (Strassburg, 1898.) 

Singhal, C. R., Bibliography of Indian Coins, Part I, Non-Muhammadan Series. 
(Bombay, 1950.) 

Smith V. A., Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum, Calcutta I. (Oxford, 1906.) 
Von Sallet, A, Die Nachfolger Alexanders des Grossen. (1879). 

Walsh, E. J., ‘The Punch-marked Coins from Taxila,’ MASI. No. 59. (Delhi 1939.) 
Whitehead, R. B., The Panjab Museum Catalogue of Coins, i. (Oxford, 1914.) 

B. ARTICLES IN JOURNALS, PERIODICALS ETC. 

Aravamudan, T. G., ‘A Pandyan Issue of Punch-marked Puranas,’ JNSI vi dd 1-4 
Durga ^Prasad, ‘Shamiwala (Bijnor Dt.) Hoard of Silver Punch-marked Corns,’ JNSI. 

‘Observations on Different Types of Silver Punch-marked Coins, their Periods 

and Locale, JRASB. Num. Suppl. xliu, pp. 375-400. 

Ghose, Ajit, ‘Rare Oblong Coins from Rajgir,’ JNSI. i, 1939, pp. 5-8 
Kar, Rabis C., ‘The Mithuna on Some Early Indian Coins ’ PIHC tv 1940 nn 5S f 
Kennedy, J., ‘The Secret of Kanishka,’ JRAS. 1912. ’ y4 °’ PP ' 55 *’ 

Kosambi D. D. , ‘On the Study and Metrology of Silver Punch-marked Coins,’ NIA. iv, 
1941, pp. 1-35, 49-76. ^ ’ 

Mirashi, V. V., ‘A Large Hoard of Satavahana Coins,’ IHQ, xvi. 503 f 

‘A New Hoard of Satavahana Coins at Tarhala,’ JNSI. ir 

‘Siri-Sadavahana,’ JNSI. vii. 


Sewell, R., ‘Roman Coins found in India,’ JRAS. 1904. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


839 


Spooner, D. B., ‘A New Find of Punch-marked Coins,’ ASIAR. 1905-6, pp. 150-5. 

Young, G. M., ‘A New Hoard from Taxila (Bhir Mound),’ Ancient India (1946), 
No. 1. 

Walsh, E. H. C., ‘A Comparative Study of Patraha (Pumea) Hoard of Silver Punch- 
marked Coins,’ JNSI. iv, 1942 (1943), pp. 81-82. 

‘A Note on Six Silver Punch-marked Coins described by Babu Shri Nath Sah,’ 

JNSI. v, 1943, pp. 13-16. 

‘Some Notes on Punch-marked Copper-band found at Patna,’ JBORS. 

‘Some Notes regarding Marks on the Silver Punch-marked Coins found in Goluk- 

pur in Patna and at Gorho-ghat,’ JBORS. xxv pp. 1-10. 

‘Notes on Two Hoards of Silver-Punch-marked Coins, one found at Ramna and 

one at Machchua,’ JBORS. xxv pp. 91-117. 

Supplementary Note on Two Hoards of Punch-marked Coins.’ JBORS. xxvi, 

Pt. ii, 1940, pp. 168-9. 

‘Paila Hoard of Punch-marked Coins,’ JNSI. n, 1940. pp. 15-78. 

‘A Note on Shamiwals (Bijnor Dt.) Hoard of Silver Coins,’ JNSI. n, 1940, p. 79. 

‘Notes on the Silver Punch-marked Coins and Copper Punch-marked Coins in the 

British Museum,’ JRAS. 1941, pp. 223-32. 

‘Examination of a Hoard of 105 Silver Punch-marked Coins found in the United 

Provinces in 1916,’ JNSI. m, 1941, pp. 1-20. 

Whitehead, R. B., ‘Notes on Indo-Greek Numismatics,’ NC. 1923, p. 298. 



CHRONOLOGY 


B.C. 

327 Alexander’s invasion of India. 

325 Alexander’s return from India. 

325-23 Chandragupta’s War of Independence; conquest of Magadha; accession to 
sovereignty. Death of Alexander. 

321 Death of Perdiccas; second partition of Alexander’s empire at Triparadisus. 
312 Seleucus Nicator well established in power; foundation of the Seleucidan Era. 
304 Seleucus’ invasion of India; his defeat; conclusion of treaty with Chandragupta 
Maurya; the arrival of Megasthenes at Chandragupta’s court. 

299 Chandragupta’s migration to Mysore, and the end of his reign. 

299-74 or 72 Bindusara. 

293 Antiochus I became joint ruler with his father Seleucus. 

274 or 272 Aioka’s accession and Coronation. 

266 Antiochus n became joint ruler with his father Antiochus I. 

264-63 Kalinga War. 

259-58 Asoka’s conversion to Buddhism. 

252 (at the latest) 

Rock Edict xiii; contemporary Greek kings — Antiochus II of Syria 261-246 
b. c., Ptolemy Philadelphus of Egypt (287-247), Antigonus Gonatas of 
Macedon (278-239), Magas of Cyrene (300-C.250), and Alexander of 
Corinth (252-244). 

251 Buddhist Council at Pataliputra. 

250 Diodotus of Bactria assumed independent sovereignty. 

246 Seleucus II succeeded to the throne. 

240 (or earlier) 

Diodotus II became the ruler of Bactria, battle of Ancyra. 

236-30 Death of Asoka. 

Foundation of the Satavahana empire; accession of Simuka (Srimukha). 
234-184 Successors of Asoka. 

212 (or earlier) 

Death of Diodotus II; Euthydemus seized the throne of Bactria. 

212-195 Kapha (Krishna) Satavahana. 

206 Antiochus Ill’s Indian expedition. 

196-180 Kharavela of Kalinga. 

194-185 Sri Satakarpi. 

193-92 Kharavela’s expedition to the West disregarding Satakarni and against the 
Bhojakas. 

190 Nile-Red Sea canal opened. Death of Euthydemus. Demetrius I became 
king of Bactria. 

190-180 Demetrius’s invasion of India; foundation of Euthydemia; conquest of por- 
tions of the Panjab and Sind. 

188 Kharavela’s first expedition to the North. 

186 Kharavela’s expedition to the Gangetic valley 
185 Kharavela’s expedition to the South. 

1 84 Kharavela’s second expedition to the North, Brihadratha Maurya assassinated 
by Pushyamitra Sunga; Pushyamitra’s usurpation of the throne of Magadha. 
184-148 Pushyamitra Sunga. 

184-167 Satisiri (Saktikumara) Satavahana. 

176 Ytie-chi defeated by Hiung-nu; migration to Ta-hia. 

175 Eucratides seized Bactria. 



CHRONOLOGY 


841 


B.C. 

175-164 Antiochus IV of Syria. 

166-111 Satakarpill. 

160 Apollodotus. 

160-156 War between Demetrius and Eucratides. 

155 Menander’s invasion of India; assassination of Eucratides; and accession 
ofHeliocles. 

150 Saka migration to the south. 

148-140 Agnimitra. 

145 Menander’s death. 

140-133 Sujyeshtha. 

135 Barbarian conquest of Bactria. 

133-129 Part of Ytle-chi subjugated by Wu-Sun. 

133-123 Sumitra. 

126 Ytle-chi ruling in the north of Oxus with their capital at Kian-she; Ta-hia 
subject to their authority; Chang-Kien’s embassy to the West. 

125-100 Antialcidas 
123-114 Vajramitra. 

122 Andhra occupation of Magadha. 

114-82 Bhagavata 

100-50 Scythian conquest of Kathiawar and Malwa 
82-72 Devabhuti 
75-50 Maues (Moga) 

72-63 Vasudeva (Kapva) 

69-60 Vonones 
63-49 BhOmitra 

63-25 Liaka Kusulaka, Satrap of Chhatra and Chukhsa under Moga. 

50-40 Spalihores and Spalgadames 
50 AzesI 
50 Hermes 
49-37 Narayapa 
37-27 Susarman 
25-1 Mahakshatrapa Patika 


15 Soijasa, Kshatrapa of Mathura 

19- 46 Gondophares 

20- 24 Hala 

25 Tiravahrana, Kshatrapa of Pushpapura. 

25-64 Kujula Kadphises 

25-46 Subjugation of Ansi, i.e. the Indo-Parthians 
25-71 Sundara Satakarpi, Chakora Satakarpi, Siva Svati 
35-90 Kshatrapa invasions of the Satavahana country 
45 Hippalus’s discovery of the monsoon. 

46-56 Abdagases 

64-78 Wima Kadphises (Yen-Kao-Chen). 

65 Conquest of Taxila and Panjab by Wima Kadphises 
72-95 Gautamlputra Sri Satakarpi; overthrow of Nahapana (but see p. 278) 

78 Accession of Kanishka I, and the foundation of the Saka Era 
80-88 Conquest of Sarnath 

81 Kharapallana and Vanaspara Satraps in Benares 

89 Zeda inscription; Kushan conquest of Eastern India: meeting of the Buddhist 
Council at Peshawar. 

96 Kshatrapa Vespasi t 
96-119 Pulumayi II 

101 Kanishka’s northern expedition and death 


106 



842 


CHRONOLOGY 


101-106 

106-138 

119 

120-149 

130 

130-150 

140-150 

150 

150-156 

152-176/7 

157-159 

150-189 

180-210 

183-225 

200 

210-230 

225-250 

248-249 

250 

250-275 

255-275 

300 

300-325 

426 

484 

486 


Vasishka 
Huvishka 
Kanishka II 
Sri Satakami 

Chashtana; Rudradaman, a Kshatrapa under Chashtana 
Rudradaman I’s reconquest of territories from the Andhras. 

Rudradaman became Mahakshatrapa. 

Junagadh inscription of Rudradaman. 

Sivasri Pulumayi 
Vasudeva I. 

Sivakhada Satakarni 
Yajfla Sri Satakarpi 
Kanishka HI 

Madhariputa Svami Sakasena, Vijaya, Sri Chapija Satakarpi, Pulumayi IV. 
Bodhi dynasty founded 
Vasudeva II 

Ikshvaku Chamtamula (Santamula I) 

Foimdation of the Kalachuri or the Chedi era by Isvarasena 
Satavahanas and their feudatories in Kuntala; Haritlputa Viphukhada 
Satakampi 

Ikshvaku Vira Purushadatta 
Vakataka Vindhyaiakti I. 

Bfihatphalayana Jayavarman; Siihhavarman Pallava; the Pallava conquest 
of the Andhrapatha; the end of Ikshvaku rule. 

Pallava Sivaskandavarman. 

Bhulupda 
Eran inscription 
Subandhu. 


Successors of Rudradaman I 


181 End of Damaghsada’s reign; Abhira Rudrabhuti 
181-197 Mahakshatrapa Rudrasimha 
183 Abhira power established in Nasik 
188-190 Mahakshatrapa ISvaradatta 
C. 190 isvarasena (Abhira) at Nasik 
197-199 Mahakshatrapa JIvadaman 

199- 200 Rudrasena I Kshatrapa 

200- 222 Rudrasena I Mahakshatrapa 
222 Damasena I 

222- 223 Sanghadaman 

223- 238 Damasena H Mahakshatrapa 
232-233 DSmajada H Kshatrapa 
234-238 VIradaman Kshatrapa 

238- 239 Yasodaman Kshatrapa and Mahakshatrapa 

239- 250 Vijayasena Mahakshatrapa 
250-255 Damajada Sri ni 
255-277 Rudrasena H. 

275-278 Visvasimha Kshatrapa. 

278-282 Visvasimha Mahakshatrapa 
278-282 Bhartridaman Kshatrapa 
282-297 Bhartridaman Mahakshatrapa 

290 Sassanian conquest of the W. Kshatrapas 
293-304 Visvasena Kshatrapa 



CHRONOLOGY 


843 


A.D. 

304-316 Rudrasimha II Kshatrapa 
316-332 Yasodamanll 

Rudradaman II Mahakshatrapa 
348-378 Rudrasena III Mahakshatrapa 
382-384 Svami Simhasena 
384-388 Svami Rudrasena IV 

386 Svamidasa. Svami Satyasimha Mahakshatrapa 
388 Rudrasimha III Mahakshatrapa 
401-02 The Gupta conquest of the W. Kshatrapa kingdom 
436 Rudrasena. 


KINGS OF CEYLON 


Geiger Mendis 


247-207 

207-197 

197-187 

187-177 

177-155 

155-145 

145-101 

101-107 

77-59 

59-50 

44 

50-44 

44-29 

29-17 

17-3 

3-A.D.9 


— Devanampiya Tissa (a contemporary of Asoka) 

— Uttiya 

— Mahasiva 

— Sura Tissa. 

— Sena and Guttika 

— Asela (Brother of Dev. Tissa) 

— Elara (Chola) 

— Dufthagamani 
137-119 Saddha Tissa 
119-109 Lanja Tissa 

109 Vatthagamarji 

— Khallatanaga 

— Five Damijas: Pujahattha, Bahiya, Panayamara. Pi|ayamara, 

DaUhika. 

96-84 Vafthagamapi (Second Period) 

77-63 Mahachuli Maha Tissa 
63-51 Choranaga 


A.D. 

9-12 

12-16 

16-38 

38-66 

66-78 

78-88 

88-91 

91- 92 
92 

92- 95 
95-101 
101-110 
110-118 
118-124 
124-168 
168-171 
171-193 
193-199 


— Anula and Tissa 

— Anula and her consorts: Siva, Vajuka, Darubhajika Tissa. 

Niliya, Anula. 

— Ku(akanna Tissa (Abaya) 

22 b.c.-a.d. 7 Bhatikabhaya 

7-19 Mahadhatthika Mahanaga 
19-29 Amapdagamapi 
29-32 Kapirajanu Tissa 
32-33 Chulabhaya 
33 Slvali 

— Interregnum 

36-43 I]anaga (3 yrs. in exile). 

43-52 Chapdamukha Siva 
52-60 Yasalalaka Tissa. 

Subha or Subharaja 
67-111 Vasabha 
111-114 Vankanasika Tissa 
114-136 Gajabahukagamapi 
136-143 Mahallakanaga 



844 


CHRONOLOGY 


Geiger Mendis 


199-223 143-167 

223-241 167-186 

241-243 186-188 

243- 244 188-189 

244- 263 189-209 

263-285 209-231 
285-293 231-240 

293-295 240-242 

295- 296 242-243 

296- 300 243-247 

300-302 247-249 
302-315 249-263 

315-325 263-274 
325-352 274-302 


Bhatika Tissa. 

Kanitlha Tissa 
Khujjanaga 
Kunchanaga 
Sirinaga I 
Voharika Tissa 
Abhayanaga 
Sirinaga II 
Vijaya (Kumara). 

Samgha Tissa. 

Samgha (or Sirisariigha) bodhi 

Gothakabhaya 

Jettha Tissa 

Mahasena. 





■S I TO VIII 


COINS 

PLAT F IX 

MONOGRAMS 



PLATE I 


Sophytes. Obv. Head of King to r. inside dotted border. Helmeted head 
adorned with a laurel wreath and a cheek plate. Rev. Cock strutting to r., 
caduceus behind. Legend in r. field ZO0 YT OY. At round. Ch. vi, p. 142. 


2. Diodotus (II). Obv. Diademed head of King to r. inside dotted border. Rev. 
Naked Zeus stands to 1 . hurling thunderbolt, tegis on extended I. arm. Fillet 
below the aegis. Legend BAZIAEOZ mr. field, A 1 0 AOT 0 Y in 1. A' round. 
Ch. vi, p. 147. 

3. Euthydemus I. Obv. Diad. bust of King to r. inside dotted border. Rev. 
Heracles seated on rock with club resting on rock. BAZIAEOZ and mono- 
gram in r. field. EYOY AHMO Y in 1 . Dotted border. Ground. Ch. vi, p. 150. 

4. Barbarous imitation of Euthydemus I’s coin described above. Obv. Diad. bust 
of King to r. Rev. Heracles seated on rock with club resting on knee. Legend 
blundering and illegible. Ch. vi, p. 149. 

5. Demetrius. Obv. Diad. head of King adorned with elephant’s scalp to r. Rev. 
Heracles stands facing, crowning himself with r. hand, with club and lion's 
skin in his 1. hand. BAZIAEOZ r. AHMHTPIOY 1. Monogram in 1. field. 
At round. Tetradrachm. Ch. vi, p. 156. 

6. Antimachus. Obv. Diad. head of King with kausia (Macedonian head-dress) to 
r. Rev. Poseidon stands facing, with trident in r. hand and palm bound with 
fillet in 1. BAZIAEOZ 0EOY r. ANTIMAXOY 1 . Monogram in r. field. 
At Obol. Ch. vi, p. 160. 

7. Agathocles. Obv. Maneless lion to r. in incuse. BAZIAEOZ above, AT A- 
0OKAE[OYZ] below. Rev. Dancing girl (? goddess) witha flower in r. hand. 
Brahmi legend raja (tie) in r. field, Agathukla (yesha) in 1 . .E Square. Ch. vi, 

p. 158- 

8. Eucratides. Obv. Diad. and helmeted head of King to r. inside astragalus 
border. Crested helmet adorned with 'ear and horn of bull’. Rev. Dioscuri to 
r. on prancing horses with lances at rest. BAZIAEOZ MET A A 0 Y above , 
EYKPATIAOY below. Monogram in r. field. At tetradrachm. Ch. m, 
p. 164. 


9. Eucratides. Obv. Diad. and helmeted bust of King to r. BAZIAEOZ 
MET AAOY EYKPATIAOY on three sides. Rev. Dioscuri as above. Khar- 
oshthi legend Maharajasa above, Evukratulasa below. Monogram in r. corner 
below. IE square. Ch. vi, p. 164. 


10. Eucratides. Obv. Diad. bust of King to r. within astragalus border. Rev. Apollo 
standing to 1. with bow and arrow in bis left and right hands. BAZIAEOZ r., 
EYKPATIAOY 1 . Monogram in 1 . field. At tetradrachm. Ch. vi, pp. 163-4! 





PLATE II 


1. Heliocles. Obv. Diad. bust of King to r. Astragalus border. Rev. Zeus stand- 
ing to 1. with thunderbolt and long sceptre in his r. and 1. hands. B A Z I A Efl Z 
r., AIKA10Y below, HAIOKAEOYZ 1 . Monogram in 1 . field. At tetra- 
drachm. Ch. vi, p. 167. 

2. Antialcidas. Obv. Diad. bust of King with kausia tor. BAZ I AEflE NIKH0O- 
POY above, ANTI AAK I AOY below. Rev. Zeus seated on throne with Nike 
in extended r. hand and long sceptre in 1. Forepart of an elephant with trunk 
upraised in 1. field and monogram in r. Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa Jayad- 
harasa above, Amtialakitasa below. At round. Ch. vi, p. 180. 

3 . Lysias. Obv. Diad. and helmeted bust of King tor. B A Z I A E fl Z ANIKHTOY 
above, A Y Z 1 0 Y below. Rev. Heracles with club and lion’s skin crowns him- 
self with r. hand. Partially legible Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa apadihatasa 
above, Lisiasa below. Monogram in 1. field. At round. Ch. vi, p. 177. 

4. Antialcidas. Obv. Diad. bust of King to r. Gr. legend as on No. 2. Rev. En- 
throned Zeus with Nike and forepart of an elephant, and Kharoshthi legend as on 
No. 2. Monogram r. below throne seat. At round. Ch. vi, p. 180. 

5. Lysias. Obv. Diad. head of King adorned with elephant’s scalp to r. Gr. legend 
as on No. 3. Rev. Device, legend, and monogram as on No. 3. At round. Ch. vi, 
p. 177- 

6. Apollodotus. Obv. Diad. bust of King to r. BAZI AEflZ ZflTHPOE K A I 
0IAOTTATOPOZabove, ATTOAAOAOTOY below. Rev. Pallas with aegis 
on 1. arm hurls thunderbolt with r. hand; incomplete Kharoshthi legend Maha- 
rajasa tratarasa above, Apaladatasa below. Monogram in 1. field. At round. 
Ch. vi, p. 171. 

7. Menander. Obv. Diad. and helmeted bust of King to r. BAZIAEflZ ZflTH- 
POZ above, MENANAPOY below. Rev. Pallas as on No. 6. Kharoshthi 
legend Maharajasa tratarasa above, Menadrasa below. Monogram in r. field. 
At round. Ch. vi, p. 175. 

8. Apollodotus. Obv. Elephanttor. Circular legend BAZIAEflZ ATTOAAO- 
AOT OY ZflTHPOZ. Rev. Bull to r. Circular Kharoshthi legend Mahara- 
jasa Apaladatasa tratarasa. No monogram. At round. Ch. vi, p. 170. 

9. Menander. Obv. Diad. bust of King to 1. with javelin over shoulder; con- 
tinuous circular legend MENANAPOY BAZIAEflZ ZflTHPOZ. Rev. 
Pallas to r. hurling thunderbolt. Continuous legend Menadrasa maharajasa tra- 
tarasa. Monogram in r. field. At round. Ch. vi, p. 175. 

10. Menander. Obv. Helmeted bust of Pallas to r. Circular Gr. legend as on 
No. 9. Rev. Owl to r. Circular Kharoshthi legend as on No. 9. Monogram in 
r. field. At round. Ch. vi, p. 175. 

11. Strato I. Obv. Diad. bust of King to r. BAZIAEflZ ETT I <t> A N O YZ 
ZflTHPOZ above, ZTPATflNOZ below. Rev. Pallas hurling thunderbolt 
to 1. Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa prachachhasa tratarasa above, Stratasa 
below. Monogram in r. field. At round. Ch. vi, p. 176. 

12. Apollodotus. Obv. Elephant walking to r. Monogram below. BAZIAEflZ 
1., ATTOAAOAOTOY above, ZflTHPOZ r. Rev. Bull standing to r. 
Monogram below. Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa r., Apaladatasa above, 
tratarasa 1. At square. Ch. vi, p. 170. 

13. Menander. Obv. Helmeted bust of Pallas to r. BAZIAEflZ 1., ZflTHPOZ 
above, MENANAPOY r. Rev. Circular buckler with bull’s head in centre. 
Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa r., tratarasa above, Menadrasa 1. Monogram in 
r. bottom. A£ square. Ch. vi, p. 175. 



PLATE III 


1. Antimachus Nicephorus. Obv. Nike standing to 1. with palm in r. and fillet in 
1. hand. Continuous circular legend ANTIMAXOY BAZIAEflZ NIKH- 
<J>0P0 Y. Monogram in 1. field. Rev. Diad. King on prancing horse to r. Con- 
tinuous circular Kharoshthi legend Amtimakhasa Maharajasa jayadharasa. JR. 
round. Ch. vi, p. 160. 

2. Hemiaeus. Obv. Diad. bust of King to r. BAZIAEflZ ZC1THP0Z above, 
EPM A I OY below. Rev. Enthroned Zeus to 1. Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa 
tratarasa above, Eramayasa below. Monogram in r. field. ,R round. Ch. vi, 
p. 183. 

3. Hermaeus and Calliope. Obv. Jugate and diad. busts of King and Queen to r. 
BAZIAEflZ ZflTHPOZ EPMAIOY above, KAI K AAAI OTTHZ below. 
Rev. King on prancing horse to r. Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa tratarasa 
Heramavasa above, Kaliyapaya below. Monogram in r. field. .R round. Ch. 
vi, p. 183. 

4. Hermaeus and Kujula Kadphises. Obv. Diad. bust of Hermaeus to r. Corrupt 
partially legible Gr. legend BAZIAEflZ ZTHPOZZY EPMAIOY. Rev. 
Heracles with club and lion’s skin stands facing. Circular Kharoshthi legend 
mostly legible Kujula Kasasa Kushana yavugasa dhramathidasa. .E round. 
Ch. vi, p. 183. 

5. Hermaeus. Obv. Bearded bust of deity (or King?) wearing Phrygian cap to r. 
B A Z I A EflZ 1., ZflTHPOZ above, EPMAIOY r. Rev. Horse trotting to r. 
Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa r., tratarasa above, lleramayasa 1. Monogram 
below the horse. JE square. Ch. \i, p. 183. 

6. Maues. Rev. Caduceus. BAZIAEflZ r., MAYOY 1 . Monogram in 1 . 
field. Obv. Elephant’s head to r. within astragalus border. .E round. Ch. vii, 
P- 195- 

7. Maues. Obv. Zeus stands to 1. BAZIAEflZ B AZI AEON METAAOY 
above, MAYOY below. Rev. Nike with fillet m her extended r. hand standing 
to r. Kharoshthi legend rajatirajasa mahatasa, below Moasa. Monogram in r. 
field. Al round. Ch. vii, p. 197. 

8. Maues. Obv. Elephant walks to r. with trunk upraised inside square frame. 
Gr. legend outside the frame as on No. 7. Rev. Deity seated on a raised seat 
inside square frame. Kharoshthi legend as on No. 7 but illegible. JE square. 
Ch. vii, p. 199. 

9. Azes I. Obv. Zeus as on No. 7. Partiallv legible Gr. legend BAZIAEflZ 
BAZIAEflN MET AAOY ; AZOY below. Rev. Nike as on No. 7. 
Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa rajarajasa mahatasa, below Ayasa. Monogram 
in r. field. Al round. Ch. vii, p. 205. 

10. Spalirises. Obv. King wearing long coat holding a weapon in his extended r. 
hand stands to 1. inside square frame. Partly legible Gr. legend B A Z I A E Cl Z 
BAZIAEflN MET AAOY ZITAAIPIZOY. R ev . Enthroned Zeus. 
Kharoshthi legend mostly legible Maharajasa r., Mahatakasa above, Spaliri- 
shasa 1. iE square. Ch. vii, p. 203. 

11. Azes 1. Obv. King on horseback with lance at rest. Gr. legend as on No. 9. Rev. 
Zeus standing facing with long sceptre in 1. hand and thunderbolt in r. hand. 
Kharoshthi legend as on No. 9. Kharoshthi ji on r. field, and monogram on 
1. Al round. Ch. vii, p. 205. 

12. Spalahora with his son Spalagadama. Obv. King on horseback inside square 
frame. Partly legible Gr. legend ET7AAYPIOC 1., AIKAIDY above 
A AEA<t>DY TOY r., BACIAEflZ below. Rev. Heracles seated on rock to 
1. with club resting on knee inside square frame. Monogram in 1. field, just like 
a wheel. Partially legible Kharoshthi legend Spalahoraputrasa dhramiasa 
Spalagadamasa. JE square. Ch. vn, p. 202. 







PLATE IV 



PLATE IV 


1. Azes I. Obv. Bull walking to r. BAZIAEflZ BAZIAEflN METAADY 
below AZE 3 Y. Monogram above. Rev. Lion to r. Kh. legend Maharajasa 
rajatirajasa maliatasa, below Ay as a. Kharoshthi monogram (?) above. /E 
round. Ch.' vii, p. 205. 

2. Azes I. Obv. Poseidon facing, trampling with r. foot on prostrate figure, trident 
in 1 . hand. Gr. legend as on No. 1. Rev. Draped goddess standing facing be- 
tween vine branches. Traces of Kharoshthi legend as above. Monogram in 1 . 
field below. IE square. Ch. vii, p. 205. 

3. Azes II. Obv. King on horseback to r. Gr. legend as on No. 1. Rev. Rudely 
designed Pallas to r. with spear and shield in 1 . hand. Lotus, nandipada trisiil 
symbol, &c., in the 1 . field, and monogram on r. field. Kharoshthi legend Indra- 
varmaputrasa Aspavarmasa Strategasa, below jayatasa. IE round. Ch. vii, 
p. 209. 

4. Azilises. Obv. King on horseback tor. with couched lance. B AZI AEflZ, &c., 
AZIAIZDY below. Rev. Goddess standing to 1 . with palm branch in her 
1 . and an indistinct object in her extended r. hand. Kharoshthi mi r. and 
monogram in 1 . field. Kh. legend Maharajasa rajarajasa mahatasa, Ayilishasa 
below. JR round. Ch. vii, p. 205. 

5. Gondophares and Sasan. Obv. King on horseback to 1 . Gondopharian symbol 
in 1. field. Partially legible Gr. legend BACI A ECO C B A Cl A E (ON META- 
AOY YNAO 06 PPOY. Rev. Zeus standing to r. holding long sceptre. 
Sandipada trisiil symbol in 1 . field, Kharoshthi pra and another monogram in 
r. field. Partially legible Kharoshthi legend rayarayasa apratihatachakrasa 
devavratasa, below sasasa. Billon round. Ch. vii, p. 214. 

6. Gondophares. Obv. King on horseback to r., Gondopharian symbol. Blunder- 
ing Gr. legend. Rev. Pallas standing to r. Monogram in r. field. Partly legible 
Kharoshthi legend Maharaja rajatiraja tratarasa deraoratasa, below Gudu- 
pharasa. Billon round. Ch. vii, p. 214. 

7. Gondophares. Obv. Parthian type of King’s head to r. Blundering Gr. legend 
illegible. Rev. Winged Nike standing r. holding wreath and palm. Traces of 
Kharoshthi legend Maharajasa Gudupharnasa tratarasa. Billon round. Ch. vii, 
p. 214. 

8. Kujula Kadphises. Obv. Diad. bust of Hermaeus to r. Corrupt Gr. legend for 
KOPANO KOZOYAO KAA 0 IZOY. Rev. Heracles standing facing with 
lion’s skin and club. Traces of Kharoshthi legend Kujula Kasasa Kushana 
Yavugasa dhramathidasa. .L round. Ch. viii, p. 228. 

9. Zeionises, the Satrap of Chukhsa. Obv. Satrap on horseback to r. Corrupt Gr. 
legend all round, of which Z I N N I Y CATPATTOY is discernible. Rev. Male 
figure (the Satrap himself) being crowned by a goddess (Demeter ?). Kharoshthi 
legend Managulasa Kshatiapasaputrasa Kshatrapasa jfihuniasa. Monograms in 
r. and 1 . field. ,?R round. Ch. ix, p. 265. 



PLATE V 


1. Kujula Kadphises. Obv. Head of King to r. with a peculiar helmet with two 
recarved horns. Traces of Gr. legend. Rev. ‘Macedonian soldier’ to 1 . Traces 
of KharoshthI legend Kuyula Kaiisa Kushamua. .E round. Ch. vui, p. 23S. 

2. Kujula Kadphises. Obv. Humped bull to r. Traces of debased Gr. legend. 
Indistinct symbols on field above and r. field. Rev. Two-humped Bactrian 
camel to r. Traces of KharoshthI legend Kushana Kuyula Kara Kaphsasa. 
Symbol in r. field. JE round. Ch. viii, p. 228. 

3. Kujula Kadaphes (Kadphises). Obv. Diad. head of King resembling that of 
Augustus to r. Gr. legend not legible, but on better specimens X 0 1 1 * 3 A N C Y 
ZAOOY KOZOAA KAAA<1>EZ. Rev. King (or deity) seated on a curule 
chair with r. hand extended. Traces of KharoshthI legend Khushanasa Yaviiasa 
(or Yaiiasa) Kuyula-Kaphsasa sacha dhrama thitasa. JE round. Ch. viii, p. 228. 

4. Weraa Kadphises. Obv. Diad. and bearded bust of King rising from the clouds, 
flames issuing from the shoulders, club in r. hand. BACIAEYC OOHMO 
K AA<t>ICHC. Symbol behind the head. Rev. Two-armed Siva facing, with 
trident-battle-axe in r. hand and tiger skin over 1 . arm. KharoshthI legend 
mostly legible Maharajasa rajadirajasa sarvaloga iharasa mahiharasa vima kath- 
phisasa tratarasa. Nandipada trisiil symbol in r. field and another symbol in 1. 
N round. Ch. viii, p. 232. 


5. Kanishka. Obv. King to 1 . sacrificing at altar, with elephant goad and long 
sceptre in r. and 1. hands respectively. PAONANO PAO KANHPKI 
KOPANO round the figure of the King. Rev. Four-armed 6iva standing to 1 ., 
with elephant goad and water vessel, and thunderbolt in his r. hands, and trident 
and antelope in his left hands. Symbol in 1. and OHpO in r. field. Inside 
dotted border. N round. Ch. viii, p. 241. 

6. Kanishka. Obv. As on No. 5. Rev. Zoroastrian fire god Atash standing to 1 . 
holding fillet in extended r. hand and tongs m 1. hand. Symbol as on No. 5 and 
A 0 P 0 in hand r. fields respectively. Inside dotted border. A’ round. Ch.vni, 
p. 241. 

7. Kanishka. Obv. As above. Rev. Helmeted war god standing to r. holding long 
spear in r. hand. Usual symbol in r. field, OPAATNO in 1 . field. Dotted 
border. A r round. Ch. viii, p. 241. 


8. Huvishka. Rev. Robed goddess standing to r. holding cornucopia in 1 . hand. 
Variant of the symbol in r., and APAOXPO in 1 . field. Dotted border. A r 
round. Ch. viii, p. 245. 

9. Huvishka. Obv. Diad. and helmeted bust of King to 1 . rising from the clouds, 
holding sceptre in r. hand. Circular legend PAONANO PAO OOHPKI 
KOPANO. Rev. Mahasena, the Indian war god, standing facing ; holding in r. 
hand a standard surmounted by a bird, 1 . hand rests on sword. Usual symbol in 
1 . field and M A ACHNO in r. Dotted border. A' round. Ch. viii, p. 245. 

10. Huvishka. Rev. Four-armed moon god seated on throne, head to r., crescent 
behind the shoulders, with feet resting on a footstool. M A N A 0 B A in 1., and 
TO in r. field. Symbol. Dotted border. A’ round. Ch. viii, p. 245. 

11. Huvishka. Obv. Half length figure of King to 1 . with pointed thicklv jewelled 
helmet, holding sceptre. Traces of legend in peculiarly formed Gr. characters. 
Rev. Two-armed moon god standing to 1. with fillet in r. hand the 1 one 
resting on hip. Symbol in 1 . field, MAO in r. filed. Dotted border N 
round. Ch. viu, p. 245. 


Huvishka. Obv. Bust of King and other features 
god nimbate and radiate standing to 1., r. hand 
Symbol I., M 1 1 P 0 r. Dotted border. N round. 


as on No. 9. Rev. Draped sun 
extended, 1. on sword at side. 
Quarter dinar. Ch. viii, p. 24s. 


1 3 " huvishka. Obv. Bust of King as on No. 9. Nimbate. Traces of usual legend. 

Rev. Three-faced and four-armed Siva standing facing with water-vessel 
thunderbolt, trident, and club in the hands. Usual symbol in 1. field- OHPO 

in r. Dotted border. N round. Ch. viii, p. 245. 




PLATE Y 








PLATE VI 


1. Huvishka. Obv. Bust of King to 1 . and other features as on PI. V, fig. 1 1. Rev. 
Zoroastrian fire god (really god of royal splendour) standing to 1 . Nimbate, 
extended r. hand holds fire, 1 . hand resting on sword at side. Usual symbol in 
1 . field, 0 A PRO in r. Dotted border. .V round. Ch. viii, p. 245. 

2. Vasudeva. Obv. King standing sacrificing at altar, holding long sceptre ini. hand. 
Trident battle-axe and Br. sa in 1. field. T races of legend PAONANO PAO 
BAZOAHO KOPANO. Rev. Two-armed £iva with bull behind him, holding 
a noose and a trident in his r. and 1 . hands respectively. Dotted border. Symbol 
in top 1 . and OHPO in r. field. N round. Ch. viii, p. 247. 

3. Bhadra, late Kushan chief. Obv. Standing King sacrificing at altar, holding 
sceptre in 1 . hand. Trident battle-axe in 1 . field. Brahmi legend written vertic- 
ally under King’s 1 . arm in two parallel lines, Bhadra, Shaka. Alloyed gold 
round. Ch. viii, p. 250. 

4. Vasu Kushan. Obv. As on No. 3. Br. legend written vertically in the r. field 
Vasu. Rev. Ardochso seated on throne, with fillet and cornucopia in her r. and 
1 . hands. Symbol in top r. field. Traces of the name of the goddess Ardochso in 
corrupt Gr. script in left margin. Alloyed gold, round. Ch. viii, p. 248. 

5. Kaneshko (Kanishka II?). Obv. King 1 . as on Nos. 2-4. Gr. legend illegible. 
Stray Brahmi letters in field. Rev. As on No. 4. Base gold, round. Ch. viii, 
p. 250. 

6. Sayatha, late Kushan chief. Obv. As on No. 3. Vertical Brahmi legend r. in 
two parallel lines, Sayatha and Shaka ; 1 . bha. Rev. As on No. 3. Pale gold, 
round. Ch. viii, p. 250. 

7. Punch-marked coin. Obv. Solar symbol, taurine, humped bull, &c. Al oblong. 
Ch. xxv, pp. 778-9. 

8. Punch-marked coin. Obv. Three human figures, mountain symbol, &c. Rev. 
Only one indistinct symbol. rectangular. Ch. xxv, pp. 778-9. 

9. Punch-marked coin. Obv. Solar and other symbols. AI rectangular. 

10. Punch-marked coin. Obv. Solar symbol, tree within railing, &c. Rev. ‘Cadu- 
ceus’ and ‘Ujjain’ symbols. M round. 

11. Single-die coin from Taxila. Obv. Symbols such as mountain with crescent, 
swastika, 'pile of balls’, ‘river’; in incuse. JE square. Ch. xxv, p. 782. 

12. Ujjain coin. Obv. Deity ( ?) stands facing, holding ‘sun standard’ in his r. hand ; 
other symbols. Rev. Ujjain symbol. JE round. Ch. xxv, p. 781. 

13 Double-die coin from Taxila. Obv. Lion to 1 ., swastika above, mountain with 
crescent in front. Rev. Tusked elephant to r., mountain with crescent above. 
JE square. Ch. xxv, pp. 781-2. 

14. Early rectangular cast coin. Obv. Tree within railing and other symbols. Rev. 
Elephant to 1 . and other symbols. JE square. Ch. xxv, p. 780. 



PLATE VII 


1. Kumudasena. Obv. Humped bull to 1 ., tree within railing in front. Brahmi 
legend Rdjiia Kumudasenasa below. All in incuse. Rev. Nandipdda trisul 
symbol inside a linear enclosure. JE round. Locality Ayodhva ; date c. ist cent. 
a.d. Ch. xxv, p. 801 (n.). 

2. Anonymous from Ivosam (ancient Kausambi). Obv. Tree in railing in centre, 
six-arched mountain symbol below; Ujjain symbol and another indistinct 
symbol in r. field ; a wheel and Nandipdda trisul symbol in 1 . Rev. Lanky bull 
to 1 ., a curious standard in the 1 . field, and another symbol in the r. JE circular. 
c. ist-2nd cent. B.c. 

3. ‘Panchala Mitra’ coin. Obv. Three symbols (tree in railing, ‘Naga’, and a 
peculiar swastika) in a row above. Brahmi legend below, Agimitasa. All in 
incuse. Rev. Agni with flames issuing from his head inside a shrine. -L round. 
c. 2nd cent. b.c. or a little later. Ch. xxv, p. 800. 

4. Ayumitra (Ayodhya). Obv. Humped bull to 1 . Brahmi legend Ayumitasa 
below. Rev. Palm tree, cock facing it in 1 . field. vE round, c. ist cent. A.D., or 
a little later. 

5. Amoghabhuti, a Kuninda chief. Obv. Goddess (Lakshmi) in front of a stag; 
other symbols. Traces of Br. legend Amoghabhutisa Maharajasa rdjiia Kunadasa. 
Rev. Mountain (6-arched) symbol with Nandipdda trisul on its top. Conven- 
tional tree in railing in the r. field, swastika and other symbol in the 1 . Waved 
line (river symbol) below. Dotted border. vE round. 2nd-ist cent, b.c., or a 
little later. Ch. xxv, p. 801. 

6. Phagunimitra, a local chief of Panchala. Obv. Three symbols as on No. 3. 
Brahmi legend Phagunimitasa below. Rev. Goddess Phalguni standing on a 
lotus. IE round, c. 2nd cent. B.c., or a little later. Ch. xxv, p. 800. 

7. Kshatrapa Sodasa. Obv. Lakshmi standing, tree in r. field. Traces of marginal 
Brahmi legend Mahakshatapasaputasa Khatapasa Sodasasa. Rev. Lakshmi 
(Gajalakshmi) with elephants pouring water over her. JE round. 1st cent. 
a.d. Ch. ix, p. 269. 

8. Amoghabhuti, a Kuninda chief. Obv. As on No. 5. Marginal Brahmi legend 
fully legible rajnah kunadasa Amoghabhutisa Maharajasa. Rev. As on No. 5. 
Kharoshthi legend similar, almost fully legible. Fine. JR round. Ch. xxv, 
p. 801. 

9. Sibi janapada coin. Obv. Tree in railing and other symbols. Partially legible 
legend Majhimikaye Sitijanapadasa in Brahmi characters of c. 2nd cent. B.c. 
Rev. Lion (griffin?) to 1 . JE round. Ch. xxv, p. 801. 

10. Yaudheya gana. Obv. Elephant to r., Nandipdda trisul above. Rev. Humped 
bull to r. facing a Y upa (a sacrificial post) in railing. T races of legend Yodheyana 
(Sans. Yaudheyanam ) in Brahmi characters of the 2nd cent. B.c. JE round. Ch. 
viii, p. 255; also ch. xxv, p. 800. 

11. Malava gana. Obv. Tree in railing. Brahmi legend on its two sides Malava-na 
jayo. Rev. Vase inside dotted border. Tiny copper coin, square, c. ist cent. 
B.c. Ch. vii, p. 257; also ch. xxv, p. 801-2. 




PLATE VII 




PLATE VIII 


1. Yaudheva gana. Obv. Six-headed god Karttikeya standing on lotus facing with 
spear in r. hand. Traces of legend in irregularly placed Brahmi letters of c. and 
cent. a.d. Brahmanyadevasya bkagavato. Rev. Six-headed goddess standing 
facing on lotus. Nandipada trisul and other symbols on her r. and 1. JE round. 
Ch. viii, p, 255; also ch. xxv, p. 800. 

2. Yaudheya gana. Obv. God Karttikeya standing facing with spear in r. hand, 
and a cock near his 1. foot. Legend in Brahmi characters of the 3rd~4th cent. 
A.n. Yodheya gatiasva java. Rev. Robed figure standing to 1. inside dotted 
border. JE round. Ch. viii, p. 255; also ch. xxv, p. 800. 

3. Gautamiputra Vilivayakura. Obv. Bow and arrow (Stupa with umbrella?) 
Marginal Brahmi legend Ratio Gotamiputasa Vilivayakurasa. Rev. ‘Mountain’ 
symbol flanked by a tree, on base. Lead round coin. c. 2nd cent. a.d. Ch. xxv, 
p. 805. 

4. Pulumayi. Obv. Elephant to r. Brahmi legend Pulumav(isa) above. Rev. 
Ujjain symbol. Potin, round, c. 2nd cent. A.D. Ch. xxv, p. 805. 

5. Sri Yajna Satakarni. Obv. Elephant r. Brahmi legend on 1. margin S(i)ri Yana 
sdta (Sri Yajiia Satakarni). Ujjain symbol defaced. Potin, round, c. and~3rd 
cent. a.d. Ch. xxv, p. 805. 

6. Rudrasimha I. Obv. King’s head r. corrupt Gr. legend. Rev. Mountain and 
river symbols, crescent 1., star r. Marginal Brahmi legend complete rajno 
mahakshatrapasa Rudradamaputrasa rdjfio mahakshatrapasa Rudras(tm)hasa. rR 
round. Ch. ix, p. 283. 

7. Ji\ adaman, son of Damajada. Obv. King’s head r. ; corrupt Gr. legend. Rev. 
As on No. 6. Nearly complete marginal Brahmi legend rajno mahakshatra- 
pasa Damajadasa putrasa rdjiio mahakshatrapasa Jivadamasa. JR round. Ch. 
ix, p. 284. 

8. Vijayasena, son of Damasena. Obv. As on Nos. 6 and 7. Traces of date behind 
the King’s head. Corrupt Gr. legend. Rev. As above. Fully legible marginal 
Brahmi legend rajno mahakshatrapasa Damasenaputrasa rajno mahakshatrapasa 
Vijayasenasa. JR round. Ch. ix, p. 289. 

9. Rudrasena, son of Rudrasimha I. Obv. As on Nos. 6-8. Traces of date behind 
head. Rev. As above. Nearly complete Brahmi legend on the margin rajno 
mahakshatrapasa Rudrasimhasa putrasa mahakshatrapasa Rudrasenasa. JR 
round. Ch. ix, p. 286. 

10. Vlradaman, son of Damasena. Obv. As on the previous coins. Rev. As above. 
Nearly complete Brahmi legend rdjfio mahakshatrapasa Damasenaputrasa rajno 
Kshatrapasa Viradamnah. JR round. Ch. ix, p. 288. 




Monograms found on Bactrian and Indo-Greek coins. From A Catalog i 
of Coins in the Indian Museum, Vol. I, by V. A. Smith 

PLATE IX 




PLATES X TO LXXXVIII 


ANTIQUITIES 


NOTE 

The descriptive matter relating to 
these illustrations f pilous the 
last of the plates 



























IJJJJJJJ . 

71 3 - 

t Dl K 























RANI GUMPHA 

UDAYAGIRI 



L XWI 








PLATE XXXV 






PLAfh XXXVIll 






XL1I 






PLATE XLV 





1. Mathura. Inscribed Kanishka 2. Laurivan Tangai he 

image inscribed Buddh 

Arch. Dept. Areli. Sec. Indian Museum, < 


PLATE XLVII 







PLATE L 





















PLATE LXI 


. Bhaja. The Surya and the India panels of the doorway of the Vihara Arch. Dept. 







Rate lxiV 


Kanheri. Sculptured panels of couples 











PLATE LXIX 







'LATE LXXIII 












I. Scythian soldier. Kafiehuki. 2. Figure of Dionysus 
Arch. Dept. 


PLATE LXXVIII 








PLATE LXXXI 






PLATE I XXXIV 



Mihintale. Stele of Kantaka Chaitya 

Arch. Survey oj Ceylon 


Pt-ATI LXXW 








NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


Northern India 

Frontispiece — Samath. Lion Capital (p. 91) 

PLATE X 

Bharhut. Railing sculptures showing three different episodes connected with 
the Buddha. The uppermost panel is the visit of Raja Prasenajit, king of Kosala, 
to the Buddha. The Buddha is represented by a Dharma-chakra, surmounted by a 
parasol in a building ( Bagavato Damachaka is written on the roof). The king, whose 
name is also inscribed near his figure, on bottom right, is mounted on a chariot 
drawn by four horses and is in full retinue, the two foremost attendants riding on 
elephants shown at extreme top right facing the reader. Another, on horseback, is 
shown on top left extreme with his back to the reader. Two more on horseback 
appear behind the king just outside an arched gate, bottom right. Thus the artist 
has cleverly portrayed the circumambulating royal procession, with emphasis on 
the Dharma-chakra and the king himself. 

The middle panel shows the Naga chief Eraga worshipping Buddha in the form 
of a Bodhi-tree platform, while in the right upper half of the picture the Naga is shown 
as a five-hooded cobra in the midst of water; in the lower half he is repeated twice in 
human form with the cobra hood on his head. 

The lowest panel represents a herd of elephants kneeling down before the Bodhi 
platform, (p. 686) 

Bharhut. Railing pillar depicting a scene from the Tushita heaven. Here again 
the sculptor has very ingeniously depicted the devotees clustering all round the Bodhi 
tree within a railing— those in the foreground being seated and facing the Bodhi 
tree, and those at the two comers being seen in profile, while there are two in the 
background (seen through the railing) facing the reader. 

PLATE XI 

l. Bharhut. Sirima Devata. (p. 687) 2. Sudarsana Yakshini. (p. 687) 

PLATE XII 

Bharhut. Medallion. The graphic depiction of the Jetavana garden purchased 
by the merchant Anathapiiujika for 18 kotis of gold pieces paved over the ground. 
On the upper left hand and the lower extreme left is repeated the same ‘Gandhakuti’ 
which Anathapipdika built for Buddha. On the upper right are shown two persons 
paving the ground apparently with gold pieces, in the lower right are the bullocks 
and the cart in which the 18 kotis of gold pieces were brought. At the upper extreme 
left is seen a retinue of merchants. The central event of the story is depicted roughly 
in the centre where Anathapipdika pours water from a spouted vessel over the ‘Bo’ 
tree in railing, the symbol of the Buddha, and dedicates the Jetavana vihara he built 
to the Buddhist Order. The way in which all these details are worked in is indeed 
striking, though there is some overcrowding of figures, (p. 687) 

PLATE XIII 

Bodh Gaya. The remnants of a square railing that enclosed the early Bodhi shrine, 
assignable to about the early first century a.d. It indicates on the whole the style 
of Bharhut, though slightly more advanced, as clearly proved by the deletion of un- 
necessary details in the narrative reliefs to bring out a more lucid account of the story. 
Even in three dimensional depiction convincing improvement over the technique of 
Bharhut is visible, (p. 689) 

PLATE XIV 

Bodh Gaya. Railing pillars— on left, Indra, on right, Surya etc. (p. 689) 


107 



846 


NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


PLATE XV 

Mathura. Support of a torajja architrave from Kankali tila, front view. First century 
a. d. Same, back view. (p. 693) 


PLATE XVI 

Barabar. The horseshoe-shaped arched chaitya window dominating the facade of a 
Buddhist chaitya hall had a steady anterior evolution traceable to non-Buddhistic 
monuments, and an excavated specimen of this style is the group of caves at Barabar 
near Gaya. The most important in this group is the Lomasa Rishi cave which, though 
undated and unfinished, is clearly Mauryan. The facade of this cave, however, is 
finished with great care and represents the starting point of elaborate ornamentations 
characterising chaitya facades of the later period. That it has been modelled after 
wooden structural forms is evident from the sloping of the jambs of the doorway 
and the moulded cornice, (p. 718) 


PLATE XVII 

1. Bulandibagh. The appearance of buildings in early relief carvings clearly implies 
the development of the essentials of wood technique. Fragments of the huge wooden 
palisades of the city of Pataliputra unearthed at Bulandibagh near Patna prove by 
their size and dimensions its ancient grandeur and the correctness of its description 
by classical writers. 

2. Kumrahar near Patna. Remains of a palace, though fragmentary, have been 
excavated, and particularly the huge pillared hall obviously supported on a high 
substratum of wood with rows of pillars dividing the chamber into many smaller 
bays, indicate that earlier wooden columns preceded the stone columns which replaced 
them in Asoka’s time. The lower halves of ash funnels where pillars originally stood 
and also subsidiary circles of dark clay within the bays can be seen in the picture. 

PLATE XVIII 

1. Taxila. Dharmarajika Stupa, locally known as ‘Chir Tope’. Main structure circular 
in plan with a raised terrace around its base ascended by flights of steps at the 
four cardinal points. Core of stupa of rough rubble masonry strengthened by radi- 
ating walls 3 ft. to 5 ft thick probably beiongingto Kushapa reconstruction phase Outer 
facing of limestone originally finished with lime plaster and paint. Niches all around 
alternately framed by trefoil arches, which once held relief figures of Buddha or 
Bodhisattva. First erected possibly in the reign of Asoka (third century b c) and 
added to during early Saka period. Fell into ruin with lapse of time and again par- 
tially reconstructed during 4th-5th century a.d. when a combination of ashlar and 
diaper masonry was very common, (p. 715) 

2. Taxila. Kunala monastery is supposed to have been built by Asoka to commemorate 
the spot where his son Kunala had had his eyes put out. According to Hiuan Tsang 
the stupa was more than 100 feet in height The stupa rests on a lofty rectangular base 
with stepped approach at north end. The base rises in three terraces. The drum of 
the stupa circular plinth has a delicate concave curvature. Assignable to 3rd-4th 
century a. d. Buried in the core of the structure in its N.W. comer was another very 
small stupa probably ot the time of Scythio-Parthians. It is made of blocks of 
limestone with square plinth, and drum and dome above, (p. 715) 

PLATE XIX 

1. Taxila. Plan of Pippala monastery. 2. Plan of Jaulian monastery, (p. 720) 

PLATE XX 

1. Safichi. A general view of Stupa II. Originally it had a dome similar to the main 
stupa with a railing and parasol, but repaired later after the fashion of Mughal dome 
and since then this fault has been somewhat rectified. The pillars of the outer 
balustrade alone are ornamented, and the cross bars are bare. 

2. Safichi. Stupa Jl. An inner view of the outer r ailin g, (p. 7^4^ 



NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


847 


PLATE XXI 

Safichl. Stupa I, view from north-east. (p. 715) 

PLATE XXII 

Safichl. Stupa I, northern gateway, front view. The only one that has a large part of the 
decorated figures intact. The top has in the centre the wheel of law with attendant 
yakshas, a triratna and a winged lion on either side. The yakshas and lions on the 
top and the sides are carved in the round, while in the middle part of the architrave 
the horses, elephants etc. are in high relief. Elephants have replaced lions on the 
capitals here and on the eastern gateway. The pillars are edged with small pilasters 
and sinuous creepers, (p. 690) 


PLATE XXIII 

1. Safichl. Stupa I, northern gate, architrave. The first lintel contains the legend of the 
six-tusked elephant and the middle, Buddha’s enlightenment. From end to end the 
bottom one depicts Visvantara Jataka. 

2. Sanchi. Stupa I, northern gateway (middle section) top lintel, legend of six-tusked 
elephant Bodhisattva (Shacjdanta Jataka). Mara’s temptation scene with Buddha 
depicted in the form of Bodhi tree in the middle. The uprights between the top and 
middle lintel show mostly palmettes resembling bhadra ghata similar to those of 
the two upper dies in previous plate, or they depict yakshas and the spaces between 
the uprights depict horses and elephants with riders carved in high relief. 

PLATE XXIV 

1 . Safichl. Stupa I, eastern gateway, front. Preserved in its original position but less intact 
than the northern one. Motifs on capital and the false capitals are similar to the 
northern gateway but treated with greater ease and freedom. The top lintel shows 
the seven past Buddhas, the middle one the ’Great Departure’, and the bottom one 
‘Asoka’s visit’ to the Bodhi tree. The dies represent Sri, a first sermon, and Maitreya. 

2. Safichl. Stupa I, northern gateway, eastern jamb. Yaksha. 

3. Saflchl. Stupa I, eastern gateway, front middle lintel. The scene of the ‘Great Depar- 
ture’ of Buddha from Kapilavastu, the city depicted on the extreme left with inhabi- 
tants resting on the balconies and the streets. The richly decorated horse Kanaka, 
the constancy of the umbrella and the chamara accompanying it and hanging at 
the extreme right above the sacred foot prints, the sacred feet marked by the ‘wheel’ 
are some of the important things to be noticed. 

PLATE XXV 

Safichl. Stupa I, eastern gateway, front and back views of the bracket figure. 

PLATE XXVI 

1. Sanchi. Stupa I, southern gateway, middle section architrave. The middle and bottom 
lintels shown. The former depicts the Shaddanta Jataka and the latter the battle 
for the relics with Kusinagara city shown in the middle with its battlements and the 
armies of the seven claimants attacking it, one on chariot and the others on elephants 
shown on either side of it. 

2. Safichl. Stupa I, southern gateway. Contains the seven Buddhas, Asoka’s visitlto Rama- 
grama Stupa and the war of the relics respectively in the three lintels. The capital 
has the standing lions with their forequarters only shown. The dies have Sri, two 
illuminations, and a parinirvana respectively. The left jamb has the depiction of the 
first sermon and two ‘visits’ in a royal chariot and on a divine elephant. 

PLATE XXVII 

Safichl. Stupa I, western gateway. The lintels show the seven manusha Buddhas (as in 
others), the war on relics and the miracle of the enlightenment. The capitals have 
yakshas (in the place of elephants in the north and east, and lions on the south). The 



NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


dies show Sri and three Bodhi trees. The mutilated jambs show on the right scenes 
of paradise and on the left Mahakapi Jataka. 

PLATE XXVIII 

1. Sanchi. Stupa I, western gateway, back view. Top and middle lintels depict a pro- 
cessional transportation of relics and the ‘war of relics’ respectively. 

2. Sanchi. Stupa I, western gateway, back view. Middle and bottom lintels depict ‘war of 
relics’ and a ‘sambodhi’ between two processions. The false capitals show the 
winged lions. 

PLATE XXIX 

Dhauli. The Elephant on top of the rock contains an Asokan inscription, (p. 692) 
PLATE XXX 

Udayagiri, Rani-gumpha. Belongs to early second century a. d. In conception 
and treatment the frieze sculptures, depicted in both the upper lower storeys of this 
group, are very advanced and mature, even though the workmanship is often crude 
and coarse. The carvings belong mainly to the early school of Bharhut, Bodh Gaya 
and Sanchi though having a local outlook of their own. Of all the caves in the 
Udayagiri and Khandagiri hills, the Mafichapuri cave reliefs do indicate an advance 
on the Bharhut school in depth of relief and robustness of vitality. The poor rock 
material must have been greatly responsible for the coarse workmanship, (p. 693) 

PLATE XXXI 

1. Udayagiri, Rani-gumpha. Plans of upper and lower storeys, (p. 693) 

PLATE XXXII 

1. Kolhua (Basarh Bakhira). Lion pillar. 2. Lion pillar. Lauriya Nandangarh. (p. 90) 
PLATE XXXIII 

1. Saflchl. Lion capital. 2. Rampurva. Bull capital (p. 690) 

PLATE XXXIV 

1. Lion capital from Rampurva. (p. 90) 2. Elephant capital from Sanskisa. (p. 692) 

Best specimens of Mauryan sculpture as furnished by the monolithic columns with 
animal capitals. Each column generally consists of a shaft and a capital. The former 
is circular in section and made up of a single block of stone, and the latter, though 
again monolithic, consists of three parts, namely, the ‘bell’, the abacus, and 
the top sculpture in the round. The abacus is either circular or rectangular. In 
the general style of the capital, and particularly in its sculpture, a gradual evolution 
can be traced from the Bakhira pillar to the elegant climax at Lauriya Nandangarh 
and Samath, through the Sankisa elephant and the Rampurva lion. The Samath 
quadripatite capital is, however, of very superior workmanship despite the highly 
conventional nature of its conception and execution. But at the same time the 
tension of the muscle and the rigidity of the features of the Samath lion form a »ood 
contrast to the dynamic naturalism and strength of the Rampurva bull. This °bull 
is architecturally less advanced than the Rampurva lion or the clearly stylised 
striding bull of the Samath abacus. In this it stands good comparison with the 
quiet dignity and potency of the elephant carved in round on the rock at Dhauli 
above the inscribed record of Asoka, representing a superior sense of creative 
form and aesthetic vision. 


PLATE XXXV 

1. Samath. Lion capital, horse and lion on abacus, (p. 691) 
PLATE XXXVI 

1. Samath. Lion capital, elephant and bull on abacus, (p. 691) 



NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


849 


PLATE XXXVII 

1. Parkham. Yaksha. 2. Patna. Yaksha. (pp. 693, 694) 

PLATE XXXVIII 

1. Besnagar. Yakshml, (p. 694) 2. Lohanipur. Jina, (pp. 693, 695) 

PLATE XXXIX 

Besnagar. Yakshiril, front and back views, (p. 694) 

PLATE XL 

Pawaya. Yaksha, front and back views, (p. 695) 

PLATE XU 

Didarganj. Yakshini. (pp. 693, 695) 

PLATE XLH 

Samath, Friar Bala’s image of Bodhisattva (p. 697) 

PLATE XLIII 

1. Mathura. Inscribed Buddha statue, (p. 697). 2. Slab from Holi gate. (p. 700) 
PLATE XLIV 

Mathura. The Ayagapata from Kankali Tila. (p. 700) 

PLATE XLV 

1. Mathura. Bacchanalian scene. 2. Mathura, Yaksha. 

PLATE XL VT 

Bhuteswar. Yakshinls. (p. 700) 

PLATE XL VII 

1. Mathura. Inscribed Kanishka image, (p. 699) 2. Loriyan Tangai headless 

inscribed Buddha, (p. 703) 

PLATE XLVIII 

1. Mathura. Yakshipl from Curzon Museum. 2. Gandhara. Miniature votive 
stupa (p. 715) 

PLATE XLIX 

Patajiputra. Terracotta figurines, (p. 705) 

PLATE L 

1. Tamluk. Terracotta figurine, (p. 705) 

2. Dinajpur. Terracotta figurine from Bangarh. (p. 705) 


Southern India 
PLATE LI 

1. Ghantasala. Plan and section of the stupa, (d. 733) 

PLATE LII 

2. Nagarjunakonda. The Maha Stupa and its plan. (pp. 733, 735) 

PLATE LIII 

Ramatirtham. Plan and section of the Buddhist monastery, (p. 737) 



850 


NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


PLATE LIV 

GuntupaUe. Plan and elevation of the stone built stupa, (p. 741) 

PLATE LY 

1. Pathardi (Nasik), Pan<Julena. The decoration on either side of the chaitya window 
is itself a miniature chaitya hall with pillars on either side (which have the inverted 
pyramid abacus and the animal figure capital) with a stupa in the lower half, and 
with a chaitya window in the upper half. (p. 742) 

2. Pathardi (Nasik) Pandulena. Note the miniature bhuta ganas bearing the abacus 
of the pillars and the capital with animal riders (the animals being the bull, the 
elephant, and the lion) and the elephant frieze over the cornice, (pp. 742, 744) 

PLATE LVI 

1. Bhaja. Fagade of chaitya cave. (p. 742) 

2. Kondane. Facade of chaitya hall. The entire scheme of carving with its receding 
stepped cornice windows pierced in bas relief and chajjas on top left carved out in 
monolithic rock show the clear imitation of wood technique, (pp. 742, 744) 

PLATE LVII 

1. Bedsa. Chaitya cave fagade showing beautiful pillars with ‘bell’ inverted pyramidal 
abacus and animal rider capital. Note that the animals are elephants and horses, 
(pp. 742, 744) 

2. Junnar. Manmoda cave, showing the largest unfinished chaitya cave. (p. 745) 

PLATE LVIII 

1. Junnar. Cave No. 48. The stupa inside the chaitya and the painted ceiling ate 
shown. 

2. Karle. Fagade of chaitya cave showing also the fluted pillar in front with lion 
capital. 

PLATE LIX 

Karle. Chaitya cave, interior of the hall. (p. 745) 

PLATE LX 

1 . Karle. Chaitya cave showing sculptured panels on south wall of verandah. 

2. Karle. Chaitya cave interior view showing the details of pillars. 

PLATE LXI 

1. Bhaja. The Surya and the Indra panels on either side of the doorway on the south 
wall of verandah of the vihara. (p. 748) 

2. Kanheri. Details of capital depicting a pair of elephants, showering water over 
the stupa and two Nagas holding piirna ghata aloft towards the siupa. (p. 746) 

PLATE LXII 

1. Kanheri. Chaitya cave showing the huge lion pillars on either side. (p. 743) 

2. Karle. Chaitya cave, details of sculptures on outer wall. 

PLATE LXIII 

1. Karle. Sculpture and inscribed panel depicting probably the donors to the chaitva 
cave. (p. 745) 

2. Karle. Dancing couple in the chaitya cave with exquisite rhythm of movement. 
The ornaments on the breast of the woman, the girdle and the general delineation 
recall Bharhut female figures, (p. 745) 

PLATE LXIV 

Kanheri. Two sculptured panels of couples, probably donors. Note the development 
and modelling in the round over the panel sculptures at Karle (PI. lxii). (p. 746) 



NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


851 


PLATE LXV 

1. Gu<JimaUam. Therioanthropic sculpture of linga in the Siva temple at Gudi- 
mflllam considered as the oldest sculptural depiction in the South, dated to Bharhut 
school on analogy of style of figure sculpture. 

2 Amaravatl. Vihara round a vriksha chaitya. First period (c. 200-100 B.C.). The 
head-dress and kundala of the two flying yaksha figures recall those of Karle. 
(p. 750) 


PLATE LXVI 

1. Amaravatl. Man and boy. First period, (p. 750) 

2. Jaggayyapeta. Chaitya (temple) type bas-relief showing two-storeyed structure of 

sdla type. First period, (p. 749) 


PLATE LXVII 

1. Jaggayyapeta. Chakravarti Mandhata. First period, (p. 749) 

2. Amaravatl. Casing slab depicting preaching Buddha with inscription at the base. 
Second period. 


PLATE LXVIU 

1. Amaravatl. The story of Kavi Kumara showing the king’s men pursuing Kavi 
Kumara, the washerman hiding the prince in a bundle of clothes, the prince run- 
ning after being let out of the bundle, and the potters leaving the prince under the 
pretext of a corpse. Note the sdla type of houses at the background and at the left 
foreground and the synoptic method of narration handled. 

2. Amaravatl. Terraced building with two women in the topmost apartment. Second 
period (c. a.d. 100). (pp. 750-1) 

PLATE LXIX 

Amar avatl. The Mahila .mnkha Jataka showing on the right the king Brahmadatta 
in his court with the Bodhisattva as his minister. On the left is shown successively 
elephant Mahila-mukha listening to the wicked talk of the burglars and again to 
the righteous talk of the good men. Note the structural royal gate. 

PLATE LXX 

Amaravatl. The Mittavindaka Jataka showing the unfortunate Mittavindaka 
with new bom babes, his family with children grown up, the king’s men coming to 
punish the villagers, and the drying up of the village tank suggested by the elephant 
wading in it. Note the rural type of houses in the background. 

PLATE LXXI 

Amaravatl. Division of Buddha’s relics showing the consultation and the division 
of the relics by Dona, music and dance going on, and the relics being carried on 
elephants by the recipients. The consultation panels on top right show the clever 
way in which the sculptor has depicted men seated around a table. Third period 
(c. a.d. 150). (pp. 751-2) 


PLATE LXXII 

1. Amaravatl. The Nalagiri Jataka depicting the mad careering of the elephant Nala- 
giri through the streets of Rajagpha creating panic amongst the citizens and later 
Nalagiri subdued and bowing before the Buddha. Third period, (p. 755) 

2. Amaravatl. A court scene. The presents of King Bandhuma, pages presenting the 
golden wreath and precious sandalwood to the king in a casket. 



852 


NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


PLATE LXXIII 

1. Amaravatl. The story of Udayana and his queens. Third period, (p. 755) 

2. Amaravatl. Chaitya slab with the Buddha’s renunciation, temptation and enligh- 
tenment depicted on top, his birth scenes depicted on the stupa and the wheel sym- 
bolizing his first sermon on either side and in the centre below. Fourth period 
(c. A. D. 200-250). (p. 753) 

PLATE LXXIV 

Nagarjunakonda. The gift of earth. Fourth period. 

PLATE LXXV 

Nagarjunakonda. The Mandhata Jataka. Fourth period. 

PLATE LXXVI 

1. Nagarjunakonda. Pillar showing battle scene. Fourth Period. 

2. Nagarjunakonda. The Andhrasundari. The pose and delineation of the sculpture 
are reminiscent of Ajanla painting. Fourth period. 

PLATE LXXV1I 

1. The carved moon-stone step with lions, deer, horse and boar sculptures at the 
entrance of Buddha chaitya. Fourth period. 

2. Goli. Two last scenes from Vessantara Jataka. Note the sculpture of the yakshini 
playing on the harp. (p. 756) 


PLATE LXXVIII 

1. Nagarjunakonda. Scythian soldier (Kanchuki) carved on a pillar recovered from 
the palace site. Note the exotic dress and headgear, (p. 755) 

2. Figure of Dionysus -carved on a pillar from the palace site with a rhyton raised 
in his left hand. His right hand holding the loosened garment, and a jug of wine 
near his left foot. Fourth period, (pp. 755-6) 

PLATE LXXIX 

Ajan(a. Cave 9. A group of votaries (Nagas). (p. 759) 

PLATE LXXX 

Ajanta. The Buddha and a group of votaries (Nagas). 

PLATE LXXXI 

Ajanta. A group of votaries approaching the stupa, (p. 760) 

PLATE LXXXII 

Ajanta. Cave No. 9. The stupa, (p. 760) 

Ceylon 

PLATE LXXXIII 

Mihintale. Kantaka Chaitya. (p. 622) 

PLATE LXXXIV 

Mihintale. Eastern Vahalkada, (after conservation). Second in importance and age 
only to Thuparama Chaitya. Originally of brick; stone facing of the basal terraces 
supplied at the time of Lanja Tissa. The vahalkadas or the projections of chapels 
at the cardinal points corresponding to the ‘Ayaka-khamba’ faces of the Andhra 
stupas have a series of mouldings with two vertical side jambs surmounted by 
elephants or lions, and the chief motifs adopted in the mouldings are the rows of 
kneeling elephant figures, swans, and bhutaganas. These pertain to the second century 
a.d. as suggested by inscriptional evidence on a similar vahalkada in the Abhayagiri 



NOTES ON ILLUSTRATIONS 


853 


PLATES LXXXV-VI 

Mihintalo. Stele of Karflaka Chaitya — The important motif respresented here is the 
Purnaghata from which sprout up intertwined creepers. In one such interesting stela 
(PI. lxxxv right) we see reared up in pairs along the sides of the high stalk emerging 
from the Purnaghata, elephant, bull, horse and lion in pairs alternating with pairs of 
human figures, vertically, corresponding to the lateral animal arrangement in the 
abacus of the Sarnath lion pillar. It is worthwhile recalling that the ‘moon stones' 
of sacred edifices of Anuradhapura also have the same set of four animals carved 
on them. 


PLATE LXXXVII 

Abhayagiri. The Dagaba was built by Vattagamapi Abhaya and enlarged by Gaja- 
bahu. Has the terraced base and domical body surmounted by a cubical structure 
and a tapering pillar-like slkhara. Vahalkada or entrance platforms on cardinal 
directions built during second century a.d. The stupa type is later than the Andhra 
stupa form. (p. 623) 

PLATE LXXXVIII 

1. Abhayagiri. The broken Dagaba stela (broken) shows again the animal series of the 
Sarnath lion pillar in vertical sequence of which only the elephant and the bull have 
survived. By the side ot the stela is another sculpture showing a bhutagarta (damaged) 
with legs astride holding a load with both hands on his head. (p. 600) 

2. Anuradhapura. Stele of the southern Vahalkafla, Jetavanarama dagaba. The 
sculptural pose, the delineation of the race and the depiction of the bhiitagana carry- 
ing a load, all these show influence from India; particularly of the Andhra area. 
(P. 623) 


108 




INDEX 


Ab astanoi, 128; see also Ambashthas 
Abdagases, 212, 214-17 
Abhaya (king), 575-6, 581 ; Amapda Gamani 
— ,584; Kutakana — , 584; Raja — 580; 
Vaftagamarii —,574, 582-3, 616-17, 623, 
649-50 n 

Abhayagiri ( vihara ), 587, 616, 618-24, 852 
Abhayanaga (king), 586 
Abhayavapi (Abhayvava), 595, 597, 605, 
622, 624 

Abhidhamma, 83, 650; see also Pitakas 
Abhidhana Chintamarii, 134, 305 
Abhidhanarajendra, 497n 
Abhidharma , 367, 370, 373-5 
Abhidharmajnaprasthdnasdstra 663; see also 
Sastra 

Abhidharmakosavyakhya, 66 
Abhimanyu, 636, 646-7 
Abhinanda, 652 

Abhira(s), 285, 331-3, 348; origin and 
nationality of, 331; settlements, 331; 
nature and character of, 472n; caste of, 
475 ; Mahakshatrapa, 284-5 ; generals, 285, 
331, 348n; in Nasik region, 285; under 
western Kshatrapas, 285, 331; rise to 
power and period of, 285-6, 323-5, 331-2; 
founder of dynasty of, 324, 332; kings, 
284-6, 324-5, 332-3 474 &n; kingdom, 
285, 331-2; religion and association with 
Gopala Kfishna, 392, 655; branch of, 332; 
Indianisation of, 474 &n ; successors of, 
. 323-4, 332 
Abhiravata, 331 
Abhisara (country), 1, 120, 267 

; — (king), I; see also Abisares 

Abhisaraprastha, 267, 344n 
Abiravan, 331 
Abiria, Abiria, 323, 331 
Abisares, 120-1, 136, 267; see also Abhisara 
Achaemenid(s), Achaemenian, emperors, 41, 
187, 263; imperial traditions, 52, 54; 
imperial titles, 192-3; conquests, empire 
and extent, 187, 250,779; administrative 
system (satrapal), 57, 139, 141, 263; art 
and architecture, 87-92, 745 ; inscriptions, 
187; coins, 166n, 779; influence of art of, 

T 87-93 
Achara, 658 

Acharjanaga (Naga king), 258 
Acharyas (Buddhist), 270 
Achyutanandi, 257 

Acts of Judas Thomas , the Apostle, 211-12 
Adan Adukotpa(tuchcheral, 506-7, 525 

Elini of Vattaru, 513, 546 

Imayabaramban Ne<junjeral, 506-7, 

_ 517-18, 522 

Adan Kuijakko IJafijeral, 506-7, 510, 519-20 


Oyman ViUi, 550 

Perunjeral, 541 

Selvakkaduhgo Vali, 506-7, 517, 

526-7, 533-4 

Serai, 506, 520, 542 

Adanar Karungulal, 542 
Aden, gulf of, 599 

adhyakshas (heads of departments), 57, 59, 64 

adhyakshaprachara (a Book of the Arthasastra) 

r 51,57 

Acjhyaraja, 651 

Adhyatmapatala, 661 

Adichchanallur, 727, 729 

Aditi, 80 

Adigaman, Neduman Afiji, 514, 522, 535-7, 
544-5, 557 

, 572, 

Aditya(s), 170, 392 
Adiyar, 536 

Adiyarkkunallar, 506, 522, 676 
Adrestai, 124; see also Aristas 
Aegean Sea, 141 
Aelian, 11 

Afghanistan, 72, 139, 193, 244, 248, 270, 
359, 701-2, 705; Northern—, 785, 789; 
Eastern—, 131 

Africa, 599-601; East—, 434, 598 ; South— , 
725 

Agacha, Agacha, see Agastya 
Agalassi, 126 
Agamas, 370, 408 

Agastya, 111; Agastya (saint), 528, 551 
Agathias, 682 

Agathocleia, 167-8, 172-5, 340n 
Agathocles, 169, 185, 340n; in Bactria, 158; 
predecessors of, 158; family and relations 
of, 157-9, 169; titles of, 158; sister of, 172; 
coins and coin types of 157-9, 162, 175, 
341, 341 n, 365, 473n, 781-4, 786, pi. I (7) 
Agatya, 111; see also Agastya 
Agisala, Agesilaos, 239 
Agni, 80, 379, 398, 800, pi. VII (3) 

Agnidatta, 358 
Agnidesa, 768 

Agnimitra, 95n, lOOn, 339n; Baimbika, 95n; 
son of Pushyamitra, 96, 339n; viceroy at 
Vidisa, 96, 100, 339 &n ; war with Vidarbha, 
96; succession and date of, 100; reigning 
period of, 100, 101 n; son of, 97; titles of, 
100, 339n; Kalidasa on, 95n, 640; his 
identity with Agimitrasa of coins, 100; 
successors of, 100; Sunga empire after. 
108; coins of, 100, 133, 135 

(of coins), 800, pi. VII (3) 

Agnivarman, 286, 332, 474n 
Agra, 109, 126, 342 
Agra-Srenis, 126 



856 


ItfDEX 


Agrammes (king of Gangaridai and Prasioi), 
121 ; see also Xandrammes 
Agreya, see Agastya 
Agrodaka-janapada, 111, 136, 342 
Agronomoi (officials), 12, 52 
Ahananuru (Tamil Sarigam anthology), 502, 
504-5, 677, 730n, 73 In, 746n 
Ahaval, 676, 682 

Ahichhatra, Ahichcnhatra, independent 
principality at, 104; local dynasty of, 339; 
capital of Paflchala, 106, 132, 340n; king 
of, 107; Nagas of, 255; terra-cotta art and 
architecture of, 705-6, 710; coins of, 94, 
135, 340n 

Aihole (inscription of Pulakesin II), 49 

Aikshvaka(u)s, 5, 132; see also Xkshvakus 

Aindra system, 637, 654, 673 

Aingurunnuru, 511, 670n, 677 

Aira (lunar race), 111 

Airavata, 731, 748 

Aeriya Hugha, 369 

Ain-i-Akbari, 50 

Aiyai, 510 

Aiyirai (mountain), 521 
Ajadyadantam (a sutra of Paijini), 382n 
Ajamitra, 135 

Ajapta, 330, 377, 742-4, 758, 758n-9, 763, 852 
Ajatasatru (name of Yudhis{hira), 647 

pillar at Bharhut, 688, 690-1 

Ajavarman (king of Kosala), 106, 133 
Aji Saka, 772 

Ajivika(s), 81-2; a sect of the Jamas, 82; 
antiquity of, 399-400; a religious order or 
sect, 80, 399-400; popularity of, 399; as 
religious householders, 400; identity with 
the Digambaras, 81-2; a subdivision of 
the Bhagavatas, 390, 399-400; predecessors 
of Lakulisa Pasupatas, 399; associated 
with Brahmanical sects, 399; association 
with Buddhism and Jainism, 399; and 
Buddhist community, 84; leaders of, 82, 
399-400; cave dwellings bestowed upon, 
44, 81-2, 89, 399, 718-19, 742, temple in 
Ceylon, 605; identity with Maskari- 
Parivrajakas, 399 
Ajivikism, 390 
Ajmer, 128, 279, 288 
Akalankadeva, 41 1 
Akara, 279, 312 

Akesines or Acesines, 125, 128, 395; see also 
Chenab 

Akhakhayika (famine), 594 
akhayikas, 637 
Akkura, 551 

Akola (dist), 323-4, 329 
' Akouphis (President of Nysa), 117 
Akrura, 382, 390n, 551 
Akshapatala (record office), 59 
Aksharasataka , 666 
Alahara, 595, 625 
Alakapuri (cave), 693 
Alambagama, 596 
Alanganam, 545-6 


Alasanda ( dvipa ), 117, 172, 366 
alayavijnana, 378, 664 
Alberuni, 244 

Alexander of Corinth or Epirus, 26 
Alexander, the Great, 7, 25,53-4, 141, 152, 
158, 166n, 184, 267, 383n-4, 395, 400, 
777, 779; India before his campaigns, 7, 
116; campaigns of, 2, 53, 117-31; period 
of his campaigns, 54; communities over- 
powered by, 3, 73, 75, 117-20, 122-30, 136, 
257; and: Indian chiefs, 5,64,119-21, 124, 
142, 221-3; Nanda king of E. India, 
64, 121-2, 124; Chandragupta, 2-5; 
administration of, 1, 139, 263 ; Persians, 
140, 263; retreat Of, 1, 125; followers 
of, 4, 398; Greek settlements made by, 
117, 152, 169; marriage of, 140; portrai- 
ture of deeds, 221 ; effects of invasion, 
1-2, 4, 54, 138; successors of, 54, 

138-40, 151, 153; coins of, 142, 144, 782, 
792; liberality of, 199; death and effects 
in India, 2, 4-5, 7, 121, 140 
Alexandria, 204, 516, 598-9, 790 

and Caucasus, 117, 172, 366, 785 

Alikasumdara, 26; see Alexander of Corinth 
or Epirus 

Aliyavasani (Buddhist text), 630 
Allahabad, 107, 128, 132-3, 252, 256-7, 
260, 332 
Almora, 134, 796 
Altyntagh (eastern), 223 
Aluruttimalai, 725 
Alvars, 517 

Alvar Tirumangai, 543 
Aluvihara, 617 

Amaravati, 465n, 608, 775; Buddhist es- 
tablishments and schools at, 334, 367-8, 
736; H. Tsang’s reference to, 730; 
Nagarjuna in, 754; under Pallavas, 335; 
inscriptions at, 322, 329, 368, 465n; art 
and architecture, 316, 319, 497, 622, 624, 
638, 696, 702-3, 708-9, 725, 731n, 732, 
734-5, 749, 750-6, 851-2; —art, 754 
Amaruiataka, 652 
amatya, 62-3, 348, 348n 
Ambodugga, 595 
Amban Gahga, 625 
Ambarisha (Puranic hero), 641 
Ambashtha, Ambashthyas, 128 
Ambatthala Mahathupa, 616 
Arnbhi (king of Taxiia), 1, 118-20 
Ambhiyas, 119 
Ambika (deity), 379, 404 
Ammuvanar, 509, 511, 682 
Amoghabhuti (Kuninda ruler), 110, 135-6, 
_ 342, 801, pi. VII (5, 8) 

Amohini (relief), 271,700 
Amtekina (Antigonus Gonatas), 26 
Amtiyoka, 7, 26; see also Antiochus II 
Amur, 550, 561 
Amyntas, 182, 204, 783, 785-6 
Amyrgian (geographical title), 187&n; Amyr- 
gium, 187 n 



INDEX 


857 


An-si, 183, 201, 226-8 
Anadhfishti (Vfishni hero), 385, 390n 
Anahid, 140 &n 
Anahit, 790 

Anamda, Ananda, (foreman of artisans), 
_ 303, 690 
Ananda, 84 

Anandagamani, 569, 576, 584, 588, 595, 616 

Ananta, 565 

Anantagumpha, 692 

Anantakaya, 172 

Ananta Naga, 389 

Anantapadmanabha, 747n 

Anantapur, 326, 727 

Anantasayl, 746; see also Vishnu, 

Anarta, 8, 131, 282, 313, 348n-9 
Anathapingika, 845 
Andai, Pisir, 555 
Andha-attakatha, 651 
Andhaka(s) 368, 381-2, 655 
Andhakaveijhu, 381 
Andhau, 276-7, 280, 309n-10n 
Andher, 71 3n, 741 

Andhra(s), see also Satavahanas, origin 
and home land, 296-9; social position 
of, 468; in Asoka's, inscriptions, 25; 
and: Mauryas, 25; Sungas Yajnasena, 
96, 98, 101; conquest of Magadha, 101, 
103-4; and Kharavela, 113; dynasty and 
kings, 103-4, 113, 301-24, 326, 804-5; 
period of rule, 103; extent of power, 
102, 275, 323; and Kshatrapas, 280, 
323; decline of, 252, 322-6, 335; and: 
Abhlras, 323-5 ; Pahlavas, 335; feudatories 
of, 360, 805; coins, 97, 280, 323-6, 804-6; 
ware, 724, 726; structure and stupas, 
733-4, 736, 852; sculpture, 747, 752; 
culture, 725 ; — Sufiga, 98 
Andhra-bhfityas, 296, 298-9, 640, 805-6 
Andhra (desa), 297, 323, 624; location, of, 
23, 296n, 298n, 804; capital of, 298; 
conquered by Bipdusara, 23; under: the 
Satavahanas, 297-9 & n, 324, 333; the 
Ikshvakus, 333, 335; communication 
with Ceylon, 618; scripts and language 
of, 618, 807; school of sculpture, 750; 
inscriptions of, 61 9n; coins of, 323-4, 
805-7; Buddhist missions to, 86, 359; 
Stupas of, 297 
Andhraka schools, 368-70 
Andhraka (Puranic Sunga king), 101 
Andhrapatha, 335-6 
Andhrasundarl, 852 

Androcottus, 7; see also Chandragupta 


Androsthenes of Cyzicus, 45-6 
Anekanta, 358n 
Anga (country), 112, 115, 707n 
Angas (Jaina canonical texts), 115n, 356, 
_ 358,408 

Angirasa ( gotra ), 381 


Ghora, 381, 391-2 


Aniruddha, 384-7, 390, 679n, 757 


Annam, 772-3 
Anporundam, 539 
antas, 7, 26-7, 39 

Antalikada, Antialcidas (Indo-Greek ruler), 
174, 180-1; king of Taxila, 102, 167; family 
of, 177; succession of, 180; dominion of, 
167, 180; mentioned in inscriptions, 102, 
168, 180; titles of, 177, 180-1 ; his ambassa- 
dor to Sunga court, 102, 180, 387; 
successor of, 181; coins of, 167, 177-8, 
180, 473n, 785, 792, pi. II (2, 4) 
anta-mahamdtras, 30, 39 
Antigonus (Gonatus), 7, 26, 140-1 
Antimachus Niciphorus, Theos, 149, 158-60, 
162, 169, 176-7, 195, 200, 340n, 783, 786, 
pi. I (6), pi. Ill (1) 

Antioch, 141 

Antiochus I Nicator Soter, 19, 78, 143-4, 158, 
172 

II Theos, 7, 26, 144-6, 158 

Ill Magnus, 45-6, 78, 147-8, 151-2, 

162, 188, 340 

IV Epiphanes, 141n, 162, 439 

Anula, 582-3, 588, 590, 604, 607 
anuloma (form of marriage), 486 
Anupa, 312 

Anuradhapura, 582, 609; variant names of, 
600; description of city of, 593, 595; kings 
of, 575-6, 580-9, 591-602; extent of power 
of kings of, 576, 592; titles of kings of, 
589, 602; capital at, 577, 585, con- 
quered by Dutthagamani, 581; battles 
fought at, 515; trade routes to and from, 
597; Tamil guilds at, 598; early Tamil 
buildings in, 579; tanks of, 593, 595, 602, 
624; religions in, 604-5 ; Mahinda’s mission 
to, 610; vihdras, chetiyas, dagaba, etc. 568, 
_587, 613, 620; inscriptions at, 585 
Anvikshiki, 659-60; see also Vedas 
Aomos, 119 
Aparagodana, 764 
Aparajita, 80 

Aparamaha Vinaselya (a sect), 741 
Aparanta (Konkon), 73, 86, 134, 278-9, 
312-13, 323, 331-2, 353, 369, 434, 765 
Aparantaka, 365 ; see also Aparanta 
Aparasaila, 366, 368 
Aparatike, 279; see also Aparantaka 
Apasmarapurusha, 403 
Apastamba, 654-5, 661 ; see also Dharmasutra 
of Apastamba 
Apaya (underworld), 61 1 
Apliaka, 304, 326 

Apollo, 150, 157, 163-4, 169-70, 176-8, 198, 
702, 783, pi. I (10) 

Appolodorus of Artemita, 148n, 151, 153-4, 
160 

Apollodoto(u)s, family of, 161 ; mentioned 
in Indian literature, 168; titles of, 170 
pi. II (6, 8, 12); chronological position of, 
170-1, 174; advance to India, 154; extent 
of his kingdom, 154, 170-1; and: Bactria, 
167; Eucratides, 161; Demetrius, 154, 



858 


INDEX 


340n; Menander, 154, 169, 174; coins of, 
135, 164, 167-8, 170-1, 178, 195, 198, 
200n, 201, 383, 784, 792, 797, pi. II 
(6, 8, 12) 

II, 170-1 

Philopater, 177-8, 185 

Apollonius of Tyana, 120, 213, 221 
Appoilophanes, 177-8 
Appian (author), 7 & n 
Aptamimamsa, 411 

Ara (inscription), 243, 245-6, 248, 266, 345n 
Arabia, 435, 598-9, 601 
Arabian Sea, 338 

Arachosia (Kandahar), 152; satrapy of, 7-8, 
139; under: Seleucids, 7-8, 141; Bactrian 
Greeks, 148, 152; Parthians, 165, 192, 
194, 201, 203, 210, 217; Sakas, 182, 191, 
194; ceded to Chandragupta, 7, 141; 
Megasthenes in, 8; coins of, 191; trade 
with China and India, 791 
Araiyam, 531 

Aranyaka (s), 300, 378, 383n, 393; Taitiriya 
— , 300, 383, 383n, 393, 404n, 552 
Arattas or Arash(rakas (republican tribe 
of Punjab), 3, 123-4 
Archebius, (king), 175, 181-2, 209, 785 

,-Arcot (district), North , 403, 524n, 725n, 

729; South , 524n, 531, 550, 729, 746 

Ardeshir I, 214, 250-1 
Ardha-Magadhi, 629-31, 649-51 
ArdhanSri, Ardhanariivara, 565, 746 
Ardhaphalaka, 357 
Ardochso (deity), 248, 790, pi. VI (4) 
Arhat-pravachana-samgraha-paramagama- 
sara, 408 

Arhatyana (Pratyeka Buddha), 240 
Aria(Herat), 7, 139, 142, 148, 165, 191 
Ariaca, Ariake, 279, 434 
Ariana, 139 

Arikame(e)du, 438n, 440,440n-ln, 724, 726, 
756 

Arimanavayil, 510 
Arish(as, 124 
Arishianemi, 381, 390 
Aristobulus, 123 

Ariyappadai-Kadanda, 524, 544 
Ariyavamsa, 606 

Arjuna ( Mahabharata-hero ), 109, 313, 381-4, 
386, 392-3, 421, 484n, 494n, 551, 641, 
645-7, 672 

Arjunayanas, 109, 126,128, 255-7,342,788-9 
Arkatos (Arcot), 26 
Arkkadu, 510 

Arrian (classical writer), on: political con- 
dition of N. W. India, 116; Mauryan army, 
13; Mauryan revenue, 56; castes, 18, 66-7 
dress and ornaments, 69-70, 73-4; industry, 
74; communities, 117-8, 120-30; Porusand 
territory, 122; Sophytes, 142; Sagala 
(city), 152; cities, 708; Heracles, 383 
Arsakes, Arsaces (ruler of Urasa), 121, 145, 
217 

Arsaces III, 45 


VI, 163, 193 

Arsacid(s), 178, 213-14, 252, 787 
Arfi, 225 
Arta, 267, 270 
Artabanus III, 215 
Artemidorus, 177, 199, 213 
Artemis, 140 &n, 147, 169, 177, 181, 199, 
200n, 783 

Artemita, 151, 153-4, 160 
arthakavi, 649 

Arthasastra, Bdrhaspatya, 128n, 658 

(of Kautilya), 50, 52, 434, 452, 642, 

657, 764; nature and character of 52-3, 
55, 649, 666-8; date and authorship of, 10, 
50, 55; on: foreign rule, 2; duties of king, 
22; state officials, 30, 62, 348; state funct- 
ions, 30; castes and tribes, 30; protection 
of women, 30; state finance, 48, 61-2; 
administration of justice ( kantakaiodhana 
courts), 51, 62-3; exaltation of royal 
power, 51-2; non-monarchical states, 54, 
131; state ownership of land, 57; agri- 
culture and marketing, 57 ; machinery 
of government, 58-66; public works of 
utility, 62; foreign policy, 63-4; military 
system, 64-5, 76; society, 22, 66-70; 
slavery, 470-1 ; industry and trade, 70-80, 
433-5, 437, 451-2, 764; espionage, 469 ; 
guilds, 8; politics of Saurashtra, 8,54, 
131; religion, 80-1, 389, 656; cities, 80, 
708; popular lore and technical sciences, 
667-8; character of Mauryan monarchy, 
65-6; and Indica, 52-3, 55; refers to 
China-patta, 764; see also Kautilya 
Aruhai, 512, 523 
Arundhati, 551 

Aruvandai, Ambar Kijan, 514, 546 
Aruvar, 542 n 

Aryadeva, (disciple of Nagariuna), 376-7, 
_ 664, 666 

Aryadinna (Dinasuri), 360 
Arya khaputa (ascetic), 361 
Arya-Manjusri Mula-kalpa, 19 
Aryamitra (king of Kosala), 106, 133, 135 
Aryarakshita, 357 

Aryan(s), 544; language and dialects, 572-4, 
577, 669; in central India, 412; and pre- 
Aryan & non-Aryan elements, 412-13, 
472,498, 697; influence in South, 498; 
culture, 319; introduction of rituals in 
South by, 567; settlements, 467; and 
other castes, 467; immigrants in Ceylon, 
571, 573; settlements in Ceylon, 573-8, 
593; place names, 572 &n; settlers of 
Ceylon, 574-5, 577; Indo— , 132, 378, 

627-32; pre , 412, 498, 697; non , 

.472, 697 

Aryappadaikadanda, 544 
Arya-safigha, 369 
Arya-saptasati , 652 
Aryavarta, 189, 467, 475 
Asali, Aya, 579, 580-1 
Asanga, 377-8, 416, 418 



INDEX 


859 


Asani, 394 
Ascharya -vihara, 372 
Asela, 576, 579-80 
Ashadha, 362n 

Ashadhasena (king of Ahichchhatra), 106-7, 
370 

Ashtadhyayi (of Panini), 110, 381, 395, 634 
Ashlaka (tribe), 117-18 

Asia, 140, 142, 366n, 391; Central ,162, 

186-8, 218, 236, 370, 372-3, 631, 633, 636, 

648, 663, 665, 701, 705, 764, 766-7, 792; 

Western , 340-1, 343, 599, 795 

Minor, 144, 150, 224, 263, 790 

Asiriyar, Nallanduvanar, 681 
Asmakas, 5 

Asoka, 43-4, 49, 68, 78, 80, 115-16, 347, 352, 
364-5, 638, 669, 751, 765, 765n, 767, 846; 
parentage and family of, 19-21, 43, 609, 
649; as viceroy of Ujjain, 19-20, 133; 
deputed to quell rebellion in Taxila, 19-20; 
contest for throne, 19-20, 22; accession, 
20; date and chronology of, 10, 21-2, 
27n, 43, 621-2; appellations of, 21, 339; 
private life, 21-2; life before conversion 
to Buddhism, 22, 614; conquest of Kalinga 
and its effects, 23-4, 66, 77, 111; con- 
version to Buddhism, 24, 30-4, 84-5; 
extent of empire of, 24-7, 499; and antas, 
26-7; relation with West and Greeks, 7, 
25-6, 39-40, 77, 117, 131, 282, 472, 764; 
administration of, 27-30, 39, 60, 62, 78, 
316, 339, 364, 555; provinces and vice- 
royalties of, 21, 28-9, 107, 111, 120; sends 
Kunala to quell rebellion at Taxila, 765 
&n; his Dhamma, 34-5, 376; bans injury 
to living beings, 38-9, 81 ; his Dhammavi- 

jaya promotion and propagation of 

Dhamma missionary activities, 35-40, 

54, 85-6, 606-9, 621, 679, 765-6, 771; 
results of his missionary activities, 41-2; 
and Buddhism, 82-6, 364n, 606-7, 614, 

649, 684; religious policy, 32-3, 67, 81-2, 
115, 379-80, 399; relation with Ceylon, 
31, 39, 85-6, 515, 574, 576, 578-9, 592, 
606-9, 621, 649, 765; death and succes- 
sors of, 43-9, 65, 148, 295, 339; estimate 
of, 42-3; inscriptions of, 7-8, 10-11, 20, 
22-5, 47, 50, 60, 66, 81-2, 84-5, 117, 351, 
379, 472, 499, 515, 574, 578, 607-8, 628, 
630, 650, 725, 764, 848; architecture 
and art, 86-93; architecture: palace, 87-9, 
846; rock-cut sanctuaries, 87,717-19,721, 
742; columns and pillars, 87, 89-92, 624, 
693, 745, 748, 846; stupas, 84, 90, 650, 
713 An - 15, 846; sculptures, 74, 91-3,624, 
684-5, 693-4; Edicts of: Rock Edicts, 7-8, 
11, 21, 24n, 25-7, 32-3, 35, 35n-6, 38, 
38n-9, 42, 60n, 66, 81, 111 & n, 131, 379, 
499, 578; Pillar Edicts, 22n, 25, 34n, 
36-9, 47, 82, 84, 399, 472, 630, 650, 721 ; 
visits Ramagrama stupa, 847 

asoka-grove, 643-4 

Asokarama, 83-4 


Asokavaddna, 607, 609, 614 
Asokavarma (Pallava), 499 
^Aspa, Aspavarma, 206, 208-10, 214-15,217- 
18, 221, 264, 344n, pi. IV (3) 

Aspasians, Aspasioi (Hippasioi of Strabo), 
118 

Aspeisas, 144 
asrama, (Sannyasa), 660 

— , ( Vanaprastha ), 660 

Assakenians, Assakenos, 118, 120, 782 

Assakenos (leader of Massaga), 118 

Assakas, 782 

Assam, 435 

Assamukhi, 577n 

Assikas, 113 

Assyria, 90 

astagiri, 551 

Astes (Hasti or Ashfaka, see also Ashtakas), 
117 

Astynomoi (town officials), 12, 52 
Asura(s), 392, 552, 566, 611, 660 
asura (form of marriage), 482 & n, 
dsura-vijaya, 9, 116 

Asvaghosha (theologian), 376, 638-41, 657, 
660, 664-5, 667; early life of, 373-4, 640; 
presented to Kanishka, 237; associated 
with Kanishka, 373, 391, 665; date of, 
640, 648; works of, 235-6, 373-4, 391, 416, 
628, 631-2, 639-41, 648, 660, 665; ori- 
ginator of a system of philosophy, 373-4; 
religion of, 373-4, 416, 640, 664; influence 
of, 648 

II, 665 

(king of Kausaihbl), 107-8 &n, 133, 

80In 

Asvakas, Asvakayanas (same as Aspasioi), 
4,118-19 

Asvamedha (horse sacrifice), legendary per- 
formers of, 53; performed by: Pushyami- 
tra, 97-9, 339n, 364; Satakarni, 302; Pra- 
varasena, 328, 330; Bharasivas, 331; 
Ikshvakus, 333, 353; Sarvatata, 393; 
coins commemorating horse sacrifice, 135 
Asvamitra, 362n 
Asvatthaman, 647, 773 
Asvins, 80 
Atavi-SantisrI, 334 
Atash (z. deity), 790, pi. V (6) 
atavikas, 3 

Athamasa (on coins), 220n, 

Athena, 142 
Athenaeus, 8, 69 
Athene Alkis, 181 

Promachus, 170-1, 173-4, 176, 178, 

205 

Athens, 120, 142 
atimargika, 400 
Atthakatha, 612, 617, 621, 651 
Atti, Attam, 543 
Attic helmet, 142 

-measure, 792, 794 

-silver, 164 

standard, 166-7, 180, 786 



INDEX 


system, 143, 170 

weight, 142, 785 

Attock, 245 

Auddehikas (people), 134 
Audumbaras, 109, 133, 135-6, 185, 342 
& n, 797-800 

Anduvan, 506, 517, 526-7, 533, 540 
AnduvanjelJai, 506-7 

Augustus (Roman emperor), 228, 231, 344, 
516, 599, 673-4, 725, 795 
Aurangabad, 742 

Auvai(yar), 514, 530, 535, 544, 552, 554-5 
Avadana, avadana (literature), 642, 649, 654 
Avadanakalpalata, 172 
Avadanasataka, 447 &n, 465n, 485, 490-ln, 
496, 649, 659 

A valokitesvara-guna-kdrandavyuha , 665 
Avanti, 119; under; Mauryas, 19; Sungas, 
97-8; Satavahanas, 97-8, 312-13; Nahapana 
279; western satraps, 287, 321; black- 
smiths from, 724; invitation for 2nd 
Buddhist council to people of, 82; coins of, 
_ 781 

Avanti-prakfits, 628 
Avantikumara (Sukumara), 359 
avarodhana (harem), 20, 68 
Avasyakasutra ( niryukti ), 279, 312 
avatars, 387n, 593 
Avestan, 266n 
Avur, 548 

Ay Eyinan, 510-11, 527-8, 538 
Aya, 205-6, 208 ; see also Azes 

Sura Tissa, see also Tissa, 579 

Siva, 579 

Ayachuda, 690 
aydgapatas, 363, 700, 849 
Ayama, 271, 274-6, 348n 
Ayasi Kamudha, Kamusa, 270 
Ayilishasa, 205-6; see Azilises, 

Ayodhya, 100, 153; under Sungas, 97; re- 
ferences to Yavana invaders in, 95, 153; 
post-Suhga independent principality at, 
104-5; local dynasty at, 339; Ikshvakus of, 
333, 642; Dasaratha of, 642; Rama's 
return to, 644; rulers of, 105, 798-9; dress 
of the queens of, 433n; dress and orna- 
ments of the people of, 496n-7n; gold- 
smiths of, 435n; inscriptions from, 94, 
97, 101, 105; coins at, 94, 100, 104-5, 
133, 406 799-800, pi VII (1,4); journey 
of Vasishtha’s messengers from, 438n 
ayudhajivisamghas (of Panini), 3, 123 
ayukta (officials), 29 
Ayumitra ( Ay limit asa ), pi. VII (4) 

Ayyamita, 133; see also Aryamitra 
Azania, 599 
Azes (same as Aji), 772 
Azes I, 196; family and nationality of, 194, 
204, 207; successor of Maues, 192, 196, 
201; group of kings, 194, 204-5; dynasty 
of, 220n; and: Maues, 207; Spalirises, 
202-3, 203n, 206-7 274; Vonones, 203; 
titles of, 197-8, 205-6, 208, 246, 343, pi. 


Ill (9), pi. IV (1); date of, 207-8, 213n, 
702; era started by, 207, 213n; chrono- 
logical position of, 196-8, 204-9; suc- 
cessor of, 198; associated with Gandhara 
art, 702-3; archaeological strata of, 206; 
and Hippostratus, 179, 207; empire of, 
207; coins of, 197-8, 200, 202-3, 205-8, 
274, 343, 786-7, pi. Ill (9, 11), pi. IV 
(1-2) 

II, son and successor of Azilises, 203n, 

207; nationality of, 207; titles of, 197-8, 

205- 6, 246, 343; and: Spalirises, 203n, 

206- 7; Aspavarma, 206, 208-10, 218, 264, 
344n; dominion of, 209-10; chronological 
position of, 196-8, 204-5, 206-10; suc- 
cessor of, 209-10, 215, 218; archaeological 
strata of, 206; coins of, 197-8, 205-6, 

207- 9, 215, 219, 786-7, pi. IV (3) 

Azilises, 220n; successor of Azes I, 203n, 

207; nationality of, 194, 207; titles of, 197, 
205-6, 246, 343, pi. IV (4); dominion of, 
209; chronological position of, 196-8, 
204-9; coins of, 197-8,205-6, 208, 219-20 
n, 246, 786-7, pi. IV (4); represented 
by Rajuvula at Taxila, 219 


Ba phnom (in Cambodia), 773 
Babar, 118 

Babhravy (author from Pafichaia), 667 
Babylon, 7, 140-1, 163, 263, 445, 517, 791 
Bacare (port town), 438 
Bactra (variant of Bactria), 139n, 147, 785 
Bactria, 138-9, 231; location & people of, 
138-40, 223; Vendidad on, 139n; under: 
Achaemenids, 139, 141; Alexander, 117, 
119, 139-40; Seleucids, 7, 45, 78, 140-3, 
148; Diodotus I & II, 143-7, 264; Euthy-, 
demus I & II, 45-50, 157; Demetrius 
46-7, 149-52, 155; Eucratides, 114, 155-7, 
160-6; Heliocles, 161, 166-8, 181; Partis- 
ans, 165-6; Scythians, 165-6, 168; Yuechis 
& Sakas, 186-7, 189, 191, 223, 225-6; 
Kushaijas, 248.255; Sassanians, 251-2; 
trade with India and China, 78, 449; 
Chinese ambassador in, 449; coins from, 
141-7, 149-50, 156-9, 161, 163-4, 166, 
181, 184-5, 248, 783-5, 792 
Bactriana (variant of Bactria), 139 
Badakhshan, 119, 223, 244 
Badarayana, 428 
Badarikasrama, 384 
Baghelkhand, 258 

Bahasatimita, Bahasatimitra (king), 98,106-7, 
114, 133, 340n, 370 
Bahawalpur, 125-6 
Bahika, 132 

Bahiya (king of Ceylon), 583 
Bahlhi & Bahlika(s), 4, 139, 432n, 764-5 
Bahudhahaka, Bahudhdnyaka (on Vaudheya 
coins), 798, 800 


Ha-! I 

Bairat, 719 


ist school), 366, 368-9 
95n-6n, 293, 339 



INDEX 


861 


Baithana, 278, 316; see also Paithaaa 
Bajaur, relic casket ins., 174, 219; seal from, 
184n; part of Menander’s dominion, 174, 
264 

3akhira(Basarh), 848 
Bala Bhikshu, 237, 254 

Friar 240, 272, 697 

Balabhuti, 268, 271, 799, 801 u 
Baladeva, name of Samkarshana, 382, 384; 
one of the Kiras, 384, 390; as a S aldka- 
purusha, 390; iconographic concept of, 
746; colour of, 757; shrines dedicated to, 
731; worshippers of, 379 
Balaka (sculptor), 749 
Balamitra (Suhga king ), 98, 690 
Balarama, 389, 547 

Balasiri (Balasri) Gautairu, mother of Saia- 
kariji, 315; as regent, 47 7 ; deed granting 
endowment of, 351; Nasik ins. of, 29Sii, 
300, 312-13 
Balhika, 132 
Baleokuros, 314n, 805 
Bali (codling), 81 

(island), 658, 776 

(P uranic figure), 638 

ball (oblation), 535 

(tribute), 534 

Balkh, 139n, 149, 765 
Balia Hisar, 702 
Baluchistan, 72, 192-3 
Bamiyan, M9, 702 

Buna (author), 305; writer and Court poet 
of Harshavardhann, 94; on: Pushya- 
mitra, 46, 65, 94-5 & n; Sumitra, 100; a 
Suhga king killed by female attendants, 
1,02; a Naga king of Paumavatl, 258; 
Satavahar.as, 299, 305, 313, 323; Guna- 
dhya, 306; Vritti, 635n; works of, 94, 9:n 
-6n, 105, 258; on Devabhuti, 102 
Banaras, 431, 433-4; see also Benares 
Banavasi, capital of Kuntala, 325; under: 
western Kshatrapas, 308; Sata\ahanas, 
336n; Chutas of, 325-6, 334, 337, 353; 
Kadamba family of, 332; a market town, 
307; ins. of, 326, 337 
Bandar (Port), 319, 565 
Bandhogarh, 259-61 
Bandhuma (king), 851 
Banahupalita (son of Kunala), 43 
Bangalore, 728n-9 
Bangarh (Dinajpur), 705, 849 
Banswara (state), 285, 289 
Bapaka (general), 331, 34Sn 
Barabar (hills), location, 114, 846; dedicated 
by Asoka, 44; Asokan rock-cut sanc- 
tuaries at, 89 ; Kharavela’s invasion of, 
112, 114; rock-cut caves at, 717-19, 721, 
739, 845; Lomosa-rishi cave at, 846 
Barake(port), 674 
Baramula Pass, 244 
Barnasa, R, (Banas), 311 
Baroda, 93, 286, 323, 693-4 
Barygaza, Bharukachchha or Broach (port), 
109 


170, 242, 279, 307, 309, 311, 438n, 771; 
protection given by Sake rulers, 349; 
foreign ships sailing into, 279, 309, 349; 
under Nahapana, 279 & n. 309, 312; 
Satava'nana conquest of, 312; under 
Abhiras, 332: voyages from. 447; inland 
routes to, 307, 43 S & n; Indian goods 
brought to, 307-8: trade, 71, 30S; exports 
from, 445-6, 449; imports into, 242, 
307, 434, 435n, 444-6. 449 
Basarh, 93, 104, 287, 705, 710, 720. 848 
Basavakkulam, Ahhuyavava, 595, 624 
Batiicaioa (district), 575, 580, 604 
Baudhayana, 55, 334, 482-3, 660 

Bharrr.asutra, 3 

Gjihyasuu-a, 474n 

Srnutasiiira. 95 

Baveru (Babylon), 71 
Bazar (site of Bazira), 1 19 
Bnzdeo (Kushana king Vasudeva), 248 
Eazira, 199 

Seas, R„ 109-10, 121-2, 124, 126, 135-7, 342 
Bedali (ins.), 370 

Bedsa, 307. 319, 742, 744, 747-8, 760, 763, 850 
Begram (site of Nicaea), 1 17, 270 
Behistun (in Persia), 89 
Benakataka, 298n, 313 
Benakatokasvami, 298n 
Benares, 256n, 258n; kings of, 579n, 606n; in 
kingdom of KausambI, 108; Kushana 
empire extended to, 237 767; provincial 
centre of Kharapallana, 272; Kushana 
coins from, 233; clay seals from, 105n, 
ins. of, 237; textiles from. 73, 433-4; 
sandal wood of, 431; see also Banaras 
and Kasi 

Bengal, 132, 43 In, 433-6n, 705 
Berar, 302, 304, 310, 312-13, 329, 436 
Berenice (Egyptian porti, 446, 599 
Besnagar, under Sungas. 102; excavation at, 
289; C-aruda pillar of Heliodorus at, 47, 
102. 180, 641, 655; clay sealing at, 473n; 
antiquities discovered from, 497n; ins. 
from, 47. 102, 180, 184. 473n, 641, 655; 
coins from. 289, 777, 781, 799; sculptures 
from, 693-4, 71 1 ;— Yakshini, 849 
Bezwada, 740, 756 
Bhavadasa, 662 
Bhaora (ins.). 629-30 
Bhaddakachchana. 609 
Bhaddasala, Bhadrasala (Nan da comman- 
der). 6; companion of Mahinda, 608 
Bhadra, 250, pi. VI (3) 

Bhadrabahu (Jaina saint), 358; predecessor 
of, 355; prediction about famine, 48, 356; 
and Chandragupta, 44, 81, 355, 498; 
migration to south, 9, 48, 81, 357, 498; 
and schism, 357-8, 651 ; waiter of niryuktis, 
662; death of, 357n-8 & n,; life of, 356; 
works of, 358; second — , 662 
— — author of Avasyakasutraniryukti, 279, 662 

charita, 356 

Bhadrabala (Magha king), 261 



862 


INDEX 


Bhadradeva (Magha king), 261 
Bhadraghosha (Panchala king), 106, 135 
Bhadramagha (Magha king), 259-61 
Bhadramukha (Magha king), 277, 286, 639 
Bhadrayaniya, Bhadayaniya(s), (sect) 312-13, 
320, 366, 369 

Bhadrayasas (on coins), 176, 360 
Bhaga (deity), 170 

Bhagabhadra, Kasiputra, 102, 180-1, 339n 
Bhagadatta, 170. 

Bhagala, (a chief), 5, 121-2; see also Phegelas 
Bhagalpur, 707n 
Bhagavan, 389, 420 
bhagavata, 135, 388 

Bhaga vata(s), 382; Mahadeva (Audum’oara 
king) as, 135; Heliodorus as, 180, 387-8, 
473, 655; deities of, 380, 392; tenets of, 

385- 6, 390-1; vyuha doctrines in cult of, 

386- 7; Vishiju in cult of, 379; and Jainas, 
391; cult of, 389-90; subdivisions and 
schools of, 247, 390, 419; influence of, 
391, 655; — emblems, 139n;— cult, 379, 
381, 387-8, 389, 390-3; —creed, 387 

(king of Ahichchatra), 106 

(Sunga king), 101 & 101n-2, 181 

Bhagavadgita, 386; author & time of, 391, 
420; doctrines of, 67, 385-6, 391, 393, 
664; Arjuna and Krishna in, 384, 647; 
absence of vyuha-docirint in, 387; doctrine 
and philosophy of, 67, 420-1, 660; message 
of 647; influence of, 391, 641, 647, 656-7, 
661, 664 

Bhagavatism, founder of bhakli - school of, 
247; Greek convert to, 180; and Jainas, 
390; and other creeds, 390-2; foreigners 
converted to, 701; influence of, 655; 
and vyuha- doctrine, 386-90; 
Bhagavati-sutra (Jaina text), 399 
Bhagirathl, R., 331 

Bhaja, Buddhist caves at, 319; xihdra & 
chaitya halls at, 319, 742-4, 748, 760, 
850; sculptures at, 747-8; fragments of 
painting at, 763; Surya and Indra panels 
at, 748, 850; ins. from, 307, 319 
bhakti school, 247, 633, 711 

path, 420 

Bhallika, 765 

bhandagarika (treasurer), 590-1 
Bhanumit(t)ra (Sihga king), 98, 106, 135, 800 
Bharadvaja (writer), 635 

— (sage), 494, 496 

Bharasivas, 258, 330-1 

Bharata (author of Natyasdstra), 638-40 

(epic hero), 438n, 494n, 496, 642-3 

(name of a tribe), 190, 645 

Bharata, 645, 647 

, battle of, 672 

Bharatavarsha, 1 14, 255 
Bharatpur, 125 
Bhargava dynasty, 775 
Bharhut, 258; under: Sungas, 99, 339, 686; 
Bharasivas, 258; ins. from, 94, 96n, 99n 
339, 465n, 629, 650, 686; art and archi- 


tecture (general) 684, 686-9, 693-4, 697, 
700, 703, 705, 750, 758; sculptures, 93, 
624, 686-8, 690-1, 700, 718, 747, 750, 
758, 850; architecture (stupas), 93, 339, 
629, 650, 686-91, 708, 714, 718, 745; 
railing pillar, 845; medallion, 845; re- 
presentation of coins in monuments of, 
777; school of, 848, 851 
Bhatridaman, 273, 290-2 
Bhatrihari, 635-6 

Bharukachchha or Broach, see Barvgaza, 279 
Bhas?., 345n, 444, 496n, 628, 631, 640-1 
Bhatikabhaya (king of Ceylon), 584, 617-8, 

Bhatinda, 128 

Bhattiprolu, monastery at, 736; railing in, 
734; stupas at, 319, 490, 712, 732, 734, 
749; casket from, 75, 490; ins. from, 297, 
500 

Bhavadatta (king), 108, 134 
Bhavanaga, 258-9, 330 
Bhavanandam, 525n 
Bhavasvamin (commentator), 658n 
Bkikshu-sutra(s) (of Parasarya and Kar- 
manda), 661 

Bhilsa, 102, 303 & n, 369, 713, 741 
Bhlma (epic hero), 641, 645-6 
Biilmam, 306 
Bhimanaga, 258 
Bhimaratha, 637 

Bhimasena (KausambT ruler), 259-60n, 313 
Bhlma varman, 261-2 
Bhir mound, 638, 779 
Bhishar.ana (a demon), 306 
Bhishma, 484n, 645, 647 
Bhita, 260-1, 705-6. 710 
Bhitargaon (temple), 731 
Bhoja(s),^ ethnic name, 316, mentioned in 
Asoka's ins. 25; location of their country, 
25; under: Mauryas, 25, 293; Satava- 
hanas, 301, 316; as independent ruling 
powers, 112; Buddhist mission to, 86; 
titles derived from, 316-17 
Bhojakas, 112, 655 
Bhopal, 180, 689, 741 
Bhrigu Maharshi, 657, 775 
Bhpgukachchha, see Barygaza 
bhritakas, 68 

Bhumaka, 273-5, 292, 309, 348, 807 
Bhumi (deity), 800 

Bhumimitra (Kanva king), 103, 106, 800 
Bhuteswar (Yakshinls), 700, 849 
Bhuvanaikabahu V, 617n 
Bhuvanesvara, 111, 115, 721 
Bible, The Holy, 658, 670 
Bihar, coins from, 137; expansion of Jainism 
beyond, 365; terra-cottas in, 705; Cham- 
panagara in, 707n; Barabar caves in, 
71 7-1 S; Nagarjuni hills in, 44, 724; 
Rajmahal traps of, 443 
Bijnaur-Bagat, 329 
Bimbisara, 574, 621 

Bmdusara, 19, 41, 637-8, 667; title of, 19; 



INDEX 


863 


birth-story of, 667; accession, date & 
chronology, 10, 19, 43; conquests of, 19, 
23; quelling of rebellion at Taxila, 19, 
120; empire of, 19; relation with Greeks, 
19, 27; administration of, 19; death & 
successors of, 20, 41; sculpture assigned 
to the time of, 87; reigning period of, 
27n 

Birani (story of), 615 
B'iu-kam-tuo-luo, 772 
Bm-nam (Fu-nan), 773 
Bnam (Phnom), 773 

Bodhgaya, Asoka’s pilgrimage to, 29; 
temple at, 93; ins. from, 105, 134; art & 
architecture of, 684, 6S9, 691-3, 700, 703, 
845 ;representation of coins in monuments 
of, 777 ; — Railing piliars, 845 ; school of, 
848 

Bodhi(s), 333, 417 

shrine, 689; platform, 845 

tree (also Bo-tree), symbol of Buddha, 

240, 265, 687, 845 ; carried by Sanghamitta 
to Ceylon, 607-9; Asoka's visit to (in 
sculpture), 609, 847; substitute of, 612; 
enlightment of Buddha represented by, 
751; Asoka watering (in sculpture), 751; 
temple of, 754; worship of (in painting), 
758; in Ceylon, 609; — platform, 845; 
in art, 847-8 

Bodhisattva(s), 244, 373, 687; as Buddha, 
119; legends of descent and marriage, 
484; ideals of, 409, 664-5; installation of 
image of. 242; cult of, 620; symbols of, 
687; in ins., 687, 697; representations of 
his life, 762-3; in art, 240, 241-3, 254, 
697, 699, 702-3, 715,762-3, 847, 849,851; 
Fa-hien’s praise of image of, 254; Katra 
— , 698; as minister of Brahmadatta, 
851 

Bodhisattva-yana, 239 
Bolor (route), 191 

Bombay, 275, 290, 307-8, 317, 321, 355, 
438n, 662, 727, 732, 742 
Borobudur, 752 
Brahmas. 611 
Brahma Sahampati, 611 
brahmacharis, 18 
Brahmadatta (king), 851 
Brahmadeya, 80 
Brahmagiri, 9, 725-6 

Brahmamitra (king of Mathura), 108, 134-5, 
689 

Brahman, 428-9, 665 
Brahmanyadeva (deity), 406 
Brahmapuri, 314n 
Brahmaputra, R., 431-2 
Brahma (deity), 419, 746 
brahma (form of marriage), 482, 486 
Brahmanais) (literature), 132, 491-2, 576n, 
634, 650, 668 

Altareya, 126, 128, 132 

Pahchaviriisa, 627 

Satapatha, 392, 394, 712, 77Sn 


Taittiriya, 404n 

Brahminism, Brahmanism, 663, 680; langu- 
age of, 663; philosophy of, 665; influence 
of, 663, 665, 680; and foreigners, 473 & 
n; under: Sungas and Kanvas, 656; 
Sakas, 655 ; Kshatrapas, 656; Satavahanas, 
656; Ikshvakus, 333-4; in southern India, 
548, 577; in Ceylon, 604-6, 610, 612; Vedic 
—723 

Bfihaddranyaka Upanishad, 121, 132 
Brihadratha (last Maurya), 43, 46, 65, 94-6 
100, 104 

Brihaspati (author of Dharmasastra), 651-9 

—(chief star of Pushya constellation), 

98, 115 

Bfihaspatimitra I, 107-8, 133, 135 

11, 106-7, 133, 144-5 

, 801n 

Brihaspatinaga, 258 
Brihasvatimitra, 133 
Brihatkalpasutra, 433n 
Brihatkatha, 305-6, 631, 636-7, 653-4n, 661 
771 


Bfihatkathamahjan, 306, 447, 631, 653, 771 
Brihatkathaslokasamgraiw , 306, 447, 631, 

653, 771 

Brihanamhita, 110, 134, 136, 154, 400, 797 
Bfihaiphalayanas, 335-6, 353 
Broach or Bharukacnchha, see Barygaza 
Bu-ston (story), 364n, 373n 
Bucephala, Bucephalus, 141n, 169, 175 
Buddha (Bhagavan, Gautama, Sakyamuni), 
93, 367, 380, 3S4. 415, 571, 575, 578, 579n 
603, 614, 641, 648. 664,711-12,732, 734, 
765, 847 ; place of birtn, 31, 603 ; legends of 
life, 119, 571-2, 575, 603, 609, 614, 648, 

654, 664, 754-5, 765: enlightment of, 31, 
85, 417-8, 607, 852; conditions in age of, 
116, 131, 379, 707; religion & doctrines 
( dhanwm ) of, 32, 35, 39, 83-4, 99, 239, 
375, 414, 578, 663, 684,767 ; samgha of, 32 ; 
and nirvana, 417-8; nirvarta and after, 
82-3, 413-5, 575, 663; as a reformer, 378; 
cult of, 384; contemporaries of 621, 668; 
language of, 650; preaching of first ser- 
mon, 91; preaching doctrines, 610,612; 
conversions by, 611, 640, 648, 765; and 
Mahayana school, 414; nature & char- 


acter of, 368, 663-4, 413-14, 430, 663; 
relics of, 174, 184, 194, 231, 264-5, 267, 
269, 320, 365, 607, 612, 732, 851; alms- 
bowl of, 237, 607 ; symbols of, 240, 265, 
687, 751; Flinduisation of, 633; in human 
form, 240, 366, 734, 750; on coins, 199, 
231, 474n, 789; in art, 240. 366, 372, 615 
624,687,697. 699, 702-4,711-12, 714-15 
734, 738, 740-1, 745, 750, 752-6, 846-7, 
851-2; installation of image of, 243; 
mentioned in ins. 307-8 ; prophecy about 
Vijay, 573; visits Soparaka, 307-8; visits 
Ceylon, 571-2n; as a historical figure, 
368-71,376; followers of, 611 ; — chaitya, 
734, 741, 852; earlier—, 86, 239-40, 254, 



864 


INDEX 


763; — Kassapa, 660n; — Kanakamuni, 
31 ; Pratyeka — , 239-40, in Bharhut sculp- 
ture, 845; figure at Dharmarajika, 846; 
Great departure from Kapilavastu, 847; 
Seven Buddhas, S47; indnusha Buduhas, 
847 

Buddha-charita , 373, 416, 495n, 648 
Buadhabhadra, 367 
Buddhadatta, 679n 
Buddhadeva, 27G 
Buddhaghosha, 651, 679n, 809 
Buddhanaga (Thera), 809 
Buddhc-pada, 750, 755 
Buddhaputta (Thera), 580n 
Buddhararhbha, 769 
Suddhatvarii, 239 

Buddhism, 148, 364-78, 661, 717; definition 
of, 418; philosophy of, 413-19; under: 
Mauryas, 80-6, 614; Suhgasand Kanvas, 
99, 364-5, 656; Indo-Greek kings, 99, 175, 
364-6, 473n, 655; Sakas and Kushanas, 
233, 238-40, 247,, 254, 475n, 655, 704; 
Auduriibaras,136;Satavahanas,293, 318-20, 
656; Ikshvakus, 334; schools of, 368; and 
other religions, 412, 611; and Christi- 
anity, 39-40; and Bhagnvatism, 391-3; 
and schism, 413-14; concept of nirvana 
in, 414; doctrines of, 414,611-52,660,663; 
history of, 416; spread of, 85-6. 364-6, 
656, 766; in South Indian literature, 566; 
in S. India, 500, 566, 679, 747; in Ceylon, 
568, 573-7, 592, 604. 607-8, 610-26: sects 
of, 665 ; in ins., 247 ; and art, 624, 692, 
701-4, 710, 712, 715, 717, 720; monastic 
organisation of, 720; in Khotan. 765-6; 
in China, 766-70; in E. Turkestan. 766-70; 
in Indo-China & Indonesia, 771-6; in- 
fluence of 39, 363, 613, 652, 660, 701, 

712, 723, 747, 754; Sanskrit , 239, 

663-6; Mahayana , 240, 376-7, 409, 

413-14, 417, 633, 664; Hinayana , 413 

& n, 415, 633, 664; northern ,233 

Buddhist councils (mahasamgiti), at Gaya, 

84-5: second , 82-4, 86; third- — 82-A 

86, 606-7, 649, 765; fourth , 238-40 

Schools, 366-72 

Order, 845 ; see Saritgha 

Buddasvamin (author), 306, 653 
Buddhiia, Budhila (Buddhist Acharva), 270, 
367, 375 

Buhndibagh, 88, 93; architectural remains 
at, 846 

Bundelkhand, 329 
Byzantium, 308 

Caesar (Roman), 345; Julius , 795 

Calcutta, 248, 657n, 687n, 796 
Calicut, 729 

Calliope, 182-3, pi. 111(3) 

Calinga (Kaiihga), 24 
Cambay, Gulf of, 282 
Cambodia, 447n, 773 
Cambyses, 263 


Caracalla (Roman emperor), 600 
Carmania, 139 

Caucasus, 117, 149, 725, 730, 785 
Ceylon, 515, 568-626, 664, 67 6; names, 
geography & peoples of, 498, 501, 515, 
571-2, 574-7; Vaddas ia, 571-2; sources of 
history of, 568-70; Aryanisation of, 
573-8; in classical literature, 498, 574, 
598-600, 674; Tamils in, 515; and: Cholas, 
515, 583; Asoka, 86, 499, 574, 578, 
606-9, 765; early kings of,500, 504,514-15, 
578-88; Vijaya and his successors in, 
573-8; poeis of, 515; Yonamahadhamma- 
rakkhita’s migration to, 117; Aryadeva of, 
376, 666; script, language & literature oi, 
117, 366, 369, 56S-9, 574n, 607, 609, 613, 
615-18, 621-2, 651; religion of, 86, 573, 
575, 587, 604-20, 624; Pattmi cult in, 515; 
system of government of, 5S8-93; eco- 
nomic and social development of, 498, 
565, 574, 577, 593-603; secular life of, 
624-6; ins. of, 500, 515, 569, 616; coins 
from, 570. 598; art and architecture of, 
366, 500, 570, 610, 613-15, 622-4, 724, 
731, 740, 753; and S. E. Asia, 446-48 
Chacn (ancient Chukhsa), 199, 220, 228, 
265-6, 788 

Chaity a, Buddha, 737, 741, 756 

Chaitvasaiia (Buddhist School), 366, 368 

Chaki a varnkshetram, 51, 53 

Chakrava. iin , 53, 175 

Chakrayudha, 132 

Chalmadana (Chet-mo-tan), 767 

Chaiukyas, 330 

Cham (country), 775 

Champa (Champanagara), 71, 707, 773-5 

Cnamtamula, 333 

Chamtisiri, 735, 74! 

Chanakva, 1-3, 6, 19, 120, 667, 673; see also 
Kauplya 

Chandalas, 467-8, 582. 584, 603 
Chandamukhasiva (king of Ceylon), 584, 
593 

Chandana, 236-7 ; see also Kanishka I 
Chandasoka, 83; see also Asoka and Kama- 
soka 

Chandra, 237 
Chandrabodhi, 333 
Chandracharya, 636 
Char.dragiri, 9 

Chandragupta Maurya, 1-19, 45, 60, 104, 
651, 666; predecessor of, 6, 64; early life 
of, 2-4; in classical literature, 2-3, 6-8, 
123; accession and chronology of, 5, 10, 
43; and: Kautilya, 1-2, 3n, 6, 51,54-5, 
61, 80, 120, 123, 667; Alexander, 

2-3, ^5; liberator of India, 2-5, 120; army 
of, 3-4, 8, 13, 123; opposed by a coalition, 
4; war with Nanda king, 5-6, 61; con- 
quests of, 5-8; and Seleucus, 2-3, 7-8, 
26, 77-8, 131, 501; extent of empire, 
6-10, 41, 51, 104; diplomatic relations 
and Megasthenes in court of, 8, 27; 



INDEX 


865 


association with S. India, 8-9, 498; end 
of and date, 9, 19; religion of, 9, 80-1, 
555; administration of, 10-6, 51, 55, 
316; society in period of, 17-9; Greeks in 
his service, 8, 28, 131, 282, 349, Kumranar 
during reign of, 74; successor of, 19 

— I (Gupta king) 132 

II, 249, 330, 361 

Chandragupta-raWid, 332, 725n 
Cnandravaili, 774 
Chang, 774 
Chang Ch’ien, 189n 
Chang-Ki’en, 188, 223, 765-6 
Ch’ang-ngan, 770 
Characene, 791 

Charaka, 254, 435, 659-60, 668 & n 
Charakasamkita, 435n, 668 
Charayaiia, 667 
Charikar, 117, 172 
Charmakhandika, 764 
Charmanvati, R., 97 
Charsadda, 1, 118, 210, 266, 702-3 
Charudatta, 496n, 640 
Chashtana, 474; origin and nationality of, 
273; father of, 273-4, 280; ruler of 
Western India, 236; descendents & 
successors of, 273, 280, 290-2; Indiani- 
sation of, 273; and Nahapana, 274, 276; 
family and line of, 273, 275. 280, 290-2, 
807; and Rudradaman, 276-8; son of, 
276-7; dates of, 276-3, 280-1; accession 
& reign of, 276, 310n; titles of, 274. 
276-7, 280, 309n, 348 & n; joint rule with 
son and grandson. 276, 230-1, 309n; 
conquests of, 278, 280, 309n: royai seat 
of, 287; and Satavahanas, 278, 280-1, 
286, 321 ; uses three scripts, 280; coins of, 
280, 807-8; portrait statues of, 699; ins. 
309n, 

Chatumaharajika, 611 
Chalussataka, 377, 648, 666 
Chchhandasa , 650 
Chi-kien, 768. 770 
Che-mo-tao, 767 
Che-yao, 768 

Chedi (people and country), 4, 11-2, 254, 
332-3, 347 
Chen-li, 772 

Chen-t’an, 236, 767; see also Chandana 
Chenab, R., 120-3, 125-6, 128, 256-7, 267 
Cheou Ta-kuan, 773 
Cher-chen, 767 

Chera (people and country), 548, 555; 
country, 500, 522, 552; kingdom. 499; 
capital, 497, 500, 549; kings, 503, 505-41, 
549, 556, 586, 672, 632, 730; geneology 
and chronology, 505-18; and Yavanas, 
519; agriculture and industry, 552, 565; 
society, 550-63, 566-7; religion, 565-6; 
government, 555-7 
Cheraman (royai dynasty), 541 
Cheta, 15 In, 347 

Cheti (Chedi — royal house), 11-2, 347 


Chetiya, KalyanI, 572n 

Rajayatana, 572n 

Chetiya-parbhata, 584, 619 
Chetiyavadaka, 368 
Cnhahara, 265 ; see also Chuksha 
Chhandasa, 627 

Chhannagarika (Buddhist School), 366 
Chhatresvara, 796, 7S9n 
Chikhalapadra (headquarters of Nahapana). 
279 

Chikhali, 279 
Chikharpajli, 534 
Chikitsasthana, 495n 

China, China, 188,245-6, 665. 774-6; country 
of, 238; domain of rulers of, 222; envoys 
to and from, 204, 765 ; monks and nuns 
from, 369, 767-8; religion (Buddhism) 
of & cultural contact with India, 369, 
371-2, 663-5, 705. 766-71; trade with 
West and India, 516, 765-7; and India, 
448-50 

Chlnabhumi, 74 

Chinnakadaburu, 324 

China-patta, 362, 764 

Chinasthana (China), 767 

Chingleput, Chmgelput, 542n, 726, 729 

Chinna Ganjam, 319, 747, 756 

Chinttakavi , 649 

Chinthan, 236 

Chionites, 252 

Chir tope, 229 

Chitaldurg, S05-6 

Chitor, Chitorgarh, 109, 126, 153 

Chitral. 119, 204, 226 

Chitrangada, 645 

Chitrangada (Pandya princess). 672 
Chitravarma (of Kuluta), 4 
Chittalapabbata, 613 

viltdra, 610 

Chittaraja ( yihara ), 575, 605 
Chittaraja-Yaksha, 577 
Chittavisuddhiprakai ana, 666 
Choaspes (mod. Kunar R.), 118 
Choda(s), fee Cholas, 26, 468, 499; Choda- 
Nagas, 26 

Cliola(s), 9, 23-4, 505, 525, 544-5, 557, 586, 
607, 672; antiquity of, 499; ancestor of, 
126; in Asoka's ins., 9, 26; location of 
their country, 26, 499 ; capital of, 26, 434, 
499 ; Bihdusara’s attempt to conquer, 23 ; 
princes & kings, 506, 510, 513, 524-5, 
532, 535, 540-50; kingdom of. 499; re- 
lation with Cheras, 511, 513, 519-20, 
524, 532-3, 539, 540, 549; commander, 
511; relation with Ceylon, 500, 515, 580, 
583, 587. 598,; history, 541-50; maritime 
empire of, 542; industry, 434, 500; imports, 
598; games and sports, 561 ; poets, 546-7; 
administration. 556; emblem of, 557; life 
of king of, 360; decline of, 550; ins. 531, 
730; funerary practices and architecture, 
730 

Cho]aman<jalam, 23, 435 



866 


INDEX 


Chora-ganas, 3 
Chorakatha, 614 

Choranaga (king of Ceylon), 583, 616 
Chotanagpur, 435 
Chozbo, Chozboa, 266 
Christ, 342, 347, 435, 647, 650, 659-60, 
664, 668n, 756, 758; worship of, 212; 
and Gopala-Krishna, 392; and Buddha, 
39-40 

Christian immigrants to India, 392 

mythology, 21-2 

Christianity, converts to, 212; and: Buddhi- 
sm, 39-40; Bhagavatism, 391-2 
Chryse, 319 
Chu (Saka tribe), 223 
Chu-ch’a-shi-lo (taksha-sira), 119 
Chu-Fa-lan (Dharmaratna?), 767 
Chu-po, 776 
Chu-She-hing, 767 
ChuYing, 773-4 

Chuksha, 119, 220, 228, 241, 264-7, 270, 
788, pi. IV (9) 

Chulabhaya, 584, 617 
Chulavaritsa, 601 
Chullavagga, 650 
Chunar, 91, 93, 693, 747 
Chutu(s), 325-6, 337-8, 353 
Chutuka, 337 

Chutukcu&Dananda, 326, 337, 352n, 805-6 
Chutuka'ta, 337 

Chutukula, 337; Vishnukata , 337 

Cochin, 540, 726-9, 739 
Coimbatore, 725, 729 
Colandia, 319 

Colchi, 435-6n; see also Korkai 
Colombo, 570n, 580n, 622n 
Comorin, Cape, 498-9, 520, 523 
Coromandel, 575, 805 
Cuddapah (district), 334, 741 
Curtius, Quintus, lln, 126; on: condition 
after Alexander’s retreat, 1; Persian 
satraps, 1; Indian tribes, 3,118-19,121-2, 
124, 126-30; Nanda army, 5, 64; Mauryan 
king, 11, 76; political condition of N.W., 
116-7; queen of Asvakas, 118; Aitibhi’s 
presents, 119, 777; territory of Sophytes, 
122; Saubhuti and Alexander, 122; 
dogs of country, 122-3; army of confe- 
derated tribes, 127; tribes submitted to 
Alexander, 127; worship of Vasudeva, 
383; image of Heracles, 383 
Cutch, 276-7, 282 

D a b h o l (port), 308 
Dadhikarna (mythological figure), 379 
Daduru Oya (in Ceylon), 594 
Dagdhamarana (poet), 678n 
Dahanu, Dahanuka, 311 
Daimachus (ambassador), 19, 78 
Dakhanapatha (Dakshinapatha), 297 
Dakhina vihara, 616, 620 
Dakshamitra, 292 
Dakshinapatha, 322, 486 


Dal-ul-Aman (Museum, Kabul), 266 
Damaghsada, 282-7, 292, 808 
Damajada(srl) I, 283, 287, 289, 292 
II, 288, 292 


Daman (Damana), 311 
Damaraja, 579 
Damaraxus (Indian chief), 4 
Damasena, 273, 285, 287, 290, 292n, pi. 
VIII (8) 

Damayanti, 477, 479, 484n 
Damila(s), 369, 515, 679; see also Tamils 
Damis (companion of Appollonius), 120, 
221 

Damodaranar, Maruttuvan, 547 
dandajinika, 397 

Dandapani (father of Gopa), 484n 
Dandaranya, 525 
Dapdin (writer), 306, 651 
Daniel (the Book of,) 141n 
Dantapura, 439n 
Darada(s), 434, 468. 764, 797 
Darius I, 41, 186-7, 263 

Ill, 140 

Dardura (hills), 43 In 
Darshtantika(s), 375 
Darvabhisara, 797 
Dasabhumisvara, 665 
Dasa (tribe), 129 
Dasapura, 279, 311 

Dasaratha, accession and coronation of, 22, 
44; grandson and successor of Asoka, 

43, 81; son of Kunala,_ 43; Puranas on, 
44; dedicates caves to Ajivikas, 44, 81-2; 
son and successor of, 44; ins. of, 22, 

44, 301n; rockcut sanctuaries during reign 
of, 89, 721, 742; edicts of, 44, 301 

(King of Ayodhya & father of Rama a 

131, 642-3 

dasaratra (sacrifice), 302 
Dasarna, 432-33n 
Dasarpabhadra, 359 
Dattaka, 667 

Dattamitra, Dattamitri, 152 
Deccan, 332, 361 ; peoples of, 119; Aryanisa- 
tion of, 627; under: Satavahanas, 293, 
318, 320, 322-3, 350; Kshaharatas, 320; 
Ikshyakus, 333-5, 353 ; Abhiras, 323, 331-3 ; 
Vakatakas, 328-31; Brihatphalayanas 
335-6; Bodhis, 333,338; Nandas in, 498; 


Chandragupta in, 498; administration in 
350-4; religion in, 302, 318, 320, 361 
market towns of, 307; trade of, 320 
social practices of, 334; political organisa 
tion of, 350-4; after Satavahanas, 328-38 
language and literature of, 627, 629, 634 
636; art and architecture of, 320, 634, 717, 


/zu, /jz, /vi-i, nti; inscriptions, 329, 

629; N.W. , 219; under: Bodhis, 

333; Sakas, 219; Satraps, 291; Abhiras, 
331--; art, 732; Eastern — , peoples of, 
502; capital of, 297; inscriptions from, 
294, 315; under: Satavahanas, 294, 297, 



INDEX 


867 


306, 314n-5, 317, 319, 323; Ikshvakus, 
317, 353; coins from, 294, 314n, 323; 
market towns of, 307; ports in, 319; 
administration, 353; religion, 320; art and 
architecture, 320, 738-9, 741, 747; 

Western—, 297-8, 312; inscriptions from, 
294, 297, 319; capital of, 297; under: 
Satavahanas & Andhras, 294, 297-9, 303, 
306, 308, 310, 312, 314n, 317-8, 320, 323; 
Kshaharatas, 310, 320: religion, 320; art 
749 ; coins from, 294,303-4, 31 4n; Yavanas 
in, 306; market towns of, 307; religion of, 
320; arts, 319-20, 736, 738-40, 742-3, 
747; Central — , 297; South-western—, 
337; Southern— 502 
Delhi, 89, 126, 154, 342 
Demeter, 785 

Demetrius I, 97n, 151, 161-2. 188, 340n; 
parentage and family of, 46, 148-9, 161-2, 
169, 172, 188, 340n: king of Baclria. 46-7, 
149, 151-2; leaves Bactria, 155; titles of, 
45, 159, 340n; date of, 161, 174-5; and: 
Menander, 97n, 104, 153-4, 170, 172-3, 
341n, 364; Eucratides, 95, 112, 114, 
155, 159, 162, 168, 170; Antiochus, 
148; in Indian literature, 151, 154, 172; 
in Hathigumpha inscription, 151n; 
establishes Greek settlements, 152; 
invasion and conquest of India by, 46-7, 
95, 98, 112, 114, 149, 151n-2, 154-5, 169; 
date of invasion and retreat, 95n; limit 
of advance in India, 152-3; and Apollodo- 
tus, 154; kingdom of, 341 ; capital of, 341n; 
religion of, 364-5, 473n; end of, 155; 
sons and successors of, 156-60, 169; coins 
of, 140n, 147n, 156-9, 169, 175, 195, 198, 
201, 341, 473, 783-4, 786, pi. I (5); 
Hellenisation of India by, 55; Indianisa- 
tion of, 473 

II (son of Demetrius I), 158n-9, 161, 

340n 

Deslnamamala, 305 

De\a (name of Siva), 214,401 

rulers of Ayodhya, 105 

temple, 401 

Devabhumi, 102n 

Devabhuti (Sunga king), 101 &n-2 
Devadeva Vasudeva, 387 
devadasi, 480 

Devadharman (Maurya king), 43, 46 
Devaki, 379, 381, 385 
devakula, 345n, 605 
Devamant(r)iya, 151n, 172 
Devamitra (king of Kosala), 106 
Deva-naga, 258 

Devanarhp(r)iya (epithet of Asoka), 21, 339 

— (Tissa of Ceylon) see also Tissa, 578-9, 

585, 588-9, 592, 608-9, 614 
Devanapiya, 588 
Devanapiyakula,_588, 601 
Devnar, Ilattu Pudam, 515 
devaputra Xputta), 231, 242, 244-5n, 394 
Devardhigaiji, 657 


Devaraja, 165 

Devarakshita, Jayabahu Thera (Dharmakirti 
II), 617n 

devata, Chulakoka, 687 

deratdkanda, 428 
Devavarman, 776 
Devavrata (son of Santanu), 645 
devavrata, 214 
Devayana, 664 
Devgarh, 308 
Dhamekh (stupa), 716 
Dhamma, 20, 23-4, 31, 33-9, 85; 
see also Dharma of Asoka 

— chakka, 320, 687; Buddhist—, 320, 

499, 578-9,606, 612,617 
Dhammagiri hills (Lesser), 741 
Dhammakirti II, 617n 
Dhammamahdmdtha(s), see dharmamahamd- 


Dhammapada, 374, 630, 632, 665 
Dhamapalasa, 781, 796 
Dhammarakkhita, 86, 765 
Dhammaruchi ( Acharyya), 618 sect, 619-20 
Dha(r)m(m)avijaya of Asoka, 9, 39-41, 116 
Dhammottariya (sect), 320 
Dhamnakata, Dhanakataka, Dhannakataka 
(md. Dharanikot), 296 & n, 298n, 307, 754 
Dhanabhuti, 96n, 99n, 339-40 & n, 6S6n-7n 
Dhanadeva (king of Ayodhya), 96 & n-7, 
101-2, 105 & n. 133 
Dhanaka (family), 334 
Dhana Nanda, 5, 6 
Dhanushkoti, 551 

Dhanyakataka, 298n, 323, 335, 367-9, 377, 
736; see also Dhannakataka 
S'wami, 298n 

Dharaghosha (Audumbara ruler), 109, 135, 
797-8, 801 

dharana (measure & coin), 143, 167n, 778, 
780n, 797 

Dharanikota 297-8n, 307, 335; see also 
Dhanyakataka 

Dharma see Dhamma of Asoka & Asoka 

(law, morality, religion), 350, 528, 

552; and : king, 10, 51, 534; law, 51; 
caste, 190n, 486; Manu on, 657; 
Book of, 656; Rama as embodiment of, 
644; Bhishma’s discourse on, 647 
— sons of, 384 

chakra, 175, 274, 687,751,809; Dhar- 

ma-chakra (of Buddha), 845 
Dharma (Asoka's mother), 19 
Dharmadeva, 243, 340n 
Dharmagupta(s), 663 

Dharmaguptaka (Buddhist School), 366, 
370-1, 769 ; — rinaya, 370 
Dharmakala (Buddhist monk), 769 
Dharmakirti, 640 


dharma-mahamdtras, 29-30, 37, 39, 60, 82, 84 
Dharmamita (Demetrius), 154 & n 
Dharmamrita (Kannada poem), 335 



868 


INDEX 


Dharmapala (Pala king of Bengal), 132-3; 
—796, 801 n 

Dharmarajika stupa, 229, 435n, 497n, 713n, 
715, 719; remains of,_846 
Dharmaraksha, 768, 1 / 0 
Dharmarakshita, Elder, 365 
Dharmaratna, 450n, 767, 769 
Dharmasamgraha, 666 

Dharma sastra(s), 316, 567, 632, 656, 65S, 
661, 666-7; Barhaspatya — 658; Manava — , 
see Manu 

Dharmasoka, 83 ; sec also Asoka 
dharmasthas (jurists), 62, 67 
dkarmasthiya (court), 51, 62 
dharma-stambhas (of Asoka), 89 
Dharmasutra(s ), 62, 49 ln-2, 495, 655-6, 
661; Apastambia — , 656, 661; Baudha- 
yana — , 482-3, 656, 660; Gautama — , 
655-6, 659; Harita— , 656; Saiikha- 

Likhita — , 565; Vasishtha, 656; Vishnu — . 
656 

Dharmatrata(s) (teacher), 374-5, 665 
Dharmavardhana, 491 

dharma vijaya, 116; see also dhamma-vijaya 

Dharmottarlya (school), 366 

Dhatarattha, 611 ; see also Dritarashtra 

Dhauli, 25, 92, 848 

Dhavala, Dhavalappadeva, 49 

Dhenukakata, 365 

Dhfitarashtra, 488, 645-7 

Dhruva, 410 

Dhruvamitra, 106, 135 

Dhvajastambhas, 711 

Didarganj, 93, 693-6; Yaksha image at, 849 
Didm-li, 772 

Digambaras, 81-2, 356-7, 362 
DIghabhanaka(s), 616 
DIghakarayana (Brahmin), 618 
DIghavapi 581, 596 
Dilipa, 657 
Dimbulagala, 579 
Dimka, 292 
Dinnasuri, 360, 362 
Diocletian (Roman emperor), 251, 291 
Diodorus, on: revenue, 56; Nanda array, 
64: social organisation, 18, 66; Indian 
resources, 73; Indian peoples, 73; political 
condition, 116; North Indian cities, 121-2, 
125-6, 128-30; army of Porus, 121; terri- 
tory of Sophytes, 122; Sibae, 395; Darius 
III, 140 

Diodotus 1, 143-5 

— II, 103, 143, 147, 158, 792; coins, 

pl. I (2) 

Diomedes, 181, 209 
Dion, 180 

Dionysius (ambassador to the court of 
Bindusara), 19 

(king) 157, 177-8, 341 n 

Dionysus (figure of), 755-6, 852 

founder of Nysa, 1 17 

Dionysopolis, 117 

Dioscuri, 163-4, 169, 177, 180-1, 209, pl. 1(8) 


Dipavamsa (Pali chronicle of Ceylon), 
366n, 515, 649n; as source c; 

history, 568; character of work, 515, 568: 
on: Buddhist mission to Himalayan 
zone, 86; Aryanisation of Ceylon, 573-5; 
early history of Ceylon, 579-80; Anuradha- 
pura, 600; Brahmanism in Ceylon, 604; 
Buddhism in Ceylon, 607-9; ihupa & 
rihara in Ceylon, 610, 614-5; redaction 
of canon, 617; Vaitulyakas, 619-20; 
chronology and commentaries, 621-2; 
see also Mahavamsa 
Divakaram (Tamil work), 673 
Divyavaddna, date and nature of evidences 
of, lOOn, 649; on: stupas built by Asoka, 
84; Asoka’s visit to Bo-tree, 609; minister 
of Bindusara, 19; post-Mauryan dynasties, 
94; Pushyamitra and Suhgas, 96n, 99-100n. 
151n; conquests of Demetrius in India, 
151 n; medicinal plants, 431; industries, 
433-4; science of testing gems, 430; 
slavery, 471; marriage, 485n; beef-eating, 
494; Simhaia, 573; Yaksha story in, 151n 
Dohad (township), 279n 
Dornitian, 516 
Dona, S51 
Dong-duong, 775 
Dorsanes (Heracles), 383 
Dossarne, 433n; see also Dasarna, 
drammas (coin), 809 
Drangiana, 187, 192-4, 197 
DraupadI, 471, 477, 479, 484, 494n, 496, 
646-7 

Dravida(s), Dravidian(s), 293, 315, 318, 
468, 572, 593, 669; language, 632, 637, 
669-70, 681 
Draksharama, 306 
Dridhabala, 668 

Dridhamitra (king of Mathura), 108, 134 
Drishtantapariktih-kalpandmanditikd , 648 
Drona, 645, 647, 773 
Drupada (king), 646-7 
dukula (fabric), 73 
Dundubnisara, 86, 369 
Durga, Parvatl, 80, 87, 379, 403-4&n, 566 
786 

Durvinita (Ganga king), 653 
Duryodhana, 645-7, 675 
Dushana, 643 
Dussala, 645 
Dussasana, 645-6 
Dutaga, 581, 585, 589 
Dutakagamani, 581 

Dutthagamani, 586; other names of, 581; 
Mahavamsa on, 576n; founded great 
stupa, 366; pillar ins. referring to prophecy 
about, 610; was originally gamanis, 376; 
Buddhisim became powerful from time 
of, 613; Mahavihara connected with, 614; 
builder of Mahathupa, Lohapasada, 
614-15 & n; became sole ruler by shedding 
blood, 614; story of, 6 14-1 5 &n; death of, 
615; pali canon on, 615; ancestors of. 



INDEX 


869 


580; descent from, 580; parents of, 580; 
war against Tamils, 580-2; and Elara, 515, 
579; son of, 603; conquest of Anuradha- 
pura, 581; routes in account of, 597; 
estimate of, 614; successors of, 597 
Dvapara (age), 390 
Dvaraka, 528, 673, 683 
Dvarasamudra, 528 
Dvatrimsat-puttalika, 300 

Ectabatana, 87 
Egypt, 77, 90, 140- In, 263, 599-600 
Ekanalika (famine), 595 
Eakanamsa (Durga-Parvati), 786 
ekarasaskandha, 375, 378 

Ekavyavaharika (Buddhist sect), 366-8 

Elara, 5 15, 579-82 

Elavaddhana, 771 

Elini, 512-3 

Ellora, 92 

Endere, 631 

Epander, 181 

Ephesus, 92 

Era, Chedi — , 333; Gupta — , 260n; Kala- 
churi— , 260n, 333; Kanishka— , 246, 
474n; see also Saka Era; Kpita — , 128; 
Pahlava — , 213n; Saka— of 84 b.c., 213n, 
474n; see also Saka; initial date of, 218; 
inaugurator and beginning of, 234-5 ; origin 
of, 235-6; continuous use of, 236; Magha 
ins. dated in, 260 & 260n; used by western 
Kshatrapas, 277, 284, 287 ; mentioned by 
Pitamahasidlldnta, 668; Seleucid — , 703-4; 
Vakafaka— , 260n; Vikrama— , 212, 267, 
see also Vikraoia Sarfivat 
Erage (Naga chief), 845 
Eran, 133, 725, 781, 796, 799 
Eransahr, 226 
Eraos, 213 
Erichchalur, 547 
Erukkattur, 548 
Erumaiyuran, 513 
EHut-togai, 677 
Euaspla, R., 118 

Eucratides, 174; parentage & family of, 
161-2, 174, 177, 209; and Demetrius, 95, 
112, 114, 155, 159, 161-2, 168; wresting 
of Bactria, 114, 155; antecedents of, 155, 
161; army of, 155; and: successors of 
Demetrius, 156; Apollodotus, 161,169-70; 
ruler of Bactria & India, 160-6; 170; 
advance of, 95, 112, 114; reign of, 163; 
titles of, 161, 163-5, 197, 340n, pi. I (9); 
and: Parthians, 165; Scythians, 166; 
death and successors of, 97n, 156, 161, 
165-8; descendents of, 159; estimate of, 
166; coins of, 159. 161-5, 165n, 169, 179, 
198, 783-5, 792, pi. I (8-10) 

second, 163 

Eucratidids (house of Eucratides), 159n 
Eudamus, 120-1 
Eudoxus of Cyziens, 71 


Europe, 143, 151, 161, 187, 730, 795 
Euthydemia, 152 

Euthydemids, 159n, 169, 172, 177 
Euthydemus I, 147-51, 187; king of Bactria, 
45-6, 147, 149, 158; and Antiochus III, 
45, 147-8; accession of, 147; date of 
independence of Bactria under, 46; sons 
and family of, 46, 158-9, 168-70, 172, 176, 
340; expansion of Bactrian power under, 
147-9; prosperity of Bactria under, 149; 
title of, 150, 158; coins of, 147-50, 153, 
169, 178, 783, 792, pi. I (3-4): portraits of, 
149 & n, pi. I (3-4) 

Euthymedia, 152 

Evvi, VeJ, 510-2, 525, 545; Evvis, 510 
Eyippattinam, 550 

Fa-hien, 119; visits Takshasila, 120; his 
route to India, 191; translates Vinaya- 
pitaka, 367; travels of, 367; on: palace of 
Palaliputra, 88; discovery of Vinaya text, 
367-8; Abhidharma, 367-8; Buddhist 
sects, 372; Asoka’s brother, 608; monaste- 
ries of E. Turkestan, 768: people of E. 
Turkestan, 769 
Fan-chan, 447n, 774 
Fan Hiong, 775 
Fan She-man, 774, 776 
Fan-ve, 188, 226-7n, 235 
Fan Yi (king), 776 
Far East, 632-3, 764, 772-3 
Farrukhabad, 259 
Fatehpur, 260n-l 
Ferghana, 148n, 189 
Ferozepur, 128 
Fo-sho, 769 
Fu-kan-tu-lu, 772 
Fu-nan, 773-6 

Gad, 186, 210-2 
Gadahara, Go<Jakhara, 252-3 
gahapati, grihapati(s), 464-5 &n 
Gaja-Lakshmi, 786, pi. VII (7) 

Gajabahu I (king of Ceylon), 589; succes- 
sion of, 585; synchronism of, 514-18; 
and Senguttuvan. 504,514-15,517; date of, 
514; titles of, 576: founder of Pattini- cult, 
515; religion of, 515, 586; invasions of, 
585 ; dredging and building of tanks, 592, 
595; builds shrines and dagdba , 586, 616, 
623; inscriptions, 585, 592; successors 
of, 586 

Gajalakonda, 729 
Gallus, Aelius, 599 

Gamarii Tisa (Tissa) 595-6; see also Tissa 
Gambu, 772 

gamika(s), 590-1, 606; gcmnka, 363 
ganas, 124, 347, 363 
ganaka(s) (accountant), 590-1 
Ganapaka, 286, 286n, 332 
ganapatha (of Panini), 121, 123, 128-9n, 136, 
142 ' 

Ganapati, cult of, 405-7 


110 



870 - 


index 


Gapapati-naga, 257-9 
Gandaridai, 121 ; see also Gangaridae 
Gan4avyuha, 447n, 665 
Gandhavamsa, 679n 

Gandhara(s), (people and country), 226, 230; 
people of the land of rivers, 3 ; mentioned 
in Asoka’s inscriptions, 25, 131, 471-2n; 
territory of, 701; under: Mauryas, 7, 25, 
28, 148; Greeks, 97n, 167-8, 170, 174, 
178, 181; Scythians and Parthians, 167-8, 
195-6, 199, 201, 203n, 207, 213, 230, 243; 
Kushapas, 226, 230, 237, 240, 250; Shakas, 
250; Kshatrapas, 266-7; religion, 86, 168, 
240, 663, 701, 765; army recruits from, 
4; strapy ceded to Chandragupta, 7; 
capitals of, 25, 118, 168, 181, 199; Buddhist 
missionaries to, 86, 765; deities of, 168, 
266, 701; monks and nuns from, 369; 
inscriptions, 207, 213, 240; coins, 167-8, 
199, 250, 784; school of art, 185, 701-5; 
art in general, 185, 220, 240, 253, 699, 
701; sculptures, 220, 240, 701-5; archi- 
tecture, 220, 714-16, 720; western — , 
118; miniature votive stiipa, 715, 849 
Gandharva, 306 

gandharva (form of marriage), 475, 482&n-3, 
487, 567 
Gandhikas, 467 
Gandharl, 479, 645 
Gatjesa, 604 

Ganesagumpha, 693, 722 
Ganga (dynasty), 681n 
,362n 

R. 772; Amban , 595; Mahavali 

, 577, 579, 581, 595; Manik , 

577, 596; Nilvali , 575; Valavi , 

575, 577, 596 

Gahga, 81, 708 • see also Ganges 

, (bore Santanu a son), 645 

Gangan Katti, 673, 681n 
Gangaridae, 5, 6; see also Gandaridai 
Gange (market town on mouth of Ganges), 
438-9n 

Ganges, ( see also Gariga) 111, 329, 502, 600, 
774; people in region of, 121, 342, 432n, 
773; products of, 433-4, 443, 565; trade 
through, 136, 319, 436-7, 442-3, 446-7, 
449; Senguttuvan’s bathing of stone and 
mother in, 523-4; bathing in, 666; coins, 
449; valley of, 114, 136, 772; fisheries in, 
436; Nanda’s wealth in, 502; Kharavela’s 
horses watered in, 1 14; routes to and from, 
136, 154, 437, 447; Greek advance to, 
153; ship voyages to, 319, 438, 446, 674; 
Prayaga on, 329; flourish of jainism on 
basin of, 412; supplies brought down, 
436, 442-3; market towns on, 438; 

upper , 447; lower , 433-4, 436, 

438, 443, 449; Yamuna doab & Ding 

basin, 628; Gangetic valley, 696; Gangetic 
doab, 271 

ganikd(s), 69, 480-1 
Gapatirupadaka, 590n 


Gardabhilla(s), 190, 325, 355, 360-1 
Garga-samhita, Gdrgi-Sarnhitd, 45, 94-5, 
153, 156, 472 
GargI, 661 
Gargya, 649 
Garikapad stupa, 733-4 
Garikapadu, 750 
Garuda, 87, 313, 473, 552, 655 
GaiuddL-dhvaja, 180, 746 
gdthci(s), 634, 652, 682 

Paftavali, 309n 

Gathasaptasati, 305, 336, 495n 
Gauri (Parvatl), 320 
R., 118 

Gautama, the Buddha (q.v.) 357, 380, 698 

, a gotra name, 314 

, author of law-book, 78, 469, 492, 

655 

, author of Nyayasutras, 422 

GautamI Balasri, 131, 351 n; see also Balasri 
Gautamiputra Satakami, 22, 47, 102, 104, 
132, 313-14, 326, 742-3; see also Satakarpi 
Gavimath, 9 

Gaya, 105, 108, 717, 739, 742, 744 
Gedrosia (Baluchistan), 7, 129, 139, 141, 
182, 191-2 
Georgies, 193 

Ghaptasala stupa, 319, 336, 732-4, 849 
Ghajaka (Kshaharata), 272 
Ghaz-Dheri, 702 
Ghazipur, 233 

Ghora, Angirasa Rishi, 381, 391-2 
Ghoshaka (teacher), 374-5 
Ghosha datta, 801 n 
Ghasmotika, 273-4, 292, 310n, 321 
Giri (Nigantha), 604-5 
Giribhapda, 606 
Girivraja, 707n 

Gimar, Rock inscription of Rudradaman, 
8, 125, 255, 299-300, 321-2, 348, 350; 
time of inscription at, 125, 255; dialects 
of Asokan R. edicts at, 629-30 
Glauchukayanakas, Glauganicae-Glausae, 

Goa, 308 

Godana (ancient name of Khotan), 764 
Godavari (district), 296, 321, 323-4, 736-7 

R, 103, 110-3, 278-9, 313, 643, 652 

Bhimam, 306 

Godha, Thera, 618 
Gokula, 383n 
Goli, 319, 725n, 732, 756 
Gomatl mahavihara, 768 
Gomitral, 134 


Gonardiya, 667 
Gond(s), 669 
Gonda, 237 
Gondi, 669 

Gondophares (Parthian chief), 135, 186, 
210-15, 226, 343; variant names of, 210-12; 
succession of, 209-10, 215; in Christian 



INDEX 


871 


legends, 186, 211; date & chronology of, 
186, 195, 208, 212-13n, 218, 227, 266; 
a Pahlava ruler, 207 ; conquests and 
kingdom of, 195, 207, 213-15, 217, 226, 
230, 266; titles of, 210-15,264,343,787, 
pi. IV (5-7); rise to power, 210; as a 
viceroy in Arachosia, 210 ; and Aspavarma, 

209, 214-15, 218, 264, 344n; associates of, 

210, 215; relations of, 210-12, 215-16; 
religion of, 214, 787; end of, 218, 227; 
successors of, 215-16, 226-7; inscriptions, 

211, 266; coins, 135, 210-17, 344n, 787, 
pi. IV (5-7) 

Gonikaputra, 469n, 667 
Gopa, 484n 

Gopi (Gopika), cave, 89, 721 
Gopuras, 747n 

Ghosala Mamkhaliputta (Maskariputra), 
parivrajaka, 81-2, 379 
gosthis, 489-91 &n 
goiirsha, 431 

GotamI Balasiri, 275, 278; see also Gautami 
Balasri; Gotamiputa Siri-Satakani, 312; 
see also Satakarni 
Gothabhaya, 580, 586-8, 619-20 
Gotthamahila, 362n 

Gotiputra Varunamitra (of Kausambi), 107 
gotrakshatriya , 382 
Gourians, 118 

279, 307, 311, 313, 

315, 332, 652-3 

Govinda III (Rash(rakuta king), 43 
Govindagupta, 261 
Govindaraja (Mauryan chief), 49 
Govinda Singh (Guru), 132 
Graeco-Roman, 152, 187, 280, 349, 702, 

755; Buddhist, 701 ; ’Indian kings, 

311 

gramabhyitakas, 72 
gramarti(s), 60, 576n 
grama-vriddhas, 61 
Grapavhryaka, 268, 344n 
Greece, 187, 264, 633, 778 
Greek(s), 66, 69, 125, 139-40, 142, 145n, 
166, 176, 670, 793, 797, 803; in Indian 
literature, 95, 97 &97n-9, 112, 117, 153-4, 
154n, 172, 472; writers and observers, 
12-13, 16-17, 45, 53-4, 66, 69,73,87,116, 
119, 125, 129, 383, 455, 574, 598, 670, 
673; accounts and annals, 56, 75-6, 78, 
104, 120, 129, 186; settlements and garri- 
sons, 4, 25, 152, 472; kings, 102, 110, 
138, 143, 154, 167; invasions, conquests 
and occupation, 1-3, 45, 47, 95, 97 & 97n-9, 
103-4, 109, 112, 114, 120, 136, 138, 151-85, 
302, 696; and: Nandas, 5-7; Chandra- 
gupta, 1-7; Asoka, 25-7, 40; Pushyamitra, 
95, 95n, 97-8, 154; Kharavela, 112, 114; 
city, 120; Indian cities, 117-8; invasion 
under Alexander, 1-5, 118-31, 138-40; 
readers, 129; mercenaries, 6; and Bactria, 
139-40; citizens of Bactria, 159; contact 


Gourppiya, 243 
Gova(r)dhana (Nasik), 


with India, 138; culture, 138, 140; Art, 
92-3; satraps and viceroys, 1, 4-5, 140; 
deities, 142, 160, 165, 168, 170, 179, 474n, 
786, 789-90; script and language, 144, 158, 
160, 166, 183, 322n, 444n, 473, 784, 787, 
792; die-cutters, 179; ambassadors, 8, 
10-11, 19, 53, 180, 473 ; and Indian hermits, 
18-9; mythology, 789-90; trade, 439, 442, 
444n, 445, 598, 600; ins. 473; legends on 
coins, 118, 122, 147, 157-9, 164, 167, 
170, 173, 175, 179-83, 185, 474, 785, 791; 
coins, 110, 164, 166, 778, 794; end of rule 
of, 174, 176, 184, 702; cultural contact 
with India, 184-5, 633-4; influence on 
Indian art and culture, 439, 442, 444n-5, 
598, 600, 639; and: Bhagvatism, 102, 383, 
473, 655; Buddhism, 99, 184, 364-6; 
influence of Indian religion and culture 
on, 102, 171, 184, 473-4, 655, 670; Asiatic 

, 673; Bactrian , 48, 165, 472; 

in India, 38-68, 170, 472, 782; decline and 
successors of, 182-3, 187, 189, 201, 786; 
contributions of, 184-5, 780; and Indian 
culture, 220; effects of invasions of, 95; 

coins, 149, 168, 220, 782-5, 792; Indo , 

168-85, 787; rulers, 102, 150, 157, 164-5, 
167-85, 191, 195, 207, 229, 232, 248, 264, 
473, 785; invasions, conquests and occu- 
pations, 174; administration, 219, 264, 
340-1, 344; coins, 164, 174, 179-80, 183, 
191, 195, 197-201, 208, 220, 235, 272, 
473, 781-6, 792-5, 797; decline and succes- 
sors of, 174, 180, 186, 253; art, 366, 372; 
Indo-Bactrian rulers, 144, 199 

Grihyasutras, 492; Baudhayana , 474n; 

Paraskara 658 

Gridhrakuta (hill), 500 
Guda, Guda, 210, 212; see Gondophares, 
Gudana, Gudana, 210, 212 
Gudiva^a, 732, 734 

Gudnaphar, Goundaphoros, Gundnaphara, 
variants of Gondophares (q.v.), 211-2, 
215 

Guduvhara, 212-3, 266n; see Gondophares 
Guduru (Kudura), 335 
Gujarat, 474, 772; under: Kshaharatas, 
274, 279, 308-9; western satraps, 282, 
286; Abhiras, 332; trade and voyages, 
439; religion of, 321; coins, 274, 289, 
309, 323, 808 
Gumba(port), 771 
Gummadidurru, 320, 756 
Gunadhya' (author), 294, 305-6, 447, 631, 
637, 653, 771 

Gunda (inscription), 277, 284-5 
Gundaforus, Gundiphero, 211, 215; see 
Gondophares 

Gundlakamma, 334; Siva temple at, 851 
Guntupalle, 719, 736, 738-9, 741, 745, 747, 
756; stupa, 850 

Guntur, 296, 319, 323, 325, 329n, 334-5, 665, 
756 

Gupta(s), 257; rule of, 329; rise of, 104, 



872 


INDEX 


249-50; foundation of dynasty of, 104: 
kings, 132, 249, 252; conquests and 
empire of, 106, 116, 132, 250, 257, 259, 
328-9; and Vaka{akas, 328-30; adminis- 
tration, 28; coins, 253-4, 311, 331,525, 
792, 795; ins, 195, 633; development of 
language and literature under, 254, 633, 
654; development of art and architecture 
under, 696, 698, 705, 716, 745, 749, 758; 
pre— 195; later— 248 
Gurdaspur (dist.), 124, 135 
Gushana, 228n-9, 241 ; see Kushanas 
Guttaka, 579, 580 
Gwalior, 249, 257, 693, 711 


Habban, 211 
Hadda, 702 

Hadrian (Roman emperor), 600 
Hagamasha, Hagama, 268-9, 272, 344n, 800 
Haihayas, 5, 332n 

Haimavata(s), 366, 369-70, 404n, 663 
Haimavatl, 379, 404n 
Hakusiri, 302 

Hala (Satavahana), 295, 300, 304-6, 326, 
636, 638, 649, 653, 665, 682; see also 
Satavahana 
Hambantota, 604 

Han dynasties, 223; earlier , 188, 190n, 

204, 227n, 709, 766, 768-9, 772, 776; 

later , 188,227, 232 

Harappa, 74, 402 
Hari, 384, 393 
Karidatta, 134, 796, 801 n 
Harishena, 330 
Hariti, 326, 704 

Harivamsa, 80n, 95n, 190n, 309n, 339n, 447 
Harivarman, 376, 665 
Harivarsha, 432n-3n 
Harmatelia, 130 

Harshacharita author of, 94, 258; commen- 
tator of, 259; on: post Maurya period, 
94; overthrow of last Maurya, 96n; 
Muladeva, 105; Naga king of Padmavatl, 
258 ; see also Bana 
Harshavardhana, 94 
Hastabalaprakarana, 666 
Hasti, 117 ; see also Astes 
Hastinapura, 645-6 

Hathlgumpha (inscription of Kharavela, 
king of Kalinga), 1 1 3n, 355 ; location. 111, 
629; script and language of, 112, 629; 
date of, 112, 629; purpose of, 115; on: 
Nanda-raja, 6; Brihaspatimitra, 133; 
Demetrius, 112, 151 n; Kharavela, 98, 
111-5, 347; Maurya Era in, 296n 
Haumavarka (Saka), 187 
Hayanaga, 258 

Hazara (ancient Urasa), 121, 267, 370 
Heliocles, 166-7; family and parentage of, 
161-3, 174; last Bactrian ruler in India, 
161, 167; marriage of, 162; succession of, 
166, 175-6; date of, 168, 174; extent of 
rule, 167-8, 171, 180-1; end and successor 


of, 167, 180-1, 201; coins of, 161, 163-4, 
166-7, 171, 175-6, 180-1, 201, 783, 

792, pi. II (1) 

Heliodorus, 393, 641 ; Gr. ambassador from 
Antialcidas to Vidisa, 102, 480, 387, 
473; erects Garuda pillar at Besnagar, 
102, 388, 473, 641, 655; date of, 102; 
homeland of, 180, 655; God of, 387; 
converted to Bhagavatism, 387, 473; 
— Column ins., knows Mbh., 641 
Helios, 163, 200, 789 
Hellanicus, 187n 
Hellenism, 704-5 
Hellenistic art, 92-3 

school, 185 

Helmand, 187 

Hemachandra, Jaina author, 358; works of, 
134, 306, 359n, 654; on: Chapakya, 358; 
Jalandhara, 134; Satavahana and Hala, 
299. 305; Bhadrabahu, 358; Samprati, 359 
Hemamali, 615, 623 
Hephaestion (general of Alexander), 118 
Hephaestus, 209 
Hephaistos, 789 

Heracies, described by Megasthenes and 
Arrian, 383, 498; Greek deity, 245, 790; 
indentified with Krishna- Vasudeva, 383; 
also called Dorsanes, 383; in Greek 
mythology regarding invasion to India, 
395; portrait statues of, 699; army of 
Porus with image of, 383 ; worshipped by 
Saurasenoi, 383; described by Curtius, 
383; descendents and companions of, 
395; S. India colonised by daughter of, 
498; representation on coins. 144, 150, 
156-7, 169, 173, 176-9, 199-200n, 201-2, 
205, 227-8, 268, 786-8, 789n, pi. I (3-5). 
pi. II (3), pi. Ill (4, 12), pi. IV (8) 
Herao(u)s, 204, 271 
Herat, 139, 201, 331 
Hercules, 125, 383 

Hermaeus, 182-3, 204, 344; installed king of 
Kabul, 204; last Indo-Greek king in 
Kabul valley, 182; predecessors of, 182, 
191; titles of, 183, pi. Ill (2-5); and 
Amyntas, 182, 204; adversaries of, 182-3, 
191; queen of, 182-3; end and successors 
of, 183; coins, 182-3, 184n, 227-8, 785, 
788, 792n, pi. Ill (2-5), pi. IV (8) 

Hermes, 208 
Herodotus, 66, 187 
Hesychius, 168, 400 
Hi-tun, 224, 226 
Hien-tu, 191 
Hiu-mi, 224, 226 

Himalayas, 498-9, 520; peoples of and 
beyond, 132, 136; forestry of, 431-2; skins 
and furs in, 432 & n; routes to and from, 
438n; in S. Indian literature, 505, 520, 
523, 528, 543; Buddhist missions to, 608; 

coins found in, 796: trans , 432n 

Himalayan country, 43 In 
Himavatkuta, 6 



INDEX 


873 


Hindu, 746 

Hinduism, 311, 419-29, 633, 657, 710-1 
Hindukadesa, 190 

Hindukush mountains, 148, 151, 170, 340, 
792; migrations in countries of, 187; 
Alexander’s route across, 117; Bactria 
bounded by, 139; Antiochus’s and Deme- 
trius crossing, 148, 152; Eucratides relin- 
quished land beyond, 166; Antialcidas’s 
rule on north oi', 167; southern boundary 
of kingdom of Eucratides,_ 166; Indo- 
Greek kings ruling in, 169; Saka invasion 
through, 191; trade articles from, 307; 
route across, 449; coins in and near, 160, 
169 

Hippalus, 307, 674 
Hippasioi, 118; see also, Aspasioi 
Hippostratus, 176-7, 179, 183, 191, 200n, 
202, 207-8, 340n, 786 


Hirapyakas, 334 
Hiranyarashtra, 334 
Hiraijyavaha, 708 

Hiuan Tsang, 123, 323, 447n, 542n; travels 
of, 48-9, 165, 244; date of visit to India, 
49, 270; visits Taxila, 120; on: des- 
truction and restoration of Bodni-tree, 
49; deity of Kapisa, 165; Kanishka, 
238-9; Buddhist council, 239; Buddhist 
monastery ( vihara , stupa, etc.), 244, 270, 
323, 716, 736, 765; Asoka and his brother, 
608-9; Kunala monastery, 846 
Hiung-nu, 188-9, 223-4, 766, 768 
Ho-mo, 224 
Ho-p’u, 772 
Ho-ti, 238 

Holi (relief), 700, 849 
Hormizd 1, 246, 251,291 

II, 252 

Hoshiarpur (dist.), 129, 342 
Hon-Han-shu, 188, 223-4, 231, 235 
Hoyasala(s), 523, 673 


Huang-ho, R., 223 
Huen P’an-huang, 773 
Huen-t’ien, 773 

Hunas, 4, 189, 253, 332n; Hephtalite , 

245 

Hushka, 243-4; see Huvishka 
Hushkapura, 244 

Huvishka, 260, 698; succession, date and 
chronology of, 236, 243-6, 247 ; as viceroy, 
346n; reign of, 244-5; titles of, 244-5, 
345; extent of empire of, 244; and Kani- 
shka II, 245-6; religious policy of, 475n, 
791; portraits on seals and coins, 245, 
345, 784; endowments during reign of, 
243-4; building of structures, 244; end of, 
247; ins. 243-4; coins, 135, 137, 209, 
225, 235, 241, 244-6, 345, 406, 784, 788-91, 
794, pis. V (8-13), VI (1) 

Hydaspes, R., 1, 122, 125, 169, 193, 395 


Hyderabad (Sind), 130 

(Deccan), 294, 295, 705, 725, 727, 742 

Hydraotes, R., i23-4 

Hylobici (forest-dwelling philosophers of 
Strabo), 18 
Hypanis, 153 
Hyphasis, R„ 1, 122, 124 

i b a d t u (port) 771, 776; see a/soY a vadvlpa 

ibhyas, 68 

Idaiyaru, 542 

Idharasa, 219 

Idumbil, 523 

Ikshvakus, 131, 735, 754; origin of, 333; 
territory and rise to power, 324-5, 333, 
353; foundation of dynasty of and kings 
of, 287, 333-5, 754; imperial titles, 353; 
decline of, 335 ; inscriptions of, 287, 324, 
329n, 334, 629; religion under, 333-4, 
457n; social practices of, 334; as local 
rulers, 335 

Il.a, 501 ; see also Ceylon 
liambodhijar (Buddhist name), 679 
IJanaga (king of Ceylon), 584, 586, 595-6, 
622, 624 

Ilandattan (poet), 549 

ijandiraiyan Tondai-man, 507-8, 518, 536, 
543-4, 556, 564, 680 
Ilangiranar Porundil. 532, 541 
Ijango (author), 503, 506 
Ilaujetchenni Uruvappahrer, 507, 517, 541, 
549 

Uavandigaippaiji — tunjiya Nanmafan, 546 
Ilavar (dhana) 772 

Imayavaramban Neduiijeral, 520-1; see also 
Nedunjerai 

Indo-China, 516, 771, 773, 776 
Indonesia, 771, 773 

lndo-Scythia (lower Indus Valley), 191, 309, 
343 

Indra, 474n; worship of, 81 ; festival of, 361 ; 
palace of, 528; as a sectarian deity, 379; 
on airavata, 748n-9n; grammatical system 
ascribed to, 673; identified with Zeus and 
representations on coins, 165, 199, 473n, 
800; and elephant, 87, 165; Sakas & Par- 
thians devoted to, 474n; in art, 845, 850 

(Rastrakuta king), brother of Govinda 

111,43-4 
Indrabhuti, 355 

Indradatta (Indradinna), 360, 362 
Indragnidata, 365 
Indragnimitra, 105, 689 
Indramitra, 106, 135, 800 
Indravarman, Indravarma, (strategos), 206, 
208-9, 215, 221, & n 264, 474n, pi. IV (3) 
Indrayudha (king of Kanauj), 132 
Indus, R. (Sindhu) and its neighbouring 
regions, 97, 119-20, 122, 126, 130, 151-3, 
184, 191, 230, 270; Pushyamitra’s horse 
and contact with Greeks on, 97 &_97n; 
under: Greeks, 1, 98, 104, 160; Sakas 
and Parthians, 193, 198, 200, 229; Kusha- 



874 


INDEX 


nas, 218, 232, 238; dialects of, 629; ex- 
ports from, 434; lower — , 707; tribes 
of, 129; progress of Alexander, 129; 
Saka movements on, 191; see also 
Sindhu 

— civilisation, 671n, 705 

delta, 279, 324 

— Valley, 191, 194, 229, 331, 343-4, 684 

lraiyanar Ahapporul , 503-4, 672, 676, 678 

Iran, 192, 245-6, 269; eastern, and: 

Bactria, 139; Sakas and Parthians, 193-4, 
202-3, 213, 215, 225; Kushanas, 245-6; 
Sassanians, 251-2; Abhiras, 331; mega- 
liths, 725 
Irila, 365 
Irippal, 797 
Irulas, 571 

Irumporai Kanaikkal, 549 

(Kochcheraman) Yanaikkatchey 

Mandaraiijeral, 509, 517, 532, 539, 541 

Kudakko IJanjeral, 506-7, 512, 517, 

539-40 

Kuftuvan, 506 

Tagadur-erin-Peruiijeral, 506, 512, 517 

527, 534-5, 537 

Irungovel (Irungo-vel), 510-12, 528, 531, 673 
Irungo Venman, 513 
Isapur, 242-3 
Isila, 29 

Issy-kul (lake), 148n, 189 
Isurumuniya, 613 
ISvaradatta, 283, 285-6n, 331, 808 
Isvarasena, Madhariputra, 285-6, 324, 332, 
474n 

Itravarma, 209, 22 In, 264; see also Indra- 
varma 

I-tsing, 635n, 648 
itthakavaddhaki, 597 
Itthiya, 608 

jaffna (Peninsula), 572n, 600 
Jagayyapeta, 725n, 731 n; votive records of, 
334; stupas, chaityas of , 732-4, 749, 851; 
sculptures of, 749-50 
Jaimini (Sutras), 662 

Jainas (Digambara and Svetambara), 362-3, 
651, 662 

Jainism 355-64, 390; centres of, 355, 630; 
under: Mauryas, 80-2, 355-6; post- 

Mauryan rulers, 115, 359, 362; in South 
India, 500, 566, 679-80, 723; in Ceylon, 
606, 610; doctrines and philosophy of, 
361, 407-13; language and literature of, 
630,633,662-3,679-80; and: inscriptions, 
247, 363; architecture, 720, 723; coins, 
800; schism in, 357-8; progress of, 358-62; 
and sculptures, 363 
Jaipur, 109, 126, 128, 257, 342, 719 
Jalalabad, 117, 266, 702 
Jalandhara, 134, 136, 341n, 373 
Jalauka, 46 
Jambavati, 385, 388 
Jambudvipa, 85, 320, 356, 359, 716, 764 


Jambukolapattana, 594, 597 
Jambunada, 551 
Janaka(s), 131, 433n, 643, 661 
Janamejaya, 641 
Janasthana, 643 
Jandial, 221 
Janiform, 233 
Jankhat, 259 
Jasdhan, 277, 283 

Jarasandha, 396n; Jarasandh-ka(f)-baithak, 
41, 74 

Jataka(s), 92, 125, 465, 572, 577n, 581 ; on: 
trade routes, 70-1; Andhakas, 296n; 
guilds, 78; Ajivikas, 400; voyages, 447; 
industry and trade, 41, 74, 433, 707, 771-2; 
different classes of people, 465 & 465n; 
tales and legends, 573, 575, 582, 607, 654, 
714, 752; stories from life of Buddha, 
687; scenes in art, 714, 752, 755, 757, 
759; Gha{a — , 575; Mahajanaka — , 707n; 
Nimi— , 615; Padakusalamanava— -, 573; 
Shaddanta— , 761, 847; Syama— , 761; 
Valahassa — , 572n-3; Visvantara— , 847; 
Mahakapi— , 848; Mahilamukha— , 851; 
Mittavindaka — , 851; Nalagiri— , 851; 

Mandhata— , 852; Vessantara , 852 

Jatiiiga Rameswara (hill), 9 
Jaugada, 25, 111 

Jaulian (centre of Gandhara art), 704; 

monastery at, 846 
Java, 319, 447-8, 658, 772, 776 
Jaxartes, R., 139, 187 
Jaya Vijaya (cave), 693 
Jayadaman, 276, 280-1, 286, 348n, 474n 
Jayadratha, 494n 
Jayagupta, 135 
Jayamitra, 106, 135 
Jayanta (deity), 80 
Jayanta Bhatta, 640 
Jayapura, 117 

Jayavarman (Bfihatphalayana), 335-6, 353 
Je-nan (Tonkin), 772, 775 
Jerusalem, 141n, 211 
Jetavana (vihara) 367, 845 
Jetavanarama (vihara), 367, 616, 620 

(dagaba), 623-4 

jettha (alderman), 78 
Jhang (dist.), 126 
Jhelum (dist.), 195 

(river), 119, 123, 125-6, 176, 257, 

267, 341, 395 
Jihonika, 196, 344n, 788 
Jihunia, 265 

Jina, 115n, 362, 700, 710; figure of Lohani- 
pur, 849; see also Mahavira 
Jinas, 358, 362 
Jinadatta, 358 
Jinaprabhasuri, 44 

Jivadaman (son of Damajada), 283-6, pi. 

Jivaka, 668 
Jivakachintamani, 679 
Jivanmukta, 664 



INDEX 


875 


JnanaprastMnasastra, 370 
Jobares, R., 383 ; see also Jamuna 
Jogalthembi, 275 
Jogimara (cave), 757-8 
Johiya Rajputs, 125 
Jotiya, 605 

Judas Thomas, Apostle, 211-12 
Julandhara, Jullundur, 134, 341n 
Jummoo, 178 

Jumna (Jamuna), 97n, 109-10, 136-7, 437 
Junagadh (inscription) Asokan R. E. at, 25; 
ins. of Rudradaman, 28; date of ins., 
274, 278; Surashtras in, 131; on: ad- 
ministration of Surashtra, 28, 131, 282, 
Rudradaman, 281-3; Sudarshana lake, 
281-2; vidya, 659; see also Girnar ins. 
Junnar; inscription of Ayama, 274; head- 
quarters ofNahapana, 279; Ijila builds 
cisterns for monks at, 365; ins. on 


pottery, 465n; chaityas & viharas, 742-5, 
850; Cave ins. &date, 275n 
Jushka, 243-4 
Jushkapura, 243 

Justin, 144, 206n; on: Chandragupta, 2-3, 
123; Bactrian Greeks, 151, 155, 160-1, 
163, 165-6, 171, 183; Parthians, 144-5, 
165, 183, 201 
Justinian, 682 
Jvalamukhi, 109-10, 135 
Jyesh(hadatta (king), 342 
Jyeshthamitra (king), 107, 133 
jyotisha, 668; Vedanga , 668 


Kabul, 204, 226, 244; satrapy ceded to 
Chandragupta, 7; Yavana rule in, 183; 
Gr. sovereignty in, 201; Sakas of, 204; 
Saka governor of, 204; Gondophares in, 
207; date of Kushana conquest of, 229; 
under Kushanas, 227; museum, 266, 785; 
trade centre, 791 ; coins, 149, 174 

river, 118, 172, 190n; route along, 7 

valley, Subhagasena in, 45; Alexan- 
der’s governor of, 1 ; Antiochus marched 
down on, 148; Heliocles in, 171;Peucoi- 
ous in, 181; Harmaeus and his prede- 
cessors in, 191; a Gr. chief in, 184n; last 
Indo-Gr. king in, 182; destruction of Gr. 
power in, 201; Indo-Gr. king harassed 
by Parthians in, 227; Kushanas destroy 
Parthian dominion in, 227-8; kingdom 
in, 227; Sassanians in, 251; coins, 149, 
171, 177, 182; upper—, 171, 181 


Kachchayana, 637 

Kadamba(s), 337-8; rise to power, 337; 

dynasty, 332, 338, 519 
Kadambu (pirates), 519-20, 523 
Kadmabari (of Bana), 653 
Kadambin-peruvayil, 522 
Kadiyalur-uruttiran-gannanar (author), 680 
Kadphises (Kadaphes, Kapa, Kapasa, Kau), 
I (Kujala, Kuyula), 204, 217, 228-9, 231, 
266, 277n, 345n; rise to power, 183, 227, 
230; variant names, 228-9; titles of 228, 


344-5n, pis. IV (8), V (1-3); date of, 

229- 30; on coins and coin type of, 184&n, 
227-8, 230-1, 788, pi. Ill (4), pi. IV (8), 
pi. V (1-3); extent of rule, 236; religion of, 
231 

— II, Wema (Wima, Verna), 231-3, 266, 

277, 249n; life of, 231-2; succession and 
date of, 218, 231, 233, 237; conquests 
and empire of, 218, 231-3, 344; reign of, 
218, 232, 474n, 656, 792; titles and date of, 
218, 227-8, 231-3, 344, 656 pi. V (4); 
relation with Rome and China, 233, 238; 
religion of, 214 & n; representations of, 
345, 784; portrait statue of(?), 699; coins 
and coin types of, 213-14n, 218, 227-8, 

230- 3, 235, 341-2, 344-5, 656, 784, 788-9, 
792, 794-5, pi. V (4) 

Kadungo, Mandaram Poraiyan, 510, 517 
Kafiristan, 171, 190 

Kahapanas (coins), 570, 750, 806; see also 
kurshapatfas 
Kaikeyl, 642-3 
Kaisara (Caesar), 246 
Kaivalyadhama, 66 In 
Kakavanna, Kakavariia, 83, 604 
Kald{s), 486, 497 
Kajabhras, 550 

Kalachuris, 134, 332 & n, 673 
Kalaiyar Kovil, 539 

Kalaka (Kalakacharya), 190, 229n, 360-1 

Kalakachary Kathanaka, 190, 229n, 343 

Kalamukha (port), 771 

Kalamukha, 397n 

Kalanda, 601, 604 

Kalaniya (vihdra), 575, 580, 613, 622 

Kalaruchi (translator), 770 

Kalantra (school), 636 

Kalasi, 172 

Kalasoka (son of Sisunaga), 83 
Kalattalaiyar, 510, 520, 531, 541 
Ka]a\a]i, 549 

Kalavela, Yaksha, 575, 587, 605 
Kalawan, 196, 207 
Kalhana, 243-4, 246, 636 
Kali yuga (age), 433n, 472, 672 
Kali (deity), 566 

Kalidasa, lOOn, 639, 644; works of, 94, 
95n-7n, 98, 100, 153; date of, 640; extols 
Bhasa, Kaviputra, etc., 640; presupposes 
Natyasastra, 638; on: minister of last 
Maurya king, 96; Pushyamitra and 
Agnimitra, 95n-6 & n-7&n, 100; war 
between Sunga and Gr. army, 97 & n-8, 
153; Yavana invasion, 97-8, 153; Dilipa’s 
subjects, 657; Kalinga, 11 In; see also 
Malavikagnimitra 
Kalika, 360 

Kali Sindhu, R„ 97n, 153 
Kalinga, 5, 6, 113, 296-8; geography of, 
llln,297; under : Nandas, 5-6; Mauryas, 
23-5, 28, 41, 77, 11 In; Mahamegha- 
vahanas, 98, 112-15, 335, 362, 692; 
industries of, 73, 433-4; inscriptions, 



876 


INDEX 


28, 98, 111-13, 115, 347, 692; seat of 
Jainism, 362 
— — — Jana, Jina, 115n 
Kalinganagara (capital of Kharavela), 113 
Kalingattupparani, 518n, 672n, 680 
Kalipani, R., 119 

Kahttogai (poem), 505, 677, 681, 757 
Kalki, 472 
Kaliadam, 514 

Kalladanar, 511, 514, 522, 531, 546 
Kaljil Attiraiyanar, 501 
Kaimunai, 596 
kalpas, 611 

Kalpa-siitra (Jaina), 358, 436n, 481, 656; 

see also Sutra 
Kalpanalankritikii, 648 
Kalpanamanditika, 236-7, 641, 648-9 
Kalsi, 25 
Kalur, 534 
Kalu-vu], 534 
Kalyapa, 279, 349 
Kalyani chetiya, 572n 
Kama, 552 

Kamadatta, 134, 268, 271, 801n 
Kamarupa, 75 
Kamasoka, 83 

Kamasutra (of Vatsyayana), date of, 667; 
commentary on, 336; on: Kuntala 

Satakarpi, 304, 336, 667; Gonikaputra, 
469n; marriage rules, 485-8; courtship, 
486-8; town life, 489-91, 494-5; wife of 
city-bred man, 479-80; sixty-four arts, 
497 

ICamban, 670n 

Karhboja(s)Kambhojas (people and country), 
included in Chandragupta’s army, 4; 
in Asoka’s inscriptions, 25, 131, 472; 
country of, 25; Kautilya on, 54, 131; 
Buddhist mission to, 86; Yaksha and 
Panini on, 131; Ramayana on, 190. 472, 
764; originally Kshatriyas but fallen, 
190, 468; territory of, 471 -2n; Harivamsa 
on dress of, 190n; neighbours of, 432n; 
presents of king of, 432n 
Kambuja, Kambujaka (tribe), 270 
Kamsa, 552, 638 
Kamsavadha, 655 
Kanchukl, 852 
Kan-su (province), 204, 223 
K’ang-Tai, 774 

Kanada (philosopher), 421-3, 655, 660 
Kanakamuni, 3 1 ; see also Buddha 
Kanam(p), 535, 539, 683n 
Kanapper, 539, 557 
K(c)anara, 336, 352, 519, 550, 805 
Kanauj,82, 132, 135 

Kanchl, Kanchipura, Pallavas of, 334, 
336, 338; Asokavarma of, 499; kings of, 
543; centre of Buddhism, 679n; architec- 
ture of, 730; Varadaraja temple at, 746n 
Kandahar, 7, 149, 183, 192, 194, 216-17, 331 
Kandegamakanda, 575 
Karidula, 581 


Kandy, 604 
K’ang Kiu, 769 

Mong-siang, 769 

seng-hui, 770 

Tai, 773, 776 

Kahgul-vellattar, 678 
Kangra (dist.), 135, 797 
Kanha (sculptor), 749 
Kanhagiri, 313 
Kanhan, R., 113 

Kanheri, Kanheri, 281, 317, 337, 636n, 
742-3, 746-9 & n, 763, 850 
Kanisnka I (Kushana emperor), 233-43, 
267-8, 349n, 363, 416, 474n, 640, 665, 
700; rise to power, 233; date and 
chronology of, 218, 234-5; conquests and 
extent of rule, 107-8, 216, 218, 235-8, 
344, 767; administration of, 240-1, 272; 
capital of, 238-9; imperial titles of, 237, 
344-5 &n; reverses and end of, 238, 242-3; 
death & successors of, 242-8 ; religion of, 
239-40, 244, 254, 475n, 664-5, 697, 767; 
court of, 237, 344-5; ins., 216, 237-8, 
267, 272, 367; coins and coin types of, 
135, 137, 209, 225, 231, 235, 241-2, 344-5, 
473, 656, 784-5, 788-90, 794-5, pi. V (5-7); 
art and architecture, 254, 697, 699-700, 
702, 704, 715 ; image of, 699, S49 

(Kaneshko) II, 243, 245-6, 248, 260, 

345 & n, pi. VI (5) 

Ill, 248-50 

Kanishkapura (Kanishpur), 246 
Kankali-tila, 363, 693, 700, 846, 849 
Kanoabemija, R., 113 
Kannada 335, 500, 502, 528, 550, 669, 670; 
see also Kanara 

Kannagi(cult), 479, 515, 524-5, 544, 586 
Kannam balanar, 513 
Kannanar Kumatiiur, 519 
Kanfaka, chetiya, 604, 609, 622, 852; horse 
, 847 

Kart(akasaila, kantakasaula, 336 
Karttakasodhana (courts), 51, 62-3, 79 
Kantakassulos (Gr. form), a Kossyla, 336, 
see also Kantakasaila, Kan(akasela 
Kantakossyla, 319 
Kantalai, 596 
Kantantra, 636-7 
Kanyakumari (deity), 404n 
Kautamanar, 521 
Kantipuri (Kantit), 255, 257-8 
Kanuparti, 756 

Kanvas, Kanvayanas, 102-4, 135, 656 
Kao-Ch’ang, 225 

Kao-fu, 224, 226, 229 ; see also Kabul 
Kapa, Kapasa, 228-30n, 788; see also 
Kadphises 
Kapallakhanda, 584 
Kapalika, 397n 

Kaphsa 228, 788; see also Kadphises 
Kapila (Sarhkhya writer), 421, 424, 629, 660 
Kapilar (Tamil poet), 507-9, 511-13, 525, 
527-33, 539, 541, 555, 673, 675, 680, 682 



INDEX 


877 


Kapilavastu, 84, 708, 847 
Kapisa, region and geographical position of, 
168, 190; Chinese writer on, 190; deity of, 
165, 167, 199 &n; under; Indo-Greeks, 
165 &n, 179, 180-1 ; Scythians & Parthians, 
179, 189, 199-201; Kshatrapas of, 268; 
ins. 190; coins, 169, 180-1, 199-200 
Kappiyarruk-kappiyanar, 509, 521 
Karajaka, 313 
Karakoram (pass), 191 
Karani (caste), 501 
Karssahr, 768 
Karddamaka, 281, 475n 
Karikala (Chola king), 541-3; meaning of, 
541; father of, 507, 509, 541; date of, 
541 ; reign of, 507 ; stories and legends of, 
553, 614; victories of, 509, 541-2; con- 
quests and extent of empire, 543; con- 
temporaries and opponents of, 510-11, 
525-6, 541-3; Silapadikaram on, 503, 510, 
514, 543; industry and commerce under, 
542; food, drink, music, etc. in palace of, 
560-1 ;KaverI bund by, 586 
Karikaj-peru-vaJattan, 680 
Kari-kkapnanar Malaiyaman, 511-12, 525, 
527, 531-2, 539, 546-8, 556 
Kariyaru, 548 
Karkotanagara, 128, 257 
Karle(a), caves at, 320, 710; building of 
temple at, 365; chaityas and viharas at, 
742-6, 749, 760, 850; sculptures at, 747-9; 
fragments of painting at, 763; ins. 465n; 
Mahasarhghikas at, 313 
karmakaras, 72, 78 
Karmania, 129 
Karmarashtra, 296n 
karmasachivais), 283, 348n 
Karmavacha (work), 769 
Karpa, 645, 647 
Karnikaramankha, 67 8n 
karsha, 780 

Karshaparia(s ) (coins), 2, 119, 311, 323, 
332, 433n, 452n, 780 & n, 794, 803, 806, 
809 

Karshaphala, 780 

Karttikeya, Kartiikeyaswamin (Skanda, 
Karttika), 125, 135, 256, 346, 405-7, 
493, 663, 797n-800, pi. VIII (1-2) 
Karundavasoka ( vihara ), 616 
Karur, Karuvur, Karu-ur (Chera capital), 
499-500, 513, 527, 539-40, 547, 549, 730-1 
KaruvakI (Asoka’s second queen), 20 
Karwar, 337, 352 
Kashgar, 236-7, 767 

Kashmir, 190n, 246, 248, 770; people of, 
132; under; later Mauryas, 46: Azilises, 
208; Kushanas and after, 239, 243-4, 246, 
252; language and literature of, 636, 653-4, 
668; religion and religious missions to, 
239, 244, 608, 663, 765; routes to and 
from & trade, 191, 791 ; coins, 208-9, 254 
Kasi, 5, 73, 132, 434n, 484n, 761-3 & n; 
see also Benares 


Kasia (Kusinagara), 720 

Kasika, 123, 635 &n 

Kasmira, 86, 797; see also Kashmir 

Kassapa, 579n 

Kassapagota, 86 

Kasyapa, 95n, 423 

Matanga, 450n, 767, 769 

— — —Parivarta, 665 

Kasyaplyas, 366, 663 
Kata (Katta), Kampal. 729 
Katantra, 636-7, 652, 673 
Kataragama, 575 

Katha, Katnaians, Kathoi, 54, 123-4 
Kathaka (school), 656 
Kaihasariisagara, 5, 637n, 653, 771 
Katha Tarahgavati, 652 
Katharattliu, 83-4, 650 

Kathiawar, 331; people of, 131; Scythian 
conquest of, 190, 343; under: Kshaharatas 
and Kshatrapas (Nahapana, Rudradaman 
and Rudrasena), 279, 282, 286; Abhiras, 
331; maritime communications, 349; 
industry and exports from, 434; ins., 286, 
331; coins found in, 274, 286, 808 
Ka((havahana (king of Benares), 579n, 606n 
Katti(s), 511 

Kahgan, 511 

Katturai, 524n 

Katya (commentator on Panini), 634 
Katyayana (grammarian) alias Varuruchi, 
635; place of origin and life of, 365-6; as 
minister of Nandas, 635; works of, 635, 
637, 659; belongs to the Nandas and 
Mauryas, 632, 635; presupposes Vaydi, 
635; standard of Sans, of, 632; and: 
Patanjali, 635-6; Panini, 498, 634-5; 
on: league of Malavas and Kshudrakas, 
127; Pandya, 498, 636, 669 
Katyayam-sraddha-kalpa, 658 
KatyayanI (deity), 404n 
Kaukkutika, 366, 368 
Kauluta, 797 ; see also Kuluta 
Kaumudimahotsava, 259n 
Kaundinya, 773 
Kauravas, 645 
Kausalya, 642 

-Kausambi, 107-8; extent of, 108; under: 
Mauryas, 10, 107; Sungas, 94, 107; 
independent pricipality and local dynasties 
of, 101, 104, 107-8, 339; Maghas, 255, 
259-62; kings of, 107-8, 259-62; routes to, 
71; Buddhist communities in, 82; Maha- 
matras of, 84; industry of, 433; art 
(terra-cotta), 697, 705-7; ins. from, 94, 
106; coins, 100, 105-7, 133, 259-62, 
340n, 801n, pi. VII (2); one of six great 
cities in time of Buddha, 707; see also 
Kosam 
KauSeya, 74 
Kausikam, 764 

Kausiklputra Dhana (Dhanadeva of 
Ayodhya ins.), 105 


111 



878 


INDEX 


Kautamanar Palaik, 520 
Kauthara, 775 

Kautilya (author of Arthasdstra), 9, 50-2, 
56, 658; period of, 52; and: Megasthenes, 
14-17, 52, 498;Nandas, 8; Chandragupta, 
1-3 &n, 6, 8, 12, 54-5, 80, 123; on: princes, 
56; chakravartin, 53; foreign rule, 2; 
conquest, 116; foreign policy, 62; inter- 
state relation, 50; kinghship, 11, 51, 55-6, 
65; general administration, 12, 14-17, 22, 
29, 50-2, 55-9, 61-2, 65, 69-70, 72, 79, 81; 
ministry, 55; spies, 469; military system, 
3, 64, 76; finance, 61-2, civil & criminal 
laws, 62, 69; character of monarchy, 63; 
non-monarchical states and tribes, 54,124, 
126, 131-2, 347, 526; social life, 67, 69, 
72-4, 78-80, 638; slavery, 470-1; marriage, 
483; religion and religious life, 67, 80-2, 
654-5, 661; routes 70-1, 79, 498; industry 
and trade, 70-1, 74-9, 433-5, 498, 764; 
village and agriculture, 58, 72-3, 77; 
guilds, 78, 347 ; forestry and metallurgy, 
75-6, 435; town planning, 57; policy, 57, 
80-1 ; language, literature & sciences, 638, 
649, 654-60, 666-7; Kulasangha, 526; 
see also Arthasdstra 

Kaveri, Kaviri, R, 499, 510, 534, 540, 542-3, 
552, 565, 585-6 

Kaveripatta(i)nam (Puhar) (Khaberis of 
Ptolemy), 725n; port of Chola kingdom, 
499; chief port of Tamil land, 516, 679; 
location of, 564; crowded by foreigners, 
516; life of fisherman of, 534; Chola 
emblem on mansions of, 557; ships 
sailing into, 564; merchandise brought to, 
565; cosmopolitan centre, 565; Buddha- 
datta in, 679n; description of, 542; 
Karikkannanar of, 546; see also Puhar 
Kaviputrau, 640, 678 

Kavirippurhpattinam, 542, 546; see also 
Kaveripattanam 
Kavisi, 164; see also Kapisa 
Kavyakaranagrantha, 649 
Kavyamimamsa, 336, 651n 
Kekaya (country and people), 121, 335, 
643 

Kerala, 499, 527, 607, 640 
Keralaputra, 9, 26 
Kesava, 641 

Ketalaputo, Ketalaputra, 578n; see Kerala- 
putra 

K’eu-tsiu-kio, 226 

Kevalin{s), Kevala, 409 ; see Mahavlra 
Khaveris (of Ptolemy), 499, 564; see also 
Kaveri 

Khajuraho, 259 

Khakharata(s), 275, 277; see also Kshaha- 
Khalatse, 196, 231 

Khallataka (minister of Bindusara), 19 
Khallatanaga, 616 
Khamdanaga (Mahasenapati), 324 
Khapdagir (hill), 692, 721 ; Caves at, 848 


Khandava, 551 

Khara, 643 

Kharosta, Kharaostes, 220, 267, 270, 787 

Kharapallana (Mahakshatrapa), 240 2T> 

346n 

Kharasalera, 243 

Kharavela, 22, 111-15, 151n, 347-8, 629; 
family of. 111, H3n, 296n, 347; pre- 
decessors of, 112; early life of, 113; ris" 
to power. 111; date of, 112, 30?n, 692; 
expedition and conquests cf, 93, 112-15, 
296n, 335; administration of, 1 14, 347-48n ; 
irrigation works of, 114; religion and 
religious toleration of, 115&n, 347, 362- 
inscription, 98, 112, 347, 115n, 362, 629’ 
692; art and architecture, 114-15, 692: 


Khorasabad, 92 
Khorasan, 251-2 

Khoshansu, 228n; see also Kushanas 
Khotan, 236-7, 630-2, 764-5, 765n, 767-8 
Khotani Saka, 225 
Khudacha, Khudachi, 241 
Khujjanaga, 586 

Khushana, 228n; see also Kushana 
Khyber Pass, 191 
Ki-lia(e)n, 188, 223 

Ki-pin, 189-190n-92n 204, 226, 229; see 
also Kapisa 
Kia-ni-cha, 236 
Kia-siang-li, 774 
Kian-she, 223 
Kiang-su, 770 
Kiao-che, 770, 775 
Kieu-che, 774 
Kien-chu-sse, 770 
Kien-shi, 224 

Kieu-tsiu-khi-o, Ki’u-tsiu-Kio, 183, 227-30 

Kien-wu, 227n 

Kien-ye, 770 

Kilakila, R., 329 

Kilan, Ambar, 514 

,Maiyur, 540 

Kllar Alattur, 549 

, Arisil, 511-12, 534 

, Idaikkunrur, 545 

, Kovur,_532, 547-9, 555-6, 558 

6gl j Kudalur Pulatturaimurriya, 541, 

— , Kurungoliyur, 541 

s§ Mangudi, 510, 513, 544-6 

-, Perungunrtir, 511, 539, 555 

, Turaiyur Odai, 527 

, Umattur, 527 

— , Kdar Kari, 544n 
Kijavon, Poraiyarru, 514 
Killi, 524 

Kaivan, 538 

— Vcrpahradakkaip Peru', ire.;-, : 20 



INDEX 


879 


KIranar, Kutfuvan, 528 
Kratas, Kiradas, ( Mlechcha tribe), 3, 
forming army of Chandragupta, 4; Mbh. 
on, 190, 43 5n, 468; Ramayana on, 764 
KIrattanar Kudavayir, 511 
Kirinda(i) Oya, 577, 589, 596 
KIrtishena, 259n 
Kishkindhas, 467 
Kissa Samkichcha, 82 
K’iu-lien, 775 
Kiu-sha, 236 
K’iu-tu-k’uen, 774 
Kochchenganan, 614 
Kodaimarpan, 518 

Kodai Seraman Kuttuvan, 513; see also 
KIranar Kuttuvan 
Kodavolu (place), 324 
Kodukur, 523 
Kodumanam, 565 
Kodumbalur, 725n 
Kodungunram, 529 
Kodura, 336 
Kol'aba, 742 
Kolambahalaka, 5S3 
Kolami, 669 
Kolatur, 729 
Kolhapur, 338, 352 
Kolhua (Basarh Bakhira), 848 
Kolkei, 43 8n 
Kolkhie (Gulf), 436n 
Kollemallai, 511-12 
Komaro (Kumara), 790 
Konadu, 547 
Kondamudi, 335 

Kondane, 319, 7!0n, 742-4, 749, 760-1, 


Kor.dapur, 705 

Kondivte, 718-19, 739 

Kohgar, 510, 524, 528, 537-8, 540, 547 

Kofigu Konguvelir, 521, 653 

Konkan, 433; Northern , 278-9, 286, 

331 

Konkanam, 535 
Konkanangilan, 535 
Konperunganam, 535 

Kopen, Kophene (Kabul, R.), 25, 190n, 
204 

Kopperunjolau, 555 

Korkai, 435, 499, 516, 546, 725n; see also 
Kolkai , . 

Kojrranar, Seyalur IJampon Sattan, 547n 
Korrangogranar, 547n 

Korur(a) (of Ptolemy), 500, 540; see also 
Karur-karuvur, Kaur-ur 
Kosa, 436 

Kosala, 5, 82, 96, 101, 105-6, 112n, 132, 
259n, 340n, 724 

Kosam, 133, 259n-62, 697, 705, pi. VII (2); 

see also KausambI 
Kosar, 502-3, 512, 538, 558, 672 
Koshsanu, 228n; see also Kushanas 
Koshthagaradhyaksha, 57 
Kotumbara, 433-4 


Kottadamuhela, 575 
Kottamalaya, 580 
Kotiambalam, 518 
Kottonara, 674 
Kovalan, 524, 544 
Kovalur, 536-7 
Kpimisha, Yaksha, 151n, 364 
Krishna (deity), 80, 271n, 383, 547, 566, 
575, 665, 746; conflict with asuras, 552; 
colour of, 757; in Gr. literature, 383; 
in epics, 419, 494, 645-7; in Tamil litera- 
ture, 566, 683n; incarnation of Vishnu, 
419; worship of, 566, 665; and Vasudeva, 
383, 799; and Gita, 647 ; on sanyasa, 421 ; 
on Kshatriya marriage, 484n; cycle of 
legends, 321; worshipped by Satavaha- 
nas, 320 

Krishna I (Rashtrakuta king), 351n 
Krishna, (region), 113, 329n, 334, 336 

.river, 113, 333, 732 

Krishnala (measure & coin), 778, 780 

Kritavlrya, 252 

Kpittikas, 656 

Kroraina, 631 

Kroshtha, 635 

Kshaharata(s), 275, 310n; Bhumaka and 
Nahapana, 236, 241 &n, 274-6, 282, 309; 
kshatrapa of Chukhsa, 265 ; tribe and race, 

272- 4, 277, 309n; family of, 273; official 
title, 275; in Malwa, 31 On; destroyed by 
Gautamlputra Satakarni, 275-7, 309-10n; 
and: Andhras, 275, 309; Chastana, 
276-7, 310n; king's metropolis, 279; 
feudatories of, 312; dynasty of, 274-9, 292 

Kshaharatasa, 273 
Ksnatra, 255n 

Kshatrapa(s), of Western India, 236, 251, 

273- 92, 348-50; variant forms of, 322n; 
of Kushana empire, 240-1; of Mathura, 
255n, 268-73; origin of, 263, 273; of 
Chuksha and Pushpapura, 264-7; of 
extreme North, 267-8; setback of invasion 
of, 308-12: and Kushanas, 274-5; decline 
of Western, 290-2; and Satavahanas, 
278-81, 312-13, 321-2; language and 
literature under, 639; titles of, 273, 278; 
era used by, 273-4; geneological table 
of, 292; language and script used by, 
349; chronology of 286n; took to Bra- 
hmanism, 656; Indianisation of, 273 ; ins. 
639; coins used by Northern — , 787-8; 
coins by Western — , 321, 802, 805-9 

kshatrapasa, 273 
Kshathrapavan, 263 

Kshatriya(s), Kathoi, Kathaians of Gr. 
writers, 129; organised into guilds, 8, 54, 
131, 342; status of, 8, 110 

— tribes, 109, 110, 128-9, 132, 475, 

798n; coins, 110, 129 

caste, 79, 190n, 221, 225, 282, 472, 

480; social customs of, 470, 481-2, 484-5, 
488, 493 ; performing vedic sacrifices, 463n 
Kahu(au)draka-mdlansend, 3, 127 



INDEX 


Kshauma (linen fabrics), 73 

Kshayathiydnam, Kshayathiya , 193, 241 

Kshemendra, 172, 653 

Kshudrakas, 3, 126-7 

Kuang-Tong, 775 

Kubera, 687 

Kucha, 632, 767-8 

Kuchumara, 667 

Kuci-Kucha, 228 

Kuchika, 764 

Kuda, 319 

Kudagaram, 546 

Kudagumalai, 724 

Kudalparandalai, 510 

Kudal, 512 

Kudam, 731n 

Kudanadu, 525 

Kudepa (lord of Kalinga), 112, 348n 

ku4is (tribe), 553 

Kudirai, 538 

Kudugumalai, 725n 

Kudura (dist. & city), 335 

Kuei-shuang, 224, 226, 230; see also Kushapa 

Kuei-tseu, 767 

Kukkutadhvaja, 799 

Kukkuiarama ( vihara ), 99, 364 

Kukku{ika (Buddhist sect), 367 

Kukura, 131-2, 279, 655 

kulagamaka, 601 

Kulaipa, 282 

Kulamunam, 513, 532, 547 
Kulanagara, 601 
kulasangha, 526 
Kulindas, 136-7 
kulinl, 601 

Ktilu valley, 136, 256 
Kulumur, 518 

Kuluta(s), 136, 256; see also Kaulutas & 
Kulindas 

kumara (prince), 229 316; — vra, 406n 
(viceroy), 28-9 

Kumara (deity), 406, 636, 656, 746, 790 & n, 

Skanda (deity), 245; Skanda , 

790n; Kavi— , 845 

Bhagavan Svarm Brahmanya, 797-8n 

Satavahana, 806n; Kavi , story 

of, 851 

Kumaradatta (gamika), 324 
KumaradevI, 132 
Kumaragupta II, 107n, 133n 
Kumaralata (author), 236, 648 
Kumar! (Cape Commorin), 498 
— (hills), 362-3 

Kumaridevt (consort of Karttikeya), 798 
Kumarila, 652, 657, 665 
Kumbakanam, 504n, 746n 
Kumbhandas, 572, 605, 611-12 
Kumbukkan Oya, 577, 596 
Kumrahar (Patna) 74, 76n, 88, 93; remains 
of palace of, 846 

Kumudasena, 133, 799, pi. VII (1) 

Kun-lun, 766 

Kunala (son of Asoka), 43, 364n 715, 765; 


monastery, 846 

Kunar, S Icfll8 
Kunchanaga, 586, 594 
Kundakunda, 410, 355n, 662 
Kundalavana-i ihdra, 239 
Kundall ( sakti ), 661 
Kunets, 797 
Kuni, 635n 

Kuninda(s), 110, 256; in literature, 110; 
republican people, 346; territory and 
kingdom of, 109-10, 136, 342; kings of, 
110, 135-6, 342 & n; subdued by Sakas, 
110; rise to power after Kushanas, 242-50 
255; and Yaudheyas, 256; disappearance 
of, 256; religion of, 346 &n, 798n; coins, 
110, 135-7, 1S5, 256, 342n, 346 & n 
796-8 &n, 800 

Kunaravadava (yarttika- writer), 635 
Kuntala, 6, 336-8 
Kunti, 645-6 
Kuras, 338 

Rural, 479, 499n, 541, 669n 
Kurarlgi (wife of Indragnimitra), 105, 689 
Kurappalli, 547 
Kuravas, 562 

Kuriiijippdttu, 509, 55 In, 746n; date of, 507; 
author of, 507, 532, 675, 680; composed 
to describe Tamil culture, 532; eighth of 
series of poems, 677, 680; consists of 
twenty-six lines, 680; themes of, 675, 677, 
680 

Xurnool, 729 
Kuru (king,) 112 

people, 5, 54, 131-2, 190; Uttara , 

533, 551 

s (of Kolhapur), 338 

Kurukshetra, 647 
Kurunagala, 597, 604 
Kurundi Atthakalha, 621 
Kurundcgai (anthology), 504, 510-12, 527, 
530-1, 538, 562n, 670, 675; refers to 
Nandas, 503; one of eight anthologies, 
677; authors of, 505, 525, 537, 541, 543, 
678; themes of, 525, 541, 543, 677 
Kusa (Rama’s son), 642, 644 
Kusan, 251 
Kusadhvaja, 643 
Kusala, 252 

Kusalanakanda, 580, 589 
Kusha, 224-5, 228 
Kushana (coin), 809 

Kushana(s), Kushapa 125, 138, 183, 222-54, 
268, 331, 846, pis. Ill (4), IV (8); etymo- 
logy of, 224-5; variant forms of, 228n; 
origin, nationality and early history of, 
223-7 229n; and Yuechi & Sakas, 223-7, 
230, 235, 253; language of, 225, 772; 
growth and extent of empire, 106-7, 136, 
183, 213, 218-19, 222,225-7, 232, 236-8, 
697, 701, 767-8, 772; kings, 183, 204, 
207, 213, 225-50, 260, 268, 272, 287, 
788-96; chronology of, 234-6; capital of. 



INDEX 


238; titles of, 229, 231-3, 241-2, 244-6, 

251, 345-6, 696; decline & fall of, 108, 
110-11, 243, 247-62, 346; administration 
of, 240-1, 272-4, 344; trade and contact 
with Rome, 233, 241-2, 349; religion of, 
232, 238-40, 247, 474, 655-6, 704, 767; 
art and architecture. 185, 220, 222, 247, 
253-4, 436, 696-8, 701-2, 704, 706, 715, 
719, 750; Indianisation of, 138, 222, 247, 

252, 255, 474; culture, 253-4; literature 

and sciences under, 253-4; incriptions, 
197, 206, & n, 230, 237, 267-9, 632, 651 n; 
coins, 132, 213, 225, 228, 230-5, 241-2, 
246-8, 250, 252, 254, 345, 474, 784, 

788-98; Kidara , 252-3; Sassanian — , 

251 

Kushih, 225 

Kuo-hao-kuei-shuang-wang, 226 
Kusika, 764 

Kusinagara, 84, 708, 847; see also Kasia 
Kusulua, 228, 271 ; see also Liaka Kusuluka 
(Kusuluka Liaka) 

Kusumadhvaja, 153-4 
Kustana (abandoned son of Asoka), 765n 
Kusumahvaya (Pataiiputra), 153 
Kutakanna, 583, 585; see also Tissa, Ku(a- 
kanna 

Kuttalam (Aykkudi), 725n 
Ku(tanad, 674 

Kuttuvan Palyanai-selkelu, 506, 509, 512-14, 
518, 520-2 
Kuttuvanjeral, 506 
Kuijuvar, 540 
kutumipikan (peasant), 501 
KuvenI, 571, 573 

Labdances, 212 
Ladakh, 231 
Laghulovade, 630 
Lahore (dist.), 132, 200n, 640n 
Lakshmana, 494n, 641-4 
Lakshmi (deity), Sakas and Partnians devoted 
to, 474n; representations on coins, 134, 
158, 168-9, 271, 346, 473n, 783, 798. 800, 

pi. VII (5, 7); Abhisheka , 209 & n, 

269, 272, 787; Hellenistic , 168; 

Gaja , 786, pi. VII (7) 

Lakullsa, 397-8, 656 
Lala (Kushana dandanayaka ), 241, 267 
Lalaka Hatthisimha (father-in-law of Khar- 
avela), 113 
Lalitapattana, 86 

Lalitavistara, language of, 630, 648; date of, 
648; refers to treatise on poetry, 649; 
refers to philosophical works, 659; con- 
tains account of Buddha, 664; on: sub- 
jects of learning, 667 ; kalas, 497 ; marriage 
of Boddhisattva, 484; seclusion of wife, 
481 ; low castes, 468 
Lariibakarna(s) (clan), 584-6, 601 
Lambodara (successor of Satakani II), 304, 
326 

Lampaka (md. Laghman), 25 


Lan-shi, 223-4 
Lang-ya-sieu, 776 
Lanka, 574, 581, 614, 643-4 
Lankasuka (Lang-kia-shu), 776 
Laodice, 161-2 
Laodicean (wine), 307 
Larkhana, 130 
La(a(s), 332, 468 
Lauhitya, 432n 
Lauriya, 729; 

— Nandangarh (Lion pillar), 848 
Lava, 642, 

Leh, 231 
Levant, 440 
Lhasa, 736 

Liaka Kusuluka, viceregal ruler and a 
Kshatrapa under Maues, 181, 241, 267, 
270; son of, 195, 220, 344n; governor of 
Chukhsa, 199, 241, 265, 267; variant 
epithets of, 228; descendants of, 241; 
mentioned in ins., 241 ; legends on coins 
of, 265; coins of, 181, 265, 344n 
, Kshatrapa (a descendant of Kusu- 
luka), 241, 267 

Lichchhavi(ka)s, 54, 104, 131-2 
Lieu-ye (queen of Fu-nan), 773 
Ligor, 776 
Lilavai, 294, 305-6 
Lllavatl (wife of Hala), 306, 

Lilavati (Prakrit romance), 652, 665 

Lin-yi (country), 775-6 

Liu-ngan (Taoist philosopher), 766 

Lin-ti (emperor), 770 

Lo-yang, 767, 769-70 

Lob-nor, 631 

lobha-vijayc, 9, 116 

Lohanipur (near Patn^), 93, 693, 695; 

Jina image at, 849 
Lohapasada, 587, 614-5 & n 
Lokakshema, 768-9 
Lokapala, 61 1 

Lokayata(s), 408, 429, 659-60 
Lokattara(s), 368, 648 
Llokottaravada, 366-8, 376-7 
Lomas Rishi cave, 89, 718-19, 721, 739, 
744, 846 
Lou-lan, 631 

Loriyan Tangai (image), 703, 849 
Lu Tai, 775 

Lumbini, Lumbinigrama, 31, 61, 84, 92 
Ludhiana, 256 
Luhrasp, 245, 790 
Lydia, Lydian, 778 

Lysias, Lysius, 177-8, 213, 785, pi. II (3,5) 

Maced on, 141n, 777, 795 
Macedonia, 118; Macedonian — head dress, 
pl. I (6) 

Macha, 313 

Mada, Mada (harvest), 596 
Madanamanjuka, 653 
Madhavasena, 96 

Madhavavarman I (Vakataka), 330 



882 


INDEX 


Madhura (Mathura), 381 

— (Pandya capital), 73, 433 

Madhurika/243 
Madhvacnarya, 42! 

Madhya Bharat, 180, 257 
Madhya Pradesh, 133, 329, 781, 805-6 
Madhvadesa (Middle country), 21,47, 
153-4, 156, 368, 496, 627, 684, 686, 692 
Madhyamaka(s), 376-8, 

Madhyamika(s) (school), 415-16, 664-6 
Madhyamika-kdrikas, 377, 666 
Madhyamika- Sastra, 418 
Madhyamika, Madhyamika (near Chitor), 
97n, 126, 153, 635 
Madhyamikdm, 95 
Madhyant avibhugatika, 377n 
Madira (Durga), 80 &n, 

Madra(s), Madraka(s) (people and country), 
territory of, 132, 190, 256, 764; Mbh. & 
Rm. on, 3, 190, 764; sangha, 54, 131; 
capital of, 190; Kautilya on, 54, 131; in: 
Vedic literature, 132; Upanisbads, 132; 
origin of, 132; resist foreign invasions, 
132; pull down edifice of Kushana empire, 
255; regarded as Kshatriyas, 132; under 
Saniudragupta, 132; in copper plate ins. 
of Dharmapaia, 132; in Allahabad pillar 
ins., 256; duties of, 468; food and drink 

of, 473; southern , 132; Uttara , 

132 

desa, 132, 256 

MadrI, 4S4n, 645 

Madurai, 499, 508, 510, 512, 524, 544, 554, 
556; location of, 26; capital city and its 
description, 4S9, 545, 556-7, 561, 730-1, 
757; limit of Mauryan advance, 510; 
kings of, 544; religion and religious 
centre at, 566, 679n; industry, trade and 
port of, 498, 546, 564; inscriptions, 516, 
669; in literature, 545-6, 548, 554, 556, 
730, 757; art and architecture, 724-5, 
730-1 

Maduraik-kafiji, 503, 512; author of, 508, 
544, 680; sixth of ten longer poems, 677; 
consists of 782 lines, 680; Sanskritic ideas 
in, 551 ; on; wealth of Vanap, 513; kings, 
544; Madurai, 545, 557, 561, 566, 730-1; 
Agastya, 551; animals in royal palace, 
553; king's army, 558; beating of arum, 
559; fine arts, 561; coastal trade, 564; 
painted scene in, 757; North Indian Coun- 
tries in, 456n 

Maduraikkumaran Erichchalur Madalan. 

, 513, 547 

Maduru Oya, 595 
Maga (Magas of Cyrene), 26 
Magadha, 101, 103, 104, 574; capital of, 29, 
707&n; under: Nandas, 53, 362; Mauryas, 
9; Suhgas and after, 94, 102, 364; Khara- 
vela’s invasion of, 93, 112, 144-5, 362; 
under Kanvas and Andhras, 103-4; later 
rulers of, 104-5n, 114-15, 287; kings of, 
574, 576, 625; matrimonial relations with 


Western Satraps, 104, 287; Sakas in, 772; 
under Guptas, 329; Asvaghosha in, 373; 
famine in, 9; religion of, 9, 364, 373, 412; 
Fa-hien in, 367-8; industry and trade of, 
73, 433; artisans from, 724; language and 
literature of, 368, 628-9; art & archi- 
tecture of, 707; Mahapadma of, 114; see 
also Mauryas 
Magadhas, 551 
Magadhi, 47, 629-31, 650-1 
Magama (in Ceylon), a large town. 593, 
600; location of, 600; capital at, 577; 
and Dutthagamani, 576n, 580-1, 597; 
Nagathtipa of, 600; cheliyaso f 613; Tissa 
Tank of, 624 

Magana (same as Magama), 600 
Magas of Cyrene, 26 

Magltas, 255, 259-60n, 262; later , 261 

Magnesia, 147, 149 
Mahabala, 769 

Mahabharata (great epic), 384n, 433n, 435n, 
473. 518, 551, 641-2, 645, 653, 672; on: 
peoples and states, 3, 110, 118, 126, 128-9 
134, 136, 256, 346, 472, 764; Greeks, 151, 
170, 475; Sakas, 190, 475; Abhlras, 475; 
non-monarchical states, 347; killing of 
animals, 23, 493; Girivraja, 707n; 

social condition, 465-8, 470-2, 475-8, 493, 
495-6; industry and trade, 433-4, 436; 
religion and philosophy, 419-20, 493, 
655; influence of, 642, 648, 666; date and 
antiquity of, 645; story of, 645-7; nature 
and character of, 647-8; Durga stotras 


Mahabhashya (of Patanjali), 635; author 
of, 257, 635, 661; nature and character 
of, 635, 662; revival of its study in Kash- 
mir, 636; on: Chandragupta-jeWw, 12, 
48; Mauryas, 48; post-Mauryan dynast- 
ies, 94; Greek invasions, 95, 98, 112; 


656; akhyanas, etc., 637; nata, suta, etc., 
638-9; Krishna-Vasudeva, Karhsa and 
Asuras, 382, 552; Sudras, 467; its author’s 
association with PataJiputra, 636; on 


Mahabhutimitra, 135 
mahabi (title), 589 


mahamachchakatha, 614 
Mahachozbo (in Chinese Turkestan), 266 
Mahachulika, 582 

Mahadeva (Audumbara ruler), 109, 135, 
342, 797-8 

—(Buddhist missionary), 86 

Mahadhammarakkhita, Mahadharmaraks- 
hita, 86, 366, 765 
Mahagamendi, 595 
Mahakasyapa, 84, 367 
Mahamani (tank), 596 
Mahameghavahana(s) (of Kaliiiga), 111-12, 



INDEX 


Mahameghavana, 606-7, 609-10, 613 
Mahanadi, 313 

Mahanaga ( Uparaja Mahadathika Maha- 
llaka), 579-80, 583-4, 589, 604, 607, 610, 
616, 622-3 

Mahaniddesa, 512a, 771, 776 
Mahapadma Nanda, 5, 114 
Mahaparinirvdna, 711; see also Nirvana 
and Parinibbdna 
mahapdtakas, 492 
mahaprasthdna, 647 
Maharakkhira, 86, 765 
Maharashtra (Maharattha), 86, 279, 332, 
765 

Maharashtrins, Maharashtri, 47, 337, 628, 
630, 651 

Maharathi, Sadakaija Kajalaya, 337, 805 

• , Trapakayiro, 805 

Maharattaka ( senapati ), 582 
Mahasarhmata, 593, 603, 609 
Mahasangha, 369 

Mahasarhghika(s) (Buddhist school), 648; 
and second council, 83-4; schism & rise of 
school of, 83-4, 366, 663; sown seeds of 
Mahayana, 664; mentioned in inscrip- 
tions, 270, 367, 369 ; gives rise to numerous 
schools & branches, 366, 368-9; spread of, 
367; under patronage of Satavavahanas 
and their successors, 313 369, 377; doctri- 
nes of, 368-9, 371, 375-6, 378; stronghold 
of, 369, 377; at Karla, 313 320 and Sar- 
vastivadas, 371 ; viharas & halls given to, 
367; in South India, 367; lineage of, 

367; literature of, 367-8; vinaya, 367 

Mahasena (king), 342, 570, 587-8, 591, 

596, 602, 604, 616, 619-20, 623 

(Skanda Karttikeya) (deity), 245, 

333, 656, 790 & n, pi. V (9) 

(Sangharama) 238-9 

Mahasiva, 579, 610 
Mahasthan, 705 

Mahasthan(garh), 48 & n, 57, 73 
Mahathupa, 366, 610, 614-15, 622-3 
Mahatissa, Kupikkala Thera, 618 

, Mahachuji, 569, 583 

Mahatittha (Mantai), 597 
Mahatthakatha, Mulatthakatha, 621 
Mahavali (Ganga), 600 
Mahavamsa (Ceylonese chronicle), 172, 366, 
514, 568, 576n, 591, 667n; on: chrono- 
logy, 27n, 568, 621-2, 625; Alasanda, 
117, 172; Anuradhapura, 604; Chola influ- 
ence, 515; Asoka, 27n, 80, 86, 606-7, 609; 
Ceylon: 568, 574, 614-1 5 ; early inhabitants, 
571, 602; early kings, 578-95 613; ad- 
ministration, 589-93; religion, religious 
sects and missions, 80, 86, 117, 366n, 
568, 604-10,612, 617-19. 621, 625; industry 
and trade, 596-8; social and economic 
condition, 590-604; art and architectuie, 
596-7, 610, 614-16, 622-3; coins, 570, 
598 ; nature and character of, 568; Buddha, 
573; Vijaya, 573-4; date of, 574 


Mahavamsa Tikd, 3n, 6n, 667 
Mahavanseliya, 368 
Mahavarttikas, 635 

Mahdsvastu, 648; portion of Vinayapitaka, 
368; language of, 630 
Mahavibhdsha, 374-5 

Mahavihara, 373, 568, 587, 594, 605, 609-10, 

613- 14, 616-21 

Mahavira, contemporaries of, 81, 379; 
followers of, 357; nephew and son-in-law 
of, 362n; visits Orissa, 362; and Brahmani- 
cal sects, 378; hero worship in cult of, 
384; doctrines of, 411; growth of religion 
of, 710; head of Jaina Community, 555; 
death and successor of, 555; Jaina Church 
after, 357 ; see also Jina 

Jina, 710 

Mahayana, see Buddhism 
Ma'ndy ana-viiiisikd, 666 

Sraddhotpada, 665 

Mahayogi (Siva), 800 
Maheja, 605 

Mahenda, Mahendra, Mahindra (apostle of 
Ceylon). took lessons from Moggaliputta, 
83; mission to Ceylon, 86, 606, 649, 765; 
date of. 576; introduction of Buddhism 
in Ceylon, 576: son or brother of Asoka, 
606, 608-9, 649, 765; and Tissa, 606, 

614- 15n; rock-cells ghen to. 606, 609-10; 
sends for his sister, 607; H. Tsang on, 
608-9; Ceyionese legends on, 609; ins- 
criptions refer to, 603n; lives in Mihintate, 
613; prediction cf, 61 5n; came from 
Vidisa, 623 

Mahendra (Mahidu) (mountains), 11 In, 
313 

Mahendravarman (Pallava king), 730 
Mahesvara, 655 
Mahesvara, 232, 656, 788 
Maheth, 237 
Mahidasa Aitareya, 381 
Ma'nila-mukha, 851 
Mahimitra, 135 
Mahinda guhd, 613 
Mahlsasaka(s), 366, 370-1, 663-4 
Mahisha, 73, 433-4 
Mahishamaridala, 86 
Mahishmatl, 282. 332 
Mahiyangana, 579, 581 
Maira, 195 

Maisoloi (of Ptolemy), 335 
Maitreya, 847 
Maitreyanatka, 377 
Maiyur, 507, 526 

Majhimikaya, 126; see also Madhyamika 

Majjhantika, 86, 765 

Majjhima, 86 

Majjhimabhanaka, 616 

Maka, 187 

Makha-nakshatra, 551 
Makkodai, 518 
Makuran, 251 

Malabar, 434, 575, 599, 601, 724, 728, 739 



884 


INDEX 


Malaipadukadam, 508, 511, 554n, 561n, 670n 
677, 680 

Malaiyadippatti, 747n 
Malaiyaman, Tirukkannan, 532 
Malakonda, 500 

Malaprabha, Malaprahara, R., 338 
Malatimadhava, 653 
Malashua, 266 

Malava(s), Malli, 130, 257; country of, 
257, 347n; tribe of N. W., 3, 126-7, 249; 
republics, 346; and: Kshudrakas, 126-7; 
Alexander, 3, 73, 75, 126-7, 257; Kusha- 
nas, 257; Kshatrapas, 288; Vikrama era, 
128, 207, 266; chiefs and kings of, 190, 
288; submit to Samudragupta, 257; 
migration of, 128, 257; coins of, 128, 
257, 346-7n, 796, 801-2, pi. VIII (11); 
inscriptions, 288; achievements of, 346; 

eclipse of, 257; later , 128 

Malava-gana, 128, 801, pi. VII (11) 

Malavalli, 338 

Majavar, 525, 536 

Malavatu Oya, 577 

Malavedans, 571 

Malavika, 96 

Mdlavikdgnimitra{m), 94, 95n-6n-7 & n-8, 
100, 153, 304, 339n 

Malaya (mountains), 583, 586-7, 594, 600, 
617-18 

Peninsula, 434, 773-4, 776 

Ketu (Parvataka), 4 

Malayalam, 500, 669, 670 
Ma-li (Ma-wu), 776 
Malichas (king), 241 n 

II, 241 n 

Mallas, 54 

Mallakas, Mallakis (Mallas), 131-2 
Majlanar Alakkar Nalarmagar.ar Maljanar, 
547 n 

Mallavaram, 725n 

Malli 124-7, 257; see also Mallas and 
Malava 
Malpi, 550 
Malto, 669 

Malwa, 97, 331; Scythian conquest of, 190; 
under: Satavahanas, 97; Sakas, 190; 
Kshaharatas and Kshatrapas, 247, 278-9, 
282, 286-7, 474; Bharasiva conquest of, 
331 ; coins, 247, 286, 781, 805; Eastern— 

279, 282, 331, 433n; Western , 279, 

287 

Mamallapuram, 564 
Mambaros, 241 

Mambarus, 275; see also Nambanos 
Maminiya Korale, 596 
Mamulanar, 501-2, 510-12, 514, 519, 526 
ManakkiHi, Solan, 506, 522 
Manao Bago, 790 

Manar, Mannar, (Gulf of), 435, 500 
Manavadharmasutra, 657; see also Manu 
and DharmaSastra 
Mahchapurl (cave), 692, 848 
Mapdagala, 580 


Maridagapatju, 730 
Mandara, 434 
Mandaran, 512, 517, 539-40 
Mandasor, 279 
Maridavl, 643 

Mandhata, 282; see also Mahishmati 
Mandi, Adi, 543 
Manibhadra ( Yaksha ) 379, 695 
Manigula, 220, 265-6, 344n, 788 
Manixar(a)gama, 595, 597 
Manikyala, 237, 241, 267-8, 715 
Manim ekalai (Tamil epic), time of com- 
position of, 503-4; importance of, 504; 
language and metre of, 676; refers to the 
art of painting, 757; on: training of 
courtesans, 481; disposal of dead, 566, 
730; Elara, 580; arttsans, 724 
Manjusnmulakalpa, 364n; see also Aryaman- 
jusnmulakalpa 
Manmatna, 757 
Manmoda, 745, 748 
Mannar, 577 
Mansehra, 25, 629 

Mantai, 577, 582, 584, 597 ; see also, Matota 
mantriparishad (council of ministers), 12, 19 
Manu, 471, 474, 656-9; date of, 656-7; on: 
Sakas & Yavanas, 475; council of minis- 
ters, 12; king’s ownership of land, 56; 
coins, 143, 778, 780; castes, 465, 467, 
469-70; marriage, 467, 469-70, 475-6, 
481-4; ascetics, 469; woman, 469, 470-1, 
475-81; niyoga, 488; funeral rites, 469; 
slavery, 470-1; student life, 495; food & 
drmk, 491-3; dress, ornaments, hygiene, 

Manusmriti 55, 647, 657-8; date of, 657; 
scope of, 657; religion and philosophy 
in 657; influence of, 657; and Kantaka- 
sodhana, 51; kingship, 55; Ambas'thas, 

Mao, 789-90 
Mao-tun, 188 
maparumaka , 592, 602 
Mara, 611, 751 
Maraka, Palaya, 515 
Panaya, 515 

Maran Ijarn Palaiyan, 512-3, 540, 583 

Maranapara, 771 

Marandai, 509, 520, 541 

Maralta, 724 

Maravar, 556 

Mardan, 212 

Margana, 600 

Margiana, 139 

Maricha, 642-3 

Marichavatti, 614 

Markanam,' 550 

Maru, 125 

M ^™dan Maduraikkanji Mangudi, 508-10, 
Marwar,’ 282' 

Masakavati (of Panini), 118; also 



INDEX 


885 


Masalia, 434 
Masalipatam, 333 
Misaitacar, 547 

nusiiakms), uiiisha, mashas (measure & 
coins), 14, 7S0a, 309 
i'vl ishanagur of Babar, 1 IS 
Mask!, Ma,ki, 5, 21, 629, 725, 727 
Mr.ssuaa, 113. 120 
Mat, 2“3 1. 243 
Mat ale, 604, 617, 625 

Muhnra, 103-9, 133. 25 5, 331, 333, 801n; 
unie, : Post-Ma crva rulers, 101, 104-5, 
103-9, 123, 134, 263-9, 339, 341; Greeks, 
95, 103n, 112, 114, 154, 174,272; Scythians 
and Pah!a\ as, 103 & n-10, 218-20; 

Kushanas, 10S, 238, 243, 255n, 260-1, 272; 
Saka satraps, 265. 267-8, 269-72, 274, 737, 
796, 800; Nagas, 249, 255, 257-9; Saurase- 
noi of, 335; dialects spoken at, 629: 
religion of, 32, 113n, 363, 655; art and 
architecture, 240. 253-4, 634, 693, 696-7, 
701, 706, 716; sculpture, 231-2, 240, 
247, 497, 634, 693, 696-702, 708-9, 747, 
750-1, 753, 845, 849; inscriptions, 113n, 
133, 192, 220, 231-2, 242-4, 260n, 265, 
267, 269-72, 274-5n, 3-t5n, 363, 3o7, 369, 
465n, 481, 630-1, 631; coins, 94, 101, 
104, 108 & n, 134, 174, 219, 258-9, 271-2, 
737-800; museum at, 231-2, 244, 247, 
693: Buddha Statue at, 349; Holi-gate. 
849; B.tehchanahan Scene, 349; Yaksha 
Sidtue, 849; imiee of Kanisnka, 699. 
849; Yakshinl, 849 
Moth'irhrirti. 635 
maihscluu,:, 233. 348 
Matovi, 582, 600; see also Mantai 
Ivtitj-ichela, 643 
tnarnkas, 650 
M.nsyadesu, 109 
Ma-twav.-lin, 189 

Mauakes, :94, 197; se-> also Maues 
Maudgalyayana, 84, 6-»0 
Maues (Moga), 195, 198, 200; as sovereign 
ruler, 181, 194-7: first Saka king. 5-G: 
identified with Moga, 195, 197; origin 
and nationality of, 193-4, 207; family of, 
194; epithets of, 192, 197, 265, 343, 475... 
pi. Ill (6-7); and; Vonor.es, 192-3; 
Parthians (Ates), 204: Suicas, 193: uido- 
Greeks, 193, 19S-9, 220n; rules in Punjab, 
192-3, 208 ; date of. W5-7. 20!, 205, 207-8: 
coins, 178-9, 192-201, 20S-9n, 214, 217, 
265, 786, pi. Ui (6-8); successors of, 192, 
194, 201, 207, 343-4 

Mnurya(s), 10, 347, 472, 512, 514, 627, 
632; foundation of empire, 1-5, 250; 
empire & its extent, 5-10. 19, 2-1-6, 47-S; 
empire in South, 9-10, 499, 501; kings: 
C’nandragupta, 1-9, 282; Bindusara, 

19; Asoka, 20-43; later — — 43-9; chrono- 
logy, 10, 43-9; eiplhets, 19. 21, 44; capita! 
and palace of, 11, 114n, 154; conquest, 
5-10; administration, 10, 12-14, 16-17, 27- 


30, 50-66, 107, 339, 351 ; viceroyalty, 341 ; 
public works, 349; decline and fall of, 
43-9, 94-5, 125, 133, 364, 695, 766; succes- 
sors of, 94-115, 339; army, 57; monarchy, 
54-6; society, 17-18, 66-70, 472; industry 
and trade, 70-80, 433; religion and 
philosophy, 44, 80-6, 364, 654, 656, 661, 
684; relation with Greeks, 1-5, 7-8, 19, 
26-7, 44-6, 48; relation with Ceylon, 578; 
language and literature, 623-9, 634-5, 
638, 655; inscriptions, 10, 20-1, 47, 50, 60, 
67-8, 351, 503, 515. 578, 62S-30, 764; 
coins in period of, 779-80; Art, 55, 86-93, 
633, 694. 706, 713 & n, 718-19, 747-3, 848; 
post — dynas.ics, 94-115, 339; Kofikaru — , 
501 

Ma,d]aUan, 543 

Maya (architect). 646 

Maya (queen), 754 

Mayidasolu, 335 

Mayon, (Vishnu). 7M, 746 

M .ivurasanns.il, thluuumba km.n, 332, 338 

M-'J.a, 25 1 

M.izdai, 2! 2 

Med nautili, 492 

Mediterranean S:ti, 5?8, 725, 730n 
Modus H. daspvs. .93 

Mcgasthenes, 3. 10. 50. 78. 669; date of, 
3. 52, 593; \wk of, 53, 69; in Arachosia, 
3; and Kautliya, 10, i4, 52, 55; sent by 
Stic .cus as ambassador to court of 
Pataliputra, 8: on: king ar.d kingship, 
10-1, 55; capital city .tad palace, i 1- 1 2, 
4 i, 76, 88, 707-8; administration, 12-13, 
52, 59, 64-5; military adnimsi ation, 13, 
64; food & drink, 15-16; castes, 17-18, 55, 
66-7; slavery, 67-8; Kuiiiiga a -my, 24; 
royal procession, 55; state o.motship, 
56; Praia, 64; social life, 6b, 69; manners 
& customs, 69-70; non-monarchtcal states, 
116; industry and trade, 70-3, 75, -G- 1 -; 
South India & Ceylon, 443, 574. 598; 
routes, 70-1 ; religion, 75-6, 383, 655 
Megna (king of Purasikas), 4 
Mcghas (of l-losala), 112n, 259n 
Meskcscudesa. 640 
iMeg.'.av.inna. (Kitti) Siri, 596, 602 
Meghan ahan.a, see Kharuvela 
Meghav-innabhaya, 587 
Mcitala (country), 1C6 
ivlekalas, 463 

MenanC773 

Meiiadraia, Menamlfou, 175; ses also 

Menander, 55, 169-76, 184, 209, 219, 635, 
70S; birth place of, 117, 172; lineage of, 
475; life of, 104. 1 72; rise to power, 
97<& n; conquests of. 98, i53-4; imasien of 
India and routes of advance, 97dtn-S, 154, 
169, 635: and: Demetrius, 104, i54, 170, 
173; Pushyamitra, 97-8; I. re of. 104, i 72; 
territories ruled over by, 104, 102n-9, 174; 


112 



886 


INDEX 


capital of, 132, 341, 365; chronology and 
date of, 168, 172, 174-5; and Apollodotus, 
169-70; court of, 172; administration of, 
174, 264, 340 & n-1 & n; public works of, 
365; marriage of, 172; mentioned in ins., 
168; epithets of, 175, pi. II (7, 9, 13); 
religion (Buddhism) of, 171n-2, 175, 

230, 232, 364-5, 473n; policy towards 
Indians, 341 ; in Milinciapanha, see also 
Milandapahha, 171; coins of, 108n, 163, 
168, 170, 172-5, 177-8, 181, 185, 232, 
783, pi. II (7, 9-10, 13); eminence of, 
171; death and successors of, 172, 175-6, 
341 ; Greek rule after, 174 
Meros (mountain), 117 
Meru, 434, 548, 764, 766 
Merutunga, 98 
Merv, 139 
Messene, 791 

Methora, 383 ; see also Mathura 
Metteyya, 611, 614 
Meu-luen, 774 

Meuakos, 194; see also Maues 
Mevaki Miyika, 269-70 
Mi-son, 775 
Miaos, 213 

michchhaditthikula, 605 
Middle country, 134, 136; see also 

Madnyadesa 

Mihintale, 578-9, 584, 606, 608, 610, 613, 
619, 622, 852 
Mihira, 245, 789-90 
Mi]aikkandan, 530 
Milalaikkurram, 545 

Milinda, 117, 171, 175, 651; see also 
Menander 

Milinciapanha (Pali work), 151n, 436n, 441, 
607; date & composition, 650-1 ; nature of 
work, 171; on: Chandragupta's war 
against Nandas, 6; Sakala, 132, 708; 
Menander, 171-2, 175, 340, 365, 473n, 
475; industry, 433-5n; caste, 467-8, 
475 ; slavery, 470-1 ; widows, 480; marriage, 
484; drinking, 494; dressing, 495; garland- 
makers, 496; philosophical systems, 659; 
Indianisation of Greeks, 184, 365; Social 
divisions & castes 461-4; a Setthi of 
Pataliputra, 464-5; agriculture & plant 
products, 430-1 

MImarhsa, 56, 659, 661 -2n; Karma , 

662n; Kdsakritsna , 661; Purxa , 

661-2; Uttara , 661 

Min (emperors), 770 
Mlnadhvaja, 799 
Ming (emperor), 769 
Minili, 511, 538 
Minnagara, 279 
Minneriya, 596, 624 
Missakapabbata, 606 
Mita ( senapati ), 581 
Mithila, 661 

Mithra, 785, 789; see also Mitra 
Mithridates 1, 163, 165, 193, 196-7, 217 


II, 193, 196, 202, 343 

Mitra (Sun god), 379 

(kings of Kosala and Panchala), 103, 

105-7, 340n, pi. VII (3) 

(kings of Mathura), 108, 341n 

Mitradeva, lOln 
Mitta, 582 
Mittabindaka, 851 
mlechchhas, 3, 46, 68, 508, 554, 680 
Mo-la-po, 128, see Malava 
Moaphernes, 194 
Modoura (Madurai), 26 
Moga, 181, 194-7, 207-8, 241, 265; see also 
Maues 

Moggallana, 713n 

Moggaiiputta (Tissa), 31, 83, 86, 607, 765; 

see also Tissa Moggaiiputta 
Moghasis, 129 
Mohra Moradu, 704 
Mohur, 502-3, 511-2, 523 
Mokshala, 770 
Molucca, 561 
Mou-tseu, 770 
Moneyasute, 630 
Mora, 107, 133 

Moriyas, 501-2, 585, 672; see also Mauryas 

Monyar (Mauryas), 501-2 

Motupalle (port), 319 

Mrichchiiakatika, 640-1 

Mfitapas, 467 

Mu-ku’a, 197 

Muchukarna (Musicanus of Gr. writers) 
129n 

Mudamosiyar Enicncheri, 526-7 
Mudananda, 337, 352n 
Mudattamakkanniyar, 507, 541, 680 
Mudavanar Aiyur, 546, 548 
Mudmagarayar, Murihjiyur, 518 
Mudiyan 538 

Mudrurakshasa, 3-4, 9, 61, 256 
Mudukudumi, 544 

Moiadeva (of Kosala), 96n, 100-ln. 105. 
133, 801 n 

Mulakas (of Patitthana), 119 
Mulananda(e) 805-6; see also Mudananda 
Mulangilar Avur, 546, 548 
Mula-Sthaviravada, 366; Sarvastivada, 

Mulat{hakatha, 621 
Miilavasara, 286 
mulaxijhuna, 368, 371, 377 
Mull aippci ttu-N appfulanar, 508, 55 In, 554n, 
558-9n, 566n, 677, 680-ln, 746n 


- -ulwasar, 286; 
Munda, 669 
Munigatha, 630 
Murugan (Kuma 
Murugarruppada 
murundais), mien 
Muduvehilai, 54 
Mushtiprakaranci 
Musi, R., 113 


ee also Mulavasara 


a, Siva), 566, 746. 757 

, 677-8, 680-1 

lida, 188, 273, 772, 774 

666 


Musicanus(i), 67, 129-30 



INDEX 


887 


Musiri, 499, 516, 548n, 565, 674 
Mushikas, 129 
Musikanagara, 113 
Muslins, 434 
Mutasiva, 576, 578, 621 
Mutugala, 579 
Mutturu, 510 

Muziris, 674; see also Musiri 
Mysore, 9, 26, 523; migration of Chandra- 
gupta to, 9, 498; Asokan edicts in, 725; 
under Satavahanas, 336; Kekayas of, 335; 
industry of, 433; megaliths in, 725, 727; 
coins in, 805-6 


Nabataeans, 241n 
Nabhaga, 641 

Nabhaka-Nabhapanktis, 25-6n 
Nabhaka (country), 86 
Nachchaduva, 595 

Nachchel]aiyar, Kakkaipddiniyar, 511, 525 
Nachchinarkkiniyar, 512, 544, 672 
Nada Diaka, Nada Siaka, 270 
Naga(s), 249, 257-8; Kings: of Mathura, 
108, 249, 255, 257, 259; of Padmavatl, 
249, 257-9; of Kantipuri, 257-8; succeeded 
Kushanas, 249; ruling to east of Malavas, 
128; rise to power and prominence, 249; 
performance of horse sacrifice, 249; 
conquests of, 249; preceded Guptas, 257; 
principalities of, 257; and Bharasivas, 258, 
330; coins, 128, 258-9; uprooted by 

Samudragupta, 257, 259; king in 

Ajapta painting, 759, 852; religion of, 258 

(early king of Ceylon), 576 

(king of Fu-nan), 773 

Mahallaka (king of Ceylon), 586, 

589 


( nagas ), (mythical figures), 379, 502, 

527, 571-2 &n, 578, 61 1-12. 755 
Naga(s) in art, 743, 845, 850; on coins, 
pi. VII (3) 

Nagadatta, 257 
Nagadeva, 689 

Nagadlpa, 600, see Nagadiboi 
Nagadouba (Nagatuba, Nagathupa?), 600 
Nagamahavihara, 610 
Naga-Muchalinda, 755 
Nagamula, 337 
Nagamulanika, 337 
Nagananda , 653 
Naganar, Vejlaikkudi, 548 
Nafg)anika, Nayanika (queen of Satakarni I), 
98, 351, 477, 806n 

Nagar (Karkota Nagar, Jaipur), 128 
Nagara (md. Jalalabad), 117, 270, 369 
nagaraganaka, 590 
nagara-\ya\ahara(i) kas, 29, 30 
Nagarahara, 117, 341n; see also Nagara 
ndgaraka{s) (city-bred man), life of, 489-90, 
494; duties of his wife, 469 
N(ii)agaraka (mayor of city), 16, 52, 60 
Nagarayar, Muraiijiyur Mudi, 672 
Nagar! (near Chior), 74, 126, 153 


Nagarjuna ( acharva ), 376, 664; homeland, 

376, 665; early life and family, 376, 665; 
residence of, 244; converted to Buddhism, 
376; period of, 416, 665, 754; works of, 

377, 659, 666, 668; founder of Madhyama- 
ka system, 376-7, 416; disciples of, 376; 
and Satavahanas, 376, 665, 754; phi- 
losophy of,416-18,662,666; and Amaravat! 
& Nagarjunakonda, 665, 735, 752, 754; 
propagation of ms faith in South, 754; 
successors of, 754; influence of Vedanta 



754; votive records at, 334; gift of stone 
pillar at, 287; excavations at, 737; inscrip- 
tions, 2S7, 368-70, 619n, 630-1, 679n; 

sculpture, 723, 750, 753-6, 852; architec- 
ture, 622, 732-7, 740, 742; Maha stupa of, 
849 

Valley, 333 

NagarjunI (hills), 22, 44, 89, 721, 742 
Nagasena (Thera), 171-2, 257-9, 365, 607-8, 
651 

Nagathupa, Nagatuba, 600 
Nagod, 258, 714 
Nagpur, 329 

Nahapana, Naravahana, (Kshaharata 
Kshatrapa), 273-9, 283, 309n, 742-3; 
mentioned in Periplus, 241 &n, 275, 279, 
309- lOn; satrap under Kanishka, 236, 
241; enjoyed sovereign authority, 236, 
241 ; period and chronology of, 236, 
274-S, 311-12; origin & family of, 273, 
348n; extent of kingdom, 278-9, 282, 286, 
311: capital of, 279&n; administration, 
349; minister of, 271, 348n; and: Malavas, 
128, 241n; BhGmaka and his succession, 
274-5; Chaslana, 274; Satasahanas 275-7, 
279, 309-11; Rudradaman, 278, 282-3; 
son-in-law of, 278-9, 350; wealth & 
prosperity of, 278-9, 311; religion of, 350; 
successors of, 280, 310; inscriptions, 
273, 275, 278, 310; coins, 241, 273-5, 
277-8, 280, 311, 348n, 805, 809; titles of, 
241, 274, 278, 348&n; vihara named after, 
742-3 

Nahavahana, Nahavana, 279 
Nahusha, 641 
Naiyayikas, 655-6 
nakatikas , (astrologers), 625 
Nakklrar I, 503, 507-8, 510, 512-13, 525, 
538, 542, 544-6, 583, 680-1 

II, 508 

Naksh-i-Rustam, 187 
Nakula, 645 
Nalagiri, 753, 755, 851 
Nalanda, 107n 
Nalangilli, 548-9 
Nali, 595n 

Nallamalai (range), 333 
Natlanduvanar, 505 
Nallarallabodu, 737, 741 



INDEX 


NaHi 5!!, 525, 527 
Nallini, 5)8 

Nalliraiyanar (poet), 548 
Nalliyakkodan, (Oyman), 508, 5 ! 3, 518, 
550, 680 ' 

NamamSla, 637 

Nambano(u)s (of Periplus ), 24!, 275, 279 
Nan-shan, 225 

Nana (Syrian deitv), 245, 247, 790, 796 
Nanaghat, 47. 297n. 317, 30in-2,i, 390n, 
465n, 747, 74 9n, 790-1, 806 & n 
Aunaka, 795 
Nanashao, 790 

Nanda (cousin of Buddha), 643 
Nanda(s) (kings of Ivfagadha) 634-5, 653; 
low origin of, 122; war with Chandra - 
gupta. 5-6, 61; army of 5-6, 64; title of, 
5; in South Indian literature, 3, 514, 072; 
empire and extent, 5, 122; wealth and 
oppressive rule of, 5, 122, 502; religion of, 
9; and Kalinga, 5-6, 144-15.;, 362;Muga- 
dha under, 53; and Deccan, 498; prime 
minister of last, 356; and Subancihu, 
638 ; irrigation works by._l Nt^Mahapadrr.a 

Nanda Vachchhn, 82 
Nandagopa, 38' 

Nandanavar.a. 613, 620, 622 

Nandhimitta, (Senapati Mita), 581 

Nandin, 247, 566 

Nandsa (in Udaipur), 283 

Narigur, 543 

Nanjil (mountains), 538 

Nanjilnad, 499 

Nanjio, 666n 

Nanking, 768, 770 

Nanmaran, 513, Ilavandigaippallit-tunjiya, 
546 

Nanna, 508 

Nannaganar, Purattinai, 530, 550 
Nannan(s), 535 

1, 518-19, 525, 527, 680; family of, 

508; wars waged by. 509, 511, 514, 552-3, 
535; administration cf, 511, 538 

II. 511, 535, 681 ; Udiyan , 51 1 

Nannul Mayilainatkcn Urai, 654, 677 
Naoshera (dist.), 120 
Nappaiattanar, Maduraikamakkapi, 513 
Nappasalaiyar, Marckkattu, 531, 548 
NaDpudanar, 508, 680-1 
Nara, 384 

Narada (law-giver), 51, 483, 642, 657-9 
Naradasmriti 653: see also Smriti 
Narcdiya-manusamhita, 658n 
Naradatta (king of Mathura), 105, 133 
Naravahanadatta, 653 
Naptvu, 525 
Nlrpeyarru. 564 
Narayana (deity), 379, 383-4 _ 

(successoi of Kanva Bhumimitra), 103 

(translator of Buddhist texts), 770 

Narmada (river), 96, 98, 103n, 134, 332, 571, 
652 


Narmudichcheral, Xalahgaykkanpi, 5C6, 5 b 


Narrinai (anthology), 504, 538. 5-'*i; on 
eight anthologies, 677; cods of, 
524, 529, 545, 678; nature and impen. 
of, 505; cn: kings and war inciui 
510-12; Kannagi, 524-5; Ay Apdiran, : 
Fari hill, 529; KS.n, 531; Pandya cr 
545 

Narseh (Sassanian emperor), 251-2 
Narwar (dist.), 257 
Naryn (Saka settlement), 223 
Nasik, 850; under: Satraps, 278-9, ! 
Sata\ahanas, 275, 286; Abhlras, 23 
trade guilds of, 352; Y at ana donnt 
at, 473n; caves at, 355. 558, 377, 
742-3, 745, 748, 763; inscriptions, 
275, 278, 313, 33o, 349, 3:8, a 
sculptures, 747-8, 751; painting, 1 
paduka worship in capital of, 
Bhadayaniyas at. 313 


Natasutra r, 538-9 

NatuUtunar. Idaikkalinattu Nshur, 503, 
513, 550, 630 

Ndtyasdstra (of Bharata), 63S-9, 649, 667; 

Bharata Ndtyasdstra, 676 
Nausari, 332 
Nava, 258, 262 

na'.adhyakika (superintendent of ships), 65 
Navavitaara, 768 
Nay-aka, 65 
Nayanars, 517 

Nayanika, 301n; see also Naganika 
Nearchus. 73 

Nedivon. Niiandaru-tinr. in, 539, 544, 757 
Neduniidai Anji, 521-2 
Nedumpa'.liyattanar, 544n 
Nedumparaciayanar, 521 
Uedinahadai. 503, 503, 551 n, 554n, 559n, 
56!n-2, 669n, 677, 680-1, 730-1, 757 
Nedungihi, 548-9 
Ncdunjeral, ImayavaranVoan 507 
Nedunjeliyan Talaivalancanatte-chcheru- 
venra, 50S, 518, 514, 541, 544, 680 
Negama ( naigama ), 781 
Nelcynda, 441 
Nellore, 500 

Nepal, 86, 90, 115, 131, 254, 653, 767 
Neri, 533 
Nerivayil, 524 

Nemiudichcheral Kalaiigaykkarrii, 509 
Nero (Roman emperorf 795 
Nerti-prakarcria , 417, 650 
Nettimaiyar, 544n 
Neydalahganal, 549 
Ngan (Chinese emperor), 226-7n 

Fa-hien (Parthian monk), 769 

Hiuan, 769 

— She-kao, 769-70 

Nhatrang, 775 

Ni-palei (Nepal), 767 

Nicaea, 117, 169, 173, 175-6 

Nicanor (Alexander’s satrap), 1, 4, 117 



INDEX 


Nicias (Indo-Gr. king), 177, 179 
Nicocles (king of Paphos), 144 
Niddesa, 379, 405, 771n 
Nidradaridra, 678n 
Nidur, 510 

Nigall Sagar (Asokan pillars), 3 In 
nigamc, 5S0 

coins, 781 

sabhu, 349n 

Nigamthas, 82 
Nieantna, 604-5 
N&iantus (Tamil), 673 
Nigrodha, 31 
Nikavaratiya, 596 

Nikaya(s), nikaya(s), 83, 620; Digh.a — ., 40n, 

71 405, 71 In, 616; Majhima , 616; 

Aiiguttara , 641 n; Samvutta — , 641n 

Nlkaya-sangraha, 617-8, 620n 
Nike (,Gr. deity), on corns of: Bactnan 
Greeks, 142, 160, 164, 169, 173, 175-6, 
180, pi. II (2, 4), pi. Ill (1); Scythians and 
Parthians, 200n, 210. 213-17, 777, pi. Ill 
(7, 9), pi. IV (7); Kushanas, 245 
Nilagiri hills, 727 
nilakahapaija (measure), 809 
Nilakarirha, 746 
Nilarajiya (tank), 596 
Nimbus (on coins), 345 
Nimiii, 538 
Nimmaijarati, 611 
Nineveh, 120 
Ning-nsia, 223 

Nmravan, Vadirnbalama, 541 
niraya, 61 1 
Nirmartakava, 376 

Nirvana , nirvana, 35, 82-3, 235, 366, 408, 
417, 612, 664; see also Mahaparinirvuna & 
Parinibb&na 
Nishada, 282 
Niya, 266n, 631 
niyoga, 488, 645 
North Sea, 730n 

North West Province, 210, 245, 252 

Nundas, 502 

Nyagrodha (cave), 718 

Nyaya, 422, 655, 659-62, 666 

Nyuyasutras , 422, 659 

Nydyavatara, 362n 

Nysa, 25, 117 

O a d o, 790 

Oininda (Zoroastrian deity), 245 

Odai, 559 

Odalandai, 509 

Odal-Andaiyar, 682 

Odeonbares, 135 

Odraka, 101, 133 

Oeso (Siva), 789 

Okandtir, 534 

Okhamandal. 286 

Okkaka, 603, 609 

Oliyar, 542 

Olympian Gods (king of), 165 


Oman (Guif of), 25 1 
Onuno , 7S0 
Omphis (Ariibhi), li9 
Oijam (festival), 680 

Onesicritus, on: Musicanus and their custo- 
ms. 67, 129-30; kingship of Kathaians, 
124; Ceylon, 574, 598; and Megasthencs, 
67-8 

Onio, 790 

Oppiliyappar (idol), 74Cn 
Oram-bogiyar, 682 

Orissa, visited by Mahawra, 362; caves in, 
692, 721; art movement in, 684; coins 
from, 137; ins. in, 628-9 
Oriyar, Ori, 502, 511-12, 525, 531 
Orlagno, 245, 790 
OriYues (Hormizd), 251 
Orodes 1, 202, 215 
Orosius, 193 
Orthagnes, 215, 343 
Ossadu, 128 

Ottorrogorras (Uttaiakuru), 764 
Quranos {Ur on) 790 
Ouron (Z. deity), 245 
Oviya-c!t-chem:iil (a iteatise on art of paint- 
ing), 757 

Oxus, 1C, 139, 188, 223 
Valley, 766 

Oxyartes (father-in-law of Alexander), 1, 

140-1 

Oxycanus, 129 
Oxydraci, 124, 126-7 
Oxyrhynchus (papyrus form), 550 
Ozene, 281, see also Ujjain 

Pabhosa (near Kausambi), lOln, 106-7, 
133, 370 

Pachchhirna rajini ( Yakshnil), 605 
Pacores, 215-18, 343-4i 
Padama-Pavvaya (Padmavau), 257-9 
padapcitha, 650 
padas (measure), S09 
Padavigampola (dolmen of), 572 
Padnam, 272 

padim (a singing woman), 56! 

Pcidiryuppattu (anthology of S. India), 504, 
554; its importance, 504; legendary 
accounts in, 551; life of poets of, 554-5'; 
period of, 680; on: early kings of S. India 
503-5, 509, 537, 540; wild beasts, 552; 
one of eight anthologies, 677 ; weapons and 
dress, 55S-9; princes, 560; line arts, 56 1 ; 
pastimes, 561; stones, 565; gifts to 
Brahmanas, 555; industry and Bazar, 
564; perts, 565; poets of, 678; Vedic gods 
in, 679; chronology of ooets and kings of. 
b81-2 

Padmanubha , 745 

Padmavatl (Md. Padama Pavvaya), 249 2^5 
257-9 

Paduman, Velavi ICkoman, 506-7, 521, 534 
Padumassaravanuyyana, 623 
Paethana, 438; see also Pratishtliana 



890 


INDEX 


Pahlava(s), 131, 192-222, 271, 282, 696; 
locality of, 190; in early India literature, 
138, 186, 190, 475, 764; classical writers 
on, 186; family of, 193-4; rise to power, 
183, 201 ; of Kandahai, 183; dynasty, 201 ; 
kings and rule, 194, 201, 207, 197-215, 
261 ; period of, 196-7; era, 21 3n; titles of, 
343, 345; administration, 218-9, 240, 264, 
267, 273-4, 340 & n, 343-4, destruction of, 
277; end and successors of, 215-18, 222, 
229; inscriptions, 197, 219, 261; coins, 
215, 220,235,264,346,474,786, 794; art 
and architecture, 220-1, 701; religion of, 
474-5, culture, 220-1, 475, 701; strata at 

Paikuli, 251-2 
Palana, 676n 

paisdcha ( form of marriage),482&n,487, 637 
Pcuiuchi (dialect), 631, 637, 653-4; chu- 

lika , 653 ; Kekaya— — , 653. 

Paithan (Pratishthana), 119, 278-9, 634 
Pajjusana, 361 

Pakhalavatl , 168; see also Pushkalavatl 
Pakistan (Western), 25, 245 
Pakura, ( Pakurasa ), 216; see also Pacorcs 
Palaesimundu (Ceylon of Ptolemy), 599 
Palaigoni ( parajana , people of Ceylon), 598 
Palaiyan,(s) 511-12, 523-5; — Maran, 540, 
583 

Palani, 727 

Palatu-dheri (near Charsadda), 210, 702 

Palghat (gap), 500 

Palibothra, 153; see also Pataliputra 

Palita, 652 

Palitana, 361 

Palk Strait, 435 

Palkiguiidu, 9 

Palladam (taluk), 725 

Pallas, 147, 157, 169, 182, 209, 214, 219, 
272, 783, pi. 11 (6-7, 8, 11, 13), pi. IV(3, 6) 

Athene, 142, 159, 173, 178, 201, 

208, 785-6 
Pallava, 318, 705 
Pallavaram, 729 

Paloura, 439n; see also Dantapura 
pamukha (guild president), 78 
t’amirs, 768 
Pampa, 644 
Pamujur-erinda, 549 
Pan-chao, 238 
Pan-ku, 188, 191n, 227n 
Pan Fan, 773-4 
Pan Yonng. 226-7n, 235 
\ panan (tribe), 553 

pdnars (minstrels & caste), 527, 554, 561 
Panarruppadai, 549 
Panayamara, 583 
Panch Mahals, 279n 
Paficha Pandavamaiai, 500 
nahchagavva , 492 

Panchala, 106-7; mentioned by Panini, 132; 
overrun by Greeks, 95; ind. ruling dynasty 


of, 106; period of Ind. ruling dynasty of, 
106, 132; Mitra kings of, 106-7, 132, 135, 
340n; rulers of, 101, 103, 106; capital of, 
105, 132, 135, 710; end of Mitra dynasty 
of, 107; and Kausambi, 105; republics of, 
151; Babhrawa of, 667; coins, 100-1, 
103, 106, 132, 134-5, 796, 500, pi. VII (3); 

dynasty, 105; coins, 796; 

Mitra coins, 800; kings, 80in 

Panchamuks (live rhers), 3 
Pancharatra(s), 379-81 
Pafichasikha (Suriik'nya teacher), 660-1 
Panchastikdya, 410 
Pancliatantra, 653 
Pauchavatx, 643 
Panchariritiati (B. Text), 664 
Panchayats , 63 

Pandaia (daughter of Heracles), 383, 498 
Panduva(s), 471, 438, 493n, 498, 645, 647, 
675 ' 

Panduva-pabbata, 500 
Pandion, 26, 673 
Panda, 484n, 498, 645-6, 672 
Pandukabnaya, 571, 575-6, 581, 598, 604-5 
panel. i- Kan.balat::, 362 
Pandulena (c-.ai!ya), 742, 744-5, 748-9, 850 
Panduraiiga (Phan- rang), 775 
Fandu-Vasudevu, 575, 609 
Piindya(s), 114, 518-19, 536, 540, 548, 550, 
578n, 636; Ioca.ion of kingdom & country 
of, 26, 499, 527, 529, 536; and Asoka, 9, 
26, 499, 607; war with Bmdusara, 23; 
capital of, 26, 73, 433, 499; Ptolemy on, 
126; Megasthenes on, 498; and Pandavas, 
498, 672; kingdom, 1 14, 435, 438, 442, 523; 
early references to, 49S; in South Indian 
literature, 513, 523, 540-2, 544-5, 586; 
clan rule in country of, 526; antiquity 
of monarchy of, 499; rulers and chieftains 
of, 505, 511-13, 531, 533, 538-42, 544-7, 
565, 682, 757 ; and Cholas, 541-2; industry, 
73, 433-4.1, 435, 442, 498, 500; port in 
kingdom of, 438; religion, 565, 586; 
fortress, 548; Purohita, 551; army, 537; 
queen, 730; and Ceylon, 583, 586; 
poets of, 554; social life of, 554; king in 
painting, 757 
Pandyaka, 296n 
Panemos, 196 

Panini, 122, 127n, 339, 489, 632, 638, 642, 
649, 662; birthplace of, 627; grammar and 
surras of, 95, 1 16, 634-6; character of work 
of, 673; date of, 116, 672; commentaries 
on, 95, 109, 116, 123, 136, 189, 339 & n, 
49S, 634-5, 636-7; school of, 636; and 
Aindra system, 672-3 ; on: tribes, peoples 
& republics of N.W., 3, 109-10, 116, 118-19, 
123, 130-1, 134, 142, 342, 382; council of 
ministers, 12; Sungas, 95-6; Vasudeva, 
Arjuna and their worshippers, 381-2, 
384, 655; Sanskrit language, 627-8, 634; 
Nata-sutras, 638-9; Brahmas fitras, 661 ; 



INDEX 


891 


Siva, 395; school of, 636 
Panjab, Punjab, 110, 154, 170, 174, 341n, 
708; streams of, 129; peoples of, 3-4, 
123, 134, 136; Alexander's campaign 
and_ conquest of, 1-2, 4; under: Mauryas, 
7; Suhgas, 109; Porus, 121; Sakas, 182; 
Kushanas, 232-50; Kshatrapa rule in, 
267-8; Shakas and Shiladas, 250; Kidara 
Kushanas & Sassanians, 250-3; Greek 
invasion, occupation & rule over, 97n, 
99, 102-4, 109, 151-85; Scythian & 
Parthian invasion and rule over, 179-SO, 
182, 191-221; Scythian kings of 179-80; 
republican states of, 109-11, 116, 127, 
134, 136; revival of indigenous rule in, 
255-7, 342, 346; religion in, 99, 701; wool 
from, 433; inscriptions, 267: eoins, 135, 
160, 191, 197, 217, 233, 267, 271, 797: art 
and architecture, 366, 708, 715; Central 

,209, 250; Eastern , 125, 178, 

239, 256. 272, 342; North-Western , 

114n, 267: South-Eastern, 255; Western 

,178,209.241,250,767 

Panjkora, R„ 1 IS 
Panjshir, 204. 226 

R„ 172 

Panjtar, 230. 345n 
Panna state, 329 
Panan, 547 

Pannalti (praj'wpti or paina), 676n 
Pantaleon, 157-9, 185, 34on-l, 473n, 782-4 
Paphos, 144 

Parada(s), 190n, 764; sec also Parthians 
Paradavar (Southern), 546 
paraiyan (tribe). 553 

purajana (Palaigeni, people of Ceylon), 598 

Paiakramabahu If, 580 n 

Paramartha, 370, 660 

Paramurthika. 377 

Paramattha dipani , 61 5 n 

Paramattha JotikCi , 579n 

Paramayona, (Hellenistic countries), 440 

Paramban Tali, 728 

Paranar (poet of Sahgani age), 538n; author 
of Fifth Ten on Senguttuvun 507, 509; 
poems of, 520, 538; longest-lived Sangam 
poet, 522; contemporaries of, 507, 518, 
525; on; ILthjetchenni, 507; rulers of S. 
India, 507, 511: Chera kings, 520; Sen- 
guttuvan, 522-3; Ay, 527, 538; Kaluvu], 
534; Adigan, 536-8; battle at Venni, 541; 
Karikala, 541-2; rewarded by Senguttuvan, 
522 

Parangorranar, 501, 527 
Parasamudra, 599; see also Palaesimundu 
Parasara, 661, 797 
Parata, 764 

Pari, 507, 512-13, 527-31, 533, 538, 552, 555, 
678 

Parichata (Pariyatra), 313 
Parikshit, 647 
Parimagajir, 678 

Parimel-Alagar, Parimelalagar, 499n, 517, 


669n 

Parimdas, 25-6 & r,, 

Parinimarhtavasavatti, 611 

Parinibbana, 172, 573, 609,621, 663, 713; 

see also Makdparinindna 
Paripadal, 505, 517, 677-S, 681, 731n, 757 
Paniishtaparvan, 3, 6 
Parlsvara (temple of), 529 
Puritta, 605, 612 
pamcr.a (cells), 606 
Parivrajaka (dynasty), 1C3 
parivatti (learning of texts), 617 
Parkiiam, 41, 93, 693 ; — Yaksha, 849 
parnastdd (pansala), 597 
Paropanisadae, Paropanisene, Paropanisus, 
5; Alexander's governor of, 1 ; satrapy of, 
7; ceded to Chandragupla, 7 & n, 141; 
formed part of Baclna, 139; province of, 
141; conquered by 3. Gr.. 148; under: 
Antialcidas, 180-1 ; Scythians & Parthians, 
203-4; Indian provinces to east of, 340; 
routes connecting, 438 
Parsva, 239, 373-4 
Parthalis (royal city of Calinga), 24 
Parthasarathi (Krishna), 384n 
Parthia, 149; revolt and secession from 
Seleucids, 78, 145, 148, 264; and Antio- 
chus, 148; foundation of imperial dynasty 
of, 217; kings of 145, 163, 194, 217; trade 
with India, 78; conquered by Kadphises 
1, 344 

Parthian(s), 186, 210; in early Indian texts, 
186, 228; and: Bactrians, 145, 165; 
Scythians, 165, 193-4; Kushanas, 216, 
218-20, 227-8, 230, 237; race, 192; ele- 
ments, nationality and family, 192-4, 211, 
213, 787; conquest of India, 193: Saku 
influx checked by, 191; kings and chief- 
tains, 145, 164, 192-4, 200-4,~207, 209-18; 
empire, 1S9, 193, 197, 207; titles, 165, 
192-3, 241; conquest over Bac. Greeks, 
165-6, 182-3, 104n, 201; era, 195-6, 198; 
trade and communications, 78, 440 & 
n; culture, 225; monks to China, 768-9; 
coins, 164-5, 184, 193, 210-1, 216, 227-8, 

241, 786-7; Indo , 193n, 214-17; 253, 

rulers, 1S6, 193, 209-18, 266, 787, 794; 
regnal year, 212; empire, 213; adminis- 
tration, 217-20, 266; and Kushanas, 
216-18, 222,227, 241 ; end & successors of, 
215-18, 222, 227-8, 230; economy under, 
213, 241; ins., 212; coins, 213-18, 241, 
787, 794; art and culture, 220-1, 225; 

Scytho , 194; administration, 218-20; 

Gandhara art in period of, 185; art and 
architecture in period of, 220-1; coins, 
228, 794 

Parvata, Parvataka, 3-4, 6, 133, 801 n; 
Parvatl(deity) 786 
Parwan, 226 

Papak (father of Ardeshir 1), 250 
Pasaka, 250 

pasapa-kottakal stone cuttei), 74 



892 


INDEX 


pashanda(s) (religious sect), 67, 82 
pashandika , 605 
Pasenadi, 757 

Pasumputapandlyan, 510, 537 
Pasumoutporaiyan, 538 
?asapa;a(s), 232, 397a, 656, 788 
Pasupatacnarya, 656 
Pa tala, Patalene, 129-31 
Putalbutra,9,20,27n-8, 97;Gr.nameof, 153; 
capital of ivlagadha, 6, 10, 11, 20, 28, 41, 
95, 634; under: Nandas, 6; Mauryas, 
6, 8, 10, 44; Sungas, 95, 97; besieged Py 
Chandragupta, 6; Megastnenes at, 8, 10, 
88; described by Megasthenes and 
Chinese pilgrims, 11-12, 41, 88-9, 708, 
710; Life of Asoka in and outside, 21; 
religion of, 9, 84, 362, 364, 373-4, 651; 
iimiras at by Satnprati, 44; routes to 
and from, 47, 70, 438n; niahamatras of, 
84; imperial palace at, 87-90; Yavana 
advance to, 95, 112, 153-4; monastery at, 
99, 364; occupied by Andhras, 101; 
king vanquished by Kanishka, 237; 
Buddnist council of, 373, 765; treasures 
and god of Nandas in, 502-3; goldsmith 
from, 724; intellectual centre at, 634-7, 
663; famous for courtesans, 667; muni- 
cipal administration of, 12-13; language 
of, 650; terra-cottas of, 705 849; excava- 
tion at, 88-9; palisades of city of, 846 
POlaliputraka'.pa, 44 
Patalpura (cave), 112 

Patanjali, 21n, 3S2n, 421, 636; works of, 12, 
48, 94-5, 151, 139, 257, 421, 634-6, 641, 
661; date of, 635-6; refers to Ccandra- 
gupta sabitd , 12 , 4o; contemporary of 
Pushyamitra, 48; priest of Pushyamitra, 
95, 97, 636; on; Pushyamitra sabhd, 48, 
339n; tribes and satraps of N. W., 125-S, 
130, 132, 257, 382; Vavanas and Sahas, 
95, 189, 475, 635; Datf aruitra, 151-2; 
Vasudeva, 382; castes, 467, 475; poetry, 
drama and kavya, 637-8, 641-2; itihdsa- 
purdr.a, 655; gramniatico-philosophical 
questions, 662; cultivation of Sanskrit, 
632, 650: and Panini, 634-6; refeis to 
Athanarsda , 654; refers to Nayasutras, 
659; epithet of, 635; comments on 
\fittisutra, 635; on: Sudras, 467; Sibis 
and Saivapura, 128-9, 395; Siva, 396; 
Mauryas, 397n; see also Mahdbhdshya 
Pathadeva, 133 
Palhankot, 797 
Pathardi, 850 

Patika, Kusuiaka, Manakshatrapa, 181, 195, 
220, 228, 265, 269-71, 344n; see also 
Kusuluka 
patipatti, 617 

Patithana (md. Paithan), 119 
Patna, 93, 153, 693-5, 705;— Yaksha, 849 
P attinappdlai (anthology), 512, 551, 667; 
poem of 301 lines, 680; on: Karikala, 
507-8, 541-2; Ijandiraiyan, 544; govern- 


ment and society, 551, 554, 557, 559; 
industry, commerce & ports, 441 n-2 
557, 562, 564-5 

Pattini (cult), 515, 523-4, 586; temple 

731n 

Pattuppdttu, 504-5, 507-8, 512, 515, 532, 
544, 550, 680-2 
Paiumitras (of Kosala), 106 
PaulomI, 80 

Paumachariya ( Ramdyana , story in), 651 
paunarbhava (remarried woman), 483 
Paundras, Paundrakas, 468 
paura-vyavaharikas, 30 
Paurarxikas, 648 

Paurava, Porus, 119, 121 ; see also Poros 
Pasupala, 764 

Pavata (Parvata of KausambI), 107 
Pawaya, 693, 695; Yaksha from, 849; see 
also Padam-Pawaya 
Pedda Ganjam, 732-3, 756 
Pe(i)han, 511, 525 
Pehlavi, 139n 

Peithon (satrap in Sind), 1, 5 
Peninsula of gold, 771 
Peppar, R., 542 
Pentha (king of), 361 
Pentapolis, 781 
Perak, 776 
Perasiriyar, 537, 677 
Peraya, 253 

Perdtccas (general of Alexander), 118, 140 
Pergamun, 92 

Perimiyankulam (Gamanivapi), 595 
Peritnula, 436 

Periplus of the Erythraean Sea ( Maris 
Erythaei Periplus), 170, 349n. 771; nature 
& character of work, 516, 599; author of, 
242, 279, 435, 440, 516, 599, 771, 803; 
date of, 237, 241n, 435, 516, 599, 674, 
771; on: currency of Indo-Greek coins, 
i70; Sakas & Nahapana, 241n, 275, 279, 
309-3 10a, Barygaza, 242, 279, 349n, 
438, 440-6; Menander, 170; exports 

and imports, 242, 307-8, 431, 435 & n, 
441-6, 456-7n; Eastern trade, 446-8; Gieek 
ship diverted to Baryagaza, 279, 349- 
pilot service of Saka rulers, 349; Saka 
invasion, 309; location of Aberia, 331 - 
Indo-Arab trade, 440; exchange 
of Roman coins, 311; Arab traders and 
voyages to Incua, 440; seats of cotton 
manmacture, 434, 443 ; iron & gold in- 
dustry and exports, 434; pearl fisheries, 
43^-6, 442; stone industry, 436; inland 
trade routes, 438; ports & marts, 307-8, 
438 & n-9n, 456, 803 ; Indo-Roman mari- 
time trade, 307, 440 & n; sailing of Indian 
ships, 440,-ln; exoorts and imports of 
Ceylon, 599; ports and marts of Ceylon, 
599; land and peninsula of gold 319 
771; Deccan, 297; plant products, 431; 
Anake, 279; mentions Sandanes, 217n, 
2 j 7, 349n 



INDEX 


893 


Periya-pudrinam y 580 
PeriyaJ, 561 
Periyar, R., 499 
Peroz I., 246, 251 

Persepolis, Persopolis, Persopolitan, 92, 
187, 744-5, 748;— -capital(s), 744, 748; 

pillars, 745; inscription, 187 

Persia, 778 

Persian(s), 139, 166, 187, 674n, 701; Achae- 

menid •, 779; empire, 122n, 139, 

141n, 189; Indo , 793; invasion, 

252; Medo , 263; Old , 139n, 

231; Scythian , 202; Merchants, 

674n 

Persian Gulf, 435, 441, 445 
Perumbair, 729 

Perumban-arruppadaiy 724n; on: Ilandirai- 
yan, 507-8, 543-4, 680; social life, 553-4, 
560-2, 724n; administration, 556-7; in- 
dustry, 564; Vishiju, 565-6; nature and 
character of, 677, 680; author of, 680; 
grouping according to age, 508 
Perumbutporaiyan (Chera), 510 
Perunarkijli, Mudittalaikko (Chola prince), 
527 

(Sojan) Rajasuyam-Vetta, 532, 539 

Perundevi, Poraiyan (Chera queen), 506, 526 
perundinai, 567 

Perurigadai (Tamil work), 653, 724 
Perutigajam, 729 
Perurtgausikanar (author), 681 
Perufigausikan (great Kausika), 508 
Peruhgunrur, 681 
Perunjeral, 535 
Perunjoru, 511 

Peruvaludi-Palyagasalai-Mudukudumip, 544 
Peshwar, ancient Gandhara, 226; Takhti- 
Bahi in, 230; H. Tsang on, 238; capital 
of Kushana empire, 238, 254-5, 767; 
excavations at, 238; relic casket, 240; 
chaitya built by Kanishka,254; Charsadda 
in, 266; Shaka coins near, 250; Kanishka- 
Mahavihara of, 372; Buddhist temple of, 

767; dist. 230,266 

Petakopadesa, 650 

Peucelas, Peucelaotis, Peucolaus (Pushkala- 
vatl), 118, 168, 181-2 
Peyanar, 509, 682 

Phagunimitra, (Panchala king), 105, pi. 
VII (6) 

Phalgudeva (King), 105 
PhalgunT (deity), 800, pi. VII (6) 
Phalgunimitra, 106, 135, 796, 800 
Phan-rang (ancient Pariduranga), 775 
Pharro, 790 

Phegalas (Bhagala), 121 

Philip (Alexander’s satrap), 4, 5, 120 

(father of Alexander), 158 

Philostratus, (writer), 213, 221 
Philoxenus, 177, 213, 783-6 
Phraates IV, 787 
Phraotes, 214 
Phrygian, 783 
113 


Phussadeva (Senapati Parumaka), 581 
Pi-lo-sho-lo (Pilusara), 165 
Pi-tsong, Pi-tsuong, 772 
Pilayamara, 583 
Pilusara, 165 

Pimprama (capital of Adrestai), 124 

Ping-k’i-lo (Vengila), 736 

Pingala (author), 637 

Pingalandai (lexicon), 540 

Piprahwa, Piparahwa, 41, 75, 712-1 3n, 720 

Pippala (monastery), 846 

Pir Sar (site of Aornos), 1 19 

Piranmalai, 529 

Pirahatta (n), 508, 532, 680 

Pisachas (Paisachl), 631, 653 

Pitadada (Maha), 596 

Pitaka{s), 650; Abhidhamma , 650; 

Vinaya , 83, 606n; see Vinaya 

Pltalkhora, 742-4, 747, 763 
Pitamahasiddhanta, 668 
Pithuda, Pithurhda (Pityndra of Ptolemy), 
114, 335,438n' 

Pitinikas, 86 
Pitriyana, 664 

Pitundra, 335; see also Pithuihda 
Piato (Bactrian king), 163, 200, 784-5, 789 
Pliny, 436n, 771; work and date of, 439, 
674; nature & character of work of, 674; 
on: ambassador to India by Ptolemy of 
Egypt, 19; military strength of Kalinga, 
24; Prasii and its king, 64; royal road & 
distances, 70; tribes of N.W. & Punjab, 
135-6; Indo-Roman trade, 233, 439; 
industry, exports and imports, 434, 442-4; 
fishery and stone industry, 436, 444n; 
sailing to a Ceylon port, 799; Plocamus, 
599 

Plocamus Annius, 599 

Plutarch, 145n; date of, 172; on: Chandra- 
gupta, 2, 5, 7-8; military strength of king 
of Prasii, 64; Oxyartes and Alexander’s 
marriage, 140; Menander, 171-2, 175, 365 
Po-ma-sse, 767, 769-70 
Po-mao, 224 
Po-yen, 768-9 

Poclais, 438 ; see also Pushkalavatl 

Podiya, Podiyil (hills), 8, 501, 527-8 

Poduca,_438-9n 

Pol Pawaya (in Gowalior), 249 

Polalaiyan, 501 

Pollux (divine warrior), 163 

Polonnaruva, 579, 581, 596 

Polybius, 45-6, 147-8, 151 

Pompeii, 433n 

Pondicherry, 438n, 440, 516, 724, 756 

Ponnani, R., 43 8n 

Poona, 279, 662n, 742, 762n 

Por (battle of), 549 

Poraiyan, 534, 539 

Porakad (Bacare), 438n 

Poranatthakatha, 621 

Poros, Porus (Paurava), 53, 129; identified 
with Parvataka, 3-4; feud with king of 



894 


INDEX 


Taxila, 119; alliance with Abhisares, 120; 
battle with Alexander, 120-1, 123, 384; 
most powerful king of Punjab, 121; 
territory & dominion of, 121, 123; became 
friend of Alexander, 121, 124; satrap of 
Alexander, 1 ; confirms reports about 
Nanda’s army, 5, 122; conflict with 
Eudamus, 121 ; Audumbaras not sub- 
jugated by, 136; image of Heracles in 
front of army of, 383 & n; army of, 121; 
worshipper of Vasudeva-Krishna, 383 

(nephew of Porus), younger, 121 

, Pandion (a generic name for Indian 

king), 673-4; embassy to Augustus by, 673 
Porticanus, 129, 130 
Porto Novo, 499 
Porunai, An, 547 

Porunararruppadai (anthology), 677 ; author 
of, 507-8, 680; nature and character of 
work, 680; on: Karikala, 507-8, 541, 
560-1, 680; social life, 551-2, 559-61; 565; 
industry and trade, 564; worship of a 
forest deity, 566; tapas, 566 
Poseidon, 160, 200, 783, 786, pi. I (6), 
pl. IV (2) 

Poshapura, 266 

PothasrI, Kautslputra (Magha ruler) 259-61 

Potti, 540 

Poftisa, 652, 665 

Pounnata (city), 436 

Poygaiyar, 549 

Prabhakara-naga (Naga king), 258 
Prabodha chatidrodaya, 640 
Prabhudama (Mahadevi, daughter of 
Rudrasimha), 104, 287 
Prachl, R., 114 
Prachlnika, 243-4 
Prachyas, 5-6, 627, 712 
pradakshina, 713 

patha, 712, 734-6 

pradeSika(s), 28-9, 36, 39, 60 

pradeshtris, 60-3 

Pradyota, 653 

Pradyumna, 384 

Praesti (Prosh(has ?), 130 

Pragjyotisha, 432n-3n 

Prahasta (Pirahatta), 508, 532, 680 

Prajapati, 379 

Prajapatimitra, 106 

prajapaiya (form of marriage), 482, 486 
Prajiidpdramita , 377 
Prajnaruchi, Gautama, 370 
Prajnaptivada, 366, 368 
Prakaranapada (Buddhist work), 374 
Prakasa, 252 
Pramdnavighatana, 666 
pranaya, 61, 283 
Prasastapada (author), 660 
prasastri, 65 

Prasenajit (king of Kosala), 845 
Prasii, Prasioi, 5-6, 64, 121 
Prasthalas, 3, 190 
pratibhanakavi, 649 


pratiloma (form of marriage), 467, 486 
Pratimdnataka, 345n 
Pratimoksha, 769-70 
Pratisakhyas, 637 

Pratishthana, 71, 278-9, 349, 360, 437; 

see also Patithana 
Pratityasamutpadahridaya, 666 
Pratyeka-Buddha-yana, 240 
Praushlhamitra, 107 
Praushthapada, 243 
Pravachanapariksha, 65 In 
Pravachanasara, 410, 412n, 663 
Pravarasena I (Vakataka), 259, 330-1 
Praxiteles (School of), 783 
Prayaschitta, 658 
Prayaga, 329 
Prehara, R., 338 
Prei Veng, 773 
Pfithivishena I, 287-8, 330 
Pfithudaka (Md. Pehoa), 114n 
Priyangu, 637 

Proclais, 168; see also Pushkalavatl 
Proshthas, (Praesti), 130 
Protogoras, 412 
Ptolemaic kings, 341 
Ptolemaeus Claudius (author), 600 
Ptolemy (Geographer), 448n; author of 
geography, 335; date of, 278, 335, 600; 
refers to: Pitundra, 114; Paithana & 
Pulamayi, 278, 316, 321; Nagara, 117; 
Ay and his country, 528; Baleokouros, 
805; Ibadiu, 776; on: Chola capital, 26, 
499; peoples, cities & countries, 129, 
137, 152, 278-9, 381, 335, 436; location of 
Minnagar, 279; Tiastenes, 278, 281, 
316, 321; location of Abiria, 331; pearl 
fishery & stone industry, 436; sea voyages, 
771; Indian provinces, 340; maritime 
trade, 446-7; silver and gold country, 
447-8; copper mines, 448; Chera capital, 
500, 540; Ceylon, 600; Indo-Roman 
trade, 516; port towns, 438-9n; South 
India, 516; Pounnata, 436 
Eurgetes II, 71 

II (Philadelphus of Egypt), 7, 19, 26, 

Pu-ta, 226 

Pudukkottai, 499, 725n, 727-9, 747n 
puga, 590 
Pugam, 772 

Puhar, 725n; Chola capital at, 499; foreign 
merchants at, 441 n; lord of, 534; maritime 
trade of, 549; ships sailing into, 549; 
life of fisherman of, 554; emporium of, 
564; cosmopolitan city, 565; life of people 
of, 565; Manimekalai on, 730; mansion 
of, 731; see also Kaveripatta(i)nam 
Pujdvaliya (religious work), 580n, 585 
Pukiya (family), 334 
Pukkasas, 468 
Pulahattha, 583 
Pulikadimal, 512 
Puli-nadu, 522 



INDEX 


895 


Pulinda(s), 86, 468, 571 

Pulindaka (king), 101 

Puliyar, 521-2, 534, 539-40, 553 

Pulney (Palni) hills, 727n 

Pulumavi, Pulu(a)mayi, 322n,367,pl. VIU(4), 

Vasishthiputra Sri , 275, 278, 281, 336, 

351, 367, 752, 805, pi. VIII (4) 
punarbhii{s), 483, 485, 488 
Punch (dist.), 120, 208 
Pundra (N. Bengal), 73, 433-4 
Purigi (dist.), 334 
Punjarjrur, 546 
Punyatrata (author), 370 
Puranais), 45, 94, 108, 572n, 321; nature and 
character of, 48, 154, 294, 325, 568, 654-5, 
764; date and language of, 323, 329, 632, 
654-5; on: Nanda, 5; Mauris, 43-4, 
46, 94, 364; Pushyamitra and Sufiaas, 46, 
94-5n & 6n, 100 &n, 101-2; Kanvas, 103 
& n-4; peoples, 64, 328; Kunindas, 110; 
tribes and minor states, 106, 128; Andhras, 
103-4, 113, 295&n, 6&n,298, 301-4n,305, 
324-7, 805; Naga kings, 249, 257, 259&n; 
Vaka takas, 328-9; Abhiras and their 
V- ' ■v”, 325;Ikshvakus 333; 

K- . -v 336; Gupta rule, 

329; Vasudev a-Kfishna, 380-1; and 

Samkhya, 660; Bhagavata , 419; 

Bhavishya , 655, 657 ; Brahmdiida , 

lOOn, 115, 257; Matsya , 295n, 303; 

Vaytt , lOOn, 257, 295n, 303, 321, 

328; Vishnu, 257, 295n, 322n, 332n; 

Yuga , 45, 95, 98-9, 112, 153-4&n, 

156 &n, 472 

(coins), 119, 143, 166n, 452n, 570, 

778, 780n 

(measure), 797n 

Purananuru (anthology), 504, 675, 730n, 
746n; anthology, 677; author of, 672, 
675, 678; date of, 673; importance of, 
505, 682-3; on: Chera king, 541, 672; 
state of society, 553-65, 567, 730; religion, 
565-6; duties, 746; buildings, 731 
Purijabnadra, 379 

Purrjavarman (king of Mathura), 49 
Purus (tribe), 121 

purusha(s) (Anoka’s officials), 28-30 
Purushadatta (of Mathura), 108, 134 
Purushapura, capital of Kushana empire, 
238, 254-5, 767; H. Tsang on,’ 238, 715; 
chaitya built by Kanishka at, 254; in 
inscription, 266; Kanishka-v/Aara of, 
369; Asvaghosha brought to, 373; Asanga 
and Vasubandhu of, 377; stiipa at, 715; 
Buddhist temple at, 767 ; see also Peshawar 
Purava-phatguni (nakshatra), 681 
Purvasaila, 368 
Purva-videha, 764 

Pushkalavatl (Prang and Charsadda), 169; 
submitted to Alexander, 1, 118; satrapy 
under Alexander, 1; king of, 117-18; 
capital of Gandhara, 168, 181, 199; 
Greek name of, 168; deity of, 168, 266; 


mentioned in coins, 168; under: Indo-Gr. 
rulers, 168, 177, 181, 199, 785; Scytho- 
Parthians, 210, 794; satraps, 266; 

Kushanas, 266; royal road from, 437; 
pedestal from, 210; spikenard from, 443; 
coins, 163, 199, 785, 794 
Pushkara, 279 

Pushkaraksha (of Kasmira), 4 
Pushpadanta, 637 
Pushpaka (aerial car), 644 
Pushpapura, 45, 154, 264, 266; see also 
Pataiiputra 

PushpasrI (king of Kausambi), 107 
Pushya (constellation), 98, 115 
Pushyagupta, Vaishya (rdshtrira of Chandra- 
gupta in Saurash(ra), 8, 10. 28, 282 
Pushyamitra (Suhga king), lOOn, 102, 462n; 
Mauryan governor & senapati , 46-7. 94, 
ICOn; murders last Mauryan king, 46, 48, 
65, 94-5, 104; and: Patanjali, 43, 95, 153, 
635-6; Kharaveia, 98, 112; Menander, 98; 
Greek invasions and encounter with, 
95 &n, 97, 112, 153-4; Dhanadeva,, 105; 
lineage of, 95n-6n; founder of Suhga 
dynasty, 46, 95&n, 106, 339; date of 
accession, 95&n, 112; period of reign. 98, 
100 &n, lOin; performs Asvamedha 
sacrifice, 97-100, 339 & n; and Andhras, 
97-8; troubles in Vidharva and Vidisa, 
96; his son as viceroy of Vidisa, 96, 
100, 339; extent of empire, 96-7, 109; 
religious policy and persecution of 
Buddhists, 99&n, 364; reverses of, 97-8; 
successors of, 100, 339, 364; ruler of 
Ayodhva descended from, 105, 340n; 
and Bfiliaspatimitra & Bahasatimitasa of 
coins, 107, 133; coins attributed to, 94; 
title of, 339&n; Brahmana officers under, 
462; title of, 339 

Pushyamitras (of Kosala and Mekala), 106 

Pushyamitra-saAAa, 48 

Pusyadata, 242 

Puttalam, 591, 604 

Puvasele(purvasaila), 368 

Pythagorean theorem, 668 

Quano-nam, 775 
Quetta, 251 

Quuduz, 784-5, 789, 792n 
Quintus Curtius 383 ; see also Curtius 

Raghavananda (commentator), 492 
Raghuxamsa (of Kalidasa), 1 1 In 
Rairh, 433n, 435n, 497n 
Rajadhartna, 666 
Rajghat (Benares), 105 & n, 705 
Rajagriha, 753, 755, 851 ; capital of Magadha 
29, 707; administrative centre of Asoka, 
29; routes to and from, 30-1, 70; architec- 
ture of, 87; rock-cut sanctuaries near, 
89; overrun by Kharaveia, 112, 114; 
Schism in Jaina Church by Tishyagupta 
of, 362n; one of 6 great cities in time of 



896 


INDEX 


Buddha, 707; Bharata’s journey from, 
438n 

Rajagiriya, 368 

Rajanya ( janapada ), 129, 342, 800 
Rajarshis, 656 
rajasabdopajivinafi, 131 
Rajasekhara, 336, 637, 651n; see also 
Kavyamimathsa 
Rajasthan, 153, 257 

R(a)ajasuya (sacrifice), 53, 114 & n, 539, 646 
Rajatalena ( vihara ), 616 
Rajatarangini (of Kalhapa), 120n; speaks 
of Jalauka in Kashmir, 46; on: Kushapa 
kings, 243, 246; revival of study of 
Mahabhdshya in Kashmir, 636; see also 
Kalhapa 
rajavishaya, 27 
rajayatana (tree), 612 
Rajgir, 31, 74, 721 ; see also Rajagriha 
Rajkot, 288n 
Rajmahal, 443 

Rajputana, under: Yaudheyas, 125, 346&n; 
Nahapana, 279; Rudradaman, 282; 
Rudrasena, 286; Sivas and Malavas into, 
126; minor republics in 346; inscriptions 
from, 288; coins, 126, 285, 347n, 780 

Central , 279; Eastern — , 128, 

346— 7n; South Western ,331;Western 

, 125, 282, 286, 346&n 

desert, 331 

rajuka(s), 28-30, 36, 39 
Rajula, 269-70, 272; see also Rajuvula 
Rajuvula(Kshatrapa), 800 ; represents Azilises 
at Taxila, 219; rise to power at Mathura, 
268; came to Mathura from N.W., 
271, 800; conquered Mathura from local 
rulers, 271-2; titles of, 268-9, 344n; and 
Hagana & Hagamasha, 268-9; enshrine- 
ment of relics of Buddha by chief queen 
of, 269; chief queen of, 269-70; religious 
endowment by chief queen of, 270; period 
of rule, 271; dominion of, 271; date and 
chronology of, 268-9 & n-70; earlier 
contemporary of, 787 ; son and successors 
of, 268, 272, 344n, 787; coins of, 268-9 
270-2, 344n, 787, 796 
Rakkhita, 86 

rakshasa (form of marriage), 482n 
Rama, 131, 382, 419, 494, 551, 641-4 

cult, 644 

Ramacharita , 652 
Ramadata, 268, 604 

Ramadatta I (of Mathura), 108, 134 271, 
801 n 

II, 134 

Ramagrama (stupa), 847 
Ramakesava, 655 
Ramarajya, 644 
Ramatha (people), 764 
Ramatirtham, 736-n, 741; Buddhist 

monastery at, 737, 849 
Rdmdyana, 653; epic and its character, 
419, 641-2, 644-5; story, 642-4; author 


and date of, 132, 641-2, 771; cosmologies 
in, 764; influence of, 641-2, 644-5, 651, 
656; on: Sakas, Yavanas, etc., 190, 472n; 
Saka settlements, 190; glorification of 
Rama, 419; industries, 433&n, 435n; 
woman’s status, 477-81; marriage, 484n; 
food & drink 494n; toilet and appliances, 
496-7n; Pandya Kapata , 548; chaitya. 


Rambukkana, 572 
Ramgarh, 629, 757 
Ramila— Somila (Poets), 640 
Ramireddipalle, 756 
Ramnad, 499, 724 
Ramnagar, 106 

RampQrva (Bull and Lion Capitals), 87, 
90-1,848 

Randhakandeka, 595 
Ranganatha (temple at Srirangam), 747n 
Rapigumpha, 693, 722, 848 
Rapi-ka-Nur, 722 

Ranjuvula 176, 268; see also Rajuvula 

Rantideva, 23 

rdshtra, 3, 6, 8, 52, 58 

Rashtrakuta(s), 43-4, 50 

Rashtrapala 640; (piece of song), 374, 

Rashtrapala-nataka, 373 

rastrika (official), 337, 589 

Rashlrikas (people), 25 

rcishtir... i. j 8, 10,28, 131 

rfsisx« i. .i., 681 

Rasopa^iu 

Rathikas, 112-13, 316 

589, 592; rati (measure), 

/ /o, 7oOn 

Ratnagotra vibhaga, 664n 
Ratnakuta, 665 
Ratnapasada, 616 
Rauhipeya, 382 

Ravapa, 549, 551, 643-4, 660, 664 
Ravanabhashya, 660 

Ravi, R„ 97-8, 104, 109-10, 121, 123-4, 126, 
134-5, 256-7, 342 
Rawalpindi (dist.), 241, 267 
Rebhila ( Gapapaka ), 286, 332 
Red Sea, 440, 598-9 
Reuta, R., 133 
Rewa State, 259-60 
Rhogandonai, 600 
Ridi (vihara), 616 

Rig Veda 125, 121, 57 6n; see also Vedas 

Pratisdkhya, 635 

Rikshavat (Achhavata), 313 
Riom, 245, 790 

Rishabhadatta, 273n, 474n; see also Ushava- 
data 

Rishigiri, 707n 
Rishika, 764 
Ritigala (vihara), 616 
Rohagupta, 362n 
Rohana, 589, 600, 604 
Rohipl 551, 567 



INDEX 


897 


Rohitaka (md. Rohtak), 136, 346n 
Roma, 790 

Roman emperor(s), 108n, 208, 233, 242, 

27 8n; empire, 222, 233, 246, 516, 

565, 570, 599 &n— 600, 756; writers, 

441; nobles, 233; titles, 246; 

world, 441-2; ladies, 442, 444; 

merchants, 443, 516; law (digest 

of), 443-4n; gold and coins, 242, 311, 

444, 500, 516, 600; factory near 

Pondicherry, 516; capital, 599; 

ships, 599; goddess, 790; 

denarii aurei, 795; Graeco , 186, 

755; influence on Kushana coins, 795; 

import, 681 

Romans, 442-3 

Rome, 599; Indian trade with 233, 441-2, 
516; emperor of, 245; demand for Indian 
ivory in, 441; use of pearls in, 442; great 
demand for pepper in, 442; articles highly 
prized in, 443; pushes eastwards, 599; 
Greek and Egyptian subjects of, 599; 
and Ceylon, 599; in Indian literature, 
633 ; Serapis personified, 790; drain of gold 
from W. Asia and S.E. Europe to, 795; 
Tarlonia Museum in, 149 
Roruka, Roruva, 71 
Roxane, 140 

Rudra 281, 379; see also Siva 
Rudrabhattarika MahadevI, 287, 475n 
RudrabhQti, 285, 324, 331 
Rudradamaka (coins), 809; Rudradamakadi, 
809 

Rudradaman I (Mahakshatrapa), 474n, 
632, 639; parentage and family of, 236, 
273, 276, 280-2, 475n; joint rule with 
Chastana, 276-7, 280-1; date of, 276-7, 
280-1; chosen by people for protection, 
282; and: Nahapana, 274, 276-8, 282; 
Satavahanas, 278, 281-2, 321, 475n; 
war with Yaudheyas, 125, 255, 282; titles 
of, 273-4, 276-7, 282, 348&n, 632; extent 
of his rule, 132, 236, 277-8, 282, 286; 
administration of, 131, 282-3, 348-50&n; 
repair of Sudarsana lake, 281, 349-50, 
457n; qualities and an estimate of, 283, 
350 ; successors of, 282-3 ; coins, 282-3, 809 ; 
inscriptions, 8, 10, 19, 25, 131, 255, 276-8, 
282-3, 348, 350&n, 632, 649, 659 
II, 273, 804 

Rudradasa (on Audumbara coins), 109, 
135, 797 

Rudradharabhatlarika, 334, 475n 
Rudragupta, 135 
Rudraksha, 50.7 

Rudrasenal (SvamI Mahakshatrapa, son of 
Rudrasimha I), 104, 273, 277, 283, 285-8, 
pi. VIII (9) 

— II (Mahakshatrapa), 287, 331, 334 

II (Vakataka emperor), 330-1 

Rudrasimha I (§vaml Mahakshatrapa), 104, 
273, 277, 282-7,324,331, 348n,pl. VIII (6), 
807-8 


Ill, 808 

Rudra-Siva, 379 

Rudravarma (on Audumbara coins) 109, 
135, 797 

Ruhuna, 577, 582-9, 594-6, 610 
Rulupurushadatta (Ikshvaku king?), 334 
Rummindei, 3 In 
rupodasaka (sculptor), 597 
IWpnath, 31, 629 
'■''Ruvanmali, 623 

Saba (Subha), 584 
Sabaean, 791 
Sahara, 662 
Sabarasvamin, 56, 662 
Sabarcae, 128 
Sabarai, 436 

Sabbakami ( thera of Vaisall), 83 
sabha, 12, 532, 555-6, 563, 718 
Sacae, 186-7 

Sacaraucae, Sacarauli, 186 
Sadakaija, Sada, 305n, 337, 805; see also 
Satakarni 
Sadasiva, 639 

Sadavaha ( nasa ), 806; see also Satavahana 
Sadharmapundarikd, 376, 391, 641, 654, 664 
Sagakula, 190 

Sagala, Sagala, Saggala, 152, 341 n, 434n, 
708; see also Sakala 
Sagara, 313, 641 
Sahadeva, 645 
Sahajati, 71 

Sahanusahi (Saka), 343n 

Saheth, 237; ; Maheth (ancient SravastI), 

697; see also SravastI 
Sahis, 190, 343n 
Sahri-Bahlol, 704 
Sahya (mountain), 313 
Sakti Kumara (Satisiri of ins. ?), 303 
Sai, Sai Wang, 188-9, 191-2, 224 
Sailoda, R., 434-5n 

Saiva(s), means descendent of Siva, 395-6; 
one of Brahmanical sects, 403; emblem, 
232; affiliation of Gondophames to, 214, 
401, 787; affiliation of Wima to, 232, 
474n, 788-9; Mathura ins. and history of, 
397; orders, 398; Order and Lakulisa, 398; 
sect & its flourish, 396, 400; sanctuary in 
N.W., 401 ; sectary andKushana monarchs, 
401; convention to install lihga, 403; 
cult, 394, 789; Jaina writers on, 656; 
. shrine on Audumbara coins, 799 
Saivapura, 395 

Saivism, 393-403; cult picture of, 393-5; 
Panini & Patanjali on, 395-6; origin & 
development of, 397-400; spread of, 400-2; 
and phallicism, 402-3 

Sakabda, Saka-kala, Saka-nripakala, 235-6, 
, 273-4; see also Era (Saka) 

Sakala, (Sialkot), location of, 123-4; Saggala 
& Sagala identified with, 152; Sangala or 
Samkala different from, 123-4; Milinda- 
paiiha describes city of, 132, 708; wrested 



INDEX 


by Menander during time of Pushyamitra, 
98; capital of Menander, 132, 172, 178, 
365; Greek ruler of, 99; Pushyamitra 
destroys Buddhist stupas, monks, etc., up 
to, 99, 364; Pushyamitra announces 
rewards for killing Buddnists at, 99 &n; 
younger Porus’s territory round about, 121 ; 
annexed by elder Porus, 121; S. Madras 
lying in region of. 132; great route to 
Taxila by way of, 1 36; mighty Yavana king 
of, 171; Menander born in Kaiasi near, 
172; broken into hilly states, 178; coins, 
178; see also Sagala 
Sakan, 344 
Sakani, 332 
Sakanika, 474n 
gakara, 639 

Saka(s), 846; beyond sea, 187; Indian 
literature on, 138, 186, 189-90 & n, 764; 
original homeland of, 192; called them- 
selves Arsi, 225; nationality of different 
branches of, 192-4; settlement in Sukas- 
thana, 197; forming Chandragupta’s 
and Malayaketu’s army, 4; in Indian 
history, 4; Mathura conquered by, 10S- 
9, 274; Mathura infested by, 800; 
subdue: Arjunayanas, 109; Kunindas, 
110; and Yaudheyas, 125, 255; Greek 
dominion swept by, 136, 178; establish- 
ment of sovereignty of, 174; conquest 
of Gr. kingdom, 178, 182, 187; trans- 
ference of sovereignty from Greeks to, 
181; chiefs & kings, 181, 188, 190-2, 196, 
210, 221, 224, 274, 328-9, 341, 344, 349; 
and Indo-Greeks, 182, 186, 191 ; Parthians, 
191-4, 196-7, 210, 225, 266; Abhlras, 
331-2; Isvaradatta not a, 331; territories, 
331 ; rule, 344n; ruling houses of Western 
India, 348; strategus & meridarkh, 340n; 
successors of, 329, 333 ; of Western India, 
332, 348-50; and Satavahanas, 275, 111, 
333; destroyed by Satavahanas, 309n, 512; 
Chastana revenges defeat of, 277-8; 
disintegration & decline of Western, 
328-9, 772; Ushavadata, 310-11, 313; 
association with India, 187; location of 
settlement of, 190, 192, 270, 764; nomad 
hordes of central Asia, 186; in classical 
literature, 186; and Yuechi, 186, 188-9, 
193n, 223-5; in Chinese sources, 186, 188; 
oldest reference to, 186-7; under 
Achaemenids, 187; abode of, 187; 
migration from Sakastha.na, 187-8, 269-70; 
movements, 191-2; branches of, 192-3; 
of Sogdiana, 187-9; kingdoms, 189; 
migration and routes to India, 189-93, 
472, 696; establishment at Malwa, 190; 
dynasty of Malwa uprooted by Vikra- 
maditya, 190; settlements referred to in 
ins., 190; conquest of Ki-pin, 190-l&n; 
date of invasion of, 193n; expansion of 
power of, 198, 265; governor of Ki-pin, 
204; of Kabul, 204; nationality of Maues, 


207; decline of 210; and Kushanas, 235; 
revival, 321-2; Kdlakacharya on, 343; 
Satraps, 192, 218-20, 228, 265, 271, 291, 
796, 800; administration, 218-20, 343-5, 
348-50; race of Mathura Mahakshatrapas, 
268; nationality of Vtspila, 219; pre- 
decessors of Kushanas, 222; ethnic ele- 
ments, 225; Natysastra refers to, 638; 
term alysanai transliterated as kumara, 
229; movement to West and South, 772; 
empire of N.W., 229; movement to East, 
772; country in Indus valley, 229; conquest 
of Sind, 229n; and Sassanians, 251, 
291; origin of Western Kshatrapas, 273; 
Kshatrapas, 236, 273-91; princes’ move- 
ments, 309; Periplus on invasion of, 309, 
349; donor investing land with a guild, 
452 n; dress, arms, etc. of, 187, 190 & n; 
religion of, 655; caste status of, 467, 475; 
early Hindu colonists were, 632, 772; 
culture, 220-1, 225; Indianisation of, 
474-5; titles, 273, 348,350, 632; rejuvenated 
splendour of Ujjain, 634; influence of, 
286; of Western India, patrons of language 
& literature, 632-3; coins. 191, 197-201, 
220, 346, 786-7, 794, 796; ins., 192; 
and Gandhara school of art, 701, 704; 

Asiatic—-, 194; early , 229n; 

empire, 229, 269, 772 ; geneology, 

331 ; epoch, 341 ; lady's dona- 
tions, 755; Mahadantfanayaka, 345n; 

Satavahana period, 640; Ku- 

shana period, 706, 715, 719; Agnivar- 

man, 286, 332; world, 270, 274; 

predecessors, 266; later , 271; 

Khotanese , 241; Aji , 772; - • 

Yasomotika, 274; name, 772; 

—-device, 787; word, murunda, 

188; lord, 188; Amyrgian 187- 

Pahlava, 186, 196-7, 201, 219-21* 

264, 267, 271. 343-5, 794; era 196-7 

213n, 235, 260, 276-7, 284, 290,’ 294-5,’ 
309&n-10, 319, 321, 474n, see also era ; Saka 

Somevargah, 187; Saka Tigraxauda, 

187; Saka Tyetirojraya, 187; 

Calendar, 474n 

Sakasena, SvamI, 

324,805 

Sakastan, Sakasthana, 196n, 21 4n; location 
of, 187; identified with md. Seistan, 192; 
independent Saka settlement in, 197: 
Sakas spreading from, 187-8, 269-70; 
wife of Rajula associated in pious acts 
with her relations of, 269; conquered by 
Sassanians 291 ; reference in inscriptions, 
192; see also Seistan 

Sa fi ct a. one of 6 great cities in time of 
Buddha, 707; Patanjali on Gr. invasion 
into, 95, 635; beseiged by Yavanas, 635; 
Yugapurana on Yavana invasions into, 
154&n; earliest possession of Guptas, 106; 
Palahputra in conflict with kings of, 237; 
Puranas on Gupta rule over, 329; 


Mathariputra, 304n, 



INDEX 


899 


Asvaghosha of, 640 
Sakka, 573, 607, 611 
Sakkaravalakkottam, 370n 
Sakkharasobbha, 584 
Saktism, 403-5 
Sakuna, 562 
Sakuni, 646 

Sakya (s), Kautilya forbidding entertainment 
of, 81; Asoka calls himself a, 84; youths, 
484 & n; noble’s daughter, 485; clan and 
Ceylonese royal dynasty, 575; Buddha 

belongs to clan of, 609; Buddha , 

84; — clan, 575, 609 

Sakyamuni, Sakyasimha, 240, 379, 698; 
see also Buddha 

Salahaiia, 300, 336; see also Satavahana 
Salai, 600 

Salankayana ( \ishaya ), 318 
Salene (deity), 789 

Sali (son of Dutthagamani), 582, 603 
Salica, 600 ; see also Ceylon 
Salihundam, 738, 747, 756-7 
Salisuka, 43-6 

Salivahana, 294n, 300, 652; see also Sata- 
vahana 

Saliytir (port), 499, 564 
Salt range, 122, 195 
Salween, R., 449 
Salya, 647 

samaharta (collector general), 52, 58-61 
samaja , Asoka celebrates, 22-3; two kinds 
of, 22; of feeding, drinking, etc. condemn- 
ed and stopped by Asoka, 36, 38; cele- 
brated to keep people pleased, 22; celebrat- 
ed by Kharavela, Gautamiputra, • 22; 
Kautilya on king’s duty to participate 
in, 22; given a new turn by Asoka, 23; 
Asoka exhibits spectacles of gods, 
elephants, etc. in, 36; Vatsyayana on 
Ndgaraka and, 490 
Samajam, 678 
Samalipada (village), 315 
Samanar-kudagu (cave of Jainas), 500 
Samantabhadra, 411 

Samantapasddikd, 400, 651; does not refer 
to Mahameghavahna and Mahinda story, 
610; a work of Mahavilidra, 610; on; 
apostles of Buddhism, 369; Theravada 
Buddhism, 568; Mahanaga, 583 & n; 
king’s officials, 591 & n; spread of 
Buddhism, 606; story of Ceylonese king, 
607 ; introduction of Buddhism in Ceylon, 
608; Devanampiya Tissa, 607, 609; 
Chulabhaya, 617; references of coins in, 
809 

Samardichcha Kaha, 361n 
Samarkand, 764 
samasyd-kridd, 490 
Samayasara, 663 
Samba, 130, 384 
Sambala, 608 
Sambalpur, 436 
Sambandar, 517 


Sambastai, 128; see also, Ambash(has 

Sambara, 81 

Saubhava (author), 636 

Sambhogakaya, 376 

Sambhu, 130 

Sambhutivijaya, 358 

sambodhi (Bodn Gaya), 31, 848 

sambuddha, 31 

Sambus, 129-30 

Sambulturai, 597 

Samghamitra, 133 

Samgraha, 634, 662 

Sariihit&ls), 492; Gargi , 45, 94-5, 153, 

156, 472; see also Gdrgi-sariihitd, Susruta 

, 495, 668; Taittjriya , 657; 

Vedic , 491 ; Naradiyamanu , 658n; 

Vdjasanevi, 404n; 

Samkala, 123 

Sarhkarshana, 320, 382, 384, 

Sarnkhya, (philosophical system), 425-6, 

634, 659-60; niriiavara , 426 

Sdmkhya-kdrikds, 660 
Samkrantika, 371 
Samkrantivada, 367, 371-2 
Sammauya, Sammitlya, 366, 369-71 
Samprati (Asoka’s grandson), 43-4, 82, 
358-9,364 

Samsara, sarhsdra, 424, 426-7 
Samudra (type of Gadahara coins), 253 
Samudragupta (great Gupta emperor), Ar- 
junayanas in ins., of, 257; Arjunayanas 
tributary to, 126; Madras tributary to, 
132; Abhuas in ins., of 332; Kushaija 
scions subdued by, 222, 252; Kushaijas 
continued up to time of, 252; Samudra 
of Gadahara coins identified with, 253; 
Madrakas in ins, of, 256; Kuninaas not 
mentioned in ins. of, 256; Nagas in ins. 
of, 257; Naga kings overthrown by, 259; 
Kausambi annexed by 262; subjugation of 
N. India by, 329; Vaka(aka contemporary 
of, 330; Abhiras subdued by, 332; 
standard type of coins of, 253; Allahabad 
pillar inscription of, 107n, 132, 252, 
256-7, 332 
Samudravijaya, 381 

Samvat, Krita, 207; Malaxa-Vikrama 

207-8, 212, 235, 266-7, 271 ; see also Era 
Sdmvritika, 377 
Sariiyuktaratnapitaka, 235 
Sana (Shaka chief), 250 
Sanabares, 216-17 
Sanakanikas, 123 

Sanavasin ( guru of Upagupta), 82-3 
Saiichl, 608; Buddhist settlement at, 90; 
under Kushana influence, 243; Buddhist 
missionaries from, 608; artistic activity 
at, 684; sculptors of, 747; reliefs of early 
Indian art at, 703 ; inscriptions, 86, 247-3 
328-9, 465n, 491, 608, 629, 650, 690; 
Madhyadesa school represented by, 692 
697; chaitya halls at, 717, 719; vihdras at’ 
720; tor ana architraves of, 695, 736, 



900 


INDEX 


759; city relief representations at, 708-9; 
Asokan pillars at, 90-2; sculptures, 93, 
609, 624, 688, 691, 695, 700, 714, 758; 
stupas ( thupas ), 99, 365, 432, 491, 623, 
650, 686, 688-93, 713 & n-17, 732, 
846-8; art and Gandhara school, 705; 

—gateways, 88, 432, 609, 847; 

Museum, 243; trend, 690; car- 
vings, 691; composition, 691; tora- 

nas 693; relief, 709; school of, 848; 

Lion Capital, 848 

Sandanes, 217n, 237 

sandhi-vigrahis (minister of war & peace), 
50 

Sandrocottus (Chandragupta), 2, 69 
sandu (chandana), 683n 
Sanga-Ilakkiyam, 678 
Sangaios, Sanjaya, (friend of Ambhi), 118 
Sangala, 123; see also Samkala 
Sangam(s) (literature & age), anthologies, 
677-8 ; importance & influence of, 683 ; 
3 Tamil, 671-2; technical literature in, 
669; buildings, arts, crafts, etc. of, 732; 
industry in works of, 436; Yavana mer- 
chants in works of, 440; social divisions in, 
468; wisdoms in, 480; courtesans in, 481 ; 
Adigaman in period of, 500; date of 
literature of, 501, 672-3, 675; earliest 
Tamil literature as, 503 ; poets and poems 
of, 503, 680-2; political history of, 504-50; 
cultural fusion in, 550-2; castes in, 553-4; 
poets & kings in, 554-5; government in, 
555-7; army and art of warfare, in, 557-9; 
dress & pastimes, 559-602; palaces in, 
562; superstitious beliefs & ethics in, 
562-3; agriculture, industry & trade in, 
564-5; religion in, 565-6; social harmony, 

in, 566-7; literature, 503 ; classic, 

503 

sangha (Buddhist order), 613; and Asoka, 
31-2, 82, 84; Moggali-putta, head of 
Buddhist, 31; Chita builds a meeting- 
hall for, 365 ; donations to, 569; Mahinda’s 
entrance to, 576; wife of Devanampiya 
maharaja presents a cave to, 578; Ku(a- 
kanna joins, 584; king to serve, 591; pre- 
senting caves to, 606; Devanampiya 
Tissa builds rock cells for members of, 
607; large number entering, 607, 612; 
Dutthagamani to advance cause of, 614; 
split in, 618; Dharmaguptaka school 
placed Buddha higher than, 371 ; purified 
by Voharika Tissa, 619; Kohon Tissa ex- 
communicated from, 620; fails to en- 
force discipline, 620; and constitutions, 
625; cleaned of schismatics, 649; puri- 
fication of, 663 

sangha(s) (republics), as political organi- 
sation, 116, 131; Panini on, 116; different 
classes of, 131, 347; binding authority 
of an agreement with a, 451; Kautilya 
on, 54, 78, 131, 347; two groups of, 54; 
troops maintained by, 64; as guilds 


playing a large part in economic life, 78; 
constitution, of 78, 347; charitable en- 
dowments to, 452 
Sanghabodhi, Siri, 586-7, 594, 605 
Sanghadaman, 287-8, 292 
Sanghamitra (king of Kosala), 106 
Sanghamitta Vaitulyaka, 619 
Sanghamitra, Sanghamitta (daughter of 
Asoka), 31, 86, 587, 607-9 
Sanghatissa, 587; see also Tissa 
Sangha varman (author), 769 
Sanjaya (religious leader), 379 

— , see Sangaios 

Sankara (commentator), 101, 421 
Sankararya, 259 
Sankaram (hills), 736, 741 
Sankasya, 82, 84 
Sahkhya (philosophy), 424-6 
Sankisa, 272; Elephant capital of, 848 
sannidhata (chamberlain), 58 

Santamula I, 333-4; Ehuvula (Ikshvaku 

king), 334 
Santanu, 645 

Santivarman (Kadamba king), 300 & n 
Sanur, 729 
Sapedana, 217 

Sapta Godavari-Bhimam, 306 
Saptakarpa, 300 

Saptasati{s), age of, 641; contains gathd, 
641, 649; story of, 641 ; nature & character 
of, 652; anthology of verses byHala&other 
poets, 652; compiled of 700 Prakrit gathas, 
652; influence of, 652; on: Prakrit poetry, 
652; Hala Salivahana, 305, 652; dramatic 
performance, 638; Epic influence on, 641; 
on Vikramaditya, 652; deals with love, 
652; contents of, 652; flowered in South, 
652; geographical background of, 652; 
includes verses composed by women, 
652; refers to royal compiler as kavi- 
vatsala, 652; Pottisa and Kumarila of, 
665; refers to worship of deities, 320-1; 
Hari or Trivikrama in, 321; source 
book of culture, 652; see also Satsai 
& Sattasai 

Saptavahana, 299-300 
Saraganus, Elder, 349n 
Saranagati (doctrine of), 645 
Sarasvatl (deity), 80, 490 

R., 121, 331 

Sarasvatikanthabhararia, 65 In 
SarathadipanI, 809 

Sariputra, Sariputta (Thera), 84, 640, 713n, 

(drama) or Saradvatiputra prakarana, 

640 

Sariputraprakarana, 373, 628, 631 
Samath; conquered by Kanishka, 237; 
Asokan pillar at, 91-2; Mathura school 
of art sending products to, 254; donor 
of image of, 237; inscriptions, 237, 240, 
272, 369; sculptures, 91-2, 685, 697-8; 
chaitya halls & structural sanctuaries, 



INDEX 


901 


719, 771, viharas, 720; stupas at, 713n, 

716; terra-cotttas from, 93; pillar, 91; 

capital, 91; lions, 91 848; 

Lion Capital, 848; abacus, 848; 

image of Bodhisattva, 849 

Sarukumana, 243 

Sarvania (hoard of coins), 285, 289-90n, 
Sarvastivada, 366-7, 369-75, 415, 608, 632 
Sarvastivadins, 270, 648, 663 
Sarvavarman, 636-7, 653 
Sarvayasa, 252 
Sasa, 344n 

Sasan, 214-18, 221, 264, pi. IV (5) 

Sasanka (king of Karnasuvarna), 49 
Sasanadhikara (chapter of Arthasastra), 
649 

Saskya Pandita, 767n 

Sassanian(s), Sassanids, 214, 222, 250-2, 
254, 291; Kushano , 252; Schytho 


-, 666 ; 


,251 

Sastra, 636; Dasabhiimivibhasha — 

Jfieyaprakdsa , 767n; Pri, , 

m itd , see also Ashtasdhasrika 

Prajndparamita ; Sammitiya-nikaya , 

370 ; Samyukta-abhidharma-hridaya , 

665; Satyasiddhi , 665; 

tdstropajivisrenis, 3 

Sata-panchaSataka-stotra, or Adhyardha- 
Sataka-stotra , 648 
Sata ( yaksha ), 299 

Siri, 304n-5n, 337n, 805; see also 

Satakarni 

Satadhanvan, 43, 46 
Satahana, 300; see also Satavahana, 
Satahani-hara, 299n; see also Satavahana- 
hara 

Sataka, Skandanaga, 337 
Sataka, 337n; see also Satakarni 
Satakani, 297, 303, 805; see also Satakarni 
Satakarni (s), Satakani, Satakarpi, Sin, 
several families of, 295n; of Girnar ins- 
cription, 295; surname of Satavahanas, 
298, 330; derivative meanings of, 299-300; 
on coins as Sata, Sada, etc., 305n 

1, 3rd member of dynasty, 296n, 805 ; 

and Kharavela, 113, 303 ; regnal period of, 
326;parentageof,301, 690; first to bear Siri 
& Satavahana, 301; family of, 302; and 
Pushyamitra, 97; Sata of coins and, 97-8; 
conquests of, 302; titles of, 302; perfor- 
mances of sacrifices and gifts made by, 
302-3; Nanaghat portrait of family of, 
749 ; coin and legends, 303, 805 ; sculptured 
rilievo figures of, 303; Sanchl architraves 
by munificence of overseer of artisans of, 
690; death and successors of, 303 

II, period between Satakarni I and, 

303; date of, 303; identity with Satakarni 
of Hathlgumpha and Bhilsa inscriptions, 
303; and Pushyamitra, 304; conquests of, 
304; coins of, 294n, 304 & n; successor of, 
304 

Gautamiputra, first Satavahana king 


to use metronymic, 314; conjoint rule with 
son, 278, 298n, 315&n; caste of, 300, 
314; destroyer of Kshatriyas, 300 ; restored 
Satavahana power & glory, 312; date & 
regnal period of, 276, 278, 295n, 326; 
and: Nahapana & Ushavadata, 279, 286, 
309-10, 312,-3; Yavanas, 275, 277, 308, 
312; Chastana, 321 ; Saka satraps, 275-6, 
282, 286, 300, 309-10, 312; Rudradaman, 
281-2; mother of, 275, 351 ; titles of, 314, 
351-2; conquests of, 132, 275, 282; 
victories of, 312-13; son of, 278,281 ; extent 
of empire, 312-13;religion and gifts made 
by, 313; other achievements, personal 
qualities & an estimate of, 313-14, 352; 
administration of, 3 1 3-1 4, 3 1 6 ; predecessor 
of, 336; emulating epic and Puranic heroes, 
313-14, 641 ; panegyric of, 352;caves called 
after, 742-3; Nagarjuna, a friend of, 376; 
lord of Deccan, 104; inscriptions, 295, 
310; coins, 286, 805 

— — (Gautamiputra) (Siri) Yajna, 320; and: 
Rudradaman, 278; Damaghasada, 286; 
Kshatrapas, 323-4; Abhiras, 1323-4; Isvara- 
sena after death of, 332; Kuntala after, 
337; conquests of, 278, 286; cave called 
after, 742-3; coins, 286; 323, 805-7, pi. 
VIII (5); decline of Satavahanas during 
rule of, 323; successors of, 324; Khada, 322 
Haritlputra Vishnukada-chutakulananda 

, 337-8; Vishnukada Chutu II , 

338; Kumbha , 806; Kuntala , 

295n, 304-5, 336-7, 667; Saka , 806; 

Siri Sivakhada , 322; Sivamaka , 

281, 322; Sivaskanda , 281, 332; 

Sri Krishna , 805; Sunandana , 

349n; Sundara , 310; Vasi{hlputra 

Chatarapana Siri 322; Vasishihlputra 

Siva Sri, 281, 321-2n, 805; Vasishihlputra 
Siri , 281, 321, 323, 475n; Vijaya , 

, 294 

Satamagha, 259, 262 

satamanas, (coins), 778 

Satavahana(s), 754; sources for history of, 
294-5; dynastic name, 298; derivation & 
meanings of, 299-300; Sata for, 97-8, 
336-7n; founder of dynasty of, 690; rise 
to power before disappearance of Mauryas 
293; Salivahana corrupt form of, 294; 
origins of, 296-300; number of kings of, 
295n; chronology of, 295&n; beginning of 
dynasty, 296n; and: Kanvas, 295n; 

Kharavela, 113-14; Sassanians, 251; Saka 
kshatrapas, 275-86, 308-13, 321-2; Puranic 
list of, 326; identity with Andhras, 296; 
regnal periods of kings, 326; duration of 
dynasty & empire of, 293, 295n; conflict 
with Sungas, 304; empire, 293, 296n, 
304; capitals, 297-8; kings, 275, 296, 
301-26; suzerainty over Vidarbha, 98; 
polity and administration, 316-18,350-4; 
queens ruling as regents, 477; maritime 
trade and colonisation, 293, 306-8, 318-19; 


114 



902 


INDEX 


language & literary activity under, 293, 
305-6, 634, 651-2; Gunadhya, a contem- 
porary of a, 631; traditions in Tamil 
literature, 654; Nagarjuna worked under 
patronage of, 377; Nagarjuna worked in 
territories of 665 ; Kshatrapa princess 
accepted in marriage by, 475; religion of, 
293, 319-21, 376-7, 457n, 656; Maha- 
sanghikas under patronage of, 369; 
feudatories of, 336-8, 352; inscriptions, 
132, 294-5, 629-30, 641 ; coins, 275, 294&n, 
297, 314n, 805-7; sculpture, 634; art, 293; 
decline & end of, 322-6; Deccan after, 

328-36; Sri , 294, 304; Sunga, 

304; Hala — — , 636, 652; king , 631, 

636; later— — '754; Kumara , 806n; 

Hindu , 319 

(a king of Kuntala), 336 

Satavahanam (Tamil work), 654 
Satavahani-ha(a)ra (Satavahana-ha(a)ra), 
324, 298n 
Satavastra, 217 
Satadhara, 713n 
Sati, 69, 563 

Satisirimat (Sakti-kumara of Jainas), 302n, 
303 

Satiyaputra, Satyaputra(s), derivation of, 
500; origin of, 500; belongs to south, 86; 
identity & location of kingdom of, 26, 
500; in Anoka’s inscriptions, 9, 26, 299, 
499; and Satavahanas, 297; identity with 
Kosar, 500 ; was Tamil chieftain Adigatnan 
500 

Satpura (hills), 313, 436 
Satrughna, 642-3 
Satrunjaya, 361 

Satsai, Sattasaf, 305, 652, 682; see also 
SaptaSati 

Sattan Vadamavaiiiiakkan Peri, 532, 546 
Sattanar, Mudukaijoan Uraiyur, 549 
Satvata(s), 380, 383-4 
Satyadaman, 283, 285, 292 
Satyamitra, 133 
Satyasimha, 808 
Satyavati, 645 
Saubhuti, 122-4, 142 
Saudras, Saudrayanas, 129n 
Saugor (dist.), 133, 781 
Saumilia (Semylla of Greeks), 640; see also 
Semylla 
Saunaka, 635 

Saundarananda, 373, 495n-6n, 648 
Sauras, 405 

SaurasenI (Prakrit), 628, 631, 639 
Saurashtra, 473; see also Surashtra 
Sauryas, 467 
Sauryapura, 381, 383 

Sautrantika(s), also called Samkrantivada, 
367; last school from Sarvastivada, 366; 
last of 18 schools, 371 ; date of origin, 371, 
375; doctrines of, 371-2, 375-6, 378, 415, 
663 ; to be also distinguished from 
Samkrantivada, 372; opponents of 


Vaibhashika, 375; constituted a fully 
fledged school by Kumaralata, 375; 
arose out of Hinayana, 415; also regarded 
as Sarvastivada school, 415; had sown 

seeds of Mahayana, 664; teacher, 374 

Sauvira(s), 3, 71 ; see also Sind 
Savita, 80 

Savitri, 477, 479, 484n 
Saya, Ruvanvali, 616 

Sayatha (Shaka chief), 250;— (late Kushana 
chief), pi. VI (6) 

Scythianfs), Sytiiic, 221; migrations, move- 
ments & entrance into India, 187-92; 
early reference in ins. of Darius, 186- 
branches of, 187, 192-4; conquests & 
settlement in Central & Western India, 
190; North & West of India under different 
lines of, 191; two royal lines of, 192- 
territories- of house of Eucra tides annexed 
by, 209; rulers of India, 200; under Greek 
satraps, 140; on other side of Sogdiana 
148; on north of Bactria, 167; penetra- 
tion & conquest of Bactria, 166; Strabo 
on, 166; and; Eucratides, 165-6; Heliocles, 
167; Parthians, 194; driven out of Sog- 
diana by Yue-chi, 188-9; imitation of 
Bactnan Gr. coins, 149, 786; imitation of 
Heliocles corns, 167; Athene Promachus 
type of coins issued by, 176; nationality 
of Maiies, 192, 194; extent & period of, 
218; coins, 149, 192, 786; culture, 220-1 
influence on Nagarjunakonda art 755 
—barbarians, 148. 166; — -nationality! 

*92; Persian, 202; rulers 794' 

- — Pences, 287 ; types, 755 ; war- 
rior, 755, 852; Amyrgian , 187&n; 

European—, 194; Indo , 794; king! 

Maues, 179; kings of Punjab, 180; 
transference of sovereignty of N.W. from 
Indo-Greeks to, 180; empire 199- 

predecessors of Indo-Parthians 213; and 
Indo-Greeks & Indo-Parthians, 253' 
Dharmaraksha born in a family of 770 : 
country, 774; coins, 165, 179, 18o’ 21 0 

„ ~~ s £ rIes > I9 9; money, 214 

Scytho-Parthian (period), 219-21, 846 
Setstan, abode of Sakas in, 187- coins of 
Euthydemos in,. 149; location of, 192; 
identical with Sakasthana, 192; under: 
Vonones, 193; Parthians, 194; Sassanians, 
i At no e Y lde ?SP rtde °* Diodotus over, 
146; revolt of Sakas of, 196; independent 
settlement of Sakas in, 197; coins of 
?a»° re J < n ' 216; coins of Yasudeva in, 
•^48; Sakas spread out from, 269-70; 

route through, 439; Arachosia , 146; 

see also Sakasthana 
Selene, 789 
Seleuecia, 77-8, 439 

Seleucid(s), Seleucidan, 145; supremacy 
re-established by Antiochus, 78; and 
Asokan art, 90; Bactria under, 140-3; 
satraps, 141, 264; central Asia under, 143; 



INDEX 


903 


satraps under early, 146; dynasty in W. 
Asia Minor, 150; of W. Asia, 340-1, 343; 
coins, 142-3, 145, 792; Indo-Greeks 
borrowed administrative, system from, 
340; and Indo-Greeks &Sakas, 341, 343; 
ensured supply of elephants & Indian 

wares, 78; era, 141, 163; mint 

141; empire, 141, 143, 148; 

emperors, 143; kings, 145, 792; 

early , 146; dynasty(ies), 46, 150 

Seleucus I, general of Alexander, 140; 
succeeds Alexander, 140; fled from Egypt, 
140-1 ; established on throne of Babylon, 
7, 141; rivalry with Antigonus, 140-1; 
son of, 46; and Chandragupta, 2-3, 7, 
26, 46, 77-8, 131, 141, 501 ; terms of treaty 
with Chandragupta, 7, 78, 141, 501; 
matrimonial alliance with Chandragupta, 
7-8; his successors’ control over Bactria, 
141 ; conquest and expansion of power, 
7, 141; rule of, 141; Eastern capital of, 
77; joint rule with Antiochus I, 78; 
Diodotus as a satrap of, 144; Indian king 
sends drugs to, 8; sends Megasthenes to 
court of Chandragupta, 8; coins and seals 
of, 141&n-2, 144; successors of, 141, 
143-4 

Ill, 147 

IV, 162 

Seliyan, 510 

Selkelu Kuttuvan Palyanai, 517; see also 
. Kuttuvan 
SeJJai, 507 

Selvakkadungo, 533, 539 
Sembiyan, 513 

Semylla, 308, 436; see also Saumilla 
Sena, 579-80 
Sendan, 510 
Senganan, 549-50 
Sengoftiyal, 561 
Sengonrarai-ch-chelavu, 676 
gehguttuvan, 506, 521n; Chera king, 503; 
relation with Ilango, 503; in Sangam 
literature, 507, 509-10, 514, 522-6; brother 
of, 503, 525; Parapar on, 507, 509, 522-3; 
Karikala, contemporary of, 509-10, 514; 
synchronism between Gajabahu and, 
514; date of, 5 1 7 ; re ward given to Paranar, 
522; parentage & family of, 522; friend 
of, 523; wars & conquests of, 523-4; 
epilogue to establishment of Pattini cult, 
523-4, 586; and Cholas, 524, 526; succes- 
sors of, 525 ; achievements and an estimate 
of, 523-4 

Serai, Kuttuvan, see also Kuttuvan, 513, 522 
Seraman, Kuttuvan, 513 
Serapis (Sarapo), Alexandrian, 245, 790 
Seres, 129 

Serlsaka ( vimana ), 615 
Seruppaliyerinda, 549 
Seruppu (mountain), 521 


Sesecrienae (Vengurla rocks), 308 
Seshadatta, 108, 134 


Setagiri, 313 

Svetambara(s), 81-2, 356-9, 362-3 
Seunachandra II (Yadava Mahamapda- 
lesvara), 49 

Sey, Sey, 508-9, 518, 541, 545, 563 
Seyyuliyal, 611a 
Shadarhadvana, 244 
Sahan Shah, 241, 245 

Shahanu Sahi, 190, 241; see also Sahi- 
and Sahanu 
Shahbazgarhl, 25, 629 
Shahdaur, 207 
Shahls, 190 

shah! devaputra, 243-4 
Shah-jl-ki-Dheri, 238, 704, 716 
Shaka(s), 250, pi. VI (6) 

Shan-tung, 770 
Shapur I, 251 
II, 252 

Shariar (Shareoro), (deity), 245, 790 

ShashthI (deity), 256 

Shashtitantra, 660 

She Huang, 766 

Shen-tu (India), 766, 768 

Shi-ki, 188 

Shiladas, 250 

Shinkot, 264 

Sholagas, 571 

Shorkot, 126 

Shu-lei, 767 

Shuang-mi, 224, 226 

Si-hia, 767 

Sialkot, 132, 152, 171-2, 178, 708; see also 
Sakala 
Siam, 658 

Sian(g)-lin, 772, 775 
Siang-lin-yi, 775 
Siberia, 319, 434 
Sibae, 395, 400 

Sibi(s), Sivas, republican state of, 109; 
territory of, 125; descendants from 
Heracles, 125; capital of, 126; king in 
A. Brahmaija, 126; and Alexander, 125; 
same as Sivas of R.V., 125; Patanjali 
on, 125, 128-9, 395; migrated to Raj- 
putana, 126; same as Sibae, 395; in- 
habitants of Sivapura, 395; king in 
Hindu & Buddhist legends, 126; ancestors 
of Cholas, 126; of Western Rajputana, 
342; Agalassi near, 126; struck coins in 
name of state, 342; classical writers on, 
395; worshippers of Siva, 395; coins, 109, 

126, 342, pi. VII (9); janapada{sa), 

126, pi. VII (9) 

; (story of), 552 
Sibipura, Sivapura, Saivapura, 126, 395 
Siboi, Sivis, 125; see also Sibis 
Sibyrtius (Satrap in Arachosia), 8 
Siddapura, 9, 629 
siddha(s), 313, 665 
Siddhartha (Buddha), 456n, 481, 751 
Siddhasena Divakara, 361 
Siddhatthika (Buddhist school), 368 



904 


INDEX 


Sigalovada-sutta, 35 
SIgiriya, 625 
Siglos, 779 
SIhabahu, 573 

SIhala, 571, 573-4; see also Ceylon 
Sijistan, 187, 269; see also Seistan & 
Sakasthana 
Sikri, 698 
Siladitya, 252 
Sildlin (author), 638 

gilappadikaram, 505; a work in Ahaval 
metre, 676; author of, 503, 506; comm- 
entator of, 522, 524; Sangam classic Tamil 
epic, 503, 580, 586; antiquity & date of, 
498, 503, 514; importance & nature of 
data of, 503-4, 514; list of Chera kings 
in, 507; Satavahana in commentary of, 
299&n; on: Satakarni, 300; wife’s 

devotion to husband, 479; courtesans, 
481 n; shepherds supplying ghee to palace, 
498; legends of flood & conquests, 505; 
Senguttuvan & Karikala & Gajabahu, 
510, 514, 522-5, 343, 586; Kannagi cult, 
515, 586; contemporaneous kings, 515; 
Kuttuvan’s religious performances, 521; 
EJara, 580; construction of Pattini temple, 
731n; cities & temples, 730n 
Sirhhagiri, 362 

Simhala, 573 ; see also Ceylon 
Siihhanada, 4 
Sirhhasena, 273 
Simhavarman, 335 
Simhavishpu (Pallava king), 517 
Simuka (Satavahana king), 103, 301, 690 
Sind, Alexander meeting first tribe in, 129; 
government of people of, 129; Sudras 
in, 331; under: Demetrius, 152, 170; 
Menander, 174; Kanishka, 237; Ru- 
dradaman, 282; Chastana, 321; Saka 
conquest of, 182, 229n; capital of Naha- 
pana in, 279; Abhiras in, 331; Sakas in, 
343 ; home of horses & asses, 71 ; route to, 

71; stupa in, 713n; upper , 237; 

Northern , 331 

Sindimana, 130 

Sindhu, 97n; Sauvira, 152, 321 

Sindhus, 3 
Sisini, 363 

Sinnamanur, (plates), 551n 
Sirguja, 757 
Sirima Devata, 845 
Sirimaga I, 586 

II, 586 

Siri Sanghabodhi, 586-7 
Siri(ana, 313 

Sirkap, excavations at, 206, 217; intermediate 
city of Taxila, 219; under: Saka-Parthians, 
219; Kushanas, 229; remains of royal 
palace and city at, 220-1, 456n; Pahlava 
strata at, 229; city site of, 229; coins 
unearthed at, 206, 217, 219, 229; silver 
vase ins. from, 266; ivory, dice-play, 
hair-pin, gold & silver ornaments. 


antimony rods, etc. discovered at, 433n, 
435n, 497n; apsidal temple at, 720; 
built by Azes?, 45 6n; see also Taxila 
Siro, Ptolemaios, 278 
Sirukudi, 513, 547 

Sirupan-arruppadai, a poem on Nalliya- 
kkodam, 508; last Sangam poem, 513-14; 
one of poems in Pattuppattu, 550; one of 
ten longer poems, 677; contains 269 
lines, 680; author of, 508, 513, 680; 
Oyman, the hero of, 550; on: Ay, 527; 
Chera country, 552n; refers to 7 Vajjals, 
680; lac & lacquering in, 747n 
;:-.:i\..-, 679 
S - k. •:!..> IS..'-!.! .|V:>. 4 
Sisunaga, 83; see also Susunaga 
Sita (Shaka chief), 250 
Sita, 484n; Janaka, father of, 131 ; Ramayana 
story of, 477, 479, 642-4; nature & 
character of, 477, 479; story in Tamil 
literature, 549, 551 

Sitala (deity), 269; Sitalanatha (Jina of 
Kalihga), 115n 
Sitamarhi, 82 
Sittannavasal, 725n 
Situlpahuva, 589, 613 
Siu-wen, 772 

Siva (deity), Patanjali on, 396; Panini on, 
395; followers of, 395; worshippers of, 
395, 400-2; Kaufilya on temple of, 80; 
bull of, 87, 167, 401; bull representing, 
167-8, 401; deity of Gandhara, 168, 401; 
prominence of, 419; and Saktism, 403-5; 
cult of, 393, 402-3 ; in later Vedic literature, 
394; same as Mahesvara &Mahadeva,394; 
in Buddhist literature, 394-5 ; Saiva, 
descendant of, 396; in epics and Purapas 
as a great healer, 396-7; sacred spots of, 
544; Aya presents to, 527; swallowed 
poison to save world, 536; Senganan 
devoted to, 549; centres of worship of, 
401; in human form, 403; consort of, 
405; sons of, 405; royal house of Bhara- 
sivas founded by favour of, 258; worship 
of, 258, 321, 395, 401 ; Kunindas dedicated 
their state to, 346, 798n; mythological 
being, 379, 798; image of Heracles 
identified with, 383 ; Rudra identified with, 
394; name of cult god, 394; in Upanishads, 
394; epithets of, 394; Punjab tribe 
associated with, 395; principal deity in 
Sivapura, 395; foreigners as followers of, 
400-2; Deva and, 401; title of Kunindas 
on coins, 136; images of, 396, 400; 
religious system centering, 397; incarna- 
tion of, 397-8; vrata of, 398; phallic 
emblem of, 402, 799; prototype of, 402; 
phallicism and, 402-3; on seals, 401; 
on coins of: Kunindas, 137, Maues, 199, 
786; Kushanas, 228, 232, 241, 245, 247-8, 
254, 401, 788-92, pi. V(4-5, 13), pi. VI (2); 
Yaudheyas, 798; Parthians, 787; Dharma- 
ghosha, 798&n; Ujjain, 799; burning of 



INDEX 


905 


fortress of Rakshasas by, 551 ; in Tamil 
literature, 566; as ardhanarisvara, 565-6; 
Aya as, 579; devotees of, 655; devakulas 
of, 604; propitiated by Arjuna,646; icono- 
graphy of, 655, 746, 790; propitiated by 
Kariada, 660; shrines dedicated to, 731; 
temple of, 851 ; colour of, 757; emblem 
of, 788; Rudra — -, 329, 393-5, 396n, 398, 
403 ; — Pasupati, 394, 402; — Visvamitra, 

798; Aya, 579; — Mahakala, 800; 

Raja, 579; — — Vaisravana, 396; 

Bhagavata(s), 396-400, 655; 

Srlkanfha, 397; temple, 403; 

emblem, 655 ; form, 655 

Siva (king of S. India & Ceylon), 579, 
, 583, 590, 604, 610, 617 
Siva(s) (people), 125, 395; see also 

Sibis & givis 

Siva (mother of Arish{nemi), 381 
Sivabhuti, 651 
Sivabodhi, 333 
givadasa, 109, 135, 797 
givadatta, of Mathura, 105; date of, 796; 
coins, 105, 133-4, 796, 801n; Kshatrpa 

, 268; bearing foreign title, 269; 

coins, _269&n, 272 

, Abhira, 324, 474; father of Abhlra 

Isvarasena, 285-6, 321, 474n 
givaghosha (Mathura-satrap), 268-9, 272 
sivakasala (hall), 604 

Sivakhadila (gatavahana governor), 315, 
321 

Sivalakura, Mathariputra, Madhariputa, 
^ 314n, 338, 352n, 805 
Siva-linga, 247, 258&n, 397, 402-3, 604 
Sivamagha, Gautamiputra, 259&n-60n-l 
givapalita, 134, 321, 796, 801n 
givapura, 125, 395 
givarakshita, 207, 401 
giva Sati, 310 
givasena, 267, 344n 
givaskanda, 320, 322, 335n 
givaskandanagasri, 337 
givaskandavarman (Pallava king), 296n, 
298 & n, 335, 337-8 

givi country & people), 73, 125; see also 
gibi and Siva 
Sh/li!.!’.-Si...slVl.'.401 
S-w.iU UU. 110. 136, 342 

Smriti(s), works, 66, 778; date of, 656-7; 
growth of, 657; yoga in, 661; on: castes, 
66, 465-8; protection of castes, 350; 
spending taxes, 352; manufacture of 
metals, 435; slavery, 470-1; woman's 
position, 475-83 ; marriage rules & practi- 
ces, 485-8; food & drink, 491-3; Vedas 
& Sutras, 658; puranas (coins), etc., 778; 

dictum, 350; law, 465, 485-6, 

491; metrical , 656-7; Brihaspati — , 

658n, 661; Manu , see also Manor 

vadharmaiastra & Manusmriti, 657; 
Yajnavalkya , 659, 795; Narada , 


658; see also Dhannasdstra(s) 

Soanus, R., 120; see also Sohan 
Socotra, 440-1 

godasa, Sudasa (satrap), son & successor 
of Rajuvula, 268-9, 344n; satrapal ruler 
of Mathura, 268, 271, 796, 800; and 
Hagamasha & Hagana, 268-9; title of, 
268-9, 344n, pi. VII (7); in inscriptions, 
270-1 ; as a Kshatrapa under Rajula, 270, 
344n; as a Mahakshatrapa, 271, 344n; 
date of, 271; extent of rule, 272; coins, 
270, 272, 344n, 787, 796, 806, pi. VII (7); 
successors of, 272 

Sodrae, 129; see also Saudras & gaudrayanas 
Sogdi, 129 

Sogdiana, location of, 139; haunt of 
Scythians, 139; horse head device appro- 
priated to, 141n; Diodotus as satrap of 
parts of, 144; Sakas of, 187-9; Yue-chi 
drove Sakas out of, 188-9; Kusha towns 
in, 224; included in Kushana empire, 255 
Sogdian(s), Sulikas were, 764; monks, 768-9 

Sogdinian, mountain, 148; confederates 

of Bessus, 140; habitat, 167 

Sohan, R., 120 
Sohgaura, 48, 57, 73 
Soked (Saketa) 237 
Solomon, 670 

Soma, (Malava chief), 80, 288 
Soma (daughter of Naga king), 773 
Somadeva (author), 653 
Somasarman (Sunga king), 46 
Somila (Semylla), 640 
Son, R„ Sona, 86, 503, 587, 708, 771 
Son Bhandar (cave), 721 

Sonaka or yavana, 724; , 106n 

(father of Vangapala), 106n 

SonakayanT, 106n 

gonakayaniputra Vangapala (grandfather 
of Ashadhasena), 106 
Sonari (stupa), 369, 713n, 717 
Song-yun, 765n 
Sopnamali, 615, 623 
Sonuttara, 762 

Sopara, 8, 25, 278, 286, 438n 
Sopeithes (satrap), 142 
Sopheites, Sopithes, Sophytou Sophytes, 
Sophitou, 122 & n, 142-3, 782; coin, pi. I 
(1); see also Saubhuti 
Sophagasenus, 45-6, 148 
Sorai (Chodas), 26 
Soretai (Chodatra), 26 
Soriyapura, 381; see also Suryapura 
Sornagas (Choda-naga), 26 
Sorparaga, 279; see also Sopara 
Sotthisala (hall), 604 
Sourasenoi, 383 ; see also Surasenas 
Sovlra, 125; see also Sauvira & Sindhu- 
Sauvlra 

Spalagadama, Spalagadames, 201-4, 344n; 
coins, pi. Ill (2) 

Spalahora, Spalahores, 201-4, 344n, 

pi. Ill (12) 



906 


INDEX 


Spalirises, Spalirisha, Spalahores, names 
contain Scythic or Iranian elements, 
194, 201; responsible for destruction of 
Greek povver, 201; brother of Vonones, 
202-3; title of, 343, pi. Ill (10); last 
member of Vonones group, 203; houses 
of Vonones & Maues united during time 
of, 203; sole ruler, 203; ruling conjointly 
with Azes, 203; and Azes, 204, 206-7, 
274; extension of foreign power during 
time of, 203 ; Azes group of kings after, 
205; co-rulers of, 206-7; son of, 203n; 
coins, 203, pi. Ill (10) 

Spalyris, 201-4 
Sparta, 130 

Sphotayana (grammarian), 662 
Spitamenes, 140 
sarddhas, 450, 460, 477 
Srarnana (ascetic movement), 82 

Srauta ( sutra , sdstra), 656; Asvaldyana , 

645 ; Katyayana — — , 662n 
Srdvakas, 239-40; Srdvakayana, 240 
Sravapa Bejgola, 9, 498 
Sravastl (Saheth-Maheth), one of 6 great 
cities in Buddha’s time, 707; route from, 
70-1 ; Mathura school of art sending its 
products to, 254; voyage of caravan leader 
of, 447n; voyage of merchants of, 447n; 
A vaddnasataka on gosthi in town of, 
490; Buddhist image inscription of, 237; 
miracle in art, 624; Buddha image from, 
697; relief representation of city of, 708; 
see also Saheth-Maheth 
s{s)renis (republics & guilds), 8, 64, 78, 126, 

131, 452; Agra , 126 

sreshthin, Sresthin, 72, 485 

Sri, §ri, (deity), 80, 847-8; see also Lakshmi 

— Mara (king), 774 

Srlbodhi, 333 
Srlchandrabodhi, 333 
Srxdharavarman (Saka), 348n 
Srigupta, 36 

Sri-kaku}am, Srikakulam, 296, 747 

iSrilata, 376 

Sringaraprakdsa, 654 

grlparvata, Sri Parvata, 333, 665, 754 

jjjrlrahgam, 296n, 747n 

grotriya, 487 

grutakirti, 643 


66; slavery, 67 ; Indian customs & manners, 
69; Indian trade with West, 71 ; festivals & 
procession, 75-6; craftsman, 79; tribes & 
minor states of N. India, 118, 120-4, 129; 
Bactria, 137; Sophytes, 142; Demetrius 
& Menander, 151, 153-4; Bactrian 

invasion, 153-4; Eucratides, 160, 165; 
Parthians, 165; Scythians, 166; worship 
of Vasudeva, 383; voyage to India, 440-ln; 
embassy to Augustus by a Porus, 673 
Strato I (Sorter), belongs to house of Eucra- 
tides, 168; and Agathocleia, 167-8, 172-7; 
Heliocies restrikes coins of, 1 68 ; name and 
titles of, 173, 176, pi. II (ll);bustsof (on 
coins), 173, 176; his mother as regent, 173, 
175; son of Menander & Agathocleia 
173; grandson of, 176; joint rule with 
mother and grandson, 176, 340n; inde- 
pendent rule of, 176; Maues came after, 
198; sub-kings under, 340n; decline of 
power of, 176; successors of, 176; coins 
and coin devices of, 167-8, 172-3, 175-7, 
198, 271-2, 787, pi. II (II) 

II (Philopater), Indo-Greeks after, 

174; date & chronological position of, 
174; and Menander, 174; grandson of 
Strato I, 176; joint rule with Strato I, 
176, 340n; titles of, 176; decline of power 
of, 176; coins, 176, 271 
stryadhyaksha ( mahamatras ), 30 
Su-wu, 774 
Subahu, 642 
Subandhu, 306, 638 

Subha, Saba (a military official, Ceylon) 
584-5, 588-90, 592 

Subhadda, Chulla, 762; Maha 762-3- 

(wife of king of Kasi), 763n 

Subhadra (sister of Krishna), 484n, 646 
Subhadrangi (Asoka’s mother), 19 
Subnagasena, 45-6, 148; see also Sopha- 
gasunus 

Subhashitavali, 678 
Subhuta — Janapada, 123, 142 
Subrahmanya, 566 
Sudama (cave), fl8, 721, 739 
Sudarsana, Sudarasana (lake), 8, 281 ?83 
349, 350, 457n 

Sudarsana-chakra (weapon of Vasudeva) 


Sse-chuan, 769 
Ssu-ma-chien, 188 
sthanikas, 60 
Sthaviras, 648, 663-4 

Sthaviravada, 366, 369-71 ; see also Theravada 
Sthaviravadins, 663 
Sthulabhadra (Jaina teacher), 358 & n 
Sthulakoshtha (place), 364 
Strabo, 434, 441 n; work and date of, 673; 
depends on Megasthenes, 674; and Megas- 
thenes, 67; on: Chandragupta & Seleucus, 
7-8; Indian castes, 17; Sramanas & 
philosophers, 18, 66; ownership of land, 
56; wages, 56; marriage & occupations. 


Sudas (Rigvcdic King), 125 
Sudasa, 270-1 ; see also Sodasa 
Suddhodana (father of Bodhisattva), 484&n 
Sudeva (King), 133 

Sudhamma Sabha (of Barhut relief), 718 745 
Sudhanvan (son of Kuru), 1 12 
Sudra (s), 68, 465-7; originally name of a 
Dasa tribe, 129; Mbh. on, 466; same as 
Sodrae, 129; Patanjali on, 467; Gargisam- 
hita on, 472; contains professional & 
ethnic elements and their respective 
position, 467; social status of, 79; Western 
side of market-town allotted to, 79; makers 
of textiles & armours, 79; ascetics not to 



INDEX 


907 


be entertained at sacrifices, 81; Smriti 
laws on position of, 465-6; pratiloma 
castes have status of, 467; caste status in 
marriage with woman of, 469-70; Yavanas, 
Sakas, etc. recognised as, 475; and mar- 
riage rules & practices, 481-2 & n; 

ascetics, 81 

(republican people), see also Saudras 

& Saudrayanas, 129, 331 
Sudraka (author), 639-41 
Suganga (Maurya palace), 114n 
Sugriva, 644 
Suhastin, 44, 359 
Sui Vihar, Sug-Vihar, 216, 237 
Suhrillekha (an epistle), 376, 665 
Sujyeshfha, Vasujyeshtha (Sunga king), 
100 & n-ln 
Sukhdvativyiiha, 665 
Sukra, 493 

suktakavi (a classification of poets), 649 

sutas, 551 

guladhvaja, 799 

Siilagava (sacrifice), 396n 

gulamani (work), 679 

Sulikas, 764 

Sulur (place), 725 

Sumana (Suslma) (son of Bindusara), 19- 
20n, 612 

Sumangalavildsini, 614n 
Sumanottara, 637 
Sumati (Bhrigu), 657 
Sumatra, 319, 434, 516 
Sumitra (king), 100-1, 105 
Sumitra (wife of Dasaratha), 642 
Sunaga, 635 
Sundaramurti, 529 
Sunet (near Ludhiana), 256 
<5uAga (s), 101, 125, 309; sources for history 
of, 94; origin & rise of, 95 & n-6, 138; 
dynastic designation, 95 & n; associated 
with Vedic priestly families, 96; caste of, 
96 & n; founder of, 95, 153, 339; duration 
of rule of, 101 ; Brahmin empire of, 81 ; 
succeeds Mauryas, 94; kings, 94-8, 101 
& n-5, 133-5, 180-1, 339-40; Puranic list 
of kings, lOln, 181, 340n; length of 
individual reign of kings, lOln; march of 
army of, 96, 98; extent of influence & 
empire of, 107, 196; two distinct groups of, 
96n; administration, 339; characteristic 
features of dominion of, 339; Patanjali 
belongs to period of, 632; Vidisa attracted 
arts & letters under, 634; Kalidasa under 
Agnimitra, 640; recitation of Itihasa & 
Parana in period of, 655; Brahmanic 
revival under, 656; Manusmriti, a docu- 
ment of, 657; stupas & caves_ belonging 
to period of, 364-5, 686; Bharhut stupa 
& railing during time of, 99; and: Kanvas, 
102-3; Andhras, 96-8, 102; Mitra kings, 
105-6; Bahasatimita, 107 & n, 133; Vidisa 
still held by, 103 & n; religious policy & 


Buddhism, 99 & n, 364-5 ; and Greeks, 97, 
138,153-4,156; friendship with Indo-Gr. 
kings, 102, ISO; scions or governors found 
kingdoms, 101; decline of empire of, 101, 
112; Pusftyamitra as a, 96n; branch of 
Kosala, 96n, Dhanadeva as a, 96n; hold 
on territory west of Magadha lost, 101; 
disruption after the founder of empire of, 
104; hostility of Buddhists, to, 104; Gr. 
invasion gave blow to, 104, 108; empire 
after Agnimitra, 108; hey-day, glory of, 
112; Arjunayanas rose during later period 
of, 109; political condition after, 104-5; 
rulers associated with, 105, 339-40; over- 
throw of last, 102; continuance of, 102; 
Pushyamitra— — , 107, 133-4, 364; imperial 
, 104-5; Agnimitra, 640; his- 
tory, 94; army, 96; glory, 112; 

real , 96n; Andhra 98; regime, 

99; dynasty, 101; Kanva, 364-5; 

Mitra , lOln; arms, 153; Bhagava- 

ta , 102; Nanda-Maurya period, 

,634; bhrityas, 103; Kanva, 364 

Sunyata, 664-5 
Smyatasapatati, 666 
Sunyavada,l>ll , 415-16 
Suppara, Supparaka, 434n, 771; sec also 
Sopara 
Sura, 566 

Surasenas, Saurasenas, 5, 190, 383, 655 
Surashtra, Surashtras (country & people), 
Mauryan province, 8, 10, 131, 349; 
Chandragupta’s governor (Pushyagupta) 
of, 10, 131, 281-2, 349; Asoka’s governor 
(Tushaspa), of, 131, 281-2; under: 

Rudradaman, 131, 282, 348n-9; Naha- 
pana, 279; Gautamiputra Satakariji, 
312-13; Kautilya on politics of, 8,54, 131; 
Chandragupta’s conquest beyond, 8; 
forming srenis & sanghas, 8, 54, 131; 
devoted to economic pursuits & warfare, 
54; practising vdrttd, 131; under pro- 
tection of ( amatya ) Pahlava Suvisakha 
during time of Rudradaman, 282, 348n-9 ; 
given to trade & war, 131; Yavana en- 
trance into, 308; continued republican 
institution under royal representative, 
131; fabric coins of Gautamiputra Sata- 
karni and Sri Yajna Satakarni, 805-6; 
Valabhi in, 49 
Surashtra vishaya, 190 
Surat (dist.), 279 

Suratha, Surattha, (Surashtra), 312-13, 438 
Surparaka, Soupara, 8, 71, 438 &n-5n; 

see also Sopara 
Suppara, 438 

Surya (deity) 379, 746, 748n;— {Varttika- 
kdra), 635; in art, 845, 850 
Suryamitra (king), 100, 108, 134-5, 800 
Suryanardyana, 746 
Suryaprajnapti , 668 
Susa, 87, 263 



908 


INDEX 


Susarman (founder of Parivrajaka family), 
103 

(son of Kanva king Narayana), 103 

Sushkaletra, 244 

Susruta, 435, 668; see also Samhita 
Susthita, Kotika and Supratibuddha, 360 
Susunaga, 574, 621 ; see also Sisunaga 
sutas, 551 

Sutlej, R„ 110, 125-6, 134-7, 249, 342; 

valley, 797 

SittraU) sutra, 421-29, 633, 659, 663; Asval- 

ayana Srauta 96; Baudhayana Srauta 

, 95n; Dattaka , 667 ; Lankavatara 

, 656, 658, 664; Mimdmsa 427-8, 

661-2; Nidana , 638; Panini — -see 

also Panini, 116; Paramita- 664 \Pitaka, 

, 368, 370; Samavayanga , 497n; 

Sangiti , 374; Sankhyapravachana , 

424, 661; Sulba , 668; Tattvartha- 

dhigama , 663 ; Uttaradhyayana , 

494; Vaipulya , 664; Vaiseshika 

421-3; 660; Yoga , 426, 661; Aupa- 

pdtika—m ; Achardnga , 430, 435; 

Saddharma-Smrityupasthdna , 431, 

447; Vedanta , 421, 428-9 

Sutrakntanga, 474, 496 
Sutralamkara , 235-6, 373, 648 
Sutrasthana, 494 

Suttaianta) Mahaparinibbana, 707n, 711; 

Nipata , 579, 606n 

Suttasamgaha, 650 
Suttavibhanga, 366n 

Suvappabhumi, Subarpabhumi (Burma), 
435n; generic name for countries east of 
Bay of Bengal, 447n; merchants from 
Bharukachchha traded with, 71 ; Buddhist 
missionaries to, 86, 607, 765, 771; gold 
supply from, 434; one of principal ports 
in Mahaniddesa and Ptolemy, 771; Kin- 
lin (frontier gold) corresponds to, 774; 
merchants from Champa and Benares to, 
437 

Suvarnadvipa, 434, 772n 
Suvarnagiri, 10, 21, 29, 31 
Suvarnakudya Suvarmakudya, 73, 447 &n, 
774; Suvarnakudyaka, 448n 
Suvannakuta, 447n 

Suvarnakshi (father of Asvaghosha), 640 
Suvarnanabha, 667 
Suvarnaprabhasa, 376, 664 
Suvarna-rupyakadvlpa (island of gold and 
silver), 447-8n 

Suvisakha (Pahlava amatya of Rudra- 
daman), 131, 282, 348n 
Su-Wu, 774 

Suyamita, Suyamitasa, 134, 781; see also 
Suryamitra 
Suyasas, 43 
Svapakas, 468, 472n 
Svaphalka, 382 
Svapnavasavadatta, 640-1 
svasti-vachana, 604 

Svayamvara (form of marriage), 485, 646 


!§vetambara(s) (Jaina sect), 9, 82, 362-3, 651 
Svetavatalaya, 199 

Swat, R., 118, 344n, 702; valley, 184, 

341, 702, 715 
Syadvadamanjari, 410n 
Syama, 761 
Syr Daria R., 187 
Syracusan, 142 

Syrastrene, 349; see also Surashtra 
Syria, Syrian, king of, 141 n; Antiochus of, 
145, 162; imperial house of, 162; and 
Bactria, 148, 162; Emperor’s death, 163; 
and Eucratides, 163; Antiochus III of, 
188; emperors and Scythians, 187-8; 
Seleuclid money of, 783; Antiochus II of, 
26; Chandragupta’s diplomatic relation 
with court of, 27; Asoka disseminated 
Dhamma, 39; Arsaces’ revolt from, 146; 
emperor’s designs foiled by Arsaces, 146; 
Antiochus to re-establish suzerainty of, 
147 ; Antiochus went back to, 148 ; imperial 
house of, 162; Greeks, 187; em- 
perors, 148, 187-8; king, 162; 

princess, 162 

Ta-hia (Tokaristan), 226 ; stands for To- 
chari, 189n; people of, 188; indentified 
with Bactria and its people, 223 &n; 
identity with Tukharas, 764; and Saka 
migrations, 188; Yue-chi subjugated 
people of, 189; Yue-chi occupied, 189; 
Yue-chi expansion to ‘real’ capital of, 
223n; capital of, 188, 223; Yue-chi 
transfers royal seat to capital of, 223; 
occupied by Tochari, 223; Yue-chi 
principalities forming part of realm of, 
224; Chinese envoy to, 765-6; divisions 
of, 226 

Ta-li (Mahabala), 769; tali, 566 
Ta Tch’eng k’isin louen, 665n 
Ta-wan, 189 

Tagadur, 512, 527, 535, 537 
Tagaduryattirai, 537 
Tagara, 349, 434 

Takht-i-Bahi, 212, 228-30, 266, 702-4 
Takola, Takkola, 771, 774 
Takshaka, 379 
Takshasila, see Taxila 
taksha-sira, 119 
Taladhvaja, 799 
Talaing (records), 679n 
Talaiyalanganam, 509, 513, 531, 544-6, 
682 

Talai-yalamkadu, 545 
Talgunda, 300n 
Tamala, 772 
Tamali, 771 
Tamankaduva, 575 

Tambaparini, Tarhbapanni, Tarhbraparpi, 
Tambapamni, Tamraparni, Taprobane, 
border state of Asoka’s empire, 9, 26, 499; 
in Asoka’s inscriptions, 499, 574, 578n; 
Asoka speaks of his mission to, 86; Ceylon 



INDEX 


909 


known by this name, 9, 572n, 601; One- 
sicritus on, 598; in classical writings, 
574, 598; port of, 599, 771; in Mahdni- 
ddesa and Jatakas, 446, 572n; Asoka 
arranges for care of men and beasts 
of, 578; monks and nuns from, 369; 
location of, ‘145; visited by merchants 
in ship, 446 
Tamvati Nagari, 109 
Tamil-chudar-maniga ! ', 673n 

Ndvalar charitai, 529 

Varalaru, 504n 

Tamralipti, Tamluk, 71, 318, 43Sn, 705, 
849 

Tamraparni (Ceylon), see Tarhbapanni 

— , Tarhbraparni, R., 435, 499, 578n 

T’an-ko, 769 

Tan-mei-lieu, 776 

Tauala, 130 

Tanasuli, 114 

Tang period, 190n 

T’ang-yang, 774 

Tangana, 772, 797 

Tanjore, 499, 541, 545, 565 

Tankana, 764; see also Tangana 

Tantpur, 747 

tantrayuktis , 659 

Tantric symbols, 778n 

Tantrimalai, 571 n 

T’ao Huang, 775 

Taoist, 766 

tdpasd, 605 

tapas, 566 

Taprobane, 574, 59S-9; see also Tamba- 
parhni 

Taradraya (§aka clan name), 187 
Taranatha (historian), on: Chanakya & 
Bindusara, 19; Pushyamitra, 99; king of 
Gandhara, 148; Kanishka, 236; teachers 
of Vibhashika school, 374; Dharma- 
trata, 665; monastery in Tibet, 736; Tibe- 
tan historian on Buddhism, 148 
Tarhala, 805 
Tarim, R„ 14Sn, 225 
Tarka, 659 
Tarkikas, 659 

Tathagata, 765; see also Buddha 
Tathagatagarbha, 664 
guhyaka, 664 

Tathata, tathata (philosophy), 373, 664-5 
Tattvasamasa, 660 
Tavatimsa, 611 

Taxila, Takshasila, Takhasila, Takkasila, 
771; capital of Gandhara, 25; Ambhi of, 
1, 4, 118-20; surrendered to Alexander, 
119-20; Alexander’s satrap at, 1; Alex- 
ander at, 4,120; derivation and meaning 
of, 169; kingdom of, 119; presents to 
Alexander by king of, 777; Kautilya and 
Chandragupta in, 2; under Mauryas, 
10, 19, 21, 25, 28, 120; Mauryan pro- 
vincial capital & viceroyalty at, 10, 19, 
21, 28, 120; under Indo-Greek rulers, 
115 


102, 130-1, 199, 219, 341n, 655; Apollo- 
nius’ description of, 120, 214, 221; H. 
Tsang’s & Fa-hien’s visit & description of, 
120; under: Scytho-Parthians, 194-6, 

198-9, 200n, 205-7, 214-20; Aspavarma, 
215; Kushapas, 206, 217-18, 229-32, 344, 
370; Saka-satraps, 219-20, 265, 267, 

270-1; Idharasa, 219; administration of, 
217, 219-20; kumaras of, 28; Kunala as 
a viceroy of, 765; centre of learning, 
ascetics & philosophers. 2, 119, 634, 
653; language of, 653; Kumaralata of, 
648; religion of, 369-70; industry of, 433n, 
435n, 497; trade routes from and to, 
4J9; popularity of Sarvastivada school 
at, 369; Dion, an inhabitant of, 80; 
excavations at, 120, 206, 217, 220-1, 
229, 496-7, 638, 702, 710; remains at, 
456n; ivory play-dice of, 433u; articles 
discovered at, 435n, 497n; inscriptions of, 
25, i 94-6, 198, 207, 218-20, 229-31, 
255. 270-1, 370; coins, 120, 150n, 158, 
180, 206, 216-17, 219-20, 229, 341, 777-9, 
731-3, 788, 794, 800, pi. VI (11, 13); 
stupas of, 120, 184, 194-5, 497n, 713n, 
715, 719, 846; fire temple at, 221 ; apsidal 
shrines at, 719-20; viharas at, 720; brick 
built cities at, 710; architecture of, 220; 
sculpture of, 220, 701-5; terra-cotta centre 
at, 638, 702, 705; as a port, 771 ; centre of 
Gandhara school at, 702, 705 ; Gan- 

dhara, 195 
Taxiles, 129 
Tayafigannanar, 548 
layinippatti, 727 
•Tchen-t’afi, 236 
Tekirasi (ascetics), 275 
Teleas, 147-8, 188 
Telmhus, 177-9, 199 
Tem.tla, 771 

Ten Iclvlls, 508, 532. 551, 553 
Ten Tens, 504-5, 518, 525, 541 
Tentmalai, 725n 
Teradaran, 679 
Tervapmalaiyan, 511, 532 
Teu-kiu-li, 774 
Tevaniputra, 106 
thalaniyamaka, (land-pilots’*, 71 
Tharshish, 670 
Theodamas, 184n 

Theodorus, Meridarka (Meridarkh), 184, 
219 

Theodotus, 145 
Theophilus, 177-8, 785 
Theravada (Buddhist sect), Ceylonese chro- 
nicles on, 569; second council & rise of, 
83-4,366; Samantapasadika on, 568; 
Mahasena’s intolerance to bhikshus of 
sect of, 587; sect in Ceylon, 618-19; 
bhikshus reject Vaitulya Pit aka, 619; 
Great Elder of, 609 ; rituals and practices 
of, 620; influence of Vaitulyakas on 
bhikshus of, 620; inspiration & sectarian 



910 


INDEX 


tendency of, 83; association with Asoka 
or Buddha and other important persons 
of, 578; Pali-Buddhism of 678n; chief 

vihara of, 619; Buddhism, 617n, 569, 

578; —tradition, 619; Pali •, 366 

Theravadins, Theravadins, 83,587, 619, 679n 
Thomas Judas, Apostle, 211-12 
Thrace, 141 n 
Thulathana, 582, 625 

Thuparama ( chetiya ) 852; dagaba built at 
Nandanavana called, 622; established at 
Nandanavana & Mahameghavana, 613, 
622; grounds of Mahavihara extended 
from boundary of, 616; bhikshu-sahgha 
at, 582; influence of, 582; a carpenter 
killed Sahghamitta who came to destroy, 
587; Maheja to west of, 605; built by 
Devanampiya Tissa, 607, 610; Kat)i- 
rajanu "Tissa settles disputes on upastha- 
house of, 619; Pali verses of Dipavamsa 
composed at, 621; Dipavamsa on, 621; 
remains of, 852 
Tiao-Pien, 776 

Tiastenes, 281 ; see also Chashtana 
Tiberius (Roman emperor), 231, 444, 795 
Tibet, Wima extended rule up to corner of, 
231-2; spread of Buddhism into, 633; 
663; Kat antra circulated to, 636; works 
recovered from, 648; MatficheSa’s epistles 
preserved in, 648; monastery and Uni- 
versity in, 736; inscription, 231 

Tibetan historian, 148; borders, 189; 

translation of Vastimitra’s work, 366n; 

accounts, 367, 374 

T’ien-chu, 226, 230 

shan, 223, 225 

suen, 774 

t'en-tzu (Son of Heaven), 345 
Timarchus, 163 
tirachchhana, 614 
tirachchhanayoni, 61 1 
Tiravhanja, 266-7 
Tirtha-kalpa, 44 
Tlrthahkara(s), 93, 409, 412 
Tirukkoyilur (taluk), 531, 746n 
Tirumalai, 725n 

Tirumudik-kari, Malaiyaman, 531, 537 
Tirumurugarruppadai 508; see also, Mudu- 
garruppadai 

Tirunelveli (dist.), in Pandya country, 499; 
Mauryan invasion of, 501; Buddhagho- 
sha, a native of, 679n; natural caverns 
of, 724-5n; inscriptions, 516, 669 
Tirupati (hill), 498, 553 
Tiruvalur, 545 
TiruveJJajrai, 680 

Tisa, Aya Sura, 579; Lajaka , 582; 

Malu ■, 596; Ya(alaka , 589 

Tishya (Asoka’s brother), 19-20 
Tishya-gupta, 362n 
Tishyarakshita (Asoka’s wife), 43 
Tissa (king of Ceylon), 576, 580-1, 583, 617; 


Bahalamassu , 618; Bhatika— — ■, 

586 ; Brahmin , 582, 594, 601 , 6 1 6, 6 1 8 ; 

Devanampiya , Buddhism introduced 

in Ceylon during time of, 575, 608; Pali 
chronicles on, 575; date of accession of, 
575-6, 621-2; succeeds Mutasiva, 578; 
friendship with Asoka, 578, 606n; corres- 
pondence with Asoka, 578-9; 2nd conse- 
cration of, 578, 609; historicity of, 578; 
identity with Devanampiya maharaja, 
578; donations of wife of, 578, 609; 
adopted title from Asoka, 578, 592; 
Mahinda met by, 613; period from, 
621-2; brother of, 579-80, 589; account of, 
581; end of royal line traced to, 
585; title of, 588; Buddhist missionaries 
welcomed by, 606; religion of, 613; 
builds rock cells for missionaries, 606-7; 
builds buildings in Anuradhapura, 607; 
Thuparama built by, 607; builds chetiya 
for Mahinda, 609 ; Mahavihara connected 
with, 609, 613-14; stone pillar set up by, 
615n; Lohapasada built by, 615n; succes- 
sors of, 579, 610, 613; Gamani , 

582; Jettha , 587, 596; Kakavanna 

, 580-1, 589, 610; Kanirajanu , 

584, 619; Kapittha , 586, 592, 596, 

602, 616, 623; Kohan 620; Ku{aka- 

ijrja , 583-5, 592, 595, 616, 623; Lajaka 

, 582, 616, see also Tisa Lajaka; 

Lanja , 582-3, 589, 622-3, 852; Maha- 

daliya 618; Malu , 596; Moggali- 

putta , head of Buddhist Sahgha, 3 1 ; 

and Asoka, 31, 606, 649; Buddhist council 
called by, 83; great Elder of Thera vada 
sect, 609; propounded Abhidhamma Katha- 
vathu, 83; Mahinda learnt nikayas from, 
83; sends missionaries to different coun- 
tries, 86, 606-8; went to Yavana country, 
365; selects Greek elder Dharmarakshita 
for missionary work, 365; legends of, 607; 
Ceylonese legends on achievements of, 
608; pupil of, 649, see also Moggaliputta; 
sends Mahinda to Ceylon, 649; Saddha 

, 576, 582, 610, 613-16, 621; Sahgha 

-, 586; Sura , 579, 610; Suvanna- 

pipda , 579 ; Ussiliya , 620 ; Vanika- 

nasika , 581 , 585; Voharika— , 586-7, 

619; wood carrier , 584; Yasalalaka 

, 584-5, 592; Yattha laya , 580 

Tissamaharama (Mahavihara), 589, 595, 
610, 613 
Tivakka, 601 
Titiyan, 513 
Tittan, Mavan, 510, 518 
Tlvara (Asoka’s son), 20-1 
To-mu, 773 

Tochari, 189n, 223, 225; see also Tukhara 

Togai, 677 

Togar, 225 

Tokaipakarkku, 670 

Tokharistan, 764-5 



INDEX 


911 


Tolkappiyam, 543n; Tamil poem, 654; date 
and antiquity of, 672-3, 675; commen- 
tators on, 677; on: rituals and marriage 
ceremonies introduced by Aryans in S. 
India, 567; tumbai, 675; and Aindra 
grammar, 654 

Tolkappiyar, 672-3, 675-6, 681 
Tondaiyar, 548n 
Tondaiman, 536 

Tondi (port), 499, 513, 516, 525, 540, 674 

T'ong-hiu-sse, 770 

Tonkin, 770, 772, 775 

Tosall, 10, 21, 28 

Tra-kieu, 775 

Traigartas, Traigartayana (republican clan), 
122n, 341n 

Traikutakas, 323, 332-3 
Trakata-janapadasa, 110, 134; see also 

Trigarta 
Trapusa, 765 

Travancore, 442, 499, 727 ; Cochin, 540 

Trayanaga, 258 

Trayi, 654, 659; see also Vedas 

Trichinopoly, 499, 679n 

Trigarta (republic), 110, 122n, 134, 341 n 

Trikuta (hill), 332 

Tripetra, 543 

tridanda, 566 

Triparadisus, 140 

Tripitaka, Tipitaka, Kanishka appoints a 
body of Buddhist elders to collect variant 
texts on, 239; put to writing (Ceylon) in 
time of Vattagamani, 617, 649; date of 
its writing, 649; formation of Sanskrit, 

664; Sanskrit , 664 

Tripura, 522 
Tripurantaka , 746 
Tripuri, 134 
Trirasmi, 332 
triratna, 714, 847 
Trisala (queen), 456n 
Trivandrum, 499, 641, 747n 
Trivikrama, 551, 746 

mulavigraha, 746n 

Trogus, 171 

Pompeius, 145, 154, 160 

Tsiao-li, 372 

Ts'ien-Hau-shu ; date of, 188; on: tribal 
migrations, 188; Saka movements, 191; 
king of Ki-pin and his son, 204; Kushanas 
and Yue-chi, 223-4, 226 
Tsin (dynasty), 766, 770 
Tsin She-H(h)uang, 86, 766 
Ts’ong (range), 768 
Ts’ong-she, 775 
T’sung-ling, 237-8 
Tu-mi, 224, 226 
Tu-yuan, 772; Tuen-suen, 776 
Tukhara(s), 193n, 236, 374, 764 
Tulaja-lena, 719 
Tulu, 670 

Tun-H(h)uang, 188, 223, 767-8 


Tung T’ien-chu, 236-7 
Turamaya (Ptolemy II Philadelphus of 
Egypt), 26 

Turan, Turanian, 147, 251 
Turfan, 640 

Turkestan Chinese, 224, 631, 764; Eastern 

, 631-2, 767-70 

Turushka(s), 193n, 236, 243-4 
Tusharas, 193n, 475 

Tushasp(h)a (Yavana-raja, Asoka’s gover- 
nor), 28, 131, 282, 299 
Tus(h)ita (heaven), 377, 611, 614, 845 
Tuvarai, 528, 683n 
Tyriespes, 1 

U B a R k a d u, 519 
Uchh, 126, 129 
Udabhandapura, 267 
Udaipur, 288 

Udaka, lOln, 107, 133, 340n 
Udanavarga, 665 

Udaiyagiri, 111, 362, 692, 721-2, 848 

Udayana, 637-8, 641, 653, 753, 755, 852 

Uddehikas, 781 

Uddyotakara, 655 

Udehaki, 134 

Udlchya, 627 

Udipi, 550 

Udiyan, Perunjojru, 511, 518 
Udiyanjeral, 506, 517-19, 526, 675 
Udyana, 184, 191, 702 
udyanayatra, 490 
Ugrasena, 382 
Ujeni (UjjenI), 134, 573 
Ujjain, situation of, 278; Mauryan capital 
of Avanti at, 19, 341; Asoka as a viceroy 
at, 19; capital of Samprati at, 44; lost to 
Satakarni, 97; under Kshatrapas, 278; 
Nahapana’s headquarter at, 279; Maha- 
raja of, 334; Vikramaditya of, 360-1; 
Vikramaditya expelling invaders from, 

360-1 ; routes to and from, 438n; develop- 
ment of Sanskrit under Saka settlers of, 

639; Sudraka’s drama depicting a love 
story of, 641 ; Sakas rejuvenated splendour 
of, 634; Siva worship at, 403; coins of, 

341, 403, 781, 799, pi. VI (12); 

symbol, 322n, 781, pi. VI (10, 12), VII (2), 

VIII (4-5); see also Ujjayini 
Ujjayini, Mauryan provincial capital at, 10, 

28; Mauryan viceroyalty at, 21, 133, 341; 
kumara in charge of, 21, 28; Saka king 
of, 475n; satraps of, 280-7; capital of 
Gardhabhilla, 190; Kalaka brought the 
Sakas into, 190; Buddhist communities • 
in, 82; coins from, 133-4, 341; royal 
princess from, 287 ; see also Ujjain 
Ukkirapperuvaludi Pandya Kanappertanda, 

538-9 

Ulana (Mahadandanayaka), 346n 
Uma (deity), 168, 208, 245, 379, 404n, 790 
Umasvati, 663 
Umbarkadu, 521-2 



912 


INDEX 


Und, 240, 267 
undankal (cave), 500 
United Provinces, 780 

Upagupta ( guru of Asoka), 31, 82-4, 607-8, 
649 

Upanishad(s), 132, 378, 492, 634, 661; 
Bnhadaranyaka , 121, 131-2; Kena 


Uparaja Naga, 580 
upasampada (ordination), 83, 619 
upasthana (Hall of Audience), 1 1 
Upatisapasine, 630 
Upatissagama, 573 
Upavarsha (author), 661-2 
Upaveda, 668 
upayas, 63 

Upayakausalya-hridaya, 666 
upayuktais), 29-30 
Uposatha, 606, 614, 616 
Uppiliyappan ICovil (idol in), 746n 
Uragapura (md. Uraiyur), 679n 
Uraiyur, 510; Chola capital at, 499; location 
of, 679n; ancient Uragapura 679n; Tittan 
of, 518; battle at a village near, 524; 
poets of, 526-7, 547, 555; sablia, of, 532, 
556; Chola prince ol, 540; poem on siege 
of, 548; NalaiigiHi of, 549; siege of, 555; 
birth place of Buddhadacta, 679n; descrip- 
tion of city of, 730; assembly hall of, 731 
Urandai, 510-11,547 
Urasa (md. Hazara), 208 
Urattur, 510 
Urmila, 643 

Uruttirahgaijnanar Kadiyalur, 507, 544 
Uruvela, 573, 607, 609 
Usha, 757 

Ushavadata, son-m-law & general of Naha- 
pana, 273n, 279, 349-50, 723; forces of 
Nahapana led by, 128, 310; nationality 
of 273n, 310-11; religion and charities 


invasion of, 310-11; see also Rishabha- 


Ushkara, Ushkur, 244 
Uslnaras, 468 
Utara, 585-6, 589 
Uti, 579, 608n 
Utkala, 11 In 

Utpala (commentator on Brihatsamhita ), 
797 

Utpalim, 637 

Uttamabhadra(s), 128 & n 
Uttamadatta (king of Mathura), 108-9, 123n, 
134 &n 

Uttar Pradesh, 134, 237, 247, 258-60, 272 
Uttara, 86, 368 
uttarapatha, 71, 114n 
Uttarasaila, 366, 368 
Uttara-\ihara-Atthakaiha, 618, 621 
Uttiya, 576, 579-80, 608, 610 
Uvasaga ( dasao ), 465n, 494, 496 


Uvima Kavthisa, 196; see also Wema 
Kadphises 

V a c c h i p u T r a, 369 

Vachabhumikas, lyrajabhumikas), 30 

Vachakas, 651 

Vadathika, 721 

Vaddas, 571-2 

Vadha Pala, 687n 

Vadugar, 502-3, 548n 

Vadvgu (language), 553 

Vagramarega, 367 

vahai (tree), 522 

Vahaipperundurra 522; Vahaipparandalai, 
509-10, 537 

Vahika, 3, 116, 123, 473 
Vahiyaka, 721 
Vaibhashika, 374-5, 415 
Vaigai, R., 499, 517 
Vaihara (hiil), 707n 

Vaijayanta, VaijayantI (Banatasi), £0, 308, 
336n-7 

Vaikhdnasa, 469 
Vaikrintcka, 75 
Vairadeva, 721 


rairajya, i 
Vairochana, 81, 765 
Vairochani, 404n 

VaisalT, Sabbakami of, 83 ; routes connecting 
Kusinara and Rajagriha, 70; second 
Buddhist council at, 82-3; mcnks of, 83; 
community forming a different school at, 
83-4; governor Govindagupta of, 261; 
inception of Mahasanghika at, 367; 
Divyavaddna on, 494; terra-cotta centre 
at, 705-6 

Vaiseshika(s), 655-6, 659-60 
Vaishnavism, 82, 378-94, 417, 420; see also 
Bhagavatism 

Vaisravana, 80, 259, 261, 396, 605 
Vaitdhkas, 551 
Vaitarani, R., 436 
Vaitulyakas, 587, 619-20 
Vaitulyavada, 619-20 
Vaiyapuri, 508 
Vajapyayana, 662 

Vajheshka, Vajheshka, 243, 245-6; see also 
Vasishka 
Vajiraghara, 113n 
Vajiriya, 368 
Vajjians (Vrijjikas), 131 
Vajjiputtaka (sect), 618 
Vajra, 731 

Vajrachchhedika, 665 
Vajramitra (Suriga king), 101 
Vajrapurusha, 786 
\ajrasana, 240 
Vajrasena, 362 
Vajrasuchl, 657 
Vajrasvami, 362 
Vakana, 243 

\akatakas, 258-9, 261n, 329-21 



INDEX 


913 


Vakkula, 84 
Vakyapadiya , 636, 662 
Valabhl, 651 
Valakhilya (sages), 552 
Valana, 346n 

ValavamukhI (Yakshinl), 575, 577, 605 
Valavan, Kijli, 512-3, 532, 547-8 
Valvan, Perundiruma Kurappallittunjiya, 
546-7 

Valin (demon), 644 
Valiyon ( Baladeva ), 746 
Vallcls, 503 
Vahuvan, Nafijil, 538 
Valmiki, 641-2 
Valudi Maran, 546 
Valuraka, 313 
Vamana, 551 
VarnSd Brdhmana, 96 
Vamsadhara, R., 738 

Vamsatthappakasini, 580, 582n, 584n, 604n, 
621 

Vanan, 513 

vdnaprastha, 469, 661 

Vanaspara (Kshatrapa), 240, 272, 346n 

Vanavaramban, 513, 521, 525 

Vanavasa, Vanavasi 86, 334, 369, 519; 

see also Vaijayanti 
Vanga, 73, 369, 433-4, 771 
Vangapala (king of Ahichhatra), 106 &n 
Vani, R., 539-40 

Vafiji (managaram), 499, 513, 540, 547-S 
Vappaka, 595 
Varada, R., 96, 436 
Varadaraja (temple), 746n 
Varaha (hili), 707n 
Varahamihira, 134, 388, 797 
Varanasi, 707-8; see also Benares 
Vararuchi (Katyayana), 635-7, 653 
Vardhamana, Mahavira, 41 1 ; see also 
Mahavira 
Varhran II, 251 

Ill, 251-2 

vartta[s) (castes), 66, 68, 466 
Varshaganja, 660 
xarta, vatta, 8, 78, 131 
vdrttasastropajivinah, 124 
Vdrttikals), 382, 635n, 659; Vdrtika-kdras, 
635 

Varupa, 379 
Varupadata, 604 

Varunamitra (king of Panchala), 106 

(Gotiputra of Kausambi), 107 

Varvara, 764 

Vasabha, 585, 589, 595, 615, 623 
Vasashka, 243, see also Vasishka 
Vasat(is) (ayah), 3, 125, 128 
Vasavadatta, 637-8 
Vasishka, 236, 242 - 4 , 246, 345 
Vasishtha, 493, 512 

Vasishihiputra Pulumav(y)i [see pulamayi), 
47, 367 

Satakarni, see Satakarni 

Vaskushana, 242-3 


Vasu (sage), 111-2 

Vasu, see Vasudeva I, 248-9; Vasu Kushana, 
pi. VI (4) 

Vasubandhu, 377-8, 416, 418 
Vasudeva (founder of Kapva dynasty), 
102-3, 462n 

(deity), worship of, 383, 385, 393, 

403 ; origin and antiquity of cult of, 384, 
392; devotee of, 384; son of, 387-8; 
worshippers of, 379, 382, 384, 395; and 
Jainas, 390-1; as a man, 381; birth place 
& family of, 381, 389; son of Vasudeva, 
385; as a god, 382; fight with Kamsa, 382; 
weapon of, 799; brother of Samkarsana, 
382; identity with Heracles, 383; con- 
temporary of Aristanemi, 381; as king, 
381; Buddhist and Jain texts on, 379, 
381, 390-1; Papini on, 381-2, 384, 655; 
Patanjali on, 382; classical writers on, 
383; identified with Vishpu & Narayapa, 

383, 392; and Arjupa, 384; an incarnation 
of Vishpu, 384; one of virus, 384-5, 390; 
amalgamation with Narayapa and Vishpu 
worship, 393; fivefold aspects of, 385; 
and vyuha-vada, 385-8; in ins. of Helio- 
dorus, 387, 473; shrines of, 387; in ins. 
387, 655; worshipped by Satavahanas, 
320-1; worshipped by Kushanas, 474n; 

Krishna , 381-2, 384-6, 388; Arjuna 

, 382; Krishna, 379-80, 382-3&'n, 

384, 386, 388-9, 392-3, 420, 799; 

Vishpu, 389, 393; Vishpu , 393; 

Devadeva , 387, 393; Bhagavan , 

389; Para , 386; Vyuha , 386; 

Vishpu-Narayapa, 403; cult, 

384, 3S8-9, 392 

— ; — I (Kushapa king), 247-8, 402; succes- 
sion and date of, 247; religion of, 
474&n-5n; empire of, 247; lost control 
over eastern part of empire, 260-1; 
sovereignty confined to Mathura, 261; 
break up of empire and successors of, 
248-50, 792; sculptures dated to reign of, 
698; portrait of, 345; inscription, 234; 
coins, 225, 234-5, 246-9, 788, 794, 796, 
Ph VI (2) 

II, 248-50 

Vasudevabhaktas, 382 
Vasudevahindi, 653 
Vdsudevdrjuna, 382 
Vasudevism, 405 

Vasumitra(s) (theologians), 239, 366, 373-5, 
413,665 

(son of Agnimitra Sunga), 97, lOOn, 153 

Vasu-naga, 258 
Vasurata, 636 
Vata (Persian deity), 790 
VataSvaka, 119 

Vatsa (country), 73, 433-4, 724 
Vatslputrika, Vatslputriya (B. school), 366, 
369, 37 1 ; see also Vacchiputra 
Vatsyayana (author of Kamasutra), work of, 
299, 336, 667; Bhashya ol, 660; Sata- 



914 


INDEX 


vahanas in work of, 29 9; Kuntala 
Satakarni in work of, 336, 667; on: 
sixty-four fine arts, 436, 497; impure 
practices of women of Punjab and 
Saurashtra, 473 ; life of wife of Nagaraka, 
469, 479-80; position of ganika, 480; 
life of courtesans, 481 ; courtship, marriage 
rules and practices, 485-8 ; remarried 
woman in work of, 488 ; life of a Nagaraka 
in work of, 489-91; on food & drink of 
Nagaraka, 494; description of daily 
life of Nagaraka, 495; on toilet and 
personal hygiene, 495 ; list of professions 
in, 496; writers mentioned by, 667; 
influence of, 667; Kalidasa knows, 667; 

date & period of, 667; pre , 469; 

see also Kamasutra 
Vattagamapi, see Abhaya 
Vaiiakera, 663 
Vattajru, 513 
Vajuka, 584 
pa tulatantra, 400 

Vaydi (descendent of Panini), 634 
Vayudeva (Sunga king of Kosala), 105, 133 
Vayu Parana, lOOn, 257; see also Purdpas 
Veda(sj, 350; contents of, 428; nature and 
character of, 428; different branches of 
principal, 378; ritualism in, 378; un- 
popularity of religion of, 379; Vishnu of, 
392; duties not found in, 396; one of 
five systems, 397; on: sacrifices, 404; 
purification, 408; slavery as old as, 470; 
cultivated by Brahmins of S. India, 553; 
good rule promoted by knowledge of, 
555; ltihasa as additional, 654; language 
of, 634; discussions on meaning of, 662; 
period of, 668; Vyasa shaped, 672; 
literary tradition on art dating from, 757; 

latter , 396; fourth , 654; subsidiary 

, 667; Atharva , 394, 654; fifth 

, 647-8; Pig , 121, 125, 300, 404, 

576n; Sama , 638; Yajur , 300, 

311, 656-7; Yajus Sukla , 658 

Vedanga(s), 668 
yotisha, 668 

Vedfinta, 428-9, 633, 658, 660n-l, 664-5 
Vedantins, 420 
Vedasri, 351, 656 

Vedic religion, 87, 302, 320-1, 378, 565; 

texts, 378, 466; pantheon, 379; 

deities, 379, 392; Vishnu, 392; 

Rudra, 396; hymns, 405; 

study, 466; sacrifices, 87, 466, 534, 

565; language, 634; exegesis, 661 ; 

times, 103; seers, 404 

# Vedisagiri, 21 ; see also Vidisa 
Vedisiri, 303 ; see also Vedasri 
VejayantI, 312n; see also VaijayantI 
Vel-pula-arasar, 673 
Velapadal, 566 
Velir, 511, 673 
Velir Varalaru, 529n 
Vejiyan, Tittan, 511, 518, 527 


Vejlar, 499 
Vellerukkilaiyar, 510 
Veili vldiyar, 538, 543 
Veiur, 550 

Velusumana, Paramata, 581 
Vejvikudi, 544 
Vemaki, 135 
Vendidad, 139n 
Vengadam, 498, 548n 
Vengai-marpan, 539 
Vengi, 701 
Vengila, 736 

Venkanniyar Podumbil Kijarmaganar, 545 

Venko, German Mari, 538-9 

Venni Kovil, 509, 526, 538, 541, 544 

Vennikkuyattiyar, 542 

Vennippajandalai, 542 

Venus, 140, 547 

Verapatha, 771 

Verethaghna, veretraghna, (Vptrahan), 210, 
790 

Verpahjadakkaip-Peruv ijrar KiJJi, 510 

Vespasi, 241 

Vessagiriya, 583, 613 

Vessavana, 61 1 ; see also Vaisravana 

Vesunga, 771 

Vibhdsha (Sdstra), 375 

Vibhishana, 644 

Vibu-naga (Naga king), 258 

Vichchi, Vichchikkon, 530-1, 540 

Vichitravlrya, 645 

Vidarbha (Berar), usurped by Yajnasena, 
96; rightful heir to throne of, 96; Madhava- 
sena crossing frontier of, 96; war with 
Vidisa, 96; divided between Yajnasena 
and Madhavasena, 96; Sufiga influence 
over, 98; Agnimitra’s war with, 100; 
Satakarni I conquers, 302; Gautamlputra 
recovers, 312; Sata vahanas of, 329; 
Nagarjuna of, 665 
Videha(s), 131 

Vidisa, route through, 71; Agnimitraas a 
viceroy of, 96, 100, 339; war with Vidar- 
bha, 96; Suiigarulein, 102-3; passedunder 
Andhras, 102; successors of Pushyamitra 
ruled from, 364; stronghold of Haimavata 
school at, 369; Greek ambassador at the 
court of Bhagabhadra of, 387, 473; 
associated with Vasudeva-Kfishija cult, 
388; ivory workers of, 432; donations by 
Ivory workers of, 433n ; Buddhist missiona- 
ries from, 608; thiipas near, 623; Sinhalese 
script traced to, 623; Mahinda came to 
Ceylon from, 623; Barulamisa-gns/ifAf of, 
491; attracted arts and letters under 
Sungas, 634; Kalidasa on, 640; royal 
capital at, 640; coins, 781; ins. from, 
94, 180; see also Bhilsa 
Vidura, 645-7 
Viduratha, 390n 
Vidyadharas, 113, 502 
Vidyadharapuram, 740, 756 
Vidyddhari (Jaina Pakhu), 113n 



INDEX 


915 


Vidyamati, 242 
vidyasthanas, 659 
Vigrahavyavartani, 659, 666 

Vihara Abhayagiri, 587; Kanishka , 

369; see also Abhayagiri 
ViharadevI 580-1 
vihara-yatra, 21 

Vijaya (son of Srlnaga II of Ceylon), 586-7 
— — — (place name), 775 

(Purapic Andhra king), 324, 805 

(simha), 571, 573-6, 581, 609, 621 

Vijayadurga (Vizadrog), 308 
Vijayalaya, 550n 
Vijayamagha, 259, 262 
Vijayamitra (king of Kosala), 106, 133 

(vassal of Menander), 209, 219, 221, 

341n, 474n 

Vijayapuri (Ikshvaku epithet), 333-4, 754-5 
Vijayasena (son of Damasena), 273, 288-9, 
292, pi. VIII (8) 

Vijha (Vindhya), 313 
Vijitanagar, 581 
Vijnanavada, 415-6 

Vikrama Era, 128, 190, 212, 267, 640; 
see also Era 

sarhvat, 212, 230-1, 267, 271 


* — era, zj j 

Vikramaditya (Gardhabhilla of Ujjain), 
Saka dynasty uprooted by, 190; establish- 
ed Vikrama Era, 190, 640; and Kalaka, 
361; patron of Jainism, 361; converted 
by Divakara, 361 ; a shadowy figure, 361 ; 
stories about, 361; doubtful historicity 
of, 361 ; fame of, 652 ; tales connected with, 
653 

— (Chandragupta II), 361 

Vilivayakura, 3 1 4&n- 1 5 ; Gautamlputra , 

314n, 338, 352n, 805, pi. VIII (3); Vasish- 

thlputra , 314n, 338, 352n, 805 

Vimaka(s), 797, 800 
Vimalasuri, 651 
vimana(s), 615, 747n 
Vimanavatthu, 36, 615 
Vinaya, 83, 367 

Pitaka, 367-8 

Mahasahghika, 367 

samukase, 630 

Vinayaka, 658 
Vinayatthamahjusha, 809 
Vindhya (Vijha), 257, 282, 313, 329, 406, 
636, 652, 723-4 
Pradesh, 259 

Vindhyasakti (Vakataka king), 290, 329-30 
Vindhyavasin, 660 
Vindhya vasini, 379 
Vinpandayan, 546 
Viras 384, 390n 
Virabahu II, 61 7n 
Virabodhi (Virabodhidatta), 333 
Viradaman (son of Damasena), 288-9, 
292, pi. VIII (10) 

Viradha, 643 
Viralis, 561 


Viraihna, Virampaka, 322n 
Virapurushadatta, 287, 334, 475n 
Virasaivas, 398 
VIrasena, 148, 258-9 
Virasvarga , 558 
Virata, 496, 646-7 
Virataparva (of Mbh. ), 404 
VIravannan (Pallava), 300 
Virujha, 611 
Virupakkha, 611 

VIryakamitra, (Viyakamitra), 174, 264 &n, 
341n, 474n 
VIrayasa, 136, 256 

Visakha (deity), 245, 396, 406, 655-6, 790 &n 
Visakhadeva (king of Kosala), 105, 133 
Visakhapatnam, 736, 738, 741, 747 
viseshakas, 495 
Vishamasilalambaka, 654 
Vishpu (deity), 245, 383n; Garuda of, 
87; pillar with Garuda of, 87, 655; 
pillar by Heliodorus in honour of, 102, 
655; on seal of Huvishka, 245; thousand 
names of, 300, 647; worship of, 321, 
403, 522, 534, 565, 711; a Vedic God, 
379, 392; and: Bhagavata & Pahcharatra 
cult, 379; Vasudeva, _383, 389; 

incarnations of, 384; one of Adityas, 392; 
and Siva, 419, 420; Brahma springing 
from navel of, 419, 551; cult of, 420; 
tulasi garland of, 522 ; title identifying with, 
539; descendant of, 544; weapons of, 562; 
vyuha form of, 711; shrines dedicated to, 
730; iconographic concept of, 746; 

temple of, 746n-7n; on coins, 800; 

Vasudeva, 393; Vasudeva , 389 

( Sutra writer), 656; see also Sutras 

Vishpudata, Vishpudatta, 474n 
Vishnudatta, SakanI, 286, 332 
Vishpudeva, 135 

Vishpugopavarman (Pallava king), 261 
Vishnukada, (Vishpukadda), 337-8 
Vishnukupdin(s), 300, 330&n 
Vishpumitra (king of Panchala), 103, 106, 
134-5, 389, 800 
Vishpupalita, 321 
Vishpu Purana, see Puranas 
Vishnusahasranama-stotra, (AT, 656 
Vishpuvriddha (name of gotra), 330 
vishti (forced labour), 283 
Visnvaksena, 382 
Visishtadvaita, 420 
Vispamitra, 135 
Vissakamma, 611 
Visunga, 772; see also Vesunga 
Visva Jhopri, 721 

Visvamitra, 135, 296n, 642-3, 668, 798 
Visvapala, 135 
Visvasena, 290-2 

Visvasirhha, 273, 289-90 &n, 292 
Visvavarman, 286, 332, 474n 
Vitandavada, 619 
Vitasoka (brother of Asoka), 608 
Vitihotras, 5 


S 

% 



916 


INDEX 


Vivasvan, 392 

Viyakamitra, 174, 209, 219, 264&n; see also 
VIryakamitra 
Viyalur, 523 

Vizadrog, 308; see also Vijayadurga 
Vizago, 790; see also Visakha 
Vo-canh, 774-5 

Vonones I, 135, 192-4, 201-3, 205, 343-4n, 
787 

II, 192 

Vraja, 30, 58; — — bhumi, 30 

vrata (vow), 1 1 

Vratyas, 627 

Vfiddhavadi, 361 

Vfijis, Vjijjikas, 54, 131 

vrikshakas, 700 

Vfishabha (hill), 707n 

Vrishadhvaja, Gautamlputra, 406 

Vfishpi(s) 380-2, 384-5, 390 & n, 655, 799 

Kshatriyas, Rajanyagatta 342, 797-800 

Viras, 384-8 

Vrittisiitra, 63 5n 
Vudhika, 474n 
Vyadhapura, 773 

Vyadi, 634-5, 637, 662; see also Vaydi 
Vyaghragumpna, 721n 
Vyaghra-naga, 258 

Vyasa, a son of Satyavatl, 645; founder of a 
school, 421; philosophical Sutras of, 421, 
661; Badarayana identified with, 428; 
Vedanta-sutras ascribed to, 428; and 
Valmiki, 642; author of epic, 642, 645; 
shaped Vedas, 672- sons of, 645; advises 
Arjuna to worship Siva, 646; incarnations 
of, 653 

Vyavahara, 658 
Vyiiha, 385-9, 711 

W a k h a n, 226, 764 
Wang Mang, 772 
Wardak, 244, 246, 367 
Wauchope, 719n, 721 n 
Wei (dynasty), 191, 769-70 

Northern, 190n 

Wen-chung, 204 
Western Ghats, 527, 742 
Wou-ti-lao, 204 
Wu (dynasty), 769-70 

Emoeror, 772 

Sun, 188, 223 

ti (Han), 766 

Yi, 768 


Xandrames (Agrammes), 121 
Xathri, 128 
Xerxes, 187 
Xvaranah, 266n 


Y a b g u, Yamga, 183, 218n, 227-8n, 230 
Yadavas, 646 
Yadu (race), 132 
yaga, 679 

Yajnasri (Satakarpi), 656, pi. VIII (5); 


see also Satak^rni 
Yajiiasena, 96 

Yajnavalkya (Smriti- writer), 419; also 
author of a treatise on yoga, 661 ; works 
of, 143; hypothetical character of doctrine 
of, 470; growth of civil law in, 657; uses 
Manu and Kautilya, 658; and: Manu, 
658; Bfihaspati, 659; devaluates 
Arthasastra, 666; on: kashapana, 780; 
purdna (coin), 143, 778; Sudras, 465-7; 
jatyutkarsha & jaiypakarsha, 470; de- 
rivative castes, 466-7 ; rise & fall in caste 
status, 469-70; slavery, 471; position of 
woman, 475-80 ; marriage rules & practices, 
481-3; niyoga, 488; food & drink, 491-3; 
rules for body-purification, 495; Vishnu- 
dharmasutra drawing heavily on, 656; 
occupations of Vaisya, 437; guilds, 451-3; 
interest, profits and wages, 453-5 
Yaksha (s) Yakkha (s), yaksha (s); story in 
Divyavadana, 151n; mythical beings, 379; 
non-human beings, 572 ; ill-disposed human 
beings, 612; not harmful beings, 611; 
image of Heracles identified with, 383; 
Pushyamitra’s war with Krimisa, 364; 
expelled by Buddha, 571, 573, 612; Vijaya’s 
war with, 571 ; cults of, 572, 605; worship 
of, 605, 611; andBuddhism,611-12; ruler 
of, 611; Pali commentaries on, 572; 
statues & images of, 93, 383, 687-8, 691, 

693-8, 714, 754-5, 847, 849, 

Ratakhi, 605; Chitrariija, 577;— cults, 

572, 605; Kalavela, 575, 587, 605; 

Manibhadra, 695 

yakshim(s), Yakshi(s), YakshinI (s), early 
Ceylonese tracing descent from, 571; 
worship of, 577, 605; residing deity of 
Nagarahara, 341n; on coins, 341n; statues 
& images of, 93, 687-8, 691, 693-8, 700, 

849, 852; Sudarsana , 687, 845; 

Valavamukhl, 577, 605;— Kevepi, 571 
Yak (dist.), 580, 596 
Yama, 379, 552 
Yamuna, R., 383n 
Yange-t’se (valley), 767 
Yasa, 607-8, 765n 
Yaska, 131, 649, 656 
Yasodaman I, 285, 288 
Yasomati, 107-8 
Yatia, 228n, 344; see also Yabgu 
Yaudheya (s), 110-11, 255-6; Kshatriya war- 
rior tribe, 110, 249; mentioned by Panini 
110, 342; territory of, 110, 125, 249, 255, 
346; withstood Saka attacks, 111, 125,255; 
centre of. 111; overthrow Kushanas, 111, 
249, 255-7; gana form of republic, 125, 
255, 342, 346; constitution of, 125, 346; 
on Beas (R), 124-5; Alexander did not 
cross frontier of, 125; period of rule of, 
125, 249, 256, 342; war with Rudradaman, 
125, 255, 282; Junagad inscription on, 
255, 282; religion of,' 125, 256, 346; 
connected with Trigartas, 134; titles of 



INDEX 


917 


• heroes of, 255; subdued by Samudragupta, 
256; and Arjunayanas, 257; modern 
representatives of, 125; seals of, 125, 
255-6, 346; coins of, 110-11, 125, 128, 
249, 254-6, 342, 346, 796-800,pls.VII (10), 

VIII 0-2); jay a , 256; gana, 125, 

pis. VII (10), VIII (1-2) ; ganasya jaya, 

255, pi. VIII (2); dnam jayamantra- 

dharanam, 255 
Yava, Yavadvipa, 771,776 
Yavana (s), 467, 764; forming army of 
Chandragupta & Malayaketu, 4; king 
as Mauryan governor, 28, 131, 472; 
Patanjali on, 95, 153, 475, 638; Hari- 
varhsa on, 190n; Saketa and Madhyamika 
besieged by, 95, 97n, 153, 635; foreigners, 
(Greeks, Persians) referred to as, 28n; 138; 
amalgamation with Indians & Indianisa- 
tion of, 138, 221, 308, 473, 475; kings of, 
151-2, 170 & n— 1, 180, 183, 202, 635; 
fight with Sufigas, 153; Greek rulers in 
period of expansion of, 169; royal houses, 
177; diplomatic relation with king of, 
180; rule in Kabul,183; nature, status and 
character of, 472n-3; Mbh. on, 151, 
170, 475; Indian texts cn, 153, 168, 186; 
Kalidasa on, 153; Yuga-Purdpa and 
Cdrgi Sariihitd on, 153-4, 156, 472; 
in Surastra, 308; limit of expansion of, 
154; internecine strife among, 1 68 ;coins of 
rulers of, 181, 202; transference of power 
to fiakas, 181; king supplanted by Ku- 
shapas, 183; culture of, 221; havoc on 
Indian society brought by, 472; foreign 
wines imported in bottles of, 554; regarded 
as Sudras, 475; captured by Chera king, 
519; Tamil literature on, 554, 680; Mul- 
laippattu mentions, 508; contact with 
Tamil countries, 516; as Kshatriyas, 
475; scents, 496; country converted to 
Buddhism, 365; monks from land of, 369; 
settlement beyond and in India, 471-2; 
settlement in Asoka’s ins., 471-2; visited 
Mauryan courts, 472; and Sakas, 186, 
189-90; became adherents of Indian reli- 
gious systems, 221 ; satrap under great 
king of, 264; donors in inscriptions, 341 & 
n, 473 & n-4n; ant as in dominion of, 27; 
articles of, 724; traders, 674 & n, 723; 
Musiri frequented by, 674; establish 
colonies and emporia on coast, 723; 
destroyed by Gautamlputra Satakarr.i 

275, 277, 308; raja, 131, 473;— 

woman in harem of S. India, 723; 

guards in palace of S. Indian 723; 

carpenters in Tamil country, 724; Buddhist 

, 308 

Yavani (s), 639 
Yavanika, 639 
Yajati, 637, 641 
Ye-tiao, 776 
Yellow, R., 238 

Yemkao-chen, 226, 228, 230-2, 238 
116 


Yertagudi, 629 
Yi-Iu-mii, 772 
Yin-mo-fu, 204 
Yodheyanam, 798 

Yoga, 658-60; ashtanga , 661; , 

Yajnavalkya, 661 
Yogdck.dra, 376-8, 415-16, 418, 660 
Yogachara-vijnanavada, 664 
Yogasana, 800 
Yogayajnavalkya , 661 

Yona (s), 131; in Asoka’s ins., 25, 380,764; 
identified with Greek colony of Nysa, 
25, 117; Buddhist mission to country of’ 
86; Alasanda of, 172; king Antialcidas’ 
180; non-existence of Brahmanas & 
Sramanas among, 380; settlement and 
country of, 471, 765; garden of, 604; 

king, 180; Dhammarakhhita, 765 

Yonaka (Greek) 172, 342n 
Yonaki, 204 

Yonamahadhammarakkhita (Thera), 117 
Ysama, Yasamotika , 274, 280 
Yu-t’ien, 764 
Yuan-ti, 204 
yuddhakathd, 614 
Yudhishtfiira, 493n, 645-7 
Yue-chi, original homeland & country of, 
189, 223, 766; in Indian texts, 193n; 
Scythians driven out of Sogdiana by, 167, 
188; Hermaeus to protect against, 182; 
Greek suzerainty over Bactria destroyed 
by, 186; and Sakas, 186, 188-9, 193n, 
223-5; Chinese annals on, 188, 224; 
defeated by Hiung-nu, 188-9, 244; became 
master of Ta-hia, 188, 224; on north of 
Oxus, 188; movements of, 189, 223n-6; 
conquest of Kapisa, 189; conquest of 
Bactria, 189, 191, 223; and Scythians, 167; 
branches of, 188-9, 223, 229; kings and 
princes, 204, 226; and Kushanas, 223-6, 
228, 766; subjugated by Wu-Sun, 223; 
and: Kidara-Kushapas, 252; Gadahara 
tribe, 253 ; royal seat of, 223 ; identical with 
Tochari, 223, 225; expansion of power of, 
223n; division of land of, 224, 226; 
culture of, 225, 253; principalities of, 
226; king of Pataliputra vanquished 
by, 237; empire in Oxus valley, 766; 
friendly relation with China, 766; court 
visited by Chang-kien, 766; E. Turkistan 
under influence of, 267; scholars, 768; 

Great (Ta) , 189, 224, 226; Little , 

189, 223, 225, 252-3; Kusha 225; 

merchants trading with Malaya, 447n 

Yuga-purana 95, 98-9, 112; see also Puranas 
yuktas, 29-30, 36, 39 
Yuktisatika, 666 
Yung-kiu, 204 
Yunnan, 766-7, 770 

Yusufzais, (country and people), 118, 212, 
702 

yuvaraja, 29 

Yuvaraja, II (of Kalachuri dynasty), 673 



918 


INDEX 


Vwang-tsie, 772 

Z a b a g (Maharajas of), 502 

Zakar, 243 

Zeda, 237, 240, 267 

Zeionises, 220, 266-7, 343, 787, 808, pi. IV 

(9) 

Zeus (deity), Dionysus grew in thigh of, 117; 
not a city deity of Kapisa, 199n; on coins 
of: Seleucids, 142, 144; Diodotus II, 
146-7; Indo-Greek rulers, 156-7, 164-5, 
167, 169, 180-2, 783, 785, pi. II (1-4); 


Scythians and Parthians, 183, pi. Ill (9-11), 
pi. IV (5), 199-203, 209, 214-17, 2S6; 
-Indra, 165&n 

— Nikephorus, 167, 182, 199, 205, 214, 

216-17 

— Promachos, 145n 

Zoilus, 135, 177 

Dikaios, 178 

Soter, 178 

Zoroastrian, 240, 245, 789, 791 
Zydri (of Ptolemy), 129 




tiiniiVfj of S 

•- J .i. 

QmtUters 

Unit 





**A book that is shut is but a block ” 

VtfLOLOo 

& Ht 

GOVT. OF INDIA , 'O. 

/«y Department of Archaeology yA 

& NEW DELHI. rw 

U £ 

Please help us to keep the book 
clean and moving. 


S. B., mb. N. DELHI. 



