

CULTURAL 

ARYANS 


CONTACTS BETWEEN 
AND DRAVIDIANS 




CULTURAL CONTACTS BETWEEN 
ARYANS AND DRAVIDIANS 


ooc 

by 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 




MANAKTALAS : BOMBAY 




P. C. MANAKTALA AND SONS PRIVATE LTD 
6 Fair Field, Road No. 4, Churchgate, Bombay-1 


First Published 1967 


© Department of History, Patna University, 1967 




- *4pr r* ,? 

, = t i. 


Ssn 


4 jl & ft ♦ * *> ft v '.'***1 j 


S3 64 4 
2_ 7 v 2 - 9 r 

30 \ * 0 


* <g * t. & 4 ^ ^ ^ 


1A\\ 


PRINTED IN INDIA BY KRISHNA S‘ KURWAR AT MOHAN MUDRANALAYA* 
ACME INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, SEWRI BUNDER ROAD, SEWRI (EAST), 
BOMBAY 15 AND PUBLISHED BV JAYANT MANAKTALA FOR P. C. 
MANAKTALA AND SONS PRIVATE LTD, 6 FAIRFIELD,. ROAD NO.. 4* 
CHURCHGATE, BOMBAY- 1 



Foreword 


The contents of the present book represent four lectures 
delivered in 1964 under a scheme for teaching and research 
in the Early History of Peninsular India in the Depart- 
ment of History, Patna University. These have been made 
possible by a grant sanctioned by the Bihar State Univer- 
sity Commission, whose Deputy Chairman Shri K. S. V. 
Hainan initiated the scheme. We were fortunate in having 
Professor K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, the foremost authority on 
the subject, for the first series of these lectures, which 
discuss the nature of the social, religious and linguistic 
-contacts between the Aryans and the Dravidians. Professor 
Sastri not only revaluates recent studies on the origins of 
the Aryans and Dravidians but also throws light on the 
formation of the Indo-Aryan society. Throughout these 
lectures the Aryans and Dravidians do not appear as dis- 
tinct racial groups but represent different languages and 
cultures. It is hoped that the book will stimulate younger 



FOREWORD 


scholars to follow up and extend this study on new lines* 
including the investigation of material and technological 
contacts between different regions and peoples in the 
country. 

It is a pity that on account of his failing eyesight it has 
not been possible for Professor Nilakanta Sastri to see these 
lectures through the press, which has been done by Dr 
(Mrs) Suvira Jaiswal and Dr D. N. Jha. I wish to thank 
them. 

Department of History 

Patna University R. S. oHARMA 

SI May 1967 


§ vi § 



Contents 


Foreword 

CULTURE CONTACTS 
THE ARYAN PROBLEM 
THE ARYANIZATION OF 

SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS 
IN SOUTH INDIA 

Index 


INDIA 

SYNTHESIS 




Culture Contacts 


Prefatory 

The subject for these lectures suggested by Professor 
R. S. Sharma is “Cultural Contacts between Dravidians 
and Aryans”. You know that in South India it is at the 
moment of great topical interest. Who in all India has 
not heard of the D.K . 1 and D.M.K . 2 and their aims and 
activities in the political and social field? Even other- 
wise, the subject is one of great academic interest, though 
a very complicated one, and an attempt at a proper com- 
prehension of these relations is fundamental to a fruit- 
ful understanding of the story of Indian Civilization. 

It is wellknown that in all countries of the world a 

1 Dravida Kazhagam. 

2 Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam.' 


DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


certain polarity develops between north and south owing 
to differences in the physical and climatic conditions 
between widely separated latitudes of the earth. In India 
this polarity has been accentuated by differences in lan- 
guage and culture which have persisted through the ages, 
and by some modern assumptions and identifications of 
an unfounded character. Notable among such facile as- 
sumptions are the ideas that the North of India is Aryan, 
Brahmin and Sanskrit while the South is Dravidian, non- 
Brahmin and Tamil (Dravidian). This derives some 
plausible support from etymology, because Ayyar, Ayyan- 
gar, etc. which are suffixes to Brahmin names are all 
derivatives of Arya. It will be the aim of these lectures to 
demonstrate that the truth is much more complex than 
the assumptions just noticed which have become articles; 
of faith among some propagandists. 

The use of Aryan and Dravidian as racial terms is un- 
known to scientific students of anthropology. When Max 
Miiller found that some of his earlier writings on Indo- 
European philology had been misunderstood and people 
began to talk as if an Aryan race exisited, he took great 
care to deprecate the inference of race from language,, 
and said that an Aryan race had no more real existence 
than a brachycephalic language. But, as often happens, 
this warning went unheeded, and several decades later 
Julian Huxley, among others, felt the need to repeat and 
underline it. In an essay on "Eugenics and Society” (No. 2 
in his Uniqueness of Man, 1941) he said : "In the practical 
handling of every so-called racial problem, the error 
seems invariably to have been made of confusing genetic 
with cultural factors* The former alone could legitimately 
be called racial; but indeed the very term race disinte- 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


grates when subjected to modern genetic analysis. The 
net results are: Firstly , that it would be best to drop the 
term race from our vocabulary, both scientific and popu- 
lar, as applied to man; and secondly , and more impor- 
tantly, for our present purpose, that until we equalize 
envii'onmental opportunity, by making it more favourable 
for those less favoured, we cannot make any pronounce- 
ments worthy to be called scientific as to the genetic diffe- 
rences in mental characters between different ethnic 
stocks.” This caution is often neglected with disastrous 
practical results as witnessed in the Herrenvolk theory 
and its consequences and the Dravidian secessionism cf 
the D.M.K. in India. 

The force of Huxley’s warning and its supreme neces- 
sity are underlined by another consideration. There is 
little direct evidence available on the beginnings or the 
history of racial’ differentiation, and anthropologists 
depend largely on recent and current anthropometrical 
data for their conjectures on the races of men five, six or 
seven thousand years ago. And no two scholars agree in 
their inferences and conclusions. 

But these uncertainties and tentatives of science have 
not invented the growth at times of extreme ‘race con- 
sciousness’ among modern peoples, which exhibits itself 
in many forms and lead to much pseudo-scientific 
research. Some of the Tamils claim, for instance, that 
the Tamil land was the original home of man and civiliza- 
tion (P. T. Srinivasa Iyangar), a claim which flies in the 
face of modem archaeology as represented by Leakeys 
work in E. Africa and that of other archaeologists in Pales- 
tine and the Fertile Crescent. They are tempted to treat 
legend as history and link the chronology of the Sahgam 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


period with the geological postulate of Lemuria and thus 
seek to establish hoary antiquity for the Tamil language 
and culture; but the story of the three Saiigams which 
flourished at long intervals for about ten thousand years 
and includes among the members of the Sangams some 
divinities of the Hindu pantheon, this story is not heard 
of earlier than in the commentary on Iraiyanar Ahappoml 
which may be of the eighth or ninth century a.d. at the 
earliest. The wide gulf between the ten thousand years of 
the literary legend and the hundreds of millions of years 
of the geological ages is silently passed over from the 
heights of their credulity. They claim further that the 
Indus Valley Civilization of Harax>pa and its script are 
the creations of Tamils and have been strongly supported 
in this by the work of the late Rev. H. Heras, S- J. whose 
speculations on this subject have been practically ignored 
by the world of scientific scholarship. Again, they have 
not hesitated even to claim that some at least of the Vedic 
tribes like the Bharatas (in fact one of the most important 
among them) were also Tamils 3 though there is not a 
shred of evidence for this quixotic view. 

Scope of these Lectures 

A proper approach to the problems of our study in these 
lectures involves, first of all, a lively ’ regard for the ac- 
cumulating evidence from modem archaeology which, in 
recent years, has developed into a multi-faced discipline, 
yielding data and conclusions much more reliable than 

3 N. S. Kandiah Pillai, Tamilar Charitam (Madras: Orrumai 

Office', 1939). ' 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


the evidence from literature, folklore and so on. Secondly, 
it involves a systematic revaluation in the light of new 
ideas and evidence of the linguistic and literary data, 
which were often all that was available in the last century, 
and of the older theories based on them. This is indeed 
an extensive and difficult task, much beyond the capacity 
of the present speaker who has been mainly a historian 
with a nodding acquaintance with allied disciplines. He 
can only deal with some aspects of the problems in a 
general way and perhaps indicate some lines of further 
work. 

We use the terms Aryan and Dravidian in these lec- 
tures as convenient short descriptions of the languages 
and the cultures they carry, always with the reservation 
that no ethnic implications are involved. We shall also have 
to consider some factors of the pre-Dravidian epoch, and 
at some points our discussion may have to take a general 
account of the differentiation between North and South. 

Recent History of the Subject 

Throughout the nineteenth century and well into the 
twentieth, the prevalent view of ancient Indian history 
tended to glorify the Aryans and their Rgvedct, and treat 
the whole of Indian culture and civilization as their gift. 
H. R. Halfis suggestion put forward in his Ancient History 
of the Near East that the Sumerians may have been of 
Indian (Dravidian) origin was received with considerable 
scepticism. The discovery of the Indus Valley civilization 
in the twenties of the present century brought a great 
change, and linked pre-historic India, at least the North- 
west, more clearly with Western Asia and Eastern Mediter- 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


xanean than ever before. Since then, there has been a 
strong reaction which stresses the pre-Aryan elements in 
India’s culture and apparently goes a little too far in this 
direction. There have also been attempts to get behind 
the Dravidian stage of pre-Aryan and identify a pre-D'ra- 
vidian, particularly by the French school of philologists 
represented by Przyluski, Sylvain Levi, Bloch and others, 
and some of their main contributions were collected and 
translated by the late Dr P. C. Bagchi and published as 
a book Pre-Aryan and Pre-Dravidian in India, issued seve- 
ral years ago by the University of Calcutta. This new 
development was subjected to a critical review by A. B. 
Keith in Appendix G to his Religion and Philosophy of 
the Veda (1925), and his conclusion was stated thus: “We 
may readily believe in pre-Dravidian language and reli- 
gion or even political organization as affecting the same 
phenomena among the Vedic peoples, but we still lack 
strict proof” (p. 433). But this estimate of Keith greatly 
underrates the results reached by the French school, and 
I think that J. H. Hutton is more balanced in his critique. 4 
He refers to Beers Zoological law that the most widely 
spread species in space are also the most widely spread in 
time, and points out that the Austro-Asiatic group, to which 
Munda and other languages belong, is most widely spread 
in the world — from Punjab to New Zealand, from Mada- 
gascar to Eastern Islands, and may well be pre-Dravidian. 
He thinks that some Munda group tribes survived the 
Dravidian thrust and became directly Aryanized while 
others became Dravidianized later by a Dravidian move- 
ment from the south in the post-Indo-Aryan period. The 

4 Census of India , 1931, I. i, para 154, 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


southern limit of the Munda group cannot be decided till 
the tribal dialects of the South have been fully analysed. 
They must be taken to have prevailed in the Deccan at 
one time if we accept Przyluski’s derivation of the names 
Satavahana and Satakarpi from Munda Sadam, horse, 
hapan y son, and kon, son . 5 Munda has affinities with 
speeches in South East Asia and Pacific on the one side, 
and with the agglutinative Sumerian language to the west. 
How exactly it came to India is uncertain. Hutton postu- 
lates a common original home in Central or South East 
Asia, while Sylvain Levi and others favour an oceanic in- 
trusion into India. The latter point to culture traits of 
eastern origin like the outrigger canoe , 6 cocoanut palm, 
the shouldered celt, etc. The tribal traditions of the Kha- 
sis and other Assamese tribes are also apparently of 
eastern origin. But we are not much concerned with the 
pre-Dravidian and need not pursue the subject much fur- 
ther. We must be, however, aware of the uncertainty in 
the range of influences exerted on Indo-Aryan by Dravi- 
dian and pre-Dravidian elements. 

Migrations 

Most probably both Dravidians and Aryans came into 
India not all at one time, but in a series of waves separat- 
ed by varying intervals of time, and Professor J. Burrow 
of Oxford has suggested that the Vedic speech was in- 
fluenced not by the Dravidian languages of history as we 
"know them, but by an earlier form, a sort of proto-Dra- 

> 5 JRAS 1929, p. 273 ff. 

6 Homell, Indian Boat Designs , Memoirs, ASB VII, 1920. 

§ 7 § 


DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


vidian which long preceded them as well as the Aryan 
advent into India. 7 This postulates that Dravidian speech 
of some kind, primitive or proto — as we may describe it, 
at some remote past prevailed all over India including 
the northwest, and this general belief in the wide spread 
of Dravidian in India is held by many scholars still. As 
against this, however, is the view of Professor Fiirer Hah 
mendorf and others that the Dravidians were at no time 
spread over a wider area than we find them in historical 
times, that the mutations of Vedic speech and grammar 
are better explained by contacts with Austro-Asiatic spee- 
ches than with Dravidian, and that the presence of Bra- 
hui in Baluchistan does not necessarily imply the preva- 
lence of Dravidian along the land route from Western 
Asia into India, and may be explained as due to coloniza- 
tion from the south in relatively recent historical times. 

Chronology 

Turning for a moment to chronology, the peak of Harap- 
pan civilization is now placed generally between 2500 and 
1500 b.c. Despite some feeble conjectures put forward by 
stray scholars to the contrary, this civilization must be 
taken to have been definitely and essentially pre-Vedic in 
its character and development, though the nature of its 
contact with Vedic civilization and the results of the con- 
tact are still questions beset by considerable uncertainty. 
The idea once held that this contact was direct and the 
Aryan impact violent and that the Indo-Aryan god Indra 

7 lndo-A$ian Culture, April 1960, "Sanskrit and the pre-Aryan 
Tribes and Languages” (esp. pp. 338-39). 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


Purandara was the destroyer of Harappa and Mohenjo 
Daro no longer finds favour. It is now seen to have been 
an unwarranted simplification of much more complex pro- 
cesses. New archaeological evidence is accumulating that 
goes to show that the Indus Valley culture may have de- 
clined much before the Aryan advent, and that in the rest 
of India there were other cultures more or less contempo- 
rary with the Indus Valley culture at least in its latter 
phases, say from 2000 b.c.; we are not, however, yet able 
to correlate this new evidence with the language families 
involved. Round about 1200 b.c. is the date usually as- 
sumed for the Aryan advent into India. The Aryans are 
supposed to have brought in a type of pottery designated 
by archaeologists 'Tainted Grey Ware”; this correlation 
was put in some doubt by some recent C. 14 tests, but we 
have been told again that further tests actually confirm 
the date which has become "traditional.” The evidence 
from Asia Minor, Boghaz Koi, c. 1400 b.c., does not con- 
tradict this though writers have differed on its exact sig- 
nificance as we shall see presently. 

Our plan is to discuss first Dravidian and Aryan sepa- 
rately indicating the circumstances of their entry into India 
and then illustrate the results of their contact in India 
with the aid of typical instances from the different spheres 
of life. The time for systematic or exhaustive study of the 
questions involved is not yet come. 

Dravidian 

It is often said, at least in South India, that the term 
Dravidian is a gift of Bishop Caldwell to modern Indian 
linguistics; this is not correct, though it is a fact that he was 

§ 9 § 

c-2 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


the first to apply the term to a group of allied languages. 
In earlier times Dravida was synonymous with Tamil. 
The great writer in Mimamsa, Kumarila, (eighth century 
a.d.) in his Sloka vdrtika (on 1.3.5 on the Mimamsa 
Sutras) mentions that Aryans sanskritized mlecha words 
by adding suitable vowels to consonantal endings, and 
gives as examples : cor oclanan ityukte corapadavdkyam 

kalpayanti; likewise citcir atom eva panthd; pump papa; 
mala (satya) iruitd; vair (udara) vairi — saivasya ksudhitasya 
akdryapravartandt . He adds that similar vocables may be 
found in Parsi, Berber, Greek and Roman. The seman- 
tics is all wrong, but the philological range of the remarks 
is notable for Kumarila’s time in India. They also sug- 
gest the possibility that Dravidian (Tamil) may also be 
regarded as one of the Prakrits of India, a view which 
occurs off and on in some later indigenous writings also. 

In times much later than Kumarila’s the term Pan- 
cadravidas came into use to describe Brahmins of five 
groups which included Kannada, Telugu, Maharastra, 
Kamata (Tamil), and Gurjara. 8 Attention must be invited 
particularly to the presence of Gurjara and Maharastra 
among the groups, which serves as a link between 
Dravidian and Aryan. The Sabdakalpadruma, a Sanskrit 
cyclopaedia compiled in the last century in Bengal, cites 
a verse from the Skmdapurdna which applies not only to 
Brahmins but to the entire population of these lands : 

Kamdtascawa Tailangd Gurjara rastravdsinah 
Andh/raSca Drdviddh panca Vindhyadaksina vdsinali 

8 See Abhidlianacintammi in Tamil by Singaravelu Chettiyar 
(Madurai Tamil Sangam, 1910); also Apte, Sanskrit Dictionary and 
the Tamil Lexicon of the Madras University. 


5 io § 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


So we find here five Dravida nations south of the Vindhyas 
— but the list is notable in two 1 ways: (1) It includes 
Gurjaras and Maharastra, (2) it mentions Tailangas and 
Andhras sej)arately and omits the Tamils from the “five 
Dravidas” which is sure indication that the verse is cor- 
rupt in some way. In another list of nations south of the 
Vindhyas 9 the Gurjaras find no place; but as they do 
not figure in the northern list also, the lists possibly go 
back to pre-Gurjara times. Thus we see that Dravida in 
the sense of Tamils and their land, and in a broader sense 
of the entire land south of the Vindhyas and their inhabi- 
tants was well-known long before Caldwell. Scholars 
differ in their estimates of the extent to which Vedic 
Aryan speech was influenced by Dravidian and Munda 
languages. Hutton (para 156) holds that Dravidian influ- 
ence on phonetics (cerebrals) and vocabulary was much 
greater than Munda influences, though others take the 
opposite view. In the Indus Valley occur skeletons of all 
the types of people known at any time in India and they 
provide no clue to the proper answer to this problem even 
on the basis of tentative assumptions of correlations bet- 
ween racial types and language groups. Words like riira , 
rmna , the story of the deluge unknown to the Rgveda and 
doubtless of Sumerian origin, and the fact that Manu, 
the Saviour, is called Lord of Dravida are important data, 
and so too perhaps is the presence of Brahui in Baluchistan. 
Hutton draws attention to the fact that the Brahui con- 
sider Mohenjo Daro the work of their ancestors who 
brought their culture from Mesopotamia, Asia Minor and 
the Eastern Mediterranean, but how far these admittedly 


59 Mbh, Bhtsmaparva , ch. IX, 58-60, Kumbakonam edition. 

§'u §' 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


modern beliefs may be taken to provide the correct clue 
to the distant past is a question. 

More relevant may be the Dravidian place names trac- 
ed in Mesopotamia and Iran by scholars like Schoner and 
L. V. Ramaswami Aiyar . 10 And G. W. Brown 11 studies 
similarities between Dravidian and Kharrian spoken in 
Mitanni at the bend of the Euphrates before and after the 
advent of the Indo-European invaders there. Dravidian 
languages and culture may thus be seen, in the light of 
such evidence, to hark back to the highlands of Anatolia, 
Armenia and Iran. The name Trimmlai by which the 
Lycians of Asia Minor called themselves, it has been 
pointed out often, makes a close approach in sound to 
Drainila (Tamil). Caldwell in his celebrated Comparative 
Grammar of the Dravidian Languages indicates a connec- 
tion between Susian and Dravidian as x'egards structure. 
Apart from the Dravidian place names already men- 
tioned, the Human and Kassite languages are said to pos- 
sess a clearly demonstrable affinity with Dravidian, and 
one writer has connected Elamite with Brahui. We have 
to deal with the whole problem in a cautious and tenta- 
tive manner, because no single scholar, however learned, 
can command equal competence in all the varied lines of 
evidence involved in a final consideration of the question. 
Some genetic connection between all the languages we 
have named seems very probable. Western Asia being the 
home of Elamite, it seems not unlikely that Dravidian, or 
rather proto-Dravidian, language and its speakers also 

10 Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society , Bangalore, Vol. XX, 
1929-30. 

11 Journal of the American Oriental Society , Vol. 50, p. 273 If. 

§ 12 § 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


reached India from this part of the world. Inheritance 
through women, the cult of the Mother Goddess under 
the name of the Lady of the Mountain (cf. Parvati) and 
the snake cult are notable culture traits common between 
these lands and South India. 

Early Myths 

Schayer published in 1935 12 a short note on the Russian 
version of the Purusasukta — the well-known hymn in the 
last part of the Rgveda which contains the myth of the 
origin of the world from the members and organs of the 
Cosmic Man (Purusa). He quotes Zimmers opinion that 
the parallelism between the macrocosm and microcosm — an 
essential element of the Purus asuktaem, is of Babylonian 
origin, 13 besides other views, and adds: “l think that all 
these opinions are, in a certain sense, right, and wrong 
in another. The myth of the Cosmic Man is undoubtedly 
of Asiatic origin; nevertheless it is neither Aryan nor 
Semitic, but belongs most probably to pre-Aryan and pre- 
Semitic civilization, the realm of which must not be con- 
ceived within too narrow boundaries. It extends from 
Aegea in Asia Minor across Mesopotamia and Iran to 
India and comes into contact with Austro-Asiatic and 
Oceanian civilizations. In this case the Indian and Iranian 
variants would be independent developments of a myth 
belonging to the common Indo-Iranian, but non-Aryan, 
substratum.” (p. 322) This recondite theory furnishes a 
good background against which some recent theories of 

n Archiv Orientalni, vii, pp. 319-23. 

18 ZDMG. N. F., Vol. I, p. 36. 


§ 13 § 


DBA VIDIAN S AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


Dravidian origins and their relations to the West may be 
viewed. 

Recent Theories of Dravidian Origins 

I am referring to the theories reviewed and synthesized 
recently by the late N. Lahovary, a Roumanian diplomat 
and linguist, who devoted the last dozen years or so 
(cl 1963) of his life, to a comparative study of Dravidian 
and Basque or Alpine toponomy where the pre- Aryan 
languages of southern Europe have left tangible marks. 
He published the results of his study in learned periodicals 
in several languages in Europe, and then collected them 
in a French book which he revised subsequently with a 
view to an English version of it calculated to suit the 
needs of Indian readers. This final version is the book 
Drcwiclian Origins and the West „ 14 It carries a formidable 
bibliography, and is by no means easy reading for the lay 
reader. The position of Lahovary may be briefly sum- 
marized as follows: He seeks to show that just as Indo- 
Aryan languages of Northern India are related to the Indo- 
European languages of Northern and Eastern Europe, so 
also the Dravidian languages of South India are more or 
less closely related to a Near-Eastern and Mediterranean 
agglutinative group of languages of pre-Indo-European 
times. This type of languages covered a vast area round 
the Mediterranean and in the Near East in those remote 
times. Prehistoric archaeology gives clear indications of 
the steps by which this ancient linguistic unity was bro- 
ken by geographical changes and racial migrations, the 

14 Orient Longmans, 1963. 


§ 14 § 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


results being sometimes cataclysmic in character. Laho- 
vary seeks to establish his thesis mainly by laying stress 
on the oldest elements in Basque — a pre-Indo-European 
language which still survives in the Pyrenees on the 
borderland between France and Spain in the paleocauca- 
sian idioms, and in the Dravidian languages of South 
India, and by tracing the relics of this primitive type of 
language also in Semitic, Hamitic and in Indo-European, 
The pre-Aryan languages of Greece belonged to this 
Mediterranean group, although they were comparatively 
newcomers there, successors rather than sisters of ancient 
Basque. 

There is nothing intrinsically improbable in these views, 
though they startle one by their novelty and have been 
violently repudiated by some of our best-known linguists 
whose opinions are entitled to weight. But a learned 
reviewer of the French original of this book has reminded 
us that in Bopp’s day, the classical philologists who had 
not so far studied any other languages but Greek and 
Latin were filled with indignation at the attempt to ex- 
tend the field of research to other far away and little- 
known languages and to postulate a common ancestry for 
them in the remote past; and that it took a century and a 
half for them to learn that after all Bopp was right. The 
evidence that Lahovary has set out in the volume is ex- 
tensive and obviously not all of it of equal value, not all 
of it equally precise and authentic. But it deserves con- 
sideration at the hands of scientific professional philo- 
logists who should consider the subject without bias. 

Without attempting any final estimate of this revolu- 
tionary thesis for which task I am not competent, and 
perhaps the time is not yet come, we may note that it 


§ IS § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


renders plausible the view that Dravidian speech came 
,to India in several waves spread over long stretches of 
time. If tliis is correct, Haimendorfs view that one of 
these waves, perhaps among the latest, if not the last, 
comprised the authors of the megalithic culture which 
had a knowledge of iron and most probably also of culti- 
vating rice by means of artificial irrigation becomes quite 
plausible. Haimendorf, however, seems to hold the opin- 
ion that the megalithic builders were the earliest Dravi- 
dians to reach India and that by sea, and that Dravidian 
speeches never occupied a much wider area than where 
we find them today. These views, however, have not 
found general acceptance. But in his Presidential Address 
to the Archaeological section of the All India Oriental ' 
Conference in 1957, Dr Aryendra Sarma categorically 
supported the views of Haimendorf and suggested: “Any 
non-Indo-European Rgvedic words if found in Dravidian 
or Munda have to be considered as having come into 
these languages from old Indo-Aryan, since there is no 
evidence of Aryan-Dravidian contact during the Rgvedic 
period. The story of Aryan invasion and of Dravidians 
being pushed out of Northern India has no real basis, 
Aryan-Dravidian contacts — friendly contacts — are clearly 
in evidence from fifth century b.c. onwards, and may have 
begun a little earlier. Dravidian loan words in classical 
Sanskrit therefore are an obvious possibility. But even ^ 
here, one has to be cautious, particularly because we do 
not have before us a clear picture of the early Dravidian 
or Munda. Particular care should be taken with regard to 
such old Indo-Aryan words as are found in both Munda 
and Dravidian. In all probability these have been adopted 
by both from old Indo-Aryan.” In other words, he clearly 


§ 16 § 



CULTUBE CONTACTS 


rejects the view of Dravidians having once spread all over 
India, as well as Burrow's hypothesis of a proto-Dravidian, 
different from modern Dravidian as known in history and 
literature . 15 

Professor Burrow who has considered the question at 
.some length in his book The Sanskrit Language 16 takes a 
middle position. Speaking of the Vedic language and classi- 
cal Sanskrit he says : “The vocabulary was further enriched 
from outside Indo-Aryan itself. The pre-existing vernaculars 
made a sizeable contribution to the Sanskrit vocabulary. 
The influence is strongest, it seems, in the case of Dravi- 
dian words that can be identified with certainty as Dravi- 
dian and run into several hundred. Though a few are 
found already in the Vedic language, the majority do not 
become current before the classical language. A smaller 
"proportion was provided by the Kolarian languages. 
Occasionally words were introduced from outside India, 
e.g. from Iranian (varabana, ^breast plate') or from Greek 
(hom, hour), but these were always rare ." 17 Again the 
Sanskrit vocabulary is composite, and the total number of 
(such) extraneous words is very large. Their source is 
mainly to be found in pre-Aryan languages of India. It 
is likely that there existed in India various linguistic 
groups which have been totally extinguished by the ad- 
vance of Indo-Aryan, and in so far as Sanskrit has drawn 
Words from such sources, their origin must remain for 
ever unknown. On the other hand those non-Aryan lan- 
guages which have maintained their independent exis- 

15 Proceedings of the All-India Oriental Conference , Delhi, 1959, 
p. 196. 

16 Faber, London, 1955. 

17 Ibid., p. 43. 


§ 17 § 


DRA VIDIAN S AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


tence form a valuable source for the investigation of the 
extraneous elements in Sanskrit/ 18 

Language and Race 

The race history of the subcontinent, by which we mean 
the order in which different ethnic stocks came to mingle 
with and form part of the population of India, is extre- 
mely confused, and it seems virtually impossible to con- 
nect particular language groups with definite ethnic stocks. 
Sir Herbert Risley was the leading authority at the begin- 
ning of the century and his views found full expression on 
the census reports of 1901 and in his well-known book. 
The People of India. He held the view that at one remote 
period the whole of India was an isolated ethnic unity 
occupied by a single people whom he called << Dravidian’ r 
tacitly implying great antiquity also for the languages so 
described, and that the present populations of the diffe- 
rent parts of India represent mixtures in varying degrees 
of several other incoming “races” with the Dravidians, and 
his terminology abounded in compound terms like “Aryo- 
Dravidian” “Scythio-Dravidian”, “Mongoli-Dravidian” and 
so on. But these views no longer hold, and on further 
study, India's isolation is seen to be a myth and she is 
now likened more to a net collecting the flotsam and 
jetsam of all Asia as Hutton puts it. 33 Of Risley s “races" 
the Dravidian has been the first to go. The reconstructions 
of racial history based on recent anthropometry are very 
vague and doubtful and differ with different writers, and 

18 Ibid., p. 375. 

19 Census Report , 1931, I. i., p. 440. 


§ 18 § 


CULTURE CONTACTS 


we have not much to gain for the elucidation of our ques- 
tions by pursuing these speculations in any detail. The 
view sometimes urged that Dravidian speakers were 
autochthonous descendants of the neolithic folk seems to 
find no tangible support from any evidence either inside 
or outside the Tamil land, but a mere guess possibly 
prompted by “patriotism” calculated to deny all “foreign”' 
origins and connections. Likewise the claims often made 
for an advanced pre-Aryan Dravidian civilization and 
sometimes based on fantastic concepts of a Vanara or 
Raksasa civilization depicted in the Rdmdyana by Valmiki 
will be unhesitatingly dismissed by all sober students of 
histoiy. Caldwell attempted to reconstruct the pre-Aryan 
civilization of the ‘primitive Di*avidians” and I reproduce 
the following extracts from his Comparative Grammar^ 
calculated to give an idea of the method he followed and 
the conclusions he reached: “If we eliminate from the 
Tamil language the whole of its Sanskrit derivatives, the 
primitive Dravidian words that remain will furnish us 
with a faithful picture of the single life of the non-Arya- 
nized Dravidians. From the evidence of the words in use 
amongst the early Tamilians, we learn the following items 
of information. They had 'kings' who dwelt in 'strong- 
houses’ and ruled over small 'districts of the country’. 
They had minstrels who recited 'songs’ at 'festivals’, and 
they seem to have had alphabetical 'characters’ written 
with, a style on palmyra leaves. A bundle of those leaves 
was called 'a book’; they acknowledged the existence of 
God, whom they called Ko, or king — a realistic title little- 
known to orthodox Hinduism. They erected to his honour 

20 University of Madras, reprint, 1956, pp. 113-14. 


§ 19 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


*a ‘temple, which they called ko-il, God’s house. They had 
‘laws’ and 'customs’, but no lawyers or judges. Marriage 
existed among them. They were acquainted with the ordi- 
nary metals, with the exception of ‘tin’, lead’ and zinc’ 
‘canoes’, ‘boats’, and even ships (small ‘decked’ coasting 
vessels), no acquaintance with any people beyond sea, ex- 
cept in Ceylon, which was then, perhaps, accessible on 
foot at low water, and no word expresses the geographical 
idea of ‘island’ or ‘continent’. They were well-acquainted 
with ‘agriculture’ and delighted in ‘war. They were armed 
with ‘bows’ and ‘arrows’, with ‘spears’ and ‘swords’. All 
the ordinary or necessary arts of life, including ginning’, 
weaving’ and ‘dyeing’ existed among them. They excelled 
in ‘pottery’ as their places of sepulchre show, 

“This brief illustration, from the primitive Tamil voca- 
bulary of the social condition of the Dra Indians prior to 
the arrival of the Brahmans, will suffice to prove that the 
•elements of civilization already existed among them.” 

A legitimate doubt may cross the readers mind if “writ- 
ings” and “books” are properly included in the outfit of pri- 
mitive Dravidians; similar doubts have been raised about 
the reconstruction by Krom of primitive Indonesian cul- 
ture by the same method as Caldwell’s; but even setting 
aside tills doubt and accepting the picture as drawn by 
‘Caldwell, we can say only that the Dravidians had attain- 
ed the “elements of civilization” as Caldwell puts it, and 
this is a far cry from the glorious pre-Aryan Tamil civiliza- 
tion of which alluring pictures are painted by popular 
.writers and orators of the Tamil country. I am not aware 
of the existence of any significant study of the subject 
later than Caldwell’s. It is perhaps worth while noting, 
By the way, that Caldwell’s use of “Brahmans” as synony- 


§ 20 § 



CULTURE CONTACTS 


mous with “Aryans” in his scientific work may be said to 
provide the basis in modem times of the facile identifica- 
tion of Arya, Brahman, Sanskrit and North which has been, 
the root of much current social and political trouble. 

Archaeological Evidence 

Archaeology shows the prevalence of a widespread chal- 
colithic culture in the peninsular region, contemporaneous 
with the later and declining phases of the Indus Valley- 
culture, and a comprehensive survey of the evidence so 
far obtained has been made by Dr Sankalia in Prehistory • 
and Proto-history in India and Pakistan ; 21 but the absence* 
of written evidence and of a key to the decipherment of 
the Indus script render it virtually impossible to correlate* 
the archaeological data with the speeches and cultures, 
with which we are primarily concerned here. "Those who 
believe in the theory of independent origination of cul- 
tures,” writes Dr Sankalia, “would argue that the various- 
cultures in different parts of India which archaeology has- 
revealed during the last ten years show that when the 
great Indus civilization was flourishing in Sind, Saurasfra,. 
and the Panjab, the rest of India was developing the vari- 
ous regional cultures.” “The diffusionists on the contrary”' 
continues Dr Sankalia, “discern in these cultures, though 
known so far in some cases only by pottery— which is but 
an industry and not the totality of a culture — the spread 
of Aryan or Dravidian speaking people from Iran or Cen- 
tral and Western Asia which in our present knowledge- 
had witnessed the various steps in the growth and birth 


21 University of Bombay, 1962, pp. 270-71. 


§ 21 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


'of civilization. In support of tliis view is pressed the stock 
•argument of movement of peoples in about 2000 b.c. and 
earlier owing to pressure from stronger groups. Within 
India destruction of the Indus civilization and dispersal 
of refugees and survivors to places of safety and more 
favourable areas was also cited as an argument for the 
•civilizing touch to the rest of India which was believed to 
be inhabited by hunters and food-gatherers.” Thus from 
the juxtaposition of the Mahdbhdrata and Painted Grey- 
Ware sites in the Gangetic valley, and the occurrence of 
the latter in Sind and Baluchistan and in the distant 
Thessaly, Shri Lai has pointed out the possibility of the 
bearers of this culture being a group of Aryans from Shah 
Tepe or some such site in Iran. 

“Likewise the writer (Sankalia) has collected evidence 
from recent excavations at Navdatoli, Chandoli and else- 
where showing how one may argue for another Iranian 
wave or waves of peoples and/or ideas which helped in 
the colonization of the Cambal, Narmada, Tapti and 
'Godavari valleys. One may go a step further and identify 
some of the Aryan or mixed Aryan tribes mentioned in the 
Puranas with the authors of Chalcolithic cultures in the 
above-mentioned valleys. For all these are tied by com- 
mon features and differ from valley to valley, according to 
the pottery fabrics and types. But their basic way of life 
remains the same” But as already stated, certainty is 
unattainable in the absence of contemporary written evi- 
dence which Sankalia fears “may never be found”. The 
chalcolithic stage thus remains hazy, almost unknown as 
yet so far as the identity of its actors is concerned. 


§ 22 § 


CULTURE CONTACTS 


Legends 

We have legends galore in the epics and the Puranas; they 
centre round Agastya and Rama, the prince of Ayodhya; 
but it is impossible to treat them as history, however in- 
teresting they may be from the social and religious points 
of view and as embodiments of the race-memory relating 
to far off events. The Agastya legends are in many ways 
the more interesting and perhaps a wee bit better founded 
.in history as they seem to extend not only to the whole of 
India but beyond the seas of Indonesia and Indo-China 
where Agastya worship -prevailed in the early centuries 
of the Christian era. They have been discussed at some 
length from the standpoint of their historical implication 
by Poerbatcharka in his Agastya in den Archipel and by 
the present writer in an article “Agastya 9 in Tiditschrift 
vorr Indische taal — Land en volken-kunde (Batavia ). 22 
Our definite knowledge of the southern speech and cul- 
ture begins at the earliest only long after the mingling of 
northen Indo-Aryan influences with them and we have 
no records earlier than Megasthenes* vague account of the 
Pandya Kingdom, the Asokan inscriptions and the short 
BrahmT cave inscriptions that follow soon after. 


22 Pp. 471-545, 1936. 


§ 23 § 


2 

000 


The Aryan Problem 


The discovery of the Sanskrit language by western scho- 
lars in the eighteenth century was followed by the deve- 
lopment of comparative philology based on the study of 
the relations of that language with the ancient and modern. 
European languages, and as a result of these studies the* 
Aryans or Indo-Europeans as they were called gained great- 
vogue among the historians and linguists of the nineteenth 
century; an original Indo-European language was postulat- 
ed as the parent of all the related languages of subsequent: 
times, and often there went with it the hypothesis of a. 
common ancestral race and of a common original habitat. 
For a time there was a strong tendency to trace to the* 
Aryan all that was good, noble and progressive in human, 
history and civilization. Very soon it was seen that lan- 
guage was a culture trait easily learnt by different groups 
and that the inference from language to race was a fallacy 


§ 24 § 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


against which Max Muller himself, one of the early and 
powerful protagonists of Indo-European, raised a clear 
warning which however was not always heeded. But the 
prestige of the Aryan stood high for a long time as may be 
seen from Hitlers ideas about the Herrenvolk that added 
to the momentum of the militarism of the Third Reich. 

Basing their arguments on literary evidence of different 
types some scholars have argued for a very high antiquity 
for the Veda and for the Vedic Aryans being held to be in- 
digenous to India and not immigrants from outside. Tilak 
and Jacobi interpreted some Vedic texts as giving astrono- 
mical indications of an Arctic Home for the Vedic Aryans 
and a high antiquity like 6000 or 4000 b.c. for the hymns 
of the Rgveda. Pargiter studied the genealogies and myths 
in the Puranas and evolved a theory of indigenous growth 
of Aryan civilization and its spread outside from India. 
Tilak's arguments and conclusions were set forth in his 
Origin and the Arctic Home in the Vedas , and Jacobi's 
articles are found in German learned periodicals, some of 
them having been also translated into English in the 
Indian Antiquary. Pargiter set out his theories in the An - 
cimt Indian Historical Tradition . It is not necessary to go 
into all this in any detail here as few scholars accept them 
now as valid, and archaeology has provided much more 
reliable clues to the probable course of events in the pre- 
historic period. We may also mention, for the sake of 
completeness, some oilier writings which have also rightly 
fallen into oblivion like A. C. Das's Rgvedic India and 
Oldham's Sun and Serpent (1905) as typical examples of 
what scientific research should not be. It is now more or 
less generally recognized that Aryans migrated into India 
some time in the second millennium b.c. and that for the 

§ 25 § 
c-3 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


earliest beginnings of Indo-European it is difficult to get 
beyond 3000 b.c. Let us begin with the results of modern 
language studies. 

By comparing Sanskrit with related languages two stages 
in the prehistory of the languages have been established. 
The different stages in the development of Sanskrit and 
allied Indian languages are generally divided into Early, 
Middle and Late or Modern Indo-Aryan. “By comparison 
of early Indo-Aryan/' says Professor Burrow/ “with the 
very closely related Iranian, it is possible to form a fairly 
accurate idea of the original Indo-Iranian or Aryan lan- 
guage from which both have evolved. By comparing Indo- 
Aryan and Iranian with the other Indo-European langua- 
ges, it is possible also to go beyond this, and to reconstruct 
in general outline the characteristics of the original lan- 
guage from which all these are derived/' But it has not 
been found possible by this method to reconstruct a sin- 
gle original ancestor language such as what Latin is to the 
romance languages, but we see clearly that the earliest 
Indo-European we can reach by this method was already 
deeply split into a series of varying dialects. 

Original Home 

There is general agreement now that the original home of 
Indo-European is to be sought in Europe where we find a 
concentration of many languages of the family “occupying 
comparatively restricted areas and already markedly dif- 
ferent from each other in the earliest" rather than in Asia 
where we find “enormous stretches in the occupation of 

1 The Sanskrit Language , p. 3. 


§ 26 § 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


Indo-Iranian, a single member of the family, and as yet 
little differentiated,” most probably “the result of a late 
colonial expansion on a vast scale .” 2 And about Indo- 
European itself, we no longer think simply in terms of pri- 
mitive Indo-European, the line of division being marked 
chronologically by the migration of Hittites and the sepa- 
ration of their language from the main body of Indo-Euro- 
pean, this separation being now taken to have been the 
earliest movement in the splitting up of Indo-European. 
This assumption of the early separation of Hittite is the 
“only way to explain the great differences which exist bet- 
ween it (Hittite) and the type of Indo-European that has 
been reconstructed from the previously known members 
of the family .” 3 Late Indo-European (that is, after the 
separation of Hittites) is marked by certain developments 
in which different dialects evolving in common were gra- 
dually beginning to assume the character of different lan- 
guages . 4 

The original home of Indo-European is now held to 
have been the central portion of Europe, extending from 
the Rhine to Central and Southern Russia, and it is con- 
sidered probable that by the time of the Indo-Iranian 
migrations the larger part of this area had long been occu- 
pied by various Indo-European dialects . 5 

The Near East 

The earliest recorded traces 6 of the Aryan peoples after 

2 Ibid., pp. 9-10. 3 Ibid., p. 17. 

* Ibid., p. 18. 5 Ibid., p. 11. 

6 The account in these paragraphs rests on Burrow, op. cit., pp. 
27-30. 


§ 27 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


their dispersion from the original home are now thought 
to be found not in India nor in Iran, but in the “Near 
East”, in the documents of the Mitanni Kingdom of North 
Mesopotamia during the period 1500-1300 b.c. We find 
royal names with a decidedly Aryan look in several cunei- 
form documents: examples are Sutarna, Parsastar, Arta 
Lama, Tusratten, Matiwaza, i.e. respectively in Indo- 
Aryan Sutarana, Prasastar, Tirsratha (cf. Vedic tresaratha 
having rushing chariots), Mativaja (victorious through pra- 
yer). Assyrian private documents contain proper names 
which can be interpreted as Aryan, such as : Artamna, Bar- 
da^va, Purusa, Birya^ura, etc. corresponding to IA. Rtamna 
(mindful of the law), Vardhasva (son of Vrddha^va), 
Purusa (man, male), VIryasura (hero of valour), etc. In this 
period Mitanni influence was spread over a wide area and 
we find principalities with apparently Aiyan names as far 
as Syria and Palestine. The contemporary Hittite kingdom 
had close relations of peace and war with the Mitanni 
kingdom, and some documents from the Hittite capital of 
Boghazkui provide valuable evidence for the presence of 
Aryans in the Mittanni country. The most interesting 
among them is a treaty of about 1350 b.c. concluded bet- 
ween the Hittite king Suppiluliuma and the Mitanni king 
Matiwaza. Among the divinities sworn by in this document 
there occur four well-known Vedic divine names. They 
are: Indara, Mitras(il), Nasatia(nna) Ruvanass(il), which 
stripped of their non-Aryan terminations are unmistakably 
the Vedic Indra, Mitra, Nasatyas and Varupa. It is thus 
clear that not only Aryan language but Aryan religion also 
closely resembling that of the Rgveda was current in this 
region in this period. The introduction of the horse to the 
countries here seems also due mainly to these Aryans. The 


§ 28 § 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


Hittite capital has also yielded a treatise on horse-breeding 
and training written in the Hittite language, but the author, 
who had charge of the royal horses, was a Mitannian by 
name Kikkali. And some of the technical terms in the work 
are clearly Aryan words. These are aika vartana , tera-v , 
panza-v y satta-v , and navartmim(hapl. for nava-v) corres- 
ponding to Sanskrit ekavartana , one turn (of the course), 
and likewise for the numbers 3, 5, 7 and 9. The existence 
of these loan words in the Hittite text shows clearly the 
priority of the Aryans in this field. 

A few Aryan traces are also found among the docu- 
ments of the Kassite Dynasty of Babylon ( c . 1750-1170 b.c.). 
The Kassites were invaders from the Iranian plateau and 
their language has no connection with Aryan or Indo- 
European. Still in a list of god’s names with their Baby- 
lonian equivalents we get surias (rendered samas) clearly 
the same as Sanskrit Sufya. We have also Mafuttas the 
war god (rendered En-urtd ), cf.' Sanskrit Marut *, which 
however always occur in rhw plural. Among the kings, 
one has a name apparently Aryan, Abirattas , abhi-ratha 
"facing chariots” (in battle). 

The existence of Aryans in this area was unsuspected 
till the discovery of these Aryan names in cuneiform docu- 
ments; but now there is no doubt that a sizeable influx of 
Aryans had taken place in the Near-Eastern scene. The 
Aryans appear in Mitanni from 1500 b.c. as the ruling dy- 
nasty; they must have entered as conquerors as they did 
in Iran and India. But there was difference in two impor- 
tant respects: (1) they did not succeed, as in Iran, India 
and elsewhere, in imposing their language on the coun- 
try they occupied; the native Hurrian remained the lan- 
guage of the country and was adopted by the conquerors, 

§ 29 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


and it is not known whether the Aryan language was pre- 
served for any length of time apart from proper names 
and some technical terms; (2) we find no trace of the im- 
placable antagonism between Aryan and non-Aryan so 
characteristic of the Aryan expansion in India and Iran. 
In the field of religion in particular, Aryan and local gods 
appear to have been honoured side by side — a striking con- 
trast to the behaviour of the Vedic peoples. 

Linguistically the material is not enough to warrant any 
far-reaching conclusions and the few phonetic changes ob- 
servable such as v to b (■ biruna ), and c to z (panza) a£)pear 
to be local and independent changes. "There is clearly no 
point,” says Burrow, e 'in arguments as to whether the lan- 
guage is Iranian or Indo-Aryan since there is no evidence 
of its being either, and we can be pretty sure that if more 
abundant material turned up, we should discover that we 
were dealing with a third and independent member of the 
Indo-Iranian family. It is only the antiquity and conserva- 
tism of the Indian tradition, as opposed to die Iranian, 
that has led scholars to regard these Aiyans as specifically 
Indo-Aryans ” (p. 293) The occupation of Near East was 
completed by 1500 b.c., and the beginning may well have 
been considerably before this date since the regime seems 
to be fully and finally established and there is no hint any- 
where that the ruling families are newcomers. The direc- 
tion of the invasion would seem certainly to have been 
from the North, via the Caucasus. 

Some Earlier Studies 

We may now refer to some relatively early studies on 
Aryan migrations by way of introduction to the story of 


§ 30 § 


THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


Indo-Aryan and its linguistic and cultural evolution in the 
historical period. In 1884 Wilhelm Geiger wrote, for that 
time, a remarkable paper styled “La Civilization des 
Ary as” (Le Museon III). He pointed out that the country 
south of Lake Baikal is called the land of seven rivers by 
the Russians. Was this invented by them or borrowed from 
the indigenous people? On the latter and more probable 
alternative, tire name accompanied the Aryans still united, 
in their migrations till they separated in Mt Suleiman. 
The names of these rivers were originally prevalent in 
the land of the Indo-Iranians, whence some of them at 
least if not all, were carried into India by the Indo-Aryans 
and applied to other streams, e.g. Harhavati (Sarasvati), 
and ITarayu (Sarayu). The Indo-Iranian country extended 
from Syr Daria to the south, including Bokhara, Afghanis- 
tan and part of Baluchistan to the frontiers of the Panjab. 
There was apparently no knowledge of metals or of bronze 
in the Indo-European epoch; the language of the primi- 
tive Aryans has no common words of metallurgy. But the 
words for melting and tempering are known to the Rgvecla 
— ayohata (IX.I.2.) and clham and sanaclham (X.72.2; V. 
9.5). Aryan arms were only of wood and stone, rarely of 
metal. According to Schrader, Indo-Germanic (Indo-Euro- 
pean) belongs to the stone age; Indo-Iranian to the transi- 
tion from stone to metal when gold and copper were 
known, but not silver or zinc and hence no bronze. Silver 
is called white gold — rajatam hiranyam in the Taiftinya 
Samhitc (I.5.I.2.). Indo-Iranian utensils were still largely 
of stone or wood — asvattha, udumbara , salmaU being, how- 
ever, unknown before the Aryans entered India and settled 
there. 

Almost exactly fifty years later, in 1934, Stein published 
§ 31 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


an important paper under the heading, Tndo-Iranian Bor- 
derlands ” 7 This was a study in the prehistory of the Indo- 
Iranians in the light of geography and of recent explora- 
tions many of them conducted by Stein himself. He said 
that Rgvedct was much fuller on Aryan society than any 
evidence that archaeology could ever yield, and added: 
‘There could never be any doubt for serious students that 
these tribes who called themselves Aryans in distinction 
from the original inhabitants of the land whom they fought 
and subdued, reached the Indus, the ‘Land of the five 
rivers' beyond it from the West and across the Indo-Ira- 
nian border region. We have the clearest evidence of this 
in the fact that in the territories immediately adjoining the 
region westwards we find established from the earliest times 
•a population speaking languages derived from that East- 
ern Iranian tongue which in its oldest form as preserved 
by the Avesta , the sacred Zoroastrian texts, is so closely 
akin to Vedic Sanskrit as to appear almost like a dialect, 
It is from the same designation of Arya, as likewise claim- 
ed by this population, that the name Iran for the whole 
country is derived .” 8 Again, turning to archaeology, he 
made some observations which are in conformity with 
what we have already stated about the Aryans in West- 
ern Asia. He said: "Inscriptions recovered from Hittite 
archives in distant Anatolia have revealed to us that in 
the seventeenth century b.c. a semi-nomadic people speak- 
ing the Vedic tongue and worshipping the chief deities 
named in the hymns of the Rgoeda was still training its 
horses and flocks in the mountains of what is now Kurdis- 

7 Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute , pp. 179-202. 

8 Ibid p. 197. 


§ 32 § 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


tan. This mention, fully according with what internal evi- 
dence could previously be deduced from the development 
of Vedic literature, has provided us for the first time with 
,a reliable chronological starting point.” Hie discerning rea- 
der will not fail to notice that Stein's view of the role of 
the Aryans in the Near East places a larger emphasis on 
it and treats it as closer to Indian Vedic civilization than 
the more recent views of Professor Burrow cited above. 
There can obviously be no certainty in such questions, but 
on the whole I am inclined to treat with Burrow the Hit- 
tites as the earliest instance of Aryan migration, less influ- 
ential perhaxis because of smaller numbers than the later 
migrations, amongst which we must include Indo-Iranian, 
which came in sufficient force to impose the Aryan lan- 
guages on the occupied territories and virtually drown the 
pre- Aryan speeches of the earlier inhabitants. The survival 
in strength to this day of the Dravidian languages in penin- 
sular India should be accounted for in part by the distance 
of the area involved from the original seat whence the 
migrations of Indo-Aryans began and partly by the strength 
in numbers of the pre-Aryan inhabitants of Southern India. 
To resume Stein's arguments, “Now the discoveries made 
at M'ohenjo Daro and Harappa have established the fact 
that at least a thousand years before (that time) the time 
we find Aryans in the Near East, the Indus Valley was 
already in possession of a settled population which by the 
influence of its religious beliefs, its arts, and probably its 
system of writing has already affected the development of 
the Indo- Aryan civilization of India” 9 Stein thought that 
the Indus people, though superior in material culture, were 

* Ibid p. 197-98. 


§ 33 § 


DBAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


inferior in virility and physical strength; but he made the 
wise reservation : “What the actual state of civilization pre- 
vailing in the Indus Valley was at the time of the Aryan 
conquest, we cannot expect to learn until sites abandoned 
much later than Mohenjo Daro have been explored.” He 
suggested also the possibility of a decline before the Aryans 
came in, a view which discounts the plausible idea put 
forth by some scholars that the Aryans were the destroyers, 
of the urban civilization of the Indus Valley and that the 
great warrior-god of the Indo-Aryans, Indra Purandara,. 
was the embodiment of this destructive phase of Aryan 
expansion into India. Recent excavations seem to point, 
as already hinted, to a succession of two or more poorer 
cultures after the decline of Harappa culture and before 
the rise of Indo-Aryan; they also point to widespread con- 
temporary Chalcolithic cultures prevailing in the rest of 
India including the Deccan which exhibit some features 
that seem to link them up with Indo-Aryans in a way that 
has not yet been fully determined. Lothal, Rangpur, Ne- 
vasa, Navda Toli and other sites which fall in the cate- 
gory of "sites abandoned much later than Mohenjo Daro” 
seem to support this view. 

The route of Aryan incoming is indicated, says Stein, 
by the Avestic name Harhavati for the Arghandab. Ara- 
chatos of the Greeks. This tributary of the Helmund pass- 
es through the fertile tract of Kandahar; the name is the 
exact equivalent of Sarasvatx prominent in the Rgvecla. “It 
may be doubted whether any of the Rgvecla passages nam- 
ing Sarasvatx actually refer to the Harhavati, Arghandab 
has been assumed for some passages by Professor Hilde- 
brandt. Ordinarily the name Sarasvatx is applied in Vedic 
hymns, as it is in later Sanskrit literature, to a small river 


$ 34 § 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


of sacred fame in the east of the Panjab, though elsewhere* 
in the hymns it may possibly designate also the Indus. 
But the relation of the Avestic and Vedic river names 
is so close as to make it appear probable that we have 
here a case of that transfer of river names which is of 
common occurrence from very early times in the topogra- 
phis sacra of India” In the famous hymn R.V. X. 75 in 
praise of the rivers, c \ve find mentioned in correct sequ- 
ence from east to west all the rivers of the Panjab right 
up to the borders of Afghanistan. Among these are named 
together the Krumtt and Gomati corresponding to the pre- 
sent Kurram and Gnmal. The mention of these rivers, both 
comparatively small except when sudden spates fill their 
beds, suggests such acquaintance with Waziristan and 
the adjacent valleys drained by them as only a recollec- 
tion of their prolonged occupation by Aryan tribes of the 
early Vedic period seems likely to account for. This con- 
clusion is strengthened by the incidental mention in the 
Rgveda of two other rivers of this border region — the- 
Yaydvati and Hariyupiyd. Their identification with the 
present Zhob and Hariob, the one a tributary of the Ga- 
mal and the other of the Kurram, has long ago been re- 
cognized and is supported by adequate philological evi- 
dence. We may note, by the way, that the identification 
of Hariyupiya with the famous town Harappa and the in- 
ferences drawn therefrom on the hostile relations between 
the Indus Valley people and the invading Aryans fall to. 
the ground as a result of the correct equation of Hariyu- 
piya and Hariob. 

Stein's conclusions based on linguistics, geography and 1 
literature were confirmed with the aid of archaeology by 


§ 35 § 



DHAVTDIANS AND ABYANS — CUTTUBAL CONTACTS 


Robert Heine-Geldern in an article two years later 10 in 
which he discussed five prehistoric forms of tools, all later 
than the Indus Valley culture and related to the region 
from Caucasus to Luristan (c. 1200-1000 b.c.) and was 
quite sure that two of the tools, the trunnion axe and the 
axe-adze, had been brought to India by a migration from 
the South Russian steppes passing through Caucasia and 
North Persia. 11 He also stressed the fact that the Mitanni 
Aryans were not a detached branch, but remained in close 
touch with the main body further north in Armenia, Asia 
Minor and Transcaucacia; but as we have seen on this 
matter quite different views have been developed by other 
‘scholars subsequently. 

Route of Migbaiton 

The route of the main Aryan migration to Asia is now 
conceived slightly differently from what Heine-Geldem 
thought about it, but in no way incompatible with it. After 
mentioning the presence of the Aryans in the Near East 
(Mitanni) as the result of an early and minor break off 
from the Indo-European homeland, Burrow proceeds to 
say, "The major migrations, however, took place to the 
East, North of the Caspian Sea, and resulted in the major 
portion of the Aryan tribes being concentrated in what is 
now Russian Turkestan. From there Iranians and Indo- 
Aryans separately penetrated into Iran and India. It is 
only at this period that a common Indo-Iranian, albeit with 


10 J1SOA IV 1936, p p. 87-115, “Archaeological Traces of the Vedic 
Aryans”. 

11 Ibid., p. 100. 


§ 36 § 


THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


dialectal divisions, divides into two branches, Indian and 
Iranian. The existence of Indo-Axyan as an independent 
form of speech begins with the entrance of Aryan tribes, 
into India. From this period the two branches evolve in 
comparative isolation.” 12 But at the beginning of their 
separate evolution, the relations between Vedic and Ira- 
nian languages was so close that, as Burrow puts it, “It 
is quite possible to find verses in the oldest portion of the- 
Avesta which simply by phonetic substitutions according 
to established laws can be turned into intelligible Sans- 
krit.” 13 

“There is some linguistic evidence to show that the Indo- 
Aiyan invasion took place in successive phases, and not in 
one simultaneous movement.” The Kafiri languages of the 
North-west show features which indicate that they occupy 
linguistically as well as geographically a place between 
Indo-Aryan and Iranian, and some of these features can 
be explained only on the assumption of important dialec- 
tal divergences of ancient Ayan at a time preceding the 
invasion of India and of the migration of Kafiri taking 
place earlier than the occurrence of certain linguistic de- 
velopments which are shared alike by Iranian and Indo- 
Aryan but not by Kafiri. Likewise there are dialectal dif- 
ferences between the Vedic language of the North-west 
and the later classical language of Madhyadesa; for in- 
stance Vedic turns l into r while the distinction is preserv- 
ed in the classical language. The Vedic feature is charac- 
teristic of Iranian also. “Clearly the fact that the more east- 
erly dialects of early Indo-Aryan have avoided this change* 

12 Op dt., pp. 30-SI. 

12 Ibid , , p. 4. 


5 . 37 . 5 . 



DRAVTDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


indicates a comparatively early separation from the main 
body, in comparison with the Vedic dialect which has un- 
dergone this change in common with the rest of Aryan 
before being introduced into India.” In other words the 
Indo-Aryans of the eastern half of North India must be 
taken to represent an earlier wave of Aryan immigrants 
than Vedic Aryans. Lastly, it is wellknown that there is 
no reference to the original Aryan- home or to the migra- 
tion into India in the hymns of the Rgoeda . This has 
often formed the basis of the view that Aryans were indi- 
genous in India and not immigrants from outside. But 
modem critical scholarship explains this by assuming a 
considerable interval between the entry of the Aryans into 
India and the composition of the Vedic hymns, and this 
view is summed up by Burrow in the following words: 
■“The history of Indo-Aryan begins with the first introduc- 
tion of Aryan speech into India, but between this event 
and the composition of the first recorded document of Indo- 
Aryan, the hymns of the Rgoeda , a considerable period 
must have elapsed. This is clear from the fact that in the 
text of the Rgveda itself, although historical allusions are 
not uncommon, there is no reference anywhere to the fact 
of the migration, nor any definite indication that it was 
■still remembered. linguistic reasons also compel us to 
assume such a period, since the number of linguistic 
(mainly phonetic) changes that have taken place since the 
common Indo-Iranian stage is considerable. No doubt the 
begining of dialectal cleavage go back to the Indo-Ira- 
nian period, but there is no doubt that the bulk of the 
characteristic changes of Indo-Aryan and Iranian respecti- 
vely have taken place after the complete separation of the 
two groups, that is to say, after the Aryan invasion of 


§ 38 § 


THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


India /' 14 I omit the list of changes that follows which is 
impressive enough” as Burrow himself puts it. 

Besides phonetic changes there were changes in voca- 
bulary of a remarkable nature. There were first of all 
changes in meaning as a natural occurrence over long pe- 
riods or sometimes as a result of misunderstanding; thus 
for instance vahni (carrier) came to mean “fire” as Agni, 
the Fire-God, was the carrier of sacrifical oblations to the 
Gods. Again, the tenn dasyu, primarily ethnic and applied 
to non-Aryan inhabitants of India, acquired the meaning 
of “robber”; likewise deist, “slave,” was originally a tribal 
name (cf. Dahe of Central Asia), and the same may apply 
to Sudra, member of the fourth caste, since a tribe with 
this name is mentioned in both ancient Indian and classi- 
cal sources relating to north-western India. Changes of 
meaning due to misunderstanding, may be illustrated by 
Icratu , “sacrifice” as opposed to Vedic kratu, “wisdom, in- 
sight”, which is perhaps no change of meaning so much as 
failure to understand the proper sense of the Vedic word. 
In classical Sanskrit matarisvan is “wind”; originally it 
meant the divine being who discovered fire by the method 
of rubbing two sticks, and also Agni himself (from mdta- 
ris, “fire stick”, cf. Lat. matrix). The change of meaning 
can only be due to the fading of the old mythology in 
the popular mind. The use of Ktlcila for “blood” in Sans- 
krit was also* due to a misunderstanding of Vedic Kxldla 
meaning “a certain milk preparation”, cf. Khowar, ¥SLdl, 
a kind of cheese. False popular etymology is another source 
of changes including creation of new words. Thus asura 
(demon) and asita (black) were falsely taken to begin with 


14 Op cit pp. 32-33. 


§ 39 § 



DBAVXDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


the negative particle a and gave rise to sum (God) and 
sita (white). The growing difficulties of language due to 
such changes gave rise at an early date to schools of in- 
terpretation (Nirukta) and lexical collections ( nighantus) T 
Yaska being the earliest of the writers of this class ac- 
cessible to us. As has already been noted the vocabulary 
was enriched by the adoption of new words from verna- 
cular speech and the exact origin of many of these still 
remains unknown. 

In fact Aryan speech had already made many non-Aryan 
borrowings before it entered India. Some examples have 
been pointed for the IndoTranian period (by a critic of 
Przyluskis Emprunts anaryans in Indo-Iraniari) like: Kam- 
bala, cf. Ber bal; Godhumci, cf. Avest. Gautuma; istaka, 
cf. Avest. istya; Ndsatya , cf. Avest. Naodhiya; makara, cf. 
Avest. Kara. Likewise some borrowing may have taken 
place earlier in the Indo-European epoch; it has been 
pointed out that the Austro-Asiatic names of poison visa/ 
bisa/misa (Munda — biS , Khmer — pis. Cam. bih, Indone- 
sian — bisu, visit was borrowed on three several occasions : 
(1) in I.E. epoch — Skt. visa , Lat. virus, etc. (2) IndoTranian 
period — Avest. bis, remedy, bisas — to look after, to cure; 
Pali — bhisa , Skt bi^a, visa , etc. (3) More recently by Indo- 
Aryan speech with prefixes — Skt. kilbisa, kalmasa , cf, co- 
existing Cam. forms like bih , poison. 

Aryans in India 

For what happened in India after the Aryan advent we 
have the well-studied evidence of the Vedic literature and 
the growing evidence of modem archaeology; the two 
lines stand somewhat apart just now, and much more ex- 


§ 40 § 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


ploration and study would be needed before a satisfactory 
integration can be achieved. One of the most comprehen- 
sive and shrewdest evaluations of the literary evidence is 
tha t found in Oldenberg’s Buddha, 16 particularly the 
twenty-page excursus on the relative geographical location 
of Vedic and Buddhist culture. 16 He points out that there 
was — and could be — no community of culture over the 
wider area of Aryan territory and peoples in India, and 
draws attention to parallels from the smaller lands of 
Greece and Italy after the Aryan advent. He sees evid- 
ence of the prevalence of a distinction among the Aryans 
between the champions of Aiyan culture and other Aryans 
more liberal and eclectic in their outlook. The association 
of distant emigrants with the pre- Aryan inhabitants in 
varying stages of development was the most important 
factor, in the differences that developed, though possibly 
there were also inherent differences among the different 
leading groups and types of the Indian Aryan stocks also. 
Much in this literature reflects the higher and older sacral 
authority of the western peoples, and the disregard, not 
to say contempt, for the easterners who derived their in- 
struction from the west. Differences also grew between the 
north and south which were recorded by Baudhayana in 
his Dhmmasutra 17 where he notices five differences ( vipra - 
tipatti) between north and south, cross-cousin marriage 
in the south and sea voyage in the north being among the 
regional peculiarities. Among the many Vedic tribes nam- 
ed, the Bharatas had a long history and were hailed as 

15 Eng. tr. by Hoey, London, 1882. 

18 Ibid., pp. 391-411. 

17 I.2.I.4. 


5 41 5 

c-4 



DRAVIDIANS AND ABYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


the ideal in speech and action. 18 They become increasingly 
important and isolated, and disappear from later lists 
found in Manu and Buddhist literature, because they were 
absorbed in Kuru-Pancalas along with their enemies — the 
Purus; and their sacred land becomes Kuruksetra. The 
Ko^alas, Magadhas, and Videhas had already pressed for- 
ward farther to the east down the Ganges. Vedic cultmre 
has not had its home, originally at least, among these stocks 
of the east, but among peoples of the western group: Jana- 
ka’s relations to the west were similar to those of Mace- 
don with Athens. Videgha Mathava crossing the Sadanlra 
with Agni-vaiivanara 19 may well signify the advent of 
Aryan culture in these distant lands. 

The different culture regions as they developed ulti- 
mately in the late Vedic may be seen reflected in some 
verses in the Manusmrti 20 which enumerate them thus: 

(1) Brahmavarta, the land between the rivers Sarasvatx 
and Drsadvati; its hereditary tradition ( paramparyakramd - 
gatdcura) furnished the standard of propriety ( saddcdra ); 21 

(2) Brahmarside^a, comprising Kuru, Matsya, Pancala and 
Surasena, and adjacent to Brahmavarta; all men should 
learn conduct (svani svam caritram ) from the Brahmanas 
(agrajamndnah) of this area; 22 (3) Madhyade^a, land bet- 
ween the Himalayas and the Vindhyas, east of the Vina- 
£ana and west of Prayaga; 23 (4) Aryavarta, a name of wider 
import, applied to the whole area between the two moun- 

. 38 Ait> hi. is. 

19 Sat Br 1.4.1. lOff. 

29 ii. 17-23. 

21 vv. 17-18. 

22 w, 19-20. 

23 v. 21. 


§ 42 § 


THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


tains named above the eastern and western seas (22). It 
should be noticed that the first three divisions are more 
specific than the fourth which is more general, not to say 
vague; it may not be wrong to suppose that the three 
represent divisions that were current in the later Vedic 
age when the aryanization of North India was in its early 
stages, and peculiarities of particular regions well-marked. 
The fourth name Aryavarta must be taken to reflect the 
more widesx>read and general influence of Aryan culture 
in the rest of North India which had xnhaps advanced to 
a perceptible extent by the time the Manusmrti was com- 
posed, some time between the second century b.c. and the 
second century a.d. (the date suggested by Biihler). It is 
interesting to note that Medhatithi, the earliest extant 
commentator on Manu, by whose time the Muslim inroads 
had begun and Sind had passed under Arab rule, and 
many earlier foreign inroads by the Greeks, Sakas, Pahla- 
vas and Kusanas had taken place with their concomitant 
vicissitudes, political and social, Medhatithi interprets Ar- 
yavarta in an interesting manner. He says Aryd avartanta 
iti Aryavarta , meaning the land where Aiyas keep con- 
stantly recurring, and explains it further by saying that 
though this land may often pass temporarily under mleccha 
occupation it is as often redeemed by the reappearance of 
Aryas. This is, for his time, a remarkable recognition of 
the insistence of Aryan culture as the major constituent 
of Indian culture even after all the tumults and confu- 
sions of a long history. This is not all. Manu adds a fifth 
category to his account and mentions this: (5) yahiya 

country, land where sacrifices may be performed, com- 
prises all the land where the black deer ( Krsnasdra mrga) 
flourishes naturally, the rest being mleccha de£a (23). One 


5 43 $ 



DR A VIDIAN S AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


wonders if this definition is confined to India or may be 
taken to extend to other lands; at any rate we know now 
that Vedic sacrifices were performed in the fourth cen- 
tury a.d. in distant Borneo, as recorded in the Yupa ins- 
scriptions of Mulavarman, and it seems quite possible that 
the author of this verse had in his mind the overseas lands 
where Indo-Aryan culture was beginning to make its mark 
in the early centuries b.c. and a.d. 

The Shudras 

Were the Sudras Aryans or non- Aryans? The evidence of 
the Purmamkta apparently gives them a place in Aryan 
society by giving them an origin coeval with that of the 
three twice-born varnas, each vama being said to be or 
emerge from the different parts of the body of the cosmic 
Purusa. But this is not conclusive, for this hymn occurs 
in the tenth book and is held to be relatively late both 
in its language and content. It is therefore possible to 
suggest that Aryan society proper comprised only three 
varnas before the advent of the Aryans into India, and 
that the Sudras were added on as the fourth vama in 
India to find a place for the pre-Aryan inhabitants of the 
land in an integrated society. This view is supported by 
two facts. First, there is no parallel to the Sudra in Iranian 
society, while the other three varnas have their counter- 
parts. And secondly, Indo-Aryan literature reflects a deep- 
seated prejudice against the Sudras, which may well be 
the relic of the cultural and “racial” antagonisms of the 
period of the Aryan advent. Manu’s code is typical of the 
orthodox Hindu outlook. It regards him as the lowest 
bom and lays down savage punishments for offences com- 


§ 44 § 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


mitted by him, 24 while the other classes are let off more 
lightly. He can never qualify to give advice in matters of 
state to the king. 25 He can be employed for menial work 
by the higher classes, particularly Brahmins, for he was 
created by Brahma just for such work. He cannot get rid 
of his serfdom ( ddsya ) even though he is freed by his mas- 
ter, because it is inborn to him; 26 he has no right to pro- 
perty, and whatever is his can be appropriated with im- 
punity by others, particularly Brahmins. 27 

In Indo-Aryan society, the tendency may have been 
strong at first to draw a line between Aryans and pre- 
Aryans of all sorts, though the line was being blurred all 
the time by the facts of life which perhaps included num- 
berless intermarriages between people on either side of 
the line, and the name Sudra may have been bestowed 
generally on all sections of the population that were not 
demonstrably Aryan. A distinction is made sometimes in 
Vedic literature between the Aryavarna and Dasavarna, 
and this renders plausible the view that all groups be- 
longing to the Dasa varna came to be designated Sudras 
in later parlance. The origin of the name is obscure, and 
it has been held that it was originally the proper 
name of non-Aryan chieftain which was extended in its 
application; the classical writers of the time of Alexander s 
invasion and the Mahabhmata mention the presence of a 
republican clan of Sudras in the Indus valley. 28 It is per- 
haps worth noticing also that Yaska in his Nirukta (III 8) 

24 viii. 270 ff. 

25 viii. 20. 

26 viii. 413-14. 

27 iv. 417. 

28 Jayaswal, Hindu Polity , Bangalore, 1943, pp. 154-55. 

$ 45 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


says the following in explanation of the well-known Vedic 
expression pancajanah : Gandharvdh pitaro deva asurd 
raksamsityeke catvdro varnah nisnaddh pancamd ityaupa- 
manycmah ; which L. Sarup translates as: “According to 
some (the five tribes) are the gandharvas, the manes, gods* 
demons and evil spirits. They are the four castes with 
nis-ada as the fifth, says Aupamanyava The second ex- 
planation is interesting as the oldest evidence of the group- 
ing of all people outside the pale (of the vama system) 
perhaps all aborigines, as Nisadas or padcamas — a title to 
which untouchability was attached either then or at a 
later stage of social evolution, It has now been statutorily 
abolished since Independence and Gandhi attached the 
utmost importance to this reform. 

Neither the racial nor the cultural history of the period 
of the formation of Indo-Aryan society is as clear as we 
would wish, and clear and definite conclusions are not 
easy to formulate. A. B. Keith has pointed out 29 for in- 
stance: “It is natural to regard the Dravidians as ulti- 

mately not essentially different from the pre-D'ravidians 
or even the Negritos, but all these views rest on insuffi- 
cient grounds.” He also rejects Chanda's attempt 80 to treat 
Sudras as Aryans and deny their aboriginal character, 
though he admits that they may have, of course, included 
Aryan slaves. The well-known declaration in the Gita that 
God created the four varnas on the basis of inherent qua- 
lities and occupations {cdturoarnyam maya srstdm guna- 
karina vibhdgasah), it should be noted, still reflects a fluid 
social order in which heredity had not come to play the 

29 Religion and Philosophy of the Veda, p. 634, n. 2. 

30 Indo-Aryan Races , i. 74 ff. 


§ 46 § 



THE ARYAN PROBLEM 


dominant role in the determination of status; but even 
this conclusion may be valid only in theory, because we 
have much fairly early evidence regarding hereditary 
castes and occupations (jatis). Vincent Smith 31 stressed the 
distinction between Varna, “class” or “order” and jati, 
“caste”, and averred that “the compiler of the Iristitutes of 
Manu was well aware of the distinction between varna 
and jati”; this may, however, be doubted as the two terms 
are used interchangeably not only in the context he has 
mentioned, but elsewhere also both by text writers and 
commentators. But he was perhaps right in his further 
statement: 32 “Separate castes existed from an early date. 
Their relations to one another remained unaffected whe- 
ther they are grouped theoretically under four occupa- 
tional headings or not.” The origin and history of caste in 
India is indeed one of the most vexed questions and has 
gathered a great volume of controversial literature round 
itself. Perhaps the best among recent studies is that by 
Hutton who was census commissioner in 1931, and his 
main thesis that the caste system is the product of the 
mingling of Aryan and pre-Aryan social institutions and 
beliefs seems the best we can formulate. Our ancestors 
were remarkably successful not only in integrating diver- 
sities of various kinds and at different levels, but also in 
covering up their tracks by myths and legends. The 
omission of a historical record seems almost deliberate. 


31 Oxford History , p. 63. 
a **~lbid., p. 64. 


§ 47 § 



3 

ooc 


The Aryanization of India 


No one doubts that there was much mixing of the Aryans 
with the pre- Aryan inhabitants of India, but in the result- 
ing culture the dominant note was that of the Aryans 
whose language generally displaced the pre-existing lan- 
guages and who by their superior martial equipment due 
to the use of the horse (and p>ossibly of iron also) imposed 
themselves as rulers wherever they went. This process 
used to be called Aryanization, but in recent years some 
anthropologists have suggested the name “Sanskritization” 
though others have been very critical of the new term. 
Perhaps we may retain the old term, but note that this 
has been a continuing process through the centuries and 
the census reports of recent decades reveal the persis- 
tence of the process even in modem times. But our con- 
cern primarily is with the beginning of the process. 

This movement seems at first to have proceeded in 


§ 48 § 



THE ARYANIZATTON OF INDIA 


Northern India from the northwest to the southeast, and 
perhaps somewhat later from the north to the south into 
the Deccan across the Vindhyas. We may not try to de- 
pict the early results of the process as seen in the religious 
and social set up in the late Vedic period as we may 
roughly put it. One of the recent attempts to portray this 
set up is that of the German scholar Hauer in his Glau- 
bengeschichte der Indogermanen 1 (1932)* His earlier book 
on the Vratyas is more definitely a work of pure scholar- 
ship which gives excellent proof of his intimate knowledge 
of the Vedic texts; but the work I have just mentioned, 
while it is wider in its scope, is marred by his perhaps 
enforced loyalty to Nazism; it hails Hitler as the modern 
avatar of Sri Krsna. Though it is perhaps strongly tinged 
with the doctrine of the Herrenvolk, still the analysis of 
the Indo-Aiyan social and religious set up in Northern 
India is not without interest to us. He present a picture 
which has much plausibility, though it is perhaps not 
unexceptionable in all its details. He says that the Madh- 
yade£a was between Ganga and Yamuna, and west of it 
was the orthodox area. The North, Northeast and East, 
and perhaps the Northwest, also were different; here the 
non-orthodox Rudra-Siva worship grew and the Vratyas 
were at home, but in close contact with Brahminism. The 
Vratyas were perhaps the earliest immigrants pushed to 
the East and the Himalayas by the later Aryan immigrants. 
We shall come back to the Vratyas presently. To the South- 
west was a third region, the home of Visnu-Krsna. We 
must note however that indigenous tradition locates the 
home of Krsna in the Yamuna valley round about Mathura 
and Brindavan, and the southwest, according to this tra- 
dition, Dvaraka enters into Krsna’s life at a relatively 


§ 49 { 



DRAVTDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


late stage. But to continue Hauers exposition. He 
suggests, possibly in tune with the current notions in Nazi 
Germany about Herrenvolk, that the Aiyan noble held his. 
court and led his independent life ruling over all Indo- 
Aryan territory. But he admits .that there was plenty of 
mutual intercourse and influence between the Aryans and 
the non- Aryans. 

Like many others, Hauer also points out that these 
contacts produced notable changes in religious thought 
and practices and created a new philosophy as seen from 
the corpus of the upanisads. Belief in an inner being, call- 
ed Atman by some and Purusa by others became common, 
and one of the most notable effects of the new lore was 
to antiquate the old ritualism and apply its notions to 
the processes of life and make sacraments of them. See 
for instance passages in the Chmdogya Upanisad like 
Puraso vdva yajfiah 1 and puruso vdva Gautama Agnih. 
yosd vdva Gautama Agnih 2 and many others of the same 
type. By the side of this identification of life processes 
with ritualism, there was also an attempt to pour con- 
tempt on ritualism (e.g. plavd hyete adradhd yajnarupah-- 
Mundaka 1.2.7) accompanied by the call to a higher life 
of meditation and contemplation. The new message is one 
of peace and unity, an experience which is summed up in 
the famous phrase, tat tvam asi~ the identity between 
the soul of the individual and of the universe. This mysti- 
cal and metaphysical trend began, according to Hauer, 
among the Samagas having a Vratya origin according to 
the JaimMya Upanisad Brdhmana , in which the Kma 

- 1 iii. 16-17. 

2 v. 8. 


§ 50 § 


THE ARYANIZATION OF INDIA 


Upanisacl is embedded as is well known. The common 
view regarding these developments ascribes them either 
to the impact of pre-Aryan faiths and practices, among 
which yoga is often included, on the Aryan, or to the- 
advances which the warrior class of Ksatriyas made over 
the Brahmins in the field of philosophical speculation. 
Neither of these alternatives can be demonstrated with 
adequate proofs; though there are instances of Ksatriya. 
philosophers like Janaka there is little to supxDort the 
postulate of a monopoly of philosophic thought among 
them; many Brahmin teachers are equally prominent and 
instances of prominent non-Aryan leaders being instruct- 
ed by them are quite common. 

Hauer holds that the idea cf the soul and that of the one 
High God were already known to the Aryans before they 
came to India. Tire divinity of the soul occupies, accord- 
ing to him, an important place in all early Indo-Germanic 
documents, and in no other system does it occupy so cen- 
tral a position as in this. He also stresses the common 
character of all human religious development instanced by 
the place of the High God (Hoch-gott) in many primitive 
religions. He also contrasts Semitic monotheism and the 
idea of law as Gods will with the Indo-German concept 
of Rta , eternal law, and the do ut des (reciprocity) of the- 
yajna , sacrifice (offer). The Indo-Aryan Vasistha and the 
Iranian Zarathushtra are examples of the prophetic theis- 
tic j)hase of development. The Indo-Germanic God does* 
not speak in thunder like Jehovah, but Vasistha travels 
with God in a heavenly boat, and Zarathushtra questions 
Ahura Mazda face-to-face. Hauer also stresses the con- 
servative innovationism and the organic character of Indo- 
German development in general; the mythical phase is 


DRAVTDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


never altogether lost. This sense of wholeness and organic 
growth governs the attitude to other religions, a trend 
crystallized in the relatively late statement of the Lord 
in the Gita: ye yatha, mum prapadyante tdmstathaiva 
bhajamyaham. A Cyrus or As oka is of world significance. 

Keith has suggested 3 that differences of beliefs existed 
among the Indo-Aryan tribes themselves and that we 
need not assume that accusations of being without gods, 
without sacrifice, without Indra, necessarily always apply 
to non-Aryan foes. It has become difficult to trace these 
differences clearly "with the available material in which 
local and tribal distinctions have been largely removed 
by syncretism.” Nevertheless he suggests that the eclipse 
of Varuna, a highly moral deity earlier, and the rise of the 
war-God Indra in the Rgveda is significant in the history 
of Indian religion, as also the rise of Agni, the God of 
the sacrifice and of the sacrificial priest, and of Prajapati, 
the embodiment of the more reflective section of the 
priesthood. In these changes Keith sees the effects of the 
admixture of races in India which was, among other 
things, fatal to the conception of Vanina . 4 

'The Vraatyas 

At this point we may stop to consider in some detail the 
problem of the Vratyas which, as already stated, has been 
studied in a scholarly (pre-Nazi) monograph by Hauer. 
The views on the Vratyas contained in the traditional 
literature of India are clear evidence that their true origin 


3 Religion and Philosophy , pp. 91-92. 
' 4 Ibid., pp. 101-02. 


5 52 $ 


THE ARYANIZATTON OF INDIA 


and role had fallen into oblivion relatively early. The 
explanation of Vratyas as the class of persons who by 
long neglect of ritual practices had fallen out of the 
Aiyan fold (patitasavitrikas) is a relatively recent surmise 
of the commentators on Smrtis (law-books). Even the 
statement in the Baudhdydna Dharmasutra 5 that Vratyas 
resulted from mixed unions among different caste — 
Vamasamkardd utparumn Vrdiydn ahur manlsinah — is, in 
spite of its early date, only a bad guess. The Vratyas toma 
is described at some length in he Tandy a Brdhmana 6 and 
this is regarded as a ritual for enabling Vratyas to enter 
the Aiyan fold in early historical times. Weber thought 
this a ceremony for the conversion of non-Brahmin Aryas 
to Brahminism; he also thought that the red garment of 
the Vratina was that of the Buddhist monk and identified 
Vratya and Arhat; he also thought that Vratyas repre- 
sented some primitive religious practices, and put forward 
the daring suggestion that the Atharvavecla was the Veda 
of the Vratyas as many Vratya documents are best pre- 
served in it. Much more to the point is his guess that 
Atharvaveda XV is a glorification of upanayana, initiation, 
i.e. the entry in Aryan fold as against Vratya. The St 
Petersburg Lexicon (1871) defined Vratya as 'Belonging 
to a roving band, a vagabond; united in a band which 
stood outside the Brahmanical order, and held that 
AV XV was an idealizing of pious vagrants or mendicants ” 
Charpentier 5 * 7 in his Rudra-Siva stressed the difficulty aris- 
ing out of Vratya meaning heretic and god at the same 

5 1.9-15. 

e XVII. 1-40. 

7 WZKM 1909, pp. 151 ff. 


§ 53 § 



DRA VIDIAN S AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


■time, and treated Vratyas as worshippers of Siva— A V XV 
being praise of Siva and his earthly followers, the pious 
mendicants. In 1924-5 Kshetreschandra Chattopadhyaya 
rightly pointed out that AV XV has nothing to do with 
Vratyastoma, but a mystic Vratya life. About the same 
•time Winternitz called Vratyas robber herdsmen, first out- 
side the pale of Brahmanical culture, and later admitted 
into it by gradual propaganda. But the Brahmins are not 
known at any time to have admitted such folk into their 
•circle, and on the whole there is more to be said for 
Weber s old conclusion that Vratyas were Aryans. 

There are other texts outside the Atharmveda , which 
Radhabinod Pal 8 sums up as follows; “We are told of 
Vratyas in a disparaging tone. These Vratyas are included 
in a list of victims at the Purasamedha in the Yafurveda , 
where however no further explanation of the name is 
given. Fuller information is furnished in the Atharvaveda 
which describes at length a certain rite intended for the 
use of the Vratyas. These were treated as outcastes, the 
hina. As has been pointed out by Professor Macdonell 
and Keith, they were Aryans outside the sphere of Brah- 
min culture already developing. They are said not to prac- 
tise agriculture or commerce or to observe the rites of 
Ijrahmacarya. They were, however, allowed to become 
members of the brahmanical community by performance 
"of the ritual prescribed,” (p. 332) The Vratya leader 
(grhapati) bore an elaborate equipment on his person- 
turban, black robes, a wagon ( viputha ) a pratoda and so 
un. Vedic vratyas were apparently a society of primitive 

8 History of Hindu Law, Tagore Law Lectures, 1929, Calcutta, 
1958. 


§ 54 § 



THE ARYANIZATION OF INDIA 


priests wandering in the land, and received in Bralimani- 
cal society after conversion. The attendants of Vratyas 
.such as Magadha, pwrmcaU (a harlot) and so on show 
them to be leaders in the relics of an orgiastic tribe that 
practised rites founded on the holy maithuna — thus 
Magadha is a wandering musician and pumscalu the 
prototype of the devacldsi . Rites of the mahdvrata includ- 
ing a phallic dialogue between a Brahmacdriti and a 
pumscal followed by ceremonial copulation, show that 
primitive magic became a vrata described as ameclhya 
(impure) in the developed ceremonial; it perhaps found 
entry with the Vratya, and therefore called “out of use" 
in the Sdhkhydna Sraata Sutra? But the unconverted 
Vratyas seem to have kept, their usages and are described 
in the Tdndya statements : aduruktavdkyam duruktam 

dhuh; acBksitam diksitavacam vadanti and so on. 

There are two ways in which Vratya can be derived 
from Vrata (vow) and from Vrata (group). Outside the 
Rgveda, Vratya occurs only in the Atharvaveda , Taittinya 
Bamhita (Keith), and Tdndtfa Mahdbrdhmana — thus either 
in the oldest layer or in writings not without a tinge of 
heresy. Varunasija Vrata , etc. in the Rgveda means bound 
by a vow to god Varuna, etc., and this is the earlier phase. 
Later where Rudra is dominant, Vrata occurs along 
with Gana — the latter explained as devanucara bhutavi- 
sesah. The Kuntapa siiktas, Atharvaveda XX. 127-36, are 
closely related to the Mabavrata and the old Vedic tradi- 
tions; e.g. 129-32 contain only beginnings of lost verses 
of an a^vamedha rite; 134 likewise of the maidens’ water 
dance in the Mahavrata. These suktas were the hymn 

^ XVII. 6-2. 


§ 55 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYAN'S — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


book of the Vratyas, who had also a primitive horse- 
sacrifice. Vratyas were thus the earliest Aryan arrivals in 
India who found their way east to Magadha, but kept on 
an early Aryan rite. 

The extraordinary holiness of the Mahavrata was perhaps 
due to the central place it held in the pre-Brahmanie 
epoch, and its deposition from that place later by the 
Soma sacrifice was duly followed by its total disappear- 
ance; but relics of the old rites survived in Sivaratri, Holi> 
Maidens' water dance [Malabar Gaz, I. 184(1908)]. The 
philosophy of Purusa in an undeveloped form was part of 
the secret lore of the Mahavrata — cf, dadhika purusa. 10 

The Mahavrata in its essentials, according to Hauer^ 
goes back to the Indo-Germanic period. For instance, the 
magic ceremonials with the breath ( pranas — at first three 
in number, two being added later) can be no innovations, 
nor the Vegetarian magic, water dance, swing songs like 
Brhat and Ratnantara already raised in the Rgveda to the 
position of supernatural powers. The weightiest parts of 
the later speculations are rooted thus in a vratya cult dat- 
ing from before the Rgveda. 

Something may now be said about the concept of Eka- 
vratya and Ekarsi. The Ekavratya is either the Wind God 
or Rudra I&ina. 11 The initiate holds parley with God, with 
whose being his own is closely bound up. The Vratya was 
identified with the ur-principle of all divine might — Maha- 
deva. Prasna Upanisad (11.11) identifies prana , Vratya and 
Ekarsi and seems to stand in the tune of the Vratya lore 
of theistic mysticism: 

10 Ait . Ar III. 2.3 and AV XV. 7; and about atmah Ait. At ., HI.* 
3.2. 11 Jain u. Br. III. 21. 


§ 56 § 



THE AJRYANIZATION OF INDIA 


Vmtyastvam pranaikars irattd visvasya satpatih 
Vauam aduasua ddtardh pita tvam mcitdrisvanah 

(cf. X.7.14) 

Ekavratya and Ekarsi are parallel figures, essentially simi- 
lar which have merged in the course of development; 
both were priest-seers at the start, with tills difference 
that Ekavratya is a figure with much sharper outlines ( AV 
XV. 1) holding a central place in a definite cult, which 
duly leads to the growth of the Purusa as all ruling power. 

In the Upanisads prana , the urmacht of the Mahavrata, 
and Rudra Siva are worshipped as the highest gods. Here, 
according to Hauer, are two religious worlds — the Brah- 
mana (in the narrow sense represented by the Satapatha), 
and the non-Brahmana of which the te deum is the Sata 
rudiiya, united with each other, i.e. Ekavratya and Ekarsi. 

In this connection, we must also take account of the 
divinization and astralization of rsis — the Great Bear, and 
Buddha as Mercury. Ka^yapas, prominent among the divi- 
nized Rsis was called svayamhhu , and hence became a 
prajapati in later times. From his name has grown by false 
etymology (Kurl, Kurme — Sat . Br. VII.5.1. ff) the entire 
myth of Kaccaxia (tortoise) culminating in the Puranic 
Kurmavatara. 

Another feature: Kesin, brahmacarin and other types 
of holy persons raised to the level of cosmic powers ( RV 
X. 136 for Ke£n or muni. The Keiin is cosmogonic power 
and his experience has cosmc range; his company with 
divine powers is of a wild ecstatic kind, and he is All. He 
is the friend in need of men and gods. Brahamacarin is a 
concrete type with some features of the Kesin (AV X.5). 
The Svetdsvatara ZJpanisad stands in close relation to 

§ 57 § 

c-5 


BRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


the converted Vratyas and sets out to find a place for the 
Vratya in the Vedic pantheon. We have another Vratya 
tradition in leader Buddha and Baudhayana of which the 
Taittinya Samhitd knows something. 

The heavenly Vratya is not acknowledged elsewhere in 
Vedic literature. This bespeaks an opposition of later ortho- 
doxy to the Vratyas who perhaps still had their own rites 
while the orthodox soma sacrifice was not acknowledged 
by them as the central mystery . But on the conversion of 
some Vratya leaders to the orthodox rite, the heavenly 
Vratya may have come into the Vedic pantheon and the 
groups pertaining to him like Vasus, Sadhyas, etc. and 
their leader Rudra forced their way in after losing their 
Vratya names. Rudra was among the last to be recognized 
before the final synthesis reflected in the Upanisads . 

Synthesis of Beliefs and Practices 

No one doubts that with the mixture of Aryan and pre- 
Aryan peoples in India, their beliefs and practices also 
mingled and brought about new developments which were 
very different from the originals which entered the mix- 
ture and which obscured the exact identity of the origi- 
nals. After about a century of continuous study and scho- 
larship, a consensus emerged towards the end of the nine- 
teenth century on the most x>robable line of religious and 
philosophical development in Vedic India and this is re- 
presented in a work like Keiths Religion and Philosophy 
of the Veda. The different successive stages according to 
this view may be summed up somewhat as in the follow- 
ing phrases: nature-worship and polytheism, henotheism 
side by side with or preparatory to monotheism, ritualism, 


§ 58 § 


THE ARYANIZATION OF INDIA 


reaction against ritualism, and the development of Upa- 
nisadic philosophy with features of pre-Aryan origin- The 
doctrines of Karma and transmigration make their first ap- 
pearance in the Upanisads , and opinion is divided about 
how far these doctrines were Aryan or non- Aryan in origin 
and inspiration. We have seen that according to some 
authors (Hauer in particular) the ideas of soul and of High 
God are of great antiquity and go back to the Indo-Ger- 
manic period. 

In recent decades there has been a strong tendency 
among some scholars to lay increasing stress on the pre- 
and non-Aryan elements in the historic civilization of 
India, and some of them, particularly the late Rev. Fr H. 
Heras, have insisted on designating them Dravidian. Fr 
Heras sets forth his views in the Introduction to Mystic 
Teachings of the Hariddsas of Karnatak by A. P. Karmar- 
kar and N. B. Kalamdani (1939). According to the learned 
Father, Rgveda is "anti-philosophic” and "devoid” of any 
ascetic ideals, it is wholly materialistic; he cites in his sup- 
port, "Is Indra existing? Who has seen him!” 12 He asserts 
that the idea of prajapati is the "evident effect of a totally 
foreign influence on the doctrines of the Rgveda, an influ- 
ence which undoubtedly hails from the Dravidian peoples 
of the country whose theological doctrine was monotheis- 
tic.” According to him the significant statement, Ekam sad 
viprd hdhudha vadmti 13 is a relatively late interpretation. 
The fumsasukta , says Heras, embodies a materialistic pan- 
theism arising out of a fusion of materialism and multi- 
plicity of gods with a foreign Unitarian influence. Five 

12 RV II. 15.5 and III.100.3. 

13 Ibid.', I. 164-46. 


§ 59 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


new ideas animate this outlook and the reaction against 
ritualism was their effect and not cause. The new ideas 
were: Atman, Karman, transmigration, revelation of God 
to man, and asceticism. 

All questions of origin are very difficult of precise deter- 
mination and it is common knowledge that the new ideas 
here exclusively traced by Fr Heras to Dravidian origins 
have been ascribed to other sources or to the natural re- 
sults of interaction between Aryan and pre- Aryan con- 
cepts and practices in general. And his suggestion that 
monotheistic texts in the Rgveda are late interpolations is 
an easy but unconvincing way out of a real difficulty. It is 
neither possible nor necessary to discuss the genesis of the 
so-called five new ideas at any great length, but the com- 
plexity of the issues involved may be illustrated by a brief 
consideration of the first and perhaps most important of 
these ideas, that of Atman. Heras says that this word 
comes from atarn — an, meaning lord of the underworld* 
and argues that this word while passing into Sanskrit lost 
the second short d , and by a natural reaction lengthened 
the first a and became dtman (p. xxiii). He does not ex- 
plain how an became an, the first long vowel becoming 
short and the second palatal becoming a dental; further 
the word atam is not a Dravidian word as Heras seems 
to think : the Tamil Lexicon derives it from Skt. adhas , be- 
low. And it is well known that, as Hauer has pointed out* 
Atman meaning self is very common in the Rgveda and is 
derived from man to think or to function with t prefix in- 
dicating the third person singular. 

Heras goes further and interprets the famous mahdvd - 
kya , viz. tat tvam asi not as affirming the identity of the 
individual soul with universal, but as affirming the 


§ 60 § 



THE ABYANIZATION OF INDIA 


independent self-subsistence of God and avers that this 
is what Sankara shows also I According to him tvam does 
not refer to Svetaketu but “thou” — the subject of the sen- 
tence being God, as the pure absolute subject; the predi- 
tion that the absolute subject is the absolute object is only 
subsisting, knowledge itself and the subject of His know- 
ledge (xxvi). We can only observe that this interpretation 
is paralleled only by another of Heras’s in which he held 
that to the aclvaita philosophy there is no distinction bet- 
ween truth and falsehood and therefore the saints of Srin- 
geri made no bones about forging copper-plate grants en- 
dowing their monastery with large properties (see his My- 
sore Lectures on the “Origin of Vijayanagara”). 

He also argues that the exaltation of the second asrama 
(grhastha) is Aryan while that of the last asrama (satin- 
ydsa) is Dravidian, perhaps implying that the Aryans were 
more material in their outlook and the Dravidians more 
spiritual. 


§ 61 § 


4 

000 


Social and Religious Synthesis 
in South India 


Turning to the south of the Vindhyas, we lack the evi- 
dence even more than for the north, which would help 
us visualize the reactions between Aryan and pre-Aryan 
cultures. f We get a stray glimpse from Buddhist books; 
which refer to Bavari and his pupils at Pratisthana in 
Mulaka on the banks of the upper Godavari and their 
visits to the North via Mahismati and Ujjayinl The gram- 
marian Katyayana (fourth century b.c.) knows the three- 
Tamil kingdoms of Paiidya, Cera, and Cola, and about 
the same timeTKautilya mentions the southern trade route 
as more valuable to the people of the Ganges valley than 
the northern routes leading to the Himalayan states, for in 
his view though the northern region had the advantage in 
blankets, skins and horses, much other valuable merchan- 


§ 62 § 



SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


dise like conch-shells, diamonds, jewels, pearls and gold 
was more plentiful in the south. He also mentions the ex- 
cellent cotton fabrics from Madura and other places in 
the soutl^In the earliest stratum of Tamil literature, the 
oldest accessible in any Dravidian language, which can be 
placed on good grounds in the early centuries a.d., we find 
evidence that the mingling of cultures and the Sanskriti- 
zation of the South has gone very far indeed?)(hiis litera- 
ture mentions clearly the Vedic sacrifices performed by 
kings and chieftains with the assistance of Brahmins, the 
Vedic gods Indra and Varuna, besides other deities like 
Siva, Visnu, Balarama, Krsna, and other members of the 
relatively late Puranic pantheon, besides several local cults 
of more or less primitive and universal nature like the 
Worship of streams, trees, hills, crossways, etc. It also 
knows the epics, the Ramdt/ana and Malvzbharata quite 
fully and often makes effective use of this knowledge. And 
the Tolkdppiyam , the grammar not only of the Tamil lan- 
guage but of Tamil life, definitely affirms that the rituals 
of marriage were established by the Aiyar, i-e. Aryas 
among the Tamils; accordingly we find that marriages are 
contracted before the sacred fire as witness and the cere- 
mony of sthaUpaka , the cooking of food by the bride 
soon after the marriage is also described. The grhya sutras 
make no mention of the tali , the ornament-bearing string 
worn round the neck of women as symbolic of their mar- 
ried status with husbands living; yet it seems to be men- 
tioned in the Sangam poems (e.g. Puram 127), and this may 
well indicate that the tali was part of some kind of ritual 
or ceremony of pre-Aryan provenance which became in- 
tegrated with the Aryan fire ceremony when it was in- 
troduced by the Aiyar. 


§ 63 § 


DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


Tlie study of Sahgam literature shows unmistakably that 
Aryan culture was apparently welcome everywhere in the 
South and that Brahmin ideals were accepted heartily. 
One poet thinks it is the highest praise he can bestow 
on a king to say that he did nothing that could hurt the 
feelings of the Brahmins. We may well say therefore that 
in the Deccan and far South, as in the North, the advent 
of the Aryans and their cultural influence laid the real 
foundation for the historical culture of India as we have 
known it for about two to three thousand years if not 
more, and that Aryanization (Sanskritization as some mo- 
dem anthropologists prefer to call it) was the great divide 
in the cultural evolution of India North and South. The 
same is true to a large extent of the lands in South-East 
Asia, including the Philippines and Indonesia. 

But to say this is not to imply that all was smooth- 
sailing all the time, that there were no differences or even 
conflicts and that the integration of cultures was alto- 
gether smooth and perfect. Everywhere in India and out- 
side, though the indigenous cultures were under for a 
time before the superior power and influence of the new 
Aryan culture, in course of time there was a recovery 
and reassertion of the indigenous elements leading to a 
reformulation of the cultural milieu. One of the best illus- 
trations of this more or less universal phenomenon comes 
from outside India, from Java. It is the contrast between 
the Rdmmjana sculptures of Prambanan in Central and in 
Panataran in East Java; these two sets of sculptures de- 
pict often the same scenes in the Rama saga and the cha- 
racters portrayed are the same; but while the sculptures 
in Prambanan (ninth century a.d-) are typically Indian in 
physiognomy and execution, those at Panataran (thirteenth 


§ 64 ? 



SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


century) have become typically Indonesian in these res- 
pects and Krom has explained the change, rightly it seems, 
as due to the resurgence of the submerged Indonesian 
element. In South India there was never so complete an 
overthrow of indigenous culture as to lead to the com- 
plete submergence of either the language or the culture 
of the x^eople. The earliest inscriptions though carved in 
an all-India script (Brahml) exhibit significant modifica- 
tions to suit Tamil phonology, and Prakrt or Sanskrit never 
completely replaced ‘the local language, at least in the 
Tamil country, as it did elsewhere in India and abroad. 
Tamil held its own and evinced a marvellous capacity for 
assimilating the incoming culture with the result that we 
have in the Sangam classics a superb literature of incom- 
parable force and beauty coupled with economy of telling 
expression. 

In later times, however, for reasons that are not quite 
clear but seem in some way or other to have operated all 
over India, society became more pronouncedly hierarchi- 
cal, caste crystallized and proliferated and the Brahmin 
claimed for himself social prestige and other privileges 
which roused the anger and envy of the other classes. 
The Manusmrti in its present form, the Mahabharata and 
the Purdnas are studded with numerous passages setting 
forth the divine rights of the Brahmins and the movement 
seems to have attained its greatest strength in the age of 
the Guptas in North India and some centuries later in 
the South. In mediaeval times in South India there came 
up rival legends calculated to support the views of rival 
schools of thought; both admitted that the Vedic seer 
Agastya was the pioneer of the Aryanization of the Tamil 
land, but one school held that he was also the creator of 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


the Tamil language and grammar, and that Tolkappiyar* 
whose work on Tamil grammar is the earliest now extant* 
was the pupil of Agastya; the other denied this and held 
that Agastya and Tolkappiyar had quarrelled and were 
enemies, the work of the latter being altogether indepen- 
dent of the former. This opposition to Aryan influences 
identified with the Brahmins and with Sanskrit has merg- 
ed in modern times with the social and political move- 
ments of the Justice, D.K. and D.M.K. parties. 

For a sober scientific student of India's history and 
culture, however, South India forms no exception from 
the rest of this vast country, and its living pulture of to- 
day is no less a blend of Aryan and pre-Aiyan elements 
than elsewhere. And it is perhaps worth noting that the 
Pallavas played a prominent role from the third and fourth 
centuries a.d. in the Aryanization of the far South and in 
the transmission of Indo-Aryan culture to the lands and 
islands of South-East Asia across the Bay of Bengal. 

We may now notice some instances of the pronounced 
tendency in recent decades to stress the pre-Aryan as 
against the Aryan elements in Indian culture, and the 
grotesque results to which it has sometimes led. We have 
already indicated the fanciful derivation suggested for the 
word Atman by Fr Heras and its true origin. Another 
crucial instance is furnished by the word pujci (worship). 
Vedxc religion was aniconic and sacrifice by fire-offerings 
was its central feature. The worship of images of gods 
in temples is a relatively later development, and many are 
inclined to ascribe it to the influence of the pre-Aryans. 
So attempts have been made to treat puja as a Dravidian 
(Tamil) word and two possible derivations have been sug- 
gested which are so contradictory as to cancel out each 


§ 66 § 



SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 

other. One is to connect it with the words pu (flower) and 
sey (do), pusai being an act done with flowers; the other 
is to connect it with piisu (smear), the act of worship in 
this case being the smearing on the idol of the blood of 
the victim (cock, goat or buffalo) sacrificed to it. But two. 
eminent linguists have suggested a much more probable 
Indo-European derivation for the word, Theime, connects 
it with prnc parka , as in ( Madhuparka ), JOR xxvii, trans- 
lation of ZDMG 1939 pp. 105-23; and even better J. W. 
Bailey 'Cognates of puja — puj, Brahmavidyd 1961, Jubilee 
number pp. 1-12. Another instance is Maya, a term of 
great philosophical import, which is sought to be con- 
nected by some with Tamil, may , die or perish, a sug- 
gestion based on the Maya doctrine as usually misunder- 
stood and ignoring the original meanings of the word. 
But Mmjd is one of the oldest Sanskrit words and the St 
Petersburg lexicon traced it to md measure; and recently 
Qonda gave two meanings to md, viz. measure and create 
(Studies in the Language of the Veda, The Hague, 1959). 
In a review of this book, Professor Burrow suggested that 
the two meanings were those of two homonymous roots, 
and pointed out that the correct rendering of the passage 
from Svetdsvatara Upanisad , viz. mdydm tu prakritim vid- 
dhi mdyinam tu mahesvaram is: "Know that nature is 
creation, and that the Great Lord is the wielder of Maya, 
i.e. the Creator” He also cited Sayana’s derivation of 
mdtar (mother) from md, to make, in his commentary on 
RV L 160-2. saying: pita pdlayitrl dyau mdtd nirmdtd 
prtthvu A third instance is the attempt to solve the 
name of Hanuman, the monkey hero of the Ramdyana; a 
plain Sanskrit word into an absurd Tamil concatenation 
an mandi. 


§ 67 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


Religion 

Admittedly the Hindu religion of the historical period is 
the complex product of the interaction of Indo-Aryan 
and pre-Aryan beliefs and practices, and it is now vir- 
tually impossible to disentangle with confidence the con- 
tributions of the different races or cultures to its make 
up. One of the best efforts to do so is that of Hutton found 
in para 176 of the Census of India 1931 , Vol. I (1). In his 
view the different layers that can be distinguished are the 
following: The earliest form of religious belief and prac- 
tice was perhaps that of the Negritos and associated with 
the pipal tree and a phallic fertility cult, both of which 
were perpetuated by (the proto-Australoids wfho added 
totemism or at least its basis. Then came the Mediterra- 
neans and Armenoids, Munda and Mon Khmer with a me- 
galithic culture, life-essence theory, reincarnation and wor- 
ship of the Great Mother. It is difficult to decide the 
order or strength of these various elements and ideas. Roth 
Munda and Mediterranean must have been followed by 
religious elements from Asia Minor brought via Mesopo- 
tamia by traders and settlers from the West which super- 
seded the fertility and soul-matter cult by one of personi- 
fied deities, sacrificial propitiation and a formalized wor- 
ship, again with phallic elements and such institutions 
as that of the D'evadasi together with astronomical lore 
and cultures of the heavenly bodies and priestly institu- 
tions. These formed a proto-Hinduism which by its re- 
actions to the imported religion of the Aryan invaders who 
gained unquestioned social ascendency resulted in modern 
Hinduism. Such in more or less rough outline may well 
have been the development in this sphere. We may now 


5 68 $ 


SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


try and look into some specific details as instances of the 
complex process of which the full details will perhaps 
never become clear. 

Before entering the details, one preliminary point may 
be mentioned. Scholars have stressed with much appro- 
priateness the fact that in modem Hinduism only the so- 
cial elements of Vedic rites have survived like the common 
people participating in some aspects of religious ceremo- 
nials even sacrifices not excepted, marriage ceremonies 
and so on; even here there has been much syncretism with 
folk customs like the tying of the tali in marriage which 
finds no sanction in any old manuals of the ceremonials 
like the grhya sutras. The point to be noted is that though 
society was or at least aimed at being Aryan, most of its 
religion seems to be older and pre-Aryan in its essentials. 
Historical Hinduism makes its first appearance not in the 
Panjab where the Aryan element may have predominated 
in the Vedic period, but farther east where the chances 
of a stable equal mixture were greater. “It is quite clear/’' 
says Hutton, “that the previous inhabitants of India lived 
in cities and had a high civilization, probably of W. Asiatic 
origin, and it is significant that Hinduism is remarkable for 
the similarity of many of its tenets and practices with 
those of Asia Minor and Mesopotamia/’ Siva, Visnu and 
Kali become more important than Indra and his company 
of old Vedic gods, and they carry any pre- and non-Aryan 
traits, with some later accretions as in the Krsna cycle. It 
is perhaps worth noting in passing, however, that the 
Tamil vin, sky, cannot account for Visnu, though some 
contamination with a sky-god is possible as L. V. Rama- 
swami Aiyar pointed out. It mav also be noted that bull 
and snake cults are common to Mohenjo Daro and Oete* 


§ 69 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


and. are also found widespread, particularly the snake 
cult, in the rest of India from apparently late prehistoric 
times. 

Hauer in his Glakbengeschichte rightly stresses the fact 
that it is no easy thing to unravel the non-Aryan religious 
elements in the Rudra concept of later times. He points 
out that Rudra was originally a good Aryan deity over- 
laid in course of time with the later mythological accre- 
tions gathered together in one of the relatively recent 
parts of the Mdhdbhdrata (XII ch. 285 ff) which also con- 
tains the story of the yafna of Daksa and the Sivasahasra- 
nama. There is quite a bright side to Rudra according to 
Hauer and no un-Aryan trace in such texts as RV. 11.33, 
1.43, (4-6), 1.129.3, X.92-9, etc. and there is a clear line 
of development which leads from this through the AV, and 
other samhita texts to the highest philosophical concept 
of Rudra-Siva culminating in the Sveidsvatara Upanisad. 
Rudra is also Agni and Asura, a word of good repute 
originally applied to Indra and Varuna also. But this line 
is not represented in the sacrifice books, which always stress 
the dark side of Rudra. The earliest Aryan worshippers 
of Rudra who had settled in India suffered along with the 
indigenous inhabitans as a result of fresh Aryan inroads 
and found themselves forced to seek refuge in mountains, 
forests and the remote parts of the country; in this phase 
Rudra developed new aspects like that of Pa^upati, lord 
of beasts — a concept perhaps drawn from the Harappan 
culture, and certain incipient original traits of his — the 
erotic, ecstatic, gloomy and wild ones — received greater 
development and emphasis by contact with the eastern 
peoples as these characteristics agreed with their own (the 
eastern peoples) vegetation-god and goddesses and rites 


§ 70 § 


SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


xelating to them; thus by a law of the attraction of the 
related, as it were, the lowest levels of early Indo-Aryan 
faith and practice became united with and strengthened 
by the original eastern traits. Schroeder (. Arische Religion) 
has rightly compared Rudra with Odin, and this parallel 
has been noticed by others as well, e.g., Otto, Leonard. 
Again, Megasthenes’ Dionysus is surely Rudra-Siva in 
the form in which eastern influences have shaped the 
deity. One may compare the youthful Cretan Zeus, also 
developed doubtless from the Indo-Germanic Ur-Gott 
along local lines under local influences. Rudra-Ekavratya 
belonged to the original Aryan but non-brahmanical cul- 
ture groups who had their home in the north and east of 
Madhyade^a and in Magadha, where Buddhism and Jain- 
ism came up later, perhaps not without relation to the 
heretical Saivism of the earliest Aryan arrivals who were 
also the custodians of the Mahavrata and of a higher wis- 
dom embodied in the tradition of the Purusa. 

I have cited Hauers views at some length not because 
1 accept them all, much less because I wish to enter into 
any criticism of them, but just to show how complex the 
questions are with which we are concerned here. These 
views contain many suggestions and hints that may help 
the student in some ways. I shall now complete the 
•sketch of his views on the subject before proceeding to 
other topics. The old concept of the good god Rudra 
keeps on, as already indicated, and culminates in the 
SvetaSvatara, the high hymn of the One God. There is no 
Svetaivatara among the Vedic schools, and the Sveta^va- 
taras were members of a non-Brahmin Vratya Samgha. 
Their Upanisacl , particularly its fifth chapter, is important 
for Sankhya and yoga tradition of Kapila. It is the great 


§ 71 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS CULTURAL CONTACTS 


charter of the old Indian theism of eka deva Rudra-Siva*. 
Indo-Aiyan thought is characterized by a polarity between, 
the personal and super-personal, and here the personal oc- 
cupies the foreground. Another polarity is that between 
transcendence and immanence developed with wonderful 
clarity. Immanence has a threefold aspect. God is the 
world, its creative secret, and its in dweller (in man as well); 
transcendence as substratum of all being (Abgrund alles. 
seines) AV. X. 8 as yet shows no sign of world-weariness 
as also the older strata of the Upanisads which discourse 
often on amrtarn. Later on we get the tendency that finds 
its culmination in the Buddha — mucyate sarvapmaih. 

Several new features make their appearance in later 
Vedic religion which are not found in the religion of the 
Rgveda , and it is generally a difficult thing to decide how 
far these new features are the results of a natural develop- 
ment of an internal nature and how far they reflect the 
results of contacts with the pre-Aryan j>eoples and cul- 
ures. Among the new features, some of the most prominent 
are the cult of the moon and of snakes, of the debt and of 
dead/lMs, phallic symbolism and human sacrifice. The 
idea of human sacrifice underlines the Vurusa-mlda , but the 
sukta is a late hymn and it has been interpreted by some 
as embodying at least in part some non-Aryan folk-myth 
of creation. The cult of the moon, on the other hand, gets 
mixed up with the cult of the sacrificial plant soma whose 
juice is identified with the drink of immortality (amrta) and 
drunk ceremonially at sacrifices and possibly on other oc- 
casions as well, and in this latter respect it has been traced 
to the earliest Indo-European times (M'acdonell, Vedic 
Mythology). The other features enumerated above havo 
been traced to pre- and non-Aryan sources both in India 


§ 72 § 



SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


and outside, particularly to lands bordering on the eastern 
Mediterranean and to Western Asia. 

The idea of transmigration and reincarnation of souls is 
very common in later Vedic literature; but it was unknown 
to the earlier northern religion in which the dead continue 
to live underground. Ancestor-worship is another similar 
trait impossible among nomads who may have introduced 
creation and thus given it a social cachet. But in fact the 
question of the disposal of the dead is a tricky one and 
has been solved in diverse ways under the influence of 
differing conditions and ideas. The Iranians, for instance, 
held that fire was sacred and was not to be polluted by 
contact with the dead body; but the Rgvecla has both cre- 
mation and burial, and burial has been retained for scm~ 
nyasis and children (below two) even after cremation be- 
came universal. Holy places have been recognized outside 
Aryavarta with non-brahmin priests officiating in some of 
them. Cow-killing (Sulagava) was practised by the Aryans; 
but the cow seems to have been cherished by the cattle- 
loving pre-Aryans; at any rate the sanctity of the cow is 
unknown to the Rgveda. On the other hand the Serna 
Nagas still have something like the Sulagava, killing with 
a pointed stake and erecting a wooden post with a round 
top morticed on to it. It is not easy to accept the antithesis 
suggested by Marshall between bull-worship and cow-wor- 
ship; both were pre-equine (perhaps pre-iron also) and pre- 
Aryan in India. And one wonders also if in the stories of 
Kaliyadamana and Khandavadahana one may see evidence 
of an opposition between the snake-cult and the Aryans. 

Even pre-Vedic proto-Hinduism may have included be- 
liefs and practices that had come in by trade routes from 
Asia Minor. The magic element is common to tribal reli- 

§ 73 § 

06 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS CULTURAL CONTACTS 


gion and Hinduism, and some scholars have suggested 
that the Vedic Brahma (mantra or spell) is more or less 
the same as mana (Bolynesian) in nature; and they invite 
attention to the sanctity of the fig tree connected with 
fertility (through the milk-like sap ?) and with the spirits 
of the dead over a wide area including Africa, Italy, New 
Guinea, Assam and the Andamans and suggest that all this 
may stem from original Negrito traits. The view of soul- 
matter or life itself as a transferable and material sub- 
stance is familiar in Indonesia and farther India; it is not 
unknown in India also. In the garbhddhdna ceremony the 
husband infuses the clarhha grass in water and pours the 
water down the wife's nostrils to cause conception; also 
headhunting before marriage based on this theory is com- 
mon in Assam and elsewhere. The origin and migration of 
such practice unknown to demonstrably Aryan sources 
are problems into which we cannot go in any detail, but 
they have persisted in many areas of Indo-Aryan occupa- 
tion and have entered into the composite Indian heritage 
of modern times. Indecent priapic social customs are seen 
even now changing under influence of external criticism 
after a long period of customary survival; instances are 
Cochin government forbidding obscene songs at Holi, and 
Mysore and Madras terminating the devaddst system by 
legislation. 

In general we may say that tribal religions in India as 
we find them today form a sort of surplus material not yet 
built into the temple of Hinduism to what has already been 
used. The erection of megalithic monuments to the dead 
and of sail stones commemorating the self-immolation of 
chaste wives survived long into historical times, and pos- 
sibly still linger m a few obscure • spots of India, The 


§ 74 § 



SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


practice of fixing a pretasild (stone for the dead) for the 
performance of obsequies still persists among those who 
perform funeral rituals in the prescribed manner. All these 
practices have been interpreted as means of fixing or pro- 
pitiating harmful and dangerous spirits of the dead, and 
they seem to represent an inseparable blend of Aryan and 
non- Aryan. We may also mention the practice of human 
sacrifices for foundations of important structures like 
bridges, palaces, and so on, to impart permanence and 
stability from the soul-matter of the dead; till recently 
there were scares about children being kidnapped for such 
purposes in the neighbourhood of such constructions. There 
is also a whole wide area of little-explored institutions 
of tribal and semi-tribal society like totemism, witchcraft, 
hagiolatry and so on which still offer much scope for study, 
analysis and interpretation. 

Vedic religion was aniconie at the start, and even as 
late as the time of Yaska, sixth or seventh century b.c., the 
question was still a matter of debate whether gods had 
human shapes or not, some holding the one view and some 
the other. P'atanjali in his Mahdbhasya has an enigmatic 
passage in which he says that the Mauryas created images 
.(areas) in their desire for gold (hiranya); and in the early 
centuries b.c. and a.d. we get inscriptions and coins men- 
tioning and exhibiting images of Viras who were worship- 
lied in temples and gods and their symbols employed as 
devices on coins. Whether representation of deities in hu- 
man shapes is a natural evolution from discussions like 
those mentioned by Yaska, on a purely Vedic Aryan basis 
or was influenced by pre- non-Aryan religious beliefs and 
practices is by no means easy to settle. 

' It is generally known that almost all the gods of the 


$78 $ 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


modern Hindu polytheistic pantheon have been evolved 
by the syncretism of features drawn from diverse sources, 
and the subject has been dealt with at considerable length 
in several books on Hinduism — one of the latest in the 
line being Hindu Polytheism by Alian Danielou (London, 
1963). It is neither possible nor necessary to trace these 
developments in any detail here. But it is perhaps worth- 
while illustrating from one example the complexity of the 
questions involved. The worship of Kartikeya, called 
Murugan in Tamil, is today very common in the Tamil 
country, and has all but disappeared in Northern India. 
And the view has often been expressed that this God is a 
Tamil deity par excellence ah initio . But when I started 
testing the validity of these beliefs, I found a number of 
suiprises, and it now seems clear that this deity is no ex- 
ception to the general rule and that he is also an originally 
Indo-Aryan deity overlaid with a number of local and 
possibly non-Aryan traits in different places. It is true that 
in the early Sangam literature there are references to a 
Velan (a name afterwards applied to Murugan also) and 
his veriyddal or ecstatic dance; Velan literally means 'men 
with a spear”, and the early Tamil references to him lead 
us to suppose that he was some kind of a priest or Sha- 
man with powers of magic and divination, and he is often 
mentioned in contexts where he diagnoses the condition 
of lovestick maidens as possession by Murugan- On the 
other hand the same literature particularly in one of the 
Ten Idylls, the Tinimurugdrruppadai, and in the songs of 
the Paripadal , contains the entire gamut of the Kartikeya. 
cycle of mythology — his birth from Siva and Agni, his six 
faces and the motherhood of the Krttikas and of the wives 
of the six sages (all except Arundhati, the wife of Vasistha), 



SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


his leadership of the divine hosts in the war against Asuras 
particularly Jaraka (and the Tamil addition of Sura, not 
known to northern sources), and his eternal youth, beauty 
and other characteristics. One poem in the Paripdclal avers 
that on the day Murugan espoused the Tamil huntress 
Valli, his elder wife Devayana, daughter of Inclra, shed 
such a vast quantity of tears as filled the lake on the hill 
of Tirupparangunram, a hillock near Madura which carries 
one of the most sacred shrines of the deity. If, on the other 
hand, we turn to the northern sources we find references 
to the Kartikeya mythology which seem surely to carry 
us far back into Aryan and even Indo-European antiquity. 
In one of the early Upanisacls he is called Skanda and 
identified with Sanatkumara — kumara may well be the 
shorter form of this name— the teacher who imparts the 
moksa marga toNarada. (Chandogya, VII. 26). In the Vana 
Pawa of the Mahdbhdrata the Skanda mythology is set 
forth at some length and this account shows that the 
cycle links up with the myths of the wars between devas 
and asuras on the one hand, and with soma or Indu im- 
plying both the moon and the sacrificial Soma juice often 
identified with amrta , nectar or the drink of immortality 
on the other. Skanda gets Devasena, the divine army, as 
his wife after Indra rescues her from a Raksasa Ke£i whom 
Devasena’s sister Daityasena (the army of the anti-gods) 
loves and accepts as her husband. The connection with 
Soma takes us back perhaps to an Indo-European past 
when Madhu (mead) was looked upon as amrta. I have 
dealt with this complex mythology at some length in a 
paper on Muruga which I read before the Archaeological 
Society of South India, some months back and which will 
appear in due course in the transactions of the society for 


§ 77 $ 


DRAVTDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


1964. But I have said enough here to show that Skanda- 
Kartikeya has his roots in the early Indo-Aryan past if not 
in an earlier time, and the fact that Patahjali mentions 
his images, and that he is found figured with other com- 
panion deities in Kusana coins may also be taken to streng- 
then the same view. The Sarigam classics are relatively 
later than the other sources I have mentioned above and 
it seems a safe inference that this God was also taken 
over by the Tamils from the incoming Aryans though 
some new features were conferred on him by the usual 
process of syncretism, such as his identification with Velan 
and his veriyddal , and his second wife Valli. All his other 
traits including his cock banner and peacock mount are 
found in the northern cycle, though his elephant mount 
was also perhaps a Tamil accretion. We may in passing 
note among the efforts to Tamilize original Aryan deities 
the identification of Korravai with Durga, the bestowal 
of Pinnai as another wife on Krsna and so on. This highly 
interesting aspect of religious development which exhibits' 
clearly the mingling of originally distinct cultures to form 
the modern stream of Hinduism has begun to attract at- 
tention and led for instance to a study of the Vifhoba cult 
at Fandharpur. 1 The research on these lines deserves to be 
pushed much further. 

The great lesson learned by the sages of old and broad- 
cast to the world as a result of their contacts with pre- 
Aryan civilizations in India is the need for mutual under- 
standing and tolerance. This has been well stressed by 
Alain Danielou when he says in his recent book on Hindu 
Polytheism: “Hinduism, or rather eternal religion’ (Sana- 

1 C. A, Delewry, The Cult of Vithobo , Poona, 1960. 


5 78 § 



SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


tana Dharma), as it calls itself, recognizes for each age and 
each country a new form of revelation and for each man, 
according to his stage of development, a different path of 
realization, a different mode of worship, a different mora- 
lity, different rituals, and different gods/' 

Caste 

There remains one fundamental social institution of India 
which calls for some consideration before this brief sketch 
of a vast subject is brought to an end: and that is the 
caste system. Jati (caste) is obviously different from varna 
(lit. colour; but used for class). Jati with its hereditary 
feature and restrictions on inter-dining and inter-marriage 
is peculiar to India. The proliferation of castes has gone 
on right through history, and even reformers who wanted 
to abolish caste succeeded only in founding new castes. 
The writers of smrtis (law books) have a facile theory that 
new castes arise by mixed marriages (■ varna-sankaram ); 
whatever the element of truth in such a theory during the 
early stages of India’s social history, the idea ceased to be 
valid several tens of centuries ago, and we know that new 
castes come into existence owing to a multiplicity of prac- 
tical considerations, or mode of dressing the hair or clothes 
and what not. There has come up a great volume of litera- 
ture which discusses the problems involved — generally 
without reaching final or clear results — and I have no 
great hope that the present discussion will succeed where 
others have failed. 

There can be no doubt that the differing physical cha- 
racteristics of different peoples, called "races” at one time, 
had much to do with the origin of the system, but pre- 

§ 79 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


historic craniology in India is in a poor way, and there is 
even no indication that the Mohenjo Daro skeletons are 
of equal antiquity with their surroundings . 2 Adiccanallur 
and some other places in South India, Sialkot, Bayana 
(near Agra) and Nal in Baluchistan are some of the other 
sites that have been studied. Though it is possible to diff- 
erentiate Negroid, proto-australoid and Mediterranean 
and Alpine and other elements, they are by no means 
easily correlated to the castes as we know them. And the 
physical material for most of the Indian population seems 
to have been present in the Indus Valley at an early date. 

The separatist principle has become basic to the histo- 
rical Hindu society as we know it, and it is by no means 
easy to say if it is Aryan or non-Aryan in origin. Only the 
fact that this divine principle in its extreme form occurs 
only in India, while it is unknown in other countries which 
owe their historic civilization to the advent of the Aryans, 
points to the inference that it was perhaps basically pre- 
and non-Aryan. Two factors have contributed to the pro- 
liferation of caste right through history: the conserva- 

tism of groups is one, and tolerance of differences and 
the policy of live and let live, another. And the restrictions 
on dining and marriage have multiplied with the growth 
of the system. It is only in quite recent times that 
the impact of the West has brought in notions of social 
democracy among others, and to the progressive industria- 
lization and urbanization the old barriers are beginning 
to yield; though the change is yet not on a sufficiently large 
scale, there can be no doubt that the future lies with it. 

The institution of marriage in its relation to caste has 

2 Census Report , 1931, I, p. 444. 

§ 80 § 


SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS 


naturally evoked much attention and study, and without 
attempting any detailed or comprehensive study of this 
question, I shall just seek to illustrate the issues involved 
by citing one example furnished by a very suggestive book 
and the criticism it has evoked. The book I have in mind 
is S. V. Karandikar s Hindu Exogamy (Taraporevala, Bom- 
bay, 1929). The author has argued that gotra or sept 
exogamy was unknown to Indo-Europeans, and even to 
Indo-Iranians. It is a later and very rigid development 
(that is, in India) on two lines, viz. gotra and, still later, 
pravara exogamy); and forbidden degrees among sapindas. 
Baudhayana (fifth century b.c.) has no great penance for 
sagotra marriages and only a Krccra for the birth of a son 
from such a union; but 1,500 years later Vijnane^vara vio- 
lently condemns sagotra marriages, calls the wife a Can - 
dcili, and classes her issue likewise. Greek, Roman and Per- 
sian customs have no parallel to gotra exogamy. Karandi- 
kar suspects the influence of non-brahmin (pre-Aryan ?) 
totemic exogamy in the growing rigidity of sept exogamy. 
O. Bertold in a review 3 points out the secondary nature 
of the sources on which Karandikar relies for his study of 
aboriginal tribes, thinks that all their names are totemistic, 
and says that his own studies (unpublished) had led him 
to the same conclusion; he adds : “ I considered my reasons 
insufficient in a matter of such important. By the present 
work of S. V. Karandikar I consider the problems of Hindu 
exogamy to have been definitely solved” R. J. Richards 
has another review 4 of the hook also worth our attention. 
He draws attention to two systems of exogamy: (a) sept 

* Archiv Oriental i, II. 192-93. 

* Man , April 1930, No. 54. 


§ 81 5 


DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CXJLTURAL CONTACTS 


exogamy analogous to clan exogamy characteristic of the 
classificatory system of relationship all the world over; (fc) 
sapinda exogamy resembling the more capricious restric- 
tions of Christian ecclesiastic tables of kindred and affinity. 
Of (a) there is no trace in Vedic literature; Manu III, 5 
is the earliest reference where it means only “family” or 
“name,” i.e. an exogamous clan of the normal Dravidian 
type. Manu s text is : 

Asopindd ca yd mdtuli asagotrd ca yd pituh 

sd probata dmjdtmam darakarmani maithune 

The far-reaching scheme of Vedic pedigrees is the result 
of fusion and standardization worked out by jurists (like- 
Varna samkara theory) having little in common with the 
simple social units from which the gotras were originally 
derived- Dravidians stoutly resisted the expansion of pro* 
hibited degrees and refused to tamper with cross-cousin 
marriages. Not so in North India where a puritanizing zeal 
has in some socially ambitious castes outdone the Brah- 
mins. 

Richards also points out that Karandikar s ethnology is- 
rather sketchy. Indo-Aryan is applied to race, language 
and culture indiscriminately; Brahmins are treated as one 
homogeneous group. He ignores also that sections of non- 
brahmin society have often been raised by royal decree to 
Brahmin status. But his main conclusion is correct that 
gotra exogamy is modelled on indigenous prototypes while 
sapinda exogamy is not. 

Independent India has legalized sagotra marriages. 


$ 82 § 


Index 


Adhas, 60 

Adiccanllur, 80 

Aegea, 13 

Africa, 3, 74 

Afghanistan, 31, 35 

Agastya, 23, 65, 66 

Agni, 52, 70, 76 

Agni-Vai^vanara, 42 

Ahur Mazda, 51 

Aiyar, L. V. Ramasvami, 12, 63 

Alexander, 45 

Amrta, 72, 77 

Anatolia, 12, 32 

Ancestor-worship, 73 

Andamans, 74 

Andhras, 11 

Arachatos, 34 

Armenia, 12, 36 

Arghandab, 34 

Arhat, 53 

Arta Lama, 28 

Artamna, 28 

Arundhati, 76 


Aryavarna, 45 
Aryanization, 64-5 
Aryavarta, 42, 43, 75 
Asia, 21, 36 

Asia Minor, 9, 11, 12, 13, 36, 69,. 
73 

Afoka, 52 
asrcima , 61 
Assam, 74 
Asura(s), 70, 77 

Atharvaveda, 53, 55, 57, 70, 72 

Aupamanyava, 46 

Avestd , 32, 37 

Ayodhya, 23 

Ayyangar, 2 

Ayyar, 2 

Brindavan, 49 
Brown, G. W., 12 
Buddha, 57, 58, 72 
Biihler, 4, 43 

Burrow, J., 7, 17, 26, 30, 33, 36, 
37, 38, 39, 67 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS CULTURAL CONTACTS 


Calcutta, 6 

Gandhi, 46 

Caldwell, 9, 11, 12, 19, 20 

Ganga (Ganges), 42, 49, 62 

Cambal, 22 

garbhcidhana , 74 

Candall, 81 

Geiger, W., 31 

Caspian Sea, 36 

Germany, 50 

Caucasia, 36 

Gita , 46, 52 

Caucasus, 30, 36 

Godavari, 22, 62 

Census of India, 68 

Gomati , 35 

Ceylon, 20 

gotra, 81, 82 

Chandogya Upanlsad , 50 

Greece, 15, 41 

Chandoli, 22 

grhastha, 61 

Charpentier, 53 

Gmnal, 35 

Chattopadhyaya, K., 54 


Chanda, 46 

Hagiolatry, 75 

Cochin, 74 

Hague, 67 

Cyrus, 52 

Haimendorf, F., 8, 16 


Hall, H. R., 4 

Daityasena, 77j 

Hanuman, 67 

Daksa, 70 

Harappa, 4, 9, 33 

Danielou, Alian, 76, 78 

Harappan culture, 70 

Dasavarna, 45 

Harayu, 31 

Das, A. C., 25 

Harhavati, 34 

Deccan, 7, 34, 49, 63 

Harnavati, 31 

devaddst , 55, 68, 72, 74 

Haridasa of Karnatak, 59 

Devasena, 77 

Hariob, 35 

Devayana, 77 

Hauer, 49, 50, 51, 52, 57, 59, 60, 

Dionysus, 71 

70, 71 

D. K., 1 

Heine-Geldem, R., 36 

DMK, 1 

Helmund, 34 

Drsadvati, 42 

Heras, H., 4, 55, 59, 60, 61, 66 

Durga, 78 

Herrenvolk, 25, 49, 50 

Dvarka, 49 

Hildebrandt, 34 


hiranya, 75 

Eastern Islands, 6 

Hitler, 25, 49 

Ekarsx, 57 

HoK, 56, 74 

Ekavratya, 57 

Human sacrifice, 72, 75 

Euphrates, 12 

Hutton, J. H., 6, 7, 11, 18, 47, 68, 

Europe, 26, 27 

69 


§ 84 § 


INDEX 


Huxley, Julian, 2, 3 
Indara, 28 

India, 1, 8, 9, 17, 18, 21, 22, 

25, 28, 30, 31, 34, 36, 37, 

40, 41, 43, 44, 48, 49, 59, 

74, 79, 80, 81 
Indo-China, 23 
Indonesia, 23, 64, 74 
Indra, 52, 59, 63, 69, 70, 77 
Indra Purandar, 33 
In du, 77 
Indus, 32 
Indus Valley, 80 
Iraitjandr Ahapporul , 4 
Iran, 12, 13, 21, 28, 30, 32, 36 
Italy, 41, 74 

Jacobi, H., 25 

Jaimimya Upanisad Brahmana , 
50 

Jaraka, 77 
Jehovah, 51 

Kacchapa, 57 
Kalamdani, N. B., 59 
Kali, 69 

Kaliyadamana, 73 
Kandahar, 34 
Kapila, 71 

Karandikar, S. V., 81, 82 
Karmarkar, A. P., 59 
Kamata, 10 
Kartikeya, 76, 77 
Ka^yapa, 57 
Keiia Upanisad, 50-1 
Katyayana, 62 
Kautilya, 62 


Keith, A. B., 6, 46, 52, 54, 58 
Kesin, 57 

Khandavadahana, 73 
Kikkali, 29 
Korravai, 78 
Krccra, 81 
Krom, 20, 65 
Krsna, 49, 63, 78 
Krsna cycle, 69 
Krttikas, 76 
Kruma, 35 
Kumarila, 10 
Kurdistan, 32 
Kurmavatara, 57 
Kurram, 35 
Kuru, 42 
Kuruksetra, 42 
Kuru-Pancalas, 42 

Lahovary, N., 14, 15 
Lai, B. B., 22 
Leakey, 3 
Lemuria, 3 
Leonard, 71 
London, 76 
Lothal, 33 
Luristan, 36 

Macdonell, 54, 72 
Madagascar, 6 
MadhyadeSa, 37, 49, 42, 71 
Madras, 74 
Madura, 63, 77 
Madhu, 77 
Madhuparka, 67 
Matrya, 42 
Magadha, 55, 71 
Mahabhasya, 75 


§ 85 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS CULTURAL CONTACTS 


Mahabharata, 22, 45, 56, 63, 

Narada, 77 

65, 70, 77 

Narmada, 22 

Mahdvrata, 55, 71 

Nasatia(nna), 28 

Mahdvakya , 60 

Nasatyas, 28 

Maharastra, 10 

Navdatoli, 22, 34 

Mahismati, 62 

Nazism, 49 

Manavrata, 57 

Nevasa, 34 

Mam, 11, 44, 82 

New Guinea, 74 

Manusmrtiy 42, 43, 65 

New Zealand, 6 

Marshall, 73 

Nimkta, 45 

Marut, 29 


Marriage, 80 

Odin, 71 

Mativaja, 28 

Oldenberg, 41 

Matiwaza, 28 

Oldham, 25 

Mathura, 49 

Otto, 71 

Max Muller, 2, 25 

Oxford, 7 

Maya, 67 


Medhatitlii, 43 

Pacific Ocean, 7 

Mediterranean, 4, 11, 14, 68, 

Painted Grey Ware, 9, 22 

73, 80 

Pal, Radhabinod, 54 

Megasthenes, 23, 71 

Palestine, 3, 28 

Mesopotamia, 11, 12, 13, 28, 

Pancadravidas, 10-11 

68, 69 

Pancala, 42 

Mitanni, 12, 28, 36 

Pandharpur, 78 

Mitra, 28 

Panjab, 6, 21, 31, 35, 69 

Mitras(il), 28 

Pargiter, 25 

Mixed marriages, 75 

Taripadal , 76, 77 

Mohenjodaro, 9, 11, 33, 69, 79 

Parsastar, 28 

Moksa marga, 77 

Parvati, 13 

Mon Khmer, 68 

Pasupati, 70 

Mulaka, 62 

Patanjali, 75, 78 

Mulavarman, 44 

Persia, 36 

Muni, 57 

Petersburg, 67 

Muruga, 77 

Philippines, 64 

Murugan, 76-7 

Pinnai, 78 

Mysore, 74 

Poerbatcharka, 23 


Prajapati, 52, 57, 59 

Nal, 80 

Prambanan, 64 


4 86 4 


INDEX 


Prasastar, 28 
Prasna Upanisad , 56 
Pratisthan, 62 
pretasila, 75 
Prnc Parka, 67 
Przyluski, 6, 7, 40 
Purandara Inclra, 8 
puniscali, 55 
piisai , 67 
pum, 67 m 
Purusa-Sukta, 59, 72 
Purus, 42 

Raksasa, 19 

Raksasa kesi, 77 

Rama, 23, 64 

Ramayana , 19, 63, 64, 67 

Ramaswami Aiyar, L. V., 69 

Rangpur, 33 

Rgveda , 5, 11, 13, 25, 28, 31, 
'*32, 34, 35, 38, 52, 55, 56, 
59, 60, 72, 73 
Rhine, 27 

Richards, R. G-, 81, 82 
Risley, H., 18 
Rtamna, 28 
Rudra, 58, 70, 71 
Rudra Ekavratya, 71 
Rudra Kana, 56 
Rudra Siva, 49, 53, 57, 70, 71, 
72 

% Ruvanass(il), 28 

'Sabdakalpadruma, 10 
Sadanira, 42 
■sadhyas, 58 
Sarnia, A., 16 
Sarup, L., 46 


Sanatkumara, 77 
Sangam, 3, 63, 64, 65, 78 
Sankalia, H. D., 21, 22 
Sankara, 61 

Sankhyana Srauta Sutra , 55 
Sankhya, 71 
nanny am, 61 
Saurastra, 21 

Sanskritization, 48, 63, 64 
Sarasvati, 31, 34 
Sarayu, 31 
Satarudriya, 57 
sati, 74 
Schayer, 13 
Schoner, 12 
Schrader, 31 
Schroedar, 71 
Sharma, R. S., 1 
Sialkot, 80 
Sind, 21, 22, 47 
Siva, 54, 63, 69, 76 
Sivaratri, 56 
Sivasahasranama, 70 
Skanda-kartikeya, 78 
Skandapurdna, 10 
Smith, V., 47 
Snake-cult, 73 
Soma, 58, 72, 77, 78 
Sri Krsna, 49 

Srinivasa Iyangar, P. T., 3 

Sringeri, 61 , 

Stein, 31, 33, 35 

Stem, 32 

Sthalipaka, 63 

Sutarana, 28 

Sutarna, 28 

Suppiluliuma, 28 

Surya, 29 


§ 87 § 



DRAVIDIANS AND ARYANS — CULTURAL CONTACTS 


Surasena, 42 
Soayambhu, 57 

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 57, 67, 
70, 71 

Svetaketu, 61 
surias, 29 
Sylvain Levi, 6, 7 
Syr Daria, 31 
Syria, 28 

Tailangas, 11 
Taittiriya Samhitd , 55 
tali , 63, 69 

Tandy a Mahdbrdhmana, 55 
Tapti, 22 
Taraporevala, 81 
Ten Idylls , 76 
Thessaly, 22 
Tilak, B. G., 25 
Tirsratha, 28 
Tirumurugarruppadai , 76 
Tirupparangunram, 77 
Tolkappiyar, 68 
Tolkappiyam, 63 
Transcaucasia, 36 
Tusratten, 28 
Turkestan, 36 

Ujjayini, 62 
upanayana , 53 

Valli, 77, 78 
Valmlki, 19 


Vana Par van, 77 
Vanara, 19 
Vardha^va, 28 
Vanina, 52, 63, 70 
Varna Sankara, 79, 82 
Vasistha, 51, 76 
Velan, 76, 78 
Veriyadal, 76, 78 
Videgha Mathava, 42 
Vijayanagara, 61 
Vijilanesvara, 81 
Viryasilra, 28 
Visnu, 63, 69 

Visnu-Krsna, 49 % 

Vithoba cult, 78 
Vratyastoma, 53, 54 
Vratya Samgha, 71 
Vrddhasva, 28 

Waziristan, 35 
Webu, 53 
Winternitz, 54 
Witchcraft, 75 

Yajna , 70 
Yajurveda , 54 
Yamuna, 49 
Yaska, 40, 45, 75 

Zarathnshtra, 51 
Zeus, 7 
Zhob, 35 
Zimmer, 13 


§ 88 § 






Central Archaeological Library, 


NEW DELHI. 




Call No. %\' 0^3^ 


Kfr't . 


Author-^ k ' A 




