GO VERNMENT OF INDIA 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 


ACCESSION NO.. 44 3 0^) 

call No. £ 9 4 - 5 o 35 45 Nil 


D.G.A779 



A? 


73°£ 


S5°£ 


^ AjANTA 


AURANGABAD 



BHUVANESVAfUzcf 


J06ESVAR ^a.KANHERJ 
BOMB 

ELEPHANTaI!' a dhAiA 


k KARLE 
BHAjA 
^ BEDSA 


Kk TER □ HYDERABAD 

JAflSAYYAPETA A 
NAG ARJUNAKON 

5 RISAILAM A £ 
PATTADAKAL CHEZARLA 


s - StMHACHALAM B 
A BHA ORACH Al AM 


(' VIZ AG A PAT AM 


DRAKSHARAMA 


ARABIAN 


□ MODERN CITIES Y\T 
A HINDU MONUMENTS \\\ 
A HINDU (R0CK-CUT) V 
~m BUDDHIST MONUMENTS' 
BUDDHIST (ROCK-CUT) 
O JAIN MONUMENT 


1\L £ lur 1A h ^ b " 

sravanabelgolaO 

\SOMANATHPuaJb 


□ BANGALORE 


bhattiprolo 

QANTASALA 


BAY OF 
BENGAL 


□ MADRAS 


CONJEEVARAM 8 B A' MAHAB. 

m 

m TIRUVANNAMALAI 


HJDAMBARAM 

0LvMT TAN Ji 


' A RAMESWARAM 


RELIGIOUS SITES 

A 

MONUMENTS - 

Scale or Miles 


TRtVANORUM □ 


CAPE COMORIN 


75* E 


60 * E 


1ST 



DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGION 

IN 

SOUTH INDIA 


'A A 

% f i 


By 

K. A. N1LAKANTA SASTRI 


#i,' * 

|’;A r,P.;«2| 

t 


ZIltSMSkg. 

nr 


ORIENT LONGMANS 
BOMBAY - CALCUTTA - MADRAS - NEW DELHI 



ORIENT LONGMANS LIMITED 
Registered Office: 17 chittaranjan avenue, Calcutta 13 

NICOL ROAD, BALLARD ESTATE, BOMBAY 1 

36a mount road, madras 2 
1/24 ASAF ALI ROAD, NEW DELHI 1 
SARABHAI ESTATE, SHAHPUR ROAD, AHMEDABAD 1 
17 WOOD STREET, SHOOLAY, BANGALORE 1 
GUNFOUNDRY ROAD, HYDERABAD 1 
373/374 NARAYAN PETH, LAXMI ROAD, POONA 2 
Also at 17 NAZIMUDDIN ROAD, DACCA 
LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO. LTD 
48 GROSVENOR STREET, LONDON W. 1 
RAILWAY CRESCENT, CROYDON, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA 
443 LOCKHART ROAD, HONG KONG 
LONGMANS OF MALAYA LTD 
44 AMPANG ROAD, KUALA LUMPUR 

LONGMANS SOUTHERN AFRICA (PTY) LTD 

THIBAULT HOUSE, THIBAULT SQUARE, CAPE TOWN 

LONGMANS CANADA LTD 

137 BOND STREET, TORONTO 2 


OFN' VM L A ^ i v ' */ 

JJ.iiuAKY, > • jj” ^ 

First Published, 1963. 44 O O 5 

c. No A. >...«* 

fe-S^/9^ 


Ar- 
Date . . 
1 No 


... 5 . 6.9 F.kff'., t 


O ORIENT LONGMANS, LTD., 1963 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

AT THE JUPITER PRESS PRIVATE LTD., MADRAS- 18 


PREFACE 

At the invitation of The American Historical Association and 
the University of Chicago, I became Visiting Professor at that 
University during the spring and summer quarters of 1959, 
I delivered lectures in three courses on South Indian History 
and the present book is based upon one of them bearing on 
Development of Religion in South India. 

My thanks are due to Mr. C. S. S. Thathachari of Orient 
Longmans for undertaking the publication and to Mr. M. San- 
karan, B.A. (Hons.) who compiled the Index to this book. 


K. A. N. 



CONTENTS 


CHAP. 


PAGE 

I. 

Introduction 

1 

II. 

Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hin- 
duism. The Age of the Sangam 

12 

III. 

Bhakti Movements in the South 

35 

IV. 

Gods and Sects 

49 

V. 

Philosophies in Relation to Religion 

79 

VI. 

Religious Institutions 

97 

VII. 

Movements after a.d. 1000 : The Role of Vijaya- 
nagar (1336-1650) : Reform and Modem 
Hinduism 

120 


Bibliography 

141 


Index 

145 




DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGION 

IN 

SOUTH INDIA 


I. INTRODUCTION 

Religion has generally formed one of the most important 
factors in the life and history of all nations. In India it has 
animated social life in an exceptional measure and the concept 
of Dharma has commanded universal allegiance throughout the 
sub-continent in all its history. It has exerted its influence even 
on the followers of alien faiths like Islam and Christianity, which 
in their turn have also influenced it, though perhaps not to the 
same extent. It is the aim of this little book to trace the leading 
religious movements in the history of South India and assess the 
contribution made' by their leaders at different times to the 
practice of religion and the speculations* of philosophy which 
in India were seldom divorced from religion. 

By South India we mean the entire triangular peninsula 
south of the dividing line formed by the Vindhya mountains and 
the Narmada and Tapti rivers in the west and the MahanadI in 
the east. This region has been held to be one of the oldest 
habitats of man, say from 300,000 b.c. ; this view gains support 
from the discovery of considerable numbers of paleoliths, crude 
stone implements, in various parts, though not of skeletal remains 
of humans. These were followed by microliths, some of which 
are thought to be as old as 6000 b.c. if not earlier, though their 
use seems to have continued till relatively much later. The 
remains of the neolithic age are more plentiful, though not enough 
to give a clear picture of its life and culture. Many megalithic 
monuments have come to light and these constitute tangible 
evidence of the latest phases of the pre-history of South India — 
a subject that is being studied systematically only of late. 

Megalithic settlements are generally found on the slopes of 
hills or amidst rocky outcrops in the neighbourhood of natural 



2 Development of Religion in South India 

tanks and reservoirs, and it seems probable that the people who 
erected the megalithic monuments also introduced the cultivation 
of rice by irrigation in South India. They brought also ‘ an 
elaborate equipment of iron, wheel turned pottery, and the 
custom of burying the dead, sometimes, collectively, after 
exposure and excarnation, in megalithic cists with a round port- 
hole or doorway in one end’. 1 More or less contemporaneous 
with these cists are urnfields where the dead are seen buried in 
large pear-shaped urns associated with smaller urns. One of 
the best known of these urnfields is that of Adiccanallur on the 
Tamraparni river in the Tinnevelly District. In the neighbour- 
hood of Madras a terracotta sarcophagus on legs takes the place 
of the urns. The urnfields have no megaliths but share many 
common features with them. 2 Finds in some sites of Cyprus 
and Syria, dating from about 1200 b.c., include iron tridents, 
bronze cocks, gold mouth pieces and other articles very similar 
to those found in Adiccanallur ; the megaliths of eastern Medi- 
terranean and Western Asia also closely resemble those of the 
Deccan and South India ; but they have been dated round about 
1500 b.c, Facts like these suggest the probability that the 
megalithic culture of South India may have been brought by a 
western people across the Arabian Sea to South India several 
centuries earlier than the post-Asokan period to which Wheeler 
has with good reason assigned the artifacts of Brahmagiri, 
D. H. Gordon and Haimendorf are inclined to suggest some date 
about 800 or 700 b.c. for this event. Considering the manner 
in which the Tamil Kingdoms are mentioned in Asokan edicts, 
this date would seem to be nearer the truth than any later date. 

^ Very plausibly Haimendorf has suggested that this mega- 
lithic folk who came into South India by sea from the west were 
the Dravidians who in course of time not only imposed their 
own speech on the pre-Dravidian population of the South, but 
soon became ready to absorb and profit by the Indo-Aryan 
influences which began to flow in from Northern India witnin 
a few centuries of their arrival. Till recently it was vaguely 
assumed that Dravidian speaking peoples were spread over 
practically the whole of India before the Aryans came, and that 
they were identical with the Dasas and Dasyus of the Rigveda ; 
the views of Sir Herbert Risley on the races and cultures of pre- 
Aryan and Indo-Aryan India formulated in the early years of 
the twentieth century were largely based on this assumption. 


1 Wheeler in Smith O.H.P p. 36. 

2 Ancient India, No. 9, pp. 110-11. 



Introduction 


3 


The subsequent progress of linguistic analysis and of anthropo- 
logical studies has led to very different conclusions pointing to 
a more complex picture. The Dasa-Dasyus now seem to be 
affiliated to the pre-Aryan peoples of Eastern Iran and Afghanis- 
tan and to have occupied a considerable area in the North-west 
of India which certainly included the Indus Valley and the 
Punjab. Lands lying more to the east in Northern India, the 
Gangetic plain and the Vindhyan highlands, were occupied by 
Austric speaking peoples who are best described as Ni§adas. 
The north-eastern sector of Northern India and more generally 
the Himalayan regions formed the home of peoples with a strong 
Mongoloid admixture who are now designated Kiratas . 3 Most 
probably the Dravidian speaking people whom we now find 
confined to South India did not occupy any extensive tracts in 
the rest of India though at various times and for specific reasons 
they may have spilled over as colonies into the North, like the 
Brahuis in Baluchistan. The attempt, particularly by the late 
Father H. Heras, to trace the Indus Valley Culture to the 
Dravidians and to interpret the inscriptions on the numerous 
seals as proto-Dravidian has not received the assent of scholars, 
and until the script of these inscriptions is deciphered satisfac- 
torily, the genesis and the language of the culture must remain 
open questions. The claim that the pre-Aryan Dravidians 
enjoyed a highly developed civilization rests only on data drawn 
from the literature of the Sangam 4 period, data to which a fanciful 
antiquity of several thousands of years is ascribed by credulous 
or * patriotic 9 writers . 8 Bishop Caldwell who sought to recon- 
struct the pre-Aryan culture of the Dravidians by a relatively 
critical study of the words in Tamil, doubtless one of the most 
ancient of the surviving Dravidian languages, did not find any 
support for the extravagant claims of the writers mentioned above, 
but discovered the elements of a culture that had made some 
progress towards a settled social and political order, but was 
still very far from having attained the complexity of the organi- 
zation reflected in the literature of the Sangam period . 6 The 


8 S. K. Chatterji : Race Movements and Prehistoric Culture, ch. VIII 
in Vedic India — History and Culture of the Indian People, Vol. I (1951). 

4 The Sangam (Skt. Sangha) was an Academy of Tamil maintained 
by the early Pandyas in Madurai' — according to legend dating from the 
eighth or ninth century and a copper plate grant of the early tenth 
century. 

5 cf. P. T. Srinivasa Iyengar — Pre-Aryan Tamil Culture, 

6 Caldwell : Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian Languages 3 * 

pp. 113-4, 



4 Development of Religion in South India 

fact remains that Dravidian culture becomes articulate and enters 
the field of authentic recorded history only after its contact with 
Indo-Aryan. The earliest inscriptions of the Tamil country are 
found engraved on stone surfaces in natural caverns slightly 
improved by art and just rendered habitable ; the inscriptions 
themselves are short records in southern Brahmi characters of 
about the third or second century b.c. at the earliest, and already 
contain such Sanskrit words as Kutumbika though otherwise 
composed of Tamil in its formative stage. These brief records 
are generally donative or commemorative in character, and give 
the names of donors or resident monks of the caverns who were 
probably both Buddhists and Jains. The literature of the Sangam 
age, i.e., of the early centuries of the Christian era, appears to 
reflect conditions as they stood some three or four centuries after 
the period of the short cave inscriptions. That literature is now 
accessible only in schematic anthologies made much later. Many 
of these anthologies open with an invocatory song in praise of 
Siva and His attributes and exploits, and this song is by the poet 
‘ Perundevanar who sang the Bharatam \ i.e., translated the 
Great Epic ( Mahabharata ) into Tamil poetry. Now, the earliest 
extant Tamil Bh&ratam is a work of considerable length which, 
like Campus in Sanskrit, uses both, prose and poetry in the 
narrative ; it was the work of a Perundevanar who was a contem- 
porary of the Pallava king Nandivarman III in the ninth 
century a.d. It has been suggested that this poet was the com- 
piler of the anthologies. But one cannot be sure of this ; for 
we gather from a Pandyan inscription of the tenth century 7 that 
the Pandyan kings had the Mahabharata translated into Tamil, 
besides establishing the Sangam. This implies that there was an 
earlier Tamil version of the Bharatam> and it is prima facie 
more likely that it was this author of the Pandyan country that 
put together the anthologies as we now have them. The antho- 
logies present problems of literary chronology which are similar 
to those of the Rigveda and are nearly as difficult of satisfactory 
solution. 

Tamil the language which possesses the oldest of the known 
literatures in the Dravidian languages, occupies the extreme south 
of the peninsula and its area now coincides with the state of 
Madras with a population of about 30 millions, of whom less 
than 4 millions speak other languages than Tamil. It may be 
noticed en passant that the reorganization of the Indian States 
(1956) has resulted, for the first time in India’s history, in the 


7 Larger Sinnamamir plates — Tamil part SII. IT. 



Introduction 


5 


creation of linguistic States ; time must show whether the result- 
ing cultural solidarity of the individual states will be duly 
restrained or burst the bond of political unity inherited from 
British rule and cherished by the Constitution of the Union. 
Kerala on the west coast of South India, the home of the 
Malayalam language, is a smaller state with a population of 
13*5 millions ; the Malayalam literature is the youngest of Dravi- 
dian literatures with a history beginning in the thirteenth or 
fourteenth century a.d. Mysore contains 14*5 million Kannada 
speakers besides five million others ; the extant literature in 
Kannada dates from the tenth century, though we have in the 
Kavirajamdrga, ‘the Royal Road of Poets’, c, 850 a.d., a 
rhetorical work which presupposes the existence of a considerable 
body of prose and poetry in the language. A Greek farce 
recorded in a papyrus of the third century a.d. is held by some 
scholars to contain several expressions in Kannada ; but this 
unconvincing claim has not gained acceptance and the beginnings 
of Kannada literature must be assigned to rather three centuries 
later, if not more. Telugu is the main language of Andhra 
Pradesh spoken by about 31 millions ; its literature begins from 
the eleventh century, though the inscriptions of an earlier time 
contain stray verses in native metres. These are the four prin- 
cipal Dravidian languages. There are several others spoken by 
small numbers and with no written literature worth the name ; 
they are of interest to philologists and not of much concern for 
our purpose. Marathi is the speech of 27 millions in Western 
Deccan and Oriya of about 13 millions in the north-east of 
peninsular India ; these are Indo-Aryan languages — extensions 
of North India into the South. 

All the modern Indian languages, southern as well as 
northern, have developed from the beginning on a common 
background of culture furnished by Sanskrit language and litera- 
ture, particularly the two great epics and the Puraijas. The 
process by which this common cultural background was rendered 
acceptable to non-Sanskritic peoples used to be called Aryaniza- 
tion and has come to be designated more recently as ‘ Sanskriti- 
zation \ not a more satisfactory term by any means. Though 
conflicts were not unknown at first, the change was effected on 
the whole more by peaceful and steadily pervasive penetration 
than by military conquest. This was particularly so in the 
South where, unlike in the North, the Dravidian languages have 
survived in all their strength and vastly improved under the new 
influences, and many facets of the old pre-Aryan culture have 
been integrated with the new Aryan, and the integration is often 



6 Development of Religion in South India 

so complete as to render it next to impossible to separate the 
elements of the amalgamated culture. In the sphere of our 
particular concern, that of religion and philosophy, the South is. 
seen to start with a heavy debt to the North, but more than 
amply to repay by her own distinctive contributions to theory 
and practice. 

Other influences flowed in from outside in the course of 
centuries, Graeco-Roman, Scythian, Islamic and so on, and these 
were accepted and assimilated to the extent possible and neces- 
sary. In this age-long process, the contact with the western 
European nations, which began in the sixteenth century and 
reached its culmination in the establishment of British rule over 
the whole of India early in the nineteenth century, marked a very 
important stage. The Portuguese brought to India the chilli,, 
potato, and other produce not known in India earlier. The 
extent to which the French influenced the daily speech of those 
who came into close touch with them can be judged by a perusal 
of the pages of the unique diary of Ananda Ranga Pillai. But 
the most abiding influence was that of the English language and 
literature which began to be felt even before the historic decision 
to impart modern education in India with English as the medium 
of instruction (1835). 

In fact that decision was itself, in part, the result of 
the pressure of Indian public opinion voiced by advanced 
leaders like Raja Ram Mohan Roy who by their voluntary 
efforts had put themselves in close touch with the new 
forces and felt their bracing effects. Ideals of national unity, 
individual freedom, constitutional government and social equality 
and mobility embodied in English literature and thought opened 
out new horizons, and the time-honoured institutions and values 
inherited from a distant past in unbroken continuity began to 
change and reshape themselves under the impact of the new 
forces. From the beginning there were two sides to the process. 
One was the tendency to admire everything English and Euro- 
pean and to condemn everything oriental and Indian ; this aspect 
led Macaulay and those of his way of thought to expect that, in 
course of time, India would so change that the people of India 
would be Indians by birth but Englishmen in all other respects. 
That this has not come about is due to the other side of the 
effects of the Western impact. This consisted in an attempt to 
revalue indigenous traditions and institutions in the light of the 
new ideas, distinguish their essentials from superficial accretions, 
and adapt them to the extent necessary to make them fit into 
modern conditions and to make India a progressive nation like 


Introduction 7 

the nations of West. Both these trends can very well be seen 
in the life and writings of Rani Mohan Roy himself. 

The ‘ nationalist * aspect of the development was aided and 
strengthened by other factors. There was first of all the recovery, 
by the scholarly labours of western savants from different nations, 
of the ancient history and civilization of India which had been 
more or less completely forgotten in the long centuries of foreign 
domination culminating in the disintegration and anarchy of the 
eighteenth century on the eve of the establishment of British 
rule in India. The power and prestige of western civilization 
which stood at its meridian in the nineteenth century suffered 
a decline in the twentieth. Japan’s victory against Russia in the 
early years of the century first proclaimed to the world that an 
eastern nation which sets its heart on it may well emulate and 
surpass the western nations in the application of modem science 
and technology in the arts of war and peace. There arose critics 
of western civilization who like Spengler foretold the Decline 
of the West or like the different types of socialists attacked the 
glaring injustices of an acquisitive capitalist society or contrasted 
the nerve-racking rush of the west and the ugliness of its machine 
products with the restful nature of Eastern civilization, its spiri- 
tual balance and the artistry of its handicraft products. The 
first world war, the alarms and tumults of the inter-war period, 
and the catastrophe of the second world war completed the 
disillusionment of the East, and spelt the ruin of European 
colonialism in Asia. To-day India is a free nation seeking, like 
other nations of Asia in a similar situation, to work out her 
problems in her own way. 

In the sphere of religion, we may distinguish the chief land- 
marks in this long history, many passages in which still continue 
to be obscure or controversial. Sacrifice, domestic and tribal, 
was the most prominent feature of Indo-Aryan religion in the 
age of the Rigveda ; that religion was most probably aniconic 
and temples were unknown. We have no direct knowledge of 
the religious beliefs and practices of the indigenous inhabitants 
in the different parts of India at the time ; but we may surmise 
with good reason that the gradual spread of the Aryans over 
the country brought them into contact with different local faiths 
and cults, and this naturally gave rise to a process of mutual 
adjustment, and to the modification of vedic religion by the 
absorption of many new features. There were doubtless other 
changes which came about in that religion by a process of 
internal development, for life is nowhere static and change is 
its law. The results of both these types of change are reflected 



8 Development of Religion in South India 

in part in the different strata of vedic literature which is the 
only known contemporary record to aid the study of these 
changes. 

To put the matter briefly and in broad outlines : the 
samhitds of the Yajurveda and the Samaveda show that the 
religion of sacrifice had become very much more elaborate than 
before, while the fourth and last of the vedas, the Atharvaveda, 
apparently includes many beliefs and practices drawn from non- 
Aryan sources ; it is to be noted that this veda gained recogni- 
tion only relatively late, and it long continued to be the rule to 
talk of Trayi, the three vedas, alone as canonical. The large 
volume of Brdhmana literature which has survived, after much 
has been lost on account of diverse reasons, is of the nature of 
prose commentaries on their respective vedas, and they also 
exhibit further stages in the elaboration of the sacrificial religion ; 
they contain myths, stories and speculations, and are often so 
jejune as to be justly described as * babblings They also con- 
tain many ideas and beliefs that are held to be ultimately of 
non-Aryan origin. 

The Upanigads come generally at the end of the Brdh- 
manas, including the Aranyakas (‘ forest books \ meant to be 
studied in forests and not in homes); they are much better 
known as they deserve to be, embody a strong reaction from 
the religion of sacrifice, and bear witness to the prevalence of 
an earnest and fervent effort to solve the problems of high 
philosophy. The truly early upani?ads that have survived are 
just about a dozen ; their number has been swelled in more 
recent times by the addition of new texts, because each new 
religious sect as it came up wanted to have its own upani$ad 
and produced it ; their present total number is believed to stand 
at the sacred figure of 108. The ideas of Karma and transmigra- 
tion, unknown to early vedic literature, have become basic 
postulates in the upani?ads, and thenceforth almost all religious 
systems that came up in India felt compelled to build on this 
foundation. 

The period of the early upani§ads was a time of intense 
speculation and spiritual progress not only in India but in 
all the . lands from the Aegean basin to China ; it was also 
the period when Jainism and Buddhism were formulated. The 
further stages of religious evolution in ancient India included a 
long and varied process of syncretism between the vedic religion 
and the indigenous cults which resulted in the birth of a rich 
pantheon of Puranic gods and goddesses together with a colour- 
ful mythology of divine and semi-divine occurrences and the rise 


Introduction 


•of a strong theistic trend stressing intense devotion ( bhakti ) to 
a personal god as the easiest if not the only road to the attain- 
ment of mok§a (or release from the cycle of repeated births, 
mmsara) \ another trend, already noticeable in the veda, to 
which Max Muller gave the name of henotheism, mingled with 
bhakti to produce sectarianism of a pronounced character ; this, 
in turn, was followed by efforts to blunt the edge of sectarian 
animosities and effect a conciliation among the sects. 

By the side of these developments there were others of a 
more intellectual type which led to the elaboration of separate 
systems of philosophy, of which six came to be regarded as most 
important in later times, though many more claimed recognition 
and got it at the hands of Madhava who wrote in the fourteenth 
century a.d. a concise manual of the different systems or darsanas 
in his Sarv a-D arson a-Sangraha . The celebrated Bhagavad-gita 
reflects a much earlier stage in the history of these developments, 
and rightly has it been described as a great eirenicon. All these 
changes concern what we may call the higher religious conscious- 
ness of India, the ‘ Great Tradition 5 — to adopt a convenient 
term suggested by Redfield. The different varieties of popular 
faiths and beliefs which varied with time and place and covered 
many forms of faith ranging from crude animism expressing 
itself in the worship of stocks and stones right up to very refined 
forms of philosophic thought and religious practice ; on the 
whole this may be called the ‘Little Tradition*. The mutual 
reactions between the Great Tradition and Little Tradition con- 
stitute perhaps the most fascinating as well as the most compli- 
cated chapters in the history of Hinduism, using the term in its 
broadest sense so as to include Jainism and Buddhism. 

Another important aspect of the Hindu religion was its 
concern from the earliest times with all aspects of the individual 
and social life of man and its attempt to regulate the social set 
up in the light of an accepted philosophy. The concept of 
Dharma, the entire system of Vartias (classes) and ASramas 
(stages of life), and all the rituals to be observed in daily life 
and in the important crises of the life cycle belong to this sphere. 
Their gradual adoption, often piece-meal, by new strata of society, 
a process which, according to some observers, has not yet come to 
an end, is one of the most notable features of the ‘ Sanskritization 5 
mentioned above. Not all the rituals are followed by all castes and 
groups, but all accept the common ideology underlying ritualism, 
and a pronounced tendency towards standardization and unifor- 
mity in the observances was at work in all India. Pilgrimages to 
sacred spots and shrines distributed over all parts of the country 



10 


Development of Religion in South India 


including its extreme frontiers must be counted as part of this, 
ritualism ; it was not the least important among the factors pro- 
moting and maintaining the cultural unity of the country ; it is 
still a valid force operating among the vast majority of the people. 

Hindu civilization as we know it in history may be said 
to have taken its definite shape by the time of the Buddha. 
Since then foreigners came into India on several occasions 
and for different purposes. Till about a.d. 1000, however, 
though they sometimes succeeded in establishing political rule 
over parts of the country their advent did not mean any 
great change in its religious outlook or sociology. They often 
adopted one or other of the Indian faiths, becoming, for instance,, 
devotees of Buddhism or the Bhagavata cult, and were accorded 
a place in Hindu society by being vaguely designated as Ksatriyas 
of sorts by the writers of Hindu law books (dharma-sastras ) . 
After 1000 India came into massive contact with credal religions 
that were exclusive and even intolerant in their outlook; first 
Islam and later Christianity. But on the whole Hinduism stood 
its ground. Even after six or seven centuries of political and 
military domination of the land, Islam was found to have made 
a tangible impression only in those corners of the country in 
the north-west and north-east which separated from the rest of 
the country in 1947 and form Pakistan today. Muslims also 
form a substantial minority in the rest of India, but both in India 
and Pakistan the bulk of them have retained many Hindu beliefs 
and practices; in Java they have done so even in a larger 
measure. Though there were extensive changes in all depart- 
ments of life as a result of Muslim rule in the North, Southern 
India, particularly the region south of the Kpsna river, was kept 
on the whole free from the Muslim impact by the Hindu empire 
of Vijayanagar ; southern Hinduism has thus been able to main- 
tain the continuity of its tradition much better than the northern. 

As for Christianity, it has been represented on the west 
coast of South India from relatively early times ; the Portuguese 
put forth much effort in the sixteenth century to bring about 
mass conversions ; and later, numerous missionary bodies, both 
Roman Catholic and Protestant, made sustained efforts at winning 
over Indians' to their faith, employing education and medical 
care as the means of developing contact with the people; the 
missionaries shared with Macaulay the view that a short period 
of western education and the Bible 4 would not leave an idolator 
in Bengal * or India. But these hopes have been falsified, and 
though on occasions a measure of success has attended missionary 
efforts among the so-called lower ranks of the people in some 



Introduction 


11 


parts of the country, the main effect of the Christian attack on 
Hinduism in modern times has been to evoke movements of 
internal reform for the abolition of age-long evils, and this has 
contributed to strengthen and vitalize Hinduism. The world-wide 
activity of the Ramakrishna Mission may be cited ; but who can 
decide how much of it is modelled on Christian missions, and 
how much harks back to the model of the Buddhist sanghas 
of old ? 

It will be the aim of the succeeding pages to trace in some 
detail these fascinating developments within Hindu society with 
particular reference to occurrences in South India and their 
contribution to the common fund. The object of this introduction 
has been to show that developments in the South cannot be 
studied in isolation, but always against the background of move- 
ments in the whole country. 



II. INTEGRATION OF CULTS AND THE BEGINNINGS 
OF HINDUISM. THE AGE OF THE SANGAM 


The fusion of Aryan with non-Aryan cults began imme- 
diately after the Aryans entered India ; and the process had a 
long course lasting over many centuries before the new culture 
crossed the Vindhyas to continue the same process in the South, 
probably by much milder methods evolved by long experience 
in the North. We hear of wars with the Dasyus in early vedic, 
literature which praises Indra, the chief of the gods, for protect- 
ing the Arya-varna against the Dasyu ; expatiates on his exploits 
which, quite obviously, are modelled on those of a tribal war 
leader; and describes some battles and alliances of a manifestly 
historical nature. There is no record of such conflicts in the 
South, The Kamdyana which localizes some of the adventures 
of the Prince of Ayodhya in some identifiable spots' in the south 
like Pancavafi (Nasik) and Pampa (perhaps near Hampi) 
altogether lacks a historical basis ; its monkeys and ogres who 
inhabit the South are totally mythical, and one may sooner get 
ofi by pressing sea sand than derive light on the Aryanization 
of the South from the central incidents of the poem, The talk 
of monkey (vanara) totem and vanara-civilization as facets of 
pre-Aryan Dravidian culture is altogether misplaced. The poetic 
descriptions of asramas (hermitages) which provide the back- 
ground of the incidents may, however, be accepted as the reflec- 
tion of a stage in the Aryanization of the South as visualized by 
the poet, and possibly, though this is perhaps on the more doubt- 
M the hmdninces the inmates of the dramas- experienced 

from the hostility of the ogres contain a hint of the conflict of 
cultures at their first meeting. The earliest stratum of the. arti- 
literature of the Tamils, the literature of the Sangam 

Ss m cleTr ° f SUCh C0Dflict ’ but oa a,e oth£ * hand 

mtern^J?T’ ho " ever > other legends that have plausibly been 
rminrf tv. ** Tennmscent of historical occurrences. They centre 
r ° UQd ^ Sa S e A W a vedic seer who came to embody t 



Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 13 

himself all the stages of the progressive Aryanization not only 
of India, but of Indonesia and Indochina. His abode (aSrama) 
which is first located in the Himalayas moves by several stages 
to the extreme south of India, the Agastyakufa or the Peak of 
Agastya at the southern end of the Western Ghats, and crosses 
the seas thence to Indonesia and Indochina. He still receives 
special worship in South India which also contains several Siva 
temples all designated by the name Agastyesvara, which means 
an Isvara (Siva) shrine set up by Agastya. The vedic Agastya 
has a miraculous birth like many other * heroes of nations *, but 
otherwise he is a historical person, as real as the kings and 
tribes mentioned in the Rigveda ; he composes hymns, has a wife 
and sister, and perhaps also a son. His life history receives full 
treatment in the two epics of the Mahabharata and the Rama - 
yana, and many new legends are recorded about him ; the 
Puranas and Tamil tradition mark still further stages of this 
development. 

Three achievements ascribed to Agastya are of particular 
significance to the story of progressive Aryanization of South 
India and the East. First , Agastya is said to have prevailed 
upon the Vindhya mountains to cease growing in height until 
he returned to his Northern abode from the South whither 
he was going on some business ; but the sage never returned, 
and the mountain continues to be stunted. Later Tamil tradi- 
tion mentions Siva’s marriage with Parvati in Mount Kailas 
as the occasion for Agastya’s southward exodus, and explains 
that the exodus was meant to redress the balance of the earth 
rudely disturbed by the assemblage of all divinities in the North 
for the occasion. Secondly , Agastya is said to have destroyed 
the Raksasa brothers Ilvala and Vatapi ; the brothers hated all 
Brahmans because one of them „ had refused to grant Ilvala’s 
request for a son equal to Indra, and their revenge took a curious 
form. Ilvala transformed Vatapi into a ram and offered his 
flesh as food to Brahmans, and then recalled him to life, as 
whomsoever Ilvala summoned with his voicfe would come back 
even from the abode of Yama (Death) ; and Vatapi would come 
out laughing after ripping the flanks of the Brahmans who had 
eaten his flesh. Thus the brothers killed many Brahmans. Mean- 
while Agastya had to satisfy his wife Lopamudra, a princess from 
Vidarbha, who had laid down a condition for her fulfilling her 
marital duties towards him viz. that he should approach her on 
a bed like that which she used to have in her father’s palace, 
that he should be adorned with costly ornaments for the occa- 
sion, and that Agastya should procure these things without in 



14 


Development of Religion in. South India 


any way impairing his ascetic merit. Agastya approached three 
kings in succession ; none of them could meet his demand with- 
out detriment to their kingdoms, and so all the four of them 
went together to Ilvala, who received them and entertained 
Agastya in the usual manner. But when he summoned Vatapi, 
there came out only air out of Agastya’s stomach, Vatapi having 
been already digested there. Then the saddened Ilvala gave 
Agastya twice as much wealth as Agastya wanted, after the latter 
had correctly guessed Ilvala’s intentions regarding the gift. 
Agastya and' his companions go back, and Agastya duly begets 
a son on Lopamudra by name Drdhasyu who relieves the 
ancestors of Agastya and obtains for them the lokas (happy 
abodes) they desired in the other world. This is the story found 
in the Mahabharata. The Ramayana version differs in some 
respects; the most important being that after Vatapi’s death, 
Ilavala attacks Agastya and is burnt to death by the irate sage, 
and that there is no mention here of Agastya’s compact with 
his wife or his demand for wealth. Rama, who narrates the 


story of Agastya to his brother Laksmana on the eve of their 
visit to the aSrama of the sage’s brother, begins his narra- 
tion with the round assertion : ‘ This verily is the asrama 
of the brother of Agastya who, intent upon the good of 
the world, overpowered the death-like demons and thereby 
rendered this quarter (i.e. Dandakaranya or the forest of 
Dandaka) habitable/ The third achievement of Agastya was 
to drink up the waters of the ocean to enable the devas 
(gods) to dispose of their enemies (the asuras) who had taken 
refuge under the sea. These three achievements have been 
understood to represent respectively the crossing of the Vindhyas 
into the Deccan by the bearers of Indo-Aryan culture to that 
region, the initial opposition to that culture on the part of the 
indigenous inhabitants of the South which, however, soon died 
away and gave place to a more propitious attitude, and the spread 
of the culture to the eastern lands across the sea. There are 
several ^scnptions m Sanskrit attesting the prominent place held 

TnriZr ya { i ha T a 8Um) “ the P alUheon of Indonesia and 
Indochina m the first millennium of the Christian era. 

noth . er name that bears an equally close connection with 
die Aryanizntion of South India and of the East is that of 

fln U A ya ’ W ' ld \ iS like A e ast ya. the name of a gotra 
( ndo-Aiyan gens ) . There are in existence quite a number of 
copper plate inscriptions in the South Indian languages 

ZtfsZ Z **■ t0 me T bei ‘ s of Kaundinya gotru Sg 
others, in different parts of the country from different dynastief 




Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 15 

.of rulers. Much earlier than these is a full dress description 
of the daily life of religion and sacrifice observed in a Brahmin 
household of the Kaundinya gotra (Kauniyan in Tamil) in the 
village of Punjarrur in the Tanjore District of the second or third 
century a.d. 1 The prominence of the name of Kaundinya in the 
foundation myths of the different kingdoms forming the Hindu 
colonies of South-east Asia is well known and need not be 
reviewed here in detail. 2 3 There can thus be no doubt that the 
Agastyas and the Kaundinyas were very prominent among the 
adventurous leaders of Indo-Aryan society who spread its culture 
in lands originally non-Aryan. 

In relatively late Tamil tradition Agastya was recognized 
as the family-priest ( kulaguru ) of the Pandyan royal line, and, 
what is more important, as the original inventor of Tamil ^nd 
the author of the earliest grammar of that language. In Tamil 
Buddhist tradition the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara holds the cor- 
responding place. But in later times an effort was made to deny 
that Agastya established the Tamil language, that he wrote its 
first grammar, and that Tolkappiyan whose grammar is the earliest 
now extant was a pupil of Agastya. The mediaeval commentator 
Perasiriyar discusses that question at some length in his com- 
mentary on the Tolkappiyam , the grammar written by Tolkap- 
piyan. He says that in his day some scholars held that Tolkap- 
piyan composed his work on principles other than those of 
Agastya’s grammar ( Agattiyam ) ; but he turns down this view 
and appeals to authority and tradition. He says : ‘ This view 
is urged by modern authors who go against the authority of the 
Veda ; in the past even heretics, not to speak of the wise men 
of the three Sangams and the four Varnas, did not say so. How 
(is this)? Because the son of Kapakkayanar, Nakklrar of the 
last Sangam, who composed the gloss on the Kalaviyal 3 said : 
“ The standard for those of the second and third Sangams was 
the Tolkappiyam while that for the first was Agattiyam The 
author who composed the commentary for later generations also 
cited his testimony ; and he, being a monk under strict vows, 
was not likely to utter a falsehood/ He then proceeds to quote 
three old works in support of the tradition that Agastya was the 
founder of the Tamil language and grammar, and that Tolkap- 

1 Purananuru No. 166. 

2 South Indian Influences in the Far-East — Index s. v. Kaundinya. 

3 A short work on the erotics of ‘secret love’ (kalavu) in the form 
of about sixty sutras ascribed to god Siva (Iraiyanar) himself. The 
commentary on this work ascribed to Nakkirar which is perhaps not 
earlier than the eighth or ninth century a.d. is the locus classicus of 
the incredible tradition relating to the three Sangams. 



36 Development of Religion in South India 

piyan was the most celebrated of the twelve pupils of this great 
/sage. The difference between the two schools represented here 
regarding the position of Agastya in Tamil culture is perhaps 
best understood as the reflection of a difference in their attitude 
to the Aryan Sanskrit culture of the North. Those who welcomed 
it and were ready to acknowledge its good effects stood up for 
the traditional view ; others who wished to defend the indepen' 
dence of Tamil and minimize its debt to Sanskrit repudiated the 
traditional position of Agastya. This difference persists even at 
the present day, and we see attempts to expunge from Tamil 
all words and letters of Sanskrit origin leading to a tangible loss 
of richness and ease of expression. But then it may be pointed 
out that even Tolkappiyan who is taken for an apostle of the 
independence of Tamil bears a name which means the ancient 
scion of the Kavyas i.e. members of the gotra of Kavi (the sage 
! Usanas). The truth is that Sanskrit is the taproot of all Indian 
culture as we know it in history, and in this respect South India 
and Tamil culture are in no way different from the rest of the 
country. 

The gradual extension of the connotation of the term Arya- 
varta (land of the Aryans) is also worth noting in this connec- 
tion. The Manusmrti (the code of Manu), the earliest of the 
metrical law books of India, probably assumed its present form 
in the early centuries before and after the Christian era. Some 
verses (17-23) in the second chapter of that work reveal the 
stages in the extension of Aryandom. The first of these verses 
defines Brahmavarta (the land of the Veda) as the region lying 
between the holy rivers of Sarasvatl and Drsadvatl and affirms 
that it was created by the gods ; the next verse states that the 
traditional usages ( acara ) of that region set the model for others 
to follow. Then there was the Brahmar§ide£a (the country of 
the Brahman seers) adjacent to Brahmavarta and comprising 
Kuruk§etra (the field of the Kurus where the Great Battle of 
the Mahabhdrata was fought, the historic Panipat plain) and 
the countries of the Matsyas, Pancalas and Surasenas ; all men 
in the world should be instructed on their respective mores from 
the Brahman bom in this region. The region between the Hima- 
layas and the Vindhyas bounded by Vinasana (the place where 
the Sarasvatl river disappears in the sands of the Rajaputana 
desert) on the west and Prayaga (Allahabad) on the east is 
blown as MadhyadeSa (21). Again the entire area between 
the two mountains already named and the seas on the west and 
east, (i.e. the^ whole of what we now call Northern India) is 
described as Aryavarta by the learned (22). The name Arya- 



Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 17 

varta is explained by the commentators as indicating that Aryas 
appear over and over again in this region ; and Medhatithi, the 
earliest extant commentator (ninth century), states expressly 
that though the land may pass for a time under the rule of 
barbarians ( mlecchas) > yet it is soon restored to orthodoxy by 
the reappearance of Aryas — a comment full of historical import 
if we consider his date falling after the first Muslim impact on 
North India and on the eve of the definitive Muslim conquest 
of the North. Lastly, all lands where the black buck (spotted 
antelope) roams about naturally are fit places for the performance 
of the yajna (vedic sacrifice), i.e. places where Aryas could 
reside; all beyond is barbarian country (mlecchadeto) (23). 
Here is a conscious extension of the limits of Aryadesa to lands 
other than Northern India ; and whether the test of the natural 
presence of the spotted antelope is literally fulfilled or not, there 
is little doubt that this last verse includes India south of the 
Vindhyas and is capable of application to Indonesia and Indo- 
china as well. In this context we are forcibly reminded of the 
seven inscriptions from East Borneo engraved on stone yupas 
(sacrificial posts to which the animals are tied before being sacri- 
ficed), and detailing many vedic sacrifices by name which were 
performed for the king Mulavarman by Brahmins who had gone 
there specially for the purpose. 4 

This expansion of Indo-Aryan civilization was naturally 
accompanied by a considerable mixture of races (Vyasa — lit. 
compiler, arranger, of the Vedas and author of Mahabharata and 
Puranas — was reputed to be a son of a fisherwoman) and 
cultures and the assimilation of many aspects of the thought and 
practice of the non-Aryan culture with which it came into con- 
tact ; as a result the vedic gods and religion underwent several 
changes and a new composite religious and philosophical back- 
ground was created on which arose the historic Hinduism which 
has baffled all attempts at defining it in simple terms or analys- 
ing clearly its component elements. The most striking feature 
of Hindu society is its cultural pluralism. Peoples belonging to 
different grades of spiritual (and material) culture were received 
and assigned a definite place in an elastic framework and then 
allowed to jostle with one another in the activities and cere- 
monies oi their daily lives. The exact details of the stages of 
the adjustment will perhaps never be known ; but its broad results 
stand out in the clearly mixed character of the chief gods of 


* South Indian Influences , pp. 137-40. 
2 


18 Development of Religion in South India 

the Hindu pantheon and in the appearance of new concepts in 
the realm of philosophy and metaphysics. 

Siva and Visnu are the most prominent Hindu deities, and 
constitute together with the more or less anaemic Brahma, the 
celebrated triad (Tirmurti) who are believed to create (Brahma) 
protect (Vis^u) and destroy (Siva) the universe again and again 
in the course of countless aeons. These two gods are by no 
means prominent in the Rigveda, and even the name Siva is 
unknown in that Veda as the name of a god ; the word being 
generally used as an adjective meaning propitious, or, as a proper 
name, being applied to a tribe who survived at least till the 
time of Alexander as the Siboi of the Greeks, and whose city 
Sivapura is also known to relatively late literary sources. But 
these gods are seen to have gathered many new features and 
become more concrete and important divinities in the later vedic 
literature, and there is good reason to trace many of these new 
features to syncretism with non-Aryan factors. The Rigvedic 
precursor of Siva is Rudra, generally regarded as a storm god 
representing more the baleful side of the storm in the destructive 
agency of lightning than the fertilizing and cleaning agency of 
the rain. The word Rudra has generally been held to come 
from the root rud to cry and has been interpreted as the Howler. 
But the suggestion has also been made that it is derived from 
rud with the conjectural meaning ‘to shine ’ or ‘to be ruddy ’ 
so that Rudra is the red god. Rudra is also a great healer who 
has a thousand auspicious remedies and is the greatest physician 
of physicians. If he is described as Siva (auspicious) it is as. 
much for this reason, as just to gain his good will and escape 
his wrath by flattering him, and Siva thus ‘became the regular 
name of Rudra’s historical successor in post Vedic mythology \ 
He has close association with Agni (Fire). In later times this 
divinity was also regarded as Pasupati, Mahayogi and Mahakala. 
The first two of these epithets meaning respectively the Lord 
of the Animal World and the Great Yogi are anticipated in the 
celebrated seal from Mohenjodaro where we find a perhaps 
three-headed figure seated in the posture of a yogi and surrounded 
by a number of animals viz. an elephant, a tiger, a rhinoceros, 
a buffalo and two antelopes with long horns. Even in the Rigveda 
Rudra is called pa§upa , protector of animals, and prayers are 
addressed to him to spare the domestic cattle of the supplicant 
from the shafts of his anger. If, as is generally held, the Harappa 
culture and Vedic culture represent pre-Aryan and Aryan strands, 
we have here an instance of the syncretism of allied features 
from the two cultures into a new amalgam. We may also note that 


’> Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 19 

an later times, particularly in the philosophy of the Saiva-Sid- 
dhanta system, the term pasupati gained another interpretation; 
[ an that phiiosophy it was explained as ‘Lord of souls' — Pati 

(Lord, Supreme God) and Pasu (individual soul) forming toge- 
; ther with Pasa (bond lit. rope) the triple basis of the phenomena 

of the universe — a more or less typical instance of new appli- 
cations of old forms to be traced throughout the long history 
of Hinduism. As for Yoga (cf. yoke) the practice of establishing 
increasing control over mind and body by continuous practice of 
prescribed exercises (under guidance to start with), it is attested 
[ an Harappa civilization not only by the pasupati seal just men- 

| tioned, but by a number of other minor antiquities as well. Siva 

; as the Great yogi is held in later religious thought to be himself 

I; clad in an animal skin ( krttivasas ) while being the bestower of 

f high material prosperity on his devotees. The kala (time) aspect 

j; of Siva is best typified in the Mahakala shrine at Ujjain; here 

i he embodies not only death and destruction, but the power of 

regeneration also ; the negative aspect is stressed in his associa- 
tion with crematoria and his leadership of groups of bhutas 
l (goblins), pretas (the unredeemed souls of the dead), and 

pisacas (goblins). The positive side is seen in his representation 
i as a phallus ( linga ). The phallic significance of the linga is 

I sought to be denied at times and it is taken to represent the 

i formless absolute. This sophistic interpretation finds much sup- 

\ port in relatively late literary sources and its validity is unques- 

? tionable. Nevertheless, it is quite probable that originally some 

; primitive fertility cults and practices were absorbed in the growing 

J complex of the Rudra-Siva concept; the pejorative reference to 

l Sisnadevas (phallicists) in the Rigveda and the realistic model- 

1 ling of the lingas in early Indian sculpture alike support this 

i view of the evolution of the Siva cult. Siva is often represented 

l by a Bull, which also serves as his mount. Closely allied to the 

C Kala aspect is that of Bhairava (lit. terrifying) which has many 

varieties and forms the centre of many legends. Combining both 
l the positive and negative aspects is the more amiable form of 

Siva as Nataraja (the lord of Dance), the cosmic significance 
of whose rhythmic dance is interpreted in different ways in 
different contexts and by different sources. It is not possible 
; here to go further into the many forms of Siva and the legends 

concerning them ; we must, however, note that these forms and 
I legends have furnished the themes of a rich iconography which 

I observes a broad distinction between the gracious and propitious 

forms ( anugraha miirti) and the dreaded destructive forms 
( samhara miirti ) . 


20 Development of Religion in South India 

Visiiu likewise takes on an increasingly complex form by 
the accretion of new features. His solar associations begin from 
the Veda and his cakra (discus) is said, in later mythology, to 
have been shaped out of the sun. His celebrated three steps, 
of which two traverse the earth and are visible to men but the 
third and highest is beyond the flight of birds and the ken of 
mortals, are generally held to refer to the course of the Sun. 
Visnu is the friend of Indra whom he frequently aids in the fight 
with Vrtra and in vanquishing demons. But this does not stand 
in the way of his being identified with Vasudeva-Krsna whose 
opposition to Indra is well marked in many puranic legends. 
There is a further growth of Krsna legends when he is endowed 
with the features of a ‘ cowherd god 5 (Gopala Krsna) and many 
new stories are evolved of his pranks and adventures as a child 
or young hoy. The Mahabharata which in different contexts 
reviews the whole gamut of Krsria’s achievements is a much more 
human document than the Ramayana which has been not inaptly 
described as a ‘polished fantasia’. The Great Epic and its 
supplement the Harivamsa create a strong impression in the mind 
that behind all the distortions and exaggerations of legend, there 
must lie a genuine historic core, though it is risky to attempt to 
separate it from the overgrowth ; we also get the feeling that 
many of the details of the legends bear an unmistakable local 
colour and may well be pre-Aryan in origin. The Bhagavad - 
Gitd inseparably associated with Kr§na’s name is a landmark in 
the history of Hindu thought ; it not only preaches with a new 
emphasis the religion of devotion and duty, but adumbrates the 
theory of avataras (epiphanies) which shows Vi§nu as the 
watchful guardian of the universe, ever intent upon rescuing it 
from disaster whenever its existence is threatened. But when 
we look into the details of the avataraSt we find, surprisingly 
enough, that many of them stem from the Veda, the Rigveda 
itself in one instance — the Boar incarnation. 5 Two other 
avatdras can be traced to the Brahmanas, though not yet con- 
nected with Vi§nu. 4 The fish which in the Satapatha Brdhmana 
delivers Manu from the flood, appears in the Mahabharata as' a 
form of Prajapati, becoming in the Puranas an incarnation of 
Vispu. In the same Brahmana Prajapati about to create off- 
spring becomes a tortoise moving in the primeval waters In the 
Purtnas this tortoise is an Avatara of Vi§nu, who assumes this 
form to recover various objects lost in the deluge.’ Rama, the 
Prince of Ayodhya, and Kf§na are, of course, the best known of 


5 Macdonell, Vedic Mythology , p, 41. 



Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 21 


f the avataras whose sagas constitute no small part of Hindu 

f culture wherever it has spread. The diversity of the sources of 

the avataras shows the extreme difficulty of identifying the Aryan 

* warp and the pre-Aryan woof in the fabric of Indian culture. 

ij 

1 We may now mention one further instance of syncretism 

{ -of particular import to students of South India. That is the 

{ identification of Skanda, Kumara, or Karttikeya with Murug(k)an, 

: also called Velan and Subrahmanya, of the Tamils. In the 

l North he is regarded as the son of Siva and Parvatl, and Kali- 

{i dasa’s poem Kumdrasambhava (Birth of Kumara) is based on 

the legend that Siva gave up his penance as Mahayogi, and 
wedded Parvatl to procreate a war-leader under whom the divine 
f hosts could overthrow the defiant and oppressive Asura (demon) 

• by name Taraka ; hence his names SenanI and Mahasena. 

| Another stream of legend embellishes the story saying that Siva 

emitted his sperm in Fire (Agni) who passed it on to Ganga 
where it matured into Skanda in a forest of rushes, whence his 
name (Saravanabhava) ; the child was then brought up by the 
six stars of the Krttikas or Pleiades, who nursed him by his six 
; heads, whence his names Sanmukha (six-faced) and Sanmatura 

( (six-mothered) . 

> Another form of the story makes him the son of Agni and 

l his wife Svaha who assumed the forms of the wives of six Ri§is 

l whom Agni loved. In some coins of Kani§ka there are four 

; figures with names subscribed in Greek as Skando, Mahaseno, 

\ Komaro and Bizago ; they seem to have been regarded as separate 

deities even as Patanjali seems to have regarded Skanda and 
| Visakha as separate deities. But in course of time they were all 

l identified with one another, and in South India with the trans- 

f parently indigenous Tamil deity known as Murugan or Velan. 

While the entire mythology of Karttikeya-Skanda of the North 
5 is fully accepted in the Tamil country, there exist other traits 

f peculiarly Tamil in origin. The name Murugan, however, is an 1 

\ exact rendering of Kumara (Youth), for muruguy a word of 

i unknown affiliation in Tamil, also means tenderness, youth. The 

jj other term Velan means the god with the spear (vel), the most / 

| characteristic weapon of this deity. He has a cock on his / 

l banner, and is believed to be fond of sporting on hill tops. On^ 

I of his wives ( ValU ) is from the hill tribe of the Kuravas. The 

undoubted antiquity of his cult among the Tamils is attested by 
the discovery at the pre-historic urn-field at Adiccanallur of 
S' bronze cocks, iron spears and mouthpieces of gold leaf similar 

to those employed by modern worshippers of Muruga when they 


22 


Development of Religion in South India 


are on a pilgrimage carrying the Kavadi 6 in fulfilment of a vow. 
The oldest stratum of Tamil literature mentions a Velan-ddal y 
an ecstatic dance by a priest possessed by Velan. The Murugan 
cult never lost its popularity in the Tamil country, witness the 
stirring hymns of the Tiruppugal of Arunagiri-natha (15th cen- 
tury), and may be said to be experiencing a notable revival 
under the leadership of one of the leading Brahmin advocates of 
Madras who has earned the title of TiruppugaL-mani by his 
musical renderings of the celebrated hymns of Arunagiri-natha. 

The instances of syncretism cited so far are just a few 
leading examples of a large class of facts of the religious history 
of India, the systematic treatment of which would, in itself, 
require a good-sized volume. While these mutual approaches, 
and adjustments were occurring in the sphere of the Great Tradi- 
tion, the more popular cults continued everywhere more or less 
in the same old way, though not altogether uninfluenced by the 
developments in and the spread of the Great Tradition. The 
details of the Little Tradition can be gathered by a study of the 
contemporary villages of India. Such a study discloses altogether 
a new world of village-gods and goddesses, genii of sorts including 
Yaksas, Yaksls, Gandharvas, Kumbhandas, Nagas, Bhutas, rivers, 
trees and mountains — all being honoured and worshipped in 
different Ways which differ widely according to time and place. 

It is quite possible that some of these village deities are local 
adaptations of borrowals from the Great Tradition which has its 
own godlings ; but in the main they date from pre-Aryan times 
and were^ in origin, probably Dravidian in the South, and Dravi- 
dian, Kirata or Ni$ada in the North. The dominant note in the, 
worship of village deities is one of fear, an element not altogether 
unknown, as we have seen, in Vedic religion such as, for instance, 
in the prayers to ward off the results of Rudra’s rage. The 
village deities, and the majority of them are goddesses, inflict or 
ward off diseases and calamities, and the rituals of their worship 
are crude and in the past involved much drunkenness and even 
immorality. Here is a brief account from a work of the last 
century : ‘ The sacrifice of fowl, sheep and buffaloes is normal, 
and the blood of the sacrificial victim is sometimes drunk, or 
applied to the forehead and breast of the worshippers, sprinkled 
on the lintel and doorsteps of the shrine, or mixed with rice and 
scattered over the fields, streets and bounds of the village. The 


w?fh Lex i con defines Kava& as ‘a decorated pole of wood 


Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 23 

eating of the flesh of the victim is also held sometimes to he 
part of the sacrifice. In a buffalo sacrifice, the animal is paraded 
through the village with a garland round its neck, and after the 
sacrifice, its head is cut off and its foreleg is put in its mouth, 
the nose is smeared with fat and a lighted lamp is put on its 
forehead.’ It is impossible to explain the significance of all these 
details and many others not mentioned here that constitute 
perhaps the sum of accretions through the ages from many 
diverse sources. And in one way or other such rituals mark the 
practice of popular religion in all the villages not only in South 
India, but in the entire sub-continent. There were two attempts 
to explain these features, both made about the middle of the 
second decade of the twentieth century. Bishop Whitehead 
lived many years in Madras, and though he looked upon Indian 
villages and their inhabitants primarily as potential recruits to 
the Christian faith, his knowledge of rural institutions was deep, 
and his views are entitled to respect. He thought that a primitive 
Animism succeeded by Totemism in a later nomadic stage 
explained much, if not the whole, of the practices he described. 
The ideas of blood relationship among clansmen ; and the unity 
of their brotherhood to be extended, whenever possible by 
alliances with other clans — each clan with its own animal totem, 
and the transition from a nomadic to the more settled life of an 
agricultural community, were put forward by him. As agricul- 
ture in early ages all the world over was the work of women, the 
preponderance of the female element among village deities is 
easy to understand. To this he also traced the practice of the 
pujari (worshipping priest) occasionally dressing himself as a 
woman, sitting in a cart with the animal impaled alive, and being 
dragged in procession through the village. Above all he held 
that the animal sacrifice as practised in the village was not so 
much a propitiatory gift to the deity, as born of a desire for 
communion with the totem spirit. The'* killing of the totem 
animal which would normally be regarded as the murder of a 
kinsman became on the occasion of a solemn sacrifice a ritual 
act conducing to the strength of those who partake in the sacri- 
fice and the blood and flesh of the animal in different ways. 
The liver and entrails were, considered to be the seat of life, and 
so the pujari put the liver in his mouth and the entrails round 
his neck. The animal sacrificed was the representative of the 
spirit to be worshipped and so was honoured with garlands, 
turmeric and kumkum (saffron), and its feet washed with 
water before sacrifice. 

Very soon after, an American scholar, Elmore, criticized the 


24 Development of Religion in South India 

totemistic theory of the origin of the buffalo sacrifice. The 
argument was that current stories suggest a historical origin for 
the rites and that the sacrifices symbolize ‘ the dire punishment 
and disgrace of a conquered enemy.’ The cutting off of the 
head, the putting the foreleg in the mouth, the smearing of the 
nose with fat, and the sticking of a lighted lamp upon the fore- 
head are intended to express ‘the supreme humiliation of a 
feared, despised and defeated enemy.’ So too the procession of 
the buffalo with a garland round its neck through the village 
before the sacrifice was the ‘ remnant of a triumphal procession 
in which the enemy was exhibited before the disgraceful death.’ 
The sacrifice therefore represents the triumph of the Aryan 
invaders over the Dravidian aborigines and their ‘ mad gods \ 

In the second edition of his book (1925) Bishop Whitehead 
rejected the whole of this argument as far-fetched and improba- 
ble. The argument, if correct, compels us to assume that the 
buffalo sacrifice originated at a comparatively late date, and 
contradicts all we know of the origin and meaning of sacrifice 
and ritual. The stories relied on by Elmore obviously belong 
to a time when the Pariahs, originally a leading clan among the 
Dravidians, had been degraded under Brahman influence. But 
the worship of grama devatas (village deities) and buffalo sacri- 
fice go much farther back, probably to the time when the Dravi- 
dians first came to India and settled down to an agricultural life, 
say 3000 to 4000 b.c. at the latest ; so we cannot interpret them 
in the light of events that occurred 3000 years later. Without 
committing ourselves to all the details of the arguments involved 
or to the chronology of Dravidian immigration suggested by 
Whitehead which few scholars will accept today, we may say 
generally that Whitehead has the better of the argument and that 
his approach seems to be nearer the true explanation of the 
9 surviving village rites, in so far as they are pre-Aryan in their 
origin. "" 

Whitehead says further that his theory explains the origin 
of stones and images as objects of worship. The totem animal 
was killed in order to shed the blood and thus secure the presence 
of the totem deity at a particular spot, which then became sacred 
or Taboo, to violate which would be a grievous offence. Accord- 
ingly the spot was marked by a simple heap of stones, or an 
upright stone pillar which would perhaps be sprinkled with the 
blood. Then Totemism gradually died out and gave place to 
higher religious ideas and anthropomorphic conceptions of the 
deity. This brings us to the question of the origin and place of 
temples and temple worship in Hinduism, but before we proceed 



Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 25 

to consider it, we should notice two other interesting features of 
rural worship to which Whitehead refers. 

At Pullambadi, a village in the Tiruchirapalli District, the 
shrine of the goddess Kulanthalamman serves as a civil court for 
the determination of suits concerning civil debts. The creditor 
wrote his complaint against the debtor on a palm-leaf and hung 
it on a spear in front of the image of the goddess ; the debtor 
will contract illness if the claim is just and he does not pay up. 
If he disputes the claim, he may put in his counter statement 
on the same spear. The deity then decides the truth between 
them and afflicts the perjurer with dreams and misfortunes till 
the false statement is withdrawn. The debtor pays through the 
pufari and the temple takes a commission. The settlements are 
usually finalized during the annual festival in April or May. 
The temple, says Whitehead, got a commission of Rs. 3,000 in 
the thirty years since the system was introduced. Earlier, the 
creditors promised a part of the debt to the deity if she helped 
in the recovery of it, all transactions being oral. * This \ adds 
Whitehead, ‘ to the practical British mind, seems the only really 
sensible ceremony connected with the worship of village deities 
in South India/ One wonders if this simple method which 
depends altogether on the faith of the votaries still continues, or, 
if it does, will long continue under the impact of modem 
conditions. 

Whitehead also records a legend on the origin of two of 
the village-goddesses. It is a distorted version of the well known 
Puranic story of Parasurama (Rama with the axe) cutting off 
the head of his mother Renuka at the behest of his father who 
suspected the purity of her devotion to him. In this story the 
mother is called Mariyamma, and her head is cut off along with 
that of a Pariah woman whom she had embraced for her sym- 
pathy. Then when the father granted the boon of recovery, 
Parasurama transferred the heads by mistake, and the revived 
ladies became Mfiriamma (with Brahmin head and Pariah body) 
wanting goats and cocks but not buffaloes as sacrifice, and 
Yellamma (Pariah head and Brahmin body) wanting buffaloes. 
The former is usually regarded as the goddess of small-pox and 
the name of the latter means ‘ lady of the boundary ( ella ) \ 

* The story says Whitehead, ‘ is an interesting one, because it 
probably represents the fusion of the Aryan and Dravidian cults 
in the days when the Aryans first found their way into (South) 
India. A Pariah body with a Brahmin head is an apt descrip- 
tion of the cults of Siva, while a Pariah head with a Brahman 
body might well describe some of the cults of the ancient Dravi- 



26 Development of Religion in South India 

dian deities, modified by Brahman ideas and influences. The- 
fact that the deity to whom the buffalo is offered was the one 
with the Pariah head shows that the buffalo sacrifice was specially 
characteristic of the old Dravidian religion, and suggests that the 
buffalo was the totem of the Pariahs’ (116-7). 

The rise of temples, temple worship, and images of deities, 
is most probably rooted in pre- and non-Aryan forms of religion. 
The contrast between the rites of a Vedic sacrifice and of temple 
worship is striking and yet both hold an equally important place 
in historic Hinduism as we know it. The Vedic sacrifice is a 
solemn and formal invocation of the heavenly powers accom- 
panied by oblations in fire for their furthering the well being of 
the person who performs the sacrifice and those whom he repre- 
sents ; the worship in a temple closely imitates the daily routine 
in a royal palace, where the king’s daily wants and needs are 
attended to with meticulous care from dawn to night by a whole 
host oi; servants and slaves ; the deity, like the king, is roused 
from sleep with music in the morning and gets his wash, meal, 
sport and pastime through the day and is ultimately put to sleep 
in his bed room — everything being done with due pomp and 
i ceremony and with suitable accompaniments. The Vedic Yagna 
is conceived as part of the cosmic cycle calculated to maintain 
the rhythm (rta) of the universe by a mutual exchange between 
Heaven and Earth, the gods being sustained by the offerings in 
sacrifices and the men by the bounties (good seasons and har- 
vests) they get in return from the gods. The worship in a temple” 
stems from a much simpler world of ideas about the relations 
between a ruler and his subjects, and in fact the whole cere- 
monial of such worship is generally summed up as Soclakirajopa- 
edra, the sixteen attentions due to a king. It is ‘true that in 
relatively recent times another set of ideas probably of Mesopo- 
tamian origin gathered round the temple which came to be 
considered as the sacred mountain (Meru) at the centre of the 
world (universe) and served as the abode of the gods, a con- 
ception which accounts for the colossal vimanas of some of the 
Indian temples and such stupendous monuments as Bara Budur 
and Angkor Vat. But in the early period that witnessed the 
fusion of Aryan and pre-Aryan cultures in India the temple was-, 
perhaps just a sacred spot indicated by an enclosure, a tree or 
a stone heap or pillar, and had little to show of architecture or 
sculpture. An early Tamil poem 7 contains a short description 
apparently reminiscent of pre-Aryan times ; it says that Tudiyan, 


7 Purandnuru, No . 335 . 



Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 27 

Panan, Paraiyan and Ka^amban are the only four castes (or f 
races, kudi), and that there are no gods (kadavul) to be praised 
( paravu ) with offerings of paddy (unhusked rice) unless it be 
the stone commemorating the hero who fell in battle while 
opposing the enemy and his white-tusked elephant. Here is a 
clear hint that some at least of the deities worshipped by the 
common people had their origin in the apotheosis of local heroes. 
That others arose from the cult of ancestors may be inferred 
from the practice that survived into late historical times of 
marking by a linga and sometimes also a small temple the sites 
where important persons, chieftains or saints, were buried or 
cremated ; this class of temple is distinguished in the inscriptions 
of the Tamil country by the title palli-padai-kdyiL The name 
koyil for the temple is of much semantic interest as it means 
both a temple and a palace, which were often erected side by 
side in historical times, the most conspicuous instances being 
furnished by the celebrated Cola capitals of Tanjore and Gangai- 
konda-CoJapuram ; the practice was followed by the monarchs. 
of Vijayanagar also. We notice the same feature in the Sanskrit 
word Prasada , also meaning both temple and palace. Again, 
the word employed for worship in the citation made above from 
Purananuru is paravu i.e., praise, same as rc (Rk) from which 
we get arcana , a common word for worship in later times. Stress 
has been laid on the contrast between yagna (sacrifice) and 
puja (worship) and the suggestion made that the former is Vedic 
and Aryan, and the latter non-Vedic and pre-Aryan. Accord- 
ingly, puja, in Tamil puM, is sought to be derived in one of 
two ways : One method is to connect with the words pu, flower, 
and sey, do, i.e., an act done with the aid of flowers ; the other 
is to connect it with pusu (smear), implying that the smearing 
of the object worshipped with the blood of the animal sacrificed 
in the act was its central feature. We must observe, however, 
that the word puSai does not occur in early Tamil literature of 
the Sangam period, and that the Tamil Lexicon does not notice 
either of these derivations for the words but simply refers to 
the Sanskrit word puja . Worship in temples and the domestic 
worship of deities is repeatedly mentioned in the late Vedic lite- 
rature of the Sutras. Vedic religion was aniconic, and the objects 
that received worship from pre-Aryan peoples in India were 
trees and stones which were regarded as the abode of deities, 
good and bad, and possibly some animals held sacred for one 
reason or another. The beginnings of anthropomorphism can 
be traced to an interesting discussion by Yaska (c 600 b.c.) on 
the human attributes of Vedic deities and we may assume that 



28 Development of Religion in South India ( 

figural representation of gods became common thereafter, and 
a regular iconography began to develop. The accretion of myths 
and legends drawn from various sources such as the elaboration 
of hints contained in the Vedas, the adaptation of local stories 
and traditions prevalent in different parts of the country, led 
on the one hand to an increasing volume of Puranic literature 
and on the other to a diversification of cults and deities each 
with its own particular iconic ideals enshrined in dhyana slokas 
(verses in aid of meditation) supposed to embody the visions 
vouchsafed to eminent seers who practised the particular cults. 
These in turn gave rise to an extensive sculptural art in stone 
and metal, an art rich alike in aesthetic and symbolism which, 
with many changes, has survived to our own day. We shall 
study these developments in some detail later. 

The whole of India including the extreme south had been 
Aryanized by the fourth century b.c. if not earlier, and a new 
Hindu Society marked by certain prominent traits constituted 
everywhere. It was a pluralistic society which had found in the 
caste system the most expedient method of accommodating 
peoples professing differing faiths and following diverse practices, 
while ensuring the acceptance by all of a common idealogical 
framework. The system is certainly open to attack from the 
standpoint of modern egalitarian democracy, and perhaps in the 
long run it tended to encourage narrower group loyalties to the 
detriment of the wider loyalty to the race or nation. But equality 
even in the modem world is more often an ideal rather than a 
reality and no system ever realizes in their entirety all the merits 
and demerits that are its theoretical concomitants. The Indian 
caste system is no exception. In its actual working through the 
ages it was neither so good and perfect as the orthodox advo- 
cates of the theory of varnatrama think, nor so evil and degrad- 
ing as its critics, particularly from among Christian missionaries, 
have been prone to depict. How much of it grew out of the 
class-system ( varnas ) of the Indo-Aryan Society and how much 
was incorporated from pre-Aryan social institutions and practices 
will perhaps never be satisfactorily determined. While in the 
rest of the Aryanized world the original class system showed no 
tendency to harden into more or less self-sufficient and socially 
exclusive groups, in India not only did the classes develop into 
rigid castes which are mutually exclusive, particularly as regards 
marriage and eating together, but the principle of caste fissipa- 
rousness became so deep-rooted that even the reformist attempts 
to abolish caste ended generally in the formation of new castes 
♦of such reformers. Caste has invaded even the Islamic and 


Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 29' 

Christian sections of Indian society, and today, more than a 
decade after the attainment of political freedom, the leaders of 
the country who mind its unity find the need to inveigh against 
‘ Casteism But the roots of * Casteism * still baffle understand- 
ing and analysis. 

The more admirable on this account was the success of the 
early founding fathers of Indo-Aryan society in inventing an 
idealogy which was accepted not only in all India, but to a large 
extent even in lands colonized by them outside India and which 
served as an effective bond of cultural unity. The central idea 
was that of the autonomy of the individual soul ; not only 
humans and superhumans but all live beings have souls, and the 
Jains postulate souls even for the inanimate world ; the grada- 
tion of births is regulated by the individual’s Karma (acts), and 
the individual can work his way up the scale by good deeds 
through many births until at last he transcends the cycle of births 
and his soul regains its pristine condition of freedom and happi- 
ness. The processes by which the soul gets entangled in the cycle 
of births and then works out its release ( mokqa ) are explained 
differently by different schools of philosophy, and the common 
people who follow each school, though they may not be adepts 
in its metaphysics, do not lack an inkling of the truth as their 
acaryas (teachers) saw it, because even the routine of their daily 
life is replete with nuances answering to the particular metaphysic. 
Karma and its consequences, together with the strong appeal to 
ethical conduct implicit in the theory, were almost universally 
accepted and actively held in the whole of Hindu India, Buddhists 
and Jains not excluded. The only exception were the handful of 
Cdrvdkas (Nihilists) who never commanded much influence in 
Indian society. 

The whole pattern of Hindu social thought and conduct was 
calculated to ensure a stable society on the basis of this meta- 
physic, a society in which each individual would find his or her 
place duly defined, a place in which there would be no lack of 
opportunity for working one’s way up both here and hereafter. 
The emphasis was more on duty than on right, on order and 
the continuance of ancestral custom than on innovation and 
change. The social order, particularly the Dharma (duty and 
function) of the varnas and the asramas (stages of life) was 
believed to be divinely ordained, but the code was not inflexible 
and changes, necessitated by time, place and circumstance, were 
effected by the example and consent of the 61ite of society ; and 
this principle applied even to secular matters such as the regu- 
lation of industry, trade and the arts by the guilds or groups 


30 Development of Religion in South India 

concerned. The state had no legislative power and was only 
law-guardian and not law-maker ; its main task was to keep the 
ring and enable the units of society, territorial (village) or social 
(caste, guild), or institutional (temple, college), and so on to 
carry on their legitimate functions without hindrance from anti- 
social elements. The actual multiplication of castes (jati) was 
reconciled with the four varnas of divine ordinance by the theory 
of mixed castes (varitasahkara ) , worked out in much detail in 
textbooks, but bearing little relation to the facts of life ; but the 
books were consulted at times to decide practical issues, and 
foreign immigrants were given a place in Hindu society if they 
desired entry by being regarded as Ksatriyas of sorts. 

All the important stages in the life-cycle from conception 
to cremation had their appropriate ceremonies and rituals, which 
were marked by endless variations in detail according to locality 
and group. These ceremonies ( samskaras ) were believed to be 
purificatory and calculated to fit the individual for the higher 
life. The words Dharma and Karma covered the whole gamut 
of duties, individual and social, and the entire round of cere- 
monies, but the details of their content were by no means rigid, 
and could always be adapted to circumstances, under the guidance 
of the accepted leaders of society at the time. The concepts of 
rnatraya (three debts) and purusarthas (the objectives of human 
endeavour) may be taken to complete the basic ideas of Hindu 
society. A man is believed to be bom with three debts and 
he is expected to discharge them duly in the course of his life ; 
first is what he owes to his parents and ancestors who gave him 
birth ; this he repays by procreating children in lawful wedlock 
to continue his line ; second is what he owes to the r$is (seers), 
the founders of the culture and organizers of social life, whom 
he satisfied by vidyd (education), i.e., by becoming an adept in 
the traditional learning and the arts, and if possible contributing 
to their development, at any rate securing their being handed 
down intact to future generations ; and lastly what he owes to 
the gods — the good seasons and harvests, of which he ensures 
the continuance by sacrifices, daily and occasional. The aims of 
life were categorized as four : dharma (sufficiently explained 
already); artha (Goods) — pursuit of wealth, material good in 
general ; kdma (Love) — sex life, the foundation of the family ; 
and lastly , moksa, liberation from the cycle of births. These 
aims were linked to the asramas : dharma was to be pursued 
constantly, mok$a was to be prepared for by proper education 
during the first stage (Brahmacarya — stage of scholar), artha 
and kdma in the second stage that of grhastha householder, and 



Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 31 

tnoksa in the evening of life when he developed detachment from 
mundane preoccupations in two stages — vanaprastha, forest 
dweller (when his wife could keep him company), and sanyasi 
(anchorite). The stage of grhastha was considered most impor- 
tant socially as persons in all the other stages of life depended 
on householders for their sustenance. Family life including the 
earning of wealth and its enjoyment ( artha and kdma) was thus 
enjoined as essential duty, and this perhaps needs to be stressed 
a little in view of the not uncommon misreading of the Hindu 
outlook on life which attributes to it an undue concentration 
on the other world to the negation of this one. In fact the cele- 
brated Tamil classic, the Kura\ concerns itself only with the first 
three objectives of human life — Aram (Dharma), Porul 
(Artha), and Inbam (Kama) — -and omits all reference to 
Mok$a (liberation). Even in the North the Trivarga (three 
ends) were long treated as the norm, and Mokqa got entry into 
the group only relatively late. The W eltanschaung thus briefly 
sketched had become universal in India several centuries before 
the Christian era, but conformity to it in detail was by no means 
strict or uniform. The large classes of people who were new 
to Indo-Aryan society naturally retained many of their old ways 
and gradually adopted whatever they could of the new ones, 
and nowhere did they continue to be the same as before the 
contact with the new culture. This process of ‘ Aryanization 5 
or ‘ Sanskritization * as it has been recently designated is still 
going on among the backward tribes in the hills and forests of 
India. The state of religion and society that resulted from the 
mingling of cultures is reflected in a few early inscriptions and 
more fully, particularly for the Tamil country in the literature 
of the Sangam period ; and this may be taken to furnish the 
starting point for our study of the subsequent religious move- 
ments in the region. 

In the Deccan, Buddhism was well established by the third 
century b.c. and continued to flourish throughout the Satavahana 
period ; indeed the first two centuries of the Christian era consti- 
tute the most glorious epoch of Buddhism in the Deccan. The 
stupa of Amaravati was enlarged and embellished, many new 
but smaller stupas came up in many spots in the Kr§na Valley, 
and many new caityas and viharas were excavated from rock 
in the Western Ghats to the north of Poona and elsewhere. The 
contemporary inscriptions mention the names of a number of 
sects and of monks of various grades of learning and eminence 
engaged in preaching the Law ot the Master to the faithful. 
Stupas , the sacred tree, the footprints of the master, the trisula 



32 Development of Religion in South India 

(trident) emblem representing the three jewels ( triratna ) of 
Buddhism, viz., Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha (congregation of 
monks), the dharmacakra (Wheel of Law), relics and statues 
of the Buddha and other great teachers, Yak?as, Yaksis and 
Nagarajas (spirits and godlings) were all objects of worship. 
The sculptures of this period show men and women in states 
of ecstatic devotion rather than merely kneeling or perhaps 
prostrating themselves with joined hands before the objects of 
their devotion. 

Buddhism, however, did not by any means displace Brah- 
manical Hinduism to which adhered most of the Satavahana 
rulers (c. 200 B.C.-250 A.D.). The third king of the line per- 
formed a number of Vedic sacrifices and even named one of 
his sons VedisrI (the glory of the altar). King Hala’s SaptaMh 
a Prakrit anthology, opens with a passage in adoration of Siva. 
Another king Gautamlputra Satakarnd was a great supporter of 
Brahmans, and is said to have emulated the examples of the 
epic heroes Rama, Kesava (i.e. Krsna) and Arjuna. The pan- 
theon of Hinduism included Indra, Vasudeva, the Sun and the 
Moon, Siva, Vi?nu, Kr^a, Gaiiesa, and Pasupati. Temples of 
Gauri, the consort of Siva, are mentioned in Saptatotl as also 
the obscure Vrata (vow) of fire and water. 

The fusion of cultures is seen much more clearly farther 
South and we may take a broad view of the conditions not 
confined only to the sphere of religion. The. stories of the 
Rdmdyana and Mahabharata were well known to the early Tamil 
poets and they refer frequently to episodes from these epics. 
Each of the three ‘ Crowned Kings ’ ( mudi-ara&ar ) of the Tamil 
country, Cera, Pandya, and Cola, claims to have fed the opposing, 
forces on the eve of the Great Battle in Kuruk§etra. Among the 
myths and conventions of Northern Sanskritic origin that had 
already entered Tamil literature may be noted : the destruction 
of the three cities (Tripura) of the Asuras by Siva; King SibI 
giving away his flesh to save the dove from the Vulture ; Uttara- 
Kuru as the land of perpetual enjoyment ; Arundhati as the ideal 
of conjugal fidelity ; the concept of rnatraya ; and the beliefs 
that the Cakora bird feeds only on rain drops ; and that rain- 
drops turn into pearls in particular conditions. The Tolkdppiyam 
grammar is avowedly modelled on the Sanskrit grammar of the 
Aindra school. The eight kinds of marriage mentioned in the 
Dharmautras are known, and the gdndharva form is equated ta 
the ka\avu (secret meetings between a young man and a maiden 
unknown to their # parents), an originally Tamil convention. 
Many popular beliefs and customs mentioned in literature seem 



Integration of Cults and the Beginnings of Hinduism 33 

to be blends of the North and South. A woman with dishevelled 
hair was a bad omen. Fortune tellers plied a busy trade and so 
did astrologers. Children were provided with amulets for ward- 
ing off evil, and the five weapons (< aimbadai ) of Vi$nu figured 
prominently among them. Rites were practised to avert the 
mischief of demons (pey), to bring rain, and produce other 
desired results. Crows were believed to announce the arrival of 
guests by their cawing, and particularly the return of the absent 
husband to his lonely wife, and were fed regularly in front of 

1 Vi Qi icp Vi rU r\ Th a rtrcWire 









34 Development of Religion in South India 

worship in the temples. The worship of Murugan was of ancient 
origin and embodied some indigenous features like Velan-adal, an 
ecstatic dance in his honour. Indra came in for special worship 
in an annual festival held in Puhar (Kaveripatnam), the Co] a 
port-town, and the story is told that the omission to celebrate 
the festival brought about the destruction of the city by a tidal 
wave. Asceticism was honoured and tridandi (triple staff) 
ascetics are particularly mentioned. There was in vogue a con- 
ventional classification of the landscape of the Tamil country into 
five regions each being presided over by its special deity ; thus 
Mullai (forest land) had Mayon (Visnu) for its deity ; Kuriiiji 
(mountain country) had Seyon (Murugan); Marudam (wet land) 
had Vendan (King of the Gods, Indra); Neydal (sea coast) had 
Varuna; and lastly Palai (desert land) had a goddess Korravai 
(lit. goddess of victory or heroism, identified with Siva’s consort 
Parvatl). Here we have another conspicuous example of the 
blend of Aryan and pre-Aryan concepts resulting in a new 
complex partaking of the features of both. 



III. 


BHAKTI MOVEMENTS IN THE SOUTH 


The next epoch in the history of South Indian religions is 
the growth of an intense theism marked by a fervid devotion 
( bhakti ) to a personal god which found expression in numerous 
popular devotional hymns ; these hymns were collected and 
edited in a canonical form at a later time, and continue to be 
regarded as among the most precious treasures in the heritage 
of the country. The period of this development may be said 
to have lasted from the sixth century to about the end of the 
eighth century a.d. It was heralded by notable changes in the 
political map. The Satavabana power came to an end in the 
third century and the break up of their empire led, as often in 
the history of India, to the rise of a number of smaller kingdoms 
in the different parts of the Deccan — the Abhiras and Traikuf:a- 
kas in the north-west, the Cujius followed by the Kadambas in 
the south-west, the Gangas to the east of them, the Pallavas in 
the south-east, and the Ik§vSkus and others in the coastal Andhra 
country. What happened in the Tamil country is not clearly 
known. The close of the Sangam age which may have lasted 
well into the fifth century a.d. was followed by a dark period 
of well over a century. A Pandyan copper plate charter of the 
ninth century a.d., the Velvikudi grant, mentions that during this 
dark period, perhaps towards its close, there occurred a political 
revolution as a result of which several kings lost their thrones, 
religious endowments were abrogated, and much disorder and 
oppression ensued. This revolution was the work of the Kaja- 
bhras, a tribe or dynasty of obscure origin. From the contem- 
porary Buddhist Pali works of Buddhadatta we hear of a certain 
Accuta-Vikkanta (Acyuta-Vikranta in Sanskrit) of the Kalabba- 
kula (Kalabhrakula, Skt.) during whose reign Bud dhist monas- 
teries were built and Buddhist writers enjoyed considerable 
patronage in the Cola country. Much later Tamil literary 
tradition avers that Accuta captured and imprisoned the three 
! Crowned rulers* of the Tamil land — the Cera, Cola and 
Pandya, and some songs about him are quoted by Amitasagara, 
a Jain grammarian of Tamil in the tenth century a.d. Possibly 



36 Development of Religion in South India 

Accuta was himself a Buddhist, and the political revolution which* 
the Ka|abhras effected may have been provoked by religious 
antagonism. The Colas virtually disappeared from the Tamil 
land as a power in this debacle ; a branch migrated to the Telugu 
country and became celebrated as Telugu-Colas from the seventh 
to the tenth century and beyond ; the main Tamil dynasty lived 
obscurely in Uraiyur in the neighbourhood of Trichinopoly, occa- 
sionally furnishing brides for the princes of neighbouring king- 
doms. The duration of Kalabhra rule and the extent of territory 
that passed under their sway cannot be determined, but it is 
clear that under them Buddhism (and possibly Jainism) also 
made great progress among the Tamils. All references to this 
period in later Tamil literature, particularly in the poetical classic 
of Tamil hagiology, the Periya-Purdnam of Sekkilar, are loaded 
with a deep sense of the danger of the overthrow of orthodox 
Hinduism by the rising tide of Buddhistic and Jaina heresy. 

Three kingdoms rose into prominence in the latter half of 
the sixth century, the Calukyas of Badami to the north of the 
Tungabhadra, the Pandyas in the extreme south, and the Pallavas 
in the country in between. And the first rulers of all these 
kingdoms claim to have overthrown the Kalabhras, among others* 
before establishing their sway. The Calukyas who make their 
appearance for the first time in the middle of the sixth century 
soon succeeded in reuniting the Deccan under one State, though 
a little later the subordinate Viceroyalties of Lata (South Guja- 
rat) and VefigT (Coastal Andhra) ruled by princes of the blood 
royal! developed into virtually independent kingdoms. Farther 
south, the Pallavas and the Pandyas kept up a more or less cons- 
tant war, and the Pallavas had to fight on two fronts against the 
Calukyas in the north and the Pandyas in the south ; naturally 
also the Cajukyas and Pandyas sometimes joined hands against 
their common enemy in the middle. These political alignments 
were, as we shall see, sometimes reflected in the religious prac- 
tices of the different states. 

The Bhakti cult had its origin in the North. It is primarily 
associated with Krsna-Vasudeva identified with Visnu, Nara- 
yana and Puru§ottama. A Krsna is known as the composer of 
a Vedic liymn (RV. viii 74) and he is called an Angirasa in the 
Vedic Index ( Anukra man z). There is also a Krsna DevakTputra 
who figures as the pupil of Ghora Angirasa in one of the early 
upani$ads ( Chhdndogya in, 17. 6), dating from a time not later 
than the seventh century b.c. Legends of early date are found* 
and these represent Krsna as a hero not yet divine, though 
well on the road to becoming so. About the same time or a 



Bhakti Movements in the South 


37 


little later the grammarian Paiiini writes of Vasudeva and Arjuna 
(IV. 3. 98) as objects of worship — being K§atriya heroes per- 
haps regarded as semi-divine. Magasthenes (c. 320 b.c.), the 
Macedonian ambassador at the Mauryan Court, evinces know- 
ledge of Krsna, whom he calls Herakles, and the places asso- 
ciated with his cycle of legends ; he says that Herakles was 
worshipped by the Saurasenoi (Surasenas) in whose land are 
two great cities Mathura (now Muttra) and Kleisobora (Kpsna- 
pura(?)> unidentified), and through this land flows the river 
Jobares (Yamuna, Jamna of the maps). Epigraphical references 
from Central India mark the further stages in the growth of the 
cult. About 200 B.c. an inscription from Ghasundi in Rajpu- 
tana records the building of a stone wall round the hall of wor- 
ship of Sankar§ana and Vasudeva. Vasudeva is of course 
Krsna ; Sankar§ana is the name of his brother Balarama ; Pra- 
dyurnna was Krsna’s son and Aniruddha one of his grandsons. 
‘ It is probable \ says Farquhar, * that these three were local 
divinities, that an arrangement was made to bring them into 
relation with Kf§na so as to form a combined sect, and that the 
doctrine of the (four) Vyuhas (expansions or manifestation) is 
a theologism created to give them a permanent place in the 
teaching and worship of the community ’ of Satvatas, Panca- 
ratas or Bhagavatas as they were variously called. In its final 
form the doctrine of Vyuhas held that Vasudeva, Sankarsana, 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha were the manifestations of Purusot- 
tama. The Besnagar inscription (100 B.c.) records the erection 
of a Garuda-Dhvaja (i.e., a Pillar topped by Garuda, the mount 
of Visnu) of Vasudeva by the Bhagavata Heliodorus of Taxila, 
an ambassador from King Antialkidas to King Kasiputra Bhaga- 
bhadra. The Mahabha$ya of Patanjali (150 b.c.) mentions the 
followers of Vasudeva, associates Ky?na closely with Sankar§ana, 
and speaks of dramatic representations of the story of Krsna, 
especially the binding of Bali and the slaying of Kamsa. An 
inscription from the Nanaghat Cave (100 b.c.) associates San- 
karsana with Vasudeva. The later parts of the Great Epic 
{Mahabharata), the Atharva Upani§ads, and some Puranas agree 
with the Bhagavadgita in regarding Krsna-Vasudeva as supreme. 

The rise and spread of the Bhagavata cult has been the 
subject of much learned discussion. We need not review the 
discussions here, but, with due reserve, accept that Kr$na, the 
son of Vasudeva and Devaki was in truth a K§atriya warrior 
and diplomat who played a prominent part in the events recorded 
in the Mahabharata. He had his education at the time which 
witnessed the rather widespread and speculative reaction against 


38 Development of Religion in South India 

an overgrown sacerdotalism, and in this reaction which is the 
core of the upani?adic thought, K?atriyas had an important, if 
not the leading, role. Krsna was initiated into the m_ystical and 
moral teaching of the time by his preceptor Ghora Angirasa, a 
worshipper of the sun, from whom he learnt ‘ those lessons of 
the meaning of sacrifice, the merit of virtue, and the importance 
of last thoughts, which reappear in the Bhagavadglta , and which 
we may suppose to have been preserved for centuries as the 
sacred heritage of the Bhagavata sect* (Hill). We know little 
more of Krsna ; the story of his overthrow of the tyrant Kamsa 
may have a historical foundation ; the rest including the legends 
of his childhood is ‘ unworthy myth *, Kr?na perhaps taught the 
worship of the Sun to his followers, but they, like the Buddhists 
and the Jains, soon turned their worship to their teacher himself. 
Vasudeva worship was still intimately connected with that of the 
Sun, and this patronymic name was preferred in the sect as more 
significant of the “ radiant lord of Heaven ” than ever could be 
the name of Kr?na “ the black ” (Hill) . Kr§na, however, was 
still demi-god and not Supreme Deity in the days of Panini who 
couples his name with that of Arjuna as objects of devotion. 
The district of Mathura was the centre of the cult, and Vasudeva 
was revered here much as Herakles was among the Greeks. 
Vasudeva’s position as Supreme God is proclaimed in the Helio- 
dorus inscription which calls him devadeva , and this is also 
reflected in the attitude of Patanjali which marks a distinct 
advance on that of Panini. The supremacy of Krsna-Vasudeva 
was not, however, accepted by all, and there are indications both 
in the Bhagavadglta and in the rest of the Mahabharata 1 that 
there were some who would subordinate him to Siva and revile 
him and cast aspersions on his character \ Moreover the compre- 
hensive tolerance of the new cult of devotion to a personal God 
which admitted all and sundry within its fold on a basis of spiri- 
tual equality must have been unacceptable to some Brahmans- 
who noted the threat to their own proud status and to the tradi-. 
tion of caste that the new movement involved. The doctrine of 
avatara which makes a rather sudden appearance in the Bhaga- 
vadglta was ‘ the necessary corollary to the identification of 
with the supreme. Here was Krsna in human form, 
Arjuna’s charioteer at Kuruk?etra ; if he was at the same time' 
highest God, the paradox could be explained only by the theory 
of “ descent God had taken earthly forms in earlier days for 
the benefit of Gods and men ; Kr$pa was then the last and 
greatest of a series of descents \ (Hill) . 

The Nanaghat inscription mentions only Vasudeva and 


Bhakti Movements in the South 


39 


Sankar§apa, and the suggestion has been made that the doctrine 
of Vyuhas was still in its early formative stages ; this may well 
be so, for the Vyuhas are not known to the Gita. So the bhakti 
cult must be taken to have entered the Deccan at a relatively 
early stage in its history. Another side of the bhakti movement 
of which we have rather less knowledge is that relating to the 
worshippers of Siva, gatanjali in his Mahdbhasya speaks of 
Sivabhagavatas, who worshipped Siva as the Bhagvat and carried 
an iron lance in the hand as the emblem of the deity they wor- 
shipped. The doctrines of this school formed the Pasupata 
system founded by Lakulisa or Nakulisa perhaps in the early 
centuries B.c. * The fact that his rise has been represented by 
the Puraijas to be contemporaneous with Vasudeva-Krsna poims 
to the inference that traditionally the system was intended to Lake 
the same place in the Rudra-Siva cult that the Pancaratra did in 
the Vasudeva-Kr?na cult. We may therefore, place the rise of 
the Pasupata school. . . . about a century after that of the Panca- 
ratra system, i.e., about the second century b.c.’ (Bhandarkar), 

We have lost the historical link between the early bhakti y 
movement of the North of which we have just traced the outline 
and the movement in the Tamil country that began most probably 
in the sixth century a.d. and continued to flourish with some 
force till the ninth century. We may assume, however, that the 
southern movement was in some way inspired by the northern 
example. The movement had two wings — one Saiva and the 
other Vai§nava. They were contemporary and cooperative- and' 
had many close resemblances. They have both left a precious 
heritage of popular hymns of high literary quality marked at times 
by great philosophical insight and always reflecting the spiritual 
exaltation experienced by the hymnists as they stood worshipping 
in the shrines of their favourite deities. They have also left a con- 
siderable body of legendary history purporting to narrate the life 
histories of the saints and gathered together in canonical collec- 
tions by their followers of a later age, say about the twelfth or 
thirteenth century a.d. As already noted, this hagiology is / 
replete with the sense of a great danger to the orthodox faiths 
from the spread of the heretical creeds of Buddhism and Jainism. 
These creeds offended the Hindu sense of religious decency in 
two ways ; they denied the authority of the revealed word, the 
Veda ; they also denied God ; Buddhism denied the existence of 
the soul also, though in this respect Jainism parted company 
with it. These creeds had come into the Tamil country well 
before the Christian era and had more or less peacefully co- 



40 Development of Religion in South India 

existed with the orthodox religious faiths and practices for quite 
a number of centuries. We have seen,, however, that these 
creeds, Buddhism in particular, seem to have gained an accession 
of political power with the advent of Kalabhra rule, and it is 
possible that this power was employed to promote actively the 
non-Vedic creeds at the expense of the Vedic. We have no 
direct evidence to judge the intensity of the danger to orthodoxy. 
The only evidence on the subject is the Mattavilasa , a farce 
( prahasana , lit., play of laughter) by the Pallava King Mahendra- 
varman (c. 620 A.D.). Far from reflecting an atmosphere of 
intense sectarian rivalry, the play introduces us to an easy going 
tolerance of foibles and turns the laugh against the Kapalikas 
(a class of extreme Siva worshippers) as much as against Bud- 
dhist monks (bhiksus). But then the play is a farce, and its 
author a versatile curious-minded ( vicitra-citta ) monarch who 
may have meant the play as an essay in religious reform. We 
shall see that there is some reason to think that Mahendravar- 
man was himself caught in the religious rivalries of his time. 

If we may trust the indications from later legend, this was 
a period of great stir. There came up a succession of great 
leaders among the worshippers of Siva and Vi?nu, the former 
known collectively as Nayanars (leaders) and the latter as 
Alvars (divers, into the Divine). They evolved a new type, of 
bhaktit a fervid emotional surrender to God which found in due 
course its supreme literary expression in the Bhagavata purdna 
(tenth century), a bhakti very different from the calm, dignified 
devotion of the Bhagavatas of the early centuries before and after 
.yChrist in Northern India. An outspoken hatred of Buddhists 
and Jains which finds expression in almost every one of the 
hymns was among the chief characteristics of the new epoch. 
According to the canonical works mentioned above, the rivalry 
between the orthodox and heretical sects exhibited itself in chal- 
lenges to public debate with the condition that the vanquished 
party should give up his creed and adopt that of the victor, 
competition in the performance of miracles on similar terms, and 
tests of the truth of respective doctrines by means of ordeals. 
Parties of devotees under the leadership of one gifted saint or 
another traversed the country many times over, singing, dancing 
and debating all the way. This great wave of devotional enthu- 
siasm attained its peak in the seventh century and had not 
spent itself in the midst of the ninth. This indeed was the golden 
age of Hindu Revival in South India. The shrines visited by 
the saints and celebrated by them in song were deemed parti- 
cularly sacred, and princes, nobles and merchants who wished 



Bhakti Movements in the South 


41 


to build and endow temples generally chose them for their parti- 
cular attention in subsequent times down to our own day. 

Later tradition has recognized the number of nayanars or 
adiyars , devotees of Siva, as sixty-three ; most of them were 
individuals though occasionally a group of devotees was counted 
under one name. The individual saints included a woman fronw 
Karaikal, in Tanjore, till recently a French possession, a Pariah 
by name Nandan from Adanur, also in the Kaverl valley, and 
Siruttondar, a general of the Paliava army, who won distinction* 
by carrying out the siege and destruction of the Cajukya capital 
Badami (7th century). Nandan’s life, much embellished, is a 
popular opera today and forms the subject of Katha kdlaksepams, 
oral expositions of legends with music and sometimes a minimum 
of acting. But most prominent among them all were Three 
Great Hymnists ( Muvar ) whose songs form the Devaram (lit. 
songs in praise of God) making up the first seven books out of 
the twelve in the entire Saiva Canon ( tirumurai ). The collec- 
tion now comprises 795 hymns (Jiianasambandar 384, Tiru- 
navukkarasu or Appar 311, and Sundaramurtti 100); they 
are, however, only the survivals of a much larger original whose 
number tradition, with the usual exaggeration, puts at 103,000 
(16,000+49,000+38,000). The story is that the entire collec- 
tion had been written on palm leaves and stored in a vault 
behind the shrine of Na£araja at Cidambaram, that when Nambi 
Ap$ar Nambi, the editor of the extant version, opened the vault, 
he found the palm leaves mostly eaten up by termites and was 
able to recover only a small fraction. We may not believe this 
legend or the figures it gives ; but that not all hymns entered 
the canon as we have it was established when some years ago 
the Epigraphical Department discovered an entire hymn of Sam- 
bandar engraved on the wall of a Siva temple in the Tanjore 
District, but not found in the printed collection. The original 
song modes seem to have been lost irretrievably. 

First among the Devaram Trio was Tirunavukkarasu 
(lit. king of the holy tongue) also known as Appar. He 
was a Vellala (peasant proprietor) from Tiruvamur, gene- 
rally believed to have been a contemporary of the Paliava 
ruler Mahendravarman I. Though bom in an orthodox Saiva 
family he was attracted to Jainism in his early life, and 
joined the monastery at Pajaliputra (near Cuddalore in South 
Arcot) as a monk. His elder sister Tilakavati, who had 
watched his change of faith with untold regret, implored 
Siva’s help. Her prayer was answered ; Dharmasena, that was 
her brother’s ordination name, became the victim of an abdomi- 


42 Development of Religion in South India 

nal disorder, and all his Jain companions could not help him. 
Seeking his sister’s aid, he was cured by the grace of the God 
of Tiruvadigai and so returned to the Saiva faith. This defec- 
tion greatly upset the monks of Pataliputra who trumped up 
false charges against Dharmasena and poisoned the mind of the 
Pallava king against him. Appar was subjected to many trials 
and tortures which, however, by the grace of Siva, caused him 
no hurt.' The king was convinced of the superiority of Saivism,. 
and himself embraced it. This king is generally identified with 
Mahendravarman, mainly on the ground that the Siva Temple 
at Tiruvadigai renovated by him bore the name Gunadhara- 
iSvaram, and Mahendra himself had a similar title, Gunabhara. 
It is quite possible that the title of the temple in Sekkilar’s 
poem is a misreading of the title of the Pallava monarch. There 
is a verse in the Trichinopoly inscription of Mahendravarman 
which furnishes clear proof that the king did indeed return to 
Saivism from some other creed which may well have been Jain- 
ism. It must, however, be admitted that, as already hinted, the 
tradition regarding the persecution of Appar is hard to reconcile 
with the spirit of the Mattavilasa. The rest of Appar’s long 
life of eighty-one years was spent in pilgrimages during which 
he met many contemporary myandrs of whom Jnanasambandar 
was the most notable, indeed the greatest of them all. 

JnSnasambandar, or Sambandar for short, was a Brahmin 
of the Kauntfinya gotrci from Shiyali in the Tanjore District. 
There are few Siva temples today in South India where worship 
is not offered to him. As a child of three he is said to have 
got the milk of divine knowledge from Parvatl (the consort of 
Siva) herself and narrated the incident to his father then and 
there in song. Realizing the divinity of his child, the father 
carried him on his shoulders from one Siva temple to another 
until he was relieved by the present from the Gods of a pearl 
palanquin for his son’s use. At that time the Pandya country 
was almost completely overrun by_ Jainism which had built a 
strong centre for its diffusion at Anaimalai (Elephant hill, so 
called from its shape) within a few miles of the Papdyan capital 
of Madurai. The Papuan queen, a Cola princess by name 
Mangaiyarkkarasi (Queen among women), and the minister 
Kujacci^ai, both staunch Saivas, sent a pressing invitation to* 
Sambandar to come and retrieve the position. The holy man 
went over to Madurai, foiled all the nefarious conspiracies of 
the Jains against him, vanquished them in debate and converted 
the king and his subjects to Saivism. The story goes that on 
this occasion 8,000 Jains were put to death by impalement, and 



Bhakti Movements in the South 


43 


a festival in the Madurai temple is supposed even now to com- 
memorate the event every year* This shocking legend can hardly 
be history. Religious antagonism was sharp at the time, and im- 
palement as a punishment of felons is attested by more or less-V 
contemporary sculptures and otherwise. Still we can hardly believe 
that the intolerance of heresy on the part of the youthful and 
gentle saint — he did not live to be more than sixteen — des- 
cended to such cruel barbarities. The story is doubtless the pro- 
duct of orthodox imagination of a later time animated by a false 
scale of values, Sambandar had disputations also with Buddhists 
and visited many' shrines which he praised in song. He was the 
saintliest of the Ndyanars and had no past to regret. He may 
be placed in the middle of the seventh century or a little later 
and his Pandyan contemporary was most probably Maravarman 
Avanisulamani. 

About a century after Sambandar came Sundaramurtti of 
Navalur. A child of poor Brahmin parents, he caught, by his> 
physical charm, the attention of the local chieftain Narasinga 
Munaiyadaraiyan who, with the consent of the parents, interest- 
ed himself in the child’s education and bringing up. When: 
Sundaramurtti was about to marry a girl of his own caste, the 
marriage was stopped by the mysterious intervention of Siva 
who claimed him as his slave. A little later, Sundaramurtti fell 
in love with two young women, one a Sudra girl of Tiruvorriyur 
(near Madras) and the other a dancing girl of Tiruvalur (Tan- 
jore District). Their jealousies, it is said, could only be resolved 
by Siva himself acting as a messenger to one of them. Like the 
other Nayanars, Sundaramurtti is also credited with many miracles 
and the contemporary Cera ruler, Ceraman Perumal, was his 
friend. They exchanged mutual visits regularly and made their 
last journey to the abode of Siva in Mount Kailasa together, 
Sundara on a white elephant and Ceraman Parumaj on a horse. 
Sundara’s devotion to Siva was that of an intimate friend so 
that he was given the title Tambiran-tolan (friend of God). The 
hymns of Sambandar, Appar and Sundara constitute, as already 
noted, the Devaram and the first seven out of the twelve sections 
of the Tamil Saiva canon. They form a varied treasure house 
of religious experience which tells of mystical raptures and 
ecstasies, of moments of light when there is a vision of God 
and the world is transfigured in the light of his love, and of 
periods of gloom when all is dark and the blind seeker is filled 
with a sense of fear. They are read widely by Saivas in the 
Tamil country even now and sung in temples by trained choris- 
ters on scheduled occasions. 



44 


Development of Religion in South India 


A little later than Sundara came the illustrious Mapikka- 
v&sagar (one whose speech is ruby). Legend makes him the 
minister of a Pandyan king, and on his account Siva, the pre- 
siding deity of Madurai, is said to have performed many miracles. 
His Pandyan contemporary was most probably Varaguna II 
(862-80 a.d.) . Manikkavasagar is said to have debated with 
Buddhists from Ceylon at Cidambaram and to have utterly van- 
quished them. His hymns constitute the Tiruvasagam (The 
sacred word) which forms the eighth section of the Tamil Saiva 
canon. Another work, Tiruccirrambalak-kovai, 1 is also ascrib- 
ed to him. The Tiruvasagam is the expression of confessions 
more outspoken and of a devotion more impassioned than those 
of the Devaram Trio, whose works were doubtless the source 
of his inspiration. That he was an accomplished poet with a 
mastery of diction and metres is clear from the Tiruvasagam , 
v He draws freely on the epics, Purapas and Agamas and on the 
rich Tamil literature that had preceded him. ‘He knew also 
liow to find poetry in local customs and homely stories, espe- 
cially the mass of legends that illustrate Siva’s sacred sports. 
Over all he threw the glamour of his genius * (Farquhar) . He 
gives, striking and frequent expression to his dislike for the 
iivedanta, by which we must, of course, understand the system 
of Sankara propounded not long before his time. Mapikka- 
vaSagar came after the tradition regarding the ‘ sixty-three ’ 
saints (individuals and groups) of Tamil Saivism had found 
their definitive formulation in the Tiruttonclattogai (the collec- 
tion of the sacred servants of God) of Sundaramurtti which 
became the accepted basis of all later literature on them. 

MapikkavESagar’s protest against advaita-vedanta must be^ 
noted particularly, because it represents the core of the bhakti 
cult. The ultimate aim of the bhakta is not to lose his identity 
in the impersonal Absolute, but to attain and enjoy for all time 
the blissful company of a personal God. The attributes of God, 
his relation to the universe he repeatedly creates, protects an<| 
destroys, and to the individual soul before and after its release 
from the cycle of births and deaths (samsara), are described 
differently by different schools of bhakti ; but they are all agreed 
in maintaining the fundamental difference between God and the 


1 Kovm literally means ‘stringing’, ‘a set arrangement’; it is the 
name also applied to a variety of literary composition which treats suc- 
cessively the different stages in the development of the love of a young 
couple, but suffused with an esoteric significance relating to the quest of 
the_ individual soul (the nayika, heroine) for union with the absolute 
tnayaKa, hero). The work under reference centres on &iva as lord of 
Cidambaram. 



Bhakti Movements in the South 


45 


human soul and the eternal reality of both. They do not subs- 
cribe to the identity of the universal soul with the individual 
soul which figures prominently in the Mahavakyas (key sen- 
tences) of the upanisads like tat-tvamasi (That art Thou), and 
which forms the sheet anchor of advaita (non-duality) as ex- 
pounded by Sankara. In this respect Manikkavasagar is the true 
representative of all the many different schools of bhakti which 
flourished in different regions and periods of India’s long evolu- 
tion. 

Some time between Sundaramurtti and Manikkavasagar 
came the mysterious Tirumular whose Tirumandiram (the sac- 
red mantra ) forms the tenth section of the canon. This is per- 
haps the earliest Tamil work that reflects the theology of the*/ 
Agamas ; it is a poem of 3,000 verses dealing with practical 
religion. The life of Tirumular is wrapped in a fantastic legend. 

A siddha from Kailasa, the abode of Siva, migrated to the South 
to meet his friend Agastya ; near Tiruvaduturai he entered the 
dead body of a shepherd out of compassion for the herd which 
had just lost him ; he led the herd back home in the evening, 
after which he abandoned the shepherd’s family ; then as a 
penance he sat under a tree for 3,000 years composing the work 
at the rate of one verse a year. The poem is obscure in many 
parts ; it is held in great veneration by Tamil Saivas. 

The Vai^nava wing of the orthodox movement is represent- 
ed by ten alvdrs for whom tradition has fabricated an impos- 
sible chronology. Three of them form the earliest group. They 
are Poygai, Pudam and Pey, born respectively in Kanclpuram, 
Mamallapuram and Mylapore. A beautiful legend tells how 
these three saints sought shelter from the rain in a narrow room 
which could just hold them standing, when Visnu himself sought 
their company; they felt the pressure due to the presence of 
a new companion and recognizing his identity, praised Him in 
song then and there. The bhakti of these early saints of Tamil 
Vai$navism is a gentle, simple devotion, altogether free from 
an intolerant sectarian outlook. This fact together with their 
use of the Venbd metre in their songs points to a really early 
date for them — not later than the fifth or the sixth century a.d.* 

Then came Tirumalisai, who takes his name from the 
village of his birth in the Chingleput district. He may well have 
been an elder contemporary of the Pallava king Mahendravar- 
man I, and thus of Appar also. Legend avers that at his birth 
he was a shapeless mass of flesh abandoned by his parents and 
brought up by a 3udra. He practised Jainism, Buddhism and 
Saivism, before finally settling down as a Vaisnava yogi. His- 


46 


Development of Religion in South India 


poems exhibit a more controversial tone than those of his pre*^ 
decessors, and this was quite natural to his age. After him came 
Tirumangai, one of the most celebrated among the alydrs. He 
was a petty chieftain who ruled Alinadu in Tanjore District. He 
is reputed to have turned a highwayman in order to carry away 
and marry the daughter of a Vai§rtava doctor of a higher caste, 
for whose sake he also changed his religion. He is also said 
to have stolen from the vihara of Nagapattinam an image of the 
Buddha of solid gold to pay for the renovation of the temple 
of Ranganatha in Srlrangam — the most celebrated Vaisnava 
shrine in South India as it is often referred to as * the temple * 
( Koyil ) in Vai§nava parlance. In his hymns which contain 
several historical references, he distinctly mentions the siege of 
Kanclpuram by Vairamegha, i.e., the first Ra^trakuta king 
Dantidurga, and this places him in the middle of the eighth 
* century a.d. — a date which discredits the story of his friendly 
meeting with Jnanasambandar at Shiyali. His hymns, the most 
fhumerous in the Canon, are equally full of good poetry and 
■{attacks on Buddhism and Jainism. To Saivism on the whole he 

/ evinced a more friendly attitude as to a colleague cooperating 
in the war against heresy, and there are many resemblances in 
literary form and religious sentiments between Jnanasambandar 
J and Tirumangai, which may explain the rise of the beautiful 
(^though unhistorical legend of their meeting. 

A little later than Tirumangai, about the close of the eighth 
and the beginning of the ninth century, came Periyalvar, a Brah- 
min from Srivilliputtur in the Tirunelveli district. An untutored 
devotee originally known as Vi?nu-citta (one whose mind was 
set on Vi§pu) he was enabled by the grace of God to establish 
the supremacy of Narayana in a religious disputation held in the 
•court of the Banyan king grimara Srivallabha (815-862 a.d.) 
and thereby appropriate to himself a large quantity of gold which 
the king offered as reward to the most_ successful disputant. He 
became the foster father of Goda or Andal, the only woman in 
the group though not counted an dlvar, whom he found as a baby 
in the flower-garden he maintained to ensure a regular supply of 
flowers for his daily puja. The story is that Apdal, when she 
attained the age of discretion, used to decorate herself with the 
flower garland her father had prepared for his god and admire her 
make up in a mirror, and then quietly restore the garland to its 
original place for her father to offer it to God. One day the father 
happened to see what his daughter was doing, and so did not offer 
the garland soiled by use to the deity. That night Vi$nucitta had 
a dream in which the God rebuked him for having withheld 



Bhakti Movements in the South 


47 


the garland which was doubly dear to him on account of Andal’s 
use of it, and the devotee conformed thenceforth to the God’s 
desire. On this account Andal came to be known as Sudik - 
kodutta-nacciyar , the lady who gave what was worn by her (in 
her hair). The celebrated emperor Kr^nadeva Raya of Vijaya- 
nagar made the story the theme of his well known Telugu work 
Amuktamdlyade or VisnucittTya, one of the five great kavyas 
(epic poems) in that language. In her intense devotion to 
Visnu, Andal dreamt of her marriage with the God, and des- 
cribed her experience in a hymn which is sung to this day when 
a marriage takes place in a Tamil Vai?nava household. This 
mystical union was the only one she knew, and she was taken 
by her father to Srlrangam where she entered the garbhagrha 
(sanctum) of Ranganatha and disappeared, and her father was 
•duly honoured as the father-in-law of the deity and then sent 
back to his native place Srivilliputtur. The ardour of Andal’s 
devotion resembles that of Manikkavasagar, and her hymns are 
replete with allusions to Kr§na stories. 

To about the same time belonged Tiruppan, a minstrel of 
low caste, who was not permitted to enter the temple of 
$rlrangam, and was thus the Vai§nava counterpart of Nandan 
who had a similar experience in the Nataraja temple at Cidam- 
baram ; after worshipping their respective deities for many years, 
each in his way, from outside the precincts of the sacred shrines, 
they were both miraculously absorbed by the deities of their 
devotion. There was also Ton^ar-adi-ppodi (the dust of the 
feet of the devotees), a Brahmin from the Tanjore District, whose 
real name was Vipranarayana and whose intolerance of Bud- 
dhism and Jainism was nearly as great as that of Tirumangai./ 
Like Sundaramurtti, this alvar fell in love with a dancing girl, 
and found that the god of Srirangam did not disdain to smoothen 
the path of his love. Kulasekhara, a ruler of Kerala, proficient 
alike in Sanskrit and Tamil, was the next alvar who, among 
other shrines of Visnu, sang of that at Cidambaram, and after 
renouncing the throne, spent the last days of his life in Srtrangam. 
Lastly came the celebrated Nammalvar and his pupil Madhura- 
kavi. The former was born of a Vellala family of Ajvar-tiru- 
nagari, the sacred city of the alvar — apparently so calied after 
him, originally known as Kurugur, in the Tirunelveli District. 
His personal name was Maran, and he seems to have gained the 
title Sathakopa (hater of rogues) at his initiation. He renounced 
the world in his thirty-fifth year to practise yoga. His hymns, 
the largest in number after those of Tirumangai, are rightly 
regarded as embodying the deepest religious experiences and 


48 Development of Religion in South India 

philosophic thought of one of the greatest seers of- the- 
world. 

Hiuan Tsang, who visited South India in 642 a.d. when the 
Hindu revival was just gathering momentum, did not notice the 
new movement, although in speaking of Maharastra he mentions 
the worshippers of Deva (Siva) who covered themselves with 
/ashes. He mentions with regret that Buddhism, his own creed, 
was on the wane, but remarks that it had yielded to Digambara 
Jainism. The triumph of the revivalist movement was largely 
achieved in the two centuries that followed. Public disputations 
which led kings and rulers to transfer their allegiance from one 
creed to another did much to bring this about. More important, 
however, was the use of the popular speech by the nayamrs and 
the alyars in their soul-stirring compositions, and the fact that 
these poems were sei to^ simple tunes which the masses loved to 
sing. Not only did they thus constitute a precious heritage in 
literature and music, but they furnished numerous themes for 
dance and sculpture in temples and palaces. Siva burning the 
Tripura (three cities) of the Asuras, his destruction of Cupid 
(Kama), his bestowal of the Pasupata astra (arrow) on Arjuna, 
his forms as the great yogi and the great teacher (Dak$inamurti), 
his role as the cosmic dancer (Nataraja) were represented in 
superb sculptures in stone and bronze all over the land ; the 
bronzes have largely disappeared, but the stone sculptures sur- 
vive in varying states of preservation. The Vai?rtava legends 
were equally important and gained equally artistic expression. 
The avatar of Narasimha (Man-lion) for the destruction of 
HirajiyakaSipu was popular and often vigorously sculptured in 
stone. Then came Kr$na’s exploits and the incidents of the 
Ramayaija. The Pallava rock-cut mandapas at Mamallapuram 
about forty miles to the south of Madras contain exquisite sculp- 
tures of Kf§pa lifting the mountain Govardhana and sheltering 
the cattle and their keepers from the hail storm caused by Indra, 
of Durga fighting the asura Mahisa, and other scenes from the 
sacred mythology 'of Hinduism. 



IV. GODS AND SECTS 


The Religious Revival traced in the last chapter was the 
work of two of the main sects of Hinduism. It centred round 
the numerous temples in all the Tamil Country in which Siva 
and Vi§pu were worshipped in one or other of their many mani- 
festations known from the rich and colourful mythology that had 
grown up round them ; some temples outside the Tamil country 
proper, in Kerala, in Ceylon and even in the North up to the 
Himalayas were visited by the saints or at least evoked their 
hymns by their celebrity. We may now consider in some detail 
the history of temple worship and of the growth of religious sects. 

There have been two views on the question of the existence 
among Vedic Aryans of images of their gods ; several hymns 
ascribe human attributes to the gods and describe their activi- 
ties in human terms ; this has led scholars at times to affirm that 
images did exist. But the better and more widely accepted view 
is that such descriptions are merely poetic and imaginative, and 
that Vedic religion was in fact aniconic and mostly sacrificial. 
The fact that Yaska, as already mentioned, is still found debating 
the question whether gods are like human beings or not, would 
seem to confirm the correctness of the second view. But this 
does not mean that shrines of sorts and worship at them were 
altogether unknown in Vedic India. The pre-Aryan inhabitants 
must have had many beliefs and practices of animistic nature 
and fetishes must have been known. The ‘ pasupati ’ seal from 
the Indus Valley and other minor antiquities from the same 
region create the impression of the prevalence of some form of 
proto-Saivism among the people who reared that widespread 
chalco-Jithic culture ; certainty in this matter must, however, 
await the proper decipherment of the writing on the seals. The 
pejorative reference to Sisnadevas (worshippers of the phallus) 
in two contexts in the Rigveda confirms the surmise that worship 
of the phallus, whether as representing Siva as in later Puranic 
Hinduism or as part of a more primitive fertility cult, was known 
to the pre-Aryans. The old Indian commentators on the Veda 
explain the term Sisnadevas differently and think it is a refer- 

4 


50 Development of Religion in South India 

ence to libertines ; but this flies in the face of the plain meaning 
of the word and is obviously unhistorical linguistic ingenuity. 
Likewise the linga received more mystic interpretations as the 
representation of the Absolute of monistic (advaita) Vedanta 
which had no form and no attributes, with which is allied the 
Puranic legend that it is a pillar of fire of which the top and 
the base could not be discovered by Brahma who flew up as a 
bird, and Vi§nu who burrowed down below as a boar ; this story 
received frequent sculptural representation in later times on the 
back walls of the sanctum in temples dedicated to Siva. While 
such facts deserve notice as marking stages in the later history 
of Hindu religious thought and practice, they cannot command 
any relevance or validity in the explanation of the data relating 
to much earlier times. 

There are numerous references in early texts to shrines and 
temples of Yak§as ; the shrines were perhaps often no more than 
a sacred tree or a tree with an altar, while the temples may have 
been structural buildings with images installed in them. That 
these became centres of devotion ( hhakti ) becomes clear from 
the well known Yak§a statue from Pawaya (near Gwalior) in 
Central India which bears an inscription of the first century b.c. 
saying that the image ( pratimd ) of Bhagavan Manibhadra was 
being established by the guild of the worshippers of Manibhadra 
(gau^hya Mariibhadra-bhakta). The images of Yak?as, Nagas 
and Devatas sculptured on the railing of the stupa at Bharhut 
with their inscribed names also belong to the same stage of 
religious development, or at least are reminiscent of it, though 
on a Buddhist monument their decorative significance is greater 
than the religious import. 1 Such facts go far to prove that the 
practice of making images and worshipping them was taken over 
by Indo-Aryans from the earlier inhabitants of India and some- 
how incorporated into the corpus of their religious beliefs and 
practices. The early Aryan aniconism continues to influence 
Buddhism also for quite a considerable time when Buddhist art 
refrained from any iconic representation of the Buddha, but 
indicated his presence only by means of symbols like an empty 
throne under a tree, a riderless horse and so on, while they 
represented the many popular gods and goddesses iconically on 
the same monuments as at Bharhut and Sancl. But by the first 
or second century a.d. the situation changes, and the orthodox 
Brahminical deities like Siva, Vasudeva and others begin to be 
represented by images in the same manner as the more popular 


1 See A. K. Coomaraswamy, Yak$as, Part I. 


Gods and Sects 


51 


folk deities. ‘In early Indian Art’, says Coomaraswamy, ‘so 
far as cult images are concerned, one monographic type stands 
out predominant,. that is the standing figure with the right hand 
raised, the left on the hip. . . Of this type are the early images 
of Yak§as and Yaksls whether independent or attendant. And 
it is also this type which provided the model for the cult images 
of other deities, such as Siva or Buddha, when the necessities 
of Bhakti determined the appearance of all deities in visible 
forms ’. 

Literary evidence points to an even earlier origin of the 
practice of making images and offering worship to them. Panini 
makes a clear reference to the bhaktas (devotees) of Vasudeva, 
Arjuna, and the Maharajas — i.e. the guardians of the four 
quarters, Kubera in the North, Dhrtarastra in the East, Vidu- 
dhaka in the South and Virupaksa in the West ; he also mentions 
images which served as a means of livelihood without being sold. 
And Patanjali’s comment on this statement furnishes important 
data on the history of iconography. He says that the Mauryas 
wanted money ( hiranya ) and so set up images (areas) ; it is not 
clear whether they made money by selling them or merely exhi- 
biting them and charging a fee from the spectators. In any 
event, this works in with the statement in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra 
that in the centre of the capital city (pura) there should be 
erected temples dedicated to Aparajita, Apratihata, Jayanta, 
Vaijayanta, Siva, Vaisravapa, Asvins, and Sri Madira (Parvatl?) 
the Vastudevatas (guardians of the ground and structures) being 
set up in subsidiary shrines (kosfhakalaya) . Patanjali also 
mentions images of Siva, Skanda and Visakha made for worship. 
Altogether we have here a rather miscellaneous assortment of 
deities ; only some of them are vedic, others may be objects of 
popular veneration, some even perhaps Jainistic. At any rate 
we are as yet far from the Purapic Hinduism of later times and 
its categorical and clear cut iconism with its rules prescribed 
by the Agamas. 

Quintus Curtius states that an image of * Hercules ’ was 
carried in front of Porus’s army as it advanced against Alexander ; 
this may well have been an image of Siva or Krsna. Besides 
the well-known Garuda-dhvaja in honour of devadeva Vasudeva 
to which reference has already been made, there are other 
evidences of the existence of temples in which Samkarsana and 
Vasudeva were worshipped in Rajputana and even in Western 
Deccan in the early centuries b.c. The words pratima (image) 
and area (icon) occur in the Mora well inscription which refers 
to the stone images of the five heroes ( paficavXras ) of the Vrsnis 



52 Development of Religion in South India 

who were worshipped as divinities. 2 The devices on coins are: 
of great interest to the study of the evolution of iconography. 
An uninscribed tribal coin of the third century b.c. from 
Kausambi shows a Gaja-Laksmi image — a standing LaksmI 
between two elephants engaged in pouring water over her from 
pots held in their trunks. The same device occurs in many coins 
of later date including some of foreign rulers like Azilises,. 
Rajuvula and Sodasa. Foucher thought that the figure repre- 
sented the nativity of the Buddha. The same motif occurs in 
sculpture on many monuments of the time in Central India. 
Other coins exhibit Lak§mX alone (without the elephants) seated 
on a full blown lotus, or standing with a lotus in her hand. The 
same figure on some Indo-Greek coins has sometimes been 
wrongly described as a dancing-girl. Like the Buddha being 
represented by symbols in early Buddhist art, Siva seems to be 
represented just by a humped bull on some early coins and else- 
where. The linga (phallus) and the trident, with or without a 
pedestal or accompanying tree or trees, are other emblems of 
Siva that have been identified on tribal coins of the early cen- 
turies b.c. Siva in his anthropomorphic form appears for the 
first time, appropriately enough, in coins from Ujjain and its 
surroundings. We have also six-headed figures of Karttikeya on 
local issues of indigenous coins (e.g. Audumbara, Yaudheya) 
and other three-headed figures of Siva on Ku$ana coins. The 
former bear on the reverse representations of structural shrines 
with the trident or battle-axe standards placed in front of them ; 
these are doubtless meant to be Siva temples containing either 
images of Siva or lingas. These coins can be dated to the second 
or first century b.c. 

Figures of Siva with his characteristic attributes like the 
trident, battle-axe etc., with or without his mount, the bull Nandi, 
and in different postures, can be easily recognized on the coins 
of the Saka Maues, the Parthian Gondophares, and the Ru§ana 
Wema Kadphises in the early centuries b.c. and a.d. On most 
of his coins Gondophares is described as devavrata (vowed to 
god), and almost certainly the deva here is Siva. In the coins 
of Kaniska and Huvi§ka Siva appears sometimes with three heads 


2 Ep, Ind. XXIV, pp. 194 ff. The five heroes, as named in the Vdyu 
Pur ana, are Samkai<?ana, son of Vasudeva by Rohini ; Vasudeva (Krsna), 
son of Vasudeva by Devakl ; Pradyumna, son of Vasudeva (Krsna)' by 
Rukmmi ; Samba, son of Vasudeva (Krsna) by Jambavati — of probably 
non-Aryan extraction; and Amruddha, son of Pradyamna. All of them 
are known to have been apotheosized and worshipped. The Cultural 
Rentage of India , (1956) IV p. 115. 


Gods and Sects 


53 


and four arms bearing a variety of attributes anticipating the 
varied iconography of later Puranic Hinduism. Of unique 
interest is one gold coin of Huviska described by Gardner as 
follows : 6 Siva facing, three-headed, nimbate ; clad only in waist 
band, ithyphallic ; has four arms and hands, in which are goat, 
wheel, trident, and thunderbolt’. The wheel (cakra) in one of 
the hands, together with ithyphallic ( urdhvalinga ) feature, are 
suggestive of the line of development which led to the composite 
ligures of Harihara (Vi$iiu and Siva in one) or even Trimurti, 
already recognized in a Gandhara relief of a three-headed six- 
armed figure. 3 Other coins of Huviska bear the figure of Uma 
(Ommo), sometimes identified with Nana, either alone or with 
her consort, who is described as Isa (Oeso). It is curious that, 
notwithstanding the epigraphic evidence cited above on the pre- 
valence of the Bhagavata cult and of shrines dedicated to it, 
very few representations of Vasudeva-Krgna can be traced in 
the coins of the period ; among the few instances known are one 
on the reverse of a coin of Visnu Mitra in the Pancala series, 
and another on a Ku§ana seal-matrix attributed to Huvi§ka. 
Somewhat more common are the Vaisnava emblems of Garuda, 
Makara, the tala (palm) capital, and the Sudarsana Cakra 
(wheel) . The sun is often represented as a rayed disc enshrined 
as an object of worship on certain tribal coins dating, according 
to Allan, from 200 b.c. to the end of the first century b.c. — 
the coins being those of Suryamitra and Bhanumitra, in the Mitra 
•series from Pancala. The symbol is in Suryamitra’s coins placed 
on a railed platform between two pillars, which, according to 
J. N. Banerjea, ‘is very likely the summary representation of the 
fire-altar ’ ; this, according to the same author, is evidence ‘ that 
the Vedic sacrificial system had been much mixed up with the 
far-reaching religious changes due to contacts with local cults, 
and ‘thus it happens that the sun symbol appears in the role 
of an area (idol) on these coins \ 4 Figures of the Sun in human 
form occur on the coins of alien rulers, the Indo-Greeks and 
Kusanas, and the attire of the deity attests his Iranian associations. 

R. G. Bhandarkar has pointed out that Rudra-Siva was a 
deity whose worship was common to all the Aryas, and who 
was not at first a sectarian god. He was in charge of the field 
before the Vaisnava or Vasudevic deities came in to contest his 
supremacy. The Gfhya-sutras, which give directions as to the 


3 A. S. I. 1913-14, pp. 27 6 ff., pi. lxxii a. 

4 Development of Hindu Iconography 1 , pp. 153-4. 



54 Development of Religion in South India 

adoration of Rudra under various circumstances cannot be con- 
sidered to belong to any Saiva sect. The images of Siva, Skanda 
and ViSakha, mentioned by Patanjali as already noticed, and 
sometimes made of precious metals, were kept for common 
worship by certain religious persons who derived an income from 
them ; they cannot have been meant for the use of a particular 
sect. But even in Patanjali’s time sects were not unknown as 
he mentions the Sivabhagavatas and the sectarian worship by 
the Satvatas of Vasudeva-Kr§na. 5 Even at the time of Panini,. 
several centuries before Patanjali’s time, the exclusive devotees 
of Siva (Sivabhagavatas) were distinguished by certain external 
marks ; they wore animal skins and bore clubs and tridents. 
The Greek authors who describe North-Western India at the 
time of Alexander’s invasion like Curtius and Diodorus mention 
the Sibae or Siboi (Sivas), a tribe in the Panjab who were dressed 
in animal skins, had clubs for their weapons, and branded their 
oxen and mules with the mark of a club. We may suppose that 
Siva was their tribal deity, and this seems to be confirmed by 
Patanjali’s mention of a northern village ( udicyagrama ) with 
the name Sivapura or Saivapura. 

In Northern India, then, the iconographic representation of 
deities and the erection of temples for their worship had become 
well established by the beginning of the Christian era. It was 
the complex result of the concurrence of many factors. Ideas 
which animated the religious practice of the Indus Valley people 
and found expression in the ‘ Pasupati * seal doubtless furnished 
the background, though it seems possible that they were not 
received very favourably at first in Indo-Aryan Society — witness 
the hostile references to Sisnadevas in the Rigveda. The Rig- 
vedic practice of exalting one particular god above all others 
and treating him as the Supreme Being, which was described by 
Max Muller as Henotheism, must also have contributed to the 
formation of sects distinguished by intense and perhaps exclusive 
devotion ( bhakti ) to particular gods. The popular worship of 
local godlings dating most likely from pre-Aryan times and 
finding its manifestation in symbols, shrines and images of sorts 
was a third element. 

The origin of the Buddha image has been a subject of some 
discussion ; Foucher made out a plausible case for ascribing it 
to Gandhara and Greek influence ; others have sought to derive 
it from an early school of art in Mathura and the Yak§a primi- 
tives. However this may be, there can be no doubt that the 


5 Vai^navism, Saivism etc., pp. 115 and 9. 



Gods and Sects 


55 


foreigners who came into India in considerable numbers after 
the fall of the Mauryan empire, the Greeks, Sakas, Pahlavas and 
Kusanas, played a notable part by adopting the religious beliefs 
and practices of Indians and by giving a varied and artistic 
expression to them in beautiful iconographic representations of 
the deities on their coins and seals ; though possibly the temples 
proper were reared by Indians, they could not have altogether 
escaped the influence of the new aesthetic resulting from the 
mingling of peoples and cultures. 

The corresponding developments in South India are attest- 
ed only by literary evidence for the early period from which 
practically no material remains have survived. The South at 
that time maintained active contact not only with Northern India 
as throughout its history, but with the Roman Empire in the 
west — a temple of Augustus is said to have flourished in the port 
town of Musiri (Muziris of the Greeks) on the west coast — 
and with the Hindu colonies that were coming up in the eastern 
lands beyond the sea. In the Sangam literature we read of the^ 
performances of Vedic sacrifices by kings, of domestic rituals 
by Brahmins, of temples and the worship offered in them to a 
colourful pantheon and of other forms of popular worship, 
including folk dances accompanied by song, to celebrate a joyous 
occasion or to ward off an evil signified by portents. The preva- 
lence of Buddhism and possibly of Jainism too is attested. 
Karikala, the Cola king, is said to have established a temple 
wherever he set up a colony of his subjects. In a long descrip- J 
tion of the city of Madurai the poet mentions temples of different 
faiths. Every evening worship was offered to the shining gods 
with the offering {ball) of fragrant food to the accompaniment 
of music ; the gods were headed by the great God who created v 
the (five) elements (water, earth, fire, air and ether— akato) 
and who bore the battleaxe and the sword as his emblems ; the 
crucial expression malu-vdl~nediydn though generally interpreted 
as meaning Siva may well apply to Vi^nu also, and at least in 
later parlance nediyon (the tall one) was exclusively applied to 
Vi§nu. Then there was the Buddhist shrine visited by young 
women carrying their tender children together with flowers and 
incense to worship and pray for their well being. There was 
also the Brahmin temple which rose like a hillock at which were 
happily settled kindly virtuous men distinguished for their clear 
recital of the Vedas and qualified to attain heaven in due time as 
a reward for their pure living. Lastly there was the Jain temple 
which shone like a group of several hillocks, surrounded by 
wonderful beds of fragrant flowers, whose painted walls looked 



56 Development of Religion in South India 

like being made of copper — a remarkably cool temple into 
which crowded laymen (Savakar i.e., Sravakas) who came to 
worship with full blown flowers and incense, and wise ascetics 
with their gogglets, ascetics who knew the past, present and 
future, and all that is in heaven and on earth, and were ready 
to impart their knowledge to the world. 

We find reference to periodical festivals in temples lasting 
for many days and the special ritual performed on specified days 
during the festival. We hear of the search for stone of proper 
quality for carving the image of a deity, which means that 
anthropomorphic figures of gods had become common. But 
beyond the verbal descriptions of contemporary poets, we have 
no other means of ascertaining the appearance of the temples 
or the deities enshrined in them. 

Poygai, one of the earliest djyars, gives a valuable hint of 
the methods of worship prevalent in his day; he says that the 
devotees praised Visriu, each in his own way, saying this and 
this (form of Vi§nu) is my Lord ; and among the forms (muni) 
which they painted on a wall or leaned against it, that which 
measured the universe (in its strides i.e., Trivikrama) stood 
first. An old poem (No. 167) included in the anthology known 
as Ahananuru (the Aham 400) refers casually to the ruins of 
a temple ; its brick walls and wooden beams had crashed down, 
and the god beautifully painted on the walls had long deserted 
it — which is striking confirmation of Poygai’s reference to the 
painting on a wall of the deity to be worshipped. Another poem 
(No. 369) in the same collection mentions a beautiful wooden 
image of the deity painted in bright colours and fixed on the 
wall (of the temple). Again, the recent excavations in the 
NagSrjunakonda area in the valley of the Kr§na river have 
brought to light a very interesting inscription of the third or 
fourth century a.d. recording the consecration of a wooden 
(udumbara) image of Astabhujasvamin (the eight-armed god, 
here Vi?nu — as the associated finds clearly attest) in the ninth 
year of an AbhTra king. The structural remains in the area 
comprised three shrine chambers with a dhvajastambha (flag 
staff, c.f. Heliodorus’s dhvajastambha in Besnagar near Bhiisa) 
opposite one of them. Two inscribed conches, one bearing in 
addition an incised cakra (wheel) on a pedestal flanked by 
anku§a (elephant goad) and chhatra (umbrella) on either side, 
were also found ; one of the inscriptions reads bhagavato atha 
bhujasdmisa meaning ‘ of the adorable god with eight arms \ A 
gold plaque with a nobleman holding a lotus and standing in 
the posture of adoration was among the antiquities recovered 



Gods and Sects 


57 


from the area . 6 From these data, literary and archaeological, 
we can surely draw the conclusions that the early temples were*/ 
built of perishable material, that the deities were either painted 
on walls or carved in wood and leaned against or fixed in a wall 
in the shrine for worship, and that the devotees ( bhaktas ) were 
free to choose the particular form of a god that appealed to 
them most and make that the centre of their devotion ( bhakti ). 

The transition from wooden and painted images employed 
In worship to the carving of stone images for the same purposes 
in South India is rather obscure. There are indeed fairly early 
references to memorial stones ( nadu-kal ) erected to commemo- 
rate heroic deeds of soldiers who laid down their lives in war 
or more often in the defence of their respective villages against 
cattle-raiders and other depredators ; these stones were also, as 
we have seen, worshipped in the old pre-Aryan way with offer- 
ings of unhusked rice (paddy). Whether these early memorial 
stones carried any sculpture of the hero or a written record of 
his achievement like some of the relatively recent ones is not 
clear ; most probably they did not. References to the search 
for a stone of suitable quality for the carving of divine images 
occur only in later strata of Tamil literature. Some of the 
earliest instances of the use of stone for this purpose come front 
the Andhra country. They belong to the fifth or sixth century 
a.d. at.the latest. One of them is a small stone plaque preserved 
in thegSiva temple in the village of Madugula in the Macherla 
area of the Guntur District. The carving presents a lively 
picture of Siva with his family. He is seated at ease, and has 
four arms, with one of his back arms holding the trident ( siila ) 
and the other a serpent ( naga ) ; his matted hair ( jata ) is 
gathered up in the shape of a turban (usntsa) on the head, and 
there are iiowers and the crescent moon adorning it. His ear 
is adorned with a circular ear-ring, of the type known as patra- 
k undata. The third eye is present though he wears a smile of 
bliss and composure. Around his neck is a necklace of pearls 
and he wears the sacred thread (yajnopavlta). A fat dwarf 
(one of the ganas) supports his seat. We see the Nandi, the 
bull mount of the god, lying to his left, and the god is caressing 
the horns of the bull with his left (front) hand. Parvati, the 


0 Indian Archaeology , 1958-9, p. 8. The inscription, however, is not 
quite clear. The operative passage has been read differently and inter- 
preted to mean that the image was painted with the best ochre : but this 
seems a less plausible interpretation of an admittedly difficult phrase. 
The inscription opens with salutation to Narayana described as bhagavan, 
deva, parama-deva (supreme god) and puraija puru?a. 



1 


58 Development of Religion in South India I 

consort of Siva, is standing to his right, holding his right arm ; 

in her left and supporting their child, the baby Skanda, on her | 

hip. She wears the usual ornaments on her head and neck. \ 

The family is completed by the presence of Ganesa with his 
elephant head seated on the left of Siva. There are also devotees 
worshipping the divine group, and the flying couple at the right 
top corner may well represent Manmatha, the Indian Eros, and 
his wife Rati. 7 

Not quite so artistic but much more interesting to a student 
of cults and iconography, is the stone plaque from Peddamudi- 
yam in Cuddapah District of about the same period. In it there 
is a representation of several deities which furnishes a notable i 
instance of an early rapprochement among the different cults 
within the fold of Hinduism. In this plaque are represented in 
order from the left Ganesa seated on a lotus pedestal in the 
manner common in early Javanese sculpture, viz., with the soles j 
of his feet meeting ; the four-faced Brahma (creator) ; the Man- 
lion avatar of Visnu (Narasimha) ; the Siva-linga on a tall lotus ; 

pedestal ; Vi$nu ; Devi (Goddess) ; Uma-mahesvara (i.e., the ! 

Goddess Parvatl and her consort Siva) together with the Nandi, i 

their bull attendant and mount, Laksmi — the goddess of pros- 
perity and consort of Vi$nu represented here by the Srlvatsa 
symbol ; and lastly Mahi§asura-mardinl i.e. the goddess Durga- 
Parvati engaged in the fight with the Asura (demon) named 
Mahisa (buffalo, because he had a buffalo face). 8 Only the 
last named goddess engaged in a contest with the enemy has 
four arms ; all the others, including the multifaced Brahma, have 
only two arms. These and other fragmentary pieces from the 
same area are with good reason held to belong to the period ■ 

of Vi§nukundin rule, i.e., the fifth and early sixth centuries a.d. : 

They show clearly the almost completed development of ortho- 
dox PurSnic Hinduism with its multiplicity of gods and its 
colourful mythology. In the century or two that followed this 
development was continued further and the Deccan, which 
enjoyed the beneficial effects of political unification under the 
Cajukyas of BadSmi, served as a bridge between the North and' 

South of India, and promoted the free exchange of influences, ; 

religious, artistic and literary, to their mutual advantage and the 
cultural unification of India as a whole. 

In the far south, the first temple in durable material of 


r 7 b C. Sivaramamurti, Early Eastern Chalukya Sculpture, pp. 12-13 & 
6 Ibid,, p. 12 and Pt. II A. 



Gods and Sects 


59' 


which we have record is dedicated to the Trinity of the Hindu 
Pantheon, Brahma, Vi§nu and Siva. It is a rock cut cave temple 
scooped out by the Pallava Mahendravarman I (a.d, 580-630) 
at Mandagappatju (a village in South Arcot district) ; this ✓ 
remarkable king calls himself Vicitra-citta (inventive minded) 
and was fully conscious of the innovation he was making ; in 
the short dedicatory inscription in the temple he says that he 
had made without the use of brick, timber, metal or mortar, 
a temple ( dyatana ) dedicated to Brahma, Isvara (Siva) and 
Visnu. Unfortunately it is not possible now to say exactly how 
these deities were actually represented in the three shrine cells 
at the back of the rock-cut cave. The latest report, based on 
a careful inspection in situ of this and other Pallava rock-cut 
temples of Mahendravarman’s time, reads : ‘The shrine cells 
in all cases are now empty and do not contain either a rock-cut 
linga (as is common in the Calukya, Pandya and Muttaraiyar 
Cave temples, or is seen at Bhairava-kon^a, where the linga 
pedestal is at least rock-cut) or any appropriate Siva or Visnu 
image. Often there is a slight relief of a pedestal cut at the base 
of the back wall indicating that the deity in worship was either 
a wall painting ( bhitti-chitra ) or was picked out in stucco from 
the plastered wall, above the line of the pedestal. Tell-tale traces 
of painted plaster extant in many places, as also the absence 
of any original water-outlet in the cell, would confirm this.’ 9 
From the reign of ParameSvaravarman I (672-700) the 
painting of stucco relief of the image on the back wall of the 
cella seems to have given place to a carving on the stone wall 
itself of a bas-relief of Somaskanda 10 i.e. of Siva and Parvatl 
seated together with their little child Skanda in between. This 
feature was repeated even after the practice of building temples 
out of cut stone came into vogue and after stone lingas were 
installed capable of being bathed with water in the course of 
worship. The Panamalai temple (South Arcot District) dedi- 
cated to Talagirlsvara (the lord of the palm-mountain) of the 
time of Rajasimha (695-722) contains in the main cella a 
Somaskanda bas-relief on the back wall, and a dhara-linga (i.e. 
a linga for being washed with water during worship) on the 
floor. A general feature of Pallava structural temples, as of the 
monolithic rathas (chariot-shaped temples), is the absence of 
the water-chute ( pranala ) usually found on the northern side 

9 Ancient India , No. 14 (1958), p. 122. 

10 This compound word splits into sa — with, Uma — Parvatl, and 
Skanda and applies to the representation of Siva with his consort and 
child. 



,<50 Development of Religion in South India 

of the shrines of a later time and calculated to draw oft’ the 
t abhi$eka (ceremonial bath) water from inside the sanctum. In 
the few instances where they occur, they are seen to be not 
part of the original design but later insertions. This furnishes 
1 clear indication that the object of worship inside the cella was 
generally a painting or stucco relief that could not be bathed 
in daily worship ; whether this also implies that abhiseka (bath- 
ing) of the image was a later innovation cannot be decided 
without further study. Even where lingas were installed, the 
practice at first would seem to have been to collect the bath water 
in vessels inside the cella and distribute it to the devotees or 
dispose of it otherwise. In any case, the lingas seem to have 
V been secondary for some time after Rajasimha’s reign, and the 
Somaskanda panel to have held the chief attention in worship. 
Towards the close of the Pallava period, however, say from 
I some time in the ninth century a.d., this panel gradually dis- 
appears from the back wall of the Siva shrines, and the objects 
of worship, generally linga in Siva shrines and other forms else- 
where, find a place on the floor at the centre of the cella and 
are free of any particular relation to its back wall. 

There is a notable difference in the iconography of the 
Pallava temples so far mentioned and that of the contemporary 
Pandya temples farther south which are also rock-cut. Ganesa 
in his Valampuri form (i.e., with his trunk bent towards his 
proper right) is invariably found in the latter while he is un- 
known in the Pallava cave temples and monoliths. Into the 
relatively late temples of the Pallava country, he is generally 
regarded as an importation from the Calukya capital, Badami 
(VStapi). The Pandyas and Cajukyas were often allied toge- 
ther in war against the Pallavas, and it seems probable that this 
political alliance led to the adoption of Ganesa worship in the 
Pandyan country somewhat earlier than in Pallava dominions. 
Likewise, the Sapta-matrkas (Seven Mothers), who were parti- 
cularly worshipped by the Cajukyas, are also frequently found 
in the Pandyan cave temples. They are first found in the Pal- 
lava country in the celebrated Kailasanatha temple at KancI- 
puram built by Rajasimha (eighth century). 

By an evolution of which the stages can no longer be traced 
in detail, there came into existence a considerable body of reli- 
gious opinion and practice which sought to outgrow the acer- 
bities of sectarian animosity within the Hindu fold and establish 
harmony among the various groups, a development that belongs 
more to the sphere of popular practical religion of daily life 
than the higher speculative side of it. The new practice inaugu- 



Gods and Sects 


61 


rated by some unknown genius consisted in the regular daily 
worship of five gods, viz., Siva, Vi?nu, Devi, Surya and Ganesa 
in what is called Paiicdyatana pujd, i.e., five shrine worship. This* 
worship is done at home with the aid of symbols 10a represent- 
ing the deities and those who practise it are known as Smartas 
or Traditionalists. Some of them believe that Sankara Acarya 
introduced it and others ascribe it to Kumarila who preceded 
him by less than a century. Yet others hold, perhaps correctly, 
that the practice was of still earlier origin. It is impossible to 
give a definite date. It must be noted also that the five gods 
are representative of the whole pantheon and are by no means 
the exclusive objects of the devotion of the Smartas. Note that 
of the four male gods two are Saiva and two Vaispava, while 
the Devi (goddess) is common to both as mythology makes 
her the wife of Siva and the sister of Vi§iju. In South India ' 
the term Smarta implies not only the worship of the five gods, 
but allegiance to Sankara’s Vedanta as well ; whereas in North 
India the Smarta is free in philosophy. In the domestic worship 
(pujci) of the five gods, the image or symbol of the god whom 
the worshipper prefers, his istadevata, is placed in the centre, 
and the other four are so set as to form a square around the 
central figure — a quincunx. In addition to this worship the 
Smartas observe also the Sandhya, i.e. the offering of prayers 
three times a day — at dawn, midday and sunset. 

Despite this move towards sectarian harmony and some 
others to be noticed presently, the sectarian outlook did not 
altogether fade out. It is not possible or necessary to describe 
the numerous sects and the differences among them. The general 
situation may, however, be illustrated by a brief reference to 
the differentia of the two main subsects of the Sri Vaisnavas 
as the devotees of Visnu came to describe themselves after the 
time of Ramanuja (1050-1137 A.D.), if not from the time of 
Nathamuni (c. 1000). ‘After Ramanuja’s death,’ says a modem 
J§rlvai?nava scholar, * differences arose in interpretations, and 
this led to differences in doctrines and observances. At first the 
differences were only in philosophical explanations, but as time 
rolled on the differences became larger and larger in number 
and at last when Pijlai Lokacarya (end of 13th century) and 
Vedanta Desika (c. 1380) appeared, the Sri Vaispavas became 
sharply divided into the two sections, Tengalais (Southern school) 
and Vadagalais (Northern school), the former recognizing PiJJai 
Lokacarya and the latter Vedanta Desika as their leader? Both 


10a See Farquhar, Outline , p. 293, n. 2. 


•62 Development of Religion in South India 

schools recognize the validity of Sanskrit and Tamil scripture ; 
but the Southern uses Tamil and the Nalayira Prabandham in 
.that language much more than the Northern. Both use a white 
U mark with vertical red line in the centre (the ndmam) as 
the sect mark, that of the southern school has a light prolonga- 
tion of the white from the bottom of the U down the nose. 
Widows belonging to the southern school do not undergo ton- 
sure. From the early fifteenth century Manavala Mahamuni 
(1370-1443), called Ramya-Jamatrmuni in Sanskrit, became 
the special Acarya of the Tengalais after Ramanuja, just as 
Vedanta DeSika was for the Vadagalai, and the two subsects 
honoured each its own separate succession of Acaryas in general. 
Other notable differences between them were : for the northern 
school Lak$ml, the female consort (Sakti) of Visnu is in every 
way equal to him and shares all his Vibhutis (powers), and co- 
operates with him in the protection of the universe ; but accord- 
ing to the southern school Sri or LaksmI is definitely inferior 
to Narayana, in fact just one of the created lives ( jlvakotis ) 
with no pretence whatever to the divine powers (vibhutis). 
While both schools agree that surrender to God ( prapatti ) is 
the means to salvation they differ on the place of individual 
effort in the process. The northern school holds that a great 
deal of preparation on the part of the individual is a necessary 
preliminary to the surrender; the southern school denies this 
and affirms that as God’s love is spontaneous, a mere act of 
■surrender is enough. The difference is summed up in picturesque 
similes — the* northern view being described as the law of the 
young monkey (markata-kisora-nydya) which actively clings to 
the mother’s body when it is being carried about, and the sou- 
thern view as the kitten rule — (mdrjardkisora nydya) by which 
the young one is picked up by the mother in its mouth and 
carried about from place to place. The Sri-vaisnava hermits 
(sanydsis) have a tridanda (three bamboo sticks tied together) 
as their staff, and not one bamboo stick like the sanydsis of the 
advaita (Sankara) school ; they also retain the Sikha (tuft on 
the head), perform the daily prayers of the Sandhya, worship 
god, and perform other daily rites unlike their counterparts of 
the advaita school. 

In Saivism, by the side of the pure bhakti represented by 
the three saintly authors of the Devdram and by Mapikkavasagar, 
there existed other types of worshippers of Siva whose tenets and 
practices are gruesome and repellant to modem taste. Among 
such groups must be counted the Paisupatas^ (adorers of Pa£u- 
pati), Kapalikas (skull-bearers), Kalamukhas* (black-faces), and 



Gods and Sects 


63 


.others whose presence in large numbers at different centres like 
KancTpuram is evidenced by inscriptions and literature from the 
seventh century onwards ; they claim to have been established 
either by Pasupati or the more tangible historical figure of Laku- 
llsa (first century a.d.). In the Deccan a copper plate charter 
of the time of Pulakesin II (acc. a.d. 610) records the grant 
of a village in the Nasik District for the worship of the Kapa- 
lesvara, i,e., the lord of (the weavers of garlands of) skulls, and 
for the maintenance of the Mahavratins residing in the temple ; 
the name Mahavratin, ‘observer of the great vow’, designated 
the Kapalikas or Kalamukhas ; ‘ the greatness of their vow says 
Bhandarkar, ‘ consists in its extraordinary nature, such as eating 
food placed in a human skull, besmearing the body with the 
ashes of human carcasses and others which are attributed to 
the Kalamukhas by Ramanuja.’ 11 Whatever the mutual relations 
among these different sects, all of which were marked by such 
horrible practices, the ordinary people do not seem to have made 
a sharp distinction among them. It must be observed, however, 
that these demoniacal sects, which perhaps included an ascetic 
class as well as a class of lay followers or householders, perhaps 
formed all together only a small fraction of the large numbers 
of the worshippers of the ancient divinity of Siva. Some of 
these sects, if not all, were addicted to the worship of the female 
principle — of which more will be said presently, and the wor- 
ship tended at times to degenerate into licentious orgies. The 
practice of the devotee ( bhakta ) offering his own head as a 
sacrifice to the goddess is shown clearly in the sculpture and 
literature of the age of the Pallavas and Colas. 

Among the more benign developments in the fold of Saivism, 
two deserve particular attention — viz., the growth of Vlra- 
Saivism (stalwart Saivism) or Lingayatism 12 and of the very 
similar Aradhya Saivism in the Telugu country. The Vira Saiva 
sect was founded on the borders of the Karnataka and Maha- 
ra§tra country in the twelfth century, and spread rapidly in the 
south in the Kannada area. The sectarians claim a hoary anti- 
quity for their creed, but historically it is not traceable farther 
back than about 1160 a.d. when Basava, the Prime Minister 
of Bijjala, the Kalacuri king of Kalyani, gave his powerful sup- 
port to the new creed started by Ekantada (exclusively devoted) 
Ramayya of Ablur whose career is recorded in detail in a con- 


11 Vaisnavism etc., p. 128. 

12 So called because each votary carried a lingam on his body, 
usually encased in a small container suspended from the neck. It is 
known as the jangama linga, mobile linga. 


64 Development of Religion in South India 

temporary inscription. Tradition traces the foundation of tile- 
sect to five ascetics of hoary antiquity who sprang from the five 
heads of Siva and founded the five original monasteries 
( mafhas ) of the faith at Kedamath in the Himalayas, at Siisaila 
(Kurnool district), Balehajli (West Mysore), Ujjini (Bellary 
boundary of Mysore) and Benares, and Basava was only the 
reviver of this ancient faith. But literary evidence is clear that 
the five ascetics named were all contemporaries of Basava, some 
older some younger. In every lingayat village there is a monas- 
tery (mafha), which is affiliated to one or other of the five ori- 
ginal ones named above. Every Lingayat must have a guru, 
who initiates him into the faith and guides him generally, and 
must belong to a mafha. Lingayats hold Siva to be the Supreme 
and worship no other deity. Elaborate worship (with all its 
sixteen upacaras or attentions) is paid to the guru when he visits 
the house of a devotee, and the daily observances of the Lingayat 
resemble, with some differences, those of the Smartas. They 
bury their dead, and are strict vegetarians and abstainers. On 
the whole the Lingayats are a peaceable race of Hindu puritans 
who deny the supremacy of the Brahmins. There is more or 
less complete social equality among the sectarians, and this has 
been traced to the influence of Jainism and Islam. Caste res- 
trictions are, however, observed in marriage, though not in dining 
together. The Lingayats reverence the sixty-three nayanars of 
the Tamil country whom they recognize as elders ( Purdtanas ), 
and also 770 later saints including Manikka-vasagar, Basava, 
and his chief disciples. 

4 The Aradhya-Brahmins of the Kannada and Telugu coun- 
tries are best regarded as semi-iingayats, half converted Smartas 
who wear the sacred thread and the linga and worship Ganapati. 
They adopt Lingayat forms in private worship, but intermarry 
with Smarta Brahmins, and will not dine with other Lingayats. 
They followed Mallikarjuna Pandita Aradhya (aradhya is a 
Sanskrit word meaning * adorable ’), a contemporary of Basava, in 
refusing to accept the latter’s rejection of the Veda and renun- 
ciation of caste. They are numerous in the Northern Circars, 
less so in Cuddapah and Kurnool Districts and in Mysore. 
Their tradition regards four Aradhyus, viz., Revana, Manila, Eko- 
rama and Pa^ita as successive avatars and precursors of Basava. 
They do not take prasSda (food offered to the deity) from the 
temples, because it cannot be offered to the linga, as they are 
bound to do before eating anything. They bury their dead, and J 
have no Sraddha (death anniversary) proper, but only an ara- 
dhana (worship) with no apasavya (reversal of the sacred thread 



Gods and Sects 


65 


so as to carry it on the right shoulder instead of on the left as 
usual), no sesamum, no darbha grass and no homa (fire obla- 
tion) or pinda (ball of rice), all of which are essential to a 
srnddha. Their widows do not shave their heads. In spite of 
their differences, the relations between the Aradhyas and Linga- 
yats were friendly and in the fourteenth century they joined 
together to resist the inroads of Islam and prepare the way for 
the glories of Vijayanagar. 

The worship of the goddess Durga and her varied mani- 
festations gave rise to a number of sects of which a special 
mention is necessary. These sects which adore the female prin- 
ciple have their roots both in the pre-historic tradition of the 
Mother Goddess and also in the principle of the Great Tradi- 
tion which sees in the female Sakti the active generative, dynamic 
impulse in the manifestations of the Absolute in the universe. 
The Mahdbharata celebrates Durga, the slayer of the Buffalo- 
demon (mahi$asura-mardim) , as a virgin goddess, who dwells 
in the Vindhya mountains, delights in wine, flesh and animal 
sacrifice, is the sister of Krsna and like him dark in colour, and 
wears a crest of peacock feathers. Elsewhere in the same epic 
she is no longer regarded as a virgin, but definitely identified 
with Uma, the wife of Siva, and is also identified with the Vedas, 
Vedanta and many other things. She is also regarded as the 
Brahman of the upanigads, the one Reality set far above all 
other divinities. Here we see clearly the results of syncretism 
of many elements including a virgin goddess worshipped by the 
wild tribes of the Vindhyas, parts of the Kr§iia myth, and ideas 
from the mythology and philosophy of the veda and upani§ads. 
Many indeed are the forms in which the goddess (Devi) is wor- 
shipped in different parts of the country ; they vary according 
to the groups of worshippers and occasions of worship, and we 
cannot stop to review any of them in detail. Some forms 
peculiar to the South may, however, be briefly mentioned. The 
village deities, grama devatas, who have already been mentioned 
as worshipped with the sacrifice of animals — goats, cocks 
and sometimes buffaloes, and as belonging to the Little Tradi- 
tion, are all regarded generally as manifestations of the goddess. 
Then there is the tradition regarding the Mothers, whose number 
and names vary with the context. The Early Calukyas of 
Badami (sixth-seventh century a.d.) described themselves as 
descendants of HaritI, nurtured by the Seven Mothers — -Haria 
putranam sapta mdtrbhirabhivardhitdnam. In the Brhatsamhitd 
of Varahamihira we find the monographic rule that Mothers are 
to be made with cognisances of the gods corresponding to their 
5 


66 Development of Religion in South India 

names — Indrani for instance being represented with the elephant 
Airavata, Vai$navl with the discus ( cakra ) and the conch 
(fankha) and so on. The Mothers indeed form an indefinite 
group (gana), an assemblage of the Saktis (female counterparts) 
of every male divinity, of whom seven were chosen as most 
representative by a widely accepted tradition. These are often 
carved together in relief on a single rectangular stone slab and 
are found flanked by Virabhadra and Ganesa on either side. The 
Matrka slabs are common in South Indian temples. One of the 
earliest and finest of these is found in the Kailasa temple at 
Kahclpuram. 

Sometimes the male deities are conceived as inseparably 
associated with their saktis and the two are worshipped together 
in specially prepared icons like those of Lak§mi-Narayana, 
Lak§ml-Nrsimha, Radha-krsna, Ardhanarlsvara (the hermaphro- 
dite form of Siva), of which we get an early example in the 
Dharmaraja Ratha at Mamallapuram (seventh-eighth century 
a.d.), and so on. These composite images and the combined 
worship offered to them may also be regarded as indicating an 
effort to bring closer together saktism (worship of female prin- 
ciple) and the more ordinary form of worship of male deities. 
Another remarkable attempt at transcending the sectarian out- 
look and ensuring religious harmony resulted in the concept of 
Hari-Hara or Sankara-Narayana, and the cult images of this 
creed consist of composite forms of the deity in which one half 
of the body is figured as Saiva i.e„ bearing the marks of Siva 
like matted hair with Ganga in it, the antelope, the tiger skin 
for robe and so on, the other half being Vai§riava with the jewel- 
led crown ( kirjta ) on the head, the conch, the discus, the Sarnga 
bow, or the mace in different hands. This rapprochement between 
the forms of Siva and Visnu calculated to proclaim that all divi- 
nities are just different manifestations of the Supreme to suit the 
different contexts, seems to have come about very early in the 
Christian era ; Harihara images are very common in the Hindu 
colonies of South East Asia where they are met with perhaps in 
larger numbers than in India. 

What is the exact role of the idol or image in the practice 
of Hinduism ? The view accepted by the majority of Hindus is 
that it is a symbol of god, an aid to the mind of the devotee to 
concentrate itself on the divine and become one with it ; prayer 
and worship are directed in fact not to the idol as such but to 
the spiritual power which directs the universe and is conceived 
by the worshipper in the particular form that makes a special 
appeal to him ; the idol is only a concrete symbol ( prafika ) 


Gods and Sects 


67 


jneant to aid the concentration of his mind. The worshippers 
.of Visnu, however, take a different view of the matter ; there 
are two traditions ( Agamas ) among them which are called 
Vaikhanasa and Pancaratra ; the first name is derived from that 
of a founder Rishi (sage) named Vikhanas ; the derivation of 
Pancaratra (five nights) is uncertain — being connected by some 
with the sacrifices performed by the original adherents of the 
cult five times a year or with their observation of some vows 
according to five ratras or seasons ; others connect the name with 
a sacrifice performed by the cosmic purusa (man) or Narfiyana 
over a period of five ratris (nights). These two traditions differ 
from each other in many small details such as the description 
and disposition of subsidiary deities ( parivara devatas ) in tem- 
ples. Again the Pancardtras have admitted innovations unknown 
to the older and more conservative Vaikhanasa tradition — such 
as the consecration of Andal and other women devotees who are 
believed to have attained the status of the Lord’s consort ( nacci - 
yar in Tamil) like Lak§mi, by the practice of the nayika-nayaka 
(loved and lover) type of bhaktu Despite such minor differences, / 
the two traditions are agreed in regarding the image {area) of 
Visnu as one of the real forms of the Lord, an avatara, an epi- 
phany witnessing the easy accessibility of the Lord to the devotee, 
who finds his surrender ( prapatti ) rendered easier thereby. The 
Vaikhdnasas, again, lay more stress than others on service to 
the area as the primary duty of the devotee, and do not fritter 
their energy on the worship of the alyars and dcaryas whose 
images, however, are set up sometimes in Vaikhanasa temples as 
in the Pancaratra. Other differentiae of the Vaikhdnasas are 
that they do not brand their bodies with the Vai?nava emblems 
of Cakra, Sankha etc., as the other school does, nor do they 
recite the Tamil hymns of the Prabandham during worship. 

To complete this brief and selective sketch of the principal 
religious sects of South India, some account must be given of 
the non-vedic and non-Hindu faiths which flourished in more 
or less strength alongside of those so far mentioned. Jain tradi- 
tion claims that the first Mauryan emperor Candragupta abdi- 
cated the throne when the Patriarch Bhadrabahu foretold a 
twelve years’ famine in Magadha and migrated fcvith him to the 
South where in due course he terminated his ascetic life by the 
orthodox rite of sallekhana (starving unto death) on a hillock 
in Sravana Belgola in the Mysore country. This tradition is 
repeated in relatively late inscriptions from the tenth century 
onwards at Sravaria Belgola, and there is no other clear account 
of the actual end of the first Maurya emperor. In any event, it 


.68 Development of Religion in South India 

seems probable that. Jainism gained an early foothold' in S, India?, 
and some of the natural caverns of the Tamil districts with stone.’ 
beds and short Brahml inscriptions must have been occupied by 
Jaina ascetics. Tradition credits Vajranandi with having esta- 
blished the Dravida Sangha in Madura about a.d. 470, and this- 
seems to fit in very well with the accounts of the ascendancy of 
Jainism in the Pan<Jya Country before Sambandar went over and 
put it down at the instance of the Pandyan queen and minister. 

The spread of Buddhism in the Deccan and the farther South , 
is better attested by the inscriptions of Asoka in which he claims- 
to have sent missions to four Tamil countries for preaching the 
Dhamma and for establishing hospitals for men and animals, 
and by monumental remains such as the caityas (temples) and 
vihdras (monasteries) cut into the Western Ghats in the neigh- 
bourhood of Poona and the numerous stupas of the lower Krsna 
valley in coastal Andhra country. Hiuen Tsang noticed the 
decline of Buddhism in the seventh century, and the intense 
activity of Hindu saints, the ndyandrs and alyars, in the seventh 
to ninth centuries a.d. must have adversely affected the fortunes 
of both Buddhism and Jainism. The renascent Hinduism of 
^Andhra began the worship of the Buddha at Amaravati as an 
incarnation of Vi§#u and converted .many other Buddhist centres 
into Hindu shrines. But both the religions survived the storm 
and continued to flourish for quite a long time, and there are 
still in existence some noteworthy centres of Jainism. Some 
large centres of religion and learning like Ellora and Kanclpuram 
cherished institutions belonging to all these creeds side by side 
and produced remarkable achievements in architecture and 
sculpture, painting, literature and the other arts. 

The Jains found patrons among the royalty and merchants of 
the Kannada country in particular, and both Kannada and Tamil 
literatures count remarkable contributions from Jain authors. 
Buddhist writers of Tamil continued to be equally important till 
the fourteenth century or so,, and great logicians and divines like- 
Diftnaga, Dharmapala and Dharmaklrti came from Kanclpuram 
and its neighbourhood. There were Buddhist settlements of 
considerable proportions in Negapatam on the east coast and in 
Srlmulavasam on! the West. Negapatam was the first port of call 
for travellers to India from Malaya and Indonesia, and a King 
of the Sumatran empire of Srlvijaya erected a large monastery 
there (c, 1000 a.d.) for the use of his subjects when they visited 
South India. In north-western Deccan also new Buddhist Viharas 
were coming up late in the ninth century ; in 853 a monk from 
Bengal built a -great monastery in Kr § nagiri (Kanheri) for the 


Gods and Sects 


69 


-use of the sangha and endowed it with one hundred gold 
drammas (cf. Drachma). In the same neighbourhood a medi- 
tation hall was constructed for monks in 877 and other endow- 
ments are recorded for the regular worship of the Buddha. The 
Jain temple at Aihole built by Ravikirti in 634 is said to have 
been the abode of all excellences, and Jain temples and monas- 
teries continued to be built everywhere in the extensive dominions 
ruled by the Calukyas and the Ra§trakutas» seventh to tenth cen- 
turies. Ra§trakuta Amoghavar$a I (814-80) found solace by 
retiring to a Jain monastery more than once in the course of his 
long reign. The Western Gangas generally and the Eastern Calu- 
kyas on occasions also patronized Jainism. E. Calukya Amma II 
t(mid-tenth century) built two Jinalayas (temples of Jina) and 
established sattrcis (feeding houses) attached to them where 
kramaiyas (Jain monks) of all the four castes were to be fed. 
Jainism was closer to Hinduism in its beliefs and practices ; thus 
in 812 a Jain temple was endowed for the removal of trouble 
•caused to a Calukya Vimaladitya by the planet Sanaiscara 
(Saturn). In Jain grants we find donees required to use the 
proceeds of the endowment for their daily rites and observances 
in terms identical with those employed -in Hindu endowments. 
Influential guilds of merchants often included a strong Jain wing 
in their membership. Soon after the establishment of Vijaya- 
nagar, the Jains complained to King Bukkaraya of persecution 
by the Vai§navas ; the monarch interceded (1368) and decreed 
that both parties should practise their respective religions with 
equal freedom and without mutual interference. Though perhaps 
steadily losing ground, Jainism has not altogether disappeared 
from the country like Buddhism. Buddhist values, however, are 
experiencing a new vogue in independent India which has adopted 
Asoka’s Lion pillar of Saranath as its emblem. 

The Ajlvikas were another sect outside the pale of ortho- 
doxy which continued to count some adherants in South India 
long after its disappearance elsewhere. Founded by Gosala 
Maskarlputra, a contemporary of the Buddha and Mahavlra, this 
strictly deterministic school was influential in the Mauryan period 
in North India, and Asoka and his successor Dasaratha presented 
fine rock-cut cave dwellings to them. They believed in an 
inexorable Niyati (Destiny) which man was unable to counteract. 
The South Indian Ajlvika monks practised severe asceticism, and 
probably influenced by Hinduism and Mahayana Buddhism, came 
to look upon Gosala as ‘ an ineffable divinity * ; they also deve- 
loped the ‘ view that all change and movement were illusory, and 
that the world was in reality eternally and immovably at rest \ 


70 Development of Religion in South India 

The inscriptions show that they were sometimes subjected to at 
special tax levied on them at least by the Colas. 

The Muslims : With Islam South India came into touch, 

much earlier than the North ; this was due to long established- 
trade connections with pre-Islamic Arabia which continued almost 
unaffected by the religious revolution in that country. A Muslim, 
fleet first sailed in Indian waters in 636 a.d. when a governor 
under Caliph Umar sent an army to Thana ; but Umar disapprov- 
ed of this. Muslim traders, however, continued the contacts of 
pre-Muslim days, settled in several ports on the Malabar coast, 
married the women of the country, and created the class of 
Mappillas (lit. sons-in-law) or Moplahs, whose unruly fanaticism 
has occasionally led to serious disturbances to the peace of the- 
country, the last instance having occurred as recently as 1921, 
The Muslim traders were encouraged by the Hindu Rajas who 
bought the horses they imported and employed them and their 
progeny for manning their fleets. An Arab writer who knew India 
at first hand in the tenth century, Al-Ishtakhri, says that there 
were Muslims and Jumma Masjids in the cities of the Rastrakuta 
empire. A doubtful legend relates the conversion to Islam of 
the last of the Perumal rulers of Kerala, Ceraman Perumal. He 
is said to have made the pilgrimage (Haj) to Mecca (a.d. 825) 
and to have directed from there the rulers of his homeland to 
receive Muslims hospitably and to build mosques for them. But 
another and perhaps more likely tradition makes him, as we have 
seen, the friend of Nayanar Sundaramurti with whom he jour- 
neyed to KailSsa, the Himalayan abode of Siva. In fact Ceraman 
Perumal seems to have been one of those truly spiritual men- 
whom every religion proudly claims as its own — Jainism, Chris- 
tianity, Saivism and Islam in this instance. Travellers like 
Masudi (916) and Ibn Battuta (fourteenth century) testify to' 
the presence of Muslims and mosques all along the west coast. 
There were Muslim settlements on the east coast also, of which 
Kayal-Paftanam (Tirunelveli District) and Nagore (Tanjavur 
District) were the most important. Islam, we learn, was actively 
preached in the neighbourhood of Trichinopoly (Tiruccirapalli) 
early in the eleventh century by a Sayyid prince of Turkey, 
Nathad Vali, a missionary who spent his last years converting 
many Hindus ; his tomb is still pointed out in the city. Ibn 
Battuta affirms that the army of Hoysala Ballala III included 
20,000 Muslims. Vijayanagar had to recruit Muslim infantry 
and cavalry for more effective defence against the Bahmani 
kingdom and its successor states. At the beginning of the 
sixteenth century Duarte Barbosa estimated that one-fifth of the- 



Gods and Sects 


71 


population of Malabar comprised the Mappillas ; but the arrival 
of the Portuguese checked the growth of Muslim power and 
named the Arab trade. Under Bahmani rule (1347-1527) 
numbers of foreigners — Persians, Turks, Arabs and Mughals — 
came in search of trade or office, settled in the Deccan and 
formed unions with the women of the land. Later came the 
extension of the Mughal sway over Bijapur and Golkonda, and 
the rise of Nizam’s state of Hyderabad in the eighteenth century 
— a state which continued intact till 1956 when it was disinte- 
grated and added to the States of Bombay, Andhra Pradesh and 
Mysore on a linguistic basis. All the same, the bulk of the popu- 
lation continued Hindu, and the number of Muslims in the former 
‘ Hyderabad State ’ never exceeded fifteen per cent. 

How far did Islam influence the religious thought and 
practice of South India ? Some traits of the Hindu revival, such 
as the increasing emphasis on monotheism, on emotional worship, 
on self-surrender, on the need for devotion to a spiritual teacher, 
and the growing laxity in the observance of caste rules and 
indifference to ritual at least among some sects, have all been 
held to be in some way or other the result of Islamic influence. 
But these developments may well be explained from the internal 
history of Hinduism itself, and there is no direct evidence of the 
influence of Islam on their growth. Perhaps, after all, it is not 
an accident that sects grew ‘ more definite in doctrine and orga- 
nization especially among Visnuites, as Hindus became more 
familiar with Islam’ (Eliot). 

The Jews : The Jews are found mostly on the Malabar 
coast. When they reached there is hard to determine since their 
old records were destroyed by the Portuguese when they attacked 
their original settlement in Cranganur in 1565 and when later 
they plundered the Synagogue in Cochin as they suspected the 
Jews of having aided the Dutch against them. In the eighteenth 
century, captain Hamilton recorded in A New Account of the 
East Indies (1744) : * the Jews (of Cochin) can show their own 
history from the reign of Nebuchadnezzar to the present time.’ 
Logan, in his Malabar Manual says : 4 the Jews have traditions 
which carry back their arrival to the time of their escape from 
servitude under Cyrus in the sixth century b.c.’ ; and Sir W. Hun- 
ter speaks of Jewish settlements in Malabar long before the second 
century a.d. They possess charters given them by the Malabar 
inlers in old Tamil (Vafteluttu) characters of probably the 
eighth century a.d. The Jews themselves say that Mar Thomas, 
the apostle, arrived in India in a.d. 52, and themselves in 69. 
At Cochin the Jews seem to have enjoyed full freedom, religious 



72 Development of Religion in South India 

and civil, and to have remained without attracting any opposition 
or persecution for many centuries, till in the sixteenth century 
they fell victims to the attacks of fanatical Moors and Christians* 

The Cochin Jews are generally divided into two classes, the 
White and the Black. The Black Jews claim to have been the 
earliest settlers, while the White Jews came later. But the latter 
assert that the former are pure natives converted to the Jewish 
faith. Even historians and antiquarians are quite as divided on 
the questions of priority of settlement and purity of race between 
the two sections. About a.d. 1170 Benjamin of Tudela, who 
refers to the Jews of Cochin and Quilon, found no White Jews 
among them. But Linschoten (c. 1590) mentions Jews who 
were rich merchants and the nearest counsellors of the king of 
Cochin and who were most white of colour like men of Europe 
and had many fair women and were supposed to have come from 
Palestine and Jerusalem, The White Jews who prospered under 
the Dutch have dwindled to less than 200 in number now. 
Although the White Jews are fair, some of them are certainly 
not quite white, nor are the Black Jews quite black ; some 
of the Black Jews are hardly distinguishable from their white 
brethren. Their customs, ritual, and religious observances are 
the same. 

The Black are still the ones that make use of the privileges 
granted in the copper plate charter. They still carry a silk 
umbrella, and lamps lit at day time, when proceeding to the 
Synagogue on the eighth day after birth of sons. They spread a 
cloth on the ground, arid place ornaments of leaves across the 
road on occasions when their brides and bridegrooms go to get 
married. After the wedding is over, four silk sunshades, each 
supported on four poles, are borne, with lamps burning in front, 
as the bridal party goes home. The Black Jews say that the 
White Jews use none of these, and never have done so ; but the 
White Jews say that they used them once but have discontinued 
them. Jealousy and strife between the two sections on matters 
of intermarriage and equal privileges seem to have existed during 
the time of the Portuguese and Dutch, and Canter Visscher 
alludes to them in his Letters from Malabar (No. 18), The 
White Jews appear to have maintained the purity of their race 
by declining inter-marriage with the Black Jews. The Jews at 
one time had numerous slaves, whom they converted to their 
faith. They are said to have had former fugitive connections 
with the women of these converts, and brought into existence a 
mixed race of Dravidians and Semitics. But we cannot infer 
from this that all the Black Jews are the descendants of converted 



Gods and Sects 73 

-slaves or half castes, as it would be unreasonable to suppose that 
.all of them are the descendants of the original settlers. 

In recent years the Black Jews have developed a new dis- 
tinction between Brown Jews and Black Jews, the former claiming 
to be the genuine Jews with surnames, the true descendants of 
the Cranganur or Singli Jews. The White Jews are generally 
known as Paradesis (foreigners). 

The Jews wear a long tunic of rich colour, a waistcoat 
buttoned up to the neck, and full white trousers. They go about 
wearing a skull cap, and put on a turban when they go to the 
synagogue. The Black Jews dress more or less like the native 
Muslims. Many of them put on shirts, and have skull caps like 
the Jonaka Mappilas. They generally wear coloured clothes. 
The Jews invariably use wooden sandals. These, and their locks 
brought down in front of the ears, distinguish them from other 
sections of the population. The Jewesses always wear coloured 
.clothes. Hebrew is still the liturgical language, and is studied as 
a classic by a few, but the home language is Malayalam. The 
White Jews celebrate their marriage on Sundays, but the Black 
Jews still retain the ancient custom of celebrating them on Tues- 
days after sunset. Though polygamy is not prohibited, mono- 
gamy is the rule. The males generally marry at the age of 20, 
while the marriageable age for girls is 14 or 15. Marriages are 
generally celebrated on a grand scale. The festivities continue for 
seven days, in the case of the White Jews, and for fifteen days 
among the Black Jews, who still make use of some of the ancient 
privileges granted by the charter of CheramSn Perumak The 
Jews of all sections have adopted a few Hindu cus.toms. Thus, 
before going to the synagogue for marriage, a tali (marriage 
badge) is tied round the bride’s neck by some near female rela- 
tive of the bridegrooin (generally his sister) in imitation of the 
Hindu custom, amidst the joyful shouts (kurava) of women. 
Divorce is not effected by a civil tribunal. Marriages are dis- 
solved by making good the amount mentioned in the kethuba or 
marriage document. In regard to their funerals, the corpse is 
washed, but not anointed, and is deposited in the burial-ground, 
which is called Beth Haim, the house of living. 

Like their brethren in other parts of the world, the Cochin 
Jews observe the Sabbath feasts and fasts blended intimately 
with their religion, and practise the rite of circumcision on the 
eighth day, when the child is also named. The Passover is cele- 
brated by the distribution of unleavened bread, but no kid is 
killed, nor is blood sprinkled upon the door-post and lintel. The 
other feasts are the feast of Pentecost, feast of Trumpets, and 


74 Development of Religion in South India 

feast of Tabernacles. The day of atonement, and the anniversary 
of the destruction of Jerusalem, are observed as fasts. On the 
day of atonement, the Jews pray in the synagogue from 5 a.m. 
till 7 p.m. The Jewish fasts commence from 5 p.m. on the day 
previous to the fast, and end at 7 p.m. next day. Their days, 
begin and end with sunset. The feast of Tabernacles is observed 
with more pomp and ceremony than other feasts. 123 

Christians : The origins of Christianity in South India centre 
round the sea ports — Cranganore (Muziris of the Greeks) and 
Goa on the West Coast, Tranquebar on the east. The Syrian 
Christians have a tradition that Apostle Thomas (Mar Thoma) 
after visiting Parthia and the Kingdom of Gondophares in North- 
west of India, landed in Cranganore (c. 52 a.d.) preached the 
Gospel, and established several churches on the Malabar coast,, 
before he moved to the east coast where he fell a martyr to the* 
faith at St. Thomas Mount. The authenticity of this tradition has 
often been questioned, and it is over thirty years since Farquhar 
wrote : ‘ Thirty years ago, the balance of probability stood abso- 
lutely against the story of the apostolate of St. Thomas in India ; 
today the balance of possibility is distinctly on the side of histori- 
city’. Somewhat better attested is the arrival about mid-fourth 
century a.d. of a body of Christian immigrants from Persia and 
Mesopotamia who fled from persecution by Sapor II ; they were 
led by one known as Knae Thomman, i.e., Thomas the Mer- 
chant, and they found welcome at the hands of the Hindu King 
of Cranganore where they landed. The Alexandrian merchant 
Cosraas Indicopleustes (voyager to India) travelled in India in 
the second quarter of the sixth century a.d., found a community 
of Christians, both clergy and laity, in Ceylon, and said : ‘ Simi- 
larly in Male (Malabar, perhaps more particularly Quilon) 
where pepper grows, and in the place called Caliana (Kalyan 
near Bombay), there is also a bishop who receives imposition 
of hands from Persia \ The Christians of Ceylon and Malabar 
were Nestorians. From the sixth to the sixteenth century there 
were different waves of immigrants from western Asia to Malabar, 
and they seem to have had a cordial reception. Copper plate 
grants of the eighth and ninth centuries show that many natives 
had accepted conversion, though they were not yet very nume- 
rous. In these copper plate grants and in the inscribed Persian 
crosses found at St, Thomas Mount, Kottayam in Travancore 
and elsewhere we find the use of Pahlavi attesting their connec- 


12a This account of the Jews is based on Thurston — Castes and 
Tribes of Southern India > Vol. II. 



Gods and Sects 


75 


tion with the East Syrian or Nestorian church. Among visitors 
to the Malabar church who have left notices of it were Marco 
Polo, the Venetian traveller (1293), Friar Jordan of Toulouse, 
a Dominican (1302), and John de Marignolli (1348) ; all of 
them make it clear that the Malabar Christians were not only 
good traders but patriotic soldiers and administrators. The 
Christians of St. Thomas are now known as Syrian Christians on 
account of their connection with the Syriac speaking churches in 
the East and the use of Syriac as their ecclesiastical language. 

The Roman Catholic church came in with the Portuguese, 
and though for a time its relations with the old Syrian church 
were friendly, soon relations became strained and at the end of 
the sixteenth century at the Synod of Diamper (Udayamperur) 
the Syrian church was obliged to promise obedience to the Pope 
and merge itself in the Roman church. But later with the help 
of the Dutch the Syrian church renounced the authority of the 
Pope and regained its independence (1653) and placed itself 
under a bishop sent out by the Jacobite Patriarch of Antioch. 
In the nineteenth century the Syrian church gained new life by 
its contact with the many active Protestant Missions that came 
in to work in South India. The Syrian Christians of the west 
coast are now about two millions in number and are divided 
into four or five sections including one section who are members' 
of the Church of South India, until lately closely connected with 
western churches, but quite an independent organization since 
September 1 947 ; though at present it does not include even all 
the non-Roman Christians in the South, still it is likely to exert 
its influence for unity and co-operation in the social activities 
of the churches in the field of education, medical relief, creative 
literature and so on. 

The sixteenth century, when Portuguese power was well 
established in the Indian ocean, was the period when Roman 
Catholic Missions became prominent in the South. With Goa 
and Cochin and Tuticorin as their bases, Portuguese missionaries 
preached the gospel to the fisherfolk on the coasts and later went 
into the interior. Francis Xavier (1506-52) was the first Jesuit 
missionary to reach India and he was one of the greatest in the 
whole history of the Church. Robert de Nobili (1577-1656), 
born an Italian nobleman, led the life of Sanyasin, adopting his 
dress and ways of life, and attracted many from the higher classes 
by his habits and ideals as well as by his erudition. He too 
belonged to the Society of Jesus which led the van in the seven- 
teenth century, established seminaries, and encouraged liberal 
education. Jesuits brought the first printing press to India about 


76 Development of Religion in South India 

1550 and a Spanish lay brother cast the Malayalam types with 
which a catechism was printed in 1577. Missions sponsored by 
-other orders — Franciscans (1517), Dominicans (1578), Augus- 
tinians (1572) and Carmelites (1656), followed. The contribu- 
tion of Catholic missions in the field of education of all stages 
is a notable one, and perhaps to-day they form the largest single 
private interest in the field. 

Tranquebar on the Tanjore coast became the birth-place of 
Protestant Christianity in South India when some German Luthe- 
rans landed there in 1706 under the protection of the king of 
Denmark who owned that coast town. Ziegenbalg’s translation 
of the four Gospels (1714) is one of the earliest specimens of 
mode'rn Tamil prose. C. F. Schwartz (1726-97) who has been 
compared to C. F. Andrews of recent times was the trusted 
friend and counsellor of the Raja of Tanjore and the mediator 
between Haidar Ali and the British East India Company; he 
also saved many people from famine during the Carnatic wars. 
In the nineteenth century when the East India Company adopted 
a more liberal attitude to missionary work in response to pres- 
sure from British public opinion, a number of other Protestant 
missions were established in various places in South India ; they 
came from Great Britain, Europe and the U.S.A. Since 1900 
the growth of the church was specially marked among the under- 
privileged in Madras and Andhra States. In 1947 there were 
over 150 missionary societies at work in India and a fair pro- 
portion of these was represented in the South. In that year most 
of the societies merged themselves in the newly formed Church 
of South India. In modern times the missions have taken a 
broad view of their work and have not been content to preach 
the gospel, but to work for a fuller life for- all. Agriculture, 
sanitation, handicrafts, the entire rural economy in general have 
enlisted their interest in addition to education and medical relief. 

The long contact between Christianity and Hinduism has 
naturally led to transformation due to mutual influences which 
are naturally more apparent where the contact has been longest. 
The Syrian Christians of Malabar approximate the Nairs in some 
of their social customs, and the system of caste which began to 
prevail in sections of the church had to be fought down stre- 
nuously, and it may well be doubted if the fight has quite suc- 
ceeded. Some good things in Hindu literature and religion have 
sometimes been traced to the influence of Christianity. The 
Kural, generally regarded as the Bible of South India, and the 
Bhagavad-tgita as well as the Bhakti movement have been held 
to demonstrate the influence of Christian ideas ; this has been 



Gods and Sects 


11 


denied by others. Grierson may be taken to sum up the true 
position ; he says : 4 But it was in the Southern India that Chris- 
tianity, as a doctrine, exercised the greatest influence on Hinduism 
generally. Although the conception of the fatherhood of God 
and of bhakti were indigenous to India, they received an immense 
impetus owing to the beliefs of the Christian communities react- 
ing upon the mediaeval Bhagavata reformers of the South *. On 
the other hand, the Indian Christians are responding to the call 
of Nationalism. They seek the independence of their church from 
the domination of foreign control and modes of thought. They 
wish to rethink Christianity in terms of Indian thought and life 
and to express its genius in Indian modes and patterns. They 
have started a movement for the establishment of Christian 
asramas (hermitages) beginning with one started at Tirupattur 
(North Arcot) in 1921 and leading to the establishment of a 
dozen others elsewhere ; they all stand for the same ideals of 
communion with God and fellowship in the service of humanity. 
The chapel at Tirupattur is built in the style of South Indian 
temple architecture. Indian tunes and Indian musical instruments 
find increasing use in Christian worship in the aSramas. This is a 
revival of de Nobili’s policy on a wider front, on an institutional 
instead of individual basis. Whether this will result in larger 
numbers of Hindus adopting Christianity remains to be seen. 13 

Parsis : The Parsis who follow the religion of Zoroaster are 
concentrated in Bombay and Gujerat. Iran felt the impact of Islam 
when it was new and vigorous in the seventh century ; Zoroas- 
trianism could not hold its own and was nearly wiped out of the 
land of its birth. A few who clung to the ancient faith, left 
their motherland and found refuge in India (a.d. 936). These 
Parsi ‘Pilgrim Fathers’ brought with them the sacred fire of 
ancient Iran. They erected a temple for it on Indian soil, and 
after many vicissitudes, the sacred Iranshah fire has now been 
established at Udwada, a small town about eighty miles north of 
Bombay. There are now about 100,000 Zoroastrians in India 
and about 12,000 in Persia. The Parsi community while retain- 
ing their ancient religion and its ritual observances, have been 
quite friendly to the other communities including Europeans. 
They distinguished themselves in ship-building in the eighteenth 
and early nineteenth centuries, and took the lead in the modem 
Industrial Revolution of India. The first steel-mill in Jamshedpur 
was a product of the imagination of a Parsi magnate Sir J. N. Tata. 

13 The section on Christianity is largely based on Rev. C. E. Abra- 
ham’s contribution: ‘The Rise and Growth of Christianity — India’ in 
Vol. IV of The Cultural Heritage of India (1956), 


78 Development of Religion in South India 

The community produced eminent political leaders in Dadabhai 
Naoroji, Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, D. E. Wacha and others. The 
Tatas have maintained their leading role in trade and industry 
including aviation. A leading Parsi scholar claims : * The exter- 
nal truth which Zarathustra proclaimed ages ago in Iran are 
still kept alive as living ideals among the Parsis in India/ 14 


14 The Cultural Heritage of India , iv. p. 546. Farquhar places the 
Parsi migration into India at the beginning of the eighth century, more 
(than a century earlier than Dr. I. J. S. Taraporewala. 


V. PHILOSOPHIES IN RELATION TO RELIGION 


In India philosophy has always stood in close relation to 
religion and life. It has generally laid stress on the spiritual 
nature of man and sought to relate him in one way or other 
to a universe also essentially spiritual in character ; the only 
-exception was the minor materialistic school of the Carvakas or 
Lokayatas who do not seem ever to have been influential. Indian 
philosophy has gained depth and power from its close association 
with religion, and the purpose of philosophy has been to regulate 
life. The Indian philosopher aims in fact not merely at know- 
ing the truth and formulating a system of ultimate truth as he 
conceives it, but of realizing it, becoming one with it so to say, 
.and living it every moment of his life. Moral purification has 
generally been recognized as a necessary preliminary to the entry 
-on philosophical search, and Sankara formulated this demand as 
-comprising four requirements, viz., an enquiring mind which has 
become dimly aware of the distinction between the transient and 
the permanent and seeks to explore it further ; a renunciation 
of all desire for personal gain or advantage ; qualities of self- 
control and faith, and a desire for spiritual liberation (mok$a). 
While accepting the usefulness and validity of Reason, the intel- 
lectual process, as means to discovery of truth, the philosophy 
of India holds that intellectual knowledge so gained is not enough, 
mid that the truth must be realized and actually experienced by 
intuition; this is implied in the very name dartona (vision) 
applied to a philosophical system in India. All Indian systems 
except the materialist Carvaka, agree that this direct perception 
or experience of ultimate reality is beyond the reach of reason 
and superior to it. From this peculiarity flows the consequence 
that the authority of scripture, Sruti or revelation, is accepted 
as the authentic record of the experiences of the seers of the 
past. This respect for authority is, however, no bar to the freedom 
of its interpretation as is evident from the diversity in the atti- 
tudes of different darsanas to fundamental metaphysical prob- 
lems. Thus 6 the original Samkhya says nothing about the possi- 
ble existence of God, although it is emphatic in its doctrine of 
the theoretical undemonstrability of his existence ; the Vai£e§ika 
and the Yoga, especially the latter, admit the existence of God, 
but do not consider him to be the creator of the universe ; the 



80 


Development of Religion in South India 


Mlmamsa speaks of God but denies his importance and efficacy* 
in the moral ordering of the world \ 1 Unlike Western philosophy 
which is analytic in its approach to reality and experience, Indian 
philosophy is essentially synthetic. Its basic texts treat not of 
any one phase of experience, but of the entire sphere. ‘Meta- 
physics, epistemology, ethics, religion, psychology, facts, and value 
are not cut off one from the other but are treated in their natural 
unity as aspects of one life and experience or of a single com- 
prehensive reality’.* 

The ultimate aim of all schools of philosophy in India is 
the practical one of moksa (liberation); even the Carvaka is 
interested not in theory, but in a life of material enjoyment, since 
he holds that the world is conducive to. that kind of life and 
no other. All the schools which fall within the elastic frame- 
work of Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism, accept some basic 
concepts, particularly those of Karma and rebirth, as the means 
by which the moral order of the universe works itself out in 
the life of man. They all accept escape from this cycle of births 
(samsara) as the true goal, though they differ about the nature 
of the road to such liberation, and about the nature of the libe- 
rated state ; some hold that it is only cessation of suffering while 
others describe it as a state of positive bliss, the achievement of 
a richer and fuller life, eternal and free from entanglements. The 
road to the goal lies through ethical conduct, comprising the 
suppression of the possessive and acquisitive instinct, friendliness 
and compassion to all, and the performance of duty without any 
selfishness or attachment to the things of the world. 

In philosophy as in religion South India derived its initial 
impulse from the North, but in the course of centuries made 
striking contributions to thought and practice. The Veda and 
the Agama constitute, broadly speaking, the sources respectively 
of philosophy as systematized in the darsanas and of temple 
worship together with its philosophic background. The two lines 
of development reacted on one another and were never fully 
separated, much less antagonistic to each other. The darsanas 
are historically developments of the religion of sacrifice and 
ritualism which becomes complex and overgrown in the Brah- 
mapas, and provokes a speculative reaction reflected in the 
Upani$ads ; the Upani§ads, particularly the early ones, which are 
not more than a dozen in number, form the records of an age 
of earnest spiritual quest, philosophy in the making so to say* 

(1957K p°xxv B0 ° k Inciian Philoso Pliy> Radhakrishnan and Moore 
2 ibid., pp. xxv-xxvi. 



Philosophies in Relation to Religion 


81 


eloquent and mystic utterances in prose and verse describing the 
visions of many seers and 'schools. They are the Vedanta, end 
of the Veda, which gives its name to the most influential of the 
clarSanas. The philosophy of the earlier phase of the Veda and 
its ritualism is the Mimamsa (meaning investigation), sometimes 
called the Purva Mimamsa to bring it into organic relation with 
Vedanta, which from this standpoint is called XJttara-Mimamsa . 
The contribution of South India in both these fields was most 
significant and this must be described in some detail. The other 
four dar&anas comprising the two pairs of Nyaya-Vaigegika 
and Samkhya-Yoga, while they are important in the general 
history of Indian philosophy, are not of much direct concern 
to us. 

We must note, however, that the Buddhist Tamil poem 
Manimekalai (Canto 27) portrays the different schools of philo- 
sophy that were in vogue in the Cera capital Vanji (Karflr) 
about the sixth or seventh century a.d. It mentions the schools 
of Pramana (means of valid knowledge) which traced themselves 
to Vedavyasa, Krtakoti and Jaimini and accepted ten and eight 
and six pramdnas respectively ; it concludes this section on pra~ 
manas with a terse statement naming six schools with their 
founders in the ascending order of the number of pramdnas they 
recognized among the six current ones, viz., Lokayata by 
Brhaspati (one pramana ), Bauddha by Jina (here a name of 
the Buddha) (two pramdnas ), Samkhya by Kapila (three), 
Naiydyika by Aksapada (four), Vai§e$ika by Kanada (five), and 
Mlmamsd by Jaimini (six). Then there are mentioned in order 
along with their doctrines in more or less detail the Saiva, the 
Brahma, the Vaisnava, the Vaidika, the Ajivaka whose position 
as set forth by the work of Maskari ( markali-nul ) is described 
at great length (11. 106-65), the Nirgrantha (Jaina, called here 
Nikanda) ; the Samkhya, the Vaise^ika, and lastly the Bhutavadi 
(Naturalist). We are not in a position to decide if this interest- 
ing account of the different schools of philosophy with the expo- 
nents of which Manimekalai came into- contact at Vanji can be 
accepted as representing the general situation at the time in the 
whole of South India, or whether it is just an academic exercise 
of the poet. It is remarkable that the expositions of the followers 
of the three great gods of Hinduism are the briefest, counting 
only a few lines each, while the Ajlvika and the Nirgrantha get 
many lines each. The omission of Buddhism from this canto 
is easy to understand, as Buddhist philosophy gets a whole 
canto (xxix) to itself later and the whole poem is unmistakably 
Buddhist in its trend. The evidence of the poem is clear that 
6 


82 Development of Religion in South India 

all the main schools of philosophy were already well known in 
the South. 

The chief contributions made by South India to Indian 
philosophy lay, however, in the fields of the Mlmamsd and 
Vedanta. By the side of the widespread popular bhakti move- 
ment led by the Nayanars and Alvars, the more speculative and 
philosophic foundations of Hinduism were strengthened by the 
two great Mimdmsd writers Prabhakara and Kumarila and the 
superb Vedantist Sankara. Though a general historical account 
like this is not the place for a detailed exposition of their doc- 
trines, some account of their life and work will not be out of 
place. Both Prabhakara and Kumarila expounded their ideas 
mainly in the commentaries they wrote on Sabarasvamin’s bhasya 
on Jaimini’s Mlmamsd-sutras. Sabarasvamin belonged to North 
India and perhaps to the fifth century a.d. His great commen- 
tary ( bhasya ) is written in a supple concise style following an 
archaic dialectic method. While following closely the original 
sutras of Jaimini, Sabara may be said to inaugurate the polemic 
against Buddhism which continued ever after to be a distinguish- 
ing trait of Mimdmsd. It is, however, with Prabhakara and 
Kumarila that the system takes a definitely speculative turn. 
Though they both expounded Sahara, they differed perceptibly 
in their interpretations and became the founders of rival schools. 
Though tradition makes Prabhakara a pupil of Kumarila, his 
date is uncertain and modern criticism considers it very likely 
that he rather preceded Kumarila by some years, and lived per- 
haps in the seventh century a.d. Prabhakara was also known as 
Guru, and wrote two commentaries, the extensive Brhati and the 
shorter LaghvT on Sahara, both somewhat archaic in style and 
both carrying forward the polemic against Buddhist theses. 
Kumarila also called Bhajta came in the eighth century and by 
his penetrating and daring interpretations welded the sutra of 
Jaimini and the bhasya of Sahara into a vast doctrinal system. 
His work included (1) a verse commentary on the first quarter 
(pada) of the first chapter ( adhyaya ) of Jaimini, known on that 
account as Slokavartika ; (2) the Tantravartika on the remain- 
ing three quarters of the first chapter and the second and third ; 
and (3) the Tupfika much briefer notes on the remaining nine 
chapters of Jaimini’s original. 

He is free in his criticisms of Sabara, and irreconcilably 
hostile to Buddhism. In spite of his difficult style, his works 
are lively and alert, and the Tantravartika is rich, in linguistic 
data and local usages. Both Prabhakara and Kumarila maintain 
the original atheism of the system and hold that Karma produces 



Philosophies in Relation to Religion 


83 


its fruit without divine intercession. Later writers like Khanda- 
deva (c. 1650) recoiled from this atheism and were profusely 
apologetic even for their restating the original doctrine. Both 
Kumarila and Prabhakara also hold a realistic view of the uni- 
verse. They differ on the nature of the soul, whether it is pure 
consciousness or not, and on the nature of pramaqas (means of 
valid knowledge). Epigraphic evidence goes to show that Prabha- 
kara was more commonly studied at first in South, India at least 
in the age of imperial Cola rule ; but in the long run Kumarila 
proved the more influential .both within the school and without. 
He is said to have used all means to discredit and weaken the 
Buddhists in the course of his extensive and scholarly journeys, 
and even persuaded the civil power to act against them. If this 
tradition contains any historical truth, it only means that Kuma- 
rila acted in accordance with the spirit of his age, the age of 
the Nayanars and Alvars, who were ardent enemies of the non- 
vedic faiths of Jainism and Buddhism. We have seen that tradi- 
tion also credits Kumarila with the organization of the Smartas 
and their practical outlook in daily religion expressed in the 
worship of the five deities (pancayatanapuja) . It must also be 
noted that the notion of moksa or final release first appears 
in the Mlmamsa system with Prabhakara and Kumarila. In the 
original Mlmamsa doctrine, the fruit of good karma was taken 
to be a happy existence in Heaven of which the duration 
depended on the extent of the merit of the karma. ‘ During the 
interval between Jaimini and these thinkers \ says Farquhar, 
‘Release had become a matter of such moment to the Hindu 
mind that it could no longer be evaded. They teach that release 
is won when both dharma and adharma disappear, and that he 
who desires release should therefore perform only necessary 
duties’ (nifya karma) , and refrain from the sacrifices and other 
acts to which special rewards are attached in scripture. Vedic 
religion, however, was nearly played out by the time of these 
thinkers, because temple worship became more popular, and the 
sentiment against animal sacrifice gained strength from a new 
emphasis on ahimsd. All the same, sacrifices did continue to be 
performed occasionally almost up to modern times, and Prabhg- 
kara and Kumarila had many generations of successors in the 
field of Mlmamsa literature, at least to the end of the seventeenth 
century if not later ; the names of the authors and their works 
are of no general interest and need not find a place here. 

We turn now to Sankara whose commentary on the Veddnta 
or Brahma-sutras of Badarayana is the earliest extant exposition 
of that often annotated text. There must have been many earlier 



84 Development of Religion in South India 

glosses and commentaries in the centuries that elapsed between’ 
the composition of the Sutras and Sankara’s day, and Sankara 
himself quotes some of them though not always by name. The 
Brahmasutras themselves sum up a long development of the 
doctrine at the hands of successive scholars of whom no fewer 
than seven are named in the Sutras. Though the Upani$ads. 
teach no settled system but are just a record of many guesses 
at truth from various points of view, the Sutras of Badarayana 
proceed on the assumption that the entire Veda is the Reve- 
lation of a harmonious system of truth. Very soon the Sutras 
themselves came to be looked upon as inspired work and seem 
to be mentioned in the extant text of the Bhagavadgita . Some 
of the Sutras refute Mahayana Buddhist doctrines and this indi- 
cates a relatively late date for the work ; they may be regarded 
in. any case as later than the Mtmdmsa sutras of Jaimini. The 
Brahmasutras are the most concise of all the texts of its kind 
expounding the darsanas and are so enigmatic as to lend them- 
selves to an extraordinary diversity of interpretations. Thibaut, 
who translated the bhdsyas (commentaries) of both Sankara 
and Ramanuja, expressed the opinion that while Sankara’s expo- 
sition stands closer to the teachings of the Upanigads, Rama- 
nuja’s is closer to the Sutras themselves. For many centuries 
now, perhaps beginning from a time anterior to Sankara, the 
Brahmasutras together with the Upanijads and the Bhagavad- 
gita, have been regarded as the Triple Source of Vedanta 
philosophy — prasthana-traya , and in spite of its transparent 
electicism the Gita has been interpreted by each great Acarya 
from his own particular standpoint. It is worth noting that the 
three distinct theories of the relation of the individual soul to 
the universal soul or Brahman which distinguished the great 
schools of Vedanta started by Sankara, Ramanuja and Madhva 
had been adumbrated in principle, even before Badarayana’s 
time by other thinkers cited by him. To these later Scaryas 
however, belongs the credit of having erected finished systems 
out of hints thrown out by the earlier teachers. 3 Sankara’s 
system was anticipated more immediately by Gaudapada (mid 
eighth century) the teacher of Sankara’s teacher according to 
tradition ; his poem known as the Maiidukya-karito or Agama - 
idstra (a free commentary on the Mandukya upani?ad) forms 
the first concise though at times obscure statement of the strict 
monist doctrine afterwards fully developed in Sankara’s works ; 
here occurs the famous image of the circle of fire seen when 


3 See Farquhar, sec. 145. 



[ Philosophies in Relation to Religion 8 5 

j .a brand is whirled rapidly ( alatacakra ) — a symbol of the mani- 

/ festations of the phenomenal world without any real basis. Some 

scholars hold that the work reflects and criticizes Madhyamika 
; (Buddhist) doctrines in its last (fourth) section which refers 

to the Buddha by name in the penultimate verse, while others 
! think that Gaudapada’s aim was to reconcile Vedanta and Bud- 

dhism. Some see good reason to place Gaudapada in the fifth- 
1 sixth century a,d. and this if correct, would contradict the tradi- 

; tion mentioned above, that is, if we accept the date usually 

assigned to Sankara, 788-820. Ramanuja’s theistic interpreta- 
tion of the sutras was also anticipated likewise in three works 
j (no longer extant) cited by both Sankara and Ramanuja, viz., 

Rodhayana’s Vriti, Tanka’s Vakya, and Dramida’s Bhasya, all 
I commentaries on the sutras, 

j Sankara was a master-mind of undoubted originality who 

f was content to claim for himself the humbler role of elucidat- 

j ing doctrines handed down by earlier masters. He gave the final 

| shape to monistic Vedanta and its central doctrine of Maya, 

and also settled by example and precept the main features of 
| the daily religion of the smartas. There are several traditional 

l biographies of the great man, but few details of his life are 

known beyond doubt. He is generally taken to have been a 
Nambudiri Brahmin from Kaladi on the banks of the Alwaye 
river in North Travaneore, to have lost his father early in life, 
j and to have turned Sanyasin and assumed the name Sankara, 

[ with Govinda yogin, a pupil of Gaudapada, as his guru . He 

became a brilliant scholar and preacher and produced a number 
I of philosophical works marked by great intellectual capacity and 

! an extremely eloquent style. In his relatively short life he tra- 

I veiled all over India propagating his new philosophy and achiev- 

ing triumphs in public debates with the protagonists of rival 
doctrines. He reorganized the ascetic order of sanyasis perhaps 
borrowing points from the organization of the Buddhist Sangha, 
and founded a number of mathas in different parts of India for 
the continued study and propagation of his doctrine. The best 
known of these mathas are those at Spngeri where he himself 
is believed to have spent several years, Dvaraka, BadrinSth, Puri 
and Kancl. Within a short time of his death, a pupil of 
his, Sivasoma by name, was spreading his philosophy in distant 
Kambuja across the seas. Sankara’s works include commentaries 
on the V edanta-sutras , the Bhagavadglta and the principal 
Upani§ads. A number of vedantic works and stotras mostly in 
verse pass under his name ; the chief among the former is Vpa - 
idesa-sahasrl a summary of his doctrines in verse. Numerous 



86 Development of Religion in South India 

Sakta works in prose and verse also bear his name. There 1 
can be no doubt that most of these minor productions are 
not really his, and much more critical scientific study of them 
would be required before the genuine ones can be identified 
satisfactorily. 

i Sankara holds strongly that while works {karma) may 
prepare the soul for the discipline of knowledge Qhdna ), it is 
only the latter that leads to and constitutes release {moksa). 
Hence when a man becomes Sanyasin, he gives up sacrifices 
and other daily duties of a Hindu completely, only seeking know- 
ledge as a means of release ; this is typified by the laying aside 
of the sacred thread in the ceremony of initiation into a Sanya- 
sin’s life. In this respect Sankara differs from other teachers of 
Vedanta who before and after him sought to give karma and 
jhdna a coordinate status as direct means to salvation. Sankara 
recognizes that the Upani?ads contain two streams of thought ; 
but he holds that one of them which affirms the reality of diver- 
sity is just a concession to common modes of thought and 
expression in the work-a-day world. The essential teaching of 
the Upani^ads is that of unity. It is not, however, bare unity 
which cannot exist apart from variety ; the true description of 
the position is non-duality ( advaita ) rather than monism strictly 
so called. Vacaspati, one of the great commentators on Sankara,, 
has said that he only denies the many but does not affirm the- 
j one. The ultimate truth as realized by a liberated soul ( jivan - 
mukta) denies the reality of the world, but not of the individual 
soul ( atma ) which in a state of release gets free of the limiting 
adjuncts ( upddhi ) and exists as Brahman. ‘ We cannot therefore 
say that the individual self is false ( mithya ) as we may say that 
the world is false. We can only say that it is not truly the agent, 
the enjoyer, etc.’ To put the matter in other words : 4 Brahman 
is the sole reality, and it appears both as the objective universe- 
and as the individual subject. The former is an illusory mani- 
festation of Brahman, while the latter is Brahman itself appear- 
ing under the limitations which form part of that illusory 
universe ’ 4 Again, * the individual self is Brahman itself, and its 
supposed distinction from it is entirely due to the illusory 
adjuncts with which it identifies itself. Man’s ultimate aim in 
life should accordingly be to know and realize this truth’. 
Formal study ( sravana ), reflection ( manana ) and meditation 
( dhydna ) form part of the discipline calculated to serve the end. 
Opinions differ as to whether a man should formally. become an 

4 The citations are from Hiriyanna : The Essentials of Indian Philo- 
sophy, pp. 157-8; 169. 


Philosophies in Relation to Religion 


87 


ascetic ( sanyasin ) or not before entering upon this course of 
discipline. Liberation comes finally by the grace of God. 

Sankara distinguished between supreme truth ( paramar - 
ihika ) and the truth of experience (vyavaharika) . Some modern 
scholars hold that this doctrine of double truth has been drawn 
from Buddhist thought. Again, besides the supreme (para) 
Brahman, there is recognized a lower ( apara ) Brahman wrapped 
In limitations and attributes (saguna), who is the world soul 
and a personal God. From this lower standpoint, the sutras 
recognize all the main features of orthodox Hinduism, and 
Sankara accepts and supports them with arguments. Among 
such features Farquhar enumerates : * the inspiration of the 
Puranas, the permanent presence of all the traditional gods, even 
though each is a transient being, the visibility of the gods to 
the rsis in ancient time, the eating of the sacrifice by the gods, 
the assumption by a god of many bodies so as to be present 
at many sacrifices at one moment, etc.’ Thus is popular religion 
sought to be reconciled with the highest metaphysic. 

Sankara commanded great respect in his day and the vast 
body of smdrtas in the South, in Gujarat, and many throughout 
Northern India became his disciples and acknowledged him as 
their religious head, and his apostolic successors have continued 
to command the same position more or less to this day. The 
literature of Advaita after Sankara is very extensive ; it starts 
with the work of his direct pupils and their pupils and goes 
on in an unbroken stream till the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies ; it comprises mostly commentaries, super-commentaries 
and manuals which elucidate and restate the doctrine, and some- 
times add new refinements of detail and is not of much interest 
to the general reader. An exception may be made in favour 
of the prolific scholar Madhava (brother of the erudite Vedic 
exegetist Say ana) who composed the Sarvadartonasamgraha in 
the fourteenth century, which summarizes the doctrines of fifteen 
philosophic schools arranged in an ascending order of values and 
beginning with the materialist Carvaka system. One of the most 
recent works in the same line of general philosophical manuals 
is the Saddarsana-siddhantasangraha (summary of the findings 
of the Six systems) of Ramabhadra-dlk?ita and a group of authors 
at the behest of the Maratha sovereign of Tanjore, Shahji (1685- 
1711). 

The Vedantic school most memorable after that of Sankara 
is that of Ramanuja, the founder of 5rivai§pavism, who flourished 
about 1100 a.d. He received his early philosophical training 
in Kanclpuram from Yadava Prakasa, a teacher belonging to 



88 Development of Religion in South India 

the school of Sankara. Ramanuja disagreed with his teacher 
and preferred the doctrine called Visistadvaita (modified monism 
or better, qualified non-dualzty) which was being developed by 
a succession of teachers including Nathamuni and his grandson 
Yamunacarya and of which he was himself to become the classical 
exponent. Ramanuja was still young when Yamunacarya died ; 
but he had already reached eminence as a Vai§nava scholar, and 
was invited to succeed Yamunacarya in the pontificate of 
Srlrangam. Very successful as teacher and writer he spent over 
twenty years in Srlrangam. He wrote three philosophical works 
of importance : the Vedarthasangraha (summary of the import 
of the Veda) calculated to show that the Upanisads did not teach 
a strict monism as Sankara held, a bhdsya on the Bhagavadgita* 
and the celebrated Srlbhdsya on the Vedanta sutras. Ramanuja 
seeks to reconcile in an integral system a non-dualist metaphysic 
with devotion to a personal God. The system is perhaps best 
stated in Farquhar’s summary from Thibaut : 

e There exists only one all-embracing being called Brahman, 
who is endowed with all imaginable auspicious qualities. The 
Lord is all-pervading, all-powerful, all-knowing, all-merciful ; 
His nature is fundamentally antagonistic to all evil. He contains, 
within Himself whatever exists — material or immaterial — and 
is the “ internal ruler ” ( antarydmin ) of all. Matter and souls, 
as forming the body of the Lord, exist in two different, periodi- 
cally alternating conditions. During the period of world-rest, 
matter and souls being apart from bodies, their intelligence is in 
a state of contraction. The Lord is then said to be in his causal 
condition. When the period comes to an end, creation takes 
place owing to an act of volition on the Lord’s part. Unevolved 
matter then, evolving, acquires its sensible characteristics, while 
souls enter into connexion with bodies, and their intelligence 
undergoes expansion. 

‘ Owing to former actions, souls are implicated in the 
process of transmigration ; and from this Release is possible only 
through true knowledge of the Lord, which rests on a study of 
the scripture and consists in constant devotion ( bhakti ) to him 
and meditation ( upasana ) on him. The released soul enters 
paradise and enjoys intercourse with the Lord for ever. 

* The Lord is a personal being. Brahman is but another 
name for Narayana-Vi$nu, the god .of the Vai?nava sect \ 

‘The final teaching of the Upanisads,’ according to Rama- 
nuja as Hiriyanna puts it, * is that while Brahman, the soul and 
the physical world are all different and equally eternal, they are 
at the same time quite inseparable . . . The three entities are 



Philosophies in Relation to Religion 


89 


^different, though they stand in a peculiarly close relation to one 
another . . . Brahman as embodied in or inspiring the souls and 
matter is one. The latter viz., souls and matter are not identical 
with it or with one another. If we like, we may interpret the 
term “ Vi£i§tadvaita ” as signifying that there is nothing outside 
the embodied whole ’. Again, ‘ God exists for himself, while 
eventually matter and souls exist for his sake. The same obser- 
vation, we may state by the way, applies to the individual soul 
and its body also. In other words, god together with the souls 
and matter is an organic whole, just as the soul with its physical 
body is an organic unity’. 

Ramanuja assigns equal importance, as already stated, to*' 
Karma and Jhana and to both the sections of the Veda dealing 
with ritual and Brahman. He holds that the two are parts of one 
single doctrine, the first expounding the ways of worshipping 
God, the second dealing with His nature. This goes of course 
against Sankara’s view that the two sections of the Veda are 
different and meant for different sets of persons — the earlier for 
those who are preparing for Brahma knowledge by cultivating 
detachment ( vairagya ) through karma , the later for those who 
uim directly at knowledge or realization of Brahman ( Jrnna ). 
Ramanuja draws more upon the Puranas for support to his 
doctrine than Sankara. Another difference between them is that 
while Sankara holds that the teaching of the Agamas is not 
entirely in agreement with .the teaching of Revelation of the 
Vedas, Ramanuja places both on the same footing. 

Ramanuja’s Sribhasya is a work of magistral dialectic 
imbued with a passion much unlike the serenity of Sankara. 
The commentary on the first sutra in itself comprises a com- 
plete treatise setting forth fully all the rival theses and their 
refutations. 

The Sribhasya was the first sectarian bhasya and became 
the model for many others that followed. The suggestion has 
been made that Ramanuja linked his sect with Vedanta to get 
rid of the reproach of heterodoxy that had attached to the 
Pancaratra worship in the temples of the Bhagavatas which lacked 
Vedic roots and stemmed apparently from ancient forms of 
worship traditional among Sudras or even perhaps pre-Aryans ; 
his own scrupulous observation of caste rules about eating and 
intercourse with other castes may well have been intended as 
aids to the same result. Though he held that the Sudras and 
outcastes may not read the Upanisads and the Veda, he was 
eager to spread the doctrine of bhakti among them in the manner 
of the Ajvars of old, and in certain temples he arranged that the 



90 Development of Religion in South India 

outcastes should have the privilege .of visiting them one day ini 
the year. 

Ramanuja travelled throughout India to disseminate his. 
system and the great influence his doctrine commanded in North 
India in later times was doubtless due to the great success of 
his propagandist travels. Tradition has it that the contemporary 
Coja king, usually taken to be Kulottunga I (1070-1120 a.d.), 
started persecuting Vaignavism, and Ramanuja had to withdraw 
into Mysore territory where he won over the Hoys ala prince 
Vi?nuvardhana (a name he assumed after he abandoned Jainism 
which he had originally professed) and organized a strong centre 
of Vai?pava learning and propaganda at Melkote. He returned 
to Srirangam some time after Kulottunga’s death and himself 
met his end in 1137. He is worshipped as an incarnation in- 
temples. 

Madhva (1199-1278 or some forty years later according to> 
another computation) was the founder of the first sect directly 
based on the Bhagavata-purana. Born at Kalyanapura near 
Udipi in South Kanara District, he was named Vasudeva by his 
parents. Like Ramanuja he received his early training in the 
system of Sankara. But soon he developed violent differences 
with that doctrine and began to consider the great dcarya an 
incarnation of a demon while he looked upon himself as an 
avatar of Vayu. Tradition credits him with a great capacity for 
physical endurance, and he became a sanyasi when he was quite 
young and came to be known as Purpa Prajna (fully enlightened). 
In his writings he calls himself Ananda Tlrtha. A debate at 
Trivandram with an clcdrya of Srngeri ended in his discomfiture, 
and he was robbed of his library and subjected to much annoy- 
ance and persecution. He toured Northern India where he had' 
encounters with robbers, wild beasts, and hostile chieftains in the 
course of his journeys. After resting for a while at Hardwar he 
retreated into the Himalayas for communion with Vyasa and 
published his commentary on the Vedanta-sutras on his return. 
Back at Udipi again he built a temple of Kr§pa and spent his 
time preaching, converting and defeating * illusionists \ After a 
ministry of nearly eighty years and at the age of ninety-six he 
disappeared as he sat teaching and was seen no more. The- 
centre of his religion is bhakti to Kr§na as taught in the Bhaga- 
vata, R&dha having no place in it, though she had gained a place- 
as Kona’s consort in Jayadeva’s Gitagovinda and in the teach- 
ings of NimbSrka a little before and after Madhva’s time. All 
other avataras of Vi$nu are revered, Siva is worshipped and the* 
v five gods’ ( panedyatana ) are recognized. 



Philosophies in Relation to Religion 91 

Madhva’s chief works are his Bhasya and Anuvyakhyana r 
both on the Vedanta-sutras. The Bhasya, a relatively short work 
in prose, is frankly dualistic in its interpretation, and contends 
with the aid of texts drawn from the Rg. Veda, the Upani§ads, 
and the Gita, but more particularly from the Puranas, the 
Vaisnava samhitas and other late works, that Madhva’s explana- 
tion of the sutras is the only correct one. He also wrote com- 
mentaries on ten Upani?ads, and an exposition of the Bhagavata 
called Bhagavata-tatparya-nirnaya and a companion volume on 
the Mahabharata — all of which are held in much esteem by his 
sect called Madhvas. Jayatlrtha of Malkhed (1365), who- 
became head of the sect more than half a century after Madhva’s 
death, wrote commentaries on Madhva’s works which are also 
among the chief books of the sect. Jayatlrtha was a soldier as* 
well as a thinker. Another Dvaita thinker of note was Vyasa- 
tlrtha (1460-1539). 

Madhva’s theology is similar to Ramanuja’s. He taught a 
Vaisnavite faith where deliverance is the result of a direct per- 
ception of Visnu who decides whether souls gain deliverance or 
remain for ever in Samsara or lastly are condemned to an eternal 
hell. Brahman directs the delivered souls to Brahmaloka, while 
Vayu incites the others to seek deliverance. The Madhvas are 
confined to the south of the Vindhyas, mostly in Mysore, and 
their numbers in the North were never great. 

4 Madhva holds that God, selves, and the world exist perma- 
nently, but the two latter are subordinate to God and dependent 
on Him : Brahman or God possesses all perfection and is 
identified with Vi§nu. The supreme directs the world. He is 
endowed with a supernatural body and is regarded as transcen- 
dent to the world as well as immanent in it, since he is the inner 
ruler of all selves. 

‘ Madhva’s system, as contrasted with other schools of 
Vedanta, is noted for its doctrine of five fundamental differences ; 
(1) between God and the individual self; (2) between God and 
matter ; (3) between individual selves ; (4) between selves and 
matter ; and (5) between individual material substances. 

‘ For Madhva, everything on earth is a living organism. 
The self is not an absolute agent, since it is of limited power 
and dependent on God. It is by nature blissful, though it is 
subject to pain and suffering on account of its connection with 
a material body due to its past Karma . So long as it is not freed 
from impurities it wanders about in changing forms of existence. 
No two selves are alike. 

* God cannot be approached directly, Vayu, whose ancestry 



92 Development of Religion in South Indict 

can be traced to the vedic air, being in Madhva’s system the 
mediator. The divine will is free. It sets men free or casts 
them into bondage. 

‘ Salvation, for Madhva, consists in the perpetuation of the 
. individual self in the condition of release, where the self takes 
delight in adoration and worship of god \ s 

Though difference (bhteda) is fundamental to the doctrine, 
it does not necessarily mean the independence of the objects 
distinguished : ‘ Particularly is this so in the case of God and 
the world. The difference between the two does not mean that 
the world has nothing to do with him and can exist in spite of 
him. That is taken to be independent here which can of its own 
accord, be, know and act. Such an entity is God alone. Every- 
thing else exists, kriows, and functions finally at his will \ 5 6 

Another development of Vai§navism based on the Bhaga- 
vata was the rise from the close of the thirteenth century of a 
number of poet-saints whose popular songs stirred the life of 
Maharastra as those of the ndycmars and alvars had stirred the 
Tamil country centuries earlier. The earliest of them was 
Jnanesvara, popularly called Dnyandev or Dnanoba, a pupil 
according to some accounts of Vi?nusvami who was a dualist 
and founder of a sect of his own. Jnanesvara was the author 
of an extensive work in Marathi verse on the Bhagavad-giffi ; 
it is known as Jndnesvari, runs to 10,000 verses and bears the 
date 1290. It is advaitic in tone, but lays much stress on yoga. 
JnaneSvara was also the author of Haripdth, a collection of 
twenty-eight Hbhangs (hymns) in praise of Hari (Vifnu). 

< Tradition makes him the greatest of a group of saints. His 
poems are philosophical in tone and full of reflective thought, 
and have had' a great and lasting influence on the educated 
classes. There need be no doubt that he was the coryphaeus 
of the whole bhakti movement of the Maratha country’ — 
(Farquhar). He was a true Bhagavata honouring 5iva as well 
as Visnu and following Sankara in philosophy. He also wrote 
an advaita philosophical work Amrtdnubhava in MarafhT verse. 
The movement he thus began continued through a succession of 
saints to Tukfir&m, the contemporary of Sivaji. 

Vai§navism continued to be one of the dominaiit forces 
influencing the life of the people. Occasionally the cult, espe- 
cially that of Radha, tended to degenerate into excessive eroticism. 
This is particularly true of the followers of Vallabhacarya (1479- 
1531), a Telugu Brahmin contemporary of Caitanya. He was 

5 Cited from A Source Book of Indian Philosophy . pp. 508-9. 

6 Hmyanna, Essentials, p. 19 0, 



Philosophies in Relation to Religion 


93 


born in Benaras, wrote several works in Sanskrit, including a 
commentary called Anubhasya on the Vedanta-sutras and became 
the founder of a system called Suddhadvaita, i.e., pure non- 
dualism as against Sankara’s advaita which was soiled by the 
* demonic * doctrine of Maya* He exalted Bhakti above knowledge 
and is reputed to have vanquished smarta scholars in debate at 
the court of Kr§nadeva Raya of Vijayanagar. The acaryas of 
the sect called themselves Maharajas and lived luxurious lives 
particularly in Western India. The highest ambition of the 
followers of Vallabhacarya, both male and female, was to become 
gopls (shepherdesses of Brndavan) and sport eternally with 
Kr$na in his heaven called Vyapi-Vaikunfha where there is a 
heavenly Bnidavana and glorious forests, an ideal which in 
practice corrupted the relations between the Maharajas and their 
. disciples. Such occasional aberrations apart, Vai§uavism was in 
general a sweet and noble influence in social life. The Rayas of 
Vijayanagar were great patrons of Vai§navism ; in 1556 Sada- 
siva, at the request of his minister Rama Raya, gave thirty-one 
villages for the maintenance of the temple of Ramanuja and the 
institutions attached to it at Srlperumbudur (near Madras). 

The philosophy of Saiva Siddhanta is based on the Agamas. 
Their origin is obscure and it is not known if they arose in 
Northern India or the South. These are the Saiva Agamas to be 
distinguished from the Vai$nava Agamas known as Samhitas and 
the Sakta Agamas or Tantras. They are said to be twenty-eight 
texts in all, of which ten are held to be good (sat) Saiva, and 
the rest bad (asat), classed as raudra (fierce). There are also 
a number of commentaries and upagamas (subsidiaries) making 
a total of 198. Like the Samhitas and the Tantras, the Agamas 
are encyclopaedic in their contents ; for instance they describe 
the construction of temples, the iconography of images of all 
kinds, the details of daily religious observances, of magic, of 
medicine and what not. They are generally in verse, though the 
earliest and least sectarian, the V aikkanasdgama already men- 
tioned, is in prose. They are all in Sanskrit and are taken to 
date from fifth, to seventh centuries a.d. (Farquhar) or even from 
before the fifth century (Schomerus). The Agamas are first 
mentioned by Sundaramurti, and the Tirumandiram of Tirumular 
(ninth century) is the earliest work to reflect the theology of 
the Agamas in Tamil. Agamic tertninology is also found in the 
writings of Mr M \ :■ r who frequently speaks of the 
Agamas as v .■ Vv v-. and gives open and strong expres- ^ 

sion to his dislike of the Vedanta of Sankara. 

The first formulation of the philosophy of Saiva Siddhanta 



-94 Development of Religion in South India 

.in Tamil was in the work of Meykandar (lit. seer of Truth) a 
pious Vellala (farmer) who lived early in the thirteenth century V 
on the banks of the Pennar river, south of Madras. He is 
reputed to have received instruction from saint Paranjoti (efful- 
gent light) who was sent down from Mount Kailas, the abode of 
£tva, specially for the purpose. Meykaridar’s Sivci-J nana-Bodam 
(Instruction in Knowledge of Siva), a translation into Tamil 
verse of twelve Sanskrit sutras from the Raurava-Agama, is 
looked upon as the fountain head of the dogmatics of the 
system. The author has added vdrttikas which explain and 
illustrate the argument of each of the sutras. The scheme of the 
work is simple ; the first three sutras affirm the existence of the 
three entities — God (pad), bondage (pah), and soul (pafu) ; 
the three next define and explain their nature and interrelation ; 
the third triad deals with the means of release, and the last with . 
its nature. The Bodam gave rise to a considerable body of 
expository literature which need not be noticed in detail here. 
But three names stand out and constitute together with Mey- 
kandar himself the four Santana Acaryas (teachers in a conti- 
nuous series) of Tamil $aivism. They are Arulnandi, Marai- 
nana-sambandar and Umapati. Arulnandi is reputed to have 
been first the guru of Meykandar’s father, and later the disciple 
of Meykandar himself. His Si va-nana-tittiyar written altogether 
in verse is an important statement of the doctrine following the 
order of the sutras in the Bodam ; this is preceded by a critique 
of rival systems of which no fewer than fourteen, including four 
schools of Buddhism and two of Jainism, are passed under 
review. Umapati Sivacarya (end of the thirteenth and early 
fourteenth century), was the author of eight works which, with 
the two works just mentioned and four others, complete the tale 
of the fourteen Siddhanta Sdstras. 

The progress of discussion led to the growth of different 
schools within the fold of the Saiva Siddhanta. But in the main 
the system sought, like other philosophies of religion, to deter- 
mine the relation of God, matter, and the soul. It is realistic W' 
and pluralistic like the Vai$ijavism of Ramanuja and Madhva, 
and declared that matter and souls were, like God, eternal. The 
Absolute, through its ‘grace form’ is for ever engaged in the 
rescue of souls from the bondage of matter and the three stains 
(malas) which defile their purity. 1 As body and mind together 
form a unity, so God is the soul whose body is the universe of 
nature and of man. He is not identical with either ; He is not 
their substance, but he dwells in them and they in Him. Advaita v 
is not oneness, but inseparability. To realize this union is the 



Philosophies in Relation to Religion 


95 


high calling of the soul \ It is for the guru or teacher to let in 
the light, but Siva is the source of all enlightenment, sole embodi- 
ment of intelligence and grace and hence the true object of all 
devout aspiration. The system transcends caste and ritual, and ^ 
calls for inner devotion. According to one writer contentment, 
justice and wisdom are the flowers of worship. 

It may be noted by the way that the Saiva literature of 
ancient Java portrays a stage in the development of the doctrine 
midway between the pre-sectarian Saivism of ancient India and 
the Saivasiddhanta. 

There was also a body of Sanskrit literature of Saivism the 
first notice of which occurs in Madhava’s Sarva-darfiana-sangraha . 
But the most noteworthy book of the school was the $aiva-bha$ya 
of Snkanth a-Sivacary a (c. 1400) on the Vedanta sutras. The 
tradition that Srikantha was a friend of Govinda, the guru of 
Sankaracarya, and that he defeated the latter in controversy 
deserves no credit. We do not hear of the $aivabha?ya from any 
source for centuries after Sankara, and what is more, the work 
itself draws manifestly on the Sribhasya of Ramanuja and seems 
definitely to have been inspired by it. The author meant clearly 
to do for the Saiva Agamas and Pasupata theology what Rama- 
nuja had done for the Vai§iiava samhitas and the theology of 
the Narayaniya section of the Mahabharata. His philosophic 
position is the same as Ramanuja’s and described by the same 
name Vi£i$tadvaita. The bhayya was commented on extensively 
in the Sivarka-mani-dipikd (the light of the gem of the Saiva 
sun) c. 1600 a.d. by the celebrated polymath Appaya Dik$ita. 

Another sectarian bhdsya of Saivism on the Ved&nta sutras 
was the &nkarabha$ya attributed to Srlpati Panditaradhya ; tradi- 
tion assigns him to the twelfth century when the Lingflyat faith 
was established, or according to the Lingayat tradition, revived. 
But the bhdsya remained unknown till quite recently and its date 
is uncertain. Its standpoint is described as Sakti Vi&stddvaita. 

Beginning from about the thirteenth century, but most pro- 
minently in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, there 
flourished in the Tamil country a monotheistic puritan creed, 
that of Sittar (Siddhas meaning the perfected) who denounced 
idolatry and whose history is rather obscure. Their teaching may 
well have been the outcome of Muslim and Christian influence 
on Hindu thought and practice. Sivaprakasa (Light of Siva) of 
the early seventeenth century is known to have met a Christian 
missionary for a disputation and to have composed a polemic 
refuting the Christian creed — Esumadanirakaranam (refutation 
of the creed of Jesus), no longer extant. The chief singers among 



96 Development of Religion in South India 

the Sittars are known by the curious names Ahappey (the inner 
demon) and Pambatti (the snake charmer). Many of the hymns- 
of the Sittar are collected in the anthology known as Sivavakyam 
(Siva’s utterance) which contains also some orthodox lyrics. On 
the other hand a number of beautiful lyrics which now pass 
under the name of the tenth century poet Pattinattu Pillai show 
the unmistakable Sittar spirit. Tattuvarayar who wrote against 
idolatry in the seventeenth century may also have been one of 
the Sittar. What relation, if any, there was between these Sittar 
and those who are adepts belonging to a school of medicine 
(Siddha-Vaidyam) is not clear. 



VI. RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS 


In this chapter we shall give some account of the institutions 
of organized Hinduism, viz., the temple, its priests and daily 
routine, the festivals and vratas (vows) observed in temples and 
households, the mathas (monasteries) and orders of Sanyasis 
(monks) and so on, and describe briefly some of the more 
celebrated shrines of South India. What the caitya and vihdra 
were in Buddhism that the temple and the matha were in Hindu- 
ism, and as the two religions were more or less competing for 
popularity and patronage, there ensued a great deal of assimi- 
lation in the observances and practices of both. Without attempt- 
ing to trace the obscure details of the stages of this process, 
our account will set forth the position reached finally in what 
may roughly be described as mediaeval Hinduism of the South. 

The temple stands at the centre of popular Hinduism./ 
Almost every village of any importance has at least one temple 
of higher Hinduism ( Sfikoyil as it is called in Tamil inscriptions) 
situated in the middle of surrounding streets or in some other 
prominent place, besides the shrines of village deities generally 
located outside the village near its boundary. The latter class 
of shrines where cocks and sheep are generally sacrificed on 
Tuesdays, Fridays and some special occasions are most likely 
survivals of indigenous pre- Aryan religious practice ; but even 
this sometimes takes on features from the higher religion by a 
process of ‘ Sanskritization ’. For the understanding of the 
temples we have the surviving monuments themselves in con- 
siderable numbers and the various builders’ manuals or silpa- 
sdstras. These are relatively late works often written in 
incorrect Sanskrit, but they are records of an undoubtedly 
much more ancient oral tradition handed down for centuries 
by word of mouth from master craftsmen to their apprentices. 
The Agamas and some Puranas also have much to say on temple 
architecture and iconography. The choice of sites for temples, 
the materials to be employed in their construction, and the 
rituals to be observed at every stage, the kinds of images to be 
installed in the different parts of the temple, together with the 
materials and modes of their fashioning, are alt prescribed in 
detail. This apparently rigid control of the creative imagination 
of the architect and sculptor did not, in the best days of the 
7 


98 Development of Religion in South India 

arts, prove an impediment to originality of conception, or result 
in a dull uniformity in the temples constructed and sculptures 
produced. A code and a discipline of mind and hand are no 
more obstacles to creativeness than the rules of cricket are to 
expertness in playing the game. 

The Hindu temple architecture found its maturest expression 
in the countries of South-East Asia which accepted Indian cul- 
ture with alacrity * and cherished it for many centuries. The 
stupendous mandala of Boro Budur (eighth-ninth century a.d.) 
in Central Java with its innumerable sculptures of the jdtakas 
and the life of Gautama Buddha and many another sacred legend 
and the rows of seated Buddha images lining the galleries and 
toratias leading the devotee to the summit of the monument and 
of supreme wisdom is a veritable epitome of all that is best and 
most edifying in the religious thought and experience of India. 
Likewise the famous Vaispava sanctuary of Angkor Vat, twelfth 
century a.d., is a colonial version so to say of the great con- 
temporary Co] a temples of South India. This great temple, how- 
ever, is dedicated not to the ancient Hindu god Visnu, nor even 
to any of his traditional incarnations, but to King Suryavarman II 
(a.d. 1118-1150) of Kambuja, identified, after his death, with 
Vi§pu, consubstantial with him, and residing in his mausoleum 
fully adorned by gracious figures of apsarases just as Visnu 
resides in his celestial palace. That the extensive Angkor Vat 
temple like Boro Budur represents a cosmic design and links 
up this world with the other can be seen from its very plan with 
its wall, its moats, its central temple and its gates, the temples 
in the form of pyramids crowned or not by a quincunx of towers, 
the bridges across the moats with the naga balustrades, and the 
monuments so complicated as Neak Pan and the Bayon. Here 
we have obviously the translation in stone of the grand myths of 
Hindu cosmology, calculated to realize here below in our world 
and on a terrestrial scale, the whole or part of the divine world. 

The mention of Angkor Vat and its funerary significance 
serves as a reminder that the Hindu temple is a complex insti- 
tution of multiple origins. Sometimes it is the continuation of 
a prehistoric shrine with animistic or totemic associations ; else- 
where it is worship offered to a dead ancestor or a hero fallen 
in battle, and it is to this class that we must perhaps assign 
the temples of South India built over the bodily remains of saints 
and princes often referred to in inscriptions as palli-padai kdyil 
funeral te’mple, as also the shrines in South-East Asia, particularly 
the candis of Java and temples like Angkor Vat in Kambuja 
which are regarded as the posthumous abodes of kings apotheo- 



Religious Institutions 


99 


sized at their death or even during their life-time ; the rest are 
the temples proper dedicated to divinities or epic heroes often 
on spots where particular myths or legends were localized by 
the imagination of the people ; such spots would appear in many 
instances to have been chosen for their natural beauty or for 
their historic associations. The capitals of great kingdoms and 
empires naturally attracted extensive royal patronage and came 
to possess great temple complexes. Kancipuram, Aihole and 
Pattadakal, Tanjore, Gangaikondacolapuram and Madura are 
conspicuous examples, among others, from South India. 

There is also a symbolic aspect of the temple which is * 
somewhat esoteric and not very widely known or regarded, but 
which merits at least a passing mention. It is that the temple 
is a microcosm £ a kind of magic replica of some unseen region 
or sacred being \ The proportions and the motifs employed are 
governed by this mystic necessity to conform to an ideal pattern 
calculated to secure ‘the harmony of the structure with the 
cosmos that it reproduced J . In such a conception, the emphasis 
on the vertical in * the Sikhara or spire, is literally meant to 
point to God to be the very embodiment of that magic axis that 
pillars apart heaven and earth and is variously symbolized by 
the mountain, the tree, or the universal Man — Puru§a ’. ‘The 
temple or vimana is at once the house and body of the deity, its 
fabric the very substance of the divinity \ 1 

Though Buddhist art, perhaps as a result of Asoka’s magni- 
ficent lead, used stone freely in architecture and sculpture and 
developed to a high degree of perfection the art of scooping 
caityas and viharas out of live rock, the use of brick and timber 
seems to have been continued for many centuries later in orthodox 
Hindu structures. This may have been due partly to the respect 
for the practice of Vedic Aryans who used only these materials 
for the construction of Vedic altars and partly to the prejudice 
against following the lead of the heretical faith in its innovation. 
Whatever it was, no Hindu stone monuments, rock-cut or struc- 
tural, are found in South India dating from a time anterior to 
the sixth century A.D., though stone had come into use even as 
yupas (sacrificial posts) in distant Borneo at least a century 
earlier. The boyish glee with which Mahendravarman I Pallava 
announces at the end of the sixth century his achievement in 
having made a shrine to the Three Gods of Hinduism without 
the use of brick, timber or metal by scooping out a rock, and 
seems to describe himself as curious-minded ( vicitra-citta ) on 

1 The citations are from Rowland. Cf. Kramrisch, The Hindu 
Temple , Part III. 



100 Development of Religion in South India 

that account, gives a measure of the reluctance to change that 
prevailed at first. But such resistance gives way sooner or later,, 
and once the barrier is broken, the change sweeps in like a flood. 
Soon building temples with cut stone became the rule and the 
art of excavating rock almost completely went out of fashion 
some time in the eighth or ninth century. 

The two last and most impressive achievements of Hindu 
rock-architecture were the Kailasa temple at Ellora and the 
temple of Siva Mahadeva at Elephanta. The former was a crea- 
tion of the Ra§trakuta King I<r?na I (757-83); the date of the 
latter which cannot be far removed from this was perhaps 
included in an inscription which was destroyed in the ruthless 
desecration of the temple by the Portuguese in the sixteenth 
century. It is now taken to have been an excavation of the 
latter part of the seventh century a.d„ by the Kalacuri kings of 
N. W. Deccan. The Kailasa temple is reared on a most specta- 
cular podium consisting of a row of deeply carved elephants, 
representing the Caryatids of the universe, as it were ; * nowhere 
has more adequate and dignified expression been given to the 
majesty and grandeur of the elephant. In these figures there is 
an intimate feeling for the character of the elephant, at once 
realistic and monumental, testifying to the long and close com- 
panionship of the Hindu with this mighty beast’ (Zimmer). The 
main shrine itself is an incredible achievement alike in archi- 
tecture and sculpture, and there are besides several lesser 
sanctuaries dedicated to the river goddesses and other Hindu 
deities ‘forming an almost continuous cloister, around the cir- 
cumference of the great pit in which the principal temple is 
isolated’ (Rowland). Sculptures of £aivite themes, most cele- 
brated among them being the Descent of the Ganges, and the 
giant Ravana uprooting Mount Kailasa — the abode of Siva, 
and episodes from the Rdmdyana cover almost the entire wall 
space of the temple. The entrance to the temple is on the west, 
and its main body measures roughly 150 feet by 100 feet, with 
projections at intervals throughout the entire height of the 
structure. The substantial plinth is itself 25 feet high and marked 
by heavy mouldings above and below the elephants (and lions) 
already mentioned. The stately vimana over the sanctum with its 
prominently projecting gable front and surmounted by a shapely 
cupola reaches a total height of 95 feet. The achievement as a 
whole was unique in its excellence and contemporary inscrip- 
tions evince a vivid consciousness of this fact. The architect is 
said to have declared that he could not produce another monu- 
ment like the Kailasa, and the gods of heaven in the course 



Religious Institutions 


101 


•of their aerial journeys in their Vimanas are said to have stopped 
their progress for a while and declared that such excellence as 
they saw below in the temple was decidedly unearthly in its 
character. The temple at Elephanta is a cruci-form hall (130 feet 
by 129) with three entrances. The temple proper is a pillared 
hall roughly ninety feet on a side with six rows of columns sup- 
porting the roof of the cave. The main object of worship is 
attached to the back of the hall and pradaksina (circumambu- 
lation) is impossible. The temple excels all others of its kind 
in sculpture, particularly those on the back wall. There are 
three large square recesses separated by pilasters each bearing 
a huge dvdrapala (door keeper). The panel on the left contains 
a representation of Ardhanari, the hermaphrodite form of Siva, 
while the corresponding one on the right contains figures of Siva 
and Parvati. In the central recess is the famous colossus, a three- 
headed bust long called Trimurti, but in reality a representation 
of Mahesa. This great sculpture, one of the greatest in world’s 
art, has evoked many appreciations, and from our standpoint, 
the description of Rowland may be accepted as one of the latest 
and best amo’ng them ; { This triune conception presents the 
supreme form of Siva Mahadeva as the central of the three 
faces ; at the left, in profile, is the skull-crowned head of Aghora- 
Bhairava, Siva the Destroyer ; and, balancing it at the right, the 
face of Uma, the Beautiful wife or sakti of the third member 
of the Brahmanic Trinity. As in some of the reliefs at EHura 
(Ellora), the figures are set in an enormously deep, box-like 
niche, so that they seem to emerge from an unlimited and nebu- 
lous darkness. The three gigantic heads are perfect embodiments 
of the monographic concept they signify ; the impassiveness and 
august serenity of the supreme Siva made manifest ; the moving, 
satanic countenance of the wrathful Aghora-Bhairava ; and the 
youthful peace and beauty of the face of Uma.’ 

The beginnings of Hindu temple architecture in structural 
temples as distinguished from excavations in live rock are best 
traced in the Calukya temples at Aihole and its neighbourhood 
from about the middle of the fifth century a.d. Aihoje in the 
Bijapur District is a city of temples and contains no fewer than 
seventy of them, mostly of moderate size. The work started there 
was continued in the neighbouring towns of Badami and Pattada- 
kal (coronation stone 2 ). Today Aihole is a squalid little village 


2 It is perhaps worth noting that the form of Pattadakal which 
found entry in several standard works on Indian art (not Rowland’s) is 
wrong. Patfa means diadem or coronation, da is genitive suffix, and kal 
means stone.. The word is Kannada (Kanarese). 



102 Development of Religion in South India 

in rather wild country overgrown with prickly pear. The plan 
of the Aihoje temples is a natural development of that of two- 
caitya halls built in brick about 450 a.d., but surviving intact 
to this day perhaps because they were turned to BrahminicaF 
uses after the decline of Buddhism ; these are now known as the 
Trivikrama temple of Ter and the Kapotesvara temple of 
Chezarla ; their names show that the former is a Visum shrine 
and the latter one of Siva. The usual caitya hall is preceded 
by a mandapa, a porch carried on pillars, sometimes walled in 
as at Ter. The mandapa in front became a regular feature thence- 
forth of sanctuaries of all types, Hindu and Buddhist. 

The temple at Aihole known as Ladh Khan, usually assigned 
to the fifth century a.d. is a low flat-roofed building fifty feet 
square, with a small square cella and a porch set on the roof, 
at a later time to form an independent shrine of the sun. Of 
the main temple three sides are completely enclosed by walls, 
two of which carry stone windows perforated in a variety of 
beautiful designs. On the fourth side, which forms the eastern 
front, there is an open porch on the pillars of which are figures 
of the river goddesses. The interior is a pillared hall containing 
c two square groups of columns one within the other A large 
nandi (bull) fills the central bay, and the cella at the farther 
end is not a separate chamber leading off from the main hall, 
as one would expect, but built within it against the back wall. 
The entire disposition is totally inadequate for the purposes of 
a temple, and Percy Brown suggests that it was just an Indian 
village meeting hall ( santhdgara ) converted into a temple. Very 
different is the Durga temple, another experiment seeking to 
adapt the Buddhist caitya to a brahminical temple. The temple, 
perhaps of the sixth century, is an apsidal structure (60 feet 
by 36) with a large portico 24 feet deep on its eastern front 
making an overall length of 84 feet. The temple stands on a 
high plinth with many mouldings. The top of its flat roof is 
30 feet from the ground. A sikhara rises above the garbhagrha 
in the apse and there is a veranda roofed with sloping slabs 
carried on massive square columns with heavy brackets, and 
this forms the pradaksina path. 

The origin of the Sikhara (pyramidal spire or tower) is 
disputed ; some hold that it is a development from the stupa ; 
others that it is a stone version of the procession car of wood ; 
yet others sec in it an imitation of the kirita, the towering head- 
dress of Vi$nu ; lastly Coomaraswamy suggests more plausibly 
that it was due to the piling up of successive floors or talas, a 
suggestion supported by the figuration of the crowning amalaka 



Religious Institutions 


103. 


finial at each level of roof. The sikhara is generally curvilinear 
in shape in Northern India, but in the far South it rises by 
square terraces of diminishing size. In the Deccan both, styles 
were used, sometimes the features of both being combined in one 
sikhara . The sikhara of the Durga. temple is perhaps a later 
addition in the northern style. 

Another temple very similar to the Durga temple is the 
smaller and simpler Huccimalli-gudi which contains one new 
feature, namely a vestibule or antarala between the cella and 
the main hall. This became more or less the standard design 
for all later temples, irrespective of their size. 

We need not follow the details of the evolution of temple 
architecture but just note the chief epochs in the history of 
temple construction. The next stage in the development of 
Calukyan art is marked by the temples at Paftadakal, about ten 
miles from Badami, the Calukyan capital. There are ten temples 
here, four in the northern style and six in the southern. The 
Papanatha temple (c. 680) was perhaps one of the first attempts, 
not quite successful, to combine the features of the two styles 
in one structure ; the temple is too low for its length of ninety 
feet, its tower in northern style too small and stunted, and its 
antarala too big. The Virupak§a (c. 740) is a vast improve- 
ment in design and execution, most likely the work of artisans 
imported from Kanclpuram ; it was built by a queen of Vikra- 
maditya II who invaded the Pallava capital and left a Kannada 
inscription there on a pillar in the celebrated Kail&sanatha temple 
of which the Virupak$a is a close imitation. The inscription 
records that Vikramaditya, though he defeated Nandivarman If 
and occupied his capital for a time, did no damage to the city, 
pleased its people by his liberal gifts, and restored to Kailasa- 
natha and all other temples the heaps of gold that belonged to 
them. It is reasonable to suppose that the conqueror carried 
away with him some expert workmen who helped him adorn 
his own capital with a replica of the temple he admired so much 
in his rival’s capital. 

In the far South, as has often been hinted before, the Pal- 
lavas bridge the transition from rock-architecture to structural 
stone temples, and their architecture and sculpture constitute a 
most brilliant chapter in the history of Indian art. One remark- 
able open air sculpture though not strictly in the line of temple 
development, calls for special mention. It is found in Mamalla- 
puram (vulgo MahSbalipuram ) , and, after having been long 
known as Arjuna’s penance, is now generally taken to represent 
the Descent of the Ganges (Gangavataraija) from Heaven to 


104 Development of Religion in South India 

Earth, in response to Bhaglratha’s penance and calculated to 
redeem his ancestors from the curse of Kapila. 3 Whatever it may 
be, this vast sculpture in high relief, nearly 30 yards long and 
23 feet high covering the sea face of a cliff seems to have been 
connected with a carefully designed system to supply the town 
with fresh water drawn from the Palar river and distributed to 
all parts of the port. There is a cascade in a natural fissure 
in the middle of the rock in which a band of Nagas and Nagls 
sport and symbolize the sacred waters, and on both sides are 
sculptured figures of deities, human beings and animals of all 
kinds approaching or facing the fissure in attitudes of adoration. 
‘ In this wonderful relief ’, says Zimmer, ‘ as in the Indra relief 
at Bhaja executed some centuries earlier, the rock transforms 
itself into a telling procession of animated figures, drifting by, 
fleetingly passing, like a flock of luminous clouds. The anony- 
mous, undifferentiated substance ( prakrti ) manifests every kind 
of being. The figures produced and animated by the divine 
essence, the mirage personages of the cosmic dream of the God, 
are radiant with a blind delight in life, the enchantment of the 
spell of mayd. The heavenly couples of the gods and goddesses 
are borne along lightly. They do not share the bulk and weight 
of earthly creatures. They are made of subtle mind stuff ( suksma ) 
such stuff as composes the figures of our dreams and phantasies, 
or the divine apparitions that come before the concentrated inner 
vision of the yogi and devotee. They are angelic figures full of 
sensual spirituality of a subtle, unearthly voluptuousness. Shining 
forth from them is their delight in the glorious impalpability of 
their bodies. Their corporeal incorporeality is a sublime form 
of Maya. The melodious, musical character of bodily charm is 
rendered through a delicate articulation and joyous vitality of 
their limbs and contours. Distinctive bodily features are as far 
as possible ignored ; the male and female figures resemble each 
other as closely as sex difference permits ; they are like twin 
brothers and sisters, conceived in the one spirit of subtle charm 
and unearthly bliss \ 4 

Among the free standing rock-cut rathas of Mamallapuram, 
popularly known as the Seven Pagodas, the Dharmaraja is a 
good example of the vihdra as against the caitya type. It is a 
small square hall in the centre with pillared verandas below and 
a pyramidal Mkhara above. Its plinth has many strong mouldings 
and its porticos with lion pillars gfeatly improve the appearance. 
Its niches carry superb sculptures of gods and princes, includ- 

3 See the Ramayana, Cantos 38-44 of Balakan^a. 

4 Myths and Symbols, pp. 120-21, 



Religious Institutions 


105 


ing one of the earliest representations of Ardhanarisvara known 
in the South. ‘This type of design’, says Brown, ‘is not only 
an effective production in itself, but it is a storehouse of pleasing 
forms and motifs, besides being replete with potentialities \ 

Among the structural stone temples of the Pallavas, the 
most noteworthy are the Shore Temple at Mamallapuram, the 
TalagirlSvara temple at Panamalai in South Arcot District — 
(Skt Talagiri and Tamil — Panamalai both mean the Palm- 
mountain), and the Kailasanatha and Vaikunthaperumai temples 
at KancTpuram — all built in the eighth century. The imperial 
Colas of Tanjore were the inheritors and continuators of the 
Pallava traditions in temple construction. They built numberless 
stone temples throughout their kingdom which extended over the 
whole of South India below the Tungabhadra, but to the end 
of the tenth century the structures were not very large. The 
many small and medium-sized temples of the Pudukotfai region 
enable us to trace clearly the transition from the Pallava to Cola 
art forms in the different aspects of temple construction. In the 
reign of Rajaraja I (985-1014) larger temples came into vogue, 
and among these the most remarkable was the TiruvalTsvaram 
in the Tiranelveli District, unique for the wealth and details of 
the iconography of the superb sculptures on its Mharu or viinana 
as it is called in the South. The maturity of Cola architecture 
found its expression in the two temples in the Co]a capitals of 
Tanjore and Gangaikondacojapuram, the former completed by 
Rajaraja about 1010, and the latter twenty years later by his even 
more illustrious son Rajendra I. The Cola style continued to 
flourish for nearly two centuries more and expressed itself in a 
very large number of temples, of which, however, only two can be 
said to bear comparison with the great temples of the two capitals 
already mentioned ; these are the Airavatcsvara at Darusuram 
(Tanjore District) of the reign of Rajaraja II (1146-73), and 
the Kampaharesvara at Tribhuvanam near Kumbakonam (also 
in the Tanjore District) of the reign of Kulottunga 111 (1178- 
1218). 

The Coja period was also remarkable for its sculptures and 
bronzes, many of which, are masterpieces of technical skill and 
aesthetic excellence. Many complex pieces listed in the Tanjore 
inscriptions as portraying scenes of Saiva hagiology have dis- 
appeared, but quite a good number still survive and can be seen 
not only in the temples of South India but in all the big museums 
of the world that carry an Indian art section. Among these, the 
images of Nataraja, Siva as the Cosmic Dancer, are in many ways 
the most remarkable. Some of the best and biggest of these 



106 Development of Religion in South India 

Nataraja bronzes are still in worship and therefore inaccessible 
to the art connoisseurs of the modern world. What Zimmer says 
of the Nataraja bronzes is well worth reproduction : ‘ In these 
figures the contrast of the blissfully dreaming silent countenance 
with the passionate agility of the limbs represents, to those ready 
to understand, the Absolute and its Maya as a single trans-dual 
form. We and the Divine are one and the same precisely as the 
vitality of these swaying limbs is one and the same with the 
utter unconcern of the Dancer who flings them into play ’. 5 

Under the Pandyas who followed the Cojas in the thirteenth 
century in holding a supreme position in the Tamil country* 
and the empire of Vijayanagar that followed them in the four- 
teenth to seventeenth centuries, the builders began to divert their 
attention to the outlying portions of the temple. They sought 
to emphasize the sanctity of the shrine by making the entrances 
to the enclosures containing it into vast towered gateways of 
imposing size and appearance, and thus the gopuras (entrance 
towers) came to form immense piles and provided a basis for 
a wealth of sculptured embellishments. Generally the two lowest 
storeys of the gopura are vertical and built of solid stone masonry, 
a stable foundation for the high pyramidal superstructure of brick 
and plaster. These gopuras are some of them firm and rigid in 
their contours with straight sloping sides while others have some- 
what curved and concave outlines imparting to them an impres- 
sive upward sweep. In the latter class the sculpture is also of 
a more florid character. 

The temples built in the western Deccan under the Calukyas 
of Kalyani (973-1250) developed features which received their 
most mature expression in the Hoysala temples in Mysore. These 
temples often had their principal entrances not at the front but 
at the sides, and the decoration of their external walls with 
architectural motifs dividing the wall into well proportioned 
areas tended to be singularly graceful and restrained, while their 
vimanas (sikharas) were a compromise between the plain, » 
stepped storeys of the early Cajukyas and the closely moulded 
tiers of the Hoysala style. The doorways, both at the entrance 
and of the shrine-chamber, were very elaborately carved with 
fine detail and finish. Among the numerous examples of this 
style spread over the entire area of the Calukyan empire, the 
temples of Ka£i Vi£ve£vara at Lakkund 1 *, of Mahadeva at Ittagi, 
and of Mallikarjuna at Kuruvatti are perhaps the most 
typical. 


5 op. cit p. 156. 



Religious Institutions 


107 


The builders of Hoysala temples invariably used a dark 
stone of much finer grain than the large unwieldy blocks ot 
sandstone used by the early Cal.ukyas. The change of material 
made it possible for the masonry of the Mysore temples to be 
better finished and the sculptures to be carved in more minute 
and exquisite detail. In general, the Hoysala temple comprises 
a central structure surrounded by walls containing a number of 
cells with a pillared veranda or cloister in front The main 
building contained the cella with a vestibule in front ( sukhamsi ) 
and connecting with a pillared hall ( navaranga ). In front of this 
there was often an open pillared pavilion, the mukhamandapa. 
In many cases, the Hoysala temples are not single but double, 
having all essential parts duplicated ; indeed they are frequently 
even built in triplicate, quadruplicate, and occasionally even 
quintuplicate. Another notable feature was the star-shape of the 
external walls of the main shrine, set on a high platform, the 
sides of which project or recede with lines and angles parallel 
to those of the building it supports. The platform is much wider 
than the temple, leaving a flat surface all round to serve as the 
pradaksina-patha (circumambulatory path) for which there is 
no provision inside. The general treatment of wall surface is 
marked by a large number of horizontal friezes imposed upon 
one another. The walls of the sanctum are divided into three 
horizontal divisions while those of the pillared hall have only 
two ; but a wide continuous cornice binds the two parts of the 
structure together. In both, a high and almost vertical basement, 
nine or ten feet high, is made up of a number of sculptured 
animal friezes running right round the building. The lowest band 
is usually a procession of elephants ; the next of horsemen. Then 
after another band of spiral foliage, and on a level with the eye, 
is a wider frieze depicting a succession of Puranic scenes executed 
with great effect and a considerable wealth of detail. Above 
this is a border of yalis (mythical animals) with spirals^of foliage 
issuing from their mouths, and crowning all is a frieze of hamsas 
(swans). The basement of the pillared hall is terminated above 
by a ‘ sloping seatback * ( dsana ) above which rise the external 
pillars of the hall with their moulded shafts at regular intervals, 
the spaces between the columns being filled by perforated 
screens. 

The three horizontal divisions of the sanctum are even more 
ornate than the two of the hall. The basement which is conti- 
nuous with that of the hall is just the same. Above it, the broad 
square space corresponding to that taken up by the pillars and 
screens of the hall is adorned with ornate niches containing 


108 . Development of Religion in South India 

images of gods under foliated canopies, each one so elaborately 
chiselled (and often signed by the sculptor) as to constitute a 
more or less distinctive work, The rich effect of all this statuary 
is enhanced by the star shape of the structure which produces 
vertical planes like facets and provides an abundant variety of 
light and shade. The tikhara separated by the wide projecting 
cornice from the body of the temple below keeps the stellate 
formation, but its vertical lines are balanced by horizontal 
mouldings so that the whole tower appears as an orderly succes- 
sion of diminishing tiers terminating in a low finial having the 
shape of a parasol at its apex. Miniature shrines and niches 
adorn each of these tiers. These Hoysala temples of the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries though basically developments of the 
South Indian style, represent an art which applies to stone the 
technique of the ivory worker or the goldsmith, and is comparable 
to the art of the toranas (entrance gateways) of the great Sane! 
stupa going back to the early centuries b.c. The wealth of 
jewellery borne by many of the figures, the variety of head- 
dresses and other details, are well calculated to give a fair idea 
of the social life of the times. The temple of Hoysalesvara at 
Hajeb'fd, now half in ruins and lacking its entire superstructure, 
was perhaps the highest achievement of the school. 

In the Kalinga kingdom (Orissa) many temples were built 
from the ninth to the thirteenth centuries by the rulers of the 
Eastern Ganga dynasty, all in the North Indian style. Bhuva- 
nesvar contains the main group of over thirty temples ; but the 
Jagannaih at Puri and the Sun temple at Konarak are the largest 
and most important. There is also a small group to the south 
of Mukhalingam on the coast of the Ganjam District ; this group 
shows traces of both Cajukya and Gupta influences in its decora- 
tive features. The Orissan temples are in general characterized 
by the plain treatment of the interior contrasting strikingly with 
the profusely ornamental surface of the exterior. 

A variation of the Northern style flourished also in the north- 
west of the Deccan from the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries, 
Ambamath in the Thana District, near Bombay, contains one 
of the earliest examples (1060) ; the temple is delightfully 
located by the side of a long deep pool ; its two essential parts 
are both set diagonally astride the axis making an attractive plan 
90 feet long and 75 feet wide ; the temple is covered with intri- 
cate decoration of a lavish but tasteful design. In the latter part 
of the thirteenth century and early fourteenth were built in the 
same region a number of temples marked by their heavy propor- 
tions and a scarcity of external figure sculpture ; they are known 



Religious Institutions 


109' 


as Hemadpanti from Hemadri or Hemadpant, the celebrated 
minister of the Yadavas of Devagiri, the reputed builder of 
several of these edifices and author of an encyclopaedic digest of 
religious and social laws known as Caturvarga-cintamani (the 
wish yielding jewel of the four aims of human endeavour). 
Examples of this style are found in the Berars also. 

Under Vijayanagar (1336-1650) temple architecture and 
sculpture attained a fulness and freedom of rich expression in 
keeping with the general consciousness of the great task of the 
empire ; namely the preservation and development of Hinduism 
against the onslaughts of Islam. Temples now became very 
elaborate both in structure and organization. Old temples were 
amplified by the addition of pillared halls, pavilions and other 
subordinate structures. The most notable of such additions was 
the Kalyanamandapa (marriage-pavilion) generally placed on the 
left in the courtyard of the temple as we enter it from the east. 
This is a very ornate pillared structure, open on the sides, with 
a raised platform in the centre for the reception of the deity 
and his consort at the annual celebration of their marriage 
ceremony. The goddesses invariably came to have separate 
shrines of their own in the precincts in the temple, a development 
which began in the late Cola period. Another feature was the 
so-called 4 thousand-pillared mandapa’, a huge hall with many 
rows of pillars. In fact the varied and complicated treatment 
of the pillar was the most striking feature of the Vijayanagar 
style. The shaft becomes just a core round which is grouped 
a vast amount of statuary of great size, sculptured in the round ; 
the most conspicuous element is a furiously rearing horse, 
rampant hippogryph or other upraised animal of a supernatural 
kind ; the whole of it, pillar and sculptures, is carved out of a 
single block of stone. Another rarer type shows a cluster of 
miniature pillars encircling the central column and so carved as 
to give out, when struck, the seven different notes of Indian 
music. The tall entrance towers, gdpuras f begun under the 
Pandyas, were further developed in this period. Vijayanagar 
buildings are scattered throughout the country south of Tunga- 
bhadra, but the finest and the most characteristic group are still 
to be found in the ruined capital city now known as Hampi. 
The principal temples here are those of Vitthaia (Visnu) and 
Hazara Rama. The former is by far the most ornate ; begun 
in the first half of the fifteenth century, parts of the temple were 
still under construction nearly a century later, and it was never 
quite finished. The more modest but perfectly finished HazSra 
Rama (Thousand R&mas) is most probably of the time of 


110 Development of Religion in South India 

Virupaksa II (1465-85) and scenes in relief from the Rama- 
yarn decorate the inner walls. The last stages of Vijayanagar 
art are known as the Madura style, the Nayaks of Madura being 
their most reputed patrons. In some ways it was a revival and 
continuation of the Pandyan style. We may note here in parti- 
cular the provision of additional prakaras by means of concentric 
outer walls of enclosure, each prakara wall having generally four 
gopuras at the cardinal points, and enclosing important adjuncts 
to the temple like a hall of thousand pillars, a sacred tank and 
so on. Srirangam, for instance has seven such concentric 
rectangular enclosures, the outermost one being 2,880 feet by 
2,475. There is also a tendency to multiply the pillars wherever 
possible, and some of them begin to bear on their shafts more 
than life-size statues of deities or donors including ruling princes 
and their consorts. 

The temple of Madura is, perhaps, the most typical of the 
Nayak style, though Srirangam and JambukeSvaram — both on 
an island in the river Kaverl near Trichinopoly, Tiruvannamalai, 
Ramesvaram, Cidambaram, Tinnevelly, Srlvilliputtur and Tiru- 
valur are also well known. The Madura temple is a double 
structure, one dedicated to Siva as Sundaresvar (the beautiful 
Lord) and the other to his consort Minak§I (the fish eyed 
goddess) ; the two shrines take the largest space inside the main 
enclosure, an area 850 feet by 725 feet within a high wall, with 
four large gopuras towards the centre of each of its four sides. 
Outside the main enclosure but in axial alignment with the 
eastern gbpura and separated from it by a street is the Pudu- 
maridapam (New Pavilion) known also as Tirumalai’s choultry. 
This is a large open hall 350 feet by 105 feet, divided longitudi- 
nally into a nave and two aisles by four rows of pillars, all very 
elaborately carved. The pillars towards the centre of the hall 
bear life size statues of the Nayak kings of Madura, the latest 
being that of Tirumalai Nayak, the builder of the mandapa. The 
temple of Ramesvaram, planned and constructed on a unitary 
plan like the Madura temple, is remarkable for its impressive 
pillared corridors which completely surround it besides forming 
avenues leading up to it. These passages vary in width from 
17 to 21 feet and are about 25 feet high ; their total length is 
estimated to be about 3,000 feet. 

A word may now be said about the main image in the 
sanctum (garbhagrha) of the temple and the disposition of sub- 
sidiary deities in relation to it. The main image {mula vigraha') 
in a Siva temple is usually a Linga while in a Vai§nava temple 
it is usually one of Vi?nu’s manifestations ( avatars ) or Visnu 



Religious Institutions 


111 


himself modelled according to one of the many monographic 
forms prescribed in the Agamas. In a temple dedicated to other 
deities like Kali, Durga, Subrahmanya etc. it is their respective 
icons that form the main image. All temples of any size contain 
shrines of subsidiary divinities connected in some way or other 
with the mythology of the central deity. These minor gods are 
enshrined either in subshrines erected in the same enclosure as 
the main temple, or in niches on the exterior of the walls of the 
garbhagraha. The positions of the sub-shrines and niches for 
these deities are prescribed in detail in the Agama texts. The 
vimdnus ( sikharas ) over these minor shrines should in no case 
exceed half the height of the vimana over the sanctum. In the 
course of centuries the number and description of the minor 
deities, and even their location in relation to the Central deity 
underwent changes, and it is easy to find differences in these 
matters between different localities and centuries. To give one 
instance : in the SundareSvara (Siva) temple at Tirukkaftalai in 
the Pudukkottai area, built circa 850 a.d., there are seven sub- 
shrines dedicated respectively to Surya, the Saptamatjkas (seven 
mothers), GaneSa, Subrahmanya, Jye$fha — the elder sister of 
Lak§mi and usually regarded as the goddess of ill-luck and 
sought to be propitiated for that very reason, Candra, and 
Candikesvara. The multiplicity of subshrines is a characteristic 
of early Cola temples. In course of time the Saptamatfkas and 
Jyestha, and in some instances Surya and Candra also are omitted, 
and new gods brought in in thei: places like Harihara, Daksina- 
murti, Nataraja, or any of the canonized saints. The Devi came 
to have a separate shrine to the north-west of the main shrine 
from the eleventh century. The temples of Subrahmanya have 
generally eight, twelve, sixteen or thirty-two parivara devatds 
(subsidiary deities). Planets and R§is also appear among such 
devatds in the later temples, and there are always local legends 
( sthalapurdnas ) to account for their presence. 

Repair and renovation of temples have continuously engaged 
the attention of princes and nobles, and failing them, the general 
public, at subsequent times. No new temples comparable in size 
or art to those of earlier periods have come up. Some new 
temples, relatively modest structures, use new material like 
cement concrete blocks and conform more to modern ideas of 
lighting and ventilation caring little for the ‘ dim religious light * 
bordering on semi-darkness even in broad daylight characteristic 
of the temples in the older tradition. Several temples have lost 
their ancient land endowments, and got instead a relatively 
meagre money allowance for their use from government. Govern- 


112 Development of Religion in South India 

ment also seeks now to control and regulate the administration 1 
of Hindu Religious Endowments which are still of considerable 
size. 

Hinduism is still a live force and there is no sign of its hold 
on the minds of the bulk of the population weakening in any 
way as a result of the impact of modern science and technology. 
Famous shrines like Tirupati, Srlrangam, Srlsailam, Raraesvaram 
and Pandbarpur (Mahara§tra) continue to attract pilgrims in 
large numbers throughout the year, and collect a large revenue 
in the shape of offerings from devotees. The practice is growing 
of diverting the temple surpluses to modern secular uses parti- 
cularly in the educational sphere such as scholarships to 
deserving poor students, feeding them, or even making substantial 
annual contributions towards the maintenance of schools, colleges 
and, in some instance, even universities. The temple continues 
to occupy an important place in the social life of the surrounding 
community. Its daily routine, including the recitals of sacred 
texts and hymns during the daily pufas and on a larger scale on 
festive occasions, engages the attention and provides the means 
of livelihood of thousands in the country. Expositions of epics 
and puranas, and dance, drama and music have not altogether 
lost their traditional association with the temple, though they are 
finding other and perhaps more popular and therefore lucrative 
avenues in the growing cities of the land. 

Before we take leave of temples and their organization, a 
brief reference to the different classes of temple priests will not 
be out of place. As a rule Brahmin priests who conduct worship 
in temples are socially not as high up as the other Brahmins who 
devote themselves to the practice of domestic ritual and sacrifice 
on Vcdic lines (the footriyas as they are called) and pursue careers 
of learning and teaching or even state service and other occupa- 
tions. The SmSrta and Vai§nava priests recognize the three chief 
gods (Trimurti) Brahma, Vi$pu and Siva, though the active 
worship of the first is not much in vogue, Brahma figuring more 
often only as a subsidiary deity on the exterior of the walls of 
the sanctum in Siva temples. The Saivas, however, at least some 
sections of them, hold Siva to be the only god. Both Saivas and 
Vaisnavas attribute personality and qualities to the Supreme 
Being and all temple worship is directed to him. The priests in 
Siva temples are generally known as Gurukkal and those of 
Vi§nu temples as Arcakas, Pancaratra or Vaikhanasa as the case 
may be. In Vi§mi temples Brahmins repeat the Veda and 
Tiruvdymoli during worship, while in Siva temples though the 
Veda is recited by Brahmins, the Devdram, or Tiruppadigam 



Religious Institutions 


113 


as it is described sometimes, is recited, generally to the accom- 
paniment of music, by oduvar (reciters) who are generally 
panddrams (non-Brahmin priests, of whom, more presently) 
specially trained in schools maintained for the purpose. The 
temples generally have a fixed image of stone, wood, or stucco 
in the sanctum ( mula vigraha) which receives the main daily 
worship, and an utsava vigraha (festival image) of metal which is 
also offered daily worship but which is meant primarily for being 
taken on processions during festival days. Temples of any size 
have usually an annual festival for about ten days, the Brahmdt- 
sava, which generally ends with a car festival ( rathotsava ) in 
which the metal image is set upon a big wooden car which is 
dragged along the streets surrounding the temple by the people 
of the township, all castes joining in the task. The Pancaratra 
worship may be conducted by any Brahmin priest, but the 
Vaikhanasa only by arcakas specially trained to it TulaM 
(basil) is specially sacred to Vi§nu and bilva (bael) leaves to 
giva. Brahmins generally ignore the lower deities, though for 
gaining particular ends they occasionally offer special worship 
to some of them in forms prescribed by astrologers or adepts in 
the occult lore (mantravadis) . Thurston has listed no fewer 
than twelve divisions or sub-groups among the Smarta Brahmins, 
four among Vadagalai Vai?navas and six of the Tengalai group. 

In the Deccan under the Calukyas of Badami and the 
Ra?trakutas (750-950) both Saivism and Vai?navism flourished, 
the former being perhaps the more favoured creed. For the 
temples they erected at Badami, Pattadakal, Mahakuta, EllSra 
and elsewhere, they imported Saiva arcakas (temple priests) 
from among the acaryas on the banks of the Ganges, and richly 
endowed the daily worship and the periodical festivals to be 
conducted by them. At the same time Vedic sacrifices were not 
neglected, vratas (religious vows) were observed, and danas 
(gifts) made. The worship of Karttikeya attained much pro- 
minence in the Bellary region in the tenth century, and two 
tapovanas (penance groves) were dedicated to him as the 
supreme- deity, a development initiated by some teachers from 
Bengal (Gau^adesa) as recorded in contemporary inscriptions. 
It is possible that several other facts like these have escaped the 
records, and that developments in Hindu religious practices in 
different parts of India reacted on one another much more 
intimately than we realize from the extant sources. 

The DIkgitars of Cidambaram claim to have come down 
from Benares, three thousand of them including their leader who 
was no other than lord Siva-Nataraja Himself, and settled in 
8 


114 Development of Religion in South India 

Cidambaram, They enjoyed the prerogative in olden days of 
crowning the Cola emperors. They wear a top knot of hair on 
their head in front like the Nayar and Nambudiri of the West 
Coast. They take turns in the service of the Nataraja temple and 
live on the perquisites of the temple which they own and manage. 
They marry early in order to qualify for a share in the perqui- 
sites. The temple has no lands, government grants or endow- 
ments ; but the* regular flow of gifts of devotees from all grades 
of society enables it to be fully supplied with sumptuous food 
offerings both during daily worship and on special festivals. 
There are at present about 250 shares claimed by the DIk§itars. 
The temple is exceptional in this respect, as Siva temples usually 
distribute only holy ashes as prasadam (lit. grace) unlike Vi§nu 
temples where tasteful food of different kinds is regularly offered 
to the deity and then distributed among the worshippers. Twenty 
Dlksitars are always on duty for twenty days at a time, and 
perform their function in five parlies of four doing the pujd for 
four days each in the different shrines. The Dlksitars claim this 
monopoly of worship for themselves and do not permit even the 
Sankara-acaryas (successors of the great founder of Advaita) to 
offer worship to the deity directly — a privilege which they enjoy 
in every other temple. 

Similar to the Dlksitars in some ways, but very different 
from them, are the Soliyars who are in charge of the Tiruvanaikka 
temple and of whom there are six sections. They wear front 
locks and take turns in the puja like the DTk$itars. Like the 
Gurukkajs they have an initiation {diksa) enabling them to enter 
on their duties as piijdris or arcakas , but otherwise have little 
general education. They count about 300, men and women and 
children, and the arcakas do not intermarry with other Sofiyars. 
Another group of Soliyars are in another shrine Avudaiyarkoyil. 
CS^akya is believed to have been a Soliya and a Tamil proverb 
says that the tuft of a Soliya doe_s not shake in vain, implying 
that his exertion is never wasted but invariably has a puipose 
which it generally achieves. Other priestly sections with 
noticeable peculiarities of their own are the Mukkanis of Tiru- 
ccendur, Cochin and Travancore ; the Sanketis of Mysore who 
speak a strange mixture of Tamil and Kannada, and the Aradhyas 
of Northern Circars, found also to a less extent in Cuddapah, 
Kurnool and Mysore, who wear both the sacred thread and the 
linga and worship Gapapati. 

The Paqdarams who have been briefly mentioned before 
are the most important among the non-brahmin temple priests. 
They are recruited from among the Saiva Sudras and are known 


Religious Institutions 


115 


-to drink liquor and eat meat furnished by any respectable Sudra. 
Tirattani (Chittoor District) is an important centre for them. 
■One section among them known as Tirumanjana (bathing) 
pandarams bring water for bathing the deities in temples. 
Tambirans form another section who act as managers of temples 
and heads of mathas . 

There is another caste also known as Pandarams who are 
staunch Saivas and strict vegetarians, lead a celibate life, wear 
the lingam, and accept initiation from Diksitars. There are two 
classes among them distinguished by the epithets abki$eka 
(corresponding to Tirumanjana) and deMka. There are also 
mendicants drawn from all castes who eat meat. The Lingayat 
pandarams are different from the true Lingayats who venerate 
the Jangam (ascetic) and use water with which his feet have 
been washed for abhiseka to the lingam, and observe no pollu- 
tion — all respects in which they differ from Tamil Lingayats. 
Several derivations have been suggested for the word Pandaram 
in this context — one tracing it to Panduranga, another to 
Bhandara (treasury) and a third to a yellow powder called 
pandaram kept in a little box and given in exchange for alms ; 
but the powder may well have got its name from its users. In 
some Siva temples Brahmins function under the control of a 
Pandaram who is the head of the organization. It is a question 
if the Pandarams are or are not Lingayats . There are numerous 
married Pandarams who have kudumi (tuft), and wear ashes 
and sandal pottu ( tilak ) on the forehead ; the less numerous 
celibates wear orange robes (Mfdya), carry iron tridents ( trifrda ) 
and dandayudha (lit. stick-weapon) and sing popular Tamil 
hymns. Married men also beg with a bell metal gong and a 
wooden mallet. Both classes bury the dead and erect a linga 
on the burial spot. The Pandara Sannidhis, heads of Maths , 
are celibate and scholarly, being well versed in Puranas and 
Agamas. They are the Tambirans proper ; but the title is often 
usurped by uneducated beggars ; the Vairavis are a sub-caste of 
Pandaram. 

The Palps or Vanniyans claim descent from the K§atriyas 
■of Agnikula (fire-race) and Pallavas. Kulagekhara alvar is said 
to have been the king of the caste. The Pallis have an annual 
ceremony in the Parthasarathi temple in Triplicane (Madras) 
and some other temples ; and make camphor offerings in the 
Mylapore Siva temple. There is a Papigopuram in the Ekamra- 
nathar temple at Kanclpuram. Vanni is the name of a District 
in N.E. Ceylon, and Sambhus and Sambuvarayas (mediaeval 
-chieftains) are said to have been connected with them. To the 



116 


Development of Religion in South India 


Vanniyans belongs the privilege of fire-walking in the temple at 
Tirupporur near Madras. They are priests in the Draupadi. 
temples in South Arcot District, Draupadi being the common 
wife of the five Pandava heroes of the Mahabharata, currently 
worshipped as a goddess in the * Little Tradition 5 ; in these 
temples fire-walking and recital of a part of the Great Epic 
(Mahabharata) are part of the Draupadi festivals both here and 
in Madras city. Some sections of Vanniyas wear the sacred 
thread and even claim to be Brahmins, forbid widow remarriage 
and are vegetarians. Palli Poligars, feudal chieftains, with high- 
sounding titles were known. The Pallis of Kumalam, a village 
in S. Arcot, are known as Kovilar (templars) and priests of the 
PaUis ; like the Bhatfar (priest) Brahmins they are well versed 
in temple ritual, and the Veda ; they claim to be K?atriyas and 
adopt the titles of Rayar, Nayakkar, Varma, Padaiyacci, Kandar 
etc. ; others call them Kumalam Brahmins. They belong to the 
left hand section of castes , 6 and are generally Saivas or Vai§na- 
vas ; but they also practise dcmonolatry, and worship village 
deities like Mutyalamma, Mariyamma, Ayyanar, MunTsvara etc. 
Sakti worship with bloody sacrifices is also known. They use 
the Karagam, a pile of seven pots set one upon another and 
decorated with flowers and garlands, in their festivals. They 
practise both burial and cremation. The Pagans, a division of 
Pa^aiya (drummers) are said to be related to them. 

By the side of the temple, the matha (monastery) which 
corresponded to the vihdra of Buddhism, was an important 
institution basically religious, but with many ramifications in the 
intellectual and economic life of contemporary society. The life 
of the ascetic had a strong appeal to the imagination of the 
people, and one of the most common forms of religious charity 
was to provide for the feeding, regular or occasional, of ascetics 
in temples or mafhas. Vai$navism was on the whole moderate 
in its practice of the ascetic ideal, and did not give rise to the 
bizarre manifestations of it associated with Saivism. The 
Vai$nava endowments generally provided for the feeding of Sri 
Vai?$avas and tddar (dasas) or of Brahmins who had a perfect 
mastery of the Veda. The dasas are itinerant Vai$nava mendi- 
cants, reinforced by idle Sudras, branded by gurus of the Tirupati 
and other shrines as dasas; they sing sacred songs and keep 
young bulls trained to perform tricks. They are generally Ten- 


6 In South India the Castes were grouped as two confederations, so 
to say, of the Right Hand and Left Hand, and the differences among 
them, generally over religious or social trifles, often led to violence as is 
seen from frequent entries m the Records of Fort St. George (Madras) 



Religious Institutions 


117 


•galais and wear garlands of tulasi (basil) beads; there are six 
subdivisions among them who neither eat together nor inter- 
marry. Tradition avers that Sankara found the Vedantic ascetic 
orders in confusion and regulated them, dividing them into ten 
groups each placed under one of his disciples and named after 
them ; all of them came thenceforth to be known as Dasnamis, 
Sanyasis of ten names . 7 There are also Sanyasinis (nuns). 
Srngeri matha of which Sankara was himself the head is the chief 
monastery, and its ruler is the supreme pontiff of all advaita 
sanyasis. It may be noted that the dualist Madhva Sanyasis also 
adopt these ten suffixes, Madhva himself being a Tlrtha. Sri- 
vai?nava sanyasis, an order to which only Brahmins are admitted, 
carry a triple dat)da in contrast to the single dandz of the advaita 
sanyasis, and hence they are respectively known as Tridandis 
and Ekadandis . Saivism was in marked contrast with the 
Advaita of Sankara. 

The ascetics owned no property themselves but their mafias 
often owned vast estates earmarked for their maintenance and 
the encouragement of learning and the arts. The climate of 
opinion has always been favourable to the ascetic ideal and a 
fair, though varying proportion of the population has at all times 
taken to the life of pious, if not uneasy, poverty. All religious 
systems applauded it. The well-to-do householder has ever been 
ready to make gifts ( dana ) to the orders, because he was assured 
of a good berth in the other world as much for his dana as the 
ascetic for his renunciation and austerity. There was no doubt 
many a hoax masquerading under the garb of asceticism who 
often became the butt of a good joke among the populace whose 
shrewd common sense got at the truth in such cases. But it is 
only very recently that in the name of economics we have come 
to look upon each man as a hand and a mendicant as an idle 
hand; By and large, the ascetic ideal did much good to the 
people by stressing the higher values of the spirit and by giving 
them a ready-made philosophy with which to face the hard 
realities of life. It is still cherished by the masses of the people 
in the villages, though perhaps not so much in the big cities. 

Tire history of the mafias and guhais (as they are some- 
times called in the inscriptions) has not been studied as much 
as it deserves to be, and cannot be pursued here in any detail. 
Their origin is definitely some centuries anterior to the reign of 
Rajaraja I, but their number and influence steadily increased 
under him and his successors. Starting from important centres 

7 The ten names are : Tirlha, Asrama, Sarasvati, Bharati, Vana, 
Aranya, Parvata, Sagara, Giri and Puri. 



118 Development of Religion in South India 

where one or more mathas were established in the first instance,, 
the movement spread all over the land until almost every 
important temple came to possess one or more mathas function- 
ing in close proximity to it. In course of time they grouped, 
themselves around a limited number of santdnas or successions 
of gurus , each having a central matha which was looked up to 
for guidance by a number of subordinate mathas in different 
places. Many of these, the Tamil Saiva mathas proper, were 
confined to the Tamil country. Others, however, maintained 
Voider contacts and prided themselves on their connection with 
Aryadesam (North India), Banaras, or even Kashmir. Some 
Northern mathas like the Golaki commanded a considerable 
following in the South. Both epigraphy and tradition point to 
a fairly large immigration of Bhattas from North India to 
important religious centres in the South, particularly to Srlran- 
gam ; immigrants from Kashmir (Kagmlradesam) are specially 
mentioned in Srirangam as in other places in the Chingleput 
and Ramnad Districts. Generally the mathas which maintained 
their North Indian contacts belonged to the various schools of 
Pa&ipatas, Kapalikas and so on. Mathas often helped religious 
pilgrims in their progress from one shrine to another by supplying 
salt, medical help and other specific services as required, and 
there were endowments ear-marked for these services. The 
mathas , like the temple, had a strong multi-purpose social side 
to their work and the ascetics inhabiting them often devoted 
themselves to feeding the hungry, tending the sick, consoling the 
dejected, and educating the young ones ; in the process several 
Buddhist shrines and vihdras were turned to Hindu uses when 
Buddhism ceased to be an active force in the land. 

The mathas are still continuing to be active agencies for the 
promotion of traditional learning and social welfare. Modern 
conditions are perhaps growing steadily adverse to their work 
and outlook, and the State has begun to claim and exercise the 
right of supervision and control of all religious endowments by 
legislation and executive action. Even in ancient days surplus 
funds owned by these institutions were invested with merchants 
for fixed rates of interest or advanced as working capital to agri- 
culturists on agreed terms ; there is therefore no new principle 
involved in the diversion of surplus funds to modem uses like 
the award of scholarships to pupils in modern schools and col- 
leges, and even supporting the institutions themselves, provided 
the main activities for which the mathas were originally meant 
and which they are still keen on carrying out are not starved on 
this account. Among the mathas still actively functioning in 



Religious Institutions 


119 


South India may be mentioned : the Advaita mathas of Srngeri 
and KancI, the Vaisnava mathas of Ahobalam (Kurnool) and 
Parakala (Mysore), both Vadagalai; those of Vanamamalai 
(Tirunelveli District), Srlperumbudur (Chingleput District) and 
Tirukoyilur (S. Arcot) — all Tengalai ; the Madhva mathas 
include the Kr§na Matha at Udipi (South Kanara District) with 
its eight branches, the Vyasaraya Matha, the Uttaradi Matha and 
the Raghavendraswami Matha ; and among the Tamil Saiva 
Mathas those of Tiruvaduturai, Dharmapuram and Tiruppanan- 
da], all in the Tanjore District. In their turn the mathas are try- 
ing to take account of the impact of modem forces and move 
with the times, but without in any way departing from their 
original raison d'etre. They seek to combine a modicum of 
modern studies with traditional studies in the educational insti- 
tutions in their charge. They seek to distinguish the essentials 
of religion from the externals, and bring about a common under- 
standing and co-operation among mathas of different schools — 
a thing undreamt of in the old order. They seek to check the 
forces of division in the Hindu fold and secure a fresh and vital 
unity on a ground of social philosophy and ethics commonly 
accepted by them. It is too soon to judge the results of these 
reformist endeavours. 



VII. MOVEMENTS AFTER A.D. 1000 : THE ROLE OF 
VIJAYANAGAR (1336-1650) : REFORM AND MODERN 
HINDUISM 

Under the Cojas of the house of Vijayalaya (acc. 850 a.d.) 
may be said to commence the Silver Age of South Indian 
Hinduism. Precise dates are difficult in the present state of the 
evidence ; but we may still be reasonably certain that the sacred 
hymns of the ndyanars and alyars, in many ways the most 
characteristic product of Tamil religious experience, were 
arranged in canonical form sometime in the eleventh century. 

Nambi Andar Nambi, the author who arranged the Saiva 
canon substantially in the form in which we now find it, was 
most probably a contemporary of Rajaraja I (985-1014) and 
his son Rajendra I (1014-44). The account of his life and work 
given in a short Tamil Puranam attributed to Umapati Siva 
Acarya (early fourteenth century) seems to conserve, in the 
midst of many legends, a fairly correct account of the growth 
of the canon in the hands of Nambi himself and his successors. 
The inclusion in the canon of Nambi’s own poems and those 
of other writers (e.g. Karuvur Devar) manifestly later than 
Rajaraja’s time, and the titles Abhaya (fearless) and KulaSekhara 
(head ornament of the family) given by Umapati to the Cola 
king who was Nambi’s contemporary, may well imply a later 
date for the redaction of the canon. Even in Nambi’s time 
difficulty was felt in making the collection complete as may be 
seen from the hymn of Jnanasambandar on Tiruvidaivayil which 
finds no place in the canon but is found engraved on stone in 
the temple concerned ; as is common in such conditions in India, 
a legend was invented to cover up the incompleteness of the 
collection, and it was said that the bulk of the palm leaves on 
which the poems had been written had been destroyed by 
termites in their original store room behind the Nataraja temple 
at Cidambaram. 

The practice of reciting these hymns in temples had come 
into vogue long before the time of Rajaraja from the late Pallava 
period when the inscriptions begin to- include the reciters among 
the regular employees of the temple. The inference is clear 
that the hymns had gained the status of divine literature by that 



Movements after a.d. 1000 121 

.time. From the time of Parantaka I (907-55) Cola there is a 
regular series of endowments recorded in the epigraphs of the 
Cola — and Tondaimandalams (i.e. roughly Madras, Chingleput, 
S. Arcot, Tanjore and Trichinopoly Districts) for the recitation 
of these hymns in temples to the accompaniment of instrumental 
music. The mention of a Devaranayakam, Superintendent of 
Devaram, in the reign of Rajendra I, implies a regular State 
department regulating this work and securing its proper perform- 
ance ; the same department may have looked after the dance 
and music performances in temples which were also often 
separately endowed. 

Lyrical hymnology continued to flourish in the early im- 
perial Cola period, and Pajtinattu Pillai, who probably lived in 
the tenth century, was the author of some beautiful devotional 
verse. Pattinam or Kaveri-ppum-pattinam was the place of his 
birth and hence his name meaning the Pillai (son) who belonged 
to Pattinam. His hymns are five in number ; which along with 
the work of ten minor authors and the ten hymns of Nambi 
Andar Nambi himself constitute the eleventh book of the Saiva 
canon. The Tiruttondar Puranam or Periya Puranam of Sek- 
kijar, a long hagiology in epic style composed in the reign of 
Kulottunga II (1133-50) constitutes the twelfth and last book 
of the Canon. To complete the account of the Saiva canon, it 
may be noted that the ninth book comprises hymns by nine 
authors. Among them figures a Cola king Gaudaraditya (Sun 
among heroes), son of Parantaka I ; both he and his queen 
Sembiyan Mahadevi (the great queen of the Coja) have a better 
place in religious than in political history. We must also notice 
Karuvur Devar (the lord of Karuvur, the place of his birth, in 
Trichinopoly District) who is reputed to have been Rajaraja’s 
spiritual adviser and who has hymns on the temples of Adit- 
yeSvara in Tirukkalandai, the Great Temple of Tanjore, and 
its counterpart in Gangaikondacojapuram — all constructions of 
the Cola kings more or less contemporary with Karuvur Devar. 
In the hymns of the ninth book, the largest number celebrate 
Koyil (Cidambaram), 

The history of Vai?pava hymnology in the period is quite 
similar. Tradition confers upon Nathamuni, RanganEthamuni is 
the full name, the honour of having done for Vai^ava lyrics 
what Nambi Andar Nambi achieved for the Saiva ones. The 
Anbil copper plate grant of Sundara Coja’s reign (956-73) 
mentions a Srlnatha ; he may well be the same as the Vai?$ava 
saint Nathamuni (i.e. Saint Natha) who thus finds a place early 
in the tenth century. This record provides a good glimpse into 



122 Development of Religion in South India 

the role of Vaignavism in the social life of the time, for it bears, 
testimony to the strong Vai§navism of the family of Aniruddha,. 
the minister of Parantaka II Sundara Cola ; the glory of Anirud- 
dha’s father was his great learning and the number of his pupils ; 
Aniruddha’s mother and her father were staunch devotees of 
God Ranganatha; his great grandfather Ananta extended con- 
siderable support to the poor and the indigent. Nathamuni was 
the first of the great succession of Acaryas who carried forward 
and completed the work started by the Alvars of an earlier time. 
His birth place was Viranarayanapuram (South Arcot District) 
the place is now known as Kattu-mannar-koyil (i.e. the temple 
of Kr§na in the forest) , perhaps the original name of the village ; 
ViranSrayana was a title of Co}a Parantaka I (907-55) as also> 
of a slightly earlier Paiidya king, a contemporary of the father 
of Parantaka I ; we may therefore assume that Nathamuni 
belongs to the late ninth or early tenth century. The story is. 
that Nathamuni once heard some visitors to his place from Kuril- 
gur (Tirunelveli District) recite a hymn of ten verses from the 
Tiruvaymoli, the 1000 hymns composed by Sathakopa, also* 
called Nammalvar. Captivated by the melody of the hymn and 
noticing from its last verse that it comprised only ten out of a 
thousand verses composed by Nammalvar, Nathamuni undertook 
a journey to Kurugur, the birth place of Nammalvar, in the hope 
of discovering the whole collection there. Kurugur, it may be 
mentioned by the way, has the alternative name of Alvar-Tiru- 
nagari, the sacred city of the alvar , in memory of the great saint 
and composer. After worshipping Visnu in that city, Nathamuni 
resorted to the foot of the sacred tamarind tree of the place in* 
his desire to meet the alvar ; great was his grief and disappoint- 
ment when he found his yogic powers unequal to the task of 
invoking a vision of Sathakopa (Nammaiv&r). He then adopted 
the plan of reciting 12,000 times the hymn of Madhurakavi (lit. 
sweet poet) on his guru Sathakopa ; pleased by this, both Satha- 
kopa and Madhurakavi appeared before Nathamuni and imparted 
to him the knowledge of the works of Sathakopa with their full 
import together with all the rest of the hymns. Thereafter 
Nathamuni stayed at Kurugur meditating upon the new know- 
ledge he had acquired until he was summoned by Vlranarayana 
Krs^a, the god of his native place, to go back to it. There he 
collected a band of disciples and made them sing these hymns, 
to divine tunes. All this is, of course, legend, but typical of the* 
Indian way of keeping fresh the memory of great men and their 
deeds. We may infer surely that the Vai§pava canon was 
arranged and its musical modes settled by the first great Acaryai 



Movements after a.d. 1000 


125 


of the second great division in the history of Vai§navism in 
South India, the one that falls between the creative age when 
the hymns were sung and that of the great commentators who- 
came long after Ramanuja. We have epigraphic evidence that 
at least from the time of Rajaraja I Cola the hymns were recited 
in Visnu temples during worship and in festivals just as the Saiva 
hymns were recited in Siva temples. One inscription of a.d. 1242 
mentions a choir of fifty-eight Brahmins reciting Tirumoli (sacred 
word, short form of Tiruvdymoli) in Kanclpuram. 

Besides arranging the Tamil canon, Nathamuni wrote a 
number of works in Sanskrit expressing the clear need he felt 
for the support and guidance of a living God, and pointing the 
way to a philosophical justification of the path of love ( bhakti ) . 
His grandson Alavandar, also called Yamunacarya in memory 
of his visits to the sacred spots of Kr§na’s youth on the banks 
of the Yamuna (Jamna) river, was the next great name in the 
succession before Ramanuja. In his early years he was a man 
of the world, but a follower of Nathamuni called him to the 
higher life. He then turned ascetic and led the life of a religious 
teacher, gathering disciples round him and preaching, writing 
and conducting debates. In his Sanskrit writings, often cited by 
Ramanuja, ‘he sought to establish the real existence of the 
supreme soul, and the eternal independence of the individual 
soul k 1 Yamunacarya is said to have met Ramanuja as a young 
student studying in KancI the philosophy of Sankara ; but 
unwilling to disturb his studies, he simply uttered a prayer for 
the increase of Vai§navas and went back to Srirangam, Then 
Ramanuja developed differences with his guru Yadava Prakasa 
which led him to the Srlrangam school of philosophy. 

In religion, as in politics, the age of the Imperial Co] as 
(950-1250) was marked by a notable expansion of external 
contacts and a remarkable mutual tolerance and respect among 
the different religious denominations as a rule. An important 
exception is the persecution of Ramanuja and his followers by 
some of the later CoJas, of which Vaispava tradition has pre- 
served a rather vivid memory. Rajendra I (1014-42) provided 
for the annual supply of a large quantity of grain as acdryabhfigct 
to Udaiyar Sarva Siva Pandita, who was performing worship in 
the Tanjore temple, and his pupils, and their pupils, whether 
they lived in the Aryadesa, Madhyadesa or Gaudadeia. In 1214 
we find the Kolla-matha of Benares represented by its disciples 
in the Chingleput District in the Santana of Lak$adhyaya 

1 ‘ Perpetuity which is a form of time is different from eternity which 
is timelessness ’ — Radhakrishnan, The Brahmasiitra (1960), p. 185. 



124 Development of Religion in South India 

Iravalar ; the Bhiksa matha of Benares is likewise represented 
in the Tanjore District three years later. There is also a tradi- 
tion that Rajendra I imported large numbers of Saivas from the 
banks of the Ganges and established them in several parts in 
the Co|a country. The kings as a rule patronized all persuasions 
without discrimination. The sculptures of Rajaraja’s Great 
Temple in Tanjore include both Vai^nava and Buddhist themes. 
His sister Kundavai built three temples- — -one to Siva, one to 
Vi$nu and a third to Jina — all in one place Rajarajapuram 
(now Dadapuram) in the Tanjore District, and her gifts to all 
these shrines are recorded in one inscription ; it contains one of 
the earliest known references to several namams , (the Vai?nava 
caste-mark) made of gold, in the list of jewels of the Visnu 
temple. Many temples contained shrines both of Siva and Visnu, 
the most conspicuous instance being the Cidambaram (South 
Arcot) temple ; the relative positions of Nataraja (Siva) and 
Govindaraja (Visnu) in this temple is brought out with great 
precision in a verse in the Tirukkovaiydr (attributed to Manikka- 
vaSagar) which depicts Visnu as lying in front of Nataraja, 
absorbed in the contemplation of the foot lifted in his dance 
by Nataraja (the lord of the Dance) and supplicating him for 
a view of the other foot as well. In later times this proximity 
*of the deities led to acrimonious disputes between the devotees 
in which Govindaraja was pulled out of his place by Kulottunga II 
(1133-50) and thrown into the sea; the image was restored to 
its place in the reign of Acyuta Raya in the Vijayanagar period, 
and in more recent times became the subject of litigation in 
courts of law when the renovation of the two shrines was in 
progress. 2 The history of the two shrines thus briefly summa- 
rized furnishes a conspicuous instance of the difference to prac- 
tical life made by religion proper and religions as sects. It would 
be wrong to infer, however, that all was narrow sectarianism after 
Kulottunga II. In the short reign of Adhirajendra (1067-70) 
we find an inscription recording the rebuilding in stone of a 
shrine of Varadaraja (Vi§nu) originally built of brick by 
Koccoja in the precincts of a Siva temple at Tiruvakkarai (South 
Arcot District). This late reference to Koccola i.e. Cola Sen- 
ga$an (Red-eye) having built a Visnu temple is remarkable, 
because the great Vai§pava saint Tirumangai has praised that 
king in his hymns for having constructed seventy beautiful 
temples dedicated to fh: r' 1 *:-- "\\1 Isa (i.e. Siva). Senganan 
lived in the interval ivi.\ of the Sangam age and 

2 T. V. Mahalingam : Administration and Social Life under Vijaya- 
nagar, p. 325, n. 86. ' 



Movements after a.d. 1000 


125 


the Hindu revival of the Pallava times (seventh, century). At 
that time Hinduism was still an attitude to life as a whole and 
had not lost itself in the arid desert of sectarian rivalries. But 
at all times, even in the worst days of sectarianism, there were 
some, perhaps a very small minority, wedded to true religion 
and rising above the narrow sectarianism of the day. 

The role of Vijayanagar as the defender of Hinduism in 
the South against Islam has been stressed more than once already. 
The foundation of the empire was the culmination of a strong 
wave of religious revival and political excitement caused by the 
Sultanate of Delhi seeking to impose its sway on the Deccan 
and farther south in the early fourteenth century. The first rulers 
of Vijayanagar proclaimed their special mission to the world, 
among other things, by commissioning a syndicate of scholars 
headed by Sayaiia Acarya to compose commentaries on the entire 
Veda, and this monumental work which has survived almost in 
its entirety has been appraised differently by different Western 
scholars who have taken to vedic studies on modem philological 
lines. An earlier commentary on the Rgveda known as Rgartha 
dipika (light on the meaning of Rks) and composed by Venkata 
Madhava on the banks of the Kaverl river, likewise coincided 
with the inauguration of the Cola empire in the tenth century 
under Parantaka I. Again, Sayapa’s brother Madhava was ano- 
ther prolific author whose works command great authority even 
now. His commentary on Para&arasmrti known as Paratora 
MadhavTyam is an erudite work which restates the social code 
and includes an independent treatise on Vyavahara (secular law) 
which was neglected in the original text of ParaSara. He also 
wrote the Jaimimya Nyaya maid (the garland of the rules of 
Jaimini) and its Vistara (explanation), an abstract in verse and 
an explanation in prose of the subject matter of each section of 
Sabarasvdmirts bhdyya on the Mlmamsa-sutras of Jaimini. His 
Sarvctrdarsana-sangraha gave a succinct survey of the principal 
systems of philosophy including several non-vedic systems. His 
Dhdtuvrtti , a commentary on the Dhdtupdtha (list of roots) 
ascribed to Panini is a distinct contribution to Sanskrit linguistics 
and suggests the derivation of quite a large number of words 
whose origin is not given in any other work. 

Vaisnava. tradition preserved in the Snrangam temple 
chronicle known as Koyil-olugu (chronicle of the temple) and 
other works avers that the Ranganatha temple of Srlrangam was 
sacked twice by the Muslim invaders, once during the invasion 
of Malik Kafur about 1310-11 and again during the Tughlak 
inroads of 1327-8, The different accounts differ much in details 



J26 Development of Religion in South India 

.and include a number of miracles. But the main incidents that 
concern us and are not in any doubt are that on both occasions 
the defenders of the temple suffered considerable loss of life and 
property, that the movable subsidiary idols of the temple had 
to be hidden away, while the main images were carried over 
to other places, and that after Kumara Kampana’s overthrow of 
the Sultanate of Madura, his commandant Goppana brought back 
the two main idols to Srlrangam from Singavaram near Gingee 
and from the foot of Tirupati hill and had them duly installed 
in the renovated temple in 1370-71. The destruction of the 
tyrannical Sultanate of Madura (1334-71) is celebrated by the 
wife of the victor Kampana by name Ganga Devi in her exquisite 
Sanskrit kavya (epic) Madhuravijayam. This conquest and the 
consequent restoration of Srlrangam must be counted as impor- 
tant landmarks in the history of South Indian Hinduism. 3 

The Rayas of Vijayanagar (particularly those who. came 
after the first Dynasty of Saivas) were generally Vaisnavas, but 
tolerant in their outlook. Their attempts to reconcile sectarian 
conflicts and ensure harmony have been noticed already. Even 
Kasivilasa KriyaSakti, a Pasupata saint, who rivals Vidyaranya 
in the support he gave to Vijayanagar and the cause of the 
Hindu revival and who is acknowledged as their guru by several 
princes of the First Vijayanagar Dynasty, was very tolerant in 
his general outlook and not only approved of his disciples sup- 
porting Advaita and Vai§pava institutions but himself made 
.endowments and grants to temples of Visnu. All types of reli- 
gions found encouragement from the Rayas. Sometimes public 
debates were held in open court like that in which Vallabhacarya, 
the founder of a Vai?pava sect, is said to have vanquished smarta 
scholars in the reign of the celebrated Kr?nadeva Raya. Royal 
patronage was extended even to Islam, though neighbouring 
Muslim rulers sometimes bitterly persecuted their Hindu subjects. 
Devarflya II (1422-46) built a mosque in his capital for the 
use of his Muslim soldiers. 

A staunch Vai^pava himself, Kr$nadeva Raya repaired and 
rebuilt the temple of Virupaksa (Siva) at Hampi very soon after 
his accession. He made handsome gifts to the Saiva as well as 
to Vai$pava temples. The temples of Kanci, Tirupati, Simha- 
calam and Ahobalam (all Vai§pava) as well as those of Tiru- 
vappilmalai, Cidambaram, Kalahasti, 5ri6ailam and Amaravatl 
(all Saiva) received liberal grants of land from him. Smartas, 
Vai§pavas and Jains were found in his service. A fanatic Vfra 

3 The details are set forth fully and discussed by S. Krishnaswami 
Aiyangar m his South India and Her Muhammadan Invaders. 


Movements after a.d. 1000 


127 


;§aiva chief of the lingayat community paid the extreme penalty 
because he massacred several Svetambara Jain priests in the 
belief that thereby he was making an easy road for himself to 
heaven. Duarte Barbosa records : ‘ The king allows such free- 
dom that every man may come and go, and live according to 
his own creed without suffering any annoyance and without 
inquiry, whether he is a Christian, Jew, Moor or Heathen. Great 
equity and justice is observed by all *. The same policy was 
continued by Kr?nadeva Raya’s successor Acyuta Raya. The 
famous Rama Raya (son-in-law of Krsnadeva) who wielded the 
real power in the state after Acyuta Raya, caused the Quran to 
be placed before him in the Audience Hall in order to reconcile 
his Muslim soldiers to the act of making obeisance to him when 
they came to pay their respects ; this had also been done by 
Devaraya II earlier. He allowed them to build mosques and 
offer worship according to their practice as in a Muslim state. 
He even risked the displeasure of his Hindu subjects and of his 
own brother Tirumala by refusing to adopt their suggestion that 
the Muslims should be forbidden to slaughter cows in the Turu- 
Icavada (Muslim quarter). The Vijayanagar sovereigns and the 
Nayaks of the empire often made substantial endowments to the 
Dargas of Muslim saints where miracles were believed to be 
performed and horn (horoscopy) was studied. Venkata II, for 
instance, renewed certain grants of villages to the Darga of 
Babayya at Penugonda in 1638-39. Mangammal, the Nayak 
queen of Madura, gave some villages near Trichinopoly in 
1701-2 to the darga of Babanatta as the reward for a prophecy 
foretelling success in the state business of Tanjavur (Tanjore). 

Some records seem to mention even a Christian Divan of 
Deva Raya II as early as 1445. After the coming of the Portu- 
guese, the Jesuits made converts from the people especially from 
among the Paravas of the Pearl Fishery Coast who were eager to 
escape the oppression of the Muslim monopolists of the industry 
by transferring their allegiance to Christianity and seeking the 
protection of Portugal. Robert de Nobili’s attempts, not very 
successful, to gain converts from among Brahmins in Madura 
by leading the life of a Hindu Scmyasi have been noticed already. 
Venkata II patronized the Jesuits after the manner of Akbar 
and organized debates between them and Hindu leaders. He 
allowed them to establish their churches at Candragiri and 
Vellore, and settled upon them an annual income of one thou- 
sand gold pieces which they employed in maintaining the Candra- 
giri mission and a college at St. Thome near Madras. 

Vaispavism, however, naturally received special patronage. 


128 


Development of Religion in South India 


and Tirupati, to which the emperors made frequent journeys even, 
in the midst of the most arduous military campaigns, became 
the most important centre of Vai?navism in the fifteenth and 
sixteenth centuries, and continues to retain its place to this day. 
Telugu Vai$nava tradition is eloquent about a Tatacarya who' 
was the guru of Kr§nadeva Raya. The Jiyars of Ahobalam 
matha played an important part in spreading Srivai§navism, and 
Van Sathakopa JTyar, the founder of the matha , was apparently 
in close touch with the court. He was the guru of Allasani 
Peddana, the poet laureate of Krsnadeva Raya. Several Vai^ava 
families, like the Kandadai and Paravastu, took to regular mis- 
sionary work in the cause of Vai?navism, secured a large number 
of new disciples, and made Vai^avism. the most infl uential faith 
in the country. The other branch of Vaisnavas, the Madhvas, 
also increased their numbers and influence as they produced great 
teachers like Aksobhya Muni, Brahmapyatlrtha, Vyasa(raya) 
tirtha and others. The great saint Purandaradasa, said to have 
been a convert of Vyasaraya, enriched the faith by the hundreds 
of devotional songs he composed and set to music in the most 
popular tunes. Vyasaraya himself was the greatest expounder of 
the faith and deserves to rank as its second founder. A pupil 
of Brahmanyatlrtha, in his early years he was attached to the 
matha at Mulbagal, and then migrated, acting on the advice of 
his guru , to Candragiri where Saluva Narasimha was holding 
court at the time before his accession to the throne in 1485-6. 
He then spent twelve years at Tirupati acting as pujari (wor- 
shipping priest) in the temple of VenkateSa, probably at' the 
bidding^ of Saluva Narasimha. When Narasimha became king, 
Vyasaraya went over to the capital Vijayanagara along with him, 
and became spiritual adviser of successive kings after the demise 
of Narasimha (1492). In Kj-snadeva Raya’s reign, it is said, 
that the king vacated the throne temporarily in favour of Vyasa- 
raya in order to avoid the evil effects of an inauspicious conjunc- 
tion of the planets, and Vyasa is said to have taken' the title 
rdya m commemoration of this incident. Vyasaraya survived 
Krspadeva Raya and died at Vijayanagar about 1532 ; his tomb 
is still pointed out to the pious pilgrim on an island called Nava- 
brndavanam (new sepulchre) in the Tungabhadra river about 
a ? lIe the east of the site of the great city. Though 
Madhvaism failed to attract many adherents in spite of the great 
eachers it produced, it made a notable contribution to popular 
religion by attaching very great importance to the worship of 
Hanuman, the aide and devotee of Rama. Madhvaism lost its. 
importance after Kpujadeva Raya. 


Movements after a.d, 1000 


129 


The Telugu and Kannada countries maintained quite a 
number of Lingayat mathas, the most important of which were 
located at Srlsailam, Sangamesvaram and Ummattur. The monks 
who lived there propagated the Lingayat faith and spent their 
time in studying the agamas and allied literature that had grown 
up since the days of Basava in the twelfth century. They used 
the local languages in preference to Sanskrit in their propaganda. 

Jainism continued to be important in some centres, parti- 
cularly in the Tuluva rajya, within which lay the important city 
of Sravana Belgola (lit. the White Tank of the Jains). There 
was an important Jain matha here and another at Kanclpuram 
in the Padaividu rajya. 

The head of the matha had absolute authority in all matters 
including the selection of his successor. This holds good of the 
mathas of all faiths. The inmates of the mathas had no voice 
in their management and were under the complete control of the 
respective heads. As a rule the mathas were centres of learning 
and took a prominent part in promoting education, both religious 
and secular, and morality among the people in the neighbourhood. 

Harihara II (1377-1404) had a minister Irugappa Dai$a~ 
nStha, who was a Jain and pupil of Puspasena ; he built a Jain 
temple in the capital, the extant Ganigitti temple at Hampi,' and 
another at Gutti for Par£va Jinanatha. He also patronized the 
Jain colony at Tirupparuttikunru near Kanclpuram. And Deva- 
raya II (1422-46) built a temple for Arhat ParSvanatha in the 
Pan-supari-bazaar (the market street where betel nuts and leaves 
were sold) at Vijayanagar. Kr§nadeva Raya and his successors 
also continued to patronize Jainism as occasions offered them- 
selves. Of Buddhism, however, we hear very little in the period 
of Vijayanagar. 

The historic role of Vijayanagar and the increased stress on 7 
theism due to the spread of Vai$navism and LingSyatism gave a 
fresh impetus to temple building and organization ; and the 
temple entered even more intimately into the social economy and 
the daily life of the people than ever before. New temples were 
built and old ones enlarged, and all were enriched by fresh 
endowments in land and cash. The daily routine of terfiple 
worship became more elaborate and its assimilation to the routine 
of the palace of a king or chieftain was completed. The number 
of persons who found their livelihood in their participation in 
the holy work of the temple increased proportionately with the 
increase in the temple’s resources ; musicians, dancers, florists and 
perfumers, pipers and drummers, goldsmiths and jewellers found 
more or less regular employment in the palaces and temples, and 
9 



130 Development of Religion in South India 

found exceptional opportunities of profit during festivals, monthly 
and annual. With the large increase in gifts of land, cash, etc, 
to the temples both from the state and the devotees temple 
management became a complicated and responsible duty, and we 
begin to hear more and more in the inscriptions and records of 
the time of the stkanikas or temple-trustees either acting singly 
or as boards though the exact manner of their appointment is 
not easy to ascertain. Some may have been imposed by govern- 
ment, others chosen by big donors, or the consensus of devotees ; 
the children of a single trustee (stkanika) may after his death 
have divided the duties among themselves and thus grown into 
a board. In any event the government exercised a general 
supervision over all temples and their administrations and did 
not hesitate to interfere through the agency of a special staff 
when things went wrong. But the regular cultivation of temple 
lands including the regulation of tenancies and leases and invest- 
ment of temple monies as well as the control of the temple staff, 
which included a considerable number in large temples vested 
in the sthdnikas . The temple office or cdvacli engaged accountants 
(karnams) who assisted the sthanikas, and all offices tended to 
become hereditary, so long as the incumbents continued to give 
reasonable satisfaction all round by their capacity and conduct. 
Sometimes specific taxes were assigned to a temple and their 
collection was part of the duties of the officials of the temple. 
The salary of the officials generally comprised a daily share in 
the prasadam (food offerings) of the temple and a periodical 
payment in cash or kind. The chief executive officer of the 
temple is often called Parupatyagdr or Manigar, terms borrowed 
from the revenue administration of the village, but there is little 
information on the mode of his choice or the range and limits 
of his duties. We can only surmise that the office was taken by 
turns among the sthanikas where there were more than one. 
Each important temple had necessarily to maintain a well guarded 
strong room as its treasury ( Sribhcmdara ) where the cash and 
jewellery of the temple were stored. The school, the dharma- 
sana (court of justice) ; occasional meetings of castes and guilds ; 
hostels and hospitals — all were accommodated in the extensive 
premises of the temple without prejudice to its primary objects 
in the religious field. 

To complete the picture of religious life and practices in 
the Vijayanagar empire, we must advert to the village deities of 
the Little Tradition and to the conditions of travel attendant on 
pilgrimages to holy places which became increasingly popular. 
The 4 village deities * generally of the female sex and regarded 



Movements after a.d. 1000 


131 


ns manifestations of Durga did not stop with the villages, but 
found a place in specific parts of cities, and even in the Capital 
city of Vijayanagar. Their worship involved animal sacrifices 
with which the slaughter of animals for food also got mixed up. 
The Portuguese chronicler Paes records : * At the door of one of 
these (temples) they kill every day many sheep ; for in all the 
city they do not kill any sheep for the use of the Heathen, or 
for sale in the markets, except at the gates of this pagoda. Of 
their blood they make sacrifices to the idol that is in the temple. 
There is present at the slaughter of these beasts a yog/, who has 
charge of the temple, and as soon as they cut off the head 
of the sheep or goat, the fogi blows a horn as a sign that the 
idol receives that sacrifice \ If Paes has recorded the facts cor- 
rectly, and we have no reason to doubt it, the temple he had 
in view was both a place of worship and the abattoir of the 
capital city. But the most important festival of Vijayanagar was 
the mahanavami celebrated in honour of Durga herself (along 
with Lakshml and Sarasvati) for nine days. ‘ The first day } , says 
Nuniz, another Portuguese chronicler, ‘ they kill nine male buf- 
faloes and nine sheep and nine goats, and thenceforward they 
kill each day more, always doubling the number 5 . The ninth 
day must have witnessed a veritable holocaust in which 2304 
animals of each of the three varieties mentioned must have perish- 
ed. Paes, however, puts the figures differently and says that the 
sacrifices on the last day were 250 buffaloes and 4,500 sheep; 
this butchery took place before the eyes of the Raya and his 
nobles. 4 

Another grisly aspect of Vijayanagar religion was hook-swing- 
ing which took place in almost all village Jatras or festivals and 
caused much excitement among the rural population. The women 
anointed their heads in lukewarm oil and bathed in water mixed 
with the yellow turmeric powder ; then they put on new clothes 
and visited the temple built in the rice fields outside the village. 
People from neighbouring villages, particularly the Reddis 
(headmen), attended with their spouses. Goats were slaughtered 
in numbers and liquor flowed in large quantities ; the uproar of 
the gathered crowd filled the air. Several women chose the 
occasion to fulfil their vows ; some swung from beams by hooks 
which tore into their flesh in the loins, blood dripping down 
their legs ; others plunged in a ‘ fire-river ’ — a long narrow pit 
filled with blazing charcoal ; a third group entered a pandiri- 
gunda or a circular pit of fire with a temporary shed over it; 

4 For more details of festivals see T. V. Mahalingam, op. cit., pp» 
338 - 44 . 


132 Development of Religion in South India 

others offered to the deity bits of flesh cut off from their shoul- 
ders. There is no reason to think that these details gathered 
from the literature of the time at all exaggerate the position in the 
field of popular religion ; the testimony of foreign travellers con- 
firms them in almost every detail. We may also recall the sculp- 
lures of the late Pallava and imperial Cola times depicting devo- 
tees offering their own heads to Durga to propitiate her by exhi- 
biting their devotion in this strange manner; some years back 
1. Ph. Vogel drew pointed attention to the sculptures and the 
practice they commemorated in a contribution to the Bulletin of 
the London School of Oriental Studies. 

Pilgrimages to holy places became more common than ever 
before in the Vijayanagar empire and they were also attended by 
much risk of the pilgrims being robbed on the way, even though 
they travelled in company. The Rayas themselves and their 
numerous feudatories set the example by their frequent pilgri- 
mages and it was followed extensively by the lesser people who' 
were by no means so well off. Contemporary literature and 
copper plate grants are full of lists of holy places pilgrimages to 
Which and mahd-ddnas (great gifts) made at which ensured a 
passage to heaven. One copper plate grant for instance mentions 
Cidambaram under the name Kanakasadas (Golden Hall) 
Srlkakulam, Kalahasti, Venkatadri (Tirupati), KancI, SrTsaila, 
Sonasaila (Tiruvannamalai) , Harihar, Ahobalam, Sangamesvar, 
Srlranga, Kumbakonam, Mahanandi, Gokarna, Anantasayanam 
(Trivandrum) and Ramesvara, a list which includes both Saiva 
and Vai?riava shrines. The pilgrims thus traversed long distances, 
and many did it on foot for greater merit. They were helped 
by the rest houses and prapas, places where water and dilute 
butter-milk with condiments were supplied free to refresh travel- 
lers ; these places were located at relatively short intervals on the 
route and endowed by charitable persons. The keepers of prapas 
were generally Brahmin women, and some literary writers have 
a fling at the travellers lingering too long in prapas where the 
attendants were attractive young women. Often carts drawn by 
bullocks, or the bullocks themselves, and horses were hired by 
travellers who could afford to pay. V.I.P.s as we should call them . 
now, travelled with the aid of palanquins carried on the shoulders 
of bearers. A small store of articles of food and change of clothes 
and a shawl or two in cold weather formed the usual baggage of 
the common wayfarers. They began the journey well before sun- 
rise and stopped it for the day before it became too hot. Shady 
groves and fresh water tanks on the way gave added amenities 
en route on some roads, a spreading banyan tree often serving as 



Movements after a.d. 1000 


133 


a fairly crowded camp. Strict caste rules were very much relaxed 
during travel as is evident from the common saying pathi Sudra- 
vad dcaret, one may adopt the ways of the sudra when one is 
travelling. 

The traditions and practices of Vijayanagar were continued 
almost to the end of the eighteenth century in the South by the 
rulers of the subordinate states of Gingee, Tanjore, Madura, 
lkkeri and Mysore which continued to support the old religious 
institutions in a liberal measure even after they became virtually 
independent. But the mantle of Vijayanagar as the Defender of 
Hinduism against Islam fell upon Sivaji who' linked up his political 
work with the great bhakti movement in Mahara§tra by accept- 
ing Ramadas as his guru. That movement goes back to the end 
of the thirteenth century when Jhanesvara’s work gave an impetus 
to the ideals of mysticism and bhakti in Western India. His 
brothers and his sister also contributed to the development of the 
mystic life and literature of the time. A century later came 
Namdeva (c. 1430), a tailor by birth and occupation, who, how- 
ever, spent most of his time in composing hymns of high quality 
in Marathi and Hindi, and propagating the bhakti cult in Maratha 
country and the Panjab ; his hymns show clear traces of the 
influence of Islamic thought, particularly in their deprecation of 
idolatry, and are found in the Granth , the sacred book of the 
Sikhs. The next eminent name is that of Eknath (d. 1608), a 
Brahmin from Paithan and a monist in philosophy who opposed 
caste and translated parts of the Bhagavata purdna into Marathi 
verse which is still sung in the temple at Pandharpur ; he has 
also left a collection of twenty-six dbhangs called Haripafh. A 
petty shop-keeper Tukaram (1608-49) who took up the thread 
was a contemporary of Sivaji in his youth ; he was passionately 
•devoted to Vithoba of Pandharpur and wrote some of the most 
moving devotional hymns in his language which are replete with 
his vivid consciousness of the omniscience of his god. His hymns 
have been judged to have been the largest religious influence in 
the Marfltha country. His own religious life fully occupied his 
soul, and when Sivaji invited him to his court to be his 
guru, he sent him a few verses in reply and advised him to become 
a disciple of Ramadas. The original name of Rflmad&s was 
Narayana. Born in 1608 and orphaned of his father when he was 
twelve, he left home soon after and realized God by his penance 
at a place near Nasik. After wandering throughout India for 
another twelve years he finally settled at Chaphal on the banks 
of the Kf$na where he built a temple. He assumed the name 
Ramadas evidently under the influence of the Ram&nandi move- 



134 Development of Religion in South India 

ment started by Ramanada (c. 1430), a follower at first of 
Ramanuja’s Srlvaisnavism. Ramadas was more practical than 
Tukaram and better fitted to be the guide of Sivaji. He 
organized an order of ascetics and established monasteries 
throughout Mahara§tra. His abhangs have not the same 
wide appeal as Tukaram’s, but his Dasabodha synthesizes his 
vast knowledge of various sciences with the spiritual principle. 
From about 1650 he exercised great influence over Sivaji. The 
Ram-dasis, still form a small sect perpetuating the name of 
Ramadas ; they wear a sect-mark and use a secret mantra of 
their own. They have their headquarters at Sajjangarh (near 
Satara) where there is the Samddhi (tomb) of Ramadas, a temple 
to Rama, and a Ramadasi matha. The renascent Hinduism of 
Mahara$tra brought about the formal recognition, after solemn 
ceremonies, of Sivaji as a K§atriya king and the celebration of his 
coronation ( abhiqeka ) with Vedic rites and officiating Brahmins. 
Though the Maratha state under Sivaji thus formally signified its 
particular concern for Hinduism, under his successors including 
the Brahmin Peshwas, it assumed, outside Maharasfra proper, an 
incurably predatory character which showed no inclination to 
spare Hindu temples and mathas from being robbed of their 
accumulated properties and treasures. 

The religious movement was represented early in the 
eighteenth century by a Brahmin poet Sridhara who presented; 
the stories of the two epics, Rdmdyana and Mahabhdrata, in 
stirring Marathi verse which attained much popularity. A little 
later Mahlpati wrote the lives of the devotees and saints of 
Mahara^ra in a number of works such as Santa Lilamrta (1757) 

— the nectar of the sports of the saints ; Bhakta Vifaya (1762) 

— the triumph of the devotees ; Bhakta Lildmrta (1774) — the 
nectar of the sports of devotees ; and Santa Vijaya, the triumph- 
of the saints. 

The Saiva tradition in the Tamil country waxed strong both 
in literature and in the field of practice. At the end of the four- 
teenth century and beginning of the fifteenth came Svarupananda 
Desikar and his pupil Tattuvarayar. Both were asectics and 
authors of many devotional poems and songs remarkable for the 
simplicity of their diction and their wide appeal to the common- 
man ; the songs were of the nature of ditties which created many 
new models for subsequent composers. The teacher and pupil 
were also responsible respectively for the compilation of a large 
(2824 verses) and a smaller (half the larger) anthology in Tamil 
on the philosophy of Advaita which together conserve much of 
the religious and philosophical literature of the silver age of 



Movements after a,d. 1000 


135 


Tamil Saivism, which might otherwise have been lost. Even wider 
in its appeal was the Tiruppugdl (the Holy Praise) of Aruna- 
girinatha, over 1360 songs in various metres handled with the 
utmost skill and characterized by a charming lilt. The diction 
is highly sanskritized and the imagery vivid. The author’s inti- 
mate knowledge of the sacred lore of Hinduism is evident in 
every song. His mention of Praudhadeva Raya (of Vijaya- 
nagar?) places him in the fifteenth century. His songs betray 
evidence of a youthful life of libertinism followed by remorse. 
He accepted Muruga or Karttikeya as the supreme deity, and in 
philosophy he followed the Saiva Siddhanta system. He seems 
to have visited all the shrines of Muruga and been particularly 
attached to Palani which figures largely in the Tiruppugal . He 
was perhaps also author of shorter devotional poems, all in 
praise of Muruga. Tayumanavar is another great Saiva saint 
who belonged to the seventeenth century and is still a living force 
in South Indian religious life. A Vellala by birth, he was at 
first attached to the temple of Vedaranyam (Tanjore District). 
His learning and character soon got him high office under the 
Nayak ruler of Madura ; when the ruler died, the widowed queen 
tempted him with the offer of her hand and kingdom. This 
was the turning point. After giving her much good advice, 
Tayumanavar left her service to become a seeker of God and 
Truth. His hymns constitute a simple and moving record of his 
experiences and are still popular, being often sung in musical 
concerts. He tries to reconcile Advaita and Saiva Siddhanta by 
playing down their differences often over-emphasized by contro- 
versialists. Another group of five saints, also of the seventeenth 
century, professed adherence to the Lingayat faith ; they were 
Sivaprakasa I, Santalinga, Kumffiradeva, SivaprakaSa 11, and 
Cidambara Svamin, all men of high spiritual attainments and 
authors of hymns and treatises. 

The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries witnessed the grow- 
ing impact of Western ideas and civilization on the East as a 
result of trade contacts at first, soon replaced by colonial con- 
quest and exploitation. The printing press, the Christian missio- 
nary, and the rapidly improving means of communication are 
notable elements. Bentinck and the younger officials who came 
out to India in the twenties of the nineteenth century were under 
the influence of the humanitarian reform movement and felt that 
they had a moral mission towards the people under their rule as 
representatives of a higher civilization and a better religion — 
another factor in the attack from the West. Different sections 
of Indians reacted differently to the changing situation. The un- 


136 Development of Religion in South India 

successful rising of 1857 was an attempt to deal with the pro- 
blem on a physical plane and by force. A rebel proclamation 
found in Lucknow in 1858 affirmed that the British wished to 
destroy caste and convert Hindus and Muslims to Christianity, 
that in their eyes the low castes were the equals of nobles, that 
they disgraced the nobles in the presence of the ignoble, and 
summoned to their courts the gentry, Nawabs and Rajas at the 
instance of Chamars and disgraced them. India was still far 
from accepting democracy and the rule of law as ideals. On 
the mental and spiritual plane the reactions were more complex. 
For a time western rationalism captivated forward minds' and 
promoted an excessive iconoclastic zeal. Traditions, ancestral 
practices and beliefs were denounced, and India’s salvation was 
held to depend on their total abandonment. Several adopted 
western ways of life wholesale, and even went over to Christia- 
nity ; and Macaulay’s belief that the new enlightenment would 
kill Hinduism and make India Christian appeared to be plausible. 
This was, however, only a passing phase, and it received a check 
from the growing strength of other phases of the reaction. The 
great body of the people were conservative and orthodox, eager 
to retain the status quo and suspicious of innovation, though 
ready to avail themselves of the new methods of organization 
and polemics, and to resort, not to violence, but to the new law 
courts in defence of their cause taking full advantage of the 
crown policy of non-interference in the religious and social tra- 
ditions of the people. They formed the Dharma Sabha, the 
predecessor of the Hindu Mahasabha of today, and opposed re- 
formist legislation which abolished Sati, raised the Age of Con- 
sent, or permitted the remarriage of widows. 

But the future lay, as time was to show, with the small 
body of intellectuals who were stimulated by the new knowledge 
into reforming Hinduism and Plindu society from within, enabling 
it to meet the new challenge by blending all that was essential 
and true in the old and the new cultures. Raja Ram Mohan Roy 
was the first and by far the most celebrated member of this group. 
He supported the abolition of Safi and the introduction of west- 
ern education through the medium of the English language. 
While acknowledging the value of Christian ethics, he offended 
the Serampore missionaries by questioning the divinity of Christ. 
Like Luther taking his stand on the Bible, he appealed to the 
purer Hinduism of the earlier scriptures, the Vedas and Upani- 
$ads. In 1828 he founded the Brahma Sabha and opened a 
mandir (temple) dedicated to Brahman, the impersonal absolute, 
with no image in it. The Brahma SamSj founded in 1845 by 



Movements after a.d. 1000 


137 


Maharsi Devendranath Tagore, the father of the poet Rabindra- 
nath Tagore, was the outcome of Ram Mahan’s work. We need 
not pursue in detail the history of this movement, but just note 
that it gathered a few adherents in South India in the latter half 
.of the nineteenth century and was at no time an influence of 
much power. 

In the nineteenth century we are once more in a period when 
powerful forces of an all-India character are at work, and it is 
not easy to isolate specifically South Indian developments as such. 
Reform on distinctly Hindu lines was carried forward by Rama- 
krishna Paramahamsa (1835-86), mystic untouched by Chris- 
tianity or Western education and a devotee of the goddess Kali. 
But after he attained realization of Truth on orthodox lines, he 
undertook experiments in other faiths and discovered that all re- 
ligions are at one in their core, thus adding his personal testi- 
mony to the age old truth which had determined the general 
•tolerant outlook of Hinduism. His religion was animated by a 
vivid social consciousness ; ‘ who dare talk of showing mercy to 
fellowmen ? 9 he said * not mercy, but service, service for man, 
must be regarded as God’. His celebrated pupil Vivekananda 
(1862-1902) institutionalized Ramakrishna’s ideals of social 
service. He surprised America by his eloquent and lucid pre- 
sentation of Vedanta and Hinduism at the Parliament of Reli- 
gions at Chicago in 1893 and on other platforms. He had more 
to do with South India than his 'guru and spent some time in 
the city of Madras on different occasions. He organized the 
Ramakrishna mission, a potent agency for the regeneration of 
Hinduism and for social work both in India and abroad ; the 
Mission runs a Matha, a Students’ Home, a college and several 
High Schools in Madras. Vivekananda laid stress on the broad 
basis of Hinduism, its tolerance and catholicity. The Arya 
Samaj of Dayananda Sarasvati (1824-83) founded in 1875 
takes its stand on the Vedas as interpreted by the founder, repu- 
diates the hereditary caste system and untouchability and admits 
the remarriage of widows. It has been more influential in 
Western and Northern India than in the South. It has aimed 
at reclaiming to Hinduism those who had left it for Christianity 
and Islam by organizing the Suddhi (purification) movement. This 
movement of proselytization was particularly successful in Malabar, 
Rajputana and Uttar Pradesh ; some Samajists fell martyrs to 
it becoming victims of the fanaticism of rival creed of Islam. 
The Arya Samaj maintains several colleges which combine a 
‘Western’ curriculum with Hindu religious teaching, besides its 
CJurukula near Hardwar and girls’ schools free from a foreign 



138 Development of Religion in South Indict 

atmosphere. The Prarthana Samaj, started in 1867, was the 
West Indian counterpart of Brahma Samaj, and enlisted such 
leaders of thought as Justice Ranade, Sir R. G. Bhandarkar and 
G. K. Gokhale among its members ; it laid more stress on social 
reform than on religious reconstruction as such. The Theoso- 
phical movement began in India (after an insignificant American 
phase) in 1878 under Madam Blavatsky, and her pupil 
Mrs. Annie Besant carried the exaltation of Hinduism as against 
Christianity one stage further, but was not altogether free from 
obscurantism ; the Central Hindu College founded by Mrs. Besant 
has developed into the Benares Hindu University. Tilak’s inter- 
pretation of the Bhagavad Gita as the Gospel of an activist ethic 
was perhaps not uninfluenced by the West. Besides giving a 
fillip to the political movement which had been gathering force 
since the foundation of the Indian National Congress in 1885, it 
did much to convert modern Hinduism into an ethical code with 
a wide social outlook. The writings of Sir S. Radhakrishnan 
have offered an integral reinterpretation of Hindu religious; 
thought and philosophy in a manner which is at once authorita- 
tive and couched in language more readily followed in the West 
than translations of texts like those in the Sacred Books of the 
East edited by Max Muller with the collaboration of several 
scholars. Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941) and Mahatma 
Gandhi (1869-1948) also did much to divert attention from 
distinctively Christian influences. Tagore was more a poet and’ 
thinker than a prophet or man of action ; his forceful writings 
extending over an unusually long stretch of time drove home his 
rational and humanitarian outlook combining all that is best in 
eastern and western thought ; he was a citizen of the world, with, 
a deep love for whatever was racy of the soil. Gandhi was on 
the whole a traditionalist and perhaps owed more to Marathi 
mystic poetry and the Bhagavad Gita, than to Thoreau and 
Tolstoy, Islam and the Sermon on the Mount. His emphasis on' 
human solidarity and brotherhood, his compassion for the poor 
and the outcastes, his ascetic passion for the simple life, his stress 
on a positive experience of God and a life of service and sacri- 
fice, his message of Truth, Love and Ahimsa (non-violence), and 
his insistence by example and precept on the efficacy of vicarious 
suffering were all derived from Hindu precedents. But their 
integration into a social and political gospel of dynamic power 
which attached as much importance to the purity of the means 
as of the ends was his personal contribution. His life’s work 
conferred a new value on old concepts and helped India to dis- 
cover her true self. There were other forces in South India 



Movements after A/D. 1000 


139 


working in a similar direction though less influential such as the 
life and work of Ramana Mahar^i of Tiruvannamalai, of Auro- 
bindo Ghose at Pondicherry and of others. Though the West has 
influenced Hindu thought only to a small degree, its challenge 
has led Hinduism to reconsider its social practices and restate 
the fundamentals of its faith in terms of the present world con- 
text. 

A notable contemporary of Ramakrishna in South India 
was Ramalingasvami, a saint on the old model and a prolific 
hymnist in Tamil. He had little learning, and poetry was his 
natural gift which he employed to translate his vision of god (as 
Murugan) to the world. He was grieved at sectarian differences 
and was a staunch advocate of the path of harmony ( samarasa ) , 
At Vadalur in South Arcot, the place of his birth, he built a 
shrine in which the flame of an oil lamp was the only object 
of worship. He exhorted all to transcend caste, creed and scrip- 
tures, and to realize the oneness of God through love and com- 
passion for all living beings. He disappeared mysteriously in 
1892 and people believe he may come back. His hymns are 
still very popular. 

The present position in the world of Religion and the 
Indian reaction to it have been succinctly summed up by 
Radhakrishnan : ‘ Many of the Living faiths are passing through 
self-criticism, are getting infected with secularism and humanism 
and the loss of the vision of God. Many of the leaders regard 
themselves as priests of a new religion. We need not a new reli- 
gion but a creative vitality in the practice of the old, the recog- 
nition that the Kingdom of Heaven lies within man, in his 
depths, in his integrity, in his inmost truth. God is the potentia- 
lity of every man \ 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Basham, A. L. The Wonder that was India , London, 1954. 

Banerjee, N. R. The Megalithic Problem of Chingleput in the 
Light of Recent Exploration. Ancient India No. 12 pp. 21-34. 

Banerjea; J. N. The Development of Hindu Iconography , Calcutta, 
1941. Second edition, 1957. 

. Bhandarkar, R. G. Vaisniavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
Systems (Strassburg, 1913). 

Carpenter, Estlin. Theism in Mediaeval India (London, 1921). 

Chatterji, S. K, Race Movements and Prehistoric Culture, 
Ch. VIII pp. 141-68 in Vedic India — History and culture of 
the Indian People Vol. I (London, 1951). 

Dave, J. H. Immortal India (a description of temples and places 
of pilgrimage — tlrthas) in 2 vols. Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 
Bombay 1957-9. 

Diehl, Carl Gustav. Instrument and Purpose : Studies on rites 

and rituals in South India (Lund, CWK, Gleerup, 1956). 

Eliot, Sir Charles. Hinduism and Buddhism, 3 vols. London, 1921. 

Elmore, Wilber Theodore. Dravidian Gods in Modern Hinduism. 
Univ. Studies of the University of Nebraska XV No. 1 (1915). 
Reprinted by CLS for India, Madras 1929 (p. 159). 

Esnoul, A. M. Le courant affectif a l’interieur du Brahmanisme 
ancient, BEFEO. xlviii pp. 141-207. 

Farquhar, J. N. Outline of the Religious Literature of India , 
Oxford, 1920. 

Grousset, R. (tr, C. A. Phillips). India. (The civilizations of the 
East), London, 1932. 

Hill. W. Douglas, P. The Bhagavadgjta, Translated from the 
Sanskrit with an Introduction, an Argument and a commentary. 
Oxford Univ. Press, London, 1928. 

Hiriyanna, M. The Essentials of Indian Philosophy (London, 1940). 

Hutton, J. H. Caste in India (Cambridge, 1946). 

Indian Archaeology — Annual Review of the work of Indian 
Archaeological Department. 

Jagadisa Ayyar, P. V. South Indian Shrines, Madras, 1920. 

Joad, C. E. M. The Story of Indian Civilization, London 1936. 

Keith, A. B. Dravidian Element in Indian Thought. App. to 
Religion and Philosophy of the Veda (Harvard, 1925). 

Kramrisch, Stella, The Hindu Temple. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1946. 

Krishna Sastri, H. South Indian Images of Gods and Goddesses , 
(Madras Government Press, 1916). 



142 


Development of Religion in South India 


Krishnaswami Aiyangar, S. South India and Her Muhammadan 
Invaders (Oxford Univ. Press, 1921), 

Macdonell, A, A. Vedic Mythology, Strassburg, 1897. 
Mahalingam, T. V. Administration and Social life under Vi jay cl- 
angor (Madras Univ. 1940), 

Marshall, Sir John. Mohenjodaro and the Indus Civilization, 
3 vols. (London, 1931). 

Minakshi, Cl Administration and Social life under the Pallavas 
(Madras Univ. 1938). 

Narayana Ayyar, C. V. South Indian Saivism (Madras Univ. 1936). 
O’Malley, L. S. S. Popular Hinduism , The religion of the masses. 
Cambridge, 1935. 

O’Malley, L. S, S. (ed.). Modern India and the West ( Oxford 
Univ. Press 1941). 

Pandey, R. B. The Hindu Samskaras, (Vikrama Publishers, 
Banaras, 1949). 

Poerbatjaraka. Agastya in del Archipel (Leiden 1926). 
Radhakrishnan, S. The Individual and Social Order in Hinduism — 
the last chapter in Eastern Religions and Western Thought 
Oxford, 1939). 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli, and Moore, Charles, A. A Source 
Book in Indian Philosophy (Princeton, New Jersey, 1957), 
Rangachari, K. Sri Vaishnava Brahmanas — Bulletin of the Madras 
Govt. Museum, New Series. General Section, Vol, II, pt. 2, 
Madras, 1931. 

Renou, Louis, and Filuozat, Jean. L’lnde Classique, Payot, Paris. 
Tome. i. 1947 ; ii. 1953. 

Rowland, Benjamin. The, Art and Architecture of India ■ — Buddhist. 
Hindu. Jain. Pelican History of Art. Published by Penguin 
Books, 1954. 

Sarma, D. S. Hinduism through the Ages. Bhavan’s Book Univ. 
Bombay. 

Sastri, K. A. N. A History of South India . 2nd Ed. Oxford Univ. 
Press. 1958. 

„ „ Colas, 2nd Ed. Madras Univ. 1955. 

„ „ Agastya, Tijdschrift voor Ind. Taat, Land-, en Vol- 

kenkunde . Lxxvii (1936) pp. 471-545. 

Sesha Iyengar, T. R. Dravidian India . Madras. 1925. 

Sivaramamurti, C. Early Eastern Clialukya Sculpture. Madras 
Museum Bulletin, New Series — General Section Vol. VII, No. 2 
Madras 1957. 

Smith, V. A. Oxford History of India. 3rd edn. by Percival Spear. 
(Also Wheeler, Basham, and Harrison). Oxford, 1958. 

, Srinivasa Iyengar, P. T. Pre-Aryan Tamil Culture, Madras. 1930. 
Srinivasan, K. R. The Pallava Architecture of S. India. Ancient 
India No. 14 (1958) pp. 114-38. 

Srinivasan, K. R. and Banerjee, N. R, Survey of South Indian 
Megaliths. Ancient India No. 9. pp, 103-15. 


Bibliography 


143 


‘Stevenson, S. The Rites of the Twice horn, 1920. 

Thurston, E. Castes and Tribes of Southern India . IIlus. 7 vols. 
Madras, 1909. 

Wheeler, Sir Mortimer. Early India and Pakistan to Asoka, 1957. 
Whitehead, Right Rev. Henry, Bishop of Madras. The Village 
Gods of South India (The Religious life of India) O.U.P, 1921. 
p. 175. 

.Zimmer, Heinrich. Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civili- 
zation (Ed. by Joseph Campbell). The BolJingen series vi — • 
Pantheon Books, New York, 1947. 

„ „ The Philosophies of India (Routledge and Kegan 

Paul Ltd., London, 1953). 

„ „ The Art of Indian Asia (The Bollingen series 

xxxix — Pantheon Books, 1955). 




INDEX 


A 


Abhi§eka 

115 

Acyuta Raya 

124, 127 

Adhirajendra 

124 

Advaita 18, 86, 87, 126, 134 

Agaraas 93, 97, 111, 129 

Agastya 

12-16 

Ahananuru 

56 

Ahimsa 

138 

Ajivakas 

69 

Aksobhyamuni 

128 

Alavandar 

123 

Allasani Peddana 

128 

Alvars 40, 45-47, 56, 68, 

83, 120, 122 

An$al 

46, 47 

Angirasa 

36 

Aniruddha 

122 

Ankor Vat 

98 

Appar 

41, 42 

Arcaka 

131 

Arunagirinatha 

135 

Aryans 

2-3, 5-6 

Aryanization 

12, 13, 31 

Aryasamaj 

137 

Aryavarta 

16, 17 

Aurobindo Ghose 

139 

B 


Basava 

63, 64 

Bhagavad-Glta 

9, 138 

Bhagavata Cult 10, 37, 38, 53 

Bhakti Cult 35 

-37, 39, 40, 

44, 45, 

48, 77, 133 

Bhantfara 

115 

Bilva 

113 

Brahmanya Tirtha 

128 

Brahmanas 

8 

Brahma Sabha 

136, 137 

Brahmotsva 

113 

Bfhatsamhita 

65 

Buddhism 10, 

31, 32, 36. 


39, 50, 68, 80, 129 

10 


c 


Calukyas 

36, 65, 69 

Sculpture 

106, 113 

Carvakas ' 

79, 87 

Caste system 

28-30 

Christianity 

10, 11, 127, 
135, 137 

Christians 

74-77, 136 

Colas 33, 

36, 55, 120- 
121, 123 

Culture 

32, 33 

Pre-Aryan 

5 

Western Impact 6, 135, 

136 

D 

Dar£ana 

79-81 

Devaram 

41, 43 

DSvaraya II 

126, 127, 139 

Dharma Sabha 

136 

Dlkjitars 

113, 114 

Dravidians 

2, 3, 24 

Durga 

65, 136 

G 

Gandhi, M. K. 

138, 139 

GangadevI 

126 

Gautfapada 

84, 85 

Gopura 

106, 109 

Gurukkal 

113 

H 

Hanum^n 

128 

Haripaih 

133 

Hymnology 

T 

120-121, 122 

X 

Iconography — Represen- 

tation of deities 52-54 

Inscriptions — 

Anbil copper plate 

Grant 

121 



146 


Development of Religion in South India 


East-Borneo 17 

Pandyan 4 

Mandagappattu 59 

Nagarjunakopda 56 

Vejviku^i Grant 35 

irugappa DandanStha 129 

Islam 65, 70, 125, 133, 137 

J 

Jainism 8, 42, 68, 69, 80 
Jains 126, 127 

Jangam 115 

Jatras 131 

Jayatirtha 91 

Jesuits 127 

Jews 71-73 

Jlyars of Ahobilam Matha 128 

Jnanasambandar 120 

Jnanesvara 92 


K 


Mahanavami 

131 

Mahadanas 

132 

Mahendravarman 

41, 42, 
59, 99 

Mahlpati 

134 

Malik Kafur 

125 

Mamallapuram 

48, 66, 
103, 104 

Mandukya Karika 

84 

Mangammal, Queen 

127 

Manimekalai 

81 

Manusmrti 

16 

Matha 

116-119 

Mattavilasa 

40 

Medhatithi 

17 

Megalithic settlement 

1, 2 

Mlmamsa 

80-83 

Modern Temples 

112 

Murugan Cult 21, 22, 34 

Muslims 10, 70, 

71, 125, 
127, 135 


Kalabhras 


36 

Kalamukhas 


63 

Kalyapamandapa 

109 

Kapalikas 


63 

Kasi Vilasa Kriya Sakti 126 

Kaupdinya 


14, 15 

Kiratas 


3 

Koyil Olugu 


125, 126 

Kr§na 

36, 

, 38, 65, 123 

K^na Deva Raya 

126, 128. 



129 

Kulottunga II 


124 

Rumania 


82, 83 

Kundavai 


' 124 

Rural 


31 


L 


Languages 


4-6, 15, 16 

Lingayats 

64, 65, 115, 


126, 129, 135 


M 


MSdhava 


125 

Madhva 


9, 90, 91 

Mahabharata 


13, 32, 116, 



134 


N 


Nambi- Apdar-N ambi 

120 

Namdeva 

133 

Nammalvar 

122 

Nathamuni 121, 122, 123 

Nayak (of Madura) 

127 

Nayanars 40-41, 43-44. 

68, 70, 83, 120 

Ni?adas 

3 

P 


Pallava Temples 

103-105 

Pallipadai koyil 

27 

Pallis 

115, 116 

Pancaratra 

67, 89 

Pancayatana Puja 

61, 90 

Pandaram 

114, 115 

Parantaka I 

121, 122 

Parsis 

77, 78 

Pasupa 

18 

Pasupati 

19 

Periyapuranam 

36 

Pilgrimage in Vijaya- 


nagar 

132-133 

Portuguese 

127 



Index 


147 


Prabandham 

67 

Prabhakara 

82, 83 

Prapas 

332 

Prarthana Samaj 

138 

Prasada 

27 

Q 


Quran 

127 

R 


Radhakrishnan 

138, 139 

Raja Raja 

120, 122 

Raja Ram Mohan Roy 136 

Rajendra 121, 

123, 124 

Ramadas 

133, 134 

Ramakrishna Mission 

11, 137 

Ramakrishna Parama- 


hamsa 

137 

Rnr.r’.iiii'r.-vair.: 

131 

R;;in.iia 

139 

Ramanuja 84, 85, 87-90, 

123 

Ramayana 12, 13, 32, 134 

Ranganatha muni 

121 

Rathotsava 

113 

Rayas of Vijayanagar 

126, 

127, 

128, 132 

Religion 7-9, 

18-22, 33 

Ritualism 

9, 10 

Artha 

30 

Asrama 

9, 29 

Dharma 

9, 29, 30 

Gfhastha 

30, 31 

Kama 

30 

Mok§a 

30 

Rnatraya 

30 

Sraddha 

64, 65 

Varna 9, 

28,29, 30 

Robert de Nobli 

127 

S 


Sabrasvamin 

82 

Saiva Siddhanta 

93, 94 

Saivism 63, 95, 

113, 134, 


135 

Saluva Narasimha 

128 

Samarasa 

138 


Sangam Literature 

3, 4, 55 

Sankara 79, 83-87, 89, 

117, 123 

SaptaSati 

32 

Sathakopa Jiyar 

128 

Satavahanas 

32, 35 

Sat! 

136 

Sisnadevas 

49, 50 

Sittars 

95, 96 

Siva 18, 48. 52, 53 

Siva and Vi§nu 

18, 66 

worship 

57 

Sivaji 

133, 134 

Skanda 

21 

Smartas 61, 

87, 126 

So^agarSjopacilra 

26, 27 

Soliyas 

114 

South India 

1, 5, 6, 
32, 33 

Sravana Belgola 

129 

Srldhara 

134 

Srlvai^navism 

128, 134 

Stone images 

57 

Svarupananda Desikar 

134 

Suddhadvaita 

93 

Suddhi 

137 

T 

Tagore, Rabindranath 

138. 

139 

Tatacarya 

128 

Tattuvarayar 

134 

Tayumanavar 

135 

Temple Administration 130 

Temple Architecture 

98-101, 

105-110 

Aihoje Temples 

101, 102 

Kailasa temple 

100-101 

Mamallapuram 

104 

Palladakai 

103 

Siva Mahudeva 

(Hlephanta) 

101 

Temple — Deities 

56-57 

— Worship 

129 

Temple sculpture 

57-60, 

98-110 

Calukyan art 

101-103 

Hoysala 

107, 108 



148 


Development of Religion in South India 


Orissan 

108-109 

Nayak 

110 

Pallava 

104, 105 

Pandyan 

106 

Theosophical Movement 138 

Tirumandiram 

45 

Tirumanjana 

115 

Tiruppugal 

135 

Tiruvasagam 

44 

Tiruvaymoli 

122 

ToMppiyam 

32 

Tokappiyan 

15, 16 

Totemism 

23, 24 

Tukaram 

133 

Tulasi 

113 

Turukavada 

127 

U 


Umapati Siva Acarya 

120 

Upani$ads 8 

, 80, 84 


y 


Vai§nava Temples 126 

Vais 9 avism 88, 89, 91, 92, 


94, 121-122, 123, 128 


Vallabhacarya 

92, 93, 126 

Vasudeva 

37 

Vedas 

8, 80, 125 

Vedic Aryans 

49 

Vedic Religion 

27, 35 

Vedic Sacrifice 

26 

Venkata IT 

127 

Vidyara^ya 

126 

Vi jay an, agar 

125, 126, 127 

Village Deities 

22-24, 25 

Virupak§a' 

126 

Vigistadvaita 

88, 89, 95 

Vi§nn 20, 

33, 56, 58, 66. 


113, 126 

Vi§nucitta 

46 

Vogel J. Ph. 

132 

Vyasaraya TXrtha 128 


Y 


Vaikhanasa 67 Yadavaprakasa 123 

Vai§navas 61, 62, 69, 116, Yagna 26 

123, 126 Yak$as 50 

Va^agalai 113 YamunacSrya 123 






Central Archaeological Library, 

. ° e V™W3a 



'■ && L± -JL^L 


“ A book that U shut icbuta block" 

.^ae°l° G/ c ^ 

/ GOVT. op INDIA ^ 

Department of Archaeology *f> 

# NEW DELHI. • % 


Pleas e help tta to keep the hook ' 
oiee.li wad moving. 


C. B*r 1 48. 


