



FOREIGN NOTICES OF SOUTH INQIA 

FROM MEGASTHENES TO MA HU AN 


Collected and Edited 


K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, M.A., 
Professor of Indian History and Archaeology, 
University of Madras. 





UNIVERSITY OF MADRAS 




PREFACE 


This is a source-book of Early South Indian History. Its aim 
is to present in a handy form the numerous Foreign Notices of 
South India including Ceylon scattered in several books and 
journals published by learned Societies not easily accessible to the 
general reader. In some cases the passages selected for inclusion 
have been specially rendered into English from French translations 
of Arabic or Chinese originals. 

The sources included here comprise mainly Greek and Latin, 
Arabic, Chinese and Persian authors ; but not being acquainted 
with their several languages, I have based this work altogether 
upon translations into modem European languages. Though the 
collection is not exhaustive, I believe nothing of importance has 
been omitted. The reasons for the choice of the extracts and their 
importance to students of South Indian History arc briefly explain- 
ed in the Introduction and notes, and will, I trust, be borne out by 
the extracts themselves. 

I acknowledge* with great pleasure the assistance of 
Dr. N. Venkataramanayya, who gave me the transliteration of 
proper names occurring in Ibn Battuta and also some of the notes 
to the same author ; and of Miss K. M. Sowmini, who made some 
of the translations from French and checked the references to 
French periodicals. 

Excepting Ibn Battuta, I have generally retained the forms of 
proper names as they appear in the authorities I have used. 

For permission to include extracts I am indebted to M. ^aul 
Pelliot, Directeur, Toung Pao, for Nos. II, IX, XI, XVI, XXTV, 
XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV A-B ; to Archibald R. Maclean, Esq., 
for Nos. Ill, IV, VI and XII A i to iii, B and C, and to the High Com- 
missioner for India, London, for procuring this permission ; to the 
Director, Philadelphia Commercial Museum, for V and VII ; to the 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, for Nos. VIII and XV B-D; to the 
General Secretary, Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta, 
for X, XIII and Appendix IV ; to the Secretary, Royal Asiatic 
Society, London, for XIV, XXXTV C-D ; to the Librarian, 
Societe Asiatique, Paris, »for XV A, Xyill, XXX A-BB, C-ii, 
Appendix i, ii and iii ; to Secretaire General, Libraire Ernest 
Leroux, Paris, for XV E ; to the Directeur, B.E.F.E.O., Hanoi, for 



FOREIGN Nonas 


xvn ; to Dr. A.'Rouhier of Libraire et Editions, Vega, Paris, who 
noW- represents Editions Bossard, for XIX ; to Messrs. Kegan Paul, 
'Dench Trlibner & Co. 1 , for XX ; to the Honorary Secretary, Hakluyt 
Society, London, for XII A iv, XXII, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, 
XXX, C-i and XXXI ; and to Messrs. John Murray, London, for 
XXV. Extracts No. XXI and XXIX are from publications issued 
under the auspices of the Governments of Burma and France. 
Finally, Extract No. XXIII is from Chau Ju-kua (Hirth and 
Rockhill) published by the Imperial Academy of Sciences, 
St Peterburg, with whom or whose representatives no communica- 
tion could be established. Extract No. I contains matter which 
appeared in the Indian Antiquary (Vol. VI) and was also 
published in book form by Messrs. Thacker Spink & Co. ; and is 
included with the permission of Mr. C. E. A. W. Oldham on behalf 
of the Indian Antiquary. 

My thanks are due to the Syndicate of the University of 
Madras for including this work in the University Historical. Series. 

I must also thank the G. S. Press for the speedy and excellent 
execution of the work. 


Department of Indian History, 
University Buildings, Madras, 
20 September, 1939. 


K. A. N. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Periodicals, 

Bulletin de l’ficole Frangaise D’Extreme-Orient (BEFEO), 
Hanoi. 

Indian Historical Quarterly (IHQ), Calcutta. 

Journal of Oriental Research (JOR) , Madras. 

Journal of the (Royal) Asiatic Society, Bengal (JASB), 
Calcutta. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (JRAS) , London. 

Spolia Zeylanica : Colombo, Ceylon. 

Tounjj Pao (TP) , Leyden. 

Books and Monographs 

Adler, M.N. : The Itinerary of Benjamin of Tudela, London, 

1907. 

Asher, A. : The Itinerary of Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela, 

(New York), Vok. I and H. 

Barbier de Reynard : Le Livre des Routes et des Provinces 

par Ibn-KHordadbeh, public, traduit et annotA J.A. 6 : 5 
(1865): Pages 1-127, 227-95, and 446-532. 

Beal : Si-Yu-Ki. Buddhist Records of the Western World, 

2 Vols. in one, London, (n-d). 

Bombay Gazetteer : Vol. I, Parts i and ii (1896) . 

Bretschneider : Mediaeval Researches from Eastern Asiatic 

Sources. Fragments towards the knowledge of the Geogra- 
phy and History of Central and Western Asia from the 13th 
to the 17th Century. 2 Vols. (Trilbner’s Oriental Series), 
London, 1910. 

Buzurg Ibn Shahriyar : The Book of the Marvels of India, 

English Translation by L. Marcel Devic (The Golden Dragon 
Library), London, 1928. • 

Buzurg Ibn Shahriyar : Kitab* ‘Ajayab-ul-Hind or Livre des 

Merveilles de L’Inde, Texte Arabe par P. A. Van der Lith ; 
traduction Frangaise par L. Marcel Devic, Leide, 1883-1886. 

Ca*y : History of Rome, London, 1936. 

Cary and Waimington : The Ancient Explorers, London, 1929. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


‘•Chavannes: M&noire Compose a 1’ 6poque de la grande 

dynastie Tank sur les Religieux Eminents qui allerest 
chercher la loi dans les pays d’occident par I-Tsing. 
Librairie Ernest Leroux, Paris, 1894. 

I^Chavannes : Notes Additionnelles sur les Tou-kiue (Turks) 

>6ccidentaux, TP, ii. 5 (1904) pp. 1-110. 

vDay : The Land of the Perumals, or Cochin, Its Past and Its 

Present. Madras, 1863. 

Defrdmery and Sanguinetti : Voyages D’Ibn Batoutah, 

(Society Asiatique), Paris. Vol. Ill, 1855, Vol. IV, 1858. 

Duyvendak : Ma Huan Re-examined. (Verhandelingen der 

Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen — Aid. Letter- 
kunde, Niewe Reeks, Deel xxxii No. 3) Amsterdam, 1933. 

Elliot and Dowson : The History of India as told by its own 

Historians, 8 Vols., London, 1867-77. 

Ferrand: Relations des Voyages et Textes Geographiques 

Arabes, Persans et Turks Relatifs a 1‘ Extreme-Orient du 
VHI au XVIII sidcles. 2 Vols., Librairie Ernest Leroux, 
Paris, 1913-14. 

Ferrand: Voyage du Marchand Arabe Sulayman en Inde 
et en Chine — Redig6 en 851 suivi de 'remarques Par Abu 
Zayd Hasan vers 916. Paris, 1922. < 

CJibb: Ibn Battuta, Travels in Asia and Africa 1325-1354, 

(Broadway Travellers) London, 1929. 

Giles : The Travels of Fa-hsien, Cambridge, 1923. 

Hervey de Saint Denys : Ethnographie des peuples etrangers 
a la Chine par Ma-Touan-Lin, Meridionaux, Geneve, 1883. 

Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-kua : His work on the Chinese 
and Arab Trade in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, 
entitled Chii-fan-chi. Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, 


I-Tsing : A Record of the Buddhist Religion as practised in 
India and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671-695), tr. by 
J. Takakusu. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1896. 

I-Tsihg : jMemoire, see Chavannes. 

Krom : Hindoe-Javaansche Geschiedenis, ‘S-Gravenhage 

(1931). 

Legge : Fa-Hien’s Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms, Clarendon 
Press, Oxford, 1886. 



BIBI.TOGRAPHV lx 

L4vi, Sylvain: Pour l’historie du Eamayana, JA: 11: '11 
(1918). 

Ldvi, Sylvain: Ptolemee, Le NiddeSa et la Bfhatkatha, in 
Etudia Aaiatiques, 2 Vols. 

Major : India in the Fifteenth Century, (Hakluyt Society) 

London, 1857. 

Ma-Touan-Lin : See Hervey de Saint-Denys. 

McCrindle : Ancient India as Described by Megasthenes and 

Arrian, Calcutta. 1877. 

McCrindle : Ancient India as Described in Classical Litera- 

ture, Westminster, 1901. 

McCrindle : Topographia Christiana of Cosmas Indicopleustes, 

(Hakluyt Society) London, 1897. 

Oakeshott : Commerce and Society, A Short History of Trade 

ancl its effect on Civilisation. Oxford. 1936.. 

Pelliot : Les grands voyages maritimes Chinois, TP xxix, 

(1933) pp. 237-452. 

Pelliot: Encore apropos des voyages de Tcheng Houo, TP 

xxxii, (1936), pp. 210-22. 

Reinaud: Relati&n des Voyages faits par les Arabes et les 

Persans«dans 1’Inde et & la Chine dans le IX* sidcle de l’ire 
chr6tienne. 2 Vols., Paris 1845. 

Reinaud and Guyard : Geographic D’Aboulfdda, Vol. I and 

Vol. H, Pt. i, Paris 1848 ; Vol. II, Pt. ii, continuation by 
Stanislas Guyard, Paris 1883. 

/4&cci : The Travels of Marco Polo (Broadway Travellers) , 

London, 1931. 

Rockhill : Notes on the relations and trade of China with the 
Eastern Archipelago and the Coasts of the Indian Ocean 
during the fourteenth century, TP XV and XVI (1914 and 
1915). 

Rockhill : The Journey of William of Rubruck to the Eastern 

Parts of the World 1253-55, (Hakluyt Society) London, 1900. 

Sachau: Alberuni’s India (Trtibner’s Oriental Series), 

2 Vols. in one, Kegan Paifl Trench, Triibner *& Co., Ltd., 
London, 1914. 

Schoff : Parthian Stations by Isidore Char ax, an account 

„of the overland trade route between the Levant and India- 
in the first century B.C., Philadelphia, 1914. 



FCRS30N NOTICE 


' Schoff : Periplus of the Outer Sea by Mercian of Hera c lea , 
Philadelphia, 1927. 

Schoff: The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, New York, 
1912. 

Smith : Early History of India,* Oxford, 1924. 

Spies (Otto): An Arab Account of India in the fourteenth 
century, being a translation of the chapters on India from 
Al-Qalqashandi's Subh-ul-A’shd. (Bonner Orientalische 
Studien Heft 14) . Stuttgart, 1936. 

Watters : On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India (629-645 A.D.) 
2 Vols. London, 1904-5. 

Yule: Mirabilia Descripta (The Wonders of the East) by 
Friar Jordanus, (Hakluyt Society) London, 1863. 

Yule and Cordier : Cathay and the Way Thither, 4 Vols. 

(Hakluyt Society), London, 1913-16. 

Yule and Cordier : The Book of Ser Marco Polo, 2 Vols, 

Messrs John Murray London 1903 ; Notes and Addenda by 
Cordier, London 1920. 



MB Ikhs Us 


CONTENTS 


(A) Or Taphobane 

(B) i. Or Pandya 

11 Or Hercules a 

(C) Or tee Beasts or 

n. Kanci Aim China n 


x Second Century B.C. 


41 

41 

42 

44 


(A) 1 P ABUT AH (?) 


• (B) CEYLON 

(C) On Gallos’ Expedition to Arabia and S 
to India 

IV. Puny : 

. (A) Description or Taprobane 

(B) Voyages to India 

V. The Pebjplus or 


Fa-Hien : 

(A) Daxsina and the Pigeon Monasteby 

(B) Tambalipti and Ceylon 

(C) Ceylon 

(D) Passage to Java 


Cosiias: 

(A) A Description or Indian Animals 

(B) Indian Flora |> . 

(C) Concerning the Island or Taprobane , 

Ma Twan Lin on the Condition or S. India, c. 550-800 AD. . . 
Yuan Cnwano 


1-nan: 

(A) 


K 8 838 S S 3 3838 8 3 S 86 8 388 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


ua 

(B) t . How thi Buddhist Pmxsn wo Rkbvb up 

Attended on at a Dinner .. 108 

ii. Oh Chop Stick in China and India .. Ill 

(C) On Clothing in Different Lands 

(E) Six Pilgrims or I-tsing’s Tike 

XVI. Emb a ssies ieom South India to China 

XVII. Kanshin on Brahmin Temples and Merchants in Canton . . 

XVHL Ibn Khurdadbeh: 

(A) Route to the East 

(B) Principal Kings or India j Elephants 

(C) Castes 


XIX. (i) Anonymous Arab Write: 

(A) The Maldives, Ceylon and Other Islands .. 122 

(B) On India, China and their Kings .. 123 

(C) Royal Funeral in Ceylon ' ..125 

(D) Ascetics .. 125 

(E) Marriage .. 125 

(F) Houses .. 126 

(G) Food, Worship, etc.— Comparisons .. 126 

(ii) Abu Zail : 

(H) Companions or Honour .. 128 

( 1 ) Miscellaneous . , 129 

XX. Alberuni . . iri 

XXI. A Mon Inscription from Prom* or the Reton or 

Kyamzittha . . 133 

36tn. Benjamin or Tudela 134 

XXm. Chad Ju-hua : 

(A) Si-lan (Ceylon) 133 

(B) Malabar .. 137 

(C) Hu-ch’a-la (Gueerat) .. 140 

(D) Cola Dominion .. 141 

(E) India .. 147 

XXIV. Embassies between China and South India ( 1279-92) .. 150 

XXV. Marco Polo: 

(A) Concerning the Island or Seilan (Ceylon) .. 157 

(B) Concerning the Great Province or Maabar, which 

IS called India the Greater, and is on the 
Mainland ’ .. m 

(C) Or THE PLACE WHERE UETH THE BODY or Si. THOMAS 

the Apostle ; and or the miracle thbreot . , 172 

(D) Concerning the Kingdo* or Murnu (Motutalu) .. 174 

(E) CoNCBNora the Province or Lar (Guzixat) weenie 

the Brahmins come .. 175 

(F) Concerning the City or Cail (Kayal) f .. 179 


SSg g g ggg 



CONTENTS 


(Q) Or the Kingdom or Coa.ni (Quilon) 

(H) Or THE COUNTRY CALLED CoMABJ (COMOEW) 

( I) CONCERNING THE KINGDOM Of Eu (Ml. D’Ely) 

<yD Concerning THE Kingdom or Meijbab (Malabar) .. 

XXVI. John or MONTICORVriJO 


. Friar Odobic : 

(A) Hormuz to Tama 

(B) Or the Kingdom or Mimibar . 



XXVIII. Friar Jobdanus: 

(A) Scope tor Conversions m India 

(B) Concerning India the Less 

(C) Concerning India the Greater 

XXIX. Abolteda: 

(A) South India 

(B) Coromandel (Ma’bar) 

(C) Caoulem (Kaulam) 

XXX. Ibn Battuta : 

(A) * On the Rebellion or Bahauddeh Gushiasp 

(B) Rebellion in Ma’bab 
(BB) Rebellion in Tiling 

(C) . i. Summary of his Travels in South India : Yule . . 

11. Travels in South India 


John Dx 
V<A) < 


(B) Ceylon 

(C) ON 


Adam’s Garden and 


XXXII. Wang Ta-yuan: 

(A) Coral at Dondera Head 

(B) Colombo 

(C) Pearl Fishing jn the Gulp or Manas (?) 

(D) Northern Maldive Islands 

(E) Kaw Colas (Kayangulam) 

(F) Hnj (Ely) 

■Jfi) Calicut 

(H) JUBTATTAN 

XXXm. Fta Hsxn: 

(A) Ceylon 

JEC) Caucus 


stag mum u g m ms s s g smsi i 



XXXIV. 


L 


m. 


Ma Hoad: 

(A) The Nicobam and Cmox 

(B) Tn* Maiabvb 

(C) Ko-ciith, (Cochin) 

(D) Ktj-u. (Caiicdt) 

APPENDIX 

NAVIGATION TOWABD6 THE END 07 THE FD1BNTB ClNTUHI 

The Role oi Gujabaub ' 

Indian Mehchants and Merchandise in m«.h> 
(10th centust): 

L Ddaxte Babbosa 
it Castanheda 


IV. Smi Au: On Navigation in the Indian Seab 
Addenda 
Index 


gg il |ggg 



INTRODUCTION 


‘The more we learn the further goes back the history of Eastern 

Navigation.’ 

-Yuli. 

‘LUatoire de 1'Inde, trop exclusivement regardfe du continent, dolt 

toe aussl envisage* au point du vue maritime.’ 

— Stlvaih Levi. 

The Indian Ocean Is not a closed basin like the Mediterranean 
Sea ; on the South it opens on an infinite expanse of 
water. Yet the prevalence of currents and of 
the indiah periodical winds conducive to navigation has 

ocean maintained here, since very early times, a system 

of exchanges in which the African coast, 
Arabia, the Persian Gulf, India, Insulindia, Indo-China, and 
beyond it, China and even Korea and Japan, continually gave 
and refeived their quotas. And in this system, India held 
a privileged, if not a preponderant, place by the advant- 
age of her situation ’ and the great length of her coasts; 
'she is the centre towards which the many lines of this 
system converge. Doubtless, the documents are rare for the 
ancient period ; but the race which carried civilisation by the sea 
to Burma, to Siam, to Cambodia, Indo-China arid Java, god Mada- 
gascar, was a race of navigators. 

And though as. a whole Southern India ‘ has in the past looked 
east rather than West,’ still the mariners of Surparaka, Bharukaccha 
and Muziris are famous in history and legend, 
'nuun' 1131 his celebrated study on the Ramayana, 1 

Sylvain Ldvi draws pointed attention to many 
similarities between the geographical cantos in the fourth 
book of the Rdmiyana and the statements of Arab geographers, 
and argues that* these similarities suggest the existence of ‘ a folk- 
lore of the Indian ocean,’ stories current among mariners pf the 
* distant countries to which either .their voluntary sailings or the 
freaks of winds had carried them.’ “ And from Africa to China,” 
he says, “ on this immense extent of coasts Which recede in deep 
hollows or project in compact masses, the same narratives recur, 

1. Pour Z’Hiatotrr du Bimiyana, JA. U: tt <1918) pp. 147-8. Cf. also 

mq. «l gw* 



ever re-examined find ever guaranteed by fresh proofs. Each ( 
respecting navigator must have seen the sacred marvels with , 
own eyes. From the Periplus of Scylax to the voyages of Sindbad 
the Sailor, the same stories pass from collection to collection, as 
they pass from mouth to mouth”. And the testimony of Al-Biruni 
is dear on the existence, in his day, of an active intercourse of 
ancient standing between Africa and China, and of the part of 
India in it ; for he says : * “ The reason why in particular Somnath 
has become so famous is that it was a harbour for sea-faring people, 
and a station for those who went to and fro between Sufala in the 
country of Zanj (Africa) and China. ” 

On the landward side again India was in equally active com- 
munication with China. The route taken by Ffi-hien and Yilan 
Chwang into India was followed by many others, 
LAW) routes and trade was at least as good an incentive to this 

to chiha intercourse as religion ; I-tsing has preserved a re- 

cord of sixty of his contemporaries who visited 
India for religious study, but we have no account of the mercantile 
intercourse of the same period. But as Garrez has shown* even 
for the Persians of the Sassanian period, BaclrianB, the Cradle of 
the religion of Zoroaster, had become virtually an Indian country 
and the Oxus a river of the Buddhists and Brahmins. “For 
nearly eight centuries in effect (125 B.C. to G50 A.D.), Bactriana 
was occupied by the Ku?ans, who also extended their sway over 
the entire valley of the Kabul and that of the Indus up to the 
neninsula of Guzerat. Connected thus politically with the land of 
Indians, separated on the other hand from Iran proper by a desert, 
it fell gradually under Indian influence, and the ancient religion 
of the Magi had to give place to the Brahmins, and above all to 
the Buddhists. The Greek writers of this period always cite 
Bactriana with India, and mention thousands of Brahmanas and 
Samanas who reside there. Already the medals of many Greek 
kings of this country bear legends in an Indian language and 
character. Those of Indo-Scythians show us still, it is true, 
names of Iranian divinities ; but the figures on them are accom- 
panied by Indian attributes, some even being oddly made up with 
that superfluity of heads and arms which characterises so specially 
the representation of divinity in the land of the Hindus. The 
Chinese annalists, who have conserved to us precious data regard- 


2. Al-Biruni ed. Sachau, Vol. il, p, 104. 

3. JA vi: 13 (1888) pp. 179-84, 



introduction 


2 these Scythian princes, describe them as zealous Buddhist! ; 

it beyond all possibility of doubt for many among them, 
notably for the celebrated Kanerki or Kani$ka. It is during this 
period that the Iranian name of B&lhi entered Sanskrit literature, 
gnd that the Oxus, under its primitive name of which we find no 
trace in Iran, took a place in the Indian cosmography of the 
Brahmans as well as the Buddhists”. Sylvain Ldvi has pointed 
out that the Ramayana mentions the Tarim under the name of 
SltS, while traditional Buddhist cosmography makes this stream, 
as well as the Indus, the Oxus and the Ganges, rise from one and 
the same lake Anavatapta.* 

In the days when Yuan Chwang traversed Bactriana, “ Bud- 
dhism was generally flourishing from Termez, at the passage of 
the Oxus, up to Bamian at the gates of Kabul, 
and in the south-west up to Ta-la-kien on serindia 
the frontier of the kingdom of Po-la-sse (Persia). 

The country of Balkh alone contained nearly one hundred 
convents and 53,000 monks. One of the convents, the most remark- 
able for its magnificence, situated to the south-west of the town, 
was known by the name ‘ New Convent ’ (novo sangharama or 
novo vi flora) ”. 5 This 1 new convent ’ ( Nubehar ) was destroyed by 
Islamic forces within Hblf-a-century after Yuan Chwang visited it, 
and Buddhism suffered in Central Asia the same fate which befell 
it in India some centuries later. And for many centuries after the 
land routes across the North-Western frontier of India ceased to 
be frequented by merchants and pilgrims from China, the sea-route 
between India and China was open, and there is much evidence 
available on these latter-day commercial relations. 

Besides these contacts with Africa, Arabia and China, India, 
and Southern India in particular, had in the early centuries of the 
Christian era, a regular system of exchanges, direct and indirect, 
with the Eastern section of the Homan Empire. 

Our aim is to see what impression Southern India (including 
Ceylon) made upon the foreigners who came into contact with 
it one way or another. Hie earliest accounts we 
have are, speaking generally, those of the sotracri 
classical writers, whose notices* of India gain ' 
in extent and accuracy to the end of the second century A.D. 


4. Op. cit pp. m-4. 

5. Gams, loc. ett. p. 178. 



Then came several notices from Chinese travellers and annalists 
many of which have been made accessible only by researches that 
are still in progress. From the eighth century the writings of Arab 
merchants and travellers, historians and geographers begin to be 
important, while the Chinese sources become more copious and 
definite than before. We have also occasional notices by European 
travellers (and priests) like Benjamin of Tudela and Marco Polo. 
After the end of the fourteenth century, the foreign notices of 
Southern India become too many and too voluminous for inclusion 
in this collection, and an exception has been made in favour of 
only a very few highly significant accounts. 

Among the classical writers directly accessible at present the 
earliest to mention India is Herodotus. Writing in the fifth century 
B.C., the Father of History had only a vague 
classical and meagre knowledge of the country and his 

writers notice of it is valuable for his curious account of cer- 

tain wild trees that bore wool which in beauty and 
quality excelled that of sheep and out of which the Indians made 
their clothing. 6 . His is the first rational account of India and its 
peoples, generally free from the fables described by other’ writers 
both before and after him. The first direct notice of a South 
Indian kingdom occurs in Megasthenes whose quaint account of 
the Pandyan Kingdom seems to be a mixture qf facts and of ' 
contemporary fables relating to that Kingdom. (I B, i and ii) . 


One of the most surprising results of recent research is the 
discovery by Paul Pelliot of a passage (II) .in Pan Kou, a very 
early Chinese writer, attesting the existence of 
ainiA *2m> an active intercourse between China and the 
states of Insulindia and Southern India in the Han 
period, beginning from the second century B.C. 
If the text of Pan Kou has been correctly interpreted, it would 
warrant a somewhat drastic revision of the notions now held 
regarding the age when the Hindu colonisation of the eastern lands 
began. 86 


Alexandria in Egypt rose to great prosperity in the Hellenistic 
Age, and though it was noted for its manufactures, it derived its 


6. McCrindle — . Ancient India at described in Classical Literature, p. 4 
paragraph 106. * 

6a. Cf. The Beginnings of Intercourse between India and China— IHQ. 
xiv, 2. (Wintemltz Comm. Vol.), pp. 380-87. 



nftftODUCTION 


immense wealth in part from its “ share in the trade of the Hast 

which had by now assumed very large proporti&ns 

thanks to direct contact with India. .. .Ptolemlic Hellenistic 

merchant fleets were sent to the southern ports of ass 

the Red Sea,” 7 8 by the Nile-Red-Sea canal 

which had been opened in 190 B.C., and the Arabs and the Hindus 

served as intermediaries for the trade with 'India and the Far 

East till Roman times. 

The Andhras are the earliest Indian line of kings definitely 
known to have developed a sea power and to have promoted 
maritime trade and also perhaps overseas colonisation. The attribute 
trisamudradhipati, lord of the three oceans, is applied to them by 
Bans in his Harsacarita, and there is mention in the Apocrypha of 
an Andrapolis as a port in Western India ; lastly, numerous coins 
of this dynasty are known to bear the design of a double-masted 
ship figured on them.* 

“The policy of the Roman Empire during the two centuries 
following the Christian era was to encourage direct sea trade with 
India, cutting out all overland routes through 
PartHia and thus avoiding the annoyance of fiscal kouan empdus 
dependence on that consistent enemy of Rome”. 9 
Strabo records the increase in the knowledge of India 
among the Jtomans of his day and the success of the ex- 
pedition under Gallus, sent by Augustus (25 B.C.) to secure for 
the empire the command of Aden and the Red Sea route to India, 
which was becoming increasingly popular among the merchants 
of the empire, (III C). Aden was soon after occupied by a colony 
of Egyptians and Greeks, and the monsoon was discovered _for the 
Romans by Hippalus, an Egyptian pilot. This discovery not only 
shortened the duration of the journey, but, by enabling ships to 
cut across the open sea, greatly diminished the danger from pirates 
who infested the coastal waters. “ We are told that whereas before 


7. Commerce and Society, W. F. Oakeshott (1936), p. 10. For an inscrip- 
tion from Ptolemaic times (cited by O. Stein), in which an Indiag makes a 
thanksoffering in an Egyptian temple, of Ammon-Ra for the. successful com- 
pletion of a journey, see ZH. Vol. 3. p. 318. 

8. JA. Jan.-Mar. 1936, p. 96 ; Rapson : Coins of the Andhras, etc. Among 

the clearest references to ocean-navigation in early historical times in India 
must be noted the evidence of the use of birds by mariners for discovering the 
proxftnity of land— Dip ha Nikiya, id. Kevaddha Sutta, 85. * 

9. Schoff : Parthian stations, p. 19. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


this discovery hardly twenty ships a year had made the voyage, 
after it, on an average, a ship a day left the Egyptian ports for the 
East. To the sailors of these ships the whole of the western coast 
of India was well known. ” J0 It is noteworthy that more than one 
half of the Roman coins found in India date from the time of 
Augustus and Tiberius. Before the first century A.D. was far 
advanced, the Indian trade attained such magnitude as to give 
concern to thoughtful observers. 

“ Besides cloves and other products of Malaya and silk from 
China, the ports on the West coast of India furnished pepper, ivory 
of the elephants of Malabar, indigo, steel, muslins, ebony, pearls 
from Cape Comorin, and teak-wood which was employed in car- 
pentry on the coasts of the Persian Gulf where in general teak did 
not grow. Lastly the Coromandel coast supplied cotton stuffs. In 
their turn the Roman ships brought wine, Egyptian fabrics, coral, 
a rare article in all the Eastern countries, tin, lead ancf bronze. 




INTRODUCTION 


As die articles brought by the Romans did got suffice to pay for 
what they purchased, the difference was paid in cash”. 11 

Pliny the Elder, the anonymous author of the Periplus of the 
Erythraean Sea, and Ptolemy, represent the further stages in that 
increasing acquaintance of the Romans with the 
countries of the East of which we get the first puny 
hints in Strabo. Though Pliny generally derives 
his information regarding India from earlier writers, still his refer- 
ences to Indian trade (IV B) and the drain of Roman treasure due to 
it must have been quite up to date when he wrote 
his Natural History about 75 A.D. Whether the ™ 

Periplus was written a few years before or after 
the publication of Pliny's work, its author had 
doubtless visited the seats of commerce on the West coast of India, 
and his account is invaluable for the directness and accuracy that 
generally characterise it (V). 

The voyages of Greek sailors were continued beyond Cape 
Comorin from about the close of the first century A.D., and in the 
early decades of the second century they explored 
many * sea-routes across the Bay of Bengal, exploration 
“ One pioneer apprspriately named Alexander 
cut across the Isthmus of Malaya and skirted the Annamese 
coast as far as Cattigara (probably Hanoi in Tonkin). 
Finally, in 166 a deputation of Greek merchants, who styled them- 
selves ‘ambassadors’ from the emperor ‘An-Tun’ (M. Aurelius 
Antoninus) visited the court of the Emperor Huan-ti at Loyang and 
opened negotiations for a regular overseas trade between the 
Mediterranean lands and China”. 12 But these voyages were occa- 
sional ventures that led to no extensive changes in the trade con- 
nections of the Roman Empire. Yet the improvement effected 
in the knowledge relating to the geography of the East is reflect- 
ed in Ptolemy’s ^pages. Pliny and Periplus knew nothing of the 
Far East ; the merchants who frequented Barygaza and Muziris in 
their time knew little of the Eastern navigation beyond India, and 
they were still enquiring if Taprobanl was an island or a continent 
communicating with Africa. 18 On the other hand, coins oi Trajan 
(98-117 A.D.) and Hadrian (117-138 A.D.) are not Uhcommon on 


11. Reinaud, JA. : Mal-Juta, 1863, pp. 308-9. 

12. Cary, History of Rome (1935), p. 871. See,' however, Ferrand in JA. 
11: 13,*pp. 456-7; and post p. 11, n. 24. 

13. Sylvaln Uvi— Ptotemie, Le Niddeia et la Brhatkathd, in Etudes 
Aaiatiques, ii. pp. 1-55, esp. 50-2. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


the East coast of Sauth India, though comparatively rare on the 
West coast. And though “ his map of India has been distorted out 
pf recognition by a portentous error,” Ptolemy “made important 
additions to the knowledge of the geography of Ceylon, the interior 
of India, and India beyond the Ganges”.** And after Ptolemy, as 
Sylvain Levi has shown, all texts Greek and Indian relate them- 
selves to him and to the Niddesa. It has been rightly observed that 
Ptolemy’s Guide to Geography ‘ differed from Strabo’s production 
as does a skeleton from the living body ’; 1B for this reason and 
because of the numerous and difficult problems of identification 
presented by his tables relating to Southern India, problems which 
cannot be adequately treated in casual notes, I decided to omit the 
tables from the present collection. 

After Ptolemy’s attempt ‘ to put into scientific form the records 
and personal impressions of a number of merchants, travellers and 
others of his time,’ there ‘ followed a long period 
majutan or without original observation or authorship — a 
BniActxA period of copying, compilation and imitation’. 16 

The Roman empire began to develop *signs of weak- 
ness and the delicate commercial system which had been beared 
during the Hellenistic and early Imperial periods broke down com- 
pletely towards the end of the third century. The Greek half of 
the Roman empire indeed kept up its political unity much longer 
than the Western half ; but ‘ knowledge and enterprise were 
languishing and were not revised until the conquests of the 
followers of Mohammed again brought East and West into contact 
and orderly relations ’. ,T To this period belongs Marcian 
of Heraclea (VII) whose work has survived only in frag- 
ments. “ If it had been preserved to us in complete form ”, says 
Schoff, 18 “ it might indeed have been a more useful compilation 
of Roman geography for general reference than the highly tech- 
nical work of Ptolemy.” 

A more typical Byzantine figure was the ‘crotchety monk* 
Cosmas, called Indikopleustes ‘ the man who sailed to India ’. In 
his early life he was a merchant, and his business 
coshas took him to many places on the Persian Gulf, 

on the West coafct of India and as far east as 

14. McCrindle — Ancient India as described in Classical Literature, p. xvilL 

15. McCrindle, ibid., p. xix. 

16. Schoff, Periplu* of the outer Sea, p. 6. 

17. Schoff, ibid. 

18. ibid., contra Yule, Cathay, 113-14. 



introduction 


Ceylon (XII C). His book, Christian Topography, written sorife 
time between 530 and 550 A.D. sets out to disprove the theories of 
classical geographers on the configuration of the earth and establish 
doctrines ‘ drawn from Holy Scripture.’ Yule characterised it, not 
very unjustly, ‘ a continent of mud ’ from which we may extract, 
however, ‘a few geographical fossils of considerable interest.’ 19 
The live contact between South India and Persia in the first 
part of the seventh century A.D. is attested by a striking coincidence 
between the paintings in the ceiling of Cave No. I rouucniH n 
in Ajan(a and a somewhat detailed notice by a and khusru 
Persian historian of a correspondence between pahwis . 
Pulakesin II and the Sassanian monarch Khusru II. c> 625 AJ) - 
Some doubts have indeed been cast upon the view that Ajan(a 
paintings portray Khusru II and his celebrated consort Shirin on die 
one hand, and Pulakesin II receiving a Persian embassy on the 
other. Bpt the details mentioned by Tabari (838-923 A.D.), the 
Persian historian, in his account of the dispute between Khusru II 
and his son are quite clear and definite. “ Tabari ”, says Noldeke, 
“in this part of his narrative followed a Pehlevi work written 
shortly after the king’s death, but before the Arab conquest ” ; and 
Tabari puts the following statement in the mouth of Khusru : “ Two 
years ago, Pulakesi, King of India, sent to us, in the thirty-sixth year 
1 of our reign, ambassadors carrying a letter imparting to us various 
news, and presents for us, for you, and our other sons. He also 
wrote a letter to each of you. To you he presented — don’t you 
lemember it ? — an elephant, a sword, a white falcon and a piece of 
gold brocade. When we looked at the presents and at the letters, 
we remarked that yours bore the mark ‘ Private ’ on the cover in 
the Indian language. Then we ordered that the presents and other 
letters should be delivered to each of you, but we kept back your 
letter, on account of the remark written on the outside. We then 
sent for an Indian scribe^ had the seal broken, and the letter read. 
The contents were : — ‘ Rejoice and be of good cheer, for on the day 
Dai ba Adhar, of the thirty-eighth year of the reign of Chosroes, 
thou wilt be crowned king and become ruler of the whole empire. 
Signed, Pulakesi. ’ But we closed this letter with our seal, and gave 
it into the keeping of our consort Shirin ”. 1Ba 


19. Cathay, i. p. 27. McCrindle protests that Yule’s estimate ‘docs less 
than justice to the work* of Cosmas. 

18a. JRAS, 1878, pp. 165-6? Yazdani, Ajanta, Text i, pp. 46-51. 
Ettinghauscn (Harfavardhana, pp. $2-4) doubts Noldeke's restore- 1 
tion of Purumesa into Pulukesa (Geschic hte Des Perser und Araher, Tabari, 
1879, p. 371 »), suggests that Paramesvara is better, and takes it to mean 
F.N.-2 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


* India ’s relations with China form a long and instructive story. 
But I must in general confine my attention to South India and 
Ceylon and the sea-route to China ; an occasional 
nn.. glance at the relations between China and 

the maritime states of the Malay peninsula 
along that route will also be useful to our understanding 
of the subject. The beginnings of this intercourse may be traced, 
as has been seen, to the second century B.C. or even earlier. The 
evidence for the first and second centuries A.D. is meagre. Yet 
there is no room to doubt that the political condition of India and 
the extensive trade relations maintained by the various parts of 
that country were well known in China. This becomes clear from 
an interesting passage in the report made to the emperor in 125 
A.D. by general Pan Yong, the son of the cele- 
pan yong brated Pan Tch’ao and nephew of the historian 
Pan Kou. Pan Yong played an important part 
in the conquest and administration of the Western parts 
of the Chinese Empire in the first years of the second century 
A.D., and his account of India, remarkable alike for its brevity and 
precision, deserves to be reproduced here 21 ': • 

" The kingdom of T’ien-tchou (India) is also known as Chen- 
tou ; it lies several thousands of li to the south-east of Hiong-wou. 
Its customs are similar to those of Hiong-nau, but, the country is 
low, humid and warm. This kingdom is on the banks of a great 
river. The people ride on elephants while going to war ; they are 
weaker than the Yue-tche ; they practise the religion of the 
Buddha ; and it has become a habit with them never to kill or to 
fight. 

“ If after leaving the kingdom of Kao-fou (Kabul) which be- 
longs to the Yue-tche , one goes south-west, one reaches the western 
sea ; in the East one gets to the kingdom of P’an-k'i ; 21 all these 


Pulakesin, the Paramesvara of the South. Noldeke says that if Fergusson’s 
date for the paintings is correct, his interpretation of them can hardly be 
impugned (op. cit., p. 503). Toucher’s view is that no historical scenes 
were represented anywhere in Ajanta, Journal of the Hyderabad Archaeo- 
logical {Society, 1919-20, pp. 99-100. R. C. Majumdar relates Tabari’s 
passage to Har$avardhana (Journal of Indian History, Vol. iv, pt. ii, 
PP. 29#.). 

20. Chavannes in TP. ii. 8 (1907), pp. 149, and 192-4. See Elmer H. 
Cults on Chinrse-Indian Contacts (prior ta the latter half of the first cen- 

< tury), IHQ, xiv, No. 3 (Wintcmitz Comm. Volume) pp. 486-502— whsre this 
* passage is reproduced at the end in Chavannes’ French Version. 

21. Apparently in Annam or in Burma (Chavannes). 



INTRODUCTION 


lands form part of Chen-tou. Chen-tou contains several hundreds 
of towns other (than the capital) ; in each town they have 
appointed a governor ; there are many dozens of other 
kingdoms (besides the principal one) ; in each kingdom 

there is a king. Though seme small differences may be noticed in 
each of these kingdoms, yet all are called Chen-tou. At this period 
(apparently 125 A.D.) they are dependent altogether on the Yue- 
tche ; the Yue-tche having killed the king and installed a chief 
as governor of these people. 

“ This country produces elephants, rhinoceroses, tortoise shell, 
gold, silver, copper, iron, lead (and) tin. From the West coast it 
is in communication with Ta-Ts‘in (the Roman province of Syria) , 22 
and precious objects from Ta-Ts'in are found there. There are also 
fine fabrics, woollen carpets of good quality, perfumes of all kinds, 
sugar-candy, pepper, ginger (and) black salt. 

“ In the epoch of the emperor Ho (89-105 A.D.) , they sent on 
several occasions ambassadors carrying tribute and presents. Later, 
the countries of the West having revolted, these relations were 
interrupted. Then in the reign of emperor Houan, in the second 
(159 A«D.) and fourth (161 A.D.) years Yen-hi they came again 
on two occasions from beyond Je-nan ”.- 3 The Hindu embassies of 
,159 and 161 thus followed the same route as the so-called ‘embassy’ 
from Marcus Aurelius which reached China in 166 A.D. 5,1 and 
brought with them ivory, rhinoceros horns and tortoise shells. 

According to a Chinese authority cited by Sylvain Levi, 25 there 
was another and a longer break in the relations between China and 
India in the third century. But it may be 
doubted if this statement refers to the Southern sea-route 
sea-route between China and India. At any 
rate there is much evidence to show that Southern India was in 


22. TP. ibid., p. 179. Also Yule Cathay, i.42, n2. 

23. i.e. southern pai I of Tonkin — (Chavannes) . 

24. “Proof has been sought in this famous embassy that Marcus Aurelius 
was tempted to enter into communication by sea with China, because the silk 
trade by land was interrupted owing to the campaigns of Avidus Cassius 
against the Parthians and of the plague that followed. But on the one 
hand, it seems that the person who represented himself as the ambassador 
of Marcus Aurelius was a simple merchant with no official character: and 
on the other that, as wc shall see, musicians and jugglers from Ta Ts’in 
arrived in Burma as early as 120 A.D., which shows that the relations bv 
sea between the Eastern part of W Roman Empire and the Far East did 
not waft to establish themselves till the reign of Marcus Aurelius”— 
Chavannes, TP. ib, 185 m. 1. See also Yule and Cordjer, Cathay, i. pp. 50-3. 

25. Yule, Cathay, i. p. 66 n. 2. 




12 FOREIGN NOTICES 

active touch with the colonies of Indonesia and that these colonies 
often employed South Indian products in their exchanges with 
China. 

In 225 A.D. Fu-nan (Ancient Cambodia) and other countries 
offered the lieou-li (pkt. verulya, skt. vaidurya) , the cat’s-eye gem, 
as a present ; this gem must have been of South Indian origin." 
About the same time, the king of Fu-nan sent an embassy to India ; 
this embassy went up the river Ganges and reached the court of 
the Murunda king and returned to Fu-nan at the end of four years 
with a present of four horses of the country of the Yue-che (Indo- 
Scythians) . S7 Other embassies from Fu-nan to China are 
recorded in the years, 225-30, 243, 268, 285, 286, 287, 
357, 434, 435, 438, and 484 bringing presents of “an image 
in chased gold of the seat of the king of dragons, an elephant 
in white sandal, two stupas of ivory, two pieces of cotton, two sou-It 
(surahi) of glass, and one tray of areca-nut and tortoire shell.” 
Again in 503, 511, 514, 519, embassies brought as presents a lucky 
image of sandalwood from India and the leaves of the sdla tree, 
besides pearls, rock crystal, turmeric, and storax and other per- 
fumes. Later embassies offered a live rhinoceros atnong other 
things." It is easily seen that vaidurya, sandalwood and pearls are 
specifically South Indian products. 

The kingdom of CampS (Ancient Cochin-China) also sent 
embassies in the years 230, 268, 284 and 340 offering tame elephants 
and carrying a letter 1 written entirely in barbaric characters,’ i.e., 
an Indian alphabet prevalent in Campa, and it is well-known that 
this alphabet was of South Indian origin." 

It has been shown that asbestos was shipped from India to 
Fu-nan in the beginning of the third century A.D." From Java 
again at least seven embassies are known to have been sent to 
China in the fifth century, and in 430 one of these is said to have 
taken to the Chinese court rings of diamond, red parrots, cotton 


26. Ferrand, JA. 11: 14 pp. 21-2. "The term vaidurya” says Chavannes 
"designates properly the cat’s eye (and not beryl); but, by the way, in 
Chinese* the name pi-lieou-li had come to mean simply coloured glass which 
the Chinese t*ok to be a natural mineral till the 5th century AD.” TP. ii, 
8 (1907) p. 182, n. 3. 

27. Ferrand JA: 11:13, pp. 458-9; Pelliot, BEFEO iii, pp. 277-8. 

28. JA. 11:14, pp. 7-8. BEFEO iii p. 255. 

29. JA. ibid. For the alphabet of CampS see JOR x pp. 192-99=BEFEO 
xxxv, pp. 233-41. See Pagel, ZDMG. 91 pp. 747-8 on Tamil influence on the 
Katakana alphabet of Japan. 

30. TP. xvi pp. 349-50. 





INTRODUCTION 


stuffs, coarse and fine, from India, and cotton goods from Ye-fio 
(Gandhara, according to Pelliot) . 81 

Facts like these show that the sea-route between India and 
China was being actively used during the early centuries of 
the Christian era, if not- directly at least by the 
mediation of the Hindu colonies of Indonesia, fa-hun 
This inference is confirmed by the story of 
Fa-hien’s travels at the beginning of the fifth century. He is 
indeed the first Buddhist who is known to have succeeded in 
accomplishing a sea journey from Ceylon to China. He did not 
visit the mainland of South India but took ship from Tamluk to 
Ceylon, (VIII B, C), and his interest was centred chiefly in 
Buddhism. His account of the Deccan and the ‘ pigeon monastery ’ 
is just edifying gossip (VHI-A). 

It may be noted that in this early period the sea-trade between 
China aifd the Western countries was developed by the initiative 
and enterprise of the Arabs and Indians. The Chinese were still 
timid navigators and much afraid of pirates. 32 

After Fa-hicn there was a succession of Buddhists who sailed 
between Southern India and China. Sanghavarmi, a Ceylonese 
monk, arrived in China in 420 A.D. and translated 
the Mahisasafca Vinaya. The more celebrated gunavarman 
Gunavarman arrived soon after. The stories 
that have gathered round his name may not all be history; 
but there is little reason to doubt that Javanese Buddhism 
owed a great deal to him, and that, in China, he helped to establish 
a community of nuns, a project which involved the invitation of 
some nuns from Ceylon to come and assist in the initiation of the 
order. Gunavarman also translated many sacred books into the 
Chinese language (IX) . The names of several others who follow- 
ed the sea-route in the fifth century are mentioned in the Kwai- 
Yuen catalogue of the Chinese Tripitaka, compiled in 730 A.D, 33 

The maritime intercourse between the two countries seems to 
have continued in full swing in the sixth and seventh centuries 
A.D. Cosmas mentions the arrival in Ceylon of sncrH AND 
ships from the remotest countries including pronu 
those that brought silk from Tsinista (China), aanrcBna 


31. ,JA. ibid. p. 7. 

32. Hirth and Rockhill — Chau Ju-Kua, p. 7. 

33. Anesaki in JRAS. 1903 pp. 368-70. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


anti his testimony, is that of a merchant who had taken 
a personal part in trading with Ceylon in the sixth century. Later 
Chinese authors like Cho'u K‘iu-fei (1178) and Chau Ju-kua (1225) 
record it as their opinion that though Kia Tan (730-835 A.D.), the 
great Chinese geographer, described a land-route from Annam to 
India, still the sea-route must have been more expeditious than the 
long overland route, because the celebrated Bodhidharma sailed all 
the way to Canton about 520 A.D. S4 Ma-Twan-lin has preserved an 
account of a South Indian embassy to China (X) at the beginning 
of the sixth century A.D. which took some horses of a fine breed as 
presents to the Chinese Emperor and gave much interesting 
information on the products of the country. The role of Fu-nan as 
intermediary in the trade relations between South India and China 
becomes apparent in a curious account (XI) of a highly valued 
mirror from Western India offered for sale in China sometime be- 
tween 500 and 550 A.D. To Ma Twan-lin again we owe the survi- 
val of a short and rather vague passage (XIII) which refers to 
conditions prevailing in India, maybe in the second half of the 
sixth century or in an earlier period; it says that some Indians 
went as far as Fu-nan and Tonkin to traffic in coral necklaces 
and pearls of inferior quality, and then proceeds to give A brief 
sketch of the Indians, their habits and dress. 

The seventh century forms a great epoch in Ihp annals of 
Indian Buddhism and the attractions offered by its study in situ 
to many pious Chinese pilgrims. Some Indian monks also travel- 
led to China to labour there in the cause of 
sHUMAcvm the Buddhist faith. Dharmagupta, for instance, 
a scholar of Lata (Gujerat) , left his native 
land at first for Central India, and gradually found his way 
across Kapisa and Badakshan, Kashgar, Turfan and other places 
to the Chinese capital about 590 A.D. ; and he spent the rest 
of his life there translating Hindu texts into Chinese and writing 
a memoir on the countries of the West till 
rvAK c hwanc 619 A.D.- 1S Of all the Chinese pilgrims that 

came to India, Yuan Chwang righlly claims 
the first place in the attention of the historians and archaeologists 


34. Chau Ju-Kua, pp, 97, I01-Z and Pelliot’s remarks at TP.xiii (1912) 
pp. 471-2. Ferrand, JA. 11:13 (1919) p. 461 has missed Pelliot’s remarks 
/>n the citation from Kia Tan. The story of Bodhidharma is obscure-. TP. 
xxii (1923) pp. 2S3 ff. 

35. BEFEO iii pp. 439-40. 



INTRODUCTION 


of India. Not only did he travel much more extensively in India 
than his compatriots, but he was on the whole much less of a 
recluse than they. Like them, he was primarily interested in the 
study and collection of Buddhist sacred books and in visiting the 
far-famed shrines of India, but as Watters has said ‘ his creed was 
broad and his piety never became ascetic, and he was by nature 
tolerant.’ The record of his journeys and experiences is as varied 
and interesting as may be expected, and, except in recording Bud- 
dhist miracles, he generally depended on the testimony of his own 
personal observation (XIV). Even so, he does not completely 
satisfy the curiosity of modern students, and to cite Watters once 
more : ‘ He was not a good observer, a careful investigator, or a 
satisfactory recorder, and consequently he left very much untold 
which he would have done well to tell.’ 

By the side of Yuan Chwang, I-tsing appears more bookish. 
I-tsing 36 Was a boy of twelve when Yuan Chwang returned to 
China in 645 A.D., and his biographer informs 
us that I-tsing made up his mind to follow i-tsing 
Yuan Chwang’s illustrious example in the year 
649. Eor reasons unknown to us, he had to put off the exe- 
cution of his plan till 671 when he embarked from Canton on a 
Persian ship ; many other monks had promised to accompany him, 
but stayed away in the end, and his only companion was his pupil 
Chan-hing. He reached India early in 673 and landed at Tamluk. 
He spent three months there and made the acquaintance of a China- 
man who had already lived twelve years in India. In his company 
he visited Bihar, the true Holy Land of Buddhism, travelling with 
a caravan of hundreds of merchants. He fell ill on the way, and 
later became a victim to a band of robbers who relieved him of 
all possessions, including his clothes. He rejoined his companions 
later and finished his pilgrimage without any further adventures. 
He then spent ten years m Nalanda till in 685 he made up his mind 
to return to China by the same route as he had taken on his out- 
ward journey. He spent four years at Srivijaya, went to Canton 
for a short period, and returned to Srivijaya with four companions 
to carry on his literary work. His memoirs were written when he 
lived in Srivijaya. He returned to China in 695 and was received 
with great pomp by the notorious* empress Ou. He kept himself 
busy with his literary work till his death in 713. 31 

36. JThis is his ordination name. His original name was Chang Wen- 
Ming. 

37. Chavannes — Religieux Eminents, Introduction. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


I-tsing thus did not visit Southern India or even Ceylon, and he 
has therefore nothing to tell us directly about these lands. But his 
works are valuable for the itineraries they contain (XV-A), for 
their notices of differences in doctrines and social practices among 
the Buddhists of different lands (XV-B, C, D), and above all for 
the brief biographies of eminent monks who visited India in his 
time (XV-E). For, as Chavannes has observed, it is surprising 
to find that in one generation as many as sixty persons braved the 
hazards of this distant and perilous voyage. And it is legitimate to 
suppose that in the periods before and after I-tsing hundreds of 
pilgrims must have undertaken similar voyages the details of which 
have altogether escaped the historian. 

That religion was not the sole motive force that brought China 
and India together in this period, that trade and politics also 
worked towards the same result, becomes clear 
trade and from the notices of certain embassies from the 

politics kingdoms of India 37 " including the Pafiava 

kingdom of K&ncI in the last years of the seventh 
century and the first years of the eighth (XVI) . These 
notices have been collected from a Chinese encyclopaedia of 
the eleventh century by Chavannes, and are also preserved in a 
later abbreviated version in the pages of the indefatigable Ma- 
Twan-lin. These embassies have not received the attention they 
deserve at the hands of Indian historians. Siladitya of Western 
India, 38 and the Calukya Vallabha of South India, sent their repre- 
sentatives to China in 692. But the most surprising fact we learn 
from these records is that in 720 A.D. Narasimhavarman II, the 
Pallava ruler of Kanci, well-known under his surname Rajasimha, 
sent an embassy to China to inform the Chinese emperor of his in- 
tention to go to war with the Arabs and Tibetans and asked the Em- 
peror to give a name to his army ; he also sent word that he had 
constructed a temple on account of the emperor and wanted him 
to give it too a name. The ambassador that brought these requests 
was highly honoured, and a Chinese embassy was sent in return 
to visit South India and gratify the wishes of Narasimhavarman. 


37a. By a decree of the Chinese Emperor issued in 695 A.D. 
from South India were to get provisions fr«m court for six months. BEFEO 
. iv p. 334. 

38. A later monarch than the one noticed by Smith, Early History ,* 
pp. 343-4. 



INTRODUCTION 


/ 

These precise references to Narasimhavarman go to show that 
the usual chronology of the reigns of the Pallava monarchs at the 
dose of the seventh century and the beginning of 
the eighth is not as well founded as it is generally pallavas 
taken to be; it is possible that the reign of am> chika 
Narasimhavarman lasted longer and that of Nandi- 
varman II Pallavamalla began later than is generally believed.* 8 
The mention of Arabs and Tibetans as the enemies of the Pallava 
kingdom in this period should also be noted. Separately or 
allied together, the Arabs and the Tibetans were more the enemies 
of China in this period than of any Indian state, 
least of all a South Indian state, and one tibhan powir 
may reasonably surmise that it was the 
Chinese court which, being impressed by the political power 
of Narasimhavarman in India, was anxious to enlist his support in 
its plans against the Tibetans. “ It is certain, according to the 
evidence of certain Chinese authors," says Reinaud, “that the 
Tibetans, called Thufan by those writers, played in the seventh 
and eighth centuries A.D. a great part in Central Asia. Masters 
for a time of regions situated in the north-east and south-east, they 
made tTie emperors of China tremble even in their capital. A 
Chinese author says that, at an epoch which corresponds to the 
‘year 787, the egiperor of China found himself constrained, for his 
own security, to make an alliance with the king of Yunnan, the 
Khalif of Bagdad, and certain Indian princes. The Tibetan arms 
seemed to extend to the remotest parts of the Bay of Bengal ; it 
is only in some such way that we can explain the name Tibetan Sea 
applied to the Bay by Ishtakri and Ibn Hawkal.” 40 

The career of the remarkable monk Vajrabodhi 41 falls in the 
same period as the South Indian missions to China just mentioned 
and is connected with the most celebrated 
among them. He was a native of South India vajiiabodhi 
bom in 661 A.D. He studied in Nalanda 
till his twenty-sixth year, and then made a pilgrimage to Kapila- 
vastu in 689 before he returned to Southern India, the centre of 

39. Cf. N. Venkataramanayya in JOli viil pp. 1-8. 

40. Reinaud— Aboulfeda, i. pp.ccelvil-viii. Also Smith— Early History of 
India, 4 p. 377. 

41. For the sketch that follow! I depend on Livi and Chavannes in JA. 
9:15 (1990) May-June pp. 418-81, and- 1J-8 (1916) pp. 48-9, accepting the 
later statement regarding the native place of Vajrabodhi. Cf. Watters, 
Yuan Chwang ii. p. 231. 

F.N. — 3 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


the cult of Avalokite&vara. Then Kaiici had been suffering for 
three years without rain, and the king Narasimhapotavarman im- 
plored the help of the pious monk, who brought on rain by means at 
prayer. Soon after this Vajrabodhi had a vision in which he was 
ordered to visit Ceylon and to go and worship ManjuSri in the Mid- 
dle Empire of China. He crossed the sea and was solemnly received 
in Ceylon. There he spent six months worshipping the holy relics. 
He returned to India, and with the permission of the king, perhaps 
Narasimhavarman himself, he embarked for China together with 
an ambassador carrying presents to the Emperor. The mission, 
doubtless the same as Narasimhavarman’s mentioned above, halted 
first at the port of Po-tchi-li in Ceylon, which it reached in twenty- 
four hours and in which there were already thirty-five Persian 
vessels that had come to exchange precious stones. The monk became 
friends with the Persian merchants, and after a month’s stay in 
Ceylon all of them sailed together and reached Srivijeya after a 
month’s voyage. The last stage in the voyage ended disastrously, 
all the boats except Vajrabodhi’s being scattered by a tempest. 
After a long series of reverses, he landed at Canton and took the 
road from there to the Eastern capital, where he arrived in 720 A.D. 
Vajrabodhi had introduced the Mahayana into Ceylon when he 
stayed there, and when he died in China in 732, he enjoined his 
pupil Amoghavajra to go to the five Indias and tq the kingdom of 
Ceylon. Amoghavajra left Canton on a Malay boat (741) and 
reached Ceylon where he was received with pomp by the ruler 
Silamegha. There he pursued his work with vigour and fixed the 
Mahayana doctrine in its final form. 

Bodhisena, a South Indian Brahmin of the Barachi (Bharad- 
vaja ?) family, was drawn to China by the fame of the land and by 
his desire to meet MafijusrI who was then 
uoDHtsENA reputed to be living in China. On his way, 
he met a priest from Campa, Buttetsu by 
name, and they travelled together to China in 733. Bodhisena 
learnt from a facetious priest that MafijusrI had left for Japan, and 
just at the time he was pressed by a Japanese embassy taking leave 
of the Chinese court to embark with them for Japan. And Bodhi- 
sena accepted the invitation with alacrity, reached Naniwa 
(modem Osaka) in 736 and was received in great pomp by the 
officials and priests of the court. Bodhisena and his friend Buttetsu 
lived there for many years as highly honoured guests, and officiated 
in the installation of a great statue of Buddha Vairocana 1 in 749. 
In 750 Bodhisena became Sojo, the head of the entire Buddhist 



INTRODUCTION 


ecclesias tical order in Japan, and was popularly known as Bara mon 
Sojo (Brahman Bishop). He taught Sanskrit and the doctrine 
of the Gandavyuha of the Mahayana at three different monasteries 
till his death in 760 A.D. at the age of fifty-seven. An inscribed 
stupa erected ten years later marks to this day the place of his 
final rest The Japanese alphabet was fixed about this time and 
shows unmistakable traces of Sanskrit influence, and Takakusu 
suggests that the studies inaugurated by Bodhisena had something 
to do with it. 42 

Several embassies from Ceylon to China are mentioned in the 
eighth century. 43 Some other facts of considerable significance may 
be noted before we leave this phase of Indo-Chinese 
relations. A disciple of the Chinese priest Kien- brahmins 
tchen, who made a voyage from China to Japan in m canton 
749 A.D., while describing the journey (XVII), 
states that*the Canton river was full of vessels from India, Persia 
and Arabia, and that in Canton itself there were three Brahmin 
temples where Indian Brahmins lived. And in 881 A.D. a Japanese 
prince, Shinnio Taka-oka by name, who had started on a pilgrimage 
to India, died on his way at Lo-yue, in the southern part of the 
Malay peninsula. 44 Lastly, the Tamil inscription of Takua-pa 
'mentioning a Vi?nu temple, a tank called Naranam and the 
Maijigramam (irihrchant guild) of that place may be assigned also 
to the same period. 45 

A Chinese work of the early ninth century, purporting to 
record facts relating to the eighth, states that the foreign ships 
“ which visited Canton were very large, so high out of the water that 
ladders several tens of feet in length had to be used to get aboard. 
The foreign (Fan) captains who commanded them were registered 
in the office of the Inspector of Maritime Trade (Shi-po-shi) . This 
office (the existence of which, by the way, proves the importance 
of this trade) , before allowing the ships to clear, required that the 
manifests should be submitted to it, and then collected export duty 
and also the freight charges. The export of ‘precious and rare 
articles’ was forbidden, and attempts at smuggling were punished 
with imprisonment.” 48 * 


42. BEFEO, xxviii (1928-29) pp. 24-6. See also «. 29 ante. 

43. JA: 9:15 (1900) pp. 411-8; <428. 

44. Tqjcakusu: 1-trtng, p. xlv, n.3; BEFEO iv p. 232. 

45. JOR. vi. pp. 300 f. 

46. Hirth and Rockhill, Chau Ju-Kua, p. 9. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


With the ninth century we enter on the period of the great 
Arab travellers, geographers and historians. From very ancient 
times much of the trade of the Indian Ocean 
.... mrm . had been in the hands of the Arabs, and with 
the rise of Islam there came a sudden ex- 
pansion the effects of which were not confined to religion and 
politics, but spread to commerce and science. The Prophet had 
been himself a merchant in his early life, and this no doubt ex- 
plains in part the great prestige which Muslim merchants enjoyed. 
The dramatic story of the expansion of Muslim power under the 
early Khalifs is well known ; one would expect that the political 
revolutions which accompanied it would have been hindrances to 
trade. But even in the midst of the most rapid and surprising 
conquests, commercial expansion went on apace. In the 16th 
year of the Hegira (637 A.D.), in the Caliphate of Omar, a fleet 
started from the coast of Oman to ravage Sindh and the West Coast 
of India. And before the end of the seventh century, a colony of 
Muslim merchants had established themselves in Ceylon. Some 
Muslim women who had lost their parents in Ceylon were carried 
off by Indian pirates on their way back home, .and this event 
furnished a pretext to the famous Hajjaj to invade the Indus Val- 
ley. 47 In 758 A.D. the Arabs and Persians settled in Canton 
were sufficiently numerous for them to be able to^ raise a tumult 
in the city and turn to their own profit the confusion thus creat- 
ed. 48 In fact politically the Arab empire was not stable and “it 
split up into various elements almost as quickly as it had been 
constructed. But as an economic and cultural power it remained of 
the greatest significance. It created for a tune the conditions 
under which a revival both of prosperity and of learning was 
possible. The actual contribution of Arab scholars and of Arab 
artists is not so important as the work they enabled others to do. 
The empire was not so much Arab as Muslim, not a racial but a 
religious unity. ‘ Out of some sixteen geographers of note ’ (who 
wrote in Arabic), we are told by a modem historian, ‘from the 
ninth to the thirteenth century, four were natives of Persia, four 
of Baghdad, and four of Spain ’. ” 48 

Abul-Kasim-Obeidulla bin-Ahmad was among the earliest of 
these writers. He is better known as Ibn Khurdadbeh, his Persian 


47. cf. Elliot and Dowson, i pp. 118-19. 

48. Reinaud— Relation pp. xl-xlii and dx. Also Hirth and Rockhill, Chau 
Jtt-Kua, p. 15. 

49. Oakeshott— op. cit. pp. 48-9. 



INTRODUCTION 


surname indicating that he was a descendant of a Magi all, 
Khordadbeh by name. The latter embraced Islam like many of 
his co-religionists, and his grandson rose to a high 
position in the official world, and he was in on 
a position to gather much authentic information on khurdaduh 
the various parts of the empire and the countries 
with which it maintained relations of one kind or another. His 
Book of Routes and Kingdoms was composed between 844 and 848 
A.D., but was still being modified in 885 A.D. r>u Unfortunately, as 
Masudi remarks, he presents his facts in a dry and incomplete 
manner (XVIII), and if he enters into details occasionally, it is 
only to refer to some quixotic legend. Yet, there is one precious 
passage describing the state of intercommunication between Europe 
and Asia in the second half of the ninth century : 

“ The Jewish merchants speak Persian, Roman (Greek and 
Latin) , Arabic, and the French, Spanish and Slav languages. They 
travel from the West to the East, and from the East to the West, 
now by land and now by sea. They take from the West eunuchs, 
female slaves, boys, silk, furs and swords. They embark in the 
countiy of the Franks on the Western sea and sail to Farama; 
there they put their merchandise on the backs of animals and go 
by land marching for five days to Colzom, at a distance of twenty 
parasangs. Than they embark on the Eastern sea (Red Sea) and 
go from Colzom to Hedjaz and Jidda ; and then to Sindh, India 
and China. On their return they bring musk, aloes, camphor, 
cinnamon and other products of the eastern countries, and return 
to Colzom, and then to Farama where they take ship again on the 
Western sea, some going to Constantinople to sell their goods, and 
others to the country of the Franks. 

“ Sometimes the Jewish merchants, in embarking on the 
Western sea, sail (to the mouth of the Oronte) towards Antioch. 
At the end of a three days’ march (from there), they reach the 
banks of the Euphrates and come to Baghdad. There they embark 
on the Tigris and descend to Obollah, whence they set sail to Oman, 
Sindh, India and China. The voyage is thus made without inter- 
ruption.” 51 . 

Abu Zaid Hassan, of Siraf on {he Persian Gulf, though no great 
traveller himself, had immense opportunities of meeting much tra- 

50. *Reinaud— Aboulfcda, L lvii-lvifl; Ferr and— Relations pp. 21-2. 

51. JA. 6:5 (1865) pp. 512-14. Reineud—Aboulfeda i. pJvU. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


veiled merchants and scholars, the celebrated Masudi among them. 
Siraf was then a busy port frequented by merchants from all parts 
of the world, and Abu Zaid declares that Ms object was to supple- 
ment an earlier work on India and China by adding to it data drawn 
from Ms own studies and Ms talks with persons who had travelled 
in the eastern countries. Abu Zaid’s prede- 
buleiman (?) cessor who wrote his work in 851 A.D. has 
often been called Suleiman ; but the evidence 
does not warrant anything more than the cautious conclusion of 
Yule, re-stated by Pelliot, that the work edited by Abu Zaid is a 
compilation of notes made by an anonymous writer “ from Ms own 
experiences in at least two voyages he made to India at an interval 
of sixteen years and from what he had collected from others who 
had visited China, Suleiman among them. ” 52 “ It is clear, ” says 
Yule, “ from the vagueness of his accounts that the author’s know- 
ledge of India was slight and inaccurate, and that he, had no 
distinct conception of its magnitude.” (XIX. i). However that 
may be, he was largely drawn upon by Masudi who had travelled 
in India and Ceylon and wanted to devote particular attention to 
India. 53 Ibn Al-Fakih (902), another writer of the darly tenth 
century. 54 who preceded Abu Zaid and Masudi, also drew largely 
upon this anonymous writer whom Abu Zaid considered worthy of 
being edited more than half a century after the date of the original 
composition. In fact it is a common trait of Arab writers to copy 
one another extensively and it would be otiose to reproduce all 
their accounts. 

Abu Zaid adds many interesting particulars (XIX, ii) to the 
notes of his predecessors. The accuracy of his information is 
established by the remarkably correct account he 
abd zaid gives of the political revolution that caused confu- 

sion in CMna soon after Suleiman’s visit or visits to 
that country and had entirely stopped the Arab trade with China 
at the time he wrote Ms work. 

There are many other Arab writers, travellers and geo- 
graphers, of the tenth century, 65 besides those so far mentioned. 

52. Yule, Qithay, i. p. 126. Pelliot in TP. 21 (1921) pp. 401-2. Relnaud 
himself had his own doubts on this subject in 1845, Relation pp. xiv-xv, 

53. Aboulfeda, i.p.lxv. 

54. Ferrand: Relations pp. 54-66, esp. 60-3. 

55. Ibn Rosteh (903), Abu Dulaf Mis'ar Mulhallil (940), Ishtakri (951) 
end Ibn Hawkal (976) are among them. Particularly valuable for the folk- 
lore of the Indian Ocean, of which Sylvain Levi has spoken, is Kitab ‘Ajiyab- 



INTRODUCTION 


But their works have little on Southern India or at least little that 
is new except exaggerated and apocryphal accounts like that of 
the temple of Mankir (Malkhed) from the pen of Abu’l-Faradj 
(988). 56 The illustrious Al-Biruni (c. 1030) took 
the whole range of human sciences for his a l butohi 
sphere ; philosophy, mathematics, chronology, 
medicine, nothing escaped his attention ; he knew Sanskrit 
very well and appears to have read even Greek works 
in the original- 57 He spent many years in India, was the friend 
of Mahmud of Ghazni and his son Mas’ud, and was in correspond- 
ence with Avicenna. He died at Ghazni in 1048. His great work 
on India is an excellent account of Indian religion, philosophy, 
literature, chronology, astronomy, customs, law and astrology. His 
interesting fable on Kikhind (XX) attests the hold of the Rama 
legends on the minds of the people and the attention paid to it by 
Al-Biruni himself. 

To return to the relations between Southern India and China. 
We have seen that the political troubles which broke out in China 
in the latter part of the ninth century had, as Abu 
Zaid ^marked, put a stop to the maritime trade ramA trade 
with the West. The foreigners at Canton and iktebrtjpted 
• Chuan-chou had to seek refuge in Kalah on the 
West coast of tne Malay peninsula and in Palembang in Sumatra. 
And for a time, foreign ships did not proceed beyond Kalah where 
they were met by Chinese vessels. This went on at least till 
Masudi’s visit to that place early in the tenth century.* 8 What 
took place later when conditions in China again became favourable 
to trade is recorded in the Sung annals as follows : 

“In the 4th year k‘ai-pao (A.D. 971) a Merchant Shipping 
office was established at Canton, and later on offices were also 
established at Hang-chou and Ming-chou (i.e., 

Ning-po) . All Ta-shih (Arabs) and foreigners revival 
from Ku-lo (Kalah), She-p‘o (Java), Chan- 
ch‘eng (Annam), P’o-ni (Borneo), Ma-i (Philippine islands) 
and San-fo-ts’i (Palembang, Sumatra) exchanged at these places 
for gold, silver, strings of cash, lead, tin, colored silks, and porcelain- 

trf-Hind or The Book of the Marvels of India by Buzurg ibn Shahriyar— 
available in two editions (Vide Bibliography) . 

56. JTerrand: Relations pp. 119-20. 

57. Reinaud, Aboulfeda i. p. xcv. 

58. Hirth and Rockhill, op. ctt, p. 18. 



FOHEIGN NOTICES 


ware, their aromatics, rhinoceros horns, tusks of ivory, coral, 
amber, strings of pearls, steel, turtles’ shells, tortoise-shell, corne- 
lians, ch’ih-k’u shells, rock crystal, foreign textile fabrics, ebony, 
sapan-wood, etc. In the Emperor Tai-tsu’s time (960-976) a 
Licence office was established at the capital, and orders were given 
that the foreign aromatic drugs and high priced goods brought to 
Canton, Kiao-chih (Tonkin), the Liang Che and to Ch’iian-chou 
(Zayton) should be deposited in the governmental godowns, and 
that all private trading in pearls, tortoise-shell, rhinoceros horns, 
ivory, steel, turtles’ shells, amber, cornelians and frankincense out- 
side of the official markets was forbidden. All objects not includ- 
ed in the above list might be freely dealt in by the people^ 89 

Besides these steps to monopolise the luxury trade with 
foreigners and regulate all foreign trade, the Chinese government 
also endeavoured successfully to increase its volume by .sending a 
trade mission abroad and offering special licences. And this new 
trade movement reached its greatest extension during the southern 
Sung dynasty in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and in course 
of time the growth of an illicit trade in luxuries brought about a 
drain of metallic currency that created anxiety in China. 80 

A casual statement of Gaspar Correa, the Portuguese traveller 
who came to India in 1512 and died there in 1563', throws a wel- 
come light on the commercial relations between 
correa’s China and South IndiB towards the close 4(f the 

evidence eleventh century and the beginning of the twelfth, 

and implies that the island of Formosa also took 
a share in this trade. Correa says : “ By the time the Portuguese 
ships arrived (at Calicut in 1498), four centuries had elapsed 
since the year when there came more than eight hundred sailing 
ships from Malacca, China and the land of the Lequeos (Formosa) , 
— ships, great and small, manned by people of various nationalities 
and charged with very rich merchandise which they brought for 
sale. They came to Calicut, navigated the entire coast up to Cam- 
bay, and they were so numerous that they spread themselves over 
the whole country.” 41 


59. TP. xv p. 420, n. 1. 

60. See RockhlU in TP. xv, pp. 419-21. 

61. Cited by Ferrand JA: 11:12 (1918), p. 181. 



INTRODUCTION 23 

Cho'u K'ii-fei, writing in 1178, gives a short and valuable* 
sketch of the route taken by Arab merchants in his time: 
(Traders) coming from the country of the Ta- 
shi, after travelling south to Quilon (Ku-lin) on 
small vessels, transfer to big ships, and proceeding CH0D K U ' FEI 
east, they make Palembang (San-fo-ts'i) . After 
this they come to China by the same route as the Palembang 
ships.” 82 


Of the countries engaged in trade with China, the same writer 
says : “ Of all the wealthy foreign lands which have great store of 
precious and varied goods, none surpass the realm of the Arabs 
(Ta-shi). Next to them comes Java (Sho-p'o) ; the third is Palem- 
bang (San-fo-ts‘i) ; many others come in the next rank." 82 Southern 
India does not figure among the states taking the front rank in the 
China trade, though in another passage, Cho'u-k‘ii-fei does make 
mention of ships from Quilon as distinct from those of the Arabs, 84 
and Quilon was the chief port of South India in this period. But 
the omission of South India may be merely due to the fact that the 
Arabs were the most active sailors of the time doing a large carry- 
ing trade for South India among other lands, and that the Chinese 
. vaguely ascribed to their native land all the products they fetched 
•in their ships. .However that may be, the Chinese attempts to 
revive foreign trade which began in the later 
part of the tenth century happened to coincide col* 
with the rise of the greatest empire of the Tamils, embassies 
the Cola empire of Rajaraja I and his successors. 

And the maritime power of this empire was by no means negligible, 
and the Chinese books bear testimony to the political embassies that 
were received in China from the Coja empire of this period. The 
first mission to reach China from the Coja country was that of 1015. 
Of this mission, the Sung-shi and Ma Twan-lin record fairly full 
details which will be found extracted elsewhere in this book (Notes 
to XXIII, D) . Though the whole journey of the embassy extend- 
ed over three years, the envoys were under sail for only 247 days 
during that period. They said that the king of their country was 
called Lo-tsa-lo-tsa (Rajaraja). That monarch sent the emperor 
of China many valuable presents, end the envoys addfed to them 
some on their own account. There was another embassy in 1033 


62. Hirth end Rockhill, Chau Ju-Kua, p. 21. 

63. Ibid., p. 23. 

64. Ibid., p. 23, n. 2. 

FJI. — 1 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


from Shi-lo-lo-cha Yin-to-lo-chu-lo, Sri Rajendra Cola, and yet 
another in 1077 when the king of Chu-lien was Ti-hua-kia-lo, which 
is a name not easy to explain. 011 

The foreign contacts of the Cola empire in this period are 
attested also by a curious passage in a Mon inscription from Prome 
of the reign of Kyan-Zittha (1084-1112 A.D.) 
A MON record which makes a cryptic reference to the conversion 
on a cola of a C6 j a prince t(J Buddhism (XXI). The identity 
of the Cola prince who changed his creed and 
subsequently offered his daughter in marriage to the Mon ruler 
cannot be determined at present. 

The great geographer Edrisi, whose work was written under 
the patronage of Roger II of Sicily and completed in 1153-4, de- 
pended exclusively on the writings of his 
mRlaI predecessors like Ibn-Khurdadbeh and Ibn-Hawkal 

for what he said on India. Yfile 6 ® has 
characterised his account of south-eastern Asia, including 
India, as very meagre and confused. “ Professing to give the dis- 
tances between places,” continues Yule, “he generally under- 
estimates these enormously, insomuch that in a map compiled from 
his distances Asia would, I apprehend, assume very contracted 
dimensions.” 

Only a few years later than Edrisi was the Jewish traveller 
from Spain, Benjamin of Tudela, who has some interesting remarks 
to offer on Quilon and South India (XXII) . Yule 
op^tudela doubts if the travels of Benjamin (1159-73) ex- 
tended farther east than the island of Kish in the 
Persian Gulf and says that what he relates of India is to all appear- 
ance hearsay.® 7 

One of the most valuable notices of the kingdoms of South 
India in the Middle Ages is that of Chau Ju-Kua (XXIII), the 
Chinese inspector of foreign trade, who compiled 
chac ju-xua his work called Chu-fan-chi about 1225 A.D. 88 

The editors of this work give the following esti- 
mate of Chau Ju-Kua : “ His notes to a certain extent 


65. See Hirth and Rockhill, op.'cit., pp. 101-2 and The Colne for further 
details of these embassies. 

66. Cathay i. p. 141. Extracts relating to India may be read conveniently 

in Elliot and Dowson I. pp. 75-93. 1 

67. Cathay i. pp. 144-5. c 

68. TP. xiii (1912) p. 449. 



INTRODUCTION 


are second-hand information, but notwithstanding this, he 
has placed on record much original matter, facts and information 
of great interest The large percentage of clear and simple matter- 
of-fact data we find in his work, as compared with the improbable 
and incredible admixtures which we are accustomed to encounter 
m all oriental authors of his time, gives him a prominent place 
among the mediaeval authors on the ethnography of his time, a 
period particularly interesting to us, as it precedes by about a 
century Marco Polo, and fills a gap in our knowledge of China’s 
relations with the outside world extending from the Arab writers 
of the ninth and tenth centuries to the days of the great Venetian 
traveller ” 00 

Soon after, the Sung empire fell before the Mongols. In 1251 
Mangu Khan became the great Khan, and appointed his brother 
Kublai Khan as the governor-general of China 
Kublai, able and energetic commander and the moncol 
statesman, set about subjugating, by slow and sure empibe 
stages, the whole of the Sung empire Mangu died 
in 1259, and Kublai became the Great Khan m 1260 From this 
time to his death m 1294, his was the most celebrated court in the 
world Under the Mongol domination there were in fact fewer 
obstacles to China communicating with the other countries of the 
world than at a«y other time And the fame of the Great Khan 
that had spread far and wide attracted many persons of various 
types from all parts of the world to China Scholars and artists, 
merchants, missionaiies and ambassadors, musicians and jugglers, 
came crowding in And living in China for many years together, 
Kublai himself became more and more Chinese m sympathy, 
habits and outlook Good roads and a quick and efficient postal 
service made for a surprisingly well-organised system of communi- 
cations within the vast limits of the Mongol empire According to 
Marco Polo, Zayton (Chuan-chou) as a port easily sur- 
passed Alexandria in the heyday of its prosperity Chinese 
influence spread rapidly m this period to the archipelago 
and in a measure even to India , we hear of Chinese soldiers 
m the service of the Ceylonese king in 1266 A D , 70 and the travel- 
lers of the period attest the presence of considerable numbers of 
Chinamen m the ports on the West* coast of India 71 " 

69 p 39 . 

70 T^ule, Cathay, 1 p 75 

71 It may be noted in passing that even travellers who took the land 
route across Asia from China to the West were interested m things Indian 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


Hie restlessness of Kublai Khan and his vanity or scientific 
curiosity, together with the very unsettled political conditions that 
prevailed in the Paiidyan kingdom towards the 
kohju’s dose of the thirteenth century, brought about a very 

embassies active exchange of political embassies between 

the Chinese court and the South Indian powers 
between the years 1279 and 1292, and these embassies 
have been succinctly discussed by Rockhill with citations from the 
Chinese annals of the period (XXIV), the Yuan Shih. The 
presence of Buddha relics in Ceylon was another factor which 
provided some of the missions with a definite objective. 


The legitimate king of Ma'bar who sent a secret message to 
the ambassador of Kublai Khan in 1281 must have been Kula- 
Sekhara, the Kales Dewar of whom Wassaf, the 
fanbyak great Muslim historian of Shiraz, has given the 

politics following account : “ Kales Dewar, The ruler 

of Ma'bar, enjoyed a highly prosperous life, ex- 
tending to forty and odd years, during which time neither any 
foreign enemy entered his country, nor any severe "malady confined 
him to bed. His coffers were replete with wealth inasmuch that 
in the treasury of the city of Mardi (Madura) there were 1,200 
crores of gold deposited, every crore being equal to a thousand 


About 1254, Friar William of Rubruck records that he met the envoy of 
a certain Sultan of India, who had brought bb presents to Mangu Khan 
"eight leopards and ten greyhounds taught to sit on horses’ backs, as leopards 
sit.” (Rockhill, The Journey of Friar William of Rubruck, p. 24S). In 
1259 Chang Te wrote the following account of India: “The country of Yin-du 
(Hindusthan) is the nearest to China. The population of it is estimated at 
twelve millions of families. There are in that country famous medicines, 
great walnuts, precious stones, Ki she (cloves), pin t’ie (fine steel) and other 
products. In this kingdom there are large bells suspended near the palace 
of the ruler. People who have to prefer a complaint strike against the 
bell. Then their names are registered and their cause is investigated. The 
houses are made of reeds. As it is very hot there in summer, people pass 
the whole time in the water. 1 ’ (Bretschneider, Med. Res. i. p. 146). The same 
writer also notes that ‘diamonds came from Yin-du. The people take flesh 
and throw it into the great valleys (of the mountains). Then birds come 
and eat this flesh, after which diamonds are found in their excrements.* (ib. 
pp. 151-2). The bell of justice and the method of getting diamonds are 
perhaps old fables; the latter is traced by Major in Epiphanius’ (d. 403 AD.) 
account of the mode of collecting jacinths in Scythia. (India in the Fifteenth 
Century, p. xlil). Both, however, were well known in South India— the 
bell of justice in the story of Manu, the legendary Coja king, and the 
diamond gathering method applied to the mines of Gdeonda. 



INTRODUCTION 


laks, and every lak to one hundred thousand dinars. Besides this 
there was an accumulation of precious stones, such as pearls, rubies 
turquoises, and emeralds, — more than is in the power of language 
to express. (Here follows a long string of reflections upon the 
instability of worldly wealth and grandeur.) 

“ This fortunate and happy sovereign had two sons, the elder 
named Sundar Pandi, who was legitimate, his mother being joined 
to the Dewar by lawful marriage, and the younger named Tira 
Pandi, was illegitimate, his mother being one of the mistresses who 
continually attended the king in his banquet of pleasure ; for it was 
customary with the rulers of that country that, when the daily 
affairs of the administration were over, and the crowds that attend* 
ed the court had gone to their respective homes, a thousand beauti- 
ful courtezans used to attend the king in his pleasure. They used to 
perform the several duties prescribed to each of them ; some were 
appointee! as chamberlains, some as interpreters, some as cup- 
bearers, and day and night both the sexes kept promiscuous inter- 
course together ; and it was usual for the king to invite to his bed 
that girl upon whom the lot should happen to fall. I have mention- 
ed thft in illustration of their customs. 

“As Tira Pandi was remarkable for his shrewdness and 
intrepidity, thd ruler nominated him as his successor. His brother 
Sundar Pandi, being enraged at this supersession, killed 
his father, in a moment of rashness and undutifulness, 
towards the close of the year 709 H. (1310 A.D.), and 
placed the crown on his head in the city of Mardi. 
He induced the troops who were there to support his interests, and 
conveyed some of the royal treasures which were deposited there 
to the city of Mankul, and he himself accompanied, marching on, 
attended in royal pomp with the elephants, horses and treasures. 
Upon this his brother Tira Pandi, being resolved on avenging his 
father’s blood, followed to give him battle, and on the margin of a 
lake which, in their language, they call Talachi, the opponents came 
to action. Both the brothers, each ignorant of the fate of the other, 
fled away; but Tira Pandi being unfortunate (tira bakht), and 
having been wounded, fell into the hands of the enemy, and seven 
elephant-loads of gold also fell to the lot of the army of Sundar 
Pandi. 

“It is a saying of philosophers, that ingratitude will, sooner or^ 
later, meet its punishment, and this was proved in the sequel, for* 
Manar Barnaul, the son of the daughter of Kales Dewar, who 



30 FOREIGN NOTICES 

espoused the cause of Tira Pandi, being at that time at Karamhatti, 
near Kalul, sent him assistance, both in men and money, which 
was attended with a most fortunate result. Sundar Pandi had 
taken possession of the kingdom, and the army and the treasure 
were his own; but, as in every religion and faith, evil deeds 
produce a life of insecurity, a matter which it is unnecessary to 
expatiate upon, he, notwithstanding all his treasures and the good- 
will of the army, was far from being happy and prosperous, enter- 
taining crude notions, and never awaking from his dream 
of pride, and at last he met with the chastisement due to his in- 
gratitude, for in the middle of the year 710 (1310 A.D.) Tira 
Pandi, having collected an army, advanced to oppose him, and 
Sundar Pandi, trembling and alarmed, fled from his native country, 
and took refuge under the protection of ‘ Alau-d-din, of Delhi, 
and Tira Pandi became firmly established in his hereditary king- 
dom. 

“ While I was engaged in writing this passage, one of my friends 
said to me : ‘ Hie kings of Hind are celebrated for their penetra- 

tion and wisdom ; why then did Kales Dewar, during his life-time, 
nominate his younger and illegitimate son as his successor, to the 
rejection of the elder, who was of pure blood, by which he'intro- 
duced distraction into a kingdom which had been adorned like a 
bride.” 72 t 

The troubles between Kulasekhara’s children that ended so 
disastrously for him and his kingdom evidently started very much 
earlier in his reign. The affairs of the South Indian Kingdom 
round about 1281 as recorded in the Yiian-shih give sufficient indi- 
cation of this. Sven the great Kublai Khan could not have 
interceded with any tangible effect in the affairs of so remote a 
country ; but we owe it to his interest in these distant lands that 
we have before us a business-like record of occurrences in South 
India of which we should have otherwise remained ignorant. But 
the questions arising out of these diplomatic embassies cannot be 
pursued further here. 

* Marco Polo’s journey to the East was the beginning of direct 
contact between the Far East and Europe — with the exception of 
the Roman embassy of the time of Marcus Aurelius 
xarco polo ' recorded above.*’ 13 This ‘ prince of mediaeval 
travellers’ reached the court of Kublai Khan 
after a hazardous journey of three years and a half 

73. Elliot and Dowson: iil, pp. 52-4. 

73. Oakeahott, op. cit. p. 87. 



INTRODUCTION 


across Asia. He became a great favourite of the Khan and spent 
seventeen years with him, being employed by him in several im- 
portant missions in different parts of his empire. Finally he was 
chosen to escort a princess of the Khan’s family, who had to be sent 
as a bride for the ruler of Persia. He left China in 1292 and his 
voyage to Persia through the Indian seas lasted about a year and a 
half. Thence he travelled to Constantinople, and finally reached 
Venice in 1295. 

During the years that Marco Polo spent in the East he had 
exceptional opportunities for observation, and he used them well. 
He was only passing through some parts of South India on his way 
to Persia, and the amount of information he was able to collect on 
these countries is indeed surprising. His work has come down in 
several recensions of varying authenticity, and it is sometimes 
difficult to distinguish what he wrote from later accretions. And 
for a time his name passed under a cloud and his veracity was 
impeached partly on account of the fables that had crept into copies 
of his work. But now, as Yule observes, ‘his veracity and justness 
of observation still shine brighter under every recovery of lost or 
forgotten knowledge.’ 74 Marco Polo was doubtless himself res- 
ponsible for some of the fictitious and fabulous statements in his 
' book, for he offc-n records the things he heard in addition to those 
he saw, and perhaps he did not always understand correctly what 
he saw in so many strange lands. But when all deductions have 
been made, his narrative still remains an invaluable source of 
knowledge about the countries he touched. 

It is with his return voyage by sea from China to Persia that 
we are primarily concerned (XXV) , and I can do no better than 
reproduce the following summary and estimate by Major of this 
part of Marco’s travels : “ He touched at the kingdom of Ziamba 
(Tsiampa, Campa), where he learned much of Great Java or Java, 
though he did not himself visit either that island or Borneo. He 
then sailed southward, and passing the small island of Pentan 
(Bintang) came to Java Minor, under which name he designates 
Sumatra. He appears then to have sailed along its coast through 
the Straits of Malacca to Seilan (Ceylon) , noticing on.his way the 
island Angaman (Andaman Islands). After some stay at Ceylon 
he sailed to Maabar, which, however, must not be confounded with 
Malabar, but is the coast of Coromandel. He notices its fine cot- 


74. Cathay, i, p. 165. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


tons ; also its various superstitions, as the worship of the cow, the 
abstinence from animal food, the courtezans dedicated to the 
service of the temple, and the acts of voluntary self-sacrifice to their 
gods, as well as the custom of females burning themselves after 
the death of their husbands. Then passing Cape Comorin he sailed 
along the coasts of Malabar, where he notices the abundance of 
pepper and ginger ; then along those of Guzerat and Cambaia, and 
so, across the Indian Ocean, home. 

" In the course of his inquiries and explorations, Marco Polo 
took pains to make himself acquainted with the natural history of 
each country, and especially with such products as by their costli- 
ness or usefulness might become valuable as articles of commerce. 
By his observations on the manufactures and navigation of different 
countries, he constantly shows his sense of what would be chiefly 
interesting to a maritime and commercial people like the Venetians, 
to whose nation he belonged ; and a rich field for such observation 
lay before him. The commerce of India he found stretching, like 
an immense chain, from the territories of Kublai Khan to the 
shores of the Persian Gulf and of the Red Sea. He found the 
shores and the islands of the India Sea luxuriantly covered with 
nature’s choicest productions. In lieu of wine, the palm tree gave 
its milk, and the bread fruit tree afforded its wholesome food. The 
betel nut, and spices, and everything which might natter the palate 
of man, he found in rich abundance in those climates, and if he 
does not minutely describe them, he at least names the different 
plants from which these luxuries were procured. Nor is he silent 
upon those less useful but not less highly prized productions of 
India which are derived from beneath the surface of the earth. 
He tells us of the topaz, the amethyst, and the emerald, of the 
sapphires of Ceylon, and the diamonds of Golconda, and the rubies 
from the mountains of Thibet.” 15 


The Yuan shih records an attempt on the part of the Chinese 
government in 1296 to prohibit the export of gold and silver, as 
also to limit the value of the trade with Ma’bar 
TRAMt (Coromandel), Kulam (Quilon), and Fandaraina 

to a relatively small sum of money. 7 ® Ma Twan- 
1 lin records that about 1300 A.D. many 
Brahmins from India were found in the court of Pan-pan, and tW_ 


75. Maim: India in the Fifteenth Century, pp. 11-Ui. 

76. TP. xv. pp. 425-6. 



INTRODUCTION 


being much in favour with the ruler of the land, they received rich 
gifts from him. 77 


By the side of the bright star of Marco Polo, other European 
travellers of the Middle Ages seem to lack lustre. But if the 
Venetian merchant represents one side of the 
culture contacts between the West and the East, cousnAN 
the three monks who visited South India soon fuabs 
after Marco Polo represent another. First among 
them was the Franciscan friar John of Monte Corvino who ‘ already 
nearly fifty years of age’ plunged alone into China, ‘that great 
ocean of Paganism, and of what he deemed little better, Nestori- 
anism, to preach the Gospel. ’ 78 His travel to China by way of 
India fell in 1292-3. He became later archbishop 
of Cambluc where he died in 1328. This lonely J0HN OF 
monk was out of sympathy with much that he saw in C0HVIN0 
India (XXVI) ; with him may be said to begin the 
stream of Christian missionary criticism of Indian life and habits 
which has not always been either intelligent or charitable. John’s 


account of ships and navigation in the Indian seas has much in 
commoi) with similar statements of other writers and may be use- 
fully compared with them. Nearly thirty years after John of 
Monte Corvino left the shores of India came Friar 
‘Odoric of PordtSione, who was in India soon after odobic 
1321. From Hormuz he embarked for Tana near 
Bombay (XXVII-A) ; either here or from Surat, “ he 
gathered the bones of four brethren who had suffered 
there in 1321 (as related by Friar Jordanus) and carried them with 
him on his voyage eastward. He went on to Malabar, touching at 
Pandarani, Cranganor, and Kulam (Quilon) , and proceeded thence 
to Ceylon and the shrine of St. Thomas at Mailapur, the modem 
Madras.” 78 His account of some Hindu customs and practices is 
doubtless that of an eye-witness (XXVII B, C, D). 


Lastly we have Friar Jordanus. It is possible that Jordanus 
first came to India some years before Odoric, and 
two of his letters are dated from India in 1321 and johdahos 
1324. In both of them, he holds out to t 

his brother Friars in Europe thp prospect of extensive mis- 


77. JA: 11:13 (1319) p. 255, Fan-p’an was, according to Pelliot, 
in the Mglay peninsula, between Tenasserim and Kedah (BEFEO, iv, p. 229) . 

78. Yule: Cathay, i. p. 189. 

79. Yule: Cathay, li. p. 10. 

PN.-5 



34 FOREIGN NOTICES 

nonary work in the East (XXVTH-A) . He says, for instance in 
his letter of 1321 A.D.: “ I will only say a word as to the harvest 
to be expected, that it promises to be great and encouraging. 
Let friars be getting ready to come, for there are three places 
that 1 know where they might reap a great harvest and where 
they could live in common. One of these is Supers where two 
Friars might be stationed ; and a second is in the district of Paroc- 
co, where two or three might abide ; and the third is Columbus ; 
besides many others that 1 am not acquainted with.” 80 The three 
places named here are Supara, Broach and Quilon. Jor- 
danus was appointed Bishop of Columbum 81 (or Colum- 
bus, Quilon) in 1328, and it is most likely that he 
wrote Mirabilia between this date and that of his second 
departure from Europe, 1330. 82 It is not known that Jordanus 
ever reached Columbum as its bishop. His mention of the Parsis 
in India and their mode of exposing the dead deserves to be noted 
as among the earliest notices of this community, if not actually 
the first account of them (XXVIII B, C). 

There is one more friar we must notice ; he* is John of Marig- 
nolli, a native of Florence. He was appointed Papal legate- to the 
court of the Great Khan in response to a request 
john from him received by the Pope ten years after the 

de MMucNoLu death of John of Monte Corvino, the founder of the 
Cathay mission and Archbishop of Cambluc. 
Like Marco Polo, John of Marignolli took the land route to China 
and left China by sea via Zayton in 1346 or 1347. Of the voyage 
that followed he says nothing more than that he arrived at Colum- 
bum (Quilon) in Malabar (XXXI-A). “He remained with the 
Christians of Columbum upwards of a year, and then, during the 
south-west monsoon of 1348 or 1349, set sail for the Coromandel 
coast to visit the shrine of Thomas the Apostle. After passing only 
four days there,” he went to Saba, which has not been satisfactorily 
identified, though it seems probable that some part of Sumatra is 
meant. When he quitted Saba, he was overtaken by a storm which 
drove his vessel to Ceylon perhaps against his wish. And in spite 
of his unpleasant experiences in the island at the hands of a Mussal- 
man chieftain, Marignolli’s recollections of Ceylon were very 
pleasant and* he locates the Earthly Paradise very near that island 


80. Yule. Cathay, iii. p. 77. 

81. This is the usual form of the 

82. Yule, ibid., pp. 29-31. 


in Sanskrit works. 



INTRODUCTION 


if not actually there. His account of the Buddhist monks of Ceylon 
makes interesting reading. He returned to Europe in 1353 and 
wrote down his recollections soon after (XXXI B, C). He was 
perhaps an aged man at the time. 63 

Abulfeda (1273 — 1331), the celebrated Arab historian and 
geographer, does not mark any great advance in 
knowledge relating to India. His notices of South abulfeda 
India are brief, vague and secondhand (XXIX). 

He cites the inveterate traveller and geographer Ibn Sa'id (1214 — 
1274 or 1286) quite often. 

On the other hand the Moorish traveller Ibn Battuta was an 
indefatigable explorer. Bom in Tangier about 1300, he left his 
native place at the age of twenty-two, and continued 
to travel incessantly for the next thirty years. He ^ dattuta. 
died at Fez in 1377. He did not write his work 
himself, but was content * to dictate to a copyist the 
description of the towns he visited, the anecdotes and 
history he could recall and so on.’ He was by profession a doctor 
of the Muhammadan law and traditions. A detailed summary of 
his experiences in South India will be found reproduced from Yule 
elsewhere in this book (XXX-C-i) as an introduction to the 
.translation of the original narrative which follows. “ The adven- 
tures which beiell Ibn Battuta during his long sojourn in India,” 
says Major, “ form one of the most curious and eventful chapters 
of his peregrinations ; and this part of his narrative derives addi- 
tional interest from the details which he introduces, not only of the 
natural productions and agriculture of the country, but of the 
manners, institutions and history of Hindustan, under the Affghan 
dynasties, which preceded for nearly three hundred years the 
establishment of the Mogul power. He gives an historical retros- 
pect, extending from the first conquest of Delhi by the Muham- 
medans under Kotbed-din Ai-bek, in 1188, to the accession of the 
reigning sovereign, Sultan Muhammed, the son of Tughlak, in 1325; 
which is especially valuable from the additional facts which it 
supplies, and the light thrown on many of the transactions recorded 
by Ferishta. This preliminary sketch is continued by the personal 
narrative of Ibn Battuta himself, whose fortune led him to India 
at the crisis when the unity of the Patan power (at all times rather 
an aristocracy of military leaders than a consolidated monarchy) 
was on the point of dissolution, from the mad tyranny of Sultan 


83. Yule: Cathey, iii. pp. 177-207. 



at 


FORSICN NOTICES 


Muhammed, which drove all the governors of provinces into open 
revolt, and led to the erection of independent kingdoms in Bengal, 
the Dekhan, etc. On the arrival of an embassy from the emperor 
of China, he gladly accepted an appointment as one of the envoys 
destined to convey the gifts sent in return by Sultan M uhamm ed ; 
and receiving his outfit and credentials, quitted without delay the 
dangerous walls of Delhi early in the year of the Hejira 743 
(A.D. 1342).”“ 

Sidl Ali CelibI (1554) is one of the latest among the foreign 
Muhammadan writers on India. He was an admiral, poet and 
writer. He came to India, and visited important 
smi ali towns in it in order to get into touch with the 

learned men in the country and to collect all books 
in Arabic, Persian and Turkish treating of the art of 
navigation. He returned to Constantinople by the land route 
across the N.W. of India, Badakshan, Transoxiana and Persia. Some 
sailing directions from his treatise called Mohit, The Ocean, are 
reproduced in an Appendix (App. IV) . He based his work on ten 
earlier works, three ancient and seven modem. • Among the modem 
authorities used by Sidi Ali was Ahmad Ibn Majid 
a hmad (A.D. 1489-90), who called himself “Master of 

ibh majid Navigation and Lion of the Raging Sea." Though 
the Portuguese sources are not cla*r on this point, 
it seems possible that he helped Vasco da Gama to reach India. 
In his Nautical Instructions he often refers to the opinions of Cola 
mariners, and so does Suleiman al Malm (C 1511-53). Ibn Majid 
records that in his day, at the commencement of the period of Saba 
(east winds) a flotilla of ships left Komar (Madagascar) to the 
destination of Zang (part of the Bast African coast, say 3° N.L. to 
3° S.L.), of Marima (same coast, say 8° to 11° S.L.), of Hormuz 
and of Al-Hind (the West coast of India) . 85 

Contemporary with Ibn Battuta was the Chinese merchant 
Wang Ta-Yiian who visited a number of foreign countries for pur- 
poses of trade between the years 1330 and 1349. 
wa»c ta-yvah His Tao x c hi lio (Description of the Barbarians 
of the Isles) is therefore for the most part 
the account of an eye-witness and thus superior to that 
of Chau Ju-Kua who wrote from hearsay. This book describes no 


84. Major: India in the Fifteenth Century: pp. liv-lv.; Also FemmA 

Halations, pp. 426-27. * 

85. Ferrsnd, JA: 11:13, p. 484; and 11:14 pp. 171-2. 



INTRODUCTION 


fewer than ninety-nine countries, ports and noteworthy localities’, 
and follows closely the model set by Chau Ju-Kua (XXXII). 
Though his literary style is said to be poor, his work gives evidence 
of wide learning and a philosophic turn of mind. M 

In 1382, an embassy from Java to China took “black slaves, 
men and women, to the number of one hundred, eight large 
pearls, and 75,000 cotti of pepper,” 87 which shows that towards the 
end of the fourteenth century the interrelations between China, 
Java and India continued more or less unchanged. 

At the beginning of the fifteenth century, ‘ the third emperor 
of the Ming dynasty, whose reign is known under the title of Y ang- 
le (1403-25) sent out a series of naval expeditions 
overseas which established the fame and the su- mino policy 
premacy of the new dynasty far and wide and 
which prompted a score of princes to despatch em- 
bassies to the Chinese court and pay homage to the Emperor.’ 88 
These embassies were stupendous enterprises, comprising a fleet 
of 62 vessels and 37,000 soldiers on the first occasion, each ship 
being 440 feet by 180. And among their commanders none was 
more famous than the eunuch Cheng Ho. The 
initial motive of these embassies lay in the desire cheng ho 
of the emperor to ascertain the whereabouts 
of his nephew Kien Wen dethroned by him and suspected 
to have hidden himself somewhere in the countries beyond 
the sea. 89 

Cheng Ho was accompanied in these voyages by two persons 
whose writings throw much welcome light on the state of the 
countries they visited. One was Fei Hsin whose 
work Hsitig cha sheng lan or 1 Description of the m atm 
star raft ’ bears a preface dated 1436 and 
thus forms one of the earliest accounts we have of the cele- 
brated voyages of Cheng Ho. We do not know in what capacity 
Fei Hsin was attached to Cheng Ho’s suite. His work describes 
forty countries or localities ; the author borrows much from earlier 
writers but also gives much that is new, and sometimes elucidates 
and supplements the brief notes of his predecessors (XXXQI). 00 

86. JRockhill, TP. xvi, pp. 61-9. 

87. JA: 11:14, p. 6. 

88. Duyvendak, Ma Huan Rl-ex amined, p. 3. 

89. %etsdmeider, Med, Ret. ii p. 142, n 880. 

90. TP. xvi, pp. 73-6 and Duyvendak op. c it 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


* The other was the better known Ma Hnan, a Chinese Muslim, 
who, on account of his knowledge of foreign languages, was attach- 
ed as Interpreter to the expedition of 1412-13. 
ma hu an The voyages of Cheng Ho and the texts of Ma 

Huan have been recently studied at some 
length and with great critical acumen by Duyvendak and 
Pelliot, and it seems desirable to state here the broad conclusions 
that emerge from these studies. 

The first voyage to the Western seas was ordered in the sixth 
month of the third year of Yong-lo ; i.e., 27th June-25th July 1405. 

In the voyage Cheng Ho visited Calicut (Ku-li) 
chenb ho’s where he erected a stele, and probably visited 
voyages Ceylon. On his return he captured the pirate 

Chen-Tsu-yi of Palembang and carried him to China 
where he was put to death. 91 The second voyage was in Sep.— Oct. 
1408 and was primarily directed to Ceylon though it went as far 
as Cochin and Calicut (Fci Hsin). The king of this island, 
A-lie-k‘ou-nai-eul (Alagakkonara, i.e., Vijaya Bahu VI) lured 
Cheng Ho into the interior and then despatched'soldiers to pillage 
his ships in his absence. Cheng Ho rose equal to the occasion. 
When he found the interior depleted of its soldiers, he put himself 
at the head of the 2000 men or so that he had with him and took 
the capital city and made prisoners of A-lie-k‘ ou-nui-eul, his wife 
and children, together with his principal officials. In June-July 
1411, Cheng Ho presented his prisoners at the Chinese Court, the 
emperor was merciful to them and set them free to return to their 
country. There is a Chinese inscription in Ceylon, discovered at 
Galle in 1911, commemorating this visit of Cheng Ho to Ceylon.”- 
The third voyage lasted from December 1412— Jan. 1413 to Aug. — 
Septr. 1415. Ma Huan went on this voyage in the course of which 
Ceylon, Cochin, Calicut, the Maldives and Ormuz were visited. 
The Ming shih adds Kayal to the list. Thus in this voyage Cheng 
Ho went beyond India for the first time. The fourth voyage was 
from 1416 to 1419. Ma Huan was not on this embassy which went 
up to Africa and as a result of which nineteen kingdoms sent 
embassies bearing tribute to China. Ma Huan joined the fifth 
voyage .(1421-22), an exceptionally rapid one which induced fifteen 
states, Calictfi among others, to send embassies to China in 1423. The 
sixth voyage lasted from February 1424 to March 1425, and before 

61. cf. Krom, Hindoe-Javaansche Ge»chiedeni», p. 434. 

92. Spolia Zei/latuca, viii (1813) pp. 122-32. 



INTRODUCTION 


it returned, there had occurred a change on the Chinese throne. Hie 
new emperor was opposed to these voyages and posted Cheng Ho 
to guard the southern capital, Nanking. But this emperor died in 
May 1425, and his successor revived the old practice five years 
later. In the seventh and last voyage (1430) Cheng Ho visited 
Calicut, Quilon and Cochin, and according to the Ming Shih the 
Maldives also were visited by Cheng Ho, Ma Huan and Fei Hsin. 
Possibly Ma Huan went to Mecca on this occasion. 

Cheng Ho himself, it may be noted, though a Mussulman and 
son of a haji, showed an inclination to Buddhism with that eclec- 
ticism of which there were many instances in the Mongol period.®* 

The knowledge of the world gathered by the Chinese as a 
result of these expeditions was proved inadequate by the coming 
of the Europeans soon after; but the accounts of these voyages 
fill a gap from Marco Polo and Ibn Battuta to the early Portuguese. 

Ma Huan’s work was first published in 1451. Ma Huan’s style 
was that of an unlettered sailor, prolix and lacking in 
literary quality. The book is called Ying-yai- 
sheng-lan, ‘ Description of the coasts of the Ocean.’ MA 
Both Groenveldt and Phillips used this original text 
text. Rockhill’s translations were made from 
‘the polished ana' revised version of Chang Sheng dating from 1522 
(XXXIV).® 4 

Some extracts of unusual interest, bearing on navigation in 
the Indian Ocean at the close of the fifteenth 
century (App. I) , on the part played by Gujaratis °™ ER 
in the maritime trade of the Middle Ages (App. II) , NOTICES 
and on the Indian merchants and merchandise in Malaka (App. Ill) 
are included in the Appendix. 


93. Felliot: Let grands voyages maritime* CMnoie au dfbut du XVe 
slide, TP. xxx (1933), pp. 237-452; and Encore a propos det voyages dee 
Tcheng Howt, TP. xxxU (1936), pp. 210-22. 

94. Duyvendak, op. rit, 




I. MEGASTHENES 
(A) Of Taprobane 

Megasthenes says that Taprobane is separated from the main- 
land by a river ; that the inhabitants are called Palaiogonoi, 1 2 and 
that their country is more productive of gold and large pearls than 
India. Taprobane is separated from India by a river flowing bet- 
ween; for one part of it abounds with wild beasts and elephants 
much larger than India breeds, and man claims the other part. 

—Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian, 
J. W. McCrindle, pp. 62-63. 

(B) i. Pfiwfyo 

The Pandaean nation is governed by females, and their first 
queen is said to have been the daughter of Hercules. The city 
Nysa is assigned to this region, as is also the mountain sacred to 
Jupiter, Meros by name, in a cave on which the ancient Indians 
affirm Father Bacchus was nourished ; while the name has given 
rise to the well-known fantastic story that Bacchus was bom from 
. the thigh of hi^ father. Beyond the mouth of the Indus are two 
islands, Chryse and Argyre, which yield such an abundant supply 
of metals that many writers allege their soils consist of gold and 
of silver. 

— Op. ctf. 156. 


if. Of Hercules and Pandaea 

Herakles begat a daughter in India whom he called Pandaia. 
To her he assigned that portion of India which lies to southward and 
extends to the sea, while he distributed the people subject to her 
rule into 365 villages, giving orders that one village should each 
day bring to the treasury the royal tribute, so that the queen might 
always have the assistance of those men whose turn it was to pay 
the tribute in coercing those who for the time being were defaul- 
ters in their payments.* 

* —Op. cit! 158-59. 


1. McCrindle explains this term es Pali- Janas, 'men of the sacred 
doctrine which is hardly satisfactory. 

2. See Pfindyan Kingdom, p, 34. 

F.N.-6 



42 FOREIGN NOTICES 

(C) Of the Beasts of India. 3 

(17) In the sea which has been mentioned they say there is 
a very large island, of which, as I hear, the name is Taprobane, 
From what I can learn, it appears to be a very long and moun- 
tainous island, having a length of 7000 stadia and a breadth of 
5000. 4 It has not, however, any cities, but only villages, of which 
the number amounts to 750. The houses in which the inhabitants 
lodge themselves are made of wood, and sometimes also of reeds. 

(18) In the sea which surrounds the islands, tortoises are 
bred of so vast a size that their shells are employed to make roofs 

for the houses : for a shell, being fifteen cubits in 
tortoises length, can hold a good many people under it, 

screening them from the scorching heat, of the sun, 
besides affording them a welcome shade. But, more than this, it is 
a protection against the violence of storms of rain far more effective 
than tiles, for it at once shakes off the rain that dashes against it, 
while those under its shelter hear the rain rattling as on the roof 
of a house. At all events they do not require to shift their abode, 
like those whoso tiling is shattered, for the shell is hard and like a 
hollowed rock and the vaulted roof of a natural cavern. 

The island then, in the great sea, which they call Taprobane, 
has palm-groves, where the trees are planted with* wonderful regu- 
larity all in a row, in the way we see the keepers of pleasure-parks 
plant out shady trees in the choicest spots. It has also herds of 
elephants, which are there very numerous and of the largest size. 
These island elephants are more powerful than those of the main- 
land, and in appearance larger, and may be pro- 
sxep hants nounced to be in every possible way more intelli- 

gent. The islanders export them to the 
mainland opposite in boats, which they construct expressly 
for this traffic from wood supplied by the thickets of the island, and 
they dispose of their cargoes to the king of the Kalingai. On ac- 
count of the great size of the island, the inhabitants of the interior 
have never seen the sea, but pass their lives as if resident on a 


3. There is no conclusive evidence that these curious fragments preserved 
In A elian , Hist. Anim., are from Megasthenes, see n at page 159 of McCrlndle 
(Megaathenes and Arrian). Aelian was af contemporary of Hadrian (U7-138 
AJ>.). 

4. ‘In the classical writers the size of this island is always greatly 
exaggerated. —McCrlndle . 



MEGASTHENES 


Continent, though no doubt they learn from others that they are 
all around enclosed by the sea. The inhabitants, again, of the 
coast have no practical acquaintance with elephant-catching, and 
know of it only by report. All their energy is devoted to catch- 
ing fish and the monsters of. the deep ; for the sea encircling the 
island is reported to breed an incredible number of 
fish , both of the smaller fry and of the monstrous sea monsters 
sort, among the latter being some which 
have the heads of lions and of panthers and of other 
wild beasts, and also of rams ; and, what is still a greater marvel, 
there are monsters which in all points of their shape resemble 
satyrs. Others are in appearance like women, but, instead of 
having locks of hair, are furnished with prickles. It is even solemn- 
ly alleged that this sea contains certain strangely formed creatures, 
to represent which in a picture would baffle all the skill of the 
artists of the country, even though, with a view to make a pro- 
found sensation, they are wont to paint monsters which consist of 
different parts of different animals pieced together. These have 
their tails and the parts which are wreathed of great length, and 
have for feet either claws or fins. I learn further that they are 
amphibious, and by night graze on the pasture fields, for they eat 
grass like cattle and birds that pick up seeds. They have also a 
•great liking for the date when ripe enough to drop from the palms, 
and accordingly they twist their coils, which are supple, and large 
enough for the purpose, around these trees, and shake them so 
violently that the dates come tumbling down, and afford them a 
welcome repast. Thereafter when the night begins gradually to 
wane, but before there is yet clear daylight, they disappear by 
plunging into the sea just as the first flush of morning faintly illu- 
mines its surface. They say whales also frequent this sea, though 
it is not true that they come near the shore lying in wait for 
thunnies. The dolphins are reported to be of two sorts — one fierce 
and armed with sharp-pointed teeth, which gives endless trouble 
to the fisherman, and is of a remorselessly cruel disposition, while 
the other kind is naturally mild and tame, swims about in the 
friskiest way, and is quite like a fawning dog. It does not nm 
away when any one tries to stroke it, and takes with pleasure any 
food it is offered. * 4 

— Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian, 
J. W. McCrindle, pp. 169-72. , 



II. KAflC! AND CHINA IN THE SECOND CENTURY B.C. 


Pan Kou, a Chinese writer who lived not later than the end 
of the first century AD., says in his Ts’ien han chou : 

“ From the gates of Je-nan, 1 from Siu-Wen and Ho-p’ou travel- 
ling by boat for five months we reach the kingdom of Ton-Yuan. 

After a further journey of about four months 
mmaABY by sea is reached the kingdom of Yi-lou-mo. 

By sailing still further for a period of over 
twenty days, the kingdom of Chen-li is reached. From there 
you travel more than ten days by land to the kingdom of Fou-kan- 
tou-lou. 2 From the kingdom of Fou-kan-tou-lou, going by boat for 
more than two months you reach the kingdom of Houang-tche. The 
habits of the people there generally resemble those of the people 
of Tchou-yai. These are extensive and populous lands, full of 
strange products. From the time of Emperor Wou (140-86 B.C.) 
all of them have been sending tribute. 3 There are official inter- 
preters who belong to the (administration of the) palace houang- 
men (yellow-gate) ; with the recruits they go by sea to buy shin- 
ing pearls, glass, 4 5 6 rare stones and strange products, giving gold and 
silks in exchange. In the lands to which they go, the people supply 
them with food and join them in their repast The merchant ships 
of the foreigners take them to their destination by turns. These 
foreigners also profit by the trade; (besides) they also plunder 
and kill people. Moreover (the passengers) have to be afraid 
of tempests which drown them. If nothing happens, they take 
many years to go and come back. The large pearls measure up 
to seven inches. s In the period of Yuan-che (1-6 A.D.) of the 
emperor Ping, Wang Mang desired to transform the government 
and manifest stately power. He sent rich presents to the king of 
Houang-tche and asked him to send an embassy bringing a live 
rhinoceros as tribute. From the kingdom of Houang-tche, going 
by boat for about eight months, we reach Fi-tsong.® Travelling 
again by sea for about two months, we get to the frontier of Siang- 

1. Upper Annam, at the interior of the Gulf of Tonkin. 

2. Pagan— Ferrand, JA. 11. 14, p. 47. 

3. Le. have had trade relations with China. See Cifas, ii. p. 25. 

4. pi-Iteou-U, sometimes taken to be vaiiurya. See n. 1 unde* XI post. 

5. Pelliot himself expresses a doubt about his translation of this sentence. 

6. Hsang island on the west coast of the Malay Peninsula. JA. 11. 14, p. 47. 



PAN KOU 


lin in Je-nan. They say that to the south of Houang-tche lies the 
kingdom of Ssen-tch’eng-pou, whence the interpreter envoys of 
the Han return.” 7 

It is seen, observes Pelliot, that Pan-Kou has joined two series 
of data, one going back to the period of the emperor Wou (140-86 
B.C.), and the other coming from the envoys 
of Wang Mang in the initial years of the crihqui 
Christian era. He also points out that in 
this passage, in spite of its obscurities, we are 'in the realm of 
history, not legend. Now the country which is reached after a 
year’s voyage from the coasts of Indo-China, and from which pearls 
and glass were procured, must have been in the midst of the 
Indian ocean, 8 possibly even at its western end. Herrmann locates 
Houang-tche in Abyssinia and B. Laufer in Malaya ; Ferrand re- 
jects these identifications with good reason, 9 and says : “ Phoneti- 
cally, the equivalence Houng-tche < Kanci is satisfactory for the 
epoch of Han ; historically it is possible ” 10 that China had relations 
with Kanci in the second century B.C. Let us note also this. A 
Cola embassy of the eleventh century from Coromandel to Canton 
look eight months to complete the journey; Pan Kou gives ten 
months to one year for the same voyage, nearly a dozen centuries 
earlier. Chinese vessels, it should be noted finally, had not yet 
begun to sail to* India ; they began to do so only much later. And 
the Chinese are distinctly stated by Pan Kou to have depended for 
their transport on foreign ships. But he makes it no less clear 
that from the first century B.C. the products of Southern India had 
begun to reach China by sea, and that at the beginning of the 
Christian era, under orders of the Court, a Chinese mission traversed 
the entire Indian ocean. 1 11 


1. Pelliot in To trap Poo, xiii (1912), pp. 457-9; cf JA. 11.13, pp. 451-5. 

8. Pelliot, ibid., p. 460. • 

9. JA: 11: 13, p. 453 n. 2. 

10. JA: 11: 14, pp. 45-6. 

11. TP. xiii, p. 461. 



III. STRABO 


(A) t — Pa.n4.yan (?) embassy to Augustus 

The merchants of the present day who sail from Egypt to India 
by the Nile and the Arabian Gulf have seldom made a voyage as 
far as the Ganges They are ignorant men and unqualified for 
writing an account of the places they have visited. From one 
place m India and from one king, Pandion, but according to other 
writers, Poros, theie came to Caesar Augustus 1 gifts and an 
embassy accompamed by the Indian sophist who committed him- 
self to the flames at Athens, like Kalanos, who had exhibited a 
similar spectacle in the presence of Alexander. 

—Ancient India as described m classical Literature, 3 W. Mc- 
Crindle, p 9, para 4 

(A) u— Indian embassy to Augustus 

Nikolaos Damaskenos - says that at Antioch by Daphne he met 
With the Indian ambassadors who had been sent to Augustus 
Caesar It appeared from the letter that their number had been 
more than merely the three he leports that he saw. The rest had 
died chiefly in consequence of the length of the jouAiey The letter 
was written m Greek on parchment and imported that Poros was 
the writer, and that though he was the sovereign of 600 longs, he 
nevertheless set a high value on being Caesars friend and was 
Willing to grant him a passage wherever he wished through his domi- 
nions, and to assist him in any good enterprise. Such, he says, 
were the contents of the letter Eight naked servants presented 
the gifts that were brought. They had girdles encircling their 
waists and were fragrant with ointments. The gifts consisted of 
a Hermes boro wanting arms from the shoulders whom I have 
myself seen, large snakes and a serpent ten cubits long, and a 
river tortoise three cubits long, and a partridge larger than a vul- 
ture. They were accompanied, it is said, by the man who burned 
himself at Athens. This is done by persons in misfortune seeking 
relief from t^ieir present circumstances, and by others in prosperity, 


1. See JRAS I860, p 321 for a sceptical critique of this embassy. 

2 intimate friend of Herod the Great and much esteemed by Augustus; 
he wrote a universal History in 144 books at the request of the farm— 
(McCnndle). 



STRABO 


which was the case with this man. For as everything had gone 
well with him up to this time, he thought it necessary to depart, 
lest if he tamed longer in the world some unexpected calamity 
should befall him He therefore with a smile leaped upon the 
pyre naked and anointed, and wearing a girdle round his loins 
On his tomb was this inscription, ‘ Zarmanochegas, 3 an Indian from 
Bargosa, 4 havmg immortalised himself according to the custom of 
his country, lies here ’ 

— Ibtd,pp 77-78, para 73 5 
B. Ceylon 

They say that Taprobane is an island lying out m the sea, 
distant from the most southern parts of India which are next to the 
country of the Komakoi, a seven days’ voyage to southward, and 


3 Sramanacarya ( 7 ) 

4 Bargyza, Bharoch 

5 ' Florua contemporary of Trajan (98-117 AD), also towards the dose 
of his Epitome of Roman History, mentions the same embassy 

‘ For both the Scythians and Sarmatians sent ambassadors begging our 
alliance The Seres also and the Indians who live under the Sun, together 
• With jewels and prycious stones, bringing elephants also amongst their presents, 
reckoned nothing so much an obligation laid upon the Emperor, as the length 
of their journey, which they had finished in four years and notwithstanding 
the complexion of the men showed that they came from another climate ’ 

Orosius a native of Tarraco (Tarragona), (c 420 AD) states in his 
History (vi 12) that an Indian embassy reached Augustus at the time when 
he was residing in that city As the date of this embassy does not tally with 
that noticed by Nicolaos some have supposed that there were two different 
embassies, but this is highly improbable Orosius is by no means an accurate 
historian 

Dion Cassius (ix 58) (end of second century AD) also mentions this 
Indian embassy m these terms — 

‘Numerous embassies came to him (Augustus at Samos, BC 21), and the 
Indians having first proclaimed a league of amity with him, obtained its rati- 
fication, and presented him, besides other gifts, with tigers also— animals seen 
then for the first time by the Romans, and, if I mistake not, even by the Greeks 
They gave him also a stripling without arms (like the statues we see of 
Hermes), but as dexterous in using his feet as others their hands, fpr with 
them he could bend a bow, hurl a dart, qnd put a trumpet to hi^ mouth One 
of the Indians, Zartnaros, perhaps to make a show for the Athenians and 
Augustus who was then in Athens, resolved to put an end to his life And 
having been initiated m the mysteries of the two gods (Demeter and Perse- 
phone) which were held out of the'ordinary course on account of the initiation 
of Auguftus, he committed his living body to the flames ’ (McCnndle, op cit 
pp 78-79) 




48 FOREIGN NOTICES 

extending about 8000 stadia in the direction of Ethiopia. It too 
produces elephants. Such are the accounts of Eratosthenes ; and 
these, when supplemented by the accounts of other writers when 
they convey exact information, will determine the nature of our 
description of India. 

Onesikritos ,« for example, says with regard to TaprobanO that 
it has a magnitude of 5000 stadia, without distinction of length or 
breadth ; that it is distant from the mainland a voyage of twenty 
days, but that the vessels employed for the voyage sail badly owing 
to the wretched quality of their sails, and to the peculiarity of their 
structure ; that other islands lie between it and India, but 

that Taprobane lies farthest to the south ; that there are 

found around its shores cetaceous animals which are amphibious 
and in appearance like oxen, horses, and other land animals. 

— Ibid., pp. 20-21,— paras 14 and 15. 

(C) On GaZIus J expedition to Arabia and Sailings to India 

The entrance of a Roman army into Arabia Felix under the 
command of my friend and companion Aelius Gallus, and the 
traffic of the Alexandrian merchants whose vessels pass up the 
Nile and Arabian Gulf to India, have rendered us much better ac- 
quainted with these countries than our predecessdrs were. I was 
with Gallus at the time he was prefect of Egypt, and ac- 
companied him as far as Syene and the frontiers of Ethiopia, and 

I found that about one hundred and twenty ships sail from Myos- 
Hormos 6 7 to India, although in the time of the Ptolemies scarcely 
any one would venture on this voyage and the commerce with the 
Indies. 

— Ancient India as described in Classical Literature, McCrindle, 
p. 98. 


6. “Who may as well be called the master fabulist as the master pilot of 
Alexander”— Strabo. (McCrindle, pp. 34-5)”. 

7. "The situation of Myos Hormos is determined by the cluster cf islands 
now called Jifatrn (let. 27-1? N., long. 35-55' E.) . It was founded by Ptolemy 
Phlladelphos B.C. 274"— (McCrindle). 



IV. PLINY 


(A) Description of Taprobani ( Ceylon ) 

TaprobanS, under the name of the ‘ Land of the Antichthones,’ 
was long regarded as another world. The age and achievements 
of Alexander the Great made it clear that it is an island. 
Onesikritos, the commander of his fleet, had stated that its 
elephants are larger and more bellicose than those of India, and 
from Megasthenes we learn that it is divided by a river, and that 
its inhabitants are called Paleogoni, and that it is more productive 
of gold and pearls of a greater size than India itself. Eratosthenes 
has also given its dimensions as 7000 stadia in length and 5000 
stadia in breadth, 1 while he states that it has no cities, but villages 
to the number of seven hundred. It begins at the Eastern Sea, and 
lies extended over against India east and west. The island in former 
days, when the voyage to it was made with vessels constructed of 
papyrus and rigged after the manner of the vessels of the Nile, was 
thought to be twenty days’ sail from the country of the Prasii but 
the distance came afterwards to be reckoned at a seven days’ sail, 
according to the rate of speed of our ships. The sea between the 
•island and Indir# is full of shallows not more than six paces in 
depth, but in some channels so deep that no anchors can find the 
bottom. For this reason ships are built with prows at each end to 
obviate the necessity of their turning about in channels of extreme 
narrowness. The tonnage of these vessels is 3000 amphorae. 2 3 In 
making sea-voyages, the Taprobane mariners make no observations 
of the stars, and indeed the Greater Bear is not visible to them, 
but they take birds out to sea with them which they let loose from 
time to time and follow the direction of their flight as they make 
for land* The season for navigation is limited to four months, and 
they particularly shun the sea during the hundred days which 
succeed the summer solstice, for it is then winter in those seas. 4 

So much we have learned form the old writers. It has been 
our lot, however, to obtain a more accurate knowledge of the 


1. As usual with classical writers, an exaggeration. The extreme length 
of the island from North to South is 271% miles, and its greatest width 137% 
miles.’— McCrindie. 

2. Aia amphora was a fortieth of a ton — McCrindie. 

3. This ia mentioned in Buddhist stories also. See p. 5, n. 8. 

4. The S.W. Monsoon prevails from June to October (McCrindie) . 

FN.-7 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


island, for in the reign of the Emperor Qg^idius 5 6 ambassadors 
came to his court therefrom, and under the following circumstances. 

A freedman of Annius Plocamus, who had farmed 
embassy from the treasury the Red Sea revenues, while 

to Rome sailing around Arabia was carried away by 

gales of wind from the north beyond Carmania. 
In the course of fifteen days he had been wafted to Hippuri,® a 
port of Taprobane, where he was humanely received and hospitably 
entertained by the king; and having in six months’ time learned 
the language, he was able to answer the questions he was asked. 
The king particularly admired the Romans and their emperor as 
men possessed of an unheard-of love of justice, when he found 
that among the money taken from the captive the denarii were 
all of equal weight although the different images stamped on them 
showed that they had been coined in the reigns of several emperors. 
This influenced him most of all to seek an alliance with the Romans, 
and he accordingly despatched to Rome four ambassadors, of 
whom the chief was Rachia (Rajah) . 

From these it was ascertained that in Taprobane there are 
500 towns, and that there is a harbour facing the south, adjacent to 
the city of Palaesimundus, the most famous city in the island, the 
king’s place of residence, and inhabited by a population of 200,000, 
They stated also that in the interior there is a lake 
new data called Megisba 375 miles in circuit, and con- 
taining islands which arc fertile, but only for 
pasturage. 7 From this lake, they said, there issued two 
rivers, one of which, called Palaesimundus, flows into the harbour 
near the city of the same name by three channels, the narrowest 
of which is five stadia wide, the largest fifteen, while the third, 
called Cydara, has a direction northward towards India. They 
further said that the nearest point in India is a promontory called 
Coliacum, 8 a four days’ sail distant from the island, and 
that midway between them lies the island of the Sun ; 
also that those seas are of a vivid green colour, and that 
a great number of trees grow at the bottom, 9 so that 
the rudders of ships frequently break their crests off. They 


5. 41-54 A.D. 

6. Kudirimalai (?); contra JRAS 1904 pp. 539-41 where it is suggested 
that Taprobang was probably Sumatra. • 

7. There is no such lake in existence. „ 

8. Cape Kory, (from Kodi). 

9. The coral reefs (?) 



PUNY 


saw with astonishment the constellations visible to us — the Greater 
Bear and the Pleiades— as if they were set in a new heaven, and 
they declared that in their country the moon can only be seen 
above the horizon from her eighth to her sixteenth day, lft while 
they added that Canopus, a large, bright star, illumined their nights. 
But what most of all excited their wonder was that their shadows 
fell towards our part of the world and not to their own, and that the 
sun rose on the left hand and set on the right, and not in the 
opposite direction. 11 They also informed us that the side of their 
island which lies opposite to India is 10,000 stadia in length, and 
runs south-east — that beyond the Hemod! moun- 
tains they look towards the Seres, with whom seres 
they had become acquainted by commerce; 12 
also that the father of Rachia had often gone to their 
country, and that the Seres came to meet their visitors on their 
arrival. These people, they said, exceeded the ordinary stature of 
mankind, and had yellow hair and eyes; the tones of their voice 
were harsh and uncouth, and they could not communicate their 
thoughts by language. In other particulars their accounts of 
them agreed with the reports of our own merchants, who tell us 
that the wares which they deposit near those brought for sale by 
the Seres, on the further bank of a river in their covntry, 
■are removed by tjhem if they are satisfied with the exchange. 13 The 
detestation of luxury could not in any way be better justified 
than by our transporting our thoughts to these regions and reflecting 
what the things are that are sought for to gratify it, from what vast 
distances they are brought, and for what low ends. 

But yet Taprobane even, though isolated by nature from the 
rest of the world, is not exempt from our vices. Even there gold and 
silver are held in esteem. They have a marble which resembles 
tortoiseshell, pearls also and precious stones, and these are all held 
in high honour. Their articles of luxury surpass our own, and they 
have them in great abundance. They asserted that their wealth is 
greater than ours, but acknowledged that we 'excelled them in 
the art of deriving enjoyment from opulence. 

10. A fable or a misunderstanding on the part of the Romans. 

11. Again a fable. 

12. Note this early reference to Chinese trade. 

13. Cf. Periplus, Sec. 65 and Fa-hien, post. The Seres mentioned here 
cannot be Ceras, as has sometime? been thought, but the Chinese, and by 
the HemoCi mountains the Himalayas seem to be meant. Contra JRAS. 1904, 
pp. 359-62 where Kennedy upholds the Cera view, and 539-41. See also 
IHQ. XIV. 3 (Winter nitz Comm. Vol. pp. 487-9) . 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


Here are no slaves in the island; the inhabitants do not 
prolong their slumbers till daybreak, nor sleep during the day ! 
t heir buildings are only of a moderate height from the ground; 
the price of com is never enhanced ; they have no courts of law 
and no litigation. Hercules is the God they worship ; their king is 
chosen by the people, and must be an old man, of a gentle disposi- 
tion and childless, and if after his election he 
polity should beget children, he is required to abdicate, 

lest the throne should become hereditary ; 
thirty counsellors are provided for him by the people, and no one 
can be condemned to death except by the vote of the majority — the 
person so condemned has, however, the right of appeal to the 
people, in which case a jury of seventy persons is appointed; if 
these should acquit the accused, the thirty counsellors lose all the 
respect they enjoyed, and are subjected to the uttermost disgrace. 
The king dresses like Father Bacchus ; the people like the Arabs. 
The king, if he offend in aught, is condemned to death, 
but no one slays him— all turn their backs upon him, and will not 
communicate with him in any way, not even, by speech. Their 
festive occasions are spent in hunting, their favourite game being 
the tiger and the elephant. The land is carefully tilled ; the vine 
is not cultivated, but other fruits are abundant. Great delight is 
taken in fishing, especially in catching turtles, beneath the shells- 
of which whole families can be housed, of such vast size are they 
to be found. 14 These people look upon a hundred years as but a 
moderate span of life. Thus much we have learned regarding 
Taprobane. 

— Ancient India as described in Classical Literature , McCrin- 
dle, pp. 102-106. 

B. Voyages to India 

In after times it was considered an undeniable fact that the 
voyage from Syagrus, a capo in Arabia, ,s reckoned at 1335 miles, 
can be performed by aid of a west wind which is there called 
Hippalus. The age that followed pointed out a shorter route that 
was also safer by making the voyage from the same cape to 
Sigenis, 18 a seaport of India ; and for a long time this route was 
followed until one still shorter was discovered by a merchant, and 


14. Cf. 1(C) Ante. 

15. Now Ras Fartak— McCrindle. 

16. Vincent identifies this port with Jaygadh. (McCrindle). 



PLINY 


India was brought nearer us through the love of gain. So then at 
the present day voyages are made to India every year ; and com- 
panies of archers are carried on board because the Indian seas are 

infested by pirates If the wind called Hippalus be blowing, 

Muziris, the nearest mart of India, can be reached in forty days. 
It is not a desirable place of call, pirates being in the neighbour- 
hood who occupy a place called Nitrias, and besides it is not well 
supplied with wares for traffic. 17 Ships besides 
anchor at a great distance from the shore, vuznus 
and the cargoes have to be landed and 
shipped by employing boats. At the time I was writing this 
Caelobothras was the sovereign of that country. Another more con- 
venient harbour of the nation is Neacyndon which is called Becare. 
There Pandion used to reign, dwelling at a great distance from 
the mart, in a town in the interior of the country called Modura. 
The district from which pepper is carried down to Becare in 
canoes is called Cottonara. 18 None of these names of nations, 
ports, and cities are to be found in any of the former writers — 
from which it appears that the names (stations) of the places are 
changed. Travellers sail back from India in the beginning of the 
Egyptian month Tybis — our December— or at all events before the 
6th day of the Egyptian month Mechir, that is before the Ides of 
January. In this way they can go and return the same year. 
They sail from India with a south-east wind, and on entering the 
Red Sea catch the south-west or south. 

—Op. cit. pp. 111-112. 


17. «Contrs Peri plus (54) on Muziris. 

18. “According to Or. Burnell, Cottonara is Kolattu-nadu, the district 
about Tellicherry, the pepper district”— McCrindle. 



V. THE PERIPLUS OF THE ERYTHRAEAN SEA 


45. Now the whole country of India has very many rivers, and 
very great ebb and flow of the tides ; increasing at the new moon, 

and at the full moon for three days, and falling 
barycaza off during the intervening days of the moon. 

But about Barygaza it is much greater, so 
that the bottom is suddenly seen, and now parts of the 
dry land are sea, and now it is dry where ships were sailing just 
before ; and the rivers under the inrush of the flood tide, 1 when the 
whole force of the sea is directed against them, are driven upwards 
more strongly against their natural current, for many stadia. 

46. For this reason entrance and departure of vessels is very 
dangerous to those who are inexperienced or who come to this 
market-town for the first tune. For the rush of waters at the 

incoming tide is irresistible, and the anchors 
tides cannot hold against it; se that large ships are 

caught up by the force of it, turned broadside 
on through the speed of the current, and so driven on the shoals 
and wrecked; and smaller boats are overturned; and those that 
have been turned aside among the channels by the Receding waters 
at the ebb, are left on their sides, and if not held on an even keel 
by props, the flood tide comes upon them suddenly and under the 
first head of the current they are filled with water. For there is 
so great force in the rush of the sea at the new moon, especially 
during the flood tide at night, that if you begin the entrance at the 
moment when the waters are still, on the instant there is borne 
to you at the mouth of the river, a noise like the cries of an army 
heard from afar ; and very soon the sea itself comes rushing in 
over the shoals with a hoarse roar. 

47. The country inland from Barygaza is inhabited by numer- 
ous tribes, such as the Arattii, the Arachosii, the Gandaraei 2 and 
the people of Poclais, 3 in which is Bucephalus Alexandria. Above 

1. ‘According to the Imp. Gaz. of India, IX, 297, high spring tides in the 
Gulf of Camber rise and fall as much as 33 feet, and run at a velocity of 
6 to 7 knots an hour. Ordinary tides reach 25 feet, at 4Vb to 6 knots. The 
inevitable damage to shipping, under such difficulties, was the cause of the 
desertion of the Cambay ports for Surat, ‘and, more recently, Bombay.’— 
Schofi. Cf. Ibn Battuta. 

2. People of Gandhara, the modern Peshawar District. 

3. Cf. Skt. Pujkalavatl, the W. Capital of Gandhara. 



these is the very warlike nation of the Bactrians, who are under 
their own king. And Alexander, setting out from these parts, 
penetrated to the Ganges, 4 5 6 leaving aside Damirica and the southern 
part of India ; and to the present day ancient drachmae are current 
in Barygaza, coming from this country, bearing inscriptions in 
Greek letters, and the devices of those who reigned after Alexander, 
Apollodotus and Menander. 

48. Inland from this place and to the east, is the city called 
Ozene,® formerly a royal capital ; from this place are brought down 
all things needed for the welfare of the country about Barygaza, 
and many things for our trade : agate and camelian, Indian muslins 
and mallow cloth, and much ordinary cloth. Through this same 
region and from the upper country is brought the spikenard that 
comes through Poclais ; that is, the Caspapyrene* and Paropanisene 7 
and Cabolitic 8 9 and that brought through the adjoining country of 
Scythia ; also costus and bdellium. 

49. There are imported into this market-town, wine, Italian 
preferred, also Laodicean and Arabian ; copper, tin, and lead ; coral 
and topaz ; thin clothing and inferior sorts of all kinds ; bright- 
colored girdles a cubit wide ; storax, sweet clover, flint glass, re- 
algar. antimony, gold and silver coin,® on which there is a profit 
when exchangecl for the money of the country ; and ointment, but 
not very costly and not much. And for the King there are brought 
into those places very costly vessels of silver, singing boys, beauti- 
ful maidens for the harem, fine wines, thin clothing of the finest 
weaves, and the choicest ointments. There are exported from these 
places spikenard, costus, bdellium, ivory, agate and carnelian, 
lycium, cotton cloth of all kinds, silk cloth, mallow cloth, yam, long 
pepper and such other things as are brought here from the various 
market-towns. Those bound for this market-town from Egypt 
make the voyage favourably about the month of July, that is 
Epiphi. 


4. ‘Our author Is confusing Alexander with Menander.’— Schoff. But 
the author’s meaning may be no more ,than that Alexander marched in the 
direction of the Ganges, neglecting the South. 

5. From Pali: Ujjeni. 

6. Kasyapapura, (? Kashmir) . 

7. Hindu Kush. # 

8. Kabul. 

9. "The Roman aureus and denarius were current throughout W. India, 
and strongly influenced the Kusan and Kgatrapa coinages.’— Schoff. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


50. Beyond Barygaza the adjoining coast extends in a straight 
line from north to south ; and so this region is called Dachinabades, 
for dachanos in the language of the natives means “south.” The 

inland country back from the coast toward the east 
dsccan comprises many desert regions and great moun- 

tains ; and all kinds of wild beasts — leopards, 
tigers, elephants, enormous serpents, hyenas, and baboons 
of many sorts ; and many populous nations, as far as the Ganges. 

51. Among the market-towns of Dachinabades there are two 
of special importance ; Paethana, 10 distant about twenty days’ 

journey south from Barygaza ; beyond which, 
towns about ten days’ journey east, there is another 

very great city', Tagara. 11 There are brought 
down to Barygaza from these places by wagons and through great 
tracts without roads, from Paethana carnelian in great quantity, 
and from Tagara much common doth, all kinds of muslins and 
mallow cloth, and other merchandise brought there locally from 
the regions along the sea-coast. And the whole course to the end 
of Damirica is seven thousand stadia ; but tVie distance is greater to 
the Coast Country. 

52. The market-towns of this region are, in order, after Bary- 
gaza ; Suppara, 12 and the city of Calliena, 13 which in the time of 
the elder Saraganus became a lawful market-town; but since it 
came into the possession of Sandares the port is much obstructed, 
and Greek ships landing there may chance to be taken to Bary- 
gaza under guard. 14 

53. Beyond Calliena there are other market-towns of this 
region ; Semylla, 15 Mandagora, 16 Palaepatmae, 17 Melizigara, 1 " 


10. Skt. Pratisthana, mod. Paithan. 

11. Tcr(?)— Fleet. 

12. Sopara, north of Bombay. 

13. Kalyan. 

14. Satakami, tide of some of the Andhra kings. Schoff thinks that the 
‘elder ^arganus' was Arista Satakami (44-69 AX).) and Sandares, his heir- 
presumptive, Sundara. But it seems 'possible that Sandanes (not Sandares), 
Candana, was the title of a Ku$an King (JA. Jan-March, 1936, pp. 75-85.) 

15. Mod. Chaul, about 25 miles south of Bombay— Schoff, whom I follow 
in the aucceeding notes also. 

16. Perhaps Bankot. 

17. Dabhol. 

18. Rajapur. 



PEREPLUS 57 

Byzantium, 11 Togarum, 20 and Aurannoboas. 21 Then there are the 
islands called Sesecrienae 22 and that of the Aegidii,® and that 
of the Caenitae, 24 opposite the place called Chersonesus 2 * (and in 
these places there are pirates) and after this the 
White Island. 26 Then come Naura 27 and Tyndis, 28 ports 
the first markets of Damirica, 29 and then Muziris 30 
and Nelcynda, 31 which are now of leading importance. 

54. Tyndis is of the Kingdom of Cerobothra ; it is a village in 
plain sight by the sea. Muziris, of the same kingdom, abounds in 
ships sent there with cargoes from Arabia, and by the Greeks ; it 
is located on a river, distant from Tyndis by river and sea five 
hundred stadia, and up the river from the shore twenty stadia. 
Nelcynda is distant from Muziris by river and sea about five 
hundred stadia, and is of another Kingdom, the Pandian. This 
place also is situated on a river, about one hundred and twenty 
stadia from the sea. 

55. There is another place at the mouth of this river, the vil- 
lage of Bacare ; 32 to which ships drop down on the outward voyage 
from Nelcynda, and anchor in the roadstead to take on their car- 
goes ; because the river is full of shoals and the channels are not 
clear. The kings of both these market-towns live in the interior. 
And as a sign t« those approaching these places from the sea there 
are serpents coming forth to meet you, black in colour, but shorter, 
like snakes in the head, and with blood-red eyes. 

56. They send large ships to these market-towns on account 
of the great quantity and bulk of pepper and malabathrum. There 


19. Corruption for Vizadrog. 

20. Deogarh. 

21. Mai van. 

22. Vengurla rocks. 

23. *t#ea. 

24. Oyster rocks, west of and facing the roadstead of Karwar. 

25. Karwar, an active port as late as the 16th century, exporting fine 
muslins from Hubli and elsewhere in the interior, also pepper, cardamoms, 
cassia, and coarse blue dungari cloth. 

26. Pigeon Island. 

27. Cannanore. 

28. Ponnani. 

29. i.e. ‘country of the Tamift.’ 

30. Cranganore. 

31. ‘Certainly very near file modem Kottayam.’ 

32. Porakad. 


FN.-8 




FOREIGN NOTICES 


are imported here, in the first place, a great quantity of coin ; » 
topaz, thin clothing, not much ; figured linens, antimony, coral, 
crude glass, copper, tin, lead ; wine, not much, but as much as at 
Barygaza ; realgar and orpiment ; and wheat enough for the sailors, 
for this is not dealt in by the merchants there. There is exported 
pepper, which is produced in quantity in only one region near 
these markets, a district called Cottonara. Besides this there are 
exported great quantities of fine pearls, ivory, silk cloth, spikenard 
from the Ganges, malabathrum from the places in the interior, 
transparent stones of all kinds, 34 diamonds and sapphires, and tor- 
toise-shell ; that from Chryse Island, and that taken among the 
islands along the coast of Damirica. They make the voyage to this 
place in a favourable season who set out from Egypt about the 
month of July, that is Epiphi. 

57. This whole voyage as above described, from Cana and 
Eudaemon Arabia, they used to make in small vessels, sailing close 
around the shores of the gulfs ; and Hippalus was the pilot who by 

observing the location of. the ports and the con- 
roppALtrs ditions of the sea, first discovered 35 how to lay 

his course straight across the ocean. For at 
the same time when with us the Etesian winds are blowing, 
on the shores of India the wind sets in from the, ocean, and this 
southwest wind is called Hippalus, from the name of him who first 
discovered the passage across. From that time to the present day 
ships start, some direct from Cana, and some from the Cape of 
Spices : and those bound for Damirica throw the ship’s head con- 
siderably off the wind ; while those bound for Barygaza and Scythia 
keep along shore not more than three days and for the rest of the 
time hold the same course straight out to sea from that region, 
with a favourable wind, quite away from the land, and so sail out- 
side past the aforesaid gulfs. 

58. Beyond Bacare there is the Dark Red Mountain, and 
another district stretching along the coast toward the south, 


33. Tile steady loss of specie in the Indian trade caused grave difficul- 
ties in the Roman Empire. 

34. These were principally the beryl? of the Coimbatore district, for 
which there was a constant demand in Rome.’— Schoff. 

35. Indian sailors must have known and used the monsoon much earlier 
than c. 45 A.D., the date of Hippalus’ discovery. 



PKBIPLUS 59 

called Paralia.** The first place is .called Balita ; 37 
it has a fine harbour and a village by the comobdi 
shore. Beyond this there is another place 
called Comari, at which are the Cape of Coxnari and a harbour; 
hither come those men who wish to consecrate them- 
selves for the rest of their lives, and bathe and dwell in celibacy ; 
and women also do the same j 38 for it is told that a goddess once 
dwelt here and bathed. 

59. From Comari toward the south this region extends to 
Colchi,*® where the pearl-fisheries are ; (they are worked by con- 
demned criminals); and it belongs to the Pandian 

kingdom. Beyond Colchi there follows another koskai 
district called the Coast Country, 40 which lies on 
a bay, and has a region inland called Argaru. 41 At this place, and 
nowhere else, are bought the pearls gathered on the coast 
thereabouts ; and from there are exported muslins, those called 
Argaritic. 

60. Among the market-towns of these countries and harbours 
where the ships put in from Damirica and from the north, 42 the 
most important are, in order as they lie, first 

Camara, 43 then Poduca, 44 then Sopatma; 45 in 
• which there s?e ships of the country coast- 
ing along the shore as far as Damirica ; and other very large 
vessels made of single logs bound together, called sangara ; but 
those which make the voyage to Chryse and to the Ganges are 
called colandia, and are very large. There are imported into these 
places everything made in Damirica, and the greatest part of what 
is brought at any time from Egypt comes here, together with most 
kinds of all the things that are brought from Damirica and of those 
that are carried through Paralia. 

61. About the following region, the course trending toward 
the east, lying out at sea toward the west is the island Palaesi- 


38. ‘The coast-line below the Travancore backwaters, around Cape 
Comorin, and as far as Adam’s bridge.’— Schoff. * 

37. VarkkalaL 

38. Cf. Manimekalai, xiii 11.5-7. 

39. Korkai. 42. Be. Pal. 

40. The Coja kingdom. • 43. Kaveripafnam. 

41. Uralyfir. 44. Pondicherry (?) 

45. Maikanam, called So-pattinam in Tamil. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


mundu, 46 called by the ancients, Taprobane. Hie northern part is 
a day’s journey distant, and the southern part trends 
ai * 1 ®* gradually towards the west, and almost touches the 

opposite shore of Azania. It produces pearls, transparent stones, 
muslins, and tortoise-shell. 

62. About these places is the region of Masalia 47 stretching a 
great way along the coast before the inland country ; a great quanti- 
ty of muslins is made there. Beyond this region, sailing toward 
the east and crossing the adjacent bay, there is the region of 

Dosarene, 48 yielding the ivory known as Dosarenic. 
obkbjTtribes Beyond this the course trending toward the 
north, there are many barbarous tribes, among 
whom are the Cirrhadae, 49 a race of men with flattened noses, very 
savage ; another tribe, the Bargysi ; M and the Horse-faces and the 
Long-faces, who are said to be cannibals. 

63. After these, the course turns toward the east again, and 
sailing with the ocean to the right and the shore remaining beyond 
to the left, Ganges comes into view, and 'near it the very last land 
toward the east, Chryse. 

— (Pp. 40-47, ed. Schoff). 


46. Lassen held that this name of Ceylon was derived from Palisimanta. 

47. Maisolia of Ptolemy, ‘no doubt, the greatest market of the Andhra 
kingdom . ’—Schoff . 

48. Dasarna, Orissa. ‘ 

49. Kiratas. 

50. Bhargas, mentioned in the Visnu Purina, as the neighbours of the 
Kiratas. 



VI. AELIAN 


Pearl-fishing 

The Indian .pearl-oyster (I have already spoken of the 
Erythraean kind) is caught in the following manner. There is a 
city which a man of royal extraction called Soras 1 governed at the 
time when Eukratides governed the Baktrians, 2 and the name of 
that city is Perimuda. It is inhabited by a race of fish-eaters who 
are said to go off with nets and catch the kind of oysters mention- 
ed, in a great bay by which a vast extent of the coast is indented. 
It is said that the pearl grows upon a shell like that of a large 
mussel, and that the oysters swim in great shoals, and have leaders, 
just as bees in their hives have their queen-bees. I learn further 
that the leader is bigger and more beautifully coloured than the 
others, and that in consequence the divers have a keen struggle in 
the depths which of them shall catch him, since when he is taken 
they catch also the entire shoal, now left, so to speak, forlorn and 
leaderless, so that it stirs not, and, like a flock of sheep that has 
lost its shepherd, no longer moves forward against any incipient 
danger. As long, however, as the leader escapes and skilfully 
•evades capture, he guides their movements and upholds discipline. 
Such as are caught are put into tubs to decay, and when the flesh 
has rotted and run off nothing is left but the round pebble. The 
best sort of pearl is the Indian and that of the Red Sea. It is pro- 
duced also in the Western Ocean where the island of Britain is. 
This sort seems to be of a yellowish colour, like gold, while its 
lustre is dull and dusky. Juba tells us that the pearl is produced 
in the straits of the Bosporus and is inferior to the British, and 
not for a moment to be compared with the Indian and Red Sea 
kind. That which is obtained in the interior of India is said 
not to have the proper characteristics, but to be a rock crystal. 

— Ancient India as described in Classical Literature, McCrindle 
pp. 143-4. 


1. From Sola (Tam.) 

2. 181-147 B.C. 



VII. C. 400 A.D. MARCIAN OF HERACLEA 

Sailing-course of the Left-hand side of the Arabian Gulf and 
Erythraean Sea and of the whole Indian Ocean. 

On the left or Asiatic side the location of continent and seas 
is as follows. It is understood here again that it is best to state 
general names before local,, and to give the relation .of countries. 
So if you navigate the Arabian Gulf, and hold the continent on the 
left, you come first to Arabia Felix, which extends along 
the whole Arabian Gulf as far as the aforesaid Arabian Strait. 
Beyond the narrows of the Arabian Gulf follows the 
Erythraean Sea, and if you navigate along it and hold 
the continent on the left you come to the well-known 
people of the Arabs, who inhabit all this continent. In 
this part of the sea is also the people of the Homerites, 
settled on the land of the Arabs and holding as far as the beginning 
of the Indian Ocean. Then beyond the Erythraean Sea follows the 
Indian Ocean. Now if you navigate the left hand side of this sea, 
holding next to the land of the Arabs as far as the mouth of the 
Persian Gulf, you come to the mountain of Syagrus 1 and the great 
bay of Sachalites, 2 which runs as far as the mouth of the Persian. 
Gulf. If you enter the Persian Gulf and navigate it, holding the 
continent on the left as far as the mouths of the river Tigris (you 
come to the bay of the Fish-Eaters, 3 which extends a long way, 
and the Laeanite bay 4 of Arabia Feiix and after that, the bay of 
Mesanites, 5 then, beyond the river Tigris) 6 along the same Persian 
Gulf you come to the province of Susiana, not to omit Persis which 
lies next to Susiana, and after that the greater part of Carmania as 
far as the narrows of the Persian Gulf. Furthermore the Persian 

1. Ras Fartak on the S. Coast of Arabia. It is an Arabic tribe-name: 
the Saukar, pi. Sawakir. 

2. Early geographers erroneously thought there was a deep indentation 
in the Arabian coast between Ras-el-Kelb and Ras Hasik, bisected by Ras 
Fartak or Syagrus Cape. This strip of coast is called by the Arabs Es-Shehr. 
The wArd Sachalites is from the Arabic sohil, coast. 

3. This fnay be Moseirah Channel. 

4. Arabic Lihvan: Bay of Bahrein. 

5. Northern shore of Persian Gulf; the name is Maisan, near the modem 
Basra, long an important trading port. • 

6. Arabic Diklath. Hebrew Hiddekel. Mention of the singje stream 
indicates that then as now, the Euphrates and Tigris discharged through a 
single mouth, the Shatt-el-Arab. 



MAHCIAN 63 

Gulf is opposite to the Caspian Sea, which is also called Hyrcanian, 
and the two, narrowing the intervening land, make a great isth- 
mus of Asia. 

If you go forth from this gulf and navigate eastward, always 
holding the continent to the left, you come back to the Indian 
Ocean, where dwells the remainder of the people of Carmania. 
Beyond is the people of Gedrosia, and then India within the 
river Ganges ; and opposite to the middle of this continent lies the 
great island which they call Taprobana. After this is the other 
India beyond the river Ganges ; which is the boundary of either 
India. In India beyond the Ganges is the so-called Golden 
Chersonese ; (Suvama-bhumi) ; beyond which is the so-called 
Great Bay, in the midst of which are the borders between India 
beyond the Ganges and the Sinae. Then you come to the people 
of the Sinae, whose metropolis, which is called Thinae, is the 
boundary between the known and the unknown land. 

This is the general statement of countries and the description 
of the left-hand parts of Asia and the Arabian Gulf and the Ery- 
thraean Sea, also of the Persian Gulf and the whole Indian Ocean, 
-(pp. 17-18). 

. Sailing-course pf India within the river Ganges and of the Bays 
and islands t hereof 

India which is within the river Ganges is bounded on the north 
by the Imao mountains, along the Sogdiani and Sacae who dwell 
above them; on the west by the sea and by Gedrosia aforesaid, 
inland by Arachosia and the region of the Paropanisadae which 
lies above it, on the east by the river Ganges, on the South by the 
Indian Ocean. This is the general description; the local descrip- 
tion is as follows : 

(The local description is lacking) . 

The whole sailing-course of the aforesaid part of India within 
the Ganges from the port of Naustathmus 7 8 to Cape Cory® is 21,725 
stadia. 


7. (which in sec. 38 is said to be situated on the Gulf of Canthl) is 
probably Mandvi on the Gulf of Gutch, or Kaohchh, an important commer- 
cial port jp western India from early times. 

8. Is Comorin, the southernmost point of India. [More likely Pt. Cali- 
were— KANJ 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


Sailing-course of the island of Taprobana 

Opposite to the cape of India which is called Cory, is the cape of 
the island of Taprobana called Boreum. 9 The island of Taprobana 
was formerly called Palaesimundu, but now Salica. This cape of 
the island, which we said is called Boreum, opposite to Cape Cory, 
is distant from the eastern horizon 26,460 stadia, from the western 
61,626 stadia, while on the south it is at a distance of 6,350 stadia 
north from the equator. 

(The local description is lacking) . 

Beyond the promontory of Boreum the whole description and 
sailing-course of the island of Taprobana is as follows : the length 
through the diameter is 9,500 stadia, the width 7,500 stadia. It has 
13 peoples or satrapies, 22 notable cities and market-towns, 2 nota- 
ble mountains, 5 notable rivers, 8 notable capes, 4 notable ports, 
2 great bays, 1 great coast-line. The whole sailing course of the 
island of Taprobana is 26,385 stadia. We have said enough about 
the island of Taprobana. Let us return to the sailing-course along 
India within the Ganges. 

(The local description is lacking). 

Sailing-course of the Gangetic Bay 

From this Point of Departure 10 (for those bound to Chryse) 
begins the very great bay called Gangetic into the head of which 
empties the river Ganges, discharging through five mouths ; which, 
as we have said, is the boundary between India within the Ganges 
and India beyond the Ganges. 

(The local description is lacking). 

Die length of India within the river Ganges, where it extends 
the greatest, from the fifth mouth of the river Ganges, which is 
called Antibole, to the port of Naustathmus situated on the gulf 
of Canthi, is 18,290 stadia ; and the width from the cape of the 
Point of Departure, so-called, to the sources of the river Ganges 
is 13,000 stadia. It has 54 peoples or satrapies, 216 notable cities 
and towns and market-towns, 6 notable mountains, 23 notable 
rivers; 2 notable capes, 1 notable port, 5 notable bays, 12 notable 
mouths of 'rivers, 1 notable Pdint of Departure, 10 confluences of 
notable rivers, 8 notable islands. 


9 Pt. Palmyra? (KAN). 

10. Probably Masulipatara 



MAHC1AN 


The whole sailing course through that part of the Gangetic 
Bay which is between the Point of Departure and the fifth mouth 
of the Ganges, called Antibole, is 5,660 stadia. All the sailing 
courses of India within the river Ganges, from the port of 
Naustathmus to the fifth mouth of the river Ganges, which is called 
Antibole, total 35,695 stadia. 11 

— Periplua of the Outer Sea by Marcian of Heraclea — W. H. 
Schoff pp. 17-18 and 24-25. 


11. The dimensions of India ace vaguely stated. The "length” or longi- 
tude calculated between the deltas of the Indus and the Ganges, the length 
of the Ganges, the sailing course around India, and the width of the Ganges 
delta, are all overestimated, but the error is not great. 


F.N.— » 



VIII FA-HJEN (401-10 A.D.) 

A. Daksina and the Pigeon Monastery 

There is a country named Daksina 1 where there is 4 monas- 
tery (dedicated to) the bygone Kasyapa Buddha, and which has 
been hewn out from a large hill of rock. It consists in all of five 
storeys ; — the lowest, having the form of an elephant, with 500 
apartments in the rock ; the second, having the form of a lion, with 
400 apartments; the third, having the form of a horse, with 300 
apartments ; the fourth, having the form of an ox, with 200 apart- 
ments ; and the fifth, having the form of a pigeon, with 100 apart- 
ments. At the very top there is a spring, the water of which, 
always in front of the apartments in the rock, goes round among 
the rooms, now circling, now curving, till in this way it arrives at 
the lowest storey, having followed the shape of the structure, and 
flows out there at the door. Everywhere in the apartments of the 
monks, the rock has been pierced so as to form windows for the 
admission of light, so that they are all bright, without any being 
left in darkness. At the four comers of the (tiers of) apartments, 
the rock has been hewn so as to form steps for ascending to the 
top (of each). The men of the present day, being of small size,' 
and going up step by step, manage to get to the top ; but in a for- 
mer age they did so at one step. Because of this, the monastery 
is called Paravata, that being the Indian name for a pigeon. There 
are always Arhats residing in it. 

The country about is (a tract of) uncultivated hillocks, with- 
out inhabitants. At a very long distance from the hill there are 
villages, where the people all have bad and erroneous views, and 
do not know the Sramanas of the Law of Buddha, Brahmanas, 
or (devotees of) any of the other and different schools. The peo- 
ple of that country are constantly seeing men on the wing, who 
come and enter this monastery. On one occasion, when devotees 
of various countries came to perform their worship at it, the peo- 
ple of those villages said to them, 1 Why do you not fly ? The 
devotees w>iom we have seen hfreabouts all fly and the strangers 

1. Said to be the ancient name for the Deccan. Aa to the various mar- 
vels in the chapter, it must he borne in mind that our author, as he tells 
ub at the end, only gives them from hearsay. See ‘Buddhist Recolds of the 
Western World,’ Vol. U, pp. 214-215, where the description, however, is very 
different. — Xegge. . 




FA-HIEN 


answered, on the spur of the moment, ‘Our wings are not yet fully 
formed.’ 

The kingdom of Dak|ina is out of the way, and perilous to 
traverse. There are difficulties in connection with the roads ,* but 
those who know how to manage such difficulties and wish to pro- 
ceed should bring with them money and various articles, and give, 
them to the king. He will then send men to escort them. These 
will (at different stages) pass them over to others, who will show 
them the shortest routes. Fa-hien, however, was after all unable 
to go there ; but having received the (above) accounts from men 
of the country, he has narrated them.. 

— Legge — Fa-hien, pp. 96-8 (cf. Giles — Fa-hsien, pp. 62-3 ; Beal 
Buddhist Records pp. lxviii-lxx.) 

B. Tamalipti and Ceylon 

Following the course of the Ganges, and descending eastwards 
for eighteen yojanas, he found on the southern bank the great 
kingdom of Campa,- with topes reared at the places where Buddha 
walked in meditation by his vihara, and where he and the three 
Buddhas, his predecessors sat. There were monks residing at them 
all. Continuing his journey east for nearly fifty yojanas, he came 
‘to the country of Tamalipti, 2 3 (the capital of which is) a sea-port. 
In the country there are twenty-two 4 monasteries, at aU of which 
there are monks residing. The Law of Buddha is also flourishing 
in it. Here Fa-hien stayed two years, writing out his Sutras, and 
drawing pictures of images. 

After this he embarked in a large merchant-vessel, and went 
floating over the sea to the south-west. It was the beginning of 
winter, and the wind was favourable; and, after fourteen days, 
sailing day and night, they came to the country of Singhala. 5 The 


2. Probably the modern Champanagar, three miles west of Baglipoor, 
lat. 25” 14'N. , Ion. 56“ 55'E.— Legge. 

3. Then the principal emporium for the trade with Ceylon and China; 

the modern Tam-look, lat. 22” 17H., Ion. 88” 211.; near the mouthy of the 
Hoogly.— Legge. , . 

4. Twenty-four.— Beal. 

5. The Kingdom of the Lion,’ Ceylon. Singhala was the name of a 
merchant adventurer from India, to whom the founding of the kingdom was 
ascribed. His father was named Singha, ‘the Lion,' which became the name 
of the c&intry;— Singhala or Slngha-Klngdom, ‘the country of the Lion.’— 
Legge. 



68 FOREIGN NOTICES 

people said that it was distant (from Tamalipti) about 700 yoja- 
nas. 

—Legge— Fa-hien, p, 100 (cf. Giles, Fa-hsien , pp. 65-66 ; Beal, 
Buddhist Records lxxi-lxxii). 

C. Ceylon 

The kingdom is on a large island, extending from east to west 
fifty yojanas, and from north to south thirty. Left and right from 
it there are as many as 100 small islands, distant from one another, 
ten, twenty, or even 200 It; but all subject to the large island. 
Most of them produce pearls and precious stones of various kinds ; 
there is one which produces the pure and brilliant pearl, 6 an island 
which would form a square of about ten li. The king employs 
men to watch and protect it, and requires three out of every ten 
such pearls, which the collectors find. The country originally had 
no human inhabitants, 7 but was occupied only by spirits and 
nfigas, with which merchants of various countries carried on a 
trade. When the trafficking was taking place, the spirits did not 
show themselves. They simply set forth their precious commodi- 
ties, with labels of the price attached to them ; while the merchants 
made their purchases according to the price ; and took the things 
away. 8 

Through the coming and going of the merchants (in this way), 
when they went away, the people of (their) various countries 
heard how pleasant the land was, and flocked to it in numbers till 
it became a great nation. The (climate) is temperate and attrac- 
tive, without any difference of summer and winter. The vegeta- 
tion is always luxuriant. Cultivation proceeds whenever men 
think fit ; there are no fixed seasons for it. 

When Buddha came to this country, 9 wishing to transform the 
wicked nagas, by his supernatural power he planted one foot at the 

6. Called the meni, pearl or bead. Afani ia explained as meaning 'free 
from stain,’ ‘bright and growing purer.’ It is a symbol of Buddha and of his 
Law. The most valuable rosaries are made of mania. — Legge. 

7. .According to other accounts Singhala was originally occupied by. 
Rak$asas or,.Rak$as, 'demons who devour men,’ and ‘beings to be feared,’ 
monstrous cannibals or anthropophagi, the terror of the shipwrecked mariner. 
Our author’s ‘spirits’ were of a gentler type. His dragons or nagas come 
before us again and again. — Legge. 

8. cf. Pliny, ante re. Seres. 

9. That Sakyamuni ever visited Ceylon is to me more than ''doubtful. 
Hardy, in M.B. pp. 207-213, has brought together the legends of three 



FA-HlKN 


north of the royal city, and the other on the top of a mountain, 10 the 
two being fifteen yojanas apart Over the foot-print at the north of 
the city the king built a large tope, 400 cubits high, 11 grandly adorn- 
ed with gold and silver, and finished with a combination of all the 
precious substances. By the side of the tope he 
further built a monastery, called the Abhayagiri, 12 abhayagiri 
where there are (now) five thousand monks, vihaba 
T here is in it a hall of Buddha, adorned with 
carved and inlaid work of gold and silver, and rich in the seven 
precious substances, in which there is an image (of Buddha) in 
green jade, more than twenty cubits 13 in height, glittering all over 
with those substances and having an appearance of solemn dignity 
which words cannot express. In the palm of the right hand there 
is a priceless pearl. Several years had now elapsed since Fa-hien 
left the land of Han ; the men with whom he had been in intercourse 
had all been of regions strange to him ; his eyes had not rested on 
an old and familiar hill or river, plant or tree ; his fellow tra- 
vellers, moreover, had been separated from him, some by death, 
and others flowing off in different directions ; no face or shadow 
was now with him but his own, and a constant sadness was m his 
heart Suddenly (one day) , when by the side of this image of jade, 
he saw a merchant presenting as his offering a fan of white silk ; 14 
.and the tears of^sorrow involuntarily filled his eyes and fell down 


visits— in the fust, fifth and eighth years of his Buddhaship It is plain, 
however, from Fa-hien’s narrative, that in the beginning of our fifth cen- 
tury, Buddhism prevailed throughout the island Davids m the last chapter 
of his ‘Buddhism’ ascribes its introduction to one of Asoka’s missions, after 
the Council of Patna, under Jus son Mahmda, when Tissa, 'the delight of 
the gods,’ was King (B C 250-230) — Legge 

10 This would be what is known as ‘Adam’s peak,’ having, according to 
Hardy (pp 211, 212, notes), the three names of Selesumano, Samastakuta, 
and Samamla ‘There is an indentation on the top of it,’ a superficial hollow, 
5 feet 3% inches long and about 2 l <z feet wide The Hindus regard it as 
the footprint of Siva, the Mohammedans, as that of Adam; and Buddhists, 
as in the text, — as having been made by Buddha —Legge. 

11. 470 feet— Beal. 

12 Meaning ‘The Fearless Hill.’ There is still the Abhayagiri tope, 
the highest in Ceylon, according to Davis, 250 feet in height, and huill about 
BC 90, by Watta Giunini, in whose rei|n, about 160 years aft* the Coun- 
cil of Patna, and 330 years after the death of Sakyamuni, the Trlpitaka was 
first reduced to writing in Ceylon— ‘Buddhism,’ p 234— Legge. 

13. About 22 feet.— Beal 

14. We naturally suppose that the merchant-offerer was a Chinese, 
as indeed die Chinese texts say, and the fan such as Fa-hien had seen 
end used in his native land.— Legge. 




FOREIGN NOTICES 


A former king of the country had sent to Central India and 
got a slip of the patra tree, 15 which he planted by the side of the 
hall of Buddha, where a tree grew up to the height of about 200 
cubits. 16 As it bent on one side towards the south-east, the king, 
fearing it would fall, propped it with a post 
sacked thee eight or nine spans round. 17 The tree began to 
grow at the very heart of the prop, where 
it met (the trunk); 18 (a shoot) pierced through the post, and 
went down to the ground, where it entered and formed roots, that 
rose (to the surface) and were about four spans round. Although 
the past was split in the middle, the outer portions kept hold (of 
the shoot), and people did not remove them. Beneath the tree 
there has been built a vihdra, in which there is an image 
(of Buddha) seated, which the monks and commonalty reverence 
and look up to without ever becoming wearied. In the city there 
has been reared also the vihdra of Buddha’s tooth, on which, as 
well as on the other, the seven precious substances have been 
employed. 

The king practises the Brahmanical ‘purifications, and the sin- 
cerity of the faith and reverence of the population inside the city 
are also great. Since the establishment of govern- 
tkeasdm ment in the kingdom there has been no famine or 

scarcity, no revolution or disorder. In the 
treasuries of the monkish communities there are many 


15 This should be the pippala, or bodhidruma, generally spoken of, in 
connection with Buddha, as the Bo tree, under which he attained to the 
Buddhaship. It is strange our author should have confounded them as he 
seems to do. In what we are told of the tree here, we have, no doubt, 
his account of the planting, growth, and preservation of the famous Bo tree, 
which still exists in Ceylon. It has been stated in a previous note that 
Asoka’s son, Mahinda, went as the apostle of Buddhism to Ceylon. By-and- 
by he sent for his sister Sanghamitta, who had entered the order at the 
same time as himself, and whose help was needed, some of the king’s female 
relations having signified their wish to become nuns. On leaving India, 
she took with her a branch of the sacred Bo tree at Buddha Gaya, under 
which Sakyamuni had become Buddha. Of how the tree has grown and 
still lives we have an account in Davids’ ‘Buddhism.’ He quotes the words 
of Sir 'Emerson Tennent, that it is ‘the oldest historical tree in the world;’ 
but this mus. be denied if it be true, as Eitel says, that the tree at Buddha 
Gaya, from which the slip that grew to be this tree was taken more than 
2,000 years ago, is itself stall living in its place. We might conclude that 
Fa-hien, when in Ceylon, heard neither of Mahinda nor Sanghamitta.— Legge 

16. 220 feet.— -Beal. 

17. placed eight or nine surrounding props to support the tree’.— Beal. 

18. "Where the tree and prop met, the tree shot out’— Giles. 



FA-HTEN 71 

precious stones, and the priceless munis. One of the kings 
(once) entered one of those treasuries, and when he looked all 
round and saw the priceless pearls, his covetous greed was excited, 
and he wished to take them to himself by force. In three days, 
however, he came to himself, and immediately went and bowed his 
head to the ground in the midst of the monks, to show his repent- 
ance of the evil thought. As a sequel to this, he informed the monks 
(of what had been in his mind) , and desired them to make a regula- 
tion that from that day forth the king should not be allowed to 
enter the treasury and see (what it contained), and that no bhikfu 
should enter it till after he had been in orders for a period of full 
forty years. 

In the city there are many Vaisya elders and So-po, 19 whose 
houses are stately and beautiful. The lanes and 
passages are kept in good order. At the heads preaching 
of the four principal streets there have been 
built preaching halls, where, on the eighth, fourteenth, and 
fifteenth days of the month, they spread carpets, and set forth a 
pulpit, while the monks and the commonalty from all quarters come 
together to hear the Law. The people say that in the kingdom 
there may be altogether sixty thousand monks, 
who get their food from their common stores. FEH1ING OF 
•The king, besides, prepares elsewhere in the M0NKS 
city a common supply of food for five or six thousand more. 
When any want, they take their great bowls, and go (to the place 
of distribution), and take as much as the vessels will hold, all 
returning with them full. 

The tooth of Buddha is always brought forth in the middle of 
the third month. Ten days beforehand the king 
grandly caparisons a large elephant, on which he tooth relic 
mounts a man who can speak distinctly, and is festival 
dressed in royal robes, to beat a large drum, and 
make the following proclamation : 

‘The Bodhisattva, during three Asankhyeyakalpas, 2 ' 1 mani- 
fested his activity, and did not spare his own life. He gave up 
kingdom, city, wife, and son ; he plucked out his eyes and gave them 


19. Hie phrase ’Sabaean merchants’ suggested to ’-egge by Beal’s ren- 
dering of So-po is wrong; So-po, according to Pelliot, stands for Sarthaviha, 
a merchant-prince . — BEFEO, iv, p. 358, n. 1. 

20. A Kalpa denotes a great period of time; a period during which a 
physical universe is formed and destroyed. Asankhyeya denotes the highest 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


to another ; he cut oi! a piece of his flesh to ransom the life of a 
dove ; he cut off his head and -gave it as an alms ; he gave his body 
to feed a starving tigress ; he grudged not his marrow and brain3. 
In many such ways as these did he undergo pain for the sake of 
all living. And so it was, that, having become Buddha, he conti- 
nued in the world for forty-five years, preaching his Law, teaching 
and transforming, so that those who had no rest found rest, and 
the unconverted were converted. When his connection with the 
living was completed, he attained to pari-nirvana (and died). 
Since that event, for 1497 years, the light of the world has gone 
out, 21 and all living beings have had long-continued sadness. 
Behold ! ten days after this, Buddha’s tooth will be brought forth, 
and taken to the Abhayagirivih&ra. Let all and each, whether 
monks or laics, who wish to amass merit for themselves, make the 
roads smooth and in good condition, grandly adorn the lanes and 
by-ways, and provide abundant store of flowers and incense to be 
used as offerings to it.’ 

When this proclamation is over, the king exhibits, so as to line 
both sides of the road, the five hundred different bodily forms in 
which the Bodhisattva had in the course of his history appeared ; — 
here as Sudana, 22 there as Sama ; 23 now as the king of elephants ; 
and then as a stag or a horse. 24 All these figures are brightly 
coloured and grandly executed, looking as if they Were alive. After 
this the tooth of Buddha is brought forth, and is carried along in 
the middle of the road. Everywhere on the way offerings are 
presented to it, and thus it arrives at the hall of Buddha in the 


sum for which a conventional term exists: — according to Chinese calculations 
equal to one followed by seventeen ciphers; according to Thibetan and Sin- 
ghalese, equal to one followed by ninety-seven ciphers. Every Mahakalpa 
consists of four Asankhyeya-kalpas. Eitel, p. 15.— Legge. 

21. Compare Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XI, Buddhist Suttas, pp. 89, 
121, and note on p. 89.— Legge. 

22. Sudana or Sudatta was the name of the Bodhisattva in the birth 
which preceded his appearance as Sakyamunl or Gotama, when he became 
the Supreme Buddha. This period is known as Vessantara Jataka of which 
Hardy, MB. pp. 116-24, gives a long account; see also Buddhist Birth Stories, 
p. 158.*— Legge. 

23. The* Sudana Jataka, the sahie as Vessantara Jataka; both thiB and 

the Sima Jataka are among the SancI sculptures.— Beal. For the stories 

see Jitakas Nos. 547 and 540 respectively in the JStaka, ed. Cowell, Vol. VI. 

24. In an analysis of the number of times and the different forms in 
which Sakyamuni had appeared in his JStaka births, given by Hardy (M.B., 
p. 100), it is said that he had appeared six times as an elephant; ten times 
as a deer; and four times as a horse.— Legge. 



FA-HEN 78 

Abhayagiri-vihara. There monks and laics are collectedin crowds. 
They bum incense, light lamps, and perform all the prescribed 
services, day and night without ceasing, till ninety days have been 
completed, when (the tooth) is returned to the vihfira within the 
city. On fast-days the door of that vihara is opened, and the forms 
of ceremonial reverence are observed according to the rules. 

Forty li to the east of the Abhayagiri-vihara there is a hill, with 
a vih&ra on it, called the Chaitya, 25 where there may be 2,000 monks. 
Among them there is a Sramana of great virtue, named Dharma- 
gupta, 28 honoured and looked up to by all the kingdom. He has 
lived for more than forty years in an apartment of stone, constantly 
showing such gentleness of heart, that he has brought snakes and 
rats to stop together in the same room, without doing one another 
any harm. 


Cremation of an Arhat 

South of the city seven U there is a vihara, called the Maha- 
vihara, where 3,000 monks reside. There had been among them 
a Sramana of such lofty virtue, and so holy and pure in his observ- 
ance of the disciplinary rules, that the people all surmised that he 
was an Arhat. When he drew near his end, the king came to 
examine into the point ; and having assembled the monks according 
to rule, asked whether the bhik$U had attained to the full degree 
of Wisdom. They answered in the affirmative, saying that he was 
an Arhat. The king accordingly, when he died, buried him after 
the fashion of an Arhat, as the regular rules prescribed. Four or 
five li east from the vihara there was reared a great pile of fire-wood, 
which might be more than thirty cubits square, 27 and the same in 
height. Near the top were laid sandal, aloe, and other kinds of 
fragrant wood. 

On the four sides (of the pile) they made steps by which to 
ascend it. With clean white hair-cloth, almost like silk, they 


25. Chaitya is a general term designating all places and objects of 
religious worship which have a reference to ancient Buddhas, and including 
therefore Stupas and temples as well as sacred relics, pictures, statues, &c. 
It is defined as ‘a fane,’ ‘a place for worship and presenting offerings.’ ‘ Eitel, 
p. 141. The hill referred to is the sadred hill of MJhjntale, ‘about eight 
miles due east of the Bo tree: —Davids’ Buddhism, pp. 230, 231.— Legge. 

26. Bitel says (p. 31): ‘A famous ascetic, the founder of a school, which 
flourished in Ceylon, A.D. 400.’ But Fa-hien gives no intimation of Dharma- 
gupta’s founding a school.— Legge. Beal transcribes the name as Dharma- 
ko(i also alternatively. 

27. 34 feet.— Beal. 

FN.— 10 



74 FOREIGN NOTICES 

wrapped (the body) round and round. They made a large carriage- 
frame, in form like our funeral car, but without the dragons and 
fishes. 2 * 

At the time of the cremation, the king and the people, in 
multitudes from all quarters, collected together, and presented 
offerings of flowers and incense. While they were following the 
car to the burial-ground, 29 the king himself presented flowers and 
incense. When this was finished, the car was lifted on the pile, all 
over which oil of sweet basil was poured, and then a light was 
applied. While the fire was blazing, every one, with a reverent 
heart, pulled off his upper garment, and threw it, with his feather- 
fan and umbrella, from a distance into the midst of the flames, to 
assist the burning. When the cremation was over, they collected 
and preserved the bones, and proceeded to erect a tope. Fa-hien 
had not arrived in time (to see the distinguished Shaman) alive, 
and only saw his burial. 

At that time the king, 30 who was a sincere believer in the law 
of Buddha and wished to build a new, vihara for the monks, first 
convoked a great assembly. After giving the monks a meal of rice, 
and presenting his offerings (on the occasion), he selected a pair 
of first-rale oxen, the horns of which were grandly decorated with 
gold, silver and the precious substances. A golden plough had been 
provided, and the king himself turned up a furrow on the four 
sides of the ground within which the building was to be. He then 
endowed the community of the monks with the population, fields 
and houses, writing the grant on plates of metal, (to the effect) 
that from that time onwards, from generation to generation, no one 
should venture to annul or alter it. 

— Legge op. cit. pp. 101-109 (Cf. Giles op. cit. pp. 66-74 ; Beal, 
op. cit. lxxii— lxxviii) . 


28. See the description of a funeral car and its decorations in the 
Sacred Books oj the East, Vol. xxviii, the Li Ki, Book xix. Fa-hien’s 
‘in this (country),’ which I have expressed by ‘our,’ shows that whatever 
notes of this cremation he had taken at the time, the account in the text 
was composed after his return to China, and when he had the usages there 
in his mind,and perhaps before his^yes. — Legge. 

29. The pyre served the purpose of a burial-ground or grave, and 
hence our author writes of it as such.— Legge. 

30. This king must have been Maha-nama (A.D. 410-432). In the 
time of his predecessor, Upatissa (AD. 368-410), the pitakas yrere first 
translated into Singhalese. Under Maha-nama, Buddhagho?a wrote his 
commentaries. Both were great builders of vihar as— Legge, 


FA-HUSK IS 

D. Passage to Java 

Fa-hicn abode in this country (Ceylon) two years; and, in 
addition (to his acquisitions in Patna) , succeeded in getting a copy 
of the Vinaya-pitaka of the Mahisasakah (school);” the Dirgha- 
gama and Samyuktagama 32 (Sutras) ; and also the Samyukta- 
sancaya-pi(aka ; 33 — all being works unknown in the land of Han. 
Having obtained these Sanskrit works, he took passage in a large 
merchantman, on board of which there were more than 200 men, 
and to which was attached by a rope a smaller vessel, as a provision 
against damage or injury to the large one from the perils of the 
navigation. With a favourable wind, they proceeded eastwards 
for three days, and then they encountered a great wind. The vessel 
sprang a leak and the water came in. The merchants wished to 
go to the smaller vessel ; but the men on board it, fearing that too 
many would como, cut the connecting rope. The merchants were 
greatly alarmed, feeling their risk of instant death. Afraid that 
the vessel would fill, they took their bulky goods and threw them 
into the water. Fa-hien also took his pitcher (kundika) and 
washing-basin, with some other articles, and cast them into the 
sea ; but fearing that the merchants would cast overboard his books 
and images, he could only think with all his heart of ICwan-she- 
yin, 34 and commit his life to (the protection of) the church of the 
lgnd of Han, (saging in effect), ‘ I have travelled far in search of 
our Law. Let me, by your dread and supernatural (power) , return 
from my wanderings, and reach my resting-place ! ’ 

In this way the tempest continued day and night, till on the 
thirteenth day the ship was carried to the side of an island, where, 


31. No. 1122 in Nanjio’s Catalogue, translated into Chinese by Buddha- 
jiva and a Chinese Sramana about A.D. 425. Mahisasakah means ‘the school 
of the transformed earth,’ or 'the sphere within which the Law of Buddha 
is influential.' The school is one of the subdivisions of the Sarvastivadah. 
— Legge. 

32. Nanjio’s 545 and 504. The Agamas or Sutras of the Hinayana, 
divided, according to Eitel, pp. 4, 5, into four classes, the first or Dirgha- 
agamas (long Agamas) being treatises on right conduct, while the third class 
contains the Samyuktagamas (mixed Agamas) .—Legge . 

33. Meaning 'Miscellaneous Collections;’ a sort of fourth Pifaka. See 
Nanjio's fourth division of the Canon, containing Indian and Chinese miscella- 
neous works. But Dr. Davids says that no work of this name is known either 
in Sanskrit or Pill Literature.— Legge. 

34. Kwan-she-yin and the dogmas about him o; her are as great a 
mystery as Manjusrl. The Chinese name is a mistranslation of Avaloki- 
tesvara . ? . To the worshippers of whom Fa-hien speaks, Kwan-she-yin 
would only he Avalokites vara.— Legge. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


on the ebbing of the tide, the place of the leak was discovered, and 
it was stopped, on which the voyage was resumed. On the sea 
(hereabouts) there are many pirates, to meet with whom is speedy 
death. The great ocean spreads out, a boundless expanse. There 
is no knowing east or west ; only by observing the sun, moon and 
stars was it possible to go forward. If the weather were dark and 
rainy, (the ship) went as she was carried by the wind, without any 
definite course. In the darkness of the night, only the great waves 
were to be seen, breaking on one another, and emitting a brightness 
like that of fire, with huge turtles and other monsters of the deep 
(all about) . The merchants were full of terror, not knowing where 
they were going. The sea was deep and bottomless, and there was 
no place where they could drop anchor and stop. But when the 
sky became clear, they could tell east and west, and (the ship) 
again went forward in the right direction. If she had come on any 
hidden rock, there would have been no way of escape. 

After proceeding in this way for rather more than ninety days, 
they arrived at a country called Java-dvipa, where various forms 
of error and Brahmanism are flourishing, while Buddhism in it is 
not worth speaking of. After staying there for five months, 
(Fa-hien) again embarked in another large merchantman, which 
also had on board more than 200 men. They carried provisions 
for fifty days, and commenced the voyage on the sixteenth day of 
the fourth month. 

Legge — Fa-hien pp. 111-113 (Cf. Giles: Fa-hsie n pp. 76-78; 
Beal Buddhist Records, lxxix-lxxxi) . 



IX. GUNAVARMAN ; 367-431 A.D. 


Life translated from Kao Seng tchouan of Houei-Kiao, composed 

in A.D. 519, the most complete of the Chinese biographies of 

this monk. 

Summary : Gunavarman was a k§atriya of the royal line of 
Kashmir. He was remarkably intelligent, and of a thoughtful dis- 
position. He renounced the world at twenty, and became a master 
of the agamas, and earned the name ‘ Master of the Law of Tri- 
pitaka ’ . When he was thirty the king of Kashmir died without 
an heir, and the ministers pressed Gunavarman to rule the king- 
dom, but he declined. He retired to the forest and carefully hid 
himself away from others. 

He then went to Ceylon, developed his religious practices, and 
then went over to Cho-po (Java ?) . There the king’s mother had 
a dream regarding him on the night preceding the day of Guna- 
varman’s arrival ; the queen-mother respectfully received him and 
the king became a Buddhist after his mother and the religion spread. 
Gunavarman then wrought many miracles. What follows is a 
translation of the Chinese text from Chavannes’ rendering. 

“ Then, the»famous monks of the capital, 1 the sramanas Houei- 
kouan, Houei-ts‘ong and others, heard of the good work (of Guna- 
varman) and thought of telling their sovereign 
about it ; in the ninth month of the first year m 
Yuan-kia (424), they spoke out their ideas in an in- to china 
terview with the emperor Wen, and proposed that 
they would go and ask Gunavarman to come (to China). The 
emperor then issued a decree requiring the prefect of Kiao tcheou 
-(Hanoi) to take steps for the transport by boat of (Houei-) Kouan 
and his colleagues; he sent at the same time the sramanas 
Fa-tchang, Tao-Tcho’ng, Tao-tsiun and others that they might go 
down there and request (Gunavarman to come) ; they carried also 
(imperial) letters to Gunavarman and the king of Cho-po (Java ?), 
Po-to-kia, 2 expressing a lively desire to see Gunavarman come to 
the Song territory and spread the religious teaching there. Guna- 
varman, considering it important Jo spread the holy dpctrine, had 
no fear of travel, and before the imperial envoys came, he had 
already embarked on the boat of a merchant, the Hindu Nandi, 

1. The Song capital was Nanking. 

2. What this stands for is unknown— cl. Krom, HJ.G. p. 83. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


with the intention of going to a small kingdom ; but he found a 
favourable wind, and arrived at Kouang-tcheou (Canton). Ibis 
explains the following passage in his posthumous writing : ‘ When 
I was already en route, 1 was carried by the wind, and I arrived in 
the Song territory The emperor Wen, learning that Gupavarman 
had reached (the province of) Nan-hai, issued a new decree requir- 
ing the prefects and governors to see that Gunavarman was supplied 
with provisions and sent to the capital . 

“ The route passed Che-hing ; a Gupavarman spent over a year 
there. At Che-hing is the mountain Hou-che, a solitary eminence 
of which the peaks are scarped and abrupt ; 
at che-hing Gupavarman said that it resembled the Grdhra- 
kuta, and they changed its name and called 
it the Peak of the Vulture ; outside the temple on this mountain, 
there was a hall of dhydna in a separate spot ; this hall was many 
li distant from the temple, and no noise was heard there ; yet, 
when the Ghanta began to resound Gunavarman was already 
there ; if he came in the rain, he was not wet ; if he walked in the 
mire, he was not soiled. There was then no one, cleric or lay- 
man, that did not feel an increasing and respectful admiration for 
him. 

“ In the temple was the hall Pao-yue (ratnacandra) . On the 
northern wall of this hall, Gunavarman painted with his own hand 
the image of Lo-yun (Rahula) and the scene of Dipankara and the 
young student spreading his hair. 3 4 When the figures were 
completed, as the evening came on, they gave out a lustre which 
ceased only after a long time. 

“ The prefect of Che-hing, T’sai Mao-tche evinced the greatest 
admiration for Gupavarman ; later, when he was at the point of 
death, Gunavarman came in person to see him, and comforted him 
by preaching the law. Subsequently, a relation (of Tsai Mao-tche) 
saw him in a dream with a multitude of the clergy expounding the 
law in a temple ; that surely was an effect produced by the force 
of the conversion made by Gunavarman. 

“ This mountain was once infested by a large number of tigers; 
from the time Gupavarman settled there, he went by day and 
returned by night, and if now and then he met a tiger, he touched 
his head with his baton, stroked him and then went away ; then the 
travellers who went by the mountains and on the rivers found no 


3. Now Chao-tcheou in the province of Kouang-tong— (Chavatmes) . 

4. See JA. Sep.-Oct 1903, pp. 199-209 and fig. 11 (Chavannes). 



H0UEI-K1A0 


obstacle to their going and coming. Among them seven or eight 
out of ten were touched by this kindness and became converted. 

“Once Gunavarman was engaged in a meditation in a 
separate hall from which he did not come out for many successive 
days. The clerics of the temple sent a sramapera 
to observe him ; he saw a white lion standing erect mhacles 
alongside of a column ; everywhere in the 
chamber bloomed the flowers of the blue lotus. Hie 
Sramaijera was frightened and raised a loud cry and entered (the 
hall) to chase the lion ; but then there was only a void, and nothing 
more to be seen. Many were the miracles of this unparalleled 
nature that Gunavarman wrought. 

“Meanwhile the emperor Wen reiterated to (Houei-) Kouan 
and his colleagues, the order to request Gunavarman once more to 
come at once. Then Gunavarman proceeded by boat to the capital 
and reached Kien-ye (Nanking) in the first 
month of the eighth year Yuaiv-kia (431). at Nanking 
The emperor Wen went out to receive him 
and made solicitous enquiries of him. He (Emperor) profited by 
the occasion and put him this question : ‘ I, your disciple, have a 
constant desire to observe the prohibitions and to abstain from 
.killing ; but as ],have necessarily to subordinate my sentiments to 
those of others, I am unable to give effect to my intentions. O. 
Master of the Law, since you have not found 10,000 li too great a 
distance to traverse for converting this kingdom, what will be your 
instruction to me?’ Gunavarman answered : ‘ Wisdom is in the 

heart, not in acts ; religion originates in yourself and not from 
others. Besides, kings and ordinary men have entirely different 
codes of conduct ; for the ordinary man, his person is of little 
value and his reputation is inconsiderable ; his commands are not 
feared ; if he does not conquer himself and lead a life of asceticism, 
what is he good for ? As for the sovereign, the country bounded 
by the four seas is his house ; the thousands of the people, his 
children ; when he speaks a good word, all men and women 
rejoice ; when he conducts an excellent government, men and gods 
are reconciled thereby ; punishments no longer shorten lives ; 
forced labour no more exhausts the strength (of the people) ; it 
causes the wind and rain to come in proper time, winter aftd summer 
to correspond to their proper periods, all sorts of cereals 
to increase in abundance, the mulberry and thr hemp to flourish. 
To observe abstinence in this manner, is an abstinence which is 
also lofty ; to shun killing likewise, is a benevolence which is also 
manifold. How could it be possible by curtailing the nourishment 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


of half a day or by saving the life of some one animal for one to 
find that he has accomplished this noble and salutary work ? * The 
emperor then softly struck the table and said with a sigh : ‘ The 

laity go wrong in ultimate principles ; the clergy embarrass themsel- 
ves in the doctrine of what is near at hand. Those who go astray 
on ultimate principles hold empty discourses on absolute wisdom ; 
those that embarrass themselves in a doctrine of what is near at 
hand allow themselves to be fettered by the written rules. But 
regarding the language you employ, Master of the Law, we can 
well say that it is that of an open and intelligent man ; it is worth 
while for all to talk with you about what concerns heaven and 
earth ’. Then he ordered that Gunavarman should reside in the 
temple Tche-houan (Jetavana vihara), and he provided liberally 
for his maintenance ; the dukes, kings and all persons of distinction 
paid their respects to him. 

“Then Gunavarman began to expound in this temple the 
Sa.ddharmapwn4a.Tika sutra and the Dasabhumi sutra. On days when 
he started to preach, ^edan chairs and canopies 
preached of officials blocked the road ; the spectators who 

went there and came back in succession 
ruhbed shoulders with one another and walked close on one 
another’s heels. Gunavarman had marvellous natural resources ; 
his admirable dialectic was divinely eminent ; sometimes he had 
recourse to an interpreter, and, by a series of dialectical discussions, 
obscure points became clear. 

“Afterwards, Houei-yi, (monk) of the temple Tche-houan 
asked him to publish (the book called) P‘ 01 i-sa 
writer chan kie ; (Gunavarman) began by issuing 

twenty-eight sections of it ; later, one of his 
disciples published for him two sections, thus making a total 
of thirty sections. But before the work was recopied, the sections 
comprising the Prefaces and the Prohibitions were lost ; that is why 
there are still two different texts (of the work) , 5 6 This work was 
also called P'ou-sa kie ti. 

“ Earlier, in the third year Yuan-Kia (426), the prefect of Sin 
tchou,„Wang Tchong-to, while he was at Pong-tcheng, had request- 
ed the foreigner I-che-po-lo (Isvara) to translate the work called 
Tsa-sin ; fl but when the section on Choice was reached, (Isvara) had 

5. It is now found in the Japanese Tripitaka— (Chavannes). <.. 

6. The Samyukta abhidharma hrdayn H.rtra; this Chinese translation 
is now lost (Chavannes). 



HOUEI-KUO 


to stop the work on account of some difficulty. Now Gui^avarman 
was requested again to translate and publish the last sections (of 
this work) which formed thirteen chapters. We get a total of 
twenty-six chapters if we add the earlier publications, viz., the Sseu 
fen kie-mo, yeou-p‘o-sai won kie lio louen, the yeou-p‘o-sai 
eul che eul kie. In all these translations, the style and the sense 
were perfect and exact ; there was not the least difference between 
the Sanskrit and the Chinese. 

“ Meanwhile, the nuns of the temple Ying-jou viz., Houei-kuo, 
Tsing-yin and others, 7 addressed to Guqavarman a request in these 
terms : ‘ It is six years since eight nuns from 
Ceylon came to the Capital. There have been nuns 
no nuns before in the territory of the Song. 

Where shall we find (the rules for) the second assembly 8 * 
receiving the prohibitions ? We fear that the section 
on prohibitions is not complete.’ Gunavarman answered them : 
‘The system of prohibitions was promulgated at first with the 
assembly of the great monks in view ; supposing that a case other 
than that of the original type presents itself, nothing prevents the 
reception of the prohibitions, being due to love of religion.’ The 
nuns were still afraid that they were not of the prescribed age, 
and desired at once to receive (the prohibitions) afresh. Guna- 
llarman told therS : ‘ Very well ! if truly you desire to increase 

the lustre (of religious life), that will aid the company greatly to 
enjoy itself (punyanumodana) . Only the nuns of the western land 
are also not of the prescribed age ; besides, the number of ten 
persons has not been reached.’ 1 ' He then induced them to study 
the language of the Song (Chinese), and, on the other hand, with 
a notable from the Western countries as intermediary, he requested 
that more nuns from the foreign land should come to make up the 
number ten. 10 


7. The story that follows is very obscure; in my opinion, Houei-Kuuo, 
Tsing-yin and the others are precisely the eight nuns from Ceylon referred 
to below. (Chavannes) Later, Chavannes and Levi thought that Chinese 
women, seeing these nuns from Ceylon, demanded admission into the order, 
and the message to Ceylon was necessitated *by this request. 3 A: 11; 8 (1916). 
pp. 45-6. Cf. also Pelliot BEFEO. iv. p. 275 n. 1, and p. 356 n. 4. 

8. Of the nuns, the first being that of the monks. 

B. There were only eight. It was perhaps necessary to have ten for 
forming a ragular community. 

10. Gunavarman died before this affair was fully regulated; when the 
nuns from Ceylon whom he had sent for arrived at the Capital, it was the 
FJL— 11 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


“ During that year, in summer, Gunavarman passed the season 
of retreat in the lower temple of Ting-lin. There were then 
devoted people who gathered flowers for spreading them on the 
mats; only the colours of the flowers placed in the spot where 
Gunavarman was seated increased in freshness; all the people 
adored him as a saint. When summer came to an end, he returned 
to the temple Tche-houan (Jetavana vihara). The same year, on 
the twenty-eighth day of the ninth month, before the mid-day meal 
was finished, he got up first and went back to his chamber. His 
disciple went a little later, but he had already died suddenly. He 
was then sixty-five. 

(Ed. Chavannes— Toung Pao II, 5. (1904) , pp. 193-206) . 

Cf. Pelliot, BEFEO. iv. pp. 274-5. 


(The biography of Sangbavarman follows that of Gunavarman in the Kao 
Seng tchuuan) .—Chavannes. 



X. A SOUTH INDIAN EMBASSY TO CHINA C. 510 A.D. 


“In the time of Seuen-woo, of the dynasty of the later Wei 
(A.D. 500-516), South India sent an ambassador to offer 
as presents some horses of a fine breed. This ambassador stated 
that the kingdom produced lions, leopards, panthers, camels, rhino- 
ceroses and elephants; that there was a species of pearl there, 
called ho-tse, similar to talc (y un-moo), the colour of which was 
yellowish red (tse, reddish blue) ; if it is divided, it disperses like 
the wings of the cricket, if it is heaped up, on the other hand, it 
becomes compact, like threads of silk strongly woven. There 
were diamonds resembling amethysts (tae-skih-ying) . When puri- 
fied a hundred times in the fire, without melting, this diamond is 
used to cut Jasper (yu stone). There were also tortoise-shell 
(tae-mei), gold (kin), copper (tung), iron (tee), lead (yuen), tin 
(seih) , fine muslins embroidered with gold and silver ; there were 
also a variety of odoriferous plants, yuh-kin, sugar-canes, and all 
kinds of products ; honey-bread (or solid honey) , pepper, ginger 
and black-salt.” 

— 1 " Chinese account of India. Translated from the Wan-heen- 
t’hung-kaou, or Deep Researches into Ancient Monument' by 
Ma Twan-lin ; kook 338 fol. 14. Journal of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal , vi. p. 66 ; cf. JRAS., vi. p. 458 ; IA ix, p. 18. 



XI. A MIRROR FROM -WESTERN INDIA 


Liang se kung tse ki, ‘ Memoirs of the Four Lords of the Liang 
Dynasty (502-556)’ written by Chang Yue (667-730), statesman, 
poet, painter. “The story connected in this report with the 
crystal mirror is a somewhat abrupt and incomplete version of the 
well-known legend of the Diamond Valley, the oldest hitherto 
accessible Western version of which is contained in the writings of 
Epiphanius, Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus (circa 315-403)” 
(Laufer) . 

“ A large junk of Fu-nan which had hailed from western India 
arrived (in China) and offered for sale a mirror of a peculiar 
variety of rock-crystal, 1 2 one foot and four inches across its surface, 
and forty catties in weight. It was pure white and transparent 
on the surface and in the interior, and displayed many-coloured 
things on its obverse. When held against the light and examined, 
its substance was not discernible.- On inquiry for the price, it 
was given at a million strings of copper coins. The Emperor 
ordered the officials to raise this sum, but the treasury did not hold 
enough. Those traders said, ‘This mirror is due to the action 
of the Devaraja of the Rupadhatu. On felici+ous and joyful 
occasions, he causes the trees of the gods to pour down a shower 
of precious stones, and the mountains receive them. The moun- 
tains conceal and seize the stones, so that they are difficult 
to obtain. The flesh of big beasts is cast into the mountains ; and 


1. Pauthier who first called attention to this text explained p'o-li rightly 
as ‘rock-crystal.’ Felliot (BEFEO, iii, p. 283) adopts the usual meaning 
‘glass’ though he allows its connection with Sphatifca (Skt.). It cannot he 
glass, for (1) the story of the Diamond valley makes it a matter of precious 
stones, as also the high price; (2) real glass mirrors were not yet invented 
in the West and could not have been known in India and Fu-nan in the 
sixth century. They did not come up in Europe before the latter half of 
the 13th century. In later times p'o-H did mean glass.— Laufer (abridged). 

2. Hirth’s translation of this sentence is based on an incomplete text and 
renders it Unintelligible . “As they were not acquainted with the complete 
text, as handed down in Tni ping yii ton, Hirth and Rockhill imderafamd 
that the junks of Fu-nan habitually sell such mirrors to the Chinese. Our 
story renders it clear that only an isolated instance comes into question, 
and that this particular, unusual mirror could not even be disposed of in 
China. The Liang se kung tse ki is not a work on commercial geography 
summarising general data, but is a story-book narrating specific events. 
We have in the present case not a description, but a narrative.’’— Laufer. 



CHANG-YUE 


when the flesh in these hiding places becomes so putrified that it 
phosphoresces, it resembles a precious stone. Birds carry it off in 
their beaks, and this is the jewel from which this mirror is made 
Nobody in the empire understood this and dared to pay that 
price 

—Chinese text, cited and translated by Berthold Laufer: 
Optical Lenses, Toung Pao, Vol. xvi (1915), pp. 200-02 — (cf. 
Ferrand, JA : 11 : 13, pp. 461-2) . 



XII. COSMAS 


(A) A description of Indian Animals 
i. The Rhinoceros 

This animal is called the rhinoceros from having horns upon 
its snout. When it is wandering about, the horns are mobile, but 
when it sees anything which excites its rage, it stiffens them, and 
they become so rigid that they are strong enough to tear up even 
trees by the roots — those especially which come in the way of the 
front horn. The eyes are fixed low down about the jaws. It is 
altogether an animal much to be dreaded, and in this respect so 
far a contrast to the elephant. Its feet and its hide, however, 
closely resemble those of that animal. The hide when dried is four 
fingers thick, and this is sometimes used instead of iron in ploughs 
for tilling the land. The Ethiopians in their language call the 
rhinoceros Arou, or Harisi, prefixing the rough breathing to the 
alpha of the latter word, and adding risi to it in order that by the 
arou they may designate the animal and by the ortsi, ‘ ploughing,’ 
giving it this name from its shape about the nostrils, as well as 
from the use to which its hide is applied. I have seen in Ethiopia, 
when I was standing at a distance off, a living rhinoceros and I have 
seen also the hide of a dead one stuffed with chaff, and set up in 
the royal palace, and of this the picture I have drawn is an exact 
copy. 1 


ii The Taurelaphos, the Bull-stag or Ox-deer 
The taurelaphos is an animal found in India and in Ethiopia. 
But the Indian ones are tame, and gentle and the people use them 
for transporting pepper and other stuffs packed in saddle-bags. 
They supply the natives with milk and butter. Moreover we eat 
their flesh, the Christians killing them by cutting their throats, and 
the Pagans by knocking them on the head. The Ethiopian ox- 
deer, unlike the Indian, are wild and untamable. 

— McCrindle : Ancient India as described in Classical Litera- 
ture «pp. 156-7, (ef. The Christian Topography of Cosmos, ed. 
J. W. McCrindle, Hakluyt Society, (1897), pp. 358-9) . 


1. In the Codex the pictures of the animals and plants precede the des- 
cription of rtiMti — .MpPr lmtl ^ , 



COSMAS 


tit. The Agriobous or Wild Ox 
This is an animal 2 of great size and belongs to India, and from 
it is got what is called the toupha 3 wherewith commanders deco- 
rate their horses and their banners when taking the field. It is 
said of this animal that if its tail be caught by a tree, it no longer 
stoops but stands erect, from its reluctance to lose even a single 
hair. The natives thereupon come up and cut off its tail, and then 
it scuttles away completely docked of this appendage. Such is the 
nature of “this animal. 

—Ancient Ind., pp. 157-8. 
it). The Moschus or Musk-deer 
The small animal, 4 again, is the Moschus, called in the native 
tongue Kastouri. Those who hunt it pierce it with arrows and 
having tied up the blood collected at the navel 5 they cut it away. 
For this is the part which has the pleasant fragrance known to us 
by the name of musk. The men then cast away the rest of the 


— The Christian Topography, p. 360. 

(B) Indian Flora : i. Piperi-pepper 

This is a picture of the tree which produces pepper, each sepa- 
rate stem being very limp and slender twines itself, like the pliant 
tendrils of the vine, around some tall tree that does not itself bear 
fruit. Each of the clusters is enveloped within a couple of leaves. 
It is of a deep green colour like that of rue. 

ii. ArgeUia — The Nurikela of Sanskrit — Cocow-nuts 
The other tree (represented) is that which bears what are 
called argellia, that is, the large Indian nuts. It differs in no way 
from the date palm, except in being of greater height and thickness, 
and in having larger branches. It bears not more than two or three 
flower-spathes, each having as many nuts. Their taste is quite 
sweet and pleasant, like that of green nuts. The nut is at first 
full of a delicious liquid which the Indians therefore drink instead 


2. Evidently the yik.— MeCrindle. 

3. The chowries or fly-flappers used in India an occasions at state and 
parade.— MeCrindle . 

4. Little mare than three feet in length— MeCrindle. 

5. ThS cyst of the male, which is about the size of hen’s egg, contains 
a clotted, oily, friable matter, dark brown in colour, and this is the true 
musk. — MeCrindle • 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


of wine. 6 Ibis very sweet beverage is called rhongkhosura. If 
the fruit is gathered at maturity, then so long as it keeps fresh, the 
liquid in contact with shell hardens upon it progressively, while 
the liquid in the centre retains its fluidity until it entirely fails. 
If, however, it be kept too long the fruit becomes rancid and unfit 
for human food. 

—Ancient India, p. 159 ; (cf. Christian Top. p. 362) . 

(C) Concerning the Island of Taprobani — Ceylon 

This is a large oceanic island lying in the Indian sea. Among 
the Indians it goes by the name of Sielediba, but the Pagans call it 
Taprobane, wherein is found the stone hyacinth. It lies farther away 
than the pepper country. Around it there is a great number of small 
islands, 7 all of them having fresh water and cocoanut trees. They 
nearly all have deep water close up to them. The great island, as 
the natives allege, has a length of three hundred gaudia 8 and a 
breadth of as many — that is of nine hundred miles. There are two 
kings in the island who are at feud \yith each other. The one 
possesses the hyacinth, and the other the rest of the island wherein 
are the port and the emporium of trade. The emporium is one 
much resorted to by the people in those parts. 9 The island has 
also a church of Persian Christians who have settled there, and a 
Presbyter who is appointed from Persia, and a Deacon and a com-' 
plete ecclesiastical ritual. 10 The natives and their kings are, how- 
ever, heathens in religion. In this island they have many temples, 
and in one situated on an eminence is a single hyacinth as big as a 
large pine-cone, the colour of fire and flashing from a distance, es- 
pecially when the sunbeams play around it — a matchless sight. 11 
As its position is central, the island is a great resort of ships from 


B. “Possibly,” says Yule, “Cosmas has confounded the cocoanut milk with 
the coco-palm toddy. For sura Is the name applied on the Malabar coast to 
the latter. Roncho may represent lanha, the name applied there to the 
nut when ripe, but still soft." Yule’s lanha seems to stand for Ilanha, Mai. 
for tender cocoanut. 

7. The Laccadives. 

8. ‘From gau, the distance a man can walk in an hour. 

9. The Emporium, according to’ Gibbon, was Trincomale, but Tennent 
takes it to be Point de Galle.— McCrindle . 

10. This was a branch of the Nestorian Church.— McCrindle. 

11. Yiiang Chwang and Marco Polo mention this stone. "Tennent thinks 
that this stone was not a ruby but an amethyst, a gem found in large crystals 
in Ceylon which, according to mineralogists, is the hyacinth of the ancients.” 



COSMAS 


all parts of India, and from Persia and Ethiopia, and in like man- 
ner it despatches many of its own to foreign ports. And from the 
inner countries, 1 * I mean China and other marts 
in that direction, it receives silks, aloes, clovewood, mautimx 
sandalwood, and their other products, and these it t®"* 
again passes on to the outer ports, I mean to 
Male, 13 where pepper grows, and to Kalliana 14 where copper is 
produced and sesame wood and materials for dress ; for it is also 
a great mart of trade ; and to Sindu also, where musk or castor is 
got, as well as Androstachus, (?) and to Persia and the Homerite 
country, and to Adule. 13 Receiving in return the traffic of these 
marts, and transmitting it to the inner ports, the island exports to 
each of these at the same time her own products. Sindu 
is the frontier country of India for the river Indus, that is, the 
Phison, which empties itself into the Persian Gulf, separates Persia 
from India. The following are the most famous commercial marts 
in India : Sindus, Orrhotha,'* Kalliana, Sibor, 17 Male which has 
five marts that export pepper : Parti, Mangarouth 18 Salopatana, 
Nnlopatana, Poudopatana. 19 Then out in the ocean, at the distance 
of five days and nights from the mainland, lies Selediba, that is 
TaprobanS. Then, again, farther away and on the mainland is 
the mart MaraUo, which exports chank shells, then comes Kaber 20 
■which exports atabandenum, then next is the clove country, then 
China, which produces silk, beyond which there is no other land, 
for the ocean encircles it on the east. 

Sielediba being thus in a central position with reference to the 
Indies, and possessing the hyacinth, receives wares from all 
trading marts and again distributes them over the world, and thus 
becomes a great emporium. Now once upon a time one of our 
countrymen engaged in commerce and called Sopater who to our 
knowledge died five and thirty years ago, came on business to the 
island of Taprobane, where also, it so happened, a ship from Persia 


12. The countries inside of Cape Comorin, that Is, to the east of it.— 
McCrindle. 


14. Kalyan, near Bombay, cf. Perijjlus sect. 52. 

15. Mod. Thulla or Zula on the E . African coast. 
IB. Incorrect for Sorath, Sura$tra, Gujarat. 

17. Chaul(?) 


it have been situated between Mangalore 


FN—12 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


came to moorings. So the men from AdulS, among whom was 
Sopater, disembarked, as did likewise the men from Persia, among 
whom there was one of advanced age. Then in accordance with 
the custom of the place, the magistrates and the custom-house offi- 
cials received them and brought them to the king. The king, having 
admitted them to his presence and received their obeisances, re- 
quested them to be seated. Then he asked them : How fares it 

with the countries you come from, and how are things moving 
there ? To this they replied : Things are going 
msMw and on all very well. Afterwards, when in the course of 

bohan conversation, the king inquired : Which of your res- 

pective kings is the greater and the more power- 
ful ? the Persian, who was in haste to speak first, replied : Our 
king is both more powerful and is greater and richer, and is 
King of Kings, and he can do whatever he pleases. Sopater, on the 
other hand, remained silent. So the king asked : Have you, 
Roman, 21 nothing to say ? What have I to say, he rejoined, when 
he there has said these things ? If you wish to ascertain the truth, 
you have both the kings here. Examine each and you will see 
which of them is the more illustrious and the more powerful. On 
hearing this the king was surprised at what he said, and 
asked : How, have I both the kings here ? The other then replied : 
You have the money of both— the current coin of. the one and the. 
drachma of the other, that is, the miliarision. 22 Examine the imago 
of each, and you will see the truth. The king thanked the man, 
and assenting to his proposal, ordered both coins to be produced. 
Then the Roman coin had a good ring, and was bright and finely 
shaped, for choice pieces of this nature are exported thither. But 
the miliarision, was silver and, to say in a word all that need be 
said, was not to be compared with the gold piece. The king having 
closely examined each of the coins both on the obverse and reverse 
side, bestowed all manner of praise on the Roman coin and said : 
Truly the Romans are splendid men and powerful, and possessed of 
great good sense. He therefore commanded Sopater to be greatly 
honoured, and having mounted him on his elephant, he conducted 


21. In the text Rumi, 'a term applied in India to all the powers who 
have been successively in possession of Constantinople, whether Soman, 
Christian or Mahommedan’ — So Vincent.— McCrindle. 

22. It was a silver drachma, twenty of which made a Daric. Gold and 
silver denarii, as we learn from the Feriplus, were among the imports of 
Barygaza (Bharoch) . The silver denarius was nearly equal in value to 
the drachma. — McCrindle. 



COSMAS 


91 

him round the whole city with drums beating and many marks of 
honour. All this was told us by Sopater himself as well as by his 
companions, who had gone with him to that island from Adule. 88 
This occurrence, they assured me, overwhelmed the Persian with 
shame. 

Between the famous marts already mentioned, there are many 
others, both on the coast and in the interior, and the country has 
a vast area. The regions higher up, that is, farther north than 
India, are occupied by the White Huns, whose 
king, called Gollas, 24 when going to war is collas 
said to take with him no fewer than two 
thousand elephants and much cavalry. Within his empire is in- 
cluded India, from which he extracts tribute. Once on a time, 
this king, as the story goes, wished to sack an Indian city in the 
interior — one that was surrounded by water and was thus protected 
from assault. He encamped all around it for a considerable time, 
until all the water had been drunk up by his elephants, his horses, 
and his soldiery. Having then crossed over to the city on dry land, 
he was able to capture it. This people highly prize the emerald 
stone and wear it when set in a crown. For the Ethiopians, who 
traffic with the Blemmyes 25 in Ethiopia, carry this same stone into 
India, and with the price they obtain make purchases of the most 
beautiful articles* All these particulars I have related and describ- 
ed partly from what fell under my observation, and partly as I 
learned them after most careful inquiry when I was in the neigh- 
bourhood of the places I have mentioned. 

The kings of various parts of India possess elephants, as for 
instance the kings of Orrotha, and Kalliana, and Sindu and Sibor 
and Male. They have each six hundred, it may 
be, or five hundred more or less. But the king of elephants, 
Sielediba obtains by purchase both the elephants houses 
and horses which he possesses. The price he 
pays for the elephants depends upon the number of cubits they 
reach in height. For the height is measured from the ground in 
cubits, and the price is reckoned at so many pieces of money for 
each cubit, say fifty or a hundred pieces, or even more. His horses 
again are imported from Persia, and the traders from whom ha buys 


23. This seems to be a traditional story, for we 1< am from Pliny that 
ambassadors who had been sent from Ceylon to the Emperor Claudius regard- 
ed with pjpfound respect the Roman denarii.— MeCrindle. 

24. Mihiragula, see Smith-Early History of India,* p. 336. 

25. Fierce predatory nomads of the Nubian wilds.— MeCrindle . 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


them he exempts from the payment of custom house dues. But 
the kings of the mainland catch their elephants as they roam 
about at large, and having tamed them, employ them in war. They 
often set elephants to fight against each other in the presence of the 
king. They separate the two combatants by means of a large 
cross-beam of wood fastened to other two beams standing upright 
and reaching up to their breasts. A number of men are stationed 
on this and that side to prevent them meeting in close fight, but 
they instigate them to attack each other, and then 
elephant the beasts becoming enraged use their trunks to 

fighis belabour each other with blows till one or other of 

them gives in. Hie tusks of the Indian elephants 
are not large, but should they be so the Indians shorten them with 
a saw so that the weight may not encumber them when in action. 
The Ethiopians again have not the art of taming elephants, but 
when the king happens to wish to have one or two for show, they 
catch young ones and put them under training. Now they are quite 
plentiful in Ethiopia, and their tusks being large are exported by 
sea from that country into India and Persia and the Homerite 
country and the Roman dominion. These facts I have recorded 
on the testimony of others. 

The river Phison (Indus) divides India from the country of 
the Huns. In Scripture the Indian country is called Euilat (Havi- 
lah) , 1 where there is gold ; and the gold of that land is good.' 

— Ancient India as described in Classical Literature, McCrindle, 
pp. 160-6 (cf. The Christian Topography of Cosmos, pp. 363-373 ; 
and Yule, Cathay and the Way Thither 1 i. pp. 222-231) . 



XIII. C. 550-600 A.D. (MA TWAN LIN) 


Ma Tie an Lin, a mediaeval Chinese historian, brought together 
in a Cyclopaedia all the ancient authorities known to him, and the 
extract given below may well be taken to apply to South India 
about the second half of the sixth century or earlier from its posi- 
tion in the work of Ma. 

On the condition of South India 

On the west, India carries on a considerable commerce by sea 
with Ta-tsin (the eastern Roman empire), the An-se (or Asae, 
Syrians) ; some of the Indians come as far as Foo-nan and Keaou- 
che (Tonquin), to traffic in coral necklaces and pearls of inferior 
quality (or which only resemble pearls — san-kan) . These mer- 
chants are accustomed to dispense with books of accounts (in their 
commercial transactions). Teeth (elephants’ or rhinoceros’ ?) and 
shells form their articles of exchange. They have men very skilful 
in magical arts. The greatest mark of respect which a wife can show 
towards her husband is to kiss his feet and embrace his knees : 
this is the most energetic and persuasive demonstration of the 
interior sentiments. In their houses, they have young girls who 
dance and sing yith much skill. Their king and his ministers (to- 
chin, ministers about the sovereign) have a vast number of silk 
dresses and fine woollen fabrics. He dresses his hair on the top 
of his head (like the Chinese women) , and the rest of the hair he 
cuts, to make it short. Married men also cut their hair, and pierce 
their ears, to hang valuable rings in them. The general practice 
is to walk on foot. The colour of their dress is mostly white. The 
Indians are timid in battle ; their weapons are the bow and arrows, 
and shield; they have also (like the Chinese) flying or winged 
ladders -, 1 and according as the ground will permit, they follow the 
rules of the wooden oxen and rolling horses . 2 They have a written 
character and a literature and they are well versed in astronomy 
or the science of the heavens, in that of numbers, and in astrology. 
All the men study the instructive books denominated Seihthan, 3 
written on the leaves of the tree pei-to intended to preserve a record 
of things. • 

— JASB. vi. pp. 66-7. (JRAS vl. pp. 457-9 and IA. ix pp. 14 ff). 

1. Scaling ladders. 

2. Machines of war of which we can form no Idea now. 

3. Siddhanta. This and the reference to writing on (palm) leaves seem 
to indicate S. India as the subject of this description. 



XIV. YUAN CHWANG— KINGDOMS OF THE DECCAN 
Wu-t'u (Ota) 

From Karnasuvanja he travelled south-west above 700 2i and 
came to the Wu (U) — t‘u country.’ This, he states, was above 
7000 li in circuit, and its capital above twenty It in circuit, 
the soil was rich and fertile yielding fruits larger than 
those of other lands, and its rare plants and noted flowers could 
not be enumerated ; the climate was hot ; the people were of vio- 
lent ways, tall and of dark complexion, in speech and maimers 
different from the people of “ Mid India ; ’’ they were indefatiga- 
ble students and many of them were Buddhists. There were above 
100 Buddhist monasteries, and a myriad Brethren all Mahayanists. 
Of Deva Temples there were 50, and the various sects lived pell- 
mell. There were more than ten Asoka topes at places where the 
Buddha had preached. In the south-west of the country was the 
Pusie-p' o-k'i-li (restored by Julien as “ Pushpagiri ”) monastery 
in a mountain ; the stone tope of this monastery exhibited super- 
natural lights and other mircales, sun-shades placed by worship- 
pers on it between the dome and the amalaka remained there like 
needles held by a magnet. To the north-east of tjus tope in a hill 
monastery was another tope like the preceding in its marvels. The 
miraculous power of these topes was due to the topes having been 
erected by supernatural beings. 2 3 Near the shore of the ocean in the 
south-east of this country was the city Che-li-ta-lo (Charitra ?) , s 
above twenty li in circuit, which was a thoroughfare and resting- 
place for sea-going traders and strangers from distant lands. The 
city was naturally strong and it contained many rare commodities. 
Outside it were five monasteries close together, of lofty structure and 
with very artistic images. Far away, 20,000 li distant in the south 
was the Seng-ka-lo (Ceylon) Country, and from this place on calm 
nights one could see the brilliant light from the pearl on the top 
of the tope over the Buddha’s Tooth-relic in that country. 


1. Modern Orissa. The capital of ancient Odra has been identified 
variously with Jaipur (Hunter) and Midnapore (Fergusson). 

2. ‘Cunningham supposes the two hills named in the text to be Udaya- 

giri and Khanfiagiri in which many Buddhist caves and inscriptions have 
been discovered.’— Beal. 1 

3. Fergusson identified this with Tamluk. 



YUAN CHWANG 


Kung-yii (Gu or Yo) To 

From the Ota country a journey south-west, through a forest, 
for over 1200 li, brought the pilgrim to the Kung-yii (or gu or-ya) - 
t’o country. 4 This country was above 1000 li in circuit, and its 
capital was above twenty li in circuit. It was a hilly country 
bordering on a bay of the sea, with regular harvests, a hot climate. 
The people were tall and valorous and of a black complexion, 
having some sense of propriety and not very deceitful. Their 
written language was the same as that of India, but their ways of 
speaking were different, and they were not Buddhists. Deva Temples 
were above 100 in number, and of Tirthikas there were more 
than 10000. The country contained some tens of towns which 
stretched from the slopes of the hills to the edge of the sea. As the 
towns were naturally strong there was a gallant army which kept 
the neighbouring countries in awe, and so there was no powerful 
enemy. As the country was on the sea side it contained many 
rare precious commodities; the currency was couries and pearls; 
and the country produced large dark-coloured elephants which 
were capable of long journeys. 

Ka-lcng-ka (Kalinga) 

From Kung+iii-t'o the pilgrim travelled through jungle and 
forest dense with huge trees, south-west for 1400 or 1500 li, to 
Kalinga. This country he describes as above 5000 li in circuit, 
its capital 5 being above twenty li. There were regular seed-time 
and harvest, fruit and flowers grew profusely, and there were 
continuous woods for some hundreds of li. The country produced 
dark wild elephants prized by the neighbouring countries. The 
climate was hot. The people were rude and headstrong in dis- 
position, observant of good faith and fairness, ' fast and clear in 
speech; in their talk and manners they differed somewhat from 
Mid-India.” There were few Buddhists, the majority of the 
people being of other religions. There were above ten Buddhist 
monasteries, and 500 Brethren, “ Students of the Mahayanist 
Sthavira school system.” There were more than 100 Deva Tem- 
ples, and the professed adherents of the various sects were very 


4. Cunningham and Fergusson agree in identifying ih.'s with the country 
round the Chilka lake, — apparently a part of Harsa’s empire at the time 
of Yiian Clgvang’s visit. 

5. Rajahmundry according to Cunningham. But Fergusson held it to be 
not far from Kalingapatam. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


96 

numerous, the majority being nirgranthas. 6 This country had 
once been very densely inhabited ; a holy r$i possessing superna- 
tural powers had his hermitage in it; he was once offended by 
a native and cursed the country ; as a consequence of this curse 
the land became, and remained, utterly depopulated. In the lapse 
of many years since that event it had gradually become inhabited 
again, but it still had only a scanty population. Near the south 
wall of the city (i.e. the capital apparently) was an Asoka tope 
beside which were a sitting-place and exercise-ground of the Four 
Past Buddhas. On a ridge of a mountain in the north of the 
country was a stone tope, above 100 feet high, where a Pratyeka 
Buddha had passed away at the beginning of the present kalpa when 
men’s lives extended over countless years. 

The Southern Kosala 

From Kalinga he went north-west by hill and wood for above 
1800 li to Kosala. 7 8 This country, more than G000 li in circuit, was 
surrounded by mountains and was a succession of woods and 
marshes, its capital being above 40 It in circuit. The soil of the 
country was rich and fertile, the towns and villages were close 
together ; the people were prosperous, tall of stature and black in 
colour ; the king was a ksatriya by birth, a Buddhist in religion, 
and of noted benevolence. There were above 100 Buddhist 
monasteries and about 10000 Brethren, all Mahayanists. Near the 
South of the city (that is apparently, the capital) was an old 
monastery with an Asoka tope where Buddha had vanquished 
Tirthikas by the exhibition of supernormal powers, and in which 
Nagarjuna Fusa had afterwards lodged. Contemporary with this 
P'usa was the king styled Sha-to-p‘o-ha or “ Leading-right ” ( yin - 
cheng),* who treated Nagarjuna with ceremonious respect, and 
kept a guard at his residence. 

Deva Fusa from Senkgala came on a visit to this monastery in 
order tojiave a discussion with Nagarjuna. 9 When Deva arrived 

6. I.e. Digambara Jains. 

7. Most probably Chattisgarh; the site of the capital being near about 
Wyraghur, the Vayiragaram of the Cola inscriptions. See Fergusson in JRAS, 
NS. li. p. 260. 

8. Thu is, no doubt, the dynaktlc name Satavahana, the Chinese transla- 
tion being due to some mistake. 

9. This account of the encounter between NSgSrjuna and Aryadeva is 
of great interest, especially after the excavation of Nagarjunikonda. On the 
problems arising out of Yuan Chwang’s text the reader must consult, besides 
the commentary of Watters, Vogel’s notes to the inscriptions in El. xx. See 
also JOR. ix, pp. 95-99 for an account of an inscribed earthem pot possibly 
containing the remains of Aryadeva, 



YUAN CHWANG 


and requested to be admitted, the disciple in charge of the door 
reported the circumstance. Nagarjuna, who had heard of the 
vistor’s fame, merely filled his bowl with water 
and gave it to the disciple to show to Deva. This hagarjotja 
last silently dropped a needle into the bowl, and dis- amd aryadeva 
missed the disciple. On learning this Nagarjuna 
exclaimed — “ He is a wise man ! It is for the gods to know the 
hidden springs, and it is the sage who searches out their minute 
developments ; as the man has such excellence call him in at once.” 
“What do you mean,” asked the disciple, — “is this a case of 
‘ Silence being eloquence ?’ Nagarjuna explained that the bowl 
full of water typified his own universal knowledge, and the drop- 
ping of the needle into it typified Deva’s thorough comprehension 
of all that knowledge. When Deva was admitted he was modest 
and timid, and he expressed his views clearly and distinctly, wish- 
ing to be instructed. Nagarjuna said to him — “ You as a scholar 
are above your contemporaries, and your excellent discourse sheds 
glory on your predecessors. I am old and feeble, and meeting one 
of such superior abilities as you I have a pitcher into which to 
draw water, and a successor to whom the continuous lamp may 
be handed over. You can be relied on for propagating the religion. 
Please come forward, and let us talk of the mysteries of Buddhism.” 
Deva was proceeding to enter on an exposition when a look at the 
majestic face of Nagarjuna made him forget his words and remain 
silent. Then he declared himself a disciple, and Nagarjuna having 
reassured him taught him the true Buddhism. Nagarjuna had the 
secret of long life, and had attained an age of several centuries, 
with his mental faculties still flourishing, when he voluntarily put 
an end to his life in the following circumstances. The king Yin- 
cheng was also some hundreds of years old, and his life depended 
on that of Nagarjuna by whom it had been prolonged. This king’s 
youngest son became impatient to succeed, and learning from his 
mother the secret of his father’s life, at her instigation he went 
to the great P*usa, and persuaded him that it was his duty to die 
on behalf of the young prince. Nagarjuna, accordingly, cut his 
own head off with a dry blade of grass, and his death was immedi- 
ately followed by that of the old king. 

To the south-west of this country above 300 li from the cdpital 
was a mountain called Po-lo-mo-lo-tci-li, 10 which rose lofty and 


10. This name which seems to represent Bhramara-giri is not easily 
explained, teal’s suggestion that it comes from Bhramarl, a name of DurgS, 
is not easy to accept; and Watters argues that Po-lo-yue of Fa-hien, usually 
rendered Pfiravata (pigeon), may represent parvota which he might have 
FJN.-13 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


compact like a single rock. Here king Yii^cheng had quarried for 
Nagarjuna a monastery in the mountain, and had cut in the rock a 
path, communicating with the monastery, for above 
ssi paevata ten It. The monastery had cloisters and lofty halls ; 

monastery these halls were in five tiers , each with four 

courts, with temples containing gold life-size 
images of the Buddha of perfect artistic beauty. It was well sup- 
plied with running water, and the chambers were lighted by 
windows cut in the rock. In the formation of this establishment the 
king’s treasury soon became exhausted, and Nagarjuna then pro- 
vided an abundant supply by transmuting the rocks into gold. 11 
In the topmost hall Nagarjuna deposited the scriptures of Sakya- 
muni Buddha and the writings of the P“ usas. In the lowest hall 
were the laymen attached to the monastery and the stores, and the 
three intermediate halls were the lodgings of the Brethren. When 
the king had finished the construction of this monastery an estimate 
of the maintenance of the workmen came to nine koti of gold coins. 
In later times the Brethren had disagreed, and had referred their 
quarrels to the king ; then the retainers of the monastery, fearing 
that the establishment would become a prey to the lawless, ex- 
cluded the Brethren, and made new barriers to keep them out; 
since then there have not been any Brethren in the monastery, and 
the way of access to it was not known. 

AnAo-lo (Andhra) 

From Kosa la he travelled South, through a forest, for above 
900 li to the An-to-lo country. This country was above 3000 li in 
circuit, and its capital P'ing-ch'i (or k'i)-lo 1= was above twenty li 
in circuit. The country had a rich fertile soil with a moist hot 
climate; the people were of a violent character; their mode of 
speech differed from that of “ Mid-India ” but they followed the 
same system of writing. There were twenty odd Buddhist monas- 
teries with more than 3000 Brethren. Near the capital was a large 
monastery with a succession of high halls and storeyed terraces 
wrought with perfect art, and containing an exquisite image of the 


heard* wrong, but not Parvati. But there seems to be no doubt that both 
Fa-hien arid Yuan Chwang describe one and the same Buddhist monastery, 
that this must have been the Sri Parvata monastery famous in Naggrjuna 
legends as the place where he spent his last days, and now found mentioned 
in the Nagarjunlkonda inscription F— Beal, ii p. 214 n. 80; Watters li, 207-8; 
Vogel, El. xx.pp.9 and 22. Fa-hien ante Vm (A). , 

11. Several works on Alchemy still pass under Nag&rjuna’s name. 

12. Does this stand for Vengl? See JRASJ7S. vi. p. 261. 



YUAN CHWANG 


Buddha. In front of the monastery was a stone tope some hundreds 
of feet high, tope and monastery being the work of the arhat A-che- 
lo (Acara, translated by So-hsing, “Performance” or “Rule of 
Conduct ") . Near the south-west of this monastery was an Asoka 
tope where the Buddha preached, displayed miracles, and received 
into his religion a countless multitude. Above twenty li further 
south-west was an isolated hill on the ridge of which was a stone 
tope where Ch’cn-na 13 P‘usa composed a “ yinming- 
lun ” or treatise on Logic (or the Science dihnaca 
of Inference). Ch‘en-na after the Buddha had 
departed from this life came under his influence, and 
entered the Order. The aspirations of his spiritual knowledge 
were vast and his intellectual strength was deep and sure. Pitying 
the helpless state of his age he thought to give expansion to Bud- 
dhism. As the sastra on the science of Inference was deep and 
terse, and students wrought at it in vain, unable to acquire a know- 
ledge of its teachings, he went apart to live in calm seclusion to 
examine the qualities of the writings on it, and investigate their 
characteristics of style and meaning. Hereupon a mountain-god 
took the Fusa up in the air, and proclaimed that the sense of the 
y in-ming-lun, originally uttered by the Buddha had been lost, and 
that it would that day be set forth at large again by Ch‘en-na. This 
latter then sent abroad a great light which illuminated the dark- 
ness. The sight of this light led to the king’s request that Ch‘en-na 
should proceed at once to the attainment of arhatship. When the 
P'usa reluctantly agreed to do so, Manjusri appeared, and recalled 
him to his high designs and aspirations for the salvation of others, 
and also summoned him to develop for the benefit of posterity the 
“ Yu-kashih-ti-lun ” (Yogacarya-bhumi-sastra) , originally deli- 
vered by Maitreya. On this Ch‘en-na renounced the idea of an 
arhat’s career, and devoted himself to a thorough study and develop- 
ment of the treatise on the science of Inference. When he had 
finished his work on this subject, he proceeded to the propagation 
of the rich teaching of the Yoga system, and had disciples who 
were men of note among their contemporaries. 

Te-Na-Che-ka (DhanaJcataka ? ) 14 

From Andhra the pilgrim continued his journey south, through 
wood and jungle, for over 1000 li and reached the Ti-na-ka-che- 
ka country. This was above 6000 li in circuit, snd its capital was 


13. i.e. Dinna, DinnSga. See Watters, ii.212-14. 

14. Vogel (El. xx. p, 9) accepts this identification. 



100 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


above 40 li in circuit. 18 The country had a rich soil and yielded 
abundant crops; there was much waste land and the inhabited 
towns were few; the climate was warm, and the people were of black 
complexion, of violent disposition, and fond of the arts. There was 
a crowd of Buddhist monasteries but most of them were deserted, 
about twenty being in use, with 1000 Brethem mostly adherents of 
the Mahasanghika system. There were above 100 Deva-Temples 
and the followers of the various sects were very numerous. 

At a hill to the east of the capital was a monastery called 
Fu-p‘o-shih-lo (PurvaMld) or “ East Mountain,” and at a hill to 
the west of the city was the A-fa-lo-shih-lo 
monasteries (Avarasila) or “ West Mountain ” monastery. 

These had been erected for the Buddha by a 
former King of the country, who had made a communicating path by 
the river, and quarrying the rocks had formed high halls with long 
broad corridors continuous with the steep sides of the hills. The 
local deities guarded the monasteries, which had been frequented 
by saints and sages. During the millennium immediately following 
the Buddha’s decease a thousand ordinary Brethren came here 
every year to spend the Retreat of the rainy season. On the day 
of leaving Retreat these all became arhats, and by their super- 
normal powers went away through the air. Afterwards common 
monks and arhats sojourned here together, but f6r more than 100 
years there had not been any Brethren resident in the establish- 
ment, and visitors were deterred by the forms of wild animals 
which the mountain-gods assumed. 

Not far from the south side of the capital was a mountain-cliff 
in the Asura’s Palace in which the Sastra-Master P*o-p‘i-fei-ka lc 
waits to see Maitreya when he comes to be Buddha. Then we have 
the story of this renowned dialectician, who “ externally displaying 
the Sankhya garb, internally propagated the learning of Nagarjuna.” 
Hearing that Hu-fa (Dharmapala) P'usa was preaching Buddhism 
in Magadha with some thousands of disciples, the Sastra-Master 
longing for a discussion, set off, staff in hand, to see him. On 
arriving at Pataliputra he learned that Hu-fa was at the Bodhi- 
Tree and thither he sent as messenger a disciple with the 
following message for the P'usa : “ I have long yearned 

to come wider the influence pf you as a preacher of Buddhism, 
and a guide to the erring, but have failed to pay my respects to you 

15. Bezwada according to Sewell, following Fergusson. Cunningham 

suggested Dharaiukot or Amaravati. < 

16. Bhaviveka— (Watters, ii. 221-2), not Bhavaviveka as Beal, following 


Julien, has it. 



YUAN CHWANG 


loi 


through the non-fu lfilme nt of a former prayer I have vowed not 
to see the Bodhi-Tree m vam If I visit it I must become Buddha 
Fa-hu sent back a reply that human life was illusory and fleeting, 
and that he was too much occupied to have a discussion 
Messengers and messages Went to and fro, but there was no 
interview Then the Sastra-Master went back to his home m this 
country, and after calm reflection concluded that his doubts could 
be solved only by an interview with Maitreya as Buddha He 
thereupon abstained from food, only drinking water, and for three 
years repeated before an image of Kuan-tzu-tsai P'usa the 
“ Svi-hsin Dharani” After all this that Pusa appeared m his 
beautiful form, and on hearing the devotee’s desire to remain in 
this world to see Maitreya, he advised him rather to cultivate a 
higher goodness which would lead to rebirth in the Tusita Heaven 
and so acceleiate an interview with Maitieya But the Sastra-Mastcr 
had made up his mind and was not to be moved from his resolve 
So Kuan-tzu-tsai P'usa directed him to go to this country, to ihe 
shrine of the god Vajrapam in the clift to the south of the capital, 
and on leciting the “Vajrapam Dharani’ there he would obtain his 
desire The Sastra-Master acted on the advice, and after thice years’ 
repetition of the dharani, the god appealed gave a secret 
prescription, and told the devotee to make due petition at the 
Asuia’s Palace pi the cliff, the rock would then open and he was 
to enter on the coming of Maitreya the god would let him know 
After three more years constancy the Sastra-Master with a charmed 
mustard-seed struck the cliff which thereupon opened There 
were at the place many myriads of people who had continued 
gazing, forgetful of their homes When the Sastra-Master passed 
quietly in he urged the crowd to follow, but only six ventured 
after him , the others held back through fear, but they lamented 
their mistake 


Chu-lirya (Chulya ? ) 

From Dhanakataka the pilgrim went south-west above 1000 li to 
Chu-li-ya 17 This country was about 2,400 It in circuit, and its capi- 
tal was above ten It in circuit It was a wild jungle region with 
very few settled inhabitants, and bands of highwaymen went about 
openly, it had a moist hot climate, the people were of a* fierce 
and profligate character and were *believers in the Tirfhikas , the 
Buddhist monasteries were in ruins, and o riv some of them had 



MB FOREIGN NOTICES 

Brethren; there were several tens of Deva Temples, and the 
Digambaras were numerous. To the south-east of the capital, and 
near it, was an Asoka tope where the Buddha had preached, 
wrought miracles, overcome Tirthikas, and received men and devas 
into his communion. Near the west side of the city was an old 
monastery where Deva P'usa had discussed with the arhat Uttara. 
And this is the story of the discussion. 18 Deva had heard of this 
arhat with supernormal powers and attainments, so he made a 
long journey to see him and observe his style of teaching. Uttara, 
being a man content with little, had only one couch in his room, 
so he made a heap of fallen leaves on which he bade his guest 
recline. When the arhat was ready Deva stated his difficulties, 
and the arhat gave his solutions, then Deva replied and put further 
questions and so on for seven rounds ; the arhat unable to reply 
transported himself secretly to the Tu$ita Paradise and obtained 
the necessary explanations from Maitreya who told him that he 
should be very respectful to Deva who was to be a Buddha in the 
present kalpa ; when Uttara imparted his information to Deva the 
latter recognised it as the teaching of Maitreya ; hereupon Uttara 
gave up his mat to Deva with polite apologies, and treated him 
with profound respect. 


Dravida 

Prom Chulya he travelled 1.500 or 1,600 li through wood and 
jungle south to the To-lo-p'i-t‘u country. This was above 6,000 
li in circuit and its capital Kan-chih-pu-lo was above thirty li in 
circuit. 19 The region had a rich fertile soil, it abounded in fruits 
and flowers and yielded precious substances. The people were 
courageous, thoroughly trustworthy, and public-spirited, and they 
esteemed great learning ; in their written and spoken language 
they differed from “Mid-India." There were more than 100 Bud- 
dhist monasteries with above 10,000 Brethren all of the Sthavira 
school. The Deva-Temples were above 80, and the majority be- 
longed to the Digambaras. This country had been frequently 
visited by the Buddha, and king Asoka had erected topes 
at the various spots where the Buddha had preached and 


18. Thi* story oi Deva P'usa and Uttara is one of our pilgrim’s silly 
legends about the great apostles of Buddhism in India, and we need not 

examine it closely Our pilgrim evidently understood the arhat to 

be a Hlnayanlst Buddhist who was no match in discussion for the Maha- 
yanlst P'usa who had god-given powers of persuasion.’— Watters. 

19. This is doubtless Kindpuram. Elsewhere ft is described as tne 
■ea-port of South India for Ceylon; this is possibly due to a confusion with 
Negapatam. See Watters, ii p. 227. 



YUAN CHWANO 


admitted members into his Order. Hie capital was the birthplace 
of Dharmapala Fusa 20 who was the eldest son of a high official 
of the city. He was a boy of good natural parts 
which received great development as he grew dhaxmafala 
up. When he came of- age a daughter of 
the king was assigned to him as wife, but on the night 
before the ceremony of marriage was to be performed, being 
greatly distressed in mind, he prayed earnestly before an image of 
Buddha. In answer to his prayer a god bore him away to a moun- 
tain monastery some hundreds of It from the capital. When the 
Brethren of the monastery heard his story they complied with his 
request, and gave him ordination, and the king on ascertaining 
what had become of him treated him with increased reverence and 
distinction. Not far from the south of the capital was a large 
monastery which was a rendezvous for the most eminent men of 
the country. It had an Asoka tope above 100 feet high where the 
Buddha had once defeated Tirthikas by preaching, and had received 
many into his communion. Near it were traces of a ‘ sitting-place 
and exercise-walk ’ of the Four Past Buddhas. 

Mo-lo-kii-t'a (Malakuta) 

From Kanci city he went south above 3000 li to the Mo-lo- 
ku-i‘a (Malakuta) country. 21 This country he describes as being 
above 5,000 li in circuit with a capital above forty li in circuit. The 
soil was brackish and barren ; the country was a depot for sea- 
pearls; the climate was very hot and the people were black; they 
were harsh and impetuous, of mixed religions, indifferent to culture 
and only good at trade. There were many remains of old monas- 
teries, very few monasteries were in preservation and there was only 
a small number of Brethren. There were hundreds of Deva- 
Temples, and the professed adherents of the various sects, espe- 
cially the Digambaras, were very numerous. Not far from the 
east side of the capital were the remains of the old monastery built 
by Asoka’s brother, or Ta-ti or Mahendra, with the foundations and 
dome, the latter alone visible, of a ruined tope on the east side of 
the remains. The tope had been built by Asoka to perpetuate the 
memory of Buddha having preached, made miraculous exhibitions, 
and brought a countless multitude into his communion gt the 
place. The long lapse of time had served to increase *the effica- 


20. A devoted student of Buddhism and author of repute who wrote 
treatises on Etymology, Logic and the Metaphysics of Buddhism. (Watters, 

a.p.228) . * 

21. This is the contemporary Pandyan Kingdom. See Proceeding* and 
Transaction* of the Sixth All-India Oriental Conference, pp. 173-9, 



104 FOREIGN NOTICES 

cions powers of the tope and prayers offered at it were still 
answered. 

In the south of the country near the sea was the Mo-lo-ya 
(Malaya) mountain, with lofty cliffs and ridges and deep valhiys 
and gullies, on which were sandal, camphor and other trees.® To 
the east of this was the Pv-ta-lo-ka (Potalaka) mountain with steep 
narrow paths over its cliffs and gorges in irregular confusion ; on 
the top was a lake of clear water, whence issued a river 
which, on ils way to the sea, flowed twenty times round 
the mountain. By the side of the lake was a stone Deva- 
palace frequented by Kuan-tzu-tsai Fusa. Devotees risking life, 
brave water and mountain to see the P'usa, but only a few 
succeed in reaching the shrine. To the people at the foot of 
the mountain who pray for a sight of the P'usa, he appears some- 
times as a Pasupata Tirthika, or as a Mahesvara, and consoles the 
suppliant with this answer. To the north-east of Potalaka on the 
seaside was a city, the way to Seng-ka-lo (Ceylon) of the south 
sea, and local accounts made the voyage from it to Ceylon one of 
about 3000 li to the south-east. 

[Yuan Chwang’s account of Ceylon and other islands is 
full of legend and gossip of no value for our purposes, and 
may hence he passed over. Wc return to hjs account at the 
point where he resumes his description of the countries 
visited by him.] 


Kung-kan-na-pu-lo 

From the Dravida country he went north 23 into a jungle in- 
fested by troops of murderous highwaymen, passing an isolated 

22. Beal’s version gives more details of the Malaya mountain and is 
worth citing here : 

“Here is found the whiLe sandal -wood tree and the Chan-t'an-ni-p'o 
(Chandaneva) tree. These two arc much alike, and the latter can only be 
distinguished by going in the height of summer to the top of some hill, 
and then looking at a distance great serpents may be seen entwining it; thus 
it Is known. Its wood is naturally cold, and therefore serpents twine round 
it. After having noted the tree, they shoot an arrow into it to mark it. 
In the wintfr, after the snakes havf gone, the tree is cut down. The tree 
from which Kie-pu-Io (karpura) scent is procured, is in trunk like the pine, 
but different leaves and flowers and fruit. When the tree Is first cut down 
and sappy, it has no smell; but when the wood gets dry, it forms into veins 
and splits; then in the middle is the scent, in appearance like mica, of the 
colour of frozen-snow. This is what is called (in Chinese) longfnao-hiang, 
the dragon-brain scent.” 

23. The direction given in the Life is North-West. 



YUAN CHWANG 


105 


city and a small town, and after a journey of above 2000 li he 
reached the Kung-kin (or kan)-na-pu-lo country. This country 
was above 5000 li and its capital above thirty li in circuit. 24 It 
had more than 100 Buddhist monasteries and above 10000 Brethren 
who were students of both “ Vehicles.” Close to the capital was a 
large monastery with above 300 Brethren all men of great distinc- 
tion. In the temple of this monastery was a tiara of Prince 
Sarvarthasiddha (that is, the prince who afterwards became 
Gautama Buddha) which was nearly two feet high adorned with 
gems and enclosed in a case ; on festival days it was exhibited and 
worshipped, and it could emit a bright light. In the temple of 
another monastery near the capital was a sandalwood image of 
Maitreya made by the arhat Sronaviihsatikoti. To the north of the 
capital was a wood of tala trees above thirty li in circuit, 25 and 
within the wood was a tope where the Four Past Buddhas had sat 
and walked for exercise, and near this was the tope over the relics 
of Sronaviihsatikoti. Near the capital on the east side was a tope 
which had associations with the Buddha’s preaching ; to the south- 
west of the capital were an Asoka tope at the spot where 
Sronaviihsatikoti made miraculous exhibitions and had many con- 
verts, and besides the tope the remains of a monastery built by 
that arhat. 


Mo-ha-la-ch‘a (Maharastra) 

North-west from this he entered a great forest-wilderness 
ravaged by wild beasts and harried by banded robbers, and travel- 
ling 2400 or 2500 li he came to the Mo-ha-la- ch‘a (or t‘o) country. 
This country was 6000 li in circuit and its capital, which had a 
large river on its west side, was above thirty li in circuit. The 
inhabitants were proud-spirited and war-like, grateful for favours 
and revengeful for wrongs, self-sacrificing towards suppliants in 
distress and sanguinary to death with any who treated them insult- 
ingly. 26 Their martial heroes who led the van of the army in bat- 


24. Though the country meant seems to be Konkana, there is no agree- 
ment as to the capital. Beal, ii, p. 253 n 40 and Watters, ii, p. 2^8. 

25. Here Beal adds: "The leaves (of this tree) are long and broad, 

their colour shining end glistening. In all the countries of Trivia their leaves 
are everywhere used for writing on." 

26. Further details found in Beal’s version at this point are of interest: 
“If thtty are going to seek revenge, they first give their enemy warning; 

then, each being armed, they attack each other with lances (spears). When 
one turns to flee, the other pursues him, hut they do not kill a man down 
FJN.-14 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


i<rt 

tie went into conflict intoxicated, and their war-elephants were 
also made drunk before an engagement Relying on the strength 
of his heroes and elephants the king treated 
pulaxzsm n neighbouring countries with contempt. He was 

a ksatriya by birth, and his name was Pu-lo- 
ki-she , 27 The benevolent sway of this king reached far 
and wide, and his vassals served him with perfect loyalty. The 
great king Siladitya at this time was invading east and west, and 
countries far and near were giving in allegiance to him, but Mo-ha- 
la-ch'a refused to become subject to him. 

The people were fond of learning, and they combined ortho- 
doxy and heterodoxy. Of Buddhist monasteries there were above 
100 and the Brethren who were adherents of both Vehicles, were 
more than 5000 in number. Within and outside the capital were 
five Asoka topes where the Four Past Buddhas had sat and walked 
for exercise and there were innumerable other topes of stone or 
brick. Not far from the south of the capital was an old monastery 
in which was a stone image of Kuan-tzu-tsai P“usa of marvellous 
efficacy. 

In the east of this country was a mountain range, ridges one 
above another in succession, tiers of peaks and sheer summits. 
Here was a monastery the base of which was in a dark defile, and 
its lofty halls and deep chambers were quarried*^ in the cliff and 
rested on the peak, its tiers of halls and storeyed terraces had the 
cliff on their back and faced the ravine. This monastery had been 
built by the A-che-lo (Acara) of West India. 29 The pilgrim then 
relates the circumstances in Acara’s life which led to the building 
of the monastery. 29 Within the establishment, he adds, was a large 


(a person who submits). If a general loses a battle, they do not inflict 
punishment, but present him with woman’s clothes, and so he is driven to 
seek death for himself.” This practice survived at least to the eleventh 
century, cl. SII. v. No. 465 H25-6, and Colas, i.p.275. 

27. Pulakesin II, Cajukya. 

28. The Ajanti Caves. An inscription here mentions the Sthavira Acala, 
as noted by Burgess. ASWI. iv. p. 135. The Chinese translation of the 
name, however, suggests the form Acara. 

29. ' Watters omits this part of the narrative. In Beal's version we have: 

“This convent was built by the Arhat Acara (O-che-lo). This Arhat 

was a man of Western India. His mother having died, he looked to see in 
what condition she was re-bom. He saw that she had received a woman’s 
body in this kingdom. The Arhat accordingly came here with a view to 
convert her, according to her capabilities of receiving the truth. Having 
entered a village to beg food, he came to the house where his mother had 
been bom. A young girl came forth with food to give him. At this moment 



107 


temple above 100 feet high in which was a stone image of the 
Buddha above seventy feet high ; the image was surmounted by 
a tier of seven canopies unattached and unsupported, each canopy 
separated from the one above it by the space of three feet. The 
walls of this temple had depicted on them the incidents of the 
Buddha’s career as Bodhisattva, including the circumstances of his 
attaining bodhi and the omens attending his final passing away, all 
great and small were here delineated. Outside the gate of the 
monastery, on either side north and south, was a stone elephant, 
and the pilgrim was informed that the bellowing of these elephants 
caused earthquakes. The P'usa Ch‘en-na or Dinnaga stayed much 
in this monastery. 

Po-lu-ka-che -p'o (Bharoch) 

From this the pilgrim went west 30 above 1000 li (about 200 
miles), crossed the Nai-mo-fc river, and came to the Po-lu-kie- 
(ka)-che-p‘an (or p'o) 41 country. This was 2400 or 2500 li in 
circuit, and its capital above twenty li ; the soil was brackish and 
vegetation was sparse ; salt was made by boiling sea-water, and 
the people were supported by the sea ; they were mean and deceit- 
ful, ignorant and believers in both orthodoxy and heterodoxy. 
There were above ten Buddhist monasteries with 300 Brethren, all 
students of the iftahayanist Sthavira school. 

—Watters : On Yiian Chwang’s Travels in India, ii pp. 193-241 
(cf. Beal : Buddhist Records of the Western World ii, pp. 204-260) . 


the milk came from her breasts and trickled down. Her friends having seen 
this considered it an unlucky sign, but the Arhat recounted the histbry of 
her birth. The girl thus attained the holy fruit (of Arhatehip). ’The Arhat, 
moved with gratitude for her who had borne and cherished him, and remem- 
bering the end of such (good) works, from a desire to requite her, built 
this sangharema.” 

30. North, according to the Life, which is better. Watters il, p. 241. 

31. Bharoch, at the mouth of the Narbada, 200 miles N. W. of Ajanta. 
Watters tb. 



XV. I-TSING 


(A) Itineraries 

i. I-tsing 

From Canton to Fo-che=Palembang (Sumatra) 20 days 
From Fo-che to Mo-lo-yu=Malayu, on the River Jambi (E. 

coast of Sumatra) 15 days 

From Mo-lo-yu to Kie-tch’a=Kedah on the W. coast of the 
Malay peninsula 15 days 

From Kie-tch’a, northwards, to the Nicobars (Lo-jen-Kouo, 
the land of naked men) 10 days 

From Lo-jen-Kouo to Tamralipti (on the Hooglv) in a NW. 
direction 1% months 1 

ii. Wou-Hing 2 3 and Tche-hong (two other pilgrims) 

From Chen-wan (in Tonkin) to Che-li-fo-chc (Palembang) 

1 month 

From Che-li-fo-che to Mo-lo-yu 15 day* 

From Mo-lo-yu to Kie-tch’a 15 days 

From Kie-tch’a West to Nagapattana (Na-kia-po-tan-na). 

30 days 

From Nagapattana to Ceylon 2 days* 

— F errand, J.A. 11 : 14, p. 51. 

Note : Takakusu, I-tsing, gives 20 days for the journey from 
Negapatam to Ceylon (p. xlvi) , which seems to be a mistake. 

(B) i. How the Buddhist priests were received and 
attended on at a Dinner 

I shall brieflv describe the ceremony of inviting priests, in 
India as well as in the islands of the Southern Sea. In India the 
host comes previously to the priests, and after a salutation, invites 
them* to the festival. On the Upavasatha-day he informs them 
saying, ‘ It is the time.’ ‘ 


1. Chavannes: Rellgieux Eminent}, pp. 119-21. 

2. See (E)vi below. 

3. Chavannes: op. cit. pp. 144-45. 



I-TSING 109 

Hie preparation of the utensils and seats for the priests is made 
according to circumstances. Necessaries may be carried (from the 
monastery) by some of the monastic servants ; or provided by the 
host. Only copper utensils as a rule are used, which are cleansed 
by being rubbed with fine ashes. Each priest sits on a small chair 
placed at such a distance that one person may not touch another. 
The shape of the chair has already been described in chapter iii. 4 
It is not wrong, however, to use earthenware 
utensils once, if they have not been used be- vessplb 
fore. When they have been already used, 
they should be thrown away into a ditch, for used vessels 
(lit. ‘ touched ’) should not be preserved at all. Consequently in 
India, at almsgiving places at the side of the road, there are heaps 
of discarded utensils which are never used again. Earthenware 
(of superior quality) such as is manufactured at Siang-yang (in 
China) may be kept after having been employed, and after having 
been thrown away may be cleansed properly. In India there were 
not originally porcelain and lacquer works. Porcelain, if enamel- 
led, is, no doubt, clean. Lacquered articles are sometimes brought 
to India by traders j people of the islands of the Southern Sea do 
not use them as eating utensils, because food placed in them re- 
ceives an oily smell. But they occasionally make use of them 
when new, after washing the oily smell away with pure ashes. 
Wooden articles are scarcely ever employed as eating utensils, yet, 
if new, they may be used once, but never twice, this being prohi- 
bited in the Vinaya. 

The ground of the dining hall at the host’s house is strewn 
over with cow-dung, and small chairs are placed at regular inter- 
vals; and a large quantity of water is prepared in 
a clean jar. When the priests arrive they untie washing 
the fastenings of their cloaks. All have clean 
iars placed before them : they examine the water, and 

if there are no insects in it, they wash their feet with it, then they 
sit down on the small chairs. When they have rested awhile, the 
host, having observed the time and finding that the sun is nearly 
at the zenith, makes this announcement : ‘ It is the time.’ Then 
each priest, folding his cloak by its two comers, ties them in front, 
and taking up the right comer of fcis skirt, holds it by, the girdle 

4. In Ch. iii. (p. 22) we read: “In India the priests wash their hands 
and feet before meals, and sit on separate small chairs. The chair is about 
seven indies high by a foot square, and the seat of it is wicker-work made 
of rattan cane. The legs are rounded, and, on the whole, the chair is not 
heavy," 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


at his left side. The priests cleanse their hands with powder made 
of peas or earth-dust ; and either the host pours water, or the priests 
themselves use water out of the Kundi (i.e. jars) ; this is done 
according as they find one way or the other more convenient Then 
they return to their seats. Next eating-utensils are distributed to 
the guests, which they wash slightly so that water does not flow 
over them. It is never customary to say a prayer before meals. 
The host, having cleansed his hands and feet (by this time) , makes 
an offering to saints (images of arhats) at the upper end of the row 
of seats ; then he distributes food to the priests. At the lowest end 
of the row an offering of food is made to the mother, Hariti. 


The following is the manner of serving food. First, one or 
two pieces of ginger about the size of the thumb are served (to 
every guest) , as well as a spoonful or half of salt on a leaf. He 
who serves the salt, stretching forth his folded hands and kneeling 
before the head priest, mutters ‘ Sampragatam ’ (well come !) . 
This is translated by ‘ good arrival.’ * * * Now the head priest 
says ‘Serve food equally.’ 


He who serves food, standing before the guestf, whose feet are 
in a line, bows respectfully, while holding plates, cakes, and fruits 
in his hands, serves them about one span away from (or above) 
the priest’s hands; every other utensil or food must be offered 
one or two inches above the guest’s hands. If anything is served 
otherwise, the guests should not receive it. The guests begin to 
eat as soon as the food is served ; they should not trouble them- 
selves to wait till the food has been served all round. 

That they should wait till the food has been served equally all 
round is not a correct interpretation. Nor is it according to the 
Buddha’s instruction that one should do as one likes after a meal. 

Next some gruel made of dried rice and bean soup is 
served with hot butter sauce as flavouring, which is to be mixed 
with the other food with the fingers. They (the guests) eat with 
the right hand, which they do not raise up higher than the middle 
part of ‘the belly. Now 'cakes and fruits are served; 
ghee and also some sugar. If any guest feels thirsty, he drinks 
cold water, whether in winter or summer. The above is a brief 
account of the eating of the priests in daily life as well as at a 
reception. * 


— Takakusu, I-tsing, pp. 35-10, 



Ill 


I-TSING 

(B) ii. On chop sticks in China and India 
As to the mode of eating in the West, they use only the right 
hand, but if one has had an illness or has some other reason, one is 
permitted to keep a spoon for use. We never hear of chop-sticks 
in the five parts of India ; they are not mentioned in the Vinaya of 
the Four Schools (Nikayas) , and it is only China that has them. 
Laymen naturally follow the old custom (of using sticks), and 
priests may or* may not use them according to their inclination. 
Chop-sticks were never allowed nor were they prohibited, thus 
the matter should be treated according to the ‘ abridged teaching,’ 
for when the sticks are used, people do not discuss or murmur. 

In China they may be used, for if we obstinately reject their 
use, people may laugh or complain. 

They must not be used in India. Such is the idea of the 
‘ abridged teaching ’ (Samksiptavinaya) . 

— Op. c it. p. 90. 

(C) On clothing in different lands 
If we come to India in Chinese garments, they all laugh at us ; 
we get much ashamed in our hearts, and we tear our garments to 
be used for miscellaneous purposes, for they are all unlawful. If 
I do not explain 'this point, no one will know the fact. Although I 
wish to speak straightforwardly, yet I fear to see my hearer indig- 
nant. Hence I refrain from expressing my humble thought, yet I 
move about reflecting upon these points. 

I wish that the wise may pay serious attention and notice the 
proper rules of clothing. Further, laymen of India, the officers 
and people of a higher class have a pair of white soft cloth for their 
garments, while the poor and lower classes of people have only one 
piece of linen. It is only the homeless member of the Sangha who 
possesses the three garments and six Requisities, and a priest who 
wishes for more (lit. who indulges in luxury) may use the thirteen 
Necessaries. 5 * * 8 In China priests are not allowed to have a garment 


5. I-tsing says elsewhere: , 

“There are strict rules about the six •Requisites and the thirteen Neces- 
saries fully explained in the Vinaya. The following are the six Requisites 
»f a Bhik$u: — 

1. The Sangha tl, which is translated by the ‘double cloak.’ 

8. TJie Uttaraaanga, which is translated by the ‘upper garment’ 

3. The Antarvasa, which is translated by the 'inner garment.' 

The above three are all called cl vara. In the countries of the North 



112 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


possessed of two sleeves or having one back, but the fact is that 
they themselves follow the Chinese customs, and falsely call them 
Indian. Now I shall roughly describe the people and their dresses 
in Jambudvipa and all the remote islands. From the Mahabodhi 
eastward to Lin-i (i.e. Champa) there are twenty countries ex- 
tending as far as the southern limits of Kwan Chou (in Annam) . 
If we proceed to the south-west we come to the sea; and in the 
north Ka$mlra is its limit. There are more than ten countries 
(islands) in the Southern Sea, added to these the Simhala island 
(Ceylon). In all these countries people wear two cloths (Skt. 
kambala) . These are of wide linen eight feet long, which has no 
girdle and is not cut or sewn, but is simply put around the waist 
to cover the lower part. 

Besides India there are countries of the Parasas (Persians) 
and the Tajiks (generally taken as Arabs), who wear shirt and 
trousers. In the country of the naked people (Nicobar Isles) they 
have no dress at all ; men and women alike are all naked. From 
Ka$mira to all the Mongolic countries such as Suli, Tibet, and the 
country of the Turkish tribes, the customs resemble one another 
to a great extent ; the people in these countries do not wear the 
covering-cloth (Skt. Kambala), but use wool or skin as much as 


these priestly cloaks arc generally called kagaya from their reddish colour. 
This is not, however, a technical term used in the Vinaya. 

4. Patra, the bowl. 

5. Nisidana, something ior sitting or lying on. 

6. Farisravana, a water-strainer. 

A candidate for Ordination should be furnished with a set of the six 
Requisites. 

The following are the thirteen Necessaries : 

1. Sanghap, a double cloak. 

2. Uttarasanga, an upper garment. 

3. Antarvasa, an inner garment. 


U. 


Nisidana, a mat for sitting or lying on. 

Nivasana, an under garment. 

FraP-nivasana (a second nivasana) . 

Sankakgika, a side-covering cloth. 

Frati-sankaksika (a second sankak?ika) . 

Kaya-pronchana, a towel for wiping the body. 

Jlukha-pronchana, a towel for wiping the face. 

Kesapratigraha, a piece of cloth used for receiving hair when one 


12. 

13. 


Kandupraticchadana, a piece of cloth for covering if-t— . ’ 

(Bhesajapariskaracivara), a cloth for defraying the cost, of medicine 
m case of necessity," [rather-a cloth for - - 


pp. 54-5. 



I-TSING 


US 

they can, and there is very little karpasa (i.e. cotton), which we 
see sometimes worn. As these countries are cold, the people al- 
ways wear shirt and trousers. Among these countries the Parasas, 
the Naked People, the Tibetans, 6 and the Turkish tribes have no 
Buddhist law, but the other countries had and have followed Bud- 
dhism ; and in the districts where shirts and trousers are used the 
people are careless about personal cleanliness. Therefore the 
people of the five parts of India are proud of their purity and 
excellence. 

— Takakusu : I-Tsing, pp. 67-8. 

(D) Brahmans 

The Brahmans are regarded throughout the five parts of India 
as the most honourable (caste). They do not, when they meet 
in a place, associate with the other three castes, and the mixed 
classes of the people have still less intercourse with them. The 
scriptures they revere are the four Vedas, containing about 100,000 
verses ; ‘ Veda ’ hitherto was wrongly transcribed by the Chinese 
characters ‘ Wei-t‘o the meaning of the word is ‘ clear under- 
standing’ or ‘knowledge.’ The Vedas have been handed down 
from mouth to mouth, rot transcribed on paper or leaves. In 
every generation *here exist some intelligent Brahmans who can 
recite the 100,000 verses. In India there are two traditional ways 
by which one can attain to great intellectual power. Firstly, by 
repeatedly committing to memory the intellect is developed ; 
secondly, the alphabet fixes one’s ideas. By this way, after a prac- 
tice of ten days or a month, a student feels his thoughts rise like 
a fountain, and can commit to memory whatever he has once heard 
(not requiring to be told twice). This is far from being a myth, 
for I myself have met such men. 

— Takakusu : I-tsing, pp. 182-183. 

(E) Six pilgrims of I-tsing’s time 

(i) Then Ming -Yuen arrived in the island of the son of the Lion 
(Ceylon) where he became the object of respectful attentions 


# 6. We know very little of the introduction of Buddhism into Tibet. 
In AD. 632 the first Buddhist King of Tibet sent an envoy to India to get 
the Buddhist Scriptures. I-tsing’s date is A.D. 671-695, and he says that 
the country Rad no Buddh ism . We know, however, that some of the Parasas 
(Pbreian settlers) had become Buddhists in Hiuen Thsang’s time ^ee Hiuen 
Huang under Persia), and Tibet too was Buddhistic in his time. — Takakusu. 

FJt.— 13 



114 FOREIGN NOTICES 

from the sovereign. Then he got into the tower secretly and stole 
the tooth of the Fo (Buddha) , which he hoped to take to his coun- 
try in order that one may make many offerings to it. When he 
attempted to do so, by a just turn of events he was forced to give 
it up. Hie affair was not to his liking and he covered himself 
with disgrace and shame. 

He then went to South India. I heard that following the ad- 
vice of a man in Ceylon, he went (for rest) to the central place 
where the monastery of the Great Knowledge (Mahabodhi) is 
situated ; but there is no news of him and he must have died on 
the way ; we do not know how old he was. 

The people of the island of Ceylon guard this tooth of Fo 
(Buddha) with extraordinary care. They have placed it in a high 
tower ^ they lock its many doors with complicated safety locks ; 
on the locks they set a seal on which five officials affix their marks. 
If a door is opened, a resounding noise fills the town and its suburbs. 
Every day they go and make offerings to this relic, and cover it 
with fragrant flowers on all sides. If- one supplicates with great 
faith, then the tooth appears above the flowers or a supernatural 
light is produced, and the whole crowd can see it. 

According to one tradition, if this island loses the tooth of 
Buddha, it will fall a prey to the Raksasas ; to prevent this calamity, 
the tooth is guarded with exceptional care. 

According to another tradition, this tooth must go to the 
country of China. That will be the distant effect of holy power ; 
if we have faith, it will come. How could this be realised by the aid 
of a man who pretended to accomplish by violence what was not 
his task? 

— Religieux Eminents par I-tsing, Traduit en Francais par 
Edouard Chavannes, pp. 54-6. 

(ii) The venerable (I) -long embarked with his younger 
brother for Ceylon where he wanted to study the different systems. 
He prostrated in adoration before the tooth of the Buddha, and 
then travelled little by little in the countries of the West. 

Such are the reports that have reached me ; but now I do not 
know where he is. I did not find him in the island of Ceylon ; nor 
did I hear of him in Central India. It is probable that his soul has 
taken on other births. He was more than forty years of age.- _ 
— Op. ext. pp. 58-9. 

(hi) Ta-tch'eng-teng, called Mo-ho-ye-na-po-ti-i-po (Mahfi- 
yanapradftia) in Sanskrit, spent many years in Dvaravati, and 



I-TSING 


" then took the images of Fo (Buddha) and procured for himself 
the sutras and sastras ; he then traversed the southern seas and 
arrived in the kingdom of Ceylon where he went and adored the 
tooth of Fo (Buddha). He witnessed all the supernatural prodi- 
gies. He traversed Southern India and reached Eastern India 
where he stopped in the country of Tan-mono-li-ti (Tamralipti) 
— Op. c it. p. 71. 

(iv) Tao-lin travelled in South India to gather information 
on the dark systems (pour s‘y renseigner sur le regies sombres). 

— Op. cit. p. 101. 

(v) Hiuen-yeou, disciple of Seng-tch6, was a native of the 
kingdom of Kao-li. 7 In the wake of his master he went to the king- 
dom of the son of the Lion (Ceylon) and there he renounced the 
world ; he is now settled there. 

—Op. cit. p. 133. 

(vi) Then (after his sojourn in Sri Vijaya) Ou-hing embark- 
ed on a royal boat ; after fifteen days he landed in the isle of Mo- 
louo-yu ; 8 after another fifteen days he arrived in the country of 
Ki4-tch‘a. 9 When it was the last month of winter, he changed his 
course and turned towards the West. After thirty days, he reach- 
ed the country of Na-kia-po-tan-na (Nagapatana) ; leaving this 
place, he arrived, after two days on the sea, in the island of the Son 
of the Lion (Ceylon); there he went and worshipped the tooth of 
the Buddha. Leaving Ceylon, he resumed his voyage going north- 
east, and, at the end of one month, he reached Ho-li-ki-louo (Hari- 
kela). 10 

— Religieux Eminent s, pp. 144-5. 


7. In Korea. 

8. Maliyu In Sumatra. 

9. Kedah. 


10. The 


between TSmraliptt and Utkala, 



XVI. 692-720 A.D. EMBASSIES FROM SOUTH INDIA 
TO CHINA 


In the third month of the third year t’ien-cheou (692), the 
king of the kingdom of Eastern India Mo-lo-pa-mo, the 

king of the kingdom of Western India Che-lo-ito (Sila- 

ditya) , the king of the kingdom of the South India 
Tche-leou-k'i-pa-lo (Calukya Vallabha), the king of the kingdom 
of Northern India Na-na, the king of the kingdom of central India 
Ti-mo-si-na and the king of the kingdom Kieou-tse (Koutcha) 
Yen-yao-pa all came to render homage and make presents, (pp. 24- 
25) . 

(The kingdom of South India, among others sent an embassy 
with tribute and the products of the country). In the reign of the 
Emperor Joei-tsong, in the 9th month of the first year (710) the 
kingdom of South India and the Tou-po, (Tibetans) , and in the 10th 
month the kingdoms of Sie-yu (Zabulistan) and of Ki-pin (Kapisa) 
all sent ambassadors bringing in tribute and products of their coun- 
tries. The Kagan “who respects the transformation,” the Tou-k’i- 
che (Turgach) Cheou-tehong, ordered an ambassador to go and 
render homage (p. 28). 

I. In the eighth year of K‘ai-yuen (720), the king of the 
kingdom of South India, Che-li Na-lo-seng-kia (Sri Narasimha), 
proposed to employ his war elephants and his cavalry to chastise 
the Ta-chc (Arabs) as well as the Tou-po (Tibetans) 1 and others. 
Moreover he asked that a name be given to his army ; the emperor 
praised it greatly and named his army ; “ file army which cherished 
virtue.” 

II. In the 8th year K‘ai-yuen (720) , the 8th month, the day ting- 
tch'eou, a decree was addressed to tchong-chow-men-hia to inform 
him that the king of South India having sent from afar (an ambas- 
sador) to render homage and pay tribute, and this ambassador being 
due to return, he must look after him with the greatest care till his 
departure and «ct in such a way that his desires might be fulfilled. 
This ambassador was therefore given a robe of flowered silk, a 
golden girdle, a purse with an emblem in the form of a fish and the 
seven objects ; then he was sent away. 


1. In this period “the supremacy of Tibet was i 
engal that, for 200 years, the Bay of Bengal was 
ibet.” jf. D- P- SOI. See Abulfeda ed. Remaud « 
in HawHT and A1 Ishtakri called the Bay by that n 


o firmly established in 
known al the sea of 
drill, Eneycl. Br. Tibet 



TS‘0 FOU YUAN KOUEI 


117 

m. In the 11th month, an ambassador was sent to confer by 
brevet the title of king of the kingdom of South India on the 
king of the kingdom of South India, Che-li-Na-lo-seng-k’ia pao-to- 
pa-mo (Sri Narasimha Potavarman). 

The texts marked I and II under year 720 are found again in 
Kieou Tang Chou which adds the following: “ the 9th month, the 
King of South India Che-li-Na-lo-seng-k‘ia-to-pa (Sri Narasimha 
Potavarman) constructed a temple on account of the empire (i.e. of 
China) ; he addressed to the emperor a request asking from him 
an inscription giving a name to this temple; by decree, it was decided 
that the name should be ‘which causes return to virtue’ (Koei- 
hoa) and it was presented to him (i.e. the emperor sent Narasimha a 
tablet with the inscription Koei-hoa se, so that it might be placed 
on the front of the temple erected in India by Narasimha for the 
benefit of China) This Narasimha, king of Kafici, is known to us 
from the Mahavamsa and from the inscriptions of India; and relying 
on these last pieces of evidence, inscriptions, Sylvain-Levi has 
proposed to carry back the reign of this prince to about 700 A.D. 
(J.A .1900 May-June) ; we see that his conclusion is borne out by 
the Chinese texts which speak at such length of Sri Narasimha 
Potavarman in 720. (Chavannes, p. 44 n) 

The data given in these extracts from Ts'o fou yuan Kouei, a 
great Chinese cyclopaedia compiled about 1013 A. D., are confirmed 
by the following extract from Ma Twan-lin : 

“ In the third of the years keen-fung (A. D. 667), the Five 
Indias (or five kingdoms of India) sent ambassadors to the court 
of the emperor. In the years kae-yuen (A.D. 713 to 742) , an ambas- 
sador from Central India proceeded three times as far as the ex- 
tremity of southern India, and came only once to offer birds of five 
colours that could talk. He applied for aid against the Ta-she 
(or Arabs) and the Too-fan (or Tibetans), offering to take the 
command of the auxiliary troops. The Emperor Heuen-tsung (who 
reigned from A. D. 713 to 756) conferred upon him the rank of 
general-in-chief. The Indian ambassadors said to him : ‘ the Fan 
(or Tibetan) barbarians are captivated only by clothes and 
equipments. Emperor! I must have a long, silk embroidered robe, 
a leathern belt decorated with gold, and a bag in the shapfe of a 
fish.’ All these articles were ordered by the emperor.” ’ 

— Chavannes : Notes additionnelles sur les Tou-kiue (Twrcs) 
Occidentaux. Toung Pao n 5 : pp. 1-110 ; and JASB vi., p. 71 
for Ma-Twan-lin. 



XVII. C. 750 A.D.— KANSHIN ON BRAHMIN TEMPLES 
AND MERCHANTS IN CANTON 


Hie Chinese priest Kien-tchen, (742-54), Kanshin in Japanese, 
made a voyage from China to Japan, and this was described by his 
contemporary and disciple Aomi-no Mabito Genkai. In this descrip- 
tion we read : “ There were also three monasteries of Po-lo-men 

(Brahmans) where Brahmans were residing. The tanks in these 
monasteries contained blue lotuses, particularly beautiful, of which 
the flowers, leaves and roots were perfumed. 

“ On the river (of Kouang-tong) (Canton) there were mer- 
chantmen belonging to the Po-lo-men (Brahmans of India), the 
Po-sseu (Persians), the K'ouen-louen (Malays) , and others besides, 
of which it is difficult to determine the number. They were all 
laden with incense, herbs, jewels and other precious products. 
The merchandise was piled up in heaps. These ships were 60 to 
70 feet deep. 

“ The barbarians, white, red and so on, coming from the Land 
of the Lion (Simhala, Ceylon), the Land of the Ta-che (Tadjik, 
Arabia), or the Land of the Kou-t‘ang were in the habit of coming 
or stopping there. An enormous variety of races was encountered 
there." 

— Tr. from Takakusu in BEFEO xxviii. pp. 466-67. (cf. 
Ferrand, Relations des voyages: ii. 640. See also Ferrand: JA. 
11:13, (1919), p. 246). 



XVm. 844-8 A.D. EBN-KHURDADBEH 


(A) Route to the East 

Narmechireh, 1 2 the boundary between Persia and Sind, is 7 days’ 
journey by water (from Ormuz) From there to Daibal, 8 
days. This town is two parasangs from the Mouth of the 
Mehran (Indus). The country of Sind produces the costus (cos- 
tus speciosus), cane and bamboo. From the river Mehran to 
(Yeksir?) 3 where Indian territory begins, 4 days. They 
gather cane in the mountains and com 3 in the plains; the 
people, divided into tribes, live by brigandage. Two farsakhs 
beyond, there lives another people the Meyd, 4 5 who also apply them- 
selves to stealing. From there to Koul (or Koula), 2 parasangs. 
From Kaoul to Sendan, where you have the ieakwood (sadj) and 
cane, 18 parasangs. From Sendan to Mely (Malabar), land of 
pepper and bamboo, 5 days. The sailors say that every bunch 
of pepper is covered up by a leaf which shelters it from the rain ; 
when the rain ceases, the leaves turn off ; if it starts raining again, 
they cover the fruit once more. From Mely to Balin, s 2 journeys. 
From there to the great gulf (sea) 2 days. At Balin, the route 
divides itself (iSito two). Following the coast, we reach Baneh 
(or Bas), which produces rice which they carry to Serandib, 2 
days. Sandy and Askan, land producing rice, 2 days. Koura, 
where many rivers empty themselves, 3 parasangs. Kilakan 
(Kilkayan), Louar and Kendjeh, 2 days. This country produces 
wheat and rice ; they send aloes by way of the fresh water, 6 from 
countries situated at a distance of 15 days, such as Kamoul and 
other places. From Semender to Ourtasir, 7 great kingdom where 
abound the elephant, the horse, the buffalo and all sorts of products, 
12 parasangs. From Ourtasir to Alneh, where again we find 
elephants, 4 days. From Houbalin (?) to Serendib, 2 days. 

Serendlb (Ceylon) is 80 parasangs in length and breadth. We 
find there the mountain on which Adam was thrown (after having 
been chased from the earthly paradise). The summit is lost in 


1. Narmaslra. 

2. Baker (Elliot and Dowson) . 

3. Wheat (E. and D.). 

4. The Meds. 

5. Baibun— (E and D). 

6. The Godavari according to Dr. Sprenger. 

7. TJraair — (E. and D.) , 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


the clouds, and it is perceived by navigators from a distance of 
about twenty days (sic). The Brahmans, who are the pious 
people of India, show on this mountain the impress of one of the 
feet of Adam ; the other is found in India, at a distance of two or 
three days from the first. They gather in this mountain aloes, 
pepper, and many kinds of aromatic stuff and perfumes. We find 
in the neighbourhood different varieties of rubies and other precious 
stones ; in fine, in the valley, a mine of diamonds and musk-goats 
(des chevres & muse) . The people of India say that the foot of 
Adam has left only one mark on the rock, and that a flame leaps 
up incessantly on the summit of the mountain like lightning. Seren- 
dib produces cocoanut and emery which serves to polish the metals; 
we find in its rivers rock-crystals and along its coasts are establish- 
ed the pearl-fisheries. 

— Le Lime des Routes et des Provinces : ed. C. Barbier de 
Meynard. JA.: 6 : v : pp. 283-6. (Cf. Elliot and Dowson i, 
pp. 15-16.) 


(B) Principal Kings of India : Elephants 
The kings and the peoples of India abstain from wine; but 
they consider adultery a lawful act with the exception of the king 
of Komar who abstains from both. On the contrary the king of 
Serendib gets the wines of Irak for his use. All the kings set 
great store on the elephant, and they compete for its acquisition 
at gold prices. The maximum height of this animal is 9 cubits. 
However, in Chohb 8 one could find elephants which are 10 or 11 
cubits high. The most powerful sovereign of India is the Balhara 
whose name signifies ‘King of Kings.’ On his ring is engraved 
this motto : “ Anything undertaken with passion always ends in 
success.” After him come the King of Tafen, the Ktag of Djabah 
(Java) ; the King of Djozr (Gujerat?) where the dirhems called 
the tatherides are current ; the King of Anah, and Rahma. The 
states of the last named are far from all the others by a year’s 
journey. 8 9 Rahma possesses 50,000 elephants, cotton stuffs and 
aloes. After him comes the King of Kamroun, whose kingdom 
touches China and abounds in rhinoceroses. This animal has a horn 
in froijt, one cubit long and the thickness of two palms. We find 
a sort of figure marked in the direction of its length. When it is 


8. Masudi places this in the neighbourhood of Ceylon.— C. de 

Meynard. » 

9. Masudl places the empire of Rahma near Guzerat.— Barbier 
de Meynard. 



IBN -KHURDADBEH 121 

slit, inside one could find standing out in white on a black back- 
ground, the image of a man, horse, fish, peacock or some other 
bird. The Chinese buy them to make waist bands of which the 
price varies from two hundred dinars up to three or four thousand. 

All the kings of whom we have just spoken, have their ears 
bored. The king of Zabedj is named Maharaja. He possesses in 
his states an Island named Dhou-Tail, which resounds with the 
sounds of tambours and timbals. According to the report of 
sailors, in these parts one finds a horse which resembles the species 
of horse found among us, but whose mane is so long that it drags 
on the ground. The Maharaja collects each day a contribution of 
200.. pieces of Gold. He melts this sum into a single ingot and 
throws it into the water saying, “ Here is my treasury.” There is 
in this sea an Island in which there are monkeys that have tails 
like that of an ass. 

— J. A.: ibid. pp. 289-91. 


(C) Castes 

There arc seven castes in India : 

1. The Sabeltlerya (B. the Sabiens, Ed. Sakrya) . This is the 
caste of the nobility and of the king. All the other castes prostrate 
before them, but»fhey do not render this homage to any one. 

2. The Brahmans, who drink neither wine nor any fermented 
liquor. 

3. The Kesrya (Ksatriya) . They drink 3 cups of wine only. 
They cannot marry into Brahman families, but the latter marry 
their daughters. 

4. The Soudarya (Sudra) or cultivators. 

5. Meisera (Vaisya) artisans and labourers. 

6. The Sandalya (Chandala) servants and escorts. 

7. The Zenya (musicians and jugglers) . 

There are 42 religious sects among the Hindus. Some believe 
in God (may His holy name be glorified) and in the mission of the 
prophets ; others reject the prophets, yet others reject all these 
beliefs alike. 

In this country is found a class of magicians who realize 
everything that they wish for, by their spells and heal all, sickness. 
Versed in the occult sciences and in the art of divination, they 
exercise an absolute authority, do good and evil, conjure up appari- 
tions and phantoms which strike the spirit with fear, and command 
rain and hail. 

— J.A.: ibid. pp. 295-6 (cf. Elliot and Dowson i. pp. 16-17) . 

F.N.-18 



XIX. TWO ARAB WRITERS 


I. Anonymous (Suleiman ?) 

A. The Maldives, Ceylon and other islands 

The third sea is the sea of Harkand (Bay of Bengal) . Between 
this sea and that of Lar (Gujerat) lie numerous islands (the Lacca- 
dives and the Maldives). They say that their number goes up to 
1900. These isles separate the two seas. They are governed by a 
woman. Occasionally, (the sea casts upon the shores) of these 
islands large pieces of amber ; these pieces often look like a plant 
or something similar. This amber grows like a plant, at the bottom 
of the sea. When the sea is very rough, it throws up the amber 
to the surface, and the pieces of amber look like mushrooms or 
truffle. 

In these islands, where a woman rules, cocoanut is cultivated. 
These islands are separated from one another by distances of two, 
three or four parasangs. 1 They are all inhabited, and they grow 
the cocoanut-trees in all of them. The wealth of the people is 
constituted by cowries ; their queen amasses large quantities of 
these cowries in the royal depots. They say that there is not in 
existence a people more industrious than these islanders, so much 
so that they weave tunics of a single piece with two sleeves, two 
facings of the collar and the opening of the chest. They build 
ships, houses and execute all sorts of works with a consummate 
art. 

The cowries are got by them from the surface of the sea. (The 
head of this mollusc) encloses something living. (To fish them up) , 
they take a branch of the cocoanut tree, and put it in the sea, and 
the cowries attach themselves to it. The islanders give the cowries 
the name of kabtaj. 

The last of these Isles is (Sirandib) Ceylon ; it is situated in 
the sea of Harkand. It is the most important island of this archi- 
pelago. 

All these islands (the Laccadives and the Maldives) are call- 
ed Dlbajat. At Sirandib is found a pearl fishery. The island is 
completely surrounded by the sea. In the island there is a moun- 
tain called Rahun on which was thrown Adam — Salutation to him 
— (when he was chased out of earthly paradise) . The print of his 


1. A paramng is about five miles. 



ABU ZAID 


123 


feet is on the summit of the mountain hollowed in the stone. At 
the summit of the mountain there is only the mark of a single 
step. It is said that Adam in taking a stride put his other leg into 
the sea. It is also said that the footprint found at the summit of 
the mountain is about 70' cubits long. 

In a region around this mountain abundant precious stones 
are found: rubies, topaz, and sapphire. 

In the island of Ceylon there are two kings. It is big and 
extensive. Aloes, gold, precious stones are found on it and in the 
sea which bathes it, the pearl and shank are found. The latter is a 
big shell used as a trumpet into which one blows. It is preserved 
like a precious thing. 

— Ferrand, Voyage, pp. 31-3. 

B. On India, China and their Kings 

The people of India and China are of unanimous opinion that 
the great kings of the world are four in number. The first among 
them in rank is the king of the Arabs, (that is to say the Khalif of 
Baghdad). Indians and Chinese are agreed without contradiction 
on the fact that the king of the Arabs is the greatest of the kings, 
the richest and the most magnificent, that is the king of the great 
religion of Islam; above whom there is no one. The king of China 
takes the second rank, after the king of the Arabs. Then follows 
the king of Rum (Byzance) and the BallahrS, the king of those 
who have their ears bored (to suspend rings). The BallahrS is 
the sovereign of India who belongs to the highest nobility, which 
the Indians themselves recognize. Each king of the Indians is 
independent, but all recognize the high nobility of the Ballahra. 
When the Ballahra sends ambassadors to other kings, the latter 
pray in the name of these ambassadors to do honour to him 
whom they represent. The BallahrS makes generous gifts like 
the Arabs. He has horses and elephants, in great number, and 
plenty of money. His money is the dirham (piece of gold) , called 
to tin. The weight of each of these dirham is equal to that of one 
dirham and half of the king’s money. 

The BallahrS dates his era starting from the year of the reign 
of the sovereign who preceded him (sic), 2 whilst the Arabg date 
from the Hegira of the Prophet — Salutation to him; — as against the 
latter, the Indians date according to the kings, and their kings 
reign long, sometimes a king reigns for 50 years. The subjects of 

2. Here Reinaud has: “Their era starts from the year in which the 
dynasty came to the throne.” (p. 25)— which is more intelligible. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


124 

Ballahrfi claim that if their kings reign and live long, it is due to 
the affection that they have for the Arabs. There is in fact no king 
who has greater affection for the Arabs than the Ballahrd. It is 
the same with his subjects. 

BallahrS is the title of all the kings of this country like Kisra 
(for Persians, Caesar for Romans) . It is not a proper name. The 
territory of the Ballahra kingdom begins on the sea coast (west of 
India) where there is a country called the Konkan, which borders 
on it and extends through a part of the Asiatic continent, stretch- 
ing right up to China. Around the kingdom of the Ballahra there 
are a number of kings with whom it is in a state of war, but it is 
always victorious. Among the enemy kings there is one called 
the king of Gujra. He commands an important army. No other 
Indian king has a cavalry comparable to his. The king of Gujra 
is the enemy of the Arabs, but he recognizes, however, that the 
king of the Arabs is the greatest of kings. No king of India hates 
Islam as much as he. He reigns over a strip of land. He possesses 
great riches, camels and beasts in great number. (In his country) 
buying is done with bullion-money. It is said that mines of this 
metal are found there. There is no country in India where one is 
better protected from robbers. 3 

— Opj c it. pp. 47-9. 


3. This is what Masudi (d. 956 AD.) says on the Balhara : 

"The greatest of Ihe kings of India in our time is the Balhara, sovereign 
of the city of Mankir. Many of the kings of India turn their faces towards 
him in their prayers, and they make supplications to his ambassadors, who 
come to visit them. The kingdom of Balhara is bordered by many other 
countries of India. Some kings have their territory in the mountains away 
from the sea, like the Rai, King of Kashmir, the King of Tafan, and others. 
There are other kings who possess both land and sea. The capital of the 
BalharA is eighty Sindi parasangs from the sea, and the parasang is equal 
to eight miles. His troops and elephants are innumerable, but his troops 
are mostly infantry, because the seat of his government is among the moun- 
tains. One of the neighbouring kings of India, who is far from the sea, 
is the Bauura, who is lord of the city of Kanauj. This is the title given 
to all the sovereigns of that kingdom. He has large armies in garrisons on 
the north and on the south, on the east and on the west, for he is surround- 
ed oq all sides by warlike kings.” (Elliot and Dowson i. p. a ; see also 
Ferrand: Relations, i, p. 94). The king is uniformly called Balhara and 
his capital Mankir by the Arab writers. There is no doubt that Balhara 
stands for Vallabha, he, here Ra?(rakuta and Mankir for M.llrM, 
the Manyakhefa of the South Indian Inscriptions. The Ra$traku(as were 
the most powerful Western Indian dynasty in the ninth and tenjh centuries. 
Cf. Ferrand, op. cit. n. 3 at p. 94 citing Masudi himself in support of this 
view; contra the note on Balharfi, Elliot and Dowson, i.pp.354-8, which must 
now be taken to be antiquated. 




ABU ZAID 


C. Royal Funeral m Ceylon 

When the king ot Sirandib (Ceylon) dies his corpse is laid on 
a chariot near the ground. The corpse is tied to the back of the 
chanot, the legs in the air, the back against the chariot (facing be- 
hind) so that the hair trails in the dust on the ground A woman 
throws dust on the royal head with a broom in her hand, and says 
to the people met for the occasion “ Eh' you' this was your king 
yesterday, he governed you and his order was absolute He has 
come to the state of renouncing the goods of this world as you see 
him . The angel of death has taken his soul Be no more hence- 
forward seduced by the pleasures of this life ” And she continues 
to speak in the same sense for three days (sic) Then a funeral 
pyre is prepared on which is put sandal, camphor and saffron The 
body is burnt and its ashes are thrown to the winds All the 
inhabitants of India bum their dead 

Ceylon is the most southern among the islands of India, of 
which it is a pait Sometimes when the corpse of the king is burnt 
his wives throw themselves mto the fire, and burn themselves with 
him , but they may not do it 

— Op cit pp 64 -G 


D Ascetics 

There are in India some people who consecrate themselves to 
a life of wandering m the woods and the mountains They rarely 
frequent men They lave on herbs and wild fruits from time to 
time These recluses put an iron ring to the organ to prevent all 
sexual relationships with women Some of them are nude , others 
stand facing the sun, equally nude, but covered by some panther 
skins I have seen one of them m the state that I have just said (m 
a certain place) then I continued my way Sixteen years later I 
went agam by the same place, and I saw this ascetic in the same 
state I was astomshed that his eye had not been destroyed by 
the heat of the sun. 

— Op ci t p 66 


E Marriage 

In India and in China when "one wants to get married (the 
interested families) pay mutual compliments and give presents to 
each other. Then the marriage is celebrated to the sound of 
cymbals and drums. The presents exchanged on this occasion 
consist of sums of money which are proportionate to the wealth 
of the givers. If a man and a woman are convicted of adultery, 



126 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


both are put to death, (such is the law) in the whole of India; 
but if the man has violated the woman, only he is put to death. 
If the woman has acted with full consent she is put to death with 
her paramour. 

— Op. cat. p. 67. 


F. Houses 

The walls of the Chinese houses are of wood, the Indians con- 
struct their houses with stones, plaster and bricks baked in the 
fire and with clay. Sometimes in China also they build just like 
this. 

— Op. cit. p. 68. 

G. Food, Worship, etc. — Comparisons 

The Indians cal rice, the Chinese wheat and rice. The Indians 
do not eat wheat. Neither the Indians nor the Chinese are cir- 
cumcised. 

The Chinese adore idols. They pray to them as Mussalmans 
pray to Allah. They address to them prayers. They possess reli- 
gious books. 

The Indians allow their beard to grow long, I have seen 
them sometimes having a beard three cubits long. They do not 
trim their moustaches (like the Mussalmans). The greater num- 
ber of the Chinese have no beard, and for the greater part of them 
this is their natural condition. In India when a man dies the hair 
and the beard are shaved. 

The Chinese and the Indians claim that their idols in the 
temples speak to them. But it is the priests (officiating ministers) 
of the temples that speak to them (and make them think the idols 
speak) . 

In China and in India, they kffl, animals to eat them, hut they 
do not butcher them (so as to let the blood flow, as do the Mussal- 
mans) . They beat them on the head till they are dead. In India 
and in China they do not take a bath after a serious pollution 
(that ’which results from sexual relations), like the Mussalmans. 
The Chinese do not wash after going to stool. They just wipe 
themselves with paper. The Indians purify themselves each day 
by bathing before the morning meal, and then they eat. 

The Indians do not have any sexual relationships with their 
women during the menstrual period. They make them go out of 



ABU ZAID 


127 


their houses to avoid being polluted by them. Hie Chinese on the 
contrary have relations with their women during the menstrual 
period, and they do not make them leave their houses. 

The Indians clean their teeth (with their tooth picks). No 
one in India would eat without cleaning his teeth and purifying 
himself by bath. The Chinese do not do thus. 

India is more extensive than China. Its area is double that of 
China. It has a greater number of kings than China, but the latter 
is more thickly populated. 

Neither China nor India has the date-tree ; but they have 
other trees, and fruits we do not have are gathered in. In India 
there is no grape. There is a little in China. India and China 
produce other fruits in plenty. Pomegranates are found in India 
in abundance. 

The Chinese have no religious science. The practices of their 
religion (Buddhism) are derived from India. They believe that 
it is the Indians who brought idols to them and that the latter were 
their religious educators. In China and in India they believe in 
metempsychosis. The Chinese and Indians draw from the same 
religious principles different conclusions. 

In India medicine and philosophy are practised. The Chinese 
practise medicine equally. Their chief treatment is cauterization. 

The Chinese practise astronomy but the Indians practise this 
science still more. 

No Chinese or Indian Mussalman is known who does not speak 
Arabic. 

In India there are few horses ; there are more in China. In 
China there are no elephants. They are not allowed to penetrate 
into the country because they are animals of bad omen. 

Hie armies of the king of India are numerous, but they receive 
nothing for their maintenance, neither food nor pay. 

The king only convokes them in case of holy war. Hie troops 
then take the field and realize for themselves the cost of their 
maintenance. The king furnishes them nothing for this purpose. 
In China the troops receive the sam* pay as the troops of the Arabs. 

China is a brighter and more flourishing country (than India) . 
In the greater part of India there are no towns (the country is 
desert). ,In China on the contrary there is in each place a big 
fortified town. In China the climate is healthier, and sicknesses 
less numerous than in India. The air is so pure. There one does 



128 FOREIGN NOTICES 

not see either blind or one-eyed people nor deformed people. The 
infirm of this sort are numerous in India. 

In China and in India there are everywhere great rivers, big- 
ger ones than ours. It rains abundantly in these countries. 

There are in India many deserts, in China the whole country 
is inhabited and cultivated. The Chinese are better made than 
the Indians. The clothing and the beasts of burden of the Chinese re- 
semble more those of the Arabs than of the Indians. In costume 
and in the official processions the Chinese resemble the Arabs ; 
they put on the costume called kaba by the Arabs and the sash. 
The Indians clothe themselves with two cloths. Men and women 
adorn themselves with bracelets of gold and precious stones. 

— Op. cit. pp. 68-72. 

II. 916 A.D. Abu Za® 

H. Companions of Honour 

When they mount on the throne, some kings of India cause 
rice to be cooked which is then presented to them on the leaves of 
ihe banana. The king musters (on this occasion) three or four 
hundred friends (who attach themselves to him) by deliberate 
design, freely, without any one being forced to it. After eating of 
the rice himself, the king gives of it to his friends, ‘and each one of 
Ihem, in his turn, goes near (him), takes a little of the rice and 
eats it. When the king dies or is killed, all those who have eaten 
of the rice (with him in this sort of religious communion which 
binds them intimately), should burn themselves voluntarily on a 
pyre, to the last man, on the very day when the king ceases to live. 
(The king dead, his friends should disappear) without delay. This 
obligation is so imperative that there should remain nothing of 
these friends, neither body nor trace of themselves. 

— Op. cit. (Abu Zaid) , p. 114. 4 


4. Cf. the following curious account from The Book of the Marvels of 
India of about the same period: — 

Touching singular customs, widespread throughout India, Hassan, son 
of Amr, tells me that he heard a sheik, a well-informed man, who had 
travelled thf country, relate the stqjy which follows. 

One of the great kings of India was sitting down, taking a meal. Before 
him was a parrot in its cage. Said the king: “Come and eat with me." 
"I am frightened of cats,” replied the parrot. “No matter,” answered the 
king. “I will be your bola-udjer,”— that is to say, in the Indian tongue, “I 
engage myself to suffer the like of anything that may happen to you.” And 
this is how the above expression was explained by the old man. The kings 
of India have about their persons a company of men, which is more or less 




ABU ZAS) 


120 


I Miscellaneous 

The kings o f India wear ear-rings of precious stones mounted 
on gold. They wear round the neck collars of great value made of 
precious stones, red (rubies) and green (emeralds) , but pearls 
have the greatest value and m most cases they are used. In fact, 
pearls constitute the treasure of the kings and their financial re- 
serve. 





m 


He generals and the high functionaries wear equally collars 
of pearls. The Indian chiefs are carried in palanquin ; they are 
clothed in a waist-cloth ; they hold in the hand an object called 
chatra— it is a parasol in the plumes of peacocks ; they hold it in 
the hand to keep off the sun. They are surrounded (when they 
go out) by their servants. 

There is, in India, a caste the members of which will not eat 
two from the same plate or even at the same table ; they find this 
a pollution and an abomination. When these persons come to 
Siraf and one of the principal merchants invites them to a banquet 
in his house, at which about 100 persons are present, the host 
should cause to be set before each one of them a plate exclusively 
reserved for him. 

As to the kings and notables, in India they prepare for them 
each day tables to eat in (the form of) leaves of the cocoanut 
excellently plaited; they manufacture with these same leaves of 
the cocoanut all sorts of plates and small dishes. When the meal 
is served, they eat the food in these plates and dishes of plaited 
leaves. When the repast is ended, they throw in the water these 
tables, plates and dishes of plaited leaves with what remains of 
the aliments. And they recommence it the next day. 

• • * 

Most of the kings of India, when they give public audience, 
allow their women to be seen by the men of the country and by 
strangers ; no veil obstructs the view of them. 

— Ferrand, Voyage (Abu Zaid), pp. 138-9. 



XX. C. 1030 A.D. ALBERUNI 


The southern frontier of India is formed by the ocean. The 
coast of India begins with Tiz, the capital of Makran, and extends 
thence in a south-eastern direction towards the region of Al-daibal, 
over a distance of 40 farsakh. 1 Between the two places lies the Gulf 
of Turan. A gulf is like an angle or a winding line of water pene- 
tratiug from the ocean into the continent, and is dangerous for navi- 
gation, specially on account of ebb and flood. An estuary is some- 
thing similar to a gulf, but is not formed by the ocean’s penetrating 
into the continent. It is formed by an expanse of flowing water, 
which there is changed into standing water and is connected with 
the ocean. These estuaries, too, are dangerous for the ships, because 
the water is sweet and does not bear heavy bodies as well as salt 
water does. 

After the above-mentioned gulf follow the small Munha* the 
great Munha, then the Bawarij, i.e., the pirates of Kacch and Soma- 
nath. They are thus called because they commit their robberies on 
sea in ships called bira. ITie places on the coast are: Tawalleshar, 
50 farsakh from ,Daibal; 3 Lohara.nl, 12 farsakh ; Baga, 12 farsakh ; 
Kacch, where the mukl-tree grows, and Boro?, 4 6 farsakh; Somandth, 
14 farsakh ; Kanb&yat , s 30 farsakh: Asawil. 2 days; Bihroj, 6 30 far- 
sakh (?); Sanddn, 50 farsakh; Sahara? 6 farsakh; Tana, 5 farsakh. 

Thence the coast-line comes to the country Laron, in which lies 
the city of Jrmur, then to Vallabha, Kdnjt, Darvad. Next follows 
a great bay in which Singaldib lies, t.e., the island Sarandib 
(Ceylon) . Round the bay lies the city of Panjayavar* (sic). When 
this city had fallen into ruins, the king, Jaur, built instead of it, on 
the coast towards the west, a new city which he called Radnor. 

The next place on the coast is Vmmalndra, then Rdmsher 
(Rameshar?) opposite Sarandib ; the distance of the sea between 


1. A farsakh is S miles — Alberuni, ii. •p. 68. 

2. Cf. Skt. Mukha, mouth. 

2. Karachi, Elliot and Dowson, i. p. 375. 

4. Baroda. 


5. Cambay. 

6. Broach. 


7. Sopara. 

8. TanjavOr (?). 



rt>am is 12 farsalch. The distance from Panjayfivar to Ramsher. b 
40 fanakh, that between Ramsher and Setubandha 2 fanakh. Setu- 
bandha means bridge of the ocean. It is the dike of Rama, the son 
of Dasaratha, which he built from the continent to the castle Lanka. 
At present it consists of isolated mountains between which the ocean 
flows. Sixteen farsakh from Setubandha towards the east is Kih- 
kind, 9 the mountains of the monkeys. Every day the king of the 
monkeys comes out of the thicket together with his hosts, and settles 
down in particular seats prepared for them. The 
insKnni inhabitants of that region prepare for them cooked 

rice, and bring it to them on leaves. After having 
eaten it they return into the thicket, but in case they 
are neglected, this would be the ruin of the country, as they are 
not only numerous, but also savage and aggressive. According to 
the popular belief, they are a race of men changed into monkeys on 
account of the help which they had afforded to Rama when making 
war against the demons ; he is believed to have bequeathed those 
villages to them as legacy. When a man happens to fall in with 
them, and he recites to them the poetry of Rama and pronounces 
the incantations of Rama, they will quietly listen to him ; they will 
even lead on the right path him who has gone astray and give him 
meat and drink. At all events, thus the matter stands according to 
popular belief. If there is any truth in this, the effect must be pro- 
duced by the melody, the like of which we have already mentioned 
in connection with the hunting of gazelles. 

— Sachau — Alheruni’s India. Vol. I pp. 208-10. 


In former times there were pearl-banks in the Bay of Sarandlb 
(Ceylon), but at present they have been abandoned. 
PE * BL8 Since the Sarandlb pearls have disappeared, other 

pearls have been found at Sufala in the country of 
the Zanj, so that people say the pearls of Sarandlb have migrated 
to Sufala. ' 


— Sachau — Alberuni’s India, Vol. I. p. 211. 



XXI. A MON INSCRIPTION FROM PROME OF THE REIGN 
OF KYANZITTHA (1084-1112 A.D.). CONVERSION OF 
A COLA PRINCE 

Chen the king wrote of the grace of the Buddharatna, Dharmma- 
ratna, (and) Sangharatna (upon a leaf of gold with vermilion ink?), 
the king sent it to the Coli prince. The Coli prince, with all his 
array, hearing of the grace of Buddha, the Law, (and) the Church, 
from King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja’s sending (word of it 
to him) , he cast off his adhesion to false doctrines, (and) he adhered 

straightaway to the true doctrine ; he saw he was pleased 

(and) happy (1. 15) (of pearls?), an awning of 

pearls, a kalpavrkfa 1 tree adorned with the seven (kinds of) jewels, 
together with a virgin daughter of his who was perfect in form and 
with ornaments of divers kinds, who was shaded by a white 

umbrella, a peacock umbrella, a peacock set with the seven 

(kinds of) jewels, (he) came to offer to King Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja. That too, other kings (1. 17) have not got the like of. 

—Epigraphia Birmanica, Vol. I. Translation by C. O. Blagden. 


1. Sec, the C6|as, ii. p. 66 tor the present of a kalpavrkta to the Cidam- 
baram temple by Vikramacola in 1128 A.D. Also Vogel, Yupo Inscriptions 
of King Mulovarman, pp. 214-15, Ins. C., for a much earlier example C 400 
A.D. from Borneo. 



XXII. C. 1170 A.D. BENJAMIN OF TUDELA 


This Jewish traveller from Spain, relates that about the middle 
of the twelfth century A.D., the island of Kish marked the limit of 
the voyages of Indian merchants trading *toith 
kish Persia and the West. Kish, he says, is “ a con- 

siderable market, being the point to which Indian 
merchants and those of the island bring their commodities ; 
while the traders of Mesopotamia, Yemen and Persia import all sorts 
of silk and purple cloths, flax, cotton, hemp, mash (a kind of pea) , 
wheat, barley, millet, rye and all sorts of comestibles and pulse, 
which articles form objects of exchange ; those from India import 
great quantities of spices, and the inhabitants of the island live by 
what they gain in their capacity of brokers to both parties. The 
island contains about five hundred Jews.” 

Benjamin states that Chulam was seventeen days by sea from 
Kish; Chulam may therefore be Quilon or some other port more to 
the north on the West coast of India. Ritter says : ‘ Choulam is 

beyond doubt the Koulam of Marco Polo and Ibn Battuta.’ Of the 
people of this place and their government and comity, Benjamin 
observes : 

“ They arc descendents of Khush, are addicted to astrology, and 
are all black. This nation is very trustworthy in matters of trade, 
and whenever foreign merchants enter their port, 
omLoir ? three secretaries of the king immediately repair on 

board their vessels, write down their names and 
report them to him. The king thereupon grants them security for 
their property, which they may even leave in the open fields 
without any guard. 

“ One of the king’s officers sits in the market, and receives goods 
that may have been found anywhere, and which he returns to those 
applicants who can minutely describe them. This custom is observed 
in the a whole empire of the king. 

“ From Easter to New Year ‘(from April to October) during the 
whole of the summer the heat is extreme. From the third hour of 
the day (nine o’clock in the morning) people shut themselves up 
in their houses until the evening, at which time everybody ^oes out. 
The streets and markets are lighted up and the inhabitants employ 
all the night upon their business, which they are prevented from 
doing in the day time, in consequence of the excessive heat. 



BENJAMIN OF TUDELA 


135 


“ The pepper grows in this country ; the trees which bear this 
fruit are planted in the fields, which surround the towns, and every 
one knows his plantation. The trees are small and the pepper is 
originally white, but when they collect it, they put it into basins and 
pour hot water upon it ; -it is then exposed to the heat of the sun 
and dried in order to make it hard and more substantial, in the 
countfc of which process it becomes of a black colour. 

“ Cinnamon, ginger, and many other kinds of spices also grow 
in this country. 

“ The inhabitants do not bury their dead, but embalm them 
with certain spices, put them upon stools and cover them with cloths, 
every family keeping apart. The flesh dries upon 
the bones, and as these corpses resemble living emsalminq 
beings, every one of them recognises his parents 
and all the members of his family for many years to come.” 1 

— R. H. Major — India in the fifteenth century, pp. xlvi-xlviii. 
— The Itinerary of Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela, ed. A. 
Asher, i. pp. 137-40. (cf. M. N. Adler, The Itinerary 
of Benjamin of Tudela, pp. 63-5). 


1. Benjamin mentions further that ‘these people worship the sun’, and 
that there were among them ‘ only about one hundred Jews, who are of 
colour ’, whs are ‘ good men, observers' of the law and possess Pentateuch, the 
Prophets and some little knowledge of the Thalmud and its decisions'. His 
paragraphs on the 'island of Khandy’ are no good and are not reproduced; 
he says there were 23,000 Jews there, which is not easy to believe. 



XXIII. C. 1225 A.D. CHAU JU-KUA 


A. Simian ( Ceylon ) 

Sailing from Lan-wu-li, 1 one knows that one is nearing §i-lan 
by continual flashing of lightning. 

The king (of Si-lan) is black, his hair unkempt and his head 
uncovered. He wears no clothes but has a cotton cloth of different 
colours wrapped around him ; on his feet he wears sandals of red 
leather, tied with golden strings. When he goes forth he rides an 
elephant or is carried in a litter. All day he chews a paste of betel 
nut and pearl ashes. 

His palace is ornamented with cat’s-eyes, blue and red precious 
stones, cornelians and other jewels ; the very floor he walks upon 
is so ornamented. There is an eastern and western 
palace palace, and at each there is a golden tree, the 

trunk and branches all of gold, the flowers, 
fruit and leaves of cat’s-eyes, blue and red precious stones 
and such like jewels. At the foot of these trees are golden thrones 
with opaque glass screens. When the king holds fris court he uses 
the eastern palace in the forenoon and the western in the afternoon. 
When (the king) is seated, the jewels flashing in the sunshine, the 
glass (screens) and the jewel-tree shining on each other, make it 
like the glory of the rising sun. 

Two attendants are always present holding a golden dish to 
receive the remains of the betel nut (paste) chewed by the king 
The king’s attendants pay a monthly fee of one i 2 
ram. of gold into the government treasury for the pri- 

vilege of getting the betel nut (paste) remains, for 
it contains “ plum flower ”, camphor and all kinds of precious 
substances. 

The king holds in his hand a jewel five inches in diameter, 
which cannot be burnt by fire, and which shines in (the darkness 
of) night like a torch. The king rubs his face with it daily, and 
though he were passed ninety he would retain his youthful looks. 

The people of the country are very dark-skinned, they wrap 
a sarong round their bodies, go bare-headed and 
ra°PLE bare-footed. They use their hands in taking up 

their food ; their household utensils are 'of copper. 


2. Twenty tail*. 



CHAU JU-KUA 


W 


There is (in this country of Sl-lan) a mountain called Si-lun-tie,* 
cm the top of which there is a huge imprint of a man’s foot, over 
seven feet long, and a like imprint is visible in the water (of the 
sea) within a distance of over 300 li from the mountain. Hie forest 
trees on the mountain, little and big, all bend towards it (as if 
reverencing it). 

The products (of Si-lan) include cat’s-eyes, red transparent 
glass, camphor, blue and red precious stones. The products of the 
soil are cardamoms, mu-lan bark 4 and both coarse 
and fine perfumes. Foreign traders exchange foi products 
them sandal-wood, cloves, camphor, gold, silver, 
porcelain-ware, horses, elephants, and silk stuffs. 

This country sends a yearly tribute to San-fo-ts’i. 5 

— Chau Ju-kua : (ed. Hirth and Rockhill) I. 13, pp. 72-73. 

B. Malabar 
Nan-p'i 

The Nan-p'i country® is in the extreme south-west. From 
San-fo-ts‘i one may reach it with the monsoon in a little more than 
a month. 

The capital of the kingdom is styled Mie-a-mo, which has the 
same meaning as the Chinese expression li-ssi. 6 7 

The ruler of the country has his body draped, but goes bare- 
footed. He wears a turban and a loin-cloth, both of white cotton 
doth. Sometimes he wears a white cotton shirt 
with narrow sleeves. When going out he rides an ruler 
elephant, and wears a golden hat ornamented with 
pearls and gems. On his arm is fastened a band of gold, and 
around his leg is a golden chain. 


3. te., Serendib. Our author is, so far as is known, the only Chinese who 
has used this name to designate Adam's Peak (Hirth and Rockhill). It is more 
commonly employed by mediaeval Arab writers, cf. Ibn Battuta, post. 

4 . Marvdamaram in Tamil according to Hirth end Rockhill,* citing 
Tennent’s Ceylon, i. p. 99 ; Pelliot, however, considers it a kind of cinnamon. 
TP. xiii, p. 468. 

5. This is a doubtful statement. Possibly ' tribute ' is used in the Chinese 

6. Oi'more correctly 'the country of the Nan-p'i’, or Naira of Malabar. 
—Hirth and Rockhill. 

7. This statement has not been satisfactorily explained. 


FN.— 18. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


138 


Among his regalia is a standard of peacock feathers on a staff 
of vermilion colour; over twenty men guard it round. He is 
attended by a guard of some five hundred picked _ 
worn* otabbs foreign women, chosen for their fine physique. 

Those in front lead the way with dancing, their 
bodies draped, bare-footed and with a cotton loin-cloth. Those 
behind ride horses bareback ; they have a loin-cloth, their 
hair is done up and they wear necklaces of pearls and anklets 
of gold, their bodies are perfumed with camphor and musk and 
other drugs, and umbrellas of peacock feathers shield them from 
the sun. 

In front of the dancing-women are carried the officers of the 
king’s train, seated in litters of white foreign cotton, and which are 
called pu-tai-kiau 8 and are borne on poles plated with gold and 
silver. 


In this kingdom there is much sandy soil, so, when the king 
goes forth, they first send an officer with an hundred soldiers and 
more to sprinkle the ground so that the gusts of wind may not 
whirl up the dust. 

The people are very dainty in their diet ; they have a hundred 
ways of cooking their food, which varies every day,. 

There is an officer called Han-lin who lays the viands and drinks 
before the king, and sees how much food he eats, regulating his diet 
so that he may not exceed the proper measure. Should the king 
fall sick through excess of eating, then (this officer) must taste his 
faeces and treat him according as he finds them sweet or bitter. 

The people of this country are of a dark brown complexion, the 
lobes of their ears reach down to their shoulders. They are skilled 
in archery and dexterous with the sword and lance. 
topix They love fighting and ride elephants in battle, 

when they also wear turbans of coloured silks. 

They are extremely devout Buddhists. 9 

The climate is warm ; there is no cold season. Rice, hemp, 
beans, wheat, millet, tubers and green vegetables supply their food ; 
they are abundant and cheap. ' 


8. Called mafijil, a sort of hammock-litter. , 

9. A natural confusion on the part of the author between Hindu and 



CHAU JU-KUA 


138 

They cut an alloyed silver into coins ; on these 
they stamp an official seal. The people use these in conn 
trading. 

The native products include pearls, foreign cotton stuff of all 
colours (i.e., coloured chintzes) and tou-lomidn (cotton cloth). 10 

There is in this country a river of brackish water, which, at a 
certain point where its different channels meet, becomes very broad. 
At this point its banks are bold cliffs in the face of which sparks 
(lit., stars) can constantly be seen, and these by their vital powers 
fructify and produce small stones like cat’s-eyes, dear and trans- 
lucid. They lie buried in holes in (these) hills until some day they 
are washed out by the rush of a flood, when the officials send men 
in little boats to pick them up. They are prized by the natives. 

The following states are dependencies of this country (of 
Nan-p‘i) . 

Ku-lin (Quilon) Fong-ya-lo (Mangalore) 

Hu-ch‘a-la (Gujerat) Ma-li-mio (Malabar?) 

Kan-pa-i (Cambay) Tu-nu-ho (Tana ?) 

Pi-li-sha (Bharoach ?) A-li-jo (Eli) 

Ma-lo-hua (Malwa) Au-lo-lo-li (Cannanore?) 

This country (of Nan-p‘i ?) is very far away and foreign 
vessels rarely visit it. Shi-lo-pa-chi-li-kan, 11 father and son, belong 
to this race of people ; they are now living in the southern suburb 
of the city of Ts'uan— (cho'u-fu) . 

Its products are taken thence to Ki-lo Ta-nung 12 and San-fo-t‘si, 
and the following goods are exchanged in bartering 
for them : Ho-ch'i silks, porcelain-ware, camphor teams 
( chang-nau ) , rhubarb, huang-lien, doves, lump- 
camphor (nau-tzi), sandal-wood, cardamoms and gharu-wood. u 

Ku-lin may be reached in five days with the monsoon from 
Nan-p‘i. It takes a Ts‘uan-chou ship over forty 
days to reach Lan-li (i.e., Lan-wu-li) ; there the wilox 
winter is spent, and, the following year, a further 
voyage of a month will take it to this country. 

10. Probably ‘the buckram which looks like tissue of spider’s vteb’ of 
which Polo speaks— Hirth and Rockhill. 

11. Two names of Neirs here— Shl-lo-pa and Chl-li-kan (?). 

12. KwSla Terong on the Perak coast— Gerini. 

13. Pepper is omitted by Chau in this list of the products of Malabar 
‘presumaMy because nearly, if not all, the pepper trade of China in his days 
was with the Indian archipelago.’— Hirth and Rockhill, 



148 FOREIGN NOTICES 

“ The customs of the people are, on the whole, not different from 
those of the Nnn-p‘i people. The native products comprise cocoa- 
nuts and sapan-wood ; for wine they use a mixture of honey with 
cocoanuts and the juice of a flower, which they let ferment. 

“ They are fond of archery ; in battle they wrap their hair in 
silken turbans.” 

For the purpose of trade they use coins of gold and silver; 
twelve silver coins are worth one gold one. The country is warm 
and has no cold season. Every year ships come to this country from 
San-fo-ts‘i, Kien-pi and Ki-t‘o, 14 and the articles they trade with 
are the same as in Nan-p‘i. 

“ Great numbers of Ta-shi live in this country. 

Whenever they (i.e., the inhabitants) have taken a bath, they 
anoint their bodies with yu-kin (turmeric), as they like to have 
their bodies gilt like that of a Buddha.” 15 

—Chau Ju-kua, I. 16. pp. 87-89. 

C. Hu-ch’a.-la ( Guzerat ) 

The kingdom of Hu-ch‘a-la 16 rules over a hundred cities and 
more ; its (principal) city has a four-fold wall. * 

The inhabitants of this country are white and clean looking ; 
both men and women wear double rings hanging down from holes in 
their ears ; they wear close fitting clothes with a cotton sarong 
wrapped around them. On their heads they wear white hoods, and 
on their feet shoes of red leather. They are forbidden to eat flesh. 


14. All in Sumatra. 

15. All citations in this chapter are from the Ling-wai-ta-ta, which adds: 
"The king of the country worships Heaven. He who kills an ox forfeits his 
life. Chinese traders with big ships who wish to go to the country of the 
Arabs, must tranship at Ku-lin to smaller boats before proceeding farther. 
Although they may get (to their destination) in one month with a southerly 
wind, it may be two years before they can get back (to China).” The Text 
goes on to state that “ the people of Ku-lin are black, they wrap their bodies 
in white cotjon cloth, wear their beards and all their hair loose and uncovered. 
They wear red leather shoes, so they look when walking as if they had the 
painted feet of a lo-hnn . . . The king wraps his body in cotton-cloth, when 
he goes out he is carried in a litter (juan-tou) of cotton cloth, or else he rides 

16. This is the earliest mention in Chinese works of the name'* Guzerat ’. 
— Hirth and Rockhill. 



CHAXJ JU-KUA 


There are four thousand Buddhist temple buildings, in which 
live over twenty thousand dancing-girls who sing twice daily while 
offering food to the Buddha (i.e., the idols) and while offering 
flowers. When offering flowers they tie them in bunches with cotton 
thread, of which they use three hundred catties every day. 

There are over four hundred war-elephants and about one 
hundred thousand cavalry horses. When the king goes about he 
rides an elephant ; on his head he wears a cap. His followers ride 
horseback and carry swords. 

The native products comprise great quantities of indigo, red 
kino, myrobalans and foreign cotton stuffs of every colour. Every 
year these goods are transported to the Ta-shi countries for sale. 

— Chau Ju-kua, 1. 17, p. 92. 

D. Chola Dominion 
(Coromandel Coast) 

Chu-lien 

“The kingdom of Chu-lien is the Southern Yin-tu of the 
west.” 1 ’ 

To the east '(its capital) is five li distant from the sea ; to the 
west one comes to Western India (after) 1500 l* ; to the south one 
comes to Lo-lan la (after) 2500 li; to the north one comes to Tun-t‘ien 
(after) 3000 li. 1 * 

This country had not from olden times carried on trade (with 
China) . By water one comes to Ts'iian-cho'u after some 411,400 li. 

" If you wish to go to this kingdom, then you must change ships 
at Ku-lin to go there. 20 Some say that one can go there by way of 
the kingdom of Fu-kan." 


17. i.e. , the peninsular part of India. 

18. Mistake for Si-lan(?). 

19. It seems just possible that we should correct the text to read “to the 

east one comes to Tun-sun ” which is supposed to have been near the soythem 
extremity of the Malay Peninsula.— Hirth and Rockhlll. • 

20. Chou K’ii-fei and Chau Ju-kua indicate a first route by sea via Qufion 
in S. W. India with transhipment in the last port for going to the Coromandel. 
The second along the Burman coast of the Bay of Bengal and without doubt 
also the east coast of India. Tbs navigation in the bay was thus performed 
either right across its greatest width from East to West, from the Straits of 
Malaca to Ceylon and Quilon— or from the Strait of Sunda to Ceylon— if one 



142 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


In this kingdom there is a city with a seven-fold wall, seven 
feet high, and extending twelve U from north to south and seven li 
from east to west. The different walls are one hundred paces dis- 
tant from each other. Four of these walls are of brick, two of 
mud, and the one in the centre of wood. There are flowers, fruit 
trees, and other trees planted (on them?). 

The first and second walls enclose the dwellings of the people, 
— they are surrounded by small ditches ; the third and fourth walls 
(surround) the dwellings of the court officers ; within the fifth dwell 
the king’s four sons ; within the sixth are the Buddhist (i.e., idol) 
monasteries where the priests dwell ; the seventh wall encloses over 
four hundred buildings forming the royal palace. 

There are thirty-one (sic) pu-lo ; 21 of these twelve are in the 
west, namely : 

Chl-tu-ni (Chitor). 

Shl-ya-lu-ni. 

Lo-pa-li-pi-pa-i. 

Pu-lin-pa-pu-ni (Brahmapuri) . 

Ku-tan-pu-lin-p‘u-tong (Kaveripatnam). 

Ku-li (Koil). 

Po-lun-ts‘on. 

Pon-t‘i-ki4-ti (Bundelkhand) . 

Yen-li-ch’I-li. 

Na-pu-ni (Nagpur). 

Cho-ku-lin. 

Ya-li-cho-lin (Elichpur). 

Eight are in the south, namely : 

Wu-ya-kia-li-ma-lan. 

Mei-ku-li-k‘u-ti (Motupalle). 

Sho-li-ni (Jaliat). 

Mi-to-lo-mo (Madura). 


followed the reverse of the route from the countries of the West to China 
or starting from the Strait of Malaca, along the coasts of Burma and of India 
adjoining the Bay of Bengal. It is no doubt this last route that is alluded to 
by the passage from Ling Woi ta to, fextually reproduced by the Chu-fan-chi 
(Chau Ju-kua, p. 94) Ferrand, JA, 11 : 14, pp. 48-49. 

21. pura (Skt). The following list seems quite original with Chau 
Ju-kua. "There is nothing to show where one name ends and another begins 
in the list.” The conjectural identifications that have been suggested by Hirth 
and Rockhil] are placed in the text within brackets. " Other arrangements of 
the characters are possible.” 



CHAU JU-KUA 


K‘16-lan-p‘u-t8ng (Kalingapatam) . 

MSng-k‘16-lin-kia-lan (Mangalore). 

Pa-li-pa-li-yu. 

Ya-lin-ch‘i-m6ng-k‘id-lan. 

and twelve are in the north, namely : 

Fa-lo-y6 (Vallabhi). 

Wu-mo-li-kiang. 

Chu-lin. 

Kia-li-mong-k‘ie-lan. 

Ts‘i-kie-ma-lan. 

Wu-cho-mong-k‘ ie-lan. 

Pi-lin-k‘ie-lan. 

Fulong-ho-lan. 

Pau-pa-lai. 

Tien-chu-li. 

Lu-so-lo. 

Mi-mong k'id-lan. 

When any one among the people is guilty of an offense one of 
the Court Ministers punishes him; if the offense is light, the cul- 
prit is tied to a wooden frame and given fifty, seventy, or up to an 
hundred blows with a stick. Heinous crimes are punished with 
decapitation or by being trampled to death by an elephant. 

At state banquets both the Prince and the four Court Ministers 
salaam at the foot of the throne, then the whole (company present) 
break into music, song and dancing. He (the 
Prince) does not drink wine, but he eats meat, and, EIA te banquets 
as is the native custom, dresses in cotton clothing 
and eats flour-cakes. For his table and escort he employs “ fully a 
myriad dancing-girls, three thousand of whom are in attendance 
daily in rotation.” 

When contracting marriage, they send, in the first place, a 
female go-between with a gold (or) silver finger-ring to the girl’s 
home. Three days afterwards there is a meeting 
of the man’s family to decide upon the amount of icajouagi 
land, cotton, betel nuts, wine and the like 
to be given as marriage portion.. The girl’s family *sends in 
return (a ?) gold or silver finger-ring, yiie-no cloth® and brocaded 
clothing to be worn by the bride to the ''intended) son-in-law. 


22, Probably a kind of very fine muslin, made In various localities of 
Western Asia. — -Hirth and Rockhill. 



144 


Should the man wish to withdraw from the engagement, he would 
not dare reclaim the marriage gifts ; if the girl should wish to reject 
the man she must pay back double. 

As the taxes and imposts of the kingdom are numerous and 
heavy, traders rarely go there. 

“The country is at war with the kingdoms of the west (of 
India ?) . The government owns sixty-thousand war-elephants, 
every one seven or eight feet high. When fighting 
was elephants these elephants carry on their backs houses, and 
these houses are full of soldiers who shoot arrows 
at long range, and fight with spears at close quarters. When 
victorious, the elephants are granted honorary names to signalise 
their merit.”® 

“ The inhabitants are hot-tempered and reckless of life ; nay, 
in the presence of the king they Will fight man to man with swords 
and die without regret.” 

“ Father and son, elder and yolmger brother, have their meals 
cooked in separate kettles and served in separate dishes ; yet they 
are deeply alive to family duties." 

The native products comprise pearls, elephants’ tusks, coral, 
transparent glass, betel nuts, cardamoms, opaque glass, cotton stuffs 
with coloured silk threads, and cotton stuffs. 

Of quadrupeds they have goats and domestic cattle ; of birds, 
pheasants and parrots ; of fruits, the yii-kan, the t'ong-lo, Persian 
dates, cocoanuts, the kan-lo, the k'wn-lun plum, and the po-Io-mi 
(jack-fruit). 

Of flowers, they have the white jasmine, the san-ssi, the sho- 
ts’i-sang, the li-ts'iu, the blue, yellow and green p‘o-lo, the yau-lien- 
ch'an, the red canna (?) .^ 


23. Quotation from Chou K'ti-fel who continues : " and there are some 
who hestow upon them (the elephants) embroidered housings and golden 
mangers. Every day the elephants are taken into the presence of the king. 
The king, his officers and the people all twist their hair into a knot, and wrap 
(themselves) in white cotton cloth. They make coins of gold and silver. The 
country produces finger-rings, camphor, eat’s-eyes and such like things ; also 
pearls, elephant’s tusks, amber of different colours and cotton stuff, with 
coloured silk threads.” • 

24. Most of these flowers are indetermined, the names seem to be foreign. 
— Hirth and Rockhill, 



CHAU JU-KUA 


145 


Of grain they have green and black beans, wheat and rice ; the 
bamboo is indigenous. 

In former times they did not send tribute to our court, but “ in 
the eighth year of the ta-chung and siang-fu periods (A.D. 1015), 
its sovereign sent a mission with pearls and like 
‘articles as tribute The interpreters, m translating embassies 
their speech, said they wished to evince the 
respect of a distant nation for (Chinese) civilization” They 
were ordered by Imperial Decree to remain m waiting at the 
side gate of the Palace, and to be entertained at a banquet by the 
Associates in the College of Court Annalists. By Imperial favour 
they were ranked with envoys of K‘iu-tz-‘i It happened to be 
the Emperor’s birthday, and the envoys had a fine opportunity to 
witness the congratulations in the Sacred Enclosure 25 


25 Ma and the Sung-shi contain information not found in the work, of 
the two earlier writers The Sung-shi says the principal envoy from Chu-li£n 
was called So-li San-Won, So-li, I take it, represents the name Chola Con- 
cerning the voyage of the mission to China, this envoy said “After leaving 
Chu-hen they had sailed for 77 da>s and nights, during which they passed the 
island (or headland) of Na-wu-tan and the island of So-li Si-lan (Ceylon of 
the Cholas’), and, came to the country of Chan-pin (not identified, but pre- 
sumably in Pegu) Thence going 61 days and nights they passed the island 
of I-ma-lo-li (not identified) and came to the country of Ku-lo (possibly on 
W coast of Malay Peninsula or in Sumatra), m which there is a mountain 
called Ku-lo, from which the country takes its name 

“ Proceeding again 71 days and nights and passing the iplaed of Kia-pa 
(not identified), the island of Chan (or Ku)-pu-lau (or Cham pulo) and the 
island of Chou-pau-lung (not identified), they came to the country of 
San-fo-ts'i 

“Going again for 18 days and nights and having crossed (or passed by) 
the mouth of the Man-shan river (in Kambhoja’) and T'len-chu islands 
(Pulo Aor ’), they came to the Pin-t'ou-lang headland (Cape Padaran) , from 
whence, looking eastward, the tomb of the Si-wang mu was about 100 It from 

"Proceeding 20 days and nights and having passed by Yang island (Pulo 
Gambir) and Kiu-smg island, they came to Pi-p'a island of Kuang-tung 
(Canton) 

“ From their home they bad taken m all 1150 days to reach Kuang-chiu ” 

As previously noted, great exaggeration is met with in all that has, 
down to us concerning this mission It is»said by Ma-Twan-hn and the Sung' 
shi that the king of Chu-hen sent the Emperor of China, among other presents, 
21000 ounces of pearls, 60 elephants’ tusks, and 60 catties of frankincense The 
envoys’ gifts to the Emperor included 6600 ounces of pearls end 3300 catties 
of perfumes’ 

The ranking of the envoys of Chu-Uen with those from K‘iu-tz'i, K’ucha 
m Eastern Turkestan, a vassal state of China, shows the low estimate in which 
F. N.-18 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


“In the tenth year si-ning (1077) they again sent tribute of 
native produce. The Emperor Shiin-tsung sent an officer of the 
Inner Department (i.e., a Chamberlain) to bid them welcome.” 

The remaining countries (of India), Nan-ni-hua-lo and others, 
are more than a hundred in number ; they are all included under 
the term of “ Western ” (lit., Western Heaven) . 

Concerning Wang-sho-ch‘ong, 26 tradition says that north of 
Kiau-chi (Tongking), “ one comes to Ta-li (Ytin-nan), and west of 
Ta-li one comes to Wang-sho-ch'ong in less than forty days’ 
journey.” 

Kia Tan in the Huang-hua-ssi (or si)-ta-ki, says that to go from 
An-nan to Tien-chu, there is an overland route which one can take 
to get there. Yet as Ta-mo came sailing across the sea to P‘an-yu 
(Canton), we may fairly ask whether the sea journey is not more 
expeditious lhan the long overland one. 

Fong-k‘ie-lo of the West has a capital called Ch‘a-na-ki. 27 The 
city walls are 120 li in circuit. The common people are combative 
and devoted solely to robbery. They use (pieces of) white conch 
shells ground into shape as money. The native products include 
fine swords, to’u-Io 28 cotton stuffs and common cotton cloth. 

Some say that the law of the Buddha originated in this country 
for Huan-tsang, the master of the Tripitaka in the T’ang period, 
(when) he got the Buddhist Classics (to bring to China) had 
already reached the West. 

“ Nan-ni-hua-lo city 29 has a triple wall. The inhabitants morn- 
ing and evening bathe and besmear their bodies with yii-kin 
(turmeric) so as to look like golden coloured images (lit., 
Buddhas).” A large proportion of them are called P‘o-lo-mon 
(Brahmans) , as they are geunine descendants of Fo. 30 


Chu-lien was held. In 1106 the Chu-lidn vassalage to San-fo-ts‘i was given 
by the Burmese envoys as a reason for asking greater privileges at the Chinese 
court than they had received.— Hirth and Rockhill. 

26. Magadha. 4 

27. The name of the capital remains unidentified, and, according to Hirth 
and Rockhill, it is doubtful if P'ong-k'ii-lo stands for Bengal or Balhara. 

28. tola (Skt.) , cotton 

29. Perhaps in Sindh.— Hirth and Rockhill. 

30. Here and in the next paragraph, this word must be taken to mean 
Brahma.— Hirth and Rockhill. 



CHAU JU-KUA 


“ The walls of their rooms and the mats they sit on are be- 
smeared with cow-dung, which they look upon as a clean substance. 
In their houses they set up altars, three feet high and which are 
reached by three steps, and on which daily in the morning they 
burn incense and offer flowers ; this is called ‘ the offering to Fo.’ ” 

When Arab (Ta-shi) foreigners come to this country they give 
them seats outside the doors and lodge them in separate houses sup- 
plied with beddings and household utensils. 

When a woman is guilty of adultery she is put to death, and 
the officials make no enquiry about it. 

Hie native products include the best quality of putchuck, and 
fine white flowered (or dotted) cotton stuffs. The people eat much 
butter, rice, beans and vegetables : they rarely eat fish or meat. 

“ A road leads to the Western Regions (Si-yii); whfen there are 
raids (on Nan-ni-hua-lo ?) by the light horsemen of the Western 
Regions, 31 the only resistance they offer is to lock their gates. In 
a few days provisions run short, and (the raiders) withdraw of their 
own accord.” 

—Chau Ju-kua, I. 19, pp. 93-98. 

E. India 
Tien-chu 

“The country of Tien-chu is subordinate to the country of 
Ta-ts‘in ” ; its rulers are all selected by Ta-ts'in. 32 

It is the custom of the people to plait their hair and to let it 
hang down, but the temples and the crown of the head are covered 
with a silken turban. In their dwellings they use plaster instead of 
tiles. They have walled cities in which the people dwell. 


31. Early Moslem invaders of Sindh (?)— Hirth and Rockhill. 

32. “It appears that Chau’s Tidn-chu was the coast of Madras, at least 

so far as the first three paragraphs of this chapter are concerned ; in the rest 
of the chapter, derived nearly entirely from the T'ung-tien and other Chfneee 
authorities, Tito-chu must, I think, be understood in Its broader meaning of 
India generally. _ , . 

“The in which the king, t.e., the head priest of the Christians, 

appointed by the king of Ta-ts'in, dressed his hair might be looked upon as 
a strange anomaly, considering his being deputed by the Syrian, or the Chal- 
daean patriarch. But it appears that in India the Christian clergy followed the 
native custom in this respect.” — Hirth and Rockhill. 



148 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


The king dresses in brocaded silk, and his hair is wound into 
a spiral knot on the crown of his head ; the rest of the hair is cut 
short. When holding his court in the morning he 
coo ar sits on a tong skin— tong being the name of an 

animal — ornamented with representations of vari- 
ous objects painted in red wax ; and his courtiers make 
obeisance to him and pray for his life. When he goes forth he rides 
on horseback, and his saddle and bridle are thickly set with dark 
gold and silver. His followers, three hundred in number, are armed 
with spears and swords. 

His consort wears a gold embroidered scarlet dress with large 
sleeves. Once a year she shows herself in public, when considerable 
bounty is given to the poor. 

“ In this country there is holy-water which can still the wind 
and waves. The foreign traders fill opaque glass bottles with it, and 
when they suddenly get in a rough sea they still it by sprinkling this 
water on it.” 

It is said that “ during the reign of Siian-wu of the Posterior 
Wei dynasty (A.D. 500-515) , Ti&i-chu sent envoys with a present 
of swift horses. It is said that their country 
products produces lions, sables, leopards, camels, rhinoceros, 

elephants, tortoise-shell, gold, copper, iron, lead 
and tin, gold embroidered rugs, po-tid (muslin) and t'a-tong 
(rugs). There is a stone like talc, but of a reddish colour; 
when split it is as thin as a cicada’s wing : when put together the 
pieces look like silken gauze. There is the diamond which looks 
like fluor-spar, but which will not melt, though exposed to the fire 
an hundred times.” It can cut jade-stone. 

There is sandal-wood and other aromatic woods, sugarcane, 
sugar and all kinds of fruits. They trade yearly with Ta-ts’in 33 and 
Fu-nan. 34 They use cowries as a medium of exchange. They are 
clever jugglers. They have bows and arrows, armour, spears, 
flying-ladders, saps, and also the contrivances called the “ wooden- 
oxen ” and the “ gliding-horses ” ; yet they are cowards in battle. 
They are good astronomer's and calculators of the calendar (or 
astrologers). They all study the Si-tan-chang-shu. 35 . . . (Note: 


33. Baghdad. 

34. Cambodia. 

35. ‘ Siddhanta book of rules’ — astronomy (?) — Hlrth and Rockhill. 



CHAU JU-KUA 


A gap of seven characters occurs here) . They use the leaves of the 
p eWo 34 as paper. 

In the periods chSng-kuan (A.D. 627-650) and tiin-sho'u (690- 
692) of the Tang (this country) sent envoys with tribute (to our 
Court) . In the yung-hi period (of the Sung, A.D. 948-988) a priest 
by name Lohu-na 37 arrived (in Ts‘iian-cho'u) by sea ; he called 
himself a native of Tien-chu. The foreign traders, considering that 
he was a foreign priest, vied with each other in presenting him gold, 
silks, jewels and precious stones, but the priest had no use for them 
himself. He bought a piece of ground and built a Buddhist shrine 
in the southern suburb of Ts’iian-chdu ; it is the Pau-lin-yiian of 
the present day. 


—Chau Ju-kua, ed. Hirth and Rockhill, I. 21, pp. 110-111. 


36. patft (Skt)j in full to-lo-p'o li-ch‘a pei-to (i.e.) tUa-vrkaa-patra. 
lirth and Rockhill 

37. Rihula (?) 



XXIV. 1279-92 A.D. EMBASSIES BETWEEN CHINA 
AND SOUTH INDIA 


Possibly as a result of the arrival at the Mongol court in the 
7th moon of 1279 of missions from Ma’bar and Annam (Chan-ch’Sng) 
which presented the emperor with a live elephant and a rhino- 
ceros, Yang Ting-pi, the able lieutenant of So-tu and now Comman- 
der-in-Chief in Kuang-tung with the title of Da-ruga, was appointed 
Imperial Commissioner in the 12th moon .of the year (early part 
of 1280) with orders to proceed to Kulam (Quilon) to invite the 
ruler (Pi-na-ti) 1 to recognise Kublai as his liege lord and to send an 
envoy to China ; this he promised to do. 

In the early autumn of 1280 (8th moon) missions arrived at the 
Mongol court from Annam and Ma’bar bearing memorials from 
their rulers to the Emperor in which they styled themselves “ Your 
servants,” thus recognizing him as their liege lord. They presented 
as tribute valuable presents and, a8 in 1279, an elephant and rhino- 
ceros. 2 This mission had been sent spontaneously by the legitimate 
sovereign of Ma’bar and before the arrival of Yang Ting-pi, the 
king being most anxious to secure, by recognition of Chinese 
suzerainty, the protection of the Mongols against has domestic foes 
who were depriving him of all his power ; its leader was named 
Jumaluddin. 

Hardly had Yang Ting-pi returned from this mission when he 
was ordered to proceed again to Kulam and the adjacent countries. 
The narrative of his journey is given as follows in the Yuan shih. 

“ In the 10th moon (of the year 1280) the rank of Envoy to 
Kulam was given to Ha-sa-erh-hai-ya and he was sent, in company 
with Yang Ting-pi, to summon (the other countries adjacent to 
Kulam) to come to Court. They put to sea from Ch’iian-chou in 
the first moon of the 18th year, (about February, 1281) and after a 
voyage of three moons arrived in the island of Seng-kia-yeh 
(Ceylon). Ch6ng-chen and the other sailors persuaded them, in 
view of the contrary winds and their provisions running short, to 
make„for Ma’bar, whence Kiilam could bo reached by a land-route 
which they believed existed. In the 4th moon they landed from 

1. Pi-na-ti (di) may stand for an original Pandl or Pandya, the name at 
the then reigning dynasty of Ma*bar. 

2. This is evidently the mission referred to by the king of Mabar in the 
secret message he sent Yang Ting-pi in the 5th moon of 1281 ; he then stated 
that Cha-ma-li-ting (Jamaluddin) was his envoy. 





151 


their junk at the port of Hsin-tsun 3 (in Ma’bar). Ma-yin-ti, the 
Miwiator of State (Vezir) of the country, said to the Chinese 
Officials : “ You are most welcome. Whenever our ships have been 
to Ch'iian-chou your officials have done their best to spare us all 
trouble and expense. What business has brought you here?” 
Yang Ting-pi and the others explained the purpose of their mission 
and all about the supposed route to Kiilam. Ma-yin-ti requested 
them, on the score of not fully understanding what they said, to 
see his Assistant (or Secretary) Pu-a-li (Abu Ali) , and to him they 
told about the reported road and their business. 

“ In the 5th moon two men came stealthily to the envoys’ lodg- 
ings, and keeping the people away (so that they could not be over- 
heard) said that, in view of their evident and sincere friendliness, 
they begged them to convey the following message (from the legi- 
timate king of Ma’bar) to the court of China. “I am sincerely 
desirous of becoming the subject of the Emperor. My envoy 
Cha-ma-li-ting (Jumaluddin) has been received at your court. My 
Great Pi-she-ch’ih has gone to the Suan-tan (“ Lord 
of a kingdom”) and asked for a change. The PAlro yAn 
Suan-tan has sequestered my gold and my politics 
silver, my lands and my property. He has laid 
hold of my wives and seeks to put me to death, I have only been 
able to escape by deceiving him. At the present moment the Suan- 
tan and the (or his) brothers have met, all five of them together 
in one place, and are deliberating about fighting with (Kiilam) . 
When they heard of the coming of the Imperial envoys to raise me 
to the rank of a feudal prince of the Empire, they gave it out that 
this country is poor and lowly. This is false ; all the gold, pearls 
and precious things of the Moslim countries come from here, and 
all the Moslims come here to trade. All the kingdoms (of Southern 
India) will show their submissiveness if Ma’bar has once done so. 
My envoy (Jumaluddin) bore a most submissive letter (in this 
sense).” 4 

Ho-sa-erh-hai-ya and Yang Ting-pi having been prevented by 
contrary winds from going by sea to Kiilam (and being detained in 
Ma’bar), Ho-sa-erh-hai-ya went back to the Court of C hina to 


3. Perhaps Kaveripattanam 

4. This important text supplements the data given by the Muhammadan 
historians and Marco Polo on the condition of the Pandyan kingdom towards 
the close of the thirteenth century. The legitimate king who sent the secret 
message to the Chinese envoys was, doubtless, Kulasekbara; and Suan-tan 
may stand for Sundara. 



152 


explain matters. (As a result of this) , when the northerly winds 
had set in, in the 11th moon (of 1281) , the Emperor sent a messenger 
ordering Yang Ting-pi to proceed alone (to Kiilam, by the land- 
route ?) 

“ In the 2nd moon of the 19th year (1282) he arrived in the 
kingdom of Kiilam where the king 9 and his minister Mohammed and 
others received the Imperial letter with the Privy Seal with deep 
prostrations. In the third moon he ordered his minister Chu-a-li- 
sha-mang-li-pa-ti to depart with present to Court. At the same 
time (the head of the) Yeh-li-k’o-wen, 5 6 Wu-tsa-erh-sa-li-ma, and 
Mohammed, the head of the Mussulmans, and others of the country, 
having heard of the coming of the Imperial envoy, all came and 
requested that they be allowed to send yearly presents to Court. 
They therefore sent a representative to be received at the audience. 
Likewise the Kingdom of Su-mu-ta 1 8 9 10 sent a man; as a result of 
the lord of Kiilam having asked of Yang Ting-pi to offer his alle- 
giance, they all accepted the invitation.” 

In the 4th moon (of 1282) Yang Ting-pi started on the return 
journey (to China) . He came to the Kingdom of Na-wang® 
where he again urged its ruler Mang-ang-pi to make his submission. 
Then they came to the Kingdom of Su-mu-tu-Ia B where the ruler 
of the Kingdom, the Tu-han-pa-ti welcomed the* mission. Yang 
Ting-pi having exposed the general purpose of his mission, the 
Tuan-pati 10 on the same day made him presents, called himself 
“ feudatory ", and dispatched his two ministers Hussein and Suli- 
man to Court. 

In the autumn of 1282 the envoys from Kulam, Na-wang, 
Su-mu-ta and Su-mu-tu-la arrived at Kublai’s court. Hie event 
is noted as follows in the Ytian shih : 

“In the 19th year chih-yiian (1282) in the 9th moon, on 
the day of hsing-yu, and as a result of the mission of Yang 


5. Pi-na-U. 

6. This term, in Mongol times, always designated Christians; here St. 
Thor&as Christians. Duarte Barbosa says that the church of St. Thomas 
in Kulam ‘was endowed by the king of Coulam with the revenue from the 
pepper, which remains to it to this day.’ 

7. Mangalore or some place not far from it— Rockhill. 

8. This place and its ruler, not easily identified, must have been in South 

India or Ceylon. « 

9. In Sumatra. 

10. Malay for ‘Lord Ruler— Yule Marco Polo, u, p. 296. 



CHINESE EMBASSIES 158 

Ting-pi, for the establishment of friendly relations with 
the barbarians outside of the sea (of China) , they arriv- 
ed at Court bearing tribute. The ruler of Kti-lan sent 
a mission with a memorial, and presented valuable arti- 
cles and one black ape. The lord of Na-wang, Mang-ang, 
there being no persons acquainted with the art of writing in his 
country, sent four persons but did not present a memorial. The 
ruler of Su-mu-tu-la, the Tu-han-pa-ti, likewise sent two men. 

“As to Su-mu-ta the Prime Minister Na-li-pa-ho-la-nan- 
ch’ih, being (absent) in Kti-lan on business, requested instead 
his lord Ta-ku-erh to send an envoy with a memorial. He brought 
to court the signet ring (of the king ?), brocaded silks and twenty 
brocaded coverlets. Wu-tsa-erh-p , ieh-li-ma, u the chief of the 
Yeh-li-k’o-wen (Thomas Christians) resident in the kingdom of 
Kii-lan, sent also a messenger with a memorial who presented a 
gorget set with different kinds of jewels, and two flacons of drugs. 
Furthermore Mohammed, the head official of the Mussulmans, also 
sent a messenger and a memorial.” 

In 1282, possibly after the Tetum of Yang Ting-pi to China, 
another officer, the Uigur-I-hei-mi shih who already in 1272 and 
1275 had carried out successfully missions beyond 
the sea, and who at the time was assisting So-tu, huddua relics 
then Resident in Chan-ch’Sng, in establishing 
Chinese suzerainty over that country, was detached from that 
duty by order of the Emperor and sent beyond the sea 
to Seng-kia-la (Ceylon) to examine the Buddha’s almsbowl and 
body relics ( saiira ). He made the journey but without accom- 
plishing the object for which he was sent which was to secure 
this priceless relic for the Emperor, for in 1287 he was again sent 
on a mission for the same purpose, as we shall see later on. 12 

Yang Ting-pi was not at the end of his travelling; a few 
months after his return (in the 1st moon of the 20th year chih- 
yrian, January-February 1283) he was made Imperial Commis- 
sioner, honoured with imperial gifts of a bow and arrows, a sad dle 
and bridle, and sent on a new mission to Kiilam and other states. 
He was also entrusted with a golden badge for Wa-ni, 18 king of 


U. Contra ga-li ma for p‘ieh-li-ma, (ante) . 

12. Cf. Marco Polo, ii. 318. 

13. A tttk. We hear of a tiger-badge and the title of Fu-mo being con- 
red on Wa-ni at Ku! am in 1344. 

F. N.— » 



154 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


Kulam, on Whom the Emperor conferred the title of Fuma or 
“ Imperial Son-in-Law ” 

As a result of the missions of Yang Trng-pi and of the friendly 
reception given the foreign envoys to Court m 1282, missions from 
the states of Southern India and the islands of the Archipelago 
became during the next few years more numerous In the 5th 
moon of 1283 Seng-tso-yu-pan, an envoy of the king of Ma’bar, 
arrived at Court, and in the first moon of 1284 there came another 
who presented the Emperor with pearls, rare jewels and light 
silks. 

In the latter part of the same year, and in compliance with 
the commands brought them by an official named Pa-ko-lu-ssu sent 
by the Governor of Fu-kien, ministers of the four states of Nan- 
wu-li, Pieh-li-la, La-lun, and Ta-h, M brought letters from their 
sovereigns and articles of tribute 

The stories told by the missions from India, Indo-China, and 
the islands of the Archipelago, of the rare and precious products 
of their native lands, of the wondrous skill of their magicians and 
physicians, must have incited Kublai, evei desirous 
kdblai’s aims of adding to the magnificence of his Couit and to 
the treasures from every land which he already 
possessed, to send mission after mission to these distant 
parts to learn more of them and to bring him of their 
strange birds and beasts, their jewels and their learned men 
In the summer of 1285 we lead that he despatched a certam Ma- 
su-hu, and A-li to Ma'bir ‘to look for rare and precious things,’ 
supplying them with a large sum of money for that purpose 

In 1282 the Uigur I-hei-mi-shih had been unable to bring 
from Ceylon the almsbowl of the Buddha and the idrlra which Kub- 
lai had sent him there to procure In 1287 the Empeior ordered the 
same officer to ‘ proceed to Ma’bar to get these holy relics ’ ls 
The envoy started, probably with returning missions from Ma’bar 
and Sumatra which had been in China since the latter part of 
1286 16 The voyage was a rough one, contrary winds so delayed 


14 The first name here is Lambn (NW coast of Sumatra), and the 
second Beligamme, about 13 miles from Galle in Ceylon The rest are un- 
identified 

15 ‘Possibly to get the support of the Malabars under whose dominion 

part of Ceylon then was ’— RockhiR • 

16 In the first moon of 1286 this mission from Ma'bar presented to the 
emperor a bronze shield 



CHINESE EMBASSIES 


him that he was a year making the journey. Nor did he find the 
almsbowl or the relics he was sent to procure. He brought back, 
however, a skilled physician and most excellent drugs, and a 
number of people from Ma’bar who fetched presents to the Empe- 
ror, while he himself offered him red sandal-wood and building 
materials he had bought in India with his private funds. 
The mission appears to have been received in audience in the 3rd 
moon of 1288. As a reward for his services abroad, the Emperor 
raised him to the rank of Minister of State and made him Governor- 
General of Fu-kien. 17 

The largest mission which had yet visited the Mongol court 
from the countries of the South was that which arrived in 1286. 
It had in it representatives of ten states, all of them members of the 
rei tming families. Of it we read that “in the 9th moon of the 
23rd year chih-yuan (1286) on the day yi-ch’ou being the first day 
of the moon, Ma-na-erh, 18 Hsii-men-na, ]9 Seng-ki-li.^Nan-wu-li,* 1 
Ma-lan-tan, 22 Na-wang, 23 Ting-ko-erh, Lai-lai, Ki-lan-i-tai and 
Sa-mu-tu-la. 24 ten kingdoms in all, each of which had sent either 
a son or a younger brother of its ruler with a letter to the Emperor, 
were received in audience and presented articles of tribute.” 

Three months later (1st moon 24th year) an envoy from 
Ktilam, Pu-liu-wen-rai by name, and others were received 
in audience and in the 3rd moon the envoy from Ma’bar (presum- 
ably the same who had arrived in the autumn of the preceding 
year, but this is not quite clear) presented the Emperor with a 
strange animal like a mule, but mottled black and white ; it was 
called an a-t’o-pi. 

In 1288 a mission is said to have arrived at Court from Ma’bar, 
and in 1289 we read of Ma’bar presenting the Emperor with two 
zebras, and in the 8th moon of 1290 another envoy came to Court 

17. Ibn Battuta, speaking of the footprint on Adam’s peak says “The 
people of China came here formerly and have cut out of the stone the impress 
of the big toe and the adjacent parts and have deposited these fragments in 
a temple in the city of Zeitun (Ch'tian-chou) where people go from the most 
distant provinces of China.” Can I-hei-mi-shih have been responsible for this 
act of vandalism?— Rockhill, cf. p. 275 po.y. 

18. Ma’bar. 

19. Mangalore or some place near it. 

20. Cranganore or Kayankulam. 

21. Lambri in Sumatra. 

22. Maflifattan, port on the Coromandel coast. 

23. Nellore (?) See n. 8 ante. 

24. Sumatra on the island of Sumatra. 



US FOREIGN NOTICES 

from the same country and presented the Emperor with two piebald 
oxen, 25 a buffalo and a t’u-pioo. 

In the same year 1290 (in the 4th moon) Sang-ki-la-shih and 
others were sent by Kublai to Ma’bar to search for clever jugglers : 
or, according to Gaubil, “ for persons learned in sciences, 
for skilled workmen, soldiers and sailors, and interpreters 
for diverse languages.” 

Again the following year the Emperor sent people to Killam 
and to Ma’bar, but we learn nothing of the purpose of the mission. 

In 1292 I-hei-mi-shih, the former envoy to Ceylon and Ma’bar, 
was appointed one of the generals in command of the punitive 
expedition against the state of Ko-lang in north- 
last Missions eastern Java. On arriving with his fleet in 

Chang-ch’eng (Annam) , he despatched two officers, 
Ho Ch’eng and Liu Yuan, on a friendly mission to the little states 
of Nan-wu-li (Lambri), Su-mu-tu-Ia (Sumatra, Pu-lu-pu-tu and 
Pa-la-la ; all of them sent missions to the Mongol Court. 

Subsequent to these missions official intercourse with Ma’har, 
Sumatra, and adjacent countries seems to have become of rare 
occurrence. In 1296 we hear of a mission under Yo-lo-yeh-nu 
being sent to Ma’bar, and in the following year Ta-hsi of Ma’bar 
was sent abroad and told to procure drugs, but we have to come 
down to 1314 to find mention of a mission from Ma’bar arriving at 
the Mongol court. In that year we hear that the king of Ma’bar 
Hsi-la-mu-ting M sent his minister Ai-ssu-ting with presents 
to Court. 

After this, thirty years appear to have elapsed before another 
mission was sent to Southern India, for it is only in the year 1344 
that mention is made of an envoy being sent to Kulam, when, as 
in 1283, he carried the king, or Wa-ni, a tiger-badge and the title 
of imperial son-in-law or fu-ma. With this official relations bet- 
ween the government of China and the peoples of southern India, 
Ceylon, and Sumatra seem to have come to an end, though com- 
mercial relations continued uninterruptedly and were of consider- 
able importance — though of much less volume and value than in 
the earlier days of the dynasty. 

• — Rcukhill — Toung Pao, xv, pp. 430-444. 


25. These and the zebras, as also the buffalo, must have come from Africa. 
China knew the ordinary buffalo at this time. Tu-jAao is perhaps a lynx. 
-RockMl. 

26. Nizamuddin, grandson of Jamaluddln— Yule JRAS. N.S. iv. 348. 



XXV. C. 1293 A.D.— MARCO POLO 


A. Concerning the island of Seilan 
( Ceylon ) 

When you leave the island of Angamanain 1 2 and sail about a 
thousand miles in a direction a little south of west, you come to 
the island of Seilan, which is in good sooth the best island of its 
size in the world. You must know that it has a compass of 2,400 
miles, but in old times it was greater still, for it then had a circuit 
of about 3600 miles, as you find in the charts of the mariners of 
those seas. But the north wind there blows with such strength 
that it has caused the sea to submerge a large part of the Island ; 
and that is the reason why it is not so big now as it used to be. 
For you must know that, on the side where the north wind strikes, 
the Island is very low and flat, insomuch that in approaching on 
board ship from the high seas you do not see the land till you 
are right upon it.* Now I will tell you all about this island. 

They have a king there whom they call Sendemain* and are 
tributary to nobody. The people are Idolaters, and go quite naked 
except that the^ cover the middle . They have no wheat but have 
rice, and sesamum of which they make their oil. They live on 
flesh and milk, and have tree-wine such as I have told you of. And 
they have brazil-wood, much the best in the world. 

Now I will quit these particulars, and tell you of the most 
precious article that exists in the world. You must know that 
rubies are found in this island and in no other 
country in the world but this. They find there pricious 
also sapphires and topazes and amethysts, and btohjs 
many other stones of price. And the king of this 
island possesses a ruby which is the finest and biggest in the world; 
I will tell you what it is like. It is about a palm in length, and 
as thick as a man’s arm ; to look at, it is the most resplendent 
object upon earth ; it is quite free from flaw and as red as fire. 
Its value is so great that a price for it in money could hardly be 


1. The Andwmana. 

2. The real circuit is under 700 miles — Yule. 

S. Thii name Is difficult to explain, Is it a corruption of Candramas, 
‘moon’, and an indication that Polo heard that the kings of Ceylon were 
descendants of the moon ? 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


named at all. You must know that the Great Kaan sent 
an embassy and begged the King as a favour greatly desired by 
him to sell him this ruby, offering to give for it the ransom of a 
city, or in fact what the King would. But the king replied that on nc 
account whatever would he sell it, for it had come to him from his 
ancestors. 4 

The people of Seilan are no soldiers, but poor 
army cowardly creatures. And when they have need of 

soldiers they get Saracen troops from foreign parts. 

The History of Sagamoni Borcan and the beginning of Idolatry. 

Furthermore you must know that in the Island of Seilan there 
is an exceeding high mountain; it rises right 
adam’s peak up so steep and precipitous that no one 
could ascend it, were it not that they have 
taken and fixed to it several great and massive iron chains, so 
disposed that by help of these men are able to mount to the top. 
And I tell you they say that on tliis mountain is the sepulchre of 
Adam our first parent ; 5 at least that is what the Saracens say. 
But the Idolaters say that it is the sepulchre of Sagamoni Borcan, 
before whose time there were no idols. They hold him to have 
been the best of men, a great saint in fact, aceording'to their fashion, 
and the first in whose name idols were made. 


He was the son, as their story goes, of a great and wealthy 
king. And he was of such an holy temper that he would never 
listen to any worldly talk, nor would he consent 
sagamoni to be king. And when the father saw that his son 

Cnn^BODDHA) would not be king, nor yet take any part in affairs, 

he took it sorely to heart. And first he 


tried to tempt him with great promises, offering to crown him king, 
and to surrender all authority into his hands. The son, however, 
would none of his offers ; so the father was in great trouble, 
and all the more that he had no other son but him. to whom he 
might bequeath the kingdom at his own death. So, after taking 
thought on the matter, the King caused a great palace to be built, 
and placed his son therein, and caused him to be waited on there 
by a number of maidens, the most beautiful that could anywhere 


4. Cf. Ibn Battuta’s account of the ruby bowl of Arya CakravSrti, a Tamil 
chief of Ceylon. 

5. Other travellers speak of the Foot of Adam. 



MASCO POLO 


be found. And be ordered them to divert themselves with the 
prince, night and day, and to sing and dance before him, so as to 
draw his heart towards worldly enjoyments. But ’twas all of no 
avail, for none of those maidens could ever tempt the king’s son to 
any wantonness, and he only abode the firmer in his chastity, 
leading a most holy life, after their manner thereof. And I assure 
you he was so staid a youth that he had never gone out of the 
palace, and thus he had never seen a dead man, nor any one who 
was not hale and sound ; for the father never allowed any man 
that was aged or infirm to come into his presence. It came to pass 
however one day that the young gentleman took a ride, and by the 
roadside he beheld a dead man. The sight dismayed him greatly, 
as he never had seen such a sight before. Incontinently 
he demanded of those who were with him what thing that was ? 
and then they told him it was a dead man. “ How, then,” quoth 
the king’s son, “do all men die?” “Yea, forsooth,” said they. 
Whereupon the young gentleman said never a word, but rode on 
right pensively. And after he had ridden a good way he fell in 
with a very aged man who could no longer walk, and had not a 
tooth in his head, having lost all because of his great age. And 
when the king’s son beheld this old man he asked what that might 
mean, and wherefore the man could not walk ? Those who were 
with him replied that it was through old age the man could walk 
no longer, and had lost all his teeth. And so when the king’s son 
had thus learned about the dead man and about the aged man, he 
turned back to his palace and said to himself that he would abide 
no longer in this evil world, but would go in search of Him Who 
dieth not, and Who had created him. 

So what did he one night but take his departure from the 
palace privily, and betake himself to certain lofty and pathless 
mountains. And there he did abide, leading a life of great hard- 
ship and sanctity, and keeping great abstinence, just as if he had 
been a Christian. Indeed, as he had but been so, he would have 
been a great saint of Our Lord Jesus Christ, so good and pure was 
the life he led. And when he died they found his body and brought 
it to his father. And when the father saw dead before him that 
son whom he loved better than himself, he was near going dis- 
traught with sorrow. And he caused an image in the similitude of 
his son to be wrought in gold and precious stones, and caused all 
his people to adore it. And they all declared him to be a god ; and 
so they still say. 

They tell moreover that he had died fourscore and four times. 
The first time he died as a man, and came to life again as an ox ; 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


and then he died as an ox and came to Ufa 
jataxa tales again as a horse, and so on until he had died four- 
score and four tunes , and every time he became 
some kmd of animal But when he died the eighty-fourth time 
they say he became a god And they do hold him for the greatest 
of all their gods And they tell that the aforesaid image of him 
was the first idol that the Idolaters ever had , and from that have 
originated all the other idols And this befel m the Island of 
Seilan in India 8 

The Idolaters come thither on pilgrimage from very long dis- 
tances and with great devotion, just as Christians go to the shrine 
of Messer Saint James in Gallicia And they maintain that the 
monument on the mountain is that of the king’s son, according to 
the story I have been telling you , and that the teeth, and the hair, 
and the dish that are there were those of the same king's son, 
whose name was Sagamom Borcan, or Sagamom the Saint But 
the Saracens also come thither on pilgrimage in great numbers, 
and they say that it is the sepulchre of Adam our first father, and 
the teeth, and the hair, and the dish were those of Adam 7 


6 Marco Polo is of course wrong m placing the scene of the history 
(of Sakya mum) in Ceylon though probably it was so told him, as the vulgar 
in all Buddhist countries do seem to localise the legends in regions known to 
them " —Yule 

7 ‘Adam's Peak has for ages been a place of pilgrimage to Buddhists, 
Hindus and Mahomedans and appears still to be so ’—Yule of The 
following account of Ceylon by Buzurg Ibn Shahnyar — 

Among remarkable islands, in all the sea there is none like the 
Island of Serendib also called Sehilan (Ceylon) It is an hundred parasangs 
long and the circumference is three hundred parasangs There they fish 
pearls of fine water but little, big pearls, when they happen upon them, are of 
inferior quality And there is a mountain called Hasm, a mountain of jar- 
goon and diamonds And there it was so they say, that Adam stepped 
down, and you can view his footprint which is seventy cubits long The 
inhabitants are they who declare that this is Adam’s footprint, and that the 
blessed patriarch set one foot on that spot and the other in the sea In 
the same island is found a red earth, which is the senadtd] used for 
polishing rock-crystal and glass Its trees yield excellent cinnamon bark, the 
famous Sincalese cinnamon The grass is red, and employed m dyeing stuffs 
and cotton thread, it makes a better dye than that of baqqstn, 
saffron, safflower, or any other kmd of red dye And the Island bears many 
another remarkable plant, which it would take too long to catalogue They 
aver that the Island of Serendib contains some hundred thousand town- 


— The Mansis of India, pp 154-5 



MARCO POLO 


Whose they were in truth, God knoweth ; howbeit, according to 
the Holy Scripture of our Church, the sepulchre of Adam is not 
in that part of the world. 

Now it befel that the Great Ka an heard how on that mountain 
there was the sepulchre of our first father Adam, and that some 
of his hair and of his teeth, and the dish from 
which he used to eat, were still preserved there. So embassy nos 
he thought he would get hold of them somehow or koblai khah 
another, and despatched a great embassy for 
the purpose, in the year of Christ, 1284 . The ambassadors, with a 
great company, travelled on by sea and by land until they arrived 
at the island of Seilan, and presented themselves before the king. 
And they were so urgent with him that they succeeded in getting 
two of the grinder teeth, which were passing great and thick ; and 
they also got some of the hair and the dish from which that per- 
sonage used to eat, which is of a very beautiful green porphyry. 
And when the Great Kaan’s ambassadors had attained the object 
for which they had come they were greatly rejoiced, and returned 
to their lord. And when they drew near to the great city of 
Cambaluc, where the Great Kaan was staying, they sent him word 
that they had brought hack that for which he had sent them. On 
learning this die Great Kaan was passing glad, and ordered all 
the ecclesiastics and others to go forth to meet these reliques, 
which he was led to believe were those of Adam. 

And why should I make a long story of it? In sooth, the 
whole population of Cambaluc went forth to meet those reliques, 
and the ecclesiastics took them over and carried them to the Great 
Kaan, who received them with great joy and reverence. And they 
find it written in their Scriptures that the virtue of that dish is 
such that if food for one man be put therein it shall become enough 
for five men ; and the Great Kaan averred that he had proved the 
thing and found that it was really true. 

So now you have heard how the Great Kaan came by those 
reliques ; and a mighty treasure it did cost him ! The reliques 
being, according to the Idolaters, those of that king’s son. 

— Travels of Marco Polo, ed. Yule A Cordier, Bk. iii. chh. xiv-xv. 

B. Concerning the great Province of Maabar, which is called 
'India the Greater, and is on the mainland. 

When you leave the Island of Seilan and sail westward about 
60 miles, you come to the great province of Maabar which is styled 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


India the Greater , 8 9 it is best of all the Indies and is on the main- 
land 


You must know that m this province there are five kings, who 
are own brothers I will tell you about each in turn The Pro- 
vince is the finest and noblest in the world 

At this end of the Province reigns one of those five Royal 
Brothers, who is a crowned King, and his name is 
thk pANDYAs sonder BANTU davar In his kingdom they find very 
fine and great pearls , and I will tell you how they 
are got 

You must know that the sea here forms a gulf between the 
Island of Seilan and the mainland And all round this gulf the 
water has a depth of no more than 10 or 
pearc- FisiuNc 12 fathoms, and in some places no more 

than two fathoms The pearl-fishers take then- 
vessels, great and small and proceed into this gulf, where they 
stop from the beginning of April till the middle of May They 
go first to a place called bettelar® and (then) go 60 miles into 
the gulf Here they cast anchoi and shift from then: large vessels 
into small boats You must know that the many merchants who 
go divide into various companies, and each of thesl must engage 


8 Abulfeda names Cape Comoun as the point where Malabar ended and 
Maabar began Marcos account of Maalwi can be usefully compared with 
Wassafs slightly later account 

Mabar extends in length fiom Kulam to Nilawar (Nellore), nearly three 
hundred parasangs along the sea-coast and in the language of that country 
the king is called Dewai which signifies the Lord of Empire The curiosities 
of Chin and Mach m and the beautiful products of Hind and Sind, laden on 
large ships (which they call junks) sailing like mountains with the wings of 
the winds on the suiface of the water, are always arriving there The wealth 
of the isles of the Persian Gulf in particular, and in part the beauty and adorn- 
ment of other countries, from Irak and Khurasan as far as Rum and Europe, 
are derived from Ma bar, which is so situated as to be the key of Hind 

A few years since the Dewar was Sundar Pandi who had three brothers, 
each of whom established himself in independence m some different country 
The eminent prince the mai grave (marzban) of Hind, Takiu-d din ‘Abdur 
Rahman sort of Muhammad-ut-Tibi, whose virtues and accomplishments have 
for a long tune been the theme of praise and admiration among the chief in- 
habitants of that beautiful country, was the Dewars deputy, minister, and 
adviser, and was a man of sound judgment Fitan, Mali Fitan and Kabil were 
made over to his possession, for he is still worthy (Icabtt) of having the Khutba 
read m his name, end, notwithstanding these high dignities, is no^ worthy of 
seditions (fitna) ' (of Sashid-ud-din in Elliot and Dows on, 1, pp 68-70) 

9 Patlam on the Ceylon coast— Yule 






MASCO POLO 


a number of men on wages, hiring them for April and half of May. 
Of all the produce they have first to pay the king, as his royalty, 
the tenth part. And they must also pay those men who charm the 
great fishes, to prevent them from injuring the divers whilst en- 
gaged in seeking pearls under water, one twentieth part of all that 
they take. These fish-charmers are termed Abraiaman ; 10 and 
their charm holds good for that day only, for at night they dissolve 
the charm so that the fishes can work mischief at their will. These 
Abraiaman know also how to charm beasts and birds and every liv- 
ing thing. When the men have got into the small boats they jump 
into the water and dive to the bottom, which may be at a depth of 
from 4 to 12 fathoms, and there they remain as long as they are able. 
And there they find the shells that contain the pearls (and these 
they put into a net bag tied round the waist, and mount up to the 
surface with them, and then dive anew. When they can’t hold their 
breath any longer they come up again, and after a little down they 
go once more, and so they go on all day) . The shells are in fashion 
like oysters or sea-hoods. And in these shells are found pearls, 
great and small, of every kind, sticking in the flesh of the shell-fish. 

In this manner pearls are fished in great quantities, for thence 
in fact come the pearls which are spread all over the world. And I 
can tell you tirf King of that State hath a very great receipt and 
treasure from his dues upon those pearls. 

As soon as the middle of May is past, no more of those pearl- 
shells arc found there. It is true, however, that a long way from 
that spot, some 300 miles distant, they are also found; but that is in 
September and the first half of October. 

You must know that in all this Province of Maabar there is 
never a Tailor 11 to cut a coat or stitch it, seeing 
that everybody goes naked ! For decency only do clothes 
they wear a scrap of cloth ; and so 'tis with 


10. ‘ The shark-charmers do not now seem to have any claim to he called 
Abraiaman or Brahmans, hut they may have been so in former days. At the 
diamond mines of the Northern Circars Brahmans are employed in the analo- 
gous office of propitiating the tutelary genii. The shark-charmers are called 
in Tamil Kadal-katfi, (sea-binders) . . ^ It is remarkable that when Tunnent 
wrote, not more than one authenticated accident from sharks had ^aken place, 
during the whole period of the British occupation.’— Yule. Buzurg 
Ibn Shahriyar (The Marvel* of India, pp. 135-7) narrates how such a charm 
came to bind the crocodiles in the port of Serira permanently because its king 
had the hettd of the charmer chopped of E before he could remove the spell. 

11. Tailors are mentioned in the Tanjore inscriptions of the Colas in the 
eleventh century. — SII, ii, p. 302, n. 8. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


men and women, with rich and poor, aye, and with the 
King himself, except what I am going to mention. 

It is a fact that the King goes as bare as the rest, only round 
his loins he has a piece of fine cloth, and round his neck he has a 
necklace entirely of precious stones,— rubies, 
Royal sapphires, emeralds, and the like, insomuch that 

jzwzllery this collar is of great value. He wears also hanging 
in front of his chest from the neck downwards, a fine 
silk thread strung with 104 large pearls and rubies of great price. 
Hie reason why he wears this cord with the 104 great pearls and 
rubies is (according to what they tell) that every day morning and 
evening, he has to say 104 prayers to his idols. Such is their reli- 
gion and their custom. And thus did all the Kings his ancestors 
before him, and they bequeathed the string of pearls to him that he 
should do the like. (The prayer that they say daily consists of 
three words, Pacauta! Pacauta! Pacauta! And this they repeat 
104 times). 1 * 

The King aforesaid also wears on his arms three golden brace- 
lets thickly set with pearls of great value, and anklets also of like 
kind he wears on his legs, and rings on his toes likewise. So let 
me tell you what this king wears, between gold and'jpms and pearls, 
is worth more than a city’s ransom. And ’tis no wonder ; for he 
hath great store of such gear ; and besides they are found in his 
kingdom. Moreover nobody is permitted to take out of the kingdom 
a pearl weighing more than half a saggio, 13 unless he manages to do 
it secretly. This order has been given because the King desires to 
reserve all such to himself : and so in fact the quantity he has b 
something almost incredible. Moreover several times every year 
he sends his proclamation through the realm that if any one who 
possesses a pearl or stone of great value will bring it to him, he will 
pay for it twice as much as it cost. Everybody is glad to do this, 
and thus the King gets all into his own hands, giving every man his 
price. 

Furthermore, this king hath some five hundred wives, for when- 
ever he hears of a beautiful damsel he takes her to wife. Indeed he 


12. ‘No doubt the number in the text should have been 108, which is 
apparently a mystic number among both Brahmans and Buddhists.’ —Yule. 
Pacauta is usually explained as a corruption of Bhdgavata; perhaps Acyuta 

13. A Venice weight : 1/6 oz. — Ricci, 



MARCO POLO 


did a very sorry deed as I shall tell you. For 

seeing that his brother had a handsome wife, ^ 

he took her by force and kept for himself. 

His brother, being a discreet man , took the thing quietly and 
made no noise about it. The King hath many children. 

And there are about the King a number of Barons in attend- 
ance upon him. These ride with him, and keep always near him, 
and have great authority in the kingdom ; they 
are called the King’s Trusty Lieges. And body-goam 

you must know that when the King dies, 

and they put him on the fire to bum him, these Lieges cast them- 
selves into the fire round about his body, and suffer themselves to 
be burnt along with him. For they say they have been his comrades 
in this world, and that they ought also to keep him company in the 
other world. 14 

When the King dies none of his children dares to touch his 
treasure. 15 For they say, “ as our father did gather 
together all this treasure, so we ought to accumu- treasure 
late as much in our turn.” And in this way it 
comes to pass that there is an immensity of treasure accumulated 
in this kingda 


14. These are the vilaikk&rar, also called Tennavan-apattudavigal in 
Pandyan Inscriptions, see PK. pp. 196-7. Yule cites several analogies from 
Malaya, Bali and elsewhere. Cf. also XIX. H. above. 

15. Wassaf on the share of the king and his ministers in treasure and trade 
of the country is instructive: 

" In the months of the year 692 H. the above-mentioned Dewar, the ruler 
of Matjar, died, and left behind him much wealth and treasure. It is related 
by Malik-ul-Islam Jamal-ud- din, that out of that treasure 7,000 oxen, laden 
with precious stones, and pure gold and silver, fell to the share of the brother 
who succeeded him. Malik-i a'zam Taki-ud din continued prime minister as 
before, and, in fact, ruler of that kingdom, and his glory and magnificence 
were raised a thousand times higher. 

"Notwithstanding the immense wealth acquired by trade, he gave orders 
that whatever commodities and goods were imported from the remotest parts 
of China and Hind into Ma'bar, his agents and factors should be 
allowed the first selection, until which no one else was allowed to 
purchase. When he had selected his goads he despatched themaon his own 
ships, or delivered them to merchants and ship owners to carry to the island 
of Kais. There also it was not permitted to any merchant to contract a bargain 
until the factors of Mallku-1 Islam had selected what they required, and after 
that the merchants were allowed to buy whatever was suited to the wants of 
Ma’bar. Tlfe remnants were exported on ships and beasts of burden to the 
isles of the aea, and the countries of the east and west, and with the prices 
obtained by their sale such goods were purchased as were suitable for the 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


Here are no horses bred ; and thus a great part of the wealth 
of the country is wasted in purchasing horses; I will tell you how. 

You must know that the merchants of Kts and 
house-trade hohmes, dofar and soer and aden collect great 
number of destriers and other horses, and 
these they bring to the territories of this King 1 ® and of 
his four brothers, who are kings likewise as I told you. For a horse 
will fetch among them 500 saggi 11 of gold, worth more than 100 
marks of silver, and vast numbers are sold there every year. 
Indeed this King wants to buy more than 2,000 horses every year, 
and so do his four brothers who are kings likewise. The reason 
why they want so many horses every year is that by the end of the 


home market ; and the trade was so managed that the produce of the remotest 
China was consumed in the farthest west. No one has seen the like of it in 
the world. 

Nobility arises from danger, for the interest is ten in forty ; 

If merchants dread risk they can derive no profit. 

As the eminent dignity and great power of Malik-i a’zam Taklu-d din, and 
Maliku-1 Islam Jamalu-d din were celebrated in most parts of Hind to even 
a greater extent than In Ma"bar, the rulers of distant county have cultivated 
and been strengthened by their friendship, and continw&HUpt up a corre- 
spondence with them, expressing their solicitations and dedres.” —Elliot and 
Dowson, iil. pp. 34-5. 

18. Wassaf gives very interesting and important details of the horse trade 
in his time : 

“ It was a matter of agreement that Maliku-1 Islam Jamalu-d din and the 
merchants should embark every year from the island of Kais and land at 
Ma'bar 1,400 horses of his own breed, and of such generous origin that, in 
comparison with them the most celebrated horses of antiquity, such as the 
Rukhs of Rustam, etc., should be as worthless as the horse of the chess-board. 
It was also agreed that he should embark as many as he could procure from all 
the isles of Persia, such as Katif, Lahsa, Bahrein, Hurmuz, and Kulhatu. The 
price of each horse was fixed from of old at 220 dinars of red gold, on this 
condition, that if any horses should sustain any injury during the voyage, or 
should happen to die, the value of them should be paid from the royal trea- 
sury. It is related by authentic writers, that in the reign of Atabak Abu Bakr, 
10,000 horses were annually exported from these places to Ma'bar, Kambayat, 
and other ports in their neighbourhood, and the sum total of their value 
amounted to 2,200,000 dinars, which was paid out of the overflowing revenues 
of the estates and endowments belonging to the Hindu temples, and from the 
tax upon courtezans attached to them, and no charge was incurred by the 
public treasury.” Elliot and Dowson, iii. p. 33. 

17. “Appears to be intended for 500 dinars, which in the then existing 
relations of the precious metals in Asia would be worth just about 100 marks 
of silver. Wassaf's price, 220 dinars of red gold, seems very inconsistent with 
this, but is not so materially, for it would appear that the dinar of red gold 
(so called) was worth two dinars," —Yule. 





MASCO POLO 


1ST 

year there shall not be one hundred of them remaining, for they 
all die off. And this arises from mismanagement, for those people 
do not know in the least how to treat a horse; and besides they have 
no farriers. The horse-merchants not only never bring any farriers 
with them, but also prevent any farrier from going thither, lest 
that should in any degree baulk the sale of horses, which brings 
them in every year such vast gains. They bring these horses by 
sea aboard ship. 18 

They have in this country the custom which I am going to 
relate. When a man is doomed to die for any crime, he may 
declare that he will put himself to death in 
honour of such or such an idol ; and the ^' r . Tln „ 
government then grants him permission to do 
so. His kinsfolk and friends then set him upon a cart, and provide 
him with twelve knives, and proceed to conduct him all about the 
city, proclaiming aloud: “ This valiant man is going to slay him- 
self for the love of (such an idol).” And when they be come to 
the place of execution he takes a knife and sticks it through his 
arm, and cries : “ I slay myself for the love of (such a god) !” Then 
he takes another knife and sticks it through his other arm, and 
takes a third knife and runs it into his belly, and so on until he 
kills himself Qyafi&it. And when he is dead his kinsfolk take the 
body and burn It with a joyful celebration. Many of the women 
also, when their husbands die and are placed on the pile to be 
burnt, do bum tJiemselves along with the bodies. And such women 
as do this have great praise from all. 

The people are Idolaters, and many of them worship the ox, 
because (say they) it is a creature of such excellence. They would 
not eat beef for anything in the world, nor 
would they on any account kill an ox. But there food 
is another class of people who are called Govy, and 
these are very glad to eat beef, though they dare not kill the animal. 
Howbeit if an ox dies, naturally or otherwise, then they eat him. 

And let me tell you, the people of this country have a custom 
of rubbing their houses all over with cow-dung. Moreover all of 
them, great and small, King and Barons included, . 

do sit upon the ground only, and the reason they H*nits 
give is that this is the most honourable way to sit, 

18. ‘Rasfiduddin and Wessaf have identical statements about the horse 
trade, and so similar to Polo’s In this chapter that one almost suspects that he 
must have been their authority.’ —Yule. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


let 

because we all spring from the Earth and to the Earth we must 
return ; so no one can pay the Earth too much honour, and no one 
ought to despise it. 

And about that race of Govts, I should tell you that nothing on 
earth would induce them to enter the place where Messer St. Tho- 
mas is — I mean where his body lies, which is in a certain city of the 
province of Maabar. Indeed, were even 20 or 30 men to lay hold 
of one of these Goois and to try to hold him in the 
oovig place where the Body of the Blessed Apostle of 

Jesus Christ lies buried, they could not do it ! Such 
is the influence of the Saint ; for it was by people of this generation 
that he was slain, as you shall presently hear. 

No wheat grows in this province, but rice only. 

And another strange thing to be told is that there is no possibi- 
lity of breeding horses in this country, as hath often been proved by 
trial. For even when a great blood-mare here has 
horse- been covered by a 'great blood-horse, the produce 

breeding is nothing but a wretched wry-legged weed, not fit 

to ride. 19 


19. ‘ The ill success in breeding horses was exaggerated to impossibility, 
and made to extend to all India.’ —Yule. Cf. Wassaf on horses in Maljar : 

“ It is a strange thing that when those horses arrive there, instead of giving 
them raw barley they give them roasted barley and grain dressed with butter, 
and boiled cow’s milk to drink. 

Who gives sugar to an owl or crow ? 

Or who feeds a parrot with a carcase? 

A crow should be fed with a dead body. 

And a parrot with candy and sugar. 

Who loads jewels on the back of an ass ? 

Or who would approve of giving dressed almonds to a cow ? 

They bind them for forty days in a stable with ropes and pegs, in order that they 
may get fat; and afterwards, without taking measures for training, and with- 
out stirrups and other appurtenances ol riding, the Indian soldiers ride upon 
them like demons. They are equal to Burak in celerity, and are employed 
either in war or exercise. In a short time, the most strong, swift, fresh, and 
activte horses become weak, slow, useless and stupid. In short they all become 
wretched and good for nothing. In this climate these powerful horses, which 
fly swiftly without a whip (for whips are required for horses, especially if 
they are to go any distance), should they happen to cover, become exceedingly 
weak and altogether wom out and unfit for riding. There is, therefore, a con- 
stant necessity of getting new horses annually, and, consequently, the mer- 
chants of Muhammadan countries bring them to Maljar.” —Elliot and Dowson, 
Hi. pp. 33-4. 



MARCO POLO 


Hie people of the country go to battle all naked, with only a 
lance and a shield; and they are most wretched soldiers. They 
will kill neither beast nor bird, nor anything that hath life ; and 
for such animal food as they eat, they make the Saracens, or others 
who are not of their own religion, play the butcher. 

It is their practice that every one, male and female, do wash 
the whole body twice every day; and those who do not wash are 
looked on much as we look on the Patarins. 80 (You 
must know also that in eating they use the right personal 
hand only, and would on no account touch their food habits 
with the left hand. All cleanly and becoming uses 
are ministered to by the right hand, whilst the left is reserved for 
uncleanly and disagreeable necessities, such as cleansing the secret 
parts of the body and the like. So also they drink only from drink 
ing vessels, and every man bath his own; nor will any one drink 
from another’s vessel. And when they drink they do not put the 
vessel to the lips, but hold it aloft and let the drink spout into 
the mouth. No one would on any account touch the vessel with his 
mouth, nor give a stranger drink with it. But if the stranger have 
no vessel of bis own they will pour the drink into his hands and he 
may thus drin|| from his hands as from a cup.) 

They are very strict in executing justice upon criminals, and 
as strict in abstaining from wine. Indeed they have made a rule 
that wine-drinkers and seafaring men are never to 
be accepted as sureties. For they say that to be a justice 
seafaring man is all the same as to be an utter 
desperado, and that his testimony is good for nothing. Howbeit 
they look on lechery as no sin. 

(They have the following rule about debts. If a debtor shall 
have been several times asked by his creditor for payment, and 
shall have put him off from dav to da" with promises, then if the 
creditor can once meet the debtor and succeed in drawing a circle 
round him. the latter must not pass out of this circle until he shall 
have satisfied the claim, or given security for its discharge. If he 
in any other case presume to pass the circle he is punished with 
death as a transgressor against right and justice. And th» said 
Messer Marco, when in this kingdom on his return home, did him- 
self witness a case of this. It was the King, who owed a foreign 
merchant a certain sum of money, and though the claim had often 

20. A term applied to the ‘heretics’ otherwise called ’Cathari’. — Yule 
(i. 321). 

F. N.-22 



been presented, he always put it off with promises. Now, one day 
when the King was riding through the city, the merchant found his 
opportunity, and drew a circle round both King and horse. The 
King, on seeing this, halted, and would ride no further; nor did he 
stir from the spot until the merchant was satisfied. And when the 
bystanders saw this they marvelled greatly, saying that the King 
was a most just King indeed, having thus submitted to justice.) 

You must know that the heat here is sometimes so great that 
’tis something wonderful. And rain falls only for three months 
in the year, viz., in June, July and August.* 1 Indeed 
climate but for the rain that falls in these three months, 

refreshing the earth and cooling the air, the drought 
would be so great that no one could exist. 

They have many experts in an art which they call Physiognomy, 
by which they discern a man’s character and qualities at once. 

They also know the import of meeting with any 
astrology, particular bird or beast ; for such omens are regard- 

smsm ed by them more than by any people in the world. 

Thus if a man is going along the road and hears some one sneeze, 
if he deems it (say) a good token for himself he goes on, but if 
otherwise he stops a bit, or peradventure turns Khck altogether 
from his journey. 

As soon as a child is bom they write down his nativity, that 
is to say the day and hour, the month, and the moon’s age. This 
custom they observe because every single thing thev do is done with 
reference to astrology, and by advice of diviners skilled in Sorcery 
and Magic and Geomancy, and such like diabolical arts; and some 
of them are also acquainted with Astrology. 

(All parents who have male children, as soon as these have 
attained the age of 13, dismiss them from their home, and do not 
allow them further maintenance in the family. For 
boys ik trade they say that the boys are then of an age to get their 
living by trade ; so off they pack them with some 
twenty or four-and-twenty groats, or at least with money equi- 
valent to that. And these urchins are running about all 
day 'from, pillar to post, buying and selling. At the time 
of the pearl-fishery they run to the beach and purchase, from the 
fishers or others, five or six pearls, according to their ability, and 



MARCO POLO 


HI 


take these to the merchants, who are keeping indoors for fear of 
the sun, and say to them: “These cost me such a price; now give 
me what profit you please on them.” So the merchant gives some- 
thing over the cost price for their profit. They do in the same 
way with many other articles, so that they become trained to be 
very dexterous and keen traders. And every day they take their 
food to thfeir mothers to be cooked and served, but do not eat a 
scrap at the expense of their fathers.) 

In this kingdom and all over India the birds and beasts are 
entirely different from ours, all but one bird which is exactly like 
ours, and that is the Quail. But everything else is 
totally different. For example they have bats, — I fauna 
mean those birds that fly by night and have no 
feathers of any kind ; well, their birds of this kind are as big as a 
goshawk ! Their goshawks again are as black as crows, a good deal 
bigger than ours, and very swift and sure. 

Another strange thing is that they feed their horses with boiled 
rice and boiled meat, 22 and various other kinds of cooked food. 
That is the reason why all the horses die off. 

They have certain abbeys in which are gods and goddesses to 
whom many jn»Ung girls are consecrated; their fathers and mothers 
presenting them to that idol for which they enter- 
tain the greatest devotion. And when the (monks) devadasie, 
of a convent desire to make a feast to their god, 
they send for all those consecrated damsels and make them sing 
and dance before the idol with great festivity. They also 
bring meats to feed their idol withal ; that is to say, the 
damsels prepare dishes of meat and other good things and put the 
food before the idol, and leave it there a good while, and then the 
damsels all go to their dancing and singing and festivity for about 
as long as a great Baron might require to eat his dinner. By that 
time they say the spirit of the idols has consumed the substance of 
the food, so they remove the viands to be eaten by themselves with 
great jollity. This is performed by these damsels several times 
every year until they are married. 

(The reason assigned for summoning the damsels to, these 
feasts is, as the monks say, that the god is vexed and trngry with 
the goddess, and will hold no communication with her; and they say 
that if peace be not established between th°m things will go from 
bad to worse, and they never will bestow their grace and benedio- 


22. Cf. Wassaf In Elliot and Dowaon, iii. pp. 33-4 cited above »J9. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


tion. So they make those girls come in the way described, to dance 
and sing, all but naked, before the god and the goddess. And those 
people believe that the god often solaces himself with the 
society of the goddess. 

The men of this country have their beds made of very light 
canework, so arranged that, when they have got in ancl are going 
to sleep, they are drawn up by cords nearly to the ceiling and fixed 
there for the night. This is done to get out of the way of tarantulas 
which give terrible bites, as well as of fleas and such vermin, and 
at the same time to get as much air as possible in the great heat 
which prevails in that region. Not that everybody does this, but 
only the nobles and great folks, for the others sleep on the streets.) 

Now I have told you about this kingdom of the province of 
Maabar, and I must pass on to the other kingdoms of the same 
province, for I have much to tell of their peculiarities. 

— Op. cit. Bk. Ui. chh. xvi-xvii. 

C. Of the place where lieth the body of Si. Thomas the Apostle ; 
and of the miracle thereof 

The body of Messer St. Thomas the Apostle lies m this province 
of Maabar at a certain little town having no great population ; ’tis 
a place where few traders go, because there is very little merchan- 
dise to be got there, and it is a place not very accessible. Both 
Christians and Saracens, however, greatly frequent it in pilgrimage. 
For the Saracens also do hold the Saint in great reverence, and say 
that he was one of their own Saracens and a great prophet, giving 
him the title of Avarian, which is as much as to say “Holy Man.’’ 
The Christians who go thither in pilgrimage take of the earth from 
the place where the Saint was killed, and give a portion thereof 
to any one who is sick of a quartan or a tertian fever ; and by the 
power of God and of St. Thomas the sick man is incontinently cured. 
The earth, I should tell you, is red. A very fine miracle occurred 
there in the year of Christ, 1288, as I will now relate. 

A certain Baron of that country, having great store of a certain 
kind of corn that is called rice, had filled up with it all the houses 
that belonged to the church, and stood round about it. The Chris- 
tian people in charge of the church were much distressed by his 
having thus stuffed their houses with his rice ; the pilgrims too had 
nowhere to lay their heads; and they often begged the pagan Baron 
to remove his grain, but he would do nothing of the 
mucus kind. So one night the Saint himself appeared with 

a fork in his hand, which he set at the Baron’s 



MARCO POLO 


113 


throat, saying : “ If thou void not my houses, that my pilgrims 
may have room, thou shalt die an evil death,” and 
therewithal the Saint pressed him so hard with the fork that he 
thought himself a dead man. And when morning came Re caused 
all the houses to be voided of his rice, and told everybody what 
had befallen him at the Saint’s hands. So the Christians were 
greatly rejoiced at this grand miracle, and rendered thanks to God 
and to the blessed St. Thomas. Other great miracles do often come 
to pass there, such as the healing of those who are sick or deformed, 
or the like, especially such as be Christians. 

The Christians who have charge of the church have a great 
number of the Indian Nut trees, whereby they get their living; and 
they pay to one of those brother Kings six groats for each tree 
every month (year?). 

Now, I will tell you the manner in which the Christian breth- 
ren who keep the church relate the story of the Saint’s death. 23 

They tell that the Saint was in the wood outside his hermitage 
saying his prayers; and round about him were many peacocks, for 
these are more plentiful in that country than anywhere else. And 
one of the Idolaters of that country being of the lineage of those 
called Govi thaU told you of, having gone with his bow and arrows 
to shoot peafowl, not seeing the Saint, let fly an arrow at one of 
the peacocks; and this arrow struck the holy man in the right side, 
insomuch that he died of the wound, sweetly addressing himself 
to the Creator. Before he came to that place where he thus died 
he had been in Nubia, where he converted much people to the 
faith of Jesus Christ. 

The children that' are bom here are black enough, but the 
blacker they be the more they are thought of; wherefore from thj 
day of their birth their parents do rub them every week with oil 
of sesame, so that they become as black as devils. Moreover, they 
make their gods black and their devils white, and the images of 
their saints they do paint black all over. 

They have such faith in the ox, and hold it for a thing so holy, 
that when they go to the wars they take of the hair of the wil4-ox, 
whereof I have elsewhere spoken, aftd wear it tied to th^ necks of 

23. This is among the earliest accounts localising the martyrdom of 
St. Thomas ig S. India. Note that the story of his death, a manifest fabrication 
from the name Mayilappur, has nothing in common with other stories on the 
same subject ‘ But the tradition of Thomas’s preaching in India is very old, 
so old that it probably is, in its simple form, true.— Yule, 



IT* 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


their horses ; or, if serving on foot, they hang this hair to their 
nMol/tc, or attach it to their own hair. And so this hair bears a high 
price, since without it nobody goes to the wars in any good heart. 
For they believe that any one who has it shall come scatheless out of 
battle. 

—Op. cit. Bk. iii. ch. xviii. 

D. Concerning the Kingdom of Mutfli (Moflipalli) 

When you leave Maabar and go about 1,000 miles in a northerly 
direction you come to the kingdom of Mutfili, 24 This was formerly 
under the rule of a King, and since his death, some forty years past, 
it has been under his Queen, e lady of much discretion, who for the 
great love she bore him never would marry another husband.® 
And I can assure you that during all that space of forty years she 
had administered her realm as well as ever her husband did, or 
better ; and as she was a lover of justice, of equity, and of peace, 
she was more beloved by those of her kingdom than ever was Lady 
or Lord of theirs before. The people are Idolaters, and are 
tributary to nobody. They live on flesh, and rice, and milk. 

It is in this kingdom that diamonds are got ; and I will tell you 
how. There are certain lofty mountains in those pbrts; and when 
the winter rains fall, which are very heavy, the 
diamond-mints waters come roaring down the mountains in great 
torrents. When the rains are over, and the 
waters from the mountains have ceased to flow, they search 
the beds of the torrents and find plenty of diamonds. In summer 
also there arc plenty to be found in the mountains, but the heat of 
the sun is so great that it is scarcely possible to go thither, nor is 
there then a drop of water to be found. Moreover in those moun- 
tains great serpents are rife to a marvellous degree, besides other 
vermin, and this owing to the great heat. The serpents are also the 
most venomous in existence, insomuch that any one going to that 
region runs fearful peril ; for many have been destroyed by these 
evil reptiles. 

Now among these mountains there are certain great and deep 
valleys, to the bottom of which there is no access. Wherefore the 


24. Of course M&fupalU (Guntur Dt.) which was a famous port town in 
Marco Polo’s day. The Kakatiya ruler, Ganapati, did much tp encourage 
foreign merchants visiting the port. — JOR. 1934, pp„ 315-20. 

25. The reference Is to Rudrfimba, the daughter, not wife, of Ganapati. 



MARCO POLO 


ITS 


men who go in search of the diamonds take with them pieces of 
flesh, as lean as they can get, and these they cast into the bottom 
of a valley. Now there are numbers of white eagles that haunt 
those mountains and feed upon the serpents. When the eagles see 
the meat thrown down they pounce upon it and carry it up to some 
rocky hill-top where they begin to rend it. But there are men on 
the watch, and as soon as they see that the eagles have settled they 
raise a loud shouting to drive them away. And when the eagles 
are thus frightened away the men recover the pieces of meat, and 
yfind them full of diamonds which have stuck to the meat down in 
the bottom. 2 * For the abundance of diamonds down there in the 
depths of the valleys is astonishing, but nobody can get down ; and 
if one could, it would be only to be incontinently devoured by the 
serpents which are so rife there. 

There is also another way of getting the diamonds. The people 
go to the nests of those white eagles, of which there are many, and 
in their droppings they find plenty of diamonds which the birds 
have swallowed in devouring the meat that was cast into the 
valleys. And, when the eagles themselves are taken, diamonds are 
found in their stomachs. 

So now I have told you three different ways in which these 
stones are found. No other country but this kingdom of Mutfili 
produces them, but there they are found both abundantly and of 
large size. Those that are brought to our part of the world are only 
the refuse, as it were, of the finer and larger stones. For the flower 
of the diamonds and other large gems, as well as the largest pearls, 
are all carried to the Great Kaan and other Kings and Princes of 
those regions ; in truth they possess all the great treasures of the 
world. 

In this kingdom also are made the best and most delicate buck- 
rams, 27 and those of highest price ; in sooth they look like tissue of 
spider's web ! There is no King nor Queen in the 
world but might he glad to wear them. The people corrow- 
have also the largest sheep in the world, and great MAirorAcruma 
abundance of all the necessaries of life. 


26. ‘The story has a considerable resemblance *o that which Herodotus 
tells of the way in which cinnamon was got by the Arabs (HI. 111). No doubt 
the two are famifications of the same legend.’— Yule, cf. xi ante pp. 84-5. 

27. ‘Here buckram is clearly applied io fine cotton stuffs . . . The fine 
muslins of Masalta are mentioned in the Per iplus.’— Yule. 



178 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


There is now no more to say ; so I will next tell you about a 
province called Lar from which the Abraiaman come. 

— Op. cit. Bk. iii. ch. xix, 

E. Concerning the Province of Lar whence the Brahmins come 

Lar is a province lying towards the west when you quit the 
place where the Body of St. Thomas lies ; and all the Abraiaman 
in the world come from that province. 28 

You must know that these Abraiaman are the best merchants 
in the world, and the most truthful, for they would not tell a lie 
for anything on earth. (If a foreign merchant who does not know 
the ways of the country applies to them and entrusts his goods to 
them, they will take charge of these, and sell them in the most 
loyal manner, seeking zealously the profit of the foreigner and 
asking no commission except what he pleases to bestow). They 
eat no flesh, and drink no wine, and live a life of great chastity, 
having intercourse with no women except with their wives ; nor 
would they on any account take what belongs to another ; so their 
law commands. And they are all distinguished by wearing a 
thread of cotton over one shoulder and tied under the other arm, 
so that it crosses the breast and the back. * 

They have a rich and powerful King who is eager to purchase 
precious stones and large pearls; and he sends these Abraiaman 
merchants into the kingdom of Maabar called soli , 29 which is the 
best and noblest Province of India, and where the best pearls are 
found, to fetch him as many of these as they can get, and he pays 
them double the cost price for all. So in this way he has a vast 
treasure of such valuables. 

These Abraiaman are Idolaters ; and they pay greater heed 
to signs and omens than any people that exists. I will mention as 
an example one of their customs. To every day of the week they 
assign an augury of this sort. Suppose that there is some pur- 
chase in hand, he who proposes to buy, when he gets up in the 


28. “What is said here of the Brahmans coming from ‘Lar, a province 
west of St. Thomas’s,’ of their having a special King, etc., is all very obscure, 
and that I suspect through erroneous notions . . . Marsden supposes that there 
has been confusion between Brahmans and Banyans; and, as Guzerat or Lar 
was the country from which the latter chiefly came, there is muefi probability 
in this.’’ —Yule. 

29. he. Cola- (maruialam) . 



MARCO POLO ITT 

morning takes note of his own shadow in the sun, which he says 
ought to be on that day of such and such a length; and if his 
shadow be of the proper length for the day he completes his pur- 
chase ; if not, he will on no account do so, but waits till his shadow 
corresponds with that prescribed. For there is a length establish- 
ed for the shadow for every individual day of the week ; and the 
merchant will complete no business unless he finds his shadow of 
the length set down for that particular day. (Also to each day in 
the week they assign one unlucky hour, which they term 
Choiach. 30 For example, on Monday the hour of Half-tierce, on 
Tuesday that of Tierce, on Wednesday Nones, and so on.) 

Again, if one of them is in the house, and is meditating a pur- 
chase, should he see a tarantula (such as are very common in that 
country) on the wall, provided it advances from a 
quarter that he deems lucky, he will complete his omzss 
purchase at once ; but if it comes from a 
quarter that he considers unlucky he will not do so on any 
inducement. Moreover, if in going out, he hears any one sneeze, 
if it seems to him a good omen he will go on, but if the reverse 
he will sit down on the spot where he is. so long as he thinks that 
he ought to tarry before going on again. Or, if in travelling along 
the road he sees a swallow fly by, should its direction be lucky he 
will proceed, but if not he will turn back again ; in fact they are 
worse (in these whims) than so many Patarins' 

These Abraiaman are very long-lived, owing to their extreme 
abstinence in eating. And they never allow themselves to be let 
blood in any part of the body. They have capital teeth, which 
is owing to a certain herb they chew, which greatly improves their 
appearance, and is also very good for the health. 

There is another class of people called Chughi, 31 who are in- 
deed properly Abraiaman, but they form a religious order devoted 
to the Idols. They are extremely long-lived, every 
man of them living to 150 or 200 years. They eat togb 
very little, but what they do eat is good ; rice and 
milk chiefly. And these people make use of a very strange beverage; 
for they make a potion of sulphur and quicksilver mixt together 
and this they drink twice every month. This, they say, gdves them 
long life ; and it is a potion they are used to take from their child- 
hood. 


30. A corruption of Ty&jya — Caldwell cited by Yule. 

31. Jogi. 

F. N. — 23 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


There are certain members of this Order who lead the most 
ascetic life in the world, going stark naked ; and these worship the 
Ox. Most of them have a small ox of brass or pewter or gold 
which they wear tied over the forehead. 32 Moreover they take 
cowdung and bum it, and make a powder thereof ; and make an 
ointment of it, and daub themselves withal, doing this with as 
great devotion as Christians do show in using Holy Water. (Also 
if they meet any one who treats them well, they daub a little of 
this powder on the middle of his forehead) . 

They eat not from bowls or trenchers, but put their victuals 
on leaves of the Apple of Paradise and other big leaves ; these, 
however, they use dry, never green. For they say the green 
leaves have a soul in them, and so it would be a sin. And they 
would rather die than do what they deem their Law pronounces to 
be sin. If any one asks how it comes that they are not ashamed 
to go stark naked as they do, they say, “We go naked because 
naked we came into the world, and we desire to have nothing 
about us that is of this world. Moreover, we have no sin of the 
flesh to be conscious of, and therefore we are not ashamed of our 
nakedness, any more than you are to show your hand or your 
face. You who are conscious of the sins of the fl/sh do well to 
have shame, and to cover your nakedness.” 

They would not kill an animal on any account, not even a fly, 
or a flea, or a louse, or anything in fact that has life ; for they say 
these have all souls, and it would be sin to do so. They eat no 
vegetable in a green state, only such as are dry. And they sleep 
on the ground stark naked, without a scrap of clothing on them or 
under them, so that it is a marvel they don’t all die, in place of 
living so long as I have told you. They fast every day in the 
year, and drink nought but water. And when a novice has to be 
received among them they keep him awhile in their convent, and 
make him follow their rule of life. And then, when they desire 
to put him to the test, they send for some of those girls who are 
devoted to the Idols, and make them try the continence of the 
novice with their blandishments. If he remains indifferent they 
retain him, but if he shows any emotion they expel him from their 
society. For they say they vnll have no man of loose desires 
among them. 


82. The jangame, a Llnga-worshlpping sect of Southern India, we 
copper or silver lingo either round the neck or on the forehead.’ —Yule. 



MARCO POLO 


They are such cruel and perfidious Idolaters that it is very 
devilry ! They say that they bum the bodies of the dead, because 
if they were not burnt worms would be bred which would eat the 
body; and when no more food remained for them these worms 
would die, and the soul belonging to that body would bear the sin 
and the punishment of their death. And that is why they bum 
their dead! 

Now I have told you about a great part of the people of the 
great Province of Maabar and their customs ; but I have still other 
things to tell of this same Province of Maabar, so I will speak of a 
city thereof which is called Cail. 

—Op. cit. Bk. iii, ch. xx. 

F. Concerning the City of Cail ( Kayal ) 

Cail 33 is a great and noble city, and belongs to Ashar, the 
eldest of the five brother Kings. 34 It is at this city that all the 
ships touch that come from the west, as from Hormos and from 
Kis and from Aden, and all Arabia, laden with horses and with 
other things for sale. And this brings a great concourse of peo- 
ple from the country round about, and so there is great business 
done in this city of Cail. 

The King possesses vast treasures, and wears upon his person 
great store of rich jewels. He maintains great state and adminis- 
ters his kingdom with great equity, and extends great favour to 
merchants and foreigners, so that they are very glad to visit his 
city. 

This King has some 300 wives ; for in those parts the man who 
has most wives is most thought of. 

As I told you before, there are in this great province of 
Maabar five crowned Kings, who are all own brothers born of one 
father and one mother, and this king is one of them. Their 
mother is still living. And when they disagree and go forth to 
war against one another, their mother throws herself between 


33. Kayal, near the mouth of the Tamraparni, on the coast of Tinne- 
velly district. Sulaiman Al-Mahri (first half of the sixteenth century) notices 
this place as the most celebrated port of Cojamandalam from ancient times and 
as the residence of nautical authors. JA: Jul.-Sep. 1923, p. 93, n. 2. 

34. Asher seems to stand for (Kula) -sekhara, ie., Maravarman Kula- 
fekhara, * who conqilered all countries ' — AJD. 1288-1308. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


them to prevent their fighting. And should they persist in desir- 
ing to fight, she will take a knife and threaten that if they will do 
so she will cut off the paps that suckled them and rip open the 
womb that bare them, and so perish before their eyes. In this 
way hath she full many a time brought them to desist. But when 
she dies it will most assuredly happen that they will fall out and 
destroy one another. 

(All the people of this city, as well as of the rest of India, 
have a custom of perpetually keeping in the mouth a certain leaf 
called Tembul, to gratify a certain habit and desire 
Bim. they have, continually chewing it and spitting 

out the saliva that it excites. The Lords and 
gentlefolks and the King have these leaves prepared with 
camphor and other aromatic spices, and also mixt with 
quicklime. And this practice was said to be very good for the 
health. If any one desires to offer a gross insult to another, when 
he meets him he spits this leaf or its juice on his face. The other 
immediately runs before the King, relates the insult that has been 
offered him, and demands leave to fight the offender. The King 
supplies the arms, which are sword and target, and all the people 
flock to see, and there the two fight till one of them is killed. They 
must not use the point of the sword, for this the Kfiig forbids) . 

—Op. c it. Bk. iii, ch. xxi. 

G. Of the Kingdom, of Coilum 

When you quit Maabar and go 500 miles towards the south- 
west you come to the kingdom of Coilum. 35 The people are Ido- 
laters, but there are also some Christians and some Jews. The 
natives have a language of their own, and a King of their own, 
and are tributary to no one. 

A great deal of brazil is got here which is called brazil Coilu- 
min from the country which produces it ; ’tis of very fine quality. 8 * 
Good ginger also grows here, and it is known by the same name of 
Coilumin after the country. Pepper too grows in great abundance 
throughout this country, and I will tell you how. You must know 
that .the pepper-trees are (not wild but) cultivated, being regu- 
larly planted and watered ; and the pepper is gathered in the 
months of May, June, .and July. 


35. Modem Quilon. 

36. Cf. Ibn Battuta on the route from Calicut to Quilon. 



MARCO POLO 


in 


They have also abundance of very fine indigo. This is made 
of a certain herb which is gathered, and (after the roots have been 
removed) is put into great vessels upon which they 
pour water and then leave it till the whole of the indigo 
plant is decomposed. They then put this 
liquid in the sun, which is tremendously hot there, 37 so 
that it boils and coagulates, and becomes such as we see it. 
(They then divide it into pieces of four ounces each, and in that 
form it is exported to our parts). 38 And I assuie. you that the 
heat of the sun is so great there that it is scarcely to be endured ; 
in fact if you put an egg into one of the rivers it will be boiled, 
before you have had time to go any distance, by the mere heat of 
the sun! 

The merchants from Manzi, and from Arabia, and from the 
Levant come thither with their ships and their merchandise and 
make great profits both by what they import and by what they 
export. 

There are in this country many and divers beasts quite differ- 
ent from those of other parts of the world. Thus there are lions 
black all over, with no mixture of any other colour ; and there are 
parrots of many sorts, for some are white as snow 
with red beak and feet, and some are red, and fauna 
some are blue, forming the most charming sight 
in the world ; there are green ones too. There are 
also some parrots of exceeding small size, beautiful creatures. 
They have also very beautiful peacocks, larger than ours, and 
different; and they have cocks and hens quite different from ours; 
and what more shall I say ? In short, everything they have is 
different from ours, and finer and better. Neither is their fruit like 
ours, nor their beasts, nor their birds ; and this difference all 
comes of the excessive heat. 

Corn they have none but rice. So also their wine they make 
from (palm-) sugar ; capital drink it is, and very speedily it makes 
a man drunk. All other necessaries of man’s life they have in 
great plenty and cheapness. They have very good astrologers and 
physicians. Man and woman, they are all black, and go naked, 

37. The heat is generated by fermentation, the sun having nothing to do 
with it. 

38. " Marco’s account, though grotesque in its baldness, does describe the 
chief features of the manufacture of Indigo by fermentation . . There is now 
no indigo made or exported at Quiion, but there is still some feeble export of 
sappanwood, ginger and pepper.” —Yule. 



182 


all save a fine cloth worn about the middle. They look not on 
any sin of the flesh as a sin. They marry their cousins german, 
and a man takes his brother’s wife after the brother’s death ; and 
all the people of India have this custom. 

There is no more to tell you there ; so we will proceed, and I 
will tell you of another country called Comari. 

— Op. cit. Bk. iii, ch. xxii. 

H. Of the Country called Comari 

Comari 39 is a country belonging to India, and there you can see 
something of the North Star, which we had not been able to see 
from the Lesser Java thus far. In order to see it you must go 
some 30 miles out to sea, and then you see it about a cubit above 
the water. 

This is a very wild country, and there are beasts of all kinds 
there, especially monkeys of such peculiar fashion that you would 
take them for men ! There are also gatpauls i0 in wonderful diver- 
sity, with bears, lions, and leopards, in abundance. 

— Op. cit. Bk. iii. ch. xxiii. 

I. Concerning the Kingdom of Eli 

Eli 41 is a kingdom towards the west, about 300 miles from 
Comari. The people are Idolaters and have a king, and are tri- 
butary to nobody; and have a peculiar language. We will tell 
you particulars about their manners and their products, and you 
will better understand things now because we are drawing near 
to places that are not so outlandish. 

There is no proper harbour in the country, but there are many 
great rivers with good estuaries, wide and deep. Pepper and 
ginger grow there, and other spices in quantities. The King is 
rich in treasure, but not very strong in forces. The approach to 
his kingdom however is so strong by nature that no one can attack 
him, so he is afraid of nobody. 

And you must know that if any ship enters their estuary and 
anchors there, having been bound for some other port, they seize 
her and plunder the cargo. For they say, “You were bound for 
somewhere else, and ’tis God has sent you hither to 

3B. Cape Comorin, Kanyakumari. 

40. ‘ Some kind of ape '—Yule, citing Spanish Dictionaries. 

41. Mount D’EIy, cf. Ibn Battuta on HilL 



MASCO POLO 


us, so we have a right to all your goods.” And they 
think it no sin to act thus. And this naughty custom pre- 
vails all over these provinces of India, to wit, that if a ship be 
driven by stress of weather into some other port than that to which 
it was bound, it is sure to be plundered. 4 * But if a ship come 
bound originally to the place they receive it with all honour and 
give it due protection. The ships of Manzi 43 and other countries 
that come hither in summer lay in their cargoes in 6 or 8 days 
and depart as fast as possible, because there is no harbour other 
than the river-mouth, a mere roadstead and sandbanks, so that it 
is perilous to tarry there. The ships of Manzi indeed are not so 
much afraid of these roadsteads as others are, because they have 
such huge wooden anchors which hold in all weather. 

There are many lions and other wild beasts here and plenty 
of game, both beast and bird. 

— Op. c it. Bk. iii. ch. xxiv. 

J. Concerning the Kingdom of Melibar ( Malabar ) 

Melibar is a great kingdom lying towards the west. The 
people arc Idolaters; they have a language of their own. and a 
king of their own, and pay tribute to nobody. 

In this country you see more of the North Star, for it shows 
two cubits above the water And you must know that from this 
kingdom of Melibar, and from another near it 
called Gozurat, there go forth every year more pmiCY 
than a hundred corsair vessels on cruize. 

These pirates take with them their wives and children, 
and stay out the whole summer. Their method is to join in fleets 
of 20 or 30 of these pirate vessels together, and then they form 
what they call a sea cordon, that is. they drop off till there is an 
interval of 5 or 6 miles between ship and ship, so that they cover 
something like an hundred miles of sea, and no merchant ship 
can escape them. For when any one corsair sights a vessel a 
signal is made by fire or smoke, and then the whole of them make 
for this, and seize the merchants and plunder them. After they 
have plundered them they let them go, saying : “ Go along yrith 
you and get more gain, and that mayhap will fall to us Also!” But 
now the merchants are aware of this, and go so well manned and 

42. The practice is mentioned as prevailing on the east coast in the 
Motupalll Inscription of Ganapati, A.D 1244. 

43. Southern China. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


armed, and with such great ships, that they don’t fear the cor sair s. 
Still mishaps do befall them at times. 44 

There is in this kingdom a great quantity of pepper, and 
ginger, stnd cinnamon, and turbit, and of nuts of India. They also 
manufacture very delicate and beautiful buckrams. 
products The ships that come from the east bring copper in 

ballast. They also bring hither cloths of silk and 
gold and sendels ; also gold and silver, cloves and spikenard, and 
other fine spices for which there is a demand here, and exchange 
them for the products of these countries. 

Ships come hither from many quarters, but especially from 
the great province of Manzi. Coarse spices are exported hence 
both to Manzi and to the west, and that which is carried by the 
merchants to Aden goes on to Alexandria, but the ships that go in 
the latter direction arc not one to ten of those that go to the east- 
ward ; a very notable fact that I have mentioned before. 

Now I have told you abouf the kingdom of Melibar; we 
shall now proceed and tell you of the kingdom of Gozurat. And 
you must understand that in speaking of these kingdoms we note 
only the capitals ; there are great numbers of other cities and 
towns of which we shall say nothing, because it vlould make too 
long a story to speak of all. 

— Travels of Marco Polo, ed. Yule and Cordier, 
Bk. iii, ch. xxv. 


41. "The northern part of Malabar, Canara, and the Konkan, have been 
nests of pirates from the time of the ancients to a very recent date . . . Ibn 
Battuta fell into their hands, and was stripped to his drawers.”— Yule. 



XXVI. C. 1292-3 A.D. JOHN OF MONTECORVINO 


I, Friar John of Monte Corvino, of the order of Minor Friars, 
departed from Tauris, a city of the Persians, in the year of the 
Lord 1291, and proceeded to India. ,And I remained in the coun- 
try of India, wherein stands the church of St. Thomas the Apostle, 
for thirteen months, and in that region baptized in different places 
about one hundred persons. The companion of my journey was 
Friar Nicholas of Pistoia, of the order of Preachers, who died 
there, and was buried in the church aforesaid. 

— Yule: Cathay and the Way Thither, Vol. iii; First 
letter of John of Montecorvino, page 45. 

Possibility of Conversions to Christianity in India 

I have seen the greater part of India and made inquiries about 
the rest, and can say that it would be most profitable to preach 
to them the faith of Christ, if the brethren would but come. But 
none should be sent except men of the most solid character ; for 
those regions are very attractive, abounding in aromatic spices 
and precious stones. But they possess few of our fruits, and, on 
account of the great mildness and warmth of the climate, the peo- 
ple there go naked, only covering the loins. And thus the arts 
and crafts of our tailors and cordwainers are not needed, for 
they have perpetual summer and no winter. I baptized there 
about a hundred persons. 

—Op. cit. Second letter of John of Montecorvino, p. 57. 

To you, Friar Bartholomew of Santo Concordio 1 your brother 
in all things, Menentillus of Spoleto, wisheth health and wisdom 
in Christ! 

And because I wot of the greatest curiosity that you have in 
regard to all science, and that, much as you do know, you would 
fain know everything and especially things that are new to you; 
and in truth that you are one whose desire is to have knowledge 
and information of all kinds ; therefore transcribe I for you certain 
matters just as they have been written from India by a certain 
Minorite Friar (the travelling companion of Brother Nicholas of 
Pistoia, who died in Upper India), whi: on his way to the court 
of the Lord of all India. The bringer of the letter I have seen 

i, ‘A Dominican monk, a Pisan by birth’ —Yule. 

F. N.— 24 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


and spoken with, and it was in his arms that the said Brother 
Nicholas did die. The letter was to the effect following : 

“ The state of things (with regard to climate) in the Indies is 
such as shall now be related. 

“ In India it is always warm, and there never is any winter ; 
yet the heat is not extravagant. And the reason is, that there be 
at all times winds which temper the heat of 
cumatii the air. And the reason why there can be 

no winter is the position of the country 
with respect to the zodiac, as I shall now tell. This is to say, the 
sun when entering Virgo, i.e., on the 24th day of August, sends 
down his rays, as I have seen and in particular noted with my own 
eyes, quite perpendicularly, so as to cast no shadow on either side. 
And in like manner when he is entering Aries, i.e., at the end of 
March. And when he has gone through Aries he passes towards 

the north, and casts shadows towards the south until (the 

summer solstice) and then turns ta Virgo, and after he has past 
through the sign of Virgo he then casts his shadow towards the 
north. And thus there is never so great an elongation of the sun 
as to admit of cold, and there are not two seasons. Or, as I have 
said before, there is no winter or cold season. 

“ As regards the length of the day and the night I have tried 
to determine them by such measures and indications as I could. 
I have observed that at the two epochs before mentioned, when 
the sun's rays strike perpendicularly without casting any shadow, 
the day is fifteen hours long, and the night nine. And when the 
sun is at the solstice of Cancer, the day is a little less than four- 
teen hours long, and the night is a little more than ten, perhaps by 
a quarter of an hour. But when the sun is in the solstice of 
Capricorn, that is to say in the month of December, the day 
has a length of eleven hours and the night of thirteen. For the 
sun’s elongation is somewhat greater when it is in Capricorn than 
when it is in Cancer* 

“Moreover, the star which we call the Pole-star is there so de- 
pressed, i.e., so low, that it can scarcely be seen. And methought 
that if I had been on a lofty point I could have seen the other Pole- 
star which is in the opposite quarter. I looked many a time for a 
sight of it, and I saw several constellations which moved round 
about it, from observing which I gathered that they were exceed- 

2. ‘I am afraid we cannot throw the blame of these*extraordlnary state- 
ments on anybody but Friar John himself. 1 — Yule. 



JOHN OF MONTECORVXNO 


187 


ingly near to it. But because of the continual haze on the horizon 
in that quarter, caused by the heat and the winds, and because of 
the stars being so low, I never could satisfy myself. However India 
is a very extensive region, and perhaps in some places ,it would 
be seen at a greater elevation, in others at a less. I have examined 
the matter to the best of my ability. So much as to (the climate 
of) Upper India, which is called maebar, in the territory of St. 
Thomas. 


“ Concerning the state of things as to the country 
itself in Upper India . — The condition of the country of 
India aforesaid is this. The land is well enough peo- 
pled ; and there be great cities therein, but the houses are wretched, 
being built of sandy mud, and usually thatched with leaves of trees. 
Hills there are few; rivers in some places are many, in others few. 
Springs there are few or none; wells in plenty; and the reason is 
this, that water is generally to be found at the depth of two or 
three paces, or even less. This well water is indeed not very good 
to drink, for it is somewhat soft and loosens the bowels; so they 
generally have tanks or excavations like ponds, in which they col- 
lect the rain water, and this they drink. They keep few beasts. 
Horses there are none, except it be in possession of the king and 
great barons. Flies there be few, and fleas none at all. 3 And they 
have trees which produce fruit continually, so that on them you find 
fruit in every stage up to perfect ripeness at one time. In like 
manner they sow and reap at almost all seasons, and this because 
it is always warm and never cold. Aromatic spices are to be had 
good cheap, some more so and some less so, according to what spices 
they be. They have trees that produce sugar, and others that pro- 
duce honey, and others that produce a liquor that has 
a smack of wine. And this the natives of those pepper 
countries use for drink. And those three things plant 
are to be had at very small cost. And the pepper 
plant is here also. It is slender and knotty like a vine ; and indeed 
’tis altogether very like a vine, excepting that it is more slender, 
and bears transplanting. 


“ Ginger is a reed-like plant, and, like a cane-root, it can be 
dug and transplanted. But their # canes here are 
more like trees, being sometimes a cubit in girth 0DJBBt 
and more, with slender prickly branches round 
about, and small leaves. 


3. ‘ They must Live come with the Portuguese then ! ’ —Yule. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


“ The Brazil tree is a slender, lofty and thorny tree, all red as 
it were, with leaves like fern. The Indian nuts 
jjaa, are as big as melons, and in colour green like 

gourds. Their leaves and branches are like 
those of the date tree. 

“ Hie cinnamon tree is of a medium bulk, not very high, and 
in trunk, bark, and foliage is like the laurel ; 
cinnamon indeed, altogether it resembleth the laurel 

greatly in appearance. Great store of it is 
carried forth of the island which is hard-by Maabar. 4 

“ As regards men of a marvellous kind, to wit, men of a different 
make from the rest of us, and as regards animals of like description, 
and as regards the Terrestrial Paradise, much have I asked and 
sought, but nothing have I been able to discover. 

“Oxen are with these people sacred animals, 
oxen and and they eat not their flesh for the worship they 

COWB bear them. But they make use of cow’s milk, and 

put their cattle to labour like other folk. 

“ The rain falleth at fixed seasons. 

“ The state of things as regards the inhabitants of India is as 
follows -.—The men of this region are idolaters, without moral law, 
or letters, or books. They have indeed an 
people alphabet which they use to keep their accounts, 

and to write prayers or charms for their 
idols ; albeit they have no paper, but write upon leaves of trees like 
unto palm leaves. They have no conscience of sin whatever. They 
have idol-houses in which they worship at almost all hours of the 
day ; for they never join together in worship at any fixed hour, but 
each goes to worship when it pleases himself. And so they worship 
their idols in any part of these temples, either by day or by night. 
They frequently set forth their fasts and feasts, but they have no 
fixed recurring day to keep, either weekly or monthly. Their mar- 
riages take place only at one time of the year ; and when the hus- 
band dies the wife cannot marry again. The sin of the flesh they 
count not to be sin, nor are they ashamed to say so. 

“ In the regions by the sea are many Saracens, and they have 
great influence 5 but there are few of them in the interior. There 

4. Ceylon. ‘One of the earliest notices of the Ceylon cinnamon trade. 
—Yule. 

5. Elliot and Dowson, i. pp. 69-70. 



JOHN OF MONTECOEVXNO 189 

are a very few Christians, and Jews, and they are of little weight. 
She people persecute much the Christians, and all who bear the 
Christian name. 

“ They bury not their dead but bum them, carrying them to the 
pile with music and singing ; whilst apart from this occasion the 
relatives of the deceased manifest great grief and affliction like 
other folk. 

“ But India is a region of great extent, and it hath many realms 
and many languages. And the men thereof are civil and friendly 
enough, but of few words, and remind me some- 
what of our peasants. They are not, strictly dress 
speaking, black, but of an olive colour, and 
exceedingly well formed both women and men. They go barefoot 
and naked, except that they wear a cloth round the loins, and boys 
and girls up to eight years of age wear nothing whatever, but go 
naked as they came from their mother’s womb. They shave not the 
beard ; many times a day they wash ; bread and wine they have 
none. Of the fruits that we make use of they have few or none ; 
but for their daily food they use rice and a little milk ; and they eat 
grossly like pigs, to wit, with the whole hand or fist, and without a 
spoon. In fact, when at their food they do look more like pigs than 
men! 

“ There is great security in the country. Bandits and robbers 
are seldom met with ; but they have many exactions to pay. There 
are few craftsmen, for craft and craftsmen have little remuneration, 
and there is little room for them. They commonly use swords and 
daggers like ourselves ; and if actually they have a battle they make 
short work of it, however great the forces be, for they go to battle 
naked, with nothing but sword and dagger. They have among them 
a few Saracen mercenaries, who carry bows. 


“ The state of things in regard to the Sea of India is this. The 
sea aboundeth greatly with fish ; and in some parts of it they fish 
for pearls and precious stones. The havens 
are few and bad ; and you must know that the sea 
the sea here is the Middle Sea or Ocean. Tra- 
versing it towards the south there i^no continent found but islands 
alone, but in that sea the islands are many, more than* 12,000 in 
number. And many of these are inhabited and many are not. 

"Youjjan sail (upon that sea) between these islands and 
Ormea and (from Ormes) to those parts which are called 
( Minibar ) is a distance of 2,000 miles in a direction between south 



190 


and south-east; then 300 miles between east and south-east from 
Minibar to Maabar, which (latter however) you enter steering to 
the north ; and from Menabar (Maabar ?) you sail another 300 
miles between north-east and north to Siu Simmoncota .° The 
rest I have not seen, and therefore I say nothing of it. 

“ The shores of the said sea in some places run out in shoals for 
100 miles or more, so that ships are in danger of grounding. And 
they cannot make the voyage but once a 
navigation year, for from the beginning of April till the end 
of October the winds are westerly, so that no 
one can sail towards the west ; and again ’tis just the contrary from 
the month of October till March. From the middle of May till the 
end of October the wind blows so hard that ships which by that 
time have not reached the ports whither they are bound, run a des- 
perate risk, and if they escape it is great luck. And thus in the past 
year there perished more than sixty ships ; and this year seven ships 
in places in our own immediate neighbourhood, whilst of what has 
happened elsewhere we have no iritelligencc. Their ships in these 
parts are mighty frail and uncouth, with no iron in them, and no 
caulking. They are sewn like clothes with twine. And so if the 
twine breaks anywhere there is a breach indeed ! Once every year 
therefore there is a mending of this, more or less, if they propose to 
go to sea. And they have a frail and flimsy rudder like the top of 
a table, of a cubit in width, in the middle of the stern ; and when 
they have to tack, it is done with a vast deal of trouble ; and if it is 
blowing in any way hard, they cannot tack at all. They have but 
one sail and one mast, and the sails are either of matting or of 
some miserable cloth. The ropes are of husk. 


6. The first section of the voyage, then, I understand to be from the Per- 
sian Gulf to one of the ports of Malabar (called Minabar); the second from 
the said port to some city on the Gulf of Manaar; and the third from the Gulf 
of Manaar to some place on the Coromandel coast, at least as far north as the 
Church of St. Thomas, i.e., Madras. I say “some city on the Gulf of Manaar” 
because we shall see presently that Mabar is, with the present writer, a city, 
and is probably to be identified with that where Marco Polo locates his chief 
king of Mabar. As Polo seems to specify this as sixty miles west of Ceylon, 
I judge that it must have been somewhere near Ramnad. It is not Cail, be- 
cause he saits distinctly that Cail was subject to another of the chiefs, and Cail 
is a good deal more than sixty miles from any part of Ceylon. 

The extreme point which our author visited, whether Siu Simmoncota or 
Giu Gimmoncota (for it is so read by Kunstmann), I cannot determine. It 
must have been at least as far up the coast as Madras, because te tells us In 
the first letter that his companion Nicholas of Pistols was buried in (he church 
of St. Thomas.— Yule. 


JOHN OP MONTECOKVINO 111 

“ Moreover their mariners are few and far from good. Hence 
they run a multitude of risks, insomuch that they are wont to say, 
when any ship achieves her voyage safely and soundly, that 'tis by 
God’s guidance, and man’s skill hath little availed. , 

“ This letter was written in Maabar, a city of the province of 
Sitia 7 in Upper India, on the 22nd day of December in the year of 
Oun Lord MCCX (CII or CIU). 

—Yule and Cordier, Cathay and the Way Thither, iii; No. iii 
Letter from Friar Menentillus, a Dominican, for- 
warding copy of a letter from John of Monte- 
corvino ; pp. 58-67. 


7. Named by no other traveller that I know of. The Island or peninsula 
of Ramisseram was, however, called Setbu, ‘ the bridge ’ —Yule. 



XXVII. C. 1321-2 A.D. FRIAR ODORIC 


(A) Hormuz to Tana 

In this country 1 men make use of a kind of vessel which they 
call Jase 2 3 4 5 6 which is fastened only with stitching of twine. On one 
of these vessels I embarked, and I could find no iron at all therein. 
And having thus embarked, I passed over in twenty-eight days to 
Tana? where for the faith of Christ four of our Minor Friars had 
suffered a glorious martyrdom. The city is excellent in position, 
and hath great store of bread and wine, and aboundeth in trees. 
This was a great place in days of old, for it was the city of King 
Porus, who waged so great a battle with King Alexander* The 
people thereof are idolaters, for they worship fire, and serpents, and 
trees also. The land is under the dominion of the Saracens, who 
have taken it by force of arms, gnd they are now subject to the 
Empire of Dili? 

Here he found sundry kinds of beasts and especially black 
lions* in very great numbers, besides monkeys and baboons, and 
bats as big as pigeons are here. There be also rats as big as here 
are our dogs called Schcrpi. And for this reason rats 7 are there 
caught by dogs, for the mousers or cats are of no use for that. In 
this country every man hath before his house a plant of twigs as 
thick as a pillar would be here, and this never withers as long as 
it gets water. 8 9 And many other strange things are there which it 
would be pretty to hear tell. 

9 [The women go naked there, and when a woman is married 
she is set on a horse, and the husband gets on the crupper and holds 
a knife pointed at her throat; and they have nothing on except a 


1. Hormuz. Cf. Marco Polo, i. p. 108. 

2. (Pers.) Jahaz, a ship. 

3. On the landward side of Salsette islands. 

4. Some strange mistake here. Yule traces it to tradition connecting 
Alexander 'with the caves of Elephants. 

5. Odoric came here soon after the conquest of the Yadava kingdom of 
Devagiri by the Delhi Sultanate. 

6. Tigers (?). 

7. Big bats and rats are also mentioned by Jordanus. •> 

8. This is generally taken to be a reference to the Tulati or Basil. 

9. Additional particulars 1 depending on doubtful or exceptional ’ mss. 
are enclosed within brackets. 



ODORIC wa 

high cap on their head like a mitre, wrought with white flowers, 
and all the maidens of the place go singing in a row in front of them 
till they reach the house,, and there the bride and the bridegroom 
are left alone, and when they get up in the morning they go naked 
as before.] 

[In this country there are trees which give wine which they 
call Loahc, and which is very intoxicating. And here they do 
not bury the dead, but carry them with great pomp to the fields, and 
cast them to the beasts and birds to be devoured. And they have 
here very fine oxen ; which have horns a good half pace in length 
(girth ?) , and have a hump on the back like a camel. And from 
this city to Panche (Paroche ?) is fourteen days’ journey.] 

— Yule and Cordier, Cathay, ii, pp. 113-17. 

(B) Of the kingdom of Millibar and how pepper is got 

And now that ye may know how pepper is got, let me tell you 
that it groweth in a certain empire whereunto I came to land, the 
name whereof is Minibar,' 0 and it groweth nowhere else in the world 
but there. And the forest in which the pepper groweth extendeth 
for a good eighteen days’ journey, and in that forest there be two 
cities, the one whereof is called Flandrina and the other 
Cyngilin. 11 In the city of Flandrina some of the inhabitants are 
Jews and some arc Christians ; and between those two cities there 
is always internal war, but the result is always that the Christians 
beat and overcome the Jews. 

Now, in this country they get the pepper in this manner. First, 
then, it groweth on plants which have leaves like ivy, and these are 
planted against tall trees as our vines arc here, and bear fruit just 
like bunches of grapes ; and this fruit is borne in such quantities 
that they seem like to break under it. And when the fruit is ripe 
it is of a green colour, and ’tis gathered just as grapes are gathered 
at the vintage, and then put in the sun to dry. And when it is dried 
it is stored in jars [and of the fresh pepper also they make a con- 
fection, of which I had to eat, and plenty of it]. And in this forest 
also there be rivers in which be many evil crocodiles, i.e., serpents. 
[And there be many other kinds of serpents in the forest, which the 

10. ‘Minibar is Malabar, and seems to have been an old Arabic form of 
that name.’ —Yule. 

11. Flandrina is Fantaiani, sixteen miles N. of Calicut. ‘Cyngilin is a 
greater difficulty.’— Yule. Heyd suggests Kayangulam, about 18 miles N. of 
Quilon, and this may be accepted in view of Odoric’s statement that Polumbum 

(Quilon) was at the southern end of the pepper ‘ forest ’. 

F. N.-25 




FOREIGN NOTICES 


men bum by kindling tow and straw, and so they are enabled to 
go safely to gather pepper.] [And here there be lions in great 
numbers, and a variety of beasts which are not found in our Frank 
countries. And here they bum the brazil-wood for fuel, and in the 
woods are numbers of wild peacocks. 12 ] 

At the extremity of that forest, towards the south, there is a 
certain city which is called Polumbum, in which is grown better 
ginger than anywhere else in tho world. And the variety and abun- 
dance of wares for sale in that city is so great that it would seem 
past belief to many folk. 

— Op. cit. pp. 132-137. 

(C) Of the manners of the idolaters of 
Polumbum (Quilon) 

[Here all the people go naked, only they wear a cloth just 
enough to cover their nakedness, which they tie behind.] All the 
people of this country worship the ox for their god [and they eat not 
his flesh]; for they say that he is, as it were, a sacred creature. 
Six years they make him to work for them, and the seventh year 
they give him rest from all labour, and turn him out in some 
appointed public place, declaring him thenceforward to be a con- 
secrated animal. And they observe the following abominable super- 
stition. Every morning they take two basins of gold or silver, and 
when the ox is brought from the stall they put these under him and 
catch his urine in one and his dung in the other. With the former 
they wash their faces, and with the latter they daub themselves, 
first on the middle of the forehead ; secondly, on the balls of both 
cheeks ; and, lastly, in the middle of the chest. And when they have 
thus anointed themselves in four places they consider themselves 
to be sanctified [for the day]. Thus do the common people; and 
thus do the king and queen likewise. 

They worship also another idol, which is half man and half ox. 
And this idol giveth responses out of its mouth, and oft-times 
demandeth the blood of forty virgins to be given to it. For men 
and women there vow their sons and their daughters to that idol, 
just as here they vow to place^them in some religious order. And 
in this manner many perish. 


12. ' Marignolli has a mild sneer directed probably at Odorie’s talk about 
the pepper ‘forest’; apparently the latter did not stay any time in Malabar, 
and he probably derived his information from harbour gossip.’ —Yule. 



ODORIC 


US 

And many other things are done by that people which it would 
be abomination even to write or to hear of, and many other things 
be there produced and grown, which it booteth little to relate. But 
the idolaters of this realm have one detestable custom [thjrt I must 
mention]. For when any man dies, they bum him, and if he leave 
a wife they bum her alive with him, saying that she ought to go and 
keep her husband company in the other world. But if the woman 
have sons by her husband she may abide with them, as she will. 
And, on the other hand, if the wife die there is no law to impose 
the like on him ; but he, if he likes, can take another wife. It is also 
customary there for the women to drink wine and not the men. The 
women also have their foreheads shaven, whilst the men shave not 
the beard. And there be many other marvellous and beastly cus- 
toms which ’tis just as well not to write. 

—Op. cit., pp. 137-140. 


(D) Concerning the kingdom of Mobar, where lieth the body 
of St. Thomas, and the customs of the idolaters. 

From this realm 18 ’tis a journey of ten days to another realm 
which is called Mobar, 1 * and this is very great, and hath under 
it many cities and towns. And in this realm is laid the body of the 
Blessed Thomas the Apostle. 15 His church is filled with 
idols 16 , and beside it are some fifteen houses of the Nesto- 
rians, that is to say Christians, but vile and pestilent here- 
tics. There is likewise in this kingdom a certain wonderful idol, 
which all the provinces of India greatly revere. It is as big as 
St. Christopher is commonly represented by the painters, and it is 
entirely of gold, seated on a great throne, which is also of gold. And 
round its neck it hath a collar of gems of immense value. And the 
church of this idol is also of pure gold, roof (and walls) and pave- 
ment. People come to say their prayers to the idol from great dis- 
tances, just as Christian folk go from far on pilgrimage to St. Peter’s. 
And the manner of those who come is thus : — Some travel with a 
halter round their necks ; and some with their hands upon a board, 
which is tied to their necks ; others with a knife stuck in the arm, 


13. Quilon. 

14. ' The Coromandel region ’ —Yule. 

15. ‘As vague as Polo’s is Odoric’s in li-ation of Hie position of the 
Shrine of St. Thomas.' — Cordier. 

16. On-this Barth observes : " It was really a Hindu temple, and seems to 
refer to the Mailapur sanctuary, where, from a long time, stood the temple of 
Mayila Devi which, •'to this date, is near the Christian Cathedral”— Cordier . 



196 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


which they nevei remove until they arrive before the idol, so that 
the arm is then all in a slough And some have quite a different 
way of doing For these as they start from their houses take three 
steps, and at the fourth they make a prostration at full length upon 
the ground And then they take a thurible and incense the whole 
length of that prostration And thus they do continually until they 
reach the idol, so that sometimes when they go through this operation 
it takoth a very groat while before they do reach the idol But when 
those who are going along in this way wish to turn aside to do any- 
thing, they make a mark there to show how fat they have gone, and 
so they [come back upon this, and] continue until they reach the 
idol 

And hard by the church of this idol there is a lake, made by 
hand, into which the pilgrims who come thither cast gold or silver 
or precious stones, m honour of the idol, and towards the mainte- 
nance of the church, so that much gold and silver and many preci- 
ous stones have been accumulated therein And thus when it is 
desired to do any work upon the church, they make search m the 
lake and find all that hath been cast into it 17 

But annually on the recurrence of the day when that idol was 
made, the folk of the country come and take it down, and put it on 
a fine chariot , and then the king and queen and all the pilgrims, 
and the whole body of the people jom together and draw it forth 
from the church with loud singing of songs and all hinds of music , 
and many maidens go before it by two and two chauntmg in a mar- 
vellous mannei And many pilgrims who have come to this feast 
cast themselves under the chariot, so that its 
cab festival wheels may go over them saying that they 
desire to die for then God And the car passes 
over them, and crushes and cuts them in sundei, and so they 
perish on the spot And after this fashion they drag the idol to a 
certain customary place and then they drag him back to where he 
was formerly, with singing and playing as before And thus not 
a year passes but there perish more than five hundred men m this 
manner, and their bodies they bum declaring that they are 
holy, having thus devoted themselves to death for their God l * 


17 The Mamlak-el-Abrar conoborites this story and says that Mahomed 
Tughlak (a few yoais after Odonc s visit) captured the city and caused the 
lake to be drained and the wealth which he found accumulated m it sufficed 
to load two hundred elephants and several thousand oxen ' — Ytle 

18 ‘One might think Odonc had got to Juggernaut But this practice 
was not peculiar to Onssa ’ —Yule 



ODORIC 197 

And another custom they have of this kind. One will come 
saying : “ 1 desire to sacrifice myself for my God ? ” And then his 
friends and kinsfolk, and all the players of the country, assemble 
together to make a feast for him who is determined to dij for his 
God. And they hang round his neck five very sharp knives, and 
lead him thus to the presence of the idol with loud songs. Then 
he takes one of those sharp knives and calls out with a loud voice : 
“ Thus I cut my flesh for my God ” ; and cutting a piece of his flesh 
wherever he may choose, he casteth it in the face of the idol ; and 
saying again : “ I devote myself to die for my God,” he endeth by 
slaying himself there. And straightway they take his body and 
burn it, for they look on him as a saint, having thus slain himself 
for his idol. And many other things greatly to be marvelled at are 
done by these people, which are by no means to be written. 

But the king of this island 19 or province is passing rich in gold 
and silver and precious stones. And in this island are found as great 
store of good pearls as in any part of the world. And so of many 
other things which are found in this island, which it would take too 
long to write. 

—Yule and Cordier : Cathay and the Way Thither, ii. pp. 141-46. 


19. The only instance of such a mistake in Odnric ; others make islands 
of nearly all the Eastern lands. —Yule. 



XXVIII. 1323-1330 AD. FRIAR JORDANUS 


A. Scope for conversions in India 

Let me tell you that the fame of us Latins is more highly 
thought of among the people of India than among us Latins our- 
selves. Nay they are in continual expectation of the arrival of the 
Latins here, which they say is clearly predicted in their books. 1 
And moreover, they are continually praying the Lord, after their 
manner, to hasten this wished-for arrival of the Latins. If our lord 
the Pope would but establish a couple of galleys on this sea, what 
a gain it would be ! And what damage and destruction to the Soldan 
of Alexandria ! O, who will tell this to his holiness the Pope ? 
For me, wayfarer that I am, ’tis out of the question. But I commit 
all to you, holy fathers. Fare ye well, then, holy fathers, and re- 
member the pilgrim in your prayers. Pray for the pilgrim of Christ, 
all of you, that the Indian converts; black as they are, may all be 
made white in soul before the good Jesus, through his pitiful grace. 
I end my words with many a sigh, most heartily recommending my- 
self to the prayers of all. 

Dated in Thana of India, the city where my holy comrades 
were martyred, in the year of the Lord 1323, 2 3 in the month of 
January, and on the feast of the holy martyrs Fabian and Sebastian. 

— Yule and Cordier, Cathay, iii, pp. 79-80. 

B. Concerning India the Less? 

In the entrance to India the Less are (date) palms, giving a 
great quantity of the sweetest fruit ; but further on in India they 
are not found. 4 


1. See also p. 204 below. The Chinese and Burmans also had such 
prophecies ; the Mexicans had similar tales also. —Yule. 

2. For details see Odoric in Cathay, ii. pp. 117-132 " The date (Jan. 1323) 
must mean, I think, our Jan. 1324.”— Yule. 

3. It may he gathered from yrhat follows, that Lesser India embraces 
Sindh, and probably Mekran, and India along the coast as far as some point 
immediately north of Malabar. Greater India extends from Malabar very in- 
definitely to the eastward, for he makes it include Champa (Cambodia). India 
Tertla is the east of Africa. —Yule. 

4. I believe this is substantially correct. Sindh is the only province in 
India that produces edible dates. A date-palm is found all over India, but 
the fruit is worthless. —Yule. 



JORDANUS 


189 

la this lesser India are many things worthy to be noted with 
wonder ; for there are no springs, no rivers, no ponds ; nor does it 
ever rain, except during three months, viz., between the middle of 
May and the middle of August ; and (wonderful!) notwithstanding 
this, the soil is most kindly and fertile, and during the nine months 
of the year in which it does not rain, so much dew is found every 
day upon the ground that it is not dried up by the sun’s rays till 
the middle of the third hour of the day. 

Here be many and boundless marvels ; and in this first India 
beginneth, as it were, another world; for the men and women be all 
black, and they have for covering nothing but a strip of cotton tied 
round the loins, and the end of it flung over the naked neck. 
Wheaten bread is there not eaten by the natives, although wheat 
they have in plenty; but rice is eaten with its seasoning, only boil'-d 
in water. And they have milk and butter and oil, which they often 
eat uncooked. In this India there be no horses, nor mules, nor 
camels, nor elephants ; but only kine, with which they do all their 
doings that they have to do whether it be riding, or carrying, or 
field labour. The asses are few in number and very small, and 
not much worth. 5 6 

The days and nights do not vary there more than by two hours 
at the most. 

There be always fruits and flowers there, divers trees, and 
fruits of divers kinds ; for (example) there are some 
trees which bear very big fruit, called Chaqui , ,ACK mnT 
and the fruit is of such size that one is enough for five persons.® 

There is another tree which has fruit like that just named, 
and it is called Bloqui, quite as big and as sweet, but not of the 
same species. These fruits never grow upon the twigs, for these 
are not able to bear their weight, but only from the main bran- 
ches, and even from the trunk of the tree itself, down to the very 


5. He is wrong about the non-existence of horses and camels in what he 

calls India the Less. —Yule. # , 

6. The name jack, which we give to the tree and its fruits, is' one of that 
large class of words which are neither English nor Hindustani, but Anglo- 
Indian, and the origin pf which is often very di^tcult to trace. Drury gives 
ptlavoo as the Malayalam name, but I find that Rheede (Hortus Malabaricus, 
vol. iii) give* also Tsjaka ; and Linschoten, too, says that the jack is in Malabar 
called laca : so here we have doubtless the original. —Yule. Rheede’s tsjaka 
is clearly Mai. Cakka. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


There is another tree which has fruit like a plum, but a very 
big one, which is called Aniba. This is a fruit so sweet and delici- 
ous as it is impossible to utter in words. 7 

Thefe be many other fruit trees of divers kinds, which it would 
be tedious to describe in detail. 

I will only say this much, that this India, as regards fruit and 
other things, is entirely different from Christendom; except, in- 
deed, that there be lemons there, in some places, as sweet as sugar, 
whilst there be other lemons sour like ours. There be also pome- 
granates, but very poor and small. There be but few vines, and 
they make from them no wine, but eat the fresh grapes; albeit 
there are a number of other trees whose sap they collect, and it 
standeth in place of wine to them. 

First of these is a certain tree called N argil ; which tree every 
month in tho year sends out a beautiful frond like (that of) a 
(date) palm-tree, which frond or branch produces very large fruit, 
as big as a man’s ' head. There often grow on 
cocoaitot one such stem thirty of those fruits as big as I 

have said. And both flowers and fruits are pro- 
duced at the same time beginning with the first month and 
going up gradually to the twelfth ; so that there are flowers and 
fruit in eleven stages of growth to be seen together. A wonder! 
and a thing which cannot be well understood without being witness- 
ed. From these branches and fruits is drawn a very sweet water. 
The kernel (at first) is very tender and pleasant to eat ; afterwards 
it waxeth harder, and a milk is drawn from it as good as milk of 
almonds ; and when the kernel waxeth harder still, an oil is made 
from it of great medicinal virtue. And if any one careth not to 
have fruit, when the fruit-bearing stem is one or two months old he 
maketh a cut in it, and bindeth a pot to this incision ; and so the 
sap, which would have been converted into fruit, drops in ; and it is 
white like milk, and sweet like must, and maketh drunk like wine, 


7. Amba (Pers.), the Mango. Ibn Battuta writes it ‘anba’ with an ain, 
as appears from Lee’s note (p. 104), and the latter translates it “grape,” which 
is the meaning of that word I believe in Arabic. Our author’s just description 
of ihe flavour of the mango is applicable, however, only to finer stocks, and 
seems to show that the “Bombay mango” already existed in the thirteenth 
century. The mango is commonly believed in Anglo-India to produce boils, 
which I see was also the belief in Linschoten’s day. But I agree with his 
commentator, that, at the time when the fruit is ripe, “ by reason of the great 
heate and season of the yeare— many doe fall into the fore-named diseases, 
although they eate none of this fruite.” —Yule, 



JQRDANUS 


so that the natives do drink it for wine ; and those who wish not to 
drink it so, boil it down to one-third of its bulk, and then it be- 
cometh thick, like honey; and 'tis sweet, and fit for making pre- 
serves, like honey and the honeycomb. One branch gives one 
potful in the day and one in the night, on the average throughout 
the year ; thus five or six pots may be found hung upon the same 
tree at once. With the leaves of this tree they cover their houses 
during the rainy season. The fruit is that which we call nuts of 
India ; and from the rind of that fruit is made the twine 8 with which 
they stitch their boats together in those parts. 

There is another tree of a different species, which like that 
gives all the year round a white liquor pleasant to drink, which 
tree is called Tari. 9 There is also another, 
called Belluri , 10 giving a liquor of the same palmyra 
kind, but better. There be also many other 
trees, and wonderful ones; among which is one which sendeth 
forth roots from high up, 11 which gradually grow down to the 
ground and enter it, and then wax into trunks like the main trunk, 
forming as it were an arch ; and by this kind of multiplication one 
tree will have at once as many as twenty or thirty trunks beside 
one another, and all connected together. Tis marvellous ! And 
truly this which I have seen with mine eyes, ’tis hard to utter with 
my tongue. The fruit of this tree is not useful, but poisonous and 
deadly. There is (also) a tree harder than all, which the strongest 
arrows can scarcely pierce. 

The trees in this India, and also in India the Greater, never 
shed their leaves till the new ones come. 

To write about the other trees would be too long a business ; 
and tedious beyond measure ; seeing that they are many and 
divers, and beyond the comprehension of man. 

But about wild beasts of the forest I say this : there be lions, 
leopards, ounces, and another kind something like a greyhound, 
having only the ears black and the whole body 
perfectly white, which among those people is called wild animals 
Siagois . 12 This animal, whatever it catches, never 


8. The well-known coir. —Yule. * * 

9. Tadi (Tel.), Palmyra. 

10. 'Belluri, I conceive to be the Caryota vrens, which, according to 

Rheede ( Hortua Malabar, i), is called by the Brahmans in Malabar blrala.— 
Yule. e 

11. The Banyan. 

12. Siya-gosh (blhck ear), the Persian name of the lynx.— Yule. 

F. N. — 26 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


lets go, even to death. There is also another animal, which is called 
Rhinoceros, as big as a horse, having one horn long and twisted; but 
it is not the unicorn. 

Thete be also venomous animals, such as many serpents, big 
beyond bounds, and of divers colours, black, red, white, and green, 
and parti-coloured; two-headed also, three-headed, and five-head- 
ed. Admirable marvels ! u 


There be also coquodriles, which are vulgarly called Calcatix ; 
some of them be so big that they be bigger than the biggest horse. 
These animals be like lizards, and have a tail stretched over all, 
like unto a lizard’s ; and have a head like unto a swine’s, and rows 
of teeth so powerful and horrible that no animal can escape their 
force, particularly in the water. This animal has, as it were, a coat 
of mail ; and there is no sword, nor lance, nor arrow, which can 
anyhow hurt him, on account of the hardness of his scales. In the 
water, in short, there is nothing so strong, nothing so evil, as this 
wonderful animal. There be also many other reptiles, whose 
names, to speak plainly, I know not. 

As for birds, I say plainly that they are of quite different kinds 
from what are found on this side of the world; except, indeed, 
crows and sparrows ; for there be parrots and 
sums popinjays in very great numbers, so that a 

thousand or more may be seen in a flock. 
These birds, when tamed and kept in cages, speak so that you 
would take them for rational beings. There be also bats really and 
truly as big as kites. These birds fly nowhither by day, but only 
when the sun sets. Wonderful ! By day they hang themselves up 
on trees by the feet, with their bodies downwards, and in the day- 
time they look just like big fruit on the tree. 

There are also other birds, such as peacocks, quails, Indian 
fowls, and others, divers in kind; some white as white can be, some 
green as green can be, some parti-coloured, of such beauty as is 
past telling. 

In this India, when men go to the wars, and when they act as 
guards to their lords, they go naked, with a round target, — a frail 
and -paltry affair, — and holding a kind of spit in their hands ; and, 
truly, their fighting seems like child’s play. 

13. Two-headed and even three-headed serpents might be suggested by 
the portentous appearance of a cobra with dilated hood and spectacles, es- 
pecially if the spectator were (as probably would be the case) in a great 
fright. But for pot heads I can make no apology.— Yide. 



JORDANUS 


In this India are many and divers precious stones, among 
which are the best diamonds under heaven. These 
stones never can be dressed or shaped by any art, precious 
except what nature has given. But I omit the pro- storjs 
perties of these stones, not to be prolix. 

In this India are many other precious stones, endowed with 
excellent-virtues, which may be gathered by anybody ; nor is any- 
one hindered. 


In this India, on the death of a noble, or of any people of sub- 
stance, their bodies are burned : and eke their wives follow them 
alive to the fire, and, for the sake of worldly glory, 
and for the love of their husbands, and for eternal bati 
life, bum along with them, with as much joy as if 
they were going to be wedded ; and those who do this have the 
higher repute for virtue and perfection among the rest. Wonderful! 
I have sometimes seen, for one dead man who was burnt, five living 
women take their places on the fire with him, and die with their 
dead. 

There be also other pagan-folk in this India who worship fire ; 
they bury not their dead, neither do they bum them, but cast them 
into the midst of a certain roofless tower, and there 
expose them totally uncovered to the fowls of farms 
heaven. These believe in two First Principles, to 
wit, of Evil and of Good, of Darkness and of Light, matters which at 
present I do not purpose to discuss. 14 

There be also certain others which be called Dumbri , 15 who 
eat carrion and carcases ; who have absolutely no object of wor- 
ship ; and who have to do the drudgeries of other people, and carry 
loads. 

In this India there is green ginger, and it grows there in great 
abundance. 

There be also sugar-canes in quantities; carobs also, of such 
size and bigness that it is something stupendous. I could tell very 
wonderful things of this India ; but I am not able to detail them 
for lack of time. Cassia fistula is in some parts of this. India ex- 
tremely abundant. 


U. Is n<X this short and accurate statement the first account of the Parsis 
in India, and of thalr, strange disposal of die dead ? —Yule. 

15. Domra or Dom. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


Hie people of this India are very clean in their feeding ; true 
in speech, and eminent in justice, maintaining carefully the privi- 
leges of every man according to his degree, as they have come down 
from old* times. 

The heat there is perfectly horrible, and more intolerable to 
strangers than it is possible to say. 

In this India there exists not, nor is found, any metal but what 
comes from abroad, except gold, iron, and electrum. There is no 
pepper there, nor any kind of spice except ginger. 

In this India the greater part of the people worship idols, 
although a great share of the sovereignty is in the hands of the 
Turkish Saracens, who came forth from Multan, 
RSligions and conquered and usurped dominion to themselves 

not long since, and destroyed an infinity of idol 
temples, and likewise many churches, of which they made mosques 
for Mahomet, taking possession of -their endowments and property. 
"Rs grief to hear, and woe to see ! 

The Pagans of this India have prophecies of their own that we 
Latins are to subjugate the whole world. 

In this India there is a scattered people, one here, another 
there who call themselves Christians, bet are not so, nor have they 
baptism, nor do they know anything else about the faith. Nay, 
they believe St. Thomas the Great to be Christ ' 

There, in India I speak of, I baptised and brought into the 
faith about three hundred souls, of whom many were idolaters and 
Saracens. 

And let me tell you that among the idolaters a man may with 
safety expound the Word of the Lord ; nor is any one from among 
the idolaters hindered from being baptized throughout all the East, 
whether they be Tartars, or Indians, or what not. 

These idolaters sacrifice to their gods in this manner ; to wit, 
there is one man who is priest to the idol, and he wears a long shirt, 
down to the ground almost, aqd above this a white surplice in our 
fashion ; and he has a clerk with a shirt who goes after him, and 
carries a hassock, which he sets before the priest. And upon this 
the priest kneels, and so begins to advance from a distance, like one 
performing his stations ; and he carries upon his bent awns a tray of 
two cubits (long), all full of eatables of different sorts, with lighted 
tapers at top ; and thus praying he comes up to fhe altar where the 



JORDANUS 


as 


idol is, and deposits the offering before it after their maimer; 
and he pours a libation, and places part (of the offering) in the 
hands of the idol, and then divides the residue, and himself eats a 
part of it. , 

They make idols after the likeness of almost all living things 
of the idolaters; and they have besides their god according to his 
likeness. It is true that over all gods they place One God, the 
Almighty Creator of all those. They hold also that the world has 
existed now xxviii thousand years. 16 

The Indians, both of this India and of the other Indies, never 
kill an ox, but rather honour him like a father ; and some, even 
perhaps the majority, worship him. They will more readily spare 
him who has slain five men than him who has slain one ox, saying 
that it is no more lawful to kill an ox than to kill one’s father. This 
is because oxen do all their services, and moreover furnish them 
with milk and butter, and all sorts of good things. The great lords 
among the idolaters, every morning when they rise, and before 
they go anywhither, make the fattest cows come before them, and 
lay their hands upon them, and then rub their own faces, believing 
that after this they can have no ailment. 

Let this be enough about Lesser India ; for were I to set forth 
particulars of everything down to worms and the like, a year would 
not suffice for the description. 

But (I may say in conclusion) as for the women and men, the 
blacker they be, the more beautiful they be (held) . 

— Yule, Friar Jordanus : pp. 11-25. 

C. Concerning India the Greater 

Of India the Greater I say this; that it is like unto Lesser India 
as regards all the folk being black. The animals also are all simi- 
lar, neither more nor less (in number), except elephants, which 
they have (in the former) in very great plenty. These animals 
are marvellous ; for they exceed in size and bulk and strength, and 
also in understanding, all the animals of the world. This animal 
hath a big head ; small eyes, smaller than a horse’s ; ejrs like the 
wines of owls or bats ; a nose reaching quite to the ground, ex- 
tending right down from the top of hh head ; and two tusks stand- 


cal chronology that I know of. —Yule. 


of the Hindu mytbi- 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


tag out of remarkable magnitude (both in) bulk and length, which 
are (in fact) teeth rooted in the upper jaw. This 
ibaurd animal doth everything by word of command ; so 

that his driver hath nothing to do but say once, “ Do 
this,” and he doeth it; nor doth he seem in 
other respects a brute, but rather a rational creature. They have 
very big feet, with six hoofs like those of an ox, or rather of a 
camel. This animal carrieth easily upon him, with a certain struc- 
ture of timber, more than thirty men; and he is a most gentle 
beast, and trained for war, so that a single animal counteth by 
himself equal in war to 1,500 men and more ; for they bind to his 
tusks blades or maces of iron wherewith he smiteth. Most horri- 
ble are the powers of this beast, and specially in war. 

Two things there be which cannot be withstood by arms ; one 
is the bolt of heaven; the second is a stone from an artillery 
engine ; this is a third ! For there is nothing that either can or 
dare stand against the assault of an elephant in any manner. A 
marvellous thing ! He kneeleth, fieth, sitteth, goeth, and cometh, 
merely at his master’s word. In short, it is impossible to write in 
words the peculiarities of this animal. 

In this India there are pepper and ginger, cinnamon, brazil, 17 
and all other spices. 

Ginger is the root of a plant which hath leaves like a reed. 
Pepper is the fruit of a plant something like ivy, which climbs 
trees, and forms grape-like fruit like that of the wild vine. This 
fruit is at first green, then when it comes to maturity it becomes all 
black and corrugated as you see it. ’Tis thus that long pepper is 
produced, nor are you to believe that fire is placed under the 
pepper, nor that it is roasted, as some will lyingly maintain. 18 


17. Brazil. This is the sappan-wood, affording a red dye, from a species 
of caesalpina found in nearly all tropical Asia, from Malabar eastward. The 
name of brazil wood is now appropriated to that (derived from another species 
of caesalpina) which comes from Brazil, and which, according to Macculloch, 
gives twice as much dye from the same weight of wood. The history of the 
names here is worthy of note. First, brazil is the name of the Indian wood in 
commerce. Then the great country ft called Brazil, because a somewhat simi- 
lar wood is found abundantly there. And now the Indian wood is robbed of 
its name, which is appropriated to that found in a country of the New World, 
and is supposed popularly to be derived from the name of that country. I do 
not know the origin of the word brazil. Sappan is from the (Malay name 
tapang. —Yule. 

18. The Bishop's mention of “long pepper” shews confusion, probably in 
his amanuensis or copyist; for long pepper is file produce of a different 



JORDANUg 


tot 

Cinnamon is the bark of a large tree which has fruit and flowers 
like cloves. 

In this India be many islands, and more than 10,000 of them 
inhabited, as I have heard ; wherein are many world’s /wonders. 
For there is one called Silem, where are found the best precious 
stones in the whole world, and in the greatest quantity and num- 
ber, and of all kinds. 

Between that island and the main are taken pearls or mar- 
guerites, in such quantity as to be quite wonderful. So indeed 
that there are sometimes more than 8,000 boats or vessels, for three 
months continuously, (engaged in this fishery). It is astounding, 
and almost incredible, to those who have not seen it, how many are 
taken. 

Of birds I say this : that there be many different from those 
of Lesser India, and of different colours ; for there be some white 
all over as snow ; some red as scarlet of the grain ; 
some green as grass ; some parti-coloured ; in fahfots 
such quantity and delectability as cannot be 
uttered. Parrots also, or popinjays, after their kind, of every 
possible colour except black, for black ones are never found; 
but white all over, and green, and red, and also of mixed colours. 
The birds of this India seem really like creatures of Paradise. 

There is also told a marvellous thing of the islands aforesaid, 
to wit that there is one of them in which there is a water, and a 
certain tree in the middle of it Every metal which is washed with 
that water becomes gold ; every wound on which are placed the 
bruised leaves of that tree is incontinently healed. 

genus (Chained), which is not a vine, but a shrub, whose steins are annual. 
The chemical composition and properties are nearly the same as those of black 
pepper. Crawfurd draws attention to the fact that, by Pliny’s account, piper 
lonpum bore between three and four times the price of black pepper in the 
Homan market (Drury in voc. — Crawfurd’s Diet.). Though long pepper la 
now cultivated in Malabar, it was not so, or st least not exported, in the 
sixteenth century. Linschoten says expressly that the “ long pepper groweth 
onely in Bengala and Java." (p. 111). Its price at Rome was probably therefore 
a fancy one, due to its rarity. It is curious that Pliny supposed pepper to grow 
in pods, and that the long pepper was tfafe immature pod picked and prepared 
for the market. He corrects a popular error that ginger was the root of the 
pepper tree (Bk. xii). I bn Battuta, like our Bishop, contradicts what "same 
have said, that they boil it in order to dry it,” as without foundation. But 
their predecessor, R. Benjamin, says— “the pepper is originally white, but 
when they collect it, they put it in basins and pour hot water upon it; it is 
then exposed to the>heat of the sun,” etc.— Yule. 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


In this India, whilst I was at Columbum, were found two cats 
having wings like the wings of bats ; 19 and in Lesser India there be 
some rats as big as foxes, and venomous exceedingly. 20 

In this India are certain trees which have leaves so big that 
five or six men can very well stand under the shade of one of 
them. 21 

In the aforesaid island of Sylen is a very potent king, who 
hath precious stones of every kind under heaven, in such quantity 
as to be almost incredible. Among these he hath two rubies, of 
which he weareth one hung round his neck, and the other on the 
hand wherewith he wipeth his lips and his beard ; and (each) is of 
greater length than the breadth of four fingers, and when held in 
the hand it standeth out visibly on either side to the breadth of 
a finger. I do not believe that the universal world hath two stones 
like these, or of so great a price, of the same species. 22 

There is also another island where all the men and women go 
absolutely naked, and have in place of money comminuted gold 
like fine sand. They make of the cloth which they buy walls like 
curtains ; nor do they cover themselves or their shame at any time 
in the world. 

There is also another exceeding great island, which is called 
Jaua, 22 which is in circuit more than seven (thousand ?) miles as 
I have heard, and where are many world’s wonders. Among 
which, besides the finest aromatic spices, this is one, to wit, that 
there be found pygmy men, of the size of a boy of three or four 
years old, all shaggy like a he goat. They dwell in the woods, and 
few are found. 

In this island also are white mice, exceeding beautiful. There 
also are trees producing cloves, which, when they are in flower, 
emit an odour so pungent that they kill every man who cometh 
among them, unless he shut his mouth and nostrils. 2 * 


19. The flying squirrel found in Malabar, Ceylon and E. India. —Yule. 

20. The bandicoot. 

21. The Talipat or great fan-palm, the leaves of which have sometimes 
an area of 200 sq. ft. —Yule citing Tennent. 

22. Cf. similar statements of Marco Polo and Ibn Battuta. 

23. His Java vaguely represents the Archipelago generally, with some 

special reference to Sumatra.— Yule. * 

24. This seems to be a jumble of the myths about the spice-groves and 

the upas tree. —Yule. * 



JORDANUS 


There too are produced eubebs, and nutmegs, and mace, and 
all the other finest spices except pepper. 

In a certain part of that island they delight to eat white and 
fat men when they can get them. 25 • 

In the Greater India, and in the islands, all the people, be 
black, and go naked from the loins upwards, and from the knee 
downwards, and without shoes. 

But the kings have this distinction from others, that they wear 
upon their arms gold and silver rings, and on the neck a gold collar 
with a great abundance of gems. 

In this India never do (even) the legitimate sons of great 
kings, or princes, or barons, inherit the goods of their parents, but 
only the sons of their sisters ; for they say that they have no surety 
that those are their own sons, because wives and mistresses may 
conceive and generate by some one else ; but ’tis not so with the 
sister, for whatever man may be the father they are certain that the 
offspring is from the womb of their sister, and is consequently thus 
truly of their blood. 

In this Greater India many sacrifice themselves to idols in 
this way. When they are sick, or involved in any grave mis- 
chance, they vow themselves to the idol if they 
should happen to be delivered. Then, when they saur- 
have recovered, they fatten themselves for one or h«molatio* 
two years continually, eating and drinking fat 
things, etc. And when another festival comes round, they cover 
themselves with flowers and perfumes, and. crown themselves with 
white garlands, and go with singing and playing before the idol 
when it is carried through the land (like the image of the Virgin 
Mary here among us at the Rogation tides) ; and those men who 
are sacrificing themselves to the idol carry a sword with two 
handles, like those (knives) which are used in currying leather; 
and, after they have shown off a great deal, they put the sword to 
the back of the neck, cutting strongly with a vigorous exertion of 
both hands, and so cut off their own heads before the idol. 26 

In this Greater India, in the place where I was, the nights and 
days are almost equal, nor does one .exceed the other in length at 
any season by so much as a full hour. 


25. A reference to Batak cannibalism. 

26. Cf. Vcgel’a paper on The Head-offering to the Goddess In PalloM 
Sculpture— BSOS, vi. pp. 539-43, and the citations in Yule and Cordier, 
Marco Polo, iL p. 349, <L 8. 

T. W.-27 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


In this India the sun keeps to the south for six months con- 
tinuously, casting the shadows to the north ; and for the other six 
months keeps to the north, casting the shadow to the south.* 7 

In this India the Pole-star is seen very low, insomuch that I 
was at one place where it did not show above the earth or the sea 
more than two fingers’ breadth. 

There the nights, when the weather is fine and there is no 
moon, are, if I err not, four times as clear as in our part of the 
world. 

There also, if I err not, between evening and morning, often 
all the planets may be seen : there are seen their influences (as it 
were) eye to eye, so that ’tis a delightful thing there to look out at 
night ! 

From the place aforesaid is seen continually between the south 
and the east a star of great size and ruddy splendour, which is 
called Canopus, and which from these parts of the world is never 
visible. 

There are many marvellous things in the cycle of those 
(heavenly bodies) to delight a good astronomer. 

In this India, and in India the Less, men who dwell a long way 
from the sea, under the ground and in woody tracts, seem alto- 
gether infernal; 28 neither eating, drinking, nor clothing themselves 
like the others who dwell by the sea. 

There serpents too be numerous, and very big, of all colours 
in the world ; and it is a great marvel that they be seldom or never 
found to hurt anybody unless first attacked. 

There is there also a certain kind of wasps, which make it 
their business to kill very big spiders whenever they find them, and 
afterwards to bury them in the sand, in a deep hole which they 
make, and so to cover them up that there is no man in the world 
who can turn them up, or find the place. 

There is also a kind of very small ants, white as wool, which 
have such hard teeth that they gnaw through even timbers and the 


27. As Quilon is between 8° and 9° of north latitude this is somewhat 

overstated.— Yule. , 

28. By this the bishop perhaps means only ‘inferior’; but tradition often 
represents the aborigines under the name of Rikfwu •or demons.— Yule. 



JORDANUS 


joints of stones, and, in short, whatever dry thing they find on the 

face of the earth, and mutilate woollen and cotton 

clothes. And they build out of the finest sand a white acts 

crust like a wall, so that the sun cannot reach them, 

and so they remain covered. But if that crust happeiis to get 

broken, so that the sun reaches them, they incontinently die. 2 ® 

As regards insects, there be wonders, so many, great, and 
marvellous, that they cannot be told. 

There is also in this India a certain bird, big like a kite, having 
a white head and belly, bu.' all red above, which boldly snatches 
fish out of the hands of fishermen and other people, and indeed 
(these birds) go on just like dogs. 

There is also another big bird, not like a kite, which flies only 
at night, and utters a voice in the night season like the voice of a 
man wailing from the deep. 

What shall I say then? Even the Devil too there speaketh to 
men, many a time and oft, in the night season, as I have heard. 30 

Everything indeed is a marvel in this India! Verily it is quite 
another world! 

There is also a certain part of that India which is called 
Champa. There, in place of horses, mules and asses, and camels, 
they make use of elephants for all their work. 31 

’Tis a wonderful thing about these animals, that when they 
are in a wild state they challenge each other to war, and form 
troops (for the purpose); so that there will be sometimes a hun- 
dred against a hundred, more or less ; and they put the strongest 
and biggest and boldest at the head, and thus attack each other in 
turn, so that within a short time there will remain in one place 
XL or L killed and wounded, more or less. And 'tis a notable 
thing that the vanquished, it is said, never again appear in war 
or in the field. 

These animals, on account of their ivory, are worth as much 
dead as alive, nor are they ever taken when little, but only when 
big and full grown. 


29. The white ants have apparently a great objection to working under 
the light of day, but that they “incontinently die" is a mistake. —Yule. 

30. This is, according to Mitford, a reference to the night-hawk, rather 
than the brown owl as others have supposed.— Yule. 

3X. Information derived perhaps from his brother friar, Odoricus, who 
visited Champa.— Yule. 



And the mode of taking them is wonderful. Enclosures are 
made, very strong, and of four sides, wherein be many gateways, 
and raised gates, formed of very big and strong timbers. And 
there is one trained female elephant which is taken near the place 
' where the elephants come to feed. The one 

capture op which they desire to catch is pointed out to her, 

elephants and she is told to manage so as to bring him home. 

She goeth about him and about him, and so 
contriveth by stroking him and licking him, as to induce him to 
follow her, and to enter along with her the outer gate, which the 
keepers incontinently let fall. Then, when the wild elephant 
tumeth about, the female entereth the second gate, which is in- 
stantly shut like the first, and so the (wild) elephant remaineth 
caught between the two gates. Then cometh a man, clothed in 
black or red, with his face covered, who cruelly thrasheth him 
from above, and crieth out abusively against him as against a thief; 
and this goeth on for five or six days, without his getting anything 
to eat or drink. Then cometh another fellow, with his face bare, 
and clad in another colour, who feigneth to smite the first man, and 
to drive and thrust him away ; then he cometh to the elephant and 
talketh to him, and with a long spear he scratcheth him, and he 
kisseth him, and giveth him focd ; and this goeth on for ten or fifteen 
days, and so by degrees he ventureth down beside him, and bindeth 
him to another elephant. And thus, after about twenty days, he 
may he taken out to be taught and broken in. 82 

In this Greater India are twelve idolatrous kings, and more. 
For there is one very powerful king in the country where pepper 
grows, and his kingdom is called Molebar. There is also the king 
of Singuyli and the king of Columbum, the king of which is called 
Lingua, but his kingdom Mohebar There is also the king of 
Molephatam, whose kingdom is called Molepoor, where pearls are 
taken in infinite quantities There is also another king in the 
island of Sylen, where are found precious stones and good ele- 
phants. There be also three or four kings on the island of Java, 
where the good spices grow. There be also other kings, as the 
king of Telenc, who is very potent and great. The kingdom of 
Telenc abounds in com, rice, sugar, wax, honey and honey-comb, 
pulse, eggs, goats, buffalos, beeves, milk, butter, and in oils of divers 
kinds and in many excellent fruits, more than any other part of 


32. This Is evidently drawn from the life. Compare du account of 
elephant taming in Burma in the Misjion to Ava In 1855, pp. 103-5, and the 
authors there quoted.— Yule. 



JORDANUS 


the Indies. There is also the kingdom of Maratha which is very 
great; and there is the king of Batigala, but he is of the Saracens. 
There be also many kings in Chopa. 33 

What shall I say ? The greatness of this India is beyond descrip- 
tion. But let this much suffice concerning India the Greater and 
the Less. 

— The Wonders of the East (Mirabilia Deecre pta) by Friar 
Jordanus : Yule pp. 26-41, 


33. This* may be Champa. But It is difficult to explain satisfactorily 
all the loose statements in this paragraph. The number of kings, ‘twelve,’ 
is conventional. 



XXIX. ABULFEDA— b. 1 2 1273 A.D. d. 26TH OCT. 1331 A.I>.* 


• (A) South India 

A traveller states the following : Div is an island which faces 
Kanbait (Cambay) from the southern side. Its inhabitants prac- 
tise piracy and live in reed huts. Their drink is rain water. 

A traveller says that the country which extends from Sinda- 
pur to Hannaur (Honavar) towards the east leads to Malabar. 
Hannaur is a pretty little town with numerous orchards. All 
Malabar is covered with forest and with trees entangling one 
another, thanks to the abundance of water. From Hannaur one 
goes to Basarour (Barcelore), a small place; beyond it, one comes 
to Manjarur (Mangalore), one of the largest towns of Malabar. 
Its king is an infidel. Manjarur is to the East of the localities 
already mentioned. After a three days’ journey from Manjarur, 
one comes across a big mountain which projects into the sea and is 
9een by sailors from a distance ; it is called Ra’s Haili (promon- 
tory of Illy). At the extremity of Malabar we have Tandiyur, a 
small place to the east of Ra’s Haili, and there we find many 
gardens. The other localities of Malabar are Schaliyat (Jaliat) 
and Schinkili. One of these places is inhabited by Jews, but the 
narrator has omitted to note which. 3 Kaulam is the last town of 
Malabar, the pepper country. 

The first locality in the Coromandel from the side of Malabar 
is Ra’s Komhori (Cape Comorin), mountain and town. Another 
town of Coromandel, Manifattan, is situated on the coast. The 
capital of Coromandel is Biyyardawal. It is the residence of the 
Sultan of Coromandel. Horses are brought to him from other 
countries. 

—Geogr aphie D’Aboulfeda, n ii. ed. M. Stanislas Guyard, pp. 115-6. 

(B) Coromandel ( Ma’bar ) 

According to Ibn Sa’id, 142° Long, and 17° 25 Lat. Third 
climate. Extremity of India. It has been said above that Ma’bar 
is the name of a region; it ii hence possible that the situation 
indicated here refers to the capital mentioned above, Biyyardfiwal. 


1. Reinaud, I, p. ii. •> 

2. Reinaud, I, p. xxvii. 

3. It is Schinkiii-rf. Dimaahki tr. Hehren p. 2S4A-S. Guyard. 



ABULFEDA US 

The Coromandel, says Ibn Sa'id, is celebrated by the reports 
of travellers. It is from there that they export a muslin which has 
passed into proverb for its fineness. To the north lie the moun- 
tains adjacent to the country of Balhara, who is one of the kings 
of India ; to the west the river of Suliyan falls in the sea. The 
Coromandel is three or four days’ journey to the East of Caoulem. 
I should add that this ought to be with an inclination towards the 
south. 

— Geographie D’Aboulfeda — M. Stanislas Guyard, II, ii (1883) 

p. 121. 

(C) 12°. Caoulem (Kaulam) 

According to Ibn Sa’id, 132° of longitude and 12° latitude, ac- 
cording to the Atwal, 110° longitude 13 5 30' latitude. First climate. 
At the extremity of the Pepper country (Malabar) . 

Caoulem, says Ibn Sa’id, is the last town in the Pepper country 
towards the east. One sets sail from this town in order to go to 
Aden. A traveller has told me that Caoulem is a town situated on 
a gulf at the very end of the Pepper country and that it includes a 
quarter for the Mussulmans and a Mosque. The town is built on 
a Sandy Plain. The orchards there are always numerous. One 
notices the boqqam tree (brazil) which looks like a pomegranate 
and whose leaf is like that of a Jujube tree. 

— Geographie D’Aboulfeda : M. Stanislas Guyard II ii p. 121. 



XXX. 1333-45 A.D. IBN BATTCTA 


<A) On the rebellion of Baha-ud-din Guehtdsp 

On the rebellion of the son of the Sultan’s paternal aunt and 
what relates to it : 

The Sultfin Tughlaq had a nephew (son of his sister) called 
Baha-ud-din Gushtasp (Hystaspe), who was appointed gover- 
nor of a province. When his uncle died, he refused to take the 
oath of allegiance to his son ; he was a brave soldier, a hero. The 
king sent against him an army commanded by powerful amirs 
like Malik Majir and the Vazir KHwajah Jahan who was comman- 
der-in-chief. The cavalry on both sides were engaged, and the 
combat was fierce, both the armies exhibiting great courage. In 
the end the Sultan’s troops prevailed, and Baha-ud-din fled to one 
of the Hindu kings named the Rai Kanbilah ( rata or raja). The 
term ‘ rai ’ among these people, as among Christians, 1 means ‘ king.’ 
As for Kanbilah, it is the name of the country where the 1 raja ’ 
lived. This prince possessed territories situated on inaccessible 
mountains, and he was one of the principal Sultans of the infidels. 

When Baha-ud-din fled to this king, he was pursued by the sol- 
diers of the monarch of India who beset these countries. The infidel 
prince, perceiving the danger to which he was exposed as his 
stores of grain became exhausted and fearing that 
snci or they might capture him by force, told Baha-ud-din : 

kamfila “You see in what condition we are ; I have 

decided to perish with my family and all those 
who wish to follow me. Go to the Sultan so and so (he mentioned 
the name of a Hindu prince) and stay with him, he will protect 
you.” He sent some one with him to conduct him there ; then he 
ordered a great fire to be prepared, and this was done. Then he 
burnt his effects, and said to his wives and daughters : “ I intend 
to die, and those of you who wish to do as I do, may do so.” Then 
each one of his wives bathed, anointed herself with sandal named 
muqasari, kissed the earth before the rai of Kanbilah and cast her- 
self on the pyre ; they all perished. The wives of the amirs, vazlrs, 
and nobles "of his state followed them; other women besides did 
likewise. 

The king bathed in his turn, anointed himself with sandal and 
took his arms, but did not put on the cuirass. Those of his men 

1. The author refers no doubt to Spaniardi and the!/ term rey. — B. h D. 



IBN BATTCTA 


m 

who wished to die with him followed his example in every respect. 
They went out to fight with the troops of the Sultan and fought 
till all of them met their death. The town was 
invaded, and its inhabitants were taken captive, fall or 
and eleven sons of the rai of Kanbilah thus cap- kamAla 
tured were sent to the Sultan, and they were 
made Mussulmans. The sovereign made them amirs and honoured 
them greatly as much for their illustrious birth as in consideration 
of the conduct of their father. I saw in the Sultan’s palace, among 
these brothers, Nasr, Bakhtiyar and Almuhardar, ‘the Guardian 
of the Seal.’ He keeps the ring with which is sealed the water 
(doubtless Ganges water) which the monarch is to drink ; his sur- 
name is Abu Muslim, and we were comrades and friends. 

After the death of the rai of Kanbilah, the troops of the Sultan 
marched to the infidel country where Baha-ud-din had taken re- 
fuge, and surrounded it. This prince said : “ I can not do like rai 
Kanbilah ” . He caught hold of Baha-ud-din and 
delivered him to the army of the Emperor of India . capture or 
They fettered his legs, tied his hands to his neck and gvshtasp 
conducted him thus before the Sultan. The 
Sultan ordered him to be taken before his wives and female rela- 
tions ; they insulted him and spat upon him. Then he ordered 
him to be flayed alive : after he had been skinned, his flesh was 
cooked with rice and some of it was sent to his wife and children, 
They put the remnants on a large plate and gave them to the 
elephants which declined to eat them. The Sultan ordered the 
skin to be stuffed with straw, and paraded in all the provinces to- 
gether with the stuffed figure of Bahadur Burah. 

—Voyages D’Ibn Batoutah, ed. Defr&nery and Sanguinetti, 
iii, pp. 318-21, (cf. Elliot and Dowson, iii 614-6) . 

(B) Rebellion in Ma’bar 

The rebellion of Sharif Jalal-ud-din in the province of Ma’bar, 
and the death of the Vazlr’s nephew (sister’s son) who joined this 
revolt : 

The Sultan had appointed the Sharif Jalal-ud-din Ahasan Shah 
governor of the country of Ma’bar ‘(the passage, the South-east of 
the peninsula), which is at a distance of six months’ march from 
Delhi. Jalal-ud-din rebelled, usurped the power, killed the lieute- 
nants and agents of the sovereign, and struck coins of gold and 
silver in his own name. On one Side of the dinars he had the 
following words Engraved : ‘ the offspring of Ta-hfi and Ya-sro 
F. N. —28 



m FOREION NOTICES 

(these letters which constitute the titles of the two chapters of the 
Quran, xx and xxxvi, are among the epithets applied usually to 
Muhammad), the father of fakirs and indigents, the glory of the 
world and of religion and on the other face : ‘He who puts his 
trust in the help of the Merciful ; Ahasan Shah Sultan.’ 

Hearing of this revolt, the emperor set out to suppress it. He 
camped in a place called Kushak-i-Zar meaning ‘ castle of gold and 
he spent eight days there attending to the needs of the people. It 
was then that they brought to him the nephew of the vazir KHwfijah 
JahSn, as also three or four amirs — all with fetters on their feet and 
their hands tied to their necks. The Sultan had sent this vazir 
with the advance guard ; and he had arrived at the town of ZhSr 
(Dhar) ; which was at a distance of twenty-four days’ march from 
Delhi ; and where he stopped some time. The son of his sister was 
an intrepid fellow, a brave warrior ; he plotted with three other 
chiefs, who were caught at the same time as himself, to kill his 
uncle and flee to the rebel Sharif in the province of Ma’bar, carry- 
ing with them all the treasures and provisions. They had decided 
to attack the vazir at the moment when he came out to go for the 
Friday prayer; but one person who was in the know of their 
plans denounced them. He was called Malik Nusrat, the 
chamberlain ; and he told the vazir that the proof of their project 
would be found in their wearing cuirasses under their robes. The 
vazir had them produced before him and found them in the condi- 
tion stated ; he sent them to the Sultan. 

I was with the emperor, when these conspirators arrived ; one 
of them was tall and bearded, but he trembled and read the chap- 
ter Yd- sin of the Quran (xxxvi, the prayer of the dying). 
In accordance with the Sultan’s order, the amirs in question were 
thrown to the elephants which are trained to kill men, and the son 
of the vazir’s sister was sent to his uncle that he might kill him ; 
and he did so. 

— Op. cit. ui. pp. 328-30. (Elliot and Dowson, iii, p. 618). 

Pestilence in the Sultan's army : 

The emperor reached the country of Tiling on his way to the 
province of Ma’bar to put doWn the rebel Sharif. He encamped 
in the town of Badrakot, capital of Tiling, three months’ march 
from Ma’bar. Then a pestilence broke out in his army and a great 
part of it perished thereby. The slaves and the mameluks died as 
well as the chief amirs like Malik Daulat Shah, whom the Sultan 
always called ‘Q! uncle,’ and amir ‘Abd-ul-lah alharavy. 



DSN BATrtTA 


When the emperor saw the calamity that had befallen the 
troops, he returned to Daulatabad. The provinces rose, anarchy 
reigned in the country. 

— Op. cit. iii, pp. 333-4. (Elliot and Dowson iii, p. 618-9.) 

(BB) Rebellion in Tiling. 

Of the rebellion of the Sultan’* lieutenant in 
the country of Tiling : 

When the Sultan returned from Tiling, he left behind Tfij- 
ul-Mulk Nu$rat KHan, an old courtier, as his lieutenant in this 
country. Hearing the (false) news of the death of the sovereign, 
he had his obsequies celebrated, usurped the power and received 
oaths of allegiance from the people in his capital, Badrakot.” 
When the Sultan came to know of these things, he sent his 
preceptor, Qutlu KHan. at the head of a numerous army. 
A terrible combat ensued in which whole multitudes 
perished; finally Qutlu KHan invested his adversary in the 
capital ; Badrakot was fortified ; but the siege did much 
damage to its inhabitants, and Qutlu KHan began to open a breach. 
Then Nusrat KHan surrendered himself with a safe conduct into the 
hands of the enemy commandant who assured him of his life and 
sent him to the Sultan. He also pardoned the citizens and the troops. 

— Op. cit. iii pp. 340-41. 

(C) i. Summary of Ibn Battuta’s travel in S. India : Yule. 

From KANAUJ Ibn Battuta and his companions turned south- 
wards to the fortress of gwalior, which Ibn Battuta had 
visited previously, and had then taken occasion to describe with 
fair accuracy. At pahwan, a place which they passed through 
on leaving Gwalior, and which was much harassed by lions (pro- 
bably tigers rather), the traveller heard that certain malignant 
Jogis were in the habit of assuming the form of those animals by 
night. This gives him an opportunity of speaking of others of the 
Jogi class who used to allow themselves to be buried for months, 
or even for a twelvemonth together, and afterwards revived. At 
Mangalore he afterwards made acquaintance with a Mussulman 
who had acquired this art from the Jogis. The route continued 
through Bundelkhand and Malwa to the city of daulatabad, with 


la. Telugu— Bedadakot, Bidar. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


its celebrated fortress of dwaigir (Deogiri) , and thence down the 
Valley of the Tapti to kinbaiat (Cambay) . 

From Cambay they went to Kawe, a place on a tidal gulf be- 
longing Jo the Pagan Raja Jalansi, and thence to kandahar, a 
considerable city on another estuary, and belonging to the same 
prince, who professed loyalty to Delhi, and treated them hospita- 
bly. Here they took ship, three vessels being provided for them. 
After two days they stopped to water at the Isle of bairam, four 
miles from the main. This island had been formerly peopled, but 
it remained abandoned by the natives since its capture by the 
Mahomedans, though one of the king’s officers had made an 
attempt to resettle it, putting in a small garrison and mounting 
mangonels for its defence. Next day they were at kukah, a 
great city with extensive bazaars, anchoring four miles from the 
shore on account of the vast recession of the tide. This city be- 
longed to another pagan king, Dunkul, not too loyal to the Sultan. 
Three days’ sail from this brought the party abreast of the Island 
of sindabur, but they passed on and anchored under a smaller 
island near the mainland, in which there was a temple, a grove, 
and a piece of water Landing here, the traveller had a curious 
adventure with a Jogi, whom he found by the wall of the temple. 
Next day they came to HUNAWUR (or Onore), a city governed 
by a Mahomedan prince with great power at sea ; apparently a 
pirate, like his successors in later times, but an enlightened ruler, 
for Ibn Battuta found in his city twenty-three schools for boys and 
thirteen for girls, the latter a thing which he had seen nowhere 
else in his travels. 

After visiting several of the northern ports of Malabar, then 
very numerous and flourishing, they arrived at calicut, which 
the traveller describes as one of the finest ports in the world, fre- 
quented for trade by the people of China, the Archipelago, Ceylon, 
the Maldives, Yemen, and the Persian Gulf. Here they were 
honourably received by the king, who bore the title of samabi 
(the Zamorin of the Portuguese) , and made their landing in great 
state. But all this was to be followed by speedy grief, as the tra- 
veller himself observes. 

At Calicut they abode fox' three months, awaiting the season 
for the voyage to China, viz., the spring. All the communication 
with that country, according to Ibn Battuta (the fact itself is per- 
haps questionable), was conducted in Chinese vessel^, of which 
there were three classes : the biggest called junk, the middle- 
sized zao, and the third kaxam. The greater ships had from 



IBN BATTCTA: YULE 


three to twelve sails, made of strips of bamboo woven like mats. 
Each of them had a crew of 1000 men, viz., 600 Bailors and 400 
soldiers, and had three tenders attached, which were called res- 
pectively the halt, the third, and the quarter, names appa- 
rently indicating their proportionate size. The vessels ’for this 
trade were built nowhere except at zaitun and Sinkalan, the 
city also called sin-ul-sin, and were all made with triple sides, 
fastened with enormous spikes, three cubits in length. Each 
ship had four decks, and numerous private and public cabins for 
the merchant passengers, with closets and all sorts of conveniences. 
The sailors frequently had pot-herbs, ginger, etc., growing on 
board in wooden tubs. The commander of the ship was a very 
great personage, and, when he landed, the soldiers belonging to 
his ship marched before him with sword and spear and martial 
music. 

The oars or sweeps used on these great junks were more like 
masts than oars, and each was pulled by from ten to thirty men. 
They stood to their work in two ranks, facing each other, pulling 
by means of a strong cable fastened to the oar (which itself was, 
I suppose, too great for their grasp) , and singing out to the stroke, 
La, La! La, La! 

The only ports of Malabar frequented for trade by the China 
vessels were Kaulam, Calicut, and Hili ; but those which intended 
to pass the Monsoon in India, used to go into the harbour of 
fandaraina for that purpose. Thirteen of these ships, of dif- 
ferent sizes, were lying at Calicut when Ibn Battuta’s party were 
there. 

The Zamorin prepared accommodation on board one of the 
junks for the party from Delhi ; but Ibn Battuta, having ladies with 
him, went to the agent for the vessel, a Mahomedan called Sulei- 
man ul-Safadi-ul-Shami, to obtain a private cabin for them, having, 
it would seem, in his usual happy-go-lucky way, deferred this to 
the last moment. The agent told him that the cabins were all 
taken up by the Chinese merchants, who had (apparently) “ return 
tickets.” There was one, indeed, belonging to his own son-in-law, 
which Ibn Battuta could have, but it was not fitted up ; however 
if he took that now, probably he wbuld be able to maker some bet- 
ter arrangement on the voyage ; (it would seem from this that 
shipping agency in those days was a good d<*al like what it some- 
times is npw) . So one Thursday afternoon our traveller’s bag- 
gage and slaves, male and female, were put on board, whilst he 
stayed ashore to attend the Friday service before embarking. His 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


with the presents for China, were already on board. 
But the next morning early, the Eunuch H il a l, Ibn BattGta’s 
servant, came to complain that the cabin assigned to them was a 
wretched little hole, and would never do. Appeal was made to 
the captain, but he said it could not be helped; if, however, they 
liked to go in a kakam which was there, they might pick and 
choose. Our traveller consented, and had his goods and his wo- 
men-kind transferred to the kakam before public prayer time. In 
the afternoon the sea rose (it always did in the afternoon, he 
observes), and it was impossible to embark. By this time the 
China ships were all gone except that with the presents, another 
junk which was going to slop over the monsoon at Fandaraina, 
and the kakam, on which all the moor’s property was embarked. 
When he got up on Saturday morning the junk with his colleagues, 
and the kakam, had weighed, and got outside the harbour. The 
junk bound for Fandaraina was wrecked inside. There was a 
young girl on board, much beloved by her master, a certain mer- 
chant. He offered ten pieces of gold to any one who would save 
her. One of the sailors from Hormuz did save her, at the immi- 
nent risk of his life, and then refused the reward. “I did it for 
the love of God,” said this good man. The junk with the presents 
also was wrecked on the reefs outside, and all on board perished. 
Many bodies were cast up by the waves ; among others those of 
the Envoy Zahir-uddin, with the skull fractured, and of Malik 
Sunbul the eunuch, with a nail through his temples. Among the 
rest of the people who flocked to the shore to see what was going 
on, there came down the Zamorin himself, with nothing on but a 
scrap of a turban and a white cotton Dhoti, attended by a boy 
with an umbrella. And, to crown all, when the kakam’s people 
saw what had befallen their consort, they made all sail to seaward, 
carrying off with them our traveller’s slaves, his girls and gear, and 
leaving him there on the beach of Calicut gazing after them, with 
nought remaining to him but his prayer-carpet, ten pieces of gold, 
and an emancipated slave, which last absconded forthwith! 

He was told that the kakam must touch at Kaulam, so he de- 
termined to go thither. It was a ten days’ journey, whether by 
land or water, so he set off by the lagoons with a Mussulman whom 
he had hired to attend on him, 'but who got continually drunk, and 
only added to the depression of the traveller’s spirits. On the 
tenth day he reached Kaulam, the Columbum of our friars, which 
he describes as one of the finest cities of Malabar, with splendid 
bazaars, and wealthy merchants, there termed Suli, some of 
were Mahomedans. There was also a Mahomedan Kazi 


whom 



BATTCTA : TULE 


and Shabandar (Master Attendant), etc. Kaulam was the first 
port at which the China ships touched on reaching India, and 
most of the Chinese merchants frequented it. The king was an 
Infidel, called tirawaiu, a man of awful justice, of which a 
startling instance is cited by Ibn Battuta. One day when the 
king was riding with his son-in-law, the latter picked up a mango, 
which had fallen over a garden wall. The king’s eye was upon 
him; he was immediately ordered to be ripped open and divided 
asunder, the parts being exposed on each side of the way, and a 
half of the fatal mango beside each! 

The unfortunate ambassador could hear nothing of his 
kakam, but he fell in with the Chinese envoys who had been 
wrecked in another junk. They were refitted by their country- 
men at Kaulam, and got off to China, where Ibn Battuta after- 
wards encountered them. 

He had sore misgivings about returning to tell his tale at 
Delhi, feeling strong suspicion that Sultan Mahomed would be 
only too glad to have such a crow to pluck with him. So he 
decided on going to his friend the Sultan Jamal-ud-din at Huna- 
wur, and to stop with him till he could hear some news of the 
missing kakam. The prince received him, but evidently with no 
hearty welcome. For the traveller tells that he had no servant 
allowed him, and spent nearly all his time in the mosque — always 
a sign that things were going badly with Ibn Battuta — where he 
read the whole Koran through daily, and by and by twice a day. 
So he passed his time for three months. 

The King of Hunawur was projecting an expedition against 
the Island of Sindabur. Ibn Battuta thought of joining it, and on 
taking the sortes koranicae he turned up xxii, 41. “Surely 
God will succour those who succour Him which so pleased the 
king that he determined to accompany the expedition also. Some 
three months after the capture of Sindabur the restless man start- 
ed again on his travels, going down the coast to Calicut. Here 
he fell in with two of his missing slaves, who told him that his 
favourite girl was dead ; that the King of Java (probably Sumatra) 
had appropriated the other women, and that the rest of the party 
were dispersed, some in Java, some, in China, some in Bengal. So 
there was an end of the kakam. 

He went back to Hunawur and Sindabur, where the Mussul- 
man forces were speedily beleaguered by the Hindu prince whom 
they had expelled. Things beginning to look bad, Ibn Battuta, after 
some two months’* stay, made his escape and got back to Calicut. 



224 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


Here he took it into his head to visit the dhtbat-ul-mahal or 
Maidive (Male diva) Islands, of which he had heard wonderful 
stories. 

One ,of the marvels of these islands was that they were under 
a female sovereign, Kadija, daughter of the late Sultan Jalal-ud-din 
Omar, who had been set up as queen on the deposition of her 
brother for misconduct. Her husband, the preacher Jamal-ud-din, 
actually governed, but all orders were issued in the name of the 
princess, and she was prayed for by name in the Friday Service. 

Ibn Battuta was welcomed to the islands, and was appointed 
Kazi, marrying the daughter of one of the Wazirs and three wives 
besides. The lax devotion of the people and the primitive costume 
of the women affected his pious heart ; he tried hard but in vain to 
reform the latter, and to introduce the system that he had witness- 
ed at Urghanj, of driving folk to mosque on Friday with the con- 
stable’s staff. 

Before long he was deep in discontent, quarrels and intrigues, 
and in August 1344 he left the Maldives for Ceylon. 

As he approached the island he speaks of seeing the Mountain 
of Serendib (compare Marignolli’s mons seyllani) rising high 
in air “like a column of smoke.” He landed at Batthalah (pat- 
lam). where he found a Pagan chief reigning, a piratical poten- 
tate called Airi Shakarwati, who treated him civilly and facilitated 
his making the journey to Adam’s Peak, whilst his skipper oblig- 
ingly promised to wait for him. 

In his journey he passes manar manuali, and the port of 
SALAWAT, and then crosses extensive plains abounding in ele- 
phants. These however did no harm to pilgrims and foreigners, 
owing to the benignant influence exercised over them by the Shaikh 
Abu Abdallah, who first opened the road to the Holy Footmark. 
He then reached kunakar as he calls it, the residence of the 
lawful King of Ceylon, who was entitled Kunar, and possessed a 
white elephant. Close to this city was the pool called the Pool of 
Precious Stones, out of which some of the most valuable gems 
were extracted. His descriptiijn of the ascent to the summit is 
vivid and minute, and probably most of the sites which he .speaks 
of could be identified by the aid of those who act as guides to 
Mahomedan pilgrims, if such there still be. He descends on the 
opposite side (towards Ratnapura), and proceeds to ivisit din- 
war, a large place on the sea, inhabited by merchants (Devi- 
neuera or Dondera), where a vast idol temple then existed, 



IBN BATTUTA : YULE 


225 


galls (which he calls kali), and columbo (kalanbu), 
so returning by the coast to Patlam. Columbo is described as 
. even then one of the finest 1 cities of the island. It was the abode 
of the “Wazir and Admiral Jalasti,” who kept about him a body 
of 500 Abyssinians. This personage is not impossibly the same 
with the Khwaja Jahan, who so politely robbed John Marignolli. 
It is not said whose Wazir and Admiral he was. 

At Patlam he took ship again for Maabar, but as he approach- 
ed his destination he again came to grief, the ship grounding some 
six or eight miles from the shore. The crew abandoned the wreck, 
but our hero stuck by it, and was saved by some pagan natives. 

On reaching the land, he reported his arrival to the de facto 
ruler of the country. This was the Sultan Ghaisuddin of Damghan, 
recently invested with the government of Maabar, a principality 
originally set up by his father-in-law, the Sheriff Jalal-uddin. The 
latter had been appointed by Mahomed Tughlak to the military 
command of the province, but about 1338-9 had declared himself 
independent, striking coin in his own name, and proclaiming him- 
self under the title of Ahhsan Shah Sultan. Ibn Battuta, during 
his stay at Delhi, had married one of the Sheriff’s daughters, 
named Hhumasab. “ She was a pious woman,” says her husband, 

“ who used to spend the night in watching and prayer. She could 
read, but had not learned to write. She bore me a daughter, but 
what is becoming of either the one or the other is more than I can 
tell! ” Thus Ibn Battuta was brother-in-law to the reigning Sultan, 
who, on receiving the traveller’s message, sent for him to his camp, 
two days’ journey distant. This brother-in-law was a ruffian, whose 
cruel massacres of women and children excited the traveller’s 
disgust and tacit remonstrance. However, he busied himself in 
engaging the Sultan in a scheme for the invasion of the Maldives, 
but before it came to anything the chief died of a pestilence. His 
nephew and successor, Sultan Nasir-uddin, was ready to take up 
the project, but Ibn Battuta got a fever at the capital, muttra 
(Madura), and hurried off to fatan, a large and fine city on 
the sea, with an admirable harbour, where he found ships sailing 
for Yemen, and took his passage in one of them as far as Kaulam. 
Here he stayed for three months, and then went off for the fourth 
time to visit his friend the Sultan of Hunawur. On his way, 
however, off a small island between Fakanur and Hunawur 
(probably the Pigeon Island of modem maps), the vessel was 
attacked by pirates of the wrong kind, and the unlucky adven- 
turer was depbsited on the beach stript of everything but his 
F. N. — 29 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


drawers! On this occasion, as he mentions elsewhere incidentally, 
he lost a number of transcripts of epitaphs of celebrated persons 
which he had made at Bokhara, along with other matters, not im- 
probably including the notes of his earlier travels. Returning to 
Calicut He was clothed by the charity of the Faithful. Here also 
he heard news of the Maldives; the Preacher Jamal-uddin was dead, 
and the Queen had married another of the Wazirs ; moreover one 
of the wives whom he had abandoned had borne him a son. He 
had some hesitation about returning to the Islands, as he well 
might, considering what he had been plotting against them, but en- 
couraged by a new cast of the Sortes he went and was civilly 
received. His expectations, however, or his caprices, were dis- 
appointed, for he seems to have stayed but five days, and then 
went on to Bengal. 

— Yule: ‘ Cathay and the Way Thither Vail. iv. Introductory 
Notice pp. 20- 36. 

(C) ii.~Ibn Battuta : Travels in S. India 
From Ujjain we went to Daulatabad, a large and illustrious 
city which rivals the capital, Delhi, in importance and in the 
vastness of its lay-out. It is divided into three 
daulatabad parts. One is Daulatabad, properly so called, 
reserved for the residence of the Sultan and his 
troops; the second part is called Katkah (Skt. Kataka, camp), and 
the third is the citadel, unequalled for its strength, and called Davai- 
quir (Devagir). 

At Daulatabad resides the great KHan, Qutlu KHan, preceptor 
to the Sultan. He is the commandant of the city, and represents the 
Sultan there as well as in the lands of Saghar, Tiling and their 
dependencies. The territory of these provinces extends for three 
months’ march, and is well populated. It is entirely under the 
authority of Qutlu KHan and his lieutenants. The fortress of 
Devagir above mentioned is a rock situated in the midst of a plain; 
the rock has been scarped and a castle built on its summit; it is 
reached by a leather ladder which is raised at nighty/ 

There live with their children the Mufnd, that is to say the 
Zimamy (soldiers entered in the army lists) . In its dungeons are 
imprisoned persons convicted of serious crimes, 
otnrssom In these dungeons there are huge rats, bigger than 

cats ; in truth cats run away from them as they are 
unable to resist their attacks. Hence they can be caught only by 
recourse to ruses. I saw these rats at Devagir and marvelled at 
them. 



IBN BATTOTA 


Hie Malik KHaftab, the Afghan, related to me that he was at 
one time imprisoned in a dungeon in this fortress, called the dun- 
geon of rats. ‘ These animals,’ he said, ‘ gathered near me by night to 
devour me. I defended myself against them, not without experi- 
encing fatigue. I then saw some one in a dream who said to me : 
“ Read the chapter on true piety (ch. 112 of the Quran) a hundred 
thousand times, and God will deliver you.” I recited this chapter 
(continued KHaftab) , and when I had completed the required 
number of times, I was released. The cause of my release was 
this : Malik Mai was imprisoned in a chamber near mine ; he fell 
ill, the rats ate his fingers and his eyes, and he died. When the 
Sultan heard of this, he said : “ Release KHaftab lest he should 
come to the same end.” ’ 

It was to the fortress of Devagir that Na$ir-ud-din, son of the 
same Malik Mai, and Qa?i Jalal-ud-din fled for refuge, when they 
were defeated by the Sultan. 

The inhabitants of the territory of Daulatabad belong to the 
tribe of Mahrathas, to whose women God has granted a peculiar 
beauty, especially in their noses and eyebrows. 

They possess talents not found in other women, people 
in the art of pleasing men, and they know 
everything connected with the union of the sexes. The 
idolaters of Daulatabad are devoted to commerce, and their princi- 
pal trade consists in pearls ; their wealth is enormous, and they 
are called Saha (Skt. Sarthavaha) ; the singular of the word is 
— and they resemble the Akdrims of Egypt. 

There are in Daulatabad vines and pomegranates which yield 
two harvests in a year. By its population and the extent of its 
territory, and the number of very large and important cities in it, 
this province is very important for the revenues derived from it. 
I was told that a certain Hindu took a lease of 
the contributions from the province for seventeen Ecoxoinc 
crores. The province extends, as stated above, common 
for a distance of three months' march. A crore 
is a hundred lakhs, and a lakh is a hundred thousand dinars. But 
the Hindu did not keep his engagements ; a balance remained to 
his charge ; his treasures were seized, and he was himself flayed. 

In Daulatabad there is a bazaar for singers and singing girls. 
This bazaeuj called farh ab&d (abode of rejoicing) is among the 
largest and most beautiful in existence. It contains many shops, 
each with a door leading to the house of its proprietor, which has 



FOREIGN NOTICES 

another gate independent of this. The shop is 
beautified with carpets, and in the midst of it, 
there is a sort of a large swing on which the singing 
girl sits or reclines She is adorned with all 
kinds of sewels, and her attendants rock her swing In the centre 
of the bazaar, there is a large pavilion, furnished with carpets, and 
gilded, where the chief musician goes and sits on all Thursdays, 
after the prayer at four m the evening, with his servants and 
slaves in front of him The singing girls come in groups, and sing 
and dance in his presence till sunset when he withdraws 

In this bazaar there are mosques for prayer, where the priests 
recite the prayer called tarawih m the month of Ramzan One of 
the Hindu rulers, whenever he passed through this bazaar, used to 
alight in this pavilion, and the singing girls used to sing In his 
presence One of the Muhammadan Sultans used to do likewise 
We proceeded from this place to the small town of Nazarbar 
inhabited by Mahrathas well-skilled m the mechanical arts Their 
physicians astrologers and nobles are called Brahmins and 
Ksatiiyas Their food consists of rice, vegetables 
nazarbar and oil of sesame for they dislike giving pam to 

animals or slaughtering them, they wash them- 
selves before eating as we do (at home) to get rid of a 
pollution They do not many among their relatives at least upto 
the seventh remove Neither do they drink wine, for this in their 
eyes is the greatest of vices it is so in all India even among the 
Mussulmans any one of them (Muslims) that drinks wine is 
punished with eighty stripes and imprisoned for three months in a 
dungeon which is opened only at meal-tunes 

From Nazarbar we went to Saghar a large city on a considera- 
ble river of the same name 2 On the banks of this river, we see 
water wheels, 3 and orchards where grow mangoes, 
saghar bananas and sugar-cane The inhabitants of the 

city are peaceable, religious and upright men and 
all their acts are worthy of approbation There are 
orchards, with hermitages meant for travellers Some man 
founds an hermitage bequeaths an orchard to it, and vests the 
supervision of it in his children , when the succession fails, the 
supervision passes to the magistrates The population of Saghar 
is very large, strangeis go there for the company of the people, 
and because the town is exempt from taxes and dues 



2 The Tapti Gibb 

3 A kind of water-lift 



IBN BATTUTA 


From Saghar we travelled to Kinbayah (Cambay), situated 
on an arm of the sea resembling a river. It is navigable for ships 
and the ebb and flow of the tide are felt in it. I 
saw ships lying in the mud during the ebb floating cambay 
on water at the flow . Kinbayah is among the most * 
beautiful cities by the elegance of its construction and the 
size of its mosques . This is due to the majority of its 
inhabitants being foreign merchants who are always building fine 
houses and superb temples, and vie with one another in doing so. 

Among the large mansions of the place was that of Sharif-ul- 
Samarry with whom I had the adventure of the pastry cakes. 4 I have 
never seen more solid woodwork than I saw in his house; its door 
was like the gate of a town, and quite close to a large mosque also 
bearing the name Samarry, Then there is the re- 
sidence of the Malik-ul-Tujar 5 6 ul-Kazaruni which mansions 
has also a mosque quite close, and the 
house of the trader Shams-ud-din Kulah Duz. The last two words 
signify ‘ cap-maker ’ in Persian. When QazI Jalal, the Afghan, re- 
belled, as stated already, this Shams-ud-din just mentioned, the 
captain of the ship Elias, one of the principal residents of Kinbayah, 
and the chief of the medical men who has been spoken of above, 
wished to hold this city against the rebel. They attempted to dig a 
moat round it, as it had no walls. But Jalal defeated them and 
entered the town. These three persons hid themselves in a house, 
and were afraid of being discovered. Hence they agreed to com- 
mit suicide, each of them striking another with a qat tarah* Two 
died accordingly, but the chief of the medical men survived. 

Among the principal merchants of Kinbayah, there was again 
Najm-ud-din of Jilan endowed with a fine figure and enormous 
riches. He built a large house and a mosque in 
this city. Later, the Sultan sent for him, made him mzrcbants 
governor of Kinbayah, and conferred honours on 
him. This led to the loss not only of his wealth, but of his life. 

Hie commandant of Kinbayah, at the moment of our arrival in 
the town, was Muqbil the Tilingi, 7 who was greatly respect- 
ed by the Sultan. He had with him Shaikh Zadah of 
Ispahan who deputised for him in all his affairs. This Shaikh 
had enormous wealth, and had a profound knowledge of sfate affairs. 


4. Vol. iii, p. 425. 

5. MalUt-uI-Tujar, meaning Prince of Merchants, is a title which Mus- 
sulman Kings of India conferred on one of their nobles.— N. V. R. 

6. A kind of dagger. 7. See EJD. iii, pp. 367f. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


He was always sending out sums of money to his country and plan- 
ning devices to take his flight The Sultan came to know of this, 
and he wrote to Muqbil asking him to send this person to him, and 
Muqbil having sent him without delay, he was brought before the 
Sultan who placed him under guard It was rarely that a person 
so guarded by the Sultan made good his escape The Shaikh, how- 
ever, struck a bargain with his keeper promising to pay him a sum 
of money, and they both fled A trustworthy man told me that he 
met him m a comei of a mosque m the town of Qalhat adding that 
he subsequently returned to his native country, collected his trea- 
sures and had nothing to fear any more 

The Malik Muqbil entertained us one day m his palace By a 
curious chance, the Qazi of the town who was blind in his right 
eye, found himself seated opposite a Sharif of Baghdad, who closely 
resembled him in his appearance and his infirmity except that he 
was blind in his left eye The Shaiif looked at the Qazi and 
laughed Hie Qazi having repiimanded him, he replied ‘Do not 
reproach me, for I am better looking than you ’ ‘How is that’’ 
asked the Qazi The Sharif answered ‘ Because you are blind in 
your right eye, while I am that only m my left eye ’ The governor 
and the assistants laughed, and the Qazi looked foolish He could 
make no answer, for in India the Sharlfs are held m great regard 

Among the good men of this town (Cambay) was the pilgrim 
Nasir, native of the country of Bakr, living in one of the pavilions 
of the principal mosque We visited him and dined with him He 
happened to go and meet the Qazi Jala! when, in the course of hi* 
rebellion, he entered Kinbayah It was reported to the Sultan that 
he had prayed m favour of the rebel He fled for fear of being 
put to death like A1 Haidari Another virtuous man living m 
Kinbayah is the merchant KHwajah Ishaq who has a hermitage 
where all are fed He spends a great deal on the fakirs and the 
indigent, and yet his wealth is ever increasing 

From Kinbayah we proceeded to the town of Kavy ,® situated 
on a bay where the flow and ebb of the tide are felt It forms part 
of the territory of the infidel Rai Jalansy of whom 
* A ' WA we shall speak presently From Kavy we went to 

, Qandhar, 8 9 a large city belonging to the infidels and 
situated on a gulf of the sea 


8 Kawa, a small place on the opposite side of the Bay frem Cambay— 
Gibb, also Yule, Cathay, lv, p 63 

9 Gandhar or Gandar, a little to the south of Kawa —Gibb, cf Yule ibid. 



IBN BATTOTA 


Hie Sultan of Qandhar is an infidel called Jalansy, who is 
subject to the authority of the Mussulmans, and sends an annual 
present to the king of India. When we reached 
Qandhar, he came out to receive us, and showed qandhjlb 
us the greatest consideiation, and even quitted his ' 
palace to lodge us in it. Tb,e principal Mussulmans in his court 
came and visited us, such as the children of KHwajah Buhrah, one 
of whom was the patron of the captain Ibrahim who owned six 
vessels. At Qandhar we embarked on the sea. 

We boarded a vessel belonging to this IbrShlm and called the 
J&kir. We took on this ship seventy horses that were part of the 
present offered by the king of India to the emperor of China, and 
we put the others with the horses of our companions in a ship 
belonging to a brother of Ibrahim and called Manuvart. Jalans; 
gave us a vessel on which we put the horses of Zahlr-ud-din, Sanbal 
and their comrades. He provisioned it for us with water, victuals 
and forage, and sent his son with us on a ship called the ’Akairy 
resembling a galley, but more roomy. It has sixty oars, and, during 
a combat, it is covered with a roof so that arrows and stones may 
not hit the rowers. I embarked on the Jakir which had fifty bow- 
men and as many Abyssinian soldiers. The latter are dominant in 
this ocean, and when there is even one of them on board a vessel, 
pirates and Hindu idolaters refrain from attacking it. 

After two days we reached the isle of Bairam (Perim) 10 , 
which is deserted and four miles from the mainland. We 
disembarked there and drew some water from a 
reservoir. Hie island has remained deserted since fctim 
the time the Muslims invaded it against the infidels. 

Desirous of re-peopling it, the Malik-ul-Tujar, of whom we have 
spoken, has built a fortification, placed mangonels in it and esta- 
blished some Mussulmans there. 

We left Bairam and on the next day we reached the 
large town of Quqah 11 which has extensive bazaars. 

We cast anchor four miles from the shore on account kujcah 
of the low tide. I got into a boat with some of my 
companions to reach the shore. The boat stuck in the 
mud, and we had to stop about a mile from the city. 
When the boat stuck, I leaned on two of my comrades. 
Though my assistants frightened me that the tide might 


10. Yule, Sathay, iv, p. 64. 

11. Hie still tolerably flourishing port of Gogo on the W. side of the 
Gulf of Cambay.— Yuli, ibid. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


return before I reached Quqah and I could not swim 
very well, still I managed to reach the town in safety, and went 
round the bazaars. I saw there a mosque said to have been built 
by KHizr and Elias. I said my sunset prayer there, and came across 
a group if Haidar! fakirs accompanied by their superior. I then 
returned to my ship. 

The Sultan of Quqah is an infidel, Dunkul by name, who pro- 
fessed submission to the king of India, but was in reality a rebel. 
Three days after setting sail again, we arrived at the island of 
Sandabiir, 12 where there are thirty-six villages. It is surrounded by 
a gulf, and at the ebb tide the water in it is sweet 
sANDABtm and agreeable, whereas it is salt and bitter during 

high tide. There are two towns in the interior, 
one an ancient construction of the infidels, and the other 
built by the Mussulmans when they first conquered the island 
In the latter there is a great cathedral mosque comparable to 
the mosques of Baghdad: it was founded by Captain Hasan, father 
of the Sultan Jamal-ud-din Muhammad of Hanaur, of whom and 
of my stay with whom when the island was conquered a second 
time, I shall speak later, D. V. We passed this island, and cast 
anchor at a small island near the mainland ; on this island there 
were a temple, an orchard and a tank. 

When we landed on this island, we saw a Jogi leaning against 
the wall of a buthkanah , i e.. a temple of idols. He stood between 
two of these idols, and showed clear traces of self-mortification. 

We spoke to him, but he did not answer. We looked 
rucouNTER to see if there was any food near him, but there was 
with a yoci none. As we were thus engaged, he gave a loud 
shout, and at once a cocoanut fell before him, 
and he presented it to us We were surprised at this, and offered 
him pieces of gold and silver, but he did not accept them. We 
brought some provisions to him which he likewise refused. A 
mantle of camel-hair was spread before him; I turned it in my 
hands, and he handed it over to me. I had in my hand a chaplet of 
shells which he touched and I gave it to him; he polished it with 
his fingers, smelt it and kissed it, pointing to heaven and then in 
the direction of the Qiblah. JAy companions did not understand 
these signs, but I knew that he implied that he was a Mussulman 
who hid his religion from the inhabitants of this island. He lived 
on cocoanuts. When we took leave of him. I kissed his hand, and 
my comrades disapproved of my action. He perceived their dis- 

12. Goa-Gibb. cf. Yule, ibid., pp. 64-6. 



IBN BATTCTA 


2S3 


approval, took my hand and kissed it smiling, and signalled to us 
that we might go back. We then went away, I being the last to 
leave. The Jogi pulled me by my dress, and when I turned to him 
he gave me ten pieces of gold. When we went out of his presence, 
my friends asked me: * Why did he pull you? ’ I replied/ ‘He gave 
me these gold pieces.’ I gave three of them to Zahlr-ud-din and 
three to Sanbal, telling them : “ Ibis man is a Mussulman. Did you 
not see how he pointed to heaven to indicate that he acknowledged 
the Almighty God above, and how he pointed to the direction of 
Mecca, to show his recognition of the mission of the Prophet? This 
is confirmed by his taking tile chaplet.” When I had said this, they 
turned to look at him again, but he was not there. 

The next day we came to Hanaur (Honavar) situated on a large 
gulf navigable for large ships. The city is a mile and a half awav 
from the sea. In the rainy season the sea is so 
disturbed that for four consecutive months there honavar 
can be no sailing except for fishing. 

The day we arrived at Hanaur, a Hindu Jogi came to meet me 
secretly, and gave me six gold pieces, saying : 1 The Brahmin (for 
so he called the Jogi who got my chaplet and gave me the dinars) 
sent you this money.’ I took the dinars from him and offered him 
one of them, which ho refused. When he went away, I informed 
my companions of this, telling them : * If you wish, you can take 
your share of this sum.’ They declined, but they were astonished 
at this occurrence, and said : ‘We added an equal sum to the six 
pieces of gold you gave us, and left the whole amount, between the 
two idols in the spot where we met this person.’ I was very much 
surprised by all that concerned this man, and I kept the dinars he 
had presented to me. 

The people of Hanaur profess the doctrine of Shafi'i ; they 
are pious, devoted, courageous, and wage war on the sea with infi- 
dels. They are noted for this; fortune has deserted them after they 
conquered Sandabur, as we shall narrate. 

Among the holy men I met at Hanaur was Shaikh Muhammad 
ul-Naqury who entertained me in his hermitage. He cooked food 
with his own hand, regarding as impure anything prepared by 
slaves, male or female. I also met Ihe jurisconsult Ismail who was 
teaching the Quran. He was given to fasting, looked conceited, 
but had a generous heart. I saw too the QC A of the town, Nur-ud- 
din ’Aly aijd the preacher whose name I have forgotten. 

The women of Hanaur and of all the coastal districts do not wear 
stitched cloths, but only unsewn garments. They tie one end of the 
F. N. — 30 



234 


cloth round their waist and drape the rest over 
w orn the head and chest. They are beautiful and 

chaste ; each of them wears a ring of gold 
In her nose. One notable feature is that they all know the Quran 
by heart. 1 saw in Hanaur thirteen schools for the 
schools instruction of girls, and twenty-three for boys, a 

thing I have not seen anywhere else. 

The people of Hanaur live by maritime trade, and own no culti- 
vated land. The inhabitants of Malabar pay a fixed sum every year 
to Sultan Jamal-ud-dln (of Hanaur) as they are 
sultan afraid of his power on the sea. His army com- 

prises six thousand men, horse and foot. This 
Sultan Jamal-ud-dln Muhammad, son of Hasan, is one of the best 
and most powerful sovereigns. He is subject to the supremacy of an 
infidel king named Hariab 13 of whom we shall speak later. Sultan 
Jamal-ud-din is fond of praying in the company of others of the faith. 
He has the practice of going to the mosque before daybreak and 
there reading the Quran till it is'dawn ; then he prays for the first 
time, and goes for a ride outside the city. He returns to the mos- 
que about nine o’clock, and, after prostrating himself there, goes 
back to his palace. He fasts on full-moon days During my so- 
journ near him, he invited me to break the fast in his company, 
and I assisted at this ceremony as well as the jurisconsults ’Aly and 
Isma’il. They placed four seats on the ground ; he sat on one of 
them and the rest of us sat on the others. 

The order observed in the Sultan’s meal is as follows: there is 
set a table of copper called khwancha (in Persian) and on it 
they place a plate of the same metal, which they 
sultan’s meal call tdlam. A beautiful slave, clad in silk, comes 
and causes to be placed before the prince saucepans 
containing the food. She has a large spoon of copper with 
which she takes a spoonful of rice and serves it on the plate ; she 
pours ghee on it, and places some pickled pepper in bunches, green 
ginger, and pickled lemons and mangoes. The guest eats a mouthful 
and then some of the preserves. When the spoonful that she served 
on the plate is consumed, she serves another spoonful of rice, and 
serves in pnothor bowl a roast„fowl with which some more rice is 
eaten. After this second course, she fetches, still in a saucepan, 
another species of fowl and serves it; this is always eaten with rice. 


13. Of course Harihara of Vijayanagar; but Ibn Battuta does not men- 
tion him again. 



EBN BATTOTA 


23$ 


When the different kinds of fowl have been done with, there follow 
divers sorts of fish and more rice with them. After the fish, they 
serve vegetables cooked in butter, and milk foods, also taken with 
rice. At the end of all these courses, kushan i.e., butter-milk is 
brought, and this finishes the meal. When butter-milk 'is served, 
it means that there is nothing more to eat. Above all, they drink 
hot water, for cold water is harmful in the rainy season. 

On another occasion I spent eleven months with the Sultan 
without ever eating bread, for the people there live only on rice. I 
also spent three years in the Maidive islands, in Silan (Ceylon) and 
in the countries of Ma’bar and Malabar, eating only rice, so that 
I could swallow it only with water. 

The dress of the Sultan of Hanaur consists of clothes of very 
fine silk and linen; he ties a loin-cloth round his body, and wears 
two cloths one over the other ; he plaits his hair 
and ties a small turban rpund it. When he mounts his dbess 
a horse, he puts on a tunic and two cloths over it. 

They beat a kettle-drum and sound the trumpet before him. 

This time we spent three days at his court; he gave us provi- 
sions for the journey and we took leave of him. At the end of 
three more days we reached Malabar* the land 
of pepper. It extends along the sea coast for malabar 
a length of two months’ journey, from Sandabur 
(Goa) to Kulam (Quilon) . For the whole distance, the road passes 
under the shade of trees ; at every half-mile, there is a 
wooden structure with platforms on which all travellers, Muslim 
or infidel, may sit. Near each of these rest houses, there is a well 
for drinking and an infidel is placed in charge of it. He supplies 
the water in vessels to infidels; in the case of Muslims he pours the 
water into their hands, and continues to do so until they signal to 
him to stop. The idolaters of Malabar do not allow Muslims to enter 
their houses or eat from their vessels. If a Muslim should do the 
contrary, they break the vessel or give it to the Muhammadan. When 
a Muhammadan goes to a place where there is no house belonging 
to one of his class, the infidels cook the food and serve it to him 
on banana leaves ; dogs and birds eat what is left over. In all the 
places on the road through Malabar, there are Muslim houses where 
their co-religionists can alight and buy all their requirements. 
But for these, no Mussulman could travel in this country. 

On this road, which as we said extends for two months’ march, 
there is not a palm’s breadth of land that is not cultivated. Every- 



236 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


body has his own garden and his house in the 
gardens middle, the whole being surrounded by a 

wooden enclosure. The road runs through these 
gardens. When it comes up to the enclosure of an orchard, 
it goes up by one flight of wooden steps, and descends into the 
neighbouring orchard by another ; this happens over the whole 
length of the road. No one travels in this country on an animal, 
and only the Sultan owns horses. The principal 
palanquin vehicle of the people is a palanquin carried on 
the shoulders of slaves or hired labourers ; those 
that do not get up on a palanquin, whoever they be, go 
on foot. People who have baggages or moveables like merchand- 
ise hire out men who carry them on their backs. One merchant 
may be accompanied by about hundred men carrying his wares. 

Everyone of these men carries a stout stick fitted 
merchants with an iron point at the lower end and a 

hook of the same metal at the top ; when 
the porter is fatigued and does not find any place for resting him- 
self, he sticks his baton into the ground and suspends his burden 
on it. After rest, he takes up his charge without any one to assist 
him and resumes his march. 

I have not seen a safer road than this, for the Hindus put to 
death any one who steals a single nut. Again, when a fruit drops 
on the ground no one picks it up until the owner 
justice takes it. I heard that once several Hindus passed 

by the road and that one of them picked up a 
nut. The governor, coming to know of it. ordered a stake to 
be driven into the ground and its upper end to be cut and 
fixed on a wooden plank in such wise that a portion of it 
showed up above the plank. The culprit was extended on it and 
fixed to the stake which entered his abdomen and came out by 
the back; he was left in this posture to serve as an example to the 
spectators. On the road there are many stakes like this, so that 
passers by may see them and be warned. 

Now, we sometimes met infidels on the road by night, who, 
when they saw us, turned aside to let us pass. Mussulmans are 
held in the highest regard in tjiis country except that the people, 
as we said, do not eat with them or allow them to enter their 
houses. 

There are twelve infidel Sultans in Malabar ; the more power- 
ful among them having an army of fifty thousand troops, the weaker 
ones only three thousand. But there is nb discord °™»n g 



tBN BATTOTA 


23? 

them, and the strong does not covet what the weak 
possesses. At the boundary of each state there is antes 
a wooden gate on which is engraved the name of 
the Sultan whose territory begins there ; they call it ‘ the gate 
of security ’ of N. When a Mussulman or an infidel flees from 
the state of one of these princes because of some delinquency, 
and reaches the gate of security of another prince, he is safe 
and cannot be caught by him from whom he had fled though he 
may be powerful, having many troops at his disposal. 

Hie sovereigns of this country transmit their royalty to their 
sister’s son to the exclusion of their own children. I have not 
found this rule elsewhere, except with the Messufah who wear the 
liQdm (veil which covers the lower part of the face) and who will 
be referred to later. 1311 When a ruler of Malabar wishes to put a stop 
to his subjects buying and selling, he gives his orders to one of his 
slaves who hangs before the shops a branch of a tree with its foliage 
intact. No one buys or sells so long as these branches remain before 
the shops. 

The pepper-plant resembles the vine; they plant it near the 
cocoanut trees, round which they climb like the stem of the vine; 
only, unlike the vine, the pepper-plant has no ten- 
drils. The leaves are like those of the rue ; and tepver 
partly also resemble the leaves of a bramble. The plant 
pepper-plant bears small bunches of berries which, 
when green, resemble those of the abu-Qinninah (raisin?). When 
autumn arrives, they gather the pepper and spread it in the sun 
on mats, as they spread grapes when they wish to dry them. They 
do this until it becomes perfectly dry and black, and then they 
sell it to the merchants. People in our country maintain that the 
wrinkles on the pepper are caused by its being roasted on the fire; 
but this is not so, and it is due only to the action of the sun. I have 
seen this in the town of Qalqot (Calicut) where they measure 
pepper by the bushel as we do millet in our lands. 

The first town of Malabar we entered was Abu Sarur (Barce- 
lore) , a small place situated on a large bay and rich in cocoanuts. 
The chief of the Mussulman population here is Shaikh Jum’a, known 
as Abu Sittah ‘father of six,' a generous man who has spent all 
his wealth on fakirs and the indigeht. Two days after Cur depar- 
ture from this town, we reached Fakanur 
(Bakanur), 14 a large town on a bay. There was bakadvr 
an abundance of excellent sugar-cane, unequalled 

13a. S. and D. in # dex, s.v. Messoitfah . • 

14. Yule, Cathay, lv, p. 73. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


in the rest of the country. There are some Mussulmans and their 
chief is called Husain-ul-Salat. There is a QafI and a preacher, 
and this Husain has built a mosque for the Friday prayer. 

The Sultan of Fakanur is an infidel called Basadav (Vasu- 
deva). He has about thirty ships of war under the command of 
Lula, a Muslim, a bad man and a pirate who robs merchants. When 
we anchored at Fakanur, the Sultan sent his son to us to stay as 
a hostage on the vessel. When we went to see him, he entertained 
us with great cordiality for three days as a mark of respect for 
the Emperor of India and with a desire to gain by trade with our 
men. It is the custom of the country that each vessel which passes 
near a town must necessarily enter the port and offer the prince a 
present, ‘ the right of the port ’ as it is called. If a ship fails to do 
so, the people pursue her in their vessels, bring her forcibly into 
port, impose a double tax on her and detain her as long as they 
like. 

We left Fakanur, and at the end of three days we arrived at 
Manjarur (Mangalore), 15 a large town on the bay of Dunb, the 
largest inlet in Malabar. It is here that most of the 
mangalobe merchants from Fare and Yemen disembark. Pep- 
per and ginger are here in great abundance. 

The Sultan of Manjarur is one of the principal rulers of this 
country. His name is Ram-dav (Rama-deva). There are in 
Manjarur about 4000 Mussulmans who live in a suburb. Conflicts 
occur often between them and the inhabitants of the city, and the 
Sultan reconciles them as he has need of the merchants. We saw 
in Manjarur a Qazi, a distinguished and generous man, who pro- 
fesses the doctrine of Shafi’i. and teaches the sciences ; his name 
is Badr-ud-dln of Ma’bar. He came first to visit us on board and 
asked us to land and go into the town. We answered him : “ We 
will not do so, until the Sultan sends his son to stay on board.” — 

‘ The Sultan of Fakanur,’ he replied, ‘ did so only because the Mus- 
sulmans living in his town had no power ; but here the Sultan 
fears us.’ We persisted in our refusal until the Sultan sent his 
son as the Sultan of Fakanur had done. When we landed he treat- 
ed us with great consideration, and we stayed there three days. 

Then^we left for Hlly 16 and reached it in two days. It is a 
large town, well-built and situated on a large bay navigable for 

15. Yule, ib., pp. 73-4. 

16. Mt. D’Eli. Gibb ‘thinks that the mediaeval port is to 'be sought at 
Nileshwar, a few miles to the north of the promontory.— Cf. Yule, ibid., 
pp. 74-5. 



IBN BATTOTA 


large ships. The ships from China come here ; 
they enter only this port and the ports of d’ely 
Kulam and Calicut. Hily is respected alike 
by Mussulmans and idolaters on account of its great mosque, a 
source of blessings and of light. Sailors make vows of Consider- 
able offerings to it, and it possesses a rich treasury, placed under 
the supervision of the preacher Husain and of Hasan-ul-vazzan 
(the weigher) the chief of the Muslims. There are in this mosque 
a certain number of students who learn the sciences and receive 
stipends from its revenues. It has a kitchen whence food is sup- 
plied to travellers and poor Muslims in the town. I met in the 
mosque the virtuous theologian, Sa’id by name, a native of 
Maddshau. He had a fine figure and a good character and he. 
fasted often. He told me that he had lived at Mecca for fourteen 
years and as many at Medina, that he had seen the amir of Mecca, 
Abu Nemi, and of Medina, Mansur, son of Jamaz, and lastly that 
he had travelled in India and China. 

From Hily we went to Jurfattan, 17 at a distance of three para- 
sanga. There I saw a theologian from Baghdad, a man of great 
merit, named Sar?ary, after a village ten miles 

from Baghdad on the road to Kufah He cannanore 

had a very rich brother living at Jurfattan who 
had young children. This brother had died commending the 
infants to him ; I left him as he was preparing to take them 
to Baghdad. For it is the custom among the people of India and 
of Sudan not to interfere in the succession to strangers who die 
among them, though they leave behind millions in gold. Their 
money remains in the hands of the chief of the Mussulmans till it 
is received by those lawfully entitled to it. 

The Sultan of Jurfattan, Koyal, by name, is one of the most 
powerful rulers of Malabar, and he owns a number of vessels which 
sail to ‘Aman (Oman) , Fars and Yemen. Dahfattan 
and Budfattan are included in his state. We sailed dhasmapatam 
from Jurfattan to Dahfattan, 170 a large town on a 
bay, with many orchards in it. Here are found cocoanut palms, 
pepper and betel leaf and nut, and much qalqtis (colocassia) 
with which the Hindus cook theif food; and as foi; banana, 

I have not seen any country which produces it more or 
cheaper. We have at Dahfattan a very large bam or tank, five 


17. Cannanore, according to Yule. Cathay, iv, p. 76. 
17a. Dharmapatam!— Yule. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


hundred feet long and three hundred broad. It has a facing of 
red stone and has on its sides twenty-eight domes of stone, each 
containing four seats of the same material. Each of these pavilions 
is reached by a flight of stone steps. In the middle of the tank 
there is 'a large pavilion three stories high, each of them having 
four seats. I heard that this b&in was erected by the father of 
Sultan Koyal. Opposite to this, there is a cathedral mosque for 
the Mussulmans. The mosque has steps by which the faithful 
descend to the tank and wash themselves. The theologian Husain 
told me that the mosque and the bdin were built by one of the 
ancestors of Koyal who was a Mussulman; his conversion came 
about in the following marvellous manner. 

Near the mosque I saw a beautiful green tree with leaves like 
those of the fig, except that they were smooth. It was surround- 
ed by a wall and had a niche or small chapel near it where I pray- 
ed and kneeled twice. The tree is called dirahkt-i-shahadat, * the 
tree of testimony.’ I was told ,that every year when autumn 
came this tree dropped one leaf which had changed its colour first 
to yellow, and then into red, that on this leaf was 
written with the pen of divine power, the words : 1 There is no 
God but God, and Muhammad is the Prophet of God.’ Husain and 
many other trustworthy men told me that they had seen this 
leaf and read the inscription on it. Husain added that when the 
time came for the leaf falling, reliable persons among the Muslims 
as well as the infidels came and sat beneath the tree, and when 
the leaf fell, the Muslims took one half of it, the other half being 
deposited in the treasury of the infidel Sultan. The people use 
it often for the purpose of curing their discases. 17b 

This tree was the cause of the grandfather of Koyal going 
over to Islam. He could read Arabic, and when he deciphered the 
inscription and understood its import, he embraced the Islamic 
religion and practised it to perfection. His story is transmitted by 
tradition among Hindus. Husain told me that one of the children 
of this Sultan returned to idolatry after the death of his father, 
behaved unjustly, and ordered the tree to be tom up by the roots. 
The order was executed and no vestige of the tree was left. But 


17b. Compare the following from The Marvels of Indio : 

“Somebody, who had travelled in India, once told me that he had seen, 
at Atakia, not far from Mankir, a city of the gold-bearing countries, a big 
tree, thick-boled, and much like a walnut, which bore red roses (or leaves), 
whereon you fead, written in white characters: “There is no God but God, 
and Mohammed is his Prophet.” (p. 146) . 



IBN BATTOTA 141 

it grew up again and regained its original state. And the king 
died suddenly soon after. 

From Dahfattan we proceeded to Budfattan, 18 a considerable 
town also on a bay. There is a mosque here near the sea outside 
the town, and Muslim strangers resort to it, for * 
there are no Mussulmans at Budfattan, most of budfattan 
the inhabitants being Brahmin idolaters who hate 
Mussulmans. The harbour here is one of the most beautiful; the 
water is sweet, and there is an abundance of areca-nut which is 
exported to India 19 and China. 

I was told that the reason why the Brahmins have allowed 
this mosque to remain is that one of them demolished its roof to 
make the roof of his own house with the material ; but the house 
caught fire and he perished with his children and his moveables. 
The Hindus respect this temple, and no longer entertain any ill 
designs against it. They render homage to it, store water before it 
so that travellers may drink, and place a trellis at the gate to 
prevent birds entering in. 

Then we sailed to Fandarina, a large and beautiful town with 
gardens and bazaars. Here the Mussulmans occupy three quarters, 
each having a mosque ; the chief temple on the 
beach is admirable; it has belvederes and halls fandahina 
facing the sea. The Qazi and preacher of Fandarina 
is a man from ‘ Aman and he has a good brother. The ships from 
China pass the winter here. 

We went from Fandarina to Calicut one of the great 
ports of Malabar. Men from China, Java, Ctylon, 
the Maldives, Yemen and Fars come here as well as caucut 
merchants from all parts. Its harbour is one of the 
largest in the world. 

The Sultan of Calicut is an idolater known as the Samuri 
(the Zamorin) . He is advanced in age and shaves his beard, like 
some of the Greeks. I saw him at Calicut and spoke to him, as it 
was God’s pleasure. The chief of the merchants in this town was 
Ibrahim, the chief of the port, a native of Bahrain. He is a distin- 
guished man endowed with generous qualities; the merchants meet 
in his house and dine at his tab'le. The Qazi of Calicut was 
Fakhr-ud-din 'Ugman, a distinguished and generous man. The 

18. The name is not found in modern maps, bdt it must have been near 

Waddakarre of Keith Johnston's— Yule, Cathay, iv, p. 77. • 

19. Evidently the East Indies and Indo-China. 

F. N.— 31 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


head of the hermitage was the Shaikh Shahab-ud-din of Kazrun, 
and the people of India and China vow and send offerings to him 
(may God enable us to profit by his merits!). In this town also 
lives the very rich and celebrated ship-owner Migqal, who posses- 
ses numerous vessels employed in his trade with India, 20 China, 
Yemen and Fars. 

When we reached the town, Ibrahim, the chief of the port, 
came out to receive us, and so did the Qazl, the Shaikh Shahab- 
ud-din, the principal merchants and the deputy (naib) of the 
Hindu sovereign, Qalaj by name. They had drums, trumpets 
bugles and standards on their ships. We entered the harbour in 
great pomp, such as I did not see elsewhere in these lands. But it 
was a joy to be followed by distress. We remained in the harbour 
of Calicut, where there were already thirteen vessels from China. 
We then went into the city and each of us was accommodated in 
a house. We remained there three months awaiting the day of 
our voyage to China. We were the guests of the idolatrous 
sovereign. Voyages in the Sea of China are made only in Chinese 
vessels, and now, we shall describe the arrangements relating to 
them. 


There are three kinds of Chinese vessels: 1. large ships, called 
junks; 2. middling ones called zu-s and 3. the smallest, kakams. 
On the large vessels there are three sails or more, up to a dozen. 

Their sails are made of cane reeds plaited together 
types or like mats ; they are never lowered, but are turned 

vessels about according to the direction of the wind. When 

the ships arc anchored, the sails are allowed to 
float in the wind. Each of these ships is manned by a thousand men, 
six hundred sailors and four hundred soldiers among whom are 
archers, men armed with shields, and persons who throw naphtha. 
Each large vessel is followed by three smaller ones, a middle-sized, 
a third and a fourth sized. These vessels are built only in the city 
of Zaitun in China or in Sain-kalan (Canton). This is how they 
build the ships: They erect two walls of wood and fill the Inter- 
space between them by means of very thick planks joined together 
along their length and breadth by large nails each three cubits 
long. When the two walls have been joined together by means of 
these planks, they lay on the bottom of the vessel and then push 
the whole of it out on the sea where the construction is finished. 
The planks and the two walls which touch the water serve the 
crew for washing and other needs. On the sides of these planks are 
found the oars which hre as big as masts and are manipulated each 


20. See n.19 (ante.) 



IBN BATTOTA 


by ten or fifteen men together, standing. They make four decks 
on a vessel ; it contains chambers, cabins, and saloons for the merch- 
ants. Many of these cabins contain chambers and water closets. 
They have keys and their occupants lock them. They take their 
wives and concubines with them. It often happens that a wan lives 
in his cabin unknown to any others on board till they meet on 
their arrival in some place. 

The sailors’ children live in these cabins. They grow vegeta- 
bles, pulses and ginger in wooden tubs. The commander of a ship 
is like a great amir ; when he disembarks, archers and Abyssinians 
march in front of him with javelins, swords, drums, bugles and 
trumpets. When he arrives at the inn where he is to live, they 
place their lances on either side of the door and continue to do so 
throughout his stay. Some of the Chinese own many ships on which 
they send their factors abroad; in the whole world there is no peo- 
ple richer than the Chinese. 

When the time came for sailing to China, the Sultan, i.e., the 
Zamorin, equipped for us one of the thirteen junks that were in 
the port of Calicut. The commander of the ship was one Sulaiman 
ul-Safdi of Sham 21 already known to me. I said to him : ‘ I want a 
cabin all to myself and for my slave-girls as it is my 
rule never to travel without them.’ He replied, ‘ The BOOKD ' r ' 
Chinese merchants have taken the cabins for the 
voyage both ways. My son-in-law has a cabin 
which I shall give you, but it has no lavatory ; it is possible that 
you may be able to exchange it for another.’ I issued instruc- 
tions to my companions, and they took on board all my luggage and 
the slaves, male and female. This was on a Thursday; I remained 
on shore to get through my Friday prayer and then join them. The 
Malik Sanbal and Zahir-ud-din also embarked with the present. 
Meanwhile, Hilal, a eunuch of mine, came to me on Friday morn- 
ing and said: ‘The cabin we have taken is very small and incon- 
venient.’ I mentioned this to the captain of the ship, and he answer- 
ed: ‘It cannot be helped; but if you like to travel by the Kakam, 
you may have cabins of your choice.’ I accepted this, and in ac- 
cordance with my instructions my companions transported my slave 
girls and my luggage to the Kakam. and settled there before prayer 
time on Friday. Now it is usual for the sea to become rough after 
four in the evening, and then no one can embark. All the junks 
had gone except the one which contained the present, one other 


21. ShSm is Syria or its capital Damascus.— N. V. R. 



M FOREIGN NOTICES 

the owners of which had resolved to spend the winter at Fands- 
rina, and the Kakam mentioned above. We spent 
non, the Friday night on the shore, not being able to 

embark on the Kakam, and those on the Kakam 
being uhable to come to us. I had only a carpet with 
me to sleep on. On Saturday morning both the junk and 
the Kakam had drifted far from the port. The junk bound 
for Fandarina was dashed against rocks and wrecked ; a part of 
the crew perished, the rest escaped. There was on this ship a 
slave girl well beloved of a merchant who offered ten pieces to any 
one who should save her. She had caught hold of a piece of wood 
at the back of the junk, and one of the sailors of Hormuz, in res- 
ponse to this appeal, rescued the young girl from danger; but he 
refused to receive the money, saying: ‘I did it only out of the love 
of God ! ’ When night came, the junk which carried the pre- 
sent was also dashed against the rocks, and all the men in it perish- 
ed. The next morning we examined the spots where their bodies 
lay; I saw that Zahir-ud-din had his head shattered, and that a nail 
had entered one of the temples of Sanbal and come out by the other; 
we prayed over their bodies and buried them. I saw the Hindu Sul- 
tan of Calicut, wearing a large white cloth round his waist from the 
navel down to the knees and a small turban on his head ; he was 
bare-footed, and a parasol was held over his head by a young slave. 
A fire was lit before him on the beach, and his bodyguard were 
beating the people who were there to stop their stealing anything 
that the sea might cast up. The custom of Malabar is that every 
time there occurs a ship wreck, what is recovered goes to the 
treasury; this town is however an exception; indeed here the legiti- 
mate owners receive it, and this is why this city is flourishing and 
strangers come here in large numbers. 

When the crew of the Kakam saw what had befallen the junk, 
they set sail and went away carrying all my property and slaves of 
both sexes. I was alone on the beach with only one slave whom I 
had enfranchised. When he saw what had happened to me, he 
left me, and I had nothing more with me than the ten pieces of 
gold which the yogi had given me and the carpet I had spread on the 
ground. The people there told me that the Kakam should neces- 
sarily enter the port of Kulam' (Quilon) . I resolved then to go to 
this town, at a distance of ten days by land or by river®— if any 
one prefers this. I started by the river and engaged a Muslim for 
carrying my carpet. The custom of the Hindus, when they travel 

22. Gibb rightly points out that there is no inland water-way leading 
right to Quilon from Calicut. 



1BN BATTCTA 141 

by this river, is to disembark in the evening and spend the night in 
villages on its banks; the next morning they get back to the boat 
We did likewise. There was no Mussulman on the boat except the 
one I had in my employ. He drank wine with the infidels when 
we disembarked and behaved to me like a drunken man. Hus 
annoyed me greatly. 

The fifth day after our departure we reached Kanji-kari on the 
peak of a mountain; it is inhabited by Jews who have one among 
themselves for their chief and pay a poll tax to the Sultan of 
Kulam (Quilon). 

All the trees found near this river are cinnamon and hrazil. 
Here they are used as firewood, and during this voyage we cooked 
our food in fire lighted with this wood. On the tenth day we came 
to the town of Kulam (Quilon), one of the most 
beautiful towns in Malabar. Its bazaars are quilon 
splendid and its merchants are known as 
Solis. 23 They are very rich ; any one of them will buy a vessel 
with its tackle and load it with merchandise from his own house. 
There are in Kulam many Muhammadan merchants ; their chief is 
‘ Ala-ud-din Alavji, native of Avah in ‘ Iraq. He is a rafizi (or 
partizan of ‘AU) and has friends who openly follow the same doc- 
trine. The QazI of Kulam is a distinguished man from Qazwln; 
the head of all the Muslims in this town is Muhammad Shah Ban- 
dar, the chief of the port, who has an excellent and generous 
brother, Taql-ud-dln. The principal mosque there is admirable; it 
was built by the merchant KHwaja Muhazzab. Kulam is, of all 
the towns of Malabar, the nearest to China, and most of the Chinese 
merchants come there. Mussulmans are honoured and respected 
there. 

The Sultan of Kulam is an idolater, Tirwari (Tiruvadi) by 
name ; he respects Muslims and severely punishes thieves and male- 
factors. I was an eyewitness to the following, among other events, 
at Kulam; an archer from 'Iraq killed one of his companions and 
fled to the house of Alavji. This murderer had enormous wealth. 
The Mussulmans wished to bury the victim, but the officers of the 
ruler stopped this saying: 'he should not be buried till you sur- 
render his murderer who will be put to death to avenge hjpi.’ Hiey 
left the body in the coffin in front of the Alfivji’s house till it began 
to rot. Alavji then delivered the assassin io the officers offering 


23. This shows that the Tamils from this side of the Ghats had already 
begun to take part in' the lucrative trade on the West coast. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


to give over to them all his wealth if they would spare his life; but 
they refused, put the criminal to death and then buried his victim. 

I was told that the ruler of Kulam onco went out for a ride 
outside the town. His path lay among orchards and his son-in-law, 
a prince, went with him. The latter picked up a 
stebn rule mango which had dropped outside one of the 
orchards, and the Sultan saw this. He at once 
ordered that the prince should have his body split in twain, 
and each half exhibited on a cross on either side of the road, one 
half of the mango being put alongside each half of the body, to 
serve as a warning. 

Another like occurrence which happened at Calicut was this. 
The nephew of the lieutenant of the ruler took by force a sword 
belonging to a Muslim merchant. The merchant complained to the 
uncle of the culprit and he promised to inquire into the affair. 
While he was seated at the gate of his house, he saw his nephew 
wearing this sword on his side; he called him and said: “ This is 
the sword of the Mussulman.” “Yes”, answered the nephew. “Did 
you buy it of him?” asked his uncle. “No” replied the young man. 
Then the viceroy asked his followers to seize him and cut his neck 
with the same sword. 

I spent some days at Kulam in the hermitage of Shaikh 
Fakhr-ud-dln, son of Shaikh Shahab-ud-din AlkazarunI, superior 
of the hermitage at Calicut. I had no news regarding the Kakam. 
But then the ambassadors of the king of China who had accompa- 
nied us and embarked on one of the junks above mentioned arrived 
there. Their ship had also been wrecked; the Chinese merchants 
provided them with clothes and they returned to China where I 
met them again later. 

I wanted to return from Kulam to the Sultan of Delhi to tell 
him what had happened to his present; but 1 was afraid that he 
might find fault with my conduct and reproach me for having 
separated myself from the present. I resolved then to go back to 
Sultan Jamal-ud-din of Hanaur and stay with him till I should get 
news oi the Kaltam. 1 returned to Calicut and there I found 
vessels belonging to Sultan oi India on which he had sent an Arab 
amir 24 named Sayyid Ab-ul-IJasan. This person was one of the 
bard-i-dari (Pers. pardah-dar), i.e., the chief door-keeper. The 
Sultan had sent him with much money for enrolling as many Arabs 
as possible from the territories of Hormuz and of Qat’f ; for thia 

SI Amir means a general or commander N. V. R. 



IBN BATTOTA 


prince has an affection for Arabs. I went and saw this amir, and 
found him inclined to spend the winter at Calicut 
and then go to the land of the Arabs. I consulted « 

him on my return to the court of the Sultan ; but CAUCDT 
he did not give his approval. However, I em- * 
barked with him at Calicut. We were then at the end of the season 
for these voyages. We sailed during the first half of the day after 
which we anchored till the next morning. We encountered four 
ships of war on the way, but they did us no harm, though we were 
afraid of them. 

We reached the city of Hanaur and I went to meet the Sultan 
and salute him. He lodged me in a house where there was no ser- 
vant, and invited me to recite the prayer with him. 

I sat most of the time in his mosque and 1 read the at honavar 
whole of the Quran each day. Later I read it twice 
a day beginning my first reading soon after the morning prayer 
and closing it about one o’clock in the afternoon. I then repeated 
my ablutions and resumed reading, completing the second reading 
by sunset. I continued to do this for three months, of which I spent 
forty days fully in religious exercises. 

Sultan Jamal-ud-din had equipped fifty-two vessels with a view 
to subduing Sandabur (Goa). The sovereign of this island had 
quarrelled with his son, and the latter had written to Sultan Jamal- 
ud-din requesting him to come and take the town, and promising 
to embrace Islam and marry the sister of the Sultan. 

When the vessels were ready, I wanted to go with expedition 
them for the holy war. I consulted the Quran. TO goa 
On the first page I lighted on, I read the 
words: "In them (churches, mosques, etc.) the name of God is 
often mentioned. Certainly God will help those who help him.” 1 * 
I rejoiced at this, and when the Sultan came for his prayer, at four 
in the evening, I said to him: * I wish to go also.’ ‘ Then you will be 
the chief of the expedition,’ he replied. I told him what I had read 
in the Quran when I opened it. This pleased him, and he resolved 
to join the expedition himself though he had not thought of it before. 
He embarked on one of the vessels and I with him. It was on a 
Saturday. We reached Sandabtir and entered its bay qp Monday 
evening. We found the people ready for the fight, having already 
set up their mangonels. We passed the ni »ht near the town, and 
at dawn, the drums, trumpets and bugles resounded, and the ships 
advanced. *The besieged made a discharge «from their mangonels. 

25. Quran, xxii, 41. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


I saw a stone strike one oi the men near the Sultan. The men 
from the ships jumped into the water, with shields and swords in 
their hands. The Sultan got into an ‘Akatry, a kind of boat. I jump- 
ed into the water with the rest. There were near us two tartans* 
open abdft with horses in them. They are so constructed that a 
cavalier can mount his horse in them and put on his armour and 
then come out. It was thus that cavaliers were mounted on these 
two ships. 

God granted the victory to the Mussulmans and Sandabur was 
conquered. We entered the town at the point of the sword, and 
most of the infidels took refuge in the palace of their ruler. We fired 
the palace, and when they came out, we seized them. The Sultan 
spared their lives and restored to them their women and children. 
They were ten thousand in number, and they got a suburb of the 
city for their residence. The Sultan himself occu- 
vtcio«T pied the palace and gave the neighbouring houses 

to his courtiers. 'He gave me a young captive girl 
named Lemky, whom I called Mubaraka (blessed) . Her husband 
wanted to buy her back, but I refused. The Sultan presented me 
a costly robe of Egyptian material found among the treasures of 
the infidel ruler. I stayed with the Sultan at Sandabur from the 
day of the conquest, the 13th of the first Jumadi, to the middle of 
Sha’ban; 27 then I sought permission to leave, and he made me 
promise that I would come back to him. 

I left by sea for Hanaur whence I went in succession to Fakanfir, 
Manjarflr, Hfiy, Jurfattan, Dahfattan, Budfattan, Fandarina, Calicut 
— all places already mentioned. I then went to Shalyat, 28 a most 
beautiful town, where they make the fabrics that go 
Brrrora by its name. I stayed there long and then returned 

to Calicut. Two of my slaves who had embarked 
on the Kakam, came to this town and informed me that the slave 
girl who was with child and for whom I was much concerned 
was dead ; that the ruler of Javah 29 had appropriated the other 
slave girls ; that my goods had become the booty of strangers ; and 
that my comrades were dispersed in China, Javah and Bengal.* 9 

26. Small coasting vessels. 

27. Three months roughly. 

28. Modem Beypore, 6% miles south of Calicut, according to Gibb, who 
suggests that the word 'JShaw! may he derived ultimately from the name of 
this town.-Cf. Yule, ibid., p. 77-8. 

29. Sumatra: Gibh. , 

30. The text has Banjala.-N. V. R. 



IBN BATTtJTA 


When I heard this, I returned to Hanaur and Sandabur; I 
reached Sandabur at the end of Muharram and stayed there till 
the second day of the month Rabi’ n. The infidel Sultan of this 
town, against whom we had succeeded, now advanced to recap- 
ture the city, and all the infidels fled to his side. Hie troops of the 
Sultan were scattered in the villages and they abandoned us. The 
infidels besieged us and pressed us hard. When the situation be- 
came difficult, I came out of the town, still being 
besieged, and returned to Calicut. I made up maihitis 
my mind to go to Zibat-ul-Mahal (the Mal- 
dives) of which I had heard much. Ten days after we 
embarked at Calicut, we reached the islands of Zibat-ul-Mahal. 
Zibat figures as the feminine of zib (wolf, in Arabic; it is an altera- 
tion from Sanskrit Dvipa, island). These islands are among the 
most marvellous in the world and number nearly two thousand. 
About a hundred of these islands or a little less are found grouped 
together in a circle in the form of a ring ; the whole group has 
one entrance like a gateway, and ships enter only by this. When a 
ship arrives near any one of these, it is absolutely necessary for it 
to take one of the inhabitants as a guide, in order that under his 
guidance it may cross to the other islands. They are all so close to 
one another that as soon as you leave one island the tops of the 
palms on another island become visible. If a vessel loses its 
course, it cannot enter these islands and the wind sweeps it to 
Ma’bar (Coromandel coast) or to Sllan (Ceylon) . 

The people in these islands are all Mussulmans, pious and 
honest. The islands are divided into regions or ‘ climates,’ each 
ruled by a governor styled Karduy. The regions are: 1. Balbur; 
2. Kannalus ; 3. Mahal, which gives its name to all the islands and 
forms the residence of the sovereigns ; 4. Taladib ; 5. Karaiduv ; 6. 
Talm ; 7. Taldumtl, 8. Haldumtl, differing from the preceding only 
in the first letter ; 9. Barldu ; 10. Kandakal; 11. Maluk ; 12. Sawid. 
The last is the farthest of all. All the Maidive 
islands are destitute of grains, except that a food 
cereal resembling millet is grown in the 
region of Sawid and transported thence to Mahal. The people sub- 
sist on a fish similar to lairun and called Qulb-ul-mas. M It has red 
flesh ; it has no fat, but it smells dike mutton.. When.they catch 
it, they cut each fish into four, cook it lightly and then place 
it in a palm-leaf basket and smoke it. They eat it when it is quite 
dry. From here it is also exported to India, China and Yemen. 

31. Pyrard calls It Coboliy masse black fish.— S. and D. 

F. N. — 32 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


iso 

Most of the trees on these islands are cocoa-palms ; together 
with fish, they provide the subsistence of the people. The 
cocoa-palm is a marvellous tree. Each tree yields twelve 
clusters each year, one every month. Some are small, others 
large, sonde dry, the rest green, and this goes on continually. From 
the fruit they make milk, oil and honey. With its honey they 
make sweetmeats, pastries, eaten with dried cocoanuts. All the 
cocoanut foods and fish which the people here live on are a strong 
incentive to venery. The people of these islands are capable of 
surprising things in this line. I had in this country four wives, not 
to speak of concubines. 1 went round to all of them by day and 
spent the night with each one of them by turns ; I lived like this 
for the year and half that I spent in the Maldives. 

We find among the vegetal products of these islands the 
Jamun ( Eugenia Jambu), the citron, lemon and colocassia. The 
natives prepare a flour from the root of colocassia ; from this 
flour they make a kind of vermicelli, which when cooked in cocoa- 
nut milk makes one of the best dishes known ; I liked it very much. 

The people of the Maidive islands are honest and pious, of 
sincere faith and steady mind. They eat what is lawful, and their 
prayers are fulfilled. When one of them meets another, he says 
to him : 1 God is my Lord, Muhammad is my 
raomc prophet ; I am a poor ignoramus.’ Their bodies 

are weak ; they do not engage in combats or 
warfare, and prayer is tbeir weapon. One day, when I 
ordered the right hand of a thief to be cut off, many of the natives 
who were present in the comt-room fainted. The pirates of India 
do not attack them, and cause them no fear, for they have found 
by experience that any one who takes anything of theirs soon 
encounters misfortune. When enemy ships come to this country, 
they seize the strangers whom they find there, but do no harm to 
any one of the natives. If an infidel takes something for himself, 
be it only a lemon, the chief of the infidels punishes him, and 
causes him to be beaten so severely that he dreads the results of 
the act. If it wore otherwise, surely these people would be the 
most contemptible of men in the eyes of their aggressors, on 
account of the feebleness of thefr bodies. In each of their islands, 
there are beautiful mosques, and most of their buildings are of 
wood. 

Hie islanders are a clean people; they avoid filth, and the 
majority bathe twice & day to keep clean because of the extreme 
heat of the climate and the profuse perspiration . They make much 
use of scented oils like that of sandalwood and 'anoint themselves 



IBN BATTOTA 


with musk got from Maqdashu. 31 * It is one of their habits that, after 
morning prayer, each woman goes to meet her husband or her son, 
with a box of collyrium, rose-water and the oil of musk ; he applies 
the collyrium to his eyelashes, and rubs himself with rose-water 
and musk-oil, thus polishing his skin and removing all trace of 
fatigue from his Countenance. 

The dress of these people consists of simple cloths ; one they 
wear round their loins in the place of drawers, and others of 
material called Siyab-ul-waliyan 32 on their backs, 
as Muslim pilgrims wear the ihram. Some mas 
wear a turban while others substitute a small 
kerchief, When any one meets the Qazi or the preacher, he 
removes his garment from his shoulders exposing his back 
and thus accompanies him to his house. Another custom of 
theirs is this: when one of them marries and goes to his wife’s 
house, she spreads, in his honour, cotton cloth on the ground from 
the threshold of her house to the nuptial chamber ; 
she places handfuls of cowries on either side of his marriage 
path, and herself stands expecting him near customs 
the entrance to the apartment. When he comes 
near her, she throws a cloth at his feet, which his servants 
take. If the woman goes to her husband’s house, the same forms 
are observed by the husband. The same rule is observed by the 
people of these islands when they salute their sovereign, and it is 
absolutely necessary to throw cloth at his feet on such occasions. 

Their buildings are of wood and they take care to raise the 
floor of their houses well above the ground level as a precaution 
against humidity, for the soil is moist in these islands. They do 
this by employing cut stones of two or three cubits 
each in several rows and laying beams of cocoa- bouses 
nut palms across ; then they raise the walls 
with planks. They give evidence of very great skill in this 
work. In the vestibule of the house they build an apartment 
called malam where the master of the house sits with his friends. 
This room has two doors, one opening on the vestibule by which 
strangers enter and the other on the side of the house by which 
the master of the house enters. Near this chamber there is a jar 
full of water, and a vessel called wafanj made from the stfell of the 
cocoanut. It has a handle two cubits long, ard it is enough for rais- 
ing water from the wells which are not deep. 

82. It probably meuw a protecting cloth.— N. V. R. 



252 FOREIGN NOTICES 

All the inhabitants of the Maldives, high and low, are bare- 
footed ; the streets there are swept very clean ; they are shaded 
with trees, and to walk there is like walking in a garden. Still, it 
is essential for every person before entering a house to wash his 
feet with the water from the jar placed near the rntilarn. and to rub 
them with a rough mat of palm-fibre which he finds there. Every 
body who enters a mosque also does likewise. 

When a vessel arrives, usually the people of the neighbouring 
island come in small boats bringing betel and cocoanut to meet the 
visitors ; each one offers these to whomsoever he 
hospitality likes among the persons on the ship, and 
thus becomes his host, and carries to his house the 
goods belonging to his guest as if be were one of his near 
relatives. Any one among the newcomers that wants to marry 
may do so, on condition that at the time of his departure he 
divorces his wife, for the people of Maldives never leave their 
country. If a person does not marry, his food is cooked and serv- 
ed by the lady of the house where he lodges, and she supplies him 
the provisions for his journey at the time of his departure ; in re- 
turn for all of which she is content to receive the smallest present 
from him. The gain to the treasury, called bandar, consists in the 
right to purchase a certain portion of all the merchandise in the 
vessel at a fixed price, whether it is worth that or more ; they call 
this the law of bandar. This bandar has, in each island a wooden 
warehouse where the governor, i.e., the Kardury, gathers, buys, and 
barters all the merchandise. The natives buy earthenware with 
poultry, and one pot will fetch five or six chickens here. 

From these islands are exported fish, as already mentioned, 
cocoanuts, cloths, waliyan and cotton turbans. Also brass vessels 
commonly used by the natives, cowries and qanbar 
exports i.e., fibrous rind of the cocoanut. The natives mace- 

rate this rind in pits dug on Ihe seashore and then 
beat it with mallets ; then the women spin it ; they make 
thread from it for sewing together the planks of ships 
and export it to China, India and Yemen in the form of ropes. 
The qanbar is better than hemp. It is with such cords that the 
ships of India and Yemen are sewn; for the Indian ocean is full of 
rocks ; and if a vessel joined with iron nails strikes against a rock 
it would fall to pieces, whereas if it is sewn with cords it gains a 
certain elasticity and does not break. 

The inhabitants of these islands use cowries as their money. 
This is the name of an animal (a mollusc) which is got from the 



IBN BATTOTA 


253 

sea and deposited in pits dug on the shore. Its flesh disappears and 
only its white shell remains. A hundred of these 
shells is called syah, and seven hundred fal ; 12,000 cowhub 
form a kuttai, and 100,000 a bustu. They settle 
accounts in the bazaar with these cowries on the basis 
of four bustu for a gold dinar. They often fall in price so that 
twelve bustu are sold for a dinar. The islanders sell them to the 
people of Bengal 33 in exchange for rice, for cowries are used as 
money also there. They are sold also to the Yemenites who use 
them as ballast for their ships in the place of sand. These cowries 
form the medium of exchange among the negroes also in their 
native country. I saw them sold at Maly and at Juju (Gogo) on 
the basis of 1150 for a gold dinar. 

The women of these isles do not cover their heads, not even 
their queen. They comb their hair and gather it on one side. 
Most of them wear only one cloth which covers 
them from the navel downwards ; the rest wouxn 
of the body remains bare. It is in this dress 
that they walk about in the bazaars and elsewhere. When I 
held the office of Qazi in these isles, I made efforts to put an end to 
this habit and to got them to clothe themselves, but I could not 
succeed. No woman was admitted to my presence in a case unless 
her body was covered ; but beyond this I could do nothing against 
this usage. Some women wear, in addition to the cloth, a chemise 
with short and broad sleeves. I had some slave girls who dressed 
like the inhabitants of Delhi. They covered their heads, but this 
rather disfigured than adorned them, as they were not used to it. 

The women of Maldives adorn themselves with bracelets, 
covering both their arms with these from wrist to elbow. These 
jewels are of silver ; only the wives of the Sultan and his relations 
wear bracelets of gold. They have also anklets, and golden collars 
round theii necks. One of their singular habits is to seek employ- 
ment as household servants for a fixed wage of not more than five 
dinars, their maintenance being also a charge on their employer. 
They do not consider this dishonourable and most of the girls follow 
this practice. You find ten or twenty such girls in a rich man’s 
house. Each servant is charged jvith the cost of any vessels 
broken by her. When a girl wishes to change from one house to 
another, her new master lends her the sum ih® owes to her former 
employer, and she remits it to him. The chief occupation of these 
hired women is to spin qan bar. • 

33. See n. 30 (anfe). 



254 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


It is easy to get married in these islands because of the small- 
ness of the dowry and the approval with which intercourse with 
women is viewed. Most men say nothing about the nuptial gift; 

they are satisfied with pronouncing the creed of 
njMroujury * Islam and giving a nuptial gift in conformity with 
kahsuoi law. When ships arrive, their crews marry wives, 

and they divorce them before their departure; it is 
a sort of temporary marriage. The women of Maldives never leave 
their country. I have not seen any place in the world where the 
company of women is more agreeable. In the native households, the 
wife does not entrust to any one the task of serving her husband; 
she serves his food, cleans up after his meal, and washes his hands; 
she offers him water for his ablutions and she covers his feet when 
he goes to sleep. The wife never eats with her husband, and no 
man knows what his wife eats. I married several women when I 
was there ; some of them ate with me at my request, others refused 
so that I never succeeded in my efforts to see them at their table. 

The motive for which the people of these islands embraced 
Islam; description of evil spirits which caused damage to them every 
month : 

Trustworthy men among the inhabitants of the Maldives, such 
as the theologian ‘ Isa of Yemen, the theologian and professor 1 Aly, 
the QazI ‘Abd-ul-lah and others told me that the people of these 
islands were idolaters, and that there appeared before them every 
month an evil spirit, from among the spirits that came from the 
sea. It resembled a vessel full of lights. The custom of the 
natives who saw this was to get hold of a young virgin, adorn her 
and conduct her to a butlthanah, M i.e., an idol temple, which was 
built on the beach and had a window through which she could be 
seen. There they left her for a night, and came back in the morn- 
ing; then they found the young girl deflowered and dead. They did 
not miss drawing lots each month, and whoever had his name 
chosen gave up his daughter. Later on there arrived in that place 
a Maghrib! called Ab-ul-Barkat, the Berber, who knew the illus- 
trious Quran by heart. He stayed in the house of an old woman in 
the island Mahal. One day when he visited his hostess, he found 
that she had gathered her family together and that these women 
wept as if they had gone to a funeral. He questioned them on the 
subject of their sorrow, but they did not tell him the cause. A 
dragoman turned up and informed him that the lot had fallen an 
the old lady, and that> she had only one daughter wham the evil 

34. but=idol ; khanah=house,— N. V. R. 



IBN BATTOTA 


spirit would kill. Ab-ul-Barkat told the old lady : “ I shall go to- 
night in the place of your daughter.” Now he was completely 
without a beard, and they brought him in the night and left him 
within the temple'after he had finished his ablutions. He started 
to recite the Quran ; then he perceived the demon by the window 
and continued his recitation. As soon as the demon came within 
hearing distance, he plunged into the sea, and when morning came, 
the MaghribI was still engaged in reciting the Quran. The old 
woman, her family and the people of the island came as usual to 
remove the body of the girl and burn it They saw the stranger 
who recited the Quran and took him to their king, called 
Shinurazah, 35 and reported to him this occurrence. The king was 
astonished at it ; the MaghribI bade him embrace Islam and roused 
in him the desire to do so. Shinurazah told him ; “ Remain with 
me for a month, and if you repeat once more what you have done 
and escape the evil spirit, I shall change my faith.” The 
stranger lived among the idolaters, and God ordained that 
the king receive the true faith. He became a Muslim 

before the end of the month, as also his wives, children 
and his courtiers. When the next month began, the MaghribI was 
conducted to the temple of idols ; but the demon did not come, 
and the Berber recited the Quran till the morning. The Sultan 
and his subjects came in the morning and found him thus engaged. 
They broke the idols and demolished the temple. The people of 
the island embraced Islam and sent messengers to the other islands, 
the inhabitants of which were also converted. The MaghribI 
remained among these people greatly esteemed by them. The 
natives began to profess his doctrine which was that of the Imam 
Malik. Even to-day, they venerate the Maghribls because of him. 
He built a mosque, which is known under his name. I read the 
following inscription engraved on wood on the grilled tribune of 
the great mosque : “ The Sultan Ahmad Shinurazah has embraced 
Islam at the hands of Ab-ul-Barkat, the Berber, and the MaghribI." 
This Sultan has assigned a third of the imposts on these islands as 
alms to the travellers in recognition of his having embraced Islam 
by their intervention. This portion of the taxes still bears a name 
which recalls this circumstance. 

Because of the demon spoken of here, many of the islands of 
the Maldives were depopulated before then conversion to Islam. 
When we entered the country, I had no know’^dge of this event 
One night when I was attending to my business, I suddenly heard 


35. Probably Chinaraja.— N. V. R. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


the people reciting in a high voice the formulas : “ There is no 
god but God ” and “ God is Almighty.” I saw children carrying 
the Quran on their heads, and women who struck on basins and 
vases of copper. I was surprised at what they did, and I said: 
“What has happened to you?” They replied: “Have you not 

looked at the sea?” I then turned to die sea and noticed a kind of 
a great ship seemingly full of lamps and stoves. They told me : 

“ It is the demon ; it generally appears once a month. But when we 
do what you see us doing, it goes back and does no harm to us.” 

One of the wonders of these islands is that they have a woman 
for their ruler, viz., KHadijah, daughter of Sultan Jalal-ud-din 
' Umar, son of Sultan Salab-ud-din Salih-ul- 
QOTBJ Bangali. 36 The kingship belonged at first to 

her grandfather, then to her father, and when he 
died, her brother Shahab-ud-din became king. He was a minor, 
and the vazir, ‘ Abd-ul-lah, son of Muhammad-ul-Hazramy 37 mar- 
ried the prince's mother, and gained control over him. The same 
man later married Sultanah KHadijah on the death of her first 
husband, the vazir Jamal-ud-din, as we shall see. When Shahab- 
ud-din came of age, he drove out his step-father, the vazir 'Abd-ul- 
lah. and exiled him to the islands of Suwaid. He remained sole 
master, chose a freedman named ‘ Ali Kalky as Vazir whom ho dis- 
missed at the end of three years and exiled to Suwaid. Shahab-ud- 
din, however, was a libertine who went out every night to meet the 
wives of his officers and courtiers, and so he was deposed and de- 
ported to the region of Haldatany, where he was put to death soon 
after. 

The only survivors of the royal family were the sisters of the 
late monarch, KHadijah, the eldest, Miriam and Fatimah. The 
people raised to the throne KHadijah, who was married to their 
preacher Jamal-ud-din who become vazir and real master of the 
state, and promoted his son Muhammad to the place of preacher, 
vacated by him ; but orders are issued only in the name of 
KHadijah. They write these on palm leaves with a curved iron 
tool resembling a knife. They write on paper only copies of the 
Quran and scientific treatises. The preacher mentions the Sul- 
tanah in, the prayers on Fridays and other days in these terms. 
“My god, succour thy servant whom thou in thy knowledge hast 
preferred over other mortals, and whom thou hast made the instru- 

36. Probably §aiah-ud-din Salih hailed from Banjala, i.e., Bengal.— N.VJl. 

37. Bazranfy, of the tribe or province or city of Ba*ramaut in Yemen in 
Arabia.— N. V. B. 



tBN BATTOTA 


merit of thy grace towards all Mussulmans, that is to say, the 
Sultanah KHadijah, daughter of the Sultan Jalal-ud-din, son of 
Sultan Sal&b-ud-din.” 

When a stranger arrives among these people and visijs the hall 
of audience, called dor, custom requires that he should take two 
cloths with him. He makes an obeisance to the Sul- 
tanah, and throws down one of the two cloths ; then HA1L or 
he salutes her vazir, who is also her husband, atjiumci 
Jamiil-ud-din, and throws down the second cloth. 

The army of this Sultanah comprises a thousand foreigners, though 
some of the soldiers are natives. They come every day to the hall of 
audience, salute her, and go back. Their pay consists of rice which 
is supplied to them every month at the bandar. At the end of the 
month, they come to the hall of audience, salute the vazir, and 
tell him : “ Convey our homages to the sovereign and inform her 
that we have come to ask for our pay ” ; thereupon the necessary 
orders are issued. The Qazi and the officials, who bear the title 
‘ vazirs’ in this country, also present themselves every day in the 
audience hall. They make an obeisance and depart after the 
eunuchs have transmitted their homage to the sovereign. 

The people of the Maldives call the supreme vazir, lieutenant 
of the Sultanah, Kalky ; and the Qazi, Fandayarqalwa. All sen- 
tences proceed from Qazi, who is treated with greater respect 
than all the other officials, and whose orders are carried out like 
those of the Sultan, or even better. He sits on a 
carpet in the court hall ; he receives the omcas 
income from three islands for his own use, 
in accordance with an old custom established by Sultan Ahmad 
Shinurazah. The preacher is called Handijary, the chief of the 
treasury Fdmaldary, the receiver-general of finances Mafakalwa, 
the Magistrate of police Falnayak and the admiral Man&yak. All 
these persons have the title of vazir. There is no prison in these 
islands; culprits are shut up in wooden houses meant for the 
storage of merchandise, each being confined in a wooden cell like 
the Christian prisoners of Morocco. 

When 1 arrived in this country, I disembarked on the island 
of Kannalus, a fine island with many mosques. I put up in the 
house of one of the most pious inhabitants. The theologian ‘ Aly 
gave me a feast ; he was a distinguished 
man ; he had sons who devoted thery selves zankalvs 
to study. I met a man called Muhammad, , 
native of Zafar-ul-Humuz, who entertained me and told me : ‘If 
"r. N.—33 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


you enter the island of Mahal, the vazir will detain you by force, 
for the people have no Qfi?l there.’ Now my plan was to go from 
there to Ma’bar (Coromandel coast), SarandJb (Ceylon) and 
Bengal, and thence to §In (China). I came to/the Maldives in a 
vessel of the captain ‘ Umar-ul-hanaury who was among the 
virtuous pilgrims. We spent six days at Kannalus ; then he engag- 
ed a small boat for going to the isle of Mahal with a present to the 
sovereign and her husband. 1 wished to go with him, but he said : 

* The boat is not large enough to take you and your companions ; 
if you will come without them, you may do so.’ I declined this 
offer, and ’Umar went away. But the wind was against him, and 
after four days, he returned much fatigued. He made excuses to 
me, and entreated me to accompany him with my companions. 

We set sail in the morning and reached 
taim some island by midday ; we sailed thence and 

spent the night on another island. After sailing 
for four days, we reached the region of Taim, where Hilfil 
was governor. He saluted me, gave me a feast, and then came to 
see me with four men, two of whom carried on their shoulders a 
pole from which four chickens were suspended, while the two 
others carried similar poles with about ten cocoanuts tied to them. 
I was surprised at the value they set on these miserable objects, 
but I learned that they acted like this out of consideration and 
regard. 

We left these people, and disembarked on the sixth day in 
the island of Usman, a great and good man. He received us with 
honour and entertained us suitably. On the eighth day we put 
into port in an island belonging to the vazir Talamdy. At last on 
the tenth day we came to the Mahal island where the Suljanah 
and her husband dwelt, and we entered the 
“sum. port. It is the rule here that no one is 

allowed to disembark without the permission 
of the inhabitants. They gave us permission, and I wished to go 
to some mosque ; but the slaves who were on the shore stopped 
me saying that it was essential to visit the vazir. I had enjoined 
the captain to plead ignorance if he was questioned about me; 
this I did lest they should detain me; for I did not know that an 
ill-adviseA gossip had written to them about me that I had been 
Qazi at Delhi. When we reached the court hall, we sat on the 
benches placed near the third door from the entrance. The Q&p, 

‘ Isa-ul-Yemeny, turned up and saluted me. On my side I saluted 
the vazir. The captain of the ship Ibrahim (called ‘ Umar else- 
where) brought ten pieces oi cloth, made a salifte to the sovereign 



IBN BATTOTA 


and threw down one of these cloths; then he bent his knee in 
honour of the vazir and threw down another cloth, and so on to the 
last. They askedihim about me, and he said ‘I do not know him.’ 
Then they gave us betel and rosewater, a mark of honour 
among these people. The vazir put us up in a house, and sent us 
food consisting of a large basinful of rice and 
other plates of meat salted and dried in the mottion 
sun, chickens, ghee and fish. The next day 
I went with the captain of the ship and the Qa?i * Isfi-ul-Ye- 
meny to visit a hermitage founded at the extremity of the island 
by the virtuous Shaikh Najib. We returned by night, and the 
next morning the vazir sent me a robe and meal comprising the 
same items as before, and cocoanuts and honey extracted from 
them which the islanders called qv.rha.ny, ' sugar water’. They 
brought also 100,000 cowries for my expenses. At the end of ten 
days, there came a vessel from Ceylon which carried Arab and 
Persian fakirs who knew me and who told the servants of the 
vazir all about me ; this greatly increased the joy he experienced 
at my arrival. He sent for me at the commencement of the 
Ramzan. I found the chiefs and the vazir already gathered there, 
and food was being served on tables each taken up by a number 
of friends. The grand vazir seated me by his side along with the 
Qa?i ‘ Isa, the vazir Famalddri or chief of the treasury, and the 
vazir ‘Umar dahard, i.e„ the general of the army. The meal of 
these islanders consists of rice, chicken, ghee, fish and flesh salted 
and dried in the sun, and cooked banana. After food they drink 
the wine of cocoanut palm mixed with spices for promoting diges- 
tion. On the ninth day of Ramzan, the son-in-law of the vazir 
died. His wife, the daughter of this minister, had already been 
married to Sultan Shahab-ud-din, but neither of her husbands had 
lived with her on account of her tender age. The vazir, her father, 
took her back into his house and gave me her 
bouse which was one of the best. I asked i-axibs 
for permission to entertain the fakirs who had re- zsTarrAnnD 
turned after a pilgrimage to the Foot of Adam in the 
island of Ceylon. He gave me the permission and sent me five 
sheep, rare animals on these islands, as they are imported from 
Ma’bar, Malabar, and Maqdashu. The vazir sent me>also rice, 
chicken, ghee and spices. I had all these things carried to the 
house of vazir SulaimSn, the M&nayak (admiral) , who added more 
to them and had them cooked with the greatest care and also sent 
me carpets* and brass vessels. We broke Vie fast, according to 
custom, in the palgce of the Sultfinah, with the graftd vazir, and I 
begged him to allow some of the vazirs to assist me at my feast. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


He told me that he would himself come there, and I thanked him 
duly and came back to my house; but he had already come with 
the vazlrs and the magnates of the court. He wae seated in a high 
wooden pavilion. All who came, chiefs or wzirs, saluted the 
grand vaAr and threw before him a piece of unsewn doth, so that 
the total of such cloths was nearly a hundred, and these the fakirs 
took. The food was then served and eaten; then the readers of 
the Quran gave a reading with their fine voices after which they 
began to chant and dance. I had a fire made, and the fakirs en- 
tered it and trod upon it with their feet ; some among them swal- 
lowed burning charcoal as one eats sweets, till the flame died out. 

When the night came to an end the vazir returned, and I ac- 
companied him. We passed by a garden belonging to the trea- 
sury and the vazir said to me : ‘ This garden 
slave Guos is yours; I shall have a house built there 
for you to live in.' I praised his action and 
prayed for his welfare. The next day he sent me a slave-girl 
and his messenger told me : ' The vazir wants me to tell you that 
if this girl pleases you, she is yours ; else he will send you a 
Mahratha girl.’ I like Mahratha girls, and so I replied to the mes- 
senger : ‘ I want only Mahrathas.’ The minister had one sent to 
me by name Gulistan which means, ‘ flower of the garden,’ (or, 
more exactly, ‘flower-garden.’) She knew Persian and pleased 
me very much. The people of Maidive islands speak a language 
I cannot understand. 

The next day the vazir sent me a young slave-girl from Coro- 
mandel, called ‘Anbarl (colour of ambergris) i.e., black. The 
following night, after prayer, he came to my house with some of 
his servants, and entered it with two small slaves. I saluted him 
and he asked me how I fared. I prayed for his happiness and 
thanked him. One of the slaves placed before him a luqshah 
(buqshah) i.e., a kind of leather bag, from which he took out silk 
cloths and a casket containing pearls and jewels. The vazir pre- 
sented them to me, and added : “HI had sent you this with the 

slave-girl, she might have said — ‘ this is my property, I brought 
from my master’s house.’ Now these things belong to you and 
you may 'present them to her.” I prayed to God for the minister’s 
good and rendered thanks to him as he deserved. 

The vazir Sulaiman, the Mdnayak, proposed that I should 
marry his daughter ; ,1 sent to ask of the vazir Jamab-ud-din per- 
mission to ccyi tract this marriage. My messenger returned and 
said : “ This proposal is not to his liking as he Grants you to marry 



IBN BATTOTA 


his daughter when the legal period of her widowhood comes to 
an end." I refused to agree to this union out of fear for the bad 
luck attaching to»the daughter of the grand vazir as both her hus- 
bands had died before consummating their marriage with her. 
Meanwhile, I fell ill and had a bad fever ; • 

for every one who enters these islands invaria- 
bly catches fever. I took a firm resolve to frevehtid 

leave the country ; I sold a part of my jewels for cowries and en- 
gaged a vessel for sailing to Bengal. When I went to 

take leave of the vazir, the Qazi came to meet me and 
said in the name of the vazir : ‘ If you wish to go, 

give back to us what we have given you, and then go.’ I 
answered, ‘With some of the jewels I have bought cowries, you 
may do what you like with them.’ After some time the Qazi re- 
turned ; ‘the vazir,’ he reported, ‘says we gave you gold and not 
cowries.’ ‘Very well,’ said I, ‘I shall sell them and return your 
gold.’ As a result, I sent asking the merchants to buy the cowries 
from me, but the vazir ordered them not to do so ; for he meant 
thus to prevent my departure from his country. Afterwards he 
sent me one of his friends to say : 1 The vazir wants me to tell you 
that if you stay with us you will have all you want.’ I said to my- 
self : “I am in their power ; if I will not stay with good grace, I 
shall have to do so by constraint; a voluntary stay is much the 
better.” And I told the messenger : ‘ Very well, I shall stay with 
him.’ He returned to his master who was greatly pleased at my 
answer, and sent for me. When I entered his house, he got up, 
embraced me and said : ‘ We wish you to be near us, and you wish 
to go away!’ I made my excuses to him which he accepted, and I 
told him: ‘If you wish me to stay, I shall make conditions.’ The 
vazir replied, ‘ state them and we shall accept.’ I said : ‘ I cannot 
walk on foot.’ Now it is the custom of the country that no one 
rides a horse unless he be a vazir. When they gave me a horse 
and I rode on it, the people, men and children, began to follow me 
in amazement, till at last I had to complain of it to the vazir. 
He caused it to be proclaimed by beat of danqurah that no one 
should follow me ; the danqurah is a kind of brass basin which is 
beaten with an iron rod and is heard far ; after beating it, they 
proclaim in public what they want. . 


The vazir told me : ‘If you would ride in a palanquin, it 

would be very good ; else, we have a horse and a mare ; choose 
whichever you like.’ I chose the mare, and they brought her to 
me at once, along with a robe. I asked the vazir ^ * what shall I 
do with the cowrites I have bought V He replied ; ' Send one of 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


your companions to sell them in Bengal.’ ‘ I shall do so,’ said I, 

‘ II you will send some one to assist him in the work.’ ' Yes ’, he 
replied. I then sent my companion, Abu Muhammad, son of 
Farhan, with whom they sent a man named t\fe pilgrim ‘Aly.** 
Now the •sea was rough, and the crew threw overboard all the 
cargo including the mast, the water and all other provisions meant 
for the journey. For sixteen days they were without sail or rudder, 
and after having endured hunger and thirst and fatigues, they 
reached the island of Ceylon. At the end of a year, my companion 
Abu Muhammad returned to me after visiting the Foot (of Adam) . 

At the end of the month of Ramzan, the vazir sent me a robe, 
and we went to the place set apart for prayers. The way from 
the minister’s house to this place was decorated ; cloth was spread 
(on the ground) and heaps of cowries placed to the right and left. 
All those among the amirs and nobles who owned houses on the 
way had caused small cocoanut palms to be planted near them to- 
gether with areca palms and bananas. Ropes had been stretched 
from tree to tree and green cocoanuts suspended from them. 1116 
master of the house stood near the door and, when the vazir pass- 
ed, threw at his feet a cloth of silk or cotton. The slaves of the 
minister picked them up as well as the cowries placed on his route. 
The vazir walked on foot, wearing an ample robe of wool, of 
Egyptian make, and a large turban. He wore a silk napkin as his 
scarf; four parasols sheltered his head, and there were sandals on 
his feet. All the others, without exception, had bare feet. Trum- 
pets, clarions and kettle-drums preceded him ; the soldiers march- 
ed before and after him crying : 1 God is great,’ till they reached 
the place of prayer. 

When prayer was finished, the vazlr’s son preached; then they 
brought a litter and the minister got into it. The amirs and the 
other vazirs saluted him and threw pieces of cloth according to 
custom. In former times the grand vazir never went in a litter 
and only the kings did so. The litter was then lifted by porters, 
I mounted my horse, and we went to the palace. The minister 
sat on a raised seat, and there were vazirs and amirs near him. 
The slaves were standing with shields, swords and batons in their 
hands. Then they served food, and afterwards arecanut and 
betel ; then they brought a small bowl containing sandal maq&fary. 
As soon as a party finish their dinner, they smear themselves with 
sandal. That day I saw over some of their food a fish of a species 
of Sardine, salted and uncooked, which had been senfto them as 


98. AI-Hajj All— Gibb. 



DSN BATTOTA 


a present from Kulwm (Quilon), This fish is plentiful on the 
Malabar coast, the vazir took a sardine and started eating it, saying 
to me at the samatime : ‘eat this, it is not found in our country.’ I 
replied : ‘ how shill I eat it ; it is not cooked.' ‘ It is cooked,’ he 
answered j but I replied : ‘ I know this fish well, for it abounds in 
my country.’ 


Of my marriage and my nomination as Qdfi 

On the second day of Shawwal, I agreed with the vazir Sulal- 
min M&ndydk or admiral, that I would marry his daughter ; and 
I sent to ask of vazir Jamal-ud-din that the marriage should take 
place in his presence, in the palace. He agreed to this, and sent 
betel and sandal according to custom. People were ready for the 
ceremony, but the vazir Sulaiman delayed ; they sent for him, but 
still he did not come. He was sent for a second time, and he ex- 
cused himself on the score of the illness of his daughter. But the 
grand vazir told me in private : “ His daughter has refused to 
marry, and she is the mistress of her own actions. There are the 
people assembled, and how do you like marrying the step-mother 
of the Sultanah?” (The son of the grand vazir had married the 
daughter of this woman). I replied: “O! certainly.” He sum- 
moned the Qazi and the notaries. The profession of Mussulman 
faith was recited, and the vazir gave the nuptial gift. After a few 
days, she was brought to me. She was one of the best of women. 
Such was the excellence of her manners, that when I became her 
husband, she anointed me with good scents and perfumed my 
garments ; laughing all the while and showing no signs of incon- 
venience to her. 

After I married this woman, the vazir forced me to accept the 
functions of Qazi. The reason for my nomination was that I had 
reproached the Qazi for his taking the tenth part of all inheritances 
when he divided them among the parties entitled to them. I told 
him : “ You should take only a fee fixed with the consent of the 
heirs.” And this judge did nothing properly. When I took up 
the functions of judge, I spent all my efforts to enforce the precepts 
of the law. the law-suits do not take place there as in our country. 
The first bad custom that I reformed related to the stay of di- 
vorced women in the house of those who had repudiated them; 
for each of these women continued to live in the house of her 
former husband, till she married another. I prevented their doing 
this on any. account. About twenty-five men who had behaved 
like this were brought to me ; I had them whipped and paraded in 
Ihe market place ; ’and as for the women, I forced *them to leave 



284 FOREIGN NOTICES 

the houses of these men. Afterwards, I strove to secure the strict 
observance of the prayers, and ordered the men to go quickly in 
the streets and bazaars immediately after the Friday prayer. Any* 
one who was discovered not having prayed, I hacubeaten and parad* 
ed in public. I compelled the imams and mu’zzins holding fixed 
appointments to perform their duties assiduously ; I wrote in the 
same sense to the magistrates of all the islands. Lastly, I tried to 
make the women wear clothes ; but I did not succeed in this. 

On the arrival of vazir ‘ Abd-ul-lah, son of Muhammad, ul- 
Hasjramy, whom the Sultan Shahab-ud-dtn had exiled to Sawaid ; 
narrative of what passed between us : 

I had espoused the step-daughter of this man, the 
daughter of his wife, and I loved her greatly. When the 
grand vazir recalled him to the isle of Mahal, I sent him 
presents, went to meet him and accompanied him to the 
palace. He saluted the supreme vazir who lodged him in 
a superb mansion where I visited him often. It happened that I 
spent the month of Ramzan in prayers, and all people visited me 
except 'Abd-ul-lah. The vazir Jamal-ud-din himself came to see 
me, and ‘ Abd-ul-lah with him, to bear him company. An enmity 
arose between us. For when I came out of the retreat, the mater- 
nal uncles of my wife, the step-daughter of ‘Abd-ul-lah, complain- 
ed to me. They were the sons of the vazir Jamal-ud-din ul-Sanjary. 
Their father had named vazir ‘Abd-ul-lah as their guardian, and 
their properties were still in his hands, though, according to law, 
th^v had come out of his tutelage. They demanded his appearance 
before the tribunal. I had a rule, when I summoned one of the 
opposing parties of sending him a piece of paper with or without 
writing. As soon as they knew of it, they came to the tribunal ; 
or else I punished them. I sent then a paper to ‘Abd-ul-lah as 
usual with me. This procedure made him very angry, and because 
of it he conceived a hatred against me. He concealed his enmity, 
and asked some one to speak in his place. Dishonest statements 
were repeated to me as having been made by him. 

The custom of the islanders, weak or strong, was to salute the 
vazir ‘Abd-ul-lah in the same manner as the vazir Jamal-ud-din. 
Their salutation consists in touching the ground with the fore- 
finger, and then kissing the finger and placing it on the head. I 
gave order to the public crier, and he proclaimed it in the palace 
of the sovereign, in thf presence of witnesses, that all persons who 
rendered homage to vazir ‘Abd-ul-lah in the same way as to the 
grand vazir would incur severe punishment. 1 required him to 



IBN BATTOTA 


bind Himself no more to allow people to do this. His enmity to 
me was aggravated by this. Meanwhile, I married yet another 
wife, daughter o&a vazir, much respected by the islanders, and a 
descendant of Sulmn DSud, grandson of Sultan Ahmad ShinGrS- 
zah ; then I married another who had been married to Sultan 
Shahfib-ud-din, and I had three mansions constructed in the gar- 
den given to me by the vazir. As to my fourth wife, who was 
the step-daughter of the vazir 'Abd-ul-lah she lived in her own 
house. She was the best loved of them all. When I had contract- 
ed these marriages, the vazir and the people of the island began 
to fear me much, because of their weakness. False rumours were 
carried to me and to the chief vazir, largely owing to the exertions 
of vazir ‘Abd-ul-lah, so that a definite estrangement came between 


On my separation from these persons and the motive of it 

One day it happened that the wife of a slave of the late Sul- 
tan Jamal-ud-din complained about him to the vazir, telling him 
that the slave was found having adulterous intercourse with a 
concubine of the Sultan. The vazir sent witnesses who entered 
the house of the young man, found the slave sleeping with her on 
the same carpet, and imprisoned them. Next morning I heard the 
news, and went to the hall of audience, and took my seat as usual. 
1 did not say a word about this affair. A courtesan came near me 
and said: “ The vazir sent me to ask you if you need anything.” 
I replied : “ No. ” The idea of the minister was that I should speak 
of the affair of the concubine and the slave; for it was my rule 
that no case came before me without my judging it. But as I 
disliked and hated him, I omitted to do this. I then returned to my 
house, and sat in the place where I pronounced my sentences. 
Forthwith there came a vazir, who told me, on behalf of the grand 
vazir: “ Yesterday such and such a thing happened on account 
of the affair of the concubine and the slave ; deal with them as the 
law requires.” I answered : “ This is a case in which it is not 
proper to pronounce judgement outside the Sultan’s palace." Then 
I went back there, the people assembled, and the concubine and 
the slave were summoned. I ordered both to be beaten on ac- 
count of their tite-d-tete, and caused the woman to be set free and 
the slave to be imprisoned ; after this, I returned to my house. 

The vazir sent me several of his principal servants to ask me 
to set the*slave free. I told them: “ Yoy intercede with me in 
favour of a negro slave who has violated the honour of his master, 
and but yesterday, you yourselves deposed the Sultan Shahab-ud- 
T. K.-M 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


din and killed him, because he had entered the house of one of 
his slaves!” And at once I ordered the culprit to be beaten with 
bamboo sticks (which have greater effect than whipping) and 
paraded through all the island with a cord royhd his neck. The 
messengers of the vazir went and told him what happened. He 
showed great excitement and was roused to great anger. He as- 
sembled the other vazirs and commanders of the army, and sent 
for me. I went, and, without making the usual salutation, bend- 
ing my knee, I just said : ‘ Salutation to you.’ Then I said to 
those present : “ Bo my witnesses, that I resign the functions of QazI 
because of my inability to perform them.” The vazir having ad- 
dressed me, I mounted (the dais) and seated myself in a place 
where I was face to face with him ; then I answered in the firmest 
possible manner. Meanwhile the mu’zzin called for the sunset 
prayer, and the grand vazir entered his house saying : “ It is said 
that I am sovereign ; now I summoned this man in order to vent 
my anger on him, and he vented his on me.” The islanders show- 
ed me respect only because of the Sultan of India, for they know 
the esteem in which he holds me : and though they are at a great 
distance from him, there is great fear of him in their hearts. 

When the grand vazir entered his house, he sent for the Qayl 
who had been removed from office. He was eloquent and address- 
ed me as follows : “ Our master asks why, in the presence of 
witnesses, you failed to show him the respect that was his due, and 
why you did not render him homage”; I answered: “I saluted him 
only when my heart was satisfied with him ; but as I am now dis- 
satisfied, I have given up doing so. The salutation of Muslims 
consists only in the word salam, and this I said.” The vazir sent 
this man a second time to me when he said : “ Your object is just 
to leave us ; pay the dowries of your wives and what you owe to 
the men, and then go if you will.” On hearing this, I bowed, went 
to my house, and cleared the debts I had contracted. In those 
days the vazir had given me carpets, and other personal property 
comprising copper vessels and other objects. In fact he gave me 
everything I asked for, loved me and treated me with considera- 
tion ; but he changed his mind, and had his fears roused regarding 
me. 

When he heard that I had paid my debts and was preparing 
to go, he repented of what he had said, and put off giving me per- 
mission for my departure. I swore the most solemn oaths that it 
was absolutely essential for me to resume my voyage,' and carried 
whatever I had to a mosque on the sea-coast, and divorced one of 
my wives. Another was with child, and I fixed a term of nine 



B3N BATTOTA 


287 


months for her within which I was to come back ; if I defaulted, 
she would be free to act as she liked. I took with me the wife that 
had formerly beena married to Sultan Shahab-ud-din in order to 
restore her to her^ather w h 0 lived in Muluk island, and my first 
wife whose daughter was the consanguineous sister of the Sultanah. 

I made a compact with the vazir ‘ Umar dahard (or general of 
the army), and the vazir Hasan, admiral, that I should go to the 
country of Ma’bar (Coromandel), the king of which was my 
brother-in-law, 39 and return from there with troops to bring the 
islands under his power, and that afterwards I should exercise autho- 
rity in his name. I arranged that the hoisting of white flags on the 
ships was to serve as the signal between them and me; the moment 
they saw these, they were to rise in revolt on the island. I had never 
aimed at this till the day of my estrangement from the vazir. He 
dreaded me and told the people : “ Quite sure, this man will seize 
the vazirate either in my life time or after my death.” He used to 
ask many questions concerning me. and said : “ I have heard that 

the king of India has sent him money to enable him to stir up 
trouble against me.” He feared my departure, lest I should return 
with troops from the Coromandel coast. He sent word to me to 
wait till he could fit out a ship for me, but I refused. 

The consanguineous sister of the Sultanah complained to her of 
the departure of her mother with me The Sultanah wished to stop 
this, hut could not do so. When she found her resolved to leave, 
she told her : “ All the jewels you had were made from the money 
belonging to the customs house. If you have evidence to show that 
Jalal-ud-din gave them to you, well and good; else, returg them.” 
These jewels were of great value ; nevertheless, my wife gave 
them back. The vazirs and chiefs came to me while I \ 'ps in the 
mosque, and begged me lo rti'm. I answered them: “If I had 
not sworn, certainly. T should return.” They rejoined : “ Go then 
to some other island lhat v"u mav keep your onth, and then come 
back,” to which I aereed in o>-de • to please them. When the day 
of aiv departure came. I went to bid farewell to the vazir. He 
embraced me and wept so much that his tears fell on my feet. He 
spent the following night guarding the island himself out of fear 
that my relatives by marriage and my friends would rise against 
him. 

At last I left the island and reached that of the vazir ‘Aly. My 
wife was attacked by a severe pain, and she wanted to go back. I 


39. ‘Husband of ay wife’s sister. ’—Gibb. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


divorced her and left her there, and I wrote about thiB to the 
vazir, for she was the mother of his son’s wife. I also divorced the 
wife for whom I had fixed a term (for my return) and I sent for a 
young slave whom I loved. Meanwhile we continued the voyage 
in the midst of these islands, passing one district after another. 

Of the women who have only one breast : 

In one of these isles, I saw a woman who had only one breast. 
She was the mother of two daughters, one of these resemhling her 
completely, and the other had two breasts, one large and containing 
milk, while the other was small and had no milk. I was surprised 
by the form of these women. 

Then we reached another of these islands, a small island with 
only one house in it, occupied by a weaver, who was married and 
father of a family. He had small cocoanut palms and a small boat 
which he used for fishing and for going to any of the islands at his 
pleasure. On his islet there were’ also some small bananas ; we 
found no land birds there except two crows which flew towards us 
when we came and made a circle above our vessel. I really envied 
this man, and wished that his island had been mine, for me to retire 
in it and await the inevitable end of my time. 

Then I came to the island of Mulfik, where a ship belonging to 
Captain Ibrahim was lying. I resolved to go in this ship to the 
Coromandel coast. This man visited me with 
MCLUK his companions, and they entertained me at a 

fine feast. The vazir had written to the effect 
that I was to be given in this island one hundred and 
twenty bustu of cowries, and twenty goblets of cocoanut-palm-wine, 
and each day a certain amount of betel, areca-nut and fish. I spent 
seventy days in Muluk, and married two wives. Muluk is among 
the most beautiful islands, verdant and fertile. Among the marvels 
of the island, I noticed that a branch cut from any tree and planted 
on the earth or on a wall, soon became covered with leaves and 
grew into a tree. I saw also that the pomegranate bore fruit 
throughout the year. The people of the island feared that Captain 
Ibrahim might plunder them at the time of his departure. As a 
result thdy wished to seize all the weapons on his ship and keep 
them till the day of his departure. A dispute arose on this account, 
and we returned to Mahal where we did not land. I wrote to 
the vazir to tell him what had happened. He sent a .letter to the 
effect that it was no t^ right to have seized the arms of the crew. 
We then returned to Muluk, and again set sail from there in the 



IBN BATTOTA 


middle of the month of Rabi’ II of the year 745 40 (26th August 
1344). In the month of Sha’ban of the same year (December, 
1344), the vazir iamal-ud-din died. The Sultanah was pregnant, 
and was delivered after his death. The vazir ’Abd-ul-lah married 
her. As for us, we sailed without a trained pilot in opr midst; 
and though the distance between the Maldives and the Coro- 
mandel is just three days’ journey, we sailed 
for nine days and landed on the island of crram 
Silan (Ceylon) on the ninth day. We saw 
there the mountain of Sarandib 41 rising in the air like a column of 
smoke. When we approached this island, the sailors said : “ This 
port is not in the country of a Sultan whose lands merchants 
might enter in full security ; but it lies in the territory of 
Sultan Airy Shakrauty (Arya Cakravarti) who is a perverse 
and unjust man, and owns a pirate fleet.” Hence we were afraid 
to land in his port ; but a high wind arose, and we dreaded the sink- 
ing of the ship. And I told the captain : “ Get me ashore, and I 
shall get for you a safe-conduct from this Sultan.” He acted 
accordingly and put me ashore. The idolaters came to us and 
asked : “ Who are you ? ” I told them that I was the 

brother-in-law and friend of the Sultan of Ma’bar, that I 
had set out to visit him, and that what was on board the vessel was 
a present meant for this prince. They went to their sovereign and 
conveyed my answer to him. He sent for me and I went to see 
him in the town of Battalah (Puttelam) , his capital. It is a s m all 
and pretty place, surrounded by a wall and bastions of wood. The 
whole coast in the neighbourhood is covered with trunks of 
cinnamon trees washed down by the torrents. These trees are 
heaped on the shore and look like a sort of hillocks there. The 
people of Ma’bar (Coromandel) and Malabar take them without 
paying anything; in return for this favour, however, they make 
presents to the Sultan of cloth and similar things. Between the 
Ma’bar and the island of Ceylon, it is a day and a night’s journey. 
We also find on this island much brazil wood as well as Indian aloe, 
which is called alkalkhy (probably the Greek agallokon), but has 
no resemblance to Qamary or Qaquly. We shall speak of this later. 

The Sultan of Silan is called Airy Shakrauty; and he is power- 
ful on the sea. Once, when I was on the Ma’bar Coast, I saw a 

40. 22nd August— Gibb. 

41. Ibn Battuta speaks of the island Silan and the mountain Sarandib. 
The distictloif is interesting as it seems to indicat* the probable Arab name 
Sarandib for the island of Ceylon. Where was this Jabsl-i-Sarsndib in the 
Island ? Is it identical with the Adam's peak? 



270 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


hundred vessels of his, great and s ma ll, which came 
isb bolt ah there. There were in the port eight ships belonging 

or cmoN to the Sultan of the country reserved for a voyage 

to Yemen. The king ordered preparations to be 
made and appointed the persons to guard his vessels. When the 
Ceylonese despaired of finding an occasion to seize them, they said : 
“ We have come only to protect our vessels which have also to go 
to Yemen.” 

When I entered the house of the infidel Sultan, he rose, made 
me sit by his side and spoke to me with the utmost kindness. He 
told me: “Your companions may land in all security; they will be 
my guests till their departure. The Sultan of Ma’bar coast and I 
are friends.” Then he arranged for my lodging, and I spent three 
days with him, treated with great consideration, which increased 
every day. He understood Persian and enjoyed greatly what I 
related to him regarding foreign kings and their lands. One day 
I went to him when he had near him a quantity of pearls, brought 
to him from the fisheries in his comftry. His officers separated the 
valuable ones from the rest. He asked me: “Have you seen pearl 
fisheries in the countries you have travelled in?” “Yes,” 1 replied 
“ I have seen them in the islands of Qais and Kish that belong to 
Ibn Sawwamaly.” "I have heard of them,” he said, and then gave 
me many pearls and added: “Are there pearls equal to these in 
that island?” 1 replied: “I have seen only inferior pearls there.” 
My answer pleased him, and he said: “Hie pearls are yours.” “Do 
not blush !," he added, “ask for whatever you want.” I then said: 
“1 have had 'no other desire, since coming to this island, than to 
visit the celebrated Foot of Adam.” The people of the country call 
Adam, Baba, and Hava, M&ma. “ That is easy ” he replied, “ I shall 
send some one with you to take you there.” “ That is what I want," 
said I, and then added: “ Hie ship in which I came can proceed to 
Ma’bar in all safety, and when I come back, you will send me in 
your vessels.” “ Certainly,” he said. 

When I reported this to the Captain of the ship, he said to me: 
“ I will not go till you come back, though I have to wait a year on 
your account.” I informed the Sultan of this reply, and he said to 
me: “ The captain will be my guest till your return.” 

The Sultan then gave me a palanquin which his slaves carried 
on their shoulders, and sent with me four of the yogis who have 
the custom of undertaking an annual pilgrimage 
pilgrimage to to the Foot, three Brahmins, and ten others from 

ah am'b peak among his companions, and fifteen men for carrying 

•provisions. Water was to be had in plenty all 



ibn battota an 

along the route. On the first day, we camped near a river, which 
we crossed by a ferry made of bamboos. From there we travelled 
to Manar Mand^y, a fine town at the extremity of the Sultan's 
territory ; the people there treated us to a great feast. The repast 
comprised young buffalos, captured in a hunt in the* adjoining 
wood, and brought home alive, of rice, ghi, fish, fowl and milk. We 
did not find any Muslim in this town, with the exception of a 
KHurasanian who remained there for reasons of health and who 
accompanied us. We left for Bandar Salaw&t, a small town, and 
passed through a rough country with many water courses in it. 
There are many elephants, but they do no harm to pilgrims and 
strangers, and this is due to the holy influence of Shaikh Abu ’Abd- 
ul-lah, son of the KHafif, the first to open, the road for visiting the 
Foot. Formerly the infidels stopped the Mussulmans from making 
this pilgrimage, annoyed them, and neither ate nor traded with 
them. But since the adventure that befel Shaikh Abu 'Abd-ul-lah 
as has been narrated above, 42 they began to honour the 
Muslims, allowing them to enter their houses and eat with them. 
They even trust them with their wives and children. To this day 
they do great honour to the Shaikh and call him ‘ the great Shaikh 
Then we went to the town of Kunkar, the residence of the 
principal sovereign of this country. It is built in a valley between 
two mountains near a large bay, called the bay of precious stones, 
because gems are found in it. Outside this 
town, there is the mosque of Shaikh ‘Usman kuhjcah 
of Shiraz, sumamed Shawush (the usher); the 
sovereign and the inhabitants of the place visit it and show their 
regard for him. It was he that served as guide to the Foot, and 
when he had one of his hands and feet cut off, his sons and slaves 
became guides in his place. He was thus mutilated because of his 
having killed a cow. Now the law of the Hindus ordains that who- 
ever kills a cow should be slaughtered in the same manner, or 
packed in her skin and burned. As Shaikh ‘Usman was respected 
by the people, they stopped with cutting off his hand and foot, and 
made him a present of the revenue raised in a certain bazaar. 


<2. il 80-1. Ibn Battuta's story is that the Shaikh once went to Adam's 
Peak with about thirty dervishes who, while journeying in this part of 
Ceylon, felt the pangs of hunger, caught hold of a young elephant and ate 
it, in spite of J he Shaikh’s warning. That night the elephants mustered strong 
and killed all the dervishes who had eaten of the* elephant’s flesh, sparing 
only the Shaikh who had refrained, and was carried by art elephant on its 
back.— See Gibb pp. 96-6. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


The Sultan of Kunkar is called Kunar, 4Sa and he has a white 
elephant. I have not seen another white elephant anywhere. He 
king rides on it on solemn occasions, and then its forehead is adorn- 
ed with large gems. It so happened that the nobles in his empire 
rose agaiifst this monarch, put out his eyes, and made his son king. 
He himself continues to live in that town, a blind man. 

The admirable gems called the bahramdn (rubies or carbuncles) 
are to be seen only in this town. Among them, some are taken 
from the bay, and these are the most precious in 
precious stones the eyes of the natives ; others are taken out 
of the earth. We find gems in all places in 
the island of Silan. In this land, the entire soil is private 
property. When a person buys a piece of land, he digs it for gems. 
He comes across white and ramified stones, and inside these stones 
gems lie hidden. The owner sends them to the lapidaries who 
strike them till they separate the gems from the stone hiding them. 
The gems are red (rubies), yellow (topazes), and blue (sapphires) 
or ntlam as they call it. The custom of the people is to reserve for 
the Sultan all precious stones of the value of a hundred fanams or 
more; the Sultan pays the price and takes them for himself. Stones 
of a lower value are retained by those who find them. A hundred 
fanams are equal to six gold pieces. ' 

All the women of Ceylon have necklaces of precious stones of 
divers colours, and they have likewise bracelets on their hands 
and lekalakhail (anklets) on their feet. The Sultan’s women make 
networks out of these gems for their head. I saw on the forehead of 
the white elephant seven of these gems, each bigger than a hen’s egg. 
I have also seen near the Sultan Airy Shakrauty (Arya Cakravarti) 
a bowl of rubies of the size of the palm of the hand and containing 
the oil of aloes. When I expressed my surprise at this bowl, the 
Sultan said to me: “ We have even larger articles made of the same 
material.” 

We left Kunkar and stopped at a cave called after Us(a 
Muhammad Allury. He was a good man; he dug out this cave on 
the slope of the mountain, near a small bay. Leav- 
black „ mg this cave, we went on, and encamped near 

voRKRB the bay called Khaur bu snah (the bay of the mon- 

keys). Buznah (Pers. Buzinah) is the same as 
the qurd (pi. of qird, monkey) in Arabic. Monkeys are very numer- 
ous on these mountains; they are black in colour, and have long 


42a. Konar, as in Alagakkonar. 



IBN BATTCTA 


STS 

tails. Those of the male sex have beards like men. Shaikh ‘Usman, 
his son and other persons told me that these monkeys have a chief 
whom they obey %s if he were a king. He wears on his forehead 
a fillet of leaves a|d leans upon a staff. Four monkeys, staves in 
hand, march on his right and left, and when the chief «is seated, 
they stand behind him. His female and young ones come and sit 
before him every day; the other monkeys come and sit at some 
distance from him; then one of the four monkeys abovementioned 
addresses them, and all the monkeys withdraw; after this, each 
brings a banana or a lemon or some similar fruit. The king of the 
monkeys, his young ones and the four principal monkeys eat. A 
certain yogi told me that he saw these four monkeys beating another 
monkey with sticks before their chief and then pulling out his 
hair. 

Trustworthy men have told me that when one of these 
monkeys seizes a young girl, she cannot escape his lewdness. 
An inhabitant of the island of Ceylon narrated to me that 
there was a monkey in his house, and that when one of his 
daughters entered a room, the animal followed her. She raised a 
cry, but the monkey violated her. "We rushed up to her,” he 
continued, “we saw the monkey holding her in his embrace and 
we killed him.” • 

Now we left for the bay of bamboos whence Abu ’Abd-ul-lah, 
son of the KHafif, got the two rubies that he gave to the Sultan of 
this island, as we have stated earlier. 43 Then we travelled to a 
place called “ The house of the Old Woman,” at the extreme limit 
of the inhabited world. Thence we went to the Cave of Baba Tahir, 
who was a good man, and then to the Cave of Sablk, who was a 
Hindu sovereign that retired to this spot for giving himself up to 
devotional practices. 

On the Flying Leech 

In this place we saw the flying leech called zolti by the natives. 
It stays on the trees and herbs near the water, and when a man 
approaches, it rushes on him. Whatever the part of his body on 
which the leech settles, it bleeds profusely. The people keep a 
lemon ready to squeeze out its juice, in such a case, on the worm, 
which then falls away from the body; they then scrape the part of 
the body with a wooden knife kept for the purpose They said that 
a certain pilgrim passing by this route was fastened on by the 
leeches, antf that, as he was slack and did net press citron juice on 



foreign notices 


274 

them, all his blood was lost and he died. His name was Baba 
KHuzy and there is a cave bearing his name. From this place, we 
proceeded to the seven caverns, and then to thl hill of Iskandar 
(Alexander). Here there was a cave called th^Safhany, a water- 
source and an inhabited castle, below which was a bay called "The 
place of the sinking of the contemplatives.' In the same spot are 
found the cave of the orange and that of the Sultan. Near this 
last is the entrance ( darw&zah in Pers., bob in Arab.) to the 
mountain. 

The mountain of Sarandib (Adam’s Peak) 

Hie mountain of Sarandib is among the highest in the 
world; we saw it from the sea when we had still to travel 
nine days to reach it. When we ascended it, we 
■rm ascent saw clouds below us, hiding its base from our view. 

to the peak On this mountain there are many ever-green trees, 

flowers of many polours and a red rose as 
big as the palm of the hand. They say that on this rose there is an 
inscription of the name of the Almighty God and His Prophet. 4 ** 
On the mountain there are two paths leading to the Foot of Adam, 
called after the father and mother, i.e. Adam and Eve. Eve’s path 
is the easy route by which pilgrims. return, and those who take it 
on their way to the Foot would be regarded as not having made the 
pilgrimage. Adam’s path is rough and difficult to climb. At the 
foot of the mountain, near the gate, is a grotto called after Iskandar 
(Alexander) , and a spring. 

The ancients have cut on the rock a sort of stairway leading 
up the mountain; they have also planted iron posts from which 
chains are suspended so that those who ascend may hold by them. 
There are ten of these chains, two at the base near the gate, seven 
others in succession after the first two, and, as for the tenth, it is 
the “ Chain of the Profession of Faith ” (Mussulman) , so called be- 
cause a person who reaches it and looks down to the foot of the 
mountain will be seized with hallucination and fear of falling, and 
will recite the words: “I declare that there is no other god but 
God, and that Muhammad is IBs Prophet.” When you pass the tenth 
chain, you come to an ill-kept road. From the tenth chain to the 
Cave of KHizr, it is seven miles. This cave is situated in a wide 
area, and near by is a spring also called after KHizr and full of fish 
which no one catches. Near the cave, there are two cisterns cut 
in the rock, one on either side of the path. The pilgrim* leave their 

43a. cf. n. 17b. ante. 



IBN BATTOTA ‘ 275 

belongings in the KHi?r grotto, and from there ascend two miles 
further to the summit where the Foot is. 

Description of the Foot 

The notable f&ot-print of our Father Adam 44 is on ajhigh black 
rock in a roomy place. The foot has sunk in the stone so as to 
leave its imprint as a clear depression in the rock; it is eleven spans 
long. Formerly the people of China came here; they cut from the 
rock the impression of the great toe and the adjoining parts, and 
put it in the temple of Zaitun, which is visited by people from the 
remotest parts of the land. In the rock bearing the imprint of the 
Foot are dug out nine holes in which the infidel pilgrims put gold, 
precious stones and pearls. You can see the Fakirs, when they 
reach the grotto of KHizr, seeking to race one another to take what 
there is in these holes. For our part, we found only a few small 
stones and a little gold, which we gave to our guide. It is usual for 
pilgrims to pass three days in the grotto of KHizr, and on these days 
to visit the Foot morning and evening. We did it also. 

At the end of the three days, we returned by the mother’s path, 
and encamped near the grotto of Shiam, who is the same as Shait, 
the son of Adam. We then came to the ‘bay of fish,’ the towns of 
Kurumlah, Jabarkavan, Dildmivah and Atqalanjah. It was in the 
town last mentioned that the Shaikh Abu ’Abd-ul-lah, son of the • 
KHafif, passed the winter. All these towns and stations are on the 
mountain. Near its foot, in the same road is found ‘dirakht-i- ravin' 
‘the walking tree,’ an old tree from which not a single leaf falls. I 
have not met anybody who has seen its leaves. It is called ‘walking’ 
because a person who looks at it from the top of the mountain 
thinks that it is at a great distance from him at the foot of the 
hill, but when he looks at it from the base of the mountain, he 
believes quite the opposite. I saw there a group of yogis who never 
quit the foot of the mountain awaiting the fall of the leaves of this 
tree. It stands in an absolutely inaccessible place. The idolaters 
have all sorts of fables regarding this tree, one being that any one 
who eats of its leaves will recover his youth, though he be very 
old. But that is false. 

Beneath this mountain is the large bay which yields precious 
stones. Its waters appear extremely blue to the eye. From this 
spot, we travelled for two days and reached the large town. Dmur, 
situated on the sea coast, and inhabited by merchants. There 
is here a vast temple, the idol in which Jjears the name of the 

44. In a former Context the word is spelt with a short ' a.’ 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


town. There are in this temple about a thousand Brahmins and 
yogis and about five hundred women, born of infidel fathers, who 
sing and dance every night before the idol. The £own with its re- 
venue belongs to the idol ; all those who live in the temple and those 
who visit it are fed therefrom. The idol itself is 6f gold, and of the 
height of a man. It has two large rubies for its eyes, and these, I 
was told, shine like two lamps at night. 

Then we left for the small town of Qaly (Galle) , six parasangs 
from Dinur. A Mussulman, called ship's captain Ibrahim, entertain- 
ed us in his house. We started thence to the town of Kalanbu 
(Colombo), one of the most beautiful and largest 
Colombo towns in the island. In it lives the Vazir prince of 

the sea, Jalasti, who has about five hundred Abys- 
sinians with him. Three days after leaving Kalanbu we 
reached Batfalah, mentioned once before. We visited its Sultan of 
whom we have spoken already. I found the 
patlam ship’s captain Ibrahim awaiting me, and we start- 

ed for Ma’bar. The wind was strong, and 
our ship was about to fill with water. We had no trained pilot, and 
so we drifted near some rocks, and narrowly escaped being wreck- 
ed; then we entered shallow water and our vessel grounded, and 
we were face to < face with death. The 
' to ma'bab passengers threw their belongings overboard, 

and bade farewell to one another. We cut down 
the mast of the ship and threw it into the sea ; the sailors made a 
float of planks. We were two parasangs from the shore. I wished 
to get down on the raft; but I had two concubines and two com- 
panions, and they said to me: “ Will you go on the raft and abandon 
us?” I preferred them to myself and said: “ Get down both of you, 
along with the young girl that I like.” The other girl said : “ I can 
swim well; I shall attach myself by a cord to the raft and swim 
with them.” My two comrades descended; one of them was Muham- 
mad, son of Farhan-ul-Tiizary, and the other an Egyptian. One 
of the girls was with them, and the second swam. The sailors tied 
ropes to the raft and swam with their aid. I put in their charge 
all my valuables, jewels and amber. They reached the shore in 
safety as the wind was favourable to them. As for myself, I stayed 
on the vessel, while the captain gained the shore on a plank. The 
sailors started making four rafts, but night came on before they 
were completed, and the water entered the ship. I got up on the 
poop and stayed there till the morning. Then many infidels came 
to us in one of their boats, and we went ashore with tJikm, in the 
land of Ma’bar. ■ We told them that we were frien.ds of their Sultan 



1BN BATTOTA 


vh 

to whom they paid tribute, and they wrote to inform him of this. 
He was engaged in a war with the infidels, at a distance of two 
days’ journey; I yrote to tell him what had happened to me. 

The idolaters ip question took us into a large wood and showed 
us a fruit that looked like a water-melon; it grows on the’muql, the 
dwarf palm. Inside this fruit is a kind of cotton, containing a honey- 
like substance, which is extracted and made into a kind of pastry 
called 'tall' and quite like sugar. They also served us excellent fish. 
We stayed there three days at the end of which an amir, named 
Qamar-ud-din came from die Sultan together with a detachment of 
horse and foot. They brought a palanquin and ten horses. I 
mounted a horse, and so did my friends, the captain of the ship, 
and one of the two girls; the other was carried in the palanquin. 
We reached the fort of Harkatu** a where we spent the night, 
and where I left the young girls, some of my slaves, and my compa- 
nions. The second day we arrived at the camp of the Sultan. 

The Sultan of Ma’bar was Ghayag-ud-din-ul Damaghany; at 
first he was a cavalier in the service of Malik Majlr, son of Abu-ul- 
raja 45 , one of the officers of Sultan Muhammad; then he served the 
amir Haji, son of the Sayyid Sultan Jalal-ud-din. At last, he was 
invested with royalty. Before this he was called Siraj-ud-din; hut 
at his accession he took the nanie Ghayag-ud-din. Formerly Ma’bar 
was subject to the authority of Sultan Muhammad, king of Delhi. 
Later, my father-in-law the Sharif Jalal-ud-din Ahsan Shah raised 
a revolt against him. and ruled for five years, after which he was 
killed and replaced by one of his amirs, ’Ala-ud-din Udaijy who ruled 
for a year. At the end of this period, he went to war against the 
infidels, seized much of their wealth as spoil and returned to his 
kingdom. The following year, he went on a second expedition 
against them, and routed them and put a large number to the sword. 
ITie same day on which he inflicted this disaster on them, he hap- 
pened to remove his helmet in order to drink; an arrow shot by 
an unknown hand struck him and he died at once. His son-in-law, 
Qutb-ud-din, was placed on the throne ; but as his conduct was un- 
popular, he was killed at the end of forty days. The Sultan Ghayag- 
ud-din was invested with authority, he married the daughter of the 


44a. This cannot be the modem town of Arcot. whicn l s es too far north, 
(Gibb) . It may have been a place in the Tanjore or S. Arcot District. See 
Colo* i.p.31 . . 

45. This officer was governing Biyanah at the time of Ibn Battuta’s stay; he 
was also one of the meipbers of Sultan Muhammad’s Council.— N. V. R. 



278 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


Sultan and the Sharif Jalal-ud-din ; it is her sister that I had mar- 
ried in Delhi. 

t 

My arrival at the court of Sultan Ghayag-ud-din : 

Whep we came near his camp, the Sultan sint one of his cham- 
berlains to receive us. He was seated in a wooden tower. It is 
the custom in all India that no one enters the Sultan’s presence 
without boots on. Now, I had no boots with me, an idolater gave 
me a pair, though there were some Mussulmans there, and I was 
surprised that the infidel was more generous to me than these. I 
then appeared before the Sultan who asked me to be seated, 
sent for the Qa?i and the Haji JU $adr-ul-Zaman Baha-ud-din, and 
lodged me in three tents near himself. The people of the country 
call these tents khiyam (pi. of khaimah). The Sultan sent me 
carpets and food comprising the rice and meat usual in this coun- 
try. It is the rule here, as in our own lands, to serve butter-milk 
at the end of the meal. 

Later, I had an interview with the Sultan, and proposed to him 
the plan of despatching an army to the Maldives. He resolved to do 
this, and chose the ships for the enterprise. He intended to send a 
present to the Sulfanah of the Maldives, and robes of honour and 
gifts to the amirs and vazirs. He entrusted to me the task of drawing 
up his contract of marriage with the sister of the Sultanah ; finally 
he ordered three vessels to be loaded with alms for the poor in the 
islands, and said to me; “You will come back at the end of five 
days.” But the admiral KHwajah Sarlak told him: “ It will be possi- 
ble to reach the Maldives only in three months from now.” “If that 
be so”, replied the Sultan addressing me, “ come to Fattan ; after we 
finish the present campaign, we may return to our capital Mutrah 
(Madura) ; and the expedition will start from there.” I then stay- 
ed with him and, while waiting, I sent for my slave-girls and 
comrades. 

The march of the Sultan and his disgraceful conduct in massacring 
women and children : 

The country we had to traverse was an impenetrable jungle of 
trees and reeds. The Sultan ordered that every one in the army, 
great and small alike, should carry a hatchet to cut down these 
obstacles. When the camp was struck, he set out on horseback 
towards the forest together with his soldiers who felled the trees 
from morning to noon. Then food was served, and the whole 

46. A person who has made a pilgrimage to Mecda. 



IBN BATTOTA 


279 

army ate, troop by troop ; afterwards they resumed cutting trees 
till the evening. All the infidels found in the jungle 
were taken prisoners ; they had stakes sharpened at both 
ends and made th^ prisoners carry them on their shoulders. Each 
was accompanied by his wife and children, and they were thus led 
to the camp. .It is the practice here to surround the camp with a 
palisade, called katkar and having four gates. They make a second 
katkar round the king’s habitation.. Outside the principal enclo- 
sure, they raise platforms about three feet high, and light fires on 
them at night. Slaves and sentinels spend the night here, each 
holding in his hand a bundle of very thin reeds. When the infidels 
approach for a night attack on the camp, all the sentries light their 
faggots, and thanks to the flames, the night becomes as bright as 
day, and the cavalry sets out in pursuit of the idolaters. 

In the morning, the Hindus who had been made prisoners the 
day before, were divided into four groups, and each of these was 
led to one of the four gates of the main enclosure. Ibere they were 
impaled on the posts they had themselves carried. Afterwards 
their wives were butchered and tied to the stakes by their hair. 
The children were massacred on the bosoms of their mothers, and 
their corpses left there. Then they struck camp and started cut- 
ting down the trees in another forest, and all the Hindus who were 
made captive were treated in the same manner. This is a shame- 
ful practice, and I have not seen any other sovereign adopt it ; it 
was because of this that God hastened the end of Ghayag-ud-din. 

One day the QazI and I were dining with this prince, the QazI 
being to his right and I to his left, and an idolater was brought 
before him together with his wife and son aged seven years. The 
Sultan made a sign with his hand to the executioners to cut off the 
head of this man ; then he said to them in Arabic ; * and his son 
and his wife’. They cut off their heads, and I turned my eyes 
away. When I composed myself, I found their heads lying on the 
ground. 

On another occasion I was with Sultan Ghayas-ud-din when 
a Hindu was brought to him. He spoke some words that I could 
not understand, and at once many of his followers drew their 
swords. I got up hurriedly, and he said : ‘Where do you go?’ I 
answered : “ I go to say my afternoon (4 p.m.) prayer.” He 

understood my motive, laughed, and ordered the hands and feet 
of the idolater to be cut off. On my return* I found this unhappy 
man swimming in his blood. • 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


The victory which Ghayaa-ud-din won over the infidels, and which 
is among the greatest successes of Islam : 

Adjoining his state was that of an infidel sovereign named 
Balal Dev, who was one of the principal Hindis kings. His army 
exceeded 100,000 men, besides 20,000 Mussulmans, rakes, criminals 
and fugitive slaves. This monarch aspired to conquer the country 
of MaTjar, of which the Muslim army numbered only 6000 troops, a 
good half of them being excellent soldiers, and the rest absolutely 
worthless. The Muhammadans came to blows with him near the 
village of Kubban ; he routed them, and they had 
kamka won to fall back on Mutrah (Madura), their capital, 

koptam The infidel sovereign camped near Kubban 

(Koppam, Kannanur), one of the largest and 
strongest places held by the Mussulmans, He besieged it for six 
months, at the end of which the garrison had provisions for only 
fourteen days. Balal Dev proposed to the besieged to offer them 
a safe conduct if they would retire leaving him to occupy the town ; 
but they replied : “ We must inform our Sultan of this.” He then 
offered them a truce for fourteen days and they wrote to Sultan 
Ghayas-ud-din describing their situation to him. The Sultan read 
their letter to the people on the following Friday. The 
faithful wept and said: “We will sacrifice our lives to God: 
if the infidel takes that town, he will then lay siege to 
us ; we prefer to die by the sword." They then engaged to ex- 
pose themselves to death, and set out the next day, removing their 
turbans from their heads and placing them round the necks of 
their horses, which was an indication that each of them sought 
death. They posted the bravest and most courageous among them, 
some three hundred, as the vanguard : the right wing was under 
Saif-ud-din Bahadur (hero), a pious and brave lawyer, and the 
left under A1 Malik Muhammad, the silhadar (armour bearer). 
The Sultan himself was in the centre with three thousand, and the 
rear-guard was formed by another three thousand under the com- 
mand of Asad-ud-din Kaikhusru Alfarisy (the Farsian) . In this 
order, the Mussulmans set out at the siesta hour towards the 
infidel camp and attacked it, when the soldiers were off their guard, 
having sent away their horses to graze. The infidels, thinkiTig that 
robbers were attacking the camp, went out in disorder to combat 
the assailants. Meanwhile, Sultan Ghayag-ud-din arrived, and the 
Hindus suffered the worst of all defeats. Their sovereign tried to 
mount a horse though he was aged eighty. Na?ir-ud-din, nephew 
and successor of the Sultan, overtook the old man ancl was about 
to kill him, for' he did not know who he was. But one of his slaves 
said : ‘ He is the Hindu sovereign ’ ; he then made him prisoner 



IBN BATTOTA 


and led him to his uncle, who treated him with apparent 
consideration till he extorted from him his riches, his elephants 
and horses, and ^promised to release him. When he had yielded 
up all his wealth to him, he had him killed and flayed. His skin 
was stuffed with straw and hung up on the wall of Madura where 
I saw it in the same position. 

To return to our subject. I left the camp and went to the 
town of Fatten, a large and fine city on the coast. It has an 
admirable harbour, and there is a large wooden 
pavilion in it erected on stout beams and faitaw 
reached by a covered pathway also made 
of wood. When an enemy arrives, all the ships in port are attached 
to this pavilion; the soldiers and archers mount up the pavilion, 
and the enemy gets no chance of inflicting any injury. In this town 
there is a beautiful mosque built of stone, and grapeB and excellent 
pomegranates are available in large quantities. Here I met the 
pious Shaikh Muhammad-ul-Isabury, one of the fakirs who have a 
troubled spirit and who let their hair hang loose over their shoul- 
ders. He kept a lion with him which he had tamed, and which ate 
with the fakirs and sat with them. The Shaikh had about thirty 
fakirs with him, one of whom owned a gazelle which lived in the 
same place as the lion who did t no harm to it. I stayed in Fatten. 

Meantime, a yogi had prepared for Sultan Ghayas-ud-din some 
pills calculated to improve his virility. It is said that iron filings 
were among the ingredients of these pills. The Sultan swallowed 
a larger dose than was good for him and fell ill. In this state he 
reached Fattan ; I went out to meet him and offered him a present. 
When he had settled down, ho sent for admiral KHwajah Sarur, 
and said to him: “Take up nothing but equipping the vessels 
chosen for the expedition to the Maldives.” He wished to remit to 
me the cost of the present I had made to him ; I refused, but re- 
pented afterwards, for he died, and I got noth- 
ing. The Sultan remained at Fattan for half a madura 
month, and then left for his capital ; I stayed 
there for fifteen days after his departure, and then started 
for Madura, the place of his residence, a large town with broad 
streets. The first prince who made it his capital was my father-in- 
law, the Sultan Sharif Jalal-ud-din Ahasan Shah, whft made it 
look like Delhi, building it with care. 

On my arrival at Madura, I found a contagious disease pre- 
vailing thye ; people died of it in a short time. Those who 
were attacked by it succumbed on the second or third day ; if death 
was delayed, it was only till the fourth day. When I went out, I 
F. N.— 86 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


saw only the sick or the dead. I bought a young slave girl here, 
being assured that she was healthy ; but she died the next day. 
One day a woman whose husband had been a* vazJr of Sultan 
Ahasan Shah came to see me with her son aged eight years, a nice 
lad full of intelligence and spirit. She complained of poverty, and 
I gave some money to her and her son. Both of them were strong 
and healthy ; but the next day the mother returned, asking for a 
shroud for her son, as he had died suddenly. I saw in the audi- 
ence hall of the Sultan, at the time of his death, hundreds of women 
servants who had been brought to pound rice for preparing food 
for other persons than the sovereign ; these women, taking ill, 
were thrown on the ground, exposed to the sun’s heat. 

When Ghayas-ud-din entered Madura, he found that his 
mother, his wife and his son had fallen ill. He remained three days 
in the city, and then he went out to a river at a distance of one 
parasang, on the banks of which is a temple belonging to the infi- 
dels. I went to meet him on a Thursday and he ordered me to be 
lodged with the Qazi. When the tents had been erected for me, I 
saw people hastening along pushing one another. One of them said: 
‘The Sultan is dead’; another asserted that it was his son that had 
died. We ascertained the truth, and found that the son was dead. 
The Sultan had no other son, and this deaih aggravated his own 
disease. The Thursday following, the mother of the Sultan died. 

The death of the Sultan, the accession of his brother’s son and my 

separation from the new prince : 

The third Thursday, Ghayas-ud-din died. I heard of it and 
hastened to return to town, for fear of a tumult. I met the nephew 
and successor, Nasir-ud-din, who had been called to the camp as 
the Sultan had left no son. He urged me to retrace my steps and 
return to the camp with him ; but I refused, and he took this re- 
fusal to heart. Nasir-ud-din had been a domestic servant at Delhi 
before his uncle came to the throne. When Ghayag-ud-din became 
king, the nephew fled to him in the guise of a fakir, and it was the 
will of fate that he should rule after his uncle. When they had 
sworn allegiance to Nasir-ud-din, poets recited his praises and he 
gave them magnificent gifts. The first that rose to recite 
verses was the Qazi Sadr-ul-Zaman, to whom he gave five hun- 
dred gold pieces and a robe of honour ; then came the vazir al- 
Qazi (the judge) whom the Sultan gratified with two thousand 
pieces of silver. As for myself, he presented me with three 
hundred gold pieces arid a robe of honour. He distributed alms to 
the fakirs and' the poor. When the preacher .delivered the first 
discourse in which he inserted the name of the new sovereign, they 



IBN BATTOTA 


showered on him drachmas and dinars from plates of gold and 
silver. The funeral of Sultan Ghayag-ud-din was celebrated with 
pomp. Every day the Quran was read in full near his tomb. Then 
those whose duty it was to read the tenth section of the holy book 
gave a reading, after which food was served and the public ate ; 
finally, silver pieces were distributed to each person according to 
his rank. These things were done for forty days. They repeated 
the ceremony every year on the anniversary day of the death of 
the deceased. 

The first measure of Sultan Nagir-ud-din was to dismiss the 
vazir of his uncle, and to exact sums of money from him. He 
installed in the vazirate Malik Badr-ud-din, the same man that had 
been sent by his uncle to meet me when I was at Fattan. He 
died not long after, and the Sultan appointed KHwajah Sarur, the 
admiral, as vazir, and ordered that he should be styled KHwajah 
Jahan, just like the vazir of Delhi. Whoever addressed him by 
any other title had to pay a certain number of gold pieces (as fine) . 
After this Sultan Najir-ud-dln killed the son of his paternal aunt, 
who was the husband of Ghayas-ud-din’s daughter, and married 
her himself. He heard that Malik Mas'ud had visited his cousin 
in the prison before he was put to death, and he murdered him as 
also Malik Bahadur, a generous and virtuous hero. He gave 
orders that I should be provided with all the vessels that his uncle 
had assigned for my expedition to the Maldives. 

But I fell ill of a fever which is fatal in this ravin 
country, and thought that it would be my end. 

God inspired me to have recourse to the tamarind, which 
is very abundant in this country. I took about a pound of it, put 
it in water and drank it. It relaxed me for three days, and God 
cured me of the disease. I took a dislike to the town of Madura, 
and asked the Sultan for permission to go away. He said to me : 
“Why should you go? There t is only one month for going to the 
Maldives Stay then till we give you all that the master of the 
world (the late Sultan) ordered to be given to you.” I refused, and 
he wrote in my favour to Fattan that I might 
sail in any vessel of my choice. I returned to 10 

Fattan, and found there eight vessels sailing 
for Yemen, and I boarded one of them. We met four ships 
of war which engaged us for a time and then retired ; afterwards, 
we reached Kulam (Quilon) . As I still felt the «*ffects of my ill- 
ness, I stayed three months in this town, and then embarked with 
a view to g8 to Sultan Jamal-ud-din of Hartaur ; but the idolaters 
attacked us between Hanaur and Fakanur. • 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


How toe were despoiled by the Hindus : 

When we reached the small Island between Hanaur and 
Fdkanur, the Hindus assailed us with a dozen wtEr ships, and after 
a vigorous combat, overpowered us. They took all 1 had, includ- 
ing the reserve I had kept against emergencies, as well as the 
pearls, precious stones given to me by the king of Ceylon, my 
clothes, and the provisions for travel given to me by good and holy 
men. They left me no dress but a pair of trousers. They seized 
the belongings of all the passengers and sailors, and forced us to 
disembark. I returned to Calicut and entered one of the mosques 
there. A jurisconsult sent me a robe, the Qazi a 
calicut again tuyhan and a certain merchant another robe. 

Here I learnt of the marriage of vazir ’Abd-ul- 
lah with the Sul(anah KHadijah. after the death of the 
vazir Jamal-ud-din; and I also learned that the wife whom I 
had left pregnant had given birth to a male child. I wanted then 
to go to the Maldives, but I recollected my enmity with the vazir 
’Abd-ul-lah. Hence I opened the Quran and these words caught 
my eyes : “ Angels shall descend on them and say to them : ‘ Fear 
not, and be not sad’” (Quran, xli. 30). I 
inMi rvre implored the benediction of God, and set sail. At 

again the end of ten days I reached the islands and dis- 

embarked on Kannalus. The governor of this island, 
’Abd-ul-’Aziz Almaqdashawy, welcomed me kindly, entertained me 
and fitted out a boat for me. I then went to Hululy, the island to 
which the Sultanah and her sisters went for diversion and for bath- 
ing. The natives call these amusements totjar and indulge in them 
on board. The vazlrs and chiefs sent the Sultanah presents and gifts 
when she was on this island. I met there the sister of the Sul- 
tanah, her husband, the preacher Muhammad, son of vazir Jamal- 
ud-din, and his mother, who had been my wife. The preacher 
visited me and ate with me. 

Meanwhile some of the islanders went to vazir ‘Abd-ul-lah 
and told him of my arrival. He made enquiries about my condi- 
tion and about my companions. 

They told him that I had come to take my son, aged about two 
years. TJie mother of the child went to the vazir to lodge a com- 
plaint about my plan ; but he told her : 1 1 will not hinder him from 
taking his son.' He pressed me, to go to the island (of Mahal), 
and lodged me in a house opposite the tower of his palace that 
he might know all abaut my movements. He sent ms a complete 
robe, betel and rosewater according to custom. I took to him two 
pieces of silk to throw them before him when I ’saluted him. They 



IBN gATTOTA 


MS 

took it from me, and the vazir did not come out that day to receive 
me. My son was brought to me, and it seemed to me that his stay 
with the islandeifc suited him best. So I gave him back to them. 
I remained five days in the island, and it seemed best for me to 
hasten my departure and I asked for permission to leqve. The 
vazir called me, and I went to him. They brought the two pieces 
of silk they had taken from me before, and I threw them down 
while saluting the vazir according to custom. He made me sit by 
his side, and asked me how I fared. I ate with him and washed 
my hands in the same basin as he, which he never does with any 
one. Then they brought betel, and I returned. The vazir sent 
me cloths and bustus (hundreds of thousands) of cowries, and be- 
haved himself perfectly. 

I started again; we spent forty-three days on 
the sea, and then reached Bengal, a vast country TO Br " 0A1 - 
abounding in rice. 

—Voyages D’Ibn Batoutah, ed. C. Defremery and 
Dr. B. R. Sanguinetti, Vol. iv. pp. 46-210. 47 


47. Ibn Bittuta touched again at Qullon and *C allcut early In 1347 on 
his way back from China to Morocco (ibid, vp. 309-10); but hie account on 
this occasion is very brief and contains nothing new. 



XXXI. 1347 AJ3. JOHN DE MARiq^OLU 
A. Quilon 

And sailing on the feast of St. Stephen, 1 2 we navigated the 
Indian sea until Palm Sunday, and then arrived at a very noble 
city of India called Columbum, where the whole world’s pepper is 
produced. Now this pepper grows on a kind of vines, which are 
planted just like in our vineyards. These vines produce clusters 
which are at first like those of the wild vine, of a green colour, and 
afterwards are almost like bunches of our grapes, and they have a 
red wine in them which I have squeezed out on my plate as a 
condiment. When they have ripened, they are left to dry upon 
the tree, and when shrivelled by the excessive heat the dry clus- 
ters are knocked off with a stick and caught upon linen cloths, 
and so the harvest is gathered. 

These are things that I have seen with mine eyes and handled 
with my hands during the fourteen months that I stayed there. 
And there is no roasting of the pepper, as authors have falsely 
asserted, nor does it grow in forests, but in regular gardens ; nor 
are the Saracens the proprietors but the Christians of St. Thomas. 
And these latter are the masters of the public steel-yard, from 
which I derived, as a perquisite of my office as Pope’s legate, every 
month a hundred gold fan, and a thousand when I left.* 

There is a church of St. George there, of the Latin communion, 
at which I dwelt. And I adorned it with fine paintings, and 
taught there the holy Law. And after I had been there some time 
I went beyond the glory of Alexander the Great, when he set up 

1. Probably 26th December 1347.— Yule. 

2. "The value of the fanarn (Marignolli’s fan) has varied so much that 
it is difficult to estimate what the legate received in this way. Marsden 
makes the fanam 2 '/ad. (Marco Polo, p. 656) . In the beginning of last cen- 
tury, Visscher says the fanam of Cochin was about l%d., that of Calicut 6d., 
and that of Quilon lSd. Late in the same century Friar Paollno states the 
Paliacat fanam at 9 sous or 4 Mid., that of Tanjore or Calicut at 6d. or 7d., 
and that of Madura at 3%d. And Ibn Battuta (iv, 174) tells us that 100 
fanams were equal to 6 dinars, which would make the fanam nearly 8d. 
This last may be taken as probably about the value of our author’s fan. 
So his monthly perquisite would be about £3,6s., and the present he received 
at parting £33. If we. may judge from the calculations based on Ibn 
Battuta’s statement of prices at Delhi in his time, the money would repre- 
sent at least ten times as much wealth as at present. ”-*Yule. 



JOHN DE MABIGNOLLI 


287 


his column (in India). For 1 erected a stone as my land-mark 
and memorial, in the comer of the world over against Paradise, 
and anointed it vfith oil ! In sooth it was a marble pillar with a 
stone cross upon it, intended to last till the world’s end. And it 
had the Pope’s arzfts and my own engraved upon it, with inscrip- 
tions both in Indian and Latin characters.’ 

I consecrated and blessed it in the presence of an infinite multi- 
tude of people, and I was carried on the shoulders of the chiefs in 
a litter or palankin like Solomon’s. 

So after a year and four months I took leave of the brethren, 
and after accomplishing many glorious works I went to see the 
famous Queen of saba. By her I was honourably treated, and 
after some harvest of souls (for there are a few Christians there) 
I proceeded by sea to Seyllan, a glorious mountain opposite to 
Paradise. 

—Yule, Cathay, iii pp. 216-20. 

B. Ceylon : Concerning Adam’s Carden and the Fruits thereof. 

Plantain: The garden of Adam in Seyllan contains in the 

first place plantain trees which the natives call figs. But the 
plantain has more the character of a garden plant than of a tree. 
It is indeed a tree in thickness, having a stem as thick as an oak, 
but so soft that a strong man can punch a hole in it with his finger, 
and from such a hole water will flow. The leaves of those plan- 
tain trees are most beautiful, immensely long and broad, and of a 
bright emerald green ; in fact, they use them for table cloths, but 
serving only for a single dinner. Also new-born children, after 
being washed and salted, are wrapped up with aloes and roses in 
these leaves, without any swathing, and so placed in the sand. 
The leaves are some ten ells in length, more or less, and I do not 
know to what to compare them (in form) unless it be to ele- 
campane. The tree produces its fruit only from the crown; but 
on one stem it will bear a good three hundred. At first they are 
not good to eat, but after they have been kept a while in the 
house they ripen of themselves, and are then of an excellent odour, 
and still better taste ; and they are about the length of the longest 
of one’s fingers. And this is a thing that I hove seen with mine 

3. In 1662 Baldaeus said that the pillar was erected by St Thomas— 
Day— Land of the Perumdls, p. 212. “Three hundred years of tradition 
might easily swamp the dim memorv of John the Legate la that of Thomas 
the Apostle.”— Yule. *The pillar seems to have disappeared since. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


own eyes, that slice it across where you will, you will find on 
both sides of the cut the figure of a man crucified, as if one had 
graven it with a needle point. 4 5 * And it was of*these leaves that 
Adam and Eve made themselves girdles to cover their nakedness. 

Cocoanut: There are also many other trees and wonderful 

fruits there which we never see in these parts, such as the 
Nargd. Now the Nargil is the Indian Nut. Its tree has a most 
delicate hark, and very handsome leaves like those of the date- 
palm. Of these they make baskets and com measurers; they use 
the wood for joists and rafters in roofing houses ; of the husk or 
rind they make cordage ; of the nutshell cups and goblets. They 
make also from the shell spoons which are antidotes to poison. 
Inside the shell there is a pulp of some two fingers thick, which is 
excellent eating, and tastes almost like almonds. It bums also, 
and both oil and sugar can be made from it. Inside of this there 
is a liquor which bubbles like new milk and turns to an excellent 
wine.® 

Mango : They have also another tree called ambuban® having 

a fruit of excellent fragrance and flavour, somewhat like a peach. 

Jack : There is again another wonderful tree called chake- 

bahuhe, 7 as big as an oak. Its fruit is produced from the trunk 
and not from the branches, and is something marvellous to see, 
being as big as a great lamb, or a child of three years old. It has 
a hard rind like that of our pine-cones, so that you have to cut it 
open with an axe ; inside it has a pulp of surpassing flavour, with 
the sweetness of honey and of the best Italian melon ; and this 
also contains some five hundred chestnuts of like flavour, which 
are capital eating when roasted 

—Ibid. pp. 235-7. 

C. On Buddhist Monks of Ceylon 

At that place dwell certain men under religious vows, and 
who are of surpassing cleanliness in their habits ; yea of such cleanli- 
ness that none of them will abide in a house where anyone may 
have spit; and to spit themselves (though in good sooth they 

4. MandevUle gives a like account of the cross in the plantain or ‘apple 
at Paradise’ as he calls it and also some others.— Yule 

5. Cocoanut milk confounded with the toddy, a mistake made by later 
travellers as well.— Yule. 

8. Hie Mango, omra,' 

7. The jack,* cakkai-varlkkan. . 



JOHN DE MARIGNOLU 


rarely do such a thing) they will retire a long way, as well as for 
other occasions. 

They eat only once a day, and never oftener; they drink 
nothing but milk «or water; they pray with great propriety of 
manner; they teach boys to form their letters, first iy writing 
with the finger on sand, and afterwards with an iron style upon 
leaves of paper, or rather I should say upon leaves of a certain 
tree. 


In their cloister they have certain trees that differ in foliage 
from all others. These are encircled with crowns of gold and 
jewels, 8 and there are lights placed before them, and these trees 
they worship. And they pretend to have received this right by 
tradition from Adam, saying that they adore those trees because 
Adam looked for future salvation to come from wood. And this 
agrees with that verse of David's " Dicite in gentibus, quia Domi- 
nus regnabit in ligno," though for a true rendering it would be 
better to say curabit a ligno . 9 

These monks, moreover, never keep any food in their house 
till the morrow. They sleep on the bare ground ; they walk bare- 
foot, carrying a staff ; and are contented with a frock like that of 
one of our Minor Friars (but ‘without a hood), and with a mantle 
cast in folds over the shoulder Ad Modum Apostolorum. They 
go about in procession every morning begging rice for their 
day’s dinner. The princes and others go forth to meet them with 
the greatest reverence, and bestow rice upon them in measure 
proportioned to their numbers ; and this they partake of steeped 
in water, with coconut milk and plantains. These things I speak of 
as an eyewitness ; and indeed they made me a festa as if I were 
one of their own order. 

—Yule, Cathay, iii pp. 242-44. 


8. Doubtless Peepul trees. 

9. Psalm xcvi. 10.— Yuls. 

F. N.-S7 



XXXII. 1330-1349 A.D. WANG TA-YUAN 
A. Coral at Dondera Head j 

The Ta Fo shan lies between Ya-li (Galle) and Kao-lang-pu 
(Colombo). 

In the keng-vou year of the Chih-shun period (A.D. 1330) in 
the tenth moon, in winter, for two days I was sailing along the 
base of this mountain. All night the moonlight made it as clear 
as day, the sea was calm, the water so clear that I could look down 
in it and see things floating about on the bottom. There was a 
tree in the waters winch moved about. I pointed it out to the 
sailors and said to them, “Is this not a piece of pure lang-kan 
coral?” They replied, “ It is not” 

“ Is it then the shadow of the (magic) so-lo tree in the moon?” 
They answered, “ It is not” 

Then I told a boy to get into the water and to fetch it. He 
pulled up a soft and slimy thing, and brought it out of the water 
when it became as hard as iron. I took it and examined it. It 
was barely a foot long. Then this Jiranch curled up into a knot, 
and, strange to relate, on the branch there was a half-opened 
flower with a single stamen, of a reddish colour, and like a half 
opened peony, or a lotus flower. 

The sailors, holding candles, stood around looking on. Then 
they all began hopping about like birds, laughing, and saying, 
“Why, this is the precious tree (i.e., the coral tree) which has 
bloomed. Truly, of the marvellous things of the sea there are 
some which are novel even to the Chinese ; for over forty years 
we have never seen the like of this, and there is not a chance in 
a thousand that it could be found again, and now you, Sir, it is 
yours !" 

The following day I composed a piece of poetry in the antique 
style in an hundred verses to commemorate the event, and stuck 
it away in my sleeve to carry home. When An Yu (Yii An?), 
hsien-Shepg of Yii-Chang, saw it, he composed an additional piece 
of poetry. Down to the present day it has been kept in the Chiin- 
tzfi t’ang (at Nan-chang) as a curious record. 

—Too i chih lio , 79 Ta Fo shan, translated by Rockhill ; Toung 
Pao xvi pp. 383-384. 



WANG TA-YUAN 


291 


B. Colombo 1 2 

(Kao-lang-pn) is at the foot of the Ta Fo shan. The whole 
shore of the bay is nothing but jagged rocks standing up or lying 
flat. The ground is damp, the- soil is poor, and rice very dear. The 
climate is hot, the customs of the natives are boorish. * 

Sailors who have had the misfortune to be wrecked, and who 
have to stop for a while in this place, are fleeced by the ruler of 
whatever merchandize their junk may have on board, even the 
gold and jewels are sent to him. He looks upon them as sent by 
Heaven, and little he knows and cares that they were expected by 
the sailors’ wives and children to save them from starvation and 
cold. 

The natives, men and women, do up their hair in a knot and 
wrap around them a sarong of Pa-ch‘ ieh-na-chien (i.e., Javanese) 
cotton cloth. They boil sea-water to make salt, and ferment the 
juice of the sugar-cane to make spirits. 

They have a ruler. The native products are red stones 
(rubies), the same as those of Seng-ka-la (i.e., near Beligam.) 

The goods used (by the Chinese) in trading are Pa-tan (Shali- 
yat?) cotton stuffs, tin, samshu, rose-water, sapan-wood, gold and 
silver, and such like things. 

—Too i c hih lio, 65 Kao-lang-pu, tr. Rockhill, Toung Pao xvi 
pp. 384-5. 

C. Pearl Fishing in the Gulf of Manor (?) 

It was formerly called Wei yiian, but now it is called the 
'* New Harbour.” The shore trends north and south ; the inhabi- 
tants live scattered about The soil, the climate, the customs, the 
people, are like those of (Sha-li) -pa-tan (Jurfattan) ? 

Some eighty odd li away from the harbour at a spot in the sea 
called “ Ta-lang pang-chu” (“ Great-bright oyster pearls ”) , here 
the waters are very rich in pearl oysters. When about to begin 
gathering them, the chief kills a human being and some tens of 
animals in sacrifice to the gods of the sea. Then they make choice 
of the day, the boats, and the men, to gather the pearls 

Each boat has a crew of five men ; two to row, two to manage 
the ropes. The fifth man hangs around his neck a bag, the mouth 

1. Wang Ta-yiian is the only Chinese writer to mention Colombo. In 
a subsequent chapter <82) he writes the name Kao-lang-fu.— Rockhill. 

2. See the extract on this place (H) below. • 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


of which is held open by means of a bamboo ring, and, providing 
himself with a safety-rope, he ties a stone to his waist and lets him- 
self sink down to the bottom of the sea. Then frith his hand he 
pulls up the pearl-oysters and puts them in his bag. In response 
to his pulljng the rope, the men in the boat, whf> are looking after 
it, pull him and the bag of pearl-oysters on his neck, into the boat. 
And so they do until the boats are full, when they go back to the 
government station, where, under the guard of soldiers, (the 
oysters) remain for a number of days until the meat rots. Then 
they remove the shells and wash away the rotten meat by stirring 
them around in a sieve, by which means the flesh is got rid of and 
the pearls are left. They are then classed by means of a very fine 
sieve, and the officials levy as duty five-tenths of the whole, and 
the five-tenths remaining are equally divided among the boat 
crews, if indeed the gods of the sea have not claimed the divers, 
for many of them get buried in the bellies of rapacious fish. Alas! 
how sad a fate. 

Some sailor men, who are so lucky as to get their shares of 
profits for some years, sell their pearls for money to do some trad- 
ing, and go home, happy with the large profits they have made, 
which establish them in opulence ; but such are few indeed. 

— Tao i chih lio. 72 Ti-san chiang, 3 tr. Rockhill, T’oung Pao xvi 
pp. 385-7. 

D. Northern Maidive Islands. 

(Pei Liu) is in a group of about a thousand islets and a myriad 
islands. When a ship sailing for the Western Ocean has passed 
near Seng-ka-la (Belligam, Ceylon), the set of the tidal current 
rapidly changes, and (if) it falls in with a head wind, it is driven 
at once to this country. The following year in the spring with the 
south-east wind the ship proceeds again northward. Around all 
the Liu (islands) there are in the waters rocky ledges with teeth 
as sharp as the point of a knife, which no vessel can withstand. 4 

3. The name Ti-san chiang does not occur in any other Chinese work 
I have seen of earlier or later date than that of Wang Ta-yiian. Chau Ju-kua 
knew thet pearls were got from Ceylon but he does not mention where. 
Marco Polo (II, 331) describes the mode of fishing in the Gulf of Manar 
much as Wang does. He says the fishers started from a place in Ceylon 
called Bettelar (Ibn Battuta’s Batthala) and then went sixty miles into the 
Gulf.— Rockhill. 

4. Pyrard I, S3, 95, says, the Maldives were divided into thfrteen provin- 
ces or afollous. .The natives informed him that there were 12000 islands. 
The title of the king was “King of thirteen provinces 'and twelve thousand 



WANG TA-YUAN 


Tlie native products are cocoa-nuts, cowrie shells, dried fish, 
and large cotton handkerchiefs. 

Every sea-trader takes one shipload of cowries to Wu-tieh 
(Orissa?) (or) Peng-ka-la (Bengal) , where he is sure to exchange 
it for a shipload of rice and more, for these people use cowries as 
money, and a very ancient style of currency it is. 

—Too i chih lio. 63 Pei Liu, tr. Rockhill. Toung Pao 
xvi, pp. 387-8. 

E Kain Colan (Kayangulam) . 

It is in the neighbourhood of the Tu-lan rocks. The soil is 
black and well suited for the raising of cereals. The people are 
indolent in their work of the tillage of the soil. They count yearly 
(to eke out their subsistence) on the contribution made them by 
the Wu-tieh (Orissa) rice trade. Sometimes through stress of 
weather (these Wu-tieh boats? or a boat?) arrive late after the 
departure of the horse ships (from Kan-mai-li, the Comoro Islands) 
and without a full cargo ; the wind blows (too) violently (for them 
to proceed). Other times the wind is contrary, and it (or they) 
cannot reach the Sea of Lambri and escape the danger from the 
ragged rocks in (the bay of) Kao-lang-fu (Colombo), so they pass 
the winter in this place, remaining until the summer of the follow- 
ing year; when in the eighth or ninth moon ships come again 
(from Kan-mai-li ?), then they go on (in their company so as to 
escape the pirates which infested the coast?) to Ku-li-fo (Calicut) 
to trade. 

As to the usages and customs, the clothing of both sexes is 
like that of Ku-li-fo (Calicut). They have village rulers, but no 
chieftains (or chief ruler). 

The native products are pepper, cocoa-nuts, betel-nuts, and 
Liu fish (i.e., cobi ly mash, from the Maidive Islands) . 

The goods used (by the Chinese) in trading there are gold, 
iron, blue and white porcelain-ware, Pa-tan cotton cloth (Jurfat- 
tan doth?), satins of various colours, iron-ware and the like. 

—Tao i chih lio, 82. Hsiao Kii-nan, tr. Rockhill. Toung Pao 
xvi, pp. 445-7. 


isles.” RajarSja I Cola is said, in his inscriptions, to h^ve subdued “the 
many ancient islands, ’12,000 (in number).’’ 



294 FOREIGN NOTICK 

F. Hili (Ely) 

This country is between Hsiao Kii-nan (Ifain Colan) and 
Ku-li-fo (Calicut) 5 , it is also known (to the Chinese) as the Hsiao 
chiang-k‘ou, or “ Little Harbour." The hill i^ bare and flat, it 
extends oter several thousand (sic) li. 

The dwellings of the people are scattered about close together 
on every side with a sufficiency of land to supply the wants of 
each family, though the soil is far from good for tilling. 

The climate is hot, the usages of the people pure. They are 
hot-headed, and wherever they go, they carry about with them 
their bows and arrows. Men and women cut their hair and wrap 
around them Liu pu (i.e., cotton cloth from the Maidive Islands). 

The natural products are pepper, superior to that of any other 
foreign port. It is impossible to state the number of plants which 
cover the hills (of Hsia-li). It is a creeper which grows like a 
wistaria vine, and which blooms in winter and bears fruit in 
summer. The people gather it and dry it in the sun to remove its 
pungent flavour. The pepper gatherers for the most part do not 
mind its flavour, but if they do, they get relief by using a decoction 
of Ch'uan-haiung. The pepper of all other foreign parts is all the 
surplus product of this country. • 

—Too i chih lio. 64. Hsia-li, tr. Rockhill. Toung Pao xvi, p. 453. 

G. Calicut 

Ku-li-fo is the most important of all the maritime centers of 
trade. It is close to Hsi-lan (Ceylon) and is the principal port of 
the Western Ocean. The land is flat and the soil poor, though 
grain can be grown. 

Each year they depend on the shipping from Wu-tieh (Orissa, 
for a sufficiency of grain). They cede the path to each other; 
they will not pick up things on the highways ; their customs ap- 
proach those of antiquity (in honesty). Should anyone steal an 
ox, the chief verifies the number of oxen, and (or) the rightful 
owner seizes all the property of the offender, and he is put to death. 

The seat of government is far off in the hills, but the place 
where trading is carried on is on the sea-shore. 

The native products include pepper very like that of Hsia -li 
(Hili). The people have public godowns in which they store it 


5. This is wrong. Mt. Ely is to the North of Calicut. 



WANG TA-YUAN 


Each po-ho ( bahar ) is of 375 catties weight. The customs dues 
are two tenths. There are also kajang leaves, p’t sang doth, rose- 
water, jack-fruitf and catechu The coral, pearls, and frankin- 
cense (obtained here), all come from Kan-mai-(h) and Fo-lang 
(Comoro Islands and the countries of the Franks?) The goods 
exported are the same as from Hsiao Ku-nan (Kam-Colan) 

They have fine horses which come from the extreme West, 
and which are brought here by the shipload Each horse will 
fetch from an hundred to a thousand pieces of gold, even going as 
high as four thousand, and the foreign people who fetch them 
thither would think the market a very bad one if they did not 

— Tao i chth ho 83 Ku-h-fo, tr Rockhill* Toung Pao xvi, 
pp 454-5 


H Jurfattan 

This country is beyond Ku-li-fo (Calicut) The soil is fertile 
and level, (but) the cultivated fields few The usages of the 
people are pleasmg As to the climate it is rather hot Men and 
women wrap cotton cloth around them and wear a turban They 
are sea-farers, and this is the principal port for the pearl trade 

When anyone of the people commits a crime, they draw a cir- 
cle with lime on the ground and cause him to stand inside it, not 
allowing him to move This is their most severe form of punish- 
ment 

The natural products are Pa-tan cotton cloth and pearls, all 
of which latter are brought here from the Ti-san chiang (Gulf of 
Manar, Ceylon 7 ), their place of production, and where the pearl 
collectorate office gathers them all in and brings them over m 
small boats to this place (i e Jurfattan) , where the rich (traders) 
use gold and silver to force down the prices ( 7 ) If a boat should 
come (from Ti-san-chiang) to try to sell (directly) to the Chinese, 
its profits will be insignificant mdeed (le, the Jurfattan pearl 
traders will undersell them with the Chinese 7 ) 

— Tao t chth ho 66 Sha-li-pa-tan, tr Rockhill T’oung Pao xvi 
pp 464-5 



XXXIII. 1436 A.D. FEIHSIN* 


A. Ceylon. 

This country (Hsi-lan shan) can be reached from Su-men- 
ta-la with a fair Wind in twelve days. The territory of this state 
is extensive, the population dense. The riches they have amassed 
eqyal those of Chao-wa (Java). In the interior there is a high 
mountain which reaches to the sky. On the summit of the 
mountain are found blue median stones, yellow ya-ku stones, blue 
and red precious stones ; they are washed down in the sands after 
heavy rains and picked up. In the sea near the coast there is a 
pearl shoal ; here they are in the habit of going and gathering 
oysters with nets. These they pour into a pond, and when they 
have rotted, they wash them in a sieve and get the pearls. 

On the sea-coast there is a flat stone on which is the impress 
of a foot over three feet long, and in it there is water which never 
evaporates. They say that in ages gone by Sakya Buddha, when 
going to the Tsui-lan islands (the Nicobar islands) went up this 
mountain and left this footprint. Down to the present day it is 
worshipped. Below it there is a temple called (the place of) the 
nirvana of Sakya Buddha. His true body (i.e., the lifelike repre- 
sentation) lying on its side is in this temple. There are also relics 
(Sarlra) in his resting place. 

The climate is constantly hot ; the people are usually well-to- 
do, and rice is plentiful. 

The products of the soil are precious stones, pearls, ambergris, 
frankincense. The goods used (by the Chinese in trading) are 
gold and copper coins, blue and white porcelain-ware, coloured 
satins, coloured silk gauzes. 

Men and women bind their heads and wear a long shirt, wrap- 
ping around their middle a piece of cotton stuff. 

In the 7th year of Yung-lo (1409) Cheng Ho and others pre- 
sented to this temple in the name of the Emperor gold and silver 
altar vases and a coloured pennant embroidered in gold. They 
also put up a stone tablet with an inscription, and bestowed im- 
perial gifts on the king of the country and his chiefs. 

The King A-lieh-Vu-na-erh 1 showed himself ungrateful, and 
formed a plot to injure (the mission) . The admiral*, the eunuch 

I. Alag^konira, te, Vijaya Bihu, VI, 1397-1409. 



m hbin m 

Cheng Ho, secretly made his preparations, and having previously 
Issued orders, his messengers advanced rapidly and silently (lit., 
“ gag in mouth ”) .• In the middle of the night the guns were fired ; 
they dashed in and captured the king alive. 

In the ninth yfear of Yung-lo (A.D. 1411) the king came to 
Court and made his submission, and sought the imperial favour. 
He was forgiven, and the kingdom was restored to what it had 
been originally. From that time the barbarians of the four quar- 
ters have all been filled with fear, and have taken absolutely to 
cherishing virtue. 

— Using ch'a sheng lan. 26 Hsi-lan shan, tr. Rockhill, Toung 
Pao xvi pp. 381-383. 

B. Cochin 

This locality is on a headland facing Hsi-lan (Ceylon). To 
the interior it confines on Ku-li (Calicut). The climate is con- 
stantly hot, the soil is poor, the crops sparse. The villages are on 
the sea-shore. The usages and customs are honest. 

Men and women do their hair in a knot and wear a short shirt 
and a piece of cotton stuff wrapper around them. 

There is a caste of people called Mu-kua (Mukuva) ; they 
have no dwellings but live in caves, or nests in the trees. They 
make their living by fishing in the sea. Both sexes go 
with the body naked and with a girdle of leaves or grass hanging 
before and behind. If one of them meets someone, he must crouch 
down and hide himself by the way-side, where he must wait until 
he has passed by. 

The natural product is a great abundance of pepper. Wealthy 
people put up broad godowns in which to store it. In their trad- 
ing transactions they use a small gold coin called panan (fanam). 
The goods used in trading are coloured satins, white silk, blue and 
white porcelain-ware, gold and silver. 

Its ruler in grateful recognition of the imperial bounty con- 
stantly sends presents to our Court. 

— Using ch’a sheng lan, 30. Ko-chih, tr. Rockhill, Toung Pao, 
-:vi p. 452. 


C. Calicut 

It can be reacted from Hsi-lan (Ceylon) with* a favourable 
wind in ten days. It is an important islet, and together .with adja- 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


cent Seng-kia (la) (Ceylon), is the trade centre for the countries 
of the Western Ocean. The place is extensive and the soil barren, 
but wheat is in quite sufficient quantity. * 

In their customs they are very honest. Tjtose walking along 
make wajr for each other ; they will not pick up anything on the 
road. They have not the bastinado as a punishment, they draw a 
circle with lime on the ground which (the culprit) is forbidden 
(to pass beyond). 

Their ruler and people live far off in the hills. The place for 
all the business is on the sea-coast. 

The men wear a long shirt, around their heads they wrap 
white cotton stuff. The women wear a short shirt and wrap 
around them coloured cloth. Strings of gold pendants hang from 
their ears. On the tops of their heads they wear pearls, jewels, and 
coral, forming a fringe ; on their wrists and ankles are gold and 
silver bracelets, on their fingers and toes are gold and silver rings 
set with precious stones. They do up their hair in a knot behind 
the head. Their faces are white, their hair is black. 

There is a caste among them which goes naked; they are 
called Mu-kua, the same as in Ko-chih (Cochin). 

The country produces pepper equal to that of Hsia-li (Hills) . 
They have godowns to store it while waiting to be sold. They 
have oil of roses, po-lo-mi (jack-fruit) , cutch, flowered chintzes, 
coral, pearls, frankincense, putchuk, amber, but all of them are 
imported there from other countries. The fine horses found there 
come from the West. They are worth hundreds or thousands of 
gold coins. 

The goods used in trading (by the Chinese) are gold, silver, 
coloured satins, blue and white porcelain, beads, musk, quick- 
silver, and camphor. 

The ruler, touched by the imperial bounty, constantly sends 
missions to Court with memorials on leaves of gold, and he presents 
articles of tribute. 

— firing ch’a sheng lan, 31. Ku-li, tr. Rockhill, Toting Pao xvi, 
pp. 461-462. 



XXXIV. 1451 A.D. MA HUAN 


A. The Nicobar* and Ceylon 

In the Great Sea are the Tsui-lan shan (the Nicobar islands) . 
There are three or four islands (in the group) . The highest is called 
Su-tu-man. 1 Sailing before the north-east wind they can be reach- 
ed from Mao shan (Fulo Weh) in three days. 

The people all live in caves. All of them, males as well as 
females, go naked like wild animals, so they grow no rice, but feed 
on yams, bananas, jack-fruit, and such like things, or on fish and 
prawns. 

There is a foolish story to the effect that if they wore but a 
little piece of cotton to hide their nakedness, they would have ulcers 
and sores. This is because when anciently the Buddha crossed the 
sea, on coming here he took off his clothing and bathed, when the 
natives stole them. The Buddha thereupon cursed them. It is also 
commonly said that this is the country of Ch‘ih-luan-wu. 2 

Westward from the Tsui-lan islands for seven or eight days 
(watches) one comes in sight of the Ying-ko-tsui 3 headland, and in 
another two or three days (watches) one comes to the Buddha 
Temple Hill, Dondera Head, and to the first place (reached in) 
Ceylon, the port called Pieh-lo-li. 4 At the foot of the hill by the 
sea-side there is a huge rock with the mysterious imprint of a foot 
which is greatly revered. It is about two feet long. Tradition says 
that it is the impress of the Buddha’s foot. In the impress there is 
a spring which does not dry up. People dip up the water and wash 
their face and eyes, saying, “The Buddha water will make us clean.” 
Such is the common belief of the people. 


1. Possibly an error for Yen-tu-man ; An-tuk-man is used for the Anda- 
mans by Chau Ju-kua. The Tsui-lan shan of Ma Huan may have included the 
Andamans.— Rockhill. 


2. A name not yet satisfactorily explained; See however, Gertnl, Ceos. 
of Ptolemy, pp. 388, n. 3 ; 413-15. 

3. Phillips renders it by Hawk’s Beak Hill— Duyvendak, p. 47. 

4. Beligam, about 13 miles from Galle. The sailing directions given 

above are, of course, wrong In making junks come to Galle before reaching 
Beligam and Jn the number of watches stated gs necessary to sail tha t 
distance. It seems strange that our Ming authors knew nothing of Colombo 
which must have been, an important port, judging from wllat Ta-yttan Bays 
of it in his days— Rockhill. . 



300 FOREIGN NOTICES 

In the temple there is a sleeping Buddha, the couch is made of 
eagle-wood and ornamented with all kinds of precious substances, 
and the daia is equally beautiful Hie Buddha's tooth (and other 
relics) are also revered in this temple which is said to be the place 
of the nieh-pan (nirvana of the Buddha) . ' 

Travelling north-west by land 5 from this place (ie., from Beli- 
gam) one then comes to where the king lives.* The king is a So-li 
man (from Coromandel) . 

They believe in the Buddha, Sakyamuni, and show great rever- 
ence to elephants and cows. They bum cow dung to ashes with 
which they smear their bodies. As to cows, they drink their milk 
but do not eat their flesh. When one dies, they bury it. He who 
kills a cow is punished with death, or he may redeem himself with 
a cow’s head of gold. At dawn, both in the king's palace and in 
the dwellings of the people, they must mix up cow dung and smear 
the ground and worship the Buddha. [Stret ching both hands wide 
out in front and stretching both legs out behind, they remain glued 
to the earth, both with their breast and abdomen, and so make their 
salutation.] (Duyvendak p. 47). 

The great mountain (near) the capital («.«., Adam’s Peak) 
pierces the clouds. (On it) is a great footprint two feet deep and 
over eight feet long. Tradition says that it is the footprint of A-jan 
(Adam) , the first father of men ; that is to say, Pan-ku. 

The country is extensive, the people numerous. It equals the 
kingdom of Chao-wa (Java) in its wealth and plenty. 

The people have the upper part of the body bare; as to the 
lower part, they have a piece of stuff held in place by a waistband. 
Their bodies are clean shaven, but they leave the hair of the head 
and wrap the head in a cotton doth turban. 

When they mourn their fathers, they do not shave their bodies. 
The women draw their hair into a knot behind and wrap around 
themselves a piece of white cotton cloth. [Newly bom male child- 
ren have their heads shaven; the head of the female child is not 
shaven, the hair is done up into a tuft and they let it grow until 
she is grown up.] (Duyvendak p. 47). They eat and drink in 
private, and men may not see them do so. 

Butter is a necessary ingredient in their food, and betel-nut is 
never out of their mouths. 


5. Tour or five li’ in one text; ‘fifty H’ in another.-*Z>uyvendak, p. 47. 
9. Gamppla— 1 Tennent, Ceylon, H, 224. 



MA HU AX 


They burn the dead and bury the bones. [It is the custom in 
a family in wh^ph a death has occurred, for the relatives’ and 
neighbours’ wives to assemble together and smite their breasts with 
their hands, at the time loud lamentations and 

weeping.] (Duyvtndak, p. 47) . • 

The native products are ya-hu of which there are three colours, 
blue, red and yellow, and blue mirlan stones. The two kinds of 
stones (called) hsi-la-ni and kii-mo-lan are found in the sand brought 
down by the water which falls on the slopes of the mountain (i.e., 
Adam’s Peak) and rushes down. 

The floating brightness of the rays of the sun on an island of 
the sea is the essence of the pearl oyster. 7 They have made a pond 
(in which) every two or three years they spread out oysters which 
officers guard; then the pearls can be sifted out and removed. 
[Those who sift those oysters to take them to the authorities, some- 
times steal and fraudulently sell them ] (Duyvendak, p. 47). 

They have rice, sesamum, and lentils, but no wheat. There are 
many cocoa-nut trees. 

As to fruits, they have the banana, the jack-fruit, sugar-cane, 
melons, and esculents. There are also cattle, sheep, fowl, and 
ducks. 

In trading they use a gold coin weighing 1 can dareen 6 I», 
(also) Chinese musk, fine silk gauzes, embroidered taffetas, blue 
(and white) china-ware, copper cash, copper, iron, and camphor. 

Its tribute (to the Court of China) consists in pearls and preci- 
ous stones. 


— Ying yai sheng lan. 10 Hsi-lan. Tr. Rockhili. Toung Pao 
xvi, pp. 377-381. Modified by Duyvendak, Ma Huan Re- 
examined, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van 
Wetenschappen Amsterdam, Afdeeling Letterkunde, 
Nieuwe Reeks, Deel xxxii, No. 3. 


7. The original text of Ma Huan has: ‘It is a common saying that the 
precious stones (of Ceylon) were formed from the tears of Lord Buddha. 
There is in th* sea (along the coast of Ceylon) a grip of snow-white floating 
sand (a sand bank); the radiance from the reflection of the rays of the 
sun and moon on this’ sand Is overwhelming, and the pearl 'oysters all gather 
together on the sand.-Cited by Rockhili, p. 380 n. 2; see Duyvscdak, p. 47. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


B. The Maldives 

[Setting sail from Su-men-ta-la past Hsiao-itao-shan (on S. 
coast of Pulo Weh?), southwestward with a favourable wind one 
may arrive in this country in ten days. Its native name is Teih 
Kan There are no walled towns and the people live close together 
against the slope of the mountains.] — (Duyvendak). 

To the west [the sea-route changes its character]; in the ses 
there is a gate of rocks like a city gate. 

There are eight large islands all bearing the name of Liu, and 
they row in boats from one to the other. TCie rest are (called) the 
“Little Liu,” they are approximately three thousand in number, and 
are (also) called the “three thousand (islands) of the shallow 
waters.” 

The people (on the little islands?) all live in caves [and in 
nests]. They do not know of pulse and grain, but only eat fish and 
prawns. They have no clothing, but hide their nakedness before 
and behind with leaves. [When a ship meets untoward conditions 
of wind and sea, and the ship’s master has lost his bearings and the 
rudder is gone, if one then passes the Liu islands and drifts on to 
t its waters which are drained off, the ship is powerless in the shoals 
' and sinks so that generally they all keep a sharp look out for it.]— 
(Duyvendak). 

In the kingdom of Tieh-kan all are Mussulmans. The habits and 
customs are virtuous and good, they follow the precepts of their 
religious teachers. Their occupation is fishing. They like to plant 
cocoa-nut trees. The complexion of the men is rather dark. They 
wear a white turban and wrap around their lower parts a small 
piece of stuff (lit., “a handkerchief”) . 

The women wear [a short upper coat] and also wrap around 
the lower part of their bodies a small piece of stuff. A large piece 
of stuff (conceals their faces) . 8 In their marriage and funeral cere- 
monies they follow the rites of their religion. 

The climate is constantly as hot as summer. The soil is poor 
and rice scarce. They have no wheat. In trading they use silver 
coins. 

The native products are laka-wood [but not much] and the 
cocoa-nut (tree). [Cocoa-nuts are very abundant and people come 

8. c f. Ibn r Battuta, pp. 253-4 above. 



MA HD AN 


from everywhere to buy them; amongst the merchandise which they 
sell to other countries there is a kind of cocoa-nut shell, from which 
those people mdhufacture a kind of wine-bowl, with legs of rose- 
wood, the legs and the inside being varnished with native varnish, 
very unusual. From the fibre on the outer shell of the cocoa-nut 
they twine fine rope which is heaped up in the houses, and which 
the people aboard native ships from other places also come to buy. 
It is sold to other countries for building ships and other uses. In 
building native ships nails are never used, but with the clefts (the 
boards) are joined together and tied fast with this kind of rope, 
wooden wedges being also fixed to them. Then they smear the 
seams with a native resin so that the water cannot leak through]* 
(Duyvendak p. 57). 

[People who fish for ambergris often stay at the Liu-isltads. 
They find it when the water rises; it has the colour of resin, but has 
no odour; when it is burnt there is a rancid smell. Its price is high 
and it is exchanged against silver.] (Duyvendak p. 57). 

[They gather cowrie-shells which are heaped up like a moun- 
tain; they catch them in a net and let them rot and sell them to other 
places ; they are sold under the name of hai-liu-yu. 9 10 ] (Duyvendak 
p. 58.) 

They weave silk handkerchiefs very finely and decidedly better 
than elsewhere; they weave also gold (embroidered) handkerchiefs,’ 
which the men wrap around their heads. [Some are sold for five 
ounces of silver.] 

[There are not many vegetables.] They have cattle, sheep, 
domestic fowl, and ducks. [One or two Chinese trading-ships also 
go to that place to buy ambergris and cocoa-nut. It is however a 
small country.] 

— Ying yai sheng lan. 14 Liu-shan Tieh-kan. TV. Rockhill: 
Toung Pao xvi, pp. 388-390. (Modified by Duy- 

vendak, Ma Huan Re-examined, Verhandelingen der 
Koninklijke Akademie Van Wetenschappen, Amsterdam, 
Afdeeling Letterkunde, Nieuwe Reeks, Deel xxxii No. 3.) 

9. For this passage Rockhlll’s text reads: “The skin of the coconut 

(f.e., the fibre) can be twisted into rope, which is strung through boards 
for making ships, and they are smeared with resin (li-ch ing ) ; (these ships) 
are as strong as if iron nails had been used.” 

10. Rockhill has: “They gather cowrie-shells and sell them to Ko-la 
in Hsien-lo «(K4dah In Siam), where they are \jsed as money. They dice 
sharks' flesh to sell to the neighbouring countries; it is called Hu-vfl (Le., 
'Meldive fish.’) 



SM * FOREIGN NOTICES 

C. Ko-Chih, Cochin 

(Ma Huan’s account: a precis, by Geo. Philips) 

Cochin is described as a day and a night’s sail 11 from Coilum, 
the present Quilon, most probably the Kaulam Malai of the Arabs 
(vide Yule’s Glossary under Malabar) , known to the Chinese navi- 
gators of the Tang dynasty, A.D. 618-913, as Muhlai. 

Hie king or ruler is of the solar race, 12 and is a sincere believer 
in Buddhism, 13 and has the greatest reverence for elephants and 
oxen; and every morning at day-light prostrates himself before an 
image of Buddha. 14 The king wears no clothing on the upper part 
of his person; he has simply a square of silk wound round his loins, 
kept in place by a coloured waist-band of the same material, and 
on his head a turban of yellow or white cotton cloth. The dress of 
the officers and the rich differs but little from that of the king. Hie 
houses are built of the wood of the cocoanut-tree and are thatched 
with its leaves, which render them perfectly water-tight. 13 

There are five classes of men in this kingdom. The Nairs 13 
rank with the king. In the first class are those who shave their 
heads, and have a thread or string hanging over their shoulder, 
these are looked upon as belonging to the noblest families. 17 In 
. the second are the Muhammadans; in the third the Chittis, who 
are the capitalists; in the fourth the Kolings, who act as commission 
agents; in the fifth the Mukuas, who are the lowest and poorest of 
all. The Mukuas live in houses which are forbidden by the Govern- 
ment to be more than three feet high, and they are not allowed to 
wear long garments; when abroad, if they happen to meet a Nair 
or a Chitti they at once prostrate themselves on the ground, and 
dare not rise until they have passed by; these Mukuas get their 
living by fishing and carrying burdens. 


11. To the North-west.— Rockhlll. 

12. A So-Ii man.— Rockhill. 

13. Ma Huan makes no distinction between Buddhism and Hinduism. 

14. Rockhill has also this: “He has built a temple in which the of 
the god <Ut„ Buddha) is of gold, and the dais has knobs of blue stone. It 
is surrounded by a moat, and on the side he has sunk a well. Beery day 
at dawn to the sound of bells they draw water from the spring and pour 
it over the head of the god a number of times. His is the only cer emon y." 

15. Rockhill adds : 'Besides this each home builds a store house for Its 

property to escape the danger of fire and thieves.’ ' 

16. Nan-ITueu, in Ma Huan’s text.— Geo. Phillips. 

17. Most probably the Brahmins.— Geo. Phillips * 



MA HU AN 


The merchants of this country carry on their business like 
pedlars do in China. Here also is another class of men, called 
Chokis (Yogi), who lead austere lives like the Taoists of China, 
but who, however, are married. These men from the time they are 
bom do not have* their heads shaved or combed, but, plait their 
hair into several tails, which hang over their shoulders; 1 * they 
wear no clothes, but round their waists they fasten a strip 
of rattan, over which, they hang a piece of white calico; they carry 
a conch-shell, which they blow as they go along the road; they are 
accompanied by their wives, who simply wear a small bit of cotton 
cloth round their loins. Alms of rice and money are given to them 
by the people whose houses they visit. 

In this country there are two seasons, the wet and the dry. In 
the first two months of the rainy season there are only passing 
showers, during which time the people lay in a stock of provisions; 
in the next two months there is a continual downpour day and night, 
so that the streets and market places are like rivers, and no one is 
able to go out of doors; during the last two months the rain gradu- 
ally ceases, and then not a drop falls for another six months. Hie 
soil is unproductive; pepper, however, grows on the hills and is 
extensively cultivated; this article is sold at five taels the P'o-ho, 1 * 
which is 400 cattis of Chinese weight. 

All trading transactions are carried on by the Chittis, who ' 
buy the pepper from the farmers when it is ripe, and sell it to 
foreign ships when they pass by. They also buy and collect 
precious stones and other costly wares. A pearl weighing 
three-and-a-half candareens can be bought for a hundred ounces 
of silver. Coral is sold by the catti ; inferior pieces of coral are 
cut into beads and polished by skilled workmen; these are also 
sold by weight. The coinage of the country is a gold piece, called 
Fa-nan, weighing one candareen ; there is also a little silver coin 
called a Ta-urh, which is used for making small purchases in the 
market. Fifteen Ta-urhs make a Fa-nan. There are no asses or 
geese in this country, and there is neither wheat nor barley ; rice, 
maize, hemp, and millet abound. Articles of tribute are sent to 
China by our ships on their return voyage. 

—Geo. Phillips in JRAS 1896, pp. 341-44; cf* Rockhill. 

Toung Pao xvi pp. 449-52. 


18. "They smear their bodies with ashes of cowdung.’— Rockhill. 

IS. Bahar® A commercial weight which differ* greatly in many places. 
Pepper at Cochin apparently sold, reckoning the tael at 68 . td., at £1 13s. 4d„ 
or less than a penny a' pound.— Phillips. 

F. N.— 39. ® 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


D. Ku-li, Calicut 

Hus sea port, of which Ma Huan gives us a most lengthy ac- 
count is described as a great emporium of trade frequented by 
merchants from all quarters. It is three 0 days’ sdil from 
Cochin, by which it is bordered on the south ; on the 
north it adjoins Cannanore (K‘an-nu-urh) ; it has the sea 
on the west ; and on the east, through the mountains, at 
a distance of 500 li (167 miles), is the kingdom or city of 
K-an-pa-mei, 20 a great seat of cotton manufacture where is made, 
as also in the surrounding districts, a cloth called Chih-li (Chih-li- 
pu) cloth. It is made up into pieces, four feet five inches wide and 
twenty-five feet long; it is sold there for eight or ten gold pieces of 
their money. They also prepare raw silk for the loom which they 
dye various shades of colour and then weave into flowered pattern 
goods made up into pieces four to five feet wide and twelve to thir- 
teen feet long. Each length is sold for one hundred gold pieces of 
their money. 

To return to Calicut, much pepper is grown on the hills. Cocoa- 
nuts are extensively cultivated, many farmers owning a thousand 
trees; those having a plantation of three thousand are looked upon 
as wealthy proprietors. The king belongs to the Nair class, and, 
like his brother of Cochin, is a sincere follower of Buddha, and as 
such does not eat beef; his overseer, b"ing a Muhammadan, does not 
eat pork. This led, it is said, in times past, to a compact being made 
between the king and his overseer, to the effect that if the king 
would give up eating pork the overseer would give up eating beef. 
This compact has been most scrupulously observed by the succes- 
sors of both parties unto the present day. The king at his devo- 
tions prostrates himself before an image of Buddha every morning; 
which being over, his attendants collect all the cow-dung about the 
place, and smear it over the image of the god. Some of the dung 
the king orders to he burnt to ashes and put into a small cotton bag, 
which he continually wears upon his person; and when his morn- 
ing ablutions are over, he mixes some of the powdered dung with 
water and smears it over his forehead and limbs; by so doing he 
considers he is showing Buddha the greatest reverence. 

Many, of the king’s subjects are Muhammadans, and there are 
twenty or thirty mosques in the kingdom, to which the people resort 

20. Koyampadi, a former name of Coimbatore. (Geo. Phillips); Cambay 
(RocMiill who writes lf‘an-pa-i) . Duyvendak and Pellio! agree with 
Phillips, and dte<a Chinese work copying the form K‘an-pa-yi-tl from Ma 
Huan, TP. xxx. (1933) p. 290, «. 1. 



MA HUAN 


307 

every seventh day for worship. On this day, dining the morning, 
the people being at the mosque, no business whatever is transacted; 
and in the after part of the day, the services being over, business is 
resumed.. 

When a ship arrives from China, the king’s overseer and a 
Chitti go on board and make an invoice of the goods, and a day is 
settled for valuing the cargo. On the day appoint- 
* ed the silk goods, more especially the Khinkis Chinese ships 
(Kincobs), are first inspected and valued, which 
when decided on, all present join hands, whereupon the broker 
says, “ The price of your goods is now fixed, and cannot in any way 
be altered.” 

The price to be paid for pearls and precious stones is arranged 
by the Weinaki broker, and the value of the Chinese goods taken in 
exchange for them is that previously fixed by the broker in the way 
above stated. 

They have no abacus on which to make their calculations, but 
in its place they use their toes and fingers, and, what is very won- 
derful, they are never wrong in their reckonings. 

The succession to the throne is settled in a somewhat curious 
manner. The king is not succeeded by his son, but by his sister’s 
son, because his nephew, being bom of his sister’s body is consi- 
dered nearer to him by blood. If the king has no sister the suc- 
cession goes to his brother . if he has no brother it goes to a man 
of ability and worth. Such has been the rule for many generations. 

Trial by ordeal is much practised in this country, such as 
thrusting the finger of the accused into boiling oil, and then keeping 
him in jail for two or three days. If after that 
time the finger is ulcerated he is pronounced guilty obdeal 
and sentenced to punishment ; but if his finger has 
received no injury he is at once set free, and escorted home by 
musicians engaged by the overseer. On his arrival home his rela- 
tives, neighbours, and friends make him presents and rejoice and 
feast together. 

The jack fruit and the plantain abound in this country, which 
is also well supplied with melons, gourds, and "mips, and every 
other kind of vegetable. Ducks, herons, and swallows are numbered 
among the feathered tribe, and there ate bats as large as vultures, 
which hang suspended from the trees. , 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


As in Cochin, the money in circulation ia the Fa-nan and the 
Ta-urh. Their weights are the Fo-ho and the Fan-la-shih, and 
there is a measure called a Tang-ko-li. 21 * 

The king’s present to the Emperor is ust^lly a goM-plaited 
girdle set with all kinds of precious stones and pearls. 

—Geo. Phillips in JRAS 1896, 345-48; cf. Rockhill; Toung 
Pao xvi, pp. 455-60. 



APPENDIX I 


NAVIGATION TOWARDS THE END OF THE FIFTEENTH 
CENTURY 

Ibn Majid (in a work dated 1489-90 A.D.) says : “As to what 
concerns the entry to Malaka while coming from Kalikut, some- 
times the monsoon scatters the ships and sometimes carries them 
beyond it. The only exception is in the case of the well-armed 
ships coming from Campa, ready to set sail at the commencement 
of niruz or about that time. The monsoon brings back to Malaka 
ships from Hormuz and from Mekka and the late ships enter there 
(Malaka) on the 120th (day of niruz) 

We may deduce from this passage that Malaka was in regular 
communication with India, Southern Arabia, the Red Sea and 
Campa in the last years of the 15th century. 

— Ferrand, Malaka Le Malayu et Malayur, JA. 11 : 11 
(1918), p. 401. 



APPENDIX II 


THE ROLE OP GUJARATIS 

In February 1511, Albuquerque went from Cochin to Malaka 
with a flotilla of 18 ships : The Commentaries say : 

“When they arrived at Ceylon, being East-West in relation 
to the isle of Sumatra, they descried a ship. Albuquerque gave 
orders to come alongside of it and they took it. They rejoiced 
much (to find) that it was a ship (armed) with Guzaratis, and 
they concluded from it that they were on the right path, for the 
(Gujaratis) know this route much better than all the other nations, 
because of the great commerce they have with these (eastern) 
countries.” 1 


— Fcrrand, JA. 11:12 (1918) p. 165. 
Cf. Commentaries, vol. iii, p. 58. 


1. Hobson-Jobson under Java cites the Ras Mala : 
It is a saying in Goozerat— 

Who goes to Java 
Never returns. 

If by chance he retfoms, 

Then for two generations to live upon, 
Money ^enough he brings back. 



APPENDIX HI 


INDIAN MERCHANTS AND MERCHANDISE IN MALAKA 
(16TH CENTURY) 

i. Duarte Barbosa 

“ Many Moorish merchants reside in it, and also Gentiles, parti- 
cularly Chetis, who are natives of Chobnendel (Coromandel) : and 
they are all very rich and have many large ships, which they call 
jungos (junks) . They deal in all sorts of goods in different parts, 
and many other Moorish and Gentile merchants flock thither from 
other countries to trade ; some in ships of two masts from China 
and other places, and they bring thither much silk in skeins, many 
porcelain vases, damasks, brocades, satins of many colours, they 
deal in musk, rhubarb, coloured silks, much iron, saltpetre, fine 
silver, many pearls and seed pearl, chests, painted fans, and other 
toys, pepper, wormwood, Cambay stuffs, scarlet cloths, saffron, 
coral polished and rough, many stuffs of Palecate, of coloured 
cotton, others white from Bengal, vermilion, quicksilver, opium 
and other merchandise, and drugs from Cambay; amongst which 
there is a drug which we {Portuguese) do not possess and which 
they call putcho, and another called cachb, 1 and another called 
magican, which are gall nuts, which they bring from Levant to 
Cambay, by way of Mekkah, and they are worth a great deal in 
China and Java 

— Cited by Ferrand JA. 11 : 11 (1918) pp. 407-8. Cf. Longworth 
Dames ii 172-3. 


ii. Castanheda. 

“ In the northern part (of the city) live merchants known 

as Quelins (kling, the people of Kalinga from India) ; in this part 

the town is much larger than at any other There are at 

Malaca, many foreign merchants, who, I said before, live among 
themselves ; they are moors and pagans. The pagans come princi- 
pally from Paleacate; they are installed permanently ; they are very 
rich ; they are the greatest merchants of the Vorld at 
this period. They evaluate their wealth only by bahar 
of gold ; there are some possessing 60 quintals (quintal 
= 100 kilogrammes) of gold. They do not consider as 

X. Putchok; Catechu.— Hobson- Jobson. 



312 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


rich the merchant who, in a single day, does not buy three or 
four ships charged with merchandises of great value, and make 
them reload (the ships) and pay them their proper amounts. 
Thus, this port is the most important and has the 

richest merchandises known to the whole worfd They (the 

Chinese ships) buy pepper, cloth from Cambaya, from Bengal and 
from Paleacate; grains, saffron, yellow coral, red lead, mercury, 
opium, the drugs of Cambaya called cacho and pucTio and other, 
articles of merchandise which come there by the Red Sea.:.... 
(There come paraos laden with) pepper from Malabar. There 
come likewise merchants from the whole of India, from the Coro- 
mandel, from Bengal, from Tenasarim, from Pegu with provisions 
and rich merchandise. They carry likewise to Malaca the cloves 
of Molucus, the camphor of Borneo, the mace and the black nut- 
meg of Banda, the white and red sandal of Timor. Thus, as I said 
already, this is at this epoch the largest and the richest emporium 
in the world.” 

— Castanheda (1528-38) : Bk II ch. ii. on the city of Malaca : 
cited by Ferrand-JA. 11 : 12 (1918) pp. 148-9. 



APPENDIX IV 


Extracts from, the Mohit, the Ocean, 1 a Turkish work by 
Sidi All Capudan (1554) on navigation in the Indian Seas Trans- 
lated by Joseph von Hammer 

EIGHTH VOYAGE FROM ADEN TO GUJERAT 

If you start from Aden, you go true east till you lose sight of 
the mountains of Aden , you continue to hold the same route a day 
and a night, then E by N till the Southern wind sets in, then 
E N E if possible, and if not you follow the above course and 
go then E N E , if theie be little motion with the Awelamaf) 
there is no harm m it, if a closer course is pursued you side to 
E by N and return from thence again to E N E till the measure 
is equal , in this measure Lyra 2 is five inches, or Sagitta six inches, 
or Canopus and Lyra are equal to three inches and a half Under 
this measure (height) you see in the sea frequently sea snakes, 
which ought to be taken care of as it is a good sign , if you do not 
see them follow your way in the direction right east till you see 
them, and then change again your course to E by N till you see 
land The best rule is ‘O trust»to the soundings and not to the sea- , 
snakes which, if they prove true show themselves twice and thnce 
a day Be it known, that sometimes in the monsoon Daman t the 
ship is thrown hv the current towards the Persian shore like mount 
Koholad Dabbaghat , at this time the ship finds itself m the bar- 
barian channel , there great precaution is necessary against the 
whirlpools besides this place there are such between Gujerat and 
Smd in the gulph Jakad, where the wind blows continually from 
the sea and the current comes from the shore, so that waves and 
contrary currents are not wanting and a ship falling in with them 
runs great nsk to be lost, if it is not saved by the grace of God , so 
It is necessary to avoid these places You must turn from the 
Persian shore to the Arabian, and steer N N E and N E by N 
till you are out of reach of this dangerous place, after which you 
steer again E N E Know that the wind of Canopus (S S E ) is not 
to be trusted till the pole is made with six inches or six inches and 
a quarter , the flood runs then true E The signs of a tempest are 
great distress, and the summer birds called in Yaman, * jam, also 
the birds bani safaf and amm ul sanani these birds keep then to 

1 Ferrand, Relations, il 484 

2 There must be some mistake m these stars — (J von Hammer) 

F N— 40 



814 


FOREIGN NOTICES 


the shore, flying m the summer on the sea, sometimes you see 
them till where the pole is made with nine inches (Lat 19°54') 

— JASB v tl836) pp 456-57 

FOURTEENTH VOYAGE, FROM ADEN TO MONEMBAR, 
(MALABAR) 

The course is the same which has been already mentioned be- 
fore from Aden to Gujerat , you go on till the pole markj six ‘ 
inches and a half or seven inches , 3 if from thence you can go 
tacking, you go m the direction of E by S or true east , if it is 
impossible to keep this course, your way is E by N till the pole is 
made by seven inches and half or eight inches , from thence you 
follow the direction E by S till the pole is made with six inches, 4 
then true east till land is in sight, which is A’zadiw 5 or a place near 
it , vou steer then towards the shore , what is meant by the inches, 
assaba, and the pole or polar star j ah has been explained m the 
former chapters 

—tb p 458 

TWENTIETH VOYAGE FROM DABUL TO THE ISLANDS 
OF DIB 

You follow first the direction W S W till you lose the shore, 
from thence to Daira S W by W till land is in sight , from thence 
S S E till the pole comes to three inches from thence to the south 
pole and S S W till the Farkadam (|3 and y in the little bear) are 
marked by eight inches and a half from thence true west to 
Foyuka or its neighbourhood Mark what has been said above , 
till land is in sight steermg S W by W , that means, that the land 
is at hand Be it known to you that in some of the islands of the 
Maldives the inhabitants hunt with dogs, bred to the purpose, the 
Orang-ootang (Nisnaus) and eat it The Nisnaus is an animal 
resembling a monkey but endowed with speech , but generally 
monkeys are also called Nisnaus I have heard from the brother 
of Janum Hamza, the late Intendant of Egypt, that coming one 
day on commercial business at the extremity of Yaman to a walled 
village, he alighted at a house where two boys lying on the ground 
were cryihg, and that out of commiseration he untied their fetters 
The master of the house returning, laughed at it, and said, these 

3 About Lat 17* . 

4 Lat 15* , 

5 Ajldeeva near Ankola lat IVtO" 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


3lS 


are Nisnaus, which we hunt. The next day the master of the house 
took his disbelieving guest with him, and he saw the Nisnaus hunt- 
ed by dogs. Sofne Nisnaus emerge from the sea, their flesh is a 
great dainty ; that they are endowed with the power of speech is 
even recorded in the books of philosophers . , 

-ib. pp. 461-62. 

TWENTY-SIXTH VOYAGE, FROM CALICUT TO KARDAFUN. 

If you sail from Calicut with a favourable wind, steer W. by S. 
and sometimes W.S.W. so you come to the island Kolfaini ;« if at 
this time, that is to say, on the 140th day of the Yazdajerdian year, 
which the fifth of Jelalian (March) , the sea shuts, the flood runs 
at this time N.N.W. from thence you direct your course to the south 
pole, and go tacking if the flood runs to the south pole, 
but if the wind falls lower, then this course to S.W., 
S.W. by S. and S.S.W, you may follow it a day and a night 
without inconvenience. If it should fall yet lower, turn and steer 
to the north pole or near it, particularly if the pole is made by less 
than three inches (lat.10 0 ) , because it is profitable to be then high 
north, and the wind grows favourable ; if it be already so, you run 
from Calicut till Kolfaini two zams in the direction of W. by S., 
then eight of nine zams W.S.W- then you may rejoice, as you have 
got clear of the islands of Ful, from thence W. by N. and W.N.W. 
till the pole is four inches and a quarter, and then true west to 
Kardafun. Calicut is famous for its pepper plantations : its 
Prince is the Saumeru who is at war with the Portuguese. On 
these coasts are a great number of elephants employed in dragging 
ships, launching them into the sea, and similar doings. 

— ib. p. 465. 

TWENTY-SEVENTH VOYAGE, FROM DIU TO MALACCA. 

Leaving Diu you go first S.S.E. till the pole is five inches, and 
side then towards the land, till the distance between it and between 
the ship is six zams ; from thence you steer S.S.E., because in the 
neighbourhood of Ceylon, the sea runs high, the further you keep 
off the more quiet the sea grows ; you must not side all at once but 
by degrees, first till the farkadain ((3 and y in the little bear) are 
made by a quarter less than eight inches, from thence to £>.E. till the 
farkadain are seven inches and a quarter, from thence true east at a 
rate of 18 zams, then you have passed Ceylon. The sign of Ceylon 
being near is continual lightning, he it accompanied by rain or 

6. Caipeni, on* of the Laccadives. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


without rain ; so that the lightning of Ceylon is grown proverbial 
for a liar. After having passed Ceylon you go E.N.E. and E. by 
N. till the pole is made by two inches, from thenfce true E. till to 
the island of Sarjal which is one of the Najbafi (Nicobarian) islands. 
After having left it behind you steer E. by S. (jll land is 'in sight, 
you go along it to the islands Falusanbilen 7 which are nine islands ; 
from thence to the south pole. At your right some islands are 
seen at a distance, so you go towards the south pole till you come to 
the islands to Folodjora 8 which appear near, from thence E,S.E. 1 
where the sea is more than ten fathoms, if it be 11 or 12 never 
mind, because after 12 is the deep sea, and you are clear of the 
Shob Kafaussi. You go till mount Folupasalar is opposite, N.E. 
till the soundings give 24 fathoms, because there is a bent shab 
running out in the sea, which is to be taken care of — wherefore 
your course must be followed always in a depth of 24 fathoms till 
you see the mount Folupasalar N.N.E., ; then you steer towards 
the land and Diaraibarra (E.N.E.) till Malacca. The inhabitants of 
Shu]i s (?) go from Falusanbilen two zams to the south pole. 

— ib. pp. 465-66. 

TWENTY-EIGHTH VOYAGE FROM DIU TO SHATTJAM, 10 I.E, 
TO BENGAL. 

Sailing from Diu, your course, till you have left Ceylon behind 
you, is the same as the above mentioned, then you steer N.E. 
Ceylon remaining on the western side ; then N.E. by N. till you 
come opposite to Rakanj, 11 where the pole is made with a quarter 
wanting to nine, and the Aselli scarce with six inches; if in this 
course you see land it is well; if not, steer E.N.E. till the 
pole is nine inches and a half, so you come to the island of Dardiw. 

If you see it at this time it is well, if not go right east till you see 
land, but take care of Fesht Hayumiun, 12 which is a desert rock, 
round which the water is twenty fathoms deep ; take care also of 
Dardiw 13 where the water is but five fathoms. If Rakanj is in 


7. Palo Sambelan on the Malay Coast, lat. 4*5'. 

8. The.Arroas islands. 

9. Doubtless the Cola country. 

10. Chittagong. 

11. Arrakan, lat. 20‘ 10'. 

12. Probably oyster island, a barren rock off Arrakan, or St. Martin’s 

reef. (J. von Hammer). ’ * 

13. Probably Nardlel or Narkol deep of Horsburgh, off the Talc Hoof 
entrance. (J* von Hammer) . 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


•3X7 

sight, go N.N.W. with 25 fathoms of water. At this time Hayu- 
rniun remains on your right, of which great care is to be taken. 
After having paised it you approach the land till your soundings 
give 16 fathoms, and With this course you come to Dardiw ; after 
having left it behind you go with 12 fathoms depth N.N.W., there 
you come to a great Khur(?) called Bakal, 14 and then* five capes 
which are taken for islands by those who don’t know them ; then 
comes a Ghobba, that is to say, a gulf full of shallows, shoals and 
“ breakers ; this place is called Kakar Diwa, 15 then you come to the 
island Zenjilia 14 which is facing you, your way lies N.N.W. When 
you approach this Island, side to the sea, because its southern cape 
is rikk, that is to say, a shallow, and the colour of the water grows 
white; meanwhile, on the sea side it is seen green. Hold that 
course, and you will find better soundings by degrees till you come 
to 17 and 18 fathoms. Coming to this place you find the water again 
whitish, these shallows are on the south side of Fesht Gurian, which 
is a desert place ; here the sea is noisy, don’t keep either too near 
to the island of Zenjilia, nor too far from it but steer a middle 
course ; if the soundings give 18 fathoms or near it, you have pass- 
ed Zenjilia ; then you go in the direction of the north-pole, and con- 
tinue to take soundings till you come to seven fathoms ; from 
thence you steer in the direction of the north pole, and to the rising 
place of the fl and y of the little bear, till your soundings are six 
fathoms but not less. So you come to cape KHur which is Shati- * 
jam. Here you stop till the rebban (tide) come, with which you 
enter the port. Bengal is abundant in ivory and ebony ; the finest 
muslin turbans, the very best jutar, 17 and most precious Indian 
stuffs come from thence ; the finest muslin sashes are called maimed, 
and the most precious of them malmali-shahi, which by confusion 
is generally named marmare-shahi (royal marble) ; there are also 
sea-bulls, the best of them are found between Bengal and Delhi in 
the interior lake ; they are called sea bulls, although they don’t live 
in the sea, but in the interior lakes on the land ; but the merchants 
call them so ; for in the interior northern lakes, in the mountains 
of the Afghans, are also found the rhinoceros (Karkadan, the name 


14. Probably Mascall island (J. von Hammer) 

15. Cutub-deep, south of Chittagong. (J. von Hammer) . 

16. Though there is no such island now there might have been one in 
Sidi's time. 4J. von Hammer, citing Lieut. Lloyd ^of the Indian Navy). 

17. Chautar, a fine cloth, so called from its four threads. (J. 

von Hammer) . • ' 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


quite the same as the Krokotos of Ctesias), but their horns are but 
two palms long ; it is related that those which are found in Abys- 
sinia have much longer horns. Giraffes are found but in Abyssinia 
and never in India. 

JASB. v. (1836), pp. 466-67. 



ADDENDA 


The following notice of Ma Twan-lin (middle of the thirteenth 
century A.D.) is worth noting along with the passage from Pan 
Kop reproduced in extract 11 above : 

HOANG-TCHI 

The kingdom of Hoang-tchi sent, for the first time, some 
ambassadors at the time of Han and since the reign of Emperor 
Ou-ti 1 regularly paid the visit of homage. It is situated at (a 
distance of) 30,000 li to the south of Hopou and Ji-nan. 2 Its 
customs resembled those of {he country of Tchu-yai s . It furnished 
beautiful pearls, lieouli, fine stones, and many curious things. 
Pearls which are nearly two tsun 4 in circumference are found 
there, and others smaller, with a perfect roundness, which when 
laid on a polished surface, keep moving the whole day, before 
coming to a standstill. 

— Ethnographic, Merjdionaux, ed. Hervey de Saint-Denys, 
pp. 412-13. 


H 

The long notice on the Cola country in Ma Twan-lin is well 
worth comparing with that of Chau Ju-kua (ante pp. 141-7). The 
two accounts have much in common, but there are also important 
•differences which go to show the diverse character of the sources 
the two authors drew upon for composing their accounts : 

TCHU-LIEN 

On the eastern side, this kingdom is 5000 li along the sea- 
board. On the western side 1500 li separate it from Western India 
( Tien-tcho ). On the southern side, it is situated 2,500 (t from 

Lo-lan; and on the northern side 3,000 It from Tuntien. It had 


1. 140-86 B.C. Deguignes said : ‘ The country ot Hoang-tchi Is situated 
in India, but I do not know its exact position ’—Hervey de Saint-Denys. 

2. TongeKing— H. de. S-D. . 

3. Southern part of the Isle of Hainan— H. de S-D. ^ 

4. Nearly three * centimetres— H. de S-D. 
r.N^-4i. 



FOREIGN NOTICES 


no communication with China in the olden days. In order to 
go there, setting out from Kouangtcheou, it is necessary to go by 
sea a distance of nearly 411,400 It. * 

The capital of Tchu-lien has seven enclosing walls,' with a 
height of seven tchi, and a hundred paces apart from one another. 
The outermost enclosure has a diameter of twelve li from south to 
north, and seven li from east to west. The first four walls are 
built of brick ; the two following are of mud, and that of the in- 
terior is of wood. All are covered with espaliers, or decorated 
with flowers. The first three enclosures are occupied by the peo- 
ple and include numerous water courses. The fourth enclosure 
contains the houses of four great officers. The fifth enclosure 
belongs to the sons of the king. In the sixth is a temple of Buddha, 
served by hundred Buddhist priests. Finally the seventh contains 
the palace of the king, or royal town, comprising more than four 
hundred buildings. The towns of the second order are thirty-one 
in number, twelve to the west of the royal residence, eight to the 
south, and eleven to the north. The reigning dynasty has occupied 
the throne for three generations 5 . 

The administration of justice is entrusted by the king to one 
of his four great officers. Those who have committed offences are 
• put in fetters and receive from fifty to a hundred strokes with 
rods. The criminals are beheaded or crushed under the feet of an 
elephant. 

During feasts, the king and the four great officers salute each 
other, crossing their hands, and inclining the body like the Bud- 
dhist priests ; then they all sit together. They eat meat, but they 
do not drink wine. They have different sorts of soups, cakes and 
particular dishes of very good taste. They wear cotton clothes. 
The feast is accompanied by music, singing and dances. The ser- 
vice is done by women. 

For marriages, the suitor sends at first a mediatrix to the 
family of the young girl, whom he courts, offering her a ring of 
gold or silver. Three days after, the relatives of the young man, 
join and consult together to determine if they could, according to 
their resources, give to the new household some fields, domestic 
animals, or only palm wine and some areca nuts and so on. From 
their side, the future relations send to the fianc6 some gold or silver 
rings; some pieces of doth; and some beautiful dothes for his 

5. This may unply that this part of the notice dates from the tbm» of 
Rajarija I. 



ADDENDA 


wife. These preliminaries ended, if the young man refuses to 
marry the young girl, he should send back the tokens of betrothal 
that he has received, and if it is the young girl who wishes to re- 
tract, shg ought to restore' twice the presents she has accepted. 

When war is carried on, the order of battle is as follows : In • 
the front rank are placed the elephants, behind the elephants are 
the lightly armed men, protected with small shields ; then soldiers 
armed wiih lances having points resembling the weaver’s shuttle ; 
then the infantry handling long swords ; and lastly the archers 
forming the rear guard. The four great officers command all the 
available forces by divisions. About 2500 li to the south-east of 
the kingdom of Tchu-lien is the kingdom of Si-Umtchi. War 
sometimes breaks out between these two countries. Tchu-lien 
produces pearls, coral, crystal, areca-nuts, nutmeg, cotton Jci-pei, 
etc. Elephants, goats, oxen, pheasants, parrots; a lot of white 
iasmine and a quantity of other flowers, are also found there. Its 
fruits are the jujube, cocoanut palm, plum tree, jack, etc. The 
inhabitants cultivate the legumes, green and black, as well as many 
sorts of grains, notably wheat and rice. The bamboo thrives on 
their soil. 

This kingdom which in antiquity never had communications , 
with the Empire, sent ambassadors for the first time under the 
dynasty of Song They arrived at the ninth moon, of the eighth 
vear ta-tchong-siavg-fou (1009) ; the chief of them, named Cha- 
li-san-oupn, was one of the four great officers of the reigning king 
Lo-tcha-lo-tcha. Then came a second ambassador named Pou- 
kia-sin and two councillors whose names were Ong-ou-fang and 
Ya-kin-kia. These strangers brought a letter from their sovereign 
for the Emperor, with the presents offered as tribute. They ad- 
vanced right up to the steps of the throne, and there deposited these 
pearls and precious stones, on a tray, and drawing back to the 
furthest end of the hall of audience, made two deep bows. The 
interpreter explained that they meant by that to show their respect 
and their attachment from far as well as from near. 

The letter of the king was more or less to the following effect : 
“I, Lo-tcha-lo-tcha, your subject, I have learnt through a merchant 
vessel which visited my kingdom that the greM dynasty of Song 
was ruling the Empire, that already two emperors of your race had 
occupied th$ throne, that to-day the mandajte of Heaven has been 
gloriously acquired by you. Some words of antiquity which have 
happily come to * me, have first of all inspired the desire 



FOREIGN 


to render homage to you. 6 Soon, I knew that your 
beneficial influence extends far, that your subjects are 
very submissive, that your high merit surpasses that of 
all your predecessors. You practise justice; you main- 

tain peace by the sole power of your virtue. You are 
strong and formidable; but you do not like to strike. Also, 
all the peoples turn towards you. You know to instruct the men 
and serve the Supreme Lord with a sincere piety. Your goodness 
extends even to the feeble reed; it reaches the fishes in the depths 
of the sea. That is why Heaven enlightens you, and protects 
you; that is why the graces descend on you, manifest, constant and 
brilliant. I, your subject, I am humble and small ; I reside, as 
have resided my ancestors, in a barbarous town, very far from 
the shining light of Chinese civilization. I see in some way, by the 
light of candles. However the noise of your praises which fills the 
world, could not fail to move me. My age, the stretch of the seas 
which separate us, and the great difficulties on the route to traverse, 
do not permit me to go, in order to carry myself the tribute that 1 
wish to offer you ; but if it is forbidden me to contemplate from 
near and with my own eyes, the brilliance of your glory, I pour out, 
at least in this letter, the sincerity of my heart, and I send you 
respectfully the best products of my country. Just as ants are 
•attracted by a sweet smell, as the sun-flower is drawn towards 
the sun as by an irresistible charm, so will be my envoys, to the 
number of fifty-two, arriving at the foot of your throne. I have 
ordered them to offer you a robe and cap decorated with pearls, 
pearls of different sizes weighing about 21,000 leang; 7 sixty pieces 
of ivory and sixty pounds of incense.” 

The ambassadors distributed besides, personally, their own 
presents, 6,600 leang of pearls and 3,300 pounds of perfumes. 8 

The words of antiquity to which the king Lo-tcha-lo-tcha made 
allusion in his letter were those which had been pronounced by the 
skipper of the foreign vessel which visited his kingdom who had 
said: “ During these ten years, there have been no storms at sea.” 


6. This is explained later. 

7. Sixteenth part of the Chinese pound of about 38 grammes. Unis 

nearly 800 kilogrammes of fine pearls are meant— exaggeration so fantastic 
as not to merit the least discussion.— H. de S-D. ' 

& Another esaggeration not less ridiculous thap the preceding. Ma 
Twan-lin is himself critical of the Song notices of Tchu-lien.— H. de S-D. 



ADDENDA '8ffl 

Hie sense of these legendary words was that for ten years the 
Empire had for master a pious prince, endowed with all the vir- 
tues. Hence thS desire of the king to send ambassadors to the 
court of China. 

San Ouen,® arid his suite, having navigated in the 'beginning 
during seventy-seven days and nights, and passed before the Isles 
No-ou-tan and Po-K-st-lan arrived at the kingdom of Tcfien-pwi. 

.Pursuing their course, sailing night and day, and passing before 
the Isle Y-ma-lo-li, their vessel reached the coasts of the kingdom 
of Kou-lo after a sixty-one days’ journey. The kingdom of Kou-Io 
contains a high mountain called Kou-lo, to which it owes its name. 
Again sixty-one days and nights of navigation, and the voyagers, 
after having left behind them the Isles Kia-pa, Kou-po-lao, and 
Tcheou-pao-long, anchored on the shores of San-fo-tsi. Continu- 
ing to advance during eighteen days and nights, after traversing 
the mouth of the river Man-chan and coasting the Isles of Tien- 
tcho, they found themselves, in sight of the Isle of Pin-teou-lang. 
and could see in the distance, about 100 li towards the east, the 
tomb of Si-ouang mou. 10 They travelled again twenty days and 
twenty nights, passed the Islands of Yang-chan and Kieou-si ng- 
c han, touched at the island of Pi-pa, and landed finally at the 
port Koung-tcheou (Canton) after a voyage of 1,150 days. 

Hie Emperor issued instructions to receive them with the 
greatest regard and to accord to them the same honours as to the 
envoys of Kouei-tse for all that concerns the ceremonial of audi- 
ence, the invitations to official dinners, etc. As they celebrated 
this year, the tenth anniversary of the coming of Tchin-tsong, 11 
San-Ouen, and his companions went to the Buddhist temple of 
Ki-ching-chenyouen, wishing to unite their prayers with those of 
the Buddhist priests who invoked Heaven to accord longevity to 
this prince. 

In the fourth year tien-hi (1020), a second embassy from 
Tchu-lien entered the port of Kouang-tcheou. Hardly had he dis- 
embarked, the first ambassador named Pa-lan-te-molie died of an 
exhausting illness. The credentials brought by him were sent to 
the court. The Emperor responded giving orders to treat honour- 
ably all the strangers who formed the suite of the late* ambassa- 
dor, and send them away with very rich presents. 


9. The first of the Cola ambassadors named above. 

10. A quasi -historical and quad-fabulous figure.— H. d<? S-D. 

11. The reigning emperor.— H. de S-D. 4 



324' FOREIGN NOTICES 

In the second year Ming-tao (1033), a new ambassador of 
Tchu-lien, arrived. He bore a letter from his sovereign written 
in characters of gold. He offered as tribute a dress, and a cap 
ornamented with pearls, hundred and five leang of peprls and 
hundred pieces of ivory. This ambassador declared that many 
embassies which had left" his country to go to China had been sur- 
prised by storms at sea, and had perished along with their goods. 
He showed a great desire to be able to advance right up to the , 
base of the Imperial throne to perform there, with the pearls 
of the first choice, the ceremony called Sa-tien, 12 the greatest 
evidence of respect and attachment in his own view. The per- 
mission having been given him, he put his pearls on a silver tray 
which he raised above his head after kneeling down; then he 
spread them at the feet of the Emperor. This ambassador was 
called Pou-ya-toli. Honorary titles were given to him. 

In the tenth year hi-ning (1077) envoys of Tchu-lien appeared 
again at the court. They were twenty-seven in number. They 
offered pearls as big as peas, a big piece of lieou-li, camphor, the 
teeth of rhinoceros, beautiful textiles, incense, diverse perfumes, 
essence of roses, medicinal plants, borax and spices. The chief 
among them, having accomplished the ceremony of Sa-tien, the 
Emperor conferred on him a very high title and caused to be given 
to him precious medicines from the Imperial pharmacy. The other 
envoys were gratified with numerous presents, consisting above 
all of silks, and this embassy bore for the king of Tchu-lien 81,800 
strings of cash 13 with 52,000 taels of silver. 14 

In conclusion, if we wish to examine seriously all that is just 
related (according to the annals) on this kingdom of Tchu-lien, 
situated precisely at the distance of 411,400 Zi by sea from the port 
of Kouang-tcheou, the voyage to it requiring a navigation of 1,150 
days, one will scarcely find three facts meriting to be put beyond 
doubt: to know that Tchu-lien was a country very far from China, 
that it has never communicated with the Empire in olden days, 
and that it offered for the first time the tribute in the middle of 
the years ta-tchong-siang-fou. As to the letter of the kin g Lo- 


12. This consists in spreading on the steps of the throne, camphor mixed 
with pearls.— H. de S-D. 

13. ■ Sap&jues ' is the .French word employed. A small Chinese MH-m 
coin with a square hole in the centre.— H. de S-D. 

14. The whole works to about 3000 kilogrammes of silver.— H. de S-D, 



ADDENDA 325' 

tcha-lo-tcha, it suffices to note its elaborate style, full of phrases 
and rhetoric purely Chinese, without the least foreign turn of 
inspiration, to judge that it has not even been drawn up at some 
distance Jtiy one of those emigrated half-literate Chinese who posses- 
ses the Kao-kiu-li and the Kiao-tchi. It is the work of p veritable 
litterateur of the Empire, whose brush is exercised to embellish 
or rather disfigure an original document supposing that an original 
document existed. 

— Ethnographie, Meridionaux, ed. Hervey de Sanit-Denys, 
pp. 571-82, 


in 

Ma Twan-lin on Nan-pi (Malabar) may also be compared with 
Chau Ju-kua’s account (pp. 137-40 above): 

NAN-PI 

This kingdom is to the southwest. A month is needed to go 
there, setting out from San-fo-tsi, at a favourable time. There are 
always continual winds there. When the king wishes to go out, he 
sends in advance, a squad of more than hundred soldiers, under 
the direction of many officersj in order to water the ground and 
beat the dust on the road he is to traverse. The prince takes very 
choice food. He is served varied dishes by hundreds and (this 
happens) two times every day. One of the great dignitaries of the 
court has the high direction of his cuisines. 

The inhabitants of Nan-pi are very warlike. They manage 
skilfully the sabre and the lance. They are shrewd archers. They 
know to mint and strike silver coins with alloy which bear the 
royal seal of the State and which serve as currency for commerce. 
They fish for pearls and make cotton cloth of all colours. Because 
of its distance, this country lived without any relation with China, 
when two merchants who were natives of the land and who were 
called Chi-lo-pa-tchi-li-yu, father and son, came to establish 
themselves in the centre of the town of Tsiouen-tcheou (of Fo- 
kien) . After this, many Chinese vessels took the route to Nan-pi 
in order to carry on trade. , 

— Ethnographie, Meridionaux, ed. Hervey de Saint-Denys, 
pp. 587-88. 



foreign notices 
IV. 


The following from Ibn Battuta should be redd in continuation 
of XXX (B) at page 219: — 

Of the false rumour which was spread on the Heath of the Sultan, 
and the flight of the MaUk Hoshang. 

As be returned to Daulat-a-bad, the sovereign was indisposed 
during the journey; the rumour ran among the people that he- 
was dead. This news spread and was the cause of grave seditions. 
Malik Hoshang, son of Malik Kamal-u-din Gurg, was then at 
Daulat-a-bad, and he had promised to the Sultan never to take the 
oath of obedience to any other than himself as long as the Sultan 
should live and even after his death. When he heard of the death 
of the sovereign he fled to an infidel prince named Burabrah who 
lived in inaccessible mountains between Daulat-a-bad and Koaken 
TSnah. The monarch was informed of his flight, and as he suspected 
trouble, he hastened to reach Daulat-a-bad. He followed Hoshang 
in his track and surrounded him with cavalry. He sent word to 
the Hindu prince to surrender him; but the latter refused saying, 

“ I will not surrender my guest, not even when the consequence 
would be, as far as I am concerned, similar to what has happened 
to the king of Kanbflah.” However Hoshang was frightened about 
himself; he expedited a message to the Sultan, and they thought 
it expedient that the latter should return to Daulat-a-bad; that 
Qujlu KHan, the preceptor of the Sultan, should remain in order 
that Hoshang may receive some sureties from him and come to 
Qutlu KHan with a safe conduct. The Sultan left, and Hoshang 
conferred with the preceptor who promised him that the monarch 
would not kill him or lower his rank in any way. Then he set out 
with his goods, his family, his people and went to the Sultan ; the 
latter rejoiced at his arrival; he clothed him with the robe of 
honour and thus gratified him. 

-Voyages d’Ibn Batoutah ed. Defremery and Sanguinetti, 
Vol. iii, pp. 335-36 ; cf. Elliot and Dowson, iii, p. 619. 








FOREIGN NOTICES 


Bactriana, virtually Indian country, 
2 ; Yiian Chwang in, 3. 

Badrakot (Tel Bedadakot, Bidar), 
fortification ct, 219; the siege of, 
219. 

Baga, on the coast of India, 131. 

Baghdad, the Khalif of, the Arabs’ 
King, Suleiman (?) on, 123; his 
alliance with China, 17. 

B&in, a large tank in Dahfattan, 
239-40. 

Bairam (Perim), the Isle of, 220, 231. 

Bakanur (Fiikanur), a town in Mala- 
bar, 237; Basadav (Vasudeva), 
Sultan of, 238 ; right of the port in, 
238; sugar-cane in, 237-8. 

Balal Dev, encounter with Ghayafl- 
ud-din, 280 ; death of, 281. 

Baldud jer, companion of a king, 128- 
129n. 

Balhara, a sovereign of India, Ibn 
Khurdadbeh on, 120 ; P’ang-k'ie-Io 
(?), 146n. 

Balkh, the country of, Buddhism in, 
3. 

Ballahra, the, Suleiman (?) on, 123-4 ; 
Mankir, capital of, 124n ; stands for 
Vallabha, 124n. 

Banquet, State, at Chu-lien, 143. 

Barcelore, see Abu Sarur. 

Baroda (Baroi), on the coast of India, 
131. 

Barygaza, ancient drachmae in, 55 ; 
flood-tides about, 54; Periplus on, 
54; tribes of, 54. 

Basadev, see Vasudeva. 

Batigala, Saracen King of, 213. 

Batthalah (Patlam), Ibn Battuta at, 
Airl Shakarwati, ruler of, 224, 269, 


substances chewed by King of 
Ceylon, 136 ; given to guests in the 
Maldives, 259. , 

Beypore (mod. for Shaliyat), 248. 

Bharoch '(Po-lu-ka-che-p‘o) , Yiian 
Chwang on, 107; Buddhftt monas- 
teries in, 107.* 

Bharukaccha, mariners of, 1. 

Bihar, I-tsdng’s visit to, 15. 

Bihrdj (Broach), an the coast of 


Blyyardawal, the capital of the Coro- 
mandel, 214. 

Bloqui, a fruit, in India the Less, 199. 

Bodhi-dharma, Chinese, sailed to 
Canton, 14 and n. 

Bodhisena, South Indian Brahmin, in 
China, 18 ; in Japan (Naniwa), 18 ; 
became Sojo, 18; Boramon Sojo 
(Brahman Bishop), 19. 

Bosporus, Straits of the, pearl pro- 
duced in, 61. 

Brahma, see Fo. 

Brahmins (Abralaman, P*o-lo-man), 

. descendants of Fo (Brahmfi), 146; 
the fish-diarmere, 163 and nj in 
Canton, 19 ; in Pan-pan, 32 ; of Lar, 
most truthful, 176; omens among, 
.176-7. 

Brazil (Sappan-wood) , produced in 
India the Greater, 206 and n. 

Brazil Collumln produced in Coilum, 
180. 

Britain, island of, 61. 

Broach, see Bihroj. 

Buddha, the (Fo, Sagamonl Borcan), 
deification of, 159; guarding the 
tooth of, in Ceylon, 114; Jataka 
tales of, 160 ; sepulchre of, on 
Adam's Peak, 158; the story of, 
158-9. 

Buddhism, Javanese, Gunavarman 
and, 13 . 1 

Budfattan, a harbour in Malabar, 241. 

Bundelkhand, 219. 


Bawarij, pirates of Kacch and Soma- 
nath, 131; their ships called bird, 
and hence Bawarij, 131. 

Be care (Neacyndon), a harbour, 53. 

BeU of Juftice, 28n. 

Belluri, a tree in India the Less; 
liquor prepared from, 201 ; birole, 
201n. 

Bengal, see P’ong-k'ie-lo. 

Benjamin of Tudela, on Quilon and 
S. India, 26, 134-35. 

Betel (tembul), brewing of, in India, 
180 ; betel paste containing precious 


Ta-Tsln, in, llit. 

Butkh&mh, a temple of idols, Ibn 
Battiita’s encounter with a yogi 

Butte tou, priest of Campa, 13 ; friend 
of Bodhisena, 18. 


Caelobothras, of Muziijs, 53. 

Call, (Kayal) , a business centre, 179; 
chewing Tepibul (betel) in, 180; 
Marco Polo 'on, 179-80. 



Csitya, a Vlhara, 73; (Mihintale), 
73n; Dharmagupta of, 73. 

Calicut (Ku-li, Ki*-li-ro, Qalqot) a 
trade centre, 294-5; booking pas- 
sage to China from, 243 ; Chinese 
ships inf 307 ; frequented by Chi- 
nese ships, 221 ; codbanuts in, 300 ; 
fruits of, 307 ; Ibn Battuta at, 223, 
247, 284 ; Ibn Battuta sailing from 
Calicut to China* 321 ff ; missions to 
China from, 298 ; money in, 308 ; 

* *Mg hnTYHnnHawa In 306 ; Mu-kuaS 

in '598; people of, 298 ; pepper in, 
237, 298, 306; port (harbour) of, 
220, 241; Samuri (Zamorin) the 
King (Sultan of), 220, 241; ship- 
owner Migqal in, 242 ; shipping 
arrangements st, 221 ; trial by 
ordeal in, 307 ; voyage to Kardafun 
from, 315. 

Camb(a)luc, Adam's reliques at, 161 ; 
John of Monte Corvino, archbishop 
of, 33. 

Cambay (Kanbayat, Kinbaiat, Kin- 
bait, Kinbayat, Kinbayah), 214, 


Campa, (Champa), Indian alphabet 
in, 12 ; the kingdom of, 67 ; 
(Champanagar ?), 67 n ; the kingdom 
of, embassies from, 12 ; Jordanus 
on, 211. 

Cannanore (Jurfattan), 239. 

Canton, Arabs in, 20 ; Brahmins in, 

chants in, 118 ; Licence office at, 24 ; 
Mari tim e office in, 19 ; Persians in, 
20 ; Shipping office in, 23. 

Caoulem, see Quilon. 

Caspian Sea, called Hyrcanian, 
63. 

Castes, Seven, in India, Ibn Khurdad- 
beh on, 121. 

CeUM, Sidi Ali, Mohit, the Ocean by, 
36, 313. 

Ceras, see Seres. 

Ceylon (Hsia-lsn sban, Palaesiraundu, 
Salles, Sarandlb, Seilsn, Seng-kla- 
la, Serendlb, Seyllen, Sielediba, Si- 
tail, Sl-lan, Sin ga ld Tb , Sing ha l g, 
Sirandib, Sylen, Taprobana, Tapro- 
bane), the island of, 42, 131; 
the beat Island of its size, 
157; Adam’s Toot in, 137, 296; 
AlagafckonSra, King of, 38, 296 and 
n; ambassadors to Claudius from, 
50; Ambuitn (Mango, amra) in, 
288 ; Amoghavajra in, 18 ; articles of 
luxury in, 51 ; beastS-in, 42-3 ; birds 
used by mariners of, 49; black 




monkeys in, 272-3 ; the Buddha in 
(?), 68 and n ; the Buddha relics in, 
296, 300 ; the Buddha’s Foot in, 299 ; 
Buddhist monks of, 288*9 ; catching 
of fish off, 43 ; Chake baruhe (jack) 
in, 288; Chau Ju-kua on, 136-7; 
Cheng Ho in, 296-7; Chinese sol- 
diers in, 27; cocoanut in, 288; 
Cosmas on, 88-92; cow- worship in, 
300 ; elephants and horses purchased 
from India by King of, 91 ; ele- 
phants exported from, 42; embas- 
sies to China from, 19 ; Erato- 
sthenes on, 47-8, 49; Fa-hien in, 
67 ; Fa-hien on the kingdom of, 68 ; 
food of the people of, 157; guard- 
ing the Buddha’s tooth in, 114; 
Gunavarman in, 77 ; horses from 
Persia to, 91 ; Ibn Khurdadbeh on, 
119-20 ; John de Marignolli on, 
287-9 ; Jordanus on, 208 ; justice by 
majority vote in, 52; Kunakar, the 
residence of the king of, 224 ; 
Kunar, King of, 224; Mahavlra in, 
73 ; Marcian’s account of, 63, 64 ; 
Marco Polo on, 157-61; maritime 
trade of, 89 ; Masuch in, 22 ; Mega- 
sthenes on, 41 ; mountain of 

Sarandib in, 137, 224, 269; Muslim 
merchants in, 20 ; north-winds cause 
sea to submerge part of, 157 ; occu- 
pied by Raksasas, 68n ; Onesikritos* 
account^ of, ^48 ; ^ulehnan (7) on ' 

king of, 136; Pedaiogonoi, the in- 
habitants of, 41 ; palm groves in, 42 ; 
pearls in, 41, 68, 132, 296; pearls 
produced about, 68 ; people of, 
account by Chau Ju-kua, 136; the 
people of, no soldiers, 158; Persian 
Christians in, 88 ; Persian and 
Homan in, 90-91 ; plantain in 287-8 ; 
Pliny on, 49-52; polity of, 52; 
preaching in, 71 ; precious stones in, 
157-8, 212; products of, 137; the 
ruby of the king of, not sold to the 
Great Kaan, 158 ; sailing course of, 
by Marcian, 64 ; Saracen troops 
fought for, 158; Sarira (Buddha 
relics) in, 153 ; Scene of the history 
of the Buddha (?), 180; sea- 
monsters of, 43 ; separated from 
India by river, 41 ; known as 
Sielediba in S. India, 88; silk from 
rainista (China) to, 13; called 
Singhala after Indian merchant 
Singhala, 67 a ; So pater in, 89; 
Strabo on, 47-8; Suleiman (?) on, 
122-3 ; Tamralipti and, 67 ; tooth- 
relic festival in, 71-3; trade with 
Seres of, 51 ; treasuries of, 70-71 ; 
tribute to San-fo-ts‘i from, 137 ; 
Vaisya elders in,- 71 ; Fajrabodhi in, 





INDEX 


inn-til, 141; state banquet in, 143, 
320; taxation heavy in, 144; the 
greatest Tamil .empire, 25; war- 
elephants in, 144 ; women guilty of 
adultery put to death in, 147. 

Colchl (Korkai), pearl-flahenes of, 59. 

Collacum, Cape Kory (7), 50. 

Colombo (Kalanbu, Kas-lang-pu) , 
description of, 291 ; Jalasty lived in, 


... 9, 214; account of, 182 and 
n ; point where Malabar ended and 
Maabar began, 162n. 

Coral, at the base of Dondera Head, 
290. 

Coromandel, the, see Maabar. 

Correa, Casper, a Portuguese in India, 
24 ; account of China and India by, 
24. 

Cosmos, (Indikopleustes) , author of 
Christian Topography, 8-9. 

Cotton manufacture in Motupalll, 
175-6. 

Cottonara, Kolattu-nadu, 53n ; the 
pepper district, 53. 

Cow-dung, considered clean sub- 
stance in Chu-li£n, 147; rubbing 
house with, in Maabar, 167. 

Cowries, constituted wealth of Mal- 
dives, 122 ; medium of exchange in 
T14n-chu, 148 ; used as money in 
the Maldives, 252-3. 

Cremation, of an Arhat, (Fa-hien on), 
73-4. 


I, voyage to Dib island from, 


the IrinflflATq of, 162 ; pfrarl - fishin g 

in Maabar, 162-3. 

Debts, rule about, in Maabar, 169-70. 
Dp&an (Dachinabadefl, Dakgina) * 
'- / Fa-hian on, 13, 66-7; imports and 
exports of, 58; perilous to travel, 
67; Periplus on, 56: the Pigeon 
Monastery and, 66-7 ; ports of, 57 ; 
towns of, 56. 

DT3y, Mount, (Eli, Ely, Hily), the 
Kingdom of Eli, 182, 294; customs 
and manners of people of, 182-3 ; 
frequented by Chinese ships, 221 ; 

Malabar, 238-9. 

Devadasis, girls consecrated to Gods 
and Goddesses in Maabar, 171-2. 
□rfaglr (Deogiri, Devaiquir, Dwai- 
^gir), fortress of, 220, 226; part of 


; products of, 239. 
^uocpna, see Deccan 
Damaskenos, Nikolaos, met Indians at 
Antioch, 46. 

Dpjdatabad, dungeons in, 226 ; eco- 
•'nomic condition of, 227 ; fortress of 
Dwaigir (Deogiri) in, 220 ; Ibn 
Battuta at, 226 ; Katkah, Devaiquir 
(Devagir), parts of, 226 ; Mahrathas, 
the people of, 227 ; Malik Khatfab, 
prisoner in the dungeon at, 227 ; 
pearls in, 227; Qujlu Khan, com- 
mandant of, 226; Saha, the people 
of, 227 ; Tarb abad (abode of re- 
joicing) in, 2 27-8 ; Sultan ill at, 328. 

Davar, Sender Band!, ' 

kings of Maabar; 1 ' 


Deva Pusa, came to Kosala from 
Senkgala, 96 ; Arya Deva. 97 : visit 
to Nagarjuna, 97; discussion with 
Uttara, 102. 

Deva temples in Dhanakataka (?), 
99-100 ; in Dravida, 102 ; in Kalinga, 
95 ; in Malakuta, 103 ; in Orissa, 94. 

Dhanakataka (?), (Te-Na-Che-ka), 
Buddhist monasteries in, Deva- 
temples in, 99-100; Yilan Chwang 
on. 99-100. 

Dharmagupta of Gujerat, in China, 
14; of Caitya (Mihintale), 73 u 
famous ascetic, 73n; also Dharma- 
koti, 73n. 

Dharmapala Pusa (Hu-fa), preached 
Buddhism in Magadha, 100; Yuan 
Chwang on, 103 ; bom at KancI, 103. 

Dharmapatam (Dahfattan), 239. 

Dhibat-ul-Mahal, see the Maldives. 

Diamond, ways of getting diamonds 
in Motupalli, 174-5. v 

Diamond Valley, the legend of, 84; 
Epiphanius on, 84. 

Dib, the islands of, voyage from Dabul 
to, 314-15. 

Dibajat (Laccadives and) Maldives, 

122 . 

DinnSga (Ch‘6n-na), Yiian Chwang 
on, 99 ; Arhat’s career renounced 
by, 99 ; stayed in Maharastra 
monastery, 107; treatise on infer- 
ence by, 99. 

Dinner, I-tsing’s account of, among 
Indian priests, 108-llOf 

Dinur, 275-6. 

Dirham, see tatiri. 


315-16. . 

DIv, island opposite 
piracy in, 214. * 












fcMtJWf 





INDEX 


‘U4; in Ceylon, 113-14; in India 

lit. 

Mirror, a, from Western Ttwtin, Chang 
Yue on, 84-5 ; at Fu-nan, 84 ; made 
of stores, 85. 

Miaqal, a ship-ownet in Calicut, 242. 

Jfohit, the Ocean, a Turkish work on 
navigation in Indian Seas, 36, 313 ; 
extracts from, 313-8. 

Monastery, Pigeon, rock-cut, in 

. Dakqina, Fa-hien on, 66-7; called 

^Peravata, 66. 

Monembar, see Malabar. 

Mongol court, Jumaluddin at, ISO, 
151 ; missions from Ma'bar at, 150 ; 

south at, 155 ; last missions to and 
from, 156. 

Mon inscription, a Cola prince's con- 
version to Buddhism referred to in 
26, 133. 

Monkeys, black, in SilSn, 272-3 ; the 
king of the, 273; Kihkind, the 
mountains of, 132. 

Moschus (Musk-deer), Cosmas on, 
87 ; called kostouri, 87. 

Motupalli (Mutfili), the kingdom of, 
Marco Polo on, 174-5 ; cotton 
manufacture in, 175 ; diamond 
mines, and how diamond is got, 
174-5; Rudramba, queen of, 174 
and n. ’ 

Muhammad ul-Naqury, Shaikh, en- 
tertained Ibn Battuta at Hanaur, 
233. 

Mukl-tree, grows in Kacch, 131. 

Muluk, the island of, Ibn Battuta in, 
268; marvels of, 268. 

Muqbil, the Tilingi, commandant of 
Kinbayah, 229; Ibn Battuta enter- 
tained by, 230. 

Mussalmans, the, in Ceylon, 20 ; in 
Mangalore, 238 ; in Quilon, 215 ; 
majority of population in Fanda- 
rina, 241; people of Malabar and, 
235. 

Muziris, mart of India, 53 ; mariners 
of,l. 

N 


Nifir-ud-dln, successor to Ghayag- 
ud-dln, 282#. 

Na-wang, envoys at Kublal’s court 
from, 153. 

fyazarbir, a town, inhabited by 
Mahrathas, 228. 

Neacyndon (Becare), 53. 

Necessaries, the thirteen, of a priest, 
I-tsing on, 112n. 

Nicobars, the (Tsul-lan ahan), the 
people of, 299. 

Nitrias, pirates of, 53. 

Nubehar, Buddhist convent in Balkh ; 
destroyed by Islamic forces, 3. 

Nuns of Song territory, correspond- 
ence with Gunavarman, 81. 

Nusrat Khan, lieutenant in Tiling, 
219 ; rebellion of, 219 ; surrender of, 
to Qutlu Khan, 219. 


Odoric of Pordenone, on Hindu Cus- 
toms, 33, 192#. 

Omens, among the Abraiaman of Lar, 
176-7 ; in Maabar, 170. 

Onesikritos, account of Ceylon by, 48. 

Onore, see Hunavar. 

Ordeal, trial by, in Calicut, 307. 

Orissa CWu-t'u), Yuan Chwang on, 
94 ; Deva temples in, 94. 

Ou-hing, pilgrim, I-tsing on, 115; at t 
Nagapatana, Ceylon, 115. 

Ox, the hair of, worn in war, 174; 
worship of, by Yogis, 178 ; worship 
of, in India the Less, 205 ; worship 
of, in Quilon, 194; worship of, in 
Upper India, 188; worship of, in 
Maabar, 167, 173. 

Oxus, the, pn Indian river, 2. 

Ozene, Ujjenl (Pali), 55n, trade centre 
in Barygaza, 55. 


Pacauta, prayer of King of Maabar, 
164; Bhigavata (7), Acyuta, 164n. 
Paethana (mod. Paithan), market 
town of, 56. 

Palaeslmundu, 50-60; derived from 


Nagirjuna P'usa, in Kosala, 96 ; visit- 
ed by Arya Deva, 97 ; death of, 97. 

N Mklabar Cochin ’ 304 ’ and m 

Nalanda, I-tsing at, 15. 

Nanking, Gunavarman at, 79. 

Nan-ni-hua-lo (in Sindh), Brahmins 
in, 146. 

Nan-p'i, see Malabar. 

Narasimhavarman II (R&jasimha) , 
Kin g of KaficI, embassies from and 
to China, 16, 116, if?. 

Nargil, see Coeoanut. 


Palaeslmundus, city in Ceylon, 50; 
also a river, 50. 

Palaiogonoi, inhabitants of Taprobane, 
41. * 

Pallava Kingdom, Arabs and Tibetans 
enemies of, 17. 

Palm groves, in TaprobanO, 42. 

Palmyra (Tail) , liquor prepared from, 
201 . , 

Pandaia, daughter of Hercules 
(Her aides ) , 41. » 

Pandlon, King, embassy to Augustus 
(7), 46; at Madura, 53. 





INDEX 


RSjsrfija I (Lo-tsa-lo-tsa) , Cola Em- 
peror, 25, 145n, S2bn, 324-5 
Rajasimha, see Narasimhavarman n 
Rajendra Cola, gri, embassy to China 

Rakoasas (Raksas), Singhala, oocu- 
by, 68n 

Rama-deva, see Ram-dav 
R&mayana, the, geographical cantos 
of, 1 , Sylvain Levi on, 1-2 
Ram-dav (Rama-deva), the Sultan 
of Manjarur, 238 

Ramsher (Rameshar ? ) , on the coast 
of India, apposite Sarandib, 131 
Ra’s Haih, promontory of Illy, 211 
Ra’s Komhon (Cape Comorin), 214 
Requisites, six, of a priest, I-tsmg on. 


Roman and Persian, in Ceylon, 90-91 
Roman Empire, India s contacts with, 
3, Roman coins influenced Kusan 
and Ksatrapa comage, 55n, trade 
with India ot, 5, 93 , musicians and 
jugglers of Ta-tsm (E Roman 
Empire) in Burma lln 
Ruby, the biggest, possessed by King 
of Sedan, 158 

Rudramba, Queen of Motupalli, 174 
Rum (Byzance), the king of, Sulei- 
man (?) on, 123 


Sachahtes, the bay of, 62, (from 
Arabic SahiC, coast), 62n 
Sacred tree, the, m Abhayagin 
Vibara, 70, grew from patra slip, 


Saha (Skt Sarthavaha), the people 
of Daulatabad called, 227 
Samun (Saman, Zamorm), the Sul- 
tan of Calicut, 220, 241 
Sandabur (Goa), the island of, 232 , 
Jamal-ud-dln’s expedition to, 217 , 
conquest of, 248 

Sandanes, title of Kusan king, not 
Sandares, $n 

San-fo-t‘si, trade with Nan-p'i, of, 
139, tribute from Ceylon to, 137 
Sangb» Varan, Ceylonese monk, m 
China, 13 


Sarthavaha, merchant .prmce, 71n , 
also So-po, 71, (Saha), 227 
Sati m India the Leas, 203 
Schahyat (Jaliat), m Malabar, 214 
Schools for boys and girls m Hona- 
var, 220, 234 
Sedan, see^Ceylon 

bar, 167 , m India the Greater, 209 
Sendemam, King of Ceylon, Candra- 
mas (’), 157 
Seng-kia-la, see Ceylon 
Serendib, see Ceylon 
Seres, (Ceraa?), 51n, trade with 
Taprobane, 51 

Setubandha, ‘bridge of the ocean’, 
132 

Seyllan, see Ceylon 
Shaft l, the doctrme of, practised at 
Honavar, 233 

Shalyat (mod Beypore) 248 
Shatijam (Chittagong), 316 
Shinurazah, the Sultan of the Mal- 
dives, converted to Islam, 255 
Ships, three types of, of China, 
242-3 , return-tickets in, 221 , ship-_ 
ping arrangement at Calicut, 221,’ 
of India, frad and uncouth, 190 
Shirm, consort of Khusru n, 9 
Siddhanta (Seihthan) written on 
leaves, studied by Indians, 93 and 
n, 148 

Sielediba, see Ceylon 
gdaditya, and China, 16 
Si-lan, see Ceylon 
Sinae, the people of the, 63 Thinae, 
the metropolis of, 63 
Singaldib, see Ceylon 
Singhale, see Ceylon 
Sirandib, see Ceylon 
Soli (Cola-mandalam), merchants of 
Lar at 176 

Solis, the merchants in Quilon, 245 
Song territory, Gunavarman m, 78 
Sopater, Roman, m Ceylon, 89 
Sophen, see Subhanu 
So-po, see Sarthavaha 
Soras (from Sola— Tam), 61n, ruler 
of Perimuda, 61 

Spirits, Evd, story of, in the Maldives, 
254-5 

grsmana, 73 

Stones, precious, 84 , birds carry, 
method of getting, 85 , mirror made 
of, 85, pool of, 224 , beneath the 
mountain of Sarandlfe, 275. 



FOREIGN NOTICSS 


ler to Egypt, 6n. 

Suttla, In Zanj, pearls m, 132. 

Suleiman (?) on India, 22, 122 jf. 

Sundara (Suan-tan), Kulasekhara 
Pandya's enemy, 151. 

Sundar Pandi, legitimate son of 
Kales Devar, 29; driven away by 
brother Tira Pandi, 29-30. 

Surparaka, mariners of, 1. 

Susiana, the province of, 62. 

Suvama-bhumi (Golden Cherso- 
nese), S3. 

Syagrus, the mountain of, 62 ; also 
Saukar, Arable tribe-name, 62u. 

Sylen, see Ceylon. 


Tabari, Persian historian, account of 
Pulakesi by, 9. 

Tagara (Ter 7), market-town of, 56. 

Taim, Hilal, Governor of, 258. 

Takua-pa, Tamil inscription of, 19. 

Tamralipti, modem Tam-look, 67n ; 
Fn-hien on Ceylon and, 67 ; 
Ta-tch‘eng-teng at, 115. 

Tana, on the coast of India, 131 ; 
beasts in, 192; Loahc, an intoxi- 

, eating wine at, 193 ; marriage cus- 
toms in, 192-3; Odoric on, 192-3. 

Tao-lin, pilgrim, I-tsing on, 115 ; in 
South India, 115. 

Taprobana(e), Sumatra (?), 50ti ; 
see Ceylon. 

Tarb abad (abode of rejoicing), the 
bazaar of singers in Daulatabad, 
227-8. 

Ta-tch'eng-teng, pilgrim, I-tsing on, 
114-15; at Dvaravatl, 114-15; at 
Tamrahpti, 115. 

Tatiri (dirham), Ballahra’s money, 
123. 

Ta-tBin, see Roman Empire 

Taurelaphos, animal Indian, Ethio- 
pian (Cosmas on), 86; (Bull-stag, 
ox-deer), 86. 

Tawalleshar, on the coast of India, 
131. 

Taxation, heavy in Chu-lien, 144. 

Tche-houan, temple (Jetavana VI- 
hara), 80. • 

Telenc, kingdom of, products of, 212. 

Tembul (betel), chewing of, in Call, 
180 ; see also Betel. 

Thinae,- metropolis of the Sinae, 63. 

Thomas, Saint, body of,* lies in 
Maabar, 172, 195; called Avarian 
(Holy man) b/ Saracens, 172; 
miracles done by, 172-3; slain by 


173. 


e by > Govi. 


Tibetans (Thufan) and China, 18, 17. 

ridn-chu, see India. , 

Tiling, the country of, Bndrakot, the 
cartel 'of, 218; pestilence to Em- 
peror’s army at, 218-19 ; the rebel- 
lion of the Sultan’s lieutenant to, 
219 ; of Mnlflg HoJang . 328. 

Tira Pandi, son of Kales Dewar, 79., 
30; drives Sundar Pandi and^fce- 
comes king, 30. 

Tirwari (Tlruvadl), the Sultan of 
Quilon, 245 ; a stem ruler, 223, 245, 
246. 

TIz, capital of coast of 

India begins with, 131. 

Tortoises, shells of, for house roofs, 
42. 

Trajan, coins of, in South India, 7-8. 

Tughlaq, Sultan, Baha-ud-dln Gush- 
tasp’s rebellion against, 2X6. 

Turan, Gulf of, between TIz and 
* Al-daibal, 131. 

Turtles, shells of, used for roofs, 52. 

Twine (coir) f 


Uigur-I-hei-mi-shih, his attempts to 
get the Buddha relics unsuccessful, 
153-5. 

OmmalnSra on the coast of India, 131. 
Uraiyur, see Argaru. 

Uttara, Arhat, discussion with Deva 
P’usa, 102 and n. 


Vaisya elders in Ceylon, 71. 




by prayer, 18 ; 

China, 18. 

Vallabha Calukya and China, 16. 
Vallabha, see Ballahrfi. 

Vasudeva (Basadav), Sultan of Ffika- 
nur, 238. 

Vazir, the Grand, of Mahal 


Ibn 


azir, tne irrano, or manat ; 
Battuta’s relations with, 258 ff. 
Vedas, recited by Brahmins, 113. 

‘ bodyguard of king of 


Wang-ta-yUan, Chinese merchant, 
wrote Too-i-chi-Uo, 36-7, 280 ff. 

Wa-ni, King of Kulam, title ‘Puma* 
conferred by Chinese Jmperor an, 
153-4. 

War, in Maabar, hair of ox worn by 
soldiers to, lft-174; to Tchu-lien, 



sc 


bhayagiri Vihira. YOan Chwang, is Baetrlana, 3 ; tra- 
or, invited Qupa- vela in India at. 14-15, 94#. 
ivarman’a advice Yii-Mn (tumeric), people of QuHon 
anoint body with, 140. 

i Chine* forma Yunnan, kins of, alliance with China 
. of, 17. 


Y Zamorin (Samari), the Mug of 

. , _ Calicut, 220, 241. 

Yma. Ting-pi, Chinese envoy at Zanj, country of, Suf*la in, 132. 

Ma’bar, 150; at Quilon (Kiilam), Zao (Zu), a middle-sized Chinese 

150; expeditions of, 150-5. ship, 220, 242. 

Yin-du (Hindusthan), account of, Zarmanochegas, an Indian from 

Z7-28n. Bargosa, 47. 

Yogis (Chokis, Chughis, Jogis), in Zeitun (Ch'fian-chou) , temple in the 
Cochin, 305 ; in Parwan, 219 ; Ibn city of ; foot-print on Adam’s Peak 

Battuta’s encounter with, 220, 232 ; removed to, 155n. 

ox worshipped by, 178 ; long-lived Zibat-ul-Mahal (Maldives) the, 249. 
yogis of Lar, 177-9. Zolu, flying leech in Silan, 273-4. 


B. 8. ram, MOUNT 




