Madras University Historical Series, No. 18 


GENERAL EDITOR : 

Peofessor K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 


FURTHER SOURCES 

OF 

VU AY AN AG AR A HISTORY 


CENTRAL A ROHAE0LOGICAL 
LiJfci.AiiY. 




FURTHER SOURCES 

OF 

VIJAYANAGARA HISTORY 


BY 

K. A. N FLA KANT A SASTEI, M.A., 

Professor of Indian History and Archaeology 
AND 

N. VENKATARAMANAYYA M.A., Ph. D, ? 

Reader in Indian History and Archaeology ? 
University of Madras 



UNIVERSITY OF MADRAS 
19 4 6 





FURTHER SOURCES 


VIJAYANAGARA HISTORY 


VOL. I 


INTRODUCTION 


N. VENKATARAMANAYYA, M.A., Ph. D., 

Reader in Indian History and Archaeology , 
University of Madras , 







PREFACE. 


|N the preface to ‘Administration and Social Life tinder 
Vijayanagara ’ by Mr. T. V. Mahalingam (No. 15, Madras 
University Historical Series), I stated in- some detail the work 
on Vijayanagara History carried on by this department and 
concluded with the statement ‘Further work on the subject 
is being done and a very considerable collection of further 
sources of Vijayanagara history is already in the press.' 

Experience has shown how useful students find handy 
collections of source material, and the Sources of Vijayanagara 
History published in 1919 as the first book in this series has 
marked a decided step in the advance of knowledge on the 
subject, particularly relating to Hindu literary sources, which 
go far to correct one-sided and inaccurate impressions derived 
from the chronicles of Muslim historians and the records of 
foreign observers. The detailed examination of the Mackenzie 
manusoigfpts undertaken by this department since 1938 showed 
clearly that there was scope for another collection of extracts 
on the history of the great empire which forms the last glorious 
chapter of independent Hindu India in the South. 

About 300 extracts have been brought together in the 
present collection and they are drawn from works in all 
languages, Sanskrit, Persian, Telugu, Kannada, Tamil and 
Malayalam. (generally the texts have also been translated fully 
into English; in some instances, however, a brief summary 
of the essential details has been considered enough to guide 
students unable to read the originals. In a comprehensive 
introduction, which forms the first of the three volumes of this 
work, Dr. N. V enkataramanayy a has discussed the -historical 
significance of the extracts and sought to indicate the ways 
in which our knowledge of the history of Vijayanagara 
is amplified by the new material now presented. 



We offer our thanks to Mr. G. Kalyanasundaram, M.A., 
Junior Lecturer in Geography, for having drawn the maps that 
are included in the introductory volume, and Mr. S. Kameswara 
Ran M.A., Research student in our department, for preparing 
the index. 

Our thanks are due to the Syndicate of the University of 
Madras for their sanctioning the inclusion of the work in the 
departmental series. 


K. A. N. 


CONTENTS. 


Chapter. 

Page. 

I. 

Nature of the sources ... 

1— 8 

II. 

The history of Kampili 

9— 21 

III. 

The origin of the Sahgamas 

22— 34 

IV v 

V., 

The declaration of Independence 

The foundation of the city of Vijaya- 

35— 53 


nagara 

54— 58 

VI. 

The chronology of Vijayanagara Kings ... 

59— 72 

VII. 

Harihara I 

73— 76 

VIII. 

Bukka I ... 

77- 

79 

IX. 

Harihara II 

80— 85 

X. JDevaraya I 

86- 

- 93 

XI. 

Vijaya I and Devaraya II 

94—111 

XII. 

Mallikarjuna 

112—122 

XIII. 

Virupaksa II 

128—140 

XIV. 

Saluva Narasimha 

141—148 

XV. 

Immadi Narasimha 

150—176 

XVI. 

Immadi Narasimha and Vlra Narasimha... 

177—178 

XVII. 

Vlr a Narasimha 

179—185 

XVIII. 

Krsnadevaraya — 

186—231 

XIX. 

Acyutadevaraya 

232—242 

XX. 

Sadasiva (Ramaraja) 

243—262 

XXI. 

The battle of Raksasi-Tahgadi __ 

263—290 

XXII. 

Last days of Sadasiva's Reign 

291—300 

XXIII. 

^rlranga I ... 

301—309 

XXIV. 

Venkata II 
* 

310—325 

XXV. 

Sriranga II 

326—329 

XXVI. 

Ramadeva 

330—338 

XXVII. 

Venkata III 

339—347 

XXVIII. 

Sriranga III 

348—369 



ABBREVIATIONS. 


A. Little Known 

Chapter . 


ASPP 


Foreign Notices 

Govt. ( Madras ) Or. 

Mss. Lib. 


A Little Known Chapter of Vijayanagara History 
by Dr. S. K. Ayyangar. 

Amuktamalyada. 

Annual Report of Epigraphy, Madras. 

Andhra Sahiiya Parisat Patrika. 

Report of the Archaeological Survey of India. 
Cambridge History of India. 

Epigraphia Carnatica. 

History of India as told by its own Historians by 
Sir H, M. Elliot and Prof. John Dowson. 

Epigraphia Indica. 

The Forgotten Empire by Robert Sewell. 

Foreign Notices of South India by K. A. Niiakanta 
Sastri. 

Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras. 

Hyderabad Archaeological Series. 

Historical Inscriptions by Robert Sewell. 

Journal of the Andhra Historical Research Society. 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society. 

Journal of the Bombay Historical Society. 

Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society. 
Journal of Oriental Research, 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great 
Britain. 

List of Antiquities by Robert Sewell. 

Local Records. 

Mackenzie Manuscripts* 

Mysore Archaeological Report. 

Madras Epigraphy Report. ( , - v 


MGOM 

NDI 

Purchas 

QJMS 

811 

Sources 


Madras Government Oriental Manuscripts Library. 
Neilore District Inscriptions. 

Purchas : His Pilgrims. 

Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society. 

South Indian Inscriptions. 

Sources of Vijayanagara History compiled by 
A. Rangaswami Sarasvati and edited by Dr. 
S. K. Ayyangar. 


STG 

TAS 

TDER 

TTDE 

TDI 

The Yet Remembered 
Ruler. 

Vijaycmagcira : Third 

Dynasty. 

VR 


Sivaji Tercentenary Volume. 

Travancore Archaeological Series. 

Tirupati Devaethanam Epigraphy Report by 
S. Subrahmanya Sastri. 

Tirupati and Tirumalai Devaethanam Epigraphical 
Series 

Tirupati Devastha n am Inscriptions. 

The Yet Remembered Ruler of A Long Forgotten 
Empire by Dr. S. K. Ayyangar. 

Studies in the Third Dynasty of 'Vijayanagara by 
N. Venkatramanayya. 

Topographical Inscriptions of the Madras Presi- 
dency bv V, Rangacharya. 




IUTASAM 

SmOOWAOK^ 


|VA»DADI / 


SRKRAiraAHi 


Catapftifin oif NARaSa Nav'aKa as 
doticn'oed ia VARADAMBlKA .PaRINAYaK 


■KEISHNAEAYA'S Haling* Campaign aa daacriW 
5b bis inscriptions and contemporary hteratnrj 


Campaign of HAMARAJA CHIKNATSmM^ 
-a* deacribed m .BALABHAGAVATBAM. 

Approximate Northers So«nd*ry ojf' tbo 
Vj^yanagar Bppirp. 

: ■: ; ;i? : 7 v 


EMPi R E OF VI JAY AN AG AR 


^palavoi^ I / 

AEVAPALLI^ff^ ^ 

. Jd f K A MBHAJ/iiaETTti. . :\| 

^Iakohb, d! » *» /^r rT4gy«*» MCT A 

ikokoao' / 

^VINOKONDAb,^ SONDAVEEDirk J 


%j# simhachalam 

r ^®^A« EABAarai 


n EAJAMAHENjDKAVARiiM: 
\^:sisS, 









INTRODUCTION, 

CHAPTER I. 

NATURE OF THE SOURCES. 

The extracts that are included in the present collection 
have been drawn from three sources, viz., general literature, 
chronicles and the Mackenzie Manuscripts. They offer much 
valuable material which the historian can ill- afford to neglect. 

It is generally stated that the Hindus did not cultivate a 
taste for historical studies, and that they did not produce 
any historical work. The charge is not entirely groundless. 
Hindu literature, rich as it is, cannot boast of a work 
like that of Thucydides, Livy or even Firdausi. Nevertheless, 
it must be admitted that the Hindus produced a species of 
historical literature which is not without its value to the 
modern investigator. The Vidyaranya Kalajnana (14) which 
describes within a brief compass the history of the kings of 
Vijayanagara is a work of this type, and it throws some 
welcome light on the dark corners of Vijayanagara history. 
The Kamparmjacarita, the Saluvabhyudaya , the Rdyamcaka , 
the Krmaraya vijaya, the V a ra da in b ihap arin ay a, the Acijiitaraya- 
bhyudaya, the Raghunathabhjudaya and the SahityaratnaJcara , 
extracts from some of which are included in the present book 
also belong to this class. Of much less literary value, and in no 
way more dependable is the Tamil chronicle of Kongudesa- 
% rdjakkalin-caritUram or the history of the kings of the Kongu 
country. Another type of Hindu historiography must be sought 
in the pra§astis included in inscriptions recording the pious be- 
nefactions which the ancient Hindu monarchs made to religious 
institutions and Brahmans. There is one unique record of the 
first quarter of the 15th century which deserves special notice in 
this context. This charter which was issued by Anitalli, the 
Reddi queen of Rajahmundry, describes not the history of a 
dynasty like other inscriptions but that of a country. This 
. charter contains a short history of Telingana from the 13th to 
the 15th century. It describes the boundaries of the 


2 



to trace the history of his patron’s family in the prologue of his 
poems. He gives a succinct account of the Nellore branch 


inhabitants, and its economic condition, before commencing to 
narrate the main events of its political history. Then it notices 
briefly, the rule of the Kakatiya monarch®, the Muhammadan 
conquest, the expulsion of the conquerors, the establishment of 
a new Hindu kingdom, its dismemberment and the foundation 
of the Reddi kingdoms of Kondavidu and Rajahmundry. It is 
evident from this brief analysis that Anitalli’s charter is indeed 
a history of Telingana in miniature. The conception of history 
which the author of this prasasti had is surprisingly modern. 
Unfortunately his example was not followed by the other 
praiasli writers ; consequently there is no other charter which 
bears comparison with it. 

Works of general literature often contain data of great 
value to the student of history. The establishment of a new 
Hindu kingdom at Vijayanagara coincided with a period of 
literary revival ; and a large volume of literature was produced 
under the aegis of the Rayas. The commentaries, kavyas, 
dramas, farces, and so on contain valuable historical accounts of 
this kind. Madhava, Sayana, Madhavamantrin, Caundapa and 
other commentators describe the origin of the Sangama family 
and the rule of the early Rayas. Laksmana Pandita, the court 
physician of Bukka II, narrates at length the history of his 
patron’s family in the introduction of his Vaidyardjavallabham 
(34-a), a treatise on the Ayurveda. Laksminarayana relates 
briefly the story of the Tuluva kings and enumerates the 
victories of his patron Krsnadevaraya in his Sangtiasuryodayam, 
a work on music (116-a). The Gajapati king Prataparudra, 
gives a short account of his family history in the introduction 
to his Sarasvatioildsam, a book on law (89). 

It is, however, in the field of vernacular literature, 
especially Telugu, that this species of historical composition is 
perfected. The historical introduction made its appearance in 
Telugu works as early as the age of the Calukyas ; but it did not 
come into vogue until much later. Tikkana who lived during 
the latter half of the 13th century A.D., is the first Telugu poet 





of the Telugu Coda family in the introduction to his Nir- 
vacanottara Bamayanam. This plan soon acquired considerable 
popularity, and introductions describing the history of the 
patron’s family became a normal feature of the literary 
works of this age. The example of Tikkana was followed 
by all the subsequent Telugu poets so effectively that Telugu 
literature has become one of the principal sources of 
Yijayanagara history. The earliest Telugu writer who was 
associated with the Rayas was the poet Nacana Somana who 
lived at the court of Harihara I. Unfortunately, the early 
books of his poem Harivamsa have not come down to us ; and 
it is not possible to discover what he said about the history of 
his patron’s family. Vallabharaya, who was a subordinate of 
Harihara II, gives some interesting information in his Krldd- 
bhiramam about Bukka I and Harihara II ; Jakkana refers to 
the activities of Devaraya I in his Vikramarkacaritra ; 
Snnatha, the Vidyadhikari at the court of Pedakomati Verna, 
and the author of many of Verna’s inscriptions gives an excel- 
lent account of the Reddi kings in the introductions to his 
Kasikhandam and Bhlmakhaudam ; besides, his catus contain 
vignettes of the social life of the citizens of the empire and of 
the court during the time of Devaraya II (60). Pina Vlra- 
bhadra, Singaya and Mallaya, Peddana, Timmana, Krsnaraya, 
Ellanarya, Ramarajabhusana, Rangapparaja, Konerinatha and 
others describe the history of the Saluvas, Tuluvas and Aravxdu 
kings in the introductions to their respective poems. The 
works of some of these writers are utilised in the present 
volume.* 

* No passage that has already been published in the Sources of Vijayanagara 
History compiled by the late Mr. A. Rangaswamy Saraswati R.A., and edited by 
Dr. S. K* Aiyangar (Madras University Historical Series, No. 1) is included in the present 
work except in one or two cases, where their inclusion is rendered necessary for a proper 
understanding of the whole extract. Only portions f urnishing us ef ul information have been 
extracted from historical introductions, and the passages describing the uninteresting de- 
tails of family history are rigorously kept out. A few typical instances may be mentioned 


IS 


% i 


4 



Another kind of historical composition which stands 
between the praiastis in inscriptions and the chronicles is the 
biruda-gadya which the Vanclis and the Magadhas recited every 
morning at the palaces of the kings. It consists of a string of 
phrases describing in highly eulogistic terms the achievements 
of kings and nobles. The members of the Bhdt community 
held the monopoly of reciting the biruda-gadyas in South 
India, and exercised a good deal of influence on the growth of 
historical literature. The mediaeval prasasti writers not only 
based their compositions on the material furnished by the 
biruda-gadyas , but frequently adopted even the language of the 
Bhats, One interesting feature of the biruda-gadya is that it 
grew with the passage of time. It passed on from generation 
to generation gathering mass, absorbing new titles, so that the 
biruda-gadya of the last king of any dynasty attributed to him 
all the titles of his predecessors. If the Bhats confined their 
attention only to the composition of these gadyas, the chronicle 
would not have come into existence at all. Besides the biruda- 
gadyas, they composed verses eulogising the glory of their 
patrons. These verses which were composed for the occasion 
were preserved carefully and tacked on to the biruda-gadya on 
which they serve as a metrical commentary. As each 
generation made its own contribution, the biruda-gadya was 
transformed into a chronicle within the course of a few 
generations. Although every noble family must have had 
its own chronicle, only a few have survived. The most im- 
portant of them are the Velugot-ivari Varusdvali the Rama- 
rajiyam , the AravUivamacaritrara, the Keladinrpavijayam and 

elaborate account of the Gobburi family which he gives in the introduction of his Rama- 
bhyudayam. Only these passages are noticed here, and rest of the long introductions has 
been ignored. No notice is also taken of the works which mention a king or one or more of 
his subordinates without offering any information of histroical value. For c- th* 

VaisyavamiasudhUrvavam, a work which was written by the famous commentator Malli- 
natha, at the instance of DSvaray* 1, defines the terms ‘VaisyB, ' Kdmaii' 'Bln', etc but 
it throws no light on the events that took place during the reign of DSvarSva or earlier The 
Udayanodayam, a poem composed by Narana SSrana, contains an account of U .. family 
and the deeds ofhispatron Bhaskara, who governed the province of Komjavldu « t b. “ f 
of Bayakara Mmappa, the governor of the fort. No extracts from wo'rks of this descWn- 
tion are included m this book, as they yield little or B0 information of general interest 











Cikkadevamija Vamsavali , Of these the Velugotivari Vamidvali* 
/ appears to be the most ancient. The chronicle commences 
; with the reign of the Kakatlya king, Granapati, and comes to a 
i close with the advent of the British government. It gives 
much valuable information about the history of the Velugoti 
family ; but its main importance is due to the light it throws 
on the histories of the Kakatlyas, the Reddis, the Rayas, the 
Gajapatis and the BahmanI Sultans with whom the chiefs of 
this family came into intimate contact The value of this 
work for the student of South Indian history cannot be 
overestimated. The Bcimarajlyam which is similar in 
character to the above describes the history of the JLravidu 
family from the time of the Calukyas of Kalyani to the middle 
of the 17th century, when the empire of Vijayanagara finally 
disappeared. Although like the Velugotivari Vamsavali, it 
preserves the distinctive character of the two elements, the 
biruda-gadya and the eulogistic verse, the combination of 
which produced the chronicle, yet from the standpoint of the 
evolution of historical literature, it must be regarded as later ; 
for, it is the composition of a single writer, Andugula Ven- 
kayya, who attempted to introduce some sort of unity into the 
loosely connected material, whereas the Velugotivari Vamsavali 
still remains a motley collection of the biruda-gadyas and 
eulogistic verses from the pen of several authors who lived in 
different ages. The AravUivamctearitram which traces the 
history of the Avuku branch of the Aravidu family presents 
another stage in the growth of the chronicle. The biruda-gadya 
completely drops out of it. This is probably due to an 
accident. The AravUhamsacaritram is not an independent 
work ; it is tacked on as an appendix to Konerinatha’s poem, 
the Dvipada Balabhagavatam. Probably, the author consciously 
made an innovation in the method of writing the chronicle. 
Whatever be the circumstances ■ in which the change was 
introduced, there need be no doubt about its result. It 
gave the Hindu chronicle its final shape. The Keladinrpa- 
vijmgam however betrays no traces of the biruda-gadya. It is 

* Edited by N. V enkatararaanayya, Bulletin No/ 6 of the Department, 


a typical chronicle in prose and verse, approximating very 
nearly, to the Muhammadan historical works in verse. 

Two other works which are laid under contribution in the 
preparation of this volume may now be considered. One of 
them is the Ramarajana-bakhair (186), which is included in the 
Mackenzie Collection. It describes the events connected with 
the disastrous battle of Raksasi-Tangidi which opened the 
flood-gates of the Mussalman invasions on South India. This 
chronicle furnishes us with the Hindu version of the great 
battle and enables us to investigate the problem afresh. Two 
versions of the chronicle — one in Marathi, and the other in 
Kannada— are extant. One appears to be a translation of the 
other, although it is not easy to determine which of the two 
works is the original. It purports to be the account of an eye- 
witness. The minute description of the contending armies, 
and their movements on the battle-field, and the graphic 
narration of the progress of events seem to bear out this claim ; 
but it has several defects of a serious nature. The inclusion 
of the emperor Akbar in the confederacy of the Mussalman 
kings fighting against the Raya, and the introduction of a long 
passage enumerating the fictitious names of the most 
important of' the 64 queens of the Raya make it obvious that the 
author of the bakhair could not have been a contemporary of 
Ramaraja, much less an eye-witness of the battle which saw his 
downfall. Probably, a genuine old chronicle -was tampered 
with by a later redactor, who distorted it in his attempts to 
improve it, owing to ignorance. This supposition gives a satis- 
factory explanation of the intriguing problems with which the 
student of the chronicle is confronted. 

A history of the Mussalman kings of India called Futuh-us - 
Salcitln is the second of the works mentioned above. It was 
written in A.D. 1350 by ’Isamy, an Indian Mussalman of 
Arabian extraction. ’Isamy was born in or about 1310 A.D., 
and had a first-hand knowledge of the events of the reigns of 
the later Khaljis and early Tughlaqs to the description of which 
he devotes nearly two-thirds of his work. He was a partisan of 
* ’Ala-ud-dln Hasan G-angu, the founder of the BahmanI kingdom, 



and gives much valuable and interesting information about the 
political condition of. the Deccan during the reign of Muhammad 
bin Tughlaq and the circumstances under which the Bahmani 
kingdom was founded. Notwithstanding his admiration 
for ’Ala-ud-dln Hasan, ’Is a my tries to do justice to his 
enemies. Even the Hindus on whom the Muhammadan 
' historians usually empty the vials of their wrath receive just 
treatment at his hands. The sections of his work in which he 
describes the history of Kampili, the rebellions against Sultan 
Muhammad bin Tughlaq and the relations of ’Ala-ud-dln Hasan 
with the founders of Vijayanagara (8, 4, 5, 6, 7, 22, 23) are in- 
cluded in this work. They enable us to see the circum- 
stances in which Vijayanagara was founded in a new light. 

Another species of historical literature grew up in South 
India, specially in the Telugu country, from the administrative 
records maintained in the villages. These records, known as 
dandakaviles or Icaviles are village registers containing infor- 
mation about the political, religious, social and economic 
conditions of the village. It remained in the custody of the 
village karamm, who would enter into it all important events 
concerning the village that happened during his time, and 
pass it on to his successor. The dandakavile would thus 
grow in bulk from generation to generation, each generation 
making its own contribution to the history of the village. 
Col. Colin Mackenzie who was the first to recognize the value 
of these records, sent into the villages his clerks with instruc- 
tions to collect and copy them. The clerks whom he 
despatched in this manner collected several of these danda- 
kaviles, and copied every inscription in the villages either on 
stone or copper ; but in many cases, either because they 
could not induce the karanams to part with their Icaviles or 
because they considered the original not worth copying, they 
prepared digests of the village registers. These digests are 
usually known as kaifiyats , and they yield much information 
of value. '■ ' ' "A 

The dandakaviles and the kaifiyats contain, as is to be 
spected in records of this description, an admixture of legend ' 


, - I-** 


8 



* The Katakaraja Vamsavati , a chronicle of the Kings of Orissa, for instance, alludes 
to some invasions of Kapilesyara and PurulsSttaina, and the latter’s marriage with a 
daughter of the King of Kabcs ; hut these facts are presented in such a legendary setting 
that it seems hardly possible to separate the historical material from the legend. There- 
fore, the information furnished by ICatakarajct Yamsavali and the kaifiyats of that descrip- 
tion, is very seldom utilised in the preparation of this book* 


and history. The legendary element predominates in the 
accounts of the early period 5 but it leaves the later history com- 
paratively free. The c landakaviles are usually silent about the 
administration of the early dynasties such as the Satavahanas 
and the Pallavas. Occasionally they break the silence, only to 
treat us to a description of the miraculous birth of some forgotten 
king or the foundation of some vanished temple ; but as they 
approach our own times they free themselves from mythology, 
and grow more and more accurate and trustworthy. Though 
they give only a hazy and not very accurate account of the 
Calukyas and the Colas, they become fuller and more precise in 
describing the history of the Ivakatiyas ? and their account of the 
Reddis of Kondavldu, the Rayas of Vijayanagara, and the Gaja- 
patis of Orissa is very nearly accurate, and occasionally they 
even furnish us with the key to the solution of some problem 
on which the inscriptions throw little or no light. But these 
works must be used with great caution, as fact and fiction are 
sometimes found in them inextricably mixed together.* 


CHAPTER II. 


THE HISTORY OF KAMPILI. 


A knowledge of the history of the principality of Kampili 
is indispensable for a clear understanding of the circumstances 
under which the kingdom of Vijayanagara was founded ; for in 
the first place, the founders of Vijayanagara, were, according 
to tradition, in the service of Kampiliraya, and his son Kumara 
Rama or Ramanatha, and secondly, the territory over which 
Kampiliraya bore sway was the nucleus around which the 
kingdom of Vijayanagara grew. 


The name of the kingdom and its capital The Muham- 
madan historians generally refer to. the Bai of Kambila or the 
Raja of Kampila as the person who offered protection to Baha- 
ud-Dln Garshasp, and laid down his life in his defence. Ibn 
Bajsuta who came to India, shortly after the conquest of the 
kingdom of Kampili refers to its ruler as the ‘ Rai of Kambila ’ 
and~ explains that the kingdom obtained its name from the 
capital* Similarly, Ferishta speaks of him as the ‘ Raja of 
Kampila ’ and seems to imply that Kampila was the name of a 
place, probably the eapital.t It appears from this that the 
protector of Baha-ud-Dxn was the Raja of Kampili, whose capi- 
tal was probably the city of Kampili. The inscriptions, how- 
ever, do not mention the name of the kingdom but invariably 
refer to the chief who was holding sway over the territory in the 
neighbourhood of Kampili as Kampiladeva or Vlra Kampila- 
deva. An inscription in the shrine of Prasanna Virupaksa 
on the Hemakuta hill at Hampi states that Vlra Kampiladeva, 
son of Mummadi Singaya Nay aka, and S ingay a Nayaka and 
Paremeya Nayaka set up a linga (1). Some of the inscriptions 
of B allala III allude to Vlra Kampiladeva as the ruler of the 
territory in the neighbourhood of Siruguppe in the Bellary dis- 
trict. J His capital is said to have beep, a town called Doravadi,§ 


I 




* Foreign Notices , p. 216. 
i M. A. R. 1923, No. 121. 

1-3 




f Briggs Serishta I, pp. 418-19* . 1 

§ B. C viiij Nr. 19. 


' ./ 


S'* 


10 



which like Hampi was included in the Ballakundi 300* The 
inscriptions, therefore, state unequivocally that the territory in 
the neighbourhood of Kampili was governed by Vira Kampila- 
deva from his capital Doravadi. As the Muhammadan historians 
and the inscriptions refer to the same time, there arises a doubt 
in the mind whether Kampila was the name of the kingdom or 
its ruler. ’Isamy seems to suggest the correct solution to the 
problem. He employs the term, Kampila, to designate both the 
king and his kingdom (3, 4, 5). The explanation for the use of 
the term in this manner is found in the Kmnara-Bamanakathe. 
According to this work, Mummadi Singa who had no sons took 
a vow to the God Somesvara of Kampili, commonly known as 
Kampiliraya, that, if the God favoured him with a son, he would 
name the boy after the deity. The God acceded to his prayer, 
and in due course a son was born to Mummadi Singa ; and he 
gave the name of Kampiliraya to his son in fulfilment of his 
vowf. This explanation of the origin of Kampiladeva’s name 
seems to be reasonable. The habit of naming the children 
after some god or famous place of pilgrimage is still popular. 
Persons bearing the names of such famous places of pilgrimage 
as Kancl, Kalahasti, Cidambaram, Tirupati and Ramesvaram 
are commonly met with. It is not, therefore, unreasonable to 
conclude that Kampiliraya obtained his name from the God 
Somesvara of Kampili by whose favour he is said to have been 
born. ' . '' 


The origin of the kingdom ‘.—The kingdom of Kampili came 
into existence during those troublous years of the fourteenth 
century when South India had to face a series of Muhammadan 
invasions under the leadership of the Khaljl and Tughlaq Sultans 
ofDehll. Tradition embodied in the Kumar a-Bamanakathe , a 
poem written in the 16th century A.D., states that the kingdom 
was founded by Mummadi Singaya, a nobleman dependent on 
Ramadeva of Devagiri. After the capture of his master by the 
Sultan of Dehli, Mummadi Singa is said to have migrated 

: , ■ 

* S.r.J. IV. 260. 

•f N. Yeakatarsunanayya: Kampili and Vijayamgara, p. 5. 


11 


southwards and established himself as an independent prince.* 
Be that as it may. The earliest mention of Mummadi Singa is 
found in an epigraph dated 1280 A.D. It records a fight 
between a certain Caundarasa and Mummadi Singa, in which 
the former suffered defeat and death. f Another epigraph dated 
in the next year % alludes to an attack which Mummadi Singa 
made upon some fort in the Chitaldrug district. Therefore, he 
appears to have been a powerful baron on the southern frontier 
of the Seuna kingdom, who was not always willing to obey the 
orders of the officers sent by his master to govern the frontier. 
It is not possible to say how long he lived. Khandeyaraya, one 
of his sons, was governing the tract in the neighbourhood of 
Harihara in 1300 A.D.,§ and Kampiladeva, another son, assisted 
his sovereign, . Ramadeva, in a campaign against Ballala III in 
1303 A.D.If These inscriptions make it clear that Mummadi 
Singa and his sons were subordinates of Ramadeva of Devagiri, 
and that they did not set up an independent kingdom at least 
until 1303 A.D. 


The Kumara-Ramanakathe , as already noticed, states that 
Mummadi Singa became an independent prince subsequent to 
the capture of Ramadeva by the Mussalmans. This event took 
place in 1307-S A.D., when, at the instance of Sultan ’Ala-ud- 
Din Khaljl, Malik Na’ib Kaffir invaded the Deccan, and having 
made Ramadeva a prisoner despatched him with his sons and 
family to the court of the Sultan at Dehli. By this act, the Malik 
Na’ib removed the pivot on which the administrative machinery 
rested ; and as he did not make suitable arrangements except- 
ing in the district of Ellichpfir to carry on the government of 
the country, disorder seems to have broken out. The state of 
confusion into which the country was plunged roused the 
ambition of petty chiefs who appear to have become virtually 
independent. The quick return of Ramadeva from Dehli, 
however, cheeked the forces of disintegration, as well as the 


N. Venkataramanayya .* B amp Hi and Vijayanagara^ pp. 5-6. 


t B* C. vii, Ci. 24. 
§ Md. Dg. 26. 












12 



The history of Kampili from 1314 to 1329 A.D . : — The 
death of Bamadeva brought in its train a series of events which 
culminated in the establishment of Muslim government perma- 
nently in the Deccan. Sankhaina, the son and successor of 


The date of Kampiladeva’s accession cannot be fixed with 
precision. His father appears to have died some time before 
A.D. 1314, for, when Malik Kaffir took charge of the administ- 
ration of the Senna kingdom, he found Kampiladeva already 
established at Kuinmata. Therefore, the accession of Kampila 
must have taken place some time between 1308 and 1314 A.D. 


And this short period of six years was well suited for 
the aggrandisement of his power. Bamadeva, of whom 
he must still have been a subordinate, was not in a position 
to make his authority felt. His failure to repel the Muham- 
madan invaders, coupled with his subservient attitude to the 
Sultan of Dehll, brought discredit upon his rule, and his 
sons, kinsmen, and ministers were busy devising plans to expel 
the Muhammadans from the Deccan. Therefore, the hold of 
the central government on the outlying provinces must have 
lost its firmness ; and chiefs with far-reaching ambitions must 
have welcomed the growing weakness of the government. 
Moreover, Bamadeva’s acknowledgment of the supremacy of 
the Sultan of Dehll relieved his subjects of the fear of the 
devastating expeditions of Islamic armies from the north, and 
of Hindu attacks from the south and the east. The absence of 
internal and external checks encouraged the nobles, and other 
powerful subordinates of the king to unfold their ambitious 
schemes of conquest and aggression. Kampiladeva seems to 
have taken full advantage of the prevailing conditions to streng- 
then his position. 


activities of ambitious chiefs ; but his power did not regain its 
lost prestige and vigour. It was during these years that 
Mummadi Singa strengthened his hold on the southern frontier, 
and he seems to have died soon after, bequeathing his estate to 
his more ambitious and abler son, Kampiladeva. 



Ramadeva,* who resented his father’s tame submission to the 
Mnssaltnans, withheld the payment of tribute and set up the 
standard of rebellion. When ’Ala-ud-Dln heard of the death of 
Ramadeva and the rebellion of Sankhama, he despatched Malik 
Na’ib Kafur, at the head of an army to the Deccan, with instruc- 
tions to seize the country, and establish Muslim authority. He 
appointed Kafur as the governor of the conquered country, and 
commanded him to build a JummaMasjid at Devagiri. The Malik 
Na’ib set out for the Deccan without delay, and having reached 
the Ghat of Saguna, began to plunder the territories dependent 
on Devagiri. Information soon reached Sankhama that the 
Dehll army had arrived ; but as he felt that he was not strong 


14 



of the province to his lieutenant, ’Ain-ul-Mulk and hastened to 
Dehli ; but ’Ain-ul-Mulk had not the enterprising spirit of his 
ebief to prosecute his schemes. 

Moreover, the revolutionary changes that were taking 
place in the capital, began to produce serious repurcussions in 
the provinces. Boon after the Malik Na’ib’s return to Dehli, 
the Sultan, who was in an indifferent state of health, sickened 
and died ; and at the instance of the Malik Na’ib, Khizr Kh an 
was blinded in the state prison at Grwalior. He set up Shihab- 
ud-Din, an infant son of ’Ala-ud-Dln, on the throne, and began 
to govern the kingdom as regent on his behalf. 

The high-handed acts of the r-egent, however, caused wide- 
spread resentment, and Grujarat rose up in rebellion. On 
getting news of this revolt, the Malik Na’ib ordered ’Ain-ul- 
Mulk, who was already hastening, according to instructions, 
with all the Mussalmans of the Deccan to join his master at 
Dehli, to proceed to Grujarat. The Malik Na’ib was soon after 
murdered by the palace guard, and prince Qutb ud-Dln, who 
later on assumed the title of Mubarak Shah, seized the 
government. 

Nothing is known of the kingdom of Kampili during the 
short period of rapid palace revolutions that followed Malik 
Na’ib’s assassination at Dehli. His failure to capture Kummata 
and his subsequent retreat to Devagiri must have enhanced 
the importance and reputation of Kampiladeva in the eyes of 
bis contemporaries. ’Ain-ul-Mulk who succeeded Malik Na’ib 
at Devagiri seems to have confined his attention to the admini- 
stration of his province. It is not likely that he could have 
come into conflict with his Hindu neighbour in the south. 
How Kampila reacted to the . political changes that came over 
the Deccan after ’Ala-ud -Din’s death is not known. Did he 
join Harapaladeva in his rebellion ? Or did he remain neutral, 
seizing as much territory as he could grasp on his own 
account? Again, did Mubarak Shah or Khusrau come into 
conflict with Kampiladeva during their Mahratta campaigns, 


15 


and if they did, what was the result of this conflict? No 
answer can be given to these questions at present. Ferishta, 
it is true, states that Mubarak Shah posted garrisons at Grulburga, 
Sagar, Dvarasamudra and other places* and two inscriptions 
of Baliala III s officers dated 1320 and 1321 A.D. respectively 
claiming victory over Turuka army lend colour to this 
statement ;f but they do not throw any light on the affairs of 
Kampili. It is also possible to argue that because Ferishta 
mentions Dvarasamudra after Sagar, Kampila’s kingdom 
which lay immediately to the south of the latter did not 
come within the ambit of Mubarak Shah’s power. Whatever 
the relations of Kampila with Mubarak Shah, he became so 
strong in 1320 A. D. that Baliala III was obliged to lead an 
expedition against him with the object of putting down his 
power. .. ' v..;':::; x'.':^xSflS 

The kingdom of Kampili was surrounded by powerful 
states. On the north lay the territories of the Sul, tan of Dehli, 
a source of danger to all its neighbours ; on the south and the 
west were the Hoysala dominions and the Kakatiya boundary 
marched very near the capital on the east. Kampiladeva who 
was anxious to extend his dominion naturally came into con- 
flict with his neighbours. 

The Kumara-Bamanalcathe gives an account of a war 
between Kampiladeva and Prataparudra of Warangal, in which 
the flatter is said to have been worsted.! But the BUmakhanda 
of Srlnatha alludes to the destruction of the pleasure gardens 
of Kummata by Bendapudi Anna, one of Prataparudra’s 
ministers. It is stated in the Balabhagamta, that Kotikanti 
Raghava, a half-brother of Somadeva, the progenitor of the 
Iravidu chiefs, inflicted a defeat on Kampiliraya, and deprived 
him of the seven members of his royalty (2-b). Now, Kotikanti 
Raghava was a petty chief, and he could not have secured a 


* Tarikk-i-Ferishta, (Navval Kishore Press) p. 125 
t M. A. R. 1910, para. SB ; Md 1914, p. 87. , , 






t N. Venkataramaaayya: Kampili and Vijayanagara, p. 9: M H. Rama Sarma 
Q-J M. S. XX, pp. 95-96. 

; ■ ■ - • • • - ' . 





victory over Kampiladeva without some external assistance. 
As the early Aravidu chiefs were holding sway over Kurnool 
and its neighbourhood which was included at that time in the 
Kakataya dominions, it is not unlikely that he should have 
joined Anna’s expedition. It is not possible to determine the 
date of this expedition ; but it may be provisionally assigned 
to A. D. 1319 or 1320. The Kakatiya kingdom fell in 1323 A.D., 
and the territory corresponding to the present Raichore 
district must have passed into Kampila’s hands after this 
date. 

The struggle between Kampila and Ballala III appears to 
have been bitter and protracted. The Kumara-Ramanalcathe, 
and the Ballalarayana Yuddha devote considerable space to 
describe the struggle. The inscriptions also allude to the 
events connected with this war. It is stated in an epigraph of 
Hoskote in the Shimoga district dated 1320 A. D. that 
Ballala III marched with all his forces to Doravadi against 
Ka(m)piladeva, and that in the battle which ensued, Kuruka, 
a subordinate of Ballala, was killed.* Another record of the 
Tumkur district^ dated 1 325 A. D. also refers to a war between 
Ballala III and Kampila, and a damaged vlragal record alludes 
to the march of Ballala’ s army to Siruguppe in the Bellary 
district for destroying the pride of Vira Kampiladeva. A fierce 
battle for the acquisition of land (yele-yuddha) was fought and 
Sakki Sahini, one of Ballala’s officers, was evidently slain.* It 
is obvious that Ballala III was frequently at war with Kam- 
piladeva from 1320 to 1325, although he gained no advantage 
by it. The absence of Ballala’s inscriptions in the Bellary 
district, and in the Davanagere and Chintamani taluks of the 
Mysore state clearly shows that he was not successful in his 
fight with Kampila. 

The extent of Kampila’s territory and his capitals. — Not- 
withstanding the constant wars in which Kampila involved 
himself he seems to have managed to increase the extent of his 

• E. C. VIII, Nr. 19. f E. C. XII, Tp. 24- 

, % M- A. R. 1923, p. 119. : • 



17 


territory. Mummadi Singeya, the father of Kampila is said to f 

have ruled from Doravadi in Kurugodii-wSdw.* It is evident 1 

that Kurugodu which corresponds to the Bellary and Hospet 1 

taluks of the Bellary district was the heart of his kingdom. f 

It seems to have extended to Holalakere talukf in the south 
and the whole of Devanagere taluk including Harihar in the 
Chitaldrug district in the west ; in the east it included Siriguppe 
in the Bellary taluk. it The river Krsna appears to have been 
its northern boundary, in the east and the north-east its 1 

frontiers cannot be described definitely at present. So far as 
it is possible to estimate the extent of Kampila’s kingdom ! 

from the inscriptions and the contemporary Muhammadan j 

historians §, it appears to have comprised large portions of 1 

Bellary, Chitaldrug, Raichore and Dbarwad districts. if 



* s c - vn, Ci. 24. t Ibid, xi Hr. .16 ; M.A.R. 1912, para. 89; 1913, para. 3 

t M. A. R. 1923, No. 121, ' ■■ 

■ § Tt « Muhammadan historians state that BahS-nd-DSn Garshasp fled from SSgar 

the kingdom of Kampila. 'Isamy says that the soldiers of Muhammad bin Tughlaq urn 
Malik ZSda, pursued Garshasp after defeating him in a battle up to a river and tk 
-turned back. Evidently the river was the KjsnS which must have been the bound* 
’between the. two. kingdoms. . . . : - ' , I 

Cvn,Ci,24; VIII, Nr. 19. . - ||l|i 

isii 


The capital of the kingdom appears to have been shifted 
constantly, owing probably to the extension of the territory 
and the requirements of strategy. The town of Kampili 
(2§ miles to the east of Hampi, on the Tungabhadra) from 
which the kingdom is said to have derived its name, must have 
been its earliest capital, although it is not mentioned as such 
in any of the known sources ; but Doravadi is spoken of as the 
place of residence of Mummadi Singeya and Kampila in two 
inscriptions dated 1280 A. D. and 1320 A. D. respectively.f 
This place is said to be situated in the Grangavati taluk of the 
Raichore district at a distance of some 7 or 8 miles to the east 
or the north-east of Anegondi. It appears to have been 
supplanted by two other forts, Kummata and Hosadurga which 
figure largely in Kampiladeva’s wars with the Mussalmans. 
Kummata was situated on the Tungabhadra, and it appears to 
be identical with either Hale Kummata or Kumara-Ramana 


18 



A battle was 


Kummata both of which stand at a distance of about eight 
miles from Anegondi,' !: to the west of Hampi. This fort was 
attacked by the Malik Na’ib in 1314 A.D., and subsequently 
by the Kakatlya general Bendapiidi Anna. Kummata was, 
according to the Kumara~Tl(iw>(inakathe^ the capital of Kampila- 
deva. It was here that Baha-ud-Dln Garshasp met him when 
he fled from Sagar. ’Isamy refers to a place called Hosdurg 
which seems to have been an important stronghold in the 
kingdom. The Kumar a-Bamanakathe states that Kampila 
built a fort named Hosamaladurga at a place called Muraneya 
Sandi on the Tungabhadra. Hosdurg appears to be identical 
with Hosamaladurga. An inscription dated 1436 A. D. 
engraved on 4 a Naga stone to the left of the road to the north 
of Anegondi ’ mentions ‘ Bayiradeva of ’ Aneyasandi of Hasti- 
navati.’f Mr. M. Narasimhachari considers that it is ‘probably 
the old form of JLnegondi.’ It may be added that it is also an 
abbreviation of Muraneya Sandi. If these identifications are 
correct, Hosamaladurga which Kampila built at the Muraneya 
Sandi must be regarded as no other place than Inegondi 
which was destined to play a glorious part in the history of 
South India during the succeeding centuries. 

The fall of Kampiladeva . — The brilliant career of Kampila- 
deva ended abruptly in a great disaster. In A. D. 1326 he 
came into conflict with Muhammad bin Tughlaq, the Sultan of 
Debit, who slew him in battle and annexed his territory. On 
the death of Sultan Ghaiyas-ud-Dln Tughlaq in 1325 A. D., his 
son, Mulxammad Tughlaq ascended the throne of Dehll. 
Although all the nobles of the kingdom paid homage to the 
new sovereign, Baha-ud-Dln Grarshasp, a nephew (a sister’s son) 
of the old Sultan who was holding the fief of Sagar, declined 
to follow their example, and having gathered forces, set up the 
standard of rebellion. Suljtan Muhammad despatched Malik 
Alimad Ayaz, the governor of Gujarat, with an army to sup- 
press the rebellion. He reached Devagiri whence he marched 


19 


somewhere on the banks of the Grodavarl in which Grarshasp 
was defeated owing to to the desertion of Khizr, son of 
Bahram, one of his subordinates. Grarshasp then retreated to 
the fort of Sagar, hotly pursued by his enemies. Feeling that 
his chances of success were completely ruined, he fled towards 
the kingdom of Kampili with his women and children to seek 
safety from the attacks of the enemy. On reaching Kummata, 
he crept into the fort and begged Kampila to offer him protec- 
tion. Kampila spoke to him kindly and promised generously 
to protect him, even if by this act he brought death upon 
himself and ruin upon his kingdom ; Kampila thus invited 
trouble upon his own head by baulking the Sultan of Dehll of 
his prey ; the Sultan’s armies came one after another and 
* boiled violently (like the waves of) the salt sea on every side 
of his fort’. ■ 



Sul.tan Muhammad had to send three expeditions against 
the kingdom of Kampili, before he could subdue it. The first 
expedition which was commanded by Malik Rukn-ud-Din was 
repulsed and Rukn-ud-Dxn had to turn his back upon Kampili 
having sustained a defeat in the battle-field. A second 
expedition which was despatched under Qutb Malik Jahan met 
with a similar fate. These failures made the Sultan more 
determined than ever to subjugate Kampila and punish him 
for having succoured Baha-ud-Dln who defied his authority. 
Therefore, the Sultan himself marched at the head of an army 
and arrived at Devagiri, which he made the capital of his 
empire. He despatched an expedition for the third time against 
Kampiladeva under Ahmad Ayaz Malik Zada, one of the ablest 
and most faithful of his officers. Malik Zada proceeded 
against Kummata ; but before he could reach the place, he was 
opposed on the way by an army under the command of 
Kampila and Baha-ud-Dln. In the engagement that followed, 
they were, however, defeated, and forced to take refuge under 
the walls of Kummata. Malik Ayaz laid siege to it and pressed, 
the garrison to extremities. The commander of Kampila’s 
army made a sally and perished in the attempt. Kampila and 


Wmm 








20 



Baha-ud-Dm escaped from the fort, and reached Hosadurga after 
facing many hardships on their route. Malik Ayaz pursued 
them thither and besieged the fort of Hosadurga for a month, 
at the end of which he attempted to capture it by escalade. 
Baha-ud-Dm realised that the fall of the fort was inevitable, 
and having slipped out of it with his women and children, he 
fled towards the kingdom of Ballala; but “ like a (true) warrior, 
Kampila did not abandon the fort ; the danger threatening his 
friend seized him by the head and hurled (him with) the whole 
of his family into peril. He fought fiercely, and at last when 
he died, his body was covered with the wounds caused by a 
shower* of arrows Malik Zada sent the head of Kampila 
stuffed with grass to the Sultan at Devagiri ( ). 

Kampili under the Sultan of Dehll . — The kingdom of 
Kampili which Mummadi Singeya founded in A. D. 1307-8 
came to an end in A. D. 1326 after a glorious history of well 
nigh two decades. The territory over which Kampila bore 
sway passed into the hands of the Sultan and became a pro- 
vince of his empire, as may be inferred from the occasional 
statements of Muhammadan historians ; but of the officers to 
whom the Sultan entrusted its administration, and of the 
manner in which they carried on their work, no information 
has been recorded. However, Zia-ud-Dln Barm incidentally 
alludes to the happenings in the land of Kampili. While 
describing the series of rebellions that broke out in quick 
succession about 1330 A. D. during Muhammad Tughlaq’s 
reign, Barn! observes ; 

“ About the same time (as the outbreak of rebellion in 
Telingana), one of the relations of Kampila, whom the 
Sultan had sent to Kampila, apostatised from Islam, and 
stirred up a revolt. The land of Kampila was thus lost and 
fell into the hands of the Hindus.”* 


* Tar%kh-t~Flro%shahi } (Descriptive Catalogue of Arabic and Persian mss* in the 
Madras Government Oriental mss. Library, No. 298). E> D. ill, p. 245. This reading is 
adapted both by Nizam-ud-DIn Alimad and Mulla 'Abd-til-Baqy, The published text of 
TSri&i-i-Firoxs haht has, however, Kanya Nayak in the place of Kampila. 


21 


The same individual seems to have effected the conquest 
of Karnata some time before 1349 A.D., for ’Isamy states that 
an apostate conquered the whole of Kannada from one end of 
the country to another. 

“An apostate (from Islam)”, says he, “seized the country 
of Kannada, and captured (the territory) from Griitty to the 
frontier of Ma’bar.” * 

It is evident from these passages that the Sultan sent 
a Hindu convert to Islam, who was a relation of Kampila 
whom he had overthrown in 1327 A.D. to govern Kampili some 
time after its conquest ; but this officer, having apostatised 
from Islam, stirred up a rebellion, and asserted his indepen- 
dence. Next, he undertook the conquest of Kannada the whole 
of which he seems to have brought under his authority some 
time before A. D. 1349. 


* Ind. Off. Ms. f . 36i, . -- 

. : ' ; 'i- ;A; ■■ 

A : A; C''' A^xVArAAA);;^ ’ ' ■ ; A( A : )77A 


J 




CHAPTER III 



THE ORIGIN OF THE SANGAMAS. 

i He governor whom Muhammad bin i ughlac[ sent to 
govern Kampili is said to have asserted his independence, 
and established a powerful kingdom. It is necessary to 
discover his identity, for a clear understanding of South 
Indian. History during the 14th century. He is said to 
have borne sway in Kampili and Kannada, and we must 
turn to the epigraphy of this region in this period for more 
light. The extent of Kampili has been already indicated. 
The boundaries of Kannada yet remain to be described. Gutty 
and Ma’bar mentioned by Tsamy must be taken to represent 
the two extreme limits of Kannada in 1350 A. D., when he 
completed his history. Ma’bar is the name by which the 
Mediaeval Muhammadan writers refer to the Pandyan king- 
dom. According to Wassaf, Ma’bar extended 4 in length from 
Kulam (Quilon) to Nilawar (Neilore) nearly three hundred 
farsangs along the coast * How far it extended into the interior 
of the peninsula is not known. Tsamy states that Sayyid 
Jalal-ud-Din Ahsan, the kotwal of (Madura?), having 
murdered all the nobles rose up in rebellion against 
Muhammad bin Tughlaq, and set up a separate kingdom in 
Ma’bar about, 1334 A. D. In 1342 when Ibn Batina visited 
Madura, (Kannantr)-Koppam near Trichinopoly was the 
northernmost outpost of the Madura sultanate. To the north 
of it lay the dominions of the Kannada king, B allala III, 
who lost his life in attempting to capture it. It is thus 
Seen that Ma’bar lay on the southern frontier of Kannada. 
Therefore, Gutty the other extremity of the country, must 
have stood somewhere in the north. It may, however, be 
nointed out that as Ma’bar extended as far north as Neilore, 


23 



Kannada must have situated to the west rather than the north 
of Ma’bar. In that case Gutty must be looked for somewhere 
in the territory extending westwards from Nellore to 
the shore of the Arabian sea. It is in the inscriptions of this 
region that we have to search for discovering the identity of 
the apostate general whom Muhammad bin Tughlaq sent to 
govern the province of Kampili. 

Who was the king that is mentioned in the inscriptions as 
the ruler of the region corresponding to the defunct kingdom 
of Kampili during this period ? The earliest record that gives 
a direct answer to this question is the Kapaluru grant* of 
Harihara dated 1836-7 A.D. It states that Harihara, the eldest 
of the five sons of Sangama of the Yadu race, was ruling the 
country in the neighbourhood of Pampaksetra with the city of 
Kunjarakona (Aneyagondi) as his capital. His four brothers 
were known by the names of Kampana, Bukka, Marapa, and 
Muddapa ; and acting on the advice of the sage Vidyaranya, 
he laid the foundations of a new city called Vidyanagara, on 
the southern bank of the Tungabhadra. The same informa- 
tion is conveyed by another grant from the Bagepalli taluk of 
the Kolar district. f An unpublished epigraph engraved on a 
stone in front of Siva’s shrine at Atakalagunda in the Kurnool 
district dated 1339 A. D. bears testimony to Harihara’s rule 
over Sindavadi Thousand of which Adavani was the chief city. 
Harihara is said to have been ruling at the time from his nele- 
vidu at Gutty (Gooty) in the Anantapur district.* An undated 
epigraph probably belonging to this period describes the fort 
of Gutty as the navel to the wheel of sovereignty over the whole 
earth of the illustrious King Bukka.§ The northern boundary 
of Harihara’s dominions seems to have marched along the 
Krsna ; for according to ’isamy, Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dln’s officers 
made an attack upon Raichore which appears to have been 
within striking distance of Sugar, the southernmost outpost 
in the Sultan’s kingdom. This is confirmed by an inscription 

* N. D. I. i, Cp. 15. f £. G. x, Bg. 60. 

J .L-, J?* 23, pp« SS-’SS* § S’ I* p» 167* 


24 



found in the fort of Badami dated 1340 A. D. which records the 
construction of the fort by an officer of king Harihara who 
bore the titles of Mahamandalesvara, arirdyavibhah, bhasage - 
tappuva-rdyara-gaada and purvapascimasamiidrMhisvara * *The 
last mentioned title seems to indicate that Harihara’s authority 
extended from the eastern to the western sea. This statement 
derives support from two records of the Nellore district. A 
damaged inscription near Buggabavi at Udayagiri dated 
1343 A. D. registers a grant to a shrine made by Kampala 
one of Harihara’s brothers.f He is also mentioned as ruling 
over this region in another grant at Kodavalur dated 1347 A.D.J 
Harihara’s rule over the west coast is testified by the evidence 
of Ibn Bajuja and the famous Srngeri inscription recording 
the assembly of Harihara, his brothers, and their officers to 
celebrate the conquest of the earth from the eastern to the 
western sea.§ 

Thus, it is seen from the evidence of the inscriptions that 
the province of Kampili, besides a considerable tract of terri- 
tory outside it, was under the control of Harihara, the son of 
Sangama of the Yadu race from 1336 to 1846 A. D. 

Next, it must be found out whether this Harihara had also 
conquered Kannada. The first point that must be noted in this 
connection is that the term Kannada denoted the name of a 
country and not of a kingdom. A large part of Kannada was 
at tins time under the sway of the Hoysala kings of Dvara- 
samudra, who are occasionally referred to in the inscriptions 
as the rulers of Karnata ; the Hoysala kingdom at this time 
extended as Jar asffie Kaverl in the south, and KancI in the 
east. The Yadavarayas of Candragiri and the Sambuvarayas of 
Padaividu appear to have been the subordinates of Ballaja HI. 
And the Tuluva country as far as Barakuru acknowledged his 
sway Is there any evidence to show that Harihara or his 
brothers conq uered Kannada including the Hoysala dominions? 

• YltSlt-m 28 + •£• R. 46, pp. 236-37. 

± N. D. I. u, Nl. 28. § £. C. vi, Sg. 1. 


ifffJIfihh 


■ :> l. 


hr* 



The answer to this question is in the affirmative. I He insciip- 
tions of the time of Harihara I and Bukka I contain definite 
allusions to the conquest of the Kannada country inclusive of 
the Hoysala territory. Mallinatha Vodeyar, son of Aliya Sayi 
Nayaka and a subordinate of Harihara and Bukka, is said to 
have won victories over the Hoysana army among others* 
Tipparaja, another officer of Bukka, captured the fort of 
Ucchangi. Tipparaja, together withTeppada Naganna, appears 
to have waged some war in the Hoysana country in which the 
town of Sosavur was somehow involved.f Sosavur is said to 
have been the birthplace of the Hoysalas, and if any one were 
desirous of taking it from these officers it must have been the 
Hoysalas themselves. It is also stated in two inscriptions 
dated 1354 A.D. that Bukka ruled over the hereditary territory 
of the Hoysalas, from the city of Hosapattana, ■ having made 
the circle of earth belonging to the Hoysala family an 
ornament of his arm ’ (i.e., reduced it to subjection by 

the strength of his arm).J Similarly, an epigraph dated 


•E.C.x i,Cd.2. 
t E. C. vi, Mg. 25. 

%M.A.R. 1925, No. 84, pp. 73-4; 339 of 1901 (S.I.X VII, No. 566, Sewell, L. A. I 
Penagonija No. 23, pp. 19-20.) 

§ M. A. R. 1936, No. 24. 

\E. C, iv, Yd. 46. 

%A.R. E. 023 of 1906. 


26 



>gress of the conquest of the Hoysala 
the following schedule - 

Date of the 
earliest 
Vijayanagara 
inscription. 


Date of the 

Reference. last Hoysala Reference, 
inscription. 


District, 


L. A. i, 
pp. 119-20, 
Penngonda 

No. 23. 


Anantapur 


Chitaldrug 


Koiar 


Bangalore on. 41 

■r»mkm ... Tp.100 13U m* «13M 

M J3 o,e ... Yd. 29 1349 H..114 13« 

Hassau ... Ak. 183 1338 Ak. 159 1343 

Eadar ... Cm. 45 «42 Sg. 1 1346 

. qk 494 1334 Sb. 263 1342 

Shimoga ... bt> . 1 ■ 

Tt is evident that the Hoysala rule came to an end in 
1343 A.D., and that the rule of Vijayanagara kings commenced 
almost immediately. ■' 

The conquest of the Tuluva country seems to have been 
undertaken about the same time. Marapa is said to have 
acquired a kingdom in the west from Kallasa and established 
himself in GamantaSaila, the excellent Candragupti.f Marapa s 
advance was probably the first stage in the expansion of 
Vijayanagara into Konkan. That Harihara’s authority was 
established over the whole of Koukan coast down to the frontiers 
of Malabar as early as 1342 is shown by the following statement 
of Ibn Batuta 

“ The ruler of Hinawur (Honavar on the west coast) is 
Sultan Jalal-ud-Dln who is one of the best and most powerful 

•JUT. A. R. 1914, PM*. 91; 3. C. r, Ak. «9. 

fZ. C. Vui, Sb. 375, ■ •; ' , 


27 



Sultans. He is under the suzerainty of an infidel Sultan called 
Haryab of whom we shall speak later. The people of Mulay- 
bar (Malabar) pay a fixed sum annually to : Sultan J alal-ud-Dln 
through fear of his sea power.” * 

This passage makes it clear that the people of Malabar 
an annual tribute to Sultan Jalal-ud-Dln of Honavar who 

Therefore, it is not 
1342, Harihara’s sway was 


paid 

was himself a subordinate of Harihara 
unreasonable to suppose that, in 
acknowledged all along the Konkan coast up^to Malabar. J?he 
accuracy of this inference is proved by a Srngeri inscription 
of 1346 A.D.f On the occasion when Harihara I and his 
brothers met at ^rngeri, to celebrate their conquest of the 
earth from ‘ the eastern to the western ocean’, Kikkayi Tayi, 
the widowed queen of Ballala III, who was the hereditary 
ruler of the Tuluva country, came to the place like all the other 
subordinates of Harihara, and made a grant of the village of 
Hosavur in the Santalige-wcj$w to Bharat! Urtha Srlpada. 
Harihara’s conquest of the the Tuluva country was probably 
completed before 1342 A.D. 

The foregoing discussion makes it clear that Harihara, 
the son of Sangama of the Yadu race, was not only ruling over 
the province of Kampili but had completely subjugated the 
whole of the Kannada country between 1336 A. D. and 1346 
A. D, Therefore, he must be that relation of Kampila, who 
embraced Islam, and who was appointed by the Sultan as 
the governor of the province of Kampili. If this identification 
be correct — we believe it . is — then Harihara must have been a 
follower of Islam and a subordinate of Muhammad bin Tughlaq 
before he obtained the governorship of Kampili. 

This conclusion is fully supported by tradition, as recorded 
in the Vidyaranya Kalajnana, the Vidyaranya Vrttmta, the 
Keladinrpavijayam and works of that description. Tradition in- 
deed is often suspect, and often rightly kept back in the discus- 
sion of historical problems; we venture to utilise its evidence in 

* Travels of Ikn Batata, Broadway Travellers, pp. 230-31. 

’ -f ‘ 





this context, as we believe it to be valuable. In. the first place, 
the tradition concerning the origin of Vijayanagara, coming as 
it does from entirely Canarese sources, attributes the foundation 
of the kingdom, to two alien chiefs from Telingana. Secondly, 
it is throughout consistent. It always attributes the foundation 
of the kingdom to Harihara and Bukka. Lastly, its evidence 
agrees remarkably well with the information derived from 
contemporary sources regarding the origin of the kingdom. 
Therefore, it is necessary that the evidence of tradition should 


The Vidyaramja Kalajnana (No. 14), the earliest recension 
of which seems to have been composed before the close of the 
15th century, and the Vidyaramja Vrttdnla (13) describe the 
circumstances under which the kingdom of Vijayanagara was 
founded. 

Although these two accounts agree substantially with 
each other, they differ on certain points which must be noticed 
here. 

1 . The Vidyaranya Vrttanta mentions, besides the names 
of the father, brothers and ministers of Harihara and Bukka, 
their original habitat. It is said that Sangama ruled from a 
place called Mangalanilaya ; the place cannot be identified at 
present though its name leads one to think of the present 
Mangalagiri or Mangalur (the present Santa-Ma(n)gaMr) in 
the Guntur district ; but the other facts mentioned about 
Sangama’s family are capable of verification. 

2. Though the Vrttanta agrees with the Kalajnana in 
stating that Harihara and Bukka entered the service of Pratapa- 
rudra of Warangal, they give divergent account of what 
happened to them subsequent to the defeat and capture of 
Prataparudra by the Sultan of Dehll. According to the 
Kalajnana, Harihara and Bukka fled to the court of a king 

. called Ramanatha, and remained in his service until his defeat 


29 



and death at the hands of the officers of the Suljsan of Deh.ll, 
when they were carried away as prisoners to the Sultan’s city. 
The Vrttanta ignores the flight to Ramanatha’s court altogether 
and states that they were carried away as prisoners to the 
Sultan’s camp from Warangal itself. The evidence of 
epigraphy as well as the later chronicles, however, lends support 
to the Kalajnana. According to an inscription dated 1314 A. D. 
Bukka, one of the two chiefs who founded Vijayanagar some 
twenty years later, was holding sway at the time over the tract 
of country in the neighbourhood of Kanigiri in the present 
Nellore district* As the territory over which Bukka exercised 
authority was at that time included in the Kakatiya dominions, 
it is obvious that he held the territory as a subordinate of 
Prataparudra, the Kakatiya king, who was ruling at that time. 
Moreover, the evidence of the Keladinrpavijayam, Kumara- 
Ramanakathe, and the chronicle of Nuniz point in the same 
direction. The first (No. 9) mentions two northern Ksatriya 
brothers called Harihara and Bukka who migrated to the 
southern country, entered into marital relations with 
the Kurubas, settled down there. The second alludes to 
Bhandarada Harihara and Bhandarada Bukka as officers in the 
service of Kampila, the king of Kummata ; and the last states 


# JV. D. I. II, Kg. 7. Butterworth and Venugopala Chetty, the editors of the 
Nellore District Inscriptions, expressed the opinion that as the date of the record was too 
early for Bukka I of Vijayanagara, Bukkaraya Vo$ayalu mentioned in it should be ' the 
father of Sangaxna,’ and the grandfather of Bukka I. (A”. D. L III, p. 1467). This view was 
accepted as reasonable in later works on the subject. (See Origin of the city and empire 
of Vijayanagara , p. 99). It is not however impossible that the chief mentioned in the 
inscription under consideration was identical with Bukka I himself ; for several of the 
younger contemporaries of Prataparudra lived up to the closing decades of the 14th century; 
Kannu or Kattu who was one of the important commanders of PraiSparudra embraced 
Islam, and rose to prominence in the service of the later Sultans of Debit- He was made 
a provincial governor by Muhammad bin Tughlaq, Who entrusted to him the adminis- 
tration of several provinces. On the death of Sultan Muhammad, he entered the service 
ofFiruzShah, and became the prime-minister of the empire, an office which he held 
almost up to the time of his death in 1370 A.D. 'Ain-ul-Mulk who rose to importance as 
a lieutenant of Malik Kafur lived almost up to the end of Firuz Shah's reign- 
Similarly the sage Vidyaranya who helped Harihara and Bukka to found the city of 
Vijayanagara died in 1384 A.D. some time subsequent to his 80th year. It is not there- 
fore unlikely that Bukka I who died in 1368 A.D. was governing the region in the vicinity 
of Kanigiri as a subordinate of Prataparudra in 13X4 A.D. 



30 



that Devarao whom the Suljtan of Dehli sent to rule at Nagundy 
(Ineyagondi) was formerly in the service of the king of that 
place whom the Suljtan slew in battle about 1330 A.D. Now, 
this king of Ineyagondi was, according to the Kumara-Ramana- 
kathe, KampilirSya, and he had a brave son called Rama- 
natha who carried on the administration of the kingdom on 
behalf of his father. Therefore, the flight of Harihara and 
Rukka from Warangal to the court of Ramanatha seems to 
be a fact. 

3. Though the Vrttanta and Kalajnana agree about the 
captivity of Harihara and Bukka, the circumstances under 
which they gained their freedom, and their appointment as the 
leaders of a military expedition to Karnata, the former gives 
a much more cogent account of the events which happened 
during the captivity of Harihara and Bukka. The Suljan set 
them at liberty and entertained them in his service, because he 
was convinced that they were upright and trustworthy; he 
sent them to Karnata with an army to subdue the country, 
because the Ballalas rebelled against him ; and he entrusted to 
them the administration of Karnata, because they pleased him 
by their services to the state in suppressing the rebels. 

The outbreak of a rebellion in the Karnata before the 
appointment of Deorao as the governor of Nagundy is also 
mentioned by Nuniz. The Sultan is said to have stayed in the 
place for two years after the death of the king of Nagundy. As 
he obtained information that a rebellion broke out in the north, 
he was compelled to collect all his scattered troops, and hasten 
homewards ; but before his departure, he appointed Meliquay 
Neby one of his officers, the governor of the conquered 
kingdom, and left under his charge many troops to help him 
in upholding his authority. Nevertheless, as soon as the 
Sultan had departed to his kingdom, the people rose in rebel- 
lion against their governor, and having declined to pay taxes, 
they came to besiege him in the fortress. Realising the pre- 
carious condition in which he found himself, Meliquay Neby 
Sent a report to his master acquainting him with the state of 


31 


affairs obtaining in his province. On receiving this report, the 
Sultan held consultations with his ministers, and acting on 
their advice, appointed the principal judge of the late king of 
Nagundy called Deorao, and his treasurer whom he held 
captive as the king and governor respectively, and having 
released them from prison, he took from them oaths of fealty 
as vassals and despatched them to their land ‘ with a large 
following to defend them from any one who should desire to do 
them an injury.’* 

Nuniz’s description of the Sultan’s movements at this 
period is generally correct. Sultan Muhammad who came to the 
Deccan in 1826-27 A. D. to direct personally the campaign 
against Kampiladeva, stayed at Devagiri, the official icapital, 
until 1328 A. D. During this period, he busied himself with the 
systematic conquest of the Deccan ; the subjugation of Nag 
Nayak, the Koli chief of Grandhiyana, alone took nine months. 

The Suljtan was obliged, however, to hasten to Hindustan 
owing to Kishlu Khan’s rebellion in Multan, and the threatened 
invasion of Mughals under Tarmashirln. The accuracy of 
Nuniz’s chronicle is proved so far by the accounts of 
Muhammadan historians. Muhammad Tughlaq must have 
made some arrangements for carrying on the administration 
of the conquered territoi-y. It is not unlikely that he appointed 
Meliquay Neby as the governor, and ‘left many troops’, with 
him to maintain his authority. The people of the province rose 
in rebellion against this governor, and forced him to shut himself 
up in his fort. If there is any truth in this part of Nuniz’s 
narrative, it is necessary to account for the sudden accession of 
strength to the rebels. Nagundy (ie., Aneyagondi) was but a 
small province, and the governor had many troops to maintain 
his authority. In these circumstances, how was it that he was 
obliged to stand a siege by the rebels and report to his master 
his incapacity to control the situation? The only answer to 
this question is that the people of Nkgundy probably received j 

* Tht Forgpttm Empire p* 098, , 



32 



some sort of help, direct or indirect, from some external 
source, say Ballala III, and that this help enabled them to defy 
the authority of the governor. The reasonableness of this surmise 
is proved by the Vidyaranya Kalajnana (14) and Vrttanta (13). 
The former states that Karihara and his brother overthrew the 
power of Ballala in obedience to the commands of the Sultan. 
The latter is more explicit. It states that Ballala rebelled 
agaist the Sultan in Karnata and that an army under Harihara 
and Bukka was sent to put down the rebellion. Moreover, 
according to these works, the brothers met Ballala in battle 
somewhere on the banks of the Tungabhadra in the neighbour- 
hood of Hampi. This establishes Ballala’s complicity in the re- 
bellion of Nagundy. That is the reason why Sultan Muhammad 
commissioned the two brothers to overthrow his authority. 

Summing up the results of the foregoing discussion it may 
be briefly stated that Harihara and Bukka, two of the five sons 
of Sangama, entered the service of Prataparudra of Warangal 
as the superintendents of his treasury. On the overthrow of 
Prataparudra’s authority by the Sultan of Dehli, they fled to 
the court of Ramanatha of Kampili, married into his family, 
and entered his service. On the death of Ramanatha in the 
battle-field at the hands of the soldiers of the Sultan, they were 
carried away as prisoners of war; but the Sultan being 
impressed'by their upright conduct in prison, set them at 
liberty and having induced them to accept Islam, as shall be 
shown presently, enlisted them in his service at court. When a 
rebellion broke out in Hagundy at the instigation of Ballala III, 
the Sultan sent Harihara and Bukka with an army to suppress 
the rebellion. Though they met with a reverse at the beginn- 
ing, they succeed in re-establishing the Sultan’s authority. As 
a mark of recognition of their services, the Sultan appointed 
them as the rulers of Karnata. This was how these two 
chiefs acquired the government of Kampili, which became the 
nucleus of the future empire of Vijayanagara. 

. It is thus seen that tradition both confirms and supplements 
the information gleaned from contemporary sources. There is, 


33 


however, one point where tradition appears to differ from the 
contemporary records. The Muhammadan historians, both 
’Isamy and Barm, state that the person whom the Sultan sent 
to" Kampila was a Hindu convert to Islam, who subsequently 
reverted to his original faith and asserted his independence. 
Tradition does not allude to the change of faith of Harihara and 
Bukka implying thereby that they had always remained within 
the fold of the Hindu religion. The silence of the Kalajnana, the 
Vrttanta, and other works of the kind must not, however, be 
taken as a contradiction of the statements of contemporary his- 
torians. The Hindu writers did not like to record the unpleasant 
fact, viz., the conversion of the founders of a Hindu kingdom to 
Islam. Therefore, they kept a judicious silence over it. Tradition 
does not give the reason why, contrary to the spirit of Islam and 
the policy of Muhammadan sovereigns of the age, the Suljan 
should release these Hindu captives from prison, and confer on 
them the governorship of Karnata. It was not their practice 
to do so. The truth seems to be that Harihara and Bukka 
secured their freedom by their upright conduct (13) and, like 
so many of their contempox-aries, rose to prominence in the 
service of the state by embracing Islam. And the Sultan, who 
showed a distinct partiality to the Hindu converts, received 
them into his favour, and elevated them to positions of great 
dignity and responsibility.* 


• A summary comparison of the information furnished by tradition and contemporary 



records is given below 


Tradition. 

Contemporary records. 

1. Harihara and Bukka were the sons of 
Sangama of Mangalanilaya. Their 
brothers Were Kampana, Marapa and 
Muddapa. 

1. Harihara and Bukka were the sons of 
Sangama of Yadava race. Their 
brothers were K amp an a, Marapa, 

and Muddpa. (M D. L i, Cp. No. 15.) 

2, They entered the service of Pratapa- 
rudra of War&ngal. They served him 
as the pratViUras of his treasury* 

2. Bukka must have been a subordinate of 
Prataparudra about A.D. 1314. {NMM 
H, Kg. 7), 

3. The Sultan of Dehli defeated Pratapa- 
, , 1 rudra and captured him. 

3. The Sultan defeated Prataparudra* and 
captured him, {EM. in, p. 223.) 



34 



9. See 6 above. The relation of Kampila 
*•**> Harihara apostatised from Islam 
and rebelled against the Sultan. 

10. Harihara ruled at first In Hastikona 
(Xneyagondi) (AT. D, I i, Cp. 15). And 
later, he founded, on the advice of 
Vidyaranya, a city called Vidyanagara 
on the southern bank of the Tunga- 
bhadra. {Ibid.) 

11. He conquered the whole of the Kannada 
including the Hoysala kingdom and 
Konkana [’Is3my (7); E. a i Y , Yd. 46; 
Ibn BatSta, Travels, (Broadway Tra- 
vellers) pp. 230-31]. 

12. The conquest was completed by 
A.D. 1346, when Harihara, his brothers, 
and his subordinates, met at 5*ngeri 
and celebrated a feast in comme- 
moration of the conquest of the country 
from, the eastern to the western sea, 
under the presidency of Bharati Tirtha. 
{E.C vi, Sg. 1), 




Tradition. 


Contemporary records. 


4. Harihara and Bukka fled to the court of 
Ramanatha, the son of Kampiliraya, 
married into his family and entered his 

..service. 

5. Mahandhesvara's (Muhammad bin 
Tughlaq’s) soldiers killed Ramanatha, 
and carried away Harihara and Bukka 
as prisoners to the camp or the city of 
the Sultan. 

6. The Sultan released them from prison, 

and sent them to Karnata with an army 
to subdue Balla|a who rebelled against 
him. 


7. Harihara and Bukka came to Karnata 
but were defeated by BailaJ a. 

8. They met Vidyaranya, fought against 
Balla]a for the second time and de- 
feated him. 

9. The Sultan appointed them the gover- 
nors of Karnataka in appreciation of 
their services. 

10. They ruled at first in Xneyagondi , and 
later founded, on the advice of Vidya- 
ranya, a city called Vidyanagara, on 
the southern bank of the Tunga- 
bhadra. 

11. Nib 


4. Nil. 


5. Muhammad bin Tughlaq killed Kampi- 
lideva in battle and annexed his king- 
dom [£. D. iii, pp. 614-15; Tsamy, 
Futuh-us-Salatin (5, 6.)] 


6. A relation of Kampila who embraced 
Islam was sent by the Sultan some 
time before 1336 A. D. to govern 
Kampila {Tarikh-i-Firm Skahi , Madras 
Govt. Or. Mss. Lib. D. No. 258). As 
Harihara was ruling over Kampila 
in A.D., 1336, 1340, 1342 and 1347 
[iV. Z>. I i, Cp. 15; I A . x, p, 63; Ibn 
BatJUa’s Travels (Broadway Travel- 
lers), pp, 230-1] and Tsamy, Futu^us* 
Salatm (5, 6), he must be the relation of 
Kampila whom the Sultan sent to 
govern Kampila. 

7. Nil. 

8. Nil. 


OHAP'TER IV 


t he declaration of independence. 

It has been shown that Harihara was sent to Kampili by 
Sultan Muhammad to suppress a rebellion, and on the success- 
ful execution of the commission appointed, as the governor of 
Karnata. These events must have taken place before 
1336 A.D., as Harihara was ruling from Aneyagondi, from 
that year onwards. However, he is said to have rebelled 
against the Sultan soon after this date, and asserted his 
independence at Kampili so that the country was lost by the 
Mussalmans.* Why did Harihara rebel against the Sultan ? 
and how did he manage to establish himself as an independent 
ruler ? A satisfactory answer to these questions involves a 
discussion of some problems connected with the expansion 
of the Mussalman power in the Deccan. 



£. D. iii, pp. 245-46. 


The Muhammadan conquest of the Deccan which was 
commenced by the Khaljis was completed by the Tughlaqs. 
’Ala-ud-Din Khaljl subdued all the Hindu kingdoms in the 
south, and exacted tribute from their rulers. Towards the 
close of his reign he annexed the Yadava kingdom of 
Devagiri, as a consequence of Sankhama’s rebellion after the 
death of his father, Ramadeva. Ghiyas-ud-Dln Tughlaq 
inaugurated the policy of systematic annexation of the 
Hindu kingdoms of the Deccan which his son and successor 
Muhammad bin Tughlaq successfuEy carried out. The 
Kakatlya kingdom of W arangal was overthrown in A.D. 1323, 
and Telingana was incorporated with the empire of Dehll, 
The ruler of Kampili who for a time withstood the attacks of 
the Sultan’s armies was slain in 1326-7 A. D., and his territory 
passed into the hands of the victor. B allala HI saved himself 
and his kingdom by timely' submission, and Ma’bar, which was 
constantly harassed by the Hindu and the Muhammadan 


36 



invaders, passed ultimately into the hands of the Suljcan who 
constituted it a province of his empire. Of the four Hindu 
kingdoms of the South — Tiling, Kampila, Ma’bar and Dhor- 
samand — the first three were absorbed into the empire of Dehll, 
the last alone still preserving its individuality though not its 
sovereignty. Muhammad bin Tughlaq, thus, brought the 
whole of India under the shadow of a single umbrella. 

Muhammad bin Tughlaq, however, did not succeed in main- 
taining his authority over this extensive empire. The pro- 
vinces of his kingdom rapidly fellaway from the crown and 
became the nuclei of independent kingdoms which played an 
important part in the history of the Deccan during the 
succeeding centuries.* 

Barm has pointed out in forcible terms that the failure of 
Sultan Muhammad was ultimately due to the impracticability 
of his schemes of conquest. The Sustain exhausted the 
treasury in financing his expeditions of world conquest. In his 
attempts to replenish the exhausted treasury, he showed 
extreme severity so that people — nobles and common folk — rose 
against him to save themselves from complete ruin, and these 
rebellions in their turn led to the dismemberment of the 
empire. Other causes tending to produce the same result 
were also at work. The position of the capital in a corner of 
the empire made the authority of the central government less 
effective in the outlying provinces and fostered the growth of 
rebellion. The jagir system on which the civil administration 
of the kingdom was based encouraged separatist tendencies, 
and the foreign nobles, who held most of the fiefs under the 
government, proved a source of ever present danger. 
Moreover, the feelings of jealousy which the foreign nobles 
had entertained towards the Hindu converts to Islam com- 
plicated the situation further. The Sultan showed much favour 
to fee Hindu converts, and raised them to positions of power 
and influence under the state. This roused the jealousy of 

• £. Id. iii, p. 237. : • 



the foreign nobles, who considered the elevation of the Hindu 
converts an insult to their dignity. The most important cause 
of disaffection has to be traced to the Sultan’s attitude towards 
Islam. He was a student of philosophy, and consequently he 
treated the narrow-minded theologians with contempt. He was 
an ardent disciple of the famous Sufi teacher and saint 
Nizam-ud-Dln ’Auliya from whom he seems to have acquired 
his love of mysticism and fondness for the discussion of 
spiritual problems with learned men and doctors of religion to 
whichever faith they belonged. He was frequently seen in the 
company of yogis, and would even join the Hindus in the 
celebration of some of their festivals. Barn! observes, “ The 
dogmas of philosophers, which are productive of indifference 
and hardness of heart, had a powerful influence over him. 
But the declarations of the holy books, and the utterances of 
the prophets, which inculcate benevolence and humility, and 
hold otT? the prospect of future punishment, were not deemed 
worthy of attention Ibn Batiita states that he saw the Sultan 
on one occasion witnessing the performance of yogic practices 
by an adept in the art.f 

His intellectual curiosity, and the love of philosophical 
enquiry of the tenets of other religions, brought him into 
conflict with the orthodox, who did not show any hesitation 
in denouncing him. The contemporary orthodox opinion on 
the irreverent conduct of the Sultan is vigorously expressed 
by ’Isamy. 

“ The people (of the kingdom), the small as well as the 
great, were vexed by the king of kings, the friend of the mean 
and the enemy of the faith who completely set his face against 
religion... He disregarded the laws of Islam and resorted to the 
company of the infidels. He prohibited the custom of calling 
for prayers, and caused anguish to the followers of the faith 
day and night. He stopped the Friday congregation, and 
played in the Holy festival with the Hindus. He used to 

* BJ>. Hi, p, 236, t Ita Batata: Travels (Broadway Traveller*), p. 226. 





39 


,1 


til 

f 1 1 

til 

h 



“ The times were Tulukkan times; the devadana lands of the 


9 The Devalrant and Khizr KFdn > (Aligarh Edition), p. 72. 
f Khm a'inul Futuh (^Jabib’f Translation) pp. 102-4. 
t The Kdyilolugtty (Ripon Press Edition, 1888), p. 51. 

H Md\ Eha%Winul FutUh (Habib's Translation), pp. 104-5. 

I 434 of 1903; A*R.E. 1904, p. 14. 

II 119, 120 of 1908. | A.&JB. 1909 


the fanaticism of Islam called for some concerted action. 
The destruction caused by the Muhammadan armies was indeed 
wide-spread. Temples and other religious foundations excited 
their special wrath. They carried away everything which 
could be moved and what they could not carry, they either 
demolished or burnt to ashes. Malik Na’ib Kaffir, obtained tbe 
title of ‘ the idol breaking Malik ’ on account of his iconoclastic 
tendencies. He destroyed 4 the golden temple’ at Marhatpur* 
and shattered the images of Siva and Vis nut 5 he plundered the 
temple of Srlrangam, killed the Vaisnavas and carried away the 
idols} ; ‘ he destroyed all the temples at Birdhul, and placed the 
plunder in the public treasury’, § and he burnt down the temple 
of Cokkanatha at Maduraf. The example of Malik Na’ib Kafur 
was followed by all the other invaders. As a consequence of 
the continuous spoliation and destruction of temples the 
religious activities suffered a set back. The inscriptions of this 
period which allude to these events give us an idea of the 
confusion caused by the lawless behaviour of the invaders. 
An epigraph found in the Abhiramesvara temple at Tiruva- 
mattur in the North Arcot district “ refers to an invasion of 
the Tulukkar, i. e., Muhammadans which took place in 
‘previous days’ and to ‘ the ruin of the country ’ brought about 
by invasion”.® Two records of Tirupattur in the Ramnad 
district,! describe the occupation of the local $iva temple by 
the Muhammadans, and its consequent ruin. The Muham- 
madan occupation of the temple premises must have taken 
place before 1389 A. D. when it was reconsecrated by a certain 
Visalayadeva. According to the epigraphist, it must have 
taken place somewhere about 1810 A. D. | The general 
condition of Madura country during the Muhammadan occupa- 
tion is briefly described in an inscription of Tirukkalakkndi : 


gods were taxed with Jcudimai ; the temple worship, however, 
had to be conducted without any reduction ; the ulavu or the 
cultivation of the temple lands was done by turns by the 
tenants of the village.”* The Maduraittala Varalaru, a 
chronicle of the sacred city of Madura, gives a more vivid 
account. 

“For a period of forty-eight years from $aka 1246-93, 
the place was under Mussalman sway ; the god of the place 
went to Nanjilnadu, and the Panjdksaratirumadil, the enclos- 
ing wall, named after the five letters composing the name of 
Siva, namely Om Namasivaya, and the fourteen go pur as 
(gateways) as well as the streets were pulled down. The 
sanctum of Nay agar (Lord) temple, the ardhamaudapam (the 
inner hall) and the mahamandapam (the outer hall) alone escaped 
destruction.” All the temples of Siva and Visnu, were 
closed.f It is, however, GrangadevI, that narrates in detail 
the misery caused by the Muhammadans. 

“The temples in the land have fallen into neglect, as 
worship in them has been stopped. Within their walls the 
frightful howls of the jackals have taken the place of the sweet 
reverberations of mrdanga. Like the Turuskas who know no 
limits, the Kaveri has forgotten her ancient boundaries, and 
brings frequent destruction with her floods. The sweet odour 
of the sacrificial smoke and the chant of the Vedas have 
deserted the villages (agraharas) which are now filled with the 
foul smell of roasted flesh and the fierce noise of the ruffianly 
Turuskas. The suburban gardens of Madura present a 
most painful sight ; many of their beautiful cocoanut palms 
have been cut down ; and on every side are seen rows of stakes 
from which swing strings of human skulls strung together. 
The Tamraparnl is flowing red with the blood of the slaugh- 
tered cows. The Veda is forgotten ; and justice has gone into 
hiding ; there is not left any trace of virtue or nobility in the 

* 64 of 1916, A.R.E. 1916, Part II, p. 126. ' 

f History of the Nayaks of Madura, Appendix E, p. 374. 


41 


land and despair is writ large on the faces of the unfortunate 
Dravidas.”* 

The condition of the Hindus outside the Dravida and the 
Pandya countries was no better. The Muhammadan conquerors 
believed that they were commissioned by Providence to trample 
upon the Hindus. The doctors of their faith preached that it 
was the duty of the true believers to maltreat the Hindus ; and 
the rulers thought that it was their duty to be inhuman. 
The advice that QazI Mughls-ud-Dln of Bayana gave to 
’Ala-ud-DIn Khalil on how an orthodox Muhammadan king 
should treat his Hindu subjects is well-known.f 

Muslim rulers plundered the Hindus, deprived them of 
their property, prohibited them from practising their religion, 
and put thousands of them to death without any justification. 
’Ala-ud-DIn Khaljl was convinced that the Hindus would not 
become 1 obedient and submissive ’ until they were reduced to 
poverty. He ‘ left them from year to year of corn, milk, curds, 
just enough for them to live’, so that they might not accumulate 
wealth. He prohibited the Hindus from riding on horses, 
wearing fine apparel, and going on hunt. 4. Muhammad bin 
Tughlaq hunted them like wild animals ; Flruz Shah suppres- 
secTthe performance of the Hindu religious rites in public.§ 
Hindu pilgrims to Benares were compelled to pay vexatious 
levies, and Hindu rulers in different parts of India found the 
need to create endowments for enabling poor pilgrims to meet 
this impost.T Ghiyas-ud-Dln, the monstrous sultan of Madura, 
slaughtered inoffensive Hindus every day. This was the 
character of the Mussulman rule, under which the Deccan and 
South India passed in the first quarter of the fourteenth 
century. The Hindus, who chafed under such tyranny, 
were naturally eager to overthrow the Muslim power and 
regain their lost freedom , and the political unrest that was 

: * K. A. Nilakanta Sastri: The PUndyan Kingdom , pp. 242-3. 

t E.D. iii, p. 184. t PP- l® 4 ' 5 - 

§ ibid, p. 365. H A . R. 1909, para. 85 


1® 

v 

1 


‘ . ' ' . 


1-6 






? . 


42 


engendered by the Sultan’s high-handed policy and the selfish 
designs of his ambitious subordinates offered them fair chances 
of success. 

Sayyid Jalal who was the hotwal of Madura killed the 
artiirs and declared his independence in Ma’bar in or about 
A.D. 1834* Sultan Muhammad is said to have despatched an 
army to suppress the rebellion, but it joined the rebel leader. 
Therefore, the Sultan having resolved to lead the campaign 
in person collected an army and marched to Devagiri. Having 
attended to some administrative affairs, he proceeded towards 
Ma’bar by way of Telingana. When he reached Warangal, 
where plague was prevalent, his army caught the contagion, 
and several nobles and a large number of soldiers died. The 
Suljian himself was attacked, and his condition was so grave 
that rumours of his death spread in the provinces. 

The strength of the Sultan’s army seems to have been 
greatly reduced by the plague. His own sickness, coupled 
with the rumour of his death, excited rebellion. Hoshang, one 
of the amirs ruling near Daulatabad, revolted; but on hearing 
of the approach of the Sultan’s army he fled to Konkan. 

The abandonment of the Ma’bar campaign by the Suljtan 
reduced the prestige of the -imperial government considerably. 
Ma’bar became an independent kingdom ; and the example of 
Sayyid Jalal proved contagious ; the dormant ambition of the 
provincial governors was roused, and several attempted to 
carve out independent kingdoms for themselves even as 
Sayyid Jalal had done. 

* The exact date of the outbreak of this rebellion is not known. All that we know 
about it is that the Sultan reached Warangal with an army to suppress this rebellion in 
A.D. 1335. The rebellion, therefore, must have broken out some time before. As he is said 
to have despatched an army already to put down the rebellion, and as he was obliged to 
lead a second expedition as a consequence of the first joining the rebel leader, it may be 
presumed, considering the distance between Dehll and Madura (six months’ journey), 
that the rebellion broke out in 1334 or a little earlier. The Maduraittala-VaralSru states 
that the first UlapatikhSn (Ulugh Khan) ruled from 1326 to 1331 A.D. If Ulugh Khan is 
identified with Muhammad bin Tughlaq, 1331 A.D. must be regarded as the latest date of 
his rule in Madura. The matter must he further investigated- 


43 


Owing to the outbreak of disturbances in his kingdom 
Sultan Muhammad could not pay any attention to the events 
that happened in the remote corners of his dominions. Sayyid 
Ibrahim, the purse-bearer, rebelled at HansI, while the Suljtan 
was at Devagiri. There were other disturbances besides 
Therefore, the Sultan appointed Nusrat Khan as the governor 
of Western Telingana with his capital at Bldar, entrusted the 
administration of Devagiri and the Marhatta country to Qutlugh 
Khan and returned to Dehll either at the end of 1335 A. D. 
or early next year. While he was in Dehll information reached 
him that Shahu Afghan or Shahu Lodi rebelled in Lahore ; 
and he immediately marched against him in person. The 
rebel fled in panic, and the Suljfcan returned to Dehll. After a 
short stay in the capital, he marched to Sannam and Samana 
to suppress the Hindus who withheld tribute and created 
disturbances. While he was engaged in putting down this 
rebellion, the Hindus of Telingana and Kampili threw off the 
Muslim yoke and asserted their independence. A severe 
famine which occurred during that year produced much distress 
in Northern India. The Sultan remained in a camp called 
Sargadwarl, on the banks of the Ganges distributing corn 
among the famine stricken inhabitants of the Doab. Nusrat 
Khan rose up in rebellion in the Deccan; and Qutlu gh Kh an 
was engaged in putting him down. In the next year the Sultan 
despatched a large army against some independent kingdoms 
in the Himalayas. Nagarkot (Kangra) was captured. Fakr- 
ud-Dln asserted his independence in Bengal in A.D. 1338 — 9. 
’All Shah Nathu revolted at Gulburga in A.D. 1340, and attempt- 
ed to establish himself as an independent monarch in the 
Deccan; but Qutlugh Khan suppressed his rebellion and sent 
him and his dependents to the Sultan at Dehll. Nizam- 
ul-Mulk, a low born adventurer, revolted in Kaya in the 
next year and assumed the title of ’Ala-ud-Dln. His rebellion 
was, however, easily put down. The Sultan, who began to 
entertain suspicions about Qutlugh Khan resolved to recall him 
from the Deccan and appointed ’Ain-ul-Mulk as the governor 
of Daulatabad ; but ’Ain-ul-Mulk, who was unwilling to leave 





Oudh, revolted, and the Sultan defeated him in the battle of 
Kanauj and took him prisoner. No other untoward event 
seems to have disturbed the peace of the kingdom, until 
1343 A.D. It was in this year that Muhammad Tughlaq took an 
important step which soon terminated his authority in the 
Deccan. He committed the blunder of superseding Qutlugh 
Khan by Maulana Nizam-ud-Dln ’Alim-ul-Mulk in the 
viceroyalty of the Deccan. The turbulent ‘ Amirs of the 
Hundred ’ who were kept under check by the tactful manage- 
ment of Qutlugh Khan showed scant respect to the new gover- 
nor, and the authority of the Sultan suffered an eclipse.* 

This brief survey of the events which happened between 
A.D. 1334 and A.D. 1344 makes it obvious that the affairs of 
the empire of Dehli were in a state of confusion, and as a 
consequence the Sultan did not find it possible to enforce his 
authority in the outlying parts of his territories. The abandon- 
ment of the idea of a second campaign to suppress Sayyid 
Jalal’s rebellion after the abortive expedition of 1335 A.D., and 
the tacit acquiescence in the assumption of sovereignty of 
Malik F akr-ud-Dm over Bengal in 1338 — 9 A.D., show clearly 
how helpless the Sul,tan was to combat the progress of 
disintegration. 

It was in these circumstances that the Hindus of the 
Deccan endeavoured to expel the Muhammadans from their 
land and re-establish their power. The movement of Hindu 
independence had its origin in Telingahta ; it seems to have 
spread rapidly westwards and southwards. It was essentially 
religious in character, and its object was the restoration of the 
Hindu dharma which had almost sunk in the ocean of Islam. 
Naturally enough the movement started under the aegis of god 
Visvesvara of KasI, for the protection of the cows and the 
Brahmans, the two characteristic symbols of the Hindu dharma. 
Harihara I renounced Islam, and reverted to his former faith 

* N. V»nk ataramanayya : * The Date of the Rebellions of Tilang and Kampilah-, 
Indean Culture v, pp. 133-46, 261-69. Cf. Haig -J.R.A.S. 1922, pp. 362-3. 


45 


through, the instrumentality of the sage Vidyaranya, who 
exercised, in his capacity as the head of the local Advaita 
matha, considerable influence over the Hindu population. 
Vidyaranya appears to have suggested that Harihara should 
surrender his territory to the god Virupaksa of Hampi and 
thenceforward administer it 'as an agent of the god ; and 
he seems to have promised in return to re-admit him into the 
Hindu fold, and help him in establishing his sway over the 
Hindus of South India. Harihara surrendered the kingdom to 
Vidyaranya, the visible representative and the agent of the 
god, for his re-admission into the Hindu fold. Thencefoward, 
God Virupaksa became the de jure sovereign of the kingdom. 
Vidyaranya gave back the kingdom to Harihara, and com- 
manded him in the name of the god, to administer it on his 
behalf. Harihara accepted the command, and began to rule 
the kingdom theoretically as an agent of the god. That was 
how he came to adopt &r r i Virupaksa as his sign manual. 
By surrendering the kingdom to God Virupaksa, Harihara 
secured the support of Vidyaranya and the pontiff of Srngeri, 
and as a servant of the god, and friend and disciple of the 
Jagadguru, he became naturally the accepted leader of the 
Hindus of Karnataka. 

Harihara was now ready to free himself from his subordi- 
nation to Dehlx, and he found the atmosphere quite congenial 
to his schemes of aggrandisement. He also discovered an 
ally whose support strengthened his position immensely. 
Kanya (Kapaya) Nay aka, the leader of the Telingana 
Hindus had succeeded in bringing together all the Hindu 
chiefs of his country, and he came forward with a proposal 
that Harihara should join him and his allies to expel the 
Muhammadans from South India. 

The rebellion of Kanya (Kapaya) Nay aka has been des- 
cribed by Barn! ; and the later Muhammadan historians add 
but little to what he has said. According to Barm, Kanya 
: (Kapaya) Nay aka rebelled, when the Sultan was at Sannam and 


46 



Samaria putting down the local disturbances caused by the 
brigands. “ While this was going on,” says he, “ a revolt broke 
out among the Hindus of Arangal. Kanya Nayak had gathered 
strength in the country, Malik Haqbul, the na'ib wazlr, fled to 
Dehli, and the Hindus took possession of Arangal, which was 
thus entirely lost. About the same time one of the relations 
of Kambala* whom the Sultan had sent to Kambala, apostatised 
from Islam and stirred up a revolt. The land of Kambala also 
was thus lost, and fell into the hands of the Hindus.” 


Barn! seems to suggest that the rebellions of Telingana 
and Kampila were somehow connected. The nature of this 
connection is explained by Ferishta in a passage of his history 
which though teeming with inaccuracies contains some 
valuable information. 


“ And at this time (A.H. 744), Kisna Nayak (Kamba), the 
son of Luddar Dev, who was living in the neighbourhood of 
Warangal having gone privately to Balal Dev who was the 
great king of Kaniatak said, — 

“ The Mussalmans having entered the countries of Tiling 
and Karnatak desire that they should extirpate us once for all. 
Deliberation concerning this matter is imperative. 

“Balal Dev summoned all his nobles and asked their 
advice. After careful consideration and close examination, it 
was resolved that Balal Dev leaving the whole of his kingdom 
behind, should make the path of the armies of Islam on the 
frontier his capital ; and Ma’bar, Dhorasamand and Kambila 
should be wrested from the Mussalmans ; and Kisna Nayak, 
making use of his power at this time which was opportune, 
should also take Warangal from the court of Dehli. 


“ Balal Dev built in an inaccessible place in the hilly tract 
on his own frontier, a town called after the name of his son 

* ED. iii, pp. 245-46. The word Kambala (Kampila) has been substituted for Kanya 
Nayak of Elliot’s translation in conformity with the reading of the Madras Test. 


47 



# The Tarikh-i-Ftrishia (Naval Ki shore Press) Part I, p. 138. 

f The Origin of the City and the Empire of Vijayanagara, p. 141, n. 144; TfSmy ; 
Fum^Saimln, p* 562* 


Bijan Rai which became famous as Bijan Nagai\ In course of 
time owing to constant usage it was known as Bljanagar. 
Taking considerable foot and horse along with him Kisna 
Nayak first took possession of Warangal. Malik Tmad-ul-Mulk, 
the icazir, fled to Daulatabad. Afterwards, Balal Dev having 
sent help to Kisna Nayak, they drew from both the sides the 
Rais of Ma’bar and Dhorasamand, who had been the tributa- 
ries of the king of Karnatak from ancient times, out of the 
power of the Mussalmans. And the sleeping unrest having 
been awakened everywhere none of the distant provinces of 
the kingdom remained in the possession of the emperor 
excepting Gujarat and Devglr.”* 


The first point that calls for comment is the date of Kisna 
Nayak’s visit to the court of Ballala III. It took place accord- 
ing to Ferishta in A. II. 744 (1343-44); bat this date is 
impossible, for, in the first place Ballala III, who was taken 
prisoner by the Sultan of Madura in September 1342 A.D., was 
assassinated a few months later in his prison, and his son 
Ballala IV, who ascended the throne in June 1343 A.D., was 
obliged to seek shelter at Kharepattan on the west coast after a 
brief rule of three months.f Secondly, the place which Barn! 
assigns to this revolt in the list of the rebellions of Muhammad 
Tughlaq’s reign seems to indicate an earlier date. At the time 
of Kanya Nayak’s revolt, the Sultan is said to have been 
engaged in reducing the Hindus of Saunarn and Samana to 
subjection. This happened, as noticed already, in 1336 A.D. 
It follows from this that Kanya Nayak rose in revolt in the 
same year. Lastly, Ferishta’s chronology for this period is far 
from accurate. It is found on examination that it is in advance 
of the actual chronology by seven years. If the error is recti- 
fied, Ferishta’s date is found to be in total agreement with the 
chronological data furnished by Barnl. Therefore, Kisna 
Nay aka’s visit to Ballala’ s court took place in 737 A.H. and not 


48 



* Indian Culture *v, pp. 268-9* 
t E.D. m, p. 245. X Tabaqat-i- Akbarl 

§ J.B.O.R.S. xx, p. 260, SJJ. iv, No. 950 

1 **. xxviii, pp. 145-146. 


seven years later as it is generally believed.* The other facts 
mentioned by Ferishta in the passage under consideration do 
not admit of such an easy explanation. 

The name of the Hindu leader of Telingana is wrongly 
given not only by Ferishta but by most other Muhammadan 
historians. Barn! calls him Kanya Kayakf ; Nizam-ud-Dln 
Ahmad refers to him as Kanya PaikJ ; and Ferishta gives him 
the name of Kisna Kayak, and makes him a son of Luddar 
Dev. The name of the leader of the Telingana rebellion was 
not Kanya or Kisna Kayak, nor was he a son of Pratapa- 
rudra. On these points our evidence is conclusive. An 
examination of relevant epigraphical material shows that 
Warangal and the neighbouring country was under the sway 
of a chief called Kapaya Kayaka, son of Mastmtiri Devaya 
Kayaka, between 1844 and 1354 A.D. He expelled the Mus- 
salmans from Telingana and re-established the Hindu govern- 
ment^ The evidence of the inscriptions is corroborated by 
Sayyid * AIT Aziz-ul-lah Tabataba who frequently refers to 
the ruler of Telingana in 1348 A. D. as Kabanld, Kabanayand 
or Kanabayandif. Any doubts that may be entertained 
about his name are set at rest by ’Isamy, a contemporary 
writer, who invariably alludes to him as Kaba or Kabanld. 
The name as written by ’Isamy and Sayyid ’All consists 
of two words Kaba and Kid or Kayand. Kid or Nldu is a 
common contraction of Kayand or Kayandu, an appellation 
borne by the members of several communities in the Telugu 
country. Kaba or Kaba (a scribal error for Kapa or Kapil', is 
identical with Kapa. It is therefore reasonable to hold that 
the Correct name of the ruler of Telingana about 1345 A.D., 
and consequently of the leader of the Telingana rebellion 
against Muhammad Tughlaq in 1336 A.D., is Kapaya Kayaka. 
As he was the son of Musunuri Devaya Kayaka and a cousin of 


49 



Prolaya Nayaka, he could not have been the son of Luddar Dev 
or Prataparudra as Ferishta would have us believe. 


Again, according to Ferishta, ’Imad-ul-Mulk was the 
governor of Telingana at the time of Kapaya (Kanya) Nayak’s 
rebellion. This is not true. Barm states that Malik Maqbul, 
the Na’ib Wazlr, held sway over Telingana ; * and his state- 
ment is confirmed by Nizam-ud-Din Ahmad.f There is no 
evidence to show that Malik Maqbul had also the title of ’Imad- 
ul-Mulk. 


Lastly, Ferishta attributes to Ballala the foundation of a 
city called Bijanagar which he confounds with the capital of 
the famous Vijayanagara empire. The following facts must 
be taken into consideration in this context. The city which 
Ballala is said to have founded stood on the northern frontier 
of his own dominions ; and at the time of the foundation of this 
city, the kingdom of Kampili with its capitals Anegondi and 
Kummata as well as Hampi around which a new city called 
Vijayanagara was soon to grow was governed by Harihara I 
who was still a subordinate of the Sultan of Dehll. Therefore, 
the city founded by Ballala on the frontier of his own kingdom 
could not have been identical with Vijayanagara which arose 
in the immediate neighbourhood of Anegondi, the capital of 
Harihara I, the governor of Kampili. 


Moreover, Ferishta does not adhere to this story of the 
origin of the city of Vijayanagara ; for, in the concluding 
chapter of his history he gives another account which has 
nothing in common with the above. “ The other great raja of 
Hindustan is the raja of Karnatak in the Deccan. One of the 
kings of that place called Bijay Cand who was on the royal 
throne nine hundred years before this time, caused a city to be 
built and named it Bijanagar after his own name in as much as 
he founded it. His descendants knowing it to be auspicious 
took considerable trouble in making it populous, so that the 

* E. D. iii, p. 245: t TabaqUt-i-Akbar} I (Tr.), p. 224. , 


— 


50 



inhabited area of that city extended over seven miles. The 
first person who made rebellion manifest in Hindustan and 
gave currency to sedition and mutiny against the raja of the 
kingdom of Kanauj is the ancestor of the Rayas of Karnatak. 
So it has been described. Maharaj who was his contemporary, 
going out on an expedition against Subva Ray, the ruler of the 
Deccan, expelled him (from his kingdom) ; but his descendants 
held the sovereignty from generation to generation until that 
time when (the king) of the name of Ramaraj having waged 
war on the rulers of the Deccan was killed in 970 A.H. After 
that, his descendants having gathered strength acquired the 
sovereignty over the peoples of that kingdom.”* 

An examination of the facts mentioned in this account is 
not necessary for the persent purpose. It is enough to point 
out that Ferishta had no definite information regarding the 
circumstances of the foundation of Vijayanagara and that he 
incorporated into his history whatever story reached his ear 
without regard to consistency. Therefore, no importance 
need be attached to the testimony of Ferishta in this matter. 
In spite of these inaccuracies, his account of the rebellion of 
Tiling may be taken to be substantially true. 


What part Harihara played in this rebellion is not stated 
by Ferishta. No doubt he makes mention of Ballala’s desire 
to free Kampila and other kingdoms from the thraldom of the 
Mussalmans ; but he does not refer to this country again. It 
may, however, be inferred from the statement that nothing 
remained in the hands of the Sultan except Gujarat and Deva- 
giri, that Kampili also regained its independence. Ferishta 
probably exaggerated the part played by Ballala in the 
liberation of the South ; for he is not even mentioned in this 
connection by the contemporary historians. Neither ’Isamy 
nor Barm alludes to Ballala while describing the southern 
rebellions, though they refer to the activities of Kanya Nayak 
and the governor of Kampili. An important fact which seems 

• The Tarthh-i- Ferishta (Naval Kia^we Press), Part ii, p. 420. 


51 


to have a bearing on this subject must be noticed here. 
Harihara assumed about this time the significant title of 
Hinduraya Suratrana i. e. the Sultan (lord paramount) of 
the Hindu kings ; which clearly indicates that he claimed not 
only the sovereignty over the Hindus but equality of status 
with the Suljtan of Dehli who was the overlord of all the 
Mussahnans in India. Since the assumption of this title by 
Harihara coincided in point of time with the outbreak of the 
rebellion in Tiling and Kampili, it is not unreasonable to 
believe that he not only participated in the rebellion but 
assumed its leadership. 

The Hindu confederacy which Harihara joined was indeed 
powerful. It included among its adherents all the Hindu 
rulers of the South. According to Ferishta, besides Kis^a 
Nayak and Balal Dev, the Rajas of Ma’bar and Dhorasamand 
took part in it. It is not easy to identify the two princes 
mentioned last. The Raja of Ma’bar was probably Ballala’s 
friend and ally Vira Pandya who continued to rule over the 
northern districts of the old Pandyan empire until 1340 A. D.* 
Ferishta’s inclusion of the Raja of Dhorasamand as distin- 
guished from Ballala among the leaders of the confederacy 
must be attributed to his carelessness, if not actually to his 
ignorance. 


Besides these, several other Hindu kings participated in 
this war of liberation. Prolaya Verna, the founder of the 
kingdom of Kondavidu is said to have expelled the Muham- 
madans from the country and restored the agraharas which 
they had seized to the Brahmans in a record of 1345 A.D.f 
Verna appears to have joined Kapaya Nayaka, of whom he is 
said to have been a subordinate , % in waging war upon the 
Mussalmans and expelling them from the Telugu country. 
Mummadi Nayaka of Korukonda who married a daughter of 
• Kapaya Nay aka’s sister must have also assisted his distinguished 

48 K. A. N. Sastri * The Pandyan Kingdom , p. 240. 

+ .£./. viii, pp. 9 f. . , %A.S.P.P.ii,M.3U 




52 



D. Hi, pp. 245-6, 


relative in establishing the national independence.* Many 
other chiefs besides those mentioned above must have joined 
their forces with the leaders of the movement and strengthened 
their hands. 


_ The representatives of the Sultan of DehlT, who had to 
maintain the authority of their master, over a hostile population 
whom they had done nothing to conciliate, could not carry 
on the administration of the country in the changed condition. 
The small band of Muslims in the Deccan had by this time become 
hostile to the Sultan. And the Hindus in whose disunion lay 
the strength of the Muslim power, joined together and presented 
solid opposition to the continuance of their rule. Under these 
circumstances the Muhammadans found themselves in a sorry 
predicament, and were obliged to retire from the country 
hastily. Barm describes the situation briefly. “Malik Maqbul, 
the na'ih-wazlr fled to Dehli and the Hindus took possession 
of Arangal, which was thus entirely lost. ...The land of 
Kambala was also thus lost, and fell into the hands of the 
Hindus. Devgir and Gujarat alone remained seeure.”t 

The Hindus of South India seem never to have learnt the 
value of stable unity. They reverted to their original 
state of selfish autonomy, and hampered the progress of the 
Hindu cause. The Velamas of Raeakonda and the Reddis 
° Ko 9$avidu declined to recognise the sovereignty of 
Kapaya Nayaka, and set up independent states. The Reddis 
of Korukomja and the Nayaks of Pithapuram followed their 
example, and they began to fight with one another for supre- 
macy. The conduct of the Velamas of Raeakonda was indeed 
most unpatriotic. They not only made war upon Kapaya 
Nayaka frequently but joined the Sultan of Gulbarga (34) and 
brought about his downfall. The political unity of Telingana 
which was effected by the fear of Muslim domination vanished 
soon after the expulsion of the Muslim governor. The other 
partS ° f tlle P emnsula were not entirely free from separatist 




53 



tendencies. Ballala was not disposed to regard Harihara as an 
independent monarch. The Hoysala and the Vijayanagara 
inscriptions of this period reveal a state of hostility between 
the two kingdoms*; but B allala's preoccupation with affairs of 
Madura, and his captivity and death in 1342-3 A.D. freed 
Harihara from an ambitious and powerful enemy. 

The work of the Hindu confederacy was not, however, 
completely undone ; and Harihara kept steadily in view the 
objects for which the confederacy came to existence. He was 
convinced that the integrity of his kingdom and the Hindu 
freedom could be permanently preserved only by eliminating 
the numerous kingdoms and petty principalities whose 
existence constitirted a source of weakness to his cause. 
Fortunately, he had the necessary strength and resources to 
destroy the rival kingdoms and impose his authority over a 
large part of South India. Thus the founder of Vijayanagara 
was obliged to undertake the subjugation of the southern 
kingdoms in the interests of the Hindu civilisation. 


* Orig'Mof Oiiy and Empire <>f VijayaMgare,, pp. jSSMS. 


HUB 


chapter V 



THE FOUNDATION OF THE CITY OF 
VI JAY AN AG AHA. 

Tradition, embodied in Vidyaranya Kalajnana and other 
works, attributes the foundation of the city of Vijayanagara 
to Vidyaranya. But Nuniz states that Deorao or Dehorao 
whom Sultan Muhammad Tughlaq sent to govern the kingdom 
of Nagundym (Anegondi) built a city on the banks of the river 
Nagundy (Tungabhadra) on the advice of a sage called 
Vidyajuna (Vidyaranya)* * * § . Now, both these statements are 
supported by the evidence of the inscriptions and literature 
belonging to the middle of the 14th century. 

Two inscriptions assigned to the year A.D. 1347 refer to the 
city of Vidya, distinguished as the abode of Vijaya (victory), 
made by Vidyaranya. f Their evidence is corroborated by the 
Virupaksa Gampu of Ahobalapati who refers to Devanrpati “ as 
the king-emperor of the city built by Vidyaranya, the prince 
of ascetics .” % Who was this Devanrpati ? Could he be one of 
the two Devarayas who ruled at Vijayanagara during the 15th 
century? The evidence of the book is against any such 
identification. It must have been written during the life-time 
of Vidyaranya, as the author, who was an eye-witness of the 
spring festival described in the work, states that Vidyaranya, 
accompanied by his disciples, came to offer worship to the 
processional images of Virupaksa and Pampambika after they 
were installed in the temple car for being taken round the 
streets.§ As Vidyaranya died in the year 1386 A.D., the date 

* Forgotten Empire ^ p- 301, 

f E.C. X, Mb* 158 ; Gd. 46. The dating of these inscriptions is defective. 

J Sa hhlau tad r'aj-anvavay-odbhavb 

Vidyaranya-yatindra-nirmita-pura-Sri Cakrvartl nrpah. 

§ Tate VidyaranyabHdha-yati-varl bhusura-gurau 

Samar udnB siddhais^saha rath am imam harmya-sadrsam 
VidhUy-asau pujam Par ama-£iva~murt foil pnnar == apt 

Jdviil-ihadat^t&ira vyajanakara astasti mahimUn (?), . ' ’ 




55 



of the composition of the Virupaksa Campu must he placed 
earlier. Therefore the Devanrpati mentioned in the work, 
cannot be identified either with Devaraya I or Devaraya II. 
He must be identified with one of the early kings of Vijaya- 
nagara. The Virupaksa Campu itself seems to offer the clue 
for the identification of Devanrpati. The name of Harihara is 
introduced in three passages with double entendre .* 

The author appears to have intentionally introduced the 
name of Harihara in these passages. According to them, the 
story of Harihara was recited in the streets of Hampi. There 
was no shrine dedicated to the god Harihara in the place; 
nor was his name associated with it in any manner. It may, 
however, be pointed out that ‘ Harihara ’ of these passages 
does not refer to any deity of that place but to Visnu and Siva 
(Hari and Ilara). Even after admitting the reasonableness 
of this view, the name ‘ Harihara ’ still demands explanation, 
when the passages are interpreted as having reference to a 
human being. Who was this Harihara whose glories were 
sung in the streets of Hampi ? It is not unreasonable to think 
that he was none other than the king himself. If this Is 
admitted, it follows that at the time of the composition of 
Virupaksa Campu, there ruled at Vidyanagara a king of the 
name of Harihara. Between A.D. 1336 and A.D. 1386, two 
kings bearing this name sat upon the throne of Vijayanagara. 
One of them, Harihara, the son of Sangama, ruled from 
A.D. 1336 to A.D. 1356 ; and the other, his nephew, the son of his 


* Vr§asyantl kacii ptilina-nikctf& tatranalint 

Vinisvasy- edanim Etarihara caritr am sumahtiavt 
Par as tri- mo hart ham sarasam abhinttam nata-vi^aili 
Priyas-fesam drasfum gata iti sakhlm-Sha vacanam. 

Again, 

Nanu-, Vi dwan . ,.sakala- d vifa- rUja- viraj am’ana Pan 
bhakt~agragany~aganya mah im a-sa r any a sat-purusa-i 

sravanaya ^vartatl. 

Again, 

Ktsucit grhita Virupaksai’eva darsanesu sva sva ja 
gacchatsu-api nibida-tama j anata-bhar a-bharitayam rath 
hara saranya-punya-caritra kathU-sravan = <isakta~$cir< 
malpam-api alpam~1va menirl* 


56 



brother Bukka I, ascended the throne in 1B78 A.D. Which of 
these two is the Harihara mentioned by Ahobalapati? According 
to our author, Harihara was also known as Devanrpati* 
Nuniz informs us that the founder the kingdom of Vijaya- 
nagara and the predecessor of Bucarao was Deorao or 
Dehorao.f Sewell has correctly indentified him with Hari- 
hara l.% If the evidence of Nuniz is accepted, then the 
Harihara Devanrpati of Ahobalapati must be identified with 
Harihara I. This identification appears to be reasonable when 
we take into consideration the comparatively small extent of 
territory over which Harihara Devanrpati of the Virupaksa 
Campu seems to have ruled. 


Ahobalapati mentions several chiefs, evidently sub- 
ordinates of Harihara Devanrpati, who came to witness the 
spring festival of Virupaksa. These were : Kasmlrabhupala, 
the chiefs of fsrlrasi, Moksapura, Rajadurga, Balharipura, 
Citrasilanagara, Bhujanganagarl, Laksmanesvarapm-I, Varnsa- 
nagarl and Ambalapurx on the slopes of the Kapotagiri.§ All 
these places are found in the area comprising Kurnool, 
Bellary, Chitaldrug, Shimoga, North Uanara, Belgaum, and 
Dharwad districts, a region which corresponds to the territory 


* Nanu brahmann-'Uaih him api tava dattam him alhava 
Bhavan-’lvaife.b hyd disati Siva' ling— arc ana-p halam 
Madly am vety-ahar-nisa imam- aha Devanrpafe 
MayU dattam sarvam phala~husuma-panca(mrt a) hrfZ. 

f Forgotten Empire, pp. 209, 300. J Ibid , p, 27. 

§ The term ‘ Kasmlrabhupala * means the king of Kashmir; but it is highly 
improbable that a king of Kashmir should have been a subordinate of the king of 
Vijayanagara. The term also means a chief of Kashmirian birth or nationality. 
MSdhava, the son of Caun^apa, who was a minister of Harihara’s younger brother Marapa 
in A.D. 1347, was a Kashmirian. The KasmirabhSpala mentioned by Ahobalapati may be 
either Madhav a or some other officer of Kashmirian extraction. 

• Srirasi is Sirasi in North Canara district. Moksapura is very probably Moksagun<Jam 
in the Kurnool district. Rajadurga and Balharipura are Rayadurga and Bellary respec- 
tively in the Bellary district. Citrasilanagara is Chitaldrug in the Mysore State ; 
Bhujanganagari is Naganur in the Dharwad district. Laksmanesvarapuri is identical 
with Laksmeswar. As Kapotagiri is the Sanskrit name of the Kappa Ga^e, in the 
, same district, Amfealapun which is said to have stood in its neighbourhood must be 
looked for in the same locality, Vamsanagari may be identified either with Belgaum of 
; Balgamva (Vemigrama) in the Shimoga district ' ' • 

V ; • • , : ; 

U . .. * ^ i vi : d;-- t.V , H rid - ' '■ ' ■ . : ' ! . - ; : ^ . : - ; 


57 



under Harihara I’s rule in 1343 A.D. Therefore, the identifi- 
cation of Harihara Devanrpati with Harihara I seems to be 
reasonable. 

It is obvious from the foregoing discussion that, according 
to Ahobalapati, who was a contemporary both of Harihara I 
and Vidyaranya, the city of Vidyanagara was built by 
Vidyaranya. Therefore, the Virupaksa Campu supports the 
evidence of the two inscriptions mentioned above, and 
shows that the tradition regarding the origin of Vijayanagara 
is based on fact. 


The Kapalur plates dated 1336-37 A.D. however, state that 
Vidyanagara was built by Harihara I, according to the instruc- 
tions of Vidyaranya ; “ The sage told the king thus : Oh 

Lord, found a city named Vidya, as beautiful as Alaka 
(Kubera’s city), which shall be a forest of learning (Ira = Saras- 
vati, learning).”* The king is said to have carried out the 
instructions of the sage, and built a city called Vidyanagara, 
where he celebrated his coronation on S. 1258 Dhatri, 
Vaisakha su. 7, Pusya, Hari.t The epigraphical evidence thus 
corroborates the statement of Nuniz that Harihara I built the 
city, at the instance of Vidyaranya. . , 

But, an inscription dated 1368 A.D. asserts that Bukka I, 
the younger brother and successor of Harihara, * having 


* M JP. I. i, Cp, 15. The reading of the text is irU- variant nfiiha pwrlm 
vidadhyah' « Cf. E.C. X, Bg. 70. atr-Uvam-riatha pnrlm vidadhyah. 

f It is evident that, according to this inscription, the building of Vidyanagara was 
completed by this date; but the Vidyaranya Kalajnana (14) states that Vidyaranya laid 
the foundations of Vidyanagara on this date. Moreover, according to Vtrappayya Kala* 
jnana (16), Hariharaiaya ruled at Anegondi for seven years from &S, 1258 Dhatri, Vaisakha 
su 7 (Saturday, 4th May A.D. 1336). Having constructed Vijayanagara in the Vaisakha of 
Svabhanu (April-May A.D. 1343), he ruled in that place for 14 years. Therefore, the 
term *viracayya* occurring in v. 27 of the Kapalur plates must not be interpreted literally, 
but must be understood as having commenced to build. Though the foundations of 
Vijayanagara were laid in May 4, 1336 A.D., the coronation of the king also was celebrated 
there at the same time, lest such an auspicious occasion might not occur again in the 
immediate future. Until the construction of the new city was completed in 1343 A.D., 
Harihara resided in. his old capital ; then he removed to Vijayanagara which became the 


58 



conquered all the world ‘ built a splendid city called the city 
of victory (Vijayanagarl).’* Thus the tradition and inscriptions 
attribute the construction of the city to three persons, viz., 
Vidyaranya, Harihara I and Bukka I. How is their testimony 
to be harmonized ? The difficulty is more apparent than real. 
Vidyaranya was the spiritual preceptor of Harihara and Bukka. 
There is ample evidence to show that they consulted him on 
almost all the affairs of state. Harihara I ‘ appointed his 
younger brother Bukka-Raja as yuva-raja ’, and had given to 
Mm ‘ the wealth of the empire.’t Bukka was associated with 
Harihara in the government of the kingdom. The idea that 
a new city should be built around the Hemakuta hill had 
originated in the mind of Vidyaranya. He commanded his 
royal disciples, Harihara and Bukka, to give material shape to 
the idea. They obeyed his command. Harihara entrusted 
to his brother the task of constructing the city. Accepting 
the orders of his guru, and his sovereign, Bukka erected the 
new city. The testimony of tradition and inscriptions is not 
only not contradictory but complementary. Vidyaranya sup- 
plied the idea ; Harihara gave the necessary sanction ; and 
Bukka carried it into execution. The city of Vidyanagara 
was thus built by all the three, Vidyaranya, Harihara and 
Bukka. 




t im. 







CHAPTER VI. 


THE CHRONOLOGY OF VIJAYANAGARA KINGS 


v ; .-: 


60 



, * Several works of this class such as the Raja Katajnana. and Emmeyc, Basavana 
KTuatttana purport to describe the history of the Hugs of Vijayanagara. As they are 
more legendary than historical, no extract from them is included in the present work. 

isifils'i ' " A : :i : ' : r ■ M V ; '■ vB : ^ / ’ ■ /? : ; ' v 

iseiUS : \ r: • : : : ■ ■ ■■■ : ; = « 


Of the three Kalajndnas mentioned in the foregoing 
paragraph, the Vidyaranya Kalajnana is the earliest, although 
it appears to have been revised twice or thrice, when much 
legendary material was incorporated into it. In its earliest 
form the work must have been short, probably containing 
some fifty slokas. It seems to have contained a brief account 
of the circumstances under which the kingdom of Vijaya- 
nagara was founded, the names of the kings of the first 
dynasty, the duration of their rule and the manner of their 
downfall. The account of the Kalajnana, so far as it deals 
with the history of the first dynasty, is borne out by the 
evidence of the inscriptions and other trustworthy documents. 
The Vlrappayya Kalajnana is the latest. Although it gives a 
complete list of the kings of all the four dynasties, its accuracy 
is not above doubt, especially with reference to the first 
dynasty. This may be attributed to the author’s imperfect 
knowledge of the early history. He based his account of the 
first dynasty on the Vidyaranya Kalajnana , and in his attempt 
to restore the names of the kings which are represented in that 
work only by the initial letters, the author introduced wrong 
names. The regnal periods which he assigns to the kings of 
this dynasty as well as the total duration of their rule cannot 
accepted as correct, as they are opposed to the evidence of 
the inscriptions. However, he gives an accurate account 
of the other dynasties of which his knowledge appears 
to have been more perfect. The Kalajnana attributed to 
Sivayya is brief; and it describes the order of succession 
correctly from the beginning up to the accession of Srlranga I. 
The substitution of the name of Narasa for Immadi Narasimha 
appears to be intentional* 

The Vijayanagara Samrajyamu (19 -a) is a kadita register 
which is said to have been prepared by the officers of the 
atthavanam at the instance of Venkata II (1585 to 1614). It is 



very accurate and trustworthy. The account which commences 
with the reign of Krsnadevaraya comes to an end with the 
reign of Venkata II who ordered its compilation. The Vijaya- 
ncigara Samrajyami not only gives the length of each reign 
like the Virappayya Kalajnana , but mentions the dates of acces- 
sion and death of Krsnadevaraya. The dates are correct, and 
the accuracy of the account is borne out by the evidence of the 
trustworthy records. The kavile of Grorakallu (18-a) enume- 
rates the names of kings who ruled over the eastern part of the 
Kurnool district, and on the whole, it indicates correctly the 
succession of dynasties that controlled the destinies of this 
region. The Keladinrpa Vijayam (17) is the least trustworthy 
record, from the point of view of the Vijayanagara chronology. 
Though the author states that he derived his information from 
the Vidyaranya Kalajnana, his account is confused and faulty. 

According to Nuniz, ten kings of the first dynasty 
ruled at Vijayanagara. Sewell accepts this number in his 
Forgotten Empire , though he includes fourteen names besides 
the nameless king whom he places between Devaraya II and 
Mallikarjuna in his 4 Table for Reference thereby indicating 
that he kept an open mind on the question. Krishna Sastri 
conforms to the lists of Nuniz and Sewell, though he shows an 
inclination to modify it in certain respects. The Vidyaranya 
Kalajnana , however, definitely states that thirteen kings of the 
first dynasty sat upon the throne of Vijayanagara and that their 
names commenced with the letters, Iia, Bu, Ha, Vi, Bu, De, 
Ra, Vi, De, Vi, Ma, Ra, and Vi respectively. The Kalajnana of 
Sivayya and the Keladinrpa Vijayam accept the mnemonic 
verse of Vidyaranya Kalajnana giving the initial letters of the 
names of the kings. The Virappayya Kalajnana not only gives 
the names of the kings completely but specifies their regnal 
periods also. These lists, especially the one that is given in 
the Vidyaranya Kalajnana , conform closely to the, list of kings 
derived from the inscriptions by modern research. There- 
fore, a comparative study of all the available data may be 
helpful in arriving at more satisfactory results. 



■sjraoj^ 


'ounsjsj 


' SJtJ9 A 


’©ni^ 




68 



All the Kdlaj nanus and the Kslctdinvpa Vijtxyatn are 
unanimous in stating that the number of kings of the first 
dynasty is thirteen. The Vidydraaya Kalajnma refers to 
another king whose name is not mentioned. The Keladinrpa 
Vijayam also alludes to the rule of a Praudha who succeeded the 
last Virupaksa. Nuniz mentions only nine kings, if we exclude 
Padearao who was expelled by Saluva Narasimha. Sewell 
adheres, as mentioned already, to this number, although there 
is clear evidence to show that more than eight kings of the first 
dynasty ruled at Vijayanagara. “ The succession to the 
throne of Vijayanagara immediately after Harihara’s (It) death 
seems to have been disputed.” * Harihara II died on Monday, 
September 15, 1404 A.D f An inscription of October 5, 1404 


It is evident from the foregoing that after the death of 
Harihara II his three sons Virupaksa I, Bukka II, andDevaraya I 
i.e., kings Vi. I, Bu II and De I of Vidydranya Kdlaj nana 

* A.S.S. 1907-8, p. 2+5. f E.C. viii, Tl. 129. 

t Ibid, TL 1. § E.C. viii, Tl. 13 j 196. 

1 H. /., P . 208. : % E.1 3cv, p. 14. h-'- 


64 



succeeded one another. This order of succession is also support- 
ed by the list furnished in the foot note to th q Keladinrpa 
V'ijayam. The Virappayya Kalajnana substitutes wrong names, 
and therefore its evidence cannot be accepted. 

The successors of 'Devaraya I : — The reign of Devaraya I 
lasted until the middle of 1422 A.D. It is generally believed 
that he was succeeded by his son Yijaya, who took his own 
son Devaraya II into partnership in the administration of 
the kingdom. The Vidyaram/a Kalajnana however, introduces 
Ra I after De I. The Vlrappayya Kalajnana restores the 
name as Rajasekhara and assigns to him a short reign of 
six months. The foot note in the Keladinrpa Vijayam has 
Ramaraya in its place. The latter appears to be nearer the 
truth. According to a copper plate grant of 1390 A.D., 
Devaraya I had a son called Ramacandraraya who was ruling 
at Udayagiri in the Nellore district* He was govern- 
ing the same place until 1416 A.D.f A few years later, he 
was holding sway over the territory corresponding to the 
present Guntur district. The epigraphist believes that 
Ramacandraraya was deputed to rule over the frontier 
province of Kondavidu.J Devaraya I appears to have died 
some time before August 8, 1422 A.D.§ The event must 
have taken place before April of the same year, as Rama- 
candraraya was ruling as sovereign at Vijayanagara on April 22, 
1422 A.D.f It appears from these inscriptions that Ramacandra- 
raya ascended the throne after the death of his father; but 
an inscription at Barakuru dated S. 1343 Sarvari® introduces a 
complication. It states that “ Yira Pratapa Devaraya (II) 
began to reign from the * summer month’ (hesigeya tingalu) of 
Saka-Samvat 1343”. H. Krishna Sastri understands the 
hesigeya tingalu to mean ‘ the lunar month of Caitra, which 
commences the summer season.’ He observes : “ There is no 
reason to suspect the accuracy of this date, and I accept it as 

* W. D. I. i, Cp. No. 1. t Ibid ii, Kn. 4. 

t 125 of 1917 ; A R,E. 1917, Part, IT, para. 43. The date of this inscription is -wrongly 
given. 

§ E.Q. ix, An. 79. 1 317 of 1931-32. « 160 of 1901, 

■■ i : 1 11 Si : SiltSill 

siil .... > i-. i :■ . ’■ ......... -■lliilSSSlil 


65 



the date of the accession of Devaraya II”*. Therefore, in the 
opinion of Krishna Sastri, Devaraya II began to rule in 
& 1343, &arvari, Caitra (March-April 1420 A.D.), that is, 
nearly two years prior to the death of his grandfather. It fol- 
lows from this that Ramaeandraraya and Devaraya II were both 
ruling at Vijayanagara jointly as sovereigns from April 
1322 A.D. The epigraphist presumes “that Ramaeandra 
Odeya, the son of Devaraya I, and Devaraya II were joint 
rulers in the beginning of the latter’s reign.”f This is not all. 
Vijaya Maharaya, the son of Devaraya I, and the father of 
Devaraya II, is said to have been ruling at Vijayanagara at the 
same timet . It is obvious from the foregoing evidence (1) that 
Devaraya II, the son of Vijayaraya and the grandson of Deva- 
raya I commenced to rule in March-April 1420 A.D. ; (2) that 
Devaraya I was alive and ruling until March 1422 A.D. ; and 
(3) that Ramcandraraya and Vijayaraya, the sons of Devaraya 
I, were ruling at Vijayanagara in April and August of 1422 A.D. 
respectively. Though these conclusions are based upon what 
appears to be indubitable epigraphical evidence, it is not possi- 
ble to accept some of them especially the first, without further 
examination. The date 1420 A.D. seems, however, too early 
for Devaraya II. One would like to have some corroboration 
of the evidence of the Barakuru epigraph. It may be remem- 
bered here that, according to Nuniz, Visarao (Vijayaraya), 
1 inherited the kingdom ’ after the death of his father Ajarao 
(Devaraya I); and that he ruled for six years. § This is con- 
firmed by the Kalluru grant of Devaraya II, in which it is 
stated that Devaraya II obtained the kingdom from his father, 
Vijaya.1T Therefore, it may be tentatively concluded that 
Ramaeandraraya was the immediate successor of Devaraya I 
and that on the former’s death after a short rule, Vijayaraya 
ascended the throne in July or August of 1422.A.D. 

* A.S.R* 1907-8, p. 247. t M.B.R. Part II, 1931-32, para. 35, p. 63. 

t B.C ix, An. 79. § Forgetten Empire, p. 302. 

% (Unpublished). Sri Tnhgahhait’a parikhl nagafl Vijayahvaye 
Pitr% simhasanam preipya pUlayann^&vafdim^imum 
Pranata (Afaia) SUkagramh Praudka UtvarZya mahipatih . 


66 



* E.C. vUi, Sb. 565. 

I ff. I, p.2X4. 

| B.C. ii, 328 (125) ; H. 


t A.S'.X. 1907-8, p. 248. 
§ FJ7. ii, Tan. 1460- A. 

$ ./■■■■ : :'r 


i; 

: ■ • ■. ! . 
< f ' , 


Although Nuniz asserts that Vijayaraya, ruled for six years, 
he appears to have been a shadowy monarch. Inscriptions 
show that his son Devaraya II was also ruling from A.D 1423* 
a fact which led some scholars to think that both the father 
and son were joint rulers for some time.f Sewell, however, is 
of opinion that Vijaya, whom he styles Bukkaraya III, ruled 
singly ; and that he died in 1423 A.D. “ after a very short reign 
of a few months. He was succeeded by his son Devaraya II.” J 
But a few inscriptions of Vijaya bearing a later date, which 
Sewell attempts to explain away, clearly show that his position 
is not tenable. An inscription of Tiruppundurutti dated S. 1 346 
Krodhi(A.D. 1424-5) records that Vijayaraya Maharaya grant- 
ed some land to Grod Candesvara.§ Therefore, it is obvious 
that Vijaya ruled until A.D. 1424 — 5 and probably longer. 
If the duration of six years assigned to his reign by Nuniz be 
accepted as true, his reign must have lasted until 1428 A. D. 
As Devaraya II was also ruling at Vijayanagara at the same 
time, the conclusion that Vijaya and Devaraya jointly held 
sway over the kingdom cannot be avoided. 

The successor's of Devaraya II. — The long and prosperous 
reign of Devaraya II came to an end in 1446 A.D. An inscrip- 
tion at Havana Balagola records the date of his death. “In 
the evil year Ksaya, in the wretched second month Vaisakha, 
on a miserable Tuesday in the dark fortnight, on the fourteenth 
day (May 10, 1446 A.D.), the abode of valour, the matchless 
Devarat, alas ! met with his death. ’Ii Sewell asserts that £ the 
accession of his son Mallikarjuna by his wife Ponnala- 
devl therefore took place on that day.’i However, there is 
reason to believe that between Devaraya II and Mallikarjuna 
there ruled another king for a short time. The Vidya- 
ranya Kalajnana mentions a Vi. II after De. II, and it has been 
restored as Viraraya in the Vlrappayya Kalajnana and as 
Vithalaraya in the foot note to Keladinrpa Vijayam. Both 



tliese restorations are wrong as shown by the inscriptions. 
Some inscriptions dated 144:6-47 AD. record the administrative 
reforms of a king called Vijayaraya * They puzzled the epi- 
graphists a good deal ; but with the discovery of new records 
of the monarch they are gradually coming into the belief that 
Vijaya was perhaps a separate monarch ‘who might have ruled 
for a short time between Devaraya II and Mallikarjuna ’.f 
Though Vijaya II appears to have been exercising some 
sort of authority over Kondavidu as early as A. D. 1441 J 
nothing is known of his antecedents. It is not known 
whether he was connected with the royal family or how 
he came to ascend the throne. His reign appears to have 
been very brief, as there is no mention of his name in the 
records of the subsequent years. Vijaya II was succeeded by 
Mallikarjuna, who appears to have ascended the throne some 
time before May 1, 1447 A. D.§ His reign lasted for 19 years. 
Though the date of his death is nowhere recorded, it is not 
unlikely that he breathed his last in A. D. 1465, as none of his 
inscriptions bearing a later date has been so far discovered. 
Mallikarjuna left behind him a son called Rajasekhara. The 
Ra II who, according to the Vidyaranya Kalcijnana, succeeded 
Ma may be identified with this prince. A few inscriptions 
registering grants to temples during his reignlj show that the 
statement of the Kalajnana is based upon truth. It is believed 
that Rajasekhara was a mere child at the time of his father’s 
accession ; and consequently Virupaksa II is said to have been 
elevated to the throne.! 


The rule of Virupaksa II lasted until 1485 A.D. for nearly 
twenty years, when he was murdered by his eldest son. The 
parricide did not, however, ascend the throne; but he persuaded 
his younger brother Padearao to allow himself to be crowned. 
This Padearao has been identified with Praudhadevaraya 
who is mentioned in a few inscriptions of the timeil. The 

* 476 of 1921 ; 23 of 1905 ; 161 of 1906. + A. R. E. 1923, Part if, para. 46. 

{ 420 of 1915. § 435 of 1922- H 4 of 1896. 

$ H. /., p. 225. li 593 of 1903 ' 





Keladinrpa Vijayam also mentions a Praudha, who succeeded 
Virupaksa. It assigns to him a reign of twelve years a fact 
which is not capable of verification. Whatever be the length 
of his reign, there can be no doubt about his expulsion from the 
kingdom. Nuniz states that one of the captains of the king, 
Narsyamgua rebelled against him and marched at the head of 
his army towards the capital seizing the territories belonging 
to the king. He despatched one of his officers to capture the 
capital. The officer proceeded to Vijayanagara, and as the 
king fled from the city, he occupied it, and proclaimed his 
master the king of the country*. The Viclyaramja Kalajnam 
also refers to this incident. ‘ The last (king) of the line, much 
troubled by the enemies will take to flight to another country 
after crossing the river, and will doubtless meet with his death 
there— such being the inevitable course of fate’ (14). It is 
evident from this that with the reign of Padearao, the 
Sangama dynasty came to an end, and very little is known of 
the members of this line in the history of the subsequent 
period. 

The Vidyaramjd Kalajnam states that the kings of the 
first or the Sangama dynasty ruled for one hundred and fifty 
years, whereas the Virappayya Kalajnam gives 155, and the 
Keladinrpa Vijayam 232 years as the period of their rule. It 







The exact date of Krsnadevaraya’s coronation is not 
given in any of his inscriptions. His earliest inscription 

* Another ms. wrongly gives the figure as 31. + Forgotten Empire, pp. 311-14. 

t A Little Known Chapter , p. 71. § Forgotten Empire, p. 314. 




among kings’ ruled first, and he was succeeded by ‘his servant, 
Narasa ’. It does not mention Immadi Narasimha. The 
Ylrappayya Kalajnana supplements this meagre account. It 
describes the Saluva chronology thus: “ Then came the rule 
of the Ksatriyas who asserted their independence. The years 
of Saluva Narasingaraya’s rule are three (B) 5 the years during 
which Narasa Nay aka ruled in the name of the son of 
Narasimharaya are thirteen.* Though the length of Saluva 
Narasimha’s reign is not correctly stated, the other facts 
mentioned in the Kalajnana are trustworthy. They are 
corroborated by the evidence of the inscriptions and other 
material. 


The Kalajnana and other records furnish much useful and 
interesting information about the succession and the duration 
of the rule of the Tuluva monarchs. The first king of the 
dynasty was Vira Narasimha. The Vlrappayya Kalajnana asserts 
that Vira Narasimharaya, the (eldest) son of Narasa Nayaka, 
having caused the death of Tammaraya(i.e., Immadi Narasimha), 
ruled for five years (16). Nuniz, however, attributes the assassi- 
nation of Immadi Narasimha to Narasa Nayaka. f This has been 
questioned by several writers, especially by Dr. S. Krishnaswamy 
Iyengar, who believes that ‘ Vira Narasimha, son of Narasa, set 
him (Immadi Narasimha) aside completely and even got rid 
of him in the manner described by Nuniz. Vlrappayya’s 
statement lends support to Dr. S. Krishnaswami Iyengar’s con- 
tention ; but the problem is very complicated ; and no definite 
conclusion can be arrived at without a thorough and searching 
examination of the available data. Nuniz assigns a period of six 
years rule to Vira Narasimha§, but as stated already, Virap- 
payya allots him only a rule of five years (16). Whatever be 
the length of his reign, it came to an end in §.1431 (1509 A.D.), 
when he was succeeded by his brother Krsnadevaraya. 


70 


1 


So far discovered is dated July 26, 1509 A.D.* * * § The last 
known inscription of his predecessor, Vlra Narasimha is dated 
May 4, A.D. 1509. f The Virappayya Kalajnana asserts that 
Krsnaraya’s reign commenced in the month of Vaisakha of the 
year Sukla (May, 1509 A.D.). As Vaisakha came to an end on the 
18th May, it may be presumed that Vlra Narasimha died 
between 4th and 18th of May of that year, and that Krsnaraya 
succeeded him at once. The Vijayanagara Samrajyamu 
states that his coronation was celebrated on the day of 
&rljayanti in the month of Avani of Sukla, 6. 1432, (Wednesday 
8 August, 1509 A.D.) As Krsnadevaraya was considered to be 
an avatara of Krsna,$ it is not unlikely that his coronation 
was most appropriately celebrated on the anniversary of the 
birthday of Sri Krsna. It is obvious that the reign of Krsna- 
devaraya commenced in the middle of 1509 A.D. He is said to 
have reigned until the month of Karttikai in the year Virodhi 
(November, 1529 A.D.) for a period of 21 years.§ He was 
succeeded by his brother Acyutadevaraya. The Virappayya 
Kalajnana (16) and the Vijayanagara Samrajyamu (19-a) give 
accurate information about the chronology of the remaining 
kings of the Tuluva dynasty. The following table shows their 


close agreement 









Name of the king. 


Acyut ade varay a. 

Venkatapatiraya I. 

Salakaraju Timma who caused the 
assassination of Acyuta's son. 

Sadasiva (Raraaraja). 

The years of anarchy following 
Ramaraja's war with the Panca - 
PftdusZhus, 


Details about the regnal years, etc. 


Vijayanagara* 
samrajyamu . 

12 years 


8 months 


22 years 


5 years 


Virappayya Kalajnana. 

12 years beginning with 
(the year) Vikjti. 

8 months from Subha- 
krt, Ssvija. 

22 years from Jyestha, 
Sobhakyt. 

5 years. 


* 703 of 1919* The 5aka year 1430 does not coincide with the cyclic year §ukla, the 

epigraphist has corrected it as 1431. A.KB. 1920, App. F, p, 87. 

+ 342 of 1892; H. /„ p. 236. J ^pp. 139-40. 

§ This is confirmed by Virappayya Kalajnana and other works. The Keladinrpa 
Vijayam gives him a reign of forty years which is certainly wrong. It is now definitely 




71 



it is tiras seen that there is very close agreement 
between these two records, except in one particular. The 
Vijayanagara Satnrajyamu does not mention Venkata I and 
allots a period of 8 months to Salakaraju Timma’; but the 
Virappayya Kalajnana refers indirectly to Venkata’s rule and 
his assassination by Salakaraju Timma who is said to have 
ruled for eight months. The information supplied by 
Virappayya enables us to find the month and the year in which 
each reign commenced. Thus Acyutaraya’s reign beo-an in 


Acyuta ruled from April A.D. 1530 to Aug, 
12 years 4 months. 


Salakaraju Tirumala rued from Oct. A.D. 1542 to April 
. 1543, — 8 months. 


Sadasiva from May A.D. 1543 to (? A.D. 1565), - 22 years 


The Aravidu kings : — No serious difficulty is met with in 
the chronology of the Aravidu kings. The Vijayanagara Sam- 
rajyamu stops in the middle of the reign of Venkata II ; but the 
Virappayya Kalajnana takes us to the end of Ramadevaraya’s 
reign. No definite information is furnished by our records 


known that he began his reign in May, 1509 A>D. He completed the 20th year of his reign 
in May, A.D. 1529. As he died in November, A.D. 1529, his reign, lasted for another six 
months. He reigned for 20 years and 6 months or in round numbers 21 years 


* The last date of Sadasiva’s reign under the regency of Ramaraj is taken from the 
R'amar’Hjana bakhair . According to this work the mahaldar from Bijaptir came to the 
court of Ramaraj a on Vaisakha bit 8, Raktaksx, Saka i486, (27 May, A.D. 1564), This was the 
beginning of the trouble. The war between the Five Sultans and Ramaraja is said to have 
lasted for six or seven months. Thus the last days of the reign of Sadasiva (more correct- 
ly of the regency of Ramaraja) fell into the early months of A. D. 1565. As a mailer of 
fact Ferishta places the great battle on 23 Jam A.D., 1565. 


72 


® :» , ; 


1 1 




about tbe chronology of bis successors. The contents of these 
works are reproduced in the schedule below : 


The name of the king. 


Details about the regnal years, etc. 


Vijayanagara - 
Samraj yamu. 


Vlrappayya 
Kalajnana . 


Tirumalaraya (having crowned him- 
self at Penugon<Ja) ruled. 




Jsrirangaraya 

Vira Venka$apatiraya II 


fyfj, 


-v 

mm 


ll ' ■ • t • 


1 -A; 

1 


Cikkadevaraya 

Ramaraya 

Confusion 

The invasion of Turukas 


1 year 


14 years 


His coronation was 
celebrated in Parthiva 
(§. 1507) ; he was on the 
throne in 5. 1526 (ex) 
Parabhava (current) 
1606 A.D. (?) 


11 months. 


14 years. His reign 
began on Vaisakha ba 15, 
Xngirasa (g. 1494). 

28 years 7 months 
15 days His reign began 
on Magha ba 11, Parthiva 
(g. 1507). 


4 months 


15 years 
15 days. 

1 year. 


5 months 


Bahudhanya (5. 1560) = 
1638 A.D. 




J : ; ; , ) 




s . 




This table gives interesting details regarding the regnal 
periods and tbe dates of accession of tbe Iravldu kings. There 
is some slight difference between the Samrajyamu and the 
Kalajnana about the length of Tirumala’s reign. The former 
states that he ruled for one year, whereas the latter reduces his 
reign to eleven months. The actual length of the reign was 
probably eleven months, and the author of the Samrajyamu 
rounded it to one year. According to the Kalajnana, Srlranga I 
commenced to rule on Vaisakha ba IB, Angirasa (S. 1494) i.e. 
May 11, A.D. 1572. Therefore Tirumala’s coronation must have 
been celebrated in June, 1671 A.D. 




Tirumala, June 1571 to May 1572. 

Srlranga I, May 11, 1572 to Feb. 1586 A.D. 
Venkata II, Feb. 4, 1586 to (?) Sept. 27, 1614 A.D. 
Cikkaraya, Sept. 27, 1614 to Jan. 25, 1615 A.D. 
Ramadevaraya, Jan. 25, 1615 to July 9, 1630 A.D. 

Confusion .....July 1630 to July 1631 (?) 

The Turuka invasion, 1638-39 A.D. 

These dates agree very closely with those supplied by the 
inscriptions and the Portuguese records. 







CHAPTER VII 



Harihara I and the Mussalmans : — Within a dozen years of 
the foundation of Yijayanagara, a new Mussalman kingdom 
was established in the Deccan with Grulburga as its capital, by 
’Ala-ud-Dln IJasan Gangu Bahmanl.* It was only natural that 
these two kingdoms, established to foster two opposing faiths, 
should come into conflict with each other sooner or later. As a 
matter of fact, Sultan ’Ala- ud -Din took the earliest opportunity 
to despatch an army against Harihara’s dominions. There 
was a rebellion in 1347 A.D. at Sagar which was in the neigh- 
bourhood of Harihara’s northern frontier ; the Sul,tan marched 
thither to put down the rebels. On this occasion he sent 
Mubarak Kh an, one of his officers, with an army to raid HarL 
hara’s territory. The officer marched to Raichore, and laid siege 
to the fort, the commandant of which ‘ tendered his submission/ 
and gave horses and wealth (to the invader)’ (22). Hariap 
whom the Sultan’s army attacked has been correctly 
identified with Hariappa (Harihara I) of Yijayanagara.f This 
is the first clash between the two kingdoms. As the Sultan’s 
army had to retire from Kaichore, it may be surmised that 
their progress into the interior of the Yijayanagara kingdom 
was obstructed by some obstacle. As a matter of fact, it is 
stated in an inscription of A.D. 1356J that Harihara I defeated 
‘ the Sultan, who resembled Sutraman (Indra) ’. Therefore, it is 
not unlikely that the first Bahmanl attack upon the Vijaya- 
ngara kingdom was repulsed. 

Another interesting problem calls for consideration in this 
connection. ’Isamy (23) and following him Sayyid ’All refer to a 


* Haig questions the propriety of the use of the name Gangu ; ( C.HJ. iii, pp. 372-73); 
but * Ala-ud-Din IJasan is referred to as Kangu which is the same as Gangu by Barn* 
Shams-i-Siraj Yahya bin Ahmad and other early historians. The explanation of 

Maulvi ’Abdul Wall that it is a corruption Kaikaus is hardly satisfactory, though it has 
found favour with Haig, Whether one is prepared to accept Ferishta's explanation or 
not the name Gangu certainly betrays its Hindu origin, 

t Sewell * F.E. p. 7. ' t Hi. P* 32. 


sin 


illlli 


.iiiJjLv 


chief called Khaipras who was holding the fort of Kimba 
(Kemba)* which was situated between Sagar and Mandhol. 
His fort was at first besieged by Safdar Khan, who was, 
however, murdered by his mutinous soldiers before the fort 
could be captured. Sultan ’Alamd-Dln laid siege to it for the 
second time on his way from Sagar to Mandhol, but Khaipras 
submitted and agreed to pay him an annual tribute (23). 
Khaipras has been identified with Bukkaraju, one of Harihara I’s 
younger brothers.f This identification does not rest upon 
secure foundations. Bukka was governing at this time, 
the Hoysala 'country which he had recently subdued. 
It is highly improbable that he should have been the chief 
of a small fort outside the boundary of Vijayanagara 
kingdom. Moreover, ’Ala-ud-Din could not have found the 
subjugation of Kemba an easy task, had Bukka I, who had 
the resources of the Hoysala country under his control, been 
really its chief. Therefore, the identification of Khaipras 
with Bukka 1 must not be taken as established until evidence 
of a more reliable character is brought forward to support it. 

Administrative measures : — According to Nuniz, Dehorao 
(Harihara I) did nothing but * pacify the kingdom ’ during his 
reign ; he is said to have left the kingdom ‘ in complete 
tranquillity.’} Harihara seems to have taken considerable 
interest in organizing the internal administration of his domi- 
nions. Two measures of administrative reform are associated 
with his name : (1) He introduced a new scheme of territorial 
sub-divisions probably to ensure efficiency of administration. 
He is said to have grouped four or five hamlets into a village, 
twenty or thirty villages into a sthala, in the territory bounded 
by Siddhavatam in the east, Maddikara in the west, Dronacalam 

* The name of the fort is spelt in two different ways by *I§amy: Kimba luf or Kimbah ^ 

Sayyid ’All refers to it in one place Knmba and in another Knmbari [Burhan-i- 
Mu asir • (Hyderabad edition) pp. 19, 21], In King’s translation {I, A. xxviii, p. 146) it is 
spelt Kanbari 

t K. Iyengar : South India and Mr Muhammadan Invaders, p, 181. 

% F* M* p* 300, 


7B 



in the north and Penugonda in the south. He placed each 
village under a karnam, and sthala under a ( sthalaykaruam , 
and appointed nadu-gaudas and nadu-talaiyars over the nadus 
for enforcing law and order (24g). (2) Harihara was also 

responsible for introducing another important measure. 
He bestowed the office of the karnam in all the villages under 
his rule upon Brahmans (24a-d). The reform was introduced at 
the instance of his minister Cikka Vodeya who is said to have 
represented to the king that the gift of the karamka-mirmi to 
Brahmans on the holy occasion of §ivaratri was an act produc- 
tive of much religious merit. Having consented to the proposal 
of the minister, the king made the gift to Brahmans of the 
Nandavaidika sect of which the minister himself was a member, 
on the occasion of the holy Bivaratri in &S. 1258.* Whatever 
be the motive behind this measure, it must have caused much 
injustice, as it resulted in the displacement of people of other 
communities specially the goldsmiths and the Velamas who 
held the office at the time. The idea of Brahmanization of the 
karanlka service did not originate with Cikka Vodeya. Tradition 
preserved in the kaviles of several villages in the Telugu country 
ascribes it to a certain Goparaju Ramapradhani, the minister 
of G-ajapati Ganapati who is said to have ruled the east coast 
in the 12th century. f If there is any truth in this tradition, 
Cikka Vodeya must be regarded as a person who completed 
the work of Ramapradhani. 

Harihara, like his great successor Krsnadevaraya, believed 
that the extent of the kingdom was the most important source 
for the acquisition of wealth. Therefore, he strove hard to 
extend the cultivable area of his kingdom, by cutting down 
forests which covered large tracts of country which are at 
present known as the Ceded Districts. He granted kauls to 
people to cut down forests, make them habitable by building 

*The date of this gift is variously given. The gift is said to have been made in one 
record on &S. 1255 Isvara Margasira su 6, Kapila(Skanda ?) Sasti in another on 
S S* 1259 Is vara, Magha ba 30 ; and in a third on §.S* 1275 Magha ba 30, bivaratri. 

f IConiavlti Dandakavile quoted in the Kondavlti Samraj yatnu by M. Gurubrahma 


villages, and to bring the land under cultivation. The ryots who 
settled in these new villages were allowed to cultivate the land 
on easy terms. The persons who took initiative in building 
these new villages were granted certain privileges as a reward 
for the trouble they had taken, and the money they had 
invested. Provision was also made for carrying on the 
administration of these forest colonies by the appointment of 
the ayagars, who were given hereditary allotments of land as 
remuneration for their services. 


CHAPTER VIII 

BUKKA I. 


During the early years of the reign of Harihara I, Bukka 
was governing the western districts of the Telugu country. 
The fort of Grutti (Gooty in the Anantapur district) is said to 
have been ‘ the nave of the wheel of the sovereignty over the 
whole earth ’ under his control.* Though Bukka, like his other 
brothers, was a subordinate of Harihara I, he did not confine 
his activities to the administration of the territory directly 
under his jurisdiction. He took great interest in the affairs 
of the whole kingdom, and rendered much assistance to Hari- 
hara not only in defending it against external enemies but in 
increasing its resources by placing the internal administration 
on a sound basis. The part played by Bukka in the affairs 
of the state is forcibly described in a gift-deed dated S.S. 1259 
Isvara, Magha ba 30. It states that { the prosperous Maha- 
mandalesvctra Bukkaraya ’ was 4 the prop of the throne ’ of 
Hariharadeva Maharaya. (24-d). It was probably for this 
reason that Harihara I chose Bukka at first as yuvaraja,f and 
later as a partner in the government of the kingdom. $ 


Though Harihara I’s rule lasted, as shown by the evidence 
of the inscriptions, until 1354-55 A.D., several records of 
Bukka make it clear that he was ruling at Vxjayanagara as 
king even before the death of his brother. In fact, tradition 
preserved in the Kalajnanas and the Danda-Jcaviles, confirms the 
testimony of the inscriptions. The Virappaya Kalajnam (16) 
states that Bukka I ruled for twenty-nine years and eight 
months ; and the Kaifiyat of Malanndi-Kambaiadinne (25) is 
roughly in agreement with this. According to this document, 
Bukka I ruled for twenty-eight years from S.S, 1273 Khara 
to S.S. 1301 Kalayukti (1351-52 A.D. to 1379 A„D.).§ It is 


w $>LL i t p. 167. f E.C. v, Cn. 256. t 7&V. ix, Bg. 59. 

§ The dates given in the kaifiyat agree with the cyclic years, and they yield also the 
poxiod of 28 years, assigned in it to the reign of Bukka I ; but this conflicts with the 
evidence of the inscriptions according to which Bukka I appears to have died in the 
beginning of 1377 A.D. 


■ : ' A- 

• •*' 





78 



Briggs : Fcrishta ii, p< 301, 


evident from this that reigns of Harihara I and Bukka I 
overlap. The explanation for this overlapping must be found 
in the joint rule of the two brothers. 


Bukka I and the Mussulmans : — The chronicle of the 
Palaigars of Nadimidoddipalem states that Bukka I fought with 
the Mussalmans in S.S. 1286 (1364-65 A.D.) and defeated them 
in a battle (28). Mesa Timma Nayadu of Kummetta, having 
gathered his levies at the command of the Raya, joined the 
expedition. He distinguished himself in the field by putting 
several Muhammadan chiefs to the sword. The enemy was 
routed and the Raya returned victoriously to Vijayanagara. 

Both Ferishta and Sayyid ’All allude to this war. Accord- 
ing to the former, the kings of Vijayanagara and Warangal 
having joined together in an alliance, demanded that Sultan 
Muhammad Shah Bahmani I should restore to them some 
territories which his late father ’Ala-ud-Dln Hasan Grangu had 
wrested from them. With the object of gaining time, Muham- 
mad Shah prevaricated for a while, and at the end he sent a 
defiant reply. Thereupon, the Raja of Warangal, invaded 
Kaulas, and his ally, the Raya of Vijayanagara sent a large 
force, to co-operate with him. The Hindus were, of course, 
defeated, and the king of Warangal was compelled to pay a 
large sum of money.* 

Sayyid ’All attributes the genesis of this war to the land 
hunger of the Bahmani Sultan. “ Being desirous of conquering 
countries and cities,” says he, “he (Muhammad Shah) conceived 
the idea of conquering the country of Vijayanagar, and 
accordingly marched towards that place with a large and well- 
equipped force.” The Raya came to defend his territory at 
the head of a large army ; but was, no doubt, defeated after 
much fighting by the Muhammadans. His country was 
plundered, the temples were levelled to the ground and much 
booty fell into the hands of the victors. The Sultan then 



79 



marched away to Fllampatan 
captured.* 


in Telingana which he soon 


This is the account of the war given by the ] 
historians. The chronicle of the Nadimidoddi 
gives the Hindu version of the events. It el'ain 
for the Hindu side. Though the truth about the v 
discovered under the circumstances, it may be 
keeping in view the well-known Muhammad 
ignoring the success of the infidels against the 
the accounts of the Muslim historians are, indeed, 


* I-A. xxviii, p. 180. 





CHAPTER IX 
HARIHARA II. 

| 

Bukka I was succeeded by his son, Harihara II. The 
Vmppaya Kalajnana assigns to him a reign of twenty-two 
years (16) ; and this is confirmed by the Kaifiyat of Malamldi- 
Kambaladinne (29) which supplements this with the statement 
that he ruled from S.S. 1302 Siddharti to S.S. 1324 Citrabhanu 
(1380 to 1402-3 A.D.) This information, however, cannot be 
accepted as true 5 for the inscriptions give him a reign of 
twenty-seven years from 1377 to 1404 A.D. 

The reign of Harihara II marks the beginning of an 
important epoch in the history of Vijayanagara. The first step 
which he took after his accession was to consolidate his 
dominions. The kingdom of Vijayanagara was jointly founded 
by the five sons of Sangama, who governed the territories 
under their jurisdiction more or less independently, though they 
acknowledged the overlordship at first of Harihara I and later 
of Bukka I who ruled at Vijayanagara. Under this arrange- 
ment the kingdom of Vijayanagara was more a group of 
semi-autonomous states than a unified kingdom. Con- 
sequently, the resources of the kingdom could not be efficiently 
utilised in organizing the defence. Harihara II, who recognized 
this defect, removed his cousins from their principalities, and 
appointed his own sons to govern them. Virupaksa was 
appointed as the governor of the Tamil districts, where he 
succeeded to the power and influence of Kumara Kampana. 
Prince Devaraya (the future Devaraya I) was posted to Udaya- 
giri, where he succeeded the two sons of Kampana I. Immadi 
Bulska was placed in charge of Mulbagal, and as yuvaraja he 
was probably permitted to assist the king in the administration 
of the kingdom. The A.r&g&~rajya and the Banavasi country 
which were at first under Marapa and later under Uddagiri 
Virupanna were placed under his trusted minister and general 
Madhavamantri. 


81 


The appointment of Devaraya as the governor ofUdaya- 
giri was fraught with important consequences. He conceived 
the idea of making the river Krsna the north-eastern boundary 
of the kingdom. The Reddis of Kondavldu were a powerful 
obstruction in his path, and during the twenty -six years of his 
rule at Udayagiri, he strove ceaselessly to undermine their 
power and absorb their state. To achieve this object Devaraya 
plunged into the vortex of the politics of the Eastern Telugu 
country which engrossed the attention of all his successors 
until the death of Ramaraja on the battle-field of Raksasi- 
Tangadi. 

Devaraya’s attitude towards the Reddis and the other chiefs 
of the Eastern Telugu country was probably influenced by the 
happenings in Telingana. The Velamas of Racakonda who 
never showed any inclination to submit to Kapaya'Nayaka 
invaded his dominions some time after the retirement of ’Ala- 
nd -Din Bahmani I from Telingana, and having slain him in a 
battle at Bhlmavaram made themselves masters of his kino-- 
dom*. Anapota I, the chief of the Velamas, transferred his 
capital to Warangal, and, if the evidence of the Muhammadan 
historians is to be trusted, entered into an alliance with the 
king of Vijayanagara. Taking advantage of the death 
of Ala-ud-Din I and the accession of his youthful son, 
Muhammad Shah I, he not only demanded, as already 
noticed, the restoration of the territory formerly wrested from 
Kapaya Nay aka by the Bahmani Sultan but sent an army to 
invade the district of Kaulas. 


Muhammad Shah marched at the head of an army to repel 
the invasion and chastise the Velama king for having made 
common cause with the king of Vijayanagara. He proceeded 
rapidly against the fort of Fllampatan, where Naga Nayaka, 
a cousin of king Anapota, f was stationed with a strong 


* Velug otivari Va?ks’avali i p. 36. 

f The name of this chief is variously given by the Muhammadan historians. In 
some places he is called Nagdev, whereas in others he is referred to as Vinayagdev, 
which seems to be wrong. Moreover, his relationship with the Velama king is not 
correctly stated by the Muslim writers. He was not a son of the king but a cousin being 
the son of his oaterna.1 mini a Daua 


as I 


ill 

m ’ 


11 


v 


the son of his paternal uncle Daca. 


* 

'' ' ' ■ ££ ££ 





82 


o-arrison, and having entered the fort by means of a stratagem, 
he slew Naga and took possession of it with its dependent 
territory. Thence he marched upon Warangal and forced 
Anapota to sue for peace. The war came to an end in A.D. 1865 
and Anapota had to cede a part of his territory including 
the fort of Golkonda and agree to pay an annual tribute as the 
price of peace. Muhammad Shah promised, in return, immunity 
from attack and help in the event of an invasion of his 
dominion by other enemies. Thereupon, the Mussalman army 
retired from Telingana leaving the Velamas free to govern the 

country. 

The formation of the alliance between the Velamas and 
the Sultan of Gulburga, and the frequent aggressions of the 
former on the Reddi kingdom of Kondavidu made the north- 
eastern frontier of Vijayanagara insecure ; and it was 
imperative that an attempt should be made to ensure the safety 
of the kingdom. It was probably to further this object that 
the administration of the district was placed in the capable 
hands of Bevaraya. As soon as he took charge of his office 
he seems to have come to the conclusion that so long as the 
Reddi kingdom was allowed to remain it was not possible to 
strengthen the frontier. He strove, therefore, to remove this 
obstacle from his path. Moreover, the alliance of the Velamas 
with the Sultan was fraught with danger, and it was necessary 
to break this alliance as quickly as possible. To achieve- 
this end, an expedition was despatched to Telingana under 
the command of the yuvciraju , Immadi Bukka, and he was 
accompanied by Saluva Ramadeva, and the Nayakacarya 
Kampana * Though Anapota I is said to have confounded the 
Karnataka army (31), he was not able to prevent it from 
penetrating into the heart of Telingana. A serious engage- 
ment took place in the neighbourhood of Warangal. When 
the Vijayanagara forces reached Kottakonda, the Turukas 
came and attacked the place. Saluva Ramadeva fell. This 
does not seem to have produced any effect upon the progress 


83 


of the invasion. According to the Vaidyarajavallabham (34-a) 
which gives a glowing description of this campaign, Bukka II 
routed his enemies, both Hindus and Mussalmans, and returned 
triumphantly to the capital. The results of this campaign are 
not quite apparent. The Velamas remained still defiant, and 
their friendship with the BahmanI Sultan was not broken. 

A second expedition appears to have been launched 
against Telingana about A. D. 1390. The Velugotivari 
Vamsavali alludes to an invasion of a Yijayanagara army under 
the command of Dandanatha Gunda whom Peda Vedagiri, a son 
ofMada and a nephew of Anapota I is said to have defeated (82). 
At the command of his father, Devaraya marched with the 
six-fold army to Alampura on the Tungabhadra some time 
before A. D. 1390.* No information is available about the 
circumstances under which this order was given or the events 
that followed this march. It may be surmised that Devaraya 
was asked to move with his armies to Alampura either to lead 
an attack - upon the Bahmani kingdom or to ward off an 
invasion of the Bahmani Sultan. The anarchy and confusion 
that prevailed in the Bahmani kingdom at this time makes an 
invasion from that side highly improbable. It may therefore 
be assumed that Harihava II despatched an army under 
Devaraya to invade the territories of the Sultan. Nothing is 
known about what happened afterwards. The siege of the fort 
of Panugallu in 1397 A. D. by Immadi Bukka is probably 
connected with this campaign (33). Irugapadandanatha 
assisted him in conducting the operations, and Panugallu 
which was defended by stone ramparts and many Turuska 
warriors was captured. The subjugation of Panugallu was an 
important achievement. It served as a basis of operations 
during the later campaigns in Telingana. 

During these years, the kingdom of Yijayanagara, 
expanded considerably. In the north-west, Goa, Kharepatan, 
Chaul and Dabul were wrested from the successors of Mujahid 


D.L i, Cp.l. 


: ' . . . . . ' : .. 


M 


84 



the Krsna became the northern frontier of the kingdom ; and 
the Reddis of Kondavidu were deprived of their possessions in 
the Kurnool and Nellore districts ; and even in Guntur they 
were pushed out of the Bapatla and Narasaraopet taluks. 
Thus Harihara II became the undisputed monarch of the whole 
of South India to the south of the Kr§na. 

The period of anarchy that followed the assassination of 
Mujahid in the BahmanI kingdom came to an end with the 
accession of Fxroz Shah in A. D. 1397. The new Sultan was 
young and energetic* and he wanted to restore the fortunes of 
his family, which declined considerably during the reigns of 
his predecessors. He led an expedition against Vijayanagara 
with the object of conquering that kingdom in 1399 A. D., and 
having defeated the Raya in battle he marched upon his 
capital and exacted, according to the Mussalman historians, 
a large war indemnity and a promise to pay an annual 
tribute of thirty -three lakhs of tankas* . 

A great famine devastated the country at the time of 
this war. Its severity was such that people abandoned their 
homes and migrated to places which escaped the visitation (29). 

This famine appears to have affected the whole of the Deccan. 
Perishta states that a famine occurred during the reign of j 
Mahmud Shah BahmanI I who succeeded Baud Shah. The '■> 
Sultan is said to have employed ten thousand bullocks at his 
private expense and imported corn from Malwa and Gujarat 
which he sold to the people at a cheap rate.f Grant Duff 
briefly describes this famine in his History of the Mahrattas. 

“ In 1396”, says he, “ the dreadful famine, distinguished from 
all others by the name of Doorga Dewee , commenced in 
Maharashtra. It lasted, according to the Hindu legends, for 

12 years "Whole districts were entirely depopulated, and 

a very scanty revenue was obtained from the territory between 
the Godavari and Kistna for upwards 30 of years afterwards,”! ■£ 

* Briggs: Feriskta ii, pp. 3*70 f; LA. xxviii, p. 186 . 

t Briggs ? Feriskta ii, p. 349. % The History of ih& Mahrattas i, p* 44. ;/, 


"Jt- 


85 


Notwithstanding the occurrence of famines such as 
these, the country, judging from the standards of the 
age, appears to have been fairly prosperous. The scattered 
ryots returned to their ruined homesteads with the fall of rains, 
and by their patient toil made the sun-scorched fields smile 
once again. 

Harihara II seems to have fallen ill during the last years of 
his reign. His sons, each of whom had designs upon the throne, 
left their provincial headquarters and returned to the capital. 
Some light is thrown on the events which immediately preceded 
his death by the local histories. “ While Pedaraya Vodeya 
(Harihara II) was ruling at Vijayanagara, his son, Mahamaa- 
dalesvara Praudha Vodeya (Devaraya I) was governing the 
province of tJdayagiri. Owing to the illness of his father, 
Praudha Vodeya was obliged to pay a visit to Vijayanagara” 
(39, 40). This happened some time before S. S. 1329. 

Harihara II died of this illness in August, A.D. 1404 ; and 



Virixpaksa I seized the throne at first and held it for a short 
time. He was however ousted by Bukka II who ruled the 
kingdom for about two years. The throne at last passed into 
the hands of Devaraya who is said to have been crowned at 


Vijayanagara on S.S. 1328 Vyaya, Kartika ba 10 Friday.* 




t /• A. xxirili, p. 187. 


* Briggs: Ferishtaii, pp. 378 f. 


CHAPTER X. 

D£ VAR AY A I. 

The reign of Devaraya I began in the midst of a foreign 
invasion. The peace of the kingdom was very ranch disturbed 
during the interval between the death of Harihara II and the 
accession of Devaraya I. Taking advantage of the unsettled 
state of affairs, the enemies in the neighbouring states invaded 
the kingdom. 

The Balimaul Sultan, Firoz Shah, invaded the Vijaya- 
nagara kingdom in A.D. 1406. Ferishta gives a sensational 
account of this invasion. The Sultan is said to have attacked 
Devaraya I to save the chastity of a goldsmith’s daughter, 
defeated him in every engagement, ravaged his country, and 
having driven him within the seven walls of .his capital, 
compelled him to purchase peace by bestowing the hand of 
his daughter on the Sultan* Sayyid ’All gives a more sober 
description of the events. According to him the Sultan, having 
conceived the idea of waging religious war, came with a 
large army, and ‘ conquered several districts of Bhanur and 
Musalkal.’ He ‘ appropriated the fixed sum of thirty-three 
lakhs ’ and ‘ returned to his capital.’! 

The Reddis of Kondavldu made a simultaneous attack 
upon the U day agiri-rcy yet . Malla Reddi, a descendant of 
Perumala Reddi, and a cousin of Anavema Reddi (Peda Komati 
Verna), * the" * king of Kondavldu, led an army into 
Vijayanagara territory and occupied two districts of Udaya- 
gifi -rajya, viz., Pottapi-naiw and Pulugula-wadk There he 
remained until A. D. 1413, when he was expelled by an army 
which Devaraya I sent to Udayagiri (39 to 43). 

The causes of the Reddi invasion . — The Reddi invasion was 
not prompted by motives of aggression. The kings of Vijaya- 
nagara had been encroaching upon the Reddi territory for 


87 




a long time. Prolaya Verna’s authority extended, during the 
early days of his rule, over Ahobalam in the Kurnool district 
but this territory soon passed into the hands of Harihara I. 
Moreover, it is stated that Vema asserted his independence at 
Vinukonda; but this district appears to have formed part of the 
Vijayanagara kingdom during the reign of Bukka I (27).* The 
hostility between Kondavldu and Vijayanagara did not assume 
an active form until the accession of Harihara II. Devaraya 
who was appointed as the Governor of Udayagiri about 
1378 A. D. showed an inclination to pounce upon the Reddi 
dominions at a favourable moment. There must have been a 
war between the two kingdoms about 1384 A. D. The territory 
extending from the Srlsailam to Tripurantakam passed from 
the hands of the Reddis to those of the Raya between 1382 
and 1385 A. D. ; the district of Addanld, the original capital of 
the Reddis, together with the coastal strip up to Motupalli 
appears to have fallen into the hands of the Raya about the 
same tirne.f The death of Anavema, coupled with the acces- 
sion of his incompetent nephew to the throne of Kondavldu, 
must have greatly contributed to the success of Vijayanagara 
armies. A peace was probably concluded about 1385 A.D.; for 
Kataya Verna, the brother-in-law of Kumaragiri Reddi and the 
real ruler of the kingdom was busy fighting along the Kalinga 
frontier from 1385 to 1391 A.D. It was probably about tills time 
that the marriage of Harihara’s daughter, was celebrated with 
Kataprabhu, the son of Kata ya Vema. J As a consequence of 
this marriage, the hostile relations between the two kingdoms 
temporarily ceased, and the southern and western frontiers of 
Kondavldu remained unmolested. This state of affairs, however, 
did not last long. 


There appears to have been some strife at Kondavldu 
during the last years of Kumaragiri Reddi ’s reign, over the 
question of succession. His son Vira Annapota seems to have 


* Y- R. ii, Ki. 56, 58. The date of the inscriptions has been wrongly given as 
5. 1274; the correct date of the record is 3. 1294 (1372-73 A.D.). 
f The Reddis and the Rfiyasx Triveni vi, pp. 273, f. 




88 



Whatever might have been the inter-relation of these two 
invasions, Devaraya I withstood their impact, and had so far 


* Velugdfivari 


predeceased him. Therefore, Kumaragiri divided his kingdom 
into two halves, and assigned the northern half with Rajah- 
mandry as its capital to his brother-in-law and minister, Kataya 
Vema, and the southern half with Kondavldu as its capital to 
his cousin, Peda Komati Vema. This division of the kingdom 
did not satisfy either of the assignees. Kumaragiri Reddi died 
in 1403 A.D., and Peda Komati Vema seized the throne of 
Kondavldu at once, and Kataya Verna took possession of the 
Krsna-Grodavari delta. 

The death of Kumaragiri seems to have coincided with 
the departure of Devaraya to Vijayanagara, on hearing of the 
illness of his father. The outbreak of civil dissensions at 
Vijayanagara subsequent to the death of Harihara II and the 
continued absence of Devaraya from Udayagiri gave a 
splendid opportunity to Peda Komati Vema to recover the 
territory lost during the reign of his predecessor. Malla Reddi, a 
cousin of Peda Komati Vema, as noticed already, led the 
invasion, and occupied a large portion of the Udayagiri-rq/s/a, 
where he remained until his expulsion in 1413 A.D. 

Was the Reddi invasion an isolated affair ? Or, did it form 
the part of a larger movement in which all the enemies of 
Vijayanagara participated ? There is reason to believe that 
the BahmanI and the Reddi invasions of the Vijayanagara 
territory were inter-connected. In the first place, the time of 
the occurrence of the Bahman! and the Reddi invasions 
coincided ; both of them took place in A.D. 1406. Secondly, a 
few years later, about 1416 A. D., an alliance between Firoz 
Shah and Peda Komati Vema is known to have been in exis- 
tence.* Therefore, it is not unlikely that these two monarehs, 
entered into an alliance against their common foe, the Raya of 
Vijayanagara as early as 1406 A. D. 




89 


recovered from their effects that he became ready to take the 
offensive once again. 

The affairs of the kingdom of Rajah mandry, which Kataya 
Verna received from Kumaragiri Reddi, claimed his attention 
first. On the death of Kumaragiri, Verna retired to Rajahman- 
dry, and devoted his energies to strengthening his position. 
He attempted to consolidate his territories by eliminating a 
number of local chiefs who held semi-autonomous position 
under his predecessors. This naturally involved him in a conflict 
with Annadeva, a scion of the Eruva branch of the Telugu Cola 
family, who, with the help of the Velamas of Racakonda and 
Devarakonda, seized the region between the mouths of the Krsna 
and the Grodavarl during the short period of confusion which 
followed the death of Kumaragiri. He showed no inclination 
to submit ; on the contrary, he began to develop schemes for 
ousting Kataya Verna from his place. He knew that Kataya 
Verna had powerful enemies, from whom he could expect much 
help. Therefore, he seems to have approached the Velamas and 
arrived at an understanding with him. He invited Firoz Shah 
BahmanI to invade the Telugu country and promised to assist 
him in the enterprise. The Sultan who was anxious to extend 
his territory eastwards accepted the invitation, and moved 
towards the Telugu country with his army (46). 

Kataya Verna who was aware of the danger threatening 
his position appears to have turned for help in this crisis to his 
ally and relation Devaraya I. He paid a visit to Ahobalam 
in the interior of the Vijayanagara kingdom in 1410 A.D. 
accompanied by his family.* Though the motive for this visit 
is not known, it is not unreasonable to surmise that he would 
have met Devaraya or his representative on this occasion and 
discussed with him the inter-state relations. The fact that 
Devaraya’s armies fought with Kataya Verna’s enemies on the 
banks of the Grodavarl in the succeeding years surely points to 
the existence of some sort of an understanding between them. 


, 


* 84 ft 1915 . 




90 



War broke out between the two opposing factions in 
1415 A. D. Devaraya despatched his troops promptly to assist 
his ally. The intervention of the Vijayanagara army 
appears to have drawn Annadeva’s friends into the field. Firoz 
Shah moved eastwards ostensibly to help his ally, but really 
to subjugate Telingana and bring it under his control. There 
is reason to believe that Kataya Verna opposed the advance of 
the enemy, and lost his life in the battle. Gajaravu Tippa, a 
chief of Koppunulla sub-division of the Velama community, 
claims to have defeated Kataya Verna’s army at Gundukolanu, 
a village in the Ellore taluk of the West Godavari district. 
The biruda, Kataya-Vemuni-tala-gonda-ganda occurring in the 
family prasdsti of the Koppunulla chiefs points to Verna’s death 
at the hands of Gajaravu Tippa or some other member of the 
family probably at Gundukolanu itself. The Rajahmandry 
Museum plates of Annadeva Coda, which describe the events 
of this war, refer to three victories won by him over the 
Karnatakas. He is said to have won a victory at Attili (in 
Tanuku taluk) over the southern rulers, one of whom must 
have been the king of Vijayanagara. On another occasion, 

• ‘fighting on the side of the Turuska king’, he is said to have 
‘destroyed the Karnata forces.’ Again, he is said to have 
massacred the Kannadas and others with the assistance of his 
friend Pinayundiraja, at Kankaraparti on the banks of the 
Godavari, to protect his ally. The ally for whose protection, 
he butchered the Kannadas, was probably the Sultan him- 
self (46). It appears from this that Devaraya I suffered a 
series of disasters at the hands of the Sultan and his 
allies in the Telugu country. The Sultan’s power increased 
and he seems to have been recognised as the overlord of 
Telingapa. These events have been alluded to by Sayyid 
’All. “ The Sultan”, says he, “ being determined to conquer 
Telingana proceeded in that direction, till having got near 
RajamundrI, he conquered many forts and districts of that 
country and having taken possession of the whole of that 
territory, he consigned it to agents of government, and then 


Jr 


91 


set out for his capital.”* This is corroborated, to some extent 
at least, by the evidence of inscriptions. According to an 
epigraph at Vedadri, in the Nandigama taluk of the Kistna 
district dated & S. 1339 Hevilambi, Sravana su 5, Thursday 
(18 July A.D., 1417), two officers of Fxroz Shah, Masnada Yeli 
Abibu Nidamalu-Maluka and his elder brother, &arakhumalu 
Jainadi-Vodeya were ruling at Vodapalli-VajxrabSdu and 
^rxrangarajakonda respectively ‘ on the banks of the Krsna 
in the Eastern- Country .”f 

The success of Fxroz Shah and his allies was not, however, 
permanent. Their good fortune deserted them soon. While 
Fxroz Shah was engaged in pushing forward towards Rajah- 
mandry, Devaraya I seized the important fort of Nalgonda- 
Pangal in the neighbourhood of Racakonda, the principal 
capital of Fxroz Shah’s Velaxna allies, and cut off the line of his 
communications. He was therefore obliged to suspend opera- 
tions in the Godavari delta and hasten to Nalgonda-Pangal with 
the object of recapturing the fort in A.D. 1417. Though he met 
with stubborn resistance from Devaraya I, he won a severely 
contested battle and laid siege to the fort. The siege lasted two 
years ; the garrison held out bravely ; and Firoz Shah was no 
nearer capturing it than he was at the beginning. Mean- 
while, Devaraya I gathered a fresh anny, and having secured 
the help of the Telugu chiefs, marched against the Sultan. 
Help came to him also from another quarter unexpectedly. 
The Yelamas who had been the allies of the Bahmanx Sultan 
deserted him and joined the Raya. With the death of Kapaya 
Nayaka in 1365 A.D. they became the neighbours of the 
Suljan, and though they were his allies they obstructed the 
expansion of his dominion eastwards. It did not serve his 
interests any longer to adhere to the former alliance. There- 
fore, he began to develop friendship with Peda Kornati Verna 
between whom and the Velamas there existed a family feud. 
Verna welcomed the alliance because it gave him a chance not 
only to protect his kingdom fronLjhe attacks of the Raya of 


92 


Vijayanagara, but to avenge the death of his brother, Maca, 
whom the Velamas had put to death in a battle. The Velamas 
under the circumstances lost their only friend; and as it was 
imperative to have the support of some one powerful enough 
to help them in preserving the integrity of their kingdom, they 
befriended their old enemy, the Raya of Vijayanagara. A 
great battle was fought under the waifs of Nalgonda-Pangal in 
which the Sultan suffered a crushing defeat. He fled in panic, 
and his troops were massacred * This happened in 1419 A. D. 

In the meantime, the affairs of the Reddi kingdom of 
Rajahmandry brightened. Allada, the general of Kataya Vema 
upheld the cause of his late master’s son, Kumaragiri bravely. 
He defeated Peda Komati Vema at Ramesvaram, plundered his 
camp and put him to flight ; he next turned towards Annadeva 
Coda and his son Virabhadra, defeated them in battle and 
probably put them to death. The young Kumaragiri having 
died in the interval, Allada claimed the kingdom for Anitalli, 
the sister of Kumaragiri and having celebrated her marriage 
with his second son, Virabhadra, he began to rule the kingdom 
on her behalf, f 

Peda Komati Vema who was repulsed from the dominions 
of the Reddis of Rajahmandry was not allowed to rule his 
kingdom in peace, the Velamas used the occasion to avenge 
the death of Peda Vedagiri, one of their chiefs, whom Peda 
Komati Vema had formerly slain with the help of Piroz Shah. 
Now that the Sultan was crushed, they invaded the Kondavidu 
kingdom fearlessly. Peda Komati Vema was not in a position 
to expel them. He was without friends. His ally, the Suljtan 
was defeated by his enemies and driven away, and there was no 
chance of getting help from that quarter. The Coda chief, Anna- 
deva, who had caused a revolution in the affairs of the kingdom 
of Rajahmandry was crushed by Allada. Devaraya I appears to 
have taken advantage of \ etna’s troubles, and annexed a part 
of his territory. In the midst of these difficulties, Peda 

* /. A. xxviii, p. 188 ; Briggs: Ferishta ii, p. 390. f /• 0. R. viii, p. 15?. 


93 


Komati Verna met the Velamas in battle, and was defeated 
and slain.* 

Devaraya * 1 and Ahobala Gocla .— There appears to have 
been some trouble in the western part of the Udayagiri-rq;?/a 
during the last years of the reign of Devaraya X. A Telugu 
Coda chief called Ahobala of the Apratimalla family holding 
sway over the country in the neighbourhood of Puspagiri seems 
to have rebelled. An inscription of this chief dated S.S. 1342 
Plava, Vaisakha ba. 15, Thursday (May 1, A.D., 1421) is found 
in the village of Groturu near Puspagiri. It is said that 
Praudhadevaraya (Devaraya I) and his son Vijaya, marched 
against him at the head of a large army, and defeated him in 
battle. As a consequence of this war, the capital of Ahobala 
Coda was ruined, and several merchants who were residents 
therein migrated to foreign lands (44). 

Very little is known of the activities of Vijaya. Nuniz 
says that he ‘did nothing worth relating’f. The haifiyats 
show, however, that Nuniz does him very little justice. They 
represent him as an energetic prince, who actively participated 
in his father’s wars against the Coda chiefs. One record, as a 
matter of fact, gives him the entire credit of suppressing their 
rebellion (45). 

Devaraya 1 passed away in the middle of A.D. 1422 after 
a rule of 16 years; and he was succeeded by his son Rama- 
candra who seems to have sat on the throne for a few 
months. 


r i 




* Triwni vi, pp. 286-7 ; Velugo(ivUri Vamsavali, Intro, pp. 23-8; E.t. jncvi, pp. 32-7. 
'('Forgotten JEmfire, p. 302. !.■ 




Sill 




• Sewell:#/., p. 213. 


CHAPTER XI. 


VIJAYA I AND DEVARlYA II. 

The length of Vijayaraya’s reign is variously estimated by 
our authorities. Nuniz states that he ruled for six years, Vlrap- 
paya assigns to him a reign of ten years, and the Kaifiyat of 
Malamldi-Kambaladinne allots only five years to his reign (47). 
According to the inscriptions he appears to have ruled for 
three or four years- He is said to have ascended the throne in 
the middle of 1422 A.D. * and he died in 1425-6. Even during 
this short period, he was not the sole sovereign*, his son 
Devaraya II, was ruling jointly with him. The circumstances 
under which both the father and the son happened to rule 
jointly are not known. Their joint rule did not, however, last 
long ; and Devaraya II became the sole monarch of the king- 
dom, after his father’s demise in A. D. 1425-26. 

The affairs of Kondavldu.~~Deya,rsija. II was obliged to pay 
attention to the affairs of Kondavidu soon after his accession. 
The death of Peda Komati Verna proved disastrous in its con- 
sequences to the Reddi kingdom. Raca Verna, his son, and 
successor was an incompetent and oppressive ruler. He was 
murdered by one of his own subjects after a rule of three or 
four years. After his death, the Kondavidu branch of the 
Reddi kingdom was dissolved, and its territory became the 
battle-ground of the ambitious monarchs of the neighbouring 
states. 

Considerable obscurity hangs over the history of Konda- 
vidu immediately after the downfall of the Reddis. It cannot 
be definitely ascertained who ruled their territory between 
1424 and 1428 A. D. The kaifiyats of several villages in the 
Gruntur district allude to the occupation of the country by an 
Uriya monarch called Langala Grajapati who is said to have 


95 


ruled it for a period ranging from 12 to 25 years (50, 51). 
This is not supported by other evidence. No king of the name 
of Langula Gajapati ruled over Orissa during the fourteenth 
century ; nor is there any trace of his invasion in the Southern 
Telugu country. A stray verse ascribed to the poet, &rlnatha, 
describes the political condition of Kondavidu after the fall of 
the Reddis briefly : “ The chiefs that rule at present over 

Kondavidu,” declares the poet, “are as numerous as the sluices 
carrying off a river’s water, the snake-holes on this earth, 
the hair growing on the body of a bear, and the trees of the 
jungle offering shelter to a bird in flight.”* * * § Of the chiefs who 
attempted to seize the patrimony of the Reddis, the names of 
only two have survived. Panta Mailara Reddi and Saluva 
Telungaraya — both of them patrons of ^rlnatha — appear to 
have aimed at carving out independent principalities in the 
southern marches of the old Reddi kingdom. The former was 
the son of Mummadi Reddi, and he was holding portions of the 
Ongole and the Narasaraopet taluks of the Guntur district as 
an independent prince in 1424-5 A.D.f The latter was the son 
of Saluva SamburayaJ and he ruled over a part of Podili in 
the Nellore district, and portions of the Ongole and the Bapatla 
taluks of the Guntur district in A. D. 1428§ ; but these chiefs 
were not allowed to remain undisturbed in the possession of 
their estates. Devaraya II seems to have made an attempt to 
subjugate them about 1427 A.D. ; and they were forced to 
acknowledge his supremacy. Panta Mailara, IT the Reddis of 
Cundi$ and Avubhu Coda || had all. submitted. Though no 
indication of Telungaraya’s subordination to Devaraya II is 
seen in his inscriptions, it is highly improbable that he could 
have remained independent, ruling as he did so near Panta 
Mailara, Avubhu Coda and others. Therefore, it is not unrea- 
sonable to conclude that by 1428-29 A.D. Devaraya II completed 
the subjugation of the border chiefs, and proceeded against 

* Prabhakara Sastri : The Srngara Sriri&tham, p. 136. 

f AT. D. /. iii, O. 104. 11 B. /. xiii, p. 2 ; N. £>. I. i, Cp. 18. 

% Ibid , p . 26. « W. D. I. ii, Kr. 16. 

§ 476 of 1915. J Ibid ii, O. 56. 




f'M 




96 

Kondavldu which seems to have fallen into his hands some 
time before A.D. 1432 * It is evident from this that the 
Vijayanagara conquest of the Reddi dominions was finished by 
this date and that Devaraya II succeeded in pushing forward 
the north-eastern frontier of his kingdom up to the Krsna. 

A brief but interesting passage in the Vemavaram plates of 
Allaya Verna dated A.D. 1434 alludes to an attack of the Karna- 
taka king upon the Grajapati. The passage which enumerates 
the achievements of Allada states that he made friendship bet- 
ween the Grajapati and the king of Karnata who came (to fight 
in his country).! When did Allada exercise his good offices 
to conciliate the two monarchs ? Nothing is known of Allada 
before 1415 A. D. ; nor did any king of Vijayanagara enter 
the Rajahmandry territory up to that time. Devaraya I, 
however, despatched an army in A.D. 1415, as noticed already 
to help his ally, Kataya Verna, in his fight against his enemies. 
It is not unlikely that he himself might have come to the front 
to direct the operations ; but it must be pointed out that 
Devaraya’s presence in the Rajahmandry kingdom on this 
occasion was not due to his desire to wage war on the 
Grajapati but to help Kataya Verna. Moreover, the Grajapati 
did not come into the Rajahmandry territory about this time. 
At any rate, there is no evidence of his having done so. 
Allada also must have been far too much engrossed in the fight 
with "the enemies of his master to offer his services in settling 
the disputes of others : and his position in A. D. 1415 could not 
have commanded sufficient influence to enable him to pose as 
an arbitrator in deciding international quarrels. 1 herefore, 
Allada must have conciliated the Karnata and the Grajapati 
kings later, when his position as the ruler of Rajahmandry was 
firmly established. As Devaraya I was engaged in a fierce 

* L. R. 42, p. 323. 
t %% I- P* 

JitvU-nalpa-vikalpa'kalpita-batam tain c^Alpakhanam fane 
Mtttikriya tamagaiam Gafapaitm Karna{a-bkupatn ca tarn 
halv'd Kama#- Vlwa-sainya-nikaram bhuyo^pi Rdmesvarl 
prnjyam Rn/amah^ndra-rdJyam—a^od^Attd<ia-bhumUvara^ 


97 


struggle with Flroz Shah from 1417 to 1419 A.D., it is highly 
improbable that he should have embarked upon a distant expe- 
dition during the last years of his reign. Therefore, the 
arrival of the Grajapati and the Karnata king, and the effecting 
of conciliation between them must have taken plaee subsequent 
to the death of Devaraya I, i e., during the reign of his 
grandson Devaraya II. A solitary inscription of the Saluva 
chief, Telungaraya dated A. D. 1428 found at Simhacalam* 
the northernmost frontier station of the Rajahmandry 
kingdom gives the time of Devaraya IPs invasion. Though 
the inscription gives no information about Devaraya or his 
connection with Telungaraya, it is likely that the latter was a 
subject of the king of Karnataka at that time. It describes 
him as 1 Telungaraya, the son of Samburaya (a resident) in the 
Kannada-desa.’ The Vijavanagara dominions were generally 
referred to at this time as Karnata or the Kannada-dm. 
Therefore, an inhabitant of Kannada-de$a must necessarily 
have been a subject of the king of Karnata. Now, the presence 
of an inscription of a subject of the Karnata king at Simha- 
calam at this time calls for air explanation. It has been 
rightly assumed that Telungaraya was a subordinate of 
Devaraya II and that he accompanied his master to this part 
of the country during the course of a military expedition.f 
The justness of this assumption is proved by the passage of 
Vemavaram grant under consideration. It is evident from 
what has been said above that the arrival of the Karnataka 
king into the Rajahmandry kingdom referred to in the Vema- 
varam grant took place in A. D. 1428. The Karnatakas appear 
to have reached the southern frontier of the kingdom of 
Orissa, when the Gajapati came to oppose the invader. It 
must have been at this point that Allada stepped in and by 
skilful diplomacy brought about the cessation of hostilities 
between the belligerents as mentioned in the Vemavaram 
grant. ; : - . ' ■ : 


* 293 of 1899. 


t Virabhadra Rao : The History of the Andhra s iii, pp, 390-91; V. Prabhakara Sastri: 
he SrngUra Srinatham, pp. 154-55. 

1 - 13 " 


98 



The circumstances under which Devaraya II marched 
up to the frontier of Orissa are not known. The term 
‘ mitnkrtya ’ employed in the passage of the Vemavaram 
grant, implies that the Grajapati and the king of the Karnatakas, 
i.e., Devaraya II were not originally well disposed towards 
each other. Devaraya II seems to have led an invasion into 
the dominions of the king of Orissa for some reason unknown 
to us at present. Did he invade Orissa actuated by motives of 
self aggrandisement ? or, did he go there chasing the sub- 
ordinates of the Grajapati whom he found in occupation of the 
Kondavldu territory as the kaifiyats would have us believe? 
The evidence is not sufficient to make an assertion either way. 
Future investigation alone can reveal the truth. 


Devaraya 11 and the Velamas . — The Velamas played an 
important part in the history of Vijayanagara at first as 
enemies and later as friends and faithful supporters of the 
Rayas. The reign of Devaraya II was a transition stage in the 
relations of the Velamas with the Rayas of Vijayanagara. They 
were forced by circumstances to change their attitude towards 
their old enemy. The steady advance of power of the BahmanI 
Sul,tan into Telingana impressed on their minds the supreme 
necessity of befriending the Raya, and securing his support in 
repelling the aggressions of the Suljtan. Nevertheless, the old 
spirit of hostility persisted for a while, and if the Velugotivari 
Vandavali is to be believed, the northern districts of the 
Vijayanagara empire were convulsed by the depredatory 
Velama expeditions during the latter part of Devaraya ITs 
reign. 

The Velama dominions were under the government of 
two branches of the Recerla family at this time. The two 
sons of Ravu Singa I, Anapota I and Mada I, divided their 
patrimony between themselves. Anapota I and his descend- 
ants ruled from Racakonda the northern half of the state ; the 
forts of Warangal and Bhiwanagiri with the dependent terri- 



ruled the southern half with Devarakonda as their capital. As 
the chiefs of Raeakonda held sway over the territory in the 
neighbourhood of the BahmanI kingdom they came into 
conflict with the Mussalmans more frequently ; and, as a 
consequence, their power declined sooner than that of their 
cousins of Devarakonda. 

The information pertaining to the struggle between the 
Yelamas and the Bahmanis is drawn almost entirely from the 
histories of Ferishta and Sayyid ’All, and they are by no means 
in agreement with each other. According to Ferishta, Ahmad 
Shah BahmanI invaded Telingana in A. D. 1425, in order to 
punish the king of that country for having joined the Raya of 
Vijayanagara in a war, against him in 1423 A. D. The king of 
Telingana was slain and W arangal was captured. Khan-i-A‘azain 
subdued the rest of Telingana. Having left Khan-i-A‘azam at 
Warangal with instructions to capture some forts that were 
still in the possession of the heirs of the late king, the Sultan 
returned to Grulburga. Khan-i-A‘azam seems to have success- 
fully performed the task entrusted to him ; for in 1428 A. D. 
Sultan Ahmad conferred regal insignia upon Daud Khan, one 
of his sons, and sent him with the nobility to establish himself 
in Telingana.* On the accession of Sultan ’Ala-ud-Dln II 
in 1435 A. D., his brother Muhammad Khan revolted ; 
but his rebellion was suppressed. The Sultan, however, 
pardoned him, and bestowed on him the fortress and revenue 
of Raichflr, which became vacant by the death of his brother, 
prince Dadd, the governor of Telingana j\ It is obvious from 
the account of Ferishta that Warangal and Telingana fell into 
the hands of the BahmanI Sultan in A.D. 1425 and that the 
Hindu power disappeared at the same time. 

The account of Sayyid ’All is slightly different. Ahmad 
Shah BahmanI invaded Telingana in 1424 or 1425 A. D., with 
the object of subjugating the country. He captured the forts 
of Warangal and Mandal. The Rajas of Rajkonda and 
Devarkonda submitted and agreed to pay tribute.^ About 

•Brigg's FerUhia ii, pp. 406, 412. + Hid , p. 423. % 1. A. Xxviii, p. 210, 


r 


100 

1432 A.D., the Sultan invaded Telingana for the second time, 
and captured the fort of Ramglr. The intelligent Hindu wall 
of Warangal, having realised the futility of opposing the 
Sultan, sued for and obtained peace. The Suljtan conferred 
Bhonagir as jaglr upon Sanjar Khan. Towards the close of 
his reign, Ahmad Shah divided his kingdom among his sons, 
when he assigned Mahur with its dependencies to Mahmud 
Khan, and Raichur and Cliul to Baud Khan.* On the death of 
Ahmad Shah, his eldest son ’Ala-ud-Dln II ascended the throne. 
Muhammad Khan, his younger brother, who was placed by the 
late Sultan under his protection, rebelled against him ; but the 
rebellion was quickly put down. The Sultan, however, 
forgave Muhammad Khan, and granted to him on feudal 
tenure, the district of Rayacal in Telingana. j 


Notwithstanding the differences between the narratives of 
Ferishta and Sayyid ’All which need not be taken into account 
in this context, they agree in stating that the Hindu Raja of 
Telingana lost his independence. It is not possible to state 
definitely whether the Raja was killed or allowed to hold some 
sort of authority in the neighbourhood of Warangal. The 
testimony of the Velugolivari Vamsavali would seem to indicate 


‘that Anapota II who was ruling at Racakonda about this time 
was engaged in a war with the nobles of Vijayanagara even 
after the annexation of Kondavldu by Devaraya II about 
A.D. 1428. In any case, it appears certain thatbetween 1425 A.D. 
and 1435 A.D., most of Telingana passed under Muslim rule. 
The senior branch of the Recerla family which was ruling at 
Warangal since A. D. 1365 was ousted from its place. Owing to 
the increasing pressure of the Mussaimans on their native 
district, several members of the family appear to have migrated 
to the neighbouring states, where they created much 
disturbance by attempting to carve out new principalities for 
themselves. Anapota II established himself in the district of 

* L A. xXviii, pp. 216-17. Tfre names Ra’Ichur and Ckul seem to be corruptions dtte 
to scribal carelessness of Rayacal, mentioned below. 

f Ibid, p. 338. - 


ioi 



Devaraya II placed in charge of the district. Anapota II is said 
to have won a victory over them after a severe fight (55, 56). 
His campaigns and victories do not seem to have produced any 
substantial result, for Devaraya’s hold upon these districts 
remained unshaken until the end of his reign. 

The most noteworthy achievement of the Velamas of 
this age was their invasion of the kingdom of Rajahmandry. 
Both Anapota II and his cousin Linga claim victories over 
the Reddis. According to the Velugotimri Vamsdvali, our only 
source of information on this subject, the latter is said to have 
defeated Allaya Verna and his brother Vlrabhadra, who saved 
their kingdom by submitting to his irresistible might. Though 
it is not possible to test the truth of these assertions at present, 
they must not be treated with undue suspicion, as there is 
nothing improbable in an invasion of this kind having taken 
place. It may be assumed, therefore, that the Velamas 
attacked the Reddis of Rajahmandry and vanquished them in 
battle. The invasion must have taken place before 1437 A.D., 
after which no information is available either about the Reddis 
or their kingdom. 

Devaraya 11 and the kingdom of Bajahmandry , — ‘The events 
of the last years of the Reddi rule at Rajahmandry .are enve- 
loped in darkness. An examination of the Reddi inscriptions 
shows that Allaya Verna and presumbly his brother Vlrabhadra 


# It may be noted here that Cennapatfana Madras was not then in existence. 
The passage, in the Velugotivari Vamsavali on which the present account is based seems 
to be a later interpolation ; but an inscription dated 1437 A. D. which records the gifts of 
Vaianjfcaraya, son of Anapota II to the shrine of Devarajasyami at Conjeevarim 
(634 of I919) shows that Velama raid did really reach the neighbouiliood of Madras, 


102 


were ruling at Rajahmandry until 1437 A. D.* Nothing is 
known of them or of their descendants, if they had any, sub- 
sequent to this date. Was their authority overthrown? And 
if it was overthrown, by whom ? We learn from an inscription 
of Draksaramam that Mallappa Vodeya, one of the mahapra- 
dhanas of Devaraya II, was governing the city of Rajahmandry, 
and presumably the territory dependent on it in 1444 A.D.f 
Devaraya IPs rule over the Krsna-Godavarl region about this 
time is also indicated by the copy of an old inscription pre- 
served in the introductory portion of $arabha Kavi’s Adhyatma- 
ramdyaaam (54). % Plow did the government of Rajahmandry 
pass from the Reddis into the hands of Devaraya II ? Did he 
overthrow the authority of the Reddis and subjugate their 
kingdom? This is highly improbable. The contemporary 
writers bear testimony to the existence of continuous friendship 
between the Reddis of Rajahmandry and the king of Vijaya- 
nagara§ ; and there is no evidence to show that it was ever 
broken. Therefore, it may be reasonably assumed that 
Devaraya II would not have overthrown the authority of the 
Reddis ignoring the longstanding friendship that existed bet- 
ween them and his family. If Devaraya’s officers did not go 
to Rajahmandry as conquerors, their presence in the city and 
its neighbourhood must be due to some other cause. 

The Gangadasapratapavilasam, a contemporary work, 
alludeB to a defeat which the Grajapati sustained at the hands 
of Devaraya II. The author, G angadhara, states that ‘ on the 
death of Pratapadevaraya, the Purandara of Vijayanagara, 

* 424 of 1893; 426 of 1893. 

t 442 of 1893. The inscription is incomplete, as the face of the stone on which the 
concluding portion is inscribed has been built into a wall. (5. /. /. IV, p. 484, n. 2). But 
at the time when Col. Mackenzie's surveyors visited the place, the stone appears to have 
stood by itself, and the copy made at the time gives the interesting information that the 
grant recorded therein was made by the command of Allaya Verna. If this were true, it 
would show clearly that Devaraya II sent Mallapa Dan^anayaka to Rajahmandry to help 
the Re^4is. 

% Madras Govt. Or. Ms. Lib. Triennial Catalogue : Telugu Vob iii, Part iii, 

: R. No. 313. ■ ■ , 

§ &rlnatka; Kasikkandam , 2: 165 ; 3 : 246. 


103 


Mallikarjunaraya ascended the throne. On hearing this, the 
Sultan of the Deccan and the Gajapati, both of whom had been 
formerly defeated by Pratajpadevardya, marched upon Vijaya- 
nagara with a large army consisting of elephants, horses, and 
foot soldiers.* It is evident from this passage that Devaraya II 
inflicted a defeat upon the Gajapati. Who was he,? His identity 
is not dififlcult to discover. Since he is the same as the 
Gajapati who laid siege to Vijayanagara after Devaraya IPs 
death in 1446 A. D., he must be identical with the Gajapati 
Kapilesvara who reigned from 1434-85 to 1470 A. D. The time 


and the place of Devaraya’s conflict with Kapilesvara, 
however, are not known ; they can easily be surmised with the 
help of the available data. As Kapilesvara came to the throne 
in A. D. 1434-35, he could not have come into conflict with 
Devaraya II earlier; and as Devaraya died in 1446 A.D., Kapiles- 
vara could not have suffered defeat at his hands subsequent to 
that year. Therefore, the war between Devaraya II and 
Kapilesvara must have taken place some time between 1484-35 
and 1446 AD. The approximate time of the war being thus 
fixed, an attempt must now be made to find out the locality, and 
the probable causes which gave rise to it. There is no evidence 
to show that Kapilesvara led an invasion against Vijayanagara 
before 1448 A. D. Hor is there any indication of his rule over 
the Telugu country prior to 1452 A.D. Therefore, it is very 
unlikely that he could have come into conflict with Devaraya II 
either in the Vijayanagara territory or in the Telugu country 
beyond his frontiers. The authority of Devaraya II, as noticed 
already, extended in 1444 A.D. to Rajahmandry, if not actually 
to the southern frontier of the kingdom of Orissa. The conflict 
between Devaraya and Kapilesvara in which the latter suffered 
defeat must Rave taken place in Kalinga where the rival 
ambitions of the Gajapatis and the Reddis seem to have clashed 
with each other. 

The Reddis who strove from the beginning to establish 
their authority over Kalinga came into conflict with the 

■* Sources, p. 66. 


102 



were ruling at Rajahmandry until 1487 A. T>.* Nothing is 
known of them or of their descendants, if they had any, sub- 
sequent to this date. Was their authority overthrown? And 
if it was overthrown, by whom ? We learn from an msciip ion 
of Draksaramam that Mallappa Vodeya, one of the mahapra- 
dhanas of Devaraya II, was governing the city of Rajahmandry, 
and presumably the territory dependent on it in 1444 A-D.f 
Devaraya IPs rule over the Krsna-Godavan region about this 
time is also indicated by the copy of an old hum 3nption pre- 
served in the introductory portion ofSarabha Kwi&Mhyatma- 
ramdyanam (54)4 How did the government j>f 
pass from the Reddis into the hands of Devaraya II? Did he 
overthrow the authority of the Reddis and subjugate their 
kingdom ? This is highly improbable. The eontempoiary 
writers bear testimony to the existence of continuous friendship 
between the Reddis of Rajahmandry and the king of Vijaya- 
nagara§ *, and there is no evidence to show that it was ever 
broken. Therefore, it may be reasonably assumed tha 
Devaraya II would not have overthrown the authority of the 
Reddis ignoring the longstanding friendship that existed be - 
ween them and his family. If Devaraya’s officers did not go 
to Rajahmandry as conquerors, their presence m the city an 
its neighbourhood must be due to some other cause. 


.. The Gangaddsapratapavilasam, a contemporary work, 
alludes to a defeat which the Gajapafci sustained at the han s 
of Devaraya II. The author, Gangadhara, states that on the 
death of Pratapadevaraya, the Purandara of Vijayanagara, 

tSion is incomplete, as the face of the stone on wMJ the 

a t the Um6 J & mad e at the time gives the interesting information that the 

st °° b ^ ^' a ; r d e 4Xa m ad e by the command of Allaya Verna. If this were true it 

Mallapa Dan^anayaka to ^ahmandry to help 

Govt. Or. Ms. Lib. Triennial Catalogin ’- Telugu Vol. iii, Part iii, 

R. No. 313. 


103 



Mallikarjunaraya ascended the throne. On hearing this, the 
Sultan of the Deccan and the Grajapati, both of whom had been 
formerly defeated by Pratapadevardya, marched upon Vijaya- 
nagara with a large army consisting of elephants, horses, and 
foot soldiers.* It is evident from this passage that Devaraya II 
inflicted a defeat upon the Grajapati. Who was he ? His identity 
is not difficult to discover. Since he is the same as the 
Grajapati who laid siege to Vijayanagara after Devaraya IDs 
death in 1446 A. D., he must be identical with the Grajapati 
Kapilesvara who reigned from 1434-35 to 1470 A. D. The time 
and the place of Devaraya’s conflict with Kapilesvara, 
however, are not known ; they can easily be surmised with the 
help of the available data. As Kapilesvara came to the throne 
in A. D. 1434-35, he could not have come into conflict with 
Devaraya II earlier; and as Devaraya died in 1446 A.D., Kapiles- 
vara could not have suffered defeat at his hands subsequent to 
that year. Therefore, the war between Devaraya II and 
Kapilesvara must have taken place some time between 1434-35 
and 1446 A-D. The approximate time of the war being thus 
fixed, an attempt must now be made to find out the locality, and 
the probable causes which gave rise to it. There is no evidence 
to show that Kapilesvara led an invasion against Vijayanagara 
before 1448 A. D. Nor is there any indication of his rule over 
the Telugu country prior to 1452 A.D. Therefore, it is very 
unlikely that he could have come into conflict with Devaraya II 
either in the Vijayanagara territory or in the Telugu country 
beyond his frontiers. The authority of Devaraya II, as noticed 
already, extended in 1444 A.D. to Rajahmandry, if not actually 
to the southern frontier of the kingdom of Orissa. The conflict 
between Devaraya and Kapilesvara in which the latter suffered 
defeat must have taken place in Kalinga where the rival 
ambitions of the Grajapatis and the Reddis seem to have clashed 
with each other. 

The Reddis who strove from the beginning to establish 
their authority over Kalinga came into conflict with the 

* Sources , p. 66, - ^ 


liftfgtii 



* Srinatha: Th* Kasikhandam , 3: 247. 
f Kalingatancika, p. 334. 


t I, A, xxvjii, p. 237. 


I Aili 

j; ■ 


| . ■ 

i 

t 

: ' 

i 

« i 

Sif'i 

;l| ; 

ilis 

i 

; ? 

fill 

' 1 

If 


: 

;V. 

i i 

• 1 |i j : ;; 

ill 1 


ill! . 


104 

Gajapatis from time to time. Prolaya Verna and his sons 
claim victories over the Gajapatis bat the peace of Kalinga 
remained, on the whole , undisturbed until Rajahmandry 
became the seat of a separate kingdom under Kataya Vema 
after the death of Kumaragiri. With the object of increasing 
his territory, Kataya Vema, subjugated several chiefs who held 
sway over southern Kalinga. Allada who succeeded him set 
the conquest of Kalinga as the goal of his political ambition. 
His sons followed in his footsteps. In pursuance of this 
ambition, Allaya Vema conducted several campaigns against 
the petty principalities with which the whole of Kalinga was 
honeycombed at this time. As a result of these campaigns, 
the extent of the kingdom of Rajahmandry considerably 
increased. Its northern frontier gradually reached the Cilaka 
lake in the Ganjam district. When the conquest of the 
Kalinga was completed, at the instance of Allaya Vema, his 
brother, Virabhadra assumed the title of Kalingarajapara- 
meivara* 

The extension of the Reddi power was keenly resented by 
the Gajapatis. According to the Gangavamsanucaritram, a 
work probably of the early 18th century, Kajjalabhanudeva, 
the predecessor of Kapilesvara invaded the northern districts 
of the Reddi kingdom about 1433 A. D., and owing to the 
political upheaval in his capital, was obliged to remain there 
permanently. f As a consequence of this, the Reddis appear 
to have lost much territory, which they acquired after a 
continuous warfare of a decade. Kapilesvara who established 
himself at Cuttack was a strong and energetic king. We learn 
from Burhan-i-Ma'asir that he was recognised as the leader of 
the Hindus of Telingaija as early as 1435 A. D.+ It is not 
unreasonable to believe that a monarch who acquired the 
leadership of the Hindus of Telingana could have avoided a 
conflict with the Reddis of Rajahmandry. Probably Kapilesvara 
made an attack upon Rajahmandry some time after 1437 A.D., 


105 




and recognised him as his suzerain. This is confirmed by an 
explicit statement in the Kerala Palama that Devaraya had 
conquered the kings of Kerala and other countries and exacted 
tribute from them (19-b). Nevertheless, one of the Kerala 
chiefs, the Samuri of Calicut, managed to retain his inde- 
pendence until the end of Devaraya’ s reign ; but this indepen- 
dence did not amount to much, for the Samuri had such a 
fear of Devaraya that he dared not go against his 
wishes. “ Although the Samuri is not under his authority,” 
says Abdur Razaak, « nevertheless, he is in grant alarm and 
apprehension from him.” Therefore when Devaraya II 1 sent 


107 



On hearing this, Devaraya attempted to remove these detects 
at once and increase the efficiency of the army. He ‘ gave 
orders to enlist Mussalmans in his service, allotting to them 
estates, and erecting a mosque for them in the city Beeja- 
nuggar.’* Some of the Muhammadan officers in the Vijaya- 
nagara service are mentioned in the kaifiyats. The family of 
one of these officers held Panem with its dependent territory 
as a jafir for nearly one hundred years from A.D. 1393 to 1497 
It was at first granted to Sa’bat Mulk by Praudhadevaraya in 
A. D. 1393, and he and his successors held tire place as shown 
below (57). 


No, Name of the overlord. Name of the jagirdar 


Christian. 


Sa’bat Mulk ... 1315 Snmukha 1393-1418 

to 1335 Vijava 

Khanli Khaiia Vo4eya . 1336 Java to j 1414-1444 
1366 Raktaksi 


1. Praudhadevaraya 


1367 0) to 1406 j 1445-1484 
Krodhi \ 


Sultan V o< 
son of 2 


1407 Visvavasu j 1485-1497 
to 1419 Pin- j 
gala | W&M 


Raja Khan Vodeyar, 
the son of 3 


S a J u v a Vira Nara- 
singaraya 


It must be noted that the kaifiyat agrees but partially 
with Ferishta. The Vijayanagara kings, no doubt, enlisted 
Mussalman soldiers in their service, and granted estates to 
their officers ; but the practice did not commence with 
Devaraya IPs desire to improve the efficiency of his army in 
A. D. 1437. According to the kaifiyat cited above, the fort of 
Panem was bestowed as a jaglr on Sa’bat Mulk by Praudha- 
devaraya as early as A. D. 1393. This Praudhadevaraya is 
not Devaraya II but his grandfather Devaraya If The account 
of the kaifiyat is consistent ; and so far as it can be tested by 

* Briggs Ferishta ii, pp. 430-31. ■- 

. f Devaraya 1 is also referred to occasionally in his inscription? as Praudhadevaraya. 

See 399 of 1926 dated 1878 A.D. - - 


108 



epigrapmcai evidence, it stauus me cAtuumauuu 
well If the evidence of the kaipjat be accepted) t erishta s 
account must be discredited. The problem demands further 
investigation ; and no definite conclusion can be arrived at in 
the present state of our knowledge. 

■Devaraya II and the temples of Hazara Rama and fitthala- 
smnii Devaraya’s activity was not confined to politics ; it also 
manifested itself in the field of architecture. He is said to have 
built £ the exquisite Hazara Rama temple in honour of fen 
Rama.’* There is no definite evidence to show that he was 
the builder of this shrine. A small epigraph consisting of a 
single Sanskrit sloka in the anustubh metre, engraved on the 
basement of the Hazara Rama temple, no doubt, mentions one 
of the two Devarayas. It runs thus : 

Va>t~iva Bhbjarajam Tripuramba Vatsarajam-iva 

Kal-iva Vikranmrkmn kalayati Pamp=adya Demrayanrpam . f 
The verse seems to prove conclusively that Hazara Rama temple 
' Was;' in ''existence during the reign of one of the Devarayas ; but 
it rises an interesting question. The verse under consideration 
refers to the great favour which the Goddess Pampa had 
bestowed upon Devaraya. How did this verse come to be 
p.no-raved on the basement of a temple built in honour of Sri 




on insufficient evidence. The inscriptions of Krsnadevaraya 
and his succesors, are, no doubt, found engraved on the walls 
of the temple ; but, as they only record the grants of land to 
the temple audits servants, they cannot enable its to attribute 
its construction to these monarehs. On the contrary, there is 
evidence to show that this temple was in existence long 
before the accession of Krsnadevaraya. It is stated in the 
introduction of Haribhatta’s JJttara Navas ini h a pur a n a that 
Proluganti Tippana, one of the commanders of Devaraya II, 
built a gopura to the temple of Virupaksa and constructed the 
bhoga-mantapa of Vitthalasvami, besides making benefactions to 
the other important shrines in the city (48). It is obvious that 
Vitthala’s temple was already an old shrine in the time of 
Devaraya II. It must have had its origin in the early days 
of the Sangama dynasty. 

The economic, social and religious conditions. — The first 
half of the fifteenth century was an age of great literary 
activity. Several kings of the age, such as Devaraya II, 
Sarvajna Singa, Peda Komati Verna, Kataya Verna and others 
were great scholars. They took considerable interest in the 
development of literature, and offered encouragement to men 
of letters. Devaraya II was himself a scholar, and the com- 
position of two works in Sanskrit, the Mahanatakasudhmidhi 
and a Vrtti on Badaravana’s Brahma Sutras is aseribed to 
him.* Like most of his contemporary princes, he extended 
his patronage to men of letters and lavished upon them 
gifts with an unsparing hand, irrespective of their creed or 
nationality. Consequently his court became the meeting 
place of scholars, poets, philosophers and theologians, who con- 
tended with one another to establish their superiority in' art 
and scholarship. Famous scholars from all parts of South 
India flocked to Vijayanagara, attracted by the well-known 
generosity of Devaraya, and attempted to win recognition 
by challenging the court pandits and poets for a literary 
disputation. The Raya presided over these discussions, and 


60 j Vijayanagara Stx-Cmimary 


jam 


mm 



! 

i 

i 


} 


% 

ill 


{ 

111 


it a 


, i 

I®!; 

If|i; 


ill 1 1 



110 



causing him to De Darned m a snower oi goiueu umma in rue 
famous Pearl Hall in the presence of the assembled scholars. 
This was a unique honour, reserved for poets and scholars 
of extraordinary merit. Besides, they obtained costly gifts 
of jewels and tax-free gifts of land. The great honour shown 
to men of letters, and the value set upon learning promoted 
literature, science and philosophy. 

The poets and scholars who wandered in search of 
patronage from one court to another passed through many 
lands ; and they came into contact with peoples whose habits 
of life differed very much from their own. The experiences 
of some of these wandering scholars arc preserved in literature, 
and though originally composed for amusement, these descrip- 
tions throw valuable light on the economic, social and religious 
conditions of the age of which we are otherwise ignorant. The 
poet !§rlnatha, who was a great traveller, visited the courts of 
all the famous South Indian kings of his time, and during the 
course of his peregrinations, he saw many cities and villages. 

• The places that figure in Srlnatha’s poems are Palnad, 
Blnad, Eruva, Rajahmandry, Kondavklu, Vijayanagara, and 
Cohjeevaram, besides many other places of smaller importance. 
He mentions many interesting facts about agriculture. Owing 
to the fitful rainfall there was water scarcity in Palnad; the 
staple product 1 of the country was eholam, and rice was practic- 
ally unknown^ The same conditions obtained in the neigh- 
bouring districts of Er uva and Renad where cereals and eholam 
were cultivated respectively. The country in the neighbour- 
hood of Vijayanagara was very fertile ; grapes, betel, plantains 
and other fruits grew there in abundance. In the Tamil 
country where rice was evidently cultivated, the fields were 


Ill 



Palnad seems to have specially excited the anger of 
Srlualha. He never lets an opportunity go without mailing 
some bitter remarks at the expense of the district and its inhabi- 
tants. The towns were contemptible ; the villages were small ; 
the houses were filthy j and the people were rude and inhospit- 
able. The staple food of the peoples in Palnad, Renad, Eruva, 
etc., was. cholain, whereas all civilised men ate rice. The 
Dravidas talked big; but their standard of living was low; the 
pungent earn, (pepper water), dishes made of cereals and leaves, 
even those of the bitter margosa, were applauded as delicacies. 
In Karnata, garlic and sesamum seeds entered largely into the 
composition of food which was generally unpalatable. The 
people ate porridge of ragi. 

The dress of the people varied with the country and the 
general culture of the society. The finest garment known to 
the people of Masara (Kolar) was the rough woollen blanket 
on which white lice crawled ; they put on dirty clothes, and 
wore the turban at an angle ; the Kamatakas dressed them- 
selves in a dhoti, laced-cloak, and cap ; the merchants of the 
west country wore dhotis of ochre-colour impregnated with 
the smell of the sweat. h ; (h-b- pvvbhvthh . /fb v f ; v ■ 

Srlnatha’s verses do not give us much information about 
the religious conditions of the age ; but they throw some light 
on popular religion especially of Palnad. There were temples 
in almost all the villages dedicated both to Visnu and Siva. 
The heroes were the divine lingas ; Genua was Visnu ; Kalin 
Poturaju was Kalabhairava ; and Ankamma, the Sakti, was 
Annapurna ; and the town of Karemapiidi was Kasi. Every 
small stone was a godling. Such was the religion which found 
favour with the people, of Palnad. 

The villages were governed by a body of officials of whom 
the karaam , redcU and the nayadu were the most important. 
In addition to these, mention is made of the village pur oh it ; 
hut he was a humble servant of the villagers ; and lie played 
no part in the village administration. 



CHAPTER SIT 


MALLIKARJUNA: 


karjuna ruled lor iy years xrom o.o. -lou* to ±oia 
to 1450) ( 61 ). The dates given by the haifiyat are not 

accurate, though the duration of the period of his rule very 
nearly coincides with that deduced from the inscriptions. 
Mallikarjuna, according’ to the inscriptions, appears to have 
ascended the throne in A.D. 1447 and ruled until the middle 
of A.D. 1465. 

The accession of Mallikarjuna marks the beginning of a 
long period of decline of the royal power which only termi- 
nated with the disappearance of bis dynasty about A.D. 14b5. 
The Vhlyaranya Ealajnana briefly describes the political 
condition of the kingdom after the death of Devaraya 11(14). 


113 



came into conflict with his nobles and local officers in their 
efforts to adjust themselves to their new environment. The 
most important chief that stood as an obstacle in the path of 
the Velamas was a certain Polepalli Bukkaraju, who held the 
important fort of Gandikota. Ee appears to have been a 
person of great valour, and, if the poetry of the bards can 
be trusted, a knight without fear and without reproach. .The 
conflict between Peda Singama Ann am a and Bulckaraju, and 
the former’s death in a night attack, and the subsequent cap- 
ture of the latter in the fort of Podacedu are described in 
the Velugotivari VaMavali (62). The activities of the turbulent 
noblemen such as these disturbed the peace of the kingdom, 
and by weakening the royal authority, paved the way for 
foreign invasions. 


Secondly, the enemies, whom Devaraya II had harassed, 
took advantage of the accession of Mallikarjuna to attack 
the kingdom. The dramatist, Gangadhara, as noticed already, 
gives an account of the earliest of these attacks. He 
states that the Bahmanx Sultan and the Gajapati, who had 
been defeated by Devaraya II formerly, marched upon Vijaya- 
nagara as soon as they obtained information of the death 
of their old enemy lay siege to the city and that Mallikarjuna, 
notwithstanding his youth, is said to have sallied out of the 
fort and put them to flight.* 

The Bahmanx Sultan at the time of Mallikarjuna’s 
accession was ’Ala-ud-Din II who ruled from A.D. 1435 to 1461. 
He was discomfited in a war with Devaraya II and it was only 
natural that he should have made a fresh attack upon the 
infidel state, when a favourable opportunity presented itself. 
The Gajapati king who is said to have made common c^use 
with the Muhammadans was Kapiles'vara, The . earjy^|j»tory : ' 




114 



the death of his master* probably with the help of the Mussal- 
mans.f According to the Katakarajava»i§avali, Kapilesvara 
was not a minister but an adopted son of Akata Bhanudeva. 
It is said, that during the last days of Akata Bhanudeva, the 
Moghuls (Muhammadans) invaded his country, and demanded 
a large ransom. The king paid a portion of it and for the re- 
mainder left his son as a hostage. He died soon after. The 
Moghuls released Kapila and he was anointed king over the 
Odhra country (74). It is not possible to state how far these 
chronicles are trustworthy. The truth about the circumstances 
in which Kapilesvara rose to power must be discovered by 
future investigations. 


The causes of Kapilesvara’s war upon Vijayanagara have 
already been stated. He wanted to establish his authority 
over the whole of Telingana, and humiliate the Raya of 
Vijayanagara who defeated him on a former occasion. In 
order to achieve his object successfully, he allied himself with 
the Bahmanl Sultan, and marched at the head of a large army 
to Vijayanagara and invested the city. Kapilesvara’s attack 
upon Vijayanagara is also mentioned in later records. Accord- 
ing to the Anantavaram copper-plate grant of Prataparudra 
Gajapati dated 1500 A. D., Kapilesvara laid siege to Vijaya- 
nagara, the capital of Karnata (69). R. D. Banerjee, however, 
denies that Kapilesvara entered into an alliance with the 
SultanJ. The reasons which he brings forward in support of 
his contention are not very convincing. The Russian traveller, 
Nikitin, alludes, in his diary, to a Mussalman attack upon 
Vijayanagara, and its capture.§ Although it is not possible to 
decide definitely when this attack was made, it is not unlikely 
that Nikitin and Gangadhara allude to the same event. 


The date of the siege : — When did Kapilesvara invest the 
city of Vijayanagara ? According to Gangadhara the event 
todk place soon after the accession of Mallikariuna. Devaraya II 
_____ 

• Banerj.e: History of Orissa I, pp. 287-88. + /. A. S. B. 1900 LXIX, p. 182. 

$ The History of Orissa I, pp. 293-4. , § India in the x$tk Century iii,p. 29. 


115 


died in A. D. 1446 and he was succeeded by Vijaya II, who 
ruled for a short time. Mallikarjuna’s coronation was probably 
celebrated some time in A. D. 1447. The KatakarajavaMavali 
and the Kaifiyat of Jagannatham state that Kapilesvara laid 
siege to Vidyanagara in his 19th year (i.e-, A. D. 1449-50) and 
took possession of the kingdom from its. ruler and bestowed 
the kingship on Amir (Ambira) (71). This may provisionally 
be accepted as the date of the siege of Vijayanagara by the 
combined armies of the BahmanI Sul, tan and the Gajapati. 


How the siege terminated cannot be ascertained at present, 
as both the sides claim victory in the fight. Gangadhara 
states that “ Mallikarjuna sallied forth from his capital, like 
the cub of a lion from his den, and routed the armies of the 
besiegers after completely defeating them in battle.”* The 
Anantavaram grant, on the contrary, asserts that Kapilesvara 
not only captured Vidyanagara but exacted (from its ruler) a 
huge sum of money as tribute (69). It is not possible for us 
to discover which of these statements is true. 



The conquest of Rajahmandry and Kondavldu. The date of 
Kapilesvara’s conquest of Rajahmandry is not known ; but it 
is certain that the conquest was completed some time before 
A.D. 1458, for it is stated in an inscription dated in that year 
that one of his officers, Raghudeva Narendra Mahapatra was 
governing the kingdom of Rajamahendravara.f The conquest 
of Rajahmandry must have preceded that of Kondavldu. 
According to the Oavali grant, Ganadeya, one of Kapilesvara’s 
cousins, was governing . Kondavldu in A.D. 1455. % In an 
epigraph of Cintalapalle dated in the previous year, he is said 
to have been ruling at Addanki, Vinikonda, and KondavIdu.§ 
It is evident that Kapilesvara completed his conquest of Konda- 
vldu, and consequently also of Rajahmandry before A.D. 1454. 
The authority of Devaraya II over the territory of Kondavldu 
was recognised until his death in A.D, 1446. One of the Sajuva 
chiefs, Mxsaraganda Kathari Tippayyadeva Maharaja was 


® Tlit Sourett, p. 66. 

$ I, ‘A> xx, pp. 390-393. 


f S. /. /. v, 100. 
§ 70 of 1917. 


' ; * 




' > i • « r ' ’ , - f ’ 

J 1 * - : 








mm 



holding sway over the. country in the neighbourhood or J3apatla 
in A.D. 1449.* It is not possible in the present state of our 
knowledge to know whether he ruled over the district as an 
independent chief or as a subor; 
either ease, it is certain that Kond 
hands of the Gajapafci until A. D. 1449 


Wdinate of Mallikarjuna. In 
vldu did not fall into the 
Although the avail- 
ble evidence does not clearly indicate the date of the conquest 
>f Eajabmandry, it is not unlikely that it took place before 
LD. 1450, as an inscription found in the northern extremity of 
he Rajalunandry kingdom shows clearly that Kapiiesvara’ s 
luthority was recognized in that region as early as A. D. 14o0.*j* 

Kapiiesvara appears to have received considerable help 
rom some of the Ksatriya and V elama chiefs of r I elingana in 
subjugating the Vijayanagara territory. Pusapati Tammaraja, 
>ne of the ancestors of the Zamindar of Yizianagaram, 
ippears to have played an important part in Kapiiesvara s 



attention to Telingana. That country remained m a state of 
turmoil ever since the time of its conquest by Ahmad Shah in 
1425. The Velamas of Raeakonda and Devarakonda who 
were forced to submit to him at that time, attempted to shake 
off the Muslim yoke in A. D. 1434 ; but their attempt was 
fr ustrated. Though the ruler of Warangal was forgiven, a 
portion of his territory was conferred as a jaglr upon Sanjar 
Khan, one of Ahmad Shah’s retainers. Telingana was once 
again in the throes of rebellion during the last years of the 
reign of ’Ala-ud-Dln II. Jalal Kh an and his son Sikandar 
Kh an rose up in rebellion against their master in A. D. 1453, 
and sought the aid of Maliamud Khaljl, the Sultan of Malwa. 
’Ala-ud-Dln who was confined to his sick-bed despatched 
MahamM G-awan against the rebels ; and he seems to have 
received considerable help from Linga I, the V elama chief of 
Devarakonda.* Gawan laid siege to Balkonda, the rebel 
stronghold, and captured it. Jalal Khan and his son were 
forgiven and they were allowed to retain Balkonda in their 
possession.! ’Ala-ud-Dln II, dying soon after, was succeeded 
by his son, Humayun. He sat upon the throne for three 
years (A.D. 1458-1461). During his short reign a fresh rebellion 
broke out iu Telingana, once again headed by the un- 
repentent Jalal Khan and his son Sikandar. The Hindus of 
Telingana, especially the Velamas of Devarakonda, supported 
them. Humayun marched at the head of the army against the 
rebels and killed Sikandar Khan who came to oppose him. 
Then he proceeded to Balkonda, and having effected its 
capture after a week’s investment, took Jalal Khan prisPhijiv' 
Next, he marched to W arangal with the object of punishing the 
Hindus for their share in the rebellion ; thence he despatched 
a large army under the command of Khwaja-i-J ahan and 

* VelugZ{ivari Vamsavali, p. 49. 

t Bfigp Ferishia ii, pp. 447-9 ; BurhSn-i-Md'ftstr, L A* xxviii, pp* 240*% j 


■r- .. . : . 



Nizam-ul-Mulk to reduce Devarakonda. They proceeded 
against the fort, and laid siege to it, when the velamas 
appealed to Iv apiie s v&r a for liclp. 

Kapilesvara who was eager to bring the whole of 
Telingana under his sway, promptly responded to the appeal 
of the Velamas. He sent a large army, to their assistance 
Prince Hamvira who was the commander of the army marched 
his troops so quickly that the besiegers were completely taken 
by surprise. Attacked by the forces of Kapilesvara m the 
rear, and the Velamas who sallied out of the fort, the 
Muslim army was out to pieces, and both the Muslim 

generals sought safety in flight. On hearing of this disaster, 

Humaydn Shah put Nizam-ul-Mulk to death and imprisoned 
Khwaja-i-Jahan. Owing to the outbreak of a rebellion m the 
capital, the Sultan could not endeavour to retrieve the 
misfortune. He entrusted the defence of Telingana to 
Mahamnd Gawan, and hastened to Bldar to suppress the 



Kapilesvara advanced at the head of a mighty host, and 
reached the neighbourhood of Bidar, where he lay encamped 
at a distance of ten miles from the city. The Muhammadan 
historians declare that this vast host was repulsed and put to 
flight by one of the captains of Nizam Shah, supported by one 
hundred and sixty horsemen S It is incredible that the war- 
worn veterans of Kapilesvara who had successfully fought 
against the Mussalmans of Dehll, Bengal and Malwa, should 
have turned tail at the sight of a few Bahmanx troopers. It is 
not unlikely that he captured the capital of the Bahmanx Sultan 
on this occasion and assumed the title of Kalubarigesvara. 
Whatever be the true results of this attack, Kapilesvara still 
lingered in the neighbourhood and carried on his depradatory 
expeditions unchecked at the time of the invasion of Maha- 
mud Khaljx of Malwa.* Kapileslvara’s campaign against the 
Bahmanx Sultan was completely successful and as a con- 
sequence the Telugu districts of the Bahmanx kingdom passed 
into his hands. . 


The conquest of Udayagiri. — The conquest of Udayagiri 
is not mentioned in any of Kapilesvara’ s inscriptions. How- 
ever, the fort must have been conquered by him some time 
before A.D. 1470, as, according to the Saluvabhyudayam, it was 
in his possession at the time of Saluva Narasimha’s accession to 
the throne of Gandragiri. It is stated in the Telugu Prabodha- 
candrodayam, a contemporary work, that Basava, a son of 
Tammaraya, of Kantamaraja’s family, who is said to have been 
the adamantine gate to all the forts of the Grajapati and the 
Sultan, broke into the fort of Udayagiri in such a manner that 
he destroyed the pride of all his wily foes.f This achievement 
must probably be attributed to his father Tammaraya, as he 
is said to have been the ruler of the fort in two inscriptions 
dated A.D. 1470. % When did Basava, or more probably his 
father, capture Udayagiri ? According to the Katakaraja- 
vamsavali, Kapilesvara ‘ruled as far as Setu (Ramegvaram) 

* Burf0n-i-Ma’%sir, LA. sxviii, p. 277; TabqUt-i- Akba-rb in, p. 344. 

f Prabadkaeandrbdayam , 1: 16. % N. JD. I. in, U. 28, 29. 

' ft v ; . '■ "■ fr '■ . 


120 



in the 25th year, i.e., A.D. 1454-55 (71). This is too early a 
date for his conquest of the South. Moreover, Udayagiri 
which stood on his path to the South, remained in the posses- 
sion of the Vijayanagara king until A.D. 1462A Therefore, it 
could not have fallen into the hands of the Grajapati or his 
subordinates before that date. It is very likely thatTammaraja 
Basava who seems to have accompanied Kumara 
southern expedition, helped him 
And it remained in the possession 
hen Saluva Narasimha 


and his son 

Hamvlra Mahapatra in his 
in capturing the fort, 
of the Gajapati until A.D. 1471, w 
recaptured it. 

The conquest of the South {A. D. 1463).— Kapile4vara 
undertook the conquest of the Vijayanagara territory extend- 
ing to the south of Kondavidu in A D. 1468. According to the 
Anantavaram copper-plate grant, Kumara Hamvlra, at the 
command of his father, subdued the kings of the southern 
quarter and washed his sword clotted with their blood in the 
water of the southern ocean (69). The details of this cam- 
paign are not available at present, though the names of a 
number of forts such as Candragiri, Padaivldu, Valudnlam- 
patti-Usavadi, Tiruvarur and Tiruccilappalli, which he captured 
are* mentioned in the inscription.! The fort of Udayagiri 
mus t have been captured, as noticed already, during the 
course of this expedition. , Another city which fell into the 
hands of the invader was Kanci.J 

The conquered territory was placed under the control of 
Kumara Kapilesvara Mahapatra, a son of Kumara Hamvlra, 
who seems to have assisted h is father during this campaign. 
As, a result of this expedition, the kingdom of Orissa reached 
the greatest extent which it was ever destined to reach, and 
: Kanilesvara became the master of a far firing empire extending 


Ibid} /» A* 


121 



* * -*V' 



A.D. 1466, this part of the country which was under the 
Gajapati two years earlier had already passed into the hands 
of Sajuva Narasimha.'* A third record inscribed on the wall 
of the mandapa near Manavalar Sannidhi in Litde Conjeevaram 
shows that Virupaksa’s sway was acknowledged in that region 
in A.D. 1487. f These inscriptions show the unbroken continuity 
of the rule of Vijayanagara kings over the Tamil districts 
during this period. Therefore, ‘ the only safe conclusion to 
adopt is in the words of Sewell, 1 that the expedition so far 
to the south, of the Orissa force from Kondavid, was merely 
a sudden raid followed by speedy withdrawal’^ 


The Gajapati invasion, it is true, did not seriously 
the trend of political life in the Tamil districts ; 
destroyed the power of the Rayas in the two Telugu di 
along the coast. This part of the Vijayanagara kingdo: 
annexed to the Gajapati dominions. Uriya garrisons 
posted at all important forts and Uriya governors 
appointed to carry on the administration of the ter 


urvive the Gajapati invasion, 
x was probably too much for 
1 in June A.D. 1465. As the 
xaksa II was celebrated in 
sems to have died some time 
1465. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


virupaksa it. 


After Mallikarjuna’s death, the throne was usurped by 
Virupaksa II. Considerable difference of opinion exists among 
scholars regarding his relationship with Mallikarjuna. Some 
hold that he was a cousin of Mallikarjuna, being the son of 
his paternal uncle, Pratapadevaraya. Others vigorously 
repudiate this and maintain that Virupaksa II was a son of 
Devaraya II, and therefore a brother or half-brother of Malli- 




Now, the ^rlsailam plates'* give an exact account of the 
parentage of Virupaksa. Verses 16-17 of the inscription state 
that a prince named Pratapadevaraya was born to Vijaya- 
bhupati and his queen Narayanambika ; and that ‘ he obtained 
the Grhanadri -rajya (Penugonda territory) from his elder 
brother.’ It follows from this (1) that Virupaksa’s father’s 
name was Pratapadevaraya, and (2) that the latter had 
obtained the Gh an a&vi-rajya as an appanage from his elder 
brother. 

Pratapadevaraya mentioned in this grant must not 
be identified, as is sometimes done, with Devaraya II. In the 
first place, there is no evidence to show that Devaraya II had 
any elder brother, of whom he could have been a subordinate. 
Secondly, the inscriptions refer to him as the supreme ruler of 
the whole kingdom, and they do not suggest even remotely 
that he ever filled a subordinate place. Lastly, the acquisition 
of the Peniigonda-fq/^a from an elder brother is not alluded to 
either in liis own records or that of his son, Mallikarjuna. V 
Owing to these considerations it is not possible to identify 
Pratapadevaraya, the father of Virupaksa, with DevAra^a II, 
Who then was this Pratapadevaraya ? And what was the name of 

his elder brother from whom he obtained the Penugonda-rq/ya ? 

•• ■ ' - ■■■ - ’ * 






E.J. XT, p 24. 




■ ■V’ ' 


■ - : " ■■ : : : a 

* • 





rhese questions are answered by the batyamaugatam plates, 
which* disclose the identity of Pratapadevaraya and his 
unnamed elder brother. According to tills grant, Yijaya had 
by his queen Narayanaml)ika ; a son, Devaraya II, whose glory 
was ‘ made resplendent by his younger brother Pratapadeva- 
raya just as that of hlaheadra by ins younger brother Upendra 
(Yisirn}.’* Here we have clear' evidence to show that 
Devaraya II had an younger brother called Pratapadevaraya. j* 
This prince ‘was successively governor, under his elder brother, 
of Teiltkanambi in Mysore, Mulbagal-r%a, and later still of 
M arakatanagara-pr a»£a It is assumed that he predeceased 

his . brother, having died in A.D. 1446 ;§ but this is wrong, as 
the Sravana-Belgola epigraph^ on which this assertion is 
based refers to the death of Devaraya II himself, and not 
to that of his younger brother, Pratapadevaraya. As 
a matter of fact, he was alive at least ten years after 
the demise of his illustrious elder brother. An interesting 
epigraph from Badinenipalli in the Kurnool district dated 
A,D..:t® ^registers a gift of land made by a subordinate of 
Maharajadhiraja Paramesvara Fratapadeva Maharaya who 
was ruling the kingdom seated on the diamond throne, with 
Penugojjda as his capital (68). This epigraph brings to light 
a Fratapadeva Maharaya who was ruling at Penugonda ten 
years after the death of Devaraya II. As the name of this 
prince and the seat of his political power are the same as 
those of the father of YirSpaksa, it is not unreasonable to 
believe that they were identical. It follows from this that 
Yirupaksa was a cousin and not a Brother or half-brother 
of Mallikarjuna. ' 


sgarding the circum- 
irorns it seems that 


Though no information is available rej 
stances in which Yirupaksa came to the tb 

■ t.;T, AvOop-inatha Rao makes a vain attempt to nullify t3 
tion by assuming that the engraver of the grant wrongly inset 


deace of this inscrip- 
*r a iapadlvara ylna far 


ted to Sir R, G, Bhandarkar, p. 



lie forcibly took possession of it. The story in the Vaisnavite 
work Prapanmmrtam attributes his cr.eeossiou to a dastardly 
deed of murder perpetrated by him when the victims were under 
the spell of sleep ;* but it is impossible to take the weird story of 
Prapannamrtam seriously. The time for giving a connected 
account of the early career of Virupaksa has not yet come. 
Future investigation alone can dispel ' the darkness hanging 
over the history of this period. 

Although Virupaksa proudly asserts that he had vanquish- 
ed the enemies at the point of his sword, his kingdom was 
infested with the enemies both external and internal. He did 
nothing either to expel the Uriyas from the kingdom or to 
keep the ambitions Nayakas under control. Nuniz gives a 
very poor estimate of bis character as a ruler, and says that 
‘ he was given over to vice, caring for nothing but women, and 
to fuddle himself with drink. ’f The authority of the central 
government declined, and the outlying provinces asserted 
their independence. The whole kingdom would have probably 
fallen an easy prey to foreign conquerors, had not some of 
the patriotic nobles exerted themselves. 

The most outstanding event of the reign was the 
expulsion of the Uriyas ; but, as mentioned already, Virupaksa 
did not take any part in the affair. The task of liberating the 
country, therefore, devolved upon his nobles, especially Saluva 
Narasimha the ruler of Candragiri. Narasimha was a scion of 
the influential Saluva family, the members of which held 
important offices of great responsibility and trust under the 
government. He was a descendant of the famous Saluva 
chief, Mangi, who played an important part in the southern 
wars of Kumar a Kampana and who ultimately establishedf 
himself in the neighbourhood of Candragiri. Of Saluva 
Narasimha’s father Grunda III not much is known 
he ruled at a place called Kalyana and had two sons, 
Tirumala and Narasimha. It is not known when Saluva 

.. * Sources, p P . 71-9. f Forgotten Empire, p. 305. 




126 


Narasimha succeeded Ids father on the throne of Candra- 
o-iri. From the fact that his earliest known inscription is 
dated in AD. 1456* it may he assumed that he came to 
power either during that year or a little earlier, re must 
have been ruling at Oaudragiri at the time when Kumara 
Hamvlra led his armies to the South in AD. 1468 and was 
probably forced to pay tribute to the Gajapati.f Hus was 
the origin of his hostility towards the Uriyas ; and throughout 
his long career, he spared no effort in waging incessant war 

upon them. 



The events connected with Narasimha’s war with the 
Gaiapati are described by several writers ; the account of 
Raiauatha Dindima, one of the poets of Narasimha s court, is 
of o'reater importance than others as it describes the campaign 
at some length. According to the Saluvabhyuclayam, 'a poem 
in which Dindima glorifies the Saluva family, Narasimha was 
advised, on ’the' death of his father, by the ministers to wrest 
the fort of Udayagiri which was in the possession of the 
Gajapati, or the king of Kalinga, at that time. Having agreed 
with the view of his ministers, he marched at the head of his 
army to take Udayagiri. The king of Kalinga naturally- 
attempted to oppose him ; hut he was defeated and forced to 
take refuge in the fort. Narasimha followed him thither, and 
having laid siege to it, captured it by scaling its walls. The 
king of Kalinga submitted ; and placed himself with all his 
dependents under the protection of his victorious enemy . % 

The account of the Saluvabhyuclayam appears to be based on 
facts. We learn from the Muhammadan historians that Saluva 
Narasimha made himself the master of the east coast up to the 
Krsna some time before AD. 1475. It is improbable that he 
would have advanced up to the Krsna leaving behind him such 
an important fort as Udayagiri in the hands of the enemy. 


W04. ... V: : 

"' + c <the f 0 n ow i ns statement of the Kaiakaraja VamsUvali (71). Panca-vimiaU 

■oatsar? sVu-parymlam rUjyam krtavan. 

J Sources, pj>- 90-102. 





Moreover, the Jaimimbharatam ancl the Varahapuranam, 
two contemporary works, refer to Narasimha’s victory over 
the Uriyas and the consequent subjugation of Udayagiri * 
Therefore Saluva Narasimha’s conquest of Udayagiri must be 
regarded as a fact. There is one point, however, which 
demands explanation. The Saluvabhyudayam, refers to a 
Kalingaraja whom Narasimha captured at Udayagiri. 
The name of this chief is not known. Any attempt to 
discover his identity involves the discussion of the time 
when Narasimha captured the fort. Two epigraphs at Udaya- 
giri make it clear that the fort remained under the control of 
Kantamaraju Tammaraya until A.D. 1470.f Kapilesvara died, 
according to tradition on the banks of the Krsija, probably at 
Kondapalii, in the same year. The available evidence shows 
that the country up to the Krsnu passed into the hands of 
Saluva Narasimha immediately after. Now, had the presence 
of Kapilesvara in the south any connection with Saluva Nara- 
simha’s attack upon the Gajapati dominions '? Did Kapilesvara 
or his son Purusottama, who appears to have been present in 
the camp of his father at the time of his death, participate in 
the defence operations at Udayagiri '? It is not unlikely that 
they should have done so. But it is hazardous to base a con- 
clusion on a surmise. For the present, it may be assumed 
that Dindima treated the defeat of Tammaraja, the Uriya 
commandant of the tort, as that of his master. .H-wy 

After the fall of Udayagiri, Narasimha’s path for the 
conquest of the Telugu country to the north lay open ; 
but instead of proceeding northwards, he is said to 
have turned, on the contrary, towards the south. The 
reason for his return to the south is not mentioned in the 
Saluvabhyudayam ; but he is said to have proceeded against a 
Cola king, who, however, fled on the approach of his army. 


128 



in the Cola country, 1 where a local chiet, rLampa, claiming 
descent from the Colas, opposed baluva Tirumala, (elder bi other 
of Narasimha) in his government of the country.’* He was not 
alone. According to the Jcamviubh afcitciw ^ Narasimha scattered 
the ‘ eared-men ’ (cemdapdltdu) who settled down in the lands of 
the Tigulas (Tamils). t The 1 eared-men ’ are probably to be 
identified with the Lambakarnas who dwelt on the northern 
borders of the Pandyan kingdom. If this is the correct inter- 
pretation of the term, it may be suggested that the Cola was 
supported by a chief of the Pandyan family. Curiously enough, 
an inscription in the Ekamranatha temple at Kan cl dated 
A.D. 1469 indicates the presence of the Pandyan chief, Bhuva- 
4ekavlran SamarakSlahalan in Tondaimandalam. The epi- 
graphist is of opinion that Samarakolahala ‘occupied Conjee- 
varam for a short time taking £ advantage of the weakness of 


rt, if hot. 


129 



■Ml 


the whole, of his time in subjugating the territory between 
Udayagiri and the Krsna, but the events that happened during 
these years are not recorded. It is only possible in the present 
state of knowledge to indicate the probable trend of events 
with the help of such material as we have at our disposal. 

The affairs at Telingana and the Godavari delta fell into 
confusion on the death of Kapilesvara in A.D. 1470, owing to 
the fratricidal war that broke out between his sons. The 
succession to the throne was disputed. Hamvlra or Amblra and 
Purusottama, both of them sons of Kapilesvara by different 
mothers, claimed the throne, and naturally they had recourse 
to arms to settle their differences. The Ka\akaraja Vandavali 
alludes to these events in a cryptical manner. 

“ He (Kapilesvara) had several sons, and could not decide 
on whom he should bestow the kingdom. Therefore, he 
appealed to the God* ; and the God appeared to him in his 
dream and told him that Purusottama, his son by a prostitute 
would succeed him. The king accompanied by the boy (went 
to the South) and resided in the country of Kundaram (Kundaj- 
hari) on the banks of the Krsna, where he died. Then Puru- 
sottama was anointed as the king in his southern camp. When 
he returned, to Kataka (the capital), his eighteen brothers 
objected to fiis accession to the throne. It was pointed out 
that he was the God’s choice, (and that they should not raise 
any objection against his accession). They said that they would 
test the truth of the statement by attacking him jointly, (and 
they proceeded to do so) ; but he withstood their united attack. 
Therefore, they surrendered the kingdom to Purusottama in 
accordance with their pledges and retired from the coun- 
try” (84). 

Whether God Jagannatha ever appeared to Kapilesvara 
in his dream and communicated that his choice fell Upon the 
king’s illegitimate son, Purusottama, cannot now be discovered; 

* The God referred to here is the God Jagannatha of PUfi who was the de facto 
sovereign, and in whose name the Gajapati* ruled the kingdom as his deputies. 


130 



but it may be noted here that Kapilesvara regarded himself 
strictly as a servant of Jagannatha and was in the habit of 
addressing pathetic appeals to the deity for help in his difficul- 
ties. Kapilesvara appears to have chosen — whether prompted 
by the deity or not —Purusottama as his successor and admitted 
him into partnership in the government of the kingdom during 
his last years. The inscriptions show that Kapilesvara and 
Purusottama ruled the kingdom jointly from A.D. 1466 to 1470. 
As noticed already, the former died in A.D. 1470, but the 
latter claims to have commenced his reign four years earlier. 


It is obvious that, according to these inscriptions, 
Purusottama began his rule in A.D. 1465—6. Now the pro- 
bthiii is that if Kapilesvara died in A.D. 1470, how could the 
rule of his successor commence in A.D. 1465-6, that is, four 
years earlier? Two answers are possible to this question: 
(1) It may be said that though the death of Kapilesvara actually 
took place in A.D, 1465-6, it was kept a secret, owing to political 
considerations for some time. When the secret was revealed 
either by accident or design in A.D. 1470, people came to 
know of it for the first time. They believed that he died 
during that year. (2) Though Kapilesvara was alive until 

* Tlie date of this record is given as * trisamka Barnett has corrected ;t as 23rd 
anha\ but the correct date Is trims at yanka* 


Ref. 

Saka 

Year 

Anka 

Regnal 

Year 

Date of 
accession. 

J A. E. E. 365 of 1896 

1392 

| 7 

5 

1465-6 

j „ 366 of 1896 

1393 

! 7 

i. ■ 

5 

4465-6 

| „ 274 of 1896 

1393 

7 

5 

1465-6 

j L. E. 42, pp. 323-4. 

1411 

28 

23 

1465-6 

| j - E.I. xiii, p. 155 

1412 

| 30* 

| 24 

1465-6 

111 A. E. E. 347 of 1896; 

1$. S.IJ. v. 1229 

1417 

j 37 

'J- . 

30 

1465-6 



181 



A.D. 1470, he might have abdicated the throne in favour of 
Purusottama in A.D. 1465-6, owing to his inability to attend 
personally to the affairs of the state on account of old age or 
sickness. In that case there is nothing strange in Purusottama 
commencing to rule in A.D. 1465-6, though Kapilesvara was 
alive for four more years. The latter alternative offers a 
satisfactory explanation of all relevant facts. Therefore, it may 
be considered that Kapilesvara, having entrusted the kingdom 
to the care of Purusottama, retired from the kingship in 
A.D. 1465-6. Though he was alive for a few more years, 
Purusottama who became the sovereign, carried on the 
administration of the kingdom. '-tVv/'-fyyH:;: yh 

Civil War 'in Orissa. — Kapilesvara’s selection of Puru- 
sottama as his successor, naturally created much heart-burning 
among his other sons. Hamvira who had greatly contributed 
to the military success of his father was not expected to 
acquiesce in an arrangement which superseded his claims to 
the throne. He did not recognize Purusottama as the lawful 
sovereign, and consequently civil war broke out in Orissa on 
the death of Kapilesvara. Ferishta gives a brief account of 
the causes that led to the outbreak of this war. 


“ In A.H. 876 information came that the king of Uriya, 
having fallen ill, died. ? f 1 : 

“ ‘He had an adopted son, a brahman who ascended the 
jewelled throne. He had a paternal uncle’s son, Hammlr by 
name ; as to bravery, he was absolutely brave ’. 

Between them there was a dispute. When the treasures 
and the throne came into the hands of the adopted son of the 
king of Uriya, he became victorious and drove Hammlr, into 
hills and jungles.”* 

■ It is evident from this passage that on the death of 
Kapilesvara in A.D., 1470-1 there broke out a civil war in 

• TariU-i-Perishta (Naval Kishore Press), p. 35, This Is, in fact, a passage quoted 

Mvm* parliVi* writer. • 1 • 


lit® 




132 



Orissa between Kapilesvara’s adopted son whom Ferishta calls 
Mangal Ray and his brother’s son, Hammlr. In the struggle 
Hammlr was worsted and was obliged to seek refuge in, hills 
and jungles, but he did not despair. He appealed to the 
Bahmatu Sultan, Muhammad Shah If, for help. 


“ Hammlr, the. paternal uncle’s son of the king of Uriya, 
wrote a petition to the Suljan Muhammad Shall that the king 
of Uriya died. His adopted son, Mangal Ray has taken posses- 
sion of the crown and the throne and calls himself the king of 
Uriya. It is time that an army should be sent to this country; 
and after effecting its conquest it should be handed over to me. 
I shall send every year a certain quantity of wealth by way of 
tribute to the court of the king.”* 


Moreover, Hammlr seems to have promised the Sultan 
that he would surrender no tonly Telingana, which Kapilesvara 
had wrested from the BahmanI Sultan some ten years earlier, 
but most of the territory belonging to the old kingdom of 
Rajahmandry. Muhammad Shah promptly promised support. 
His predecessors suffered considerably at the hands of 
Kapilesvara. Moreover, he had £ a desire to possess the 
territory of Uriya Rajahmandry and Kondblr.’ Therefore, 
he comm'anded Malik Hasan Bahry, the ancestor of the 
kings of Ahmadnagar, on whom he conferred the title of 
Nizam-ul-Mulk to proceed to Orissa with a large army and 
place Hammlr upon the throne of that country. When 
Nizam-ul-Mulk reached the frontier of Orissa, Hammlr, 
hastening to receive him became the leader of the advanced 
guard. And they defeated in battle Mangal Ray, who opposed 
them with a large army. Nizam-ul-Mulk then placed Hammlr 
in possession of his hereditary dominions. Then they 
proceeded to Rajahmandry and Kondblr and conquered those 
two countries. According to the orders of Sultan Muhammad 
Shah, Nizam-ul-Mulk took possession of the conquered places 
and entrusted them to trustworthy men. He sent Hammlr to 

*/«</,{>. 351. . ■ Y • Y.; , ... 



his own place. Then Nizam-ul-Mulk began to rule the Telugu 
country as the viceroy of Muhammad Shah II with the city 
of Rajahmandry as his headquarters,* 

Ferishta’s account does not fully agree with the evidence 
of the inscriptions and of Hindu literature. In the first place, 
he makes Hammxr a nephew (brother’s son) of Kapilesvara, 
whereas the inscriptions allude to him as Kapilesvara’ s son. 
This may be explained away by assuming that though 
Hammlr was in fact a nephew of Kapilesvara he referred to 
himself as his son following the well-known Hindu practice 
of addressing one’s own paternal uncle as father. The other 
points on which Ferishta differs from the Hindu sources 
cannot be explained so easily. He introduces a Brahman 
Mangal Ray as the adopted son and successor of Kapilesvara 5 
but the inscriptions and the SarasvaUvilasam of Prataparudra 
Grajapati assert that Purusottama Gajapati who was born to 
Kapilesvara by his queen Parvatl, ascended the throne after 
the death of his father. ; 

Notwithstanding these differences, which may be attri- 
buted to the inaccurate sources of information, it must be 
admitted that Ferishta’s account is substantially true. Kapi- 
lesvara’s territories in the Telugu country could not have 
passed into the hands of the BahmanI Sultan immediately after 
his death, had there been no civil war between his two sons 
Hamvlra and Purusottama, or Mangal Ray as Ferishta calls 
him. This is in agreement with the view of M. M. Chakravarti 
who states, while commenting on one of Purusottama’s inscrip- 
tions at Jagannatha that “ Purusottama Deva got on the 
throne after a civil war. In this inscription he hastens to 
propitiate by gifts the gods and their priests. ”f 

. The outbreak of the civil war between the sons of Kapi- 
lesvara after his death threw the kingdom of Orissa into 
confusion, and this offered a splendid chance to the Raya 
and his nobles to recover the lost territory. Though Virupaksa 

* TariU-i-Fsrhhta, p. 351. f /. A. S. B. (1893) Ixii, Part I, p. 92. . 


134 


was too absorbed in the pursuit of pleasures to bestow any 
attention on the affairs of state, Saluva Narasimha took 
full advantage of it, and made himself, as noticed already, 
the master of the entire east coast up to the G-odavarl. 

Hamvlra who ascended the throne of Orissa in A. D. 1471 
with the help of Muhammad Shah Bahmam II was not able to 
keep himself in power. Purusottama (Mangal Ray) who was 
defeated by Nizam-ul-Mulk Bahry gradually gathered strength 
in the country, attacked Hamvlra, and overthrew him. 
According to the Sarasvatlvilasam, Purusottama forced his great 
foe Hamvlra to bow before his feet. The victory of Purusot- 
tama over his rival was so complete that he was free from 
anxiety from his side during the rest of his reign. Having thus 
got rid of his domestic enemy, he felt that he was strong enough 
to make an attempt to reconquer the Krsna-Grodavarl delta. 
An accident which happened in the fort of Kondavlr* gave him 
an opportunity to take the first step in this direction. The 
garrison which was stationed by Muhammad Shah mutinied, 
and murdered their governor. Then they surrendered the 
fort to an Uriya nobleman called Hamlr who was originally 
patronised by Muhammad Shah. Hamlr sent messengers to 
Kataka to inform the king of Uriya that the proper time 
for the recovery of his hereditary dominions had come, tie 
premised to join the king of Uriya provided that he was 
given a share in the country conquered from the Mussalmans. 
Sp ree the king of Uriya collected 

all his forces and advanced upon Rajahmandry. Nizam-ul- 
Mulk Bahry, being unable to oppose the Uriya army in the 
field, fled towards Wazlrabad leaving the garrison at Rajah- 
mandry to defend the city as well as it eould.f Purusottama, 
the Uriya monarch, marched to the city and laid siege to it. 
Saluva Narasimha was also present in the neighbourhood of 


* Tarlkh-t-Ferishta (Naval Ki shore Press)* p. 353. This is the name given by 
Fsrishta. Though the name is similar to Kondaynju which is usually written as Kond- 
ylt in Persian histories, the identity of the place is not established. The situation of the 
place a$ described in Ferishta seems to point to a fort somewhere near Rajahmandry* 
f Ibid, p. 353;' B'urfiUn* I A, raviii, p. 288* ' ’ - ' 




135 



* Ibid, p, 283. The Katakaraja VaihSHvctli states that Purusottama demanded the 
daughter of the King of KaEcI in marriage. His proposal, however was turned down. 
Purusottama thereupon marched to Kanci at the head of his army, hut being defeated was 
obliged to retreat pursued by the King of KaEcI who chased him' across the GSdavarf (94). 
If this were true, it would give a satisfactory explanation of SSluva Narasimha’s presence 
on the banks of the Godavari 'C 

t The armies of Sajuva Naraiimha and Purusottama lay encamped on the western 
bank of the Godavari in the neighbourhood of Rajahmandry in A.D. 1477. “ When they 

(Muhammad Shah and his army) arrived in the neighbourhood of the fort of Rajahmundry, 
they saw an immense city on the farther side of which the infidel Narsinga had 

taken his stand. On this side of the river, ho had dug a ditch ” (/. A. xxviii, p. 288). 

Rajahmandry stands on the eastern bank of the Godavari, and Sajuva Narasimha’s camp 
must have lain on the opposite (».«., the western) bank. Ferkhta who : also alludes to this 
expedition states: “ On his (Muhammad Shah’s) arrival near RSjahmundry the enemies 
deliberated with one another, and'saw the inadvisability of the war. Therefore, Hsjmir, 


■ 


136 

to remain there long. The activities of Purusottama and 
Saluva Narasimha in the Krsna-Godavari doab was a direct 
challenge to Muhammad Shah’s authority. As soon as he 
obtained intelligence of what had happened in the Telugu 
country, he hastened with all his forces to Rajahmandry. On 
his arrival in the neighbourhood of that city, the Hindus 
are said to have fled precipitately without giving the Sultan 
a chance to fight. Saluva Narasimha abandoned his fortified 
camp and retired to the south ; Purusottama crossed the 
river Godavari, and retreated towards his dominions; and 
Hamir, the IJriya, who was assisting .him withdrew to the 
fort of Kandanir. Muhammad Shah then laid siege to 
Rajahmandry, and reduced the garrison to extremities. The 


commander of the fort, having discovered that further 
resistance was useless, surrendered and he was enrolled among 
the Turki, Telangi and Habshi slaves of the Sultan.* 

Muhammad Shah next marched into Orissa in order to 
punish Purusottama for having invaded the Godavari delta 
and captured Rajahmandry. He is said to have devastated the 
country and slaughtered its inhabitants. Purusottama 
purchased peace by surrendering twenty-five elephants of 
his father which he 4 prized next to his life The Sultan 
next proceeded against Kandanir and invested it closely for 
six months. Hamir, the Uriya, who was very hard pressed, pro- 
mised to surrender the fort, on condition that the Sultan pardon- 
ed him. The pardon was granted, and the fort capitulated. The 

tlx® Uriya, retired to the fort of Kandanir, where lie was besieged. The Ray of Orissa 
having crossed the river alighted on the bank of the river on the side of liis country/' 
(, Tar%hh;i-Fe.ri$hia , p. 354). It is obvious that the king of Orissa Purusottama 

Gajapati) and his confederate Hamir, the Uriya, were also encamped on the western, bank 
of the river, i.e., on the same side as Sajuva Narasimha. No information is available 
regarding the attitude of the Hindu armies towards each other. The account of the 
Muhammadan historians dimly indicates that they were friendly. Fetish ta states that the 
Hindus deliberated with one another, and having seen the unwisdom of fighting near 
Rajahmandry dispersed. According to Sayyid *AH, ‘when Narasimharaya heard of the 
arrival of the Sultan's army, thinking it advisable to avoid meeting their attack, he 
elected to take to Sight/' '{T.A. xxviii, p. 288). It may be noted here that the plan of 
action which both the Gajapati and Sajuva Narasimha followed is the tame. They were 
probably allies, and acted according to a plan which they had agreed previously to adopt. 

* /. A . xxviii, p. 288. 


si! 



137 


Sultan, having successfully re-established his authority in the 
Godavari delta, remained at Rajahmandry for three years pro- 
bably to organize the administration of the conquered territory . 

The Sultan's raid upon Kahci . — Muhammad Shah next 
turned his attention to the South. The whole of the east 
coast to the south of the Krsna was under the sway of 
Saluva Narasimha who was governing it practically as an 
independent sovereign, though he still owed allegiance to 
Virupaksa II. Narasimha who was not well disposed towards 
Muhammad Shah caitsed him much annoyance by frequently 
exciting ‘the zamindars on the BahmanI frontier to rebel.’* 
Now that* he had established his sway over a large part of the 
coastal Telugu country, Muhammad Shah resolved to conquer 
the remaining portion which was under Saluva Narasimha. 
Having entrusted the government of the tarfs of Rajahmandry 
and Warangal to Nizam-ul-Mulk Bahry and A’azam Khan res- 
pectively, he marched towards the country of Narasimha. At 
first, he went to Kondavldu, the people of which had recently re- 
belled against him, and had thrown themselves on Narasimha’s 
protection. The Sultan subdued the place, and forgave the 
inhabitants who expressed regret for their past conduct. It 
was while staying at Kondavidu that Muhammad Shah heard 
of the immense riches and booty of the temples of Conjeevaram. 
He immediately conceived the idea of attacking the city, and 
plundering its temples. With a select band of 6,000 troopers, 
the Saltan proceeded to the city by forced marches, and reached 
it on the 12th March A.D. 1481. The temples were plundered 
after some fighting and the Sultan carried away all the gold, 
jewels and silver.f 


# Brigg’s F&rishta ii, p. 499. ' 

■ f LA* xxviii, pp. 289-90. The route which Muhammad Shah look on this occasion 

has been the subject of controversy owing to doubt about the identity of Malar jSx 
where according to one copy of the Burftan-i- Met asir he is said to have halted on his 
way. The name of the place is given as Telur jyQ. in the recently published Hyderabad 

edition. Taba$at~i~Akbart correctly gives the name of the place as Nilawura 
(Nell ore) which stands on the direct route from Komjayldu to Cofijeewaxta (iii, p,$0). 

V/ by 


1—18 


\Llit : 'hi V-- 



138 



Muhammad Shah, however, could not reach his capital 
safely with his rich booty ; Saluva Narasimha who seems to 
have been absent from this part of his dominions, despatched 
his general Isvara Nayaka, as soon as he heard of the happen- 
ings at KancI, in pursuit of the Sultan. Isvara intercepted the 
Muhammadan army at Kanduktir in the north of the Nellore 
district and inflicted a crushing defeat upon them. He plun- 
dered their camp, and took back, it may be imagined, much of 
the booty which they were carrying away from KancI* 

Muhammad Shah was naturally enraged at the unexpected 
manner in which his plundering raid had terminated. There- 
fore, he planned a double attack upon Narasimha’s territory as 
soon as he returned to his army headquarters. In the first 
place, he resolved to lead - personally an expedition against 
Masulipatam and its neighbourhood which were included at 
that time in the dominions of Narasimha. Secondly, Yusuf 
’Adil Khan and*F akr-ul-Mulk were despatched with an army 
of about 15,000 troops mostly consisting of foreigners against 
another part of his dominions, in order probably to distract 
attention, while the Sultan himself was engaged in the reduction 
of the maritime districts. According to Ferishta, our only autho- 
rity on this subject, the Suljtan reduced Masulipatam with all the 
dependent country and returned to Kondapalli.f But he keeps 
a judicious silence over the achievements of the two officers 
whom the Suljtan sent against N arasimha. The Salumbhyudayam 
alludes to the siege of Penugonda by the combined armies of a 
Sahara chief and the Turuska king. It is said that Narasimha, 
who paid a visit to a sage inhabiting the Kutuvacala proceeded 
from that place with his elephant forces (nagamandala) to 
Penugonda, with the object of taking that fort. When he 
approached the fort, he was obstructed by the armies of the 
Sahara and Turuska kings. The Vardhapurdnam mentions 
Penugonda as one of the places captured by Saluva Narasimha’s 
general Isvara. The Jaiminibharatam states that Narasimha 

9 Sources, pp, 89, 106; K. K Rangaswami Aiyangar Commemoration Volume, pp, 312-3* 

f Brigg’s Ferishta ii, p. 501* 


189 


destroyed the army of a eertaia Pikkillu (Fakr-ul-Mulk ?) aad 
other enemies at Penugonda. The Muslim armies which 
according to these works laid siege to Penugoiida have perhaps 
to be identified with the contingent which Muhammad Shah 
despatched under Yusuf ’Adil Khan, and Fakr-ul-Mulk against 
Saluva Narasimha. In that case, it must be said that though 
they penetrated into the very heart of the Vijayanagara king- 
dom, they were defeated and driven away. 

The expeditions planned by Muhammad Shah against 
: Saluva Narasimha after his return from Kane! turned out to be 

the last which he was ever destined to undertake. He fell into a 
plot hatched by his nobles against his able minister Khwaja-i- 
Jahan Mahmud Gawan, and ordered his execution on April 5, 
A.D. 1481, less than a month after his return from Kane! * With 
the execution .of Gawan, Muhammad Shah’s power rapidly 
waned; and he soon followed to the grave, the faithful minister 
whom he had unjustly put to death. The Sul, tan died at Bid ar 
on March 26, A.D. 1482. 



Important changes took place at Vijayanagara during 
the subsequent years. Virupaksa II continued to rule until 
the middle of A.D. 1485, when he was murdered by his eldest 
son. The parricide, however, refused to ascend the throne, 
as he deemed himself to be impure, on account of the heinous 
crime he had committed. At his instance, his younger brother 
Padearao was crowned ; but the new king turned out to be 
as unworthy as the old. His first act, after his coronation, 
was to get his elder brother, to whom he owed his crown, 
assassinated. Then he gave himself up to wine and women, 
and became utterly indifferent to the fate of the kingdom. 


The conduct of the king roused the indignation of the 
nobles, specially Saluva Narasimha who had done so much 
to defend the kingdom during the last two decades. He 
seems to have been convinced that unless the rule of the 


Briggs Feri&M& . u, 



140 


m 


old dynasty was put an end to, the condition of the kingdom 
could not be bettered. Therefore, he assumed royal titles, and 
commanded his general, Narasa Nayaka to proceed against the 
capital and capture it. Though Padearao was informed of 
the approach of Narasa Nayaka’s army, he remained indifferent 
without taking any steps to defend either himself or his capital. 
When at last he was told that Narasa Nayaka entered the 
gate of the palace, he roused himself, and fled by the other 
gate. He seems to have taken refuge in a foreign kingdom, 
where he soon perished. Thus ended the dynasty of Harihara 
and Bukka after a rule of one hundred and tifty years. 



CHAPTER XIV. 


SALUVA NARASIMHA. 

The flight of Tadearao from Vijayanagara left the 
jewelled-throne of the Rayas vacant} and. Saluva Narasimha 
siezed the kingdom without much trouble. He brushed aside 
the old dynasty, and crowned himself king. Nuniz who lived 
in Vijayanagara within forty years of the event leaves no 
room for any doubt. “ When it was known by the captain” 
says he, “that the King had tied, . . . . he sent to acquaint his 
lord, Narsymgua. And after that Narasymgua was raised to 
be king .... Thenceforward this kingdom of Bisnaga was 
called °the kingdom of Narsymgua.” * This is corroborated 
by the evidence of the inscriptions. Apart from the imperial 
titles that are coupled with his name in several of his records, 
the Cakenahalli plates of A.D. 1492 make the direct statement 
that Saluva Narasimha ascended the throne of Vidyanagara.f 
That Narasimha usurped the throne of his master 
cannot be gainsaid ; but if usurpation was ever justified by 
the conditions that necessitated it, it was in this case.J 


Saluva Narasimha found that it was easier to capture the 
throne of Vijayanagara than to enforce his authority over the 
nobles of the kingdom, who were accustomed to govern their 
estates as independent chiefs during the anarchic confusion 
prevailing in the preceding reigns. The support of ‘ the 
captains and the chiefs of the kingdom ’ which enabled him to 
oust the old dynasty did not outlast the act of usurpation ; for 
in attempting to enforce his authority he came into conflict with 
the nobles who regarded themselves as the virtual sovereigns 
of their estates. “ He took the territories from whomsoever 

had, contrary to right, taken them from the king ....and he 

regained all the lands which the kings his predecessors had 


* Forgotten Empire, p. 307. 


§ M.A.&. 5924, No. lit 




% Contra Stdhxi Subrahmaaya pp, 145-7. 


lilil 


lilfl* \ 


iMB. 

i 'i hi 


WM 1 








142 



Numz ; Forgotten £mj>ire t p, 307. 


f L. R. 18 (JillSJJa), p. 34. 


lost.”* The nobles whose rights to the lands they were 
holding he had thus questioned did not tamely submit to his 
authority. They took up arms in defence of their vested 
interests, and held out until they were compelled to surrender 
to superior military force. Therefore, Saluva Narasimha was 
obliged to undertake the reconquest of the territory which 
nominally acknowledged his authority. Consequently, he was 
involved in petty warfare with his nobles which weakened his 
military strength considerably. Of the nobles who attempted 
to defy his authority, the Sambeta chiefs of Peranipadu and 
the palaigars of Ummattur and its neighbourhood deserve 
particular attention. 

The Sambetas : — The Sambetas were an important family 
of Kgatriya chiefs who held myankara estates in the Gandi- 
kota -Sima. The most important branch of this family 
established itself at Peranipadu in the Pulivendla taluk of the 
Ouddapah district, feomadeva and his son Pinnaya, two 
important chiefs of this family rose to prominence under 
Devaraya II. The former whom Devaraya II placed in charge 
of the fort of Kondavidu about A.D. 1432 came into conflict 
with the Velamas, as noticed already; Anapota II and his 
cousin Linga I are said to have vanquished Somadeva and 
Pinnaya respectively. Pinnaya had two sons. Goparaja and 
Sivaraja ; the former who was a subordinate of Mallikarjuna 
was ruling the family estate about A.D. 1460 ; f and he appears 
to have been succeeded by his brother. It was during the 
administration of Sivaraja that Saluva Narasimha put an end 
to the rule of the Sangamas, and usurped the throne of Vijaya- 
nagara. Taking advantage of the prevailing confusion in the 
kingdom owing to the political changes in the capital, Sivaraja 
collected from the simas in the neighbourhood in defiance of 
the royal authority taxes which he appropriated for his own 
purposes. At the same time, one of his kinsmen, Sambeta 
Vlra Narasimha, rose up in rebellion, and according to the 
custom of the rebellious noblemen of the age, began to plunder 


143 



the neighbouring country side and waylay the merchants and 
the travellers passing along the highway. When the intelli- 
gence of the doings of the Sambeta chiefs reached Vijayanagara, 
Sahiva Narasimha despatched one of his courtiers, Vankara 
Ktimara Dhhli Basivi Nayadu against Yira Narasimha, and 
proceeded himself -with an array against Sivaraja. Basivi 
Nayadu arrived at Kamalapur which he made his headquarters; 
thence he advanced upon Maddi Gundala where Yira Nara- 
simha was halting ; after some fighting the followers of Vira 
Narasimha yielded, and Maddi Gundala fell into the hands of 
Basivi Nayadu. Yira Narasimha fled towards Udayagiri. In 
the meanwhile Saluva Narasimha reached Peranipadu and laid 
siege to the fort ; Sivaraja offered resistance, but as the fortifica- 
tions could not withstand a sustained artillery attack, the fort 
fell and Sivaraja perished with most of his followers at the 
hands of the enemy (79, 80). 

Another nobleman who attempted to defy Saluva Nara- 
simha’ s authority was Saluva Mallideva, the chief of 
Bommavaram. His rebellion seems to have taken place at 
the time of Purusottama Gajapati’s attack upon Udayagiri. 
Narasimha made an attack upon Mallideva, while he was 
on his way to Udayagiri to oppose the Gajapati inva- 
sion. He laid siege to Bommavaram, Mallideva’s capital, and 
quickly destroyed its fortifications by means of his artillery. 
The fort and the palaces were demolished, and the defenders 
were put to the sword. The inhabitants including women 
and children committed suicide by drowning themselves in a 
tank in front of the palace (82). 

Saluva Narasimha’s authority does not appear to have 
been effectively established in the Kanarese country. The, 
chiefs of Ummattur and Sangitapura who held sway over the, 
Mysore district and Tulu-nM respectively did not acknowledge 
his suzerainty ; and the princes of the old royal family who 
appear to have taken refuge on the west coast exercised some 
sort of control over Barakur and its neighbourhood.* The 

* 391 of 1927 ; 278 of 1931-32. 


144 


ft 



efforts which Saluva Narasimha made to subjugate these 
regions are not known, though he seems to have succeeded in 
imposing his authority over Barak ur during the last years of his 
reign.* 

It is evident that the difficulties which Saluva Narasimha 
had to face in maintaining his power increased after his 
usurpation of the throne of the Rayas, and consequently his 
capacity to offer successful resistance to the invaders from 
outside had somewhat decreased. 

The Gajapati Invasion.- Sultan Muhammad Shah II who 
disturbed the peace of the neighbouring kingdoms died in 
A.D. 1482, and he was succeeded by his son Mahmud II 
who was an imbecile. Taking advantage of Muhammad’s 
incapacity to rule, the nobles attempted to establish them- 
selves in their respective estates, and were frequently engaged 
in petty warfare on their own account. The royal power 
consequently declined rapidly, and the Su].tan was soon 
reduced to the position of a mere figurehead. 

Notwithstanding the decline of the royal power and the 
disobedience of the nobles, Telingana and the Godavari delta 
remained under the officers to whom Muhammad Shah II had 
entrusted their government up to A.D. 1486. At the time of 
the death of Muhammad Shah II, the ’Adil Khan Deccani held 
the governorship of Warangal, and Qawam-ul-Mulk, the junior, 
was in charge of Rajahmandry. This arrangement remained 
in tact until the death of the ’Adil Khan Deccani at Warangal 
in A.D. 1486. Thereupon, Kawam-ul-Mulk marched upon 
Warangal and occupied it without the permission of the king. 
Nizam -ul-Mulk Bahry who was the prime minister at the time, 
taking the Sultan with him, marched to W arangal to chastise 
Qawam-ul-Mulk. On hearing of the approach of the royal 
army, Qawam-ul-Mulk fled to Rajahmandry and Nizam-ul- 
Mulk meeting with no opposition restored the Sultan’s 
authority in Telingana without difficulty, 

* See Appendix at the end of the Chapter, 


145 



The history of Qawam-ul-Mulk, subsequent to his flight 
to Rajahmandry, is not known. Probably he held sway over 
the Godavari delta until he was expelled by Purusottama 
Gajapati a month later. 

The deplorable condition into which the affairs of the 
BahmanI kingdom had sunk revived the hopes of Purusottama 
Gajapati to recover the Godavari delta from the Mussalmans. 
He seems to have attacked Rajahmandry in A.D. 1487 or a 
little later. The history of this campaign is not recorded; but 
Purusottama’s inscriptions which are found in the Godavari 
valley and farther south show clearly that he had fully 
realised his ambition before A.D. 1489. A damaged copper- 
plate grant from the Godavari district dated in that year which 
records Puru§ottama’s gift of the village of Ganti to Brahmans 
shows that the Godavari valley had already passed into his 
hands.* He was not satisfied with the acquisition of this 
territory, but evidently resolved to recover all the southern 
conquests of his father. With this object in view, he appears 
to have crossed the Krsna and invaded the Kondavldu country. 
An epigraph at Kondavldu dated A.D. 1489 records the king’s 
edict abolishing the marriage tax which the people of the 
Eighteen Sects had to pay in Kondavldu and Kandravadi and all 
other countries.f A copper-plate grant of A.D. 1489-90 records 
Purusottama’s gift of Potavaram in the Ammaiiabroli-sfwta to 
the temple of Lingodbhava Mahadeva of Cadaluvada on the 
bank of the Brahmagundl (Gundlakamma).|; It is evident 
from these records that before the middle of A.D. 1489, 
Purusottama conquered the whole of the east coast as far 
south as the Gundlakamma. 


Conquest of TJdayagiri. — Puru§ottama’s victorious cam- 
paign did not terminate with the subjugation of Kondavldu 
and its dependent country. The capture of Udayagiri was 
indispensable for securing the safety of his southern frontier. 

* A.R.B . 1900, Part ii, para. 65. t Z,R, 42 (Koijda-niJu), pp. 323-4, 

t £.J»xin, p. 15$. 


146 


Therefore, lie seems to have made an attack upon Udayagiri with 
the object of seizing it; but Saluva Narasimha, notwithstanding 
the internal broils in his kingdom, hastened with an army from 
the capital to oppose the advance of the Uriya monarch. The 
result of this encounter is briefly described in the Sarasvatl- 
vilasam of Prataparudra Grajapati. According to this work, 
Purusottama ‘ captured Narasimha, the king of the Karnatakas 
alive and set him again at liberty as he humbly begged for 
his life ’ (89). The Anantavaram copper-plate grant dated 
A.D. 1500 gives more information about this incident. It 
states that ‘Narasimha, the king of the Karnatakas, trembling 
with fear, offered to Purusottama the fort of Udayagiri, and 
begging protection, secured his own release’ (88). These 
records make it clear that Saluva Narasimha who came to 
defend the province of Udayagiri was defeated by Purusottama 
in battle, and was taken prisoner. He purchased his freedom 
by surrendering to his captor the fort of Udayagiri with its 
dependent territory. The information furnished by these 
records is also supported by the evidence of Nuniz. Udayagiri 
was one of the three forts which rebelled against Saluva Nara- 
simha and which he could not retake owing to want of time * 
It remained under the Uriyas until A.D. 1514, when Krsnaraya 
finally expelled them from the south of the Krsna. Saluva 
Narasimha did not long survive the loss of Udayagiri. His latest 
inscription is dated 14th October A.D. 1490f and the earliest of 
his son Immadi Narasimha is dated 28th November A.D. 14914 
Therefore, he must have died some time during the interval 
bequeathing his kingdom and throne to his successor.§ 

* Forgotten Empire^ p. 308. f 269 of 19 31-2. 

% Mat. Mss. 15-4-30, p. 234. 

§C. Hayrvadana Rao’s date (between March 18, 1497 and April 16, 1498 — Mys. Gat, II, 
p. 1717) for the death of Sajuva Narasimha cannot be accepted. The casual mention of his 
name in 719 of 1917 dated & 1420 cannot be taken to mean that he was alive at that time; 
and Narasimha M aha ray a of that record, who is coupled with Narasanna Nay aka, was 
most probably Sajuva Narasimh&'s son, Immadi Narasimha. The other record cited by 
H. Rao (£. C. iv, Hg. 74) is of no value as the Saka year is 1400, and the date is not 
susceptible of verification as the astronomical details given in the record are not enough 
for this purpose. While more than twenty inscriptions bear testimony to the continuous 
rule of Immadi Narasimha from 1491 to 1497, not a single record clearly traceable fo 
gajuva Narasimha bears a date latter than 149Q. 


lllllilillili 


14 ? 


Military Reforms of Saluva Narasimha . — During the forty 
and odd years of his rule, at first as the governor of Candragiri 
and later as the king of Vijayanagara, Saluva Narasimha 
frequently came into conflict with several enemies, specially 
the Muhammadans. He found that he could not always 
successfully oppose the Mussalman 4*mies owing to the 
existence of certain defects in his military organisation. In 
the first place, his armies were weak in cavalry, an arm 
which contributed so much to the success of the Mussalmans. 
Secondly, the people from whom he recruited his troops 
lacked the proper military spirit which was very essential for 
success in the battle-field. 

Therefore he endeavoured to remove these defects, and 
make his armies thoroughly efficient in war.* 

To provide his armies with efficient cavalry he required 
good horses and capable riders. All the horses that were 
required for the armies and the court equipage were imported 
from Persia and Arabia, and the Arab merchants enjoyed a 
virtual monopoly in the horse trade at the time. Owing to the 
short-sighted policy of Virupaksa II, the Arab merchants were 
scared away from his dominions, and the kingdom lost the 
principal ports of Goa, Chaul and Dabul on the west coast. It 
was of utmost importance that Saluva Narasimha should 
secure some ports in order to realise his ambition. Therefore, 
he organised an expedition of conquest, and subjugated the 
Tulu country ( 104 ). He established his garrisons at ‘ the 
sea-ports of Honavar, Bhattakkula, Bakkaniru and Mangala- 
puram to which stations he imported from abroad, large num- 
bers of horses. To induce the Arab merchants to bring the 
best horses to his ports, he offered them extravagant terms. 

“He caused horses to be brought from Oromuz and 
Adeem into his kingdom, and thereby gave profit to the 
merchants, paying them for the horses just as they had asked, 

# Niiaixt JForftftea' JtyW* ' * t ^ ij/tj \ 1 , 1 ; “ >’ i : 


148 



He took them dead or alive at three for a thousand pardaoS, 
and of those that died at sea, they brought him the tail only, 
and he paid for it just as if it had been alive.”* 

Saluva Narasimha’s services to the kingdom of Vijaya- 
nagara can hardly be over-estimated. It is true that he expelled 
the old dynasty and seized the throne ; but that was rendered 
necessary by the exigencies of the situation in which he found 
the affairs of the kingdom. The last princes of the Sangama 
family demonstrated their utter incapacity to rule. The 
nobles became unruly and showed very little regard for the 
sovereign power; the BahmanT Suljtan and the Gajapati 
invaded the kingdom without opposition and appropriated 
some of the fairest districts. Saluva Narasimha resolved to 
save the kingdom from its enemies, both internal and external. 
He expelled the Raya, put down the nobles with a stern hand, 
and waged a life-long war upon the foreign foes. More than 
the insubordination of the nobles, more than the might of the 
Gajapati, he dreaded the all sweeping hordes of Islam. He 
wanted to prevent the Mussulmans from entering the kingdom 
of Yijayanagara, a land where the Hindu Dharma still flourish- 
ed unconquered, and where the cows, the Brahmans and the 
Gods were still honoured. To secure this end he effected a 
revolution in the minds of his people; he transformed peace- 
loving farmers into a nation of warriors; (104) and bequeathed 
to them his newly organized cavalry — a weapon which contri- 
buted a great deal to the military greatness of Vijayanagara 
in the future 


Nuniz : Forgotten Empire^ p, SO?, 


APPENDIX. 


The Kerala Pajama which refers to Narasinga Raya’s conquest of the west coast is si 
Mai ay al am account of the dealings of the Portuguese with people of Malabar and Kanara 
on the west coast, written very probably in the 17th century. This work while describing 
the arrival of an ambassador of Narasinga RSya to the Portuguese governor Almeida, 
gives a short account of the affairs of kingdom of Narasinga, in the course of which 
it casually alludes to Narasinga Raya’s conquest of the west coast. (104), 

It is necessary to establish the identity of this Narasinga Raya, as it has an impor- 
tant bearing upon the subject under consideration. As Almeida did not airive at the 
west coast before September A. D. 1505 {The Rise of the Portuguese Power in India , 
p. 105), Narasinga Raya who sent him an envoy must be either Immadi Narasimha or 
what is more likely, the de jacto sovereign Vira Narasimha; but there is reason to 
believe that the west coast was conquered much earlier. This region came under Sajuva 
Narasimha during the very last years of his reign, and it appears to have remained 
under his successors ever since without a break, as seen from the following schedule : — 

SCHEDULE. 


King: Sajuva Narasimha. 

Governor of BarakSm-rS/y^ : 
Hamparasa Odeya. 

King: Immadi Narasimha. 

Governor of Barakuru : Honnaka- 
lasaraya Maharaya, son of Tri- 
yambakaraya. 

Virapratap&Homnakalasa Maharaya. 
King: Immadi Narasimha. 

Governor of Kalasa: Vira Bhaira- 
rasa Odeyar. 

King: Immadi Narasimha. 

Sub: Vira Bahairarasa Oijeya. 
King: Tammaraya. 

Governor of Barakuru: Honnaka- 
lasaraya in the time of Gavurappa 
Dannayaka. 

King: Immadi Narasimharaya. 
Governor of Barakuru*. Sadarana- 
deva O^eya makes a grant for the 
merit of Narasanna Nayaka. 

King: Immadi Narasimha. 

Governor of Barakuru: Sadharana- 
deva Odeya. 

King: Vira Narasimharaya. 

Governor of Barakuru: Basava- 
rasa O^eya. 

King: Narasingadevaraya. 

Governor of BarakHru: Basava- 
rasa 0<Jeya. 

King: Immadi Bhujabala Nara- 

simhadevaraya Maharaya, 
Governor of Baraktim: Basava- 
rasa Odeya. 

King: Bhujangabala Narasimharaya. 
Governor of BarakSru: Mallappa 
Nayaka. 


269 of 1931-32— -Chaujikeri. 

Oct. 14, 1490 

591 of 1929-30 — Handadi. 

May 11, 1492 

386 of 1927— Kotesvar. 
EX. VI, Mg. 54— Kajasa. 

Oct. 21, 1492 
Jan. 27, 1493 

,, Mg. 50 — Kajasa. 

May 14, 1493 

270 of 1931-32— Chaujikeri. i 

Jan. 6, 1494 

511 of 1928-29— Giliyara. 

July 3, 1498 

166 of 1901 — Manigarakeri 

July 9, 1499 

152 of 1901— Chaujikeri. 

? Jan. 14, 1502 

423 of 1927-28— Basrur. 

Oct. 20, 1507 

541 of 1929-30— Bandar. 

Oct. 25, 1508 

410 of 1927-28— BasrUr. 

Jan. 14 1510 


As the inscriptions included in the schedule indicate the continuance of the authority 
of the Sajuvft and the Tuluva kings over the west coast from A. D. 1490 to 1510 the 
subjugation by Narasinga Raya must have taken place earlier. In that case, Narasinga 
Raya Who conquered the west coast, as mentioned in the Kerala Pajama , must be 
idunlihed with Sajuv* Narasimha. , ^ ... ' > 




CHAPTER XV. 

IMMADI NARASIMHA. 



hidden in obscurity; and most of the problems demand 
reconsideration in the light of the fresh material that 
has accumulated in recent years. The first problem that 
deserves examination is the position of Narasa Nayaka in the 
government of the kingdom. According to Nuniz who came 
to Vijayanagara some thirty years later; Saluva Narasimha 
left, at the time of his death, £ two sons who were not old en- 
ough to govern the kingdom.’ He summoned his minister, 
Narasa Nayaka, to his bed-side and ‘ begged him to keep guard 
over the kingdom and to deliver it up to the princes, to which- 
ever of them should prove himself most fitted for it.’ In 
obedience to the commands of his late master, Narasa 
Nayaka is said to have raised the elder prince 4 to be 
king’ retaining in his own hands, in his capacity as the 
guardian of the king and the kingdom, 4 the treasures and 
revenues and the government of the country.’ After the 
assassination of this prince through the machinations of 
Tymarsaa, Narasa Nayaka 4 raised up ’ the murdered prince’s 
vouneer brother called Tamarao who was very young 4 to 



up son in A. D. 1493 could not have been a cliild at that time.f 
Sadbu Subrahmanya Sastri strengthens Sewell’s view by- 
adducing what appears to be definite evidence. He alludes to 
an inscription at Tirupati dated A.D. 1473, in which Saluva 
Narasimha and three other persons Kumara Narasayyan, 
Periya Tangama and Cikka Tangama are mentioned , % and he 
believes that Kumara Narasayyan of the inscription is identical 
with Immadi Narasimha. He is, therefore, of opinion that 
Immadi Narasimha was * almost 30 years’ old at the time 
of his father’s death ‘ and it is possible that he was still 
older.”§ ■ ' ■ 

Now, the evidence on which these statements are based 
is not quite trustworthy. In the first place, the Mysore 
inscriptions from which Sewell has drawn his inference do not 
mention Immadi Narasimha’ s son Devapparaya. They regis- 
ter the gift of Salavaya or Surreyavi Dyavappa Nay aka, the 
son of Immadiraya. The chiefs mentioned in these records 
are the rebellious chiefs of Ummattur who attempted to assert 
their independence. They assumed Yijayanagara titles^ about 
A.D. 1491|| in defiance of royal authority. Sewell was 
evidently deceived by the name Immadiraya, a name by which 
Immadi Narasimha is never mentioned in the inscriptions, — 
coupled with the royal and Saluva titles such as Maharajcidhi- 
raja, Rajaparamesvara, Medimmlsaraganda, Kathari Saluva, Sal- 
uva and Mahdrdya $ 

* E.C. ix, Db. 42, 45. t J.A.R.S. 1915, p. 387. 

% T.D.E.R., p. 142. § Ibid, p. 147. 

1 Cf. E.C. Ill, Nj. 118 ; IV. Gu. 2 and Intro, p. 27. 

8 Rice : My sort and Coorg from the Inscriptions, p. 155. 

♦ It was also customary with some of the friendly subordinates of Sajuva Narasimha 
to assume the Sajuva titles, though they were not Sajuvas by birth. The Tujuva princes 

assumed Sajuva titles even before they rose to royal power, though they had no 
connection with the Sajuva family. The practice was begun by Narasa when, after the 
death of Saluva Narasimha, he became virtual master of the empire*.: The assumption 
of the Saluva titles raises the doubt whether the idea of the usurpation of the royal 
throne had not already taken shape in Nar^sa’s n4nd ? ‘ ! " 


152 


li 


m 

ili. 


Secondly, it is not possible to draw any definite con- 
clnsjon from the data furnished by the Tirupati inscription. 
It consists of two different records both registering certain 
gifts made by Saluva Narasimha for offerings to the deity on 
some specified occasions. The first is dated S.S. 1395 Vijaya 
Mithuna su. 6, Tues. !§atabhisak (June 2, A.D. 1473), when 
the sthanattar are said to have executed a silasasanam in favour 
of M. M. Medim-misara-ganda Kathari- Saluva Saluva Nara- 
simharaya Udaiyar. This silasasanam concluded with the fol- 
lowing sentences. “ In the above manner are the said stipulations 
drawn up by the temple accountant Tiruninra-ur-udaiyan with 
the assent of the &rl Vaisnavas. May these the Sri Vaisnavas 
protect.” The second record which appears to be a supple- 
ment to the above bears no date ; and it was probably added 
to the first some time later, when, it cannot be ascertained. 
It opens thus : “ From the income realised from the said 
Domarapatti only shall be offered 4 appa-padai at the rate of 
one at each mantapam . . . in the name of yourself, in the 
name of Kumara Narasayyan, and in the names of Cikka 
Tangaman and Periya Tangaman.” * 


These epigraphs do not enable us to understand how 
Saluva Narasimha was related to Kumara Narasayyan and 
others. Therefore, the identification of Kumara Narasayyan 
with Immadi Narasimha cannot be taken as established.")* 
Granting for the nonce, that such an identification is not 
impossible, the supplementary inscription does not help 
us in determining Immadi Narasimha’ s age, as it is not dated. 
Therefore, there is no justification for doubting the trustworthy 
character of Nuniz’s account. On the contrary, there is reason 


* T.T. D.E. Strict ii, pp. 89*99. 

f There is reason to believe that Kumara Narasayyan mentioned in the inscription is 
the eldest son of Narasa Nayaka who later assumed the name of VTra Narasimha ; for the 
Varahapuranam which was composed while Sajuva Narasimha was still ruling at Candragiri 
and dedicated to Narasa Nayaka mentions that the latter's dearson Narasayya 7 was in 

attendance on his father in the durbar SfoodS' 

otS l: 11^. He might have been the Kumara Narasayyan of the Tirupati epigraph. 





for believing that the narrative describes genuine historical 
events. . ; - - . \ 

A study of the inscriptions of the period shows that 
Narasa Nayaka was the de facto sovereign of the kingdom. 
He was associated with the king in the administration; he 
was called * the protector ’ (raksdkarta)* and 1 lord ’ (svami). f 
He was the senadhipati +, mahapradhana%, and karyakartah 
of the king and he ruled the kingdom of the world on behalf of 
the kingl, and kings bowed to his feetJ Narasa Nayaka 
assumed the royal and Saluva titles. In an inscription of 
A.D. 1497 he is referred to as king Nrsimha, son of Isvara and 
Bukkamba; the Saluva title Kathari- Saluva is coupled with 
his name. He is said to have 1 ruled over the vast earth 
standing under a single umbrella causing admiration to 
people’. | In another record dated A.D. 1502 the royal 
titles such as mahamandalehara, bhasege-tappuva-rayara-ganda, 
ariraya-vibhada , rajadhiraja and rajaparamesvara are 

attributed to him.** It is evident from this that Narasa 
Nayaka’s position in the state Was equal to that of the king. 
If Immadi Narasimha was a grown up man nearly thirty years 
old, having sons old enough to be the governors of districts at 
the beginning of his reign, it is inconceivable, unless he 
happened to be an imbecile incapable of managing his 
own affairs, how he could have retired into the background 
allowing his general to usurp his power. There is nothing to 
show that he was an imbecile. What little evidence there is 
on the subject goes to show that he was restive under Narasa 
Nayaka’s guardianship, and made unsuccessful attempts to 
overthrow his authority. Nuniz, who must have obtained his 
information from the contemporaries of Immadi Narasimha, 
states that he and his elder brother were boys at the time of 
their father’s death, and were placed under the guardianship 


m 



of Narasa Nayaka. This being in agreement with the evidence 
of the inscriptions, may be accepted as the truth. 


Immadi Narasimha and Narasa Nayaka : — Immadi Nara- 
simha owed his elevation to the throne to an accident. His 
elder brother, Timmabhupala whom Narasa Nayaka* first 
placed upon the throne on the death of their father was 
assassinated by one of his own attendants at the instigation 
of Narasa Nayaka’s rival Tymarsaaf, and Narasa Nayaka in 
order to establish his own innocence placed Immadi Nara- 
simha upon the throne. 


Immadi Narasimha was not content to remain a mere 
figure-head allowing the kingdom to be governed by the all 
powerful protector. He manifested signs of discontent with 
his subordinate position from the beginning. When Narasa 
Nayaka demanded from his retreat at Penugonda that his rival 


* Adayar Library Bulletin , I. iii, pp. 91-2. A commentary on Gangesa’s Tattva- 
cintUmani called Tattvavarttika is ascribed to Sajuva Timmabhupala. * The introductory 
verses, after Mangala , describe the parentage and prowess of the author, TimmabhtJpala. 
First is mentioned King Kumja of Sajuva- kulax u Alahkari$nuh kila Salu v=$ndra-kulath 
gum Kunda iti kfiiindrah His son was Sajuva Narasimha whose wife was Tippam- 
bika. To these two was born Sajuva Timma, who is described as yuvaraja * The 
colophon "runs thus: Iii Sriman^MahamandaUsvara Vira~vlsya~bhujanga Saiuva Nara- 
simha* nandana Sri T tmitpabhu paliyb. 

t Ferishta alludes, in describing the history of Yusuf *Xdil Shah of Bijapur, to the 
death of a prince (ray zada) of Vijayanagara who accompanied the de facta ruler Tim raj 
in his campaign against Bijapur as a consequence of the wounds received in a battle near 
BijapUr. The battle took place in the month of Rajab A.H. 898 (April A. D. 1493). On 

authority of this statement, the prince who died of wounds near Raichur has been 
identified with the elder brother of Immadi Narasimha; and as he died of wounds 
received in the battle-field, it is pointed out, that he could not have met with his death at 
the hands of the assassin ; (S. K. Aiyangar : The Little Known Chapter , pp. 59-64) but 
Ferishta is such a dubious historian that no definite inference can be drawn from hi# 
statements. According to him, Timraj was the de facto ruler of Vijayanagara in 
A.D. 1493. The name of the de facto ruler, we know, was not Timraj but Narasa Nayaka. 


155 



Tymarsaa who was really responsible for the murder of Immadi 
Narasimba’s elder brother, Timmabhupala, should be punished, 
he remained silent. “The king (Immadi Narasimha) at that 
time was very fond of that captain (Tymarsaa), since by 
reason of him, he had become King, and in place of punishing 
him, he bestowed favour on him, and took his part against the 
minister The disagreement between the king and Narasa 
Nay aka is also noticed in the Kaifiyat of Raniesvaram 
“ While this Saluva Narasimharaya was reigning, Narasa 
Nayaka who was governing the kihgdom was dismissed from 
his office, and Nadindla Timmarasayya (a Brahman) of the 
^ruvela caste was appointed minister (gradhani) in his 
place”f (91). Therefore Immadi Narasimha seems to have made 
a serious effort to get rid of Narasa Nayaka ; but he was not 
destined to succeed. Narasa Nayaka did not allow himself to 
be trifled with. He ‘ made ready large forces’ and marching 
against Yijayanagara laid siege to the city. Immadi Narasimha 
was forced to sue for peace. He commanded that Tymarsaa 
should be put to death and that his head should be taken to 
Narasa Nayaka to appease his anger. His orders were carried 
out ; and Narasa Nayaka entered the city triumphantly. His 
authority was established more firmly than ever. 


Immadi Narasimha seems to have caused continuous 
anxiety to Narasa Nayaka, as he grew into manhood. 


* Nuniz : Forgotten Empire , p. 309. 

t NSdindla Timmarasayya who was appointed as the minister in the place of Narasa 
Nayaka may seem, at first sight, to be identical with ‘ Tymarsaa’ mentioned by Nuniz, 
Tempting as the possibility of such an identification is, it must be rejected, until 
explicit proofs are available. Sajuva Timmarasa who was a trusted minister of Natasa 
Nayaka, Vira Narasimha and Krsnadevaraya; and Nadindla Appa and Gopa who held 
offices of great trust and influence under Krsnadevaraya were his son-in-law and sons 
respectively. It is very doubtful whether Narasa Nayaka and his sons would hltVe' 1 
employed the sons and son-in-law of the arch-enemy of their family, if. indeed, Nadindla 
Timmarasa were identical with ' Tymarsaa’, of Nuniz. It seems more reasonable to 
suppose that they were different. ‘Tymarsaa’, the minister of Immadi Narasimha 
mentioned by Nuni*» may be provisionally identified with a* minister of that namr at 
whose instance Immadi Natasimha granted some land in the village Mallela in the 
Kurnool district, to God Cennakesava of Cangalam&$p on 3. , S'; 1413 Viradhifcjt| 
MSrgaiira ba, 12 (28..Nnv., A.D. 1491) {Mm. Mss, 15-4-30, p. 234), 

■'(! i.'L; 1 . . ... / V - : : : : v 


156 


Anticipating trouble from His activities, Narasa Nayaka, under 
the pretence of securing His safety, kept him under custody 
in the fort of Penugonda, granting Him an allowance of 
20,000 cruzados annually for His maintenance. Immadi Nara- 
simha seems to have welcomed his removal to Penugonda, as he 
expected that he would there be free from the surveillance of 
his guardian ; but Narasa Nayaka took good care to place him 
beyond the reach of mischief. He posted one of his trust- 
worthy officers, Timmapa Nayaka with an army of 20,000 men 
to keep guard over him effectively “(commanding him) that 
he should not allow the King to leave the city, and that he 
should carefully guard his person against treachery.”* 

Though Narasa Nayaka did not secure the removal of 
his inconvenient ward by assassination, as was once believed, 
he cannot be completely exculpated from the charge of 
usurpation. He rebelled against his master and compelled him 
to submit to his superior force ; he kept him under custody 
and granted him an annual pension for his maintenance. 
Though he carried on the administration generally in the 
name of his master, he did not hesitate to assume the royal 
titles when he chose.f The inscriptions of his sons state, as 
a matter of fact, that he ruled at Vijayanagara as king. 
In a copper-plate grant of Vira Narasimha dated A.D. 1505 
it is said explicitly that Narasa born of king isvara “was 
ruling the whole kingdom ” “ in Vidyanagarl formerly made 
by Vidyaranya, seated on the jewelled-throne. ” % This is 
corroborated by the evidence of contemporary writers. Nandi 
Timm an a states that ‘King Narasa, son of Isvara was seated 
on the jewelled-throne of Vijayanagara which was like a mirror 
unto the face of the goddess of earth.’ § According to Rajanatha 
pindima, Narasa Nayaka ‘made V idyapuri his capital.’! 
Similar statements are found in other writers. There is ample 
evidence to show that Narasa Nayaka did, indeed, usurp the 
throne of his master. Therefore, the second usurpation must 

* Nuniz : Forgotten Empire, p. 310. + Ante, p. 152. 

x E.C. x, Gdr 77. | Sources, p. 107. % Ibid, p. 103. 


, '» ' , ,* ’ i '■ < 5 i i o* . ' . / 

thi si, - ’ . 


15? 



have taken place during his time and not in the time of his 
son Vira Narasimha as is generally held at present. 

Narasa Nayaka' s achievements : — The mantle of Saluva 
Narasimha descended on the worthy shoulders of Narasa 
Nayaka. Saluva Narasimha set before himself the task of 
resuscitating the fallen fortunes of the Vijayanagara kingdom. 
Owing to the weakness of the last rulers of the Sangama 
dynasty, the affairs of the government had fallen into chaos. 
The Nayakas and the other subordinate chiefs who held sway 
over the provinces of the kingdom defied the authority of 
the central government ; and foreign enemies having swooped 
over the outlying districts wrested them from the feeble hands 
of the Raya. The kingdom of Vijayanagara appeared to be 
on the brink of dissolution. Saluva Narasimha came forward 
to arrest the' progress of disintegration and to infuse fresh 
vigour into the palsied limbs of the body politic. He expelled 
the old dynasty from Vijayanagara and occupied the throne ; 
he subdued the recalcitrant chiefs who asserted independence 
during the feeble administration of his predecessors ; but 
before he could completely restore the kingdom to its former 
glory, he passed away. Saluva Narasimha died with the 
regret that nature had not given him time to fulfil the task 
which he had undertaken. Therefore, he besought his succes- 
sors to capture the forts of ‘Rachol and Odegary and Conadolgi' 


During the twelve or thirteen years of his rule as 
virtual sovereign of Vijayanagara, Narasa Nayaka made 
strenuous efforts to recover the lost forts which his late master’s 
testament had enjoined him to subdue ; but his attempts were 
no more successful than those of his master. His failure is 
partly attributable to internal troubles which seem to have 
threatened to plunge the kingdom again into the chaos from 
which Saluva Narasimha had rescued it. Therefore, he was 

* NuniS : For fatten Empire*, pp. 308, 316, 


158 


never free to concentrate all his energy on the reconquest of 
the lost territory, a task which he was obliged to leave to be 
accomplished by his more fortunate sons. 

The achievements of Narasa Nayaka are described in the 
inscriptions of his sons. He crossed ‘ the Kaveri, when in full 
flood, and seizing his enemy alive, taking possession of his 
kingdom, and making Srlrangapattana his own, he set up the 
pillar of his fame, and won the praise of the three worlds. 
Conquering Cera, Cola and Pandya, and Manabhusa, the 
king of Madhura as well as the fierce Turu§ka, the Grajapati 
king and others, from Granga to Lanka, and the eastern to the 
western mountains, he imposed his commands on all kings.” * 
The contemporary writers not only confirm the evidence of 
the inscriptions, but supplement it with some more valuable 
information. Nandi Timmana, the earliest of these writers 
describes Narasa Nayaka’s victories briefly. Narasa, the 
son of tsvara, manifested his skill by capturing Vidyapura 
(Vijayanagara) so as to cause distress to the king of Kuntala ; 
he destroyed the unbearable prowess of the Persian (Muham- 
madan) in the 'district of Manavadurga f 5 gave (the taste of) 
the sweet lips of the heavenly damsels (i.e. killed) to the lord 
of the Cola country and captured the city of Madhura and 
exhibited his swordsmanship before the Heyanendra. Raja- 
natha Dindima gives a similar account. According to him, 
Nrsimha (Narasa Nayaka) captured the fort called Manava 
together with its Saka ruler, but he restored it to him thereby 


• E.C. viii, Nr. 64. 

Kavtrlm asu baddhva ba hula-jala-b hat am yo vilahghy=aiva SatrUn 
Jtva grahani grhitva samiti bhujarbalai iam ca raj yam iadiyam 
Krtva Sriranga'purvam tad apt nija-vasl pat(ana?n yb babhase 
Kirti-stambham nikhaya t ri - bh uvana- bhavana stuyaman^Bpadanah, 

Ceram Colam ca Pattdyam tarn apt ca Madhura-vallabham Manabhusam 
Vtryddagram Turu$kam Gajapati-nrpat im c^Upi jit v a tad^any’dn 
A~Ganga-tlr a Lanka~prathama~cara?na-bkubhlt-ta{antam nit ant am 
K kyat ah kfbnipatinftm srajam-iva UrasB s as an am yb vyatUmt. 

t The translation on p. 106 of the Sources does not bring out the sense of the text 
quite correctly* 




159 



manifesting his prowess as well as liberality. He built a 
bridge across the waters of the Kaveri, and captured 
Srlrangapattanam. He destroyed the arrogant Marava in battle 
and captured Madhura. He vanquished Konetiraja who fell 
on him with his herd of elephants and married the damsel of 
victory on the field of battle.” * 

Tirumalamba describes the same events more elaborately. 
Narasa began his victorious career by conquering at first 
the eastern quarter ; then he turned south and marching 
along the coast of the eastern sea through Tundira, he reached 
the Cola country. As the Cola ruler was oppressing the 
people of the territory given to him as his appanage, Narasa 
made up his mind to punish him. He crossed the Kaverl, and 
halted on the southern bank of the river to give rest to his 
army. Having learnt from his spies that the Cola ruler was 
preparing for war, Narasa sent envoys to his court calling on him 
to submit, but the Cola mistaking this to be a sign of weakness 
insulted the envoys and turned them out of his court. Then 
he marched at the head of his army supported by a strong 
contingent of elephants, and offered Narasa battle. He was, 
however, defeated in the fight and taken prisoner. Narasa 
Nayaka then entered the Cola’s capital ; whence the 
Cola, who was a Marava by birth, escaped (from prison 
and fled?) to the sea-coast, abandoning his wealth and 
relations. Narasa next proceeded to the city of Madhura, and 
having received valuable presents from the ruler of the place 
he went to Ramesvaram by way of Setu. Next, he turned 
against Srlrangapattanam, and spanning the river Kaverl, 
which was swollen with floods, by a temporary bridge, he 
crossed over to the island and reduced the fort without much 
difficulty. He forgave the chief who surrendered himself 
with all his ministers, relations and friends and restored to him 
his estate. Then turning to the west, he captured the forts of 
Dumakara and Tarasangi and reached the sacred shrine of 
Grokarna on the west coast where he made several gifts. Finally, 


160 


Narasa turned towards tbe north, and advanced upon Suratrana 
Sapada (the ’Adil Shah), who shut himself up in the fort of 
Manava. Narasa laid siege to the fort and defeated the 
Sultan ; but he restored the fort to the Sultan and returned 
to his capital VidyapurL* 


The following schedule presents a comparative account of 
the victories of Narasa Nayaka, as described in the inscriptions 
and other contemporary works : — 


Inscriptions. 

Parijatfipa h aranam. 

A sy u tar ay abh yu~ 
day am. 

Varadambikapari- 

nayam. 

1. Captured Sriranga- 

pattanam by 
building a bridge 
across the Kaveri. 

2. Conquered t h e 

I 

1. Captured Vidya- 

pura so as to 
cause embarass- 
ment to the king 
of Kuntala. 
la. Defeated the 
Heuna f chief at 
Srirangapat^a- 
nam. 

2. # 

1. Built a bridge ac- 

ross the Kaveri 
and captured §ri- 
rangapattanam. 

2. 

1. Built a bridge ac- 

ross the Kaveri 
and captured Sri- 
rangapattanam. 

2. 

Cera. 




3. Conquered the 

C51a. 

4. Conquered t h e 

3, Killed the Cola and 

(see 5). 

4. 

3. Killed the Marava 

and (see 5). 

4. I 

3. Defeated the 

Cola king, cap- 
tured him and 
entered his capi- 
tal ; but the Cola 
(a Marava) fled. 

4. 

Pan^ya. 


- 


5. Conquered Mana- 
bhiisa of Madhura 

5. Captured Madhura' 

5. Captured Madhura 

5. Received gifts 
from the ruler of 
Madhura. 

6, Conquered the 

Turuska. . 

6. Des t royed the 
power of the Pa- 
rasika in the dis- 
rict of Manava. 

6. Captured Manava- 
durga together 
with the king of 
the Sakas. He 
restored the fort 
to the 3aka king. 

6. Defeated Surat- 
rana Sapada at 
Manavadurga. 

7. Conquered t h e 

Gajapati. 

8. 

9. 

7. 

8. 
9. 

7. 

8. Defeated Kone$i~ 

raja. 

9. 

7. Conquered the eas- 

tern quarter, and 
probably fought 
with the kings of 
Gauda, Kalinga 
and Trilinga. 

8. 

9. Captured the forts 
of Damakara and 
Tarasangi. 


* Sourttt) pp- 172-75. 


f In the ms. preserved in the Mysore Govt Or. Mss. Library we have Hoyasa- 
nendra instead of Heunendra. Our thanks are due to Sri R. Anantakrishna 5arraa who 
consulted t}ae ms. on our request and furnished us with the information. 



161 





It is clear from this that Narasa Nay aka captured 
Vidyanagara causing distress to the king of Kuntala ; 
conquered the Cera, the Cola, the Pandya, Manahhusa 
of Madhura, the Gajapati and Kofietiraja ; took Madhura, 
Damakara and Tarasangi ; built a bridge across the Kaverl, 
inflicted a defeat upon the Henna (Hoysana) chief and 
wrested from him ^rlrangapattana ; laid siege to the fort of 
Manava, and took the ’Adil Khan a prisoner. Though so much 
information is available, it is not possible to understand the 
sequence of events in the absence of a chronological frame- 
work ; but 1 * * 4 the means of arranging ’ the abundant details in a 
chronological order are not entirely lacking. The inscriptions 
and the Muhammadan histories provide us with valuable data 
which are helpful in fixing the chronological order of Narasa 
Nayaka’s victories in a fairly satisfactory manner. It must be 
stated at the outset that the Tuluva inscriptions and the 
literary works mentioned above describe only the victories 
which Narasa won after he became the regent. The events 
connected with his early career are not touched upon There- 
fore, in arranging the chronology of Narasa’ s wars, it is not 
necessary to consider the events of his early history. 


(1) The earliest of Narasa Nayaka’s exploits appears to 
have been his capture of Vidyapun, i.e., Vidyanagara. It is said 
that by this act he caused distress to the king of Kuntala or 

Vidyanagara. The circumstances under which he laid siege to 
Vijayanagara and forced Immadi Narasimha to submit have 
been explained already. This event must have taken place at 
the commencement of Immadi Narasimha’s reign. Narasa 
Nayaka is said to have retired to Penugonda some time after 
raising Immadi Narasimha to the throne. Having gathered 
large forces, he attempted at first to settle his differences with 
the king by peaceful negotiation ; but when the king remained 
indifferent to his advances, he marched upon the capital and 
invested it. All these events must have taken at least one 

year. As Immadi Narasimha’s reign seems to have commenc- 

ed some time before Nov. A.D. 1491, Narasa Nayaka’s 


162 



Yusuf ’Adil Khan, however, bided his time; lie had 
secured a victory over Qasim Barid with the help of Malik 
Ahmad Bahry, “ and then, on learning that dissensions 


* Briggs : Feritkta iii, p. 11 
t Hid, P- 10. : : : : 


investment of Vijayanagara may be placed about the end of 
A.D. 1492. This derives support from a casual statement of 
Ferishta, who says that some months before his victory over 
TimrSj in April A D 1493 Yusuf ’Adil Khan heard at first that 
dissensions prevailed at Vijayanagara. While he was march- 
ing after this against Raichur he heard once again, probably 
inJanuary A.D. 1498, that Timraj « composed his disputes with 
young Ray of Beejanuggur.’* We may conclude from this 
that Narasa Nayaka’s investment and capture of Vijayanagara 
took place towards the close of A.D. 1492. 


(2) Narasa Nayaka’s encounter with the ’Add Khan and 
his capture of Manavadurga (Manvi in Raichore Dt.) seem to 
have happened immediately after his capture of Vijayanagara. 
Ferishta alludes to two occasions, when Yusuf ’Adil Khan 
came into conflict with the regent of Vijayanagara in A.H. 898 
(A.D. 1492-93). The circumstances under which these con- 
flicts took place are thus described by Ferishta. Yusuf ’Adil 
Khan declared independence in A.D. 1489 and established a 
kingdom in Bijapfir. Qasim Band Turk who entertained 
similar hopes instigated ‘ the Ray of Beejanuggur ’ offering 
him the forts ' of Raiclvur and Mudkal as an inducement ; 
similar proposals were made to Bahadur Grilany, the ruler of 
Konkan, to attack the ’Adil Khan. Both these people made a 
simultaneous attack upon the ’Idil Khan : “ Timraj, the 
general of the Ray of Beejanuggur, having crossed the river 
Toongabudra, laid waste the country as far as Moodkul and 
Rachore ; and Bahadur Greelany reduced the fortress of J um- 
kindy.” The ’Adil Khan was not in a position to oppose both 
the invaders. Therefore, he ‘ made peace with Timraj and ex- 
pelled Bahadur Greelany from his dominions.! ’ , 




prevailed in Beejanuggur, he marched to retake Rachore.”* 
On reaching the banks of the Kysaa, the ’Adil Khan was obliged 
to halt, as he fell seriously ill. Meanwhile ‘Timraj, the minister, 
having composed his disputes with the young Ray of Beeja- 
nuggur, advanced at the head of an army to Rachore/’t The 
’Adil Khan recovered from his illness, and opposed Timraj 
who, having crossed the Tungabhadra, was marching upon 
Bijapur in April A.D. 1493 ; the ’Adil Kh an’s forces were defeat- 
ed in battle, and he was obliged to retire to his camp; but obtain- 
ing information that Timraj’s army was * busily engaged in 
plunder,’ he collected his scattered men, and made a sudden 
attack upon the Hindu camp. Timraj who was completely 
taken by surprise was utterly routed. He fled towards 
Vijayanagara accompanied by the young Raya, who, however, 
died on the way, owing to the arrow-wounds received in the 
battle.J According to Dastur Khan, however, the ’Adil Kh an 
won his victory by the basest treachery. Having been defeated 
in battle, the 'Adil Khan entreated Timraj to grant him peace. 
He invited the young Raya, and Timraj to a peace conference 
promising that he would pay allegiance to the Raya on the 
occasion. Timraj agreed to the proposal, and attended the 
conference with the king and the nobles. The Adil Khan 
treacherously attacked them and put to death seventy persons 
of rank. Thereupon, the Hindu army fled and the ’Adil Kh an 
obtained vietory.§ 

The information furnished by Ferishta does not offer 
much help in fixing the date of Narasa Nay aka’s victory over 
the ’5.dil Khan, as its accuracy is not above suspicion. There 
was no person at Vijayanagara corresponding to Ferishta’s 
Timraj. His personality is protean in character. Ferishta 
gives two contradictory accounts of the manner in which he 
rose to power : 

First, “ the government of Beejanuggur had remained in 
one family in uninterrupted succession for seven hundred 


* IHd, p. 11. 


pp. 12-13. 


f IUd } Hi, p. 11- 
% Ibid , p . 13, 




1 i ; 






r 


164 


years, when Shew r Ray dying, he was succeeded by his son a 
minor, who did not long survive him, and left the throne to a 
younger brother.: Not long after, he died also, leaving an 
infant only three months old. Timraj, one of the principal 
ministers of the family, celebrated for his wisdom and experience, 
became sole regent, and was cheerfully obeyed by the nobility 
and vassals of the kingdom for forty years. On the 
occasion of the young King’s attaining the age of manhood, 
Timraj poisoned him and put an infant of the family on the 
throne, in order to have the pretence for retaining the regency 
in his hands. Timraj at length dying, was succeeded in his 
office by his son Ramraj.”* 

The second, “ Timraj was the first usurper : he had 
poisoned the young Raja of Beejauuggur, son of Shew Ray, 
had rendered his infant brother the tool of his designs, and, 
by degrees, overthrowing the ancient nobles, he at length 
established his authority over the kingdom. 

Though these two accounts do not agree with each other 
regarding the manner of Timraj’s rise to power, they have this 
in common that he was a minister of Shew Ray who seized the 
supreme power some time after his master’s demise. After 
making himself supreme in the state, he waged war, as noticed 
already, upon Yusuf ’Adil Khan twice in A.D. 1493, when the 
young Raya is said to have perished as a consequence of 
wounds received in the battle. f Later, Timraj invaded once 
again the Bijapnr territory in A.D. 1512, taking advantage of 
the confusion caused by the regent Kamal Khan, and captured 
the fort of Raiehurij He held power for forty years, and died 
probably in (1493 + 40) A.D. 1533, and was succeeded by his 
son Ram raj. If This Ramraj, it may be noted, was the same 

prince who was slain by the confederacy of the Deccani 
Mussalmau kings on the battle of Raksasi-Tangadi in 
A.D. 1564 - * - 



165 



. Nevertheless, some of the deeds ascribed by Ferishta to 

Timraj can only be explained with reference to the history of 
NaFaSS Nayaka ; for instance, he is said to have poisoned the 

'* nr' ” 72 . " • ' ■ - - - : 

* Mac. Mss. 15- 1-30, p. 234. 

+ Forgotten Empire, p. 309, - 


Though there were some ministers and generals bearing 
the name of Timmarasa or Timmaraja at Vijayanagara about 
this time, it is not possible to identify Feriskta’s Timraj with 
any one of them as most tacts mentioned in connection with 
his career cannot be satisfactorily explained with reference to 
them. Thus, there was a pradhani Timmarasa who figures in 
one of the earliest inscriptions of Immadi Narasimha* He is 
probably identical with Tymarsaa, who attempted to oust 
Narasa Nayaka from his office as regent; but he was killed 
' aboBt ^.D. 1^92, and therefore, the exploits of Ferishta’s 
Timraj cannot be attributed to him. There was Nadindla 
Timmarasa who is said to have displaced Narasa Nayaka 
as the minister of Immadi Narasimha (92) ; but he was not 
a military officer and there is no evidence to show that 
he lived after A. D. 1495 or 1496. Lastly, there was Arevxti 
Bamaraju Timmaraju who is said to have defeated the ’Adii 
Khan at Maixuva ; but Timmaraju was not a minister of 
Immadi Narasimha or any other king. He rose only to the 
position of a karyakarta to Nrsnaraya and Acyuta, and he was 
alive at least until A.E). 1542. None of the persons mentioned 
above could have been the father of Kamraj, as he was born of 
Srxrangaraja, a grandson of Arevxti Bukka. The identification of 
Ferishta’s fixnraj with Narasa Nayaka who was the lxiinister of 
Saluva Narasimha (She# Kay) and who after his death became 
supreme as the regent of the kingdom is also not possible ; for 
Narasa Nayaka died xn A. if. 1508, and therefore, he could not 
have captured Kaichur from Ismail ’Adil Shah in A. D. 1512 * 
neither did he live up to A. D. 1538, nor beget a son of the name 
of Kamraj. It must, therefore, be concluded that Ferishta’s 
Timraj is an imaginary person whom his ill-equipped but fertile 
imagination conjured up to confound posterity* 1 • ■ • . * 


166 


eldest son of Shew Ray, ‘ rendered his infant brother a tool of 
his designs’ and ‘ established his authority over the kingdom 
bv making himself the 1 sole regent’ about A. D.l AH 
these actions are attributed by Nuniz to Narasa Nayaka, and 
his statements arc confirmed by inscriptions, contemporary 
literature, and the kaijimts or local histories. 1 Wore, the 
account of Ferishta seems to contain, notwithstanding its con- 
tradictions and fictitious incidents, some elements of truth; 
and the events of the early career of his Timraj may be attri- 
buted to Narasa Nayaka. Therefore, he seems to have been the 
person that led the two expeditions against Yusur Adil Khan 

in A. D. 1493. 


We may now consider when Narasa Nayaka besieged the 
’Adil Khan in the fort of Manava. This event could not have 
taken place during Narasa’s first encounter with the ’Adil Khan; 
for, on this occasion Timraj (Narasa Nayaka), having crossed 
the Tungabhadra laid waste the country and captured the forts 
of Mudkal and Raich fir; and the ’Adil Khan being unable to resist 
concluded a treaty with him. It is not possible that the ’Adil 
Khan could have' come to Manavadurga (Manvi) winch is m the 
neighbourhood of Adoni on the north of the Tungabhadra. 
Therefore, the siege of Manava must have taken place during 
the second encounter. On this occasion, the ’Adil Khan was 
the aggressor. He invaded the Vijayanagara kingdom to 
retake Raichfir; on hearing that Timraj (Narasa Nayaka) was 
marching upon his capital Bijapfir, he advanced from his 
camp on the Kr|na to oppose him ; he was, however, defeated 
and forced to retire from the field. The siege of Manava 
must have taken place on this occasion ; for, the Varadambika^ 
parinayam states that the ’Adil Khan, on seeing the army of 
Narasa Nayaka, climbed the (hill) fort of Manava in fear, u 
order to protect his life ; but Narasa laid siege to the fort ; and 
he was assisted by Arevlti Ramaraja Timma and other officers. 
The Muhammadans are said to have opposed the besiegers 
fiercely. The fort was, however, captured, and the ’Adil Khan 
was taken prisoner. It is said that Narasa Navaka set the 




! I , 1 
“S 





Adil iUian at iiDerty and displayed his generosity by restoring 
the captured fort to him. Manava must have been an 
important stronghold commanding the road to Raichur and 
Mudkal. By handing over the fort to the ’idil Khan 
Narasa Nayaka seems to have deliberately unbolted~~ the 
doors to let in the flood of Mussalman invasions. The 
cession of the fort could not have been actuated by feel- 
ings of generosity. Narasa Nayaka was probably compelled 
to abandon the fort which he had captured. It was very 
probably here that the ’idil Khan, as narrated by Dastur Khan, 
invited Timraj and the Ray, for a peace conference*7and 
attacked them treacherously. f Narasa Nayaka was obliged 
to seek safety in flight abandoning the fort. The writers 
patronised by the court, naturally seek to conceal this ugly fact 
of humiliation. 


(B) Southern conquests : — Narasa Nayaka’s southern ex- 
pedition may be taken up for consideration next. The causes 
of this invasion are not far to seek. The country to the south 
of the Kaverl shook off the yoke of Vijayanagara after the 
southern expedition of KapileSvara Grajapati in A.D. 1464. No 
attempt had been made ever since to reduce it to subjection once 
again. Saluva Narasimha appears to have been too busy with 
affairs nearer home to undertake the reconquest of the southern 
provinces. The available epigraphieal material clearly shows 
that his authority was not acknowledged in the south of the 
Kaverl. Narasa Nayaka, who desired to complete the work of 
his late master marched at the head of his army to the south. 


tferishta states that the Raya died of wounds received in the fig] 
to^Vijayanagara ; but in other contexts he attributes the death of all the 
Ray ^either to natural causes or poison administered by Timraj (Nar 
Dastur Khan whom Ferishta quotes does not allude to the death of the Ray. 
and Zabfrx who cite Ferishta’s history in this context do not refer to the deal! 
We know from inscriptions that Immadi Narasimha who ascended the throne 
continued to rale until A.D, 1505 proving thereby that no king of Vijayar 
have died in A. D. 1493, Therefore, Ferishta’s statement must not be contid 

' ; f f J FithMm m s p. 13 . ' ; " ■ • ; ' " ' ' ■ ~ ' . ' . ; ■ 


168 



The date :- The date ox - 

against the southern districts can be Axed with ‘“'“able ««- 
tainty. The inscriptions of Immadi Narasimha m Madura and 
Ramnad districts appear in a series beginning with S. 1421 
Ldhaithi (A. D. 1499),* The conquest of this region, how- 
ever seem to have laken place at least some three years 

14, fn an ins* ^ — 

Kscapl N5yaka,“on ofKacapa Nayaka »f_U»vW had gone 
to Setuhandha-Ramedvaram with Navasa Nayakal . Now, « 

Tarammimjarim™ Pl»«“ Ws ™* 

varam at the end of his southern campaign. Tneiefoie, t - 
lampaign must have preceded the date of the inscription 
!2L" to his visit to Rames'varam. It very probaly com- 

ot a little earlier. 

paign . — During tlie course of this 
b is said to have conquered the Cola, 
Manabhusa of M adhura and a certain 
tion of the information furnished by 
for understanding the events of the 


campaign, LNarasa 
Pandya and Cera, besides 
Konetiraja. An examini 
our sources is necessary 
campaign in their proper setting. 

’ i The Cola may be taken up at first for consideration. 
The first observation that has to be made about him is that lie 
W as not a scion of the ancient Cola family: he belonged to the 
Marava caste. The VaradambiMparmayiim refers to him as 
mrumtaia-A “ 4 the Acyutm-mbhymlM V arn support: > 
Secondly, his authority was confined only to a part ot tl 
C51a country in the south of the Kaverl; it is said m the 
VaraMmbiltUfari^ayam that Narasa Nayaka had, to cross the 
Kaverl and await the arrival of the Cola.ti But a part of the 
Papdya country with the city of Madhura seems to have been 

1 See Varadambikaparimyam Ms., p. 45. 

§ Madapcvritc.m tiure.vm mc.thuvH me hi maVindrd Mad.huu.tn aharp : 


% $ 0 ftr**s, p. 


169 


included in his dominions ; for the Pdrijatdpaharamm asserts 
that Narasa Nay ah a captured Madhura, having slain the Cola 
king*; and the Aeyutarayabhyudayam states that he, having 
despatched the Marava to the world of Indra in a battle, 
captured the city of Madhura.f It may, therefore, be con- 
cluded that a Marava chief was called Cola because he 
was ruling the Cola country, and that the city of Madhura was 
included in his dominions. $ 


There is some difference of opinion among our authorities 
regarding the ultimate fate of the Cola ruler. The Parijata- 
paharanam and the Aeyutarayabhyudayam assert unequivocally 
that Narasa Nayaka killed him ; but according to the Varadam- 
bikaparinciyam, he was captured alive, but later escaped to an 
island in the sea.§ It is said in an inscription of Narasa Nayaka 
dated 12th Aug. A.D. 1497 that he * swallowed’ the Cola king’!, 
an expression which may be taken to support the view that 
the Cola king was slain in battle. 

As the fall of Madhura was closely connected with the war 
against the Cola, the identity of Manabhusa, the lord of 
Madhura, may be appropriately considered in this context. The 
term Manabhusa is a title meaning ‘ he who has honour ( mana ) 
as his ornament.’ He is said to have been identical with the 
Tenkasi Pandyan king, Arikesari Parakrama who bore the titles 
of Manakavaca and Manabhusana,\\ though the available evidence 
points to the contrary. The verse ‘ Ceram Colam ca Pandyam 
tarn api ca Madhuravallabham Manabhusam, makes it clear that 
Manabhusa was neither a Cola, nor Cera nor a Pandya but 
some one’ other than these three. A stronger objection against 
this identification is the disparity in time, Whereas Arikesari 


* IUd, p. lot. + lHi t 9. 109.' 

% The names C31.a and P&jfca were attributed to the rulers of 
countries in the loth, 16th and 17th centuries irrespective of the caste or famny to which 
they belonged. The Brahman Sapiva Narasingaraya Danjwyaka is spoken of w the 
Atntaray'abhyudayam as a Cola. The NSyak. of Tanjore ana Madura are ^u^Uy 
called Colas and P%dya« respectively though they were Balyas of Telugu nationality 

by birth. " , 

S Source P. lft. 1 M.A.R. 1938, No. 44 : Cuimhrta-CSlUdrarn, 

[\ \\}^ _ /'?' " ‘ "■ 7" 

I T.A*S* i s pp. SM. ' - -■ 

■ ' v. ■ . ; 


8 * 




iff 


III 


iJife . 






mi 




■tmKm 


170 



the present, he has to be considered as an unknown chief who 
was holding Madhura as a subordinate of the Cola. 

Narasa Nay aka’s claims of victory over the Cola king and 
the lord of Madhura are supported by the provenance of the 
Vijayanagara inscriptions. Several inscriptions of the sub- 
ordinates of Imrodi Narasimha are found in the Pudukkottah 
state and Madura and Ramnad districts. It may be concluded 
from this that the country from the Kaveri to Setubandha- 
Ramegvaram was thoroughly subdued. 

ii. The Cera king whom Narasa Nayaka is said to have 
vanquished must have been one of the princes of Kerala. 
Alb uquerque alludes in his Commentaries to an attack of the 
king of Vijayanagara upon the kingdom of Quilon, a few years 
a d 1 BOO The Viiavanaerara armv seems to have 



power, til© auiiiuiiij ui ■ *v HW *w«vh 

tbeir more southern possessions in the Tinnevelly district.”* 
Therefore, Narasa Nayaka’s Pandyan opponent must have 
been one of the rulers of Tenkas'i, probably Parakrama alias 
Kulasekhara who ruled from A.D. 1479 to 1499.f 

iv. Konltiraja Rajanatha Dindima alludes to the victory 
of Narasa Nayaka over a chief called Konetiraja — the hero un- 
rivalled in the world — who caused confusion to the army of the 
enemies. He attacked Narasa with his elephant forces; but 
was defeated by him in battle and taken prisoner.^ Konetiraja 
was not the title of a Pamjyan prince as has been suggested 
by A. Rangaswami Sarasvati but the personal name of one of 
the Vijayanagara officers who appears to have held sway over 
portions of the present Trichinopoly and Tanjore districts from 
A. D. 1488 to 1492.§ He was a Makamandalehara, bore the 
titles of Raya-Basava§ankara, Rajarajaganda, Pattukattdri, and 
KanclpuravaradhUvara. Probably he or his father governed a 
part of Padaivldu -rajya with KancI as his capital. As there 
is no allusion to the ruling king of Vijayanagara in any one of 
his records, it is doubtful whether he was amicably disposed 
towards his sovereign. It is probably permissible to infer from 
Narasa Nayaka’s hostility towards him that he did not 
recognise the authority of the regent. Besides, other reasons 
were not wanting to afford Narasa a very good pretext forwar. 
It is said in the Koyilolugu that Konetiraja who succeeded 
Saluva Tirumalaraja as the governor of Tiruccinapalli-siwa 
oppressed the Sri Vaisnavas of §rlrangam, and that they 
requested Narasa Nayaka to punish him. 

“ At this time Koneriraja, who succeeded Saluva Tirumalai- 
raja in the government of the Trichinopoly district (shna) 

• The ~PUndyan Kingdom, p. 347. t Md, p. 249. t Sources, p. 109. 

§ 259 of 1911 ; 74 of 1913 ; 396 of 1918 ; 54 of 1920 ; 49 of 1920 ; 51^0^1920.^ The first 
of these inscription* is referred to in an inconclusive discussion of Konetiraja’s identity 


172 


favoured the people of the Tiruvanaikkaval, gave away the 
temple villages to Kottai-samantan Sennappa Nayaka, extract- 
ed puravariy kanikkai, pattu, parivatiam and such other taxes 
and caused much annoyance to the temple authorities at &rl- 
rangam. When the matter was repeatedly reported by 
Kandadai Ramanuja to Narasa Nayaka, the latter came with a 
large army, put down Koneriraja and took away the charge of 
the district from his hands. Narasa then got back to the 
temple those villages which it had been dispossessed of, remit- 
ted the newly imposed taxes, and removed all the grievances 
of the people.”* (cf. 95-a). 

The causes of Narasa Nay aka’s war upon Konetiraja are 
now clear. He had been hearing of the oppressive character 
of Konetiraja’s administration for some time in the past ; and 
he took the earliest opportunity to put down his tyranny. 

The TSoyilolugu assigns Narasa’s victory over Konetiraja 
to §. 1111 (A. D. 1489-90) but this date is too early; for 
according to this work, Konetiraja’s authority came to an end 
with Narasa’s victory, whereas his rule lasted at least until 
A. D. 1492 - 3 , as shown by his inscriptions. Therefore it is 
evident that Konetiraja must have been deprived of his office 
and power some time subsequent to A. D. 1492-3, probably 
during Narasa Nayaka’s southern expedition in A. D. 1496. 

(4) Srirangapattanam . — Srirangapattanam appears to have 
been the capital of a small principality in the Mysore country 
comprising portions of Coimbatore and Mysore districts. 
A family of chiefs called Heunaf, or Hoysana who became 
prominent a little later at Ummattur and Sivanasamudra held 
sway over this territory. They claimed descent from the 
Gfangas and attempted to rule their principality independently. 
Though . Vlra Nanjaraya and Devappa, sons of Immadiraya 
succeeded in preserving their independence for a while, they 
were forced to submit to Narasa Nayaka finally. On his 
return from his southern expedition, Narasa Nayaka marched 


* l A. % 1, p.142. 


flitiS $S 


*9 ; l§fk 





along the upper Haven valley and approacnea Driranga- 
pattanam; but as the river was in full flood, an attack upon the 
fort seemed almost impossible. Nevertheless, he managed to 
cross the river by means of a bridge which he hastily con- 
structed and reduced the fort without difficulty ; but he found 
it expedient to restore the fort with the dependent territory to 
its master whom he had taken prisoner in the battle. The 
fall of Srlrangapattanam and the imprisonment of its chief by 
Narasa Nayaka are alluded to in the Konkaaadesarajula- 
vrttantam (97). The subjugation of the ELeuna chiefs is also 
attested by epigraphical evidence. According to an epigraph of 
Somanathapur in the Mysore district dated A.D. 1497, by the 
order of Narasimha, son of Isvara whose feet were bowed to by 
the kings, Nanjabhupati or Nanjaraja Vodeyar restored the 
agrahara of Somanathapura.* It is, therefore, evident that 
Narasa Nayaka took the fort of Srlrangapattanam either in 
A.D. 1497 itself or in the preceding year. 

(5) The Gajapati. — Two Grajapati kings, Purusottama and 
Prataparudra, ruled at Kataka, during the regency of Narasa 
Nayaka. Purusottama who had been reigning from A.D. 1465 
died in A. D. 1496, after a reign of thirty years and he was 
succeeded by his son, Prataparudra. The character of this 
monarch has been grossly misunderstood. It is said that he 
was * cowardly ’ and that he neglected to safeguard the interests 
of his kingdom owing to his preoccupation with religion. - ! 
Moreover, his failure to conquer the east coast during the early 
years of his reign is attributed to his indolence. 11 From 149 < 
to 1511 Prataparudra could have easily conquered the Tamil 
districts of the coast land, if he had only exerted himself.” J 
Prataparudra was not a coward; and his failure to subdue 1 the 
Tamil districts of the coast land 5 was not due either to his 
religious preoccupation or to the inherent inertia of his 
character. As a matter of fact, the early years of Pratapa- 
rudra’s reign were eventful years, when he attempted, not 



in 


without success, to extend the boundaries of his kingdom. 
Though his father had recovered a large part of his kingdom 
from his enemies, a portion of Telingana still remained uncon- 
quered. The fort of Warangal with its dependent territory, 
which Hamvira ceded to the BahmanI Suljan Muhammad 
Shah II, as part of the price for his support against Purusot- 
tama, still remained in the hands of Mussalmans. It had been 
made the seat of a BahmanI viceroyalty ; but later, when Quly 
Qujfcb-ul-Mulk established his supremacy over Telingana in 
A.D. 1497 “ the towns of Warangal and Kovilkonda with their 
dependencies ” passed into his hands.* Prataparudra wanted to 
recover this territory. Moreover, he seems to have entertained 
an idea of conquering the South. It is stated in the Ananta- 
varam copper-plate grant that he reached the banks of the Kr§na 
on Thursday, 4th November A.D. 1500 during the course of 
‘his expedition for the conquest of the South’ (93). No further 
information is available regarding this expedition. Probably it 
was an attack upon the Vijayanagara kingdom. Or was it 
intended to ward off an invasion of the king of Vijayanagara? 
Whatever might have been the cause of the expedition, it is 
Certain that there was a conflict between the Gajapati and 
Narasa Nayaka. Though Narasa is said to have vanquished 
the Gajapati and thereby acquired the title of Gajapati-ray= 
ebha-gandabherunda ’f, his success could not have amounted to 
much; for the Gajapati still remained the master of the Telugu 
districts of the east coast to the south of the Krsna, and the 
boundaries of both the kingdoms remained unchanged as they 
were at the time of Saluva Narasimha’s death. 

. Prataparudra’s attempt to reduce Telingana however was 
more successful. There is reason to believe that the recon- 
quest of Telingana by Cittapa Khan (Sitapati) was effected at his 
instance. It is stated in the pillar inscription in the fort of 
Warangal dated January 21, A.D. 1504 that some time before that 


* BvrftSn^Ma'Ilsf r : L A . xxviii,' p. 315. 

+ E> C. X, Gd. 77; also of, Sources, p, 173, Varadambik'&farinayam : Gau^a KaUnga 
Trilings mukkya pVrihivZnZm atyWU^s^chaUm-nkava kriyamudUrtya* 



175 


date Cittapa Khan had captured the forts of Rajadri and Waran- 
gai * Now, this Cittapa Khan was of obscure origin and there is 
no reason to believe that he inherited any power from his father. 
It would not have been possible for an adventurer of Cittapa 



Khan’s type to reduce such an impregnable fort as Rajadri 
without the assistance of some powerful ally. According to a 
copper-plate grant dated AJD. 1510-11 Prataparudra was ruling 
at Undrakonda in southern Telinganaf. Moreover, Cittapa 
Khan figures in the Rayavacaka as a subordinate of Prataparudra 
in A.D. 1514 , % and this is confirmed by the evidence of the 
Anonymous Historian of Grolkonda who alludes to his depen- 
dence upon Ramacandra, the son of Prataparudra Gajapati.§ 
Therefore, it is not unlikely that Cittapa Khan received help 
from Prataparudra, when he marched to the banks of the 
Krsna for the conquest of the South. It may be said with 
justice that during the early years of his reign, Prataparudra 
completed the reconquest of his ancestral dominions, a task 
which was left incomplete by his father. 

(7) The West Coast :— According to the VaradambiH- 
parhxayam Narasa Nayaka is said to have marched towards the 
west coast, capturing on his way the forts of Damakara, 
TaraSanffi and other forts and reached the sacred shrine of 


176 



The southern expedition — the war 
with Cola, ManabhSsa, Cera, 
Pandya and Konetiraja 

The capture of Srirangapattanam 
and inarch to Gokarna ••• 

The war with the Gajapati 


The twelve or thirteen years during which Narasa Nayaka 
controlled the destinies of the Vijayanagara kingdom were 
eventful. He continued the work of Saluva Narasimha, and 
restored the ancient boundaries of the kingdom by reducing to 
subjection all the rebellious chiefs who asserted independence 
during the days of the last Sangama kings. He found the 
state in a convalescent condition, imparted fresh strength to it, 
and lhft it fully vigorous pulsating with new life. Narasa died in 
A. D. 1503, bequeathing the king and the kingdom to his eldest 
son, Vlra Narasimha. 




CHAPTER XVI. 



IMMADI NARASIMHA AND VlRA NARASIMHA. 

After the death of Narasa Nayaka, his eldest son, 
Immadi Narasa Nayaka or Vlra Narasimha, as he was more 
generally known, succeeded him as the regent. The lawful 
sovereign, Immadi Narasimha, was still kept under tutelage, 
though he must have been old enough to look after his own 
affairs. The new regent carried on the administration of the 
kingdom for a short time in the name of his master* ; but he 
seems to have soon grown tired of the show, and got rid of his 
inconvenient ward by means of assassination. The Vlrappaya , s 
Kalajnana briefly states that “ Vlra Narasimharava, son of 
Narasa Nayaka. having caused Tammaraya to be assassinated, 
ruled from the year Raktaksi for five years” f (16). Muniz who 
wrote his chronicle some thirty years later also alludes to 
Tamarao’s (Immadi Narasimha’s) assassination, though he 
wrongly attributes the perpetration of the deed to Narasa 
Nayaka. 1 

Vlrappaya Kalajnana, as noticed already, places the 
assassination of Immadi Narasimha in the year Raktaksi 
which corresponds to A.D. 1504 March— 1505 March. It is 
interesting to note that the latest records which can be 
definitely attributed to Immadi Narasimha is dated in 
Feb. 1505. $ Curiously enough definite indications of the for- 


* Inscriptions show that Vlra Narasimha continued for a short time the arrangement 
under which the kingdom was governed during the days of his father. Nearly a dozen 
inscriptions dated in the years 1504 and 1505 refer to Im ma4i Narasimha as the king rul- 
ing the country (£.C x, G. 38, xii, Mu 59; £. L vih pp. 74f ; 412 of 1913; 359 of 
1912; 396 of 1912 and 354 of 1912). It is reasonable to conclude that Immadi Narasimha 
still remained the nominal ruler of the kingdom. 

+ A. Mysore epigraph, which is unfortunately damaged (£.C. x, Mb. 242) records that 
some people of the Mulavagila~»E$* made a gift evidently to a temple in S. 1427 Krodhana 
to enable Narasinga Maharaya and Nara&inga Nayaka to attain Uttama (loka) or the 
highest heaven. The evidence of this inscription cannot be pressed far, as the text 
* Narasinga Mab&rUyarige Narasinga Nayakarige Uitama^.^v&ga blk-endu' can be, and 
in fact, has been, otherwise restored. . 

J 396 of 1912; also 354 of 1912. ' - - 

T .23 ' " 1 , 



178 



mal assumption of royalty by Vtra Narasimha are found 
in an inscription from Nagaragare in Mysore dated & 14=27 
Krodhana, Nabhas, Purnima Sravana, Irkivasara (A. D. 1505). 
In the first place, the regular pra§asti of the Tuluva kings 
tracing their descent from Brahma, Atri and the Moon through 
Pururava and Nahusa down to Vira Narasimha makes its 
appearance for the first time.* Secondly, the typical 
Vijayanagara royal titles are attached to the name of Ylra 
Narasimha. It is therefore reasonable to assume that Vira 
Narasimha, haying got rid of his lawful master, proclaimed 
himself the king of Vijay anagara. After a shadowy reign of 
nearly fourteen years, Immadi NaraBimha fell a victim to the 
overmastering ambition of his perfidious guardian. With him 
ended the rule of the Saluva kings at Vijayanagara. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

VlRA NARASIMHA. 





* Ham* t Mmfirt, p. 3M. __ t xxrlil, f. 

| 1H4. Th. Anonymots* HUWtUn ; Brigg.' Ftri'kt* 1», p. . 


Vlra Narasimha is said to have ruled for fire years from 
Raktakijji (1505 A.D.) to the mouth of Vaisakha of the year 
gukla (May 1509) (16). During his short reign, he had to 
face many difficulties, and was always engaged in war with 
some enemy or other. His usurpation of the throne evoked 
much opposition, and the whole kingdom is said to have 
‘ revolted under its captains.’* To complicate matters 
further, Yusuf ’Idil Khan, who had always been lying in wait 
for a suitable opportunity to seize the Vijayanagara territory, 
invaded the kingdom (100, 101). 

Ever since his perfidious attack upon Narasa Nayaka, 
Yusuf ’Idil Khan had been attempting to make himself master 
of the Raichur Doab, and by a favourable turn of events his 
attempts appear to have been crowned with success. Though 
Mahmfid Shah BahmanI II had not the power, much less the 
capacity, to make his authority respected by his nobles, his 
zeal for the spread of the True Faith kept him busy, 
planning jihads against the infidels. He proposed in A.D. 1501, 
to his assembled nobles at Bldar that they should attend the 
court once a year to wage a holy war against the idolators of 
Vijayanagara. As they had nothing to lose but everything to 
gain, the nobles readily agreed to the proposal of the monarch. f 
The first fruit of the compact of Bidar, as this agreement was 
called, was borne in A.D. 1502, when all the amirs of the 
BahmanI kingdom had joined the Suljan and invaded the 
Raichur Doab by way of Karhad. The efforts, if any, which 
Narasa Nayaka made to protect the invaded territory are 
not known. Mahmud Shah II subjugated the jloab, and 
having entrusted it together with the forts of Raichur and 
Mudkal to Yusuf ’Idil Khan retired to his capital.^ Fenshta 


180 



ignores, for some unknown [reason, the part played by the 
Bahmanl Suljtan and his amirs in the conquest of the doab. 
Yusuf ’Adi! Khan became, as a consequence of this war, 
master of the territory up to the banks of the Tungabhadra. 

The acquisition of new territory seems to have whetted 
fhe ’Adii Khan’s appetite for more, and the political upheaval 
in the Vijayanagara kingdom consequent upon the usurpation 
of the throne by Viva Narasimha excited his ambition. The 
time was suitable for an invasion. He seems to have entered 
into an alliance with Kaca or Kasappa Udaya, the governor 
of the important fort of Adoni*, and crossing tlie Tungabhadra 
at the head of a large army laid siege to the fort of Kandana- 
volu. 

Although most of the nobles set their faces against Vxra 
Narasimha, some stood by him and supported him steadfastly. 
Of these the Aravldn chiefs Ramaraja and his son Timma 
«0erwe particiilar mention, as it was by their help that Yira 
Narasimha was able to expel the invader, and suppress the 
internal troubles to some extent. At the time of ’Adil Khan’s 
attack, Ramaraja and his son are said to have been in the fort, 
The details of the siege and the circumstances under which 
the ’Adil Khan was forced to retire from the fort without 
accomplishing his object are not recorded. It is simply stated 
in the Balabhagavatam that Ramaraja, having opposed the 
’Adil Khan (Sava) in battle, scattered his forces and put him 
to flight (101). p \ 

Rama and Timma took full advantage of the victory, and 
pursued the ’Adil Khan’s army. Their object was probably 


* According to the passage, 

Sahasrais = saptatyU sahit&m-api yas* Stmdhtt fanujftm 
Sapadasy—Unikam-samiti bhuja saurylna mahatU 
Vijity~Udait? sm=A davani-giridurgam vibhutay 3 
VidhZt-'lndrah KZ$app-udayam-api vidrZvya sahasa. 

'•Which, 'appears in the copper-plate 

in close league with the Sapada, or the ’Adil Khan. 1 The Balabhagavatam of Kftnfranit ha 
states that KSsappa rose up in rebellion against Vira Narasimha. 


181 



succeeded in overtaking the ’Adil Khan and inflicting another 
defeat upon him.* Next, they attacked Kasappa Udaya, and 
having expelled him from Adavani, occupied the fort. 

Ylra Narasimha was greatly delighted to see the flight of 
the ’JLdii Khan, and the destruction of the traitor Kasappa 
Udaya. He showed his gratitude to the faithful JLravIdu chiefs 
by bestowing on them Kandanavolu and Ada van i as fiefs 
and decorating Timma with the anklet of heroes (< qanda - 
pe&dera) for overthrowing the traitors >100, 101). 

The rebellion of the Ummattur chiefs : — A large portion of 
the Southern Canarese country was governed by a family of 
chiefs whose principal seat was probably the fort of Ummattur 
in the present Mysore district. They appear to have come into 
prominence during the last decades of the 15th century, when 
the affairs of the kingdom of Vijayanagara were very much 
disturbed owing to the degeneracy of the later Sangama kings 
and the usurpation of the throne by Saluva Narasimha. The 
first chief of any importance was Somaraya or Immadiraya. 
He had two sons, Depanna or Devaraja Udaiyar and Naiija- 
raja Udaiyar. From the provenance of their inscriptions, 
they seem to have been ruling an extensive territory com- 
prising Mysore, and portions of Bangalore and Tumkur 
districts of the Mysore state, and parts of Coimbatore and 
Salem districts of the Madras Presidency. The sons of 
Immadiraya appear to have divided their ancestral estate, the 
elder keeping the family seat Ummattur with its dependent 
territory, and the younger taking Srlrangapattanam and its 
neighbourhood. The division of territory, however, does 
not seem to have been rigid, as the inscriptions of the one 
are found in the territory which must have been under the 
control of the other. Depanna had two sons, Immadi Depanna 
and Cikkaraya ; and Nanjaraja had an only son called Vfra- 
Nanjaraya. 

• S.I. xri, p. 344. . 


182 



According to KonkanadetarUjula VrttUntamu, Tyaparaj* 
(Depariya - Devaraja), the chief of Urn mattfir who bore sway 
over Konkaija (Kongana - Kongu), together with the other 
chiefs of Karnata defied the authority of the Vijayanagara 
government and refused to pay the tribute. On obtaining the 
information about their rebellion, Vira Narasimha resolved to 
put them down ; he is said to have gathered forces and having 
entrusted the defence of the capital to his half-brother Krsna- 
raya, marched towards Ummattur, accompanied by Acyuta, 
Sriranga and other princes. Having entered the territory of 
the enemy he invested Ummattur for three months ; but owing 
to the stout resistence offered by the enemy, he was obliged to 
relinquish the siege. Then he marched towards Srirangapatta- 
jiam with the hope of capturing it ; but the son of that chief 
whom formerly Narasa Nay aka captured alive sought the help 
of the Palaigars of Ummattur and Talakad ; and as soon as 
he obtained assistance from them, he sallied out of the fort and 
inflicted a defeat upon the royal army (97). 

The account of the KonkanadeSarajula Vrttantamu is in- 
directly supported by the inscriptions and the contemporary 
accounts of Portuguese writers. Though Cikkaraya alias 
Mallaraja, a son of Immadi Depanna Udaiyar of Ummattur, 
acknowledges the suzerainty of Vira Narasimha in A. D. 1506*, 
his cousin Nanjaraja seems to have repudiated the royal 
authority in the following year ; for, according to an epigraph 
of Satyamangalam in the Coimbatore district, he assumes the 
specifically Vijayanagara royal titles, ariraya-vibhada and 
IMsaikku-tappuva-rayara-ga^daj. By another title Penugonda- 
cakrehara , whieh the Ummattur chiefs bore, they laid claim 
implicitly at least to the possession of the fort of Penugonda 
in the Anantapur district . % Therefore, the inscriptions show 
obvious indications of the rebellious attitude of the Ummattur 
chiefs during the reign of Vira Narasimha. The contemporary 
TBiu^u literature states that Kr§naraya subdued the rebellious 

» E. C. iii. Ml. 93. f 310 of 1909; A.R.E. Report 1910, Part ii, para. S3. 

% A. S. R. 1908-9, p. 175. 


188 



Wmm 


chief of Ummattur at the beginning of his reign* This is 
corroborated by a statement of Friar Luiz, the Portuguese 
ambassador, who was at the Vijayanagara court in A.D. 1510, 
“The king of Narsinga ”, says he, “ was getting himself ready 
with five thousand men on foot and two thousand on horse, 
for an expedition against one of his vassals, who had risen up 
in rebellion, and seized the city of Pergunda, (the rebel) declar- 
ing that to himself belonged the kingdom itself by right ”.f 

It is evident that the rebellion had broken out some time 
before April A.D. 1510 ; and as it was only a month before, that 
Krsnaraya himself had ascended the throne, the rebellion of 
the Ummattur chiefs appears to have broken out in all 
likelihood during the last years of Vlra Narasimharaya’s reign. 

Though Ylra Narasimha failed to subjugate Ummattur 
and &rlrangapattanam, his campaign in the Kanarese districts 
was not entirely unsuccessful ; for he appears to have crossed 
the Western Ghats and reduced Tulu-nocZ with all its ports to 
subjection. Having entered the Tulu -rHjya, Ylra Narasimha 
proceeded to Mangalore where he lay encamped for some time. 
The country in the neighbourhood was swept over by Vijaya- 
nagara armies; and unable to oppose them Immadi Bhairarasa 
Odeyar, the powerful king of the Kalasa-Karakala kingdom, 
sought safety in flight. J The epigraph which furnishes this 
information does not however, refer to the events of the 
campaign. Nevertheless, his failure to capture Ummattfir and 
Srirangap attan am seems to have weighed heavily on the mind 
of Ylra Narasimha ; and as soon as he reached the capital 
he began to concert measures for renewing the attack. He 
collected a fresh army and large quantities of ammunition; 
but before he could complete his preparations, he was mortally 
taken ill and died (97). 

t Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalkuquerqut ill, p, 35. 

t Mg. 41. The inscription is dated A.D. 1516 at the time of the consec- 

ration of, the shrine of the God Kalaianatha which Immadi Bhairarasa- Odeyar had r-eao- ■ 
yat*d in fulfilm.ht of a v ow made at the time of the invasion of Bhujabala MaharSya of 
Vijayanagara. 


184 



'*ted friendly relations with the Portuguese, and the Klrata Palamu, 
,Ms y from him to Almeida who became the Viceroy of the Portuguese’ 
ndia in A.D. 150S. The embassy is said to have met Almeida at Csnnanore 
a marriage alliance between the royal families of Portugal and Vi jay a- 
e result of the embassy is not stated. It may have been connected with 
. treaty which TimSja, the Commandant of the Vijayanagara fleet, 
Almeida on behalf of his master RSja Nara Sinha Raya at Anjadiva in 
e Whiteway: 7' he Rise of the Portuguese, p. 105).’ 


Though Vira Narasimha was engaged, during the 
short period of this reign, in constant warfare with the 
Mussalmans and his rebellious nobles, he did not lose 
sight of the permanent interests of the kingdom. In the first 
place, as the safety of the kingdom depended mainly on 
freedom from external attacks, he bestowed much attention 
on concerting measures to prevent their occurrence. The 
most important way of securing this object was to improve the 
condition of the army. To make his army strong enough to 
resist the Mussalmans, Vlra Narasimha attempted to improve 
the efficiency of his cavalry. He conquered, as noticed 
already, Tu1u-m3$ and made himself master of its port towns, 
whither he could import horses from abroad without obstruc- 
tion from his enemies.* Hood horses and up-to-date weapons 
do not in themselves make an army victorious, unless they are 
properly handled by bold and courageous warriors. Therefore 
he bestowed much attention on the selection of trainers and 
cavaliers. “ As trainers and troopers he enlisted all efficient 
candidates irrespective of caste or creed.” 

Moreover, Narasimha encouraged among his subjects “all 
kinds of heroic activities,'’ in order to infuse warlike spirit 
among them. Tb% were taught to believe that fighting 
a duel was the honourable way of settling their disputes. 

“ If soldiers had any personal quarrels they were compelled to 
settle them before the Raya himself by means of duels with 
swords. Smiths (manufacturers of tools, armours, weapons, 
etc.) also, if they had any disputes, had to settle them in the 
presence of the Raya by duels. As a consequence of this, 
people acquired mastery over fencing and became expert 
swordsmen. Skilful swordsmen obtained from the Raya 


185 



beautiful maidens as a reward for proficiency in the art. 
Thus men of every social rank, in every occupation of life 
happened to imbibe a warlike spirit in the kingdom of the Raya, 
and cowardice (fear of death) was condemned as a most 
disgraceful thing among the Raya’s subjects. Thus military 
exercise happened to be the delight of all the subjects of the 
kingdom so that to fight against the Muslims the king could 
mobilise an army of 300 to 400 thousand fighting men (104). 

Vlra Narasimha also took an active interest in the civil 
administration of his kingdom. He was ready to listen to the 
grievances of his subjects and alleviate their distress as much 
as possible. The movement for the abolition of the marriage 
tax, a tax which greatly oppressed the people, had its origin 
in his reign. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


KRSNADEVARlYA. 



By a happy conjunction of circumstances, much valuable 
information of a trustworthy character has come down to ns 
about the reign of Krsnadevaraya. The inscriptions of the 
Raya and his subordinates, contemporary writers both native 
and foreign, Mussalman historians, Hindu chroniclers, and 
the compilers of the village kaviles and kaijiyats furnish the 
historian amply with information about his personality and 
achievements. The only thing which the historian has to do 
is to arrange the facts in their proper setting so that their true 
significance may be seen clearly. 

The first problem that has to be considered in dealing 
with the reign of Krsnadevaraya is the question of succession. 
Much uncertainty prevails about the circumstances under 
which Krsnadevaraya ascended the throne. Nuniz states that 
King Busbalrao (Yira Narasimha), having summoned his 
minister Saluva Timma near his death-bed, commanded that 
he should place the king’s eight year old son upon the 
throne after his death and put out the eyes of his half-brother, 
Krsnadevaraya to prevent him from seizing the throne. 
Saluva Timma pretended to obey the order* of his dying 
master. He put out promptly the eyes of a she-goat, and 
produced them before the king ; but as Busbalrao was already 
sinking, he was unable to detect the fraud. He died soon 
after probably with the satisfaction that he had removed the 
obstacles from the path of his son; but as soon as he died, Saluva 
i imma set aside the claims ot the late king s son, and raised 
Krsnadevaraya to the throne.f 

The account of Nuniz is, however, contradicted by the 
Bayavacakam. According to this work, Vira Narasimha} 

■; ; * Forgoittn Empire p. 314-15. ' f Xbid* 

t According to A. Rangaswamy Sarasvati, ‘ the father of K^adeyaraya is called 
Vwa Narasimha instead of Narasa,’ in the Rayavacakam, and that Vira Narasimha the 
elder; brother of Kjsnaraya, who preceded him on the throne for some years is 

-1" . by , • 

\ 1 * ^ * 1 ■’ . 1 i 


187 


communicated one day to the assembled captains (dalanayakas) 
that as he had become old, they should make the necessary 
arrangements for crowning Krsnadevaraya king of the city 
and the kingdom. He is also said to have handed over to 
Krsnadevaraya the signet-ring at an auspicious moment ! 

It is not easy to decide which of these two accounts is 
correct. Nuniz visited Vijayanagara some ten years after the 
coronation of Krsnadevaraya. Though he could not have 
acquired the knowledge of events leading up to the coronation 
from his personal experience, he could have collected the 
necessary information from people who had direct knowledge 
of the various happenings that took place at Vijayanagara on 
the eve of Krsnaraya’s accession. There is no reason for 
treating the account of Nuniz with undue suspicion. The 
Rdyavacakam, which must have been composed either at the 
end of the 16th century or at the commencement of the 17th 
embodies a traditional account of the events which took 
place nearly a century before. It derives, however, some 
support from the inscriptions. Krsnadevaraya seems to have 
been on friendly terms with Vlra Narasimha almost up to the 
end of the latter’s reign. In several copper-plate charters of 
Vlra Narasimha, Krsnaraya and his mother Nagaladevi are 

{Sources, p. Ill) The same opinion has been expressed by Dr. S. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar 
in the foreword which he contributed to the Andhra Sahitya Paris at edition of 
the RftyavUcakam. One historical discrepancy, however, ” says he, * is too important to 
.be omitted. Krsnadevaraya is said to have succeeded his father as ruler, and nothing 
is said of Krsna*s elder brother, who ruled before him and whom he succeeded/* { The 
Andhra SUhitya Farijat Pubticitions, No. S3, pp. 3-4). This is not true. Though the 
Rayadacakam does not explicitly state how Krsnadevaraya is related to Vlra Narasimha, 
it makes it clear that the latter is not identical with Narasa. The following passages 
put into the mouths of Kysnaraya and the ’Sdil Khla make it obvious that the author 
of the R3y<w3cakam was aware of the distinction between Vira Narasimha and Narasl 
■Nayaka., y^Isvara / Naya4u, ' Narasimha' Naya$u, and Vira 

kingdom before us/* Again* * What can Krsnaraya hops to achieve more than Is vara 
Nayaka, ^ Narasa Nayaka, and Vlra Narasimharaya?” (The 2nd hr a SUhltya Pari$at 
Publications, No. 33, pp. 28, 48). It is evident tbatt he Rdyavacakam does not confound 
Narasa with Vira Narasimha. On the contrary, it distinguishes between them carefully. 
Therefore, Vira Narasimha who according to the Rayavacakam made arrangements for 
KjsnadevarSya's coronation must be identified not with his father, Narasa, but with his 
elder toother, and predecessor, Vira 'Narasimha/ ' ” /'V 


v 

r 1 ' i 
> ) . - 

1 

:: 


; 




11511 ii ; 


Hill 

mmm, 





■■■■■! ' : ■ ' i. v;' 





188 





I 


• • 



referred to in respectful terms ;* neither Acyuta and Sriranga 
nor their mother Obamba is ever mentioned. This seems to 
indicate the existence of friendly relations between Vira 
Narasimha and Krsnaraya. Though the account of the 
Bayavacakam appears to be in harmony with the tenor of the 
inscriptions, evidence of a more substantial character is 
necessary for setting aside the almost contemporaneous 
narrative of Nuniz. Therefore, the story of Nuniz may be 
accepted, for the present, as genuine. 

The da t e of Krm a decar aya ’s accession. -The exact date on which 
Krsnadevaraya ascended the throne has not been discovered 
so far. His predecessor Vira Narasimha was ruling on May 4, 
A.D. 1509f and his rule very probably continued up to July 22, 
A.D., 1509$. The earliest inscription of Krisnaraya is dated 
July 26, A.D. 1509§. There is thus a short interval of four days 
between the latest date of Vira Narasimha and the earliest date 
of Krsnadevaraya. The death of the fonner and the succession 
of the latter to the throne must have taken place within this 
interval. The Vijayanagara Samrajyamu, a report prepared 
by the officers of the atlhavanam at the instance of Yenkata II 
in A.D. 1604, states that the coronation of Krsnadevaraya 
was celebrated on the Sri-jayanti day in the bright half of 
the month ot Xvani of the year Sukla corresponding to 
o. S. 1482 (current) (19-a). As Krsnadevaraya was considered 
a re-incarnation of Sri Krsna,1i it is not unlikely that the 
celebration of hk coronation was put off until the Sri-jayanti, 
the birth-day of Sri Krs^ia, which was near at hand. As the 
Srij-ayanti of the year &.S. 1432 Sukla fell on 8th August 
A. D. 1509, it may be concluded that though Krsnaraya 
succeeded his brother about July 25, A.D. 1509, his coro- 
nation was actually celebrate cl fortnight letter 


"V lj3>y 

Kr§iiadevaray 

* &.I. 33V, pp. 2 
§ 703 of 1919. 

■ pmm 


accession 


kingdom . — The condition of the 

is tar from satisfactory at the time of 
Although Nuniz asserts that King 

U2 of 1892. j 289 of 1915. K 


t 342 of 1892. 

1 Sturm, p. 139* 


. 1 f 


—ujjhiS 












sovereignty of the entire Mysore ^country, which appears to 
have backed him up. To aggravate the internal situation, the 
kingdom was subjected to the attacks of the enemies from 
outside. The Gajapatis of Orissa were still in occupation of the 
north-eastern districts of the kingdom, and Prataparudra was 
showing distinct indications of hostility. Though the BahmanI 
kingdom had virtually ceased to exist by. the commencement 
of the 16th century, the Muslim pressure from the north had 
lost none of its vigour. Yusuf ’Adii Khan, the founder of the 
’Adil Shah! dynasty of Bijapur, had been persistently attempt- 
ing to extend the boundary of his kingdom at the expense of 
the Raya. The Portuguese, who made their first appearance 
in India during the last decade of the fifteenth century, though 
generally well-disposed towards the king of Vijayanagara 
were occasionally inclined to give trouble. Therefore, Krsna- 
devaraya was obliged to be at war with some one or other of 
his enemies almost from the day of his accession. 

To begin with, Kr§naraya appears to have been involved 
in a war with his northern neighbours. His Hampi inscrip- 
tion dated 28th January A.D. 1510 alludes to victories which 
he won over the Suljan and the Grajapati.f The circumstances 
under which these victories were won are not fully known. 
The data available leave some gaps to be filled by surmise 
regarding the probable course of events. 


Krstiaraya and the Sultan . — The Sultan over whom Kpgija- 
raya claims the victory is Mahmud Shah II, the Sultan of 
Bidar. That Krsnaraya was involved in a war soon after his 
accession with the BahmanI Sultan is revealed by a casual 

• Forgotten Empire , p. 314. t E,f, i, p, 370, 


190 



reference in the instructions which Afonso Albuquerque 
gave to his agent in the Yijayanagara court. Albuquerque 
instructed his agent to promise the Raya help in the war 
which he was waging with the Suljfcan of the Deccan provided 
he agreed to join the Portuguese in a league against the 
Zamorin of Calicut.* The war, however, was not due to any act 
of aggression on the part of the Raya. Sultan Mahmud Shah II, 
though incapable of enforcing his authority over his subjects, 
was untiring in his efforts to spread the gospel of Islam by 
means of the sword. In the year A. EL. 907 (A.D. 1501) it was 
resolved at Bidar that ‘ once in each year the whole of the 
amirs and tvazlrs should come to the royal court, and join in 
a jihad against the idolaters of Yijayanagara and hoisting the 
standards of Islam should use their utmost endeavours to 
eradicate the infidels and tyrants.f In pursuance of this reso- 
lution, Sultan Mahmud was accustomed to invade the 
Yijayanagara kingdom from time to time, plunder the villages 
and towns, and seize as much territory as he could lay 
hands on. 


One of the these jihads seems to have come immediately 
after Krsnaraya’s accession. The Muhammadan historians 
describe & jihad against the infidels of Vijayanagara in which 
Sul, tan Mahmud Shah II not only sustained a defeat but 
received serious wounds from which he recovered but slowly. 
The date of this jihad , however, is divergently given. The 
Anonymous Historian of the Qujtb Shahl kings assigns it to 
A.H. 911 ;J but Sayyid ’All places it, in A.H. 928.§ The dates 
mentioned by these two historians cannot be accepted. The 
former dislocates the events from their chronological setting to 
show that the Bahmani nobles, specially 'Quly Qntb-ul-Mulk, 
the ancestor of his patron, remained loyal to the Suljtan until 
his death which he refers to 912 A.H. This is palpably false ; 
for, in the first place the regnal period of thirty-seven years 

Us of the Great Afonso DAlhoupeergue ii, Ch. xvii, pp. Vo-fi. 
Wa’Zsir, I.A.xxy Hi, p. 316, $ Brig®* Perishta iii, (App.j, PP- 350-1. 

’A.:’ ...1 



■which he allots to Mahmud Shah II does not tally with the 
date of his accession as given by other historians. Deducting 
87 years from A.H. 912 we get A.H. 875 as the date of his 
accession ; but as a matter of fact, his father Muh.ammad 
Shah II was on the throne until A.H. 887, and his accession 
did not take place until after his father’s demise.* If, on the 
other hand, 87 is added to A.H. 887 we obtain A.H. 924 which 
is the actual date of his death. Secondly, the jihad is said to 
have taken place in the year following the death of Yusuf 
’Adil Khan, an event which though, he assigns to A.H. 911, did 
not take place before A.H. 916. Therefore, the date given by 
him for the jihad does not indicate accurately the time of its 
occurrence. A.H. 923 given by Sayyid ’All for the jihad 
is too late ; for, at that time Krsnaraya could not have success- 
fully opposed the combined might of the BahmanI kingdom as 
he is said to have done, since his armies were still involved in 
the Kalin ga war. Moreover, the inclusion of Malik Ahmad 
Balm Nizam-ul-Mulk among the nobles who accompanied the 
Sultan on this occasion definitely points to an earlier date. 
Since Malik Ahmad died in A.H. 916 or 917, the jihad in which 
he participated could not have taken place later. Taking all 
the facts mentioned by the Muslim historians into consideration, 
A.H. 916 (A.D. 1510) appears to be the most probable date for 
the jihad. In that case it must be identical with the war 
between Krsnaraya and the king of Deccan alluded to by 
Albuquerque. Another fact which seems to have a direct 
bearing on the subject must not be lost sight of in this connec- 
tion. Krsnaraya’s victory over the Sultan is referred to, as 
noticed already, in his Hampi inscription dated 28th January 
A. D. 1510. It follows from this that the jihad under discussion 
had taken place some time before this date. As Krsnaraya 
succeeded his brother about the end of May A.D. 1509, the 
jihad in which he overthrew the BahmanI Suljtan must have 
taken place between the date of his accession and that of the 
Hampi inscription. 


* Briggs Ferishta ii, p. 518 ; Burk^n-i-Ma'UHr, /.A. xxviii, p. 293. 




Mahmud Shall II set out from Bidar, 
Nuii Kh an Khwaja-i- 
Tmad-ul-Mulk, Dasturi 
id others.* When the Muslim armies 
ress was checked by the Vijaya- 
pose their advance. Both the sides 
Mahmud Shah II commanded the 
the right: and the other nobles 
e ’Adil Kh an were probably 
itb-ul-Mulk broke the left 
fere under the Sultan gave 
fierce and impetuous that it 
1 threw them into utmost confu- 
; and while he was probably 
, he was thrown off his horse 
was, however, rescued from 
Timma, one of Krsna- 
; a gift to Muhammad 
i, some of his troops who 
took charge of him and 
Lutf-ul-lah, where his 


The Battle of Dhcani 
accompanied by Malik .Ahmad LahrT 
Jahan, the ’Adil 
Mamalik, Mirza 3 
reached Dlwanl 
nagara forces wl 
then prepared ft 
centre : and Qut 

including Malik Ahmad Bahrx and th 
in charge of the left. Though 
wing of the enemy, the Muslim c 
wav. The Hindu onset was so 
shattered the Muslim lines and ... 
sion. The Sultan was isolated 
attempting to extricate himself, 1 
and nearly trodden to deatli.f He 
the jaws of death perhaps by Ramaraja 
raya’s officers, who is said to have made 
of his life (108). In the meanwhile 
accidentally discovered the Sultan 
conveyed him to the tent of Muza 
wounds were attended to, 

The jihad ended in a great disas 
gave up fighting, and having folded u 
tion and war’ they retreated towards 1 

The retreat of the vanquished Muslim army was not un 
hampered, as Krsnaraya seems to have followed it at the heac 
of his forces in close pursuit. Yusuf ’Idil Khan whose territory 
lay adjacent to Vijayanagara frontier turned round to oppost 
him • but in an engagement which took place in the neighbour 


193 


Meeting with no further opposition on his way, Kmiaraya pro- 
ceeded to Kovilkonda, and having laid siege to the fort 
captured it without difficulty.* 

Kr§naraya returned to Vijayanagara after his victories at 
DlwanI and Kovilkonda, and busied himself with the internal 
administration of his kingdom. It was at this time that he 
reorganized the army and converted the motley collection of 
the Jcaijitam and the amaratn forces into an effective instru- 
ment of war (188). He did not, however, neglect to keep a 
vigilant eye on the affairs of the Bahmani kingdom, where the 
elements of anarchy and disorder were gradually gaining 
strength owing to the rivalry of ambitious noblemen. 

On the death of Yusuf ’Sdil Khan, his young son Isma’il 
succeeded. As Isma’il was too young to govern his dominions, 
Kamal Khan, the right-hand man of his father, became his 
regent and assumed the reins of government. Kamal Khan, 
who received the training in statecraft from his late master, 
directed the affairs of state with energy ; and in attempting to 
push forward one of his schemes of territorial aggrandizement, 
he came into conflict . with Malik Dastiir Dinar, the ruler of 
G-ulburga. Kamal Khan marched against him and after a 
siege of two months captured Gulburga.f Dinar fled to 
Bidar and took refuge with Barld-i-Mamalik, who received 
him cordially, and marched at the head of his army accom- 
panied by the Sultan to drive away the ’5dil Khan ; % but in an 
encounter with the ’Adil Khan’s forces he was routed and the 
Sul,tan was taken prisoner.§ Kamal Khan then appears to 
have proceeded to Bidar, and captured the place. He deprived 
Mahmud Shah of all power and having confined him to his 


•The Anonymous Historian refers to the capture of Kovilko§4a by QUly Qutb-ul- 
Mulk from Kfsnaraya about A. D- 1517 [Brigg's Feriihta iii App., p. 357]. This fort^was 
not included in the Vijayanagara dominions before Krsnaraya’s time. As Krjnaraya’s 
armies are not known to have penetrated to this region during his Kajinga campaign, he 
must have taken possession of it after the destruction of the Muhammadan army at 
Diwanl 

•j- The Commentaries of the Great Afonso DAlhoguerque iii, Ch- viii, p. 36. 

J BurftMn-i-Ma’asir, LA. xxviii, p. 391. 

§ The Commentaries of the Great Afonso DAlboquerque iii, Ch. viii, p. 


36 


{YavanarBj yasthfyannearya) J. O. R. x, pp. 168-17?, 

1-35 




i 

*■ 4 












194 



dencies enhanced the 1 Ad.il Khan’s power. Besides, he was 
expected to make use of the name of the Sultan, who had fallen 
into his hands, to serve his own ends. Therefore, they resolved 
to make war upon the ’Adil Khan. Barld-i-Mamalik, Malik 
Ahmad Bahrl, Qutb-ul-Mulk and Dastur Dinar united their 
forces and marching against Bidar laid siege to it. The Say- 
yids and other men endeavoured their utmost to effect an 
amicable settlement, but to no purpose. The fort held out for 
a while, and after a good deal of fighting, ’Azmat-ul-Mulk had 
an interview with Barid and apparently made arrangements 
for the surrender of the fort.f They next proceeded against 
the ’JLdil Khan! dominions and captured several forts includ- 
ing Grulburga on the east of the Bhima, and finally advanced 
on Bijapur itself . t The approach of the allies created panic 
in Bijapur, and caused much confusion in the districts. Dis- 
orders broke out in several places specially at Belgaum, where 
the Hindus rose up in rebellion and requested Krsnaraya to 
come and occupy their city.§ Krsnaraya, who was in fact 
waiting for a favourable opportunity to dislodge the ruler of 
Bijapur from the Krsna-Tnngabhadra doab, readily responded 
to the invitation of the Hindus of Belgaum and led his armies 
against Bijapur in August, A.D. 1510 and laid siege to Rai- 
cur.f Kamal Khan met the situation manfully ; he hastily 
summoned troops from distant garrison towns like Groa ; and 
with their help defeated Band and his allies in battle and 
forced them to retreat. 11 He does not however seem to have 
concerted measures for driving back the Vijayanagara armies 
from the neighbourhood of RSicfir. 

* The Commentaries iii, Ch. viii, p. 36 ; Burhm-TMa'Udr I. A* xxviii, p , 319. 

f Bwhand-Ma'nwt LA. 

t The Commentaries iii, Ch. viii, p. 36 ; Briggs Ferishta ii, pp, 549-50. 

§ The Commentaries of the Great Afonso DAlhoquerque iii, Ch. viii, p. 36. 

\ Forgotten Empire, p. 125 n. 1; The Commentaries of the Great Afonso £>A!io- 
querqut iii, Ch. ziii, p. 202 ; Briggs’ Ferishta iii, p. 44. 

oftU Guai VMoiuerqne iii, Ch. viii, p. 36 ; Briggs' 


195 



* Briggs Ferishia iii, p. 37. 

t Cmmntari»of tU Great Afrnu DAlboquirquc iii, Cb. ilii, pp- 248-9, 


Kamal Khan’s failure to oppose Krsnaraya was probably 
due to considerations of policy. He must have been aware of 
the friendly relations that existed between the Raya and the 
Portuguese- governor ; and felt that under the circumstances 
it was not easy to gain any advantage in the field over the 
former. Moreover, he began to cherish treacherous designs 
upon the throne. He wanted to set aside his young master, 
and seize his kingdom. To further his designs he entered into an 
alliance with Amir Barid and having ceded to him Gulburga 
and other forts up to the Bhima secured his support. As soon as 
the treaty was concluded Kamal Khan imprisoned Isma’Il ’Adil 
Khan and the Queen-mother Bubfiji Khanam in the citadel of 
Bijapur and proceeded to Sholapur with his army to invest 
that fort. At the same time Barid imprisoned Sultan Mah- 
mud Shah II in his palace at Bidar and moved to Gulburga 
and occupied the fort. Meanwhile, Kamal Khan laid siege to 
Sholapur and having captured it after a siege of three months 
returned to Bijapur. While he was engaged in making 
arrangements for formally proclaiming himself king, he was 
slain in May A.D. 1511 by an assassin in the employ of the 
Queen-mother.* : V '-i : :;■> . :: - ' 

Though the assassination of Kamal Khan brought freedom 
and power to Isma’Il ’Adil Khan, it did not restore tranquillity 
in the kingdom. Dissensions arose among the ’Adil Khan! 
nobles. Kamal Khan who was a Persian by birth was the 
leader of the Persian and Khurassan! nobles ; and his assassi- 
nation was strongly resented by them, and 4 they opposed the 
Turks and Rumes because they had put to death Camalcao’.f 
Krsnaraya who took Raicur by this time moved northwards 
and advanced on Gulburga. Ferishta, no doubt, declares that 
Amir Barid evacuated Gulburga as soon as the news of Isma’Il 
’Adil Khan’s emancipation reached him. It is unlikely that 
Barid would have abandoned Gulburga unless he was com- 
pelled to do so. What really forced him to leave the fort 
was the arrival of the Vijayanagara army. The Vijayanagara 


196 



Gbilburga refers to the forces of the Nizam (104-d). Probably 
Band obtained assistance from the Ahmadnagar court. The 
battle of Grulburga ended in the defeat of Muslim armies. 
Krsnaraya captured the fort of Grulburga and set up the boar 
standard on the battlements. He pursued Band to Bidar, laid 
siege to the fort and captured it (114-a). Though the fall of 
Bidar spelt ruin to the ambitions of Barld, it brought liberty 
to Mahmud Shah II. Krsnaraya was a politician as well as 
a general. He set the Sul.tan at liberty and restored 
him to power; for, he wanted to weaken the Mussalmans by 
throwing an apple of discord in their midst. So long as the 
shadow of the Bahmani monarchy persisted there would be 
no peace among the Muslim rulers of the Deccan. To 
commemorate this act of the resuscitation of the Bahmani 
monarchy, Krsnaraya assumed the title of Yavanarajyaslha- 
panaccirya*. 

An epigraph dated 13th Oct. A.D. 1510 states thatKoccerla- 
kota in the Ammanabroli-slma in the Kondavidu-rayya was 
granted to Saluya Timma by Krsnadevaraya.f Unless this 
region had been conquered by Krsnadevaraya from the 
Grajapati, he could not have bestowed it as an amaram upon 
his minister. Therefore, it is not improbable that Krsnaraya 
came into conflict with the Grajapati as early as A.D. 1510. 

The subjugation of Ummattur Krsnadevaraya had to 

turn his attention to the affairs of the Ummattur country 

next. Gfangaraja, the palaigar of the district had been in a 

state of rebellion, since the last years of the reign of Ylra 

Narasimha. Emboldened by his success over the armies of 

that monarch, he showed no inclination to submit to his 

successor who had yet to show his capacity to govern. With 

■ o island forts of &ivansamudram and Srxrangapattanam 

° . " * ' * 

* /. 0. R. x, pp. 153-76. - - 1 ii.O. 46 ; A.R.E. 1933-34 > ii, p. 42. . 


Emsa 


in his possession he was able to impose his power over the upper 
Kaverl valley and imperii the maintenance of royal authority 
in that region. Although Krsnaraya was aware of the danger, 
he was not able to pay much attention to it, owing to his 
preoccupation with the BahmanI invasion ; but with the 
defeat and the retreat of the invaders, Krsnaraya became 
free to deal with the Ummattur chieftain; accordingly he 
despatched an army to reduce him to subjection. 

The strength of the army .'—According to Nuniz, Krsnaraya 
is said to have remained after his coronation at Vijayanagara 
‘ for a year and a half ‘ learning the affairs of the kingdom. 5 
Daring this period he is said to have collected an army of 
“thirty-four thousand foot and eight hundred elephants.” * 
Though the Bayavacakam corroborates Nuniz’ s evidence that 
Krsnaraya spent some time at Vijayanagara at the beginning 
of his reign in making preparations for war, it does not 
precisely state the length of this time or the strength of the 
army gathered under his standard. However, it leaves the 
impression on the mind that the army which he led after the 
preliminary period of preparation against Grangaraja was far 
greater in strength than the -figures mentioned by Nuniz. 
The amara levies which Krsnaraya is said to have summoned 
to join him consisted of 24,000 horse, 1,200 elephants, and 
200,000 foot. Besides, the 12,000 horse, 100,000 foot, and 
500 elephants made over to him by the amara-nayakas in lieu 
of the arrears of tribute, the kaijUam forces maintained by the 
king, and the j rilaipat contingents must also be taken into 
account. But according to Fr. Luiz, who was at Vijayanagara 
at the time, the force that was despatched against the rebel 
consisted only of seven thousand men. Nuniz- does not 
mention the Ummattur campaign, although it is possible that 
Krsnaraya might have despatched all the forces which he 
collected during ‘ the one and half years 5 period of preparation 
to subdue the rebel. The account of the Bayavacakam cannot 
be completely trusted, as it only embodies the tradition that 


■ Forgotten Empire^ p« 3X6. 


■<* * r * 


HP 

* 

£ 


I f. 


198 



# Sources, p. 118. f Commentaries of the Great Afonso DAlboquerque iii. p. 35. 

I S.K. Ayyangar : The Yet-remembered Ruler %c., p. 5. Though it is not unlikely that 
the rebellions chief of Ummattur, who seised Pent)gon(Ja is identical with Gangaraja, the 
inference drawn from Gajigaraja’s titles is not sapportedby svMenee. In the first place, 
no evidence is available in support of the proposition that Narasa conferred any 
titles upon Gangaraja, or, as to that matter, on any Ummattur chief. Secondly, the title 


was current about the beginning of the 17th century. Greater 
credence must be given to the contemporary estimate of 
Fr. Luiz, though the army mentioned by him might, have com- 
prised only the preliminary expeditionary force. 

The duration of the Ummattur campaign -The Raya- 
vdcalcam and the Knnardya Vijayam dismiss the Ummattur 
campaign with a brief notice. Krsnaraya is said to have 
captured both Ummattur and Sivansamudram within a single 
day* This is not, however, supported by other evidence. In the 
Kongudesardjakkalin Garitram, the campaign is stated to have 
lasted for one whole year (113) ; and this is corroborated by the 
contemporary Portuguese writings and the inscriptions. 
Fr. Luiz, whom Alfonso D Albuquerque despatched as his 
ambassador to the Vijayanagara court, alludes to this campaign 
in a letter which he wrote to his master some time before 
September A.D. 1510, 

“The King of Narsinga” says he, “ was getting himself 
ready with five thousand men on foot, and two thousand men 
on horse, for an expedition against one of his vassals, who had 
risen up in rebellion and seized the city of Pergunda, (the 
rebel) declaring to himself belonged the kingdom itself by 
right.”t 

The rebel chief who seized Pergunda (Penugonda) has been 
identified with Gangaraja of Ummattur, “ who”, it is said, “show- 
ed himself ready to make capital out of the titles conferred 
on him by Krsna’s father Narasa (1) Penugo ndacakresmra which 
might have carried with it the administration of the province 
of Penugonda, and (2) Gikkarayapatta which in his case should 
have been the dignity of a subordinate kingf’J; 



199 


that the proposed identification is not unreasonable, the 
campaign against Ummattur must be said to have begun 
some time before December, A.D. 1510. As Krsnaraya was still 
at Sivansamudram on Wednesday, Asvija. sn. di. 12, Angirasa 
(&aka. 1484),* the campaign appears to have extended up to the 
end of A.D. 1512. 

The events of the campaign.— The earliest event connected 
with this campaign must have been the recapture of the fort 
of Penugonda. As Fr. Luiz states that some time before 
December, A.D. 1510 Krsnaraya despatched an army against 
the rebel who seized Penugonda, and as Penugonda was in the 
possession of Kondamarasa at the end of April, A. D. 1512f, 
it is evident that it was captured in the interval. The Baya- 
vacakam and the Krsnaraya Vijayam allude to the capture of 
Ummattur and ^ivansamudram.J The Parijatajoaharanam 
mentions the dismantling of the battlements of Ummattur and 
§ivansamudram.§ The Kongudesaraj akkalin Oaritram des- 
cribes the siege of Sivansamudfam at some length. It is said 
that Gangaraja made the fort of Sivansamudram his head- 
quarters, where he collected forces and ammunition in order 
to make it (more) secure. Krsnaraya having laid siege to it 
secured the alliance of Cikkaraya who was ill-disposed to- 
wards Gangaraja. ‘ He pitched his camp on the slopes of the 
Preta and the Gauri hills and (invested the place) for more than 
one year. At last he approached the fort by the Ottina pass 
and stormed it. Gangaraja while fleeing from the enemy was 

Penugonda’. Now, according to Nuniz, the fort of Penugonda was in the possession 
of Narasa Nay aka at the time when Codemera (Konijamarasa) acting upon his 
instructions, is said to have murdered Tammaraya. {PE* p. 360 and n. 1 .} As 
Tammaraya was alive even after the death of Narasa, it had been rightly suggested 
that the deed was perpetrated at the instance of his son, Vira Narasimba. In 
that case, Penugonda was in the possession of the Raya up to A.D. 1505, and Rayasam 
Komjamarasayya (Codemera) was holding sway over Penugonda in April, A.D. 1512 
(R.C. xii, p. 95). As Fr. Luis explicitly states that the rebel chief had * seized the 
city of Pergtmda', the RSya appears to have temporarily lost hold of it between A.D. 1505 
and 1512. Therefore, it cannot be said that the title Penugonda C&m$vara carried with 
it the administration of the province. 

* 180 of 1913. f E.C. xii, Pg. 5. 2 Saurcis^ pp, 118, 130, 

§ Bid, p, 142. ' • ‘ ; . a a v ' 


» i '• 




: {’ - m 1 * ; 1 u, 

‘ 








drowned in a pool of the Haven canea 
According to the SangHasuryodayam , Krsnaraya, destroyed 
the fort of &ivansamudram so completely that its site soon 
became a proper habitation for jackals. (116-a). 

arrangements c— The Wongudesar cij aikltalin 
administrative arrangements which 
' ' - s of royal authority 

He is said to have made SSriranga- 
and entrusted the administration to three 
>a Grauda and Cikkaraya, the 
■ule in this part of the country is attested 
to have constituted the 
-• — w ith Srlrangapattanam as its 
effectively under control, and ap- 
of his officers probably Saluva Govindaraja as its 


Administrative 
Caritram refers to some 
Krsnaraya made for the maintenance 
in the conquered territory 
pattanam its capital ; f — 
chiefs, Vlrapa Gauda, Kemp; 
existence of whose ri- 
by the inscriptions* Krsnaraya appears 
territory into a new province 
capital, to keep it more < “ 
pointed one c _ * 

first governor. f 

The Kalinga War— Krsnaai 
to the affairs of the east coast, 
still in possession of the district 
which Purusottama had wrestec 
loss of these two districts seems to have weighed very heavily 
upon Narasimha’s mind ; for, according to Nuniz, he enjoined 
on his successors, in his last will and testament, that they should 
capture them. Though Narasa Nay aka made an attempt to 
recover them, he was not successful. Moreover, the king of 
Orissa showed no inclination to be a peaceful neighbour. 
Consequently Krsnaraya made rip his mind to wage war 
upon him as soon as circumstances proved favourable. His 
victory over the Mus salmans freed him from the fear of an 
attack from that side. Therefore, he declared war upon the 
Gajapati in A.D. 1518, and marched upon the fort of Udayagiri. 

“ .» virappa Gaufla figures in S.C. Hi, My. B, 32: and' Kempa Gau^a mnst He the 
same as Kempe Gauda ■who is said to have ruled from 1S13 to 1569 (Journal of the 
Mythic Society xii'i, p. 724); and Cikkaraya is mentioned in B.C. iii, Ml. 95, 9g 


201 


The Amuktamalyada marks out five distinct stages of the 
war, and its evidence is supported by the inscriptions * The 
first stage ended with the capture of Udayagiri ; the second 
with the fall of Kondavldu ; the third with the storming of 
Kondapalli ; the fourth with the setting up of a pillar of 
victory at Potnur ; and the fifth with the attack upon Cuttack, 
the capital of the Gajapati. This division of the Kalinga War 
into five stages is helpful and convenient, as it renders possible a 
succinct description of all the events connected with it. 

(i) The siege of Udayagiri: — The siege of Udayagiri 
appears to have commenced about the beginning of the year 
A.D. 1513. According to Nuniz, Krsnaraya captured the fort 
after a siege of ‘ a year and a half ’.f After the capture of 
the fort, he paid a visit, on his way to Vijayanagara, to the 
Tirumala hill in the Chittoor district to offer thanks to god 
VenkateSvara, his favourite deity, on 6 July, A.D. 1514. % 
Assuming that Krsnaraya accomplished the journey from 
Udayagiri to Tirumala hill within a week, the fort of 
Udayagiri may be considered to have fallen about the end 
of June, A.D. 1514. Then, making allowance of 5 a year and a 
half ’ for the duration of the siege, it may be said to have begun 
roughly in the month of January, A.D. 1513. The Vijaya- 
nagara Samrajyamu, however, states that Krsnaraya started from 
his capital, on 16 March, A.D. 1513, on an expedition against 
the Gajapati. (114-c). This seems to gain support from the 
evidence of the inscriptions. Krsnaraya was very probably 
at Vijayanagara on 7 March, A.D. 1513, § and at Tirupati, on 
his way to Udayagiri, on 13 June, A.D. 1513. t It may appear 
from this that the evidence on the subject is contradictory ; 
but the contradiction is more apparent than real. Krsnaraya 
might have sent his army in advance to besiege Udayagiri 
and started later from his capital to join the army, when the 

siege had already made considerable progress. 

. ■ * '■ . •: 

* N.DJ. Hi, U. 40; S.IJ. vi, 248, 694, 696; 824 of 1922. 

+ Forgotttn .Empire, p. 316. t 53, 54, 56 of 1899. : 

\ T.D.B.R., p, 152 


IMi 


lllff 

II 


:pfl 

ll# 

lit 

P 





#1 

l! 


■pf 

Sifsii 


■■■ 

Iplli 


I " If 







202 



The siege of the fort was, as stated already, protracted 
extending over & period of nearly eighteen months. This was 
partly due to the natural strength of the fort and the inacces- 
sibility of its walls, which were encompassed by hills and rocks. 
“The place at this time,” says Nuniz, “ was so strong that 
they could not approach it except by one way which was so 
narrow that men could only pass along it one at a time.” * 
But Krsnaraya was a general who never allowed himself to be 
deterred by difficulties however insuperable they might appear. 
As rocks and boulders stood in his way, he made up his mind 
to remove them. In the course of a few months, ‘ he made 
many paths across the rocky hills, breaking up many 
err eat boulders, in order to make a road for his soldiers to 


Krsnaraya was not, however, allowed to proceed with the 
investment of the fort undisturbed. The Grajapati, Prataparudra, 
seems to have advanced at the head of his army upon Udayagiri 
with the object of raising the siege ; Krsnaraya opposed him on 
the way, and having inflicted a defeat upon him, pursued him 
as far as Koijdavfdu. Then he returned to Udayagiri and 
constructed a menata (a wall of circumvallation ?) around 
the fort with the object of starving the garrison to surrender. 
Tirumala Rahuttaraya, a paternal uncle of the G-ajapati, who 
was in charge of the fort, seems to have offered stubborn resis- 
tance^ Well-attested tradition has it that Krsnaraya, being 
vexed with the pertinacity shown by the defenders, vowed 
On one day that he would not bathe (and consequently 
would not partake of food) until he set his foot on the head 
of Tirumala Rahuttaraya; on hearing this declaration, 
Rahuttaraya is said to have surrendered, placing his usmsa at 
Kr§naraya’s feet, so that he might trample upon it instead of 

* Forgotten Empire , pp. 316-17, f Ibid, p, 316. 

J p. 317, § N.D.I iii, U. *0, 

^ ^ ^ i £ * * i? y,». ^ iv ^ j 


203 



upon his head and spare his life without any breach of his 
vow. This tradition appears to be founded on fact ; for 
Krsnaraya asserts in his Amuhtamalyada that the paternal 
uncle of the Gajapati placed the rare gift of his usmsa at his 
(Raya’s) feet.* This act of submission, no doubt, saved 
him from death but not from captivity. Krsnaraya took 
possession of the fort, and appointed Kondamarasayya as 
its governor.f 

The fall of IJdayagiri was celebrated as a great event 
Krsnaraya, accompanied by his queens Tirumaladevi and 
Cinnadevi, paid a visit to Tirupati and presented valuable 
jewels to the god Venkatesvara, as a thank -offering. J To 
commemorate the victory, a special shrine was erected at the 
capital, and the image of Balakrsna which Krsnaraya carried 
away from Udayagiri was installed therein.§ The great sage 
Vyasaraya composed special songs in honour of the advent of 
the deity J 

(ii) The capture of Kondavldu . — Though Krsnaraya 
returned to the capital after the fall of Udayagiri, the army 
proceeded towards Kondavldu. ‘On seeing the army rolling 
onwards like an ocean at full tide, the dust spreading up to the 
sky and hiding the sun’s light, and hearing the sound of the 
trumpets, the garrisons of various forts abandoned their posts 
and took to flight. In this manner the garrisons of all the 
forts in the district of Kondavldu, having been ousted from 
their places, repaired to the headquarters of their respective 
chiefs. The Boya chiefs of the Eighteen Kampanas together with 
the 8,00,000 infantry (of the royal army) devastated the country 
dependent on Kondavldu, Kondapalli, Bellamkonda, 


*■ Sources^, p. 137. 

f NIV.R fix, 14. According to the RUymacakam y Krsnaraya placed this fort in charge 
of a certain Kampana. This officer is probably the same as Sajuva Kamparaya, who is 
spoken of in the Hayalaksana Vilasam as the bearer of Krsnaraya’ s sword. But there is 
no epigraphical or other reliable evidence to show that he had any connection with the 
administration of Udayagiri. 

% S.LL sv, No. 232, M.B.R, 53 of 1889. § SJ.L iv, No. 254, 

If Naxasimhachari: Karnafa fCavicariU ii, pp. 206-7 ‘ it 


204 



p. 140). 

Kjsnaia: 

( ■, -blit ak< 

Mcarif 


evidence. In the Snsailam epigraph of 
-aptnred not only the Gajapati’s son Vlrabhadra 
Kumaxa Hamvirapatra's son Naraharid$va, 
. Kasuyapatra, Ptisapaji RScixaju, fenatharaju 


Vinukonda, Nagarjunakonda and other forts. The people of 
various sun as having given up all their property to plunder, 
crept into the forts that were within easy reach.”* Such is said to 
have been the effect of the invasion, on the inhabitants of the east 
coast. The forts of Kandukur, Addanki, Vinukonda, Bellam- 
konda, Nagarjunakonda, Tangeda and Ketavaram fell rapidly 
one after another into the hands of the Raya; and having com- 
pleted the subjugation of the country and the minor forts, the 
Vijayanagara army proceeded at last against Kondavldu and 
laid siege to it. The conduct of the siege operations was left in 
charge of Saluva Timmarasa, who seems to have devoted all his 
energies to reduce the garrison quickly to submission. 

Kondavidu was a place of great importance ; it was the 
chief city of the Grajapati dominions in the south of the river 
Krsna; because of its importance, it was strongly guarded, and 
‘all the chiefs of the kingdom’ were stationed in it. 

Owing to the natural strength of the fort, and the 
concentration of the Uriya noblemen and their troops therein, 
the fort could not be captured easily, and the siege 
necessarily became protracted. Kr§nadevaraya is said to 
have remained there ‘three months without being able 
to capture it;’ and in the end the fort is said to have 
been taken ‘ more by reason of his numbers than by 
force of arms.’f The contemporary literature and the 

* Sources, pp. 123-4. 

t Forgotten Empire, p. 318- Of course, this is based on the justifiable assumption 
thatNuniz's description of the siege of Kondapalli applies to Konflavitfu and vice versa. 


inscriptions furnish interesting details of the siege. According 
to the Amuktamalyacla, all the Uriya noblemen, who were 
assembled in the fort of Kondavldu, “ went to heaven without 
any wounds on their bodies.”* That is, their death appears to 
have been brought about by starvation. This view is confirmed 
by the Mangalagiri pillar inscription which asserts that Saluva 
Timma, who was actually responsible for the reduction of the 
fort, starved the Uriya noblemen to surrender. “When 
Salva (or the hawk) surnamed Timma... having captured the 
swan-like kings appointed by G-ajapati at Kondavldu, is plan- 
ning an attack (on the fort), the hostile princes, secretly abscond- 
ing, tormented by hunger and thirst, are searching for 
herbs and the (rain -giving) clouds, in the mountains, the towns, 
the oceans and the earth ”f Krsnaraya blockaded the fort. 
According to an epigraph at Lower Ahobalam, “he surrounded 
the fort with his army, and living erected movable wooden 
platforms to enable his soldiers to stand on a level with the 
defenders and demolish the walls, he scaled them on all sides 
and captured the fort .” % Many of the Uriya noblemen who 
survived the siege were taken" prisoners. Of these, Virabhadra- 
raya, son of the G-ajapati Prataparudra, Naraharideva, son 
of Kumara Hamvirapatra, Laksmipatiraju, son of Srlnatharaju 
Ramaraju, Racuri Mallu Khan, Uddanda Khan,§ Janyavula 

Laksmipatiraju, and Pascimabalacandra Mahapatra. {Mack. 15-3-6, p* 17). Again, 

Nuniz states that while Krfnaraya was besieging Kon^avi^u, on hearing that the 
Gajapati was approaching with a large army, he went out four leagues from the place 
to oppose him, and arrived at a large ‘ salt water river 1 (F E. p. 317.) Now, there 
is ‘no such river * as pointed by Sewell, ‘within twelve miles or thereabouts from 
Kon<}avx<|u \ {Jbid r n. 4). The place referred to must be Komjapalli and not Komja* 
vfcjiu. The river which Kjsnaraya came across within four leagues must have been the 
river Krsna which Sows about 10 miles from Komjapalli. “ Salt” may perhaps mean, as 
Sewell puts it, * brackish’ ; or more probably it is due to a mistake of Nuniz or his 
informant. 

; ;■ Sources* p. 136. 

t E. L vi, pp. 128-9 

Sapi=ang-dp'Ua~sakti-trita ya caturu=pay^aika mantr=isa S3tm 
Timm—akkye. Eondavt$yant Gaj apati-nihitan rdf a-hantsan gthitvt 

Dha$tm—ai%katfiane para-nrpaii-khagdh k$ui~pipds~dti~k}dnndh 
£d>te=d&bddn m'argayant'l giri-pura-jaladhi-k§niasttgttehdh pralinSh, 

% L*R, 15, pp. 431-33. 

§ See Appendix at the end of the chapter. 

■■■■ , ■■ ■■ ■ ■- : 







Ifif 


;W I 






mmmm. 


206 



Kasuvapatra and Timma(?) Balacandrapatra were the most 
important. * In addition to these seven noblemen, Nuniz 
mentions a wife of the Gajapati among the prisoners. f It is 
probably to this fact that Peddana alludes, when he speaks 
of Krsnaraya’s frequent invasions against the king of Kalinga 
in the north and the carrying off of his women as prisoners of 
war.} The lives of the prisoners were spared, and they were 
sent ‘ by road to Bysnaga.’§ 


ion of the fort and the district of 
ntrusted its administration to Saluva 
due to his exertions that the work of 
ihed. The garrison of the fort was 
nand of Timmaraju Pina-Kondraju, 
amily (122). Having thus made the 
for the administration and defence of 
Krsnaraya proceeded to Amaravati, 
ms, TirumaladevI and CinnadevI and 
imaregvara.f Hence he repaired to 
) his capital, and made magnificent 
god Mallikarjuna.i! 


-Krsnaraya did not remain at Vijaya- 
tme. Having probably attended to the 
ingdom, he started once again from the 
ly. He visited, on the way, Ahobalam, 
Narasimha valuable jewels and money, j 
,vs to have begun with the capture of 
a, a city which Krsnaraya made the base 
ations in Telingana on the west and 
3ast. Kondapalli, a strong fort with lofty 
powerful apparatus of defence, stood in 
hin a few miles in the north-west. It was 


f Forgotten Empire , pp. 318-9* 

tgr&ha * , 1( The comm on t&tor ^ takes the 
;e women belonging to the king of Kalinga. 

1 Ed, vii, pp. 20.; Mack dfw. 15-3-6, p. 17- 




% £ £ 


207 



guarded by a strong garrison under Praharesvara Patra ; * 
and he was assisted by Bodajanna Mahapatra, Bijlikhan and 
other officers.f Krsnaraya marched against it and sat down 
around its walls with the object of seizing it. However, 
Prataparudra Gajapati on getting the information of the 
investment of Kondapalli, proceeded against the besiegers with 
a large army consisting of ‘ one thousand three hundred 
elephants, twenty thousand horsemen’ and ‘five hundred 
thousand foot soldiers’. Having learnt that the Gajapati was 
marching against him with a vast host, Krsnaraya left a force 
around Kon.dapalli to keep the garrison engaged, and pro- 
ceeded towards the river with the bulk of his army to give 
battle to him. While he was attempting to ford the river, the 
passage of his army was obstructed by the Grajapati; and a 
great battle ensued in which he defeated the Uriya forces and 
put the Gajapati to flight . % Ivrsnadeva then returned to his 
camp around the walls of Kondapalli and pushed forward the 
siege vigorously. After an investment of two months, the fort 
capitulated, and the commandant with his lieutenants became 
a prisoner in the hands of the victor. 

The capture of Kondapalli was a prelude to the conquest 
of Telingana, which acknowledged the suzerainty of the 
Gajapati at this time. The Velamas who dominated^ this 
region during the last century had vanished ; and a large part 
of the territory was under the sway of Shitab Khan (Sltapati) 
of Bhogikula who conquered it from the Muhammadans 
probably with the aid of the Gajapati at the beginning of the 
16th century. § His original capital was Kambhammettu in 
the Warangal district, and on the conquest of Warangal about 
AD. 1504, he shifted the capital to that city. The famous forts 
of Rajuko^da and Devarkonda also passed into his hands some 
time before this date. Although Shitab (Cittapa) Khan is not 
mentioned in the records describing Krsnaraya’s Telingana 
campaign, they allude to the subjugation of several forts 

f J'.D.T. iii, 80. 

§ H.A.S. No. 9, p. IS, 


7 .-,; 

t Fargottm Empire , pp, 317-18. 


20S 



belonging to him. The important forts which Krsnaraya captur- 
ed in this region are Anantagiri, Undrakonda, Urlagonda, 
Aruvapalli, Jallipalli, Kandikonda, Kappaluvayi, Nallagonda, 
Kambhammettu, Kanakagiri and Samka(ra)giri* Devarakonda 
must be added to this list.f The Kaifiyat of Anumakonda states 
that during this campaign Krsnaraya had also captured the 
fort of Warangal (124). Though this is not unlikely, there is 
no other evidence in support of this statement. Most of these 
places are included in the Nalgonda and the Warangal districts 
of the Nizam’s Dominions. The subjugation of these forts 
must have been followed by the conquest of the territory 
dependent upon them. It may, therefore, be assumed that 
Krisnaraya subdued the whole of Telingana before he advanced 
upon Kalinga. 

(iv) Simhadri : — The Simhadri expedition was very 
probably a continuation of the Telingana campaign. Accord- 
ing to Peddana, the fire of Krsnaraya’s prowess * having crept 
into the Vegi country through the Jammi Valley, burnt it ; 
reduced Kona to ashes ; extended to Kottam, melted the bulk 
of Kanakagiri (golden hill), boiled the waters of the GautamI 
(the Godavari,) and finally set fire to Potnur.” % Though some 
places like Kanakagiri which are said to be in the Teluganya § 
are mentioned in the passage just quoted, the progress of 
the fire of prowess may be roughly taken to have followed 
the route of Krsnaraya’s victorious army. The details of 
warfare have not come down to us, though Peddana 
alludes to Krsnaraya’s conquest of all the cities of the king of 
Kalinga in the country between the rivers Krsna and 
Godavari. (116-b) One of the cities of this region which 
Krsnaraya conquered was Rajahmandry. If. 


The progress of Krsnaraya’s army was not, however, 
uninterrupted . According to the Rayamcakam, the army was 

• , . , • ■ . ^ 

* A. S. R. 1908-9, p. 179. t S.htc*,, p. 140. 

t p. 135. § a, S. R. 1908-9, p. 179. 


209 



obstructed by the enemy when it was attempting to cross the 
defiles in the hills to the south of Potnur. Cittapa Khan 
occupied the passes with 60,000 mounted archers, and fiercely 
attacked the Yijayanagara army, which was consequently 
thrown into utmost confusion. The Karnata Jeaijltam cavalry, 
however, mounted the hills in the rear of Cittapa Khan’s army 
on both sides of the pass and attacked it with arrows, swords 
and spears. Unable to resist this unexpected attack, Cittapa 
Khan’s men fled in confusion, pursued by the Vijayanagara 
forces, until they took refuge in a neighbouring fort. Krsna- 
raya is said to have posted 30,000 infantry to guard the pass, 
and marched with the remaining forces to Potnfir-S imhadri, 
devastating the territory of the Gajapati along the road.* 
There he set up a pillar of victory, which is mentioned by 
Peddana, Lakssmlnarayana, Nuniz and other writers and 
returned to his capital by way of Rajahmandry. 

(v) Expedition against Cuttack : — According to Peddana, 
Kr§ nade varaya, after setting up a pillar of victory at Potta* 
nuru (Potnur), led an expedition against the Gajapati, when he 
laid waste the country along his route and set fire even to the 
Gajapati’s capital. The fire of his prowess is said to have 
‘ roasted the (Seven) Mades, reduced the town of Oddadi to 
ashes, and burnt Cuttack forcing thereby the Gajapati to seek 
safety in flight. ’f This statement of Peddana has been recently 
called into question. It is pointed out that the statement is 
poetical and that it is “ as close to facts as poetry can be to 
history”. Moreover, it is asserted that an expedition of the 
kind is extremely unlikely ; for, in the first place, it is against 
the principles of military strategy ; and secondly, “ setting fire 
to her father’s capital is by no means the best way of wooing 
the Gajapati’s daughter.”! Therefore, it is contended that 
having come to the end of the campaign at Simhadri, Kr§na- 
raya entered into a treaty with the Gajapati, 1 set up the pillar 
of victory and returned’ to his eapital.§ Whatever be the force 

* p.134, t P* 13S - : . ■' ■: . : 

% Th& ¥et~rtm$mbertd Rultr p* 17. § IMd, 


210 



211 



of victory at Simhadri Kr§naraya won a victory over the 
Grajapati, and 4 espoused his daughter together with his Sri 
(prosperity)' (116-a). Cuttack appears to have fallen into the 
hands of the invaders. Peddana alludes to the battering of the 
‘bell-metal doors of the Grajapati’s fort.' # It is therefore evident 
that after Krsnaraya’s return from Simhadri, the army which 
he left behind proceeded against Orissa, and after laying the 
country waste advanced upon Cuttack and sacked it. 

The concluding phase of the war may now be briefly 
narrated. The Grajapati who was defeated in every battle and 
lost almost the whole of his kingdom had to sue for peace. He 
gave his daughter to Kr§naraya in marriage and obtained in 
return all the territory to the north of the Krsjna which the 
Raya had taken from him during the war. Thus ended one 
of the most brilliant episodes in the military history of India 
during the 16th century. ; 

JRUicur : — Krsnadevaraya’s war against I small ’Adil Khan 
and the capture of Raieur from him are elaborately described 
by Nuniz. A few points in his account demand reconsidera- 
tion in the light of the fresh material that has accumulated in 
recent years. W$ V' v- "V ' ' 

(1) The date of the battle *. — Nuniz states that Krsnadeva- 
raya conquered Ismail ’Adil Khan ‘in the month of May, on the 
new moon day, in the year one thousand five hundred and 
twenty-two’ f Sewell has conclusively proved that this date is 
wrong and that Nuniz ‘ made a mistake in the year and 
should have written “1520” \ % Therefore, the “ great battle 
took place on Saturday, May 19, A. D. 1520.” § The date 
fixed by Sewell is shown to be correct by an allusion in one of 
the inscriptions of Krsnadevaraya’s reign which has, not been 
noticed so far. Kanthamaraju-Singaraju, while describing his 
pious benefactions at various places, asserts that he built in the 
month of &ravana of the year Vrsa a shrine and a well for the 



god Ranganatha of Raicur ” *. This date corresponds to 
July, A.D. 1521. If an officer of Kr§nadevaraya couid build a 
temple in Raicur in July, A.D. 1521, that fort must have been 
in the possession of his master at that time. Since the con- 
struction of the temple and the excavation of the well would 
require some time for their execution, Raichr must have been 
in the possession of Kj^nadevaraya for at least some months 
before July A.D. 1521. This is in agreement with the date fixed 
by Sewell and establishes finally that Raicur was captured 
by Krsnadevaraya in A.D. 1520. 

(2) Another point that deserves consideration pertains 
to the possession of Raicur before Krsnaraya’s campaign 
of A.D. 1520. Who was in possession of the fort V Was it Ismail 
Adxl Khan or Krsndevaraya ? Historians are divided in their 
opinion on the subject. According to Ferishta, the fort was in 
the possession, at the time, of the king of Yijayanagara ; and he 
came to oppose Ismail ’Adii Khan who came to recapture it, 
deteated him, and put him to flight, f Nuniz on the contrary, 
asserts that it was in the possession of the ’Adil Khan ; and on 
hearing that Ky^araya had laid siege to the fort, lie came 
with a large army to drive him away ; but was defeated in 
battle and put to flight. J Modern scholars who have studied 
the question are also not agreed in their opinion. Some accept 
Nuniz’s account as genuine and point out that Ferishta is a' 
Later writer and that “ there are some inherent improbabili- 
ties in l irishta’s narrative”. § On the other hand, other writers 
reject Nuniz s account and believe that there is “ some evi- 
dence to support the statement of Ferishta and ipso facto f to 
iescredit that of Nuniz in this particular”; II and that 
'* Krsna s battle of Raicur was a successful beating back of 
an invasion from Bijapur to recover the possession of it, as 


tan&tfcadjti ftUcMru-Jaga&ka*. 
'Sctlri SrirangarSjufa guginw 


tyavmm i 

f Brigg’t Ftrithia 

-1 S- K* Ayyaag* 

SlUkdU,.. . 


Wiim Empire, pp. 325, 334-42. 




21S 



Ferishta has it, though it is quite possible that in the course of 
the campaign, they succeeded at first in occupying the for- 
tress” *. 

It must be pointed out in this connection that Nuniz is not 

a captured Raicur 
Castanheda, who was in India in 
“while Sequeira was absent at the Red 
broke out between the king of Vijayanagar and the 

was defeated and put 


the only author who states that Kysnaray 
from Ismail ’Adil Khan, 

A.D. 1629, declares that 
Sea war 

’Adil Shah, at the close of which the latter 
to flight, while the Hindus took Raicur and other places.” 
“ Now, Sequeira left Goa for the Red Sea on February 13, 
A.D. 1520.”t The testimony of these two foreigners, who were in 
or about Vijayanagara during the life-time of Krsnaraya, makes 
it clear that when Krsnaraya led his armies towards Raicur in 
A.D. 1520 that fort was in the possession of the ’Adil Khan. 
Their statements are further corroborated by the evidence of 
Krsnaraya’ s court musician who also mentions the name of the 
place of battle in which his master had overthrown the ’Adil 
Khan: “ Krsna conquered the Gajapati and espoused his daughter 
with his Sri (prosperity) ; subsequently he attacked the Yavana 
king Sapada (tiavayi) who was encamped at Gobburu, put him 
to flight and captured his elephants, horses and his unequalled 
fortress, Raicur ” (116-a). There is thus definite contempo- 
rary evidence, both foreign and Indian, to prove that Raicur 
was in the possession of the ’Adil Khan, when Krsnadevaraya 
led his armies to capture it. In the light of such clear contem- 
porary evidence, no importance need be attached to the state- 
ment of a dubious historian like Ferishta. This, however, raises 
the interesting question, how and when Krsnaraya lost his 
hold upon Raicur, which he conquered in A. D. 1512. 
Although no information is available at present on this subject, 
it is not unlikely that Isma’Il ’Adil Khan succeeded in recaptur- 
ing it, while Krsnaraya was busy with the affairs of the 
Kalinga War. 


* S. K. Ayyaugar : Tht Yet-rememiered Ruhr $c, 
t forgotten Empire, p. 142. 


214 





Qulburga Campaign Krsnadevaraya invaded the king- 
dom of Bijapur once again in A. D. 152B. It was dae to tire 
machinations of Asad Khan Lari who was sent to Vijayanagara 
by the Bijapfir court for concluding a treaty. Nuniz briefly 
describes this invasion. Krsiiaraya proceeded to the northern 
extremity of his kingdom expecting, according^ to an under- 
taking given by Asad Kh an, to meet the Afiil Kh an 01 
his mother ; but as he did not find them, he was enraged ; and 
in order to teach them a lesson, “he entered the kingdom of 
Daquem, and marched against the city of Ouibergura and 
destroyed it and razed the fortress to the ground, and the 
same with many other places.” '* Laksminarayana gives some 
more information about this war. “ This great king (Krsna- 
raya) crossed the Krsna river and consigned to flames 
the whole of the Yavana country (the territory ruled by 


tV4'l igf ilp; || * §§ 1 J 

■ f ? J i ( •*»!■ * 

- - 

, r';, 4-'/; 

iiilsiite liiirtw is t 


215 


I 


fortress”, because he “wanted to mate King one of his brothers- 
in-law, who was a bastard son of the King of Daquem and had 
married one of Yadallcao’s (’Adil Khan’s) sisters,” * By this 
time, Sul]fcan Mahmud Shah II whom Krsnaraya had restored 
to his throne in A.D. 1512 was dead. Therefore, he set up the 
eldest of these princes on the throne of his father, and forced 
the nobles who were the subordinates of his father including' 
the ’Adil Khan to pay him homage and taking the remaining 
two princes with him, he returned to Vijayanagara. He 
showed much honour to them and “ gave them each one an 
allowance, to each one every year fifty thousand gold 
pardaos” t 

Some unidentifiable campaigns : — In the introduction to 
his Manucaritra, Feddana states that Udayacala became the 
Kraunca to the warlike sports of Krsnadevaraya’s youth (kuma- 
rata ) ; that the chief of Navada, ^akandhara, and the 
Sindhuradhyaksa, being afraid of his sword, paid tribute to him; 
and that the country as far as the Pancagauda became the 
open ground of his exercises in fencing (116 -b). Of these 
the Udayacala and the Sindhuradhyaksa are, as pointed out 
by thejate Mr, K. V. Lakshmana Rao, identical with Udayagiri 
in the Nellore district and the Grajapati respectively. J The 
chief of Navada and Sakandhara as well as the Pancagauda 

* Nuniz : Forgotten Empire, p. 358. 

t NuniZ: Forgotten Empire , p. 358. Sewell seems to have been much perplexed 
by this passage. “This passage”, says he, “does not seem very exact from an his- 
torical standpoint*". {Ibid, p. 358, n. 1.) " We hear nothing of this from Firishta. But we 
know, that Bahraani Sultan Mahmud II, who died in 1518,' had three sons, Ahmad, 
"Ala-ud-Din, and Wall Ullah, the first of whom became Sultan in December 1S17, 
the second in 1521, the third in the same year; in all cases only nominally.” (F. Jg., 
p. 157, n. 1.) 

The authenticity of the information conveyed by Nuniz in the passage under con* 
sideration is proved by a contemporary Hindu writer, Bhandaru Laksminarlyana, the 
; ' : court : ^inusiciaii' of KrmadeYar&ya. Like Nuniz, he also states that Krsnadevariy* had set 
at liberty at Gulburga three sons of the Sultan whom the *Xdi3 Khan had kept there in 
V : ; ' to the Tab$nt~i»AkbaHlSvili%n Mahmud Shah Bahmaiu II 

had four sons, not three as Ferishta and those who follow him would have us 

fiar accenting the opinion of Ferishta In preference^ to.rell^Me^V:'. 

contemporary evidence. 

t Lahfmnarnya Vj/BOvaft, p. 46. 




; 


il 


f)',: 


■ 


216 



are not yet properly identified. The chief of Aavaaa is also 
mentioned by Ramarajabhusaria in his Vasucaritra , ‘ though 
his identity cannot yet be established owing to lack of 
information. Mr. Lakshmana Rao is very probably right in 
considering that Sakandhara is a Sanskritised form of the 
name Sikandar. The identification of this Sikandar with 
Sikandar Shah, who sat on the throne of Gujarat for a few 
months in AJD. 1526 suggested by him, is, indeed, interesting. 
His interpretation of the phrase apanca-gauda-dhatrtpada as the 
country extending as far as the Five Gaudas is also plausible; 
but his contention that Krsndevaraya invaded Gujarat in 
A.D. 1526 and defeated its ruler Sikandar Khan f needs con- 
firmation from other sources. Sayyid ’AIT, no doubt, asserts 
that, after the death of Sultan Mahmud Shah II in A.D. 1518, the 
Mussalman territories were subjected to frequent attacks of the 
infidels of Vijayanagara. “ When the Sultan departed this 
life, all at once anarchy and confusion found their way into 
the country of the Dakkan... Consequently the infidels ofthe 
Vijayanagar, seizing the property, used every year to make 
raids into the territory of Islam, and much injury used to be 
caused by those infidels to the country of the Mussalmans. 

“ Majlis-i-Rafi‘ ’JLdil Khan who after that became entitled 
‘ ’Adil Shah ’ and Masnad-i-’AlI Malik Kutb-ul-Mulk who sat on 
the Kutb Shahi throne, since they were in the proximity of the 
country of the infidels helplessly walked in the path of 
gentleness and humility in their relations with the idolators 
of that country. Of course the injury and malice of 
that tribe of infidels reached in a greater degree the capital, 
Afymadnagar and all the territory of that place.,.” $ 

* Vasucaritra, 1 : 15. f&v'ada-faii pampina~yamulya~kaiakamul karia-p'lruga bad~ 
dgramula~he?tuga. 

f Laksmanaraya Vyasavali, pp. 45-47, It is interesting to note that a Sikandar is 
mentioned as one of the adversaries of the Gajapati Prataparudra in a Sanskrit drama called 
the Jagannatha Vailabhanalakam {M.G.O.M. Library X. 4198). The Velicetla grant of 
Prataparudra Gajapati refers to him a- * Pancagaud-ddhi—nayaka { J. A. ff. P. 5. ix, p. 56) 
The ‘ afanca-gauda-dhatripada. ' of Peddana perhaps refers to the dominions of the 
Gajapats which Kjsastaya invaded. ' 

t BurhSn-i-Ma’Usir, {Sihila-i-MMmt-b-FarS m> No. 2), p. 166 ; /. A. xrviii, 


217 



But the passage is vague, and until information of a more 
preeise character is brought forward, it is not possible to 
assert definitely that Kysnadevaraya invaded G-ujarat. 

Krsnadevara ya 
defeat. Whenever 
person, he was unii 
enemies, Hindus i 


-Krsnadevaraya knew no 
omxnand of the army in 
j an d he swept away his 
3 alike. His triumphant 
5st of his enemies. The 
success which uniformly attended upon his arms must be attri- 
buted to his capacity for organisation and his skilful general- 
ship. He knew how best to pool his resources and to utilise 
them in a manner most advantageous to himself. On the field 
of battle, he exhibited amazing resourcefulness in overcoming 
obstacles. He smashed rocks and boulders to make a road for 
bis soldiers to reach the fort at Udayagiri ; * set up wooden- 
platforms around the fort at Kondavidu to enable his men 
to fight on an equal footing with the enemy in the fort ; f cut 
canals to drain the waters of a river swollen with winter- 
floods, to seize the stronghold where the rebel chief of Catuir, 
trusting to the surrounding arms of a flooded river, took 
refuge . J and put to the sword his own soldiers who turned their 
back on the enemy at Raicur.§ Moreover, he usually command- 
ed his troops in person and showed extraordinary courage in 
situations of gravest danger. When the ‘two forward-divisions’ 
which he despatched against the ’Adil Khan on the battle-field 
of Grobbur retired in confusion hotly pursued by the enemy, and 
disaster appeared imminent, he stood firm, and asked his 
officers whether they would join him in charging the advancing 
Muslim cavalry. There was an immediate response. To show 


* F&rgatim Mmpire, p. 316. 

t Forgotten Empire, p. 331 , 



l 


remaining divisions of Ms army and led them to victory.* 
A similar incident is related about his conduct at the sack of 
Gulburga. f Coupled with personal bravery, the consideration 
which Krsnaraya showed to his soldiers made him the idol of 
his army. At the conclusion of every battle, he would go into 
the field of battle looking for the wounded. He would see that 
they were properly cared for, and in the case of warriors 
who specially distinguished themselves in the battle, he 
would bestow particular attention upon their condition, so 
that there might be no delay or negligence in providing 
them with the necessary medical help. $ These qualities won 
him the affection of the rank and file of the army ; and the 
soldiers, as well as the officers, were prepared to throw 
themselves into the jaws of death in executing his commands. 

As an administrator (139): — Krsnadevaraya was a cap- 
able and wise ruler. He was a monarch who cherished the 
welfare of his subjects and the prosperity of the kingdom. 
He describes the principles of administration in his Amukta- 
malyada. They are not a mere resume of the maxims on 
dandamti which he might have gathered together from treatises 
on politics available to him. They are practical and embody 
the methods of administration that he followed. 

Contents of Krsnaraya’ s rajanlti : D karma Like all the 
writers on Hindu polity Krsnaraya was a firm believer 
in the universal dharma. “ The worlds such as this earth 


f 1 v * - ' J ? 1 ‘ ’• 


219 



The origin of Kingship : — Grod ( PrajanUtha , lord of the 
people) has created the king specially to govern the people 
(prajapalana). His office, which is analogous to the position 
of god, has been recognised by the Vedas. He should, there- 
fore, endeavour to remove the troubles of this world in spite 
of difficulties. Otherwise, he fails to justify his own exis- 
tence. “ Unless an anointed sovereign, who has been created 
by god ( Prajanatha ) specially for the purpose of governing 
the people (prajapalana), who is known by the names of 
Virat and Samrat, and who is equal to god, endures hardships 
and removes the troubles of this earth, can his birth be said to 
be fruitful ? ” * y/; ; : v ; ; W?M 

The duties of a King : — The duties of a king are primarily 
two in number, protection of the people and the punishment 
of the wrong-doers, f A king should protect his subjects 
and redress their grievances; % for, ‘the subjects of a state 
desire the prosperity of a king, who wishes to promote the 
welfare of the state ; . He shotild not be indifferent to the 
wishes of his subjects, as god, who is immanent in all people 
from Brahmans downwards, -would certainly fulfil the un- 
animous desire of his creatures.§ He should not employ in 
his service officers who oppress the people, H and should 
endeavour to promote their happiness by providing their 
lands with irrigation facilities and demanding from them low 
taxes. $ 

A king must have power to command and punish, |] for 
the maintenance of law and order in the country depends 
upon the fear of punishment which the breach of law may 
involve. “ The devotion of a wife to her husband, the obser- 
vance, by men and women, of the rule of consanguinity, the 
self-control of the ascetic, the obedience of the lower to the 
upper castes, and the faithfulness of the servant to the master 
are all due to the fear of the punishment which the king may 

flfai 4 : 285. . t Ibid, 

t Ibid, 4 : 204. § 4 : 205. 

% IHd, 4 : 237. 8 Ibid, 4 : 236, 

g Md, 4 : 306. .... 



below seventy in age, and whose ancestors are free from 
(hereditary) diseases is induced by the king to accept the 
office of the minister and discharge his duties, a single day is 
enough for the various branches of the royal administration 
to obtain stability. " 1 If a Brahman of this description were 
not available, then the king should transact the business of the 
state himself, though he might not always be successful. $ 
The preference to Brahmans which Krsnaraya manifests 
is not only confined to the ministerial services ; it extends to 
the army also. He enjoins that all the forts should be placed 
under the command of Brahman officers. “ Entrust (the 
command of) the forts to Brahmans in whom you have con- 
fidence. ? “A king ”, says he, “who appoints as the gover- 
nors of the forts honest, loyal, and warlike Brahmans learned 
in the Yedas, and dependent upon his family for generations... 
sleeps placing his hand upon his heart i.e. peacefully/' II 
Krsnaiaya gives two reasons for the excessive regard which he 
shows to Brahmans. In the first place, a Brahman “stands 
at the post of duty facing even difficulties, either to avoid the 
ridicule of the Ksatriya and the Sudrct officers or in emula- 
tion oi the other Brahmans in the kins-'s serviW ” I R««nrwtlTr 



221 



if the territory well protected by the forts is given to any one 
but a Brahman, he may turn against the king* And even 
to a Brahman a large army and much territory should not be 
given, because he might lose the fear of royal authority, f 
Besides, there is a special reason for the preference which 
Kmaraya has shown for the appointment of Brahmans in the 
military service. The South Indian Brahmans were born 
fighters ; from the time of the Western Calukyas onwards 
they entered the army in large numbers and brought credit to 
themselves and to their community by their distinguished 
service. Most of the dandamyakas under the Calukyas, 
the Yadavas, the Hoysalas, the Kakatlyas, the Rayas of 
Vijayanagara and the Nayak kings of Madura and Tanjore 
were Brahmans. And Krsmaraya seems to have been 
influenced by the long military tradition of the Brahman 
community, when he lays down the dictum that Brahmans 
should be entrusted with positions of responsibility in the 
army. However, he excludes men of ignoble origin and un- 
trained under a preceptor, dwellers among the hunters, liars, 
atatayins , strangers, men of unrighteous conduct, and fearless 
perpetrators of crime, although they happen to be Brahmans 
by birth. % He is aware of the fact that the services of the 
members of the other communities are also indispensable; 
therefore, he declares that they should be employed in the 
service of the state, especially in the army, * as they are also 
necessary. '§ si| ? fT ' 

Ministers .-—The qualifications which Krsnaraya demands 
of a minister are, indeed, very high. In order that a person 
might be eligible to a ministership, he should, in the first 
instance, be a Brahman. Moreover, he must be proficient 
in the knowledge of the theory and the practice of govern- 
ment; he must be above fifty and below seventy years in 
age, and his ancestors should be free from hereditary dis- 
eases.! Although Kr§naraya expresses the opinibfr that a 

* Am. * ; 255. f Ibid, 4: 20?. % Ibid, 4 : 200. ; 

‘ ; ; \au, 4, Mi. 



king who appoints a person of this description as his minister 
is bound to be happy, he recognises the possibility of the 
existence of evil even among them. He describes the pro- 
gress of the power of evil ministers briefly : “ The bad and 

faithless ministers ”, says he, “ ally themselves with the 
outside enemy and encourage free-booters in the country. 
When the king is caught in difficulties, they do not discharge 
their duties promptly ; but having established their influence 
elsewhere, they conduct themselves in such a manner as to 
Baake it appear that they alone are protectors (of the king). ”* 
They “ persuade (the king) to offer (rewards) to their depen- 
dents; and dissuade him from rewarding others. Moreover, 
they induce him to promise (rewards) to people, but prevent 
its fulfilment, so that the people might not approach him 
believing him to be undependable.” f 

To check the power of these overgrown ministers, 
Krs^araya suggests two remedies: (1) “(A. capable 

outsider) should be made an equal of these (bad ministers); 
he will check their power like a powerful drug which 
strengthens the appetite spoilt by the union of kapha and other 



for the collection of revenue and discharging other duties are 
both friends and enemies according to circumstances ; and the 
people who are desirous of getting bach the wealth confiscated 
by the king by way of punishment are his perpetual enemies. 
Therefore, it is only right that he should skilfully conduct 
himself towards them as becoming their disposition.’' * 

A king must proceed with caution in increasing the status 
of his dependents ; for ‘ no one who is at first raised to a high 
position, remembers his former humble condition, if he is 
reduced subsequently' ; he becomes enraged instead. The 
king must watch carefully the progress of his dependents 
and exact work from, them on all suitable occasions increasing 
their status only by degrees, f It is not possible to execute 
any work by means of money alone. The willing co-opera- 
tion of several nobles is equally necessary. To secure their 
help, the king should treat . them with liberality, kindness 
and truthfulness ; % and assign them lands without tres- 
passing the bounds of moderation. § He must encourage 
rivalry among his nobles and officers. In their anxiety to 
seek their own advancement, they lay bare the secrets of one 


224 


U • x 
d&mr k » 


for consultation a person who gives agreeable advice once 
or twice”, * it may be inferred that the council owes its 
existence to the royal mandate. The king can summon any 
person from whom he expects good advice to the council, 
excepting those who have been recently ennobled ; for, “ being 
elated by their new position ” they are likely to reveal the state 
secrets to their friends, f The councillors seem to hold their 
deliberations under the presidency of the king. $ The sessions 
of the council are secret, § and any member revealing the 
secrets is liable to punishment. f "Within the council, the 
councillors have complete freedom of speech. One councillor, 
who gives good advice, may be adversely criticised, and his 
point of view condemned. During the debate, the king is 
expected to listen calmly. He “ should not contradict either of 
them but when the council is dissolved, “ he is at liberty 
to follow that advice which he considers most advantageous 
to himself.” $ 


The information which is furnished by Krsnadevaraya 
about the council is, indeed, very meagre. The council des- 
cribed in the Amuktamdlyada appears to consist of king’s 
ministers and favourites. The king may accept their advice 
when he chooses. It looks very much like Krsnaraya’s own 
council of which Nuniz gives a few glimpses in his chronicle. 


Army and the military policy .-—The army consists of 
three sections, elephants, horses, and men. Krsnaraya places 
considerable emphasis upon the acquisition and maintenance 
of elephants and horses. A king should develop his seaport 
towns so as to increase their trade. || He should attract the 
merchants bringing elephants and horses from the islands 
across the ocean to his court by kind treatment, and by 
offering privileges and gifts so that they might not sell them 
to his enemy. ! He should not consider the money which 



t Ibid, 4 : 260. 
§ Ibidy 4 % 260. 

i Md 7 4, m 


y , •>- \ 


fill I 'v r* I « 


’Xl. -Wt 1 iij: 


'.Hi 


225 



t«r' ?•: 


he spends on the purchase and maintenance of elephants 
and horses, and the payment of salaries to soldiers... a 
waste of public funds.” * Having secured elephants and 
horses, he must keep them in his stables ; f he might give them 
to the warriors well-disposed towards him, for they would be 
useful to him, if occasion should arise. J 

Relations with the neighbouring states : — The first step 
which the ruler of a country should take is to make himself 
master of his own territory. This may be achieved by adopt- 
ing one of the following ways : (1) If his neighbour is head- 

ing towards ruin, he should be allowed to pursue his path. 
On the other hand, if he were strong, he should be befriended 
by the surrender, if necessary, of half his territory. If the strong- 
neighbour were unwilling to be friendly, it would be wife to 
enter into an alliance with his neighbour so that, they being 
involved in a mutual struggle, his frontiers might be left un- 
molested. § (2) He might strengthen his frontiers and prevent 
any invader from entering his country. As the safety of the 
kingdom depends on its forts, especially those on the frontier, 
he should strengthen the frontier forts, and keep them in a 
proper condition. He must equip them with the necessary 
weapons of defence, store up in them provisions 
to keep the garrison above want even for a life-time. 
loyal and warlike Brahmans, proficient in the knowledge of 
the Vedas, and dependent upon his family for genei||^w^ 
should be placed in charge of them, f To enable them to : 
maintain their position, and defend the districts under th&fr 
jurisdiction in case of an invasion, they should be given estates 
and forces adequate for the purpose. $ Having made the 
country free from external attack, a king should next proceed 
to root out internal enemies ; If for, £ the fear of an internal 
enemy is greater than the fear of a serpent | 


226 



A King should always keep in good humour the 
ambassadors representing the neighbouring princes at his court. 
He must speak with them amicably, and avoid harsh and un- 
pleasant language in his conversation with them. He must 
adopt euphemistic speech even while attempting to explain 
to his dependents the obligations which his neighbours owe 
him, so that their ambassadors may not take offence. * The 
same attitude should also be adopted towards the envoys of his 

enemies, for he may be obliged to conclude peace with their 
masters, f 

A king who is desirous of subduing his neighbours 
must keep himself informed about the state of affairs in their 
mgdoms. Therefore, it is necessary that he should employ 
sp:e S in his service. A capable spy should know several 
languages, be common in appearance and unknown to other 
spies. He should be paid liberally, otherwise he would not 
enter the profession. % Spies of this description should be 


237 



deadly weapons. * To all these places the king must despatch 
his troops under proper commanders, f 

After setting out on an expedition, the army should not 
march rapidly, but proceed only by short stages for a few days, 
in order to enable the various contingents to join the main 
body one after another. If the invader feels that the enemy 
has a superior force, he should mollify him by offering him 
presents and return to his capital If he learns, on the con- 
trary, that the enemy is weak, he should proceed with the 
invasion, % and harass his kingdom. § The savage tribes 
subject to invader's authority must be incited to plunder the 
enemy’s territory and create panic. 1 The invader must not be 
obstinate in his desire to subjugate the enemy ; for, that may 
not always be possible.! He must, however, drive him to a 
corner from which he cannot escape and force him to offer 
battle. || He should capture the enemy's forts, and treat his 
womenfolk honourably, if they should happen to become 
prisoners of war. | If the enemy be vanquished in the battle, 
the invader should not be obstinate in refusing to conclude 
peace with him.** 

The King and his subjects As kings are created for 
governing people, their primary duty is to exercise authority 
over them and preserve the dharma. f f The good-will of the 
subjects is necessary to the king, as god who is within them 
listens to their prayers. %% The government of a king must not 
be oppressive ;§§ the king should undertake measures to ensure 
the prosperity of his subjects, exact only low taxes, and 
provide them with facilities for carrying on agricultural opera- 
tions unhampered, f If Another important duty is the preser-. 
vation of law and order in the kingdom. He should detect 

Z~"" '** A. 

* Am. 4: 264. + Ibid, 4 : 264; 268. 

t Ibid, 4: 247. § Ibid, 4 : 267. 

1 Ibid, 4 : 257. S Ibid, 4 : 263. 

| Ibid, 4 : 264. 1 Ibid, 4: 267. 

** 73 id, 4: 252. ft Ibid, 4 : 285. 

tt Ibid, 4 : 205. §§ Ibid „ 4 : 237. 


228 



to his kingdom from abroad. || The king derives consider- 
able income from the mineral resources of his kingdom. 
It is necessary that faithful servants of the king should be sent 
to superintend mines and other sources of income. | 

The revenues of the kingdom must be carefully husband- 
ed. A king should spend less than his income and replenish his 
treasury without oppressing his subjects. ** A well-furnished 
treasury is one of the most important requirements of a 
kingdom, ff Therefore, a king who desires to rule the country 
without trouble must store up money in his treasury. Krsna- 
raya enjoins that the revenues of a state should be divided* into 
four parts of which one should be reserved for charity and 
personal expenses of the king ; one should be deposited in the 
treasury and the remaining two should be utilised for the 
maintenance of the army. 

• i«». 4: 239. f Ibid, 4:246. 

J/feW, 4:243. § Ibid, 4 : 236. 

1 JfeW, 4 : 245. S Ibid a.- ass 


ISSI 

ms 


229 


Item , 


It is not possible to discharge the duties of kingship 
without incurring sin. * That is why the ancients have said 
that kings cannot escape hell after their death, f That, how- 
ever, must not be an excuse for misrule, One should not 
think : “ What I do is to carry on the work of government 
which necessarily involves sin. Then, how can I get rid of 
sin?” This attitude is not desirable. Even the scriptures 
do not enjoin one to do the impossible. A king should do his 
duty to the best of his abilities keeping the maintenance 
of the dharma in view. Regarding what is impossible, he 
should place trust in Visnu and conduct himself humbly. % 


' .... : „ 


!li« 1 

fill * 

18 


PI ;i 

if] 


\ f if, 


;p| ; 


II 


ill 


If ' 1 

H 
m t 

im 


4 : 264. 
4 , 4 s 388. 


t IH4, 4 s 276. 


: •: : - 

. • + M 



il 


230 





Gertain misconceptions which have gained currency about some of the prisoners 
whom FCfsnaraya captured at Kondavi^u demand consideration in this connection. It is 
believed that Racuri Mallu KhSn and tJddanda Khan are regarded as Mussalman officers. 
Their presence at Komjavitfu is believed to be an indication of the Gajapati’s alliance with 
the Muhammadan rulers of the Deccan, H. Krishna Sastri sees in it an alliance w;th the 
* Adil Khan: “The presence, ..of the two Muhammadan chiefs, Mai 15 Khan and Uddan^a 
Khan of Raciiru”, says he, “ is of special interest as it suggests the intimate terms on 
which the Gajapati and the *Adil Shah! kings (to whom belonged RaicSr) must have 
then been in their common cause to oppose the victorious Kfsnarayah (A.S, R. 190S-9, 
p* 178). S. K. Ayyangar, while agreeing with Krishna Sastri in looking upon 
these officers as Mussalmans, strikes into a different path in attempting to account for 
their presence. * The presence of the two Muhammadan chiefs would indicate/ accord- 
ing to hi m, 1 the co-operation of the Mussalman Government of Haidar abacl-Telingana. ’ 
( The Yti-r member zd Ruler |v., p. 16). It must be pointed out here that, in the first place, 
there is no decisive evidence to show that Malta Khan and Uddanija Khan were Muham- 
madan chiefs. The name MallS, though occasionally borne by the Mussalmans, is a 
common personal name among the Hindus of South India at that time ; and Gddan^a is a 
purely Hindu name and is never met with among the Muhammadans. Then about the 
appellation, Khan, there is definite evidence to show that some Hindu chiefs of this age 
styled themselves KhSns. One of the subordinates of Prataparudra Gajapati, Cittapa 
Khan was a staunch Hindu. Therefore, the assumption of the title, Khan, need noth© 
taken to indicate that the bearer is necessarily a Mussalman by faith. Secondly, the 


proviaciaj fWcfc 


281 


originally was when he held Kondavi&i.” (A. S. 1908-9, p. 178). S. K. Ayy&ngar 
quotes this passage from Krishna Sastri’s report with approval, and arrives at the 
complacent conclusion that Nuniz ‘stands indubitably convicted" of a grave error, (The 
Yet-remembered Ruhr p. 11). 

’ These writers seem to be more anxious to find fault with Nuniz and glorify 
K|snadevaraya than to discover the truth. According to Nuniz, prince Virabhadra 
committed suicide after KrsnadevarSya returned to Vijayanagara from Simhadri and 
'rested for some days/ After the death of the prince, Prataparudra Gajapati being afraid 
for the safety of his wife, concluded peace with Krsnarlya. It is therefore, evident 
that Virabhadra committed suicide in the interval between the return of Krsnaraya from 
Simhadri and the conclusion of the peace with the Gajapati. Now, KrsnadSvaraya was 
at Simhadri on Saturday, 29 March, A.D. 1516 (S. I L vi, 694, 696), and he must have 
returned to Vijayanagara some time later. He appears to have concluded peace with the 
Gajapati before Monday, 8 August, A.D. 1519, for, he made a gift on that day to the 
temple at Simhadri of two villages included in the K 2\mgz-dandapata y which he obtained 
from Prataparudra Gajapati. (Ibid, 695). Therefore, in accordance with the data supplied 
by NuniZ, the death of prince Virabhadra must have taken place between 29 March, 
A.D. 1516 and 8 August, A.D. 1519. ■ ' , ; 

The evidence on which H. Krishna Sastri and S. K. Ayyangar condemn Nuniz* s 
account has no bearing on the subject. It describes the condition cf the captive prince 
before Krsnadevaraya's return from Simhadri. The Gorlakunte inscription which states 
that prince Virabhadra held the village of Gorlakunte in the Nidugal-jiw* for his 
nUyakatana is dated 5aka 1437 Yuva, Karttika Siu 15 [22 Oct., (A.D. 1515) R. C xii, 
Pg. 62]; and the Male-Bennur inscription which records the remission of the marriage 
tax under Krsnaraya’s orders is dated Saka 1438 (cur) Yuva, Karttika, Six 12, Friday 
[(Friday, 19 Oct., A. D. 1515) (R. C xi, Dg. 107)]. The evidence of these inscriptions 
cannot be used for condemning the narrative of Nuniz as erroneous and incorrect. 

Therefore, there is no reason for rejecting Nuniz’s statement that Virabhadra, 
feeling himself insulted in the court of Krsnadevaraya, committed suicide. If he were 
alive after A.D. 1515, as these authors contend, holding an exalted position in the 
Vijayanagara kingdom, the inscriptions might be expected to allude to this fact. As a 
matter of fact, no allusion, direct or indirect, to the existence of this prince, subse- 
quent to this date, is found in the inscriptions. Again, prince Virabhadra was the 
heir-apparent to the throne of his father. He. was a capable soldier and distinguished 
general who was entrusted with the administration of Kon^avidu. (H D. /., Op. No. 21). 
On the conclusion of peace between Krsnadevaraya and the Gajapati Prataparudra, he 
must have been released from captivity, if he were alive at the time, and must have 
actively participated, after hit return, in the government of his father’s kingdom ; but 
Virabhadra is not heard of again after he made the gifts recorded in Gorlakunte and 
Male-BennSr epigraphs. When the Gajapati dominions were exposed to the attacks 
of Quly Qutb*ul~Mulk about A.D. 1525 the defence of the country was entrusted to 
Ramachundur Dew, another son of Prataparudra, who was the governor of Kon^apalli. 
(Brigg’s JFerishta iii (App.), p. 361). Again, after the death of Prataparudra, he was 
succeeded by another son, Kalu-a-d^va. It is evident from what is said above that 
no trace of Virabhadra is found either in the inscriptions, Muhammadan histories, or 
literature after the date of the epigraphs mentioned above. As Nuniz who came to 
Vijayanagara during the life-time of Krsnaraya definitely asserts that this prince com- ' 
suicide between 1517 and 1519, hi® statement must be accepted as true. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

AC Y UTADE V ARA Y A. 

Acyuta ascended the throne in A.D. 1529. Although he 
was specially selected by Krsnadevaraya as the most compe- 
tent member of his family to succeed him, he had to over- 
come much trouble from his enemies before he established 
himself upon the throne. The rulers of the neighbouring 
kingdoms who had been patiently biding their time made a 
simultaneous attack upon his frontiers immediately after the 
death of his predecessor. Their invasion of his kingdom, and 
defeat at his hands are mentioned in some of his earliest 
inscriptions. In an epigraph dated A.D. 1529, for instance, 
he is described as ‘the conqueror of the Gddiya (Uriya) forces', 
and ‘ the terror to the minds of the Tulukkars'. * It is obvious 
that Acyuta came into conflict with the Gajapati and one or 
more of the Mussulman chiefs in his neighbourhood as soon as 
he succeeded to throne. 

(1) The Gajapati : — Tradition has it that immediately on the 
death of Krsnadevaraya, the Gajapati Prataparudra invaded 
the kingdom of Vijayanagara, but turned back in shame on 
reading a verse addressed to him by the poet Allasani 
Peddana (142). Although it may be doubted whether the 
retirement of the Gajapati had any connection with the receipt 
of the verse addressed to him by Peddana, there can be no 
doubt about its composition and probably also about its 
despatch. Peddana draws the attention of the Gajapati to 
the series of defeats which he had suffered at the hands of 
Krsnaraya and asks him how he dared to enter the kingdom 
of Kariiataka stealthily immediately after the death of that 
monarch. The last four lines of the verse indicate the time 
when the Gajapati's invasion took place: “Now that he 

(Krsnaraya) is dead ", asks Peddana, “ how (fare you enter 
Kannada like a dog that (stealthily) enters a house whose 

* 256 q£ 1910 A. R. B. 1911, Part ti, para. 54. 


233 


doors are, by chance, kept open ?" The kingdom of Karna- 
taka was a house with its doors closed so long as it was 
protected by the powerful arms of a king. At the time of the 
Gajapati’s invasion, however, it was like a house with open 
doors because it had no king ; Krsnadevaraya was just dead, 
and Acyuta was not yet crowned. Notwithstanding the propiti- 
ousness of the circumstances under which he invaded, the 
Gajapati does not seem to have gained any advantage. The 
poet Radhamadhava, a contemporary of Acyuta, states in 
the introduction to his Tarakabrahmarajiyam , that Acyuta 
“ showed mercy to the king of Utkala (after vanquishing 
him) (141)". This is corroborated by the epigraph from TJrattur 
cited above. * Therefore, it may be concluded from this that 
immediately after the death of Krsnadevaraya, Prataparudra 
Gajapati invaded the kingdom of Vijayanagara but was defeat- 
ed and driven away. 

(2) The Muhammadans: (a) The Sultan of Golkonda 
The Anonymous Historian of the Qutb Shahl Kings of 
Golkonda describes an attack of Qull Qutb-ul-Mulk upon the 
fort of KondavTdlu in or about the year A.D. 1530. It is 
said that the Raja of the place had neglected to pay tribute ; 
QuJb-ul-Mulk marched against the fort and laid siege to it. 
Though the garrison held out for some time, it had to surrender 
ultimately ; and Qujtb-ul-Mulk built a tower in the middle of 
the fort in commemoration of his victory and returned to his 
capital.f Though the payment of tribute to Qutb-ul-Mulk 
is unsupported by contemporary evidence, his attack upon 
Kondavidu is alluded to in the inscriptions. Bacarasa who 
was holding sway over Kondavidu a few years later claims 
to have 5 conquered all the Muhammadan armies with his 
valour /J Velugoti Timma who held Gani in the Kurnool 
district and later Tondamarayagulja in Nellore won the 
praise of Aeyutaraya by effecting the destruction of Muham- 
madan infantry, while they were attempting to cross the 
_ — _ — ... . f- .. '■ . •• ' ■ 

| §& of 1910. f Briggs: FtritMa. iii Wpp), pp 374-75. 

4: * i*Bf . — . — ^ _ 

* ffefar** 68, . ' „ . ! “ v . > / 1 

I - . A. vt t 1A All: iJ 



a, x. s. tm, pwtu, 


mm 



■ ' / : 




m- i:l 

mM 






mm 




284 



frontier (143-a). The Kaifiyat of Sanagundla states that 
Aeyutaraya who was at Candragiri paid a visit to Sana- 
gundla while marching against the kingdom of Golkonda, * 
It may be inferred from these that Acyuta marched towards 
his north-eastern frontier to ward off an invasion of the 
Sultan of Golkonda ; and as the Yijayanagara authority con- 
tinued undiminished in this region, he appears to have 
succeeded in beating back the invaders. 

( b ) The Sultjdn of Bijapur :■ — Ismail ’Adi! Kh an who had 
been making futile efforts to recapture Raicur from Krsna- 
devaraya, taking advantage of the confusion in the Vijaya- 
nagara kingdom caused by his death, invaded the doab 
between the Krsna and the Tungabhadra, accompanied by 
Tmad-ul-Mulk and Anffr Barld whom he had 'recently van- 
quished, f He was, however, opposed by Appalaraja, the 
valiant son of Aravldu Ramaraja-Timma ; but Appala perished 
in an engagement which took place at Kurakacerla (145). 
Owing to other troubles with which Acyuta was beset at this 
time, he was not able to offer further resistance to the Bijapur 
army. Isma’il ’Adil Khan, therefore, proceeded without op- 
position and captured the forts of Raicur and Mudgal 
after a siege of three months. 

Acyuta and Ramaraja : — The failure of Acyuta to offer 
successful resistance to the Sultan of Bijapur must be at- 
tributed to the machinations of Ramaraja, one of the great 
grandsons of Araviti Bukka. He began his career in the service 
of Qfill Qutb-ul-Mulk of Golkonda ; but being disgraced by 
the S alkali, he left Golkonda and repaired to Yijayanagara 
where he entered Krsnaraya’s service and won that 
monarch’s favour by showing proofs of his ability. J He 
married Tirumalamma, Kr§naraya’s daughter by Tirumala- 
devi (15 b) ; and was entrusted with positions of great 
responsibility and importance. § Krsnaraya nominated at 

* L.R- iv, pp, 273-77, f Brigg’s Perishta iii, p. 66. 

iibtAftp.), p,381. f laM 


285 



the time of his death, as noticed already, his half-brother 
Acyuta as his successor, though he had a son of eighteen 
months old. Ramaraja, who was not pleased with this 
arrangement, proclaimed his infant brother-in-law king ; but 
his attempt to seize power was frustrated by the timely 
intervention of Salvany (Saluva Narasingaraya Dandanayaka), 
who ; became minister of the kingdom, and governed it till 
the coming of King Achitarao from the fortress of Chamdegary 
where he was detained.' * Owing probably to the attitude of 
Ramaraja and bis followers, Acyuta celebrated his coro- 
nation at first in the presence of the god Venkatesa at 
Tirupati and later at Kalahasti. At last, when he reached 
the capital, Acyuta entered into an agreement with Rama- 
raja, probably against the wishes of Saluva Narasinga 
Dandanayaka, and consented to carry on the administration 
with Ramaraja as his partner. This estranged Saluva Nara- 
singa from the king; and consequently he retired to his 
province in high dudgeon and having entered into a cons- 
piracy with the chiefs of Ummattnr and Tiruvadi, set up the 
standard of rebellion. The rebellion assumed serious pro- 
portions and Acyuta was obliged to march with an army to 
the south. Salakaraju Tirumala, Acyuta's brother-in-law, 
who was in command of the royal army defeated the Tiru- 
vadi in battle and brought him and Saluva Narasinga who 
had taken refuge with him as prisoners to the king's camp 
at Srlrangam. Acyuta returned to the capital by way of 
Umwattur and SrTrangam, receiving on the way the sub- 
mission of the local chiefs, f 

: The infant son of Kr§naraya whom Ramaraja. proclaim- - 

;$d; king as a rival to Acyuta seems to have died soon after 
Aeyufa's return to the capital. The death of this prince, oii 
whose behalf Ramaraja was wielding authority, seems to have 
weakened, his position in the kingdom; and consequently 
.the attitude of Acyuta towards him very probably underwent 


i FargetUn Empire* f* 367, 

t T'Mrd $>$** 33f, 


vj 


2B6 



,tion c 


f; Ferishi* ii 





the nobles, he was obliged to abandon the scheme and set up 
Sadasiva, a nephew of Acyuta, as a nominal king and carry on 
the administration in his name. This state of affairs lasted for. 
a short time. The nobles in the extreme south of the kingdom 
defied Ramaraja and Refused to pay tribute. Therefore, Raraa- 
raja marched at the head of an army to subdue the recalcitrant 
nobles, leaving Acyuta in charge of a trusted servant at 
Vijayanagara. Ramaraja’s campaign against the sotithern 
nobles was not completely successful. One of them offered 
such stubborn resistance that he had to remain in the south 
longer than he expected. In the meanwhile, the servant in 
whose charge Ramaraja left Acyuta turned traitor; he set 
Acyuta at liberty and assumed the office of the chief minister. 
He was, however, murdered by Salakaraju Tirumala, Acyuta’s 
brother-in-law, who began to direct the affairs of state thence- 
forward. On hearing of the outbreak of the trouble at Vijaya- 
nagara, Ramaraja concluded peace with the noblemen with 
whom he was fighting and hurriedly proceeded towards the 
capital; but his progress was slow owing to the defection of his 
partisans. At the same time, Ibrahim ’Adil Khan, being 
instigated by the wily minister Asad Khan Lari, marched at 
the head of his army, and laid siege to Vijayanagara. 
Although Acy uta had sufficient force with him, he dared not 
attack the Bijapur king, lest he should make common cause 
with Ramaraja. And on the other hand, Ramaraja was not 
either sufficiently strong to extern the Suljtan or, what is more 
likely, was unwilling to molest him, lest he should join Acyuta.' 
But Ibrahim ’Idil Khan was obliged to retire to his country 
quickly owing to the machinations of Asad Khan Lari whom 
he had displeased. Asad Khan incited, on the one hand, 
Burhan Nizam-ul-Mulk to invade Bijapur dominions, and on the 
other, induced Ramaraja to attack Ibrahim ’ JLdil Khan, 
promising him secret help. Ibrahim ’JLdil Khan was helpless. 
He opened negotiations of peace with Ramaraja and Acyuta, 
and patched up their quarrel. Acyuta was to be the king of 
Vijayanagara with full authority over the whole kingdom 
excluding the districts which were included in Ramaraja’s 





■i v: 



m 

1 n 

' ai 


Hi 

IIS 




estate ; and Ramaraja was to rule his estate as an independent 
prince without any interference on the part of Acyuta. Having 
obtained large sums of money for his services from Acyuta. 
Ibrahim ’Adil Khan returned to his kingdom ; and the terms of 
peace were observed by both the parties until Acyuta’s death 
in A.D. 1542. * 

Eamaraja and Salakaraju Tirumala: — On the death of 
Acyuta, he was succeeded by his son Venkata I. As the 
new king was not of age, his maternal uncle, Salakaraju 
Cina Tirumala made himself the regent notwithstanding 
the opposition of the nobles. The queen VaradadevI, becom- 
ing apprehensive of her brother’s motives, appealed to the 
’Adil Khan to assist her in securing the throne for her son ; 
btit Tirumala becoming aware of her schemes bought off the 
’Adil Khan. Ramaraja, who was closely watching the 
of events at Vijayanagara, liberated Sadasiva from 
life prison at Gutti, and having proclaimed him emperor 
;||^^^|::;'to : the ’Adil Khan for help in establishing his 
Though the ’Adil Khan acceded to the request and 
invaded the Vijayanagara kingdom, Tirumala, who had been 
:d|||r|fe| king by the frightened citizens, defeated him in a 
battle close to the capital ; and to clear his path of all rivals, 
Me caused Venkata I and all the members of the royal family 
assassinated. Ills rule degenerated into downright 
v; and the nobles who were the principal victims being 
^rith the manner of his government requested Ibrahim 
in their turn to come to Vijayanagara and be their 
high the ’Adil Khan responded as readily as before, 
ive pride aroused hatred all round, and he was 
retire without gaming anything. At last Ramaraja 
roes and proceeded to take possession of the king- 
name of Sadasiva. He seized Penugonda, and 
i. Gandikota by way of Gutti; Salakaraju Tirumala 
prward to oppose him was defeated in a series of 
, Betamcerla, Jfitfir, Bedagallu and Adavahi. 

4 * • * 


: ■ ■_ >: 


mmm fWfwSBSWwfwiV 

• i • -s 1 

tmSm *11111 


V J-.:: \ :;;y : 


y* * 


/ r i 


0)1 if 

pm®! 


iliilliiglll* 





In a final engagement that took place on the hanks of the 
Tungabhadra, Ramaraja defeated him once again and put him 
to death. Having overthrown the usurper, he proceeded to 
Vijayanagara, where he performed the coronation of his protfege 
Sadasiva.* 

The origin of the NayaJcs of Madura : — Tradition describes 
the origin of the Kayak Kingdom of Madura divergently. 
According to one account, Nagama Nay aka, the founder of the 
family of the Madura Nayaks, was sent by Krsnaraya to punish 
one Virasekhara Cola, who seized the possessions of Candra- 
sekhara Pandya, obviously the king of the Pandyas. Nagama 
who successfully executed Krsnaraya’s order, instead of 
restoring the territory to its rightful owner, appropriated it 
Jrimself, and defied the royal command, when he was directed 
to hand it over to the Pandya. Krsnaraya, thereupon, des- 
patched Nagama’ s ow r n son, Visvanatha, against him. Visva- 
natha defeated him in a battle and carried him away as a 
prisoner to Vijayanagara. Krsnaraya admired the loyalty of 
Visvanatha to such an extent that he immediately crowned him 
king of the South and sent him with the necessary equipment 
to rule at Madura, f He founded a dynasty in that place 
which came to be known as the Nayak Dynasty of Madura. 

In another account, it is said that the Raya who is not 
mentioned by his name, and his minister, obviously Nagama 
Nayaka, became by the direction of god Visvesa of Benares, 
disciples of the yogi , §r!kanthakasavasi of the Kulasekhara-jp*f&a, 
with the object of obtaining sons. The Raya who begot a son 
bestowed the Pandyan country as gurudaksind upon the yogi, 
who, not knowing what to do with such a worldly possession, 
gave it to Nagama Nayaka’s son Visvanatha. And Visvanatha 
became the king of Madura and established a dynasty 
( 154 ). 

* Vijayanagara*. Third Dynasty, pp. 76f, 

f T an j^vum Andhra K&jula Caritramu: Soitreet, pp. 319f. According to an another 
version of this work, the king, who sent Nagama to suppress the rebellion of Vira; 
Stkhiura CSJa and later appointed Visvanatha as the king of Madura, was not 
dSvaraya but AcyutadSva MahSraya (I5i). 


240 



According to the story incorporated in the Kaifiyat 
of Karnataka Kotikam Kings , Acyuta Maharaya, the king of 
Ghanagiri and Vidyanagara made Visvanathasvami Nayadu, 
the son of Kotikam Nagama Nayadu of the Royal Treasury, 
the ruler of the Pandya, Cera, Cola, and Malaysia countries as 
a reward for the 1 meritorious services which he rendered to the 
state. He crowned him king of the F&nAjSk-mandalam, and 
sent him with the necessary paraphernalia to rule at Madura 
(152). 

These stories of origin came into existence long after the 
establishment of the Nayak kingdom of Madura ; and as they 
are not in agreement with the evidence of the inscriptions and 
such other contemporary records that have come down to us, 

they do not seem to embody the genuine tradition about its .. 

foundation. The story which assigns the foundation of this 
kingdom to the reign of Krsnadevaraya is totally opposed to 
facts. It is said that Krsnaraya made Visvanatha, king of the 
Cola and the Pandya countries, when he witnessed the 
demonstration of the latter’s loyalty to the crown. In the first 
place, it must be pointed out that the assignment of large tracts 
of country to his noblemen is against the spirit of Krsnaraya’s 
policy. He declares in his Amuktamalyada that a king who 
assigns lands to his nobles without transgressing the limits of 
moderation lives in peace* It is not credible “that he had 
assigned to Visvanatha more than a third of his kingdom, 
however loyal he might have been. As a matter of fact, an 
epigraph dated A.D. 1529-30 shows clearly that in the last year 
of Kr?nadeva’s reign Visvanatha, who was an adapam or the 
betel-bag bearer of the king, was holding the village of Palakallu 
in the idavani-rajya as his fief (134) Moreover, inscriptions 
also show that the Cola and the Papdya countries were held by 
several amaranayakas at this time ( and it is stated by contem- 
porary writers such as Numiz and Rajanatha Dindima that 
Nayaka alias Sellappa was the governor of, the Cola 
"" c °ratries during the reign of Krsnaraya and 


:| 



that he continued to hold this post even after Acyuta’s 
accession.* Therefore, it is not possible that Visvanatha could 
have obtained his crown and kingdom from Kysnadevaraya. 
The Kaifiyat of the hartiatalca Kotikam Kings attributes, as 
mentioned above, the foundation of the Nayak kingdom to the 
reign of Acyuta. It states that Acyuta made Visvanatha the 
king of the Pandya, Cola, Cera and Malaysia countries as a 
reward for his meritorious services to the state. However, 
according to the Muduvuittnla vclto. lavu, which appears to be a 
far more reliable chronicle, Visvanatha Nay aka was the 
governor of Madura from A.D. 1533 to 1542, when he gave 
place to another officer called Varada.f The account of this 
chronicle is partially supported by two inscriptions of Visva- 
natha found in the neighbourhood of Madura.$ Unlike other 


242 



terrorised the country-side by organized expeditions of dacoity. 
The most famous of this class was a certain chief called Cebrolu 
Timma, who seems to have created widespread panic in the 
north-eastern districts of the kingdom. He and his confeder- 
ates threw the district of Eruva into confusion, carried away the 
cattle of Ghirjala in Palnad, attacked Vinukonda, and plunder- 
ed the country around Tangeda ; they caused panic in Podile 
and Ammanabrolu, burgled the houses at Udayagiri and 
devastated the district of Sakili by pillage ; they ravished the 
women of Sirivelja and Nandela, harassed the people of 
Siddhapuram by their depredations, committed crime in 
Tondamarayagulla, and obstructed people travelling by the 
Nandi Pass (156). The state of affairs in the other parts of 
the empire was probably not very much better. Though the 
government attempted to suppress the brigands and restore 
peace and order, they do not seem to have been completely 
successful. 


CHAPTER XX 



SADASIVA (RiMARlJA). 

Ramaraja was, at last, successful in placing Ms protege 
Sadasiva upon the throne. As his rivals were completely 
destroyed in the civil war, he became the undisputed master of 
the whole of the Vijayanagara empire. Henceforward, his 
name was associated with that of Sadasiva in the administra- 
tion of the empire. He was not able to bear the subordination 
even to this shadowy master ; and though he did not actually 
set aside Sadasiva, he assumed the royal titles a few years later 
and governed the empire as if he were the crowned monarch 
himself. The Kaifiyat of Santaracur which alludes to this fact 
states that Sadasiva, who ascended the throne ruled the kingdom 
for 18 years from S.S. 1456 to 1473, while Ramaraja assisted 
him as the commander of his armies. Then, Ramadevaraya 
assumed the supreme authority and ruled with great valour 
for thirteen years from $.S. 1474 to S.S. 1486 (J70-a). The 
reign of Sadasiva thus falls into two periods. In the early part 
of the reign, theoretically Sadasiva was the only supreme 
sovereign of the state ; but in later part, theory was made 
conformable to practice and Sadasiva and Ramaraja became 
joint monarchs, although all the power was concentrated in the 
latter’s hands. 

The administration of the empire had undergone some 
changes, since Ramaraja began to control the affairs of the 
state. He broke the civil service on which the stability of the 
empire depended. The Brahman officers, who formed the 
bulwark of the state, were eliminated from the government 
service one after another, as they were opposed to the prosecu- 
tion of Ramaraja’s ambitious designs. He destroyed, according 
to Ferishta, * many of the ancient nobility’ and raised ‘his own 
family to the highest rank’.* This is confirmed by the 
Anonymous Historian of the Qutb Shahl kings who asserts 

• ftriM* hi, p. aiu • 



that Ramaraja strengthened his power ‘by the reduction of 
many troublesome neighbours and the elevation of his own 
adherents and relatives’* The statements of the Muhammadan 
historians are fully corroborated by the inscriptions. The 
families of the Brahman officers, which were associated with 
the kingdom of Vijayanagara since the days of its foundation, 
disappear completely from the inscriptions. Ramabhatlayya 
and Ramayamatya are the only Brahman officers of note that 
seem to have played some part in the administration in the early 
j uars of Sadasiva's reign; and nothing more is heard of them 
alter A.D. 1550. However, Puligad.da Papanarasayya, who was 
an adherent of Ramaraja, was retained in the service until the 
end of the reign (188). The place of the Brahmans in the 
government was occupied by the Ksatriyas mostly of the 
Aravxdu and the Telugu Cola families. ' Even the Saluvas who 
played a dominant part in the affairs of the kingdom under 
the pi evious dynasties seem to have been excluded. The 
brothers, the cousins, the nephews, and the other relations of 
Ramaraja as well as his Velama and Kara m a adherents are 
frequently mentioned in various administrative capacities all 
over the empire. ^ XXBiXSXXX 

Another important change which was fraught with evil 
consequences was the admission oJ the Muhammadans into the 
army. It must, however, be observed that Ramaraja did not 
introduce an innovation. As a matter of fact, a few Muham- 
madan contingents formed part of the Vijayanagara army since 
the days of Devaraya I. Some of the important Mussalman 
officers of the early Vijayanagara kings are mentioned in the 
village kaifiyats (57, 110). But the strength of the Mussalman 
contingent was not great, as it formed but a small section of 
the army. Moreover, the Muslim officers were not entrusted 
with any responsible office under the government, so that they 
might remain incapable to disturb the stability of the state. 
Ramaraja appears to have thrown prudence to winds in his 
anxiety to grasp power. He entertained as many foreiu-n 







Mussalman mercenaries and adventurers in his service as he 
could get,* and offered them facilities, which enabled them to 
acquire an inti mate knowledge of the internal affairs of the 
kingdom. f Consequently, the Muhammadan element in the 
army increased ; and correspondingly the loyalty of the army 
to the state became more problematical. 

Ramaraja was the first Vijayanagara monarch who showed 
any inclination to entangle himself in the inter-state politics of 
the Muhammadan kingdoms. His predecessors, though they 
constantly came into contact with the Mussalmans, never 
relished the idea of entering into an alliance with any Mussal- 
man prince. Ramaraja started his war against the ’ Adil Shah 
to regain some territory which he had seized ; he waited for 
a favourable opportunity to turn tables upon the ’Adil Shah, 
and being well- versed in Muslim statecraft allied himself with 
his enemies, won back what he had lost. This seems to have 
opened his eyes to the possibility of increasing his power at 
the expense of the Muhammadans; and throughout his rule 
he actively busied himself with the affairs of the Muhammadan 
states and succeeded in establishing his hegemony over them. 
The dominant position which Ramaraja acquired in the affairs 
of the Deccan roused the jealousy of the Muhammadan rulers, 
and resulted ultimately in the formation of that confederacy 
which brought about his downfall on the battle-field of 
Rak§asi-Tangadi. 

As soon as Ramaraja celebrated Sadas'iva’s coronation at 
Vijayanagara, he had to despatch an army to the southern 
provinces of the empire. The expedition is said to have 
reached Travaneore some time before 16th June, A.D. 1544; 
for the Catholic evangelist St, Francis Xavier alludes to 
fugitives, who fled from the Badaga invaders, in a letter dated 
on that day. Therefore, the expedition must have started from 
Vijayanagara either at the beginning of that year or at the 
close of the previous year. As Sada^iva’s coronation took 


* Brig**; Ftrukta iU, p, 79. 

f ? J. B. p. 38. 



. 

■ 


place only about the middle of A.D. 1543, this expedition 
appears to be the first military enterprise undertaken by the 
government during his reign. 

The causes of this expedition are not known. It has been 
surmised that Ramaraja sent the army to the South with the 
object of establishing firmly ! the authority of the empire in its 
most distant corners ’ * and to check the authority of the ruler 
of Travancore,f who made an ‘ extraordinarily successful 
effort’ ‘to extend his dominions across the peninsula.’J 
Moreover, the proselytizing activities of the Roman Catholic 
missionaries on the Pearl Fishery Coast is believed to have 
caused grave apprehension in the minds of the imperial states- 
men, as the conversion to Christianity of its industrious inhabit- 
ants implied a transfer of political allegiance to the Portuguese. 
Again, Martin Afonso de Sousa, the most rapacious of the 
Portuguese governors of Goa, organized an attack upon Kanci 
‘in the rains of 1543 ’, with the object of plundering rich 
temples. 1 he secret, however, leaked out, and ‘ the Raja of 
Vijayanagara -became uneasy ’.§ These circumstances are 
said to have compelled the imperial government to send an 
army to the southern provinces to ensure the safety of the 
empire. 

All these statements are, no doubt, based upon facts. But 
they do not describe the state of affairs obtaining in the 
southern districts of the empire completely. The aggressions of 
the ambitions ruler of Travancore, the evangelical zeal of the 
Catholic missionaries, and the thieving raids of the notorious 
Portuguese governor were not isolated events. They are the 
by-products of the political confusion and disorder that spread 
over the whole of the Coromandal Coast. The opponents 

* Heras : The Aravidu Dynasty, p. 141. ' - 

t Opinion differs pertaining to the identity of this king. S. K. Ayyangar believes 
that his name was Udaya Martamja Varman; whereas Heras declares that he was known 
a* Unni Kera]» Varman. According to Nagamaiya, Bhutala VIra KSraJa Varma was the 
king oa Jaya«inga-na4ti at the time of the Baraga invasion. {Travancore Manual fi 

' . ' : V ■ : : ; ■ ■■■ . • ■ \ ■ . 

t The Sources of Vijayanagara History, Introduction,- p. 17. - . , ■ 

§ White way : The. Rise of the Poritegiute Po wer in India, p. 283. 


247 



of Ramaraja, who could not bear to see their enemy established 
permanently as the supreme head of the state, seem to have 
made a final attempt to defy his authority. They obtained control 
over the fort of Candragiri and its dependent territory ; the 
Cola country appears to have been completely dominated by 
them. Farther south, the chiefs of Tannarasu -nadu refused 
to pay tribute. The extreme south of the empire, which had 
always constituted itself into a separate political unit, was in a 
state of upheaval owing to the jealousy and ambition of the 
local chiefs. At this time, this region, which roughly corres- 
ponds to the present Tinnevelly district and the Eastern 
Travaneore, was divided into a number of small principalities 
which were frequently at war with one another. In Eastern 
Travaneore there were no less than five of these states, 
referred to in the contemporary Telngu literature as the Pctnca 
Tiruvadis. The contemporary Portuguese accounts also 
mention some of these. According to the Malabar Christian 
D. Joao da Cruz, there were more than five states between 
Quilon and Punnaikayal of which Quilon, Travaneore and Cape 
Comorin were the most important. They are said to 
correspond to the five svarupams of Ciravayi, Attingal or 
Tiruppappur 5 Kallikku or Ceytunganad, Pokattali, and 
Kunnummel Ilayitam.* V . 

The boundaries and the extent of these principalities varied 
with time. At the time of the expedition under consideration 
(A. D. 1543), the kingdom of Quilon seems to have extended along 
the coast from the city of Quilon to Vilinjamjf and that of Cape 
Comorin from the Cape to the mouth of the Tamraparni ;J 
Travaneore lay between these two. 

The cause of the political disturbance was the attempt 
made by Iniquitibirim, the ruler of Travaneore, to seize the 
lands belonging to the king of Cape Comorin, who died in 
A. D. 1543 leaving his kingdom to a young son. Iniquitibirim, 
proceeding to the kingdom of Cape Comorin, seized its 

1931, pp, 14, 24 — The Kerala Society Paper e. 
f IMd, p. 15. X Hid, p. 10. .. - v - ; 



Paravas of the Pearl Fishery Coast into Christianity with the 
object of obtaining the help of the Portuguese governor 
through his mediation. Moreover, he entered into an alliance 
with Betibumal (Bettuperumal), the powerful chief of Kayattar 
and Tuticorin. Iniquitibirim, who grew apprehensive of the 
designs of his enemies, also requested St. Francis Xavier to 
induce the Portuguese governor to support him rather than 
his enemies ; and St. Francis was in communication with the 
Portuguese governor, eagerly looking forward to the conclu- 
sion of a treaty with one or other of these southern chiefs.* 
Such was the state of affairs in the South, when Ramaraja 
despatched an army from Vijayanagara under the command of 
his cousin, CinaTimma. What, however, really precipitated the 

despatch of the expedition was the activity of the Catholic mis- 
sionaries on the Coromandal Coast. They converted a large num- 
ber of fishermen by holding out promises of the protection of the 
Portuguese government from the tyranny of the Mussulman 
traders and Hindu governors. They built churches, appointed 
priests, and taught the new converts to disregard the native 
princes and acknowledge the king of Portugal as their 
sovereign. Emboldened by their success, thev becrnn tn 


wr after. 

E, A* Stews 




til B 





addition to this, information had reached Vijayanagara that 
De Sousa, the Portuguese governer of G oa, secretly designed 
an attack upon Conjeevaram with the object of plundering 
its rich temples.* These circumstances made the despatch 
of a strong military force imperative. 

Crna Timm a set out from Vijayanagara at the head of 
an army, accompanied by his brother, Vitthala, who appears 
to have rendered valuable service during the campaign. He 
proceeded to the fort of Candragiri and captured it. The name 
of the enemy from whom be took the fort is not known. 
He chased the rebels like wild animals, and captured several 
forts in the neighbouring country. Having completed the 
subjugation of this district, he entered the Cola country and 
stormed the fort of Bcinagiri. Marching: along: the coast, he 


250 


&||il 


reinstated the Pandya in his ancestral kingdom. During the 
campaign against BettuperumaJ, Cina Timma appears to have 
come into conflict with the princes of the Tiruvadi country. 
The Five Tiruvadis seem to have united their forces to face 
the common enemy and barred his path outside the pass of 
Toval ; but Cina Timma routed them in a battle and scattered 
their forces. The path which led to the region round the 
Cape and Travancore being thus freed from obstacles, the 
victorious army of the Vijayanagara general swept over the 
country like a tornado spreading ruin and death in its wake (168). 
One of the vanquished Tiruvadis, Iniquitibirim of Travancore, 
submitted and he was received into favour. Cina Timma 
seems to have offered terms of peace to BettuperumaJ ; but 
he showed no signs of submission. On the contrary, he 
hastened by sea to join his ally the king of Cape Comorin 
and waged war upon fniquitibirim.* He was not, however, 
successful; he was defeated in battle and taken prisoner. 
Cina Timma reduced the country to subjection and crowned 
Iniquitibirim king of it (168). Thus he successfully performed 
the task which his cousin, Ramaraja, had entrusted to him. He 
subdued the rebels and reasserted the authority of the imperial 
government in the southernmost dependencies of the empire. 
But before returning to the capital, he visited the shrine of 
the god Padmanabha at Trivandrum and offered worship 
to the deity. Thence he went to Cape Comorin and set up 
a pillar of victory. Then leaving his brother Vitthala in the 
south to govern the subdued countries as his deputy, he 
returned to Vijayanagara. 

Ramaraja and the Portuguese: — Ramaraja’s relations with 
the Portuguese were by no means uniformly friendly. With the 
advent of Martin Afonso de Sousa as the governor of Goa, the 
attitude of the Portuguese which had been until then generally 
. agreeable to the kings of Vijayanagara had undergone a sudden 
change. It was probably due to the greed of the governor, 
coupled with the opportunity for plunder which the outlying 



*. A. Stewart: St. Fttnri* Xavitr, p, 310. 

: . : 7b : ' ' ' U - ; 




251 



parts of the empire offered, on account of the confusion caused 
by the recent civil war. He attached the port of Bhatkal in 
A.D. 1542, and plundered it, as if it were a city belonging to an 
enemy. His activities on the Coromandel Coast have been 
noticed above. , V/ ; ; v : '-C::-.:-- 

De Sousa's governorship came to an end in A.D. 1545; and 
he was succeeded by Joao de Castro, who was a man of different 
character. Ramaraja concluded a political and commercial 
treaty with him in A.D. 1546, as a consequence of which cordial 
relations were restored between the two powers. The amicable 
state of affairs, however, did not last long. Ramaraja made a 
sudden attack on the Portuguese settlement at St. Thome in 
A.D. 1558 with the object of chastising the Catholic mis- 
sionaries and plundering its rich inhabitants. He exacted a 
tribute of a hundred thousand pagodas, of which one half was 
paid down immediately, and the other half was to be paid next 
year. Taking five of the chief citizens as hostages for the 
payment of the balance, Ramaraja returned to his capital.* He 
seems to have despatched an expedition against Goa about this 
time. It is stated in Ramarajiyam tbat Ramaraja terrified the 
city of Pai-Goa.j The Keladinrpavijayam gives more infor- 
mation about this incident. According to this work, Ramax'aja, 
being desirous of taking Goa from its Portuguese masters, sent 
his cousin Vitthalaraya, accompanied by the Ikkeri chief 
Sank anna Nayaka, against the city with instructions to march 
quickly, and make the enterprise successful. Vitthala and 
Sankara marched promptly against Goa and captured the 
sea-girt city (176). 

As Vitthala's expedition against Goa is not alluded to in 
any other work, it is not possible to ascertain how far it is 

* Hera* : The Aravt^u Dynatty, p. 6+ f, 

f F‘ai-Goa has been, transformed to Pegova and Paigo in The Sources of ike Vijaya* 
nagara History in order to identify it with Pegu. {The Sources of the Vij ayanagara 
History^ pp. 183, 187). This identification cannot he accepted; for, there is no evidence 

hostile or otherwise, 1; 

or Paln-Goa is identical with Pangim which together with Raibandar and the old city of 
Goa constitutes the modern capital of Portuguese India, (See Fonesca : Historical and 
drem&ohgltal Sketch of Goa % p* 97.) • : - 




seek his support to ward off the invasion of his dominions by 
Burhan Nizam Shah and his allies. Therefore, the king of 
BijapSr who sent an army against Vijayanagara, as stated in 
the Keladinrpa oijaya m must be Ibrahim ’Adil Shah. 

The kings of Bijapur and Ahmaduagar who were at war with 
each other in A.D. 1642-3 made up their differences, and con- 
cluded a treaty according to which they should cease fighting. The 

Ahmaduagar 
ecognised the right 
Although 


king of Bijapur recognised the right of the king o 
to conquer Bidar; and the latter in his turn r 
of the former to conquer the Vijayanagara territory 
the Anonymous Historian declares that Ibrahim "Adil Shah mar- 
ched after the conclusion of this treaty to the south, and ‘suc- 
ceeded in adding greatly to his territories by conquests from the 
Hindoo state of Beejamiggur,’* the invasion does not seem to 
have produced any substantial results; for, there was no terri- 
torial loss, as observed by Ileras, to Vijayanagarajf and if it is 
to this invasion that the Keladinrpa vijayam alludes, it appears 
to have been turned back by Sadasiva Nay aka. 

Ahmadnagar : — The Keladinrjgavijayam records two 

victories which the Keladi chief Sadasiva Nay aka won over 
the armies of Sultan Bhairy Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar. The 
first conflict arose owing to the desire of the Raya to capture 
the forts of ivalyfiai and Kalubarige ^Grulburga). Sadasiva 
Nayaka who was leading the Vijayanagara army found his path 
blocked at a place called Jambukhandi,J by the Nizam 
Shahi forces under the command of the vazlrs Feroja Khaua, 
Talita Khana, Sanjar Khana, Satheya Khana, Muniia Khana, 

* Briggs; Ferishia, ill, (App,), p. 387. ' : 

t The Aravtdu Dynasty^ p. 76. f 

{The Sivatattvarai n Ukaram also alludes to Sadasiva Nay&ka's, attack upon K&lylni 
and Kalubarige; but according to this work, it was not the Nizam ShShx army that 
opposed him, but the lord of VijaySpura (Bijapur). He was, however, defeated and driven 
away. It may be noted here that the forts of Kalyani. and Kalubarige formed the bone of 
contention between the *Xdil Khan and the Nizam Shahi kings. Ram&rfja helped Bushin 
Nizam Shah to wrest them from IbrShlm ’Aciil Shah,' SiwiattvaratnUkaram evidently 
refers to this wax. Ramaraja, helped later f AIX ? Adil Shah to recapture them from 
Husain Nizam Shall. The incidents described in Ktladinxpavij ayam must refer to tin# 


254 


Dastura Khaua, Vajra Khana, Ravuta Khana, and Bokka 
Singa (173). The events described in Keladimya vijayam seem 
to have taken place during Ramaraja’s first invasion of Ahmad- 
nagar kingdom. The circumstances under which Ramaraja 
came to invade the Ahmadnagar territory are fully narrated by 
the Mussalman historians. The fort of Kalyani which originally 
belonged to the kingdom of Bidar was attacked by B urban 
Nizatn Shah in A.D. 1548. As ’All Band promised to surrender 
the fort to Ibrahim ’Adil Shah, if he helped him in the 
war, the latter marched with his army and prevented B urban 
Rizam Shah from seizing his prey. However, he entered into 
an alliance with Ramaraja and succeeded in capturing the fort 
with his aid in A.D. 1548; and the fort remained in his posses- 
sion up to the time of his death in A.D. 1553. On his death he 
was succeeded by his son Husain Nizam Shah, who renewed 
his father’s contest with Bijapur with greater vigour.* He 
entered into an alliance with Ibrahim Qutb Shah of Grolkonda 
and laid siege to the fort of Gfuiburga in A.D. 1557. Ibrahim 
’Xdil Shah, unable to resist the enemy single-handed, sought 
the assistance of Ramaraja, who responded to the request 
promptly by marching in person at the, head of his army. 
Ramaraja, who was desirous of preventing bloodshed, addressed 
a letter to Ibrahim Qutb Shah, and arranged a meeting of all 
the four kings concerned in the warfare at the junction of the 
and the Bluma rivers. A peace was concluded and it 
was agreed that, in case any one of the parties were the subject 
of an unjust attack, the others should join him against the 
aggressor. Soon after the conclusion of this peace Ibrahim 
Adil Shah died at Bijapur and he was succeeded by his young 
son, ’All. 

Husain Nizam Shah did not believe in the sanctity of 
the treaties which he had concluded with his neighbours. 
Taking advantage of the youth of ’All ’Adil Shah, he invaded the 
kingdom or Bijapur; and ’All ’Adil Shah, who was not in a posi- 
tion, to defend himself, tied to V ijayanagara, and took refuge with 



255 



was Donna to otter protection to tne Adu Shah, who tell a 
■victim to the ambitions designs oi his neighbour. Consequently 
he marched northwards with all his army accompanied by ’Alt 
’Adil Shah. At the same time he despatched letters to Ibrahim 
Qujb Shah calling on him to join them, as one of the signatories 
of the Four Kings’ peace. Although Ibrahim Qntb Shah did not 
like to join in a war against Husain Nizam Shah with whom he 
secretly sympathised, he was obliged to join them with his army 
as he dared not to incur their displeasure.* At the approach of 
the allies, the Nizam Shah hastily retreated into his dominions 
entrusting the defence of Kalyani to Bhopal Ray, one of the 
Hindu officers in his service. As he realised that he could not 
be safe in his capital, he left it in charge of a capable officer 
supported by a strong garrison and repaired to Paithan on the 
Godavari. The allies detached a contingent to carry on the 
siege of Kalyajii, and marched with the rest of the army to 
Ahmadnagar which they closely invested. The siege continued 
for two months; and notwithstanding the help which Ibrahim 
QuJ;b Shah had treacherously offered to the garrison, it became 
apparent that the fall of the fort was n ot far off. Ramaraja com- 
missionfd Sadasiva Nayaka one of the chief officers of his army, 
‘to take his |pops and harry the country as far as the Godavari, ’f 
probably with the object of bringing the war to a speedy con- 
clusion. It was during the course of this raid that Sadasiva 
Nayaka came into conflict with the Nizam Shah! officers at 
Jambukhandi as mentioned in the Keladinrjoavijayam. The 
Burkan-i-Ma’asir describes this incident, Husain Nizam Shah, 
who obtained information .of this raid, ‘sent an army of ’Iraqi 
and Khurasani horsemen under Mavali Khan, Sanjar Khan, 
Daulat Kh an, Dastur Khan, Vazxr Khan and Satya to intercept 
the Hindus. They came upon Sadasiva Nayaka at a place 
called Jamgaon, where a determined engagement had taken 
place ’. % Jamgaon of Burhan-i-Ma’asir and Jambukhandi of 

* Brings: FtrUhata iii, (App.), pp. 402-? , 

t /. A., 1, p. 105. t IHd. 



Keladinrpavijayam are but two different variations of the name 
of the village of Jamkhed, a village in the Ahmadnagar district 
of the Bombay presidency. The result of the battle cannot be 
definitely known at present, as our sources are at variance on 
this point. The Burhan i-Mct’asir claims a complete victory for 
the Nizam Shall! troops, whereas the Keladinrpavijayam asserts 
that Sadasiva Nay aka not only inflicted a defeat upon the Nizam 
Shah! officers mentioned above, but captured one of them call- 
ed Bokk a Singa. There is, however, reason to believe that 
victory was on the side of the Hindus; for, in the first place, 

the other Muslim historians do not allude to any victory won 
by the Nizam Shah! troops; and secondly, Husain Nizam Shah 
is said to have made peace with Sadas'ivaraya immediately after 
this victory, because he heard that Bhopal Bay had surren- 
dered the fort of Kalyani to the enemy. Moreover, the Vijaya- 
nagara army appears to have crossed the God avail and carried 
fire and sword up to Danlatabad.* It was on this occasion that 
Venkatadri inflicted a defeat on Husain Nizam Shah and forced 
him to retreat towards Danlatabad, crossing the river Godavari 
by means of a boat.f Venkatadri advanced with his army in 
pursuit of him and captured the fort of Danlatabad. J This 
series of defeats had at last convinced the Husain Nizam Shah of 
the futility of prolonging the war. Therefore, he purchased 
peace by surrendering the fort of Kalyani to ’All ? A.dil Shah. 





Keladi, he played, in fact, only a subordinate part in the war. 
The campaign was led by Ramaraja’s brother Venkatadri;* 
and he was assisted by Narasaraja of Torgal besides Sadasiva 
Nayaka and other officers.! The causes of this war are 
unknown. The Muhammadan historians from whom some 
explanation may be expected are silent. 

The Keladinrpa vijayam places this war after Ramaraja’s 
first invasion of the Nizam Shah! kingdom. This is indirectly 
supported by the Muhammadan writers. According to 
Ferishta, ’All Rarld Shah joined Ramaraja and ’All ’Adil Shah 
in their campaign against Ahmadnagar and his presence in 
their army during the war with Ibrahim Qu.tb Shah is also 
noticed by the Anonymous Historian^ Therefore, Ramaraja’s 
war with Band Shah must have taken place earlier than his 
second attack upon Ahmadnagar. 

The events of the war may be briefly narrated. When 
Barld Shah heard that the Vijayanagara army was marching 
against his kingdom., he was very much enraged, and placing 
himself at the head of his army, he marched towards his 
frontier to repel the invaders. When the two armies met, a 
fierce engagement took place. Barld Shah, seated on the back 
of an elephant, personally conducted the operations. He was, 
however, defeated and taken prisoner with his ministers ; the 
insignia of his royalty were seized by the victorious Hindu 
general as trophies. As a consequence of his defeat, Barld 
Shah had to join Ramaraja and fight against his enemies. 

Golkonda : — Ramaraja came into contact with the Qujb 
Shah! conrt, as noticed already, early in life. During the 
short period of his service under Quit Qu$b Shah, he gained a 
first-hand knowledge of the internal conditions of the Qutb 
Shahl kingdom, which enabled him later to wage war success- 
fully against the Sultan. Moreover, he acquired the friend- 
ship of several Hindu and Mussalman nobles, who played an 

* Saurcej t p. 219. JVa rasabhupal tyam, 1 : 85. f NarasabhupaByam i 1 : 12, 3 : 12. 

t Briggs Ferishta' Hi, p. 120. ■ ■ § IHd, (App). p. 408.- ■. , - 


258 



important part in his wars with the Mussalman rulers of the 
Deccan later. Of these Raja Immadi Jagadeva Rao was the 
most important. He was a brave soldier, a capable comman- 
der, and won distinction on many a battle-field. He rose to 
prominence under Jamshid Qutb Shah, and occupied the most 
exalted place in the affairs of the kingdom. After the death of 
Jamshid, he was obliged to leave the kingdom owing to his 
disagreement with the government. He entered the service of 
’Imad Shah of Berar, but was obliged to leave Berar soon after, 
on account of his ambitious designs. At last, he migrated to 
Vijayanagara, and was warmly received by Ramaraja who 
bestowed upon him many honours and gifts (205)*. 

Ramaraja’s relations with Ibrahim Qutb Shah were at 
first friendly. When Ibrahim fled from the wrath of his 
brother to the court of Vijayanagara, Ramaraja treated him 
kindly, and showed him the honour that was due to a prince 
of his rank.' When on the death of Jamshid, Ibrahim started 
for Gfolkonda to seize the throne, Ramaraja offered to send an 
army under his brother, Venkatadri, to assist him. They 
continued to cherish feelings of friendship towards each other 
for some years even after Ibrahim’s accession to the throne 
of Grollconda; but owing to conflicting interests of their foreign 
policy, they gradually drifted apart, although they managed 
to avoid a breach up to the close of Ramaraja’s first invasion 
of the Ahmadnagar kingdom, as noticed already. 

The actual circumstances which precipitated the conflict 
between Ramaraja and Ibrahim Qutb Shah are not accurately 
recorded. According to Ferishta, Ibrahim Qutb Shah, who joined 
Ramaraja and ’All ’Sdil Shah in their first campaign against 
Ahmadnagar, becoming jealous of tbe latter, began to help 
secretly the Nizam Shah! officers defending their capital. “ ’Alt 
’Adil Shah and Ramraj demanded an explanation of Ibrahim 
Kootb Shah, who, without affording it, decamped during the 
night and marched to Holkonda.”f The Anonymous Historian, 

iii, (App.), pp. 399-401. ' ' f Ibid iii, p. 24P. , , 


mm ' h 



however, states that Ibrahim Qujtb Shall induced Ramaraja to 
raise the siege of Ahmadnagar by promising to him “to cede 
the fort and district of Condapilly but the promise was not 
fulfilled. Moreover, he showed open hostility to Ramaraja 
and joined Ilusain Nizam Shah with the object of making war 
upon the Sultan of Bijapur. He strengthened his friendship 
with the Nizam Shah by marrying his daughter; and it was 
arranged that the marriage should take place at Kalyani which 
at that time belonged to ’All ’Adil Shah. Accordingly both 
the monarchs moved with their armies to Kalyani which they 
proceeded to besiege forthwith. 

Ramaraja could not afford to neglect the hostile conduct of 
Ibrahim Qujtb Shah, who had shown his determination by his 
recent activities to upset the balance of power in the Deccan. 
The importunate solicitations of ’AH ’Adil Shah for help gave 
him an excellent opportunity to chastise Ibrahim Qujtb Shah. 
As soon as ’All ’Adil Shah came to Vijayanagara to ask for his 
support, he received him cordially, and promised to march for- 
ward with his army against the Saltans of Ahmadnagar and 
Grolkoiida. He directed his brother Venkatadri to march with 
Jagadeva Rao and ’Ain-ul-Mulk at the head of a large army 
against the southern districts of the Qujtb Shah! kingdom. He 
next set out with another army accompanied by ’All ’Adil Shah 
and ’All Band Shah to the rescue of Kalyani which was invested 
by the Nizam Shah! and Qujtb Shah! forces. f 

On the receipt of the intelligence that Ramaraja and his 
allies were marching against them, the two Sultans broke their 
camp and hastily retreated towards their respective kingdoms. 
Ramaraia nursued the Nizam Shah and the ’Adil Shah! forces 


m 


M- 





i ! ' 


i I 


:fl 


the account of Ferishta. Owing to the destruction of a part of 
the Yijayanagara army in a sudden flood of the Sena river, 
Bamaraja is said to have raised the siege of Ahmadnagar.* 

Meanwhile, Ibrahim Qutb Shah was not allowed to retreat 
without opposition. He was constantly harassed by the ’Adil 
Shah! troops who overtook him, and succeeded in inflicting a 
crushing defeat upon his forces. It was with difficulty that he 
managed to reach his capital; but he found on his arrival that 
the affairs of his kingdom were thrown into bewildering 
contusion by Venkatadri and bis army. Before he could make 
arrangements to expel them, Bamaraja and his allies returned 
from Ahmadnagar, and halted at Tarpully at a distance of 
thirty miles from Grolkonda. Ibrahim Qutb Shah attempted in 
vain to dislodge them from their camp; but he found the 
invaders too strong tor him.f Bamaraja did not give him any 
chance to reorganize his forces and offer effective resistance. 
He commanded Venkatadri and his lieutenants Jagadeva Bao 
and ’Ain-ul-Mulk to ravage the country around Grolkonda. He 
ordered his nephew Siddhiraju Timmaraju, who was the 
governor of Kondavidu, to march with fifty thousand infantry 
against Kondapalli and Masulipatam; and he also induced 
Sitapati (Cittapa Khan) and Vidiadry to march against Ellore 
from Bajahmandry.J 

Ibrahim Qu,tb Shah was thus surrounded by his enemies 
on all sides; but Bamaraja weakened the garrison defending the 
fort of Koiadavldu by sending its governor with the major 
portion of his army into the enemy’s country. Ibrahim Qutb 
Shah perceived the weak spot in the hostile ring surrounding 
him. He resolved to strike at this vulnerable point and led an 
army against it personally. He was accompanied by officers of 
distinction such as Mn^afa Khan, Azim Khan, Yakub Khan, 
Cintagunta Dharmarao and others. A part of the army reached 
Kondavidu in advance and laid siege to the fort. Bamaraja, 




18 to have foreseen this danger. At his instance, 


T*V" . .. 


iljfeft il 



p.» p. 407. 



his brother, Yara Timmaraju* sent an army under his deputy 
Velugoti Gina Timma Nayadu to rescue the fort. Gina Timma 
came upon the Muhammadan army outside Kondavldu, and 
after a fierce engagement put them to flight. But the main body 
of the Qutb Shah! forces had crossed the river Krsna, and a 
contingent under Mustafa Khan having penetrated the hilly 
tract in the north of Kurnool district, spread panic among the 
Boya tribes inhabiting the region. At the instance of Yara 
Timmaraju, Timma Nayadu marched against him; and having 
at first restored confidence in the minds of the Boyas, he put 
Mustafa Khan to flight and captured several elephants from 
him. The Muhammadan troops were chased up to the hank of 
the Krsna. Then Yara Timma and his lieutenant resolved to 
carry the war into the enemy’s country. On reaching the bank 
of the Krsna, they found that the Muhammadans had fortified 
themselves on an island in the river and were ready to contest 
their passage. Yara Timma and his subordinate boldly 
attempted to cross the river; and in a bloody engagement that 
took place, slaughtered the Mussalmans. Ibrahim Qutb 
Shah was thus foiled in his attempt ; and he returned to his 
capital humiliated. yyyf Vi>tV ■ ; Q- : t l 

The victorious troops of Yara Timmaraju now crossed the 
Krsna, and carried fire and sword into the enemy’s country. 
The forts on which rested the safety of the kingdom fell into 
their hands one after another in quick succession. The Pathans 
garrisoning the fort of Devarakonda alone offered some resis- 
tance; but Cittela, Peruru, Devulapalli, Nagulapadu, Odapalli, 
Nallagonda, Aruvapalli, Indrakonda and other forts fell without 
any struggle ( 181 -a, b). Victory crowned the attempts of the 
Vijayanagara army in another quarter also. Jagadeva Rao 
who still exercised considerable influence over the Naigwaries 
garrisoning the Qu,tb Shah! forts induced them to surrender 
Kovilkonda, Panagal and Granpura to Ramaraja. And Ibrahim 

* The Anonymous Historian of the Qutb Shah! Kings states that Jotumraj who 
Captured DSvarako$4& and other forts in its neighbourhood was Ramaraja' s son-in-law 
(Briggs FtrUhia iii, (App.) p. 408 ); but according to the Vtlug^vnrivamsZvall , he w m' 
Rlmarlja's brother, Ya^a TimmarSju. 


isiisfe^ 



Qutb Shall was forced to sue for peace. Ramaraja promised to 
terminate the war and return to Vijayanagara on condition that 
he was allowed to retain in his possession the forts of Ganpura 
and Panagal. As Ibrahim Qutb Shah agreed to cede the said 
forts as the price of peace, he marched away with all his army 
to his country.* This war widened the breach between 
Ramaraja and Ibrahim Qutb Shah and paved the way for the 
disaster, which overtook the former on the battle-field of 
Raks asi-Tangadi . 


CHAPTER XXI. 



THE BATTLE OF RlKSASI— -TANGADI. 

Wie name of the battle-field .-—The Muhammadan 
historians state that the battle in which the Deccani Sultans 
overthrew Ramaraja was fought at the village of Talikota. 
This statement, however, does not agree with the accounts 
of the battle given by them, as noticed by Sewell. “In 
fact says he, “ the battle did not take place there, 
but many miles to the south of the river. Talikota is twenty- 
five miles north of the Krsna. The battle took place ten 
miles from Rama Raya's camp south of the river, wherever that 
may have been. There is no available information on this point, 
but it was probably at Mudkal, the celebrated for tress... and the 
decisive battle seems to have been fought in the plains about 
the village of Bayapur or Bhogapur on the road leading directly 
from Ingaligi to Mudkal The place of the famous battle has 
been correctly described in the Hindu records. The Bdmarajana 
Bakhair, which purports to narrate all the facts connected with 
the battle, locates the camp of Ramaraja in the plain between the 
villages of Rakkasi and Tangadi, where the battle is said to have 
been fought. This is confirmed by the village Jcaifiyats, several 
of which allude to this event (185). Some of them give useful 
information about the situation of the village which enables us 
to establish its identity. Though the majority of the kaifiyats 
merely assert that Ramaraja the Great (Bade Ramaraja), perish- 
ed with all his army near the confluence of the rivers Krsna 
and the Malapaharl, one of them, the Kaifiyat of Nandiyala, 
describes the site of the battle more precisely. According to 
this record, “the Muhammadans who invaded (the country) put 
Aliya Ramaraja together with his army to death at Raksasi- 
Tangadi in the par gam of Honugonda near the confluence of 
the rivers Krsna and Malapaharl ” (194). The Malapaharl 
mentioned in the kaifiyat is “the modern Malaprabha or 

— — - -fM 

* Tki Forgotten Empire, p. 199, n* 2. . , . - 


264 



nasties 


'anarest districts, p, 491 . 

B J /. A. 1, p.145; Busdiln-m-Satfei*, p. 91. 

mm-, yx 


Malprabha, flowing through the south of the Belgaum district 
and along the north of the Nawalgund and Ron talukas of 
Dharwar ”.* It falls into the Krsna river in the neighbourhood 
of DhanfLr railway station in the Bijapur district. Honugonda 
pargana in which Raksasi-Tangadi is said to have been situated 
is identical with Hunugunda, the headquarters of one of the 
southern talukas in the same district. Raksasi-Tangadi is 
not, as noted above, the name of a single village but a com- 
pound term made up of the names of two villages, separated 
from each other by a distance of about ten miles. The village 
of Tangadige is situated on the northern bank of the Krsna 
opposite to its junction with the Malaprabha and Rakkasige 
stands ten miles to the east of it on the same bank. The Yijaya- 
nagara army was encamped between these two villages. Hence 
the battle is appropriately named the battle of Rakkasi- 
Tangadi or more commonly Raksasi-Tangadi. 

This gives rise to an interesting question about the actual 
site of the battle. Where -was the battle fought, on the 
southern or the northern bank of the river ? The battle 
took place, according to Ferishta, near the southern bank of the 
Krsna, the Muhammadan army having succeeded in crossing 
the river by means of a stratagem. “ The armies united and 
marched to the southward : they crossed the Krishna and 
eneamped on the Hookery river situated twelve miles from the 
former. Ramaraja marched to oppose them.”f Sayyid ’All 
and Ibrahim Zabiri agree with Ferishta in stating that the 
Muhammadan armies crossed the Krsna before they encountered 
the Vijayanagara army, although they place the site of the 
battle on the southern bank of the Krsna itself. J The Hindu 
records which unanimously assert that the battle was fought 
on a plain outside the villages of Rakkasige and Tangadige, 
however, contradict the accounts of the Muhammadan his- 
torians. These two villages stand, as noticed already, on the 
srn bank of the river at a distance of ten miles from each 


: 


other. Assuming the authenticity of the Hindu records for the 
nonce, the strategic importance of the Hindu camp can easily 
be understood. The river Krsna flowing behind the camp 
protected it from any attack in the rear; the river Don which 
falls into the Krsna at some distance to the east of the village 
of Rakkasige and a small stream which joins the same river to 
the west of Tangadige must have protected it in the flanks. If 
it was the object of the Muhammadans to attack the Hindu army, 
there was no need to cross the Krsna. AH the Muhammadan 
writers, whose works have been made available to us, assert 
that the Muhammadan armies did cross the Krsna, though they 
do not agree about the site oft he battle. That is the position. 
Where does the truth lie ? 

The causes of the battle : — The causes which led to the 
formation of the confederacy of the Deccani Sultans against 
Ramaraja are described by the Muhammadan historians. They 
may be grouped into four classes : 

(1) that Ramaraja showed disrespect to Islam, and injured 

the feelings of the Mussalmans by encouraging the outrageous 
conduct of his soldiers during his war with the Sultan of 
Ahmadnagar; % : h' - ■ ' ' v 

(2) that he behaved insolently towards the Mussalman 
kings and treated their representatives with contempt; 

(3) that he seized their territory, notwithstanding his 
obligations of alliance and friendship to them; and 

(4) that he became so powerful as to cause apprehension 
in their minds about the safety of their kingdoms. 

These charges deserve careful examination; for the writers 
who level them at Ramaraja are Muhammadan historians patro- 
nised by the descendants of his enemies. Of the charges mention- 
ed above (2) and (4) may be accepted without argument, as it is 
not impossible that Ramaraja should have become very powerful 
after his successful wars with the Deccani Sultans and treated 
them and their . representatives with contempt. The opinion of 









266 



the Mussalman historians is' not unanimous about Ramaraja’s 
disrespect to Islam or his high-handedness in dealing with the 
territory of his allies. Ferishta, no doubt, asserts emphatically 
that “ the infidels of Beejanuggur...left no cruelty unpractised. 
They insulted the honour of the Mussalman women, destroyed 
the mosques, and did not respect even the sacred Koran.”* 
“ The Hindoos of Beejanuggur committed the most outrageous 
devastations burning and rasing the buildings, putting up their 
horses in the mosques, and performing their abominable 
idolatrous worship in holy places.”f “ In the first expedition 
(against Ahmadnagar), when Ally Adil Shah invited Ramraj to 
his assistance, the Hindoos committed great outrages at Ahmud- 
nuggur and omitted no mark of disrespect to the religion of the 
faithful, singing and performing their abominations and 
superstitious worship in the very mosques.”$ 


‘ During the late wars/ says he, “ he (Ramraj) had not only 
laid waste the country of Hoossein Nizam Shah, and polluted 
the masjids by appropriating them to the use of his cattle and 
of his soldiers.”§ The Anonymous Historian was not aware of 
the other atrocities said to have been committed by Ramaraja 
and his forces. Sayyid ’All, the Nizam.Shahi historian, who 
was a contemporary of Ferishta, alludes only to devastation 
caused by the war and the oppression and the death of 
Muslims at the hands of the ‘ accursed infidels/ 


Ferishta iii, p. 120. 


267 



“ Sadashivaraya ”, says he, “in the pride of his power... 
had invaded the territories of Islam, and deluged them in blood, 
and had destroyed the dwellings of the Muslims, and slain 
large numbers of them.”* 

Although Ramaraja is said to have committed the atrocities 
detailed by Ferishta and the Anonymous Historian during his 
first attack on Ahmadnagar, it is strange that Say y id ’All, who 
was specially interested in the history of Ahmadnagar does not 
mention any of them excepting the devastation of the country 
and the death of Muhammadans. Sayyid ’All, who bore no love 
to ‘the accursed infidels’, cannot be convicted of partiality 
towards them. If that were so, what could be the reason for 
his failure to notice Ramaraja’s outrageous conduct ? Very 
probably Ramaraja did not indulge in these excesses. It must 
be remembered in this connection that Ramaraja had a large 
number of Mussalmans in his service, who had as great a regard 
for their faith as the Deccani Muhammadan kings and their 
Muslim subjects. Ramaraja treated them generously, and 
allowed them freedom to observe their religious practices with- 
out any restraint. According to a contemporary Muhammadan 
writer, Ramaraja assigned a special quarter of the city called 
Turkavada for their residence, and allowed them to build a 
mosque, where they carried on worship, as if they were dwelling 
in a Mussalman country. They were even permitted to sacrifice 
cows, notwithstanding the protests of the Brahmans and the 
Hindu nobles. Moreover, to ease the conscience of the Muham- 
madans in his service, Ramaraja is said to have placed a copy of 
the Qur’an near his seat in the durbar so that they might avoid 
the sin of offering salute to an infidel master, j* It is evident 
from this that Ramaraja showed great regard to Islam in order 
to please his Mussalman subjects. 

Moreover, Ramaraja was not free to do as he liked during 
his first expedition against Ahmadnagar. He had many power- 
ful Muhammadan allies on whose co-operation the success of. 

•M L ( 1931), p. 143. t Shiraz! : J.B.B. R.A.S. xxii, p. 23. 




268 



the enterprise depended. Besides ; Ali 'Adil Shah on whose 
behalf Ramaraja had undertaken the expedition, there were 
Ibrahim Qutb Shah, Duria ’Imad Shah and Mubarak Shah 
Farooky of Khandesh co-operatiug with Ramaraja in this war. 
Had he behaved in the manner in which he is said to have 
done, they would have deserted him, if they could not have 
effectively prevented him from offering any sort of insult to 
their faith* The fact that they neither turned against him, nor 
deserted him until the end of the campaign clearly indicates 
that they saw nothing in his conduct or that of his troops to 
which they could take exception. 

The Hindu accounts which in their present form are later 
than the Muhammadan histories mentioned above, while 
agreeing with them that the conflict arose on account of the 
insult which Ramaraja offered to the Mussulmans, describe 
variously the circumstances under which he came to offer it. 
According to the Ramarajana Bakhair , a mahaldar in the service 
of 'All 'Idil Shah of Bijapur, paid a visit to the court of 
Vijayanagara on some diplomatic mission; witnessed the 
acrobatic feats performed by the Dommaras in the presence of 
Ramaraja, and spoke disparagingly of the Hindus and their 
religion, when Ramaraja presented to them some pigs which 
they had asked for. Ramaraja, who was naturally annoyed at 
the impudent behaviour of the Muhammadan, told him that 
eating pigs did not lower the Hindus; and if it lowered them, as he 
contended, the Muhammadans must be considered lower than 
the Hindus, as they subsisted upon fowls which lived upon the 

* Ferishta states that during his campaign ’AH ’Sdil Shah was ‘ scandalised by the 
behaviour of Ms Hindoo allies/ He ‘was then much offended; but as he had not the 
means of preventing it, he pretended not to observe it * (Briggs : Ferhhia in, pp, 121, 122). 
According to the Anonymous Historian, however, the campaign was carried on by the 
obstinate insistence of *A1I ’Xdil Shah, who begged Ramaraja not to abandon the siege of 
Ahmadnagar. Ramaraja’s officers, who received bribes from Ibrahim Qutb Shah, represented 
to^himjhat it was necessary to retreat from Ahmadnagar as the rains' were approaching. 
Ramaraja consented to do so. 4 But ’A3i ’Adil Shah, who knew that the besieged were 
suffering for want of provisions, had a conference with Ramaraja, and begged him not to 
think of withdrawing till the place fell, promising to cede to him the district of Indgy, if 
he would only continue the siege for one month longer. Ramaraja consented Briggs ; 
FmtMaixL A pp., pp, 403-404. • ' ' 


269 


excreta of the pigs. He demonstrated the truth of his statement 
by means of an experiment. He drove a herd of these animals 
into a hall the floor of which was strewn with corn and shut 
its doors. After allowing them to stay there for a night, he let 
them out in the next morning. The floor of the hall was covered 
with the refuse of the animals. The fowls, which were next 
introduced into the hall, began to rake the refuse and eat the 
grain which they found embedded therein. The mahaldar who was 
brought in to witness the scene was besides himself with rage. 
On his return to Bijapur, he attempted to involve his master in 
a war with Ramaraja; hut meeting with failure in his under- 
taking, he repaired to Jalna, where the Sultans of Ahmadnagar 
and Golkonda met together to attend a musical performance. 
They listened to his story, and considering that an insult was 
offered to Islam, resolved to make war upon Ramaraja. 

The Kaifiyat of Gutti (184), however, gives a different 
account. Some Muhammadan officers, who had been in 
Ramaraja’s service, spat upon the ground on one occasion, when 
they saw a herd of pigs passing at a distance. Some of the 
Hindu courtiers who were ill-disposed towards them poisoned 
Ramaraja’s mind against them by telling.him that they treated 
the Hindu religion with contempt. To punish them, Ramaraja 
withheld their salary for a few months; and when they made 
persistent requests for its payment, he sent them a golden pig 
equivalent in value to the amount due to them. They were 
naturally indignant; consequently they left the service of 
Ramaraja and repaired to the Sul.tan of Rhaganagar. The 
Suljan listened to their complaint; and having resolved to make 
war upon Ramaraja, entered into an alliance with the Sultan of 
Delhi and invaded the Vijayanagara kingdom. 

Another story is narrated in a manuscript preserved in 
the Mackenzie Collection in the Library of the India Office, 
London. It is said that ’All 'Adil Shah, Qutb Shah and 
Nizam Shah Bhairl, who were in the service of the Raja of 
V ijayanagar, were constantly in waiting upon him. Once a 




S' 


■ ! ■ 


* 

y 


pill 


1 , ii . , , i 


i 


270 



when 'the allies reached the town of Ootgy, Ramraj under the 
••* Bri*g»: MritKa Hi,. p. 183. . ... - ' ■ ■ -■• ' • ,. - . ■ 


faqlr came to Vijayanagara from Hindustan, and washed himself 
in a well which was closed by the royal command. This was 
brought to the notice of the Raja, who condemned the faqlr to 
death for the infringement of his command. Rut he allowed 
him, on the intercession of the three Muhammadan rulers, to 
depart from the place, after mutilating a finger of one of his 
hands. The faqlr repaired to Delhi and complained to the 
Sultan, who thereupon led an army against Vijayanagara. 

These stories came into existence at a time, when the real 
facts about Ramaraja's final conflict with the Mussalmans were 
forgotten. The authors of these stories imbibed the belief made 
popular by the later Muhammadan historians that it arose out 
of Ramaraja’s outrageous conduct towards Islam, and invented 
stories to describe the form which his objectionable behaviour 
had assumed. They need not, therefore, be taken seriously into 
consideration in dealing with the problem. The foregoing 
examination of the allegation that Ramaraja insulted Muslim 
faith shows that it does not bear scrutiny. If all the facts 
narrated by Muhammadan writers about the conditions under 
which Ramaraja waged war with Ahmadnagar are taken into 
account, it is not possible to believe that Ramaraja and his 
forces behaved in the manner in which they are said to have 
done. 

The accusation that Ramaraja seized the territory of his 
allies does not bear examination; Ferishta, who brings forward 
this charge, states that Ramaraja cast ‘ an evil eye on the 
countries of Kootb Shah and 7 Jdil Shah and ‘ despatched 
armies to the frontier of each, and Ally ; S.dil Shah was com- 
pelled to purchase his forbearance by ceding the districts of 
Etgeer and Bagarkote; and Ibrahim Kootb Shah, to obtain the 
same end, resigned Kowilconda, Pangul, and Guntoor’.* 
Ferishta refers to this incident again in another context. While 
returning from the second expedition against Ahmadnagar, 


271 



pretence of foraging, halted, and took that opportunity of 
plundering some of the Beejapoor and G ole o n da districts, and 
eventually obtained from both these princes a cession of terri- 
tory, before he reached his capital.”* 

The circumstances under which Ibrahim Qutb Shah 
surrendered the forts of Kovilkonda, Pangal and Ganpura (not 
Guntoor) to Ramaraja may be first taken into consideration 
for the sake of convenience. Ibrahim Qutb Shah's treacherous 
conduct towards Ramaraja and ’All 'Adil Shah during the first 
campaign against Ahmadnagar revealed to them that he was 
an enemy in the guise of a friend. Therefore, when they 
demanded an explanation of his conduct, instead of giving them 
a satisfactory reply, 1 he decamped ', according to Ferishta, 

‘ during the night and marched to Golconda.'f Although the 
Anonymous Historian attempts to screen the conduct of Ibrahim 
Qujfcb Shah by stating that he remained with his allies until the 
end of the campaign and induced Ramaraja to raise the siege 
of Ahmadnagar by promising to cede to him the fort of Konda- 
palli, his subsequent conduct makes it evident that Ferishta is 
nearer the truth. No sooner did Ramaraja and ’All 'Adil Shah 
return to their respective capitals than he joined Husain Nizam 
Shah and violated the treaty which the latter had concluded 
with Ramaraja by investing the fort of Kalyani. To punish 
Ibrahim Qutb Shah's treachery Ramaraja and 'All ’Adil Shah 
were obliged to invade his dominions and force him to surren- 
der, after a brilliant campaign, the three forts of Kovilkonda, 
Pangal, and Ganpura as a penalty for his misconduct . % It is 
evident from this that Ramaraja did not attack Ibrahim Qujtb 
Shah to lay covetous hands upon his territory but to chastise 
him for his treachery towards friends. 

It is not known when Ramaraja took the forts of Etglr 
and Bagarkote from the ’Adil Shah. Ferishta’s statement that 
this was done on the occasion of Ramaraja's return from the 
second campaign against Ahmadnagar cannot be maintained; 

* Briggs Ferishta iii, p. 245. + Ibid, p. 240. t Hi, App., pp. 406-409. 


272 




| 

i li 


I II 


1 


for the ’Idil Shah was present in Ramaraja’s camp as an ally 
during his campaign against Ibrahim Qutb Shah in Telingana * 
It is not probable that the ’Idil Shah would have joined 
Ramaraja in making war upon Ibrahim Qutb Shah, had 
Ramaraja made an attack upon him and forced him to surrender 
the said forts. Therefore, these forts must have passed into 
Ramaraja’s possession earlier. As there is no evidence to show 
that Ramaraja had ever been hostile to ’All ’Idil Shah, it is 
not unreasonable to suppose that he acquired them during one 
of his campaigns against Ibrahim ’Idil Shah. 

The formation of the confederacy of the Muhammadan 
kings of the Deccan against Ramaraja was not prompted by a 
desire to avenge the offended dignity of Islam; nor was it due to 
a feeling of resentment against his unjust aggressions upon their 
dominions. The real cause of the formation of the confederacy 
was the fear engendered in the minds of the Deccani Sultans by 
the rapid growth of Ramaraja’s power. Taking advantage of the 
frequent quarrels which engrossed their attention, he not only 
recovered the territory which they had seized during his strug- 
gle with Aeyuta and Salakaraju Tirumala. but succeeded in 
establishing his hegemony over them.f Ramaraja’s supremacy 
was most galling to the Muhammadan rulers. His great power 
coupled with their individual helplessness against him had 
driven them to resort to combined action. This was the real 
cause which induced the Muhammadan kings to forget 
temporarily their differences to join together in a confederacy 
which brought about Ramaraja’s downfall. 

The formation of the confederacy ;—. It is not possible to 
describe accur ately how the Muhammadan kings of the Deccan 


* Briggs r Fsrishia Hi, App., pp. 407.- 403. 

>h, Deccan ,c,,al, tb, f«t .b.i *, Ji s „c„b.,„,„, «( ','he 'ah'” Stoi' 

the various chiefs who asserted independence were in a ,t a te of chronic TMs’ 

state of affairs was also noticed by Nuniz, who observes «• there if limf T-. ™ 

n *? -* *” ■" “,Lti“c“S 


, ‘ \ r " — mussaimaji princes sought Ms stio- 

•si their enemies, he natnrallv tha n- -b , , s 1 sup 

u-iturauy joined the party which gave him the greatest 

.':.v , : . : : 14 ” 

telMMliil 






1 1 



came to join in a confederacy against Ramaraja; for the 
evidence of the Muhammadan historians is so hopelessly 
contradictory that nothing can be made out of it. According to 
Ferishta, it was ’All 'Idil Shah who, being desirous to check the 
power of Ramaraja, sent his officers to the court of the other 
Muhammadan kings of the Deccan with the object of forming 
a confederacy against him.* The Anonymous Historian claims 
the credit of having taken the initiative in this matter for 
Ibrahim Qutb Shah, the father of his patron.f And Sayyid ’Ali 
puts forward a similar claim on behalf of his patron’s father 
Husain Nizam Shah.J The Muhammadan historians are thus 
seen to be good partisans and faithful adherents of the princes 
whose salt they ate. In their excessive zeal to serve the cause 
of their respective masters, they have sacrificed the truth, which 
cannot be ascertained at this distance of time. Nevertheless, it 
may be pointed out that of ali the kings mentioned above, 
’All ’Adil Shah had least cause to be dissatisfied with Ramaraja, 
who helped him against his enemies and enabled him to win 
territory at their expanse. It is not probable that this prince 
wotrld have taken an active part in the formation of the league. 
Husain Nizam Shah and Ibrahim Qutb Shah, who suffered 
much by Ramaraja’s wars, are more likely to have promoted 
the formation of the league than 'All ’Adil Shah. 


Much uncertainty also exists about personnel of the league. 
Sayyid ’All and the Anonymous Historian mention only 
Husain Nizam Shah, Ibrahim Qujb Shah, and ’All ’Adil Shah ;§ 
Ferishta adds ’All Band Shah to their number, and Nizam-ud- 
din Ahmad corroborates bis evidence.! {There is reason to 
believe that all the five Deceani Sultans joined the confederacy, 
although Zablrl explicitly states that Buxhan Tmad-ul-Mulk of 
Berar kept aloof on account of his resentment against the Nizam . 


* Briggs: Ferishta in, p. 123. + Ibid, iii, App. pp. 412-13, 

X FA, 1, p. I43» 

§ Ibid , p, 143; Briggs: Ferishta iii, App., pp. 412-13. 

1 1bid, pp. 126 ; Tabaq%$”i~Ahb®ri, {Eng, Tram,) iii, p. 141. 

. 1—35 " \ 






Shah * The village kaifiyats of the Telugu country usually 
refer to the death of Ramaraja at the hands of the 1 ive Padshahs 
CPanca Padusahulu) of the Deccan, who are also mentioned occa- 
sionally by name.f The Kaifiyat of Taclpatri (185-h), for instance, 
states that « the five Turu§ka Padusahus viz., Qutb Sahu of 
Hyderabad, Alii Adila Sahu of Bijapur, Nijam Sahu Bah! of 
Ahamadnagar, Nijam Sahu of Daulatabad, and Imad-ul-Mulk of 
Birad-Buranpur joined together, and waged jvar^upon Rama- 
raja”. The repetition of the name of the Nijam Sahu twice, and 
the omission of the name of the fifth member of the confederacy 
are, of course, due to mistake. The name of the Barid Shah 
must be inserted in the kaifiyat to make good the omission. 
The names of the confederates are also mentioned in the 
Kaifiyat of the Town of Cuddapah (185-p). They are said to be 
the Padshahs of Bijapuram, Bidar, Daulatabad and Ahmadnagai . 
Notwithstanding the omission or repetition of names of some of 
the confederates in any given kaifiyat, their number is 
invariably stated to be five. The kaifiyats, taken in the 
aggregate, furnish a full list of all the kings that joined together 
to fight against Ramaraja. They make it evident that all the 
Muhammadan rulers of the Deccan viz., the Sultans of Grolkonda, 
Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, Bidar and Berar fought against Ramaraja 
in the battle of Raksasi-Tangadi. • 

A few records, however, make the Sultan of Dehit a 
member of the Muslim confederacy. The Kaifiyat of Gutti (184) 
and another account preserved in the India Office refer to the 
participation of the Dehll Sultan in the battle in which Ramaraja 
was killed. According to the former, the ruler of Bliaganagar 
(Golkonda) communicated to the Sultan of Dehll that Ramaraja 
had offered an insult to Islam. “ The king of Dehll pondered 
over this matter for some time; he collected an army and 
despatched it to Bhaganagar. On reaching its destination, the 


275 



in order to avenge the insult ottered to a Muhammadan taqir. 
The Ramarajana Bakhair, a work of uncertain date, which 
professes to set forth all the facts connected with the battle of 
Raksasi-Tangadi, identifies the Sultan of Dehll with the Mughal 
emperor Akbar, who is, however, said to be the ruler of J alnapura. 
The participation of Akbar in this war is not impossible from a 
chronological point of view; but there is absolutely no evidence 
for presuming that he began to interest himself in the affairs of 
the Deccan so early in his reign. His protege, Burhan Nizam 
Shah II, who first roused his ambition for the conquest of the 
Deccan, reached his court only in A.D. 1588, nearly a quarter of a 
century after the battle of Raksasi-Tangadi. Therefore, |there is 
no evidence available at present which makes the participation 
of the Sultan of Dehll in the war against Ramaraja likely. ) 

The Ramarajana Bakhair further asserts that ’All ’Sdii 
Shah did not join the confederacy whole-heartedly. While 
Nizam Shah Bhairy, Ibrahim Qutb Shah, ’Imad-ul-Mulk, and 
Jalal-ud-Dln Akbar were actively engaged in warfare against 
Ramaraja, ’Alt ’Adil Shah sat on the fence pretending loyalty 
to the allies as well as Ramaraja; and he is said to have made a 
treacherous attack upon the latter, when his co-religionists were 
vanquished in battle (186). The Kela dinrpa vijaya m, the history 
of the chiefs of Ikkeri, corroborates its account. According to 
this work, “ Kutubu $.ahu of Gfolkonda and the Nijam Sahu, 
also called Bhairy Patusahu of Ahamadanagara, both these kings 
led an attack ” upon Ramaraja. But being vanquished in battle, 
they entered into a secret compact with Alii Adula *§ahu; and 
having put Ramaraja off his guard by pretending to sue for 
peace, they made a treacherous attack upon Ramaraja’s camp 
and captured him (187). These two workB thus agree in stating 
that ’All ’Adil Shah pretended loyalty to Ramaraja, but tore off 
the mask of friendship towards the close of the war, being 
incited to do so by the other Muslim kings. , 


276 



t Aravifu dynasty, p. 203 , n,l. 


Although it is not possible to verify the facts mentioned in 
these works, they must not be dismissed without consideration; 
for, some of the incidents narrated by the Muhammadan 
historians appear to impart the semblance of reality to them. 
The overture of peace which the confederate Muhammadan 
kings are said to have made to Ramaraja may be first taken 
into consideration. According to Ferishta, “ the kings of the 
Deccan made overtures to him, promising the restitution of the 
districts they had taken from him on the march, in order to 
obtain peace, conceiving themselves unequal to cope with his 
formidable army. Ramraj, however, refused to listen to any 
accommodation.”* “ This statement seems”, as observed by 
Heras, “ inconsistent with the whole account of the battle and 
its preparations.” - ! - 

It is incredible that the Muhammadan kings, who joined 
together for the purpose of crushing, Ramaraja should have 
begged him for peace at the mere sight of his army. If the 
Muhammadan kings of the Deccan had really made overtures of 
peace to Ramaraja, as recorded by Ferishta, they must have 
done so only after they had sustained a defeat at his hands. 
The Keladinrpavijayam, which also refers to these peace parleys, 
gives a more probable account. It is said that Qutb Shah of Grol- 
konda and Nizam Shah Bhairy of Ahmadnagar who invaded the 
Vijayanagara kingdom were defeated by Ramaraja. They came 
to the conclusion that without having recourse to some subter- 
fuge, it was not possible for them to win a victory over him. 
“ Therefore, they opened negotiations with Alii Adula Padusahu 
who was one of the principal servants of the Raya. They excited 
his feelings by making an appeal to his racial love, and induced 
him to take an oath on his faith, god, and sword that he would 
keep their pact a secret. They also exacted a promise from 
him that he would translate his words into action”(187). 

k The Kutubu Sahu. of Golkonda and Bhairy Nijam Sahu 
of Ahamadanagar, having thus brought Adula Sahu to their side, 


277 


'put the Raya completely off his guard by deliberately spreading 
a false rumour that they were desirous of concluding peace. 

Then inspired confidence in the mind of the Raya, and made him 
forgetful of his danger. Then, they oiuicl an opportunity to 
put their plan into action by the tricks of Alii Aclula Sahu of 
Vijapura, and having joined him, they made a treacherous attack ; 
upon Ramaraja and captured him at a place called Raksasa- | 

Dangadi ”(Ibid). The Muhammadan kings of the Deccan, no doubt, 
opened negotiations of peace with Ramanuja, on the eve of the 
battle of Talikota, as stated by Ferishta, notwithstanding their 
determination to crush him. The real explanation of this 
seemingly inconsistent action is furnished in the Keladinrpa- | 

vijayam. The Qu.t,b Shah and the Nizam Shah who first attacked | 

Ramaraja were defeated by him. Then they won over the ’Adil 
Shah to their side, and in order to create a false sense of security 
in Ramaraja's mind, pretended to sue for peace. 

Secondly, the statement of the Ramarajana Bakhair and of 
the Keladinrpa vijaya m that Ramaraja’s defeat at Raksasi- 
Tangadi was due to a surprise attack of the Muhammadan kings 
seems to receive vague confirmation from contemporary sources. 

Couto who “ spent almost all, if not all, his life in India after 
1556 ”* states “ that Ramaraja was utterly ignorant of any 
impending attack, and never even heard that the enemy had 
entered his territory till the news was brought one day while he 
was at dinner.”-)' If this statement is taken to refer to the 
beginning of the war, it must be discarded as talsd; for, all the 
other sources unanimously declare that Ramaraja was aware of 
the hostile activity of the Muhammadan kings and was fully 
prepared to meet their attack when it came. As Couto was in 
India at the time of the battle, and might have obtained 
information from first-hand sources, his information could not 
have been entirely baseless. It is not unlikely that he obtained 
the news of the final attack of the Muhammadan kings upon 
Ramaraja’s camp, and due to a misunderstanding of himself or of 
his informant wrongly attributed it to the beginning of the war. 



■ Although it is not possible to verify the facts mentioned in 
these works, they must not be dismissed without consideration; 
for, some of the incidents narrated by the Muhammadan 
historians appear to impart the semblance of reality to them. 
The overture of peace which the confederate Muhammadan 
kings are said to have made to Ramaraja may be first taken 
into consideration. According to Ferishta, “ the kings of the 
Deccan made overtures to him, promising the restitution of the 
districts they had taken from him on the march, in order to 
obtain peace, conceiving themselves unequal to cope with his 
formidable army. Ramraj, however, refused to listen to any 
accommodation.”* “ This statement seems”, as observed by 
Heras, “ inconsistent with the whole account of the battle and 
its preparations. ”f 

It is incredible that the Muhammadan kings, who joined 
together for the purpose of crushing, Ramaraja should have 
begged him for peace at the mere sight of his army. If the 
Muhammadan kings of the Deccan had really made overtures of 
peace to Ramaraja, as recorded by Ferishta, they must have 
done so only after they had sustained a defeat at his hands. 
The Keladinrpa vijayam, which also refers to these peace parleys, 
gives a more probable account. It is said that Qutb Shah of Gol- 
konda and Nizam Shah Bliairy of Ahmadnagar who invaded the 
Vijayanagara kingdom were defeated by Ramaraja. They came 
to the conclusion that without having recourse to some subter- 
fuge, it was not possible for them to win a victory over him. 
“ Therefore, they opened negotiations with All! Adula Padusahu 
who was one of the principal servants of the Raya. They excited 
his feelings by making an appeal to his racial love, and induced 
him to take an oath on his faith, god, and sword that he would 
keep their pact a secret. They also exacted a promise from 
him that he would translate his words into aetion”(187). 

The Kutubu Sahu of Grolkonda and Bhairy Nijam Sahu 
f Ahamadanagar, having thus brought Adula Sahu to their side, 

* Briggs: ferishta, iii p. 247. t Aravifa Dynasty, p, 203, n,i. 


277 


put the Baya completely off his guard by deliberately spreading 
a false rumour that they were desirous of concluding peace. , 

They inspired confidence in the mind of the Raya , and made him 1 1 

forgetful of his danger. Then, tliey found an opportunity to j 

put their plan, into action by the tricks of All! Adula Salm of j 

Vijapura, and having joined him, they made a treacherous attack ‘ 

upon Ramaraja and captured him at a place called Raltsasa- | 

Dangadi”(d&«7). The Muhammadan kings of the Deccan, no doubt, 1 1 

opened negotiations of peace with Ramaraja, on the eve of the ! 

battle of Talikota, as stated by Ferishta, notwithstanding their | j 

determination to crush him. Tire real explanation of this 1 1 

seemingly inconsistent action is furnished in the Keladinrpa- | ! 

vijayam. The Qujfcb Shall and the Nizam Shah who first attacked | 

Ramaraja were defeated by him. Then they won over the ’Adil | 

Shah to their side, and in order to create a false sense of security ; 

in Ramaraja’* mind, pretended to sue for peace. | 




1 


Secondly, the statement of the Uamarajana Bakhair and of 
the Keladinrpavijayam that Ramaraja’* defeat at Raksasi- 
Tangadi wms due to a surprise attack of the Muhammadan kings 
seems to receive vague confirmation from contemporary sources. 
Couto who “ spent almost all, if not all, his life in India after 
1556 ”* states “ that Ramaraya was utterly ignorant of any 
impending' attack, and never oven heard that the enemy had 
entered his territory till the news was brought one day while he 
was at dinner.” f £i this statement is taken to refer to the 
beginning of the war, it must be discarded as false*, for, all the 
other sources unanimously declare that Ramaraja was aware of 
the hostile activity of the Muhammadan kings and was fully 
prepared to meet their attack when it came. As Couto was in 
India at the time of the battle, and might have obtained 
information from first-hand sources, his information could not 
have been entirely baseless. It is not unlikely that he obtained 
the news of the final attack of the Muhammadan kings upon 
Ramaraja’s camp, and due to a misunderstanding of himself or of 
his informant wrongly attributed it to the beginning of the war. 


- The Rise of the Poring**** Power, p. xi. t Forgotten Empire, p. 200, n. X, 


- iBusa/m-tts~Sal5ti», p. 103, quoted in the Aravidu Dynasty, p. 213, n. 7. Heras gives 
the name of this officer as Akim Hasan Beg of Dabris; but in the published lithographic 
edition of the Susatin, it is found as Hakim QSsim Beg Tabrizy. 


;> 

^ * . 4 * '•/ r**- 


Lastly, 'All ’Adil Shall was not whole-heartedly on the 
side of his allies. Although he had joined them in the holy war 
against the infidel king, they do not seem to have been quite 
certain of his attitude. They even feared that he might risk an 
open breach with them on behalf of Ramaraja. It was this fear 
that prompted them to put to death Ramaraja as soon as he fell 
into their hands. The Ahmadnagar historian, Sayyid ’All states 
that ’All ’Adil Shah hastened to the camp of Husain Nizam 
Shah as soon as he heard of Ramaraja’s capture, ‘with the 
design of securing the release of the accursed infidel.’ ‘ Husain 
Nizam Shah being aware that ’All ’Adil Shah would press for 
the Raya’s release, which it would be a folly to grant, and that 
a refusal to grant it, would only lead to strife between the allies, 
and to the rupture of the alliance, commanded that Ramaraja 
should be put to death before the arrival of ’All ’Adil Shah.* 
Zablrl corroborates Sayyid ’All’s statement. He asserts that 
when Hakim QasimBeg saw that his master, Husain Nizam Shah, 
showed an inclination to waste time in taunting Ramaraja who 
fell into his hands, he urged that the infidel should be put to 
death immediately. “ Send him,” said the Beg, “ immediately to 
the gallows of retribution (kill him), otherwise the ’Adil Shah 
who claims to be his son, will cause great disturbances, and will 
snatch Ram Raj from your hands.”t it is evident from this that 
the allies of ’All Adil Shah still regarded him with suspicion. 
He was still believed to be a friend of Ramaraja at heart and 
was expected to throw his allies overboard for the sake of the 
infidel. The attitude ascribed to ’All ’Adil Shah by these 
writers is more in agreement with the account of the Ramarajana 
Bakhair and the Keladinrpavijayam than the narratives of theMuhammadan chroniclers. Therefore, the evidence of these two 
works concerning his attitude deserves careful examination. 


The duration of the tear: — Judging - from the Muslim accounts 
the Muhammadan kings of the Deccan seem to have overcome 
Ramaraja with comparative ease. The Muhammadan armies 
which assembled at Bijapur or Sholapur advanced to the banks 
of the Krsna, through Talikota, where they were opposed by 
Ramaraja. A fierce engagement took place which decided the fate 
of the mighty Hindu empire within a few hours. The fighting com- 
menced on the morning of 26th December, A.D. 1564* and raged 
for some time in the afternoon, when Ramaraja fell into the hands 
of the enemy, and the Hindus took to flight.f The battle is said 
to have 1 lasted but a while, not the space of four hours Consi- 
dering the extent, resources and the man-power of the empire, 
and the huge host which Ramaraja gathered to give battle to the 
Muhammadans, the ease with which the Hindu army is said to 
have been overthrown appears to be nothing short of a miracle. 
“ The revenues of Ram Raj ”, says Ferishta, “ collected from 
sixty seaports and numerous flourishing cities and districts, 
amounted to an immense sum; which enabled him to maintain 
a force, against which no single king of the Mussalmans could 
hope to contend with the smallest prospect of success. ”§ To 
meet the confederate Muslim armies, Ramaraja is said to have 
summoned “all his dependents and rajas from the banks of the 
Krishna as far as the island of Ceylon/ 7 According to the 
Anonymous Historian, he “ brought together a force consisting 
of one hundred thousand horse, and three hundred thousand 
infantry .”f Nizam -ud-Dln Ahmad partly corroborates this : 
Ramaraja is said to have, massed 1 ,00,^00 horse, 2,000 elephants 
to oppose the Muslims.!! Sayyid ’All states that Tirumala and 
Venkatadri alone had under them 32,000 horse, 2,000 elephants, 
3,00,000 infantry.® Could this mighty host of seasoned warriors, 


t IKd, pp. 126-130. 

§ Briggs: Fetiskta iii, pp. 123-4. 

| T akaqUt-i-Akhari (Bib. Ind. No. 223), 


•Brtggs; Ferhhta 111, pp. 126-27. 
t Pur chat, pp. 92-93. 

1 Bid, App., pp. 413-14. : / 

$ LA, 1., p. 144. 


280 





who were accustomed to contend successfully against the 
Mussalmans, have been annihilated— annihilated so completely 
as to leave no one to defend the Hindu capital-within less than 
four hours ? Considering the conditions of warfare in India in 
the sixteenth century, this must have been physically impossible. 

'The Hindu records, which also mention the death of 
Ramaraja and the annihilation of the Vijayanagara army, state 
that these events happened at the end of a war whicn lasted for 
a few months. The Kciifiyat of Gutti declares that the war- 
extended over a period of six months (184). The Keladinypa- 
vijayam, although it does not specify the duration of the war, 
alludes to an engagement in which the Qutb Shah and the Nizam 
Shah were defeated by Ramaraja before he was betrayed 
by the , Adil Shah and asserts that the great hattle in which 
Ramaraja lost his life took place in the month of Magha of the 
year Raktaksi (S. S. 1486) i.e. January ATX 1565. If the war- 
had actually lasted for six months as stated in the Kaifiyat^oj 
Gutti, it must have commenced in July, A.D. 1564. The 
Ramorajana Rnkhair which purports to describe all the events 
connected with this war gives more information about, its dura- 
tion. Ramaraja, according to this work, informed the nobles who 
assembled in his durbar on the day of Vijaya-dasami presumably 
of the year Raktaksi S.S. 1486 (15 Sept, A.D. 1564) that the four 
Muhammadan rulers of the Deccan, having- united lheir forces 
together, were jointly marching upon him. He commanded 
them to mobilise their troops and join him so that they might 
oppose the invaders. It is not known how long the nobles busied 
themselves in gathering together their levies; nor is it possible to 
discover the exact time of the departure of Ramaraja with his 
army to the front. It is said, however, that he was captured 
by the Muhammadans and suffered death at their hands on 
Monday, Vaisakha ba 8, Sravana of the year Raktaksi. The 
astronomical details mentioned in the Bakhair do not agree with 
Raktaksi, but they work out correctly for Krodhana. If that 
were the real date of Ramaraja’s death, he must have died on 

“ * defeat overtook Ramaraja, 



he is said to have been engaged in a fierce contest of thirty- 
three days broken only by an interval of short duration. The 
preliminary engagement lasted continuously for three days; it 
was followed by an interval when both parties attempted to 
draw the ’S.dil Shah to their side. Next came a battle of twenty- 
seven days which terminated indecisively; then ensued another 
battle of three days' duration, and this was succeeded by the 
treachery of the 'Adil Shah and the death of Ramaraja. Thus, 
according to the Bamardjana Bahhair , the battle between the 
Mussalmans and Ramaraja was long drawn out extending over 
a period of more than a month's duration. The war may be 
considered to have commenced with the mobilisation of troops on 
both the sides. And it is not improbable that they must have 
taken a few months for assembling together, and marching to 
the battle-field. 

The evidence of the Hindu records, it must, however, be 
pointed out, is not quite consistent concerning the date of Rama- 
raja's death. While the Keladinrpavijayam places his death in 
Magha. ba, of Raktaksi, 6. S. 1487 (Jan.— Feb. A. D. 1565), the 
Bahhair '°ives a later date.* Notwithstanding inconsistencies 





* Brifjtt Ftriihta, iii, p. 247. 
t LA. l., p. 144. § Aravi4u Dynasty, p. SOL 


other; for the evidence on the subject is conflicting. Ferishta 
reckons that the Hindu army consisted of 70,000 cavalry, 90,000 
infantry ‘ chiefly matchlock -men, besides archers and 
artillery-men/* The Anonymous Historian states that 
Ramaraja ‘ brought together a force consisting of one hundred 
thousand horse, and three hundred thousand infantry ', to 
oppose the Mussalmans.f Sayyid 'All asserts that Ramaraja's 
brothers Venkatadri and Tirumala had each under him 20,000 
horse, 1,000 elephants and 1,00,000 foot, and 12,000 horse, 1,000 
elephants, 20,000 foot respectively, besides the great host which 
marched under him . % The Portuguese writers Couto and Faria y 
Sousa, while agreeing with Ferishta as to the number of horse, 
enhance the strength of the infantry to six hundred thousand.§ 
And the Ramarajana BaJchair gives even higher figures. The 
Vijayanagara army is said to have comprised 12,39,430 
foot, 65,48,321 horse, 18,768 elephants 1,874,429 camels, 
besides a large host of other classes of fighting men, and camp 
followers. 


Curiously enough, the Muhammadan historians, who 
pretend to give meticulously accurate figures about the strength 
of the Hindu army, have nothing to say about the Muhammadan 
armies. Sayyid 'AH, who is the only writer to allude to the 
subject, vaguely asserts that 'All 'Xdil Shah and Ibrahim Qutb 
Shah * collected very large armies/ and that Husain Nizam 
Shah joined them with a * numerous ' army.f The Ramarajana 
Bakhdir, from which much information might be expected, gives 
an imperfect idea of the strength of the Muslim army. According 
to this work, Akbar Jalal-ud-Dln, who is said to have participated 
in this war, had under him 2,50,00,000 foot soldiers, besides 6,000 
infantry guarding tents and luggage, 12,000 hottala horse, 
1,00,000 elephants, 2,00,000 camels besides artillery and camp 
followers. Nizam Shah, and 'All 'Xdil Shah are said to have 
marched with armies equally numerous. 


Most of these figures are quite worthless to the modern 
historian. All that can be asserted is that large hosts were 
involved on either side in this historic battle. 

The Battle : — The students of Vijayanagara history have 
long been familiar with the Muslim accounts of the battle of 
Talikota or Raksasi-Tangadi. These accounts cannot be fully 
trusted, as they come from the pen of Ramaraja's enemies. The 
Hindu version of the battle which might be helpful in verifying 
their truth is not available. The Ramarajana Bakhair, which 
pretends to be the report of the envoy of a nameless prince at 
the court of Ramaraja, gives, no doubt, a graphic description of 
the battle; but as the envoy frequently betrays his ignorance 
of well-known facts, his evidence cannot be accepted without 
reservation. In the first place, he makes the Mughal emperor, 
Jalal-ud-Dln Akbar, the ruler of the petty town of Jhalna in 
Deccan and asserts that he joined the Muhammadan rulers of 
the Deccan to wage war upon Ramaraja. Although Akbar's 
participation in the battle of Raksasi-Tangadi is not, as 
already pointed out, impossible from a chronological point of 
view, it is hard to believe that it was a fact, on account of the 
absolute want of evidence. Secondly, the envoy does not 
seem to have been aware of the existence of Ramaraja 5 * 
brothers, Tirumala and Venkatadri, or of the part they 
played in the battle of Raksasi-Tangadi. Lastly, he introduces 
a number of Ramaraja’s officers who are otherwise unknown 
to history. Therefore, the evidence of RfimarUjam Bakhair 
cannot be accepted, unless it is corroborated by records of a 
more trustworthy character J Nevertheless, the narrative of 
the Bakhair is briefly stated here, and it may be taken 
for what it is worth. The Bakhair begins to narrate 
the events of the battle with a description of the 
disposition of the belligerent forces. The camp of the 
Vijayanagara army is said to have extended for eighty miles 
from the Tungabhadra to the Krsna. Ramaraja stationed 
himself in the centre between the villages of Tavarageri and 
Ky^ageri (Kannageri ?). Nigam Shah Bhairy crossed th* 



— 


river Bhimarathi and pitched his tents, outside the village of 
Sultanpur alias Firozabad.* Akbar Jalal-ud-Din lay encamped 
outside the fort of Talikota. Qujb Shah took up his position 
between Raieur and Mudgal in Telingana. And Tmad-ul- 
Mulk of Yarhad together with ’All ’Adil Shah halted at the 
fort of Jamalghar.f 

The positions which the Hindu and the Muhammadan 
armies are said to have occupied on the eve of the battle of 
Raksasi-Tangadi may be diagramatically represented, as 


.Taukqt* 




PlMCHUR 




A cm*. 

B iBRAM'M Q u r.e Sh * m 

o : Hu^MN . SHAM 

n 'All shAh 

aw* 1 mad -ul- 

"■§ hn&m 


,<hmt 


:A;<&vRi 


it from the above sketch that the Muhammadan 
nd both the banks of the Krsna ; the forces 
hah were on the .right bank of the river and 
lank of the Vijayanagara army. The armies 
tuhammadan rulers were all ranged on the 


* The Tillage of Sultanpur stands on the northern bank of the Kjsna 4 miles south- 
t of N*latva$ in the Bijapiir district near 92° 20' latitude. 

+ JsmSlghar is probably identical with Jamalpfir. v If this identification is admitted, 
lalghar stands on the northarn bank of the Kfsni, a little below its junction with ths 

a. It is at a diitanc* of about 16 milt* in ths south south-tint of TSJikBja, 

A-* ■ ' I ‘ : : : : ‘A : ■ . • ' - ■ : . ' 



m 


northern bank. Of the five Muhammadan rulers who massed 
their troops in this region, ’All’Idil Shah did not join the fight, 
until the Qutb Shah and the Nizam Shah were vanquished by 
Ramaraja ; ’Imad-ul-Mulk withdrew from the field even at 
the outset;* and Akbar Jalal-ud-Dln played but a shadowy 
part in the battle.f The brunt of the battle fell upon the 
forces of the Qutb Shah and the Nizam Shah who seem to 
have been more closely bound to each other than to the other 
members of the confederacy. 


\Fighting appears to have commenced with the plundering 
incursion of large bands of Muslim raiders into Vijayanagara 
territory . ) “ Crowds of foot soldiers, Pindaris, arrow-makers 
together with the Kallar-sepoys belonging to the Muslim armies, 
having crossed the Krsna began to plunder the territory of 
Rajabhuvara.J They slew some of his subjects and carried 
away others as prisoners. The people of these regions began 
to migrate to the villages, towns, forts, and cities all over 

Karnataka’’. 

■ ■ :* ; . * : 

Ramaraja then posted 10,000 horse and 20,000 foot to 
guard the bazaar, where grain was sold to the army; and 
turning towards his ministers he commanded that they should 
station themselves with their contingents at Raksasi-Tangadi. 
He caused guns of different sizes, and several varieties of 
rockets and bombs such as rama-bana, kumara-bam, candi-hana 
&e. to be distributed among the troops. Having given them 
presents of costly jewels and dresses, and definite instructions 
about the position which each officer and contingent of the 
army should take on the battle-field, he dismissed them. The 


j ' ' 


* lt interesting to note that the Muhammdan historians do not mention the name , 
of ? Imad«ul-MuIk in this connection* Zabiri states explicitly that ’Imad-ul-Mulk did not 
join the confederates on account of his hatred of ftusain Nizam Shah. 

•f The inclusion of the name of Akbar among the confederates is, as pointed out 
elsewhere, due to the blunder probably of the redactor. It is not unlikely that the 
original account contained the name of ’AH Band in the place of Akbar. 

^3*r:aame'.by‘ Wfcifch" KSmaxSja is frequently mentioned in the 

BMrnr* 


1:1 


286 



army then moved forward and arrayed itself in battle order 
near Raksasi-Tangadi. 

The confederate Sultans, on hearing of the movement of 
Ramaraja’s army, ordered their forces also to Raksasi-Tangadi. 
On reaching the place, Nizam Shah and Ibrahim Qutb Shah 
desired to combine their forces 5 and Tmad-ul-Mulk, for some 
unknown reason, withdrew from the field. The withdrawal of 
’Imad-ul-Mulk heartened the Yijayanagara army. They 
marched forward and attacked the Muslim forces boldly, 
thereby starting a fierce fight which raged violently for three 
days without interruption. Several people were either wounded 
or killed on both the sides. The Nizam Shah and the Qutb 
Shah seem to have won some advantage over the Hindu army, 
for they are said to have turned back from the battle gladly, 
believing that god had favoured them on account of the fruit 
of their karma. 

Ramaraja then summoned some of his ministers, senior 
officers and captains to his presence and having distributed 
presents among them, commanded them to be ready with their 
men in the places assigned to them in the battle-field ; but then 
they should not proceed to fight until his arrival. Next, he 
despatched an envoy with costly gifts to the camp of ’All ’Adil 
Shah to remonstrate against his union with the Nizam Shah 
and the Qutb Shah, The ’Adil Shah received the envoy courte- 
ously, and protested his loyalty to Ramaraja, declaring that 
although he was compelled to join the confederates, he still 
remained Ramaraja’s friend. He then dismissed the envoy, 
having bestowed upon him the customary presents which were 
given to the representatives of foreign rulers on such occasions. 
At the same time, he also sent some costly gifts to Ramaraja 
with one of his own officers. 

The exchange of secret embassies between Ramaraja and 
’All ’Adil Shah naturally roused the indignation of the other 
kings. Therefore, they sent messengers to the 
lemanding an explanation of his intercourse 


287 


with the enemy. The ’Adil Shah who was much alarmed at 
the hostile character of the message, sent them a conciliatory 
reply which greatly pleased them. 

In the meantime, Ramaraja being reassured by the ’Adil 
Shah’s message, proceeded to make arrangements to deal with 
the other members of the confederacy. He moved his camp to 
the plain outside the villages of Raksasi and Tangadi, where he 
set up the rana-ghanta and rana-stambha, and stationed himself 
in their neighbourhood. The Vijayanagara army which was 
massed into one large host surrounded him. Then they were 
engaged in a battle of twenty-seven days’ duration with Akbar 
Jalal-ud-Dln who was encamped at Talikota. The fighting 
probably during the last nine hours of the battle appears to 
have been specially severe. Casualties were very heavy on 
both the sides. At this juncture, the Nizam Shah and the 
Qujtb Shah joined Akbar Jalal-ud-Dln with their forces. 

The officers, who were eagerly watching the movements of 
the Muhammadan troops, approached Ramaraja with a 
request to post a contingent of 12,000 horse and 20,000 foot 
under a capable commander to watch the movements of ’All 
’Xdil Shah and Tmad-ul-Mulk so that they might proceed 
bravely against the enemy without fear of an attack from 
the rear. Ramaraja posted the necessary troops, in compliance 
with this request, in order to protect his army from any possible 
attack in the rear. Then he distributed presents among 
his officers and despatched them to their respective places. 

The battle which then commenced raged fiercely. Akbar 
Jalal-ud-Dln having fought for a while retreated ; the Nizam 
Shah and the Qujtb Shah, however, offered determined resist- 
ance; but they could not maintain their own against the fierce 
onslaught of Vijayanagara troops. They were constrained to 
withdraw from the field. The Hindus who were naturally delight- 
ed to see the enemy retreat set fire to innumerable rockets and 
bombs, thereby spreading panic and death among the retreating 
Muslim ranks. The Nizam Shah and the Qujb Shah, however. 


I 


1 I 


| I 





rallied their troops, and vioit 
army. Bamaraja was consic 
nacious opposition of the en< 
and gave them fresh instate 
hack of an elephant,* and p 
troops advanced upon the ei 
artillery and other fire-arms 
standing the frightful carnage pr 
rockets &c. the Mussalmans 
and nine hours 
Nizam Shah and the Qutb 
halted at a 

There was great rejoicing 
■won a battle which was very 
returned to their camp andgave 
Nizam 
gers 

They 


my. He summoned his officers 
Lons ; he then mounted on the 
icing himself at the head of his 
emy and a furious discharge of 
heralded his attack. Notwith* 
produced by the firing of guns, 
held their ground for three days 
when at last they gave way and fled. The 
Shah retreated from the field and 

distance of twenty miles. 

in the Vijayanagara army *, they 
obstinately contested. I hey 
themselves up to feasting. The 
Shah and the Qutb Shah, in the meantime, sent messen- 
to the 'Sdil Shah bitterly reproaching him with treachery. 

• charged him with disloyalty to the Mussalmans, and 
threatened to visit him with vengeance at a suitable tae. By 
threats persuasion, and cajolery, they won over the Mil Shah 
to their side and he gave a solemn undertaking to set right the 

mischief done by his neutrality. 

Bamaraja, however, was too strong to be attacked openly,* 
If the Muhammadans were desirous of getting the better of 
Mm it was necessary to have recourse to some stratagenn 
After their recent defeat at his hands, the Nizam Shah an 
(he Qutb Shah were naturally ejected to sue for peace They 
Si, ^vantage of this, and pretended to petition him for 
peace They promised “the restitution of the districts which 
theyhad taken from him on the march."* He was not expected 

— — ~ * fa « mounted a singkasun ", (Briggs: 



289 



* PutthMX, *p. 93-3. 


to accept this condition. As the victor of the battle 
he would naturally demand more. As expected by his enemies 
Ramaraja rejected these terms. Probably there was also some 
further show of negotiations. Ramaraja was completely 
taken in. “ They deliberately spread the rumour/’ declares 
the Keladinrpavijayam, '« that they were desirous of concluding 
peace ; they inspired confidence in the mind of the Raya that 
they wanted peace and made him forget his dangei ( 167 ). At 
the same time, they seem to have got into touch with the Mussul- 
man officers in Ramaraja’s service and tampered with their 
loyalty. Ramaraja who fully believed that the Nizam Shah 
and the Qtitb Shah were suing for peace, neglected to take the 
necessary precautions to safeguard his army and camp. When 
the allies found that their plan was working well, they 
concerted measures to deliver an attack. All 5.dil Shah 
joined the other Muslim rulers and made a treacherous 
attack upon Ramaraja ; though utterly unprepared to meet 
the attack, he boldly faced the enemy. “ Though Rama- 
rajayya was a crowned monarch ”, declares the chronicle of 
Matli Chiefs composed about A.D. 1680 , “ he faced the three 
Padshahs on the battle-field ; and keeping in view the conduct 
proper to a ksatriya, he fought without turning his back upon 
his enemies.” ( 238 ). Though he was taken by surprise, he fought 
so vigorously that victory appeared to favour him ; however, 
the tide of victory was turned by the occurrence of two 
incidents which changed the fortunes of the day. In the first 
place, two prominent Muhammadan nobles who were in 
Ramaraja’s service and had under their command about 1 , 50,000 
men deserted their master and went over to the side oiN&eir 
co-religionists : “ The two traitorous Captains, in the chiefest 
of the fight, with their companies turned their faces against 
their king and made such disorder in his Army.” * Secondly, in 
the midst of the confusion caused by the desertion of Muslim 
nobles, a chance shot from one of the guns of Husain Nizam 





shah, carried off Ramaraja’ s head * The Hindu ar “^ 
rtely gave up fighting. In great panic they attempted to flee, 
mt they were surrounded and cut down to pieces. The 
laifiyatl unanimously . declare that the Muhammadans 
lestroyed Ramaraja with all his army _ Phis is confirmed by 
the evidence of the Muhammadan historians. The Anonymous 
ffistorSn computes the number of the Hindu army which 
perished with Ramaraja to be 1,00, 000;t and Fenshta agrees 
^ith him.J Whatever might have been the actual number of 
the slain, the Hindu army was so completely wiped out that 
there were no men left to defend the capital. 

» en *h° took a h n 8 d ztb&Tagree with him, though they differ 
.„d ft.» F.ri.ht. .bo.. Tta W** . 

of the Muhammadan historians mentioned above, L „ ... h r 

£headifg to ’All 'Xdil Shah and Ibrihlm Qutb Shah. The JB^rttfaua 

. x »Tjm ch^v, oiiot Rlmaraia's head by means of a cannon, and sent his body 

.arixeat Muhammadan historian who describes the battle of Rak ? asx-Tanga4x, cleary 
.tat., that RamarSia’a death was du. to an unexpected happening. 


\G?} * 


t mi iii, V‘ 130- 



CHAPTER.^ XXII. 

LAST PHASE OF SADldlVA’S REIGN, 


The death of Ramaraja and the annihilation of the army 
in the battle of Raksasi-Tangadi stupefied the people of 
Vijayanagara. The city and the empire were left without an 
army to defend them or a leader to gather forces for reorganiz- 
ing defence. A vague sense of fear seems to have taken 
possession of the minds of the people, and their morale was 
completely broken. The few leaders that survived the disaster 
lost confidence in themselves, and abandoned the capital to the 
tender mercies of the Muhammadans and the Hindu marauders, 
who came in their wake, so that they might not run the risk 
of losing their precious lives. Tirumala, the only surviving 
brother of Ramaraja, who might have done something to 
restore confidence in the minds of the people and gather fresh 
forces for the protection of the capital, displayed greater zeal 
in carrying away the hoarded wealth of the royal family to 
a place of safety than in preparing the city to withstand the 
impending Mussulman attack. He left the city with the wives 
and children of himself and his brothers,* taking with him 
wealth consisting of * gold, diamonds and precious stones, 
coins of the Empire and other things of this kind, valued at 
more than a hundred millions sterling 7 , loaded on the backs 



people, abducted women and enslaved the men. The poet 
Rudra refers to the spoliation of Vijayanagara by the Muham- 
madans, in his Niranku§opakhyanam* The sack of the city is fre- 
quently alluded to in the kaifiyats. The Kaifiyat of Pmpagiri , 
for instance, states that the Muhammadans plundered the 
royal palaces and temples (185-n) ; the Kaifiyat of the Town 
of Cuddapah declares that they set fire to the city, palaces and 
temples and plundered the country (185-p.). The Kalajndna 
attributed to the Lingayat Saint, Emmeya Basava, alludes to 
the burning of the palaces of Krsnaraya and Acyuta.f During 
the six months, when the Muhammadans halted at Vijaya- 
nagara, they ravaged the neighbourhood most systematically. 
Not one village in the whole of Rayala-shna escaped the 
Muhammadan scourge. People fled in panic from their homes 
and took refuge in hills and jungles, or migrated to remote 
places. When, at last, the Muhammadans departed from 
Vijayanagara, they left the city and its neighbourhood a vast 
heap of smouldering ruins. No houses escaped fire ; no 
temples remained undestroyed ; and no idols stood with all 


Though Vijayanagara was sacked and plundered it was 
not destroyed. After the departure of the Mussalmans, most 
of the inhabitants returned. But it ceased to be the seat of 
the government, and fell gradually into decay. The cause which 
contributed to the ruin of the city is said to be its desertion 
by the inhabitants, owing to the fear of Mussalman attacks . % 
This cannot be true; for, it retained some of its former 
grandeur and remained under its Hindu masters almost up to 
the extinction of the power of the Rayas. Therefore, the city 
could not have been abandoned by the people, on account of 
the fear engendered by the Mussalman attacks. 5 

* 2 : 42 ‘TEJr ^ r '^*S^ S50 2,* S ^ 5 °® 

t sJjatfortrtJitdtf s5js<a{jfc. soodatjea aooijo 2, was 

tftajairiBsck. oto o&d 

eaa, & c . Mad. G. 0. Mss. Libr . 19-4-21. 


Map* 


293 


I 

1 


The real cause of the decay of the city was due to the 
abandonment of the city by the government. The prosperity 
of Vijayanagava was dependent upon its position as the 
metropolis of a great empire. When the imperial government 
shifted their headquarters from the city, the source of its 
prosperity ran dry 5 and consequently, it fell into decay. The 
cause of the change of their headquarters by the government 
was not also the fear of Muhammadan invasions ; for, in the 
first place, Tirumala, who assumed the regency of the king- 
dom after his brother’s death, returned to Vijayanagara as 
soon as the Muhammadans had departed, and attempted to 
revive its prosperity by inviting foreign merchants to come 
back to the city and resume their old mercantile relations ;* 
but he does not appear to have stayed there long ; for, accord- 
ing to the Muslim historians, Tirumala was already ruling 
from Penugoiida, when he was called on to join the alliance 


of the Sultans of Alimadnagar and Grolkonda in A.D. 1566.f 
Therefore, he appears to have abandoned Vijayanagara a few 
months after his return to it in A.D. 1B66. As these was no fear 
of Muhammadan invasion at that time, his desertion of the 
capital must have been due to some other reason. He seems 
to have changed his capital in order to avoid family dissen- 
sions. It may be remembered in this connection that Rama- 
raja was ruling the kingdom as a co-regent of Sadasiva in the 
years preceding the battle of Raksasi-Tangadi and that 
Tirumala was closely associated with him in the administration 
of the kingdom. On Ramaraja’s death at Raksasi-Tangadi, 
Tirumala became the regent and the sole guardian of the 
emperor Sadasiva and manifested a desire to assume the royal 
titles and found a dynasty. Ramaraja, however, did not die 
without issue ; he had several grown up sons who held places 
of responsibility under his government. Of these, Krsn.apa 
and Pedda Tirumala, his offspring by Tirumalamba, the 
daughter of Krsnadevaraya, deserve special mention in this 
context. Kysmapa appears to have died with his father at 


* Purskas x , p. 94. 

iii, App*» P* 418 » p. 205. 


294 



iii, pp. 131, 251. 


Raksasi-Tangadi 5 but Peda Timm ala, or Timma, as be was 
called • by bis contemporaries, naturally desired to succeed bis 
father;* but be was prevented from attaining bis object by his 
uncle •Timm ala, who by his age, long association with the 
Raya, and experience in the administration of the empire, 
acquired great influence in the country. But as a grandson 
of the emperor Krsnadevaraya, Peda Tirumala’s claim to be 
Sadasiva's co-regent was uncontestably superior to that of his 
uncle. And very probably he had on his side the sympathy 
and support of the people of Vijayanagara. T. irumala must 
have found the atmosphere of the capital uncongenial to 
the advancement of his plans. Therefore, he left Vijayanagara 
and retired to Penugoxida, where he could prosecute his 
designs unhampered. As Tirumala ultimately succeeded in 
seizing the throne with the help of the nobles such as Immadi 
Jagadeva Rao, (205) Penugonda became the capital of the 
empire ; and consequently Vijayanagara, having lost its im- 
portance, fell into ruins in course of time. 

The period of anarchy .-—The interval between the battle 
of Raksasi-Tangadi and the accession of Tirumala to the throne 
at Penugonda is invariably described as a period of anarchy 
in the kaifiyats. During these six years (191), the empire 
passed through the most critical period of its existence; 
internal dissensions and petty warfare rent its unity; and foreign 
invasions battered it from outside. Although Tirumala took 
the place of Ramaraja as the guardian of the empire, he found 
it hard to maintain his position. Ramaraja’s evil policy, which 
resulted in the destruction of the civil service, and the exalta- 
tion of his relations and dependents, bore bitter fruit ; most of 
his relations and dependents who held estates under govern- 
ment showed no inclination to obey its behests. They were, 
on the contrary, busy maturing plans of self-aggrandisement. 
The hostility of Peda Tirumala to Ms uncle has already been 
. noticed. He not only defied him but was actually seeking help 
frbai abroad to subvert his authority ,f Another of his relations 

' . f Mi,* 131, 


295 



Koneti Kondraju who was the commandant of the fort of 
SAavani declared his independence (190-a)*. Velapa Ray, one 
of Ramaraja’s principal dependents who held the fief of Banka- 
pur, asserted his independence after the death of his master and 
reduced the neighbouring nayaks to subjection. f The other 
chiefs in the neighbourhood followed their example. The 
unsettled condition of the country favoured the growth of 
crime ; and people suffered considerably at the hands of dacoits 
and palaigars. “ As there was no ruler for six years ”, declares 
one record, “ the people of the village fled in all directions, 
unable to endure the tyranny of the palaigars “ Anarchy 
prevailed in the country,” says another, “ up to S. S. 1492, 
Pramoduta ; and the people were considerably harassed by 
thieves and the uncertainty caused by unsettled govern- 
ment.'^ (190). - 

This was the condition of the Telugu districts of the em- 
pire ; and the state of the Canarese districts could not have been 
different. The southern part of the empire was, no doubt, 
beyond the reach of the Mussalman invaders ; but it was not, 
however, left undisturbed. The nayaks who held fiefs disturb- 
ed the peace of the country. They began to fight with one 
another for the purpose of self-aggrandisement. In the extreme 
south of the empire, Krsnappa, the son of Vilvanatha Nay aka, 
who held the Tiruvadi-deia in amaram began to subdue the 
neighbouring chiefs ; he was so successful in his task that he 
established himself within a short time at Madura and laid claim 
to dominion over the whole country south of the Kaverl. 
Similarly, Acyutappa Nay aka who was enjoying the amaram of 
a few slmas in the Tanjore district usurped the authority over 
the Coja country; and Krsnappa, the commandant of Gingee, 
seized a large part of Tojidaimandalam. Tirumala was helpless 
against all these treasonous activities. To arrest the progress 
of disintegration, he required an army. As the army was 
completely destroyed at Rak§asi-Tangadi, and as the coffers of 

•Briggs \.Feri*hta> p. 134 ; L.R. 10, p. 37. + Briggs: Perishtai ii, p. 136. 

t|£. X. 34, pp.y.63-64. §i.i. 11, p,299. 


296 




1111 i 


m ts 
m I 'M 






the state were exhausted, and the kingdom was thoroughly- 
plundered, he was without any military force to back up his 
authority. But Tirumala did not lose heart; to save the 
empire from dissolution he set to work with a stern determina- 
tion. He resolved to equip himself with an army, and was 
not very particular about the means he adopted in realising his 
object. He invited horse dealers from Goa and other places, 
promising good prices for the horses they might bring. When 
they came, he took possession of the horses and sent them 
away without paying the price.* He could not, as a matter of 
fact, afford to be very scrupulous about his methods, as he had 
no money to pay for the horses which he very badly needed. 

While Tirumala was still engaged in recuperating his 
strength, he was called upon to defend the kingdom from 
foreign invasion. Ramaraja's son Peda Tirumala entertained, 
as pointed out already, the ambition of succeeding his father 
as Sadasiva’s co-regent ; but was prevented from attaining his 
object by Tirumala. Therefore, he seems to have sought the 
help of ’All ’Adil Shah, to overcome the opposition of his 
uncle and to establish himself at Yijayanagara as the supreme 
lord of the empire. The "Idil Shah, who welcomed this 
opportunity, as it favoured the expansion of his dominions, 
“ moved with an army to Anagoondy, in order to place Timraj, 
the son of Ram raj, on the masnad of Penkonda and to depose 
Tirumala,” f who was hardly in a condition to defend 
himself. A contingent under Kasr (Khizr ?) Khan had pro- 
ceeded to Penugonda, and laid siege to the fort which was 
just then rebuilt. If the ‘Idil Khan expected to profit himself 
by the misfortunes that overtook the kingdom of Yijayanagara, 
he was soon undeceived, Bavaram Cennappa Nay aka, the 
commandant of the fort, who was an officer of exceptional 
ability, defeated him and put him to flight. J At the same time, 
Tirumala, who was trained in Ramaraja’s school of diplomacy , 
sent an ambassador to the court of Ahmadnagar to play upon 


* J’ttrchas x, p. 94. 

: S, I. f. vii, No. *63 ; 336 of 1901. 


t Briftf : Ftrishta iii, pp. 131, 361, 




Vu:- 


IP 


297 


the jealousy of the Nizam Shah and obtain relief from him. 
Khunja Sul.tana, who governed the kingdom on behalf of 
Murtasa Nizam Shah, “ unwilling to witness the aggrandise- 
ment of Beejapoor and acting by the advice of Moolla Inayut 
Oolla, took her son with her, and marched at the head of an 
army to Beejapoor.” The Nizam Shah’s invasion of the Bijaptir 
kingdom produced the desired result. And “Ally Adil Shah 
was compelled to retreat expeditiously from Anagoondy ” * 

Tirumala managed in this manner to ward off ’Ali ’Adil 
Shah’s attack ; and by a favourable turn of events, he was able 
to carry the war into the enemy’s territories. For, the Nizam 
Shah and the Qutb Shah, who were embroiled in a war with 
the 'Adil Shah, invited Tirumala to join them against him. In 
response to this invitation, he sent one of his sons at the head 
of ten thousand troops.f Tirumala gained nothing by this 
alliance; instead he brought upon himself another attack of the 
’Adil Shah, who, having squared up his differences with the 
Sultans of Ahmadnagar and Grolkonda, turned his attention to 
Tirumala in order to punish him for making common cause 
with his enemies. He marched in A.D. 1568 with an army 
against the fort of Adoni, an important stronghold on the bank 
of the Tungabhadra, which barred the advance of Muslim 
armies to the south, and fought several battles with its chief, 
Koneti Kondamaraju, and succeeded ultimately in forcing him 
to take sheiter within his fortress, which he closely invested.^ 
At the same time, he despatched an army under Mali Khan 
against Penugonda with the object probably of preventing any 
possible help reaching him from that place. On arriving at 
Penugonda, Mali Khan laid siege to the fort, but was defeated 
by Savaram Cennappa and driven away.§ Though Penugonda 
was freed from the Muhammadan peril, Adoni could not get 
rid of it, as its chief could not singly maintain his own against 
the powerful armies of the Sultan of Bijapur (190-m). 

Brigg’s x -Fetishta ill, p* , + /. A, L, p. . ■ 

$ Briggs : Firisht* .III, p. 134* § S* I* /« vii, Nos. 463, 336 of 1901. 

i — 38 

m " ■ ■■■■ - - 


298 



Notwithstanding the loss of outlying places like Adoni, 
Tirumala managed to hold the bulk of the empire together. The 
circumstances which enabled him to overcome the obstacles 
besetting his path, and the means which he adopted in 
accomplishing his object are little known. He must have been 
supported by many powerful nayaks who still remained loyal to 
the empire. Savaram Cennappa rendered, as already noticed, 
much help to Tirumala by successfully defending his 
new capital from successive Mussalman attacks; Immadi 
Jagadeva Rao, who claims to have crowned not only Ramaraja 
but also Tirumala as well as his sons, (205) must have played an 
important part in establishing his power. Moreover, Tirumala 
won over to his side some of the most powerful nayaks such as 
those of Madura, Tanjore, and Gringee by tacitly approving of 
their usurpations. In order to keep the nayaks under control, 
he divided the empire into three sub-divisions roughly corres- 
ponding to the three main linguistic areas of which it was 
composed, and entrusted the government of each of them to 
one of his three sons. According to this arrangement, his 
eldest son, ^rlranga became the ruler of the Telugu area with 
Penugonda as his headquarters; Rama, his second son, began 
to rule the Canarese districts from ^rlrangapattanam, and 
Venkatapati, the youngest, assumed the governorship of the 
Tamil country, and carried on its administration from Candra- 
giri in the Ghittoor district. Having successfully accomplished 
the task of rejuvenating the empire, Tirumala assumed the 
well-earned title of 1 the reviver of the decadent Karnataka 
empire’,* and had himself formally crowned in A.D. 1570 as the 
emperor of Penugonda. His reign was very brief. Tirumala, 
who must have been a very old man at the time of his coro- 
nation, appears to have retired from public life in A.D. 1571 
after a short reign of eleven months, and was succeeded by his 
son, §rlranga I. 

During the interval of six years which lasted between the 
battle of Raksasi-Tangadi and his own coronation, Tirumala 


299 



succeeded in firmly establishing his authority over the empire. 
However, the empire over which he came to rule was different 
in character from the old empire. It lost its unitary character. 
The nayaks, who were absolutely dependent upon the royal 
will, acquired during the years of anarchy succeeding the battle 
of Raksasi-Tangadi a status of semi-independence. They 
managed to transform the temporary occupation of their 
amarams into permanent, hereditary estates. It was no longer 
possible for the Raya to resume the amaram of a nayak or 
confer it upon another without having resort to military force. 
The belief that the Raya was entitled to claim only a fixed sum 
of money as tribute over the amaram estates took deep root in 
the minds of the nayaks. Therefore, any attempt on his part to 
interfere with their estates met with strong opposition.* Thus, 
the empire of which the Raya was the absolute master was 
transformed into a conglomeration of semi-independent princi- 
palities without much cohesion to keep them together 
permanently. Nevertheless, the service which Tirumala 
rendered to the empire and the cause of Hindu independence 
cannot be easily overestimated. He saved the heritage of the 
race by prolonging the life of the empire for nearly another 
century, until Sivaji and the Mahratta nation came forward to 
take up the charge. 


Was Sada§iva assassinated ? — It is generally asserted that 
the emperor Sadasiva did not die a natural death but was 
assassinated in the prison where he was confined either by 
Tirumala himself or by one of his sons. Sewell expressed the 
opinion that “in 15 ; 8 (so it is said) Tirumala murdered hit 
sovereign, Sadasiva and seized the throne for himself.”* Heras 
is of opinion that Tirumala did not himself commit the crime, 
but he was “ an accomplice or abettor.”f These opinions are 
based upon Csesar Frederick’s observation that one of the sons 


# Forgotten Empire, p. 212. But he changed his opinion later. In his Historical 
Inscription* (p. 260), he states, t( the date of king Sadaiiva’s death is not known. Ho 
may have died in 1570, or may have survived in retirement 11 

f Aravidu Dynasty, p. 245. 



t 5 of 1919. 

1 Purehat. x, p. 97. 


of Tirumala “ had put to death the lawful king which he had in 
prison ” in A.D. 1567* Bat Frederick’s statement does not 
appear to be true; for, in the first place, the village kaijiyats 
unanimously declare that Sadasiva ruled for six years after the 
battle of Raksasi-Tangadi; and secondly the inscriptions clearly 
show that he was not only alive but continued to rule up to 
A.D. 1576 from Vijayanagara. An inscription of Sembedu in 
South Arcot district dated 9 May, A.D. 1575 asserts that Sadasiva 
was the ruling sovereign at that time.f An epigraph of Bhaga- 
tarahalli in the Kolar district of the Mysore State declares that 
Sadasiva was ruling seated on the Jewelled-Throne on 25 Jan., 
A.D. 15764 Another record dated A.D. 1576 corroborates the 
evidence of the inscriptions mentioned above.§ It is evident 
from this that Sadasiva could not have been murdered either 
by Tirumala or his son in A.D. 1568. As a matter of fact, 
Sadasiva, whether in prison or outside, was so docile that he 
never caused one moment’s anxiety to Tirumala. There was 
no reason why Tirumala should attempt to get rid of him by 
means of assassination. Therefore, the information which 
Caesar Frederick obtained regarding the assassination of Sada- 
giva must have been false. There is reason to believe that the 
nayaks who were desirous of repudiating Tirumala’s authority 
purposely spread a false rumour to create disaffection in the 
minds of people against him; for, according to Frederick £ the 
Barons and the Noblemen in that Kingdome would not acknow- 
ledge him to be their King ’, because ‘ the Sonne of this 
Temeragio had put to death the lawfull King.’f Since Sadasiva 
was alive until A.D. 1576, the rumour of his assassination must 
have been spread by interested people who stood to gain by 
discrediting Tirumala and his family. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


SRiRANGA I. 

The reign of Tirumala lasted, as mentioned already, for 
a short time. After a rule of eleven months or one year, he 
seems to have entrusted the administration of the kingdom to 
his eldest surviving son, Srlranga, and retired from public 
life •* for, although Srlranga was ruling from AD. 1572-78, f 
Tirumala also is mentioned as the ruling sovereign as late as 
A.D. 15784 The Jcaifiyats give more information which 
enable us to fix the date of Sriranga’s accession to the throne. 
The date S.S. 1190 Vibhava which is given as the year of his 
coronation in the Kaifiyat of Pedapasupula is clearly erroneous 
(200-b); for, the coronation of his father Tirumala was not 
celebrated until S.S. 1492. The Kaifiyat of Kondavldu cites 
an inscription engraved on one of the pillars of the temple 
of Grangadhara Ramesvara to show that Tirumala was ruling 
in &.S. 1494 Angirasa, Vaisakha, £u. 12, (24 April, AD. 1572) 

(197); it asserts further that his rule came to an end during 
that year. The Vijayamgara Samrdjyamu states that 
Srlranga 1 died in Parthiva (A.D. 1585-86), having completed 
a reign of fourteen years (19). This gives AD. 1571-72 as 
the first year of Sriranga’s reign. The Virappaya Kalajnana 
declares that Srlranga I commenced to rule the kingdom on ba. 
15, Vaisakha of Angirasa (S.S. 1494), i.e. May 11, A.D., 1572(16). 
This is not unlikely ; for in an epigraph of ^rlperumbudur 
dated 9th July, AD. 1572, Venkatapati, who was governing the 
Tamil country from Candragiri, acknowledges his brother, 
Srlranga, as his sovereign.! It is obvious that his accession 
took place some time between 24th April and 9th July of the 
year AD. 1572. It is evident that a few months after his 

• Haras doa* not baliaya that Tirumala retired from tha government. "Icanaot," 
tar* h»> “ support tbit atatament with any contemporary authority/' Aruvicfn 
Dynasty, p. 360. 

1 185 of 1933. No. 89. 


§ MS of 1931 


302 



coronation Tirumala entrusted tne administration ot the 
empire to Sriranga and retired from public life. 

Sriranga, who had thus taken charge of the kingdom, had 
an arduous task to perform. The country had not yet 
recovered from the frightful shock of the battle of Raksasi- 
Tangadi. The villages were still desolate ; the fields remained 
uncultivated ; and the worship in the temples was not restored. 
To aggravate the situation the Muhammadans invaded the 
country frequently; and the palaigars and petty chiefs not 
only defied the authority of the imperial government but began 
to wasre war upon one another. 


Two Mussalman invasions, which resulted in the permanent 
loss of territory to the empire, took place during the reign of 
Sriranga I. The earlier of these invasions came in A.D. 1576. 
’ Ali ’ Jidil Shah, the Sul.tan of Bijapur, assembled a large army 
at Adoni ; and he marched at the head of the army, accom- 
panied by the traitorous Hande Chief Timma Nayaka to 
Penugonda with the object of seizing it ; but Sriranga, on 
hearing of the approach 6f the enemy, entrusted the defence 
of his capital to the valiant Savaram chief, Cennappa, and 
repaired to the fort of Candragiri with all the treasures. 
’All ’Adil Shah reached Penugonda, and invested it closely 
for three months ;* but he could not take it, on account of 
Cennappa’s stout opposition. In the meantime, Sriranga made 
Strenuous efforts to drive the besiegers from his capital. He 
sent an envoy to Golkonda soliciting help from Ibrahim Qujjb 
Shah. The envoy was successful in his mission ; and Ibrahim 
Qutb Shah promised to support Sriranga, on account of his 
enmity with the Sultan of Bijapur. He despatched his general 
Shah Muhammad Anju in advance to plunder the frontiers of 
the Bijapur kingdom and proceeded with a large army 
southward to support Sriranga. f At the same time, he sent 
one of his officers Fazl Khan to Candragiri with instructions 
■io 'conclude a pact with the Raya. Fazl Khan was so 


803 


!■ 

I 

^ successful in the execution of his mission that he persuaded 

1 Sriranga to accompany him to the camp of his master and con- f 

elude an alliance with him personally.* 


r 


Sriranga did not depend exclusively on the help of the 
Qutb Shah for the expulsion of the Sultan of Bijapur. He 
attempted to bring about a cleavage between the ’JLdil Shah 
and Hande Timma Nay aka. He is said to have offered a large 
bribe to Timma, ancp induced him not only to desert the 

* Sources, p. 237. Daring the course of this invasion, Sriranga is said to have been 
defeated in a battle and taken prisoner by the ’Adil Shah. 4 * Ranga set out”, says Heras, 
“ from Penugomja to check this expedition. When the two armies met, a great battle ensu- 
ed in the course of which the Emperor Ranga unfortunately fell a prisoner into the hands 
of *Ali ’Xdil Shah ( Aravldu Dynasty, p. 270). But S. K. Ayyangar believes that 
Ranga was taken a prisoner by the Sultan of Golkontja, during one of his expeditions into 
the kingdom of Vijayanagara. 14 Sriranga had like his father/’ says he, 44 to stand a 
siege in Penugon^a by the Sultan of Golkomja, possibly with the assistance of one of 
his brother Sultans. In the course of the wars connected with this, he was defeated, 
and he fell a prisoner into the hands of the Muhammadans. This happened about the 
year 1579-80”. ( Sources p. 19.) These statements are based on a passage of the 
Annals of Bands Anantapur or The Wars of the Raj Us, a document of doutful value. 
According to this work, Han<Je Hanumappa Naya<}u, who ruled from A.D. 1583-84 to 
1595-96 was succeeded in the government of his estate by his son, Malakappa. While 
Malakappa was governing his estate, the Muhammadans marched from the north to seize 
Vijayanagara and halted at Kalyana-Kalbarga. Sriranga, who went on a royal tour toward# 
Candragiri, returned to Vijayanagara and having hastened to Kalyana-Kalbarga with his 
army accompanied by Malakappa, fought a battle with the Muhammadans and inflicted 
a defeat upon them. In the cyclic year Vikari (S.S. 1521, A.D. 1599), the Padshas came 
to Vijayanagara once again with their army. Sriranga Raya, who wai not able to cope 
with them, was defeated and taken prisoner. 


The evidence of this document cannot be trusted absolutely, as it teems with 
improbabilities. In the first place, the dates furnished by this work are false. Sriranga 
died long before A.D. 1599, the date of his supposed captivity. Secondly, Vijayanagara 
ceased to be the capital of the empire since the battle of Raksasi-Tanga^i, and it wa# 
never the capital of Sriranga. Thirdly, although it does not mention the name# of the 
Padshas, who attacked Sriranga, it definitely indicates that they were northerners who 
* marched from the north * 4 and halted at Kalyana-Kalbarga/’ The Sultan of Ahmadnagar 
might have been one of them ; and it is not possible even to guess who the others were. 
The Sultan of Ahmadnagar never joined in an attack against Vijayanagara subsequent to 
A.D. 1565; and there is absolutely no evidence to show that there was a combined 
attack of the Muhammadan kings on Vijayanagara subsequent to this date and that 
Sriranga ever led his troops as far north as Kalyana-Kalbarga. The Muhammadan 
historians, specially the Anonymous Historian, who takes particular care to enumerate 
the names of the Hindu prince# taken by the Muhammadans, do not refer to Sriranga 4 # 
captivity. Therefore, it is not possible to accept the facts mentioned in the Annals of 
Anantapur t unless we get evidence more trustworthy in character. •/; 


804 



; of 1901; S.I.I. vii, 66J. 
4 V 4.^ # 1 'i 

« a: PerUhta m, App. 


t Briggts Ftruhta Hi, App., p. 4*5. 


’Ida Shah but to harass his camp. Cennappa Nayaka who 
seems to have been closely watching the state of affairs in the 
'Idil Shah’s camp sallied from the fort, and inflicted a defeat 
upon his army, on 21 December, A.D. 1576.* As a consequence 
of this defeat, and the formation of alliance between ^riranga 
and Ibrahim Qutb Shah, 'All 'Idil Shah was obliged to raise 
the siege of Penugonda and retreat towards his own kingdom.f 

The invasion of the Suit fin of Golkonda :-The expulsion of 
the ’Idil Shah! forces did not free the kingdom from the fear 
of foreign invasion. Ibrahim Qutb Shah forgot his recent 
alliance with S^riranga, and set out with a large army to 
conquer the Karnata kingdom in A.D. 1579. The Anonymous 
Historian attributes it to Ibrahim Qutb Shah’s desire to collect 
the tribute due to his estate from the chiefs Venkatadri, 
Kustury Timraj, and Nursing Row. These chiefs are said 
to have entered into an agreement with Ibrahim’s father Qflli 
Qujb Sh3h to pay him an annual tribute of two lakhs of huns, 
when that chief reduced Kopdavidu ; but did not pay it for the 
past few years.J It is not possible to know how far this is true. 
It is curious that Ibrahim Qutb Shah failed to make good his 
claim up to A.D. 1580, although he had several opportunities 
for bringing these recalcitrant nobles to book during the years 
following the battle of Raksasi-Tangadi. The real cause of 
the invasion was the anarchy prevailing in the Karnata country. 
Most of the nobles were involved in a feud between the Sari 
and Matli families ; and they were not in a mood to care for the 
larger interests of the empire. Moreover, Ibrahim Qu$b Shah 
appears to have received promises of support from some of 
the nobles, specially the members of the Hande family, who 
expected to push forward the fortunes of their family. He 
found the opportunity favourable for the expansion of his 
dominions. Therefore, he resolved to despatch an expedition 
into the Vijayanagara dominions, and seize as much territory 
as he could. 


305 



The Qolkonda army seems to have swept over the northern 
districts of the Vijayanagara empire in two large waves. In 
5§.S. 1500 Bahudhanya (A.D. 1578-9)* * * § , an army under Mnrahari 
Bao crossed the river Krsma, and laid waste the eastern 
taluks of the present Kurnool district with the assistance 
of the Hande chiefs, Malakappa and Kadambaraya, who 
had rebelled against Sriranga and made common cause with the 
enemy (200-b). This Murahari Eow was a Brahman by birth and 
a Mahratta by nationality. He rose to great prominence in 
the service of Ibrahim Qutb Shah and became ‘ in every respect 
the second person in the state, not even excepting the princes 
of the blood-royal \f Though a Hindu by faith, he behaved 
worse than a Mussalman during this expedition. He attacked 
the famous shrine of Narasimha at Ahoba|am, and ‘ sacked 
it of its idols, made of gold and silver and studded with rubies 
and sent them together with four lakhs of huns which he 
exacted from the inhabitants of the region as presents to his 
master. § This is confirmed by the evidence of an inscription 
at Ahobalam according to which Ibrahim Padshah having 
joined the Hande chiefs plundered the district and sacked the 
famous shrine of Ahobalesvara.1I On this occasion, he carried 
away some vessels of gold and silver which escaped the hands 
of plunderers in A.D. 15t>5. The invaders caused great com- 
motion throughout the country, plundered and devastated the 
villages. The country was annexed and was placed under the 
control of the Hande chiefs as a reward for their treachery. 

The Hande chiefs, however, could not keep their hold 
upon the conquered territory long. The Jlyar of the 
Srivaisnava matha at Ahobalam who was driven out of the 


* Sources, p. 235. + Ibid, pp. 233, 235; Briggs: Ferishia iii, App., p. 444. 

| The Anonymous Historian, who alludes to this incident, states that the temple was 
in the neighbourhood of Xdoni. As there was no temple in the neighbourhood of Xdoni 
famous and rich enough to excite the zeal and cupidity of the Mussulmans, and as the 

famous shrine of Ahobalam was plundered in the selfsame year, by the armies of 
Ibrahim Qutb Shah, it is not unreasonable to believe that the Anonymous Historian 
had in his mind the temple of AhShaJam, when he spoke of the shrine in the neighbour- 
hood of Xdoni. 

§ Briggs: FerUhta iii, App., p. 444. % Source*, p. 235* 


306 



place repaired to Penugonda and having given an account of 
the havoc caused by the invaders to the Raya requested him 
to reconquer the country from the Mussalmans and restore to 
the temple its former glory. Although Sriranga undertook 
to lead the expedition against the Muhammadans personally, 
the Jiyar dissuaded him, and begged him instead to commission 
the Telugu Cola chief, Kondraju Venkataraju, to perform the 
task. Accordingly, Sriranga commanded Venkataraju to pro- 
ceed against the Muhammadans, and expel them from the king- 
dom. On the receipt of the royal order, Venkataraju marched 
against the Hande chiefs, and their allies in A.D. 1579, defeated 
them in battle, and having annexed their estates, busied 
himself with the reconstruction of the shrine at Ahobalam. 


The success of Kondraju Venkataraju seems to have 
infuriated Ibrahim Qutb Shah. As soon as he heard of the 
defeat of the Hande chiefs he despatched a strong army 
against Vijayanagara kingdom under Haider-ul-Mulk, probably 
one of the officers serving xxnder Murahari Row, with instruc- 
tions to subjugate the Kondavidu-raj^a. The army which 
started from Golkoiida on 29 March, A.D. 1589, seems to have 
crossed the Krsna somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
Kondapally, and captured Bellamkonda and Viuukonda after 
severe fighting. Then turning west, they entered the district 
of Macerla, and having subdued the fort of Nagarjunakonda, 
took possession of the country. Next they proceeded against 
Koccerlakota in the Darsi division of the Nellore district, 
where the Velama chiefs, Velugoti Kasturi Rangappa and 
Moodna Chinia were stationed with twenty thousand infantry. 
On the approach of the Muhammadan army, they are said to 
have fled without firing a shot, and the fort fell easily into the 
hands of the invaders. They next marched against Udayagiri 
in the Nellore district and having put to flight its commandant 

Venkataraju* who opposed them, took possession of the fort. 

: - 

• Both Rangaswamy Saras vat i and Heras have identified this chief with Venkatapati, 
the younger brother and successor of Sriranga. Sennet, p. 240, n.; IravUn Dynasty, 
p. 374. There is nothing to recommend this identification excepting the similarity of the 

‘ ' • 


id n 


The fali of Koecerlakota and Udayagiri was a prelude to the 
conquest of other small forts in their neighbourhood. Addanki, 
Ammanabrolu, KandukQru, Podili, Darsi, Kambham, Kakarla, 
Dapadu, Tangeda, Gurijala, Ketavaram, and Karempudi fell 
one after another in quick succession. And the Muhammadan 
army was ready to proceed against Kondavldu which alone 
remained in the possession of the Hindus ; but Kasturi Ranga 
made one more effort to stem the tide of Mussulman invasion ; 
he and his friends Kaudi Timmana and Moodna Chinia collected 
a force of thirty thousand men and attempted to block the path 
of the Muhammadans; but in tne battle that ensued, they 
: were utterly routed and were pursued to the fort of Goorum. 

The victory seems to have broken the back of Hindu resis- 
tance ; and the Muhammadans could now proceed without fear 
of opposition to Kondavldu, which was under the control of 
Gobburi Timmaraja, a son-in-law of Ramaraja the Great. 
Accordingly, the Muhammadans marched to Kondavldu and laid 
siege to the fort ; but Gobburi Timmaraja and bis lieutenant 
Velu^oti Timma offered stubborn resistance. Haider-ul-Mulk, 
the general commanding the Muhammadan army, had to apply 
to Golkonda for reinforcements. Although he was superseded 
by Sayyid Shah Tucky, the change of commanders did not 
produce the desired result. Consequently Ibrahim Qujfcb Shah 
was obliged to have recourse to non-military methods for, the 
reduction of the fort. At his instance, Roy Row Murahari 
Row entered into secret negotiations with Timma 
Nayudu and seduced him by offering him a large bribe. As a 
consequence of this, the vigoiir of the defence was relaxed, 
and the Muhammadans were able to breach the wall. Velugoti 
Timmana soon surrendered the' fort to Roy Row on 29 April, 
A.D. 1580, and the district of Kondavldu was lost to Vijaya- 
nagara for ever* (200-c). It is not known what efforts &rxranga 
made to defend his dominions. He could not have done 
much in the circumstances in which he was situated. His failure 

name* He was probably one of the numerous k$atriya chiefs who held oSSoe under iht 
government, for instance, Ko^<Jraju Venka$a.r£ju. 

# Briggs: FerisUd iii, App. pp, 436-37, 1 


308 



to ward off the Muhammadan invasions may be attributed to 
two important facts. In the first place, the resources of the 
kingdom could not be fully utilised for its defence, owing to 
its division into three autonomous provinces. Tirmnala, who 
was responsible for this division, did not make any provision 
for carrying on their administration as integral parts of a 
united empire. Each of his three sons to whom he had 
entrusted the government of a province was virtually inde- 
pendent in his own sphere ; and although upon his death the 
eldest was recognised as the supreme sovereign, his authority 
was practically confined to his own province. Therefore, 
Siiranga’s brothers rendered him little or no assistance even 
in times of pressing danger ; consequently he could not resist 
successfully the series of Muhammadan attacks that were made 
upon his dominions. 


Secondly, Sriranga’s was a kingdom divided against itself. 
The palaigars and chiefs who gathered much power during the 
years of anarchy succeeding the battle of Eaksasi-Taugadi 
did not. show any disposition to submit to bis authority easily. 
The defection of the Hande chiefs has already been noticed. 
Moreover, the activities of Kondraju Venkataraju .and his 
brothers provoked a civil war in which a large number of 
nobles and palaigars were involved. Kondraju Venkataraju 
assisted by his brothers Dasariraju, Kondraju and Timmaraju 
subdued, as noticed already, the Hande chiefs and occupied 
their estate ; then they turned against the Sari family and 
dealt with them in the same manner. Ghana, the head of the 
Sari family, who was deprived of his territory, sought refuge 
with Velugoti Eangappa (the Kastfiri Eangia of the Muham- 
madan historians), the ruler of Eruva in the north-west of the 
Nellore district and begged him to restore to him his estate. 
Eangappa promised his help, and marched at the head of 2,000 
infantry accompanied by his brother-in-law, Damerla Venkata- 
pati, and having passed through the estate of the Matli chiefs 
he halted at Ko<Jur in the Badvel taluka of the Cuddapah dis- 
information of the arrival of Eangappa, th* 


Kondraju brothers summoned to their assistance several 
chiefs well-disposed towards them and proceeded with their 
forces to Yerragunta (a railway station on M. S. M. Railway, 
N. W. Line) near Proddutur, where they met the valiant Matli 
chief Timmaraja. They won him over to their side by pointing 
out that Rangappa had already slighted him, as he passed 
through his territory without permission. They collected in 
this manner an army of 'J 7 elephants, 1,000 horses, 300 nobles, 
J00 ksalriya warriors, 500 archers, and some matchlockmen 
and a large contingent of infantry. It was farther streng- 
thened by 7,000 JcaijUam forces in the service of Matli Timma. 
With this army the Kondraju brothers and their allies set out 
from Yarragunta, passed through Siddhavatam, and finally 
arrived at Nelatur; where they pitched their tents. After a 
half-hearted attempt to settle their difference with Rangappa, 
they moved to Kodur, where an engagement took place on 
Sunday, 27 September, A.D. 1579. The army of Kondraju 
brothers fell into four divisions : (i) the minor chiefs, (ii)the 
Matli forces, (iii) the retainers of the Kondraju family, and 
(iv) the miscellaneous crowd of warriors. To oppose this army 
Rangappa set out lance in hand ; he directed his brother-in- 
law to keep the Kondraju brothers and others engaged, while 
he proceeded against Matli Timma, who had the most powerful 
force under his command. A fierce battle took place in which 
Matli Timma and several chiefs perished ; many fell into the 
hands of the enemy, and a few fled. Rangappa won a complete 
victory over the Kondraju brothers, and fulfilled his promise 
to Sari Obana by restoring to him his lands (201, 202-a, 5). 

This war weakened the kingdom. The nobles who were 
absorbed in their own affairs neither assisted the emperor to 
organize the defence of the country effectively nor co-operated 
with one another to expel the invader. No wonder, the 
Muhammadans succeeded in subjugating large tracts of 
Vijayan&gara territory without much difficulty. 

Srlranga ruled until A.D. 1584-85 and died without issue. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 



§ Briggs: MtritMt iii, App., p. 454* 


V E N K A T A II. 


Venkatapatideva Maharaya is said to have ascended the 
throne after the demise of his elder brother, Srlranga I ; * but 
it is not exactly known when this event took place. The 
Kaifiyat of Cittiveli places the death of Srlranga I in S.S. 151.0 
Sarvadhari i.e A.D. 1588-89 ; but this is contradicted by the 
evidence of other records ; the Vijayanagara Samrajyamu (19) 
indicates that Venkata IPs coronation was celebrated in the 
year Parthiva (§.S. 1507 = A. D. 1585-86) ; and the Virappaya 
Kalajnanam, which explicitly states that the reign of Venkata- 
patiraya commenced on Magha, su. 11 of the year Parthiva 
(21 Jan. A.D. 1586), agrees with it. The date suggested by these 
documents is in conformity with the evidence of the inscrip- 
tions. According to an epigraph of the Kolar district dated on 
the day ofDhanus Sankramana of the year Parthiva (29, Nov. 
A.D. 1585) Srlranga was still ruling the kingdom of the earth ; f 
and another epigraph at Lower Ahobalam in the Kurnool dis- 
trict dated su. 1 of the month of Phalguna of the year Parthiva, 
corresponding to &.S. 1507 (9, Feb. A.D. 1586) states that at that 
time Vlra Venkatapatideva Maharaya was ruling the kingdom 
of the world from Penugonda.J The Anonymous Historian 
corroborates the evidence of the above inscription. Writing 
about the events that occurred in the kingdom of Vijayanagara 
prior to A.D. 1589, he declares that Venkatapati transferred the 
seat of his government to Penugonda, as soon as he became the 
king.§ It is evident from the inscriptions that Srlranga I died 
very probably about the beginning ofMagha of the year Parthiva 
and was succeeded by his brother, Venkatapati a few days later. 
Therefore, the date suggested by the Virappaya Kalajnanam 
for the commencement of Venkatapatidevaraya's reign may 
as genuine. Venkata’s succession to the throne 


mi 


cannot be said to be quite regular > for bis elder brother 
Rama, the Viceroy of Srlrangapattanam, had left two sons 
Tirumala and Sriranga (Cikkaraya). As these princes were 
of tender years, the succession of either of them was not 
expected to promote the welfare of the state. The nobles 
seem to have felt the need for a strong monarch, who could 
restore order among the warring chiefs, and offer effective 
resistance to the Mussalmans. Headed by the famous 
Jagadevaraya, the ruler of Cennapattana, they chose Venkata II 
as their emperor (205). This conclusion derives support 
from a passage in a contemporary Jesuit letter : “ After the 
demise of this Prince’s father, the kingdom was given by the 
unanimous vote of all the classes to the brother of the 
deceased, that is, the one ruling at present, rejecting the rights 
of the deceased's children, who, on account of their age, were 
not able to rule over a kingdom.”* It is evident from this that 
Venkata was chosen emperor, because people believed that he 
could arrest the progress of anarchy in the land. 

During the course of his reign Venkata amply justified 
the confidence which his subjects placed in him. He attacked 
the Muhammadans successfully and wrested from them most 
of the territory which they had taken from his predecessor ; 
he crushed the nobles and palaigars , who attempted to carve 
out independent kingdoms. Having fully restored the 
imperial authority, he made a vigorous attempt to improve the 
economic condition of the kingdom by resuscitating agriculture 
and industries in the villages, which had been ruined during 
the recent Muhammadan invasions. 

Venkata’s ivars with the Muhammadans : — Venkata II 
appears to have made an attempt to recover the territory 
conquered by the Sultan of Grolkonda during the last years of 
the reign of Sriranga I. The Anonymous Historian declares 
that Venkatapati, on his accession to the throne, not only 
transferred his capital to Penugonda contrary to certain treaty- 


• jlravhlu Dymtty, p. 801. 



obligations, but also ‘made some incursions and invasions into 
the Golkonda dominions;'* but he does not fully describe the 
results of these incursions. There is reason to believe that the 
Golkoiida armies suffered defeat, and Sultan Muhammad Quly 
Qutb Shah, who ascended the throne on the death of his father, 
Ibrahim, in A.D. 1580, sustained loss of territory. It is said 
in the Amlnabad inscription of Amin Mulk dated 4, April, 
A.D. 1592 that the fort of Udayagiri was captured by Ibrahim 
Qutb Shah in A.D. 1580 ;f this fort seems to have been recon- 
quered by the Vijayanagara emperor some time before 
A.D. 1589; for, a certain Kowlanunda (Kowl Ananta ?) was 
governing the fort at that time on behalf of Venkata II.* It 
is not unreasonable to conclude that Venkata 11 made an 
attempt to recover the lost dominion soon after his accession, 
and achieved a fair measure of success in his endeavour. 
An attempt was also made about the same time to overthrow 
the Qutb Shahl authority in the province of Kondavldu. A 
Qutb Shahl officer called 'AH Khan Lur, who had deserted his 
sovereign owing to his dissatisfaction with Roy Row, the 
Brahman governor of Kondavldu, joined the emperor of 
Vijayanagara and led an expedition into the district of 
Kondavldu, accompanied by the emperor's son in-law Mekur 
Timma. He attacked the fort of Kambam, but was defeated 
and driven away by Roy Row ; 'All Khan thereupon returned 
to the court of Vijayanagara ; but receiving no encourage- 
ment he -repaired once again to Kondavldu and stirred up 
trouble by seizing the fort of Ardinga (Addanki ?).§ The defeat 
of his armies, the loss of the fort of Udayagiri with its dependent 
territory, and the frequent troubles fomented by the agents of 
the emperor of Vijayanagara in the province of Kondavldu 
seem to have stirred Quly Qutb Shah to activity. He resolved 
to make a vigorous effort and complete the conquest of 
Vijayanagara kingdom. In order to achieve his purpose, he 
desDatched his minister Amlr-ul-Mulk with a large army. 


t Sources* p. 240. 

448-9. 



Amfr-ul-Mulk appears to have crossed the Krsna somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of Musalimadugu in the Nandikotkur taluk 
of the Kumool district; and having captured that fort after 
some resistance, he marched southwards to Gandikota in the 
J ammalamadugu taluk of the Cuddapah district. The 
Golkonda army had to pass on its way through the estates of 
the Nandyala chiefs, who were related to the royal family, A 
certain Basvant Raj, who was a son-in-law of Aliya Ramaraja, 
was governing Nandyala, and his nephew, Narsing Raj held 
sway over Kalagur and its neighbourhood. They opposed the 
Muhammadans for some time and being unable to hold out 
against them made peace with them by agreeing to pay an 
annual tribute. The fall of Nandyala and Kalagur was followed 
by the submission of the other Vijayanagara nobles who held 
estates in the neighbourhood. The chiefs of J ammalamadugu, 
Jutur, Sirivella, Nunduatcota (Nandavaram Kota ?), Dole 
(Phone ?) and Cennuru acknowledged the supremacy of the 
Qujfcb Shah, and agreed, like the x*ajas of Nandyala and KalagSr 
to pay tribute,* The forts of Kumool and Gutti (Gooty) appear 
to have passed into the hands of the Mussalmans at the same 
time. Having subdued the whole of the Kumool and portions 
of Cuddapah and Anantapur districts, Amir-ul-Mulk proceeded 
to Garidikota in the Cuddapah district, which was governed 
by Nandyala Narasimharaja, a distant cousin of Venkata II, 
and laid siege to it. Narasimha held out for a time and 
submitted, promising like the other nobles to pay tribute to the 
sultan of Golkonda. Sultan Quit joined the army soon after 
the reduction of Gandikota ; and, in order to punish Venkata II 
for the supposed breach of some treaty obligations, he marched 
on Penugorrda, the capital of the Vijayanagara empire at this 
time. Meeting with little or no opposition on the way, he 
reached the city within a short time and laid siege to it. 

: V enkata appears to have been prevented by some un- 
known obstacle from concerting measures for the defence 
of the realm; he could not evidently make any efforts to 

• Brigg*: Ftrishta iii, App.; p. 453. 

1—40 


814 



repel the invaders. Probably the Muslim invasion was too 
sudden; and the nobles whom he had summoned to his 
assistance had not yet joined him. With the object of gaining 
time, he made a pretence of submission, and sent his minister 
Goparaju Timma and his general Papiah Setti to the camp 
of the enemy to sue for peace. They approached Muhammad 
Quli Padshah and persuaded him to grant them a truce in 
order to enable them to settle the terms of a permanent peace. 
It appeared as if the empire of Vijayanagara had finally 
collapsed, and the Hindus were no longer capable of offering 
any organized resistance. Being obviously satisfied with the 
results of the campaign, the suljtan retired from the vicinity 
of Penugonda with bis army. 

Venkata II took full advantage of the brief respite that he 
bad thus obtained. Within the space of three days, he bad 
provisions conveyed into the citadel, sufficient to enable the 
garrison to stand a long siege; and on the fourth day a strong 


315 



dated A.D. 1605-06, for instance, clearly states that Ananta 
destroyed the pride of the Muhammadan king in the battle of 
Penugonda;* and this is corroborated by the evidence of 
Eaghunathabhyudayam, where it is asserted that the young 
Tan j ore prince, Raghuriatha, who went to Penugonda to assist 
V enkatapa tide varay a, scattered the Muhammadan troops that 
opposed him.f Therefore, it is evident that Muhammad Qull 
Padshah was obliged to raise the siege of Penugonda, not on 
account of his apprehensions of the approaching rainy season, 
but owing to the defeat of his army at the hands of the Hindus. 
Much information is not available about the battle itself. 
Jagadeva Row appears to have made a sally from the fort and 
attacked the Qujtb Shah! army. In the engagement that followed 
he defeated the troops of Mftyuja Khan and Nuri Khan, 
took Citta Khan prisoner, and put Saujata Khan to 
death and offered protection to Cerna MulkJ (205). As 
a consequence of this disaster sultan Qull abandoned the siege 
and fled precipitately towards his frontier; but before crossing 
the Krsna, he made hasty arrangements for holding the 
territory which he had recently subdued. He entrusted the 
defence of Gandikqta, Nandyala, and Musalimadugu to Sanjar 
Khan, Jagat Row and Asva Row respectively; appointed 
Murtaza Khan as the military commander of the conquered 
country; and returned to his capital having lost much of his 
prestige in the war.§ 

The Vijayanagara army flushed with victory began to 
chase the Muhammadan garrisons occupying the important 
stronghdlds in the land. They captured Gutti and proceeded 
against Gandikota. Meanwhile, Sultan Quli commanded Afzal 
Khan, the governor of Kondavldu, to send reinforcements to 
the rescue of the garrison defending Gandikota. Accordingly, 
troops set out from Kondavldu without adequate protection on 
the way. As soon as Venkata II obtained information of the 
despatch of troops from Kondavldu, he sent a force to 

* Sourtts, p. 250. T Hid, p. 285. 

t Ibid, pp. 229, 230. § Briggt : Ftrishta , Hi, App'. p. 455. 


.•„u n'z&i / ■ 


816 



Feruhta iii, App., p. 455. 


Kowalanunda, the governor of Udayagiri, with, instructions to 
harass the Muslim army and lay waste the (Jolkonda 
territory. Kowalanunda deputed his son-in-law Woorias Kay 
to raid the Kondavidu territory, which he seems to have done 
effectively. Afzal Khan, unable to cope with the enemy, 
incited the jagirdars of the district to collect their forcers and 
devastate the Udayagiri territory. Although the Anonymous 
Historian credits the Muslim officers, Afzal Khan and Ajada 
Khan, with victory, the Hindu records seem to assert the 
contrary*. According to the Kaifiijat of Cittiveli, a vast host 
of Uriya and Manne nobles under the Ravilla chief, together 
with the Muhammadan forces, came from the side of Udayagiri 
with the object of surrounding the Badvel-sima, and halted at the 
village of Kamalaku.ru in the Siddhavatam taluk of the 
Cuddapah district. A section of this army, led by one of 
the members of the Ravilla family, seems to have marched 
south and reached the hill-fort of Ghirramkonda in the 
Vayalpadu taluk of the modern Chittoor district. Venkata 11 
commanded two of his nobles, Matli Ananta and Kasturi 
Rangappa, to put the invaders to flight. In obedience to 
the royal order, they marched to Kamalakuru, and routed the 
Grolkonda army in a fierce battle; Kasturi Rangappa chased the 
broken forces of the Qutb Shah! nobles as far as Koccerlakota; 
and Matli Ananta repaired to Gurramkonda with his army and 
laid siege to it. The Ravilla chief, who appears to have been 
well provided with artillery and ammunition, offered stubborn 
resistance; but Ananta showed dogged perseverance in pushing 
forward the siege operations, notwithstanding the mines of 
gunpowder, the thundering artillery vomiting death-dealing 
fire, and the shower of stones descending from heaven like 
the rains in the Citta. He succeeded at last in demolishing one 
of the bastions and the garrison could not hold out long. The 
Ravilla chief realised the situation, and immediately sued for 
peace; and having probably surrendered the fort, departed 
to his native country (202-a, b, 216-b). 


317 


| The victories of Kamalakuru and Gurramkonda sealed 

*** the fate of the Muslim garrison at Gandikota; the rein for ce- 

! meats which sultan Quli despatched from Kondavldu could | 

\. not reach their destination, as they were intercepted and 

scattered on the way. The floods which suddenly swelled the \ 

rivers prevented any help coining from Golkonda; and the 
| attempt to embarrass Venkata II by making inroads into his 

I dominions ended in dismal failure. No doubt, Murtaza Khan 

| was in the neighbourhood; but the forces under his command 

1 could not cope with the enemy. 


A large Vijayanagara army consisting of a hundred 
thousand men under the command of Yara Timmaraja, Gul- 
ranga Setty, Manuparaju, Velugoti Cennapa, and Yaca marched 
to recover Gandikota. To divert the attention of this army, 
Murtaza Khan made a sudden attack upon Cuddapah and 
demolished the local temple. On obtaining information of this 
incident, Venkata detached Yara Timmaraja and Manuparaju 
with ten thousand cavalry and sent them against Murtaza 
Khan. They encountered him probably some *vhere in the 
neighbourhood of Cuddapah but are said to have been 
defeated and put to flight.* This victory, however, produced 
no effect, as it failed to reduce the pressure on the garrison 
at Gandikota. 





As soon as Muhammad Quli Qutb Shah heard of the desper- 
ate condition of his army, he placed under Rustam Khan five 
thousand horse, and having made him the supreme commander 
of his forces in the south, sent him to assist Murtaza Khan. 
As soon as Rustam Khan joined the army, he assumed the 
supreme command but showed no inclination to act according 
to Murtaza Khan’s advice. He crossed the river Pennar, which 
lay in front of him and pitched his tents on the clayey black 
cotton soil wet with the recent rain. The Hindus, having 
observed the forward move of the Muhammadan commander, 
dressing up a bull in a fantastic fashion, drove it towards his 


g*iS 


Briggs; FtrisMa iii* App. # p. 456, 



318 



camp, itustam ivnan, wno was scarea oy it, is saia xo nave 
precipitated an action by bis headlong flight to the rear of his 
army* Whatever be the truth about the bull story, a great 
battle was fought on the bank of the river Pennar, in which the 
Muhammadan army was completely defeated and cut to 
pieces. Velugoti Cennapa, who appears to have greatly 
distinguished himself in the battle of Pennar, marched at the 
head of the royal army accompanied by his cousin Yaca to 
Ga^dikota, and captured the fort. The fall of Gandikota was 
a prelude to the surrender of other minor forts in the neigh- 
bourhood- The Muhammadan garrisons were chased across 
the Krsna; and sultan Quli had to recognize that river as the 
boundary between his kingdom and the dominions of the 
emperor of Vijayanagara. 

Venkata It taught the Muhammadans the much 
needed lesson that they could not always afford to attack the 
possessions of the emperor of Vijayanagara with impunity. 
He not only repelled their attacks but wrested from them much 
of the Vijayanagara territory which they had conquered 
during the reign of his predecessor; he could not, however, 
complete this task, owing to the internal disorders in his 
kingdom. Therefore, he had to remain content, during the 
remaining years of his reign, with making indirect efforts to 
recapture the district of Kondavldu, which still remained 
in the possession of the sultan of Golkonda. 


Internal affairs : — The internal condition of the empire did 
not suddenly undergo a change for the better on the accession 
of Venkata II. The nobles did not give up their rebellious 
habits and become less turbulent. As a matter of fact, 
Venkata IX had to contend against several chiefs who defied his 
authority and asserted their independence. 


Tammana Gauffs rebellion : —The earliest rebellion which 
had to face was headed by a certain Tammana Gaud, 

Artl-J l , # 7 fy ' *•, - \ . n ’ t ' ' 

* -Briggs: Firiihta ill, App«, pp- 457-8. . i . , ' « \ 


819 



who seems to have held an estate somewhere on the 
frontiers of the Kanarese country. He appears to be 
identical with Mummadi Cikkaraya Tammaya Gauda of 
Sugatur, who figures as a subordinate of Venkata II 
in the inscriptions of the Kolar district.* Taking advantage 
of the Golkonda invasion and the siege of Penugoajda, he set 
up the standard of rebellion, and refused to pay the taxes that 
were due to the government. Therefore, as soon as Venkata II 
defeated the Muhammadans near Penugoiida and put them to 
flight, he seems to have proceeded against him at the head of 
an army, accompanied Matli Ananta, V elugoti Kasturi 
Rangappa, Raghunatha Nay aka of Tanjore and others, f and 
laid siege to the fort of Kolar ; Tammaya Grauda seems to have 
advanced at the head of 26,000 Mamie soldiers to raise the 
siege. Venkata II appears to have left Matli Ananta to carry 
on the siege operations ; and marched with the rest of the 
army to oppose him. Both the armies met at a place called 
Krotta-Kanama ; a battle was fought in which V elugoti Kasturi 
Rangappa greatly distinguished himself. Tammaya Gauda’s 
army was routed ; and he was himself taken prisoner. Mean- 
while, Matli Ananta captured Kolar, and Tammaya Gauda 
paid the tribute due to the Raya and made peace with him. 

The rebellion of Nandela Krsnaniardja and others : 
Venkata II had to face a serious rebellion of the Tcsatriya 
chiefs of the Rayala-slma in A.D. 1957-98, The cause of the 
rebellion is not known. Nandela Krsnamaraja, who succeeded 
his father Narasimharaja in the management of the hereditary 
estates of his family, refused to pay tribute ; and declared his 


* E.C. x, Kl. 341. 

f The Kolala expedition of Matli Ananta, and the campaign of Baghunatha Nayaka 
against the Murasas or the people of Murasu-**adi* seem to be identical with Venkata IPs 
attack upon Tammaya Gauda. It is said that embraces * the northern part 

of the North Arcot and the adjacent parts of the neighbouring districts* (Sources, p. 285) 
The Kolar ^nd Mulbagal taluks of the Kolar district adjoin the northern part of North 
Arcot. The shrine of Kalabhairava at Siti in the Kolar district is the tutelary chief of 
large sections of cultivating classes such as Morasu Vokkaligars, Re$<Jis dec. ( Mysore. 
Gazetteer v, p. 369). It is obvious that Kolar district where the Morasu tribe lives is the 
Morasu or Murasu-rtS^s# under consideration. 



mg successfully put down, the rebellion of Nandela 
,raju and Kandanavolu Gopalaraju, Venkata next 


independence in defiance of the royal authority. He was 
joined by Kondraju Tirupatiraju, the ruler of the slmas of 
Pottapi and Siddhavatam, who confiscated the ctmaram villages 
enjoyed by the members of the Matli family, as they loyally 
supported the cause of the emperor; and Kandanavolu Gropala- 
raju, the chief of Kurnool and a grandson of the famous 
Venkatadri, appears to have made common cause with them. 


Venkata II marched with his army, accompanied by 
Matli Ellamaraja, father of Ananta, Hande Devappa Nayaka 
and Pemmasani Timrna to subdue the rebels. On hearing of 
the approach of the emperor with his army, Kondraju Tiru- 
patiraju strengthened the defences of his forts, especially 
Utukuru adjoining the royal territory ; and Nandela Krsnama 
marched with his forces to oppose the Raya. They met at 
Jambulamadugu, where an engagement took place. As 
Krsnamaraja’s army was defeated, he was obliged to retreat 
from tbe battle-field and shut himself up in the fort of Nandela 
Venkata followed him hard upon his heels and invested the 
fort closely for three months. Kr§namaraja found that he 
could not hold out long ; and considering it advisable to sue 
for peace when it was not too late, he solicited Matli 
Ellama to intercede with the Raya and help him to settle 
their quarrel. Ellama readily undertook the task; but he 
could only persuade the Raya to spare Krsnama’s life. The fort 
was surrendered, and the estates of Krspama, which were con- 
fiscated, were given to Hande Devappa Nayaka and Pemmasani 
Timma Nayaka (211, 212, 213). Gandikota, which had been a 
stronghold of the Nandela chiefs, became the capital of Pem- 
masani Timma and his descendants. Krsnamaraja was taken 
to Candragiri, where he remained in captivity until his 
death (216-b). Although no information is available about the 
steps which Venkata took against Gopalaraju of Kandanavolu, 
the Kaifiyat of Gittiveli seems to indicate that he shared the 
(ct^ivii^ with his ally for some time at least. 



They were, however, overtaken by Mlamas men and were 
cut to pieces. Venkata II was greatly pleased with Ellama’s 
victory and in accordance with his promise bestowed upon 
him the amaram of Pulugula-w5dw together with Siddhavatam- 
sima. Moreover, he entrusted to him the administration of 
the districts of Cennur, Duvviir, Kamalapuram, Porumamilla 
and Badveli (214, 215-a, b). , 

Rebellions in the Tamil country The peace of the Tamil 
country was disturbed in the opening years ofthe 17th century 
by the outbreak of rebellions of the nayaks, who seem to have 
resented Venkata’s interference with the affairs of what they 
came to regard as their hereditary dominions. Lingama, the 
chief of Vellore, seems to have shown a tendency to regard 
himself as the master of his amaram; and Venkata bestowed 
the Perumbedu-sbwrt' (Chingleput and Madurantakam taluks) 
belonging to him on Yacarna Nayadu, son of Velugoti 
Kasturi Rangappa, as his amaram with the intention of 
breaking the power of Lingama and asserting the authority 
of the imperial government. Yaea took possession of 

his new estate and having made Madui antakam his 
headquarters, marched suddenly on the fort of Uttar am allur, 
belonging to Naga, a subordinate of Lingama, and seized it. 
Naga naturally sought the help of his overlord, who readily 
agreed to take up his cause and restore to him his fort. 


— — 


322 



mats of the strength of the army under Davula Papa is 
is battle. ■ • •• '-.'V- : yfo, ; ' fo;.,. ’ : l 


But, as he knew that it was not easy to dislodge Yaca 
without a powerful army, he not only summoned to his assist- 
ance all the chiefs owing allegiance to him but solicited 
help from the nayaks of Madura, Tanjore and Gringee. In 
response to his call, the chiefs holding the forts Tindivanam, 
Tiruvadi, Valadapuram, Vanda vasi, Pengotur, Tiruvattnr, 
Asamandur, Kattalai, and Arcot joined him with their forces; 
and the nayaks of Maddra, Tanjore, and Gingee sent some of 
their subordinates with contingents of horses and elephants. 
The hereditary retainers of Lingama’s family from Padaividu, 
as well as the palaigars who were dependent upon him, 
had also joined him. Acting on the advice of Naga, 
he made Naga’s brother-in-law, Davula Papa Nayadu, the 
generalissimo of the army and despatched them to Uttara- 
mallur. Papa marched at the head of an army comprising 
100 elephants, 500 pairs of horses, 1,000 nobles riding in 
palanquins, 10,000 archers, 12,000 matchlockmen, 30,000 
infantry. The army was also provided with 7,000 rockets;* 
Papa having reached Uttaramallur on Sunday, 81 
A.D. 1601 pitched his camp on the eastern side of the fort. 


Yaca saw the huge army that had come to attack him; but 
he was not perturbed. With characteristic courage, he pre- 
pared himself for the battle and issued forth from the fort on 
horse-back accompanied by Singa, his younger brother, riding 




ey were followed by their friends, relations 
h 2,000 or 3,000 picked Velama soldiers. In 
ent that followed a large number of chiefs 
3 apa was slain ; several took to flight, and 
i Cenna, who could not flee on account of 
i prisoners. Yaca won a brilliant victory 
l great renown. Having accomplished his 
.e returned to the court, and was honoured 
bestowed on him dresses, jewels, vehicles 
19-a, b). Yaca’s victory at Uttaramallur 



323 


appears to have been followed by the outbreak of a rebellion 
of the nayaks of the Tamil country.* 



The sequence of the events of this rebellion is not known; 
but it is not impossible to conjecture the probable order in 
which they might have occurred. Lingama of Vellore seems to 
have collected an army and taken the field with the object of 
retrieving the disaster at Uttaramallur. At the same time, several 
nayaks of the Tamil country, who were probably alarmed at 
Venkata’s attempts to curb their power, set up the standard of 
rebellion and defied the authority of the imperial government. 
Venkata, however, rose equal to the occasion. He gathered 
forces, and placing them under the command of Matli Ananta 
despatched them against the rebels. He was accompanied by 
his son Tiruvengalanatha, Muluvagalu II Cikkaraju, Damerla 
Cenna and other chiefs. The army set out probably from 
Candragiri and moved towards the territory of Lingama 
Nay aka of Vellore. They marched without any serious 
opposition, until they reached the maidan of Minimi 
(Minnal ?), where they encountered Lingama with his army. 
An engagement took place between the two armies in which, 
owing mainly to the efforts of Damerla Cenna, Lingama was 
put to flight. The royal army nest advanced into the Cola 
country, where they came into conflict with the rebel forces 
probably under the nayak of Tanjore at a place called 
Gudaiattur. In the battle that ensued the rebels were defeated 
again; and Damerla Cenna seems to have been greatly 
responsible for the victory. Having suppressed the rebellion 
in the Cola country, Matli Ananta crossed the Kaverl and laid 
waste the lands of the nayak of Madura and his allies. The 
nayak, while attempting to ward off the invasion suffered a 
defeat; and the fish standard of the Pandyas, which he 

# Contemporary Telugu literature alludes to a war which Venkata II waged on the 
nayak of Madura about this time. It is but natural that the nayak of Madura, who sent 
aid to Lingama in his war against Yaca in A.D. 1601, should have attempted to help him 
further in his revolt against the Raya. The Siddhavatam inscription of Matli Ananta 
dated A.D. 1605-6, idicates that the rebellion was not confined to Madura, but spread to 
Other parti of the Dravi<}a country. {Sources p. 250) 


324 



area, displayed considerable interest m i 
ic prosperity of their respective territories 


appropriated for himself was seized and carried away as a 
trophy by the royalists. Matli Tiruvengalanatha and 
Muluvagalu II had greatly distinguished themselves on this 
occasion (221, 222). 


victories gained by the royal army broke the 
lion; and most of the rebels were forced to 
, however, was not inclined to accept defeat 
himself to the strong fortifications of Vellore, 
the fort and made preparations for standing 
Lingama offered stout resistance, he fell into 
besiegers on account of a stratagem and his 
•wed after some time by the surrender of the 
appears to have deprived Lingama of his 
jd the headquarters of his government to 


§:fl 

adapam , 

|1| 

concert 

II 

Timman; 


easy con 

II 

example 

BUll' 

Pemmas' 


mistration of the empire : — Although Venkata II 
warfare more or less throughout his reign, 
attend to the internal administration of his 
northern districts of his empire were complete- 
the Muhammadans, who frequently overran 
he fateful battle of Raksasi-Tangadi. The 
the villages and migrated to places where they 
Deace; and the agriculture was consequently 
g expelled the Muhammadans from his 
kata II made a sustained effort to repopulate 
d restore their prosperity. At his instance, 
seal-bearer of the small treasury, directed his 
na, tp visit the villages of the Rayala-sjma and 
res for the rehabilitation of agriculture, 
aoned the ryots and granted them charters on 
for the cultivation of the deserted fields. The 
Raya was followed by some of his nobles, 
ana and Matli Ananta, who held estates in the 
isplayed considerable interest in increasing the 

The results 


325 



of this policy are not known (228-a-f). Nevertheless, it is not 
unreasonable to believe that in the absence of the Mussalman 
invasions, the economic policy inaugurated by the state must 
have revived the village life and restored the prosperity of 
agricultural communities. 


Venkata IPs reign lasted for nearly three decades. 
During this period he laboured incessantly not only to 
maintain the integrity of the empire but to revive some of its 
former glory, a task which was by no means easy of perform- 
ance. At the time of his accession, it was on the brink of 
dissolution, owing to two grave dangers, which threatened its 
existence: it was undermined by the action of the treacherous 
nobles within and assailed by the frequent Mussalman attacks 
without. Venkata put down the recalcitrant nobles with a 
stern hand and chastised the Mussalmans so severely that they 
dared not set their foot on the soil of Vijayanagara empire so 
long as he sat upon the throne. He brought prosperity to the 
ruined villages and peace to the harassed farmers. He 
succeeded in restoring to the royal power much of its old 
vigour and independence. During the period of his reign the 
glory of the old empire which seemed to have faded on the 
battle-field of Raksasi-Tangadi shone again brilliantly. But 
his death in A.D. 1614 deprived the empire of its protector and 
guide. Venkata II had no sons. His nephew Srlranga II 
Cikkaraya whom he nominated as his successor was weak and 
incompetent. The empire consequently fell on rocks, and 
suffered ship-wreck within a short time. 


CHAPTER. XXV. 


SR! RANG A II. 


All 


Venkata II had no sons. One of his queens, Bayamma, 
a granddaughter of Aliya Ramaraja through her mother, and 
a daughter of Gobburi Obaraju* who ‘ eagerly longed for 
a son,’ pretended that she was pregnant, and having smuggled 
in due time a Brahman infant into the palace proclaimed that 

lough Venkata II knew the fraud, 
I manifestation of disbelief. On 
iis feelings and treated the boy as 
love he bore to Bayamma; but at 
le making arrangements for the 
he ignored his putative son and 
tiranga II Cikkaraya, as his 
Venkata II in August A.D. 1614, 
i by &riranga II. The accession 
reeable to all the subjects of the 
nma and her relations. They 
would not offer allegiance to 
nthority and set up on the throne 
onarch. Jaggaraju, a brother of 


my< 


Jie 

of 


era D 


put 


SOI 


any outwa 
disguised 
of the gres 
death, wl 
the realm, 
nephew, 1 
ae death o; 
rlv succeed^ 


Bay 


mat they 
rtnrow his i 
af the late n 



is not met with in the indigenous records of the 
d the opinion that she is mentioned under another 
ler with Venkatanima, because Ramarajiyam does 
a want of acquaintance with the social life of the 
ben he makes the amazing observation that * any 
felugu *. (Sources, p. 20). Heras nods assent to 
fimarSfiyam, no doubt, does not mention the parent- 
is not a good reason for identifying her with 
ives the parentage of Bayamma's sister Kon^amma 
he author of Ramarajiyam should mention only 
ae altogether is not quite intelligible. The real 
ss of Venkatamma’s parents appears to be that 
rents of the other queens* Bayamma is a corrup- 
et with in the Telugu inscriptions and literature, 
qguese authorities, quoted by Heras, Venkata II 
one of them was Kon^amma, and the other was 


m 



queen Bayamma, and his lieutenants Timma Nayaka and 
Makaraju placed themselves at the head of the opposition and 
waited for an opportunity to strike. 

The imprudent policy which Sriranga II followed in the 
administration of the empire estranged the feelings of his 
subjects, and strengthened the hands of his enemies. In the 
first place, he ‘ accommodated in his kingdom many Belalas ’ 
with whom he became acquainted during his sojourn in 
Tanjore ; and 4 gave them honourable offices in the govern- 
ment.’ This displeased his subjects considerably * Secondly, 
he drove some of the highest officers of state into opposition 
by making injudicious demands for the surrender of lands, 
money, and jewels.f Therefore, Jaggaraya and his partisans 
gathered strength and overthrew the authority of Sriranga II 
by means of a stratagem. 


Coup d'etat of Jaggaraya : — Jaggaraya and his two 
lieutenants Timma Nayaka and Makaraja informed Sriranga 
that they wished to pay him homage; and on obtaining royal 
permission, they entered the fort with a select body of troops; 
and having surrounded the palace, forced ►sriranga to surrender 
and led him away as prisoner. Jaggaraya then crowned his 
nephew emperor and persuaded all the nobles that were 
present to do him homage . % mf 


fij 


328 



the displeasure of Jaggaraya and his partisans. The quarrel, 
which had arisen between Y aeama and Jagga in this manner, 
soon developed into a huge civil war and plunged the empire 
into confusion and disorder. 

During the early stages of the civil war, Yacama stood 
almost alone, as all the nobles having deserted their lawful 
master went over to the side of the usurper. Nevertheless, he 
did not lose courage and confidence in his capacity to 
overthrow the usurper and rescue the emperor from the prison 
into which he was thrown by the caprice of an evil fate. He 
boldly hurled defiance at Jagga and his nephew whose cause 
he espoused and devoted his attention to collect forces and 
devise schemes to rescue the emperor and his family. Although 
he successfully arranged the flight of prince Ramadeva, one of 
of the emperor’s sons from prison, he was not destined to set 
either the emperor or other members of the royal family at 
liberty. His efforts ill this direction ended disastrously, as they 
brought about the destruction of the imperial family. 

Yacama received with great cordiality prince Ramadeva, 
when he arrived at his camp and began to concert measures 
iya. At his instance, twenty soldiers entered 
le dalavay guarding the fort and dug secretly 
passage leading to the prison, where the 
mperor was detained so that he might steal away from the 
ort unobserved. While the emperor was descending into the 
>assage, he was accidently discovered by the guard, and was 
mmediately transferred to another prison where he was kept 
tnder more vigilant custody. The dalavay who was probably 
uspected to have abetted the excavation of the tunnel was 
is office; Jagga himself became the jailor of 
The failure of his scheme did not, however, 
mind with despair. He got into touch with 
captain of five hundred men employed in the 
fort of Vellore, and purchased his support by agreeing to pay 
him a heavy bribe. Obalesa agreed to slay the guard, 
protecting the prison and assist in the flight of the Raya and 

:: ' '■ : ; 1 ' ' ' " ' ' : ; ■ ■ ■ . 

.V , ; : - :A . V . 

:■ ' 

Iff 




329 



Ms family at a suitable moment. Taking advantage of the 
absence of Jaggaraya and his men from the fort, Obalesa slew 
the guards and having seized the three gates, sent an urgent 
message to Yacama to come at once and take possession of 
it. But news of the happenings at Vellore reached Jaggaraya’s 
camp quicker and he, having hastened to the place, enterd the 
fort by an unguarded postern gate, and surrounded Obalesa 
with all his men* (231). Infuriated by the successive attempts 
made by Yacama to carry away Sriranga from prison, Jagga- 
raya resolved to rid himself of the bother once for all. One 
night, he went to the prison, with his brother Cinna Obaraya 
and a few loyal friends, ostensibly for offering his respects to 
the emperor, and having surrounded the prison with their 
retainers, massacred the emperor, his wives and children 
without compunction.f 


The stormy reign of Sriranga II was thus brought to an 
abrupt end four months after its commencement. Sriranga 
was probably a good king; but he had neither capacity nor 
prudence to govern an empire seething with sedition and 
rebellion. He mismanaged the affairs of state and perished as 
a consequence of his mismanagement. 


* forgotten Empire (Barrada*), pp. 227-28. 
t Soureu, p. 382; Por&otttn Smfirt (Barrada*), p. 228. 

1—42 


CHAPTER XXVI. 



RAMADEVA. 


If J aggaraya expected to remove the obstacles completely 
from the path of his nephew, by the perpetration of such a foul 
act, he was very much mistaken; for the inhuman manner in 
which he massacred the Raya and his family sent a thrill of 
horror and pity in the minds of the people throughout the 
empire. They began to hate Jaggaraya and his nephew 
and to entertain feelings of sympathy to Ramadeva, the 
sole survivor of the royal family. Several nobles like Matli 
Tiruvengalanatha, who gave valuable assistance to the members 
of the Gobburi family to resist Yacama’s attacks upon 
their estates (235), being disgusted with Jaggaraya’s loathsome 
conduct, deserted him and went over to the side of Ramadeva, 
whom Yacama had already proclaimed emperor. Yacama 
now felt confident that he was strong enough to prevail against 
Jaggaraya. Therefore, he placed himself at the head of his 
army consisting of twenty thousand men and took the field. 
He was accompanied by his brothers Singapa, Rayapa and 
Ayyapa besides Damerla Cenna and other nobles that had 
joined him, after the assassination of Srfranga II. Jaggaraya 
could no longer avoid a battle with Yacama. He assembled 
his troops and marched to the battle supported by his 
lieutenants Makaraja and Ravijla Venka. Both the armies 
met at an unknown place, and in the engagement that took 
place, Jaggaraja, notwithstanding his superiority in numbers, 
sustained a crushing defeat and took refuge in the jungles. 
The victory which Yacama gained over the enemy produced a 
profound impression on the minds of the people. It is said 
that, as a consequence of Yacama’s victory, Karmili and 
Satyavidu, two strongholds of the Gobburi family, were/ 
alarmed; the. fort of Cenji fell to pieces ; confusion prevailed 
e country as far as Madura; and the frontier forts 



rne victory nrougnt tresti recruits to the army ot 
Yacama. Being greatly encouraged by this fresh access of 
strength, he resolved to deprive the Gobburi chiefs of their 
estates. While &riranga li was still in prison, he made an 
attempt to reduce the territories held by them in the south- 
west of the Nellore district. At his instance, an army marched 
against Podalakuru and Kuliur belonging to Grobburi Ramaraja 
and captured them. They nest proceeded to the fort of Vogfir, 
where Ramaraja had taken refuge, but were compelled to 
retreat on account of the intervention of Math Tiruvengala- 
natha (235), Yacama found it convenient to complete the 
conquest of the estates of the Gobburi family, after his victory 
over Jaggaraya and he seems to have captured Karmili and 
Palemkota, which became the headquarters of his successors. 

Jaggaraya did not take his defeat lying down. He got 
into touch with the Nayaks of Madura and Cenji, who were 
probably in league with him from the beginning, and secured 
their support. Notwithstanding his defeat and the loss of 
prestige, he appears to have become more formidable; for, 
Yacama could not think of facing him without the support of a 
powerful ally. Yacama was, however, as resourceful as he 
was brave. He knew that the Nayak of Tanjore, who was 
jealous of the power of the rulers of Cenji and Madura, 
would readily throw in his weight on his side, if he was 
requested to do so. Therefore, he visited the Tanjore court 
personally and begged Raghunatha to assist him in placing 
Prince Ramadeva on the throne of his ancestors. Agreeably 
to the wishes of Yacama, Raghunatha readily promised to lend 
his support. 

Yacama, having successfully accomplished his mission at 
Tanjore, returned to Vellore. And gathering all the forces he 
could command, he started towards the neighbourhood of 
Trichinopoly, where Jagga lay encamped with his allies. 
Yacama was accompanied by Ramadevaraya and a host of 
chiefs, the most important of whom were his brothers Singa, 
Rayapa, and Ayyapa, Damerla Kari Cenna, Oeraku Vengala, 



332 

Ketireddi Raghunatha, Pavada Krsna and others (232). On 
the way he was joined by Ragnunatha Nayaka of Tanjore; and 
both the armies proceeded towards Trichinopoly. When they 
arrived at Palamarneri, they learnt that Jaggaraya with his 
army was encamped in the neighbouring village of To pur. 
Therefore, they halted at Palamarneri, and having rested, 
arrayed themselves in battle order nest morning and marched 
eagerly desirous of attacking the enemy. 

When Yacama and Raghunatha arrived at Topur, they 
found Jaggaraya eagerly waiting for them to give them warm 
reception. He was strongly supported by Krsnapa of Cenji, 
Virapa of Madura, Makaraja, Ra villa Venka, and the 
$akamuru chiefs, besides a number of other nobles who 
acquired renown as warriors of great prowess. The battle 
seems to have commenced with an artillery duel. This was 
followed by a charge of the Tanjore cavarly on the Madura 
forces. The infantry probably led by Yacama attacked them 
before they could recover from the shock. The forces of the 
Kayak of Madura fled in panic. Jaggaraya moved forward 
to the rescue of his ally, but he was not able to turn 
the tide of the battle. On perceiving Jaggaraya, Raghunatha 
Kayak of Tanjore commanded his troops to attack him. 
A fierce action ensued in which Jaggaraya and many of his 
friends perished. The death of Jaggaraya was the signal for 
the flight of his allies. A vague panic seems to have taken 
possession of their minds; and without contemplating further 
resistance, they abandoned their camp and baggage and sought 
safety in flight. The Velugotivarioamsavali gives a graphic 
account^ of the confusion in the camp of Jaggaraya’s allies. 
The Kayak of Cenji trembling with fear approached 
Virapa of Madura and exclaimed, “O, Virapa, Jaggaraya 
is killed; Makaraja has already dashed away on his horse; 
Ravela Venka has begun to flee and the Dalavay has given up 
the idea of counting his elephant, and hidden himself outside 
the Camp. If we tarry here longer, we shall surely lose our lives 
outside the camp. Make haste, we must reach Trichinopoly.” 

jiH .. ‘ i ■ . IISSlP h ■: ; : ; ' ’ : : : ■ : ; : 





Vlrapa was not unaware of the danger. As a matter of fact, 
he saw Yacama’s dreaded infantry approaching his camp. 
Therefore, he stole away from the camp, and took refuge in the 
fort of Trichinopoly. Krsnapa of Cehji concealed his dear life 
within his fort and did not venture to come outside. The 
example of the great leaders was followed by their humbler 
followers. Cina Rautu, Tippa Rautu, Tittepa Setti, Ghatti 
Mudali and other nobles fled one after another in alarm 
from the field. When all the trusted chiefs had either perished 
or taken to flight, the defeated one (the putative son ?) being 
deserted by all was taken prisoner (231). 

The battle of Topur was, no doubt, a turning point in the 
history of the civil war; the death of Jaggaraya deprived his 
partisans of the only capable leader they had. The imprison- 
ment of his nephew must have disorganized them considerably. 
They were, however, obliged to keep together, on account of 
the menace of the Velamas, who threatened their very 
existence; for Yacama and his relations, after celebrating the 
victory over Jaggaraya, proceeded to seize the estates of his 
family and friends. It is said that he defeated Mabaraja, slew 
Jagga of Cengadu, and captured all the forts belonging to 
the Gobburi- family with their dependent territories (232). 
He attacked Krsnapa of Cenji and took four forts from him 
so that he was left with little more than the fortress of Cenji.* 
When Krsnapa attempted to recover his forts, he was defeated 
in battle and taken prisoner (232). At last, Yacama came into 
conflict with Jaggaraya's brother, Etiraja, near Palemkota and 
put him to flight. f 

Notwithstanding the numerous victories which Yacama 
gained over the enemies of Ramadevaraya, the civil war did 

* Macleod: Z>/ Oost-Indischi Compagnit i» pp* 013-14. 

f The Vdug^varivaihsUvzli declares, H (Etiraja) departed leaving his brothers 
and relations ”, which may be taken to mean that he died; but as the contemporary 
Dutch records make it clear that he was alive at least until A.D. 1629, the passage has 
to be interpreted literally so a? to mean that he ded from the battle abandoning hie 
brothers and relations. 


834 



not come to an end. Etiraja and his allies, though, vanquished 
repeatedly still exercised considerable power. And the civil 
war dragged on until A.D. 1622, as the Nayaks of Tanjore, 
Madura and Cenji still disagreed among themselves in the 
choice of their overlord. Madura and Cenji persisted in 
upholding the claim of the putative son, whereas the Nayak of 
Tanjore supported Eamadeva. The death of the putative son 
in A.D. 1619, and the reconciliation of Eamadeva with Etiraja, 
whose daughter he married, removed all obstacles to peace, 
though the Southern Nayaks, who were interested in feeding 
the embers of civil war, still found it difficult to come to an 
agreement; and began to rule their respective territories 
independently.* Eamadeva was, however, recognized as the 
emperor of Karnataka ; Etiraja now allied to him, espoused his 
cause warmly, and made strenuous efforts to strengthen his 
power. The task was not, however, easy. The Nayaks of Madura 
and Cenji who were allied to him in the past refused to 
recognize his son-in-law, Eamadeva, as their overlord. The 
nobles who held estates in the districts in the neighbourhood of 
the capital showed little disposition to obey the central 
government; they waged war upon one another in defiance of 
its authority and did pretty much as they liked. Nevertheless 
Etiraja did not lose courage. Taking with him the young 
emperor, Eamadeva, he set out at the head of his army ; and 
was joined by Raghunatha Nayaka of Tajore.f 

The events of the campaign are not fully recorded. But 
the casual references in the day hook of the Dutch factory at 
Pulieat enable us to reconstruct it in outline. The ruler of 
Madura who took the offensive made an attack on Tanjore, and 
plundered and burnt in February, A.D. 1625 Peta, the chief 
place in Tanjore for the transit trade with Malabar ;$ but he 
seems to have been loon chased out of the Tanjore .territory; for, 
a few months later (May, A.D. 1625) Etiraja and Eamadeva lay 
before Triehinopoly evidently besieging the fort. They . were, 

Dt Oott-Inducht Camfa£mt i, pp. +62, 453, 4S9. 

/ % m t p.4§9, ■ : - 


835 



* Macleod : Dt Oait-Mische Comfagnie i, p. 465. 


however, obliged to abandon the enterprise and hasten 
homewards, owing to the outbreak of a rebellion in the 
neighbourhood of the capital. 

The reconciliation of Ramadevaraya with EtirSja and 
the members of the Grobburi family led to the estrangement of 
Yacama, who had loyally stood by him during the worst days 
of the civil war. The cause of the estrangement was not so 
much due to any change in Ramadeva’s attitude to Yacama 
as to the latter’s desire to appropriate the estates 
belonging to the Grobburi chiefs, especially the port of 
Pulicat which belonged to Etiraja himself. Yacama’ s desire to 
seize this port was so well known at the time that interested 
parties, who were anxious to cause trouble to the Dutch factor, 
Isjabrants, sent messages to Etiraja informing him, falsely of 
course, that the factor was contemplating the surrender of the 
place to Yacama* The latter, however, awaited a favourable 
opportunity to attack the place ; and when Etiraja and 
Ramadeva were away with their forces besieging Trichino- 
poly, considering that the time was suitable for the successful 
prosecution of the enterprise, instigated his kinsfolk, who held 
the coastal region, to rebel. His brother Singama, who was 
holding Chingleput, having joined two other chiefs marched at 
the head of 10,000 troops to San Thome, with the object of 
attacking Pulicat ultimately, after effecting a junction with the 
army of his ally and cousin, Timma Nayaka,f who held sway 
over Armugam and the territories beyond. The plans of 
Singama, however, miscarried. Owing to the intervention of 
a certain Tiruvengalanatharaja whose lands lay between 
Pulicat and Timma Nay aka, the failure of the Portuguese to 
render any assistance, and the approach of the forces of 
Etiraja arid Ramadeva, he abandoned the enterprise and 
retired to his headquarters. 

Nothing is known about the events that happened during 
the next few months. The state of affairs probably remained 



The Muhammadan Conquest of Kurnool : — The disastrous 
civil war, which convulsed the Vijayanagara empire for nearly 
fifteen years after the death Venkata II, did not fail to attract 
the attention of the rulers of the Deccan. The Sultan of 

*!&&cl®od : Dt Oest~Inditche Compagm$i t p* 480. + !btd % p. 487. 

% Hid, p. 487; Fotter : Englith Fact oriet In India (1624 to 1629), pp. J46-7. 


unchanged. Ramadeva and Etiraja lay about Tiruvlru with 
their army in the middle of A.D. 1626, and they were harassed 
by the Nayaks of Cenji and Madura, who invaded the 
region around Puducceri belonging to Velugoti Kasturi Ranga, 
son of Yacama Nayaka. As he was not well-disposed towards 
his sovereign, he could not have received much help from 
that quarter. Although he claims victories over Virapa of 
Madura, and Krsnapa and Madhava of Cenji (233), he 
suffered much loss of territory during the invasion * To 
complicate the situation further, Damerla Venkatapati, the 
chief of Kalahasti, who had gradually made himself master of 
the north-east of the territory of Vijayanagara, rose up in 
rebellion in Feb. A.D. 1628.f But Etiraja and Ramadeva did not 
despair of success. They persisted in their attempts to subdue 
the rebels and succeeded ultimately in reducing them to sub- 
jection. Ramadeva had finally, with the help of the faithful 
Etiraja, gained great advantages over them in July A.D. 1629, 
and began to bring the kingdom under his control. The Nayak 
of Cenji gave up hostilities and went over to his side. Kasturi 
Ranga and his uncle Singama were defeated and forced to 
surrender the forts of Chingleput and Karungolipalem to the 
Raya. The rebellious chiefs in the neighbourhood of Pulicat 
were put down by the son of Etiraja who captured Tiruvattfir, 
Handiambaka, Kaliir and other places ; and Damerla Venkata- 
pati, unable to face the royal army which was now nearly 
1,00,000 strong, submitted without resistance . % Ramadeva 
had at last become the master of his ancestral territories, 
after a bitter struggle of a decade and a half with his rebellious 
subjects. 


337 



Bijapur, who attempted in vain since the days of Rak?asi- 
Tangadi, to establish himself in the Western Telttgu country, 
found that the time was favourable for realising his ambition. 
He despatched an expedition tinder one of -his officers, ’Abdul 
Wahab Khan, against Kurnool in A.D. 1619-20, Gopalaraja, 
the chief of the place offered stout resistance. The Sultan of 
Grolkonda, who was friendly to Gopalaraja, probably rendered 
him some assistance, as Ravilla Ayyapa II, who must have 
been one of his subordinates, is said to have received a jewelled 
crown as a reward for some services from Ramadeva of 
Karnataka (262). Peace was concluded between Gopalaraja 
and the Sultan of Bijapur in December AD., 1621.* 

The respite which Gopalaraja had obtained was, however, 
short-lived. The Suljtan of Bijapur did not give up his designs 
upon Kurnool. Once again in A. D. 1624, he sent against the 
fort Wahab Khan, who marched with his forces and laid siege 
to it. Gopalaraja was reduced to great straits, and he appealed 
to the neighbouring chiefs for assistance. In response to his 
request, the Hande and Pemmasani chiefs sent their troops ; 
and Matli Tiruvengalanatha, who promised Gopalaraja’s succour 
formerly at Candragiri, joined them with his forces. They 
engaged Wahab Khan in a battle under the walls of Kurnool ; 
but being defeated by him, the forces of the Hande and 

* Ibid, p. 456 Ibrahim Zabiri, however, states that the fort of Karnool was conquered 
by Ibrahim ’Adi! Shah’s officers stationed at Adoni in A. H. 1031 (A.D. 1621*22)* 

* / „ X* . it jK <s Jvr 


Bus2t~us m SalMttj p. 273, 

Thit is not probable as the contemporary Dutch records explicitly state that a treaty 
was concluded in December A*D* 1621. 


Pemmasani chiefs fled; and Tiruvengalanatha, who refused to 
accept defeat and seek refuge in flight, was slain (237-238-a). 
Gopalaraja realised that it was futile to continue the fight 
longer. Having resolved to save himself while there was yet 
time, he abandoned the fort, and sought refuge in an unknown 
place. The fort with its dependent territory passed into the 
hands of the Mussulmans permanently. 

Ramadeva who was absorbed in his own affairs could not 
send any help to Gropalaraja at the time. It is not unlikely 
that he might have thought of recovering Kurnool, after the 
subjugation of the rebellious nobles in A.D. 1629. But his 
death on 24, May, A.D. 1630, at the early age of twenty, set seal 
to the Mussulman conquest.* 



CHAPTER XXVII 


The death of Ramadeva plunged the kingdom of Karnata 
once again into anarchy and civil war. As Ramadeva had 
no sons or brothers to succeed him, he nominated one of 
his cousins, Peda Venkata, a grandson of Aliya Ramaraja, 
as his successor; but the selection of Peda Venkata was not 
agreeable to Timmaraja, who considered that he had a better 
claim to the throne, as he was the paternal uncle of the 
late monarch. On the death of Ramadeva, he seized the 
government, and forced Peda Venkata to remain at Anegondi, 
his native place. Timmaraja, however, failed to excite any 
sympathy in the minds of his subjects ; he was generally 
regarded as a usurper; and the great feudatory Nayaks of 
Cebji, Tanjore and Madura showed open hostility and 
espoused the cause of Peda Venkata* The rivalry between 
Peda Venkata or Venkata III and Timmarsja engendered 
much confusion in the country and the horrors ox civil war 
revived once again. f The Vlrappaya Kalajnana which seems 


340 



field on behalf of his uncle, and marched against Timmaraja 
and his followers who entrenched themselves . at Kulur 
(Kolfir, Ponneri tk.) in the vicinity of Katur. Isjabrants, the 
Dutch factor at Puli cat, lent him some ammunition, which 
he put to effective use during the ensuing operations. The 
fort of Ivatfir was surrendered to him on 15 April, A.D. 1635, 
and Kolur followed suit; and Solavaram fell at the end of the 
month. And Timmaraja who retired to Kanclvaram was 
surrounded by another section of the Karnataka army and 
was compelled to sue for terms. He was allowed to keep 
Chingelput and Karungulipafem, on condition that he handed 
over •S.olaVaram, Toripatur and Satavfu- to Venkata III, who 
was proclaimed sovereign. Timmaraja, however, showed 
again inclination to give trouble; but he was put down by the 
help of the Kayak of Cenji who slew him ultimately. After 
the death of Timmaraja (A.D. 1635), peace was restored in the 
country, and Venkata III went to Vellore and lived there * 


Although Venkata III was theoretically the ruler of 
Karnataka since the death of Ramadevaraya in A.D. 1630, his 
rule actually commenced only after the death of Timmaraja 
in A.D. 1635. As soon as he was firmly established at 
Vellore, he proceeded to make arrangements for the defence 
of his dominions. The Sultan of Bijapur, who captured 
Kurnool in AD. 1624, began to cast envious glances at Penu- 
gonda, his ancestral capital. To provide for its proper defence, 
he sent in Aug. A,D., 1636 his dalavay, 'Candragiri Koneti 
Nayaka to the fort, having bestowed it together with its 
dependent territory upon his as amaram . Koneti Nayaka who 
had taken possession of his new estate managed to preserve its 
independence until the final dissolution of the empire some 


a peace. In the first 
who suspected that 
of Cenji, plotted to 



seize him with Tupagi Krisnappa Nay aha, a general of Cexiji, 
at a place where all of them had arranged to meet together; 
hut the plot miscarried; and a war between Venkata III and 
the Southern Nayaks began early in A.D. 1637.* The history 
of this war is unknown. Probably V enkata soon made up his 
differences with his powerful subordinates. 

Secondly, Venkata III had to contend against internal 
troubles and foreign invasions. The Vlrappaya Kalajnana de- 
clares that several untoward events happened in the middle of 
the Bahudhanya (Aug. Sept,., A.D. 1638) ; all the forts fell into 
the hands of the Muhammadans ; and the most powerful Mamie 
chiefs of the day were enslaved by them (16). The account of 
the KalajnUna is confirmed by the evidence of the Keladinrpa 
Vijayam which asserts that the Sultan of Bijapur, at the 
instance of the chief of Tarikere and Basavapattanam, i.e., 
Kenge Hanuma, sent an army under Randaula Khan to 
conquer Ikkeri and other territories.f Randaula proceeded to 
Karnataka, and before he actually commenced operations 
agaist Vlrabhadra Nayaka, he took an important step calculated 
to strengthen his position. The petty chiefs of Karnataka, 
whom he intended to attack, were still, though only in name, 
the subjects of the emperor of Vijayanagara. An attack on 
any of them might involve him in a war with the Raya ; and 
all the Hindu chiefs in the face of common danger might join 
their forces together, and having placed themselves under his 
command, oppose his advance. The chances of his success lay 
in Hindu disunion. To keep his enemies divided, Randaula 
artfully proposed an alliance with the Raya. He declared that 
the Raya should co-operate with him to subjugate the turbulent 
chiefs of Kariiata; he desired no territorial acquisition, but 
was willing to remain contented with the movable property that 

* Macleod : D& Ovst-IndUcJu Campagnit i*V'p« 170, 

t Keladinrpa Vijayam, 6: 31. Hanuma appears to he a common name borne by all 
the members of the family to indicate their devotion to their family deity Hanuman. The 
Apredecfiaom'of ' 4h*\xoht*jtn ; pbfa^ Randaula Khan, bore the names of Yira 

' Hft&umappa, Immafi Hanumappa and Huccu Hanumappa respectively, (See My** 
Qm n VoL v, p , 1276), - ■ ' 



MHHflll 


he might capture ; and all the conquered forts belonged, of 
course, to the Raya ; and he could take possession of them. 

Venkata, who was probably taken in by the prospect of 
power held out by Randaula, accepted the proposal and entered 
into an alliance with him ; but as soon as he grasped its real 
significance, he repudiated it, ‘ made common cause with the 
other rajas and hoisted the banner of revolt Randaula, how- 
ever, did not give up his plan. He found a more pliable tool 
to promote his schemes of conquest in Srlranga, a son of Cina 
Venkata, a younger brother of Venkata III. Srlranga, who was 
taken in adoption by Gopalaraja of Kandanavolu, became, 
after the conquest of that place in A.D. 1624, a subject of the 
Sultan of Bijapur. He helped Venkata III, as noticed already, 
in overthrowing Timmaraja in A. D. 1635; and since that time, 
owing to some differences with his uncle, he retired to his 
estate, and waited for an opportunity to better his fortune. 
Randaula now entered into an alliance with Srlranga on the 
same conditions which he offered to Venkata, and began to 
prosecute his war against the petty chiefs of Karnata* 

Having taken precautions to prevent the arrival of any 
possible help from Vellore, Randaula Khan marched on Ikkeri 
with the help of Kenge Hanuma, and captured it on Pusya 
ba. 10, Isvara, S.S. 1560 (30 Dec., A.D. 1637). Vlrabhadra 
Nayaka, unable to offer resistance, fled to Bhuvanagiri ; but as 
Randaula pursued him thither, he was obliged to sue for peace. 
He surrendered his claims to the conquered forts, and was 
allowed to hold the remaining territory as a subordinate of 
the Sustain of Bijapur.f 


* Muhammadnatnah, S. T, C. 2, p, 103. Zahar assigns the conclusion of this pact with 
the Rayal and Sil Ranga to the period following the capture of BelUr and Tumklr in 
A.H. 1049 (A, D. 1639). This doe* not appear to be likely; for, the Dutch records state that 
Srlranga rose in rebellion near the Bijapur frontier in A,D. 1638. As feuranga obviously,, 
caused this disturbance to embarrass Venkata III and help Randaula, he must have entered 
into alliance with Randaula by this time. Therefore, Randaula’s pact with Venka|a III, 
and the latter’s repudiation of it must be assigned to a still earlier date. 

Vi jay am 6 t 30-33. The Muhammadi&tnah assigns Randaula'* attack on 
630), This is too early a date for the expedition. The other 
* 



In the meantime Randaula advanced on Bangalore taking 
the fort of Sira on his way. Notwithstanding the temporary 
disaffection of Kenge Hannma, Randaula captured the fort, 
and appointed Shahaji, one of his lieutenants, as its governor. 
He next proceeded to &rirangapattanam and invested the 
fort for a month ; but at the end of this period, he raised the 
siege on obtaining an indemnity of 5 lakhs of hons from its 

fact* mentioned in this work in connection with the conquest of Ikkeri are the same as 
tho*» of Ktlaiintpa Vijayam, only the Muhammadn^mak ha* Kaananidurf in the place of 
Bhuvanagiri {Mukammadn^fnak S. T. C. 2, p. 96). 

* MHfammadncLmah 2, p. 99. 

t Macleod : £>& Qest-Inditch* Cmpagnit ii, p. 173, 


Randaula did not, however, return to Bijapur after his 
victories over Vlrabhadra Nayaka, as he was instructed by the 
Suljan to subjugate the whole of Malnad and Karnataka. 
Therefore, he moved eastwards, crossed the Tungabhadra and 
contemplated an attack upon Tadipatri in the Amantapur 
district, which was the headquarters at this time of the 
Pemmasani chiefs of Gandikota ; hut Kenge Hannma, who 
was won over by the Mamie chiefs of that region, dissuaded 
Randaula from proceeding in that direction and diverted his 
attention to Bangalore, where Kempe Gauda was ruling with 
pomp and pride.* Another reason for this change of direction 
was the outbreak of a rebellion in that region headed by 
Randaula’ s ally ^riranga. Therefore, he allowed himself to 
be persuaded by Hanuma and commanded the troops to march 
towards Bangalore in the south. ; 


As soon as the news of the rebellion of ^rlranga reached 
Vellore, Venkata III hastened with 25,000 men to put him 
down 5 but he learnt on the way that Randaula had already 
invaded Karnata with 90,000 men and penetrated as far as 
Bangalore. Realising that his forces were not adequate to 
oppose the invader, he quickly returned to his capital and 
sent an appeal to his Nayaks for help.f 



ruler, Kanthlrava Narasa and returned with the army to 
Bijapur. These events took place in A.D. 1638-39.* 

It is, however, doubtful whether Randaula Khan’s retire- 
ment from iWangapattanam was due to the payment by 
Kanthlrava Narasaraja of a large indemnity of five lakhs of 
hons. The Kanthlram-Mrasarajendra-Vijayam , which was 
composed in A. D. 1648, gives an elaborate account of 
Randaula Khan’s campaign in the Kannada country, and 
attributes Ibis retreat from Srlrangapattana to a defeat 
sustained by him at the hands of Kanthlrava Narasa.f 

Rattdaula did not long remain in Bijapur ; for the outbreak 
of a rebellion of the chiefs for Malnad brought him back to 
the scene of his recent activities again. Kenge Hanuma with 
Q.n 1 rsrmmiered M&lii&d rose up in rebellion. 


■va p|>. 


345 



The Keladinrpa Vijayam gives a slightly different account. 
Virabhadra retired, after his defeat at the hands of Randaula 
Khan, to the fort of Bidurur which he made his headquarters. 
The injury caused by the chief of Tarikere and Basava- 
pattanam, however, rankled in his mind. To get even with 
him, Virabhadra resolved to seek an alliance with the Sultan, 
and bring about the downfall of his enemy. He sent Rama- 
krsnappa, a niyogi in his service, to BijapSr, in the month of 
Margasira of Bahudhanya, S.S. 1561 (Dec. 1638), and obtained 
the Sultan’s consent to join Randaula Khan in his expedition 
against Basavapattanam. When Ramakrsnappa arrived at 
Bidurur with a favourable reply from the Sultan, Virabhadra 
despatched him with an army under Sivappa Nay aka to 
Randaula’s camp at Harihara. They joined him and invaded 
the territory belonging to Tarikere-Basavapattanam.* 

The difference between the accounts of the Muhammad- 
namah and the Keladinrpa Vijayam is negligible. Whether 
Randaula invited Virabhdra to join him, or the latter volun- 
teered help on his own account is of little consequence. Both 
the accounts agree that Kenge Hanuma's rebellion was put 
down by the joint efforts of Randaula and Virabhadra. 

The story of the campaign against Hanuma may now be 
briefly told. Randaula endeavoured at first to persuade 
TTn.nnma to submit without fierh tins' ; but he was obstinate: 


846 



* M&cleod : De Oesi-Indtsche Compagnit ii, p. 174. The RUmappayyan Amn&nai 
states that in response to his appeal, Tirumala Nayaka of Madura sent to the Raya an 
army under Ramappayya, who joined him at Bangalore, defeated the Muhammadans 
, mad captured much booty from them (253). 

t Muhammzdnfimah $*T.C. 2, p. 103 ; cf, MacLeod : Dt Ont-Inducht Ctmpagnit ii, 
p - m - . 


him in response to his appeal, early in A.D. 1639 ; but nothing 
is known of this campaign except that he was defeated and 
returned to Vellore in July, having agreed to pay a large 
indemnity to the enemy. In November he started again with 
20,000 men to capture Bangalore; but returned to Vellore, 
as news of the fall of Basavapuram (Basavapattanam) .and 
the invasion of Karnataka by the BijapSr army reached him 
half way* 

Randaula halted for a short time at Basavapattanam ; 
his presence was required elsewhere. The chief of Cikka- 
nayakanahalli in the Tumkur district rose in revolt, and if 
immediate steps were not taken to put him down, the rebellion 
might spread over the neighbouring region. Therefore, he 
despatched at once a large force under Afzal Khan, and 
followed him at greater leisure with the rest of the army. 
On the arrival of Afzal Khan at Cikkanayakanahalli, the 
chief who lost his nerve submitted and surrendered his fort. 
Afzal Khan next, attacked Beiur and Tumkur and captured 
both the forts of Ballapur and Kunigal. Randaula appropriated 
all the wealth captured in them and handed the empty forts 
over to Sriranga, according to the terms of the agreement.f 

Another Bijaphr invasion came under Randaula Khan 
in May, A.D. 1641. Venkata III marched from Vellore to 
oppose him; he, however, returned to the capital before the 
rains commenced (Aug. 1641). Prince Sriranga had now 
joined the Bijapur general who captured two fortresses 
belonging to Venkata. The way into the interior was now 
open, and Randaula Khan accompanied by Sriranga marched 
upon Vellore, and pitched his camp at a distance of twelve 
miles from the city. But the timely arrival of help from the 
Nayaks of Madura, Tanjore, and Oefiji checked the advance 



847 



of the Bijapur general and gave temporary relief to 
Venkata.* 

Meanwhile, the Sultan of GrSlkonda, who had been closely 
watching the trend of events, did not like that the whole of 
Karnataka should pass under the sovereignty of Bijapur. There- 
fore,' he sent an army 4,000 horse and 14,000 foot against 
Karnataka from the east in April A.D. 1642 to appropriate 
as much territory as they could lay hands on. I he army 
marched along the coast capturing on the way eight forts with 
the territories dependent thereon and reached Armugam in the 
extreme south of the Nellore district. The people fled in 
panic towards Pulicat. Venkata III did not lose courage. 
1U manfully proceeded to oppose the invaders with Velugoti 
Timma, the lord of Armugam ; and Damerla Venkata, the ruler 
of Madraspatam and Poonamalle, joined them with 40,000 men. 
They could not, however, offer effective resistance to the 
Grolkonda forces. Velugoti Timma lost many of his forts 
including the island of Srlharikota midway between Armugam 
and Pulicat, and he fled to the hills by night. Venkata III 
also retired to the mountainous tracts in the Chittore district, 
where he sojourned in a helpless condition for sometime and 
died on 10 October, A.D. 1642.f P ' V/Sp. 


* M&cleod; Ml Ottt-Indiuht Compsgnii ii, p- V?- 

inid, pp. 176 - 7 ?; Foster: Enelith Patterhs In Indiaiib**-, p.pp, 44-5, 





CHAPTER XXVIll 

SRIRANGA III. 

Venkata III had no legitimate children;* so, on his death 
he was succeeded by his ‘treacherous’ nephew, Sriranga III. 
When his uncle lay dying among the hills of Narayanavaram, 
finding a good chance of saving the Vijayanagara throne for 
himself, he deserted the Bijapur general, and came forward as 
the defender of his ancestral kingdom. f 

Sriranga III was proclaimed king on 29 October, A.D. 1642. 
The first thing which he had to do was to expel the invaders 
from his dominions. To oppose the advance of the Golkonda 
army, he went to Tirupati, where he entrenched himself in 
April A.D. 1543. Though he had a large army with him, he 
dared not face the Mussalmans who were better armed. 
Moreover, the treachery of some of his nobles probably 
engendered a feeling of insecurity in his mind. Whatever be 
the reason, Sriranga abandoned his camp and retreated 
towards Narayanavaram and Vellore on the approach of the 
Golkonda army. However, they did not go in pursuit of him. 
Instead, they proceeded to Udayagiri in the northwest of the 
Nellore district and laid siege to that fort. 

Sriranga could not render any assistance to the garrison 
at Udayagiri owing to the rebellion of some of his nobles. 
Damerla Venkatapati Nay aka of Kalahasti was hostile to him 
ever since his accession . % In March A.D. 1643, when Sriranga 
was camping at Tirupati with the object of stemming the tide 
of Grolkonda invasion, he treacherously encouraged the enemy. 
His treason was discovered and he was arrested and kept in 
confinement; but he was not punished as he deserved. 

•The poet Perianna, in the introduction to hi# poem, Minak?ianaihyuda yam, 
dedicated to Yenkata XII, states that Venkata had a son by his queen Bhagfarthi, called 
Prasannaraya Cikkaraya. 

3bU £&>?5b 

sfs®>r~ ‘So#' to7$Ycr , c*fi y'ht>§ 

sStfar'lJj&.fsdSao SSo tT’Kfciea Z&>xr‘£T)'*d 

. 3S^$er*^«fg8ag-. 

t Maeleod : DiOost-Tniitcht Campagnie ii, p. 177. ■ \ ' 

tpr. S. K. Ayyangar makes him and his brother Ayyappa members of the 

Velugoti family!* {S*T,C. t p. 43). . ' , . , 

Mi;;,:,:' : ■ . ■ ' 




849 



What mainly contributed to the success of the tiolkonda 
forces was the outbreak of a rebellion in Malnad. Vlrabhadra, 
the Nayak of Ikkeri, who never reconciled himself to the loss 
of his territory, stirred up rebellion, and concerted measures to 
overthrow the authority of Bijapur.t The Sultan on hearing 
of the outbreak of this insurrection commanded (Rustam-i 
Zaman) Randaula Khan to lead an expedition against Ikkeri 
and put down the insurgents. Randaula set out from Bijapur 
with a large army of horse, elephants and foot, accompanied 
by several officers such as Ambar Khan, Muhammad Khan, 
Yakub Khan, Ankus Khan, Saji Khan, Fateh Khan, I arhad 
Khan and Khan-i-Khanan. They reached Malnad, laid siege 
to flu* fort of Ikkeri and captured it.l Randaula appointed 


•MacleoJ: De Oost- Inducht Compagnie ii, p. 177; Foster: English Factories 
{1642-45)* p* SO, 

f Ibrahim Zabm places the outbreak of this rebellion in 1047 A. H. {Ihm BusMn- 
us-Salathir p. 318); but this date is too early; it broke out in all probability m 
A.D. 1642, after Randaula Khan's retirement from Karnataka; Zahftr assigns it to 
1053 A, H. (A,D. 1643). [ MuhamntadnUmah , S.T.C . , p. 104]. 

J Muhammadnamah calls the fort Tikri; but Butatin Us-Sa&tln (p. 318) mentions 
only Ikkeri in this connection. 




v J(jy> • ^ of** * 


Ikkeri is also situated in the neighbourhood of Sagar. 





'.namah S.T.C. 3. pp. 104-5; K e Mi»rp a Vijayam 6: 48-51. 


060 

Khan Jan as its ham Idar] proceeded to Shimoga and invested 
it. Virabhadra assembled a large army and sent it under his 
uncle Sivappa Nayaka to attack the Mussalmans. A great 
battle was fought in which the Muhammadans sustained a 
defeat and were forced to retreat. Sivappa descended on 
Ikkeri, put Khan Jan to flight, reoccupied the town, and 
strengthened its fortifications.* 

The disaster which befell the Bijapur army in the forests 
of Shimoga appears to have been great; for, it roused the 
wrath of the Sultan who, having put Rustam-i-Zaman to 
disgrace, collected another army and marched at its head 
personally to chastise the impudent rebel. He reached 
Bankapur on 11 January, A.D. 1644, and having made it his 
headquarters appointed Mustafa Khan and Muzafar-ud-Dln 
Khan-i-Khanan as the commanders of the expedition. Sivappa 
Nayaka did not give battle ; he fortified Ikkeri and retired with 
a select body of troops into the interior of the hills. The 
Muhammadan generals proceeded towards Ikkeri with their 
forces, and captured the town of Sagar after a siege of five 
days; the fall of Ikkeri soon followed. They next moved to 
Kalavur, where Vlrabhadra was perhaps living, and halted in the 
maidan outside the town. He seems to have been convinced 
that he could no longer resist the Sultan's forces. Therefore, 
he sent Saraja Ray, a niyogi in his employ, to Bankapur, and 
concluded a peace with the Sultan through the agency of 
Sivappa Nayaka. f The affairs of Malnad being thus satis- 
factorily settled, the ’Adil Shah returned to his capital on 
25 March, A.D. 1644. 

As the government of Bijapur was preoccupied with 
affairs of Ikkeri, they could not bestow any attention on 
Karnataka. Therefore, Srlranga was left without any support; 
land bereft of friends and assailed by hidden and open foes, he 
was vanquished in the field, and lost much territory. Bijapur 


851 



S52 


engagement ensued in which Singa greatly distinguished 
himself (242). Qasim ’All, the general commanding the Gol- 
konda forces, his son and two important commanders fell in 
the fight, and the army fled in panic hotly pursued by the 
victorious Ivarnatakas, until they passed beyond Kandukur in 
the north of the Nellore district. Srlranga was not, however, 
destined to enjoy the pleasure of his triumph long; for the 
Sultan of Golkonda obtained help from Bijapur; and the 
combined armies of Golkonda and Bijapur soon made their 
appearance on the frontier of Vijayanagara. 

6riranga was not able to cope with the united armies of 
the Deccani Sultans; he abandoned Kandukur and retired 
into the interior. The Golkonda armies having crossed the 
Krsiia reached Kambham in the Kurnool district in five weeks. 
The principality Erragondapalem was attacked. The Kayak 
died during the course of the campaign, and the strong fortress 
of Daddanala fell into the hands of the invaders. The two sons 
of the dead chief fled to the hills of Parmatur in the Kandy ala 
taluk- but Mir Jumla, the commander of the expedition, 
restored to them their father’s estates on their undertaking to 
pay 5,00,000 pagodas at once and 1,00,000 per annum thereon.* 

At the same time, the Bijapur general Khan-i-Khanan 
overran the north-eastern region in the neighbourhood of 
Kurnool and captured several forts including Kandyal, and 
Sirivella and Kanigiri (A.D. 1645).| 

Suddenly the Sultan of Golkonda countermanded the war; 
and gave an undertaking probably to the Bijapur government 
not to set up claims to the conquests already made, pay 
3 00,000 pagodas and maintain at his own cost 2,000 cavalry 
„ to keep Karnata under subjection. The reason for this abrupt 
term of the campaign is not known. Probably it was 

due to an agreement with grlranga. Although Sriranga was 

* Macleod - Dt Oost-In disc U Campagnit ii, pp. 182-4, 1*8 ; Foster : English Factories 

-.1: J is! .Jfc 



freed from the peril of the Mussalman invasion, he was imme- 
diately called upon to face a fresh danger from another 
quarter. The Nayaks of Madura, Tanjore and Cenji having 
joined together rose up in rebellion, and showed an inclination 
probably to wage war upon him. To put down this rebellion, 
>§rlranga recalled his army from the northern frontier, and 
proceeded to the south burning and plundering the country- 
side along his route, until he reached Cetipattu near the village 
of Gndlisitamur and awaited the arrival of the rebels. The 
Nayaks of Tanjore and Madura came to oppose him with 
70,000 troops and halted at Sakraparon ; but as they were not 
sure of victory, they sought help from Golko^da and BijapSr, 
promising to pay them large sums of money. 

The help, which they sought from the Muslim courts of 
the Deccan, was, in fact, approaching their camps unknown to 
them. The great Mughal commanded the Sultans of Bijapur 
and Grolkonda to conquer and partition Karnataka between 
themselves ; and to carry the behests of their' imperial master, 
they despatched expeditions to Karnataka to subjugate the 
country * 

Musjtafa Khan, who headed the Bijapur expedition, passed 
through Malnad and reached ^ivaganga in the Bangalore 
district, when the ambassadors of the Nayaks of Madura, 
Tanjore and Cenji met him with requests of help ; he accepted 
their proposal and marched to Vellore, directing the Khan-i- 
Khanan, who was in the neighbourhood of Kurnool, to do the 
same. 

flrlranga realised that the best chances of his success lay 
in prompt action. He resolved to strike at once. To put 
Mustafa Khan off the scent, he sent an ambassador to his 
camp with instructions to carry on negotiations of peace. He 
intended to crush the Nayak forces by delivering a quick blow 
before they could effect a junction with Mustafa Khan, return 
to Vellore after the victory, and fortify the passes so as to 

•Maeleod: JDe 0**t;lniiwhe CampagnU ii, pp. 188, W, 

' 1-45 



cheek the advance of the Bijapur armies. He marched with 
100 elephants 12,000 horse and 3,00,000 foot to the south, and 
having inflicted a defeat on the forces of Ceiiji, forced the 
Kayak to submit. The Kayaks of Tanjore and Madura, 
however, offered stubborn resistance. He would have probably 
prevailed against them, had not Mustafa Khan, who obtained 
information of his activities, upset his calculations by marching 
on Vellore. He was therefore compelled to relinquish the 
idea of prosecuting war against the Kayaks, for Mustafa Khan 
already reached Bukkapatnam in the Chittore taluk and 
the Khan-i-Khanan came to Gru^ramkonda in the Vayalpad 
taluk of the Chittore district. Therefore, Sriranga immediately 
hastened to Vellore to protect it from the attacks of the 
Bijapfir armies.* At the same time the Sultan of Golkonda 
sent an army in his turn to Vinukonda, and ordered the com- 
mander to proceed from that place to Udayagiri and capture 
that fort. 

^rlranga was utterly helpless. He made an appeal to 
Hindu nationalism, and solicited the help of his subjects to 
protect the state, temples, Brahmans and religion against 
Islamic aggression from so many sides, f This appeal was 
fruitless, as the Kayaks did not realise the danger threatening 
Hinduism. Failing in his attempt to rouse enthusiasm for the 
defence of religion, &rlranga renewed negotiations with Mustafa 
Khan and the Khan-i-Khanan. To secure peace, however, from 
the Bijapfir generals, he needed money, but his coffers were 
empty ; and he resorted to questionable means for raising it. J 

Meanwhile, Venkanna Somayaji, his ambassador, who still 
remained in the Bijapur camp, prevailed on Mustafa Khan to 
grant peace to Sriranga, and secured permission, through the 
help of Shahjl Bhonsle, to go to Vellore in company with the 
Bijapur envoy to settle the terms of peace. As soon as he 
reached Vellore, Venkanna Somayaji advised Sriranga to 

. ' • Muhammadnantsth , S.T.C. 2, -p. 113. Macleod : Dc Otst-Indische Compagnic ii, 

; " ■ . : 777 ', 7 : ' 7 ; : , . ;; :.;-7 ' ; 

t dUd, p, 191- t Ibid, pp. 19J.-192 ; Mu^ammaduSmaA S. T.C. 2, pp. 

t&u': -I:'’.' . ‘ . ‘ . 



Organise defence, and fortify the passes. Srlranga followed 
the advice of his envoy and effectively blocked the path of the 
Bijapur general. Moreover, a quarrel between the Bijapur 
generals weakened their position. Must.afa Khan brought a 
charge of embezzlement against the Ivh a n -i - Ivh an an , who was 
obliged in consequence to visit the court to justify his conduct* 


Mustafa Khan was secretly informed of Srlranga's 
activities by his rebellious ministers. He was probably 
inclined to arrive at an understanding with Srlranga and retire 
to his country. But the Nayaks made up their minds to get 
rid of Srlranga once for all ; they massed 60,000 troops in the 
neighbourhood of Vellore; and in order to embarrass him 
further offered fresh inducements to the Bijapffr commanders 
not to abandon the campaign, but to attack some of his posses- 
sions. They prevailed on Mustafa Khan to besiege Penugonda 
by promising to pay him a sum of 20 lakhs of pardaos ; 
and persuaded the Khan-i-Khanan on his return from 
Bijapur, to proceed against Kolar.f They accepted the 
offer ; Mustafa Khan marched against Penugonda and was 
within four miles of the fort in December A.D. 1645. DalavUy 
Koneti Nayadu, whom Venkata III appointed as the governor 
(240), was still in possession of the fort ; he probably managed 
to beat back the invader. The Khan-i-Khanan united himself 
with Si-Na-Rodja (Cina Venkata) who was at Giirramkonda 
and marched to Kolar to take possession of Kokantiwara. 


856 




I m § 


in his extremity an appeal to Musjafa Khan for help ;* and 
repairing to Arcot, he deputed his trusted friend Hore Naraij- 
appa to the Kayaks to open negotiations. They appear to have 
been unwilling to come to an understanding with Sriranga, 
without the consent of their ally Mustafa Khan. So they 
approached him with a request to arrange the terms of peace. 
In compliance with their request, Mustafa Khan came to 
Vellore and began to negotiate with Sriranga as well as the 
Kayaks to gain large sums of money. Sriranga knew that 
these negotiations would not help him much ; for -he learnt 
that GSlkonda and Bijapur courts had entered into an alliance; 
and Mir Jumla, the commander of the Golkonda armies, was 
planning an expedition against Karnataka with the knowledge 
and co-operation of the Sultan of Bijapur. Kevertheless, 
Sriranga resolved to adhere to Mu§Jafa Kh an and organise the 
defence of Udayagiri. These involved heavy expenditure and 
he had no money to finance his schemes. Consequently, he 
could neither win the friendship of Mustafa Khan, nor ward- off 
the invasion from Golkonda; but the sudden departure of 
Mustafa Khan and the Khan-i-Khanan to Bijapfir on receiving 
a false report of Sultan Muhammad Shah's death, however, 
gave him breathing time, f 

In the meantime, Mir Jumla marched from Golkonda with 
an army on Udayagiri; this fort, which was under the com- 
mand of Varadappa Nay aka, a brother of Venkatappa, the 
Kayak of Cenji, was entrusted to Koneri, a nephew of the 
merchant Cinnana Setti, in March A.D. 1645, when Varadappa 
resigned his. place and retired to Cenji to succeed his dead 
brother. On obtaining the information of the advance of the' 
Golkonda army, Sriranga sent Cinnana with 50,000 men to 
oppose him; but Cinnana turned traitor. When Mir Jumla laid 
siege to Udayagiri, he surrendered the fort, and was allowed to 


■ 





{ X 

if I 

Ip 


; Be Oost-Infosthe ii, P* 393. . : * - * - ■ " * 

' f Mi f p* 394. The Dutch Dagh Register asserts that the Sultan actually dud ; but* 
&§ a matter of fact is was alive until A.D. 1656. The SultSn fell so aixiously ill in 
A.D* 16 41 that the newt of his death to have been circulated in tha kfegdop. 




{ -V. ; 

, - . ( , .• ‘ 4 

/ i M jf i -jT * vi' 






657 



go away free with all his people. The fort of Udayagiri thus fell 
into the hands of Mir Juinla without much trouble. T^hen he 
turned towards the tfest, and attacked the principality of Citti- 
veli in the Cuddapah district belonging to the Matli chiefs and 
captured Kalitur, Duvvur, Cennur, Badvel, Porumamilla and 
Kamalapuram (240). Matli Kumara Ananta, the ruler of the 
principality, had not only to acquiesce in the loss of territory, 
as he could not repel these aggressions, but to purchase peace 
by offering the aggressor a large sum of money.* 


While Mir Jumla was engaged in effecting the conquest of 
Cittiveli, Mustafa Khan returned from Bijaphr to resume the 
campaign in Karnataka. The rivalry between BijapiSr and 
Golkonda, which hitherto impeded the progress of the Muslim 
conquest, gave place to amity, on account of a dynastic 
alliance between the two courts ; and the Muslim armies under 
these circumstances were expected to co-operate with eaeh 
other to overthrow the infidel, f ' ' : 

The combined attack of the Deccan Muhammadan . powers 
upon Karnataka seems for once to have awakened in the minds 
of the Nayaks the fear of common danger that was threatening 
them all. Therefore, when they heard of Mustafa Khan's 
advance upon Vellore, the Nayaks of Mysore, Kangundi, Tan- 
jore, and Ginji (Cenji) came forward to support Srlranga ; but 
the Nayak of Madura held hack on account of selfish reasons. 
The Hindu force of 10,000 horse, 1,40,000 foot assembled for 
the defence of the nation and religion. To maintain this 
force, some of the chiefs such as Jagadeva, Naraijapa and 
Vengana voluntarily contributed money and gold; and 
Srlranga took the jewels of the women of Vellore and the 
money of the temple of Tirupati. Having equipped himself 
in this manner, Srlranga went to battle with Mustafa Khan,i 

•M*cl*od; DtOost-IndUtU Compagnit ii, pp. 394,400. Foster; English Faeiefin 
In Mia (i 646 -Jo), pp. 35-6. pr V; pppfpjp ' 

t Macleod : E>$ Oost-Indiseht Cempagnit ii, p. 394. 5 , V 

■ X na, ppi 396, 398. .... p 


35S 



The passes on the direct route to Karnataka were strongly 
guarded by Siiranga’s troops. Mustafa KRan was, therefore, 
obliged to make a detour, and reach Srlranga’s capital by 
another path. He resolved to pass through the country of 
Jagadeva Row, the Raja of Cennapattana, in the present Mysore 
state, and descend into the plains through the passes in the 
Salem district. When Mustafa Khan moved with his troops 
towards the south-west, Sriranga believed that he had retreat- 
ed ; but information soon reached him that Mustafa Khan 
invaded the territories of Jagadeva Row, and was encamped at 
Masti, a place about 30 miles to the east of Bangalore. Sriranga 
hastened to Gudiyatam in the North Arcot district, and passing 
through the territories of Jagadeva, reached the fort of 
in the north-west of the Salem district. Shahji 
nd Asad-ul-Kliawanln, who were probably in charge 

.ood, wrote to Mustafa Khan 
h the latter promptly des- 
instructions to proceed with 
jund his path blocked by the 
battle ; Jagadeva Row and 
the front, whereas the chiefs 
of Mysore and Kangundi took him in the rear. Though the 
court historian, Zahur, claims a victory for the Mussalmans, 
they suffered, as a matter of fact, a reverse, and retreated 
three miles, losing 1,000 horse and a large number of men. 
Sriranga could not, however, take advantage of his victory, as 
the Kayaks of Kangundi and Mysore deserted him. Mu§|afa 
Khan summoned the Khan-i-Khanan with 8,000 horse to his 
assistance, and as soon as he joined him, occupied the places 
abandoned by Sriranga, advanced into the country of Jagadeva, 
and set about the systematic reduction of his forts. 

Sriranga, unable to carry on the war single-handed, 
retreated to Vellore; and Jagadeva despatched his women 
and children to his capital, Virabbadradurgam, and himself 
retired to Krsn&giri, Though he offered stubborn resistance his 
country was subdued, and his important forts fell into the 


rts in t licit neighbour* 
reinforcements, wliic 
ler his sar-lchayl with 
fc the sar-khayl , who f 
s compelled to otter 
igaged the enemy in 


859 


Notwithstanding the success of his arms, Musjtafa Khan 
was anxious to come to an understanding with &rlranga and 
terminate the wav. Owing to the outbreak of a famine, the 
continuation of war became more and more difficult. He 
wrote to ^rlranga offering to consider terms of peace ; but the 
latter, influenced by the counsels of Bahlol (Babala) Khan and 
Damerla Venkata, temporised. Their object was to prevent the 
union of the Nayaks and the Golkomja forces and win over 
the former to their side; and though a peace with Mu^afa 
Khan was ultimately desirable, war should be carried on with 
him until they achieved their object. 

Musjafa Khan, getting no satisfactory reply from ^riranga, 
marched on Vellore ; he captured Grudiyatam, a fort considered 
impregnable on account of its fortifications, and Virincipuram 
on the Palar on his way and reached a place within three 
miles of Vellore. 

Meanwhile, the Nayaks showed a friendly disposition to 
§rlranga and promised to send him help. Mysore and 
Kangundi apologised for their desertion ; and Madura wrote 
to Tanjore that Srfranga deserved to be supported. They 
promised to give him 40,000 men and 60,000 pardaus for the 
defence of the kingdom. He sent, Narajiappa and other nobles 
to fix up matters finally with the Nayaks. But before the 
help promised by the Nayaks reached him, Sriranga was 
obliged to give battle to the enemy. A big battle took place 
in the neighbourhood of Vellore on 4th April A.D. 1646. 
Damerla Venkata commanded the centre of Srlranga’s army, 
facing Mustafa Khan in the enemy’s centre ; Bahlol Khan and 
Dilawar Khan, two Muslim officers in SWanga’s service, took 
Up positions on his right and left opposing Sid! Raihan 
and ShahjI Bhonsle in the Bijapftr lines. In the fight that 
ensued, Bahlol and Dilawar were routed ; and the Hindus 
accepting defeat fled into the fort for refuge. Damerla Venkata 
in the centre, however, held out and delivered a counter 
attack ; but in the end he too had to retire wounded. 


The passes on the direct route to Karnataka were strongly 
o-uarded by Srlranga’s troops. Mustafa Kb an was, therefore, 
obliged to make a detour, and reach Srlranga’s capital by 
another path. He resolved to pass through the country of 
Jagadeva Row, the Raja of Cennapattana, in the present Mysore 
state, and descend into the plains through the passes in the 
Salem district. When Mustafa Kh an moved with his troops 
towards the south-west, Sriranga believed that he had retreat- 
ed; but information soon reached him that Mustafa Khan 
invaded the territories of Jagadeva Row, and was encamped at 
Masti, a place about 30 miles to the east of Bangalore. Sriranga 
hastened to Gudiyatam in the North Arcot district, and passing 
through the territories of Jagadeva, reached the fort of 
Krfmagiri in the north-west of the Salem district. ShahjI 
Bhonsle and Asad-ul-Khawanln, who were probably in charge 
of some forts in that neighbourhood, wrote to Mustafa Khan 
asking for reinforcements, which the latter promptly des- 
patched under his mr-lthayl with instructions to proceed with 
speed. But the sar-khayl, who found his path blocked by the 
enemy, was compelled to offer battle ; Jagadeva Row and 
Sriranga engaged the enemy in the front, whereas the chiefs 
of Mysore and Kangundi took him in the rear. Though the 
court historian, Zahur, claims a victory for the Mussalmans, 
they suffered, as a matter of fact, a reverse, and retreated 
three miles, losing 1,000 horse and a large number of men. 
Sriranga could not, however, take advantage of his victory, as 
the Nayaks of Kangundi and Mysore deserted him. Mustafa 
Khan summoned the Khan-i-Khanan with 8,000 horse to his 
assistance, and as soon as he joined him, occupied the places 
abandoned by Sriranga, advanced into the country of Jagadeva, 
and set about the systematic reduction of his forts. 

ir&angaj unable to carry on the war single-handed, 
retreated to Vellore; and Jagadeva despatched his women 
and children to his capital, Vlrabhadradurgam, and himself 
Krsnagiri. Though he offered Stubborn resistance his 







impoftaht forts fell into the 

4 '" ; - . 






359 



Notwithstanding the success of his arms, Musjtafa Khan 
was anxious to come to an understanding with >§iiranga and 
terminate the war. Owing to the outbreak of a famine, the 
continuation of war became more and more difficult. He 
wrote to ^rlranga offering to consider terras of peace ; but the 
latter, influenced by the counsels of Bahlol (Babala) Khan and 
Damerla Venkata, temporised. Their object was to prevent the 
union of the Nayaks and the Golkoiuja forces and win over 
the former to their side ; and though a peace with Mustafa 
Khan was ultimately desirable, war should be carried on with 
him until they achieved their object. 

Musjafa Khan, getting no satisfactory reply from &rlranga, 
marched on Vellore ; he captured Gndiyatam, a fort considered 
impregnable on account of its fortifications, and Virincipuram 
on the Palar on his way and reached a place within three 
miles of Vellore. 


Meanwhile, the Nayaks showed a friendly disposition to 
►orlranga and promised to send him help. Mysore and 
Kangundi apologised for their desertion : and Madura wrote 
to Tanjore that Srfranga deserved to be supported. They 
promised to give him 40,000 men and 60,000 pardaus for the 
defence of the kingdom. He sent Naranappa and other nobles 
to fix up matters finally with the Nayaks. But before the 
help promised by the Nayaks reached him, Srlranga was 
obliged to give battle to the enemy. A big battle took place 
in the neighbourhood of Vellore on 4th April A.D. 1646. 
Damerla Venkata commanded the centre of §rlranga’s army, 
facing Mustafa Khan in the enemy’s centre ; Bahlol Khan and 
Dilawar Khan, two Muslim officers in feranga’s service, took 
up positions on his right and left opposing Sldl Raihan 
and ShahjI Bhonsle in the Bijapur lines. In the fight that 
ensued, Bahlol and Dilawar were routed*, aud the Hindus 
accepting defeat fled into the fort for refuge. Damerla Venkata 
in the centre, however, held out and delivered a counter 


360 




Mustafa Khan thereupon marched on Vellore and laid 
siege to the fort. Siiranga who had no means of defending 
his capital promised to surrender * 

While Sriranga was engaged in settling the terms of his 
surrender, the Nayaks, who were unaware of ins condition, 
sent word to him that he should repair to Cenji to confer 
with them and concert measures for the defence of the realm. 
Though he came to an understanding with Mustafa Khan, he 
could" not completely satisfy him owing to the lack of means. 
Though the prevalence of drought rendered Mustafa’s sojourn 
in the neighbourhood of Vellore extremely inconvenient/ he 
loitered in that region until the middle of A D. 1 • ™ 

he retired to the Mysore country, and concentrated his 

attention on the subjugation of Jagadeva Row’s country He 

captured Kaveripatan, Hasan,. ^Raidurg, Vmabhadiadurg, 
Kanakagiri, Ratnagiri, Melgiri, Arjunakota, Dalanayakankota 
and other places in quick succession ; and returned to Bijapur 
entrusting the defence to Asad-ul-Khawanln and Shahji 

Bhonsle.f 

The retirement of Mu,i»fS Khan did not bring Srlranga 
peace ; for Mir Jmnla, who had captured Udayagiri, advanced 
at the head of the Golkonda army swiftly along the east coas 
capturing in quick succession Tondamanad, Tirupati an 
Candragiri before April, A.D. 1646, and finally made his appea- 
rance before the famous port of Pulicat. Though he attempted 
to arrive at an understanding with the Dutch, his efforts could 
not bear fruit, owing to the refusal of the Dutch factor *° 
recognize the Sultan of Golkonda as the master of e 
country. ; 

Notwithstanding these troubles, Sriranga was obliged to 
leave his capital to confer with the Nayaks at Tirupandalam. 

• • Macleodj Oost-Indische. Compagnie ii, p. 398 ; ^ ^ 

6-X18. Tit© Muhattmadnamah assigns tkese events to A.H. 1057 {A.M 1 4 » 

b Dutek mgkRrnmr *re aosaptad ^is as they are hk*J t0 


plt :: 




jmm 


■MW 






P- 119- 

jllpl l||S^|||| 

: ■ ' . : ■ . >■ i. 

v ■ ■ 1 



The steps which he had taken for the protection of the capital 
are not known, but as Mir Jumla did not approach Vellore 
during the ensuing campaign, it may be inferred that he did 
not leave the capital without adequate protection. The 
conference, however, did not produce any tangible results, as 
the Nayaks who were jealous of one another could not reach 
an agreement.* 

^rlranga seems to have given up all hopes of defending 
the kingdom. He could not even think of returning to Vellore, 
as Mir Jumla’s army swept over its neighbourhood like a 
fierce tornado. After resting eight days at Pulieat, Mir Jumla 
set out with his troops plundering and burning the country. 
Some of the Hindu nobles fled in panic and others joined 
him. He captured Ponneri, Poonamalli, Kahcipuram and 
Chingleput one after another, proceeded as far as the frontiers 
of Cenji and retired in March, A. D. 1648 to Kaficlpuram to 
spend there the rainy season.f Therefore, Siiranga had to 
abandon the idea of returning to the capital and sought shelter 
at the court of the Nayalc of Tanjore. • 


Siiranga was constrained to withdraw himself from the 
arena by force of circumstances. The defence of the nation 
and religion which he attempted to organize in vain had now 
devolved upon the Nayaks, but they were as disunited as ever. 
The Nayaks of Tanjore and Cenji could not contemplate 
resistance as they were weak. Only Mysore and Madura 
made a half-hearted attempt to unite and ward off the 
impending danger. They combined their forces, obtained some 
help from Mustafa Khan and met the Golkonda army in the 
plain outside Wandiwash. Many of the Vijayanagara nobles, 
like the Velugoti chiefs who tendered their submission to Mir 
Jumla, ranged themselves against the Nayaks. In the contest 
that ensued the forces of Madura and Mysore were defeated and 
put to flight. Mir Jumla occupied Wandiwash and other 
places and proceeded to lay siege to Cenji. The authority of 

. * Macleod: Dt Oasi-Inditfhe Cumfagnie ii, p. 403. f IHd. 

V ' • ' J— 46 


862 


•*' I 







tlie Sultan of Golkonda was thus established over a large part 

of Karnataka.* 

Mir Jumla’s victory over the armies of Madura and 
Mysore, and the fear that he might seize the strong fortress of 
Genii roused the jealousy of Bijapur, and brought Mustafa 
Khan again into Karnataka. When he approached Cenji, 
Mir Jumla who resented his intrusion showed an inclination 
to fio-ht ; Mustafa Khan summoned thereupon _ the Khan-i- 
Khanan, Rustam-i-Zaman, and Afzal Khan to his assistance ; 
but Mir Jumla, on hearing of the approach of the reinforce- 
ments, concluded peace with Mustafa Khan, and retired into the 
Qutb Shah! dominions. The obstacle being thus removed from 
his path, Mustafa Khan marched to Cenji and laid siege to the 
fort ; but before he could effect its capture, he fell seriously ill 
and died. After his death the Khan-i-Khanan, who was at 
Nandyal, concerting measures for the conquest of Tadpatri, was 
instructed by the Sultan to proceed to Cenji and assume the 
command of the army. In obedience to the royal command, 
Khan-i-Khanan reached Cenji, and having taken over the 
command of the forces, directed the operations vigorously and 
eventually succeeded in capturing the foit. 

Srlranga now became a king without a kingdom, and a 
helpless fugitive at the court of one of his subordinates, a 
position which was galling to his proud nature. Moreover, 
the Kayak of Tanjore like his compeer of Cenji was forced 
into submission to Bijapur early in A.D. 1649 ;f and Tanjore 
ceased to be a safe place for sojourn. Therefore, Srlranga 
resolved to repair to Mysore which still managed to retain its 
independence and see what fortune had in store for him 4 

The flight of Srlranga from Karniataka to Mysore was 
the signal for the systematic subjugation of the small 
principalities which were not yet brought, under Mussalman 
sway. Of these three states deserve special mention. The 



Hw* ^ i t r * f., % 

Z>< Qort'Intiulu CompatnU ii, p. 40o, 


f Bid, p. 407- 










Mat]i chiefs of Oittiveli avid Siddhavataru still ruled over a 
fairly extensive territory. To overthrow their authority Mir 
Jumla sent an expedition under Bak§i Triamhak Row with 
two Mussalman officers in A.D. 1649 ; Kumara Anautaraja, the 
ruling chief, slew the officers and put the Baksi to flight ; but 
being alarmed at the possible consequences of his action, he 
abandoned his territories and repaired to the Kanarese country 
in the west (241). Mir Jumla also succeeded in ousting the 
Pemmasani chiefs of Gandikota in the same year with the 
consent of the Sul,tan of Bijapur.* At the same time, the 
Bijapur generals were eqtially busy in the Western Telugu 
country; they captured between A.D. 1649 and A.D. 1652 a 
number of places including Penugonda, the ancestral capital of 
the Xravidu monarchs (240). The Kaifiyat of Sugumancipalli 
sums up the Muhammadan conquests in a brief passage. The 
Nawab (Mir Jumla) came from Goikonda in f§. S. 1571 Vikrti, 
A.D. 1649-50 and captured Gandikota. After svibduing the fort, 
the Nawab conquered Gutti, Gurramkonda, Kahct, Yandavasi, 
Cengalpattu, Arikadu, Mylapuru aud Cennapatnam, so that 
the country up to the eastern sea came under the govern- 
ment of Goikonda. At the same time, Amir Khan, an officer 
from Bijapur, captured Penugonda, Veluru, Genji, l.rani, 
Basavapatnamf and other places (244). Thus by A.D. 1652, 
the Muhammadan conquest of the Vijayanagara empire was 
completed and the Hindu independence for the protection of 
which it was called into being also vanished with it except in 
Mysore and Madura, where it lingered for some time longer. 


Srlranga's movements during the two or three years that 
followed his flight to Mysore are not known. He is generally 
believed to have sojourned at Belur in the territories of fcivappa 
Nay aka of Ikkeri, who is said to have helped him to regain 


# Mu^mn&dntmah 5. T> & 2 > p. 132. 

f was not captured in AD. 1645*50, but a doasen years earlier, as' noticed 

already. The Ma^ammadntmah assigns the capture of Penugonda to the period follow- 
ing JumUi 3, I A. H. 1059 (May 6, A. D. 1649). The Dutch records definitely state that 
Pemugoi^a was captured in March, A. D* 1653. 





his capital in A.D. 1646* This is, however, opposed to tacts; 
for, in the first place, Srlranga’s flight did not take place until 
A. D. 1649; and secondly, he did not seek refuge with Bivappa 
of Ikkeri but with the Nayak of Mysore.y 

Srlranga’s sojourn in Mysore was not, however, long. 
During the few years that he remained there, the affairs of 
Karnataka had undergone a rapid change. The friendship 
between Biiapur and Golkonda which mainly contributed to 


halted at Roddam in the Anantapur district and requested 
permission to pass through the territory held by Golkonda on 
his way to Cenji; but this was refused by Mir Jumla who 
had no desire to cultivate the friendship of Bijapur. 

Mir Jumla, who entertained the idea of establishing himself 
in Karnataka, was alarmed by the recent success of the Bijapur 
troops.” The extension of their territory in the Pennar valley, 
especially the recent acquisition of the Penugonda, filled his 
mind with apprehension, and he resolved to dislodge them 
from Karnataka altogether. To achieve his object, he opened 
negotiations with the Nayak of Mysore, and Srlranga. He ‘M 

instigated the former, probably to divert attention, to rebel || 

against Bijapur, and persuaded the latter to return to Karnataka, 
and recapture his possessions conquered by Bijapur. The Nayak 
of Mysore allied himself with Sldx Raihan and other Bijapfir 
officers, who revolted from their master, and took all the forts 
of the country conquered by Muftafa Khan in the preceding 
years. Srlranga returned to Vellore and raised a large army to 
drive the Bijapuris out of the country* 

The news of these developments reached Khan Muham- 
mad who was on his way to Bijapur at Badkot. He imme- 
diately changed the direction of his journey and marched 
against the Raja of Mysore who, having by this time com- 
pleted the subjugation of the country of Jagadeva, attacked the 
..strong fort Krsnagiri. Khan Muhammad reached Krsnagiri, 
expelled the Raja of Mysore and captured four other forts, 
which he had recently wrested from the Bijapur officers. 

Leaving a detachment of his troops under Sldx Mas ‘fid to 
reduce the other forts that were still in the possession of the 
Mysore forces, he proceeded to Vellore to put down Srlranga 
and re-establish the authority of the Bijapfir government. 

• Fostci: Engtislt Factories In India Ufai-Sd* Intro., p. jtxxiii ; Mu$atimadn5moi, 

s.t.c. 2, v- m : :-r;. y 







On the approach of Khan Muhammad, Srlranga is said to 
have sought safety in flight. Nevertheless, the garrison 
defending Vellore held out bravely and did not surrender the 
fort, until they were compelled to submit by the hardships of a 
protracted siege in the middle of A. D. 1654 The victory of 
Khan Muhammad over Srlranga was not perhaps as complete 
— - ’ - would have us believe ; for, he was obliged to come 
ranga and cede him the fort of Candragiri 


ingement, however, was not destined to remain 
bS it was profoundly affected by the changes in 
Deccan, that came in the wake of two important 
occurred in A. D. 1656. The rupture between 
id bis master which had been apparent for some 
ame complete. Mir Jumla, whom ’Abdullah Qutb 
conquer Karnataka, converted his jaglr in that 
a kingdom BOO miles long and 50 miles broad, 
jt fortune, employed European gunners and 
----- i n his service and greatly increased the 
liency of his army.f When ’Abdullah Qufh 
Shah attempiea to reduce him to submission by force, he 
sought the intervention of the Mughal emperor in A. D. 1655, 
and joined prince Aurangzib, the subedar of the Deccan, 
near Hyderabad in March, A. D. 1556.$ Mir Jumla did not in 
the midst of his troubles forget his hostility to Bijapur, which 
thwarted his attempts to extend his territory. Therefore, 
when he left Karnataka to join Aurangzeb, he earned with 
him an appeal from Srlranga to the Mughal emperor soliciting 
help against the BijapSr government.! As an appeal of this 

S. T. C. 2, p. 133 ; Foster : English Factories In Indta 

\ i 656 - 6 o <?)1, p- wxiii. , „ 

* Sarkar: Short History o/Aurangteh p. 33. • . , „„ 

t (ffaJisat.ulr’Altm) M3rat MUt Samiddhah Mandal tiranihamSla No. 39, P- 74. 

§■ MuhammadnSmah S. T-C. 2, p. 133. Uhtr places this incident before tie capture of 
.. b ; Ktaa Mohammad, This is impossible *, for Vellore was captured, according to 
55^ ds, 'some time before Nov. 7, A.D. 1654, whereas Mir Jumla joined the 
mch later in Match A.D. 1656. Therefore, Srnanga could not hay. sent hi. 

****** nr htdot* A. D* 1656. unless it is p*eiU3»«& th&t ka took agwft 

~iw airi&iifi* ■ ' 


867 



kind was not expected to go unheeded by the Mughal emperor, 
the Bijaphr government instructed its governor in Karnataka 
to chastise Sriranga for attempting to embroil them in a war 
with Dehli. The account of Zahur is so confused that it is 
not possible to know what steps the governor took to punish 
Sriranga. He could not have achieved, at any rate, much in 
the way of enforcing the orders of his government, as Sriranga 
obtained help from an unexpected quarter, which strengthened 
his position considerably. ’Abdullah Qutb Shah, who was 
justly enraged by the treacherous conduct of Mir J nmla, resolv- 
ed to deprive him of his possessions in Karnataka and entered 
into an alliance with Sriranga. It was reported that he gave 
back Karnataka to the Rayal. The Hindu chiefs in several 
places rose against Mir Jumla’s officials and joined the Rayal; 
and encouraged by the accession of fresh strength and the pro- 
mises of the Qujb Shah, he concerted measures to recover his lost 
possessions. He captured Tirupati and designed the conquest of 
Conjeevaram, Chingelput and Pulicat ; and achieved a fair 
measure of success notwithstanding a few reverses.* The 
death of Muhammad ’Adil Shah (Nov., A.D 1656), and the 
invasion of his kingdom by Aurangzeb (March, A. D. 1657) 
freed him from the fear of an attack from the side of Bijapur. 
Some of the Bijapur officers, especially ShahjI, in fact, 
rendered Sriranga valuable assistance in the recovery of his 
possessions.! Nevertheless, Sriranga failed to realise his object, 
owing to the sudden change in the attitude of the Sultan of 
Grolkonda. 

The friendly gesture, which 'Abdullah Qutb Shah made at 
first to Sriranga, was dictated by considerations of policy. It 
may be remembered that MirJumla, who joined the Mughals 
in defiance of his authority and brought trouble upon his 
kingdom, befriended Sriranga partly to ensure the safety of his 
possessions during his absence in the Mughal camp. To entice 
Sriranga from this alliance, and cause embarrassment to 
Mir Jumla by raking up trouble in his rear, ’Abdullah 

* Foster: English Factories In India 93, 95, 97-8. f p. 136. 



Shah, casting away the masK ox menus iu Ft wui » - 

re-establish his authority in Karnataka. Sriranga probably 
came into conflict with the Qntb Shah! forces and suffered 
defeat; for, Candragiri, a fort ceded to him in A.D. 1658 by the 
Bijapur general, Khan Muhammad passed in A.D. 1658 into 
the hands of the Qntb Shah! officers * The transference of 
this fort could not have been effected by peaceful means. 
The victory of the Qntb Shah appears to have been complete 
and decisive; for, no traces of Sriranga are found on the east 
coast subsequent to this date. 

The ^nrangapattaaam Kaifiyat (248), which purports to 
describe the history of the last days of Sriranga, states that he 
retired to Ummattur between the two Kaveris, and gradually 
brought under his control almost the whole of the Mysore 
country. Though Srlranga’s stay at Ummattur is not known 
from other sources, inscriptions of the period bear ample 
testimony to his sovereignty over Mysore.f He seems to have 
received considerable help from §ivappa Nayaka of Ikkeri. 
The &ivatattvaratnaJcara states that ^ivappa captured the fort 
of Velapun and handed it over to Sriranga, who was wandering 
without a home.J The Keladinrjpavijayam corroborates it. 
According to this work, §ivappa having resolved to re-establish 
the kingdom of the Raya, persuaded the chiefs of Sode, Bilige, 
Tarikere, Haripura and other places to join him and marched 
against Belur in the year Vikari (A.D. 1659). He laid siege 
to the fort, and having taken it from the enemy handed it over 
to &r!rangaraya, and established the kingdom of the Rayas.§ 

.. *323 of 1922. 

i £. C. ix. Ht. 79; v. Bl. 80, 81, 82, 196, Ag. 83, Hu. 39, 40, Mj. 21; ui Sr, 13 

•vi Cm. 153; xii. Kg. 46. 




j jStt® rr*%r$-Kr*® •S'SPsS 

oj . <|>,, o 

■inSr’Q ti&xr-o Kn ■Sr-B^f'Sc) 
S^Sk-o-cttfc K^QSfTJfeiSM, 


The veracity of this statement is borne out by the 
inscriptions dated A.D. 1659, which refer to fcsrlranga’s rule 
atBelSr* 


Though ^rlranga was forced to seek refuge, for the 
second time, in the territories of one of his own nobles, he 
did not relinquish the hope of recovering his kingdom. He 
collected forces, subdued his neighbouring chiefs, including the 
Raja of Mysore and forced them to acknowledge his 
supremacy.! 


Meanwhile, the political condition of Karnataka seems to 
have undergone a change favourable to Sriranga and he appears 
to have returned to Penugonda in A.D. 1665. This was probably 
due to an arrangement with the Qutb Shah. The Saugandhika- 
prasavapaharanam (252), a poem dedicated to Ravilla Linga II » 
describes an expedition of ’Abdullah Qutb Shah against 
Penugonda, which must have been in the possession of the 
Sultan of Bijapur at that time. As Ravilla Linga obtained for 
his services in the expedition rewards from the Raya and his 
dalavay, Venkata, and assumed the title of Narapati-rajya- 
samsthapaka, it is not unreasonable to conclude that for some 
reasons unknown at present ’Abdullah Qutb Shah befriended 
Sriranga and helped him to regain his ancestral capital. 
This view gains support from the evidence of inscriptions 
which refer to Sriranga’s rule at Penugonda from A.D. 1669. J 
Though he continued to rule probably until A.D. 1681, the 
information pertaining to the last years of his rule is meagre; 
-and no definite conclusions are possible in the present state of 
our knowledge. 





INDEX 


A 

A’aaam Khan, 137. 

Abdur Razaak on Devaraya’s power 
over Samuri of Calicut, 106. 

Aeyuta, 165, 182, 188. 

Acyutaraya, 282 ff ; regnal years 
according to different authorities, 
70 ; beginning of Aeyutaraya’s 
reign, 7 1; Acyutariya and the Gaja- 
pati, 232-33 ; and the Muham- 
madan b, 283 ff ; and Sultan of 
GSlkonda, 233 ff; and Bijapur, 234; 
and Ramaraja, 234 f ; condition 
of the kingdom, 24X-2 ; 272, 292. 


Ahobalam (lower) epigraph, 205, 310. 
Ahobalam, 206, 305, 306. 

AhSbalapati mentions several 
OhiefSj 56. " ■ 

’Ain-uI-MuIk, 259, 260. 

’Ain-ul-Mulk, 29 ; Governor of 
Daulatabad, 43. 

’Ain-ul-Mulk, lieutenant of KafSr, 
14 ; directed to go to Gujarat, 14. 

Aiyangar, S. K., on the death of 
Immadi Naraaimha, 154 n, 187 n, 
198 n, 230-31, 246 n, 303 n, 326 n. 
Ajada Khan, 316, 

Ajmal Khan, 230. 


Acyutardyabhyudayam , 1 ; on the 
conquests of Narasa Kay aka, 160, 
168, 169. 

Addanki, 115, 204, 307, 

Adeem, 147. 

Adhydtmardmdyanam written by 
Sarabha Kavi, 102. 

’Adil Khan Deccani, held the gover- 

■ norship of Warangal, 144. 

Afzal Khan, 315,' 316, 362. 

Afzal Khan, a lieutenant of Randaula 
Khan, 315-46. 

Ahmad Ayaz, Malik, Governor of 
Gujarat, 18 ; third expedition 
against Kampila, 13, 

A^mad Aylz Malik Zada, 19, 20. 

Ahmadnagar, 132, 216, 252, 255-57, 
259-60, 267, 270-71; Court of, 196, 

' 296; King of 253;-' Kingdom of, 

• 257-58 ; officers of, 252 n; and 
Ramaraja, 253 ff; Sultan of, 259, 
265, 269, 293, 297, 303 n. 

' _ v 279, 290 n, 

Ahmad Shah Bahmani invaded 
Telingana, 99; divided his King- 
dom among hissons, 100. , 

Ahbbala 06$a anddDetar&ya I, 93. 

1— '47®a 


Akata Bhanudeva, 114. 

Akbar Jalal-ud-Din f 275, 282, 285, 
287. 

Akbar, Mughal Emperor, 1, 6, 275, 
283. ~ 

Alampura (on the Tuogabhadra), 
Devaraya’e march to, S3. 

’Ala-ud-Din Hawaii Gangu, 6, 7 ; 
Bhamani, 73, 74, 78; death of 81. 

’Aia-ud-Din II, 99, 100, 118. 

’Ala-ud-Din of Kara, 43. 

’Ala-ud-Din Khalji, 11, 13. 

Albuquerque, his Commentaries , 170, 
190, 191, 198. 

’All Barid, 254. 

’Ali Shah Nathu, 43. 

Allacla, the general of Kafcaya Yema, 
92, 96, 97. 

Allaya Yema, 96, 101, 104. 

Almeida, 141, 

AKMustafefi, puppet, Abbaside' 
Caliph, 98, 

Alp -Khan, 18. ■ ',C.C- 

Amaranayakas, 197, 240, 241, 

Amararn , 295, 299, 320, 321, 840, 

AmarSvati, 206, 


^ •■■Vvi 



Asamandur, 322. 

•g Asvarow, 315. 

' , Atakalagunda inscription, 23. 

See Hamvira.) Atthavanam, officers of the, 60. 

ption, 312. Attingal," 267. 

115. Avnbhu C5da, 95. _ 

Bahmani Kingdom, A vnkn, branch of the Aravidn 

family, 5. 

. ’Azim Ivh an, 260. 

’Azmat-ul-Mulk, an ’Sdil Khani 

Minister of Qnly noble, 194, 

L2, 313. Adavani, chief city of Sindavidl, 

242, 307 ; or Sima one thousand 23, 181, 238, 295; 
rajya, 240. 

MJ Oic 91 o 99U.94.. ’Add Khan, 192, 194, 214, 234, 296. 

»Adil Khan, Malln, 236. 

’Add Khan, Ynsnf, 161, 162-65, 167, 
copper-plat, grant o. . ISO, 189, 191, 193. 

- ■ 'Add Shah, 350; known as Suratrana 

160; war with Rama- 


Ananta, Matli, 314, . 

Anantagiri fort, 208. 

Anantapnr Dt„ 26. 

Anantavaram, 

114, 115, 146, 174. 

Anapota I, chief of the Velamas, 81, Sapada, 

82 83 98. 

Anapota II, ruling at Racakonda, 

100, 101, 142. Adil Shah 

Anavema Reddi (Peda Komati .'J ' 

Verna), 86 ; death of, 87. ’Adil Shah 

Andugula Venkayya, the author of AdSni, 166 
Bdmardjiyam, 5. {See also 

Aneya Sandi (Anegondi ?), 18. ’All Adil l 

Amtalh, charter or, 1. 302-304. 

Anju, Shah Muhammad, 302. , A *. gh - faj 257> 259) 373 , 274. 

Ankamma (a Sakti), 111. Imuhtamalyada, 201, 203, 204 «, 

Ankus Khan, 349. 205, 218, 224, 240. 

Anna, Bend:ipudi, one of Pratapa- Anegonc }i, 275. 

rudra’s ministers, Id, 18. Aueyagondi, king of, 30. 

Annadeva, a scion of the Brava . , 2 .,, 

branch of Telugu Cola family, 89 ; Appalaraja, 234. 
war with Dev ar ay a I, 90-92. Apratimalla family, 9o. 

Annals of Hande Anantapnr or the Araga-nyya, 80. 

wars of the Rayas, 303 n. Arani, 351, 363. 

Ardinga (Addanki ?), 312. Aravidu Kings, 3, 5, 363; table of 

Mikado, 363. regnal years, 72 ; chiefs— Rama- 

Ariunakota 360. raja, Timma, 180; family of, 20b 5 

ZZ ^rmnal temple, 121. , 45 

Aruv&padi, 208^261.^ Araviti Varnsa Garitram, 4, 5. 



B 

Badaga invaders, 245 ; invasion of 
246 ft. 

Badkot, 365. 

Badvel, 357, 

Badveli, 321. 

Badvel-szma, 316. 

Bagarkote (fori), 271, 

Bahadur Gilany, the ruler of Konkan, 
162. 

Baha-ud-Din Garshasp, 9 ; meets 
Kampila at Kummata, 18. 

Balilol (Babaia) Khan, 359. 

Bahmani Kingdom, founded by 
IJasan Gangu, 6, 189, 191, 193, 
272 ft; monarchy, 196 ; invasion, 
197 ; Sultan, 189, 191. 

Balal 'Dev, 46, 50. 

Balharipura, 56. 

Ballakundi, 300, 310. 

Ballaia, 30, 49, 50, 51, 53. 

Baliala III, 9, 11; inscriptions of Ms 
officers, 15, 24, 27, 32, 35; struggle 
with Kampila, 16, 22. 

Ballaia IV, 47. 

Balldlardyanayuddha , 16. 

Ballapnr, 346. 

Banavasi country, 80. 

Banerji, E.D. denies the alliance bet- 
ween Kapileavara and the 
Bahmany Sultan, 114. 

Bangalore, 26, 181, 343, 346. 

Bankapur, 350. 

Barid-i-Mamalik, 193-96. 

Barid Shah, 256, 274. 

Barn!, on the change of faith of 
person® sent by Sultan to Kampili, 
33; on the failure of Sultan 
Muhammad 36-37 ; on the rebel- 
lion of KIpaya .Nay aka, 45-46, 
47-48, 73 ft. 

Basava, son of Tamm&raya, 119, 120. 

Basava Bhupala, Keladi, 252 n. 

Basavapattanam, 341, 344-46, 363. 

Ba#vant Rai, governor of Nandyala, 
313. 


Bayiradeva of Aneyasandi of Hasti- 
navati, 18 . 

Bacarasa, 233. 

BSdami, inscription (in the fort), 24. 
Radarayana’s Brahma Sutras, 109. 
Badinenipalli, epigraph at, 124, 
Bagepalli inscription, 23. 

Bakkanuru, 147. 

Bdlabhdgavatam (of Konerinatha), 
15, 180, 180 ft. 

Baladurgam, 135* 

Balakrsna image, 203. 

Balkonda, 117, 

Banas ; rdma, Jcumdra , eandi, 285. 
Bapatla, 116, 

Barakur, 143, 149ft. 

Barakuru, inscription at, 64-65. 
Bayamma, queen of Venkata II, 326* 
Bedagallu, 235, 238. 

Beejamigger, 162, 163 {See also 
Yijayanagar.) 

Belgaum, 56, 194 ; district, 264, 
Bellamkonda 116, 203-4, 306* 
Bellary, 56. 

Bendapudi, Anna, one of Pratipa- 
rndra’s ministers, 15, 18. 

Berar, (Same as Berar), 258, 273. 
Betiuperumai, chief of Kayattar 249, 
250. 

Bezwada, 206, 210. 

Belur, 346, 368, 369. 

Betamcerla (battle), 238. 
Bhadricalam, RIja of, 135. 
Bhagatarahalli epigraph, 300. 
Bhanudeva IV, Eastern Gahga, 113. 
Bhan<Jarada Harihara, 29. 

Bhafc, reciter of Biruda-gadya in 
South India, 4. 

Bhatkal fort, 251. 

Bhattakkula. 147, 

Bhaganagar, Sultan of, 269, 274, 275. 
Bharatifcirtha Sripada, donee of 
Kikkayi Tayi’g grant, 27, 

BMma, river 194, 195, 

Bhxmarathi, river, 284* 



Bhtmakhandam, destruction of the Bukka II, 2,; death of, 13, 85. 
pleasure gardens of Kummaia, o, Bukka, Areviti, lo5, 46i. 

15. Bukkapatnam, 354. 


Bhonagir, conferred as jaglr on gn^araiu, one of Harihara’s 

Sanjar Khan, 100. younger brothers, 74. 

Bhopal Ray, 255, 256. Bukkaraju Polepalli, 113. 

^'Agari, 56. Bukkaraya III, 66 . 

i, 98, 342. Bukkaraya tJdayulu, father of 

Viran Samarakoiahalan, Sangama, grandfather of Bukka I, 

29n ; on his conversion, 33. 

5 , Bukkamba, mother of Narasa 

ir" known as Bijanagar Nayaka, 153. 
usage, 47. Burhan-i-Ma’adr 104, 174», 255, 

son of Balal Dev, 47. 256. 

49. ■ q 

2 163, 164, 166, 194, 195, 

, 279, 297, 337, 340, 342, Cadaluvada, 145. 

349, 350, 351, 352, 360, c alien ahalli plates, 141. 

.dilShahi dynasty of, 189; Camudapamatya, 116. 
utaraya,234; army of, 346; Canara, North, 56. 

sm* nf 236 ^ and Gandragiri, 119, 120, 125, 126, 152 n, 

ll^VHnlt’an of’ 259 234, 249, 298, 301, 302, 320, 323, 

3 37, 368, for. 247. ,, 

* 2 Q 7 ’ 230. Candragupti, 25. 

(dm ’ recited by Vandis Castanheda, 213. 
jad/lictSt 4, 5, Catholics, 249. 

sacked by Malik Na’ib Catholic missionaries, 246, 248, 251. 

39. _ Catuir, 117. 

179, 192, 93, 194, 196, 252, Cauncjapa, 2. 

1; and Ramaraja, • Caund.arasa, 11. 

ram, 143. Calukyas, 2, 8 ; of Kalyani, 5; 

1 Mabapatra, 207. Western, 221. 

249, Cavali grant, 115. 

fs ’ 203, ^ Cengalpattu, 363. 

indi (Gundlakamma), 145. 0enna cKari) , Damerla, 322, 323, 330. 

officers, 243, Cennapattana, not modern Madras, 

rnnarn (mother of Isma’il 101 n." ' 
rnn), 19o. Ceunapatnam, 363. 

^inscription ,i SS. ST* 

, 33 ; and Harihara, sum- 346, 351, 353, 356, 361, 

Cennnr, 3X3, 321, 357. 

the .Mus»alman8*|lfL 

. : ... n. . ■ 


^akolalialan, 





Cera, 158, 161, 168, 170, 176, 240, 
241, 

Cerna Muik, 315, 

Cetipattu, 353, 355, ' 

Chakravarti, M M. f 133, 

Chaul, 83, 147, 

Chengleput, 321, 886, 340, 261, 867* 
Chiefs, Sod®, Biligo, Tarikere, 
Haripnra, 368, 

Chitaldrug, 26, 56, 

Christianity, 248, 

CM!, 100, 

Cidambaram, 10. 

Cikkadevaraya, 72, 

Gikkadevardya Vam§dva]i , 5. 
Oikkanayakanahalli, 346. 

Cikkaraju, Muluv&gahi II, 323-24, 

Oiklraraya, Dmmattur chief, 181 ; 
alias Mallaraja, 182, 199, 200, 

Cikka Tangama, 151, 152. 
Oikkayodeya, minister of Harihara, 
75. 

Ciika lake, 104. 

Ginnadevi, queen of Krsnadevaraya, 
203, 206. 

Cintalapalli epigraph, 115, 

Ciravayi, 247. 

Citrasilangara, 56, 

Citta Khan, 315, 

Gittapa Khan (Sitapati), 174f; (Shitab 
Khan), 207 ; of Bhogikula, 209, 
280, 260, 

Citiiyeli, 263, 357, 363, 

Cdla, Virasikhara, 239. 

Cola Country, 247, 249, 295, 323, 
Colas, 8, 127, 158, 159, 161, 168, 169, 
170, 176, 240, 241; Telugu, 89, 244. 

Coimbatore district, 181. 

Comorin, Cape, 247, 250. 

Conadoigi, 157. 

Conjeeyaram, 110, 137. " 

Conto, 277, 282. 

Cuallao (Quilon), 106 * 

Cuddapah, 317. 


Cuttack, 104; capital of the Gajapati, 
201 ; expedition against, 209 t 


Babul, 83,; 147v. : 

:Badd&nSl%^ 

Dajan&yakankota, 360. 

Dalavay, 328, 340. 

Damakara 160, 161 ; fort, 175. 

Dandakaviles , 7, 8, 77. 

Dandandyakas , 221. 

Dandauatha Qunda, 83. 

Darsi, 307, 

Dastur Dinar, Malik, the ruler of 
Gulbarga, 193, 194. 

Dastur Khan, 163, 167, 167 255. 

Dastur-i-Mamalik, 192. 

Daulatabad, 42, 256. 

Daulat Khan, 255. 

Daca, 8 In. 

Baud Shah, 84, 99, 100. 

Debit, 270 ; Sultan of, 28, 29, 30, 
269, 270, 274, 275. 

De Sousa, Martin Afonso, 246, 249, 
250, 251. 

Deorao, 30, 31. 

Dehorao, 56, 74. 

Depanna, Immadi (Dmmattur chief), 
181. 

Devagiri, 13, 14, 18, 42, 43, 52. 

Devarajasyami shrine at Conjee- 
yaram, 101. 

Devanrpati, 54 ; can be identified 
with Deyaraya I or II, 55; Hari- 
hara also known as, 56. 

Deyappa, 172, Depanna 181 ; Tyipa- 
raja-Deparaja, 182. 

DeYaraya l, 3, 55 ; date of accession, 
63 ; successors of, 84, 65, 80, 81, 
82, 230, 244; known as Prauciha 
Todeya, 85, 86, ££, 97; stood Reddi 
impact, 88 ; allied with Kitaya 
Yema, 89; war against Firoz Shah, 
90 ; war against Ahobala Od$a, 
93 ; death of 93, 97, 



Dvipada Bala-Bhagavalam 
Konerinatha), 5, 15. 


Ellanarya, 3. 
lllichpur, 11. Mg 
Ellore, 260. 
Emmeya Basavc 
60n. 

Enagondapalem, 3 
Etiraja, 333, 334, i 
European gunners, 


200-311 


Devaraya II, bis times described by 
Srinatha 3, 55, 61, 64, 94, 95, 97 ; 
date of accession, 65 ; successors 

' of 66 f f ; circumstances ' of ■ ;■ ■ Ms 
march to Orissa, 98 ; annexation 
of Kondatidu, 100. 

Devarakonda, capital of Mad a and 
hi* descendants, 99, 101, 1-7, 118, 
207, 205. 

Devulapalli, 261. 

Dharma Rao, Cintagunta 260. 

Dharwad, 56. 

Dhdr#amaud, one of the four Hindu 
Kingdom* of the South, 36, 46, -ol. 

Dilawar Khan, 359. 

Dimjima, defeated by Srinatha, 110. 

Dindima, Raj ana th a, 171, 240. 

Diwani, the battle of, 192 f. 

Dole (Dhone ?), 313. 

Doravadi in the Kurugod a-nddu, 
Ballila Ill’s march against, 16, 1/. 

Doravadi, capital of Kampilsdeva, 9, 

10 . 

Draksaramam in*oription, 102. 

Dronacalam, 74. 

Dumakara, (same as Damkara) 159. 

Dutch records, 333 f; factory at 
Pnlicat, 334. 

Dnvvur, 321, 357, 

Dupadu, 307. 

Dvarasamudra, 15. 


F 

Fakr-nd-Din asserts independence in 
Bengal, 43. 

Fakr-ul-Mulk, 138 ; ^ general of 
Muhammad Shah, 139. 

Farhad Kh&n, 349. 

Farooky, Mubarak Shah, of Khan- 
desh, 268. 

Fateh Khan, 349. 

Fazl Khan, 302. 

Ferishta, 154n, 162, 163, 165, 

166, 167n, 179, 195, 212, 213, 215 n, 
243, 257, 258, 260, 264, 266, 267, 
268m, 270, 271, 273, 275, 277, 279, 
281, 282; on Kampila, 9; on 
Mubarak Shah’s garrisons, 15, 47, 
48; story of the foundation of Bija- 
nagar, 49, 50, 51, 71m, 73m, 78, 99, 
100 ; on the practice of employing 
Muhammadan troops under 
Vijayanagar, 106, 107, 131, 13-., 
133 ; on the reduction of Masuli- 
patarn, 138. 

Firdausi, 1. 

Firoz Shah, 29. 

Firoz Shah, accession of, 84; invasion 
of Vijayanagar, 86, 88; invited by 
Annadeva to Telugu country, 8J. 

Firozabad, 214. 

Filampatan in Telingana, 79, 81. 
Firuz Shah, treatment of Hindus, 41. 
Forgotten Empire, 61. 

Franciscan Friar®, 248. 

Frederick Caesar, 299, 300. 

Friar Luiz, 183 ; Portuguese ambas- 
sador, 197, 198, 199. 


FutuT}-us~Saldtln, 6 . 

: ' G 

Gajapatis, 5, 96, 97, 98, 102, 104, 
120, 135, 158, 161, 173 if, 176, 
189, 196, 200, 230, 232, 233; 
Ganapati, 75; Kapilesvara, 167 ; 
Lahgula, occupation of Kondavnju, 
94, 95, 96, 97, 98; Puru- 

sottama, 173 f» 200 ; Pratapa- 
rudra, 173 ffi, 189, 202, 207, 230- 



Gajaravu Tippa, a chief of Kappu- 
ntilla sub-division of Velama 
community, 90. 

Ganapati, Kakatxya, 5. 

Gandikota, 233, 313, 315,. 317, 318, 
320, 364. 

Ganesa, author of TaUvacintctmani 
Tattvavaritika , 154 n. 

Gangas, 172. , 

Gangddasapratdpavildsam , 102. 

Gan gad liar a, author of Gangddasa - 
pratdpavildmm , 102. 

Gangavamsdnuearitam , 104. 

Gangn, 73 n. 

Gaupura, 261, 262, 271. 

Ganti, 145. 

Garshasp, defeat of, on the banks of 
Godavari, 19. 

Gauda, Kempe, 200, 343. 

Gauda, Yirapa, 200. 

Gamantasaila, 26. 

Ganadeva, one of Kapilesvara’s cou- 
sins, 115. 

Gawan, Mahmud, Khwaja-i-Jahan 
Muhmfid, 117 ; attack against 
Kapilesyara, 118, 139. 

Ghanagin, 240. 

Ghaivas-ud-Din Tughlaq, 18, 35,41. 

Ghanldri-nl/ya, 123. 

Gingee, 295, 298, 322. 

Goa, 83, 147, 194, 213, 246, 249, 250, 
251, 296. 

GobfoSr (battle), 217. 

Gobburi family, 330, 331, 333, 335 ; 
chiefs, 335. 

Gobburi Ramaraja, 331. 

Gondwana, 135. 

Goorum, fort, 307. 

Gorlakunte inscription, 231. , 

Godavari,* 123, 135, 208, 255, 256. 

Gokarna, 175 f. .vC t;jr 

GSkama shrine,. 159. 

Gdlkonda, 234, ; 260, 271, 302, 306, 
307; 312, 351, 856, 363, 364? rfmj, 
305, 312, 813, 348, 349, 352; the 


anonymous historian of, 175, 190, 
192, 193n, 233, 243, 252, 253, 257, 
258 f, 261, 266, 267, 271, 273, 279, 
281, 282, 290, 304, 305n, 310, 311, 
314, 816 ? fort, 82 ; kingdom of 
252 ; and Ramaraja, 257ff, Sultan 
of, 233ff, 259, 269, 293, 297, 313, 
318, 337, 347, 352, 353 ; invasion 
of the Sultan of G61kon<Ja, 304! ; 
throne, 258. 

Goparaja, 142. 

Qoparaju Ramapradhini, 75. 

Gopalaraju, Eandanavolu, 320, 337, 
338, 342. 

Gorakallu, Kavile of, 59. 

Grant Duff, 84. 

Gudiyatam, 358; fort, 359* 

Gujarat, rebellion against Kaffir’s 
regency, 14; Krsnadevaraya’s in- 
vasion of, uncertain, 217. 

Gulburga, 15, 43, 52, 73, 99, 193, 195, 
196, 218, 254, 253; campaign, 214ff; 
called Kalubariga, 253. 

Gulranga Setfci, 314, 317. 

Gunda III, 125. 

Gunda, Dandanatha, 83. 

Gundiakamma, (Rrahmagun&i) 145. 

Gundukolanu, Kataya Verna, 
defeated at, 90, 

Gurijila, 307, ' 1 

Gurramkonda, 316, 317, 355, 363. 

Gutfci (Gooty) fort, 77, 236, 238, 313, 
815, 363, 364, 

Gutty, 22, 23, 

Gudalatur, 323. 

Gurjaia, 242. 


Habshi slaves, 136. . ■ , ^ 

gaider-nl-Mulk, 306, 307, 

Hammir, 131, 133, 136. : 'w- 
Hamparasa Odeya, 149. 

Hampi, 9, 10, 55 ; inscription of 
Krsnadevaraya at, 189, 191. 

Hamvira, 129, 134, 135, 174 (See 
Ambira). 

Harapiladeva, rebellion of, 14, 





878 



HosavStj 27. 

HoBhaag, one-- of the amirs ruling 
near Danlatabad., 42. 

Hoskote epigraph, 16. 

Hosamaladnrga, identical with Hoe- 
durg, 18. 

Hoysala Brahmin dandanayakaz 
under 221 ; dominions, 15; kings 


Hande family, 304 s ™s, 3 > 
306, 308,‘ 337 ; Malakappa. SOS 
Kadambaraya, 305 , ^evapp 
Nayaka, 320 ; Hannmappa Nayadu, 
303n. ' „ 

Sannma, Kenge, 341, 342, 343, 344, 

345. ■ ■ " ; 

Haribhatta, author of Uttara Nara- 

simhapuranam, luv* 

7: 

44_45, and the Mnssalmans, < 


Ibn Batuta, 9 ; visit to Madura, 22 ; 
speaks" of Harihara’s authority 
down to the frontiers of Malabar, 
26 ; on Muhammad Tughlaq, 37. 
Ibrahim (brother of Asad Kha n Lari), 
236. 

Ibrahim ’Adil Khan, 236, 238. 

Ikkeri chiefs, 251, their history 275. 
Ikkeri, 341, 342, 349, 350. 

’Imad Shah of Berar, 258. 

’Xmad Shah, Daria, 268. 
’Imad-nl-Mulk, 41, 192, 234, 273, 
275 ; of Varhad 284; withdraws 
from the field of Rak sasi-T angadi, 
286. 

Immadi Bukba, 80, 82 ; in the siege 
of the fort of Panugallu, 83. 
Immadi Narasimha, 146, 149, 150 ff, 
153,’ 155, 161, 165, 167n, 168, 170, 
Immadi Narasimha and vira 
■ Narasimha, 177 f. 

Indrakonda, 261. 

Iniquitibirim, the ruler of Travan- 
eore, 247, 248, 250. 


tt -i,.™ tt 80 ff; dispatches an 

* «. 52*1 * Ka^51TY10 

army under Devaraya, 83 became 
nnrtisrmted monarch of South 

ln!Tu * m la8t year8 ’ 

date of death. 63, o*>, 

Sarivamsa, 3. _ 

Haryab, infidel Sultan , 27. 
Hasanhad, 214. 

Hasan Bahry, Malik, 132. 
Hayalalmna Vilasam, 203 n. 
Hayavadana Rao, 0.» on the date of 
Saliva Narasimba s death* Ubn, 
Hazara Kama temple and Deva- 
: raya II, 108. 

Hansi, 43. 

Hasan, 360. 

Hassan Dt., 26. 

Herts, Kr., 253, 276,299,301m, 303n, 
306 m. : 

Heussen, 351. 

Hemakuta hill at Hampi, 9. 

Hernia (Hoysana) 161. 

Henna, chief atSrirangapattana, IbU, 

, ; A. ' ■ 

’ Hills, Piefa, Gaud, 199. . 

.Hinawur (Hooavar on the W.Uoait). 

Mahatma Prat&p* 





Kaifiyats, 7, 186, 244, 263, 274, 290, 
292; of Anumakonda-, 208; of Oitti- 
veli, 310, 316, 320 ; of the town of 
Cnddapah, 274, 292; of Gutti, 269, 
274, 280 ; of Jagannatham, on 
Kapilesvara’s siege of Vidyanagara, 
115; of Karnataka-Kotikam Kings 
240, 241 ; of Kondavidu, 301 ; 
of Kadavakolanu, 196;of Malamidi- 
Kambaladinne, 77; on Harihara 
IFs regnal years, 80, on Vijaya- 
raya’s regnal years, 94; on Mallik- 
arjuna’s rule, 112; of Nandiyala, 
263; of Puspagiri, 292 ; of Pedapa- 
supula, 30i ; of Riimesvaram, 155 J 
of Sanagundla, 234; of Santaravur, 
243; of Sugumancipalle, 363; of 
Srirangapattanam, 368. 

Kaijltam cavalry, Karnata, 209. 

Kaijltam forces, 197. 

Kajjala Bhanudeva, 104. 

Kalinga, fighting on the frontier of, 
103, 104, 126, 160, 191, 206, 208 ; 
and Krsnadevaraya,, 200ff, 213 ; 
five stages of his war with, SOlff, 
king of Kalinga, 206, 208. 

Ka ling araj cigar ames va ra , title of 
Virabhadra, 104. 

Kalitur, 337. 

Kallar Sepoys, 285. 

Kallasa, 26. 

Kallikkn, 247. 

Kalin Pdturaju, 111. 

Kallfiru grant of Devaraya II, 65. 

Kaluva-deva (son of Prataparudra 
Gajapati), 231. 

Kalubarige (Gnlburga) 253; See Gal- 
burga. 

Kalubarige&vara , 119, 

Kalur, 336. 

Kalyani, 253; fort, 254-256, 259, 


Jagadeva Rao, 314, 315, 357, 365. 

Jagadeva Rao, Immadi, 258-61, 
294, 298. 

Jagadevaraya, the ruler of Cenna- 
pattana, 311, 358, 360. 

Jagannatha, God, 129, 130. 

JagarSo Tippa, 116. 

Jagat Row, 315. 

Jagga of Cengadu, 333. 

Jaggaraju, 326ff; his coup d'etat, 
327, his death 333. 
Jaiminibharaiam, 127, 128. 

Jakkana, author of Vikramdrka- 
caritra, 3. 

Jalal-ud Din, Sultan, ruler of 
Honavar, 26, 27. 

Jallipalli (fort), 208. 

Jamal ghar, identical with Jamal pur 
284, 284n. 

Jambukhandli, 253, 255. 
Jambulamadugu, 320. 

Jambunatha, temple at Jambai, 121. 
Jamgaon, 255. 

Jamkhed (village), 256. 
Jammalamadugu, 313. 

Janyavuia Kasuvapatra, 205f. 
Jayasinga-nadw, 246n. 

Jdglrddrs, 316. 

Jala.1 Khan, 117. 

Jalaa, 269. 

Jhalna, 283. 

Jesuits, 248 ; letter, 311. 

Jihad, 190, 192. 

Jeao da Cruz, 247. 

Joao de Castro, 251. 

Jumkindy (fortress), 162. 

Jumla, Mir, 352, 356, 357, 360, 368. 
Jutur, 313. 

Jutur, battle of, 238. 


Kamalakuru, 316, 317. 

Kamalapuram, 321, 357, 

Kama! Khan, regent of Isma’il 
’Idil Khan, 164, 193, 194; his 
assassination, 195. 

Kambala (Kampila), 46. 

Kambham, 307, 312, 352. 


Kadur, district, 26. 
I — 47 -b 


380 



of Teiingana, 1 15, 11 : 
129/130, 131,132, 133/ 
K&pofcagiri, 56, . . , - 

Kappaluvayi, 208. 

Karhad* 179. 

Karmili, 330. , 

Karnata, 24 : military ext 


Katfir, 339, 340. 

KaVeri, 159, 160, 161, 167, 168, 170; 
bridge over, 200, 323; valley, 173, 
197; Cauvery, 249. 


Karnataka, 285, 341, 343, 347, 35' 
351,' 352; kingdom, 232-8, 304 

. . „i e«i > • 


Katnma adhere 
Kampa, 128. 
Kampana, 23 , i 
Kampana, Nay 
Kamparayacm 
Kampila, oxter 

defies Ka 


Kampili, I/, 

Kanakaglri (fort), 21 
Eanauj, battle of, 4< 
Kandanavdlu, 180f. 
Kandanir, 136* 
Kandikon<Ja, 208. 
Kandrava<Ji, 145. 
Kandokfir, 138 21 
Kanigiri (Nellore 
Kannada, 21, 27; 


Karnatakas, Annadeva Cora’s victory 
over, 90, 96, 98. 

Karifika-miratt, gifts of, 7 5. 
Karungolipalem, 336, 339, 340. 

Kasar (Khizr) Khan, 296. 

Kataka, 129, 173. 

KataJcarUjavamsavali, 114, 115, 

119; war between KapileSvara’s 
sons, 129, 135ft. 

Kathari Sciluva, 153. 

Kattalai, 322. 

Kanlas, 78. 

Kawam-ul-Mulk, 144. 

Kayattar, 249. 

Kaca (Kasappa Udaya), 180, 180ft, 
181. 

Kacapa Nayaka of Sdavani, 168. 
Kacapa Nayaka, Immadi, 168. 

Kaffir, Malik Na’ib, 11, 12 ; attack on 
Devagiri, 13, 14, 29ft ; the idol- 
breaker, 39. 

Kakarla, 307. 

Kakatlyas, 8, 221 ; dominions^, 16, 
29; boundary, 15; fall of, 16. 
Kalahasti, 10, 235; chief of, 336. 
Kalajnana antribnted to Emmeya 
Basava, - 292 ; of Virappaya, 177, 
301, 310, 339, 341; of Sivayya, 68, 

oSr 

Kamalapfir, 143. 

Kane!; 10, 120s. Sultan Muhammad 
Shah’s raid on, 137-139, 363; 
Conjeevaram, 249, 367; Eahci- 
varam, 340, 361. 

Kanikkai , 172. 

Kdryakarta , 165. 

Kaya,- 4.3* 

KarempMi, 111, 307. 

Kaslkhandam , 3. 

Kaiaprabhu, son of Kataya Verna, 
marries Harihara’s daughter, 87 * 

Kataya Vema, 87-89, 96, 104 ; a 
choiar, 109. 



Kaveripatan, 360. 

Kayal, port, 170. 

Kejadi, 257. 

Keladinrpavijayam, 4, 5, 27, 59, 61, 
63, 64, 66, 7 On, 251-254, 256, 257, 
259, 275-277, 278, 280, 281, 288n, 
289, 341, 342n, 345, 368. 

Kerala Palama, on Devaraya’s con- 
quest of Kerala, 105, 106 ; 

on the Naraeingaraya’s conquest 
of W. Coast, 149. 

Keralavarman, Bhutala Vlra, 216n. 

Ketavarano, 204, 307. 

Klialjis, 6, 10, 35. 

Khaipras, a chieftain, 74. 

Khandesh, 268. 

Khandeyaraya, 11. 

Khafi Khan, 167n. 

Khakan-i-Sa’id, 106. 

Khana Khana Yodeya, 107. 

Khan-i-A’azam, 99. 

Khan-i-KhSnan , 349, 350, 352 j 

Muzaffar-ud-Din, 353, 355, 356, 
358',' 362. 

Khan Jan, 350. 

Kharepattan, 47. 

Khizr (son of Bahrain), 19. 

Khizr Khan, 13; blinded at Gwalior, 
14. 

Khuuja Sultana, 297. 

Khwaja-i-Jabau, 117, 118, 192. 

Kikkayi Tayi, the widowed queen of 
Ballala III, 27. 

Kimba (Kemba) fort, 74. 

Kishln Khan, rebellion in Multan, 
31. ““ 

Kigpa Nayaka’ (Kamba) son of 
Luddar Bev, 46, 51 ; took possess- 
ion of Warangal, 47. 

Koecerlakota (Ammanabroli-slwia), 
196 ; (Darsi division), 306, 307, 
316. 

Kodavalur grant (date 1347 A.D.), 24. 

KommSr epigraph, 210. 

Kondamarasayya, Rayasam, 199, 203. 
Kondapalli 201, 203, 206, 207, 260, 
306. 


Kondavidu, 2, 51, 64, 67 ; hostility 
.with Yijayanagara, 87 ; capital 
of Peda Komati Yema, 88; 
affairs of, 94, 95, 128; ^ con- 
quest by Kapilesvara Gajapati, 
115-110, '128, 137, 142; Purusot- 
tama’s epigraph at, 145, 200, 
20!, 202; capture of, 203-206, 
217, 230-31, 233, 260, 304, 307 ; loss 
of, 312, 315; rdjya, Governor of, 
306 ; territory, 98, 101, 316, 317. 

Kondavir, identity of, 134». 

Konrjtavit isdm raj yamu, 7 on. 

Kondbir, 132. 

Kondamaraju, Koneti, 297. 

Kondraju, Koneti, 295. 

Kondrajn Tirupatiraju, 321. 

KondGr, 321. 

Kongn country, 1. 

Konkan, 26, 27. 

Konkana, 182. 

Kongudesardjdkkalin Caritram 1, 
198, 199. 

Konkanadesardj ula vrttdntam, 173, 
182.* 

Koppunulla chiefs, 90. 

Kotikanti Raghava, half-brother of 
Somadeva, the progenitor of the 
Aravidu chiefs, 15. 

Kottakonda, 82. 

Kowlanunda (Kowl Ananta ?), 312, 
Kowalanunda, 316. 

Kodur, 308, 309. ||| j 

Kokantiwara, 355. 

Kolar,*26, 319, (9n) 355. 

Kornali, battle of, 238. 

Koneri, nephew of Cinna Setti, 356. 

Konerinatha the author of Dvipada 
Bdlabhdgavatam, 5. 

Koneti Nayaka, Candragiri, 340. 

Koneti Nayadu, 355. 

Konetiraja, 159-61; 168, 171f ; hia 
titles, 171, 176. 

Kota, 101. 

Kovilkonda, 174, 19'2£, 236, 261, 270, 
271, 

Kdyilolugu, 171, 172, 


382 



Krishna Sasfcri, 61, 64 ; on JDeva- 
raya’s date of accession, 65, 230, 
231. 

Krotta-Kanama, 319. 

Krsna, R., 174, 175, 81, 126, 127, 
129, 163, 166, 206, 208, 211, 214, 


temple built by, xuot ; x*b ; 
half-brother of Vira Narasimha, 
182f ; circumstances of his acces- 
sion 186ff ; date of his accession, 
188 ; condition of the kingdom at 
his accession, 188f; and the Sultan 
of Bidar 189! ; assumption oi the 
title Yavanarcijya Sthdpandcdrya , 
19fi*8ufoiT3ff8tioii of Uminsttiir 1$$* 
his administrative arrangements, 
200 ; his Kalinga war 200 ff; his 
siege of Udayagiri, 201 ff; capture 
o£ ixongavigu n ; capture 

of Kondapall’i 206 f; his Simhadri 
expedition 208 f; expedition against 
Cuttack 209 £; battle of Raicfir, 
211-15; its date 211; his unidentifi- 
able campaigns, 215-17'; as a 
general, 217f ; as an administrator, 
218 ; contents of his Rdjaniii, 
218£ ; on the origin of kingship, 
219f ; on recuritment to services, 
220 ; on ministers, 221f ; on the 
king and courtiers, 222£ ? on the 
council, 223f ; on military policy, 
224f ; on interstatal relations, 
225f; on king and his subjects, 227 ; 
on income and expenditure, 228£; 
230, 231, 232-34; and the origin 
of Madura Kayaks, 239-41, 252, 
292, 293, 294. 

Kr^nageri (Kannageri ?), 283. 
Krsnagiri, 358, 365. 

Krsnamaraja, Nandela, rebellion of, 
and others, 319L 

Kx§napa (Nay aka) of Ceoji, 332, 333, 
, 336, 349. < ^ ■ 

Krjnappa, son of Ramaraja, 293. 
Kysnappa (Nay aka), son of V isva- 
. • natha Nay aka of Madura, the 
founder of the kingdom, 241, 295. 


Krsnappa Nayaka, Tupagi, a general 
of Cenji, 341. 

Kfmamyavijaya , 1. 

Krsnardyavijayam 9 198, 199. 

Krsna, Sri, 188. 

Krlddbhirdmam^ 3. 

Kulam (Quilon), 22* 

Kullfir, 331, 

Kuifir (Koiur), 340. 

Kumaragiri Reddi, 87 ; divides his 
kingdom into two halves, 88, 89, 

104. 

Kumara Hamvira, 120. 

Kumara Kampanna, 80, 125, 

Kumara Kapiiesvara Mahapatra, son 
of Hamvira, 120. 

Kumara Narasayyan, 151, 152, 

Kumara Rama, son of Kampili- 
raya, 9. 

Kumara Rdmanakathe , 10, 11 ; 
account of war between Kampila 
and Prataparudra, 15 ; struggle 
between Kampila and Ballala, 16, 
18,30. 

Kummata, stronghold of Kampila, 
12 ; advance of Kaffir on, 13, 14 ; 
identical with Hale Kummata or 
Kumara-Ramanaknmmata, 17. 

Kunda of Sajuva Kula, 154n. 

Kimigal, *> 4b. 

Kunjarakona (Aneyagondi), 23. 

Kunnummel Ilayitam, 247. 

Kuntala, 160, 161. 

Kurubas, marital relations of Hari- 
hara and Bnkka with, 29. 

Kurugodu-na^w, 17. 

Kuruka, a subordinate of Ballala III, 
16. 

Kurnool, in Kakatiya dominions, 16 ; 
Dt, taken from the hands of Reddis, 
84, 305, 313, 338 ; 340, 352, 353 ; 
Muhammadan conquest of 336f ; 
fort of, 313. 

Kurakacerla, battle of, 234, .. ... 


388 


1 L 

§$■' Lak^mana Pandita, the court physi- 
I clan of Bukka II, 2. 

I Lakshmana Rao, K. V., on the iden- 

tity of Udayacala and Sindhurdd - 
! hyaksa and Sakandhara, 215, 216. 

Laksmanesvarapuri, 56. 

Laksminarayana, 209, 210 214, 

215n. 

Laksmipatirajn, 205. 

Lambakarnas, 128. 

Linga I of Devarakonda, 101, 142. 

Linga II, Ravilla, 369. 

Lingama, chief of Vellore, 321, 323, 
324. 

Lingodbhava Maha.de v a, temple of? 
145. 

i ' Livy, 1. 

Ladder Dev, father of Kisna (Kamba) 
Nayak, 46 ; not the father of 
Kapaya Nayaka, 48f. 

Lhr, f AIi Khan, 312. 

: ^ 'v M 

Ma’bar, 51; extent of, 22; passed into 
the hands of the Sultan 
Muhammad, 35, 36; Say y id Jalal 
declares his independence in, 42, 
46. 

Mackenzie, CoL Colin, 7 ; collec- 
tion, 269 ; manuscripts, 1. 

Maddi-Gundala, 143. 

Maddikara, 74. 

Madhura (Madura), 53, 158, 160-61, 
i 169-71, 330; Dt; 168, 170; origin 

of the Nayaks of, 239, Nayak 
governor of 241, 298, 322, 331, 
334, 336, 339, 340, 346 ; Cokka- 
natha temple, burnt down by 
Kaffir, 39. 

Madraspatam, 347, 

Maduraittalavaraidru f gives an 
account of the Muslim rule, 40 ; on 
Visvanatha Nayaka’s governor- 
' ship, 241. : 

Mahratta nation, 299. 

I ; Mahaidar, 268, 269. 

; , Mahdndidkasiidhdnidhi ' attributed 
[1 1 ■, Ih^wriya' II,, IQ®. 


Mahmud .Shah II, of Bidar, 179, 

189 ff, 192. 

Majlis-l-RafT ’Adil Khan., 216. 

Malabar, 26, 27. 

Malakappa, 303%. 

Malapahari river (modern Mai- 
prablia), 263f. 

Malayaja country, 240, 241. 

Male-Bennfir inscription, 231. 

Malik Al^mad Bahry, 162. 

Malik Fakr-ud-Din, 44. 

Malik ’Imad-ul-Mulk, 47. 

Malik Maqbul, the nWib imzlr , 46, 

49, 52, 

Mali Khan, 297, 

Mallappa Vocjeya, one of the Mahd* 
pmdhdnas of Devaraya II, 102. 

Mallaya, 3. 

Malla Reddi, a descendant of Peru- 
mala Reddi and a cousin of 
Anavema Redd!, 86, 88. 

Mallikarjuna, 61, 66; accession to the 
throne, 67, 105, 112ff; harassed by 
enemies, 113,, 114, 115ff, 121; 
death of, 122. 

Mallinatha Vodleyar, son of AJiya 
Sayi Nayaka, 25. 

Malnacl, 343, 344, 349 350, 353. * 

Malfir, 137 n, 355. 

Manavalar-Sannidhi, (in Little Con- 
jeevaram), 122. | 

Mandhoi, 74. ^ 

Mandya (village), 210. j 

Mangalagiri, 28. 

Mangalagiri pillar inscription, 205. 

Mangaja Nilaya, (present Santa- - ■ 
Ma(n)gaifir), 28. \ 

Mangalapuram, 147. I 

Mangai Ray, 132f, 134. , .;j 

Marine nobles, 316 $ soldiers, 319 g ■ j 
chief, 341, 343. 

Manucaritra, 215. 

Manupa Raj, 314, 317. j 

Marakatanagara-jpran&s, 124. ' -I 

Marava, 159, 160, 168. 

Marhatpiir (‘golden temple’ at), 39. j 




384 





Mrtyiaja Khan, 315. 

Mubarak Khan, 73. 

Mubarak Shah, his Marhatta 
campaign, 14. ' . ' *’ 

Muddapa, 23. 

Mudkal, 162, 166, 167, 234, 263,284. 

Mudali, Ghattsi, 333. 

Mughal camp, 367, emperor, 367. 

Muhammad, Khan, 364, 366, 368. 

Mohammad Khan, brother of J Ala« 
nd-Din II, 99, 100. 

Mnlmmmad Khan, an officer of Ran- 
daula Khan of Bijapur, 349. 

Mufyammadnamalit 342 ft, 344ft, 345, 
349ft, 363ft, 366ft. 

Mohammad Shah Bahmani I, 78, 81, 


Masara, (Kolar), 111. 

Masnada Yell Alibu Nidamalu- 
Maloka, 91. 

Masnadd-'Ali Malik Kutb-ul-Mulk, 
216. 

Mas’Hd Sidi, 365, 

Masnlipatam, 128, 260, 

Matli chiefs, 289, 308, 309, forces of 
309, 357, 363, 

Matli Timmaraja, .309; Matli (and 
Sari) families, 304, 320; Kumara 
Ananta, 357, 363. 

Manlana Nizam-ud*DIn ’Alim-ul- 
Molk, 44. " 

Manlvi ’Abdul Wall, 73ft. 

Mavali Khan, 255, 

Maca, death of, 92, 

Macerla, 306. 

Mada, father of Peda Vedagiri, 83, 


Mohammad Shah II, 132, 139; death 
of, 144; tackled a famine, 84. 

Mohammad bin Toghlaq, Sol tan, 36. 
Mujahid, 83 ; assassination of, 84, 
Molbagal, 80 ; rdjya , 124. 

Mommadi Nayaka of Korukonda, 


Madala Panji , 113. 

Madhava, 2. 

Madhava of Ceiiji, 336. 
Madhavamantrin, 2, 80. 

Magadhds, reciters of Birudagadya, 


Mahur, 100. 

Makaraja, 327, 330, 332, 333,.. 
Malwa, 119. 

Manabhusa, 158, 161, 169, 170, 

Manava, 160, 161, (Manavadnrga), 
166, 167, ; dt. f 160. 

Marapa, acquires kingdom in the west 
' from Kallasa, 28, 26, 80. 

Masti, 358. 

Meliqnay Neby, 30, 31. 

Mesa Timma Nayaclu of Kommetta, 


Mommadi Reddi, holding portions of 
Ongol© and Narasaraopet fcalnks, 


Mommadi Sin gay a Nayaka, father 
of Kampiladeva, 9-11, 17. 

Munnur, inscription at, 121. 
Morahari Rao, (Roy Row), 305, 307, 


Murtaza Khan, 315, 317* 

Mosalimadogo, 313, 315* 

Mustafa Khan, an officer of Ibrahim 
Qotb Shah, 260, 261. 

Mustafa Khan, ; 'appointed/' com- 
mander of the Bijapur expedition 
(1644) 850, his military activities 
353 ff ; his siege of Genji and 
death, 362.; 

Musunuri Deva Nayaka, father of 
Kapaya Nayaka of Warangal, 48. 

Mylaporo, 868. 

25 , ^ ^ ^ . ...... 


Melgiri, 360, 

Mirza Lutf-nWah, 192. 
MlnahUandbhyudayam , 348 ft* 
Miaaragap^da . Kathari Tippayyadeva 

Maharaja, 115. , 

Media Inayut Qo% 297, . ' , 

,;M6|npaili^ 87 , , 

^oksagjara, 56*, ... > , 


S85 



N 

Nadimidoddipalem chiefs, 79, 

Nagaragaye inscription (Mysore), 
178. 

Nagundy, 30, 31 ; (Anegondi) king- 
dom, 54 ; river 54; rebellion of, 32. 

Naigwaries, 261. 

N algonda-Pangal, fort seized by 
Devaraya I, 91 ; battle at, 92. 

Nallagonda, 208, 261, 

Nandela, 242. 

Nandiambaka, 336. 

Nandi Pass, 242. 

Nandi Timmana describes Narasa 
Nayaba’s victories, 158. 

Nandyala, 315, 352 ; chiefs, 313. 

Nanjaraya, Vira (son of Im- 
madiraya), 172, 18 L 

Naftjaraya, Yira (son of Nanjaraja) 
of Dmmattnr, 181, 182. 

Naraharideva, 205. 


and the Portuguese, 184m; his civil 
administration, 185, 186-88; and 
Krsnaraya 189, 196, 

Narasingaraya Dandanayaka 
(Salvany), 235. 

Narasing Raj (of Kalagur), 313. 

Narmada, 135. 

Naoana Sornana, 3. 

Nadindla Timmarasayya, 155; not 
identical with , ‘Tyraarasa’ of 
Nuniz, 155n, 

Nadu gaud,as, 75. 

Na$u talaiyars, 75. 

Naga of Uttaramallur, 321, 322. 

Nagaladevi, mother of Kr§na- 
devaraya, 187. 

Nagama Nayaka, 239. 

Nagama Nayadu, Kotikam, 240. 

Nagamaiya, 246n. 

Naga Nayaka, 81 ; slain at Uttara- 
malliir, 82. 


Narabonda, 135. 

N arapati-raya-saibsthapaJca, title 
assumed by Ravilla Linga II, 369. 

Narasa, substituted for Iinmadi 
Narasimha, 60, 69. 

Narasa, Kanthirava, 344. 

Narasa Nayaka, general of Salnva 
Narasimha, 140, 163, 165ff, 179, 
182, 198, 200 ; de facto ruler, 150 ; 
sovereign, 153, 154-56; chronology, 
161f; encounter with the ’Adil 
Khan, 162 ; capture of Manava- 
durga, 162 ; southern conquests 
167ff, and the Gajapati 173f, and 
the west coast 175f; death, 176. 

Narasaraja of Torgal, 257. 

Narasimharaja, Nandela, 319. 

Narasimha, Salnva, (Shew Ray), 
governor of the east coast to the 
south of the Kr§na, 137, 138; 
assumes royal titles, 139f, 141ff; 
death of 146; his military reforms 
147, 165, 167, 170, 174, 176, 181, 
200; Sivayya KalajMna on, 68, 

Narasimha, Vira, 176; the regent, 
177£; ruler, 179ff; his army, 184 ; 


Nagappa, 324. 

Nagarjunakonda, 204, 306. 

Nag Nayab, the Kali chief of 
Gandhiyana, 31. 

Nagulapadu, 261. 

Nagur (port), 249. 

Naranapa, 357. 

Naranappa, Hore, 356, 359. 

Narayanambiba, wife of Vijayabhu- 
pati, 123. 

Narayanavaram, 348. 

Navada, 215. 

Nayaks, of Mysore 357-59, 364, 365 • 
of Kangundi, 357-59, of Tanjora,’ 
221, 357, 381; of Oenji, 357, 361 ; 
of Madura, 221, 298, 357; of 
Erragondapajem, 352. 

Nayankara estates, 142, 

Negapatam, 248. 

Nelatur, 309. 

Nelevtyu at Gutti, 23. 

Nellore, taken away from the Reddis 
of Kondavidu, 84. 

Nikitin, alludes to Mussalman attacks 
on Vijayanagara, 114, 


886 



Nizam Shah, IJusam, 254-56, 259, 
266 ‘Hoosein’, 271, 273, 274, 278, 
284, 286, 287-9. 

Nizam Shahi forces, 253, 256 ; king- 
dom, 257 ; officers, 258. 

Nizam Shah, Murtaza, 297 . 

Nizam-ud-Din Ahmad, 49. 

Nizam-ud-Din ’Auliya, Hazarat, 37. 

Nizam-nl-Mnlk, 118. 

Nizam-ul-Mulk, title conferred on 
Malik Hasan Baliry, 132-34, 137, 
144. 

Nizam-nl-Mnlk, Malik Ahmad 
Baljri, 191, 192, 194. 

Nizam-nl-Mnlk, Bnrhan, 237. 

Nnndnatcota (Nandavaramkota ?), 


Padaividn, 120, 322; rdjya, 171. 
Padearao mentioned by Nuniz, 63, 
identified with Prandhadevaraya, 
67 ; crowned, 139. 

Paithan, 255. 

Palamarneri, 332. 

Paleacate, 106. 

Pallavas 8. 

Palnad, 242; Srinatha on, 110, 

111 .' 

Pampa, Goddess, 108. 

Pampambika, image of, 54. 

Nursing Row, 304. Pafica-gauda, 215. 

Nusrat Khan, governor of Telingana, Panca-Pddusahiis, 70. 

43. Panca-Tiruvciflis, 247 . 

Nnniz, 30, 31, 54, 56, 61 ; mentions panta Mailara Reddi, 95. 

only nine kings, 63; on the rule of p aravas 0 f the Pearl Fishery coast, 
Vijayaraya, 66;on"Vira Narasimha, 248 

&r,:s& 2 *• 

125 ; on Salnva Narasimha’s acces- Parmatur, 3o2. 
sion, 141; on the position of Pathans, 261. 

Narasa Nayaka, 150, .166 ; on ^^, 241,295, 302, 308, 311 
Krsnadevarayas accession, lab doo . 0 { Ummattur, 142. 

188f, 197, 198n; on the siege of * 

Hdayagiri, 200-202, 204«, 206, 209- Palakalln, 240. 

13, 215 m. • ■ , Palamkota, 331, 333. 

.NM Khan, 315.; „ ' Panagal, 261, 263. ^ , 


887 


Pindyas, 168, 171, 176, 223, 239, 
240, 241 ; Gandragekhara Pandya, 
239 ; Tenkasi Pandya king (Art- 
kesari Parakramaj, 169, 170 ; king 
of the Pandyas, 249, 250 ; 

Parakrama alias KnMekhara 
Pandya of Tenkasi, 171; Pandyan 
Kingdom, 128, 

Panem, 107. 

Pan gal 270, 271. 

Panngalln, siege of the fort, 83; 
Panugal, 101. 

Papiah Samywer, 314. 

Papiah Betti, 314. 

Papanarasayya, Pnlig&dda, 244. 

Papa Nayadn, Davola, 322. 

Pdrijdtdpaharanam , 169, 199, 204 
011 the conquests of Naraea 
Nayaka, 160, 

Parvati, queen of Kapilesvara Qaja* 
pati, 133. 

Pearl Fishery coast, 246, 248. 

Pearl Hall, Srinatha mentions, 110. 

Peda Kotnati Yema alias Anavema 
Reddi, 86, '88, 91. 

Pedakonda, 116. 

Peda Singama Amiaraa, fight with 
Bukkaraju, 113. 

Peda Vedagiri, a son of Mada, 83. 

Peddana, Allasani, 3, 206, 208, '209, 
215, 232. 

Pegnn, 106. 

Pemmasani chiefs of Gandikota, 
337, 343, 363. 

Pengotnr,’ 322. 

Pennar, 317, 318, 

Penngonda, 25, 75, 161, 182f, 198, 

• 199, 238, 293, 294, 297, 298, 302, 
303n, 304, 306, 310, 311, 313, 314, 
,315, 319, 340, 355, 363, 364, 369 5 
Immadi Narasimha kept at, 156 ; 

» rdjya , 123, 139, 154. 

PenugondacaJcreS vara, title of the 

' . Onamaftw chiefs, 182 

Periya Taiigama, 151, 152. . ■ 

Per$n|]^a» Sambeta chiefs estab- 
lished at, 142. 

Perumala Reddi, 86. 

v / 1-47-0 


Perumbedu-sima, 321. 

Pernrn, 261, 

Pikkilln (Fakr-ol-Mnlk ?) 139. 

Pina Yirabhadra, 3. 

Pirmaya, 142. 

Pimiaynndiraja, friend of Annadeva 
Coda, 9.6. 

Podacedn, fort of, 113. 

Podili, 242, 307; (Nellore Dt,), 95. 

Pokattall, 247. 

Ponnaladevi, wife of Devaraya II 
and mother of Mallikarjuna, 66. 

Ponneri, 361. 

Poonamalli, 361. 

Portugese, 149; governor, 189, 246; 
writings, 72, 182, 198, 247; gover- 
nors, 195, 246, 248; and Ramaraja, 
250ff. 

Potnfir, 201, 209; Potmir-Simhadri, 
209. 

Fott&pi, 321 ; nd#u, 86 5 $ima 9 320. 

Podalaknru, 331. 

Polepalli Bnkkaraju, an obstacle to 
Yelamas, 113. . 

P5li, 321. 

Pornmamilja, 321, 357, 

Potavaram, 145. 

Prahaiesvara Patra, 207, 

Prapanndmrtam , 125. 

Prafcapadevaraya, 102, 103, 123, 124. 

Prataparndra, 28, 29, 32 ; not father 
of Kapaya Nayaka, 43f. 

Prataparndra Gajapati, 2, 49, 114. 

Prandha, who succeeded the last 
Yirnpaksa, 63. 

Praudhadevaraya, " identified , with 
Padearao, 67. 

Praudhadevaraya (Devaraya I), 93, 

; 107. 

Prolaya Nayaka, 49. ■ 

Prolaya Yerna, the founder' of -the; 
Reddi kingdom of Kondavidn,;51 r 
extent of his authority, 87, 104, 

Padnkottah region, 249. 

Pnlicat (fort), 334, 835 340, 347, 
351, 360, 361, 367, 


388 



Rajnkonda (fort), 207. 

Rakpsi-Tafiga<Ji, battle of, 6, 81, 
164, 245, 252, 262, 283, 291, 293, 
295, 298, 299, 300, 302, 303n, 304, 
308, 324, 325, 337 ; the name of 
the battle-field, 263ff; causes of the 
battle, 265ff; ormation of the 
Muslim confederacy, 273ff; 
duration of the war, 279ff; 
strength of the parties 281; the 
battle, 283:0:, 


Raghndeya Narendra Mahapatra, 

Raghunathabhyudayam, 1, 315. 
Raghttnatha, Ketireddi, 332. 
Raghtmatfia of Tanjore, 314, 319, 


Pnlivendla fk., 142. Raihan, Sidi, 359, 365. 

Pulngula-na$M, 86, 321. Rakkasige (Tillage), 264, 265. 

Punnaikayal, 247. Ramnad (Dt), 168, 170, 249. 

Puravari (tax), 172. Raudaula Khan, 341-46, 349. 

Pnrugottama Gajapati, 127, 129,130, Ranganatha, God, 249. 

Rangapparaja, 3. 

Rantn, Gina Tippa, 333. 

Puaapati ^ Tammaraja, assistance to R atn agiri, 360. 

’ ‘ Racakonda, capital of Anapota I, 98f. 

Q Raca Verna, 105. 

Qawam-ul-Mulk, flight to Rajah- R^irajn, 116. 

Racerla family, 98, 100, 

Rftcmi Mallii Khan, 205, 230* 
Radhamadhava, 233, 


mundry, 145. 

Qasim ’AH, 352, 

Qasim- Barid Turk, 162, 

Qasim, Beg, l^akim, 278, 

Qazi Mnghis-nd-Bin of Bay ana, 41. 
Queens of Ramaraya mentioned in 

Quilon, kingdom of, 170, 247. 
Qur’an, 2(56, 267. 


Rahuttar Sya, Tint ns ala, Pratapa- 
rudra Gajapatfs paternal uncle, 
202 , 


Qntb Malik Jahan, second expedition 
against Kampila, 19 


46 Rai of Kambila ”, Muhammadan 
version of the Raja of Kampila, 9. 

Raiehore, (Raichnr) 73, 99, 100, 194, 
195, 217, 284, 284 ; dt., 17, 162-67; 
doab, 179, 236; battle of, 21 Iff. 

Raidurg, 860. 

Q “lfs S 369 ’ ’ AMnlla ’ m ’ m ’ 367, Rajabhuvara, 285. 

Qntb Shah, Ibrahim, of Golconda 
and Ramarajn, 254, 255, 257 RajaJtalnjnana, b0». 

62, 268, 270-73, 275, 284, 285-89, Raja Khan Vodeyar, 107. 

302, 804-7. Rljahmundry, 2, 88, 89, 96, 97, 101, 

Qntb Shah, kingdom of, 257, 270. i03-5, 208-10, 260; : conquest 

Qntb Sbab, Jamshid, 258. by 

Qntb Shah, Sultan Muhammad Qniy Rajanatha Dmdrma, 126, 1,7, 15b, 

(son of Ibrahim), 812-15, 317. * XMm 

- Rajafiekhara, son of Mallikarjnna, 

64; identified with Rajasekhara II 
of Vidyaranya Kalajnana, 67. 

Raj Mr! (fort), ,175.; , ^ ' 


Qutb-ud Din seizes Dehli Govern- 
ment, 14. 


Qutb-ul-MuIk Qnly, 174, ‘ 190, 192, 
i94, 281, 233. 234-, ^ 


236. 


S89 


Rama, son of Tirnmala, viceroy of 
Srirangapattanam, 298, 811. 

Ramacandraraya, son of Devaraya, I, 
64 ; also known as Ramacandra 
Odeya, 65. 

Ramachundur Dew, 231. 

Ramadeva of Devagiri, patron of 
Mummadi Singaya, 10, 11. 

Ramadeva, sovereign of Kampila, 
11, 12, 13. 

Ramadeva, prince, 328, 330ff; death 
of, 340. 

Ramadeva, Salvsva, 82. 
Ramakrsnappa, a niyogi, 345. 
Ramanatha alias Kumara Rama, 9, 
30. 

Ramanatha, Harihara and Bnkka 
fled to the court of, 28, 29, 30, 32. 
Bdmappayyan Ammdnai, 346. 
Ramaraja, 6. 

Ramraj, (Ramaraja) 164, 165, 234f, 
236-38; Ramaraja and Salakaraiu 
Tirnmala, 238f, 243ff ; Ramaraja 
and the South, 245ff; Ramaraja 
and the Portugese, 250ff; Rama- 
raja and the Muhammadan kings, 
252f£; and Bijapffr, 252f, 253ff; 
and Bidar, 256f; and Golkonda, 
257ff; and Ahmadnagar, 267, 268, 
270; and the battle of Raksasi 
Tangadi, 272-90; death of, 289f, 
293, 326, 339. 

Ramarajabhusana, 3, 16. 

Ramaraja, Dala vay, 355. 
Bdmardjlyam, 4, 5, 251, 326n. 
Barnard) ana Bakhair 6, 71«, 263, 
268, 275, 278, 280, 281, 282, 288 n, 
290». 

Ramaraja, number of regnal years 
according to different authorities, 
70, 7 In, 72. 

Ramayamatya, 244. 

Ramabhatlayya, 214. 

Ramanuja, Randidai, 172. 
Ramapuram (Anantapur district), 
168. 

Ramesvaram, 10; Setubandha- 168, 
170. 


Ramgir (fort), 100. 

Ravela Yenka, 332, 

Ra villa Ayyapa II, 337. 

Ravilla chief, 316. 

Ravu Singa I, 98 ; — bore the title of 
Tribhuvaniraya, 116. 

Ray of Orissa, 136n. 

Rayal, 367. 

Rayala-swna, 292, 319, 324. 

Rayas, the, 2, 5, 6, 8. 

Rdyavdcaka, 1, 175; on Krsnadeva- 
raya’s accession, 186-88, 197, 198, 
199, 203n, 208. 

Reddis, 4, 8; causes for Reddi 
invasion of Vijayanagara, 86, 87 ; 
of Cundi, 95 ; kingdoms of Konda- 
vidu and Rajahmundry 2 ; of 
Kondavidu, 8, 82, 84, 86f; Korn- 
kond'a. 52. 

Red sea, 213. 

Renad in Srinatha, 110, 111, 

Roddam (Anantapur Dt.,) 365. 

Rudra, the poet, 292. 

Rukn-ud-Din repulsed, 19 . 

Rustam-i-Zaman, 350. 

Rustum Khan, 317, 318. 

s ; ; 

Sa’bat Mulk, 107, 

Sadaiiva, his regnal years, 70, 71; 
set up on the throne by Ramaraja, 
237 f, 243 ff; his coronation, 245; 
said to have made peace with 
Husain Nizam Shah, 256; Say y id 
’Ali on his’ invasion of the Muslim 
territories, 267; last phase of his 
reign, 29 Iff, was he assassinated, 
299 f. 

Sadasiva, Nayaka, the Eejadi chief, 
252, 253; his part in the fight 
with the Nizam Shah, 255-57, 259, 

Safdar Khan, 74. 

Sugar, 15, 18, 23 ; rebellion against 
’Ala-ud-Din Bahmani I at 73,, 74; 
fort, 19; Krsnaraya’s capture of’, 
214; captured by Bijapur generals. 
350. 

Sakandhara, 215. 


890 


Sakili, 242. 

Sakki Sahini, Ballaja ill’s officer, 16. 
Salakaraju Timma, regnal years, 70. 

Salavaya or Surreyavi Dyavappa 
Nayaka, 151. 

Salem (i)t.), 181. 

Sam.b©ta f chiefs of Peranipadu, 142ff ; 
Soma, 101, 142 ; Yira Narasimha, 
142. 

Saihka(ra)giri, 208, 


Sayyid ’AH, 78, 74n, 78; Ms descrip- 
tion of Feroz Shah’s Vijayanagara 
invasion, 86; on the war between 
Feroz and Devaraya I, 90, 
135n; on Malinin d Shah IPs 
jihads 190, 191; a contemporary of 
Ferishta, 216, 264; on the number 
of the forces of Tirumala and 
Venkatadri, 266, 267, 273, 278; on 
the Muslim armies at Talikota, 
279, 288. 

Sayyids, 194 


Sangama, family of, 2, 28, 27, 28; 
kings, 176; degeneracy of, 181; 
son of Bukkaraya ' Yodayalii, 29; 
his son's, Harihara and Bukka, 32; 
Yijayanagara founded jointly by 
his h, ve sons, 80. 

Sangitapura chiefs, 143. 
SangUasuryddayam , 2, 20 o. 

Sanjar Khan, 255. ;■■■■ 

Sanjar Khan, Bhohagit conferred as 
jdgir upon him, 100, 117. 

Sankhama Nay aka, 12f; his 
rebellion, 85. 

Sannam and Samana, 43, 45-47. 
Santalige-mMw, 27. ... 

Sarabha Kavi, author, of the 
Adhyatmarmiidya^nit 102. 

■ Saraja Ray, a niyogi, 350. 
Sar&khumalu Jainadi Yocleya, 91. 
Sarandip (Ceylon), 106. 

■ Sarasvati, Rangaswamy, A,,. 171, 

18 8n, 806n. 

Sarasvafivilasam, 184; describes the 
'fight between Saluva Narasimha 
and Purusottama Gajapati, 146. 

Sarepalli Timma, 101. 

: 'Bargaclwari, camp of Sultan Muham* 

• ;;inad;Mn Tughlaq, 43, 

. Sarvajna Singa, 109. 

Bat&vur, 340. . - 

Balya, 255. 

Satyamangalam plates, 124; epigraph 

i 'i \ 

L _ -» r\nn> ■ • 



Sayyid Ibrahim, 43, 

Sayyid Jalal, kotivcd of Madura, 
declared his independence, 42, 44. 

Sayyid Jalal* ud- Din Afcsan, 22. 

Sadhxi Subrahmanya Sastri, , 14-in-, 
151. 

Saguna, Ghat of, 13. 

‘SahUyaratnakara, 1. 

Saji Khan, 349. 

Saluva chronology, described in the 
Vlrappayya kalajham, 69. 

Saluva Govindaraja, 200; Saluva 
Narasimha, 63; Mallideva' resists 
Saluva Narasimha’s power, 143 ; 
Yira Narasingaraya, 107, 119, 

120, 122, 125,. 126; captures 

Kalingaraja, 127 ; quells ■ rebellion 
in the Tamil country, 12S, 
134-189 ; , seized the kingdom, 
141ff, 142 : war on the Sambeta 
chiefs, ' 148; authority over 
Barakfif, 144; fight with the 
thuyas* 146; military reforms, 147; 
his services to Yijayanagara, 148; 
Saluva Ram ad ova, 82; Samhuraya, 
95; Telunguraya, 95, 97; Tirumala, 
brother of Narasimha, 125. 

Sajuva Nayaka alias Sellappa,- 240 ; 
Sajuvas, 3, 244; their 'end, 178; 
titles, 151- 

Sdluvahhy udayam, 1, 119, 126-128, 

Sambuvarayas of ■ Padaividu, 24, 

Samuri of Calicut, 106, 

: Sanagmidla, 234. 

Sari family. 304; '5baha,' Its v head, 
808, 309. / 

Satavahanas, 8. 


15, ■ , . Safcheya Khana, 253, 



3$i 


Slyana, 2. 

Sembedu inscription, 300. 

Sennappa Nayaka, Kottai-samantan, 
172. 

Sequeira, 213. 

Setti, Tittepa, 333. 

Sewell, Robert, 59, 61, 63, 66, 122, 
151, 204, 211, 212, 263, 299. 

Senna, kingdom 11 ; territory, 13. 

Shahajl, 343. 

Shahji Bhonsle, 354, 35$, 360, 367 . 

Shahu Afghan or Shahu Lodi, 
rebelled in Lahore, 43. 

Shams-i-Siraj ’Afif, 73«. 

Shew Ray (Saluva Narasimha), 
164ff, 167ft. 

Shihab-nd-Din, the infant son of 
’Ala -ud- Din Khalji, 14. 

Shimoga (Dt.), 26, 56. 

Shorapfir, 195. 

Siddhavatam, 74, 320; sima, 321; 
Matli Ananta’s inscription at, 
323ft. 

Siddhapuram, 242. 

Siddhont Inscription, 314f. 

Sikandar Khan, 117 ; ruler of Gujarat, 
216. 

Simhaealam, 97. 

Simhadri, Krsnaraya’s expedition 
against, 208-11; pillar of victory 
set up at, 230, 231. 

Sindava^i Thousand, 23. 

Sindhuradhyalcsa, 215. 

Singama, 335f. 

Singaya, 3. 

Singeya, Muminadl, 20. 

Singa, brother of Yaeama, 322. 

Sirivella, 242, 313, 352. 

Siruguppe, Ballala’s Ill’s march 

• against, 16 ; under Kampiladeva, 

, 9 ‘ 

Sivaganga* 353. 

Sivanasamudra, ; i72, 196, Kr§na- 
raya’s capture and destruction of 
198-200. 




Sivappa Nayaka, 345; fortifies Ikkgri, 
350, 363, 368. 

^ivaraja, son of Sambeta Pinnaya, 
142f. 

Sivatattvaratndkaram, 252 n, 253», 
256, 368. 

Sivavya, Kalajnana, attributed to, 

59 . 

Sivaji, 299. ; 

Sosavur* 25.;\/ : V'',' 

Sousa, Faria Y, 282. 

Solavaram, 340. 

Somanathapur, 173. 

Somaraya, alias Imma<Jiraya, the 
Ummattfir chief, 181. 

Somayaji, Venkanna, 354. 

Someivara, god of Kampili, 10. 

Sravana Belagola Inscription, 66. 

SriharikSta, 347. 

Srikantha Akaeavasi, 239. 

Srinatha, the Vidyddhikari at the 
court of Pedakomati Verna, 3; on 
the chiefs of Kondavidu, 95; 
overthrew Dinditna, 110 ; places 
figuring in his poems, llOf. 

Sriperumbudfir epigraph, 301. 

Sriranga, Prince, 182, 188, 

Sriranga I (s/o Tirumala), 60 ; details 
about the regnal years, 72, 298, 
301-9, 310, 311. 

Sriranga II (Cikkaraya, nephew of 
Venkata II), 311, 325, 326ff; his 
end, 329, 331. 

Sriranga, s/o Cina Venkata, 342. 

Sriranga III, nephew of Venkata III, 
becomes king, 339, 340, 348ff. 

Srirafigam, 171, 172, 235 temple 
sacked by Kaffir, 39; Sriranga- 
pattana, 158, 159, 161, 172f, 176, 
181-183, 196, 200, 298, 343, 344. 

Srirangaraja, the Vijayanagara gover- 
nor of Bellamkonda, 116, 165. 

Srirangarajakonda, 91. 

SriSailam, 87, 206; plates, 123; epi- 
graph, 204. 

Sringeri, 27 ; inscription, 24. 

Sthala, a group of villages, 74. 



Sthala-harn.am, administrative 

officer over a sthala, 75. 1 

St. Thome, _248, 251, 252; San 
Thome, 335. 

Snhva Ray, ruler of Deccan, 50. 
Sultanpur ( alias Firozabad), 284. 
Sultans, Bahmani, 5. 

Sultan Vodeyar, 107. 

Svarupcms, 247. 

T 

Talakad, Pdlaiffars of, 182. 

Tamarao (Immadi Narasimha), 150. 
Tamma, 116. 

Tammana Gaud, 318f ; identical with 
Mummadi Cikkaraya Tammaya 
Gauda, 319. 

Tammaraja, 127, 149, 150, 1*7, 198n. 
Tammaraya (Iinmadii Narasimha), 

69. 

Tammaraya of Rantamaraja family, 

119. 

Tanajary, 106. 

Tangeda, 204, 242, 30 <• 

Tangadige, 264, 265. 

Tanjdvuru Andhrct Rdjulct Cdfi- 
tramu, 239 n. 

Tanjore, 327,331; (DC), 17 1, 249, 29». 
Tanjore NSyak, 29H, 322, 323, 334, 
339, 340, 346, 351, 354. 

Tdnnaras u-ndd u, 247, 249. 

Tarasangi, 159, 160, 161, 175. 
Tarikere, 341 , 345. 

Tarmaehirin, 31. 

Tarpully, 260. 

Tavarageri, 283. 

Tfujpatri, 362. 

Talikota, 263, 279 ; battle of, 277. 

}!'. Tamraparni, 247. 

Taraka brahmardpy am, 233. 
t |i Tarikh-i- t'6t'ishtci i 47/1. 

* l.i Telingana, 28, 81, 83, 99, 100, 

J H4 132, 144, 174, 206, 208, 272, 

!j : 284 ; incorporated in Dehii Empire, 

1 35; origin of Hindu independence, 

44 ; fight between Humayun Shah 
i , and Kapilesvara, 118 , . 

1 ' ■ ■ ' ! ' ■ ' 


Telungaraya, a Saluva chief, 97. 
Teppada Naganna, 25. 

Thucydides, 1. 

Tiling, 36, 46. 

Timma (?) Balacandrapatra, 206. 
Timmabhupala, brother of Immadi 
Narasimha, 154, 155. 

Timma, of Cebrolu, 242. 

Timma, Cina, 248, 249, 250. 

Timma, Goparaju, 314. 

Timraj, Kasturi, 304, 

Timma, Mekur, 312. 

Timma, Saluva 196, 204, 206; 

(minister of VIra Narasimha), 186. 

Timmana, 3. 

Timmana ‘ adapam \ the seal-bearer 
of Nagappa of the small treasury, 
324. 

Timmana, Kandi, 307. 

Timmapa Nayaka at Penugonda, 156. 
Timmaraju, Gobburi, 307, 339, 340, 
342. 

Timmaraju Pina-Kondraju, 206. 
Timmaraju, Siddhiraju, 260. 
Timmaraju, Yara, 261, 817. 

Timma Nayaka, held sway over 
Arumogaui, 235. 

Timma Nayaka, the Hands Chief, 
302, 303. 

Timma Nayaka, lieutenant of Jagga- 
raya, 327. 

Timma Nayaka, Pemmasani, 320, 
324. 

Tindivanam, 322, 355. 

Tinneveliy Dt,, 247. 

Tipparaja, officer of Bnkka, 25. 
Tiruccilapalli, 120. 

Tirubkalakkudi inscription, 39. 
Tirnkkoyikir, 121. 

Tirumala Hill, 201. 

Tirumala, son of Rama, 311. 
Tirumala, brother of Ramaraja, 279, 

* 282, 283; 291, 293; his regual 

1 years, 72. 

' Tirumala, Peda, 293-94, 296. 
i Tirumalaraja, Saluva, Governor of 
Tiruooinapai Ihsinia? Ill* 


393 



Tirumalamba, Oduva, describes 
Narasa-Nay aka’s campaigns, 153. 

Tirmiinra-nr-ndalyao, 152. 

Tirupandalam, 360, 

Tirnpati, 10, 201, 203, 235, 348, 
357, 360, 367 ; Acyuta’s visit to, 
236; Saluva Narasimha mentioned 
in an inscription at, 15IC* 

Tirupatiraja, Kondraju, 320. 

Tirnppatt-ur records, 39. 

Tirappappur, 247. 

Tirappundurufcti inscription, 66. 

Tirnvadi chiefs, 235, 322; country, 
Prmtfa*Tiravadis, 247, 250, 295. 

Tiruvattur, 322, 336* 

Tiruvamattur, epigraph at, 39, 

Tiruvanaikkaval, 172. 

Tiruvarur, 120. 

'Tirnvdngalanatha, Matli, 323, 324, 
330, 331, 337. 

Tiruviru, 336. 

Tondamanad, 360. 

Tondaimandalam, 295. 

Tondamaray agnila , 233, 242. 

Toripatur, 340, ^ 

Topur, battle at, 332, 333. 

Toval Pass, 250. 

Travancore, 245, 247, 250. 

Triambak Row, Baksi, 363. 

Tribhuvanlraya , the title of Ravu 
Shiga, 116. 

Trichinopoly, . 331, 332, 334, 335; 
fort, 333, 171. 

Tripurantakam, 87. ' 

Trivandrum, 250. 

Trivikrama Perumal temple at 
Tirukkoyilur, 121, 


Taj n~na4, 143, 147, 183, 184 
Tuluvas, 3. 

Tumkur, district, 26, 181; record, 16, 
Tundira 159* 

Ttmgabhadra, 162, 163, 166, 180, 
234, 239, 283, 297, 343, 
Turkavada, 267. 

Tuticorin, 249. , 


Ucchangi, fort, 25. 

Udayagiri, 64, 81, 87, 215, 217, 242, 
808, 307, 312, 316, 848, 354, 356, 
357, 360; lost to Porosottama 

Gajapati, 145f, 200; identified with 
Udayacala 255, Krsnaraya’s siege 
of, 201. 

Udaya Mattanda Yarman, 246n. 

Udayacala identified with Udayagiri, 
215f. 

Uddanda Khan, 205, 280. 

Ummattiir, 172, 182, 868 ; chief of, 
143, 181, 182, 183, 189; palaigars 
of, 182 ; subjugation by Krsna- 
devaraya, 196ff; the duration of 
Ms campaign, 198 ; Gangaraja, the 
palaigar of Ummattur, 196, 197, 
199, 285. 

Undrakonda, 175, 208. 

Unni Kerala Yarman, 246n. ' ■ YP ; ’ 

Urattur epigraph, 233. 

Uriya conquest of the Tamil dis- 
tricts, 120, 125, 127'; expelled in 
Yirnpaksa’s time, 131, 134 ; 

noblemen; king of, 204, 205, 316 ; 
forces, 207, 232. 

Urlagonda, 208. 

Utkala, king of, 233. 


m 


tJttaramallur, 321; Yaca’s victory at, 
322, 323. 

Uttara-Narasimhapurdmm, 109. 
Uliyam,2 41. 
tFtukuru, 321. 

V 

Vaidyaraj vallabham, 2, 83. 
Valadapuram, 322. 

Vallabharaya, subordinate of 
Harihara II, 3. 

Yaludulampatti-0 savadi , 120. 
Vamsanagari, 56. 

Yankara Kumara Dhuli Basivi 
Nayacju, 143. 

Varada, 241. 

Varadappa Nayaka (a brother of 
Yenkatappa of Cefiji), 356. 
Varadadevi, queen of Acyuta, 238. 


Velugotivari Vamiavali, 4, 5, 252, 
261n, 332, 333n; speaks of an 

invasion of Telingana under 
Dandanatha Gunda, 83.' 

Vemgallu, 351. 

Yengala, Ceraku, 331. 

Vengana, 357. 

Venkata I, 71 ; succeeds Acyuta, 238. 

Venkata II, 60f, 188, 310ff; wars 
with the Muhammadans, 3 1 Iff; 
internal affairs, 318; rebellions, 
against, 318-21 ; rebellions in the 
Tamil country, 321-324; civil 
administration, 324; his death, 325; 
succeeded by Sriranga II, 326. 

Venkata, Gina, younger brother of 
Venkata III 342, 355. 

Venkata, Dalavay, 369. 

Venkata (Peda) III, 339ff. 355; 
death of, 347, 



Varadambikaparinayam , 1, 160,16 6, 
168, 169, 175. 

Varahapurdnam, 127, 135 

Vasantaraya, son of Anapota II, 101. 

Vasucaritra , 216. 

Vazlrs, Feroja Khana, Talita Khana, 
Sanjar Khana, Satheya Khana, 
Munila Khana, Dastura Khana, 
Vajra Khana, Ravula Khana, and 
Bokka Singa, 253, 254. 

Vazir Khan, 255. 

Velamas, 75; 207, 244, 333, their 
alliance with the Sultan of Gul- 
barga, 82; join the Raya, 91; and 
Devaraya II, 98; their appeal to 
Kapilesvara for help, 118; chiefs, 
306 ; soldiers, 322 ; of Racakonda, 
52, 81, 89, 112, 117 ; of Dev'ara- 
konda, 117, 

Vellore, 324, 329, 331, 340, 342, 345, 
346, 348, 353, 354, 355, 359-61, 
363, 165, 366. 

Velugoti family, 5, 361; Timma, 
233, 347 ; Oina Timma Nayadu, 
261 ; ^Cen^^JI ^17,^ 


Venkatapati (s/o Tirumala), 298, 301. 

Venkatapati, Damerla, 308, 336; 
chief of Madraspatam, 347 ; of 
Kajahasti, 348, 349, 359. 

Venbataraju, commandant of Ddaya- 
giri, 306 ; his identification, 306n. 

Venkataraju, Kondraju, the Telugu 
Cola chief, 306 ; and his brothers, 
308 ; their fail, 309. 

Venkatadri, 256, 257, 258, 259, 
260, 279, 282, 283. 

Venkatadri, a chief, 304. 

Vedadri, epigraph at, 91. 

Velapa Ray, 295. 

Velapuri, 365. 

Vema, Pedakomati, 3. 

Vemavaram plates of Allaya Vema 
(d. 1434), 96ff. 

Vidiadry, 260. 

Vidya, city of (Vijayanagara), 54. 

VidyadhiMri Srinatha, at the eourt 
of Pedakomati Vema, 3. 

1 Vidyanagara, 23, 161; date of Narasa 
Nayaka’s capture of, 175. 

Vidyapura, 158, 160. 

Vidyapuri, 161. 

Vidyaranya, 45; (Vidyajuna), 54, 59. 



395 


i 

Vidudrxnya-Kalajnana, 1, 27, 

1 28, 29, 30, 32£., 54, 59, 60, 61, 63 ; 

on the order of succession of 
Vijayanagara kings, 63£ ; men- 
tions Vijayaraya II after Deva- 
raya, II, 66 ; on political condi- 
tions after Devaraya II, 112 ; 
on external help to Nagnndy, 82. 

Vidydrcmya-Vritdnia , 27, 28, 29, 
30, 32; 38. 

' Yijaya, son of Devaraya II, 65, 66, 

I ' 93, 94ff. 

| '' Vijaya II, 67, 115. 

i Vijayabhupati, 123. 

I Vijayanagara, 161, 162, 163, 167, 

1 170, 201, 206, 215, 236, 287, 239, 

24.5, 248, 249, 250, 252, 258, 259, 

1 300, 303n ; foundation of the city, 

54; commencement of the rule of 
kings, 26 ; its chronology, 59-79; 

; circumstances of the foundation of 

the empire, 243, 244, 303 ; con- 
quest of Kondavidu, 95 ; king- 
dom of, 28, 73, 166, 176, 180f, 
233££, 296, 304; kings, 250, 292 ; 
r ‘ Rayas, 221; people, 291, 294 ; 

1 ravaged after Raksas i -Tahgad i , 

. ,29 Iff ; forces, 192,’ 244, 257 ; 

. ; increase in Muhammadan element 

| in the forces, 245, 259, 260, 261, 

282, 284, 287, 288, 315. 

Vijayanagara Sdmrdjyamu , 59; 
alludes to Kr^naraya’s victory at 

Gulbarga, 195f,: on the date of 
Venkata IPs coronation 310 ; a 
Tcadita register, 60£, on the date 
of* the coronation of Krsnaraya, 
70, 188; does not mention Ven- 
kata I, 7 It 

Vijayaraya, 67, 94ft 

J ' . ViJcramdrkacaritra , written by 
Jakkana, 3. 

■ j. Vilihjam, 247. 

Yinukonda, 204, 242, 806, 354 ; 
Vema asserted his independence 
J at, 87. 

;!'■ Virihcipuram, 359. 

l| Virnpanna, Uddaglri, 80. 

?'v : „ Virupaksa, 1 ^appointed governor' of the 

? ; ' : . Tamil dts,, ; 80; his. short, reign, 63. 


Yiriipakga II, elevated to the throne, 

67, 123ff ; his short-sighted policy, 

147; kingdom infested with ene- 
mies, 125; murdered by his son, 

67, 139. 

Virupaksa, image of, 54. 

Virupaksa shrine at Hampi, 9, 45 ; 
temple, 109. 

Virupaksa campu , 55, 56. 

Visvanatha (son of Nagama), 239. 

V is vanat h as vami Nayadu, 240; not 
the founder of the Madura king- 
dom, 24 L 

Vitthala, 249f. 

Vitthalaraya of Re\adinrpa Vija - 
yam , 66. 

Vitthalaraya, cousin of Ramaraja, 

251. 

Vi tth alas vami temple, already exist- 
ed in Devaraya IPs time 108. 

Virabhadra, son of Annadeva Coda, 

92, 101. 

Virabhadra, son of Allada, 92. 

Virabbadradurgam, 358, 360. 

Virabhadra Nayaka.of Ikkeri, Sllff, 

Virabhadraraya, 205, 230. 

Vira Bhairasa Odeyar, 149. 

Vira Narasimha, first Tuluva 
monarch, 69 ; date of his death, 

70 ; and Imnadi Narasimha, 177f; 
his reign, 179ff. 

Virapa of Madura, 332f, 336. 

Vira Pandya, 51. 

Virappayya, 59. 

Virappaya Kdlajndna , 60S; on; 
Krsnadevaraya’s date of accession, 

70; refers indirectly to Venkata's 
rule, 71, 72; on the period of 
Bukka’s rule, 77; on Harihara IPs 
reign, SO. 

Vira Pratapa Devaraya, 64. 

Virapratapa Homnakalasa Maharaja, 

149. 

Vira Vehkatapafciraya II, details 
about his regnal years, 72. See 
also Venkata. 

Vod,apalli- V ajirabadu, 91. J 



396 


Vrtti on Badarayana’s Brahma 
'Sutras written by Devaraya II, 
109. 

Vyasaraya, sage, 203, 

W 

Wapb Khan, ’Abdul, 337. 

Wandiwasb, fVandavasi) 322, 361, 
363. 

Warangal, 28-30, 82; kings of, 78; 
senior branch of the Recerla family 
• ousted fsom, 100, I74f; passes into 
Muslim hands, 207f. 

Wazirabad, 134. 

Wall of Warangal, 100. 

Woorias Ray, 316. 

X 

Xavier, St. Francis, 245, 248. 

¥ 

Yadu race, 27. 

Yerragunta, 309. 


Yusuf ’Adil Khan, general ©f 
Muhammad Shah, 138f. 

Yusuf ’Adil Shah of Bijapur, 154. 

Yaca, 317f. 

Yacama Nayadu, 32if, 327, 332, 
334 ; his brothers, 330£f. 

Yadavarayas of Gandragiri, 24. 

Yadava kingdom of Devagiri, 35. 

Yadavas, 221. 

Yabya bin Abmad, 73n. 

Yakub, Khan, an officer of Ibrahim 
Qutb Shah, 260. 

Yakub Khan, an officer of Randaula 
Khan7349. 

Z 

Zabiri, Ibrahim, 167ft, 264, 273, 278. 

Zahur, 358, 366, 367. 

Zamorin of Calicut, 190. 

Zia-ud-Din Barni alludes to the 
happenings in Kampili, 20. 





fourteenth 


fifteenth 


raises 


notonly 

Muhammad’s 


Mahmud’s 


JARS 


JRAS 


Dalbuquerque 


Dalboquerque 


forwar 


Dalbuquerque 


Dalboquerque 


Kayattar 


Kayattar 







