VIJAYANAGARA HISTORY 











■MHi 

* - v j, "/j ■ ’j 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


We are obliged to Mr. P. V. Ramaswami. B.A. for trans- 
lating into English the Malay alum texts included in this 
collection. Mr. M. Mariappa Rhat. M.A.. Senior Lecturer in 
Kannada, checked the translation of the liumarUjaM J'kikhair. 
We oiler them our sincere thanks. 

Departmental Buildings. 

Senate House, 

Madras. 

1th November 1946. 






CONTENTS. 



Kampilideva’s inscription in the Prasanna Virupaksa temple 
at Hampi. 

(a) Tatapinnama. ... ... 

(&) Kotikant! Raghava. 

Malik Na’ib Kaffir and Kampila. 

Baba-ud-PTn Garskasp and Kampila. 

The siege of Knmmata, 

The retreat of Kampila and Baha-ud-Dln to the fort of 
Hosdnrg, and the conquest of Hosdnrg. 

The kingdoms that came into existence as a consequence of 
a series of rebellions against Mtrtjammad Bin Tughlaq. ... 

SomidGva and his achievements. 

The foundation of VidySnagara. 


The foundation of Vijayanagara, 

Vidyaranya VrttSnta. 

Vidyaranya KXlajftana. 

Kalajilana of Sivayya. 

The chronology of the kings of Vijayanagara. 

Chrovu.lugy. 

(a) The kings who ruled over the Kurnool District. 

(b) Chronology of the Tuluva kings. ... 

(a) Chronology of the Tuluva and the early Aravi<Ju kings, 


Atakalagundu inscription. 

Aknmalla inscription, 

Harihara 1 and ’Ala-nd-Din Bahman Shah I. 
’Alimd-Diu Bahman Shah I and Khaiprai. 

(a) Harihara I and the village adminiatratioa. 




wire* to the temple 
be ha tula of the Hava, 


25. Bukka I. . ... 

2t», Bukka I and Madhava Vidyaranya. 

27. Bukka I and Cikka Yotjayaltt. . 

28. Bukka I and the Mnssalmang, 

29. Harihara II. 

30. Vitthalamba, the queen of Harihara If, 

31. Harihara II and the Velamaa. 

32. Ramacandra and his ancestors. 

3i. Panugallu inscription. 

34 , (a) Bukka II and Telingana. 

(5) Vijaya-Blifipati aud his descendants. 

35. {it) 8rirahgam affairs up to Harihara I!. 

(h) Beriya Kfsnarayar-Uiiama*Nitmhi's ? 

• ' of Srirafigam. ... 

(c) How the devadftyas passed jut 

36. (h) Descendants of Soiaideva. 

(b) Piunama of ArevIJa. 

37. Yimpaima Udaiyur and Sriratigatn, 

38. Devaraya I. 

39. The Red'Ji invasion (j) 

40. ,» : 77 (H) 

41. Inscriptions of Mai la Reddi (i) 

42. „ ui) 

43. MOnipaili inscription of prince Devarlya, 

44. Dovariya I ami Vijaya and Ahubala Co la. 

45. Vijayariya. 

46. i .-variAa I ami Anuudhva C&la. 

47. Vir .riiya. (Vijiya r) 

48. Proiuganti Ttppa and the temples of Vijaynimgara. 

40. .D.'nu ;ly,< II ami h'..nd;t\ i hi. 

5-1 K< n lavidu after the Jail t>f tin !{• i lh- (ii 

31. i j i ) ... , 

52. Ih'v.uaya 1! and OiisupSii Kvdrujn, 

53. (a) The conquests of Kaciruju Tamtna. 

7 thhTtt ; 'ht :';t 0 ' »* S' ; 7-7-18' I' : hr t 

( c ) ** ' ••• 

54. Diivariya II and God Teluaguriya of Srikafcolaun 

55. Pina Singa AnnapOta. 

56. Macaya Lings. 

57. The Muhammadan officers ia the service of the king* of 

Vijayanagara. 

58. Dovurlya II. 


Paoh. 

2S 

n"' : 

29 

30 

31 

■»V ■ 

32 


39 

40 

41 

42 

; it 

; 

43 


■ft 

44 


45 


4 ? 

5' ' hi 

4 8 


49 


5'i 


i l ■ 

51 



Hi 


59. 

60. 


61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66 . 

67. 

68 . 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

74. 
7 ii. 
7-i. 

77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 
Si. 
82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86 . 

87. 

88 . 


Addenda 


Uttama-Nambi. 

Social conditions in the 15th century. ... 

(«) Palmnj. 

(A) The Masara kingdom 
(«) The Ranaiju country. 

(d) Vyitparis of the west. 

(e) Karinta. y ... 

{/, Vijayanagara. 

(g) Karp ftp r< 

(A) Xarella :Tiu.i. .... . . ... 

(t) Dravida. 

(/) The position o{ a dancing wonnm. 

Maliikarji.ma. .//.Ty' ... ■■■■■■ .-:y> ‘ ... 

P»-da Singam Anna and PSlepalli Bukka. 

The services of Kamparaja Malla and Jannaya Niiyaka. 

Services of Kamparaja. ... ... ... 

Services of Tirnmalainatha Uttaran-Xambi. 

Sendees of Saiuva Tirumuki Raja. 

Services of Ivrfnaraya Cttama-Xainbi. ... ... ... 

Prrdapa UP aruya. 

The* Gajapatis. 

Akatabhanudeva and Kapiicsvara. 

Gnjnpati Kapiifs-a.a. 

The victorias of Gajapati KapiKsvara and his subordinates— 

(ij > iujiuftvu Tippa. 

The victories of Gajapati Kapil Cs vara and his subordinates — 

(d) ! blrnora Tu.una. 

Xirvanaraja a 'ias Pedr-Tyr.. 

\ irupakja. ... ... 

Tam may a Bas.u.t Reddi. 

Siijnva Niirasimha. ... 

The services of KanJklai Kanaanuja Daaar. 

The revolt of the dam beta chiefs— (i) Sambeta Vira Naraaiinba, 
The revolt of the .Sambcto chiefs— (ii) Sara be Ja Siva Raja 
S.ljuva Xurasimka and Anno.-ta Uuutvaraja. 

The war between Saiuva Narasitnha and Saiuva Malidevaraja. 
Kavutija Sima during the reign of Siijuva Narasimha. .„ 

Piunsottama Gajapati .i>. ... y y 0...;.:'; ' ... ■ 

Tiw Araviiu kiiiys, ... ... ... ... 

Ana\ iti I.xiKka. ... ... ... ... 

Sijtm Narasiioha’s war upon the Qnth Shah and the Gajapati, 
Pnru$8ttam«u y.;^ 

'’"••• r ‘, Tli*.' It V / , \VtUl; 'JLi-’iiirtfyfj 
■ : : ; . ; : y yy ; . 


Pa os. 
52 


54 


55 


56 


57 


' n 

58 

59 


60 


62 


ft 

63 



KapiU'ndra and Pimsgottama. 

Naraeii Niiy .. 

Immadi Narasimha and Xarasa Nayak-t 
Immadi Narasimha and Tinimarasayy a. 
Prataparudra Gajapati, 


95. Vira Narasinearnya’s dynasty. 

95. (rr) Koneriraja and Srirarigsm, 

96. Vira Narasimha. 

97. Vira Narasimha and Umirutttnr 

97. («) Vira Narasingarara’a ersronation. 

98. Bukkaraju Ramarajts, 

99. Bukkarajn Rfunarajn’s data 

100. The invasion of Savayi Bjhbi. 

101. Rijmaraja’B victories. 

102. Sam beta Gnravaraja. 

103. Vira Narasimha and the Pormgnese, ... 

104. Military policy. 

105. The kingdom and the capital, 

106. The Put fast i of Alamkoty.la. 

107. Aravlju RSmaraja’a children. 

108. Rimaraju Timma. 

109. The coronation of Krjjjadtjvaraya, 

110. Kf?nariya and Sambeta Gnravaraja. 

111. The origin of the Kejadi chiefs, 

112. Kjynadiivaraya and CatKjapa. 

113. Ersnadovaraya’s conqnoats. 

114. (//) Capture of Bidar. 

(5) A description of the capture of Kalubariga. 


(rf) The siece of Kalninricv 

115, The revolt and subjugation of the Pajaiyagar of Palturu 

pa lam. . r ; 

116. {■/; Krfnariya'i victories. 


Kj^araya’s wars. 

About the kingdom of Orissa. 

Timmaraasr on the character of the Gajapati 




Page. 

121. Conquest of the kingdom of the Gajapati by KrjnadCvaviya. 112 
322. Timmarttj'i Kondaraju, the governor of Konflavitju. ... 113 

Kysnaraya’a campaigns against the Gajapati. 

124. KrsnarSya’a conquest of Warangal. ... . „ 214 

125. Kymaraya's invasion of Kaliiiga, ... ... >f 

126. Krjparaya’s attack upon Cuttack. Mi ng 



KypmrayaV war on Kajhiga. 

of;.- ;<i ■! the iV.r r.„'Ufse, ' 

(«) Krsnaraya and the Muhammadans. 

{t V) Tin- affaire < f Hijapur. 

(c') Precautionary measures at Ahmadanagara and Golbonja, 
(O Punishments and rewards in the Mussulman Kingdoms. 
(#) Preparations of war in the Mussabnan Kingdoms 
if) Meeting of the ministerial council 

(0) ... 

(k) The summoning of the Amara-NSyakni. 

(«) Victory of Xandyala Xarapa over Qniy Qntb Shah. 

(i) Muslim chiefs hilled by Kpjparaya. 

(a) SSjnva Timmaraaa. 


Allasim Peddana. 

Srirauga, the father of AJiya Riimaraja 
Visvanatha Nayaka. 

KruiadSvaraya and the Tambalaa of Pu§pagiri 
Chess at Krjnaraya’s Court. 

On principles of government. 

Administrative measures of Kr^nadevariya. 
Rajtmiti by Kjfnadevariya. 

Acyuiaraya and IlatnarFija, 

Acyutaraya’s victories. 

The G a jit pa: i invasion. f ... 

(a) tiani Titmna Nay.iiu. ... MS 


141. Acyutariija’s patronage of literature, 

145. Rimaraj a Tiioraa’s sous. 

146. Sari Ahobaja Niyadti. 

147. Periya Fit appn 

148. AcyutadS miya. 

149. Ramaya Bbiskara. 

150. Ramaya Bhaakara or Baca. 

151. Origin of the Madura -NIyaks. 



152, Origin of the Madura Nayaks. 

153* ' 

154. Yisvanatha Nayeka, ... 

155. 

158. Gani Timma and Caboii Timma, 

157. Police arrangements of the time of Acyu-ta. 

158. Ramaraja Srirahga and his sons. 

153. Ramaraja 5 ® marriage with Krsnaraya’s daughter, 

180. Srlrangaraja and his son Ramaraja 

161. Ramarajn Timma and Salakarajti Timma 
182. Aliya Ramaraja, 

161. (a) Salakam Tim m ay y a and Aliya Ramaraja, 


16 4. (a) Aliya Ramaraja, 


Usurpation cvf Salakam Timmaya. 

The exploits of the Pemmasani chiefs, ... 

Timmaraju Cinna-Timma and his brothers, 
Cinna-Timma. 

Ramaraja Vittbala 

(a) Two stages in the growth of Ramaraja’s power, 


Ramaraja 5 ® conquest of Kalyani and Kalubaruga. 
Ramaraja 5 ® victory over Band. 

Ramaraja’® victories over Bijipur and Akmadnag&r, 
Sadasiva Nayaka’s victories over minor chiefs. 

Dot] da Sankanna Nay aka. 

Dodda SafikannaT other victors. - 

The capture of Goa 

(a) Sahkanna’s other victories. 

Oikka SuAkanna Nay aka, 

Oikka Suhkanna’s victory over Salabhaia Khana. 

(a) Yelngoti Timmaya Havana. 


181. (a) The exploits of Timnaaya Ya^a Timma; 


182. (a) Kondoju, the barber, 


183, {a) Sadasiva, 

(5) Visvanatha Nayaka and Srirahgam, 

184, The death of Ramaraja* 




(5) Sadasiva and Tirumala. ... 

The: last phase of Sadasiva’s reign. 

Police : arrangements during the reign of SadaiSim 
Customs idnties during Sadasiva’s reign. 

Tirumala. 

Kpsnappa NSyaka and Srirafigam. 

Tirumala and Vefikata. 

(6) Srlranga I. 


201. Velugdti Kasturi Rangappa Nayadu 

202. (a) Kasturi-Rafiga. 


203. Srirafigaraya I. 

204. (a) Venkata II, 


205. Venkata II and the siege of Penugonda, 

206. (a) Venkata II and his nobles. 


207. (a) Velugoti Cennaya-Vefikatapati 


Saluva Makaraju and his sons. ... 

Cennappa Nayadu, the grandson of Gani Timma Niysuju 
Yaeama. 

Vefikata II and his rebellious subordinates. 

Venkata II and Nandyala Krsnamaraja. 

(a) Nandyala Krgnamaraja. 


214. The Matla chiefs in the reign of Vefikata II, 

215. (a) Aggressions of Matla Ellamaraja. 


216. (a) Matla Ananta, son of Ella, 


217. War between the Pemmasani and the Matla chiefs, 

218. YSeama Nayadu (The siege of Uttaramallur). 

219. (a) 


220. Vellore, the capital of Vefikata II, 

221. Ma|la Tiru vefigalanitha. 





Page. 

, 282 : 

283 

284 


Venkata IPs expedition against Madhura. 

(a) Tirumalaraya’s coronation. 

Knmara Krsnappa Nay aka and Sriraftgam. 

{a) Mail a Tiruvengalanltha and his achievements, 


The settlement of a communal dispute during the time of 
Venkata II, 

Bandits in the time of Venkata II. 

Highway robbery in the time of Venkata II 

(a) Condition of the country during the reign of 
Venkata II. 


Srirahga II and R&yaprabhu of Pudukota. 

(a) Anarchy after the death of Vehkatapatiraya, 


Yaeama and Jaggaraja. ... 

The History of Yaeama Nay aka. 

Knmara Rahgappa, son of Yaeama. 

Victories of Matla Tiruvehgalanatha. 

War between the Matla and the Yelugoti chiefs. 

Matla Knmara Aoanfca. 

Ramadevaraya : Last days of the Matla chiefs, 

(a) The fall of Kandanavolu. 

(b) Matla Tiruvehgalanatha and the *Adil Khan. 

The Muhammadan conquest of Kurnool. 

Venkata III and Penugonda. 

The Muhammadan conquest of Cittaveli. 

Yelugoti Sitiga, son of Venkatadri 
Srirahga ill. ... 

(«) Muhammadan conquest of the Vijayanagara Kingdom 


( [c ) The siege. of Gingee, 

245. vi 'A ■ 



248. The case pertaining to the Karanlka mirasi of Hanumani- 

gundam and Perusomala. (i) 

249. „ (>0 

250. Case of Dudyala Peddibhatlu Mallu Bhatlu of Karivena. 

251. The settlement of a suit regarding the Reddarikam of 

Navanandula-Nitturu. 

Appendix : 

252. The History of the Ravi]! a chiefs* ... 

253. Yenkata III And Tiruraala Nayak of Madura ... 



1. KAMPILIBEVA’S INSCRIPTION IN THE PRASANNA 
VIRUPAKSA TEMPLE AT HAMPI. 

The temple of Siva, the lingas of which were set up by 
Vxra Kampilideva, sou of Mummadi Singeya Nayaka, for these 
three viz., Mada Nayaketi, Singeya Nayaka, and Parameya 
Nayaka. 

Mac. Mss. 15-3-23 s p. 41. 

2 (a). TATAPINNAMA. 

Tatapinnama, to whom his enemies bowed, obtained the 
title of mannepuli, having defeated Ceruku Rajendra in 
battle, and deprived him of his kingdom. 


2 (5). KOTIKANTI RAGHAVA. 

Tatapinnama, who was distinguished by his titles, begot 
Kotikanti Raghava by his wife Surambika who resembled 

LaksmI. Having gained a brilliant victory in battle over 

the formidable army of Kampili Raya, he (Raghava) wrested 
from him the title, gandara-guli (the bull among the heroes), 
and won the applause of kings who were his equals. 

Dvipada-BalabhUgavaiam , Mac. Mss. 13-2-19, p. 284 


3. MALIK NSTB KAFDR AND KAMPILA. | 

THE STARTING OF MALIK NA'IB TOWARDS KAMPILA, ; 

AND HIS QUICK RETURN. \ I 

When the whole country came under his control, he 
(Malik Na’ib) came out of the city (Devgir) for hunting. He 
plundered every place he visited, and set fire to the dominions 
of refractory chiefs. Suddenly, he came upon Kummata, where •>' 
he stayed for one week. He laid waste the country and 
removed from it the undesirable elements. 

When the army had taken rest from (the toils of) that J 




no enemy met Mm on the field (of battle), he hastened to- 
wards his country (Marhatta) in great pomp. 

l$amy : Futil^-us-SalRtin, pp. 327-8. 


4. bahA-ud-din garshAsp and eampila. 

When he (Q-arshasp) reached the fort of Sagar, he 
took his women and children away from that place. He 
abandoned his troops and property, and went from that place 
towards Kampila. When he reached Kummata in the course 
of his flight, he crept into the fort for protection. Kampila 
offered him protection with all his soul, and both of them were 
united in friendship. He said to Gfarshasp, “ 0 ! brave man, 
don’t be consumed by sorrow, because you have been defeated. 
I have not seen in the world a chief who has never been 
defeated in the battle-field. Indeed, the affairs of this world go 
on in this fashion. At certain times you should stand firm, and 
at others flee. Don’t be sorry on account of the changing con- 
ditions 5 for few people remain always in the same condition. 
0 illustrious hero l you have done well by coming to this land. 
How, so long as the pulse moves in my body, I won’t take in a 
breath except in friendship to you. I swear by the Sun, the 
sacred thread (I wear), and the idols (I worship) that you shall 
find me faithful. If all (the people of the) world were to join 
together to take your life, they cannot cause you as much 
injury as a grain of barley. Don’t grieve, and be cheerful always, 
rbecause you have reached the house of safety”. When some 
time passed after this, the forces of the king came one after 
'another. The army was surging like the salt sea, coming with 
force upon that fort, from all sides. 

(V 7foW, pp. 413-14* 


5. THE SIEGE 0E KUMMAfA, 


THE ARRIVAL OF SULTAN MUHAMMAD BIN TU££[LAQ SHAH, AT 
daulatXbSd, and ms DESPATCHING aumad ayXz AGAINST 
KAMPILA, AND HIS IMMEDIATE ARRIVAL AT KUMMATA. 

The king marched the army from the city (Dehli) and led 
towards DaulatabSd. When he heard of the defeat of the 




mighty Garshasp, he summoned Malik Zada to his presence. 
By the order of that king of the fortunate star, Malik 
Rukn-ud-Dln and Malik Qutb-ul-mixlk marched towards 
Kampila twice, (and) being defeated, they turned their backs 
on both the occasions. On the third occasion, Malik Zada 

came from the court of the king against that fort (three 

couplets omitted). In short, when Malik Zada marched 

with the army, he went to Kummata at once. He moved 
forward, according to the custom of commanders-in-chief, with 
men of distinction and heroes. Garshasp and Kampila who 
were united in mind and spirit came out to the field of battle 
twice or thriee, but being defeated remained finally within the 
fort. Blood was shed there for a month or two; and tumult 
arose from inside and outside (the fort). When the condition of 
the garrison came to a crisis, the besiegers became bold in 
fighting. One day, the commander of the king of Hindustan, 
whose counsel was pleasing to his master, assembled all the 
men of the army in the place of battle. After some time, 
that illustrious knight hurled the ranks of the assailants into 
the fort The warriors ran in from every direction* and entered 
the fort, forcing their way with daggers. 

7:,'?' ' '.'i;?® Ibid % pp. 414-15, 


6. THE RETREAT OF KAMPILA AND BAHl-UD-DlN 
TO THE FORT OF HOSDURG, AND THE 
CONQUEST OF HOSDURG. 

At the time when Baha-ud-Dm and Kampila saw that 
the fort had passed from their hands, one day, they left the fort 
and went towards hills and forests. They went to Hosdurg ip 
pain and vexation with a revengeful army behind them (in 
pursuit); and they gave battle in that fort for one month, with 
arrows, spears, darts, and stones. One day, the whole army 
shot forth and forced their way into the fort. The earth fop 
into confusion and the air was filled with dust. When the 
knight, Garshasp, saw this upheaval, he meditated flight from 
(considerations of) prudence. At that juncture he bound three 



4 



the fort, in the manner of men experienced in war. Having 
seated his women upon two or three horses, he took his seat 
upon another, and rode away. As he went, he turned back and 
beheaded any person who pursued him. In the face of the 
enemy’s army he forced his way through, night and day. 

That faithful Hindu, Kampila, like a (true) warrior, did 
not leave the place. The danger threatening his friends seized 
him by the head, and hurled the whole of his family in peril. 
He fought fiercely in that battle, and at last when he passed 
away from the world, he received many wounds from a shower 
of arrows. He did not want to fly without laying down his 
head like men who follow the path of the faith. Heaven gave 
the royal army the good tidings of victory. 

All the soldiers entered the fort and engaged themselves in 
plundering. They captured and killed many Hindus, and every 
one seized much wealth. When Malik Zada subdued Hosdurg, 
the soldiers brought before him a man alive. Malik Zada said, 
“Make him identify the men of the place”. He commanded him 
to have a look at every head which the men of the army brought 
before him. The Hindu looked at the heads, and he drank the 
blood of his own liver in grief. He saw a head which was red 
on account of the wounds of the arrows, and raised a shout (of 
lamentation). In his grief he cast much earth upon his head, 
and plucked all (the hair of) his head and beard. Malik Zada 
asked “What is this agitation about ? whose head is this ? what 
is the cause of this lamentation ?” Weeping much, the Hindu 
replied, “ (This is) the head of our king whose death has in- 
creased our sorrow and anxiety The celebrated Malik Zada 
enjoined that they should flay the head and put the skin on a 
tray of gold, so that the enemies might become sad and the 
friends happy; then, they should fill the skin of that head with 
straw, and set fire to the fort. Malik Zada sent the skin of that 
head with the news (of the victory) at once to the king. 
Then he despatched in pursuit of Garshasp, a large army of 
valiant men. 




llliill® 




7. THE KINGDOMS THAT CAME INTO EXISTENCE AS A 
CONSEQUENCE OF A SERIES OF REBELLIONS 
AGAINST MUHAMMAD BIN TUGHLAK. 

“ During the time of this worthless king who kept his troth 
with no one, rebellious men grew powerful On every side arose 
uproar and noise ; on every side men of enterprise lifted up 
their heads; and in every country ruled a new king. Ma’bar 
became the seat of a separate government, and in that country 
aSayyid became king. The country of Tiling rose in rebellion, 
and the fort of Tiling* passed from the hands of the Turks. An 
apostate seized the country of Kannad, and captured (the terri- 
tory) from Guty to the boundary of Ma’bar. (The country) 
from Kahram and Samana to the Punjab and the districts of 
Lahore and Multan were devastated. In that country, families 
of saints of firm faith were afflicted with tyranny. In Lakhnauty, 
a king with a royal canopy appeared on the throne. The 
whole of Tirhnt and Gaur became recalcitrant, struck by 
a destructive wave of rebellion. Malwa showed an inclination 
towards rebellion, and the infidels recaptured it excepting 
a few places. The whole country of Mandu was seized, and 
the Mussalmans shut themselves in the forts like the Hindtii 
(in the past). The whole kingdom of Gujarat rebelled, the 
infidels increased (in power), and (the power of) the Mussalmans 
became less. At last when the tyranny of the king passed 
beyond bounds, the country of Marhatta turned against him . 
The people rebelled against that mean king, because they saw 
in him a great inclination towards heathenism. His kingdom 
was thrown into disorder from one end to the other, and all 
his officers turned against him. No power remained in him 
for war ; (and) just as a lion suffering from skin disease would 
beeome a frog-eater, he destroyed with the sword of oppression 
a band of wretches (who were) around him, (and) whose blood 
he was destined to shed; and his army decreased by day 
and night. Owing to severe oppression, famine, and death- 
sentences all the people were seized with hatred towards him; 


K. 


8. S&MIDEVA and his achievements. 

And GonkaladevI, the second wife of that Pinnaya, the 


best of kings, gave birth to the hero, Somideva, the moon to 
the ocean, that is, the Lunar dynasty. 



Somideva’s achievements: 

That preserver of the Lunar race who had the good 
fortune of India, having carried on a famous campaign with 
great energy, scaled, on a single day, the walls of seven forts, 
viz., the impregnable Mosalimadugu, the famous Satanikota, 
the renowned Kandanavoiu, the strong Kalvakolanu, the 
marvellous Raeur, that Etagiri, and the imcomparable 
Ganginenikonda. That magnificent erest-jew r el of the kings, 
who had the title of ‘the destroyer of the fourteen forts’, 
scaled the walls of Ganginenikonda, with great boldness ; and 
causing consternation to the enemies who opposed him, he cut 
off the hands and the feet of the unapproachable Gujjala 
Vlrineni, Adabala Annu, Rudrappa Nayaka, the famous 
Gaurareddi and Gangi Nayaka ; and had their bodies tied to 
the pillars of the eastern gate. Having made a determined 
attack upon the fort of Manigilla, he captured it ; and as he 
was the punisher of the hostile kings, he beheaded the Gosangi 
chief, and offered his head as an oblation to the god Bhairava 
who presided over the tank in front of that city. Moreover, 
he caused much dread in battle to the Mussalman Muhammad; 
and when, being frightened, the latter named (his) son after 
the victor, he dispelled all his fear, and offered him protection. 
He also distributed in that place six thousand horses among 
the people who asked for them. 

Dvipada-Balabhagavatam ; Mac. Mss. 13-2-19, pp. 284-85, 



9. THE FOUNDATION OF VIDYlNAGARA. 

The paramahamsa-parivrajakacarya, the preceptor of the 




world, Bahkaracarya, defeated Mapdana Misha in the course 
of an oral discussion. He composed a poem called 
Amaruka, and established the Goddess, Barada, on a th 
in the city of Srngapura. He took PadapadmSci.,, 


mm 


Mil® 


7 



~ 1 m l&fl 


Totakacarya, HastSmalakacarya and Suresvaraearya as 
his disciples and set up mathas in his name throughout the 
land, bounded by the four seas ; which he left in the charge of 
his disciples. Then, he made Vidyasankara his disciple, and 
after some time secured release from the body. 

Then the householder Madhava who was living on the 
banks of the Krsna, migrated to the southern country, and 
having settled down at Pampa, meditated on the Goddess 
LaksmT, with the object of obtaining wealth. The Goddess 
who appeared before him refused to comply with his request ; 
but consoled him with a promise that she would grant him the 
object of his desire in his next birth. Madhava then went to 
Vidyasankara, the pupil of Sahkaracarya, got himself 
ordained as a sanyasin, and assumed the name of Vidyaraiiya. 
The Goddess then appeared to him in a dream, and said, “ The 
Jainas and the Kiratas who seized this country are conduct- 
ing themselves just as they please. Build a city in this 
country, and set up a king so that he may encourage virtue 
and punish evil.” Vidyaranya was reflecting on the meaning 
of this dream for some time, when two poor Ksatriya 
brothers called Harihara and Bukka, who migrated from the 
northern country, settled down in the south and having enter- 
ed into marital relations with the Kurubas, were living in happi- 
ness. Harihara, the elder of the two brothers, dreamed that he 
would obtain great wealth, if he would go accompanied by his 
brother, Bukka, to Vidyaranya and seek his patronage. 
Accordingly, Harihara and Bukka went to Hampi, where they 
met Vidyaranya, and explained to him the dream. The sage, 
thereupon, summoned the people of the place, and questioned 
them about the past history of the shrine. They said that 
formerly king Trisahku of the Iksvaku race who visited 
the shrine granted to it the three and a half crores country 
between the Krsna and the Setu to get rid of his sins. 
When Vidyaranya heard of this, he turned to Harihara and; 
Bukka, and said, “ The God Virupaksa is the master of this 



god, and having obtained his sanction, carry on the adminis- 
tration of the state in a virtuous manner.” He then gave the 
name of Harihararaya to Harihara, and began to construct a 
city called Vidyanagara, but being misled by the blowing of a 
conch by a Vaisnava mendicant, he laid the foundation stone 
a few minutes earlier than the auspicious time fixed by him. 
He discovered that as a consequence of this discrepancy the 
city which he was then beginning to construct, would fall after 
some years into the hands of the Mussalmans. Next he wrote 
a few Kalajnana works such as Vidyaranya Kalajnam and 
installed Harihararaya on the jewelled throne of Vidyanagara 
in S. S. 1258. 

. .-f : -V Keladinrpa Vijaya % pp, 14*16. 


10. THE FOUNDATION OF VIJAY AN AGAR A. 

; stjmmaryA A A ' 

Vidyaranya Bharatlsvami founded the city of Vidya- 
nagara at Vinipaksaksetra, on the banks of the Tunga- 
bhadra in Karnataka. He ruled there for some years, and 
then crowned Harihara, the brother of Bukka, as the king of 
the place. Harihara ruled for some years ; and he was suc- 
ceeded by Bukkaraya Maharaya who began to rale in the 
city of Vidyanagara. 

The ICaifiyat of Kandanavoln ; L.R. 18, pp. 400-401. 


11. THE FOUNDATION OF VIDYANAGARA. 

r 

Vidyaranya Sankara Bharatlsvami founded in his own 
name a city called Vidyanagara at Pampak§etra on the bank 
of the Tungabhadra in Karnataka. He ruled there for some 
years, and crowned Harihara, the brother of Bukka, as the 
king of the place. Harihara ruled for some years. 5 

The Kaifiyat e/SfUaitam ; L.R. 33, pp. 472-73. 


THE FOUNDATION OF VIJAYANAGARA. , ' ; 
was founded about KoUam 500 (A.D. 1824), 


9 





Bharatlkrsnatlrtha was the son of a pious Brahman who 
resided in the city of Orugallu (Warangal), the capital of 
Prataparudra. Having taken the holy orders, he assumed the 
name of Bharatlkrsnatlrtha. His brother came in search of 
him. Before he embraced the ascetic mode of life, this 
Vidyara^ya, who was the son of a learned Brahman, mastered 
the Vedas, and ^astrasj he examined the UpUsa nakhanda and 
the Gayatrlpunakaraaa-sastra with the object of obtaining 
wealth ; but failed in achieving his purpose. He became a 
prey to despair ; and resolved in vexation to set fire to the 
Upasanayantra, the presiding deity of which did not deign to 
appear before him, notwithstanding his prolonged devotion and 
service. The goddess then made herself manifest and told him 
that he was destined to get in another birth the riches which 
he was eager to acquire. Consoling himself as well as he 
could, he set out on a pilgrimage and reached in course of 
time £rngeri, where he met the famous teacher Vidyasahkara. 
Having come to know that his younger brother, Bharatltirtha, 
received initiation at the hands of Vidyasahkara, he 
also obtained admission into the sanyasa a§rama by the graee 
of the same teacher, and assumed the name of Vidyaranya. 
Vidyasahkarasat in lambika (yoga) for performing tapas an«t 
was soon transformed into a lihga, to enshrine which the: 
architect Jakkanaearya, built a temple in Saka 1263 


Sr&gagiri- Quruparamp.ar% 
Ov 2 pp, 100, 256), the gui 




10 


Vidyaranya wrote a commentary on the Vedas and set 
out lor Benares to pay a visit to the sage Vyasa. As he was 
passing through the country in the neighbourhood of the 
Vindhyas, a Brahmaraksasa called &rngiri Bhatta, who lived 
on a tree at a certain place, begged him for some food to 
satisfy his hunger. Vidyaranya informed him that he was a 
sanyasin and had nothing to give, and that he was proceeding 
to Benares to meet the sage, Vyasa. But the Brahmaraksasa 
insisted that he should be given food to satisfy his hunger, 
and promised in return to help him to discover Vyasa who was 
accustomed to move about in disguise. Accompanied by the 
Brahmaraksasa, Vidyaranya continued his journey, and 
arriving in due course at Benares, he traced, following the 
instructions of the Brahmaraksasa, the whereabouts of Vyasa 
and obtained from him the ghatikd siddhis. 

The object of his visit to Benares being thus fulfilled, 
Vidyaranya, followed by the Brahmaraksasa Srngiri Bhatta, re- 
turned to the Pampaksetra, where he remained at the temple of 
the god Virupaksa, spending his time in the service of the deity. 
I May ana and Sayana who were the ministers of the erstwhile 
Harapati kingdom came one day to Vidyaranya and begged 
him for progeny. The sage informed them that they were not 
destined to beget children (santana) and instructed them to 
write books which are included in the seven kinds of santana. 

In the city of Mangalanilaya* there ruled a Yadava 

chief of the name of Sangaraya. He had five sons who were 

known by the names of Harihararaya, Kamparaya, Bukka- 

raya, Madapparaya and Muddapparaya. Of these five, 

Marihara and Bukka displayed considerable valour from the 

early years of their rule, and Sayana and Mayana assisted 

them as ministers in the administration of their estate. Hari- 

hara and Bukka went to the city of Orugallu where they 

entered into the service of its king, Pratapamdra. In course 

of time, the ASvapati Suljtan, who was the king of Dehli, haying 
■ . . „ 

* The identity of this town is not known. Perhaps, it is identical with Mangapr (the 
present S*ata-MagaJ!lr), in the Gantfcr District 




defeated in blttie ’ 

superlntendents of his treasury were carried W ” e * he 

to the Sultan’s oamn All tkl’ . • ar " e,i awa y aa prisoners 

camp fled in Sne'lnt g^^tT ?* 

thunder-storm. Nevertheless, S » l ^ af i‘ 
obedience to the orders within the prison. The Soft. 

them and, being convinced of their uprightness, took them into 
his service and retained them at the court. 

At that time, the Nava BaUalas, 
rebelled against the Sinitsin ;,o 


gathered strength, 

paieneu narmara and Bukka to Karnataka' ’aUht'^d rf‘a' 

by tlrZnlk? th" e b e l ebelS; b " tbei ” g defeated in battle 

aUb?fo!t“ Le Hair: Mi T f ““T^ ‘°° k 

,r , ti- * £laridlara ln to a deep sleep. Durinir 

the sleep, Bevaja Biddha, appeared to him in a dream gayf 

him a Imga of Can dram au]is vara and said, “ Yon will have an 

m emew with the yogi, Vidyaranya, the benefactor of the 

Having lid C Ke™ SmZ° U WiU : U r 
woke up from sleep and 'described* thTdreU 
who was very much pleased at what he heard. 

The arm r which was defeated by the Ballalas, rallied round 
the brothers suddenly by the grace of Vidyaranya. There- 
upon, they marched once again to the battle gro'rnd against 
the Ballalas and won a victorv o^at- fm,„ d..,,c 8 , 


12 


was found near the Matahga Hill. The city of Vijayanagara was 
built ; and all the country which acknowledged the sway o£ the 
B allalas was subjugated. The brothers went ahunting to 
Anegondi by the side of which flows the river Tungabhadra, 
where they saw hares pursuing their hounds. Vidyaranya, 
who believed that the place engendered heroism, resolved 
to build a city thereon, laid the foundations of Vijaya- 
nagara on Sunday, Vaisakha su 7 Makha, of the year 
Dhatu, corresponding to S. S. 1258. By the command 
of Bharatfkrsnatirtha, Jakkanacarya built the temple 
of Vidyasankara in ►§. S. 1263. (A.D. 1841). Vidya- 

ranya Sripada devised the same yantra for ^rngeri as well 
as Yijayanagara. Before the coronation of Harihara Maha- 
raya, Vidyaranya seated himself upon the throne, and received 
from him with libations of water a gift of a lakh and a quarter 
territory both above and below the Grhats in the kingdom of 
Karnataka, which he had obtained (from the Sultan), for the 
maintenance of the Matha, and the choultry at Srngeri as 
well as the agrahara and the Paramahamsa choultry. Seating 
Harihara on the throne, Vidyaranya next performed his pat- 
tabhiseka. He invested him with the insignia of royalty and 
entrusted to him the pearl crown and the pearl throne. The 
Raya then seated Vidyaranya Sripada in the pearl chamber of 
audience, and having shown much reverential regard to him, 
he said that the Sripada should continue to enjoy his titles 
and privileges as before. He presented to him a pearl tiara, a 
pearl settle and golden slippers. V idyarany a was pleased by 
the attentions of his royal disciple ; and he caused a shower of 
gold to fall for B| ghadis in the city of Vijayanagara by the 
exercise of the ghatika siddhi which he had obtained from the 
sage Vyasa. All the gold that fell within the houses belonged to 
their owners; and the remainder was collected and deposited 
in the royal treasury. Vidyaranya bestowed upon the Raya 
the titles of Srhnadrdjadhirdja , Par anm vara, Apratimapraiapa 
and Vlra J^ardpaPT, and jdre^ the seal ring on 

which the legend ‘ Sri Virupak&a ’ was engraved. The Raya 
granted land for carrying on the services in the temples 


13 


of Vidyasahkara, Sarada and Candramaulfsvara and the 
maintenance of charity in the feeding houses at Srngeri. 
The temple of Yidyasahkara was built in S. S. 1268 Vikrama 
(A.D. 1340-41). The temples of Srngeri, Beluru, and Halebidu 
were constructed by the architect Jakkanacarya and his son. 

“ Kings who are known by the names of ha, bu, ha, vi, 
bu, de, ra, vi, de, vi, ma, ra, and vi will rule in tlxe country 
of Karnata.” 

After the rule of thirteen kings, as mentioned above, the 
dynasty of the Rayas continued until time of Krsnaraya. 
Aliya Sri Rangaraya ruled also for some time. 

Mac. Mss. 18-13- IS— f. 16 (b)— 21. 


14. VIDYARANYA KALAJNANA. 

The determination of the age of the kings of the royal 
family (has been) given out by Yogi Vidyaranya, the pupil of 
Vidyasahkara. 

There were two brothers, heroic and celebrated, both 
pratiharas of the treasury in the service of king Vira Rudra ; 
when Vira Rudra was attacked and captured by the Yavanas 
(Muhammadans), they came out of the £ City of Stone ’ 
(Warangal), without any one to help them, and took up service 
under Ramanatha in guarding his treasury ; then the warriors 
of the Great Blind Lord (Mahandhesvara = Muhammad bin 
Tughlaq ?) came and killed Ramanatha after defeating him in 
battle, and carried off to their own city the two celebrated 
brothers, Harihara (the elder) and Bukka (the younger), who 
were endowed with the marks of heroes. When during their 
captivity, there was once a thunder-storm at night, (the jail 
guards deserted their posts) and the Suftan was asleep ; he (got 
up)* and came out and found the two prisoners standing 
(inside) far from the gateway and asked them why they were 
standing there ; then the wise Sultan decided that they were 


I 

: 


* The words within: 


ds within brackets are supplied from another text as they are neoesth 
elucidate the obscure original > , : - ;v : y: 




ill 




14 


very truthful, and he released them after presenting to them 
the country of Karnata. 

In obedience to his (the Sultan’s) commands, the two 
heroes soon reached the river KrsnavenI, crossed it on a boat, 
and went to war with king Ballala and sustained defeat. 

Then they reached the foot of a tree in the midst of a 
forest in a tired condition, and one of them, Harihara, fell 
asleep with his head on the lap of his brother. 

He then dreamt a dream that a Yogi and Siddha by name 
Revana brought and handed oyer to him, the great king, a 
fine crystal ling a of Candramauli ; he also said : ‘ From this 

moment permanent success will attend you and you will soon 
be master of a throne and also meet Vidyaranya ’ and having 
said this he disappeared immediately. 


Waking up from his dream, he (the king) told everything 
to his brother and the two brothers were very delighted. 
They then re-formed their scattered forces which had joined 
them by then, and afterwards met the sage Vidyaranya and 
praised him; he gave them his blessings. They took leave of 
him, went again to king Ballala, overthrew him (in battle) and 
then the two heroes ruled the kingdom in their might. 


They discovered the throne ( simhapltha ) abandoned on the 
field of battle, and having taken possession of it they came 
and settled in the city called Iiastikona on the banks of the 
Tungabhadra. 

After a time they once started out on a hunt, crossed the 
Tungabhadra river, and in the forest on the southern bank 
they saw a hare that was tired ; then their servants released a 
pack of hounds, and themselves ran after them to capture the 
hare ; but the hounds turned back (in fear) and the hare 


vanished ; considering this a mystery, the hunter-servants 


narrated this incident to the two kings, who in their turn 
reported it to the holy and learned teacher, the sage Vidya- 
ranya, the object of the grace of Veda Vyasa. Hearing their 




15 



15, KALAJNANA of sivayya. 

1. Thirteen kings {-with names beginning) ha, bu, ha, vi, 

bn, de etc. Narasimha, the lion among kings ; his servant 
called Narasa ; ' ; A. 

2. His (Narasa’s) son Narasimha; likewise Kpmaraya and 
Acyuta : after them Timmaraja, Ramaraja and Sadasiva ; 

3. Timmaraja and then his son called ^rlrafiga. Thus 

(there were) twenty three kings in the Karnata kingdom. 

1 / " M&c* Mss. 28~4~X, p. 92* 

■ . \ 


speech, the Yogi went to the spot along with them, and after 
inspecting it, he began to build there a capital city for the 
kings and their successors in their own line and others. 

In the year Dhatri on the seventh day of the bright 
fortnight in the solar month of Vaisakha, in the Saka year 
indicated by dik (8), laha (5), dvi (2), candra (1), (i.e. 1258), was 
the beautiful city designed in the shape of a man. 

The city had nine gates, with other sub-gates, and was 
fine. In that city (ruled) thirteen kings in succession. These 
thirteen monarehs (were) devotees of Virupaksa, thanks to the 
wise pupil of Vidyaranya-muni, Kriyasakti by name, endowed 
with great powers of blessing (his pupils) ; these kings (with 
names) signified by the letters ha, bu, ha, vi, bu, de, ra, vi, 
de, vi, ma, ra and vi, virtuous in conduct, full of mercy, will 
rule the earth in virtue and attain spotless fame. When the 
ninth king is gone, there will be much confusion in the realm, 
and the kingdom will be ruled thereafter only by three (kings). 
Then the city will be ruled only with difficulty by kings, and 
the last of the line, much troubled by enemies, will take flight 
to another country after crossing the river, and will doubtless 
meet his death there — such being the inevitable course of 
fate. The line will end at the end of one hundred and fifty 
years. 

Mac. Mss. 23-4-1, pp. 17, 25-8, 79-82. 


16 


* 

t 

a 

ft. 


16. THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE KINGS OF VIJAYANAGARA. 

From the history of Harihararaya to that of Ramadeva- 
raya; Vira-Bhoja is said to reign afterwards. So, there are 
twelve rayapatnas (reigns) for this. Harihararaya ruled at 
Anegondi for seven years from the Vaisakha su 2 of the year 
Dhatu corresponding to the Saka year 1*258; and having 
built (the city of) Vijayanagara in the Vaisakha of the year 
Svabhanu, he reigned there for 7 years, in all 14 years. His 
younger brother Bukka ascended the throne and ruled for 
29 years and 8 months. The rule of Harihara II who came to 
the throne afterwards lasted for 22 years. Vijaya Bukkaraya 
ruled for 18 years. Then ruled Palle Buttaraya for 21 years ; 
Rajasekhara ruled for 6 months; Vijaya ruled next for 
10 months. Pratidadevaraya ruled afterwards for 21 years. 
Then ruled Vlraraya for 4 years. Mallikarjuna ruled next 
for 6 years. Ramacandraraya ruled for 1 year. Viru- 
paksaraya ruled for 2 years. The thirteen reigns lasted 
for 155 years. 

Then (came) the reigns of the Ksatriyas who ruled 
independently. The years of Saluva Narasingaraya’s reign 
are 5. The years for which Narasa Nay aka ruled in the name 
of the son of Narasimharaya are 13. Vlra-Narasimharaya, son 
of Narasa Nay aka, having put Tammaraya to death, ruled for 
5 years beginning with (the year) Raktaksi. The years of the 
rule of Krsnaraya, the second son of Narasaraya, beginning 
with the month of Vaisakha of the year Sukla, will be 21. The 
years for which Acyutaraya ruled, beginning with the 
year Vikrti, were 12. From the month of Asvlja of the year 
^ubhakrt, Salakaraju Timmaraju, having caused the death 
of Acyutaraya’s son, ruled for eight months. From the 
month of Jyestha of the year Subhakrt, the years for which 
Ramaraja ruled in the name of Sadasivaraya were 22. With 
Ramaraja (the city of) Vijayanagara came to an end. There- 
fore the years of confusion (that followed) were 6. 

After this, the period of rule of Tirumalaraya, who was 
crowned at Penugonda, was 11 months. Then the years for 






17 



which &rl Rangaraya, the son of Tirumalaraya, ruled, 
beginning with Vaisakha ba 15 of the year Angirasa, were 
14. Then, from Magha su 11 of the year Parthiva, the reign 
of Venkatapatiraya lasted for 28 years, 7 months and 15 
days. The members of the Lunar dynasty were not crowned 
thenceforward. Those that ruled without crown afterwards : 
Cikkadevaraya (ruled for) 4 months. The rule of Ramaraya, 
known also as Ramadevaraya, lasted for 15 years 5 months 
and 15 days. Then (there was) one year of confusion; after 
that year, I will teU you about the strange events that will 
happen in the middle of the year Bahudhanya. 

All the forts will fall into the hands of the Turakas; all the 
powerful feudatories of to-day will be sheep paying tribute to 
the Turakas. People will sing about the history of Vlra 
Bhoja Vasantaraya. 

Ptrafijiayya’s Kalajnana ; Mae. Mti. 13-19-3. f. 51. 


17. CHRONOLOGY. 

Vidyanagara became famous as the kingdom of the 
Rayas. The lineage of the Rayas who ruled on the Jewelled- 
throne : 

r f “ The thirteen kings, the initial letters of whose names 
are, ha, bu, ha, vi, bu, de, ra, vi, de, vi, ma, ra, vi, are the 
masters of the J ewelled-throne.* They ruled the earth for two 
hundred and thirty-two years. 


* This is a quotation from VidyUranya Kalajnana ; bat the portion dealing with the 
duration of the reigns of these kings differs from the original. In the foot-note to this 
passage in the Keladinrpa Vijaya , the following explanation is given. 

“The list of kings that ruled on the Jewelled- throne of Vidyanagara, according to 
the meaning of the symbols mentioned in the verse above. Hail Prosperity 1 From the 

victorious and prosperous Salivahana 5aka year corresponding to the.......** ....day 

' ............of the year............... ' 

The years of Harihararaya ■■O '- ;■ ( 

„ Bukkaraya ...... 

” HaiihararSya 


Bukkarlya 


18 



Praudha ruled for 12 years ; Vlra Narasimha, 12 years. 
Then Saluva Narasimha, 12 years; Acyuta, 3 years ; 
Krsna, 43 years ; Sadasiva, 2 years ; and Ramaraya, 24 years. 
These seven kings were the lords of the Jewelled-throne.* 

While this Ramaraya was ruling the kingdom, as the 
kings of Vijapura, Bhaganagara, and Amadanagara, having 
joined together, killed him treacherously in the dark fortnight 
ofMagha in the year Raktaksi corresponding to S. S. 1487, 
the city of Vijayanagara fell into ruins. 

A brief account of the kings who ruled subsequently : 
After this Ramaraya, Venkatapati with a small army ruled 
over a limited extent of territory for 3 years ; !§n Rangaraya 
ruled for 5 years ; then unable to keep their position there 
(Vidyanagari), Venk atapatiray a and Sri Rangaraya, the sons of 
Ramaraya, retired to Penugonda, where Sri Rangaraya, 
ruled for five years and Venkatapatiraya for 7 years, Rama- 
devaraya ruled for 6 years, Muddu-Venkatapatiraya, 5 years, 
Sri Rangaraya for 27 years. This branch ends here.f 

Those that ruled from Anegondi ; the kinsman of 
Ramaraya who was the son-in-law of Krsnaraya, the 
sons of Mari-Timmaraya ; Rayalayyaraya and his sons 
Pedda-Venkatapatiraya, and Cikka-Venkatapatiraya their 


The years of Devaraya 

„ Ramaraya ...... 

„ Virupaksaraya 

„ Devaraya ...... 

„ Vitthalaraya 

„ Mallikarjnnaraya ...... 

' „ Ramaraya ...... . 

„ ■ Virupaksaraya ...... 

After the rule of 13 kings since the time of Haribararaya three Kurnbas ruled for 
-*.«*years. Next the Tuluva Kings ruled for....... ..years. Three CSJa kings (?) ruled for 

...years. The total number of years of the rule of the kings of the three dynasties (?). 

It is obvious that the author of this explanation did not correctly understand the 
significance of the symbol's. See Introduction for the correct explanation. 

* The order of succession, and the number of years assigned to each king are utterly 
untrustworthy. 

t The account is absolutely unreliable. 


19 



sons Pedda Venkatapatiraya Cikka- Venkatapatiraya. His 
son(?), Eamapparaya*. 

This is a description of the lineage ofHarihara andBukka. 

Keladinripa Vijaya — Canto X, pp« 16-18. 

18 (a). THE KINGS WHO RULED OVER THE KURNOOL 

DISTRICT. 

Prataparudraraju, Iiarihararaju, Colaraju, Anavemaraju, 
Praudhadevaraju, Kapilesvararaju, Nrsimharaju, Purusottama- 
raju, Krsnadevaraju, Vira Nrsimharaju, Grajapatiraju, Acyuta- 
raju, Sadasivaraju, Eamaraju, Mukundaraju, Kumararaju, 
Timmaraju, ^rlrangaraju, Venkatadevaraju and Kamaraju. 

Front a fragmentary kavile in ike possession of the 
JCaranam Garlgarafi of Gdrakalhi\ L, R. 55> p. 240, 


18 (b). CHRONOLOGY OF THE TULUVA KINGS. ■ . 

In the city of Vijayanagara' founded by the great sage 
Vidyaranya, Krsnadevaraya, the son of Narasadevaraya, 
having crowned himself, ruled for 22 years. Then Acyutaraya 
who made himself master of the city ruled for twelve years ; 
Salakaraju Timmaraju crowned himself, and ruled for eleven 
months, i.e„, nearly one year. The total number of years is 85. 
Then Eamaraja, Tirumalaraja and V enkatadriraja, ruled (the 
empire) on behalf of Sadasiva. 

Ibid , pp. 240-1. 

19 (a). CHRONOLOGY OF THE TULUVA AND THE EARLY 
ARAVlDU KINGS. 

Krsnadevaraya Maharaya having been crowned on the 
Sr! Jayanti day in the bright half of the month of Avani of the 
year &ukla corresponding to the Saka year 1482, came to the 

city of Vijayanagara Having become the supreme 

monarch (the master of a single umbrella), he ruled for 21 
years from the year Sukla to the month of Karttikai of the 
yea^ Virodlii. The details of [5] kings who ruled for f57] 

♦TEere is evidence? to sh ow that a branch Of , ^ 

but the list giVMi above fct -wrong *nd incomplete . 


years from the year Vikrti to the year Parthiva (are as 
follows) : — 

The years of Acyutaraya’s rule ... 12 

The months of Salike Timmaraja’s rule. months 8 

The years when Ramaraja ruled on behalf of 

Sadasivaraya. 2*2 

As Ramaraja was defeated and slain by the five 
Padushas the years of anarchy (that 
followed). b 

The year of the rule of Tirumalaraya who 

crowned himself at Penugonda. 1 

The years of the rule of Sri Rangaraya. ... 14 

While Sriman Mahamandalesvara Rajadhiraja Rajapara- 
mesvara Sri Vira Venkatapatidevaraya having been crowned 

was ruling. the keepers of the revenue records 

(athavanam) on being summoned in the current year Para- 
bhava corresponding to Saka year 1526 expired and command- 
ed to produce the old accounts pertaining to the lands formerly 
given to the seventy-seven palegars, brought the old accounts 
and read before Venkatapatiraya thus : 

Vijaymagara S3mr3/yamu—Mae. Mss. 19-1-59; Bkarati VI, pp. 621-22. 

19 (b). 

The first Raja was of Kurumba caste named Bokka Rai 
and his son was Harihara Rai. It was Raja Deva Rai who 
conquered the kingdoms of the Kings of Kerala and other 
kings. After this we hear of the Dhavalai (dalavay ?) as if the 
power of Rai declined for a time, and yet after this we hear 
the names of Mallikarjuna Rai, Virupak§i Rai, Sadasiva Maha 
Rai, and Immadi Timm a Rai ; then Narasimha Rayar of Tulu 
blood ascended the throne and conquered several provinces 
and extended the kingdom and assumed the title of Raja 
Paramesvara Rai Maha Rai. His eldest son, Vira Narasimha 
Rai, ruled from A.D. 1487 to 1508* and made a treaty with the 
Portuguese. But his younger brother, Krsna Rai, with the 

* This period includes the reigns of Ssjuva Narasimha, Immadi Narasimha, and Vira 
Narasimha. The date A.D. 1487 probably represents the year of gajuva Narasi mha ' s 
accession to the imperial tlirone* * )|||' 





help of the minister Appaji dethroned him in 1508 and ruled 
till 1581, conquered many kings and disbanded all Mussalman 
regiments m those territories and presented the * sixteen gifts ’ 

to temples with stone engravements and pleased all his Chris- 
tian subjects. 


Kerala Palama, p. ?5. 


20. AT AKA LA GU N D 0 INSCRIPTION. 
summary. 

* In S - S - 12 61 Pramadi Bhadrapada ba 10 ^ 
Mahamandalesvara, the lord of the eastern am 
oceans, Hariharaya was ruling the earth with 
nelevidu. His subordinate, the Mahamandale 
Miseyaraganda Vlra Sri Macappa Vodern of* th< 
ruling Sindavadi one thousand with Ada van i a 



8-10. Praise of Mallinatha’s heroism. 

11. His titles such as Rahuttaraya, Karna of the Age of 
Kali, the Malla of Nadakota. 

12. Praise of his rule. 

18. He had both Vikrama (Valour) and Srngara 

14. The goddess of valour sported with him after a long 
period of separation from suitable mates. 

15. Praise of Mallinatha’s fame, beauty and liberality. 

16. The same subject continued. 

17. Praise of his valour. 

18. Mallinatha lived in Owk and ruled his fief held of 
his friend Harihara. He founded the new village of Somala- 
pura, called after his mother, after changing its old name 
Akupadu in the year Vikrama, S. 1262, on the fifth day of the 
dark half of Pusya, being Thursday and the occasion of Makara 
Sankranti ; the new village was given to 64 Brahmans learned 
in the Veda. 

19. Boundaries of the village given in Kanarese. Usual 
imprecations follow at the end. 

Mac. Mss. 15-5-33, pp. 307-14. 


Love 


22. HARIHARA I, AND ’ALA-DD-DlN BAHMAN SHAH I 

THE MARCH OF MUBARAK KHAN INTO THE BOUNDARIES 
(OF THE KINGDOM) OF HARIYAP AND OBTAINING OF VICTORY. 

One day the king commanded that his officers should make 
an attack upon the boundary (of the kingdom) of Hariyap. 
Mubarak Khan who was very rich and powerful was in that 
army. That successful chief, Qutb Malik was made the chief of 
that army by the king. The plundering army marched (towards 
Hariyap’s country) sometimes walking and at others cantering 
or galloping. From a distance, they espied a fort which was 
called Karaichur by the people. When they surrounded that 




23 



attack which threw the inhabitants into a state of trembling. 
On that day, they fought until the evening and captured every 
entrenchment during the night. At night, after a parley, the 
governor of the fort came down from the citadel, desiring 
safety ; and having tendered his submission, gave horses and 
wealth (to the victors). The soldiers having rested in that 
f ort for some time returned in triumph to Sagar to the king 
raising the dust to the summit of atmosphere. They presented 
the booty together with the commandant of the fort of 
Karaichur to the king, who being greatly pleased with the 
success of the enterprise rewarded them in a suitable manner. 

l$amy: Futu^i-us-Salafin, pp. 551-2. 


: 23. ’ALA-UD-DfN BAHMAN SHAH I AND KHAIPRAS. 

THE STARTING OF THE KING FROM SAGAR TO MANDHOL ; AND THE 

COLLECTION OF TRIBUTE FROM KHAIPRAS AND OTHER ENEMIES: 

The next day, when this blue dome gave out from its 
mouth the disc of gold (the sun), the king of kings marched from 
the city of Sagar, the dust gradually going up to the sky. He 
marched the soldiers quickly to Kernba and gallopped his 
horse for winning victory. When Khaipras heard of this news, 
he jumped like a bird in the cage. He was afraid that he 
might be besieged for the second time and he paid money 
and saved his fort from destruction. He sent (to the 
king) messengers with horses and wealth, and saved his head 
from ruin. He wrote like a helpless man a letter in which he 
swore (loyalty) upon idols and temples (and said) : — 

“I am the slave of the slaves of the king; and I am 
acquainted with his victorious sword. As I have committed 
much sin already, I have not come to kiss the royal feet. I 
am afraid that the anger of the devil-binding king will cast 
me into the fire like the seeds of henna. If the king forgives 
ail my faults, I am sending to him the tribute of two years. 
If the fear of my mind is despelled by the favour of the king, 


When the king saw in that letter, which was brought (to 
him), the manner of excuse with flattery and humility, he said 
to himself, “ we should not harass that humble man. Why 
should the lion which hunts elephants contemplate fighting 
with foxes ? Whenever I want to hunt, the troops which sur- 
round my country (are ready to join me). ” Then the king 
accepted the tribute from him and compelled him to purchase 
(peace). He led the troops towards (the country of) Narayan, 
and reached Malkota on the second day. 

Ifatny : FutBh-us- SalU{i» t pp. 552-3, 

% * * 

24 (a). HARIHABA I AND VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION. 

, SUMMARY. ■ 

* In the $aka year one thousand two hundred and fifty 
eight, corresponding to the cyclic year Isvara, King Harihara 
granted, in the presence of God Virupaksa, on the holy day 
of Sivaratri, at the request of Cikka Vodaya, Karanika - 
svasthyas to Brahmans in all the places where they were 
dwelling. 

From the Ancient Records of Caudesvarinan davara m ; Mac « Mss, 15-3-18. 

24 (b). 

SUMMARY. 

While Harihara ray a was ruling at Vijayanagara, Cikka 
Vodaya secured the office of the Karanika for the Brahmans. 
As he caused also a canal to be dug from the Pin akin! which 
passed through the fields of Bondiladinne and Sugumanei, it 
is said that such niraramba crops as rice, sugarcane etc., used 
to grow in abundance. 

Kaifiyat of TatiaproddM$ur\ L . R. 35, pp. 122-123. 

24 (o). 

SUMMARY. 

At the request of Cikka Vodaya, Harihararaya granted 
to the Mahajanas of Nandavaram, in the temple of the god 

# 0*S* 1338 corresponds to Dmitri and not Isvara. - * , . . . 


25 



Virupak§a at Vijayanagara 
as an agrahara on S. S. 12S 
sasthi) * 


the village of Cakiraju-Yenmla 
Is vara, Margasira su 6 (Kapila- 


The ancient records of Caudesvari Nandavaram ; Mac, Mss. 15-3-18. 


24 (d). 

Hail prosperity ! In the victorious year 1259 of the 
Balivahana Saka corresponding to the year Isvara, Magha ba 
30,f Arirayaganda, Arirayamardana, the prosperous Maha- 
rajadhiraja, Rajaparamesvara, Sri Vlrapratapa Hai’iharadeva 
Manaraya, who has the prosperous Mahamandalesvara Bukka- 
raya as the prop of his throne, his Sarvapradhana Ciklta 
Vodaya having favoured the request, granted to Brahmans, 
on this holy day, the hereditary Karanika right along with 
the gift-deeds. He also granted the office of the Reddi in 
some villages. 

■dw extract from ike gift-deed given by Harihara to Vnndavllu Siva 
Re^iofBdgalaka^ia, a hamlet of Malamidikambhaladinne 
in the Cud dap ah District) L, R. 37, p. 291* 


A LEASE DEED, 


Hail prosperity! In the victorious year 1262 of the 
Balivahana Saka, corresponding to the year Vikrama, Jyeshtha 
su 10, Arirayaganda, Arirayamardana, the prosper ous Maha- 
rajSdhiraja, Rajaparamesvara, Vlrapratapa Harihararaya, who 
has the prosperous Mahamandalesvara Bukkaraya as the 
prop of his throne, granted a lease deed (> kaulu-nirupa ) to 
Vundavelu Siva Reddi of Nadigadda Sima :— 


On our order that you should cut the forest at the edge of 
Gubagundam situated to the west of Mailedevara, and the east 
of Yadaki in the (Junta Sima, you requested that we should 
grant you a lease-deed (kaulu-nirupatri). In accordance with 
your wishes, we grant you the following lease ( kaulu ). 

* The Saka and cyclic years do not tally. 


We charge at the rate of \ Ghatti addaga on one turn of 
laud (per annum) for seven years, on the extent of land which 
you may plough, having destroyed as much forest as you like 
both above and below the hill. After the expiry of (this) lease, 
we shall charge at the rate of 3 rukas per held of one turn for 
all the fields in which you sow the seeds. Having measured 
the land included within the four boundaries of the village and 
fixed its meras, we confer upon you the office of the Reddi. 
We also appoint a Brahman called Mamudur Peddanna as the 
hereditary Karanika, for submitting to us the gudikattu accounts, 
and keeping the accounts of the village which you are founding. 
When he, having entered the fields*, repairs to our presence, 
with the gudikattu register, we shall grant you and the 
Karartam as well as the Ayagars of the other castes many as, and 
fix the income ( mjam ). Have faith in our haul, and securing 

the rayats (for the cultivation of the fields), live in happiness, 
y vyy ■ mi, p. 293 . 

24 (f). 

According to the commands of Hariharadevaraya, Vunda- 
velu Siva Reddi of Nadigadda Sima, having celebrated a 
festival (jatra) in honour of the village deity, founded a village 
to the west of Mailedevara, on the ruined site of Polinenipalle 
which was deserted long ago. But the (new) village was ruined 
by an accident within a year of its foundation. Again, accord- 
ing to the order of His Majesty (^iva Reddi began to excavate) 
a tank at his own expense, at Waterless -Hifturu (which is 
situated) to the east of Yadaki, west of Mailedevara, aud south 
of G-ubagundam on Saturday Vaisakha su [10? j of the year 
Wikrama corresponding to S.S. 1262, and completed on Magha 
6u 8 of the year Visa corresponding to S.S. 1263 f (Jan. 12 

The original lias 1 mam polani sagimci \ The sense of the expression is not clear* 
for, no known meaning of x mam ’ is applicable in this context ; but ' mtlru * in such 
expressions as ‘ maru blranm 1 and * mans variakudu * means retail trade and retail 
dealer respectively. * maru~$olam~$agimci may be taken to mean registering the small 
fields. 

t Though the excavation of the tank is said to have been completed on the latter 
date, the connection of the former with the excavation work is not stated. We have taken 

*£ .-.it ** the date of commencement 



27 



a. u. j . oiaj. 10 prove me truth ox this, there is an inscription in 
the Nagari script which Vundavelu Siva Reddi had caused to be 
engraved on the sluice on the eastern side of the tank. 

Ibid) p. 295. 

24 (g). 

A description of mangas which His Majesty had granted 
on Margasira su 10 of the year Svabhanu corresponding to 
Salivahana £aka 1265. 


In the region bounded by Siddhavattam in the east of 

Gutti, Penugonda in the south, Maddikara in the west, and 

Dronacalam in the north, * (King Harihara) appointed a 

Karanika over a village consisting of four or five hamlets, and a 

Sthalakarana over (an area) containing 20 to 30 villages having 

such village Karanikas. (Ee) also appointed for the same region 

nad-gaudas and nad-talaiyars ; and having made appointments 

in this manner, (he) granted them title deeds which he had 

caused to be written. Kk.'- '-V'X' '-a 

/fcV, pp. 297-298. 

24 (h). 

SUM MART. 

While Maharajadh iraja Harihararaya, being seated on the 
Diamond-throne, was ruling from Vidyanagara known also as 
Vijayanagara, Gikka Vodaya submitted on Magha ba 30, 
Sivaratri of the year (Vijaya)f corresponding to S.S. 127 5, that it 
would be an act of merit, if the king granted to Brahmans, 
on that holy occasion, the office of the Karanika in all the 
villages of his kingdom, which was held at that time by the 
goldsmiths and the Yelamas. At that time, the goldsmith, 
Limgoju was holding the office of the Karanika in the village of 


* The original ms. describing the boundaries is corrupt ; and consequently this 
portion of the translation is only tentative. 

t The name of the cyclic year is not mentioned, and some space is left blank in the 
original. As the cyclic year corresponding to S. S. 12^5 is Vij ay a, it has been introduced 
in the translation. Again, the name of the cyclic year in which the lunar eclipse occurred on 
Vaisakha su 15, and when the king bestowed the office of the Karanika on Peda-Polamraju 
is not mentioned. No lunar eclipse occurred in Vaisakha of Jaya or the succeeding' yMr f 
The. date on which t 





25. BOKKA I. 

^ijaya-Bukkaraja ruled at Vijayanagara for twenty-eight 
Jff. 1S _^ rona r ®alivahana Saka 1273 corresponding to Khara to 
a iva ana Saka 1301 corresponding to Kalavukti * 

The JCaijiya! of Jf at a midi kambhTil ad inne\ L. A\ 37, p. 298. 

26 - BTJKKA I AND MADHAYA-Y IDY A EASY A. 

Prosperity to Sri Bukka, lord of the earth, wlio has taken 
the duty of uplifting the Smarla-clharma ; has 
is e $ a * n trn th ; possesses high intellectual powers 

(dharma 011 see ^hig the three objects of human life 

well ' ar ^ la an -^ kania )‘, ; is expert in the use of four expedients, 
in six Tl a** 1 ^ le ^ ve branches of human knowledge, renowned 
tuent ° Keredit ^’ mov hig everywhere in the seven consti- 
Parts of the kingdom, and radiant with the eight parts of 

the ten lltles ’ 7 Possessing nine treasures and shilling with 

characteristics of dharma. Madhava was the family 

the t ^blister of that mighty king ; just as Brhaspati was 

of Baib 61 aUd m bdster of Indra ; Sumati of Nala ; Medhatithi 

Y • y a i Dhaumya of Dharmaraja, Grautama of the king 

> t) Z ’ an ^ Vasistha of inward vision and spouse of Arundhatl 
of Kama of . . . 


lmd to 1379. Haiihara I was alive until AJX 1856 * The overlapping of the 
to the fact that Bukka 1 ruled the kingdom jointly for some time with Ms 


29 



Madhava having heard the pregnant words of Bukka, 
praised him and replied gladly : 

“ Listen with calm understanding to my words that deal 
with the purmartha ; here is my younger brother, Sayan- 
acarya, foremost among the learned men. 

“ 0 ! King ! desirous of learning the purusarthas, in the 
Pur anas and Upn purmas, I have given instruction to him ; and 
he will tell you the stories.” 

Thus having cheered the King, he cast a glance at 
Sayanarya ; and Sayan a having bowed down to his brother 
addressed the king. Bnkka. 

END: v 1§|| 

The king, Bukka, heard the Pit rus barta-Su dhanidhi as 
related by Madhava [Sayan a ?]-arya and felt very much 
gratified. 

He told his illustrious teacher Madhava : “ 0 ! best among 
the learned men ! I feel satisfied with your valuable stories 
and have learned many that teach the purusartha. 

“ I think you are adding to the glory of your elder brother 
Madhava as Upendra did to Indra. ” 

Purusartha Sudhtnidhi* 


27. BUKKA I AND CIKKA VODAYALU. 

Hail prosperity ! On Monday, Sravana su 15 of the year 
Parldhavi corresponding to ^. B. 1294 of increasing victory ; 
while the prosperous Mahamandalesvara, Ariray a- vibh alita, 
Prabhurayaraganda, Miirurayaraganda, and the Lord of 
eastern, western, southern and northern (!) oceans, Ylra Bukka- 
raya, was ruling, his Sarmpradkani, Cikka Vodaya granted , to 
(the god) Papavinasesvara of Eruva, the village of Cengalavidu 
with libations of water as long as the moon and the sun may 
last, in order that his rule, as well as that of Bukkaraya, then- 
life, health, wealth, cash, gold, goods, and vehicles may ii crease. 


28. BUKKA I AND THE MUSSALMANS. 


SUMMARY. 

While Bukka I was ruling at Vijayanagara, he collected a 
large army with the object of leading an expedition against the 
Mussalmans in S. S. 1286 (A. D. 1364-5).* At that time, Mesa 
Timma Nayaka, having gathered together some troops according 
to the commands of the Raya at Kummetta, on the bank of the 
Pinakinf in the northern districts, marched to Vijayanagara, 
where he joined the Raya. Then they advanced northwards 
against the army of Delhi, f Timma Nayaka fought valiantly, 
and though wounded in the battle, he slew several including 
the captains of the Delhi army, whose heads he presented to the 
Raya. The Raya bad them promptly hoisted on the flag-staffs. 
He presented to Timma Nayaka all the jewels that he was then 
wearing, his own sword and his favourite steed, as well as two 
fly-whisks. 

Having won a victory over the Muhammadans, the Raya 
returned to Vijayanagara with all his army. Fie held a 
durbar to which he summoned Mesa Timma Nayaka, and after 
complimenting him on the display of valour in the battle, 
asked him how he should be rewarded. Timma Nayaka sub- 
mitted tbat if it pleased His Majesty, he might confer on him 
the jaglr of Kummetta. The Raya complied with this request, 
and Timma Nayaka returned to his place, where he lived for 
several years. 

Kaifiydi of the NadimidoMipTilem Balmy agars\ L* AV 39, ' pp. 1-2. 

: . 29. HARIHARA II. 

Harihara II ruled for 22 years from B.S. 1302 Siddharthi to 
6.S. 1324 Citrabhanu. At the time when he waged war on the 

who states 

entered into an alliance with the Raja of Telingana and invaded the dominions of the 
Babman! Saltan during the early years of the reign of Mufeamma<TL; "Haig ; assigns "this 
war to A. D. 1365. 

t The mention of Delhi here is due to confusion. By Delhi troops, the army of 
■ Bahhiam Sultan -must 'be understood in this context* 


31 



Northern Army, the villa: 
the outbreak of famine, 
migrated to the 
breathed his last 
passed his d 

son of Peddanna, the Kar 
of the w 

managed to live in th 
during which the village remained 
was 21. 

The Kaifyat of Malamidi-Kambkaladhine, Cuddapah District ; L. K. 37 , pp. 298-9 

30. VITTHALAMBA, THE QUEEN OF HARIHARA II. 

SUMMARY, 

S. 1315 Srlmuka : King Harihara married Vitthalamba, the 
daughter of Kamadeva, the son of Basavaraja of the Kadamba 
family and his wife Padmaladevl.f Queen Vitthalamba caused 
the steps on the way from the SrTsaila" to' tFe Tatalagamga to* 
be constructed. ’ — — — «A— 

Kaifiyat of fCandanctvolu An Inscription on the grlsaila kill, on 
the wa y the shrine to the Pata{agamga-, L. R. 18 , p . 404 . 

U 31. HARIHARA II AND THE VELAMAS. 

RECERLA ANAPOTA NAYAQU. 

As soon as the Eevanta among the horsemen (Anapota) 
mounts his charger, the minds of mighty kings are nertm-be.d • 


■ge was destroyed as a consequence oi 
i. 4 - Then Kondubhattu, the purdhAt, 
southern country; Peddanna, the Karanam 
; Vundavelu Siva Reddi of Nadigadda Sima 
days in the neighbouring villages ; Timmaraju, the 
i?am, reached Vijayanagaram ; some 
yagars deserted the village, while the others somehow 
neighbourhood. The number of years 
in ruins as a result of famine 


32 


3.2. RAMACAND R A AND HIS ANCESTORS. 

Yaradaea, who killed Yimma of Eunthlru, is the grand- 
father of your grandfather; king Singa w’ slew Macca Oamiaya 
‘in battle is your grandfather's father ; Madhava who put to 
death Bhandara Mxunmadi is your iather’s father; Peda 


Vedagiri who defeated Gruuda Dandanatha is your father. 0 I 


Vedaya Ramacaudra, you pleased the Sultan, Firoz Shah, near 
the Baiidi Pass, and won a victory over the Ivaniiadis in battle. 

■ VeliigTtfrvari Vamsavali : v. 100. 

33. PXNUGALUJ INSCRIPTION. 

SUMMARY,’ : 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4 . 

5. 


6 . 

7. 


8. 


Salutation to Mother Earth, (omitted) 

Salutation to Graiiapati. (omitted) 

Praise of Harihara, son of Bukka. 

Praise of his minister Baica-daudadhipa. 

His son Irugapa was made commander-in-chief, ( dauda - 
dhinathesvara) by Harihara. Irugapa’s great qualities 

enumerated. hh Nf tlA: x . . . h 

Harihara’s son Bukka ruled the earth with distinction. 

..v;V- f./'igv A;,h ■ gv; ,:h;h' : > ' h FAy gg, : -jf. ,'f (AAA If: -'A./; A;- e AO-;'. •' oAff-AA.' ,yW : .'f :A AWhA-AA... ; xrA'f: Atlx: (AAA A: • If (A off 

The city of Lord Sambhu, Pamigallii, defended by many 
Turuska warriors and stone ramparts was conquered by 
him on Sunday in the bright half of the month of 
Bhadrapada ihfabliasya), in the year Lsvara, (which was) 
the Saka year represented by treasures (9), moon (1), 
iircs (3; and moon (1), (1319). 

Praise of Ananiaksmapati, son of Irnmadi Bukka, and 
of his heroism in war. NAN f.ff : fffhvf':: 

King Immadi Bukka, fond of doing original deeds, made 
a new lotus tank (bed) by pipes and fitted it with many 

/mew machines, AA'I. 

South Indian Research f II, pp. 172-3. 

f /. 34-a. BUKKA II AND TELINGANA. 

SUMMARY. 


1. Salutation to Narayana. 

2. Salutation to Muknnda with Indira. 




83 



Laksmi with his eye 
IS— — 5 


3. Salutation to Ardhanarlsvara. 

4. Praise of Vagbhata. 

5. Praise of Mercury. 

6. Origin of Brahma from Mukunda. 

7. Brahma creates nine Prajapatis. 

8. Among them was Atri. 

9. He married Anasuya who gave birth to the Moon. 

10. His son was Budha ; his son Pururavas who espoused 

UrvasT. 

11. Praise of the rule of Pururavas. 

12. Ayus was his son. jd 

13. His son was Nahusa, who performed 100 aivantedhas . 

14. He occupied Indra’s throne. 

15. His son was Yayati. h 

16. He married two wives and gave birth to Yadu, Puru 

and three other sons. d 0 

17. Yadu had eight sons. ;; i nhh'hh v 

18. Then Visvajaya. ' V" ’'- d 

19. Vasndeva bom in the line. 

20. His good qualities. 

21. He married Kamsa’s sister, and Visnu was born of 

them for the protection of the world. 

22. Krsna’s exploits.. . v 

23-24. In his family was horn King Sangama in whom all 
good qualities sought to unite as they had lost their 
fondness for others ; his son, who resembled Skanda, (the 
son) of Isvara, was king Bukka, emperor of the world, 
famed in all quarters, sole hero of the world; greatly 
pleased with the lotuses of whose feet, shine the bees, 
viz., the (subordinate) kings. 

25. The extremities of the quarters form the sporting 
ground of (his) fame, and the capital of the gods, ’ ; 

. enfimiAfi * . aavfK 


34 


26. That king Bukka had for his son King Harihara, the 

friend of wise (men), flourishing in prosperity and mer- 
ciful (in disposition). 

27. Anointed by great ministers, Harihara sat upon the 

lhacirasana (throne of fortune), proclaiming as it were his 
protectorship of the eight quarters by being mirrored in 
eight pillars, and resembling the heavenly elephant by 
the gurgling waters poured from the kalasas, the Kailasa 
mountain by his weighty qualities (clouds , the god of 
love by waters and golden lotuses (?) and Skanda by the 
waters of the Gratiges. 



With the eight quarters filled with his great fame, always 
devoted to the mti of Manu, the glorious king Harihara, 
Indra among rulers of men, is ever victorious. 

He shone while Kali fled in fear as the waters of his danas 
(gifts) made the earth cool after its being heated by the 
unjust taxes and qualities of kings due to the power of 
Kali. 

To him the Eastern sea tendered elephants with gold, the 
Southern ocean moon-like pearls, and the Western sea 
gave a tribute of horses. 

.His courtyard converted into a mire by the flowing rut of 
elephants and marked by (the hoofs of horses) is convert- 
ed into a pavement of precious stones by the (subject) 
kings with particles of jewels dropping from their 
coronets jostling (against one another).' 

The dark reflection of his parasol was the only stain 
on the crowns of the noble kings who were the abodes 
of valour and whose prosperity excelled that of Kubera 
and Indra. : y- ■ ■ 

The lucky Ksatriya princesses got king Harihara for their 
beloved partner, like the rivers the ocean, the lightning 
the cloud, the Yedas Visnu, and the stars the moon. 

The object of his attachment was Melam bika who shone 
like Laksmi and the Earth-Godded 


35 



conduct, virtue, splendour and tact, dana (charitable 
gifts) and beauty. 

35. Deep in mutual attachment like a pair of ruddy geese 

they flourished in the pursuit of many pleasures together 
like Indram and Indra, Rati and Kama, Uma and Mahesa, 
and RohinI and the Moon. 

36. Finding his beloved particularly attractive and very 

closely drawn to him mentally, the king, who was good 
at reading (the meaning of) signs, began to wonder 
when she would be quick with child. 

37. Then he himself saw in a dream the lotus-eyed (Visnu) 

entering his own lotus-like face and the king awoke 
with brightness in his face and still seeing (Visnu) 
shining in his mind. 

38. Afterwards the queen, whose gait was stately, bore in her 

womb a portion of the discus-armed (Visnu), and she 
shone like the bright digit of the moon and the eastern 
■ quarter. x IPiPISf : v ; 1; ; y" 

39. The slender lotus-eyed lady pleased the lord of the oceans 

(the king) by attaining a fresh loveliness (in which the 
three rekhas stood out clearly in the region of her waist) 
in her new 7 condition. ■ - 

40. At an auspicious hour when five planets were in the ascen- 

dant, the queen gave birth to a son, like Sad (giving 
birth) to Jay anata, Vinata to Garuda, Samjna to Manu, 
and intelligence to prabodha (understanding), 

41. Then Kali fled, sin disappeared, passion subsided, enemy 

houses broke; the earth had her desire fulfilled, Sri 
became resplendent and noble Brahmans rejoiced 
greatly. 

42. The wise king bestowed the name Bukkaraja on his 

excellent son who was the storehouse of intelligence, had 


36 


43. Like the calf growing into a bull, the tender elephant 
into a tusker, and the whelp into a lio so also the 
prince, who rivalled Indra in fame, attained maturity 
like the young moon gaining the fulness of beauty. 


44. On the prosperous and splendid son Bukkaraja the king 

laid the burden of (governing) the earth, and devoted 
himself to charity, and the pleasures of the chase and 
of women. 

45. (Possibly designing) to make a new garment for Sambhu 

just to please the moon and the deer (of Siva), or to 
protect the cows (in the land), or to destroy the orna- 
ment on the standard of the enemy (the Cola), he killed 
the tigers in the forest along with lions oi irresistible 
• y might, while he (only) frightened the elephant (without 
killing it) because its globes were beautiful like the 
breasts of women. 

46. Enjoying the status of the crown prince. Bnkkaraja 

ruled the earth with as much power in his charge as his 
father. 

47. With him (Bukka) the earth seemed to have Rama (for 

her ruler), because he shone by killing his enemies (was 
accompanied by Satrughna), was learned in. the dance. 
. (was followed by Bharata), had good qualities and was 
devoted to Hari and Isvara (was attended by Laksmana 
and the monkey Lord Hanuman), was a foe to villains 
(Khara), and afraid of slander (terror to Dus ana). 

48. The nails of his feet being reflected on the coronets of the 

kings who made obeisance to him caused pleasure by 
appearing like the coloured sprouts of fame or garlands 
of pearl. 

49. Then the broad-minded son of Lord Harihara, firm in his 

valour, set out to conquer the Andhra ruler who was 
defiant on account of his pride and the accession of 
| strength by his alliance with the Yavanas (Muham- 


■f : i ■ •. mad&ns). ■ • ' ' 

' ■ ’■ . >- . 



Then the battle grew by steps in intensity and swords and 
arrows were freely employed ; and there was much 
playful talk about heroic deeds bringing pleasure to the 
rising bosoms of celestial damsels. 

The battle-field strewn all over with the broken blades of 
swords looked like a bed made of blue lilies closely 
spread for the goddess of valour (to lie on). 

The Turuskas being thrown up into the sky by elephants 
which resembled the peaks of the Mandara mountain, 
looked like the heavenly Granga in their descent, and 
thus they carried on a novel (kind of) warfare. 

The blood gushing forth from the neck of the Yavana 
from which the head had been cut off resembled a tongue 
of the vital flame awaiting the vital airs released by the 
blow of the sword. 

With the fallen heads of the enemies dancing about like 
balls of ruby......... the goddess of victory (fragment). 

(Abstract) Kandarpa and Isvara’s son (Skanda) can alone | 


50-51. The armies of the prince began to move shaking even 
the unshakable earth with chariots, horses, rutting ele- 
phants and infantry, swallowing up the quarters with the 
clouds of dust (raised by their march), and bringing- 
down the prosperity of enemy (Kings) ; the forces > 
moved abont here and there as if in search of the W; 
scattered footsteps of Andhra women hidden (in the 
recesses) of mountains and forests. 

v 52. The army with its flags hoisted, swords flourished, and 
the noises of drums and conches accompanied by a 
medley of neighbours and trumpetings, quickly and 
completely surrounded the city of the Andhra king. 

58. This roused the manliness of the Turuskas who swiftly 
mounted their horses and began a deadly fight with 
their bows, and shook the van of the enemy’s forces. 


60. W ell beloved of women, the king s glances are a terror to his 

enemies; when he sets out for conquering the northern 
kings, the Andhra rulers who have been freeing fast, praise 
vO Agastya for having stopped the Vindhyas from growing. 

61. Praise of Bukka’s valour in the field. 



62. Half-verse. Meaning obscure. 

63. Bnkka’s valour is compared to a wreath of smoke that 

brings tears of joy to the eyes of women in heaven and 
of sorrow to those of his enemy women. 

64. The dust raised by Bukka’s army makes bees unhappy, as 

no place is dust-free and fit for collecting honey. 

65. Praise of Bnkka’s fame. 

66. May Bukka and his line praised of poets prosper long. 

67. Praise of Bnkka’s war-elephants. 

68. Praise of his blue parasol 

69-70. Praise of Bukka’s heroism ; fiight. of Turuskas. 

71. jfThe Suratrana eats grass (in token of submission), when 

Bukka begins a war. 

72. The confusion in the Turuska army on such occasions. 

,73. Praise of Bukka’s fame. : ) . y 

74. When the army of the Baksasas in human form (Turuskas) 

has been shattered by the warriors of king Bukka, even 
| the Andhra ruler gladly takes upon his head the lotns- 
' like feet (of Bukka), the treasure (that saves him) in 
■ distress. y:f Vlyf ;;:ybftv;f y fyy yfy’y 

75. Thus did he (Bukka) conquer all the kings of the four 

quarters beginning with the Andhra ruler ; accompanied 
by these (conquered kings) and the heaps of treasure 
and gems (gathered in war), he (went and) bowed to his 
parents. 

76. He then held a darbar* with his relatives, ministers, 

Ksatriyas and wise men; and then great poets praised 
I king Bukka saying that he was a reincarnation of Prthu, 
|(B.aglra or Puru. , . ■. ... t>. 


39 



77-78. Fragments of verses in praise of Bukka as Yuvaraja. 

79. Does artha rise out of dharma, or dharma from artha ? 

Do the others ( kama and moksa) rise from these, or these 
from them ? In this discussion, he (the prince) said that 
''P the nature of the body is best (most important) as it is 
the source of dharma. ■ ■ 

80. Praise of Ayurveda. 

81. Bukka commissions Laksmanapandita, the son of &rl 

VaUabha, the ornament of Vatsakula to inquire into the 
essence of Ayurveda. 

82. Laksmana’s humble acceptance of the task ; the king was 

the home of all knowledge, yet by service under him, 
Laksmana had also gained some competence. 

88. Bukka repeats and defines the scope of his commission 
to Laksmana. : 

84. ' He composed the Bhisagvallabha-tantra. f 

Vaidyarajavallabham ; Cat. Ski. Mss. Mysore Oriental Mss. Library, 

Nos. 148, 1283, 3832. 


34-b. VIJAYA-BHtFPATI AND HIS DESCENDANTS. 

SUMMARY. 

1. Eulogy on Bharatitirtha. 

2. Description of the milk-ocean. 

3. Description of the Moon born of the above. 

4. The royal race born from the Moon in which Krsna also 

was born as a scion of the Yadavas. 

5. In that Yadava vamsa was born emperor Samgama. 

6. Of him were born five kings, for the making of the world, 

even as the five elements— Haryapa, Kampa, Bukka, 
Muddapa and Marapa. * 

7. Of these (Bukka)..,.. (there is a gap here in the 

description of Bukka), who, taking the forms of Madha- 
varya and Sayanarya, commented upon the 'Vedasfrfrfr^ 

8-10. From this Bukka arose, like the Sun from the 
‘Udayagirf, King Harihara who frequently ovej*aaAc ’ 


40 


10 - 12 . 


earth and filled the quarters with the tr, bates pari to turn 
bT vassals i and made all the great atoms of old. 

Of him was born Yova Bttkka who first conquered 
the east and then the other quarter, ; and had hm.sel, 
weighed (with gold). 

12. His queen was Tippamba. 

13. To them was l>orn King Bhupati. 

1445 . He had two wives, Padma and Maila. 

1546 . He begot on them four sons, Haryapa, Samudra, Bukka 
(III) and Raghuttama. 

16-19. Bhupatiraya was a warrior and a scholar who ™nqiush- 
/ed external and internal foes and every day conducted a 
TuU}nmi?adana etc. 

90-21 Once, as he was righteously ruling his subjects he was 
requested by Brahmans that the subject of srauta must 
/be explained ; whereupon he ordered Cauudapaearya to 
expound the Adhvara-tantra. 

22- 9 5 Praise of Cauudapaearya of the Vasistha-gotra *, wife 
Kamamba of Bharadvaja-gotra ; two younger brothers 
, , Sdityad'Sva and Mancapa. 

26. Caundapa was the minister of Bhupatiraya, and pit pil of a 
Yisnnbhatta. 

27-28. Nature of Oaundapa s work desciibed. 

Prn yo garatnavuila : S. M. L. Descriptive Catalogue of Sit. Mss. No. 2049. 


35-a. SRIRANGAM AFFAIRS DP TO HARIHARA II. 


SUMMARY. 


After the disturbances at the “ sacred hillock of 
Panriyalvan ” in the Aksaya year i.e. Saka 1249 (expired), 
which came to an end on the 17th day of Vaikasi in the year 
Parltapi (§aka 1293), the Muhammadans disappeared com- 
pletely, and once more Visnu was installed with his consorts at 
Tirupatr, then in the north, the city of Vijayanagara-Anegondi* 





founded by Vidyaranya became the centre of a large kingdom. 
In the reign of Harihararaya, a certain ^rlrangaraya became 
the abbot (in Srlrangam). Details of his honours and duties. 
Vicissitudes of shrines during Muslim invasions before the 
foundation of Vijayanagara. Gifts to the temple and its rela- 
tions with Vijayanagara. 


Koyilahtgu, pp. 116-25. 


35-b. 


PERIYA-KRSNARAYAR-UTTAMA-NAMBI’S SERVICES 
TO THE TEMPLE OF SRfRANGAM. 


After the disturbances in Srlrangam thus came to an end, 
Periya Krsnarayar Uttama-nambi went several times to the 
court of Harihararaya, and in the course of fifteen years from 
Saka 1304 Rudhirodgari to the year Isvara, he obtained about 
thirteen gifts ( t i ruvicla iyattam) with libations of water 
(udakadhara) from the hands of Harihararaya Maharaya, 
Goppana Udaiyar, Viruppana Udaiyar, Muttaya Dannayaka, 
Tammanna-Udaiyar, Pradhani Somappa Dannayaka’s secre- 
tary Annar Goppanijar and others. He also renovated 
the anaiyerra-mandapa which had fallen into disrepair during 
the war. Annappa Udaiyar of Nagamangalam covered the four 
pillars of the amudu-mandapa with gilded copper-plates, and 
covered with silver the plank in the centre on which the sacred 
food (tirupponakam) is spread. In course of time, Timma 
Rahutta. who was in the service of Sajuva Gopalaraja, removed 
this silver and made a kopparai (wide-mouthed vessel) there- 
with, made a makara-tdram for the sacred gate of Tiru-i 
vanukkan and gilded the gate, and likewise covered its doors j 
with gilded plates, and also encased in gilded plates the pitha 
(pedestal) of the Selvar of the Sacred Arangam ( tiru - 
varangaccelvar). The sacred cot ( pallikkattil ) of ivory placed 
in the sacred mandapa of Alagiya-Manavala was made by 
Harihararaya as his gift. Periya Krsnarayar Uttama-ra 
did the holy duties of Vedacaryabhatfa for four yearn fro 

1818, Isvara. 


Proceeding southwards they also annexed the districts of 
Pottapi and Pulugulu. 

* * * * 

Praudha Devaraya, who ascended the throne of Vijaya- 
nagara, sent his armies to Udayagiri, whence they inarched 
into the two districts mentioned above, and the three Keddi 
chiefs were consequently obliged to retire to their country. 

Kaifiyat of Chi{fiveli t L, R, 22, pp. 166, 171-2. 

41. INSCRIPTIONS OF MALL A REDDI (i). 

f :: ^ SUMMARY." 

During the reign of Anavemareddi, Mallareddi a 
grandson of Vemareddi made a grant of a field of 20 kuntas to 
god Karalesvaradeva of Lembaka, at the time of lunar eclipse, 
on Thursday su 15 of Jyestha of the year Sarvajit S. 1329, 
for the merit of his father Annareddi, 

In the villagt of Attirfila in the Cuddapah District, Z. R. 20, p. 335. 

42. INSCRIPTIONS OF MALLA REDDI (ii). 

Mallu, a son of &ingama Setti of Vetanda-gotra, built the 
prakara of the Cennakesava temple, on su 11 Asadha, of 
the year Vijaya B. 1385, while Mallareddi, the son of Annareddi 
was governing the country. 

Inscription at IXbaka^ Cuddapah District , £. 20, p, 338. 

43. MOTCPALLI INSCRIPTION OF PRINCE DEVARlYA. 

) The dharma sasana of Devaraya Vo^aya, son of Maha- 
rajadhiraja Paramesvara Harihararaya, the lord of the four 
oceans, to (the inhabitants of) Motupalli given on Friday 
’ MSgha su 4 of the year Durmukhi, ^aka 1812. 

According to the custom obtaining in the port of Motu- 
palli, for all the articles brought down from the ships, the 
sunka will always be charged at the rate of five 5 for the 
imported golden kavmft (?) articles, (the sunka is) eight per 
gariSa ; the srnkas in the royal karuku are 650 (?) ; for a 



45 



hasus ; for Potmuru white paccadas and saris of delicate 
texture of the same appearance, for saris of the same kind 
manufactured by the Kaikolas, one hasu. The officers of the 
king who collect the dues should give a third to Devaraya. 

L.R. 42, pp. 422-3. 

44. DEVAR&YA I AND VIJAYA AND AHOBALA CODA. * 

SUMMARY. 

Later, Praudha Devaraya, the king of Vijayanagara, and 
his son Vijaya Devaraya had both waged a fierce war upon 
Ahobala Coda, when this town was destroyed; some of the 
merchants of this place migrated to other countries, whereas a 
few settled down in a hamlet which was erected. 

Kaifiyat of Hanumadgundam, L.R. 37, p. 246. 

45. VIJAYARAYA. 

Then, Vijayaraya, the son of Praudha Devaraya, the king 
of Vijayanagara came to this part ; and having defeated the 
Malla chiefs f in battle, he began to rule the country. 

Kaifyat of Rutpagiri, L. R. 13, p. 52. 

46. DEVARAYA I AND ANNADEVA CODA. • t'y-i.}.} 
RXjAHMUNDRY MUSEUM PLATES : ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS. 

1. The son of Bhaktlsvara was Annadeva, a handsome 
and liberal prince. 

2. Annadeva conquered his enemies, and fighting on the 
side of the Turu?ka king at Sagar, he destroyed the Kannata 
forces single-handed. 


* An inscription, of this Ahobala C34» dated §■ 1342 (A. D. 1420) is found in the 
temple of BhairavSsvarasvami at GotHru. 

f The Kaifiyat has ‘Malla Rajulu’ ; ‘Malla’, however, is not the name of their 
family. Though they were Telugu Co^a princes, the author of the Kaifiyat calls them 
4 Malla Rajulu’, owing probably to the fact that they bore the title * apratimalla \ The 
Malla Rajulu mentioned in the passage are two in number ; 

i. Apratimalla Gangayadeva Coda Maharaja, An inscription of this prince 
dated Thursday Magha svl 15, Isvara, S. 1319 is found in the Bhairavesvara 
temple at GotSru near Puspagiri (£. i?. 13, p. 50). 

ii. Ahobal ay yadeva Co$a Maharaja, son of Aprati -[malla] Ganapati 1 
mentioned in another r 
(Ibid). The MallarSja wl 

V- V "■ *£*&*■: 


46 


S. Annadeva of the Codaknla destroyed Jaggavaga and 
other enemy cities as Siva destroyed the three cities; Annadeva’s 
liberality. 

4. His devotion to *§iva, Brahmans, etc. 

5. He married Irngambika, the daughter of Cakravarti, 
sister of Pinnundi RaJaT'aiid tTie fruit of the good deeds of the 
solar race (Coda). 

6. Virabhadra, the light of the solar race, was the issue 
of that marriage. Praise of Annadeva resumed. 

7. Annadeva conquered the southern rulers at Attili and 
gave protection to 10,000 of his enemies who surrendered in 
the heart of the fortress of that city. 

'• 8. A fight at Kakaraparti on the banks of the Godavari 

in which Annadeva was helped by Pinnundi Raja is described 


of 


as a sacrifice performed with the Kannadas and others as 
sacrificial animals, for the protection of Annadeva’s ally. 

9. Annadeva, who had vowed the protection of kings that 
besought his aid, protected the line of Kataya Verna in his desire 
for fame. 


J. A. H. R. S. I. p. 184 ; £. I. XXVI, pp. 44-fi. 


47. VlRARAYA (YIJAYA ?) 

After the death of Praudha Devaraya, Vlraraya ruled at 
Vijayanagara for five years from S. 1847 Visvavaau to S. 1352. 

Kaifiyat of MalamldikambhMadinn X* if, 87, p. 301. 


48. PROLUGANTI TIPPA AND THE TEMPLES 
OF VIJAYANAGARA. 


SUMMARY. 


There was a Brahman called Prolugamti Tippana, (1) who 


became extremely prosperous owing to the favour of Praudha 

~ ■ I ? 


rav a whom he served as a co 

life*;’' ■ r & ■' 4*A<cv*Wl'Jk‘ ' a# 



constructed a ■ 





bhoga-mantapa to the god Vitthala ;* presented a valuable 
crown to god Raghunatha of the Malyavanta hill ; and offered 
a pearl- necklace to god Virabkadra of the Matanga hill. He 
also established the Brahmans in agraharas. (3). 

N&rasimhapuranam-. 21, 22, 24; Andhra Sahitya Parisat Publications, No. 18. 

49. DEVARAYA II AND KONDAViDU. 

Rudradeva Maharaya of the Kakatiya family ruled until 
S. 1240 ; then the Reddis, from the time of Prolaya Verna- 
reddi to that of Raca Vemareddi ruled until S. 1340 for a 
period of one hundred years. Then the country passed under 
/ft the sway of Gajapatis.f Then, Praudha Devaraya, the lord of 
y1 ' the Narapati throne defeated the Gajapatis, and annexed the 
land. His rule commenced in S. 1360. 

Kaifiyat of Mulkipudi, L. R. 3, p. 492. 


50. KONDAViDU AFTER THE FALL OF THE REDDIS (i). 

Then, Langula Gaja pati, the lord of the Gajapati throne, 
conquered all the hill and land forts from Cuttack to Udayagiri. 
He ruled for a period of twelve years (S. S. 1342-1353), when 
he repaired the (old) fort, and constructed the new ones called 
Pedamalemkota and Cinamalemkofa. ■ ■; : r [ : Tj 

Then the country passed under the sway of the Narapati 
kings of Anegondi. Pratapa Devaraya ruled for 7 years ; and 
Harihara 17 ; both these kings ruled for a period of 24 years ; 
(S. S. 1354-1376). The Narapatis were expelled once again 
by the Gajapati king Kapilesvara, who conquered the country 
in S. S. 1377 and ruled for seven years until S. S. 1383. He 
was succeeded by his valiant son, Purusottama, who subdued 
many countries. He also defeated Nrsimhadevaraya and 
captured the city of Vijayanagara. 

Kaifiyat of Kcndavtdu, Mac - Mss. 15-4-40, pp. 6- 17. 

# The prevailing opinion Is that the Vitthalasvami temple was built by Krsna- 
devaraya and his successors ; but the present extract shows that it was in existence long 
^before the Tujuvas came to power- 

fThe village chronicles of the Guntur District invariably refer to a Gajapa 


pati. 


48 



1. KOKDAYIDC after the fall of the REHDIS (ii), 

SUMMARY, 

Lingula Gajapati ruled for 25 years tS. 6, 1340 to 1304). 
Praudha Devaraya ruled for 7 years. 

Harihararaya ruled for 22 years. 

The authority of the Rayas prevailed until & S.13S8, when 

tesvara Gajapati put them to flight and ruled until 8. 1390 

7 years. Narasimhadevaraya who then ascended the throne 

d for 25 years, keeping the Asvapatis andjdie_ .Gajapatis 

ond the Narmada and the KrsnS" respectively . 

iCaifyat of Anantapuram, L.K, o, pp- 532-3. 


Tiaciraju* defeated in battle Timmana ot the camera 
family ; established the Calnkya here upon his throne : he 
defeated the Mussalmans and captured several of their strong- 
holds ; and caused fear to Prandhadeva and other kings by 
the display of his heroism. (1). 

He became great by obtaining rewards from Praudha 
Devaraya, and acquired the title ot the establisher of the 
Calnkya kingdom by securing the kingdom to the Calnkya. (2). 


A Catu Verse. 


* Raciraju, the founder ot me preseni ) 

Ksatriyachief who rose to prominence during the period of < 
downfall of the Kon<}avi4u kingdom. He became an ally or. a s 
nmian ' 'enemy of theiMussalmans and the Velamas of RScs 
According to the poem, Usabhyudayam, dedicated to his son 
, the famous Ravusinga who bore the tittle of TribhuvanlrZya, 
[ordinate of Kapilesvara Gajapati, and rendered him yeoman 
Telugu country. 


49 



53 (5). 

summary. 


vanquished h/batfle B R-' *1^* and Bangarajulopda ; he 

t /I-?-™?*’ Wh ° b0re «“> m ° “f 

tection and took Od “T 11 •l”'’ 1311 — “ who Bon S h ‘ pro- 
ok Odapalh with considerable still. 

VisnuihaktiiudhMaram (unpublished). 


53 (c). 


{rara, and aco„i re ?7 1 ‘ he hU1 ° f Naild5 - 

Lbattlefo r a 4 J a f 5 ^ f R n 0f ‘ ie ® aJapati Ha ™S Seated 

he seized the w!Sth „f th ^ u ** Chief ° f °^ alU ’ 
wealth of their cities with great prowess. 


on the' baHi e « I !! VU Sing& who bore the of Tribhuvanlraya 

Bahti S' 6 " ° f Peda ^ U and he 0ff - ed protection to 
Khan who submitted to him with much humility. 

UsTLbhyudayam (unpublished). 


5i ‘ D ® va RAYA II, AND GOD TELUNGARAYA 
OF SRlKAKOLANU. 


. wvinfluaiv** ; . ,/v : ; • 

Kesa^odiyalu ^TnT rF*** 7 , ^ ^ C0M “‘ “ f 
Vallablia of ^ -i°-i ^°^ a P alil panted to the God Telunga 

ITnmtTlV ? 1 “ Sunia7 ’ BMdra »> ada ™ * 

Una Virarrn^ r- _ 1 religious merit might accrue to the 
of land h , a] ° a Demra y a ( 1 )- This sarvamamja gift of 12 puitis 

entrusted 2 W ^ Md8 ° f the w'as 

reanired te 16 s [ ta ^ ara ^ am . Kaneerla Ramanna who was 
; JL of ... S ^ e “ d its income in defraying the expenses of certain 

enTra«d „7„ P °‘ *“ ^ Ti “ *»»* were 

• ^ ^ 11 a stone which was set up in the village. The 

™JT~ continued during the time when the 
Gaja f aU wan ruling the country (2 )*. 

Sarabhakavi ; Adhyatmaramayanam (unpublished) ; Tr. Cat. Tel. Mt 
— Vol. Ilf, Pt iii, R. No. °* 

poein bI!not n bT 1P n° ni which was in « istence at the time when garabhakavi 

«. * ;•? '■ * <• ““r 


50 

55. PINA SINGA ANNAPOTA. 

SCMMAiY. 


The first verse refers to Annapota’s victories over the two 
chiefs called Sammeta Soma and Sarepali Timraa who lived 
in the country of KondavTdn. The second enumerates several 
battles in which he defeated the Rava. He plundered the Kota 
country beginning with Panugal; created confusion in the 
Reddi kingdom as far as Rajahmnndry : subdued the Tamil 
country up to Cennapattana ; and destroyed the Boya-rajya 
up to Muddogi. He also vanquished the Sam beta's in defiance 
.of the Raya. 


Veiugotivari Vumsavali, vv. 153-4. 


MADAYA LING A. 


SUMMARY# 


Madaya Linga overpowered the Kannadis in a battle which 
he fought with them on the banks of the Krsna (1). His father, 
Madhava, won a victory over the Kannadis .and he himself 
captured the fort of Calamacerla (2). He put the Mussalmans 
to flight and wrested from them thirty-two forts (8). He 
defeated Sambeta Pinna so that Praudha Devaraya might 
recognize his prowess, and obtained from him the atides which 
heroes wore on their ankles (4) He conquered the Rnltiui, 
defied the Narapati, and routed the Gajapati. There was none 
who could equal Madaya Liuga (5). YyY:f: 

VehtgM'vari VamiTmtU, w. Ilf), 120, 124, 126, 130. 

57. (THE MUHAMMADAN OFFICERS IX THE SERVICE OF THE 
. KINGS OF VIJAYANAGARA. 

When Praudha Devaraya Maharaya was reigning, sitting 
upon the jewelled -throne, in the city of Yijayanagara, he con- 
ferred the government of Panem in S. R. 1805, Rv.dliirodgari, 
on a chief called Pocam Annan, who in obedience to the com- 
mand of the Raya constructed a fort at the village of Panem . 
The fort was then given to a Muhammadan officer called Rabat 
Mulk, who governed the place for twenty years from R. S. 1315, 
S§rTmukha to S. S. 1335 Vijaya. He was succeeded by another 
Muhammadan chief, Khana Khana Vodeyar, who held the fort 



51 


from g. S 1386 Jaya to 1 S. 1866, Kaktaksi in obedience to the 
wishes oi- the Raya : and his son Snl+a • tt j e to the 

s. S. 1406, Krodhh ConRWr ’ T' ^ U TOtil 
_ , IS son Raja Khan ruled from S. S 1407 

nITpT *- S ' S ', Ui9 Ping ‘‘ ia as “ snboi,d ““‘o Of Saw Vlra 
Naiasimharaya who was then reigning at Vidyanagara'. Darina ^ 

the reign or Saluva Narasimlia, Panem tfefas under th! 

jurisdiction of the office ( 8 SmW) of Penugonda passed -T 6 

T k vt ™ then ££ 

ZZZ: Nayaia> Ae ™‘ C W " ° f ** treasury, ’££ 

A aifiyat of Panem Palaiyapa{ t L. R. 6) pp . 3l6 . ? _ 


58. DB VAR AT A II. 

fi I ed I, the e .™, ai ' 1 P1 “ V “’ ^ 1343 ^ ex l } ti'ed), Uttama-nambi who 
hied the boundary-mound {ellaikhn-ai mlaiyim) went to 

Vijayan again where he pleased Gya-vettai (Elenka, ,t-hu„tl 
Piafapadeva Maharaya by playing chess with him and winnini 
against mm ; he received several honours at the king's hand, 
obtained for his brother a royal charter and the title OakrarSv ’ 
together with full rights in a separate adhlna atha), got the 
ting Gajabete Pratapadeva to declare that the i Whim of the 
two brothers had nothing to do with each other (were indepen- 
dent oi each other), received all honours, worshipped at all 
shinies exammed all the sacred affairs (SriHrya), secured 
manifold increase m the wealth of the sacred Arangam 
supported „„s, Vaifnams, ekangls, and all UcaryapurmJ 
conducted everything in accordance with ancient rule, gaffied 
titles mid honours from the Eaya, came to ferangam and 
looked aiter the snkanja (temple affairs) ; he joined the kottu » 
of Kovapavar alias Tiruppatiyar, and began to enjoy some 
honours himself, while his younger brother got the honours of' 

ftenapati. These two adlimams are still in existence as they 
were then founded. J 


1475fe y„s,v xai. 




;OJr ; .palaee sjsfy&jits. 






Sllllllli* 












lit: 


r. 2 

59. UTTAMA-NA3BI. 

In 5§aka 1354 (expired), Parltapi, Uttama-nambi built a 
temple for Hanumantadeva and consecrated his image, both as 
the service (kainkargam ) of Daksinasamudradhipati-danniiyaka,* 
who endowed ten new villages as tiruvidaiyafjam under 
Uttama-nambi. 

KdyiUlugu, p, 134. 

00. SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN THE 15TH CENTURY; SRlNATHA. 

[Srmatha, a great Telugu poet who flourished in the first half of the lathi century 
A.tX, was a great traveller. He visited several places in South India, which he described 
graphically in verses. The following is a summary of a few of these verses which refer to 
places then included in the Vijayana-gara empire.] 

(a), PALNAD, 

Palnad in general ; — Men of taste do not visit Palnad ; for, 
(in that district) even a king has to plough, and women, 
though they may be as beautiful as the apsctras Ranibha, have 
to spin ; and even Manmatha (Cupid) has to subsist upon 
millet (1). 

The villages have no shops; rice is not available for food; 
the men are untidy, and the women ungainly ; water is scarce ; 
and there are no gardens to please the eye ; men of merciful 
and generous disposition are rarely met with. Why then 
should one frequent Palnad? (2) 

The villages of Palnad : — Small stones — each of which is a 
godling, — the water of the Nagula stream, blocks of granite, 
the food of cooked millet and bajra, serpents and scorpions, 
these constitute the common features of the villages in 
Palnad (3). 

The Village Purohifs house: — The hygienic conditions 
of the purohiV s house baffle description : within the limits 
of a house of one dosili extent trampled by cattle (are massed 
together) a cot, the dung of calves, rancid food, the excreta 
of children, leaf platters, dirty linen, widows with unshaven 
heads, cooking pots and heaps of fuel (4). 

* This was probably a gift by Lakkaga Dangayaka. 



Food : — The people of Palnad district subsist upon millet 
porridge, fermented millet water, cooked millet and millet stuff. 
Excepting millet they have nothing else to eat, and the cooked 
rice of the Sauna variety is unknown to them (5). 

O Lotus-eyed (Emma), do not be puffed up with pride 
because you sucked at the poisoned breasts of (the demoness) 
Putana, and devoured the wild-fire. Swallow a morsel of the 
cooked millet mixed with a hot dish of baccali herb seasoned 
with the leaves of the tamarind tree, then your capacity will be 
tested (6). 

Water scarcity : — He who possesses wealth (or LaksmI) 
i. e. Visnu deserves to marry sixteen-thousand wives. Why 
should a beggar (like Siva) marry two wives? 0 ! Paramesvara, 
Parvatl is enough for you ; release Ganga (i. e. water) (7). 

...'Religion : — To the people of Palnad the heroe-stones are 
the divine lihgas ; Genua is Visnu. On enquiry Kalabhairava 
is found to be Kallupoturaju, and Annapurana is the Sakti 
Ankamma ; Manikarnika is the pool Gangadhara, and Karem- 
pudi is the holy city, Kasi (8).V®(^ , 

Houses When people spoke of terraced-houses of Palnad, 

I imagined that they are finer to look at than our polished, 
white mansions ; but alas ! I am deceived ; they resemble 
women with black tresses, adorned with ornaments and 
besmeared with (the paste of) musk (9). 

Some villages : — 

Pulipadu : — The name of the village is Vyaghranagara (the 
tiger city); the Karnam is a serpent (Se§ayya), the headman is 
a monkey (Hanumareddi), the Nayaka is straw (Easavayya).^ 
All the elements of evil are grouped here (in this village) in 
the district of Gurijala (10). 

Nemalipuri Nemalipuri is the city- of Yam a ; Basivi- 
reddi is Yama, and all the farmers are his messengers ; ; 
Kara^iams are buffaloes who do not know 

priety (11). 


54 


60 (&). THE MASARA KINGDOM. 

. n m the Masara country to 

How very ^ cloth (worn by the people) is the 
a sensible man . Ihe . ^ . g) & rickety bng-infested cot, 

rough woollen blanket , ( . _ drugs ne arby to cure 

with a chafing-disi un ern ’ £ £ re -wood are heaped 

Aeumatism and ini.ges^ ^Srfoes and white-lice 
lt p in the courtyards ^oi houses) , anu H 

(are everywhere) (13)- 

a- - r 

country ! (The people «« ^ sw01 . 4s . (they eat) thick 

r^‘^2 with a dish of jute-leaves. Their looks are 
craftyhnd the speech is wrongly accented ( )• 

Respect is unknown; 

truth and kindness are t „ give even 

t rr^rsL - ** " * ? e " the 

(people with these qualities avoid being Piajapa 1 ( )■ 

60 (c). THE RENADIJ COUNTRY. 

Food : — Don’t be conceited, 0 ! Destroyer of Cities, because 
yon devoured poison ; go to, go to ; eat a morsel of the bug > • 
cooked-millet of Kenadu ; your heroism will indeed be put 

the test (16). 

60 (d). VYA PARIS OF THE WEST. 

We saw, on our way the cruel vyaparis (merchants) of the 
west who filled our minds with abhorrence. They carried 
with them bundles of paper, shells of ink, pens and paste 

made of the tamarind seeds. Their cloaks diffused an evil 
smell : and their nether garments dyed with ochre reeke 
with the odour of their sweat. They wore awe-inspiring beards, 
and spoke broken Canarese (1 i). 


* There is pna on the word Pi 



55 



SO 0). KARNATA, 

I wore a cap and rolled a < 

laced-cloak and consumed garlic and 
by an unshorn widow ; ate porridge 
abandoned delicacies as if they 
Goddess of the Karnata Kingdom, h 
me ? Iam Srlnatha (18). 

60 (/). VIJAYAXA6ARA. 

Srinatha and Mumma 0 ! Good poet Mum™ , 

me in the presence of the hing PrLdhaS 'i" ca‘° 
compose poetry which is equal in pleasantness’ to the 
fagranee of the flowers worn in the matted loefa „f 

(the god) Virupaksa of Pampa ; in melody to the harmonious ^ 
sounds produced by the lofty waves of the Tungabhadra *1 
sweetness to the bunches of grapes grown in tt 1 / 
gardens of Kalasa ; and in splendour to the lustre of alidad 
gems of the ear-rings worn by the damsels of Karnata" (19). 

60 (g). NARIVAGU. 

ry ■ • Tke boundar y betH:een the kingdoms of Kondavldu and 
I yayanagara Did not Arjuna hide his Gandiva in a tree 
at the command of Dharmaja? Similarly, at the command of the , 
Goddess of learning, I also hep. my titles with humility 
near the streamlet Narivagu with the object of pichin-v thri 
up again on my way back to the Telngu country (20). “ 

60 (h). MIRELLA SIMA. 

MareHa-sTma shines, indeed, by its prosperity. I„ tie 
middle of the village streets are stones and store 


garment over it ; p u t , 
seasmum flour se 
with butter-milk, 
were sins. 0 ! Mother 
ave you Still no pit 


56 


60 (0. DRAVIDA. 

SUMMARY. 

People and their habits : — I had to see the good and evil 
(aspects of the life) of the Dravidas. Colam is the staple food ; 
karamadi (a kind of pulse) serves for curry ; and kanjee for 
supper. Butter-milk is rare ; and the chatnis are bitter. Sugar- 
cane juice is plenty. Food is cooked on date of dried dung- 
cakes, and the water has to he fetched from the street -wells. 
The people bear strange names ; they have wide mouths, hang- 
ing lobes and shaven heads. Their women are bare-breasted. 
There is a twist in every word they utter. Their fields are small 
and the ploughs which are drawn by the buffaloes tiny. But 
the mango groves are shady, vavilis dense, and the padis (?) 
green (23). 

The Tamil Pillai : — The Tamil Pillai is the veritable calf of 
an elephant in consuming food ; a pigling in flight ; a kitten in 
spoiling things ; and a monkey in appearance (24). 

Feasts .-—They serve, at first, cam (rasam) spiced strongly 
with pepper, the pungency of which penetrates like some hot 
vapour into the ears ; the caustic odour of the mustard with 
which the paccadis are prepared finds its way into the brain ; 
the curry made of fried avise (flax) leaves destroys the health 
for a period of six months ; parimela (?) tests the strength of 
the teeth ; the sight of the powder of the dried margosa leaves 
in the plate is enough to cause vomiturition. The dinner in a 
Tamil household is a fraud. Nevertheless, they praise, without 
a sense of humour, the sumptuous character of their feasts (25). 

61. MALLIKARJUNA. 

Mallikarjunaraya ruled at Vijayanagara for 19 years from 
S. S. 1354, Paridhavi to S. S. 1372, Pramoduta. * 

Kaijiyat of Malamtdi-ICambhaladinne } L.R. 37 1 p. 301. 

■ " 62. PEDA SING- AM A ANNA AND POLEPALLI BUKKA* 

SUMMARY. 

Two sons, Pina-Singama and Annama, were born to Peda 
Singama. W hen Anna lay encamped outside Arukacenu 

* The dates are wrong. 





with the object of besieging Gandikota, Polepalli Bukkaraja 
killed him in a battle at night. His younger brother, Singama 
sent his gallant brother-in-law Jupalli Konda to capture 
Bukkaraja, who shut himself in the fort of Podacedu, Konda 
entered the fort, and having promised Bukkaraja protection, 
brought him to the camp. * 

V’elugoUv'ari VanisSvap ; vv. 146-7 ; VehtgejivSri VamSacaritra, p. 84. 

63. THE SERVICES OP KAMPARAJA MALLA AND 
JANNAYA NAYAKA. 

Before all this, in Saka 1388, Citrabhanu, Kamparajamalla 
Junaraya (Mallikarjuna ?) took down the old bronze flag-staff 
standing in the sacred court of Aniyarangan, and placing it in 
the big sacred kitchen and covered it with gilded copper-plates 
comprising 112 plates including elephant plate and nacci- plate, 
the gold used in gilding the staff and the Garuda on the top 
of it being 1 ,600 palams. He gave (to the temple) several jewels 
besides. ■ : . ( .. . ' 

As the dvarapalakas on the southern side of the gopura of 
Alinadan (Tirumangai) had been damaged in the period of 
Islam, Jaunaya Nayaka installed the Cakra and Garuda there. 

Koyihsluga , p. 141. 

64. SERVICES OP KAMPARAJA. 

The restoration of Gahga and Yamuna, the dvarapalakas of 
Gopuraranganayaka, damaged by the Muhammadans, was the 
work of Kampaya-raja, who came to Tiruecirappalli savadi 
before in the year Bahudhanya. 

Koyilolugu , p. 143. 

65. SERVICES OF TIRUMALA1NATHA UTTAMA-NAMBI. 

'V r 

In Saka 1366, (expired) Raktaksi, Tirumalainatha Uttama- 
nambi went to Vijayanagara on a collection tour ( taudupanui ), 
got twenty -two villages from Praudhadevarayar Mallikarjuua- 
raya, returned to Srlrangam in the year Prajotpatti, caused 

* PSISpalli Bukkaraja was a famous Ksatriya chieftain of the 15th century ; he was 
a subordinate of the king of Vijayanagara. The passage shows that the Velamas were not 
completely .subdued yet. . . . 4 T": : 


58 


the eaves of the Periimaldevair mandapa to be built, caused 
the eastern compound wall of the tivukkottavant to be pulled 
down to its foundations as it had decayed by age and caused 
v4its stone and brick courses to be renovated, built the flooring of 
the first hall ( vnudal kctiiu), built a hundred-pillared hall to the 
east of the big sacred maadapa, and caused an abhiseka with 
1,000 pots to be made there on the occasion of the jyestabhiseka. 

When Kulittandal Kamparaja came to Tiruecirappalli 
iavadi as the authorised representative of the Raya, Tirumalai- 
raja said that these parts of the country should be left (to him), 
and there arose differences between them. In Saka 1380, 
Pramadi, Purattasi month, the snbhaiydr and ndttdr of the 
southern and northern banks set out along with the peasants 
(, kudigal ), laid the country waste, and lived in the thousand- 
pillared mandapa and in foreign lands for a period of twelve 
years ; then in Saka 1392, Khara, the Tiruccirappalli-slma and 
Tandal-slma passed under Tirximalairaja, and all the citizens 
of the southern and northern banks met Tirumalairaja and 

returned to their respective villages. 

; KdyilolugUy p, 139. 

66. SERVICES OF SALUYA TIRUMALAI RAJA. 

As the construction of Sakkalavan, the northern gate of 
the sacred street of Alinadan, had fallen into decay, in the Saka 
year 1392, Khara, Tirumalairaja renovated that gopura ; he also 
made a towered gate in the sacred wall of Alinadan tirumadil 
in the east of the Veliyalagiyan to give direct access to the 
thousand-pillared hall ; thence, for the Tiruvaymoli festival, 
the deity comes to the Veliyalagiyan and enters the thousand- 

pillared mandapa by this gate*..... 

Saluva Tirumalairaja also erected in the sacred mandapa of 
Alagiya Manavala a mandapamedai of sandalwood crowned by 
three finials (kudam) covered with gilded copper, and placed in 
it an ivory bedstead beneath a canopy ( capparam ) of ivory. 

KoyilohtgUy pp. 142-3, 

*The omitted passage only describes the procession path that was followed before. 


B9 

67. SERVICES OP KRSNARAYA UTTAMA-NAMBI. 

His (Tiramalainatha Uttama-nambi’s) brother, Krsnaraya 
Uttama-nambi got from Eramafiji Timmappa-Nayakkar and 
others twenty villages as tiruvhlaiyattam gift in Saka year 1409, 
Plavanga, and built the front mandapa of the Timkkottara^ 
renovated the sacred wall (madil) on which was the goddess, 
Seng a m alan ay ak iy ar consecrated by Nalandigal Narayana 
Jiyar, because it had grown old and dilapidated, and renewed 
the flooring of the second granary which had been cut up by 
bandicoots, besides erecting a stone post in it and otherwise 
strengthening it. 

Koyilolugu, p. 140. 

68. PRATAPA DEVARAYA. 

. . , SUMMARY. ■■■■■ . 

Velugoti Peda Kondama, son of Kumara Timma and 
grandson of Gitti Kondama, and a subordinate of Pratapa- 
deva Maharaya, who was ruling the earth, seated on the 
diamond throne in his capital, Penugonda, in Saka 1377, 
Isvara, Magha su. 5 made the grant of some land to a temple. 

An Inscription at Badinmipalli, L. R. 13, p. 247. 

69. THE GAJAPATIS. 

4. Praise of the sun. 

5. In his line was Kapilesvara Gajapati, victorious over both 

the groups of enemies, (internal and external). 


8 . 


9. 


10 . 


He attacked Vidyanagara, the capital of the Karnata king, 
and levied a heavy tribute from him. 

By his orders Kumara Hamvlra conquered the southern 
lands right up to the southern ocean. 

That king of Utkala (Kapilesvara) ruled from his capital 
Kataka and many subordinate kings came and made 
obeisance to him. 

Anantavaram Copper- PI aits ; Andhra Patrika, Ugadi, $at&ika t ' 


60 


70. AKATABHANUDEVA AND KAPILESVARA. 


SUMMARY. 


Akatabhanu was childless. He prayed to God who gave 
out in the king’s dream that he would find a hoy in the temple 
of Vimala-Parvatl on the next day and that he should bring him 
up and make him his successor. Accordingly, he went to the 
temple next morning ; and finding a boy there, took him to 
his queen in the palace, and gave him the name of Kapila 
Samantarao. Towards his last days, the Moghuls invaded his 
country and demanded a large ransom. The king paid a 
i portion and for the remainder left his son, Kapila Samantarao, 
f as a hostage. The king died soon after.* Akatabhanudeva (Skt.) 
[Akatiavabhami (Tel.)] ruled for 15 years up to Saka 1374.]- 

KafakarUja Vamsavali, {India Office Ms.) Aufrechi , cc. i. p. 77 ; 

Kaifiyat of Jaganwtiham , {Skt.) y Mac. Mss . 15-6-48, f. 12- b, {Tel.) f. 17* b — 18. 

71. GAJAPATI KAPILESVARA. 

SUMMARY. 

The Moghuls then released Kapila Samanta and sent him 
to rule this country. 

This king, when he was young, had a friend called 
Kasidasa, son of Banamali. Soon after the king’s accession, 
Kasidasa, finding that he was disregarded by his royal friend, 
broke into the royal palace through a hole made in the wall 
and carried away valuables. He was, however, arrested and 
brought before the king. On being questioned, why he commit- 
ted theft, he said that the profession was formerly practised 
both by Kapilesvara and himself, and seeing that the former, 
■who had now become king, neglected him, he committed theft 
to bring home to his mind his ingratitude towards his old 
confrere. Thereupon, the king appointed him as his pur oh it 
of the palace as well as the temple of Jagannatha and bestowed 
on him the office of the royal astrologer, and called him 
asipada Jossi. 


•The Skt. chronicle »nm» up here the rule of the King, of the Gangs, dynasty in a 
short passage. <f Thus, the kings of the Gaiigavamsa are 18 in number, their rule extended 
oyer a period of 320 year.. 




t In Tel, he is said to hay© ruled for 13 years. 


61 



# Tbe Sanskyt text reads— In the 14th year he conquered the country called 
Mahendra. (t.e. Rajamahendra) and ruled over it. - r * : 

f The portion enclosed in th^ square brackets is not found in the Sanskrt chronicle. 

t The Telugu Ms. does not mention the year in which the king made- theuttick;^|3&|i 
Vidyanagara. The passage runs thus; * Having subdued Vidyanagara, he bestowed the 
kingship on Ajnlr’ {4.e, Hanmra); but the Skt chronicle does not mention Amir. 


The king constructed the outer prakara walls to the 
temple (Jagamiatha). When he went subsequently to Vanga 
to bathe in the Granges, he granted an agrahara to the Bengali 
Brahmans and named it Tulasipura. He was at his capital for 
one year after his return from the holy hath in the Granges. 
Then he invaded the western countries in the 9th year, 
and conquered them. In the 10th year, he attacked Kintidi, 
and subdued it. 


In the 11th year, there -was a great famine in the 
country. One bharanam. of grain was sold at 105 kanala-gavvalu 
(Skt. Karsapana). Many people died of hunger. He erected a 
fortress on the Mahendragiri. and resided there * [He made 
Kapilesvarapura an agrahara (i. e. a gift to Brahmans). He won 
victories over the kings of All, K anaka, Kerada, Kunjugu (?) and 
captured a fortress called Mallika in the country of Kundajarl. 
Again the famine recurred, when one bharanam cost 100 
kanala-gavvalu. Many perished of hunger .]f In the 19th year 
he laid siege to Vidyanagara ; he took forcible possession of the 
kingdom from its ruler and made Amir the rxiler of that king- 
dom. $ When he returned to his country, he granted to 
Brahmans Damodarapura as an agrahara. Then, in the 23rd 
year there was a storm and the whole country was under water. 
Many persons died. In the same year, he defeated the king of 
Kedrajhari (Skt. Kundajori) and took his queen Candravati 
as a captive and appointed his own brother-in-law ( syala ) 
Narasinga as the ruler of the country. 

In the 25th year his authority spread as far as Setu 
(Ramelvara) and he returned to Jagannatha. He had several 
sous and could not decide on whom he should bestow his king- 
dom. He invoked the aid of Grod who appeared to him in a 


62 


dream and told him that Purusottama, his son by a prostitute, 
would succeed him. Greatly astonished at the choice, he sum- 
moned his ministers and nominated Purus ottama as his 
successor. The king, accompanied by the boy, went to reside in 
the country of ELundajhari (bkt. Krsnajliori) on the bank of 
the Krsna. There he died, in the 27th year of his reign. 


The king ruled for 27 years (till S. S. 1401.) 


K a( alt araj a Vamsavali, {India Office Ms.) Anfrecht , cc. i. p. 77; 
Kaifiyat o f Jag annUtham* (Skt.), Mac. Mss . 15-6-48, f. 12-b-13-b. 


i 


» 




72. THE VICTORIES OF GAJAPATI KAPILESVARA 
AND HIS SUBORDINATES : (i) GAJARAVU TIPPA. 

Gajaravu Tippa of shining valour... ...won a victory over 
the Yavanasin the plain outside the strong (fort of) Kambamu- 
mettu in the presence of Ambaraya; he put the soldiers to 
flight in a fierce battle at Kosur ; he overthrew the whole army 
of Kataya Vema near Gundukolanii; and he inflicted a crushing 
defeat on Camadapamatya at Kondavldu and at the fort of 
Peddakonda near the frontier. 

A v ■ S§bf Mae. Mss. 15-4-3, p. 113. 




THE VICTORIES OF GAJAPATI KAPILESVARA AND 
HIS SUBORDINATES : (ii) DAMERA TIMM A. 


Bezwada is like the elephant stable at Katakam; Orugallu 
the (royal) treasury near (the palace) ; Tondamarayagullu 
the vegetable market; Bedadakota the spinach garden in the 
back-yard ; (the seven) Mades the hunting ground of the 
heroes; Mahur the pleasure garden of the palace; Kambhas 
the posts for fastening elephants ; Delhi the suburb where the 
horses of the city are kept ; and the mighty Deyarakonda the 
hill (of sport). When the victories of the Gajaraja such as 
these are described, your emblem, the lion of Korugallu, 0 ! 
Damera Timma, points out the directions (in which these 
places are situated). 

Mac. Mss. 15-4-3, p. 167. 



74. NIRVANARAYA alias PEDARAYA. 

SUMMARY. 

As Nirvanaraya caused his umbrella to be held over his 
head on the battlements of Yelugodu, the Gajapati bestowed on 
him the title of Velugotiraya (1). He fought a fierce battle with 
some unknown enemy to the west of Mahanandi (in the Kurnool 
district), when he was slain (2—3). He went to Vaikuntha, 
and was received with much warmth by the God Visnu (4 — 8). 

Velugojivari Vaihsavali , vv. 190, 197-201, 209, 214. 


75. VIRUPAKSA. 

araya ruled at Vijayanagara for two years until 


Kaifiyat of Malamldi-Kambkaladinne , L. R. 37, p. 302. 


76. TAMM AY A BASAVA REDDI. 

SUMMARY. 

Tammaya Basava flourished in the kingdom of Udayagiri 
favoured by the goddess of victory (1). He obtained the privilege 
of riding in a palanquin from the Gajapati, and unlimited 
enjoyments of royalty from the king of Karnata. He created 
terror in the minds of Muhammadan warriors by his deeds of 
valour; and he exacted tribute forcibly from the petty chiefs j 
residing in Telingana (2). 

Vennelakanti Sarayya : Visnupmanam 1 : 37, 41. 


77. SALUVA NARASIMHA. 

Saluva Narasingaraya ruled for 20 (twenty) years until 
B. S. 1420, Ealayukti.f 

Kaifiyat of Malcimidi-Kam bh7tladinne y X. R. 37, p. 302. 

73. THE SERVICES OF KANDADAI RAMANUJADASAR. 

The following are the details of the services done by Kandadai 
Ramanuja who came in the Saka year, 1413. Vira Narasingaraya 
was successful against Praudhadevaraya and was ruling the 

•The date and the regnal years are wrong. 

t Both the gaka date and the duration of the reign given in the Kaifiyat are not 


64 


kingdom from the city 

td— U Haiiumaii ', he went 

to Ayodhya and obtained Srl-Bama-mai^ and fee sparsav i, , 
he 2n Earned to Ohanagh'i in the guise of a ia.rag, met Ins 
younger brother, Vira Narasingaraya, gave him a bn-Kama- 
wada”obtained an order under royal seal and a letter anthoris- 
U the i«a»i ri-muira for himself in all the 108 UrufaUs, gave a 
jSrn^m to the temple of Tirumolaipperumal, brought all 
‘'the sacred Mala there under his control m accordanoe with 
the royal order, and then, reaching the sacred city ot bi nangam 
in Saka year 1411, Saumya, he gave a Rmm-maja to the 
Per uni ai (deity) and became a disciple at the feet of an -a ai- 
Annan he was very much devoted to the study ot all m,tra S , 
put on the robes of an eUnfli, and obtained tae Jast/amma 

Kandadai-Kamanujadasan in the presence of Annan 

Kdyilolugu, pp- 143-5. 


79. THE REVOLT Of THE SATvlBETA CHIEFS : 

(i) SASIBETA VlRA NARASIMHA. 

While Saluva Narasimhadeva Maharaya was ruling in the 
city of Vijayanagara, seated on the jewelled-throne, a^chjef 
of the Patra caste, Vankaxa Kumara Dhuli BasiKayadu by 

name'; entered his service with three thousand retainers. 

Samheta Yira Narasimharaja, a kinsman of Sambeta Iiunaya- 
deva Maharaja, the ruler of Peranipadu, a place situated at a 
distance of twenty miles to the north of Kadapa, rose m rebel- 
>fi. Hon. He retired to a hill called the Lankamala, lying at a 
distance of fifteen miles to the north-east of Peranipadu, and 
having established himself with his army at Maddi-Gundala, he 
began to plunder the neighbouring districts. As soon as 
Harasimhadeva Maharaya heard of the activities _ of Vira 
; Narasimharaja, he commanded Vankara Kumara Dhuli Basx 
Nayadu to march to Kamalapur in the Kadapa country, and 

«The passage omitted contain, the routine of temple service and the account of a 
breach in the hnnd of the KSvSri and its repair. 


65 


protect the villages in its neighbourhood, as well as the travel- 
lers journeying along the Kasi-Ramesvara Road from the 
attacks of Vlra Narasimharaja. 

Dhfili Basi Nayadu, in obedience to the royal command, 
left Vijayanagara with all his retinue, and arrived, in course of 
time, at Kamalapura which he made his headquarters. He 
advanced upon Maddi-Grundala, and after a fight with the 
followers of Vlra Narasimharaja, captured it. Vlra Narasimha 
fled to Udayagiri. Dhuli Basi Nayadu returned to 
Kaxnalapur, and devoted his time in keeping guard over the 
■Great Road (bhara-marga), and the villages in its vicinity. 

Kaifiyat of PattHrufahm, L. R. 9, pp. 248-9. 
80. REVOLT OF THE SAIttBETA CHIEFS : (ii) SA&BETA. SIVARAJA. 

Sivaraja, the son of (Sambeta) Pinnayadeva Maharaja, 
used to collect the kavali dues from all the szmas in the neigh- 
bourhood as far as they were accessible to him without any 
regard for his equals. When Saluva Narasimharaya Maharaya 
who was ruling at Vijayanagara in $. 1425 Rudhirodgari,* 
obtained intelligence of the conduct of the Sambeta chief, 
being unable to tolerate (this defiance of authority), he 
marched with an army against him ; and (having reached his 
capital, Peranipadu) he set up his camp on the southern 
side of the town. Then he ordered that his guns should open 
fire upon the fort. As the guns mounted on the bastions 
of the fort gave a vigorous reply, the besiegers, who were 
encamped outside, were obliged to take shelter behind a 
hillock called the Gaggitippa. Having perceived that the 
hillock, at one point on its northern face, was higher than the 
bastions of the fort, they seized it at night, and by means of 
a scaffolding which they quickly erected, they set up a battery 
of guns on its summit and began to bombard the fort before it 
was morning. It was no longer possible to keep the guns of 
the bastions in position. The shots fired from a higher altitude 
penetrated the three enclosures of the fort, and fell 
palaces, which as a consequence were levelled to the . 


Z ' 





Tbe date is too late for Sajava Naraair 

E— 9 



66 


The bastions and embrasures were completely demolished. 
Some of the defenders of the fort sought safety in flight; 
whereas the rest together with the families of the chiefs includ- 
ing the young and the old, perished at the hands of the enemy. 

Kaifiyat of PeranifiUdu , Z. R. 5, p. 131-2. 

81. SALUVA NARASIMHA AND THE SAMBETA 
GURAVARAJA. 

During the reign of Mummadi Praudhadevaraya (?'. e. 
Mallikarjuna), Saxhbeta Venkataraja, who was a descendant of 
Sambeta Kondaraju, an officer in the service of Nallasiddhj_Cola_ 
v / Maharaja o f Nellore, rose to power, and established Klsautho- 
i/ rity over some villages of the Siddhavatam taluka. 

After the reign of this Mallikarjuna Raya, Saluva Nara- 
simhadevaraya ascended the throne of Vijayanagara. It is said 
that during his reign, Ghiravaraja, son of Sambeta Venkata- 
raja, built a fort at Macupalli, a village situated at a distance 
of four miles to the south-west of Siddhavatam, and making it 
his residence, he ruled the country in the neighbourhood. 

Kaifiyat of Sid d Havant am, L. R. 9, p. 275. 

82. THE WAR BETWEEN S&LUVA NARASIMHA AND 
SALUVA MALIDEVARAJA. 

As there was enmity between Mlsaraganda Kathari Saluva 
Vira Narasimhadeva Maharaya, the lord of the throne of the 
Narapatis, and Saluva Malidevaraja, the Raya marched at the 
head of his army and (laid siege to Bommavaram). To the east 
of the village there stands a hillock called Agetippa, on the west 
of which was a sluice Dadenu by name resembling a step 
(mettu). He caused an inclined plane of stone to be constructed 
from the sluice to the top of the hillock; and had the gun 
carriages pushed to the summit of the hillock over the plane. 
Having caused a battery to be erected there, he opened fire on 
ithe walls of the fort which were destroyed in a short time. It 
is said that the inhabitants including women and children com- 
mitted suicide by drowning themselves in a tank in front of the 
palace. Narasimhadeva Maharaya had the fort and the palaces 
demolished and marched (with his army) to Udayagiri, Owing 





to the disturbances caused by this war, and the pillage of tbe 
countryside, the citizens of that town deserted and migrated to 
other places (which offered them security). As a consequence 
of this, the village fell into ruin. 

Kaifiyai of Bommavaram, Z. R. 1 7, pp. 142*3. 

83. KAVUTALA SIMA DURING THE REIGN OF 
SALUVA NARASIMHA. 

After the rule of the Yadavarayas,* this district was very \ 
much harassed by the palaigars. Saluva Narasingaraya then I 
assumed the reins of government and put down the power of \ 
the palaigars. As the villages around Kavutala were situated J 
far from one another, he established the following villages so ] 
that they might stand close to one another. 


The villages which were thus established were constituted 
into a division called the samut of Kavutalam after the oldest 
village in the group. The reign of Saluva Narasingaraya lasted 
from S. S. 1403 to S. S. 1423. f As the country was not as 
properly governed as before, the people deserted their homes, 
and migrated to Manuve Sima on the other bank of the 
jTungabhadra which then belonged to the Moghuls, J 

Kaijiyat of Adavani % Z. R. 40, pp. 338-9, 

84, PURUSOTTAMA G-AJAPATL 

SUMMARY* 

Then Purusottama was anointed as the king in his southern 
camp on the banks of the Krsna. When he returned to Kataka 
(the capital) his 18 brothers who were born in lawful wedlock 
objected to his accession as king. He declared that he was 
God’s choice. They proposed to test the statement by jointly 
beating him with a savali. He withstood the test. According 
to their pledge they retired from the country surrendering 
the kingdom to Purusottama. 


* The Yadavarayas were a family of shepherds who held sway over XdavSni during 
the rule of the Sangama kings, 

f The dates are not accurate. 

' . 

J- By Moghuls ..the .writer of ::.th£ Kaifiy at means the Masaatomns of ■' 


He constructed in the 7th year of his reign Bhoga-mandapa 
to the God, and in the 9th year a stone prakara (enclosing wall) 
called Kurmabeda. [A statue of Padmacarya, the king’s 
preceptor, who died at that time, was made and set up in iront 
of the God in his memory].* One Dasmudri, (Skt. Dasamuduli) 
a cook of his household, used to prepare sweets (for offerings) 
and with the remainder of the flour he made bread and having 
offered it to the God secretly behind the garuda-stamhha, ate it. 
The report of his conduct reached the king’s ears, and he ordered 
the cook to be brought to his presence. But the God intervened 
and said that the action of the priest was acceptable to him. 
Henceforward the cook was granted the prasada (cooked food 
offered to the God) after the night’s big bhoga (main naivedya ), and 
theoffi.ce of thehead-cook(»wMswpaMra) was bestowed upon him. 

Purusottama heard of the existence of a girl of the pad-mini 
class, a daughter of the king of Kanex, and sent messengers 
(JiarMras) to demand her hand in marriage. The king of 
Kane! declined the offer; but Purusottama insisted that she 
should be given to him in marriage, but he had to take 
the rebuff again. With wounded pride the enraged king led an 
army against Kaxxci but was defeated. On his return he prayed 
to the God Jagannatha, who, appearing to him in a dream, 
promised to lead him the next day in the guise of Balarama 
and Sri Krsna riding on white and black horses respectively. 
But the king should start on the expedition only after visiting 
the temple of Durgamadhava, which he did. 

The king set out with the four kinds of troops ; but 
he was a little doubtful about the divine brothers going in 
advance. The deities understood his anxiety ; and in order to 
ease his mind, they sent to him a shepherdess from whom they 
had purchased some butter-milk and offered in return a ring 
instructing her to hand it over to the king who was following 
them and obtain payment. The king was greatly pleased to see 
the ring and asked her what she wanted. She prayed that the 
king might do something to perpetuate her memory. Orders 

*The statement enclosed within ike square brackets is not found in the Skt chronicle. 


69 



were given for the foundation of a town called Manikyapura and 
tlie construction of a Siva temple therein. An officer was left 
behind with sufficient money to carry out the orders*. 

He advanced on KancI and after a fight won the damsel 
together with a large fortune. He carried away a number of t 
images of various Gods including Saksi Gopala.f While he was ( 
returning home laden with the spoils of war, he wished to know 
how the gods helped him. Then a person of the Gudiya caste 
brought to the king a whip and demanded from him the price of 
jaggery-water which he had supplied to two of his thirsty 
cavaliers who were marching in advance. The king took the 
whip, and rewarded him with the payment of gold coins. The 
acceptance of water by the gods at the hands of a Gudiya 
removed the ban upon that caste once for all. 

Then the king crossed the Godavari and encamped on 
the (eastern) side. Meanwhile the king of Kahel advancing 
against him with a large army stopped on the other side of the 
river. The king who succeeded in attaining his object with divine 
help now felt anxious and asked (his purdhit) Godavari Rajaguru 
to protect the army from attack by his miraculous powers. 
The purdhit pronounced a mantra, and the waters of the river 
began to swell rendering it imposible for the enemy to cross. 
The king resumed his march and reached Jagannatha. There 
in the (main) temple in the Bhoga-mandapa in front of the God 
he installed the image of Saksi Gbpalasvami (Skt. Satyavadi 
Krsnamurti.) As the God objected to his installation in the 
Bhoga-mandapa , the king ordered the construction of a new 
temple in a village called Kamtulabayi (Skt. Caturdvara- 
nama-nagara,) on the bank of the MahanadI and installed 
Sri Gopala in it. 

The king fixed his residence at Kataka in anticipation of * 
his marriage with the padmini who also accompanied him. The 
king was about to enter her palace on the night after her 


* The foundation of Manikyapa$tana h not referred to in the Skt. chroj 
f Skt. SaiyavUdi~n'%maka- Kr$nam%rtL 


70 


period, when her maidens expressed to him their surprise that 
having already visited her once he should chose to come 
back again so soon after his departure. With mingled 
feelings of surprise and resentment he went back to his 
palace, where in his dream God Dhavalesvara appeared to him 
and said that he was the person who had visited the padmini. 
Further, the God told him that the male child that would be 
born of her would be an emperor. The king was gratified and 
the child was named Pratapajanamani. 


The king had learning and patronised scholars. (He wrote 
several works). He ruled for 30 years. 

Katakaraja Vaihsavciliy ( India Office Ms.) Au free Jit cc. i. p. 77 ; 
Kaifiyat of Jagannatham (Skt.), Mac. Mss. 15-6-48, f. 13- b — 15- a. 


85. THE ARAYIDU KINGS. 


SUMMARY. 


IravUi Buhl a and his Ancestors :— The famous Tata Pinnama 
was Bukka’s grandfather’s grandfather; the wise Somideva 
was his grandfather’s father ; the brave Raghavadeva was his 
grandfather; and the kind Pinnama was his father. Bukka 
[who was commonly known as the tiger among th e feudatory 
^chiefs (Manne-puli) became the establisher of the kingdom of 
^Saluva Narasingaraya. 


Paiya BalabhUgavatam , Mac. Mss. 19-2-4. 


ARAVlTI BUKKA. 


5.ravlti Bukka, the best of chiefs, was born to him (Pinnama) 
by his wife Aubhakdevl. At the time of his birth, the other 
chiefs became pale like the stars at the time of the rise of the 
,Moon. He was the chosen friend of Saluva Narasingaraya, 
jfthe crest-jewell of the kings. Bukka acquired fame as the 
protector of the wise. 

Dvipada-BUla&hagavatam, Mac. Mss. 13-2-19, p. 285. 


87. SALUVA NARASIMHA’S WAR UPON THE QU r £B SHAH 
AND THE GAJAPATI. 


At the time when Narasimharaya waged war upon the 
Qutb Shah and the Gajapati, Bukkaraja accompanied him as 
far as Delhi with 4,000 Ksatriyas of Murikina^u, 2,500 Velmas 




71 



and Kammas together with all his kinsmen. When the Qutb 
Shahi troops broke, the army ofBarno (?) Grajapati came to their 
rescue. The army of the Raya, which was defeated, retreated 
to the banks of the Narmada (pursued by the victorious 
enemy) ; but Bukka with the help of his followers arrested the 
enemy’s progress and acquired great glory by putting them to 
flight. The Raya who was struck with the courage of Bukka 
conferred upon him as jagir Iravidu and Celamaniir yielding 
a revenue of 2 lakhs of varahas in addition to the estate fetching 
one lakh which he was already enjoying. & 

KarnafarUjya VritUntamu, Journal of the Telugu Academy, X, pp. 194 - 5 . 

88. PURUSOTTAMA. 

11. His son was Purusottama, well beloved of the Earth. 


13 , 


1 . 

2 . 


He struck terror into the hearts of his enemies and 
Nrsimha, the king of the Karnata country surrendered 
Udayagiri out of fear and thus released himself. 

Anantavaram Copper-Plates, Andhra Patrika, Ugadi Sancika, 1928-9, pp. 175-6. 

89. KAPILENDRA AND PURUSOTTAMA. 

Praise of the solar line of kings. 

In the line of the Raghus, there arose king Kapilendra, 
who resembled Rama and was bright like the Sun and 
powerful like Isvara. 

Other kings were afraid of him in war. 

Praise of his queen Parvatl. 

Parvatl gave birth to Purusottama, to whom all Ws 
made obeisance. 

Praise of Purusottama s volour and beauty. 

This Purusottama Grajapati who is the subject of my 
praise made the Karnata king Nrsimha a prisoner of 
war, and again released him when, with plaintive words, 
he acknowledged submission ; he also compelled 
great foe Hamvira to bow before the footstool 
lotus feet. 


72 

90. NARASA NAYAKA. 

Several villages were ruined as a consequence of the 
rebellion of Hamani Timmappa in S. S. 14r2B, * while Narasa 
Nayaka was reigning. Nittur was in a desolated condition for 
fourteen years, until S. S. 1442, Vikrama. 

Kai fi yat of Malamidi- Kambhaladinne, L. E. 37, p. 304 

91. IMMADI NARASIMHA AND NARASA NAYAKA. 

During the reign of Saluva (Immadi) Narasimhadeva 

Maharaya, the lord of the throne of Yidyanagara, this village 
(Ramesvaram) was given as nayankara to a certain Nampa 
Kannama Nayaka by Narasa Nayaningaru, the king’s agent. 
Sanies vara, together with the village of Prodduturu was in his 
possession for some time. While this Saluva (Immadi) Nara- 
simharaya was reigning, Narasa Nayaka, who was governing 
the kingdom, was dismissed from his office, and Nadindla 
Timmarasayya (a Brahman) of the Aruvela (Niyogi) caste, was 
appointed minister (pradhani) in his place. An inscription 
dated B. S'. 1420, Kalayukti, Margasira ba. 30 found in the 
ranga-mantapa of the temple of Ramayadeva at Remesvaram 
shows that Ramesvaram and Prodduturu were given to Rampa 
Kannama Nayaka for nayankara while Narasa Nayaka was the 
head of the government. 

When Nadindla Timmarasayya assumed the management 
of the affairs of state, he bestowed Ramesvaram on Saluva 
Govindaraja, a son of Raciraja as nayankara ; and the latter 
granted the village to the God Ramalinga for the maintenance 
of the daily worship. This gift is recorded in an inscription on 
a slab set up in the mantapa opposite the go pur a of the temple 
dated & S. 1430, Prabhava, Karttika su. 15. 

Kaifiyat of DuvvUr, L. 2i. 18, pp. 38-40. 

92. IMMADI NARASIMHA AND TIMMARASAYYA. 

Then Saluva (Immadi) Narasingaraya dispensed with 
the services of Narasa Nayaka and appointed Saluva 
Timmarasayya as his deputy. While this Timmarasayya 
was carrying on the administration of the state, a deputation 

# This date is too late for Narasa Nayaka. 



of the sthanikas of the temple of Ramesvaram waited upon him 
and explained that though the village of Ramesvaram belonged 
to the temple from ancient times, Ramp a Kannama Nayaka who 
obtained Prodduturu and Ramesvaram as umbali , appro- 
priated the income of the whole village excepting the produce 
of four puttis of land with which the sthanikas were expected to 
carry on the worship in the temple.' ‘Now that you, a Brahman 
officer having faith in Gods and Brahmans, have come to power, 
you should devote your attention to the affairs of Gods and 
restore this village to the temple so that the daily worship might 
be carried on (as in former days).’ Timmarasa believed in the 
truth of the statement of the sthanikas ; but as the village was 
under the jurisdiction of the government ( divUnam ), he thought 
that it was not proper for him to bestow it upon the God. He 
therefore gave that village as nmjankara to Saluva Govindaraja, 
son of Raciraja of Kaundinya goira, in the presence of Ylra 
Narasimhadevaraya. Then he told Govindaraja, “ This village 
was formerly enjoyed by the God Mukti-Ramesvara. You 
have now obtained the fruits of that charity.” Govindaraja, 
having understood the meaning of Timmarasa, bestowed that 
village, with libations of water, on God Ramayadeva ; and 
this gift is registered in an epigraph in the temple dated 
$. S. 1430, Prabhava, Karttika su. 12. 

Kaifiyat of ProddutUm, L. R. 3, p. 5. 

93. PBATAPA RTTDRA GAJAPATI. 

15. His (Purusottama’s) son was Rudradhipa, a celebrated 
h • king. ■ 

18. After his father he ruled the ancestral kingdom under the 
name Pratapanrdra. 


74 


20. In $aka 1422, Raudri, in the month of Karttika, on a 
Thursday, when there was a lunar eclipse, he gave away 
to Brahmans the fertile village of Atumudi on the 
western bank of the Krsna. 

Anantamram Copper- Plat es t jlndhrct Pairika } 
UgUdi Sancika, 1928-9, pp. 175-6. 


94. PRATAPARUDRA 6A JAP ATI. 


Then Prataparudra came to the throne. In his 3rd regnal 
year he constructed a temple to God Dhavalesvara. He 
constructed a temple for the Goddess Girija (Skt. Carcika in the 
town of Jajipura.) In the 10th year he set out for the conquest 
of the South and proceeded as far as Setu ; and having 
subdued Vidyanagara he ruled over the kingdom as the 
sole monarch. In his 13th regnal year there was severe 
famine, when a bharanam (of paddy) sold at 120 kayala-gavvalu 
(Skt, karsapana). Burglers broke into the palace and carried 

away much wealth Then came Caitanyasvami from 

Nadia in the Gauda country. The king paid his respects to the 
Svami, and then proceeded to the South. At this time in the 
7t.h (17th ?) year of the reign, the Mlecchas of the name of 
Mughals came and laid siege to Kataka. Ananta Samantaraya, 
the governor of the city, unable to offer effective resistance, 
withdrew to the fort of Sarahga-gada ; the four images of 
Jagannatha were placed in a boat and sent to the Cajayiguha 
hill in the middle of the Cilaka lake. Asurasura- S th anu, the 
chief of the Mughals, entered the Purusottama-ksetra, and 
broke to pieces the images which he found there. The king, 
who was in the South on an expedition of conquest, having 
heard of the advent of the Mughals, hastened to the capital, 
and chased the Yavanas (Muhammadans) as far as the Ganges. 

Then, in the 20th year, the king marched to conquer 
Mahendra-Kataka, the ruler of which offered stubborn resis- 
tance, and caused much loss to the royal army. The king at 
last made peace with him and returned to Kataka. In the 28th 






, " * 1 11 ' 


year on Karttika sit. 4, lie breathed his last in the presence of 
God Dhavalesvara. The king ruled for 28 years. He died 
in the Saka year reckoned by Vedesumanavah (1454). 

Kafakaraja VamMval 7, {India Ojice Ms.) Aufreckt cc. 4 , p, 77 j 
Kaifiyat of Jagannatham % Mac. Mss. } 15-6-48, 
Sit, f. 15*a — 16- a, Tel f. 20-a~~21«a. 


95. VIRA NARASINGARXYA’S DYNASTY. 

King Yadu was born in the glorious Candra-mmia. In 
it were also born many kings, and many dynasties of kings. 

In the Tuluva-ewwsa, which was one among them, was born one 
Timmaraya who was full of prowess and attained great fame. 

To him was born a kin g (Isvara) by a chief queen Bukka- 
masani by name. To him was born a king, Narasingaraya by 
name, possessed of such qualities as modesty, severity and 
valour. 

Narasingaraya* s Coronation : — Crowned on the throne set 
with nine gems at Vidyanagari, Narasingaraya was protecting 
the Telugu country along with his minister Uddanda. Since 
the palaiy agars and dandanayakas of the Karnataka country 
did not pay tribute, minister Uddanda under orders from the 
king advanced against the Karnata country with the fourfold 
army, made war on them, captured Jivagraya himself, 
reinstated him in that country and took tribute from that 
palaiyagar. He then made great war with Vijaya Raja in 
Malayala and Kerala, conquered him, took much wealth from 
him, made friends with the Pandya Raja and gained larged 
forces from him and took tribute from the Cola and Dravida 
countries. From there he w r ent to the northern countries as 
far as Kajihga and Bengal, conquered those rulers who gave 
battle with (their) huge armies, killed Gajapati Raja, conquer- 
ed the king of the banks of the Ganges who opposed him with 
an army, won victories against many Muhammadans, 
much wealth including elephants and horses, return.* 

Yijay anagari-pattana , met king Narasingaraya and repl 
him on all matters. Then Narasingaraya, /who : :W#ii,., . ~ - 


tllBSfeSSC, ‘"1 1 


pleased, conferred on the minister the title of Vijaya Uddan- 
dendra, and with the wealth he brought, constructed many 
temples, renovated the temple of Vii’upaksadeva, made the 
sixteen great danas (gifts) such as bhudana , goduna and 
kanyadana, and attained great fame in the world. Then all kings 
called Narasingaraya Rajadhiraja, Rajaparamesvara, Raya, 
and Maharaja, and met him with presents. The Maharaja then 
felt glad, gave them presents like clothes and ornaments, and 
attained great fame which spread from the Himalayas to Setu. 
The wives of that Maharaja were Tippaksi and Nagaladevi. To 
them were horn two sons Vlra Narasinga and Krsnaraya as 
Rama and Laksmana were born to the queens Kausalya 
and Sumitra. To Vobambika were born two sons Rangaraya 
and Acyutaraya like Rama and Krsna. These four grew up in 
great friendship learning many sciences and practising 
elephant and horse riding. Then in Saka 1401, Savvari 
Narasingamarayar attained heaven. 

JCoi\gttd%saraj%Jtkalin Caritram : Madras Govt . Or Mss. Lib. 16-6-9, ff. 74 f . 

95(a). KONERIRAJA AND SRlRANGA. 

Formerly Tiruccirappalli sima and other parts passed 
into the hands of Tirumalairaja in the year Khara : 
afterwards Koneriraja became the kartta of this area, and as he 
was camping in Tiruccirappalli, he rendered help to the people 
of Anaikkaval, and enabled them to enjoy sport by scattering 
turmeric-powder, and to fix the boundaries of the Tirumalai 
garden (Soldi) ; he also handed over the tiruvidaiydttam lands 
as kuttagai to the smnantas of the fort including Cenrappa- 
nayakkar : and in Koyil (Srlrahgam, Ranganatha shrine) he 
collected many taxes in gold such as pura-vari, kdaikkai, pattu 
and parivattam, and oppressed the shrine in various ways ; then 
two jiyars and ekahgis got upon the eastern gopura of the 
sacred street of Akalahkan and perished (by casting themselves 
down from there) ; yet the oppression continued, and Kandadai 
Ramanuja often reported these occurrences to Narasa Nay aka. 
Under the pretext of attending to some state affairs in the South, 


Narasa Nay aka came with a large army, did away with Koneri- 
raja and (occupied) the area including Tiniccirappalli. In the 
next year, Nala, in the month of Aippasi, on the fourteenth day, 
Nagama ISayaka and Ivumara Narasa Nayaka came to worship 
the perumal (deity), and Kandadai Ramanuja helped them to 
do so, and obtained an order from Narasa Nayaka to resume 
for the sacred treasury the tiruvidaiyattam and other 
lands enjoyed by others in usufructory mortgage (otti), and 
thus released the tiruvidaiyattam ; he also got these lands 
exempted as sarvamanyam from vetii-vari and pura-vari including 
what was due to the talaiyari of the nadu ; he caused money to 
be remitted to the temple treasury for making jewels to the deity 
viz,, kanthamdlai, padakkam, etc., made of pearls and precious 
stones, and the purchase of aruvdnam, chauries, and several 
kinds of silks, and got these entered in the treasury 5 he 
obtained, as Narasa Nayaka’s gift, provision for one hundred 
servants of the temple on the average to pound and clean the 
paddy tor the offerings in the sacred temple ; and he 
commanded Madhava Aiyangar to see that the daily routine of 
worship, offerings and so on to the deity was carried out 
without any shortage 

‘ ' ;| tgS.|g fl : Koyilolugu , pp. 144-5. 

ig; V^y'.g ■ 96. VIRA NARASIMHA. 

Daily routine : — Vira Narasimharaya usually got up from 
his bed in Vijayanagara in the Brahma-muhurta* and listened 
to the reading of booksf both on religion and politics. Theii; 
he looked at the reflection of his own image in the mirror, and 
touched un-married girls and a black cow. He also looked at 
the face of the Brahmans, and having performed his ablutions, 
put on the caste-mark. Then he sat in the audience hall, when 
the itrtha and the prasada of 108 Tirupatis, the sacred vibhuti , 
sandal paste, and prasada of the 72 (Siva) temples were offered to 
him ; he advanced forward a little and received them in his hands 
with great respect. Having placed them upon his head, he 
commanded the Aiyangdrs and the Aradhyas who came to the 

# Tke time between 4-30 sum. and 6 a.m. is known as Brahma-muhUrta. 
tThe text contains a long list of books of little interest, hence it is omitted. 


78 


court to 


V . , • „, aC es befitting respire positions, 
be seated in places ^ ^ tem pi e s dedicated to the 

He asked the AiyangUrs g r Tmiisnam, Venkatacalam, 
eight natural images at Srira^ ^^ Puskaraksetram, and 


■r • ’'ora »yam, ru§Kara* 5 eM»m, and 
Saligramam, Totadri, Naiifl«> r6 J eC ted. They replied, “On 
(Badarikasrainam)* are we 'P 1 ^ ^ officials ( mudrakarta ) 
account of Your Majesty s P oyi worship without any 

conducting 


of all the temples are c0 ^ a “^ ° are being celebrated proper- 
eney; and the daily ea i ^ J r adhyas said that the 72 
ly in all 10S Tirupatis. ^ ^h/linated to the lingas of earth, 


deficiency 



r, light, air and. «««»«) Oidambaresvara, as well as 

Arunacalesvara, Kalabastlsvar _ proper allowances; and 
those of the 18 sakUs, receiver cede fl ra ted regularly. The 
that the daily festivals weie e » j this report presented 
king who was greatly Phased to ‘ ' 


^ , j t he signal for their departure, 
to them pattisi giving tneie } p] iariu ayya, who immediately 
He then sent for Dharmasanai ^ A n«nrdin«y to the commands 


He then sent for Hharm ^ _ {( According to the commands 

came to his presence, and sai • ^ ^ £ ndhra and Hoysana 

of Your Majesty, the agj« Karnataka, Grhattaslnia, Cera, 


esty, the ag Karnataka, Grhattaslnia, Cera, 

countries, in Morasunad, Me _ ” i “1 .. fl/vni*iaTuno' wifhrml 


countries, inMorasunaq, gla are flourishing without 

Cora, Pandya, Magadha, an ^ w h 0 dwell therein are living 
any interruption. The daily rites; they are learned 

in happiness performing 1 if t slras ; they perform the five 
in the four Vedas and tie six guests who visit them.” 

sacrifices, and f"P™^ ^ J tion . 

The Raya favoured him with 

1 the dalanayakas (commanders) 
The king next summo having stood before him, 

to his presence. They can > w the great power of Your 
submitted respectfully •• tch an fl ward (are quite effi- 

Majesty, the arrangements lot ‘ b all gMurgas , sthala- 

cient) and the walls belonging to the king- 

durgctbj yala-dut gas * *• there is scarcely any trouble 

dom are yell guarded ; mar. ^ J>4 tbe talari of 

from the feudal chiefs. itiei1 

, . Badarikasramam is left oat. 

•Only seven are mentioned in the tex > 

< Qtcca-nut paring® etc. 

f Packets made up of betel l« avCB > 


r 


i 


itll 



• The terms sons and sons-in-law must not be understood 
two classes of the royal servants who were admitted into tl 
the R3ya desired to honour them. 


the city. At first he prostrated before the royal throne ; then 
he stood up with folded arms, and addressing the dalanamkas. 
said : “ The talaris are always actively vigilant in watching 
Vidyanagara and _ its outer suburbs day and night. Therefore, 
the people of the eighteen castes (w r ho inhabit the city) are 
enjoying happiness and great prosperity.” The dalanayakas 
communicated this information to the Raya. > 

(Some messengers who entered the hall) said that the fiag- 
hoisting festival had been celebrated in the temples of Vitthala 
and Virupaksa ; and that His Majesty might be pleased to 
witness the car festival. The dalanayakas who were near (the 
king) replied that His Majestey would accordingly be pleased to 
visit the shrines, and that they should inform him as soon as 
the idols were installed in their respective cars. The Raya next 
summoned to the palace the nine sampratis who came and 
explained to him the account of the eighteen ports (of the 
kingdom). Then he listened to (his officers) who read to him ^ 
the letters and other despatches that came from different places. 
When that was over, he summoned his ministers and dalavdy, 
and took counsel with them privately for some time. He came 
to the audience hall next and having summoned all the courtiers, 
he held a durbar attended by the seventy-two niyogas, his sons 
and sons-in-law*, officers, chiefs, lords, palaiyagars , amaramya- 
kas, well-wishers, dependents, learned-men, purdhits , dcaryas, 
jtyangars, ascetics, astrologers, physicians, cavaliers, mahuts, 
police officers, tributary chiefs, vandis, vaitalikas, singers, 
pathmlMs , scientists, playwrights, rhetoricians, artists, and 
vaiaikas. The Raya spent the time conversing with astrologers, 
grammarians, and dalanayakas about the happenings of the 
past, the present and the future. 

Rayavacakam, pp. 2-5. 

97. VlRA NARASIMHA AND UMMATTUR. 

The pattabkiseka or the coronation of Maharajadhiraja Vlra . 
Narasingaraya was performed while seated on the Jewell 





81 


months ; but the palaiyagar, who gathered a strong army, did 
not allow the besiegers even to approach the fort. As he 
could not capture the fort, Narasingaraya broke up his camp, 
marched to Srlrahgapattana and laid siege to that fort. This 
place was in the possession of Jivagrahya, whom the elder 
Narasingaraya had appointed as its governor. Jlvagrahya’s 
son, who succeeded his father as the governor, occupied the 
fort with his troops, strengthened its defences ; then he sent 
messengers to the palaiyagars of Ummattur and Talakkad 
begging them to send him help. When the contingents which 
they despatched arrived at the place, he sallied out of the fort, 
and attacked Vira Narasingaraya’s army. Having been defeat- 
ed in the encounter, Ylra Narasingaraya conld do nothing but 
to retreat to Yidyanagara. He told Krsnaraya that (he could 
not take) the forts of Ummattur and Srlrahgapattana as they 
were very strong. With the object of renewing his attack, 
he was engaged in gathering large forces and considerable 
ammunition during the rest of his reign. 

Konkanarflsar'ajtila-vrit'antamu, L. R. 11, pp. 614-7. 

97 {a). VIRANARASINGARAYA’S CORONATION. 

In Saka 1401 Maharajadhiraja Ylra Narasingarayar was 
crowned at Vijayanagaripattana on the throne set with nine 
gems. While Vira Narasinga Maharaja was protecting the 
kingdom with justice along with his brothers, he sent men to 
those countries which paid tribute during the days of his 
father Narasinga Maharayar and asked for their tribute. The 
Dravida, Cola, and Pandya countries sent some money, and 
made friends with Vira Narasingaraya. Since the pSlaiya- 
gars who were in the forts like Ummattur and Talaikkadu 
protecting the Karnataka and Kongu countries did not send 
tribute, Vira Narasingaraya got very angry, assembled a large 
army besides elephants and horses, placed his brother Krsna- 
raya at Vijayanagaripattana, encamped near UmmattSr along 
with Acyutaraya and Srirangaraya besides many (other) 
princes, and sent men to (the ruler of Ummattur) to inform 


82 


him that if he paid the tribute which he was paying pre- 
viously, he would return after confirming him in his position 
to rule the kingdom, but if he did not pay tribute he would 
capture his forts, and appoint his own men and rule the 
kingdom. Then Tiyapan, Raja of Ummattur, sent word as 
follows : “ We were protecting this kingdom in this country 

for a long time. Neither the members of our dynasty nor the 
Kongana Yarma Rajas who were ruling in these countries for 
a long time paid tribute to any king. While such was the 
case, your father Narasingaraya conquered us by his might 
and took tribute from us. Legally there is no justice in our 
paying tribute (to you). Hence we will not send tribute ”. He 
sent word thus. Then, on hearing the news, Vlra Narasinga- 
raya got angry, and asking what justification there was for the 
pdlaiyagdrs to raise then so many objections since they were 
paying tribute in the days of Harihararaya and other crowned 
kings of this kingdom, laid siege to the fort of Ummattur and 
fought for three months. The palaiyagars gathered a large 
army and prevented them from coming near the fort. Being 
unable to take the fort Narasingaraya retreated with his army 
to ^rirangapattanam and besieged the place. The son of &Iva- 
grarya (Jivagrahya) who was formerly crowned by Periya 
Narasingarayar, reinforced the fort of Srirangapattanam with 
large forces, sent word to and got a big army from the palaiy ci- 
gars of Ummattur and Talaikkadu, came out of the fort, fell on 
the army of Vira Narasingarayar and fought. Then Vlra 
Narasingaraya sustained a defeat, retreated with his army to 
Vidyanagara ; he consulted with his brother Krsnaraya and 
concluded that since Ummattur and Srirangapattanam were 
strongly garrisoned, the country must be taken with strong 
forces and much provision. But nothing was done about this 
in this reign. Then Vira Narasingaraya performed many 
works of charity, made many gifts like tuladanam, mahapurusa- 
danam, svaruameruddnam, asvaddnam, gajadanam, godanam, bhu- 
danam, kannikadanam, brahmapratisthddanam, built many 
feeding houses, attained fame in the world like Parasurama for 


tm, received tit 


as . 


1 ' 1 * ' -* 1 ' " i t ; Y •'> 


lit am 



Prandhapratapa Maharaja, and reached Vaikuntha in &aka 
1425, Rudhirodgari. Then took place his younger brother 
Krsnaraya’s coronation. 

KohguilsarajUkkalin Caritram, 16-6-9, fif. 79 f. 


98. BUKKARAJU RAMARAJU. 

To this Bukkaraja was born Peda Ramappaya who ruled 
with great splendour at Kandanur. 

Karna$arajya-vrtianiamu , Journal of t he Telugn Academy, x. pp. 194-5, 


99. BUKKARAJU RAMARAJA’S DATE. 

SUMMARY. 

Mahmnandalesvara Ramay^ideva Maharaja, the son of 
Mannepuli Bukkaraju, made a grant of some land to a certain 
Nam ala Panduga on Monday * Margasira ba. 11 S. S. 1420 
Kalayukti, during the reign of Saluva Immadi Narasimha 
Maharaya, while Narasa Nayaka Vodeya was governing the 
kingdom as his deputy. The gift was made so that Immadi 
Narasaraya, Narasa Nayaka, and the donor’s father Mannepmli 
Bukkaraju might obtain religious merit. 

Kaijiyat of Yanamalaeintala, £. R. 4, pp. 453-4. 


100. THE INVASION OF SAVAYI BIBBl. 

At that time Savayi Bibbi, a subordinate of the Bamani 
Padshah who was ruling at Kaluburigi, was at Kandanavolu. 

There was a chief of the Lunar dynasty called Bukkaraju at 
5.ravidu, a village which stood on the banks of the river Citra- 
vatl, at a distance of thirty miles to the west of Gandikota.f 
He married two wives, Abbaladevl and Balladevl. The latter 
gave birth to a son called Ramaraja who rose to be the 
commander-in-chief of the armies of the kings of Vijayanagara. 

* The date corresponds to Dec. 12 A.D. 1498. According to the inscription 
Margasira ba. 11 falls on a Monday ; but in the Ephemeris, it is said to fall on a Sunday. 

fThe situation of Xravidu, as described in the Kaijiyat , does not seem to be quite 
accurate. There are two villages called Aravi^u and Aravitikota in the Rayala Sima. The 
former is included in the Ravachoti taluk of the Cuddapah district, and the latter ih 
Cum bum taluk of . the Kurnool district. The early history of Sravi^u chiefs embodied 
in their family chronicles associates them with the Kurttaol district. 


84 


With the object of capturing Kandanavolu, he marched at the 
head of seventy-thousand horse and laid siege to the fort. He 
expelled Savayi BibbI from the place and drove him 
south. Having established himself at Kandanavolu, he built 
a fort on the banks of the Tuhgabhadra, He also captured the 
fort of Adavani. He obtained (the town of) Kandanavolu and 
some other villages in the district as umbali so that he became 
known as Ramaraja of Kandanavolu. 

Kaiftyat of Kandanavolu, L. K. 16, pp. 418-9. 


101. RAMARAJA'S VICTORIES. 


Rama, the son of Bukkaraja of Aravldu, put to flight 
Savayi BibbI who came at the head of seventy-thousand 
horse, and laid siege to Kandanavolu with the object of taking 
the fort (1). He also deprived Kaea, the chief of Adavani, of 
his royalty (2). He had a son called Timma by his wife 
Lakkamadevl (8). 

Pa d ya-Bfil abhUgavatam , Mac . Mss. 14-4-6, p, 130. 


102. SAMBETA GURAVARAJA. 


SUMMARY. 


MahUmandalesmra Sambeta Guravaraja became the ruler of 
Macupalle and the neighbouring villages during the reign of 
Yirapratapa Devaraya Maharaya, son of Vira Bukka.* He 
recognized the strategic importance of a place between two hills 
called the Guiadlakatta and the Bandlammakonda and the 
river Pinakinl, and built a fortress there. At a distance of 
about three miles from the fort, he built a redoubt on 
the top of a rock overhanging a gorge through which 
flows the Pinakinl, and posted a band of soldiers to patrol 
it. To the west of the fort he built another redoubt at the 
head fo the Baiidi Kanuma and posted men to guard it. He 
ruled his estate from this fort for such a long time that he 
became gen erally known as ‘ grandfather ; Guravaraja A 
•This is another nazae cf Vijayi, tfie father of DeyaiSya II. (See 255 of J905> ' 





AiWAxcuto many Biui'iCB auoui HIS rale, 110 

epigraphical evidence has yet been found in support of them* 

Guravaraja was a tyrant, and he was extremely cruel in 
inflicting inhuman punishments over the unhappy ryots. If 
the people did not submit to his exactions, he would drag out 
their womenfolk and torture them. At that time, a troupe of 
Brahman dramatic performers from Kucipudi, a village some- 
where in the neighbourhood of Vinukonda and Bellamkonda, 
visited Macupalle, when they discovered the extremely 
oppressive character of Guravaraja’s government. In the course 
of their peregrinations, they reached Vidyanagara, and request- 
ed Ylra Narasimharaya, who was then reigning, to grant. them 
permission to enact a play under his patronage. As the fame of 
the Kucipudi players as skilful actors was very well established, 
the Raya commanded that they should perform in front of the 
royal palace, so that the ladies of his zenana might have an 
opportunity of witnessing the performance. The actors impro- 
vised, in the course of their performance, a scene representing 
a seated nobleman, at whose instance two servants tortured a 
woman to extort from her a sum of money, which their master 
demanded. 

The Raya who witnessed this scene asked his courtiers 
present on the occasion what it was all about. On enquiry they 
discovered that the scene represented the manner in which 
Sambeta Guravaraja exacted money from the people of the 
Siddhavatam sfma, and that it was enacted in order to bring 
to the notice of His Majesty the oppressive character of the 
nobleman’s rule. The Raya became indignant at the conduct 
of Guravaraja, and commanded his courtiers to remind him of 
the incident later. ■■■'- -- 


Next morning when the Raya sat in the durbar, 
officers reminded him about the affair of Sambeta Guravaa 
The Raya, thereupon, summoned the commanders of his ar 
and ordered that they should prepare the army for 



/V v-' : 86 

expedition. When the preparations were completed, he 
appointed a Muhammadan officer Ismail Khan, by name, who 
acquired the privilege of being called the Raya’s son. The sar- 
dar on receiving the tambula of appointment*, solemnly vowed 
that he would bring the head of Guravaraja, and marched away 
with his army. He reached the fort, where Guravaraja was 
residing within a short time, and having easily destroyed the 
western outpost built at the head of the Bandla Kanuma, he 
pushed his way to the western wall of the fort where he halted. 




That night he had batteries erected on the summit of the hill 
called Gundlakatta and trained the guns on the fort, which 
was, at the same time, attacked by his troops from below. The 
besieged defended the place as long as they could, and, at last, 
when they found that resistance was useless, they surrendered 
it on condition that they would be allowed to pass unmolested. 
Guravaraja, who was taken prisoner, was beheaded and his 
head was carried away (to Yijayangara). The women and 
children who were in the fort committed suicide. 

Kaijiyat of MUcupalle, L. R. 56, pp. 65 ff. 

103. VIRA NARASIMHA AND THE PORTUGUESE. 

Narasingaraya's Minister : — Mention has already been 
made that on the very day Almeida arrived at the port of 
Cannanore, Narasingaraya’s minister went on board the vessel 
and had an interview with him. This is how it happened : 
On hearing of the greatness of the victory of the Portuguese, 
the Raya sent his minister from Anegundi to Cannanore ; the 
minister submitted that “ the Raya was willing to enter into a 
treaty with Emanuel, that he proposed to offer the hand of his 
daughter to Emanuel’s son, and that the necklace of brilliants 
sent be not refused.” The Portuguese were immensely 
pleased to hear this message as also of the fame and glory of the 
| Raya’s kingdom. Therefore the Raya held the Mussalmans in 
hatred, and ever kept them in check. 

Klra\a Palama, Chapter 29. 

* It was customary at Vijayanagara to present tambula i.e., betel and nuts to 
persons commissioned specially to do some work by the Raya as a sign of formal ratifica- 
tion of the appointment . 


87 


104. MILITARY POLICY. 

The successive defeats at the hands of the Pathans 
in spite of many (of the Hindus) having fought and died, 
made the Raya discover the need for a cavalry here ; 
and towards this end he subdued the Tulu country, and 
garrisoned the sea ports of Honavar, Bhattakkala, Bakanur, 
Mangalapuram, etc., with horses imported from abroad. As 
trainers and troopers he enlisted on handsome salary candi- 
dates from anywhere irrespective of caste or creed. The Raya’s 
men believed that having regard to the affairs at Calicut, 
the Portuguese help would be an asset to them in the matter of 
fighting the Mussalmans. To good fighters the Raya presented*^'’ 7 
beautiful maidens, etc. If any quarrels arose among the 
warriors, they had to settle them by fighting with swords in the 
presence of the Raya. The disputes among the goldsmiths, 
etc., had also to be settled likewise. Thus a warlike spirit was 
infused into all. Fear of death was held in contempt, and women 
would drink poison and die to save their honour. On the death 
of the king, his wives and maidens, about 700 in all, would 
perform sati on his funeral pyre. Men also would accompany 
their departed royal master by killing themselves. Thus every- 
body took delight in military exercises. And to fight against 
the Mussalmans three or four lakhs of people would gather. 


: Ibid. 


105. THE KINGDOM AND CAPITAL. 


The kingdom was divided into five provinces : The Western 
Tulu country ; East of the Ghats, the Dekhan and the 
Karnataka; along the East coast, the Telugu country and 
Colamandalam. The king’s capital Yijayanagara was on the 
Tungabhadra. On the opposite bank was Anegundi. There 
were some famous temples also : Virupaks es varam , 

Mallikarjunam and the five hills beginning with Kiskindha, as 
also the royal residences are seen well. 

The daily income from the city was 12,000 varahas. Thej 
sheds made of granite accommodated 400 elephants, and the! 
royal stables had 40,000 horses in them ranging in 
400 to 800 pagodas. 

' ;-•? ' 

. i .A - , ^ 



mi 


88 

106. THE PUTT&STI* OF ALAi&KONDA, 

A description of the Puttasti of Alamkonda in the year of 
Raktaksi during the administration of Gavurappa Nayadu in 
the reign of Ylra Narasimharaya 

I. (a) Dry land At the rate of cja 20 ( varahas ) for a 
vlsapadi Jch § (putti) which each contractor (had taken) on an 
average, for kh 9 of fields which 18 contractors had rented, 
(the amount is) fja 360.f 


Fixed rent (?) fields (kattu-gutta polam) (which are under) 
Konala Muddayya and 15 others. The kh 2} land 'under 
fixed-rent tenants (yields) a rent of ga 3.6|. 

The two kinds of dry-land together (yield) a rent of ga 396|. 

(b) Nlrarambam (Lands depending for cultivation on 
artificial irrigation) : — 

i. (The annual income from) Sngar-cane, 

betel leaf and vegetable gardens is... ga 60 
ii. The paddy from Cintalakona ... kh 25 J 

Both the kammalaml and income .. „ 55J 

II. Siddhayas (Fixed incomes) : — 

(a) An gad i - s id d h Eyas (Fixed income from shops) : — 

The shops in the name of Gaurappa 
Nayadu ... 9 

The shops of Balija Bettis ... 12 

The shops of Racuti of Kodamuru ... 6 

The shops of Nalla Timma Betti ... 6 

The shops of Yiri Betti ... 6 

Total number of shops ... 43§ 


1ft 

m 


* The word means * (annual) produce.’ See L. 18 of Vijayaraghava’s grant to the 
Dutch — T.B.G* 1939, p. 5. 

t stands for ga,dy^na > another name for varaha ; { kh' stands for khanduga or 
land of the sowing capacity of 20 turns of grain ; it also stands for putti the equivalent of 
kkanduga. 

% The term hammaiam means the cultivation which an owner carries on with hu 
' own farming stock, 

§ The addition is wrong ; the total number is only 3& 




*Tbe correct number is 32. 
f The meaning is not known, 
t This total is not made up correctly. 


The shops that had been made tax-free 
The remaining shops 

At the rate of 1 ruka per shop, (the 
total shop siddhayam ) amounts to... 
The perquisite (vartana) of Gaurappa 
Nayadu together with adukolu f ... 
The durga-biralam (fort tax) 

Total shop dues, adukolu, etc. ... 


„ 10 + 4 

H 


(/>) Magga-siddhayas (Fixed income on looms) : — 

The specification of the 370 looms which remain 
after excluding 41 looms that were given away as 
many a from (the total number of) 411 looms - 

(i) Looms weaving (? coloured doth) 

The looms of Gurivi Setti of the 
Padmasale caste ... 65 

The looms of Kunigiri Lingi Setti. 100 
The looms weaving red-cloth in 
Gaurappanayanipeta 
The looms of Vlrayya 

Total (number of) looms 
Mdnya (tax-free) looms 
The remaining looms 

At the rate of £ ruka per loom per month, the income 
ga 15 ru 5 ; 

and for one year the cash 
Gaurappa Nayadu’s perquisite ( vartana ) ... 

The fort tax ( durgam viralam ) 

The amount pertaining to kanika 

The total amount of cash from looms 


ga 


411 


30 


(ii) Looms •weaving white cloth ( Veli - 
Maggalu ) : — 

Looms of the weaver of Koppavaram 
in G-aurappanayanipeta 

Looms in both the places 

Looms that were made tax-free 

The remaining looms 

At the rate of \ ruka per loom per 
month the money obtained from 
32 looms is ga §, ana for one year ... 

Adukolu ... 

Both 

Total income from looms is ... 


„ 234J 


(c) Golla-Kuruba Siddhdyas (fixed income 
from shepherds) : — 

The pullari * from Boyani Morratanigaru. ga 50 
„ „ Somanna of the Yerra- 

golla caste. „ 8 

„ „ Calla Macannagaru ... „ 12 

„ „ Bala Muddana Boy a ... „ 22| 

„ „ Bacam Deva Boya ... „ 40 

„ „ Nilam Devannagaru 

(per year) ... „ 12 

The total pullari per year ... „ 156£f 

The annual income from Grollas and 

Kurubas and the GerikondagdndluX ••• „ 10 

The annual income from the Cerikonda- 
gaudlu at Bogavolu ? ... „ 30 

■ ■ ' - Total .... „ 40 

The total income from G-ollas and — ~ — 

Kurubas ... ,, 196A 


* A tax paid by shepherds etc., on cattle for grazing in the pastures. 

f The correct total is ga 144J ; probably an item has been left out by oversight by 
the scribe. 

t The meaning is not intelligible. If it is, however, identical with clruvaktw}lu> 
it denotes watchmen. 






91 



|| Both Manihas 


* Blgtti mean# forced labour. What exactly is its seme in this context is not quite 
clear. It is perhaps identical with ve{(i which also means forced labour. 

f The total is wrongly made up ; the correct figures a.tega 5285. / 

$ Maniham-paihaium^m duties payable in cash to the Government on trade and 
industry. * 

§ Thes« totals are wrong : the figures given for various items of the Maniham 

|| This is the literal rendering of the phrase ubhaya-manihZlu-tahn ; but the account 
mentions only one section describing maniham-paikZUi. . We have perhaps to include- the 
previous item of revenue siddhayas under manih am-p sihSla-, but, as the totals «re- wrongly 


(<%) Jati-siddhdyas (fixed income from castes) : 

From Cennugadu, the washerman, 

per year ... 

From Rangadasari, the begdri*, per year. 

From the shoe-maker -jarapagars (?) 

per year 

The total income from Jati-siddhdyas 

per year ... 

The total cash from siddhayas per year. 

III. Maniham-paikdlut : — 

Rent of (betel) leaves : from Tandrapati 
Linga Setti per year ... 

The duty ( suhJcam ) on (leaves) with 
stems, from Paramana Nagi Setti 
of Siravolla per year 

The duty on oil mills, from Grandla 
Timmi Setti year ... 

The duty on money changers, from 
Panuganti Timmi Setti and Cilam 
Maltayya per year ... 

The duties on toddy and arrack, from 
Srlrama Graud per year ... 

The duty on cotton-cleaners from Saba- 
rautu Mulkibhai per year ... 

The duty on Indigo from Vonuri 
Grovindu per year ... 

The total (sum realised) from Maniham, 

is 




ga 250 

l|i 

„ 650 

§|1 

„ 300 

1 

„ 120 
„ 500 

1 

a 

i 

„ BOO 

f 

1 

n 50 

n 

„ 1,217| 

1 


n 


IV. lydlu (Houses) 

For the 10 houses of Cillara Rajaling- 

ayya’s community g& 10 

For the 30 houses of Pagadala Tim- 

mayya Appayya’s community ... „ 15 

With Jcanike ••• » ^ 

For vettikmdlu *, 150 hulls per 3 sd f ? 

The total including siddhayas, manihas, kanike and 
adukdlu (amount) to (cash) ga 2,403 J t 

The total suvarndddya per year ... ga 2,960 
The dhmydddyam „ ... hha 55 J 

Y. The Rayarekha of villages 

For the village of Kurapadu from 


Pedda Setti Lingareddi per year . . . 

ga 

120 

Gijiganidoddi Golla Timmanagaru 




per year ... 

n 

100 

Peddadoddi Cennareddi 

n 

130 

Tor the village of Pinnadoddi per year. 

n 

50 

ii 

Konkalavari Neredi- 




cerla per year ... 

$5 

130 


Mukilla per year ... 

5) 

100 

V 

Marella per year ... 

n 

120 


Brahmadevunimadu- 




vula per year ... 

n 

100 

. » 

Lakumasagaram 

n ' 

200 

i? 

Donturati per year ••• 

n 

50 

V 

Munasarandla per year 

, 

10 

■ ' ' : : s ■'*> : 

Lingadoddi per year • ■ • 

?? 

50 

The total income from the 12 villages . . . 

j? 

1,260§ 


41 The exact meaning is not known; probably it means the bulls for the yokes 
of (carts or ploughs) used for some public purpose without wages, 

f No figure indicating income is given against this item, 

J This total is not correct, 

f The addition is inaccurate. The total amount* to ga 1,160, . . . - • ■ 



(The dues) pertaining to the sthala 


ain (paddy) 


The (specification 
ba B (21st April A.D 
destroyed :■ — 

Sayarekiia 

Du es pertaining to the sthala 

With paddy 

Total 


of) puttasti until Krodhana Vaii 
1505 ?), when the fort of Alavakond: 


(This) account which 
been prepared up to the y 
Rangapparajayya, who, 
amaram to Mudd 
be prepared 


was read aloud in the palace, has 
r ear Dundubhi by the command of 
desiring to grant the fort as an 
ayyasani, instructed that th 
according to the old ayakat 
during the administration 
Vira Narasimharaya. 

Vobalayya read this 

year Dundubhi is ga 41,280. For the 43 villages 
to the Gods and Brahmans, 
balance is aa 31.14.0 


e account should 
account of the slma 
of Gaurappa Nayadu in the reign of 
namaraju Varadayya, and Gandiraju 
The specification of puttasti up to the 

given away 
the account is aa 10.140. TW 


ence between^ 4,460 and 4,210 represents the cost of 
:e P er « a little over gas 4*. 

>tal in «lo<iing the previous figure. 

'Ajl* **..4.*. ... . •• > : 


94 

107. ARA'VlDU RAMARAJA’8 CHILDREN. 


SUMMARY. 

Ramaraja married four wives, Aubhalambika, Lakkama, 
Rangamma and Amalamamba. Of these Lakkamamba gave 
birth to three sons, Timma, Konda and Srxranga. The eldest 
of them Timma became famous among kings as Ramaraju 
Timmayya. 

Dmpada- BUlabhUgavata m } Mac. Mss. 13-2-19, p. 286. 


108* rAmaraju timma. 


summary. 


(1 and 6) Timma, the son of Aravlti Rama, obtained from 
Vfra Narasimha, a gandapeaclara* for having punished the 
traitors. He gave eye-sight to a blind man at the command of 
the Hod Yenkatesvara ; and caused water to spring in 
summer on a rock at Mlgamula. He defeated the Sava (the 
Adil Khan) in a battle at Manuva ; (2 and 4) and subdued 
Uddandaraya, and the chief of Pattavada. 


(3) He granted to the Mussalman (chief or king) Muham- 
mad, his life, scattered the army of the Gajapati, whom he put 
to flight. 


(5) He established the chief of Gautavara in his kingdom, 
and was a lion to the elephant, i.e., the ruler of Pattavada. 

Padya-BZlabhagavatam) Mac. Mss, 14*1-34 


: 109. THE CORONATION OF KR§NADEVARAYA. 

Vlra Narasimhaf told his dalanayakas that he had become 
dd, and that they should make arrangements for crowning 


• ‘ A badge of honour bestowed on a hero, worn as a garter on one leg.’ Brovm. 
t The original has KjinarSy* which is aa crbvioas mistake. 





The Raya next dined in the company of his sons-in-law, 
sons?, relations, friends, and followers, and having washed his 


* dalanayakas Ayyaparasa, Komjamarasa, Bacarasa, Yallamarasa, Vlramarasa, 
AppSji, Yellan adannay ak a, Laksmanadannayaka, ApparapilJai, MannarupiJJai, Rayasam 
RSmacandrayya, Bokkasam Bhaskarayya, Avasaram Venkat&yya, Triambakayya Laksml- 
pati, the mimlstar Tipparasa, Dalavay Lingarasu, SaJuvaNSrS..., Aravitl Bukkaraju, Sajuva 
MSkaraju, the chiefs of the Srlpati, B3dahaJ}i, Nandela, Awuku and Toragallu families 
Racuri Timmarajn Sangaraju, Pemmasani Akkappa Nayuiju, the chief of Velugotfu ; and 
the Kamma and Tajuva noble* ; the Panels of the palace such as Caturvedi Ramadiksita, 
Kjsnavadhanlu who could compose verse in eight languages,' the astrologer Frabhaiara 
who was a SahasrUvadhanl , posts and all the others. 

t Tula means a balance. The king weighed himself against gold, silver and pearls 
which he distributed among the people. 

t See the foot-note to the extract No. 96 on P ; 79, ' 


Krsnaraya king of the city and the kingdom, so that he mioffit 
rule the state in his place. He also gave Krsnaraya his signet- 
ring at an auspicious moment. ° 


Accordingly the ministers, captains, officials, noblemen 
and the men of learning who were at the court* gave 
Krsnaraya a ceremonial bath at an auspicious moment and 
seated him upon a golden settle placed on a platform specially 
erected^ for the occasion. At their instance, he distributed the 
‘ten dams, 1 ‘ the sixteen maha-danas,’ and performed the 
svarna-tula the rajata-tula and the mauMika-tvlarf Moreover, he 
also performed the merus, made gift of one crore of cows, Ind 
established a thousand families. Then the Brahmans chanting 
the Vedic mantras bathed him at an auspicious moment in the 
water brought from the four oceans and the sacred rivers such 
as the Ganga, Yamuna, Sarasvatl, Godavari, Narmada, Sindhu, 
Kaveri and TamraparnI, while the musicians played on the 
eighteen kinds of musical instruments. Next, they bathed 
him also in a shower of gold coins and gems. The moisture 
was wiped off by means of a newly washed white cloth ; and 
a finely kneaded paste of sandal, musk and aloe-wood was 
smeared upon his body. He then put on a garment of golden 
hue, and gave permission to his courtiers to retire to their 
respective residences. 




i , T- A nerformod the MdiHdjid. 

hands in scented water, h P ^ abria?e d Ramayaira, he 

thejmglmg sandals, and ^ Mmselt on the carpet, 

walked a few steps, 1 7 7 t a nr> aii and. the 

and summoned to his presence the dalanayalas, pp 

other ministers. rz yavSeakom, pp- iS ' 17 - 


110. KMINAEATA AND SABBEfA SDRAVABSJAt 


SUMMARY. 


1 - o- heard of the tyranny of Guravaraja 

K! ,,,araya, having y offioer8 , Ismail Khan 

commanded °” e °* h tost an d punifl h him for his evil 

by name, to proceed l aga. ^ ^ the headquarters 

deeds. Ismail ““ C ^ tog 0 arfeate a and slain him in battle, he 
demohshedthe fort and confiscated Guravaraja'. estate. 


, _. „» Generally known as Tata (grand 

This Guravaraja was gene y tim6 . H is 

father) GntavarAja, as h ^ ga ama went t0 Vijaya- 
two sons Nala Itampa d J[ petiti „ n ed the Eaya 

nagara a ter e “ tlie i r father’s estate upon them. The 

, / requesting him to eonfei and ™ nte d them 


requesting nun w . ■, 

Eaya complied whh t eir requ^, ^ “ 4uling Km a 

^ *• tritate ^ larly - 


.... , r ule in this region is borne out by the 

., inscription dated in the cyclic year Pramadi 

S S U« =1S. 15W-20), recording the gift of three ®«of 

iuri V obuladeva Maharaja. ^ uw « 


. ' SippinS **>“ U™T.Tp“.p”u «•««• »' 

are the necessities of nature, repeating 


Br0WK ' rcaiflyat of mcupalh (X. *. 56, pp- 66 IQ » ™ V«a 

t According t0 * e ' f J* Kh ( n affainst Guravaraja. Probably the order *** 
N&rasimha that despatched Ism- • dtiri n g the reign of his successor. 

by Vita Naraslmba, and it was «x« 


■ S : ■■■ ■ ■ ; ■ ■■■ ..■■■■ 


97 



111. THE ORIGIN OF THE KELADI CHIEFS. 

In the country of Karnataka, there dwelt a farmer 
Basavapa by name in the village of Palliyabayal, near the 
city of Keladi, which stands on the northern bank of the 
Yarada. He had by his wife Basavamamba, two sons called 
Caudapa and Bhadrapa whom he married to two girls of good 
family. Basavapa, who prospered greatly after the birth of 
his sons, breathed his last, some time after their marriage. 

Caudapa and Bhadrapa who followed the profession of 
their father became rich, and acquired a name for their 
bravery ; and the former became the king of Keladi by the 

grace of god Ramesvara of the place. 

* ■ ■ * ■ * 

One day Caudapa went to one of his paddy fields, 
in order to supervise the work of his labourers, and be- 
coming tired, he slept under the cool shade of a mango tree. 
As he did not return to his house in time, his mother came in 
search of him, and found him asleep at the foot of the tree ; 
but she was dismayed when she discovered that a cobra was 
dancing near his head spreading its hood. She did not 
awaken him at once, but waited until the serpent retired. 
Then she explained to him the whole incident and pointed out to 
him the serpent that was slowly retiring, making them signs 
with its hood to follow it. Caudapa and his mother followed the 
serpent, until they reached a plot, where at one spot it struck 
the ground with its hood, and disappeared. They thought 
that this action of the serpent indicated a treasure buried under- 
neath the ground, and excavated the place with the object 
of acquiring it. On digging the ground, they discovered a 
huge vessel filled with money and a sword called Nagaramari 
which they took possession of. Caudapa erected a house on the 
spot, and occupied it with all the members of his family. In 
course of time, a son was born to Caudapa whom he called 
Sadasiva. When this boy grew into manhood, he married to him 
two girls of good family called Yiramambe and Bhadramambe. 


88 


112. KRSNADEVARAYA AND OATJDAPA. 


SUMMARY. 


The emperor Krsnadevaraya, who heard of the sudden 
rise of the fortune of the brothers Caudapa and Bhadrapa sum- 
moned them to his presence at Vijayanagara. 


r 

He said , 1 You are amsas of Siva, born (in this world) on ac- 
count of some special reason. The Muhammadans, Sabaras, and 
some petty chiefs having become disobedient and rebellious are 
causing us petty troubles. Therefore, you must remain with 
us and help us in all our undertakings.’ He persuaded them 
to remain at his court, where they acquired much influence on 
account of his favour. 


At that time, the Sabaras and some petty chiefs having 
joined together set up the standard of rebellion in the east, and 
harassed the kingdom very much. When the news of this 
rebellion reached the ears of the Raya, he sent an army under 
Caudapa and Bhadrapa to put it down. Both the armies met, 
and in the tumultuous engagement which ensued, the royal 
troops suffered a defeat. When Caudapa saw the miserable 
plight of the royal army, he jumped upon his steed and 
charged the rebels vigorously. He inflicted a crushing defeat 
upon them and took several of them prisoner. Then he 
returned triumphantly to Vijayanagara, carrying in his train 
several prisoners of war, some chained, and others pinioned. 
He compelled them to make obeisance to the Raya. Borne of 
the chiefs who made peace with him were then introduced to 
the king ; and others placed valuable presents before the royal 
throne as a token of their submission. On seeing the rebel 
chiefs, Krsnaraya was pleased with Caudapa and Bhadrapa 
who had subdued them. He bestowed upon them many gifts 
and sent them home, desiring to employ them in his war with 
the Muhammadans on some future occasion. 


A few days passed uneventfully when the spies brought 
the information that the Mussalmans contemplated an attack 
upon the kingdom from, the north. Thereupon Krsnaraya 


99 


decided that the defence of the frontier abutting on the Mussal- 
man territory should be entrusted to Caudapa and Bhadrapa. 
He summoned them to the durbar, and having informed them 
of the contemplated Muhammadan invasion said : “ We invest 
you with all the powers of the lords of the marches to protect 
the frontier exposed to Muhammadan attacks stationing your- 
selves at Candragutti and Keladi. We grant you the eight 
maganis of Keladi, Ikkeri, Perbayal, Elagalale...Modur, Kelise 
and Latavadi, as a jaglr which may be held by you and your 
descendants for ever rendering help to us. Krsnaraya then 
granted them a charter and conferred upon them the royal 
privileges and insignia. He also declared that Caudapa should 
thenceforward be styled as £ Caudapa of the Keladi-mula- 
samsthdna.'' Then he sent them to their posts with an army 
consisting of elephants, horses and infantry. The brothers 
who were greatly pleased by the special honour shown to 
them departed to Ikkeri where Caudapa formally installed 
himself as chief on Magha su. 3 of the year Siddharthi corres- 
ponding to S. S. 1422.* 

Ktlaiinrpavijayam, Canto 1, pp. 21-6. 


113. KRSNADEVARAYA’S CONQUESTS. 

Krsnaraya was crowned king of Vijayanagara on the 
throne set with nine gems in the month of Caitra in Raktak§i, 
Saka 1426 and protected the kingdom jointly along with his 
younger brothers Acyutaraya and Rangaraya and his 
minister. He organised a mint under the name Kr§#amurti, 
made an endowment in it for Ranganayaka, then renovated 
the Vijayanagara fort, constructed the forts of Penukottai and 
Candragiri, gathered a large army besides many elephants 
and horses, and with a view to acquire dominions went to the 
Dravida country, took possession of the forts of KaficI, Jinji, 

' |md Velur, strengthened the fort of Velur, and having placed 
^xpen and princes in it, was protecting the kingdom justly. 

lace on'd*te is equivalent to January 8, A. D. 1500. If Cau^apa’s installation took 
v!een the Raya at -whose instance he assumed charge of Ikkeri coiild not have 


too 


Then the rulers of Ummattur among those of the Karnataka 
country took possession of Sivanasainudra, strengthened the 
fort since the Kaveri passes on both sides of it and protected 
it with fire arms and other weapons. Then that Tyaparaja 
attained heaven. His son. Gangaraja made safe the fort 
with many weapons and troops. Subsequently, since his elder 
brother Vlra Narasingaraya returned without success in his 
attempt to conquer the palaiyagars and rajas of the Karnataka 
country after making war with them and acquiring the same, 
and since they were not paying tribute, Raya Krsnaraya got 
very angry against them, started with elephants, horse, foot 
soldiers, fire arms and some palaiyagars, besieged the fort of 
§ivanasamudra to the east of Paccimaranga (West Ranga) on 
the banks of the Kaveri in the Karnataka country, admitted 
into his fold Cikkaraya who was his (Gangaraya’s) enemy and 
along with some palaiyagars encamped on the hills Pretaparvata 
and Gevuruyana, and blockaded for over a year all passage 
to the fort by way of the Kaveri. Gangaraya drowned 
himself in the depths of the Kaveri called Gangansueci. Then 
Krsnaraya took possession of that fort, placed his men in 
charge of it, returned to ^rirangapattanam, conquered it, left 
gome parts under the charge of Kampa Gauda and Virappa 
Gauda, and some under the charge of Cikkaraya, con- 
quered the palaiyappattus of those parts, appointed his 
men there, fixed one crore as the tribute from the 
Karnataka country, entered the same in his accounts, streng- 
thened Srirangapattana as the important city in the Karnataka 
country in Saka 1(4?)34 and in that year he hoisted a big flag 
with Kr§naraya’s insignia, sankha and cakra. From there he 
started and conquered at a stretch Coorg, Malayalam and 
Keraiam, fixed the tribute (from them), took possession of the 
Pandya and Cola countries, returned to Vijayanagaripattana, 
started like a second ocean with large armies, many palaiyagars , 
and horses besides guns and weapons, went to the northed 
country, made friends with the king of Kalinga and^ j^ 
him along with himself went in a conquering top^ attaok 
Hindustan, the Gurjara and Magadha countries Krsnaraya 


101 


others, took tribute from them, conquered many Muham- 
madans, returned to V idyanagar apattana, and being seated on 
the throne set with nine gems, and having attained great fame 
from the Himalayas to Seta as Yaduhilodbhava, Eaja- 
mdrttamla , Bajagambhlra, and Maharajapujita Krsnaraya 
Maharayar, protected the kingdom along with the comman- 
der-in-chief Sadasivaraya and performed many pious acts. 
He made the sixteen mahadanas such as those of nteru and 
svama and attained Vaikuntha in S 14(5?)G. Details of the gift 
of land made to Paccima Rangasvami by Arikerasayyar of 
Srirangapattanam in Saka 1429, with the permission of 
Krsnaraja 

Sri Krsnarayar made an order on the auspicious occasion 
of the lunar eclipse on the full moon day in the bright half 
of Magha in the cyclic year Parthiva corresponding to 
Saka 1445 near the temple of Virupaksa on the banks of the 
Tungabhadra for the worship, offerings and festivals of Grod 
Krsnasvami of Udayagiri to Imniadi Tatacarya, son of 
Tatacarya and grandson of Vedamurti Tirumalai Tatacarya, 
that he may collect from the Kammas of the town belonging 
to thirty-seven gotras at the rate of a varahan a year, as also 
from people performing marriage at the rate of one pamrn for 
the girl and one pagam for the boy. 

The duration of the reign of Krsnaraya (is) 37 years. 

KohgudlsatajUkkalin Caritram , Madras Govt , Or. Mss . Lib. 16-6-9 ff. 84 f. 

114(a). CAPTURE OF BlBAR. 

M 2?i— r These two verses were composed by the court poets of Kjsnadevaraya in, 
commemoration of his capture of Bidar. The first is attributed to the 
poet laureate Allasani Peddana and the other is anonymous. 


Peddana describes in the first verse the war cries of the 
fierce Mussalman soldiers of Bedadakota (Bidar) who were 
h?!ain by Krsnaraya in battle, even on their journey to heaven. 
- — “^second describes the effects of the sound of Krsnaraya’s 
place on victory, which rent the heart of the ladies of Bedada- 
been K.r50^eK^ ort i n g to them the death of their lords, in battle) i; the 


m 


102 


gates of the fort of Delhi were strengthened ; the fortifications 
of Makka were increased ; new towers were built on the 
battlements of Mandu ; and grain was stored up in forts of 
Boleru and Canderu. 


114(5). A DESCRIPTION OF THE CAPTURE OF KALUBARIGA. 

The verse gives a graphic account of the hardships of 
the wives of the khans, maliks. and vaziers, when Krsnaraya 
captured the fort of Kalubariga. 

Anonymous. 

114(c). A DESCRIPTION OF THE CAPTURE OF KALUBARIGA. 

Having pitched * the veligudara'* on the 12th Tai of the 
year Prajotpatti, (Krsnadevaraya) marched upon Kutuppa 
Saha and Nizam Saha. During the course of a campaign 
of three years, he fought with the three kingdomsf , and set up a 
pillar of glory at Kalubariga, He exacted tribute from the lords 
of the three kingdoms... and returned to Yijayanagara (where 
he) remained (for some time). 

Vijayanagara SamrSjyamu, Bh&rati VI, ii. p, 621. 


114(d).' THE SIEGE OF KALUBARIGA. 

After the lapse of some time having resolved to make 
war upon Kalyanam and Kalubarige, (Krsnadevaraya) 
summoned (to the capital) all the jagirddrs. In obedience to 
the royal order, old Cannama Nayadu of Kadavakolanu went 
to Vijayanagara with all his retainers and presented himself 
before Krsnadevaraya. Then as the Raya marched at the 
head of his army upon Kalubariga, all [the officers of the 
Nizam]* came thither with large forces, and lay encamped in 
the neighbourhood of the fort. Summoning all his [nobles and 
captains] to his presence, the Raya said : “ If you fight in 

* Veligudara means outer tent, in which the kings of Vijayanagara were accustomed 
to camp during the military expeditions, 

.■ and 

fThe three kingdoms referred to here are those of Golkon^a, R : * 
Ahmadnagar. 

X Samasta NiaUnmlu, literally means all the NiSams. 


103 


this battle, with the enemy without turning- your back on him, 
and put him to flight, we will reward you richly.” Then he 
commanded virakankanas and tdmbula to be distributed among 
them. The battle having commenced by this time, several 
captains including the old Mesa Cannama Nayudu, the Handes 
of Sonnalapuram and other palaiyagars, uniting (their forces) 
together, marched upon the enemy. 

And as the forces of Krsnaraya gave way in the sanguinary 
battle that followed, he raised his arm and shouted : “ We 
bestow on those who charge the enemy and put him to flight, 
many titles and rewards.” Old Cannama Nayadu with some 
other captains wheeled round and confronted the Muhammadan 
army. They charged the forces of the Nizam and others that 
were pursuing them with such vigour that the front line of the 
enemy broke in confusion and fled. At the same time, as the 
rest of the (Raya’s) army rushed upon the forces of Nizam 
[Shah] and caused panic, they fled leaving several of their 
comrades dead upon the battle-field. [Krsnaraya] then 
commanded that the triumphant boar standard should be 
planted on [the battlements of Kalubariga] and that the drum 
of victory should be sounded. 

Then [the Raya] causing all his wounded officers to be 
brought to his presence, enquired into their condition, and 
[ordered the surgeons] to dress their wounds. On making 
enquiries about the condition of old Cannama Nayadu, he was 
told that [the old warrior] was lying seriously wounded 
in some other part [of the battle-field], Krsnaraya went 
personally in search of [the wounded captain], and causing his 
wounds to be dressed, had him removed to a tent very near 
his own, where he carefully tended him until he recovered. 

The Raya having returned to Yijayanagara with all his 
army, sent all his captains to their respective homes. He gave 
old Mesa Cannama Nayadu a palanquin, 
his own horses, kalkiturayi, udds, pavada, 
and a camel with a drum on its back. 



104 


conferred on him the titles of Airnttaru-mandaUkara-gaada , 
and Purva-simkasanadhisvara. He also granted (to Cannama) 
the forest extending as far as the village of Kadavakolanu. 
Cannama having obtained the permission of the Raya returned 
to his own village. 

Kaifiyat of Nadimidaddifa\em, L. R. 39, pp. 11 ff. 


115. THE REVOLT AND SUBJUGATION OP THE PALAIYAGAR 
OF PATTURUPALEM. 

After the death Basivi Nayadu, his son, Peda Rangappa, 
and after him, his son Musili Nayadu, were protecting the 
villages and the highway. Musili Nayadu gathered forces 
with a treasonable intent, and rose up in rebellion during 
Krsnadevaraya’s reign ; but being unable to resist the royal 
forces, he fled from his place and took refuge in the 
Lankamalai hills. Taking advantage of the Raya’s visit to 
Puspagiri, he tendered his submission through Kamarasu 
Timmarasayya who interceded with the Raya on his behalf, 
and obtained his permission for an interview. During the 
interview Musili Nayadu explained to the Raya that he was 
obliged to take refuge in the Lankamalais owing to the 
intrigues of Rangapatiraju, a Ksatriya chief, who was holding 
the village of Jillella under the Raya. 

The Raya having viewed his case leniently forgave him 
his faults. He granted to him as a jagtr the jungle stretching 
between Puspagiri and Peranipadu, and commanded him to 
keep watch over the villages and the highway as before- 
Further, he ordered a certain Malraju, one of his servants, to 
accompany Musili Nayadu, and build at any place he might 
choose a village for his habitation. In obedience to the 
command of the Raya, Malraju built a village called Patturu- 
palem at a place called Bodadinne on the Kasl-Ramesvaram 
Road and excavated a tank in its neighbourhood which he 
named after himself. 

Kaifiyat of PattUrupaltm, L- R. 9, pp. 250 ff. 



116 ( 6 ) 

SUMMARY. 

The first verse alludes to some of Krsnaraya’s vi< 
It mentions his capture of Udayacala (Udayagiri) and hh 
ries over the chief of Navada, Sakandhara, and the Gajap 


105 

116(a). KJJSN ARAYA-’S VICTORIES. 

SUMMARY. 

1. Description of Vidyanagari ; the Tungabhadra, 
Matanga hill, Pampa and Vitthala temples mentioned. 

2. Narasimha, the son of Isvara and ornament of the 
Turvasu-kula, ruled the earth with vigour with the city for his 
capital. 

3. His son Krsnaraya’s birth spread great joy all round 
like that of the moon from the ocean of milk. 

4. In his youth he (Krsna) quickly overpowered the 
powerful Gahga-raja, destroyed his fortress of Sivanasamudra 
and its site soon became a fit habitation for jackals. 

5. He then conquered Udayagiri and its ruler Rahutta- 
raya, captured the two towns Kondavldu and Kondapalli in 
war, made the son of the Gajapati a prisoner of war and 
erected an inscribed pillar of victory at Pottanur. His 
valour commanded universal admiration. 

6. Krsna then conquered the Gajapati and espoused his 

daughter together with his Sri (prosperity); subsequently he 
attacked the Yavana king Sapada (Savayi) who was encamped 
at Gobburu, put him to flight and captured his elephants, horses 
and his unequalled fortress Racur. : 

7. This great king crossed the Krsna river and consigned 
to flames the whole of the Yavana country (the territory ruled 
by Muhammadans), conquered the fortress cities called Firoza- 
bad, Asimbad, and Sagar. Then he attacked Kalubarige which 
was defended by Sapada (the ’Adi! Khan) and Captured there 
three sons of the Sultan. 

LakfimuarSyana : SangUasHryMayam, Madras Govt. Or. Mss * Lik % R. No. J 


im 

states that the country up to the five-Gaudas became, as it were, 
a maidan where he would go for taking exercise in fencing* 

The second verse refers to his capture of all the cities 
belonging to the Gajapati in the country between the rivers 
Krsna and Godavari. The third mentions the capture of 
Kalubariga ; the fourth addresses Krsnaraya as the bearer of 
the fortune (LaksmT) of the Hindu kingdom, the establisher 
of the Mussalman king,f and the captor of the women of Kalinga; 
and the fifth describes the conquest of the districts of Kondavidu 
and Kondapalli. 

Allasaai Peddana : Manucaritra, 1 : 11 ; 2 : 79, 81 ; 3 : 142, 144. 


116 (c). 

A single verse from the pen of an anonymous contem- 
porary writer enumerates briefly the events connected with the 
Kalinga war. 

When Krsnaraya, who was renowned for his skill in war, 
started on an uninterrupted expedition, Udayagiri lost its great- 
ness by the rising sun of his valour, Vinukonda fell to pieces by 
the terrific noise of his war drums ; Bellamkonda (the jaggery 
hill) melted like lac by the fire of his army ; Kondavidu (the 
abode of hills) was deprived of its wings by the lightning-strokes 
of the sw r ords of his troopers ; Bezwada collapsed ; Ivoijdapalle 
shook ; Katakam broke down ; and Delhi fell into confusion. 

116 (d). 

SUMMARY. 

This verse which is attributed to Nandi Timmana, the 
author of the Parijatapaharaaam , describes the manner in 

* The chief of N3va4a remains still unidentified. Sakandhara has been identified by 
the late Mr. K, V. Lakshmana Rao (. LahsmanarTiya Vyasavali t pp. 46*7) with Sikandar 
Shah, who sat for a few months in A»D, 1525 on the throne of Gtijerat. 

f This statement of Peddana is also supported by the inscriptions. It is generally 
believed that Krsnaraya assumed this title when he attempted to restore the defunct 
B akin any dynasty at the end of his Raicur campaign in A. D. 1521. This view is unten- 
able as the title appears in some of his early inscriptions. In an inscription dated 
A: D. 1514 (fV. JO* /. Kr. 21) Krsnaraya is styled Yavanarnjya $ amsihap ana-car y a . 

- 1*. T • ..... 1, , ' 






107 


which the Urija soldiers, who hod been slab b K , 
battle, behaved in the svarga of Indra 


116(e). 

We shall long cherish and meditate upon Lord Sri Krsna 
who has Ins abode mVadiahtam (Nagalapnr ?) and who by 

sL“d S r g ’ **"•**» *» "P - «nmphal column at 


Haridasa : Irusatnayavi lakkam , p. 2, v. 5* 


117 K E§NARAYA’J 


S WARS. 


SUMMARY. 


Krsqaraya sent o letter to Pemmasani Timma Nayadu, 
commanding him to join the royal army with his forces in an 
expedition against the Advapati. He wa, also required to 
bring with him Kunapuli Eangapatiraju and his troops. In 
obedience to the royal summons, Timma Nayadu repaired to 
Vijayanagara accompanied by Eangapatiraju. One day while 
the Eaya was seated m the durbar surrounded by his captains 
and nobles the state-elephant which was in rut rushed into 
the assembly. Rangapati, concealing himself behind one of 
the pillars of the audience hall, struck the beast with his dagger 
and forced ,t to turn back. TUis aot „f bravery excited the 
admiration of Eaya, and he granted to Eangapati the right of 
enjoying his jaglr without interruption. 

Later Krenaraya sent a „ ir r,pa to Eangapatiraju com- 
manding him to join him i„ his war against the Gajapati. 
Accordmgly, Rangapati having joined the royal army with his 
force took his position i„ the van, and participated in an 
engagement with the troops of the Gajapati. On this occasion, 
summoning him to his presence, the Eaya said that he would 
reward him amply provided that he fought well in the battle. 
Then giving him the custom ary mi bula to signify that lie was 
specially commissioned to win the victory, the Eaya vave him' 


108 


Accordingly, when the order was given for scaling the 
Walls of the fort of Udayagiri on all sides, Rangapati, who was 
near the northern wall of the fort with his force, scaled it even 
before the royal army and hoisted the flag of five colours 
which the Raya had given him on the terrace of the gate with the 
bell-metal doors. The Raya, on seeing the flag, made enquiries 
about it, and discovered that it was planted by Rangapatiraju. 
He was immensely delighted, and summoning Rangapati to his 
presence, complimented him on the display of his bravery and 
rewarded him adequately. Krsnaraya captured the fort, and 
after winning victory over the Gajapati, returned to Vijaya- 
nagara where he continued to rule the kingdom from the throne 
of the Narapatis. 

Kai/lyat of Cintakun£a } Z. R, 7 , pp. 321 ff. 

118. ABOUT THE KINGDOM OF ORISSA. 

V ' SUMMARY. 

The Raya was engaged in a conversation with Appaji and 
the other ministers. Two spies who had been wandering in 
the dominions of the Gajapati returned from Cuttack. They 
told him that after visiting several places in the Gajapati 
dominions including Rajamahendravaram and Cuttack, they 
reached at last J agannadham (Purusottamam) where the Gaja- 
pati Mukunda Bahubalendra was staying.* They gave an 
account of the Gajapati’ s ablutions and his performance of daily 
worship to the God J agannatha, in the presence of the sthanapatis 
of other kings, viz., Anantoji Pantulu of Aghapura, Madhavayya 
of Manasingu, Cennagirayya of Canduvaru, Karunakarayya 
of - Kataka, Vobalayya of Warangal, Dhakoji Pant, the 
representative of the Sultan of Delhi, Bekoji Pant ofBedadakota, 
Gopoji Pant of Golkonda, Ayyaparaju of Ahmadnagara, 
Ylramaraju of Yijayapura, Purandarayya of Puranapura and 

•The contemporary and the enemy of Krsnadgvaraya was not Mukunda 
BSbnbalendra. Gajapati but Prataparudra. Gajapati. This mistake has been repeated 
i» the JT r s narayavijayam . There was, of course, a Mukunda Bahubalendra who ruled over 
Kajinga; but he was a contemporary of Ibrahim Qutb Shah, and he did not ascend the 
throne of Orissa until A* D. 1359. 




109 


Baboji Pant of Bhaganagaram * Tbe Gajapati distributed 
presents to Brahmans at the conclusion of his daily worship 
and dismissed them. Next, he proceeded to the dining hall 
where he dined in the company of his relations. Then he 
recited the verses of the abridged Kamayana, walking up and 
down in the palace. Having put on his clothes and jewels, he 
went to the hall of audience, where he held a durbar surrounded 


by his officials, nobles, and the sthanapatis representing the 
other courts. While he was engaged in a conversation with 
the sixteen Patras and the foreign ambassadors, he received 
letters from. Niladri Pant (the sthanapaii of) the Nizam Sahu as 
well as the sthanapatis of Yedula Sahu and Kutapana Malaka. 
They stated explicitly that 1 the king of Karnataka, having 
gathered the fourfold army for the purpose of waging war, has 
come out (of his capital) and desires to make his appearance on 
the frontier. (The Nizam Shah and the other Muslim chiefs) 
used to render you assistance in the past, when Your Majesty 
had to fight against the chiefs of the north and the south. In 
great emergencies such as the war with the people of Agha- 
pura, all of us would unite together and direct the affairs 
jointly. There is nothing so serious now r , (to necessitate joint 
action). Surely Your Majesty is on the frontier and nowhere 
else. As l r edula Sahu and Kutapana Malaka are strong in 
their frontier defences, they need not be anxious. If anything 
beyond the strength of their frontier defences happens, they 
are prepared to come as far as Ahamadunagaram.f 

* This list of sthanapatis who are alleged to have been present at the court of the 
Gajapati is not genuine. In the first place, the manner in which the names of the 
sthanapatis and those of the states or the kings whom they represent rhyme with each other 
creates a suspicion in the mind that the chronicler had freely drawn upon his imagination 
in choosing the names of the sthanapatis . Secondly, the author duplicates the names of 
certain states, Golkon^a and Bhaganagara). Thirdly, he includes in his list a 

sthanapaii of Kataka. Now, K at aka was the capital of the Gajapati. It is incompre- 
hensible why he should have his ambassador at his own court. Lastly, Bhaganagara which 
is said to have sent a representative was not then in existence. It was founded about 
A. D. 1581 by Muhammad Quly Qutb Shah in honour of his mistress BhSgamaty. This 
shows clearly that the Rayavacakam must have been written some time after the foundation 
of Bhaganagara i.e. } after A. D. 1581. 

f This cannot be the same as Ahmadnagar, the capital of the Nizam SKU kings. 
According to the Rayavacakam and the Rrsnarayavijayam, Kfsnaraya attacked 
xnadan garrison town of the name of Ahamadunagaram in the z 


Konfcvlgu. Probably this refers to the same place. 


iiiiiiip 




.xWM. 



I MS 



(The people in the assembly) said by way of counsel: “As 
far as human effort is concerned, defeat (in battle) must not be 
thought of. If victory is inevitable to the Karnatakas, Your 
Majesty will lose territory, and be involved in troubles, owing 
to the defeat of the three kings on the frontier. Therefore, it 
is necessary to deliberate deeply and take preliminary 
precautions.” 

The Gajapati observed: “ There is the God Jagannatha to 
help us in all difficulties.” The envoys of the three (Mussal- 
man) states said : “ Of course, Your Majesty has Jagannatha, 
just as our masters have the Kartar (God). Our masters are 
sending all the troops of o .'.r three kingdoms to the banks of 
the. Krsna, where they should lie encamped to prevent the 
Karnatakas from crossing the river. We request Your 
Majesty to command your officers to strengthen the places on 
the frontier.” 

The Gajapati said that he would arrange the frontier 
defences accordingly and sent forces strong enough to take pre- 
liminary precautions to Kondavldu, Udayagiri, Bellamkonda, 
N agarjunakonda, Kandukiir, and other places. He also 
commanded the sixteen Patras to take similar steps in defence 
of their estates and forts ; and in obedience to the royal 
commands they sent provisions and ammunition to the frontier 
and the forts. 

RUyavacaham^ pp. 69 - 74 , 


119. TIMMAEASA ON THE CHARACTER OF THE GAJAPATI. 

. SUMMARY* 

Appaji (i.e. Saluva Timmarasa) said : “ The Gajapati is 
not like the Mussulmans ; he is a monarch of good repute ; he 
has faith in the gods and Brahmans.” 

Timmarasa then proceeded to recount the story of the 
attempted assassination of the Gajapati in order to illustrate 
the holiness of his character. On one occasion, the Gajapati’s 
enemies wanted to put an end to him by mixing poison in the 
tzrtha from the shrine of Jagannatha which he was accustomed 


" ay be&ri , din “ r - AM '»^ 1» discovered 
that he h,tl,a was poisoned owing to the agitation of the 

T»vf 6 -th ’t! dl ' ant pIaciu S fai ‘h “ favourite deity 
Jagamiatha. The poison did not produce any evil effect and 

was digested like the rest of the food which he' consumed. ’ 

Rayavticakam, pp. 81 - 82 . 


12(1. GYMNASIA AT THE CAPITAL OP THE GAJAPATI. 


XT “ d *' ■» *>■» - Pl „. „ f *.4£,z 


SUMMARY. 


We entered the city, and saw the palace of the Gaiamti 
the mansions of the sixteen Pnf^. At « Uajd P dtl ’ 

n _ rtn lo win 1 ' auas i the Gymnasia and the 

people who take exercises therein. Even the gods and the 

exercises A'tl 110 * ,° ap0bi “ of exhibiting- such skill in physical 

the CM in Zl‘ 7' mi ^ ^ observed 

other count, -£ * ?, XerC,SeS Sll0W “ by “ le 8 rea t wrestlers of 

tal A the P • , S ‘ y ° f ‘ he pe °P le at fte capi- 

ca iable ofrft Jap ‘ “ t0t!jly difee “‘- They alone ire 
capable ofliftmg up such heavy dumb-bells. They lift them 

up, and what is move they lift t l a * 

, . , ’ uc ^ utt them up cross-wise. Thev 

raise a sack weio-h i n a- to •mu.. , , . A/ 

arm of , Z r * P M t0 tlie hei - ht of uplifted 

Moreover "'‘A “““ ™ ,! ‘ ro w it upon their own bodies. 

£: '*:c " r 1 b i weea their ***** “ a 

« z “ t m i z of z cro8s - beam ( ° f *• 

ZZ Z g . S m Z the tr00peM ara accustomed to carry 
y - ii opponents bodily imprisoning them between one of 

ontlosZ S t W hZ^l *’ h ° WeVer ’ the °PP 0lients %At with- 
io. idZl t, °“ their St0eds ' the 7 ab andon ^ir attempt, 

the nrmon° Z ° PP0 ’ Wnt *° be mu “P<W«ble. The riders on 
1th ™ie7ve Tr are n °‘ afl ' aH ° f an T wound which they 

such ridetm rZ t!!‘ Can7 . aWa y ,mder arm 
. ~ •* 16 S0 ^ i61s practise this exercise in order tp '• ' 

“ * rm 00 " ra f°“ 8l y (ia ‘heir seats) on such occasions. 
maMhcmam (!) which is heavy enough to be carried by a 


112 

, ctLt with that sword strong 

man on his head. They - . . ^ thfi pith 0 f the plantain 

tamarind pillars as easily ^gether on the ground they 

trees. Planting two oio _ _ ° They bring a basket full 

cut them to pieces wit . Qr five 0 f them together. As 

of cymbal-discs, and twist f - ^ themj they place them 

the blacksmiths aie n t them (with the aid of the hammer), 
on the anvil, an ' / , ' ^^011 for the next day’s use. 

^ ^ The 

Moreover, the} tm ^ ^ tliere return with a feeling that 

wrestlers of the conn 4 am 'to cope with their methods of taking 
wealth and strength of that place cannot he seen 

gtBywll^^C dB6. JffiyavUcakam, pp. *79-80. 

... ooWSS T OF THE KINGDOM OF THE 8AJAPATI 
BY KRSN ADE V ARS.Y A. 

, _ i _ f , + i ip 7 pnana, and having entered the 

Krspadevaraya e • minister Sahtva Timm- 

andienee hall, he summoned f lm g, * the 

**• * * t <* 

necessary prepaid. • To discover whether the time 

Tl “es edition, he .-da few 
l teuiw with sa&ot, to he snnnd.ted on the 
*Z; XA honse. The w airman sang, out of tne 

' fulness of his heart, the following couplet: 

T . , -I n ic nurs * and Kondapalle is ours. If anybody 

arsp^K i:;:;:; 

country as far as Kafakain is also ours. 

wlien t ] ie son 0 ' of ike washerman was communicate to 

1 , V-T—h on his eastern campaign, accom- 
the hay a, he sUi md ... — ~ tl , mny . He captured 

mi-lied by his ennima:»dvr-iu-cl mt a..u t. c . 0 _ - . 

pan ea u> - expedition Ildayagm, AddanKi, 

d , m „gthe -ry.-^xrsagijunakonau, Tangeda, Keta- 
Vmnkomla, B.M h ^ adYancca „p„n the fort of 

varam and other xoits, > i; n „ +he walls. 

Ko,4aT-4u in S. S. U87 and captured it by scalmg 


113 


He captured Vfrabhadra Gajapati, son of Partaparudra, Gajapati 
with all the nobles and commanders alive, and took possession 
of the fortress, but he gave him an assurance of security. The 
(following) verse bears out the truth of this statement : 

“Formerly Rudra foolishly slew Manmatha, the son of 
Krsna, near a Kondavldu (mountain-abode). Is it a manly 
deed '? The celebrated king Narasimha Krsijaraya mercifully 
offered protection to Vlrabhadra, son of Prataparudra, on the 
battle-field near Kondavldu.*” 



Having offered protection in this manner to the officers of 
the Gajapati, Krsnaraya subjugated the country as far as 
Simhacalam. Next he advanced as far as Katakam where he 
attacked the Gajapati, and forcibly married his daughter. He 
ceded to the Gajapati the country on the other side of SimhS- 
calam,f and returned to Kondavldu the governorship of which 
he conferred upon Nadendla Gopamantri, a nephew of Baluva 
Timmarasa. Then the Raya went back to Yidyanagara. 

Krsnaraya ruled from S. B. 1437 to S. S. 1455; by) 

Kaifiyai of Kond^Jidu % Mac . Mss. 15-4-40, pp. 18 ft 

122. TIMMAEAJU KONDRAJU, THE GOVERNOR OF ICON DA Vi DU. 

summary. y ; .v 

This passage mentions Pina-Kondrajn, one of the sons of 
Ramaraja-Tirumala or Timma, a prominent member of the 
Sravldu family. Pina-Kondrajn, it, is said, was the protector 
of Krsnadevaraya’s kingdom at Kondavldu. 

fStt&apparKja : Sami' pakhyanam , 1: 20. 


123. KRSNAEAYA’S CAMPAIGN AGAINST THE GAJAPATI. 

He (Kivsnadevaraya) started on the Srlmma-daiami day of 
the month of Cifrai in the year Srimukha on this campaign 

♦The stanza is taken from Nandi TimmanaN ParijatTipak arananu 

f This statement is not accurate. Kysnaraya ceded to the Gajapati all the territory 
which he conquered to the north of the Krsna. 

t The dates are significant. The reign of Krsnaraya commenced, according to this 
Kaifiyai, in A S. 1437, i.e., from the year of his conquest of Kondavulu, andKr^n*. di*d 
in §. S. 1452, L e., three years before the date to which the Kaifiyai assigns his death. 




(at the end of which) he took possession, of the Grajapati’s 
daughter Lakamldevamma and returned to Vijayanagara 

Vij 'aycinitgarasamraj yamti, Bharaii VI, ii. p. 622. 


124. KRSNARAYA’S CONQUEST OF WARANGAL. 

While king Krsnadevaraya was ruling at Vijayanagara, 
he beino- desirous of conquest, started on a campaign towards 
the east and captured the forts of Kondavldu, Kondapalle, 
Inukonda, Nagarjunikonda and others. During this campaign 
he also defeated and drove away the Mussalmans from 
Ekasilanagara (Warangal) and brought the territory under his 
rule, maintaining the chiefs of the Kakatlya dynasty 
according to their status. 

Kaifiyat of Anumakoyda, Mac. Mss . 15-4-5, p. 108. 


125. KRSNARAYA’S INVASION OF KALINGA. 

Purusottama Grajapati, son of Kapilesvara Grajapati, ruled 
over Andhra and Kalihga. His son Prataparudra ruled, in addi- 
tion to his ancestral territory, over the country up to Udayagiri 
in the west, which he left in charge of his deputy, Tirumala 
Kopa(Kauta ?)raya Mahapatra. He posted his son, Virabhadra 
G-ajapati, Narahari Patra, the son of Kumara Hamvlra Patra, 
Laksmipatiraju, son of Brinatharaju, Janyavala Kasuvapatra, 
Suprapala Candra Mahapatra, Pusapati Raciraju, Bacuri Yallaya 
and Uddanda Khan at Kondavldu, with an army sufficient to 
defend the fort. Prataparudra Grajapati kept Kalihga directly 
under his control and supervised the government the entire 
kingdom, being seated upon his throne in the city of Katakam. 


Krsnadeva Maharaya, the lord of the Narapati throne at 
the city of Vidyanagara in the western kingdom, having 
started (on an expedition of conquest) with his army, reduced 
the fort of Udayagiri, and took its commandant, Tirumala 
ftautaraya Mahapatra, prisoner. Advancing with his 
army, he captured the forts of Vinukonda, Bellamkonda, 
Nagarjunakonda, Addanki, Ammanabrolu, Tangedu and Kyata- 
varam (in quick succession). At last he laid siege to Kondavldu, 






• i f. i > ;! 1 .. 



126. KRSNARAYA’S ATTACK UPON CUTTACK. 

While Prataparudra Gajapati Maharaja was ruling the 
kingdoms of Andhra and Kalihga, Vira Pratapa Krsnadeva 
Maharaya, the lord of the city of Vijayanagara in the western 
country, who was seated on the throne of the Narapatis, came 
with his fourfold army to effect the conquest of Kalihga. He 
passed through Peddapuram on his way to Katalcam, when the 
country was ruined to some extent on account of the confusion 
caused by the army. After Krsnaraya’s return to the western 
kingdom, the Gajapati once again assumed the government of 
the country. 

Kaifiyat of Kimmur, Z. R, 19> pp. 209-10, 


127. KRSNADEVARAYA’S WAR ON KALINGA. 

The Ancestors of Krsnaraya : — Krsnadevaraya was the son 
of Narasimhadevaraya and a grandson of Isvaradevaraya. 

The last mentioned chief ruled from his headquarters at 
Anegondi over the southern districts such as Snrangam and 
Tiruccinapalli.* His son, Narasimhadevaraya, was a man of 




mu 




and scaled its walls by means of movable platforms. Having 
taken the Patras and feudatory chiefs, and nobles who were 
defending the fort prisoners, he gave them assurances of safety, 
and returned to Vidyanagara. 


(Krsnaraya) once again set out from the Karnata country 
with the object of effecting the conquest of Kalihga in S. S. 1438 
Yuva. He entered the Jammi valley, passed from Kona by the 
way of Kottham and subjugated Vaddadi and Madugalu from 
Potnur. Finally be moved upon Katakam, and offered battle 
to Prataparudra Gajapati who fled from his capital (as he 
could not oppose his enemy). A peace was concluded, accord- 
ing to the terms of which, the Gajapati gave his daughter in 
marriage to the Raya. Then Krsnaraya finally returned to 
Vidyanagara. 

Kaifiyat of Samar alakot a , Z. R, 19, pp, 147-9, 


116 



considerable ability, and he governed the country from Anegondi 
to Ramesvaram. 

His son, Krsnadevaraya ruled, in addition to the terri- 
tories governed by his father, over the country up to the 
western sea, which he had conquered from his enemies. His 
son-in-law,* who was a great captain, having gathered a large 
number of foot and horse, subdued Cittur, Candragiri, Cudappah, 
Kandanavolu and Siddhavatam ; he led the army; against 
Hyderabad! and inflicted defeats' upon the Kutubu Sahi and 
the Nizam Bahi kings. Having made himself the master of 
Gandikota, he posted garrisons in the frontier forts, and 
wrested all the countries which he brought under the sway of 
Krsnaraya. 

Then, Krsnaraya who conceived the idea of conquering 
the northern region, came (with an army) and subdued the 
forts of V inukonda and Bellamkonda which were then under the 
Gajapatis. He engaged himself in a fierce straggle with 
Praharesvara, a brother of the Gajapati, who was at 
Kondavfdu, and having slain him in a battle, he made himself 
the master of the three forts, viz., Kondavidu, V inukonda and 
Bellamkonda. He advanced as far as Bengal without meeting 
any opposition on his way, and captured the forts of Katakam, 
Kalyanam and Kalubariga. He set up a pillar of victory near 
(Potnur) and subjugated the Twelve Mannes (bara~munnelu ) up to 
Simhacalam. At last, the Raya’s army surrounded the city of 
Katakam, where the Gajapati usually resided. When an attempt 
was made to capture him, the Gajapati opened negotiations with 
the object of making peace. Krsnaraya said: “ If you really 
desire peace, then you should give me your daughter in 
marriage.” The Gajapati, however, was not willing to 
accede to this demand ; but his ministers pointed out that in 
case he rejected the conditions, Krsnaraya would not only 
capture the fort but put all of them to death. Therefore, it 
was prudent to escape from the danger at any sacrifice. 

* Ramaraja. 

f It ought to h© Golko$<Ja, as Hyderabad was not built at the time. 


il I 



The Gajapati, having at last given his consent, his daughter 
Lukkha was married to the Raya who thereupon struck his 
tents and departed to Anegondi with his bride. 

Krsnadevaraya died on S.S. 1327 Tarana, Jyestha su. 6 
Sunday. 4, 

Account of the Narafati Kings, L.R. 50, pp. 313-15. 


128. KRSNARAYA AND THE PORTUGUESE. 

ALBUQUERQUE'S MESSAGE TO KRStfARAYA— HE LEAVES GOA. 

The king who ruled at Anegondi at that time was Vlra 
Krsnaraya, the younger brother of Narasimharaya. He 
was more prosperous than all the other Rayas. Albuquerque 
thought that if he made friends with him it would not be 
difficult to destroy the power of Islam in the Dekhan. And he 
sent Father Louis as his messenger to the city on the bank of 
the Tungabhadra. Along with him was sent Graspar, the 
interpreter. Swift horses were also sent as present to the 
Raya. The Father was to tell the Raya all that happened as 
also the principles of the Christian Faith and get the Raya 
on the side of the Portuguese. Further he was to tell the 
Raya, that an army should be sent to drive out the Moplahs 
from Malabar. “If you come down through the pass and 
invade the district we will (at the same time) come by sea and 
attack. This would not obstruct the trade in horses. It 
would appear that Mangalapuram or Bhattakkala will be a 
convenient station for us. If you permit us to fortify it we 
shall guard the sea so that horses may be imported by none 
bat you.” 

Yet Albuquerque could not stay in peace at Goa for more 
than three months. When the ’Adil Khan crossed the pass, the 
entry of provisions into the city was completely stopped, and 
the roads were closed (May 11). Then the citizens rose . in 
revolt and Albuquerque had to leave the city and take refuge 
at Port Raw, His stay .there was miserable; the monsoon was ■' 

*The date is wrong-. Kjfgadevarava was not born at that time, Th# Astronomical 
details do net work out correctly. 


118 



spent in fighting against the enemy as well as hunger. Many 
Portuguese fell ill and died. The rest to satisfy their hunger 
turned Muhammadans. On a day when there was no rain, 
Albuquerque left for the * Five Islands ’ along with the 
remaining Portuguese, and there stayed in peace for some 
time (1510 August). 

K'lrala Palama, Chap. 43, p. 113. 


129(a). KRSNARAYA AND THE MUHAMMADANS, h 

THE ORIGIN OF THE MUHAMMADAN KINGDOMS OF THE DECCAN. 1 

The E, ay a, while he was seated in the assembly with the 
amaranayakas, said to Ayyana Malaka (’Ain-ul-Mulk) and 
Ankusa Rayu*, “ As you lived in Bijapur for a long time, your 
government is said to be more ancient than that of Yedula 
Saha, you must have known his antecedents as well as the 
circumstances (of the origin) of Nizam Sahu and Kutupana 
Malaka. How did these chiefs acquire sovereignty ?” 


Ayyana Malaka gave the following reply 


The Barudu. of Bedadakotaf seized some territory and a 
few forts which he began to rule firmly. The bearer of the 
gindi at his court! was called Yedula Sahu ; the custodian of 
hawks Nizam Sahu ; and the watchman over the hounds 
Kutupana Malaka. § Of these three Yedula Sahu rules over 

* There is no evidence to show that ' Ain-ul-Mulk and Ankusa Ravu were the 
contemporaries of Krsnadevaraya. Both of them together with Jagadeva Ravu who is 
mentioned further below in the text lived in the court of Sadasiya. 

t Bedadakota is the Telugu name of Bidar. Barudu is identical with Barid. As 
B&xid did not seize any territory during Muhammad Bin Tughlaq’s time, and as the, 'Adil 
Shah, the Nizam Shah and Qutb-ul-Mulk were never under the authority of Barid, it is 
reasonable to suppose that the writer of this work confounds Band with his masters, the 
Bahmany Sultans. ' 

t The term gindi means a narrow necked vessel. It formed one of the articles of 
royal insignia in the Hindu kingdoms. It was customary for a person to stand before the 
king on ceremonial occasions carrying in his hands a golden gindi containing water with 
which the king rinsed Ms mouth when he was inclined to do so. It is not known 
■whether this practice also obtained at the Mussalman courts. 

§ According to Ferishta the founders of these three dynasties started from humble 
beginnings. Yusuf ’Xdil Khan was the head of the royal kitchen. 


Bijapur, Nizam Balm over Ahmadnagar, and Kutupuna Malaka 
over Golkonda. The duration of the government of Barfdu of 
Bedadakota and others is one hundred years. Of these the 
Nizam Sahu is the oldest ; next comes Yednla Sahu ; and 
Kutnpana Malaka comes last.* Honour is done to (the masters 
of) these thrones in this order. These three families together 
own 100,000 excellent horses, and 100 ghats of elephants. It is 
not a kingdom protected by foot-soldiers, and there are no 
Muhammadans to serve (the kings as foot-soldiers). But in 
Karnataka, (the king) has the fourfold- army ; and the skill 
displayed by the Karnatakas in fighting is not known to the 
people of those countries. Therefore, the rulers of other 
kingdoms cannot withstand the Karnatakas.” 

When (Ayyana Malaka) had related what he had known, 
Ankusa Ravu and J agadeva Ravu said, . . . What the Mussulman 
Ravu(?) had said is correct. The Muhammadans never compare 
their strength with that of the enemy, when they meet him on 
the battle-field. If the enemy breaks, unable to resist their 
fierce onset, they cut him to pieces pursuing him wherever he 
may go. On the other hand, if the opponents face them boldly, 
they beseech them afterwards. When the nobles and ministersf 
at the palace who know these affairs ask them to retire (from ^ , 
the battle-field) they do so at once ; and do not face (the enemy) 
having no regard for tlxe loss of prestige to the government 
which their retirement from the battle -field without showing 
fight might involve. Therefore, when a battle is unavoidable, 
the Karnatakas wdro are skilful in fight, discriminate between : 
good and evil, and offering battle, cut (the enemy) to pieces. 
They have prabhusalctit, and so the foot-soldiers and attendants 
are useful”. . . 

When (Ankusa Ravu and Jagadeva Ravu) explained (the 
matter), all the amaranmjahas who were then present submi'ttedi 

* Curiously enough this is in perfect agreement with the order in which these chiefs 
asserted their independence, 

t Vakili pinna-peddalu literally means the elders and the youngsters at the gate* 

% Power of sovereignty. ... . ' ■ ' ! ■ ■ ; 1 


120 


“ it is even so ”. So, the Raya said : “ Yon who can find what 
comes before and after, and who are acquainted with fighting 
and threats, and victory and defeat, know well (how to do 
your work.) All of you should take an oil-bath and be ready, 
for you have to wage war upon the Muhammadans.” Then he 
gave them presents and tamlnda individually and sent them 
away. 

' V v V Rayavacakam, pp. 65-9" 

129(7;). THE AFFAIRS OF BIJAPUR. 

While Krsiiaraya was engaged in a confidential conver- 
sation with Ayyamarasa, Marlei Ramayya came in, and having 
announced that the spies had returned from Bijapur, said : — 

“The spies who had gone to Bijapur saw the city, suburbs, 
fort, bastions, cavaliers, mahouts, elephants, horses, foot- 
soldiers, and amciranayakas. They went as far as the gate 
of the palace called Dadimahal, where, in the audience hall, 
all the vaziers, captains, and ministers such as Dondo Pant 
and Mukunda Pant, the envoy of Kutapana Malaka, assembled 
together and held consultations.” 

O ' :..h. >00 Ov : v: 00>\ \OOOOh/hfO''hfof fofO- 0 

“ Krsnaraya has been contemplating to wage war upon the 
Mussalmans since his accession to the throne of Karnataka; 
and to realise his object he has been making efforts (persis- 
tently). These facts are described in the despatches that have 
been sent from Yijayanagara. Of the three kingdoms, the 
Asvapati, the Gajapati and the Narapati, the last mentioned is 
of course superior ; and the other two take rank after it.” 

Mudda Pandit of Golkonda, objecting warmly to this state- 
ment, said; “ If you talk of the kingdoms, all the three 
must be regarded as equals. Are there superior and inferior 
kingdoms?” 

“ (One of the ministers) replied : “ The Troopers and 

mahouts of the Nizam Saliu, are, indeed, noted for their courage 
(in the battle) ; but as the Nizam is deficient in wealth and 
forts, there is no reason why he should be considered great,” 


121 


“ Mud da Pandit of Golkonda sarcastically observed, “ Why 
should lie not be considered great ? Where is the occasion for 
considering the superiority and the otherwise of states?” 



When each of them had thus expressed his individual 
opinion (?), Bahubalendruni Brahmayya explained to them tire 
reasons (for estimating the status of the kingdoms), in concilia- 
tory language. “These three kingdoms represent Brahma, 
Vis uu and Mahesvara. Their comparative merit should be 
determined in the same manner as the superiority of these Gods 
is decided. The Asvapati is famous for his cavalry, the 
Gajapati for his elephants ; and the Narapati for his man 
power. Therefore, it must be conceded that the Narapati is 
superior; for. the Lord has said, 1 among men I am the king.'’ 
Moreover, there are several devaddyas, brahma day as, sacred 
tanks, and holy places of pilgrimage in that kingdom. Besides, 
the God Yisnu dwells in a cognizable form on the hill of 
Venkata. Elders, wise men, Brahmans, Tatis, heads of 
monasteries, and kings visit this God and offer him their pre- 
sents. So the kings of Karnataka are celebrated for their 
holiness. The Gajapati comes next to him, as the God 
Jagannayaka has condescended to dwell in his kingdom ; the 
Asvapatis live on the banks of the Ganges in the kingdom of 
(the God) Visvanatha. Yedula Sahu, Kutapana Malaka and 
Nizam Sahu, these three who are on the frontiers of Karnataka 
belong to the same race. Is it proper to class them as the 
equals of the kings of Karnataka ? ”* 

The great ministers, Dondo Pandit, M.uddo Pandit and 
Dado Pandit understood the meaning (of Brahmayya). As 
they served under masters who were given to drunkenness and 
cow-slaughter and had no faith in the Gods and the Brahmans, 

‘^Discussions such as the one described in this passage appear to have been common 
in the sixteenth century, (see. e.g. Ktsnaraya’s Am uktamal yada, 4 : 131) *' When U 
commences to rain, the wayfarers who take shelter in the rest-houses assert (in the course 
of their talk) that the Narapati takes his rank above the Gajapati, who in his turn is 
superior io the Asvapati ; and they come to blows while enumerating the men, elephants 
and horses which each of them possessed; but as soon as the clouds show signs of 


122 


they spoke as becoming the servants of such masters with pride 
and want of foresight. They felt that Brahma Pandit 
had spoken the truth. Then they held secret consultations 
thus : ‘ If the armies of Karnata cross the frontiers forcibly, it 
will be an outrage on us and the G-ajapati. (Fresh) provisions 
must be stored in the frontier forts, and elephants, horses and 
foot-soldiers should be sent to protect them, so that this might 
not happen. ’ Then the ministers informed Yedula Sahu of 
the decision which they arrived at in the council. When he 
heard this, he exclaimed in anger, “ Have the Karnatakas ever 
crossed the Tnngabhadra until now ? Can Krsnaraya achieve 
anything more than Is vara Nayaka, Narasa Nayaka, and 
Vlra Nararsimharaya ? ” Hondo Pandit and other ministers 
represented : (Considerations of) political morality do not 

affect war. We must take the necessary precautions, though 
it is not known whom Grod will help. Both Nizam Sahu and 
Kutapana Malaka sent letters here, as soon as they received 
reports from Vijayanagara ; and having strengthened the 
defences of their frontiers, they had (already) taken the 
(necessary) preliminary precautions (to resist the invaders). 
Bahubalendrmii Brahmayya is ready to send to the mountain 
forts on his frontier provisions, horses and cavaliers. We 
must also send provisions and troops to Ikkiri-Basavapattanam 
and (the other places) on the frontiers which are under the 
control of Sankara Nayadu, Adikomallu, and Boya Ramappa (?). 
The Suljtan commanded them to do likewise; he also ordered 
them to repair the fort and the bastions of Bijapur, and store 
provisions and ammunition in the fort. For the last eight days, 
the parupatyagars of the court have been busy placing big and 
small cannon, rocket tubes, toothed stones, fulcrum stones, spike 
stones and tigers’ beads (on the walls); they have also been 
planting upright horse-stones outside the fort to prevent the 
horse (of the enemy) from approaching the walls. Moreover, 
they despatched sixty spies to Vijayanagara with instructions to 
report to them whatever information they might obtain every 
day. All the inhabitants of Bijapur are preoccupied. The 
people living on the frontiers, having heard of this talk (about 


123 


war) are sending all their belongings to Bijapur (for safety)”. 
(The spies) also reported to the Raya what they had heard and 
seen (during their sojourn) in the kingdom of Bijapur. The 
Raya, Appaji, Ayyamarasa and Kondamarasa having heard this 
report said, “ No sooner had (the rulers) of Ahmadanagara and 
Golkonda received reports from their respective sthmapatis 
stationed here than they took not only the preliminary pre- 
cautions but having informed the Yedula Sahu induced him to 
send provisions (to his frontier forts). Therefore, their prelimi- 
nary precautions, wealth and strength are, indeed, incompa- 
rable.” Then they distributed presents among the spies, who 
were instructed to remain in Bijapur, and send the Raya daily 
the information which they might obtain after thorough investi- 
gation. The Raya and his councillors having sent away menial 
servants, engaged themselves in a confidential conversation. 

: .V . "■/ -vV Rayavacaham } pp, 46-51* 


129 (c). PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES AT 
AHMADANAGARA AND GOLKONDA. 


As soon as the Raya heard that the spies Ramu and Gopoji 
had returned from Ahmadanagara and Golkonda respectively, 
lie commanded the people that were about him to retire, and 
having summoned the said spies to his presence, he asked 
them for the news of the kingdoms from which they came. 
(Then) they communicated to him the intelligence which they 
obtained from villages and towns during the course of their 
journey on foot from Vijayanagara to Ahmadanagara and 
Golkonda. ‘ In all the frontiers,’ they said, 1 strangers, people 
of other places and wayfarers are subjected to search ; the 
people who carry no letters or documents are asked in a 
threatening manner to state the place from which they come 
and the people to whom they belong. (Having satisfied 
themselves) they permit the people to go (to their desti- 
nations). On reaching the capital, if, after seeing the suburbs, 


a person desires to enter the fort, he is permitted to do so on 
after one of the residents of the place who is known 
comes forward as a surety with the declaration that 



124 


desiring to enter the fort is his friend or relation and that he is 
ready to suffer from the consequences of any crime which the 
former may commit. Then after affixing one seal upon 
another (?), they send him into the fort. On showing the seal, 
the people (who are inside) admit him into the interior. One is 
permitted to move about the city, on producing the seal before 
the talari known as the kotival. When after the clays of sojourn 
in the fort, a person desires to return to his country, he has to 
give notice of his intention to the first parupaiyagara, and get 
his seal (affixed to the permit which he carries with him). 
This permit must be shown (at first) to the talari called hotwal 
and then to the sentries that mount guard at the gate of the 


fort. The visitor is then allowed to go out. 


liayav'acakam, pp. 34-85 


129 (d). PUNISHMENTS AND REWARDS IN THE 
MUSSALMAN KINGDOMS. 

(We at last reached) the courtyard (of the palace) having 
surmounted such difficulties (as mentioned already). (Several 
kinds of) punishment, are daily inflicted (upon people)i n front of 
the palace ; men are cut into two either (with a sword) or a 
saw ; they are tied up in a sack and beaten with an iron club ; 
bow-strings are inserted into their ear (lobes?); they are made 
to sit astride on ruined walls with a stone two tulas in weight 
fastened to each leg; and they are tied into a bundle and are 
rolled (on the ground) in the sun ; besides the maaiyagars of the 
slmas, are tortured in various ways ; they are tied to the feet of 
the elephants and are dragged (on the ground). If (the maaiya- 
gars) being terrified at the sight of these horrible tortures pay 
the money, they are left alive ; if, on the other hand, 
they find it inconvenient to pay, they are tortured to death in 
the middle of the street itself. 

(Having seen these tortures, we .passed on to the 
government offices which are built in front of the palace).* 
From that place, the people of all the offices salute the First 

^Thc language of the original is Very corrupt ; and its meaning is not quite 
; intelligible. The sentence enclosed in the brackets may be taken to be the general 
drift of the passage. ■ ... 


125 


Lord, while he holds an audience in the palace surrounded by 
some of his followers. After the audience, while retiring into 
the palace, he halts on the lofty path, (connecting it with 
the audience hall) to look at the people gathered together in 
the outer offices. Then he issues a command to the effect that 
they should be honoured and rewarded according to custom. 
As soon as the order is given, the servants (who are in charge 
of different objects of present) bring cash gifts, belts, coats, 
turbans and rolls of betel all of which are stored up in the 
offices themselves and pass them on to the people concerned in 
the presence of the First Lord himself. As the allowance is 
fixed for all classes of people attending the durbar, (the First 
Lord) supervises its distribution and then retires into the palace.* 

RHyavacakain, pp. 55-6. 


129(e). PREPARATIONS OF WAR IN THE 
MOSSALMAN KINGDOMS. 

The ministers perused the letters which they received 
from all directions What (we) have heard of their delibera- 

tions is this: (The Raya?) commissioned 3,00,000 horse, f 
1,000 elephants, and some foot-soldiers to wage war upon 
Bijapur, Aimiadanagara, and Golkonda. If these forces attack 
us, it would be very difficult to contend against them. The 
armies of Aghapura t in the north, of the Kamatakas in the 
south, and of the Gajapati in the east seem to make their 
appearance. § We serve none of the three kings, viz., the Asva- 
pati, the Narapati and the Gajapati or any one else who is hostile. 
As there was no orderly government in these three kingdoms, 
we seized places belonging to them, and have been passing our 
time by the strength of our neck *.! . If they become friends, and 

* This passage is very difficult to translate, as its construction is very involved. 
The translation is not literal. . 

t Even according to Rayavacakam , the Raya possessed only 36,000 horse. It is 
incomprehensible how he could have commissioned 3,00,000 horse. 

$ The identity of this kingdom is not known. It is not unlikely that Aghapura 
mentioned here stands for Agra. 

§ The text has 'kanuphh cukoiietattu ' . 

% The sense of the passage is not quite clear. The language is enigmatic ; and the 
meaning of certain expressions such as medabalimi is unintelligible, “ By the strength of 

our arm’" is more suited to the context • ' ' 

. - ' 


§iii 





send troops to attack the garrisons on their respective frontiers, 
it may not be possible to contend against them. Owing to our 
good fortune, and (the attitude of) providence towards our 
masters (?), we have been ruling in this land, on account of the 
prevailing anarchy, as intermediate chiefs for sixty years with 
the names of Yedula Sahu, Kutapana Malaka, and Nizam Sahu. 
The people of Aghapura govern the country between the Indus 
and the Godavari, the Karnatakas rule over the land between 
Kerala and the Krsna ; and the Gajapati holds sway over the 
territory extending from Jagannatham to Bedadakota. (Our 
kingdoms are) like the Tripuras, as we have taken possession of 
impregnable forts which are inaccessible to these three kings ; 
therefore, there is no occasion for fear.” 

A person called Tatkalikamati (having heard the above) 
said : “ What you have said is true ; the demons that dwelt in 
the Tripuras were mighty beings ; they obtained from Siva a 
gift by the virtue of which they could go wherever they liked 
without fear of being killed by any one including gods and 
demons. The inhabitants of these Three Cities (Tripuras) used 
to meet for Bf gkadis once in every dozen years, to discuss 
matters (of common interest), and disperse on all sides as usual. 
When the time came for the destruction of these mighty lords of 
the Three Cities, the Goddess of Earth remonstrated with 
Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara, that she could not bear the 
burden of the wicked people of the Tirpuras. Then, Brahma 
told her that it was not possible for any one to slay them ; 
nevertheless, they could be slain, if she would become a 
chariot, the Vedas horses, the Meru a bow, the serpent Sesa 
a. bow-string, Visnu the Narayanastra, and Siva the charioteer. 
Then those demons would be destroyed. Similarly, at the time 
when the kings of the Tripuras, viz., Bijapur, Ahmadanagara, 
and Golkonda make their appearance, danger is inevitable.” 

When Tatkalikamati explained the above to the minis- 
ters, they said : “ It is even so. Nevertheless, we must not 
remain idle so long as w r e exist, for it is necessary to maintain 
the attributes of royalty and carry on deliberations.” 


127 


The representatives at Vijayanagara have reported that 
since his accession to the throne of Karnataka, Krsnaraya has 
been contemplating an attack upon the Muhammadans. On 
hearing this, they (Nizam gahu and Kutapana Malaka ?) 
became anxious, and addressed a letter to Yedula Sahu, having 
resolved to abide by the consequences. He also sent letters (to 
all frontier stations ?) and stored up provisions in, and posted 
garrisons to, all the frontier forts in order to increase their 
strength (for defence) ; he also took preliminary precautions 
(for the protection of) the First Place (Capital ?) 


When (the kings of) Ahmadanagara and Golkonda received 
letters informing them of all these arrangements, they also 
posted garrisons to forts and fortified places on the frontier. 
Having resolved to march towards the frontier on obtaining 
intelligence that the Karnatakas have moved with their armies 
(towards the frontier) and are encamped in some place, they 
sent 120 spies who are capable of assuming many grtises and 
conversing in several tongues to Vijayanagara in order to «-et 
daily information (about the movements of the enemy). 


Moreover, they summoned to their presence Brahman astro- 
logers, fakirs proficient in scriptures, and augurs knowing past, 
present and future, and commanded them to foretell who would 
be victorious on the battle-field, in the event of Krsnaraya ’s 
invasion of the Muhammadan territory. They said : “ We find 
that a king of divine origin is born in Karnata ; he will subdue 
this kingdom as well as those of the Asvapati and the Gajapati 
and set up pillars of victory ; on his way back to his country, 
he will visit Kalyana Venkatesvara, the 108 holy Tirupatis, 
72 shrines and 18 saktts. He will pay his respects to the God 
Ramanatha at Setu, wash his sword at Dhanuskoti, and rule 
without opposition as a paramount sovereign on the throne 
of Karnataka for sixty-four years.* When the elders 


this, they thought, “ Perhaps it is so ; the Mlecchas do 




Even 
Imately 



hesitate to perpetrate unjust, cruel and inhuman deeds. Gan 
the Goddess of Earth endure them? Who knows whether a 
fate similar to that of the Tripuras will overtake them ?” 
Thinking in this wise all of them went to their respective 
homes. 


“ We left the palace with them, and came out of the city 
in the company of fakirs. Then we joined the pilgrims who 
were going to Ramasetu from the Bhagirathi, and having 
crossed the water (i.e., the river Krsna) in their company we 
assumed our normal habiliments and reached the city.” 


On hearing the news of Ahmadanagara and Goikonda from 
the spies, Arava Rama and Pakkiri Gopoji, Appaji, Ayyamarasa, 
and Kondamarasa observed to the Raya : \^,The Mussalman 
country is similar to the kingdom of Yama and their capital 
is like the capital of Yama. There can be no doubt that the 
inhabitants of that city are the servants of Yama.' ( Having 
visited such places as these they obtained after careful investi- 
gation information on several topics. By the valour of Your 
Majesty, they have returned to the capital, having in the course 
of their travels, entered the palaces and dominions of the 
Mlecchas and wandered over countries such as Maharastra, 
Gujarat and Kanauja where a hundred languages are spoken. Is 
it possible for weaklings to travel like this and return (safely) ? ; ’ 
When the ministers praised, in this manner, the spies employed 
by the state, the Raya who was immensely pleased, gave them 
each 500 ghats and other gifts (as a mark of his appreciation 
of their services) and sentthem away, with instructions to report 
to him daily the news of different towns which they may visit. 

RTiyuvacakam, pp. 56-60. 


129 (f). MEETING OF THE MINISTERIAL COUNCIL. 

The Raya commanded the people that were about him to 
withdraw and said to his councillors: “ You have heard the 
news from Bijapur, Ahmadanagara, and Goikonda. What is the 


129 


cause of the anxiety of the chiefs of those Three Houses and of 
such important conversations ?”. The councillors replied : 
“ There had been no talk of waging war upon the Mussalmans 
before Your Majesty’s accession ; so, they were free from anxiety 
on the score of the masters of this kingdom. Your Majesty 
has now become the lord of the throne and given expression to 
words indicating liberality and prowess. Won’t the}' cause 
anxiety in the mind of the enemy? Your Majesty is accustomed 


to speak daily with the representatives of those Three Chiefs 
with modesty. As they are shrewd men, they (compare) Your 

Majesty with their own masters In these circumstances, 

(it is customary) to give them the salary and allowances as fixed 
by former kings ; and when they bring documents and letters or 
have a talk over some matter, they are given like the envoys from 
different places betel leaves and nuts, in accordance with the 


usual custom and sent away; hut since Your Majesty’s 


accession to the throne, Your Majesty has commanded that 
cash payments should be made from the treasury not only to 
those (envoys ?) that stay but to their retinue also (?). Your 
Majesty maintains the kaijttam force, allows the amara-nayakas 
to hold their estates (as usual) and distributes rewards and gifts 
of money evenly to people whether they are in the service of 
(our) government or of foreign states. Your Majesty is j 
accustomed to refer to the Three Chiefs in a friendly manner, j 
As the representatives of those Three Chiefs have been staying 
in Karnataka for a long time, they must have studied 
treatises on the art of government. Therefore, they have 
become thoughtful and sent despatches (to their respective 
masters, communicating to them their own ideas.)” * 


\ 


, The Raya said : “ We never spoke to them disrespectfully < 
in anger. We honoured them with rewards and held pleasant 
conversation with them as the representatives of their 


masters.” 




*The language of the original is very involved, A literal rendering of the text '! 

has not been attempted, ' ’ .. . .. , ' f 


IIIIIIM 




180 


Ayyamarasa observed: “Whatever Y our Majesty said by 
way of pleasantry may be considered by them unnatural ; for 
it is said, 


“ Is the humble speech uttered by a great man genuinely humble (in 
spirit)? It will appear unnatural later. Does the bow which bends from 
its extremities show humility ? It kills the opponent at once.” 


“ It is customary, according to the politico-moral maxims 
of Canakya, that envoys should report to their masters not 
only what they have heard and seen, hut their considered 
opinion on affairs forming the subject-matter of their report. 
The information so communicated deserves the anxious 
consideration of the people there. After careful examination of 
the facts mentioned in the report they must have tendered 
their advice.” 


When the councillors had expressed their opinion, the 
Raya said: “This appears to (provide us with) a cause for 
what we have intended to do in the future.” Then he sent 
away Appaji and others. 

' Rayavacakam % pp. 61-64% 


129 (g). 

The Raya said to Appaji and other (ministers) : “We 

have only expressed privately our desire to wage war upon the 


Mussalmans ; and they are already taking steps (to ward off 


our attack). Is it courage or panic that has prompted them to 
take these precautionary steps ? ”* 


To this question, Appaji and the other ministers replied : 
“ (Kings) generally hear the news coming from all quarters ; 
hut they do not immediately pay any attention to it. After the 
lapse of a few days, however, they cause a rumour to he spread 
that the ruler of the slma would pay a visit to his district ; so that 
the forts in all the places should have fresh supplies of provisions 
and other articles as well as its full complement of troops. f 


I iS 


•The language of the original is not quite intelligible here. So the gist of. the 
sentence is given. 

t The original has * samadalam ' which perhaps denotes the required quota of troops 
maintained for the defence of a fort. 


itained for the deferic® of it fort* : 


131 


These are the characteristics of a dignified* and courageous 
action ; but action such as this must be attributed to the 
fickleness of the mind.” 



Thereupon, Ayyamarasa and Kondamarasa said : 

“ The Muhammadans are given to drunkenness ; they 
consume opium and are (generally) intoxicated. Therefore, 
they are naturally afraid. So long as they are under the spell 
of drink, they have no control over their bodies or minds. 
In that state they Cut to pieces whomsoever they meet. They 
are the Iiaksasas of the Kali age. But when they regain their 
consciousness, they feel regret for their racial disposition. The 
Brahmans eat food cooked with salt and tamarind juice. Conse- 
quently they have neither pride nor malice. Having realised 
this fact, the Muhammadans entrusted the management of 
the administration to Brahmans who were under their control. 
They appoint and dismiss officials and generally conduct the 
affairs of the state, according to the advice of these Brahmans. 
Therefore, the affairs of state (in the Mussalman kingdoms) are 
carried on as desired by the ministers. If any differences arise 
between the king and the ministers, not only do the ministers 
lose their lives but the government itself is upset. So, this is 
the action concerted by the ministers of those three states after 
due deliberation.” They added : ** They have no initiative of 
their own, and are dependent on the advice of others ; but Your 
Majesty has both. Therefore, nothing can equal Y our Majesty’s 
policy. If the Mussalmans of the Three Classes march together 
with a single aim to the battle-field, they can bring into the field 
1,60,000 horses, 1,500 must- elephants, and 300,000 foot-soldiers. 
To conquer them, we should at least have twice that force. Can 
we acquire so many horses in Karnataka ? No. To have the 
satisfaction of keeping all the four kinds of troops (we maintain 
some horses). t ; but if we give battle in detail with (the whole 
of our army consisting of) 12,000 JcaijUam and 24,000 

* In the original we have gamhara which is very probably a corruption of gapMIH. 

f There is ©vMeutly a gap in the text here. The original, as it is, does not give any 

sense.'":.;...: . '':V: : 



amaranayakam horse, 50 ghats of kaijitam and 120 ghats of 
amaranayakam elephants, and 800,000 kaijitam foot both old 
and new, 500,000 amaranayakam foot, the war with the Mussal- 
mans is not a serious matter.” 

Some of the councillors, said : “ We will win victory by 
our courage and the grace of Laksmi as well as the help of 
Providence. It is said : — 

“ Wherever courage is, there dwells Laksmi ; wherever is Laksmi, there 
is Huri : wherever Hari is, there is dharma ; and wherever is dharma, 
there is victory 

■“ So courage is tire most important of all. Your Majesty is 
a man of courage, and every enterprise which Your Majesty 
undertakes is bound to be successful. The elephants, horses, 
and foot-soldiers are not the cause (of victory). It is only 
with the help of Grod that one can rule the kingdoms and the 
islands (in the seas). Formerly the Sis; Emperors ruled the 
Seven Islands remaining in their respective places by means of 
the discus of their command (ajnacakra). (Similarly) the 
Sixteen Kings ruled the earth later. In the same manner, Your 
Majesty gets the assistance of Grod Venkatesvara.” 

The Raya having heard this, said to Appaji and other 
ministers : “ Make arrangements so as to ensure the success of 
our future enterprise.” Then he inquired whether the spies 
brought letters and (other) documents. 

Ray avacaham, pp. 51-54. 

129 (A). THE SUMMONING OF THE AMARA-NAYAKAS. 

(Then the Raya) summoned to his presence (the following) 
Amara-Nayakas : — 

Ayyana Malaka (’Ain-ul-Mulk). 

Ankusa Khan. 

: Rana Jagadev. AYf Y ' ' ■ , .. V; : 

y Timmappa Nayaka (the muster-master). . , ' 

Racuri Rami Nayadu, 

Pemmasani Ramalinga Nayadu, 

Hande Malla Rao. 

Boyi Ramappa. 


133 


'file Ha r i vaaam-Kumallu of the 18 Kampanas; 


The Commanders 
Appara Pilla. 


Kuppara Pilla. 

Saltiva Nayadu. 

Ktimara Timmappa. 

Sangaraju. 

The minister ( Pradhcini ) Cerva. 
Tipparasu. . ■ 

Ayyappa Nayadu- 
Ko(a)tikam Yisvanatha Nayadu f- 
Cevvappa Nayadu.J 
Akkappa Nayadu. 

Krsnappa Nayadu. 

Velugoti Yacama Nayadu. 
Kannada Basavappa Nayadu. 
Sahiva Mekaraju. 

Matla Anantaraju. 

Timmaraju. 

Viramaraju. 


The Beddi Kumdllu 
Bommi Reddi. 


Nagareddi. 


* Harivanam or ArivTinam literally denotes the plate or dish from which food is taken. 
Therfore, Harivanam Kumallu literally means the sons of the eating-dish. It may be re- 
membered in this connection that one of the classes of retainers of a king or prince is called 
i Kumallu 5 or sons. They have the privilege of partaking the food left in the plate of 
the king or the prince after he finishes his meal. The Harivanam* Kumallu mentioned here 
are evidently retainers of this , class. They appear to have been recruited exclusively 
from the province of Araga which was sub-divided into IB divisions known as Kampanas* 


f The term kaiika {kattiha) means a staff or mace. Yisvanatha Nayaka, the founder of 
the Madura Niiyak kingdom, was originally a mace-bearer at the court. 

jThe founder of the Tanjote NSyak kingdom. ' ' ' ■ ' ■' 





134 


The Kanima Nayaks : — 
Vittlialappa Nayadu. 
Sons-in-law. 

Sons. 

The government (officials). 
Am aramyaka m officials. 11 ' 


He inquired after their welfare, and asked them how 
many elephants, horses, foot-soldiers, and attendants each of 
them had. The sthanapati of Vitthalappa Nayadu, the kinsmen 
of Parasurama Nayadu, one of the sthanapatis of Amaragars, 
called Vlrabhadrayya, and Dalapati Raya replied: “ After Your 
Majesty had regulated the kaijUam (forces), all (the nayaks ) 
secured as many elephants, horses, mahouts, troopers, soldiers, 
and attendants as they have to maintain for their amara-smas 
according’ to the government registers. Things are not as 
they were. Expecting that Your Majesty might decide to 
start on an expedition at any moment, and command the 
Karanlkas to take the muster, we acquired ten elephants, 
100 horses and 1,000 soldiers more than what each of us should 
maintain according to the government ledgers. As (these 
nayaks) had been eating the salt of Your Majesty, they are 
ready to conduct themselves in all the affairs of the Government 
so as to please Your Majesty.” 


The Raya was very much pleased with this reply. 

Rayavacakani) pp. 64-5. 


*A11 the nobles mentioned in this list were not the contemporaries of Kjrsnadevaraya. 
Ayyana Malaka CAm-ul-Mulk), Ankusa Khan, Rana Jagadev, Pemmasani Ramalinga 
Nayadu, and Han$e Malla Rao lived at the Court of Ramaraja, during the reign of 
Sadasiva. Velugoti Yacama Nayadu, Ma0a Anantaraju, and Sajuva Mekaraju flourished 
under Venkata II, and the first and the last played an important part in the civil war sub- 
sequent to his death. Although Katikam Visvanatha Nayadu and Cevappa Nayadu who 
founded in the subsequent period the Nayak Kingdoms of Madura and Tanjore res- 
pectively were younger contemporaries of K/sijadevaraya, there is absolutely no evidence 
to show that they had any share in his wars. 


L '■ "'V.'l * )‘ . : ‘ - , ... ‘ • ", 





135 


130 (a). VICTORY OF NANDYALA KARA PA OVER 
QULY QUTB SHlH. 

Who is equal in valour to Nara son of Narasimha ?' k 
He defeated the formidable Kutapana Malaka, the persistent 
suppressor of the King of Utkala, the Savayi and the Barld, 
in a fierce battle near Kondavidu, and put him to flight. 

Kalap ftrnddaya?n t 1 : 33* 


130 (&). MUSLIM CHIEFS KILLED BY KRSNARAY A. 

A Catu: 

0 ! Krsnaraya, the foremost of heroes ! Some of the proud 
and strong Muslim Kings killed by you in battle having arrived 
in 8 varga caused the gods therein to smile in amusement-*.// 
by salaaming and addressing the guru (i.e. Brhaspati) as Pir, 
Indra as Surat-rSya, and $acl as BZbti 

131(a). SALUVA TIMMARASA. 


Gains : 

The first verse describes the vicissitudes of fortune in the 
early life of Saluva Timma. It is said that he made his living 
at Grutti by stitching the leaf-platters from which people ate 
their food; next, he subsisted upon the food which he received 
as alms at Candragiri; then, he begged, and got himself 
admitted as a free boarder in a choultry at Penugonda. At 
last he secured the post of ‘ betel-bag bearer ’ to the com- 
mandants of various forts, and rose ultimately from that posi- 
tion to be the prime minister of the kingdom. 

The second verse states that there was none who could be 
compared with Saluva Timmarasa, for he alone had the privilege 
of being addressed with affection as ‘father’ by King 
Krsnaraya.f 

# Nara was a scion of the Nandyala family, and an officer in the service of Kjsnadeva- 

?%a. ' . ^ 

f These two verses are ascribed to Ramarajabhnsana, one of the Atfadiggajas of 
Kysnadevaray a’s court, ^ 


The Raya said, <! All things can. be acquired, if we are able 
to secure the services of extraordinary men.” Ayyamarasa 
submitted, “ Of course, a king has ■women and gems, but 
what is more desirable to him than these are : It is said in a 

verse on political morality, 

• 0 ! King Entitle, the earth is the consort of a king, and wise men are 
his gems. Are women and precious stones wives and gems to a king ? : 

“ If a king manages to secure the services of a proper person, 
he can acquire the nine gems and the fourfold army. 
Therefore, Your Majesty should not consider that Appaji 
is an ordinary minister. He is a minister of uncommon 
abilities, I-Ie alone possesses the capacity to make possible 
what is impossible. If Your Majesty is pleased to ask me liow 
it is, (I shall explain it in this manner). Although all men 
have their bodies and limbs alike, it is necessary to separate 
them into (three classes, viz.,) the best, the middling, and the 
low. Thus, greatness is determined by the possession of 
superior virtue. And all the five metals are equal (as metals) ; 
but gold has surpassed the others. Just as the quality of the 
gold is discovered by the friction of the touchstone, the 
greatness of Appaji should be known (by the contact with 
difficult problems). 

“ As it is said in an old maxim, 

4 One among a hundred is born a hero ; one in a thousand, a scholar ; 
and one in hundred thousand, an orator ; hat it is doubtful whether a 
man of munificence is at all born,’ 

Therefore, the qualities (such as those possessed by 
Timmarasa) can be found only in one person; and not 
in others.” 

RZyavacakam) pp. 45~6 , 


137 


132. ALLASlNI PEDDANA. 
summary. 

Peddana, the son of Allasani Cokkaraju of the Nanda- : 
varlka sect, was held in great esteem by Krsnadevaraya, 
because he composed the poems Manucaritra and Visnu- 
cittvijam. It is generally believed that, as a mark of his esteem, 
the Raya granted to the poet the village of Kokata as umhali ; 
and that the poet granted the village in his turn to the Sri ; 

Vaisnavas as an agrahara naming it &ath akopapuram probably 
after his preceptor. 

There is, however, no inscription to show that the poet \ 
granted this village as an agrahara to Brahmans. But in one of l 
the verses composed by Peddana, Kokata is referred to as an 
agrahara granted to him by the Raya. Moreover, there are 
two epigraphs in the village recording grants of tax-free land 
to the temples of Siva and Visnu by Peddana himself. 

Kaijiyat of Kdkafam % L.R, 10, pp. 99-100. 

133. SRIRANGA, THE FATHER OF ALIYA R&MARAJA. 

SUMMARY. | 

During the reign of Krsnadevaraya at Vijayanagara, 
Srlran garaja was governing the province of Kandanavolu. The 
period of Srlran gar aja’s authority is said to have extended from 
S.S. 1447 to S.S. 1475.* 

Xaiftyat of Krjnagiri, L.R. 55, p. 162. ; 

134. VIBVANATHA NAYAKA. 

flail 1 While the emperor, the king of kings, Vira Pratapa ; 
Krsna Mahadevaraya, having conquered the Asvapati and the } 
Gajapati, was governing all the kingdoms, Vi^vanatha 
Kayanimgaru, the son of Adapamrj- Cinna Kagama Nayadu 
saluted the God Somesvara of Palakallu and granted to him, j 
on S.S. 1451 Sarvadhari, Sravana su 15$, the tlriha-lcanika thus : 

rrhese dates"cannot be relied upon, unless they are supported by some other evidence. | 

tVisvantitha Nayaka’s father was the bearer of the betel-bag at the court He himself ■: 
appears to have started life as a katikam or mace-bearer. J 

J Date is irregular. 

E— 18 ' 


138 


The Cirapu-s'Avax which is due to us as tlrtha-Jcanika from the 
village of Palalcallu which Krsnaraya gave us for our Nayalt- 
ship, we grant to the Grod for defraying the expenses of his day- 
time offerings as long as the Sun and the Moon last, so that 
the merit may accrue to our liege-lord, Krsnaraya and our 
parents. 

An inscription at Muruvani in the Adoni taluk of the Bellary district ; L.R. 23, pp. 7-8. 

135. KRSNADE V A RAYA AND THE TAMBALAS OF 
PUSPAGIRI. 

SUMMARY. 

On one occasion, Krsnadevaraya paid a visit to the temple 
of Siva at Puspagiri with the object of offering worship to the 
Glod. The priests of the temple who were Tambalas by caste 
regulated the course of their daily life on the model of the 
orthodox Brahmans. So, when the Raya entered the precincts 
of the temple, he saluted the priests who came to meet him ; 
but perceiving that their response to his salutation was different 
from the usual response of the Brahmans, he instituted enquiries 
regarding their caste ; and discovering that they were 
Tambalas and not Brahmans, he was annoyed at having 
saluted men of a lower caste. Therefore, he resolved to 
establish a Brahman colony at Puspagiri, so that there might 
be Brahmans for chanting the Vedas during the temple 
|| festivals ; and having sent for the Brahmans of the neigh- 

| bouring agrcihara of Got "iru, he granted them the village of 

Puspagiri also as an agrakara. 

Kaifiyat of Flaniimadgundam , L. j?. 37, pp. 245-8. 

136. CHESS AT KRSNARAYA’S COURT ' 

SUMMARY. 

These two verses state that Bodducerla Cinna Timmana 
of Kausika -gotra belonging to the Nandavarlka sect of Brah- 
mans defeated invariably King Krsnaraya in the game of chess, 
notwithstanding the help which the latter used to get from 
several advisers* 

* These two verses are attributed to a certain Bo^cerla Timmana who obtained the 
village of Koppolu from Kj§nadevaraya as a reward for his skill in the game of 

chess.;. ■ . , . ; ■ ; /;/■ ; , . " ~ ^ ■ 





137. ON PRINCIPLES OP GOVERNMENT. 

Krsnaraya said : “ So long as Vlra Narasimharaya bore 

the burden of the kingdom, Acyutaraya, Candramauli* and 
ourselves sat (comfortably at home). Now that we have been 
asked to bear the burden of the kingdom, we desire that you 
who are proficient in the art of government should clearly 
explain to us how an enthroned monarch should conduct 
himself; what he should do to protect the people, regulate the 
conduct of servants and acquire merit ; what measures he 
should adopt to conquer enemies, to nourish his friends and 
followers, and reward his servants. What are the situations in 
which a king should protect himself? How should he proceed 
to acquire wealth and spend it? How can he acquire name and 
fame permanently? ” 

The four ministers, Appaji, Ayyamarasa, Kondamarasa, 
and Bacarasa replied: “What Your Majesty desires to know 
is, indeed, the policy agreeable to ethics. To discuss all 
the principles of conduct and discrimination as well as the ways 
and means of carrying on the affairs (of state) with the coun- 
sellors, contributes to the acquisition of mastery over all 
things.' f The king is nothing less than a partial manifestation 
of Visnu, for the Lord said (to Arjuna) that among men he is 
king. 

A verse + on political ethics describes the Sabhapati or 
the President of an assembly thus : 

•‘He wlio is young, wears jewels set with nine kinds of gems, perfumes 
his body with the fragrance of sandal and flowers, and surrounds himself 
with (subordinate) kings, deserves to bo called the Sabhapati ” 

“It is proper that he who is wealthy, victorious, noble-minded and 
resplendent with desirable qualities should sit enthroned in the midst of that 
assembly.” 

“Thus an enthroned king should know the seven members 
of royalty such as king, minister, ally, treasury, dominion, fori 

• ®The identity of thin prince is not known. 

fThe sentence in the original is corrupt, and an accurate rendering is not possibly 
What is given is only a paraphrase. 

« . ' •' :■■..■■■ • „ - „ ^ ■■ 

| Two verses are, as a matter < 



I '$'] 


and army as •well as the seven articles of present (during 
reception) such as palankeen, dress, ornament, vehicle, royal 
favour(?), camphor and tambula. He should also understand the 
seven expedients or devices, viz., conciliation, separation, gift, 
punishment, fraud, indifference and sorcery. The kings are 
addicted to seven (evil) passions : these, as described in a 
verse on political ethics, are : 

Woman, gambling, drinking, hunting, arrogant language, oppression 
and wasting public funds ; the king should not be caught in the toils of 
these seven passions. 

Moreover, he must obtain the seven santanas, viz., excava- 
tion of a tank, building of a Brahman village, construction of 
a temple, making a garden, getting a poem written, begetting 
a son, and discovering a treasure. Surrounding himself with 
the seven members of an assembly such as poets, scholars, 
reciters of purdnas and of ilikasas, heralds, jesters and 

dancers, he should eradicate the evil-doers and protect the 

good.” 

“There are yet many more principles of political ethics ; 
we Lave expounded but a small part.” 

On hearing this, Krsnaraya said, addressing Appaji and 
the other three ministers, 

“ You know the past, the present and the future ; you have 
foresight and a knowledge of what has happened already and 
what is yet to happen. So you have explained to me political 
ethics in a very lucid manner. As the bee knows the scent of 
flowers from the breeze (1 have learnt politics from you. In 
fact, I have been transformed into a politician by associating with 
you)* like an insect which is transformed into a bee by the 
association with bees. (Now please tell me) how to increase the 
income of the state.” 

The councillors replied : 

“If Your Majesty walks (in the path of) dharma, it is 
bound to rain thrice a month ; the land yields plenty. If the 


*Tke passage is corrupt. Two or three mutilated sentences are jumbled into one. 



141 

government collect taxes without injustice, they prosper, and 
a good deal of money surely hows into the treasury.” It is 
said : 

‘0 1 Ku-timirlyana, Justice is the means of increasing the prosperity 
of the people ; and the prosperity of the people is the source of wealth. 
Justice, therefore, is the treasure-house of kings.’ 


Moreover, the Maharaja Pariksit who was crowned at the 

commencement of the Kali age confined the evils of the Kali 

to certain places specially reserved for them, and rnled the 
kingdom like Rama removing the fear of death, of thieves, and 
of drought from the mind of the people so that they lived in 
happiness until they reached their hundredth year. Similarly 
Your Majesty should also govern the kingdom in accordance 
with the dharma. 

Rayavacakam, pp. 17-28. 


138. ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES OP KRSNADEVARAYA. 

Kr§naraya who heard attentively (the discourse) of Appaji 
and others on political ethics, said : 

“ Isvara Nayadu, Narasimha Nayadu, and Vfra Nara- 
simharaya ruled the kingdom before this. So we desire now 
to visit those kingdoms, forts, countries, strongholds, Visnu 
shrines, sacred places, the estates of the subordinate chiefs, 
and the frontiers (which are under our rule).” 

The ministers replied : “ What Your Majesty is pleased 

to say is very proper. One should tour the country ruled over 
by one’s ancestors. Nothing can be known if one remains 
stationary in one place. Such being the case, it is necessary . 
that the people in the kingdom should know Your Majesty, n 
(Therefore, Your Majesty) should establish your glory by tour- 
ing the kingdom in all directions, accompanied by the fourfold 

/-v e\ a 4r 4r aw im fit 0 rtnvnfl rvf* 'fll A All AlYl 1 Afil 51.11 



142 


Rrsnaraya was pleased to hear this reply, and resolved to 
make a tour so that he might see his kingdom and the exten- 
sive earth. With the object of getting information in advance, 
he despatched quick-footed and keen-witted spies who were 
proficient in the knowledge of tongues and skilled in assuming 
disguises to Vijayapura, Ahamadanagara, Bedadakota, Raja- 
mahendra, Aranga, Cennapattana,* SrTrangapattana, Cadaranga- 
pattana, Srlrangam, Madhura, Ramesvaram, Ummattur, Biva- 
samudram, Penugonda, Golkonda, Gurramkonda, Mein ad, 
Morasunad, the Grhat country, the Tamil country, Malayalam, 
Kocci, Konkanam, Kerala, Yiratapura, Varata, Matsya, 
Vidarbha, Kambhojanagara, Kasnura and Delhi as well as the 
southern districts of Tuluva and Haive, Candragiri, Gandikota, 
Cuddapah, Kandyala, Bellamkonda, Racur, Mudgal, Nidigal 
and Mysore, so that they might obtain information about the 
countries and their rulers, the conduct of the petty chiefs, 
their wealth and military strength, the opinions (regarding the 
government) held by the people inhabiting the hamlets, villages 
and towns and the practices which were prevalent in the forts 
and report it to him privately everyday. 

J The arrangements in the towns : fThe king issued an order 
threatening to punish evil-doers who behaved lawlessly in 
towns and molested people. He commanded that the people 
should conduct themselves without disobeying the orders of 
the government. Therefore, he enabled all people to walk 
freely in the streets and thoroughfares without the fear of 
j being molested by any one whom they might meet. 

| * After discharging all his daily duties and the closing of 

| . the night assembly, the Raya would start incognito to go 

| through the town. Having learnt everything (about the events 
1 that happened in the city) he used to return to the palace at 
| the dawn of the day. Then he would rest for a short time ; and 

| getting up (from his bed) early in the morning, he would 

•Cennapattana which i* mentioned here is obviously the town of that name in the 
Bangalore district of the present Mysore State. 

fThe passage is corrupt ; only a paraphrase is given. 



perform his morning ablutions, and hold the ‘small durbar’ while 
putting on the caste-mark. He would next enter the big 
audience hall and recollecting what he had heard and seen 
during his search of the city in the previous night, summon 
Jangamayya, the talari and ask him about the happenings 
in the city. The talari used to submit a report of everything 
that occurred within the four walls of the city. IfJangam- 
ayya’s report tallied with what he had seen or heard, he 
would listen to it in silence. If, on the contrary, the talari 
failed to give a true report,* he would flare up and say : “ You 
do not know the incident which happened in such a house 
of such a row of such street in such a ward. Why should 
we find fault with you '? Your talar ikarn and our kingship 
are both excellent ! ” The talari was frightened. He arranged 
that his subordinates should patrol the streets day and night 
even without food and sleep, and communicate to him every 
minute (what was happening in the city). He wanted to 
know who could have secretly carried tales against him to the 
Raya ; but soon he learnt that the Raya gathered the infor- 
mation from his own personal experience during his nocturnal 
visits to the city and not from any tale-bearer. So, he 
ordered his subordinates to watch vigilantly and report to him 
the events happening in the city. He warned them that the 
king would go at night into the city for the investigation (of 
crime), and that they should take precautions to prevent the 
occurrence of evil acts in the streets, and give him no chance 
to make enquiries. The talari accompanied by his friends 
and subordinates, took up his position outside the chamber of 
audience as soon as the Raya retired at the close of the durbar 
into the interior of the palace, and waited there until he came 
out in disguise two ghaclis after the closing of the gates. Then 
he followed the Raya stealthily hiding himself cautiously here 
and there. The Raya, (who noticed) talari Jangamayya, 
accosted him and said: “We go through the town (every 
night), in pursuance of the programme of our daily 

•The passage in the text has bala-iurbalamulu telupakapdte.—lAteXi.ll'j it means ‘if he 
fails to bring out the strength and weakness in the incidents.' . 

■ 1 ' • - c 




work • Tour subordinates and yourself should follow us at a 
listauo^ ” Thenceforward Jangamayya, the taUn, wandered 

thrnug Jk t0 the palaee, and then retired to his own 

“iSLce This matter reached the ears of Appaji and other 
courtiers who took great precautions both during ay an 
X“t wile discussing confidential problems in then- houses. . 

The Bam demands accounts Days passed in this maimer. 

_ y u . li-ten every morning, according to his daily 

Krsnaraya use d^ ^ vergeg 0Il political ethics. One day, 

routine, to tl 8 ^ ^ vergeg) sent his SO n to discharge 

Gandrayya, t nQt attend to it himself in person, 

his daily du y the SanjayanUi, the 

^ the NUiiataka of Bhart f hari. 

sl leTwithout ‘leaving out a single verse and while the 
Kaya was listening to him attentively, a verse from Baddenas 
Mtisataha struck him with great force. 

rv tr'no Badde only those kings deserve to be called strong who main- 

t “ ,ai1 *— <** t’f- T, “ olte 

inked', hr removed from ihe power to command. 

When the Raya heard this verse, he asked the reader to 
-. W , ■ order to grasp its meaning completely. One 
read it * lC ® _ gittin0 . j n the audience chamber, he sent for 
day, while 1 as ked & them “ How many lakhs (of var alias) 

££ 711Z2 oft Kanaka kingdom yield ? How many 
/ 1 \ e t k ere of the am, sthala, vana, and jala class 5 

Whins'* thl total number of forts, towns, and villages in each of 
; _ . AV i n ces? How much (cash) pertaining to each of the foits 

the pr treasury 9 ” Further, he ordered the nine 

iS(d ^kllrtW irXrodl accounts in detail about 
Tshklms of nine kinds, jewels and hidden treasure; the 
k’ ° ' b tbe mm iacjars of the simas and the balance 

"gtal their names; and the number o, M*- 

, aaa rripnhiTits and the retinue, 
forces, horses, eleph. 


145 



Therefore, Allalanatha of the Small Treasury submitted : 

“Heretofore, Vlra • Narasimharaya did not examine the 
accounts. Your Majesty now wishes to inspect them. So we 
shall prepare such accounts as Your Majesty desires to see 
and produce them within a day or two.” Having prepared all 
the accounts overnight, he submitted them on the very next 
day. y .. . /y ; 

The description of the Treasury. 

(i) Income : — When Vidyaranya built this city (the money) 
which he buried for (the use) of the king amounts to 99,56,00,001, 
besides jewels worth 4,00,00,000, and gems of nine kinds 

6.00. 00.000 ; besides, the money which the previous kings after 
defraying the expenses of government deposited in the treasury 
amounts to 19,56,00,000. In addition to this, the amount which, 
after deducting from 10,84,00,000 of income of the kingdom 
of Karnata, 60,00,000 pertaining to the devadaya, hrahmadaya , 
sarvamdnya and mathapura (villages) accrues to the treasury is 

10.24.00. 000. 

(ii) Expenditure : : ff ffff Iff fygggg ■ ' 

The cost of maintaining an armoured horse 

per day is 100 gha ts * 
„ 1,000 horses „ 1,00,000 „ 

„ 24,000 horses „ 24.00,000 „ 

„ an elephant ,, 1,000 „ f 

„ 120 elephants „ 120,000 „ 

„ 1,500 elephants „ ? 

„ a foot-soldier per month is 2 ,, 

„ 1,000 „ j > 2,000 „ 

„ 2,00,000 „ per day is 4,00,000 „ £ 


* Ghat means & g Haiti varaha equivalent to Rs. 4/-. It is improbable that the cost 
of maintaining a horse was 100 ghats per day* This mint represent the annual . 
cost. 

f 1,000 g hats could not have been the daily cost. It must be the annual. . 

t The calculation, as it is given in the text, is wrong. The error is due to the scribe. 
When the expenditure on a foot* soldier is 2 vmahas per month, it could not have 
amounted to 4,00,000 for 2,00,000 foot-soldiers in a day, y /y. " '/■ : . 


j||g|| 


146 


According to this reckoning, to meet the daily expenditure 
of the forces maintained by the amara-myalcas viz., 

* Horses ... 12,000 

Elephants ... ? 

Foot-soldiers ... 2,00,000 

the territories dependent on such strong forts as Adavani, 
Oeyyetidurgam, Grutti, Gandikota, Candragiri, Gurramkonda, 
Madduru, Somagiri, Trisirapuram, Kunnattu.ru and Penu- 
konda ; such (land and water) strongholds as Nandyala, 
Srirahgapattanam, Ummatturii, Dalanayakulakota, Vallamkota, 
Madhura, Palayamkota and Dindigal ; and such forest strong- 
holds as Batyavidu, Kottikallu, Dankinlkota, and Narayana- 
vanam are mortgaged to the (aniara-nayahas) who are serving 
(Your Majesty). Though they obtained the districts mentioned 
in the accounts, they have not been maintaining (the required 
number of) elephants, horses, foot-soldiers and attendants 
according to the agreement. It is requested that Your Majesty 
may be pleased to consider this. 

On hearing this, the Raya commanded that the karmkas 
should prepare and submit a statement showing in detail how 
many elephants, horses, foot-soldiers, and attendants each 
amara-nayaka was required to maintain according to the 
registers of the government. Then, seeing that no accounts 
pertaining to elephants, horses, and troops maintained by the 
government, were submitted, he turned towards Appaji, Ayyama- 
rasa and the other (ministers) and said : “ What is your 
advice regarding the work which should be transacted in the 
future ?” To this question none excepting Saluva Timmarasa 
gave an answer. He hesitated a little, and said ambiguously : 
“ We shall conduct (the affairs of state) according to the 
wishes of Your Majesty.” The Raya (was vexed); and he 
reflected : “ They have only made me (their) agent to bear the 
burden of the kingdom. That is all. (The affairs) of the 
whole world are carried on by the counsellors ; who heeds our 
words ? If we act independently in exercising our authority, 

The number of elephants is not given* But see pp. 132 and 150* 


nothing will be done owing to divided counsels. Therefore 
when the wise men of our court, having understood (wind; is 
good to the state) perform any work, we should be considered 
to have acted independently.” In this manner he meditated 
deeply over the matter. 

One day, the Raya left the palace, as if he were going to 
inspect the city according to his custom. He reached a place 
at a distance of twenty miles where there was a temple, and 
asked the priest ( nambi ) for some water. (When the water 
was brought), he cleansed his teeth, washed his face, and put 
on the caste-mark. Then he obtained some cakes that had been 
previously offered to the deity, and having consumed them, sat 
in the place. 


That 


morning Saluva 

O * 


Timmarasa went according to his 


custom to the palace and enquired whether the Raya had 
awakened from his sleep. He learnt from the anna gals *, nurses, 
house-maids and ladies-in-waiting that the Raya who left the 
palace on the previous night for his customary inspection of 
the city had not yet returned. So, he ordered that they should 
inform all people who might inquire after the Raya that owing 
to a headache he had not yet risen from his bed. Then he went 
to the front of the audience chamber, and seating himself there, 
he despatched spies in all directions to discover and report to 
him privately of the whereabouts of the Raya. The spies made 
enquiries in all places. A spy who was an expert in making 
investigations came to Saluva Timmarasa, and said that the 
king was sitting alone expectantly gazing towards the city in 
the temple of Pallikonda Ranganatha at a distance of twenty 
miles to the north of it. Appaji despatched at once letters to the 
nobles, chiefs, and amara-nayaJcas, commanding that they should 
hasten with all their retainers to join the king who had started 
for hunting. And he himself left the city in advance of the 
rest. Consequently all the cavaliers, mahouts, foot-soldiers, 
attendants, nobles and chiefs who were in the city also started 


without delay. 


w of. Tam. eunuch. 




jipw 


111® 






>( ;> ! ii '■ ■ u 1 


148 


Timmarasa, who reached the temple before others alighted 
from his palanquin at a distance of a bow-shot ; and having 
issued orders to arrange the foot-soldiers, attendants, horses 
and elephants, in ranks he proceeded for a short distance 
accompanied by a few followers. Then he commanded them to 
stop outside the enclosure, and entered the precincts of the 
temple alone. The Raya who observed the approach of 
Timmarasa, covered himself completely with his upper gar- 
ment, and feigned sleep. Appaji stood by his side patiently 
with folded hands, until he awoke after a while from his 
pretended slumber. The Raya then turning towards Appaji, 
said : “ Why have you come here ?” Timmarasa interrupting 
him replied, “ I went to the palace this morning according to 
my custom to inquire whether Your Majesty had awakened from 
sleep, having been totally ignorant of Your Majesty’s arrival 
here directly from the usual search of the city last night. I 
was very much grieved to learn from the maids of honour and 
the annagals that Your Majesty did not return to the palace 
from the nocturnal investigations in the city. I despatched 
spies in all directions ; and on learning from them that Your 
Majesty was here, I made up my mind that this incident should 
not be made public. Therefore, I sent letters to inform all 
captains and nobles that Your Majesty had started on a hunt 
and that they should hasten with their retainers to join the 
expedition. Further 1 informed them that according to the 
command which Your Majesty had issued at the time of 
departure I was hastening to join the hunt. Is it proper that 
Your Majesty should come in this fashion ? The city would 
have been ruined had the people known of this incident ; and 
it would have brought disgrace had it reached the ears of 
reputed warriors. An affair such as this is quite improper. Is 
it advisable that Your Majesty should embark on such a risky, 
enterprise and come to this place ?” 

When the Raya heard Timmarasa’s remonstrance couched 
in words which inculcated political wisdom and roused fear, he 
sarcastically replied: £; How can such dangers arise when great 



men like yon are ready to bear the burden of the kingdom? 
You can make a blade of grass equivalent to Mount Meru by 
holding it in your hand ; you can also treat that same Meru as 
a blade of grass. You alone have the capacity to make the 
impossible possible.” 


Saluva Timmarasa replied ambiguously : “ It is even so ; 
for, the affairs of state are conducted in the present manner, be- 
cause Your Majesty impels us to do everything by entrusting to 
us the responsibility in all matters. If we do not find favour 
with Your Majesty, we are (of little worth) like grass. If a 
sapphire attracts the straw, its value increases ; but if it fails 
to do so, its value decreases,. as it is not believed to be flawless. 
Similarly, the servants derive their greatness from the majesty 
of the king ; and the king acquires fame by treating the 
servants as becoming their position.” Then Timmarasa 
requested the king to return to the city. 

The Elya said, “Where is our sovereignty? Who is 
inclined to submit to us ? What can we do with the people who 
do not obey us ? We are not capable of punishing them. How 
can a person who lias no power to command govern the earth? 

How can one maintain justice ? (Without power) we cannot 
put down tire evil and uphold the good. So we will enter the 
city only after forming a plan by means of which we can 
enforce our authority ; otherwise we ought not to return.” 

The Raya, having given expression to his ideas, sat think- 
ing silently for some time. Saluva Timmarasa, then said : 

“ What Your Majesty has been pleased to say is perfectly true ; 
and it is also the right course of action. If, however, Your 
Majesty is pleased to state what we should do, then all affairs 
will, by Your Majesty’s authority, be so arranged as to give 
Your Majesty complete satisfaction.” 

The Eava replied : “ You have made us sovereign ; j 

then arrange the affairs iu a manner suitable 
dignity of a supreme monarch. We used to listen, accord- ' 

ing to our custom, to the recital of the maxims on polif"''-' 1 

fotuY/Y. gpjgjlf .. ■ p| | , p ggg 


150 


morality. One day we happened to hear a verse inculcating 
sound political wisdom. The idea that we should act accord- 
ing to the teaching of the verse had taken root in our mind 
ever since. Therefore, we resolved to organize an army larger 
than the forces of all the feudatory chiefs, and put down the 
Mussulmans (with its help). (The way to secure) this (end) is 
this. Nothing can be achieved without the JcaijUam (army). 
Therefore, we must enter the city with a well- equipped kaijMam 
army comprising elephants, horses, foot-soldiers, and atten- 


dants. 


Saluva Timmarasayya said in reply : “ Is it necessary for 
Your Majesty to come in this fashion to secure such (a small) 
object ; I shall acquire at this moment all the elephants, horses 
and foot-soldiers, in a manner most agreeable to Your Majesty’s 
wushes. Your Majesty may return now with the fourfold Army.” 

Then, Saluva Timmarasa summoned the captains, chiefs, 
amara-nayalcas , troopers of the army and the people of the 
seventy-two niyogas, to an assembly ; he also sent for the 
karmkas of the kandacara Department, whom he commanded 
to state the number of elephants, horses, and soldiers which 
the amara-nayalcas had to maintain. 

The accountants submitted that the amara-nayakas had to 
maintain 24,000 horse, 120 ghats of elephants and 2,00,000 
foot-soldiers ; and for maintaining this force, they were 
governing territories yielding an annual income of 4,80,00,000 
varahas, that is at the rate of 40,00,000 per month. When 
the accountants submitted their statement, the Raya com- 
manded, “ You should take the muster of amara troops — 
elephants, horses, and men — before the expiry of the few 
(remaining) hours of to-day ; and that for the elephants, horses 
and foot-soldiers falling short of the (prescribed number), you 
should calculate the balance which each amara-nay aka has to 
pay for the ten years which elapsed since the accession of Vira 
Narasimharaya, and collect the money due from them In 
' ienee of the royal command, the karanas accordingly 




II1II1IB III 


151 



came out. On taking tlie muster of horses and foot-soldiers 
they discovered that the former fell short (of the prescribed 
quota) by half and the latter by a fourth. Therefore, they 
demanded that the amara-nayalcas should pay the balance (due 
to the government) on the spot. As these (nayalms) enjoyed 
(their estates) for a long time and obtained renown, they con- 
sidered that it was enough if their fault was condoned ; 
however, as they were not in a position to pay the money 
charged upon them, they proposed that they would sell their 
elephants and horses to the government to clear the balance 
standing against them, provided that they were allowed to hold 
their estates as before. They also promised that they would 
purchase elephants and horses afresh (to make up their respec- 
tive quotas). The Raya, having agreed to this proposal, he 
settled the price of the animals and took possession of them. 
The government acquired in this manner 500 elephants, 12,000 
horses and 1 , 00,000 foot-soldiers with their officers. (AppSji) 
brought these elephants, horses and men before the Raya, and 
said, “these forces may be utilised, as Your Majesty deems fit.” 


The Raya having greatly wondered at (the resourcefulness 
of the minister) said to Appaji : “ You alone possess the skill to 
make what is impossible possible”. And (as a mark of his admira- 
tion) presented to him the sajptanga of honour, viz., a cap, a cloak, 
a necklace, ear-rings set with four pearls, a golden garment, 
sandal, musk, and tambula. Then he appointed Tuluva mahouts 
(to drive) the kaijitam elephants, and Kabbili, Morasa, 
and Tuluva riders (to control) the horses. The Raya then 
mounted on an elephant called Masti Madahasti, equipped with 
a golden howdah, and seating Saluva Timmarasa behind him, 
entered the city of Vidyanagara, accompanied by the fourfold 
army. Having sent Saluva Timmarasa and others home, he 
said to his friends: “ Is it possible to find a minister like 
Appaji- Saluva Timmarasa ? Because we have such a minister, 
he acquired, as we desired, kaijUam forces during the course of 
a single day, when we declared obstinately that we would pot 

enter the city until we acquired them. Having promised that., . 

' ' ■ 4 1 ■ *' , ■ ■ , • ; , 1 f 


152 


he would get them, lie led before us 500 elephants, 12,000 horses 
and 1,00,000 foot, and said: 1 Make use of them as you deem 
fit/ When we saw (the troops) we were greatly surprised. To 
provide ourselves with Karnataka mahouts and riders with a view 
to wage war upon the Mussalmans in future, we place Kabbili, 
Morasa and Tuluva troopers in charge of the 12,000 horse.” 
Praising (Saluva Timmarasa) in this manner, he distributed* 
12,000 horses and 500 elephants among (the troopers) and the 
mahouts, and fixed their salaries and allowances. f In order to 
supervise the proper distribution of provender, he appointed 
four parupatyagaras, six karauas, sixteen angajads, and mudupu - 
gollas over the stables, and issued an incontrovertible order 
that the daily expenses (of the establishment) should be borne 
by the treasury. He also appointed a body of karanas to 
regulate (the payment) of the monthly salary of 1,00,000 
nallapraja. The Raya was greatly pleased, and said within 
himself. “ Lordship and sovereignty have indeed been 
established to-day. Moreover all the a mar agars willingly 
made over the 500 elephants and 12,000 horses at a price with- 
out considering that any injustice was done to them. If we 
consider the value of the elephants, at the rate of 6,000 varahas 
per animal, it amounts to 1,20,000 varahas for twenty animals, 
and to 30,00,000 rnrahas to 50 ghats ; the value of horses, at the 
rate of 500 varahas per horse amounts to 2,00,000 varahas 
per thousand, and 24,00,000 varahas for 12,000 horses. He 
(Saluva Timmarasa) brought within a moment, as it were, an 
income of 54,00,000 varahas to the state from these elephants 
and horses. \ '/ v : - 

.• '■ Rayavacaltam , pp. 28-45, 


139. RXJANlTI OF K^SNADEVARAYA. 

Protect the people, without losing patience at any time. 
Pay heed to the cry of the injured and redress their 
grievances. Do not -entrust the execution of the (state) work 
to the wicked. 


*The original has vets abet tu which means to spend. 


fThe original has sarike. The word is obsolete and its meaning is not intelligible. 


153 


The subjects of a state desire the prosperity of the king 
who wishes to promote the welfare of the state. It should not 
be said that the desire of the subjects is of no use (to the king) ; 
for, does not God, who is immanent in all the people from 
Brahmans downwards, fulfil their unanimous desire ? (2) 

The king should have power to command; even the com- 
mands of the chiefs of the AbMrs and the Bhils are obeyed 
(at the sight of) an arrow or a string of yarn ; * should not 
all people fear the commands of a sovereign who is an 
emperor? ; (3) 

Entrust (the command of) the forts only to Brahmans in 
whom you have confidence ; and place no small forces under 
them, having in the plenitude of your power, lost the fear (of 
enemies). (4) 

No one who is at first raised to a high position remembers 
his former humble condition, if he is subsequently reduced; 
but becomes enraged. So, increase his status gradually 
observing his conduct ; and exact service from him on all 
possible occasions. (5) 

If you desire to rule the kingdom, do not entertain in your 
service a man of low birth, a resident of the hamlet of the 
hunters, a person who has not learnt under a preceptor, an 
audacious liar, a murderer, an impudent and vicious fellow or 
a stranger, though he be a Brahman. (6) 

Don’t entertain (in your service) an outcaste and one who 
is brought up in a hamlet of the hunters (though he be a 
Brahman by birth). Did not formerly an outcaste Brahman 
kill for the sake of a single meal a heron that protected 
him ? f (7) 


*The author alludes to the practice of the chiefs of wild tribes of giving a s 
an arrow or a string of yam for safe conduct while passing through the tribal d 

f The allusion is to the story of the outcaste Brahman, Gautama, and 
NSJijangha, narrated in the SteUfarvan of the SfahTUkSrata. 


!>1 


154 


A single day is enough for the various branches of royal 
administration to obtain stability, provided a learned Brahman 
who is afraid of injustice, who has studied the principles of 
political science, who is above fifty and below seventy in age, 
and whose ancestors are free from (hereditary) disease is 
induced by the king to accept the office of the minister and 
discharge his duties. (8) 


If such ministers cannot be had, a king should transact the 
business of the state himself, keeping in view the principles of 
political science, though he might not always be successful. 
If, on the contrary, being not disposed to remain content with 
(the power derived) from his wealth and army, he employs 
a wicked and uncontrollable person as minister, that minister 
not only causes annoyance but becomes, in course of time, the 
master of his master. (9-10) 

It is desirable to employ several officers to do the work 
which may be done slowly by a single person ; for the work is 
quickly performed by these and all their dependents. Decrease 
in the number of the officers gives rise to grievance. Increase, 
on the contrary, causes contentment. (11) 

No work can be transacted by the expenditure of money 
alone, without the willing co-operation of several nobles. 
Liberality, gentleness, and truthfulness are helpful in obtain- 
ing such co-operation. (12) 

Have we not heard of the kingdoms which fell a prey to 
the enemy owing to the decay of the treasury and the army 
;( they had, because they could not secure the services of 
suitable men ? (13) 

A king who confers nobility on a Brahman prospers ; for 
f the Brahman stands at the post of duty even at considerable 
risk, either to avoid the ridicule of the Ksatriya and $udra 
? officers, or in emulation of the other Brahman officers in the 

| - , , : ■■ ' r , . . : :.w 

king’s service. (H) 

Do not entrust (the administration of the properties) of 
temples and other (endowments) to the officer whom you 



155 



(Once) a hunter armed with bow (and arrows) paid a 
to another hunter who entertained him by feeding him 
milk and rice. The visitor w! 

■ j' . - ■ SivMM 


mmmmSmmSSmm 


employ to collect the revenues due to you ; for, being, anxious 
to collect money, he will make good any loss caused to the 
king’s revenue from the income (of the temples and other 
endowments), and send it to the royal treasury. That is not 
good. So, appoint a separate officer (for the management of 
temple properties, etc). If he misappropriates some part of 
the income, he alone will be ruined. (15) 

Like a farmer who, having at first taken possession of an 
(unfilled) field, plants a hedge of thorns (around it) and then 
begins to season the soil by digging it with a spade and tearing 
up the roots, stumps, etc., (the king) should (first, make himself 
the master of his territory) either by befriending the enemy 
or by strengthening his own frontier forts ; and having thus 
freed his mind from anxiety he should proceed to destroy the 
enemies within the kingdom. (16) 

Do not expel a tale-bearer precipitately with harsh words. 
If, on careful investigation, you actually find him to be a liar, 
leave him alone without discharging him from his office. (17) 

Grant temporarily to indigent foreign soldiers for their 
maintenance villages in the neighbourhood of inaccessible 
forests and hills, inhabited by savage tribes, who harass the y 
neighbouring country. Whatever may be the character of 
their mutual relations, it will be quite proper, (i.e. to your 
advantage). (18) 

Moreover, the affliction of the people cannot be reduced, 
until the power of these mountaineers is brought under the 
control of the crown. The king should somehow dispel their * 
fear, and draw them towards him. Distrust or faith, anger 
or love, bitter hostility or intimate friendship (with them) 
arises out of small causes, as these people are of limited intelli- 
gence. For instance, — (19) 


in which fibre was boiling believed that it contained meat.* 
(Considering that his host had insulted him) the guest, for- 
getting the hospitality, resolved to kill him at a suitable place 
when the former came to give him a send off. On the way, 
however, when the host sought his permission to go home 
soon, lest the fibre which was boiling in the pot should be 
spoilt, did not the hunter send his host away, having realised 
his own mistake ? (20) 

These forest dwellers who are pleased even with that 
repast of milk and rice, never act treacherously (towards him 
who has fed them). If these unsophisticated men discover 
even a very small fault, they become hostile without con- 
sidering the nature of the fault. (21) 

(A king) acquires mastery over the forest tribes by truth . 
the friendship of a hostile king by honouring the envoy ; the 
regard of his foot-soldiers by timely payment of salary 
and the affection of his troopers by offering service with 
rewards. (22) 

Give the best horses and elephants only to trusted 
servants ; it will be to your advantage when the occasion comes. 
Keep the horse and elephant stables with care ; you should 
never entrust their management to your subordinates. (28) 

When one (councillor) gives good advice, another 

condemns it on account of jealousy. Paying due regard to 
the character of both (the councillors), you must not contradict 
either of them (during the sitting of the council) ; but when 
the council is dissolved, if you follow the good advice, it is 
advantageous to you. (24) 

The bad or faithless ministers take advantage of the 
hostility of the neighbouring states and encourage the free- 
booters in the country. When the king is caught in difficulties, 
they do not discharge their duties promptly ; but having 

*The boiling fibre of the Ur l tree is said to emit a flavour like that of mutton while 

, ^ (KXpijfci 



tm 


spread their influence everywhere, they conduct themselves 
in such a manner as to make it appear that they alone are the 
protectors (of the king). (25) 

(The bad ministers) persuade (the king) to offer (rewards) 
to their own dependents ; and dissuade him from rewarding 
others. Moreover, they induce him to promise (rewards) to the 
people, but prevent the fulfilment, so that the people, believing 
him to be undependable, might not approach him. (iifi) 

If a (capable) outsider is made an equal of these (bad 
ministers), he will check their power like a powerful drug 
which strengthens the appetite spoilt by the union of kapha 
and other diseases. (27) 

You may ask how (an outsider) could be made equal to 
them in the teeth of their opposition. (28) 

If a wise and powerful monarch keeps his treasury and 
the horses and the elephants in his stables under his control, 
does not the obstruction (caused by the evil ministers) vanish 
by itself? (29) 

(The dependents who serve a king) wish him evil, if even 
a morsel is decreased in their food. Has a king (really) any 
friends? Is it wise to loosen your hold on the shoulder of the 
man by your side? You should, on the contrary, skilfully 

make him walk by your side (without relinquishing your 
hold). You must not trust him, though you have to deal with 
him kindly. (80) 

From the fact that a person does not loath an (evil) deed, 
estimate the nature of his other actions ; (for instance), when 
king Drupada requested a sage to perform a sacrifice for 
compassing the death of some person, the sage replied that his 
elder brother would comply with the king’s request, as he 
observed him on one occasion picking up a fruit lying 
on filthy ground, which he himself had abandoned in disgust 
Thus it is possible from (observation) of one (action) to 

•The allusion is to the story of YSja and Upayaja in the 

MakabhUratu. >• -'■> '■ - ' 



the whole conduct. It is not possible (for any one) to observe 
all (actions) and estimate (a person’s character). (SI) 

Do not kill a person who takes advantage of your 
difficulties to do you evil, when you win victory; but wrest 
(from him) his wealth. What harm can a serpent do, when 
the sharpness of its fangs is destroyed ? Your enemy will be 
loyal to you for the kindness which you show him. (32) 

The extent of the kingdom is the means for the acquisi- 
tion of wealth. (Therefore), even if the land is limited (in 
extent), excavate tanks and canals and increase the prosperity 
y of the poor (cultivator) by leasing him the land for low ari 
and koru, so that you may obtain wealth as well as (religious) 
merit. (33) 

The king, having an officer who acts like the jackal on 
the battle-field, does not persuade the impoverished cultivators 
migrating (from his district) to return, and wants to sell their 
cattle and grain and utilise the timber of their houses as fuel, 
t that king cannot enrich himself, though he may conquer the 
seven islands (i.e. the whole world). (34) 

A king should reserve one-fourth of his income for 
charity and personal expenses, half for the maintenance of a 
powerful army ; and store (the remaining) fourth in (his) well- 
filled treasury. He should watch, by means of his spies, not 
only his enemies but the other six members of the state includ- 
ing the ministers. He should destroy the bandits in his own 
kingdom. (35) 

A king should punish a thief, discovering him with the aid 
of a well-cherished band of policemen. If, on the contrary, he 
inflicts punishment on an innocent person whom the police 
substitute for a runaway thief, does he not acquire disrepute 
like the king who had the corpulent merchant impaled ? (36) 

A king proficient in political science should learn 
three-fourths (of what he has to know) by his own efforts ; 





1S9 


the remaining fourth relating to things happening without his 
knowledge, from his friends and well-wishers. (Having acquired 
knowledge) in this manner, if he carries on the government 
without anger and cruelty in meting out punishment he can 
rule (the earth) without difficulty for a long time. (37) 

A king, while enjoying pleasures (bkogas), should watch 
his internal and external (floes), even as the bear which sleeps 
on the top or the tree closes only one eye, keeping the other 
open. (38) 

Gifts of money and of villages made from love of learning 
to the bhiksus, and the ascetics with matted-hair encourage them 
to break their vows ; their evil deeds have bad consequences 
such as famine, epidemics, and infant-mortality. (Therefore), 

devotion (to them) is enough. Their disappointment does not 
cause you any harm. You need not entertain doubts about 
it. (39) 

Give the guilty persons who deserve death three oppor- 
tunities for begging pardon ; but those whose flight is likely 
to cause trouble must be put to death as soon as they are 
caught. (40) 

Though the king is himself a brave, warrior, he must listen, 
without impatience, to the brag of his warriors. By that, 
they are greatly pleased. His object must be to manifest his 
prowess through their brave deeds. (41) 

A king should govern his ports so as to increase their 
trade by encouraging the import of horses, elephants, gems, 
sandal, pearls etc. ; he should offer protection suited to the 
conditions of their race to people who migrate from other 
countries, owing to famine, pestilence, and (other) calamities ; 
— he should send his faithful servants to superintend his 
gardens, cattle pens and mines. (42) 

Like an archer, who, holding the arrow steadily (in the 
bow), discharges it when he feels sure of his mark, a king should 
control his wrath against a criminal until the circumstances 
become favourable for his destruction. (43) 


iiiiiiia 


160 


Like the water that stagnates until it is set in motion by 
the arrival of a flood, an invader’s forces should march by short 
stages, for a few days, so that they may get impetus gradually 
by their conjunction with his other troops. If the enemy’s 
troops are numerous, he should return (to his capital) having 
honoured the enemy with presents. If, on the contrary, he 
learns from the spies that the enemy is weak, he should 
surround him without allowing him to escape. (44) 



On discovering that his enemy extorts money (from his 
subjects), consults despicable persons, makes peace (with other 
kings) by surrendering territory, and treats with suspicion 
people that have done him good, a king should create differences 
between him and his subordinate chiefs by secret offers to the 
latter of protection and of jewels set with gems. He should 
also free himself from these faults. (45) 


A king should acquire the lasting friendship of his enemy 
by surrendering, if necessary, even one balf of his kingdom, 
and free himself from the fear of internal enemies. The fear 
of the internal enemy is, indeed, greater than the fear of a 
serpent. (46) 

What is the use of needless discussion ? If a king does 
not destroy the hidden enemies of his kingdom having dis- 
covered them by thorough investigation, and move about 
fearlessly like a man in the midst of women, what is the fruit 
of his sovereignty ? does kingship beget only misery ? (47) 

It is proper that a king should, without coercion, induce 
a strong (neighboui-) who keeps himself aloof from fear, 
to join him voluntarily like an angler, who having allowed a 
big fish to struggle with the line pnlls it up (when it swallows 
the bait). (48) 

A king should avoid (the following) : — Cruelty in punish- 
ment, blind faith in the words of tale-bearers, obstinate refusal 
to conclude peace with an enemy ; causing injury to a stranger 
who informs him of the harm done to him by other (kings); 


161 



'The three kinds of unnatural phenomena are divya, ant a 


transacting business in such a manner as to enable a minister 
opposed to his interests to know (his motives); transacting 
business with a person who is known to be faithless ; causing 
the estrangement of a loyal person ; attaching importance to 
persons while discussing the affairs of state ; indifference in 
punishing persons publishing state secrets ; negligence to seek 
ways and means of averting (the evil results of) unnatural 
occurrences ; indifferent treatment of respectable persons ; 
fellowship with the mean ; addiction to the (seven) vyasanas , 
and vindictiveness. (49) 

When three kinds of unnatural phenomena* occur, a king 
should in order to avert their evil consequences, spend large 
sums of money in feeding Brahmans and offering worship to 
the gods and performance of homa to Agni. (60) 

Kings should foster rivalry among their nobles and 
warriors so that their activities, loyal or otherwise, might not 
be hidden. Moreover, by competing with one another to 
obtain the royal favour by performance of loyal services, they 
abstain from disloyal activities. (51) 

A king should not march in person against all places. 

He should appoint another (person) commander (of the army) 
and despatch him (against the enemy), so that he (the king) 
might take rest. The commander, if he is weak, having 
no money, land, elephants and horses, cannot defeat the enemy. 

So, (the king) should give him territory well protected by forts 
and troops. If these are given to any one but a Brahman, he 
may turn against the king himself. However, (the services of) 
the non-Brahmans are also quite essential. (52) 

Foster the growth of dense forests on the frontiers ; and 
cause the destruction of jungles in the midst of your kingdom,^ 
so that (the people) may not be harassed by bandits. (53) 

The attempt to enumerate the crimes of savage tribes 

■fc ... )1. . • 1 •II JL~ A« lit warn ok 4>"U < 


162 



a wall built of mud. Punishment cannot completely eradicate 
their crime. If they are brought under control by an agree- 
ment and gifts, they are helpful in invading (an enemy’s 
country), and plundering the frontiers. A king who exercises 
his authority over all cannot contemplate the punishment 
of a thousand for the crimes of a hundred. (64) 

Acquire the friendship of merchants of distant islands 
who import elephants and horses, by granting them villages, 
spacious houses in the capital, frequent audience, presents, and 
(facilities to secure) good profits, so that they (the elephants 
and horses) may not reach your enemies. (55) 

A king should converse in the audience hall amicably with 
the ambassadors representing his neighbouring kings. He 
should explain to his dependents the neglected obligations 
(which his neighbours) owed him, and his desire to make war 
upon them. While doing this, he should talk euphemistically 
so as to preserve the (apparent) friendship. (56) 

A person who has been recently made a noble should not 
he admitted (to participate) in the secret deliberations (of the 
council) ; for being elated by his new position, he reveals 
(the secrets) to his friends ; thus he ruins the chances of the 
success (of the enterprise), thereby compassing his own down- 
fall. ‘ ” (57) 

A king who appoints as the governors of his forts honest, 
loyal and warlike Brahmans learned in the Vedas, and depen- 
dent upon his family for generations ; who stores up in his 
forts provisions including rarities sufficient to last for a life- 
time ; who distributes lands among his nobles without trans- 
gressing the bounds of moderation ; who, spending less than 
his income, replenishes the treasury without oppressing his 
subjects ; who, having watched the condition of his weak 
enemy by means of spies, swallows him crane- wise ; and who 
causes harm to the enemy without trouble to himself and his 
subjects ; that king sleeps placing his hand upon his heart, i.e.. 



163 



That money which is spent on the purchase and the main- 
tenance of elephants and horses, the payment of salaries to the 
soldiers, the distribution of gifts to Brahmans and Gods, and 
securing the personal comforts of the king, should not be 
considered a waste of public funds. (59) 

A king should not take a vow (to make war upon) an 
enemy. By inarching with his army (upon the enemy), he 
may attain his object, or he may fail ; or his desire may be 
fulfilled, on some future occasion, though not at that time. 
Is the king a politician or a lover of war ? (60) 

If a king attacks an enemy (whom he desires to conquer) 
in places from which he cannot escape, he is obliged to turn 
round and offer battle, when he may either win a victory or 
die the death of heroes. The king (should not approach) the 
walls (of the enemy’s forts) which are protected by several 
(death-dealing) machines, but send only his men instead to 
attack them. (61) 

Kings generally summon for consultation a person who 
has given congenial advice on one or two occasions. Taking 
advantage of the influence acquired by frequent consultations, 
he is likely to induce the king, having received bribes, to do 
improper deeds. (Therefore) a king should, by means of his 
spies, examine hi* conduct outside (the council). (62) 

If a king feels confident that he can effect the destruction 
of his neighbour on the frontier, it is only proper that he 
should do so. Otherwise he should befriend him. If he 
becomes hostile, his neighbour (on the other side) is the proper 
person to subdue him. Then (the king’s) frontier becomes 
secure without effort. (63) 

Burn the kingdom of your enemy and seize his forts. If 
his wives happen to fall into your hands, treat them as you 
would treat your sisters and daughters. In the presence of his 
envoys, do not utter harsh words about him, for you may be 
Obliged to conclude peace with him. ; (. ; , ■' ■ (64) 


164 


Do not enter a country where the devotees of black-magic 
abound, the water is poisonous, epidemics prevail, the hills and 
jungles are impassable, and the savages dwell, although you 
may obtain gold as large as the Meru ; despatch only your 
troops to subjugate it. (65) 

A false servant, speaking sweetly, cleverly secures his 
object ; he serves you while (you are) prosperous, but deserts 
you when your fortune is low. (Therefore) the king should 
learn to discriminate between (the true and the false) like 
the money-changer who detects the good and the bad 
coins. (66) 

A king who desires to rule long should gather around him 
expert mineralogists, and discovering (by their assistance) 
places where gold and other metals are found, acquire them ; 
he should take only a small portion of the income of his 
subjects as tax, and suppress, by inflicting punishment, the 
violence of the mighty; he should with kindness protect all 
(people) and (maintain) the order of the castes putting an end 
to irregular practices ; he should always show respect to Brah- 
mans, and increase or decrease the population of the different 
districts of his kingdom, according to their conditions : and, 
without forgetting to destroy his petty enemies, he should 
nourish the (seven) members of his sovereignty, even as he 
would the limbs of his own body* (67-a) 

A king who desires to live long should gather around him 
physicians cognizant of dhdtus ( vata , pitta and ilesma), take the 
medicines such as svarm-bhasma, prepared by them and eat 
such food is calculated to nourish the body. He should 
get rid. of the excess of vafa in his body by means of massage. 
He should take the abhyangana and nourish all the limbs of the 
body ; he should get rid of greyness and discolouration (of 
the skin), having removed the defects (that cause them) ; he 
should endeavour to strengthen his teeth, develop all the parts 
of the body according to their proportion ; he should attempt 

entendre n ms through the whole verse, „ - 




to impart lustre to the body and keep it under control without 
showing negligence in examining (its diseases). (<»7-b) 

It is desirable that a king should give audience to sattkha- 
§ayanikas*, physicians and Brahman astrologers early in the 
morning ; after (the first) yam a he should be in the company 
of his ministers and nobles as well as the accountants 
(. kayasthas ) who are employed to acquire wealth ; he should 
spend the midday in the company of mas sagers, wrestlers 
cooks and hunters ; and in the aparahna;\ having offered wor- 
ship to the household gods, he should converse with elders, 
judicial officers, and ascetics ; after dinner he should talk with 
the jester and listen to the paurauikas and the poets ; he 
should give audience to the spies and the musicians during the 
evening ; and he should enjoy the company of his queen 'at 
night, and then go to sleep. (68) 

Viewed from the standpoint of the king, (his) servants 
always fall into three classes, viz., friends ( hitulu ), friends and 
enemies by turns (hitahitulu) and constant enemies ( sadahitulu ). 
I shall describe them (to you) 0 ! Sinless one, listen ! (69) 

Physicians, astrologers, learned men, poets, and pnrohits 
are friends ; the people employed (by the king) for the collec- 
tion of revenue and discharging other duties are both friends 
and enemies (according to circumstances); and the people 
who are desirous of getting back the wealth confiscated by the 
king (by way of punishment) are (his) perpetual enemies. 
Therefore, it is only right that the king should skilfully conduct 
himself towards them according to their disposition. (70) 

Having carefully observed a worthy person, it is desirable 
that (a king) should, without being asked or told, astonish him 
by offering him (gifts) like the appearance of the fruits of a 
jack tree,t and (wealth) in a dream.' (71) 

® Soukhasayanikas are people who ask one : “ Have you slept happily 

f Aparahna is the time between 12 noon and 3 p,m, 

X The poet here alludes probably to a species of a jack tree called Vtrpala ■which 
bears fruits in it* roots. The fruits emerge out of the ground suddenly, wh«» they are 
fHLllfroVB . : . .... . ; ■ ' . . . .. . . _ _ 



166 


According to the injunctions of the Vedas, the worship of 
the pitrs is more important than that of the Gods. Therefore, 
being devoted to (the service of) the pitrs, give (the offerings 
of the sraddha ) to the devotees of Visnu who have attained 
tranquillity by the study oi the Vedas, and the practice of 
virtue and tapcis. 


Give alms for the protection of Brahmans ; acquire know- 
ledge for the protection of the self ; and take refuge with great 
devotion under Narayana ; for you cannot escape hell which 

surely awaits you at the end of your reign by any other 

(7 3) 

means. 

The devotion of a wife to her husband, the observance, by 
men and women, of the rule of consanguinity, the control of 
the self of the ascetic, the obedience of the lower to the upper 
castes, and the faithfulness of the servant to the master, are all 
due to the fear of tbe punishment inflicted by the king. (74) 

Strangely enough, (the king) maintains law (dharma) by 

killing (criminals); observes brahmacarya by having intercourse 

with his wife (on proper occasions); becomes truthful by 

/ uttering falsehood (in order to save the life of another); fasts 

by eating (only twice a day); becomes a hero by avoiding 

ffi ff ht with elders), and rich by spending money (on good 

; 6 t s (75) 

deeds). v ' 

A spy should be the resident of the king’s capital ; he should 
know (several) languages, and be unknown to other spies. 
Moreover, he should bear no external marks of identity and be 
able to give money beyond the expectations of others (in 
obtaining information). (Unless he is enabled by the king) to 
spend so much money, he will not enter the profession. (76) 

As the king, is attached to (such luxuries) as massage, bath, 
food, unguent, dress, flowers, etc., suitable to the seasons he 
/ should acquire the merit derived from ascetic practices, by 
gifts of money only. 

As the food consumed by tbe king consists of several 
delicacies, it is desirable that he should dine either at aparthm 



or while his stomach is quite empty. Pood consumed in 
hunger is very salutary. (73) 

Listen ! A king should treat the three oargas ( dharma , 
artha and kama) alike. If, perchance, the share of dharma 
increases, he should feel happy like a farmer who finds his 
rice-field unexpectedly irrigated with the water lifted into 
another’s field, through a breach in the ridge. (79) 

Purchase gems which increase splendour so that you should 
appear radiant; for, they are necessary in order to enhance 
the dignity of your appearance. A king should wear (a sepa- 
rate set of) gems and jewels on every day of the week. (80) 

You should not think: “Our work is to govern the 
kingdom. (It necessarily involves sin.) Then, how can we 
get rid of sin ?” Even the Veda does not enjoin you to do 
the impossible. It (only) commands you (to rule justly) to the 
best of your abilities. (81) 

Manu, Dandadhara and others were known as righteous 
rulers, as they punished (the criminals) having understood 
their guilt well. Unless an anointed sovereign, who has been 
created by Prajamtha for the purpose of governing the people, 
who is known by the Vedic names Virat and Samrat and who 
is equal to god -removes the troubles of the earth enduring 
hardships, can his birth be said to be fruitful ? Do not the 
bandit chiefs satisfy their sensual desires by raping captive 
women and with the wealth obtained by attacking caravans 
of merchants ? You should not consider the protection .of the 
earth a trouble, and be indifferent to it, for, formerly in the 
Erta age, Sahasrabahu, the son of Krtavlrya, punished 
(the wrong doers), appearing with sword, club, bow anu 
other weapons before them at all places and times in this earth, 
protected well by his mighty arms. It is not possible for the 
kings of this last Kali age who are feeble in keeping with it, 

to punish (evil) in that manner Therefore, you should 

carry on (the work of) protection and punishment, according 



168 


heard and seen. Regarding what is impossible, put your trust 
in the Giod Pundankaksa, the protector of the suppliants, and 
conduct yourself humbly. Then, all your objects become 
easily attainable. A crowned monarch should govern the 
state, keeping dharma in view 

AmuklamSlyada, 4. 204 ff. 


140. ACYUTARAYA AND RAMARAJA. 

As Kr?naraya had no male issue, he gave his daughter in 
marriage to Ramaraja whom he appointed Yuvaraja ; but at the 
time of his death, he bequeathed his kingdom to Acyuta, the 
son of his elder brother, and nominated Ramaraja as Yuvaraja. 
After some time, Ramaraja made himself the king and began to 
rule the kingdom in his own right.* 

Kaifiyat of Ptnugenda, Mae. Mss. 15-6-8, pp. 2-3. 



141. ACYOTARAYA’S VICTORIES. 

The king of kings, Acyutaraya, sat in his durbar on hie 
jewelled-throne in the manner of (Sri) Krsna, surrounded by 
the kings of Utkala, Yavana, and Andhra. A chrysolite sur- 
passing the splendour of the Sun which was set in the pendant 
of his necklace shone upon his breast ; a fine yellow silk nether 
garment embroidered with golden lace in which he was dressed 
lent grace to his person; a superior cap set with gems of 
brilliant lustre was more charming than the crown ; and the 
(caste) mark of musk (on his face), and the garland of flowers 
(around his neck) gave a banquet to the bees. 

ilaBjarasa-Timmarasa, the minister of king Acyutaraya 
who defeated the Tiruvadi, crowned the king of the Pandyas, 
showed mercy to the lord of Utkala, offered protection to 
the Savayi who made obeisance to him and acquired glory, 
deserves praise. e, ; e 

Tarakabrak mar a jiyam % Madras Govt. Or . Mss. Lib R. No. 347. 


* Acyuta, of course, was not a nephew of Krsnaraya, but his half-brother, 
however, is commonly met with in the village chronicles. . 


Such- 


169 



14S. THE G- A JAP ATI INVASION. ■((/ 

When the Gajapati, keeping in mincl his former enmity 
marched on inegondi after the death of Kysnaraya and 
Ramappaya, some elders living in the city, wrote to him a 
letter telling him that his arrival after the death of Krsnaraya 
whom he could not defeat did not betoken his bravery. The 
Gajapati thereupon regretted his action and returned to his 
capital. 

Account of the N’arapati Kings : L R» 50, p. 316. 


143(a). GANI TIMMA NAYADU. 

SUMMARY. 

These verses describe the exploits of Gani Timma 
Nayadu of the Velugoti family who appears to have been a 
contemporary of Krsnadevaraya and Acyuta. 

The first verse refers to Timma’g capture of tlie fort of 
Tondamarayagulla for which he was complimented by 
Acyutadevaraya. He destroyed the Mussalman infantry 
which sought to cross the frontier, and won a victory over 
Yara Timma. 

In the second verse it is said that at the instance of 
Krsnadevaraya, he defeated a chief called Linga, who was a 
son of Bhiksavrtti Mukti Santava. He inflicted a defeat on 
Honnappa Nayadu of Kandanavolu ; put to flight Santa, son 
of Vlraya, and won a victory over Jay a at N annum; he slew 
Timma of Cebrolu at Mattacer uvu, and routed Bhairava Khan 
on the field of Rompicerla. Having defeated Khanakhana, 
Hita Khan and others in battle, he deprived them of the terri- 
tories over which they ruled. Sura, the son of Suri Nayadu, 
having heard of the death of the chiefs of the Andhra country 
at his hands in the plain of Mallapura was afraid to face 
Timma in battle. 

" ' ' 

The third verse refers, in addition to some of the exploits 
mentioned above, to Timma’s victory over Yedula Khan (the 
’Xdil Khan). \ • . ■ ■ 


170 


The last verse describes the victory of Timm a over some 
feudatory chiefs, who were the subordinates of the king of 
Karnata at some place on the slopes of the Srxparvata, and 
alludes to some threat which he held out to Ramaraja. 

VelugotivSri Vaihsavali , vv. 230, 231, 233, 240. 


143(Z>). 

At the time when Timm a Nayadu was governing his 
principality, Timmaraju, the chief of Puttakota on the Gundla- 
kamma, invaded, with the assistance of his brothers, Kondaraju, 
Nagaraju and Annamaraju, the district of Palnadu and 
Gurijala, and carried away the cattle. He plundered the 
districts of Vinukonda, Tangella, Podile, Ammanavolu, 
Udayagiri, Siruvelja, and Siddhapuram, and obstructed people 
from travelling along the road at Nandikanama. Moreover, he 
seized a fort belonging to the Raya. 

Gani Timma Nayadu was commanded by Acyutaraya to 
attack Timmaraju and put an end to him with all his followers. 
T im m a, Nayadu proceeded to Puttakota, where he met Timma- 
raju in battle and slew him with all his followers. He then 
marched against Tondamarayagujla, and captured it. In re- 
cognition of his services, Acyutadevaraya bestowed favours 
upon him. Timma Nayadu slew 7 the Muhammadan chiefs 
Bhairava Khan, Khan Khan, and Hitya in a battle at 
Rompicerla, and seized their territory with the consent of 
Acyutadevaraya and ruled over them. He won a victory over 
a confederacy of Sndhra feudatories at Mallapuram. Sura 
Nayadu, the son of Suri Nayadu, fled from the country when 
he heard that Timma Nayadu was advancing upon him and the 
latter seized his territory, ypyy; 

Moreover, while Timma Nayadu was governing the 
country in the neighbourhood of the S§risaila mountain, several 
feudatory chiefs having resolved to attack him, requested Rama- 
raja to grant them permission. Ramaraja was astonished at their 
audacity gave them permission with the object of humiliating 
them. The feudatory chiefs marched to Mallapuram at the hegd 


171 


of 30,000 infantry and 7,000 horse, where they met a large 
army comprising mainly of the Boyas and the Cencus under 
Timma Nayadu. A fierce engagement took place in which 
Timma Nayadu slew several chiefs such as Ravilja Timmarma, 
Koneti Timmayya, Ceruvuri Narayana, Peruri Nayadu and 
Konda Singayya and Appayya ; the remining chiefs fled from 
the field in confusion. This battle was fought on Sunday, 
Bhadrapada su 8,* Virbdhi, corresponding to S. S. 1452. Some 
years after this victory, Avali Obalaraju slew Timma Nayadu, 
taking advantage of a difficult situation in which he found 
himself. 

Velugo$ivUri VaMamri$ta f pp. 83-5. 

143(c).t 

SUMMARY. 

Velugoti Cinna Timma (i.e., Grani Timma Nayadu) who 
was governing the region about the Siisaila hill was com- 
missioned (probably by Aeyutadevaraya) to subdue the petty 
chiefs that were holding the country between the Kr§na, the 
Eolleru and the eastern sea. He set out from Kondlavldu in 
the morning and arrived in due time at Darsi to inspect the 
military preparations in the forts ; when he reached Karr alia 
on Sunday, Bhadrapada su 8£ Virodhi, he found an army of 
30,000 foot and 7,000 horse comprising the contingents of 
the Kamma and Kapu chiefs drawn up in battle array in the 
maidan outside the village of Mallapuram. On seeing this 
host Timma Nayadu gave the order for battle and a fierce fight 
ensued. 

The following chiefs opposed Timma Nayadu in this 
battle : — i 

1. Ravela Timmayya. . ; 

2. Peruri Nayadu. 


: 1 


■il' m 
s 


• The date is wrong ; the £aka and cyclic years do not coincide* & S. 3.4*52 cotfts**; 
ponds to Vikjti and not Virodhi. Neither in Virodhi nor in Vikjti does Bhadrapada 
In 8 fall on a Sunday. 

f This poem was evidently composed by a Bhat who was a 
NSya^u to celebrate his 

t Bhadrapada su 8 was 

| H iV-c^A , . , , $ 8 ! , ; ; : */ ■’ »*\ 

If; ... '■ 





3. Koneti Timmayya. 

4. Ravela Sittgu. 

5. Appayya. 

6. The son of Yara Kondu. 

7. Cintalaceruvu Suri. 

8. Abbaya Sum, 

9. Baruva Raghava Reddi of Dupad. 

10. Ravela Potinedu. 

11. Ravela Basvin.edu. 

12. Narayya. 

13. Tiiuma of Gendaliiru. 

14. Udaniravi Parvatayya. 

15. Kaneakante Sarvana. 

16. Kakandi Tirumalu. 

17. Yenumula Basavana. 

18. Kilari Kondu Konaya. 

19. Cintagumpalli Macugangana. 

20. Muppalla Macana. 

21. Ravela Maeu. 

22. Agastyareddi Mallu. 

23. Gatulabhagam Mallu. 

24. Kafici. 

25. Payyala Papayya. 

26. Janyala Citi Ramu. 

27. Sabala Tippanedu. 

28. Potlapalli Lak§maya Lingu. 

29. Yera Voju Aubhala. 

30. Jasti Pinambu. 

31. Dkulipalepti Mallu. 

82. Sanga Mallu# 

33, Kilari Venkatayya. 


173 



34. Unnava Gopu. 

35. Maddi Mallu. 

36. Bollepalli Singarayya. 

37. Ambarasu. 

38. Cintalacervu Yellinedu. 

39. Bnkkaya Timma. 

40. Gintalacerla Nayadn. 

41. Adusxipali Ramaya. 

42. Adusupali Kasvi Nedu. 

43. Parvata Macana. 

Of these 43 chiefs, the first seven were killed in the battle, 
and the rest took to their heels. Timma Nayadn massacred 
their followers and plundered their camp. Much booty fell 
into his hands. As he was unwilling to continue the, massacre 
of the fleeing forces of the enemy, he gave an order tor blowing 
the trumpet of charity (dharmadara)* on the border of Dupadu 
in the neighbourhood of Markapur fort. This act is said to 
have been witnessed by the Gfods of Srisaila and Ahobala, 
Virabhadra of Mallapura, the dancing Tripura of Irugulasani, 
the Ghmdlakamma near the village of Renugn, Bhairava of the 
Taraka Hill, and the Tank of Tenunguraya. : ' f 

Mac, Mss, 15-4-3, pp. 124-9. 


144. AOYUTARAYA’S PATRONAGE OF LITERATURE. 

By the grace of that king (Aeyuta), Nanjarasu Timma of 
Kandacaram (the military stores department), obtained renown 
and prosperity. 

One day that minister having attended the court of 
Acyutadevaraya, the sovereign of the earth that was bounded 
by the four seas, returned and held a durbar at his residence 
attended by all his relations, learned men, poets, Vandis and 
Magadhas, songsters and dancing women living in the capital 

*Dharmadara is the trumpet, blown on the battle-field as a signal for stopping the 
slaughter of the enemy by the victor. 


174 

Vijayanagara in front of the candra§ala of his palace. At that 
time, he told me (the author) that his master Acyutadevaraya 
was accustomed to offer every year to God Vehkatesvara a 
handful of flowers with a beautiful Kamjaprahandha and was 
acquiring merit and glory thereby. By the Raya’s command 
he requested me to compose a religious poetical work and 
dedicate it to his favourite deity Sri Rama so that prosperity 
and the four kinds of Pumsarthas might accrue to him as well 
as his master. 

T’arakabra h m at a jlyam : Madras Govi. Or, Mss , Lib. ; R. No. 3417. 

145. RAMARAJU TIMMA’S SONS. 

SUMMARY. 

Timma married four wives, viz., Sedtamamma, Laksmldevl, 
GopamadevI and Tirumaladevi. Of these, the first wife 
Sedtamamma gave birth to Kondaraju, Tirumalaraju, Appala- 
raju and Ramaraju. 

Appalaraju defeated Sava and Barid in a fierce battle at 
Kurakacerla, and won the admiration of kings by entering the 
world of the gods having at first pierced through the orb of 
the Sun. 

Dvipada-Balabhagavatam : Mac. Mss. 13-2-19, pp. 286-7. 


146. SARI AHOBALA NAYADU. 


SUMMARY. 


Sari Ahobala Nayadu who was born after the 
massacre of all his kindred by Araviti Bukkaraju-Ramaraju, 
was brought up by the Tanadis, a wild tribe living in the 
jungles of Ahobalam. The Sthanapati of the Ahobalam temple, 
who discovered the identity of the boy, took much interest in 
him. During the course of one of his visits to the court of 
Acyutadeva Maharaya at Vijayanagara, taking advantage of 
an accidental reference to the destruction of the Sari family, the 
Jlyar informed the Raya that a scion of the family still existed, 
and if His Majesty desired to see him, he would produce him 
before the court in a short time. ■- 





The Raya expressed his desire to see the boy. There- 
upon the Jlyar having brought him to Vijayanagara, intro- 
duced him to the Raya who was pleased to bestow favour upon 
him. Several officers who formerly served the Sari family, 
now joined the young chief who became a courtier. 

Acyuta had to lead an expedition in S. S. 1457 Manmatha, 
against Gutti, where a certain chief called Timma Nayadu rose 
up in rebellion Ahobalapati Nayadu joined the expedition with 
all his retainers. The royal army soon reached Gutti, and 
having surrounded the fort attacked the defenders vigorously. 
Ahobalapati Nayadu with his men crept over the wall, and 
hoisted his flag on one of the towers. Encouraged by his 
example, the troops scaled the walls on all sides and entered 
the fort which soon fell into their hands. 

Aeyutadeva Maharaya, who was greatly pleased by the 
victory, summoned Ahobalapati to his presence, and granted to 
him as a reward for his meritorious services the right of policing 
the whole of the slma of Gutti ; but Ahobalapati was not 
satisfied with what he got. He, therefore, requested the Raya 
to grant, him the rights and privileges enjoyed by his ancestors. 
Acyuta acceded to the request, and bestowed upon him the 
titles and privileges of his forefathers. In addition to this, he 
granted him the right of collecting mannekavaU in the simas 
of Gutti, Caugalamarri, Ahobalam, Kandukuru, Darnpur, 
Jambulamadaka, Gandikota and Sirivolja at the rate of 10 ga 
in every 100 ga, and a manga of 2 turns in every putli of land. 

Kaifiyat of M Ht yUlapadu : L.R , 56, pp. 45 ff ; Mac. Mss * 15-3-52, pp, 72 if. 


147. PEEIYA RXMAPPA. 

SUMMARY. • 

Periya Ramappa who is said to have been the lion of 
Upanur, was the son of Golla Basava of Pippala-^otra and an 
elder brother of Cinna Ramappa. He was a friend or compa- 
nion of Vakili Cinnabhuvara, and a disciple of the famous 
Madhva teacher Vyasatlrtha. He bore the titles of ParasaU- 
soiara, and Svamidroharagancla and claims to have been the 


176 



valorous right arm of Acyutaraya, and an upholder of his 
warlike activities. 

CokkanUtha Caritra : Madras . Gov. Or. Mss. Lib . D. No. 1051. 

148. ACYUTADSVARXYA. 

SUMMARY. 

Then Acyutaraya was crowned in S.S. 1456 and ruled for 
8 years until S. S. 1468. Ramaya Bhaskara, whom he appoint- 
ed as the governor of Kcmdavldu, built a fort called Mavulakota 
at the foot of the old hill fort on the west with the material of 
the ruined palaces and temples of the time of the Reddis. He also 
built within this fort a town and a beautiful shrine dedicated to 
the God Gopinatha. At that time, the seventy -two palaigars 
who held the district, on account of contumaciousness, rose up 
in rebellion and created much confusion in defiance of the 
government. Being convinced that it was not possible to sub- 
due them except by peaceful methods, Ramaya Bhaskara had 
recourse to a strategem. Around the temple of Gopinatha he 
erected a prakara within which he excavated a deep well on 
the north side of the shrine. When the work of the temple 
was completed he sent invitations to all the palaigars requesting 
them to be present on the occasion of the festival in the temple. 
He arranged that when the palaigars came to the temple, they 
should be admitted into it through the eastern gate one by 
one ; and while being led out of it through the northern gate, 
they should be pushed into the well suddenly. He destroyed 
the seventy-two palaigars in this fashion, and restored peace 
in the country. Then he named the new town Gopinatha- 
puram after the principal deity of the place and constructed 
temples to Gods Navarnta Krsna, Mulasthanesvara and Angadi 
Vxrahhadra. Moreover, he inflicted a defeat on a large Mussal- 
man force, and ruled the Andhramandala in great glory.* 

Kmfiyat of Kondavidu % Mac . Mss. 15-4*40, pp. 20-22. 

* The Kaifiyat comes to an end with an appropriate quotation of a Telugu verse in 
sfaa metre extracted from an inscription of Ramaya Bhaskara found in the temple of 
Gopinatha, 

The verse simply alludes to the exploits of Ramaya Bhaskara, a subordinate of 
Acyutadevaraya, who built a temple to the God Gopinatha, won a victory over the 
Mussulmans and ruled Sndhramandala in great glory. 




...... i 


149. RAMAYA BHASKARA. 


summary. 


The first verse states that Cinnamamba, wife of Pratapa 
Ellarya, built a temple of Siva, and made grants of land to 
Brahmans. She was a sister of Ramaya Bhaskara, a minister 
of Acyutaraya, king of Karnata, who appointed him the gover- 
nor of Kondavidu. 

In the second verse it is said that Cinnamamba, a sister of 
the mighty Bhaskara Dandanatha, who obtained wealth includ- 
ing elephants by the favour of the king of Karnata, caused the 
excavation of a tank called Gropinatha-samudra at Vankayala- 
padu. ; 

Ibid : An inscription ef Va&kayalapTidu, 

150. RAMAYA BHASKARA OR BACA. 

The Turaka of Grolkonda consumes cows ; but Baearasa 
having come to Kondavidu is consuming the whole Brahman 
community. Which of these two is better ? 

-Ajtpakavtyam, 3 ; 230. 

V , 151. ORIGIN OF THE MADURA NAYAKS. 

SUMMARY. 

Besides this, an inscription copied in the book, Stories of 
the Kings of Tanjore in the Grovt. Mss. Library confirms 
what is said above. The following is the summary of what is 
said in the work : — - 

“ In days gone by, when king Acyutadevaraya was ruling 
at Vijayanagara and Candrasekhara, the king of the Pandya 
country, was ruling from Madura, the king of the Cola country, 
Vlrasekhara, invaded and conquered the kingdom of Candra- 
sekhara and annexed it. The latter went to Vijayanagara and 
appealed to the Raya against Vlrasekhara’s aggression. The 
Raya deputed one Nagama Kay aka, the head of the stores s , 
department ( Tosekhana ), to put down Virasekhara Cola and 
subjugate the whole of the South. The king further command- 
ed him to rule the country as his deputy collecting peishhush 
due from the dependent chiefs and remit*™ o- the tribute : 


178 



regularly to the royal treasury. Accordingly Nagama Nayaka 
advanced on the Cola, killed him in battle and became lord of 
the Cola country. Contrary to the Raya’s orders, he began to rule, 
assuming independence, the Pandyan kingdom also without 
handing it over to its lawful owner. The king of Vijayanagara 
became enraged and called upon Visvanatha Nayaka, the son 
of the self-same Nagama Nayaka, to march against his father to 
bring him back to subjection. Visvanatha, in strict obedience 
to the king’s orders, marched against his own father, defeated 
him in battle and restored to the Pandya his kingdom. The 
Pandyan king was greatly pleased and as he had no progeny, 
adopted Visvanatha as his own son and bestowed his kingdom 
upon him. The Raya was greatly pleased when he heard of all 
these events.” 

The Cola kingdom had no proper king. Acyuta made it 
over to one Cevvappa Nayaka to whom he gave his wife’s 
sister, Marti Amina, in marriage. 

Balijavaihsapuranam 9 pp. 44-5. 


SUMMARY. 

Acyutadeva Maharaya, the king of Ghanagiri and Vidya- 
nagara, made Visvanathasvami Nayadu, the son of Kotakam 
Nagama Nayadu of the Royal Treasury, who was born on 
Thursday, Vaisakha su 15, Prabhava corresponding to $.S. 1354 
the ruler of the Pandya, the Cera, the Coja and the Malayala 
countries, as a reward for the meritorious services which he 
rendered to the state. The boundaries of the territory entrusted 
to him are : in the east, the sea and Mannarkota ; in the 
south-east, Anantasayanam ; in the south, Gudalluru ; in the 
south-west, Pedderu (Periyar), Koyamutturu and Vajayar ; in 
the west, the Ghats ; in the north, Valikonda and the 
^vetanadi; in the north-east, Tanjanagaram extending as far 
as the Kaverf. The rivers that flow within this territory are ; 
the Ubhaya-Kaverf, the TamraparnI, the Citra, the Ksira, the 
Krtamala, the Vegavatl, the Niksepa, the Varaha, the Surabhi, 


179 


the North-sveta, the Amravatl, the Saligrama, the Ratua and 
the Bhavanl. The holy places included within the territory 
are : Setu-Ramesvaram, Dhanuskoti, Srirangam, Totadri, 

Madhura, Alagiri, and Jambukesvaram. The towns are ; 
Trisirapuri and Madhura. Acyutadeva Maharaya bestowed 
upon the city of Madhura the name of Baya-daksiaa-simhasana- 
sthana (the headquarters of the Raya’s Southern Throne), 
made Visvanatha Nayadu the ruler over this territory with its 
forts, nads, hamlets, villages, petas and towns, and invested him 
with the kingdom. Moreover, Acyutadeva Maharaya formally 
crowned Vis'vanatha Nayadu of the Garik epati family of the 
Balija caste as the king of Pandya country yielding a revenue 
of 2§- crores of varahas ; and he presented him the golden idols 
of Durga, JLakj-sm! and Laksmi-Narayana and sent him with 
ministers, councillors and troops to the South. Visvanatha 
Nayadu reached the city of Madhura, from which he began to 
govern the country entrusted to his care. 

Kaifiyat of Xarn'ata-Kdtikam Kings-. L.R. 8, pp. 319-22. 


153 . 

*1 — 10. Praise of a yogi by name Srikanthakasavasif and 
the pitha he occupied by name Kuiasekhara. 

11 — 12. The emperor Raya supplicated VNvehsa for a son 
and was directed by the god to seek the aid of the yogi. 

13. The emperor got a son by favour of the yogi. 

14. The emperor and his minister who got a son each by 
the yogi's favour become his pupils. 

15. The emperor bestowed the Pandya country on the 
yogi as guru-daksina. 

*&lokas were written in the presence of Ayyangajayya, a resident of Jambukesvaram 
and the guru of the Karnataka rulers, 

tAn epigraph in the jambukeivarasi temple in the Trickiuopoly district dated 
Friday Vaisakha su 2, Viscika, of the year PramSdi corresponding to &S. (Friday, ' 
31 Oct. A. a 1673) mentions SadSsiva Vajapeya YSji, son of Mahadeva - md-,the 

grandson of ^rifcan|ha IkasaySsi CaadrasUhmra Vaj&pSy a YSji (64 of 19»-<a>. ■ ■ ■ •■ 


16. The yogi wondered what he could do with the 




: : : 
'-'Vi 


•I'T 

m-- 

m: 

;iA:\ 

■i'i-F:' ■; 

m 

r* « 


II 


?• 



17. His Mmja Nagappa Nayaka, the Mahamantri of the 
emperor, had a son Vilvanatha Nayaka by name. 

18. To this young sisya who was very devoted to him, 

• the yogi gave the Pandya kingdom. 

19. Visvanatha in turn obtained initiation from him and 
gave him five villages. 

20 — 1. Mahadevadlksita,* the performer of vajapeya 
sacrifice, learned in all the arts, is a scion of the family of that 

yogi. 

Kaifiyat of Karnfya-Ko$ikam Kings L.R. 8, pp. 324*6 

154. VISVANATHA NAYAKA. 

SUMMARY. 

Acyutadeva Maharaya conferred on Visvanatha Nayau- 
ayya the kingship of the Fanija-mauclalam yielding a revenue 
of 2§- croresof varahas, in appreciation of the great skill which 
he had displayed in transacting the business of the state and 
celebrated his coronation at Vijayanagara. 

Mac. Mss * 14-4-97, pp. 97-99. 

lg| III ’ i ||l } 155 * Il I 

SUMMARY. 

Acyutaraya conferred several titles upon Visvanatha 
Nayaka, who bore the burden of the empire attached to the 
Southern Throne. Visvanatha brought Vijaya Durga and 
MahalaksmI and installed them in Madhura from which he ruled 
over the great Pandya-?wa«deda. 

,V : Adyar Library % 32— E-31. 

* Mahadeva Diksita is mentioned in 64 of 1937-8 dated A.D. 1673 as the son of 
Srikantha Akasavasi Candrasekhara Vajapeya Yaji, and the father of Sadasiva Vajapeya 
Yaji. He is also referred to in the other records of his son in the } ambukesyaram 
temple* 66, 67 of 1937-8 state that Mahadeva Diksita set up a jayastambha containing the 
; three names of Siva in the presence of Matjbhutesvara ; 50 of 1937-8 records his 
death: 69 of 1937-8 alludes to the death of the wife of Mahadeva Makhlndra in the 

Diksita flourished in the first 


year Kajayuk ti. It is therefore evident that Mahadeva Dit 
half of the 17th century. - ^ : _ . . 

iMiiiSifii: i \ .. i - . A- ; ‘ : _ .. : 





isi 

156. GAN I TIMA! A AND CAP.OLI TIMM A. 

The Tillage of Putfitkm'i! v;i is LsuVidi : the river Gundla- 
kamiim is the sea ; Git' "11 ’! immarilju h Slava m : Koji^riiju is 
Kmnbhakarna ; Nagaraj tt-Anumayy a is Marloa ; the Boyas are 
the demons ; and the buhs of pepper are ,STta. 1 laving 
entered Pruva, Timrnaraju and his followers threw the district 
into confusion. They carried a r ay the cattle of Gimijula in 
Pain ad, attacked Vinnkonda and plundered the country around 
Tangeda; they created panic in Podile and Anunanavrolu, 
commuted burglaries in tlddagiri, and devastated by pillage 
the Sakili district ; they ravished the women of Cirivelja and 
Nandela. harassed the people of the district of Siddhapura by 
dacoities, committed crimes at Tondamarayagulla, and obstruct- 
ed, as highwaymen, people travelling along the Nandikanama. 
Raghava viz,, Velugoti Gina Timma, having collected an army 
crushed the Havana of Cabolu out of existence.* 

Mae, Mrs. 15-4-3, p. 142. 


157. POLICE ARRANGEMENTS OF THE TIME OF 
ACYUTA. 


SUMMARY. 


The founder of Paudikona family was a Boya of the 
name of Kampiliraya, who distinguished himself in the wars 
during the reign of Aey utade varaya. He won the favour of 
the Raya by securing victory to the king’s arms in many 
places, and was appointed by him as havalgar over Adavani, 
Ghitti, Grandikota and Kandanavolu. He had four sous, Jaiangi- 
raya, Venkatadasari, Venkatappa, and Papa whom he appointed 
as the police officers over each of the four divisions of the 
territory which the Raya entrusted to his care. 

Kampiliraya sent his eldest son Jatangiraya to Gandikota, 
having at first specified his jaglr and the kavali dues. He • 
commanded his other three sons to remain at Kotakonda and 

•This is another poem composed by stone Bind to celebrate the victory of Gaul 


182 

Cenampalli, and protect the districts of Adavani, Ghxtti, and 
Kandanavolu.* 

The kavali dues, grain, vartana, and rusurn of all the 
villages were fixed as follows : — 

The (fee) for policing the country is 4 madas , i.e., 2| gas 
for every 100 gas and 1 turn of grain in every putti. 

Toddy rent ... 3 madas for 100 gas. 

Eoad tax ... 3 madas for 100 bullocks. 

These details were entered in a copper-plate charter with 
the Faro/m-seal, and it was handed over to the grantees pro- 
bably by the king. 

Kaifiyat of Pandikona : L,R, 8, pp. 208-9. 

158. RAMARlJU SRIRANGA AND HIS SONS. 

^rlrangaraja, the younger brother of Ramaya Timmaraja, 
married Timmamba of matchless virtue. To them were born 
five sons, who resembled the great monarchs of antiquity in 
their virtuous conduct. Kona, the most excellent Timma, 
Rama, who, having given the sovereignty of the empire to the 
prosperous Sadasivaraya, bears with elegance the title of the 
establish er of the extensive Karnata kingdom, the brave 
Tirumala and Venkatadri, the vanquisher of enemies. 

Dvipada-Balabhagavatam : Mae. Mss. 13-3-19. 

159. RAMARAJA’S MARRIAGE WITH KRSNARAYA’S DAUGHTER. 

The famous Ramaraja became the husband of the daughter 
of emperor Krsnaraya. He caused great distress to his enemies 
by his valour, and became the mainstay of Sadasivaraya’s 
uninterrupted sovereignty at Vidyanagara. 

R’amUbhyttdaya } 1 : 55*, 

, 1 : ' 160, SElRANGARAJA AND HIS SON RAMARAJA, 

summary; 

Ramaraja was born to ^riranga by his wife Tiru- 
malamba. (1) Having killed Salakaya-Timmaraju, who turned 

* The kaifiyat mentions Ga^ikota also among the districts entrusted to the care of 
Kampiliraya’s younger sons. They could have had no control over Ga^iko^a, as it is 
stated to have been given to Jatangiraya in an earlier context of. No. 146 ante, . 


traitor, with Salakaya, the lieutenant of that sinner, Srirauga- 
raja-Riimaraja acquired great fame in Vidyanagara as the 
estahlisher of the sovereignty of Sadasiva. (2) 

Padya-BalabhTigavatam , 14-4-6, p. 16. 

161. RAM AKA J U TIMM A AND SALAKARAJD TIMMA. 

Ramaraju-Timma maintained his title of Dharani-varaha 
by restoring its former stability to the trembling earth which 
was caught in the ocean of destruction, that is, the evil-deeds 
of the monster, Salakaya-Timma. 

Ibid, p. 110. 

162. ALIYA RAMARAJA. 

Ramappa, the son-in-law of the emperor Krsnaraya of 
Indra-like splendour, a bee at the lotus feet of Lord Visjpu, 
and a Brahma in intelligence deserves to enjoy the luxury of 
adorning the tresses of the ladies, viz., the quarters with the 
flowers of glory blossomed on the creeper of his sword which is 
watered by the waves of the stream of blood flowing from the 
interior of the throats of his enemies. (1) 

Who, in this world, is the peer of Ramappa who has 
satisfied the flame of his sword with libations of blood from the 
neck of king Salakaraju Cina Timma ? and whose cupid-like 
body is surrounded by haloes of beauty and whose troops 
protect the prosperity of Karnata ? (2) 

'■/ SUmbopakhyanam^ 1 ;j 32-3. 


163(a). SALAKAM TIMMAYYA AND ALIYA RAMARAJA. 

Some days passed in this manner ; then Aliya Ramappa 
attempted to rule in Vijayanagara *, but Salakam Timmayya 
who was in charge of the treasury, having gathered troops 
planned to kill him so that he might not seize the . power, 
Ramappayya having got scent of it fled to Pemmasani Rama- 
linga Nayadu, the son of Timma Nayadu, for protection *, and 
with the assistance of Hande Hanumappa Nayadu and : 
he advanced upon (Vijayanagara), and encountered the 



184 


the Parid Shah, the Padshahs of Delhi, on the banks of the 
Tungabhaclra. After a sanguinary battle, the troops of the 
Padshahs were routed, and Salakam Timmayya was slain. 
Then Ramappayya began to rule at Vijayanagara. 

Kaifiyat of the Zemindar of VyyStavada, and Sangapatla : 
L. Ji. 6, pp. 454-3 ; Mac. Mss. 15-3-50, pp. 197-8. 


I 

"i ’ 
: 


f < < 

ill 




163 ( 5 ). 

While Pemmasani Yara Timma Nayadu was governing 
(Gandikota), Aliya Ramaraja, the son-in-law of Krsnaraya, was 
ruling in the city of Vidyanagara. The cognates of the former 
Raya, who did not want him to rule, turned hostile and 
attempted to cause him trouble. As Ramaraja was not able to 
maintain his power, he left the city of Vidyanagara and took 
refuge with Timma Nayadu, the ruler of Gandikota ; and 
Timma Nayadu having pledged his word (to support him) kept 
him at his court. The cognates of the Raya, who were at Vijaya- 
nagara, having learnt the state of affairs, came to Gandikota 
with large forces, sent some persons of importance to Timma 
Nayadu, and demanded that Ramaraja should be surrendered 
to them. Timma Nayadu replied : “ We are not accustomed to 
betray people who seek our protection ; we shall fight with 
you.” Having made- this declaration, he collected an army 
drawn from the contingents of the neighbouring palaigars, 
and marched at the head of this army together with Aliya 
Ramaraja to Komali (a village) at a distance of three kos from 
this place where he joined the enemy in battle. The troops of 
the enemy broke and fled. Ramaraja and Timma Nayadu 
pursued them as far as Vijayanagara, where they destroyed 
Salakam Timmanna and others. The fear of the enemy, being 
rooted out (in. this manner), Ramaraja- became the king from 
that time; and he rewarded Timma Nayadu by giving him 
much money. 

Kaifiyat of TMifairi : Z. R< 11, pp. 301-2. 


(After the death of Krsnaraya) TirumaladevI, his queen, 
had given her only daughter in marriage to Ramaraya and 


kept him near her, so that he came to be known thenceforward 
as Aliya Ramaraya, i.e., Ramaraya, the son-in-law. While 
arrangements for celebrating his coronation at Vijayanagara 
were in progress, Salakam. Timma, the custodian of Krsna- 
raya’s treasury, who did not like that Ramaraya should be 
crowned, left the city having already sent out secretly some 
money in advance. He gathered troops and advanced upon 
Vijayanagara by forced marches with the object of patting 
Ramaraya to death, (thereby preventing his coronation). AJiya 
Ramaraya who obtained information (of the activities of 
Salakam Timma) fled from the city at night taking the royal 
seal with him and arrived at Penugonda. He sent from that 
place letters bearing the royal seal to Pemmasani Timma 
Nayadu, the Hande Chief, Mesa Pedda Nayadu and other 
jagirdars commanding them to repair to his presence expedi- 
tiously with all their troops. In response to his summons, 
Mesa Peddappa Nayadu went to (Penugonda) like all the 
others. Ramaraya described to them the wicked deeds of 
Salakam Timma, and said: “You (as well as your ancestors 
of) several generations, obtained many rewards and titles, by 
serving the king at considerable risk. Now, if you make 
this enterprise successful, by destroying the enemy, we 
shall bestow upon you valuable rewards and titles.” Next, he 
enquired whether there was any person among them who 
would, by sending spies, secure information about the where- 
abouts of Salakam Timmavya, the disposition of his troops, and 
the direction in which he was intending to march. Mesa 
Peddappa Nayadu coming forward with the declaration that 
he would get news of the condition (of the enemy) obtained 
the tambula. He sent suitable persons into the troops of 
Salakam Timmayya, and got (the necessary) intelligence, 
(Ramaraya), accompanied by the Chief of Gandikota, Hande 
Hanumappa Nayadu of Sonnalapura, and Mesa Peddappa 
Nayadu with all their forces, marched by night to Adavani, 
and falling suddenly upon Salakam Timmayya’s army which 
lay encamped on the northern bank of the Tungabhadra, 
slaughtered it. As Salakam Timmayya with the mrapajifs of bis 


TSr+M 






186 


troops was fleeing the Pemmasani, the Mesa, and the Hande 
Chiefs pursued him on their horses. Having captured him, they 
beheaded him promptly, and hoisted his head on a flag-staff. 

Kaifiyat of Nadimidoddipalem : L. R. 39, pp. 16-18. 

164(a). ALIYA RAMARAYA. 

The rule of the kings of the Lunar dynasty came to an 
end at Hastinapura. Three brothers Konamraju, Timmaraju, 
and Ramaraju, who were the descendants of the Pandavas in 
the female line, came (to Vijayanagara). Konamraju settled 
in Awku and Banuganipalle ; Timmaraju went to Candi-Canda- 
varam. Ramaraju stayed at the court of Krsnaraya who had 
given him his daughter in marriage. As Krsnaraya had no 
male issue, Ramaraju became king after his death, and ruled 
till S.S. 1476.* During his rule, he came to Adavani, where he 
built a palace, and a fort which extended as far as the Mondu 
bastion on the way to Tummalam Gate. He also founded (on 
this occasion, a suburb of the city, called) Sukravarapupeta. 

Kaifiyat of Adavani : L. R. 10, p. 34. 

164 ( 6 ). 


Then Sadasiva Maharaya, the son of Ranga, the elder 
brother of Acyutaraya, ascended the jewelled-throne of 
Vijayanagara, and was governing the kingdom of the earth. 
During his time, Ramaraja, the son of Srlranga, and the 
grandson of Ramadevaraja of Kandanavolu, having gathered all 
power in his hands, was administering the kingdom as yuva- 
raja. As he married Krsnadeva Maharaya’s daughter Tirumal- 
: r amma, he was commonly called in Kanarese Aliya Ramaraja. 

Kaifiyat of Kandanavolu : L. R. 16, p. 451. 

165. USURPATION OF SALAKAM TIMMAYYA. 

Kr§nadevaraya died in the year Tarana corresponding to 
S.S. 1387j\ Then the shepherd Salakam Timmayya who was in 
charge of the treasury at Vijayanagara usurped (the throne), 
and ruled for some time. As there was no lawful sovereign in 

*Tha date is -wrong ; the correct date is S.S. 1486. 

! + This date Which is occasionally met with in the Local Records, is, of course, wrong. 

-■ ' . ... : i ....... ' ■: . ■ • ........... . . , - . ... 








the city, the country was plunged into anarchy. This state of 
affairs prevailed for some time. Then it was decided that the 
brothers, Tiramalaraya and Ramaraya, as both of them were 
the sons-in-law oi Krsnaraya, should be crowned and that their 
capital should be the city of Vidyanagara. 

Kaifiyat of Dupadu : L. R> 8, p. 446- 


166. THE EXPLOITS OF THE PEMMASANI CHIEFS. 

Gina Timma : — 0 ! Pemmasani Akkaya- Oiua Timma, 0 lord 
of big victories and great virtues, you won a victory over 
Salakarajit in the battle-field of Juturu displaying your valour. 
You reduced the fort of Betamcerla to dust, and destroyed the 
pride of Cintagunta Raghupati. You put to flight Salaka 
once again in a fierce battle in the neighbourhood of 
Bedakallu. You killed the adventurous Sanjlva Khan (Sanjar 
Khan?), and captured Adavani. Having put to death the 
wanderer Salakaya Timma, you invested the Raya with 
sovereignty. 

Kaifiyat o f Ku riviku\amx Mac . Mss, 15-3-15, p, 40, 

Pemmasani Narasmha 0 ! Pemmasani Narasimha, the 
possessor of all novel titles such as * the placer of the foot on 
the head of the obstinate Turns has’, is it possible even to Sesa 
(the thousand-tougaed serpent) to describe properly your 
victory to the world? Ramalinga, (your paternal uncle, the 
elder brother of your father), disgraced the three vazlrs* Your 
father Peda Timma crushed the pride of Dastur Khan. 
Your elder brother China Kay aka confounded the army of 
Masta Khan. Keeping that in your mind, you destroyed the 
army of Asvaraya at J ammalamadugu. f 

. y, Jv- J' -vVs Cafupad yamanimaftjari t Pi* II, pp. 87-8. 


167. TIMMARAJU CINNA-TIMMA AND HIS BROTHERS, 

That excellent king’s wife was (xopamambika, the store- 
house of good qualities, Gropamamba and Timma obtained by 

*This evidently refers to the battle which Kjsnadevaraya fought with the armies 
of ’Sail Shah, Nizam Shah, and Qntb Shah on the banks of the K.ts# in Which. 
PenmasSni Ramalinga NSya^u had.greatly distinguished himself, 
t These -victories cannot be identified at present. 



188 

the grace of Vi§nu four sons, whose birth exalted the Lunar 
dynasty. Tirumala, Vitthala, the conqueror of the quarters, 
your glorious self, 0 King China Timm a, and the famous Papa 
Timma. 

Dvipada-Balabhagavatani : Mac, Mss. 13-2-19, p. 287. 


168. CINNA-TIMMA. 


You captured in anger Candragiri and other forts 



exciting the admiration of your peers as well as the 
common people. You resolutely hunted the eluding deer, viz., 
hostile kings ; and having destroyed several proud people, you 
restored the property of Sriranganatha. You captured Nagur 
and distributed new pearls to the complete satisfaction of all 
people who asked for them. You stormed the fort of Bonagiri 
so as to increase your fame, and exacted tribute from all the 
chiefs of Tannarasunad within a very short time. Saving 
given succour to the king of the Pandyas who sought your 
protection, you established him firmly in his kingdom. You 
crushed by means of your vanguard the pride of the powerful 
Bettu Perumal ; and having defeated the five Tirupatis (Tiru- 
vadis), you put them to flight. Y ou restored Tirupati (Tiruvadi) 
who craved your protection to his former kingdom, and having 
crossed the fort which goes by the name of Tovalaghat, you 
approached the God Anantasayana and offered him worship 
and set up permanently at Kanyakumarl a shining pillar of 
victory to commemorate your conquest of southern quarter. 
Finally you cleaned your sword which was covered with new 
drops of the blood of' your multitudinous enemies intbe waters 
of the Southern Sea. 

Hid, pp. 277-8. 


169. RAMARAJA VITTHALA. 

The sound of the war-drums which are beaten at the 
commencement of the wars of Vitthala, the soil of Ramaraja 
Tiinma, obstructs the exuberant flow of the temple-juice of the 
rutting elephants of the Gajapati, the lord of the city of 
Jvataka ; destroys the pride of the mighty warriors, honoured 



189 


by the king of the Pandya country ; increases the trenuilous- 
ness of the body of the Tnkkhara cliief, the lord of the fort of 
Makkha; aud excises the leur of separation from her lord, in 
future, in the mind of the wife of the king of Delhi. 

Padya- Balabhagivvatam : Mm. Mss, 14-1-34, f. 17- b. 


170(a). TWO STAGES IX THE GROWTH 
OF RAMARAJA’S POWER. 

Then, Sadasiva ascended the throne, and ruled for 18 
years from B.S. 1456 to S.B. 1473, while Ramaraja held the 
command of the army. 

Next, Ramadeva Maharaya became the supreme ruler in 
the state which he governed with great power for 13 years from 
S.S. 1474 to S.B. I486.* 

f;T) ; Vhv"? Kaijlyat of Sant aravur : L. X, 39, p. SOS. 

170 ( 6 ). 

Then Sadasivadeva Maharaya, having ascended the throne 
at Vijayanagara, ruled the kingdom for 23 years from B.S. 1456 
to B.S. 1479, while Ramaraja held the command of the army. 
Ramaraja thereupon became the supreme authority in the state 
and ruled for fourteen years from $.S. 1479 to B.S. 1494. 

Kaifiyai of All nr u : L. It 39, pp. 375-6. 


171. RAMA RAJA'S CONQUEST OF KALYANI 
; AND K ALU B ARU GA. * / ; • 

M JB . — The author of the Keladintp avijayam attributes these victories to KysnadevarSya 
contradicting thereby the evidence of the earlier account of &imtattvaratn&« 
karam , where they are said to have been won by Sadasiva NSyaka in the 
course of Ramaraja’ s campaigns against the Deccan Sultans during the reign 
of Sadasivaraya {Sources t pp. 195-6). As the narrative of the Sivatattva* 
ratndkaram agrees with the accounts of Muslim historians, the name of Rama" 
raja must be substituted throughout this extract for that of Kj^naraya* 


Sadasiva Nayaka, son of Caudapa, assumed the reins of 

the Government of the principality on SrSva^a.ifo .8 t>£ 

mukha corresponding to S.S. 1436. f 
* 

* The date and the periods for which Ramaraja is said to have acted as commander 
and as supreme authority .are inaccurate. 


mtz § ctr 




iso 


Krsnaraya (Ramaraja) marched on one occasion at the 
head of his army with the object of subduing his enemies 
towards Ikkeri, where he was joined by Sadasiva Nay aka. He 
placed an army under the command of Sadasiva and asked him 
to march in advance, and capture the forts of Kalyana and 
Kalubaruga. Sadasiva started at once towards these forts, in 
obedience to the royal command. 




l : 


!« 


II 


•y : 

■ V'' 

■v;. 

n'ti 





The chief of the Mussalmans, Sultan Bhairy Nizam Padu- 
sbah of Ahmadnagar* who obtained information of the invasion 
commanded his powerful vazlrs Feroja Khana, Talita Khana, 
Samjar Khana, Sathe Khana, Munila Khana, Dastura 
Khana, Vajra Khana, Ravuta Khana, and Bokka Singa f to 
oppose the invaders. The ministers having united together 
marched with their troops to Jambukhandi where they halted 
obstructing the path of the invading army. When the Vijya- 
nagara army approached the place, a conflict ensued ; and 
they soon began to fall back, as they were not able to cope 
with the Mussalmans. Sadasiva Nayaka now pushed forward, 
and in an encounter with Bokka Singa, he received a sword 
cut on his back extending along the spine. Notwithstanding 
this wound, Sadasiva led his troops against the enemy in great 
fury. Though he had to face the combined attack of the 
officers mentioned above, he withstood them all and captured 
Bokka Singa, whom he delivered to the Raya. The Raya who 
was greatly pleased with the display of Sadasiva’s prowess 
conferred many gifts upon him. . 


Sadasiva Nayaka proceeded against the fort of Kalyana 
and captured it by escalade. As a mark of his appreciation of 
Sadasiva’s valour, the king conferred upon him the title of 
Immadi Sadasiva Nayaka. As the army was returning from 


* The Sultan of Ahmadnagar at this time was Hussain Nizam Shah, 
f Most of these officers were in the service of Hussain Nizam Shah and they 
: participated in this war* See Burh*an~ i-Ma'anr IA . Vol. £ r <1921)> p. 105. 

^ *'^1 -b'/; ■ v v' : :■ -’b- ■ ' ' ** ■ , ' F."-' . '.I.'.- A '-A'.: 


191 



Kalyana, the garrison of tlie fort, of Kalubarnga opposed them. 
Therefore Krsnaraya (Ramaraja) halted at the place, and 
having thrown his jnmuvadi into the fort he commanded the 
chiefs that, accompanied him to fetch it. They hesitated ; hut 
Sadasiva Nayaka attacked the fort with great fury and 
captured it within an hour. The Raya was greatly astonished 
at his unusual valour and bestowed on him the title of Kone 
Kolahala. He also overcame at Jaleyapale, a chief called 
Yedava Murari, who defied Krsnaraya (Ramaraja), and obtain- 
ed the title of Kote-gomla Yedavamiirari. 

Ketidinrpamj ay am : 2 : 1 - 24 . 

172. KAMARSJA’S VICTORY OVER RARlD. 

SUMMARY : :V vV;y' 

Krsnaraya (Ramaraja) summoned Sadasiva Nayaka to his 
presence, and commanded him to abase the pride of Barlda 
Padusaha who had risen up against him. 

Barlda Padusaha was very much enraged when he heard 
that an expedition was launched against him. Placing himself 
at the head of an army, and accompanied by his brave 
ministers, he marched towards his frontier to oppose the 
invaders. When the two armies met, a tierce battle was 
fought. The Mussalman king Barlda, who was seated in a 
howdah on the back of an elephant, led his troops to the 
attack. Sadasiva Nayaka advanced upon him on a horse, and 
skilfully cut with his sword the ropes holding the howdah in 
position; but Banda who was skilled in wrestling leaped on the 
back of another elephant, and having rallied his scattered 
troops, turned round and attacked his assailants with fury, 
Sadasiva Nayaka, however, stood his ground firmly, and put to 
flight the enemy that came swarming around him. Having 
defeated the forces of Barldasaha in this manner he captured 
him together with his ministers and insignia and placed him 
before the Raya. Krsnaraya (Ramaraja) was greatly pleased 
with the success of Sadasiva ; and as a mark of his esteem he 
conferred upon him the titles of Aridale Meghadambara, and 
Divaprad'ipa. and presented to Mm several jewels including the 



seal ring of Banda Pad ns ah a. Further he set at liberty Bokka 
Singa who was made a prisoner on a former occasion. He 
also gave Sadasiva permission to style himself Barlda-saptanga- 
haram-Sadasiva-Nayaka. 

Ibid, 2 : 24 - 49 . 


173. RAMARAJA’S VICTORIES OVER BIJAPUR 

AND AHAMADNAGAR. 

SUMMARY : 

The king of Bijapur despatched, without having due 
regard to the might of the Raya, an army against him under 
the command of Sathe Khan a, one of his ministers; but Sadasiva 
Nay aka defeated him in battle. 

On another occasion, Nizam Saha Adil Ali of Ahamad- 
nagara, opposed the Raya in battle with considerable pride. 
Sadasiva confounded him in battle and put him to flight. When 
Krsnaraya (Ramaraja) saw the flight of the Nizam Saha of 
Ahamadanagara he was greatly delighted. He bestowed on 
him the title of Ekangavira ; and said that he was mightier 
than Krsnappa Nayak of Jinji. 

Ibid, 2 : 50 - 53 . 

174. SADASIVA NAYAKA’S VICTORIES OVER 

MINOR CHIEFS. 

SUMMARY : 

At the command of the Raya, Sadasiva Nayaka, proceeded 
against the fort of Candragutti, and having defeated Saluva 
Nayaka in battle he captured the fort and took him prisoner. 
On another occasion he defeated the mighty Madana Odeya of 
Bankapura, and obtained from the Raya the eighteen 
Kampanas of Araga. Sadasiva Nayaka caused, with the consent 
of the Raya, a tank to be excavated at Bankapura, and having 
invited the head of the Srhgeri monastery and the Raya 
brought about an interview between them. He also vanquish- 
ed Ghitti Timma who rose up in rebellion against the Raya, 
When the Tuluva chiefs rebelled against the Raya, he defeated 

brought them back to subjection. 

Ibid, 2 : 54 - 62 . 


175, 


DODDA HANK ANN A KAYAK A. 

After (the death of) Sadasiva Nayaka, Dodda Sankanna, 
his eldest sou, succeeded him at Ikkeri on Vaisakha sit 5 Visva- 
vasu corresponding to &. S. I486.* 


Sankanna defeated Virupanna Vodeya of Jambur, and 
captured Jambur and the fort of Duruguni. Virupanna, who 
had been defeated in this manner, repaired to Vidyanagara 
and reported to the Raya how Dodda Sankanna had deprived 
him of his possessions. On being summoned by the Raya he 
entrusted the administration of the estate to his younger 
brother, Cikka Sankanna Nayaka, and started to Vidyanagara 
with all his family. He reached the capital and met Ramaraja 
who commanded him to remain at, the court and hand over the 
forts of Jambur and Duruguni to Virupanna Vodeya. In obe- 
dience to the orders of Ramaraja he lived at the court for some 
years helping the Raya in the administration of the kingdom. 


Two sons, Ramaraja and V enkatanrpala were born to 
Dodda Sankanna during these years. When these boys were 


presented at the court, the Raya who was greatly struck by 
their appearance made arrangements for their upbringing. He 
also gave Sankanna on that occasion the villages of Masiir, 
Mallur and Foley a Founur as jaglr. F ' 

Keladinrpavi] a yam : Canto ill, l-*?. 


17 t>. THE CAPTURE OF GOA, 


SUMMARY. 


One day it struck Ramaraja, while he was seated in the 
durbar, that all forts were under his control excepting Gtoa 
which could not, be taken, as it was governed by the men of 
uu-pierced ears.f He deliberated on the matter with his coun- 


sellors, and came to the conclusion that his object Could 


be realised through the agency of Sankanna Nayaka. He 


*The daka. and the cyclic years do hot tally. d. S. I486 corresponds to Raktaksi and . 
not to Visva-vasu. The correct dak a date appears to be 1467. This corresponds to April 16, 
A.P., 1545, 

f The text has aviddhakatncir. They might be Mussalmans or ] 


E — 85 


USSiSBiliM 


ai||m 



194 


commanded bis younger brother,- Vittbalavaya* to lead tlie 
expedition ; and haying summoned Sankanna Nay aka to his 
presence, explained to him what he had in his mind. He 
commanded him to march quickly and make the enterprise a 
success. Sankanna accompanied the army of Vitthalaraya, 
and captured Goa which was protected by the sea. 

Having captured Goa, Sankanna returned to Vijaya- 
nagara, and had an audience with the Raya. On hearing the 
news of the conquest of Goa, he was immensely pleased. He 
granted to him the hobali of Malenahalli free from all obliga- 
tions. Moreover, he presented to him and his sons valuable 
jewels and gems. Sankanna took permission from him and 
retired to Ikkeri. He stayed there for a while, when he married 
his two sons to beautiful princesses, and having entrusted his 
family and estate to his younger brother, Cikka Sankanna, he 
went abroad to travel and see peoples and countries. 

Ktladintpavij ay am : Canto iii, 8-10. 


177. SANK ANNA’S OTHER VICTORIES. 

SUMMARY. 

Sankanna subdued the Turuskas who rebelled against 
Ramaraya (83). He abased the pride of the Muhammadans 
who used to attack (the Raya) from generation to generation 
in a great battle and subdued ail the country surrounded by 
the sea, as well as the country of the Oddis, (88). 

Keladinrp avijayam } 3: 83, 88. 

178. CIKKA SANKANNA NAYAKA. 

SUMMARY. 

After the demise of Dodda Sankanna his younger brother 
Cikka Sankaipna was installed on the throne at the palace of 
Ikkeri on Asvayuja su 5 of Kalayukti S. S. 1481. f 

Kcladtnipavij 'ayam, 4:1. 

179. CIKKA SANKANNA’S VICTORY OVER 
SALABHATA KHANA. 

Cikka Sankanna Nay aka defeated in battle at Guruvike 
Hiriya Arasapa Nayaka with the troops of his ally, Salabimta 

• This Vighalaraya appears to be identical with Ramaraja Vitjhala. 

' : f 16th Sapt. 1558 A,D. . 


mm l 



195 


K Lena of Bijapur. 1 ii' also vswjuishfid iu battle the 
Muhammadans who in v tided Hie countrv with a huge army 
of elephants, horses and men. 

AAA Ktladinrpavijayam, 4 : 6-7. 


180(«). YELUGO'P TIMMAYA NAY ANA. 

SUMMARY. 

Veiugoti Nay an a, son of Timmaya, killed Havali Obula on 
■Monday, Bhfi'di apada su 4, Parubhava, S. S. 1 -1-4>S in a battle at 
Nagai'jitnikonda. The Gods, Ikhaijdalesvara and N ages vara 
and the river Ivrsna witnessed this buttle, f o avenge the death 
of his father, Nayana met in battle Havali Obularaja* of the 
Lunar dynasty and slew him. 

VelugdtivSri Vatksilvali, 253*8. 


180(A), 

Nayanappa Nayadu slew Havali Obularaja in a battle on 
the banks of the Krsna near Nagarjunikonda on Monday, 
Bhadrapada su 4, Parabhava, S. B. 1468, in order to avenge the 
death of his father. 

Velugd(iv%ri Vaihm&aritra % p. 


181(a). THE EXPLOITS OF TIMMAYA YARA TIMMA. 


SUMMARY. 


The achievements of Kumar a Timma, son of Veiugoti 
Timma, are described in the following verses:— 

He put to flight Xzlm Khan and \ akub Khan , killed in 
battle Cintagunta Dharma Kao and expelled Mustafa Khan j 
cut to pieces (the army of) Malkibharamu (Malik Ibrahim 
Shah), and Dastura Khan, gave protection to Bhupati Ravu 
Naga, and laid siege to the fort of Cittela (1). Kumara Timma 
prospered by the favour of the king of Karijata who gave him 
wealth ; he put to flight the Mussalmaus in a fierce battle which 
took palce near Kondavidu (2). By the Mood of the intoxicate 1 


xiiis Har»U Obujaraja was a member of the Nand/ala hmmh of t be 


■:mAM^AA:A:;a.A ! 


lamUy. 


■ r- via 7 
A i'P'-. 

BSkfi 


ggSISgifil 

; ■v..:v x.v i ■ ■» ' . : ; A V.g. • .. ; ■> ■; Vf, . ■. V.,', A - V:i 

■ ■ . ' ' • . V - V. ■ ; ' A A'A- A>W 


196 

Turu§kas which he shed, the Hood of the river Krsna increased 
in volume (3). When Kumara Timma captured the forts of 
Cittela, Pero.ru, Devulapalli. Nagulapadu and Vadappalli, the 
other forts such as Devarakonda, Nallakonda, Aruvapalle and 
Undrakonda were panic stricken (4). At the instance of 
Ramaraja and Yara Timmaraja he entered the mountainous 
country and dispelled the fear of the Boyas ; put to flight 
Mustafa Khan and captured his elephants, cut off the heads of 
the soldiers of Devarakonda who met him in a fierce battle ; 
and won a victory near the Krsna over an army which 
Ibharamu Sahu (Ibrahim Shah) despatched against hint 
(5). As soon as Aliya Ramappa, Y ara Timmaraja and 
Venkatadri uttered the words, ‘granted permission’, Kumara 
Timma crossed the river Krsna, and within a gadi, he captured 
easily Cittela, Peruru, Devulapalli, Nagulapadu and Vadappalli 
cansing consternation in the minds of kings (6). At the 
instance of that Raghurama, viz., Yara Timmaraja, he killed 
like Han uman and Garutman their enemies (7). He destroyed 
the Mussalman army in a battle fought on the isle of Mandala 
near Ko^dapalle*(8)A : p|);Ah) 

VelugSfivZri Vathsavali, vv. 258-65. 


181 ( 6 ), 


This Yara Timma Nayadu marched to the assistance of 
Rhupati Ravu Nag aim a when the Pathans of Devarakondaf 
attacked him, and destroyed them. At the instance of Aliya 
Ramaraja, the king of Karnata, he captured Devulapalli, Peruru, 
Nallakonda, Aruvapalli, Gogulapadu and Vadappalli. 

VelugotivUri Vamsacaritra, p. 86. 


* Koudavi^u is the reading of the text- As there is no possibility of an island being 
near Kon4avi<}a the correct reading ought to be Kon^apalli in the neighbourhood of 
which there are two or .three islands in the Kjssja. 1 ... 


■f The authors of the Ydugdiivari Vammcaritta , unable to understand ‘ Dlvara* 
km^a-ihtintlanu * of the Velugativari VawsavatJ, amended the text and converted 
‘ $hamlanu ’ into ‘ Pathanxla thereby usuring into existence a garrison of Pathans at 
Devarakonda, ‘ fhamlann ? is the accusative plural of * plant 1 meaning * one who is 
stationed on gsuadsoa duty, 1 




mm 

m 






182(a). K02JDOJU, THE BARBER. , . 

A Catu. 

By associating with slaves who steal the leavings of food 
these ministers have coine to destroy (the good name) of the 
(royal) family. The worthy barber, Kondoju, who knows what 
is proper is more sensible.* 

A; ' KandukTlra Kutlra Kavi. 

182(6). ' ||| 

Moreover, Kondoju, the barber gave Ramaraja such a 
clean and comfortable shave at Vijayanagara that he won 
the royal approbation. Ramaraja granted him graciously a 
charter as a mark of his appreciation of Kondoju’s workman- 
ship. The pannu and kaaike which the barbers had to pay to 
the government in the village of Utukuru included in the stma 
of Pottapi-nadu belonging to the God Tiruvengalanatha were 
made sarvamanya at Awuku. In the same maimer, the pannu 
and the paryaya which the barber, Elloju, had to pay in 
Pondaluru in the Pottapi sma were also made sarvamanya. 

Kaifiyat of CitfinWi • L , R« 22, p. 180, 

183(a). SADlSIVA. 

SUMMARY, 

When Sadasiva ascended the throne of Vijayanagara, he 
appointed Ramaraju Murtiraju Vitthala as the governor of 
Kondavldu ; Vitthala made a grant of land to the god Konda 
Singarayyaon jisadha su 12, Virodhikrt $. S, 1473. Sadasiva 
ruled for 27 years from S. S'. 1404 to S. S. 1490. 

Kaifiyat of JCondavtdu : Mac, Mss . 15*4-40, pp. 22-3. 

183(5). VISVANATHA NiYAKA AND SRlRANGAM. 

After Saka year 1420, Madura and Trichin opoly became 
the fief of Visvanatha Nayaka and Narasimhaeariyar, the son 
of Vldhula Desikar, got him to make the following gifts to the 
temple : (gold vessels, etc,, names omitted). , :j 

Kdyilolugu, p» 150, 


# This verse was composed extempore by the poet in the durbar of Ramaraja as a 
park of hi* appreciation of Ko^oju’ss help in getting him introduced -*t tfca 


198 


184. THE DEATH OF RAMARAJA. 

Aliya Ramaraja, son-in-law of Krsnadevaraya, was 
rilling the kingdom afterwards. At that time two Muhammadan 
officers, who had been in the service of the Narapati kings 
for a long time, saw one day, while they were seated in the 
durbar, a pig passing at a distance, and spat upon the 
ground. Some of the courtiers who were ill-disposed towards 
them brought their conduct to the notice of the Raya, and 
pointed out that the officers who had insulted in this manner 
one of the incarnations of their god did not deserve to remain 
in the service of the state. At last they succeeded in 
persuading him to prohibit the said officers from entering into 
the precincts of the palace. 

The officers waited patiently for two or three months, 
being desirous of obeying the will of their master. As they 
did not receive their salary during these months, they were 
not in a position even to quit the city. At last they sent a 
message to the Raya : “We and our men have not received our 
salaries from a long time ; our womenfolk are put to much 
inconvenience as they have no money to defray the household 
expenses. If (Your Majesty) is pleased to pay our salary, we 
shall leave this place, and seek service elsewhere. ” When the 
Raya perused their representation, he sent the following order ; 
“ There seems to be no chance of your receiving cash ; we shall 
find out whether there is any gold or silver bullion (in the 
treasury), and send you a quantity equivalent in value to your 
salary.” The officers, considering that bullion could be easily 
converted into cash, submitted that they would readily accept 
A anything which His Majesty was pleased to pay. 

After some deliberation, Ramaraja devised a plan to pay 
their salary. With the quantity of gold due to them, he had a 
golden boar manufactured, and sent it to them in lieu of their 
salary. When they saw this golden boar, they were greatly 
astonished. Having hung it together with shoes, they spat 
upon it, and departed to Bhaganagar with their women and 
children by night. -When thev reached th 




at. When they reached that city, they narrated 


the whole incident to the king- of that place, and said : “ We did 
this in order to maintain the honour of our race. Yon are a 
powerful king, and you should make elaborate preparations 
(to avenge this insult).” 

The ruler of Bhaganagar communicated this information 
to the king of Delhi, who, having pondered over the matter 
for some time, collected an army and despatched it to Bhaga- 
nagar. On reaching its destination, this army joined the forces 


of Bhaganagar 


besides others, and marched 


against 


Aliya 


Ramaraja, the Narapati of Anegondi. 

Ramaraja gathered together his forces, and began the war 
which lasted for six months. As the head of Ajiya Ramaraja 
was cut off in the war, the troops of the Raya fled in all 
directions. Then (the king of Bhaganagar) stationed his garrison 
at Anegondi, and posted officers to garrison (the forts) on all 
sides to safeguard the kingdom. 

Kaifiyat af Gutti : X. K. 22, pp. 5*8. 

185(a). THE BATTLE OF R AKS ASI- -TAN GAD I . 

Mahamandalesvara Ramarajayya, who was governing the 
kingdom at Vijayanagara as the Yuvaraja of Badasiva Maha- 
raya, perished together with the army in battle with the 
Deccani Padushahs at Raksasi-Tangadi in the paragann of 
Henugondi near the confluence of the Malapaharl with the 
Knjna on S. S. 1486, Raktaksi. v . i; ; .' 

Kaifiyat of CiUivW-. L. R. 22, p. 184. 

185 ( 6 ). 

In this year (§. S. 1486 Raktaksi) Aliya Ramaraja fought 
a battle at Rakkasi- Taugadi on the bank of the Kr§ na with the 
Deccani Padushahs, and was destroyed with the army. Then 
the Mussalmaus came to Vijayanagara and ruined it. As they 
had given some territory to Sadasivaraya, he continued to rule. 

Kaifiyat of Kan danavolu-. L. R. 16, pp. 488-9. 

185(e). 

During the reign of Aliya Ramaraja, while Busi Reddi was 
holding the office of NUdu-gawlu, AUi Adal Shah Padushah of 


200 


Bijapur, Kutubu Shah of Bhaganagar and Nizam Padushah of 
Daulatabad, these three came with their armies, destroyed 
Aliya Ramaraja with the army, and upset the throne of 
Vidyanagara. As the said Nadu-gaudu Busi Reddi was not able 
to endure the tyranny of the Muhammadans, he fled to 
Grosununi-Anantapuram, in the Kandanavolu Taluk. The 
desais and the weak people, having abandoned their homes, 
migrated to the neighbourhood of Vidyanagara. 

Kaifiyat of Gai-wal : Mac. Mss. 15-3-18, p. 98. 

185(d). 

A Mnssalman Nizam (?) of the north called Malik Ibharam 
marched upon Ramappaya, the son-in-law of Krsnadevaraya ; 
but before he could reach Anegondi, Ramappaya advanced to 
meet him, and, having been wounded in the battle, died. 

Account of the Marapati Kings : L. R. 50, pp. 315-6. 


185(e). 


Then Aliya Ramaraja, who was managing the affairs of the 
kingdom in his capacity as Yuvaraja under Sadasivaraya, was 
destroyed with the army in a battle (fought near) the village of 
Raksasi-Tangadi on the bank of the Krsna with the five 
Padushahs of Deccan. Having set fire to all the temples at 
Anegondi and Virapaksa, they plundered the city of Vijaya- 


nagara. On that occasion the Muhammadan army pillaged 
the whole kingdom. So, the agraharas which remained intact 
until then were confiscated by the state. The same happened 
to Lebaka also. 

Kaifiyat of Lebaka : L. R. 44, p. 243. 

185(/). 

Thcfl began the rule of Aliya Ramaraja. While he was 
governing (the kingdom), in the month of Vaisakha of Raktaksi 
Si I486 (April-May 1564 A. D.) Alii Yadula Shah, the king 
of Bijapur, Kutubu Shah of Bhaganagar, and Nizam Shah 
Bhairy of Daulatabad, these three kings, having united to- 
gether, marched with their troops> fought fiercely with Rama- 


ja at Raksasi-Tangadi in the pargana of Honugondadahalli 




near the confluence of the Krsna with the Malapahan and 
destroyed him with his army. Haying plundered the city of 
Vidyanagara, the three Padushahs returned with their troops to 
Bijapur; and Vidyanagara gradually fell into ruin. Sub- 
sequently the kingdom fell into a state of anarchy and the 
depredations of the palaigars resulted in the dispersion of 
the people in different directions. The village thereupon fell 
into complete ruin. 

Kaifiyat of Sinda-vUdi ; X, R. 40, pp, 301-2, 


LvonSti Baiigaraja was governing the fort of Crutti during 
Aliya Ramaraja’s rule. The five Padushahs — Alii Abdal Shah 
of Bijapur, Badar Nizam Shah, Kutub Shah, etc. — having 
united together marched upon the Narapati, the king of kings, 
and engaged him in a battle. As the forces of the Raya were 
not strong enough, they cut off his head and overthrew the 
kingdom. 

Kaifiyat of yarra~TimmarSjucentvu : L.K.39, p. AT- 


185(A). 

While Aliya Ramaraja was governing the kingdom, the 
five . Muhammadan Padushahs — Kutubu Shah of Hyderabad, 
Alii Adal Shah of Bijapur, Nizam Shah Bahad! (Bhairy) of 
Ahraadnag-ar, Nizam Shah of Danlatabad * and lmad-ul-Muik 
of jBirad-Burlianpur — advanced with their armies, and having 
rebelled' against Aliya Ramaraya defeated him in battle, and 
cut off his head. They took possession of the kingdom. 

ICaijiyat of Tadfatri ■ L. R. 39, p. 232. 


185(f). 

Then, the Padushahs of Deccan, having joined together, 
slew Ramaraya, on account of religious hatred, and annexed 
the territories. ; 

Kaifiyat of S3ntarUvRr : L. R. 39, p. 508. 
* This it: certainly a mistake. The correct name is BarSd Shah of Bldar. 

E—26 ' , , ' fd.'f.:'. 


202 


1850 ). 

During the reign of this Sadasiyavaya ; Aliya Ramaraja 
who was the son-in-law of Krsnaraya, became the protector of 
the kingdom. The five Padushahs of Deccan— -Alii Adal Shah 
of Bijapur, Kutubu Shah of Bldar *, Nizam Shah Baharl, and 
two others — who had been paying him tribute, having united 
together fought a battle with him at Raksasada-Angadrj- on the 
bank of the Kp-sna and killed him. They plundered Yidya- 
nagara, and having made Sadasiva the ruler of the place, they 
departed (to their respective countries). Sadasiva ruled in the 
place for some more years. 

Kaifiyat of Sara : L. R. 33, p. 396. 

185(A). 

During the reign of Aliya Ramaraja in the year S§. S. 1488 
Raktaksi, the three Padushahs — All! Adalu Shah Padushah of 
Bijapur, Kutubu Shah of Bhaganagar and Nizam Shah Bhairy 
of Daulatabad — came with their armies, and destroyed him 
with the army in a battle near the confluence of the rivers 
Krsna and Malapaharl. As there was no ruler for six years, 
the people of the village fled in all directions, unable to 
endure the tyranny of the palaigars. 

Kaifiyat of Halulagondi : L. R, 34, pp. 163-4. 

185(0- 

After his (Acyuta’s) death Salakayya Timmaraya became 
king. After him came Aliya Ramaraya, who ruled the coun- 
try between the rivers Kaveri and Narmada. This king 
marched from Vijayanagara with a large army, and having 
crossed the Krsna, he advanced northwards, thereby rousing 
the enmity of all the Muhammadans. Therefore, Adal Shah 
Padushah came upon him with his troops, and slew him by 
severing his head. 

Kaifiyat ef Gulyam s' L* R . 34, pp* 47-8. 

* This is due to the ignorance or confusion of the kaifiyat writer. It should be 
Kutubu Shah of Golkon^a or Bhagaa&gar. 



f R&kf &si~T ,a&g*$u 



i I85(m). 

While Ramaraja was governing the kingdom iu this 
fash ion, the Muhammadans-— Ili Adam Shah Bahadaru of 
Bijupur, Nizam Shah, Kutub Shall, and some other Padushahs 
the total being* live — having joined together marched against 
him for war, Ramaraja was not able to cope with the enemy 
on the battle-field ; he fell into the hands of the Padushahs who 
beheaded him. The Muhammadans came to prominence in 
the dominions of the Hay a, and their garrisons were posted 
at Penugoiida and other places. 

Kaifiyat of FfcmumuAi : L. R. 17, pp. 418-19. 

185(«). 

The five Padushahs of Deccan, oiz., the rulers of Bijapur, 
Bidar, Daulatabad, Ahmadnagar, etc., fought a battle with 
Ivrsnaraya’s son-in-law, Aliya Ramaraja who was wielding 
supreme authority in the kingdom, since the accession of 
Sadasivaraya, at Raksasi-Tangadi on the bank of the Kr§na 
in S. S. I486 Raktaksi. The Muhammadans having destroyed 
Aliya Ramaraja with his army in the battle, marched upon 
Vijayanagara and plundered the royal palaces and the city, 
and burnt down the temples. They gave some territory to 
Sadasivaraya over which he ruled for six years. 

Kaifiyat &f Pu$pagiri i L. R* 13, p. 76. 


185 ( 0 ). 


"Hr 


While Ramaraja was thus ruling the kingdom, in 8. B. 1482 
Raktakfsi, 111 Adam Shah Padushah of Bijapfir, Kutub Shah of 
Bhaganagar, and Nizam Shah Bhairy of Daulatabad, these 
Mecehas, having marched with their armies, fought a fierce ;A 
battle with him at Raksasi-Tangadi in the par garni Holugonda- 
dahalli near the confluence of the Krsna and the Malapahar! 
and destroyed him with all his army. Then they plundered 
the city of "Vidyanagara, and returned to Bijapura. Since that 
time, Vidyanagara gradually fell into ruin, 

Kaifiyti of Ads-vim : £, M, 10, ft 37, 


204 


1850 ). 

Aliya Ramaraja, the son-in-law of Krsnadevamaharaja, 
who became sarvadhikari on the accession of this Sadasiva- 
raya, was exercising supreme power in the state. In the year 
&.S. 1486 Raktaksi, the Pa'nca Padushahs of Deccan, that is, the 
five Muhammadan rulers in the south — the rulers of Bijapuram, 
Bidur, Daulatabad, Ahmadnagar, etc., who had been paying 
tribute to this Raya, having united together fought a battle 
with Aliya Ramaraja at the village of Raksasi-Tangadi on the 
bank of the Krsna. These Muhammadans killed Ramaraja. 
together with his army, and marched to Vijayanagara. They 
set fire to the city, palaces, and temples and plundered the 
country. As they gave some territory to the said Sadasiva- 
raya, inscriptions bear testimony to his rule for ten years, even 
after the establishment of the Tixraka Government. 


K&ifiyat of Cnddapah ; L> R> 8, pp. 128-29, 


185 ( 2 ). 


Then, while Sadlsiva and Aliya Ramaraja were ruling as 
King and Yuvardja respectively, the five Deccan Padushahs of 
Bijapuram, Bidur etc., joined together and fought with Aliya 
Ramaraja and killed him. In consequence Warangal and 
Anumakonda were once again included in the Turaka 
dominions. 

Kaifiyat of Anumakonda : Mac . Mss. 15-4-5, p. 108. 


.185 (r). 


Ramarajayyadeva Maharaja having come to power was 
ruling the kingdom until &S. 1483. The Deccan Padushahs 
having joined together killed Ramaraja, the king of Karna- 
taka, and took possession of the country. Malik Vibauram 
Pad u shah sent a Muhammadan officer called Martuja to take 
possession of this place, . / 

Kaifiyat of ICoadavidu : Mae. Mss. 15-4-40, pp. 22-3. 


186. RAMARAJA’S BAKHAIR, 

To the presence of R. R.* my Lord Master : — The petition 
submitted by the servant of (your) servants, Ramaji Tirmala 




H 


llllil 


% stands probably for MUfarUJairl 



Harkara.* In accordance with the arrangements made by 
Your Highness, I was remaining in the presence of Rama- 
raja.f the lord of Karnataka and the southern countries until 
Vaisakha, ba., 8 of the year Raktakgi corresponding to year 
1486 of the Salivahana Saka, 


Adula Salui, who brought letters from his master, having stood 
at the main gate, informed the king (through a messenger) of 
his arrival Having had this (information; brought to his 
favourable attention, the king ordered his dulnmij, whom he 
summoned to his presence, thus : “ Make arrangements for 

lodging the ( mahaldar ) of All! Adula Salm in the Ananda Mahal 
which is outside the jdsdii cdoadi and hazard cavadi t; pay him 
(money) for his expenses as suited to his position, and attend 
to his needs.” On receiving this order the dalavai/s messen- 
ger (whom he deputed) brought (the mahaldar ), according to 
the royal order, to the Ananda Mahal where he lodged him, and 
having paid for his expenses (money) as suited to his status, 
attended to his needs. (The messenger) after carrying out his 
instructions returned (to the court) and communicated to the 
king everything. AbgJiAA 


The mahaldar , having taken rest during that night in the 
Ananda Mahal woke up betimes next morning, washed his 
hands and face, and said his prayers. Then he reflected, “ As 
the king did not summon me at once to his presence to receive 
the letters of my master, he treated (me) with indifference ; bit 
I must not say anything at present ; if I talk much, my self- 
respect will be lost. I am but a weak servant.§ It is desirable 

* ‘Ramajee Harracarra.’ LQ3L {^Macken&ii ColluHon \ India Office Mss. No* X, 
English ;tiv of the Bakh.air p. 157. It will bo referred to ; hereafter . 
means a messenger. 

• f ESmarSja is referred to by his name only in three places in the chronicle $ ,4c 
is generally spoken of as RajabhtSvara throughout this work. - • ' 

% ‘Ordered him to lodge the mahaldnr in the Ananda Mahal near Clmmo 
peshitaSara (LO.M u p. 157). JUsfiti cUvadi is th© office of the spies. AfagSn* &va$i is 
the office .of the audience halt , A;'' ■ 

§ He was but the servant of a low p. 158. 



206 


to preserve one’s self-respect at all costs. If one wants to ride 
upon a mighty elephant, one should do so only after considering 
the pros, and eons* One who is desirous of holding a long 
conversation with the king should have ample foresight.” 
Having thus restored peace to his mind, he sent a message to 
the king. 

“ Your Majesty was not pleased to summon me as soon 
as I arrived to your august presence to receive the letters 
which 1 have brought. They deal with very delicate (affairs of 
state). I submit that Your Majesty may be pleased now at 
least to send for me, so that I may deliver the letters and 
communicate all information about them (in person).” 


When this message reached the King of Kings, he was 
highly pleased and granted him permission to repair to the 
royal presence. Accordingly, the mahaldar, taking the letters 
with him, presented himself before His Majesty, and saluted 
him with much humility, and having delivered the letters, 
represented certain matters (pertaining to them). Then he 
praised the king thus : 


“ Your Majesty is the King of Kings, unequalled in pro- 
wess. No monarch who is so capable as Your Majesty is seen 
anywhere in the world ; Your Majesty has been called Navakoti - 
Narciyana. How can I adequately praise Your Majesty, who is 
a storehouse of regal splendour!” 


The king was very much pleased to hear praises such as 
these. He handed over the letters which he received from the 
mahaldar to his secretary (sthandpati),f and commanded him 
to read them. He was greatly delighted to hear their contents. 
Then, being desirous of holding a durbar in the Inanda Mahal 


* “For, as the proverb says, ' One must take a little time to consider before one 
mounts an elephant even if it be as low in stature as a diminutive ma}a ’ LO,M. , p. 168. 

t Sanapati— p. 159. 


207 



he went thither, and sat in state in the midst of all his courtiers 
and the holders of the seventy -two viniydgas. 

At that time, (a company of) Telugu acrobats called the 
Dombas came to the court, and obtained at once permission to 
exhibit their feats (before the assembled courtiers). The per- 
formance continued for about to nr to six hours; and -when it 
was concluded the king commanded that they should be given 
betel leaves, nuts, and presents (as suited to their skill). When 
this was done, the Dombas prostrated before the King of Kings, 
and petitioned that. His Majesty might be pleased to bestow 
upon them ten pigs for the purpose of eating. The Narapati 
having caused the desired animals to be brought before him 
from the karkhana of the palace, aud giving them to the 
acrobats permitted them to depart from his presence. 

The mahaldar of kill Adula Sahu was also sitting (in the 
assembly). As soon as he saw the swine, covering his face 
(with his hands). he said :* 


“ I am a Mussalman by birth ; these impure beasts should 
not come within my sight ; if they come (before me), I should 
not see them. A Mussalman, who looks at these filthy crea- 
tures, becomes (by that very act) a Hindu.” : y: ;\y : 

On hearing this, the king observed : 

“ People of your community eat fowl. A person who 
consumes a fowl, consumes filth at the same time,” 

The mahaldar replied : 

• “ You eat impure animals ; and consequently the race to 

which you belong is, indeed, low.” ,, Sift!! 

On hearing these words, the King of Kings became indig- 
nant. He had all the swine in the city collected ; and com- 
manded that ail of them should be driven inside a large house, 

. ■ . ' - ■ / . ■' • . ■' ' . * ■ " ' ■ ' 4 

# At this time the mahaldar of All! Adil Shf h ? coming in to the Raja to confer otr 

the important business he was charged with and meeting these animals on Ms way, 
immediately covered his face exclaiming etc.— /.aifef., p. 159. 


208 


on the floor of which, (grains of millet, usually consumed by 
swine, were scattered.) Then, at the command of the king, the 
doors of the house were locked and sealed (with the royal seal). 

Next morning when the doors were opened, it was dis- 
covered that the swine which had a. hearty feed, covered the 
floor of the house with filth. (Having observed this), the 
Narapati caused a hundred fowls to be; brought, and let them 
into the house. At once they began to eat the grains of millet, ^ 


picking them up from the excreta of the swine. The King of 
Kings then sent for the mahaldar, and (when he came) — point- 
ing at the fowls, asked, — “ You said that we ate filthy creatures. 
Look at the fowls that are eating the grains of millet, picking 
them out from the filth of the swine. Now, tell me, how great 
is the race to which you, who eat these fowls, belong?” 

The mahaldar was greatly annoyed to hear this question. 
In great anger, he attempted to leave (the audience hall); but 
the king, having called (him) back, quieted his mind by treating 
him with respect. Then having’ offered him tdmbula, with 
several presents suitable to his position, he gave him leave to 
depart from his presence. 

The mahaldar then repaired to the place where his master, 
Yadula >§aha Padusah was (living at the time). Removing 
the turban from his head, he put it on round his neck, and said 
. in great excitement : 

: “ Peace be on you, 0, Padxishah: (Your) rule has now come 

; YYv to an end. The practices of the Mussalmans are not respected. 
Now, the infidel has become bold, he does not care for the 
honour of the Mussalmans. (Our) honour can only be saved 
(in one way). Hazarat Padusah Saheb should destroy that 
Narapati and posting military garrisons everywhere in the 
Kingdom of Karnataka establish his authority. Otherwise not 
even a particle of honour will be left to us. Therefore, having 
listened to my words ( Your Majesty) should be pleased to enter 
ij| : Karnataka.” 


209 


On hearing- this request, the Padnsah said to the mahaldar : 

“ As I have attained the status of being called a son of the 
Narapati, i shall do nothing to harm him. Tie is my elder ; 
and it is not meet that I should stand against him.” 

The mahaldar grew angry when he heard these words. 
He left the court without asking for or obtaining permission of 
his master and repaired to the place where the three Padiisahas 
were residing (at that. time). The three Padusalias were 
Akhabasra Julayi Padushah,* the lord of the throne of Jahalna- 
pur, Yadula Saha Padushah and Savayl Jagajhampa Suguna 
Kannada Jana P5dusah.*j' They met at Jahalnapur with the 


* Akbar Jalaladeen— f.O. Af, t p* 161, 

f It Is stated clearly here that Akhabagu Julayi Padushah was the ruler of Jahalna* 
pin The name of this chief is spelt in different ways in the original. 

On p« 49, L, A, 24 it is written as Akhacara Jalaidin Padushah; on p. 162 it is written 
as Akaba.ru Jalaudin Padusahu; on p. I72.it is- written. ' as Akabaru Jaladin Mogul! 
PadulSha, Takhtu Jahalnaplr; on p. 66 it is ' written as Akhacaru Jaladiau Pldusaha 
Mop a! Fudasahsu 

/. 0 . M. has on p. 161:— ' - , . A ■, 

Akbar Jalalodeen of Jain. ah pore. 

The Mo?nS Kid nlh Ab luBa KblT:,., 

. Nizam A Cl Byr- e BIMshah. 

The ma/iahMf is said to have found them with Alii Adil ShS.h Savlyi Jagajumpa 
Sugoona Cuuarajana. 

It is obvious from this that the name of this chief was Akbar Jalahud-DJa ; and that 
he was a Moghul who ruled at Jahalnapur, The name of the second Padshah could not 
have been Yadula SSka PSdusSha; for the mahitiiUr who left Yadula Saha’s court -in anger 
could not hav * gone to that monarch to. • ventilate his grievances against him. This is 
clearly seen bv the conversation that took .place between the mahaldTir and the three 
Padshahs. They said; “ You are a makdi^r in the service of Alii Adula Sahu. It 
is strange that you should come to us instead of submitting your grievances ' to your 
master. It appears that you have come to us, without communicating the views express- 
ed by the Nasapati to your master.*' The mahaldar replied, “ I have not come without 
(at first) complaining to my master, etc.” It is evident from this conversation that All! 
Adula Sahu was not one of the three Padshahs that met at JahalnSpura. Savayi Jagajhampa 
Suguna Kannada Jana is not the name of a person, but a string of titles. . This passage 
appears to have been Interpolated by a person, who was so ignorant that he did not even 
know the names of the three Muslim rulers who met at Jahalnapura, 

The names of the three Padshahs are mentioned' in another place in this 
They are Hiram Saha Padulaha, Ib&rahim Kutapu Saha, and Imam&na Melaka. 

%ee L. A. 24, pp. 154-55), : ■ : •'' ' ;y 



210 


object of attending a dance, and sat in state in the Fasawfa 
Mahal * surrounded by the people of the seventy- two viniyogas, 
the eighteen Icarkhanas and twelve mahalsf and learned men. 


While the (three Padusahas) sat in state, surrounded by 
the men of the fifty-six countries, women danced, musicians 
sang, and persons skilled in playing on the Vina played upon 
that instrument. While the three Padusahas were conversing 
with religious men, the mahaldar of Yadula Saha Padus'ah 
presented himself before them and saluted them in a most 
respectful manner. Then he described graphically his ex- 
periences (at Vijayanagara). The three Padusahas listened 
attentively to what he said, and asked : “Yon are a Mahaldar 
(employed in the service) of Alii Yadula Saha. It is strange 
that you should have come to us (with this complaint) instead 
of submitting it to your master. It appears that yon have 
come to ns without communicating to your master the opinion 
which the Narapati had expressed. How do you account for 
this ? ” To this the mahaldar replied : 

“ I have not come (here) without (first) complaining to my 
master.” (Having given this reply), he then explained to them 
how his master, to whom he had complained, attaching no 
value to his statement, said “ I have acquired the status of 


being called a son of Rajabhuvara 5 and I will not raise my 
hand against him,” and added : “ (Having been thus brushed 
aside), I have approached you,” 

When the three Padusahas heard carefully, the story 
of the mahaldar , they became indignant, and said, “ what 
honour has the Rajabhuvara himself '? ” They resolved that 
they should make war upon him and devastate the whole 
of Karnata causing (Rajabhuvara) loss by way of 
punishment.! Summoning their astapradhanas, captains 

' * Malliga (MSJige p. 161. ; / 

t A long list of the seventy- two •&mi0gas and other offices given in the text 
(pp. 263 -7) is omitted from this translation. 

t ‘and force him to carry and eat the abominable food of his religion^ 

I v Wl* 


211 



shooting balls 


shooting bails 
weighing 2 mds. 
do. 1 ind. 


The manufacturers of ammunition 
Elephants 

Camels Kr I. : 

Palanquins 

Camel guns 

Gunners 

■Bugles y-rhy 

Carts ' : |? 
Eoot-soldiers 


* /. 0, M*t p., 171 lias the following note 

; Th© great; Akfcftf succeeded to the throne ia A.D. 1556 ; he died id 'A, IX 1605*; 

The battle was fought in A.D. 1564 ; , 

It is possible that he might have assisted the confederacy with soma auxiliary treopr 
especially as it was considered a war for the protection of their (Mussalman) religion, 
though the accommodating nature of Akbar*s religious principles is well known. It i* 
not, however, mentioned in Ferishta’s account of the war. 

f Sometimes called ioatp. To provide against erontuiditi^ 

With him a 8pare*horse so that each cavalier had two horses. 


command era, the officers of the vutr department, and the 
holders of the s venty-two i-ini !/>!;<■-. they commanded them to 
prepare the. arm) iuv war. They ...so direct ee that the tents 
should be pitched outside (the precincts of the city). Accord- 
ingly the armies of the three PSdnsahas together with the men 
of seventy-two viniyogas prepared themselves for war thus : 

The troops of Akhabara Jalaladiir ilhgeU Puduslhu, the 
lord of Jalialiiapuva : (horses, archers, the camp guard, lancers, 
and kottala del, hies). 


The superior Koitala horse f 
The archers 

Tire foot-soldiers guarding the tents 
and the luggage 
The lancers .h'.hihfh h 
Guns capable of 
weighing 5 mds. 

Guns capable of 


12,000 

5,00,000 

5.000 
50,000 

4.000 

5.000 

6.000 

25,120 

... 1 , 00,000 
... 2 , 00,000 

50.000 
•m 7 ,840 

870 

860 

60.000 
...2,50,00,000 



Rehhalis 8,000 

Elephant guns ... 9,650 

Swivel guns (Jajas) ... 12,960 

Tomtoms ... 94,320 

*Fire lock men ... ■ 9,640 


Nizam Saha Bhairy, the king of Daulatabad, and Alii Yadtila 
Saha Padusalia Savayl Jagajhampa Snguna Kannada Jana 
prepared likewise their armies (for war).f The three Padit- 
sahas having thus made ready the army comprising eRphants, 
horses, chariots, and men, distributed among them (the neces- 
sary articles). Then, they hoisted their respective banners on 
their tents, and were ready to march against the Narapati. 

Timmaji Bhlmaji, an ambassador Qiazib ) of Raj abhu vara, 
who was camping at that time in Jahalnapur, having learnt 
that the armies of the three Padusahas had marched for the 
war, sent a spy to inform his master (of the events that took 
place there). $ The spy reached (Vijayanagara), and deliver- 
ed the message of the ambassador to the Narapati, expressing 
at the same time some of his own views (on the matter). 

On the day of Vijayadasami, the Narapati held in a 
beautiful garden, § a durbar which was attended by all his 
ministers, captains, officers of the war department, and the 
men of the seventy- two kinds of vmiyogas. 


* These are not mentioned in the Madras Government Oriental Manuscript Library 
copy of the ms. 

f ‘ This was the strength of Akbar Jallalodeen’s force and an equal number was 
collected by Nizam Shah Biery of Daulatabad. The forces of Alii Adil Shah Savayee 
Jagajhampa Saguna Kanara Jana were equally numerous.’ — I. O. M., p. 01. 

There appears to be a lacuna here. The author who gives a detailed account of the 
army of one of the three allies should have given a similar account in the case of the 
other two. The inclusion of the name of Alii Adula So.hu Padusahu is a mistake, which 
any author caring for consistency would not have committed. Here the original account, 
whether it was of RImaji Tirumal or of some one else, appears to have suffered from the 
hands of an ignorant editor or restorer. 

X * * * § Sent an express to their master to Beejanagar by Davalojee-Jasood advising 
of their preparations.’—/. O. M., p. 171. 

§ ‘Upon this on the Dasara Rama Rayaloo sat in his Mahal in the Manohara- 




(The most important nobles) that were present in the 

)ar were : * ;,kk; 'kkNrk;'kkkk- : ;k'Nk:N 

Piddige Jakkana (Padeenee Juckana) Nayaka 
Madagamasuru Virupanna (Vlrapa) Nayaka 
Ikkeri Krsnappa Nayaka 
Sode (Soonda) Raghunatlin Nayaka 
Citrakullu Slnapi . Sa apa) Nayaka 
Chandavarada Bhlina Nayaka 
Kollarada Kesi (Kerallarada Kasee) Nayaka 
Bidanum (Bids mum) SSmasekhara Nayaka 
Sakarepatnada Jakkanna Nayaka 
Adavahi V enkatapati Nayaka y. 

Slreda Purpa (Parupoo) Nayaka N||I| 

Talavara Timmana Nayaka . k ;:kkky : ky 

Penagonda (Penuakonda) Ellappa Nayaka 
Ballapurada Eiii (Alla)’ Nayaka 
orlrangapattanada Ramarajit 

Gudikota Acyuta Nayaka yk-N 

Bahkapurada Ellappa Nayaka 


Tadipatri Bisalappa Nayaka 

Gutti Timmappa Nayaka . 

Kadapa Venkatapati Nayaka 

The Narapati Padu^aha addressed them and said 
“The four Mussalman Padusahas,f having combined 
their troops are together marching upon us with the object of 
conquering Karnataka. Collecting all your troops, and in- 
creasing their number by recruiting fresh soldiers, proceed 


* The /. 0 « M presents some variations in the names ; and th«y axe in^icat#d" 
within brackets. 

f Instead of the usual i three PSdusalias,* we have here four- This disOr^paBO/ ■ 
is more apparent than real. Ramaraja, who was probably under' the imptediM 
» AH ’ Sdil Shah had also joined the others, naturally referred to the 'Muss.ahnan : "ruieXs : : 
as four, ' - - . ' . 


against the enemy, and offer them a determined resistance as 
if you are fighting for stakes. Strike the enemy boldly in his 
face so as to demonstrate your manliness. Bring glory (to us) 
by turning them back (from the field of battle).” 

(The Narapati) encouraged his ministers and nobles in 
several wa) s. Then he caused to be brought from th ejamadar- 
khana (wardrobe) suitable cloths (such as) lace-embroidered 
jalci^ahari-kimujafina * jackets ( kudata ), mantles stuffed with 
cotton (dagali), double shawls made of (satin) f fezare, costly 
stuffs of various colours, shawls of saffron, crimson, + rose, and 
white. Bandar prints, sakalati, sidtani, and green woollen 
stuff’s, kalasiyadade. . .safeda durangi broad cloth, § jamedaris,$ 
laced trousers and turbans, tukumabanduks,^ embroidered 
cloths (?), upper vests with flower patterns, and turbans ; pearl 
and kaliki-c rests, necklaces, bangles set with gems, mohana - 
malas ||, pendants, and kundalas (ear-rings) set with the nine 
kinds of gems, and other valuable jewels ; and the weapons of 
thirty-two kinds such as shield, sword, discus, bow and arrows, 
nciga** hhindivala , ft lance, club, goad, etc., which he 
distributed among them, and persuaded them in spirited, 
dignified, witty and sweet words (to fight). Next he paid the 
annual and monthly allowances for their families as becoming 
their position, and sent them home. Then the Narapati, the 
hero of the heroes, sat in council with the seven councillors, 


# Meaning not . intelligible. Silk and embroidered vests and ' jackets-—. 
W.M.> p. 173. 

t Meaning not intelligible. 
t JfafarZnilaki. \ 

.v§‘'’ ■ tiii'eans" | is two coloured; but as the meaning of the 

previous words is not clear, it is not possible to know what kind of cloth ii referred 
to her©. 1 

$ Meaning u not known. ^ ... 

1 A kind of mantle which is fastened at the waist by a button. 

|| Chains worn round the neck ; from mdh zWsslov©, mal a » chain—/.#. p. 173. 

' m A serpentine weapon, 
tf An arrow or shaft discharged from a tube. 


215 



■K-'fjS; 


viz., durgadhyakm, ihanadhjakm , dharmddhyakm, sainyddhjnkm , 
j mrdhitn, duta* and rffffea/iaf, and resolved to march against 
the enemy. 

On the third day after the decision in the council to march 
upon the enemy, the spies brought information to the Raya, in 
the palace, that the three Paducah as sent the following message 
to All! Yadula Balia Padusafaa:* ** We three, having combined 
our armies, are marching together to conquer Karnata, the 
kingdom of the Narapati. You should also march for war. 
As we intend to pass through the country which is under your 
control, we request you to allow us to march along that road. 
You should join us, and conquer Karnataka (fighting the 
enemy) pertinaciously ”. 

All! Yadula Saha, as soon as lie received this message, 
sent them a reply, thus : 

“ I should not raise up my hand in opposition to Raja- 
bhuvara. I have acquired the privilege of being called his son. 
I should not be treacherous (to him) in any manner.” 

(Yadula Saha) delivered this message to the Mzibs (of the 
three Padusahas), and having honoured them, by presenting 
them suitable gifts such as dresses (of honour), ear-rings, 
necklaces, pendants, crests, horses and elephants, he gave them 
permission to depart. 

Then Rajabhuvara received a despatch from his harakara 
Nagoji Narayaiia who was at the camp of the three Padusahas, 
He informed his master that the three Padusahas sent an 
envoy to (the court of) All! Yadula Saha, (inviting him to join 
them), but he declined to accede to their request declaring 
that he would not oppose the Narapati Padusaha, As a 
similar despatch arrived, at the same time, from the Vijaya- 
nagara envoy stationed at (the court of) All! Yadula Saha, 

* PurUdhyakfa — / 0. M, , p. 174 . 

■■■■■ -':v. : 

f Devastan — Ibid* 

t M Alii Yadula Saha Padusaha Were one of the three Musli m .nil erg. who : 
TahalxtipUr, there would have hem no need, for sending this message^ ... - 


216 

Rajabhiivara was immensely delighted. Then the Narapati 
Padusaha sent with the Senapati Bisalappa Nayaka valuable 
dresses, a crest set with pearls, ear-rings, necklaces, ana five 
pairs of Icoltal horses to Alii Yadula Saha who being greatly 
pleased with (the honour done to him) received them in the 
durbar. In return, he sent with Bisalappa elephants, horses, 
jewels and dresses including jewelled turbans, and superior 
shawls, and commanded one of his vakils to accompany him 
to Vijayanagara. > ; :,V 

Now the hezths of the three Padusahas (who were at 
Bijapiir) informed their respective masters that A Hi Yadula Balia 
and Rajabhiivara, having joined together (in an alliance), were 
uniting their territories. On the receipt of this information, 
they sent to Alii Yadula Saha a subedar of considerable 
influence with the object of (dissuading him from joining 
Rajabhiivara). The subedar, as soon as he reached (Bijapiir), 
(repaired to the presence of) All! Yadula Balia and expostulated 
with him thus: “ You are a Mussalman sovereign; it is not 

advisable that you should join your kingdom with that of an 
infidel Hindu. This course of action brings you neither greatness 
nor glory. Let the past bury the past. Now, at least, be well 
advised and join the three Padusahas. If you four, joining- 
together, unite your territories, and fight the Hindu infidel 
without caring for his favour, in such a manner as to conquer 
Karnataka, you acquire glory. If yon do not listen to us, 
you will be mined, and your country will be devastated. 
When you become an exile, you lose your honour. You are 
an intelligent (King) with considerable foresight. By joining 
(the three PadutShas), you v. ill become great; and the four 
kingdoms w.il acquire renown ; and you will remain safe.” 5 ' 

When A115 Yadula Saha heard this counsel, he reflected 
(as follows) : — IB BhBB ' 

“ Why should I accept their advice and break my 
(plighted) word? I must send the three Padusahas a reply 

* The original has * ninna bajUvu idkt r \ bajavu probably is the K&ima^a cortuptioa 
of Urdu bael&v meaning safety, security, etc. 


217 


which, will enable me to keep the goodwill of both the parties.” 
Then he delivered an ambiguous message to the subedar. 
“As soon as I should join ..... .Eajabhuvara is a powerful 

Padusaha. Paying attention to what I am saying, arrange 
the affairs with foresight, so that victory should be won S ”* 

Having delivered this message to the subedar, he honoured 
him according to his position by presenting him. cloths and 
jewels, and sent him away. The subedar returned to (the camp 
of) the three Padusahas, and told them how he had communi- 
cated their message to All! Y adula i§aha. 


(Meanwhile) news reached Vidyanagara that the Three 
Padusahas having entered into an agreement with A 111 Y adula 
§aha were marching forward. As soon as this information 
reached the Sempati Bisalappa Nayaka, he communicated it 
to Eajabhuvara. In the same manner, all the ministers sub- 
mitted to the king (and said), — f. 

“You, whom people call Navakoti Narayana, are a great 
monarch of extraordinary prowess.* You should not abandon 
this affair at this juncture. The enemies having bravely 
advanced are beginning to arrive. If you remain inactive, 
(they) will increase in turbulence, harass and ruin the 

# The passage in the original is very corrupt. It is not possible to make out the 
exact sense. There is probably a lacuna here in the text Therefore only the gist of the 
passage is given. . .. 

The corresponding portion in the LO.Af. runs thus 

u He observed to the Subedar that Ramarauze was very powerful and to attempt 
his entire subversion was a serious matter requiring strides deliberation and much more 
powerful support than his ; that by all means it was necessary to weigh well the measures 
proper for conquering him in war.” — /,O.M. s p* t¥% 

t £0-M., p. 177 has the following 
1 ■ <f,; Busalapa' 'Narky th® Senapati of the Narapatee;' having ' 

Badshahs had prevailed on Ally Adi! Shah to join them and that they were about march- 
ing into his dominions acquainted Ramarayaloo together with his ministers thereof 
addressing Mm as follows :** 

t 1 King over all Kings, Navakoti Narayan, sovereign of counties treasures^** 

Si— ^8 


■ 218 


whole realm, and plunder and carry away the ryots as 
prisoners of war. The enemies should be put down in time. 
On this occasion, without hesitating to spend money, you 
should gather all kinds of forces, by honouring the vaztrs, 
umrcis, and men of noble families with the presentation of 
jewels suited to their status and dignity.” 

When the Narapati heard this petition of the astapradha- 
nas, commanders, captains and other officers of the whole 
kingdom,* he was greatly delighted, and having caused money 
to be brought from the treasury, he distributed it with tambulas 
to all the courtiers and sepoys ; he then commanded that the 
war materials and the tents should be taken outside the city ; 
and despatched (towards the frontier) some companies of his 
faithful vanguard. Then he retired into the zenana. 

(Rajabhuvara) went into the palace of his senior wife, 
Satyabhama.f He seated himself on a jewelled cot$ ...he 
who possessed the eight aisvaryas enjoyed the eight bhogas. 
Then he visited the houses of his sixty-four wives such as 
Devaeintamani,§ Tiruvengalamma, Subhadra, Mitravinda, 
Jambavati, Kadha, (Mohiul, CamavarnI etc.),# and presented 
to them valuable articles even as he had done to his first wife, 
— and drank with them. Next, he distributed presents to 
all. Having thus honoured his sons, friends, and wives, he 
climbed up to the candrasala where his mother was dwelling 
and prostrated himself at her feet with great humility. His 
mother, who was greatly delighted, blessed him and having 
waved (before him) (a plate) filled with the gems of nine 
varieties and flowers made of gold to avert evil eye, she 

was perused in the Great Connell of State when the 8 
^pradameesj'.the^DajaYoy'S^napatee and other chiefs were present 0» p, 178. 

f Sattee Banna. — /. 0. M>, p. 178. .... 

% A portion of the text which enumerates the jewels, .dress, flowers, etc., which 
Raj ahM vara is said to have presented to his wife is not translated as it is of no histori- 
cal value. 

, § Chintaxnanx* — ■/. 0. M> } p. m 
f The## two names are not mentioned ini 0 L M* 


aiy 


distributed them in charity among the Brahmans. Then she 
led her son into her palace, and offered him several presents. 

Then, the Narapaii, spoke to his mother as follows : “ The 
three Padusahas, liave joined together, and revolted against me ; 
and having declared war, they are marching upon Karnataka 
with the object of subjugating it. This is a country where 
dharma flourishes. This virtuous kingdom lias been given to 
the gods and the Brahmans. Why should tb eir (the Mussalman) 
authority be exercised in this state which contains shrines of 
gods, holy places of pilgrimage and learned men ? By your 
favour, and the grace of our family deities, all the people that 
are (under me) do not lack military force and wealth to 
protect these. I desire to march (against the enemy) with all 
my troops, and destroy them in a battle. What advice would 
you give me ?” 


When (Rajabhuvara) asked the permission of his mother 
in these terms, she was much distressed, and said : * You are the 
Narapati; a great Padusah. The reigns of the kings of seven 
generations have passed by this time. They (the Mussalman 
kings) have remained in their places of respect up to the 
present.* It is not known whether the time is unfavourable 
to them (your enemies) or to you. Owing to the adverseness 
of the circumstances, (the enemies) causing much trouble, are 
advancing (on us). Well, it is the consequence of the indebted- 
ness of the preceding birth. You are a boy. Why should you 
provoke their enmity .? Having regard for the eircumstanceS, it 
is better to act in accordance with the trend of events, and 
conclude peace with the enemy \f 


9 “As mighty sovereigns, the Kara patty race have now reigned without 
misfortune or interruption through a line of Seven of your Royal Ancestors and 
predecessors to this time; neither until now did these three Kings entertain enmity 
towards us but remained quiet within their dominions. 5 '—/ 0 . A/. } p. 183, 

t The original of this passage is \ cry corrupt and unintelligible. The passage, 
is thus summarised in L O, M, } p. 183—“ If you approve of my council it will be best to 
wait a little for the issue of the present matters &c. and to consider how tbs peace may 
still preserved.” 

;?V / ; ■■■ 

'■ ' . J r ’.v. s ' 'S' ’ ' • 


220 


Rajabhuvara* who was greatly displeased with this 
advice, said, ‘“While I have attained the status of the great 
Narapati king, and am honoured with, the title of aprati- 
parakrama ’ (unequalled in prowess), what is their greatness 
(when compared to mine) ? They had been my dependents, 
and were ruling the lands which I granted to them. Is not my 
prestige lowered, if I attempt to negotiate the terms of peace 
(with them) ? Even if I desire to fight with them continuously, 


until I secure victory, I do not lack the means. Therefore, 
I have made up my mind to fight with the enemy.” 

His (Rajabhuvara’s) mother, on hearing this, was greatly 
delighted, and catching hold of his hand, she blessed him much, 
wished that he should win victory. Then, having seated him 
upon a throne, she showered on him gold like a rain of 
flowers, and blessing him again said, “ May the enemy be 
vanquished ! ” Then she offered prayers to the gods, and gave 
her consent (in these terms) “ Return home a victor.” 

Rajabhuvara then entered the Saugata Mahal where he 
rested awhile on a couch and slept. While he was asleep 
at night, he dreamt that (some unknown persons) forcibly 
removed the pearls from his ear-rings He woke up, and having 
stretched his body, invoked Hari (Visnu), and as his mind was 
greatly perturbed, he became a prey to acute distress. Next 
morning, he summoned Brahmans who were well versed in all 
the Vedas and the §astras, and described to them his dream. 
The Brahmans said : “ (the effect of) the dream is destroyed ; 
the gods have shown their favour ; be tranquil and blessed 
him much. But the king who was not satisfied (with this 
assurance) said, “ I never dreamed such an evil dream. I 
never incurred the displeasure of God. Ruin has overtaken 

I (my) prosperity ; the goddess of wealth, and (my) family 
deifies are angry with me. What is the use of my efforts, after 
I have lost the grace of the gods ? Well, (this is) the result of the 
debt contracted in the former birth ; but courage must not be 

* ‘Ramaboovar.*— 


abandoned. As long as I have courage, so long shall I strive. 
Nothing can go contrary to destiny. No useful purpose is 
served by my sorrow.” 


While the king sat reflecting in this manner, the learned 
men restored tranquillity (to his mind), and blessing him in 
suitable terms, said, “May your enemies be defeated ! May 
you rule for ever as a permanent sovereign, with the longevity 
of Markandeya, having conquered your enemies, and esta- 
blished yourselves as a Chatrapati” (The king) then distributed 
in charity with his usual generosity jewels set with gems 
among the assembled Brahmans, and sent them away. Having 
bathed, he sent for the Brahmans once again, and gave them 
fifty thousand rupees in charity. He next summoned astro- 
logers to his presence, and asked them to fix an auspicious 
hour for starting. He had the tent pitched outside (the city) in 
the amrla-siddhi-yoga, (according to the instructions of the 
astrologers), and left the palace and V idy anagara at 1 1 o’clock, 
riding upon his swift steed Rajahamsa by name, accompanied by 
the holders of the seventy-two viniyogas. Arriving at the place 
near the Navagaja war-drum, on the northern side (of the city), 
he halted there. The officers of the seventy-two viniyogas such 
as the astapradhdnas, dalavays , commanders etc., and of the 
eighteen karkhanas and the twelve mahals lay encamped 
with their respective forces to the right and left of the 
royal tent. In response to a proclamation summoning all the 
troopers residing in Vidyanagara on pain of punishment, all 
the men gathered (at the camp), saying “ are our lives dearer 
than that of the king ? ” 

The king then summoning the astapradhanas, parupatyagars, 
princes, Dalavayi Sadasiva Nayaka, and Gropalayya of the 
Jamedarkhana commanded them to distribute presents among 
the vazzrs , umras, foot-soldiers and important jamatidars as 
well as all estate-holders, palaigdrs, mahaldars, and all the 
people belonging to the palaims and provinces. Be then handed 



over to them for distribution 
kinds : — 


Acyntaraya’s 

mole 

Jadamole-honnu 

n 

Sosa (new) 

w 

Anegondi 

?? 

Ikkeri 

n 

Raja (king) 

n 

Melu 

n 

Gutti 

V 

Madira 

» 

Hosuru 

n 

Hanumanta 

n 

Aghora 

?? 

Yallurn 

95 

Sagarappanis 

39 

99 

Vadeda 

9? 

Hosakere 

39 

Adavani 

n 

Honnattikkeri 

M 

Raghnnatha 

?? 

Kaveri 

39 

Krsnapadi 

9? 

Parasurama 

93 

Sivarama 

33 

Vamana 

n 

Sltarama 

n 

■ feagara ■ o 

n 

Oannangiraja 

n 

Node 

,• n . 

Timmanayaka 

m 

Snnanga 

: n . 


'Tbe'tot&doe** not i&llywitli tke 


the honnus of the followin 


9 , 45 , 3*21 

1 , 43,698 

98,765 

19,866 

24,820 

30,680 

9 , 10,480 

19,676 

63,348 

68,764 

14,369 

9,677 

87,683 

96,333 

1 ^ 35 , 07 , 709 * 


98,768 

63,432 

50,640 

64,470 

60,860 

90,750 

1 , 08,640 

80,530 

1 , 08,640 

60,420 

8 , 00,580 

1 , 08,640 

2 , 06,430 

3 , 04,866 

6 , 06,730 

5 , 06,809 

of tke figures given above, 


Ramatenke mole 

6,07,320 

Brahma „ 

6,08,480 

Total 

4,22,43,370 * 

Having thus distributed the honnus of the above varieties, 
among all the people as presents, he commanded all the soldiers 
to put on the armour, and be ready for the battle arming them- 
selves with weapons and muskets. Then, summoning all the 

couriers in the service of the government, he 

ordered tbem to 

inform all the sepoys that all of them should be present at the 
muster next morning. Accordingly they attended the muster 

thus : — 


Horses 

65,48,321 

Camels ... ... 

18,74,429 

Elephants 

Gun powder (according to 

18,768 

weight) 

9,87,76,413 (mds.) 

Cannon balls 9,87,65,43,21,00,00,000 


Thus, these were brought to muster. Moreover, a muster 

of the infantry was thus taken : — 


Foot-soldiers 

12,39,430 

Sappers (?) (Hunnaravanaru) 

38,460 

Slredadarleyavaru (?) 

34,567 

Swordsmen 

45,987 

Men with swivel guns 

57,965 

f Gunners (Golanddzaru) 

43,876 

Drummers and trumpeters 

45,678 

Total ... 

15,00,963 

;! : . AdhUneJcara.ru (?) : — -;:y v.: ; 0- y 


Swimmers (Igekararu) ... 

43,620 

Divers 

15,940 

Men with broadswords 

43,432 

* The total does not tally with the sum of the figures given above* 

t The word means * the throwers of balls 

mm m m ft -■ 


Arrow makers 

• • « 

97,645 

Huyalusavararu (?) 

» « « 

98,964 

Princes and relations 

« . « 

48,976 

Wearers of iron helmets or caps 

6,456 

Officers 

& O * 

4,562 

Total 


3,44,954 * 

Troops other than thesef : — 

Parangis (Franks : Portuguese 

?) 

3,454 

Couriers 

* * a 

3,454 

Mahaldars 

» 

4,595 

Mace-bearers 


6,486 

Spies 

* • * 

4,686 

Augurs ( §astrikaru ) 

cm e 

4,864 

Camel men 


5 • • 8 

Superintendents of stables 

*> * * 

4,686 

Camel grooms ... 


4,876 

Puraiiikas 

»•#« 

4,687 

Singers 

£*• 

4,896 

Dancing women 

> ® § 

5,798 

Players on Vina 


488 

Adhanekars (?) 

Masons 

« * * 

4,376 

Thatchers 

• • • 

3,766 

Polishers of weapons 

• # ® 

3,763 

Saddlers ... yy77,:- 

• • * 7 

3,763 

Carpenters 


4,320 

[Account of the artillery &c.j : — 

Big guns ; >/)v ; ... y , 

i>vv 

2,343 

Small guns 

* , » 

■ y 324 

Ramazangis . . . y y -y ;y;v ■ ; 

» 4* 

■ ' 762 

: Elephant guns ... 

r* « « 

9,876 

* The total given here is faulty* v 

f In addition to the items given in this part of, the list, 5,786 M&shalf ee« 


meatioaed ia the India Office translation of the Bakkair* 


tioix). 


Camel guns 

| 7,454 

ReJchdas (small guns) 

6,543 

Big Bantam ng is ... 

7,640 

Gddadiyavaru (cart-drivers ?) ... 

4,321 

Shield-bearers ... 

4,976 

Messengers 

. 4,567 

Money change vs 

■■■;: 3,643 

Sweepers 

3,776 

Hukkah-bearers 

4,597 

‘Kallam (?) ... •vP-h- .. ... 

6,787 

Boyar u (Palanquin bearers) 

5,476 

icription in the same manner as the above of am 

Ramabanas (a kind ... 

6,783 

of bomb) ' . : : 

Jamjas vv -y' .... 

9,87,656 

Huwteguruli (?) ... FF&F ... 

98,76,432 

Matapugalu (blue light) 

98,76,54,320 

Taramanclala 

65 , 94,321 

Bhueahra .... 

76,768 

War carts ... ... 

4,321 

Spear bearers (JBharjibdm- 

My am ) 

7,678 

Firavanaru (?) 

4,897 

Bhats 

4,577 

Braziers 

3,376 

BardbalTit i &,c : ... ... 

i ■ 76,321 


Details other than these : 
Learned men 
Poets 

'Plhyer^ibmffie Vina ... 


4,876 

5,787 

465 


* The word means 1 thieves 5 . It b not known why they were included in 'the 
army. Probably they ar© the same m hall am stpTthis mentioned in a different i* 

the ‘ Bzkhair? The India Office translation refers to Kail arts 4,567, Rogues .6,789* 
Pur lav an ar as 4,897, Banttas 4,579, 

1—29 


226 


Keepers of time 


with metallic rods 

v ;; 

579 

Time-keepers 


479 

Blacksmiths 


3,730 

Goldsmiths 

* ® 

3,775 


Having taken muster, in this fashion, Rajabhilvara 
commanded that all his elephants should be led before him for 
investing them with armour and the weapons. The following 
were led before him in obedience to his order.* 


When the elephants were thus brought before him, he had 
them invested with armour, weapons, and howdahs, in which 
were placed bows and arrows. In addition to these animals, 
he caused to be led (before him) 1 ,000 elephants for bearing 
standards, 2,000 for carrying jajayis and 8,000 for carrying 
guns. Then he alighted with the holders of seventy-two kinds 
of niyogas and troops in a camp which extended breadthwise for 
eighty miles from the banks of the Tnngabhadra to those of 
the Krsna. Rajabhuvara took up his quarters between 
the villages of Tavaragere and Krsnagiri. 

On the other side, Nizam Saha Bhairy Padusaha, the lord 
of the throne of Daulatabad, crossed the river, Bhimarathl, and 
pitched his tents outside Sultanpur alias Ferozabad. Akhabara 
Jalavudlnu Padusaha halted outside the fort. Wahib Rahimbal 
Kutupu $aha lay encamped with his army between Mudgal 
and Raicur in Telingana. Imam-ul-mulk, the king of 
Varhad, as well as All! Yadula Saha Padusaha, the lord of the 
throne of Bijapur, marched with their respective armies and 
halted at the fort of Jamalghar on the Krsna. f The armies 
of the Mussalman kings were seen everywhere. Crowds of 
foot-soldiers, Pindaris, arrow-makers, with the kallar-s&^ojs 

* A long list of the names of elephants found in the text (pp, 277-78) is not 
‘ eluded in the translation, as it is of no value. ■ ' ; ■ v; 

;; ')f Vaheebrahiih 'Coofbood Shah Padsha of Teiiiuga 'encamped together;/ with ", 
lies Adii Shah of Beejapore near Jamalgud on the hank of 4 Kistna River 1 and no men- 
tion in this context Is made of Imamanamutt '*~~L O. M., p* 195*: , ‘ 



227 


belonging to their armies, having crossed the Krsna began 
to plunder the territory belonging- to Rajabhuvara, raid slew 
some of his subjects, and carried away others as prisoners. 
The people of these regions began to migrate to the villages, 
towns, forts and cities all over Karnataka. 

Rajabhuvara thus commanded his officers and the 
arm)’ ; “ 10,000 horse, 20,0o0 foot with all their equipment 
(should take their place) outside the Jinugubazaar 
Turning to his Pamirs, f he said, “ Post yourselves with your 
respective contingents and the implemets of war outside the 
frontier.” Then the innumerable mztrs of the Ksatriya caste* 
halted outside Raksasatahgadi, with all their troops. 

A description of the war material 


Machines (Guns ?)§ 
Big size 

Medium size ... 
Small size »•« 


3.000 

4.000 

1.000 


Thus the machine-bearers stood all around the army 
which contained innumerable swivel-musqueteers, bomb-makers 
and foot-soldiers. The varieties of hams (arrows or bombs) : — 

(Pack) bullocks, 4,00,000 in number laden with the four 
kinds of banns, viz., Dhanurbanas (arrows), liamabams , Kumara - 
bams and Candtbanm came and halted. In the same maner, 
gun-powder and shots of a fine variety were caused to be 
brought, and were distributed among all (the soldiers).! 

Having thus equipped his troops with war material, the 
Narapati posted them to their respective places where they had 

* “ For the protection of the grain bazaar — I.O.M, 

f u and chiefs he commanded them to march from that ground and to encamp 
with his army near Racharlangada ".'—Ibid. 

X A few meaningless epithets qualifying the Ksatriya va%\rs are left out. 


.1 ";■/§; Machines (guns ?) are, not mentioned in LQ.M* \ bat 

are found in thtir place. 

, ' ' , $ The passage in the original is very corrupt Only the gist is 1 1 1 1 1 . ' , • 


The passage in the original is very corrupt Only the gist is gives. 


228 


to fight in the battle, lie assigned their work and distributed 
presents and jewels such as wristlets set with gems, necklaces, 
ear-rings-, , .ronetu, s a : > t uu m- sin and new and 

rare* * * § dresses among siis captains, asiapradhanas, dalamys and 
to Bisal.ppa Nay aka, Tiruvengals Nayaka, Kartika Nay aka, 
Vlrappa Nayaka, f and others whom he had summoned to his 
presence, and said, “ The Muhammadan Padusahas are 
advancing* upon us ; taking with you the necessary material of 
war, fight with them well.” As soon as he gave them the 
command, they shifted the camp from Kaksasatangadi to the 
banks of the Krsna. 


The hnrakaras, codeciars, and others;! who were in the 
service of the four Mnssahnan Padusahas communicated this 
information to their employers. All§ the Padusahas having 
met together, summoned (to their presence) their (respective) 
vazlrs, ■mm as, captains, ast'ipradkanas , and dalamys and 
distributed presents (among them), and said, “ Now that the 
Narapati Padnsalia lies encamped outside Raksasatangadi with 
all his array, we must ,:->t lag b-Mi 'd ;.-.uy more.” (Then) they 
summoned the officers of: the arsenah and commanded them 
(to hand over to the army), 



Big guns 

Medium guns ... 
Small guns 
Swivel gnus 
Elephant Guns ... 
I Led his 
Camel guns 


40,00011 

5,000 

60,000 

5,000 

1 , 00,000 

12,000 

5 , 56,000 



* * Acodya ’ in the original. It mean-; * not marvellous, *a*U strange f ? but 
context requires a meaning quite opposed to It. 

+ * BudalaNaik\ Teeroovaagal Naifc, Kartuk TCaik, Veerppa N a iV —/.<?. J/.j p, 196, 

"t. 'fiOiffl*; p- ; 1 96 : '* were,. a elasi* of servants- 

nature of whose duties is not known; the text has kaharu sakatlru saha sahavagi 
h is not quite intelligible. . ' ' \ : v . 

§ T he original lias * nalkam ’ which means * several *. • / • ’ 

$ Ihe original has 1 Ju gat akkana * : it probably mean; * aiseml *. 

% l (K J/ has 4,000 

| Th« hafcuie of this weapon is not clear, it; Q> M> p, 197 has 1 Rocktts K 


229 


Musquets 
(Other; capons 
Satyarimlu 
Archers 

Gaduderu and Farangis 


4.00. 00b 
, 00 , 0 * 0 

i. 00 0C0 t 

3.00. 000 

2 . 00 . 000 


Ami haring summoned ir, this raanncs ud t •. oJiij rs, the 
Padirsahas commanded them to light well with. Ktrubhih ara. 
Having received the order, they set out’ and ; .arriving at the 
distance of a yojam of liaksasatahgadi, where 'Rajabhuvara 
was encamped, halted there. 

Then, Niziim Saha Padusaha and Ibaralutu Saha Imamu 
Kutubu Saha, these two;:, having met together began to unite 
their forces. Next, they resolved to tight stubbornly as they 
had already planned ; and having opposed (the enemy), they 
commenced the battle. The Narapati who noticed this 
(manoeuvre), having called all his officers, united his troops, 
and said that they should fight so as to bring glory to their 
soldiership. Accordingly, they marched to the battle^. 
Imamana Miilkuna Padusaha having moved® to one side, with 
his army, marched to the battle. The Karnataka army having 
noticed this inarched forward bravely!!. It is not possible to 
describe the armies, which had joined in a fearful battle of 
artillery ;[. Owing to the smoke (of artillery), the soldiers 


* TMs is not mentioned in /. O. M* 

' ' .f HatyT&ra means a weapon. : What kind of weapon it. stands- for here is not 
quite evident. , 

t The second name appears to be a combination of two names Ibrahim Kutub 
Shah and Imam-ul-MuIk. “ Then Nizam Shah and Cootbood Shah' forffied '-ad- junction! 
of their armies in one place and took an oath among themselves to light courageously 
with good faith and valour.” — LO.M, pp, 197-8. 

They marched 11 against the fort of Elmarayaloo and, began '..'the: fight 
'Cannonade from Their' gun s.f,, The ” timf ' t.- for ' f. 

-officers, and recommending them to 'seek for renown by valour in battle, they instantly 
moved out toward the enemy.”—/. O. Jlf. s pp. 197-8. 

$ The original has ‘ fekkalavu kudi 1 but its meaning is not intelligible* 
L O . i¥l p, 198 has 4 moved up to fight on the opposite sided 

*5 Himmaiin hididu . 

I; The text is corrupt ; and the sense is not quite clear. ‘ And both parties 
standing opposite one another lived oft" their cannon in volleys at cace.’— LO.M*, p, 193, 


230 


could not see the faces of one another for three days ; the noise 

■ caused by the explosion of the bombs, and several other sounds 

,'j such as bhada-bkada-dham-dham of the carts, dhada-dhada - 

| dhada of the sargolies, sara-sara-sara, sura-sura-sura, and the 

ji cata-cata-cata , catal of the musquetary, and swish of the 

flying bullets (filled the atmosphere). The sepoys were engaged 
| in a continuous hand to hand fight in one place for three 

clays.* The Karnataka forces distinguished themselves by 
the exhibition of considerable bravery f. Then, on Nizam Saha 
: Padusaha, the lord of the throne of Daulatabad, and Kutupu 

i Saha Padusaha, (the king) of the Telugu country joining their 

armies, both the sides fought stubbornly. It was not possible 

■ ■ either to observe, hear or describe the incidents of the battle. 

]| >4 Several were wounded and killed on both the sides. It is not 

ll; ; ; possible to mention the number of the soldiers that disappeared. 

Nizam Saha Padusaha and Kutupu Saha Padusaha were 
glad that they fought well and obtained renown in the great 
. battle. Among these several people died (in battle). Believing 

j ; that God had favoured them on account of the fruit of their 

Mrma they carried them to the rear.$ 



Then, All! Yadula Saha Padusaha Karmadajana, and 
Vahimana Mulk Padusaha of Tadoradesa.§ these two, keeping 
their armies ready (for battle) remained in their respective 



231 


places. They did not join the battle ; but remained (neutral),* * * § 
ready to measure their strength, if, perchance, any (of the 
contending parties) attacked them. 

The people besides the insignificant (soldiers), belonging to 
the armies of this Nizam Saha Padusaha Bhairavatu,+ and 
Kutupu Saha, the king of Telingana — (excluding him who 
bears the name of the son)$ that died during the course of this 
three days’ battle are : 

The desciption of the wounded)) ;~~ 

Nimbajl Kale ... l 

Viroji Bapu (Veenoojee Poor) ... 1 

Sura (Surya) Rao 1 

Xnkusa Rao l 

Hasanaji ... 1 

Yibarayitu Khan a ... 1 

Sujata (Soogat) Khana ... 1 

Yimela (Ibrahim) Khana ... 1 

Mrtyuja (Matooju) Begu ... 1 

SiddI Habibulla (Habbubulla) ... 1 

Hinayita Khana ... l 

Mamada (Mahomed) Khana ... 1 

Davatu (Davoot) Khana ... l - 

Alii Khana ... 1 

Yekalasu (Aklas) Khana ... 1 : 

Hajaratu Khana ... I 

Hasana Khana ... 1 


* The sentence ends without a predicate, 

t Bhairava is the family name of the Nizam Shahi Kings,' 

' J 'After 4 1 mUrn divasa ynddha dolage% and before * % mdantasakn PadnsUha &ch 
there hangs loosely the phrase 4 na man kit a puira ivana tappisi * meaning * excluding 
him who bears the name of the son \ Probably it refers to ALII Y&dula 5aha* There 
seems to be a lacuna here, 

§ The list in the 10, M, p. 200 presents certain variations which are indicated 
within the brackets. Though the total number of the wounded in the present ms. is said to 
be 25, there are only 23 names in the list. Some names such as Moorar Cawn, Hirarat 
Cawn, Valeel Cawn mentioned in I.O. M, are not found in this ms ; nor does‘Ibju5ty4tl ■ 
KhSn, Alii Cawn of the latter had a place in the former. 


232 


Ambaji Rao 
Dhalasojala Rao 
Subba Rao 

Nagoji Tukadev (Tokkadev) 


Nagoji Raja (Ghassaly) .. ... 1 

The total number of the wounded ... 25 

Those that were taken prisoners * : — 

Alii Nayaka ... ,. 1 

Muhammad J&nab (Maharaarajulu Naik) ... i 
Abadula Nayaka ... 1 

Pirn Nayaka ... ... 1 

Silaiu (Yital) Nayaka ... ... 1 

Paras a Nayaka ... 1 

Malli (Mallu) Nayaka ... ... 1 

Nagoji Nayaka ... ... l 

Timma Nayaka ... ... 1 

Total ... 9 

The description of the dead f : — 

Yellaji Tukudevu (AUajee Muckdavoo) ... 1 

J amaf avari ( J atnadar ) Tulasi Ravu ... 1 

Kedarji S ury avamsa (Sooravunt) ... 1 

Cangaji Candagaha (Candrajee Gondakar ... 1 

Bhnjabala Ravu ... . . , i 

Sulatana (Soolatal) Khana ... I 

Bade (Rada) Khana ... 1 

Mallika 'Malluk) Sahebu ... ... 1 

Hasan a Khana ... ... 1 

Huaena Khana ... ... 1 

Akabata Khairu (Akbar Bera) Khana ... 1 

Rah imatu Khana ... i 

• This list come-: after the succeeding one i a 1, 0. M . ; the last five names are 
not found in it ; bat they figure as a separate group taken prisoners in /, 0, A f., p. £02. 

+ Although the total is said to be 25, there are only 24 names given in the list, 
the variations in I. 0. M. list are indicated in the brackets. 


Mukharatra Alii Khana 
Mahammad Alii Khana 
Jafar Alii Khana 
Rasula Khana 
Siddi Murtuja Khana 
Bhujanga Ravu 
Subhaua Ravu 
Bamse (Banku) Ravu 
$iva Ravu 
Hindu Ravu 
Murari Grhorapade 
Rama Ravu 


Total 


I 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

"25 


Ramaraja’s collection: — 

(The description of those) that were taken prisoners*. 

(Those) that were killedf : — ■ 

Raghuvappa Rayaka ... ... 1 

Kartavivya 
Komara Ravu 
Avadhuta Ravu 
Bivaji Ravu 
Ariikusa Ravu 
Surana Ravu 
J agatlpati Ravu 
Mahlpati Ravu >. 

Bhujamga Ravu 
Yaliaji (Allajee) Ravu 


1 

1 

X 

1 

1 

1 

X 

1 

1 

1 


*' Under this item, no names are : given ; and . the Bah hair , passes on to the. 'next 
item, This is a sure indication of a lacuna here. /. 0. M. p. 202 gives the following 
five names ; — ■ ■ ^ "h --I ■ ; :S; ; v f'::;-;) -v ' 7 . v: : : j ■■ v v : vfch;"- ■ ; h ■ ' ' r : ■ c ■ : ’ ' ' ‘ ' ; If: 

Seetal Naik, Parasa. N&ik, Mallu Naik, Nagojee' Naik and ^"iinixta '■ h 

.■■.These names .are however included in the present ms. hi the casualty list of the 
army of the Sultans. 

.Tvy^ of this list L 0, M, 

Row of /. 0. M. is not found here. 

E — 30 


234 


Timma Nayaka 
Deva Raju 

Setti Saluva (Satteeraja Sailuke) 

Somanna Nay aka 

Dalavayi Jagatlpati 

Gopaliiraja 

Rajakumara 

Samkara Ravu 

Rajagopala 

Rajahamsaraja 

Senapati Eaghimra Nayaka ... 
Huliearmada Saranga Nayaka ... 
Hokalagliante Vlrappa Nayaka 


1 

I 

J 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 


(Those that were) wounded* 

Silara Khana ... ... 1 

Saidali ... ... 1 

Lala Sivaji Ravu ... ... 1 

Bulatanajl Ravu ... ... 1 

Hxroji (Eroojee) Eavu ... ... 1 

Krsnaji Ravu ... ... 1 

Daulatu Bingu ... ... 1 

Raja Aiiiktiia ... ... 1 

Raja Blumasana ... ... 1 

Bhaskara Ravu ... ... 1 


Having tints heard (an account) of those that were captur- 
ed, wounded and killed, Rajabhuvara summoned some of his 
vazlrs, umras, big officers, and jamayatkarsj with their troops, 
and, distributing presents among them, said : — ■ 

“ Be ready with all your troops in your respective places ; 
but do not proceed to fight until our arrival . % Then, having 

* As against 10 names of this list l. O. M. has 20. The additional names are: 
Somunah, Dalavoy Jagapuitee, Gopulroya, Rajakoomar, Sankararow, Rajagopal, Raja , 
■. Hmsaiiajee, Seenaputtee Ragcovera Naik, Hulicharmada Sarungana and Hokulagun|e 
Veerapa Naik, It is interesting to note that 9 oat of these 10 names are included in the 
previous list of the present ms. 

f Jamadar.— /. Q. Af., p. 202, 

% The instructions of Rajabhuvara commence with the • words ‘ Vairige bahumana 
■ which means ‘having rewarded the enemy/ 



2B5 

collected all our forces with determination, we may prepare for 
battle and advance (upon the enemy). 1 " Then he sent Dalavay 
Girappa* Nay aka and Pavada Nay aka of Jamadarkhctncrf to 
All! Yadula Saha Padusaha with the (following) message 

“ Ever since your boyhood you acquired the privilege of 
being called our son. You came to us in your tender years, 
and sitting in our lap you played. We coaxed you and 
brought you up. You have now undertaken to perform 
an evil deed. It is not proper that yo- should join the 
three Mussalmans and attack us. We gave you protection, 
and conferred on you the three districts of Mudgal. Kaicur 
and Adavani for defraying your milk and butter expenses. 
It is not good that you should join them and march upon us. 
May you be prosperous in the future.” 

All! Yadula >§aha Padusaha sent the following reply to this 
message:—- . 

“ I have not joined them willingly. Having forcibly 
entered my kingdom, they ruined it. There are extensive 
mountainous tracts in my dominions covered with jungles. 
They levelled down the hills, and having constructed roads wide 
enough to enable their cavalry to march (without difficulty) 
they entered my kingdom with violence. I have done nothing 
(to encourage (horn). I have in this fashion given yon my heart, 
for having sat on your lap and acquired the honour of being 
called your son. 1 have done nothing contrary to this, and 
will not break my plighted word. Do not be vexed with me ; 
I am (really) on your side; 1 am obliged to come here with 
my army by the force of circumstances and not willingly.” 

Having given this reply, he sent away the envoys with a 
few words suitable to the occasion.^' 

■ ; ?. • ^ Veerapa- — /'» 0 . >/., p. 202, • 

f The connection of Parana Nayaka with JamadUrkkana i% not mefitftaftd lit Htfr 
Ji 0 , . ■ . ■■ ’ 

% ( He also at th« same time gave him some 'secret messages to be communicated 



236 

The envoys; on their return, gave a detailed account of 
what had taken place to Rajabhuvara, and. introduced to him 
the envoys and couriers of All! Yadula Saha whom they had 
brought with them, caused valuable dresses, pearl -turays, 
waist-bands, shawls, shirts and laced-turbans to be distributed 
among them. (Moreover, Rajabhuvara) sent to All! Yadula 
Saha a fine cannon, and (some) valuable pearls.* 

"When Nizam Saha Bhairy Padusaha, the king of 
Daulatabad, Kntnpu Saha Padusaha, the king of Golkonda- 
Telingana, and Akabaru Jaladinu Mogali Padusaha, the king 
of Jahalnapur, heard this news, they sent the (following) 
message to All! Yadula Padusaha : — ■ 

“ We and you, having united, commenced war upon Raja- 
bhuvara. f Why did you secretly open negotiations with him, 
and send him royal dresses ? Why did he send you (presents) ? 
What is the reason for this ? You have yielded to intrigues 
and we shall not trust you. It is not proper that you should 
behave in this manner. We should all join together, and make 
wart upon the King of Kings (rajarajana mele). We send you 
this message so that we may win the war. If you carry on 
your intrigues still, then we will be obliged to separate 
ourselves, and retire. There is no other (way). If you join 
us, well, our determination to wage war upon Rajabhuvara still 
holds good ; if, (on the contrary), you do not join us, well, we 
shall in future wage war on both you and Rajabhuvara 
together.” 

To this message, All! Yadula &aha, who was alarmed, sent 
the (following) reply, with the couriers : — 

“Whatever you are planning is agreeable to me. I am 
willing to follow your advice.” 

* The original has dnrda “which means ‘the dregs of wine* left at the 
bottom of a wine cup after drinking. Rajabhuvara would not have sent this as a present 
''Moreover, 'the epithet { Valuable * which qualifies this word is inapplicable:. It is "pro-., 
bable that the correct reading of the text is durya meaning a pearl, 

+ The text has bandl meaning plunder which does not suit the context. 

t The text reads here Tambi pehajayisi- The meaning of these words 
if aot clear. ; , , ■ . , , ‘ 


237 


The three monarchy who were greatly pleased with the 
message, dismissed the couriers from their presence, having 
given them (suitable) presents. 

Then, Raj abliu vara moved to a plain outside (the village 
of) Raksasataiigadi, and having set up ranaghanta and raaa- 
stmnhha * he halted nearby. The whole of the Karnataka 
army was massed together into one group. Then commenced 
the battle which lasted for twenty-seven days. Akhabara 
Jalayin Mogala Padusaha, the king of Jahalnapuri, was 
encamped with Pathans, Rajapnts, Maratas, vazirs and 
feudatory princes in the midst of the forty streets (mda) of 
Talikota. A fight took place near them. 

The three PadusShas having united (their forces) advanced 
upon Rajabhuvara. The princes, the principal nobles, vazlrsf 
and umras, who were in the service of Rajabhuvara came with 
their respective forces and (fought) for nine hours since the 
morning. The battle was well-contested on both the sides. 
Several died in the fight and several were wounded. 


The princes (raj ab indiyard) , vazirs and all the other 
(nobles) of Rajabhuvara secretly petitioned him (thus) : “ The 
three Padusahas having united (their troops) are advancing 
upon (us). We should not tarry behind but go forward, and, 
opposing them resolutely, destory them*. In this fashion, 
smiting them bn their face, we should win the battle. All! 
Yadula Saha and Imamuna (Mu)lk§, these two, still remain in 
their respective camps with their troops. It is unlikely that 
they should join the battle. (However), as they rday deceive 
us, we place no trust in them. If you post 12,000 horse and 
20,000 foot under a commander^, (to watch their movements), 


* The words ranaghanta and ranastambha mean ball of battle' and ‘pillar of 
battle * respectively. Their significance is not known. Probably, the army had to fight 
round them and defend them. 


t ‘The Vajeers of Rajaboovar named Rajacoudovaroo together with other, 
Vajeers &c . — L 6. M n p. 204 1 ' 


t ‘ It is necessary for us not longer to delay but to get behind them and at once 
destroy them all/—/. <9. M. 9 p. 205. 


§ Emam Naik. — Xbid> p. 205. 

^ $ * With Abbashee Naik/ !Ud, p. 205, Text has 'Vabba NSyaka'; Vabba* 




238 


we shall calmly fight without anxiety against the enemy on 
this side, and win the victory”*. 


Ramaraja who was delighted to hear this petition of his 
servants, despatched troops, as requested by them. Then he 
gave presents to the petitioners, and new dresses to all his 
vazlrs, and sent them to different places (on the battle-field) to 
fight. The battle then raged fiercely; Akhabara Jaladlnu 
Padusaha having fought (for a while), retreated from the field. 
Upon this, Mogalu Padusaha and Nizam Padusaha, these two, 
having joined together fought fiercely so as to destroy the 
enemy ; but they were not able to maintain their own.f Nizam 
&aha Padusaha and Kutupusaha Padusaha withdrew with 
their forces to one side. The Karnatakas who were delighted 
(to see the enemy retreat) ignited simultaneously the fuses of a 
lakh of bombs. The army of the two Padusahas fell into 
considerable disorder; several were killed and several wounded ; 



and some of the soldiers fled to their native places. The 
two Padusahas, (having rallied their troops), attacked (the 
Karnataka army) once again.* The fight was well-contested 
on both the sides, and many people were killed. Thereupon, 

* ' We will undertake on our side tc beat the enemy and punish them with little 
trouble/ Bid, p. 203. 

The text has iambi p avu j d,y isevu. The meaning is not intelligible. The translation 
is only tentative. 

f * Mogalu Padusaha * is a mistake due to a dip on the part of the author th# 
copyist of the chronicle. It should be Kutupu Saha Padusaha as the following 
sentence clearly shows. “ But Cootbood Shah retreated from the conflict to a place of 
security for his defence ; at this discomfiture and flight the Carnatic troops rejoiced/* 
cf, f.O.M., p. 205. 

The translation of the last sentence is tentative. The sentence is th© text is 
Amrige.dSm krparaiu WgaBUapu. The meaning of hrpar'&lu is not known, but th® nmt 
sentence makes it clear that the Muhammadans. had to retreat; hence the translation. 

t many troops of the two Badshahs were killed or wounded and the rest 

Great' numbers, also were slain of the army; of Rama Rayaloo by 
• those of the two Badshahs ami Rama Rayaloo being highly enraged at the great destruc- 
tion gave the most urgent orders to his vazir* and officers to renew th® '■fight/*—:' 
LO.M., p. 207. 

This is absurd. Ramarava who had just beaten the Mussalxnans could not have 
been desirous to continue the fight with the retreating enemy, unless he wanted to 
pursue them, and dislodge them from their camp. The text of the 'chronic!© does not give 
any such indication. 


289 



Ramaraja lost his temper, and gammoning his ministers, gave 
them orders.* Having seated himself on the back of an 
atnrta^f elephant called Rajahamsa, and accompanied by all 
his troops, Ramaraja advanced upon the four Padusahas, £ 
while warriors of great renown seated in howdahs marched 
on his right and left, (drummers) sounded the war drums 
behind, and musicians played upon such musical instruments 
as trumpets, lutes, tomtoms, pipes &c. in front. Havino- 
caused cannon, ramasinghs , jamjas, rockets, steel-bombs to be 
brought in large numbers, he had them fired at the same 
time. Countless numbers of people were killed or wounded 
on the side of the Padusahas. The battle raged in this 
fashion for three days and nine hours, when large number 
of the soldiers of the three Padusahas forming into groups 
took to their heels. Having formed into jaras§ they escaped 
with their lives by flight, and sought refuge in the jungles. 

The Mussalman kings, having retreated (from the field), 
halted at (a distance of) two haridarist. Thereupon, the 
forces oc Rajabhuvara being greatly delighted with their victory, 
retired in a highly elated condition? to their respective 
camps, jesting with one another. The whole army remained 
comfortably in the camp in an unwatchful condition thinking 
that they need no longer be afraid of any one, as none would 
attack them henceforth. The soldiers of each captain began 


240 


behind .without joining the battle you left our army either 
to win the victory or be destroyed in the attempt. Well, what 
has been ordained by God will come to pass. We have 
resolved sincerely to wage war and win victory.”* On hearing 
these words, their elders said, in reply, “ If the whole army 
speaks as you do, then you will win (victory) in course of 
time.” They replied that they had faith in their army that 
they would fight fiercely. 

At the same time, All! Yadula $aha, having performed his 
third namaz at the 11th tasi , f offered a silent prayer to his 
God. “ 0 l God, fulfil the desire of my heart ; let the business 
which I have thought of in my mind succeed. Maintain the 
honour of our Mussalxnan kings.” Having prayed in this 
manner, he made his troops ready for battle and began to 
attack the army of Rajabhuvara. As Rajabhuvara’s army was 
off its guard, it was completely destroyed ; and (the camp of) 
the soldiers and the non-combatants were thoroughly looted. 

(Rajabhuvara was taken prisoner.)* Then, he addressed 
(the following words of reproach) to Alii Yadula $aha : — 

“ It is not proper that you, who had been styling yourself 
my son : should behave in this manner. i? You are a virtuous 


* The message to All Xdil Shah in /. 0. M, (p. 207) runs thus : — 

u You have hitherto given no assistance in this war arid we conclude that you have 
all this time kept at a distance to amuse the enemy, while you look on and behold the 
dertruction of our armies ; be it so, may God grant you his blessing, but we shall yet 
attempt with courageous hearts to conquer the foe trusting in the assurances and the 
beany support of all our officers.” 

f Tasi, according to Kxttel, means an hour.—/. O, Mi, p. 207 has, 4 3 at noon/ 

yy://:* s ...)y|yTO the speech of RajahS vara ; and it is placed 

immediately after the first sentence. 

§ “You have been hitherto considered and called my son ; is it then honourable, 
to dec ve me at last? It is said you are a cdiarit dde ami rd igioim h »ly man. f . this 
become that reputation? Doth a truly great man deceive the father' who had adopted 
and reared him ? Is it thus you shall obtain reputation and fame in tbewvrM? As for 
me what remains to be done, now that my subjects ami army have fallen by treachery > \ 
had trusted in you as in my child who would never deceive me; but tin ugh you Have 
rewarded my kindness with ingratitude vet a . my son I ask of you this favour that you cut 
off my head instantly with my own sword and not permit my enemies to have that 
pleasure ; so may you enjoy la? ting prosperity and your race so descend in the world from 
son to -on for ever.” 

y^'lCfeosa' who : abhndon. : fheir father, their mother/tlihir'pricstund their God, are they 
to be rewar led in the next birth with Power, with Honours ami with empire ? By faith and 
■/deeds not less in merit, of many states you now muy form one empire — and now you have 
obtained the objects and advantage you wished— to say more were needless for me— the 
period of death so nearly approaches.”—/. 0 . M. } pp. 207—8. 



man. After cheating the father who begot you and him who 
adopted you, you are bound to prosper. Already you are a 
great devotee. You do not recoil from treachery against your 
father and teacher ; nor have you any hesitation (to commit 
these crimes). You have acquired great renown. What is 
the use of my efforts hereafter ? All my army is destroyed ; it 
is lying dead on the battle-field ; 1 trusted you considering 

you to he my son, and believed that you would not deceive 
me ; but you have turned out to be a man without honour, and 
cheated me. Well, it has taken place somehow. As you are 
my son, do not let me fall into the hands of the enemy and 
be beheaded, but shoot my head off with our own cannon 
yourself. Yon and your posterity will be possessed of fortune 
henceforth. (Your family) had been exercising sovereignty 
for generations. (Your ancestors) have been hostile even 
to (their) parents, teachers and God. They were born as 
fortunate men! You have united the whole kingdom. What 
can be done hereafter? You have realised your desires. My 
efforts are vain. As the time of my death has approached no 
useful purpose is served by talking further.” 


(Ram a raj a) put on his head a valuable cap adorned with 
a ruby ,* covered himself with a shawl embroidered with 
flower pattern, and offered prayer to God. Then, having called 
Yadula Saha (to his presence), he said: ‘In as much as you are 

my son, do not surrender me to the enemy ; but cut my head 
off at one stroke with a sword yourself, and let there be no 
need for a second.”-]* Then having adjured (Yadula Saha) 
on an oath, he began to think of his God once (again). ; Alii 
Yadula Saha came and stood before (Rajabhuvara), and taking 
a cannon, $ he shot away the head of Rajabhuvara. The three 
Padusahas were immensely delighted when they heard this 
news. Then the entire Karnataka army was looted, and put 


* * Dressed himself in a black habit p. 208. 

f 5 Or employing others to do it — 1,0. M. ? p. 208. 

% ‘ He took a sword in his own hand struck off the head of Rajaboovar — 
p. 209. 

E " 31 - . ' *Y \ 


242 


to iiigkt; many horses were captured ; and the ammunition 
amt well-filled * war-eliaut plundered. 

The news of RajabhuvaraV death reached his venerable 
mother who was residing in her palace ( candrasala ) at Vijaya- 
nagara. When she heard the news, she became inconsolably 
distressed. It is impossible to describe her grief. For the 
fault of her son, she put an end to herself by eating 
beilahara . y His three wives offered their jewels, clothes, 
ornaments decked with gems, jadabangarus, sisafailm, and 
pearl-necklaces to the great God embodied in the Yajhapurasa 
(sacrificial fire) ; and they also swallowed beilahara similarly, 


and secured release (from the body). 

After these events had taken place, the three Padusahaa 
marched upon Vidyanagara, and having plundered all the 
wealth including dresses and jewels stored up in the treasury 
of the fort that stood in the plain outside the city, they return- 
ed to their respective places, taking with them chariots, 
elephants, horses, and other kinds of vehicles. Then (Yadula 
Saha) sent away the three kings, viz., Akhabara Jaladlnu 
Padusaha, Imamuluku PaduISha of Varadadesa, and Nizam 
&aha Bhairy Padusaha with presents. He also sent the bones 
of Rajabhuvara to Benares i so that they might be thrown in the 
waters of the Ganges). Next, he proceeded to Penugonda with 
the object of conquering the place ; and having laid siege to it 
for a month, he captured it, after a stubborn fight. He posted 
his own garrison in the fort, and returned to Vijapura. Raja- 
bhuvara died on Monday, Vaisakha, ba 8, Sr a van a of the year 
Raktaksi (S.S. 1486)]:. 

^ "■ Bakkai? U finished in Tuesday X. sad ha ba 4 of the yearKroclhi. 

Mac. Mss. 19-1-41, pp. 1-31 ; LJl, 24, pp. 107-73. 


yTy • The; . -meaning, of' the word jhaditajkaMw used in th^; text In this context' isV not; ; 
quite clear® 

f Bella means jaggery, ami ah nr a i -■ food. Therefore, beilahara must be taken 
to mean food prepared of jaggery. Since, the mother of Rajabhuvara died after consum- 
ing it, poison must have been one of its ingredients. 

V ■' $ This date is irregular. The details are applicable to 1487 KhSdhana, Monday ■ 

M r April A,D., 1565. 



243 


■ 


187. THIS BATTLE OF KAKSA SI--TANG Api. 

R am araj a started from Vidyanagara and led an invasion 
against the Muliammadans, when a great battle took place 
in the month of Magha of that Raktaksi year* between 
his troops and those of the Muhammadans. Being unable to 
withstand the attack of the Raya’s army, the Muhammadan 
army tied in confusion Then, Kutubii Saha of Golkoiida, and 
Nizam Saha who was called Bhairy Fadusaha of Ahmad nagara, 
both these kings led an attack; but being unable to resist 
(the enemy) they fled. Finding that it was impossible to 
defeat the Raya’s army, they took counsel together, and 
arrived at the conclusion that it was not possible to win victory 
without having recourse to some trick. Then they opened 
negotiations with Alii Adula Padusuha who was one of the 
principal servants of the Raya. They excited his feelings by 
making an appeal to his racial love ; and induced him to take 
an oath on his faith, God, and sword that he would keep their 
pact a secret. They also exacted a promise from him that he 
would convert his words into action. tup' A) 

The Kutubu Sahu of Golkoiida, and Bhairy Nizam $ahu 
of Alunadnagar, having thus brought Adula &ahu to their side, 
put the Raya completely off his guard by deliberately spread- 
ing a false rumour that they were desirous of concluding a 
peace. They inspired 'confidence in the mind of the Raya, and 
made him forget his danger. They found an opportunity to 
put their plan into action by the tricks of Alii Adula Sahu, of 
Vijapura, and having joined together, they made a treacherous 
attack upon Ram araj a, and captured him at a place called 
Rakkasa-Dangadi in the bahula ( pahsa ) of the month of Magha 
of the year Raktaksi of' & S. 1487. Having beheaded 
him, they sent his head to KasI, and became independepf 
masters of their respective kingdoms. The kingdom of the 
Rayas broke, and the city ox Vidyanagara fell into ruin. 

. Narayanappa of the Small Treasury who was the iena- 
bom of the treasury of the palace being unable to remain i 








P /. 1 *■ [, ) ^ 1 {' 1, d .;lp’ 




t i 'A i, ■ 

i ,i | j | ■ \ * |g Igi i 


11 


i 

y 

') 

V, ’ki 
r , 1 


244 


Vidyanagara, repaired to Cikka Sankanna Nayaka with, ail his 
family. Cikka Sankanna gave him protection and appointed 
him to posts of great power and wealth. 

ICelaiinrpamj ayam , pp, 66*~7. 

188. PULIGADDA ' PA PAN ARAB AY Y A . 

SUMMARY. 

When the Narapati Maharayas were ruling the kingdom of 
5.negondi, there lived at Allfir a boy of the name of Puligadda 
Papanarasayya who distinguished himself in arts and sciences 
very early in life. Being desirous of seeing the beauty of 
Vijayanagara, he started alone from his village. In the 
middle of his way, he met Ramaraja who was marching with 
his armies against some enemies ; and on his invitation, he 
accompanied the army to Vijayanagara. Ramaraja who was 
greatly impressed with his intelligence and wisdom bestowed 
upon him many favours, and, having granted him the sarkars 
of Sarvepalli, Udayagiri and Nizampatnam for his salary, 
appointed him as vakil at the court of Delhi, where he trans- 
acted business on behalf of the Narapatis, until the outbreak of 
a war between Ramaraja and the Mussulmans. Papanarasayya 
remained with the Raya during the war. In the battle that 
ensued, Ramaraja fell into the hands of the Mussulmans, and 
Malik Ibrahim Padusliah killed him, and annexed much terri- 
tory over which he established his authority. 

Malik Ibrahim who became a friend of Papanarasayya 
during his sojourn at the court of Vijayanagara in his youth 
sent for him and asked him to choose some office 
under his government which he would readily bestow upon 
him. Papanarasayya who remembered the many favours 
which the Raya bestowed upcn him was greatly moved ; he 
said that he had no desire to serve any master after the 
demise of the Raya, by whose kindness he enjoyed all the 
gifts of fortune. The Padushah condoled with him, and con- 
ferred the three sarkars which were formerly under his con- 
trol as jUgirs upon his three sons; but Papanarasayya died 
some time later in retirement. . .. 

’ : . Kaifiyat ef N , i^m-pu{nam i L» ft. 191 * 4 * 



245 


189(a). MUHAMMADAN ATROCITIES AFTER THE BATTLE 

OF rAksasi-tangadi. 

Then, in S. 1486 Raktaksi Vaisakha, the Muhammadans 
came with their troops and put to death Ramaraja the Great 
and his army near the confluence of the rivers Krsna and 
Malapaharl. Next, they entered this district, and razed to the 
ground all temples in this village. They wrapped the lingas 
in hay and set fire to them ; they crushed (some) images and 
maimed others. 

Kaifiyat of A’ynyakallu : L. A\ +0, p. 317 . 


At this juncture, when the Muhammadans killed Aliya 
Ramaraja, king of Vijayanagara, in battle, they plundered the 
villages and towns in the neighbourhood. They also plundered 
this town, and as the merchants fled to foreign lands, this town 
also fell into ruin. 

Kaifiyat of RZ]ula-Man$agiri : L.R.ZA, p. 90. : 

189(c). 

Then the Padusaha. having invaded the South with an 
army of 1,00,000 soldiers, demolished the temples situated even 
in all secure places, burnt the idols and defaced them The 
people who heard of these happenings concealed the image of 
Janardana, installed by king Janamejaya, in a well in the 
vicinity of the temple. During this invasion, all the images 
excepting this were broken ; all the temples were burnt, and 
consequently most of them fell into ruin. Some disappeared 
so completely that not even their vestiges were left behind. In 
this manner (the Muhammadans) burnt houses and reduced 
entire villages to ashes. Many people perished in the flames, 
and several were carried away as captives. The survivors 
sought safety in voluntary exile. The village was totally 
destroyed, and jungle grew up on its site. 

ICaifiyat of Gulyam : L. R. 54, pp. 47-B. 

190(a). CONDITION OF THE COUNTRY AFTER THE V 

BATTLE OF R A ASI-T AN GADI. 

When anarchy prevailed in the kingdom in the reign of- 
this Sadasivaraya, consequent on the rebellion of th° 


Padusahas of Deccan against Aliya Ramaraja, his annihilation 
together with the army in S. i486 Raktaksi, the capture of 
Vijayanagara, and the plunder of the country, the village of 
Allidona was destroyed and a jungle grew up on its site, 
harbouring wild animals like tigers and bears in large numbers. 

Kaifiyat of Allidona-. L, R. 1, p. 141. 

Having killed Ramaraja the Great, with all his army in 
the year S, S. 1486 Raktaksi, the Mlecchas came to this king- 
dom, and spread anarchy throughout the country. The people 
of this village emigrated to foreign lands. When they returned 
after some time, they found the village completely destroyed. 
Therefore, they abandoned the old village site, and built new 
habitations near it on the eastern side. 

Kaifiyat of CZranfia : L. R. 37, p. 172. 

d': / 190?,;). 

The valuable jewels set with the nine classes of gems, and 
the vessels of silver and gold which were presented by former 
kings to Gods Nava-N arasimha of Upper Ahobalam, and 
Pr ahlada-Nar asimha of Lower Ahobalam and the Goddess 
Laksmldevl were stolen by the Muhammadans, at the time of 
the death of Ramaraja the Great ot Vijayanagara. A few 
vessels (of gold and silver) that remained were plundered in 
S. S. 1500 Bahudhanya when Ibharam and the Hande chief 
attacked the shrine of Ahobalam, Some jewels that escaped 
the hands of the plunderers together with the golden vehicles 
on which the Gods used to be taken in procession were broken 
arid carried away by the Muhammadans in S. 1641 
BiddbSrtbi * when the territory of Gopalaraju of Kandanavolu 
fell into their bands. ' jV ' ' Af U r : : y ; v 

(S . Kaifiyat of Ahobalam : L. R. 10. p. S77. 

190(d). 

In this Raktak§i year (B. 1486) while the country lay 
desolate owing to the death of Aliya Ramaraya at the hand of 



247 


the Mussalmans, this Siigiiinancipalle ceased to be a possession, 
of the God. Iftakamesvara of Siddhavata and was confiscated 
by the state. ft Gf 

Kaifiyat of Sugimaneipallf. L.R. 35, p. 1/0. 

1 ;' 0 («). ; ; 

The Muhammadans fought with Aliya Ramaraja in 
$.S. 1486 Raktaksi. In the disturbances which followed their 
seizure of the kingdom after they put him to death, the 
country was devastated. 

Kaifiyat of Ramainpuram'. LJi. 1, p. 49. 

190 (/). ' 

The rule of this (Arevlti) Kondraju lasted until S.B. 1486 
Raktakigi, when Aliya Ramaraja of Vijayanagara was killed by 
the Mussalmans. Anarchy prevailed in the country afterwards 
up to S.S. 1492 Pramoduta ; and the people were considerably 
harassed by thieves and the uncertainty caused by unsettled 
government. In S.B. 1493 Prajotpatti, Hande Vlra Basappa 
Nayadu was wounded in a battle at Kalayanadurga. Sadasiva 
Deva Maharaja granted to him in appreciation of his 
services the slmas of Cangalamarri, Davvuru, Porumlmilja, 
Baddivolu, and Sirivolla. 

Kaifiyat of CTingalaniarri : Z. A*. 11, p. 299. 

i 90(0). 

When Aliya Ramaraja was killed, the country was 
devastated by the Mlecchas ; therefore this village fell into 
ruin. After it was repopulated once again to some extent 
during the days of the king Sri Rangaraya of Penugonda, this 
village was in the possession of the said God of Siddhavatam. 

Kaifiyat of IndukUm t L.R. 10, pp. 162-3. 


190(7*). 

The worship of the God was not properly conducted 
during the reign of Srlrangaraja of Penugonda, When the 
country- was devastated after Aliya Ramaraja’s death by the 


248 


Muhammadans, the villages of this country fell into ruin. 
Sivapura, a peia attached to this village, and Peddanapadu 
were deserted. 

Kaifiyat of Konnnaddi : L.R. 10, p. 144. 

190(i). 

After this, anarchy prevailed in the country. As the 
people were not able to endure the tyranny of the palaigars , 
they abandoned the village and it tell into ruin. 

In S.S. 1492 Pramoda, on behalf of Ali Adul Padushah of 
Bijapiir, Hande Bala Hanumappa Navadu came to this district, 
and took possession of the whole pargana including Bellary. 
Having bnilt strong forts in ■ towns' and posted garrisons for 
their defence, he carried on the administration of the province. 
He granted hauls through Mokadesayi and Nadugaudu to 
village Gaudu and Kulkarni who induced the people to return 
to the villages and settle down. 

Kaifiyat of S indavadi : L.R. 40, p. 302. 



Haliya Rlimappaya who was the Yuvaraja under Sadariva- 
raya Maharaya was put to death with all his army by the 
Padshahs of Deccan near the confluence of the Krsna and 
the Malapaharl in S.S. 1486 Raktaksi. Then the kingdom 
came under the control of Sadasivaraya, and Nandela 
Timmaraja was governing this slma on his behalf. 

Kaifiyat of Jambul am adugu r L.R. 1, p. 225. 

190(fc). 

SUMMARY. 

In S. 1486 Raktaksi, Ramaraja the Great, the Yuvaraja, 
was killed by the Padushahs of Deccan. In S.S. 1490 
Vibhava the country had to pass through the harrowing 
experience of famine, while it was still in a state of confusion. 
As the inhabitants of the two agrakaras, Ramacandrapuram 
and Saluva-G-ovindarajapuram, could not endure the hardships, 
they emigrated to foreign countries ; and there arose bitter 


quarrels between tlie villagers of Peda-Pasnpula and parlapadu 
for the possession of the lands of these deserted agraharas. 

Kaifiyat of ReJit-P,uuj>v!a : L.R. 9, p. 177. 

190(7). 

After Ramaraja, together with his army, was annihilated 
at the junction of the Krsna and the Malapaharl, the whole 
country was conquered by the Mlecchas. The country became 
ruined. Owing to the absence of proper government, the 
depredations of the palaigars became great causing much 
misery to the people. The village remained in a ruinous state 
till &.S. 1490. When sarddr Slier Khan became tbe subedar of 
Ada van i under the Bijapur Padusliah, he granted lease deeds to 
the Gaud and Sanubhoga of Tumbala and through them 
caused people to repopulate the village and cultivate the land 
again, after fixing the grain rent to be paid by them. 

Kaifiyat of Ttlmba\am : L.R. 8, pp. 8-9. 

190(«i). THE SIEGE OF ADONI BY DAULAT KHAN. 

At the time of Ramaraya’s death, Koneti Kondamaraju the 
son of Ramaraja’s elder brother, Konamraju, was in the fort of 
Ixlavani with an army. Then Sakkara Daulat Khan, a vazlr 
of Bahadur Shah of 1 Bijapur, marched with his army, and 
besieged the fort of Adavani for two years and three months. 
Then in S.S. 1489* Fasali 976, the fort was surrendered, and 
Kondamaraja was given Penugonda which he occupied. 

Kaifiyat af Idavani : L.R. 10, p. 37. 

191. S ADA SIVA’S RULE AFTER R AKS ASI-TAN GrlDI . 

After the Padushahs of Deccan slew Aliya Ramaraja, 
Badasivaraya ruled the country for six years. 

Kaifiyat of Kamalapur am : L.R, 1, p. 15, 

" , . , 192, • ; ' / ' , 

SUMMARY, fff 

The Muhammadans annexed some territory in the west ; 
they set up the throne of the Raya, and having given some 

— **“* — —-***'■' . v -' :: 7 

■ * A. H. 976 is, no doubt the correct date of the siege of Xdavani ; but the corres- 
ponding year is not 1489 but 1490, 



U: 


m- 








territory to 


. . , , SadMvaraya, returned (to their respective 

kingdoms) As Ram&rajayya ;vro had been manao-ir:* the 
Kaja died, his brother Tirumalarajayya 


affairs of the 
succeeded him. 


rirumalaraja, the soa of Eilamaraja aad TirumalSmba of 
tae Math i&mily was serving the king at the court Th-ee 

villages . were granted to him for his maintenance in 'the 
udayagm-ra)ya. ne 


Kaifiyat cf CiffivVi : Z.A\ 22, pp. 134.5 


1S3(«). ShI)lSi?A AND TIRDMALA. 

PSdaehfh* of Deccan, having nnited 

h ]f P ( d ^% ^?^raya- 8 eoH-in-law, Ramaraja, witli 

us army m a battle on the bank of the Krsna and oc A e d 
the hngdom. With their consent, SadM^^DlIrfS^a 
mien o\ei tne kingdom tor some time i , * 

the Yuvaraja under him. .unmalaraja became 

A aijiyat of Siddhavafam : L,R. 9, p 3^ 


193(5). 


v A - ter ] he death . J f BSmarS i a &e Great, who had been 
Yuvaraja during Sadasivaraya^s reign, at Die v „ i . ,* 

Muhammadans in S§ 8, D j-Rh) RokthKi t’ i • ulj - a& 0 the 

again under the control ^7,““ 

law Tirusnalai aje, # vonnger o"t 

itCZml on ft * a4mi " istratio "’ h « -ho v%; 

Kaifiyat 0 f KemviSda , L.R. 55, p . 37 . 



194. LAST PHASE OF SADASIVA’S REION. 

ed on the Jewelled-th™»,> .+ w- ^tuuaya being seat- 

of the world from g.S. 1466 p- “l^ 0 ” 

h.s kar, Jakarta. The Mahammadans who 

W!ft * death a 

sasrlangaj, m the , a r m u of Honugonda, near the 






251 


confluence of the rivers Krsna and Malapahaii in &,S. i486 
Raktakai. The country fell into the hands of the Muham- 
madans after this event ; but Sadaiivaraya’s authority was 
restored in the par gam of Nandela which he ruled until 
S.S. 1497. Nandela Tiinmayadeva Maharaja, the son of 
Narasingayyadeva Maharaja and grandson of Narayya- 
deva Maharaja, was governing the district as Sadasivaraya’s 
karyalcarta, as shown by an inscription dated S.S. 1490 
Aksaya on the east of Ahkalamma’s shrine at the village of 
Karimaddula included in the pargana of Bandi-Atmakur 
situated at a distance of 12 miles to the north of Nandela. 

iCaifyai of Naiid yTUa : L.R. 56, pp. 105-6. 


195. POLICE ARRANGEMENTS DURING THE REIGN 
OF SADASIVA. 


Badahvadeva Maharaja, having ascended the Jewelied- 
throne of the great city of V idy anagara, was ruling the empire 
of the world. While Gutti Tirumalaraja was holding the office 
of karyakarta, bandits robbed and otherwise harassed travel- 
lers at the place where the road connecting Cuddapah with 
Gurramkonda sum passed through the Buryakomalla Pass in 
the Palakonda hills. Unable to endure the tyranny of the 
robbers, the people brought the matter to the notice of Tiru- 
malaraya, and requested him to appoint some person to protect 
the travellers and the inhabitants of the villages of the Otukfiru 


slma in the neighbourhood of the Buryakomalla Pass from the 
robbers who had taken shelter in the said place. Tirumala- 


rajayya complied with their request, and appointed one of his 
dependents, Lakki Nayadu, the son of Nare Kadireppa Nayadu 
of the Yalcarla community as the guard of the Buryakomalla 
Pass. Tirum al ar aj ay y a and the reddis, karaaams, and the 
agraharikas of the fourteen villages of the Ufukufu Sima had 
jointly fixed his share of laud, meras, and vartanas due to the 
said Lakki Nayadu, the son of Mak&n&yakacarya Nare Kadireppa 
Nayadu, in all the said fourteen villages, and granted to him a 
charter engraved on two copper-plates embodying the terms t 
the grant. 




■ i 


am 


Summary of the contents of the charter In S.S. 1479 (Kala- 
yukti Vaisaldi su !■') while Sudani vadeva Maharaya was ruling' 
the kingdom of the world, dudi fimmmaja and the agrl 
harikas, tiui reddis and the hi returns of the. fourteen villages 
of the Utukdru shna granted to Lakki Nayadu, son °of 
Srlman Mahanayakacarya Nate Kadireppa Nayadu, a copper- 
plate charter of manyas, meras and varkmas for’ policing the 
mountain pass. d ' d, . ° 


1. 

2 . 

3. 


4* 

5, 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 


i. For policing the pass : 


In the lands of Nagireddipalle a field of Ms. jl 
extent 


In the lauds of Kommaiapalle a rice field irrigat- 
ed by the Ghtrramgumpu tank, kh $ extent. 


II. 


For protecting the villages, the fields, rice-fields, 
and cartanas, are fixed thus : 


Village. 

D'tukur 

Cintakommudinne 
Ramasagaram and Timma- 
samudram 
Kopparti ( agrahara ) 
Apparajnpalle 
Pabbapuram (agrahara) 
Akkayapalle 

Buggal apalle ' ; ydi d d rd 

Prasannarayanipalle 

Gollalapalle 

Kolmulapalle : dfkd 

Govulacervu d drddf vd't/ ; : -w 

Tatigotla . ' d ddddd'? 


Field. Rice-field. Garden. 


kh | 

kh I 


kh 

kh 


h 

i 


ma 4 


i 


ic 


kh 

m 

kh & 
kh ^ 
kh f r> 
kh do 
kh do 
kh do 
kh | 

kh do 
kh 3 

hn 50 


kh £ 
kh 


ma 2 


kh do 


kh 


kh do paddy for every rice-field ; kh & for every plough 

of land; 1 ruka for every loom, and 1 rTika for every 
marriage. J 


253 


The charter bears the signatures of Tinunalarajayya, and 
several others, and it was engraved by the goldsmith Vexikata- 
giri of Utukdru with the consent of the agraharikas and karaaams 
of the said villages. 

Xaifiysi of K'ampalhx L. R. 35, pp. 475— 79. 

196. CUSTOMS DUTIES DURING SADASIVA’S REIGN. 

May it prosper ! Hail, in the year 1474 of the ever 
victorious Salivahana Saka corresponding to Parxdhavi Magha 
ba 5 Friday (Feb. 3. 1553 A.D.), Siinatha Ramayadeva Maha- 
raja, the son of Laksmipatiraja, and the grandson of Srlnatha- 
rSju Samanta Singara Mahapatra, (with several titles) granted 
(this) charter to the pilgrims visiting Tirupati Srlsaila. 

At the ford of Ketavaram (on the Krsiia) which ^rlman 
Maharaja Rajaparamesvara Sr! Sadasivadeva Maharaya, being 
seated on the Jewe'lled-throne of Vidyanagara, granted to us for 
[: nayankaram ], we have made sarvamanya the sunka thanas, and 
the duties collected therein on the pilgrims of eighteen castes / 
passing to and fro, on the horses on which they ride, 
the different articles brought by merchants accompanying 
them, and on the bullocks and asses which carry these articles. 

An inscription at Kltavaram : L. R. 12, pp. 287-58. 


197. TIRUMALA. 


Martuza captured the fort of Kondavldu, blasted all the 
shrines in the town, and broke their images. He changed the 
name of Gopinathapura into Martuzanagara and having made 
it his capital, he began to rule the country in the neighbour- 
hood ; but Tirumaladeva Maharaya marched upon him with 
an army, and having expelled the Muhammadan forces from the J 
south of the Krsna he captured several forts. During the reign 
of Tirumaladeva Maharaya his son ^rlrangaraja, who was 
governing this province, made a grant of land to the shrine of 
Gangadhara Ramesvara on S. 1494 Ingirasa Vaisakha 12. 
Tirumaladeva Maharaja ruled until B, S. 1494. 

Kaif.yat of XcHiavliu ■ Mac. Mss. 15-4-40, pp 23-4. 


Ill 

|| 


■ 5 — 

■ 


8 a ®ill!iE 


198. K$$NAPPA NAY AKA AND SKIRAKGAM. 

In Saka year 1452, in the reign of Krsnappa Nay aka, many 
jewels were presented to the deity, a flight o'’ steps and 
mcnidapa were built in his name in the Kaveii, and Kumara 
Narasimha Vadhula Desika was requested to worship and 
adorn, the deity in every way. 

K'oyilolugu, p. 150. 

■ 199. W.jTIRUMALA^ 

Then, Tirumalaraya, and Yenkataraya * younger brothers 
of Ramappaya ruled over the territory which was under the 



Rayas several years before. Having defeated ail the hostile 
Muhammadan armies, which invaded their kingdom from the 
north, and destroyed the enemies in every place, they ruled the 
country with JLiegondi and Candragiri as their respective 
capitals. 

Account vf the N'arafati Kings : Z. R. 50, p. 316. 
hl;h:/:A;A^ SRfRANG-A I. ' . 

After the death of Tirumaladeva Maharaya, bis second 
son, Siirahgaraya, was crowded king at Penugoiida, where he 
began to rule. Raghavaraja, (Ramaraja ?) one of his brothers, 
was governing Brlrangapattaijtam ; and another brother, 
Yenkataputiray a was ruli ig at. Candragiri. 

Pottapinadu iu the Biddhavatam sima which was included 
in the Udayagiri rafija was directly under the government of 
Srlrahga, whereas Pulugnlanadu formed part of Gandragiri- 
rUjya of which Venkatapatiraya was the governor. At the 
time of the death of Srlrangaraya in S. S. 1510, Sarvadhari 
(A.D 1588-89), Mahcmiamlaleimra Kondraju Tirupatiraju was 
nistering Biddhavatam stma with Pottapinadu on his 


' Xaifiyat of CHiitfti : L* It 22, p. 189 

; . 200 ( 6 )* ; ,■'* 

SUMMARY. . ' ;■ 

„ • ■■■ ' in : : -■ ' ■■'yy V : '.: C:’'. : y 

In Baka 1490 Vibbava the coronation of Siiranganayakulu 

was celebrated in Penugo^apf and he granted the tnfigayi of 

*Vefifcafaraya referred to in this extract is not Ram&raja’s younger brother, but a 
xwpkaw ; L the son of his younger brother Tirumala. 

d" This dat# is tod early for the coronation of Srirartga ; the coronation of ^riraiiga's 
father Ttrhmla- took place only in §. S. 1492. 


255 


Pasupula included in the GraMikSta slmct of the Udayagii-i-' 
rtijya to Hande Kad&mbaraya as an ummali. Kadambavaya 
granted in his tarn to his karijakarta, Kali Timma Nayadu, 
Cina-Pasupula, a village at a distance of two miles from Peda- 
' T'asupnla. Although Peda-Pasupula was under the Raya, the 

Hande chief usurped its administration, as he was very power- 
ful and had a garrison at Cina-Pasupula. 

In S. 1500 Bahudhanya, while Srxrahgaraja was govern- 
ing the kingdom, Malik i Vibharam invaded the country with 
the assistance of the Hande chief. The invaders caused great 
commotion throughout the country, plundered aud ransacked 
(the villages) and attacked Ahobalam where they ruined the 
temples. The Jlyangar of Ahobalam, having repaired to Penu- 
gonda, remonstrated with Sriranga. iS Although Your Majesty 
is on the throne, mean wretches like the Turakas having 
entered the country, ruined the temple of Ahobaja, Your 
Majesty’s tutelary god. It is not proper that Your Majesty 
should be an indifferent witness.” Thereupon at the instance 
of the Raya, Ramaraju and Venkataraju marched with an 
army and expelled Maliki Ibharam and the Hande chief from 
the country. Then the village of Pasupula had come under 
the control of the crown once again. 


As the tyranny of the palnigars increased considerably, 
Nandela Narasimharaja built, by the command of Sriranga- 
raya, a fort in the village of Peda-Pasupula where he posted a 
garrison. 


Kaifiyat of Peda-Pasupula : L. K. 9, pp. 177-83. 


200 (c). 

Maharajadhiraja Paramesvara Sri Virapratapa Sri Ranga* 
deva Maharaya ascended the throne and on Kartika su 10 of 
Isvara corresponding to S.S. 1499, he granted to Jatakarma 
Virupaksa, son of Martanda, the village of Grorizavolu as a 
sarvamanya agrahara. Then Hazarat Yibhnram Padusah, having 
become powerful collected an army on the other side of the 
Kr§pa, with the object of conquering Siirangaraya, the Padusaha 
of Karnataka, and .annexing such forts, as. Yinukonda and 




Bella ink onda which were on the south of that river.. Placing 
10,000 horse. 50,000 foot, IQu elephants, cam, on and bagas 
under the ■ command of Raya Bao, a Brahman in his 
service, he ordered him to lead the expedition. Accordingly 
Raya Rao with all accoutrements of war proceeded by forced 
marches, and crossing the Krsna, he captured Vinukonda 
and Bellamkonda after severe fighting. Next he proceeded to 
Nagarjunakonda and annexed the, Macerla alma, His success 
against these three hill forts encouraged him to invest the land 
fort of Koccerlakota which he took, after expelling the Velamas 
who were in possession of it. Then he seized the land forts of 
Addanki, Ammanabvoln, Kanditkuru, Podili, Bar, si, Kambham, 
Kakarla, Dupadu, Tangeda, Gnrizala, Keiavuram, and 
Kodepudi one after another: finally, he laid singe to Konda- 
vldu and pressed the garrison hard. Velugoti Timmana/the 
commandant ot the Raya, having received as bribe ‘ brass 
bags’ of varahas, surrendered the fort, and handed over the 
keys to Raya Rao, the commander of the Paducah’s forces on 
S.S. 1502, Vikrama, VaiSakha su 15 (April 89, A D. 1580.) 

fCaifiyat of A'ondavitiu : Mae. Mss. 15-4-40, pp, 24-25. 


200 ( d ). 

made Srlrahga 


The Muhammadans made Srlrahga the ruler of this 
country, and handed over to him the fort of Penngonda, on 
condition that he would pay them some money. Srlrahgaraja 
being seated on the Jewelled- throne at Penngonda ruled over 
Murikinadu, Siddhavatam, and Renadu included in the district 
of Gandikota. He allowed Brahmans and temples to enjoy the 
lands granted to them as before. 

KaifiVat of Cud dap ah ; L,R, 8 , p. 130. 


201. VELUGOTI KASTCRI RANGAPPA NAYADU. 


SUMMARY, 


When Velugoti Rahgappa was ruling the district of 
£|-uva, Dasariraju Kondraju, and Ids brothers, Anna Vcnkata- 
i*5ju and Timmarajn, rose to prominence, and having defeated 
in battle the Hande and Sari chiefs seized the estate of the 


Ifclif 



latter. Sari Obana, who was the head of the Sari family at 
that time, appealed to Velugoti Rangappa for help and 
requested him to restore to him his estate. Rangappa readily 
promised help, and marched without delay with 2,000 soldiers 
to Kodur, where he halted. 

Kondraju and his brothers who got information of the arrival 
of the invader through their spies sent immediately letters to 
the chiefs of Katneni, Vankara, Kunapuli, Pedapotu. Alanesa, 
Vemula, Kaluvapalli, Macupalli, Pottara, Pottare-Gurigilija- 
gunta, Dandakona, Oalla and Savaram families who were 
favourably disposed to them, requesting them to go to their 
assistance. In response to this request, they came with 5,000 
troops and halted at Yarragunta, where they met Matla 
Timmaraja. The Dasariraju brothers told their allies that 
Velugoti Rangappa invaded their estate, having pledged his 
word to Sari Obana to restore to him his lands. He passed 
through the territory of the Matla chiefs and was encamped at 
that time near Kodur with an army of 2,000 soldiers. They 
suggested that they could easily effect his capture. Matla 
Timma agreed to the proposal, and summoned to his assis- 
tance chiefs, noblemen, commandants of forts, and relations 
from Kalimili, Udayadri, Kadiri, Pottapinadu, Siddhavatam, 
and Sakili. Soon an army consisting of 97 elephants, 1,000 
horses, 800 chiefs, 100 kings, some hundreds of matchlockmen, 
and 500 archers gathered together, and it was further strength- 
ened by 7,000 kaijitam forces of Matla Timmaraja. 

The army left Yerraguinta and moved towards Siddha- 
vatam which they soon reached. Thence they marched to 
Nelatur where they waited for some of their allies who were 
still on the way. Then, with the object of gaining time, the 
Dasariraju brothers sent Gutti Venkataraju to the camp of the 
enemy to negotiate terms of peace ; but as neither party was 
desirous of settling the matter amicably, fighting became 
inevitable. 

The next morning both the armies stood against each 
other in full battle array. The army of the Dasariraju 


brothers fell into four divisions : — (1) the minor chiefs, (2) the 
troops of Matla Timmaraja, (S) the retainers of the Dasariraju 
family and (4) other forces. All these four divisions consist- 
ing of 12,000 infantry attacked the forces of Eangappa on all 
sides. Velugoti Eangappa rode forward lance in hand to 
attack the enemy. He told his ally Damera Venkatapati that 
he would lead the charge personally against the Matla chief as 
he had a large army, and asked him to keep the other chiefs 
engaged. Then commenced a sanguinary battle in which the 
following chiefs were killed : — ■ 



1. Matla Cina Ellappa. 

2. Lingaraju Timm ana. 

3. Villuru Virayya. 

4. Nakkenapalli Raghava 

5. Yeragudi Konera. 

6. The nephew of (5). 

7. Yeiragudi Timmaraju. 

8. Ranganatharaju. 

9. Balraju Ramana. 

10. Palepu Koneru. 

11. Maccala Vengayya, 

12. Kondraju Somana. 

13. Surraju Kondraju. 

14. Tulasiraju Timmana. 

15. Bhairraju Koneru. 

16. Timmaraju Tippana. 

17. Gottikanti Obaya. 

18. Sangaraju Murti. 

19. Pasupula Ghana. 

20. MulIagSru Ellayya. 

21. Sirigiri Koneru. 

22. Cintagunta Koneru. 

23. Cintagunta Subbaraju. 

24. Nakamallu Timmana. 

25. Nakamallu Oba. 

26. Gutti Y enkataraju. 

27. Malraju Kondraju. 






259 


28. Bhumaraju Timmaraju. 

29. Virayya, the son-in-law of (28). 

30. Kattuluri Laksumaraju. 

31. Salakariiju Pedaraju. 

32. Matla Varadaraju Timmaya. 

33. Matla Tirumalaraju and fifty others. .. 

When so many of their allies were killed, the army of 
Dasariraju brothers wavered and fled. Among the chiefs that 
turned their back upon the enemy were : — 

1. Gona Telagalnedu. 

2. Kaluvapalli Venkatayya. 

3. Kunapuli Ganginedu. 

4. Katneni Kadirinedu. 

5. Guriginjagunta Buccana. 

6. Calla Tati Nedu. 

7. Savaram Tatanna. 

8. Vankara Basivinedu. 

9. Nesa Timmana. y'yyy 

10. Macupal Timminedu. : v .(: 

11. Pottara Timminedu. ■ -(■■■■' 

12. Vemula Ganginedu. 

But, one chief, Appakondraju, did not relish the idea of 
flying before the enemy. He turned round, and valiantly 
opposed the pursuers but was killed. The lives of Anantaraju 
and Venkataraju who were taken prisoners were spared. 
When Rangappa was satiated with the slaughter of the enemy, 
he commanded at last the trumpet of dharma (dharmadhara) to 
be blown ; and immediately the slaughter ceased. 

This battle was fought on As'vija, su 8, Sunday, of the 
year Pramadi corresponding to S. S. 1501. 1 (Sunday, Sept. 27, 
1579 A.D.) 

Mac.Mts. 15-4-3, pp. lSa-37. 

202(a). KAST0RI RANG A. 

SUMMARY. 

Velugoti Ranga drove the chiefs of Vinukonda and 
Ko$$avI$u up to KoccerlakSta ; killed the mctmie chiefs wh~ 


26U 


were the subordinates of the Raya at Krotta-Kanuma ; exacted 
tribute witliin a gJiadiya from Timmapa Gauda who rebelled 
against the Raya; and slew Matla Tirnma with 12,000 troops, 
and won a victory over Dasariraju Timma, having put to flight 
Gonas, Vankaras and Kunapulis. He destroyed the Ksatriyas 
in the battle-field of Kodur. 

Velugotivari Vamsava^i, 392 - 3 . 

202(5). 

This Kasturi Rangappa Nayadu defeated the Muhamma- 
dans of Golkonda in battle ; and chased the petty chiefs of 
Vinulconda and Kondavldu to Koccerlakota. Having been 
commissioned by the Raya to subdue Timmana Gaud who 
rose in rebellion against, him, he killed 26,000 nmnne soldiers 
of the Gaud’s army in the battle of Krotta-Kanuma. He 
captured Timmana Gaud, and exacted from him the tribute 
due to the Raya. 

Then, Timmaraja, the chief of Matla slma, with the help 
of his brothers, Kondrajn, Venkataraju and Dasariraju attacked 
the chiefs in the neighbourhood and seized their estates.* Bari 
Obalaraju, one of the chiefs, who was thus dispossessed, appeal- 
ed to Kasturi Rangappa Nayadu for help and requested him 
to effect the restoration of his lands. Rangappa pledged his 
word to get back liis property, and to secure this end he 
marched to Kodur with an army of 2,000 soldiers. Damera 
Venkatappa Nayadu, accompanied him with some troops. 

When Timmaraja heard of this information, he summoned 
to his assistance the chiefs of the Katneni, Vanlcara, Kunapuli, 
and Pedapadu families who were favourably disposed to him 
as well as the commandants of the forts of Kalimili and 
Udavagiri to Yerragunta. He explained to his allies the state 
of affairs ; then he despatched Gutti Venkataraju to the camp 

* The author of Velugd$ivari Vamsacariiru appears to have misunderstood the mean” 
and Venkataraju were not the brothers of Mafia Timmaraja., ■ 
'itot Timma who seized the" estates'^.' the., Stitt i amity; h v 

rSju Kon«jraju and his brothers were the aggressors, and Mafia Timmaraja caju« ia as an ;■ 
when they were attacked by Kasttfri Rangappa who espoused the cause of the SSri ' 


: . . ■ : ■. - • ■ s;| / ■■ . ' . §|g . : 


Stlfl 


261 


of Kasturi Eangappa with the following message :- — “ We did 
not injure you in any manner. It is not proper that you 
should wage war upon us without provocation.” Kasturi 
Rangappa replied, “ I gave a promise to Sari Obalaraja that I 
would get him hack his estate ; and I won’t return from this 
war, unless you relinquish your hold upon it.”* On the receipt 
of this reply, Timmaraja made himself ready for battle with an 
army of 90 elephants, 1,000 horses, and 12,000 infantry. 

Kasturi Eangappa marched for battle with 20,000'f soldiers 
accompanied by Camera Venkatappa Nayadu and other chiefs. 
A fierce engagement took place in which Timmaraja’s troops 
were scattered, and fifty-three chiefs including LingarSju, 
Timmanna, Malluvaru Vlrayya, Sankenapalli Raghavayya, 
Timmaraju, Venkataraju, Kondraju, and Dasariraju were 
killed.J The remaining chiefs who were panic-stricken sought 
the protection of Kasturi Eangappa. He spared their lives, 
and gave back to Sari Obala his territory. 

This battle was fought on S. S. 1501 (A.D. 1579), Pramadi, 
Xsvija su 8, Sunday. ' i . 1 ||g|yy 

Vtlugoiivari VamkicarUra t pp. 93-5. 

, 203. srirangaraya i. - hY ; ; 

'J ' TAXES ON MARKETS. . V 


On & S. 1496 Bhava, Magha su 2, Friday, (14th Jan. 1575 
A.D.) Paracunx Papa Nayadu, a grandson of Pemmasani Timma 
Nayadu, and a subordinate of'Srl YTra Rangarayadeva Maha- 
raya, built a peta at Krasur in the Bellamkonda shna, started 
a market, 1 and granted a stone charter to the people of all 
PafaJcamUlas (?): — - . 

We have remitted the 34 (?) vedanas such as pannu, 
paravi (par ay am), gaddem ( kkaddayam ?), kdnike , vetti, 
vemi, Ido tana, etc., for twelve years. After that, we shall 

* Gutti Venkataraju was despatched as an ambassador not from Yerpigunfa but Nelatur,. 

f The poem which describes the battle has only 2,000. 

t The account given here is very faulty, as it contradicts the evidence of the contem- 
porary account No. $0L 


a oa 


collect 3 rif&as for a big bouse, 2 ruhas for a small one, and 
1 rulca for a shop per year. We have remitted for ever vetti, 
kottamu ( Jcotana ), gadda ( hhaddayam ), Jcanike, and all other 
dues. Akatra, megu, zamili-gutta and peccu-gutta we have 
remitted in favour of the talari We have also remitted the 
fines on adultery. 

Inscription at Krasur , Bdlmihoncta Par g ana • Z. R* 12, pp. 268-69. 


204(a), VENKATA IL 


SUMMARY. 

Ylra V enkatapatiraya, who succeeded Alranga, being 
desirous of renovating the agrahara established by his ancestor, 



Eamacandraraya, granted the lands of the defunct agrahara of 
Ramacandrapuram to Vellala V enkatasomayaj ulu on S. S. 1511 
Virodhi, Bhadrapada su 12 (Aug. — Sept. 1589 A.D.) ; but after 
the death of V enkatapatiraya, the Haijde chief occupied the 
fort and posted a garrison. 

Kaijiyai of Peda-Pasuputa : L. R. 9, pp. 177 f. 

204 ( 6 ). 

SUMMARY. 

Many of the Ksatriyas who were cultivating the fields 
defied the Brahman land-owners, and troubled them otherwise. 
The Brahmans were too weak to protect themselves ; and as 
the kingdom of the Rayas disappeared, there was rfone to 
listen to their complaints. Therefore, they were obliged to 
migrate to other places, abandoning their native village. The 
Ksatriya farmers, having taken shelter under the Hande chief, 
joined the neighbouring palaigars, busied themselves in 
plundering the villages. The village of Peda-Pasupula 
remained in the possession of the Hande chiefs until 
&. S. 1574 Nandana, when the country passed into the hands 
of the Muhammadans. The Mussalman officers dispersed the 
garrison of the Ha$de chief, and confiscated the village. 

; Ibid, pp. 183-187. 

205. VENKATA II AND THE SIEGE OF PENUGONDA. , 

SUMMARY. ’ 

Timma was born of the Yisnuvardhana-^oira in the fourth 
caste (1,2). His son was Shiga who begot Timma, Madaya, 


263 



Cennamankusa and Laksma (3). Of these Timma, with the 
help of his brother Cennamankusa vanquished the Band and 
the king of Puranapura (Burhanpur) and obtained the title of 
Jagadeva (4). That Jagadeva of good character, ruled the 
country with great prowess (5), To him were born Peda Jaga- 
deva, Immadi Jagadeva, Pinna Jagadeva and Ankusendra (6). 
Immadi J agade varaya, the most warlike of the brothers, killed 
Mrtyujakhan (Martuza Khan), Cittakhan and the cruel 
Nurikhan, destroying their entire following (7). Further, he 
caused the anointment to rulership of Aliya Kama, Tirumala, 
^liranga and Yira Venkataraya. 

Ponnato'a Aubhaja Kavi : VSmanafurana (Gevt. Orient. Mss. Lib., 

R. No. 60?-A), Canto I, pp. 16-23. 


306(a). VENKATA II AND HIS NOBLES. 

SUMMARY. 

When king Yenkatapatideva Maharayalu being seated on 
the Jewelled-throne was ruling from Penugonda, and when 
Krsnamaraju of the Nandyala family was ruling at Grhandikota, 
the Matla chief, Ellamaraju of the Coda family of the Solar 
race, who was a partisan of the aforesaid Venkatapati Rayalu, 
fought with Nandyala Krsnamaraju at J ambulamadaka, took 
him prisoner but offered him protection. 


When Kondraju Tirupatiraju was ruling at Siddha- 
vatam, Matla Ellamaraju fought against him at the battle of 
Utiikuru, in the Cittiveli taluka, defeated him and annexed 

Siddhavatam-:.-^Ji"^J : i'^-J';.i 


When the country fell into a state of ruin after the 
Mussalmans destroyed Vijayanagara City, king Venkata- 
patiraya granted hauls to ryots and set up inscriptions to that 
effect in the several villages of Kamalapuram taluka. These 
inscriptions range in date from & S. 1523 to 1531. 

Jtaijtyat efCadda^ah : Z. R. g* pp. 133-37. 


264 


206(6). 

SUMMARY. 

Kondrajn Tirupatiraju rebelled against Venkatapatideva 
Maharaja who ascended the Jewelled-throne at Candragiri as 
well as Penugonda. Matla Eliamaraja espoused the cause of 
the Raya, and defeated the ruler of Nandyala in a battle at 
Jambulamadaka. He offered protection to Nandyala Krsnama- 
raja. Nest, he proceeded against Kondrajn Tirupatiraju, and 
having inflicted a defeat upon him in the battle of Utukur, 
took possession of Siddhavatam. Then he erected the wall 


enclosing the temple of Siddhesvara, on which he caused an 
inscription to be engraved in S. S. 1527 Visvavasu.* 



Kaifiyat of Llbaka : L. R. 44, pp. 243-44. 
207(a). VELUGOTI OENNAYA-VENKATAPATI. 

SUMMARY. 

Cennaya Venkatapati is indeed umn vailed among the 
manne chiefs in the kingdom of Karnataka. (1) He won a 
victory over a certain Timmaraja, after both he and his enemy 

left Penugonda. (2) 

* *• # # 

Veiugetivari VajhsBvah\ 349-50. 

207(b). 

He conquered many chiefs; and having subdued the 
Gobburu chiefs at Ivalimili, he took possession of their estate. 
He introduced many changes into the village, and named 
it Venkatagiri after his name. 

Vetugo^ivari Vam$acaritra r p. 90. 

208. SiLUVA MAKARAJA AND HIS SONS. 

SUMMARY. 

Maharaja : — Makaraja came out of the fort of Baieagundla, 
when the manne chiefs of the Seventy-Seven Palems laid siege 
to it, and having defeated them in battle acquired the name of 
Kota Makaraja. \ 

His sons He had three sous, Timma, Bomma, and 
Laksmlpati. . ■ : :V -y'; 

* The inscription -was not s.t up by Eliamaraja, but by his son Aaantaraja. 


265 


Timma or Tirnmala Timma who was the most distin- 
guished of his sons rose to prominence. f^/dyy 

While Tirumalarajendra, was holding court being seated 
on the throne, the whole court-hall was illuminated by his 
jewels, which were presented to him by the Lord of Karijata. 

Laksmlpatii — He caused several times laksa-puja to be 
performed to Siva and Visnu ; and had the poem, Tapati- 
Samwitam Garita dedicated to himself. 

Poet, Mallana : — ‘ Your grandfather and great-grandfather, 
Errana and Mallana having obtained gold and other ornaments 
from Sahiva Narasimha and the Gajapatis shone brightly’. 

VipranUrayaqaearita, 1 : 15, 16, 19, 3?, 38, 39, 45. 

209. OENNAPPA NAYADU, THE GRANDSON OF 
GANI TIMMA HAY ADU. 

SUMMARY. 

Velugoti Cennappa Nayadu having persistently attacked 
Gandikota and other forts captured them. Placing himself at 
the head of the manne chiefs he opposed boldly an army of 
Kutapana Malaka in battle and having increased the flood of 
the river Penna with streams of the newly shed blood of the 
ever- vigilant, and cruel Muhammadans, he presented to his 
master the damsel of victory, ' . y; : y,y.y ,y ; ,y y;, f " 

Vilngdiivari VathMvali t 339, 

210. Y AC AM A. /'■ 

SUMMARY- ' 

Yacama entered the forts of Kandanavolu, Gutti, Ga^di- 
kota, Golkonda, Makkha, Kondavldu,* Udayadri, Nellore, 
Orukallu, Katakam, Delhi, and Kasikapuri (1) *. y : ;f'y'\ 

VdugfyivILri VatfiMvali, 406. 

211. VENKATA II AND HIS REBELLIOUS SUBORDINATES.. . 

During the reign of Srlrangaraya, Gopalaraja, a descendant 
of Ramaraja of Kandanavolu, was governing Kandanavolu. 

•It is absurd to say that Yaca entered sudh far off place* as Delhi anti Kasikapuri. 
This v#jcse appears to latsr interpolation. -djA ’’ y 1 ';;,’" 


Then, Venkatapatiraja, the younger brother of £rlranga- 
raya, having ascended the Jewelled-throne both at Penuwonda 
and Oandragiri, was ruling the kingdom. Gopalaraja streno- 
thenedjhe fortifications of Kandanavolu, and became powerful. 
Nandyala Krsnamaraja was ruling- at Nandyala. 




ft ■ ■ M 


fmn 


' ,r 


;! ; » , 


Krsnamaraja who was governing Nandyala rebelled against 
Venkat^patiraya, who consequently marched on the fort of 
Nandyala with an army accompanied by the Hande chief and 
Matla EUamaraja Devacoda Maharaja, and laid "siege to* it. 
Krsnamaraja met Venkatapatiraya by means of the good 
services of Ellamaraja (and made peace with him). Venkata- 

patiraya carried away Krsnamaraja with him to Candranri and 
annexed his territory. ° 


This facHs mentioned in the kavile of Perusomala in the 
Ivoilakuntla laluka. The date is said to be S.S. 1520 Vilambi 
(A.D. 1598). 

Katfiyat of Kandanavolu : L.R. 16, pp . 496, 499. 


212. VENKATA II AND NANDYALA KRSNAMARAJA. 
While Nandyala Sri Krsnamaraja was ruling at the fort of 


vr, 1 -1 tt- XT 1 J iluul 3 txie ion ot 

Nandyala, Vira Venkatapatideva Maharaya marched with his 
army from Oandragiri in S.S. 1520 Hevilambi, and having 
secured the support of Hande Devappa Nayadu, and other 
manne samanias laid siege to the fort of Nandyala. He feuvht 
with the defenders for some time and captured it. In Vilambi 
he entrusted a portion of the territory to Devappa Nayaka 
At that time, owing to the absence of proper government, many 
holders of the agraharas migrated to other parts of the country, 
as .he conditions of agraharas were not properly maintained 

. ;.yi:; v r : . Kaifiyat of Alavakonda * L.R, 8, p. 23. 


21 8 (a). 


ill 


glllil 


NANDYALA KRSNAMARAJA. 

When Venkajapatidevaraya, having ascended the throne 

Il- , i a . and Candra V 1 ’ ™ ruIi ”g kingdom, 
^ arnara J a " e *®ated Nandyala Krmamaraia in the battle 


267 


; of Jambulamadaka, on behalf of the Baya and offered him 

protection. He also defeated Kondraju Tirapatiraju, the 
governor of, Siddhavatam slma, at Utukur and annexed his 
territory. 

Kaifiyat ofOtukUr : L.R. 11, pp. +7-48. 

213(b). 5f 

During the reign of Venkatapatiraya at Candragiri 
Venkataraxnaraju of the family of the Cittiveli chiefs who 
joined the side of Y enkatapatiraya, the lord of the throne of 
Vidyanagara, won a victory over Nandyala Krsnamaraja in the 
battle of Jambulamadaka.* Having taken Krsnamaraja 
prisoner, he offered him protection. 

Kondraju Tirupatiraju was holding sway over Siddha- 
vatam as a subordinate of Venkatapatiraya ; Matla Ellamaraja, ; 
the chief of Cittiveli, defeated him in a battle at Utukur' and 
seized Siddhavatam. 

Kaifiyat of Siddhavatam ; L.R, 9 ? p. 281. 

214. THE MATLA CHIEFS IN THE REIGN OF VENKATA II. 

After the death of Srirangaraja, Kondraju and Tirupatiraju 
entertained the idea of ruling independently the Siddhavatam 
slma together with Pottapi slma. After the death of Sri- 
rangaraya, the Matla chief Ellamaraja and his sons went 
over to the side of Venkatapatiraya, who was ruling at 
Candragiri. Owing to the enmity that existed between them 
and the Matla chiefs, they confiscated Pondaluru, Penagaluru, 
Ponnapalli and other villages included in the Siddhavatam 
and Pottapinadu slmas which were enjoyed by the Matla chiefs 
as their amaram villages. 

Srlman Mahamandalesvara Krsnamaraja of the Lunar race, A: 

a jnati of Venkatapatiraya, who was governing the Nandyala 
i slma began to rule the district without paying any regard 

| to Venkatapatiraya. Kondraju Tirupatiraju, the ruler of ; 

Siddhavatam slma , posted a garrison at Utukur, a sammat 

* This exploit is ascribed in other Kaifiyats to Matla Ellamaraja. 


268 


village in the Pottapi-wa# shna, to prevent any attack upon 
it from Pulugula mdu which was included in the territory 
of V enk atapatiray a, the king of Canclragiri. Kondraju 
Tirupatirajn paid a visit to Utnkur with the object of streng- 
thening his hold on the whole of Pottapi-wafi sl.ma. Venkata- 
patiraya despatched an army under Mahama iida les vara Matla 
Ellamaraja, the father of Tirumalaraja, in order to destroy 
the fort erected by Kondraju Tirupatirajn at Jtukur, seize 
Pottapi nadu and post the garrisons of his own troops to 
protect it. He also promised that he would grant to Ellama- 
raju the town of Siddhavatam together with the terrritory 


attached to it as amaram provided that he e fleeted its conquest. 
Accordingly Matla Ellamaraja accompanied the Raya’s army, 
and marched to [Jtukur, where Kondraju Tirupatirajn, the 
governor of Siddhavatam shna, was then residing. When he 
attempted to enter Utukur, he came into conflict with K ondraju 
Tirupatiraju who was, however, killed in the battle that was 
fought outside the precincts of the village. Having posted a 
garrison in the fort, Ellamaraja pursued the followers of 
Tirupatiraju who were fleeing the country by three different 
routes, going to Poli, Neladalur, and Kondur respectively. He 
succeeded in overtaking them before they crossed the frontier 
and put them all to the sword either at Poli, Kondur or 
Neladalur. The portion of the enemy’s army fleeing by the 
Pottapi road, unable to resist his attack took refuge in the Nmi 
Hills in the north of Pottapi. This account of Ellamaraja’s 
pursuit of the enemy is based upon the laudatory verses which 
the jB/iflfs composed in memory of his victory. 



Tirumalaraja, the younger brother of Matla Ellamaraja, 
proceeded at the head of an army to Cennur, put to death 
Kondraju Y enkatadriraja, who was governing the place as the 

■ Tirupatiraju, and took possession of it. 
He conquered next the districts of Kamalapuram, Duvvur, 
Porumamilla, Baddevolu, and reduced the estates of the rnanne 
chiefs and the palems to subjection. While engaged in a wair 
with galaigars, Tirumalaraja met his death. In the poem 




269 


composed by the Bhats during the time of Kumara Anantaraja 
it is stated that Tirumalaraja crushed the palems of the mannes 
on the frontier, and having put the enemies to death each 
separately, he perished like Abhimanyu in the fight. 

The capture of Siddhavatam by Ellamaraja is also men- 
tioned in an inscription which his son Anantaraja caused to be 
engraved on the wall, enclosing the Siddhesvara shrine which 
he erected. 

“ In the Saka year (counted by) horses (7) eyes (2) 

arrows (5) earth (1), i.e. 1527 corresponding to Visvavasu 

Ananta built the large stone wall of Siddhavatam which his 
father obtained (as a consequence of his victory) in the battle 
of Utukur,” 

Moreover, in the Telugu slsamalika that is inscribed just 
below this verse, it is said that his (Ananta’s) father, Ellama 
converted a spring near Siddhavatam, which he took at the 
point of the sword after defeating Kondraju Tirupatiraju, into 
an irrigation tank and called it after his name. 

Ellamaraja Devacoda Maharaja effected the conquest of 
Siddhavatam and other districts in the manner described above. 
In accordance with his solemn promise, Venkatapatiraya grant- 
ed to Matla Ellamaraja as amara-nayamkara Pulugula-wafi slma 
included in the Candragiri rajya together with Pottapi -nadu and 
Siddhavatam simas belonging to the Udayagiri rajya. More- 
over, he entrusted to him the administration of the districts of 
Cennur, Duvvur, Kamalapuram, Porumamilla and Badveli. 

At that time, &rlman Mahamayclalesvara Nandyala 
Krsnamaraja, the governor of Nandyala Sima, did not acknow- 
ledge the sovereignty of Venkatapati Maharaya. In 4. S. 1520 
Hevilambi, when Venkatapatiraya started from Candragiri 
with his army to subdue him, he took Ellamaraja .also with him. 
Having left Candragiri he reached Perusomala in the Koila- 
kuntla shna, where lie halted three days. Thence he advanced 


upon Nandyala and laid siege to it. Krsnamaraja del 
fort for three months, but he could not offer further 



to the Raya’s army, which had, in the meantime, greatly 
increased in strength owing to the arrival of the Pemmasani 
and the Hande chiefs with their forces to help him. Krsnama- 
raja showed his willingness to conclude peace on the 
assurances given by Ellamaraja, and he met the Raya in an 
interview when they became reconciled with each other. The 
Raya showed him much favour and kept him in comfort in 
Candragiri. 


There is evidence to show that Mafia Ellamaraja and 
V enkatapatiray a advanced together with an army on Nandyala 
Krsjramaraja and subdued him. The proof of this is recorded in 
the l anile and the ayacid account written by the Kannadi- 
karnam, Nandiraja, and others of the fore-mentioned Perusomala. 
Mcfreover, an inscription dated S. S. 1527 Visvavasn engraved 
on the wall enclosing the Siddhesvara shrine on the eastern 
side of the gate of the Siddhavatam fort which Matla Ananta 
Devacoda Maharaja, son of Ellamaraja, had constructed shows 
that Nandyala Krsnamaraja concluded peace with Venkata- 
patiraya on the assurances of safety given to him by Matla 
Ellamaraja. (Anantaraja) describes at some length the achieve- 
ments of his father, Ellamaraja, in that inscription. 

Two lines of the sisamalika run as follows : - • 

He possessed the skilful rod-like arms capable of giving 
protection to Nandyala Krsnama, and he bore the title, 
“ the right-hand of the lord of the whole Kar^ata.” 

A few days later Matla Ellamaraja died. 

Kaifiyat of GUivVi ■. L.R. 22, pp. 190-201. 

215(a). AGGRESSIONS OF MATLA ELLAMARAJA. 

When Vlra V enkatapatidevo Maharaya was ruling the 
kingdom, Kondraju and Tirupatiraju, these two, were govern- 
ing this village together with the Siddhavatam Sima on his 
behalf.* Matla Ellamaraju, the master of the Cittivelu estate, 
conquered Siddhavatam. 

Kaifiyat of Kotjur : L. R 13, p. S85. 

•This contradicts the statement of the Kaifiyat of Cittivdi that Kondraju and 
Tirapatiraju rebelled against Vepkajapatiraya. 



271 


215(6). 

SUMMARY. 

When Matla Ellama took the fort of Siddhavatam, his 
enemies fled from the place unable to offer any resistance ; some 
disguised themselves as snake-charmers and artisans to earn 
their livelihood ; and others took refuge in hills and jungles. 

Kumudavatikalyanam , Canto I. 


216(a). MATLA AX ANT A, SON OF ELLA. 

The bards state that the Khans of AsVaraya’s army were 
killed by the sword of Matla Anantaraja. Notwithstanding 
all that they still remain encamped with their four-fold army 
in front of the camp (of the gods) in the country of Indra 
( Velupu-Rdyalasima )* 

Abhisi kta 'aghavam {.unpublished) : Mad. Govt. Or. Mss. Lib\ 
A Descriptive Catalogue of Ttlugu Mss. Vol. II, p. 439; 

Mac. Mss. 14-2-36 ff 3-4. 


216(6). 


Ellamaraja died some time later. The palaigars stirred 
up a rebellion, taking advantage of his death. Konamaraja, 
the son of Ellamaraja, by bis senior wife Dademamba, went 
with an army to suppress the rebellion and was killed by the 
rebels. Thereupon, Srhnan Mahamaudalesvat'a Ananta Deva- 
eoda Maharaja, another son of Ellama, by his fourth wife, 
gathered troops and subdued the palaigars. He enjoyed the 
shnas of Pulugula-no^M and Pottapi together with Siddhavatam 
as his amaram , and carried on the administration of Duvvur, 
Cennur, Kamalapuram, Porumamilla, and Baddevolu. 


An army of the Turmkas from the land of Mussalmans 
laid siege to Penugonda, the capital of the Raya. On the 
command of V enkatapatiraya, Anantaraja marched to Penu- 
gonda and put the besiegers to flight. The Raya honoured 
him much, and in appreciation of his services, conferred upon 


* There is pun on the word ‘ Vthipu-RTiyalasima The author indicates that 
though these Khans were put to death in the Rayala-sima {sun a. of the Raya of Yijaya- 
nagara) they continued to harass the sima (country) of the Raya (Icing) or the celestial 
beings. 


■ 


i 




i mmeBSi i 


•f \« ;; 1 , >'/+*>' 


.1 


I 

J,"'« 


272 


him titles and a dress of honour. This is proved by a 
laudatory sisamalika which the Bhats composed in praise of 

Kumara Anantaraja, a grandson of Anantaraja. 

Then, Konaraja proceeded against the enemies to destroy 
them; haying slain the foes in battle, he plundered the glory 
of Indra (i.e. died) and won the applause of the marine chiefs 
of his rank, Bhats, and poets in the presence of the Raya.” 


“ Yom ' S ran ^hither, king Ananta, put down those treacher- 
ous enemies ; he engaged himself like Hanuman in performing 
deeds beneficial to his master, and destroyed the Muhammadan 
forces at Penugonda thereby exciting the admiration of the 
famous nobles and the Raya.” 

After the destruction of the Muhammadan army at 
Penugonda, he returned to Siddhavatam, which he made his 
permanent abode. Now, the officer who was governing the fort 
of Gurramkonda, made an attack upon the territory belonging 
to the Raya’s army ( Rayaramva ). At the instance of 
Venkatapatiraya, Matla Ananta Devacoda Maharaja, marched 
with an army, and having invested the fort, he demolished one 
of its bastions. The commandant of the fort sued for peace 
(which he granted). Then he returned to Siddhavatam, ha vino- 
p&id a visit to Candragiri on his way. 

The Bhats composed the following verse when he over- 
threw the bastion during the siege of Gurramkonda. 

“0! Ananta, son of Matla Ella you fought without 

being frightened by the gun-powder bags scattering flames in 
the sky, like the wild-fire ; or confused by the reports of guns 
emptying volleys of hissing fire, or perplexed by stones falling 
down like the showers in the Citta * ; or alarmed by the roar of 
the cannon, piercing, as it were, the space itself. You over- 
threw the bastion of Gurramkonda and won the applause of 
the Padusaha and others.” 


* Here tie Urt e r,M,J Cttt, tat* teliel the r«„ (.11, i„ , 

ftm 1 - r * i “" “* - - »■ *■ — *■ —■ 






273 


While he was ruling at Siddhavatam in peace, he 
converted a small pond which was in the neighbourhood 
of the town into an irrigation tank and erected around the 
Siddhesvara temple a wall on which he caused an inscription 
to be engraved.* . . 

While this Anantaraja was ruling, an army consisting of 
pcUra-samantas and manne-samantas came from Udayaoiri 
with the object of surrounding Baddevolu sinia and halted 
near Kamalakuru. At the instance of Venkatapatiraya, 
Anantaraja marched with his army, and having attacked the 
armies of the Muhammadans and the Ravilla chiefs, won a 
victory over them at Ghirramkonda. Besides, he led an expedi- 
tion up to Kolar in the west and returned with victory. 

These exploits of Anantaraja were praised by the Bhats of 
the time in a verse. 

“0! Mafia Ananta, son of king Ella , did you not 

destroy the petty chiefs of Udayagiri in a fierce battle at 
Kamalakfiru ? Did you not defeat the forces of the Ravil|a 
chief in a battle near Ghirramkonda ? Did you not firmly 
establish yourself near the fort of Kolala without raisin tr the 
siege t 

While (Anantaraja) was ruling in this maimer, Nandyala 
Krsnamaraja whom Venkatapatiraya carried away to Candra- 
giri breathed his last ; and his son Narasimharaja succeeded 
him. Matla Anantaraja also died some time later at 
Siddhavatam. . yyyfp- y . ... ; 

, y : Kaifyat of Cittivtli : L, R. 22 , pp, 202-9. 

216(c). 

VW/'ypg ■ ■ SUMMARY. 

Matla Ananta attacked Kutupu $ahu (Qutb Shah) in the 
neighbourhood of Penugouda and put him to flight ; his forces 
fell upon Asvaraya’s cavalry near Grandikota and cut them to 

* As this inscription has b«#n published by the lata Mr. A. Rangaswami Sarasvati 
ia mSottrwt of 'mjayanagara JTis-ttry, it is not included ia this extract .. 


274 


pieces ; lie vanquished in battle the forces of Kainpa Nainappa, 
the governor of Uddagiri (XJdayagiri), and subdued at 
Gnrramkonda Ravila Konda and Venkata. He also executed 
successfully the commission entrusted to him by the Raya by 
putting down Vlrappa, (the Nayaka) of Madura. 

JCamud auatVcal yanam. Canto 1 . 

217. THE WAR BETWEEN THE PSMMASANI AND 
MATLA CHIEFS. 

During the reign of Venkatapatiraya, king of Penugonda, 
this country was administered by Matla Kumara Anantaraja, 
the chief of Cittiveli. He was engaged in a war with Pemma- 
sani Timma Nayadu, the governor of the fort of Gandikota. 
However, a peace was concluded by the terms of "which 
Oilamkuru in Duvvur taluka was fixed as a boundary between 
the estates of the two chiefs. The country to the west of 
Oilamkuru was given to Pemmasani Timma Nayadu and that to 
the oast of it was assigned to Matla Kumara Anantaraja. 

Kaifiyat of AUidona ? X, R. 1, p. 142. 

218. YACAMA NAYADU (THE SIEGE OF tJ TT A RAM ALLUR). 

SUMMARY. 

Yacama, the son of Ranga, and the grandson of Yaca, 
boldly took possession of the Perimeti slma which Vlra Venkata- 
patiraya granted to him. Having stationed his troops "at 
Madhurantakam, he led an expedition on the next day against 
the fort of Uttaramallur which he captured by escalade. 

On hearing the news of the capture of the fort, Aradi ' : 

Naga became indignant. He sent for the adventurous hero, 
Davula Papa, and explained to him how Yacama attacked and 
captured Uttaramallur. Having warned him that he should 
be ready to wage war on Yacama, he summoned to his 
assistance, the nobles and petty chiefs under him as well as 
the powerful Reddis and palaigars. He also obtained some 
elephants and horses from Ceilji and Tanjavur. He placed this 
army under the command of Davula Cinna Papa, and sent him 
against Uttaramallur with instructions to recapture it. Papa 


275 


marched at the head of an army comprising 100 elephants, 
500 pairs of horses, 1,000 nobles riding in palanquins, 

10.000 archers, 70,000 rochets, 12,000 matchlockmen, and 

30.000 infantry, and encamped on the east of Uttaramallur on 
S.S. 1523, Plava, Jyesriha su 10, Sunday* 

Yacama was not frightened at the sight of this huge host. 
He remembered his father’s victory over Mat! a Timma with his 
12,000. Therefore, he advanced upon the enemy on horse- 
back, accompanied by his brother, Singama riding on an 
elephant with such intrepidity that even the Suljfcan, the 
Gajapati and Vxra Venkatapatiraya admired him. His friends, 
brothers, relations and dependents followed him with 

2.000 soldiers. 


In the battle that ensued, the following chiefs were 


slain 


1. Balumuri Venkatappa. 

2. Pusapati Krsnamaraju. 

3. Muppalla Ragana. 

4. Gadepudi Ayyana. 

5. Ayyana, son of Yera Obulendra. 

6. Pulagamu Ka]ayya. 

7. Maccarla Timmana. 

8. Ketireddi Tammana. 

Damerla Lingana. 

Gona Tippana. . • 

Panjula Virappa. 

Suru, son of Divvalendra. 

Itikela Rangana. 

14. Sandinayani Venga. 

15. Panem Ramaraju, 

Durgamu Peddu. 

Lingamaneni Nagana. 

Kalive Yengana. 

Cina Cidambararaju. 


9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 


16. 

17. 

18. 
19. 


20. Verriraju. 


«§i;; 


* Sunday, 3ist May 1601 A. D. 


■ ; 


210 


21. Kilari Venkata. 

22. Muddu Venkata. 

28. Vlramaneni Eilappa. 

24. Potlapalli Laecana. 

25. Cintapatla Ghana. 

26. Kotapati Cenna Krsnappa. 

27. Davnla Cinna Papa. 

The following' were taken prisoners ; — 


1. Damerla Karicenna. 

2. Kamireddi. 

3. Sarvappa. 

4. Nagajanapala. 

The chiefs of several palems were also captured. Many 
fled. The most noteworthy of them are : — 

1. Ceraku Raghavanedu. 

2. Balamurti. 

3. Vissare^di. 

4. Palepu Tirumalayya. 

5. Sajva Konamaraju. : ' ; : 

■ ./ 6. Kafici Mallu. ' ' ■ , 

7. Mopuri Timm ana. 

8 . Granipinedu. 

9. Vilapurapu Virappayya. 

10. Ceppalli Siddinedn. Vfv ; . 

11. Satram Nagappa. 3.. ' e yf 

12. The Reddis of Kanci-Namhika. 

13. Odiyappa. : V 

14. §esadri. 

. 15. The members of the Uda family. 

16. Davula Sarvappa. 

17. The Padaivlti chiefs. \ 

18. The troopers from Cenji. 

19. Nellipatla chiefs. 

20. Mallareddi Mallappa. 

21. Gakkani Raju. 



22, Davula Mfirti. 

28. Panembaka Paparaju. 

24. Maddikayala China Timmaua. 

25. Udigela Yerru. 

26. Boya Rarnana. 

27. Tbe Anmri chief. ' , ; h ■. 

Yacama did not pursue the flying troops of the enemy ; 
he ordered that the trumpet of cl harm a should be blown. 
Having heard of this glorious victory, Vlra Venkatapatiraya 
honoured Yacama by presenting him dresses, jewels, vehicles, 
and lands. ■ . 

Mac. Mss. 15-4-3, pp, 137-41. 

219(a). YACAMA NAY ADD (SIEGE OF UTTAR AM ALLDR). 

SUMMARY. 

Yacama, son of Ranga of the Recerla family and a 
descendant of Barvajna Singama, plundered' on one occasion 
Boppanagari (?) and destroyed the army of the Ksatriyas 
who opposed him and annexed that territory ; then, he 
went on an expedition of conquest and captured the fort of 
Uttaramallur. Having subdued the armies of the enemy he 
annexed the territory attached to it. 

On hearing this information Linga, the ruler of Velur was 
very much annoyed. Considering that it was not prudent to 
wage war on the Velugoti chief single-handed, he took counsel 
with his friend, Aradi N again a Nedu and explained to him how 
Yacama treated his army with contempt, and began not only 
to occupy his territory but capture his forts also. Nagama 
who was proud of his wealth and military strength said that 
putting Yacama to flight was not a serious affair. He sum- 
moned his brave brother-in-law, Davala Papayya, and said: 
“ Yacama Nedu, having become powerful, encroached on (our 
territory) and captured our forts by tbe strength of bis army; 
there is none at present among the rnanne chiefs who is capable 
of leading an expedition against him. You alone possess the 
skill to gather armies together and disperse them ; besides you 


m 8 


are very fond of adventure. You must somehow achieve this 
task, and protect the family.” 

Papayya promised to march against the fort at once and 
capture it by escalade. He gathered together troops from 
■Srani, Cenji and Velilr ; then he despatched letters to the 
powerful chiefs of the forts of Tindivauam, Tiruvadi, Valada- 
purana, Vandavasi, Gotfiru, Tiruvatturn, Asamanduru, Kathile 
and Areot, the petty chiefs of Madhura and Tanjavur, the 
dependents from the neighbourhood of Padaivlda wdth their 


< '! . 


I , ■ i 

* I i i 

j & ' ■ 


, >,1 I 

: M * 


powerful horse, and rutting elephants, and the palaigars of Nelli- 
patla, Gudipadu and Amur, soliciting their help. When these 
chiefs came with their forces, cutting open the bags, he dis- 
tributed money among them. He completed his preparations, 
and marched with great pomp to Uttaramallnr, where he lay 
encamped eagerly expecting to fight the enemy. Some of his 
friends attempted to dissuade Papayya from fighting with 
Yacama, as they were convinced that he would be defeated in 
the battle ; but he turned a deaf ear to their advice. With a 
force of 100 elephants, 2,000 fully armoured horses, several 

foot-soldiers, 8,000 archers, 4,000 or 5,000 rockets match- 

lockmen 16,000 lancers, etc., he delivered an attack upon the 
eastern side of the fort of Ij ttaramallur with great clamour. 


When Yacama saw the army of the enemy, he resolved to 
deliver an attack immediately, though he had only 8,000 soldiers 
to oppose an army of 80,000. In the battle that ensued, forty 
chiefs that were in the front line including Gadepudi Ayyana, 
Kotapati Cennappa Kr§nappa, Keti Reddi, Cintapatla Obanna 
and Gandineni Venganna were killed. Damerla Cennappa, 
who was wounded while fighting boldly with the enemy, was 
taken prisoner ; and hundred others received wounds. The 
head of Davala Papayya who was fiercely charging the enemy 
was cut off ; Kalive Venkataraju, and his nephew, Ayyaparaju, 
Panem Ramaraju, Cina Cidambararaju, and several others 

elephants were captured, and the 
horses were slain, the troopers, the archers, the dischargers of 


M 










279 


Povela Venkataraju, his brother Timmaraju, Strya- 
narayanendra, Kumar a Kalaparaju, the brave Nagaveddi, and 
Cappalli Siddanna were taken prisoners. The troops that 
offered resistance were cut to pieces, and the survivors took to 
flight. Among those that fled, the following chiefs are 
mentioned : — 


Palepu Tirumalayya. 
Balamurti. 

Mopfiri Timmanna. 
Vlrapayya. 

Vadiyappa. 

Besadri, the Brahman. 

Satram Nagappa. 

Varada Boy a. 

Boy a Ramanna. 

Davala Cinnamurti. 

Udigala Yarrappa. 

Ceraku Raghava Nedu. 
Pammerla Bukkaraju. 

Granipi Nedu. 

Salva Konapparaju. 

Sarvappa Parvappa. 
Bommayya. 

Punji Timmayya. 

The Vada People. 

The Reddis of Kanci-Tambadi, 
Pulipattu Bapayya. 

Ramanna. 

Maccarla Timmanna. 

Kanei Mallappa. 
Ayyappanedu. 




The Padaividu forces disappeared ; and the pride of 
Nellipattu chief was broken ; Verriraju who was not able to 
flee with the palaigars died like a mad man ; Nalakota Cennappa 
Krsnappa lost his life in some unknown place. 


mmmsm 


280 


Yacama married the damsel of victory, at midday on Sun- 
day su 10, in the month of Jyestha of the year Plava.* The 
Sun and the Moon, and the fort of Uttaramallur witnessed this 
function. Having won this glorious victory, Yacama returned 
to Karnataka, where he was greatly honoured by Venkatapati- 
raya. 

Mac. Mss. 15-4-3, pp, 143-152* 

.219 (6). 

Yaca Sura, who was also known as Peda Yacama Nayadu, 
was at Mad Imran takam governing the Perimidi-slsm which Vlra 
Venkatapatiraya granted to him. He marched with his troops 
to the fort of Uttaramallur which he captured by escalade. 
Iradi Nagappa Nayadu, the governor of the fort, summoned 
his brother-in-law, the brave Davala Papa Nayadu and said : 

“ Yacama Nayadu seized our fort, Uttaramallur. It is, there- 
fore, necessary that we should wage war upon him.” Then he 
sent with him as auxiliaries the petty chiefs, Reddis, and 
palmgars that held estates in his districts as well as the 
contingents of elephants and horses which the rulers of Ceiiji 
and Taiijavur sent to his assistance. 

Davala Papa Nayadu who was accompanied by Ralumfiru 
Venkatappa Nayadu, Krsyamaraju, Muppalla Raganna, Gadi- 
pudi Ayyanna, Yam Vobulayya, Pulagamu Kalayya, Macarla 
Timmanna, Ivetureddi, Damerla Dingama Nayadu, Damerla 
Kari-Cennapa Nayadu and 1,000 other sardars , marched at 
the head of an army consisting of 100 elephants, 1,000 horses 
and 30,000 foot, and laid siege to the fort of Uttaramallur. 

: -T 

Yaca S3.ra was not alarmed when he came to know that 
Davala Papayya was marching upon him with a huge host. 
His younger brother, Sarvajna Singama Nayadu and himself 
opposed the enemy with 2,000 cavalry. They put the 
enemy to flight, slew the thousand sardars such as BaUunB.ru 
Venkatappa and wounded 6,000 troops. At last when they 
beheaded Davala Papa Nayadu, the rest of his followers sought 
safety in flight. ' ■ ■ ■ d. \ . 

■ ‘Sunday, 31st May 1601 (g.S. 1533). - : " - 

‘d. ' d • • : . d ' v>: d , .. ' ' , . 1 . : 


Yaca ^fira won, in this fashion, a victory in a fierce battle 
on S.S. 1524, Plava, Jyestha. su 10, Sunday.* 

VelugofivUri Vaihsacaritra , pp. 97-98. 

220. VELLORE, THE CAPITAL OF VENKATA II. 

This ksetra-ayakattu (account) is prepared by Lingarajii, 
the karaaatn of the village of Vaddirala, on hail ! 1527th year 
of the ever victorious Salivahana Saka corresponding to 
Krodhi, Magha, ba. 10. This ayakattu (account) is prepared 
while (with titles) V enkatapatirayalayy a is governing the 
kingdom of the earth in the city of Velum. 

The ksetra-ayakattii-vivaram is prepared by Cina-Surappa, 
son of Vedadri, the karanam of Vaddirala. on hail! 1531st year 
of the ever victorious Salivahana Saka corresponding to 
Kilaka, Vaisakha, su 7. This ayakattu (account) is prepared 
while (with titles) Vlra Venkatayyarayanigaru is ruling the 
kingdom of the earth in the city of Velum. 

hfAihSfh Kaifiyat of Vaddirala-, L.R. 20, p. 191. 

' 221. MAT LA TIRU VENG AL AN ATH A. of 

His (Anantaraja’s) son, Tiruvengalauatha, who succeeded 
him, canned on the administration of the estate, Vlra 
V enkatapatideva Maharaya who was greatly impressed with 
his prowess presented to him golden drums, the fish-standard 
taken from an enemy, and the Raya’s own horse and elephant, 
together with their trappings. The Bhats who were present on 
the occasion composed (the following) verse in his praise : — 

“ O! King Matla Tiruvengalauatha, the Raya commended 
your courage, arid gracefully bestowed upon you the suramayi, 
the whisk of heroism. 0 ! king, the emperor granted you the 
rare privilege of using the golden drums, having complimented 
you on your strength. He gave you the malahari, as if to grant 
you permission to conquer the countries of the, enemy; he 
presented to you kindly the fish-standard, the symbol of power 
over all earth, even on the day on which you took it. More- 

• Tha date is not. correct. The correct date is S.S. 1523. 

E — 36 


over, the lord of Karnata presented to you his own riding 
horses and elephants together with tassels of matchless pearls, 
and an yellow pamJa 

While this T ir uvengakn aih a was holding the districts of 
Pulugula-nad« and Pottapi-«3iw together with Siddhavatam- 
slma as his amararn, and governing (as a deputy of the Eava) 
the slmas of Duvvur. Cennur, Porumamilla and Radvel, he met, 
on one occasion, in the court of V enkatapatiraya at Candra- 
giri, Gopalaraja, a cousin-german of the Raya, who was 
governing the slma of Kandanavoln. In the course of convers- 
ation, G-opalaraja observed : “ Your father and grandfather 
were brave soldiers, who showed great valour. You have 
not as yet seen any serious fighting. Moreover, you are 
still young. Therefore, it won’t be to your advantage to walk 
in the footsteps of your ancestors. You will strengthen your 
position, by adjusting your conduct to the exigencies of time.” 

On receiving this advice, Tiruvengalanatha was annoyed. 
He replied : “ However much you may treat us as youngsters, 
you have to be protected by people like us, when you are beset 
by enemies. There is no other way.” Then, Gopalaraja went 
to Kandanavoln, and Tiruvengaknatha to Siddhavatam. 

* * 

While Matja Tiruvenaglanatha was thus ruling (at 
Siddhavatam) Vxra Venkatapatiraya breathed his last in 
Candvagiri in S.S. 158s Samir, a (Jan .-Feb. 1610 A.I).)* 

Kaifiyat of Cit/wcli : L.R.22, pp. 209-12. 

222. VENKATA IPS EXPEDITION AGAINST MADHURA. 

GA'AfTA SUMMARY. 

Muluvagalu (II) having, by the prowess of his arm, 
caused the destruction of the pride of the Lord of Madhura, 
was received with honour by Venkatapatiraya and hence- 
forward assumed the title of Cikkaraya. 

Ko^Hra Venkalacalapati : Skfindapurattam, §ivarahasyakhapdam i 
Mad \ Govt. Or \ Mss. Lib. D. No. 322, 13-1-37, p, 4-a. 

* Tills date ir. wrong, as there is strong evidence to show that Venkatapatiraya ruled 
until 1614 A, IX . (See fftst* In$« % p* 27Q); NUO.I. iiL U* 19 purport* to be a grant made by 
Wmia&S. 1537 <1615 A,D.). 


283 


222(a). TIEUMALARAYA’S CORONATION. ■ 

! Tirumalaraya attained great fame as a Rajaraja after 

| crowning himself in Saka 1506, Parthiva at Srlrangapattanaia 
I'* on the throne set with nine gems taking possession of all the 
Karnataka kingdom along with his Dalavay Matli (Mafia) 
Venkatayyan, granting lands to Srlranganayakkar, repairing 
many temples and doing acts of charity as in the days of the 
Rayar of old. Then after Srirangaraya who was at Penukonda 
attained heaven in Saka 1512, Khara, his son (younger brother) 
Venkatapatiraya was protecting the kingdom after his corona- 
tion at Penukonda. Venkatapatiraya, the younger brother of 
Srirangaraya, was ruling from Candragiri. While this was the 
position, Tirumalaraya, on hearing the news that Virappa 
Nayaka of Madura was coming to Brirangapattanam with all 
his forces, went with all his army along with his Dalavay 
Venkatapati Ayyan as far as Palani, fought many battles with 
them and won. Virappa Nayaka of Madura having sustained 
defeat and retreated, 'Dalavay Venkatapati Ayyan pursued him 
in the company of the king, and plundered the territory of 
Madura. Virappa Nayaka of Madura gave much wealth to 
Venkatapatirayan, (Venkatapati Ayya?) who thereupon con- 
trived to betray Tirumalarayan into the hands of the enemy 
by a cunning trick, came back to Brirangapattanam with all 
his forces and ruled the kingdom himself. Then, when Tiru- 
malaraya obtained his release from them and returned to 
Srlrangapattanam, Venkatapatiraya (Venkatapati Ayyan ?) 
drove him away without allowing him to come to the 
city. Then Tirumalaraya was staying in the village of 
Malifigakesarai. Then, when all the palaigars , listening to 
the words of Venkatapati Ayyan, and saying that they did not 
want Tirumalarayan, came with all their forces to the village 
of Kesarai and laid siege to it. Raja Udaiyar, the ruler of 
Mysore, came with all his forces to Kesarai, made war against 
them and defeated all the palaigars and stayed there. Since 
Venkatapati Ayyan came to the fort of Brirangapattanam and 
was staying in it with a feeble force, some people entered it by 
deceitful means after which Raja Udaiyar also came in and 

' ' ' a '■ : ■ ■ r J ® ; § SIS: Is IS li ■ : : ; a c- ■ : „ ' ®; 1§|I 



took possession of it. In Saka 1536, Sau my a (it) came into the 
possession of Raja Udaiyar of the dynasty of the Mysore kings, 

Kofbgihd^rTtjMMiineaiUram ; Mac. Mss. 16-6-9, ff. 95-b-98-a 

223. KOAIABA: KESNAPPA. KAY AKA AND BEIBANGAM, 

Then when Kumara . Xrsnappa Nay aka was ruling, he 
presented through the same Narasim iiadesika 1,50,000 pon in 
the form of a gold encasement ( rainu ahgi), a golden crown 
and other things, 

Koyilolugu , p. 151. 

234(a). MAT LA TIHuVBNGALANATHA AND HIS ACHIEVEMENTS. 

SUMMARY. 

The soldiers of the army of the king of Bijapur who had 
been cut down by the sword of Matla Tiruvengalanatha, look 
down from heaven upon their headless bodies lying upon the 
ground with feelings of hostility. 

The apsarasas of the S varga adopted various subterfuges to 
escape from the embrace of the barbarous Turuskas whom 
Matla Tiruvengalanatha had slain in battle. 

AbMpktaraghavam : Mac . Mss . 14-2-36, p, 4-b. 

224 ( 6 ). 

SUMMARY, 

Matla Tiruvengalanatha who was a brave warrior was 
distinguished by several titles, the most important of which 
are: Pekkandfii-rajula-kokkeUtt-ntcmga-mandallkara-ganda , aivara- 
gandu , sTiryavamsoddharaka, etc. Vlra Yenkatapatiraya, the 
emperor of Karnataka, granted him the privilege of using, as a 
part of his insignia, vlra-patakika or the ensign of the heroes, 
a war-drum called clra-malahuri , and a musical instrument 
called cakravadya ; he also presented to Tiruvengalanatha, a 
Sword set with gems, elephants in rut, Arab horses, and orna- 
ments inlaid with precious stones. 

Tiruvengalanatha conquered several forts, Such as Gutti, 
Enumugorjda, Surapura, Rayavara, and Rayavldu. He defeat- 
ed at Macanolu the combined forces of the chiefs of Uan^ikota 
and other places in the neighbourhood; scaled the walls of 
Nandimangala and Kamaiapura within half a ghaiika ; and 


captured during tne course of a single campaign Pandillapalli, 
Kokatam and Kallur ; and reduced the forts of Vellala and 
Porumamilla. He obtained victory as soon as the declaration 
of his war on Marasapura was proclaimed. He overthrew in a 
battle Handeya Kumara Demappa and the governor of the 
fort of Udayagiri. 

ICumudvaitkcdyUnaih) Canto I. 

m. THE SETTLEMENT ON A COMMUNAL DISPUTE 

DURING THE TIME OB 1 VENKATA H. ' 

On Caitra ba. 10 of the year Virodhi*, the day of the car 
festival of the Grod Raghunatha of Ontimitta, the Balijas came 
to us, Mahamaudalesvara Matla Anantarajayya Devacoda 
Maharaja, (with a request) that the carpenters and blacksmiths 
should not be allowed to mount the car putting on their 
paccadas.'f We asked, “ What is the practice in Tirupati ?” In 
reply, they said: “According to the practice regulated formerly 
by Peda Tirumalarajayya at Tirupati, this privilege is allowed 
to the carpenters and blacksmiths, with due regard to the 
worship of the G-odJ ; the carpenters and blacksmiths (are 
allowed to) put on their paccadas and jewels, apply sandal- 
paste to themselves and mount the car, holding the tools of 
their respective professions in their hands.” We have decided 
accordingly. You should willingly observe this practice, 

N.B . — ‘ This inscription does not bear the Saka date. On a comparison 
with the inscription at Siddhavatam, Virodhi is found to correspond to 
S.S. loll.’ 

An inscription at Ontimitta : L. R. 13, p. 509. 

226. BANDITS IN THE TIME OP VENKATA 11. 

Dacoits from the western country broke into the house of 
a wealthy farmer of the Arakoti family in the province of 
Udayagiri and plundered it completely. While returning to 
the west they came to Allidona, and halted for taking rest in 
the jungle at the foot of the hillocks on the west of the village 
at a distance of a mile. The Arakoti people who discovered 


* March 31, A. D., 1589. 
t Paccada, means the upper garment of men. 


* *i > : 


, % The passage Is corrupt; and the translation is only tentative. 




iue tracks of the thieves pursued them and having found out 
their hiding place attacked them. In the fight that ensued, 
people were killed on both the sides. The surviving members 
of the Arakoti family sent information to their village, and their 
women-folk came and fell into the fire-pit. Their likenesses 
are carved on stones which have acquired the name viru'lu 
ever since. The valley is called V’lrla-pmja and people visit 
the place to fulfil their vows. During the administration of 
this Matin Anantarlja, a village was built in the fields of 
Allidoha, and it was significantly named Viruiapura. 

TCiiijl jat of Aiiidona : L.R . 1. pp. 144-d ; Mac. Mss. 15—3—0/', pp. 34-35. 


m. ^HIGHWAY ;;E«3Ei3ER¥ IX THE TIME OF 
; 'TENkATA:II.. - i 

“ My grandi’ather having stayed for sometime longer at 
Vijayunagaru accompanied that Venkatacarynla to Penugonda, 
where he went to perform a sraddha. He paid him 4 carahas 
and obtained the copper-plate charter. While he was passing 
alone, on his return journey, through the Kadireppa-Nayani 
Pass, he was attacked by a highway-man who struck him 
(with a sword) on the crown of his head, and relieved him of 
the money which was about his person. While he was attempt- 
ing to wrest from him the copper-plate charter, my grand- 
father who recovered his consciousness in the interval threw 
him down, and struck him dead with sharp stones. Damana- 
eervu Eamisetti, who was returning from the Ghats with a 
train of bullocks laden with bags ofareca nuts, came upon the 
scene and made enquiries of him. My grandfather explained 
to him how he had killed the robber who attacked him. 
The merchant who was very much struck by his bravery 
mounted him on cue of the bullocks and carried him outside 
the pass where he hud the wound sewn with silken thread and 
properly dressed. Then lie took him to his village Damanacerla, 
and having nursed him back to health for three months, he 
sent Mm home with an escort. 


287 


228(a). CONDITION OF THE- COUNTRY DURING 
THE REIGN OF VENKATA II. 

During the reign of Venkatapatiraya at Candragiri, owing 
to the absence of efficient administration, ranch confusion 
prevailed in Pottapi-nad«, and this village was deserted. The 
Brahmans also abandoned it. The village had passed since 
into the hands of Matla Ella m a Devacoda Maharaja, as 
Venkatapatiraya granted to him Pulugula -nadu as his amaram. 
Having recruited troops Ellamaraja was engaged in wars with 
the palaigars and others in the neighbourhood of Siddhavatam, 
Poruruamilja, Baddevolu and ITdayagiri on behalf of the Kaya. 

Kaijiyai &f V%banainpallei L. R. 17, pp. 132-33. 

228(6). 

This village was enjoyed as an agrahara by Kandalla 
Appalacarya until S. S. 1520 V ilambi. Then the village fell 
into ruin as it was deserted by the people who ded to other 
places unable to endure the thieving activities of the palaigars. 
The Kandalla family was not able to restore its prosperity, by 
inducing the people to settle therein. The village of Tuvva- 
guntapalle then passed into the hands of Pemmasani Timma 
Nayadu of Graiidikota who treated it as a part of his own estate. 
The Kandalla family which had migrated to Awuku by this 
time, gave up all hopes of recovering the village, as an unnatu- 
ral change had come over the conduct of the kings. 

Kaifiyat of Tuvvaguntapalle : L. R. 20, pp. 248-4-9. 

228(c). 

This sima was devastated, as mentioned already, by the 
Muharnmadans. Venkatapatideva Maharaya, the king of 
Penugo^da, (with the object of restoring the prosperity) 
leased the land to the farmers, the terms of which were 
inscribed on both the sides of a stone : — 

Ww~, I: t , : " ; ' : : t ■ 

This stone inscription has been set up on Tuesday, 
Margalira, su. 10, of the year Plava* by Timmanna, the 

1523===Taes. Dee. 8, A.D. 1601. 


288 



seal-hearer of Nagappa of the Small Treasury, who is the 
Superintendent of V enkatapatidevaraya’s treasury to enable 
the farmers of Indukfi.ru to plough the uncultivated, fields. 
They took the letter (of permission allowing them to plough 
the fields ?) from the year Jay a. From that year, for every 
turn of land the gutta is 2 ruins, the kavali 4- r ulcer, total 2f rule as. 
These conditions must be observed for eight years. 


[“This inscription does not mention the Saha year. On comparing 
with the inscriptions of this king in ether villages, this (cyclic year) is seen 
io cm respond the Saba ye*r 1523 ”]. ’ 

Kaifiyat of In dnkuru * L, R, 10, pp, 163-4, 


The Brahmans enjoyed tliis village as a sarmmanya 
agrahara even during the reign of V enkatapatiraya, king of 
Penugonda. Then, the owners of the agrahara together with 

Bhandaram Nagi Nay adit granted a haul to the fanners, 

as shown by an epigraph the substance of which is given 
below : — 


On S.S. 1581 Kilaka, Asvija, ba. 3, the Vidmn- Mahajanas 
resident in Ura [fir and Nagappa of the treasury granted this 
charter to the farmers of Uratur fixing the rent (gutta) of the 
uncultivated fields. We agree to take {gutta, If ruins, and 
kavali, 4- ruka) 2 rukas per annum for eight years for every turn 
of land that is ploughed. He who goes against this agreement 
fixing the rent of uncultivated land eats dog’s flesh. 

Kaifiy.it of Uratur : L. R. 10, pp. 18S-86. 


■ 228(f). 

According to some inscriptions, while Venkatapatiraya, 
king of Penugonda, was ruling the country, he granted 
charters (for the cultivation of land) to the farmers of some 
villages in Kamalapuraxn ialuka, thereby making the country 
populous. Timmanna of this Venkatapatiraya’s treasury 
granted a charter to the farmers of Ko^duru and this village, 
and set up an inscription which is lying broken on the ground 


289 


on the east of the Madanagopalasvami temple. The substance 
of this charter is given below : - : . 


Bokkasam Tim manna, the brother-in-law of Cina Bhanda- 
tam Nagappa, the Superintendent of (with titles) Venkatapati- 
raya’ s treasury granted this charter, on Plava, Karttika, su 8. 
to the farmers and karanams of Koduru and Peddanapadu for 
the cultivation of the fallow fields. From the year in which 
the fields are first ploughed, we agree to take the gut! a for 


eight yes 
Year. 

i.rs (at the following rates) : — 

Nature of 

Extent. land 

G-utta. 

1st 

; ' 1 turn 

cultivated. 

Cenu 

? 


: ; :/g )■/;' »'■ 

yerra-celu , 

2 rukas 

2nd 

93 

celika-bldulu. 

^ ,, , ... 

3rd 

'(V'k ' 93 


4 „ 

4 th 

39 


5 „ 

k i 5th 

9? 


6 „ 

The 

kdvali (i.e., the watchman’s fee) is 

charged at half 

(the usual) rate on the 

fallow fields for eight years, and on 


celika-celu for nine years, and on yerra-celu for six years.. 

The farmers must store up this produce in the granary (kotdru). 
He who violates this is an unprincipled fellow. 


[“The Saka year is not mentioned in this inscription. From our 
knowledge of this Venkatapatkaya’s inscriptions in other places, we find 
that this year (Plava) corresponds to S.S. 1523. This Venkatapatiraya 
having granted the charter .of cultivation, made the village populous. He 
also provided for conducting ; worship' to the temples of the village. During 
the reign of this, Raya, Mafcla Kumara Anantaraja was governing f this ; 
talnlca,"] \ ' / id ; . ' , ■ if V-V 

iCaifiyai of K&mmaddi % L . 10, pp, 145-6. 


328(/\ 

SUMMARY. 

Venkatapatiraya of Penugonda granted this 


m for 


nayankara to J della Cina Rangapativaja. As the village was 


1-37 




‘290 


in a ruinous condition, consequent on the depredations of 
the Muhammadans, Duggaraju Narappa. the seal-bearer of 
Ravila Raghanatha Nayadn, granted a haul to the farmers for 
the cultivation of unplonghed fields, on the orders of Ranga- 
patideva Maharaja on S.S. 1527, Visvavasu, Sravana su. 15. 

As the land for the cultivation of which the haul was 
granted belonged to the temple of God Cennaraya, the trustees 
of the temple had to join Duggaraju Narappa in executing the 
deed. 


The terms of the haul are 

(1) The farmers had to pay for every turn of land culti- 

vated 2 rukas of guild, and J ruka of (lea ml i)- 
kanika per year. 

(2) At the end of seven years, the gutta and ( kamli )- 

kaaika should be paid according to the rates 
prevailing in adjacent lands. 

Kaifiyal of Sa mbaiur .* Mac. Mss. 15-3-57, pp. 15*17. 

. 328(0). 

SUMMARY. 

Sadasivaraya, Yeukatapatiraya and others of the Raya 
family ruled the state. Yengaja Nayadu, after being in service 
for 40 years and managing the amani affairs of the Dupadu 
taluka, died. His son Venkatadn Nayadu likewise served the 
JRaya-samsthanam for 50 to 60 years and died. His son Sayappa 
Nayadn was just born at this date, i.e., Saka 1470, Ananda, 
and he was also known as Gangappa Nayadn, By the year 
Citrabhami corresponding to Saka 1504, i.e., when he was 
27 years of age, tlie Raya -sa msth ana m fell owing to the 
invasions of the Titraka rulers of Grolkonda, Bijapur, Hamda- 
nagar ; Abmadnagar) and Blclur oiz., Abdulla Kutupu Shah 
Padshah, Muhammad A dal! Padshah, Nizam Shah Padshah of 
;flaihdanagaram, Imam 'Shah Padshah of Nagapuram, ydipl 
occupied the Yijayanagara and Penukonda rqjyas. During the 
administration of these Muhammadans, the Boya 


SlilfW 


Pjjjj* i e ! 7- _ i ; 



291 


the Kollivaru and the Jallivarn, caused great trouble in the 
Srisaila region, so. that the country fell into a state of anarchy. 
The people in this region were stricken with fear. About this 
time, a certain Niyogi Brahman of the name of Gopaluni 
Ramappayya who was in the service of the Kollivaru, 
developed friendly relations with this Sayappa Nayadu. When 
the Kollivaru came to know of this, they resented his friend- 
ship with Sayappa Nayadu and chastised him and kept him 
under custody. But Ramappayya managed to escape 
from their hands and sought refuge under Sayappa Nayadu. 
After the lapse of some time, Ramappayya submitted to his 
benefactor that instead of wasting his time, he would proceed 
to the court of the Sultan Abdulla Kutupii Shah of Grolkonda 
and represent to him his x i.e., Sayappa Nayadu’ s) case and 
obtain for him extensive jaglrs. Sayappa Nayadu paid him 
for his passage. Reaching Grolkonda, Ramappayya stayed 
there for five to six months, during which period, he became . 
acquainted with such great officials as amildars , hummaravs 
( trnras ) and divans and conducted himself in such a manner as 
to obtain their favour. On one occasion, when the Padshah, 
on coming to know of the depredations of the Boya tribes, 
the Kollivaru and the Jallivarn, wanted to entrust the task 
of subduing those Boy as to a proper man; Ramappayya 
submitted to the Padshah that the. Karama, Sayappa Nayadu, 
who belonged to a family of able warriors under the Rayas, 
might be entrusted with the task. The Padshah passed; 
orders accordingly and sent Ramappayya with a body of 
troops to aid Sayappa Nayadu in the destruction of the 
Boyas. Ramappayya returned to his benefactor with the 
body of troops and the Padshah's parvana entrusting the task 
of subjugating the Boyas to Sayappa Nayadu. Acting in 
accordance with the orders, Sayappa Nayadu, ably aided by 
Ramappayya, completely brought the Boyas under subjection in 
the course of one or two campaigns and placed his garrisons in 
the Boya cities. Accompanied by Mamie Pallayya of Ravuru, 
a rqjabandhuvu (a relation of the chief) and the Velama Papa 
o | Korlukunta, Sayappa Nayadu proceeded to the 








: \ MU ' 

court of the Padshah at Nislahar Nausliahar, ? new city), 
where he presented himself before the Padshah, who, compli- 
menting him on his success, granted him the talukas of 
Atmakuru, Biddhapuram, Dupadii and Kambham as jaglr and 
the right to collect manne-kavali-rusum at the rate of 2 vamhas 
per 100 vamhas of tax (sistu) payable by each village in the 
Desa (?) and other small dues (?) ; Marine Pallavya and Papa 
Nayadn were given a few villages and ordered to serve their 
master, Sayappa Nayadn, faithfully. 

Although a large part of the country was under Muham- 
madan rule, Venkatadevarayalu of the family of Aravlti 
Tirumaladevarayalu, who was related to the family of 
Krsnadevaraya, was administering certain portions of the 
country. There is an inscription on a stone in front, of the 
Geimakesava temple built by Sayapa Nayani Venkatadri. 

Language : Sanskrit in Telugu -verse and prose. 

Date-. Saka'1536,' Anamla (Rasa-rUma-bSya-iaSi), Isadha, 
Sitapaksa (bright half), Visnu divase i.e. Ekadasi, Thursday 
(Thursday, the 7th July, A.I). 1614). 

King : V enkatadevaray a, ruling at o ha urgiii. 

Donor: Gangapa Nay aka, of the Madala -golra, son of 
Venkatadri, ruler of SrlgirDtnamfala and grandson of Sayappa 
Nayadn. 

Donee : God Cennukesava. 

Gift: Villages of Gurrupusain, i 'on:mrhy.n:Sj!;«Ue, Garla- 
ditme and Katarivanipalle for providing daily worship and 

repairs. G f; gfh fg ;;7 f-- vf- : ' J "■ ; y ; g- ■ ; g-kh; 

Remarks: Tnc villa_-.es gn.rird are stated to !<<■ in ihe 

: ' ■■■ ° , 

fertile Dupudu-shua lying east of the Srisaila, which was acquired 
and ruled by the donors ancestors by their valour ( madmmSa - 
bdhu mibhava santata parifdliia). 

■ Kaififat of the SByafiatOnl ChUfs s Mm. Ms*, jfca-14, pp. 





After tis: 
great strong 
administered 
charge of B, 
looked after 
Bonus who • 






five years. As the people were not able to endure the tyranny 
of the palciigars and thieves, they abandoned, their homes. 
Both Devigudi and Danavulapadu were completely ruined. 

■ICaiflyai of Jimbitlamadtign : t, R. 1, p. 227. 

: 230 ( 5 ). 

As rhe efficiency of administration decreased after (the 
death of Venkatapatidera Maharaya), the palaigars who 
were in the neighbourhood of this village, having gathered 
strength, harassed the villagers by demanding money. The 
karanams made the chief farmer the reMi. The Jcaramm and 
the reddi having collected the requisite sum from the holders 
of mm !ju lands, aid them. 

i-diS;''-" '. 'p '-h;- ■ Kaifiyii of VdiTila : Z. R, 55 p, 117* 


SUMMARY. 









Yacama kicked upon the chest of the traitors who were 
treacherous to the throne of the Raya; pulled out the tongues of 
the crafty people who plotted in secret, and defeated the obsti- 
nate mannes who are frightened /by .the sight of armies engaged in 
a tight ( 1 ). On account of the victory which Yacama, who had 
stood firmly in Karnataka, won over the enemies of the Raya, the 
community of the Padmmiayakas prospered ; the family of the 
Receiia chiefs to which he belonged acquired great fame; the 
descendants of Barvajna Sing* maintained their honour; and the 
Velamas flourished having got rid of all their sorrows (2). On 
the day when Gfobbmi Jaggaraja having made the Ualavay 
niad(?), seized. his office ; when he, having gathered his friends, 
murdered Ite Obulesa in the fort of Velar; when he forcibly 
took possession of the well-filled treasury of the Raya ; and 
when he massacred without abhorrence the Raya with his sons, 
wives and friends, he might have considered himself dead ; but 
he was able to keep himself alive for two more years, as he 
sought safety in flight (8). When Yacama charged the (enemy’s) 
army at Topfir, Jaggaraja, having met death at his hands got 
fid of the reproachful name ! sinner Vlrappa, bein ^defeated, 

shin him seh‘ tu the lort of Cimtanapalli, and dared not open 


m 

1 m 

ytf , 

■ fek 


295 


even the postern on the east ; Krsnappa of Cefiji who conceal- 
ed his dear self within the fort, did not venture to show himself 
out ; on the death of all his trusted nobles, the one who was 
defeated was caught in a cage. The Sakamilrus, the Ravelas, 
and the Makarajus became wild animals in frenzy by terror (4). 


Krsnappa Nedu said : “ Oh ! Vlrappa, the battle has failed; 
Jaggaraja, among the Ksatriyas fell in the front of the battle- 
field ; make haste, we must reach Oirutanapalli ; Makaraju 
has already dashed away upon his horse. We do not know 
how to mount an elephant ; and (if we remain) death is certain 
to overtake us outside the camp. Ravela Venkana has begun 
to flee. One fled at first, and another followed him.” Vlrappa 
who listened to these words of his friend, stole away from the 
field at the sight of Yacama’s forces (5). Gina Rautu, Tippa 
Rautu, Tatapasetti and Gatti Mudali sought safety in flight one 
after another (6). Is it possible for one crore of Gobburi 
Jaggarajas, seventy crores of Makaraja’s fathers, and one lakh 
and sixteen Ravela Venkas to oppose Yacama ? Can goats 
make a stand agajnst a fierce tiger ? (7) Oh ! Makaraja, you 
can’t stand proudly in the battle-field. Abandon your 
improper pride ; Oh ! Ravela Venkatadri, this hostility with 
Yaca is not worthy of you ; Oh ! Jaggaraja, can a weakling 
attack a fierce tiger bravely V A) Thirty-thousand heroic 
warriors under Davala Papa advanced with much foolhardi- 
ness on you ; but Oh ! Y aca son of Kaiiga, you opposed them 
only with two thousand troops. There is none among the 
matmes who is your peer. (9). Yacama has taken a vow to 
place the crown of royalty on the bead of Ramaraja. Even 
the. Three Dunedars dare not face him. ;Cah;;'Etir^a ;: bpp<>^^ 
him ? Therefore, having opposed him, Etiraja -was obliged 
to take to his heels (10). When the multitude of chiefs headed 
by Jaggaraja, being unable to face Rangaya Y r aca in battle, 
took to flight, Karmili was alarmed, Satyavldu trembled, Cenji 
fell to pieces ; the frontier forts shook ; and in the countries 
up to Madura panic prevailed (11). 

VtluxHMri VathUmlil 412 - 17 , 419 - 31 , 423 - 4 .' 


s * m 


296 



232. THE HISTORY OB' YAOAMA NAYAKA. 


[Verses composed by Fasumaxti Kodandapati at the instance of Kumar a Yacama 3 
of Yacania Nayadu-] 


When Davala Papa heard of the high-handed action 
(of Yaca) in seizing the fort of Uttaramallur, he marched 
against him at the head of an army of 40,000 foot, some 
horses* and elephants, accompanied by Damera Sari Oenna and 
his forces. Yaca excited the admiration of Ylra Venkataraya 
by offering them battle with an army of only 800 kaijitam 
and 4,000 other troops in which he killed Papa and took 
Gem i a prisoner (1). 

Is it possible to estimate the greatness of Yaca ? He 
performed the coronation of Eamadevaraya. Having shone by 
the support of his relations and friends, he quickly defeated 
Makaraju and killed Jagga of Cengadu ; he captured all the 
lands and forts administered by the members of the Gobburi 
family ; vanquished the army of Krsnappa of Cenji in battle 
and took him prisoner ; he put Etiraja to flight near Palemkota, 
and slew several other enemies. Yaca made the country 
extending between the Krsna and the Kaveri to the east of 
Velur, the laud of the Velum as (2). 


Being* served bv the arm y of the h&rmkwrim of Ramarava 
and Raghunatha Nayaka ; the entire retinae ox his brothers 
Singa, Rayapa, and Ayyapa Nayaka; the troops of his relations 
like Damera Kari Cenna and Cerukn Vengala; and the forces 
of friends like the faithful Iietireddi, Raghunatha and 
Pavada Krsna, Yacama slew Gobburi Jagga in a battle at 
Riokkarasnpeta and put to flight the kings of Madura and Cenji 
and other noblemen. ■ ffff;;! Yf ■oVV 

,f ff - - Vf'f ffff ■ ; i f fffCf'ihd ^ Mi:c - l 5 ** 4 *-^ PP- 157 H. 


2:13. TvU.MA RA RANOAPPA, SON OB’ YAOAMA. 

Kumara Rangappa, the eldest sou of Yacama, won a victory 
tattle Over Cenji Madhava, Cenji Krsnayya and Madhura 


VelugdfwUri 'Wm UUmtiim* p. 104 


234. VICTORIES OF MAT LA TIRUVENGALANATHA. 


SUMMAKT. 


Handeya Demappa who was defeated by Matla Tiruven- 
galanatha in the battle of Narasapura took refuge in the 
jungles (1). Similarly, the enemies who sustained a defeat at 
his hands at the time of the capture of Porumamilla sought 
shelter in woods and forests (2). Tiruvengalanatha fought 
fiercely in the battle of Kamalapura; caused panic in 
Grandikota ; chastised the forces of the ruler of Uddagiri 
(Udayagiri) ; and led an expedition against Gurramkonda and 
captured the fort of Kanjikonda (3). He put to death several 
cavaliers who participated in the battle of the Bahuda ; and 
captured the forts of Porumamilla and Nrsimhapattana which 
were protected by (?) the ruler of the fort of Uddagiri (Udaya- 
giri) (4). He led his forces against Kandanavolu and 
Grandikota and put to death the warriors of Macanolu (5). 

ICunmdvatlkal yanam, Cantos, i, il, and Hi. 

235. 'WAR BETWEEN MATLA AND VELUGOTI CHIEFS. 

The Matla chiefs erected a fort at the village of V&gur 
during the days of Ellamaraja. Matla Tiruvengalanatha, a 
jnati of Anautaraja, was appointed as the commandant of the 
garrison which was posted to protect this fort. At this time, 
Ramaraja of the Grobburi family was holding sway over the 
forts of Kulluru and Podalakuru included in the sima of Hellore. 
As Yacama, the chief of Venkatagiri, having encroached upon 
the estate of Ramaraja, occupied the said forts, Matla Tiru- 
vengalanatha offered him some help. Consequently Tiru- 
vengalanatha incurred the displeasure of the Velugoti family. 

While Matla Ananta was ruling at Siddhavatam, a Velama 
nobleman named Papayya who was a dependent of the ■ 
Velugoti family- attacked the fort of Vogur at the head of a 
small force. Basavana Boya, a servant of Anautaraja, was in 
charge of a battery of jajays in the Jibi tower of the fort. Hav- 
ing loaded a double barelled jajay, he waited until the Velugoti 
forces approached the fort; he took aim and fired at the com- 
mander who was riding in a howdah on the back of an elephant. 
The sardar fell dead, and his forces losing courage fled. 



A Bhat who witnessed the fight rushed' to the court of 
Matla Atlanta, and announced to him the news of victory in 
a verse : 


- “ Oh ! Matla Ananta, the victorious in battle, Oh ! Prince 
of cultured men, you who have mounted upon the bullock 
( basava ), Basavana Boya, are indeed, Siva ; and the Velamas 
have all become grass (to be grazed by your mount) ”, 

Ananta who was pleased with the Bhat's eulogy gave 
him some present. 

The Velugoti chiefs, however, returned, with another 
army, and surrounded the fort of Vogur. Matla Tiruvengala- 
natha tied from the fort under the cover of night. The forces 
of the enemy fired their guns on the fort next day ; but receiv- 
ing no response they entered it and razed it to the ground. 

Kaifiyat of PatfapurTwi • L* A\ 5, pp, 15-16. 


236. MATLA KUMARA ANANTA. 

SUMMARY. 

Whenever Kumara Ananta set out on an expedition of 
conquest, the shepherds and merchants begged him to excuse 
them because the former could not afford to pay him grazing 
tax and the latter the tax on salt. 

KimudvatVtalyftnam , Canto 1. 


237, RAMADEVARAYA : LAST DATS OP MATLA CHIEFS. 

. ; :,A ’ : summary. ■ 

Then, in S. S. 1541 Siddharthi, three Muhammadan 
officers of Yadal Khan Badshah called Abdul Hussain, Abdul 
Muhammad and Abdul Wahab, came with an army and laid 
siege to the fort of Kandanur (Kandanavoln). Gropalaraja, the 
ruler of the fort, appealed to Matla Tiruvengajaiiatha for help. 
As it was considered the duty of a king to go to the rescue 
of others seeking his help, Tiruvengalanatha reposed the 
burden of the kingdom on the shoulders of his son, Kumara 
Anantaraja, and having marched with his army to Kanda- 
navolu, made himself ready for offering battle to the 



Muhammadans that were encamped there. A sardar of the 
name of Dharmaravu, and the Ilande chief, joined him : and 
they commenced to fight with the Mussalmans ; but after 
a fight lasting for ten days, both Dharmaravu and the Hand* 
chief, unable to offer resistance, fled. 

T i ruv e n g a 1 a n a th a treated these chiefs with scorn j and 
having summoned his younger brother Timmaraja, his rela- 
tions and servants one after another to his presence, he said : 
“ My ancestors of any generation did not show their back to 
the enemy, as a consequence of a defeat sustained in the battle. 
Our bodies and things (around us) are transient in character ; 
only truth, prowess and fame remain permanent. It is not proper 
that a ksatriya or a knight should flee before an enemy. A 
suitable occasion has come for the fulfilment of the promise 
I made to Gopalaraja formerly. The ancient kings who 
helped others patiently acquired honour and permanent fame. 
In former times, Vikramarka, having been slain in battle by 
Salivahana, won the applause of the world. Though Rama- 
rajayya was a crowned monarch, he faced, keeping in view the 
conduct proper to a ksatriya, the Three Dtinedars on the battle- 
field, and fought without turning his back and won glory by 
meeting his death in battle. It is nothing but dishonour for a 
ksatriya to turn his back upon the enemy. To seek to live for 
the sake of dear life is utterly unworthy of a ksatriya ” 

With all the people that were worthy to accompany him 
on such an occasion, Tiruvengalanatha marched, frequently 
uttering the name of Visnu, upon the Muhammadan army and 
offered battle. Having put many enemies to death both 
Tiruvengalanatha Devaeoda Maharaja and- his- y 
Timmaraja met death at the hands of the foes and departed 
to the heaven of the heroes on Siddharthi, Magha, ba. 11.* 

* * * ... .. 

• March 4, A.P. 1620. All the events mentioned above are described in detail by the 
Skats who are said to have been eye-witnesses. The dsamaHka describing the incidents 
.is not translated, as the above passages fairly summarise its contents, . 







301 ■ , Sif 

Matla Tiruvengalanatha Devaeoda Maharaja who marched to 
the rescue of Gropalaraju died in the fight, when the fort fell. 
Then, the fort passed into the hands of the Muhammadans, 
and the country was ruined to some extent. The fort was 
vacant until the month of Margaslra of the year Raktak§i 
corresponding to S. S. 1546. * The territory which was 
dependent on the fort also came into the possession of th^ 
Muhammadans who allowed some villages to be held under 
a mar am tenure. 

Kaifiyat K and an avTf In : 16, p, 501, 

238(A).. MATLA TIKOVENGALANATHA AND THE ’ADIL KHAN 

SUMMARY. 

The Muslim warriors in the service of the Adil Khan who 
were killed by Matla Tiruvengalanatha went to the svarga of 
Indra and harassed the apsaras. 

Kumudvatthalyanam , Canto 1. 

239. THE MUHAMMADAN CONQUEST OF KURNOOL. 

SUMMARY. 

After (the death of Venkataraju), the son of his elder 
brother, f Gropalaraju governed the Kandanavolu sima. Abdul 
Wahab Khan, one of the officers of Bijapilr, laid siege to 
Kandanavolu in S. S. 1570$ and captured it, when the agrahara 
of Nyayakallu was confiscated by the government. 

Kaiftyat oj Nyayakallu ; L. M. 40, p. 321 

240. VENKATA III AND PENUGONDA. 

Kaditam, p. 1. 

The ayakat of the territories of Rajaraja Sri ~R&y&-dalavayi 
who ruled the forts of Penugonda, Kundurpi, Rayadurgam...., 
great prosperity ! 

p. 2.- 

A description of the way in which V enkatapatiraya of 
Ray a- Veluru granted the government of Penugonda to the 

* Nov. 1624 A.D. 

t GopSlaraju -was not Venhataraju’s nephew but his younger brother. 

t In several records, Kurnool is said to have been captured by Abdul Wahab 
KJ»5n in & S. 1541 SiddhSrthi. . ... . 


Baya-dalavayi PedakSiieti Nayadu, On 


Bravana ba. 10 of 


Yuva of 146 years ago corresponding to S. S. 1558, (the Raya) 


ranted the government of Penugonda to Koneti Nayadu, the 
son of Kasturi Nayadu, the son of Akkapa Nayadu, who was 
the son of Canca(ma) Nayadu- of CandragirL a member of the 
Vasarasi family of the Ba'ija caste. Having conferred upon 
him the office of the Baya-dalavayi, the Raya celebrated his 


marriage with Sava-m 


invested him with the 


p. 3. 

sword of 


his office, and gave him 
presents, h u jewel?, and the privilege of styling himself 
Srlman Maharaja rajasrl (in his letters and other documents). 
146 years passed up to this Subhakrt* The Raya presented 


to Peda Koneti Nayadu the following gifts 


p. 5. 


R, R. Peda Koneti Nayadu ruled at Penugonda for 13 years 
and 3 months, i.e., from Bravana, su. 10 of Yuva to the 
Margasira of the year Nandana y. Then Khan Khana, the 
vazir of Bijapur (Bultan) laid siege to Penugonda on Nandana, 
Margasira, ba. 15 (?). He left it after one year in the Margasira 
of the year Vijaya.J The total duration (of Koneti Nayadu’s 
rule is 14 years and 3 (months). § (The revenue yielded) by 
the Penugonda-r%« is go, 2,50,000 ; he obtained in exchange 
(for it) the Kundurpi-r%a. (The Khan Khana) handed 
over to R. R. Peda lvbneti Nayadu five forts which lie had 
secured from the people of Ellappa Nayani Kottakota. The 
Khan Khana granted a far mm agreeing not to demand 


• This corresponds to S. S. 1704 Jsul>hakyt*(A.D. 17821, when this account appears to 
have been prepared. 

t He seems to have ruled from July A.D., 1633 to Dec. 1652. Then liis rule must have 
lasted for 17 years and 4 months, and not 13 years and 3 months. 

| The siege commenced on Dec. 20, A.D., 1652. It came to an end iu Nov.-Dee, of 
1663 A.D., ...... I 

/ f The correct figure* are 18 year* and 4 months. : ■ , . 


■ 


tribute from this estate of ga 80,000 from the beginning of 
Margasira of the year Vijaya.* 


Rayadurga-arasara Vamsavali ( Kaditam ) : Mac. Mss. 15-3-66. 


241. THE MUHAMMADAN CONQUEST OF CTfflVELI. 

Anantaraja Devacoda Maharaja, the adopted son of 
Kumara An ante, was installed upon the throne. As the 
Muhammadans who became very powerful by this time began 
gradually to encroach on their country, the Matla chiefs lost 
their hold upon Porumamilla, Baddevolu, Duvvn.ru Cennuru 
and Kamalapuram. Anantaraja, who had given up hopes of 
ever recovering this territory was carrying on the administra- 
tion of the simas of Puhtgula-wndb, Pottapi-«adw and Siddha- 

vatam, for a period of twelve years with the help of his 

uncle, Ellamaraja. 


Abdulla Kutuhu Saha of Golkonda who was the Paducah 
of the Deccan at that time, having understood that the kings of 
Karnataka who were the masters of the Narapati throne lost 
all their vigour subsequent to the death of Vita V enkatapati- 
deva Mabaraya, and that the country belonging to the army of 
the Hay a (Rayarauuva) was plunged in confusion and disorder 
owing to the predominance of the palaigars who began to rule 
their respective principalities in utter disregard of the central 
government, despatched an army to subdue all the land and 
hill-forts in Karnataka and establish his garrisons therein. 
Nawab Mir Jumla Sayyid Muhammad assumed the command 
of this army to execute the orders of the Padusah, Having 
entered Karnataka with his army, he sent two Muhammadan 
officers and a Brahman, Baksi Triambaka Ravil, with some forces 
to effect the conquest of the country from the side of Siddha- 
vatam and attach the conquered territory. These two officers 
marched with their forces and camped near Siddhavatam. 
Matla Anantarajayya Devacoda Maharaja marched with all his 
army, accompanied by his uncle Ellamaraja in S.S. 1571 
Vikrtif, and having engaged them in a battle cut off their 


•Not. 1653. 
t A.D. 1649-50. 




S!!8ili#iii 


m wm fe® n 1 1 > 

m i , , 




304 



heads. Baksi Triambaka Ravn fled with the survivors to 
Nawab Mir Juxnla Sayyid Muhammad. Then Matla A nanta- 
rajayya reflected thus : ;i We cut off the heads of the sardars 
who belong to the rank of subeddrs. The invader is a power- 
ful man. To oppose and fight against the army of the Nawab, 
we have no strength. If we remain in our own place, with the 
inmates of the zenana until the arrival of Nawab Mir Jumla him- 
self, our honour cannot be preserved. It is, therefore, proper 
that we should flee from this place. If we are destined to rule 
again, we shall do so, in course of time, by the help of the 
Providence.” 


Then he consulted with the most important men (around) 
him, and migrated to Ikkeri-Basavapuram in the western 
country, accompanied by the women of his zenana and his 
principal relations. 

Nawab Mir Jumla Sayyid Muhammad then marched with 
his army to Siddhavatam, where he posted a garrison and 
entrusted the territory which had hitherto acknowledged the 
sway of the Matla chiefs to Triambaka Sankaraji Pant. 

Kaifiyat of Ci{{h r tli : L. R. 22, pp. 223-26. 


242. YEI.UGOyi S1NGA, SON OP VENKATA DRI. 

;'yh7/. : 77;. , 7 (CONTEMPORARY OF sSrIRANGA III.) 

SUMMARY, 

The brave Velugoti Singa, son of Venkatadhipa, at the 
behest of Aravlti ^rlrangaraya, completely defeated the 
Golkonda army sent by the Malaka at the battle of Y enganti- 
eeruvu, driving his elephant on the forces of' the enemy 
unmindful of their sharp arrows, bullets, lances and swords 
and cavalry (1). He massacred the sileddrs, the vajris, the 
dutiedars , the khajis, the khans, the sardars and the sayyids (2), 
thus recalling to memory Lord £iva. the destroyer of 
Baksa and of the three cities ; Rama the slayer of Ravana ; 
p^BKmasena, 'the vanquisher of the Kaurava forces ( 8 ). 7 

Velugdfiviri Vathiava(i, 469-61 



243. SRlRANGA III. 


A kmtriya called Siiranga* who wag a descendant of 
Kr§?adeyaraya, the emperor of Karnataka, having lost his 
kingdom migrated from Candragiri to Ummattur where he was 

allowed to live by the government of Mysore As he 

offered to pay double the salary which men at arms obtained 
in those days, most of the retainers of the neighbouring 
palaigars flocked to his standard, and very soon he became the 
master of 50,000 horse and 1,00,000 foot, with which he 
resolved to subdue the eighty-four palaigars and establish his 
supremacy over them. At first he attacked Syamaraja 
Vodeyar, the palaigar of Mysore, and having inflicted a crush- 
ing defeat upon him, Srlranga not only wrested from him half 
his territory but forced him to acknowledge his supremacy. 
Most of the other palaigars who were overawed by his victory 
over Syamaraja Vodeyar, submitted to him by agreeing to pay 
him tribute. A few who still held out were subdued by force. 


While ^rlrangaraja was returning to- Srlrangapattanam 
accompanied by some of the 84 palaigars whom he had subdued, 
he fell ill on the way and died soon after he reached the town. 
A woman, whom he was keeping as his mistress, attempted to 
secure the power, but her efforts were not successful, owing to 
the intrigues of Syamaraja Vodeyar, and his minister Ealave 
Doddayya with the palaigars of Manangi and Talekadu. ......... 

The mistress of Srlrangaraja who was infuriated by her failure, 
pronounced a curse on each of her enemies ; and then she put 
an end to her existence by immolating herself on the pyre of 
her dead husband. ; ■i d 

Kaifiyat of Srirangapatfam m : L, R. 22, pp. 3S1, 391 ff, 403. 


244(a). THE MUHAMMADAN CONQUEST, OF 1 , 
V I JAY AN AGAR A KINGDOM. 


,Aj4. >d 


While Pemmasani Cina Timma Nayailu was ruling at 
Gandikota, the Nawab came from Golkonda in Sd. S. 1571 


* Cf • M. A. g. 1930, No. 30, p. 163, laser, dated Mon. May 12, 1656 A. D. . . . ... 

1 ' ^ ‘ ; i < ' l,li *■'' 




306 


Vikyti, arid captured it * After subduing Gra^dikota the Nawab 
conquered Gutti, Gurramkonda, Kaficx, Vandavasi, Cengalpattu, 
Arikadu, Mylapuru and Cennapattanam, so that tbe country 
up to the Eastern Sea came under the government of 
Golkonda. At the same time, Minu Khana (Amin Khan?), an 
officer from Yijapura (Bijapur) captured Penugonda, Veluru, 
Cenji, Irani, Basuvapattanara and other places. 

Kaifiyat of SngwnaneipaUe : L. R. 35, pp. 171-2. 

244(5). 

While Pemmasani Tirnma Nayadu was ruling, the Kutupu 
Saha of Golkonda laid siege to the fort of Gandikota in the 
year Vikrti and captured it. 

Kavile of Tollamadugu in the Jambtdamadugu talUka : Mac. Mss. 15- 3-49, p. 196. 

244(c). 

Then in Fasli year 1030 as Raja Varadappa Nayaka had 
no son, his nephew Appa Nayaka succeeded him. That ruler 
spent most of his time in the pleasures of the harem and left 
all the business of state in the hands of his minister. In Fasli 
1039 Sikandar Shah, the Padshah of Bijapur, and Tana Shah, 
the Padshah of Hyderabad, formed designs for capturing the 
throne of Ginjee ; formerly, about Fasli 10..., Maharaja 
Krsnadevaraya detached Bommaraju from Bis ancient friend- 
ship for these two from the time of their predecessors, and gave 
him the forts of Settuppattu and Cengalpattu in the Karnataka 
and treated him in a very friendly manner ; but the Padusahs 
punished him severely for his treachery to his master. In the 
Karnataka the Nayak subordinates of the Maharaja were ruling 
with the sword in Ginjee, Tanjore, Madura, Trichinopoly, and 
ruling independently. To conquer these rulers of the 
v Karnataka, the two Padusahs despatched a large army. The 
Padusah of Bijapur sent Nawab Mir Kamruddln Khan, 
b ';- X Kayaruddhi Khan Ghori, Ayaz Khan Ghori, 

Sayyid Mustafa Khan Ghori, Mahmud Khan Kurada, Sayyid 

Nasir Ali Khan, Sayyid Hasan Khan, Sayyid Husain Khan, 

. 

' ' *a. d. 1650. . . ■ ■ 







307 


Sikandar Khan Lodi, Sher Khan Lodi, Ibrahim Khan Lodi with 
50,000 cavalry ; and the Padusah of Golkonda sent Abdulla 
Khan, I arid Beg, Bawa feaheb...... with 50,000 cavalry. 

With this lakh of troops they occupied the Karnataka 
beginning from Sakepalli (Sarvepalli?) in Nellore in "the 
north, camping in Kahelpuram, Velur and other places, 
and offering battle and gaining victories against the 
Nayak rulers of Velur, Arani and so on. Everything 
north of Settuppattu was annexed to the dominions of the 
Padusah of Hyderabad as his troops had overrun these lands 
and as such was the understanding between the two Padusahs. 
Abdulla Khan, the fauzdar of this province, lived in Velffr. 
There was another fauzdar at Kanclpuram. The arnal in the 
land was held by Farid Beg Bawa Saheb who had the Jdlledari 
(command of the forts) of Settuppattu and Cengalpattu and 
other forts. Through Akkanna and Madavanna, the diwdm of 
the Padusah of Hyderabad, Podali Linganna, became amaldar 
of Kahelpuram. All this was settled there. The army of the 
Bijapur Padusah with Mir Kamruddin Khan Nawab and others 
invaded Ginjee. Appa Nayaka, the Raja of Ginjee, kept his 
courage and ordered his pradhanis to take all the protective 
steps necessary to oppose the enemy and drive him away ; he 
himself spent his time in the harem. The pradhanis posted all 
the princes, servants and soldiers in their respective posts on 
the walls, gates and redoubts of the fort, had the requisite 
ammunition carried to the proximity of the cannon, great and 
small, posted the artillery men and sarddrs needed, and kept 
Careful watch night and day. Meanwhile, Kamruddin Khan 
and others encamped on the Kalavay mound at a distance of 
two naligah to the east of Ginjee, surrounded the fort with 
their troops, and fought for four months, while the besieged also 
made sallies from time to time against the enemy. But as the 
Padusah’s forces had larger numbers, and as the Raja’s end was 
near, the army of the Padusah closed upon the ditch round the 
fort and approached the big Tindivanam gate ; then the cannon 
on the fort and those on the wails, the large batteries and 
turrets were all fired simultaneously. The pradhanis sent 



word through the servants to the Raja that the position was 
becoming untenable. They returned saying that the Raja was 
at his ablations and that it was not possible to convey the 
news to him then. When, however, the pradhanis insisted, 
the Raja was duly informed, and he came out with his 
broad sword. The princes, servants, minister and pradkanis 
with their followers, numbering ten thousand in all, came 
ready armed for battle. The Raja then issued instructions to 
the chief officers that they should make their own arrange- 
ments for safeguarding the honour of their w omen-folk and 
himself came to the Tindivanam gate, opened the door, 
and attacked the enemy force outside, beginning a light with 


Varaba -nadl and lasted lor about three hours. It was a hard 
fight as in the Bharata War. Then Ivamruddm’s men scaled 
the walls on the sides of the fort and beat the drum of 
victory. About 20,000 fell in the fight on the side of Raja 
Appa Nayaka including pradkani Nandagopala Pillai and 
several princes and officers. On Nawab Kamrud din’s side 
Sayyid Mustafa Khan Ghori, Say y id Hassan Khan, Sayyid 
Husain Khan, Ayaz Khan Ghori and others fell, the total 
number dead being 30,000. From the gate to the Varaha-jwcZf 
it was one stream of blood flowing. About BOO of the chief 
women of the Raja’s household entered the fire. Nawab 
Mir Kamruddln Khan captured the fort of Ginjee in the Fasli 
year 1040 and kept, a firm hold on it. lie captured the 
treasuries of the Raja and his minister and other things of 
value. He sent a detailed report to the Piidusah of Bijaptir 
regarding the excellence of the service of the men of the Raja 
of Ginjee, and the firm loyalty and efficiency of the shepherd 
padhani Nandagopala Pillai together with a plan of the battle 
and gave particulars of the treasury and so on. The Paducah 
read it all with wonder and sent that very plan to Dalian 
Shah (?) of Delhi. The gate where the fighting was fierce and 




309 


Ram-mandala-darwaja ; Grinjee was given the name PaduSahbad. 
No one among the Raja’s people, male or female, escaped with 
life; the j pradhani's men who were outside the fort were the 
sole survivors. Nawab Mir Kamruddln Khan occupied the 
country to the south up to the Koljadam and posted fausdars at 
Valikondai, Palaiyamkottai, Valudavur, and Tiruvannamalai. 
The territories occupied by the Hyderabad troops and ruled 
by the fauzdars were also declared annexed to that State, The 
area so included in Hyderabad compxdsed Vandavasi, KaucI- 
puram, Cengalepattn, Tiruppasur, Satyaveclu, Candragiri, 
Samvappalli, Velfiru, Sattukedai and Sekkudevakedai. The 
territory taken by the Padusah of Bijapur included Grinjee- 
Padusahbad, Tiruvannamalai, Valudavur, Palaiyamkottai and 
Valikondai. Thus these sarJcars and the eighty-four forts in 
them together comprising the Payin Grhat Karnataka were 
ruled by the two Padusahs. Nawab Mir Kamruddln Khan 
appointed Anantanarayajia Pillai to the diwanship by- 
negotiation through the pradhdnis of the late king, because he 
desired to master the secrets of the Karnataka (administration) 
by retaining men of experience. Then he sent Sher Khan 
Lodi, Sikandar Khan Lodi, and Ibrahim Khan Lodi at the 
head of 40,000 troops, infantry and horse to effect the conquest 
of the Rajas of Tanjore, Trichinopoly and Madura. They 
invaded all these areas and invested the forts and fought 
battles. At first the vakil of Vijayaraghava Nayaka, the Raja 
of Tanjore, offered money and made peace and reached a 
settlement regarding the future; Vijayaraugappa Nayaka of 
Trichinopoly was also inclined to make peace. But Tirumala 
Nayaka of Madura, who was in the position of suzerain over 
them, did not make peace ; he strengthened his fortifications, 
and summoned to his aid the local Marava rajas of Rama- 
nathapuram and Sivagangai and the pdlaigars, and arranged 
to hand over to the protection of the kallars the territories of 
Mel-Tamrarasa-n«g?w (?), Mel-»aa% Kil -nadu, Velur -mdu and 
Nalu-kottai-na^w ; the kallars are known as the watchmen of 
the Madura kingdom. Fifty thousand of these .kallars joined 
' ” r to enter the Muslim camp. at night, damage their 



tents, capture their horses and carry off all they could lay 
hands on- Meanwhile, the Raja of Madura came out with his 
troops ; the feudatory rulers on one side and the kallars on the 
other attacked the Muslims and fought them ; the Muslims 
resisted, but were forced to retreat, and their camp was looted 
by the hollars. Only a few on the Muslim side managed to 
escape and reach Ginjee. Sher Khan Lodi, Sikandar Khan 
Lodi and others fell in battle. Kamruddln Khan sent to the 
Padusah accounts of the war in Madura with plans and details 
regarding the hollar, seeing which the Padusah exclaimed : 
“ God ! are the hollar for Ginjee and the kallar for Madura 

K'arnTitarajnkkalin Vr Mint am : Mac. Mss. 17-5-11. 


245(a), THE AYAGARS. 

There are twelve functionaries (or officers) for every 


1. Accountant. 7. Shoe-maker. 

2. Headman. 8. Goldsmith. 

3. Carpenter, 9. Watchman. ' , : 

4. Washerman. 10. Waterman. 

5. Purdhit. 11. Black-smith. 

■ fi. Barber. 12. Potter. 

These are called the ay a gars. 

In each village, the villagers offer to these officers as 
suited to their status two kinds of remuneration, huijarn and 
arihayam from the produce of their fields. That which is 
given to the Gods and the Brahmans is known as devadaya and 
braJimadmja respectively.;.'^^ 

To the ay a gars two muntas* of grain are measured out as 
huydm arid two muntas as arihayam‘\ for each kapile, field or 
hkanduga according to the usage of each pargaya. 


* Mmifa is 4, vessel of standard capacity commonly three seers for dealing out quanti- 
ties of gram, 

■ 'I f Bttyam (B (A) u + ayam) means income from land ; artAUyam means Income in cash, 
had to pay the village officers a percentage of their income from either of 




311 


Moreover, all the ryots pay the taxes into the hands of the 
gaud (headman) and the sdnbhdg (accountant). The gaud is 
obliged to have the village lands cultivated for the sum of 
money fixed by the government (as tax). He has to collect 
the taxes according to musanija (agreement ?), pay it to the 
government in time, and settle the accounts once in a year at 
the jamabandi. Some fields of the village are cultivated with 
the knowledge of the government (and some without it). As 
the lands cultivated with the knowledge of the government 
are described in the duplicates of their registers, the income 
from the fields which are not mentioned therein benefit the 
village headman and the accountant, who appropriate it for 
themselves. 

The ayagdrs possess mdnyas, on which all of them except- 
ing the purdhita have to pay Jodi. The gaud and sdnbhdg , 
however, get other small perquisites, from the ryots, on 
account of the influence which they exercise in the village. It 
may however be asked why the ryots do not complain to the 
government against them. In the first place, they are swayed 
by considerations of loyalty to these officers under whose 
protection their ancestors had flourished for generations. 
Secondly, the ryots do not come into direct contact with the 
government ; and lastly, they are afraid that these officers 
might submit false reports about the extent of the land culti- 
vated by them. Owing to these considerations, the ryots 
always remain obedient to the gaud and the Sdnbhog. 

In addition to the buy am, the arthdyam and the bkafavrtti- 
mdnya , the talari gets from the villagers every day thick 
porridge of ragi flour, curry and ears of corn, and from the 
Kurubas blankets ; for they are afraid of him, as he, who is like 
the hotwal to the village, may single them out at first, to carry 

the luggage ..of the government servants. He has to 

protect the village from dangers of all kinds and assist in the 
work of administration as occasion arises. If any theft is com- 
mitted during the sojourn of aliens in the village, the talari is 
held responsible. The kavalgars are held resf 


fpi& ppi 1 



315S 


thefts committed) outside the villages. The talaris are gener- 
ally drawn from the Boya community in the Citragallu sima, 
though people of other castes also hold the post of talari out- 
side. - . : 


The purdhit has to explain to the ryots the time when the 
sowing of the seed would yield abundant corn ; he has also to 
tell them the work which they are expected to do in every 
season. He officiates at the marriages and other religious 
ceremonies that are performed in the houses of the farmers, 
and reads daily the calendar before the rich men of the village. 
Therefore, the ryots pay him horehallu and morahhatta * in 
addition to his ayam. 

The carpenter and the blacksmith attend to all artisan’s 
work in the village, especially to the manufacture of ploughs 
and other agricultural implements, without demanding wages 
for their services. When they are engaged in the construction 
of the houses of the ryots, they obtain wages, but not 
otherwise. They have to manufacture as many ploughs as 
the government requires. Therefore, they are given horehallu 
and morahhatta in addition to their ayam. 

The barber shaves the ryots and the washerman washes 
their cloths. They also get horehallu and morahhatta. More- 
over, the washerman ' gets food from every household on the 
day when he washes cloths. He pays rem-gutta to the 
government. 

The cobbler furnishes the ryots with ropes, buckets, 
sandals, etc., for which they pay him horehallu and morahhatta . 


The sanhhog has again because he keeps the village 
accounts. Moreover, he also enjoys the manya which the 


villagers and the government have granted to him as remune- 
ration for his services. He has, however, to pay jodi on his 


mUmja to the government. 


' The meaning of horehallu is not clear; but Wilson mentions in his Glossary* 
Borehullu which he understands to be the name of a tax paid by the cultivators in kind* 


in. lieu of straw, to the government. Moraihatia is said to- mean ‘established fees to 
village aer vaats.*- ■ ’ . - . - - , .. . 

< 5 4 r V*l draft " ' 


313 

Every village does not maintain a separate potter. One 
or two potters supply the pots necessary for the use of all the 
ryots of a taraf (district). However, the potter has an ayam 
in every village. He is also in the habit of selling pots in 
the bazaar for which he has to pay a tax called cakrakmike to 
the government. 

The goldsmith measures the cultivator’s half-share of the 
produce. He also tests the soundness of the coins collected as 
taxes from the farmers.... ..... For these services he is paid 

horehallu and morabhatta. 

The waterman closes the sluices of the irrigation tanks by 
diving into the water. He lives in huts on the tank-bund 
during the rainy season to prevent it from breaching, and 
regulate the supply of water according to the requirements of 
the fields. He has also to account for the deficiency of the 
water in the tank ; and if he fails to give a satisfactory explana- 
tion, he is removed from his office. He gets Horehallu and 
morabhatta for his services. 

These twelve ayagars are attached to the village ; and their 
offices are hereditary. They are called ayagars in Karnataka ; 
but in the Mughal accounts they are referred to as barahalamti. 

Afthavanavyavaharataiitram : Mae, Mss, 15-6-8, Sea 10, pp. 3-4. 

■ ' ■ ' ■ 245 ( 6 )« , ' . 

. : ' SUMMARY. ; 

Mallubhatlu, the sou of Cangoli Cennubhatlu granted a 
charter to the Vklvan Mahajanas of Allidoua alias Abhinava- 
Devarayapuram on Magha, ba. 10, Kllaka, corresponding to 
IS. 1411* ■ 

A description of the Ayagars : 

1. Purdhit (the village priest). 

2. Lekhaka (the accountant, karanam). 

3. Devalakadvayam (the areakas of the Siva and the 

Yifnu shrines). ■ . . . .. .. ■■ b 


•Jan. 36,1489 A. D. 

1-00'- ■ ■ ' 


- v • : ' ,: 


«•* , ; 


3bS:V: 


«U4 


4. Ayahkarah (black-smith). 

5. Vardhaki (carpenter). 

6. Ksuri (barber). 

7. Rcijcikah (washerman). 

8. PUajaJ (the protector of the village boundary 

the Reddi). ^ •’ 

9 ' (the knower of foot-prints, the 

10. AntyajaU-ivayam (the two of the last caste, MW 
and cMn). ’ ’ 

These are called the twelve slmasthas or ayagars. 

ICaifiyat of KZmalTipuram : /„ /e. i . pp ?s> 94 _ & 

246. CAUDARAJU CENNAMARAJU 


vs. 


bvarakacerla mallamrajd. 

SUMMARY. 


A certain Avnbalarajayya sent Gaudaraju Cennamaraiu 
the in, •<>*« of Perflru and Mallamraju, th Parana, n of Dvarlka 
cerla, who were parties m a dispute, to the merchant v„ ild o{ 
Sirivarla for settling their dispute. The merchant guild held 

SiZl'onS ”T 0 m-T ?a °V h ° temple ° f ! Siddhesvara of 

ainvana o n su, 1 1 of Magha in the year Bahudhanya corres- 
ponding to 6.8. 1430* and investigated the facts pertainht 
to the dispute. They conveyed the results of their investiga° 

ZutLZZ theni. ‘° AV “ ba!arSjU Wl “ S “* 


. The merollant guild held an enquiry, and sent the* fnlln 
mg report embodying their decision W ‘ 


We summoned Cennamaraju before us and asked him to 
state h,s case : CennamarajVs statement : 1 was the iarL m 

/“/!; g the regime 0f Naras5 NSyaka, the enemies 

invaded the country, when onr slma was devastated d 

village fell into ruin. I lived in the MI. o ’ a " d ° Ur 

& nvea m the hills for a long time with 


. . , . "1 ; f , v ; 


the object of returning to the village ; but order was not 
restored ; and to add to our distress a famine also occurred. 
Consequently I migrated with the inhabitants of the territory 
ten miles around my village to the Tamil districts, where I 
sojourned for three years. Having learnt from the people 
coming from my district that my village was once again 
inhabited, I returned. I found on my return that a few of the 
old people together with the immigrants from the east were 
cultivating the fields. There were also some ayagars, the most 
important of whom was this Mallamraju, the karanam of 
Dvarakaeerla. He accompanied the immigrants thither, and 
having secured from them the manyas and other fields, he was 
keeping the accounts of the village. Though I explained to 
him that the karamkam rights were my kanayacci, he showed no 
signs of yielding place. Therefore, I appealed to the authori- 
ties of Siruvolla sthala who sent me here for getting justice, 

MaUamraju’s statement : I lived formerly at Dvarakaeerla. 
Siruvolla slma was in a ruinous condition. Polepaile Bukka- 
raju leased the lands to farmers during his administration in 
order to restore its prosperity. Having accompanied the 
farmers who migrated from our district, I halted at Siruvolla 
for some time, when I was appointed the karanam of Peruru 
which was then in a deserted condition. The old karanam of 
the village migrated to foreign lands. He has no claims on 
the karamkam rights. 

Next we summoned Cennamaraju, and asked him to 
produce evidence in support of his contention. He mentioned 
the names of some old farmers and ayagars who, he declared*' 
would bear testimony in his favour. On putting a similar 
question to Mallamraju he said that his possession of the 
karamkam rights at that time was the only proof that he could 
bring forward to maintain his position. On being asked 
whether the farmers and the ayagars would assert on oath that 
Cennama had no claims on the karamkam rights of the village, 
he said that they would. Then we turned to Cennamaraju 
and asked him to produce his witnesses. On Ms naming 



316 



ayagars of the village, Mallamraju specified the manner in' which 
he wanted them to take the oath. Having taken the Urtha of 
the sjods Venkatesvara, Ahobalesvara and Mallesvara of 
Srlsaila and holding the prasada of the said deities in their 
hands, the witnesses should bathe in the tank attached to the 
temple of Siddhesvara of Sirivarla, stand with wet garments 
in the centre of the mukhamantapa, and declare that the 
kanmacci of Peru.ru belonged to Caudaraju Cennamarajn. 
If they took the bath in this form, then lie said, he would 
admit that lie was a hmavadi. Qennamaraju made a similar 
declaration. As both the parties agreed to this oath, it was 
resolved that if the witnesses gave their testimony in favour 
of one of the parties, the kara0ca~kmatjacei belonged to him. 
In short, Mallamraju was not successful, and as Cennama- 
rajn’s witnesses for twenty-one days '-supported his claim by 
their sworn testimony, the court comprising the members 
of the saMU of Siruvolla, the karanams and the settipekkaqdru, 
adjudicated that the kmayacci was his and granted him the 
ecisico of the court was communicated to 
Av ib; [at aj by nm s : a ie-t r 

Fr&m 'a:Ka4ita in thi \p&nts*im of Karanam fapataju 0 / Ptrum r 

X, /u 55, pp, 286-292. 


247, M VllliklA EEDD1 vs. UKDA7EU ANKAYYA. 

SUMMARY. 

While Sadasiyadeya Maharaya was ruling at Vijayanagara, 
a dharmasana was constituted by Alaji Pandita at Duvvur 
sthaki, on Sunday ^ba. 14, Bhadrapada of Vibhava correspond- 
ing to S. 8. 14 CO* to settle a dispute between Marutala Urnina- 
Tati Reddi and Undaveli Ankayya regarding the possession of 
a dasamndha manga included in Kamanur, a sarvammya 
agrahara of Tallapaka Tirumalayya. 

The dharmasana assembled in the temple of Cennaraya. 
The Heidis and the karanams who constituted the dharmasana 


20, A.D., 1568 

SlilSi M .... i MSMM 




_ Mudxre^i Lmgayya, and Karauam Ceunappa of Vela pali • 
Wn-ecld! «u i aratam IWpp. of NSk-ttta ; Tati Peddi 
Vobaya and Vell&l* JtSgaya «? Boggavav*.., ; Entnnnla Konda- 

Bodtedt i " lmre -^ i R PlmlU Nakkaladtone 

Bodiltdn, Kamanura Basuvappa, Euparajn Ellaya, Lmgaram 

Kot^aya, BWeda: Knndiraddi Jtnflireddi. U\b >i I! ,Mi 

Basnvayya, and Peddaya of K„ a , lpM u . MallSreffi, 

Grdnugala Kagisetti and Karan>m Venkataya of Duwur slhala 

An Inscription at BukkZyap^ a ka,nUi of KamanTir : Z, 36j ^ 445.^ 

248. THE CASE PERTAINING TO THE KA RAH; EA :vIIaigl 
OF HANUMANI0UNDAM AND PERUSOMALA (i). 

SUMMARY. 

. . .f 

Sivavaja who was the liarcuiam of Hanumanigundam and 
Perusomala had four sous, LingarSja, HalWfijn, Peda 
fimmaraju and Cinna Timmaraju. Peda Timmana predeceased 
his father. Of the remaining three Lingaraju had five sons 
Basuvaya, Lingaya, Kasturi, Yallaya, Venkataya and Peddi 
Kaj!!. And Cinna Timmaraju had three sons, Mallamraju 
Venkata} a and Gaddi Timmaya, As Mallamraju (son of Siva- 
raju) had no children, his elder brother, Lingaraju, attempted 
to persuade him to adopt Basuvaraju, one of his own sons • 
but Mallamraju did not approve of his brother’s proposal’ 
Moreover, he requested, on his death-bed, his two brothers, to 
divide the karamkam rights of the two villages and other 
property evenly between them. * 

At the time of the division of the family property, Cinna 
iimmaraju demanded that each of them should get half of it. 
Lingaraju said that as his son Basuvayya was adopted by their 
deceased brother, Mallamraju, the property should be divided 
into three equal shares, and that Cinna Timmaraju was 
entitled only to a third of it. On Cinna Timmaraju lodging a 
vigorous protest, Lingaraju did not press his claim ; but he 
duped his brother by sweet words, and sent him away to 

IT v,n W.,". ... H 1 • ..1- .It t _ A 

"’.age „ ■ 



— uxu » uu uecrepit. tim five sons wanted ti 

divide t.ieir patrimony. When it was suggested that it she nit 
I’ 6 ai-KL.-d.nitofire equal shares, Baauvayya claimed half of if 
in Vir: 13 of llls havill g been adopted by Mallamraju Hh 
brotIiers declined to Ms claim. They declared thai 

there was r.o adoption at all; and what their father said about 
adoption was intended only to deceive China Timtnaruju 
Thereupon Basuvaraju. who believed or pretended, to believe 
tnat he was really adopted by his uncle, resolved to place the 
matCi' ■ e.bre a dharmasam and repaired with this object to 
Kaveris a mud rani accompanied by his brothers. The dispute 
that arose among the sons of Lingaraju, revived the hopes of 
their cousins, the sons of China Timmaraju, to get their due 
share in the family property. One of them called Mallamraju 
followed his cousins to Kaverisamudram to find out how the 
judges would decide this dispute. Basuvaraju and his brothers 
assembled the Makajanas of the agrahara and placed before 
them the facts concerning their case. Thereupon, the 
Mahtjmm consulted Vynmmmrlyam and having obtained from 
the parties the necessary documents decided the case as 
follows : Basuvayya was not given in adoption, because the 
eonsmu. ot Cinna I itnmaraju and others was not obtained 
Moreover, the honm, which is necessary in all cases of adoption* 
was not at all performed. Therefore, the property must be’ 
equally divided among the live brothers. 


le five brothers returned to their native village • 
'lmmayya’s son, Mallamraju, who remained behind 
oal protest with the Mahajanas. He said : “ They 
us by having recourse to this fraud. They now 
, tliere was R0 adoption : The judges of this 
honld bear testimony to this fact.” Then he cut 



three-fourths, and his brothers the remaining fourth of the 
family property. When Mallamraju came to Perusomala and 
demanded one half of the property, he was told that he was 
entitled only to one eighth of it, on account of Basuvayya’s 
adoption. On Mallamraju denying that there had been any 
adoption, he was asked to swear solemnly to that effect. 
Having consented ■ to do so, he proceeded to the temple 
of Ramesvara at Tadpatri, and took a solemn oath in the 
presence of the deity for twenty- one days with wet garments 
on his body. He obtained a jayapatrika from the authorities 
of the temple. Notwithstanding all this trouble, Mallamraju’s 
cousins declined to accept his claim for half of their family 
property. Thereupon they repaired to Handikota to have 
their dispute settled, aud stated their case before Nandyala 
Narasimharaju who was then governing that fort. Narasimha- 
raju summoned Telugucerla Gropalacarya and said: “These 
people have come seeking justice. Convene an assembly (of 
the learned) and settle their dispute first.” Accordingly 
the acarya summoned an assembly (sabha), and having heard 
the arguments of both the parties, decided thus : ■ 

‘ Mallamraju proved his case on the day when he success- 
fully took the oath. There was no adoption. Therefore, one 
half of the property should go to Mallamraju. Then they had 
the jayalekhas written and handed over the jayajjatrikas to 
Mallamraju, who obtained the half share due to him from his 
cousins as soon as he returned to his village.’ 

From a Kavilt in the possession o,f Karanam Sivariijit Venka.ta.raju 
of Uannmadgnndam : LJL 21, pp. 8-20. 


The dispute described in the previous extract was not 
finally settled. As Lingaraju’s grandsons declined to give half 
of the family estate to the grandsons of China Timmaraju, as 
decided by the dkarmasana at Glandikota, the latter were 
obliged once again to seek justice. Both the parties resolved to 
approach Ranganatha Nayadu, the officer who was in charge 
of the administration of these villages ; and having repaired to 


320 


Gandikota. where he resided, requested him to settle their 
dispute. He assembled the learned men and the Mahajanas 
resident in the place and commanded them to administer justice. 
The parties expressing their approval of the procedure adopted 
by the Nayadu, the dharmasana adjourned the case to the next 
day for enquiry. 

That night the grandsons of Lingaraju attempted to win 
over Potkdurfi Nanis! van a Somayaji, one of the prominent 
Mahajanas, to their side by offering him a bribe of three 
varahas ; but their efforts were not successful, as he was resolved 
to pronounce judgment with due regard to the facts of the case, 
i hey, however, discovered a less scrupulous Mahajana in 
Ravadi Narayana So mayaji who was willing to accommodate 
them tor the sake of the bribe. Having learnt that the party 
opposed to his friends had thejayalekha and the jayapatriJca of 
the Gandikota dharmasana in their possession and that the 
Nayadu was already aware of their contents, he advised them 
to protest against the commencement of the investigation at 
Gandikota on the plea that they would not get justice there. 
He also instructed them to go to Tippasamudram for justice, 
having at first secured a ‘ uoradi 1 at Singanamaia sthala. He 
promised to secure the permission of the Nayadu for going 
thither. Then keeping; his friends in concealment behind a 
screen, he summoned the grandsons of Ginua Timmaraju and 
induced them to read the documents in their possession. 
While they were engaged in reading the jaydehlm and jaya- 
patrika their opponents quickly made copies of them. After 
dismissing the grandsons of China Timmaraju from his 
presence, Narayana Somayaji gave his clients a letter 
addressed to one of his relations at Tippasamudram together 
with some karikas, and assured them that they would get a 
: favourable decision. i; hTfeTffTj ■ . 

The next day, Narayana Somayaji told the chief that the 
parties would not obtain justice at Gandikota and requested 
him tc send them to Singanamaia whence they would go to 
■ Tippasamudram. for justice, having secured a koradi in the 


821 


place. The chief having agreed to this proposal, the parties 
jointly paid a sum of 24 varahas for obtaining the. necessary 
letters from the court, and repaired to Singanamala. Having 
obtained a koradi from the people of that place, they finally 
departed to Tippasamudram to have their dispute settled. They 
waited in the village for two months, at the end of which 
the Mahajanas appointed a body of seven judges to try the case. 
One day the court assembled, and obtained prajnapatras from 
both the parties. Then they desired to know who the 
complainants were. The grandsons of Cinna Timmaraju came 
forward and said that they demanded justice. Having sent their 
opponents outside, the court heard their statement, listened to 
the jayalekha and took the pramanapatrika. Next, they sum- 
moned the defendants, and asked them to represent their side 
of the case. At this juncture, Basuvayya, one of the defendants, 
called aside the son of Kondubhatta, one of the judges, who 
was a relation of Narayana Somayaji, and delivered into his 
hands the letter and the karikas which the Somayaji had given 
to him. On perusing the letter, Kondubhatta’s son instructed 
Basuvayya to place the copy of jayalekha with the karikas 
before the court. He did as he was instructed to do. 


The judges of the court perused the documents. They 
found themselves in a perplexing situation. They could not 
reject the karikas as false ; nor could they declare the 
jayalekhas and pramaaapatrikas filed by the complainants as 
forgeries. While they were engaged in discussing the problem, 
the defendants having consulted one another, offered to pay 
them a bribe of 75 varahas. As the jxidges agreed to accept the 
bribe, the defendants paid them 70 varahas in cash and execut- 
ed a promissory note for the balance. The court pronounced 
the judgment in favour of the defendants. Having secured a 
copy of the judgment and other letters, the defendants returned 
to Gandikota where they read them before Ranganatha Nayadu 
and got back the part of money which they paid for Kattu- 


.'iwhen': 


to go to 


udram i 


. . . \ H | ... . . ::: g| .. . . | nu,n-i . j 


822. 



no. CASE 01 PUDY&LA PIDDI BHATLU 
; SsALLtU 

A. dispute regarding the upaksayas (casual expenses) arose 
between the sabha of Karivena agrakara and Dudyala Peddi 
Bhatlu, one of the shareholders. The parties went to Kandy ala 
for the settlement of the dispute. The details are as follows: — 

In the year Vilambi (B. S. 1520) when Venkatapatiraya 
was encamped before the fort of Nandyala which he was 
besieging. Dudyala Peddi Bhatlu Mallu Bhatlugarix through the 
good offices of the king’s sthanapatis Vobularaju Narasimhaya 
and Menaji, despatched makaldurs to the village of Karivena. 
and having summoned the sabha , and the karanam, Parvataraju 
to the camp enquired why they refused to allow him to 
enjoy the vrttis in the village which had been previously 
granted to him. The members of the sabha stated that as 
Peddi Bhatlu Mallu Bhatln, had not paid his contributions and 
when asked to pay the amount had threatened violence 
(therefore, they had to forbid him from enjoying the vrttis till 
the dues were paid.) The king (?) said, “ the matter should be 
settled according to law ; and might is inadmissible. Summon 
a sabha here and secure (a copy of) the Vijnanesvarl.ya The 
members of the sahhds of Nandyala, Nandavaram and 
Veddugandla, being summoned by the king, constituted them- 
selves into a dharmasana and asked Peddi Bhatlu Mallu Bhatln 
to state his case. 


Peddi Bhatlu Mallu' Bhatlu stated before the sabhU that he 
had been in enjoyment of 15 | vrttis at Karivena. As he 
was not allowed to enjoy the produce from them, he came 
there to seek justice. When the karanam and the members 
of the sabha, were questioned why they so prohibited him, 
they replied as follows : — . 

% (The village has been subjected to several items of 

Expenditure): — . : ■:> 

4 A ■ ?'■ / . IS 

1. The dauduga or fine collected by 



Compensation in cash, to the farmers 
for the grain plundered during 
Ramaraja’s rebellion 

Subsistence allowance etc. for the duns 
who came (to demand money) 

Wages (paid for the repair of) the fort. 

Total ... 


(Besides these, the village also suffered a loss of) ga. 128. 
ru. 4f being the price of Ich, 12, tu. 13§ of paddy at the rate of 
ga. 10 per kh. which Ramaraja forcibly seized when he was 
encamped at Mosalimadugu. The total amount of expenditure 
on account of the financial difficulty of the village is ga. 225 
ru. 4§. When he was asked to pay his quota, Peddi Bhatlu 
Mallu Bhatlu refused to do so. 


On hearing this statement of the karanam of Karivena, 
the sthanapatis and the members of the sabha decided the 
dispute according to the injunctions of Vijnanesvara. They 
summoned Peddi Bhatlu Mallu Bhatlu to their presence and 
said: When the village is burdened with expense should not 
the sabha meet it? You are in the enjoyment of a fourth 
of the village; you have to pay your proportionate share of 
the ( upaksayas ). Peddi Bhatlu Mallu Bhatlu replied that the 
principal and the interest would be too much for him to pay. 
The sabha and the sthanapatis made an enquiry and came 
to the conclusion that he was not at all in a position to pay. 
Thereupon, they effected a compromise and persuaded the : 
sabha (of Karivena) to take 3|- vrtti^{ out of 15^ vrttis owned 
by him) in lieu of the money due from him. They su«|hidi©ds 
the karanam , Parvataraju before them and in the presence of 
the sabha had the transaction entered into the village register 
(Jcavile). They told (Peddi Bhatlu Mallu Bhatlu) : ‘ the tax 
and the produce counterbalance each other; you need not pay 
the upakmyas in future. Whatever expenditure the village 





your - account, the sabha will meet it from the income of 
these vrttis This was also recorded in the ha vile in the 
presence of the sahhS.; ’ F 


Witnesses: Sign manual: 

Hari and Kara. Vlrapratapa. 

From the ancient records of ICariaena Agrahatam : Mae. Mss. 15-4-29, pp. 12-14. ; 

L.R. 55, pp. 138-9. 


231. THE SETTLEMENT OF A SUIT REGARDING 
REDDARIKAM OF X A V A X . i X DU! - A - X . T f t 30. 

SUMMARY. 

Introduction . — While the karamm, Kondraju Siddiraju 
and Camilla Devi Reddi were carry i ,g on the administration 
of N avanand nla-N itturu, Vuihd&vblu Bodi Reddi came from 
iliiUiSu-r.:7,h/« (Kolar) and laid claim to the office of the Reddi. 
Devi Redipi the incumbent of the office at the time, expelled 
Bodi Reddi from the village. Thereupon, Bodi Reddi went to 
the king, and obtained from him an order (dimmattu) addressed 
to Pemmasani China Ramalinga Nayadu commanding him to 
investigate the complaint. Oil seeing the king’s order, Cinna 
Ramalinga Nayadu sent Devi Reddi and Bodi Reddi to Yadaki 
to have their case tried by the merchant guild of the place. 
After one month they, ‘ making their place were sent to 
Tadipatri to the merchant guild with a request that the latter 
should communicate to them their decision by means of a letter. 

There is the duplicate of the record together with the 
jayalekha with Mamuduri Siddhiraju, the karanam of Nitturu, 
The jayalekha bears the date S. 152S, Plavanga, Yai^akha 
su. 10. f : -f - 

% . 

Pemmasani Ramalinga Is ay ad u summoned the Mahajanas 

resident in the agraharas of Salakasamudra, Venkatagiri and 
Kaverisanmdra together with the karanam and the ay a gars of 
Navauandula-Nittura probably to assist the merchant guild in 

* The original has < sthalamucesukonl *, a technical term the meaning of which is 
not clear, - - . ' ' * ■ • / ’ 

' t -May 47, 1601 A J>* 'The cyclic year is not Plavanga but Plava. 

: : ■■ , . ' 




deciding tlie dispute* I li o meroliciiit guilds of T^dip&tri &nd 
Camaluru asked Camala Devi Reddi in the presence of Bodi 
Reddi, and the Icaramm and the other ayagars to state his case. 

Devi Reddi asserted that the ka-iayacci was his; hut in 
the course of the statement which h.- macc in support of his 
contention, he frequently contradicted himself. He could not 
give a satisfactory explanation of the manner in which his 
family acquired the Icanayacci, although he undertook to prove 
by the evidence of the ayagars that he had a share in if Bodi 
Reddi made a long statement in which he traced the history of 
his family from the time of Bukka I, who appointed his ancestor 
Unduvoln Siva Reddi as the reddi of the village, fie said that 
his people were obliged to flee from the village owing to the 
terror caused, by the invasion of an army from the north tea 
years ago (A.D. 1591). Subsequent to the flight of his family 
Devi Reddi assumed the reMishi )p when ' jpeopje- rdtbmed 
the village once again. ’ : .g : ; gf; ft 

Having heard both the sides, the elders who assembled 
there decided as follows :• — . ... .. 

1. Though Devi Reddi claims the kaaayaeci , he is not 

able to produce any evidence in support of his claim except 
present possession ; but as he is not able to explain the manner 
of the acquisition of the kdmydcci, mere possession alone, 
according to the smrti, does not make him the owner. ^ ■ 

2. He asserted that he would prove by the evidence of 
the ayagars that he had a share of the kanayacci ; but failed], ti» 
do so. Therefore, his own words made him a hmavadi . 

3. Basi Reddi Kondaya filed four letters to strengthen 
the claim of Devi Reddi. Of these, one supports the contention 
not of Devi Reddi but of Bodi Re^di. Another must be regard- 
ed as invalid in the light of the explicit statement of the dharma 
sdstras that a document obtained by means of force cannot be 
accepted as evidence. Granting that the document is valid, 
theoretical admission of a claim without .actual enjoyment 



cannot entitle a man to any property, according to the 
dharmasastras. 

i. Bodi Reddi proved that the kauayacci belonged to his 
family, by filing the jayalekha which his anc 
formerly obtained from the dharmasanu held at A 
pura agrahara. 

Therefore, as Undavolu Bodi Reddi has show 
kaaayacci was acquired by legal means by his £ 
been enjoying it for a long time 
in the presence of his 
declare that the k 
that Devi Reddi In 
it is outrageous that this 
settled by the 

jayalekha should have been 
Cause for fresh investigation, 
we grant a jayapatra 
returned to him after 

The document bears the 
samudra, and it 
karamm T; 


n that the 
iamily which had 
unquestioned and uninterrupted 
^ opponent and with his knowledge, we 
’maayacci belongs 
as no right to it. 

question wi 

Mahajams of Salakasamudra and Cikkapalli in a 
sent to us, although there is no 
Having decided in this manner 
to Undavolu Bodi Reddi. It should be 
your perusal. 

signatures of 40 people of Salaka- 
was written with their consent by the 
'immaraju of Tadipatri. 

: v ' Kaifiyat of KittTmt : L.R. 37, pp. 3J1 ff. 


to the said Bodi Reddi ; a 
Mof-eover, in our opinj 
hieh had been forme: 



(ii) Tippa I: — Tippa I, a descendant of Vlra Malla, 

opposed the advancing- army of the Gajapati, and having 
forced them to retreat, plundered their camp. ” 

(iii) Ayyapa I : — Tippa had two sons, Ayyapa and 
Venkatadri. The former begot a son called Tippa whom 
he crowned as the chief of his estate, and set out for Kandana- 
volu to assist Gopalaraja iu repelling an attack of the 
Mussalmans who were investing the fort. On his arrival at 
the place, he proceeded immediately to attack the besiegers ; 
and put to tbe sword dunedars (heroes), gharihs (foreigners), 
Pathans, Abisies (Abyssinians), and the Dekkanies. He cut 
the ropes of the tents of the enemy, and forced his wa;f 
into the fort, where he was received with great honoitr by 
Gopalaraja. 

(iv) Tippa II : — Ayyapa’s son Tippa II won the 
applause of the rulers of the earth by plundering the famous 
fort Ad a van i as a Suratani-lagga. He put to death in the 
fight vazirs and dunedars , ; cut down the proud Turuskas 
(Turks) without allowing them to escape ; and put the palaigars 
to flight. Having thus acquired victory, he ruled the efrth 
like Harischandra. 

(v) Lingo. I : — His son, Linga I, succeeded him. Linga I 

had two sons, Konda and Ayyapa II. ? . . 

. , iiy ;; ■ ' ■ ' , ■ . 

• (vi) Konda I:— Konda I ruled the earth in the manner 


the rulers of his estate. He went to Manavapuri to attack 
the army of Yedula Saha (le. the ’A dll Shall) like a lion 
springing upon a herd of deer. In the fight that ensued, 
though he displayed considerable heroism and slew several 
distinguished warriors on the side of the enemy, he was 
ultimately hilled by them. 

(vii) Li if ‘/a II i -Liaga II, the most distinguished among 
the sons of Honda I, succeeded his father. He had a son 
called liSraabhadra. Having established himself at Tirumani- 
k5ta, Liuga 11 began to harass the forts and towns belong- 
ins 1 to other chiefs in the neighbourhood. On hearing of the 
aciivities of Ling a 11, Abdula Padusaha (’Abd-ul-lah Qutb 
Shalt) summoned the dunedUr®, and the marines, and sent them 
against him. When they canoe and surrounded him, he 
attacked them fiercely ; anti having put to flight all the 
enemies, he showed the way to Peuugonda, and won the 
approbation of Bellamy Venkata. 

(viii) Ayyrtjm IT, the younger brother . of Honda f: — 
Ayyapa II was honoured by Sri Bamaraja by the presentation 
of a crown. 

f-' (ix) Kant] a II a— Honda II, the son of Ayyapa II, was 
a. dev tit wl w.,r 'hipper uf Vi? nr.. 

(x) fiamabhadfa : — Honda 11. had two sons, Biunabhadra 
and Tinuna. Bamahhudra was held in high esteem by kings. 

•" V.W v : ';;o ; . ■■ ■; . . ; > --wO ... '■ . y' /w -v" '/ •! • = ... w ' 'Y.'":- ; w/ : ;r’ • .‘y -Vv C ' ; y' : -v’ 

(,\i, Tinmiu wa-- 'b,id oi adventure. 

S ■.ugsnlhik :pras«v«, -.iharanam. 

■ 253. VKNK.VfA. iii A.\i) HhUM.VLA XAYAIv OB’ MADUHA. 



329 


the Raya wanted urgent relief; so Ramayyan was to reach 
Madura at once. Ramayyan welcomed the chance of showing 
his valour against the Muslims and taking leave of his 
lieutenants in the camp including his son-in-law, Kondap- 
payyan, after.giving them instructions and promising to return 
on the eighth day, he travelled in state by palanquin via Mana- 
Madura, and Tiruppuvanam ; reaching Madura he had 
audience with Tirumala to whom he promised an easy 
victory against the Muslim troops, and much booty including 
fine horses at the end of the campaign; Tirumala blessed 
his enterprise and gave him a hearty send off 1 . Ramayyan’s 
route northward lay along Tuvariman, Solavandan, Vada- 
madura, Dindigal, Tekkamalai, Manapparai, Irattaimalai, 
Trichinopoly, Srirangam, Samayapuram, Kannanur, Uttattur, 
Valikondapuram and Ami to Vellore, and thence to Bangalore 
where the Raya was in camp. The day after his arrival he 
had audience with the Raya who described to him the ravages 
of the Muslims and urged the need for early action against 
them. Ramayyan made light of the enemy and promised 
to clear the country of him in no time and bring back victory 
with a number of horses and elephants taken from them. 
He was given betel leaf and areca nuts by the Raya and sent 
to his task. Ramayyan then sent word to Ikkeri (Ikkarai) 
Venk atak r s nay y ar and secured his willing co-operation. 
Together, they completely routed the Muslim forces, and 
Ramayyan captured 60 elephants, 50 camels and a thousand 
horses from the enemy and produced them before the Raya 
as he had promised. The Raya embraced him with pleasure 
and gave him many valuable presents. When the Raya 
wanted him to stay in his court, Ramayyan asked to be 
allowed to go to Tirumala who was dear to him, and promised 
to come back at the call of the • Raya, if necessity arose as he 
had just done. Ramayyan then took leave of the Raya and 
returned to Madura with his victorious army. 




Ananda Press, Madras.' 





«i 



60c?) the position op dancing women. 

Summary : ^rinatha makes a bitter attack, in this verse, 
upon the depraved morals of his contemporaries who showed 
marked partiality to the company of the courtesans rather 
than poets and musicians. 

176. DODDA SANKANNA’S OTHER VICTORIES. 

Summary : Dodda Sankanna defeated in battle a certain 
Virupanna Odeyar and captured from him the forts of Jambur 
and U duganeyakota. He took possession of the fort of 
Madevapura and having defeated the enemies that came 
against him seized their territory. 


