GOVERNMENT OP INDIA 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 


ACCESSION NO. .it ? -?* ?. 5. 

CALL No. ^5 

T5^aT79 ~ 










INDIA 

A HISTORICAL SURVEY 




INDIA 

A HISTORICAL SURVEY 

45285 


K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 
G. Srinivasachari 


(MU. IQ'te, 




• 'a* 
•* 


ALLIED PUBLISHERS 

BOMBAY NEW DELHI CALCUTTA MADRAS 
LONDON NEW YORK 




First Published 1966 


ALLIED PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
1 5 Graham Road, Ballard Estate, Bombay 1 
J3/J4 Asaf All Road, Hew Delhi 1 
17 Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta 13 
38-C Mount Road, Madras 6 


MTfiU j ruT-wocn OAk 

LIBE. ' • * ; VUiI ‘ 


A.M. No 

ays 


4 52 . 

16-Z' W2 *7T» 1 

Z$ c[j 


© Allied Publishers Private Limited 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

AT THE NATIONAL PRINTING WORKS, 10 , DARYAGANJ, DELHI, 
AND PUBLISHED BY R. N. SACHDEV FOR ALLIED PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED, 13/14 ASAF ALI ROAD, NEW DELHI 1 , 




Contents 


1 India — A Paradox 

(i) India— A Part of Universal History 

(ii) The Story of Building up the History of India 


» 

(iii) Paradoxes 

11 

2d 

lu 

II The People of India 

18 

2, 

III Background of History 


j: 

(i) A Panoramic View of Hindu India 

25 


(ii) Outline of Muslim Rule in India 

33 


(iii) The British Rule in India 

46 

It 

(iv) Estimate of the Three Phases 

55 


IV Traditionalism and Modernism 



(i) Joint Family 

62 


(ii) The Caste 

65 

j 

(iii) The Indian Village 

68 

t 

(iv) Hinduism and Progress 

72 


V The Life of the People through Ages 
VI Indian Nationalism 


83 



VII The Struggle for Freedom 

VIII Independence and Partition 

IX Integration and Reorganization of Slates 

X The Constitution of India 

XI Nehru's Domestic Policy and Party Politics 
XII Foreign Policy 

XIII Economic Development 

XIV Social Progress 

XV National Integration 

XVI Prospect 

XVII Indo-Pakistan Conflict 
XVIII Retrospect and Prospect 
XIX Geopolitics 
Chronology 



Preface 

The purpose of this brief survey of the history of India is to give a 
panoramic view of the march of events from the earliest known 
times to the present day so as to create and sustain in the reader 
an interest in the history and philosophy of India. The book is 
designed to help the reader appreciate the vast scope and value of 
Indian thought. 

The political, social and economic problems of the country 
after 1947 when the country gained independence, have, in this 
book, received greater attention than the history of the past. To 
disentangle the story from the bewildering rise and fall of various 
dynasties in the Pre-British period, and from the intriguing wars 
and alliances of the British to attain primacy in India for presenting 
just what is necessary of the past to understand the present was no 
easy task for us. We leave the reader to judge the measure of 
success that has attended our efforts in this direction. 

Our presentation will, we hope, convince the reader that India 
is fast developing into a free democracy and that the economic 
and social experiments she has been carrying out are calculated to 
help her take her legitimate place among the great nations of the; 
world. 

If this book serves to help young men and women of India to 
feel that they may well be proud of their past and build up a future 
on the flexible traditional values of the nation absorbing what is 
best in the West and if it in some measure, be it ever so small, 
serves to build a bridge of understanding between other nations 
whatever their form of government may be, and India, we shall 
feel that our labours in producing it have been amply rewarded. 

K.A. Nilakanta Sastri 
G. Srinivasachari 




CHAPTER 


India — A Paradox 


1 


India— A Part of Universal History 

The name India comes from the name of the river which the Indians 
called ‘Sindhu’, the Persians ‘Hindu’ and the Greeks ‘Indus’. 
Foreign historians have consistently been calling the country India. 
Indians themselves called their land Bhsratavarsha after the name 
of Bharata, the son of Dushyanta and Sakuntala. They regarded 
Bhsratavarsha as the Southern division of Jambudvipa, one of the 
seven islands making up the world. The constitution of India 
retains the name India and also revives the traditional name Bharat. 

The most interesting and at the same time very puzzling thing 
about India is that it has a wider variety of geographic, climatic 
and economic conditions than any other country in the world. To 
take climate for example, the southern portions of the country lie 
within the torrid zone, while its Northern region advances into the 
temperate zone beyond latitude 35°. The South West and tlm 
North East Monsoons are as important to India as are the perennial 



India 


snows of the Himalayas. Climate and rainfall are no doubt factors 
influencing the history of any country, but some historians in t heir 
attempt to account for the peculiar traits in the history, philoso phy 
and art of India lay undue emphasis on the enervating climate of 
the country and the effects of its physical configuration in judging 
Indian character. The rise of the Maharatta power a ml of the 
Sikhs and the renascence of modern India show clearly that climate 
as a factor in Indian History is not so very significant as someti nies 
stated. 

The Himalayas on the North and the seas on the East, 'West and 
South appear to cut off India from the rest of the world* but while 
they helped her more to attain her distinct individuality, it never 
meant isolation, of India because of the passes in the mountains 
and of her central position in the Indian Ocean. She lias from the 
remotest past maintained an unbroken contact with every civi I'm- 
tion, the Egyptian, the Sumerian, the Mediterranean and [he 
Chinese. The North Western Passes have been the gateway s of 
India for nomadic tribes of Central Asia to migrate and settle in 
India. The Himalayas, in spite of their dizzy heights and forbidd- 
ing snow, have never stood as a complete barrier between the 
people of India and those of the other side. The ocean held no 
terrors for Indians who in a spirit of adventure colonized Java, 
Sumatra, Bali and the entire East Indies. And this was not the 
beginning but continuation of pro-historic movements. 

Prof. Childe in his Dawn of European Civilization maintains 
that the Occident is Vindebted to the Orient for the rudiments of 
arts and crafts that initiated man’s emancipation from bon dttge 
to his environment and for the foundation of those spiritual ties 
that coordinate human endeavours”. Surely the Orient incl uded 
India. 

The three cycles into which chroniclers usually divide Indian 
History are the Indo-Aryan, the Indo-lslamic and the Indo-Eu- 
ropean. In fact it is not possible to divide the history of I ndia 
into three such clear-cut periods, for these periods naturally over- 
lap one another in social and cultural affairs. Considered from 
the historiographic point of view they are inter-related, but each 
had its distinctive applications and atmosphere contributing s ome* 
thing special to the cultural development of India, In. Indin, as 


2 



India — A Paradox 


elsewhere, the centuries follow a regular progression in spite of 
revolutionary political changes. True, India was for a long time 
politically divided into segments but these segments have organically 
fitted into a culture pattern which made India a distinct entity. 

For many years it was held that the earliest human species originat- 
ed along the southern slopes of the Himalayas, but in the nineteenth 
century anthropologists on the basis of fragmentary skeletal re- 
mains put forward the theory that the African Continent was the 
birth place of mankind. In recent times some writers on the basis 
of geological evidence have argued that Southern India containing 
some of the oldest rocks of the world might well have been the 
earliest home zone of man, but this theory lacks archaeological 
evidence in support. 

It is agreed that the momentous revolution on domestication of 
animals and agriculture had ifs beginning somewhere in South 
West Asia. By about 5000 b.c. there were permanently settled 
■communities in Palestine, Iraq and Iran; each extended eastward 
.as far as India and West and South to Egypt and the Eastern 
Mediterranean. It must be observed that in Europe the new way 
of life spread very slowly and that the hunting people of that 
region remained undisturbed for thousands of years. Early historic 
migrations were wonderfully long and spread over a large area of 
the earth. In spite of the natural hazards cultural evolution within 
a limited region has always outstripped cultural diffusion. The 
vast Acheulian territory shows a remarkable uniformity in its 
■cultural products. “If collectors went out on from London, 
Jerusalem, Cape Town and Madras all four might find hand-axes 
which could not be distinguished one from the other unless it was 
.by the material from which they, had been made." 1 But this same 
level of development cannot mean that somehow men arose inde- 
pendently in all these places about the same time. We are to this 
•day ignorant about the early home zone of Homo Sapiens. How- 
ever, we have got into the habit of tracing the gradual spread of 
human beings over the globe on the basis of useful guesses made by 
.scientists. 

India after its political division in 1947 is a truncated country. 

* History of Mankind, p. 75, vol: I. 


3 



India 


Sind, a part of the Punjab, Baluchistan and N.W.F. Province be- 
came West Pakistan and East .Bengal, East Pakistan. History 
shows that the Punjab for ages remained as a frontier province 
not fully integrated with the rest of India. Later Yedic literature 
mentions the Punjab and the North West rarely and usually with 
contempt as impure land where Yedic sacrifices were not performed. 
By an irony of fate, they have become parts of Pakistan (the land 
of the pure). 

Partition of Country into Pakistan and India was viewed as a 
painful necessity by the nationalists both Hindu and Muslim. 

Now the Gandhian principle of non-violence which helped 
India in winning her freedom has attracted world-wide attention. 
India has voluntarily chosen to continue to be a member of the 
Commonwealth of Nations. This has helped India to retain the 
love and esteem of the members of the Commonwealth of Nations. 
“India is in fact a good Commonwealth member; she fulfils her 
obligations as a member of the sterling area and her treatment of 
United Kingdom citizens living and working in India is exemplary.'’'* 
As a member of the United Nations Organization India has been 
making her voice felt on the affairs of the world. Indians have 
been holding high offices in the U.N.O. and have been members 
of several important commissions and committees appointed by 
the U.N.O. and its organs. At the Bandung conference was evolved 
the principle of the Panchashila largely at the instance of India. 
At present her relations with her neighbours, particularly Pakistan 
and China, are not altogether happy for reasons which will be 
given in a later chapter. 

India is not militarily mighty. But still most progressive nations 
of the world consider her as a force for peace in the world. It 
was during the British period, because of her political subordina- 
tion, that India remained somewhat in isolation from the rest of 
the world. Nevertheless^ the contact with Britain helped India 
to establish trade and cultural relations with almost every country 
in the world. The Indo-Islamic cycle which lasted from the twelfth 
century almost to the end of the eighteenth century brought India 
into contact with the then most civilized countries of the world. 

* Modem India, Sir Percival Griffiths, p. 275. 


4 



India — A Paradox 


The art and architecture of India influenced Mughal art and in 
turn allowed themselves to be influenced. In the mediaeval period 
the Arabs held the carrying trade for a long time and through 
them BhSskara’s Calculus and the Astrolabe, ideas of latitude and 
longitude and numerals including zero and the decimal system of 
the place value of the numerals passed from India to Europe. The 
Hindu period in North India may be said to have ended about the 
twelfth century a.d. It is the longest period in the history of India. 
Excavations in South Tndia and Indo-China show that the Romans 
carried on a flourishing trade with India and South East Asia. 

The first early Indian civilization is that of the Indus Valley now 
in Pakistan. The hey-day of the ‘Harappa Culture’, as it is called, 
lasted from 2500 to 1500 B.c. The beginnings only date back to 
3000 B.c. There are evidences to show that this civilization bad 
lively contacts with the pre-Akkadian and post-Akkadian Culture 
of Mesopotamia. It was contemporaneous with the Egyptian 
civilization. It is said that the muslin in which mummies of Egypt 
were wrapped went from India. That the early Aryan settlers in 
India had intimate contact with the people of Persia is clear. 
Sanskrit, the language of the Aryans, is akin to Greek, Latin and 
Germanic and Slavic languages. 

Buddhism which sprang in the sixth century B.c. commanded 
tremendous influence outside India in course of time. It claimed 
converts in China and later in Japan. It became the dominant 
religion of Tibet and of South East Asia, where, however, Brahmini- 
cal Hinduism was equally important. 

In the closing years of the sixth century B.c. the North West 
region, now part of Pakistan, was conquered by the Persian King, 
Darius the Great. This conquest established links between India 
and the Greek world at the western end of the, Persian Empire. 
Alexander’s invasion of India (326 B.c.) was only an extension of 
his Persian campaign. This brought closer contact of India with 
Greece. 

Chandragupta’s empire extended to Kabul in Afghanistan, then 
called Gandhara. Asoka’s trilingual inscription at Kandaher 
shows the extent of his empire as well as that of the influence of 
Buddhism. 

The civilization of India spread into the countries of the South 

•5 



India 


East Asia; until recently, the coronation ceremonies of the 
Muhammedan Icings there, were akin to those of the Hindu Kings. 
The architecture of Borobudur (Java), and Ankorwat are monu- 
mental examples of the spread of Indian culture. The people 
of the island of Bali to the East of Java still retain Vedic mantras 
and ceremonials. 

From the period of pre-history to the present age of atomic 
energy, India has been in close contact with almost every civiliza- 
tion of every age in the world. Well may it be said that India from 
time immemorial has been a part of Universal history. 

The Western Bloc headed by U.S.A. is keenly interested in 
India because it is the largest democracy in the world. The 
Communist Bloc headed by Russia is equally interested in India 
because of the economic planning on the socialist pattern. By her 
policy of non-alignment India has been retaining a certain measure 
of the confidence and esteem of both the blocs. 

2. The Story of building up the History of India. 

The building up of the history of India has a long and interesting 
story which requires a volume to itself. A brief review of it is 
necessary to help the general reader appreciate tho hard, patient 
work of successive generations of Indologists to re-construct the 
history of India. 

In spite of the fact that no country in the world is richer than 
India in documents, monuments and archives commemorating the 
facts, public and private, of past history, there is a widespread 
notion that Indians have no historical sense and no taste for history. 
A.L. Basham says: “It is perhaps unjust to maintain that India had 
no sense of history whatever”. Indeed the interest that India had 
in her own past was concentrated not only on the fabulous kings 
of legendary golden age but also on the great empires with their 
origin and fall in historical times. The most ancient book of the 
world, the Rig Veda, contains much reliable historical material. 
However, sources sufficient to enliven the history of certain periods 
of Hindu India, with interesting anecdotes and vivid personalities, 
are no doubt lacking. Kalhana, a Kashmiri poet of the twelfth 
century a.d., wrote the history of his land in verse and named it 


6 



India — A Paradox 


Rajatarangini (River of Kings). It is of great value for the study 
of the history of Kashmir, hut unfortunately it tells us very little 
of India as a whole. This, however, suggests that, in the courts 
of ancient kings, evidences of chief importance to State were care- 
fully recorded. It is a pity that such records should have been 
completely lost to us. 

To the conquering races of the West, India appeared to be re- 
mote from their own ideas and civilization. In the first flush of 
success they looked down upon the Indians, the Hindus in particular, 
as inferior to them in every respect. To their discomfiture, they 
soon learned that India was the first recorded home of the Aryans 
from a branch of whom their own ancestors were believed to have 
sprung. It was a wonder to them that at a time when Rome and 
Athens were yet in the womb of a far off future, when Troy and 
Mycenae were unborn, when Sheikh Abraham had not yet founded 
his race, mothers in the Punjab had been telling their children 
stories, myths and legends akin to those about the Greek heroes 
and gods. Before the Aryans migrated into India, there had been 
living in the country, people whose urban civilization continues to 
be a marvel of the world. 

For a large part of the political history of their country Indians 
are indebted to foreign travellers and foreign scholars. One of 
the great moments in Indology was the time when European 
scholars took active interest in the study of Sanskrit. Until the 
last half of the nineteenth century the early history of India was 
known to Europeans only from brief passages in the works of 
Greek and Latin authors. Early European studies of India’s past 
mostly related to speculations about the link of the Indians with 
the descendants of Noah and the vanished empires of the Bible. 
The contribution of Jesuits to the study of Sanskrit is great and the 
first Sanskrit grammar in “European tongue was written by Father 
Hanxladen who worked in Malabar from 1699-1732. It must be 
observed that for all their studies most missionaries gained no real 
understanding of India’s past”. Often they tore passages out of 
their contexts to hold up to ridicule Hindu beliefs and customs. 

The foundations of Indology were laid by Sir William Jones 
(1746-94) who came to Calcutta as a judge of the Supreme Court, 
when Warren Hastings was the Governor-General. Jones learnt 


7 



India 


several important European languages as well as Hebrew, Arabic, 
Persian and Turkish. He was indeed a linguistic genius. It was 
he who first enunciated that the Persian and the European langu- 
ages were derived from a common ancestor other than Hebrew. 
Charles Wilkins (1740-1836), one of the administrators of the East 
India Company in Bengal, managed to learn the Sanskrit language. 
The foundation of the Asiatic Society of Bengal on the first of 
January 1784 was a turning point in the history of modern Sanskrit 
studies. Warren Hastings who was offered the post of the President, 
■in all humility, persuaded Jones to accept it. 

Asiatic Researches , the journal of the society took concerted 
measures to reveal India’s past to the world. Several important 
translations of Sanskrit works appeared in successive issues of 
Asiatic Researches. Important among the translations made by 
Jones were Kalidasa’s Sakuntala and the Law Book of Manu, 
■Several other European scholars followed the example of these 
.‘pioneers of Indology. A French scholar Anquetil Dupcrron 
published translations of four Upanishads from seventeenth 
.century Persian version. These translations roused the interest 
of European scholars in Sanskrit literature. It is impossible in a 
brief survey like this to do justice to all the scholars to whom 
vlndology owes a great deal. The greatest contribution to Sanskrit 
■studies made by England was the splendid edition of Rig Veda and 
the great series of authoritative annotated translations, Sacred 
Books of the East. These two monumental works were done by 
the great German Sanskritist, Max Muller (1823-1900). 

Early in the nineteenth century the Bengal Society, not content 
with the study of written records, turned its attention to material 
remains of India’s past. The Company surveyors gathered many 
reports on temples, caves and shrines. They collected early coins 
and copies of inscription in scripts that were not then in vogue. 
The second great moment in Indology came when James Prinsep, 

' an official of the Calcutta Mint and secretary of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, interpreted for the first time the earliest Brahmi script. 
He was able to read the edicts of the great Emperor Asoka. Among 
those who with single-hearted devotion addressed themselves to the 
task of unravelling India’s past must be mentioned Cunningham 
who held the post of Archaeological Surveyor from 1862 to his 

\8 



India— A Paradox 


retirement in 1885. By 1900 through his guidance many ancient 
buildings had been surveyed, many ancient inscriptions read and 
translated. 

The best service done to India by Lord Curzon was in 1901, 
when he reformed and enlarged the Archaeological Survey. He 
appointed a young archaeologist named John Marshall as Director 
General. Marshall’s greatest triumph was the discovery of the 
Indus Valley civilization. He with the assistance of R.D. Banerjee 
systematically excavated Harappa and Mohenjodaro from 1924 
until his retirement in 1931. Mortimer Wheeler during his brief 
period of Directorship also made some important discoveries at 
Harappa. All these dicoveries startled historians all over the world, 
and pushed the evidence of India’s antiquity to nearly 3000 B.c. 
But unfortunately the language of the seals of Harappa still re- 
main undeciphered. Remarkable excavations at Taxila, Sarnath, 
Nalanda and Sanchi and other historic sites have made very con- 
siderable additions to our knowledge of the past and brought 
certainty and definiteness into its successive epochs. Excavations 
are still going on; there is no knowing what wonders of the past 
they may reveal. 

Inscriptions of stone and metal counted by hundreds in the 
North and thousands in the South are among the most copious and 
authentic sources of ancient Indian History. The history of the 
early Pallavas and Pandyas would be blank without the evidence 
from about a score or more copper plate records. The evidence 
provided for us by the coins issued by the rulers of old help us with 
much information and fill up the gaps in the history. Coins called 
Puranas were in circulation from seventh century B.c. to the begin- 
ning of the Christian Era. About the Indo-Greeks and Kushans 
coins are our main source of information. Justin and Strabo men- 
tioned not more than four or five princes of the Indo-Greek line, 
while coins speak of not less than thirty-seven princes. Some of 
these coins, so decidedly of Hellenistic conception, depict the influ- 
ence of Buddhism and Hinduism. These coins unmistakably show 
cultural intermingling of the East and West. The state of the 
currency, so far as we can trace, offers a valuable clue to the economic 
condition of the people. Monuments, sculptures, paintings and 
other works of art belonging to all periods are invaluable aids to 


9 



India 


our understanding of the conditions of life that prevailed in respec- 
tive epochs. The puranas and. the epics, Mahabharata and 
Ramayana, though obscured by many layers of imaginary legends,, 
do contain useful historical materials, and Vincent Smith was very 
definite that historians should use the materials contained in them. 
Buddhist and Jain books of a quasi-historical nature make an in- 
valuable contribution to the study of Indian history. 

With the coming in of the Muslims we get an abundance of 
chronicles and histories, official and private. For example, 
Ferishta’s history written in the early part of seventeenth century 
is an admirable work of research and synthesis. Among travellers” 
accounts must be mentioned Herodotus of the fifth century B.c. 
and Megasthenes who visited Chandragupta’s court. Parts of his- 
work have survived to give us an account of the Mauryan administra- 
tion. The accounts of Chinese Buddhist pilgrims to India such 
as Fa-hien, Hiuentsang and I-tsing are of unsurpassed value. 
Alberuni (a.d. 1030) gives an excellent critical account of Hindu 
society, learning and literature as he found them, but it is of little 
value as a source of political history. 

For Indo-European history we have a mass of contemporary 
papers, official and private. The field is vast, very little of it has 
yet been studied from the Indian point of view and Indian scholars 
have to work quite a number of years to give shape to the history 
of this period. 1 

Most of the early historians of India have been Europeans. The 
first reliable book on Ancient India was that of Vincent Smith. 
Bhandarkar and other Indian scholars have contributed a great deal 
to the shaping of Indian History. While European orientalists 
have unbounded admiration and respect for India’s literature, 
religion and art, those who belonged to the utilitarian school of 
thought had nothing but contempt for Indian customs, manners 
and religion. James Mill, father of the liberal Stuart Mill, brushed 
aside the Hindu period, writing much nonsense about it and began 
the history of India with the advent of the Muslims. Some Indian 
scholars, proud of the admiration of orientalists, have been unduly 
chauvinistic in their writings. Among those that have shown an 
understanding of the true Indian spirit must be mentioned the 
Great German Antiquarian Lassen of the nineteenth century, E.B. 


10 



India — A Paradox 


Havell and A.L. Basham besides many others of different nations 
like Lanman and Bloomfield in America, Kern and Vogel in Hol- 
land, Sten Konow and Fausboll in the Scandinavian countries.. 
Burnouf, Syloain, Levi and Greuoset in France. There is an 
unmistakable tendency among most European writers of the 
history of India to attempt to trace every thing good in India to 
the West or to some other foreign origin. In the early days of the 
British conquest European scholars had opportunities to know 
more about Muslims than about Hindus. Certain common ele- 
ments in Christianity and Islam made these scholars favour Muslims ; 
the accident of Muslims having been in power had no small influ- 
ence on their somewhat respectful attitude towards them. More' 
than all, their superiority complex was heightened by their political 
success in India. The Hindus who formed the bulk of the popula- 
tion stubbornly resisted attempts at conversion, and persumably 
because of this Hindus came to be looked down upon by those 
Europeans who were interested in the spread of Christianity. The 
tendency to attribute anything good to foreign origin may be seen 
in the exaggerated importance attached by some Western writers, 
to the influence of Islam and Sermon on the Mount on Tolstoy,, 
and Gandhi. The Mahatma was a traditionalist who owed much 
more to Maratha mystic poetry and Bhagavadgita than to any other 
source. His ideas of human solidarity and brotherhood, his. 
message of Truth, Love and Ahimsa are all derived from Hindu 
precedents. 

3. PARADOXES 

India is passing through a period of transition. The chief trend 
is towards change, but the pace of change and its exact nature are 
difficult to describe and much more difficult to evaluate. Most 
Western writers study India invariably with preconceived notion 
of contrasting conditions of Eastern and Western cultures. Their 
hypothesis is that the culture of the East is in many respects a 
contrast to that of the West, and even conflicting. This is not the 
place to enter into any great detail about the problem of East versus 
West. 

Science andjher naughty daughter technology have so revolution- 


11 



India 


ized the material culture of the world, annihilating distance and 
radically changing men’s minds, that the past is looked down upon 
as a millstone hanging round the neck of a nation that desires 
progress in terms of improved standards of living and comfort. 
In the discussion of the contrasting values of the East and West, 
even moral qualities and values have acquired contrasting connota- 
tions of Eastern and Western civilizations. Hardly is it realized 
that fundamental moral values are universal. Truth, j ustice, mercy, 
kindness, charity and similar moral qualities are valued by all right 
thinking men everywhere in the world. They know neither East 
nor West. Falsehood, injustice, cruelty and uncharitableness 
deserve to be condemned by all, to whatever race, area, sect 
or caste they may belong. So, fundamental moral values cannot 
vary with the East or West; the contrast is not at all with the East 
and the West, but between those who profess the values and those 
who practise them. But it is not the same as saying that what one 
group considers to be right should also be right for another group. 
In one society it is right for a person to marry his sister’s daughter, 
but another society may condemn it as wrong. This is purely a 
matter of custom and no fundamental moral quality is involved 
in it. 

Mayhew, who believed that the spread of Christianit yin India, 
would remove cultural antagonism and ensure the protection of 
moral values says: 

When we think of what through our instruction, the Indian can 
do and must do to gain a livelihood, we imagine him in his 
government or mercantile office, pleading in the law courts, 
practising in the hospitals, and even doing in executive councils 
or ministries the work that, for a century, has been reserved to 
the ‘Heaven-born’ of the Civil Service, he is western and one 

with us If we follow the clerk home from his office, 

or the agricultural labourer, who has achieved literacy in the 
village school, home from the plough and watch his employment 
of his leisure, his search after happiness in his family or communal 

life, we shall find the Oriental, not the Occidental Practically 

everything is shed that has been acquired at such cost from school 
and college and contact with the West The western train 


12 



India — A Paradox 


is used for reaching the place of sacred pilgrimage, and the electric 
fan for cooling the performer of domestic rites and ceremonies. 
Mayhew describes one kind of paradox which seems inexplicable 
to him. 

To another writer the present trend in India appears to be from the 
old traditional, hierarchical, other-worldly, religion based view of 
life towards one, which while still rooted in India’s past, will reflect 
increasingly the whole complex of ideas, values, and technology 
originally borrowed from the West. How fast will the transition 
be? How much will be taken from the West permanently, now 
that India is free to choose? If the contrast between the old 
and the new were only a matter of technology, the answer 
would be clear. India is adopting as much of Western industrial 
technology as she can afford to do and as quickly as possible . 3 
The hypothesis of the writer is that ideas and values of the 
technological age are Western and if Eastern countries adopted them 
they should be regarded as borrowings. A little reflection will 
show that neither science nor technology can truly be called Western 
or Eastern. All scientific inventions and technological devices, 
wherever they may have originated belong to the world, not to the 
area or the people living in it. The spread of the use of machinery 
for agricultural and industrial pursuits is primarily a question of 
time and money and not of the East or the West. 

Somehow or other the contrasting conditions of the East and the 
West have become fixed even in the minds of great men who have 
striven to rise above narrow nationalism. Twelve years before 
becoming Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, when he was 
in prison wrote: 

I have become a queer mixture of the East and . the West, out 
of place everywhere, at home nowhere. Perhaps my thoughts 
and approach to life are more akin to what is called Western 
than Eastern, but India clings to me as she does to all her children, 

in innumerable ways I am a stranger and alien in the West. 

I cannot be of it. But in my own country also sometimes I have 
an exile’s feeling. 

» Beatrice Pithey Lamb, A World in Transition, p. 333. 


13 



.India 


This is Nehru’s introspection; he refers to conditions of life in 
India that are very different from those he experienced during his 
■stay in England. This does not mean that Nehru argues that 
Eastern civilization is different from that of the West. 

It is a paradox that the general masses of India have a kind of 
hostility towards the things of the West. All great Indians of the 
■nineteenth century were not able to gain any recognition from their 
own countrymen, nor exert any influence over them until they 
were recognized in the West. Swami Vivekananda’s case serves 
.as a fitting example. He was respected only after he had made his 
name, in America. He was conscious of a gulf between himself 
and the mass of India. He was a staunch supporter of the 
•national tradition. But in an involuntary slip he seems to throw 
away his case: “Can you make a European Society with India’s 

■religion?” he asked and he answered, “I believe it is possible, and 
must be.” The Swami perhaps thought that India’s religion was 
incompatible with European society. But he was so attracted by 
the high standard of life of the Europeans that he very much wished 
that the poor Indian could somehow be helped to improve his 
standard of living. 

India presents a variety of natural regions and climate. It 
presents a combination of elements that seem to belong to different 
worlds. All ethnic groups of the world are found living in India 
to this day. The streets in any city present handcarts pulled by 
men, bullockcarts, lorries and motor cars, while aeroplanes fly high 
5n the sky. It is these contrasting differences that make India 
interesting as well as confusing to foreigners. 

From the incongruities of India it is wrong to think, as some 
western writers do, that the Indians have any innate or religious dis- 
ability to draw new life from the soil or use machinery for their 
industries. As for political theories, the Arth Sastra in Sanskrit was a 
favourite special of Indians some centuries before the Christian Era. 
This shows the early development of Indian political science. “The 
king”, wrote Yajnavalkya, “must discipline and establish again on 
the path of duty, all such as have erred from their own laws whether 
families, castes, guilds or associations.” Buddhist texts give ex- 
amples of representative self-governing institutions. It may come 
as a surprise to many Westerners unacquainted with India that in 


14 



India — A Paradox 


the assemblies of the Buddhists in India 2000 years ago, there 
-were rudiments of the British Parliamentary practice of the 
present day. There were officers to preserve the dignity of the 
house such as are akin to those of the modern ‘speaker’ and ‘chief 
whip’. The member of the assembly initiating business brought 
forward a motion which was then open to discussion. There was 
also a custom of reading a resolution three times before it became 
law. Difference of opinion on any matter was settled by the vote 
of the majority, the voting being done by a ballot. In South India 
an inscription of the tenth century a.d. in the Vaikunta Perumal 
Temple at Uttaramallur gives numerous details about the system 
of village self-government, including the principle of election. Thus 
it will bo seen that the system of representative government was 
long known in India. If a union of Hindu and European learn- 
ing has not been sufficiently effected this should be attributed to 
the failure of British rule in India. We will in a separate chapter 
note the developments of democracy in India. What is puzzling 
to some Westerners is the three ways by which the Hindu sought 
to reach his spiritual goal, namely, the Guana Marga or Way of 
Knowledge, Karma Marga or Way of Action, and the Bhakti Marga 
or Way of Complete Devotion to God. We will later show that 
Pharma, Karina and Maya of the Hindu do not stand in the way 
of political or economic progress of India. 

Religion and Nationalism. Almost all major religions of the 
world are represented in India. The bulk of the population belong 
to Hindu religion. Hinduism defies definition. Hindu culture 
has shown its vitality by maintaining its tradition unbroken to the 
present day from the fourth millennium B.c., in spite of several 
attacks, Hellenic, Muslim and European among others. Its 
historic vitality shows that it has been built on the bedrock of 
spirituality; as it is built on intuitive wisdom it is of permanent 
value. It can never become obsolete like scientific knowledge. 

Hinduism adopts the attitude of toleration. It recognizes the 
relative truths in all other religions. Its toleration is not a matter 
of policy, or expediency. It is enjoined as a duty. Some great 
thinkers of the world who have studied the spiritual basis of 
Hinduism believe that the basic principles of Hindu religion would 


15 


India 


help to establish a just social order and bring about generous human 
relations among peoples of the world. 

Nationalism is a historic phenomenon; there was a time when it 
did not exist. Its first appearance in Europe was in Germany dur- 
ing the illfamed Thirty Years War (1618-48). Especially after the 
French Revolution (1789) nationalism to some extent took the 
place of religion. If nationalism is regarded as something more 
than the serving of the population of a country, for attainment of 
political independence, we cannot say when exactly it began in 
India. As a political movement we may say it began with the birth 
of the Indian National Congress in 1885. Regionalism, casteism 
and lingulism are factors that affect the development of nationalism. 
India is trying to overcome in her own way the forces that operate 
against national unity and solidarity, by trying to establish a just 
social order bringing about economic improvement of the masses. 

In 1947 India achieved success in her political revolution. This 
was led by the intelligentsia of the country with the support of 
industrialists and merchant community and of the masses under 
the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi. The duration of the active 
struggle for independence was only a few decades. 

With the dawn of independence a social and economic revolution 
was set in motion. The most important aim of this revolution is 
to improve standard of living of the masses by developing on a vast 
scale modern industry and communications system. The number 
of people who can be classed as rich is comparatively small in India. 
The population of India is a little over 439 million. This is bound 
to increase in the future, as the figure of 1961 census shows, the 
birth rate per thousand in 1951 was 40.9, in 1961 it was 40; almost 
static, the death rate has decreased from 27 . 4 to 1 8 . 0 while expecta- 
tion of life at birth has increased from 32 to 45. The problem of 
India’s poverty is very serious. The question is: How quickly 
can the social and economic revolution be effected ? 

A comparison of the earlier industrial revolution in Europe will 
be instructive. Taking -1750 as the beginning of the industrial re- 
volution in Britain we may say that British industry has had nearly 
two centuries in which to develop. France and the United 
States have had a century and a half, Germany a century and 
Russia and Japan half a. century. The example of England 


16 



India — A Paradox 


in the passing of factory laws makes India avoid the incidental 
troubles in the matter of treatment of labour. What time can 
India takeforthe development ofher industry? Her Five Year plans 
provide an answer which will be dealt with in a future chapter. 
Will the rapidity of the increase in India’s population mean that the 
standard of living may not rise but fall? This question too will 
be discussed later, One thing seems clear that the peasants and 
agricultural labourers are already impatient. They cannot put up 
with conditions in which their standard of living will rise only slow- 
ly. On 26, August 1963, the Planning Minister G.L. Nanda pointed 
out that the average per capita ‘consumer expenditure’ of 60 per 
cent of the population was seven and a half annas per day, while 
the opposition put it lower still on the basis of national income. 
Whatever be the actual figure it is a fact that most people in India 
have to spend more than they earn and are therefore for ever in 
debt. In such circumstances, the problem of improving the standard 
of living of the people is an extraordinarily difficult one for the 
Government of India. 


17 



CHAPTER 


The People of India 


2 


India, contains a larger variety of human types than any other 
country in the world. Palaeolithic and neolithic remains dis- 
covered as far apart as Bellary in Andhra and Mirzapur in Uttar 
Pradesh clearly show that parts of India have been inhabited by 
people from a remote time. However, the theory put forward is 
that the ancestors of the Indians came from a number of regions 
outside India, far removed from one another. 

The population of India according to the census of 1961 is 439 
millions; of them the scheduled castes number 64.5 millions and 
scheduled tribes nearly 30 millions. It is believed that these 
tribes are the oldest inhabitants of India, and that they are akin 
to Negritos and Proto-Australoids. The dominant ethnic strains 
in India are akin to those of the early Mediterranean and the Aryan. 

The process of amalgamation of cultures, religions and languages 
in India began as early as the days of the civilization revealed by 



The People of India 


the excavations at Harappa and Mohenjodaro. This Indus civiliza- 
tion is dated 2500 b.c. The beautiful cities unearthed were built by 
master planners who had had the accumulated knowledge of several 
centuries before them. The remains of this civilization in India 
spread over an area including Kathiawar, Baluchistan, Sind, and 
Punjab right up to Rupar. Whether the originators of this civiliza- 
tion were immigrants from somewhere in the Mediterranean region 
or people indigenous to the soil is still a matter of controversy 
among scholars. 

There is evidence to show that the people of these ancient cities 
left their abodes in a hurry, but why they did so is still largely a 
matter of conjecture; may be due to flood or epidemic or invasion. 
But there is reason to believe that the descendants of those people 
are still to be found among the inhabitants of India; and the question 
Who are they ? is really difficult to answer. 

It may broadly be said that the whites predominate in the North 
West from Kashmir to Rajputana and the blacks in the South. In 
the neighbourhood of Tibet and Upper Burma the Mongolian 
traits of high cheek-bones and yellow skins are in evidence. Ad- 
mittedly the criteria of race are uncertain and one should be wary 
■of importing any racial conflict in India as distinctly different from 
-cultural or religious conflicts. 

According to the census report of 1961 in India the Hindus were 
a little over 366 million (85 per cent); the Muslims about 47 millions 
<10.2 per cent); Christians 10.4millions (2.4per cent); Sikhs nearly 
8 millions (1.8 per cent); Buddhists a little over 3 millions (a little 
less than 1 per cent); and Jains less than the number of Buddhists. 
The number of Buddhists rose nearly eight times in 1961 over the 
.figure of 1951; and this is presumably because of Dr. Ambedkar’s 
preference to Buddhism for scheduled castes. 

The definition of a Hindu according to the law prevailing is bound 
tto be of interest. 

“A Hindu is one or other of two classes of persons shown below 
as ‘A’ or ‘S’: 

Hindu is a person, irrespective of sex, age, mental condition 
-or religious belief, who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew 
.by religion provided (?) that he is domiciled in India, and (zz) 


19 



India 


that he could have been governed by Hindu law or by any custom 

derogating from Hindu law if the Code had not been passed 

(. B ) A Hindu may also be a person, whether domiciled in India 
or not, who is a Hindu by religion. For this purpose all sects 
and developments of Hinduism, even those which are regarded 
as non-Hindu in some respects such as Lingayats or Brahmos, 
are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs are Hindus for this 
purpose. Wherever the word ‘Hindu’ occurs we are to under- 
stand a person to whom the Hindu Code applies though he may 
not be in fact a Hindu by religion according to any theological 
definition. .. .A convert to, or a reconvert, to the Hindu, 
Buddhist, Jaini or Sikh religion is a Hindu.” 1 

The four great linguistic families of India are : (1) Indo-Aryan 
(2) Dravidian (3) Austric (4) Sino-Tibetan. At present languages 
of the Indo-Aryan family prevail practically in the whole of Northern 
India and Maharashtra, while Eastern Deccan and South India 
constitute the Dravidian Zone. 

Recent studies of language have established the existence of 
another group of languages, called Munda or Kolarian, which 
belong to the Mon-Khmer family of languages found in Indo- 
china and are distantly related to other groups falling under 
Austro-Asiatic. The speakers of these languages are now found 
in the Mahadeo hills (Kurku tribe), in the Himalayas, and most 
of all in Chota Nagpur (about 3,000,000). They are mostly 
dark skinned aborigines, but their wide diffusion shows that 
they must once have occupied a much wider area than now, a 
conclusion supported by the analysis of place-names. The Munda 
languages are certainly as old as the Dravidian, probably 
much older. Some hold that the Aryans met and mingled with 
the Munda people, and that the changes in the phonetics and 
vocabulary of the Vedic language can be explained on the basis 
of Munda influence much better than on that of Dravidian. 
The almost total disappearance of Munda languages from the 
North in contrast with the continued survival of Dravidian 

i Introduction to Modern Hindu Law, Duncan. M. Derrett, p. 18-19. 


20 



The People of India 

speeches in the South may also indicate that Munda civilization 
was less solidly organized than Dravidian . 2 

We do not yet have a clear picture of the origin and early culture 
of the Dravidian-spcaking people. But it is clear that pre-Aryan 
inhabitants in India were not only people speaking dialects of the 
Dravidian languages but also others. The Vedic mantras men- 
tion the names of about forty tribes who inhabited the regions 
known to their composers. The centre of this region was a district 
round the Saraswati, south of modern Ambala. These tribes were 
not primitive. They tilled the ground, raised crops of various 
kinds and worked in metals. There is evidence to show that they 
traded with foreign countries exporting teak, peacock, spices, 
pearls and probably woven cloth. 

Caldwell indicated a connection between Susian and Dravidian 
languages as regards structure. Some ancient place-names in the 
highlands of Iran and Mesopotamia have been shown to conform 
to Dravidian forms. The construction, organization and rituals 
of the temples of ancient Sumeria had much in common with 
temples of South India. All these show that there was considerable 
communication between South India and Western Asia in remote 
times. However, it is difficult to draw definite conclusions about 
the Dravidians, for the oldest works now available in Dravidian 
were written long after their contact with Aryan culture. 

The early history of India is based on the theory of the Aryan 
invasion of India propounded by anthropologists and philologists 
who were struck by the similarities between Sanskrit and Germanic 
languages. It cannot at present be definitely stated whether the 
Dravidian people came to India from outside or were the natives 
of the country, though most western scholars regard them as the 
people of the Mediterranean region. 

In historical times new elements entered the ranks of Indian 
people. Their effect on the composition of the Indian society was 
proportionate to their numbers. Till about the seventh century 
B.c. mingling of these groups with the inhabitants of India went on. 
Those who livefi at the foot-hills and mountains of the Punjab, 

* History of India, K.A.N. Sastri, Part I. p. 28. 


21 


India 


Kashmir, and upper Tarai of the Eastern Himalayas appear to 
have kept a little aloof from the general current of culture. In 
the thick forests of Western India there were perhaps tribes who 
may have resisted changes then as now. Generally speaking, the 
mingling of the people brought about a composite culture pre- 
dominantly Aryan. The Aryan social organization and norms 
appear to have been accepted by the people. In those days inter- 
marriages were common. There were no restrictions about inter- 
dining. Society placed no impediments to a man’s desire to better 
himself and religion was largely regarded as an individual’s own 
affair. Even in those early days people appear to have accepted 
the doctrine of Karma and Rebirth. They believed that man 
enjoyed the possession of the good things of this world according 
to his good or bad deeds in past life. It was this belief in the 
doctrine of Karma, that was largely responsible for promoting a 
spirit of tolerance. 

The Persians came to India in the seventh century before Christ. 
The Macedonians were followed by the Greeks in the wake of 
Alexander in the fourth century b.c. For nearly two hundred 
years the Parthians, and Bactrians from across the Hindu-kush 
continued to pour into India. Then came the Sakas and Pahlavas. 
The Kushans and other tribes from Central Asia made the Punjab 
and North Western Frontier Province as their home. The Huns 
came, in somewhat larger numbers, at the close of the Gupta epoch. 
They established their authority in the Punjab. When Mihrgula’s 
territory was invaded he took refuge in Kashmir and made it a 
jumping off ground for his return to the Punjab. All these people 
were Indianized. Few tangible traces remain of their original 
identity. It seems probable that the Rajput dynasties that came 
into prominence in the seventh century a.d. had a large measure of 
Hunnish blood in their veins. When in the eighth century a.d. 
the Muslims conquered Persia and forced people to embrace Islam, 
the Parsis who found it impossible to live peacefully in Persia sought 
refuge in India. The Parsis though small in number have played a 
great part in the commercial and industrial development of India. 
To this day they have retained their religion and culture, while the 
other newcomers before them had accepted Hinduism or Buddhism 
as their faith. 


22 



The People of India 

Colonies of foreigrf merchants settled along the coast, particularly 
in South India, from the beginning of the Christian era, if not 
earlier. The Moplahs of Malabar are the products of union 
between Muslim merchants from Arabia and the women of the West 
Coast. The Muslim immigration into India began with the Arab 
invasion of Sind early in the eighth century culminating in the es- 
tablishment of the Mughal Empire in the sixteenth century. Among 
the Muslims that came to India were Iranian Muslims akin to Indo- 
Aryan, Turks, and Mongols. Their merging with the people and 
conversions of the indigenous population to Islam tended to assimi- 
late the Muslims to the rest of the population in general appearance 
but they continued to follow their religion. It must be noted that 
the converts to Islam kept up a large part of their customary law. 
Even now there are sects among Muslims to whom the Hindu law 
applies. A common heritage of Hindus and Muslims is veneration 
for saints and love of festivals. 

There is a tradition of doubtful authenticity that St. Thomas, 
one of the apostles of Christ, came to India from Syria in the early 
decades of first century A.D. and was martyred. It is unnecessary 
for us to get into the details of the Northern and Southern theories 
on the martyrdom of St. Thomas. Syrian Christians in the state 
of Kerala claim that they belong to the church founded by the 
Apostle Thomas in person. Whatever may be the truth about the 
visit of St. Thomas there is good reason to believe that Christians 
were established as a body in India by the third century a.d. Syrian 
Christians number about a million at present. The Jews came to 
India but not in large numbers. Now there are two communities 
of Jews living at Cochin in Kerala. Both of them claim to have 
sought refuge there, after the destruction of Jerusalem by Romans 
in 70 a.d. 

The Portuguese were the first Europeans to come to India. They 
were soon followed by the Dutch, English, French and Danes. 
The Europeans who came to India did not make India their home. 
Their presence in India, however, added what is called the Anglo- 
Indian strain to the country. They are Christians in religion and 
descendants of Indian mothers and European fathers. They have 
adopted a kind of European way of life. Their number is small. 

Thus we find that the people of India belong to different ethnic 


23 



India 


types, follow different religions and speak different languages. 
But they are heirs to the composite culture of India. They are all 
equal citizens of India and are proud that they are Indians. 


24 



CHAPTER 


Background of History 


3 


A Panoramic View of Hindu India 

We have noted that Indian history shows a ternary sequence. 
Chronologically it divides into the Indo-Aryan, the Indo-Islamic 
and the Indo-British cycles. Each cycle is clear cut and at the 
same time indivisible against what precedes and follows it. Is the 
dominant civilization of each cycle a separate species of civiliza- 
tion? Is Indian history fundamentally discontinuous? These are 
questions which elicit different answers from scholars. This is not 
the place where we can discuss the matter in all its details. We 
may, however, say that there is a continuity in the administration, 
social system and culture of India in spite of the apparently dis- 
continuous, not to say, contradictory cycles. Thanks to the patient 
work of indologists Indian history has reached a stage when it can 
present its own synthesis. The generalizer on Indian history with 
a little will power to get rid of any prepossession that may blur his 
vision can now say with the French historian, FuStel de Coulanges: 



India 


“No applause for me, please, it is history which is speaking through 
my mouth.” 

The Indo-Aryan period is the longest in Indian history, for it 
covers the field from the Vedic age to 1200 a.d. The magnificent 
urban civilization of Harappa is still regarded as part of the proto- 
historic age. Further researches may show clearly its indigenous 
roots and affiliations with Sumer. 

The Bharatas, according to the Rig Veda, seem to have been the 
first to adopt the fire rite which still continues in Brahmanical 
Hinduism. A fire cult of some form or other existed in old days 
among the Chaldeans, the Persians, the Greeks, the Italians, the 
Semites and burnt offerings were given to the gods by almost all 
the nations of antiquity. But the Indian fire cult has peculiar 
characteristics' which indicate its special development in India, 
independent of foreign influence. Among no other people was the 
fire god so definitely anthropomorphized as by the Indians. 

The people that inhabited the Punjab and the upper Gangetic 
valley in the age of the mantras were not roving hordes of pastoral 
tribes, but lived in an organized society. They lived in families in 
villages. The father was the head of the family. They were ruled 
by kings, many of whom are mentioned by name. Interesting 
among them are IkshvSku and Santanu and the doughty warriors, 
Sudas and Trasadasyu frequently referred to. Kings resided in 
forts, sat on a throne “of iron columns, decked with gold”. They 
were surrounded by ministers, and heralds proclaimed their glory. 
There were messengers to convey their commands. The mantras 
of the Rig Veda make us feel sure that the life of the gods was 
modelled on that of mortal kings. Satapatha Brahmanam says, 
“the course pursued among the gods is in accordance with , that 
pursued among men.” We have it that kings attended assemblies 
clad in robes of state. Hindu royalty was more or less modelled 
on descriptions given in the Rig Veda mantras. 

Caste as we know it now in India did not exist in ancient times. 
But the three higher castes are frequently mentioned and the Sudra, 
more than half a dozen times in the mantras. In that age priests 
were generally Brahmanas, but Rajanyas like Viswamitra and 
Devapi also acted as priests. These were exceptions. BrShmanSs 
■were generally purohits. Though the people were divided into 


26 



Background of History 


‘castes’ there was no restriction with regard to marriage. Professions 
too were not restricted to castes. During the age of the mantras ,, 
the influence of the BrahmanSs steadily increased and their claims 
to social predominance insistently urged. The BrahmanSs re- 
cognized the necessity for deserving the respect of their patrons 
and shaped their lives accordingly. 

In the time of the Buddha, the Pali texts bring to light the four 
great kingdoms of Kosala, Magadha, Avanti and Vamsa and, what 
is more interesting, numerous republics. 

Between the monarchies and the republics there were constant 
conflicts. It was no easy job for the king of Magadha to subjugate 
the republican Lichchavis. They were the leaders of a vast con- 
federation of thirty-six states. In the Buddha’s opinion they were 
invulnerable and invincible because they were keeping up all con- 
ventions “making for the strength and success of a republic, such 
as holding full and frequent assemblies, unity of counsel and policy, 
maintaining old traditions, institutions, and worship, reverence to 
elders, honouring women and ascetics” and so forth. The king 
of Magadha, however, invaded their territory and after a long and 
arduous struggle defeated and conquered the Lichchavis. 

Videha originally started as a kingdom and a strong-hold of 
Vedic culture; the greatest exponents of Vedic culture there were 
king Janaka and Rishi Yajnavalkya. It is interesting to find that 
Videha which had been a monarchy with its many distinguished kings 
was a republic in the Buddha’s time. The Buddhist texts show that 
the Lichchavi republic had a parliament which often met and that 
the members had great respect for their ancient laws, customs and 
institutions. 

Alexander on his way back home after a successful campaign in 
the Punjab met with stubborn resistance from the Brahmanas in 
the states on Ravi and Beas. The BrahmanSs were the real power 
behind the throne and determined to enter into politics. They 
denounced the submissive princes as traitors and goaded the re- 
publican peoples into revolt against Alexander. They were all, 
however, put to death by Alexander. 

The first largest empire about which there is clear recorded 
evidence was the Mauryan empire, founded by Chandragupta with 
the assistance of his master and minister Chsnakya, also called 


27 



India 


Kautilya. Kautilya’s Arthasastra, accounts of Megasthenes and 
the inscriptions of Asoka, grandson of Chandragupta, give a 
complete picture of the polity of the time. The kingdom of Magadha 
which Chandragupta took over from the Nandas was extensive 
and well-organized. 

In the days of the Mauryans there were large states under absolute 
monarchs. In spite of their hostility to non-monarchical states, 
the republican clans continued to maintain their individuality. In 
this period there was a transition from a rural to money economy. 
The volume of international trade increased. Diplomatic mission 
and growing travel multiplied opportunities of contacts and ex- 
changes among the different nations. 

The general theory of Ancient Indian Polity was that the king 
was only the guardian of the law and not its maker, and that his 
orders should conform to established principles of Dharma and 
social usage. The Mauryan Government was an elaborate 
bureaucracy with a full complement of departments and a carefully 
graded hierarchy of officials, urban and rural, with well defined 
duties. The Arthasastra describes over thirty departments of 
Government each under a superintendent ( adhyaksha ). The king 
led a strenuous life. Diligence in the affairs concerning the wel- 
fare of the people was his first duty. Ministers were of two grades — 
mantris who formed the cabinet and amatyas. The king should 
consult mantris and be guided by the majority opinion on all im- 
portant matters of state. 

The government of the capital was almost on the model of the 
present corporation in cities but with enlarged functions. The 
town Council of Pataliputra, the capital of Magadha, functioned 
through six committees or boards dealing respectively with (1) the 
industrial arts, (2) the entertainment of foreigners, (3) the registra- 
tion of births and deaths, (4) trade and commerce including weights 
and measures, (5) supervision and sale of manufactured articles 
and (6) collection of tithes on sales. 

The empire was divided into a number of provinces under 
governors or princes acting as viceroys. There were courts to 
administer justice besides village tribunals where petty disputes 
were settled by the headman and the elders. The procedure in the 
courts conformed to rules regarding plea, counter-plea and rejoinder. 


28 



Background of History 

There was a regular system of appeals right up to the king’s court. 
There was a large standing army adequate for all the needs of the 
empire, internal and external. Kautilya lays it down: “The happi- 
ness of his subjects is the happiness of the king; the good of the 
subjects his good. What pleases him is not good for the king but 
what pleases his subjects is.” The Mauryan administration set the 
model for Hindu kings of various dynasties that came after the 
Mauryans. 

Chandragupta’s grandson Asoka showed by precept and example 
that the Chakra of Power and Chakra of Dharma could be wielded 
by a single hand. In his time the Mauryan Empire extended as 
far as the Northern boundaries of Tamil kingdoms. He sent out 
missionaries for the propagation of Buddhism to Ceylon and other 
countries. He is regarded as one of the greatest monarchs of the 
world, for he renounced war after a resounding victory, and be- 
came the most eloquent exponent of the philosophy of non-violence, 
Dharma Vijaya as he puts it. The state seal of the Government 
of India today depicts the capital of one of his pillars, that is at 
Saranath. However, his attempt at the propagation of Buddhism 
throughout India was not a success. The power of Magadha de- 
clined afteHhim, when the Bactrian-Greeks, the Parthians and the 
Sakas .poured into India. We have already said that they merged 
into the Hindu fold. 

Then the Kushans established a great kingdom in North India 
and this reached its peak in the second century a.D. This kingdom 
extended from the North Western passes right up to Benares in 
the East. The Kushans held sway in Central Asia also. Thus their 
empire served as the meeting ground for the then cultural traditions 
of India, China, Persia and the Greco-Roman world. It was 
during the Kushan rule that Mahayana Buddhism took shape and 
Gandhara art produced beautiful sculptured images of the Buddha. 

On the Deccan and the East Coast there arose a mighty dynasty 
named the SstavahanSs, which may be principally regarded as 
the successor of the empire of Magadha. On account of barbaric 
encroachment in the North, the centre of Aryavarta was moved to 
the banks of the Godavari. From Paithan on the Godavari the 
Satavahanas waged a holy war of Dharma. These were Andhras 
who were powerful from the second century b.c. to the third 


29 



India 


■century a.d. After independence the Andhras looked back on 
their past with pride and their regional loyalty could not be satisfied 
until they got the Andhra State on linguistic basis. At this time 
the three Tamil kingdoms of the Chera, Chola and the Pandya sent 
out sailing vessels to South East Asia carrying Indian culture to 
■Cambodia, Thailand and Indonesia. Later Orissa and Gujarat 
•also traded with the countries of South East Asia. 

A hundred years after the fall of the Kushans, Chandragupta I 
•established in 319 a.d. the Empire of Guptas. His son Samudra 
Gupta (330-80 a.d.) was one of the most brilliant conquerors in 
history. In a whirlwind campaign he subdued most of the kings 
in a large part of the country. He restored Dharma in Aryavarta, 
•and performed an Asvamedha. His younger son Chandragupta 
Vikramaditya (380-415 a.d.), the original Vikramaditya according 
to one view, annexed Western India and transferred the capital to 
Ujjain. It was during his reign that the great poet Kalidasa and 
several other scholars lived. India reached the pinnacle of glory 
under him. His son and grandson Kumara Gupta and Skanda 
Gupta (415-67 a.d.) maintained the empire and upheld Dharma. 
The age of the imperial Guptas is considered as the golden age 
of India, for there was a glorious revival of Hindu Dharma, art and 
literature. About 447 a.d. came the Huns and the Gupta Empire 
declined. In 500 a.d. Toramana, the Hud, occupied Malwa. 
Yasodharma of Malwa- succeeded in rallying the national forces 
of Aryavarta and breaking the power of the Huns. It is said 
that the princes of all India from the Brahmaputra to the Western 
Ocean, from the Himalayas to Mount Mahendra laid their heads 
at his feet. After him there was a brief period of confusion. 

In the first decade of the seventh century came Harsha to the 
throne of the imperial Kanauj. Soon he became the Emperor of 
North India. During his period there were two other powerful 
emperors, one in the Deccan and the other in South India. Pulakesin 
II, the Chalukya inflicted a heavy defeat on Harsha who invaded 
the Deccan and came to be called the Lord of the South. The river 
Narmada remained the boundary between the dominions of Harsha 
and Pulakesin II. The Pallava ruler of the time, Narasimhavarman 
I (a.d. 630-68), was a great and powerful ruler. He defeated 
Pulakesin II and invested his capital Badami. 


30 



Background of History 

The Pallavas succeeded the Satavahanas and ruled for six centuries 
from about 275 a.d. It was in the time of the Pallavas that the 
Sanskritic culture became prominent in South India. The rock- 
cut temples as in Mahabalipuram show the high standard of sculpture 
and architecture reached by the Pallavas. 

The next great ruler of India who revived the memories of 
Vikramaditya was Mihira Bhoja. He ruled the Empire of 
Gurjaradesa from 836 a.d. to 888. Bhoja conquered Sind and 
reconverted the people who under pressure of the Arabs had em- 
braced Islam. He supported Brahmana Shati, the king of Kabul 
in his fight against Islamic aggression. He held in check the 
Rashtrakutas in the South. His sway extended from the Punjab 
to East Bengal, 

Between 1020 a.d. and 1044 there was another Bhoja who is 
regarded as one of the greatest emperors of the land. Pie was a 
poet, a patron of learning, a builder of great imagination, a con- 
queror and great philosopher. He belonged to theParam dynasty. 

In South India the period 815 a.d. to 1200 witnessed the rise 
of the Cholas to an imperial position. We have no place here for 
their frequent wars with Rashtrakutas and later with the Chalukyas 
of Kalyani. The founder of the Chola dynasty was Vijayalaya 
who made Tanjore his capital. Rajaraja and Rajendra were the 
two greatest rulers of the dynasty. The great Brihadisvara temple 
at Tanjore was built by Rajaraja. Towards the close of his reign 
he conquered the Maldives. Rajendra who succeeded him main- 
tained friendly relations with Sri Vijaya, the maritime empire of 
Sumatra. But his digvijaya across the seas led to a breach with 
Sri Vijaya. Rajendra’s capture of the capital of Sri Vijaya 
(Palembang in Sumatra) and of Kadaram (Keda on the west coast 
of Malaya) was a great event. The kingdom was restored to the 
ruler on his acknowledging Chola suzerainty. The Cholas continu- 
ed the Pallava tradition of temple architecture. The imperial age 
of the Cholas (850-1200 a.d.) was the golden age of Tamil culture. 

Hindu imperialism differs from other imperialisms in that the 
defeated monarch was allowed to rule as an independent king if 
he respected the authority of the imperial power. The conquered 
people were not enslaved nor were they disturbed from their hold- 
ings. The Hindu kings could never be autocratic because they 


31 



India 


j were governed by Dharmasasira. Those who defied the rules 
relating to Danda and Niti formed the exceptions. However, 
most Western writers characterize the rule of Hindu kings as absolute 
monarchs. Key industries and enterprises such as mines, forests, 
spinning and weaving were under state control. Irrigation works 
were all important. The assumption of Western historians is that 
the monopoly of water supply provided the basis for the absolutism 
of the monarch. However, the fact remains that Hindu kings were 
really less despotic than their contemporaries elsewhere. 

During the confusion of the seventh, eighth and nincth centuries 
appeared the Marathas of the Western Ghats and the Rajputs. The 
latter were a military aristocracy who played the role of the ancient 
Kshatriyas. Through religious rites they became Kshatriyas. 
In their courage and chivalry they remain almost unmatched. They 
established a number of personal kingdoms in North India and 
had to bear the brunt of Muslim invasions in the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries, but their utter lack of unity was largely responsi- 
ble for the success of the Muslims in India. 

The observance of Vedic rituals, common cultural traditions, 
places of pilgrimage in widely separated points in all directions in 
the country, the knowledge of the epics ( Ramayana and Maha- 
bharata ) and the put-anas that permeated the masses and the reliance 
of kings on their BrahmapS advisers — all these aided the process 
of cultural unification of the peoples of India. 

A.L. Basham’s impression of the Hindu period is that “in no 
other part of the ancient world were the relations of man and man 
and of a man and the state so fair and humane. In no other 
civilization were slaves so few in number, and in no other ancient 
law-book are their rights so well protected as in Arthasastra " . 
There is no doubt that the people of Hindu India enjoyed life, and 
delighted both in the things of the senses and the things of the spirit. 
The rishis of ancient times 'often were really very human men, full of 
the joy of life. They had no pessimistic contempt for the good things 
of the world which later rishis and unorthodox religious leaders 
like Mahavira and Buddha have filled the Indian thought with. 

The Hindu social system, in spite of the increasing rigour of 
caste system, reached a higher level of kindliness and gentleness in 
human relationship than any other contemporary society. 


32 



Background of History 


The Hindu achievement in religion, philosophy, art, literature 
and mathematics, particularly in the age of the Guptas, stands 
almost unequalled. Asceticism and the philosophical speculations 
of Sankara, Ramanuja, and Anandtirtha did turn people’s minds, 
towards ethical and moral values in life but they did not rob the 
people of their joy in life because of their inherent capacity to rise 
above tradition in several respects. We shall in a separate chapter 
deal with the bases of Hindu society, namely the joint family, the 
caste system and the village community as the political unit. 

2. OUTLINE OV MUSLIM RULE IN INDIA 

(i) The Sultanate of Delhi 

About the time that Harsha was ruling in India, there was a 
great upheaval in Arabia, owing to the teaching of Muhammad. 
He claimed priesthood in his own right about a.d, 61 1 and began 1 
his reforming task with a zeal unparalleled in the history of the 
world. He adopted the faith of Islam which means peaceful ac-' 
ceptance of God and submitting oneself to His will. The two- 
basic principles of the faith are : there is but one God and Muhammad 1 
is his apostle. In Muhammad the series of apostles reached its. 
culmination, and “the Koran revealed through him final and un- 
changeable revelation of the Divine will abrogating all previous; 
records of revelation”. 

' The people of his native town Mecca opposed him and he escaped! 
to Medina in a.d. 622 which begins the Islamic Era. He ulti- 
mately succeeded in winning over the townsmen of Mecca. 
Muhammad combined in his person priesthood and royalty and 
before his death in 632 it had become clear that Islam “involved 
the setting up of an independent community with its own system of 
government, laws and institutions.” Islam recognized neither 
priesthood nor an organized church. Within ten years of 
Muhammad’s death Syria, Iraq and Egypt embraced Islam and 
formed part of the Islamic Empire. With astonishing rapidity 
Islam expanded into Morocco, Spain, and France, to the gates of 
Constantinople, far across Central Asia, and up to the Indus river.-. 
Early in the second decade of the eighth century Sind was conquered! 
by the Arabs. The Hindu resistance prevented the further expansion 

33 



India 


of Islam in India. The Muslim incursions into India began again 
in the eleventh century a.d. after a lapse of nearly 300 years. It 
was not the Arab Muslims that came to India, but the Turks and 
the Afghans. Somehow or other the Arab energy appears to have 
declined in the tenth century. In Persia, the Arab nomads of the 
desert and the Turks, the nomads of the steppes, met. Thereafter 
Islam itself took a different turn, and it is even said that Islam was 
Iranized or Persianized. The cultural centre of Islam was Persia. 
The capital of the Islamic Empire became Bagadad not Mecca. 
The death of Muhammad resulted in a schism in Islam. The 
Muslims became divided into Sunni and Shia sects. The Sunnis 
cover about two-third of the Muslim population. For them the 
Khalif must be elected from among the members of Qurayish tribe, 
to which Muhammad the Prophet belonged. Shias who do not 
number more than twelve million consider Ali (the Prophet’s son- 
in-law) and his descendants as the only legitimate Khalifs. Besides 
these two broad divisions there are other sub-divisions among the 
Muslims to which reference will be made later. 

History shows that the rise of Seljuks to power owing to the en- 
couragement of the Khalif of Bagadad eventually brought about 
the downfall of Islam. They were rabid Sunnis employed to fight 
the Shiites and restore orthodox Islam. They were permitted to 
make Holy War. By the end of the eleventh century they built up 
an empire, which stretched from the Mediterranean to the Arab 
Sea and the Punjab. The Persians were not able to influence the 
Seljuks as they had done the Turks. The fanatic wars of the Seljuks 
and their establishment of feudal states led to the splitting up of 
the Islamic world into petty communities without contact with one 
another. At first Islam was able to overcome the Christian and 
Mazdean peoples with astonishing facility by its tolerance. But 
under the Seljuks this tolerance was replaced by the idea of the 
Holy War which brought about the struggle between Islam and 
Christendom. From the seventh to tenth century the empire of 
Bagadad by its contact with the West, India and the Far East had 
kept up a cosmopolitan civilization. But the Seljuk Empire raised an 
insuperable barrier between Europe and Asia. It is in this context 
that the Holy Wars in India and the appearance of the sea-faring 
West European nations in the Indian Ocean should be understood. 


34 



Background of History 

In the countries to which Islam was carried it was easily possible 
to make mass conversions more by force than by persuasion. No- 
where did Islam meet with such stiff resistance as in India. The 
terror and persecution practised against the Hindus only aroused 
a passive resistance, which it was impossible for Islam to break. 
Hinduism not only remained impenetrable to Islam, but attained 
the highest iiftellectual development. Shankara raised the nation’s 
thinking to the more absolute idealism than that of Plato and the 
other acharyas that followed, effectively checked the spread of 
Islam. But it was Buddhism that suffered most. It became more 
and more relegated by its asceticism to the monastery. Beginning 
to decay from the sixth century onwards, it almost disappeared 
from India with the death blow given to it by the Muslim conquest. 
But Brahmanical Hinduism which had never lost its influence among 
common people quickly recovered. No historian can fail to note 
that, alone of all the ancient religions, Hinduism surviveddhe great 
waves of Buddhist, Christian and Islamic teachings. Hinduism 
is a synthetic religion, and it is capable of bringing about a synthesis 
of cultures. But Islam asserts that it is the only true religion in 
the world and that the others are false. So does Christianity. 
This has made it impossible, for Hinduism to absorb either Islam 
or Christianity, although it did not fail to exercise some influence 
over them. 

The so-called Muslim period of India falls into two main divisions 
which end and begin respectively with the year 1526. The first 
of these periods beginning roughly from a.d. 1001 is a long one 
characterized by continual ferment and confusion. Hindus and 
Muslims were in a state of uninterrupted and fierce struggle. King- 
doms are founded and overthrown; dynasties rise and fall. How- 
ever, during the second period a greater stability prevails and for 
more than three hundred years India is dominated by seventeen 
monarchs of the same dynasty, the Mughals. 

The first period of rule passed through the hands of seven 
dynasties, namely, the Ghazni, the Ghori, the Slave, the Khilji, 
ithe Tughlak, the Sayyid and the Lodi. The Ghazni rule was 
confined to the Punjab. It was Jaipal, the prince of Lahore in the 
Punjab, that anticipated danger from the Lord of Ghazni and 
sought to reduce his rival’s power by means of an incursion into 


35 



India 


Afghanistan, which ended in a friendly settlement. But soon the 
trouble arose. The iconoclast, Muhammad of Ghazni, whose 
fame rests more upon his religious fanaticism than upon his 
military achievements inarched into India several times to plunder 
the enormous treasures which had been gathered in temples like 
Somanath. Famous poets and scholars adorned his court. 
Among them Alberuni, the historian, writes : f 

the Hindus believe that there is no country like theirs, no nation 
like theirs, no kings like theirs, no religion like theirs, no science 
like theirs. They are haughty, foolishly vain, self-conceited and 
stolid. They are by nature niggardly in communicating that; 
which they know and they take the greatest possible care to with- 
hold it from men of another caste among their own people, still 
much more, of course, from any foreigner. 

This is the one side of Hindu nationalism as Alberuni saw it. 
In 1150 Ghazni fell into the hands of the House of Ghori. The 
Ghoris extended their supremacy over the whole lowland district 
of Northern India. The thrilling story of Prithviraj’s light against 
Muhammad Ghori has to be read elsewhere. While disunion and 
treachery among Hindu rulers in India cannot be ruled out, it must 
be pointed out that recent studies discredit the story of feud between 
Prithiviraj and Jayachandra and the latter’s invitation to Muhammad 
Ghori. 

Under Kutub-ud-din, a slave who became king, the Indian territory 
of the Muslims became independent of Ghazni and Ghor, His 
territory extended to Vindhyas. It was during the period of the 
Slave Dynasty that the proud minaret Kutub Minar was raised in 
Old Delhi. All the slave princes were threatened by danger on 
three sides — from Hindus who were the more reluctant to submit 
to a foreign yoke in proportion to the pressure laid upon them by 
the fanatical Muslims, from the generals and governors who were 
attracted by the success which had attended the rise of the first 
slave princes and from the Mongols, whose devastating campaigns 
were continually and rapidly repeated after the first advance of 
Genghis Khan. 

Mention must be made of Raziya, the only Muslim queen who 


36 



Background of History 


reigned upon the throne of Hindustan (1236-39). She was a woman 
of masculine intellect, capable of shouldering the heavy responsibili- 
ties of her position. But, as Firishta says, her only fault was that 
she was a woman. 

Alauddin Khilji was a ruler of some importance. He suppressed 
rebellions with great severity, warded off Mongol invasions and 
extended his sway far into the South, after capturing Devagiri. 
The history of the Deccan during the first century of Muslim rule in 
Northern India witnesses the struggles between the Rajputs and 
the Hindu rulers of the South and the rise and fall of kingdoms 
such as the Maharatta kingdom, the Eastern Chalukya in Andhra 
and the Western Chalukya in North-Western Deccan. To these 
must be added the kingdoms of Ganapati and Bellala and further 
to the south that of Mysore and the earlier kingdoms of Pandya, 
Chola and Chera. 

In about two years Alauddin Khilji with the help of his favourite 
Malik-Kafur was able to extend his power to Cape Commerin. This 
brilliant success in no way diminished the number of revolts caused 
by the Sultan’s universal unpopularity. 

The Mongols who had remained in India embraced Islam and took 
service in army, but in 1311 they were all put to death in con- 
sequence of a conspiracy. During the Khilji period of about thirty 
years, the Muslims adopted several Hindu customs and the Hindus 
began to conform to those of the ruling race. The influence of 
Hindu favourites of the Sultans was a factor in the history of the 
period. Under the Khilji, the Muslim power in India reached its 
first period of great prosperity. Then began the downfall. 

Muhammad-bin Tughlak (1325-51) was perhaps the most striking 
figure of mediaeval Indian history. Really “he was a man of ideas 
and beyond his age”, but as Elphinstone says:. “His whole life was 
spent in pursuing visionary schemes, by means equally irrational 
and with a total disregard of sufferings which they occasioned to 
his subjects and its results were more calamitous than those of any 
other reign.” Next in importance is Firuz who acted with vigour 
and imagination. It is said that in his reign peasants grew rich 
and were satisfied. He abolished mutilation and torture as punish- 
ments for which he deserves unqualified praise. However, his 
resort to the system of jagirs which Alauddin Khilji had discount- 


37 



. India 


enanced cannot be defended. After Firuz the Sultanate practically 
ceased to exist and every province proclaimed its independence. 
One notable event of the period is the inroad of Timur who ordered 
a general massacre of the people of Delhi and sacked the city for 
five days. 

The Empire of Muhammad Tughlak had at one time included 
practically the whole continent of India with the exception of 
Kashmir, Cutch and a part of Kathiawar and Orissa. On the death 
of his grand-nephew Muhammad, it extended only from Delhi to 
Palam, now the suburban airport of Delhi. 

The Sayyids (1414-51) and the Lodis (1451-1526) held the Sultanate 
of Delhi till Baber the Mughal defeated Ibrahim Lodi and captured 
Delhi. In the days of Muhammad Tughlak a strong Hindu state 
was organized south of the Krishna River to offer a united front 
against Muslim advance. This was the kingdom of Vijayanagar. 
Its capital Vijayanagar was reported to be larger and more magni- 
ficent than even Rome. Until 1565 Vijayanagar successfully defended 
South India against Muslim conquest. During the time of Krishna- 
deva Raya, it was at the summit of its glory. North of Vijaya- 
nagar were the disrupted Muslim states of the Bhamani kingdom. 
In 1565 they united together against Vijayanagar, inflicted a crush- 
ing defeat and destroyed the capital. Vijayanagar (in Bellary 
district) even in its ruin shows the splendour of the city and the 
wonderful still of its sculptors. 

The universal state or imperium is one of the characteristic 
features of almost all ancient civilizations. There is indeed a 
similarity in the concept of an imperialistic state between Islam 
and Hinduism. The concept of a single Pan Hindu Imperium was 
first brought into being in India by the martial energy of the 
Kshatriyas. It was symbolized by the Asvamedha and Rajasuya 
sacrifices. The idea was the establishment of Dharma Rajya, or 
kingdom of righteousness. There was no second political concept 
for the Hindu society of old. In the historical age, we find Hindu 
kings striving to establish a suzerainty stirred by the concept of a 
single Pan Hindu Imperium. These kings only partly succeeded in 
establishing an empire, but rivalries resulted in fierce civil war 
among the people. The Muslims too sought to establish their 
sway of the Islamic Universal State. The Khalifate constituted 


38 



Background of History 

a theoretical embodiment of such a state. There was no alter- 
native political thought for the Muslims too. But the theory of 
a Pan Islamic State took shape only after the historic Khalifate 
had decayed beyond recovery. While most nations have evolved 
politically from the smaller to the larger entity, that is from the 
city or tribe to the empire, the Islamic people have reversed the 
order. They began with a universal state and came down to the 
competition of the disintegrated constituents. Legally the Sultan- 
ate of Delhi was a part of the Eastern Khalifate. The line of 
Khalifs in Bagadadcame to an end in 1258; but even after that the 
Sultans of Delhi kept up the fiction of allegiance to the Khalif. 
There were of course a few exceptions. The convention was kept 
up-till the Mughal conquest, when every dependent ruler became 
also the Khalif of his territory. Whatever the theory, the Sultan 
was practically an independent sovereign and the form of his govern- 
ment was despotic. In theory, however, the Sultan was subordinate 
to Muslim law (Shar) which he had to protect and enforce even 
as the Hindu king was subject to Dharma. 

It must be said that Indian nationalism in the sense of resisting, 
attacks on religion and culture began with the invasion of Muslims, 
in India. The idea of protecting the land against foreign invasion 
was also there, but it was confined to the Kshatriya elements in 
the community, real or pseudo. 

One thing that has engaged the attention of all the historians is 
to find the causes of the failure of the Hindus in stemming the tide 
of Muslim conquest. It must be observed first that the Muslims 
had no easy, swift and complete conquest of the country, as it 
happened elsewhere in the world. The Muslims were no doubt 
virile, particularly those that came from the North-West. Soldier 
to soldier, a Rajput, a Punjabi, or a Gujrati horseman was certainly 
a match for any Muslim soldier. The effects of climatic conditions 
on the mind and body are often exaggerated. It is often said that 
the caste system very largely weakened the Hindus in their resistance 
against the Muslims. This does not appear to be true for those 
that were in the army were not all Kshatriyas, Nor could it be 
said that lack of unity among the Hindu rulers was a major cause 
for the defeat of the Hindus. Although the country was not under 
a single ruler, yet impelled by patriotism, the rulers combined to 


39 



India 


.attack the invaders. The use of elephants in war is often pointed 
'out as a cause of Hindu defeat. The elephants no doubt behaved 
badly at times, but their value as an instrument of destruction was 
recognized even by the invaders. In the absence of artillery in 
those days to threaten them off, it was not possible to discard ele- 
phants altogether for purposes of warfare. The real causes of 
Muslim success appear to be the following: their horses were much 
better adapted to warfare than those of the Hindus. The Muslims 
were fired by their iconoclastic and missionary zeal and when they 
found that India did not yield much fruit in conversions, they grew 
pitiless. They believed that if they killed an infidel they would go 
straight to heaven. They knew that the temple fortresses contained 
hoarded treasure and attack on the temple would bring them rich 
reward. Moreover the Muslim practice then was to divide all the 
spoils of war among the soldiers, the commander retaining only 
■one-fifth of the booty. Thus lust for gold and money was an in- 
centive to the Muslims to fight with great severity. If the leader 
is either defeated or killed in the battle, the belief then was that the 
army lost the field. This had a psychological effect on the soldiers 
in the battlefield. After the death of the leader it was very rarely 
that a battle was carried on to a finish. The Muslims came to 
settle in India. They were in the midst of a hostile majority. As 
they had no homeland to go back to, their ferocity increased, in 
proportion to the resistance of the Hindus. 

The Muslim conquest of India was only a part of Islamic ex- 
pansion and it brought India into intimate contact with the Islamic 
empire outside India. 

I (ii) The Mughals 

The sixteenth century marks the beginning of a new era in the 
history of the world. For it was a period when the protestant 
nations of Western Europe successfully overcame the catholic 
sea-power and broke the monopoly of the trade of Spain and 
Portugal. Nearly thirty years before Baber occupied Delhi, 
Vasco da Gama had landed on the West Coast of India and with- 
in a few decades the trade across the India Ocean was wrested from 
the Arabs and Egyptians by the Portuguese. The sixteenth 
century shows the introduction of two new elements in the history 


40 



Background of History 

-of India, the Mughals in the North and the Europeans in the South. 
'The early half of the sixteenth century was a period of constant 
wars in the Deccan and South India, between Vijayanagar and the 
Bahmini Sultanates. The Portuguese allied themselves with the 
Hindu kings but their attempt at forceful conversion of the Hindus 
made them unpopular. The Protestant Dutch came as rivals and 
by their policy of non-interference in religion acquired popularity 
and almost drove the Portuguese out of Ceylon and the East Indies. 
The English who came after the Dutch, sought the patronage of 
the Muslim powers and from the start favoured the Muslims. The 
historian has to take note of the fact that two types of cultures, 
continental and maritime, started to affect the history of India from 
the beginning of the sixteenth century. We are now concerned 
with the continental empire founded by Baber. 

By his mother Baber claimed descent from Jenghiz Khan and 
■on the paternal side Timur was his ancestor, in the fifth degree. 
Having lost his ancestral kingdoms of Farghana and Samarkand, 
he came to Kabul in 1504. When he failed in his attempt to recap- 
ture Samarkand he turned his attention to India. He crossed the 
Indus, and claimed the Punjab as his by virtue of Timur’s conquest 
a hundred and twenty years before. Ibrahim Lodi met Baber at 
Panipat and suffered an ignoble defeat. Baber with his artillery 
was invincible. That was the time when Persia had greater regard for 
India than for Europe for her economic and intellectual life. Baber 
brought with him Persian culture. Baber occupied Delhi and Agra 
and distributed an enormous booty to the victorious army. He 
secured support of some Afghan Chiefs by a judicious mixture of 
firmness and cajolery. The Afghan chiefs who refused to submit 
to him made common cause with the Rajputs headed by Rana 
Sanga, who commanded a vast army. Rana Sanga was a daughty 
warrior who bore the scar, of eighty wounds on his body, besides 
losing an eye, an arm and a leg in the war. Baber’s army quailed 
before the prospect of the conflict with Rana Sanga. In 1527 
Baber was fortunate in defeating Rana Sanga. He subdued the 
Afghan Chiefs of Bengal and Bihar and made himself master of a 
wide realm extending from the Oxus to the frontier of Bengal and 
from the Himalaya to Gwalior. In 1530 Baber took ill and died. 
Baber did not like India or its people. To him the chief excellency 


41 



India 


of Hindustan lay in its vastness and in its hoarded treasures. He 
frankly stated in his intersting autobiography that he could find 
no good food or bread and no rice or cold water, no grapes or musk- 
melons in India. His memoirs contained the personal impressions, 
and acute reflections of a cultivated man of the world, well read 
in Eastern literature. 

Baber’s son Humayun was twenty three years of age at his succes- 
sion. Bengal was still unsubdued, and many of the Afghan nobles 
were still at large. His brothers to whom he was overgenerous 
gave him a lot of worry. Sher Khan, the Sur, inflicted a defeat on 
Humayun and Humayun had to run for his liberty and his life, being 
driven not by the Hindus, but by Muslims. It was on his way to 
Afghanistan that Akbar was bom at Amarkote. The Persians- 
were hospitable to him. He sought shelter under the Persian king 
and lived in exile for nearly fourteen years. Sher Khan who- 
ruled only for five years was one of the ablest men that India had 
seen. His revenue system and postal system have won the admira- 
tion of historians. He died before he could establish his dynasty 
on the throne at Delhi. Within a few years after his death. 
Humayun came back and took possession of Delhi. His stay in 
Persia helped him acquire love of literature, art and Persian way of 
life. Humayun, as Lanepool says, stumbled out of this world as he 
had stumbled into the kingdom. His son Akbar was only thirteen, 
and Bairamkhan, his regent, was an able general and statesman. 
Akbar’s rule in India was contemporaneous with that of Elizabeth 
in England and the Mughal Empire in India was not less glorious 
than Elizabeth’s in England. But Akbar’s immense empire which 
extended over the Indus and Ganges basins and as far the Godavari 
in Central India was essentially a land state. The Sultans of Bijapur 
and Golkanda were forced to accept his suzerainty. It was a pity 
that Akbar was not interested in the sea. He accepted the situation 
of the Portuguese as an accomplished fact. He had no ambitions 
to take over the Hindu kingdoms of the South. During his time 
trade with foreign countries flourished. The absolutism of the 
Mughal Emperor was more complete than that of the Ottoman 
Sultan. All power and all justice was in the hands of the emperor. 
He was absolute owner of the whole land and was free to govern 
and impose tax as he pleased. The basis of the empire was the 


42 



Background of History 

army. It had 200 thousand men and the best artillery managed' 
by Europeans. There was a corps of 5,000 war elephants. But 
of Akbar it must be said, that he did not want to be a despot. He 
took the advice of his able ministers like Todar Mai, Man Singh 
and Abul Fazl. He recognized that even with absolute power and 
an army manned by foreigners it was impossible to rule the country 
wisely, unless he made the state secular. He granted almost equal' 
rights of citizenship to Muslims and non-Muslims. He deliberately 
suppressed the inferior status of Hindus by exempting them from 
the land tax imposed on non-believers. He followed a conciliatory 
policy towards Rajputs, and succeeded in winning over the Rajput 
princes except Rana Pratap Singh of Mewar. Being attracted by 
Brahmanic thinking and educated in Persian mysticism he tried to' 
combine the essentials of Hinduism artd Islam in his new religion 
called the Din-Ilahi. The emperor worshipped the Sun. He 
kindled in the palace a sacred fire never to be extinguished. But 
unfortunately the new religion found favour neither with the 
Hindus nor with the Muslims. Only a few adherents of Akbar 
followed it. 

His court was splendid and the court manners were well regulated. 
European travellers have given splendid accounts in admiration of 
his court. Being surrounded by immense luxury Akbar needed 
evergrowing resources. With the help of Todar Mai, he had the 
land surveyed and taxes fixed. Land tax was fixed at one-third, 
of the gross yield but soon it increased to a half. It must be said 
that Akbar did not succeed in relieving the poverty of the people. 
The administrative service set up for collection of taxes developed 
into a fiscal aristocracy which later became the instrument of 
oppression. 

Akbar introduced into India the magnificence of Persian architec- 
ture and literature inspired by Persia. He was by far the wealthiest 
ruler in the world. The city of Fatehpur Sikri which Akbar laid out 
and built as his capital is an example of a combination of Hindu 
and Muslim conceptions. While the higher officials, except for 
a few, were Muslims, the power bureaucracy predominantly re- 
mained Hindu. 

Akbar left to his successors three essential lines of policy ; mainten- 
ance of the national state, conciliation of the Hindus, and unifica- 


43 



India 


tion of India. Akbar died in 1605 and his son Jahangir ascended 
the throne. Both he and his successor Shajahan maintained in 
some measure the first two principles of Akbar. It was only 
Aurangzeb, Shajahan’s son, that deliberately violated all the princi- 
ples of Akbar with disastrous consequences. All the Mughal 
rulers did their best to secure the unification of India but they did 
not succeed, Jahangir was an orthodox Muslim but he often visited 
Hindu religious men and showed them great respect. Akbar had 
introduced Persian as state language and in Jahangir’s time Persiani- 
zation of the court was more pronounced, particularly because 
of his wife Nurjahan, a Persian lady, who had very great influence 
on her husband. 

Shajahan who succeeded Jahangir followed the Deccan policy 
of Akbar very vigorously, but the Deccan Sultanates united to 
resist Mughals. Shajahan started a campaign in the South and 
captured Doulat-a-bad. The Sultans of Bijapur and Golkonda still 
remained to be conquered. Golkonda accepted Mughal para- 
mountcy, but Bijapur resisted for some time and then yielded. 
Shajahan was satisfied with the establishment of Mughal suzerainty 
in Deccan. But in his external possessions Shajahan was not 
successful. Shajahan was the greatest builder of the Mughal 
emperors. He was able to indulge in his zest for building, for he 
had enormous wealth at his disposal. The Taj Mahal at Agra and 
the Red Fort at Delhi are monumental examples of the magnifice- 
ence of Shajahan’s numerous buildings. His peacock throne whose 
beauty has been extolled by many foreign visitors is a wonder of 
the world. Shajahan was a zealous muslim who destroyed a few 
Hindu temples, but he did not want to oppress his Hindu subjects. 
He firmly adhered to Akbar’s policy of alliance with Rajputs. The 
number of Hindu officers under Shajahan greatly increased, He 
fully maintained the national character of the state, much to the 
dislike of his intriguing son, Aurangzeb. 

Aurangzeb deposed his father and succeeded to the throne. He 
was perhaps the ablest of the Mughal rulers. He was a capable 
general and good administrator, who attended to details with 
meticulous care. But there was a change in his policy. He made 
up his mind to preserve the Islamic character of the state, for to 
him the policy of a national state was the very negation of Islamic 


44 



Background of History 

ideas. He appointed censors of morals to put down un-Islamic 
practices among the faithful; he put an end to Hindu customs which 
had found their way in court ceremonies such as the weighing of 
the emperor in gold. In 1669 he issued general instructions to 
demolish “all temples and schools of the infidels”. Then began 
an active policy of temple destruction. In 1679, more than a century 
after Akbar, he reimposed the poll tax on the Hindus. Taxation 
such as customs duty on non-Muslims only was introduced in con- 
formity with the emperor’s conception of an Islamic state. 
Aurangzeb ordered the replacing of all Hindu officers by Muslims, 
but finding it difficult to secure Muslims for lower ranks of service 
he felt compelled to modify the order. It may be said that with 
the introduction of Jazia the national state ceased and Shivaji who 
was just then rising to power wrote a spirited letter of protest to 
Aurangzeb which ends thus: 

If you imagine piety to consist in oppressing the people and 
terrorising the Hindus you ought first to levy Jazia from Rana 
Raja Singh, who is the head of the Hindus. Then it will not be 
very difficult to collect it from me, as I am at your service. But 
to oppress ants and flies is far from displaying valour and spirit. 

I wonder at the strange fidelity of your officers that they neglect 
to tell you the true state of things but cover a blazing fire with 
straw ! 

Aurangzeb’s policy met with the widest opposition from the 
Hindus, He had to meet revolt of the Rajputs and the pressure 
of the Maharattas in the South. Shivaji had by then occupied 
several fortresses on the border of Bijapur. The Maharattas had 
a great tradition behind them. The area of the Maharattas had 
been one of the great centres of Hindu culture, though the great 
glory that had created the temples of Ellora and Ajanta and the 
great Chalukya architecture had disappeared. The Maharattas 
took advantage of the weakness of Bijapdir and sought to revive 
Hindu culture. Moreover, after the battle of Talikotta (1565) 
Vijayanagar lost its power. Shivaji under the inspiration of 
Ramdas tried to build up a central authority of the Hindus to meet 
Muslim challenge. When Aurangzeb was preoccupied in North, 


45 



India 


Shivaji became independent, and attempts to crush his power both 
by the Sultan of Bijapur and Emperor Aurangzeb failed. Further 
the Sikhs in the Punjab, followers of Guru Nanak (1469-1530) rose 
to power under Guru Govind Singh. Govind established the 
Khalsa and transformed the Sikh community into a military orga- 
nization. When Aurangzeb died in 1707 he had raised against 
the Mughal rule the Maharattas in the South, the Sikhs in the North 
and had alienated completely the Rajputs. The Hindu popula- 
tion was no longer inclined to support the Mughals. Aurangzcb’s 
attempt at the unification of India by the establishment of an Islamic 
■state ended in a thorough failure, and decisively led to the downfall 
■of the Mughal power in India. 

The Maharatta armies made inroads into neighbouring territories 
to extract any tribute or plunder; Maharatta chiefs carved out a 
realm for themselves out of the weakening of the military power of 
the Muslims. 

In 1724 the chief minister of the Mughal Empire became an 
independent ruler of the Deccan. He was the first Nizam of 
Hyderabad. The Mughal Empire broke up into small independent 
■states. In 1739 Nadir Shah of Persia invaded the weakened Mughal 
Empire, defeated the imperial armies, plundered Delhi and carried 
■off the Crown Jewels, including the famous peacock throne of 
;Shajahan. Delhi was again subject to an invasion by Ahamed Shah 
Durani (1756). The Maharattas helped the Mughal Emperor 
.against the Afghans. Maharatta power increased, but suddenly 
failed with the defeat at the third battle of Panipat (1761), at the 
hands of Shah Durani. Shah-Alam II, the Mughal Emperor during 
the last half of eighteenth century (1759-1806) was only a titular 
ruler; he became a pensioner controlled by one power or the other. 
He was under the Maharatta chief, Sindia of Gwalior, until in 
1 803 he came under the British control. The Mughal dynasty final- 
ly came to an end with the establishment of British rule in India. 

.3. British Rule in India 

The Nature of the British conquest of India varies fundamentally 
from that of the Muslims. The Muslim invaders settled within 
the frontiers of India and made themselves part of India’s life, but 


•46 



Background of History 

their political leaders steadily cultivated separatist tendencies, and 
developed a ‘two nation’ theory which in 1947 culminated in the 
partition of the country into Pakistan and India. The Muslim 
■conquest of India may be compared to the Norman conquest of 
England or the Manchu conquest of China, and it may reasonably 
be said that India did not lose her independence during the Muslim 
domination. The British conquest of India drew the country into 
a political and economic system whose centre of gravity lay in 
England thousands of miles away. From the time of their advent 
till their withdrawal in 1947, the British remained completely alien 
to India. 

The British conquest of India was neither sudden nor accidental. 
The East India Company acquired experience and knowledge of 
the political, social and economic conditions of India for a period 
•of 150 years before they decided to compete for primacy. In the 
middle of the eighteenth century, the political situation in India was 
bound up with European politics because of the rivalries among the 
West European nations. Portugal that came to India first retained 
her monopolistic position till the end of the sixteenth century. 
The East India Company was formed in 1600 in the reign of Queen 
Elizabeth. By then the Dutch had superseded the Portuguese in 
the Indian waters. For a hundred years from 1650 to 1750 the Dutch 
were the most powerful, wealthiest and best organized of 
the European trading nations. When their naval power was 
broken, their commercial importance too declined. Consequently 
the East India Company had no other European rival except the 
the French in India. France and England fought what is called 
the Seven Years’ War, in which India and North America were at 
stake. The victory in this war made Britain supreme at sea so that 
all European powers were cut off and Britain was left alone to con- 
test for power in India. The decay of the Mughal power plunged 
India into anarchy and greatly facilitated the British conquest. 
Jahangir allowed the establishment of a permanent English factory 
at Surat (1613). Within a few years the English were able to enter 
the Persian trade. In 1622 the Portuguese were completly defeated 
in a sea fight. The English coveted the spice trade of the East 
Indies and came into conflict with the Dutch at Amboyna but were 
■completely defeated. Never again did the English seriously challenge 


47 



India 


the position of the Dutch in the Malay Archipelago till Lord Minto’s. 
conquest of Java in 1811. After ‘the massacre of Amboyna’ the 
English concentrated their attention on trade with India. The 
beginnings of the British trade in Bengal were marked by factories 
at Balasore (1633) and at Hugli (1650-51). The chief articles of' 
trade were saltpetre, silk and sugar. In 1639 the East India 
Company got the grant of Madras from the Raja of Chandragiri. 
In return for the payment of a small quit rent the English were 
permitted to build a factory and exercise administrative authority 
over the town. Gradually the Company got power to build and 
maintain fortresses, raise armies and maintain naval units, coin 
money and to administer justice. Bombay which Charles II had 
received as a part of his Portuguese bride’s dowry was given away 
to the Company on a small rent of £ 10/- a year. Bombay replaced 
Surat as headquarters of the Company in May 1687. From the 
report of Sir Josiah Child, a prominent member of the directorate 
of the Company, it is clear that the Company hoped for a “sure 
English dominion in India for all time to come”. The Company 
got Kalighat which later developed into Calcutta. In 1700 Bengal 1 
became a separate charge under a president and council at Fort 
William. With the three presidency towns of Calcutta, Bombay 
and Madras as bases the Company started in its career of building 
up an empire in India. 

i In the later half of the eighteenth century, the English were the 
strongest power in the Indian waters and needed only an accession 
to territory to launch them on an imperial career in India. The 
French who were at Pondicherry took the first step by interfering 
in the internal politics of India. In 1746 during the war of Austrian 
Succession they seized Madras but had to return it to the English 
according to the terms of treaty which ended the war. The death 
of the Nizam of Hyderabad gave the English and the French an 
opportunity to interfere in Indian affairs. The French supported 
one contender and the English another. It was at this time that 
Clive rose from the position of a humble clerk to that of a military 
leader by capturing and occupying Arcot, the undefended capital 
of the Carnatic. The English got the better of the French in the 
Carnatic wars. 

The British in Calcutta had trouble with the Nawab of Bengal 
48 



Background of History 

who seized Calcutta. Clive and Watson were sent for the relief 
of the English. The result was the battle of Plassey in 1757. Clive 
contrived to defeat Siraj-ud-daula by intrigue with Mirjafar, the 
Chief Commander of the Nawab. The victory at Plassey was the 
starting point of British conquest in India. At that time Bengal 
was very wealthy and Clive made an immense fortune. Seven 
years after Plassey the British precipitated a war against Mir Kasim, 
an intelligent and capable Nawab of Bengal. In the Battle of 
Buxnr in 1764 the Nawab was defeated. This victory made the 
British almost supreme in North India. The helpless and power- 
less Mughal Emperor gave the British the right to collect revenues 
in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 

For nearly fifteen years after the battle of Plassey the Company’s 
servants indulged in a greedy scramble for wealth. They took 
bribes from Indians and cared more for their private trade than for 
that of the Company. According to the Regulating Act of 1773 
when for the first time the Parliament asserted its right to regulate 
the Company, Warren Hastings an oriental scholar became the 
Governor-General of Bengal. He laid the foundation of the 
British rule in India. His methods of acquiring resources for his 
wars were not above board. Lord Cornwallis who succeeded him 
as the Governor-General from 1786-93 did his best to put an end 
to the corruption among the Company’s officials. He established 
a distinction between the administrative and commercial functions 
of the Company. He organized a separate civil service to administer 
the territory. This was called a covanented service, in which the 
civil servants had to promise not to engage in trade, but Indians 
were scrupulously excluded from higher posts of Government. 

In 1765 the Nawab of Oudh came under the protection of the 
British. The real rivals for primacy in India were the Maharattas 
and the Sultan of Mysore. Hyder Ali was a soldier of fortune, 
who built up a Muslim kingdom in Mysore. He was a great 
diplomat and realized that it was impossible for him to meet the 
British at sea. His son Tippu was a young, energetic and ambitious 
ruler. He established contact with the French and with the Shah 
of Kabul. At that time Napoleon was rising into prominence. 
The Maharattas were really a power to be reckoned with, but it 
-was fortunate for the British that the Maharatta states and dynasties 


49 



India 


were plunged by a series of deaths into a state of faction and rivalries 
which effectively prevented a concentrated action against the 
threatening British power. 

Those were the days when the directors of the East India Company 
at home did not favour the policy of British expansion as it involved 
heavy expenditure in wars inevitably reducing trade dividends. 
By the Act of 1784 the Governor General was not “to pursue schemes 
of conquest and extension of dominion in India or measures re- 
pugnant to the wish, honour and policy of this nation”. The East 
India Company was forbidden to declare war or enter into treaties 
without specific permission of the Board of Control. Lord 
Wellesley, Governor General from 1798 to 1805, pursued a policy 
of aggression and expansion. He had an insatiable thirst for 
honour and an inexcusable contempt for Indians. The presence 
of Napoleon in Egypt afforded Wellesley a pretext to follow his 
policy of aggression. The Nizam of Hyderabad was hedged in 
between two powerful rivals, the Maharattas in the North and 
Tippu Sultan in the South. While the Nizam accepted nominally 
the suzerainty of the emperor at Delhi, Tippu claimed to be inde- 
pendent of the Mughal power. Fear of his enemies drove the 
Nizam to accept the protection of the British. Wellesley thrust on 
him the system of subsidiary alliance by which the Nizam agreed to 
have a British army at his expense in his territory. He agreed also 
not to make war or peace with any other power and to have a 
British resident stationed in his capital whose advice he had to take. 
Thus the Nizam became a vassal of the British. Wellesley was not 
the man to wait for a war to be sanctioned by the Board of Control. 
When Tippu refused to agree to the subsidiary alliance, Wellesley 
launched an attack on Mysore. In 1799 Tippu was killed in battle 
at Seringapatam. The coastal areas of Mysore were annexed by 
the British. The Nizam was given a portion of the territory. The 
rest of Mysore was handed over to a five year old Hindu prince. 
With the subjugation of Tippu only the Maharattas remained. The 
Peshwa who was the real ruler of the Maharattas was in trouble. 
Wellesley persuaded him to accept the subsidiary alliance. In 
,1802 the Peshwa accepted the Company’s protection. The 
Maharatta chiefs made war on the British. The British campaigns 
during 1803-04 against Sindia were successful. The Mughal 


50 



Background of History 

Emperor who had been under Sindia now placed himself in British 
hands. He was allowed to retain his empty title and his sovereignty 
did not extend beyond Red Fort in Delhi. So long as he was 
successful Wellesley’s disregard of directions from England was 
tolerated. But when there was a clear defeat Wellesley was 
recalled, When Wellesley left India he had made conquest vaster 
than those of Napoleon, closed India to the French, destroyed 
the Muslim power of Mysore, dethroned the dynasties of Surat, 
Carnatic and Tanjore, dismembered the states of Oudh, the Nizam, 
the Peshwa, Bhonsle, Sindia and Holkar, doubled the extent of the 
Company’s territory, linked up Madras with Bengal, took the 
Mughal emperor under the Company’s protection and put into 
practice ,the theory of English suzerainty over Indian princes. 

After Wellesley there was a lull in the expansionist policy of the 
British for eight years. Lord Hastings (1813-18) effectively put 
down the Maharatta power, spread British control across Central 
India so that the three ports of Madras, Bombay and Calcutta 
became linked together in British territory. Thus British power 
an India extended over the whole of India except in Punjab, Sind 
.•and Himalayan states. Lord Hastings succeeded in getting hill 
stations from the Nepalese territory like Simla and Nainital. The 
next Governor General of importance was Lord William Bentinck 
<(1828-35). It was during his period that the momentous decision 
•of making English the official language was taken. A resolution 
of the Governor General in Council 7 March 1835 said : “the 
great object of the British government ought to be promotion of 
European literature and science among the people of India and that 
the fund appropriated to education would be best employed on 
English education alone.” William Bentinck’s administration was 
peaceful except for the annexation of Coorg. Lord Auckland 
■carried out instructions he received from home in respect of a war 
with Afghanistan which ended in disaster. The Russian bogey 
acted on the nerves of the British authorities in India and to keep 
Afghanistan as a buffer state was the policy of the British. Ellen- 
boro ugh (1842-44) who succeeded Auckland was a man of vigour. He 
too suffered reverses in his Afghan war. But the failure in Afghani- 
stan was compensated by the conquest of Sind, an act which Napier 
describes “as a humane piece of rascality”. Ellenborough 



45285 



India 


in bringing Gwalior under British rule, but the Board of Directors 
alarmed at the arrogant tone of his correspondence recalled him. 
Hardinge (1844-48) succeeded in defeating the Sikhs. The English 
got Kashmir which they put into the hands of a subservient Hindu 
ruler. 

Next to Wellesley it was Lord Dalhousie who followed the policy 
of expansion and consolidation of the British Empire in India 
successfully. He sincerely believed that it was necessary to annex 
Indian territories and bring them under British power for the 
establishment of peace in India and had no, compunction in annex- 
ing Punjab. By his energetic action he brought Burma under the 
British rule. With regard to the succession of Hindu states in 
India, he used his powers of paramount authority in accepting or 
rejecting adoption. He followed the instructions of the Board of 
Directors that adoption “could never be granted but as a special 
mark of favour and approbation,” on the ground that if a prince 
died without heir his kingdom lapsed to the paramount state. 
Dalhousie annexed Satara, Sambalpore and Jhansi. The honour 
of Royalty was denied to the successors to the Nawab of Carnatic 
and the Raja of Tanjore. The greatest annexation was that of the 
Maharatta kingdom of Nagpur. When he annexed Nagpur he 
said: “I conscientiously declare that unless I believed that the 
prosperity and happiness of its inhabitants would be promoted by 
their being placed under British rule, no other advantages which, 
could arise out of the .measure would move me to propose it.” 
Berar of the Nizam territory was annexed for arrears of rent. On 
the eve of his departure Dalhousie annexed Oudh on the score of 
misgovernment. Impartial British historians have condemned it 
as an act of injustice. It was during Dalhousie’s time that the 
system of communication by railway was introduced. His idea 
was to attract private enterprise by European capitalists who would 
be safeguarded by government guarantee. Along with railways 
went the construction of the telegraph and the introduction of the 
cheap half anna postal system. The Department of Public Works 
was reconstructed in his time. That was a period when England 
was growing into the workshop of the world as a result of the indus- 
trial revolution. Sir Willson Hunter summing up the results of 
Dalhousie’s administration in India says: 


52 



Background of History 


Daring his eight years of rule the export of raw cotton more 
than doubled itself, from one and a half million pounds to close 
•on three millions and one-third. The export of grain multiplied 
by more than three-fold from £ 890,000 in 1848 to £2,900,000 in 
1856. Not only was the export of the old staples enormously 
increased, but new articles of commerce poured into the markets, 
under the influence of improved internal communications and 
open ports. The total exports of merchandise rose from 13 J 
millions sterling in 1848 to over 23 millions in 1856. The vast 
increase of productive industry represented by these figures, 
enabled the Indian population to purchase the manufactures of 
England on an unprecedented scale. The imports of cotton 
goods and twist into India rose from three millions sterling in 
1848 to 6J millions in 1856. The total imports of merchandise 
and treasure increased during the eight years from 10£ to 25 1 
millions. 

Hunter’s intention is to show the commercial prosperity of India, 
but it is clear that India which had been exporting manufactured 
goods had by 1856 turned into a country importing manufactured 
goods and exporting only raw products. By 1857 the East India 
Company was in complete control of India, ruling about three-fifth 
of the country directly and remaining two-fifth indirectly through 
subservient Indian princes. The cumulative effect of Dalhousie’s 
administration was the Sepoy Mutiny of 1857 which the nationalists 
call the First War of Indian Independence. The discrimination 
of the treatment between sepoys and British soldiers, insistence on 
overseas service which offended the religious feelings of high caste 
men in the army, the uneasy restlessness among the civil population, 
widespread unemployment caused by numerous escheats and 
annexations, tire protection of the civil rights of converts from 
Hinduism to Christianity by means of legislation and finally intro- 
duction of greased cartridges made the sepoys of Northern India rise 
in revolt against the British. The trouble began at Meerut, thirty 
miles north of Delhi. The Sepoys refused to use the greased 
cartridges and they were court-martialled. This aggravated the 
situation. The Sepoy revolt spread to Delhi, Kanpur, Lucknow 
and other places. The powerless Mughal Emperor was made the 


53 



India 


leader. Hindus and Muslims joined the fight. This was confined 
only to North India. The Punjab and South India remained un- 
touched by the revolt. The sepoys behaved savagely towards the 
British men and women. The revolt was put down with great 
difficulty after a year of hard fighting. Royal British troops were 
rushed from England to put down the revolt. Lakshmi Bai of 
Jhansi and Nana Sahib and Tantia Topi distinguished themselves 
for their heroism in the fight against the British. The British 
suppression of the revolt was as violent and shameful as the Indian 
sepoys’ inauguration of it. The Indian princes were careful not 
to give room for any suspicion that they supported the revolt of the 
sepoys. The Mutiny left bitter memories and created a social 
estrangement between the English and the Indians. This had a 
reaction on political relations as well. The British administrators 
distrusted the Indians and were unwilling to promote them to 
positions of responsibility. They were definitely disinclined to 
interfere in questions of religion or caste. The Indians on their 
side developed a more critical attitude towards the achievements of 
the West and showed a marked tendency to glorify India's past. 
This Mutiny of 1857 gave the British Government an excuse for 
formally taking over the Government of India directly under 
Parliamentary authority. The Queen of England became the 
Empress of India in 1858. 

Queen Victoria in her proclamation in 1858 promised religious 
tolerance declaring that race or creed would be no bar to office 
under the crown, renounced the doctrine of lapse, and assured the 
Indian princes that the suzerain power would not interfere in their 
internal government except to correct serious abuses. From 1858 
to 1947 India was ruled by twenty-one Viceroys, who were also 
Governor Generals. 

An independent India Council of prominent officials was created 
in 1858. It was invested with full powers over Indian administra- 
tion. In actual practice however, the Secretary of State became 
the chief person both to the India Council and the Parliament. 
The Governor General was assisted by qn Executive Council in 
administration and matters of policy. An India Councils Act of 
1892 introduced some changes in the composition of the Council. 
The members of the Viceroy’s Council consisted of a few elected 


54 



Background of History 

Indian members and they were allowed to ask questions and 
discuss the budget. The Indian National Congress founded in 
1885 represented the educated class and demanded for them a 
share in the administration of the country. In 1909 came the 
Minto-Morlcy Reforms. The number of additional members 
of the Viceroy’s Council was increased to sixty at the centre and 
from twenty to fifty in the Provincial Councils. In the provinces 
non-official members were in a majority but at the centre majority 
of official members were kept in tact. Communal representation 
was brought into effect in election to the legislature. These re- 
forms, however, did not satisfy the people. Then came the great 
war of 1914-18, which brought about a radical change in the 
British policy. The agitation for political rights among the Indians 
increased. In August 1917 the goal of British policy in India was 
announced to be “the progressive realization of responsible govern- 
ment”. The Government of India Act of 1919 introduced the 
‘diarchy* as a transitional stage. Subjects such as law and order and 
revenue were placed under executive members of the Governor in 
Council. Education and local self-government and such others were 
transferred to ministers. The diarchy did not work satisfactorily, 
but this continued until the Government of India Act of 1935. 
The Congress kept up its agitation for self-government. We 
will revert to this subject when we deal with the struggle for 
independence. 

4. ESTIMATE OF THE THREE PHASES 

The coming of the Aryans about the middle of the second mille- 
nnium b.c. may be regarded as the beginning of the first phase of 
Indian history, conventionally called Hindu Period, which is also 
called Indo- Aryan. It would, however, be truer to say that the 
beginning of this period cannot accurately be dated. The Harappa 
civilization lies below the horizon of historical knowledge and its 
relationship to the Aryan civilization is still a matter of conjecture. 
The end of the Hindu period may be dated a.d. 1192, when Muha- 
mmad of Ghor defeated Prithviraj. The second, the Indo-Islamic 
period may be taken as ending with the battle of Plassey in 1757. 
Thus the so-called Muslim period lasted for 565 years. The British 


55 



India 


period began in the middle of eighteenth century. Although the 
British rule was formally terminated on 15 August 1947, India is 
still in a period of transition. The dominant culture of each of 
these three periods varies considerably, but there is an underlying 
unity in the history of India. In the first period India used Sans- 
krit along with Prakrits, in the second Persian together with Indian 
vernaculars such as Urdu and Hindi and in Lhc third English with 
modern Indian languages. The linguistic difference is no evidence 
of discontinuity in the cultural trend of India. 

While there has been an increase in the field of politics from 
period to period, there has been a decrease in quality in the field of 
culture. By far the most original and massive was the Indo-Aryan 
period which with its Vedas, Upanishads, Ithihasas, Puranas and 
Dharmasastras built up a society, the fundamental principles of 
which survive to this day. The Arthasastra in Sanskrit shows the 
development of political science which was a special favourite 
among scholars, from some centuries before the Christian era. 
The Mauryan Empire, the Gupta Empire and the Vardhana Empire 
shows a progress in Indian politics, art and literature. 

The Islamic period, though magnificent in point of architecture 
and remarkable in its unified political structure, was certainly on 
a lower plane culturally than that of the first. The culture of the 
British period in spite of all that is said about scientific inventions 
and technological devices must be regarded as the least solid of the 
three. Garrat in his Essay on Indo-British civilization says : 

It might have been expected that Indian philosophy, litera- 
ture, and art would have received at last a fuller appreciation in 
Europe; and that some new form of civilization might have deve- 
loped from the close contact between England and India. 
Unfortunately it must be confessed that the last 150 years have 
proved the most disappointing, and in some ways the most 
sterile in Indian history. The English, working or domiciled in 
India, have not provided a good channel for spreading abroad 
the more valuable elements of Indian culture. Even more 
surprising is the poverty of harvest from this hybrid civilization, 
from Indians working under English influence, or from English 
inspired by India and the Indian peoples. 


56 



Background of History 


The failure is attributed to conditions of European colonization 
in which Britishers regarded India as a temporary place of living 
for exercising power and making money. The British neglect 
of the Indian craftsmanship is ascribed partly to the policy of the 
British Government and “to the ignorance of hubristic outlook of 
the expatriated Englishman”. The sterility of Indian science 
and art is also attributed to the same causes. The greatest contri- 
bution of Britain to India is the English language which serves as 
the medium of communication between India and the materially 
advanced West. Representative government of the parliamentary 
type and the judicial procedure in courts of law are other British 
contributions of inestimable value. 

In the first phase, the extent to which the Aryan and pre-Aryan 
cultures acted on each other does not admit of a very clear defini- 
tion. The priests and warriors were separated from the bulk of 
the people in social matters. In the age of the mantras the Brahmin 
priesthood worked out an elaborate sacrificial ritual which was 
accepted by the society. These rituals were based on the Vedas. 
Notable among the reactions to the sacrifices and rituals is rise 
and spread of Buddhism. The South was never conquered by the 
Aryan military forces, but the religious beliefs and sacrificial rituals 
evolved in the Ganges valley slowly penetrated the whole of the 
Dravidian society. The South assimilated the modes of thought 
and political institutions of the Aryans, recognized Sanskrit as 
a sacred language and accepted the Vedas and the Upanishads. 
Buddhism and Jainism were also popular in the South, but the 
Vedic religion remained unaffected by them. In consequence a 
homogeneous Hindu culture came to be established throughout 
India. This took a final shape and reached its peak between the 
fifth and twelfth centuries of the Christian era. The bases of the 
social system such as the joint family, caste system and self-suffi- 
ciency of the village will be dealt with separately later. 

In the Indo-Islamic period, bands of Turkish, Arab and Afghan 
adventurers made intermittent raids in search of money and slaves 
throughout the eleventh and twelfth centuries. In 1206 the Delhi 
Sultanate was founded as an independent Muslim state. There 
was no change in the social and economic foundations of Indian 
life, although there were conversions chiefly because of the desire 


57 



India 


of the poor people to escape from the Poll tax, levied on all non- 
Muslims. In this period Arabic and Persian languages were brought 
into India. The Muslim law was introduced and a new ruling 
class was formed. The Afghan rule in India was maintained with 
the help of military force. The new element in the Indian popula- 
tion, namely the Hindu converts to Islam, resisted absorption. 
Hinduism could not reabsorb them, but continued to be tolerant. 
The Muslims and the Hindus did not live in a state of hostility. 
No doubt there was savage persecution of the Hindus in the beginning, 
but necessity of administration made the Muslim rulers take into 
service Hindus in the lower ranks. The Muslims too learned 
the virtue of tolerance. Except under a fanatic ruler, the Hindus 
lived unmolested. After a generation or two the Muslims ceased 
to be foreign and developed social intercourse with the Hindus. 
The Muslim rulers were not less ferocious to their co-religionists 
who stood in their way than they were to the Hindus and Muslims, 
who learned to live in amity, particularly in rural areas. 

The most brilliant period in the history of the Muslim rule was 
that of the Mughals who patronized art, music, painting, poetry and 
architecture. There was a cultural renaissance in the period which 
was rudely shaken by the bigotry of Aurangzeb. The Muslim 
architecture owed not a little to the earlier Hindu design. Hindu 
craftsmen contributed to the magnificence of Muslim architecture. 

The Muslim period shows many writers, saints, and scholars and 
administrators. Ramanuja in the later half of the eleventh cen- 
tury wrote commentaries on the ancient texts and led a crusade 
for Bhakti marga. He threw open the temple of Melkote for a day 
in the year to the untouchables. Sage Vidyaranya made Harihara 
and Bukka renounce Islam and return to the Hindu fold. He 
helped them found the city of Vijayanagar. The celebrated Vedic 
commentator Sayana (died 1387) was the minister of Harihara II. 
Basava of the twelfth century, a minister of the Jain king at Kal- 
yan, was a great social reformer, who spread the Lingayat movement. 
He worked for the emancipation of women and the enrichment of 
Kannada. Among the great names of mediaeval Indian poets that 
of Kabir (1398-1448) is prominent. It cannot be said with certainty 
whether he was a born Hindu or a Muslim. He was greatly in- 
fluenced by Ramananda. Kabir was against image worship. 


58 



Background of History 

pilgrimage and fasts. His teachings had a tremendous influence 
on Hindus and Muslims. Nanak was another mystic saint of this- 
period. He was bom in 1469 in the Punjab. He travelled up and 
down the country— Punjab, Delhi and Utter pradesh. It is said 
that he also visited Mecca and Bagadad. He founded the Sikh 
religion and attempted to unite the Hindus and Muslims. Chaitanya 
in Bengal (1485-1533) had a strong hold over the minds of the 
people. He was a devotee of Krishna and his cult of Bhakti 
spread to Bengal, Bihar, Assam and Orissa. Tulsidas is an out- 
standing example of a man of letters. His memorable Rama 
Chrithamams or Tulsi Ramayana continues to be admired by the 
Indians, As it is in a form of Hindi, the language of the masses, 
it is greatly appreciated. But unlike Kabir and Nanak, Tulsidas 
preaches the cult of formal religion. Tukaram (1608-49) in 
Maharashtra was another religious reformer. Earlier, Nayanmars 
and Alwars in the South spread the Bhakti cult. It is said that the 
Bhakti movement served as a way of escape from the depressed 
feelings caused by the Islamic oppression. But Bhakti movement 
is only an extension of the old Bhagavata movement. Social and 
religious reformers did of course attempt to narrow down the gulf' 
between Islam and Hinduism and promote brotherliness among the 
peoples through the Bhakti cult. 

The third phase of Indian history is dominated by the political' 
and economic conditions created by the industrial revolution . India 
was primarily afield for economic exploitation and for the provision 
of sinecure posts for the nobility of Britain. Politically India 
became a single unit in this period. The British were fortunate in 
getting Indian money and Indian men not only to fight their wars,, 
but also to maintain their dominion in India. The presence of a 
large number of mercenary soldiers who were willing to take up- 
service under anybody who could pay them, shows the poverty of 
the people as well as their lack of a spirit of nationalism. At the 
time when the British came to India, the country was comparatively 
rich, but gradually its economic position weakened because of the 
heavy military expenditure, the top heavy administration and the 
mercantile policy of the British. 

Both in the Indo-Islamic and the British periods there arose a 
new middle class. This consisted of educated men who made their 


59 ’ 



India 


living by taking up service under the government. It also consisted 
of merchants and traders who made themselves rich. The educated 
middle class was in a way cut off from the masses of the people. 
It was thoroughly subordinate to the ruling class, Muslim or British, 
This was certainly an influential section of the community although 
subservient to the ruling class. In the Muslim period there were 
jagirdars who held large tracts of land for the military service they 
had to render to the rulers, During the British rule a new class 
of zamindurs and jagirdars came up and they were free to tax, the 
tenants so long as they paid the stipulated amount to the govern- 
ment. The mass of the people did not very much concern them- 
selves with the affairs of the government so long as they were free 
to follow their traditional occupations. Most of the Muslims were 
■of the same blood as that of the Hindus, although they differed 
in religious pursuits. There was never therefore a racial conflict 
in India during the Muslim period. Racial differences became 
prominent only during the British period. At first the Company's 
•.servants did try to adjust themselves to the new situation in India 
and to live the same kind of life that they found among the Indians 
with whom they came in contact. But when the covenanted civil 
■service and later the Indian civil service came, the officials looked 
•down upon the Indians and behaved as if they were far superior 
to the Indian subject. As they remained in isolation, there was no 
■social intercourse between them and the Indians. Even in the 
•clubs they established, Indians were prevented from entering. 
Throughout the British period the consciousness of a race barrier 
was ingrained and there was a sense of race inequality which roused 
among Indians resentment against the idea of subordination to 
the Europeans. One notable feature of the period was the growth 
of prose literature in the Indian languages and this is considered 
as a mark of modem civilization. 

In the Muslim as well as the British period there was a steady 
•destruction of exclusive privilege of certain sections of the Hindu 
•community. The very poor and down-troaden became Muslims 
and grew to be one-fifth of the population. Christianity too drew 
a small number of the socially oppressed mostly attracted by the 
opportunities for economic improvement. So long as the masses 
of Muslims remained unsophisticated there was no fear of any 


■60 



Background of History 


communal outbreak. But in the nineteenth century, there was a 
resuscitation of the Hindu past which brought about a tremendous 
revival of Hindu traditions. As a reaction to this there was a 
continuous attempt on the part of the Ulema and Muslim politicians 
to complete the Islamization of the Muslims qualitatively and 
increase their number by proselytization, The British policy was 
to exploit the differences between Hindus and Muslims so as to 
strengthen and perpetuate their hold on India. By favouring 
Muslims in recruitment to the military and civil services and bring- 
ing about separate communal electorates, the British Govern- 
ment saw to it that the Hindus and Muslims did not amalgamate. 
The group consciousness of the two communities remembers more 
the differences in religion than cultural similarities. The Hindu-. 
Muslim problem assumed greater and greater dimension and the 
country had to be partitioned at the time of the withdrawal of Britain 
from India. The European affiliation of India has continued 
unabated after independence in 1947. India is a member of the 
Commonwealth of Nations, whose leadership is in the hands of 
Britain. 



CHAPTER 


' Traditionalism and 
Modernism 

. Joint Family 

In this chapter we shall deal with the three pillars of the Indian 
•social structure, namely: the joint family, the caste and the self- 
sufficient village community, and the impact of modern ideas on 
them. In however truncated a form they may exist today they 
reveal the power which helped them to survive the ravages of time. 

' They were responsible for a secure and stable order of society. 
The history of India can be understood only when there is a clear 
conception of these bases of Indian social structure and how they 
have been modified through the ages. 

Let us take up the joint family first. In all societies the family 
is the unit. Some families are patriarchal and some matriarchal. 
Both the types are found in India. The latter is found largely on 
the West Coast of South India, but the former is the commoner. 
In olden days it was usual for all the members of a family, some- 
. times numbering more than fifty, to live together. The head of 




Traditionalism and Modernism 


the family was usually the father and after him the eldest male 
member of the family took his place. The property was held 
in trust by the head of the family, and the other members had a 
share in the produce of the land. The earnings of the members 
were also pooled by the head of the family, and each member was 
given a share according to his needs. The head of the family was 
the law giver and the other members usually obeyed his will. Some- 
times the family would include some members unable to earn on 
account of their physical or mental disabilities. Helpless widows 
formed part of the family. It was a point of pride with every 
member of the joint family to subordinate himself or herself to the 
larger interests of the family group. Each member of the group 
sought to maintain the tradition and honour of the family. Women 
were respected and had an important role to play in family 
affairs. 

This joint family system remained unimpaired till the end of 
the nineteenth century, when ideas of individualism began to affect 
Indian society in general. Paradoxical as it may seem, religious 
thought and spiritual teaching in India have always emphasized the 
individual while the social tendency has been to subordinate the 
individual to the claims of group and society. In this joint family 
system some useless mouths had to be fed. The critic says that it 
promoted indolence among the less able members and led to 
a lack of incentive in the energetic members of the family to 
greater effort and there is some truth in this. The social 
and economic value of the joint family cannot, however, be 
underestimated. That there are practically no Hindu orphanages 
shows the cooperativeness and cohesiveness of the joint family 
system. Helpless members even remotely connected to the family 
were supported. 

History shows that civilization advances parallel with the realiza- 
tion of the value of the individual progress. Individualism and 
progress seem to be inseparable concomitants. The family is a 
part of the framework of the society. The individual lives as a 
member of the family in this framework. For the development 
of the personality of the individual he has to collaborate with his 
peers. 

The criticism levelled against the joint family is that it deprives 

63 



India 


the individual of his liberty. The individual has liberty only to a 
limited extent. Western society stresses more the rights of the 
individual, while the Indian society stresses more his duties. It 
is observed that in India the individual’s obligation to the society 
is generally less realized than his obligation to the family or group 
to which he belongs. There must be a balance between the rights 
of the individual and his obligations to society or group. When the 
balance breaks down to the benefit of the individual, individualism 
becomes egocentric and destructive. If in a country the mass of 
the people are crushed by power of money it means that individual 
liberty has set up an economic dogma which rojects social morality. 
For example economic liberalism of the later half of the nineteenth 
century promoted democracy but in the twentieth century it 
became antithetical to democracy due to concentration of economic 
power in the hands of a few. 

The impact of individualism was felt in India only towards 
the close of the nineteenth century. The break-up of the j oint family 
is due to several causes. For education young men and women 
have to separate themselves from family to live in university centres. 
Occupation often forces the members of the family to live separa Lely 
in distant places. Legislative reform has led to the division of 
property among the members of the family. Sometimes lack of 
adjustment compels couples to break away from the joint family. At 
present only less than twenty per cent of the families continue to 
remain as joint families in India. The ancestors of those who are 
now Muslims lived in joint families before Islam was founded. 
Muslim families continue to be joint patriarchal families. The 
head of the family or his substitute is always entitled to respect 
from the other members of the family. 

In Hindu families marriages are generally settled by the eldest 
member in the family, though separated by distance. The modern 
practice is to allow the prospective couple to see each other and 
give their consent for the marriage. However, marriages where 
the couple see each other only at the time of the bridal ceremony 
are still not uncommon. Though for social and economic reasons 
joint families have been disrupted, still the emotional ties continue 
to operate. Important decisions such as marriages or disposal 
of property are taken by the head of the family. The Land Ceiling 


64 



Traditionalism and Modernism 


Act 1 has resulted in the division of property among the members of 
the joint family. The joint family in spite of its defects has some 
good in it. Young children living in a joint family develop a group 
consciousness and show greater cooperativeness and spirit of 
self-sacrifice. The cohesiveness of the joint family which led to 
the solidarity of the society is now a vanishing landmark in India. 

2. THE CASTE 

After the large joint family the caste was an institution that provided 
social security. Although many books have been written about the 
caste system in India, its exact origin and development are still not 
conclusive. That it is the development of thousands of years is 
mostly admitted. It should be noted that caste is not the same as 
Varna. Mahatma Gandhi supported the Varnasrama Dharma 
but condemned the rigidity and restrictions of the prevailing caste 
system. 

Although in Vedic times the caste system is not found, the ground 
work for its later development is present in Rig Veda. The distinc- 
tion between holy power Brahma, kingly power Kshatra, and the 
commonality Vis is a matter of common knowledge. In the 
Purusha Suktha in the tenth book of the Rig Veda the name Sudra 
appears. This is perhaps the name of some prominent Dasa tribal 
leader. 

There are two conflicting views about caste distinctions. One 
is that they are of divine origin and have religious sanction. The 
other is that the caste somehow developed as a social institution 
without any reference to the four Varnas. The caste system in 
its developed form is certainly peculiar to India. Among the 
causes for its development may be mentioned fear of miscegenation 
and on impure contacts, hierarchical feeling and growth of profess- 
ional specialization with the increasing complexity of social life. 
Gradually restrictions regarding worship, marriage and eating of 
food bound the clans into distinct entities. Totemic Pre- Aryan 
groups were admitted into the social structure, thus increasing the 

1 The principle that there should he a ceiling on land holdings was accepted 
in the First Plan (1950-51, 1955-56). The provisions of the Act have been en- 
forced in all states. 



India 


complexity of Indian castes. Many factors ethnic, geographical, 
professional, economic, sectarian or even merely accidental con- 
tributed to its growth through the centuries. In the age of the 
Guptas (300-550 a.d.) the caste system was still fluid in character 
and instances of inlercaste marriages arc known among royal 
families and might have been practised, though only exceptionally, 
among the common folk. Inter-marriages doubtless played a 
good part in securing the absorption of foreign tribes like the 
Hunas in Hindu society. As regards food, the smritis of the period 
forbid only eating with Sudras, though even here Yajnavalkya 
makes an exception in favour of one’s farmer, barber, milkman 
and family friend. Professions again were not strictly determined 
by caste. BrahmanSs took to arms, trade, and architecture, and 
there were several Brahmin dynasties of rulers and commanders 
of armies, not to speak of officials in the various grades of the civil 
administration of the land. The army must have been open to 
the Vaisyas and Sudras as well. There were Kshatriyas who prac- 
tised trade, and chief officers of a guild of oilmen are expressly 
described as Kshatriyas in a fifth century record. The old rule 
that the Sudras should be content to serve the twice-born might 
have lingered in theory, but no longer represented practice. 
They became traders, artisans and agriculturists, and the law-books 
of the time allow it. The Brahmanas and Kshatriyas were the natural 
aristocracy of the land and doubtless enjoyed social preeminence. 
In the middle ages during the Muslim rule the caste system assumed 
a rigidity which in some form or other still persists. 

The Western social ideal is the good of the individual. But the 
Hindu ideal is the good of the body politic. According to R.P. 
Masani the caste system embodies four principles : (1) that a man’s 
place in society is assigned to him by Providence; (2) that there are 
fundamental differences between man and man as regards, nature, 
disposition, character, capacity, and educability; (3) that individual 
members of society have, therefore, distinct duties and responsi- 
bilities and distinct rights and status suited to their respective 
places in the social organization; (4) that cooperation of the 
various units is essential for the usefulness, happiness, and progress 
of society. In spite of all that has been said against the caste 
system it must be admitted that if Hindu culture has persisted 


66 



Traditionalism and Modernism 


through ages despite political convulsions and social revolutions 
and if it has successfully combated destructive influence brought 
to bear on it by other cultures and civilizations it is due to the 
institution of caste. Again it was this that taught “both high and 
low the art of governing and being governed by the rigid rule of 
caste”. But unfortunately the caste became a closed system making 
society stationary, traditional and unprogressive. It degraded a 
mass of human beings giving them no opportunity for educational, 
cultural and economic advance. However, changes have taken 
place in the caste system and wisdom lies in taking advantage of 
the changing conditions and directing the changes so that as 
Jawaharlal Nehru says, “we can take full advantage of the character 
and genuineness of the Indian people as a whole which have been so 
evident in the cohesiveness and stability of the social organiza- 
tion they built up”. Social relationship in modern times has been 
gradually modified by the abolition of feudal tenures, law of succe- 
ession, legislation giving women rights to property and legal recog- 
nition of intercaste marriages. Birth is no longer the basis of 
social standing, New social and economic forces are attacking 
the caste system at the base and particularly after independence 
some of the abuses of the caste system such as untouchability 
•have been removed. Modern type of education and conditions 
of travel have set at nought ideas of caste seclusion. 

Jawaharlal Nehru in his Discovery of India quotes Sir George 
Birdwood as having said: “So long as the Hindus hold to the caste 
system India will be India, but the day they break it, there will 
be no more India. That glorious peninsula will be degraded to 
the position of a bitter East End of the Anglo-Saxon Empire,” 
Commenting on this Jawaharlal Nehru says: 

. .the break-up of a huge and long standing social organiza- 
tion may well lead to a complete disruption of social life, resul- 
ting in absence of cohesion, mass suffering and the develop- 
ment on a vast scale of abnormalities in individual behaviour 
unless some other social structure, more suited to the times and 
to the genius of the people, takes its place. 

We are now in a transitional period, and perhaps destruction is 
inevitable, but the question is whether it will be possible to build up 


67 



India 


something better which will help us reach the ideal of socialistic 
democracy. Mere destruction without a constructive scheme wilt 
lead to disaster. Laws relating to removal of social disabilities, 
recruitment to services without reference to caste, social education 
and the Five Year Plans for economic uplift of the nation are all 
calculated to build up a modern Indian society free from such 
burden of the past as the caste. But caution is needed to see that 
the burden of the new does not overwhelm ordered progress. In- 
telligent public opinion should lead to the gradual moulding of the 
society. When people talk about caste they easily forget that the 
medieval trade guilds of Europe were run on similar lines. Tilt 
about the time of the industrial revolution Western society was a 
feudal hierarchy. Even today, social distinction of some kind or 
other does exist in Western society. Only its objectionable features, 
are far less offensive than those of the Indian caste system. It is 
indeed very difficult to say whether the prevailing caste system wilf 
ever completely disappear. The attempt of Basava, Ramanand, 
Kabir, and Nanak in the middle ages to abolish caste met with 
failure, Social reformers of the nineteenth century Rammohan 
Roy, Keseb Chandra Sen and Swami Vivekananda all tried to put 
an end to the caste system but were not successful. Even the Sikhs 
have not been able to overcome caste feelings. Muslims also have 
shown a tendency to observe caste restrictions. The Syrian Chris- 
tians of Malabar early divided into sections which took on a caste 
character. High caste converts of Roman Catholicism have 
shown a marked tendency to hold themselves aloof from those 
of the lower orders. The growing national sentiment is steadily 
attacking caste feelings. The criticism is made that in the matter of 
elections and appointments casteism plays a part in India. We 
will have to refer to it later. To build up a substitute for the Hindu 
_ social order, which has so long preserved the identity of Indian 
society is no easy matter, but it is hoped that independent India 
through wise leadership will be able to establish a stable order of 
society absorbing modern ideas without a violent revolution. 

3. THE INDIAN VILLAGE 

India is a land of villages. There are a little over 657,000 villages, 
where eighty per cent of the population live. The great majority 


68 



Traditionalism and Modernism 


of these villages contain only about 500 people each. In the modern 
age the town began to replace the village as the characteristic unit. 
Ideas developed in the town reach villagers through newspapers and 
political propaganda and so the rural outlook is rapidly changing. 
Those who have come in contact with urban life are hardly able to 
resist the temptation to migrate to the nearest town. Till the begin- 
ning of the twentieth century it was life in the village that was 
really attractive to the rich as well as the cultured Indians. 

The encomiums bestowed on ancient village-republics of 
India by the observant British Indian administrators of the early 
nineteenth century, though we may not accept them as literally 
true, are clear proof that, until then, the village continued to be 
the real centre of social life and the principal nursery of social 
virtues. And from the hundreds of Cola inscriptions that have 
come down to us, we see that under the Colas the villages of 
Southern India were full of vigour and strength. 2 

In North India too villages flourished as in South India, but not 
much is known of their administration. Villages show clearly how 
they have survived almost unaffected by the innumerable dynastic 
wars and the shifting of political power at the top. The cellular 
structure of Indian society that has sustained national existence 
through ages can be seen even in the present day village set-up. 

The government by means of primary assemblies comprising 
the adult males of each village was the central feature of rural 
organization. Besides these assemblies, there were in existence 
many other groups and corporations of social, religious or economic 
character, each interested in looking after some local institution 
or function. The village assemblies and the groups alike derived 
their responsibilities from ancient custom and ideal right (Dharma) 
and the moral support of the public. The members of the village 
assemblies did everything possible to promote orderly and peaceful 
development of the village. The groups represented the particular 
interest, while the assembly the general interest of the village such 
as dispensing justice and adjusting rival claims, to the satisfaction 

* K.A.N. Sastri, Colas II, p.267. 


69 



India 


of all parties. Social life was dominated by innumerable groups 
in the village. The individual did not lack opportunities for self 
expression. By birth, residence and occupation and sometimes 
by choice he was a member of one or more of these corporate 
bodies, each devoted to specific local purpose. There were several 
types of assemblies each type having specific functions. There 
is evidence to show that committees were appointed for executive 
work in rural administration. The functions of these committees 
must have been determined after a fairly long period of experiment 
and trial and error. 

In the Cola period the actual selection of a member to the commi- 
ttee of assembly was by lot called Kudavolai. On bits of palm 
leaves were written the names of eligible persons and these bits 
were thrown into a narrow-mouthed pot and well shaken in the 
presence of the Assembly. A child was asked to take out one after 
another as many of the bits as were required for the purpose of the 
constitution of the committees. The selection was confined only to 
those who were duly nominated according to rules which laid down 
certain conditions which had to be satisfied by every person before 
he became eligible for such nomination. The work of the members 
of the Sabhas and committees was honorary. These village assem- 
blies have definite responsibilities both towards the localities con- 
cerned and towards the central government. The political spirit 
of the time aimed at securing the harmony of classes rather than 
equality. “A healthy society based on a general distribution of 
small properties, which was free from the glaring economic oppre- 
ssion of one class by another had no particular use for the ideals 
of modern democracy.” The description of Cola administration 
shows there was a high standard of administrative efficiency, per- 
haps the highest ever attained by the Hindu State. 

The old practice of paying workers of the village in kind still 
persists in many villages. The washerman washes clothes, barbers 
give unlimited shaves and potters make vessels' required, priests 
help the performance of rituals and all these are given an annual 
share in the harvest of the grain in return for their services. Money 
economy has somewhat disrupted these conditions. The village 
of old was a self-sufficient economic unit; peasant and non-peasant 
families lived in harmony, cooperating with one another. The 


70 



Traditionalism and Modernism 


autonomy of the village continued till the beginning of the British 
rule in India. The British in order to extend their authority and 
find market for their machine-made goods did all they could to shake 
up the village organization. The villages in pre-British days were, 
on all accounts, healthy and prosperous. Dismal poverty of villages 
seems to be of comparatively recent origin. Poverty, illhealth and 
illiteracy are really inseparable factors. It is not easy to say, 
which of these is the cause, and which the result. The lack of 
mobility of labour is often attributed to caste system among others. 
This is only partially true, but it does not explain the poverty of 
India. There seems to be truth in the allegation that British imperia- 
lism was the strongest single force which led to the decay of village 
economy, for the rural craftsmen could not compete with British 
machines in production and the weavers were the worst affected. 

The peasant tilled the land and the king was entitled to the rent 
due to him. Sometimes there was a middle man through whom 
the rent was paid. The king had power of deriving revenue or 
rent from the peasant. Where it was not possible for the king to 
maintain direct relation with the village there was an intermediary 
between the village and its ruler. When the ruler was weak, the 
intermediary became ruler for himself; in this way perhaps came 
into existence most of the petty princes and zamindars. There was 
in India nothing analogous to the British manorial system in 
which villeins bound to the land could be disposed of with the land. 
Indian feudalism remained right through fiscal and military in 
character, but never manorial. What the king or the intermediary 
wanted was not land in the village, but a share of the produce by 
way of rent usually one-sixth, which under the Mughals rose to 
one-th ird . The villagers were little interested in the wars among the 
rulers and it mattered very little to them to whom they paid the rent. 
It was this attitude that was largely responsible for the apathy of 
the peasant in the politics of the country. The British administra- 
tion brought the Thahasildar and the Revenue Inspector and the 
Settlement Officer in direct contact with the 'villages. Except in 
Zamins and Jagirs the British Government had direct authority 
for the collection of rent from the peasant. Village officials became 
hereditary and were loyal to the British Government. Village re- 
construction was never seriously thought of by the British Govern- 


71 



India 


ment, although their Department of Public Works carried out 
irrigation projects and late in their regime they started cooperative 
credit societies. The centralization of government gradually lessened 
the respect for customary law, so that the self-governing village 
community became weaker and weaker. Changing times and 
conflicts have, during the British rule, led to the break-up of village 
self-government. 

To resuscitate the village is one of the major aims of the Five 
Year Plans of the Government of India. The effect of money 
economy on villages and the extent of help that the Community 
Development Scheme gives to them will be discussed later. 

4. HINDUISM AND PROGRESS 

The Hindu religion deals with polytheism, monotheism and pantheism 
as well as belief in demons, heroes and ancestors. It deals with 
“different lines of thought and fuses them into a whole by means 
of its philosophical synthesis. A religion is judged by what it 
tends towards. Those who note the facts and miss the truth are 
unfair to the Hindu attempt.” 8 For the Hindu, the doctrine that 
the soul has only one life, a few brief years, in the course of which 
it determines for itself an eternal heaven or an eternal hell, seems 
unreasonable and unethical. The Hindu believes that this life in 
the world is not the end of everything. He believes in as many as 
births as are necessary for the soul to qualify itself for eternal life. 
“All systems of Hindu thought accept the idea of the continuous 
existence of the individual human being as axiomatic.” As you sow 
so shall you reap. Every act produces its natural result in future 
character. This is Karma or Causality which is common to all 
Asiatic religions. Most Western writers regard this as a paralyzing 
fatalism. But really it is the opposite of fatalism. It means that 
if we find ourselves helpless and unhappy we are not condemned 
to it by a deity outside of ourselves. “Raise yourself by your own 
effort ” is the thought underlying the theory of Karma. Reconci- 
liation with what is comes only when all human effort is exhausted. 
The idea that there are higher powers to rule our destinies prevents 

* S. Radhakrishnan, The Legacy of India, p. 268. 


72 



Traditionalism and Modernism 


the individual from holding other people responsible for his suffering. 

Karma, renunciation and non-violence, all these, it is pointed 
out, engender in the Hindu a passivity and an inaction and militate 
against progress by which is meant improving standard of living 
and adding to our material culture the products of scientific inven- 
tions and technological devices. Bal Gangadhar Tilak took up 
the challenge. In his Gita Rahasya he points out that the earlier 
portion of the Bhagavadgila is a positive energism. This is a 
revolutionary book, which without alluding to politics, calls on 
people to rise and fight. According to Tilak’s interpretation the 
object of all action should be Loka samgraha or the welfare of the 
world. Thus the Gita gives a social content to religion and empha- 
sizes the welfare of the world as the purpose of all action. This is 
the very opposite of otherworldiness associated with the Hindu 
religion. The doctrine of sacrifice is given a wholly different 
meaning. Tilak emphasized the dynamic aspect of the Gita and 
stimulated people to action in such a way that the British Govern- 
ment even thought of proscribing the Gita Rahasya. Aurobindo 
in his essays on Gita emphasized the rationalism of the fourfold 
order of society and showed that it had no relation at any time to 
the caste system as practised. 

Another significant teaching of the Gita is the rejuvenation of 
society based on Krishna’s declaration: “Whenever and wherever 
Dharma decays and unrighteousness prospers, I shall be born in 
successive ages for the purpose of destroying evildoers and reesta- 
blishing the supremacy of the moral law.” This means that quali- 
tative change or revolution is a divinely ordained process. 

Owing to the impact of the British a static society fell into a state 
of flux. The Gita's teaching came in as an aid to rouse people to 
action and stabilise the society. It promoted not only a religious 
fervour but social and political action. Hinduism itself became 
an intensely dynamic force. This trend in Hinduism is different 
from the dilution of Christian thought of the Brahma Samaj or the 
revivalism of Vedic concepts of the Arya Samaj or the Vedantism 
and missionary zeal of the Ramakrishna Mission. These are at 
best only socio-religious reform movements, mostly the result of 
Christian missionary attack on Hinduism. Tilak’s interpretation 
of the Gita was definitely for the welfare of the world through action. 


73 



India 


Gandhi’s exposition of the Gita, though not so learned as that of 
Tilak’s, emphasized that the Gita's idea was not merely selfless 
action for the welfare of the world, but that the means adopted 
to achieve the end should be ethically right. The suggestion in 
Tilak’s Gita Rahasya is that the action dedicated to God was 
above moral laws so long as the object was the welfare of the world, 
thus indirectly countenancing even violence. Gandhi attempted 
to correct Tilak’s interpretation of the Gita and propounded the 
doctrine of Ahimsa, or non-violence. Non-violence does not mean 
an absolute denial of force. It means that force used should not 
injure the nature of another’s law of life, or Swadharma. Auro- 
bindo’s interpretation of the Gita, though philosophical, helped 
people understand its teachings in terms of life’s problems. 

There is nothing in the Hindu Karma and Maya that stands in 
the way of social and political progress, as is often alleged. If 
otherworldliness or negation of life had been practised, there would 
never have been the marvellous development of art, architecture 
music, dance, drama and literature, both secular and philosophical, 
in the Hindu period or the vitality to resist the onslaught of Islam 
and Christianity. While the Vedas are still believed to be of divine 
origin and unalterable, the Smritis which explain them have been 
held capable of being interpreted to suit the needs of changing times. 
The philosophic resignation of the Hindus to the Islamic rule as 
well as that of the British was due to their political and economic 
helplessness, not to the so called passivity of Hinduism. 

Even the much condemned caste system does not hinder progress 
or development of nationalism. Everyone thinks that the caste to 
which he belongs is superior to others, no matter where it is placed 
in the social hierarchy. This pride serves a useful purpose, for 
it is always accompanied by intense solidarity. In a calamity like 
flood, fire or famine people forget caste distinctions and cooperate 
with one another for the common good. This cooperative spirit is 
a characteristic feature of all Asian nations. That is why Soviet 
Russia and China have been able to mobilize thousands of volun- 
teers in order to execute large public works such as roads, canals 
and dams. That this group solidarity facilitates the development of 
patriotism has been clearly demonstrated by Indians when they stood 
as a man against Chinese aggression. The predisposition of the 


74 



Traditionalism and Modernism- 


Indian to sacrifice himself for the group makes it easy for him to 
transfer his self-sacrificing spirit from the group to the nation. Hence 
if the individual considers himself socially and materially as a mere 
cog-wheel in a large machine it is no impediment to the development 
of nationalism or progress. While in worldly affairs the Indian 
subordinates himself to the group, in the higher spheres of thought, 
religion and spirituality he preserves a strong independence. But 
it is the reverse that happens to the individual in the West; in the 
higher spheres of life he easily conforms and at the same lime- 
claims greater freedom in economic and social matters. In India it 
is the Yogi who renounces the world for his individual salvation, 
but all are not to turn yogis and the individual is free to follow 
the dharma, which falls to his lot by birih, choice or accident, not. 
only for the benefit of his own life, but also for the welfare of the. 
society as a whole. 


75 



CHAPTER 


The Life of the People 
through Ages 


5 


The chief occupation of the people in India has from time im- 
memorial been agriculture. Here is a description of the life of 
the village people as gleaned from the Vedas. They ploughed the 
ground, the plough being drawn by two oxen fastened to the yoke 
with hempen or leather traces and driven with goad. The plough- 
share was made of iron which supplanted the older ploughshare. 
The fields were watered by means of irrigation canals, from wells 
■or lakes or by raising water from wells by means of wooden or 
metal buckets tied to a rope pulled round a stone pulley. They 
reaped the fields with sickles. They threshed the sheaves on 
threshing floor, winnowed the Corn in winnowing baskets and then 
■carried it to their barns. Agriculture was followed not merely 
for one’s own family for food but as a means for acquiring wealth. 

Cowherds took cows out to pasture daily. Cows were milked 
not only by ladies of the household, but also by professional milkers. 



The Life of the People Through Ages- 


Goats and sheep were reared and dogs were kept for guarding 
houses and cattle, Weaving cotton and wool was done by men 
and women. Carpenters made chariots and carts. Woodwork 
included wood carving. Houses were mostly of wood and were 
put up by carpenters who also made household utensils such as. 
ladles, cups, buckets and bowls. Blacksmiths made weapons of 
war and agricultural implements. Workers in leather made casks- 
for holding water. Bullock’s hide was used for holding shields, 
and making drums. The physicians employed spells and medicines 
to cure ills. Priests chanted prayers for the prosperity of the 
liberal lords from whom they received rewards. The bulk of the 
people were poor and borrowed at usurious rates of interest and 
repaid their debts in eight or sixteen instalments. Atharva Veda' 
says that people died of starvation during famine. Men wore- 
two clothes, the upper one especially on ceremonial occasions, 
was of deer skin. The priests shaved head leaving a tuft worn in 
a knot. The clothes were of cotton or of wool. The men were 
very particular about bathing, and women bathed as now in rivers, 
or tanks. Rice, barley, beans and sesamunt were the chief vegetable 
food stuffs. The eating of fishes and birds appears to have been 
common. Fruits were also eaten. Foods were served on leaf 
platters, the lotus leaf being commonly used for the purpose. 

The first important rite in the life of girls was marriage. The 
Atharva Veda gives details of different ways of marriage. In those 
days the people that did not follow the fire rituals formed the 
majority of the population. Perhaps their rites were exactly like 
the forms of worship observed by some non-Brahmins and scheduled 
castes today. The public rites of the fire cult were much more 
elaborate than the domestic rites. Animals were sometimes, 
sacrificed. There were four stages in a man’s life. The Brahma- 
charya was a period of education and celibacy, and the Grihastha- 
srama of married life. After a period of married life the man left 
home for contemplation and became a Vanapraslha and theSanyasw 
was the stage in which the man renousneed the world altogether 
for his salvation. We do not kno\y if all the four stages were gone 
through by an individual with any regularity nor do we know how 
long these stages were kept up in India. People believed in the 
efficay of the mantras. The life of the people was greatly governed 


77 



India 


by these mantras. From before birth to after death the individual’s 
•life was governed by the mantras. Almost every custom and 
every institution referred to in the ancient texts are yet observed in 
India. Every mantra could still be heard and every image described 
in the ancient texts can be seen in thousands of villages today. 
There have been volcanic upheavals of society, like that which was 
■caused by the spread of Jainism and Buddhism. There were also 
tremendous thunder storms of foreign invasions into India. But 
in spite of them all rural life in India is very little changed from what 
it was thousands of years ago. 

Personal cleanliness is a special feature of Hindu life. Western 
•critics say that there is no civic conscience among the people, for 
they do not keep their surroundings clean. Early rising and wor- 
ship and going about one’s duties with regularity formed part of 
the life of the ancient people. Throughout the ages they continued 
to be so, perhaps the discipline became weaker and weaker as 
•centuries advanced. When modern means of transport and com- 
munication brought the villages in contact with towns, rural life 
began to disintegrate, but even now we see villagers clinging to 
.ancient customs. 

In the age of the Mauryas the vastness of India’s agricultural 
.and mineral resources and the extraordinary skill of the craftsmen 
were noted with admiration by the companions of Alexander and 
by Megasthenes. The building of boats and ships and making of 
•carts and chariots and the manufacture of machines are mentioned 
besides house building. The Mauryan State itself was a vast in- 
dustrial and trading concern and employed in its service vast 
number of artisans and merchants. Kings and Lords patronised 
learning, and art and craft flourished. In the age of the Guptas 
we have clear accounts of higher education, secular and religious. 
Agrahara villages were mostly centres of higher education. In 
this period Taxila seems to have declined. Nalanda, Vallabi and 
Kanchi were rising to prominence. 

In olden days omens seemed to have played a great part in the 
life of the people and later astrology developed. Even today 
•omens influence the people, and newspapers and magazines not 
■ only in local languages but also in English give regularly a forecast 
•of the influence of planets on the lives of people for specific periods. 


-.78 



The Life of the People Through Ages 

One of the changes that came over the people in their form of 
worship deserves mention. At first worship was through prayers. 
This was replaced by image worship in temples that probably arose 
in and after the third century B.c. Asoka’s inscriptions make no 
mention of temples. Buddha, who neither denied nor accepted 
God, was idolized. It is an irony of history that images of Buddha 
should have been the first to be set up for worship. The visual 
appeal of the image led to the emergence of idol worship in temples. 
The temple filled a large place in the cultural and economic life 
of the people, and its role as a social institution can hardly be 
exaggerated. Its construction and the making of images to be 
installed in it gave employment to large numbers and scope for the 
talent of artists. On its daily routine depended numbers of priests, 
choristers, musicians, dancing girls, florists, cooks and others. 
Its periodical festivals were attended by fairs, learned contests, 
wrestling matches and every form of popular entertainment. In 
the middle ages the temple was also a great landlord, bank, school, 
hospital, fortress, and what not. The jewellers flourished on the 
demands of temples and palaces. Kings lavished their bounty 
oh temples, and their courtiers and the merchant princes in the 
country followed their example. From very early days holy places 
became multiplied. Seven holy cities are known to classical litera- 
ture: Haridwar, Kasi, Prayag, Dwaraka, Puri, Gaya and Kanchi. 
Similarly there are seven holy rivers. Places associated with the 
names of the heroes of the epics came to be regarded as holy places. 
Even today they draw thousands of pilgrims. Local objects such 
as a running stream, the bubbling spring or a volcanic fire came to 
•be regarded as sacred and worthy of worship. 

We have already noted how caste system became much com- 
plicated during the medieval times. The Brahmanas were the heads 
of Gurukulas and through their labours much that was handed 
down through oral tradition came to be reduced to writing. Before 
the Muslim rule began Indians seem to have enjoyed life passionate- 
ly. They delighted hot only in things of the world but those of the 
spirit also. It is said that the teaching of the great Acharyas such 
as Sankara, Ramanuja and Anandatirtha, which stressed renuncia- 
tion, struck a pessimistic note, depriving people of their joy of life, 
but exhorted the votaries of Hinduism to keep up the ancient ideals. 


79 



India 


The imperial power of the Afghan rulers was much less felt in 
the villages than in the previous period. Muslim government 
generally avoided villages. Their representatives and agents were 
contented to govern the countryside from the seats of their authority, 
in bigger towns. Among the temples built in the Muslim period 
the Sun temple built by Narasimha Deva of Orissa (1238-64) at 
Konaraka is a magnificent example of the art of the period. The 
Taj pal temple at Abu has been considered as one of the architectural 
wonders of the world. Besides morning and evening prayers at 
temples some days of the months came to be observed as fasts and 
some others as feasts and the holy days spread right through the 
year. It is in this period that daily life was complicated by popular 
belief in omens and astrology. The common man tried to do 
everything on an auspicious hour. The belief in the doctrine of 
Karma deepened. The caste system assumed a rigid form. It 
was during this period that dining among the various sections even 
of the same caste came to an end. Innumerable sub-castes were 
formed due to difference inoccupations or other causes. Brahnmnas 
as a class stood apart from the rest of the people and even they were 
divided into innumerable sections. There were untouchables in 
the North, but in the South even their very shadow was regarded 
as pollution. 

The Arab, the Turk, and the Afghan Muslims who poured into 
India formed a distinct group of ruling Muslims. There were mass 
coversions to Islam in this period. But the converts continued to 
call themselves by their caste names, for example Muslim Rajputs 
in the Punjab. The converts to Islam often stuck to their tribal 
or local customs and very rarely accepted the Muslim law. Muslim 
foreigners looked down upon these converts. The Shias and Sunnis 
stood ranged against each other as in Gujarat and Kashmir. The 
Bohras and Khojas in Gujarat were always treated as heretics. 
The slaves formed a class by themselves but were often allowed to 
high rank by their masters. Tombs of Muslim saints became 
objects of worship both to Hindus and Muslims. This is the period 
in which Sanskrit scholarship continued to flourish and several 
law digests were prepared. Among them may be mentioned the 
Deval Smriti which laid down an elaborate purificatory ritual for 
taking back Hindus who may have left the fold. Amir Kushru 

80 



The Life of the People Through Ages 

compares Indian men, women, rivers, flora and fauna with those 
of all the countries he knew of and conceded that India had the 
better of all the countries. The Turkish princes issued bilingual 
coins and the language used reflected the development of Hindi 
of the Prithviraj Rasa which uses many words of Persian origin. 
Sanskrit continued to be the language of the scholarly world. 
Bhakti movement and mysticism appear to have provided solace 
to thousands of devotees. 

Village life during the Muslim period continued to be the same 
as that during the previous Hindu period. Ceremonies and rituals 
were followed as regularly as ever before, in order that Hinduism 
might preserve its identity unaffected by Islamic onslaught. As 
we have noted already, it was during the British period that the 
villagers began to lose their solidarity and feel emasculated. 

In the later half of the nineteenth century there was demand for 
Indian labour by British capitalists in Ceylon, South Africa, Malaya 
and Fiji islands. Indians with the hope of bettering their prospects 
went as emigrants to work in mines and plantations. Some of 
them settled with their families in those countries. Then came the 
system of indentured labour, for the emigrants lived and worked 
for a specified number of years, after which some of them settled 
down there as free labourers or came back to their homeland, 
bringing with them ideas of life abroad. Their accounts broadened 
the outlook of villagers with whom they came in contact. Gandhi 
worked for the welfare and civic rights of Indians who had settled 
down in South Africa and his experiences there led to the abolition 
of the system of indentured labour (1917) because it was derogatory 
to the nation. A large number of those that settled in Ceylon are 
now deprived of their rights of citizenship. After 1947 Indians 
that settled in Burma as traders, professionalists and landholders 
had to come back to India owing to the severe nationalization policy 
of the Burmese Government. Then came refugees from Pakistan. 
All these have increased the complexity of Indian economic condi- 
tions. 

The first decade of twentieth century marks the beginning of 
renascence in India. The Congress, started in 1885, gradually 
made itself felt both on the British government and on the public. 
At first, it agitated for due representation of Indians in higher civil 


81 



India 


and judicial services and then worked for securing political rights 
for the people. It was Tilak who first turned the Congress into 
an organization for securing Home Rule for India. 

Political consciousness among the people was awakened by the 
exercise of franchise for the constitution of taluk boards, district 
boards and municipalities. Ripon was the harbinger of local 
self-government in India. Discriminatory treatment to Britishers 
in railway travel and the Ubert Bill 1 controversy roused the suspicion 
of the people and engendered feelings of racial antagonism. J apan's 
success over Russia in 1904 exploded the theory of Western superiori- 
ty in science and warfare, Curzon’s partition of Bengal to keep 
the Hindus and Muslims apart roused a nationwide protest. British 
goods were boycotted and the Swadeshi movement gained strength. 

In spite of the prejudice against the British ruling class the public 
and princes of India cooperated with Britain in her war against 
Germany (1914-18). It was hoped that after this first world war 
the authoritarian regime in India would transform itself into a 
popular one in appreciation of India’s war services. Nothing of 
the kind happened. Discontent among the people deepened. It 
was at this time that Gandhi took up the leadership of the Congress 
arid turned it into the mouthpiece of the Indian people. The 
response of the people to the call of the Congress demonstrated 
the native shrewdness and power of judgement of the uneducated 
masses of the people. About his first experience with the peasants 
of India in 1920 Jawaharlal Nehru says : “I was filled with shame 
and sorrow, shame at my own easy-going and comfortable life and 
overwhelming poverty of India. A new picture of India seemed 
to rise before me naked, starving, crushed and utterly miserable. 
There was only one way of ameliorating the conditions of “the rice 
eating puny millions of India.” That was by freeing India from 
British domination.” 


1 According to law a European British subject could be tried only by a 
European and Ripon decided to abolish the “judicial disqualifications based on 
race distinctions. Ilbert, the then Legal Member, prepared a bill to give effect 
to the decision.” The Europeans raised a storm of protest against it. 

82 



Indian Nationalism 


A nation is thought of as a distinct race or people having common 
descent, language, history, government and habit, but few nations 
possess all these common factors. The Jews, for example, had not 
a foot of territory which they could call their own, till in 1919 they 
were provided with a national home in Palestine. Nevertheless, 
all through the centuries of their dispersion, they preserved a high 
sense of nationality. The term ‘nation’ defies precise definition. 
Its chief ingredient is a corporate sentiment or collective conscious- 
ness, which makes people desire to live under one government and 
feel proud of their motherland. It must here be pointed out that 
the spirit of medieval Europe was not nationalistic, but ecumenical. 
Although the English people had shown their sense of nationalism 
earlier as in their Hundred Years’ War with France, it was only 
in the early half of the sixteenth century that they exhibited their 
nationalism by successfully challenging the claims of the Papacy 
for universal domination. 



India 


It is not easy to trace the origin and development of Indian 
nationalism. From the age of the mantras, to the Hindus India 
has been the land from the Himalayas in the North to Cape Comerin 
in the South, although the country may have been split up into 
innumerable independent kingdoms. We have already observed 
that the Hindu resistance to foreign invasions had always been 
nationalistic in character. Historical consciousness is a necessary 
component of nationalism. It is this which expresses itself in 
practical effort for the political and social uplift of the nation. 

The critic says that the Hindus lacked this consciousness and so 
could not put themselves on a footing of equality with the Muslims 
or the British both of whom had rich and vigorous historical 
traditions behind them. True, before the publication of the 
results of European oriental researches to which we have alluded 
earlier, India had practically no written history beyond myths, 
legends and puranas to link up the past with the present. The 
absence of written history like the Rajatarangani of Kalhana can- 
not lead to the conclusion that the Hindus were not conscious of a 
heritage of their own, when in their daily life they felt proud of 
carrying it, to be handed over to the next generation. The history 
of India has been found in numerous inscriptions, grants, tradi- 
tions, puranas and customary law of the people. Excavations such 
as those at Harappa and Mohenjodaro are ocular testimonies of 
the past glory reinforcing the heritage of the civilization of the 
vanished cities. The new thing is using historical consciousness 
as a political weapon. It is not easy for the historian to say how 
many of the nation states of Europe deliberately used historical 
consciousness as a political weapon against their adversaries in the 
course of history. Because there is no written history of the prc- 
Islamic period, of a type acceptable to Western scholars, it is 
argued that the Indians had not the capacity of connecting events, 
with time and space. Hindu cosmology refutes the charge, by its 
wonderful concepts of time and space. Kings had to adhere to 
the Dharmashastra and their dharmas were prescribed. Record of 
political events only would show the extent to which the rulers stuck 
to the dharmas or deviated from them. A record of this kind did 
not perhaps seem important in human affairs when the seers and 
sages were engaged in the quest of the ultimate Truth. Anyway 


84 



The Life of the People Through Ages 


the hypotheses based on a lack of an authentic history for the 
Hindu period require careful and scholarly testing. 

A long period of political subjection first to Muslim rule and 
then to the British did of course depress the Hindu spirit. In the 
late nineteenth century, India had a high type of leadership in 
social and political reforms. The facts of history revealed by re- 
searches came to be employed for political and social purposes. 
The first effect was a blind glorification of the past and an attempt 
at its revival. Leaders like Raja Ram Mohan Roy, and the Tagore 
sought to give a modern direction to the historical consciousness 
of the people: Ram Mohan Roy and later Ranade, Gokhale and 
Mehta believed that British rule in India was a case of conscience. 
While they were courageous in criticizing it they sincerely believed 
that the British connection with India was a divinely ordained one. 
Briefly stated, the liberals of the nineteenth century thought less 
of the Hindu past, than of the political and social theories of the 
modern West. The first popular impulse was to promote a sense 
of pride of the past, recollecting the glories of the Mauryan, the 
Satavahana and the Gupta ages. Knowledge of the Indian coloni- 
zation in South East Asia up to the fifth century a.d. and the glory 
associated with Champa, Kamboja, Sri Vijaya and Java and the 
maritime activities of Kalinga and the Southern Tamil kingdoms, 
all these served to revive the drooping spirit of the Indians in the 
nineteenth century. Ellora, Ajanta, Mahabalipuram, the temples 
of Orissa and the Cola bronzes brought a new meaning of art and 
architecture to the Hindus all over India. The Hindus felt that 
they were in no way inferior to their rulers. As a reaction to the 
revivalism there arose a movement to develop social and political 
institutions on Western models and promote a scientific spirit among 
the people, rejecting much of the past as a dead weight. The 
Gandhian approach to national problems was based largely on 
Tilak’s theory of action, but with a greater emphasis on the ethical 
aspect of the action. For example, while Gandhi declared that the 
British rule in India was satanic, he admonished his countrymen 
to bear no hatred to the British people. It is difficult to determine 
how far Ghandhism used the newly awakened historical conscious- 
ness and political consciousness in leading the struggle for inde- 
pendence. This was a democratic socio-religious movement with 


85 



India 


ultimate political ends. 

Political consciousness is generally understood as a capacity to 
make a distinction between various types of political institutions 
and to make deliberate choice among themselves. Indians, ac- 
customed as they had been to limited absolute rule, found it 
somewhat difficult to understand the implications of modern ideas 
of democracy, although the grass roots of democracy could be 
found in the innumerable republics of India, in the Buddhist as- 
sembly and in the village Panchayats. Raja Ram Mohan Roy 
should be credited with having been the first Indian to understand 
and appreciate the character of political institutions of the West. 
He found that democracy was a dissolvent of British power in 
India, but it was not possible for him as well as for the other liberals 
that came after him to inculcate among general mass of people 
any strong or widespread desire for internal political freedom or 
democratic freedom. Gandhi was able to contact the masses and 
rouse in them a strong desire for political freedom and social justice. 
But here the critic may saucily say that an overwhelming majority 
of the people of India have been perfectly content with “an oligarchi- 
cal one party rule”, and so they have not shown their capacity to 
appreciate political freedom and personal liberty. There are people 
who sincerely bemoan the disappearance of the nineteenth century 
liberalism in India, after the advent of Gandhism. The way people 
have exercised their franchise shows how ideas of democratic free- 
dom have permeated the masses. The Congress rule is due to 
the absence of a powerful party in opposition, capable of taking 
its place. In fact Gandhi advised that the Congress should be dis- 
solved as it had achieved its purpose, of securing freedom and a 
new party should be formed. The leaders of the Congress being 
inheritors of power were reluctant to take the risk involved in 
Gandhi’s suggestion. However, nothing prevents the formation 
of a strong all India political party with a captivating programme 
to dislodge the Congress from its seat of power. Indian nationalism 
has to be judged on its own merits. It has certain drawbacks as 
indeed the nationalism of any other country has. Casteism plays 
some part in the elections. Lingualism and parochialism often 
show their ugly features. The masses of people are often guided 
more by personal loyalty to leaders than by institutional loyalty. 


86 



The Life of the People Through Ages 

At the time when the British were supreme in India, the educated 
middle class serving the Mughals transferred their loyalty and 
service to the British authorities. The fact that the Muslims were the 
ruling class so worked on the minds of the British authorities that 
they preferred the support of the Muslims to that of the Hindus. 
When English took the place of Persian as the official language, 
the Muslims became disspirited. They did not take to English 
education. The Hindus took advantage of the educational op- 
portunities and offered themselves for serving in the British Govern- 
ment. It was high class Hindus that entered government service. 
The princes and lords in India having become subservient to the 
British authorities could not support scholars and artists as gener- 
ously as their predecessors had done. Hence middle class intelle- 
gentsia of the community had to rely on service under the British 
for their very existence. Thus the Kayasthas of Bengal, the Khatres 
of the United Provinces, and the Brahmins of South India entered 
subordinate civil and military services. Sir Sayed Ahamed Khan 
realized the position of the Muslims. In 1877 he started a college 
for Muslims in Aligarh with the object of imparting instruction (both 
Islamic and Western) and this later developed into the Aligarh 
University. The British authorities gave every possible support 
to the development of Aligarh University whose aim was to promote 
separatist tendencies among the Muslims. Sir Sayed Ahamed Khan 
may well be regarded as the ‘morning star’ of the two nation theory. 
Henceforward it was the Muslims that steadily gained the support 
of the British authorities. The Muslims except for a few highly 
educated among them avoided the Congress. The Indian National 
Congress at first followed a moderate policy, claiming for Indians 
a share in the higher posts of administration. There were two 
schools of thought, one represented by Gokhale and the other by 
Tilak. Gokhale was for the continuance of British rule until such 
time as Indians became lit for self-government, but Tilak stressed 
the evils of foreign rule, stood for a Hindu revival and opposed 
Westernization of Hindu society. He organized a festival in 1895 
to commemorate the coronation of Shivaji every year and a festival 
for Lord Ganesha, the lord who would ward off all evils. Tilak 
asserted that Home Rule was his birth right. 

His teachings played no small part in awakening political con- 


87 



sciousness among the people. In 1882 Ripon repealed the Ver- 
nacular Press Act of 1875 and newspapers in vernaculars sprang 
up. They served to promote political consciousness among the 
people. Services rendered by English dailies as The Hindu and the 
Amrita Bazar Patrika are worth recording. 

Legislative councils came up by laws passed in 1861-62 giving 
Indians limited opportunities for active participation in law-making 
and control of administration. But the people were not satisfied. 
In Bengal secret societies arose for political assassination. The 
partition of Bengal generated political activity all over the country. 
In 1906 the Congress declared Swaraj as its goal. Curzon predicted 
that Congress was tottering and would soon perish. But contrary 
to all that he said it became more and more powerful. The British 
stirred Muslims against Hindus. The Minto-Morley Reforms 
(1909) introduced the principle of election to legislative bodies in a 
very restricted measure. This only increased the discontent of 
the people. Anarchism in Bengal continued (1915-17). The 
Defence of India Act enabled the government to control the re- 
volutionary movement. During First World War (1914-18) the 
moderates were weakened by the deaths of Gokhale and Mehta. 
Tilak and Mrs. Besant gained popularity and demanded Home 
rule. It is no exaggeration to say that they laid the foundation for 
India’s struggle for freedom. 



CHAPTER 


The Struggle for Freedom 


l 


During the first two years of war (1914-18) moderate politicians 
and the princes and people in general were full of enthusiasm for 
the British cause. An ammunition board was set up to coordinate 
the’ activity of military supply and the arms supply to troops. This 
developed the manufacturing resources of India, because India 
was the base of supplies for many articles used by the imperial and 
allied forces. Nearly 1 . 75 million people were recruited for war 
and of them nearly two-third were combatants. The Indians 
hoped that the cooperation and support in war efforts would evoke 
from the British a favourable gesture for political advancement, 
but the British Government took the enthusiasm of Indian people 
as an expression of their tribute to the benevolence of the British 
rule in India. They made it clear that every political step would 
be postponed to a date after the war. The Indian soldiers found 
that they were not in any way inferior to European soldiers. They 



India 


could not help feeling that they were treated as inferiors to British' 
soldiers in the matter of pay and rations. When they returned home 
after the war, they could find no useful employment and so stirred 
up discontent among the people. Conditions of war required' 
raising of taxes all round. Duties on cotton goods went up high 
and rising prices added to the economic ills, The most important 
effect of the First World War was that Western civilization came 
to be regarded with less esteem than before. Although European 
nations belonged to the Christian community they had no compun- 
ction in fighting and killing one another mercilessly to win their 
cause. In 1917 President Wilson supported the ideas of national 
freedom and self-determination of people. The Indians began to' 
demand self-government. Edwin Montagu, who succeeded Austin 
Chamberline at the India Office declared that the policy of his. 
Majesty’s Government was that of increasing association of Indians 
in every branch of administration and the gradual development 
of self-governing institutions, with a view to the progressive realiza- 
tion of responsible government in India as an integral part of tho 
British Empire. This declaration satisfied neither the Hindus nor 
the Muslims. The Muslim League and the Congress met at 
Lucknow, composed their differences and evolved a plan of' 
government for India. This was the Congress-League scheme 
which included separate electorates and weightage for Muslims. 

Montagu visited India (1917-18). He was a man who was really 
interested in the welfare of India. That was a time when the agita- 
tion for Home Rule became persistent, and the Justice party repre- 
senting the non-Brahmanss in the South were outspokenly agaihst 
the Brahmin community. Gandhi was rising to prominence in 
Indian politics. He found that Satyagraha as expressed through 
passive resistance or non-violent non-cooperation which he had prac- 
tised in South Africa would work well in India. Gandhi’s entry 
into Indian politics was a turning point in the history of freedom 
struggle. The Montagu-Chelmsford reforms published in July 
1918 adopted the principle of diarchy. The Congress condemned 
diarchy as likely to cause friction. The moderates welcomed it. 
In the provinces executives consisted of two sections, one section 
consisted of members nominated by the Crown half of whom should 
be Indian and the other section made up of ministers appointed 


90 



The Struggle for Freedom 


by the majority party in the legislature. The ministers were in 
charge of education, local self-government, forest and excise called' 
transferred subjects. Finance, police and revenue were ‘reserved’ 
subjects’ in the hands of executive councillors. Muslims, Sikhs 
in the Punjab, Europeans, Anglo-Indians and Indian Christians 
got separate electorates. The supreme government continued to 
be unitary and responsible to the Secretary of State as before. The; 
legislature became bicameral, the upper house was called Council 
of States which consisted of an elected majority. The official block 
ceased to exist. The franchise for the Council of States was based! 
on property qualification. The Legislative Assembly had forty 
nominated members of whom twenty-five were officials and 106- 
members elected on a wide franchise, including women. The 
Governor General had the power to certify or veto any measure 
passed or voted down by the assembly. These reforms went into 
operation in an atmosphere of tragedy and strife. That was the 
time when the Defence of India Act was due to lapse. T o arm them- 
selves with sufficient power to check the outrages of terrorists 
two stringent Acts popularly known as the Rowlat Acts were passed 
by the unreformed legislature in January 1919. This gave the- 
authorities power to try terrorists without a jury and imprison 
people on mere suspicion. The Rowlat Acts were a challenge- 
to the Indian people. They roused the resentment of all the- 
political parties in India. There were other causes which stirred 
up discontent among the labourers. Rich industrialists who- 
had made enormous profits during war were unwilling to spend- 
money on equipment or wages. The epidemic of influenza carried 
away many millions of people. Now Gandhi wanted the people 
to observe a fast for twenty-four hours on 6 April 1919. By then 
Gandhi had started civil disobedience movement. Following the 
murder of a European and a woman at Amritsar, martial law was. 
declared. Amritsar was handed over to the military. All public 
meetings were forbidden. In the evening on 13 April, the Hindu 
New Year’s Day, there was a large gathering in Jallianwala Bagh 
in Amritsar. Unarmed people were shot at by armed men. In 
about ten minutes, 379 were killed and many hundreds were woun- 
ded. But eye witnesses put the figure much higher. For nearly 
nine months Amritsar was under martial law. The Jallianwala 


91 



India 


Bagh Tragedy made people very angry. General Dyer, who was 
responsible for the tragedy, was appreciated by the British authorities 
and given promotion. Therefore, the relations between the British 
and the Indians became more bitter than ever before. In December 
1920 the Indian National Congress met at Nagpur and declared 
that India’s goal was the attainment of Swaraj by all legitimate and 
peaceful means. 

From -1920 to 1945 the Congress was led by Gandhi. Gandhi’s 
programme of action was very different from any that had been so 
far adopted by politicians in the country. He carried the mass of 
people with him. He lived in villages, dressed himself in the loin 
cloth like the lowest labourer and made it a point to live in untou- 
chable colonies. He was for altering the fundamental class relation- 
ship in India. He set an example of leading a simple life. He 
■advised Congress workers not to have possessions or facilities 
which the millions of poor people in India could not have. This 
in general led to a rearrangement of life among Congressmen so as 
to be as near to the peasant’s life as possible. The masses under- 
stood Gandhiji and responded to his call. But the urban middle 
class brought up in liberal traditions thought that Gandhi’s reliance 
on the illiterate masses was fraught with danger to society. His 
call to the educated people to give up luxuries was definite and 
dear. His technique was non-violent non-cooperation. He made 
those that were serving the government in various capacities under- 
stand that it was shameful for them to assist the Britisher in main- 
taining his dominion in India. He called on lawyers to give up 
practice and non-cooperate with the government in the adminis- 
tration of law. He appealed to students to give up their studies 
and go to villages for hard work. Another technique he employed 
was civil disobedience including non-payment of taxes. If indeed 
those who were cooperating with the government in various services 
had suspended their work the entire government should have come 
to a stand- still and Swaraj might have come in one year as he had 
promised. But this did not happen. However, it was no small 
achievement for Gandhi that lawyers with roaring practice like 
Motilal Nehru, father of Jawaharlal Nehru, C.R. Das, S. Srinivasa 
lyyengar and C. Rajagopalchari willingly responded to his call. 

Jawaharlal Nehru was ready and willingto follow Mahatma Gandhi. 


92 



The Struggle for Freedom 


Indeed he was torn between the spiritual ideals of his motherland 
and the modernism of the West. He was for action and Mahatma 
Gandhi’s programme appealed to him. But Nehru’s outlook on 
life was fundamentally different from that of Gandhi. He was. 
unable to understand Gandhi’s intuitive decisions to call off civil 
disobedience, to undertake fasts on occasions, to bring moral 
pressure on people and insist on Khadi and on cottage industries 
in preference to industrial development of the country. Never- 
theless, he realized that Gandhi represented the masses of India, 
and held the magic wand of rousing people to action. Sometimes, 
he would storm against Gandhi’s decisions but he always yielded tO' 
the better judgement of his leader. Gandhi knew his disciple and 
his capacity for self-sacrifice and devoted service. He therefore 
said that the nation would be safe in Jawaharlal Nehru’s hands. 
Among those that worked with Gandhi was Patel, who successfully 
led the No-Tax-Campaign in Bardoli. 

Gandhi’s saintly character won for him universal respect. Villa- 
gers regarded him as a Mahatma. By his incessant preaching, 
he dispelled fear in the hearts of men and women in India. Rich 
men were willing to sacrifice their wealth and comfort. Some 
people in high positions were willing to give them up. The response 
to his call for non-violent non-cooperation was so striking that Lord 
Reading, the Viceroy of India, condescended to negotiate with him 
(13 May 1921), but the discussions produced no tangible results. 
Respected leaders all over the country were arrested and put in 
prison, generally for short terms. In December 1921 the Nehrus 
and C.R. Dass were arrested and sent to prison. But still the 
government considered it unwise to spirit Gandhi away from the 
scene of his activities, for they felt that his presence would ensure 
non-violence. Official repression assumed such frightening propor- 
tions that even loyal government servants grew angry. In this, 
movement women vied with men to exhibit their spirit of self-sacri- 
fice and their readiness to go to jail. Nearly thirty thousand civil 
resisters were put in jail (1921-22). The way people sacrificed, 
their wealth and comfort amazed and unnerved the government. In 
his despatch to the Secretary of State, in February 1922, the Viceroy 
frankly admitted that the no-cooperation movement had been 
“engendered and sustained by nationalist aspirations”. 


93 - 



India 


Meanwhile elections to the legislatures went on. Only about a 
.third of the voters took part in them. The Justice Party in Madras 
•captured political power, so as to redress social imbalance between 
the Brahmanas and non-brahmanas, under the leadership of 
Thyagaraya Chelty and T.M. Nair. In other provinces ministries 
were formed on coalitions of various groups. The Central legislature 
was opened by the Duke of Cunnaught in February 1921. In April 

■ of the same year, Lord Reading succeeded Chelmsford as Viceroy. 
The British Government arranged for the visit of the Prince of Wales 
■to India. The Congress Committee resolved on a boycott of the 
Prince of Wales. Hindu-Muslim tension, in spite of the best efforts 

■ of Gandhi to bring about a union, grew worse. The Prince of 
Wales visited India on 17 September 1921. Those who led the 
■boycott were arrested and imprisoned. In December 1921 Con- 
.gress met at Allahabad and affirmed its faith in non-cooperation. 
•Gandhi was appointed the sole executive authority of the Congress. 
In Bombay there were riots on the occasion of the Prince’s visit. 
.Mahatma Gandhi greatly resented this act and wont on five days’ 
fast. At Chauri Chaura in U.P. a violent mob killed some twenty 
ipolice officials and a sub-inspector. This made Gandhi call off 
.civil disobedience in all its forms. Gandhi was, however, arrested 
.and sentenced to six years’ simple imprisonment. Accepting the 
.sentence, Gandhi said “I do not ask for mercy, I do not plead 
.any extenuating act. I am here therefore to invite and submit to 
the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me, for what in law 
„is a deliberate crime and what appears to me to be the highest duty 

• of a citizen.” 

Work of the legislatures went on smoothly. Indianization 
-proceeded in the several services. Fiscal autonomy came to some 
extent. Military expenditure was reduced. The organization of 
the territorial force gave an opening to military life to the middle 

• class Indians. There was a deficit in the Viceroy’s budget and 
the Viceroy had to certify a bill for doubling salt tax (1923). 
•Gandhi was in jail. Motilal Nehru and C.R. Das thought that 
non-cooperation should be combined with council entry and so 
formed a new Swaraj Party. Their policy was to wreck the reforms 
from within the council. In the new Assembly Swarajists secured 
fifty out of 140 seats. In the provinces except Bengal and Central 

■.94 



The Struggle for Freedom 

Provinces nowhere was the Swarajist strength enough to mend or 
■end the council. 

In 1924 Motilal Nehru carried a resolution formulating 
national demand for a round table conference to framing a 
scheme of responsible government. There was a general sense of 
frustration and the Congress needed someone to give them a sense 
of direction. Motilal’s resolution resulted in a report; the majority 
of the members of the committee recommended details for the 
smooth working of diarchy, while the minority held that diarchy 
was inherently unworkable. The government accepted the majority 
report. Lord Birkenhead, Secretary of State, challenged the 
Indians to produce a constitution of their own. The Indian National 
■Convention accepted the challenge. 

In April 1926 Lord Reading was succeeded by Lord Irwin. 
At that time fierce communal riots broke out in Calcutta. 
In the next elections Swarajists lost heavily in the Central 
Assembly but gained in the provincial councils of Bengal, 
Bihar and Madras. Gauhati (Assam) Congress declared itself 
against acceptance of office until the national demand was 
■conceded. Irwin wanted to break the impasse and bring about 
■communal harmony. He urged on the Home Government to 
■deal with the actual facts of the situation. Thereupon a commission 
of seven members, all British under the presidency of Sir John 
.Sin\on was set up to enquire into the working of the constitution. 
As there was no Indian on the commission the moderates under 
•Sapru and the Congress party under Motilal united in opposition 
to the commission. Simon was empowered to include six elected 
Indian members of the central legislature to sit with the commission 
.and report separately at the same time as the British Commission. 

In December 1927, the Madras Congress resolved that its goal 
was Poorna Swaraj or complete independence. On 3 February 
1928, the Simon Commission landed in Bombay. There were 
hartals and hostile demonstrations wherever the commission went. 

There was an all party conference which drafted a constitution. 
This was mainly the work of Motilal Nehru and Sapru. This 
accepted the Muslim point of view over the formation of the North 
Western Frontier Provinces and the separation of Sind and recom- 
mended the abolition of communal electorates. Jinnah, the Muslim 


95 



India 


League leader, was a signatory to this report. Gandhi, who 
was now free, re-entered the political field and allowed Vallabhbhai 
Patel to start Satyagraha campaign at Bardoli against the unjusti- 
fied increase in the land revenue assessment. After six riionths 
Patel succeeded (1928). Jawaharlal Nehru did not at all like the 
constitution framed by the All Party’s Conference. However, at 
the Congress session in Calcutta in 1928 the constitution was accepted 
on condition that if the British Government did not accept it 
before the end of 1929, the Congress would be free to launch a 
countrywide non-cooperative movement, including non-payment 
of taxes. Meanwhile the depressed classes under Ambedkar, the 
Muslims and the Hindu Mahasabha formed parties to press their 
communal claims. 

The Simon Commission paid two visits. While leading the 
boycott of Simon Commission at Lahore, Lala Lajpat Rai, a veteran 
Congress leader, was beaten in the chest in October 1928; he died 
on 17 November. This caused deep resentment and great 
sorrow to the people of India. In December 1929 the Congress met 
at Lahore under the Presidentship of Jawaharlal Nehru and declared 
that complete independence was the goal of India. January 26 
was declared as Independence Day. Subash Chandra Bose and 
Jawaharlal Nehru wanted to take action on the Congress resolutions, 
but Gandhi refused to yield. Some months later Gandhi decided 
on defying the Salt Law. He wanted the abolition of the Salt. Act. 
Jawaharlal was not much impressed with Gandhi’s move but very 
soon found that this item of poor man’s food caught the imagination 
of people. Gandhi’s historical march to Dandi, a sea side resort 
on the west coast, was a tremendous success. On 5 April, 1930, 
Gandhi ceremoniously broke the Salt Law. Men and women 
in all parts of India enthusiastically followed Gandhi in breaking 
the Salt Law. When Gandhi was arrested civil disobedience 
movement gathered strength. Ninety thousand satyagrahis were 
seized and sent to prison. The massive character of the satyagraha 
tmnerved the Viceroy and the British officials. The Garhwali 
troops refused to open fire on an unarmed crowd at Peshawar, and 
military experts viewed the situation with alarm. The feeling came 
upon the British officials that it was impossible to govern the country 
in defiance of Mahatma Gandhi. 


96 



The Struggle for Freedom 


The first Round Table Conference was opened in London on 
2 November 1930. Those that represented India were all Viceroy’s 
nominees. The Congress and Gandhi did not attend it. In 1931 
Ramsay Macdonald held out hopes of making a sudden transfer of 
power to India. At the Round Table Conference minorities were 
unyielding. Each of the groups was claiming a virtual veto on 
progress. It was impossible to reach an agreed solution. 

With the approval of Ramsay Macdonald, Irwin took the bold 
step of releasing the Congress leaders and withdrawing the notifi- 
cation declaring that the Congress was an illegal association. Irwin 
negotiated with Gandhi and the pact between them was published. 
The Congress agreed to discontinue civil disobedience and to take 
part in the next session of the Round Table Conference and the 
government agreed to withdi'awits ordinances and release thepolitical 
prisoners not convicted of violent crime. The only gain of this 
pact was that Mahatma was recognized as the real representative 
of the Indian people. 

Irwin left India on 18th April 1931 and Willingdon, a very 
different man, became the Viceroy. Gandhi left India for London 
as the sole representative of the Congress. The second session 
of the Round Table Conference lasted from 7 September to 
1 December 1931. Gandhi claimed to be the sole proper 
representative of all India including Muslims, depressed classes 
and other minorities. v Now the Muslims became suspicious and 
did not want self-government for India, for the Muslim minority 
would ever be under the control of the Hindu majority. No agree- 
ment could be reached and Macdonald declared that if Indians 
could not evolve an agreed settlement his government would impose 
a provisional scheme of their own. On 28 December 1931 Gandhi 
returned to India. His lieutenants including Jawaharlal Nehru 
had been by then put in jail. There was ordinance rule prevailing 
in India. Willingdon was bent upon crushing the Congress. 
Gandhi was arrested on 4 January 1932 and putin Yarawada jail. 
The Working Committee of the Congress was declared an unlawful 
body. Its records and papers were all seized and its funds were 1 
sequestered, and thousands of people were sentenced during the year. 

In August 1932 the government published their communal award. 
Thereupon Gandhi began a fast unto death to secure its modifi- 


97 



India 


cation (20 September 1932). Ambedkar, the leader of the depre- 
ssed classes, yielded to the moral persuasion of Gandhi and the 
Poona Pact was concluded between the Congress and the depressed 
classes, according to which reserved seats were provided in general 
constituencies for the depressed classes. This pact was accepted 
by the government. The third and final session of the Round 
Table Conference was held without the Congress and the Labour 
Party (November-December 1932). A Parliamentary Joint Select 
Committee was appointed to draft a Government of India 
Bill. It was resolved that Burma should be separated from India. 
The White Paper did not satisfy even moderate Indian opinion. 
Full control was still retained by the British Government as the 
legislators of India’s destiny. The bill became law on 2 August 
1935. This Act retained all the objectionable features of communal 
representation. Diarchy was abolished. There was no substan- 
tial improvement in the effectiveness of the Council of Ministers, 
for the Governor and the Governor General could according to the 
instrument of instructions nullify any assertion of popular will, in 
the country’s administration. The Viceroy had special powers 
and responsibilities relating to the maintenance of internal peace, 
defence, foreign policy, safeguarding of financial stability and of 
minority interests. The British policy was to make use of communal 
differences so that they might postpone the date of transfer of 
power to Indians. 

The Congress fought the elections and accepted the responsibili- 
lities of government in provinces in 1937. The Congress policy 
was to bend the constitution to its will or to break it. The federa- 
tion proposed in 1935 Act was objectionable to the Congress but 
it never came. The Congress ministers did not accept office in 
the majority provinces until they were assured by the Viceroy that 
the governors would not use their special powers in day to day 
administration. The Muslim League fared very badly in the elec- 
tions. It could not secure a majority in the legislature even in 
provinces where Muslims were in majority. But still the League 
demanded that the Congress should admit its representatives in all 
provincial legislatures as the Congress Muslims could not represent 
the Muslim community. The Congress was unyielding and Jinnah 
grew very angry with the Congress leaders. From then on he 

98 



The Struggle for Freedom 


vigorously put forward his two nation theory and organized the 
Muslims for direct action. During the brief time of their office the 
Congress ministries succeeded in maintaining law and order and put 
through much favourable social and economic legislation. 

The Second World War broke out in September 1939 when Lord 
Linlithgow was the Viceroy of India. The Viceroy dragged India 
into the war without explaining to the Indian leaders the war aims 
and the implications of his action. He was constitutionally correct 
no doubt, but when the Congress Committee found that India 
was denied the privilege of consultation which had been extended to 
other dominions. It, therefore, refused its cooperation in the war 
conducted on imperialistic lines. The Congress called upon the 
British Government to state whether the war meant freedom for 
India. There was no favourable response from the British Govern- 
ment and so the Working Committee asked the Congress Govern- 
ment to resign and seven provinces passed under the Governor’s rule. 
In 1940 the Congress offered cooperation in the war effort if its 
political demand was accepted. Earlier the same year the Muslim 
League resolved at Lucknow that India should be divided into two 
states, one for the Hindus and the other for the Muslims. The 
Hindu Maha Sabha under M.S. Aney condemned the two nation 
theory and demanded dominion status and Hindu predominance 
in the defence force. The Viceroy proposed to Indianize the 
executive council and set up an advisory council including represen- 
tatives of the states, but the Congress rejected this offer. The 
Hindu Maha Sabha and the Muslim League accepted it in principle, 
but each wanted more places and guarantees which were not in the 
power of the Viceroy to give. 

Now Gandhi resumed the leadership of the Congress. He chose 
1,500 men to carry on the new movement of individual as contrasted 
with mass civil disobedience. The government strictly forbade 
the publication of news relating to this move. The first man to 
court arrest was Vinoba Bhave. Premiers and fifteen ex-ministers 
found themselves in jail before December. Nehru was sentenced 
to four years’ rigorous imprisonment for his speeches to peasants of 
U.P. Many other leaders were swept into prison at the most criti- 
cal period of the history of the country. The war effort was seri- 
ously affected. The finance bill was rejected by the Assembly 



India 


but the Viceroy certified it. Subhas Chandra Bose disappeared from 
his residence while on parole in Janauary 1941. It was reported 
that he was organizing a Provisional Azad Hind Government and 
Indian National Assembly for the liberation of India with the 
Japanese aid. There was a clause of the Atlantic Charter relating 
to war aims stating that “they respect the right of all people to 
choose the form of Government under which they will live and they 
wish to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to those 
who have been forcibly deprived of them”. Indian leaders consi- 
dered that this clause applied to India also. But Churchill, the 
Premier of England, maintained that it related only to the countries 
overrun by Hitler. Through the influence of the Indian press 
and the Viceroy’s council the satyagrahis including Azad were 
released. Churchill was against enlisting cooperation of the 
Congress in any manner. Much to the chagrin of Churchill,. 
Chiang kai Shek and his wife visited India in February 1942 tO' 
discuss supply routes and defence of Burma. They took the oppor- 
tunity to persuade Indian leaders to join actively in the war effort. 

On 8 March, the Japanese Army entered Rangoon. It became 
necessary to the Viceroy to break the political deadlock in 
India. A British Mission headed by Sir Stafford Cripps (member 
of the War Cabinet) came to India. Cripps was a friend of Nehru 
and Congress and this was enough for Jinnah to suspect Cripps. 
The Cripps plan offered dominion status, but the constitution 
making body for all India including states should be set up. The. 
constitution making body had two conditions to fulfil: (1) the pro- 
vinces not aequiescing in the new consitution would be free to- 
have their own constitution; (2) undertaking to be given to- 
the British Government that the interest of the racial and 
religious minorities would be duly protected. It was impossible 
for any constitution-making body to satisfy these two conditions. 
The British Government’s, policy was very clear. The problem of 
minority was to hang permanently as a millstone round the neck 
of India. The Cripps plan was not acceptable to the Congress. 
The Muslim League was glad that the principle of Pakistan was 
accepted. But Jinnah insisted on an unequivocal recognition of 
Pakistan as a pre-condition for considering the Cripps proposals. 

The people were disappointed. The Congress Executive’s 


100 



The Struggle for Freedom 


“Quit India” resolution adopted in Bombay on 8 August, 1942 was a 
natural reaction. This resulted in the arrest of prominent leaders 
including Nehru. The mass movement gathered formidable 
strength. The government could bring it under control only after 
employing what Gandhi called “leonine violence”. In order to 
focus world attention on India, Mahatma Gandhi went on a fast for 
twenty-one days from 10 February, 1943. Gandhi’s disciple Miss 
Slade, known in India as Mira Ben, said at the end of the fast: 
“God spared India the sorrow and England the shame.” 

Linlithgow, the Viceroy, laid down his office in October 1942, leav- 
ing India more divided than it had been before his arrival. It was 
during his regime that Bengal experienced a famine which claimed 
one and a half million human lives. Wavell succeeded Linlithgow. 
He was convinced of the need to secure the cooperation of the Con- 
gress. But pressure from the Home Government prevented him 
from negotiating with Gandhi. The virtual exile of the Congress 
between the years 1942 and 1945 led to a tremendous growth in 
the strength of the Muslim League. Jinnah was uncompromising 
in his attitude. On 14 June, 1945, Amery, the Secretary of State 
announced that the Viceroy’s Executive Council would be reconsti- 
tuted and that appointments to it would be made giving equal 
representation to Muslims and caste Hindus. But the proposals 
were full of snags and limitations. Jinnah insisted that all the 
Muslim members of the proposed council should be chosen by 
the Muslim League. This was regarded as an untenable claim, 
and Wavell, the Viceroy, could go no further with the proposals. 

After the Second World War things moved rapidly. In Britain 
in the last week of May 1945 a general election was held. The 
Labour Party came to power, and Attlee became the Premier of 
England. Wavell was authorized to announce on 19 September 
that steps would be taken for the ‘realization of full self-government 
inlndia”. In proof of its good faith all the members of theWorking 
Committee were released. Elections were held in January 1946. 
The Congress did well and the Muslim League also came off with 
flying colours. It was impossible for any non-League candidate 
to secure a platform. Jinnah was jubilant. 

It was India’s great good fortune that the Labour Government 
was very sympathetic towards Indian nationalists’ anxiety to settle 


101 



India 


the political question. A Cabinet Mission consisting of the Secre- 
tary of State Lord Pethick Lawrence, the President of the Board of 
Trade, Sir Stafford Cripps and the first Lord of Admirality, A.V. 
Alexander, arrived in India in March 1946. The British scheme 
attempted at the impossible task of bridging the gulf between the 
demands of the Congress and the Muslim League. It envisaged a 
Union of India with the British Indian Provinces and the Princely 
States as its constituent parts, and there were proposals for the 
reorganization of the provinces. The proposals were not acceptable 
to Nehru. Jinnah accepted them with mental reservation for he 
saw the “germs” of Pakistan in them. There is no use trying 
to apportion blame between the Congress and the League, for they 
did not survive, for no fault of the members of the Cabinet Mission. 
The Mission left the country on 29 June, 1946. Jinnah wanted his 
party to be invited to join the Viceroy’s Executive Council as he 
had accepted the Cabinet Mission’s plan. But Labour Government 
thought it unjust and risky to let the Muslim Leaguers in when 
the Congress stood out. Jinnah’s pride was deeply hurt when a 
few weeks later the Congress was allowed to join the provisional 
government. Thereupon Jinnah stirred the Muslims to resort to 
“direct action” to attain Pakistan, “to vindicate then honour and 
to get rid of the present British slavery and the contemplated caste- 
Hindu domination”. Thus the disciple of that prince of moderation, 
Gopalakrisha Gokhale, bade goodbye to constitutional methods 
and began the “Battle for Pakistan”, (16 August). We have no 
place here, for the atrocities committed against the helpless Hindu 
population in Bengal, particularly in Calcutta. General Tucker, 
an eye-witness, wrote: “...it was unbridled savagery with homicidal 
maniacs let loose to kill and to maim and burn. The underworld 
of Calcutta was taking charge of the city.” There were reprisals 
against the Muslims in Bihar and Utter Pradesh. Mahatma Gandhi 
did his best to bring about a peaceful atmosphere. 

Nehru and his colleagues joined the Viceroy’s Executive Council 
on 2 September 1 946 at a time when the Muslim League was threaten- 
ing civil war. We may say that self-government in India began 
with the formation of the interim government. Jinnah soon realized 
his error in not joining the provisional government. He therefore 
sent his men to adopt obstruction tactics. 


102 



CHAPTER 


Independence and 
Partition 


8 


Effective power had been transferred to Indian hands when the 
interim government was formed in 1946 . The entry of the Muslim 
League representatives into the interim government brought about 
complete disunity of that government, depriving it of all moral 
authority. Hindu-Muslim tension was aggravated throughout 
the country. The Congress was not for partition, and the Muslim 
League was against the unitary Government. There was a stale- 
mate that continued for some time. Attlee’s government on 
20 February 1947 made it clear that India must govern herself by 
June 1948 whether there was any agreement as to the form of the 
constitution or not. The position changed when Hindus and 
Muslims came to know that the British Government was determined 
to end its responsibility for India. The Congress and the Muslim 
League engaged themselves in finding a solution to the political 
problem. At this stage Lord Mountbatten succeeded Lord Wavel 



India 


as Governor General. He was a man who could tackle the problem, 
for he had a fondness for rapid action. 

Gandhi’s attempt to win over Jinnah for a unitary government 
failed. The League was determined to have India divided, 
and nothing could be done to resist this determination. It 
is said that if Rajaji’s suggestion to agree to the partition had 
been accepted the massacres that followed the decision for 
partition could have been avoided. But Jinnah’s attitude stiffened 
with every conciliatory move of the Congress, While the claim 
of the Congress to represent the entire nation was challenged, 
the Muslim League’s contention that it represented the 
entire Muslim population of India was accepted. Mountbatten 
had no choice except to divide India, and within three months of 
taking office he recommended complete self-government accom- 
panied by the partition of India with effect from 15 August 1947. 
The British Government accepted this recommendation and in fulfil- 
ment of British intention to grant self-government to India the 
Parliament passed the Indian Independence Act. This Act con- 
ferred on India full independence. It provided in principle the 
partition of India subject to local ratification. It ended the rela- 
tionship between the Crown and the Indian States so that the 
princes were free to decide their own future. The states could 
either be independent or accede to India or Pakistan. The ques- 
tion was the division of territories between India and the newly 
formed Pakistan. Jinnah made impossible proposals such as the 
inclusion of the whole of Bengal, Assam and the Punjab in Pakistan. 
He even demanded an eight hundred miles corridor between East 
and West Pakistan, but nobody took him seriously. The problem 
of the division of territories between Pakistan and India in the 
Punjab and Bengal was a knotty one. In the Punjab terrible 
massacres of the minorities were going on. Penderal Moon says 
that the Muslim mobs “suddenly as though on a preconcerted 
signal came out in their true colours and with weapons in their 
hands and in some places, steel helmets on their heads, indulged 
in murder, loot and arson on a scale never witnessed before in the 
Punjab during a hundred years of British Rule”. 

British statesmen’s pronouncements implied that India could 
get self-government on four conditions : that a new government must 


104 



Independence and Partition 


•be based on agreement between Indian parties; that India must 
remain within the Commonwealth; that India must remain one 
.and undivided; and that minorities must be protected. The announ- 
cement of the British Government rejected all these conditions. 
India was partitioned. Imposed safeguards for minorities were 
considered incompatible with self-government. India was free to 
leave or remain in the Commonwealth. Indian Independence 
Bill was passed without division in the Parliament; on 18 July it 
obtained the Royal assent. Attlee described the Act “as not the 
abdication, but the fulfilment of Britain’s mission in India, a sign 
of the strength and stability of the British Commonwealth”. It 
was decided that India’s Independence should be declared on 15 
August with the seceding areas assuming similar status on the pre- 
ceding day calling themselves Pakistan. At midnight on 15 August 
1947 the Constituent Assembly declared India to be independent 
amidst scenes of emotions.. 

We are yet too near the situation to give the exact causes of 
the withdrawal of Britain from India. It was no doubt, as Attlee 
put it, the fulfilment of Britain’s mission in India. It became 
increasingly clear to the British authorities that it was not possible 
to hold India without embittering the feelings of all sections of the 
Indian community. The attitude of the military, navy and the 
police was definitely nationalistic. The trials of the soldiers of 
the Indian National Army formed by Subhash Chandra Bose were 
resented by the people. There were signs of rebellion in the navy. 
The civil services too were very much affected by nationalistic feelings. 
We are reliably informed by some respectable Indians, who returned 
to India from England during the years immediately following 
the end of the Second World War, that British soldiers who had 
had first-hand knowledge of the poverty of the Indian masses 
■spoke about it feelingly to their friends and relatives. This 
knowledge filtered down to the people, generating a feeling that 
perhaps with independence the Indians might improve their eco- 
nomic condition. In that case the unanimous support of the 
Parliament to the Indian Independence Bill may well be regarded 
.as having mirrored the desire of a discerning section of the British 
public to see India free. More than all it was a fortunate circum- 
stance that the Labour Party was in power and Attlee, a sincere 


105 



India 


friend of India, was the Premier of England. 

Three things had to be done before the transfer of power. The 
first was the partition of territory. A Boundary Commission was 
appointed to make the demarcation, both in the Punjab and in 
Bengal. This was presided over by Sir Radcliffe, who was ably 
assisted by V.P. Menon. The next was the division of the apparatus 
and personnel of civil government. Then came the division of 
military assets and formation. India and Pakistan loyally accepted 
the Boundary Commission’s award. A part of the Punjab, Sind, 
Baluchistan and North Western Frontier Province formed West 
Pakistan and East Bengal became East Pakistan. The other 
British territories became India, with the states having the freedom 
to join either India or Pakistan. 

It is not necessary for us to follow the complicated details of the 
division of assets and liabilities of India and Pakistan. Muslim 
civil servants in India and non-Muslim civil servants in Pakistan 
were given the option to choose India or Pakistan. This affected 
not only transfer of senior officers, but those of all grades. In the 
Railway department alone 16,000 employees a considerable number 
of whom were technicians asked for transfer from India to Pakistan. 
The police force in Delhi was greatly depleted because of the transfer 
of Muslim members of the service to Pakistan. Those that came to 
India from Pakistan were all men of the civil and administrative 
services. It needed Gandhi’s personal intervention for al'settlement 
of the division of cash balances as well as allocation of public debts. 
A Joint Defence Council, with Auchinleck as Supreme Commander 
under Mountbatten, was established. This Council performed 
the delicate task of dividing the armed forces and their plant and 
machinery, equipment and stores between India and Pakistan. The 
functions of the Supreme Commander were to end on 1st April 
1948. 

After 15 August, 1947 violence on a scale unknown previously 
in the history oflndia broke out in the Punjab and Bengal. Gandhi 
moved about in Bengal to restore peace and order. It is difficult 
to say who.began the orgy in the Punjab, the Muslims or the Sikhs. 
The Governor of the Punjab assured Jinnah that he had done his 
best to clear West Punjab of the Sikhs and the Hindus. Muslims 
and Sikhs roamed the country committing unbelievable outrages. 


106 



Independence ancl Partition' 

District officers were powerless and the Boundary Force was unable 
to fulfil its functions, for the soldiers refused to fire on their co- 
religionists and it was disbanded later. Nearly forty per cent of 
the entire Sikh Community were rendered poor and homeless owing, 
to the partition of the Punjab. Large populations were uprooted 
form their ancestral homes; their women were abducted and sub- 
mitted to unspeakable indignities; men and women and children- 
were butchered in cold' blood. Many groups of refugees were 
attacked on the road and put to death. , Refugee trains were derailed 
and their passengers murdered. The Governments of India and 
Pakistan were helpless to restore confidence and prevent great move- 
ments of population. They addressed themselves vigorously to 
the task of feeding and protecting the terror-stricken refugees. We- 
have no place here for the story of the operation of the Joint Military 
Evacuation Organization. In forty-two days (18 September to- 
29 October) twenty-four non-Muslim foot column, 849,000 strong 
with hundreds of bullock carts and head of cattle, had crossed the 
Pakistan border into India. Between 27 August and 6 November 
1947 the Railways carried 2,300,000 refugees inward or outward 
across the Indian frontier. In India the refugees swelled the un- 
happy ranks of the unemployed and made the food problem more- 
acute than ever it had been before. 

Gandhiji very much lamented the situation that compelled such 
mass migration. He addressed himself to the task of promoting, 
reconciliation between the Hindus and Muslims with his charac- 
teristic thoroughness. He pleaded in his prayer meetings in Delhii 
specially for the Muslim minorities in India. This seemed in- 
congruous, when mob fury in West Pakistan was almost unchecked. 
The behaviour of a certain section of Muslims in Delhi, towards, 
the displaced persons from Pakistan weakened the hands of the- 
Mahatma to pacify the distressed refugees. With a firm resolve,, 
he continued to preach his message of peace, love and tolerance. 
On 12 January 1948, he undertook a fast on behalf of the Muslims, 
in India against Hindus and Sikhs. Mahatma Gandhi’s outspoken 
love and friendliness towards the Muslims in India cost him his- 
life. On 30 January 1948, he was shot dead by a fanatic Hindu. 
People everywhere in the world mourned India’s loss, and said that 
it was impossible to see the like of him anywhere in the world again. 



Gandhi’s martyrdom did not solve the problem of refugees. By 
the middle of 1948 about five and a half million non-Muslims moved 
into India from West Pakistan. About the same number of 
Muslims left India for Pakistan. According to the estimation of 
the Government of India, non-Muslims left behind them property 
worth Rs. 500 crores in West Pakistan. The Muslim loss in India 
is put at Rs. 100 crores. It took a long time to settle claims of 
‘Compensation between the two countries. The re-settlement of the 
refugees has been a hard task for the Government of India. 



CHAPTER 


Integration 
nization of 


and Reorga- 
States 


A difficult and delicate problem that faced India at the time of 
transfer of power related to the future of native states. There were 
552 states, large and small, covering an area of nearly 716 thousand 
square miles. The attitude of the princes towards the new Union 
of India was one of unconcealed hostility. These states contained 
nearly a population of ninety-three million. They did not form a 
solid geographical block but were scattered all over India. The 
British refused to transfer paramountcy to an Indian Government 
and the states could have remained separate kingdoms if it had been 
possible. As Coupland says: “an India deprived of the states 
would have lost all coherence. For they formed a gray cruciform 
barrier separating all four quarters of the country .... India would 
live if its Muslim links in the North West and North East were 
amputated, but could it live without its heartbeat." The continued 
existence of these states had served no useful purpose except to meet 



.India 


the imperial necessity of Britain in India. The best solution to the 
states’ problem lay in their total dissolution. But the majority of 
the princes excepting a few like the Maharaja of Baroda proclaimed 
their determination to fight the Congress to preserve their inde- 
pendence. The task of integration of the states with the Union of 
India fell on the shoulders of Sardar Vallabh bhai Patel, who was 
member of the interim government in charge of the states depart- 
ment. It was hoped that the task would be completed before the 
date of actual transfer of power, i.e. 15 August 1947, and Patel had 
hardly a month before him. Sir C.P. Ramaswami Iyer, Dewan 
•of Travancore whom Montagu describes as “one of the cleverest 
men I have ever met in my life”, said that his state was an independent 
■entity and would be free to deal with any government in the world. 

At that time there was a loose talk that the Southern States of 
Travancore, Mysore and Hyderabad might form a federation in- 
•dependent of the Union of India. The Nizam of Hyderabad who 
held the key to the situation was too vacillating for the concretiza- 
tion of any such proposal and Patel was relentless in the exercise of 
‘his pressure on the princes. Fortunately for India, the idea of 
separation of the princes remained a figment of imagination. To 
make a long story short, all the states within the geographical limits 
of India acceded to the Indian Union, only Hyderabad, Kashmir 
.and Junagadh held out. Some historians level two charges 
.■against Patel’s policy of integration of states: one is that “many 
•states were dragooned into accession” by him and the other is that 
•the drive for the popular movements in the states to attain that 
■measure of freedom that the British provinces in India had been 
■enjoying came not from the people themselves, but from New Delhi. 
Even such critics grant that “the states had become an anachronism 
and that it was desirable that an independent India should sweep 
■them away”. Indeed the British Government should have abolished 
them before transfer of power. But they did not, with the result 
■that' the three states of Hyderabad, Junagadh and Kashmir raised 
a crop of troubles. Kashmir still continues to be a source of fric- 
tion between India and Pakistan. 

To the Maharaja of Baroda should be given credit for the 
patriotism with which he voluntarily surrendered his rights and 
{privileges to the Indian Union, setting an example to the other large 


.110 



Integration and Reorganization of States 


states. Jinnah’s explicit statement (17 June 1947) that it was open 
to the states “to join the Indian constituent Assembly or the Paki- 
stan Constituent Assembly, or to decide to remain independent” 
was really subversive of the very existence of India. 

The Nawab of Junagadh was an inefficient ruler excessively 
.addicted to dogs and wives. The state was not contiguous to 
\ Pakistan which could be approached only through the sea. Hindus 
formed the majority of the population of the state. The Nawab 
yielded to Jinnah’s exhortation that he should ‘keep out’ of the 
Indian union “under any circumstances until 15 August.” Jinnah 
promised to the Nawab enough Pakistan Reserve Police to help 
him rid the state of the Hindu majority. The aggressive designs 
of the Nawab and his mentors went awry because of the vigilance 
and timely action of Patel. The Nawab sought asylum in Karachi. 
Junagadh and its two feudatories were merged into the Indian Union 
as a result of the referendum held in February 1948. 

At first the Indian Government was generous to the Nizam of 
Hyderabad, Mir Usman Ali Khan, who had been pampered by the 
British Government with the conferment of the title of His Exalted 
I-Iighness in 1918. He believed that he was distinct from the other 
members of the princely order and put forward claims to independent 
sovereignty so that it became necessary for Lord Reading, the 
Viceroy, to cure him of his obsession by administering a snub in 1928. 
It was suggested to the Nizam that he might accede to the Indian 
Union Defence, Foreign Affairs and Communications, subjects 
over which he had no control during the British rule. He not 
only refused, but insisted that he should be treated on an equal 
footing with the Union Government in the course of negotiations. 
Patel was willing to flatter the Nizam to some extent but the latter 
put forward fantastic claims of sovereignty, depending on his militant 
Razakars and the support of the Muslims of India and Pakistan. 
The Nizam kept his state in near war conditions. Jinnah, ignoring 
international proprieties, declared (1 June 1948) that the Nizam’s 
dominion was an “Independent state and that not only the Muslims 
of Pakistan but the Muslims all the world over fully sympathize with 
Hyderabad in its struggle”. 

Patel found that negotiations were of no avail and that 
military action alone could solve the problem. On 13 September 


111 



India 


1948, the Indian troops marched into Hyderabad under the- 
Command of Major-General Chaudhary. The Nizam to his dis- 
may found that all his preparations for war were of no use. The 
Razakars and their fanatic leader Razvi ran for their lives. The 
Nizam realized that submission was the better part of valour. On 
17 September after about 108 hours of military operation Hyderabad 
whose existence for seven generations owed mainly to the British 
protection, acceded to the Indian Union. “Shorn of all powers 
and privilege, disillusioned and growing more and more decrepit,, 
the Nizam lives on clinging desperately to his uncounted hoards.” 
Britain’s sympathy with the Nizam should be understood in the con- 
text of sentiments arising out of Hyderabad’s long standing associa- 
tion with the British power. Percival Griffiths somewhat mourn- 
fully observes: “Whether India was justified or not in the action she 
finally took is a matter about which historians may well argue for 
generations to come, but the practical man is bound to consider that 
the inclusion of Hyderabad in India was the only satisfactory con- 
clusion possible.” 

Kashmir has a proud history of its own from the Vedic age. It 
is strategically situated. At the time of partition it had a Hindu 
Maharaja ruling over people the majority of whom were Muslims. 
Mountbatten when he was the Governor-general of India, at the 
request of Indian leaders assured Pakistan that India had no inten- 
tion of forcing the Maharaja to accede to the Indian Union. But 
in the autumn of 1947 tribesmen from Pakistan territory with the 
connivance of the Pakistan government invaded Kashmir and 
precipitated matters. The Maharaja had been hesitating to accede 
either to India or Pakistan, for in each event there were formidable 
risks. Alarmed at the approach of the invaders towards the capital 
Srinagar, the Maharaj a sent word to New Delhi that he would accede 
to India. Thereupon Indian troops were flown in to defend 
Kashmir against both the tribesmen and the Pakistan army which 
had entered the state. Pakistan refused to regard the accession of 
Kashmir to India as a settled fact and continued to fight. India 
took the case to the Security Council of the United Nations. The 
claims and counter claims of both the countries have been periodi- 
cally reviewed at the Security Council but no decision has so far 
been arrived at. On January 1949 the U.N. Commission arranged 


112 



Integration and Reorganization of States 

for a cease-fire between India and Pakistan, India holds two-thirds 
of Kashmir and demands restoration of the rest now under illegal 
occupation of Pakistan. 

Patel, a man of indomitable will, high courage, swift and sane 
decision for action carried through the threefold process, assimila- 
tion, centralization and unification of the states. Small states 
numbering 216 were merged with the neighbouring provinces. A 
certain number of principalities such as Bhopal, Kutch and Manipur 
were constituted into centrally administered areas. The other 
states, large and small, were formed into six groups, namely, 
Saurashtra, Rajasthan, Madhya Bharat, Patiala and East Punjab, 
Travancore-Cochin and Vindhya Pradesh. Each group was to 
have at its head a Rajapramukh who was to be elected by the council 
of rulers from amongst the former rulers of the states. It is not 
necessary to get into the complicated details of the financial integra- 
tion of the states nor the extent of the privy purse given to each 
prince. It was soon found that the presence of Rajapramukhs was 
incompatible with Indian democracy and in the course of the re- 
organization of states on linguistic basis the states under Rajapra- 
mukhs were split up and distributed among the contiguous states. 

The Union of India still remained incomplete owing to the exis- 
tence of the French and Portuguese enclaves. The French Govern- 
ment took a realistic view and ceded Pondicherry, Karaikal, 
Chandranagore and Mahe to the Indian Union. But the Portuguese- , 
were adamantine in their attitude towards the Indian Union. They 
said that as Goa was a part of the metropolitan territories of Portugal 
they were not affected by the British and French withdrawal from 
India. The Portuguese authorities started ill-treating their subjects, 
because they favoured a move to join the Indian Union. They 
would listen to no reason. At last Nehru, the Prime Minister of 
India, lost his patience. The Indian army marched into Goa to 
set things right. The Portuguese were driven out of Goa. Western, 
peoples disapproved of India’s use of force against their declared 
policy of non-violence. Both the Asian and African countries 
welcomed the Indian action as a blow against colonialism. 

The formation of linguistic provinces was also looked upon as 
a dangerous source of disintegration. But the Congress stood 
committed to it. Political leaders, particularly in Andhra, clamoured 


113 



India 


for the formation of linguistic states. A committee consisting of 
Nehru, Patel and Pattabhi Sitaramayya was appointed to consider 
the question. The committee frankly owned that “when the 
Congress had given the seal of its approval to the general principle 
of linguistic provinces, it was not faced with the practical applica- 
tion of the principle and hence it had not considered all the im- 
plications and consequences that arose from the practical appli- 
cation”. Nehru set his face against formation of linguistic pro- 
vinces for fear that it might lead to the development of fissiparous 
tendencies. He would have postponed the problem indefinitely if 
the Communists had not exploited the Telugu demand for an 
Andhra state in the elections of 1952. Potti Sriramalu went on a 
fast unto death in support of the Andhra demand. The agitation 
was so intense that Nehru had to agree to the formation of the 
Andhra State (1953). This inevitably led to the question of state 
boundaries and the States Reorganization Commission was 
appointed, and its recommendations led to linguistic states, with the 
exception that Maharashtra and Gujarat still continued as one 
state (1956). Over the separation of Bombay state into Gujarati 
and Maharashtrian areas, feelings rose high, leading to riots in 
Bombay and Ahmedabad. After two years of intense Gujarat 
agitation the new State of Bombay was partitioned. From May 
1960 a separate state of Gujarat: with Ahmedabad as its capital 
name into existence. Bombay city remained the capital of Maha- 
rashtra. 

The Sikhs demanded a separate state for themselves but this was 
not considered favourably because no clear cut distinction between 
Punjabi and Hindi could be made out. PEPSU was merged with 
West Punjab and Himachal Pradesh came under Central Administra- 
tion. In August 1961 Master Tara Singh began a fast unto death 
for the creation of a Sikh state but was persuaded to abandon it in 
■ October. In June 1966 the West Punjab was split into two states; 
the Punjabi speaking areas forming in one Sikh State and the 
Hindi speaking areas the other. There were protracted and 
complicated discussions regarding the reorganization of states. 
The ultimate result is that India now consists of seventeen states 
besides the union territories. Nehru was completely indifferent to 
local as distinct from Indian patriotism. To him states reorga- 


114 



Integration and Reorganization of States 


nization was mainly a matter of administrative detail. But un- 
fortunately his view has not been accepted by large sections of 
the public in India so that questions of state boundaries, division 
of river waters, and merger of territories like Goa continue to give 
trouble. 


115 



CHAPTER 


The Constitution of India 


The Constitution of India was framed in circumstances that 
differed from those that obtained when the American and the 
Canadian constitutions were framed. The U.S.A. evolved out of 
a number of independent states that had been unconnected with one 
another 1 except through their common subordination to the British 
Crown. The states rebelled against British authority, and won the 
War of Independence, by forming a loose federation among them- 
selves. The constitution had necessarily to limit the authority of 
the federal centre, for the states insisted on retaining for themselves 
all powers not specifically transferred to the Union. The Canadian 
federation grew up according to Keith under the shadow of the 
great conflict between North and South in America. After a period 
of unsatisfactory unitary government, Canada adopted a federation, 
avoiding the American error of leaving the power to the states 
undefined. Canada has a strong central government with which 




The Constitution of India 

residuary powers rest. The federation of the colonies in Australia 
arose not out of any necessity but for convenience. There the 
federal government was therefore given only those powers that were 
deliberately surrendered by the states. None of these conditions 
existed in India in 1947. From 15 August 1947, the Constituent 
Assembly became a full sovereign body. This Assembly was free 
to frame any type of constitution without consulting any outside 
authorities. There were, of course, provincial rivalries, but in the 
first flush of. pride of independence all petty differences were for- 
gotten. The Constituent Assembly consisted of the pick of the 
nation. It is not possible to mention the names of all those illustri- 
ous men. But Dr. Ambedkar and Alladi Krishnaswamy Iyer must 
be mentioned for their great services in framing the constitution of 
India. The members of the Constituent Assembly were most of 
them lawyers of international reputation, well-versed in constitu- 
tional law. The situation in 1947 was different from what it had 
been in December 1946, when the Constituent Assembly came into 
existence. After partition there was no necessity for limiting the 
powers of the central government. The historic objective re- 
solutions moved by Nehru stated that the territories comprising 
British India and the acceding states “shall possess and retain the 
status of autonomous units, together with residuary powers, and 
exercise all powers and functions of Government . . . except such 
powers as are vested in the Union”. 

The framers of the Constitution of India drew liberally from 
many sources. The Government of India Act of 1935 provided 
the framework. The directive principles of the Indian Constitution 
were evolved on the model of those in the Constitution of Eire. The 
idea of the fundamental rights was inspired by the Constitution 
of the U.S.A. The section of the Constitution dealing with the 
federation shows the influence of the Canadian pattern. Above all 
the Indian Constitution drew heavily from English principles and 
concepts, with which the framers were thoroughly acquainted. 

It is impossible to analyse here in any satisfactory manner the 
Constitution of India containing 396 articles and numerous 
schedules. But we may in a broad manner say that it has to be 
read, interpreted and understood not merely in terms of its own ex- 
press texts but also in terms of the unwritten conventions as ex- 


117 



India 


pounded in English constitutional law. The constitution may not 
be quite perfect, but it has all the essentials necessary for making 
the fundamental law of the land extremely sound. This constitu- 
tion is proudly regarded as the Charter of India’s freedom. The 
new Constitution was enacted on 26 November 1 949 and inaugurated 
with due solemnity on 26 January 1950, a day which has become 
memorable in the Country’s constitutional history as the Republic 
Day. One main characteristic feature of the constitution is that it 
has preserved the unity of India which may be regarded as a British 
heritage. Consistent with the needs of a developing country, where 
there are wide variations in social and economic conditions of the 
people, the constitution gives all residuary powers to the central 
government. The Preamble to the Constitution represents the 
sincere aspirations of the noble framers, and reads thus : 

“WE THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, Having solemnly resolved to 
constitute India into a SOVEREIGN DEMOCRATIC RE- 
PUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens: 

JUSTICE, social, economic and political; 

LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; 

EQUALITY of status and opportunity; and promote among 
them all; 

FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and 
unity of the Nation; 

IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty sixth day of 
November 1949, do. HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE 
TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.” 

This Preamble assures to all alike justice, liberty, equality and 
fraternity. The primacy given to justice should be noted. This 
does not find a place in the revolutionary slogans of France. It 
is in consonance with the ancient spirit of India, according to which 
the maintenance of Dharma is the supreme duty of the state. This 
concept of Dharma has of course been transformed into the Rule 
of Law to ensure social and political justice, necessitated by the 
composite character of the Indian population. 

There is a whole chapter on fundamental rights in the constitution. 
Its place in the constitution is questioned by some. The directive 


118 



The Constitution of India' 

principles of State policy are regarded merely as a revised edition- 
of the Congress Party’s manifesto. There are some who maintain 
that Article 19 envisaging limitation on the enjoyment of certain 
freedoms by the citizens constitutes the negation of the very princi- 
pies underlying the exercise of fundamental rights. 

Certain differences between the Indian Parliamentary system and' 
that of the British may be pointed out here. The minister in the 
Indian Parliament can go to either house, and take part in the dis- 
cussion, but his vote is confined to the house to which he has been 
elected. But no British minister belonging to the blouse of Lords' 
can go to the House of Commons for similar purpose. The 
Attorney General in India is appointed by the President of India? 
he renders legal advice to government, untrammelled by personal 
and party consideration, whereas the Attorney General in Britain 
is a member of the cabinet conscious of the fact that he owes his 
position to the party in power. The Election Commission in India 
is an independent body which can be fair, free and impartial, because 
it is not a creature of the parliament or the executive. The three 
general elections in India based on adult franchise have clearly 
shown the soundness of the Indian arrangement for election. In 
Britain the responsibility for holding the election rests with the 
Parliament. But it must be observed that the British sense of fair 
play is never more strongly evident than in an election. In India 
the Parliament is not supreme in the sense in which it is in the United 
Kingdom. The judiciary here can pronounce invalid any act of 
Parliament that offends the Constitution. For example, the 
Parliament is debarred from enacting legislation to compel a 
person to give evidence against himself or to allow a child under 
fourteen to work in a factory or mine, or to appropriate revenue to 
the propagation of any particular religion. In the United King- 
dom, Parliament could, if it chose, do all these things. 

The predominance of the centre is assured in three ways. First 
the legislative powers of the centre and the state are enumerated 
in the federal, concurrent, and states lists. It is specifically 
stated that residuary powers reside in the union. The federal, 
government has wide powers of intervening in state’s matters and in 
some circumstances of assuming the entire functions of any or all 
the state governments. Such actions have, however, to be approved 


119 - 



India 


by the Parliament within a limited time. Secondly, defence, inter- 
national relations, ports, railways and currency are the prerogative 
of the centre alone. In the case of ports and aerodromes the central 
government can modify or supercede legislation, whether enacted 
by the centre or the states. The states, however, possess consi- 
derable powers over agriculture, education, law and order, etc. 
The states have sometimes asserted their rights in subjects in their 
charge; for example, in 1954 they resisted the attempts of the 
central finance minister to bring about some uniformity in the 
administration of states’ sales taxes. In spite of the advice of the 
central government against prohibition, some states are following 
the policy of prohibition. Where the state government expects 
financial assistance from the centre it has necessarily to be more 
pliable than it would wish. Percival Griffiths observes: “In 
reality the relations between the states and the centre, depend more 
on politics and personalities than on legal definition and some 
observers doubt whether the ascendency of the centre will be main- 
tained, when Nehru ceases to be the Prime Minister.” After 
Nehru, although the states have shown greater freedom in their 
expression of opinion regarding their relations with the centre, 
the relationship between the two has so far been smooth and cordial. 
Perhaps it is too early to come to a decision on the matter. 

In India the judiciary has a right to overrule parliamentary 
authority. The judges of the supreme and high courts in India 
have courageously maintained their independence. The funda- 
mental rights in the constitution are enforceable by law, while the 
directive principles cannot be so enforced. Certain conflicts have 
arisen between the approach of the fundamental rights and that of 
the directive principles. The Madras Government in its attempt 
to improve the position of the backward classes reserved seats for 
them in certain educational institutions. The supreme court held 
that this amounted to discrimination and was therefore unconstitu- 
tional. But the Government of India felt that the action to uplift 
the backward sections of the community could not be against 
the spirit of the constitution. Therefore, the government secured 
an addition to Article 15, specifically permitting the state to make 
special provision for the advancement of the backward classes. 
Articles relating to the freedom of the press have also been amended, 


120 



The Constitution of India 

in consonance with the view of the central government. This 
has aroused bitter controversy. One of the most important safe- 
guards of the constitution was embodied in Article 31; this lays 
down that a law providing for compulsory acquisition of property 
must fix the amount of compensation, or specify the principles on 
which the property is sought to be acquired. The Congress Govern- 
ment in pursuance of its policy of the abolition of the zamindars 
and landlords passed laws in the state legislatures for the State 
acquisition of property. In Bihar, the Patna High Court held that 
the Act concerned was unconstitutional in as much as it involved, 
discrimination between one class and another, The constitution 
had therefore to be amended to enable the government to imple- 
ment their policy of agrarian reform. This fourth amendment 
of the Costitution barred the courts from examining the adequacy 
of the compensation specified in any law for the acquisition of the 
property and in some important cases relieved the state of the con- 
stitutional obligation to pay compensation for the acquisition 
of rights or property. Nehru’s policy of attaching greater impor- 
tance to directive principles than to constitutional safeguards was 
viewed with deep concern by the people of India. To some extent 
it shook the confidence of the world at large. 

It may be observed that for the past 150 years there have been 
only ten amendments to the Constitution of the U.S.A., whereas 
the Indian Constitution has already been amended more than fifteen 
times. There is pressure brought to bear on the government for 
amending the clause of the constitution relating to the use of Hindi 
as official language. A commission was appointed to study and 
Teport on the question of replacing of English by Hindi. Their 
report is noncommittal, for they expressed no view as to when 
Hindi should replace English as official language. But Nehru made 
statesmanlike pronouncement that English would continue as “an 
associate additional language as long as the people required 
and there would be no imposition of Hindi on non-Hindi speaking 
people”. The Shastri government adhered to this. 

The establishment of Planning Commission to formulate Five 
Year Plans, and Indian National Development Council consisting 
of the chief ministers of the states among others, tended to increase 
the power of the Central authority. All these subjects are enumerated 


121 



India 


in the union list besides such unshared powers. The centre has 
concurrent jurisdiction over a number of other subjects. Where 
there is a difference of opinion between the centre and the state, 
the law requires that the Centre’s will should prevail. 

The greatest merit of the Indian Constitution consists in the 
fact that it is an Indian statute although it has borrowed some 
elements from other constitutions. The vision and boldness of 
the founding fathers of the constitution may be seen from the aboli- 
tion of the electoral system of communal representation and the 
preservation of the secularity of the state. 


122 



CHAPTER 

Nehru’s Domestic Policy 
and Party Politics 


In British India direct chain of authority descended from the King 
Emperor, through the Viceroy and Provincial Governor to the 
District Officer, and the British Parliament had the supreme control 
over the government and its machinery. All these changed with 
independence. After independence till the first general election 
in 1951-52 power was vested in the Cabinet. Jawaharlal Nehru, 
admittedly the most powerful political figure in India, was the Prime 
Minister. Western writers, while conceding that the scheme of 
responsible government through the ministers is quite well under- 
stood by the educated middle class in India, doubt if the culti- 
vator can easily understand it. We have already indicated that 
entrusting responsibility to selected or elected representatives, 
has long been known to India. Elections to the district board 
and municipalities had already familiarized the peasant with inde- 
pendent India’s form of government. Hence, it may be said that 



125 



India 


•free India had a tradition of reponsible government in a measure 
•which no other country in Asia could claim at the time of inde- 
pendence. 

Lord Mountbatten who had played a major part in bringing 
about transfer of power agreed to remain as the first Governor 
•General of independent India till June 1948. Mountbatten was 
really admired and trusted by Nehru and his colleagues in 
Cabinet. He was loved by the people as the connecting link 
between Britain and free India. He took a leading part in trying 
to compose the growing differences between India and Pakistan. 
By his innate nobility and his enthusiasm for right causes, this 
scion of royal lineage has won an abiding place in the history of 
free India. Lady Mountbatten was really a sister of mercy in 
the unhappy days of partition and her death in February 1960 was 
deeply mourned in India. 

The man to decide the future of the country was Jawaharlal 
Nehru. His biography has to be read elsewhere. The sacrifices 
■of the Nehru family for the cause of India’s freedom endeared 
Jawaharlal to the people of India. He was born of a very rich 
Kashmiri Brahmin family and was educated at Harrow and Cam- 
bridge in England. He was the very embodiment of a wholesome 
combination of the best in India and in England. Right through 
his life there was a conflict in him between his loyalty to the spiritual 
ideals of India and his love for the dazzling material progress of 
the West. Like Gandhi, Nehru had a certain enigmatic quality 
defying the analysis even of the most careful observer. By tempera- 
ment he was at once a democrat and a dictator. Everyone who 
knew him realized his greatness and singleness of purpose. He had 
a genuine desire for the welfare of the masses and very much enjoyed 
the presence of ordinary folk. Indeed he drew spiritual refresh- 
ment through contact with the crowd. Like a magnet he drew 
unimaginably large crowds wherever he went. By his deep scholar- 
ship and extensive travels he had acquired a rare insight into 
human nature. No wonder that he was the idol of the nation. 
He was second to none in the world in democratic leadership. 
No one in recent history had continuously held the premier- 
ship of a democratic country for seventeen years as Nehru did. 
It cannot, however, be said that he had the unanimous support 


124 



Nehru’s Domestic Policy and Party Politics 


of the intelligentsia in all the details of his domestic and foreign 
policy. When in 1956 he did not express the indignation of the- 
Indian public at Russia’s behaviour in Hungary, he was subjected 
to severe criticism. Again in 1959 when China made deep incur- 
sions into Ladakh his reluctance to condemn China raised a storm 
in the Lok Sabha. Discerning people in India felt that he had 
been duped by China. While his brilliant intellect and sincerity 
of purpose were greatly admired, his lack of grit as an adminis- 
trator was deplored. Even as a party chief he was not as efficient 
as people wished him to be. Nevertheless, his personality was 
power, and his very frailties won for him the love and regard of 
the common people. There is no gainsaying the fact that progre- 
ssive India owes a great deal to Nehru’s genius and vision. 

The Constitution of India was finalized on 26 November 1949 
and the Republic of India was inaugurated with due solemnity on 
26 January 1950. At that time India was politically immature,, 
socially backward and economically poor as already indicated. 
Nehru had to implement the following directives laid down in the 
Constitution: 

The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing 

(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to 
an adequate means of livelihood; 

(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of 
the community are so distributed as best to subserve the 
common good; 

(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result 
in the concentration of wealth and means of production to- 
the common detriment. 

What was India like in respect of food and clothing after parti- 
tion ? Agriculture, though the most important, was in some 
ways the least satisfactory branch of the Indian economy. India 
was unable to feed herself, though she had an irrigated area three 
times as large as that of the U.S.A. and larger than the combined 
total of any other ten countries in the world. It must be pointed 
out that India’s ability to feed herself was substantially lessened, 
by partition, for sixty-eight per cent of the irrigated area of undivided 


125 



India 


India went to Pakistan. According to C. N. Vakil, yields of rice 
and wheat in India were only 750 and 650 lb. respectively as against 
900 and 850 lb. in Pakistan. Consequently, India with a propor- 
tionately larger population had to experience shortage of food. 

The effect of partition on textile industries was equally serious. 
The jute mills were in India, while nearly eighty per cent of the 
raw jute was grown in East Pakistan. There was a compelling 
necessity for India to grow jute in land badly required for food 
production. Although the number of cotton textile mills was far 
larger in India than that in Pakistan, the latter had a much larger 
share of American type of medium-staple cotton. Thus Indian 
mills were deprived of an important market in West Pakistan 
where per capita consumption of cloth had been higher than 
elsewhere in undivided India. 

In 1950-51 in India the per capita consumption level of food 
was 1,800 calories per day and of cloth 9.2 yards per capita per 
annum, both distressingly low. 

At the time of partition India was comparatively well off in the 
matter of industrial establishment, for during the Second World 
War she was the base of military supplies for Middle East, She 
had a considerable number of experienced industrialists and finan- 
ciers; but even here there was shortage of mechanics owing to the 
migration of a large number of Muslim mechanics to Pakistan. 

The aims of the domestic policy of Nehru were to increase pro- 
duction; to enthuse everyone to contribute his best to increase 
the national income; and to reduce as far as possible inequalities 
in the distribution of wealth. His policy contained no doctrinaire 
approach or a rigid pattern and its key-note was integration of 
various sections in the community and the removal of disparities 
and antagonisms. 

Till 1951-52, Nehru’s Cabinet included experienced statesmen 
and financial experts who were not members of the Congress. 
Their contribution to the successful administration of the country was 
really great. But after the first general elections in 1951-52 the 
Cabinet was formed on the basis of the party system, so that only 
Congressmen could find a place in it. In the early years of indepen- 
dence, the officers of the Indian Civil Service carefully adjusted 
themselves to the changed conditions and did their best to help 


126 



Nehru's Domestic Policy and Party Politics 

maintain law and order and stability of administration. Somehow 
or other, it was felt that in the democratic set up in the country new 
cadres should be formed for different branches of administration. 
These new officers had to handle problems like the management 
of internal trade, finance, banking, insurance, control of vast indus- 
trial concerns and supervision of large welfare projects. Provision 
was made for recruitment to Indian administrative, railway, police, 
forest and other similar important services. The work of the Public 
Service Commissions grew greatly with the need to recruit more 
and more officers. The new services have grown largely under 
political control. How far considerations other than merit have 
weighed in the matter of appointments to high administrative 
posts is a matter for study. The allegation that the new officers 
have shown a bias for regionalism has also to be examined before 
it can be accepted. 

The results of the first general elections were quite revealing. 
It was clearly demonstrated that there was no political organization 
of an all India character capable of offering an effective challenge 
to the supremacy of the Congress. The Congress had the advan- 
tage of possessing a well-knit countrywide organization with 
elected officers who had considerable influence over the electorate. 
So it continued to entrench itself in power. Only a very small 
section of the community thought seriously over the question of ' 
effective opposition to the Congress. Splinter groups such as the 
Praja Socialists could show in their election manifesto nothing 
better than the socialist trends in the Congress. Only the Commu- 
nist Party had the necessary organizational power to challenge 
the Congress but it miserably failed because its roots lay outside 
India and its arguments against the Congress were palpably falla- 
cious. Its anti-God policy and its ideas about private property 
were not acceptable to the people at large. Moreover, its behaviour 
in the period of the Second World War, first opposing Britain for 
its imperialism and then supporting her war effort as soon as Russia 
became an allied power against Germany seemed ridiculous to 
people. Its thoughtless criticism of the Congress during the 
struggle for independence were regarded as anti-national. The 
Congress vigilantly watched the moves of the Communist Party 
and effectively checked its growth by exposing the dangers of its 


127 



India 


revolutionary campaign. Provincial political organizations such 
as the Hindu Mahasabha, Ganatantra Parishad, and Dravida 
Munnetra Kazhagam were all militant groups whose policies defi- 
nitely tended to disrupt the unity of India and promote religious 
and communal discord, with the result that Congress emerged 
supreme in the Lok Sabha as also in State Assemblies except in 
Kerala. It is impossible to analyse the results of the elections 
in sufficient detail here. It should, however, be noted that the adult 
franchise led to the awakening of the masses. Rural interests 
asserted themselves. The state legislatures showed a sizeable 
bloc of representatives from rural areas. University men, lawyers 
and other professional groups were not generally favoured by the 
rural people. The educated middle class came to be less respected 
than in the days of British rule. The shift to local rural leaders 
irrespective of academic credentials or political experience was 
clearly noticeable. This was not an unforeseen tendency in the 
process of Indian democracy. 

‘Nehru’ became a name to conjure with and local Congress 
leaders made full use of it. Nehru too carried on a whirlwind 
election campaign for the Congress. There was some indefinable 
trait of character in Nehru which made even respectable loaders of 
the Congress not to say or do anything calculated to displease him. 
Not that Nehru wanted them to be subservient; he was too much of 
a democrat to do that. This kind of self-surrender on the part 
of the Congress leaders led some impartial observers feel that 
Nehru could, at any moment, turn a dictator, if he chose. So 
towering was his personality that foreigners interested in India 
kept asking what would happen to Indian leadership after Nehru. 

To give concrete shape to the domestic policy based on the 
directive in the constitution, quoted earlier, planned development 
was started in 1951. Since then two Five Year Plans have been 
completed and we are now near the completion of the Third Five 
Year Plan. The goals enshrined in the directive principles of the 
constitution have been spelt out as socialist pattern in the plans. 
The achievements of the plans will be dealt withiater, in the chapter 
on economic progress. In December 1954 the Parliament adop- 
ted the socialist pattern of society as the objective of social and 
economic policy. The socialist pattern of society means increa- 


128 



Nehru’s Domestic Policy and Party Politics 

sed production, maximum contribution from every one towards 
national development and fair distribution to all concerned. It 
also involves the ownership or control by the state of basic indust- 
ries, cooperative agriculture, and a tax system meant to ensure 
equitable distribution of wealth. 

The Congress Socialist Party came into existence in 1934. Its 
members were responsible to ensure that the parent organization 
would develop a radical outlook on social and economic issues. 

... Inspiration for their socialism came from leaders like Nehru and 
' Subhgs Chandra Bose. After attainment of national independence, 
the socialists as a group seceded from the Congress in 1948. This 
group .could have developed into a second largest political party 
in the country, if there had been unity among its members. Un- 
fortunately, they spent a great deal of their energy and time in 
dialectical hair-splitting and failed to win a mass following. Jay a 
Prakash Narayan who was the leader of the party became an ardent 
Gandhian after the Mahatma’s death. . Now he has disavowed 
politics altogether. Asoka Mehta, the next socialist leader, 
found that there was a good deal of common ground between the 
Congress and the socialists. So he accepted the Deputy Chair- 
manship of the Planning Commission of the Government of India. 
In 1952, the socialists merged with the Kisan Mazdoor Praja 
Party and formed the Praja Socialist Party. For a brief period 
it had the leadership of men like Prakasam and Acharya Kripalani. 
Because the Congress stood for nationalism, secularism and socia- 
lism the Praja Socialist Party had nothing better to show to 
to capture the imagination of the people. The party has been 
languishing for want of both leaders and resources. 

The Communist Party of India is the chief single opposition 
party. This party has been under vigorous attack since the first 
Chinese invasion in 1959 and especially since the more serious 
invasion of October 1962. In 1957 the Communist Party succeeded 
in forming the ministry in Kerala. It became also the chief 
opposition party in the legislatures of Andhra Pradesh, the 
Punjab, Madras and West Bengal. The membership of the 
Communist Party is not large. Its leaders are predominantly 
university graduates, belonging to the intelligentsia of India. The 
communists were in power in Kerala for twenty-eight months. 


129 



India 


In this period they provided an instructive glimpse of communist 
methods. Namboodiripad, the Chief Minister, proclaimed that 
in all industrial and agrarian disputes the police would remain 
neutral. This gave labour an advantage in dealing with their \ 
employers and resulted in an alarming growth of lawlessness in 
the state, particularly in the plantations. Most of the minis- 
ters were above corruption; but the party grew enormously rich 
at the cost of the State. The Education Biil of the Communist 
Party aroused wide opposition. This bill required even private 
schools to choose their teachers from lists prepared by the state. 
Control over education was increased, and nationalized text books 
were written with a view to indoctrinating the student population 
with the subversive doctrine of communism. Those who opposed 
communist rule in Kerala were obliged to resort to civil disobe- 
dience. The Congress which was in opposition managed to bring 
about an intervention by the central government. Commenting 
on this K.M. Panikkar observes: 

. . .without a breakdown such intervention would not be 
justified. So a breakdown had to be brought about. For 
this purpose organized direct action was resorted to. It was 
led by the Congress, under the authority of the Party High 
Command in Delhi, whose leaders continuously visited the 
State to give guidance to the agitation. That the Party High 
Command was in close association with the Central Govern- 
ment would hardly be denied. Having thus itself helped to 
create a political crisis in the State, the Central Government 
imposed the President’s rule on the ground that there had been 
a breakdown of administration. The breakdown of adminis- 
tration was, if not created, at least promoted by the Central 
Government in order to enable it to give its intervention a 
legitimacy. In effect it was a reaffirmation of the doctrine of 
paramountcy. 1 

Elections were held in 1960 in which the Communists gained 
a few more seats than before. However, the Congress managed 

1. The Foundations of New India, p. 240. 


130 



Nehru’s Domestic Policy and Party Politics 


to form a coalition ministry with the Praja Socialist Party and the 
Muslim League. This encouraged the League in its communal 
activities and the Jana Sangh in the North hotly criticized the 
1 Congress. 

The Jana Sangh was formed in 1951 under the leadership of the 
President of the Hindu Maha Sabha, Dr. Shyama Prasad Mooker- 
jee. This party claims to stand for “one country, one culture, 
one nation and dharma raj , and rule of law”. In its election 
manifesto of 1961, written before the Indian invasion of Goa, it 
urged “the complete integration of Kashmir”, “opposition to soft 
pedalling of disputes with Pakistan”, and “the use of force to 
put an end to Portuguese colonial rule on our soil”. This mani- 
festo further said that in “proper and quick industrialization, 
instead of copying Western pattern, we should develop our own 
technique...” This party emphasises Indian self-sufficiency and 
urges greater independence of foreign capital and foreign aid. 
In the last general election this party won eighteen seats in the 
Lok Sabha, and one hundred and sixteen seats in the local legisla- 
tures. It has been putting forward an impatient demand on behalf 
of Hindi in opposition to '‘English. Its following is mostly con- 
fined to the Hindi-speaking regions. In the last elections it fared 
disastrously in the rest of the country. This shows that its policies 
and programmes have not been sufficiently popularized. 

The Swatantra Party was established in 1959. Its sudden rise 
is almost entirely due to the commanding influence of its founder 
C. Rajagopalachari, “a man of razor-like intelligence”, according 
to Nehru. He is an elder statesman in Indian politics and the 
most devoted adherent of Mahatma Gandhi. In spite of his great 
age, he has been opposing the Congress without rest and retirement. 
Writing in Hindustan Times Independence Day Supplement, he calls 
the Congress Ministry corrupt, inefficient and unscrupulous. He 
stated: “There can be no fair election with the party in office, 
distributing permits and licenses and holding the power to ruin 
any man Or any business.” The opponents of the Swatantra 
Party often accuse it of being a close ally of big business and dis- 
possessed princes. This party has certainly taken money from 
the wealthy class, but the Congress too has done the same. Among 
the leaders of the Swatantra Party are K.M. Munshi, N.G. Ranga 


131 



India 


and M.R. Masani, all men of character, worth and reputation. 
But this party fared badly in the last election. Nevertheless, 
there are people who desire that it should grow strong because 
there is an urgent need for a rival political party that can offer 
an effective constitutional opposition to the Congress. As Kul- 
karni observes :.. “the strength of the Congress party is not in 
itself, but in the weakness of its rivals”. The parties ranged 
against the Congress are many, and they are too divided to func- 
tion as a single body. Acharya Kripalani brought against Nehru 
Ministry a ‘no-confidence motion’ in August 1963 in the Lok 
Sabha. This was defeated by 346 votes to sixty one, the commu- 
nists choosing to remain neutral. This demonstrates the irremo- 
vability of the party in power. 

Minor political parties are far too many to be mentioned. The 
Akali Dal in the Punjab is led by Master Tara Singh. It is a 
communal party agitating for a separate Sikh state. In Madras the 
chief opposition party is the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (society 
for Dravidian uplift). It urged the secession of Dravidian South 
(Madras, Kerala, Mysore and Andhra Pradesh) from, the rest 
of India. It has some strength in Madras, but the other states 
have so far given no support to its aims. This party opposes the 
adoption of Hindi as the official national language. In 1962 
election, this party captured fifty-three out of 206 seats in the state 
legislature. C.N. Annadurai, the leader of the party, demanded 
secession in parliament in May 1962. Prime Minister Nehru 
said that the demand was outrageous and that it should be resisted 
“with all our force”. With the D.M.K. in mind the government 
drew up a sixteenth amendment to the constitution to permit 
restriction on freedom of speech and assembly in the interest of 
the “integrity and sovereignty of India”. Under this amendment 
the candidates advocating secession would be prohibited from 
contesting the elections. The D.M.K. has now given up its demand 
for secession. C. Rajagopalachari’s influence with the D.M.K. 
is considerable and in any event it is calculated to turn narrow 
communalism into broad nationalism. 

Nehru was determined to make India a secular state, in spite of 
the pressure brought upon by Hindu communal organizations of 
the North. The opposition to the secular state came not only 

132 



Nehru's Domestic Policy and Party Politics 

from the Hindus but from the aggressive Sikh community. Out of 
India’s total population of 360 million in 1951 not less than thirty 
to thirty-five were Muslims. The Christians numbered seven 
million. There were also other religious communities. The policy 
of Nehru’s government was to do everything possible to make these 
religious minorities feel secure in India. Therefore, Nehru was 
bent on retaining the composite character of India’s political struc- 
ture. It must here be pointed out that it is not derived from 
European traditions. The doctrine of a single community enjoying 
political power in the state is really a Christian conception deve- 
loped in Europe. For a long time after the break with Rome, 
in England the Catholics were excluded from positions of power. 
It was little by little that the Catholics came to enjoy political rights 
with those belonging to the Anglican Church. Even now the 1 
British monarch should be of the Anglican Church. The mili- 
tant Hindus in the North thought that it was possible to make 
India a Hindu state, and at the same time guarantee rights to the 
members of the minority communities, but the Indian concept 
of secular state postulates that political institutions must be based 
on the economic and social interests of the entire community 
without reference to religion, race or sect. No group has therefore 
been allowed any special right or privilege on the basis of religion. 
All communities therefore have to share the duties and responsi- 
bilities of citizenship. The fact that Pakistan is an Islamic state, 
where the Hindu minority is not given equal rights of citizenship 
with the Muslims, greatly exercised the minds, particularly of 
the members of the Jana Sangh Party. Well, whatever position 
Pakistan might give to religious groups other than the Muslims, 
India sticks to the principles of secular state, giving equal rights 
for all, irrespective of religion. This is no small achievement of 
Nehru. 

One cardinal principle of Nehru’s domestic policy was to main- 
tain and increase the strength of the centre in relation to the states. 
While there was no unnecessary interference in the internal adminis- 
tration of the state, he took care to see that every state respected 
the authority of the centre. 

Membership of the Congress now means material advantages, 
the spoils of office, patronage and power. Charges of corruption 


133 



India 


are levelled against the ruling party. It is impossible to say whe- 
ther there is, in fact, more corruption in India than in other coun- 
tries. May be that the critic’s expectation of honesty in govern- 
ment “is greater than human nature can maintain”. 


134 



CHAPTER 


Foreign Policy 


It must be admitted that in matters of diplomacy India was just a 
beginner at the time of independence. The British authorities had 
not employed Indian officials in any worthwhile diplomatic missions. 
It was, however, fortunate that India’s destiny lay in the hands of 
Jawaharlal Nehru, who was not only the Prime Minister but also 
Minister for Foreign Affairs. By his deep study, frequent and 
extensive travels and thorough grasp of geopolitics, he was eminently 
fit for shaping the foreign policy of India. The question often 
raised is : “Has India a clear cut positive foreign policy ?” It is 
difficult to answer this question; for, the foreign policy of any 
nation is basically the pursuit and assurance of fundamental 
national interests abroad by peaceful means. In a developing 
country like India, domestic and foreign policies can function only 
in unison and in a complementary way. The approach to other 
countries varies with the extent to which they respond to India’s 




India 


friendliness and goodwill. India’s main aim is to secure in a decade 
or two the industrial development and economic improvement 
which took the West more than a century of conflict. 

The international situation, at the time when India became 
independent, was very complex. As a result of the Second World 
War nine fresh communist regimes had come into existence. China 
embraced communism. Soon ideological defection of Yugoslavia, 
China and Albania from Russia came into evidence. These 
countries refused to toe the Moscow line in toto. The unpredictable 
nature of the policies of Russia and China caused grave concern 
to people all the world over, on the issues of peace and freedom. 
Russian expansionist policy in Eastern Europe and her treatment 
of East Germany in her possession alarmed the Western demo- 
cracies. So the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to contain 
Communism in Europe and the South East Asia Treaty Organiza- 
tion to do the same in Asia were formed under the leadership of 
U.S.A. While Russia showed an aggressive and subversive form 
of international communism in Eastern Europe, China was fully 
equipped with army, money and industrial power to pose a threat 
to the world. A novel feature in international politics after the 
Second World War was the logistics of the cold war. 

The U.S.A. began to play a positive role in Asian affairs only 
after India became free and Indonesia was sought to be forced 
back into slavery by the Dutch. But her role was rather pragmatic 
than based on the application of any well defined principle. The 
charge often made against the U.S.A. was that, while she claimed 
the right and duty to protect the whole of the new world from 
outside and alien influences, she was practicing a kind of imperialism 
in all of Latin America. It was Roosevelt and to a lesser extent 
Kennedy that stood for a global policy based more or less on the 
universal declaration of human rights proclaimed by the United 
Nations. The world stood divided into two blocs, the Communist 
bloc headed by Russia and the Western democracy led by the U.S.A. 
The U.N.O. has been trying to bridge the gulf between the East 
and the West. But often the members of the Security Council 
have found it impossible to act in concert. India as a member of 
the U.N.O. has been cooperating with the other members for the 
promotion of international peace. But Nehru in a foreign policy 


136 



Foreign Policy 

debate (in June 1962) in the Parliament felt compelled to observe 
that the United Nations was gradually becoming “a protector of 
colonialism”. 

It is a regrettable fact that India’s relations with her neighbours 
are not altogether friendly. India’s attitude towards all nations is 
one of peace and friendliness, but her neighbours have their own 
policies. Pakistan ever since its inception has been treating India 
as inimical to her. Jinnah’s distrust and suspicion of India appears 
to be the legacy of Pakistan. The unfounded fear is that India would 
make it impossible for Pakistan to survive as an independent country. 
Pakistan is guided by her alignment with the U.S.A. and the military 
aid that she has received from the U.S.A. has only encouraged her 
to disregard India’s approaches for good neighbourliness. Com- 
munist China does not like the planned economy of democratic 
India. India is demonstrating that a democracy could profit by 
planned economy. Ceylon has both economic and race problems 
of her own, and wants the Indian residents there to migrate to India. 
The Commonwealth countries are obsessed by their own problems 
and India does not generally figure significantly in their discussions. 
Burma’s policy of nationalization has resulted in the loss of Indian 
concerns and property in that land and has led to the migration of 
Indians that had settled there. It cannot be said that India and her 
neighbours have as yet fully reconciled themselves to the situation 
that has been developing since 1947. 

India’s foreign policy has to be understood in the light of the 
situation described above. Before we proceed to discuss India’s 
relations with individual countries, we would like to mention the 
genesis of India’s policy of non-alignment. Conditions of cold war 
have been prevailing since the end of Second World War; the NATO 
and SEATO powers are aligned against the Communist bloc; un- 
declared wars have become common. Nehru sincerely believed 
that joining any bloc meant supporting war. His most important 
concern was to make India retain the freedom she had won. He 
thought involvement in the conflict of the power blocs would be 
harmful to India. So he boldly declared that his policy was non- 
alignment. This is often called neutralism, which implies indiffer- 
ence or inaction towards mutually opposed nations. Nehru 
vehemently objected to such a description of his policy. He made 


137 



India 


it clear that his non-alignment meant freedom to judge the right 
and wrong in a situation and support the right. India’s non-align- 
ment is therefore not a negative neutralism. When two great 
power blocs stood in opposition to each other he believed that there 
must be a third party for mediation and counsel. It was his firm 
belief that India could be the spearhead of such a body and work 
for international peace. Most of the free states of Asia and Africa 
appreciate the policy of non-alignment and support it. They are 
no doubt economically and militarily weak, but it is a matter of no 
small importance that they represent large groups of people in the 
world. Another thing that should be made clear is that Nehru 
had no intention of becoming an Asian or Afro-Asian leader. He 
was conscious of the fact that India’s influence in international: 
affairs was comparatively little. Indeed, at one time he rebuked 
some of his followers when they talked as if India really counted 
in world affairs. Nevertheless, after independence India did really 
loom large in the eyes of both the blocs; Western democracies were 
interested in the development of democratic institutions in India. 
The Communist bloc was interested in the adoption of Five Year' 
Plans for social justice and economic improvement. 

India and Pakistan. The relations between India and Pakistan 
have belied the hope that suspicion and bitterness might gradually 
fade away. There were three controversial issues between India, 
and Pakistan, namely Kashmir, evacuee property and river waters. 
The Pakistan part of the Punjab depends very largely on irrigation 
for cultivation. As the result of partition twenty-one million acres 
of irrigated area of the Punjab went to Pakistan as against five- 
million acres in India. The upper regions of the rivers flowing into- 
Pakistan lay in Indian territory. Pakistan feared that India’s- 
own need to increase her irrigation facilities might leave Pakistan 
short of water. Moreover, some of the Pakistan canals have their 
headworks in Indian territory. India could, if she wished, divert 
these canals and cut off supply of water to Pakistan. Soon after- 
partition India and Pakistan entered into a stand-still agreement 
according to which the same proportions of the waters of the rivers, 
would be allowed to flow downstream into Pakistan as before: 
partition. This agreement lapsed on 31 March, 1948, and quarrels 


138 



Foreign Policy 


arose between the two countries over the question of sharing water.. 
The World Bank offered its good offices to work out a settlement. 
Eugene Black, the President of the World Bank and David Lilienthal 1 
of the Tennessee Valley Authority of the U.S.A. brought about an 
amicable settlement in September 1960. The Indus Water Treaty 
as it is called divides the total waters of the Indus system in dis- 
proportion of 80 :20 between Pakistan and India. The construction 
of the link canals, and other necessary works were estimated to- 
cost Rs. 500 crores. The World Bank, the U.K., the U.S.A., and 
other friendly countries offered loans for the engineering works, 
which, it was reckoned, would take ten to thirteen years for com- 
pletion. 

The disposal of the property of the millions of people, who had 
abandoned their homes was another difficult problem. It is not. 
necessary to trace the history of many discussions in detail. Paki- 
stan realized that under any arrangement she would have to pay a 
considerable amount of money to India and this she was not prepared 
to do. The evacuee problem, therefore, has greatly embittered 
relations between the two countries. 

Pakistan determined to set up her own jute mills and deprive- 
Calcutta of raw jute. As already indicated India planned a con- 
siderable increase of jute cultivation. The government of Sind 
placed drastic restrictions on the removal of commodities by Hindu 
emigrants to India from the province. India replied by threatening; 
to withhold the cash balances due to Pakistan under the financial 
arrangements between them. However, wiser counsels prevailed and 
both the countries signed important trade agreements, (June 1948). 

In September 1949 Britain and India devalued their currency,, 
but Pakistan decided to maintain the value of her rupee which in 
effect made her economic arrangement with India meaningless. 
India refused to recognize the Pakistan rupee at its own value or 
indeed at any value at all. No monetary transaction was possible 
between the two countries and trade was at a complete stand-still. 
The conflict became particularly bitter, when Pakistan refused to- 
allow the export to India of jute fully paid for before devaluation. 
Thereupon India stopped supply of coal to Pakistan. By April 
1950 however, both Delhi and Karachi recognized that neither 
country could withstand the loss resulting from the trade dead- 


139 - 



India 


lock, and in February 1951 there was a trade agreement between 
the two countries. India recognized the par value of the Pakistan 
rupee and the devaluation war was at an end. In July 1955 Pakistan 
devalued her rupee to Indian level and this further eased the strain. 

While these disputes between India and Pakistan have been 
settled in a way, the Kashmir problem continues to give trouble. 
We have already referred to the circumstances under which Kashmir 
acceded to India. The U.N. tried to bring about an agreement 
between India and Pakistan, but failed. Demilitarization was 
■considered essential by the U.N. Pakistan would not withdraw 
her forces unless India at the same time withdrew her forces on 
her side of the line. India insisted on Pakistan’s withdrawal first, 
as she was the aggressor. Further, India was not prepared to 
leave Kashmir unprotected or ungoverned by withdrawing her 
forces completely from Kashmir. It was suggested that a U.N. 
force composed of contingents from European or American 
■countries should hold Kashmir, pending a plebiscite. Nehru 
objected to this as it would mean a reversion to European domina- 
tion. He, however, expressed his willingness to settle the Kashmir 
•question by the partition of the state along the cease-fire line. 
Pakistan hoped that in a plebiscite the Muslim population would 
vote for Pakistan and so refused to agree to this compromise. 
During his tour of India in December 1955 Khrushchev clearly 
•said that the plebiscite was unnecessary and that Kashmir belonged 
to India. On the ground that U.S. military aid to Pakistan had 
.altered the situation, Nehru rejected the possibility of a plebiscite. 
India went ahead with a number of development projects in Indian 
held Kashmir. A Kashmir Constituent Assembly was formed. 
This assembly duly voted for the incorporation of Kashmir into 
India from 26 January, 1957. Sheik Abdullah who had been Prime 
minister of Kashmir from 1947 to 1953 favoured either independence 
or greater autonomy for his state. He did not want Kashmir to be 
incorporated into India, As he gave trouble he was put in prison. 
Pakistan regards the issue of Kashmir as one of prestige. She is 
unable to reconcile herself with the idea that the Muslim majority 
area should join India. Western nations who favour Pakistan are 
unable to understand that as a secular state India cannot allow 
religion to play a part in the settlement of the issue. Kashmir is 


140 



Foreign Policy 


regarded by Indians as a test of the very basis of the Indian nation. 
If India should yield to the demand for a plebiscite it would lead to 
a lot of communal trouble in India. Already India is experienc- 
ing a lot of worries over the question of Nagaland. A plebiscite 
in Kashmir would mean only multiplying such troubles in India. 
After Kashmir was incorporated into India, Sheik Abdullah was. 
released. He went on a European tour but abused the privileges 
of Indian citizenship. He was therefore forced to return to India 
and when he came he was interned. 

Pakistan has been keeping the Kashmir issue alive constantly 
threatening India with Jehacl (Holy war). Perhaps this is necessary 
to divert the people’s attention from internal politics that are not 
altogether reassuring. In East Pakistan, there is a sizeable minority 
of Hindus who by force of circumstances have been compelled to* 
leave their homes and seek safety in India. There has been also 
infiltration of Pakistani Muslims into the Indian territory to give* 
trouble to the Government of India. Pakistan entered into a 
boundary treaty with China, giving away territory to which India 
has a claim. Her alliance with China emboldened her to follow a 
more aggressive policy towards India. She crossed the boundary 
line and occupied a few places in the Rann of Kutch and compelled 
India to take military action in defence. It appeared that India and 
Pakistan were on the brink of war, when fortunately Harold Wilson,, 
the Premier of England used his influence at the time of Common- 
wealth Conference in London in 1965 and brought about a cease- 
fire agreement. It is hoped that by peaceful negotiation it will be 
possible to make Pakistan vacate her aggression in the Rann of 
Kutch. But unless Pakistan reconciles herself with Kashmir’s 
accession to India, there seems to be no hope of establishing cordial 
relations between her and India. 

Relations with China. In the early years of independence all- 
out friendship with China was the corner-stone of India’s foreign 
policy. She repeatedly sponsored the claim of Communist China 
to the Chinese seat in the United Nations. There were friendly 
official visits and exchange of cultural delegations between the two' 
countries. But in the autumn of 1962 India’s feelings of friend- 
ship and admiration gave place to anger and fear. Nehru awoke 


141 



India 


to see that he had been treacherously lulled into a false sense of 
security by the Chinese leaders. The first sign of trouble came 
when India discovered early in 1950 that Chinese maps included in 
■Chinese territories large areas that really belonged to India. When 
this was pointed out the Chinese explained it away saying that the 
maps antedated the Communist regime and that they had no time 
to re-examine them. Again in 1950 trouble arose over Tibet. 
The British regarded Tibet as a buffer slate between Russia, China 
and India and so in 1904 secured special privileges. They had the 
right to keep military contingents in the town of Gyantse and to 
maintain political and trade agents in Tibet, as well as postal and 
telegraph facilities. Independent India inherited these privileges. 
Theoretically it must be admitted that Tibet belonged to China, 
but had always been enjoying partial autonomy. Till 1950 China 
had made no attempt to exercise her sovereignty over Tibet; in 
that year Communist China sent in an occupying force. This of 
■ course caused concern to the Government of India. China dis- 
regarded India’s official protests. Finally, in 1954 India recognized 
China’s sovereignty over Tibet in a treaty which confirmed the 
Indian pilgrimage and trade rights. The preamble to this treaty 
■embodied Nehru’s famous Panch Shila (Five principles of Peaceful 
Co-existence) namely, mutual respect of territorial integrity, mutual 
non-aggression, mutual non-interference in each other’s internal 
affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful co-existence. The 
Chinese' respected the terms of the treaty till 1959. Before then, 
however, in 1957 the Indian Government discovered that the Chinese 
had built a road across the Aksai Chin of Ladakh, and felt greatly 
perturbed. Ladakh, a remote rugged and uninhabitable region, 
was conquered by the Hindu Maharaja of Kashmir in the mid- 
nineteenth century. But being separated by high mountains from 
the rest of Kashmir, Ladakh had not received due attention from the 
British Indian Government and the Nehru Government did not 
think it worth, risking a breach with China. But when the line around 
Ladakh had been marked on British maps in the early decades of 
the twentieth century, Tibet recorded a protest claiming the territory 
as hers. In the spring of 1958 the Indian Government sent two 
'detachments to examine the new Chinese road in the Aksai Chin 
.area; one detachment was captured by the Chinese and India pro- 


142 



Foreign Policy 

tested in vain. Nehru entered into correspondence over the matter 
with Chou-En-lai. Meanwhile the Chinese tightened their hold 
over Tibet. A revolution broke out on 20 March, 1959. The 
Dalai Lama, the supreme temporal and ecclesiastical power of the 
state, fled to India followed by thousands of Buddhist refugees. 
Stories about the ruthlessness and brutality of the Chinese in Tibet 
spread and they were later confirmed by the International Commis- 
sion of Jurists. A revulsion of feeling against the Chinese arose 
.among the Hindus and Buddhists in India. While anger was 
mounting, towards the end of 1959 China began to encroach on 
Indian territory in the North East. While there may be reason- 
able doubt about the boundary line in Ladakh, the McMohan line 
in North East Assam was well defined. The denial of the validity 
of the McMahon settlement by the Chinese was nothing short of 
■dishonesty. Further, the Chinese troop dispositions in the area of 
■encroachment really threatened Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan. This 
awoke Nehru to the realities of the danger and for the first time he 
spoke bluntly of Chinese aggression and warned China that any 
■encroachment on the three Himalayan states would be resisted by 
India, with force if necessary. When the opposition members in 
the Parliament urged Nehru to take the strongest possible action 
to drive China out of all Indian territory Nehru counselled modera- 
tion saying: “To imagine that India can push China about is silly. 
To imagine that China can push India about is equally silly. We 

must accept things as they are It is fantastic to talk about 

war.” Nehru hoped to settle the matter by negotiation. But he 
failed miserably and in 1960 he publicly admitted that the Chinese 
•claimed sovereignty of over 52,000 square miles of Indian territory 
.and had occupied 14,000 square miles of the total, most of it in 
Ladakh. Two years passed. There was no sign of the Government 
■of India having fully realized the seriousness of the Chinese danger 
in difficult mountainous region. The Chinese were well equipped 
for mountain warfare and had made careful preparation for their 
aggressive design. India’s northern frontier is about 2,600 miles. 
It is indeed impossible to guard such a long boundary “solidly and 
in depth”. The invaders from the north are in an advantageous 
position for they can choose their own striking point. The defend- 
ing army has enormous difficulty to move its contingents and 


143 



India 


supply services to attack the enemy. In some places transport 
can be had only by air. Even helicopters give trouble in the 
mountain air. 

The Chinese were not slow to take advantage of the inherent 
weakness of the Indian defence. In Ladakh they rapidly seized 
more area than they had previously claimed. In the North East 
Frontier Agency they came down the mountain slopes in several 
places. It was clear that their design was to capture the entire 
valley of the Brahmaputra and the important oil fields of Assam. 
Indian soldiers had neither the equipment necessary for mountain 
warfare nor had they even winter clothing, nor were they sufficiently 
strong in number to check the Chinese advance. On 29 October 
1962 Nehru sent urgent requests to the United States and the United 
Kingdom for military aid and both the countries readily and gener- 
ously responded. Nehru hoped to get help from Russia also. 
The promised M.I.G. fighter planes did not come in the hour of 
need. Some of them appear to have been sent too late for use. 
The non-aligned Afro-Asian countries remained non-aligned in 
the hour of India’s need and counselled negotiation for cease-fire.. 
The Chinese, perhaps because they had occupied what they had 
wanted to, or because of the consequences of the militaf/ aid of 
the U.S.A. and U.K. and the possible Russian aid to India, suddenly, 
on 21 November made a unilateral offer of a cease-fire. There was- 
a difference of opinion between India and China over the line to 
which the Chinese should withdraw. Without any agreement on 
the matter both sides stopped fighting and the Chinese pulled back 
much as they had promised, but not as India had demanded. 

The six Colombo Powers (Ceylon, Burma, Indonesia, Cambodia, 
the United Arab Republic and Ghana) negotiated for long to bring, 
about a settlement between China and India, but failed owing to 
the uncompromising attitude of China over relinquishing a large- 
part of the newly occupied territory. The answer to the question 
whether the India-China border dispute will ever be peacefully 
settled can only be conjectural at present. The Chinese aggression 
brought out clearly the need for strengthening India’s defence and 
rethinking her foreign policy, partly based on non-violence. The 
readiness of the help rendered by the members of the Common- 
wealth of Nations showed the bond of friendship and union among. 


144 



Foreign Policy 

them. The U.S.A. aided India from a genuine desire for the pre- 
servation of the democratic set up in India. Locally, all the political 
parties in India forgot their petty differences and stood united to 
meet the Chinese aggression, only the communists were divided in 
their loyalties. 

The surprise Chinese attack revealed clearly how the Chinese 
soldiers had been thoroughly trained for mountain and jungle war- 
fare and how effective their modern military equipment was. The 
Chinese intelligence service was superb and their communica- 
tions excellent. To her distress India found that there were fifth 
columnists who ably assisted the Chinese. 

Although ill-equipped and unprepared for war, the Indian soldiers 
fought bravely and inflicted heavy casualties on the Chinese. It 
became plain that the greatest need of India’s defence services was 
modern arms and equipment. V.K. Krishna Menon, the Defence 
Minister, was no doubt a man of great experience in foreign 
affairs and of outstanding ability. But his tenure of office was 
regarded as a national misfortune. He had played politics with 
the defence services and was held responsible for India’s debacle 
in the Chinese war. He was relieved of his office and Y.B. 
Chavan, the Chief Minister of Maharashtra was offered the 
defence portfolio. The defence position was studied carefully and 
it was agreed that first priority should be given to the equipment of 
the army and in particular to the provision of mountain warfare 
equipment. 

Nehru’s policy of non-alignment came in for criticism. There 
was, however, agreement in knowledgeable circles that it was sound. 
Alignment with Russia or U.S.A. would bring no tangible good to 
India, for what hope was there for an admittedly poor country like 
India to make her voice effectively felt in international politics. It 
was pointed out that Nehru’s non-alignment led the U.S.A. and 
U.K. to think that India was undependable in her relations with 
other countries. There was no doubt about that feeling, but it 
sprang not from the policy of non-alignment but from the nature of 
Nehru’s utterances on international issues, such as America’s inter- 
vention in the Cuban affair and Britain’s action against Egypt over 
the Suez. Nehru was deliberately outspoken in the belief that 
democratic nations would appreciate and tolerate honest differences 


145 



India 


of opinion. But when their prestige was at stake, such utterances 
roused resentment in them. 

Relations with the Three Himalayan Border States. The three 
Himalayan border states are Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan. They 
were once called the “Hermit Kingdoms” because of their isolation. 
India’s relations with Nepal were not quite cordial till recently. 
Nepal has an area of 54,000 square miles with a population of ten 
million. In race, religion, language, culture and tradition it has 
much in common with India. Nepal functioned only as a pro- 
tectorate, not as sovereign state during the British regime. From 
1846 to 1951, Nepal was ruled by the Ranas, who were also the 
prime ministers. The Nehru government helped king Mahendra 
to terminate the long-established Rana regime. India helped Nepal 
to take its place among the free nations of the world in its own right. 
In 1951, the king proclaimed constitutional monarchy. But in 
1959 he dismissed his Cabinet, dissolved the Parliament, banned 
all political parties and assumed sole national leadership. Nehru 
was anxious that Nepal should retain parliamentary democracy 
and was reluctant to condemn Nepalese insurgents. Mahendra 
did not like Nehru’s disapproval of his action. He visited Pakistan, 
signed a border agreement with China and arranged for the con- 
struction of a Chinese-aided road between Kathmandu, the capital 
of Nepal and Lahsa, the capital of Tibet. Chou-En-Lai proudly 
said that this was a bridge between China and India. The Chinese 
have handled King Mahendra with utmost delicacy. Nehru failed 
to win him over, because he interfered with the institutions of Nepal 
out of an abstract love for constitutional government. Fortunately, 
the state visit of Dr. Radhakrishnan, the Indian President, to Nepal 
in November 1963 and his frequent references to historic ties between 
the two countries have helped to improve the Indo-Nepalese rela- 
tions, and they are now on a better footing and more friendly. 

Sikkim is the smallest of the three Himalayan border states with 
an area of 2,800 square miles and a population of 140,000 mostly 
Buddhists of the Tibetan stock. It lies right across the main trade 
route from India to Lhasa and hence it is of strategic importance. 
A full scale attack of Communist China against India might well 
be made through Sikkim which is a protectorate of India with a 


146 



Foreign Policy 


Maharaja to rule over it. According to the treaty signed at Gangtok 
in 1950 India takes the responsiblity for defence, external affairs 
and communications of Sikkim. India has been making grants 
to aid its development. There are now 740 miles of road and tracks 
and a ropeway twelve and half miles long linking Gangtok and 
Nathula pass. 

Bhutan which is six times the size of Sikkim is more closely 
connected with Tibet than with India, geographically and culturally. 
It is not easily accessible from India. The Indian Government has 
recently undertaken a road building programme to make access 
easier. According to the treaty of 1949 Bhutan will be guided in 
its foreign relations by the Government of India. Besides promis- 
ing an annual subsidy of rupees five lakhs the Government of 
India retroceded to Bhutan thirty square miles of territory around 
Dewangiri which had been annexed by the British in 1865. “Any 
aggression against Sikkim and Bhutan will be considered aggression 
against India,” said Nehru. 

Relations with A/ro-Asian States. To stimulate cooperation and 
promote mutual understanding among Asian and African nations 
was Nehru’s policy. In March 1947 before India attained inde- 
pendence, he convened an Inter- Asian Relations Conference in 
Delhi, under the auspices of the Indian Council of World Affairs. 
Twenty-five Eastern countries including the Soviet Union and 
Egypt attended the conference. Two years later, at the .official 
level, he convened a similar conference. This was attended by 
representatives of nineteen Asian governments. This conference 
protested against the Dutch military action against Indonesian 
nationalists and asked the U.N. Security Council to order the 
complete independence of Indonesia within a year. 

Nehru was one of the sponsors of the Bandung Conference of 
April 1955. Representatives of twenty-nine nations, including 
Communist China, attended this conference whose object was to 
bring Asian nations into harmony. Soekarno, the Indonesian 
President, in his inaugural address voiced an angry indictment 
of ‘White’ imperialism. He proudly claimed ‘this is the first inter- 
national conference of coloured peoples in the history of mankind”. 
Chou-En-Lai, the Communist leader, “a product of war, conspi- 


147 



India 


racy and revolution” spoke about strict adherence to Pancha Shila. 
There appears to have been an inward personality clash among the 
important leaders. It was soon found that there was no unity 
among the nations at the conference. The non-aligned nations 
also were divided in their aims and objectives. There was estran- 
gement between Malaya and Indonesia. The Arab countries 
headed by Iraq demonstrated their hostility to Israel. Pakistan, 
Thailand, the Philippines and others refused to follow Nehru’s 
lead on friendship with Communist China. The most hotly 
debated point was military alliances with the West. Among 
Afro-Asian countries the real national interests of neighbouring 
countries did not in any way coincide. However, Nehru’s pres- 
tige among non-aligned countries rose. But not one of big nations 
assembled there could emerge as the unchallenged leader of the 
Afro-Asian group. 

In September 1961, at Belgrade, the capital of Yugoslavia, a 
conference of heads of the non-aligned states was held. It was 
hoped that Marshall Tito’s thesis that the future of mankind should 
not be allowed to lie in the hands of a few powers would be consid- 
ered and a way to reach the goal would be chalked out, but nothing 
of the kind happened. The solidarity of non-aligned nations proved 
a myth. Irrespective of the results of those conferences, India’s 
faith in the soundness of the policy of non-alignment has remained 
unshaken. 

India has special problems with a number of Afro-Asian nations 
arising from the existence of sizeable Indian minorities in them. 
These overseas Indians consist of unskilled labourers on one hand 
and big bankers and merchants on the other. The citizens of the 
country in which the Indians live resent their presence among them, 
chiefly because of their enviable wealth. 

Economic nationalism in Burma deprived Indians of their 
property rights and most of them returned to India as refugees. 
India did not officially protest against the expropriations. But 
they added tension to her relations with Burma. However, Nehru 
managed to maintain good relations with the government of Burma. 

The chief problem of the Ceylonese is to maintain their standard 
of living in the face of a, rapidly increasing population. After 
independence group rivalries and conflicts developed between the 


148 



Foreign Policy 


Tamil-speaking Ceylonese and Sinhalese. Insufficient food pro- 
duction and scarcity of jobs accentuated the rivalry. At present 
there are roughly nine million people in Ceylon of whom about a 
million are Tamils. As jobs are not sufficient the Government 
of Ceylon has sought to reserve for the Ceylonese as many jobs as 
possible in all kinds of occupations by enforcing numerous restric- 
tions on the non-Ceylonese residents there. This discrimination 
affects the domiciled Indians. The Ceylonese Indians may justi- 
fiably claim to have contributed very substantially to the econo- 
mic development and prosperity of the Ceylonese. The notifica- 
tion that Sinhalese is the sole official language of the country has 
further exacerbated the feelings between the Sinhalese and the 
Tamils. There has so far been no satisfactory solution of the 
problems. Since 1948 “Ceylon’s Indians have been progressively 
debarred from citizenship and franchise”. An Indian by origin 
can only be regarded as a Sinhalese if he has been born in Ceylon 
and can prove that he has had a family connection with Ceylon for 
two generations. In many genuine cases it will be difficult to 
prove this. 

India’s relations with Indonesia were cordial till 1950, because 
of her championship of Indonesian independence. After indepen- 
dence Indonesia turned her back towards India. Soekarno, not 
content with following Nehru’s lead, developed leadership ambition 
of his own. 

India played a major part in preventing the struggle in Korea 
and Indo-China from developing into a major war. India’s experi- 
ence of intervention on behalf of the U.N. in the Congo was not 
happy; she was treated with discourtesy. On the whole, however, 
India’s prestige stood high in international circles. 

Relations with Russia. During Stalin’s time Russians used to 
refer to India as a ‘stooge’ of the imperialists and capitalists. But 
soon after his death, Khrushchev decided to make friends with India, 
and invited Nehru to visit Moscow. Nehru accepted it and demons- 
trated that India had no antagonism towards Russia. His visit 
was a great success and led to a return invitation. Khrushchev 
and Bulganin visited India in December 1955. We have already 
referred to Khrushchev’s forthright announcements on Goa and 


149 



India 


Kashmir which though pleasing to India were somewhat startling 
to the U.S.A. and U.K. But when Khrushchev made bitter spee- 
ches against the British the initial enthusiasm for Russian leaders 
somewhat cooled down. In 1955 India was in no sense pro- 
Russian. But the Western nations could not understand why 
India did not share their fear and suspicion of Russia’s expansio- 
nist policy, They thought that with Russian help for the Second 
Five Year Plan India might be drawn closer to that country. 

Russian behaviour in Hungary towards the end of 1956 induced 
a feeling of revulsion in most educated Indians. But Nehru who 
had condemned Anglo-French intervention in Suez was silent about 
Russia’s conduct and this was vexing to U.S.A. and Britain. It 
was just at the time of Russian aggression in Hungary that Russia 
offered financial assistance to India for the purchase of machinery. 
This was embarrassing to thoughtful Indians. However, some sect- 
ions of the public believed that India could look up to Russia for 
help if China went too far. There are signs that cordial relations 
between Russia and India are growing. 

Relations with U.S.A. In the days of the struggle for freedom, 
India hoped that the U.S.A. would bring moral pressure to bear on 
U.K. to grant India self-government. During the Second World 
War a number of U.S.A. officers came in close contact with Indians. 
Somehow or other the Britishers stood comparatively high in the 
esteem of the Indians. The destruction of Hiroshema and Nagasaki 
by the use of atom bombs did really shock the Indians. After the 
withdrawal of Britain from India, Chester Bowles did much to bring 
the U.S.A. closer to India. But soon MaCarthyism undid the good 
work of Chester Bowles. Towards the end of 1956 when the U.S.A. 
intervened in the Suez episode and effectively put an end to a 
probable war, Indian feeling towards the U.S.A. changed for the 
better, for her reaction was in consonance with India’s approach 
to world affairs. Immediately after this came the announcement 
of the “Eisenhower Doctrine” with regard to the Middle East. 
This was made a few days after Nehru’s return from his historic 
visit to the U.S.A. but Nehru had not been told anything about 
it. That doctrine was complete negation of the policy implied 
in India’s non-alignment. It was clearly a war on communism. 


150 



Foreign Policy 


India believed in co-existence. American intolerance and hatred 
of communism was something which India could not clearly un- 
derstand. India never favoured communism of the Russian or 
the Chinese type. There is no fear of India turning communist 
so long as she is left undisturbed in her belief in Karma and Dharma 
which do not militate against self-effort for economic improvement, 
but only require reconciliation with the final results of the effort, 
whatever they be. In spite of obvious differences of the two coun- 
tries in their approach to world affairs, mutual understanding bet- 
ween them has been growing rapidly. The policy of the U.S.A. 
in helping the under-developed countries has greatly impressed the 
thinking section of the Indian public. Particularly, their monetary 
and technical help for the development of school education 
on modern lines has endeared the Americans to the people of 
India. 

American expressions of disapproval of India’s invasion of Goa 
were not liked by the Indians. How could peace loving India 
use force to drive the Portuguese out of Goa ? This was the 
question frequently asked. Both the U.S.A. and U.K. could have 
brought pressure to bear on Portugal to give away Goa voluntarily 
as the French had given away Pondicherry, but they did not. 
Their countenance of Portugal’s hold over Goa was perhaps to 
test the operation of India’s policy of non-violence. Non-violence 
as a political weapon in international dealings can only have a 
very limited operation. Non-violence under all conditions is a 
sheer impossibility in human relationship as things stand at 
present, unless of course people turn into mahatmas. The cow 
is no doubt a sacred animal to the Hindu; if however, a cow 
threatens to kill a Hindu he is obliged to repel it with force 
before he can allow himself to be killed, for self-preservation is 
the prime law of nature. The presence of the Portguese was 
inconsistent with the territorial integrity of India. The Western 
powers might have told India plainly why they desired conti- 
nuance of Portuguese rule in Goa indefinitely, particularly when 
Portugal made it clear that nothing but force could dislodge her 
from Goa and a few other enclaves. India feels that her occupa- 
tion of Goa by military action is unnecessarily exaggerated into 
aggression. 


151 



India 


Indian expression of opinion on American policy on Cuba was 
resented by the U.S.A. India has been unable to understand the 
policy of the U.S.A. in giving a disproportionately large military 
aid to Pakistan. In spite of the displeasure of the U.S.A. and 
U.K., India continued to remain non-aligned. The U.S.A. and the 
U.S.S.R. are two colossal powers with atomic weapons accusing 
each other of imperialistic designs. Small nations are now obliged 
to depend on big nations for their survival. Under such circums- 
tances Nehru’s determination to pursue the policy of non-align- 
ment was an act of courage. 

Relations with U.K. One outstanding feature in the relationship 
between Britain and India is that the statesmen of both the coun- 
tries were able to conquer the prejudices of the old unhappy days to 
recognize the community of interest of India and Britain. Some 
people are puzzled at it. The first thing to be decided after inde- 
pendence was whether India should continue to be a member of 
the Commonwealth or not. At the end of the Dominion Premiers’ 
Conference in October 1948 Nehru stated that “we may not agree 
about everything but it is surprising what a large measure of una- 
nimity there was, not only in the objectives to be aimed at, but 
also in the methods to be pursued — This meeting has shown me 
that there is great scope for the Commonwealth.” Nehru pur- 
suaded the Congress to agree to maintain India’s connection with 
the Commonwealth. In spite of opposition Nehru triumphed. 
The Commonwealth countries showed an imaginative flexibility 
rarely found in political history by evolving a formula which 
enabled India to become a. Republic and at the same time remain 
in the Commonwealth, through the common headship of the 
King. The Constituent Assembly accepted this formula and 
India is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. 

Before the transfer of power Indian politicians and economists 
had condemned the link between the rupee and sterling as harm- 
ful to Indian interests. In September 1949 Sir Stafford Cripps 
announced the devaluation of the pound and within a few hours 
of it, to the surprise of the world, the Indian Cabinet decided on a 
corresponding devaluation of the rupee so that the close connec- 
tion of the economy of Britain and India might be kept up. Thus 


152 



Foreign Policy 

the second issue of relations between rupee and sterling was satis- 
factorily settled. 

The U.K. was unable to understand Nehru’s policy of non-align- 
ment. But it was the United Kingdom that first understood that 
the policy of Nehru was not his own creation, but of the. dominant 
mood of India about the first decade of independence. Though 
non-aligned, India cherishes the same political and humanitarian 
ideals as Britain. We have already referred to several misunder- 
standings between Britain and India, such as, the Congo affair, 
and Suez question. The introduction of the bill to regulate migra- 
tion into the U.K., mude Indians feel that Britain was getting away 
from the Commonwealth to Europe. Britain was angry, when 
India did not yield to her pressure not to use force against the 
Portuguese in Goa. A section of the British Press went beyond 
reasonable limit to criticise Nehru. About this Percival Griffiths 
observes : 

On the other hand, there are sections of the British Press which 
go beyond reasonable limit and seem to delight in sneering at 
Nehru and his government. They do not present British opinion 
and their attitude is resented by Englishmen who have lived and 
worked in India but they receive a lot of attention in Delhi. 
Circumspection will be particularly necessary in future, in view 
of recent events. 

In spite of differences on certain international issues Britain and 
India have come closer to each other. The cordial relationship 
between the two countries was well symbolized by the tumultuous 
welcome given to her Majesty the Queen, when she visited India. 
Her Majesty’s presence on 26 January 1961 side by side with the 
President of India at the Republic Day celebrations well illustrated 
the breadth and flexibility of the Commonwealth. With the 
departure of the members of the Civil Service, there have not been 
in India British students of India’s history and culture. The British 
businessmen who come to India cannot be expected to take any 
deep interest in oriental studies. The present generation of poli- 
ticians and officials of India were brought up to English ways of 
thought. It cannot be said that the rising generation will have 


153 



India 


that understanding of British culture as their predecessors had. 
English as an intellectual link between Britain and India is growing 
weaker and weaker. In order to maintain community of thought 
and feeling between the two countries it becomes necessary for 
leaders of both the nations to put forth conscious effort. 


154 



CHAPTER 


Economic Development 


After independence India is the high road of economic and 1 ’ 
social advancement. Before the transfer of power the Indian Nati- 
onal Congress believed that the poverty of India was the result of' 
British rule and that she would rapidly prosper with independence. 
Indian economists maintain that in India Britain followed a syste- 
matic policy of “planned undevelopment” which left gaps in the- 
country’s economy, that would take a long time to fill. Radha- 
kamal Mukherjee observes, “. . . the distribution of the railway- 
net, the freight rate for railway goods, the marketing organization 
and the banking system, all helped the British economic regime- 
to replace the products of Indian cottage industries and handi- 
crafts, especially handloom weaving and facilitate the import of' 
British textile goods and export raw material .” 1 The cottage. 



Dr. V. B. Singh (Ed), Foreword to Economic History of India. 



India 


industries of India had been deliberately destroyed. The land was 
impoverished owing to heavy taxation, which left no surplus and 
no incentive with the tiller to replenish the soil. The sizes of 
agricultural holdings got progressively diminished. The yield 
from the land steadily declined. In the last four or five decades 
of British rule there had been some industrial development in India, 
but it was of a very limited character. In 1947 India's industrial 
base was thus weak. The population in 1950 was one and a half 
times that in 1900. This only increased the pressure on land and 
further depressed the already low productivity per worker. The 
standard of living was poor; opportunities for employment were 
very limited. AH this resulted in accentuating inequalities of 
income and wealth. In 1949, the annual per capita income of 
India was 57 U.S. dollars as against 1,453 of the U.S.A., 773 of 
U.K., 870 of Canada, 482 of France and 100 of Japan. Some 
of India’s Asian neighbours like Thailand had much higher per 
■capita income than India. The production and consumption of 
steel is regarded as the index of a country’s economic development. 
India produced 1 . 5 million metric tons of crude steel as against 
:87.6 of U.S.A., 16.6 of U.K.., and 4.5 of Japan. Her production 
of electric power was very low compared with that of other progre- 
ssive countries. Even what little was generated could not be fully 
used. Yet India’s resources for producing both steel and power 
have been very considerable. Agricultural productivity was low, 
for example, wheat produced per lac re was only 2.6 metric quin- 
tals as against 4.5 metric quintals in U.S.A., 10.7 in U.K., and 
7.1 in Japan.® 

The poverty of India was reflected in the extremely thin social 
■services provided. In the British period public health came to 
be organized for the British residents employed as heads of various 
.departments in the Government of India. Medical colleges were 
opened only for the training of a small number of medical men 
required. Then the Public Health Department was organized 
and the medical needs of the urban population were catered to. 
In 1950 there was one physician for every 6,000 people in India. 

3 World Population and Production Trends and Outlook 1953; The Twen- 
tieth Century Fund, New York. 

156 



Economic Development 


Only nineteen per cent of the population were literates. Poverty,, 
ill-health and illiteracy formed a vicious circle which in its turn 
sought to perpetuate economic under-development. 

Economic policy. The Congress Government believed that the 
position could be improved only by discipline and careful organi- 
zation of the resources and so planning became the corner-stone 
of the new economic policy of India. Nehru firmly believed that 
there must be industrial development at all costs. There were 
two schools of thought as to the right lines of industrial develop- 
ment. Those belonging to the Gandhian school were afraid that 
India might suffer from the social evils which attended the Industrial 
Revolution in England and therefore advocated the expansion of 
cottage industries. The Nehruites recognized that a country 
without highly developed large-scale industries could not count 
in the modern world. 

Gandhi was a strong advocate of village life. Writing in the 
Harijan on 26 July 1942 he expressed his idea of village autonomy 
thus : 

My idea of village swaraj is that of a complete republic, ide- 
pendent of its neighbours for its own vital wants and yet inter- 
dependent for many others in which dependence is a necessity.. 
Thus every village’s first concern will be to grow its own food 
crops and cotton for its cloth. It should have a reserve for its. 
cattle, recreation and playgrounds for adults and children... 
The village will maintain a village theatre, school and public 
hall. It will have its own water-works ensuring its own water 
supply. This can be done through controlled wells or tanks.. 
Education will be compulsory up to the final basic course. As. 
far as possible every activity will be conducted on the coopera- 
tive basis. ..There will be a compulsory service of village guards, 
who will be selected by rotations from the village. The govern- 
ment of the village will be conducted by the Panchayat of five- 
persons annually elected by the adult villagers, male and female, 
possessing minimum prescribed qualifications . . . The Panchayats- 
will be the legislative, judiciary and executive combined to- 
operate for its year of office. 


157 



India 


In an interview with foreign correspondents at Mussoorie in 1946, 
•Gandhi, relating to urban life said, “I consider the growth of 
cities to be an evil thing, unfortunate for mankind and the world... 
and certainly unfortunate for India. ..The blood of the villages is 
(the cement with which the edifice of the cities is built.” 8 

The economic policy of free India totally rejected Gandhi’s 
objection to the growth of cities, but in a way accepted the reform 
of Panchayati Raj, While Gandhi wanted the village to be 
an independent unit, Nehru could make it a constituent unit, sub- 

■ ordinate to higher organizations, and at the same time enjoying 

■ effective power. Nehru’s government believed that in India the 
percentage of rural population was extraordinarily high and there- 
fore made a deliberate attempt to absorb them in urban industries. 

Nehru realized that the immediate establishment of large-scale 
industries was not an easy matter. It was suggested to him that 
the sterling balances could be utilized for compulsory purchases 

• of British industries in India. But Nehru said frankly: “We 
require not only money, but what is far more important, trained 
human material; in fact that is the only thing in the ultimate 
analysis, whether it is industry or any other department of life, 

. and Jet us admit that we have not got a sufficient quantity of that 
trained human material in any aspect of life today.” To raise 
the standard of living of the people, production must be increased; 
national wealth and national dividend must be increased. Mere 
. adjustment by a more equal distribution of wealth cannot bring 
more wealth. So production of more types and kinds of goods 

■ was the cardinal principle of Nehru’s economic policy, 

After the transfer of power various forms of legislative and 

• executive discrimination that had been protecting British commer- 
cial interest disappeared. At the beginning of 1948 the Economic 
Programme Committee of the All India Congress Committee 
published a resolution envisaging a large measure of state owner- 

; ship of industry which perturbed commercial circles. Their anxiety 
was allayed by the Industrial Policy Resolution of 6 April 1948. 
This resolution recognized India’s need for the expansion of pro- 
. duction. “For some time to come”, the state should concentrate 

3 K. M, Panikkar, The Foundations of India, p. 185. 


.158 



Economic Development 

on new units of production instead of undertaking nationalization 
of existing units. Industries were grouped roughly into three 
-categories. Armaments, railway transport and certain other in- 
dustries belonging to the first category became a government mono- 
poly. The second category contained a list of basic and strategic 
industries such as coal, iron and steel, ship-building and mineral 
ores and the responsibility for their future development was ves- 
ted with the state. The third category covered the rest of the 
industrial held which was open to private enterprise. This policy 
was reiterated through the Industrial Policy Resolution of April 
1956. This showed clearly that Nehru was deliberately in favour 
of encouraging private enterprise. However, there were some 
businessmen who were unhappy about the stipulation of a period 
of ten years for a final decision on nationalization of industries 
and were nervous of undertaking long-term investments. They 
were also disturbed by the statement “that labour’s share of profits 
should be on a sliding scale, normally varying with production” 
contained in the policy resolution. 

The co-existence of public and private sectors in industry is 
called mixed economy. Government monopoly in certain spheres 
as in the Post and Telegraph department is inevitable for any 
government in the modern world. India Government’s mixed 
economy is a via media between the so called capitalist system and 
the socialistic pattern of Com m unist Russia or China. Therefore 
the experiment is looked upon with fresh interest by both Western 
and Eastern Blocs. Democratic India and Communist China 
started about the same economic level in the early 1950. Both 
countries have made every effort to increase agricultural as well 
as industrial production, but the significant difference is that China 
has used compulsion which India has determined not to use. 

The industrial policy resolution covered also the investment 
of foreign capital in India. This part of the resolution was 
explained by Prime Minister Nehru himself. He made it plain 
that he wished to encourage foreign capital investment in industry 
not only for its own sake, but because of the industrial and tech- 
nical knowledge it would bring with it. He said that as a rule 
the major interest in a new undertaking should be in Indian hands. 
The ratio of Indian investment and the foreign investment should be 


159 



India 


as 51:49 for allowing a foreign concern in India. It was announ- 
ced that each case would be dealt with on its merits by the govern- 
ment. There was provision for the employment of non-Indians, 
where necessary, in posts requiring technical skill and experience; 
the condition imposed was that Indians must be trained for such 
posts as quickly as possible. Subject to foreign exchange consi- 
derations, foreign enterprises would be given facilities to make 
remittances home. They were promised equal treatment with 
Indian concerns. The conditions regarding Indian participation 
in respect of shareholdings was in practice interpreted with consi- 
derable flexibility later. In the period 1948-57 there was a 
definite shift into manufacture for the home market. The state 
regulation guided private investment in the manufacturing sector 
into production for the home market. Up to 1955, however, 
much of the increased foreign investment in “producer goods 
production” (for example, petroleum refining, machinery making 
and automobile manufacture, etc.) was based on imported rather 
than indigenously produced components and materials. At the 
same time encouragement for manufacture based on the utiliza- 
tion of indigenous raw material was given. 

The manufacture of locomotives at Chittaranjan and sulphate 
of ammonia at Sindri and the construction of tele-communica- 
tion equipment in association with a British Company were started 
as government monopoly. The government of India in consul- 
tation with the Central Advisory Council laid down certain princi- 
ples for the foreign investor. The first was that a foreign new- 
comer must be concerned primarily with manufacture rather than 
trade. The then commerce minister made it plain that foreign 
participation in trade was not welcome. The second principle 
was to allow a foreigner to start a new industrial enterprise, if 
existing productive capacity in that field had proved to be inade- 
quate, or where the proposed investment would help to save foreign 
exchange by increasing export or reducing import. The third 
principle was that training must be given to Indian personnel for 
senior posts both administrative and technical. If these principles 
were satisfied the government was not rigid with regard to the 
fifty- one per cent participation by Indian capital. 

T.T. Krishnamachari, who became commerce minister in 1952, 


160 



Economic Development 

was a realist and a believer in private enterprise. He was perhaps 
largely responsible for the flexibility in the matter of interpreting 
rules governing private enterprise. He made it possible for private 
concerns in the iron and steel industry to expand and even to erect 
new plants. His cabinet colleague K.C. Reddy was a thorough- 
going socialist and he and T.T.K. could not see eye to eye. After 
1954 there was a growing left-wing tendency in the Congress Party. 
There was a proposal for the construction of a steel plant at Durga- 
pur on the basis of Indo-British collaboration, T.T.K. as the 
Industries minister was responsible for steel production. K.C. 
Reddy was the minister for Production. He would not allow T.T.K. 
to encourage N. Birla, a member of the greatest family of indust- 
rialists in India, to form an Indo-British steel manufacturing con- 
sortium. Ultimately, the British capital was accepted and the 
Indian element became publicly owned. The rejection of Birla’s 
proposal was regarded by Indian businessmen as a sign that socia- 
lism was to be the order of the day. 

The question of adequate compensation for property acquired by 
the Government under the scheme of nationalization came up for 
discussion. Nehru was prepared to pay some compensation, but he 
thought it improper to pay full compensation for it militated against 
reducing the disparities between the ‘haves’ and the ‘have nots’. 
The Indian National Congress at Avadi, in January 1955 expli- 
citly stated that the object of planning must be the establishment of 
a socialist pattern of society. In February 1956 at the Amritsar 
Congress the goal was defined more clearly; the term “socialist 
pattern” was replaced finally by “socialism” as the guiding principle. 
The Imperial Bank of India became a publicly owned and publicly 
managed State Bank. Life insurance was nationalized. In April 
1956 the centre advised the state governments not to grant any 
licenses for coal prospecting to private parties. Colliery com- 
panies were asked to surrender the leases of areas that they had 
not so far worked. As Nehru noticed that there was prejudice 
against private sector in the minds of some of his friends and 
colleagues, he impatiently said: “I want to encourage private enter- 
prise, because I think it desirable to encourage every way that 
helps a nation’s growth and production.” In India progress 
towards the socialistic state has been made not by nationalizing 


161 



India 


existing industry but by expanding the public sector by controlling 
private industries and by heavy taxation on accumulation of wealth. 

The State Trading Corporation was established in 1955, pri- 
marily to handle trade with iron curtain countries. This company 
was given monopoly in trade in cement. The cost of imported 
cement was higher than that of cement produced in India. A few 
years later the import of cement was discontinued and the State 
Trading Corporation continued to hold the internal trade. It 
could have reduced the price of cement, but it did not do so, 
giving room for the accusation that it was being used “as extra- 
parliamentary source of taxation”. Another factor tending towards 
the socialist state is the control-mindedness of the Government of 
India. Businessmen feel that they are hemmed in on every side 
by complicated rules and regulations of the government, For 
instance a limited company cannot appoint its managing agent with- 
out the approval of the government. Remuneration of directors is 
also limited by statute. In respect of labour there is a statutory 
fixation of minimum wages and the award of bonuses. The deci- 
sions of the industrial tribunals are binding on the employer and 
the employee. The criticism levelled is that neither employers 
nor workers are allowed to learn by experience the value of collec- 
tive bargain. 

Planning no doubt necessitates a certain measure of govern- 
ment controls. But the Government of India seems to regard 
controls not as temporary measures, but as a part of the permanent 
pattern of Indian economic life. In Asian countries economic 
nationalism has expressed itself generally in three ways. The 
first is that the industry shall be owned and controlled mainly by 
the nationals of the country’concerned. The second is that nationals 
shall fill superior posts in industry whoever the shareholders may 
be. The third is the reservation to the country’s own citizens of 
important sections of its trade. Commenting on this trend in 
economic nationalism Griffith observes: “In all these matters 
India has been more moderate than some of her neighbours. She 
has interfered little with the existing non-Indian industry and 
except to some extent in the matter of taxation, foreign business- 
men have not suffered serious discrimination.” The Government 
of India has recognized that it is right for a British-owned firm to 


162 



Economic Development 

have a British head and this necessitates continued recruitment 
of British assistants who are expected to train Indian personnel 
to replace them efficiently. 

The progress of Indianization may be seen from the figure of 
employment in foreign controlled companies, on salaries of Rs. 
1,000 per mensum and above. In January 1954 there were 3,455 
Indians to 7,008 non-Indians; in January 1959 the number of 
Indians rose to 7916 and non-Indians fell to 5304. This has to 
be interpreted in the context of expansion of different types of 
industries. But the progress of training Indian technicians, mana- 
gers and administrators to replace foreign personnel within a 
reasonably short period has yet to be scientifically evaluated. 

It is impossible in a brief review of this type to enter into details 
relating to the economic policy of the Government of India towards 
various departments of Indian industry and commerce. Expan- 
sion of public sector with constraints on private enterprise for the 
gradual development of socialistic pattern of society is the outstan- 
ding feature of Indian economic policy. Foreign observers may 
doubt “if the artificial constraints will benefit the Indian economy 
in the long run”. Conservative leaders may decry controls, 
permits and licenses, but the Government of India is determined 
to apply principles of socialism to economic development and at 
the same time avoid violence and compulsion that have characte- 
rized Marxism. The Indian brand of socialism seems to be more 
in accord with Fabian principles than with Marxism. 

Planning for Progress. Poverty has been India’s most serious 
problem. Millions of her people have been living below the margin 
of subsistence. Since independence three Five Year Plans have 
been introduced to banish poverty and as we write this India is 
on the threshold of the Fourth Five Year Plan. Thousands of 
crores of rupees have been spent towards the banishment of poverty 
and yet more money is proposed to be spent. 

The Congress gave evidence of its faith in planning as far back 
as 1937 when it accepted office in the provinces. It soon learned' 
that without political power it could do nothing. The appoint- 
ment of the Planning Commission in March 1 950 marks the begi- 
nning of a new era in the economic history of India. India’s 


163 



India 


Five Year Plans have attracted world-wide attention. America 
and many Western countries have welcomed them. They regard 
these plans as a crucial test on behalf of democratic planning, and 
have pledged their massive support to ensure their success. The 
first plan (1951-56) was relatively modest and was exceptionally 
fortunate in that most of its targets were reached. The long-term 
goal of the plan was to double the national income by 1970-71 
and the per capita income by 1977-78. The success that attended 
the first Five Year Plan led to the revision of objectives in the 
second plan. It sought to secure the doubling of the national 
income by 1967-68 and the per capita income by 1973-74. But 
the 1961 census showed that the planners had under-estimated the 
rate of growth of the population. In the next fifteen years the 
increase in population is likely to be more than two per cent per 
annum in spite of attempts to check the growth. Increased popula- 
tion means increased requirements of consumption goods like 
food and cloth. There should also be a considerable increase in 
the opportunities for employment. To meet these demands the 
long-term objective of the third Five Year Plan is to increase the 
national income at the rate of six per cent per annum as against the 
average rate of four per cent during the period of the first two plans. 

The goals of the plans are not easy to be attained. The content 
of each plan goes on increasing and deepening with the pace of 
development in India and the world. The nature of the goals is 
such that, like ideals, they cannot be reached. There can only be 
a progress towards them. In respect of increased production a 
number of key indices may be taken to indicate the progress made. 
Our national income at 1960-61 prices increased from Rs. 10,240 
crores in 1950-51 to Rs. 14,500 crores in 1960-61. The target 
for the Third Five Year Plan is Rs. 19,000 crores, which means 
doubling the national income. The difficulty here is the rapid 
increase in population. Therefore the per capita income does 
not show a rapid rise. However, the per capita income at 1960- 
61 prices was Rs. 284 in 1950-51 and Rs. 330 in 1960-61. Index 
of agricultural production (1949-50 =100) was 96 in 1950-51 and 
135 in 1960-61. Foodgrains production increased from 52.2 
million tons in 1950-51 to 76 million tons in 1960-61. The index 
of industrial production (1950-51=100) was 100 in 1950-51 and 


164 



Economic Development 

194 in 1960-61. Cloth production also shows an appreciable 
increase although the consumption of cloth per capita per 
annum stood static in the first two plans period. 

Considerable emphasis was laid on the development of human 
resources through increased facilities for education. In all bran- 
ches of education there has been a phenomenal increase quanti- 
tatively. To prevent concentration of economic power and reduce 
the existing disparities in income and wealth a number of steps 
have been taken to reorganize the production apparatus both in 
agriculture and in industry. In agriculture the middle man is 
eliminated to give tenancy right to the tiller. Greater security 
of tenure is given to the tiller. Rents are reduced and ceiling on 
agricultural holdings has been fixed. But before the law relating 
to it could come into operation estates under joint family had been 
distributed among the members of the family to avoid any loss. 
In the sphere of industry, efforts have been made to increase the 
control of the state representing the collective will of the people. 
In 1950-51 the state enterprises contributed only two per cent of 
the production in organized manufacturing industry, but by 1965-66 
it is estimated to rise to twenty-five per cent. Preferential treat- 
ment is given to new people entering industry. To reduce concen- 
tration of wealth in the hands of a few persons and at a few places, 
an attempt is made to locate new enterprises in new places. But 
as yet there is no clear evidence of the benefit of these new enter- 
prises reaching rural artisans and craftsmen. However, attention 
is being given to the development of rural areas through rural 
electrification. Various programmes have been launched to 
develop the weaker sections of the population, so that the existing 
disparities may be progressively reduced. Taking health facilities 
to rural areas and schemes of slum clearance in urban areas are 
of special importance. To improve the lot of the backward clas- 
ses, there arc schemes for the allotment of land, scholarships 
and other facilities to them. Every effort is made to create em- 
ployment opportunity. But unfortunately the rapid rise in popula- 
tion, under-employment and unemployment continue to be dis- 
tressing features. The per capita consumption of food increased 
from 1,800 calories per day in 1950-51 to 2,100 calories in 1960-61, 
The expectation of life at birth increased from 32.45 years for 


165 



India 


males and 31.66 years for females during 1941-51 to 41.68 years 
and 42.06 years respectively during 1956-61. 

Programmes for development involve considerable financial out- 
lays both governmental and private. The government outlay in 
the First Plan was Rs. 1,950 crores. This rose to 4,600 crores in 
the Second Plan. These figures do not include the contributions 
of local bodies from their own resources. Investment in the private 
sector increased from 1,800 crores in the First Plan to 3,100 crores 
in the Second Plan. These figures give a broad idea of the magnitude 
of the effort that is being put into planned development. But in 
hastening the speed of development and seeking to readjust social 
relationships considerable stresses and strains are experienced. 
Therefore, in many directions progress has not been as rapid and in 
as straight a line as the country’s well-wishers would have liked it 
to be. Whatever may have been the purely economic value of the 
plan, its psychological impact was tremendous. It engendered a 
belief in the people that the burden of poverty could be lightened, 
even if it could not be lifted altogether within a short period. 
There is no doubt that the country has entered a new dynamic 
phase. With this overall picture of planned development, we shall 
study certain phases of planning in greater detail. 

Agriculture. Agriculture still provides fifty per cent of the 
national income and serves as a means of livelihood for more than 
seventy per cent of the working population. Agricultural progress 
since the transfer of power has been spectacular. But still India 
has not been self-sufficient in food grains. Import of food grains 
has used up valuable foreign exchange. Agricultural implements 
are still the same old ones. There are practically no modern 
tractors, or other machinery except a few on large scale government 
farms and reclamation projects. The methods of agriculture too 
continue to be old-fashioned. Only the richest peasants can buy 
fertilizers and equipment. Rural indebtedness continues to be 
heavy. Under the plan the government is providing credit at low 
rates of interest. Attempts are made to promote the greater use 
of fertilizers and the formation of marketing cooperatives. The 
government brought under cultivation much marginal land which 
the ordinary cultivator had thought it wise to leave alone. The 


166 



Economic Development 


result was that the average yields per acre of the principal crops 
were considerably lower in 1951 than in 1947. Thereupon the 
government began to pay more attention to improved methods of 
cultivation and laid stress on the so-called Japanese system, based 
on careful seed selection, ruthless destruction of poor plants, greater 
use of artificial fertilizers in seedling stage and proper spacing 
between tire plants. The government provided facilities for the 
supply of good seeds and of fertilizers. Demonstration plots were 
laid out in the villages, and irrigation works were given high priority. 
In 1955 the production was sixty-six million tons as compared 
with fifty-two million tons in 1951. Thereafter, there was some 
flattening in the curve of progress. Recent figures, however, show 
that the normal outturn is seventy five million tons. “Grow More 
Food Campaign” was intensified. The deficiency of food grains 
in spite of such attempts is attributable to increase of population 
and increase in standards of living, as judged by greater consump- 
tion of food grains than before. Competent investigations estimated 
that for the foreseeable future India would need to import two to 
three million tons of food grains annually. It is a matter .for 
gratification that the U.S.A, undertook to supply seventeen million 
tons of food grains to India during the Third Five Year Plan period 
(1956-61), An agricultural production scheme sponsored by the 
Ford Foundation studied the agricultural problem in India, in 
cooperation with the Indian Government. In April 1959 they 
reported that the yields could be at least doubled, if the cultivator 
used better seeds, better tools and better cultivation methods. They 
also pointed out that the cultivator should be helped with more 
credit, more fertilizers, better drainage and soil conservation and 
increased irrigation. They chose fifteen districts of India to 
demonstrate the possibility of making the land yield more. These 
are called “package programmes”. And if successful they could be 
repeated in other districts and India could produce food grains 
enough and to spare. The bottleneck here is to secure the ready 
and willing cooperation of the peasants. Those who work among 
them now seem to enjoy little prestige and authority. There is need 
for outstanding leaders to take up the work of stimulating the 
peasants to adopt belter methods of cultivation. 

Closely connected with agricultural development are irrigation 

167 



India 


and power schemes which formed a main feature of the First and 
Second Five Year Plan. We have already seen that the power 
generating capacity of India was comparatively negligible. Another 
fact is that, in spite of the great developemt of irrigation during the 
twentieth century, only about six per cent of the annual flow in the 
rivers was utilized for irrigation. The planners thought in terms of 
great storage dams which could be used for the generation of electri- 
city as well as for irrigation. At this time the Tennessee Valley 
Scheme of the U.S.A. had caught the imagination of the educated 
Indians. Therefore, there was a demand for the initiation of multi- 
purpose river schemes. The most important multi-purpose schemes 
which were initiated were the Bhakra-Nangal Project on the Sutlej, 
the Damodar Valley Scheme and the Hirakud Dam Project. The 
Bhakra-Nangal Project utilizes the waters of the Sutlej in the Punjab 
for irrigation facilities and generating power. The State Govern- 
ment of Punjab and Rajasthan worked it out to completion in 1963. 
The Bhakra-Nangal Project will also make power available to 
Delhi and Himachal Pradesh. The Damodar Valley Project was 
started in 1948 and is scheduled to be completed by the end of the 
Third Plan. This project when completed will give continuous 
employment to 5,376 persons. Various benefits will accrue as a 
result of the completion of this project such as controlling floods, 
production of two crops in a year, increase in the area under irriga- 
tion, providing electric power to exploit the rich mineral resources 
of the region and to help the running of key industries like mica, 
iron, aluminium, etc. The Hirakund Project started in 1948 was 
expected to be complete in 1963-64. This project consists of a Dam 
for storing 6.6 million acre-feet of water and powerhouses generat- 
ing a large amount of electricity. This harnesses the waters of the 
Mahanadi and is calculated to give relief to Orissa in times of failure 
of rain. Many other similar projects are being worked out. Al- 
though so many projects have been worked out, village India is 
still in the kerosene lamp stage and only about 2\ per cent of the 
towns and villages with populations of less than ten thousand have 
an electric supply. 

Land Reform. We have already referred to the abolition of the 
Zamindari system and the Land Ceiling Act. Mrs. Kusum Nair in 
her book on village life observes: “Though since 1947 India has 


168 



Economic Development 


enacted perhaps more land reforms legislation than any other country 
in the world, it has not succeeded in changing in any essentials the 
power pattern, the deep economic disparities nor the traditional 
hierarchical nature of intergroup relations.” 

Small size of holdings in land is one of the factors that debars 
agricultural progress. With the increase in population the average 
size of the family holding of the land declines. The laws of inherit- 
ance in India confer rights on sons, and now on daughters as well, 
to equal share in the ancestral property, and this has further helped 
the process of reduction in the size of holdings. Recent enquiries 
undertaken by the Planning Commission show that a largo percent- 
age of holdings is below ten acres. This problem is further aggravated 
by fragmentation and in the Punjab there are instances of half an 
acre having been split up into less than twenty separate plots. In- 
dividual holdings lie scattered over a number of fragments each. 
No satisfactory solution for the problem of uneconomic holdings 
has so far been found. The Government of India thinks that co- 
operative farming can mitigate the evil. But there is resistance 
from cultivators. For want of better occupation the owners cling 
to their small pieces of land. Further, the Indian peasants with 
their deep traditional love of their own little plots of land refuse to 
join voluntarily the cooperatives, in spite of the inducement that the 
government offers by way of credits. In the government scheme, 
“pooling” is entirely voluntary but withdrawal from the pool would 
be permitted only under exceptional circumstances. Conservatives 
like the members of Swatantra Party think that there is very little 
difference between the India Government’s cooperatives and the 
collectives of the communist type. This has discouraged any 
vigorous implementation of the cooperative farming policy. 

Industries. India’s raw material situation is very favourable for 
industrial development. She has the largest known deposits of 
high grade iron ore in the world. Her supply of coal is almost 
limitless; much of it, however, is not fit for coking metallurgical 
use except through a special process. Rapid progress has been 
made in respect of utilizing the coal available. India has the world’s 
second largest reserves of bauxite for aluminium as well as ample 
atomic materials like thorium. She supplies most of free world’s 


169 



India 


manganese essential to the making of steel. She supplies four- 
fifths of the free world’s mica essential for electrical industry and she 
has also great hydro-electric potential. The only gap in the indus- 
trial resources of India has been petroleum. But even here im- 
portant reserves have been discovered in recent years. Assam and 
Gujarat contain large reserves. Geological studies show that there 
may be a number of other important oil bearing areas. 

It is difficult to describe in general terms free India’s industrial 
progress. We may broadly indicate the development under three 
heads namely, the public sector, the private sector and cottage 
industries. Official figures show that industrial production in 1959 
was twenty per cent greater than in 1955, and if the traditional 
industries such as cotton textiles, tea and jute were excluded, the 
increase would work out to fifty per cent. From 1958 onwards 
the rate of industrial progress has been slowed down a little, partly 
because of lack of demand in some industries and partly because of 
foreign exchange difficulties, which necessitated import restrictions. 
During the period of the First and Second Five Year Plans industrial 
production as a whole has increased by forty per cent. But it must be 
observed that credit for this increase should very largely go to the 
private sector. The public sector suffered owing to over-optimism 
in estimating construction times and underestimation of costs. 
Therefore, a large number of projects in the public sector have 
fallen behind the time schedule. This does not in any way detract 
from some remarkable achievements in this sector. The first im- 
portant achievement in the public sector was the Chittaranjan Loco- 
motive Factory. “This factory is impressive and India is now self- 
sufficient in steam locomotives, though some component parts of 
them still have to be imported.” The next most important develop- 
ment is the Sindri Fertilizers and Chemicals in Bihar. This was 
started in 1947 with the collaboration of India, the U.K and the 
U.S.A. and completed in 1950. Production started in October 
1951. This factory is the biggest of its kind in the East, producing 
over 300,000 tons of Ammonium Sulphate annually. This is a sure 
indication that India is fast becoming fertilizer-minded, but even 
with additional plants of this kind fertilizer production cannot meet 
the needs of the country for a long time to come. 

Other schemes in the public sector followed in quick succession. 


170 



Economic Development 


Machine tools, heavy machine building plant, telephone cables, 
antibiotics, insecticides and newsprint all these illustrate the wide 
range of industries covered in the plan. We shall here refer in some 
detail to steel and oil. 

Steps were taken in the very First Five Year Plan to push up the 
production of steel. Striking advance was, however, made only 
in the Second Five Year Plan during which the production of steel' 
went up from less than two million tons of steel ingots in 1955-56' 
to 3 . 3 million tons of steel ingots and 1 . 1 million tons of pig iron 
for sale in 1960-61. In the Third Five Year Plan the target is for 
10.2 million tons of steel ingots and 1.5 million tons of pig iron 
for sales. The major projects in the public sector are the steel' 
plants at Rourkcla, Durgapur and Bhilai. 

Rourkela Plant was set up in collaboration with the German firms 
Krupp and Demag in 1955 and completed in 1961. The components 
of the plant are: three batteries of seventy coke ovens, each of which 
converts 1,000 tons of coal daily into coke; three blast furnaces in 
each of which 1,700 tons of iron ore, 1,000 tons of coke and about 
500 tons of lime-stone are charged daily. The Durgapur Steel 
Plant has been put up with the assistance of a consortium of British 
firms. Work on the plant started in 1956. It is designed for an 
initial capacity of one million tons of steel which can subsequently 
be increased at a comparatively low cost. During the Third Five 
Year Plan the capacity is to be increased from one million to 1.6' 
million tons. The Bhilai Steel Plant in Madhya Pradesh is put up’with 
technical and financial cooperation of the Government of U.S.S.R.. 
This plant will produce one million of the steel ingots and finished 
products like rails, railway sleepers, bars, etc. Pig iron to the tune 
of 300,000 tons will be produced annually. 

The general trend in steel production has been one of gradual 
increase. Against the production of 1 .04 million tons in 1951 the 
figure of output during 1956 and 1957 respectively were 1.34 and 
1.35. The progress of steel production was hampered because of 
insufficient attention to building up raw material base, for example, 
shortage in the supply of good quality of coking coal resulted not 
only in the curtailment of production, but also in the increase of 
the cost of production. Outside observers are very critical of the 
administrative arrangement for the new steel plants. It is said 


171 



India 


that there has been too much centralization and too little attention 
to costs. There is again the lack of efficient experienced Indian 
managers and senior technicians. The Government of India has 
-continued to employ foreign personnel but find it difficult to secure 
them in sufficient number. Even the critics admit the wisdom of 
constructing these three plants which are calculated to save con- 
siderable foreign exchange. Difficulties that the steel industry is 
facing are only of a temporary character and most of them can be 
surmounted. There is every hope that before long India can attain 
the foremost position among the great producers of steel. The 
possibilities of development of North East India as a steel produc- 
ing centre are so great that someone recently remarked : “Here an 
Indian Ruhr is in its making.” 

The development of the oil industries has been hampered 
by insistence of government for a long time that the expansion 
■of refining and distribution of oil should be confined to the 
public sector. In 1959 a new company called Oil India Ltd., 
was founded. In this the Government of India holds one-third 
of the equity capital and the Burma Oil Company two-thirds. 
The aim of this company is to develop the new field, and to build 
the pipe line for conveying the oil to two new refineries constructed 
■by the Government of India, with assistance from Russia and 
Rumania. India’s requirements of oil at the beginning of Second 
Five Year Plan amounted to seven million tons. Only four hundred 
thousand were available from local production. The Nahorkatiya 
field in Assam is expected to produce two and half million to five 
million tons annually so that half of India’s needs will be met from 
■the local production. The new refineries will increase India’s 
■capacity by about fifty per cent to a figure of 8f million tons in 
terms of crude petroleum, which is roughly equal to India’s present 
need. 

Machine building requires mention. To manufacture the much 
needed heavy electrical equipment and machinery the government 
has set up a factory (Heavy Electricals Ltd.) at Bhopal. The 
.government entered into an agreement with a Swiss firm to set up 
.a machine tool factory called Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd., at 
Jalahalli, Bangalore, to make the country self-sufficient. 

Although the taxation is high, the private sector is abounding 


172 



Economic Development 


in vitality. Partly under the influence of protection and partly as a 
result of collaboration between the British and foreign industrialists- 
there has been a great expansion in the private sector. Those who- 
were formerly only traders and financiers have shown a readiness, 
and willingness to enter the industrial field. It is impossible to 
detail the great diversification in industry during the plan period. 
But we may say that the development has been well balanced. In- 
dustries of particular importance in India’s development are those 
concerned with engineering, heavy chemicals, metallurgy and 
cement. In all these fields there has been a remarkable expansion. 
Nevertheless, substantial import is still necessary, pointing to the- 
need for further expansion. The demand for cement is almost 
unlimited, and the satisfactory progress which has been made in 
this industry is of great importance to the whole economy. 

The large new steel plants have made steel available at low cost. 
This has stimulated the development of small industries. Many- 
small industrial enterprises, completely in private hands, have sprung, 
up to produce such articles as bicycle parts, cardboard boxes,, 
matches, shoes, carpets, umbrella ribs, aluminium utensils, etc.. 
The government has been actively helping these small-scale in- 
dustries, by giving them electric power, floor space in factories and 
other facilities at nominal cost in over a hundred locations called 
“industrial estates’’. 

In respect of cotton textiles the government policy is to see that 
the mill industry does not hamper the handloom industry. So the 
government placed restrictions on any increase in the number of' 
looms in cotton mills. Production of mill-made dhoties was also- 
limited. In spite of these restrictions, total production of cotton, 
cloth has appreciably increased. But when export market con- 
tracted production necessarily declined. However, about the year- 
1960 the production was thrity-three per cent higher than in 1950. 

Sugar production has been a heavily protected one. At present 
the sugar production may be said to be equal to India’s total demand. 
But the consumption of sugar is showing a rise in recent years,, 
which is an indication of the general rise in the standard of living. 
The unsatisfactory features of this industry are the low yields of' 
cane per acre (less than one quarter of that in Japan) and low ex- 
traction rate. 


173 - 



India 


We may on the whole say that the industrial progress has so far 
been satisfactory. Private enterprise has been playing a notable 
part in the progress. Foreign aid has also been of importance in 
stimulating industrial growth. It should be noted that from 1951 
to 1960 external loans and grants towards the development in India 
amounted to over £ 2000 million. The policy of the Government 
•of India towards cottage and small-scale industries has been some- 
•what hesitant. Support to these industries is a part of Gandhian 
tradition. These industries help India to avoid the social evils of 
the industrial revolution in Europe. Further, India is passing 
through a period of transition, when neither agriculture nor large- 
scale industry is able to provide anything like full employment. 
In the early days of independence, there were some who on senti- 
mental grounds opposed the development of large-scale industries 
for fear they would hamper the development of cottage industries. 

; Scientific enquiries of such bodies as the Ford Foundation have led 
the government to feel that the policy of developing large-scale indus- 
tries is sound. But still there are people who are inclined to the 
view that the new industries should not be allowed to compete with 

■ cottage industries. It is a fact that cottage industries employ about 
•twenty million people. Nearly a quarter of these people are eng- 
aged in the handloom industry. The government has therefore 
made arrangements to assist the development of small-scale indus- 
tries. Their policy is to arrange production programmes, to teach 
improved techniques, and to make capital grants for the provision 
• of modern equipment. Both the central government and state 

. governments offer financial and technical assistance. The National 
' Small Industries Corporation has been formed to secure assistance 
to village industries. This corporation grants credits to small units, 

. and helps them to get machinery and equipment on hire purchase. 
Village industries are likely to be transformed with increased use of 

■ electric power. The attempt is to develop these small-scale units as 
ancillaries to large-scale industries. But it must be observed that 
there has been no appreciable progress in this direction. The 
necessity for the development of these small-scale industries and 
village crafts must be conceded in the present transition period of 
the Indian economy. 


174 



Economic Development 


Community Development. There is a growing awareness that 
without improving the position of her villages, India cannot make 
any progress. The State, through the community development 
programme, has been doing its best to put the people on the path 
of self-help. It was quite fitting that the programme was launched 
on Gandhiji’s birthday, 2 October 1952. The aim of this pro- 
gramme is that each village should have a plan of all round develop- 
ment; of increasing agricultural production, organizing village 
■crafts, giving health education and providing minimum health 
services, providing educational facilities for children and adults, 
providing recreational facilities, improving housing and family liv- 
ing conditions and providing programmes for women, children, 
youth and other similar groups. Each family should also have a 
plan for its own development. There is evidence to show that 
tangible benefits have accrued to the rural population in those 
villages, where there has been hearty cooperation between the villag- 
ers and the departmental officials, in working out the community 
■development project. According to Dr. D.R. Gadgil, an eminent 
economist, the community development scheme has not borne the 
desired results, because, “characteristically, it originated with a 
foreign expert, and was sponsored and worked through top-level 
bureaucrats”. An official investigating body admits that the 
community development has failed to “evoke popular initiative”. 
■Concerted measures to improve the situation have not so far been 
successful. It is clear that there is much to be done to make it a 
people’s programme from being an official programme. And as 
V.P. Nayar observes “the success of this transformation will deter- 
mine the degree to which democracy succeeds in India and the fruits 
of economic development reach the poorest of the poor”. The 
economic regeneration of India very largely depends on the 
speed and efficiency with which science and technology are adapted 
to the creation of tempting opportunities for enterprising village 
artisans who are at present unorganized and isolated in their tradi- 
tional setting. 

Unemployment. Large-scale and small-scale industries, both public 
and private, have been started in large numbers. But still the un- 
employment problem has assumed distressing dimensions. In 


175 



India 


1951 there were three million people unemployed in India, in 1961 
the number of unemployed rose three times, i.e. nine million. This: 
may not be large in consideration of the total rise of population to 
439 million. We are told that in U.S. with a population of 18(1 
million it is not unusual for four or five million to be unemployed. 
But the problem in India is accentuated by the fact that an addi- 
tional fifteen to eigtheen million people are “under-employed”. 
In other countries it is usual to include those who do not find high 
enough wages to support themselves, among the unemployed. A 
peculiarly tragic situation in India is that those who have had high 
school and sometimes even college education are not able to find 
jobs. This problem of “educated unemployed” still remains to be 
satisfactorily tackled. 

Education. There has been a phenomenal quantitative expansion 
in education at all levels, in the post independence period. In the 
decade 1950-51 to 1960-61 the number of students increased from. 
23.5 million to 43.5 million. The right to knowledge is no longer 
the preserve of a small section of the community. The British 
system of education in spite of its drawbacks did good to a class of 
people to whom education and enlightenment has never been a new 
experience. To the few that sought education then it did not matter 
in what language the medium of instruction was. Now sons of the 
shopkeepers, artisans and cultivators who a generation ago had been 
content to follow their traditional occupation flock to schools and 
colleges. India today has an increased number of universities, with 
more than one million students seeking higher education. Most of 
them would profit more, if instruction in colleges were imparted 
through the medium of the regional language, provided, of course, 
competitive examinations for All India Services are conducted in 
a common national language. The major point for our considera- 
tion is whether attempts are being made to correlate education with 
the requirements of planning, in order that the country may have a 
growing body of able men to administer its increasingly complex 
affairs. The Third Five Year Plan eloquently observes that educa- 
tion is at the base of “the effort to forge the bonds of common 
citizenship, to harness the energies of the people, and to develop 
the natural and human resources of every part of the country”. 


176 



Economic Development 


In spite of the recommendations of the Secondary Education 
Commission, popularly called the Mudaliar Commission Report, 
nothing tangible has been done to give education a new purpose and 
direction. It is hoped that the recommendations of the Indian 
Education Commission, if properly implemented, will satisfactori- 
ly solve our educational problems. The greatest need of our 
country is technical workshops in most of our secondary schools 
and colleges, so that rural education may be industry-oriented and 
the increasing movement of people from villages to cities may be 
checked. The criticism that British India Educational System “has 
fostered a sophisticated, over-literary mind, promoted drift from 
the manual to the soft occupations and blocked an adaptive social 
and economic transformation” is not at all an exaggeration. Higher 
education at present unfortunately dovetails into politics. While 
we grant that denial of opportunities is really discrimination, we 
must emphasise that recognition of talent is not. India has staked 
her future on her economic plans. Discerning foreign observers 
arc very hopeful of the success of the plans. The memorandum 
published by the United States Business International Group in 
November 1951, after its visit to India, gives ten reasons in support 
of its conviction that India is a safe and rewarding place for foreign 
investment. The document says that “there is a genuine desire 
among many business leaders in the free world to allocate a part of 
their human and material resources for raising the living standards 
of the people of India in ways that only private enterprise can 
achieve. The people of India are more than a market, more than 
neighbours in need. They hold in their hands the destiny of the 
whole of South Asia and perhaps of the free world itself.” 


177 



CHAPTER 


Social Progress 


The social progress of a nation is to some extent a by-product 
of economic development. However, certain aspects of it require 
special treatment. The people of India have after independence 
shown an awareness of their own backwardness and a conscious- 
ness of their own needs. India’s vast population is at once a 
strength and weakness. Recognizing this the Government of 
India have been trying to maximize the contribution of every citizen 
through the national effort at development. Considerable empha- 
sis is laid on the development of human resources through increa- 
sed facilities for education, health and social welfare. 

The Third Five Year Plan says : 

in all directions, the pace of development will depend 

largely upon the quality of public administration, the efficiency 
with which it works, and the cooperation which it evokes. The 




Social Progress 


tasks facing the administration are larger in magnitude and more 
complex, but also richer in meaning than in earlier days. From 
the maintenance of law and order and the collection of revenue, 
the major emphasis now shifts to the development of human 
and material resources and the elimination of poverty and want. 

We may say that the Government of India is determined to 
ifeach the plan targets, with the aid of a competent and honest staff. 
To set up a body of officials who are competent, honest and effi- 
cient in the discharge of their duties is exclusively an Indian task. 
For in this there can be no foreign participation. 

Wc have already briefly referred to the radical change necessary 
in the system of education, to suit the conditions in our developing 
country. Griffith observes: “Despite the efforts of individual 
officers the British had been less successful in the sphere of educa- 
tion than in any other department. A self-governing India thus 
has a great task ahead of her in this field.” The Report of the 
Indian Education Commission, is calculated to give the desireable 
new direction to education at different levels. 

In the Second Five Year Plan a good deal of attention had been 
given to what is called social education. To cure the illiteracy 
of three quarters of adult population, the Congress Party realized 
that it was not possible to wait and let juvenile education play 
its part in course of time. So the Party started a vigorous camp- 
aign of adult education, but soon found that the results were dis- 
appointing, for the adults quickly relapsed into illiteracy. The 
Planning Commission therefore widened the concept of adult 
education and included citizenship training and enlightened use 
of leisure in the course designed. In each district at least one 
primary school was turned into a community centre, but the experi- 
ment has for long remained in the pioneering stage. A Central 
Welfare Board was constituted. Its three primary functions 
were provision of financial and technical assistance to voluntary 
organizations engaged in the welfare of women, children (normal 
and handicapped) and delinquents, initiation of projects to enable 
women and others to supplement their income and training wel- 
fare personnel ( gramasevikas ) for the spread of modern ideas of 
hygiene and child welfare among villagers. The most important 


179 



India 


work of these village workers in the words of V.T. Krishnamachari 
is “to change the outlook of the sixty million families living in the 
countryside, arouse enthusiasm in them for new knowledge and 
new ways of life and fill them with the ambition and the will to 
live a better life”. Experience shows that attempts at social educa- 
tion have not so far given very satisfactory results. 

The Planning Commission has put much emphasis on measures 
for the improvement of medical and health services. Subject to 
the limiting factor of finance, much good work has been done in 
this field after the transfer of power, largely because firm founda- 
tions had been laid in this than in the field of education, by the 
British Government. In the decade of the first two plans hospital 
beds rose from 1 13,000 to 1 £6,000 and doctors from 56,000 to 70,000, 
but yet we have only one doctor for every 6000 people, nor are 
beds sufficient to meet the needs. 

We have already referred to the position of consumption of 
food and clothing per capita. Housing is an important tool for 
measuring the economic well-being of a people. The increase in 
population has greatly aggravated the problem of housing. In 
villages houses continue to be ill-built and overcrowded. No 
regard for sanitation, ventilation or comfort has yet been paid in 
most villages. Slum clearance in cities has not been as effective 
as expected. Pavement dwellers have increased in number in 
large cities. Land values in the cities have shot up to unimaginable 
heights. The Government asserts her faith in the work of cooper- 
ative house building societies. Town planning laws have to be 
suitably modified if cooperative housing activities should produce 
better results. Housing is an age-old problem ancl it is impossi- 
ble to solve it in the course of ten or fifteen years. The point to 
be noted is that increase in the population has greatly neutralized 
the gains made under the successive Five Year Plans. 

To check the growth of population, the message of family 
planning is carried to the countryside. The family planning scheme 
cannot produce the intended results, without a regular supply of 
the necessary appliances to people desirous of limiting the size 
of the family. The report of the census of India points out “although 
our mortality is low by former standards, our morbidity is never- 
theless distressingly high”. Unregulated additions to the popu- 

180 



, Social Progress 


lation will only add to the already existing morbidity. More 
children moans feeding more persons who cannot contribute to 
production. It then becomes impossible to increase the wealth 
of a nation. In the present circumstances the purchasing power 
can only remain stagnant or go down. In his inaugural address 
to the Second Indian Conference on Research in National Income 
(31 August 1950) the then Governor of Reserve Bank of India, 
H.V.R. Iyengar said: 

It is conceivable that, while the per capita income is going 
up, the standard of living of large sectors of the population 
might be stationary or might even be going down. In fact, 
one of the criticisms sometimes made of our economic programme 
is precisely this, that the figures showing a rise in per capita 
income disguise the fact of economic stagnation for the bulk 
of our rural population. 

Although there is no active opposition to family planning, most 
people have chosen to be indifferent to it. 

During the last seventeen years India has sought to effect radical 
changes in the laws related to marriage, succession and women’s 
right to property *5o that the country may be brought on a level 
with modern societies in Western countries. It was Mahatma 
Gandhi’s view that laws promulgated should be such as people 
would readily and willingly obey. The effect of laws calculated 
to bring about social reforms has still to be evaluated. One thing 
is certain. The village societies are now being shaken up. The 
policy of decentralization and the institution of Panchayati Raj 
entrusted with some political and economic initiative, would, it 
is hoped, weld together the different social groups in villages and 
create a new social order. The old status-dominated society is 
in the process of being transformed into an egalitarian democratic 
community. To what extent the belief that handicrafts are broadly 
caste occupations and that any financial support given to them 
would only perpetuate the caste system is responsible for the niggar- 
dly treatment given to cottage industries deserves examination. 
It is well to bear in mind that progress can be achieved only 
when there is an effective compromise between traditional caste 


181 



India 


organization and the socialism of the Government of India. We 
may say that in India, at present, there are no convinced advocates 
of caste. There is none upholding xmtouchabilily. Special oppor- 
tunities for pulling up the backward classes are welcomed. But 
the special privileges and concessions afforded to backward classes 
are such that there is a tendency among them to continue to call 
themselves backward, for nothing more than receiving the benefits. 
Of course, poverty is at the root of this psychology in them. 

The state has assumed the role of moral preacher by the enact- 
ment of laws relating to prohibition, use of gold and the elimina- 
tion of brothels. These are matters in which effective public 
opinion more than laws can produce desirable results. So far 
as prohibition is concerned it is admittedly a failure. It must be 
owned that efforts of social reformers and legislative measures 
for ushering in conditions favourable for the development of socia- 
lism are meeting with silent and unseen resistance of age-long 
custom. It will indeed lake a very long time for inter-caste 
marriages to be common in India. The development of trade 
union movement may be cited as an instance for the growth of 
socialism. But the Government of India, as already observed, 
has left very little initiative to labour organizations to get practice 
in collective bargaining. 

It is realized that the public sector and the private sector should 
work in unison for realizing the ideals of socialist economy. But 
the public ownership of industries is ordinarily charged with 
“lack of imagination, rigidity, disregard of human considerations 
dilatoriness and, of course, wastefulness and lack of what is called 
cost consciousness”. The private sector, though it has shown 
greater efficiency than the public sector, has also its own difficulties 
and drawbacks in respect of size, heirarchy of command, control 
and chronic conflict between labour and management. More 
than all it has no obligation to render an account for the manner 
in which it exercises its powers and privileges. Confirmed sociali- 
sts are urging a reappraisal of the whole position including the 
industrial policy of the government. They call for measures 
which will prevent socialism' being used as “a cover for the pursuit 
of acquisitive private interest”. The attempts of plans to reduce 
the disparities between the high income and low income groups 


182 



Social Progress 

preventing concentration of economic power and working for 
the welfare of all should be assessed, in the context of the situation 
obtaining both in the public and private sectors. 

The most significant feature of Indian social life after Indepen- 
dence arises out of a combination of the idea of secular state 
and the principles of socialist economy. Side by side with the 
secular promise there can be seen a strengthening of religious faith 
among all classes of people. For example, the first Kumbh mela 
after Independence, a festival that occurs once in twelve years, 
attracted more than five million pilgrims to (Allahabad. Every 
year there has been a growing number of pilgrims to places like 
Badarinath, Gaya, Tirupati and Rameswaram. The religious 
feeling that is evidenced is neither dogmatic nor sectarian, but 
moved by deep faith. In the post-Independence period the life 
and activities of such saints as Ramana Maharshi, Aurobindo, 
Anandamoyee Devi and Sivananda have attracted wider attention 
than ever before. There is a persistent desire on the part of the 
Hindus to rebuild the temples destroyed by the Muslims. Many 
castes which had been considered low in rank have definitely 
come up in the social scale, although caste continues to throw its 
shadow on the social scene. The superiority of the Brahmanas 
is not accepted by anyone today. Other communities have dis- 
placed the Kashathriyas and the Vaisyas. Social progress has 
meant allowing power to get into the hands of the working class. 

The prevalence of castcism in politics cannot easily be dismissed 
as Panikkar does by saying: “This accusation comes mainly 

from the higher castes whose privileged position in society, official 
life and politics, is being threatened by the awakening of the new 
classes.” The Vanniyakula Kashatriyas of Madras feel that they 
have not had their share of political power compared to the Muda- 
liars and Nadars. In Rajasthan the ascendancy of the Jat caste 
has been causing concern to the Rajputs. In the Andhra the 
Reddies and Kammas are vying with one another for capturing 
political power. In Karnatak the Lingayat and the Okkiligas 
form rival groups. There are still some who observe that the 
Brahmanas in the South and Kayasthas in the North continue to 
be holding influential positions. In U.P. there is a special problem 
of the Muslims who are dispossesed of their jagirs. Although 


183 



India 


the Muslims form a minority, still their total strength is forty million 
scattered over different parts of India. They are naturally affec- 
ted by the form of Hindu revivalism. To bring about a healthy 
social relationship among the communities belonging to a plural 
society is by no means an easy matter. 

With the abolition of zamim and jagirs and the integration of 
states, feudalism based on princely privilege and hereditary land- 
ownership disappeared altogether. But the hierarchical character 
of Indian society only underwent a change. The Maharajas, 
Nawabs and other titled nobilities could no longer claim social 
leadership, and remained in their palaces and bunglows, hiding 
their diminished heads. The new millionaires, the so called 
industrial magnates, with vast patronage at their disposal stepped 
into the place vacated by the nobilities. This seemed to be a real 
danger, for it was easy for them to acquire political power as an 
adjunct to their financial empire. The control of the newspaper 
press in particular passed into the hands of industrial magnates. 
Some of them even sought to build up political connections with 
party leaders. The government were not slow to check this deve- 
lopment by their system of taxation. They levied a crippling 
supertax at higher levels of income. An expenditure tax, a wealth 
tax, succession duties, gift tax — all these together with a stricter 
administration of Company Laws prevented the concentration of 
wealth in a few hands to a great extent. The joint family owner- 
ship of land, has gone but this has now been replaced by a similar 
ownership of industrial concerns, in spite of the severity of the Acts, 
rules and regulations. 

Let us now turn to the position of women after independence. 
On the position and influence of women in Indian society in the 
past much nonsense has been written by ill-informed European 
writers who have been astonished at their progress in recent years 
and attribute it altogether to the influence of the West or of Christi- 
anity. Indians, accustomed as they have been to take a balanced 
view, are not surprised at the rapid change that has come over the 
position of women after independence. During the non-coopera- 
tion movement, women vied with men in exhibiting their spirit of 
self-sacrifice. The Constitution of India gave women equal poli- 
tical rights with men and opened up avenues of employment. The 


184 



Social Progress 


Hindu Code superceded the traditional personal laws of Hindus. 
This has the potentiality of bringing about a revolutionary change 
in the position of women. According to it, marriage was made 
a civil contract, polygamy was abolished and divorce was permi- 
tted under certain well-defined conditions. Caste restrictions in 
respect of marriage were done away with. A uniform law was 
enacted for all Hindus. The law of succession was changed so as 
to give women right to inherit a share in the family property. Thus 
the legal rights of Indian women are now much the same as those 
in the most, advanced European societies. The question to be 
asked is; “Has the social climate changed to reflect these trends ?” 
Marriages are still, even in the case of educated family, arranged 
by parents, and governed by traditional caste restrictions . H owever, 
in higher circles of society intercaste marriages are not frowned 
upon by society or disowned by relatives. Quantitatively there 
has been relatively more progress in the higher education of women 
than in the earlier period. The Act relating to dowries is observed 
more in its breach than in its observance. Therefore, to pay for 
the education of girls besides providing for their marriages and 
dowry on a conventional scale presents at present a hard economic 
problem for the parent. 

Today women are functioning as ministers, deputy-ministers, 
secretaries, and under-secretaries in the government. A few 
•exceptionally brilliant women compete for the foreign service. The 
majority of educated women limit themselves to the professions of 
teaching and medicine. There are a few who choose law. Increa- 
sing numbers of women seek employment in business firms as 
secretaries and clerks. Politics attract a few women. It is women 
in industry that are generally uneducated, and very soon these 
women too will have the benefit of education. The arts of music 
and dancing engage women’s attention as ever. The social refor- 
mers in the second half of nineteenth century considered dancing 
to be a degenerate and immoral art. At the beginning of the 
twentieth century that opinion began to change. The cinema 
industry has drawn educated women from some good families. 
There is a revival of Indian classical dancing. In spite of all these 
changes in the status of women, it must be observed, that most 
Indian women remain conservative in their approach to life. They 


185 



India 


quietly accept traditional ways of life, resisting the impact of chan- 
ging ideas. 

In the fields of art and literature there has been a great deal 
of progress, and it is not possible to give any satisfactory review 
of them here. Broadly stated, in the literature of different Indian 
languages secularity, copiousness, variety and vitality have charact- 
erized the writings and contact has been established through 
English language not only with the literature of England but with 
that of European countries. The forms of novels, drama, short 
story and essay have been adopted everywhere in India and new 
experiments tried in the creation of verse forms. The Govern- 
ment of India has brought into being several academies to pro- 
mote art, literature and science. Titles and national awards are 
given every year to persons who have distinguished themselves in 
art or literature or by their social services to the country. Musi- 
cians, literary men and teachers are given national awards for dis- 
tinguished service in their respective fields. 

The policy of the Government of India is to bring about a total 
improvement in the life of individuals through their plans. Much 
that formerly belonged to the sphere of the family has now been 
taken over by the government. In every department of activity 
Jawaharlal Nehru in his period of seventeen years of prime minis- 
tership gave the imprint of his personality. The death of Jawahar- 
lala Nehru on 27 May 1964 marks the end of an era in India. It is 
impossible to estimate the loss that India sustained by the death 
of Nehru who was really a much bigger man than a national leader. 
His one desire was to make India dynamic and to give a new mea- 
ning and purpose to the sapless life he saw around him. No creed 
or dogma could claim his allegiance if it offended against the dig- 
nity of man. As Kulkarni says: “Nehru’s was indeed a world 
presence, and mankind is the poorer without him.” 


186 



CHAPTER 


National Integration 


Cultural Renaissance. The cultural renaissance which forms the 
background of socio-economic improvement through the Five 
Year Plans should be clearly understood for a proper perspective 
of the history of India in the post-independence period. Here 
we can only briefly touch upon some important trends in India’s 
cultural renaissance. The mass movement started by Gandhi 
was no doubt greatly responsible for hastening the attainment of 
political independence. But that the movement was led by the 
elite of the nation should always be kept in mind. Till the end of 
eighteenth century the Indian elite consisted of a few of the princes, 
nobles, merchants and top castes and was entirely mediaeval in 
character. In the nineteenth century owing to the impact of 
modern education it passed through several metamorphoses. At 
first it was strongly Westernized; then it attempted a synthesis 
between Indian and Western cultures. Here again the impact 




India 


of the West was a. predominant feature. The third phase of deve- 
lopment marks a period of national upsurge, when there was a 
concerted attempt to exclude Western influence. In this phase, 
the influences of democratic liberalism were powerfully checked. 
Great writers sprang up in different parts of the country. A 
spirit of nationalism pervaded almost every section of the commu- 
nity. The battle for freedom was fought by the elite which then 
more than ever before was closest to the masses. We may call 
this a creative period. But unfortunately after independence 
there was a waning of the spirit, and the directing classes showed 
adherence to contrary values. A very large section of the popula- 
tion somehow or other began to lose their grip on the national 
heritage, and a small minority became militantly revivalist. The 
distance between the elite and the masses, far from being reduced, 
became widened and the support that Nehru gave to what is called 
‘Kamaraj Plan’ (that of ministers at the centre and in states resig- 
ning voluntarily to contact the masses and strengthen the Congress) 
has to be understood in this context. It is better to avoid an 
appraisal of the plan at present, because it is still bound up with 
personality clashes and power politics. The intelligentsia as consti- 
tuted at present has to be changed “in quality, composition, in 
academic heights and in creativity”. Happily it is no longer restric- 
ted to a few of the privileged classes: it includes persons belonging 
to all castes and different strata of society. But the educational 
system has not yet sufficiently improved to identify talent in all 
areas and help to promote its growth. It may reasonably be expec- 
ted that the Indian elite, at least th'e best among them, should be 
comparable to their compeers in any other progressive country. 
Frankly, we believe that there is much to be done to increase the 
number of intellectuals in our country. We wonder why after 
the period of struggle for independence the creative era of the 
Indian intellectual should have receded. Unless the educational 
system tackles seriously the most difficult task of ensuring quality 
and creativity cultural renaissance cannot pay good dividends. 
We are at present largely dependent on external sources not only 
for financial and military help, but also for scientific knowledge and 
technical knowhow. One of the unforeseen tendencies of the 
Indian democracy is that a considerable number of those whom we 


188 



National Integration 

would call non-elite have got into positions of power. This need 
not be grudged to them, but it is regrettable to note that they do 
not seem to have accepted the need for anything like intellectual 
guidance. There is no doubt that somehow a break-through will 
come. The days when the country could rely on a few great men 
are gone, and with Browning we pray: “Make no more giants 
Godl Raise up the whole race at once.” 

During the period of struggle for independence the educated 
community was suspected of aiding the Britisher in the exploitation 
of the masses. The masses were later to a great extent satisfied 
that the elite finally revolted against the British authority and won 
freedom to the country. And after the attainment of independe- 
nce the educated section appears to have fallen into disfavour with 
the masses, so that the task of establishing a proper relationship 
between the elite and the masses has become urgent. One other 
feature of the cultural renaissance should be noted. It has drawn 
more from Western literature and democratic liberalism than from 
modern science and technology, and India can resuscitate herself 
only when a modern scoiety with a predominantly scientific out- 
look is ushered into existence. Science and philosophy are not 
antithetical. There is indeed more culture in agriculture than that, 
which ordinarily meets the eye. 

As J.P. Naik, a great educationist observes: 

. . . what we need is an educational system which will not only 
preserve our cultural heritage but also continually modify it 
Uy a judicious process of comissions, additions and modifications, 
to suit new situations and challenges. This is not difficult for 
Hindus because, as Dr. Radhakrishnan has pointed out, Hinduism 
is not a position, but a movement. Muslims have stronger resis- 
tances on this point. But they too cannot but cultivate the 
humility to seek truth from outside. The conceptualization of this 
new form of cultural renaissance and to carry these new concepts 
to the masses is the responsibility of the educational system . 1 

National Integration. National integration is one of the most 
important of India’s national goals. This is sometimes called 

1 Educational Planning in India, p. 101, Allied Publishers Private Ltd. 


189 



India 


emotional integration. But “integration” in the national or emot- 
ional context docs not admit of any satisfactory explanation. Love 
and hatred are emotional expressions which can never be integrated. 
Hindus and Muslims have lived over 700 years together. Yet 
there has been no social integration. The idea behind national 
integration is to bring about unity which makes the plural society 
in India a nation. The fundamental requisite is the recognition 
of unity in diversity. This is necessary for national development 
as well as for defence against foreign aggression. Economic 
equality and equitable distribution of wealth and power are 
basic in a democratic structure. 

Boundary disputes due to regionalism, anti-Hindi agitation from 
narrow Iingualism and more than all Hindu-Muslim riots so distur- 
bed the mind of Nehru that he was bent upon evolving a plan 
to put an end to fissiparous tendencies. A conference of the 
Chief Ministers of the States and leaders of all non-communal 
parties met under the chairmanship of JawaharJal Nehru. This 
conference discussed the problem of divisive forces at length and 
finally resolved upon a programme of action to bring about grea- 
ter national integration. We have already said that anything like 
social integration among the religious communities in India and 
more particularly between the Hindus and Muslims is an impossi- 
bility. All that can be expected is to promote a high sense of 
loyalty to India, a loyalty that would sacrifice narrow communal 
interests for the good of the country as a whole. Except a few 
communists who have extra-territorial loyalty, all others do have a 
sense of loyalty to India. There may however be a small section 
of Muslims who may feel drawn towards Pakistan and therefore 
have a sense of divided loyalty. Since Independence the University 
of Aligarh has been gradually advancing towards secularism. Even 
that section of Tamil people which demanded a separate inde- 
pendent state gave it up and demonstrated their Indianness during 
the time of Chinese aggression. 

There is no problem in India of breaking external ties as in the 
case of the United States. The United States 'have developed 
into a multi-ethnical state in a remarkably short time. The 
Americans are one, so far as their relation with other countries 
is concerned. But it cannot be said that the United States is 


190 



National Integration 


altogether free from regional and group tensions. The problem of 
the Negroes in the Southern States is still giving trouble. In 
the Second World War the Japanese-Americans were evacuated to 
less sensitive areas as it was feared that they might be disloyal. 
Much has been done to keep the Jews loyal to the U.S.A. by ex- 
tending political liberties and giving opportunities for economic 
prosperity. In spite of it all the Jewish allegiance to a world- wide 
community remains strong as ever. Race riots are by no means 
uncommon in the U.S.A. There is resistance to liberal racial 
policies of the federal Government. Racial segregation is common. 
The Americans are not altogether free from anti-scmitic feelings. 
All these show that the national and emotional integration even 
in the U.S.A. is not quite complete. India’s troubles arise out 
of the pluralistic nature of her society. It would take some time 
for the Muslims to reconcile themselves that 'they are a minority 
community who have to adjust themselves to the Hindus who form 
a majority. They realize that India is a secular state and that 
they have equal political rights with the Hindus. All that they 
have got to do is to discard the sense of superiority arising out 
of a feeling that they had once been the rulers of the land. The 
Muslim society has been exclusive and will continue to be so for 
a long time. The orthodox Hindu in spite of his religious tolerance 
has an innate revulsion for the non-Hindu which canot easily be 
detected. The Hindu-Muslim relationship is therefore one major 
problem of the national integration. The Muslims who have 
stayed behind in the Gangetic valley find it difficult to forget the 
past and to reconcile themselves to the concept of a secular India. 
The Hindus, particularly of the Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, find it 
difficult to accept the view that the Muslims there are not emotio- 
nally committed to Pakistan. But as time passes we may be sure 
that a general tolerance of each other’s ideals will prevail, and the 
loyalty of Muslims to India will grow stronger and stronger. 
History shows that Islam and Hinduism have influenced each 
other in marginal ways such as the formation of certain religious 
sects and Indo-Tslamic art and architecture. So national integra- 
ration in respect of Muslims only means friendly collaboration 
with the rest of the community and loyalty to India. An exclu- 
sive society like that of the Muslims cannot merge its identity 


191 



India 


with the wider Indian community. 

As for regionalism there is no democratic country in the world 
that is absolutely free from it. Indian regionalism cannot stand 
in the way of India’s integration. The Swiss confederation is 
made up of small states based on the acceptance of the value of 
regional feeling. In federations like Germany and Soviet Union, 
regionalism is a well-marked and accepted characteristic so long 
as the primacy of the national interest is recognized. If there is 
no dominance of one area over another in India there is no fear of 
regionalism developing into dangerous proportions. India is a 
multi-lingual country. A democracy, particularly of the federal 
form, must encourage the growth of regional languages not only to 
safeguard local interests but also to prevent dissatisfaction from 
taking root. The dangers of regionalism in India arise from the 
fact that there are certain areas and groups which at present enjoy 
more than their share of power, and opportunities for industrial 
development. But a wise policy of the federal government can 
surely allay fears in this regard. The creation of linguistic provinces 
is regarded as a mistake by some, but it is difficult to see how the 
language problem can seriously interfere with national unity. 
However, cthusiasm for one’s regional language should not stand 
in the way of the development of other sister languages. Very 
much depends on the caution, circumspection and adjustability 
that the Hindi speaking areas bring to bear on the language problem, 
for they are at present impatient to make Hindi the official language 
of India to the exclusion of English. Educationists complain 
that national integration has so far remained only as an abstract 
concept and that no work has been done at the level of educa- 
tional technology to concretize the idea. 


192 



CHAPTER 


Prospect 


It will be seen from the foregoing pages that India is the scene 
of a great experiment in democracy. After 1947 there has been 
a remarkable change in the attitude of the Indian people towards 
life and its problems. Western writers who had been sceptical 
about India’s capacity to change were struck with wonder at 
the rapid strides she took in the decade following independence. 
The question often asked is: “Can the enthusiasm generated be 
sustained and the democracy be of enduring value?” Several 
writers, both Indian and foreign, have attempted to estimate 
India’s progress after independence. All agree that India is 
well set for carrying on successfully the experiment in democracy. 
There are, however, a few who fear that a possible revival of the 
traditions of a caste-bound society might adversely affect the 
growth of a parliamentary system of responsible government. 
Indian ideas of freedom, equality and government by consent 



India 


with the participation of all sections of the community are not 
all borrowings but are partly based, in some form or other, on 
traditions of ancient Indian Republic and the Panchayati Raj 
that had been extensively in vogue from very early times to the 
day of the withdrawal of Britain from India. Further, the people 
had considerable training in shouldering civic and legislative res- 
ponsibilities during the later half of the British period. 

To make a proper appraisal of the Indian socio-political experi- 
ment one must be thoroughly acquainted with the philosophy of 
history with reference to the belief in a law of progress and its value 
as a factor in human development. We do not here propose to 
burden the reader with any discussion on this topic. Suffice it 
to say that the people of India believe that their country will pro- 
gress rapidly towards social and economic uplift. India has deci- 
ded on the establishment of a socialistic pattern of society. At 
present, it is not possible to give a complete picture of what exactly 
this goal envisages. But the idea of a socialistic pattern of society, 
however nebulous, has proved itself valuable as a kind of tonic 
to keep up the courage and vitality of the government and the 
people, in their socio-economic effort. In estimating the progress 
of India each writer is guided by his own point of view of progress. 
Those with leanings towards Western democracies study the possi- 
bilities of democracy taking root in India, so as to stem the tide 
of advancing communism. Those with communist leanings 
' fondly hope that the advocacy of state ownership in certain spheres 
of industry might in time develop into a kind of socialism which 
may not be far different from communism. India by following 
her policy of non-alignment has afforded scope for the two rival 
blocs, opportunities for improvement of their relations with her 
in trade and commerce and for exchange of cultural missions. 
Probably, there is no country in the world that has so clearly seen 
the danger in man’s power over nature as India, guided by a long 
line of sages and philosophers, the latest of whom is Mahatma 
Gandhi. India realizes that the growth of man’s control over 
nature should be accompanied by a parallel growth of control 
over himself. Western thinkers admit that this recognition is the 
only way of reducing the evils of rank materialism. At the moment, 
however, India’s pre-occupation is with improvement in the 


194 



Prospect 

standard of living and the reduction of the abnormal disparity 
between the few rich and the innumerable poor. In her attempt 
to secure a reasonable share of good things of this world for her 
poverty stricken people, India has constantly kept before her the 
spirit of the words with which S. Radhakrishnan, now the Presi- 
dent of India, concludes his essay on Hinduism: 

In my travels round the country and abroad I have learnt 
that there are thousands of men and women to-day who are 
hungry to hear the good news of the birth of a new order, eager 
to do and dare, ready to make sacrifices that a new society may 
be born, men and women who dimly understand that the princi- 
ples of a true religion, of a just social order, of a great movement 
of generosity in human relations, domestic and industrial, 
economic and political, national and international, are to be 
found in the basic principles of the Hindu religion. Their 
presence in growing numbers is the pledge for the victory of 
the powers of light, life, and love over those of darkness, death 
and discord. 

We may add that the basic principles of other religions such as 
Islam and Christianity are quite in consonance with Hinduism 
in this respect, although the votaries of each religion may 
wrangle over some non-essential differences in religious practices. 
India is out, not only to improve her agriculture by the use of 
machinery and chemical fertilizers but also to industrialize the 
■country avoiding the protracted misery to which the workers 
had been submitted in the period of Industrial Revolution in 
Western Europe. 

Afro-Asian nations that have won their independence are legi- 
timately proud of their achievement. However, their pride is 
humbled at the thought that the value of independence is consi- 
derably lessened by the necessity of their having to depend on 
advanced countries of the West, for military equipment to safeguard 
their frontiers and for financial help for educational, agricultural 
and industrial development. More than all, they have still to 
learn from Western countries scientific knowledge and technical 
knowhow. 


195 



India 


Keith Callard writing about Pakistan mentions the conditions 
under which democracy develops: 

Democracy has usually developed in countries where there is 
a reasonable degree of material prosperity and where class or sec- 
tional divisions are not intense. Further, some security from 
the prospect of foreign aggression is necessary in order to per- 
mit the luxury of active opposition which attempts to frustrate 
the policies of the government. War, or the imminence of war 
always acts to curtail freedom and open opposition becomes next 
door to treason. 

In spite of experiencing all the disadvantages mentioned in the 
above extract, India seems to be well on its way to establishing a 
working democracy. At the time of partition anarchy reigned 
supreme. The Government of India succeeded in putting an end 
to it and restoring order. A new Government with Cabinet res- 
ponsibility was established. A successful war was fought in Kashmir. 
There was a Communist insurrection which was promptly put 
down. Millions of refugees were rehabilitated. The most difficult 
task of absorbing the princely stales into the Indian Unioil was 
accomplished. A new constitution formed by the Constituent 
Assembly was adopted. Elections were held and the governments 
both at the Centre and in the States began to function with a 
Cabinet form of Government. These successes, which at first 
sight seem almost incredible, are clear enough proof of something 
of the mettle of the nation. 

The question whether Indian democracy will be on all fours 
with the British or American type of democracy, is often posed. 
And what Jawaharlal Nehru said, perhaps in an incautious moment, 
is adduced as proof of the unsuitability of Western mode of 
democracy to Indian conditions. Nehru said: 

Democracy is something deeper than a political form of 
government — voting, election, etc. In the ultimate analysis it 
is a manner of thinking, a manner of action, a manner of 

behaviour to your neighbour If the inner content is absent 

and you are just given the outer shell, well, it may not be successful. 


196 



Prospect 


I do not know whether I am prepared to say that the same type 
of democratic institution is suited to every country. . . .In the final 
analysis, you come back not to political terms, not to economic 
terms, but to some human terms, or if you like, spiritual terms. 

From this it cannot be argued that Nehru himself had no idea 
of what form of government was suited to India, for the Constitu- 
tion of India had defined the form of Indian Government. To 
all intents and purposes, Nehru was only trying to emphasize the 
idea that democracy is a way of life and under Indian conditions 
its mode may have to change. It matters very little what changes 
are made in the mode of democracy so long as the essentials are 
preserved. There is every reason to hope that democracy will 
be firmly implanted in India. At present the Government of 
India looks like ‘one party government” but in time a powerful 
opposition party may be built up. 

One of the most important characteristics of the Government of 
India is its secularism. We have already observed how Nehru 
showed his grit by spurning all attempts to make India a Hindu 
state. 

India’s attempt at economic development through the Five Year 
Plans has been described. Equitable distribution of wealth is a 
thing to be striven after. Sometimes the term “economic equality” 
is used in this connection. This is a figment of imagination. 
There is no country in the world that has attained economic equality 
among its people. Whatever the form of government— demo- 
cratic, totalitarian or communist — inequalities in the possession 
of the good things of this world are bound to exist. The problem 
in India is grovelling poverty. There is no country in the world 
perhaps, where poverty is so distressing as in India. To pull up 
the standard of life of poor people is the most important aim of 
the Five Year Plans of India. It takes time to show tangible 
results in this direction. 

Indian socialism is another point that lends itself to conflict- 
ing interpretations. There are hundreds of definitions of socialism 
and it is futile to attempt at an exhaustive description of the 
Indian form of socialism. It should, however, be pointed out 
that it is not communism at all. Communist China started its 


197 



India 


planned economy almost at the same time as India did. China’s 
methods have been marked by fiats, coercion and forced labour. 
India believes in persuasion and in the willing cooperation of the 
people in implementing her Plans. Indian socialism is confined 
to state ownership in key industries and follows the principles of a 
welfare state. The individual’s freedom is not curtailed as under 
communism. Controls, permits and licenses so much condem- 
ned by opposition parties have purely an economic background 
and mistakes made may be corrected. 

In the eyes of law all are equal, irrespective of caste, creed, 
religion or sex. In the discussions relating to social uplift the 
term “social-equality” is often used. What this means is not 
clear. Inequalities in social status are bound to exist, whether 
the country is communist or democratic. Objectionable features 
such as untouchability have been removed by law. It will take 
time for people in rural areas to do away with residential segrega- 
tion. The law allows inter-caste marriages. To that extent there 
is social equality. But it will take a long time for such marriages 
to become common. Even in Western countries where there is 
individual freedom to marry, marriages are generally restricted to 
families of more or less equal social status, or are governed by here- 
ditary considerations. Very rarely does a mistress of a house permit 
her son to marry a parlour maid on grounds of social equality. 

India is a country that has a tradition of reverencing men of 
character and worth, in spite of their poverty. Respect for wealth 
is an innovation in India. Caste barriers in respect of social 
intercourse have almost disappeared. A new social order is in 
the process of being built up. The final form, whatever it be, is 
bound to have certain peculiar characteristics which may be diffe- 
rent from what may be normal in Western society. Cellular as 
the structure of Indian society is Indians have long been accustom- 
ed to the idea of separate and parallel living. This may be start- 
ling to a Westerner who visits India for the first time. But Indians 
themselves have found nothing repellant in it. Social integration 
of such a society should be attempted with great caution. Legisla- 
tion is definitely harmful, but public opinion will be effective. 

Everything possible is being done to pull up the economically 
and educationally backward communities in India. We have 


198 



Prospect 


already seen how even the constitution of India has been changed 
to give special opportunities for the backward sections of the 
community, so that they may catch up with the educationally 
advanced section of the community. The Government of India 
believes that the future of the country lies in the development of 
human resources, and education is the process by which character, 
ability and occupational skill can be brought to the masses. 
Attempts are being made to gear education on to the needs of a 
developing country. 

India has started on her democratic career under circumstances 
more favourable than any other Asian nation that has attained 
independence in recent years. It is to the interests of both 
communist bloc and the democratic bloc to help India to survive 
as an independent country. She has potentialities of bringing 
about a wholesome combinatiqn of materialistic ideals and spiritual 
ideals in the pursuit of excellence. India’s international relations 
should be understood in the context of a world torn by conflicting 
ideologies and broken into fragments by narrow domestic walls of 
economic nationalism. Conditions are such that to live in peace 
is to be prepared for war. India with her principles of non-aggre- 
ssion and co-existence finds it difficult to join any one of the two 
rival blocs. There is a growing realization among all the powerful 
nations that helping India, to preserve her independence and terri- 
torial integrity, is necessary, to make democracy safe in the Asiatic 
region and build up her economy. India has an honoured place 
in the comity of Nations. 


199 



CHAPTER 


Indo-Pakistan Conflict 


The hope that with the establishment of a cease-fire line in the Rann 
of Kutch the Indo-Pakistan conflict would be resolved by peaceful 
negotiation soon turned into an illusion. Kutch was only a symptom 
of Pakistan’s hatred for India and her determination to wrest 
Kashmir from India by force. After the Chinese invasion of India 
in 1962, Pakistan began to follow the politico-military tactics of 
the Chinese against India. Cease-fire violations in Kashmir, 
adopting the method of guerilla warfare, became a common feature. 
There were 448 cease-fire violations in Kashmir in 1963, 1522 in 
1964 and over 1,800 in 1965 to the end of July. In April 1965, 
Pakistan’s aggressive policy met with a serious set-back in Kutch, 
but she sought to achieve her object by cutting Srinagar-Leh road. 
As this is India’s life line to Ladakh, India replied by the Military 
occupation of two important Pakistani posts overlooking Kargil 
(16 May 1965). When the U.N. assured India of a closer watch 




Indo-Pakistan Conflict 

by its military observers over this crucial sector, she withdrew her 
armies from the two Pakistani posts. 

Pakistani documents that fell into the hands of Indian military 
officials gave clear proof of Pakistan’s deliberate plan of seizing 
Kashmir. This put India on her guard. When armed Pakistanis 
in civilian clothes crossed the cease-fire line in thousands and mixed 
with the native population of Kashmir on the Indian side, the second 
invasion of Kashmir may be said to have begun (4 August, 1965). 
India owes reliable information of Pakistani infiltration to one 
Mohammed Din, a shepherd, whose name deserves mention in 
history. He was bribed by Pakistani military officials to supply 
them with information regarding the location of Indian grain stores, 
transport depots, etc., so that they might destroy them. Mohammed 
Din was too clever for them and as soon as he was free he alerted 
the police about the presence of ‘out soldiers”. However, Pakistani 
infiltration went on steadily from 5 August; the Kashmir Muslims 
gave the infiltrators no quarter, and the Indian army men dealt sever- 
ely with such as they were able to recognize as infiltrators. Referring 
to incidents of 7-8 August in the Baramula sector General Nimmo, 
chief of the U.N. observer team, reported that “the observers inter- 
viewed one of the captured raiders who stated that he was a soldier 
of the 16th ‘Azad Kashmir’ infantry and that the raiding party was 
composed of about three hundred soldiers of his battalion and 
hundred mujahids (armed civilians trained in guerilla tactics)”. 

In the Poonch sector, according to U.N. observers, the Pakistani 
raiders who crossed the cease-fire line numbered more than a thou- 
sand. Some raiders fled back over the border; however, infiltrators 
continued to pour into Kashmir in ever increasing numbers. Paki- 
stan propaganda was that Kashmir Muslims were in revolt to 
liberate their homeland from the grip of India. The trouble created 
by the infiltrators was represented as the result of the action 
committee and the plebiscite front in Kashmir. The press in the 
West too readily gave publicity to the Pakistani version of the con- 
flict, paying little attention to Indian information. In Srinagar, 
8 August was the annual festival day of Pir Dastgir Sahib, a local 
saint. Pakistani infiltrators hoped to join the pilgrim crowd and 
make that day the day of Kashmir’s deliverance from India. But 
the invasion miscarried. Scattered groups of infiltrators could do 


201 



India 


nothing when they could not get the active support of their co- 
religionists in Kashmir. However, the Pakistan radio broadcasted 
what was expected to happen as something that had already happen- 
ed, and the pro-Pakistani press in the West gave prominent publicity 
to Pakistan’s untruths and half-truths. That 8-9 August passed 
quietly in Srinagar is an indisputable fact though a sore disappoint- 
ment to Pakistan. Srinagar whose fall had been reported to have 
been imminent, was safe in the hands of India. 

Throughout the early half of August it was Pakistan that seemed 
to get the upper hand. General Nimmo reported that “Indian 
positions along the cease-fire line were subject to heavy artillery 
and mortar fire from Pakistan side on 15-16 August. The attack- 
ing forces captured nine Indian positions on August 16-17”. These 
posts were retaken by the Indian forces in the next few days. The 
point to be noted here. is that large-scale and sustained attack in 
the Chhamb sector was made by Pakistan, thus establishing the 
fact that it was Pakistan not India that first crossed cease-fire 
line and committed aggression. Further, General Nimmo’s report 
on 15 August proves that Pakistani forces from Pakistan further 
crossed the international border adding a new dimension to the 
conflict. The report says that the Pakistanis “raided the village 
of Rajpur five miles on the Indian side of the Pakistan-Jammu 
border”. 

Pakistan’s deliberate intention to cut the Srinagar-Leh road, 
perhaps as a friendly gesture to China, demanded a firm reply from 
India. On 15 August India recaptured the two mountain features 
overlooking Kargil that she had vacated earlier and also occupied 
another vital post to prevent Pakistan from doing mischief in that 
“highly sensitive sector”. 

On the night of 14 August occurred an incident which reveals the 
Pakistani way of twisting facts. Some raiders got into within a few 
miles of Srinagar and set fire to Batmalu, a suburb of the capital. 
“Pakistani radio broadcast this jubilantly but later insisted that the 
Indian army had set fire to this quarter when it realized that its con- 
fession of arson was not going to be kindly received by those who 
had been rendered hornless.” 1 

1 B.G. Verghcse, The Times of India, dated 13-10-1965. 


202 



Indo-Pakistan Conflict 

It became necessary for India to seal all important routes of 
infiltration into the Indian side of Kashmir. The capture of Haji 
Pir on 28 August “was a bold swift manoeuvre skilfully executed” 
by the Indian army. Counter-attacks were beaten back and on 10 
Sepetember the Indian army completed the control of the Uri- 
Poonch link, “a splendid achievement”. By now Pakistan’s mis-' 
calculations came to her. But she kept on not only denying 
knowledge of infiltrators but passing off their activities as those 
of the “freedom fighters”. 

It is unfortunate that General Nimmo’s report was not promptly 
published to tell the world the truth. India sought its publication 
and U Thant, Secretary to the U.N.O., desired it. But the friends 
of Pakistan in the Security Council thought that it should not be 
published in the interests of peace. In fact, this only encouraged 
Pakistan to embark on war. 

In spite of the fact that all Pakistanis had been Indians before 
the partition in 1947, knowing well the people, the government and 
the army they left behind in India for new life in Pakistan, they 
appear to have held strange myths about India. The Pak 
rulers’ image of India was that it was weak and flabby; it 
had a vacillating leadership; it was defended by an ill-equipped 
army lacking physical strength and mental courage. They thought 
that man to man the Pakistani soldier was infinitely superior to the 
Indian. They were certain of the support of their friends in the 
West. Their membership in the SEATO and the Bagadad pact 
made them feel sure of the support of their co-members. More 
than all they heavily leaned on the probable support of their co- 
religionists in Kashmir and India. As the cruel hand of destiny 
had taken away Jawaharlal Nehru, a towering personality in inter- 
national circles, they thought that his successor Lai Bahadur Shastri 
would not be able to rise to the height of a conflict with Pakistan, 
the ally of China that had defeated India in 1962. It was with such 
a psychological background that the rulers of Pakistan precipitated 
the Indo-Pak conflict over the Kashmir issue. But all their myths 
were exploded by the stern realities of the battle-field. As a top- 
ranking Canadian put it “Lai Bahadur Shastri showed himself to be 
a man with an iron backbone in India’s critical hour”. Shastri boldly 
declared that India would be constrained to pursue the counter 


203 



India 

action against Pak raiders even beyond the cease-fire line if that 
became necessary. When the situation demanded it he courage- 
ously said, “Brave Jawans 1 March ! There is Nothing to Fear,” 

The military manoeuvres employed both by Pakistan and India 
.are really very interesting. But we have no place here for them all 
except for a few that show the mettle of the Indian Army and the 
Indian Air Force. 

Pakistan had demonstrated what her American Pattons could do 
in Rutch on ground of her own choosing. In the Chhamb sector 
Pakistan was more advantageously situated than India to use her 
tanks with telling effect. It was not possible for India to move her 
heavy armour beyond Akhnoor. And it did not seem prudent to 
do so even if it were possible. The Indian troops fell in a series 
■of planned withdrawals behind Chhamb. A day later the enemy 
•came in water-proofed jeeps and tanks with sealed engines. To 
blunt the enemy armour an air strike was necessary. The aid of the 
Air Force was sought; within forty-five minutes as many as twenty- 
eight sorties were flown in seven missions. The I.A.F. did a wonder- 
ful job. It knocked out thirteen enemy tanks. The ground fire 
•disabled five tanks. Pakistan called in its Air Force and her Sabres 
were no match for Indian Gnats. Pakistani drive to Akhnoor was 
temporarily halted (1 September). Akhnoor commands the 
■strategic Chenab crossing and controls the line of communications 
of the Indian forces in Naushera Rajouri Poonch sector. 

On 2 September U Thant appealed to both India and Pakistan 
for a cease-fire. In his report on Kashmir to the Security Council 
he frankly stated his inability to elicit from Pakistan “any assurance 
that the cease-fire and the cease-fire line will be respected hence 
forth”. On 4 September the Security Council formally called for 
a cease-fire. India on her part was willing to accept a cease-fire 
provided Pakistan withdrew from Chhamb and pulled out the 
infiltrators from Kashmir and provided further assurance was given 
that India would not be open to further invasion of the kind. 

Marshal Chen-i, the Chinese Foreign Minister, flew into Karachi 
and conferred for six hours with Bhutto, the Pak Foreign Minister 
(4 September). The Chinese marshal openly supported the “just 
action taken by Pakistan to repel the Indian armed provocation 
‘in Kashmir’ ”. On 5 September in the Amritsar area, a Pak Sabre 


204 



Indo-Pakistan Conflict 


made an unsuccessful low level attack on certain key Air Force 
installations. India’s supreme necessity was to relieve pressure on 
Akhnoor. Now the Indian army crossed the Pakistan border in 
the Lahore sector (6 September). At the same time the I.A.F. made 
tactical strikes against a number of military targets. The West 
which had so far been standing by silent now hastened to describe 
the new development as an Indian invasion of Pakistan. 

Without getting into the details of the Indian attack we may say 
that within a short time the result was as India had expected. 
Enemy pressure on Akhnoor was immediately relieved. This was. 
somewhat staggering both to Pakistan and her supporters. 

Indian offensive in Lahore sector was carried up to the Ichogil 
canal. The Indian force discovered that in this area Pakistan had 
built up military structures which should have taken her some 
years. Flere was clear proof of Pakistan’s preparation for war 
with India for a considerably long time. In the Lahore sector the 
battle swayed between the Indian border and Ichogil canal with 
attack and counter-attack. At the time of the cease-fire the Indian 
forces were spread along the entire length of the canal and in occupa- 
tion of the strong point of Dograi and Burki. The war in this, 
sector gave the impression that India sought to capture Lahore but 
was unable to do so. This view is mistaken. India’s object was 
not to conquer territory in Pakistan but to destroy enemy’s war 
potential and military machine. To capture territory to be given 
back later would only be a waste of men and ammunition. The 
war had a broad front and fighting went on all along the border 
with varying intensity. 

Two battles that led to enemy rout deserve to be described briefly. 
One was at Asal uttar and the other at Phillora. The Pakistanis, 
elated with the feeling that they had successfully held up the Indian 
offensive along Ichogil canal, made a determined effort to give a 
counter blow to the Indians. At Kasur the Pakistanis were well 
poised and attacked the Indians with all their vigour and strength. 
The Indian army was compelled to fall back under heavy pressure. 
Now the local commander of the Indian Force decided to take a 
big step back to a point where he could hold the enemy. This 
meant giving up some Indian territory but the commander did not 
mind it. The Indian force took new positions at the head of a fork 


205 



India 


at Khem karan, bordering on the village of Asal uttar four miles 
beyond this little town. 

The enemy concluded that he had started a rout in the Indian 
army. Confident of success he marched his regiment to dislodge 
the Indians from their new positions. The battle was fought at 
Asal uttar. The name of the place means “true north”, but it also 
means “the real anwer”. It was a splendid victory for the Indians. 
“Pakistan had lost 97 tanks, a large number of them Pattons, of 
which nine were captured intact and two were surrendered with 
crew. Ten lieutenant-colonels, Six Majors, Six other officers and 
several other ranks were captured in this engagement. This was 
indeed a real answer.” 

In the Sialkot sector there was a series of tank battles, reported 
to be the biggest sihce the Second World War. The tank battle 
continued for fifteen days without break. A decisive battle was 
fought at Phillora (11 September). The Indians destroyed as many 
as sixty-six enemy tanks on that single day and won a victory. 
Military experts believe that this is a notable victory that will find 
a very high place in the annals of armoured warfare. 

Wheu at 3.30 A.M. on 23 September, the cease-fire took effect 
the Indian forces held a salient of 180 square miles only 4,000 yards 
from Sialkot. Two hundred and forty-three enemy tanks were 
knocked out, reducing the armour strength of Pakistan. 

While the armies battled on the ground the air forces of both 
countries sought for mastery of the air. The I.A.F. tried to draw 
the P.A.F. into battle; but the P.A.F. studiously avoided the 
challenge and indulged in indiscriminate bombing. It was indeed 
cowardly for the P.A.F. to have attacked a small, slow, unarmed 
civil aircraft flying in Indian territory. This resulted in the death, 
among others, of the Chief Minister of Gujarat travelling in the aero- 
plane. The Pakistani aircraft had certain advantages which the 
Indian aircraft lacked. Nevertheless the I.A.F. did such a wonder- 
ful job that the P.A.F. was able to do extraordinarily little damage 
to airfields and installations in spite of persistent raids. The I.A.F. 
took a heavy total of enemy aircraft. On the evidence of military 
experts it may be said that the I.A.F. played its part admirably 
well in the following roles; ground attack in support of the Indian 
army; air cover; interdiction of enemy movements and supplies; 


206 



Indo-Pakistan Conflict 

air defence; the bombing of enemy air bases, and aerial reconnaiss- 
ance. 

Over a hundred tanks and large numbers of vehicles and guns 
were knocked out from the air by I.A.F. Mysteres and Hunters. 
Pakistan sought to escalate the conflict by carrying the fighting over 
the eastern region; but India wisely refrained from taking more 
than very limited defensive action. 

The exotic interlude of the Chinese in the Indo-Pakistan conflict 
afforded more amusement than serious concern at the time. They 
issued a three day ultimatum to India on 16 September 1965. Their 
allegations were, first, that there were Indian military structures on 
the Tibet side of the Sikkim-Tibet border; and secondly, that the 
Indians had committed the “theft” of fifty-nine yak and 800 sheep. 
That these charges were fraudulent was quite apparent to everybody.’ 
The Chinese rulers, of their own accord, extended the ultimatum 
for three more days and then dramatically withdrew it. Chinese 
armies marched up and down several passes and Indian posts in 
Sikkim. After indulging in desultory firing in Ladakh and Sikkim 
they announced to the World that India had dismantled the military 
structures which existed only in the imagination of the Chinese. 
Why did China do all this? May be she wanted to frighten India. 
But India refused to grow panicky although some other powers 
seemed a trifle concerned. May be the Chinese ultimatum was a 
move to encourage Pakistan to continue her war with India. 
Perhaps China intended to frighten the Security Council with the 
possibility of the involvement of great powers in the war so that it 
might fall a halt to the war which was unmistakably going against 
Pakistan. Whatever might have been the motive of the Chinese 
rulers, their rapid climb-down meant a loss of their prestige. “The 
subsequent widely publicised parade of 800 sheep before the Chinese 
Embassy in Delhi with placards reading ‘eat us and save the world’ 
was difinitely not considered amusing in Peking.” 

India was satisfied that her primary object of blunting Pakistan’s 
war machine had been achieved and so she was ready to accept a 
cease-fire from 6.30 P.M. on 14 September as originaly proposed 
by U Thant. But Pakistan wavered. The Chinese ultimatum did 
not give Pakistan the desired leverage. She wanted that a political 
settlement of Kashmir should immediately follow cease-fire. India 


207 



India 


refused to permit any discussion on the political settlement declar- 
ing that Kashmir was an integral part of India and therefore such a 
discussion should be beyond the purview of the U.N.O. as it was 
an internal affair of the country. 

Some hours after the expiry of the extended Chinese ultimatum 
to India on the evening of 22 September Pakistan accepted cease- 
fire and it came into effect in the early hours of 23 September. 
From the start it has been an uneasy cease-fire; the number of 
Pakistani violations of the cease-fire has been on the increase. 
Pakistan’s reverses in the war and her exaggerated reports of gains 
make it necessary for her to score some tactical victory to save her 
face. So she keeps up the conflict by violations of the cease-fire. 
Her continued infiltrations reveal her desire to grab as much territory 
as possible. She threatens to withdraw from the U.N.O. if the 
Kashmir issue is not settled to her satisfaction. On 18 October the 
Prime Minister of India, Lai Bahadur Shastri, declared “Pakistan 
may give up all talk of Kashmir so that, during that period, she 
can regain her poise and composure in order to forget about 
Kashmir”. 

In fact the war is not yet over. The name, Kashmir, which under 
ordinary circumstances should stir up visions of natural beauty has 
from the point of view of geopolitics acquired an emotive power 
not only in Pakistan and India but also in the two blocs into which 
the world is divided. 

The Indo-Pakistan war has given glimpses into the attitude of the 
West towards India. It was India that was hit harder when the 
U.S.A. and the U.K. stopped military supplies with an air of im- 
partiality to the belligerents during the period of war. The impress- 
ion that Indian embassies had not effectively presented the Indian 
point of view in foreign countries particularly in the U.S.A. and U.K. 
is not wholly right. It is natural for the U.K. to regard Pakistan, 
in the creation of which she had a lion’s share, as her protege. The 
U.S.A. in her desire to contain communism in the Asiatic region 
wants to be soft to Pakistan to wean her away from Chi/ia. The 
U.S.A. seems to think that Kashmir as a part of India, a non-aligned 
country, would not be so helpful for the establishment of military 
bases in the hour of dire need as it would be if it were under Pakistan 
or under international control. The shape of things to come as 


208 



Tndo-Pakistan Conflict 


a sequel to Indo-Pak conflict over Kashmir could not be predicted 
with any degree of accuracy, although Shastri asserted that Pale 
aggression had settled the issue for ever. 

The great powers were chary of getting involved deeply in the 
dispute; Russia had generally befriended India, though not being 
unfriendly to Pakistan. Through the good offices of Russia 
Indian and Pakistani leaders met at Tashkent early in 1966 to 
find a way of establishing friendly and mutual relations between 
them. It was in this hour of triumph that Lai Bahadur Shastri, 
the Prime Minister of India, died of heart-failure plunging India 
and the world into sorrow. In these tragic circumstances, Shastri’s. 
mantle fell on Indira Gandhi, the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, 
Her elevation to the premiership of India is Indian womanhood’s, 
crown of glory. 

The Indo-Pak Conflict brought home to India that wisdom 
lies in not being dependent on other countries either for economic 
aid or for military supplies. 


209 



CHAPTER 


Retrospect and Prospect 


The foregoing chapters have given a rapid survey of the march of 
events in India from the remote past to the present time with the 
barest outlines of the long period preceding India’s struggle for in- 
dependence. Our attempt has been to focus attention on major 
values and concepts in their historical perspective. We shall now 
pull together the important trends in different aspects of human life 
such as political, social, economic and philosophical to help the 
reader get a vision of the future of the country. 

Doubts entertained by most western writers as to whether India 
is safely in the camp of democracy, whether science and technology 
are compatible with traditional values in Indian life and whether 
India can be assured of increasing prosperity, arise chiefly because of 
an inadequate recognition of India’s attempt, throughout the ages, 
at a reconciliation of the opposing forces of enjoyment and 
renunciation. 



Retrospect and Prospect 

Religion and Philosophy. In India as elsewhere the prime values 
of religion and philosophy evolved from a close study of nature and 
natural phenomena, Important concepts and goals included in these 
values are: that enjoyment must be through renunciation; that life 
must be a dynamic one and that the soul passes through a series 
of births. There is no other doctrine that is so important in Indian 
life as the Karma theory. According to this theory “whatever 
happens to us in this life wc have to submit in meek resignation, 
for it is the result of our past doings. Yet the future is in our power, 
and we can work with hope and confidence. Kama inspires hope 
for the future and resignation to the past”. 1 The concepts of re- 
birth and the law of Kama form the basis of the Indian ethics. 
These were formed very early perhaps before the time of the 
Buddha as the result of the fusion of the Aryan and pre-Aryan 
outlooks on life and its problems. 

The present Indian values in the field of religion have evolved 
out of the heritage of the past, the impact of Islam, the contact 
with the West, the teachings of great religious leaders and the bitter 
experience of communalism in the early part of the twentieth century. 
Important among the concepts and goals included in these values are : 

(1) That every individual should be free to practise his own 
religion. Such always had been the case in ancient India, 
while in the mediaeval age, kings like Akbar upheld this 
principle. This freedom is now guaranteed by the Constitu- 
tion of the Republic. 

(2) That no one should be politically or socially disqualified 
for his religious views. This is also guaranteed by the 
Constitution. 

(3) That the state is not co-terminous with religion. In other 
words the state has no chruch in India as is to be found in 
some of the western countries. 

(4) That fanaticism has no place in true religion, which demands 
toleration. This is what ancient seers always preached. 

(5) That all religions are essentially the same.- (Mahatma 
Gandhi was a strong advocate of this view). 

1 Radhakrishnan. 


211 



India 

(6) That the state should intervene whenever there is any 
communal tension or fighting and the spirit of communa- 
Jism should be nipped in the bud. 

(7) That ethical rules form an important part of spiritualism. 
In fact, ethics which is based on the principle of natural 
justice, is considered to be the basis of Indian Life. 

Politics. In ancient India politics was imbued with religion. 
The belief was that God ordained society with its institution of 
Varnasramadharma, a combination of caste and stage of life. 
Laws governing the society were supposed to have been envisaged 
by seers. “The ethical principles that were the bases of customary 
traditions guiding society became the foundation stone of the 
ancient Indian legal system and the science of state-craft.” The 
Arthasastra of Kautilya, dated 200 a.d. by some and 300 B.c. by 
others, and the Dharmasastras give maxims about what ought to 
be rather than what prevailed; however, they contain enough to 
show that the laws of society and of general life were on par with 
the laws of the state, if not even of superior validity. The state 
was directly concerned with the protection and promotion of 
dharma ,' artha and karma, leaving the individual free to follow his 
own spiritual path to attain moksha (release from the cycle of 
birth and death). With a change in the pattern of social life the 
outlook of the state also changed but it could never divest itself 
of its power to preserve peace and order in society by checking 
unethical life. 

There never was a state religion as such in India. Even Asoka, 
the champion of Buddhism, patronized equally the Brahman as, 
the Ajivakas and others. Briefly stated, tolerance was the keynote 
of ancient Indian polity. 

It was under the influence of the Kushana emperors that the 
divine affiliations of kingship became prominent. The king though 
elevated to the position of mahati devata or a great god as in the 
Manu Samhita (200 A.D.) was still enjoined to look after his subjects. 
It must be stated that the strong tradition of the land prevented 
the state from assuming a despotic character. The Santiparva 
of the Mahabharata declares that “harassing the subjects in his 
ignorance, by taxes not prescribed in the text, and motivated by 


212 



Retrospect and Prospect 


artha only, the king does harm to himself”. The state was con- 
trolled to a great extent by the ideal of natural justice or dharma 
which included within it the standard set up by the customs of 
the land. Maintenance of social order and giving scope for the 
fullest expression of individuality — may be of groups rather than 
persons — were among the most important duties of the king. And 
the important concept is that the state should not only “protect 
the people but also should maintain the economic structure of 
society conducive to the fruitful occupation of the people in 
accordance with their natural talents and hereditary skill and the 
demands of society as a whole”: (Datta). 

The establishment of Muslim rule in India gave a shock to this 
ancient tradition. It was a theocratic state. The Islamic Shariat 
professed that all Muslims are equal in respect of personal 
rights and social status. In practice, however, many Indian 
Sultans denied this privilege to the converted nationals of the 
country. However, Akbar’s administration as well as that of 
Jehangir shows a close resemblance to the views of ancient Indian 
thinkers. 

During the British rule in India came in such political concepts 
as the rule of law, equality before the law and responsible represen- 
tative government. The Preamble to the Constitution of India 
shows how these concepts have influenced the Constitution. While 
the conceptions of liberty, equality and fraternity have come from 
western political thought, the concepts of justice ( Dharma ) and 
the unity of the nation come from ancient Indian culture. 

Dr. K.M. Munshi observes: 

A new and a very important element introduced in the 
Preamble was the assurance as regards ‘the dignity of the 
individual’. It implied that the Constitution was an instrument 
not only for ensuring material betterment and maintaining a 
democratic set-up but that it recognized that the personality 
of every individual citizen was sacred. Dignity, it must not be 
forgotten, is a word of moral and spiritual import; it implies 
the need of creating conditions in which the individual might 
be led to beauty and perfection, which thus constituted an end 
of the state. 


213 



India 


Law: In India the earliest form of law corresponded with na- 
tural justice as found in the Vedic texts. This natural justice which 
had been embedded in the tradition of the land was enforced by 
consensus in the Assembly of elders ( Parishad ). In this way evolved 
the unwritten laws of the land. The early writers of law books 
in India did not recognize the state as the source of law but only 
as its regulator. The four recognized ‘sources’ of law were the 
srutis or the Vedas, the smritis or the dharmasastras, sadachara, 
or the recognized customs of the elite, and that which accords 
with one’s own conscience. In practice customary laws appear to 
have reigned supreme. Baudhayana Dharmasastra (400 B.c.) recog- 
nized the peculiar customs of the northerners and the southerners 
and maintained the validity of both in their respective spheres, 
Yajnavalkya goes a step further and gives the force of law to the 
custom in conquered countries irrespective of whether they fall 
under the description of sadachara or not. From time immemorial 
India has been having a plural society and as Sen Gupta observes : 
“the organ of authority in a religious society was the Parishad 
and in a minor degree, every learned Brahmans; in a military 
society, it was the king or the chief; while trade was ruled by its 
own guilds, communities like those of the Chandalas had their own 
assemblies and villages regulated their own affairs.” 

Commenting on the persecution of religious groups in Western 
Europe after the rise of Protestentism Mac Iver observes: “The 
age had not yet discovered that the ruler need not meddle with 
the religion of his subjects or that it was unnecessary to make a 
particular religion a condition of civic rights or that, when 
citizens were divided by religious differences, the firmament of 
order was not weakened but on the contrary much strengthened if 
each group was free to worship in its own way or to worship 
its own God.” 

The tradition of India has been to allow freedom of worship and 
not deny or curtail civil rights on grounds of religion. 

Hindu law is seen as a living organism multiplying with force of 
time and enlightening liberalism and adaptability wherever the 
circumstance so required. For example, while the Mayukha 
interpretation giving greater property right to women prevails in 
Bombay, Bengal is governed by the Dayabhaga law. 


214 



Retrospect and Prospect 

The general traditional values as embodied in the ancient Indian' 
legal system may be briefly stated thus: law, besides satisfying 
the principle of egoistic utility, leads to order and harmony which- 
form the basis of socio-economic life. It is ultimately inseparable; 
from God, for He alone knows fully the conditions of real existence.- 
It checks the autocracy of the state and the growth of individuality, 
and that is why some rishis place law above the king. Man’s 
natural desire is to curb the power of others. To put a stop to 
this law is necessary in this world. Law being based on time- 
honoured custom demands our respect. Man cannot' get rid of 
the pleasures of the senses; this is the law of nature; but unless 
this is legitimatized society cannot thrive. The violation of law 
should be “assessed with expert legal advice and sound evidence, 
and punished with impartial strictness”. 

The Muslim rulers introduced in India the concept of Islamic 
law in a theocratic state. They, however, evolved certain princi- 
ples for the non-Muslims such as the levy of Zeziya . They decreed 
that the personal law of Islam would not apply to them. Non- 
Muslims could maintain their old institutions, personal laws and 
forms of worship provided that they did not wound Muslim senti- 
ments. The Islamic criminal code had however universal applica- 
tion. Under Muslim rule the traditional laws of the Hindus con- 
tinued and the panchayat worked successfully. 

The British took up the tradition of justice as it had been in the 
previous regime. But they thoroughly revised the criminal law 
and introduced new rules of evidence and a new pattern of admini- 
stering justice in civil cases. Personal law was recognized. This 
recognition of “the personal rights of all communities sprang 
primarily not from any superior virtue in the English but merely 
from their position as a small band of foreign rulers, not particu- 
larly interested in the differences between Hindu and Muslim, 
but vitally concerned to keep their subjects content”. 8 

The British were careful in the matter of social legislation. But 
the system of sati was declared illegal. Under pressure of some 
Hindu leaders a law was passed validating the remarriage of widows 
(1856). After, the Montford reforms (1919) the Sarada Act was 

2 Griffiths. 


215 . 



India 


passed prohibiting child marriage in the Hindu community. 
Though the Act roused opposition at the time, subsequent social 
and economic developments have created conditions which have 
left that law far behind. 

The Sovereign Parliament of India has gone deeper into the field 
of social legislation by the passage of the Hindu Code Bill to which 
we have already made a reference. This is now attempting to do 
what a Manu or a Yajnevalkya did in ancient days. 

Arts. The arts of India are fundamentally based on the tradi- 
tions of different ethnic groups that make up the Indian society. 
Among the diverse elements of the classical as well as the folk arts, 
the ideal of Dharma which is the backbone of Indian culture per- 
vades, exhibiting unity in diversity. One peculiar feature of Indian 
art is that side by side with the objects of extreme morality and 
Puritanism there are sensuous ones. This is a pattern which seeks 
a reconciliation of the ideal of renunciation with that of enjoyment. 
Although the themes are invariably religious, .they have never 
sacrificed beauty and expression. In the field of literature and 
music also the same features are found. 

Tolerance is the marked feature of Indian culture and the arts 
too have developed in conformity with this general rule. The 
most fruitful age in the field of Indian arts is the period of six 
hundred years lying between b.c. 300 and 300 A.D, Though pene- 
tration of foreign influences can be traced both before and after 
this period, it must be said that the most vigorous assimilation in 
every sphere of Indian life took place in this period. 

The Mauryan period (322-187 B.c.) witnessed the inflow of 
Iranian style in Indian architecture and sculpture. The Mauryan 
palace discovered at Kumrahar near Patna was modelled on the 
Imperial Achaemenids palace of Iran, but in the hands of the Indian 
artists . it excelled its model. 

In the four hundred years that followed the downfall of the 
Mauryan empire Graco-Roman and Scythian influences played a 
■dominant role in the western and north western part, giving rise 
to the famous Gandhara school of art. The form illustrating the 
life and previous lives of the Buddha is at the start, according to 
Tarn, “largely Hellenistic” or influenced by “borrowing from 


216 



Retrospect and Prospect 


Roman art”. The same cannot be said with certainty in the field 
of drama, although much has been argued for and against Helleni- 
stic and Scythian influences on Indian theatre. Patanjali (150 
B.c.) refers to two dramas ( Balibandhana and Kamsavadha ) that 
were enacted during his time. Some fragments of a drama of 
Asvaghosha, a contemporary of Kanishka (78 a.d. — 101 a.d.), 
were recently discovered in Central Asia. All this shows that the 
Indian theatre was well developed at that age. There is no clear 
evidence to show that the Indian theatre was influenced by Scythian 
models, but it is true that it made great progress under Scythian 
kings of Western India, as Levi observes. 

Most Western scholars have untiringly expatiated on the theme 
that from prehistoric times there has been a flow of foreign influ- 
ences into India. This hypothesis is still to be tested by Indian 
archaeology which in recent times has made a good beginning but 
which has yet a large field for exploration. The fact that before the 
rise of the Mauryas (322 B.c.), there could have been no foreign 
influence in India in important spheres of life except in the North 
Western region which now is Pakistan, stands out prominently. 
The Harappan art bears close affinities with the art found in Sumerian 
sites found in Western Asia. This shows that either the Harappans 
had close cultural connections with ancient Sumeria or as Hrozny 
thinks both the peoples belonged to the same ethnic group having 
•common cultural traditions. Whatever that be, the affinity of 
Harappan culture with works of Indian art found at Taxila, Patali- 
putra and other places proves clearly that the tradition of Indian 
art has been a continuous one from prehistoric times. 

There is no gainsaying the fact that Mathura (a centre of Vaishna- 
vism and Jainism) in Uttar Pradesh, and Amaravati in the valley 
of the river Krishna, developed from the early centuries of the Chris- 
tian era schools of sculpture free from foreign influence. Mathura 
represents “an outgrowth of the ancient Indian school”, (Benjamin 
Rowland). Amaravati developed under the patronage of the 
Sathavahana Kings of the Deccan and Buddhism supplied the 
inspiration to the artists. “The style of Amaravati extended to 
Ceylon, but Buddhist images in the Andhra style of the second and 
third centuries a.d. have been found as far away as Dong duong 
in Champa (Cambodia) and at Sempaga in the Celebes.” 


217 



India 


With the establishment of the Gupta rule in India in 320 a.d. 
we enter what is called the Golden Age of Indian History. Kalidasa, 
a poet of immortal fame in world literature, was a product of this 
age. To the same period or somewhat late belong Manimekalai 
and Silappadikaram regarded as gems of Tamil literature. The 
Natyasastra of Bharata of this age shows different techniques of 
theatre and dancing. The SHpasastras of this time lay down the 
Indian traditions in the field of architecture and sculpture. In 
the field of painting this age produced marvels and miracles as 
shown by the frescoes in the rock-cut caves of Ajanta. 

In the post-Gupta age Buddhism lost its influence and Hinduism 
and Jainism came to the forefront. Havell seems to be right when 
he says that “Jainism cannot be said to have created a special 
architecture of its own, for wherever they went the Jains adopted 
the local building tradition”. In North India there arose temples 
crowned by curvilinear tower ( Sikhara ). The South Indian temples, 
instead of Sikhara, have Vimana or “pyramidal tower with stepped 
sides almost akin to the Babylonian Ziggiurat”. These temples 
with their mandapa, prakara and gopuras show the influence of 
folk arts in their excellence. 

To sum up, the artists of the ancient period had well-defined 
ideals before them to which they conformed strictly. The beauty 
of Indian art is pimarily based on spiritual values without ignoring 
aesthetic considerations. One of the most important principles 
followed was that art should be based on the frank acceptance 
of the facts of life. “This accounts for the fact that in a country 
where religion forms the backbone of the people’s life, works on 
erotics like the Kamasutra of Vatsyayana (4th century a.d.) which 
anticipate many of the Freudian concepts, came to be respected, 
and why obscenity characterises certain sculptures and paintings 
in some temples of Orissa.” 3 

During the Muslim rule a new type of architecture called “Indo- 
Islamic” came to the forefront. This is splendidly exemplified 
by the Tajmahal at Agra. It is said that while its architecture 
is entirely Muslim, its symbolism is Indian in spirit. The same 
characteristics are found in several other architectures of this age. 

3 Traditional Values in Indian Life, page 35. Indian International Centre, 1961. 


218 



Retrospect and Prospect 


The meeting and mingling of Muhammedan and Hindu styles 
can be found in the Rajput or the Mughal school of painting. The 
art of the Rajput school differs from the earlier one in that it is 
not purely a symbolic one. The music of the Hindu period was 
enriched during the Mughal age by new intonations ; the Hindus- 
tani music of the North India differs from the Karnatic music of 
the South India. The alliance of two cultures is well illustrated by 
the rise of Urdu as a literary idiom. The Sufi saints believed in 
the efficacy of music as a way to please God. 

It was during the British rule in India that Indian art in every 
field suffered a set-back. There was an attempt to infuse western 
tunes in Indian songs. The Indian stage was influenced by the 
introduction of European techniques. In architecture there arose 
the “dak bungalow” in Gothic style, which is described as a queer 
admixture of ideas of Victorian England with Indian technique. 
Lack of British sympathy in Indian art is well illustrated “by the 
acts of Lord William Bentinck who seriously considered the demo- 
lition of the Taj Mahal and the sale of the marble”. “He was 
only diverted because the test auction of the materials from the 
Agra Palace proved unsatisfactory.” The survival of the Indian 
architects is due to the support given by the Indian princes. Lord 
Curzon whose interest in art and archaeology was almost 
passion, sought to preserve ancient monuments. 

In modern time when India started the freedom movement 
Indian artists showed a keenness to revive the tradition of the 
ancient days. In Bengal there arose a school of painting led by 
Rabindranath Tagore. A similar school was founded in Bombay. 
There is a feeling that the Indian tradition should not be ignored 
in architecture. In spite of the suggestion of the consulting Archi- 
tect to the Government of India to build the new capital in conso- 
nance with the spirit of “the reawakened India of the present and 
the future” New Delhi developed in an alien style. 1 

* In the course of his speech inaugurating the national art treasure’s fund in 
New Delhi (February 23, 1952) Jawaharlal Nehru said, “New Delhi has always 
seemed to me to be a place without a soul and without spirit. In spite of its 
large structures of stone and brick and in spite of a certain attractiveness which 
some of the New Delhi buildings may possess. New Delhi is not an attractive 
place. ” According to him it lacks an inspiring atmosphere, which it could 
have had if the suggestion of the Consulting Architect had been accepted. 



India 


The concepts and goals of the Republic of India in the Field of 
■art are : 

(1) To preserve and encourage traditional art and welcome such 

Western style as can be developed on the basis of the early 
patterns. 

(2) To encourage folk arts and take care to see that they are not 

marred by other influences. 

(3) To promote an appreciation of classical music and folk music, 

discouraging the undue impact of the West. 

>(4) To see that the stage and the screen deal with Indian themes 
more and more, retaining at the same time essential western 
techniques. 

■(5) To open as many art galleries as possible to acquaint people 
with the real tradition of the country. 

Science. Some historical perspective is needed to understand 
India’s contribution to the world in the realm of science. In 1858 
Whewell in his book The History of Inductive Sciences observed ; 

— almost the whole career of the Greek schools of philosophy, 
of the schoolmen of Europe in the Middle ages, of the Arabian 
and Indian philosophers shows that we may have extreme inge- 
nuity and subtlety, invention and connection, demonstration and 
method; and yet out of these no physical science may be deve- 
loped. We may obtain by such means logic and metaphysics, 
even geometry and algebra; but out of such materials we shall 
never form optics and mechanics, chemistry and physiology. 

This statement regarding the ancients and mediaevals may be 
accepted for general guidance; but we must point out that no 
impartial student of culture-history would miss the following note- 
worthy points, among others, in a survery of world’s positive sciences : 

(1) The ‘Pure’ mathematics of the Hindus was, on the whole, not 
only in advance of that of the Greeks, but anticipated 
in some remarkable instances the European discoveries 
of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries. 


220 



Retrospect and Prospect 

That mathematics is the basis of the mathematical science 
known to modern mankind. 

(2) Hindu intellect has independently appreciated the dignity of 
objective facts, devised the methods of observation and 
experiment, elaborated the machinery of logical analysis 
and truth investigation, attacked the external universe as 
a system of secrets to be unravelled, and wrung out of 
Nature the knowledge which constitutes the foundations 
of science. 5 

The point to be noted is that the Hindus have a claim to be 
regarded “as pioneers of science and contributors to exact, positive, 
and material culture” on a footing of equality with the Greeks, “in 
quality, quantity and variety”. The absolute superiority claimed 
for the Greeks by European writers cannot therefore be granted 
from the Hindu angle of vision. 

The age of experimental and inductive science is only about 
three hundred years old. This period is considered as the epoch 
of cultural superiority of the West over the East. At the time of 
the French Revolution (1789) there was hardly any difference bet- 
ween Europe and Asia. The difference set in with the application, 
of steam to production and transportation. The mechanical 
revolution led to an industrial revolution in the first three decades 
of the nineteenth century. Thus “modernism” with its social 
institutions of science and technology brought about the supremacy 
of Europe and America over Asia and Africa. 

A.E. Zimmern observes : “The white races are not strong because 
they are white or virtuous because they are strong. They are 
strong because they have acquired through a long course of thought 
and work, a mastery over Nature and hence over their weaker fellow- 
men. It is not virtue but knowledge to which they owe their strength.” 
Inventors and discoverers came by nature. They worked and 
thought not for any single group of people or nation but for all 
peoples in the world. The Europeans among whom they sprang 
were clever enough to profit by the thoughts of these geniuses and 
built modern civilization upon cheap mechanical power. 

8 Benoy Kumar Sarkar. 


221 



India 


The quite temporary advantages that the mechanical revolu- 
tion in the West had given the Europeans over the rest of the old 
world were regarded by people, blankly ignorant of such events 
as the great Mongol conquest, as evidence of a permanent and 
assured European leadership of mankind. They had no sense 
of the transferability of science and its fruits. They did not 
realise that Chinamen and Indians could carry on the work of 
research as ably as Frenchmen or Englishmen. They believed 
that there was some innate intellectual drive in the West, and 
some innate indolence and conservatism in the East, that assured 
the Europeans a world predominance for ever. 0 

The consequences of this infatuation were colonialism and imperi- • 
alism. Thus far about the historical background; now let us trace 
the development of science through the ages in India. 

In the Rigveda (1500 b.c.) along with hymns to gods we find the 
hankering of the human mind for unravelling the mysteries of 
nature. To lay down rules for Vedic sacrifices in the Brahmanas 
(900 b.c.) the study of geometry and astronomy became necessary. 
The former was needed for the purposes of constructing different 
types of altars and the latter for finding out the auspicious moment 
for the performance of sacrifices. 

In the sixth century b.c. the Buddhist revolt against the authority 
of the Vedas coincided with the establishment of Takshasila (Taxila) 
as a great centre of learning where the science of medicine and sur- 
gery was taught. Soon Indian ideas began to flow to the West. 
Indian “influences” have been traced on Pythogorean mathematics 
and in the Treatise on Winds by Hippocrites and in The Vimaeus 
of Plato. In the second century b.c. when the Greeks of Bactria 
founded an empire in India, science, specially astrology, became 
enriched by Bactrian ideas. Charakasamhita, dealing with the 
science of medicine was composed during the Kushana period. 

In this, references to preparation of medicines from metals indirectly 
show that chemistry was already in an advanced stage. Later Susruta 
produced his treatise on surgery. In mathematics the decimal 
system was first evolved in India andjater on it influenced the Arab 

• H.G. Wells. 


222 



Retrospect and Prospect 

science of mathematics and through it the mathematics of the 
world. The Zero (0) was also first discovered in India. Alberuni 
(1033) wrote: “The numeral signs which we use are derived from 
the finest forms of Hindu signs.” 

According to Hankel, the Hindus are the real inventors of Algebra 
if we define algebra as the application of arithmetical operations 
to both rational and irrational numbers or magnitudes 7 “The 
glory of having invented general methods in this most subtle branch 
of mathematics (Indeterminate Equations) belongs to the Indians.” 8 

There is evidence to show that Indian Geometry developed 
uninspired by the Greeks. Aryabhata (476 a.d.) gave the 
accurate value of it. Its correct value was not known in Europe 
before Purbach (1423-61). The history of mathematics admits 
Brahmagupta’s (598-660) fresh contributions to Geometry. 
Though Hindu geometricians achieved much the same results as 
the Greeks, it must be admitted that they did not attain the exce- 
llence of Euclid (306-293 B.c.) in method and system. 

Bhaskaracharya anticipated Newton (1642-1727) by over five 
hundred years (1) in the discovery of the principles of differential 
calculus and (2) in its application to astronomical problems and 
computations. 

The cultivation of astronomy as science did not make less pro- 
gress among the Hindus than among the Greeks under Hipparchus 
(150 B.C. ) and Ptolemy (139 A.D.). Varaha-mihra’s (505-87 A.D.) 
candid acknowledgment of the fact that astronomy was well esta- 
blished among the Greeks leaves no doubt about Greek influence 
in this field. 

The debt of Europe to Saracen chemistry or alchemy is generally 
acknowledged by historians of science. This is indirectly an 
admission of Europe’s debt to the Hindus for they had taught these 
teachers of mediaeval Europe. 

History shows that India was the greatest “industrial power” of 
antiquity. The manufactures of the Hindus were found in the 
markets of Egypt, Babylonia, Judaea, Persia, etc. To the Romans 
of the imperial epoch, and the Europeans of the middle ages the 

7 History of Mathematics, Cajori. New York, 1909; See Benoy Kumar Sarkar, 
1918, Hindu Achievments in Exact Science. 

•Nalinbehari Mitra. 


223 



India 


Indians were noted chiefly as a nation of industrial experts^ 
Patanjali (second century B.c.) gave elaborate directions for many 
metallurgical and chemical processes which show the knowledge 
of industrial chemistry of the period. The Mahrauli iron pillar 
of King Chandra shows India’s activity in iron ores carried to its 
extreme excellence. During the fourth century the Hindus could 
forge a bar of iron, says Fergusson, “larger than any that have been 
forged in Europe up to a very late date, and not frequently even 
now.” 

Pliny, the Roman of the first century a.d., noticed the industrial 
position of the Hindus as paramount in the world. This position 
was maintained by India even in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries. It was after the industrial revolution and the establish- 
ment of British rule in India that the Indians lost their industrial 
hegemony. The preparation of fast dyes, the extraction of the 
principle of indigotin which anticipated modern chemical methods 
and the tempering of steel show the important discoveries of the 
Indians in chemical technology. 

The period extending from the fall of the Guptas to the Muslim 
conquest was generally one of stagnation, but yet there was a good 
deal of the cultivation of science as revealed in the courses of study 
of the universities of the period. 

The concepts and goals that guided the scientific investigations 
of the ancient Indians included the following among others: 

(1) That the mystery of the universe should be solved for 
attaining a true knowledge of the ultimate reality. The 
atomic theory propounded by Kanada led to the develop- 
ment of the Vaiseshika school of philosophy. 

(2) That science should be cultivated in the background of 
Dharma and it must have a humanitarian end in view. 

The following conclusions may be drawn: 

(1) That scientific investigation was not confined to any parti- 
cular province of India or to any race or class of the Hindu 
population. It was a cooperative effort in intellectual 
advance. 


224 



Retrospect and Prospect 

(2) That no one hypothesis or theory ever dominated the Hindu 
thought. The intellectual universe of the Indians was 
“pluralistic”. There were different schools criticizing; 
correcting and modifying one another’s enquiries. 

(3) That the story of scientific investigation among the Hindus, 
like that among other nations, is the story of a growth and 
development in critical enquiry, sceptical attitude and ratio- 
nalism. 

In the mediaeval period nothing remarkable happened in the 
domain of science. There was, however, some activity in the field 
of astronomy. At Jaipur and Delhi, observatories were established 
for studying the positions of the stars and planets. The Unani 
system of medicine was introduced into the country, But this 
was not very different from the ancient Ayurvedic system. 

“ Charaka and Susruta were translated into Arabic about 
800 a.d. and about sixteen other Indian works on medicine were 
known to the Arabs in translation”. 

After the establishment of the British rule in India there was 
more talk about science than any determined effort to improve 
the economy of the country by the application of science to local 
industries. At first the Indians had no love for western science. 
Due to the agitation by Indian intellectuals science courses were 
introduced in the universities. The opening of the Institute of 
Science in Bangalore may be regarded as the first great step in the 
development of scientific studies in modern India. Great Indians 
that have made notable contributions to the field of science are 
J.C. Bose, P.C. Roy, C.V. Raman, K.S. Krishnan and a few others. 

Dr. Homi Jeliangir Bhabha was famous for his work in nuclear 
physics. He was one of the many men who were active in this new 
and difficult branch of science. He was the president of the First 
International Conference on the peaceful uses of Atomic Energy, 
which met at Geneva in 1955. This meeting of scientists produced 
very useful results. Coming back to India, Dr. Bhabha founded 
the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research. He was the chair- 
man of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission and secretary to 
the Government of India in the department of atomic energy till 
his tragic death in a plane crash abroad (January 1966). 


225 



India 


In the Republic of India the study of science is greatly encouraged 
and striking achievements have been made in the last eighteen 
years. Jawaharlal Nehru throughout his period of premiership of 
India did every thing possible to encourage scientific work and 
research. He was the chairman of the Board of Scientific and 
Industrial Research and was closely associated with the Atomic 
Energy Commission; through his effort a Ministry of Scientific 
Research and Cultural Affairs came into existence (since merged 
in the Ministry of Education). This Ministry is keeping before it 
the following concepts and goals: 

(1) That the power of nature should be harnessed for improving 
the general living conditions of mankind. 

(2) That the use of science for destructive purposes must be 
restrained in every way. 

(3) That proper facilities should be given to the rising genera- 
tion for getting adequate training in science and technology. 

As we see it, science is supported everywhere as a handmaid to 
industry. Scientific development generally takes top priority 
when some misfortune comes to a country in the shape of war. 
We saw the use of atom bombs in the second world war. There 
are big nuclear powers in the world, which are piling up nuclear 
weapons. Now there is a new competition between Russia and 
America in space flight. 

The question that should seriously be asked is: “ Has not 
science a nobler purpose than adding to the wealth of the nation 
and bringing about better conditions of living and using it for des- 
tructive purposes in war ?” Great thinkers have thought about 
the question. Yet there is no clear sign of putting an end to the 
manufacture of nuclear weapons which can be used only for an 
evil purpose. 

While science has grown tremendously we are doubtful if what is 
called the scientific spirit has developed even among the advanced 
countries to the extent it should. It is difficult to define exactly 
scientific spirit. People talk of science as something that declares 
war on Nature and tries to control it. To Jawaharlal Nehru it 
was not war with nature but cooperation with nature to uncover 


.226 



Retrospect and Prospect 


the secrets of nature. The discovery of science often comes in 
conflict with society that normally stands for conservatism or 
rather has a reluctance for change. “So”, as Jawaharlal Nehru 
said, “we come up against a certain inherent conflict in society 
between the coexisting principles of continuity and of conservatism 
and the scientific principle of discovery which brings about change 
and challenges that community.” The scientific spirit would 
break the continuity, shake off conservatism and accept change. 
This does not easily happen in any society however materially 
advanced it may be through the application of science to industry, 
transportation etc. It is often pointed out that Indian reluctance 
to change is of a peculiar kind which militates against the develop- 
ment of science. To reinforce this idea, telling descriptions of 
Indian superstitions are given. Historically speaking superstition 
has not had a deeper and more extensive hold on the oriental 
intellect than on the occidental. “To this day, quite a lot of people, 
in the most advanced countries still half believe in magic. In 
Britain and America, many people will not walk under a ladder, 
especially not on a Friday. Newspapers print advice as to 
what people born in certain months should, and should not, try to 
do on certain days. Few hotels have a room numbered thirteen. 
Airmen often secretly, or openly carry, lucky mascots and many 
fishermen believe that no fish will be caught if anyone in the boat 
mentions rabbits.” 9 

Have such beliefs among Englishmen and Americans prevented 
them from scientific advancement ? Why then should Indians be 
regarded as not fully qualified to embrace the so called “modernism”? 
This is perhaps due to a modern kind of superstition about the non- 
whites. 

A new science called Social Anthropology has developed in 
recent decades. Among the conclusions it has led to “one is that 
all the various and strange ways that exist in the world are all 
possible ways of living. Another is that none of them is perfect. 
We humans, young and old, have all without exception, a lot to 
learn. 


Vimabii Williams— Ellis Modern Scientist At work, George Harrap & Co., 
Ltd., 1961. p. 119-20. 


227 



India 

“In this science, and in all the others that have to do with humans, 
friendliness, tact, courage, a sense of justice and respect for other 
people, are the virtues that are needed.” We agree with Amabel 
Wiliiams-Ellis in the conclusion that if all the things that we could 
learn from studying social anthropology were put into practice, 
the reward to the world would be very great indeed. Indian tole- 
rance is nearer to the idea contained in these conclusions than any 
other. 

We believe that the Indian in spite of his reverence for the cow and 
belief in puja is developing science and technology and can reach 
the heights of developed countries in this field. And more than all 
he is showing scientific spirit in his dealings with man and matter 
and can continue to do so. 

SOCIO-ECONOMIC LIFE 

We have earlier discussed the traditional values of the caste system, 
the joint family and the self-sufficient village which form the bases 
of the Indian social structure. The joint family is now mostly broken 
up but the members of the family though separated by distance 
maintain their traditional love and regard for the head of the 
family. Measures to remove what according to modern concep- 
tion are the evils of the joint family, have been taken. A woman 
had to depend first on the will of the head of the family and later, 
on the whim of the husband. To save her from any cruelty, 
the Divorce Act has been passed. According to Hindu Law the 
daughter could not inherit property, now she can have a share in 
her father’s property. The village panchayat was deliberately 
crushed during the British period, now it has been revived subject 
to certain controls. It is the caste system, however truncated, 
that persists giving room for conflicting interpretations, and specu- 
lations. We shall therefore consider its value for the present day 
society. 

The Caste. Vedic scriptures repeatedly declare that the soul 
has no creed, caste, colour, race or sex. 

That human society should be organized and individual life should 
be planned so that each may know his duties and rights in a given 


228 



Retrospect and Prospect 

situation and satisfy his spiritual and material needs as best he may, 
is recognized by all. There will of course be differences with 
regard to how it should all be done. In spite of the abuse heaped 
on Manu, the Hindu Law giver, by some ill-informed Western 
writers, there are still some thinkers who regard that Manu’s 
Scheme of Individuo-Social Organization is the best available scheme 
of human planning. The caste system, a peculiar feature of Indian 
society is denoted by two terms Varna and Jati. Varna literally 
means colour, not race; it implies also character, nature and 
quality. Jati is interpreted as the form of existence fixed by birth. 
According to the Varna theory the position of a man in society is 
determined by the nature and quality of the occupation he 
follows. Those who hold to this theory assert that Varna does 
not mean a separate ‘birth-caste’. “The impress of its original 
and etymological sense is proved by the fact that a very large 
number of Caste-names are names of occupation .” 10 One 
may change one’s occupation and consequently one’s social 
position will also change. The Jati theory maintains that a man’s 
position in society is determined by providence which represents 
the sum total of his actions done in his previous births and hence 
the social status is a fixed one, whatever avocation he may follow 
in his present life. The conflict of these two theories has been 
going on from the ancient period to the present day. 

The Vedic Sanskrit names of the four component parts of the 
Indian society are ( a ) brahmana (the priest) ( b ) kashatriya (the warrior) 
(c) vaisya (the trader) and (d) sudra (the labourer). One point 
that has not received adequate attention in the discussions relating 
to class or caste divisions in society is that the first three main 
types “with the fourth residual plasmic type, are to be found in all 
grades of communities of human beings; primitive, barbarous, 
‘semi-civilised’ ; as well as those which regard themselves as very 
advanced and very highly civilised”. There are Islamic Arabic- 
Persian names corresponding to the names of the four varnasP 
In Britain they used to speak of the three estates of the realm (a) 
clergy, (b) nobility (c) commons to which a fourth may be added 

10 BhagvanDas. 

11 Ut-ni-ilm, also ul-ftlilbhach ( b ) ul-ul-amr (c) zwrro Id) mnzd-war: the three 
first occur in the Quran. 


229 



India 


now (d) proletariat. Other countries and languages of Europe 
have corresponding classes and words. In England the institution 
of monarchy is a standing example of succession by heredity. 
Edward VIII had to abdicate to live with a wife of his choice. 
Even now there are families in England that feel proud of tracing 
their descent to some Norman Baron and claim comparatively 
high social status. 

A description of how and why the different sections of society 
were intended to work together is found in the Bible: “There are 
many members, yet one body. And the eye cannot say unto the 
hand, I have no need of thee; nor again the head to the feet, I 
have no need of you.,.. And whether one member suffers, all 
the members suffer with it.” 

Dealing with "The Basic Natural Laws that govern Man’s Material 
Welfare” two Americani writers 1 * say that no two human beings 
are equal in all respects and that no nation can make genuine lasting 
progress without recognizing and utilizing the Law of unequal 
talents and that this is evidenced by the recognition of the need for 
unequal rewards.” When such is the case in the sphere of material 
welfare, how much more would inequality be in the realm of spi- 
ritual development. The U.S.S.R. too recognizes the law of 
inequality and pays fabulous premiums to specially talented people. 
“The 20th Century cult of artificial equality between unequal 
men, crazy as it is, has gained enormous popular acceptance, 

The varnasramadharma of the Hindu has for its basis the law of 
inequality so that people may take their natural places in the society 
and rise or sink according to their value to their fellowmen, not 
only in the matter of material welfare but also in the matter of 
spiritual welfare. , 

The most difficult problem for the historian is to account for 
the existence of the jati . There have been many efforts to decide 
how it began. All of them have suffered from one handicap, 
that is lack of historical evidences. It would be true to say that 
nobody knows how it began. However, several theories have 
been put forward, and the highest common factor of them is 
that the followers of each limited occupation became converted 

11 How we Live, Fred G. Clark and Richard Stanton Rimanoczy, page 65. 


230 



Retrospect and Prospect 

into rigidly hereditary ‘castes’ each confining interdining and 
intermarrying to itself. At the occupational level there is now a 
mobility among the castes. Interdining among different castes 
has become a common feature. But endogamous marriages help 
the survival of caste distinctions. As already pointed out caste 
docs not stand in the way of the promotion of national unity. 

That the concept of Varna allowed a man to pass from one class 
to another with the change of his disposition has historical evidence 
in support. The Harivams, 300 a.d., records the tradition that the 
sons of one Nagabhagaristha, belonging to the Vaisya group be- 
came Brahmanas. The Greeks, the Scytho-kushanas and the 
Hunas, foreign hordes that came to India, were regarded as 
Kashatriyas for their might and valour. The slow and subtle work- 
ing of the varna theory can best be illustrated by the example of the 
Abhiras. They were a Central Asian tribe that entered India during 
the confusion caused by the invasion of Alexander the Great in 
326 n.c. (Tarn). In the Mahabharata they are regarded as un- 
touchable sudras. The Mahabhashya of Patanjali (150 B.c.) 
shows that there was slight improvement in their social position, 
for they were regarded as touchable sudras. In the third century 
a.d. an Abhira dynasty ruled in the Maharashtra country. Earlier 
Manu Samhita (200 a.d.) looked upon them as Kashatriyas. Later, 
when they associated themselves with the Gopala-Krishna cult 
they won honour and devotion from the vast followers of the 
Vaishnava sect. 

These and several other instances show the Indian value “that 
diversity is the law of nature but unity must be sought in order to 
make life secure. This unity was brought about by the system of 
Varna through the medium of which foreigners and the non-Aryan 
groups of India found their way into the healthy social frame with- 
out creating any disturbance in the general life of the people.” 

The existence of the caste system such as it is cannot be ignored. 
It is a healthy sign that no caste association has become a political 
party. As Masani states: 

Whether judged by results or regarded in the light of modern 
philosophical thought, the survival utility of the caste system is 
assured, if only caste-fellows bear steadfastly in mind that it asks 


231 



India 


for free souls rather than freemen, for moral rather than material 
strength: that the essential basis of the institution was the deve- 
lopment of groups of individuals in consonance with their qualities 
and qualifications: that the key-stone of the structure was no 
detachment, but union; that the element of exclusiveness and 
imtouchability is repugnant to the social philosophy and tradi- 
tion of the Aryan race: and that the main, if not the sole, object 
of the caste system should be to secure social efficiency on the 
democratic and socialistic principles of class collaboration and 
rule of law. 

Largely influenced by English jurisprudence the Constitution 
ensures the equality of man in the eyes of law. The social dis- 
abilities from which the so called ‘untouchables’ were suffering have 
all been removed by legislative measures. The Parliament has full 
powers to safeguard the social frame from any crack. 

Education. It is in the field of education that India has gone far 
away from her ancient ideas, breaking off her past traditions. We 
have earlier given the circumstance under which an exotic system of 
education came to be established primarily to produce subordinate 
officials and clerk for the British administration. The Gurukulas, the 
Hindu Tols and the Muslim Madrasas languished for want of support. 
One of the most important principles of the Hindu type of education 
is that there is no antithesis between culture and vocation. The 
educated section of the community favoured the western system, which 
inevitably led to the falling apart of culture and vocation. In 1857 
Universities were set up in the Presidency towns of Calcutta, Madras 
and Bombay. Later on there arose other Universities in the country. 
Law colleges and medical colleges sprang up out of necessity. Il- 
literacy, premature withdrawal of children from schools, stagnation, 
and wide disparity between the number of boys and that of girls 
drawn into school were the marked features of the elementary stage 
of education at the time when India became independent (1947), 
Secondary education was several decades behind that in advanced 
countries. University education was purely of the academic type. 
One of the legacies of the British period is the unemployment of a 
considerable section of the educated youth of the land. 


232 



Retrospect and Prospect 

Mahatma Gandhi sponsored the Wardha Scheme of Basic educa- 
tion for children of the age group seven-fourteen. He described it 
as ‘the spearhead of a silent social revolution’, for it advocated 
integrated instruction through the medium of a craft or crafts. In 
practice the philosophy underlying the scheme was not properly 
understood. The hope that all elementary schools could be con- 
verted to Basic schools within a period of ten years has not been 
realized to this day. The Seargent scheme gave a proposal to draw 
■cent percent children of school going age to schools within a period 
of 40 years. This was not implemented. The University commis- 
sion produced a report called the Radhakrishnan Commission 
Report making rccomcndations. The Secondary Education 
Commission under the chairmanship of A. Lakshmanaswatny 
Mudaliar brought out a report making suggestions to bring 
.'Secondary education uptodate and relate it to actual life conditions. 

For some reason or other important recommendations of these 
■commissions have not been fully implemented. With the dawn of 
■independence the masses awoke to the need of education. There 
has been phenomenal increase in the student population at all levels 
of education. The character of education has not changed to suit 
the needs of the present day pupils, so that people talk of falling 
standards in education. 

The Indian Education Commission which has reported what 
may be done to improve education at all levels and of all types. 
It is hoped that some good will come out of the labours of the 
Indian Education Commission. The growing industries require 
educated workmen, technicians, foremen and managers. It is 
now realized that technical education should be linked up with 
the industries and that general education should be work-oriented. 

Economic Life. According to ancient Indian concept of economic 
life, individuals classified under certain groups should have their 
own traditions and hereditary proficiency in certain skills in industry. 
The principle that governed trade was that hoarding or undue 
raising of prices should be regarded as inimical to society. 
Epigraphic evidences show that the state looked after the moral 
and economic welfare of the people without burdening them with 
heavy taxation. The householder spent his life in the field of artha 


233 



India 


(earning through production) and kama (enjoyment) and in an 
advanced age he retired from the affairs of the world handing over 
his responsibilities to his immediate heir, usually the eldest son. 

In the Muslim period the structure of Indian economic life saw no 
change. The Muslims preferred urban life. So the village economy 
continued unchanged. Baber, the founder of the Mughal empire 
in India (1526 a.d.) states: “Workmen in every profession and 
trade are innumerable and without end. For any work or any 
employment there is always a set ready to whom the same employ- 
ment and trade have descended from father to son for ages.” Liv- 
ing was then cheap. Trade with European countries declined, for 
in the middle ages it lay “strangled in the grip of the Turks”. 

In the British period the economic exploitation of India became 
a necessity in the interests of English manufacturers. Age-long 
industries of India declined. The pressure on land increased. 
Agriculture in some respects became commercialized. India's 
indigenous products found market in Britain, Germany and Japan. 
Rail roads were constructed; postal system was established; banks 
sprang up and currency came into wide use. AH these helped to 
create a national market. Several large factories such as the Tata 
Iron and Steel Factory developed in the early decades of this 
century. But the economic level of the country continued to be at 
a very low ebb. 

It was after independence (1947) that concerted measures were 
taken for the economic improvement of the people. It has been 
asserted that “the basic criterion in determining social policies 
and the lines of economic advance should be not private profit or 
the interests of a few, but the good of the community as a whole”. 

The contentment with which a poor peasant keeps somehow his 
body and soul together is peculiarly an Indian asset. It is only he 
who knows well the ethico-religious doctrine underlying the 
peasant’s attitude towards fife that can correctly interpret his calm 
resignation. 

The fundamental concept of the social structure is that service 
to fellowmen is service to God. It is this that has led to many 
philanthropic activities of well-to-do men to relieve the distress 
of the poor. Exploitation of the poor by the rich or of the weak 
by the strong is alien to the theory of Indian culture. 


234 



r 


Retrospect and Prospect 

India’s present economic goal is to increase the standard of living 
of the people by the establishment of a socialistic pattern of society. 
This means an attempt to increase the National Wealth. Per capita 
income has necessarily to be raised by provision of suitable employ- 
ment for all. The live year plans are directed towards ameliorat- 
ing the conditions of the poverty-stricken people. 

Though the Indian by temperament resigns himself to his lot, he 
has always entertained the hope that he can through his effort 
improve his lot in life. That the social structure is ill-adapted 
to economic progress by the adoption of modern methods is a mis- 
conception of many western writers. The law of cooperation 
that man docs not prosper alone but by working together is inherent 
in the Indian social structure. True, there is a great deal of economic 
ignorance among the people. But this is found in all societies, the 
difference is one of degree, not of kind. 

For economic uplift higher production is necessary, both agricul- 
tural and industrial. The quantity and quality of production 
depend on the quantity and quality of natural resources, human 
energy and tools. Man has no control over the first; the rest he 
can improve. The Western countries are rich in their tools and 
power. India has to depend on them still to a large extent for 
machines and their component parts. She has to import them. 
This means ability to pay in dollars and pounds. She can do so 
only when there is a favourable balance of trade. Export depends 
on the needs of the buyers from India. Unless India produces those 
things, raw or finished, that Western countries need, India cannot 
have a favourable balance of trade to buy what she wants. This 
exchange position is now so tight that India restricts imports to 
just those things that are absolutely necessary for the country and 
saves exchange. In view of the acute exchange crisis, India has 
recently devalued the rupee. In spite of exchange difficulties India 
has made remarkable progress in her manufactures as we have 
noted earlier in the section on economic development. 

With regard to improving cattle-breed and production per acre 
of land it is money that is needed. When the per capita income is 
pitifully low, how can people be expected to save and invest ? Good 
seed, fertilizers, modem implements and improved methods of 
cultivation— all these depend on the country’s financial resources. 


235 



India 


It is wrong to think that people are not willing to change. If they 
are made to know that change is for the better there is no difficulty. 

Jawaharlal Nehru dinned into the ears of the people that the 
material welfare of India depends on her per capita production of 
goods and services. “What worries the Indian planners is not 
where to find labour but where to find the jobs for all the labour 
there is and will be.” India is rich in human resources. People 
must be helped to acquire necessary skill to work with machines. 
Planned development was started in 1951. We are at present near 
the end of the Third Five Year Plan. This will be followed by other 
five year plans to achieve the socio-economic goals set out. The 
goals and their content will go on increasing and deepening with 
the pace of development in India and the world. People ask what 
have the Plans achieved? Really, there could be no complete 
achievement of goals but there could be progress towards the goals. 

To prevent concentration of economic power in the hands of a 
few and to reduce disparities in income and wealth of the people 
a number of steps have been taken to reorganize the production 
apparatus both in agriculture and in industry. 

In agriculture the middleman is practically eliminated; reforms 
to give tenancy right to tillers have been carried out; regulations to 
give the tiller security of tenure have been made; ceilings in agricul- 
tural holding are fixed. The control of the state in the industrial 
sphere is increasing to safeguard the interest of the people. Pre- 
ferential treatment is given to new people entering industry and an 
attempt is made to locate new industries in new places to reduce 
concentration of wealth in a few places. 

The first three Plans are an important landmark in India’s march 
towards prosperity and affluence. To improve the lot of one fifth 
of the human race requires unremitting effort over a long period. 
The Chinese threat and Indo-Pak conflict have impeded the pro- 
gress of the Plan. .Defence requirements have loomed large. 

In the socio-economic field we have a variety of ideas about 
flourishing and coexistence. This is in keeping with the traditions 
of India. In the ancient and middle ages differences related to 
religion. Now conflicting ideologies are concerned with urgent 
economic and political problems. There is a strong pull towards 
secularism. The government and the people are involved in creat- 


236 



Retrospect and Prospect 

ing a better social order ; with regard to the practical steps to be taken 
there is a conflict of views. The Congress party which governs. 
India today is wedded to democratic socialism developing the public 
sector in important areas, allowing at the same time the private 
sector to grow in other areas. The Congress party is giving a 
new orientation to socialism. The Swatantra party though largely 
in agreement with the concept of the welfare state is conservative 
and seems to oppose the speed with which social reform and in- 
dustrialization are being carried on. There are nationalist bodies 
such as the Hindu Mahasabha, Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh, 
Jan Sangh and others which 'seem to follow Savarkar’s slogan 
“I-Iinduisc all politics and militarise Hinduism”. There are socialists 
and communists who are not satisfied with the extent of socialism 
found in the Congress party. Gandhiji’s more radical gospel is 
being preached by his disciple Vinoba Bhave. The philosophy 
behind his bhuclan (land-gift) and sarvodaya (the welfare of all) has 
caught the imagination of thoughtful people both in India and 
abroad. He leads no political party. .His sarvodaya is an ancient 
ideal. At present it is the Congress that remains in power almost 
unchallenged. Its chief opponent is the Communist party. Among 
the conflicting socio-economic ideals prevalent, which will have an 
enduring value cannot be predicted now. It will be an achievement 
if a political party that can powerfully oppose the Congress evolves 
out of the prevailing divided opposition. There is a growing re- 
cognition among all political parties that traditional values in life 
have be adjusted to modren requirements to table sucessfully the 
problems of poverty, hunger and ignorance that confront the 
nation. 


237 



Geopolitics— A Perspective 


have observed that India, from pre-historic times to the present 
day, has been a part of universal history. Especially after inde- 
pendence in 1947 India has become important in world affairs. 
Nehru saw India as the emerging “giant” of world affairs, able to 
stand on an equal footing with any other nation. It was the 
independence of India that paved the way for the political freedom 
of the other Afro-Asian nations. There is therefore an unconsci- 
ous tendency among the new independent nations to emulate the 
example of India. 

Discussing the question of the readjustment of the relations 
between Asia and Europe Nehru wrote: 

When we talk of Asia, remember that India, not because of any 
ambition of hers, but because of the force of circumstances, 
because of geography, because of history, and because of so many 



. Geopolitics — A Perspective 

other things, inevitably has to play a very important part in Asia. 
And not only that; India becomes a kind of meeting ground for 
various trends and forces and a meeting ground between what 
might roughly be called the East and the West. 

Look at the map. If you have to consider any question affect- 
ing the Middle East, India inevitably comes into the picture. If 
you have to consider any question concerning South East Asia, 
you cannot do so without India. So also with the Far East. 
While the Middle East may not be directly connected with South 
East Asia, both are connected with India. Even if you think in 
terms of regional organizations in Asia, you have to keep in 
touch with the other regions. And whatever regions you may 
have in mind, the importance of India cannot be ignored . 13 

Asian countries in general are at present primarily concerned with 
•problems of food, of clothing, of education and of health. All of 
them except People’s China are not concerned with problems of 
power politics as are the Western countries. They are keenly aware 
that they are far behind the Western countries in terms of power 
and technological growth. While the Asian countries are engaged 
in the difficult task of economic reconstruction, they find that of 
necessity, they have to get themselves involved in international 
affairs. In such circumstances, a large country like India cannot 
remain isolated. 

The Second World War ended creating more problems than it 
attempted to solve. Two great countries, the U.S.A., and the 
U.S.S.R., emerged as giants into the world. Since the cessation of 
hostilities there have been fundamental ideological differences 
between them. While both the countries recognize the equality 
of man and the need for social justice, the U.SA. stands for private 
enterprise and the U.S.S.R., for collectivism. These two have split 
the world into two blocs. Russia has been trying to gather adherents 
by demonstrating her theories by experiment. The U.S.A., has 
been trying to gather followers through a planned programme of 
assistance to developing countries. She has formed such organiza- 
tions as the NATO and the SEATO to contain communism. While 
18 Independence and After, 231, see also, Sources of Indian Tradition (2nd ed.), 
p. 1904,65. 


239 



India 


Russia seems to be amenable to the principle of go-existence, a third 
nuclear power, China, strides over Asia like a colossus with the 
object of spreading communism by insidious persuasion and naked 
violence, if necessary. Events have shown that China’s acceptance 
of Panchashila was only a cloak for establishing her hegemony over 
Asia. For the first time in 1962, after several thousands of 
years of peaceful cultural contact with India, People’s China 
chose to invade India. After taking what she wanted, she declared 
a unilateral cease-fire. Pakistan, whichever since its inception has 
been actively hostile to Tndia, has found an ally in China. 

The United Nations Organization is dominated by the big powers 
in the Security Council each exercising its power of veto according 
to the exigencies of the situation. With the admission of the newly 
independent Afro-Asian nations the composition of the Security 
Council demands a change for effective representation. 

To the hatred, fear and jealousy between two blocs must be at- 
tributed the cold war, the undeclared war and the threat of des- 
truction by the rise of nuclear weapons. We think that the align- 
ment of smaller nations with one or the other of the two blocs is 
only a glorified form of mediaeval feudalism. By and large, the 
Euro-American approach to the problems confronting the world 
of the mid-twentieth century is a legacy of the past conflicts of 
Europe. Each of the big powers does not want any other to grow 
more powerful than itself. The smaller nations whether they like 
it or not feel obliged to take sides. In this context, the policy of 
non-alignment is the only hope for the future of the world; for it 
opens out the possibility of bridging the gulf between the two oppos- 
ing blocs. India needs the friendship of both. 

The Himalayas are no longer impregnable. As a result of the- 
withdrawal of European powers from the Indian ocean region a 
vacuum has been created. This vacuum should be filled up by the 
united effort of the Asian countries in the interests of world peace 
and here India can play an effective role. The opposition of Asian 
countries to the establishment of British bases in the Indian ocean 
should be understood in this context. 

Taking all these circumstances into consideration, it must be 
stated that the foreign policy of any nation cannot show any con- 
sistent or constant principle as it depends on the immediate re- 


240 



Geopolitics A Perspective 

Iations of one countf^ with another. Notice for instance how China 
from a friendly neighbour turned to be an enemy of India. No 
South East Asian nation is at present capable of posing a threat to the 
other nations unless it allies itself with a big power outside the region. 

India’s avowed policy is to live in peace and be on friendly terms 
with all as far as possible. But if her territorial integrity or sove- 
reignty is threatened, she must have the power to defend herself 
effectively. Her foreign policy has to be viewed in this background. 

Next to the U.N.O., the Commonwealth of Nations is a potential 
factor in world affairs. Unfortunately the South African attitude 
towards coloured races and the unilateral independence of Rhodesian 
whites have given a rude shock to the Commonwealth. 

Britain's attitude towards the Indo-Pak conflict has caused great 
concern to India. This, we believe, is a passing phase; British 
diplomacy can tackle the situation successfully. 

Military and economic self-sufficiency is being talked about. But 
inter-depcndence is inevitable in international relations. We trust 
that the U.N.O. will be sufficiently democratized so that it may grow 
into a world Commonwealth of Nations, facilitating trade and pro- 
moting amity among the nations in the world. Realities should on 
no account be ignored. For example, the People’s Government 
of China, which is recognized by several members of the U.N.O. 
cannot be permanently shut out of the U.N.O. 

India is a land of different ethnic groups, religions and languages; 
she has however developed a national solidarity which expressed 
itself unmistakably in the face of Chinese invasion of 1962, and the 
Indo-Pak conflict of 1965. Her tradition of tolerance and the way 
her people discharge their duties believing them as service to God, 
have a message for the world. The future historian will record that 
Indians in their personal life have, to a Temarkable extent, shown 
goodwill to their difficult neighbours. 


241 




Chronology 


3000 — Beginnings of Indus Valley Civilization.. 

2500-1500 — The hey-day of Harappa Culture. Coming of 

Aryans. 

600 — Close of the later Vedic age of the Brahmanas, 

Upanishads and Sruties. 

563-483 — The Buddha. 

540-467 — Vardhamana Mahavira. > 

422-322 — The Nandees of Magadha. ' " ' 

327-325 — Campaigns of Alexander in the N.W. 

322-298 — Chandragupta Maurya. 

274-237 — Asoka.. 

237-185 — Successors of Asoka. ' 1 1 

220 • — Approximate date of the establishment of the 1 1 

Sathavahana power in the Deccan. 

184-72 — The Sunga dynasty. 

165 — The Yuch-chi defeated by the Huns. • 1 

162-25 — Yavana Princes in the N.W. 

150 — Khenevela of Kalinga. ■ 

A.D. 

1-300 — Age of the Sangam in the Tamil Country— Indian 

Colonization of the East. 

— Saka and Pahlava rule in the Punjab. • , 


75 



India 


78 — Accession of Kanishka. 

80-104 — Gautamiputra Satakarni. 

319-20 — Initial year of the Gupta Era. 

380 — Accession of Chandragupta II. 

401-10 — Fa Hien in India. 

450 — First Hun attack on Gupta Empire. 

500-50 — Decline and fall of Gupta power. 

(Toramana and Mihrakula). 

575-600 — Beginning of Pahlava and Pandya rule in the 

South. 

606-12 — Conquest of Northern India by Harsha. 

620 — Defeat of Harsha by Pulckesin II. 

629-43 — Travels of Hiuen Tsang in India. 

643 — Great Assemblies at Kanauj and Prayag held 

by Harsha. 

700-28 — Pahlava Narasimhavarma II. 

711-12 — Arab Conquest of Sind. 

730-40 — Yasovarman of Kanauj invades Bengal. 

788-820 — Sankaracharya. 

840-90 — Mihra Bhoja Prathihara. 

985 — Accession of Rajaraja I. 

1001-2 — Mahamud’s war with Jaipal. 

1023 — Invasion of Bengal by Rajendra Chola I. 

1026 — Mahamud’s expedition against Somanath. 

1100 — Kalhana, the historian of Kashmir. 

1175 — Multan taken by Muhammad Ghori. 

1178 — Accession of Kulothunga III Chola. 

1191-2 — Battles of Tarain — Fall of Prithiviraj. 

1206-90 — The Slave Kings. 

1290-1320 — The Khiljis. 

1320-88 — The Tughlaks. 

1336 — Foundation of Vijayanagar. 

1347 — Foundation of Bhamini Kingdom. 

1398 — Timur’s invasion of India. 

1414-51 — The Sayyids. ' 

1451-1516 — The Lodis. 

1498 — The Coming of the Portuguese. 

1509-29 — Krishnadevaraya of Vijayanagar. 

244 



Chronology 


1526-30 — Babar. 

1530-40 — Humayun Emperor. 

1539 — Sherkhan defeated Humayun. 

1540-55 — Humayun in exile. 

1555- 56 — Second rule of Humayun. 

1556- 1605 — Akbar. 

1605-29 — Jehangir, 

1609 — Dutch factory at Calicut. 

1612 — English Trade opened. 

1623 — Massacre of Amboyna. 

1627 — Birth of Sbivaji. 

1627-58 — Shah Jahan. 

1632-53 — Construction of the Taj Mahal. 

1650-1 — English Factory at Hughli. 

1657 — Shivaji’s first encounter with the Mughals, 

1658-1707 — Aurangzeb. 

1674 — Shivaji's Coronation at Raigarh. 

1707-9 — Civil war between the sons of Aurangzeb. 

1708 — Murder of Gurina Singh. 

1739 — Peacock throne carried away by Nadir Shah. 

1751 — Clive’s occupation and defence of Arcot. 

1 758 — Clive made governor of Bengal. 

1760 — Deposition of Mir Jafar; Mir Kasim made Nawab 

of Bengal. 

1761 — Battle of Panipat, 

1764 — Battle of Buxar — British success. 

1765 — Oudh at the mercy of the English, Northern Circus 

passed into the hands of the English, Diwani of 
Bengal conferred on the English. 

1784 — • Pit’s India Act. 

1793 — Permanent Revenue Settlement in Bengal. 

1798 — Nizam’s subsidiary alliance with the English. 

1802 — Treaty of Bassein. 

1803 • — Wellesley’s annexations. 

1805 — Recall of Wellesley. 

1813 — Charter Act. 

1818 — Surrender of Baji Rao. 

1824 — The English declared war on Burma. 


245 



India 

1828 — Lord William Bentinck became Governor-General; 

The Brahma Samaj founded by Rajaram Mohan 
Roy. 

1835 — Decision on the Educational policy of the govern- 

ment. 

1 845-6 — The First Sikh war and the treaty of Lahore. 

1845-50 — Annexations of Dalhousie. 

1853 — Charter Act. 

1856 — Act permitting remarriage of widows. 

Annexation of Oudh. 

1857 — The Sepoy War. 

1858 — End of the Company’s rule. 

1 869 — Opening of the Suez Canal. 

1 878 — Vernacular Press Act of Lytton. 

1883 — Ilbert Bill. • 

1883-4 — Ripon’s resolution on Local Government, 

1885 — First meeting of the Indian National Congress. 

1895 — Reorganization of the army as a unitary force. 

1903 — Hydro-electric works in Mysore. 

1904 — Universities reform. 

1905 — Establishment of the Railway Board. 

1906 — Foundation of the Muslim League. 

1907 — Tata Iron and Steel Company founded. 

1915 — Defence of India Act. 

1916 — The Congress— League Scheme put forth. 

1918 — Martial Law in the Punjab. 

1928 — The Simon Commission’s visit to Tndia. 

1929 — Sarada Act. 

1930 — Publication of the Simon Commission Report. 

1930-1 — First Round Table Conference. 

1931 — Gandhi-Irwin Pact — Second Round Table 

Conference. 

1932 — Poona Pact. 

Third Round Table Conference. 

1933 — White Paper on Indian Constitutional Reforms. 

1935 — Government of India Act. 

1935-6 — End of the political connection of Burma with 

India. 


246 


Chronology 

1939 — Resignation of the Congress Ministers. 

1941 — Disappearance of Subhas Chandra Bose. 

1942 — Cripps Mission to India: Quit India demand. 

1945 — Death of Subhas Chandra Bose. 

1946 — The Cabinet Mission and the formation of an 

Interim Government. 

The Constituent Assembly commences work. 

1947 — The partition of India and the Indian Independence 

Act. 

1948 — Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi. 

1950 — • 26th January: Coming into force of the New 

Constitution of India. 

December: Death of Vallabbhai Patel. 

1954 — India recognized China's sovereignty over Tibet 

and concluded a treaty, in which the famous 
Panch Shtla was incorporated. 

1962 — October: Indo-china war begins. 

1964 — May: Death of Jawaharlal Nehru. 

Lai Bahadur becomes Prime Minister. 

1965 — 14th August— Indo-Pak war begins. 

1966 — Tashkent Conference: 

January: Death of Lai Bahadur Shastri, 

Indira Gandhi becomes Prime Minister of India. 


247 




Index 


Ahamcd Shah Durani 46 
Akbar 42, 43, 44, 45 
Alberuni 10, 36 
Alexander 5, 22, 27 
Ambedkar 19, 96, 117 
Amir Kushrew 80 
Anandamoyce Devi 183 
Anandtirtha 33, 99 
Annadurai C.N. 132 
Annoy M.S. 99, 101 
Aruobindo 73, 183 
Asoka Mehta 129 
Asoka 5, 8, 29 
Attlco 101, 105 
Auckland 51 

Aurangzcb 44, 45, 46, 58 
Babar 41, 42 

Bairamkhan 42 > 

Balagangadhar Tilak 73, 74, 82, 85, 

' 87, 88 

Banerjee R.D. 9 

Basava 58, 68 

Besant 88 

Bhagavan Das 229 

Bhandarthar 10 

Bharata 1 

Bhaskaracharya 223 


Bhoja (Mibra) 30 
Birla N. 161 
Buddha 32 


Caldwell 21 
Chni tanya 59 
Chambcrlaine (Auslin) 90 
Chanakya 27, 28, 29 
Chandragupta Maurya 5, 10, 27, 
28, 29 

Chandragupta (Vikramaditya) 30, 31 

Charles 48 

Charles Williams 8 

Ghaudhri (Major-General) 112 

Cihavan Y.B. 145 

Chingiz IClian 36 

Chou-En-Lai 146 

Christ 23 

Churchill 100 

Clive 48, 49 

Cornwallis 49 

Gripps 100 

Cunningham 89 

Curzon 9, 219 

Dalai Lama 143 
Dalhousie 52 



Darius 5 
Das C.R, 92, 94 
Duke of Gonnought 94 
Dyer (General) 92 

Eugene Black 139 

Fa-hien 10 
Eirishta 10, 37 
Firuz 37, 30 

Gaclgil D.R. 175 

Gandhi M.K. (mahatma) 11, 16, 65, 
74, 82, 85, 86, 87, 90, 91, 92, 93, 
94, 96, 99, 101, 104, 107, 108, 124, 
125, 157, 158, 175, 209 237 
Gokhale Gopalalcrishna 85, [87, 88, 
102 

Govind Singh 46 

Harihara 1 58 
Harihara IX 58 
Harold Wilson 141 
Harsha 30 

Hastings (Lord) 51 

Herodotus 10 

Hitler 100 

Hiuen-tsang 10 

Homi Jehatigir Bhabha 225 

Humayun 42 

Hyder Ali 49 

Indira Gandhi 209 
Irwin (Lord) 95, 97 
I-tsing 10 

James Mill 10 

Jaya Prakash Narayan 129 

Jay Chanclran 36 

Jawaharlal Nehru 13, 67, 82, 92, 96, 
99, 101, 102, 113, 114, 124, 125, 
129, 133, 136, 137, 138, 143, 146, 
159, 186, 190, 196, 219 


Jchangir 44, 47 

Jinnah Muhammadali 101, 111, 137 


Kalhana 6, 84 
Kalidasa 8, 218 
Kennedy 136 
Keseb Chandra Sen G 8 
Khrushchev 140, 149 
King Chandra 224 
King Mahcndra 146 
Kripalani, Acharya 129 
Krishnadevaraya 38 
Krishnamachari T.T. 160, 161 
Krishnamachari V,T. 180 
Krishna Menon V.K. 145 
Krishnaswamy Iyyer Alladi 117 

Lady Mounlbatlen 124 
Lakshmi Bai 54 

Lai Bahadur Shaslri 203, 204,208, 
209 

Linlithgow 99 

Macdonald Ramsay 97 
Maharaja of Baroda 110 
Mausingh 43 
Marshall 9 
Masani M.R. 132 
Masani R.P. 66, 231 
Max Muller 8 
Mayhew 12, 13, 14, 16 
Mehta 88 
Menon V.P. 10G 
Miliragula 22 
Minto 54 

Montagu (Edwin) 90 
Morley 54 

Molilal Nehru 92, 94, 95 
Mountbattcn 103, 104, 124 


Patanjali 224, 23 1 

Patel Vallabbhai 96, 110, 114 

Plato 222 



Index 


Prakasam 129 
Prithviraj 36, 55 
Pulikesan II, 30 

Queen of England, Elizabeth, 153 ' 


Radliakrishimn S. 72, 195, 196, 211 
Radcliffe 106 

Rajagopalachari C. 92, 131, 132 
Rajaraja 31 
Rajcndra 31 

Ram Mohan Roy 65, 68, 86 
Ramananda 58, 68 
Raman G.V, 225 
Ramanuja 33, 58, 79 
Ramswamy Iyyer C.P. 110 
Rana Pratap Singh 43 
Rana Raja Singh 45 
Rana Sanga 41 
Ranedai 85 
Rangu N. G. 131 
Reddy K.C. 160 
Ripon 88 
Roosevelt 136 
Roy P.G. 225 


Samudragupta 30 
Sankara 33, 35, 79 
Sapru 95 

Sayed Ahmed Khan 87 
Shah Alam II 46 
Shah Jahan 44, 46 
Sheik Abdullah 140 
Sherklian (the son) 42 
Shivaji 45, 46 

Shyama Prasad Mukerjce 131 
Sindia 46 

Sitaramayyar, Pattabhi 114 
Sivananda 183 
Soekarno 147 


Sriramalu Polti 114 
St. Thomas 23 
Stuant Mill 10 

Subhash Chandra Bose 100, 129 


Tantia Topi 54 
Tara Singh 132 
Thyagarayachetty 
Timur 38, 41 
Tippu 50 
Todar Mai 43 
Tolstoy 11 
Toramana 30 
Tultaram 59 
Tulsidas 59 


U Thant 203 


Vakil C.N. 126 
Vasco da Gama 40 
Victoria (Queen) 54 
Vivckananda Swami 14, 68 
Vogel 11 


Warren Hastings 7, 8, 49 

Watson 49 

Wavcll 101, 103 

Wellesley 50, 51, 52 

Wells H.G. 222 

William Bentinck 51, 129 

Willinglon 97 

Wilson Hunter 52, 53 

Wilson (President of U.S.A) 90 


Yagnavalkya 14, 214 
Yasodharama 30 


Zimmenn A.E. 221 


P. 94 




♦ 


?51 







**A fools thtit is shut is but a block” 



^ c ^EOt° G ^ 

GOVt\;OF;OTk':;'; 
Department of Archaeology 

NEW DELHI. 



Please kelp us to keep ike book 
Glean and moving. 


> V «U 148.M,0«.HI. 


