
By 


EL A. NILAKANTA SASTOI 

University of Madras 



[Reprint from Journal of the Madras University , Volume XIII, No. 2.J 


1941 


NALANDA 


By 

K. A. Nilakanta SasttOs 

The Mine of Learning, honoured Nalanda 

— Tdrandth . 1 


Early References 

Nalanda, the modern Bargaon (Skt. Vata grama, village of 
Banyan trees ), 2 figures fairly prominently in the early Jaina and 
Bauddha literature . 3 From the Jain hooks we learn that Nalanda 
was a prosperous suburb ( bahiriya ) of Rajagrha and that Mahavira 
spent fourteen caturmasyas (period of rest in the rainy season) 
there. Nalanda is at a distance of seven miles from Rajagrha, and 
the Buddhist works treat of them as two different places, and often 
speak of the country between them - — antard ca Rdjagaham antard 
ca Ndlandam . These works also state more than once that the 
Buddha and Mahavira both visited the place at the same time, and 
that a mango park by name Pavarika was the usual spot of the 
Buddha’s sojourn whenever he visited the place. And the Maha- 
parinibbdnasutta 4 says that the Buddha, followed by a great 
number of disciples, turned his steps towards Nalanda on his last 
journey. Nala-grama, the place of the birth and death of one of 
Buddha’s chief disciples, was doubtless identical with Nalanda ; 5 
and the village where Maudgalyayana, another celebrated disciple, 
was born, was also in the neighbourhood . 6 


1. Geschichie, p. 152. 

2. Bosch suggests a possible derivation from the name <$> Rjlanivataka, 
one of the five villages presented to the Balaputra monaste^, ^BG, 1:>#H 
(1925), p. 569, n. 101. 

3 . The passages have been collected together by Dr. Hiranl^Ja^astrig 
roc. Fifth Or, Conf, pp. 386-400. 

4. I, 15-18. 

5. Sudassma Jataka, SBE, xi, p. 238. 

6. Beal, Life of Hiaen-Tsang, p. 105. Also, Watters, ii, 171. 

m 



148 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

The Name 

Of the name Nalanda and of the mango grove in it where the 
Buddha sojourned whenever he went there, Hiuen Tsang narrates 
the following legend : 7 ‘ The tradition was that in a mango wood 
in the south of this (Nalanda) monastery was .a tank the dragon of 
which was called Nalanda and that his name was given to the 
monastery. But the facts of the case were that Ju-lai as a P’usa 
had once been a king with his capital here, that as king he had 
been honoured by the epithet Nalanda or ‘ insatiable in giving ’ on 
account of his kindness and liberality, and that this epithet was 
given as its name to the monastery. The grounds of the establish- 
ment were originally a Mango Park bought by 500 merchants for 
ten koti of gold coins and presented by them to the Buddha.’ Hiuen 
Tsang thus implied that the monastery of Nalanda rose later on 
the spot of the mango grove hallowed by the presence of the Bud* 
dha on so many occasions. 

Hiuen Tsang thus rejects the derivation of the name of the 
monastery from that of the dragon or serpent inhabiting a tank in 
the grove, and prefers to associate it with the limitless charities of 
the Buddha in a former birth as king; Chavannes notes that this 
name na-alam-da, ‘giving without tiring,’ or ‘that which has not 
enough of giving’, is due, according to certain Chinese authors, 
to the magnificent donations that the foundation received suc- 
cessively from five princes, 8 of which more presently. 

The biographer of Hiuen Tsang narrates all the legends men- 
tioned so far, and adds some new details regarding the original 
owner of the site of the monastery which shows that we have here 
a legend which is growing by progressive exercises in euhemerism; 
the site is no longer a mango grove, but the garden of a sresthin by 
name Amra, and the five hundred merchants who gave the money 
for purchasing the garden for the Buddha got their reward duly 
and became arhats. Here is the account of the pilgrim’s biogra- 
pher The Nalanda monastery is the same as the ‘charity with- 
out intermission ’ monastery. The tradition of the old people is 
this : —To the south of the convent, in the middle of an Amra 
garden, is a pool. In this pool is a Naga called Nalanda, and the 
convent built by the side of the pool is therefore called after his 
name. Again there is a saying that Tathagata whilst a Bodhisattva 
was the king of a great country and built Ins capital in this 
place. He was deeply affected towards the orphans and destituti?, 

7. Watters ii, 164. Ju-lai is Tathagata, i.e., Buddha; P’usa is Bodhisattva. 

8. Bel. Em., p. 84, n. 2. 



NALANDA 


149 


and, ever moved by this principle, gave away all he had for their 
good. In memory of this goodness they named the place * doing 
charitable acts without intermission.’ 

“The place was originally the garden of the lord (Sresthin) 
Amra (or, Amara) . Five hundred merchants bought it for ten lacs 
of gold pieces, and presented it to Buddha. Here Buddha preach- 
ed the law for three months, and most of the merchants obtained 
the fruit of Arhatship, in consequence.” 

I-tsing adheres to the story of the serpent, and says : “ This 
is the model of the Che-li-Na-lan-t’ouo Mo-ho-F’i-ho-louo (£=ri 
Nalanda-maha-vihara) . 9 Translated into Chinese this name 
signifies : ‘ the happy great residence of the holy serpent.’ In the 
countries of the West , 10 when they speak of a king or of some high 
functionary or of the buildings of a great temple, they always pre- 
fix the particle che-li (Sri) of which the sense conveys the idea of 
happy and fortunate. Na-lan-t’ouo (Nalanda) is the name of a 
serpent; near about there, in fact, there was a serpent 
which had the name na-Ma-lan-t’ouo (Naga-Landa) . It 
is from that that this name is derived. P’i-ho-louo (vihara) has the 
sense of residence; those who say ‘temple’ do not make an exact 
translation .” 11 

Origin 

The actual date of the foundation of the vihara is not easy to 
ascertain. Fa-hien’s silence regarding it has been the basis of the 
oft-repeated inference that the vihara came into existence only 
after the period of his travel in India. But this may very well be 
doubted, because both Hiuen Tsang and I-tsing assign, as will soon 
be evident, a much higher antiquity to it, and so does the much 
later and less dependable Taranath. Fa-hien’s silence — if indeed 
Fa-hien is silent 12 — can be taken only to indicate that the place had 
not yet attained fame as the most celebrated centre of learning in 
India. For the numerous references to Nalanda in the Buddhist 


9. The plan is missing. 

10. West of China. 

11. Ib. pp. 93-4. 

12. Watters, ii, 165 indeed says like many others that Fa-hien does 
not* even mention Nalanda by name. 1 find, however, that Giles’ translation 
contains this at p. 49: ‘Nalanda, the village where Sariputra was bom and 
to which he returned to pass away. Here a pagoda was raised, which is 
still in existence.’ Legge allows the possibility also. Bosch (p. 547 n. 61) 
holds that Fa-hien’s Nala is not the same as Nalanda, but a place at some 

[33 



150 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


canonical books show that long before the visits of Hiuen Tsang 
and I-tsing to the great monastery several memorials must have 
come up to preserve the memory of the spots in the neighbourhood 
where the Buddha and his disciples had lived and taught, and that 
these * gandhakotis ’ must have been visited by numerous devotees 
in the course of their pilgrimages in the holy land. In fact the 
accounts of the two Chinese pilgrims who have most to tell us 
about Nalanda leave little room to doubt this; but it is more diffi- 
cult to decide when Nalanda became a cloister and a college with 
several halls of learning, the chief centre of Buddhist scholasticism 
that we find it in the seventh century and later. The third or 
fourth century A.D. or even an earlier time may well be suggested 
as the period of the commencement of that growth on the intellectual 
and educational side which in course of time made it the richest 
and the greatest centre, not only of Buddhist lore, but generally 
of all learning in India,— in the entire world. 

Archaeological evidence does give some support to our view 
of the antiquity of Nalanda. The exact structure of the main 
stupa, it has been shown, was remodelled no less than six times 
after its original foundation, and the fourth remodelling, ‘ the most 
interesting and the best preserved,’ had corner towers of which 
three have been exposed ; by their beautiful stucco figures of the 
Buddha and the Bodhisattvas on them, and by the inscriptions of 
Buddhist texts on bricks found in the core of votive stupas, we 
may infer that this remodelling took place some time in the sikth 
century A.D. “Considering the huge accumulations upon which 
the fifth stupa was built, it seems that the foundation of the origi- 
nal stupa must have been laid about two centuries earlier ”. 123 
The date suggested is approximate ; it may be earlier. And there 
is the possibility that even the core of the extant structure replaced 
some earlier form of which we have no knowledge. 

Early History 

Let us see what the pilgrims themselves have to say on the 
early history of the place. And first, Hiuen Tsang : 13 “ Here soon 

distance from it, and accounts for Fa-hien’s silence re Nalanda by supposing 
that like many other places it was deserted at the beginning of the fifth 
century when the strong wave of Hindu revival under the Guptas affected. 
Buddhism adversely everywhere in Northern India. I am unable to share 
this view of the position of Buddhism in the fifth century. 

12a. A. Ghosh, A guide to Nalanda, p. 3. 

13. Watters ii, pp. 164-5. 



NALANDA 


151 


after the decease of the Buddha, Sakraditya, a former king of this 
country, esteeming the one vehicle and reverencing the Three Preci- 
ous Ones, built a monastery. This king’s son and successor B'ud- 
dhagupta, continuing his father’s good work, to the south of the 
monastery built another one ; to the east of this king Tathagata- 
gupta built a third monastery; and to the north-east of this king 
Baladitya added a fourth. At the formal opening of this last- 
monastery Brethren from all quarters were present by invitation 
of the king, and among these strangers were two who said they 
were Chinese. When the king went to visit these latter, they had 
disappeared in a mysterious manner, and His Majesty was so 
affected by the incident that he abdicated and joined the Buddhist 
fraternity (in the monastery he had built). The rule of seniority 
placed him below all the Brethren, and he did not like this change 
in his social position. He put his case before the ordained bre- 
thren who thereupon made a rule that members of the establish- 
ment who were not fully ordained should rank according to age, 
a rule which is found in this monastery and in no other. To the 
west of the monastery Baladitya’s son and successor Vajra built 
another; and to the north of this a king of Mid-India afterwards 
erected a large monastery. Then round all there was built a lofty 
enclosing wall with one gate.” 

The Life of Hiuen Tsang also gives more or less the same 
details; its account of Baladitya and the priests from China is much 
more intelligible than the unresolved mystery in the pilgrim’s own 
account, for we read in the Life : ‘ Baladitya built a Sangharama 
to the north-east. Afterwards the king, seeing some priests who 
came from the country of China to receive his religious offerings, 
was filled with gladness, and he gave up his royal estate and be- 
came a recluse.’ 

I-tsing gives a mueh briefer account, but adds some fresh data 
regarding the beginnings of the foundation. He says: ‘Mere than 
seven yojanas to the north-east of the temple of Great Intelligence 
(Mahabodhi) we come to the temple of Na-lan-t’oulo (Nalanda). 
It was formerly constructed by the king Che-li-Che-kie-louo-tie-ti 
(§ri Sakraditya) for the pi-tch’ou (bhiksu) Ho-louo-che-p’an-che 
(Eajavamsa) of Northern India. This temple, in its original area, 
was only a square of fifty feet; later, the kings that succeeded vied 
with one another in extending it more and more, so that to-day 
there is no temple more beautiful than this in all Jambu-dvipa ’. 14 


14 . Rel, Em,, pp . 84-5 . 


C5J 



152 


JOURNAL OP THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


Hiuen Tsang also ascribes the foundation to Sakraditya, but does 
not say anything of Bhiksu Rajavamsa or of the original size of the 
temple. 


Critique 

Can we identify the monarchs mentioned in Hiuen Tsang’s 
account viz., Sakraditya, his son and successor Buddha-gupta, 
Tathagatagupta, Baladitya, Vajra, the son and successor of Bala- 
ditya, and lastly the king of Mid-India? It seems that we may well 
be sure of the identity of Baladitya. He was doubtless the Gupta 
king Narasimha Gupta, the pupil of Vasubandhu and the enemy 
of Mihirakula. And so far as I know, Satischandra Vidyabhushan 
was the first to treat the names preceding Baladitya as those of 
three successive generations of his predecessors, and suggest A.D. 
450 as the probable date of Sakraditya’s rule. 15 This line of argu- 
ment was taken up again in 1928 and developed in much greater 
detail by Father Heras in his memoir on The Royal patrons of the 
University of N<alanda, ls placing the foundation of Nalanda in the 
year A.D. 427 some years after Fa-hien’s travels in India. These 
views have since been adopted by other writers though with minor 
variations that we need not stop to discuss. 

Let us see what can be said in their favour. Though Vidya- 
bhushan and Heras have not said so, I think they were influenced 
largely by the narrative of the early history of the monastery by 
the biographer of Hiuen Tsang; for though the pilgrim himself 
says nothing about the intervals or the relations between Buddha- 
gupta and Tathagatagupta, and between Tathagatagupta and 
Baladitya, his biographer does make the first five kings in the list 
(Sakraditya to Vajra) succeed in a regular line, the son succeeding 
to father in every case, and after mentioning the king of Mid-India 
as the sixth, he definitely says: ‘Thus six kings in connected suc- 
cession added to these structures.’ I must hasten to add, how- 
ever, that though Ilwui Li’s account has suggested the idea of 
continuous succession of the rulers, his account of the relationship 
among them has not been followed by Heras, who adheres to Hiuen 
Tsang’s indications in this regard and finds that they tally with 
the facts of Gupta history. Thus his scheme of identifications is 
like this : 


15. Mediaeval Logic (1909), App. A. 

16. JBORS xiv, pp. 1-23. See also Kimura, Shifting of the centre of 
Buddhism in India. 


[6 3 



NALANDl 


Hiuen Tsang 
Sakraditya 

Buddha-gupta, son and 
successor 

Tathagatagupta, successor 
Baladitya, successor 


1S3 

Gupta History 

Kumaragupta I 

Skandagupta, son and suc- 
cessor of Kumara. 

Puragupta, brother (not 
son) and successor of 
Skanda 

Baladitya, (son and) suc- 
cessor. 


Other considerations urged in support of the scheme may be sum- 
med up thus : Sakra is the same as Mahendra, the Aditya title of 
Kumaragupta I. Again, the father of Baladitya was Puragupta 
L (Vikramaditya) who sent his son to Vasubandhu for his education 
and had therefore Buddhist leanings; clearly he could be referred 
to as Tathagatagupta on that account. Further, the time of Kumara- 
gupta, heir to the high intellectual tradition of the nine gems of 
Vikramaditya’s court was eminently suited for the formdation of 
the University ; the Gupta empire was at its zenith, and Kumara- 
gupta himself is known (from a reference to him in Vamana’s 
Kavyalankara ) to have been a patron of letters; how best could 
the title have been earned but by the foundation of Nalanda ? 
He was perhaps no Buddhist himself, but surely a respecter and 
promoter of the creed and its institutions. 

By themselves these considerations appear plausible and they 
seem. to contain the elements of an intelligible story of the develop- 
ment of Nalanda. But there are a number of considerations on 
the other side which seem to put the whole matter back in the 
region of doubt and uncertainty. Hiuen Tsang puts the reign of 
Sakraditya ‘soon after the decease of the Buddha’; his biographer 
is not so definite and says : ‘After the Nirvana of Buddha an old 
king of this country called Sakra ditya. .... .built this convent’; 17 
but then he says elsewhere that Nalanda as a centre of learning 
had already existed for seven hundred years at the time he wrote 
(A.D. 688) ; 18 and Beal has drawn pointed attention to this in a 
note saying that this implies two things : first that Sakraditya must 
have lived about the first century B.C., and secondly that Hiuen 
Tsang’s expression ‘soon after the nirvana’ must be taken, cunt 


17. Life, p. 110. 

18. Ib. p. 112 and n. 2. See also n. 1, p. jot. 

m 



154 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


grano, to mean ‘a good while after.’ We may not be right to take 
this as a definite indication of Sakraditya’s date without further 
evidence of a more tangible character; but we can surely infer that 
both Hiuen Tsang and his biographer thought that the Nalanda of 
which they were speaking was of much higher antiquity than the 
age of Kumaragupta I. Taranatha likewise speaks of Nalanda 
as dating from before Asoka’s time, of Asoka’s constructions there, 
and of the activity of Rahula, Nagarjuna and Aryadeva ; all this 
may not be, perhaps is not, history; but it attests sufficiently the 
prevalent belief in the antiquity of Nalanda. 

It is difficult to accept the view that Sakra should be taken 
to stand for Mahendra when we are dealing with the distinguish- 
ing titles of monarchs. Again, Vasubandhu’s relation to the 
Guptas has been much debated. Vamana in his Kavyalankdra 
distinctly says that Vasubandhu was the Counsellor of a son of a 
Candragupta, and that it was on this account that he was called the 
refuge of the learned — a&raydh Krtadhiyam. 15 Vidyabhushan 
accepts this, as also Paramartha’s statements regarding the 
discipleship of Baladitya and the death of Vasubandhu in his reign 
at the age of eighty, and makes Vasubandhu a contemporary of 
four Gupta rulers, Kumara I, Skanda, Pura and Narasimha, assign- 
ing him a life period from about A.D. 410 to about A.D. 490. 
Heras puts a more general construction on the praise of Kumara 
Gupta in order to strengthen his claims to be the founder of the 
University; but this ignores the specific gloss of Vamana whose com- 
ment must be presumed to be based on the context of his citation 
or on some living tradition on the subject. But quite other views 
have been taken, and Vasubandhu has been held to have been the 
contemporary of Samudragupta in the fourth century A.D. 20 The 
explanation offered for Puragupta being called Tathagatagupta by 
Hiuen Tsang is by no means convincing, and no reason can be 
found why Skanda Gupta should be called Buddhagupta. It may 
be noted at this point that another reconstruction is offered by 
H. C. Raychaudhuri who equates Buddhagupta with Budhagupta, 
makes him the youngest son of Kumara I (Mahendra, Sakra), and 
postulates a new branch of the Guptas. 21 I do not think he has 
answered Fleet’s objections to the identification of Buddha with 
Budha by the analogies he has cited, and I do not think there is 


19. HI, 2.2. 

20. Smith, EHI, 4, App. N. pp. 346-7. 

21. Pol. His. of Anc, India, pp. 501 and 506. 

m 



NALANDA 


155 


any evidence worth, the name for the genealogy he offers though 
with an interrogation mark and dotted lines indicating its tentative 
character; he also postulates a second Baladitya different from 
Narasimha and identified doubtfully with Bhanu Gupta. Such are 
the strange results of trying to read Hiuen Tsang’s names into the 
evidence of the inscriptions. One more point. If Hiuen T sang 
applied the name Tathagatagupta to Pura-gupta for the reason put 
forward by Heras, why did he then fail to say that Baladitya 
was the son of Tathagatagupta? 

Conclusion on early history 

I think that it is really no use trying to get more history out 
of Hiuen Tsang than there is in him ; Baladitya is a real name ; of 
him the pilgrim himself gives many other details in relation to the 
Hun invasions, and what he says on this subject as also the part of 
Baladitya in the growth of Nalanda is fully borne out by epigraphy. 
The rest seems to be no more than just edifying gossip. Names like 
Sakraditya, Tathagatagupta and B'uddhagupta are obviously legend- 
ary. It is well known that the pious pilgrim was credulous about 
whatever concerned Buddhism. 

Of the two remaining kings mentioned by Hiuen Tsang, Vajra 
is identified by Heras with Kumaragupta II, though he admits that 
the name Vajra is not easy to explain; and the king of Mid-India 
with Harsavardhana,— this in spite of the facts that Hiuen Tsang 
mentions this king of Mid-India amongst past monarchs, and refers 
later to the constructions of Harsa as those of giladitya still in 
progress while he was in India. 

Our conclusion is that Baladitya is the first truly historical 
name definitely known to be associated with the foundations in 
Nalanda; the identity of Vajra and the king of Mid-India who are 
mentioned after him is at present not clear. The earlier history is 
evidently a made up affair in which history has changed into legend 
as it does more often in India than elsewhere . 22 But we have reason 


22. It is perhaps worth while, in passing, to draw attention to some 
modern legends on Nalanda. In A Note on the excavations of Nalanda 
and its History (JBBRAS, NS ii 1926), pp. 214-6, and in the article on 
The Royal Patrons of Nalanda referred to above, Heras notes that the buildings 
in Nalanda are found built over earlier structures, and accounts for this 
by postulating that Nalanda was demolished and rebuilt more than once 
—first destruction by Mihirakula and restoration by Baladitya who held 
a great assembly in commemoration of it; second destruction by ft a&iriTra 
followed by a restoration by Harsa ; perhaps a third destruction also in the 

m 



156 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


to think that Nalanda was older than Fa-hien’s time and that he 
knew of it, though somehow he does not give a detailed account. 
It may he that, as already suggested, the v'JuLra had not attained 
such great celebrity at the beginning of the fifth century as it did 
later. It is not improbable that the Guptas patronised it, and much 
of the expansion of the place might have been due to this patron- 
age, and the Gupta names of the monarchs mentioned by Hiuen 
Tsang may be a recognition of this general fact, though even of this 
we may not be quite sure as the names might have been coined in 
the mint of legend on the analogy of names of kings most familiar 
to people in the age of the Guptas. In any event, the details of the 
early history of the growth of Nalanda before the time of Bala- 
ditya are hidden from view. 

Epigraphic evidence 

The importance of Nalanda in the early Gupta period is borne 
out by epigraphy. One of the seals recovered during the excava- 
tions there bears the inscription Kumar&rmtyadkikaraTia 23 in 
Gupta characters of the fifth century. This need not necessarily 
mean that Nalanda was the provincial headquarters, but it indicates 
at the least that some communication was made to Nalanda from 
such headquarters. An even earlier record is a copper-plate of 
the time of Samudragupta ; 24 its genuineness has indeed been called 
in question, but apparently on insufficient grounds; this record 
mentions the gopasvdmi and the aksapataMdhikrta of the Nalanda 
village, and also other offices like mahapilupati and mehabalddhi - 
krta. 


Growth 

To return to the accounts of Hiuen Tsang and I-tsing. While 
the former counts only six viharas, I-tsing saw eight of them. 


wars of Adityasena isanavarman. There is no support for all this either 
in Hiuen Tsang, our most detailed source for the period, or in Archaeology. 
Nothing is commoner than repeated reconstructions of growing institutions, 
and many stupas are known to have been rebuilt over and over again with- 
out their having been destroyed in war. The actual occasions of destruc- 
tion for which we have definite evidence will he noted in the course of 
this paper . 

23. Bhandarkar’s List No. 2103. 

24. Ib, No. 2075 ; El, xxv, pp. 50-3. A coin, archer-type of Kumaragupta 
(A.D. 413-55), and a clay mould of Gupta coins have also been discovered. 
—Ghosh, op. dk, p. 10. 


[ 10 ] 



NALANDA 


157 


Hiuen Tsang records his impressions of the sculpture in the monas- 
teries and temples and gives some details of particular 
viharas. He says: “In this establishment, the work of a succes- 
sion of sovereigns, the sculpture was perfect and really 
beautiful. In the monastery built by Sakraditya, there is now an 
image of Buddha, and every day forty brethren are sent to take 
their food there to requite the bounty of the founder.” Watters 25 
comments on this as follows : ‘ It is probable that the Sakraditya 
monastery was in ruins when Yuan-chwang visited the place, and 
that the forty brethren were sent from another vihara to eat their 
breakfast at it, to keep the memory of its establishment and its 
founder. At I-ching’s time there were only the foundations of 
this monastery visible.’ He cites no authority for these statements, 
and I have not come across any. 

Sacred Vestiges 

That Nalanda stood on most hallowed ground is emphasised by 
Hiuen Tsang’s account of the sacred vestiges round about the great 
vihara and his record of the details of some of the miracles connect- 
ed with them : 

“AH round the Nalanda establishment were 100 sacred vestiges 
of which two or three are to be briefly noticed. To the west was 
a temple at a place where the Buddha had lodged for three months 
and preached to devas and men, and above 100 paces to the south 
of this was a tope where a foreign bhiksu had visited Buddha. This 
b hiks u on meeting Buddha prostrated himself and prayed for 
rebirth as a universal sovereign; Buddha hereupon remarked with 
sorrow that as this man’s merit was vast, and his faith firm, he 
would have attained B'uddhahood if he had so desired. Now he 
would have to become a sovereign once for every atom of dust from 
the place of his prostration down to the ‘gold wheel.’ As 
he was given up to worldly joy the sacred fruit would be 
thus remote (that is, he would attain arhatship only after all these 
countless rebirths). To the south of this tope was a standing 
image of Kuan-tzu-tsai P’usa, 26 sometimes seen with a censer in 
the hand performing pradaksina to Buddha’s temple. To the south 
of this was a tope which contained the shaven hairs and nail-clip- 
pings of the Buddha for three months; and devotees who performed 
pradakgina to this tope were often cured of their ailments. Near 


25. ii p. 167. 

26. Avalokitesvara. 

[ii] 



158 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


the tank outside the west wall was a tope where a Tlrthika holding 
a small bird in his hand 27 asked Buddha about life and death. 
South-east from this and above 50 paces within the wall was a re- 
markable bifurcated tree, according to the A and C texts 80 or 90 
'(but according to B and D eight or nine) feet high. This tree, the 
height of which never varied, had grown from a tooth-stick thrown 
on the ground by the Buddha. 28 To the east of the Tooth-stick 
tree was a large temple above 200 feet high where the Buddha had 
preached. To the north of this above 100 paces was a temple with 
an image of Kuan-tzu-tsai P’usa which believing worshippers saw 
in various forms and at different positions.” 29 

Later Additions 

Of the temple of Baladitya and later additions by Harsa and 
his contemporaries we naturally get more specific details in Hiuen 
Tsang’s account : 

“To the north of this was a large temple above 300 feet high 
built by king Baladitya. In its size and ornamentation and in its 
image of Buddha this temple resembled the one at the Bodhi Tree, 

“To the north-east of Baladitya’s temple was a tope where 
Buddha had preached and to the north-west was a sitting place of 
the Four Past Buddhas; to the south was a bronze (t‘u-shi) tem- 
ple in course of construction by king sSiladitya. To the east of this 
above 200 paces and outside the wall of the establishment was kin g 
Purpavarma’s copper image of the Buddha more than 80 feet high 
in a six storeyed building. Two or three li north from thi s was 
a brick temple with a large image of Tara Fusa, a popular object 
of worship. Within the south gate of the wall 30 was a large well 
which had been miraculously produced in the Buddha’s life tim e.” 3 * 

It will be noticed that Harsa’s bronze temple was not yet com- 
pleted during Hiuen Tsang’s stay in India. Purnavarman is said 
elsewhere by the pilgrim to have been the last descendant of Asoka 
and to have resuscitated the Bodhi tree after its destruction by the 
cruel and tyrannical Sasahka of Gauda, 32 


27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 


Also mentioned by I-tsing, p. 163 post. 

Also mentioned by I-tsing, Record p. 35, Ret, Em. p. 95. 
Watters ii, p. 170. 

Of tile Tara temple, Spooner A.B.E.C., 1916-17, p. 45. 
Watters: Yuan Chwdng, ii, p. 171. 

Watters ii, p. 115, 


1 121 ' 



NALANDA 


159 


General Description : Hwui-Li 

This account of the Master of the Law is brilliantly supple- 
mented by the general description of the vihara given by his pupil 
Hwui-Li in the biography of the Master : 

“ Moreover, the whole establishment is surrounded by a brick’ 
wall, which encloses the entire convent from without. One gate 
opens into the great college, from which are separated eight other 
halls, standing in the middle (of the Sahgharama). The richly 
adorned towers, and the fairy-like turrets, like pointed hill-tops, 
are congregated together. The observatories seem to be lost in the 
mists (of the morning) , and the upper rooms tower above the 
clouds . 33 

“ From the windows one may see how the winds and the clouds 
produce new forms, and above the soaring eaves the conjunctions 
of the sun and moon may he observed. 

“And then we may add how the deep, translucent ponds, bear 
on their surface the blue lotus, intermingled with the Kie-ni 
( Kanaka ) flower, of deep red colour, and at intervals the Amra 
groves spread over all, their shade. 

“ All the outside courts, in which are the priests’ chambers, 
are of four stages. The stages have dragon-projections and 
coloured eaves, the pearl-red pillars, carved and ornamented, the 
richly adorned balustrades, and the roofs covered with tiles that 
reflect the light in a thousand shades, these things add to 
the beauty of the scenes ”. 34 


I-tsing 

I-tsing, who lived in Nalanda for a decade, gives a detailed 
account of the buildings of the monastery, their alignment and 
orientation, the technique of their construction and the size of the 
rooms occupied by the monks and the arrangements in them. He 
stresses the absence of privacy in these rooms, and the general 
impression produced by his vivid description tallies completely with 
that created by the earlier and more prosaic account of Hiuen 
Tsang, and the more lyrical descriptions of his biographer and of the 
composer of the Yasovarman inscription to be cited presently : 

“ The configuration of this monastery is nearly that of a square, 
like the earth. On all the four sides, the straight and projecting 


33. Cf. the description in YaSovarman’s inscription, infra. 

34. Life , pp. 111-2, 


rwi 



160 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


edge of the roof forms long covered galleries which go all round 
the edifice. All the buildings are in brick; they comprise three 
stories, each story being more than 10 feet high. Hie transverse 
beams are joined by plates and there are neither rafters nor tiles, 
but with bricks they have made an esplanade; all the temples 35 
are perfectly aligned and we can go and come at our ease. The 
wall of the last edifice constitutes the outer wall. The tiers of 
bricks rise to a height of thirty or forty feet. At the top there are 
representations of human heads of natural size. 

“ As to the residences of the monks, there are nine of them on 
each front; each habitation has a surface of about twenty square 
feet. At the farther end they have opened a window which rises 
up to the edge of the roof. Though the doors are high, they have 
made them with a single leaf in a manner that all can be seen from 
a distance; it is not allowed to put in any blinds there. Casting a 
cursory glance from outside, one sees all the four sides at a time; 
a mutual surveillance is thus exercised; how would it he possible 
to do the least thing secretly ? At the top of one of the angles, 
they have made a suspended way which allows of going and coming 
over the temple. At each of the four angles there is a hall con- 
structed of bricks; learned and venerable monks live there. 

“The gate of the temple is turned towards the west; its top 
floor soars into the sky and makes one giddy in the open. There 
are marvellous sculptured images the beauty of which touches the 
limit in the art of ornamentation. This gate is connected to the 
main building which has no distinct beginning; but two steps 
before it they have erected four columns. Though this gate is not of 
a great height, the wood work they have put in there is extremely 
strong. 

“Every time the Hour for a meal comes they raise the fastening 
bars at all the doors. It is in fact the aim of the holy religion to 
preclude hidden things.” 


Flooring 

“ In the interior of the monastery, wide spaces of more than 
30 paces are paved in brick. For the smaller spaces of five to ten 
feet, for all the spaces which cover the rooms, those which are 
on the roof, before the verandah or in the habitations, they have 
used fragments of big bricks of the size of peaches or jujubes; they 

35. We shall see, a few lines later, that in the monastery of Nalanda 
there were no fewer than eight temples — Chavannes. 

m 



NALANDA 


iei 


mix them together with a sticky paste and they strike on them with 
beaters so as to make them level. They enclose the circumference 
with lime. They make a mixture of the fibres of hemp to which 
they add oil with the remnants of hemp and the debris of old hides; 
they moisten it for many days after they spread this plaster on the 
floor filled with bricks; they cover it all with green herbs. After 
about three days they see if it has become dry. They rub the sur- 
face many times with polishing stones; they sprinkle it with a 
shower of red earth or a substance like cinnabar. Then, with a 
greasy plaster, they make it polished and clear like a mirror. All 
the halls and the steps of the staircases are finished in this manner, 
]When these operations have come to an end, the passers-by can 
tread on this surface with their feet and traverse it for ten or 
twenty years without its ever deteriorating or cracking. This is 
not like lime which when it is moistened by water does not fail to 
scale off. 


Plan of Temples 

“There are no fewer than eight temples so constructed, TJp 
above, all have a level terrace and we can walk there. Their di- 
mensions are more or less similar. To the eastern side of each 
temple, they have chosen a building, sometimes simple, sometimes 
triple, for placing the holy images therein. Or else, at a variable 
distance to the front on the same side, they have erected an obser- 
vatory in the form of a terrace which serves as the hall of Buddha, 

“On the western side of the temple, outside the great enclo- 
sure, they have built here and there large stupas 36 (tsoei-tou-po) 
and a large number of caityas (tche-ti). Their number is (about)] 
a hundred. The sacred vestiges are close to one another and defy 
enumeration. Gold and precious stones form a brilliant ornamen- 
tation; in truth, there are few places so perfect .” 37 

Not satisfied with his verbal description, I-tsing prepared a 
plan of the monastery calculated to enable the reader to follow his 
account more easily. The plan is unfortunately lost, but here is 
his introduction to it where he explains its purpose, and 
his wistful longing for a similar institution in China : 


36. According to this passage the difference between the stfipa and the 
caitya appears to be above all kr the size of the two sorts of edifices, the 
first being more raised than the second. (See however n. 7, p. 39 — “ They 
Call caitya the places consecrated by the great events of the life of Buddha* 
They count eight of them”) — Chavannes. 

37. Rel, Em. pp. 85-7, 


[151 



162 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

“ Although I describe again the form of the temple I still fear 
that there is some confusion in the thing; I have therefore drawn 
up this design, which represents its plan, hoping thus that the eyes 
will catch it without difficulty. If we could propose to the 
Emperor the construction of a temple conforming to this model, 
the perfection of the Royal Residence (Kusagarapura) and that 
of China would be alike. 

“ Sighing for this, I said : c a crowd of good works are as 
formerly harmoniously disposed; all the eminent men are already 
old for us; one sees thus that living persons are separated from 
the dead; how should the heart not be afflicted by this ? 5 ” 38 

Ltsing’s observations which accompanied the missing plan are 
worth reproducing on account of the precise details they furnish 
regarding the relative position. of the various buildings. A stupa 
of Baladitya is located, and more details of ornamentation and 
sculpture are furnished. 

“When one has seen one of the temples, the seven others are 
identical. On the top they offer a level terrace on which people 
can walk. 

“ In examining the configuration of the monastery, it is neces- 
sary to look at it from the Western fagade; 39 it is while going to 
the West, outside the entrance, that one well apprehends the true 
form of it. 

“ About twenty steps to the south of the door, on the edge of 
the road, there is a tsoel-tou-po (stupa) more than a hundred feet 
high. It is there that formerly the Honoured of the World (loka- 
jyestha) passed in retreat the three months of summer. 40 The 
Sanskrit name of this edifice is MoU"louo~kien-tfouo~Mu-ti (Mula- 
gandha-koti) , which signifies in Chinese : the hall perfumed by 
the first source. 41 

“More than fifty steps to the north of the door-way there is 
another great stupa higher still than the first. It is the king Yeou- 
je (Baladitya) who raised it. Both are alike built of bricks. The 
ornamentation with which they are covered is of remarkable deli- 
cateness; there are found beds of gold and floors of precious stones. 


38. lb. p. 93. 

39. As corrected in the light of !£i~ye at B3BPEO iv, p, 80. 

40. The retreat of summer (varsa) lasted in India from the middle of 
June up to the middle of October— Chavaimes. Varsa, however, is ‘rainy 
season.’ 

41. They called Koti or Gandhakoti all the places where the Buddha had 
stayed for a time.— Chavannes. 

[ 16 ] 



NALANDA 


163 


The offerings are of a rare beauty. At the centre there is an image 
of Jou-lai (Tathagata) turning the wheel of the law. Further on, 
to the south-west, there is a small tche-ti (caitya) about ten feet 
high; it is there that a P 3 ouo-louo*men (Brahman) who held a small 
bird in his hand posed some questions ; 42 what they call in Chinese 
the pagoda of the oriole, is this same edifice, 

“To the west of the ‘ hall of the first origin 3 (mula-gandha- 
koti), there is a tree of the species that the Fo (Buddha) pres- 
cribed for the teeth . 43 It is not a willow. 

“ Still more to the west, on the edge of the road, is found an 
altar of Prohibitions . 44 It is more than ten feet, large measure, 
each side. It consists of a brick wall more than two feet 
high that they have raised on a plane area; in the interior of the 
enclosure is a raised seat, about five inches higher than the sur- 
rounding (area); at the centre is a small tche-ti (caitya). From 
the east of the altar to the angle of the hall, there is the emplace- 
ment of a covered walk of the Buddha; it is made of rows of bricks; 
it is about two cubits broad, about fourteen or fifteen long and 
more than two cubits high. On the promenade they have fashioned 
with lime which they have left white, representations of the lotus 
flower; they are about two cubits high and more than one foot 
broad; there are fourteen or fifteen of them; they mark the traces 
of the feet of Buddha .” 45 

Evidence of Seals 

The village of Bargaon and its monuments and mounds were 
first noticed in modern times by Buchanan-Hamilton who visited 
the place in the first quarter of the nineteenth century . Cunning- 


42. Hiuen Tsang also, speaks of the stupa where a heretic with a sparrow 
in his hand questioned the Buddha on the subject of death and of life.*— 
Chavannes. See p. 158 ante* 

43. C;f. Hiuen Tsang, p. 158, ante . 

44. It is there that the novitiates were admitted to receive ten prohibitions 
and entered the order definitely. Cf. Edkins : Chinese Buddhism , p. 35.— 
Chavannes. 

45. Ret Em, pp. 94-6. In the Nan-hai. I-tsing speaks of the walks of 

the Buddha. There were these walks in all places that the Faithful often 
visited, as at the base of the Grdhrakuta and at the foot of the Bodhidruma, 
in the Mrgadava and in Rajagrhapura. All these walks had the same dimen- 
sions. But, according to the text of the Nan-hai. the flowers of lotus 

that mark the traces of the feet of the Buddha are only two inches and not 
more than two cubits high. There must therefore be a fault in one of the 
two texts, The reading * two inches ’ seems to me preferable. — Chavannes. 

[17] 



164 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


ham was the first to identify these ruins with the ancient Nalanda, 
basing himself on the travel account of Hiuen Tsang, and the 
inscriptions on some of the images he collected there. His 
account of the site in his first report is still very instructive study. 
Some years later Broadley carried out some amateur diggings and 
published a monograph based on them in 1872, without earning 
the thanks of his successors in the field. 

Excavations of a systematic nature carried on since 1915 have 
yielded, as noted already, a number of very interesting minor anti- 
quities besides giving striking proof of the accuracy of the literary 
accounts of Nalanda which we get from the Chinese writers. 
The most interesting among these minor antiquities are the 
inscribed clay seals, one of the earliest among which has been 
noticed already. There are at least three seals of different dates, 
all belonging to the Maukharis of Kanauj i; and other unpublished 
seals of the same line of kings are said to be preserved in the 
Nalanda Museum. 46 The three published seals belong to Hari- 
varman (475-500 A.D.) , Isanavarman (550-76) and 6arvavarman 
(576-79) 47 We may be fairly certain that the great University 
was in continuous receipt of Maukhari patronage, and one wonders 
if the king of Mid-India named by Hiuen Tsang after Vajra as the 
builder of one of the temples in Nalanda was after all a Maukhari. 
One other seal 48 proves the connection with Nalanda of the 
great Harsavardhana whose patronage of Buddhism in general and 
of Nalanda in particular is amply attested in the pages of Hiuen 
Tsang ; and yet another seal 49 shows that the contemporary and 
friend of Harsa, Bhaskaravarman of Assam, was also among the 
patrons of the great vihara. 

Yasovatiman 

We must also take note of the stone inscription of another 
Maukhari ruler Yasovarmadeva (729-43 A.D.) who was known 
only by literary references till the discovery of this stone ins- 
criptions. 50 The object of the inscription is to record the gifts to 


46. Pires, Maukharis, p. 61 n. 2 and p. 92 n. 3. 

47. Bhandarkar, List Nos. 2079-81. 

48. IK No. 2086. 

49. IK No. 1667. 

50. Bhandarkar, List No. 1742 as also 2105 and Also Pires, The Mcm- 
hharis pp. 144-5, I offer a fresh translation of the verses on Nalanda ; 
Dr. Hirananda Sastri’s translation is influenced by his untenable theories re- 
regarding Yasovarman. The inscription, is definitely a record of Yasovarman’s 
time, and Baladitya comes in most incidentally. 

[ 18 ] 



NALANDA 165 

the vihara from Malada, the son of a minister of Yasovarman and 
guardian of his northern frontier; the gifts were made in part to 
the Buddha image in the temple of Baladitya and in part to 
the monks of the Sangha. The general description of the vihara 
of Nalanda, and the particular account of Baladitya’s temple con- 
tained in this inscription are worth citing here for comparison with 
the Chinese accounts reproduced above : 

“ Nalanda with her scholars famed for their learning in the 
sacred texts and the arts, and with the clusters of rays (issuing)' 
from her caityas shining brightly like white clouds, — (Nalanda) 
seems to laugh at all the cities of monarchs, who had gained fame 
(wealth) by ripping the temples 51 of (enemy) elephants on hotly 
contested battle fields (4) . The row of her viharas with the series 
of their finials touching the clouds appears like a pretty festoon 
made for the Earth by the Creator and shining in the aerial region; 
her palatial temples brilliant with the network of rays (issuing) 
from their numerous jewels bear the splendour of Sumeru — the 
pleasant abode of groups of good Vidyadharas (of the Sangha 
which upholds right learning) 52 (5). Here was erected by the great 
king Baladitya of irresistible valour, after he conquered all his 
enemies and brought the whole earth under his sway, a large and 
beautiful white temple (prasada) to Bhagavin Buddha, to indulge, 
I think, his desire to see the Kailasa excelled (in splendour) (6) . 
Moreover, spurning the lustre of the moon, surpassing the beauty 
of the rows of Himalayan peaks, casting into the shade the white 
Gang! of the heavens, and silencing other disputing streams 53 (also 
streams of disputants), (this prasada), I believe, has discovered 
after wandering all over the earth that there are no more con- 
quests to be made, and has come to think that any further wander- 
ing would be in vain, and then, come to stay here like a lofty 
column of great fame. (7)” 

This prasasti was composed by two monks of Nalanda itself 
by command of the Sangha ; the authors, Silacandra and Svami- 
datta, were conscious of the inadequacy of their powers for the 
great task to which they had been called, and their touching apo- 
logy, echoing Kalidasa, reads: 

f Vdnchetdm kirn net pangu Hkhari-taruphalavaptimuccaik 
karena j 


51. I have not translated a cumbrous attribute to the elephants’ temples. 

52. The pun on Sadviclyadharasangha is almost -untranslatable. 

53. There is a subtle and untranslatable play on the words mukayan vadi- 
sindhun , and bhuvana iha vrtha bhrantirityakalayya. 

H9] 



166 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


Pulas 

From the middle of the eighth century almost to the day of 
its ruin and destruction by Muslim invaders, Nalanda enjoyed the 
sustained patronage of the mighty Pala kings , 54 and excavation 
has brought to light much unmistakable evidence of this. An illegi- 
ble copper-plate 55 which, judging from the seal soldered to its top 
and bearing the legend Dharmapaladevah in one line below a 
dharma-cakra, must have contained a record of Dharmapaladeva, 
the second ruler of the Pala dynasty, constitutes the earliest bit of 
evidence in this series. Of the reign of Devapaladeva in the ninth 
century, we have two records from Nalanda itself, besides the evi- 
dence of the Ghosrawan inscription on the flourishing state of 
Buddhism at the time . 56 


! Abbot Viradeva 

The Ghosrawa inscription is not dated; but mentions Deva- 
paladeva as the patron of Viradeva who was elected to the presi- 
dency of the, vihara of Nalanda to succeed Satyabodhi whose close 
friend and right hand man Viradeva had been for some time before 
his election to the succession. The inscription reads : 

Bhiksor^tmasamah suhrd~bliuja iva 
£ri-Satyabodher-nijo \ 

N alanda-paripalanaya niyatah 
sanghastliiter-yas-sthitah | ) 

Viradeva came from Nagarahara in the Jelalabad valley and had 
studied scripture under Saiwajnasanti of the Kaniska vihara in 
Peshawar before he went to Bihar and gained the esteem of Deva- 
pala and the monks of Nalanda. 

One of the two Nalanda records of Devapala’s time is a short 
inscription in the pedestal of a metal image, the gift of the king . 57 


54. The Gur j ara-Pr atiharas also patronised it if Page is right in ascribing 
some votive inscriptions of Nalanda to the time of Mahipala of Kanauj c. 
A.D. 850. ‘The coins found at Nalanda include those of Kumar agupta I 
and Narasimhagupta of the Gupta lineage, gasanka of Bengal (c. 600-620) a 
Adivarahe or Bhoja I of the Pratihara dynasty (c. 835-85), and of Govinda- 
candra of the Gahadvala dynasty (c. 1114-55) . All of these are now deposited 
in the Indian Museum’—A. Ghosh, op. cit, p. 38. 

55. ASI, 1924-5, p. 86. Bhandarkar, List No. 2082. 

56. Kielhorn, IA, xvii, pp. 309-11. 

57 . Bhandarkar, List, 2083. 

1 20 J 



NALANDA 


167 


The other 58 is a celebrated document recorded on one of the larg- 
est copper plates known, if not the largest, measuring 2' x 2^' 
inscribed on both sides, the first bearing 42 lines and the other 24 
lines in pre-Nagari script and in the Sanskrit language; the for- 
mula of gift, lines 21-43, is in prose and the rest in verse. The seal 
soldered to the top of the plate bears the inscription: ‘ Sri Deva- 
paladevasya.’ The record is dated in the thirty-ninth year of Deva- 
pala, c. A.D. 860. That Devapala was himself a Buddhist, not mere- 
ly a patron of Buddhism, is clear from his being styled in this re- 
cord and in the Monghyr plate of his thirty-third year as follows: 

r Paramasaugatah Paramesvarah Par amah hattarak o Maha- 
rajadhirajah sriman Dev a pal cidevak. 3 

Bdlaputra’s vihdra 

The chief interest of the Nalanda plate of Devapala lies in the 
fact that it records the construction, at Nalanda, of a fresh vihdra 
by Balaputra deva, the Sailendra ruler of Suvarnadvipa (Suma- 
tra), and the gift, with Devapala’s permission, of five villages to 
this new Vihdra for the purposes detailed in the following terms : 

“to serve as the source of income for the temple of the wor- 
shipful Lord Buddha and of the Initiates in the entire Dharxna 
beginning with Prajnaparamita ; for the bali- and caru-offerings, 
the accommodation, clothing, alms, beds, seats, the needs of the 
sick like medicines, etc., of the Sangha of honourable monks of 
the four quarters, being a group of Tantrika-Bodhisatvas in whom 
the eight Mahapurusas are reincarnate; for the copying, etc., of the 
Dharma-ratna and for the repair of the building of the vihara when 
it becomes dilapidated.” 59 


Organisation 

The new monastery then is a self-contained unit, with its own 
arrangements for worship, study and good living, and with its own 
separate budget. It is possible that these features mark it off as 
a foreign monastery, maintained by a foreign power for the bene- 
fit of its own nationals who came to study in Nalanda. It was, 
so to say, the ‘ Suvarnadvipa Hall’ of the University. But there is 
nothing to preclude the supposition that the whole place was orga- 
nised from the beginning in such distinct units, each with its own 
distinct features; in fact some support may be found for this idea, 

58. Ib., 1613. 

59. I have followed Bosch’s interpretation of these rather involved phrases. 

[ 21 ] 



168 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


in the progressive increase in the number of ‘temples’ that we are 
able to trace, though not in all its stages, in the course of genera- 
tions, And Balaputra might only have followed a procedure for 
which there were several precedents when he made the arrange- 
ments actually detailed in the charter of his vihara. The consti- 
tution of Nalanda then seems to have been very like that of a 
large modem university organised in residential colleges cluster- 
ing together within a small area and maintaining constant touch 
with one another'. 


National viharas 

In establishing on a permanent footing a vihara at Nalanda for 
the convenience of his subjects visiting that great centre of learn- 
ing and religion in a distant land, Balaputra might have been in- 
fluenced by what he heard of similar institutions maintained by 
others elsewhere in India, and he was also setting a precedent to 
be followed by one of his successors more than a century later in 
South India, There was in existence at Nagarjunilconda in the 
very early centuries of the Christian era a sihala-vihara, a monas- 
tery for Ceylonese monks who were actively engaged in spread- 
ing the light of true knowledge all over India; but this vihara was 
an endowment of the members of the Iksvaku family ruling in the 
locality, and not a creation of the Kings of Ceylon for the benefit 
of their countrymen visiting Nagarjunilconda. A closer analogy is 
furnished by Meghavarna’s vihara in Buddha Gaya which was 
erected by the Ceylonese king with the permission of Samudra- 
gupta to meet the felt needs of visitors from Ceylon to the holy 
land, and was still flourishing as a magnificent establishment when 
Hiuen Tsang visited it in the seventh century , 60 I-tsing mentions 
several other examples. He records that a king of the South Indian 
kingdom of Kuluka, possibly Kolkai, i.e., Pandyan kingdom 
according to Chavannes, had built a vihara for the use of his sub- 
jects at a distance of two yojanas to the north-east of the Maha- 
hodhi temple at Bodh Gaya. There were separate monasteries also 
for the people of Tukhara and Kapisa from the North. There was 
again a Chinese cloister at Mrgasikhavana at a distance of forty 
yojanas to the east of Nalanda; this establishment had been found- 
ed by &rl Gupta and granted twenty-four villages for its mainten- 
ance; but when I-tsing came to India it had fallen into decay, so 
that he complained that while all other nations had facilities for 
their sojourn in the holy land, the Chinese alone lacked it in his 

60. Smith, EHP, pp. 303-4, 



NALANDA 


160 


time. It has been suggested with great plausibility ( by Bosch ) 
that these foundations maintained by different kingdoms at a con- 
siderable expense had other purposes to serve besides serving the 
religious interests of pilgrims; merchants and ambassadors might 
have found good use for them also and they might have had a 
share in furthering profitable trade relations and friendly, political 
and secular intercourse among the different countries involved. 61 

Balaputra’s example in turn, was followed in the eleventh 
century by Cudamani Varman and his son Maravij ayottuhgavar- 
man who built and endowed a splendid vihara for the monks of 
the Sailendra kingdom at Negapatam, then the first port 
of call for all pilgrims to South India by the sea-route 
from China and Sri Vijaya; and we hear again of this 
famous establishment at the close of the century in the 
inscriptions of the reign of Kulottunga I. Like the Bala- 
putra vihara at Nalanda, it may be noted in passing, the site 
of the Cudamam-vihara at Negapatam has yielded a sumptuous 
collection of Buddhist bronzes of varying sizes which are still 
awaiting publication. 

Nalanda, Art 

The Balaputra monastery and its bronzes raise the question 
of the relation of Nalanda art to Hindu-Javanese art. Writing in 
.1925, and struck by the remarkable likeness to Javanese technique 
exhibited by some of the Nalanda finds, particularly a bronze 
Aksobhya (ASI, 1917-18, PI. XlVa) from the Balaputra vihara as 
it turned out after the discovery of the Devapala plate in 1921, 
Bosch 62 formulated one of two possibilities for accounting for the 
resemblances noticed. Either Nalanda art and Hindu-Javanese art 
were branches of an originally common Buddhist art that flourish- 
ed long before Java or Sri Vijaya entered history, or the Nalanda 
bronzes were the direct productions of Javanese artists made by 
some of them settled in Nalanda or imported from Java in a 
finished form. He also pointed out that an image of a six-armed 
Yamantaka from another monastery may well be considered t fee 
true prototype of the later Krodha forms so well known in Tibetan 
Buddhist art. 63 


61. Rel. Em. pp. 80-4; Bosch, op. eit, pp. 560-2. 

62. Op. cit., pp. 585-8. 

63. Ib, p. 581. 

[233 



170 


JOURNAL OP THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


The Nalanda bronzes have been studied in some greater detail 
more recently in a monograph by Bernet-Kempers. The long and 
continuous intercourse between the region of Nalanda and the 
archipelago is attested by the appearance in Sumatra in the late 
seventh century of the Vajrayana type of Buddhism of the Yoga- 
cara school of Nalanda, and of pre-Nagari script a little later in 
Java, the evolution of the script being quite up-to-date as com- 
pared with its development in India. A verse from the T7em- 
samMra of Bhatfca-Narayana, a Bengali writer of the eighth cen- 
tury, reappears in the old Javanese Adiparva. And we have in 
Kumaraghosa of the Kelurak inscription an instance of a Buddhist 
priest from Gaufla who went and settled in Java. But apparently 
more people came to India from Sumatra and Java as the rise of 
the Balaputra vihara shows. This vihara was exposed early in the 
excavations, in 1915, and over two hundred metal objects includ- 
ing many fine statues and statuettes were recovered from it. 
Bronze finds, on the other hand, are rare in the other monasteries 
of Nalanda. It is believed that this large find is the result of an 
accident in which the monastery perished by fire and its inmates 
had no time to remove the bronzes. However this may be, the 
fact of a part of Nalanda having perished by fire early in the ele- 
venth century, and of having been renovated thereafter is re- 
corded in an inscription of the eleventh year of Mahipala I 64 at- 
testing the gift of a door-joint by a certain B’aladitya of Kosambi 
during the agni-dagdhoddhara. Some of these bronzes are inscrib- 
ed in Devapala’s reign and are thus definitely products of Pala art. 
They are all of the same school and must be taken to represent 
the gradual assemblage of pious gifts extending over some time, 
but not long. They resemble Javanese bronzes of the period 
rather closely, and the question of Javanese influence on them has 
been much discussed; but so high an authority as Krom has de- 
clared that he would have selected only a minority of them as 
products of Hindu- Javanese art if their find spot had been kept 
away from him. 

The conclusion of Bernet-Kempers on this question seems to 
be just : ‘ The art of Nalanda, developed under the influence of 
Java, also produced deities which were unknown or not popular 
in Java. From Nalanda these and similar images were brought 
over to Burma, Nepal, Ceylon, etc., and also to Java, as is ap- 
parent from the bronzes from that country which show Pala fea- 
tures.’ 65 He also suggests that the Jambhala figure and a type of 

64. Bhandarkar, List, No. 1626. 65, p. 71. 


[ 24 ] 



NALANDA 


171 


Buddha in Vajrasana might have been taken over by Java from 
Nalanda art. But Javanese bronze-easting reached its high- 
water mark before the end of the eighth centurty, while the 
Nalanda group falls mostly in the ninth century. Let us remem- 
ber also that these are not the earliest bronzes in India of their 
type, and that Bala art, again, was not the only source of Indian 
influences playing on Javanese culture. 

Another phase of Nalanda art which has not yet been studied 
in detail is illustrated by numerous stucco figures discovered in 
1925-26 and doubtless forming part of a relatively early period in 
the life of the monastery. These form part of an original corner 
tower that was found to be completely encased in the solid brick 
work of a later structure. The stucco figures modelled on a founda- 
tion of clay are set in rows of seperate niches in several tiers ; they 
mostly represent the Buddha in different conventional attitudes, 
and their simple and effective style suggests a really early date 
for them. Mr. Page who brought them to light puts them in the 
7th or 8th century; they may well be earlier. 66 In the year 1933-34 
was recovered a magnificent image of the Bodhisattva Avalokites- 
vara in a perfect state of preservation from a small chamber on 
the side of a caitya (No. 12), and this figure has been hailed ‘as 
one of the finest sculptures left to us as a precious heirloom, by 
the master sculptors of the Gupta period.’ 67 It may be noted also 
in passing that several monasteries with monks’ cells intact have 
been exposed by the excavations carried out over a number of 
years ; these confirm very closely the accuracy of I-tsing’s descrip- 
tion of the vihara, and ‘some of the cells show clearly the shape 
of well-built true arches; the existence of these in Bihar about the 
middle of the ninth century is of great interest for the history of 
Indian architecture.’ 68 


Later History 

We lack the means of tracing the fortunes of Nalanda in any 
detail during the eleventh and twelfth centuries. A Nagari stone 
inscription discovered in two fragments in 1928-30 from the latest 
stratum of a Monastery numbered VII in the Archaeological re- 
ports is of some interest in this connection. It is not dated, but 


66. ABIA, 1928, pp. 19-20. See p. 150 ante. 

67. ABIA, 1934, p. 5. 

68. Ib. p. 4. 


[ 25 ] 



172 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 1 


doubtless belongs to the first hall of the twelfth century A.D. as 
stated by N. G. Majumdar . 69 

Vipulasri’s Mitra Viham 

The inscription details the Vidyavamsa of a certain ascetic 
Vipulasrunitra and gives an account of his sacred foundations. It 
does not mention Nalanda. by name, but seems to record the erec- 
tion of a new monastery there by him, for the benefit of the Mitras, 
the line of ascetics to which he himself belonged. The provenance 
of the inscription together with the definite statement ‘this vihara 
made by him and given to the Mitras shines here as an ornament 
of the world excelling Indra’s palace in beauty’ must be accepted 
as sufficiently satisfactory evidence of what happened. 

Library 

The following passage from Satischandra Vidyabhushan on the 
University and Library of Nalanda will doubtless be read with 
great interest : 70 “ According to Tibetan accounts the quarter in 
which the Nalanda University, with its grand library, was located, 
was called Dharmaganja (Piety Mart) . It consisted of three grand 
buildings called Ratnasagara, Ratnodadhi, and Ratnaranjaka, res- 
pectively. In Ratnodadhi, which was nine-storeyed, there were 
the sacred scripts called Prajnaparamita-sutra, and Tantrik works 
such as Samajaguhya, etc,” 

Destruction 

When the wave of Muslim inroads swept over Bihar at the 
end of the twelfth century, Nalanda suffered a cruel destruction 
like much else; Islam, as a historic force, has been the most un- 
compromising enemy of Buddhism and Buddhist institutions from 
the heart of Central Asia to the Islands of the Southern Sea. The 
occurrences in Bihar are best described in the words of the leading 
Muslim historian of the times : 71 

“Muhammad-i-Bakht-ySr used to carry his depredations into 
those parts and that country until he organized an attack upon the 
fortified city of Bihar. Trustworthy persons have related on this 
wise, that he advanced to the gateway of the fortress of Bihar with 
two hundred horsemen in defensive armour, and suddenly -at- 


69. Et, sad, p. 97. 

70. Indian Logic , p. 516. 

71. Tabakat-i-Nasiri, I, pp. 551-2. 


[ 26 ] 



NALANDA 


173 


tacked the place. There were two brothers of Farghanah, men of 
learning, one Nizam-ud-Din, the other Samsam-ud-Dln (by name)' 
in the service of Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar; and the author of this 
book met with Samsam-ud-Dln at Lakhanawafi in the year 641 H., 
and this account is from him. These two wise brothers were sol- 
diers among that band of holy warriors when they reached the 
gateway of the fortress and began the attack, at which time 
Muhammad-i-Bakht-yar, by the force of his intrepidity, threw 
himself into the postern of the gateway of the place, and they 
captured the fortress, and acquired great booty. The greater 
number of the inhabitants of that place were Brahmans, and the 
whole of those Brahmans had their heads shaven; and they were 
all slain. There were a great number of books there; and, when 
all these books came under the observation of the Musalmans, they 
summoned a number of Hindus that they might give them informa- 
tion respecting the import of those books; but the whole of the 
Hindus had been killed. On becoming acquainted [with the con- 
tents of those books], it was found that the whole of that fortress 
and city was a college, and in the Hindu! tongue, they call a col- 
lege [ madrasa ] Bihar.” 

A Tibetan Tradition 

But this apparently was not quite the end, for the Tibetan 
authorities have a tradition of their own which Vidyabhushan re- 
counts as follows: 72 “After the Turuska raiders had made incursions 
in Nalanda, the temples and caityas there were repaired by a sage 
named Mudita Bhadra. Soon after this, Kukutasiddha, minister 
of the king of Magadha, created a temple at Nalanda, and, while 
a religious sermon was being delivered there, two very indigent 
Tirthika mendicants appeared. Some naughty young novice- 
monks in disdain threw washing water on them. This made them 
very angry. After propitiating the sun for twelve years, they 
performed a yajna, fire-sacrifice, and threw living embers and 
ashes from the sacrificial pit into the Buddhist temples, etc. Thi s 
produced a great conflagration which consumed Ratnodadhi. It is, 
however, said that many of the Buddhist scriptures were saved by 
water which leaked through the sacred volumes of Prajna-pSramita- 
sutra and Tantra.” 

How Nalanda Rose 

Such then was Nalanda for over a thousand years of its splendid 
history. Before proceeding to a study of the details of its organi- 


[ 27 ] 


72. Indian Logic, p. 516. 



174 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


sation and institutions, of the names and fame of its teachers and 
the number and eminence of the visitors 'who came to it, we may 
well ask ourselves: what were the causes of the great popularity 
and eminence of Nalanda? 73 True the patronage of monarchs, the 
grant of protection, lands, immunities and what not by them to 
organised societies of monks, alone enabled them to fulfil the 
high calling to which they had dedicated themselves, and to kindle 
the light of the true knowledge of Dharma and spread it all over 
the world and thereby dispel the darkness of false knowledge and 
ignorance and even avert sickness, drought, war and other adversi- 
ties. Nevertheless the question arises why Nalanda in 
particular, which had no great advantage by way of sacred 
associations with any striking incident in the life of the 
Buddha, and in this respect could hardly compete with 
Bodh Gaya, Sarnath or iSravasti for instance attained a 
fame which cast all the other Sangharamas of India into 
the shade. To such a question we are perhaps not in a position to 
furnish a completely satisfactory answer. But surely the happy 
geographical situation of Nalanda had something to do with it, and 
T-tsing is at some pains to bring home to his readers the great ad- 
vantages of this situation. He writes : 

“ This temple faces in the south the royal town (Kusagara- 
pura) from which it is only 30 li distant; ‘the peak of the vulture’ 
(Grdhrakuta) and the ‘ garden of bambus ’ (Venuvana) are both 
by the side of the town. To the south-west, we go to the ‘temple of 
the Great Intelligence’ (Mahabodhi) , to the due south towards the 
mountain of the Foot of the Venerable (Gurupada) , these two spots 
being both about seven relays (yojanas). To the north, we go 
towards Vaisali which is at a distance of about twenty-five relays 
(yojanas). To the west, we look towards the Mrgadava which is 
more than twenty relays (yojanas); to the east, for going to the 
state of Tan-mouo-li-ti (Tamralipti) , there are sixty to seventy re- 
lays (yojanas) . That is the sea-port whence we embark for return- 
ing to China.” 733 

These observations show that pilgrims taking the sea-route 
from China and Malayasia found it convenient to go to Nalanda 
from Tamralipti, and plan the rest of their tour from there, a course 
which I-tsing himself adopted. And if they came by land, after 
all the perils and anxieties of their hard journey, the atmosphere 


73. Cf. Bosch: Een Ooorkonde, TBG, lxv, pp. 530-2. 
73a. Re l, Em, p . 97.. 



NALANDA 


175 


of quiet and study that prevailed in Nalanda invited them to stay 
there as long as they could before starting on the return journey. 
At Nalanda many pilgrims met, and it is no wonder that there grew 
up a lively trade in the two classes of goods, relics and manus- 
cripts, 74 the acquisition of which was the chief inducement to the 
pilgrims to face the trouble and toil of their long journeys to the 
holy land and back. I-tsing alone carried away at the end of his 
ten years’ stay in Nalanda about four hundred texts, sutras, trea- 
tises on Vinaya, and sastras, in Sanskrit, comprising together 500,000 
slokas, besides a faithful copy of the image at the Bodhimanda and 
three hundred relics. 75 Nalanda again had become from of old a 
centre of all types of higher study, not merely of Buddhism. In 
the old days Taksasila had been the most celebrated of such 
centres as we can judge from the repeated references to it in the 
Jataka stories and in early Sanskrit literature. But the frontier 
was exposed to many inroads by foreigners, and in the general 
disturbance of the period between the fall of the Mauryan empire 
and the establishment of Kusan power, Taksasila might have been 
subjected to all the vicissitudes to which many other Sangharamas 
in that quarter had to submit. It was seldom that these distur- 
bances reached as far as Magadha, and the distance from the dis- 
turbed frontier which gave a relative immunity from trouble to 
Nalanda must have favoured it quite as much as its proximity to 
Tamralipti, the port of landing for the pilgrims who came by sea 
from the East. Nalanda was a centre not only of Buddhism in its dif- 
ferent aspects and of Buddhist studies, but of Brahmanical prac- 
tices and scholasticism as well. The mention of ball and earn, 
quite Vedic names for offerings, 76 among the purposes for which 
the Balaputra vihara was endowed deserves to be noticed parti- 
cularly in this connection, and we shall see that Hiuen Tsang him- 
self studied Brahmanical scripture at Nalanda. 

Studies of Hiuen Tsang at Nalanda, 

The following account of Hwui Li of the course of studies 
pursued by Hiuen Tsang during the fifteen months of his stay at 
Nalanda amply proves the wide scope and universal character 
of the educational courses pursued at that great centre: 77 


74. Mss. known to have been copied in Nalanda are still found in all the 
more important collections of Mss. in all countries. 

75. Ret Em., p. 193. 

76. Cf. Bosch, p. 543 n 52a. 

77. Life, p. 121. 


[ 29 ] 



176 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


'"Hie Master of the Law whilst he stopped in the convent, heard 
the explanation of the Yoga-Sastra, three times ; the Nyaya- 
Anusara-sastra, once ; the Hin-hiang-Ud fa-ming, once ; the Hetu- 
vidya-sastra and the Sabdavidya and the tsah liang sastras, twice ; 
the Prahyamula sastra-tika, and the Sata-sastra, thrice. The 
Kosa, Vibhasa, and the Satpadabhidharma sastras, he had already 
heard explained in the different parts of Kasmir; but when he came 
to this convent he wished to study them again to satisfy some 
doubts he had: this done, he also devoted himself to the study of 
the Brahman books and the work called Vyakarana on Indian 
letters, whose origin is from the most remote date, and whose 
author is unknown." 

It should perhaps be stated that the Nyaya-Anusara-sastra was 
a Hinayanist work of the Sarvastivadins, 78 and the Primyamula 
sastra-tika, one of the leading works of the Madhyamika school of 
Mahayana. The Satasutra (Sastra) was a work of Aryadeva, 
translated by Hiuen Tsang later. 

General 

In another context the biographer of Hiuen Tsang gives a 
glowing account of the greatness of Nalanda as a centre of higher 
study, the comprehensive range of its intellectual pursuits, and 
the varied attainments of its teachers : 

“ The Sahgharamas of India are counted by myriads, but this is 
the most remarkable for grandeur and height. The priests, belong- 
ing to the convent, or strangers ( residing therein) always reach to 
the number of 10,000, who all study the Great Vehicle, and also (the 
works belonging to) the eighteen sects, 79 and not only so, but even 
ordinary works, such as the Vedas and other books, the Hetuvidya, 
Sabdavidya, the Cikitsavidya, the works on Magic (Atharvaveda) , 
the Sankhya; besides these they thoroughly investigate the 
* miscellaneous, ’ works. 


Teachers 

“ There are 1000 men who can explain twenty collections of 
Sutras and Sastras; 500 who can explain thirty collections, and 
perhaps ten men, including the Master of the Law, who can ex- 
plain fifty collections. Sllabhadra alone has studied and understood 


78. Nanjio. No. 1265. 

79. i.e. of the Hinayfina. 

[ 30 ] 



MlandA 


17? 


the whole number. His eminent virtue and advanced age have 
caused him to be regarded as the chief member of the community. 
Within the Temple they arrange every day about 100 pulpits for 
preaching, and the students attend these discourses without any 
fail, even for a minute (an inch shadow on the dial ) .” 80 

Hiuen Tsang himself has recorded what he saw of the academic 
life of the place together with the names of its prominent teachers 
and the causes of their celebrity in the following terms: 

“In the establishment were some thousands of Brethren, all 
men of great ability and learning, several hundreds being highly 
esteemed and famous; the Brethren were very strict in observing 
the precepts and regulations of their order; they were looked up to 
as models by all India; learning and discussing they found the day 
too short; day and night they admonished each other, juniors and 
seniors mutually helping to perfection. If among them were any 
who did not talk of the mysteries of the Tripitaka such persons, 
being ashamed, lived aloof. Hence foreign students came to the 
establishment to put an end to their doubts and then became cele- 
brated, and those who stole the name (of Nalanda Brother) 81 
were all treated with respect wherever they went. Of those from 
abroad, who wished to enter the schools of discussion the majority, 
beaten by the difficulties of the problems, withdrew; 82 and those who 
were deeply versed in old and modern learning were admitted, 
only two or three out of ten succeeding. 

“ Among the celebrated men of Nalanda who had kept up the 
lustre of the establishment and continued its guiding work, there 
were Dharmapala 83 and Candrapala who gave a fragrance to 
Buddha’s teachings, Gunamati and Sthiramati 84 of excellent repu- 
tation among contemporaries, Prabhamitra of clear argument, and 
Jinamitra of elevated conversation, Jnanacandi'a of model character 
and perspicacious intellect, and 6llabhadra 85 whose perfect excel- 


80. Life, p. 112. 

81. Bogus degrees then were not unknown even in those remote times! 

82. Watters doubts the * gate-keeper's part’ in this ; he thinks it was 
only a process of ‘ obtaining entrance' or ‘admission to the schools of debate. 5 
(168) . But at Vikramasila, the gate-keepers' places were held by distin- 
guished pandits. Vidyabhushan, Ind. Logic , p. 520. 

83. d. c. A.D. 600. A native of Kanci, he taught at Nalanda for thirty 
years and went to Suvarnadvipa towards the end of his life — BEFEO xxx, 
p. 56 n. 3. 

84. Both earlier than Dharmapala. 

85. Abbot of the monastery during H. T.’s visit. 

[ 31 ] 



178 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

lence was buried in obscurity. All these were men of merit and 
learning, and authors of several treatises widely known and highly 
valued by contemporaries.” 86 

Studies described by 1-tsing 

I-tsing states that the number of fully ordained monks in his 
day was 3500 ; together with the novitiates, the number exceeded 
5000. 87 His account of the course of education is of more general 
interest, but was also meant to describe what prevailed in Nalanda. 
It will be seen that it conforms very closely to the indications fur- 
nished in the less systematic account of Hiuen Tsang. After sketch- 
ing the elementary study of the Siddham in the beginning, followed 
by Sutra, Dhatu and Khila, all relating to grammar, I-tsing’s 
account proceeds to describe the study of the Kasilca-vrtti and 
what followed:, 

“This Vrtti-sutra 83 is a work of the learned Jayaditya. He 
was a man of great ability; his literary power was very striking. 
He understood things which he had heard once, not requiring to 
be taught twice. He revered the Three Honourable Ones (i.e., 
Triratna), and constantly performed the meritorious actions. It is 
now nearly thirty years since his death (A.D. 661-662) . After 
having studied this commentary, students begin to learn composi- 
tion in prose and verse, and devote themselves to logic (Hetuvidya) 
and metaphysic (Abhidharmakosa) . In learning the Nyayadvara- 
taraka-sastra, they rightly draw inferences (Amumana); and by 
studying the Jatakamala their powers of comprehension increase. 
Thus instructed by their teachers and instructing others they pass 
two or three years, generally in the Nalanda monastery in Central 
India, or in the country of Valabhi (Wala) in Western India. 
These two places are like Chin-ma, Shih-ch’u, Lungmen, and 
Ch’ue-li 89 in China, and there eminent and accomplished men 
assemble in crowds, discuss possible and impossible doctrines, and 
after having been assured of the excellence of their opinions by 
wise men, become far-famed for their wisdom. To try the sharp- 
ness of their wit (lit. ‘sharp point of the sword’) , they proceed to 
the king’s court to lay down before it the sharp weapon (of their 
abilities); there they present their schemes and show their (politi- 
cal) talent, seeking to be appointed in the practical government. 

86. Watters : Yuan Chwcng, Vol. II, pp. 164-5, 

87. Rel. Em,, p. 97 and m. 1, 

88. Kasikd-vrtti. 

89. Seats of learning in China. 

[321 



NALANDa 


179 


When they are present in the House of Dehate, they in a grave 
demeanour •, sit in the asanas 90 and seek to prove their wonderful 
cleverness. 

“When they are refuting heretic doctrines all their opponents 
become tongue-tied and acknowledge themselves undone. Then the 
sound of their fame makes the five mountains (of India) vibrate, 
and their renown flows, as it were, over the four borders. They 
receive grants of land, and are advanced to high rank. They give 
dissertations upon the great system . 91 After this they can follow 
whatever occupation they like ”. 92 

Disputation 

It will not escape the attention of the reader what a large part 
oral disputation played in the educational programme of those 
days. Scholars of established reputation all the world over, and 
young aspirants to academic knowledge and fame flocked to Nalanda 
to take part in, or at least be witnesses to, the open disputations in 
which theses on points of controversy were stated, defended and 
attacked, reputations made or lost. It was indeed a proud day in a 
scholar’s life when he won his spurs in controversy, together with a 
title and other insignia of academic distinction, which gained him 
a sure place in public esteem as I-tsing states, and as we may sur- 
mise, opened out to the lay pupils the road to material prosperity in 
some secular office in the service of the State. 


The economic basis of this good life of the spirit was well secur- 
ed by the pious devotion of the rulers of the land. The endow- 
ments recorded in the stone inscriptions of Yasovarman and the 
copperplate of Devapala’s reign are only typical of a large class of 
benefactions, the cumulative result of which is very clearly indicated 
to us by the invaluable accounts of the Chinese pilgrims. And the 
inmates of these richly endowed institutions merited the support 
they got not only by their scholarship, but by the modesty and 


90. The italicised translation is that of Jayaswal, JASB vii (1911) p. 312 
for ‘raise their seat’ of Takalcusu. 

91. ' Jayaswal, JASB vii (1911) p. 312, referring also to digvijaya of 
Panditas. Takakusu has here: their famous names are, as a reward, written 
in white on their lofty gates. 

92. Record, pp. 176-178. 


[ 33 ] 



180 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


well-regulated discipline of their personal conduct. Thus says 
Hwui Li: 93 

“The priests dwelling here, are, as a body, naturally (or spon- 
taneously) dignified and grave, so that during the 700 years since 
the foundation of the establishment, there has been no single case of 
guilty rebellion against the rules. 

“The king of the country respects and honours the priests, and 
has remitted the revenues of about 100 villages for the endowment 
of the convent. Two hundred householders in these villages, day 
by day, contribute several hundred piculs of ordinary rice, and 
several hundred catties in weight of butter and milk. 93a Hence 
the students here, being so abundantly supplied, do not require 
to ask for the four requisities. This is the source of the perfection 
of their studies, to which they have arrived.” 

I-tsing puts the number of villages set apart for the support of 
the monastery as 200 in one place and 201 in another. In the 
Record he says : 

“The rites of the monastery of Nalanda are still more strict. 
Consequently the number of the residents is great and exceeds 
3,000. The lands in its possession contain more than 200 villages. 
They have been bestowed (upon the monastery) by kings of many 
generations. Thus the prosperity of the religion continues ever, 
owing to nothing but (the fact that) the Vinaya (is being strictly 
carried out).” 94 

And elsewhere: 95 ‘There are 201 villages which are under 
them; the sovereigns have, from generation to generation, given 
them these men and these lands for their perpetual upkeep’. 

Financial Administration 

Some account is given by I-tsing of the economic administra- 
tion of the vihara and its properties ; we do not get much on the 
income side with which the monk perhaps did not concern him- 
self ; but on the method of regulating expenditure, and the sanc- 
tions behind it we get something of importance and interest: 

“Those who have charge of guarding the granaries and super- 
vision of the lands, though they be two or three, must also send a 
servant for the administration of the granaries. This (servant) 

93. Life, pp. 112-3. 

93a. 1 picul=133y s t6s. 1 catty =160!fcs.— Beal. 

94. Record p. 65. 

95. Ret Em. p. 97. 

134 ] 



NALANDA 


181 


joins hands and makes his declaration; if every body is agreed, 
then it may be done. For the expenses, in truth the defect that 
some one may arbitrarily dispose of it does not exist. If any one 
does not malm public declaration and employs something arbitrarily, 
be it only a twentieth of a bushel of grain, he is forthwith expelled 
by his colleagues. If a person considers himself so powerful, that 
he uses as he pleases the goods of the community, that he decides 
important affairs on his own private authority and without declar- 
ing to the assembly, they call him Kiu-louo-po-U (Kulapati) , 96 
which signifies ‘chief of the family’; that is a grave defect in the 
eyes of the Law of Buddha; that is what men and gods hate alto- 
gether; however useful to the monastery this same person might be 
later on, a very great fault has been definitely committed by him. 
Those who are wise certainly do not act thus .” 97 

Hospitality 

The material life of the monastery stood at a fairly high level 
of comfort, and may be said to compare by no means unfavourably 
with similar institutions maintained in our own day by the Jesuits 
all the world over. The biographer of Hiuen Tsang gives a magni- 
ficent account of the reception accorded to the Master of the Law, 
and the supplies that were granted to him during the period of his 
stay in the vihara. This account is interspersed with the story of 
Hiuen Tsang’s meeting with Silabhadra, of a former dream of J§Ila- 
bhadra that had prepared him well in advance for the arrival of the 
Chinese monk, and of his acceptance of the foreigner as his dis- 
ciple. I reproduce Hwui Li’s account of all this without any change 
in his sequence: 


Reception to Hiuen Tsang 

“On the tenth day he went to the Nalanda temple; the congre- 
gation there had selected four of their number, of distinguished 
position, to go and meet him; journeying in their company about 
seven yojanas he reached the farm-house belonging to the temple. 
It was in ( the village, where) this house (stands), that the honour- 
able Maudgalyayana was bom. Halting here for short refreshment, 
then, with two hundred priests and some thousand lay patrons, who 


96. We see that the term Kulapati when it is applied to a monk is far 
from being an honorific as was thought at one time (Burnouf — Introd, a Vhist, 
du Buddhisme Indian, p. 216, n. 2) . — Chavannes. 

97. jRel. Em. p. 90, 



182 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


surrounded him as he went, recounting his praises, and carrying 
standards, umbrellas, flowers and perfumes, he entered Nalanda. 

“Having arrived there he was joined by the whole body of the 
community, who exchanged friendly greetings with the Master, and 
then placing a special seat by the side of the Sthavira (presiding 
priest), they requested the Master to be seated. The others their 
also sat down. 


Supplies ordered 

“After this the Karmadana was directed to sound the Ghaiita 
and proclaim: ‘Whilst the Master of the Law dwells in the convent, 
all the commodities used by the priests and all the appliances of 
religion are for his convenience, in common with the rest.’ 

Escorted to Silabhadra 

“Then selecting twenty men of middle age, skilful in explaining 
the religious books and of dignified carriage, they deputed them to 
conduct the Master to the presence of Ching-fa-tsong (treasure of 
the good law). This is the same as Silabhadra. 

“The congregation, from the excessive respect they have to 
him, do not venture to call him by his name, but give him the 
appellation of Ching-fa-tsong. 

Hiuen Tsang meets Sildbadra 

“Whereupon, following the rest, he entered to salute this emi- 
nent person. Having seen him, then the chief almoner presented 
him (i.e. Silabhadra) with all things necessary without stint, paying 
his respects according to the proper ceremonial, approaching him 
on his knees and kissing his foot, and bowing his head to the ground. 
The usual greetings and compliments being finished Fa-tsong order- 
ed seats to be brought and spread out, and desired the Master of 
the Law and the rest to be seated. When seated he asked the 
Master of the Law from what part he came; in reply he said: ‘I am 
come from the country of China, desiring to learn from your ins- 
truction the principles of the Yoga-Sastra,’ 

Story of the dream 

“Hearing this, he called for his disciple B’uddhabhadra, whilst 
tears filled his eyes ; now Buddhabhadra was the nephew of 
Fa-tsong, and upwards of seventy years of age, thoroughly versed 
in the Sutras and Sastras, and excellent in discourse. Fa-tsong 

[361 



NALANDA 


183 


addressing him said : ‘ You may recount for the sake of the com- 
pany present, the history of my sickness and sufferings three years 
ago.’ 

“Buddhabhadra having heard the request sobbed aloud and 
wept— but then restraining his tears he declared the past history 
and said : ‘ My Master (Upadhyaya) some time ago was pain- 
fully afflicted with colic. On each occasion when the attack came 
on, his hands and feet were cramped with pain, and he would sud- 
denly cry out with agony as if he had been burned with fire, or 
pierced with a knife; the attack would subside as suddenly as it 
came on; and this went on for twenty years and more. But 
three years ago the severity of his suffering was so hard to 
bear, that he loathed his very life and desired to starve 
himself to death. In the middle of the night he had a dream in 
which he saw three Devas ( heavenly men), one of the colour of 
gold, another of the colour of bright crystal, another as 
white as silver, their appearance and form commanding, of digni- 
fied presence, and clad in light shining garments; approaching the 
Master they asked him, saying; ‘Are you anxious to get free from 
this body of yours? The Scriptures speak, saying, the body' is 
born to suffering; they do not say we should hate and cast away the 
body. You in one of your past births were the king of a certain 
country, and you caused much suffering among living creatures, and 
now you have this suffering as your recompense. Search out 
therefore and examine your past faults, and repent of them 
sincerely; take your affliction quietly and patiently; labour dili- 
gently in explaining the Sutras and Sastras; you will thus get rid of 
your pain yourself; but if you loathe your body, there will be no 
cessation to your sufferings’. 

“The Master having heard these words, paid his adorations with 
the utmost sincerity. 

“Then the golden-coloured one, pointing to the one that shone 
like crystal, said to the Master: ‘Dost thou know or not that this one 
is Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva?’ and then pointing to the silver- 
coloured one he added: ‘and this is Maitreya Bodhisattva’. 

“The Master immediately paid worship to Maitreya and asked 
him, saying: ‘Your servant Sllabhadra has ever prayed that he may 
be born in your exalted palace courts, but he knows not whether 
he will gain his wish or not.’ In reply, he said, ‘You must widely 
disseminate the true law, and then you shall be born there.’ 

“The golden-coloured one said: ‘And I am Manjusrl Bodhi- 
sattva. Seeing that you desired to get rid of your life, contrary to 

[ 37 ] 



184 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


your true interest, we are come to exhort you to the contrary; you 
should rely on our words, and exhibit abroad the true law, the 
Yoga sdstra and the rest, for the benefit of those who have not yet 
heard it. Your body will thus by degrees become easy and you 
will suffer no further pain. Do not overlook that there is a priest 
of the country of China who delights in examining the great Law 
and is desirous to study with you: you ought to instruct him 
carefully.’ 

“ Fa-tsong having heard these words worshipped and answer- 
ed: ‘I shall obey, according to your honourable instructions.’ Hav- 
ing said this, they disappeared. 

“From that time the sufferings of the Master from his disease 
came to an end. 

“The company present hearing this history were all filled 
with wonder at the miraculous event. 

Its Effect on Hiuen Tsang 

“ The Master of the Law having heard for himself this nar- 
rative was unable to control his feelings of sympathy and joy. He 
again paid his respects and said : ‘ If it be so, as you say, then 
Hiuen Tsang ought with his utmost strength to listen to and prac- 
tise (your religious advice). Would that your reverence, of his 
great compassion, would receive me for the purpose of instruction.’ 

Accepted as disciple 

“ Then Fa-tsong asked him further, ‘For how many years have 
you been on your journey?’ He answered, ‘During three years;’ 
and so, as the particulars of his directions, received in his dream, 
were completely fulfilled, he caused the Master of the Law to re- 
joice in their relationship as Master and disciple. 

His Residence 

“ After these words he retired and went to the college of Bala- 
ditya-raja and took up his residence in the dwelling of Buddha- 
bhadra, having four storeys (or, the fourth storey ), who enter- 
tained for seven days. After this he went to reside in a dwelling 
to the north of the abode of Dharmapala Bodhisattva, where he was 
provided with every . sort of charitable offering. Each day he 
received 120 Jambiras, 20 Pin-long-tseu (puga, areca nut), 20 tau- 
k au (nutmegs) , an ounce (tael) of Camphor, and a ching (peck)' 
of Mahasak rice, This rice is as large as the black bean, and when 

[ 38 ] 



NALANDA 


185 


cooked is aromatic and shining, like no other rice alt all. It 
grows only in Magadha, and nowhere else. It is offered only to 
the king or to religious persons of great distinction, and hence the 
name kung-ta-jin-mai (i.e., rice offered to the great householder ) . 

“Every month he was presented with three measures of oil, 
and daily a supply of butter and other things according to his need. 

“ A pure brother (c Upasctka ) and a Brahman, relieved from 
all religious duties, accompanied him with a riding elephant .” 98 

Guests 

The biographer winds up this interesting account of the hospi- 
tality enjoyed by Hiuen Tsang during his stay at Nalanda with a 
general remark which implies that the honours done to the Master 
of the Law formed more or less the norm which prevailed in the 
great vihara for the reception and entertainment of guests. 

“ In the Nalanda convent the abbot entertains a myriad priests 
after this fashion, for besides the Master of the Law there were 
men from every quarter; and where in all their wanderings have 
they met with such courteous treatment as this ?”" Well might a 
modern commentator ask : “Who would not be the guest of the 
abbot of the Nalanda monastery with its six wings, each built by 
a king, all enclosed in the privacy of solid brick ? ” 100 

Daily Routine 

Of the general administrative arrangement in the monastery 
and the details of daily life and discipline observed by its inmates, 
we get some very interesting and concrete details in the observa- 
tions recorded by I-tsing. The officers of the vihara and their 
duties are explained in the following passage, which is unfortunate- 
ly not as full as we should like : 

Officials 

“ All those who have charge of the bolts of the doors take each 
night the seals with which they seal them and return them to the 
president; they should not on any account deposit them in the 
houses of the masters of the temple ( viharasvamin ) or the directors 


98. Life , pp. 105-10. 

99. Life, p. 110. 

100. Cranmer Byng in Life , p. ix. 

[39] 



i86 


JOURNAL OP THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


(karmadana) . Only those who constitute the monastery are call- 
ed masters of the temple; their Sanskrit name is pi-ho-touo-sono- 
mi (viharasvamin) . As to those who, in their turn, enforce the 
rules, guard the doors of the temple, and go to announce the affairs 
to the assembly of the monks, they are called pi-ho-louo-po-luo 
(viharapala) ; the translation of this word is * guardian of the tem- 
ple.’ As to those who sound the kienti (ghartfa) and supervise the 
repasts, their name is kie-mouo-t’ ouo-na (karmadana); the trans- 
lation of this word is ‘those who assign occupations;’ those whom 
they call wei-na speak only in parables.” 101 


Seal 

The mention by I-tsing of seals with which the bolts of doors 
were sealed at night, reminds one of the many sealings of Nalanda 
vihara recovered in the excavations and bearing the inscription : 
c Sn Nalanda-mahavihariyaryabhikm-sa'iighasya’ below a wheel 
flanked by two gazelles, recumbent with head upraised and turned 
to the wheel. 102 It has remained a puzzle why the wheel and 
gazelles symbol which represents Sarnath, the Deer-park where 
the Buddha first ‘turned the wheel of Law’ i.e. delivered the first 
sermon, should make its appearance on a Nalanda seal. The sug- 
gestion may be offered that the sahgha of Nalanda had different 
seals which were employed for different purposes, and that differ- 
ent sacred symbols were engraved on them to distinguish them 
from one another, while the inscription which was common to them 
all identified the seals as those of the particular vihara. This is 
only a surmise, to be confirmed or contradicted by the progress of 
further exploration. 103 We have to remember that the same sym- 
bol is figured in the Bala royal seal also. 


101. Rel. Em. pp. 8S-9. 

102. ASR, EC. 1916-17, p. 43. Also ASR 1916-17, p. 21. 

103. Hirananda Sastri’s explanation that the idea was to suggest a relation 
between the Buddha preaching at Saranath and the hundreds of bhik§us 
preaching at Nalanda is, I think rightly, characterised as far-fetched by Bosch, 
who also points out that the Buddha images in Nalanda are more often in 
the Bhumisparsa mudra which suggests Bodh-Gaya, rather than Sarnath 
(p. 582, ?i. 128) . 

Bloch has noticed, however, a large image of Buddha (4ft high) preach- 
ing the first sermon attended on the sides by Bodhisattvas Maitreyanatha and 
Vasumitra and above by the flying figures of Sariputra and Maudgalyayana. 

JRAS 1909, pp. 441-2. 


[ 40 ] 



NALANDA 


187 


Ordination 

Regarding the rules of ordination and discipline at Nalanda, 
I-tsing says that they conformed generally to what he has describ- 
ed in two other works of his, and adds that the superior of the 
vihdra was appointed solely on considerations of age, irrespective 
of merit : 

“The rules concerning the monks and the novitiates of this 
temple, the statutes on the subject of the renunciation of the world 
and admission into the order, all conform to what is expounded in 
the T chong -fang-lou and the Ki-lc oei-tchoan. 10i In the interior of 
the monastery they are content to take the oldest to give him the 
presidentship and to make him the venerable superior (sthavira ) ; 
they do not trouble themselves about his merit.” 105 

We may also notice in this connection, one detail relating to 
ordination which I-tsing notes as a special feature of Nalanda in 
his Record, one of the works alluded to by him above: 

“But in the Nalanda monastery the priests often receive the 
Upasampada ordination (i.e. full ordination) in the early morning, 
on the first day of the ‘long season’ (17th of the 6th moon, see above) 
when the day has just begun to dawn. They mean to claim 
seniority among those who are ordained in the same manner.’ 106 

Seniority 

The order of seniority so established among the monks was 
no empty form, but it governed the order in the annual allotment 
of residential rooms, and was possibly also otherwise important. 


104. I have not been able to find particulars on the Tchong-fang-lou of 
which the name signifies “written on the country of the middle,” that is to 
say on India. As for Ki-koei-tchoan it is the abridged title of the Nan-hai-ki- 
koei-nei-fa-tchoan which signifies “ Treatise on the inner law (i.e. Buddhism) 
sent from the seas of the south.” This work was composed by I-tsing at the 
same time as the essay we translate, when he was in the country of Sri Vijaya, 
he sent it by the monk Ta-tsin (§ 56) who returned from the southern seas 
to Canton and he sent it thus to China; the treatise on the inner law. .expounds 
many points of discipline of the school of Sarvastivada ; it comprises four 
chapters divided into forty sections ; sections xxxii and xxxiv have been 
translated into French by M. Ryauon Fujishima (JA 1888) .—Chavannes 
(1894) . The whole work is now available as ‘A Record of Buddhist Religion 
in Takakusu’s translation, Oxford, 1896. 

105. Rel. Em. p. 88. 

106. Record, p. 103. 


[ 41 ] 



188 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

This is what I-tsing says on the allotment of accommodation every 
year : 

“ Before the Var§a (Rainy-season) rooms ai’e assigned to each 
member; to the elders (i.e, Sthavira) better rooms are given, and 
thus gradually to the lowest. In the monastery of Nalanda such 
rules are practised at present; the great assembly of priests assigns 
rooms every year. This is what the World-honoured taught us 
himself, and it is very beneficial. Firstly, it removes one’s selfish 
intention; secondly, the rooms for priests are properly protect- 
ed .” 107 


Meetings 

The occasions for summoning general meetings of the monks, 
the manner of summoning them, and the procedure followed at 
such meetings where evidently votes were not taken but the great- 
est measure of general agreement was aimed at, are detailed by 
I-tsing thus : 

“ When the community of monks has a business they convene 
a meeting for regulating it; the guardians of the temple (vihara- 
pala) have orders to go over the lines (of 1'esidences) for announ- 
cing it before each person successively; all should join the palms oi 
the hands and each one express his sentiment. If only one person 
refuses his consent the business cannot be concluded. They do not 
have by any means the custom of striking a hammer before a meet- 
ing for ascertaining the opinion by a show of hands. If they see 
that some one refuses his consent, they persuade him by argument; 
they should not use intimidation or violence in order that under the 
constraint which is inflicted on him he might submit .” 108 

Autonomy in Discipline 

I-tsing also makes it clear that the inmates of the monastery 
were autonomous in the mutual enforcement of their own rules of 
discipline, and not subject to any interference from the State : 

" The spirit of the rules of this temple is very severe and very 
high. Every fortnight, those who regulate the occupations 
'(karmadana ?) and the assistant scribes have orders to go round 
the habitations reading the rules. 

“ The names of the members of the community are not ins- 
cribed in the royal registers. Those who violate the laws are 

107. Record, p. 86. 108, Rel. Em. pp. 89-90. 


[ 42 ] 



NALANDA 


189 


punished for their faults by the assembly itself. In this maimer 
the monks and the novitiates are all afraid of one another , 109 

Worship 

The forms and modes of worship observed in this large esta- 
blishment may be gathered from the following description of 
I-tsing : 

“ In the Nalanda monastery the number of priests is immense, 
and exceeds three thousand; it is difficult to assemble so many to- 
gether in one place. There are eight halls and three hundred 
apartments in this monastery. The worship can only take place 
separately, as most convenient to each member. Thus, it is custo- 
mary to send out, every day, one precentor to go round from place 
to place chanting hymns, being preceded by monastic lay servants 
and children carrying with them incense and flowers. He goes 
from one hall to another, and in each he chants the service, 
every time three or five slokas in a high tone, and the sound is 
heard all round. At twilight he finishes this duty. The precentor 
generally is presented by the monastery with some special gift 
(Puja) . In addition there are some who, sitting alone, facing the 
shrine (Gandhakuti) , praise the Buddha in their heart. There 
are others who, going to the temple, (in a small party) kneel side 
by side with their bodies upright, and, putting their hands on the 
ground, touch it with their heads, and thus perform the Threefold 
Salutation. These are the ceremonies of worship adopted in the 
West (i.e. in India). Old and infirm priests are allowed to use 
small mats whilst worshipping. Though, (in China), the hymns 
in praise of the Buddha have long existed, yet the manner of using 
them for a practical purpose is somewhat different from that adopt- 
ed in India (lit. ‘Brahma-rastra’) . The words which begin with 
'Praise be to the signs of the Buddha,’ and are used when worship- 
ing the Buddha (in China) should be intoned in a long monoton- 
ous note, and the rule is to proceed thus for ten or twenty slokas 
at one time. Further, Gathas such as the one beginning with, ‘O 
Tathagata ! ’ are really hymns in praise of the Buddha .” 110 

Water Clocks : Time-keeping 

.The whole of the daily routine of the vihara was regulated by 
the regular announcement of the hours of the day, by means of 


109. jReZ. Em. p. 91. 


110. Record, pp. 154-56. 



190 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

a ghanta and the system of measuring time by means of water- 
clocks is described in considerable detail by I-tsing more than once. 
Thus in the Record he says : 

“Besides, clepsydrae are much used in great monasteries in 
India. These together with some boys who watch them are gifts 
from kings of many generations, for the purpose of announcing 
hours to the monastics. Water is filled in a copper vessel, in which 
a copper bowl floats. This bowl is thin and delicate, and holds two 
Shang (prasthas) of water (about two pints) . In its bottom a hole 
is pierced as small as a pin-hole, through which the water springs 
up ; this hole is to be made larger or smaller according to the time 
of the year. This must be well set, measuring (the length of) hours. 

“ Commencing from the morning, at the first immersion of the 
bowl, one stroke of a drum is announced, and at the second immer- 
sion, two strokes ; at the third immersion, three strokes. But, at 
the fourth immersion besides four strokes of a drum, two blasts of 
a conch-shell and one more beat of a drum are added. This is 
called the first hour, that is when the sun is at the east (between 
the zenith and the horizon). When the second turn of four im- 
mersions of the bowl is done, four strokes (of a drum) are sound- 
ed as "Before, and a conch-shell is also blown, which is followed by 
two more strokes (of a drum). This is called the second hour, that 
is the exact (beginning of the) horse-hour (i.e. noon) . If the last 
two strokes are already sounded, priests do not eat, and if any one 
is found eating, he is to be expelled according to the monastic 
rites. There are also two houi-s in the afternoon which 
are announced in the same way as in the forenoon. There 
are four hours at night which are similar to those of day. 
Thus division of one day and one night together makes eight hours. 
When the first hour at night ends, the sub-director (Karmadana) 
announces it to all, by striking the drum in a loft of the monastery. 
This is the regulation of the clepsydra in the Nalanda monastery. 
At sunset and at dawn, a drum is beaten (‘one round’) at the out- 
side of the gate. These unimportant affairs are done by the ser- 
vants (‘pure men’) and porters. After sunset till dawn, the priests 
never have the service of striking the Ghanta, nor is it the business 
of those servants (‘pure men’) but of the Karmadana. There is a 
difference of four and five (strokes of the Ghanta), which is fully 
mentioned elsewhere.” 111 

111. Record, pp. 144-5. 

[44] 



NALANDA 


191 


And more briefly elsewhere 112 he writes : 

“In the region of the five Indias, there are only great temples; 
the sovereigns have all directed the establishment therein of water- 
clocks; thanks to this instrument, when the different periods of day 
or night arrive, it is not difficult to comply with what discipline 
enjoins. The night divides itself into three parts; during the first 
and the last, the rules ordain giving oneself up to contemplation 
(dhyana) while singing psalms; in the intervening part they do 
what they like. The explanation of the system of the water-clock 
conforms to what is expounded in the Ki-koei-tchoan .” 113 

Bathing 

One of the uses of the ghantd was to announce the bathing 
hour to the monks, and what I-tsing says of the manner of their 
bathing is as follows : 114 

“There are more than ten great pools near the Nalanda monas- 
tery, and there every morning a ghdnt.i is sounded to remind the 
priests of the bathing-hour. Every one brings a bathing-sheet with 
him. Sometimes a hundred, sometimes a thousand (priests) leave 
the monastery together, and proceed in all directions towards 
these pools, where all of them take a bath.” 

Foreign Visitors 

Of the numberless pilgrims and students that visited Nalanda 
besides the two best known, I-tsing has preserved some names of 
his contemporaries, and it may not be without interest to repro- 
duce them here with the main facts relating to them as recorded 
by him : 

1. Sramana Hiuen-tchao (Prakasamati) — spent 3 years at 
Nalanda (c. A.D. 660) studying under Jinaprabha the Madhyamaka 
sastra and the Sata-sastra. 115 Then under Ratnasimha he learned 
tire 17 points of yoga. Met by I-tsing at Nalanda 110 where he 
came again after much travelling in India. He died in Mid-India 
when he was sixty odd years. 


112. Rel. Em., p. 92. 

113. The Ki-koei~tchoan is no oilier than, the Record. 

114. Record, pp. 108-9. See Cunningham’s plan for the pools near Nalanda. 

115. Rel Em. pp. 17-18. 

116. Ib., pp. 25-26. 


[ 45 ] 



192 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


2. Tao-hi (Srideva). Dwelt some years in Nalanda studying 
Mahayana. He engraved a tablet in Chinese at Mahabodhi, and 
wrote (copied?) more than 400 chapters while at Nalanda. Died 
in India aged over 50. 117 

3. Ngo-li-ye-po-mouo (Aryavarman) , native of Korea. 

Studied sastras of discipline and copied sutras in Nalanda where he 
died aged 70. 118 

4. Hoei-yi, of Korea (c. A.D. 638). Lived long in Nalanda 
for listening to the ‘explications’ there. I-tsing heard of his death 
there from the monks of Nalanda. The Sanskrit works he had 
written (copied?) were all in Nalanda, 119 

5. Fo-t’ouo-ta-mouo (Buddhadharma) of Tokharestan. 

I-tsing met him at Nalanda. 120 

6. Tao-cheng (Candradeva) , A.D. 649. Studied in Nalanda 
and was held in great esteem by the prince royal. 121 

7. Ta-ch’eng-teng (Mahayana Pradxpa). Spent some time in 
Dvaravati and Ceylon, Travelled in South India and lived for 
twelve years in Tamralipti learning Sanskrit before he arrived at 
Nalanda with I-tsing. Died at Kusinagara in the Parinirvana 
temple, aged over sixty. 122 

8. Tao-lin (sSilaprabha) . He reached Nalanda by the sea- 
route and examined the Sutras and the Sastras of the Mahayana 
and the Kosas and spent many years there. 123 He travelled in 
Southern and Western India. 

9. I-tsing himself. Also read Mahayana at Nalanda. 124 Stay- 
ed a year and studied sabda-vidya-sastra. 125 Returned and wor- 
shipped the Mula-gandha koti ; climbed up the Grdhrakuta. 126 
Lived ten years at Nalanda and studied the lives of the Saints. 127 
Took with him Sanskrit texts comprising more than 500,000 stanzas. 

10. Ling-yun (Prajnadeva) . Painted at Nalanda the Maitreya 
and the Bodhidruma. 128 

11. Tche-hong, nephew of Wang Hiuen-tse, the Chinese 
ambassador. In Nalanda he perused and surveyed the texts of the 
Mahayana. 129 


117. Ib., pp. 29-30. 

118. Ib., pp. 32-33. 

119. lb., p. 34. 

120. Ib., p. 38. 

121. Ib., p. 39. 

122. Ib., pp. 71-73. 


123. Ib., p. 101. 

124. Ib., p. 104. 

125. Ib., pp. 121-2. 
120. Ib., p. 123. 

127. Ib., p. 125. 

128. Ib., pp. 126-27, 

129. Ib.. tro. 133, 13R-7 


r 46 T 



NALANDA 


193 


12. Ou-hing (Prajnadeva) (another). Listened to yoga in 
Nalanda ; studied the Kosas and rules of discipline and practised 
the central contemplation (vipasyana) . 130 Companion of I-tsing. 
Died in India. 

Besides the dozen names of his time (including his own) thus 
recorded by I-tsing, there are a few more names of Chinese visitors 
that may be noted. Ou-Kong, a Chinese monk spent three years at 
Nalanda (c. A.D. 765-8) , and his memoirs, though not as interest- 
ing as those of Hiuen Tsang or even Fa-hien, still form a valuable 
supplement to them. 131 Ki-ye, who travelled in India c. 970 A.D. 
and has left a compendious description of the state of Buddhism 
in India in his time, visited Nalanda among other monasteries and 
noted that all of them had entrances facing West. 132 During the 
years A.D. 984-87. T’se-hoan, a monk of the division of Wei, seems 
to have visited Nalanda, though there is some uncertainty about 
this, due to the confusion introduced in the names in the text by its 
Song redactor. 133 

Influence of Nalanda Abroad 

Many doubtless went out from Nalanda to different countries, 
and particularly to China to assist in the great work of translation 
of Scriptures from Sanskrit that went on for several generations 
there. Some of them are mentioned elsewhere in this paper; but 
our knowledge of them is bound to be relatively meagre. 134 

We have, with the aid of the Chinese pilgrims and the results 
of archaeological research, tried to gain some idea of what Nalanda 
was like in the heyday of its splendour, how it grew to be what it 
became; we have seen that wanton destruction by a ruthless in- 
vader extinguished its great light for ever. There are many gaps 
in our knowledge, some of which one hopes may yet be filled by 
the further progress of research. Of all the centres of learning in 
Ancient and Mediaeval India, and these were many scattered all 
over the land, we have most data about Nalanda, which was the 
greatest of such centres, not only for the study and spread of Bud- 


130. Ib., p. 145. 

131. JA : 1895, Sep.-Oct. p. 358. 

132. BEFEO, ii, p. 259. 

133. Chavannes : Les Inscriptions Chinoises de Bodh Gaya, App. xiv. 

134. See Nos. 7, 16, 51 of Appendix I, and 154 and 159 of Appendix IX of 
Nanjio, Catalogue, Also Journal of the Madras University, xii, pp. 187-92, 

[ 47 ] 



194 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

dhism in its various phases, but for the pursuit of all Indian reli- 
gious and philosophical systems. The history of the University of 
Nalanda practically spans a whole millennium, a period of wonder- 
ful and sustained endeavour and achievement in the realm of the 
spirit. 


Buddhism in Nalanda. 

But when all is said, Nalanda is important more as a centre of 
Buddhism and for the tremendous influence it exerted on the 
thought and religion of the Eastern countries than for anything else. 
It is therefore necessary before we close this study to seek to deter- 
mine with some precision the role of Nalanda in the evolution of 
Buddhist thought and practice in the four or five centuries during 
which it held the position of the most renowned world-centre of 
Buddhism. For Tibet during the middle ages Nalanda was envelop- 
ed in a mysterious haze of holiness; it was the source of all know- 
ledge- Taranath traces all that is good in Mahayana in his estima- 
tion, its famous teachers, sacred texts and doctrines, its most cele- 
brated reformers, all to Nalanda without any hesitation. This 
seems to be borne out also by the data furnished by Hiuen Tsang 
who says that all the bhiksus studied the Mahayana at Nalanda, and 
counts Dharmapala, the pupil of Dignaga and famous divine of the 
Yogacarya school of Asahga, and his own teacher Silabhadra from 
whom he heard an exposition of the Yogaearabhumisastra, among 
the holders of the highest place in Nalanda. Again, of the texts col- 
lected by him and translated under his supervision, the bulk must 
have been doubtless obtained at Nalanda; and among them we 
find only seventeen titles belonging to the Hinayana while not less 
than fifty-eight books are Mahayanist texts, some of which fall to 
be classed among Tantric texts like Vajrapracchedika Prajndpara- 
mita the chief scripture of mantra-Buddhistic Shin-gon-sliu in 
Japan, the Amoghapdsahrdaya, and so on. 135 

Mahay ana and Hinayana 

I-tsing, however, who belonged himself to the Hinayana school 
of Mulasarvastivadins, makes the categorical statement: “ In Nor- 
thern India and the islands of the Southern Sea, they generally 
belong to the Hinayana,” 133 and Takakusu in Ms summary of I-tsing’s 
introduction has noted that according to him the Arya-mulasarvasti- 


135. Bosch, p. 537 and Nanjio, Catalogue, p. 435. 

136. Record p. 14. 


148 ] 



NALANDA 


195 


vada-nikaya was most flourishing in Magadha i.e, the region of 
Nalanda. 137 And we have seen above that I-tsing devotes particular 
attention to the rules of discipline prevailing in the Nalanda 
Vihara, and there is no reason for us to think that the ten years 
he spent at Nalanda were anything but a very pleasant period of 
his life spent among most acceptable spiritual companions who had 
the same outlook as himself in matters of religion. 

I-tsing surely knew what he was speaking about and made no 
mistake; and it is unlikely that in the short interval between Hiuen 
Tsang’s departure and the arrival of I-tsing there was any wholesale 
change over from Maliayana to Hxnayana; in fact, the whole trend 
in Buddhist history is the other way about, The truth of the 
matter is that it is wrong to postulate any sharp difference between 
the two main yanas of early Buddhism which were closely bound 
together by many subtle bonds from the beginning; 138 and apparent- 
ly it was quite possible for the same set of facts to be described in 
such different words as Hiuen Tsang and I-tsing adopt about 
Nalanda, each naturally selecting and stressing the features that 
struck him as the most significant. Krom has pointed out admira- 
bly how, with the development of the eclectic and idealist philoso- 
phy of the Yogacara school under the leadership of Asanga, even 
such distinction as was once recognised between Hlnayana and 
Mabayana steadily lost its significance. He says: 139 “The masters 
of the Yogacarya had already given the example; not following one 
system but drawn from all creeds, was the doctrine expounded by 
Asanga, so that the sravakas (Hinayanistic monks) became 
believers, and it is expressly related of Vasubandhu that 
he had studied the sastras of the eighteen sects, the 
points of difference between sutras and vinaya of the 
various schools and even the chief works of the Tlrthyas. 
We have already seen above, that according to I-tsing the same sect 
belonged in one place to the Hmayana and in another to the Maha- 
yana, while the same author further mentions as the only systems 
of the Mahayana the two great schools of philosophy, Madhyamika 
and Yogacarya. It is thus clearly proved how much the distinc- 
tions between the sects had been pushed aside by the schools of 
philosophy in the Church. The particular tenets of the sects lost 
their meaning except in so far as they found a place as funda- 
mental principles in one of the systems of philosophy.” 

137. lb. p. xxiv. 

138. JA 11:8 (1916) p. 28 cited by Krom and Bosch, 

139. Barabvdur ii, pp. 327-8. 


[ 49 ] 



196 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

We have seen already that Hiuen. Tsang’s own studies were 
not confined to Yogacarya texts hut included some Hmayana texts, 
and even B'rahminical sastras. We can well understand, as Bosch 
has observed, 140 that in the midst of men who did not despise the 
study of Hinayanist texts though they professed Mahayana as 
their creed, I-tsing might have felt quite at home, and when he re- 
corded his impression that the Sarvastivadins counted the largest 
number of followers in Magadha, he might have had in mind con- 
siderable numbers of sects which nominally belonged to the Hina- 
yana but studied Asahga’s system quite as much as the declared 
Mahayanists. I-tsing himself was far from bfeing a narrow Hina- 
yanist, and among the books he took with him from India to China, 
nearly one half were Mahayana texts, and some were definitely 
Tantric in character and included a number of Dharanis. K1 

Tantrayana 

In fact, a new Tantrayana was growing out of the Yogacarya 
System at this period in Nalanda, and this new development did not 
take place without opposition. Discussing this very problem of the 
relation of the Tantrayana to Yogacarya system in the Buddhism of 
Barabudur, Krom has rightly observed: 142 “ The evolution of reli- 
gion and philosophy does not take place in such a way that at some 
given moment we can draw a line at the point where an old opinion 
is unanimously dropped and a new one taken up. The one glides 
unperceived into the other and gradually the believer’s mind be- 
comes ripe for new ideas, accepted first by a few, then by more and 
finally by the majority.” We have many indications besides those 
already noted that Buddhism in Nalanda was passing through this 
type of transition in the seventh and eighth centuries A.D. 143 We 
have a curious and significant incident narrated by the biographer 


140. p. 540. 

141. Rel. Em., pp. 194-6. 

142. ii. p. 381. 

143. P. Mus (BEFEO xxxii p. 328 and n. 1) citing A. K. Coomaraswami 
expresses the opinion that Nalanda’s role in the history of Buddhist thought 
and practice was not so great as Bosch and Stutterheim would make it, and 
that Nalanda only relayed the developments that took place in Kashmir .and 
transmitted them to the countries of the Far East. I am unable to share this 
belief in the face of the volume of evidence relating to Nalanda, and the 
relative paucity of our knowledge regarding Kashmir Buddhism. Vxradeva 
went from Peshawar to Nalanda to attain the crown of his career. See Ante 
p. 166. 


[ 50 ] 



NALANDA 


197 


of Hiuen Tsang which deserves attention here : 144 “ Siladitya-raja 
had constructed a Vihara covered with brass plates by the side 
of the Nalanda monastery, about a hundred feet in height. It was 
renowned through all countries. 

* Sky-flower 3 Doctrine 

“The king after returning from the subjugation of Konyodha 
(Ganjam?) came to Orissa. The priests of this country all study 
the Little Vehicle, and do not believe in the Great Vehicle. They 
say it is a system of the “sky-flower” heretics, and was not deliver- 
ed by Buddha. 

“When they saw the king after his arrival, they entered into 
conversation and said : ‘ We hear that the king has built by the 
side of the Nalanda convent a Vihara of brass, a work magnificent 
and admirable. But why did not your majesty construct a Kapalika 
temple, or some other building of that sort ’ ? 

* The king answered : * What mean you by these words of re- 
proach ? ' 

In reply they said: ‘The Monastery of Nalanda and its ‘sky 
flower’ 145 doctrine is not different from the Kapalika sect: this is 
our meaning.” We seem to have a clear indication here that Maha- 
yana at Nalanda was moving in the direction of Tantrayana, not 
unmixed with Saivism. 

Tibet: Origin of Lamaism 

Taranatha attributes to Nalanda, as we have seen, the greatest 
influence on the growth and spread of Buddhism in many lands. In 
the first half of the eighth century Santa-raksita, Padmasambhava, 
and Kamala-slla, famous teachers of Nalanda, the two latter being 
teachers of Tantras, were invited to Tibet by king Kri-sring-deu- 
tsan (A.D. 728-786) : they are said to have succeeded in founding 
the Lamaist church there and thus displaced the older state reli- 
gion. 146 This Tibetan tradition is a further unmistakable proof of the 
Tantric direction taken by Buddhism at Nalanda after the seventh 


144. pp. 158-59. 

145. The sky-flower doctrine is fully explained in the Surangama Sutra. 
It ""was evidently a doctrine developed in the Nalanda monastery, as this 
Sutra was framed there. Hie doctrine is simply that all objective phenomena 
are only, like sky- flowers, unreal and vanishing — Beal. 

146. Vidyabhusan, Indian Logic, pp. 323 and 327 ; Bosch p. 543. Sankalia, 
pp. 117-20. 


[ 51 ] 



198 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

century. We must also note the remarkable expressions in the 
Nalanda copper-plate of Devapaladeva by which all the arya 
bhikisus are held to be a group of Tantrika-bodhisatvas : tantri- 
kabodhisatvaganasya . . . .caturddiSaryabliiksimnghasya. “From 
this it is clear,” says Bosch, “not only that the bhiksus had become 
Tantrists, but Mahayanist Bodhisattvas, once held in great honour, 
had served their purpose, and a new generation of Tantric deities 
had been elevated to the throne.” 147 Hie same writer draws at- 
tention to the evidence from the Chinese translations of Buddhist 
texts pointing in the same direction, and confirming the conclusions 
indicated so far. In the seventh century Hinayana texts still form- 
ed a considerable part of the books brought by pilgrims from 
Nalanda to China; but all the texts translated in the eighth century 
by Subhakarasimlia (716-35 A.D.) , a sramana who went to China 
from the Nalanda monastery, 148 were Mahayanist texts; finally, in 
the tenth century, of the 118 books translated by Dharmadeva alias 
Fa-hien (973-1001) , also an arrival from Nalanda in China, about 
a hundred were productions of the Tantrayana. 149 

Kd la-cakra-yana 

There was one more step taken by Nalanda Buddhism before 
its final disappearance. This seems to have occurred towards the 
end of the tenth century when Kala-cakra Buddhism was received 
into Nalanda. This creed of mysterious origin was suffused with 
Vaisnavism, and the story of its introduction into Nalanda is de- 
scribed in a Tibetan work of the sixteenth century. In the render- 
ing of Cgoma de Koros, the story reads as follows: 150 “He (a cer- 
tain pandit called Tsilu or Chilu) then came to Nalanda, in Central 
India, (S. Madhya) . Having designed over the door of the Bihar 
the ten guardians (of the world), he wrote below them thus: 

‘ He that does not know the chief first Buddha, ( Adi-Buddha ) , 
knows not the circle of time (Kala-Chakra) . 

‘ He, that does not know the circle of time, knows not the 
exact enumeration of the divine attributes. 

‘ He, that does not know the exact enumeration of the divine 
attributes, knows not the supreme intelligence (S. Vajra dhara 
jndna ) . 


147. pp. 543-4. 

148. Nanjio Catalogue , p, 444. 

149. Vo., p. 450. 

150. JASB ii (1833) pp. 57-8. 


[ 52 ) 



NALANDA 


199 


* He, that does not know the supreme intelligence, knows not 
the Tantrika principles (Tantra Y&nan). 

* He that does not know the Tantrika principles, and all such’, 
are wanderers in the orb of transmigrations, and are out of the 
way (or path) of the supreme triumphator (S. Bhagavdn Vajra 
dhara). 

* Therefore, Adi-Buddha must be taught by every true b-Lama 
(S. Gunc, a superior teacher, religious guide), and every true dis- 
ciple who aspires to liberation (or emancipation) must hear them.’ 
Thus wrote he : 

“Hie venerable (the Lord) Narotapa (Narottama?) being at 
that time the principal (S. TJpadhydya) of the Bihar; he together 
with five hundred pandits, disputed with him, but when they saw 
that he excelled them all in disputing, they fell down at his feet, 
and heard of him Adi-Buddha; then this doctrine was much pro- 
pagated.” 

Thus Nalanda accepted a creed which had nothing in common 
with Buddhism of old except the name. This change over to forms 
of belief and practice which differed little from the surrounding 
iSaiVism and Vaisnavism of the land, and these in some of their 
most degenerate forms, must have contributed not a little to the 
weakening of the distinct position that belonged to Buddhism be- 
fore this change. Henceforth Buddhism loses its identity and min- 
gles with the incoherent mass of popular beliefs and superstitions 
characteristic of the vulgar side of Hinduism. 

Influence in the Islands 

The chief stages in the transformation of Buddhism at Nalanda 
were reflected in ‘the kingdoms of the Southern Seas’ as the Chi- 
nese called them, which, as we have seen, maintained a constant 
intercourse with Nalanda. In the splendid article on the Nalanda 
copper-plate of Devapala, to which we have referred so frequently 
before, Bosch has gone into this question at some length, and we 
could do no better than present his main conclusions in his own 
words: 151 “putting side by side the important moments in the His- 
tory of the monastery of Nalanda and those in the history of Bud- 
dhism in the Archipelago, we see that the path followed by religion 
sHSrivijaya, and later in Java, runs parallel with the li ne of deve- 
lopment that Buddhism takes at Nalanda Buddhism enters 

151. Pp. 553-5 (Translated from the Dutch original) . 

[53] 



200 


JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 


Sri Vijaya after the rise of the great monastery. The period of 
the finest bloom of Nalanda (seventh century) is also the 
time when the University of Palembang attains great lus- 
tre. The gradual changes of opinion regarding the true 
doctrine, starting from the Hinayana and proceeding along 
the Mahayanist Yogacarya to a further stage of Tantrism 
already highly coloured by 'Saivism, and ending in a fully 
degenerate Bhairava-cult, these shiftings we see repeated at Sri 
Vijaya, and later in Java, in the same order and with the same 
tempo. 152 Only on one point is there a difference to be noted; while 
the role of Nalanda is irrevocably played out after the end of the 
twelfth century, Buddhism in Java has still before it some cen- 
turies of comparative prosperity.” 

In one respect perhaps these observations of Bosch, made in 
1925, need a slight amendment in the light of more recent resear- 
ches; the larg% stone Buddha of Bukit Seguntang in Palembang 
raises a strong presumption that the introduction of Buddhism 
there must Have occurred much earlier than Bosch suggests, and 
most probably from the region of the Krsna delta. But the later., 
influence of Nalanda on the Archipelago is undeniable, and Bosch’s 
estimate of it may well be accepted as substantially correct. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology, Kern Institute, 1926, pp. 12-3, 
1928, pp. 19-20. 

Archaeological Survey of India — Annual Reports— Eastern Circle 1915-16, 
1916-1917, 1917-18, 1918-19, 1919-20 ; Central Circle 1920-21. Gene- 
ral for same years, and 1921-2 and subsequent years. 

Beal: Buddhist records of the Western World, 2 Vols. (n. d. London). 

Beal: Life of Hiuen Tsang (London, 1914). 

Beal: Two Chinese Buddhist inscriptions found at Buddha Gaya — JRAS 
N. S', xiii (1881) pp. 552-72 (not much use now) . 

Bernet-Kempers, A. J. : The Bronzes of Nalanda and Hindu- Javanese Art 
pp. 1-88 (Bijdragen K. I. Deel, 90, 1933). 

Bhattasali, N. K. : The new Nalanda stone inscription of YaSovarmadeva 
(Modern Review 1931, September, pp. 306-7). 

Bloch : The modern name of Nalanda (JRAS. 1909, pp, 440 if) , 

Bosch, F. D. K. : En Oorkonde van het Groote Klooster te Nalanda (Tijds- 
chrift voor Indische Taal-, Land, en Volkenkunde Ixv ; 1925, 
509-588). 


152. I have gone into this question in some detail in a forthcoming paper 
on Sri Vijaya. 


[ 54 ] 



NALANDA 201 

Bose, Phanindranath : Indian Teachers of Buddhist Universities (Adyar, 

1923)* 

Buchanan-Hamilton ed. Martin: Eastern India I (1838) pp. 94-5 earliest 

modern account of Baragang, the site of Nalanda). 

Chavannes: I-tsing’s Memoire sur les iteligieux Eminents (Paris, 1894). 

Chavannes : Les Inscriptions Chinoises de Bodh Gaya (Revue de t’Histoire 
des Religions, Vol, 34, 1896 pp. 1-58). 

Csoma de Koros : Note on the origin of the Kala-cakra and Adi Buddha 
systems, (JASB, ii (1883), pp. 57-9, 

Cunningham : Archaeological Survey of India, I (1871) , 

Cunningham : Ancient Geography of India, ed. Majumdar Sastri, Calcutta. 

Fujishima, Rayauon: Deux chapitres extraits des Memoires dT-tsing sur 

son voyage dans ITnde (Journal Asiatique, viii,12. (1888), 
pp. 441 if, 

Ghosh, A.: Nalanda Plate of Samudragupta, EX, xxv. pp. 50-53. 

Ghosh, A.: A Guide to Nalanda, (Delhi, 1939) contains an excellent plan of 
the excavations. 

Heras, H. : The Royal Patrons of Nalanda— JBORS xiv (1928), pp. 1-23. 

Heras, H. : A note on the excavations at Nalanda (JBBRAS, N.S., ii (1926), 
pp. 214-6) . 

Hirananda Sastri : The Nalanda Copper-plate of Devapaladeva (Ep. Ind. 
xvii (7), July 1924). 

Hirananda Sastri : Nalanda in Ancient Literature (Fifth, 1928, Indian 
Oriental Conference, 1930, pp. 386-400), 

Hirananda Sastri:, The clay seals of Nalanda, (El, xxi, pp. 72-77). 

Jayaswal, K. P. : Elucidation of certain passages in I-tsing (JASB (N. S. 

vii) 1911, June pp. 309-12). 

Kielhorn, F. : A Buddhist stone inscription from Ghosrawa, IA. xvii (1888), 
pp. 307-12. 

Kimura : The shifting of the centre of Buddhism in India, Jl. of Dept, of 

Letters, Calcutta, i. 

Kuraishi, M. H, : Short guide to the Buddhist Remains Excavated at 
Nalanda, (1931). 

Marshall, Sir J. : 111. Lond. News, May 5, 1928, p. 781, only illustrations of 
(1) 18-armed Tara, (2) Bronze votive stupa, (3) Seated Bodhi- 
sattva, (4) excavations— general view, (5) great stupa, (6) Plaster 
reliefs from great stupa. 

Mazumdar, N. G. : 1. Nalanda copper-plate grant of Devapala (Varendra 

Research Society monograph-1, (1926), 2. Nalanda Inscrip- 
tion of Vipulasrlmitra, (El, xxi, pp. 97-101). 

Nanjio, Buniyu: A catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka (Oxford, 1883). 

Page, J. A. : Nalanda excavations (JBORS, ix, 1923, pp. 1-22) . 

Raverty; Taba,kat-i~Nasiri of Mihaj-us-Siraj (Calcutta, 1864)* 

[55] 



202 JOURNAL OF THE MADRAS UNIVERSITY 

Samaddar : University of Nalanda (Cal. Rev. Ap. 1024, pp. 39 ff ) . 

Samaddar : Glories of Magadha (Patna, 1922). 

Sankalia, H. D. : The University of Nalanda (Madras, 1934). 

S chief ner : . Taranatha's Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien (St. Peters- 
burg, I860) . 

Smith, V. A.: Nalanda (ERE, Vol. ix, pp. 126-7). 

Takakusu : I-tsing’s A Record of the Buddhist Religion as practised in 

India and the Malay Archipelago (Oxford, 1896) . 

Vidyabhusan, S. C. : I. Indian Logic, mediaeval school (Calcutta, 1909), 
2. History of Indian Logic (Calcutta, 1921). 

Watters: On Yuang Chwang— 2 Vols. (London, R.A.S., 1904, 1905). 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

My thanks are due to Rao Bahadur K. N. Dikshit, Director General of 
Archaeology in India, for his securing me the photograph of the stone sculp- 
ture of Buddha in Dharmacakra Mudra and for permission to reproduce the 
photographs and plans the copyright for which rests with the Department 
Archaeology of the Government of India; my thanks are also due to^Dr. 
S. Paramasivan of the Madras Museum for permission to reproduce two 
photographs from his collection. 


[ 56 ] 




Fig. 1. — Plan of Site, after Cunningham. 






;* < " 

“<? it 

V< y ,>i (>" ' v\ 




Fig, 2. — Bronze image of Buddha 
(ASI 1917-18, PL XIV-aL 






Fig. 3, — Bronze Yamantaka (p. 169) (ASI. CC, 1.20-21. Pi. I). 






Fig. 4. — Excavations — General View. 

— Photo by Dr . S . Paramasivan 



Fig. 5. — An early stucco figure 
(p. 171) 

— Photo by Dr. S, Paramasivan 







' 0 - 4 ' I ; 













