THE 

PANDYAN KINGDOM 


BY 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 



THE 

PANDYAN KINGDOM 


From the Earliest Times to the 
Sixteenth Century 


BY 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 


LONDON 
LUZAC & CO. 

46, Great Russell Street, W. C. 1. 
1929 



PRINTED IN INDIA 
BY GEORGE KENNETH 
AT THE DIOCESAN PRESS, VEPERY, MADRAS 

1929— C7805 



PREFACE 


This book is an amplification, with such revision as has 
been found necessary, of lectures delivered by me at 
the University of Madras in 1926. 

Pandyan antiquities have, somehow, failed to interest 
scholars as much as the history of the Pallavas and the 
Cholas. The relative seclusion of the country, and the 
fact that the Pandyas had at no stage any great influence 
on the main course of Indian history, may account for 
this comparative neglect. A complete view of the story 
of South India, however, cannot be obtained until the 
history of the Pandyas is fully worked out. 

Though the last twenty or thirty years have been 
marked by the discovery of much new material for the 
reconstruction of Pandyan history, we are still by no 
means sufficiently equipped to attempt a full and satis- 
factory account of the Pandyan Kingdom. This work 
makes no claim to be considered such. It aims, rather, 
at a preliminary survey of the present state of our know- 
ledge on the subject, suggesting tentative reconstructions 
wherever possible, and furnishing an outline to be filled 
in by further study and research. Much attention has 
necessarily been devoted to chronology and political 
history; society, religion and government have been, 
however, briefly discussed in relation to each section of 
the study. 

Much work yet remains to be done before the history 
of the Pandyas can be fully understood. The internal 
chronology of the Sangam Age, the history of about two 
centuries before the Pandya restoration under Kadungon 
and the transition from the conditions of the Sangam 
Age to those of the First Empire, the detailed history of 



iv 


PREFACE 


the Kings of the Pandya line in the Chola- Pandya 
period, and the dynastic relations of the Kings of the 
Second Empire, are some of the larger problems that 
await solution. Many small questions relative^ to the 
wars and campaigns have to be settled before the changes 
in the political geography of South India can be traced 
with accuracy. The Kongu chieftains with Pandya 
names and the Pandyas of Uccangi present other problems 
of considerable interest and no less difficulty. Only 
recently has the publication of the texts of inscriptions 
been started, and a careful study of these is necessary 
for a complete understanding of the social life of the 
country, at least under the Second Empire. 

Many friends have helped me in various ways in the 
preparation of this book, and to them all I take this 
opportunity of expressing my gratitude. Sir T. Desi- 
kachari very kindly allowed the use of his library and of 
the list of Pudukkottah inscriptions and their texts (un- 
published). Messrs. K. Swaminathan, B.A. (Oxon.), V. 
Saranatha Aiyangar, M.A., and C. S. Srinivasachari, M.A., 
have gone through the book at various stages and offered 
useful suggestions. Mr. S. R. Balasubramania Aiyar, 
B.A., L.T., read the proofs, verified the references, and 
offered helpful criticism ; he also assisted me in preparing 
the index. Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar kindly dis- 
cussed with me his views on the Kalabhras and some 
other matters. A special word of thanks is due to Rao 
Bahadur Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, University 
Professor of Indian History, for much valuable advice and 
for the kind interest he has evinced in the publication. 


National College, 
Trichinopoly. 
June 10, ig2g. 


K. A. N. 



CHAP. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

iii 

1-12 


Preface 

I. Introductory. Sources ... 

II. Early References. The Age of the San* 

GAM ... ... ... ... ... 13-24 

III. The Pandyan Kingdom in the Sangam Age... 25-36 

IV. The Transition to the First Empire. The 

Kalabhras ... ... ... ... 37-49 

V. The First Empire... ... ... ... 50-67 

VI. The First Empire.— { Continued ) ... ... 68-82 

VII. The First Empire. — ( Concluded ) ... ... 83-98 

VIII. The Chola Conquest ... ... ... 99-117 

IX. The end of Chola Ascendancy : Civil War 

and Recovery ... ... ... ... 118-137 

X. The Pandyas of the Second Empire (1190- 

1238) 138-156 

XL Maravarman Sundara { acc . a.d. 1238)— Jata- 

varman Sundara { acc . a.d. 1251) ... ... 157-173 

XII. Jatavarman Vira Pandya { acc . a.d. 1253)— 

Maravarman Kulasekhara { acc . a.d. 1268)... 174-187 

XIII. Jatavarman Sundara Pandya ( acc . 1276)— 

Maravarman Vikrama Pandya { acc . 1283)— 

Social Life at the end of the Thirteenth 
Century— Marco Polo ... ... ... 188-200 

XIV. The Last Years of Maravarman Kula- 

sekhara (1268) — Jatavarman VIra Pandya 
( acc . 1296-7) — Jatavarman Sundara PIndya 
( acc . 1303) — The Muhammadan Invasion ... 201-214 

XV. Administration and Social Life under the 

Pandyas of the Second Empire ... ... 215-239 

XVI. The Fourteenth Century and Later — De- 


CLINE AND End ... 


... 240-252 

Additional Notes ... 

• • (P 

... 253-257 

Chronological Summary 

i«» 

... 258-260 

Bibliography 

fit 

... 261-263 

Index 

• W • 

... 265-277 



NOTE ON TRANSLITERATION AND 
DIACRITICAL MARKS. 

LONG vowels are indicated thus : a. Generally, c repre- 
sents ^ ; but forms well established in usage like Chola 
Chidambaram, etc., have been retained. The following 
may also be noted : d stands for ^ ; 1 for «r ; 1 for ; 
n for am ; n for © ; r for p ; s for 51 ; s for <*r and t for ?• 
The form Pandya is used, though, strictly speaking, it 
must be written Pandya. The Tamil passages quoted 
in the text have been, with a few insignificant exceptions, 
transliterated in the Additional Notes at the end. 



CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY: SOURCES 

IN recent years there has been a considerable accession 
of fresh material for the study of South Indian History 
in general, and of the Pandyan kings in particular. But 
no attempt has been made till now to narrate the history 
of the Pandyas in a continuous sketch and on scientific 
lines . 1 The period to be covered in this book ranges 
over several centuries and at every step we come across 
difficult questions that could be answered, if at all, only 
by a careful balancing of several rival points of view. 
The treatment of the subject must consequently be 
selective and such as to avoid fruitless controversy. 

We have no need to concern ourselves with general 
questions of the origin of the Dravidians and their 
culture . 2 * * The student of Pandyan history is not directly 

1 There is of course the valuable sketch of Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar in his 
Ancient Dekhan . A commendable attempt has recently been made by 
Pandit Harihara Aiyar of the Tirtbapati High School, Ambasamudram* to 
present the story in Tamil in three small booklets. The old sketches of 
Wilson (J.R.A.S,), Nelson ( Madura Country) and Sewell (Antiquities, 
vol.-ii) are now much antiquated, 

2 The ‘ Dravidian problem * has been much debated from various 
points of view in the pages of the Tamilian Antiquary (defunct) . See also 
Caldwell, Comparative Grammar, Introduction ; M, Srinivasa Aiyangar, 

Tamil Studies , Essays I— III ; Slater, Dravidian Element in Indian Culture . 
Kanakasabhai, The Tamils 1800 Years Ago , pp. 493., makes several guesses 
that do not appear to have received confirmation. The main questions are— 

were the pre-Aryans a homogeneous or composite race ? Were they ' indi- 
genous and aboriginal 5 (Fergusson) or were they immigrants, wholly or in 
part, from elsewhere ? The attempt to support the Lemurian theory from 
references to Tamil literature, e.g. £ilappadikdram r si, 11. 18-20, cannot 

be considered satisfactory. 



2 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


concerned with the answers to questions like the follow- 
ing — who were the Tamils? Were they indigenous or 

foreign to the land where we find them in historical 
times ? Did they come by land from the north or the 
south, or by sea ? But it is necessary for us to Be clear 
in our minds about the relation in which Tamil culture 
stands to the culture of the rest of India. The question 
relates not so much to the extent of culture among the 
Tamils before the advent of Sanskrit influences as to 
whether the blending of Aryan with pre- Aryan culture 
was in essence a different process in the South from 
what it was in Northern India. The persistent independ- 
ence of the Tamil idiom (and to a less degree of other 
Dravidian languages) in the face of Sanskrit, is in strik- 
ing contrast with the almost total disappearance of non- 
Sanskritic vernaculars in the north of India. On the 
other hand we have at present no traces of any literary 
work in the Tamil language, however ancient, which 
does not betray Sanskrit influence to some extent. We 
may conclude that the results of Aryan penetration into 
the south were more cultural than racial and the pre- 
Aryan Inhabitants survived the ‘ conquest ’ in sufficient 
strength to retain their own language and many of their 
old habits and methods of life, with the consequence, 
that the resulting culture was a real blend of the 
Aryan and Dravidian elements which shows several 
points of difference from the culture of the remaining 
parts of India which were more thoroughly Aryanized. 1 


1 See Tamil Studies , pp. 193-5 ; ICanakasabhai (p. 52) no doubt much 
overrated the attainments of Dravidians (and traced them to China !) while 
Caldwell (i Comparative Grammar , pp. 113-1) is nearer the truth. Dr. Slater’s 
book on ‘ Dravidian Elements ’ betrays maffy signs of an utter misreading 
of the story of Indian culture. The attempted reconstruction of a pre- 
Aryan Tamil Polity before the days of Agaslya has not been a success. See, 
however, Senathi-Raja in 1887, pp. 558 ff, and the Tamilian 



SOURCES 


3 


The sources of Pandyan history may now be con- 
sidered. The value of indigenous literature for the 
historian of India has generally been somewhat under- 
rated. There are, it is true, few professedly historical 
works of a contemporary character and for the most part 
we have to rely on casual references to historical events 
in works of general literature or to winnow a large mass 
of legend in search of a grain of fact. But with patience 
and care it may be found that many useful suggestions 
are derived from these works. The local legends center- 
ing round Madura exist in three versions of which the 
earliest dating from the ninth or the tenth century A.D. 
is the T iruvilaiyadal Puranctm of Perumbarrappuiiyur 
Nambi, the other versions being another and much 
later work of the same name by Paranjotimunivar and the 
Sanskrit Stkalapurana known as the Hfilasyamahaimya. 
The two later works give a list of seventy-three or 
seventy-four kings forming one continuous line of rulers 
while the earliest version only mentions, and that very 
casually, seven kings of the family. The set lists of the 
later PmSncts were very early recognized to be worthless 
for purposes of history ; 1 in fact most of the names are, on 
the face of it, inventions of later times. But several 
of these stories have a quaint interest for the general 
student who sees here almost the same tendencies at work 
as produced the legends of Regal Rome. The older 
Tiruvilaiyadal thus gives a story (No. 12) in explanation 
of the name Madakkulakllmadurai which we find in 


Antiquary. Also Mr. P.T. Srinivasa Aiyangar, ‘ Pre-Aryan Tamil Culture ’ 
in the Journal oi Indian History, vol. vii. 

1 For the lists see Sewell’s Antiquities, vol. ii and Elliot, Coins of 
Southern India, pp. 128-9; also p. 121 for a short critique of the list. 
Nelson, Madura Country, part iii — contains an English version of the 
stories following the Sanskrit Parana mentioned in the test. Other local 
Puranas like the Kadambavana.pur3.iya have not been noticed. 



4 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


many Pandyan inscriptions as the name of the capital- 
Another story (No. 36) refers the name Madura to the 
fact that Siva converted into sweet nectar the river of 
poison emitted by a giant cobra set upon the city by the 
magic of the Jainas. On another occasion these heretics 
sent an elephant against the city (No. 26) and the Lord 
petrified this beast in the form of the Anamalai Hill, 
and as he used a lion-faced arrow on the occasion, the 
Pandyan king made a temple for Narasimha on the hill. 
We shall have occasion later to notice the true history 
of the temple. Apart from such stories, which need not 
be further retailed here, these PurUnas , — especially the 
earliest version, which has been engaging our attention 
more than the others, — may be found occasionally to 
contain hints of great importance. Thus the life of 
Manikkavasagar is treated in such detail as to explain 
the occasions on which he sang particular hymns of his 
Tiruvasagam and his life is narrated before that of 
Gnanasambandar ; and in this order, this version is 
followed by the later versions also. It must also be 
noted that some of these ‘ sacred sports ’ are referred to 
in the works of early Tamil literature and it is significant 
that none of these early references shows any sign of 
hostility to Jains or Buddhists. 1 These local and tradi- 
tional PurEnas are often very well supplemented by 
references in quasi-historical and religious works like the 
Periyapuranam , while the few direct references to his- 
torical persons and occurrences furnished by the saints 
and poets of the Tevaram and the TiruvEymoli are of 
inestimable value. Then, we have the Sangam works 
which form a class by themselves and contain much 
valuable information which still awaits systematic and 


1 See e.g. Silappadikaram, canto 11, 11. 23-30. 



SOURCES 


S 


scientific treatment by the historian ; the task has been 
begun in the works of the late Mr. Kanakasabhai and 
Dr. S. K. Aiyangar and other scholars. The 4 Age of 
the Sangam ’ however is one of the debated problems of 
South Indian. History and will engage our attention 
presently. 

Turning to foreign literary sources, some of the 
earliest references are furnished by the Old Testament 
of the Bible and the Greek and Roman writers like Mega- 
sthenes, Pliny, the author of the Periplus and Ptolemy. 
These references have been discussed out of all propor- 
tion to their intrinsic importance and much ingenuity 
has been spent in trying to press into service texts which 
are very obscure in themselves . 1 Then, there are 
occasional references in old Sanskrit works composed in 
North India, besides very passing references in the 
records of Chinese pilgrims which are not very helpful 
to our present purpose. The Ceylonese chronicle Mahs,- 
mmsa contains several references to the Pandyan king- 
dom and its affairs, but these must be carefully used as 
the chronology of the Mahuvamsa, still rests on insecure 
foundations . 2 For mediaeval Pandya history we get 
some help from the Muhammadan historians of the time 
as also from Marco Polo. 

The archaeological evidence bearing on the subject 
of our study is very extensive. Epigraphy is the most 
fruitful source of ancient history. In the variety, wealth 
and occasional length of both its stone and copper 

1 See Kanakasabhai, Tamils , p, 54, connecting Megasthenes 5 story 
about Pandaia and Pliny’s Pandse who were ruled by women with Silap- 
padikOratn, canto 23, 11. 11-13 which does not bear the interpretation given 
there. These classical references are collected together and briefly discussed 
by Caldwell, Comparative Grammar , especially pp. 88 ff. See also his 
Tinnevelly , pp. 17-22, on Korkai, Comorin, Paumben, etc, 

2 Huitzsch discusses these in JM.A.S.? 1913 pp, 517 ff 



6 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


inscriptions, South India is remarkably fortunate. The 
number of Pandyan records registered in the Epigra- 
phical reports of Madras and Travancore are now a few 
thousands ; but not many of these can be referred to 
dates prior to A.D. xooo. There are no doubl many 
more still awaiting discovery and registration. It may 
be noted in passing that, since the rejection by govern- 
ment of Dr. Hultzsch’s suggestion to prohibit the 
renovation of temples till the inscriptions in them have 
been copied, * a more vigorous attempt had to be made 
to secure impressions of the inscriptions thus threatened 
with destruction .’ 1 ‘ It was the practice in ancient 
times, whenever a temple had to be rebuilt, to copy the 
lithic records found on its walls into a book and then 
re-engrave them again on the new walls ’ 2 and it would 
be well if this practice were followed by the renovators 
of temples in our own day. 

The bulk of the early inscriptions employ the script 
known as Vatteluttu in the Tamil parts and the grantha 
in the Sanskrit parts ; Vatteluttu gave way to the present 
Tamil script about the time of the Chola conquest of the 
Pandya country, say about the end of tenth century 
A.D . 3 or the middle of the eleventh. It may also be 
noted that several of the later inscriptions are in excel- 
lent verse while the longer records of the early Pandyas 
attain to great literary merit as prose compositions. 

1 H. Krishna Sastri, Introduction to S. /. /. (Texts) vol. iv, see also 
A , R, E . 1902 . 4 What the Mussulmans did not destroy is being demolished 
by pious Hindus ! Hultzsch, Mr. Krishna Sastri has remarked elsewhere 
{A.R.E., 1913, part ii } para 4=1), 4 Some intelligent engravers on the stone 
helped by the members of the Archaeological staff must, in my opinion, 
be enough to carry out this old scheme of preserving ancient records from 
complete ruin.* 

2 1909-10, pp. 128-9. 

3 See A.R.E., 1905, p. 43 ; also Travancore Archaeological Series , 
vol. i, p. 286, 



SOURCES 


7 


Sometimes the set forms of the historical introductions 
in the inscriptions of particular kings help the historian 
in identifying the records and fixing their age. 

Considerable light has been shed in particular on the 
history of the Pandyas of the First Empire of the seventh 
to the tenth centuries A.D. by several important docu- 
ments brought to light since 1906. These are the dated 
stone inscriptions from Anamalai and Aivarmalai; the 
Trichinopoly and Ambasamudram inscriptions of Vara- 
guna ; and the copper plate records known as the loitina- 
manur plates (two sets) and the Velvikkudi grant. The 
Madras Museum plates of Jatilavarman are now better 
understood than they were when they were published in 
1893. All these records (except the Museum plates) are 
still new, and there is much room for difference as to their 
import at several points. Pandyan affairs often derive 
elucidation from the records of the contemporary Cholas 
and among these the Tiruvalangadu plates and the 
Leiden grant of Rajendra Chola deserve special mention. 
The Pallava grants are also occasionally very helpful. 

One difficulty that is common to an interpretation of 
all Pandyan records arises from the way in which they 
mention regnal years in double dates x years opposite y 
years. Several suggestions have been made but none of 
them is quite satisfactory, and the usual procedure is to 
treat the date as equivalent to x + y years, 1 and calcu- 
late the date of accession accordingly. One instance 

1 The history of this question is very interesting and the curious reader 
is referred to the following : — Burgess and Natesa Sastri, Tamil and 
Sanskrit Inscriptions, p. 30, n. 4 ; Hultzseh : I.A.,v ol. xx, pp. 288-9 ; 
Kanakasabhai, Tamils , pp. 59-60 and notes. More recently, Mr, T. A, 
Gopinatha Rao suggested {Sen Tamil, vol, iv, p. 114) that in a date 
c $jrmrt-jrGu$GBr ergbr i&n‘/bup$ir 0 k(B'’ the first figure referred to the actual 
regnal year of the ruling prince and the second gave the daite counting from 
the coronation of the previous ruler, and that this method was usually con- 
tinued till the ruling prince was crowned. But this explanation fails in a 



8 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


which may go to justify this practice is found in the 
larger Sinnamanur grant where the regnal year 
^jTessn—n-eu^im erjSir u Sdtgyeir&ir&ig) is rendered in the 
Sanskrit part of the grant by Sodase Rajyavarse. Again, 
some inscriptions give the regnal year and the number 
of days since the commencement of the reign or since 
the commencement of the current regnal year. And 
when we get to the numerous epigraphs of the mediaeval 
and later Pandyas, such difficulties increase enormously. 
Almost invariably the records of the Pandyas who ruled 
in Tinnevelly in the period of the decline of the Pandya 
power, i.e. in the fifteenth century and later are dated in 
the Saka era; on the other hand Saka dates are the 
exception in the inscriptions of the mediaeval Pandyas or 
the Pandyas of the Second Empire as we may call them. 
But several records contain astronomical data which 
yield often strange and perplexing results. Many kings 
have been made and unmade by hasty calculations and 
equally hasty corrections and the student of history who 
is not a specialist in astronomy has great difficulty with 
the astronomers . 1 And when it is remembered that 
the texts of the bulk of these inscriptions still await 

date like ‘up&Gtf&ajfiear crfiir umefonmf-Mas? 1. A. t vol. xx, p. 288. 
And Mr. V. Venkayya could only say, 4 The second figure in these 
double dates which are frequently met with in Pandya inscriptions has been 
taken to refer to the actual reign of the king and the first either to his 
appointment as heir-apparent or to some other event prior to his coronation’. 
A, 5 . 1 . 1903-4 , p. 272 n), Mr, C. V. Narayana Aiyar (Jcurn. Ind . His., 
vol. vii, part 2) assumes that the date opposite to which other dates follow 
must be constant in the case of the same king. Even this is not so. 
See, e.g., Nos. 548, 624 and 625 of 1926 which belong to the same king ; 
also Nos. 159-63 of 1894 and No. IV in Trav. Arch . Series i, pp. 99 ff., 
1.50-54. 

1 These difficulties will call for more attention later. But a few 
samples may be noted here. Inscr. No. 422 of 1917 is referred to a.d. 1357 
in p. 112 and to a.d. 1445 in p. 113 of A. R. E. 1917-18. At p. 89, A. R. E. 
1923-24 we find Nos. 327 and 334 of 1923 with calculated dates a.d, 1278 
and a.d. 1417 ascribed to the same king, 



SOURCES 


9 


publication one gets some idea of the conditions under 
which this part of the subject has to be studied. 

As pointed out in the Epigmphical Report , 1913 
(p. 85) : ‘ The subject-matter of the majority of the well- 
preserved inscriptions is, a gift made to a temple either 
of land or of money, for maintaining daily worship, 
special festivals, lamps, flower gardens and repairs ; for 
feeding Brahmanas and providing jewels ; or, it may be 
for supplying ghee of sheep and cows, to burn perpe- 
tual lamps in the temple. Lands were presented or, 
sometimes, sold to the temple by private persons and 
village communities. In the latter case, the sale amount 
was recovered from the temple treasury through the god 
Chandesvara (the supposed manager of Siva temple) and 
through temple trustees ( sthunattur ) (in the case of 
Vishnu temples). All land-gifts, whether sold or 
presented, were made entirely tax-free, the parties selling 
them invariably agreeing to meet the irai on such lands 
from their own pocket. Lands thus owned by the 
temple (devaduna.) were in turn leased out to be perma- 
nently enjoyed as kmi, to select tenants or to the donors 
themselves (if cultivators), in consideration of a fixed 
amount of coin paid, or grain measured, at the temple 
treasury, regularly every year. Money gifts made to the 
temple were deposited with village assemblies and private 
individuals on permanent interest (nilai-poliyUttu) from 
which alone the temple had to meet the expenses speci- 
fied by the donor. If the interest was not paid in any one 
year, the depositories agreed to pay it with the amount 
due for the following year together with a fine ( daiidam) 
fixed for the default period by the officer ( dharmasana or 
dharmUsanabhatta ) who was one of the members of the 
temple establishment. A curious condition was that the 
man who came to collect the arrears thus due was to be 
2 



10 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


fed twice every day till, perhaps, the amount was fully 
paid up. Sheep and cows granted to a temple for main- 
taining lamps were received by the shepherds ( manrudis ) 
and the prescribed measure or measures of ghee supplied 
without fail. The cattle were, it may be noted^ consi- 
dered “ never to die or never to grow old” for the appa- 
rent reason that they multiplied and increased in number. 
A very small percentage of the inscriptions treat of 
subjects other than the gifts specified above. Sale or 
exchange of land among private parties, inquiries into 
temple management made by officers (adhikUri) appoint- 
ed by the king with a view to collect the outstanding 
arrears of a temple, assignment of taxes by kings or of 
tolls by merchants for the benefit of a temple, dedication 
of hereditary servants (men or women), settlements of 
disputes, specification of caste or communal privileges, 
memorials to heroes who died either in cattle raids or on 
battlefields and other public charities, such as the 
construction of a tank, the planting of a grove, the gift 
of a water-trough, etc., are also, sometimes, permanently 
recorded on stone." It may be added that these records 
often yield information of value relating to land tenure, 
public revenues, village administration, and generally the 
state of social and political life, affairs and activities. 

But here a warning is necessary. The passage just 
quoted from the epigraphies! report furnishes a compara- 
tively harmless instance of a tendency to combine infor- 
mation from diverse sources, separated widely in time 
and space, and so to form a general picture of the social 
or political life of the country. This tendency has 
particularly unfortunate results in the study of institu- 
tions as it is likely to produce an appearance of flat 
uniformity and absence of change ; it will also increase 
the difficulty of detecting the presence or otherwise of 



SOURCES 


11 


any signs of change or growth. It is only by carefully 
limiting our observations to the time and place indicated 
by the sources of our information that truth can be 
served in the present, and perhaps future work rendered 
easier. ** 

We do not derive much help from numismatics for 
the study of Pandyan history. Coins definitely attribu- 
table to the early Pandyas are very rare. A few gold 
specimens are known 1 2 3 and these bear only the Pandyan 
figure of the fish. It is very interesting that the name 
Kuna known only to tradition and not to epigraphy is 
borne on a copper coin figured by Sir Walter Elliot 
(No. 140). It is well known that Roman coins belong- 
ing to different periods have been found in several places 
in South India and the abundance of Roman copper of 
the fourth and fifth centuries A.D. in and near Madura has 
sometimes led to the supposition that a local mint issued 
these pieces for daily use in a settlement of foreign 
merchants. Many Roman coins of the Early Empire 
have been found in and near Madura.® By far the 
largest number of coins belong to the mediaeval 
Pandyas and bear legends substantiated by inscriptions. 
These coins often show the influence of the Chola con- 
quest by the presence of a tiger design or of Ceylonese 
influence indicated by the presence of ' a rude human 
figure, standing on the obverse, and seated on the 
reverse’ (Elliot, p. 108). The earliest coins of the Ceylon 
type date from the eleventh century ; ‘ it came into use in 
Dravida only, at the time the Chola- Pandyan dynasty 
were masters of the whole of it’ (Elliot, p. 109). It 

1 Cl. similar remarks of Prof, K. V. Ran g as w ami Aiyangar in another 
connection, Some Aspects of Ancient Indian Polity , pp. 31-2. 

2 See Elliot, Coins of Southern India , p. 121. 

3 See Sewell in JiR.A.S., 1904, pp, 595 and (500-15, 



12 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


should also be observed that ‘the constant warfare 
which raged between Chola and Pandyan (rulers) not 
only renders it well nigh impossible at any particular 
time to fix the exact boundaries of their respective terri- 
tories, but also causes considerable uncertainty in the 
identity of a large number of their coins. n 

This review of the sources indicates that there is a 
large mass of material for the history of the Pandyas 
which awaits critical discussion and cautious summing 
up. Much good work has been done already ; but more 
still remains to be done and it will be our endeavour in 
the following chapters to do something in this way. 


1 Tufnell, Hints to Coin Collectors in Southern India, pp. 11-12. The 
most interesting of the Pandya coins known so far have been described in 
this publication and Elliot, as also in the papers of Sir T. Desikachari in 
the Tamilian Antiquary and that of Hultzsch in /. A,, vol. xxi, pp, 323-6. 
The Roman coins are discussed by Sewell in the J.jR,A.S., 1904. It may 
be noted that Sir T. Desikachari mentions that gold coins with the fish 
design were found in South Canara ; cf., in this connection, the observa- 
tions of Prof. D. R. Bhandarkar, Asoka, p, 40, 



CHAPTER II 

EARLY REFERENCES : THE AGE OF THE SANGAM 
EARLY REFERENCES 

‘ The oldest Dravidian word found in any written record 
in the world appears to be the word for “ peacock ” in 
the Hebrew text of the Book of Kings and Chronicles, 
in the list of the articles of merchandise brought from 
Tarshish or Ophir in Solomon’s ships ’ 1 * (Caldwell). 
‘ In the ruins of Mugheir . . . not less than 3,000 years 
B.C., was found a piece of Indian teak.’ 3 These 
references are calculated to give some idea of the 
antiquity of civilization in the Tamil land. 

A verse in the Kishkindhakdcnda of the RumEyana has 
been taken to refer to the Kapatapuram of the Pandyas 
famed in the Tamil legends of the ‘ Three fsangams’. 3 
But even if the sloka bears the meaning attributed to it, 
it is notoriously unsafe to base any conclusions about 
chronology solely on the texts of the epics and there is 
still the possibility that the verse is not older than the 
age in which these legends grew. It is not altogether 
free from doubt if the grammarian KatySyana refers to 


1 Caldwell, Comparative Grammar , p, 88, 

a Ragozin, Vedic India , p. 305 referring to Sayce. But see Kennedy > 
J.jR.A.S., 1898, p. 267, where a much later date, sixth century, seems to he 
suggested, 

3 R8m&yMpa> Kish. Kanda, canto 41, verse 19, It has been pointed out by 
Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar that the import of this verse has been missed 
by Tirthaand Rama, the North Indian commentators, and correctly given 
only by Govinflaraja. (Paper on f Valmiki and South India f in the 
Tamilian Antiquary) , But the Pandit seems to have mistaken Govinda- 
rEja’s meaning, See also 0. Stein, Indian Historical Quarterly , vol. iv, 
p. 778. The Mahabharaia references are not much more reliable. See 
Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, Beginnings of South Indian History , p, 60 n. 



14 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


the Pandyan country and its king as has been generally 
held on the strength of the opinions of two great 
Sanskritists of the last generation — Prof. Max Muller and 
Sir R. G. Bhandarkar . 1 The original name of the T amil 
country is urrmriy- (Pandi) and not uiremQ (Papdu) which 
it should be, if Katyayana’s rule referred to it. And there 
is the possibility that the Pandya of the Sanskrit gram- 
mar may be derived from Pandu, the name of a people in 
the Madhyadesa in Northern India . 2 The name Pandya 
perhaps came to be applied to the Tamil Pmdinadu in a 
process of Sanskritization on account of phonetic simi- 
larity and a Pandava origin invented for the Tamil ruling 
family. Whatever its derivation may be, we find the 
form Pandya employed by Kautilya in his Arthasastra 
and his references are clearly to the Pandyas of South 
India and to their capital Madura . 3 The importance of 
these references will depend upon the view taken of the 
age and authenticity of the text of the Artha'sUstra . 
Likewise the reference in the Mahavam'sa to a Pandyan 
princess who became the queen of Vijaya of Ceylon soon 
after the Nirvana of the Buddha is too vague and too 
much mixed up with legends to be of any value to the 
historian . 4 


1 See Caldwell, Comparative Grammar , p. 12 and Bhandarkar, Early 
History of the Defchan, p. 6. These writers were rather too much under 
the influence of the Aryan theory in its crude form and did not allow 
sufficiently for aboriginal influences. 

2 See Fleet’s topographical list of the Brihai-Samhita^ I. A vol. sxii, 
p. 187; contra Caldwell, Tinnevelly , p. 12, who derives urressri^. from 
Pandya as a more Tamilized form. 

3 Kautilya ii, 11 refers to Pandyakavatakam as a variety of pearl with 
which compare Varahamihira’s Pandyavdta (Fleet, ibid). Again at the end 
of the same chapter Kautilya refers to Madhuram as a variety of cotton 
fabric, thereby showing the antiquity of the cotton industry of Madura. 

* See Geiger’s Mahdvamsa> pp. 59 and 61. Is there any connection 
between this story and that of Arjuna’s (Vijaya’s) marriage with a Pandyan 
princess ? 



EARLY REFERENCES 


35 


ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NAME 

In fact the origin of the Pandyas is, like all such 
questions of origin, involved in much obscurity. This 
line of kings is given in the legends two different origins 
which are not easy to reconcile. The story of the three 
brothers of Korkai 1 is of the Romulus pattern and 
peshaps indigenous. The connection with the Pandavas 2 
and the moon is the result of another and a more ambiti- 
ous type of legend which threw the more humble story 
into the shade in historical times. And it may be noted 
here that the Tiruvilaiyadal of Nambi mentions the lunar 
origin of the Pandyas only in the course of a restoration 
after a deluge (No. 47) ; and in this it is followed by 
the later versions which, of course, contain more em- 
bellished accounts (No. 49 in Nelson). None of the 
legends can be taken as proof, as has sometimes been 
done, 3 that the Pandyas ruled from other centres like 
Korkai, Manalur or Ka'lyanapura, before they made 
Madura their capital, as the very first king in all the 
lists of kings that have been handed down to us is said 
to have founded Madura. 

There is no reason for thinking that the conquering 
expeditions of the Mauryan Emperors in the south 
reached the Pandya country as has been suggested. 4 
The earliest indubitable reference to the Pandyan king- 
dom is still that in the Asoka edicts. Recently, 3 the 
existence of rock-cut beds and Brahmi inscriptions in 

1 Caldwell, Tinnevelly , p. 12. 

2 Story of Arj una’s marriage ; the names, u&eoiir. 

3 Smith, Early History , fourth edition, p. 468 ; /. A. xlii, p. 66. 

* See Dr. S. K, Aiyangar, Beginnings , pp. 81 ft and Q . /. M. S, t 
vol. xvi, p. 304 and the references given there. 

s See A. R. E., 1907 onwards and A . S. /., 1909-10, p. 125 and A. R. E 
1909 , p. 71 for the quotations which follow. Also K. V. Subratnania Aiyar 
in the /, A. f vol. xl, pp. 209 ft 



16 


'THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


natural caverns in several places in the Madura and 
Tinnevelly Districts has been brought to light. ‘ None 
of these inscriptions have so far disclosed any king’s 
name. But they show that the possession of an alpha- 
betical system was one of the factors in the civilization of 
the Pandyan kingdom in the second and third centuries 
B.C.’, if not earlier. These monuments go also to show 
the presence very early in the south of strong Buddhist 
and Jaina influences. They seem to confirm the impres- 
sion derived from a careful study of the Tamil classics 
that while Buddhism came in earlier, Jainism was per- 
haps the more persistent in its influence on Tamil litera- 
ture. Mr. Krishna Sastri has observed that ‘ it is strange 
how these sects did not exercise any influence with their 
patrons in the matter of their being provided with 
comfortable rock-cut cells, during their retirement to the 
hills in the rainy season, as their compatriots of the 
north did. Perhaps, the South Indian kings of those 
times were inclined more towards Brahmanical institu- 
tions than Buddhist or Jaina.’ 

THE AGE OF THE &ANGAM 

The earliest historical kings of the Pandya country 
are those mentioned in the early Tamil works that have 
come down to us in the form of the collections known as 
the Sangam works. It has been sometimes doubted if 
the Silappadikciram and the Mcmimekalai belong to this 
group and the whole question of the age and historicity 
of the Sangam has given rise to controversies which do 
not seem to be justified on a calm review of the various 
lines of evidence available. It is unfortunate that the 
earliest account we have of this matter is enveloped in 
legends. This account occurs in the introduction to the 
commentary on the Iraiyanar Ahapporul which refers 



17 


THE AGE OF THE SANGAM 

to the three Sangams which lasted altogether 9,990 years 
and counted 8,598 poets including a few Gods of the 
Saivite persuasion as their members and 197 Pandyan 
kings as their patrons. The commentary that follows 
professes to be handed down through generations as 
Nakkirar made it, but quotes profusely from Sangam 
works in their present form and refers to events that 
cannot by any means be placed earlier than the latter 
half of the seventh century A.D. Nothing can be made 
of this account. 1 We have only to dismiss it with the 
remark that we have here the same tendencies at work 
which made a number of Buddhas and J inas out of one 
historic prototype and spread them over ages and aeons. 
Some of the names of the Pandyan kings and the poets 
mentioned in this account are found in epigraphs and 
other authentic records ; such names are Kadungon, 
U gr apper uvaludi and others ; this only shows that some 
facts have got mixed up with many fictions in this story 
and no conclusions of value can be based on these refer- 
ences. But the existence of an association of poets, 
modelled on the Buddhist Sangha, for the promotion 
of Tamil literature can be easily understood if it is 
referred to an age when Buddhist influence was rather 
strong in South India. 

The Sangam works are generally understood to 
comprise the two long poems, the Silappadikaram and 
the Manimekalaiy and the anthologies of occasional 
verses and short poems by different poets brought 

1 The late Prof. M. Seshagiri Sastri’s little book on Tamil Literature 
(S. V. & Co., Madras, 3904) contains an acute but very elaborate, and 
occasionally perverse criticism of the legends relating to the Sangam. 
Mr. P. Sundaram Pillai summarily dismisses this commentary as ‘apocryphal’ 
by saying * It is doubtful whether there existed any prose literature at all in 
the days of Nakkirar/ Madras Christian College Magazine , vol. ix, p. 128. 
For quite another view of this commentary see Dr, S. K. Aiyangar, Begin- 
nings, pp. 250-6. 

3 



18 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


together in the well-known collections . 1 Even a 
cursory study of the many short poems and others of 
moderate length like the Maduraikkanji will show two or 
or three things clearly. Firstly, we are dealing with a 
mass of literature that extends over three or four con- 
tinuous generations or perhaps more. In the light of this 
internal evidence we may assign a length, of, say, rscJto 
200 years for the period represented in these works. 
Secondly , the political geography of the country 
includes besides the 1 three monarchies ’ of the south, a 
number of minor principalities ruled over by petty 
warrior chieftains, vying with one another in the arts of 
war and peace. Thirdly , the references frequently made 
to ports, ships and merchandise including foreign 
imports and exports remind us strongly of the- notices of 
South India by the classical geographers and historians 
of the early years of the Christian era. The common 
references to ports like Musiri, Korkai and Tondi, to 
mention only a few, and articles like pepper, wine and 
silk cloth are too obvious to be missed. Lastly , the 
style and diction of these works undoubtedly bear close 
affinities to those of the Silappadikctram and the Mani- 
mekalai and are much nearer to these in point of time 
than to the hymns of the Tirwvasagam or the TevUram 
and the two sets of works cannot belong to the same age 
but must be assigned to different periods which may be 
separated by centuries. This consideration gains in 
strength from the state of religious life which is reflected 
in the Silap padikaram on the one hand and the devotional 


1 Perhaps it is worth stating that not much importance should he 
attached to the grouping of these anthologies into Etfuitokai and 
Padine#kilkai}akku especially as the second of these groups seems to take 
in several late and un authenticated works. See in this connection V. Ven- 
kayya on the Naladiyar and the Muttaryar in the A. S. 1905-6, p. 178 n, 



THE AGE OF THE SANGAM 


19 


hymns on the other. We have only to recall the 
enumeration of the temples in Puhiir (canto 5), the 
Vettuvavari canto 12) and the Aycciyar Kuravai (canto 
17) in the Silappadikaram 1 and contrast these with the 
fervid devotion to Siva and to Visiju coupled with an 
equally fervid hatred of the heretic sects of Buddhism 
and Jainism that mark the sectarian hymns of the 
'Tevaram and the T iruvaymoli, and we at once realize 
that there is no difficulty involved in assuming an 
interval of some centuries between the two ages ; on 
the other hand such an assumption seems to be forced 
on us by other considerations like the absence of any 
reference to the Pallavas in the Sangam works. It will 
now be clear that there is a strong prima facie case for 
accepting the chronological indications of the Gajabahu 
synchronism and referring the Sangam works to the 
early centuries of the Christian era. And this arrange- 
ment could not be shaken except by arguments of 
equal cogency which do not conflict with the general 
probabilites of South Indian history. 1 2 

1 The Manimekalai is strongly tinged with Buddhism but does not 
appear to contain anything conflicting with the indications given by the 
Silappadikaram. This work has been studied in its historical setting in a 
recent monograph by Dr. S.. K. Aiyangar, 

• I have made the discussion of this vexed question quite general and 
based it on broad considerations in order to avoid getting lost in minutiae. 
Those who wish to pursue the controversy in more detail must go to 
Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, Begnnings , pp. 161-240 and 287 ff and his Ancient 
India ; K. G. Sankara, Q . J. M. S. t vcl. viii, pp. 34-60 ; K. G. Sesha 
Aiyar, same, vol. xvi, pp. 143 ff and on the other side L. D. Swamikkannu 
Pillai, Indian Ephemeris , vol. i and Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar, Ancient Dekhan, 
pp. 91 ff. and the references given by these writers. Pandit M. Raghava 
AiyangSr’s arguments for a fifth century are refuted in detail by Mr. 
K, Srinivasa Pillai (see Q&am of the Pandit and Sen Tamil, 

vol. xv, pp. 3-24), There is little to be said in favour of Mr. T. G. 
Aravamuthan's effort to explain one unknown by another in his 
Essay on ‘The Kaveri, Maukharis and the Sangam Age \ It is 
perhaps not possible with our present knowledge to explain the references to 



20 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


We shall now briefly review some of the considera- 
tions which have been held to militate against this view. 
The late Diwan Bahadur L. D. Swamikkannu Pillai said 
in his Indian Ephemeris , vol. i, ‘ Portions of the Pari- 
patpal anthology which deal with developments of Saivism 
and Vaisnavism seem to be more recent than the first 
century A.D. if we are to follow Dr. Bhandarkar and 
other eminent authorities ’ (p. 105). Again, Kanafca- 
sabhai’s work would have to be renamed ‘ The Tamils 
i20oYears Ago ’. ‘ These somewhat overdrawn pictures 
of the state of civilization in South India 1800 years 
ago will have to be revised in the light of our present day 
knowledge of epigraphy and chronology, and the scenes 
of the Madura Sang am will have to be transferred from 
the first century A.D. to the seventh and the early part of 
the eighth century A.D., the period which witnessed along 
with the decay of Buddhism, the rise of the Saivite 
and Vaisnavite teachers, Tirugnanasambandar, Sankara- 
carya, Nammalvar, etc.’ Incidentally this rearrangement 
will explain the Tamil literary tradition which ascribes 
the Jlvakacintamani to the same age as other Sangam 
works (p. 469). Lastly, the Kanipaki legend may be as 
old as Gajabahu I in Ceylon, but not older than the 
seventh or sixth century in South India. The contem- 
poraneity of the kings mentioned in the Silappadi- 
karam is very doubtful as the figures of Karikala and 

the fights with the Aryans of the north of Karikala canto. 5, 11, 

89-110) and of Senguttuva (cantos 26-8); Dr. S K. Aiyangar (Augustan 
Age) supposes that the southern kings helped the Satavahana ruler 
Gautamiputra Satakarni in repulsing the Sakas— but this assumption does 
not rest on much solid evidence and does not explain all the references in the 
epics. It is also worth noting that the Perundevanar of the Sang am is an 
earlier poet different from the protege of Tellarerinda Nandipota. See 
Venkayya in A. R. £.,1907, pp. SI- 2 and Ncirrinai ed. Narayanaswami 
Aiyar, introduction, p. 54 ; contra K. V. S. Aiyar, op. cti., pp. 94-5 ; 
and Dubreuil, The Pallavas, p. 80. 



21 


THE AGE OF THE SANGAM 

Nedunjeliyan are shadowy whereas fsenguttuvan is the 
one bold figure. ‘ The fiction of writing a romantic 
poem under the pen-name Ilango-Adikal was cleverly 
conceived ’ (459-60, n.). 

That we read the history of religious faith in South 
India differently from Mr. Swamikkannu Pillai has been 
already indicated. It is not possible to see how that 
distinguished chronologist claims the support of ‘ Dr. 
Bhandarkar and other eminent authorities ’ for his view 
of ^aivism and Vaisnavism in the Paripadal as on 
the one hand he has not given any indications that would 
enable us to test. the statement, and on the other, Dr. 
Bhandarkar’ s work is full of the sense of the difficulties 
of marking exact chronological limits in the history of 
religions in India and leaves many points studiedly vague. 
At any , rate the present writer is constrained to confess 
his inability to see Mr. Pillai’ s meaning and rest content 
with the remark that arguments which resolve them- 
selves into differences of opinion cannot, with profit, 
be pursued far. He may however quote Bhandarkar and 
say ‘ there is nothing to show that Vaisnavism had 
not penetrated to the Tamil country earlier i.e., about the 
first century ’ (p. 50). There is indeed a tradition which 
ascribes the Jtvakacin tamani to a Sangam but this very 
tradition seems to distinguish this Sangam from the 
earlier one and refer it to Poyyamoli Pulavar. 1 That in 
a work of his brother we see more of ^enguttuvan than 
of the two other monarchs who were his contemporaries 
in the Tamil land is only to be! expected and does not 
need any special explanation ; much less does it warrant 
the theory that Ilango-Adigal is a fictitious pen-name. 
Lastly, when Mr. Pillai concedes that the Kannaki 

1 See M. Raghava Aiyangar, on ‘ Poyyamolippnlavar 1 in Sen Tamil, 
vol. v, pp, 512-13. 



22 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


legend may be as old as Gajabahu I in Ceylon he 
virtually gives away his case ; for the * Kannaki legend ’ 
was distinctly of South Indian, not of Ceylonese, origin. 

It now remains to see if our present-day knowledge 
of chronology and epigraphy throws any new light on the 
age of the Sangam; or even if it renders the early 
centuries of the Christian era an improbable period for it. 
The astronomical data in the text of the Silappadikafam 
have been held insufficient by many scholars for the 
purpose of calculating correctly the date of the events 
mentioned therein, and Mr. Swamikkannu Pillai’s efforts 
to eke out the text by doubtful particulars from the 
commentary cannot be held to be satisfactory, 1 and his 
result has not been generally accepted. And there is no 
reason to think that the mention of a week day in a work 
must mean that it is later than A.D. 400 as has been main- 
tained by those who advocate a late date for the Silap- 
padikciram and quote Fleet in their support. This has 
been made sufficiently clear by other writers who suggest 
a Chaldean origin for the Indian system. A recent writer 
has remarked 2 that * the Hindu names (of week days) are 
the exact equivalents of the Roman names which came into 
use in the West about the beginning of the Christian 
era ’ and we know that there was active intercourse 
between the Early Empire and South India at the time. 

We now come to the epigraphical evidence on the 
matter. The facts are — 

(r) The Velvikkudi grant mentions Palyaga Mudu- 
kudumi Peruvaludi as the original donor of Velvikkudi ; 

(2) This gift was enjoyed by the donee and his 
descendants for long ( nldu bkukti ) before the Kalabhra 

1 See in this particular the appendix to ch. vii in Dr. S. K. Aiyangar’s 
Beginnings . 

2 G.R. Kaye, Hindu Astronomy (Memoir No. 18 of Arch. Department), 

p. 36. 



THE AGE OF THE & AN GAM 


23 


interregnum at the end o£ which came the Pandya 
restoration under Kadungon ; 

(3) Kadungon’s grandson is called Silai-ttadakkai 
Kkolai-^kalifru Celiyan Vanavan Sengor-Cendan ; 

(4) The larger Sinnamanur plates begin the genea- 
logy with Arikesari Parankusa, evidently the king 
mentioned next to Sendan in the Velvikkudi grant, and 
refer to the battle of Talaiyalanganam, the translation of 
the Bhu.ra.tam and the establishment of the Sangam as 
among the achievements of the early Pandyas whose 
names are not given. 

In some discussions the following assumptions have 
been quietly made, though there is nothing in the 
epigraphs themselves to support any of them 1 and some 
of them are even opposed to indications in the records — 
(a) Mudukudumi ruled immediately before the Kalabhra 
interregnum; ( 6 ) the name of Kadungon’s grandson is 
Seliyan ; (c) this Seliyan must be the same as the 

famous Talaiyalanganattu Nedunjeliyan of Sangam fame 
especially because the Sinnamanur plates which begin 
the genealogy immediately after this. Seliyan refer to 
Talaiyalanganam as among the past glories of the 
Pandyas. But Mudukudumi could not have reigned 
immediately before the Kalabhra occupation, for if he did 
so, a man speaking centuries afterwards could not say 
that his gift was enjoyed for long before the foreign 
inroad. And the name of Kadungon’s grandson is not 
Seliyan, which is only a common name for the Pandyas, 
and occurs here in the midst of an ornate introduction 

1 See T. A. Gopinatha Rao in Sen Tamil , vol. vi, pp. 440 3 and K. V.S. 
Aiyar in Ancient Dekhan , p, 111 and the 1. A., vol, xl, pp. 224 fL Unless 
I am much mistaken, Mr. Aiyar begs the question at p.226, para 2 of 
/. A n vol. xl, and simply assumes what he has really got to prove, viz. that 
the victor of Nelveli was son of the victor of Talaiyalanganam. See also 
Krishna Sastri in E. vol, xvii, p. 297, contra Venkayya in The Tamilian 
Antiquary , No, 3, pp, vi and vii. 



24 THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 

to the king’s real name, ^endan which seems to be 
confirmed by the genealogy of the smaller Sinnamanur 
plates which begins with Jayantavarman. Moreover it 
must be explained why, if this §eliyan Sendai* as he is 
called by the epigraphists was the victor of Talaiyalan- 
ganam, a battle so famous in literature as to lend a prefix 
to the name of its hero, that historic fight is 'not 
mentioned in the Velvikkudi- grant which gives a long 
account of the achievements of the kings it names. It 
thus seems clear that the mention of Mudukudumi and 
Talaiyalanganam in these epigraphs confirms in some 
measure the particulars we gather from Sangam literature, 
and that it throws no new light on the age of the 
Sangam. If anything, the reference to the long interval 
between Mudukudumi and the Kalabhra occupation, 
and the reckoning of the Sangam and the translation of 
the Bharatam together with Talaiyalanganam among the 
legendary achievements which constituted the heirloom 
of the family, may lead an unbiassed student to the 
conclusion that these belong to an age altogether 
removed in the past from the kings whose history is 
recorded in these epigraphs. 

We are therefore bound to assume , 1 until much 
stronger proof to the contrary is forthcoming than has 
been put forward so far, that the Sangam age lies in the 
early centuries of the Christian era and we shall do so in 
the following chapter which attempts a reconstruction of 
the age in so far as it relates to the Pandyan kingdom. 

1 This conclusion has been accepted by distinguished writers like 
V. A. Smith, Early History , pp. 471-2 and n. ,4 at p. 457 ; and Sir Charles 
Elliot, Hinduism and Buddhism , vol. ii, p. 214 : ‘ Host Tamil scholars are 
agreed in referring the oldest Tamil literature to the first three centuries of 
our era and I see nothing improbable in this.’ Hultzsch’s objections to this 
date, SJ,I, } vol. ii, p. 378, are too general and impressionistic to need 
separate discussion, 



CHAPTER III 

THE PANDYAN KINGDOM IN THE £ AN GAM AGE 

The normal extent of the Pandyan kingdom in the 
Sangam Age corresponded to the modern districts of 
Tinnevelly, Ramnad and Madura, with the southern 
Vellar for its northern boundary. About twenty names 
of Pandyan kings and princes can be gathered from the 
Sangam works, but it is at present almost impossible to 
determine their order. Some attempts have been made 
to work out a continuous political history for this period, 
the most considerable of them being that of Mr. 
Kanakasabhai. But there is no doubt that an account 
like that goes far beyond what the evidence can sustain. 
We must rest content with gathering the chief facts 
known about the more important kings and simply nar- 
rating them as interesting but isolated events whose exact 
inter-relation cannot yet be determined. It has been in- 
dicated already that none of the kings of the Sangam, 
except one who is mentioned in the Velvikkudi grant as 
having ruled long before the Kalabhra interregnum, can 
be identified in the copper plates of the Pandyas of the 
First Empire. Nor can the attempt to determine the 
date of Nakklrar (a younger contemporary of the 
Pandyan hero of Talaiyalanganam), by counting ten 
generations backward from the date of the king celebra- 
ted in the illustrative stanzas of the Iraiyana-rakap* 
porulurai be considered satisfactory. 1 * * 4 

1 S e&I.A., sxxvij, pp. 193-8 ; also Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, Beginnings^ 

ch vi. He distinguishes two layers in the commentary in its modern form. 

The reference to pp. 125 and 191 of Mr. C, W, Damodaram Pillai’s edition 
by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar (at p. 253) is not easy to follow, 

4 



26 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


The Maduraikkwnji refers to two kings as the prede- 
cessors of the Nedunjeliyan of Talaiyalanganam viz., a 
Nediydn ( 1 . 61) identified with Vadimbalamba Ninfavan 
by the famous annotator Naccinarkkiniyar and a Palsalai 
Mudukudumi ( 1 . 759) no doubt the same as the first king 
of the Velvikkudi grant. It is not possible to decide 
the distance in time between these two kings or between 
these and the Nedunjeliyan of the Silo-ppadikarcmi known 
as Ariyappadaikadanda on the one hand and the other 
Nedunjeliyan who is the hero of the Talaiyalanganam 
fight and of the Maduraikkanji, as perhaps also of the 
Nedunalvadai. We proceed to note the outstanding 
facts about each of these kings recorded in the litera- 
ture of the age. 

The king referred to as Nediyon or Vadimbalamba 
Ninravan is an almost mythical figure whose achieve- 
ments find a place in the ‘Sacred Sports 1 of Madura, 1 
and also among the traditional achievements of the 
Pandyan kings mentioned in general terms in the 
Velvikkudi and Sinnamanur plates. Mudukudumi 
Peruvaludi is a more tangible figure who is praised by 
three poets in five short poems. 2 One of them ( Puram 1 2) 
refers to his foreign conquests as the basis of his libera- 
lity, and another by the same poet ( Puram 15) 
contains a shocking description of the way he treated 
conquered territory ploughing it with white-mouthed asses 
and refers to the many big sacrifices he performed in his 
day. Another poem ( Puram 6) contains a blessing cou- 

pled with extravagant hero-worship which claims all India 
as the territory ruled by this king. The- king who ruled 
in Madura at the time of the story of the Silappadikaram 

1 See Nambi’s Tiruvilaiyadal, No. 21. 

2 Neitimaiyari Puram 9, 12, IS ; Nedumpalliyattanar , Puram 64 and 
Karikil&r . puram 6. 



THE SANGAM AGE 


27 


was a Nedunjeliyan distinguished by the epithet 
Ariyappadaikadanda 1 for reasons that cannot now be 
traced. He is said to have died of a broken heart when 
the innocence of Kovalan was proved to him by Kannaki 
beyond ail possibility of doubt. There is a short poem 
(Puram 183) ascribed to him which puts learning above 
birth and caste. His viceroy at Korkai and perhaps his 
son a'nd successor was another Seliyan, called Verri Ver- 
celiyan or Ilanjeliyan, who wreaked terrible vengeance 
on the goldsmiths by sacrificing a thousand of them in 
one day to appease the great goddess who had been 
Kannaki. 2 This occurrence which seems to be historical 
in substance must be ascribed to about the time of 
Gajabahu I of Ceylon, somewhere in the second century 
A.D. It seems probable that the only other figure that 
stands out boldly from the rest, the victor of Talaiyalan- 
ganam, 3 was later than the rulers mentioned in the 
Silappadikaram. He came to the throne as a youth and 
early in his reign proved more than equal to a hostile 
combination of his two neighbouring monarchs aided by 
five minor chiefs. The decisive engagement took place 
at Talaiyalanganam which has been, with great plausi- 
bility, identified with a village of almost the same name, 
Talai-Alam-Kadu, eight miles north-west of Tiruvalur, 


1 See end of Maduraikkandam t Katturai , 11* 14-18. 

2 Silappadik&ram , canto 27, 11. 127 Sr. 

3 There are numerous references to this king and it will be well to 
bring them together here. Kalladanar in Puram 23, 25, 371 ; Idaikkunrur 
Kilar in same Nos. 76 to 79 all referring to the great victory of the reign and 
No. 76 giving also the' alternative name of the king Pagumputpandiyan ; 
Kudapulaviyanar in Puram 18 and 19 ; Paranar in Aham 116, 162 and 
Kuruntogai 393 ; Nakkirar in Aham 36, 253 and 266 ; also Narrinai 358 and 
perhaps Netlunalvadai in the Pattuppatfa ; Maduraikkanakkayanar in Aham 
338 ; Mangudi Kilar, Puram 24, 26, 372 and above all the Maduraikkanji of 
Mangudi Marudan ; Puram 72 is ascribed to the king himself and an ex- 
cellent piece. Nagriyai 387 and Aham 175 may or may not be contem- 
porary references. 



28 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


in the Tanjore District. 1 There exists a simple poem 
of great force and beauty ( Puram 72) in which the young 
king swears an oath of heroism and victory in the ensu- 
ing fight which he appears to have amply fulfilled. It 
seems that his enemies took the offensive, greitly under- 
rating the strength of the youthful ruler and hoping for 
an easy partition of his territory among themselves. 2 
Nedunjeliyan had to begin his fights almost at the gates 
of Madura ( Ahum 116) and pursue his foes up to the 
scene of the decisive engagement in the Tanjore District. 
It must have been in this campaign thatMandaram Cheral 
Irumporai, the son of the Chera King of the Elephant-look 
must have been captured alive, as is seen from Puram 1 7, 
in literal fulfilment of Nedunjeliyan’ s vow referred to 
above {Puram 72). After thus surmounting his initial 
difficulties in the defensive war that was forced on him 
by his jealous and aggressive neighbours, Nedunjeliyan 
appears to have taken the offensive in his turn and won 
substantial successes against his foes. Two separate 
campaigns seem to be mentioned, one against the Kongu 
chief, an Adigan, the chief event of the war being an 
engagement in a place somewhere near Uraiyur; 3 and 
another against the Mfdur chieftain Evvi which resulted 
in the annexation to the Pandyan kingdom of the 
Milalaikkurram and the Mutturrukkuiram, apparently 
territories in the modern district of Tanjore. 4 That this 


1 P. Sundaram Piliai, Madras Christian College Magazine , vol. ix, p. 11 7. 

2 Puram 78, 11. 5-6 — ‘Qu/fldjLflorCta, ibuhBjd Quir^/Eggi uSdstnuesr^ Q^trewu^iLjib 
QurftQjSesr? 

3 The place is referred to as ojnm&uu/DtBpcfa'* ( Kuruntogai 

393. Pandit R. Raghava Aiyangar calls it the battle of Qiir< 5 aauupiBj 5 ck. 
Ahandnurn , Introd., p. 49. See also Aham 253. 

* Puram 24, Aham 266. Perhaps Mutlurrukkurram was taken not 
from Ewi but some one else— Puram 24, 11. 20-23. It should be noted 
however that Evvi is called in this poem uxrGoi&r and that Mutturu is said 



the Sang am age 


29 


king was a follower of Brahminical Hinduism is clear from 
the reference to a vedic sacrifice performed by him with 
the assistance of Brahmins learned in the Vedas. Him- 
self evidently a poet of no small merit, this king appears 
to have been also a great patron of the poets and is cele- 
brated in the songs of many of them including Mangudi 
Marudan, Nakkirar and his father, Paranar and Kalladanar. 

The other Pandyas of this period may now be 
more briefly noticed. Some of them may have been only 
members of the royal family who never ruled as kings — 
for example, Ilamperuvaludi who died in the sea, the 
author of Paripadal No. 15, Pur am 182 and Narrinai 
55 and 56 ; Nambi Nedunjeliyan {Pur am 239) ; Pandyan 
Nal valudi, the author of ParipUdul 12; Cittiramadattu 
Tunjiya Nanmajan {Pur am 59) and others. 1 Pandyan 
Arivudai Nambi, suitably to his name, figures as 
the author of several wise little poems 2 and is the 
object of a beautiful address by the poet Pisirandaiyar 
( Puram 184) on the economy of moderation in taxation. 
Another king who is glorified by renowned poets like 

to have belonged to QfiirarQp^ffQeaM. Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar’s guesses 
about Yuan Chwang’s Malakuta being the same as Milalaikk iirram 
{Ancient DeHh<m> pp. 115-22) are not warranted by literary and epigraphic 
evidence. And at page 120 he surely gives a wrong lead when he says 
* this division covered a large area surrounding Madura. 1 

1 For the sake of completeness, those omitted in the test may be noted 
down here. 

(1) Andarmakan Kuruvaludi, author of Kuruntogai 345 and Aham 150 
and 228. 

(2) Pandyan Pannadutandan Kuruntogai 270. 

(3) „ Malaimaran „ 245. 

(4) „ Mudattirumaran Nagginai 105 (refers to Kuttuvan) and 

228. 

(5) „ Maran Valudi ; author of Narrinai 97 and 301. 

(6) „ Vefliyambalattu Tunjiya Peruvajiudi, Puram 58. 

(7) Karungaiolvatperum Peyar Valudi, PuramZ* 

(8) Pandyan Kiran Sattan, Pugam 178, 

(9) Kudakarattu Tunjiya Maran Valudi, Puram 51 and 52, 

* Kugun 230, Narrinai 15, Pugam 188, Aham 28. 



30 


THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 


Nakkxrar {Pur am 55-57) earned for himself the un- 
enviable distinction of being pilloried in song by two 
poets {Pur am 196, 198) for his illiberality and his name 
was Ilavandikaippallittunjiya Nanmaran. We do not 
know how the censure was provoked and how far it was 
justified. Famous as the contemporary of the author of 
the Tirukkural , Ugrapperuvaludi proved the strength of 
his arm by subduing the chieftain of Kanapper (Kalaiyar- 
koil) who had entrenched himself behind a strong fortress 
in the place. 1 He was a poet himself and is said in 
tradition to have caused the anthology of the AhanUnuvu 
to be made. This king has been sometimes identified, 
not on quite convincing grounds, with the Nedunjeliyan 
who expiated on his throne the murder of Kovalan. 2 3 
The last king we shall notice in this necessarily dis- 
connected sketch will be Bhutappandiyan who took 
Ollaiyur and whose queen is well known by her song 
on the occasion of her satiP We know little about 
this king except from his own compositions {Puram 71, 
246, 247 and Aham 25) and these present him as a 
loving husband who was lucky in the company of his 
cultured wife and dreaded separation from her, and a 
prince who valued his friends more than is the rule with 
princes. 

The period of these ‘numerous kings’ with their 
* Clumsy names and titles as Smith found it, is well 
portrayed in the literature of the age. A careful study of 


1 Puram 21, 367 and the pieces by the king himself viz., Aham 26, 
Naririmi 98 and Tiruvalluvamdlai 4. 

8 Dr. S. K, Aiyangar, The Augustan Age of Tamil Literature in Ancient 
lndia> pp. 355-6. 

3 Puram 246 ; see also Puram 247, referring to same. Pandit R. Raghava 
Aiyangar, Sen Tamil, > vol. ii, p. 304 points out that Bhuta Pandyan may be 
taken to be later than Nedunjeliyan of Talaiyalanganam as he refers to 
Titiyan who was beaten in that famous battle. 



THE SANGAM AGE 


31 


this literature does not however support the view that ‘ the 
Tamils had developed an advanced civilization of their 
own, wholly independent of Northern India ’ . 1 Already the 
three northern religions of Brahminism, Buddhism and 
Jainism have made their influence felt, and the general 
conditions of cultured life appear perceptibly Aryanized. 
Brahmins like Buddhist and Jaina ascetics have come 
to occupy a distinct place in the social and religious life 
of the country and the pre-Aryan elements forced into 
the background . 1 2 3 We have already noticed the early 
performance of vedic sacrifices by Pandyan kings. On 
the other hand it is possible that un- Aryan cults attained 
in Dravidian lands fuller and more independent develop- 
ment or survived in greater force than in the other parts 
of India more thoroughly colonized by the Aryans. 
And the line of this development can only be guessed 
by its survival in some parts, if not the whole, of what 
is known as Porulilakkanam, and in references like the 
Velan A dal in the TirumurukUrruppadai of Nakklrar 
and the worship of the Vettuvar described so graphically 
in canto 12 of the SilappadikUmm. It is remarkable 
how even in these references to manifestly pre- Aryan 
deities we are able to trace their progress towards 
securing good places for themselves in the pantheon of 
Hinduism. Thus in the Vettuva-vari we see Konravai 
described as consort of £iva and the incarnation of 


1 V. A. Smith, Early History , p. 457. Italics ours. His references to M. 

Srinivasa AiyangSr and even Kanakasabhai do not seem to support him 
to the whole length he lets*himself go. 

3 Kanakasabhai (p* 56 of his Tamils) seems to have exaggerated the 
exclusiveness and the fewness of the Brahmins in South India in those days. 
Exact comparisons being impossible, only general impressions can be 
recorded and I am unable to see that the Brahmins were less numerous 
then (proportionately to the population) or more exclusive than in recent 
times. 



32 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Laksmi. And Murugan the son of Korravai, is des- 
cribed as the son of six mothers, the captain of the 
forces of the gods, and the wealth of the Brahmins. 1 
Again a poem ( No. 55 ) in the PuranEnuru contains a 
beautiful reference to the story of the burning of the 
Tripura by Siva and to the shrine of Subrahmanya 
in Sendil (Tiruccendur) ; and the Aycciyarkuravai in 
the Silappadikaram contains songs which embody 
the whole cycles of Rama and Krsna legends in 
terms which leave no room for doubt about the 
general prevalence of the mythology of Brahminical 
Hinduism in the Tamil land in those days. It has 
been suggested that stories like those of Kannappar, 
Chandesvarar and Karaikkal Ammai may be considered 
to contain traces of pre-Aryan religious customs. It 
may be so. And the SilappadikUra/m and the Mani- 
mekalai prove unmistakably the prevalence of Jainism 
and Buddhism side by side with the other cults and this 
indication receives confirmation, as has already been 
pointed out, from the early monuments of the Tamil 
land. 

The form of government was, of course, monarchy. 
It is not possible to understand the exact import of the 
' five great Kulus ’ and 1 eight great Ay rims' which are 
often referred to as part of the king’s paraphernalia on 
ceremonial occasions. 2 These institutions seem to have 
been common to the three monarchies of the Tamil land 
and commentators differ as to their significance. The 
older annotation makes the five Kulus consist of the 
people (u>ir&etsnl), priests (urruuirr), physicians 

1 See T irumurukarrup p aiai , 1L 256-65 ; and Kunra Kuravai in canto 24 
of the Silappadikaram . 

2 See Index S9d>O/j0/s/0(^> and ermrGujnrtuu) in Pandit Swaminatha 
Aiyar’s editions of the Silappadikaram and the Manimekalai, 



THE SANGAM AGE 


33 


(u^p/sir), astrologers (iStS/spir) and ministers 
(jt/em while a later gloss adds commanders, 
messengers and spies to the ministers and priests 
(LjQirirQ/sir) to make the five groups. Likewise there 
are two ‘explanations given of the ‘ eight Ayams ’ ; the 
earlier one makes them groups of attendants on the 
king’s person like perfumers, dressing boys, etc. ; a 
later account names more important groups of persons 
among whom are included the people of the capital city 
(is&a-Larriijsir) and the leaders of the elephant corps and 
of the cavalry. One should like to know more about 
these apparently ceremonial groups of attendants, officials 
and non-officials, before one accepts Mr. Kanakasabhai’s 
statement that ‘ the council of ‘representatives safe- 
guarded the rights and privileges of the people’, 1 It 
is well known that the ideals of monarchy laid down in 
the Kurd are of a very high order, and these seem to have 
been constantly pressed on the monarch’s attention by 
the numerous poets of the land in the age we are dealing 
with. Thus one poet ( Puram 184) vividly contrasts the 
effects of moderate taxes which replenish the royal 
treasury periodically and make the king popular with 
those of oppressive exactions which impoverish the 
country and render the king unpopular ; and illustrates 
his meaning by the difference in the cost of feeding an 
elephant from a barn and of letting him roam freely 
over fields ripe for the harvest. Another ( Puram 55) 
stresses the need for impartiality in the king’s justice, 
and valour, grace and liberality in his conduct in terms 
that deserve to be quoted in the original. 


5 


* See his Tamils, p, 109. 



34 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


^jpQie/SI QpppQp iLnrSe&r Q&rrpp 
u>p(SS)<so, mLnOcrms Q&ireoQisirL-trjip 
iSlpOrresrs (^essna Qamkedrrjp 
<t5jjtru9p pekesr Qisuisjslp eO/ressresusiiLiii 
fid ibis etrekesr pessrQuQ^tGT) ^iriu^ius 
euiresrp pekesr sue mes>LbiLj Qpekjpi 

(LpemL- emu ujrrQ 

i$ i §© ewryShu OieQie pes><s. 

It is more interesting to notice the reference in the 
Silappadikamm (canto 17, 1. 7) to the supply of ghi to 
the king’s household in Madura in terms which remind 
us of Megasthenes’ statement that one village should 
each day bring to the treasury the royal tribute, which 
was apparently a tribute in kind, consisting of provisions 
for the daily consumption of the royal household. 

Social life especially in cities like Madura had attain- 
ed a high degree of refinement as could be seen from the 
literature of the age. It may be noted in passing that 
this literature was not always the work of poets who 
pursued poetry for its own sake. Minstrelsy was a 
profession, and the roving bards of the time were often 
not easy to satisfy, and sometimes exceedingly sensitive. 
We have already noted instances of princes penalized 
by the scarcely veiled imprecations of poets who felt 
they had not been hospitably treated. A song in the 
Purananuru contains a rather humble description of these 
organized bands of mendicants - some of them poets of 
real merit, some of them musicians with all kinds of quaint 
instruments, who moved about, with bands of female 
singers and dancers, from one little fortress to another, 
where their advent formed one of the few distractions 
of life for the chieftain, alternating with his hunting 



THE SANGAM AGE 3„ 

expeditions and warlike raids. 1 These chieft ains were 
not always models o£ courtesy or liberality, and some 
of them must have deserved the censures they provoked. 

The Madumikkanji which is a long poem of nearly 
800 lines contain many little pen-pictures of great interest 
to the student of the social life of the age. We cannot 
do more than draw attention to a few of these here. The 
descriptions of fights and fortifications (e.g. 11. 64-7) show 
evidence of a fairly advanced stage in the art of warfare. 
It is interesting that the Parathavar are mentioned as 
specially noted for their heroism in war (11. 139- 144) and 
they perhaps supplied good recruits to Nedunjeliyan’s 
forces. The account given of the port of Saliyur (in 11. 
75-88) and its commercial activity strongly reminds 
us of similar accounts in the Periplus and of the mention 
of Yavana guards in the fortress of Madura in the 
Silappadikaram and the frequent references to the use of 
imported foreign wines by kings and chieftains. 2 Kojrkai 
is referred to as the centre of pearl fishing (11. 131-8). 
The long description of Madura with her ditch, walls 
and gateways, her crowded bazaars more than usually 
busy on a festival day, her temples and her debating halls 
defies reproduction and is best enjoyed in the original. 
Courtesans played an important part in social life and 
were then, as in later days, the custodians of the arts of 
music and dancing (II. 570-83). But family life is also 
depicted at its best in a tender sketch of the daily routine 
of matronly duties which shows few traits that cannot be 
recognized in family life at the present day. And the 
contrast between the gay and voluptuous courtesan and 
the faithful and loving wife cannot be better drawn than 


1 Puram 47 and Selections from G. U. Pope in Tam. Ant., i, 6, p. 68. 

* Yavanas in Silappadikaram, xiv, 11. 66-7 with which cf. Mullaippattn , 
11, 59-66 ; for foreign wines see Puram 56, 11. 18-21. 



36 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


in the portraiture of Madhavi and Kannaki in the 
Silappadikuram. Some women were also known as 
poets, while others followed a life of religious seclusion. 
Brahmins chanted the Vedas early in the morning and 
the musicians practised on their favourite instruments 
much as they do now. 

There is no doubt that many of these pictures ^are 
drawn by the poets of the age in obedience to literary 
convention ; but such convention must have been reared 
on a fairly solid foundation in the facts of contemporary 
life. In this brief sketch, our attention has been given 
mainly to a part of this literature that can be definitely 
referred to the Pandya country. But the unity of Tamil 
life in the three kingdoms and the many principalities 
can only be realized by a more extensive study which 
cannot be undertaken here. 1 

There appears to be no means at present of fixing 
the chronology of the Sangam age more exactly than we 
have sought to do so far. We are in the dark as to 
when and how the period came to a close. The data 
that have been gathered together from the Sangam 
literature may, one may venture to suggest, carry us to 
about the middle of the third century A.D. or perhaps a 
little later. When next the curtain rises, it is on a scene 
that belongs to the middle or even the end of the sixth 
century A.D. We thus seem to have in between these 
two periods, a veritable dark age of about three centuries 
of which we know nothing at present. Even the 
contemporary Pallava history of the age, into which 
we get some glimpses from various sources, seems 
to throw little light on the history of the extreme south. 

1 Still the best sketches that of Kanakasabhai, The Tamils, ch. ix, but it 
is high time that another account which will keep more in touch with the 
sources of our information is attempted. There is scope for a good mono- 
graph on the subject, 



CHAPTER IV 

THE TRANSITION TO THE FIRST EMPIRE. 

THE KAEABHRAS 

We have no information as to ttie exact steps by which 
the transition was brought about from the conditions 
reflected in the ^angam literature to those of the Age 
of the First Empire, as we propose to call it, — an age 
comprising roughly three centuries from, say, the begin- 
ning of the seventh century to the beginning of the 
tenth. And the great danger at this point of the story is 
the temptation to make hasty reconstructions by piecing 
together fragments from literature and epigraphy which 
at the first blush seem to have a connection with one 
another, but on closer scrutiny fail to support the super- 
structure they have been made to bear. Great impediments 
to a proper understanding of the records result some- 
times from chance suggestions thrown out by authori- 
tative scholars which are often repeated by their followers 
without the reservations with which they were originally 
given and occasionally even palpable errors are handed 
down as gospel . 1 In the present account no attempt will 

1 The brilliant epigrapbist, Mr. Venkayya, did much good work on the 
Pandyas, He always stated his results with caution. When he wrote, some 
mistakes were unavoidable in the study and interpretation of old records 



38 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

be made to carry the story beyond what is exactly 
warranted by the state of our sources and the distinction 
will be carefully maintained between facts as such and 
subjective impressions. If in consequence we get an 
account which is discontinuous, that is unfortunately a 
result which in the present state of our knowledge 
cannot be helped. 


which he handled for the first time. Bnt his successors make a mistake 
when they fail to test his results independently for themselves before accept- 
ing them as established facts. But (1) Mr. Venkayya must in some measure 
be held responsible for starting the habit of confusing different kings with 
similar names. Thus he said, ‘ The names Nedumaran, Nedunjeliyan and 
Nedunjadayan are quite similar, and one is almost tempted to think that 
they must have denoted the same individual and though he took care 
to add * Beyond this similarity of the mere names we possess no- materials 
for their identification 5 (l.A,, vol. xxii, p. 65), some of his successors 
have not exercised the same caution — eg. the so-called Seliyan of the 
Velvikkudi grant has been identified with Nedunjeliyan by Mr. K. V. S. 
Aiyar (see chap. iii. above). (2) Mr. Venkayya also misread some of the 
names of the kings. He called Kadungon’s grandson Seliyan Sendan 
(A.jR-£n 3907-08, p, 51) in summarizing the Tamil portion of the 
Velvikkudi grant. Again, in the same summary, he called the father 
of Parantaka by the name Termaran ; it is strange that Mr. Krishna Sastri 
should have followed this reading of the king's name and perpetuated 
the mistake in his edition of the grant in E l ., vol. xvii. The king's 
name is only Maran ; ter should be read along with the preceding man 
as a compound adjective to the king’s name. (See K. G. Sankara, 
EA. } vol. li, p. 214). By a similar mistake he recognized a T§r Varddayan 
besides Varodayan in the Iraiyanar Ahapporul stanzas and identified the 
hero celebrated in those verses with his Termaran {A.R,E. t 1907-8, 
p. 57). In this, however, Mr. Krishna Sastri takes care not to follow 
him (#./., vol. xvii, p. 297). (3) Lastly he committed a somewhat serious 

error in the collation of the data from the larger Sinnamanur and the 
Velvikkudi grants and working up the genealogy of the Pandyas mentioned 
in these grants {A.R,E, i 1907-8, pp. 54-55). This has been set right 
in a large measure by Mr. Krishna Sastri giving up the consideration 
which was the most vital in Venlcayya's account of the matter, viz., 
‘ that the Nedunjadayan of the Vglvikkudi grant cannot be identical with 
his namesake of the Madras Museum plates, but that the former must be 
earlier than the latter' (see also T. A. Gopinatha Rao in Sen Tamil , vol. 
vi, pp. 437-39). Gopinatha Rao’s genealogy at p. 154 of Trav . Arch . 
Series, vol. i, is inaccurate and insufficiently documented. 



THE TRANSITION TO THE FIRST EMPIRE 39 


The chief records which furnish data on the genealogy 
and chronology of the Pandyas of the First Empire are — 

1. The Velvikkudi grant of Parantaka Nedunjadayan. 

2. The Smaller Sinnamanur plates. 

3. The Larger Sinnamanur plates of Rajasimha. 

4. The Madras Museum plates of Jatilavarman. 

5. The two related Anamalai stone inscriptions of 
Maranjaciayan (453 of 1906) and Parantaka (454 of 1906), 
the latter dated in the ICaliyuga era and yielding a.d. 770. 

6. The Aivarmalai Inscription of Varaguna dated in 
f§aka 792, i.e. 870 a.d. corresponding to the eighth regnal 
year of the King. 

The first thing to do with these records is to settle 
the genealogy of the dynasty with the aid of the copper 
plate grants which give particulars enabling us to do 
this and to assign these grants themselves to the respec- 
tive kings to whose reigns they belong. It has been 
generally accepted that the Sanskrit portion of the 
Velvikkudi grant mentions only the last four names in 
the list contained in theTamil portion which extends over 
seven generations and the last king Parantaka alias Jatila 
of the Sanskrit part is identified with Nedunjadayan the 
last king of the Tamil part and corresponding identifica- 
tions made in regard to the three preceding generations. 
It has also been generally accepted that this Parantaka 
Nedunjadayan of the Velvikkudi grant is the same as 
Jatila, the second king of the Sanskrit portion of the 
larger Sinnamanur plates — whose name has been un- 
accountably passed over in their Tamil part. But this 
arrangement leads to a duplication of kings with the 
same name for which there seems to be no warrant or 
explanation. On the other hand, if we identify Parantaka 
Nedunjadayan of the Velvikkudi grant with Varaguna 



40 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Maharaja of the larger Sinnamanur plates, this difficulty 
is avoided. And we have ample support for this course. 
Parantaka is coupled with Nedunjadayan by the Velvik. 
kudi grant and with Maranjadayan i.e. Isadayan the 
son of Maran by the Anamalai records ? and the 
Trichinopoly inscriptions (413 and 414 of 1904) of the 
reign of Maranjadayan call the king Pandyadhiraja 
Varaguna. 1 By this identification of Parantaka Nedun- 
jadayan with Varaguna, not only is the perplexing 
duplication of Rajasimha avoided, but Varagunavarman 
and Parantaka Vlranarayana become the grandsons of 
Parantaka alias Varaguna Maharaja which seems quite 
natural. It also seems to me— this is only a personal 
impression- — that the campaigns indirectly referred to in 
the Ambasamudram inscription of Varaguna Maharaja 2 
are best ascribed to Parantaka Nedunjadayan of the 
Velvikkudi grant, who according to that grant fought 
and won battles on the banks of the Kaveri early in his 
reign. One apparent objection to this course is found 
in the chronological indications given by our records 
and this has been held 3 to be fatal to the arrangement of 
the genealogy of the Pandyas suggested here ; but we 
shall see presently that the difficulty, if there is one, 
is not insuperable. It may be well at this stage to give 
the genealogy of the kings as fixed by the identifications 
proposed hitherto. 


1 There can be no doubt that the ajnapii of the Velvikkudi grant is the 
same as the excavator of the Anamalai temple and that consequently these 
two records belong to the same king. Mr. Venkayya was inclined to ascribe 
the Trichinopoly records to Varagunavarman, the elder son of Snrnara 
Srfvallabha, but he stated no reasons for his view which he said was only 
provisional. (A. R, E* t 1907, p. 53, para 21.) 

9 Edited by Venkayya, E.L, voi. is, pp. 84 ff. 

3 See Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar, Ancient Bekhan, pp. 103-4. 



THE TRANSITION TO THE FIRST EMPIRE 41 


Madras Museum Velvikkudi 

plates grant 

(I) Kadungon 

a,*d. 590-620 


Smaller 

Sinnamanur 

plates 


Larger 

Sinnamanur 

plates 


(2) Maravarman 
Avanigulamani 

a.d* c 620-645 

(3) Sendan 1, Jayantavarman 

a.d.c 645-670 I 

I I 

(4) Arikesari 2. Arikesari 1. Arikesari 

Maravarman Maravarman ParankuSa 

a!d. c 670-7X0 * I 

I I 

(5) Koccadayan .....2. Jatila 

a.d. £710-740 ’ J 

1, Maravarman (6) Maravarman 3. Rajasimha 

Paliavabhan j ana Raj asimha I 

| a.d. c 740-765 

I I 

2. Jatilavarman (7) JatilaParantaka .4. Varagtma 

Nedtmjadayan Nedunj ad ay an Maharaja 

a.d. c 765-815 | 

(8) 5 Sri Mara 
grf Vallabha 
a.d. c 815-62 
1 


(9) 6 Varaguna (10) 7 Parantaka 
Varm’an VIranarayana 

a.d. c 862-880 a.d. c 880-900 

I 

(11) 8 Maravarman 
Rajasimha II 
a.d. c 900-920 


Before taking up the chronology of the period for 
discussion, something must be said about the smaller 
Sinnamanur and the Madras Museum plates. These 
two sets are engraved by apparently the same scribe and 
this justifies the assumption that the records must be 
assigned to the same reign, especially as the writing in 
the smaller Sinnamanur inscription is held to resemble 
6 



42 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


that of the Madras Museum plates of Jatilavarman. 1 
But these considerations are not as conclusive as one 
would wish. It must be noticed that while the smaller 
Sinnamanur plates make Arikesari the son of Jayanta- 
varman, the Velvikkudi grant is not so specific in the 
Tamil portion and indicates the relation between Ari- 
kesari and Sendan by the vague phrase ‘ up.peuir&fwju 
uL$uiSl®irrSi euL$pQpirm/S \ 2 and the Sanskrit portion 
of the Velvikkudi grant gives no help here as it begins 
only with Arikesari. After some discussion, it has be- 
come clear that the Madras Museum plates of Jatila- 
varman too must be ascribed to Parantaka Nedunjadayan 
of the Velvikkudi grant. Palseographical considerations 


1 See A.R.E., 1807, p. 52 and K. V. S. Aiyar {op. cit., pp. 103-4). 
Nothing: can be stated finally about the smaller Sinnamanur grant. The 
grant is incomplete and the text is still unpublished. It is not known how 
many plates are missing. There is however just a possibility that the grant 
belongs to Koccadayan (No. 5 of the genealogy in the text), the king who 
fought at Marudur, in which case the engraver may be taken to be the 
grandfather of the engraver of the Madras Museum plates. But there can 
be no doubt that Venkayya was strangely misled by vague palseographical 
considerations into ignoring the probability of the identity of Sendan and 
Jayanta. 

2 Mr. Krishna Sastri gets over the difficulty by saying eaifi J sQ i sjrm'peo 
means ‘son I am afraid that this gives no help in interpreting the expression 
quoted which is not eu$^Gpir<zsrp®)irQ , but eai^pGpiresr^. Nor is Mr. K. G. 
Sankara’s suggestion that Arikesari was the son of a daughter of Sendan 
easy to accept. If, as is not unlikely, the smaller Sinnamanur plates are 
earlier than the Velvikkudi grant and belong to the reign of Ranadhlra, 
then their evidence must be preferred to that of the Velvikkudi grant. But 
after all, it may be that the Velvikkudi grant itself is not in conflict with the 
Sinnamanur plate. For some reason the Sanskrit part of the Velvikkudi 
grant begins only with Arikesari and the Tamil part, for the same reason, 
may be taken to make a fresh start with this king, Arikesari, though he was 
the son of the immediately preceding Sendan (EJ. t vol. xvii, p. 365, n. 5 
and K. G. Sankara, LA ., vol. 11, p. 2L3 and Q.J.M.S,, vol. x, p. 178), It 
may be noted in passing that nothing has turned up to justify Mr. Ven- 
kayya’s suspicion that the kings of the smaller Sinnamanur and the Madras 
Museum plates may not belong to the main line of the Pandyas [A. R. E. } 
1908, p, 55). 



THE TRANSITION TO THE FIRST EMPIRE 43 


which were once held very strongly to militate against 
such a view have not stood the test of further criticism . 1 
On the other hand, several weighty considerations can be 
urged in support of the view now taken of this grant 
First several surnames of the ruling king occur in both 

1 §ee A.R.E., 190S, pp, 50 and 55 and H. K. Sastri in E.L } vol. xvii, 
p. 293. Mr. Venkayya said, ‘ The characters of the Sanskrit portion (of 
the Velvikkudi grant) are older than those of the Madras Museum plates 
of Jatilavarman and of the two Sinnamatmr ones,’ Again, * the numerals 
which are marked in the Velvikkudi grant are very old, while those of 
the Jatilavarman plates bear a close resemblance to the corresponding 
symbols used in the larger Sinnaraanur plates,’ Mr. Krishna Sastri 
in editing the Velvikkudi grant enumerates the differences in the Grantha 
(Sanskrit) portions of the two sets of plates ; but a careful study of them 
does not seem to justify his conclusion that the Tamil portion in both the 
grants formed the original , * grants proper in both * cases, and ‘ the 
insertion of the Grantha portion in the Velvikkudi grant might have been 
somewhat earlier than that in the Madras Museum plates. ’ The only 

proof for this statement that is furnished by Mr. Sastri is in * the remark 
that the Sanskrit portion (of the Velvikkudi grant), by its brief notice and 
the very meagre historical material which it supplies in the form of a general 
introduction, could not have been contemporaneous with the Tamil portion.’ 
As against these statements it may be pointed out : (1) a glance at the 
Velvikkudi and Madras Museum grants (in the plates published in the 
EJ. and the LA.) does not support the view that the Sanskrit parts are 
later insertions ; (2) the differences in the Sanskrit portion enumerated by 
Mr. Sastri are not serious and may be only due to the facts (a) that 
different scribes were employed to engrave the two sets of plates and (b) 
there is an interval of at least fourteen years between them so that in 
any case the Sanskrit portion of the Velvikkudi grant will be 4 somewhat 
earlier than that in the Madras Museum plates ’ ; (3) without the Sanskrit 
portion, the Velvikkudi grant will begin with Qsfreoiuif^sr and the Madras 
Museum plates with m ressr^Qiu , and we may take it that no inscriptions 
could have begun so inauspiciously or so abruptly ; (4) the meagreness 
of the historical particulars in the Sanskrit part is only to be expected 
because that part was intended only to be a general introduction to be 
read together with the Tamil portion ; it should be noted there is not merely 
a Sanskrit introduction but also a Sanskrit epilogue to the two sets of 
plates ; (5) lastly, arguments from palaeography are always open to doubt 
and much more so in the case of early South Indian palaeography owing 
to the scarcity of the records available for comparative study. 

The Tamil parts of the two sets show only a single perceptible difference 
to which Mr. Krishna Sastri has called attention ; hut this c need not show 
that the two grants must belong to different periods 5 . 



44 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


the grants. Such are Panditavatsalan, Vlrapurdgan, 
Vikramaparagan, Parantakan, Nedunjadayan and also 
Sri varan. The biruda , Kantakanisturan of the Velvik- 
kudi grant is echoed by the phrase asmi—s Q&r l g8ssr 
/Sireir Q&iug] of the Museum plates. It is extremely 
unlikely that all these different birudas were common to 
two different kings. Secondly among the subdonees of. 
the Velvikkudi grant is a Murti Eyinan who is specially 
mentioned ( 1 . 136). The ajnapti of the Madras Museum 
plates is a Dhlrataran Murti Eyinan who was a maha- 
samanta of the king. There is reason to think that these 
two references are to the same person who may have 
been, as has been suggested on the strength of the 
Anamalai records, a brother of Marangari who was the 
cmatti of the Velvikkudi grant and the king’s uttar a- 
mantri when he excavated the Anamalai cave. 1 Lastly 
the Velvikkudi grant ascribes an important victory 
against the Pallavas to Parantaka’s father Maran, or 
Maravarman Rajasimha as he is called in the Sanskrit 
portion; and the Museum plates ascribe to Jatilavarman’s 
father Maravarman the biruda Pallavabhanjana; and this 
surely may be taken to furnish a confirmation of the 
probability suggested by the two considerations, urged 
above. It is thus clear that though there may be 
some scope for doubt as to the place of the smaller 
fsinnamanur plates, it may be accepted as settled 
that the Madras Museum plates of Jatilavarman belong 
to the reign of the same king as the Velvikkudi 
grant. 

We may now turn to the chronology of the period. 
The best starting-point is furnished by the Anamalai 
inscription which is dated in the year 3871 (expired) of 


1 Seei?./., vol, xvii, pp, 295-6. 



THE TRANSITION TO THE FIRST EMPIRE 45 


the Kaliyuga era = A.D. 770. 1 We thus get a definite 
date in the reign of Parantaka I alias Varaguna Maharaja 
(No. 7 in the table given above). 1 2 Another datum 
which is equally definite is derived from the Aivarmalai 
record (705 of 1905) which gives Saka 792 = 870 A.D. as 
the eighth regnal year of a king Varaguna who must 
have come to the throne in A.D. 862-3. This Varaguria 
must have been Varaguna varman (No. 9) the grandson 
of Varaguna Maharaja. And this has been held to be a 
serious objection to the scheme of identifications on 
which we have based the genealogy of these rulers. It 
has been said that ‘ we have only one sovereign between 
Nedunjadayan of about A.D. 770 and Varagunavarman 
who ascended the throne in A.D. 862, and we are obliged 
to give him a reign of nearly one hundred years which is 
absurd on the very face of it.’ 3 But the situation is 
nothing so absurd ; the interval is exactly ninety-two years ; 
the Anamalai record may be ascribed to an early regnal 
year of Varaguna I and the reigns of Varaguna and his 

1 See E,L t vol. viii, pp. 318 and 320. 

2 It is rather strange that Mr. T. A. Gopinatha Rao (writing sometime 
in 1910-13) should ascribe this Anamalai record to Koccdayan Ranadhir a 
(No. 5 in our list), the grandson of J ayantavarman \ this is simply impossi- 
ble because the Marangari of the Anamalai temple appears as the ajnapti of 
the Velvikkudi grant in the fifth generation after Jayantavar man (Sendan). 
After this start, he finds himself compelled (1) to ignore the Velvikkudi 
grant in the learned discussion of the history of Maranjadayan which 
follows, (2) to oppose on palaeographical considerations Mr. Venkayya’s 
suggestion that the Trivandrum Museum inscription which he edits must be 
ascribed to Varaguna Maharaja, and (3) to enter upon an imaginary recon- 
struction of the Pandyas before Jayantavarman to arrive at the date of 
Gnanasambandar and his contemporary Nedumaran in the middle of the 
seventh century A.D. (See Trav . Arch . Series , vol-i, pp. 153-7). But the 
only proper solution seems to be to identify Varaguna, Maranjadayan and 
Parantaka— a course which fits in with paleography and the place of 
Marangari in the king’s reign as indicated by the Anamalai and Velvikkudi 
records. 

3 K. V, S. Aiyar, Ancient Dekhan , p. 103. 



46 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


successor ^rimara Srlvallabha may have been exception- 
ally long yielding an average of forty-six years or a little 
more for each of the reigns. If a precedent is needed in 
support of this position, we may turn to Prof. Dubreuil 
who allows 1 13 years between the accession of Nandi- 
varman Pallavamalla and Nandi of Tellaru separated by 
only one reign, viz. that of Dantivarman. 1 There is thus 
no serious chronological absurdity involved in the assump- 
tions we have made regarding the identity of the kings in 
these records. It may be accepted that Rajasimha II 
(No. n) the last king in our genealogical table was the 
Raj asimha Pandya who was defeated by Parantaka I Chola 
early in the tenth century A.D . 2 as this fits in well with 
the chronology of the age as derived from the Aivarmalai 
record. If we calculate backward from the Anamalai 
record allowing, say, twenty-five years on the average for 
each generation we arrive at some date at the beginning 
of the seventh century A.D. for the accession of Kadungon 
from whom our genealogy begins. Even the end of the 
sixth century may be accepted as possible. We thus 
see that the epigraphs we have been discussing at such 
length relate to the history of the' three centuries from the 
beginning of the seventh century A.D. to the beginning 
of the tenth and this period we might call the Age of 
the First Empire. The period begins with a restoration 
and witnesses a rather wide extension of Pandya power 
at the expense of the Pallavas who apparently had 
succeeded in dispossessing the Cholas of their ancestral 
dominions even before the Pandya expansion began. It 
is marked by repeated contests between the Pandyas 
and the Pallavas which is carried on right through these 

1 Dubreuil, The Pallavas , p. 66. See also T. A. Gopinatha Rao, 
Trav. Arch. Series , vol. i, p. 19. n. 5. 

2 See SJT; vol. ii, p. 383, verses 9-11 and vol. iii, p. 386, 



THE TRANSITION TO THE FIRST EMPIRE 47 


centuries with varying fortunes. It ends with the 
revival of Chola power under Vijayalaya and his succes- 
sors and may be said to close with the attack delivered 
at the heart of the Pandyan Empire by Parantaka I, the 
grandson- of Vijayalaya, who began his rule early in the 
tenth century A.D. It now remains for us to narrate in 
some detail the story of the age as we are able to 
reconstruct it, and then bring together such particulars 
about the social and political life of the period as we 
can gather from the contemporary records of the age. 
We shall attempt to do this presently, but, before doing 
so, we must give some consideration to the vexed 
question of the Kalabhra occupation of the Pandyan 
country. 

The Velvikkudi grant only says ( 11 . 39-40), ‘Then 
a Kali king named Kalabhran took possession of the 
extensive earth driving away numberless great kings 
[adhircLjai] ’ and tells us no more about it, although it 
refers to the Kalabhras in the plural and their brave ocean- 
like army ( 1 . hi). 1 Mr. Krishna Sastri is inclined to 
accept the suggestion that Kali was the name of a dynasty 
of kings, Kalikula; 2 but nothing is known of such a 
dynasty yet and the mention of the Kalabhras in the plu- 
ral in the Velvikkudi grant itself and elsewhere seems to 
point to a military tribe rather than a dynasty of rulers. 
We can only say that the Kalabhras overran the Pandya 
country sometime after Mudukudumi’s time ; how long 
after we cannot say. ‘ How the Pandyas were overcome 
by the Kalabhras, how long the sovereignty of the latter 
lasted and how they were driven back are points on 

1 The translation of 11. 39 and 40 is Mr. Krishna Sastrl's. He seems 
slightly to misunderstand the word^^tfti/^/rm L 111. 

0 E.I., vol.xvii, p. 306, n. 2 ; contra, Hultzsch, EJ . , vol. xviii, p. 260 
who translates Kalikula into the people of the Kali age. 



48 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


which no information is at present forthcoming’ (Ven- 
kayya). It may however be noted that the Pallava 
king Simhavisnu who stands at the beginning of an 
important line of Pallava rulers, just as Kadungon does 
in the case of the Pandyas, and whose accession has 
been placed at c. A. D. 575 by Dubreuil, also claims to 
have conquered the Kalabhras ; and the date we have 
arrived at for Kadungon is the beginning of the seventh 
century A.D. or even the end of the sixth century. This 
raises the presumption that the Kalabhra occupation was 
a danger which threatened the independence of both the 
Pandya and the Pallava dynasties and that these powers, 
either independently or in co-operation with each other, 
managed to throw off this incubus before they started 
on their long careers of expansion and success which so 
often brought them into collision with each other and 
lasted for close upon three centuries until the newly 
risen power of the Cholas of the Vijayalaya line gave 
them a check at the close of the nineth and beginning 
of the tenth centuries. 1 * * 

1 Mr. Venkayya made an attempt to clear up the story of the Kalabhra 

occupation from Murti Nayanar Puranam in the Periyapuranam and the 

Tiruvilaiya4al (A.P,E. t 1908, p. 53). But there is nothing in the Purand 
except the mention of a Karnataka king of Jaina persuasion ruling 
in Madura which can connect it with this age. {See K. G. Sankara, 
QJ.M.S.) vol. x, p. 178). Murti, not Kadungon, succeeds the childless 
foreign ruler in the Purdna. Judging by results, Venkayya committed 
a more serious mistake in suggesting the identity of Kajabhra with the 
Erumaiyuran, one of the opponents of the Pandyan king in the battle of 
Talaiyalanganam, and saying, ‘it may be that Nedunjeliyan drove out from 
the Pandya country the Kalabhras’ [A,P*E., 1908, p. 53). This has 
led others to identify Nedunjeliyan with Jayantavarman, as we have seen 
before. Mr. T. N. Subramanian vol. xii, pp. 304-6) makes a 

number of statements which are not easy to support from the evidence 
at our disposal. He says 4 From the analogy (in the Velvikkudi grant) 
it appears that the Pandya line was unknown to the world while the 
Kalabhras ruled there. Thus the evidence of the Periyapur&ipam that there 
was no Pandya prince (!) left to succeed when a Kalabhra king died might 



THE TRANSITION TO THE FIRST EMPIRE 49 

be justified/ f Koccadyan’s victory was also over the Kalabhras/ * The 
Kalabhras are Kamasas/ He thinks also that the downfall of the Kala- 
bhras was due to Simhavisnu and not to Kadungon and says * Perhaps 
before he had succeeded in settling the land, the Pandyan prince Kadungon 
came out from the dark and occupied his ancestral land/ Mr. K. G. San- 
kara ingeniously suggests (I, A vol. li, p. 213) that the expression 
Alavariya Adhirdfarai in the Velvikkiidi grant means ‘ countless Pandyas 
through their last representative 5 : but it seems simpler to make it refer to 
other rulers besides the Pandyas, and understand the phrase Alavariya 
as containing a rather natural exaggeration of the number of dynasties 
displaced. 

It is not easy to follow what Mr. T. A. Gopinatha Rao says in a 
footnote (n. 1 at p. 49 of E. I. xv) to his edition of the Anbil plates of 
Sundara Chola. At any rate, it may be pointed out that the transition from 
Kalvara (which is a form assumed by Mr. Rao for the word Kalvar) to 
Kalabhra seems impossible ; (the analogy Valavan— Valabha is not equal) 
and that Suvaran Maran could not have been at once a contemporary of 
Nandivarman Pallavamalla and the Kalabhra king of the Velvikkudi grant 
if we follow the chronology of the Pallavas that has been established by 
modern research. At the same time it must be observed that Dr. S. K. 
Aiyangar derives Kalabhra from Kalavara through Kanarese Kalabharu 
and holds that the southern invasion of the Kalabhras was: due to the expan- 
sion of Satavahana power. (His Univ. Lectures on the £angam Age and 
Pandya Charters ; also R. Gopalan, The Pallavas of Kane hi > n. at p. 85.) 

Yet another, and a very plausible, suggestion is made by Pandit M. 
Raghava Aiyangar, in his forthcoming work on Epigraphy and Tamil 
Literature . He brings together much recondite evidence from classica 
Tamil Literature and seeks to establish : (1) that the Kalabhra king who 
displaced the ancient rulers of the Tamil land was Acyuta who perhaps 
ruled from Chidambaram and was probably identical with the Acyuta 
referred to by Buddhadatta; (2) that the expression Kaliarasan of the 
Velvikkudi grant applied to the Kalabhra King taken along with the story of 
Kurruva Nayanar as given by Sekkilar may lead one further to identify the 
Kalabhra King with Kurruva Nayanar mentioned by Sundaramurti in his 
Tiruttondattogai ; and (3) that the Kalabhras figure in Tamil literature as 
Kalappar or Kalappalar and were akin to the Vellalas- It seems very likely 
that further study on the lines indicated by the learned Pandit will yield 
results of great value for the history of the period before the accession of 
Kadungon. 


7 



CHAPTER V 
THE FIRST EMPIRE 

WE have little information about the first two kings 
after the restoration, Kadungon and his son Maravar- 
man Avanisulamani, whose reigns may be taken to have 
occupied the close of the sixth and the beginning of the 
seventh century A.D. All that we know of them comes 
from the Tamil portion of the Velvikkudi grant and that is 
not much. The nearest approach to specific historical 
statements about Kadungon is in the expressions pn-esti 
iMiEietniseintLiu iSlirnruirei e-if)<smLD ss jSlssr Jsssruir 

jpj/fiawm ifebraear uxar>Ln ; &<g (11. 43—44) which go to show 
that Kadungon must have had an active share in putting 
an end to the Kalabhra interregnum and bringing about 
the restoration of his own dynasty, as he is said to have 
abolished by his strength the claim of others to the earth 
and established his own claim on a firm basis (edrstsTih). 
We hear even less about the reign of Kadungon’s son, 
Maravarman Avanisulamani, who appears from the 
general expressions employed about him to have con- 
tinued the work begun by his father and maintained his 
power at least as he inherited it though he did not 
perhaps add much to it. 

The rule of Sendan or Jayantavarman who succeeded 
his father Maravarman may be taken to have extended 
over, say, A.D. 645-70. He is praised, for his prowess in 
war and for the justice of his rule. He also bears the 
name Vanavan which seems to indicate that he won some 
successes against his Chera contemporary. When we 
come to Jayantavarman’s successor, who was most proba- 
bly his son, our records become more helpful and mention 
specific incidents which can also be traced in the literary 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


51 


sources relating to the age. This king is called Arike> 
sari Maravarman in the Velvikkudi and smaller Sinna- 
manur plates and Arikesari Parankusa in the larger 
Sinnamanur grant. By the system of chronology we 
have adopted, this king must have come to the throne 
some time after the middle of the seventh century 
(670710) A.D. In this reign began the great contest 
with the Pallavas who were rising to power, contempor- 
aneously with the Pandyas, in the northern part of the 
Tamil land. The Velvikkudi grant says of him that he 
won a victory at PiJ.i, that he conquered the vast forces 
of Vilvelj in the battle of Nelveli, and this statement is 
confirmed by the larger Sinnamanur plates which say 
of him ‘ afisbsi)isw0ii Qfieo&ws® e_iis0/f? Qurrify p&ik&iriAiB 

€B)&U UGdSdSUQFjU) lS) IE3 & GIRT U IT IT GST It is IlOt IlOW 

easy to identify these battlefields and no attempt can 
therefore be made to trace in anyvdetail the campaigns so 
briefly recorded in the plates. It is extremely difficult to 
accept the suggestion that Nelveli stands for the modern 
town of Tirunelveli. 1 There are other achievements 

1 Mr. Venkayya ( A.R.B . , 1907, Partii, para 20) arrived at the middle 
of the eighth century as the date for Arikesari Parankusa and identified the 
campaigns of this king with those of Udayacandra, the Pallava general 
referred to in the Udayendiram plates of Nandivarman. (5././., vol. ii» 
pp. 361 ff.j. The occurrence of the names Nelveli and Sankaragtama among 
the battles won by Udayacandra may seem to lend some support to this 
view. But apart from the objections we have urged against the whole sys- 
tem of Mr. Venkayya’s identifications, we may draw attention here to the 
following points which seem to render it impossible to follow him. (1) He 
allows only twenty years for each generation, an extremely short allowance 
to make in calculating by averages the chronology of an uncharted age. 
(2) In the revised genealogy he gives at p. 54 of A. R . E. 1907-08, he 
separates the battles of Nelveli and Sankaramangai and ascribes the 
former to the son of ^endan and the latter to his (son’s) grandson— a course 
which is difficult to justify in the face of the Velvikkudi grant ascribing 
Nelveli to the former definitely, and the Sinnamanur plates coupling 
Nelveli with Sankaramangai and ascribing them to an Arikesari ParankuSa 
whose identity remains to be made out. We could understand Mr. Venkayya 
if he had at least repeated a second battle of Nelveli among the later (his) 



52 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

attributed to this king. He ruined the Paravas who did 
not submit to him and destroyed the people of the fertile 
Kurunadu (0^/5/r©). He won a great battle at Sennilam 
and defeated on several occasions the Kerala king and 
captured him alive with his near relations and his forces, 
and lastly he performed several times the hiranyagarbha 
and the tuMhara. All these statements leave on us o the 

ArikSsarPs achievements. (3) Among the achievements of the grandson of 
the present king, the Velvikkncji grant refers to a success against Pallava- 
xnalla and a fight at MantLaikkudi in which the Pandyan forces were victor- 
ious ; there is also a battle of Mappaikku^i mentioned among the campaigns 
of Udayacandra in which he is said to have beraten the Pandyan forces 
{SJJ; vol. ii, p. 368, l. 60). This makes it probable that Udayacandra 
was the contemporary of that king rather than of the present one. (4) The 
Madras Museum plates ascribe to the falter of Jafcilavarman, who was a 
Maravarman, the surname PaUavabhaajana. It is now generally accepted, 
pace Mr. Venkayya, that the' Madras Museum plates and the Velvikkudi 
grant belong to the same reign. Ztfow the name Pallavabhanjana assumed 
by the Pandyan king in an age of constant warfare between the Pandyas and 
the Paliavas may well be taken to indicate some signal successes on the part 
of the ruler who assumed the name. And, from the Udayen diram plates 
referred to above, we know t&at Udayacandra went to the aid of his master 
when he was hard pressed by the Tamil kings so much so that he is said to 
have bestowed the whole, kingdom * many times ’ on his Paliava master 
(£./•/•, vol. ii, p. 372). This again renders it very probable that Udaya- 
candra was the contemporary of Jatilavarman’s father and not of an earlier 
king. It must however be noted that there is one, and only one objection, that 
seems to suggest itself against the course I have adopted in the text and that 
is that we get two battles of Sankaramangai {grama) by my arrangement! 
one in the reign of Arikesari Parankuga and another in that of his grandson, 
Pallavabhanjana, Uut X may point out {a) that in the other arrangement 
Nelveli repeats itself, so that this objection is common to both arrangements 
and ( b ) that this objection is no objection at all inasmuch as it is only to 
be expected that, in an age of constant warfare between two neighbouring 
powers, repeated skirmishes occur in the same places more than once. At 
any rate I feel no difficulty in distinguishing the battles of Nelveli and 
Sankaramangai of the Sinnamanur and Velvikkudi plates in which the 
Pandyan king claims victory from the successes won later in the same spots 
by Udayacandra on behalf of his master. There seems, however, to be no 
need for postulating two battles of Ma$9aikkudi in the reign of Pallava- 
bhanjana as the Udayendiram plates do not seem to contradict the claim 
of the Velvikkudi grant on this point. I may add that the considerations 
brought forward by Dr. Hultzsch , voi. ii, p. 364) for identifying 
Neivel with Tinnevelly do not seem to be conclusive 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


53 


impression of a great expansion of power brought about 
by this king. The Paravas were no doubt the people on 
the south-east coast of the Pandyan country who still 
continue to bear the same name. The Kurunatfu which was 
apparently annexed after a conquest is not so easy to 
identify. And the campaigns against the Keraja king are 
narrated in a rather confused passage, and the text seems 
to be open to several alternative readings, none of which 
seems to render it possible to give a connected account 
oif the campaign or campaigns referred to. And it is not 
clear against N/Khom the fight at ^ennilam was undertaken 
or where we have to look for fsennilam. 1 But amidst all 
this uncertainty, One large fact stands out clearly. It is 
evidently under this king that the Pandyan power comes 
into collision, apparently fter the first time in this period, 
with its neighbours the PaAlavas on the north and 
the Keralas on the west ; and as important successes 
seem to have been won, we may take it that the Pandyan 
kingdom extended its territorial limits in both these 
directions beyond its traditional boundaries. And this 
expansion of Pandyan rule into foreign territory, that 
is, into territory lying outside the traditional limits of the 
Pandyan country, remains a permanent factor in the 
history of the rest of this period, and leads us to describe 
it as the Age of the First Empire. 

There is good reason for identifying this Arikesari 
Parankusa Maravarman with the celebrated Kun Pandya 
of legend, and the contemporary of the £aiva saint 
Tirugnanasambandar. This saint is known to have 
been the contemporary of another saint ^iruttoudar and 

1 It may be suggested that Sennilam is not a proper name but that the 
word only means a battlefield and may refer to any or all the battles won by 
the king* But the text of the inscription (1. 56, Vejvikktuji) and the refer- 
ences to Sennilam in the commentary to the Agapporu{ leave quite a 
different impression on the mind* 



54 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

to have converted to Saivism the Pandyan king who was 
thence regarded as a saint himself. This king is called 
Ninraslrnedumaran ; and Sundaramurti in his catalogue 
of 3 aiva saints ascribes to him the battle of Nelveli. The 
age of Siruttondar was the time of the destruction of 
Vatapi, the Chalukya capital, A.D. 642. These indications 
derived from the stories handed down in the Periyapura- 
nam seem to confirm the system of chronology we have 
adopted for the Pandyas of this period. 1 It may be noted 
in passing that there is nothing improbable in-the jV&ry 
that the Pandyan queen of this period wa^'a Chola prin- 
cess. The Cholas are not prominency mentioned any- 
where in the records of this age, but they appear to 
have continued in obscurity somewhere in their original 
territory on the banks of the^Kaveri and it is likely they 
sought or were forced into matrimonial connections with 
the rising house of the P&ndyas. 2 Finally, we may say 
that there seems to be no ground for accepting the 
identification of this kfing with the hero celebrated in the 
stanzas of the commentary to the Iraiyanar Akapporul. 

1 Sundaramurti’s )TiruUondaitogai , st, 8, 11. 3-4 ; and Pcriyapurdnam 
lives of the saints Mentioned ; Venkayya in EJ, t vol. iii, pp. 277-8 
and Dubreuil, The Pul lavas, pp. 67-8. Siruttondar was older and Majra- 
varman Pandya perihaps younger than Gnanasambanda. 

2 See verse 603 an the life of Gnanasambanda in the Periyapuranam and 
note that the Aihole inscription of Pulakesin ( verse 30 quoted by Dubreuil, 
The Pal lavas, p. 37) connects the Cholas with Kaveri even in this age. 
Mr. Venkayya says also : ‘ With the powerful Pallavas on the north and 
the strong; Pandyas in the south, the Cholas, who were hemmed in between 
the two, had . evidently to be satisfied with a comparatively insignificant 
position. ■„ . . . The Chola capital was probably Uraiyur during all 
this period and the tract of country subject to them must have been very 
small. The intermarriages with the dominant Pandyas make it likely that 
the Cholas occasionally made common cause with them against the 
Pallavas who must have been looked upon as intruders. V (A.SJ., 
1905-6, p. 178.) There is thus no reason to accept the conclusion 
sometimes drawn from Yuan Chwang's itinerary that the Cholas were con- 
fined in this period to Cuddapah and Kurnooi. Contra, K. V. S, Aiyar, 
Ancient Dekhan, ^ p.112-3. 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


55 


These stanzas indeed mention the battles of Pali, Senni- 
lam and Nelveli and call the king by the titles, among 
others, of Arikesari, Parankusan and Nedumaran. But 
there are several other battles mentioned, e.g., Vilifiam 
of which we do not hear in epigraphy till late in the eighth 
century and this renders the proposed identification 
impossible to sustain. 1 

The son of Arikesari Parankusan was Koccadayan 
also called Ranadhlra. He must have succeeded his 
father at the end of the seventh century A.D. or early in 
the eighth. This king appears to have been a great 
warrior who often waged aggressive war against his 
neighbours. He is given the titles Vanavan, Sembiyan, 
fsolan which seem to imply some claim to supremacy 
over his Chera and the Chola contemporaries. He is also 
called Madurakarunatakan and Kongarkoman and these 
titles do not seem to: have been empty boasts but the 
index of substantial military achievements which appear 
to have had a wide range ; for he is said to have attacked 
and subdued the Mahnrathas in the great city of Mangala- 
puram which seems to have been no other than the 
modern Mangalore. 2 * * * * * 8 It must, however, be noted that the 

1 See Krishna Sastri criticizing Venkayya in E.I. t vol. xvii, pp, 296-7. 
The view we take of this commentary has already been indicated. 
It seems to be utterly useless to the historian. The date of its 

composition must be later than the latest event mentioned in the illustrative 

stanzas, and the mention. of Vilinam will thus take it to the close of the 

eighth or early ninth century a.d. And it is quite possible that a 

rhetorical work like this took for its hero a saintly king of legendary fame, 

and attributed to him all the achievements of the Pandyan line, of kings 

that the author, could think: qf in bis day. : . .. 

8 Dubreuil who did not have the text of the Velvikkudi grant before 
him quotes Mr. Venkayy.a’s summary of this part of the grant and asks in 
astonishment, ‘This victory af Marudur, this ocean of enemies, this 
Maharatha> what are all these V ( The Pallavas , p. 68.) The suggestion he 
makes in the next paragraph on the same page that Koccadayan must have 
fought against Chalukya Vikramaditya I when the latter was encamped 
near Trichinopoly is hard to accept in the face of the definite statement in 



56 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


results of this raid on the west coast do not appear to have 
been permanent as portions of the Kongu country are 
said to have been conquered afresh by his son. Another 
campaign which is definitely mentioned in the grant be- 
fore the fight in Mangalapuram was directed against the 
Ay king, who was evidently a mountain chief belonging 
to an ancient line of chiefs who held sway in the neigh; 
bourhood of the Western Ghats in the Tinnevelly 
District. 1 The encounter between the forces of this Ay 
king and those of Ranadhira took place in Marudur which 
may be Tiruppudaimarudur near Ambasamudram and in 
this battle the Ay chief was worsted and apparently had to 
acknowledge the supremacy of the Pandya sovereign. 2 It 
is rather strange that this warlike king is not even mention- 
ed by name in the Tamil portion of the larger Sinnamanur 
plates. In the smaller set of plates from the same village 
we have the victory of Marudur mentioned, but the portion 
containing the name; of the king has not been recovered. 

The son and successor of Koccdayan Ranadhira was 
Maravarman Rajasimha I who has been strangely miscall- 
ed Ter-Maran by the epigraphists. The Sinnamanur 
plates (larger) only mention him and all that we know of 
him is derived from the Vejvikkudi grant. He seems to 
have been a worthy successor of his father and won 
important successes against the PaJlavas and in the Kongu 
country. The Madras Museum plates call him Pallava- 
bhanjana and the Sanskrit portion of the Velvikkudi grant 
says that he defeated Pallavamalla who fled from the field 

the Velvikkudi grant that the Pan dy an king attacked the Maharathas in 
the great city of Mangalapuram. 

1 Mr. Krishna Sastri reads Ayavel ; but see Mr. T. A. Gopinatha Rao 
in Trav, Arch . Series, vol. i, p. 3 on the Ay kings. 

2 I am inclined to accept Mr. Krishna Sastri’s suggestion that Sengodi 
and Pudankottu are not names of other battles but signify the regalia of 
the Ay king, though the text here does not seem to be very clear. (See 
E . A, vol. xvii, p. 307, notes 2 and 3.) 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


57 


of battle. In a highly ornate passage the Tamil portion 
of the same grant ascribes to him a series of victories at 
Neduvayal, Kurumadai, Mannikuricci, Tirumangai,Puva- 
lur, Kodumbalur and another place (whose name is not 
legible) and then says that the Pallava king was deprived 
of his splendour at Kulumbur where the Pandya captured 
numberless elephants and horses from his enemy’s forces. 
There seems to be little room for doubt that here we get 
the Pandyan version of the campaigns which led to the 
siege of Nandivarman Pallavamalla in Nandigrama by 
the Tamil princes which was raised by the victorious 
general of the Pallava King, Udayacandra by name, who 
won several successes against his foes as narrated in the 
Udayendiram plates of Pallavamalla. Dubreuil has 
suggested that the Pandya king espoused the cause of a 
son of Paramesvaravarman II who was kept out of his 
throne by the usurper Nandivarman Pallavamalla and that 
this Pandyan interference in Pallava disputes may be 
traced to a marriage connection which Koccadayan con- 
tracted with a Pallava princess . 1 However that may be, 
there seems to be little reason to doubt that Maravarman 
Rajasimha Pandya I was the contemporary and opponent 
of Pallavamalla. Now, turning to his campaigns else- 
where, we find that he defeated his foes at a place called 
Periyalur and crossed the Kaveri to bring about the 
subjugation of Malakongam which has been located on 
the borderland of the modern Trichiuopoly and Tanjore 
districts . 2 The Malava king who was reduced to 

1 Dubreuil, ThePallavas , pp. 68-9. M. Dubreuil seems to assume that 
Arikesari Paranku§a’s son was a Parantaka ; but he was onlyajatila ac- 
cording- to the Sanskrit part of the larger Sinnamanur plates. It may also 
be noted that Nelveli seems to have been fought by the Pallava king 
against a Sabara king Udayana ; and only at Mannaikkucji is Udayacandra 
said definitely to have faced the Pandyan forces. 

2 See K. V. S. Aiyar, Ancient D ekkan , p. 329, 



58 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


subjection gave his daughter in marriage to the Pandyan 
king. From the Malava country Rajasimha proceeded to 
Pandikkodumudi where he 1 worshipped the lotus feet of 
Pasupati and gave away with great pleasure heaps of 
gold and lustrous gems This perhaps means that the 
conquests of the Pandyan king extended up to Kodumudi. 
We also learn that he contracted relationship with the 
Ganga king. The details of this transaction are given 
later on in the Velvikkudi plates in narrating the achieve- 
ments of Marangari, the ajnapti of the grant. We learn 
that this Marangari was aided by Purvarajar (eastern 
kings) in a big fight at Venbai in which the powerful 
Vallabha king was beaten when the Ganga princess 
was secured and offered in marriage to the Pandyan 
prince who is referred to as Kongarkon and who 
may have been the son of Rajasimha by the Malava 
princess. It is not easy to explain satisfactorily the 
political transactions referred to in this account. Mr. 
Krishna Sastri has observed, * The information that a 
Ganga princess was married with the Pandya family is 
not mentioned in any of the Ganga records of this period 
which falls into the reign of Sivamara I (A.D. 755-65). 
The Vallabha or the Western Chalukya king who was 
defeated on this marriage occasion was probably Kirtti- 
varman II, who succeeded to the Chalukya throne in A.D. 
746 or 747, and whose army is stated in his records to 
have defeated the army of the Keralas, the Cholas and 
the Pandyas.’ 1 It is clear that much still remains 

% E J vol. xvii, pp. 295-6 ; contra K. G, Sankara, Q, J> M. S. } vol. x, 
p, 180, who treats the Malava princess as identical with the Ganga princess, 

i,e, holds of 1. 24 — *KiS£rirSieBrai &&rafihufr ir^fSenruy (1. 127), 

Dr. S. K. Aiyangar seems to identify Purvarajar with thePallavas and treat 
Venbai as a decisive incident in the long duel between them and the 
Chalukyas. (Introduction to The Pallavas of Kmchi t by R. Gopalan.) 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


59 

to be explained before we can make a clear story out of 
these references to the sambctndam with the Gangaraja. 

This king Rajasimha is also said to have performed 
many Gosa/iasras, Hiranyagarbhas and Tulabharas and 
to have relieved the distress of Brahmins learned in the 
Vedas. He is also reported, lastly, to have renewed 
JKu^al, Vanji and Koli. If this'is a reference to the three 
capitals of the Pandyas, the Cheras and the Cholas, the 
power of Rajasimha must have been very great indeed. 1 
His rule may be taken to have extended from about A.D. 
740 to about, say, five years before A.D. 770 which was 
definitely in the reign of his successor, and corresponded 
to some regnal year later than the third in his reign. 2 

This successor was the son of Rajasimha by the 
Malava queen and the donor of the Velvikkudi and the 
Madras Museum plates. These records together with 
the Anamalai and Trichinopoly inscriptions give him 
the names Jatila, Parantaka, and V arag una- M aharaj a 
besides Maranjadayan and Nedunjadayan. It is possible 

x This is how Mr. Krishna Sastri understands the text. He thinks that 
this Yanji was surely Karur, though he wisely concedes that an older 
capital of the Cheras may have been another Vanji. But the text is not 
without difficulty. It runs erea-j^i LO{n-.LDtrw$&> u&j'&QiLfLh' 1 , 

Mr. K. G. Sankara translates this into ‘ renewed the walls named ( ennum ) 
Kudal, Vanji and Koli * and remarks : ‘All the walls might have been in 
Madura and only named after the other capitals in memory of a pre- 
vious conquest of the Cholas and Cheras ' {I. A., li, p. 214). This 

explanation would be excellent, if Kudal were not there in the same rank 
with Vanji and Koli. On the other hand Mr. Krishna Sastri ‘s translation 
is * renewed the palaces and the high ramparts (of the capital towns) named 
Kddal, Vanji and Koli * and as he points out, we must understand after 
‘ ennum * some word like ‘ nagarangalin \ An alternative suggestion of Mr. 
Sastri is to take ma4amamadil to mean a capital city (£.I„ vol. xvii, p, 307), 

* Marangari who is the anatti of the Velvikkudi grant of third year 
becomes uttaramantri , excavates the Anamalai temple in a.d. 770 and 
apparently dies soon after— hence it seems necessary to make a.d. 770 some 
year later than the third in which Marangari would appear not to have 
been uttaramantri . 



60 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


to give an unusually complete account of this king’s reign. 
His inscriptions range from the third regnal year 
(Velvikkudi) to the forty-third (at Ervadi, 605 of 1915) 
and it may well be that he reigned for nearly fifty years, 
say A.D. 765-815. Very early in his reign 'he won a 
victory against the Pallava who was either Nandivarman 
Pallavamalla or some representative of his, at Penna- 
gadam, on the south bank of the Kaveri. This place 
would appear to have been somewhere near Tanjore. 1 
He also suppressed with a firm hand a local rising of 
Nattukkurumbu headed by Ay Vel. 2 In the third year 
of his reign, Marangari of the Vaidyakula of Karavanda- 
pura (Kalakkad in the Tinnevelly district) must have 
held an important place under the king, if he was not 
already uttaramcmtri (chief minister), as he figures as the 
ajnapti in the Velvikkudi grant. We have seen that he 
had a part in bringing about the marriage alliance of the 
ruling family with a Ganga princess in the previous 
reign. This same Marangari alias Madhurakavi built 
a stone temple for Visnu (Silagrham, Karrali) in the 
Anamalai hill, six miles to the east of Madura and made 
a gift of a rich agrahara in the neighbourhood to the 
Brahmins evidently on the occasion of the setting up of 
the image of Narasimha in the temple. This was in 
A.D. 770 and Madhurakavi seems to have died soon 
after. His brother Maran Eyinan who also became 
uttaramantri perhaps succeeding to the position held by 


1 K. V, S. Aiyar, op* cit. } p. 133 points out that inscription No. 314 
of 1907 locates the village in Tanjavdr Kurram. Inscription No. 51 of 1895 
of the fourth year of Ma^anjadayan at Tillaisthanam near Tiruvaiyar 
may be taken to confirm this. But see AM,E^ 1906-7, p. 53, para 21. 

2 The Vels seems to have been local chieftains somewhat resembling the 

feudal barons of mediaeval Europe. The Tamil Sangam dictionary under 
Velir quotes the Abhidanacintamani and calls them um&rir. 

Nattukkurumbu may be Kurumbanad as suggested by Mr. H. K. Sastri. 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


61 


Madhurakavi made further additions to the temple of 
Visnu and thus finished the work his brother had left 
incomplete . 1 Besides these two brothers, other members 
of the same family appear to have been occupying high 
positions in the government under Parantaka Nedun- 
jadayan. Dhlrataran Murti Eyinan, who is probably 
mer),tioned also in the Velvikkudi grant as a subdonee, 
was perhaps another brother of Madhurakavi and was 
mahasamconta in the seventeenth year of the king when 
the grant recorded in the Museum plates was made ; his 
family is referred to as i anr pphuQ&tu siaS/ssimsetrireo 
ldsSIQguiu £b)iu anas err is ss)/£ Another mem- 

ber of the same family was Sattan Ganavadi who was 
also mahammcmta earlier than Murti Eyinan in the sixth 
year of the king’s rule . 2 The Vaidyakula of the fortress 
city of Karavandapura (was Vanga|andai another name 
for the same city?) thus occupied a prominent place 
among the king’s officers ; but it cannot be taken as 
established that the Madhurakavi of this family was the 
same as the Vaisnava Alvar, in spite of the similarity 
in name and religious faith between the two. 3 

To return to the military transactions of the reign; 
before the seventeenth year of his reign this king appears 
to have extended his conquests considerably to the north 

1 See vol. viii, pp. 317 ff and Trav . Arch . Series, vol. i, p. 157 and 
ft, 23. Mr. Gopinatha Rao has observed (n. 21), ‘It is curious to note 
that a shrine for Narasimha, the Brahman lion-god, was excavated in the 
Anamalai hill (the Jaina Elephant hill). Perhaps it was intended to 
symbolize that the lion of Brahminism put down the elephant Jainism.’ 
For the orthodox legend about this hill and temple see chapter I (ante) , 

2 Madras Museum plates and Tirupparangunram inscription (37 of 1908) 
in the I.A., vol. xxii, pp. 67 and 71. 

3 See Venkayya in A.R.E., 1907-8 where the identity is proposed and 
Sen Tamil , vol. iv, p. 339 and vol. vi, pp. 493-6 for a criticism by Mr. 
Gopinatha Rao ; also K. G. Sankara, QJ,M.S., v ol. x, p. 185, Also Mr. 
Gopinatha Rao’s Sri Vai$navas , pp. 18-20 for a retraction of the Sen 
Tamil article. 



62 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

and it would appear that much of the fighting was under- 
taken against the same old foes as had opposed his 
father in his northern wars. There is some reason to 
believe, however, that the victory of Nedunjadayan was 
at many points more complete than that of his" father and 
that his campaigns had, speaking relatively, somewhat 
more permanent results. He fought at Vellur, Vinnam 
and Seliyakkudi against foes about whose identity 
nothing is known. He put to flight Adigan of the 
bright lance in the two battles of Ayiraveli Ayirur and 
Pugaliyur on the north banks of the Kaveri and captured 
his chariot together with several of his war horses. In 
his war against the Pandya king, Adigan was aided 
by the Pallava and the Kerala whose forces advanced 
from the east and the west and were repulsed with great 
loss by the opposing Pandyan forces. Evidently as a 
result of these campaigns, the king of Western Kongu was 
captured with his elephants and sent into confinement 
within the walls of the Pandyan capital Madura and the 
whole of the Kongu country came under Pandyan rule. 
It is well known that a family of chieftains named Adi- 
gans or Adigamans ruled from Tagadur (Dharmapuri ) 1 
in the Kongu country. We may take it that the Adigan 
who was repulsed at Ayirur and Pugaliyur was a feuda- 
tory of the Western Kongu chief who fought against the 
Pandya on behalf of his master and the appearance of 
the Kerala and Pallava forces in the campaigns may be 
explained as the result of a combined effort of the other 
three chief powers of the Tamil land to set some limit to 
the growing aggression of the Pandyas . 2 The coalition 

1 See i?./ M vol, vi, p. 331; also A*R.E, r 1906, part ii, para 34. 

2 Mr. Venkayya {I* A., vol. xxii, p, 66) is inclined to identify Adigan 
with the Western Kongu king captured and imprisoned at Madura. But 
lines 25-34 of the Museum plates when carefully analysed seem to support 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


63 


apparently failed and as a result there was a considerable 
extension of the territories under Pandyan rule. This 
extension seems to have been sufficiently permanent to 
allow the king to undertake the construction of a temple 
of considerable size (gjsar/D ucusbrmQ ptrir QairuSlG)) to 
Visnu in a place called Kanjivaypperur which seems 
to have been in the Kongu country. 1 Perhaps the in- 
scriptions at Trichinopoly (414 of 1904) and Amba- 
samudram (105 of 1905), dated in the eleventh and the 
sixteenth years of the king may be taken as records 
connected with the wars we have just described. The 
Trichinopoly inscription refers to the destruction of 
Vembil and the king’s encampment at Niyamam in the 
eleventh year. The Ambasamudram record contains a 
gift made five years later from the king’s camp at 
Arasur on the banks of the Pennai in the Tondainad. It 
may be mentioned, by the way, that though this king is 
called ‘ paramavaisnavan ’ in the Museum plates and 
builds a temple to Visnu in Kanjivaypperur, he does 
appear to have been quite ready to encourage Saivite 
temples and endow them richly. 2 The Trichinopoly 

better the reconstruction suggested in the text. Re. Tagadur, see A.R.E. t 
1901, p. 5. 

1 Mr. Venkayya was naturally in great difficulty in 1893 when be tried to 
identify the places mentioned in the Madras Museum plates. But be spent 
great ingenuity over the names Kankabhumi and Kanjivaypperur and tried 
to connect them with Tirukkalukkunram and Kanchlpttram. (J.A., 
xxii, pp. 66-7.) All this was of course wrong. Kankabhumi in the con- 
text only stands for some distant land up to which the fame of the 
Pandyan king reached and has nothing to do with ‘ Kites * or the Gangas. 
See e.g., under ‘Kanka* in Fleet’s Topographical List, I.A., xxii, 
p. 180. Mr. T. A. Gopinatha Rao has drawn attention to the mention 
of 4 QantsiQjb &(r<&j@lwrriLJu Gu&ir 5 in the Periyapuranam i v. 88 in Eyarkon- 
kalik-kammayanar Puranam. I am, however, unable to trace the presence 
of even the ruins of a Visnu temple in this place, if it is identical with 
Perur in the Coimbatore district. 

58 Cf. Venkayya (LA., xxii, pp. 64-5), who makes a similar inference 
from the salutation to Brahma, Visnu and Siva in order in the Madras 
Museum plates. 



64 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


and Ambasamudram inscriptions just referred to may be 
quoted in evidence of this ; a record of the thirteenth 
year of the king (155 of 1903) found at Tiruccendur 
mentions a considerable endowment from the proceeds 
of which the cost of regular worship in the’ temple of 
Kumara all the year round was to be met. Yet another 
inscription of the thirty-ninth year (104 of 1905) records 
the gift of three lamps to the god Tiruppottudaiya 
Bhatarar of Ambasamudram. 

The Museum plates also mention that Nedunjadayan 
conquered the king of Venad (South Travancore) and 
captured large numbers of his elephants and horses along 
with his treasures and his country. In the campaign 
that led to this annexation, the strongly fortified port of 
Vilinam was attacked and destroyed by the Pandyan 
forces. Vilinam seems to have been a great and flourish- 
ing emporium which often roused the cupidity of the 
foreign invaders of Travancore ; it would appear to have 
recovered rapidly after each disaster that befell it, for we 
find it still forming the subject of attack by the Chola 
emperors three centuries after the days of Nedunjadayan. 
The first conquest of Venad thus referred to in the 
Museum plates must have taken place before the 
seventeenth year of the king’s rule. It was soon after 
this conquest that the king undertook the task of strong- 
ly fortifying Karavandapuram (which has been identified 
with the village of Kalakkad in the Tinnevelly district) 
perhaps because it was on the frontier of the newly 
conquered country. At any rate Venad does not seem 
to have accepted this conquest as final, and we have 
evidence in the Trivandrum Museum stone inscription 
(277 of 1895) that the king was still fighting in the 
neighbourhood of Vilinam more than ten years after his 
first invasion. It may also be noted that another 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


65 


inscription found at Kalugumalai (43 of 1908) records an 
expedition in the twenty-third year of the king’s rule in 
which he went against Sadayan Karunandan of the 
Malainadu and destroyed Ariviyurkkottai which evidently 
belonged \o this mountain chief on the present Travan- 
core frontier. 1 This Karunandan appears to have been 
a member of an ancient family of Ay chieftains associated 
with the Podiya mountain and perhaps friendly to the 
kings of Venad in the period of their struggle against the 
Pandya expansion. 

No records of any fight undertaken by the' king after 
the twenty-seventh year have come down to us. But 
there seems to be no reason to doubt that he reigned for 
nearly fifty years; though it is not easy to decide such 
questions beyond the reach of doubt, we may ascribe 
to this king the inscriptions (863 of 19x 7 and 605 of 
1915) of the forty-second and forty-third years of 
Maranjadayan found respectively at Kalugumalai and 
Ervadi. There is reason to believe that this king was 
among the most powerful of the rulers of the Pandya 
dynasty in this age, and it was perhaps under him that 
the territories under the rule of the Pandyas attained 
a great and permanent extension by his successes in 
the Kongu country and in the Venad. The sway of 
Parantaka Nedunjadayan extended far beyond Trichino- 
poly into the Tanjore, Salem and Coimbatore districts, 
and all that lay south was also under him. 

One very interesting question, which is as elusive as 
it is interesting, that is connected with the name of 

* See T. A. Gopinatha Rao in Trav, Arch. Series, vol. i, pp. 3-<5. His 
arrangement of the Pandyas of course differs from that followed here. But 
there seems to be little difficulty in the way of ascribing the Kalugumalai 
record to our king. Mr. V. Rangacbari seems to have misunderstood 
No. 43 of 1808 (see p, 1465, entry No. 250 of his Inscriptions of the Madras 
Presidency ) . 

9 



66 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Varaguna is that of the date of Manikkavasagar. 
Before the discovery, about 1906, of the larger Sinnama- 
nur plates and other records there was only one Varaguna 
known, and that was the king of the legend of the vision 
of Sivalokam in the T iru vilaiyudal. And this reference 

to a Varaguna did not help ’very much in deciding the age 
of the Saiva saint who refers to the king in the Tiruk- 
kovaiyar ; but since two Varagunas became available to 
history from the new epigraphical finds, several scholars 
have, with great eagerness, sought to fix the age of 
Manikkavasagar by identifying the Varaguna mentioned 
by him with one or the other of these kings. But it does 
not seem that this epigraphical short cut to the date of 
this saint is in any way better supported than that other 
effort to fix the age of the Sangamfrom the references in 
the Velvikkudi grant which we have seen no reason to 
accept as satisfactory. But it is not possible to pursue 
the question of the age of Manikkavasagar at any 
length here ; it can only be stated that there are serious 
difficulties in the way of assigning Manikkavasagar to 
the reign of either of these kings in the eighth or the 
ninth century A. D. and that the Varaguna Pandya referred 
to in the TirukkdvaiyUr must still be taken to be the 
Varaguna of legend about whom, as yet, we do not know 
anything more than is contained in that story. 1 

1 See Venkayya i nE.L, vol. is, p. 89 and M. Srinivasa Aiyangar, Tamil 
Studies , pp. 401 ff and contrast , Pandit V. Swanainatha Aiyar in his 
Introduction to the Tiruvalav&yudaiyar Tiruvilaiyadal, first edition, 
pp. 66-7, who supports an early date by a number of weighty literary 
references ; also Messrs. K. G. Sesha Aiyar and Ponnambalam Pillai 
in the Tamilian Antiquary . The arguments of Mr. Sesha Aiyar seem to 
be complete as a refutation of the epigraphists’ position, and Mr. Pillai 
approaches the question of the date of the saint from a different stand- 
point, that of the Christian Church in Malabar. 

Minor considerations apart, the main points in the question seem to be 
the following: Manikkavasagar does claim that the miracle of the 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


67 


transformation of foxes into horses was performed by Sivan on his account 
0«»£j> in Tiru Ponn&fal , 3. 45 ; also Tim Atmnami, 11. 17-18 ; 

Tiruv&rttai, 11. 14-15 and Ananadani3,lai , 11, 25-26, to save him from the 
consequences of his master's wrath. And Appar, by general consent the 
earliest of the three Tev&rcm hymnists, does refer to this miracle and also to 
a Vncaka in manner which seems to leave no room for doubt that it is a 
reference to our saint. Then there is the fact that in ail the traditional lists 
of Pandya Kings, tlie contemporary of ManikkavaSagar is placed several 
generations before Kfin Pandya, the contemporary of Gnanasam bandar. It 
must also be noticed that Mapikkavag agar’s life and history occupy a rather 
earlier, and perhaps more .'conspicuous place in the cycle of the Madura 
sports of Sivan and that, it has not been possible to recognize so far any 
dear epigraphical references except to the last of the kings in the lists given 
in the different versions of these stories. It seems a natural inference from 
all this that ManikkavaSagar, the antagonist of Buddhism, was older than 
the saints of the age of Sambandar whose chief contests appear to have 
been with the Jains. 

The chief argument against this conclusion has generally been found in 
the absence of any reference to ManikkavaSagar in the catalogue of Saiva 
saints ( Tirutlondaticgad) given by Sundaramurti, who may be taken to have 
lived within a century of GnSnasambandar, the contemporary of Arikesari 
ParankuSa in the late seventh century. This may have been an acddent, 
and at best an argument from silence cannot be pressed far. But Mr. 
Sesha Aiyar has pointed out with great plausibility that the expression 
* Quriutui^wiJDtSemir'g Ljeowt } in Sundara’s list of saints does refer to our 
saint as it fits in very well with the traditional history of his life and doings. 
Those who hesitate to accept this suggestion are influenced by the authority 
of Nambi An<Jar Nambi and his successors, who have regularly followed 
him in interpreting this expression as a reference to the poets of the Madura 
Sangam. Great as must be the authority of Nambi and his successors in 
matters of religion and theology, I have no hesitation in dedaring with 
Mr, Sesha Aiyar that the history involved In their interpretation of the 
Tirutiondattogai seems to be, much of it, wrong. The point is that con- 
tinuity in religious tradition seems to be quite compatible with a break in 
secular historical tradition. For an illustration I may refer to the case of 
another saint in the list, ^eruttunai, who is spoken of as a king of Tanjore 
by Sundaramfirti ; Nambi makes no mention of his having been a king at 
all, evidently because in his day nothing was known about such a ruler of 
Tanjore ; and a little later, Sekkilar in his Periyapurdyam actually makes a 
VaiSya (Qeueturmr^L^. Qp/sibcuif) of this king of Tanjore. 

My condusion therefore is that MSpikkavaSagar must be taken to have 
preceded the Tevaram Trio and that once more epigraphy, despite the great 
advances it has made in recent years, fails to establish the large claims 
made on its behalf in the matter of settling beyond possibility of doubt the 
chronology of early South Indian History. 



CHAPTER VI 

THE FIRST EMPIRE .-(Continued.) 

THE son and successor of Parantaka Nedunjadayan 
alias Varaguna was Sri Mara Srivallabha whose reign 
may be taken to have extended from, say, A.D. 8x5 to 
A.D. 862. He also had the birudas Ekaiftra and Para- 
cakrakdlahala. AlHhat we know of this king is derived 
from the larger Sinnamanur plates. From the way 
these plates begin to furnish rather important historical 
data from this point onward, it would almost appear that 
the composer of this inscription had the Velvikkudi 
grant before him and avoided, by design, dwelling on the 
events already recorded in that grant. However that 
may be, what we learn about Sri Mara Srivallabha 
goes to show that he succeeded not only in maintaining 
the power handed down to him by his father, but even 
found it possible to extend it to Ceylon. The Sanskrit 
part of our record tells us that this king brought the 
whole world (a hyperbole for S. India ?) under the pro- 
tection of his umbrella and became well-beloved of his 
subjects [Prema-ps.tr am prajanam) after defeating in 
battle such diverse foes as the Mayapandya, the Kerala, 
the king of Simhala, the Pallava and the Vallabha. The 
Tamil portion confirms this and adds further that the 
king won victories at Kunnur and Vilinam as well as 
in Ceylon, and that he repulsed with great loss a 
confederation of Gangas, Pallavas, Cholas, Kalingas, 
Magadhas and others who offered battle at Kudamukku 
or Kumbakonam. This victory would appear to have 
greatly increased the king’s military reputation and 
furnished the occasion for the high-sounding title 
Paracakrakoluhala. 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


69 


We seem to have no means of elucidating the refer- 
ences to the victory over the Kerala and the fight at 
Vilinam except by supposing that trouble from this 
quarter seems to have been more or less permanent and 
that the western country never reconciled itself to the 
yoke of its Pandya neighbour. It is however possible 
to say something on the references to the conquest of 
Ceylon and the victory at Kudamukku over the Pallava. 
The evidence of the MakZLvawisa confirms in some 
measure the statement in the Pandya grant regarding 
the conquest of Ceylon . 1 According to that chronicle 
there was a Pandya invasion of Ceylon during the reign 
of the Singhalese king Sena I. The Pandyan victory 
in the battle fought at Mahatalita was complete ‘ and 
the army of king Pandu spread destruction all over the 
land The Singhalese king fled from his capital and 
took refuge in the Malaya country. Prince Mahinda, the 
‘ sub-king ’ committed suicide and was followed by 
others in this act and prince Kassapa, after an exhibition 
of personal valour, also fled. The Pandya forces took 
possession of the capital, carried away a large amount 
of booty ‘ and made Lanka of none value whatsoever ’ 
and eventually the Pandya king entered into a treaty 
with the fugitive king of Ceylon restoring the country to 
him. After this, the chronicle records a counter-inva- 
sion of the Pandya country by the Singhalese in the 
reign of their next king Sena II. And this throws some 
light on the Mayapandya, the Pandya pretender of the 
Pandyan inscription. When Sena II was preparing for 


1 A summary of chaps. 1 and li of Wijesinha's translation is given by 
Mr. Venkayya at pp. 55-6 of A.R>E. for 1907-08. It may be noticed here 
that M. Dubreuil, The Pallavas, pp. 70-71 in his account of these transac- 
tions considers only chap, li of the Ceylon accounts. 



10 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


a counter-attack on the Pandyas, ‘ it came to pass that 
at that very time a prince of the royal family of Pandu 
was come hither, having formed a design to overthrow 
that kingdom because he had been ill-treated by his 
king ’ (li. 27). Sena II allied himself with the rebel 
Pandya prince and invaded the mainland and succeeded 
in besieging the very capital of the Pandyas. The king 
of the Pandyas ‘ fled from the field of battle on the back 
of an elephant, and gave up his life in the wrong place. 
And his queen also died with him at the same time ’ 
(li. 38). ‘ The Singhalese took possession of the city, 

crowned the Pandya prince who had sought their help 
and returned to Ceylon with a large amount of booty 
including the treasures carried away by the Pandyas 
when they invaded Ceylon ’ (Venkayya). 

This narrative of events given in the Makavamsa 
cannot all of it be accepted as history. First as to 
chronology. The traditional dates for Sena I and Sena II 
are A.D. 846 to 866 and A.D. 866 to 901. We have 
assigned to Srimara, roughly, A.D. 815-862 so that the 
counter-invasion from Ceylon would fall in the reign of 
the successor of fsrimara ; but it is not possible to accept 
this arrangement, if we propose to identify the Pandya 
prince who appealed to Sena II and the Mayapandya 
who was conquered by Srimara. It has been pointed 
out that a correction of twenty-four years must be in- 
troduced into the Mahavam'sa chronology of this period 
in the light of the established dates of South Indian 
history with special reference to the early Cholas of the 
Vijayalaya line. 1 This correction will give the dates 

1 See Dubreuil, The PaUovas, pp. 70-71 ; Hultzsch in J. R, A . S., 1913 
does, not discuss cbaps. landli, a rather strange omission in an otherwise 
complete study of the synchronisms between Singhalese and South Indian 
history. 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


71 


822 to 842 and 842 to 877 roughly for the reigns of Sena 
I and Sena II and thus reconcile the chronology of the 
narrative in the MaJrnvam'sa with that of Srimara’s reign 
as fixed by independent evidence. But then there are 
other difficulties as well. The Pandyan side of the evid- 
ence makes the ruling king successful in repelling a Maya- 
pandya and thus keeping his throne to himself at the end 
of the struggle ; the Ceylon account makes out a disaster 
of the first magnitude to the Pandyan kingdom from the 
story of the counter-invasion undertaken by Sena partly 
in support of the Pandya prince. There is no possibility 
of reconciling these accounts ; one of them must be 
rejected as untrustworthy. Now, on the face of it, it 
seems impossible to suppose that such a serious disaster 
befell the Pandya power in the reign of Srimara and 
that the Sinnamanur plates suppressed the truth or 
deliberately gave a false account of the reign. On the 
other hand, the Mahtivam'sa is a highly embellished and 
poetic account of the history of Ceylon. 1 And one 
cannot help feeling that in this chapter of the Mahnvam'sa 
some transactions belonging to a later age (twelfth 
century A.D.) have been repeated perhaps to take off the 
edge from the story of the conquest of Ceylon by 
the Pandya king, narrated a little earlier. When we 
come to the Pandyan civil wars of the twelfth century in 
which Ceylonese kings often interfered, we shall see that 
the Mahavamsa persistently colours the account favour- 
ably to the Ceylonese kings and commanders. Our 
conclusion, therefore, is that Srimara did carry out a 
successful raid against Ceylon and that he repulsed 
the attempt at retaliation brought about partly by the 


1 See I.A.y vol. xxxv, pp. 153 ff, for translation of an important 
criticism of this hook and other Ceylon chronicles by Geiger, 



72 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


intrigues of an impostor, about whose identity nothing 
is known at present. 1 

1 Mr. Venkayya remarked (p. 56, A. R. E., 1908) of Sri mar a : * As he is 
also said to have conquered Mayapandya, who must have belonged to his 
own family, there is enough evidence that there were internal dissensions 
among the Pandyas already in his reign ’ ; and in this he has been followed 
by M. Dubreuil. But I do not think that Mayapandya means * a person 
belonging to the Pandya family * ; if anything it means just the contrary, 
and does not support the inferences of Venkayya about internal dissensions 
which are far-fetched indeed* We cannot of course get any light on this 
matter from the Ceylon account j for any impostor, to make himself accepted 
in Ceylon, must have claimed kinship with the Pandya ruling family. Ven- 
kayya again is not any way more fortunate in his attempts to identify this 
Mayapandya. He says: (ibid) * In this connection it is worthy of note 
that the relationship of No. 11 (my number 9) Varagupavarman to his pre- 
decessor is not given in the Tamil portion of ‘!the larger £innamanur plates, 
while the Sanskrit portion of the same plates mention the relationship only 
indirectly. No. 12 (my number 10) Parantaka is said to have been the 
younger brother of Varagu^a and the son of Srlmara. Consequently it is 
not impossible that it was Varaguna who sought help from the Singhalese 
in order to secure the Pandya throne \ Mr. Venkayya appears in this case 
to have relaxed his usual standards about evidence in his anxiety to discover 
the identity of Mayapandya. His whole argument turns upon the Tamil 
portion not mentioning the relationship of Varagunavarman to his 
predecessor, and the Sanskrit portion mentioning it only indirectly. The 
Tamil portion not only fails to mention relationships, in other cases, but 
omits all reference to Jatila Parantaka ; the Sanskrit portion mentions the 
relationship, but only * indirectly.* I am unable to see any logic in the 
inferences made by Mr. Venkayya from this supposed ‘ indirectness*. 
Personally I am of opinion that much trouble might be avoided if the 
epigraphists give up the habit of treating the integral parts of one inscrip- 
tion in different languages as altogether different inscriptions. There is 
enough indication in the inscription that Varagunavarman ruled in his turn 
and enjoyed a fairly prosperous reign. This is the text : 

* ( gmjratp/bair eoir®®D { !D(g)&& @a ma/t ■seur^frdQosr Gj<stoffLf<ss>jr'iLi i&6Bt$Q/5(B/$ 
Q-sir®! linssrearffQsnei Sr ejjr^mnsjirLD^th. * 

But Mr. Venkayya is not himself satisfied with the result he arrives at. 
He continues : 1 There is still another alternative. No. 12 Parantaka is said 
to have seized a certain Ugra, apparently in the battle of Kharagiri. It may 
be that this Ugra was a Pandya prince with whom the former had to fight 
for the throne.* This makes matters worse. This Parantaka did not reign 
till after his brother’s defeat at Sri Purambiyam ; his brother ruled at least 
eight years from the close of his father’s reign ; and it is not clear how any- 
thing that took place in the reign or just before the accession of Parantaka 
II can throw any light on the identity of Mayapandya whom his father dealt 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


73 


When we turn next to study the circumstances of Sri- 
mara’s success at Kudamukku, we get some light from 
the Pallava records of the period. Two facts are estab- 
lished beyond the range of doubt. First, Kudamukku 
is Kumbakonam as this name is given to the place 
in a record of the eighth year of Maranjadayan, most 
probably, Samara’s famous father. Second , the Pandya 

power was in this period fairly well established in the 
heart of the Tanjore district though there were frequent 
conflicts with Pallava forces across a shifting frontier in 
this direction, 1 the permanence of the Pandya occupation 
of this territory being shown by the presence of many 
Pandya inscriptions of this period in several places in the 
Tanjore district. From the provenance of the inscrip- 
tions of Nandivarman III it seems to be a reasonable 
inference that this contest continued through his reign 
with varying fortune. It seems not unlikely that the 
famous fight from which Nandi came to be known as 

Tellarerinda Nandi occurred in the course of these 

* * '* 

with years before. The fact is, we know at present nothing more about 
both Mayapandya and Ugra than what is mentioned of them in the Sinna- 
manur plates and it is best to say so. 

Mr. Venkayya also adds : * If the story of the Mahhvamia be true, the 
discontented Pandya prince whether he was Mayapandya or Ugra Pandya 
must have been on the Pandyan throne for sometime before he was 
replaced by No. 12 Parantaka.’ I am unable to concede that the story of 
the Mah&vamsa is true or that there was an interruption in the regular succes- 
sion recorded in the Sinnamanur 'plates. See however, K. V. S. Aiyar, 
Ancient Dekhan , pp. 140-1 who identifies Ugra with the protege of Sena II. 

1 1 may note here that I am not following M. Dubreuil ’s arrangement by 
which Varaguna is made the opponent of Nandi at Tellaru c . 830 a.d. If 
the opponent of Nandi at Tellaru was a Pandya, as perhaps he was (see 
Dubreuil, The Pat lavas, pp. 79-80) then he must have been £rimara. It 
may also be observed that Dubreuil seems to exaggerate the significance of 
Teljaru when he writes that ‘ this glorious campaign enabled him to reign 
peacefully not only at Kanch! but also on the banks of the Kaveri.’ The 
poetry'of the Nandikkalambakam should not be mistaken for history. Contra 
Gopalan , The Pallavas of Kanchi , p. 137. 

10 



74 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


contests, and that in that battle Srimara was the oppo- 
nent who was beaten in the fight with Nandi. This must 
have been somewhere about A.D. 830. The victory of 
Kudamukku won by Srimara against the Pallavas and 
their confederates must then be taken to fall* in Nandi- 
varman’s reign. It seems quite natural to connect this 
battle mentioned in the Pandya inscription with anpther 
that is referred to in the Bahur plates of Nrpatunga- 
varman 1 who was the successor of Nandi of Tellaru and 
came to power about A.D. 854. In the Bahur plates it is 

1 1 follow the text of Mr, Krishna Sastri as amended and translated by 
Gopinatha Rao; see Dubreuil, The Pallavas , pp. 47-50. But the verse is not 
easy and there is no means of controlling the readings. Dr. Hultzsch in his 
recent edition of the plates in the E, /., vol, xviii, pp, 5 ff writes: 1 Of him 
(Nrpatunga) verse 16 tells ns that he supplied a Pandya king, whose 
proper name is not disclosed, with an army, and that he defeated some 
enemies, who are not specified either, on the further bank of the 
Aricit river. It may be concluded from verse 16 that Nrpatunga allied 
himself with a Pandya king and undertook an expedition into the domains 
of the Chola king y ; and the text and translation as given by him support 
these statements. Looking at the verse from the Pandyan side, it strikes 
me that Mr. Rao’s translation supported by Mr. SastrPs text is the more pro- 
bable ; because (i) there seems to be little room for a Pandya-Pallava 
alliance in this period, (ii) the Cholas actually figure as the allies of the 
Pallavas in the ^innamanur plates and (iii) it seems probable that inverse 
16 (Bahur) Kudamukku of the Sinnamanur plates is referred to as having 
taken place before the accession of Nrpatunga [frura) and mentioned as a 
sort of introduction to the reprisal that followed under Nrpatunga on the 
banks of the Aricit. It may also be that Nrpatunga fought as a prince 
before his accession. 

M. Dubreuil ( The Pallavas , p. 71) may or may not be right in supposing 
‘ that the Paliava Nrpatunga profited by the invasion of the Pandya king- 
dom by the Singhalese but he is clearly misquoting verse 17 of 
the Bahur plates in support of his theory of the alliance of Nrpatunga and 
Sena II, which, he says, * seems to be confirmed by the Bahur plates which 
say that Nrpatunga’s fame had spread beyond the seas as that of Rama \ 
(italics mine). The text is ‘ Khyaio na Kevalam Bhumavamusminnafii 
RamavaV^ famed not only on earth, but in other worlds like Rama. I am 
also unable to follow him when he says that Srimara was defeated at 
Kumbakonam in the face of the definite statement in the vSinnamanur 
plates that Srimara repulsed a great confederation of his foes at Kuda- 
mukku. See also his remarks under Nrpatunga at p, 81 of his Pallavas \ 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


75 


said : * The army (of the Pallavas) which on a former 
occasion sustained defeat at the hands of the Pandya, 
was, by the grace of this king (Nrpatunga, i.e. by being 
led by him), able to burn down the hosts of the enemies 
together with the prosperity of their kingdoms on the 
bank of the river Aricit.’ From this reference it is not 
clear whether Nrpatunga’ s victory was won after he 
became ruler in his own right or earlier. Nor do we get 
any indication as to the interval between the defeat of the 
Pallava forces at the hands of the Pandya and the reta- 
liation under Nrpatunga on the banks of the Aricit. 
The use of the phrase ‘on a former occasion’ with 
reference to the Pandyan victory seems however to make 
it necessary to postulate some interval between the two 
engagements. We may conclude then, that if Nandi of 
Tellajru began his reign with a victory against Srimara, 
he lived long enough to sustain a defeat in his turn at 
Kudamukku in spite of the fact that on this occasion he 
seems to have been supported by several of his allies ; 
the tide turned once more against the Pandya on the 
accession of Nrpatunga whose youthful success at the 
Aricit— the river Arisil, a branch of the Kaveri' which 
enters the sea at Karaikkal, 1 is recorded in the Bahur 
plates as we have seen. 

The reign of Srimara Srivallabha then appears to 
have been a mixed record of success and failure. The 
advent of an impostor to the throne, apparently aided in 
his rebellion by the Ceylonese troops, and the two 
defeats at Tellaru and the Aricit at the hands of the 
Pallavas are evidence that the empire has begun to 



p. 7. The fact that the AriSii also passes 
led M. Dubreiiil to identify the battles of 
have ao indication in the plates as to the 
ft he Aricit. 


76 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

strain the resources of the Pandya country ; and the 
operations at Vilinam may perhaps be accepted as proof 
that the conquered lands are not settled on a permanent 
basis and may assert their independence at the earliest 
opportunity. But there is no reason to doubt that 
Srimara was a strong ruler who found it possible in the 
midst of so much trouble to maintain his power intact 
and hand it down at his death to his elder son V araguna- 
varman whose accession can be placed definitely in 
A.D. 862. 

About this Varagunavarman we learn nothing more 
than his name from the Sinnamanur plates. The only 
fact that can be referred to his reign with any amount of 
certainty is his fighting a great battle at Sri Purambiyam 
and losing it. It may also be that a record (690 of 1905) 
of Maranjadayan which incidentally mentions an expedi- 
tion against Idavai also belongs to the time of this 
ruler . 1 Idavai has been identified with a village of 
the same name in the Chola country referred to in Chola 
inscriptions of a slightly later date. At the battle of Sri 
Purambiyam the Western Ganga king Prithivipati lost 
his life . 2 The latest date known for Prithivipati 3 is 
A.D. 879, so that the;battle of Sri Purambiyam must be 
placed about A.D. 880 at the earliest, and Varagunavar- 
man must be taken to have reigned at least up to that 
date. Now the.last incident we noticed in the long duel 
between the Pandyas and their; neighbours in the north, 
the Pallavas, was the battle of the Aricit. After that 
battle Nrpatunga would appear to have had a peaceful 
time with the Pandyas who were for the rest of the reign 

1 See A.jR.jE,, 1907, p. 54 and 1906, p. 53. Contra K. V. S. Aiyar, 
Ancient Dekhan , p. 142. But his reasoning is not conclusive. 

2 See A.R,E. t 1906, p. 47 or E,l, t vol. is, pp, 87-8, 

3 Dubreuil, The Pallavas, p. 82. 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


77 


of Srimara and for several years after the accession of 
V aragunavarman apparently compelled to recognize the 
position Nrpatunga had established for himself by his 
early success. It is also interesting to observe that it 
was during, this period that Vijayalaya captured Tanjore 
and made the city his own and it is not unlikely that the 
Cholas and the Pallavas were on friendly terms in this 
period as the ^innamanur plates imply. After the 
death of Nrpatunga, when his successor Aparajita came 
to the Pallava throne about A.D. 88o, it would seem that 
Varaguna made an attempt to reassert the waning power 
of the Pandyas in Cholamandalam and Tondainad. The 
expedition against Idavai may well have been directed 
against the rising power of the Cholas. The king then 
ruling was probably Aditya I, the son of Vijayalaya, who 
came to the throne almost at the same time as his 
Pallava contemporary Aparajita. This attack on Idavai 
was apparently successful and Varaguna was enabled to 
carry his arms further north. The Pallava king Aparajita 
was aided on this occasion by his Ganga feudatory 
Prithivxpati I and the opposing forces of the Pandya and 
the Pallava had an encounter at Sri Purambiyam identifi- 
ed with Tiruppurambiyam near Kumbakonam. 1 In this 


1 See A'fi.E., 1906, pp. 47-8* I am unable to follow Mr. Gopinatha Rao 
in bis statement : * It is known from other records that Aditya and the 
Pandya King Varaguna marched against the Pallava, N rpatunga-Varman , 
otherwise known also by the name of AparajitaVarman, defeated and killed 
him/ (is./., v ol. xv, p. 49.) But see Dubreuil, The Pallavas, pp. 83-4. I 
believe inscription No. 337 of 1912 does not mean that the Cholas were 
the friends of Varaguna. The appearance of the Cholas among the oppo* 
hents of Srftnkra at Kudamukku and the expedition against Idavai strongly 
support the view that the Cholas were the friends of the Pallavas and the foes 
of the Pandyas till the battle of Sr! Purambiyam. Again, as Dubreuil points 
out, if Aparajita is only a pseudonym of Nrpatunga, there would be only 
one battle, that of £ri Purambiyam. Then we shall have to assume that at 
this battle Aparajita was beaten by Aditya as mentioned in the Tiruvalan- 
gadu plates of Rajendra ; but this is contradicted by the Udayeadiram 



78 THE PANDYAN.3KINGD0M 

battle although the Western Ganga king Prithivlpati I 
lost his life, still victory was with Aparajita and the 
Pandya advance was rolled back. It may be that Aditya 
I (the Chola) was also on the side of Aparajita and was 
able to get for himself some of the territory gained by 
the confederates on the repulse of the Pandyan invader. 
All this must have been in A.D. 880 or very soon after. 

Varagunavarman does not appear to have long survi- 
ved the defeat at Sri Purambiyam. He seems to have 
died childless and was followed on the throne by 
his younger brother Sri Parantaka alias Vlranarayaija 
fsadayan. Three verses in , the Sanskrit part of the 
loinnamanur plates state (i) that he captured single- 
handed the haughty Ugra near Kharagiri together with 
his elephants whose tusks were reeking of the blood of 
opposing forces killed in battle, (ii) that this pious king 
endowed many agraharas, and numberless devasthanas 
and tatukas , and (iii) that he had for his queen Sri Vanavan 
MahadevI who resembled LaksmI and Indrartl, the 
consorts of Visnu and Indra. The Tamil account 
generally confirms these statements and says further 
that he destroyed Pennagadam and fought in the 

plates of Prithivlpati II which state that victory in &T Purambiyam was 
with Aparajita and that Varagtina was beaten in the battle. The verse may 
be quoted. 

It is not likely that, if Varaguna was beaten, and Aditya was his friend in 
this battle, Aditya got the whole of the Pallava country or even a part of it 
as a result of this fight. On the other hand if Aditya helped Aparajita in 
his victory, he might have claimed a share of the spoil and lateron proceed- 
ed to make the other attack which transferred the Pallava dominions to him 
as the Tiruvalangaiju plates imply* And this, in my opinion, is what hap- 
pened actually. I am unable to see why Dubreuil must place £ri Purara- 
biyara in Njrpatnnga’s reign or ‘ admit that Nr patunga was killed in the 
battle of £ri Purambiyam * (p, 83) . 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


79 


Kongu country. It Is not possible, in the present state 
of our knowledge, to attempt to elucidate the battle 
of Kharagiri, the destruction of Pennagadam and the 
fight in Kongu. The last two events may be taken 
as some evidence that, though hard pressed by its foes, 
the Pandya power was still struggling to maintain itself 
in fqreign lands. And the name of the queen sug- 
gests that she was a Chera princess, and it may be 
tentatively assumed that the name of Seravanmahadevi, 
a flourishing little town adjacent to the railway station 
Shermadevi in the Tinnevelly district, has some connec- 
tion with the name of this queen. Perhaps this marriage 
is also some indication that, for one reason or another, 
the reign of this king was marked by happier relations 
with the Chera kings than was usual in this age. We 
may assign conjecturally the last twenty years of the 
ninth century as the period of this king’s rule. 

Parantaka Viranarayana was succeeded on the throne 
by his son by VanavanmahadevI, Maravarman Raja- 
simha II, the donor of the larger Sinnamanur plates, 
the discovery of which has meant the recovery, to a very 
large extent, of the Pandya history of this period. This 
grant is dated in the sixteenth year of the king’s reign 
and it is likely that he reigned some years after. His 
rule may therefore be taken to have extended from about 
A.D. 900 to about 920 or a little later. The Sanskrit 
part of the record of the king’s reign though it comprises 
four fair-sized slokas contrives to tell us just nothing 
about the king or his achievements as a ruler. The 
Tamil account vies with the Sanskrit in fulsome flattery 
of the king, but happens to mention a few facts. But 
the obscurity of the diction and the gaps in the text 
render it extremely difficult to be sure of the ground. 
With this caution, it may be noted that a battle at 



80 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Ulappilimangalam is mentioned, another fight with 
Tanjayarkon (the king of Tanjore) and perhaps also an 
attack on Vanji. 1 We learn also that the king had the 
titles — Vikatapatava, Srikanta, Rajasikhamani and 
Mandara Gaurava. Among his foundations are men- 
tioned numberless Palliccandams which seem to be Jain 
temples or endowments in their favour. 

Rajasimha II, however, may be surely identified 
with the Pandya King Rajasimha who is said to have 
been beaten by the Chola Parantaka I (vide the Udayen- 
diram plates of PrithivTpati II 2 ) and this fact enables us 
to get some light on his fortunes from the records of the 
contemporary Chola monarch. This king Parantaka I 
Chola came to the throne in a.d. 907. 3 Before his 

1 It will be observed thatVenkayya's summary of the reign mentions only 
that the king defeated the Chola (p. 51 of A.R.E 1907). He is perhaps 
right in the caution he observed. The text I have been using of this inscrip- 
tion is that given by Mr. A. S. Ramanatha Aiyar in the Sen Tamil , 
vol. xxiii. When I applied to the Government Epigraphist for a transcript 
of the text he had with him, I got the strange reply that the copy could 
not be given as it was undergoing publicalion in ST./. (Texts) series, 

2 ST. I., vol. ii, p. 383. 

3 A.R.E 1906, p. 51, para 21 for the date of accession of Parantaka 
Chola. See A.R.E., 1907, pp. 58-9 for the wars of Parantaka against 
Madura, a masterly account by Venkayya, Also Hultzsch in J.R.A.S,, 
1913, pp, 524-6 partly based on Venkayya, My version of the wars given in 
the text does not differ materially from Venkayya ’s. The changes I am in- 
clined to make are (i) to base the 1st war only on the reference in the Maha- 
vamia and the probabilities suggested by Inscription No. 29 of 1907, dated in 
a.d. 910 (See A.R.E . 1911, part ii, para 4), (ii) to treat the entire series of 
stanzas in the Udayencliratn and Tiruvalangadu plates as references to the 
second war of Venkayya, (iii) to follow Hultzsch in making the * unsuc- 
cessful effort to obtain the Pandya crown, etc., from Ceylon an event of 
the last years of Parantaka's reign, Mr. Venkayya seems to have thought 
that Maduraiyum Ilamum-Konda w r as a brand new title justified by a fresh" 
attack on Madura and Ceylon together : but this strikes me as an un- 
necessary assumption . The title Maduraikonda might simply have changed 
to Maduraiyum-Ilamum-Ko#da, after the invasion of Ceylon. I may add 
also that when he proposes to date the third war of Parantaka against 
Madura towards the close of his reign and apparently c. 943 a.d. A.R.E,, 
1907, p. 59, he seems to be forgetting the inscription No. 63 of 1905 found 
near Madura and dated in the thirty-third year of Parantaka to which he 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


83 


accession the Chola power under Aditya I had risen into 
some prominence by important successes against the 
Pallava Aparajita who seems to have lost the bulk of his 
territory to his new foe. It is not unlikely that Aditya, 
late in his* lifetime, undertook a campaign against his 
southern neighbour and that this campaign furnished the 
occasion for his son calling himself Madhurantaka or 
Maduraikonda. This title of Parantaka appears as early 
as the third year of his reign, A.D. 910. The Pandya 
king Rajasimha had to look about for allies and he 
turned to Ceylon. The ruler of Ceylon at the time was 
not unwilling to aid the Pandya king and sent an army 
to the mainland. Rajasimha, so reinforced, made an 
effort to retaliate on the Chola power and invaded the 
Chola country ; and thus began the second war which 
Parantaka fought against the Madura troops. A deci- 
sive battle was fought at Velur (a place not identified) 
and the defeat of the Ceylon and Pandya forces was 
complete. The Udayendiram plates say of Parantaka 
Chola: ‘His army, having crushed at the head of a 
battle the Pandya king, together with an army of 
elephants, horses and soldiers, seized a herd of elephants 
together with (the city of) Madhura. Having slain in 
an instant, at the head of a battle, an immense army 
despatched by the lord of Lanka, which teemed with 
brave soldiers (and) was interspersed with troops of 
elephants and horses, he bears in the world the title 
Samgrama Raghava (i.e. “ Rama in battle ”) which is full 
of meaning. When he had defeated the Pandya (king) 
Rajasimha, two persons experienced the same fear at the 
same time : (Kuvera), the lord of wealth, on account of 
the death of his own friend, (and) Vibhisana on account 

had drawn pointed attention two years previously (A,R*E.i 1905, p, 42). 
See also A.R.E., 1926, part ii, para. 16, 

11 



82 


THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 


of the proximity (of the Chola dominions to Ceylon).’ 
The Tiruvalangadu plates are no less explicit and more 
graphic in the account they give. 1 

This was the ruin of Rajasimha and the empire that 
had been reared by generations of his ancestors. Madura 
was lost and Rajasimha had to flee to Ceylon. There 
he made pitiful efforts to regain his fortune and, if we 
may follow the Mahwvamsa account, which is confirmed 
by the later Chola inscriptions of Rajendra I, Rajasimha 
after some fruitless waiting despaired of gaining any* 
thing by his stay in Ceylon, left behind his crown and 
other regalia ( thupetva makutudini) and betook himself to 
the Keraja country, the home of his mother Vanavan- 
mahadevi {gato Keralasantikam ) . Such was the end of 

the First Empire of the Pandyas, whose political fortunes 
we have traced through these two chapters. These last 
scenes may be placed about A.D. 920. 

Parantaka I Chola made an attempt late in his 
reign to capture the Pandya’s makuta from the Ceylonese 
ruler and failed ( c . A.D. 943) ; but this was actually 
accomplished later by the more fortunate Rajendra. 


1 aaiFKffo qftwi favrmTT^cr 1 



CHAPTER VII 

THE FIRST EMPIRE — {Concluded) 

THE history of the Pandyan kingdom in the period 
between the restoration after the Kalabhra occupation 
and the fall of Madura before Parantaka early in the 
tenth century, as made out by us so far, cannot by any 
means be regarded as either final or complete. Only the 
barest outlines of the story have been traced. Many 
points have had to be left unsettled ; others have been 
noted as points for future study in the light of further 
evidence that may become available. We have also had 
to pass by a large number of stone inscriptions dated in 
the regnal years of Maran Sadayan and Sadayan Maran 
which undoubtedly belong to this period, but cannot 
with certainty be assigned to particular rulers. If we 
know so little about the main line of the Pandyas, our 
knowledge about their subordinates and feudatories is 
even more limited. Passing references have been made 
already to the local chieftains known as Vels, of whom 
the chiefs of the family of Ay seem to have enjoyed a 
long^ spell of power and influence in the mountainous 
country between the Tinnevelly district and Travan- 
core. The Adigans of the Kongu country also felt the 
strength of the Pandyan kings and were forced for a 
time to acknowledge their supremacy. Somewhat more 
prominent than these chieftains seem to have been the 
Muttarayar 1 who have left behind several epigraphical 
records which have only been partially studied till now. 
It is certain that these rulers held large portions of the 

1 1 have not entered into the details of the records of the Muttarayar. 
Mr. K. V. Subramanya Aiyar discusses the Sendalai records very well in 
E< /., vol. xiii, pp. 134 ff. and Mr. Gopinatha Rao in Sen Tamil , voL 
vi, pp. 6 £E. A'R'E< 9 for 1899, pp. 5-6, and 1907, p. 54 are still useful. 



84 


THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 


Tanjore and Trichinopoly districts and possibly parts of 
Pudukkottah for several generations and that the centre 
of their power was somewhere in the district of Tanjore. 
Sendalai, at present a small village near Tirukkattupalli, 
appears once to have been a flourishing town with the 
beautiful name Candralekha, and either this place or 
Niyamam in its neighbourhood was most probably the 
centre of Muttaraya rule. There is even now in exis- 
tence a village by name Muttarasanallur within five 
miles of Trichinopoly. It is well known that a Peru- 
muttarayan is mentioned twice in the Naladiyar. The 
inscriptions from the Sendalai pillars mention three 
continuous generations of the Muttarayar ; the last of 
them was Suvaran Maran alias Perumbidugu Muttarayan 
who claims to have fought at many places on behalf of 
the Pallavas and against the Pandyas. There is also a 
curious coincidence in strange birudas between these 
rulers and the Pallava kings : — examples are Perum- 
bidugu and Videlvidugu. These facts might lead one 
to suppose that these rulers were the subordinate allies of 
their Pallava contemporaries. On the other hand, there 
are other facts which seem to make it necessary to 
modify this conclusion. First, some kings of the Mutta- 
raya line date their records in their own regnal jears (18 
of Ilango Muttarayan in No. 12 of 1899 from Sendalai). 
Secondly, one inscription (10 of 1899) which records a 
gift by a servant of a Muttarayan is dated in the tenth 
regnal year of Maranjadayan. And lastly, there is a gift 
by the queen of a Satrubhayankara Muttarayan recorded 
in a stone inscription in the Tinnevelly district and 
dated in the twenty-first regnal year of ^adayan Maran 
(421 of 1906). In fact at one stage it was even supposed 
that the Muttarayar were a branch of the ruling house of 
the Pandyas and emphasis was laid on the recurrence of 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


85 


the name Maran among the Muttaraya kings. But the 
facts set forth above indicate clearly that no simple 
hypothesis is likely to furnish the key to the true history 
of these chieftains. The best way of reconciling all the 
known facts about the Muttarayar seems to be to sup- 
pose that they held their sway for several generations in 
the debatable land between the Pandyas and the Pallavas 
and ruled, either independently or in subjection to the 
Pandyas or the Pallavas, in accordance with the trend 
of contemporary politics. It is unfortunate that no defi- 
nite and detailed conclusions can be arrived at regarding 
the history of these rulers and the part they played in the 
story of South India. But the conjecture may be 
accepted that when Vijayalaya recovered Tanjore for the 
Cholas, he must have taken it from a Muttaraya chief. 
The Sendalai inscriptions call one of them the lord of 
Tanjai and Vallam. 

Before leaving the period of the First Pandya Empire, 
as we have called it, an attempt maybe made to bring 
together a few facts relating to the social and religious 
life of the age. We know very little of the details of 
government and administration ; and the few references 
we get to Uttaramantrins and Mahasamantas have been 
noticed under the reign of Jatila Parantaka above. We 
have a reference to an officer in charge of the elephants, 
under the name Matangajadhyak§a in the Madras 
Museum plates and this, together with a reference to Tiru- 
malai Virar and Parantaka Virar in an inscription of the 
forty-second year of Maranjadayan from Kalugumalai, 1 

1 Inscription No. 863 of 1917. Mr. Krishna Sastri (A.R t £. t 1918), says 
that the reference to Parantaka Virar suggests the time of the father of Raja- 
simha, the donor of the Sinnamarmr grant. I do not know if he had any 
difficulty in assigning this record to Parantaka I Pandya and I do not think 
that Parantaka II reigned as many as forty-two years. I have therefore 
treated the record as belonging to the earlier king. 



86 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


is about all that we can gather on the military organization 
of the state in this period. One wonders if names like 
Parantaka Vlrar are designations of particular regiments 
or groups of soldiers. There does not seem to have been 
any rigid distinction between the civil and military 
services under the government, and in Marangari we get 
the instance of a versatile officer who was famed alilce for 
his services in war and as Uttaramantri and who was 
besides poet and orator. It seems likely that an expedi- 
tionary army was composed of troops brought together 
from several parts of the country each under its own 
leader, and we have instances of such leaders or the king 
himself, setting up permanent memorials celebrating the 
heroism of particular soldiers who distinguished them- 
selves above their compeers in war. Thus from the 
Kalugumalai record which refers to the expedition 
against faadayan Karunandan (43 of 1908) we learn that 
two soldiers did well in the storming of a fortress 
( QsiriLm >l_ /sebrjy Q&iljmi uiLi—irir ) before they 

fell, that they were in the household service (a-Wr 
QaauSlp Q&euair) of one Mangala Enadi alias Etti- 
mannan, and that this Enadi 1 made an endowment for 
the merit of these two soldiers named Vinayantolu Suran 
and Sattan Nakkan. And again, the Trivandrum 
Museum stone inscription of the twenty-seventh year of 
Maranjadayan (277 of 1895) is a record of the fail of 
another warrior by name Ranakirti in the service of the 
k ing before the fortress of Karaikkottai ; and as this 
Ranakirti is said to have been a very loving servant of 

1 Mr. T. A. Gopinatha Rao says : * Enadi corresponds to the European 
knighthood. The recipient of this honour must be the commander of an 
army and must have distinguished himself in the battlefield. The king 
adorns such a worthy soldier with a signet ring and confers upon him the 
title of En&du See the commentary on eighth sutra of Purattinaiyiyal, 
Porujadikaram, Tolkappiyam,’ Trav, Arch . Series , vol. i, p. 4, n, 9, 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


87 


the king, it is not unlikely that the king himself caused 
this stone to be set up and engraved. 

The kings as a rule seem to have been very generous 
patrons of learning and the arts. The few long epigraphs 
of this age that have come down to us furnish, by their 
poetic merit, clear proof of the high state of literary 
culture in the Sanskrit and Tamil languages in the 
Pandya country and are evidently compositions of court 
poets who were regularly maintained by the kings. The 
names of some of these composers of pra&astis have been 
preserved in the records. These compositions which are 
recorded in the copper plates which register the more 
important royal grants are, as we have seen, the most 
important source for the general history of the rulers of 
this age ; but they also furnish information on several 
minor matters of considerable interest to the student of 
social life. We learn very casually from the Madras 
Museum plates that there was a colony of Brahmins from 
Magadha; and that they had a separate gramam set 
apart for them by name fsabdali and this may be accept- 
ed as some evidence that the south of India was in those 
days not isolated from the north as is sometimes 
thought. We are able to trace the prevalence of two 
subordinate divisions adapted evidently to local adminis- 
trative purposes. One of them is referred^ to as nudu 
or kurram and the Sanskrit part of the Sinnamanur 
grant even applies the term rtistra to the same divi- 
sion. The Had™ seems to have been the connecting 
link between the kingdom as a whole and the smallest 
unit of local administration which is referred to usually 
as grWmam. The names of grUmams usually end in 
mcmgalam , kutfi and Mr and occasionally in vayal. 
The forms observed on the occasions when kings made 
gifts of whole villages are very interesting and deserve 



88 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


some notice. The gift is always a danam in the reli- 
gious sense and is expressed usually by the phrase 
$Q!riru.L-iq-xQatr®ppirm, which the Sinnamanur plates 
render into ambuparvam. The boundary of the village 
to be given away was generally fixed by following the 
beat of a female elephant that was let loose for the 
purpose as is indicated by ‘ LDesrevreueBr&i umfltuireo 
euq-eximuiuju iSiisf-fVjiptk prrax * of the Madras Museum 
grant and karenu sancam vibakta stmU of the Sinna- 
manur grant ; and the boundary was marked by stones 
and live fences of kalli (ereoSso seoguik a&retfliijii) 

is ir iL is?-) and also clearly recorded in writing. The grant 
was invariably engraved on copper plates and a high 
officer of state was entrusted with the task of drawing 
up and recording the anatti or royal order in pro- 
per form. It is curious that the scribes are gener- 
ally the Perumhanaikkarans of the kings making 
the grant . 1 * * All the gifts, when they did not go 
to temples, seem to have been in favour of Brahmanas 
and the lands so granted to Brahmanas had a recognized 
legal status brahmadeyam. This status is expressed in 
set phrases of which the following from the Madras 
Museum grant is a good example : * tShriluo Q ^ajuurmA 

srjnrexir<ss)LDiL/ih LStu/rL—QiL/ui a_s frsiri — ibs etoireuuifl eunii’jrtn/rs 
SQ/riri—iLuf-s (§®aauuiLi—&i\ KtZranmai and Miyatci 
are technical terms as can be seen from the Sanskrit 
part of the Sinnamanur plates which keeps the terms as 
such in the phrase ‘ Ku.rM.mai miyatci yutam samas - 
tam \ We have at present no means of fixing the exact 


1 Mr. Krishna Sastri does well in not translating this term in his edition 

of the Velvikkudi grant and thus declining to follow Venkayya’s lead in 
rendering it into * chief drummer V uk has other meanings besides 

* drum one of which is 4 a row of horses \ May Qu^dudssard^jrpreifr 

mean chief cavalry officer ? 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


89 


meanings of these terms. But as Karanmai seems 
etymologically connected with cultivation and MiyUtci 
likewise with supervision and control, we may not be far 
wrong if we take the terms to indicate the rights of 
tenancy and landlordship respectively . 1 The clear 
renunciation of all the rights of the donor contained in 
the phrase sarvapariharamaka must also be noticed. 
When the gift has been completed the king generally 
requests his successors and every one that comes after 
him to respect his dma and this request is reinforced 
in the records by suitable quotations from the sacred 
laws ( Smrti ) of the land. One circumstance recorded 
in the Velvikkudi grant is of considerable importance 
and it is unfortunate that the meaning of the text here 
should not be clearer than it is. The conditions under 
which this grant was made are very peculiar. The donee 
claims that Velvikkudi was granted to his ancestors by 
an ancient Pandya king Kudumi and that this gift was 
cancelled by the Kalabhra interregnum and that this 
ought to be restored to him. It is strange that this man 
should have waited for seven generations after the 
Pandyan restoration to reclaim the grant and at that late 
day should start by quarrelling with the king over the 
matter (akrodkikka). What followed must be related in 
the words of the grant 4 «r«arjj/ Sesrpeuesr 

iSliuigtjQ&tinJ jsyiBesrQpeBrjpi QpjpisueQ psitlLl- irsuResr 

U£p<sif>Lbtuir£s£o <ssiril.uf-i§ QsreksQeueiiesr, isir L-i— rr ppesr 
ufpsmLCiUJtr jEso an’tl-ty-(6B)(S!piEt&u Quir(Lp(2<3)iu. > Evidently 
here the king does not seem to have at first taken the 
petitioner seriously ; he laughed at his impudence and 
perhaps thought it an easy way of dismissing the petition 
by demanding a proof [isirtL®) of the original gift and 

1 Cf. V. Venkayya, I. A., vol. xxii, p. 74, n. 89. 

12 



90 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


of the antiquity of the petitioner’s rights ; but strangely 
enough, the proof was produced then and there, and the 
king forthwith renewed the gift. The difficulty lies in 
our inability to understand isiriL® in the passage cited 
above. 1 But most probably it was only a general term 
for satisfactory evidence. And the evidence that was 
produced in this case was most likely a written document 
which had just been found by the petitioner on the 
strength of which he made bold to press his suit in the 
manner indicated. 

The grUmam was the unit of local administration as 
pointed out before, and there are enough indications 
to show that as a rule it was well able to take care of its 
affairs and that it inspired confidence in the king of the 
country by efficiency and rectitude in its conduct of 
affairs. An inscription from Tiruccendur (26 of 1912) 
tells us that the king Varaguna Maharaja distributed 
among sixteen villages a large endowment he made to 
the local temple for meeting the cost of service in the 

1 See K, G. Sankara in /. A., vol. li, p. 215. Mr. L. D. Swamikkamm 
Pillai was surely wrong if he assumed that oral evidence was in 
question here. I am unable to accept Mr. Krishna Sastri’s translation of 
rsrrtlL-rr<sv into * (by a reference to) the district (assembly) J . isir(B does mean 
1 district 1 as I have pointed out above and this explanation of miLi^ireo as 
the instrumental of isrr® will be plausible if we had clear proof otherwise, 
which we do not have, of the existence, at this period of such district assem- 
blies. But this is not the only difficulty. If it was a reference to the district 
assembly, that ought to have been found easier to make soon after the 
Pandya restoration under Kadungon than so many generations after him; 
and we do not say why the petition was not made earlier. Again the proof 
must have been such that (1) it was missed for long ; (2) it was capable of 
production before the king at a moments notice ; and (3) it must have been 
so conclusive as evidence that the’ king was ready to accept it on the spot 
without any further enquiry. The phrases in the text of the grant clearly 
imply all this. And these conditions are best satisfied by a written docu- 
ment like a copper plate grant— what shall we not pay to get this plate if 
that were possible ! I therefore propose to follow Mr. K. G, Sankara and 
make virtLt-Jrio the instrumental of ibitiL ® der. from — fix,. establish. 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


91 


temple throughout the twelve months of the year. The 
total endowment consisted of 1,400 gold ka'sus and these 
ka'sus were to be a permanent endowment, only the 
interest being spent for the purposes specified. The 
rate of interest is fixed at two kalams of paddy per annum 
on each ku'su. The penalty for default strikes us how- 
ever as severe. It is that interest is doubled during the 
period of default and in addition a heavy fine of twenty- 
five gold kasus is to be paid to the temple. Again a sum of 
290 gold ka'sus was, in the sixteenth year of the same king, 
placed in the hands of the assembly of Ambasamudram 


Vlrrirundu Ilangdkkudi ccavaiyar kaiyirkkudutta ka'su 
Irunurruttonmlyu ) to be utilized likewise as a permanent 
endowment ; the interest on the endowment was fixed 
at the same rate as in the other gift viz., two kalams 
of paddy per annum per ka'su ; the proceeds comprising 
580 kalams of paddy per annum to be given by the 
assembly were to be devoted to meet the cost of offer- 
ings {tint amudu ) to be made four times a day in the 
temple of Tiruppottudaiya Bhatarar at Ilangokkudi 
according to a detailed schedule of offerings given in the 
inscription; and it was made the duty of the servants of 
the temple and a committee of the assembly to see that 
the expenditure was properly incurred from day to day 
{Bhatarar panimakkalum Ilangokkudi ccavai variyarum 
udaninru . . . n&ngu kalamum-tiruvamidu-Seluttum- 
patpi).' 1 Again theTrichinopoly inscription of the elev- 
enth year of Varaguna records another endowment of 125 


1 Mr. Venkayya seems to have missed the full significance of these words. 
The schedule of expenses that is given in the rest of the inscription is very 
interesting as it gives full details for a total expenditure of exactly 580 lcalams 
and contains information as to the prevailing ratio of exchange among 
several articles of common consumption. See E, /., vol, ix, pp. 92-3. 



92 


THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 


kalanjus of gold for the regular supply of ghi for the 
burning of four perpetual lamps and five other lamps in 
the temple of Tirumalai Bhatarar. This endowment 
was placed in fixed deposit with the Nagarattar of 
Sirr-ambar, and its proper administration 'was vested 
in the Pati of Sirrambar and the servants of the temple 
as trustees — ^&iQeurrtLi^.esr urfl&Qtt it 

LjSsmruuLLQi—ir ii> §)ppLc>uiru$iL]Ut urr 

Qpu )). 1 It may well be that the Nagarattar of Siffambar 
were a corporation of merchants in the place ; but it 
is not possible to say who the Pati Was. He might have 
been the head of the corporation of merchants or a royal 
officer. The analogy of the Ilangokkudi-ccavai variyam 
points to the former alternative. It is very interesting 
to see that the kalanju mentioned in this record is the 
same as the gold kasu, the coin being apparently descri- 
bed by its weight here ; 2 we cannot however be sure of 
the exact weight of the kalanju itself in those days. A 
record in some respects more interesting than these 

1 Mr. Venkayya, A.S.l. s 1903-4, p. 276, makes LurjSfyHsopGpirib the ser- 
vants of the Pati. I have followed the analogy of the Ambasamudram 
inscription in my rendering, as there seems to be no point in mentioning 
the servants of the Pati as trustees after mentioning the Pati himself as one. 

2 The conclusion is the result of a simple calculation from the data 
given by this and the Ambasamudram record. Two nalis of ghi were to- be 
given every day for four lamps to be maintained from the interest (Qu/rcrf?) 
on 120 kalanjus (Trichi. inscr.) ; the Ambasamudram records give the 
information 1 na{i of ghi = 30 nalis of paddy. This will give 60 n&jis of paddy 
every day as the cost of the service ; this makes 2/3 of a kalam (=15 
kuru%m = 90 nalis 7 Venkayya in E. /.) per day or roughly 240 kalams per 
year of 360 days, which is just the interest on 120 kalanjus (has us) at the 
prevailing rate of 2 kalams per annum per kasu (Kalanju). This conclusion, 
it must be noted, casts a doubt on Venkayya’s rendering of ujrLfLd&GOeojreo 
in the Trichinopoly record into * weighed by the standard of the district*. If 
the calculation made in this note is accepted, it will be proof that the same 
standards prevailed all over the Pandya country at the time, which is not 
unlikely, in such matters as the weight of the standard coin and the 
interest on perpetual royal endowments to temples. 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


93 


comes from Manur in the Tinnevelly district and it is dated 
in the thirty-fifth year of Maranjadayan. If this Maran- 
jadayan were the same as Varaguna Maharaja, as proba- 
bly he is, then the record may be assigned to about A.D. 
800 and would thus precede the famous Uttiramallur 
records of the time of Parantaka I by well over a century. 
This fact deserves to be stressed a little as this inscrip- 
tion contains a record of rules for membership in the 
Sabha of the village which have been summed up 1 as 
follows by the official epigraphist (Madras) in the Annual 
Report for / gi y : * It is stated that of the children 
of shareholders in the village, only one, who is well 
behaved and has studied the Mantra BrUhmana and one 
Dharma (i.e. Code of Law) may be on the village assem- 
bly ( manru ) to represent the share held by him in the 
village and only one of similar qualifications may be 
on the assembly for a share purchased* received as 
present or acquired by him as stridkana (through his 
wife) ; (2) that (shares) purchased, presented or acquired 
as strtdhana could entitle one, if at all, only to full 
membership in the assemblies ; and in no case will 
quarter, half or three-quarter membership be recognized ; 
(3) that those who purchase shares must elect only such 
men to represent their shares on the assembly, as have 
critically studied a whole Veda with its pari'sistas ; (4) 
that those who do not possess full membership as laid 
down by rule (2), cannot stand on any committee 
(i vdriyam ) for the management of village affairs ; (5) 
that those who satisfy the prescribed conditions should 
in no case persistently oppose (in the proceedings of the 

1 In the paragraph A. R. E., 1913 (part ii. para. 23) containing this 
summary it seems to me that the epigraphist combines sources in order 
to make a picture of village administration which is, in essence, not a 
faithful reflection of our sources* 



94 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


assembly) by saying “ nay, nay” to every proposal brought 
up before the assembly and (6) that those who do this 
together with their supporters will pay a fine of five kasus 
on each item (in which they so behaved) and still 
continue to submit to the same rules.’ It is a pity that 
twenty years after the discovery of this inscription, its 
text should not be available for scholars. But even the 
abstract given above contains enough to show the import- 
ance of the record. Other inscriptions which have been 
reviewed here tell us generally of the existence of village 
assemblies and of their carrying on their work through 
committees. And this Manor record may be taken 
perhaps as giving a type of the constitutions of village 
assemblies in this period in the south of the Pandya 
country. Membership in the assembly was regulated by 
qualifications of property and learning very much as in 
the well-known inscriptions from Uttiramallur (Chingle- 
put) of the early tenth century A.D. There seems to have 
been no election to the assembly, but all important 
property interests were represented on it. This seems 
to have made the sabha a rather unwieldy body in 
which the transaction of business with reasonable 
despatch could only be secured by somewhat drastic 
rules against organized obstruction on the part of sections 
of the members. We learn nothing however as to the 
method of appointing the committee (variyam) of the 
assembly which formed the executive of the assembly, 
each in its respective sphere of work. 

We may now turn to a brief review of the state of 
religious belief in the period of our study. We have 
seen that in the early centuries of the Christian era, in the 
S ang am age, Buddhism, Jainism and Brahminism flouri- 
shed in the Tamil land. The central feature of the 
development that followed in the succeeding centuries 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


95 


was the determined effort made by the exponents of 
Brahminism in its various forms to suppress the hereti- 
cal sects of Buddhism and Jainism, an effort which was 
apparently marked by greater success against the 
Buddhists than against the Jains. Yuan Chwang writing 
in the middle of the seventh century A.D. deplores the 
decay of Buddhism in South India and envies the pros- 
’ perity of the Jains. We can also trace many survivals 
of Jainism to a comparatively late age. At Ervadi in 
the Tinnevelly district there was discovered a squatting 
Jaina figure and engraved below it is a small inscription, in 
Vatteluttu characters of about the eighth century A.D. , 
which reads* Work of Ajjanandi ’. This Jaina teacher 
appears to be referred to in the Jlvakacintamani also. 
Another inscription in the same place of about the same 
period records a grant of land to a Jaina temple. 1 Two 
inscriptions of Maranjadayan from the Ramnad district 
(430 and 431 of 1914) make mention of Tirukkattampalli 
which seems to have been a Jaina temple at Kurandai, an 
important Jaina centre in Venbunadu. 2 And the well- 
known Aivarmalai record of A.D. 870 records the renewal 
of the images of Parsva-Bhatarar and the Yaksis at 
Tiruvayirai by one Santivlraguravar, the pupil of Guna- 
vlrakkuravadigal. And even Rajasimha II, the last of 
the Pandya rulers of this age, is said to have endowed, 
among others, several Jaina temples ( erwresSpkfs um<s,fi<3= 
It is clear from such facts that Jainism 
was not overwhelmed so completely as Buddhism by the 
rising tide of Saivism and Vaisnavism in the land. 

A detailed study of the various movements of this 
heroic age of religion in South India is outside the 
scope of this history. But some attention must be given 

1 See A . R . E . 1916, part ii, para. 2. 

2 A% R* E. 1915, part ii,*para. 29. 



96 


THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 


to that part of the legendary accounts of the age which 
centres round Madura and the Pandya country, and 
an attempt made to estimate the influence of the revival of 
Hinduism on the Pandya country. We have seen some 
reason to think that Manikkavasagar, the great antago- 
nist of Buddhism, was among the earliest of the great 
saints of this age. It is very likely that the period of 
his ministry was sometime before the restoration of the 
Pandya rule under Kadungon. This fervid devotee of 
£iva had his birth in the Pandya country,, and started in 
life as a high officer of the Pandya king ; the scene of his 
chief triumphs against the Buddhists was Chidambaram, 
and there is some reason to think that the Pandyan 
power extended to Chidambaram in his day. It is 
remarkable that the sage ends his contest with the 
Buddhists by admitting the discomfited opponents into 
the fold of Saivism and that as Pope has observed ' no 
mention is made of the use of any violent measures 
The greatest achievement of the sage, — this is true also 
of many others like him in this period — was the propaga- 
tion of his faith by means of fervid popular songs 
which were Unique in their lyrical beauty and the simp- 
licity and directness of their appeal to the human heart. 
The name of Tirugnanasambandar, whom Saivites regard 
as the greatest of Saiva saints of this age, is connected 
with the story of a miraculous cure worked on a Pandya 
king who may be identified, as we have seen, with 
Arikesari Parankusa, who ruled in the second half of the 
seventh century A.D. Later legend makes the occasion a 
turning point in the history of orthodox Saivism in the 
Pandya country. The king was a Jain and the whole 
land was taking to the heretical doctrine after him ; and 
it was only the devotion of the queen, who was a Chola 
princess, and the minister Kulaccirai that saved the 



THE FIRST EMPIRE 


97 


situation by sending word to the great saint of Shiyali 
begging him to come and reclaim the land by combating 
the Jains and putting an end to their influence over the 
king. It is needless to narrate the story of what 
followed, as* it is sufficiently known. But it must be 
stated that there is little ground for the view that many 
Jains were put to a cruel death on the occasion. The 
Tamil PurUnas indeed say that 8,000 Jains were 
impaled on stakes ; but this seems apocryphal. At any 
rate the saint Sambanda does not seem to be connected 
with the employment of violent measures and what 
troubles the Jains experienced seem to have been at the 
hands of the secular power. 1 Indeed, at the end of the 
contest with the Saiva saint, we learn that the Jains still 
continued defiant, and unlike the Buddhist opponents of 
Manikkavasagar at Chidambaram, these Jains of Madura 
refused to embrace the faith of their victorious opponent 
when he invited them to do so. 

The contest against the heretical sects was carried 
on by the Vaisnava Alvars as much as by the Saiva 
Nayanars. But the history of the AJvars is even more 
obscure than that of the Nayanars and it is not possible 
to say much of any of them with confidence. We 
have noted before the attempt to fix the age of 
Madhurakavi and his Guru Nammalvar by identifying 
Madhurakavi-alvar with the minister Marangari who is 
also called Madhurakavi in the Anamalai inscription. It 
has also been supposed that Nammalvar (Kari Maran) 
was the son of the minister and that ‘ he may have 
given his own father’s surname Madhurakavi to his 


1 See verses 853 and 854 of Gnanasambanda's life in the PtrlyapurSnam 
and verses 43 and 45 in the 38th Tiruvilctiya4al in PerumbarrappnliySr 
Nambi. 


13 



98 


T HE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


disciple as a dfisyanfima ..' 1 But, however plausible 
such assumptions may be, they are still only assump- 
tions which await some tangible proof. The suggestion 
has been made that another Vaisnava saint, Periyalvar, 
was the contemporary of Jatila Parantaka I. 2 Periyalvar 
does refer to a Pandya king Nedumaran in the 
lines. ‘ (Q&ir)Gsretsr<s£led ak.rQeupQ'SrreBr QisG>lL£iirp6br 
&.i—pQ&iresr Qpissrenrek 6)ffi/r®ijr£_/r©ti OpesrySI^LairsSlQ^^ 

G&ir&oQtu*. All that we can infer is that, if this 

Nedumaran is the same as the contemporary of Gnana- 
sambandar, this Alvar may also be assigned to their 
age and likewise his daughter Andal. It seems more 
likely however that the reference is to Sri Mara 
Srlvallabha. But this inference can only be tentative, 
and in any case there is no reason to assign Periyalvar 
to the times of Jatila Parantaka. But the references 
in Periyalvar to the Pandyas, and the instances we 
have already noticed of the erection of two temples 
to Visnu in the time of Parantaka Nedunjadayan furnish 
sufficient evidence of the influence of Vaisnavism in 
the Pandya country in this period. The epigraphs of 
the age furnish numerous instances of private benefac- 
tions to temples for the burning of lamps, the mainte- 
nance of gardens, etc., and one of these records from 
Tirupputtur (136 of 1908) mentions the gift of ten dlnaras 
(kUsu) by a Brahmin lady for the burning of a lamp. 

1 Gopinatha Rao, iSri Vaisnavas, p. 19. 

* See Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar in Sen Tamil, vol. vi, pp. S2-3. He 
is able to prove that Jatila was a worshipper of Visnu ; but this is admit- 
ted. But (1) he misinterprets the phrase Qartan-irif. in the Madras 

Museum plates by ignoring the phrase u >£ which im- 
mediately precedes it ; the word @0 means here, surely, not spiritual 
preceptor (Pandit’s meaning), but the king’s ancestors who preceded him 
on the throne ; (2) the pandit does not say how Nedumaran can be identi- 
fied with Nedunjadayan. See Also Gopinatha Rao, History of Srivai^na- 
vas, pp. 5 and 23 and A.R.E., 1927, part ii, para 36. 



CHAPTER VIII 
THE CHOLA CONQUEST 

From about A.D. 925 to the beginning of the thirteenth 
century, for some three centuries, the Pandyan king- 
dom ceased to exist as an independent state and was 
part of the empire of the Cholas. There are only a few 
records that can be referred with certainty to the Pandya 
rulers of this period and for the rest we have to 
depend on the Chola inscriptions themselves. One thing 
however is clear, namely, that the Pandyas never recon- 
ciled themselves to the rule of the Cholas in their 
country any more than others were willing to bear the 
rule of the Pandyas in the years before. The country 
seems to have been in a state of chronic revolt and the 
Chola emperors were fighting repeatedly in the Pandya 
country very much as the Pandya rulers of the first 
empire did in the Travancore and Kongu countries. 
The Chola emperors also found it necessary for a time to 
depute members of the royal family to act as viceroys in 
the Pandya country and the records of some of these 
Chola- Pandya viceroys have come down to us. But 
when we piece together all the fragmentary data that 
can be gathered from our sources, we do not get even 
the outline of a continuous account. We get the names 
of only a few of the Pandyan kings of this period. There 
is no possibility of tracing the relationship of these 
rulers and many gaps remain to be filled by future 
discovery and research. 

After the conquest of Madura by Parantaka I Chola 
and the flight of Rajasimha II about A.D. 920, the 
Pandya country passed under Chola control and was 



100 


1'HE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


subject to Parantaka almost to the end of his reign. This 
is borne out by the inscriptions of Parantaka found in the 
Pandya country, 1 the latest of these being an inscription 
from Sucindram in South Travancore dated in the 
fortieth year of the king corresponding to aTd. 947. In 
the thirty-eighth year of Parantaka, he levied a rather heavy 
impost {dandam) of 3,000 kaianju of gold on the members 
of the assembly ..of Kumbakonam (Tirukkudamukku), 
and they agreed to pay the amount to the Pandippadai- 
yar, by which is perhaps meant the forces that distingui- 
shed themselves in the conquest of the Pandya country. 2 

But towards the close of Parantaka’ s reign, some time 
before A.D. 949, a disaster overtook the newly establish- 
ed Chola power. The Kashtrakuta king Krishna III 
invaded the Chola country in great force and Rajaditya, 
the eldst son of Parantaka, lost his life in the battle of 
Takkola. Large portions of the Chola territory were 
occupied by Krishna who advanced as far as Tanjore 
and seems to have reduced the successors of Parantaka 
to an inferior position. 3 We have no stone inscriptions 
in the Pandya country relating to the Chola monarchs 
of this period. 

During this period of trouble in the Chola kingdom, 
the Pandya country seems to have been recovered by a 
member of the ancient royal family. We have a 

1 These are— 

No. 446 of 1917 at Kuttalam, twenty-fourth year. 

M 63 of 1905 at Anamalai, thirty- third year. 
t9 448 of 1917 at Kuttalam, thirty-sixth year. 

,, 82 of 1896 at Sucindram, fortieth year. 

* See A.R.E., 1912, p, 56, para 15. 

3 See 11. 42-5 of the larger JLeiden grant and EJ vol. iii, pp. 283-4, 
Also A.R.E., 1892, p. 3 ; and 1912, pp. 55 and 57. Was the impost on 
Kumbakonam levied by Parantaka in his thirty-eighth year an exceptional 
tax raised in view of the coming war with the Rashtraku^a king ? See 
also EJ.* vol. xix, pp. 82 E; contra A.R.E.* 1926, part ii, para 12. 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 


101 


considerable number of inscriptions in Vatteluttu 
characters, of a certain Vlra Pandya ‘ who took the head 
of the Chola Only a few of these records (e.g. No. 16 
of 1894) dated in his ninth and tenth years come from 
Klramattur in the Madura Taluq ; the others are all 
found further south in the Ramnad and Tinnevelly 
districts and in South Travancore, at Nagercoil and 
Suczndram. The claim of Vlra Pandya to have cut off 
the head of the Chola king does not seem to have been 
an empty boast. The history of the Chola dynasty be- 
tween the death of Parantaka I (A.D. 951) and the acces- 
sion of Raja Raja I (A.D. 985) is not altogether free from 
doubt. 1 But the Chola king who lost his life at the 


1 The arrangement I follow regarding the Chola kings of this period 
may be indicated here and some references added : 

(1) Parantaka 1— -Parakesari. 

(2) Gandaraditya— Maduraikonda Rajakesari [A.R.E . , 19X2, p. 57) . 

These records may however belong to No. (4) below. (See 
Ann. Rep. Trav . Arch . Dept.> 1919-20, p. 31). 

(3) Arinjaya— Parakesari (Larger Leiden grant, 11. 50-51 and 

Tiruvalangadu plates, verse 55) . 

Parantaka II 


( 4 ) 


( 5 ) 


Sundara 

Aditya II 
Karikala 


| Rajakesari 


l Parakesari 


(.contemporary Vira Pandya 1 who 
j took the head of the Chola \ 


(6) Madhurantaka 

Uttama Chola f Rajakesari title used by both. Tiruvalangadu 

(7) Raja Raja ' plates, verses 69 and 70 giving the cause of 

this exception. This assumption overcomes 
the difficulty pointed out in A.R.E., 1904, 

p. 10. 


It may be noted [re para 53 in the report for 1908, pp. 62-3) that the 
dates are doubtful in 265 of 1907 which may be a record of Aditya II ; and 
that this and Nos. 13 of 1895 and 357 of 1907 may also be assigned to Rajen- 
dra I who was a Parakesari and had the name Uttama Chola (Tiruvalangadu 
plates, verse 90). The same remark applies to No. 128 in SJ.l vol. iii — the 
Madras Museum plates of Uttama Chola, The date a.d. 969-70 for the 
accession of Parakesari, even if correct, may be accepted for Aditya II. It 
must be noted that this arrangement assumes that the explicit statement in 
the larger Leiden grant (11. 41-42) that Rajaditya ruled as king after his 



102 


THE P ANDY AN KINGDOM 


hands of Vira Pandya has been sometimes identified 
with Parantaka II Sundara Chola. 1 This Chola king 
fought at Chevur a battle which is referred to in the 
larger Leiden grant as follows : ' At the town named 
Chevur, he, completely filling all the directions by the 
multitude of very sharp arrows sent forth from his own 
beautiful bow, produced manifold rivers of blood flowing 
from the great royal elephants of his foes, cut down with 
his sharp sword.’ 2 It is remarkable that this rather 
forced account of the battle does not claim a victory for 
the Chola king ; this may mean that the Chola king did 
not have the best of the battle in spite of his heroism. 
This inference becomes more certain in the light of other 
facts. Vira Pandya claims to have taken the head of a 
Chola and his inscriptions mentioning this achievement 
range from his sixth to his nine teenth year (i 63 of 1 894 and 
65 of 1896). It is not possible to identify the prince who 
was killed by Vira Pandya ; but it cannot be Parantaka 
himself. 3 It seems a legitimate inference to make that 

father's death is a mistake as it seems to contradict the evidence on the battle 
of Takkola (A.R.E., 1892, p. 3 ; contra EJ. t vol. xv, p, 52) ; see also Trav. 
Arch. Series , vol. iii, pp. 67 ff, The discussion of this subject in A.R.E,, 
1926, part ii, paras 13 ff. does not seem to carry it much farther, 

* Cf . T. A. Gopinatha Rao in E.I. , vol. xv; contra, H. K. Sastri in 
para 31, part ii, of A.R.E. for 1915. It is rather strange that Mr. Sastri 
should think that the larger Leiden grant says that a Vira Pandya was 
defeated by Sundara Chola. He also remarks : ‘ The boast of Vira Pandya 
that he also took the head of the Chola king may be explained by assuming 
that before he was beheaded by Adilya II he would probably have killed 
a Chola,’ See also A.R.E., 1921, p. 109. The number of years (13} covered 
by the records of Vira Pandya * who took the head of the Chola ’ preclude 
the supposition that he killed Sundara Chola and was himself killed soon 
af ter by Aditya II. 

2 Burgess and Natesa Sastri— Tamil and Sanskrit inscriptions, p. 217. The 
suggestion that Vira Pandya who took the head of the Chola ’ may have 
been the son and successor of Rajasimha II based on No. 122 of 1905 
[Trav. Arch . Series, iii* p. 68) is not easy to accept as it does not seem to fit 
in with the chronology of the period. 

* Messrs, Krishna Sastri and K. V. Subramanya Aiyar come to the 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 


103 


Parantaka II Sundara Choi a fought with a Pandya a 
battle at Chevur and that this fight furnished the 
occasion of Vira Pandya’s distinction, and some further 
support may be found for this assumption in the fact that 
Chevur, nof yet satisfactorily identified, was the scene of 
many fights between the Pandya rulers and their foes in 
an earlier age. 

But if Vira Pandya succeeded in repelling what was 
perhaps the first attempt to recover Chola power in the 
south at the end of the Rashtrakuta occupation, his 
success did not leave any permanent results. The son 
and successor of Parantaka II on the Chola throne seems 
to have avenged his father’s defeat by proceeding against 
Vira Pandya in sufficient strength to inflict a crushing 
defeat on him and then to capture and decapitate 
him. And this victory of Aditya is referred to in an 
inscription (No. 472 of 1908) of the second year of his 
reign so that it seems quite possible that this success 
was won even in his father’s life time. 1 Vira Pandya 
then did not reap the benefits of his victory over Sundara 
for more than fifteen to twenty years at the most. 
But he seems to have made good use of this brief 
respite secured by him. His inscriptions contain 
references to a Cholantaka Brahmaraya, a Cholantaka 

conclusion that Parantaka II was the king who claims to have driven the 
Pandya to the forest and who is referred to as the king who died in the 
Golden Hall. (See S.I.I. , vol. iii, p. 255 ; E. vol. xii, pp. 124-5 ; the 
only references are those given by Mr. Aiyar and they are not such as to bear 
his interpretation 0 The inscriptions relied on by Messrs. Sastri and Aiyar 
are all very fragmentary with the possible exception of the vague reference 
in verse 63 of the Kanyakumari inscription of Virarajendra ( Trav. Arch % 
Series , vol. iii, p. 144). Venkayya accepts the identification of Ponmalgait- 
tunjinadeva with Parantaka II but says nothing of the other attribute 
(5././., vol, ii, Introduction, p. 1 ; see also No. 302 of 1908). 

1 See Leiden grant, 11. 58-60 and TiruvUangadu plates, verse 67. On a 
Parthivendravarman who has the same title as Aditya II, (see A.R.E^ 1900, 
p. 7 ; 1910, p. 76 ; 1911, p. 88 ; 1921, p. 109), 



104 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Pallavarayan and a Cholantakan nali (grain-measure). 
Cholantaka was probably a surname assumed by Vira 
Pandya after his successful fight with the Cholas 1 and 
the reference to the nali may imply that the king found 
time to regulate the weights and measures'' used in the 
land. Six inscriptions of this king from the Ramnad 
district refer to a Sundara Pandya Isvaram Udaiyar 
temple in Tirucculi Pallimadam, a village in the 
district ; it is not possible to say who this Sundara 
Pandya was though it seems certain that he must have 
been closely connected with Vira Pandya. 

It is not known if Madhurantaka Uttama Chola 
undertook any expedition against Madura as his biruda 
may imply, or as seems more likely, if he only inherited 
his title from his father Gandaraditya who has been 
identified with Maduraikonda Raj akesari of the inscrip- 
tions. 2 At any rate, there is no reason to doubt that 
the Chola power was not fully restored in the Pandya 
country by the success of Aditya II and that later, it 
became more firmly established in the time of the great 
Raja Raja I who came to the Chola throne in A.D. 985. 
That Raja Raja took great credit for his conquest of the 
Pandya country is clear from his inscriptions. A record 
of the twenty-ninth year of Raja Raja says, for instance, 
‘ that he deprived the Seliyas (i.e. the Pandyas) of 
(their) splendour at the very moment when (they were) 
resplendent (to such a degree) that (they were) worthy 
to be worshipped everywhere.’ 3 But we know little of 
the details. ‘ It is in inscriptions of the eighth year 

1 S eeA.jR.J2., 1910, p. 86 ; 1915, partii, para 31. 

* See A.R.E. 1912, p. 57. Gandaraditya himself seems to have got the 
title Madhurantaka from the part he took in his father’s conquest of Madura 
or by mere heredity. 

a SJ.L, vol. ii, p. 250. 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 105 

(A.D. 994) of the king’s reign that the usual historical 
introduction, beginning with the words Tivumakalpola , 
which was evidently composed after the conquest of the 
Pandyas, occurs for the first time ’ (Venkayya) and the 
conquest of ftie south may be taken to have far advanced 
by that time. The little that is known of the campaigns 
of this conquest has been summarised by Venkayya 1 
as follows : ‘ In his first campaign the king is said to 
have destroyed a fleet in the port of Kandalur, which 
appears to have been situated in the dominions of the 
Chera king. The Tiruvalangadu plates which furnish a 
lengthy account of Raja Raja’s campaigns do not men- 
tion this item at all. They begin with the war against 
the Pandyas and report that Raja Raja seized the Pandya 
king, Amarabhujanga, and that the Chola general captur- 
ed the port of Vilinam. Perhaps, Kandalur or Kandalur 
Salai was near Vilinam. It is not unlikely that the 
Chola king fought on more than one occasion against the 
Pandyas. The Cheras and the Pandyas appear to have 

1 See vol. ii, Intro., pp. 2-3. Venkayya also says : ‘A place named 

Udagai (*.*«>*) is mentioned in connection with the conquest of the Pan- 
dyas (p. 250, n, 3). The Kalingatiupparani refers to the “storming of 
Udagai ” in the verse which alludes to the reign of Raja Raja. The KuWt- 
tunga-Sdlan- Uld also mentions the burning of Udagai. This was probably 
an important stronghold in the Pandya country which the Chola king 
captured.’ But the Kalingatiupparani, verse viii. 22, clearly implies that 
Udagai was not in the Pandya country but outside the traditional limits of. 
that kingdom ; therefore Mr. Venkayya’s note to the passage quoted 
above is more to the point: ‘The Knur inscription of Raja Raja’s twenty- 
seventh year (No. 236 of 1902) which is partly mutilated, supplies a histori- 
cal introduction of the king in Tamil poetry, different from the usual 
pyaxerGurw etc., and mentions the king’s conquest of Udagai in his campaign 
against Malainadu. As already stated the Pandya country must have also 
included Malainadu at the time of Raja Raja’s conquest.* On KandalEr 
Salai, see Trav. Arch , Series , vol. ii, pp. 2-5 for a more likely interpretation. 
Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar is inclined to interpret all references to 
GMOwjvpfiGo as suppressions of local risings. But there are 
difficulties in accepting this view also. 

14 



106 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


been allied together in their war against the Chola king, 
for in the Tanjore inscriptions reference is frequently 
made to the conquest of the Chera king and the Pan- 
dyas in Malainadu, i.e. the west coast. Kandalur Salai 
which is stated to belong to the Chera king in later 
inscriptions was probably held by the Pandyas when it 
was attacked by Raja Raja.’ Many inscriptions of Raja 
Raja have been found in various places in the Pandya 
country and these range from the ninth to the twentieth 
years of his reign. Other facts also show that the Chola 
suzerainty in the Pandya country was firmly established 
by Raja Raja. Even the name of the Pandya country 
undergoes a change and becomes Raja-raja-Mandalam 
or Raja-raja-Pandinadu in the Chola records; 1 and we 
come to hear of a sub-division Pandya-kulasani-valanadu 
for the first time in the age of Raja Raja or possibly a 
little earlier. 2 Among the queens of Raja Raja is one 
Pancavanmahadevi referred to in inscriptions from the 
tenth year of Raja Raja (No. 254 of 1907) ; and in the 
twenty-eighth year of the king a grant is made by one 
of his queens Vemban Slrudaiyar alias Minavan Maha- 
deviyar. 3 Raja Raja apparently also used the Pandya 
country as a base for a successful raid on Ceylon between 
the seventeenth and twentieth years of his reign. 4 A 
Tanjore inscription of the twenty-fourth year of Raja Raja 5 
contains an order dealing with defaulters in land-revenue 
in Pandinadu alias Raja-raja-valanadu, among others. 
Above all, Raja Raja’s son and successor Rajendra 
inherited the Pandya country from his father. His 

* A.R.E., 1917, pp. 106-7. 

2 See No. 4SS of 1908 and 672 of 1909 which are Nos. 691 and 538 respec- 
tively under Trichinopoly district in Mr. V. Rangacharya’s Inscriptions of 
the Madras Presidency. 

» A.R.E., 1909, p. 91. 

* vol. iii. No. 9. 


4 J.R.A.S . , 1913, pp. 523-24. 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 


107 


inscriptions are found in places like Tinnevelly and 
Cape Comorin in the Pandya country which he does not 
claim to have conquered. 1 Rajendra’s relations with the 
Pandya kingdom can be traced clearly from the records 
of his time!! The Pandyas of the old line seem to have 
continued their rule in a subordinate capacity ; an 
inscription in the third year of Rajendra (No. 46 of 1907) 
from Tiruvisalur in the Tanjore district, records a gift 
of ornaments by the queen of the Pandya king, Srival- 
luvar. In the sixth year of his reign, A.D. 1017, or a 
little earlier, Rajendra undertook his famous expedition 
against Ceylon in which he seized * the crown of the 
king of Ilam (on) the tempestuous ocean ; the exceeding- 
ly fine crowns of the queens of that (king) ; the beautiful 
crown and the necklace of Indra which the king of the 
South (i.e. the Pandya) had previously deposited with 
that (king of Ilam) ; the whole Ila-mandala (on) the 
transparent sea.’ 8 Rajendra was also called Madhu- 
rantaka and Uttamachola; these names were perhaps 
given him by his father Raja Raja who had a great 
regard for his father’s cousin Madhurantaka Uttama- 
chola. It seems more likely that two coins, one of gold 
and the other of impure silver, bearing the legend 
Uttamachola in grantha characters and the tiger and fish 
designs were issued by Rajendra rather than by the 
earlier Uttamachola who was the contemporary of Raja 
Raja. 3 In the tenth year of his reign or very soon after, 

1 Cf. A.R.E., 1917, p. 107; contra Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar, p. 1S1 of Ancient 
Dekhan ; but Mr. Aiyar gives no references and seems to base his account 
on the Sanskrit portion (zterses 90-93) of the Tiruvalacgadu plates, which 
are dealt with later in the text. 

* SeeJ.R.A.S., 1913, pp. 522-23. 

a Contra A.R.E., 1904, p. 10. Things seem to have been still unsettled 
in the Pandya country in the time of the earlier Madhurantaka ; no 
records of the Cholas between Parantaka and Raja Raja are seen in the 



108 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


surely before the twelfth, Rajendra had to undertake 
an expedition against the Madura country in order to 
reassert his authority which seems to have been chal- 
lenged in some way or other. The early inscriptions 
of the king dated before his tenth year make no mention 
of any conquest of Maduraimandalam ; and we hear of it 
for the first time in a record of his twelfth year from 
Tirumalai. 1 It is possible that this reconquest is refer- 
red to in verses 91-93 of the Sanskrit portion of the 
Tiruvalangadu plates. 2 ‘The dan.dana.tha of this crest 
jewel of the solar race (i.e. Madhurantaka) , struck the 
Pandya king who had a powerful army. (And) the 
Pandya, leaving his own country from fear of Madhuran- 
taka, sought refuge in the Malaya hill which was the 
residence of (the sage) Agastya. (Then) the politic son 
of Raja Raja took possession of the lustrous pure pearls 
which looked like the seeds (out of which grew) the 

Pandya country and it is not likely that these coins were issued in that 
period, I have already said that the Madras Museum plates of Parakesari 
Uttamachola may be ascribed to Rajendra also. (n. 1, p. 101) And Dr. 
Hultzsch remarks ‘ The close resemblance of the devices on the coins (re- 
ferred to in this note) to those on the seal of the inscription leaves little 
doubt that both the coins and the inscription have to be attributed to the 
same king Uttamachola * (A.R.E., 1891, p. 5), 

1 See E. /., vol. ix, p. 232. Hultzsch’ s remark at p. 230 E.L ix. ‘ Madura- 
mandala need not be connected with Madura, the capital of the Pandya 
king, who has been already accounted for, but may be meant for the district 
of the northern Mathura on the Yamuna ’—will be plausible if the identifi- 
cation of Sakkarakkottam rests on a secure basis ; but this is very doubtful 
and it is possible to adopt the usual meaning of Maduraimandalam and 
explain the new conquest as in the text. The Pandya king moreover has 
not been * already accounted for ’ but only 4 two other trinkets which the 
Pandya king had previously deposited with the king of Ceylon \ 

*The Sanskrit part of the plates dates only from the sixteenth year of Rajen- 
dra at the earliest (see 5././., vol. iii, p. 384) and cannot compare in accura- 
cy with the Tamil stone inscriptions of Rajendra; hence no violence is done 
to the authority of these verses when the campaign they refer to is placed 
about the tenth regnal year according to indications in the lithic records. 
I have adopted Mr. Krishna Sastri’s translation with a correction which 
appears necessary. 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 


109 


spotless fame of the Pandya king. Having placed there 
his own son, the glorious Chola-Pandya, for the protec- 
tion of his (i.e. the Pandya’ s country), the light of the 
solar race started for the conquest of the western 
region.’ We have no means of knowing who the 
Pandya king was, whether he was Jorivallabha or a suc- 
cessor of his, that was forced to seek refuge in the 
mountain of Agastya. The appointment of the king’s 
son, the glorious Chola- Pandya, as viceroy of the Pandya 
country is confirmed by an inscription (363 of 1917) of 
the tenth year of Rajendra, which also ‘ furnishes the very 
interesting information that Rajendra Chola I construct- 
ed at Madura a huge palace ( M&ligai ) by whose weight 
even the earth became unsteady ’ ; this inscription also 
implies that the campaign undertaken by Rajendra in 
the south extended up to Salai (Kandalur Salai) whose 
destruction is mentioned. 1 For a period of about half 
a century, after this campaign of Rajendra in the Pandya 
country, which may be placed about A.D. 1020, the 
administration of this part of the Chola empire seems to 
have been regularly vested in a prince of the Chola 
royal family who bore the title Chola- Pandya. Rajendra’s 
son who figures in the inscriptions of this period as 
Jatavarman Sundara Chola- Pandya was the first of these 
Chola-Pandya viceroys, and he may have continued in 
this capacity for some years in the beginning of the 
reign of the Chola emperor Rajadhiraja I who succeeded 
Rajendra. 2 It is possible that the Chola-Pandya viceroys 

1 1918, p. 144 and Appendix B. 

* On Chola-Pandyas, see A.R.E,, 190S, pp, 48-9 and later reports, esp. 
1917, pp. 107-8 and 1924, pp. 105-6 ; also E . /.* vol. xi, pp. 292 ff. It is 
not easy to identify the particular princes mentioned in the several Chola- 
Pandya records. The Chola inscriptions themselves mention .three such 
cases of Chola-Pandya viceroys appointed by different rulers ; there is little 



110 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


had some control over the Chera country also. The ins- 
criptions of Jatavarman Sundara Chola-Pandya are found 
all over Madura and Tinnevelly and portions of Puduk- 
kottah and S. Travancore. Some inscriptions (Nos. in, 
1 13 and 1 14 of 1905) of the sixteenth year of this prince 
from Mannarkovil near Ambasamudram mention the Chera 
kings Raja Raja and Rajasimha and another record from 
the same place (No. 112 of 1905) dated in the twenty- 
fourth year of Rajendra himself says that Rajasimha 
built in Mannarkovil the Visnu temple called Rajendra- 
cholaviijpagar. 1 Besides Jatavarman Sundara Chola- 
Pandya, two other Chola princes are known from Chola 
inscriptions to have been appointed to the viceroyalty of 
the Pandyan kingdom. In the historical introductions 
of Rajendradeva (c. A.D. 1052-1064), he is stated to have 
conferred on one of his younger brothers, the victorious 
Mummadi Solan, the title Chola-Pandyan. 2 Again 
some years later Virarajendra I conferred on his son 
Gangaikondachola the Pandimandalam and the title 
Chola-Pandya. 3 It is not possible to identify these 
princes in the Chola-Pandya records very clearly ; and 
it is not unlikely there were two or three princes similarly 
deputed to rule the Pandyan kingdom. But this 
system does not seem to have been continued after the 
accession of Kulottunga I about A.D. 1070. 4 


room for doubt that this arrangement did not continue after the accession 
of Kulottunga I. 

1 A.R.E., 1905 ; Appendix B and i vol. xi, p. 294. Also No. 392 of 
1916 mentions a gift by the queen of Chera Ragingadevar to the temple. 

* A.R.E., 1917, pp. 107-8. 3 SJJ., vol. in, p. 33. 

* Mr. K. V. Subramanya Aiyar says : ‘ The Pandyas seem to have 
asserted their independence already during the reign of Kulottunga I. At any 
rate we have no reason to suppose that the Chola-Pandya Icings continued 
very long. In fact their rule could not have lasted more than half a 
century which was probably occupied by the rule of the few princes known 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 111 

These Chola-Pandya viceroys were subject to the 
Chola emperors and the control from the centre seems 
to have been both vigorous and regular. This is clear 
from the existence of inscriptions of the Chola emperors 
of the period in the Pandya country by the side 
of the records of their viceroys. At the same time, 
the Pandya kings of the old line seem to have 
survived in sufficient strength to give much trouble to 
their conquerors ; and they seem to have made com- 
mon cause with the rulers of Ceylon who had under- 
gone a degradation similar to that of the Pandya 
rulers in consequence of the Chola conquest of Ceylon, 
It is very remarkable that we hear of several princes of 
the Ceylonese and Pandya royal families of this period 
bearing identical names ; this shows the existence of 
rather close dynastic relations between the aggrieved 
families that made common cause against the Chola 
emperors ; but it also adds considerably to the difficulty 
of giving a correct account of the intricate military and 
political transactions that are referred to alike in the 
Mak&vam&a, and in the inscriptions of the imperial 
Cholas. 1 Our concern however is only with the 
Pandyas and their relation to the Cholas and this in 
itself is a fairly simple story. The chief reason for the 
adoption, in the period, of a system of government by 
viceroys is perhaps found in this political alliance 
between the dispossessed families of the Pandyas and 
the Ceylon kings ; the wide extent of the Chola empire 


from inscriptions* ( El ., vol. xi, p, 293 n.). Mr. H, Krishna Sastri [A t jR.E. t 
1917) identifies Mummadi Chola with Maravarmau Vikrama Chola-Pandya 
of the epigraphs and Gangaikopija with Jatavarman Chola-Pandya of 
No, 642 of 1916. See also Trav. Arch. Series, vol. vi, pp. 6-7 where four 
viceroys are distinguished. 

1 See the remarks of Hultzsch in 1913, pp. 519-21, 



112 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

after the conquests of Rajendra was no doubt a contribu- 
tory factor. 1 

Almost every one of the kings who reigned between 
Rajendra I Gangaikonda and Rajendra II alias Kulot- 
tunga I — he ought properly to be numbered third among 
Rajendras — claims to have conquered the Pandya 
country and some add also an attack on Udagai in the 
Kerala country to the list of their achievements. But 
we are not yet in a position to trace in detail any of these 
expeditions, the circumstances that led to them or their 
results. But a record of the twenty-ninth year of 
Rajadhiraja I corresponding to A.D. 1046 contains the 
names of three Pandya kings who opposed him and 
suffered terribly for doing so. Their fates are recorded 
in an inscription in the following terms : 2 ‘ Among the 
three allied kings of the south (i.e. Pandyas), Rajadhi- 
raja cut off on a battlefield the beautiful head of 
Manabharanan (which was adorned with) large jewels 
(and) which was inseparable from the golden crown; 

1 Mr. Venkayya remarks that though the Pandya country was conquer- 
ed early in Raja Raja Ts reign, Chola- Pandya viceroys come in only with 
Rajendra Chola I whose extensive scheme of foreign conquests made them 
necessary and that * the name Pandya was perhaps added at the end of the 
Chola prince’s name partly to reconcile the people to their new ruler * 

1905, pp. 48-9). Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar says on the other hand, * The 
necessity for their appointment arose from the fact that the Pandyas could 
never he completely subdued. They continued in a state of chronic revolt 
against the Chola yoke during the whole period of Chola supremacy in 
South India.’ (2?./., vol xi, p. 293.) Our view is that Rajgndra made the 
discovery only about the tenth year of his reign that some special steps were 
necessary for keeping a tight hold on the Pandya country ; and that -jthe 
Pandyas derived a great part of their strength from the traditional sway 
they had secured in the hearts of their people, and the rest from their 
political alliance with Ceylon. It is remarkable that all the sternness of the 
Chola emperors was not able to root out the Pandyas ; and that the latter 
should have ultimately got the better of their conquerors, and in the end 
even contributed largely to their downfall. 

2 S.U., vol. iii, p. 56. 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 


113 


seized in a battle Vira Keralan whose ankle-rings were 
wide, and was pleased to get him trampled down by his 
furious elephant Attivarana ; and drove to the ancient 
Mullaiyur Sundara Pandyan of endless great fame, who 
lost in a hot’battle the royal white parasol, the bunches 
(of hairs) of the white yak, and the throne, and who ran 
away^r- his crown dropping down, (his) hair being dishevel- 
led, and (his) feet getting tired.’ Nothing more is known 
of the three Pandyas mentioned here. Manabharanan 
and Vira Keralan appear to have occupied somewhat 
subordinate positions and Sundara Pandya seems to 
have been the chief of the trio. This is evident from 
the laudatory reference to Sundara and also from the fact 
that he escaped capital punishment. We read later on 
in the same inscription that Rajadhiraja invaded Ceylon 
and in this expedition he dethroned four rulers of the 
country. One of them was ‘ Vikrama Pandyan, who, 
having lost the whole of the southern Tamil country 
which had previously belonged to him, had entered Ilam 
(surrounded by) the seven oceans ’. We do not know at 
present what this means exactly ; but it illustrates the 
close connection, political and dynastic, between the 
Pandyas and the Ceylon kings in this period. 

The accession of Kulottunga I marks a turning-point 
in the history of the Chola empire. This king was not of 
the direct Chola imperial line ; he was an Eastern 
Chalukya prince ; and many troubles seem to have 
attended the accession of a comparative stranger like him 
to the Chola throne. Whether as a result of his intri- 
gues or not, the empire was reduced to a state of great 
confusion bordering on anarchy 1 and from these troubles 


1 See remarks at p. 14 of 1899 and also at p. 7 of same for 

1901 ; also SJ.l., vol. iii, p. 129, 

15 



114 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

it seems never to have completely recovered under Kulot- 
tunga and his successors. At any rate, we. do not find 
under Kuldttunga and his successors the same vigour in 
the administration of the empire that characterized the 
Vijayalaya line; and the Pandya kingdom, now apparent- 
ly freed from the presence of the Chola-Pandya viceroys, 
slowly began to pass more and more under the domina-, 
tion of the descendants of its ancient rulers until at last it 
not only secured its own independence but helped a good 
deal to pull down the power of its erstwhile dominant 
foe. But before we take up this part of the story, some- 
thing remains to be said about the administration of the 
Pandya country under the imperial Cholas of the Vijaya- 
laya line. 

There is a general order of Raja Raja I recorded in an 
inscription of the twenty-fourth year of his reign, i.e., 
about A.D. 1009 1 which * deals with defaulters of land 
revenue in villages held by Brahmins, Vaikhanasas 
and Jainas in the Chola, Tondai and Pandya coun- 
tries.’ 2 The default in the payment of revenue seems 
to have been on the part of a special class of tenants 
who are referred to as ‘ &rressfi e.es>L^iumr ’ and who seem 
to have in some manner abused their privileged position ; 
the penalty that is laid down by the royal order is 
drastic, but it must be noticed that it applied to other 
territories besides the Pandya country. The king orders 
that all 1 ■mirewfl £-®»r_(u/r/f ’ who between the sixteenth 

l S,/./.,vol. iii, No. 9. 

2 Dr. Hultzsch’s translation of this record does not seem to bring out the 
fact that it is significant, though its exact import is far from clear. The 
operative part of the text is ‘ .s/rossf} £_0 D£_ju/t/t iurr<swr(B 16 eng/ Qp<B60 23 £/ 

eaeamfleo Frmr&srCB iBntbiS {tparrmr® ^/b^itsirssfluuirissr $$»/&«*( asr/f 
seidmQjrirtBtb tmrfl® eurftuuir®, (Suir^ir r 

jpfflof fieoibiriu jijoiojoi asatr* efleotr QffeQ/bjDiGQ&ir&refi u Qujpieuirif&etriracyth' 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 


115 


and twenty- third years of his reign had failed to pay 
the dues paid by others in the village (aszifiQeuifluurr®) 
and whose default continued after more than two com- 
plete years into a third year — all such ‘ airesS E_©D£_iu/nf ’ 
shall forfeit their ‘ ■stresoB ’ lands to the village ; and the 
villagers shall arrange to sell the lands among them- 
selves, but the old defaulters shall not be allowed to buy 
up these lands again. The same rule was to be observed 
in all similar cases of default after the twenty-fourth year 
of the king’s reign. The whole record looks like an 
attempt to regulate the administration of charitable 
endowments made on behalf of several religious orders 
and to secure that they did not escape public dues that 
were laid on them by the terms of the original endow- 
ment or the custom of the country. Inscriptions Nos. 
327 and 619 of 1916, which are Chola-Pandya records 
from Tiruvalisvaram and Sermadevi in the Tinnevelly 
district, seem to contain interesting particulars of land 
revenue administration. But the text of these records is 
not yet available and this is how the official epigraphist 
summarizes them: ‘This record (No. 327) refers to a 
gift of land by him (Sundara Chola-Pandya) after pur- 
chasing it from the sabha of Raja Raja Caturvedi- 
mangalam i.e., Ambasamudram. (It should rather be 
Brahmadesam). The income from the land included 
paddy given by the - cultivator ( velfan ) as owner’s share 
and money called uvuvukzl-nticM’ka'su and k&kshi-erudu - 
kasu. No. 619 of the seventeenth year of the same 
king’ s reign refers to similar items of income under the 
heads of alagerudu-kStcki-kd&u, kutchi-erudu-ku'su and 
Urkkalanju. The order sanctioning the transfer of the 
land from the Byahmadlya register to the DevadSna 
register in No. 327, was communicated to the viceroy, 
the document being signed by not less than twenty-two 



116 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


officers of the emperor. ’ 1 The collection of the dues 
partly in kind and partly in money and the mention of 
sundry pecuniary levies under different names deserve 
special attention. Further study may lead to a clear 
understanding of the nature of these cesses. Another 
Chola- Pandya record which registers a sale of land to the 
Visnu temple Rajendra Ghola Vinnagaram at Mannar- 
kovil may also be briefly referred to. The sale in this 
case was ordered by the members of the sabha of Raja 
Raja Caturvedimangalam, already referred to ; several of 
these members who ordered the sale were learned men 
bearing titles like Bkatta, So may aj in and Kmmavit and 
they seem to have been resident in the different suburbs 
[seri) of the village ; and some at least among them 
appear to have been immigrants from other parts of the 
Chola empire. 2 The sale deed (afl&o is written by 
the Karanattan (sirmr^^irm) of the village and the sale is 
referred to by the members of the assembly in the phrase 
‘ sQSso (1. 4). 

One reference to a matka of the sect of Mabavratins 
that occurs in a Vatteluttu inscription from Tirucculi in 
the Ramnad district is sufficiently important to deserve 
special mention. It occurs in a record of the eleventh 
year of Vlra Pandya ‘ who took the head of the Chola ’ 
(No. 423 of 19x4). This reference is confirmed by 

1 A,jR»J£.i 1917, p. 108 ; part ii, para 4. 

2 Cf. vol. xi, pp. 292 ff. Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar remarks in a note 
at p. 292, c It is worthy of note that two of the signatures at the end of 
the inscription are in Sanskrit. Such admixture of Sanskrit words itua 
Tamil record of this period may he accounted for, to a certain extent, by the 
revival of learning brought about by the immigration to the southern coun- 
try of a large number of Brahmins from the north as a result of the con- 
quests of Rajendra Chola I, which extended as far as the Ganges.’ But the 
admixture of Sanskrit in Tamil records is very common even in the age of 
the First Empire as we have seen and even then the immigration of 
Brahmins from the north was not unknown. 



THE CHOLA CONQUEST 


117 


another record of Vikramakesari, a Kodumbalur chief- 
tain, who claims to have conquered Vlra Pandya in 
battle. This chieftain was the son of a Chola princess 
and probably took the side of the Cholas against Vlra 
Pandya in . the wars mentioned at the beginning 
of this chapter . 1 Vikramakesari presented a big matha 
( brihcm-mafham ) to a certain Mallikarjuna of Madura, 
who was the chief ascetic of the Kalamukha sect, with 
eleven villages for feeding fifty ascetics of the same sect 
(called asita-vaktra). Mallikarjuna belonged to the 
Atreya gotra and was the disciple of two teachers 
Vidyarasi and Taporasi. These references reveal the 
presence in the Madura and Ramnad districts and in the 
Pudukkottah state — the Vikramakesari record comes 
from Muvarkoil in that state — of a considerable number 
of the ascetics of the Mahavrata or Kalamukha sect of the 
Saivas- Dr. Bhandarkar says of this sect : ‘ It will be 
seen how terrible and demoniacal this sect was . . . . 
Mahavrata means the great vow, and the greatness of 
the vow consists in its extraordinary nature, such as 
eating food placed in a human skull, besmearing the 
body with the ashes of human carcasses and others 
which are attributed to Kalamukhas by Ramanuja ’. 2 


1 SeeVenkayyain A.R.B., 1903, part ii, paras 85-6, and forabrief discus- 
stun of No. 423 of 1914, A.R.E., 1915, p. 101. Mr. Krishna Sastri’s suspicion 
that Mahavratins may refer to Jains may be taken to be set at rest by the 
use pf the term asita-vaktra (= Kalamukha) in the record of Vikramakesari. 

2 Vaisnavism and Saivism* p. 128. 



CHAPTER IX 


THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY: CIVIL WAR 
AND RECOVERY 

The confusion in the Chola empire that led to the 
accession of the Eastern Chalukya Rajendra alias Kulot- 
tunga I to the Chola throne about A.D. 1070 apparently 
gave the Pandyas an opportunity to recover some of their 
lost power. A Jatavarman Srivallabha seems to have 
reigned in this period with some real power for a period 
of at least twenty-three years (No. 555 of 1922). A con- 
siderable number of his records are found in various 
places in the Tinnevelly and Madura districts, in particular 
at Kuruvitturai and Tirupputtur. Most of these contain 
a grandiloquent historical introduction beginning with 
the words Tirumadcmdaiyum Jayamadandaiyum , but this 
introduction tells us nothing about the historical details 
of his reign. There are references to a throne called 
Pandyarayan, to another throne Kalingattaraiyan which 
seems to have got its name from an important officer 
called Kalingarajan and to an Alagiya Pandyan hall in 
which these thrones were placed in the palace at Madura, 
to the east of Madakkulam. There is also reference to a 
Pillaiyar Sundara Pandya, probably the son of the king 
(493 of 1909). We also learn that drammas were among 
coins current in his time. Moreover, ‘ references in these 
inscriptions to canals, sluices, water-bunds, etc., called after 
Parakrama Pandya and to the grain measure named Vim 
Pandya., prove that Parakrama Pandya and Vira Pandya 



119 


THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 

were two predecessors of Jatavarman Srfvallabha or his co- 
regents who greatly improved the agricultural condition 
of the Pandya country.’ 1 It is not possible to determine 
precisely the period of his rule although there is some 
reason to think that he .was a contemporary of Kulot- 
tunga I. This is an inference that rests at present only 
on the slender basis that a certain Vlralekharan alias 
Adalaiyur Nadalvan refers to the fourth year of Jata- 
varman Srfvallabha in one inscription and the forty-ninth 
year of Tribhuvanacakravartin Kulottunga Chola-deva 
in another (30 and 32 of 1909). 2 It has been suggested 
that Jatavarman Srfvallabha must have adopted the sur- 
name Cholantaka ' after subduing the Cholas before he 
could secure for himself the independent position which is 
suggested by the eulogistic and poetical historical intro- 
duction with which his records begin.’ 3 But one cannot 

1 1909, part ii, para 23. 

z See A,R.E. t 1909, part ii, para 23 end. The report for 1917 finds con- 
firmation of the age of Srfvallabha in 331 of 1916 from Tiruvaligvaram in 
which a certain TXmai-Ammai of abont the end of the tenth century is 
mentioned. Again, No. 21 of 1927 !n the tenth year of this king refers 
to the thirty-first year of Kulottunga Chola who took Kollam. It must be 
noted however that the whole question is far from satisfactorily settled. 
There is a strange inconsistency in the positions taken up in the ep: graphical 
reports about this king. We learn (1909) that * he was perhaps the im- 
mediate predecessor of Jafavarman KulaSekhara of the earlier Tiruppuvanam 
grant ’ at . the beginning of a paragraph which ends with the statement 
that he was of the age of Kul5ttunga I and was among the Pgndya 
sovereigns overthrown by him. Either of these conclusions must be wrong 
as Kuldttunga I came to the throne about a . d . 1070 and conquered the 
Pandyas before a . d . 1085 (5././., vol. ii, No. 58) and KulaSekhara of the 
Tiruppilvanam grant came to the throne in a . d . 1190 (Kielhom EJ.,v ol. vi). 
The report for 1917 leans to Kuldttunga’s time but we hear a different 
story in the report for 1923 which again makes him the predecessor of Ja{. 
KulaSSkhara (para 46, part 1 i) . In the reports for 1918 and 1927 his accession 
is placed in a . d . 1291. The only' fact which seems to help us in deciding 
this is noted in the text ; the rest are impressions and may be ignored 
for the present. See also K. V. S, Aiyar, Ancient Dekhan > pp. 162-3 
for a discussion of the matter of this note re, Jat. Srfvallabha. 

3 A*R.E. t 1909, part ii, para 23* 



120 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


accept this in the absence of any mention of such an 
achievement in the introduction itself. It is more likely 
that the old name of Cholantaka Caturvedimangalam 
for Kuruvitturai or more probably Solavandan, 1 com- 
memorated the success of Vira Pandya, the opponent of 
Aditya II. 

Several inscriptions of Kuldttunga Chola I have been 
found in the Pandya country. One has been discovered 
at Tinnevelly (145 of 1894) but the regnal year has been 
lost ; and another (31 of 1896) at Kottaru ; several others 
are found on the site of ancient Korkai (157, 161 and 162-5 
of 1903). An inscription of the fifth year of Kulottunga 2 
seems to record that an unnamed Pandya king was 
decapitated by him. Another record of the fourteenth 
year 3 repeats this fact and records a fresh conquest 
of the Pandya with several details. It says : * Having 

resolved in (his) royal mind to conquer also the Pandi- 
mandalam with great fame, (he) despatched his great army. 
• • • He completely destroyed the forest which the 
five Pancavas had entered as refuge, when they were 
routed, on a battle-field where (he) fought (with them), and 
fled cowering with fear. (He) subdued their country, 
drove them into hot jungles (in) hills where woodmen 
roamed about, and planted pillars of victory in every 
region. (He) was pleased to seize the pearl fisheries, the 
Podiyil (mountain) where the three kinds of Tamil 
(flourished), the (very) centre of the (mountain) £aiyam 
where furious rutting elephants were captured, and Kanni, 
and fixed the boundaries of the southern country . . ... 
(He) was pleased to bestow on the chiefs of his army, who 
were mounted on horses, settlements on every road, 

1 Hultzsch, A.R.E., 1 894, p. 7, para 12, a5 S./,/., vol. iii, No. 68. 

3 No, 69, ibid. 



THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 121 

including (that which passed) Kottaru, in order that the 
enemies might be scattered.’ ‘ The defeat of the “five 
Pandyas ” and the burning of Kottaru are referred to also 
in an inscription at Chidambaram and the Kcdingattup - 
parani (Hultzsch). 

What does the reference in these records to the 
‘ five . Pandyas ’ (u<@&suir ® 3 <su 0 u>, Pundyan Penned) 
indicate ? Mr. L. D. Swamikkannu Pillai once thought 
that the simultaneous rule of five Pandyas was a fact 
established by tradition as well as by the statements 
of contemporary historians, 1 and proceeded to arrange 
the Pandya kings of the thirteenth century known 
to epigraphy on this basis. Mr. Robert Sewell sub- 
jected this position to a searching criticism 2 and 
concluded ‘ that we must hold the evidence to be over- 
whelmingly in favour of a single monarchy, and that the 
theory of a co-regency of five kings may be altogether set 
aside.’ There is no doubt that on this general question 
of the regular and successive rule of five Pandyan kings 
through several generations the position of Mr. Sewell is 
the sounder of the two, and that Mr. Pillai seems on the 
whole to have had an exaggerated view of the evidence 
on his side, and that he was misled by a system of 
chronology, based exclusively on dubious astronomical 
data contained in the stone inscriptions of the period. 

Mr. Sewell refers to the records of Kulottunga I and 
says : ‘ In two inscriptions of Kulottunga Chola I the 
king is lauded for having, shortly before A.D. 1084, com- 
pletely defeated “ the five Pandyas ”. But this is poetry.’ 
It is not easy so to brush aside the clear references in 

1 l.A.j vol. xlii, p. 166 ; also vol. xliv, pp. 172-6. It must be noted that 
Mr, Swamikkannu Pillai 5 s discussion of Pandya dates in his Ephemeris , 
vol. i, part ii, pp. Slff is much more cautious. 

8 Ibid. 

16 



122 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


the phrases quoted above. On the other hand, it is not 
necessary that each of these ‘ five Pandyas ’ must have 
been an independent ruler in his own right. It may be 
recalled that one of Kulottunga’s predecessors on the 
Chola throne, Rajadhiraja, had three Pandyas for his 
opponents, Manabharana, Vira Kerala and Sundara, of 
whom only the last is referred to in the Chola records in 
terms befitting a reigning king. We do not get any 
details about the opponents of Kulottunga. It may be 
surmised that Jatavarman Srivallabha was among them; if 
this surmise is correct, there can be little doubt that the 
account of Kulottunga who claims to have driven all the 
five Pandyas to the forest and then to have burnt 
that forest is over-drawn; for the chances are that 
Srivallabha survived his defeat by Kulottunga and 
continued to rule, though perhaps with diminished 
power, and this seems to be admitted somewhat later 
in the same record of Kulottunga where we are told that 
he ‘fixed the boundaries of the southern country ’. 1 

1 This conclusion seems a natural inference from the two records of 
Adalaiyur Nadalvan (30 and 32 of 1909) in which he refers to the fourth 
year of Srivallabha and the forty-ninth year of Kulottunga. We know 
that Srivallabha reigned for at least twenty-three years and we may assume 
that for the hulk of it his reign overlapped Kulottunga’s. We shall have, 
otherwise, to credit Adalaiyur Nadalvan with a rather unusual length of 
active life, nineteen plus forty-nine years, as there seems to he little doubt 
that the forty-ninth year of Kulottunga was later than the fourth of 
Srivallabha. 

Mr. R. Krishna Sastri seems to accept the co-regent theory. He suggests 
that Maravarman Parakrama Pandya (of 94, 98 and 131 of 1908) , and Tri- 
bhuvanacakravartin Vikrama Pandya Deva (of 26 of 1909) might have been 
also among the foes of Kulottunga {A.R*E^ 1909, part ii, paras 29 and 50). 
But it is well to remember Sewell’s warning-- : ‘ With some as yet unabrid- 
ged intervals, hereafter no doubt to be successfully filled in, we are now 
in possession of the general outlines, and in course of time the whole story 
will become plain. But it will never become plain if at the present very 
critical period workers are not particularly cautious in their methods. 
Deductions put forward or statements confidently made by an author who 
is recognized as an authority on the subject may, if these are perhaps based 



THE END OP CHOLA ASCENDANCY 


123 


Jatavarman Srivallabha appears to have been suc- 
ceeded by Maravarman Tribhuvanacakravartin Para- 
krama Pandya Deva ; this may be inferred from the fact 
that a certain Rajendra Cholan Keralan alias Nisadarajan 
who made a gift of sheep for a lamp in a temple in the 
twenty-first year of Srivallabha, also made a gift of 
paddy^ to the same temple in the eleventh year of 
Parakrama Pandya. 1 Parakrama Pandya's records 
begin with a historical introduction commencing with 
Tirumagal Punara and mention drammas as among the 
coins current in his time. Nothing more is known at 
present about this king. He must have reigned as a 
contemporary of Kuldttunga also. 

The next Pandya king, perhaps the immediate suc- 
cessor of Maravarman Parakrama Pandya, seems to have 
been a Jatavarman Parantaka Pandya. He is known to 
us so far only from one record of his at Kanyakumari. 
Fortunately the record is full and gives a clear account 
of the king’s reign. 2 The historical introduction com- 
mences beautifully thus c ^06uair/rff Q&tuLcGuemr Q^rnesr 

on insufficient evidence; have the unfortunate result of seriously clouding 
the issue and raising great difficulties for the student in after years. An 
assertion so made is apt to be accepted as an historic truth . 9 

It seems very likely that, from the period of the recovery of Pandya 
power which preceded the expedition of Kulotfcunga I, there were appointed 
in important subordinate capacities princes of the blood royal who recorded 
their own inscriptions after the manner of the ruling kings—a practice which 
may have been copied from the contemporary Cholas ; if that was so, 
the imitators must have gone much farther along this road than their 
models. If this suggestion is borne out by future study, the best way 
of treating Pandya history of the middle ages will be to treat the kings in 
Kielhonris list as the main line of rulers. But even so, there will remain 
much work in the way of properly interpreting the hundreds of epigraphs. 

It will be seen from the text that I prefer to treat Maravarman Parakrama 
Pandya of 94, 98, and 131 of 1908 as the successor of Jatavarman Srivallabha. 

1 A.R.E-, 1909, part ii, para 29. See also 1910, partii, para 32. 

2 Trav. Arch . Series , vol. i, pp. 18ff. Also Indian Ephemeris by 
L. D. Swamikkannu, vol. i * part ii, p. 87. 



124 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

euir^ih (SyediAtiuemr eu 0 logoi pis tr sir msmsiiGUGtnr <sudssrpgpeti&K 

gnuirfiitkap Q <£eiru>jgnrir Lfifl pQpirefrfl.' The record is 

dated in the ninth year of the king. Parantaka is said 

to have defeated the Chera and levied tribute from him. 

The king of the Kupakas (a local ruler in South Travan- 

core) offered his daughter in marriage to Parantaka 

Pandya who married her. The king then fought a battle 

at Vilinam and took the town. Next came the destruc- 
" / 

tion of Kandalur-Salai-kkalam. Apparently the systems 
of weights and measures were in an unsatisfactory 
condition and consequently the king is described as 
having reformed them by abolishing their old names 
and ordering the carp (sunk) to be engraved on the new 
weights and measures that were introduced. Parantaka 
also set up ten golden lamps of rare workmanship for the 
god at Anantapuram and granted a village for their 
upkeep. He also dedicated to the goddess Kumarl, 
called here Q&esrmsuir ptjiQijeiiQ/BiueuiA, a whole nadu as 
an endowment for the distribution of liberal gifts to all 
who attended the Taippusam festival, on the day succeed- 
ing it. Lastly, he captured Kulam of the Telinga 
Bhima and subdued South Kalinga. 

These last references to Telinga Bhima and Kulam 
and South Kalinga remind us strongly of the historical 
introduction of KulSttunga’s son and successor Vikrama 
Chola, whose expedition into the Kalinga country 
takes the first place in his Tamil inscriptions. ‘ On 
this occasion he defeated the Telinga Bhima of 
Kulam who was apparently one of the Nayakas of 
Ellore. ... As Vikrama Chola’ s inscriptions place 
the Kalinga. war not only before his coronation in 
A.D. 1118, but before his stay in Vengi, it must have 
taken place before the end of the reign of his father 
Kulottunga I ’ — (Hultzsch). But in all probability this 



THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 125 

war was different from the famous Kalinga war of 
Kulottunga celebrated in the Kalingattupparani and must 
be dated some years later. 1 It is likely that, as a 
feudatory of the Chola empire, Parantaka Pandya either 
accompanied Vikrama Chola in person or effectively 
assisted him in some manner in this expedition against 
the Telugu chieftain and the Kalinga Kingdom. His 
conquest of S. Trayancore and the imposition of a 
tribute on that country and his attacks on fsalai and 
Vilinam should, however, have constituted a clear rever- 
sal of the arrangements made by Kulottunga I in the early 
years of his reign, when he fortified Kottaru and demar- 
cated the boundary of the southern kingdom. It may be, 
however j that these achievements were undertaken with 
the knowledge of the Chola emperor and under his 
orders. It may be noted that we have references to a 
Parantaka Valanadu as a sub-division of Raja-raja Pandi- 
nadu in the inscriptions of Kulottunga which come from 
Maramangalam (near Korkai) and are dated in the 
forty-fourth and forty-seventh years of Kulottunga I 
(Nos. 161 and 164 of 1903). 

The next Pandya king of whom we have some de- 
finite knowledge is Maravarman Jorfvallabha who is 
known to have been reigning in A.D. 1160-1 and to whom 
king Vira Ravivarman of Travancore was tributary. 2 
There are a considerable number of inscriptions mostly 
from the Tinnevelly district that may be ascribed to this 
king. A record from Kottaru (49 of 1896) mentions 
prince Kulaiekhara who can be identified with good 
reason with the prince who had a. prominent part in the 
war of succession that seems to have followed the death 
of this king, Srlvallabha. In another (No. 50 of 1896) from 

1 A.R.E., 1903, page 4, para 8. Also 1905, part ii, para 8. 

2 A.R.S., 1896, para 15. 



126 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


the same place ‘ the king is said to have been ruling 
from his throne Munaiyadaraiyan in the palace at Tirunel- 
veli in Kil-vembanadu.’ 1 A Suclndram inscription of 
this king dated in his tenth year refers to Andapillai 
Bhatta Atiratrayaji at whose instance the king made a 
grant of land to the Suclndram temple. It is probable 
that this Andapillai who performed the Atiratva sacrifice 
was the same as the author of a well-known work on 
Hindu domestic ritual ( Gvhyap myd gavrtti) which is 
still used in Southern India. 2 The records of this 
king generally begin with the introduction 
giuusseir etc. But one in his thirty-seventh year (No. 426 of 
1916) begins with an introduction etc. 

almost similar to that of Jatavarman Srivallabha. The 
astronomical details furnished by this record are said to 
yield the date A.D. 1169 for the inscription ; the date is 
not quite regular but may be accepted in the light of 
other evidence relating to the king. This would mean 
that Maravarman Srivallabha came to the throne in 
A.D. 1132 and that this record is among the last ones of 
his reign. 3 * But it is doubtful if Srivallabha ruled as 


1 A>R*E., 1909, part ii, para 29. Mr. Krishna Sastri says : ‘As Jata- 
varman KulaSekhara was also occupying the throne at Madura called 
Munaiyadaraiyan we may perhaps suppose that Maravarman Srivallabha 
was his immediate predecessor.’ I do not see how we can make any such 
supposition. Frankly, we do not know yet how these thrones were named. 

For a similar reason I have refrained from accepting the proposal to treat 
Maravarman Kulalekhara of Nos. 465 and 466 of 1909 as a contemporary 
or successor of Jatavarman Srivallabha on the strength of the mention of 
Kalingarayan both as the name of a seat and as an officer (see A.R.E^ 1916, 
part ii, para 36) . I may notice incidentally that Mr. Sastri does not seem to 
be quite correct when he considers that historical introductions are a ‘special 
characteristic feature of the Fandya records prior to the time of Jatavarman 
Sundqra Pandya 1 5 {A.R.E., 1909, part ii, para 29). 

2 Trav. Arch . Series , vol. iv, p. 124. 

3 A<R.E, t 1917, pp. 94 and 109. The tithi according to calculation 

ought to be 2 but the inscription gives prathamai . 



THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 


127 


late as A.D. 1169 and it may after all turn out that this 
record belongs to some other king. 

It has been mentioned that there is reference to a 
Pillaiyar Kulasekhara in the records of Srivallabha and 
that this prince is most probably identical with Kulase- 
khara who figures in a civil war in the Pandyan kingdom 
in the second half of the twelfth century. 1 This war is 
recorded in considerable detail * in true epic fashion * 
in the Mahavam'sa . 2 The account of the Mahuvam'sa is 
confirmed in important particulars by the Chola inscrip- 
tions of the period ; these inscriptions also leave no room 
for doubt that both the Ceylonese and the Chola ver- 
sions of this war are partisan accounts from which it is 
difficult to sift the truth. The Mahuvam'sa gives the 
story in chapters 76 and 77. The Chola inscriptions 
mentioning the civil war and the events in it are : 

20 of 1899— Arpakkam stone inscription of fifth year of 
Parakesarivarman RajSdhiraj adeva. 

465 of 1905 — Tiruvalangadn stone inscription of Rajakesari- 
varman Rajadhiraja (damaged). 

433 of 1924 — Pallavarayanpeftai — (Mayavaram Taluq) stone 
inscription of the eighth year of Rajakesarivarman 
Tribhuvanacakravartin Rajadhirajadeva ; 

besides No. 1 of 1899 — TirnkkoUambudur stone inscription 
in the fourth year of Kulottnnga III, acording to Mr. 
Venkayya. 


1 A record (101 of 1908) from Tirupputtur in the fifth year of Tribhu- 
vaaacakravartin KulaSekharadeva which gives details which yield July 23, 
A.Bf. 1166, seems to belong to Mar. Srivallabha ’s son and successor— the 
KulaSekhara of the civil war; his accession would then count from 
a.d. 1161-62. See Sewell, I. A., vol. xliv, p, 255, following Mr. L. D. 
Swamikkannu Pillai. 

2 Still the best discussion of the war is Mr. Venkayya’s in A.R.E. 
1899. Secondary accounts are found in Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar, Ancient 
Dekhan, pp.: 154-61 ana Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, S. India and Her Muham- 
madan Invaders, pp. 1-11. 



128 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


According to the Makcivam'sa the war was undertaken 
after the sixteenth year of Parakramabahu I, i.e. after 
A.D. 1168-9. But the Arpakkam inscription of Rajadhi- 
raja is dated in his fifth year which began in A.D. 1167 
and shows that the war must have begun before that date. 
It is not easy to say whether the discrepancy is due to 
an error in the Mahavamsa, chronology or in that 
of the Arpakkam record. Attention may be drawn 
however to the fact that in the Arpakkam record and in 
some others 1 the Cholaking is called Parakesarivarman 
whereas the usual epithet of Rajadhiraja II (acc. 
A.D. 1163) is Rajakesarivarman. It must also be noticed 
that if Srivallabha reigned till A.D. 1169 the war com- 
menced more probably after A.D. 1168-9. In any case, 
the error is not much and the exact manner of adjusting 
it will have to be decided after further study. 2 

The Mahuvam'sa account opens with the siege of 
Madura, which was in the occupation of Parakrama 
Pandya, by Kulasekhara. Kulasekhara was probably 
the son of Srivallabha and the legitimate claimant 
to the throne. We do not know who Parakrama was 
and how he got to be in Madura. It will be remember- 
ed, however, that Maravarman Srivallabha is said to have 
ruled from Tinnevelly and this would mean that Kula- 
sekhara on his accession must have done so too ; and in this 
we may have some explanation of the occupation of the 
northern part of the Pandya country by a rival prince. 

1 vol. Hi, p. 207. 

2 See Huitzsch, J.R.A.S., 1913, pp, 518-9. Dr. S. K. Aiyacgar starts his 
account of the war with the statement ‘In a.d. 1170 or 1171 there were 
two rival claimants to the throne of Madura,* (p. 2, op. cit.) and in a note 
at pp. 41-2 proposes a.d. 1171-2 for the accession of Rajadhiraja II refer- 
ring to A*R*E.> 3904, para 21. But the matter is not simple and seems to 
deserve further investigation, 



THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 129 

A tempting suggestion offers itself and may be stated 
here with the reservation that it cannot be taken as 
proved until further evidence confirms it. A very 
interesting record (35 of 1913) in the fourth year of a 
Parakrama Pandya incidentally refers to the fourth year 
of Vikrama Chola and to Perumal Kulottungadeva, 
which must be taken to mean Kulottunga II, the succes- 
sor of Vikrama Chola. The object of the inscription is 
to record the renewal of a charter of privileges granted 
to certain Pallis in the Aduturai temple several years 
before, when they rescued some images of the Aduturai 
temple which were being removed to Halebld, apparently 
as a result of a military raid into the Chola country by the 
Hoysala king Visriuvardhana I who claims to have 
marched right up to Ramesvaram. The privileges were 
renewed in the fourth year of Parakrama Pandya, as 
stated above, and if this Parakrama was the same as the 
opponent of Kulasekhara, then it would mean that 
Parakrama had been ruling from Madura for some 
time as a separate ruler independent of Kulasekhara 
when the latter attacked him ; or it may be that he 
started as a subordinate ruler at first and that Kula- 
sekhara attacked him when he sought to make himself 
independent. 1 

However that might have been, when Kulasekhara at- 
tacked him, Parakrama appealed for aid to Parakrama- 
bahu of Ceylon, who sent an army under the general 
Lankapura. But before the Singhalese forces came to 
the mainland, Kulasekhara succeeded in capturing 
and putting to death Parakrama with his queen and 
children and in occupying the city of Madura. But the 
king of Ceylon wanted his general to proceed against 


17 


1913, part ii, paras 46-7, 



130 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Kulasekhara and, after driving him out, to bestow the 
Pandyan kingdom on one of the surviving children of the 
murdered Pandyan king. And thus began the war which, 
as it is narrated in the Makavamsa, was nothing but 
a triumphant progress of victory upon victory against 
Kulasekhara, won at first by Lankapura and later by 
Lankapura and Jagad Vijaya who had joined him with 
reinforcements, until in the end Kulasekhara was expel- 
led from the Pandyan kingdom and Vlra Pandya, the son 
of Parakrama Pandya, was crowned at Madura . 1 It 
is not necessary to trace these skirmishes in detail as the 
Mahavam'sa account is not yet corroborated in material 
particulars and as it is not easy now to identify many 
small places whose names Lave been more or less distor- 
ted in the chronicle. It may be noticed, however, that 
Kulasekhara found it possible after successive defeats to 
place fresh armies in the field and it was not till sometime 
after Vira Pandya’ s coronation that he turned to the 
Cholas for help against the Singhalese troops. The inter- 
vention of the Cholas made no difference to the fortunes 
of Kulasekhara, who sustained still further defeats and 
at last ‘ the Singhalese general was satisfied that he 
had rid the country of the enemy and, before going 
back to Ceylon, made over the kingdom to Vira 
Pandya, and ordered that the Kahupana coin bearing 
the superscription of king Parakkama, i.e. Parakramabahu 

1 It is just likely that the Sueln dram record beginning 
8iu aa^is&ojsuith (Tray. Arch , Series , vol. ii, pp. 18£E.)is an inscription 6i this 
Vira Pandya. If that is so, Vira Pandya must have married a Keraja princess 
after his campaign mentioned in 1. 3 of the record and this will explain 
his flight to* Travancore after his final defeat. It may be noted that this 
record registers a gift almost immediately after the coronation. Mr. Gopi- 
natha Rao in editing this record mixes up this Vira Pand}*a with the con* 
queror of Ilam and Kongu ( acc . a.d. 1253) and the Kulasekhara of this 
civil war with Mar. KulaSekhara (acc, A.p. 1268) 



131 


THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 

should be used throughout the country.’ So far the 
MahEvam'sa. 

There need be little doubt that this account is very 
one-sided. The Ceylon generals are said to have given 
presents to several chiefs in the Pandya country and 
these ‘ look like bribes offered to win them over from 
their allegiance to Kulasekhara Thus the success 
against Kulasekhara was not always won on the field of 
battle. And after the Chola intervention, it would seem 
that the Ceylon troops actually lost ground and sus- 
tained defeats and it may be suspected that the 
evacuation of the Pandya country by Lankapura was not 
an entirely voluntary retirement after the successful 
completion of the task laid on him by his master. 

Till recently almost the only epigraphical record 
which gave a hint as to the fortunes of the Ceylon troops 
was the Arpakkam inscription which contains .a quaint 
account of a miracle wrought in connection with the war. 
‘ The army of Ceylon having taken possession of the 
Pandya country, drove away king Kulasekhara, who 
was in Madura and then began to fight in battle the 
feudatories of the great king Sri Rajadhirajadeva. The 
danger consequent upon the war spreading to the 
districts of Tondi and Pasi combined with the (easy) 
way in which the army of Ceylon gained victories, struck 
terror into (the hearts of) people both in the Chola 
country and in other districts.’ At this juncture, a 
certain Edirili Sola Sambuvarayan felt great anxiety for 
his son, who had gone to fight at the head of the Chola 
forces and approached a holy man Svamideva with the 
request that he should pray for divine intercession 
against the Ceylonese. Thereupon, His Holiness was 
pleased to declare : ‘ This, the army of Ceylon, which 
consists of very vicious and wicked men, removed the 



132 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


sacred door of the temple of the god at the holy Rames- 
varam, obstructed the worship and carried away all the 
treasures of the temple. We also learn that they are all 
sinners against Siva. We shall make the necessary 
attempts for their flight and disappearance (?) after being 
completely defeated in battle and after being chased.* 
‘ Accordingly, he was pleased to worship (Siva) for 
twenty-eight days continually. Subsequently, messen- 
gers arrived from my (Sambuvarayan’s) son Pallavarayar 
bringing a letter (to me) reporting that Jayadratha 
Dandanayaka and Lankapura Dandanayaka and the 
other generals and the troops fled having been defeated.’ 
This is the account that is dated in the fifth year of 
Parakesari Rajadhiraja and that causes some difficulty, 
as we have seen, in the chronology of the war. Another 
record in the eighth year of Rajadhiraja wherein he is 
given his usual title Rajakesari (No. 433 of 1924) is more 
historical in that it contains nothing supernatural ; it is 
also more direct in its reference to the war. * When the 
king of Ceylon (a* Lfi^^senjrium-) sent his army and generals 
to conquer and annex the Pandya country, the Pandya 
king Kulasekhara fled from his kingdom and sought 
refuge with the Chola and entreated him to recover his 
kingdom for him. Thereupon the latter was pleased to 
direct that Kulasekhara be reinstalled on his throne 
after killing the Ceylonese commander and his 
lieutenants who had entered the Pandya country and 
nailing up their heads over the gates of Madura. In 
accordance with the direction of the Chola king 
Kulasekharadeva, during his stay in the Chola country, 
was entertained with deserving liberality. With enough 
forces, funds and zeal the Pandya country was recon- 
quered by the Cholas, Lankapuri Dandanayaka and his 
generals being put to death and their heads nailed on to 



THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 133 

the gateway of Madura. Arrangements were then made 
for the entry of Kulasekharadeva into Madura after taking 
necessary precautions against the future annexation 
of the Pandya country to Ilam.’ It was the minister 
Pallavarayar who did all this. 1 

It will be readily seen that these two inscriptions 
agree with the Mahavam'sa in important particulars. 
'The names of Dandanayaka Lankapuri and the Madura 
king Kulasekhara and the intervention of the Cholas in 
favour of Kulasekhara are common to them all. But 
both the epigraphs refer to defeats sustained by the 
Geylon forces about which the Mahavam'sa is silent; and 
there is a rather grave disagreement in detail between 
the two inscriptions as to the fate of the Ceylon 
generals : the Arpakkam record states that they returned 
to Ceylon after their defeat by Pallavarayar, while the 
other inscription says that their heads were nailed to the 
gates of Madura by order of the Chola king. And if we 
recall that a still later record of the twelfth year of Raja- 
kesari Rajadhiraja (465 of 1905) refers to this same war 
and to the part played in it by a traitor named Srf- 
vallabha, it becomes clear that many gaps still remain to 
be filled in our account of the war. 

That this war did not end with the retreat of 
Lankapura and the restoration of Kulasekhara by the 
Cholas becomes clear from the Chola records of the suc- 
ceeding years, 2 specially those of Kulottunga III, the 

1 A>R.E., 1924, part ii, para 21. 

3 Referring to No. 3 of 1899 of the eleventh year of Rajakesari Rajadhi- 
raja in which he bears the title r who had conqured Madura and Ceylon 
Mr. Venkayya says ( A.R.E 1899, para 38 1 c If this king is identical with 

Parakesarivarman alias Rajadhiraja Devan, who was an ally of the Pandya 
king KulaSekhara, the attribute prefixed to his name in the Alangudi 
inscription, which would be six years later than the Arpakkam one, was 
probably based on the victories achieved by the Cholas during his reign in 



134 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


successor of Rajadhiraja II. We do not know how long 
Kulasekhara lived after the restoration ; it may have 
been at most for about a decade from the eighth year of 
Rajadhiraja to the second or third of Kulottunga III — 
A.D. 1170-80 roughly. Thereupon he seems to have 
been succeeded by a Vikrama Pandya 1 and on the 
accession of Vikrama Pandya, Vira Pandya appears to 
have made another attempt, again with Ceylonese’ help, 
to dislodge the Kulasekhara line ; once more the Cholas 
came to the aid of the latter and the war was renewed. 
An undated inscription, later than the fourth year of 
Kulottunga (1 of 1899 ), i.e., A.D. 1182, records that ‘ the 
son or sons of Vira Pandya were defeated by the Chola 
army. The Singhalese soldiers had their noses cut off 
and rushed into the sea to escape from the Chola troops. 
Vira Pandya himself was attacked by the Cholas and 
compelled to retreat. The town of Madura was captured 
and the Chola army took possession of the Pandya 
throne and planted a pillar of* victory (at Madura). The 
town of Madura, the Pandya throne and the kingdom 


a later campaign against Vira Pandya and his Singhalese allies in which 
Kulottunga III distinguished himself, and in consequence, assumed a 
surname similar to that of Rajadhirajadeva’ (see S.U., vol. iii, part i, No. 
36). But may it not be that Rajadhiraja assumed the surname merely 
as a result of Pallavarayar’s campaigns against Lankapuri ? Mr. Venkayya 
himself noticed in the same place No. 1 of 1899 and found subsequently 
other records of Kulottunga III which give reasons for Kulottunga’s sur- 
name {AR.E.> 1907, p. 62, para 40 and 1908, p. 67 para 64). Moreover, 
further research has shown that Kulottunga III could not have been more 
than twelve or thirteen years of age in the eleventh year of Rajadhiraja^ 
reign. {AR.E., 1924, part ii, para 20). 

It may also be noticed that No. 1 of 1899 is not dated in the fourth year of 
Kulottunga III, but appears to be of some date later than his fourth year. 
( SJJ \ Texts , vol. vi.— No. 436, esp. 1 . IS.) 

1 We hear of a Sundara Pandya co-operating with Kulasekhara in a 
subordinate capacity in the Mahavamia account of the war and do not 
know how he was related to Kulasekhara or what happened to him, 



THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 


135 


were then made over to Vikrama Pandya, who was an 
ally of the Cholas.’ The same incidents are recorded 
in later inscriptions of Kulottunga III with small varia- 
tions. 1 The title ‘capturer.of the Pandya country’ 
assumed by Ammaiyappan Rajaraja Sambuvaraya, as 
early as the fourth year of the king (A.D. 1 182) shows 
that he rendered valuable help to his Chola overlord, by 
whom he must have been so honoured. 2 Kulottunga 
himself assumed the title Pandyari and performed the 
VtrUbkislka after the capture of Madura. 3 This was 
apparently after a second rebellion by Vlra Pandya and 
a battle at Nettur in which he was beaten and captured 
with his queen as recorded in an inscription of the 
eleventh year of Kulottunga (A.D. 1188-89). Two 
records of the sixteenth year (42 and 43 of 1906) mention 
the flight of Vlra Pandya and his relatives seeking refuge 
in Travancore. 4 And an inscription in the nineteenth 
year furnishes the comment on the phrase uirmru^iuSssr 
(tpy.pp?lso employed in the record of the 

eleventh year and states that Kulottunga placed his foot 
on Vira Pandya’ s crown (jyeueir opuf-QiAth jyjy. meu jb s>) 
and then gave him some presents and dismissed him. 5 
It must have been after this that Vira Pandya proceeded 


1 A.R.E., 1899, para,38 ; Ins. Nos. 66 of 1892 ; 42 and 43 of 1906 ; 190-192 

of 1907 ; and 94 of 1918. Also vol. Ui, pp. 205-6 ; No. 86, pp. 210-11 

and No. 88, p. 217. 

2 A.R.E., 1918, part if, para 39. 

2 A.R.E., 1908, part IU para 64. Also SJJ., vol, ill, p.214, inscription 
No. 87 (1L 2-4). 

4 Ref. in the preceding note and A>R.E.> 1907, part ii, para 40. 

5 Dr. S. K. Aiyangar thinks that the explanation of Hultzsch, which I 
have followed in the text, is not supported by the phrases employed in the 
inscription, p. 13 and n. 2 of p . 14 of S, India and Her Muhammadan 
Invaders . It is not possible to reconcile the view that his head was cut 
off in the eleventh year of Kulottunga after the battle of Nettur, with Vira 
Pandya’s escape to Travancore recorded in the sixteenth year. Hult2sch’s 
explanation may, for this reason, be preferred. 



136 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


to Travancore as recorded in the sixteenth year. We do 
not know anything as to what happened to him afterwards. 
Whatever happened to Vlra Pandya and his relatives, 
it seems clear that KulSttunga succeeded in establishing 
Vikrama Pandya on the Pandya throne and thus putting 
an end to all disputes about the succession in which the 
Cholas and the Ceylon kings had taken sides for qver a 
decade. But it is not yet possible to ascribe any inscrip- 
tions with confidence to this Vikrama Pandya and we 
cannot say if he was the immediate predecessor or not of 
J atavarman Kulasekhara who came to the throne of the 
PandyasinA.D. 1190; the allusion to the time of Periyana- 
yanar Srivallabha in a record of Kulasekhara (No. 1 xo 
of 1907) must however be borne in mind in coming to 
a conclusion on this question. 1 

The intervention of Kulottunga III in favour of 
Vikrama was apparently the last occasion on which the 
Cholas were able to interfere effectively in the affairs 
of the southern kingdom. ‘ Either during the latter 
portion of his reign or on his death, the power of the 
Cholas seems to have declined, though the causes cannot 
now be easily ascertained. He was succeeded about the 
year A.D. 1216 by his son Tribhuvanacakravartin Raja- 
rajadeva III whose capacity for military organization does 
not appear to have been very high. He has no exploits 
to boast of. ... It was evidently the weakness of the 
Cholas that led to the occupation of the Chola country 
by the Hoysalas under Vlra Sdmesvara and to the con- 
quest of Ranch! by the Kakatlya king Ganapati.’ 2 After 


x Dr. S. K. Aiyangar thinks : ‘ It is just possible that this KulaSekhara 
(ctcc, a.d. 1190) was the son of Vikrama and the grandson of the Kula- 
sekhara whose cause the Cholas supported in the war of succession.’— 
Op. tit. p. 44. Contra Rangacharya under Tj. 918-539 of 1904, 

2 A.R.E,, 1900, paras 29 and3Q« 



THE END OF CHOLA ASCENDANCY 


137 


the close of the civil dissensions in the Pandya country 
brought about by Kulottunga’s intervention, the Pandya 
kings appear to have recovered remarkably and it turned 
out that Kulottunga had thus only increased the difficul- 
ties of his successor and forced him to seek the help 
of the Hoysalas — a step which only added still further 
to his troubles and those of the Chola empire. But 
we are touching on the political conditions out of 
which was to grow the Second Empire of the Pandyas 
which lasted in great power throughout the thirteenth 
century A.D. 


18 



CHAPTER X 


THE PANDYAS OF THE SECOND EMPIRE 
(1190-1238) 

AFTER the close of the civil wars and the secure res- 
toration by Kulottunga III of Vikrama Pandya to the 
throne of Madura, the Pandya kingdom recovered 
rapidly much of the power and glory that characterized 
it in the days before the sack of Madura by Parantaka I. 
We have at present no means of judging how far 
Vikrama Pandya himself profited by his opportunity. 
He seems to have had on the whole a troubled time, and 
he was apparently a weak ruler who depended more on 
Kuldttunga’s support than on his own strength for defend- 
ing himself against the attacks of his enemies. Even 
when he had occupied the throne for seven or eight years, 
it needed Kulottunga’s intercession to maintain his 
power, when Vira Pandya attacked him in some force 
about A.D. x 187. After the campaign which ended in the 
defeat of Vira Pandya at Nettur, Kulottunga held a 
great durbar in the Pandya capital at which Vira 
Pandya and his Chera contemporary did him obeisance 
and Kulottunga placed his foot on the head of the 
former. 1 Thus, almost throughout his reign — Vikrama 
does not seem to have long survived the events just 


1 The facts are narrated in two records of Kulottunga dated in his eleventh 
and nineteenth years (Nos. 87 and 88 in SJ.L, vol. iii, part ii). The 
later record gives more details than the earlier, hut the reference is evi- 
dently to the same transactions. See also the notes at the end of the last 
chapter. 



THE PANDYAS OF THE SECOND EMPIRE 139 


mentioned — Vikrama Pandya was a feudatory of Kulot- 
tunga III whose hold on the country was apparently real 
and effective. There comes, however, a decisive change 
in this relation between the Chola and the Pandya rulers 
even during the life-time of Kulottunga III with the 
accession of Jatavarman Kulasekhara (A.D. 1x90). From 
this time on, almost to the end of the thirteenth century, 
the power of the Pandyas attained great strength and 
expanded as far north as Nellore and Cuddapah ; a 
succession of able and truly distinguished rulers in the 
main line made this Second Empire a real power in the 
politics of South India in their age. Their successes in 
war, their patronage of literature and the arts, and the 
methods of their rule are amply borne out by the 
numerous records they have left behind. On the other 
hand, the power of the Cholas after Kulottunga III decli- 
ned to a very low ebb and dwindled into insignificance ; 
and this was, no doubt, one of the factors that favoured 
the rise of the Second Empire of the Pandyas. 

The interpretation of the epigraphs of the period 
however presents numerous difficulties which impose 
great limitations on any attempt to restore the history of 
the age. In the first place, there is no record, among the 
hundreds of inscriptions, which gives us any clue to the 
genealogy of the rulers of this age. Even the few 
copper-plates we possess, like the Tiruppuvanam plates, 
differ, in this respect, totally from similar documents of 
the Pandyas of the earlier or later times, and fail to 
cecord genealogy. This is perhaps the most serious 
obstacle in our way, which is not altogether removed by 
the few contemporary references to the Pandyas in the 
records of other ruling families and the many instances 
of astronomical details recorded in the Pandya inscrip, 
tions themselves. These astronomical details yield 



140 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

different results in the hands of different scholars, and 
often in the hands of the same scholar at different 
times. New kings have been postulated and given up 
in a manner that has tended to make the chronology of 
the age a game of ninepins. As one wades through the 
results of Kielhorn, Jacobi, Swamikkannu Pillai and 
Sewell, one almost gets the feeling that ignorance, at 
least of astronomy, is bliss and the general rule followed 
in our narrative is not to accept any conclusion that is 
not endorsed by more than one of these four earnest 
savants whose patient labours, especially those of Kiel- 
horn, have alone rendered possible even such a pro- 
visional narrative as is given here. It must be noted 
also that palaeography fails to furnish any material 
assistance in confirming or correcting the results of 
astronomy. Mr. Sewell remarks : 1 ‘Unless the num- 
ber of the solar day of the month is stated, and it is 
not as a rule stated, all the ordinary details of a Chola or 
Pandya date will be found often to correspond with 
about three different days in a century ’ ; and palseo- 
graphy cannot possibly decide among them . 2 And 
even the texts of most of these records are yet 
unpublished. It is obvious that in the present state of 
our knowledge we shall have to leave on one side all the 
records which cannot with confidence be assigned to 


1 LA„ vol, xliv, p, 169. 

2 Mr. L. D. Swamikkannu Pillai, for instance, after wavering between two 
dates f or a Maravarman Vikrama Pandya’s accession 1269-70 and a.d« 1283 
and between two rulers of the same name, finally gave up the a.d. 1283 d%te 
altogether; epigraphy furnishes no aid here. (See’Jrf 1922, part ii, 
para 31 and A.R*E . , 1925, part ii f para 28)'. The reader may also be referred 
to the. strange manner in which the official epigraphist' discusses No.,-393 of 
1917 at para 49 of part ii of the report for 1918.. It should .be. noticed in parti- 
cular that' even when It is a question of dates centuries apart (in this case 
eleventh and thirteenth centuries) palaeography is- inconclusive. Sewell , at 

191, LA., vol. xliv, makes a similar remark. 



THE PANDYAS OP THE SECOND EMPIRE 141 


one or another of the kings whose existence has been 
proved beyond possibility of doubt. Again no attempt 
can be made to fix the dynastic relations among the 
rulers of the age. But this is not all. There is the 
possibility, nay the great probability, that several prin- 
ces ruled at the same time over different parts of the 
empire and these also engraved inscriptions in full or 
' quasi-regal style. We have already seen reason to reject 
the theory of the regular co-regency of ‘ Five Pandya 
Rulers ’ and to hold that although several princes of the 
royal family might have ruled in different parts of the 
kingdom simultaneously, there was a regular succession 
of kings who ruled in their own right, the others ruling 
more or less in a subordinate capacity. There is little 
reason to doubt that the main line of reigning kings is 
that restored by Kielhorn’s calculations and modified in 
some respects by his successors. 

Jatavarman Kulasekhara, who came to the throne in 
A.D. 1190 and ruled in Madura in considerable power 
till A.D. 1217, may have been the immediate successor of 
Vikrama Pandya ; one of his early records in the second 
year (No. uo of 1907 from Kallidaikuricci), however, 
seems to contain a reference to a Periyanayanar (an elder 
male relative) Srlvallabha, a predecessor of his; and a 
record in . the third year of a Jatavarman Srlvallabha finds 
mention in another inscription of Kulasekhara’s successor, 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya (No. 683 of 1905). ; It is not 
improbable that both these references are to the same §ri- 
vallabha,. but. we.know nothing more of him. 1 .Kulase- 
khara’s inscriptions range from his second to his twenty- 
eighth year.(No. 658011916) and generally open withone 
of three forms of historical introduction— 


1 A>R.E'> 1908, part ii, para 42. 



142 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


(No. 5 of 1894), yeSlesT (No. 14 of 1894) and 

toiesflmp (13 of 1894). None of these introductions tells us 
anything definite about the events of the reign ; all of them 
contain highly poetic praise of the glory of the king; the 
nearest approach to a concrete historical statement occurs 
in the y )i £Gtis>j<arflst»& formula in the phrase 1 — ‘ ev^9imik 

■Sn.ju LLjXseS/Seu/DB/S Qen^^isar Qeui&m>a lsQei>^^lJU.Q^a)elflLJu, , 

which is a vague hint that the Pandya kingdom is begin- 
ning to hold its own against its Chola and Chera neigh- 
bours. A rather early inscription of the reign (No. 665 
of 19x6) from S erma.de vi refers to a gift by the king to a 
temple in the name of his brother-in-law (m<£<3?«zn-@/r) 
Kodai Ravivarman, undoubtedly a Chera prince. Another 
record of some years later (No. 370 of 1916) seems to 
imply that the contemporary Tiruvadi king of Jetunga- 
nadu was a subordinate of Kulasekhara ; but we have as 
yet no means of explaining the dynastic connection 
mentioned in the earlier record. 2 In the numerous inscrip- 
tions of Kulasekhara from the Ramnad district, is found 
the name of one of the important local officials of the king, 
who seems to have played a considerable part for over 
a decade in the administration of the division known as 
Kalavalinadu and was thence known as Ka]avali-Nadalvan, 
his proper name being mentioned as J ayangondasolan 
^Ivalluvan (No. 313 of 1923). 3 Several other in- 
stances can be cited from the other records of this and 
other kings. From the provenance of Kulasekhara’s 
inscriptions we may conclude that his rule extended over 
the bulk of the modern districts of Madura, Ramnad and 

1 See 5././., vol. v } No. 428, 11. 2-3, contra the conjectural restoration 
[iBUtrpp’l in 1. 1 of No. 301 of the same volume, Some records (e.g. 512 of 
1904 and 385 of 1914) seem to take us to the thirty-ninth year of a J atavarman 
Kulasekhara. But the texts are not available. 

0 See A.fi.E.) 1917, part ii, para 8. 

3 1924, part ii, para 26. 



THE PANDYAS OP THE SECOND EMPIRE 143 

Tinnevelly. There are references to thrones with differ- 
ent names, all of them in Madura and to maids in palace 
service ( agappavivnrd ). No. 459 of 1909 mentions the 
throne Malavarayan in the hall known as Pukalabharanan 
in the palace at Madura. The same record mentions a grant 
of 100 drammas (drachms) by the king for the deepen- 
ing of, a tank called after him. The other thrones were 
called Kalingarayan (No. 29 of 1924) and Munaiyadaraiyan 
(No. 660 of 1916). The well-known Tiruppuvanam 
copper-plate grant dated in the twenty-fifth year of the 
king (29th November, A.D. 1214) records the grant of a 
new village created by clubbing together several old ones 
under the name Rajagambhira-caturvedimangalam after 
its boundaries were marked in the traditional manner by 
a female elephant. 1 The king would thus appear to 
have had a surname Rajagambhira. His records also 
contain other particulars which throw some light on the 
administration and the social life of his time; but 
these may be reserved for separate consideration 
later. 

The successor of Jatavarman Kulasekhara was Mara- 
varman Sundara Pandya whose accession is counted in 
his records from A.D. 1216. 2 It is just possible that this 
Sundara Pandya was the brother of his predecessor, 
Jatavarman Kulasekhara, and that both of them were 
the sons of that Vikrama Pandya who was restored to 
the Pandya throne at the close of the civil wars by 
Kulottunga III, and consequently, grandsons of Kula- 
sekhara in whose time the civil war began. This sug- 

1 LA; vol. XX, p. 288. The text and translation in Burgess and Natesa 
Sastri’s Tamil and Sanskrit inscriptions ( A.S.SJ vol. iv). For agap- 
parivara maids see No. 720 of 1916. 

* Kielhorn, E.L , vol. viii, App. II, p. 24. Also A.R.E 1927, part ii, 
para 41. 



144 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


gestion is supported by references to a Periyanayanar 
Vikrama Pandyadeva in the records of both these 
rulers. 1 Maravarman Sundara Pandya’s records often 
contain a fairly long and ornate introduction beginning 
jSnrjiDL-Etm'SiLiLh, (e.g. No. 49 of 1890), which 
is of considerable interest to the historian. 2 His 
well-known Tirupparankunram inscription (No.. 49 of 
1890) is dated in the seventh year of his reign and 
furnishes very important and interesting particulars; 
while another record dated thirteen years later (No. 140 
of 1894) from Tinnevelly tells us a little more about the 
intervening years. 3 The earlier record tells us that after 
his coronation, the Pandyas extended their sway at the 
expense of the Cholas and refers to an expedition of 
Sundara Pandya against the Chola country in the 
course of which he set fire to the cities of Tanjore and 
Uraiyur and laid waste the surrounding country. 
The Chola king had to seek refuge in flight and then 
the Pandyan invader celebrated a Vtrnbhiseka in the 
coronation hall of the Cholas. After that he proceeded 
north to worship at the shrine of Nataraja in Chidam- 


1 A.R.E. 1927 Ibid. (Nos. 47 of 3926 and S3 of 1927). 

8 The formula yu>a)/r^®syii is that of the later king of the same name 
wrongly given to this king in A.R.E., 1917, part ii, para 8, also A.R.E., 
1915, part ii, para 32. Inscription No. 488 of 1916 which clearly belongs to 
this king is reported to begin ytb0sSio $(npr&)Lo. As the foil test is not 
available it is not possible to say if this is only a variant of the usual formula 
of this king or a new one. 

3 These two forms of the yii^eShu introduction are repeated in other 
records as well. Bnt the enlarged version is not earlier than the twentieth 
year. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar is rather inconclusive in his remarks about 
Maravarman Sundara and his campaigns in his South India and Her 
Muhammadan Invaders , pp. 26-7, 34 and 44-5, especially with regard to 
the internal chronology of the reign. Thus achievements claimed ‘ by ins- 
criptions of the ninth year of Marvarman Sundara Pandya’, (p. 26) ‘ must 
have taken place before the nineteenth year Of Maravarman Sundara I 
(p, 34), 



THE PANDYAS OF THE SECOND EMPIRE 145 

baram. Apparently, during his sojourn in Chidambaram, 
he sent for his defeated enemy saying that he would 
restore to him the country and crown that he had recently 
lost ; and the Chola king returned and together with 
his son prostrated before the royal seat of the victori- 
ous Pandya ; the victor, true to his word, restored the 
crown and country of the Chola in the form of a religious 
gift, ’which was confirmed by the issue of a royal rescript 
with the Pandyan seal on it and the title of Cholapati to 
the vanquished ruler. So much we learn from the record 
of the seventh year. It may also be noted that in the 
records of the seventh and subsequent years Sundara 
Pandya gets one or another of the titles Q&ir< 6 ^®Q&irmr- 

L—QTjeffitu, Q&irtgsv)® Qairesar® Qpuf. © sireku— G&ir fpLjir/igi 
eff’irir sih umremfl and Q&rr^str)® <sujfitkQ- 

lu^eifliu, the first title appearing even as early as the third 
year of the king (No. 362 of 1906). 

Now, there is little reason to doubt that the facts so 
recorded in Sundara’s inscriptions are substantially true ; 
and the language of every inscription makes it a paean of 
triumph. For the first time after several centuries of 
subjection to Chola rule, followed by a period of civil 
war and abject dependence on Chola support, Sundara 
Pandya apparently in the prime of life had success- 
fully carried fire and sword into the heart of the Chola 
country and what was more, had, by an act of political 
good sense in restoring the Chola country to its vanquish- 
ed ruler, raised himself and his country in the estimation 
©f his contemporaries. The ground had been prepared in 
the days of Kulasekhara, but so long as Kulottunga III 
lived, the memory of the support Vikrama Pandya had had 
at his hands against Vlra survived, and Kulottunga him- 
self was a more capable ruler than his ill-starred succes- 
sor Rajaraja III. Rajaraja III and Sundara Pandya 
19 



146 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


were called to power about the same time ; and they had 
no old memories, either of them, that need have 
hampered their ambitions. And it was the law of life 
in those days among Indian kings that he who could 
not be hammer had to be anvil . 1 It would seem that 
Sundara Pandya invaded the Chola country very early 
in his reign, though the restoration of the country is not 
mentioned till the seventh year . 2 * 

The inscriptions of the twentieth year repeat these 
facts in identical language and add some further parti- 
culars. The king of North Kongu came and complained 
to Sundara Pandya of the wrongs done to him by his rela- 
tives; then, after some time, came also the king of South 
Kongu, accompanied by an army and prostrated him- 
self before the Pandya ; Sundara kept both the chiefs as 
his guests for some time and then dismissed them after 
imposing his own terms on them and demanding portions 
of their territory to be ceded to him on pain of death. 
Then, the Chola monarch, forgetful of the duty of 
submission and gratitude he owed to Sundara Pandya, 
raised the standard of revolt and refused the usual tribute ; 

1 Dr. S. K. Aiyangar makes Sundara’s war on the Cholas a war of 
revenge, (op. cit. p, 26 ; also 13-14). He holds that the Pandyas felt the 
insult of Kulottunga’s durbar at Madura after the battle of Nettur and 
wanted to avenge themselves by the durbar at MudikondaSolapuram. I am 
not clear about this. But it should be remembered that Kulottunga 
supported Parakrama Pandya and only insulted his enemy Vira who 
represented the beaten party in the civil war. Again, Kuldttunga cut off 
VTra’s head on the field of battle and caused it to be brought to the durbar 
in order that he, with his queen by his side, might set his foot on it (we have 
not accepted this view. See chap, is) ; and there is nothing in the 'revenge* 
of Sundara Pandya, to remind us of this barbarity. I accept Dr. S. K. 
Aiyangar' s identification of Mudikondagolapuram with JayangondaSola- 
puram (n. 2, p. 44, op . cit.) 

* 362 of 1906 from Kudumiyamalai (third year); 122 of 1910 — Tenkarai 

(fourth year) and 353 of 1916— TiruvallSvaram (fifth year) and 122 of 1903 — 
Tiruccunai (five + one year) contain the title 4 who took the Chola country 1 

but no reference to the restoration, 



THE PANDYAS OF THE SECOND EMPIRE 147 

there followed another expedition into the Chola coun- 
try, leading to a battle which is described in considerable 
detail, but after a conventional manner. After the fight 
the Chola king was absolutely defenceless. The women 
of the Chola king including his chief queen fell into the 
hands of the enemy who carried them in captivity to 
Mudikondasolapuram, where, apparently, there was 
another Vlr&bhiseka celebrated by the victorious 
Pandya. 

It is not easy to interpret these new particulars and 
relate them to the facts recorded in the earlier inscrip- 
tion so as to make a connected story. Apparently, 
between the seventh year of Sundara and the twentieth, 
i.e., between, say, A.D. 1222-3 andA.D. 1235-6, he found 
occasion to interfere in the affairs of the Kongu country 
and lead a second expedition against the Chola king. 
There seems to be no means of verifying or controlling 
the vague references to the rulers of North and South 
Kongu and their relations to Sundara Pandya. It is more 
important to clear up, as far as possible, the relations 
between Sundara Pandya and his Chola contemporary 
Rajaraja III ; and in doing so, account must be taken of 
indications given by contemporary records other than 
those of Sundara Pandya himself. 

Raja Raja III ruled from A.D. 12x6 to about A.D. 
1243. About A.D. 1220-23 must have taken place the 
first invasion of Maravarman Sundara Pandya, and the 
conquest and restitution of the Chola country recorded 
in his inscription of the seventh year. A record of 
Hoysala Vira Narasimha II in the year A.D. 1222 states 
that he was marching against Srlrangam'in the south 
while another dated two years later, A.D. 1224, calls him 
the establisher of the Chola kingdom. 1 Then, there is the 

1 Htiltzsch in JSJ voL vii, p. 162. But see text infra . 



148 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


well-known Tiruvendipuram inscription in the sixteenth 
yearo£ Raja Raja (A.D. 1231-32), from which we learn that 
the Chola emperor, who had been imprisoned by his 
rebellious feudatory Kopperunjinga, was released and 
restored to power, by the intervention of two generals of 
Vira Narasimha, in order to maintain his reputation of 
being the establisher of the Chola country. Lastly, we 
have the record of Sundara Pandya in his twentieth year 
(A.D. 1235-6) which gives the story of another defeat and 
dethronement of Raja Raja. These are the facts relevant 
to an understanding of the history of the period, and the 
chronology indicated above seems to be rather well 
established. 

There is reason also to think that at this time the 
Pandya, Chola and Hoysala families were connected by 
marriage alliances. A Chola princess is known to have 
been among the queens of Narasimha’s father Ballala 
II . 1 Rajendra III, the successor of Raja Raja, calls 
Somesvara, the son of Narasimha, uncle (Mama ). 2 
Again, Maravarman Sundara Pandya II (acc. 1238) 
refers also to Somesvara as Mfimadi, uncle or father-in- 
law, and it has been suggested that this relationship may 
be explained by supposing that Maravarman Sundara 
Pandya I (acc. 1216) married a sister of Somesvara, 3 


1 Epigraphia Carnatica , vol, v, p. xxii ; Q. J. M. S. t vol. ii, p. 120. 

e £J. t vol. vii, Kielhorn’s inscriptions of South India, No. 865, (No. 65 
of 1892). 

3 A.E >£. i 1907, part ii, para 26 and 1912, part ii, para 34. It may be noted 
that Mr. Krishna Sastri’s assumption that Tribhuvanacakravartia 
Koaerinmaikondan of Nos. 526 and 527 of 1911 was Maravarman Sundara 
Pandya II does not appear essential Lo his argument, as it would be if these 
records began ^eo/r^ 0 ^u>. In the absence of information on this point, 
and in view of the records being signed by officers of Maravarman Sundara 
Pandya I, one is tempted to assign these records to this ruler rather than to 
his successor. If this is correct, and if Mr. Krishna Sastri’s conjecture about 
Pammiyakkan can be upheld by further evidence, then these records will 
become very important in settling the main lines of the tangled diplomacy 



TfiE PANDYAS OP THE SECOND EMPIRE 149 


probably the one mentioned in some Pandya records of the 
age as Pammiyakkan. And, as we shall see, under 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya II, the Pandya and the 
Hoysala rulers were on very friendly terms. These 
facts go to show that by virtue of their power and 
their dynastic connections, the Hoysalas of this period 
were able and perhaps anxious in their own interest to 
regulate the affairs of the southern kingdoms, in 
particular the relations between the Pandyas and the 
Cholas. It appears likely, therefore, that the restitu- 
tion of the Chola country (c. A.D. 1222) to its ruler 
by Maravarman Sundara Pandya I after the first 
conquest was not altogether unconnected with Nara- 
simha’s march against farirangam about the same time. 

Now what was the nature of Narasimha's interven- 
tion ? In effect, it seems to have ended in the re-esta- 
blishment of the Chola on the throne and the consequent 
assumption of the title Cholarajya (mandala) -pratistha- 
carya by Narasimha. It is not however so easy 
to judge what the effect of the intervention was on the 
Pandya king and his kingdom. The Pandya conquest 
of the Chola country is referred to as early as the third 
year of Sundara Pandya, while the restoration of the 
kingdom is not mentioned in any inscription earlier than 
the seventh year. The interval, A.D. 1219-23, covers, 
in Hoysala history, the death of Ballala II and the early 
years of Narasimha II. An inscription of Narasimha in 
A.D. 1223 (Cn. 197) 1 gives him the titles ‘displacer of 


of the age on the lines indicated in the text in a very tentative manner. See 
also Mysore Arch . Report* 1920, p. 48. 

No. 15 of. 1912 from Tinnevelly contains a gift to the local temple by a 
relative of an officer of SomeSvara. 

1 The summary that follows is based on Lewis Rice, Epigraphia Carna - 
tica , vol. v, part i, Infcrod., pp. xxii ff. 



ISO THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

Pandya ( Pmdya disupattanum), and establisher of the Chola 
kingdom ’. Another of the same date (Cn. 203) says — 
‘ why describe his forcible capture of Adiyama, Chera, 
Pandya, Magara and the powerful Kadavas? Rather 
describe how he lifted up Chola, brought under his 
orders all the land as far as Setu.’ Narasimha is called 
« Indra to the mountain, the pride of the Pandya^ cham- 
pion (Ak. 82 of A.D. 1234). There is also a reference 
in a record of A.D. 1237 (Ak. 123) 1 to a victorious 
expedition ( digvijaya ) against the Pandya and to ‘ the sea 
roaring out with the sounds of great fish, sharks 
and alligators, saying to Pandya kings, give up all, and 
live in peace as his servants.’ A much later record of 
one of his successors (Bl. 74) dated inA.D. 1261 says that 
Narasimha ‘ setting up the Chola, who was covered up by 
the dust from the feet of the hosts of enemies, acquired 
fame as the establisher of the Chola and the destroyer of 
the Pandya.’ Now, the vague reference to the sea 
advising the Pandyas to surrender (Ak. 123) may be 
dismissed as poetic and also the reference to Narasimha’s 
fame as * destroyer of the Pandya ’ may be discounted 
as a late account not entitled to the same weight as 
the strictly contemporary references in the earlier re- 
cords. The phrase ‘displacer of the Pandya’ maybe 
taken to furnish the clue to a correct estimate of the 
nature of Narasimha’s intervention on behalf of the 


1 Rice remarks in his summary of this inscription that it * describes the 
king as encamped in a.d. 1234 at Ravitadana-kuppa while on a victorious 
expedition over the Pandya *; and this has led Mr. Krishna Sastri to postulate 
a Hoysala invasion of the Pandya country in continuation of the vsenda- 
mangalam expedition (1232-3) of the Hoysala generals recorded at Tirtt- 
vSndipuram. A*R E. y 1911, part ii, para 47 and vol.ii,'p. 122. 

But a reference to the text and translation of AK. 123 shows that the date, 
Sakall56, refers to the settingup of the God Laksmi Narasimha in 
Somanathpur and not to the encampment. 



THE PANDYAS OF THE SECOND EMPIRE 151 


Chola ruler. He did not want the Chola power to 
disappear altogether to the great aggrandizement of the 
Pandya; he therefore made up his mind to help the 
Chola to regain his kingdom ; this meant that the Pandya 
ruler had to agree to restore the Chola country in the 
manner described already, and to that extent it was a 
setback to the Pandya power. It is however quite pos- 
sible that in the final settlement, the Pandya and the 
Hoysala monarchs took each something for himself from 
the Chola empire. Such an end to this intervention 
may explain the conquests of Narasimha near Srirangam 
at this time, and the claim of tribute which Sundara 
Pandya seems to have enforced successfully against the 
Chola for some years. In other words, Narasimha’ s 
intervention was as much diplomatic as it was military, 
as much in his own as it was in the Chola interest. We 
have no means of deciding whether the dynastic connec- 
tion between the Hoysalas and the Pandyas is to be 
dated before or after the events or was part of the 
settlement on this occasion . 1 

There is very little evidence to show that, as has 
sometimes been held , 2 the Pandya ruler had the co- 
operation of Kopperunjinga in his war against the Chola 
king. The very full records pf the Pandya ruler make 
no reference to this ; nor does the Tiruvendipuram 


1 If this reconstruction of the relations is correct, we must assume that 
the Hoysala records exaggerate the achievements of Narasimha in a military 
sense as against the Pandya king ; a feature which seems quite natural if we 
compare it to the silence of the Pandya inscriptions as to the actual causes 
of the restoration of the Chola country. 

* E,g. by Dr. S. K, Aiyangar, South India and Her Muhammadan Invaders , 
pp. 33-6. It must be observed that the mention of Ka<Java or Kadavas in 
the Hoysala records (e.g. Cn. 203) is not conclusive proof of such an 
alliance as many chieftains seem to have had this title at the time. See, 
however, Mr. Shama Sastry on the Gadyakarn&mrta in the Mys. Arch, 
Report i 1924, p. 12* 



152 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


inscription, which gives the account of Kopperunjinga’s 
rebellion against Raja Raja, give any hint of the Pandya 
ruler being involved in it. The Hoysalas had an import- 
ant interest in the Chola ruler and his country, apparently 
all through Raja Raja’s reign, and they were ever 
ready to rescue him from the numerous misfortunes to 
which he was subject. But on the occasion of the second 
conquest of the Chola country by Sundara Pandya 
(c. A.D. 1234-5) the Hoysalas seem to have left Raja Raja 
to shift for himself ; at any rate we do not know that they 
actively interfered, although Raja Raja even after his 
apparently crushing defeat, seems still to have continued 
in some power up to A.D. 1243. 

Thus the two expeditions of Sundara Pandya against 
the Chola country do not appear to have resulted in any 
permanent occupation or conquest of the Chola country, 
though there are some records of this king outside the 
Pandya country which confirm the historicity of the events 
recorded in the inscriptions cited above. 1 The direct 

1 Some of these records may be noted here ;—one record from 
Srlrangam in the ninth year (No. 53 of 1892-5 1 ././. Texts, vol. iv, No> 500} 
which refers to a reform in the temple affairs ; No. 52 of 1897 in the 
seventh year from Tirukkattupalli recording the building of a shrine to the 
Goddess ( E.I . , vol. vi, p. 304) and No. 270 of 1901 from Kovlladi 
(Tan j ore Taluq) may, among others, be surely ascribed to our king 
as they all refer to his conquest or restoration of the Chola country. I 
doubt if records like 41 and 561 of 1921 from Big Ipmchipuram and 
Sulamangalam (respectively) which do not contain any specific reference 
to the conquest of the Chola among the titles of the king may, on grounds 
of astronomy alone, be ascribed to this king as has been done. 

A.R.E.. 1926 contains a discussion of this king’s reign which 
may be briefly noticed here. The epigraphist is surely wrong in 
saying that the anointment at MudikondaSolapuram is mentioned only 
in the records of the fourteenth year and afterwards (see inscription 
of the seventh year summarized earlier in this chapter). He says 
that some historical introductions of this king refer to conquests 
of the two Kongus, Ilam and Earuvur. The only instances seem 
to he No, 9 of 1926 and No, 72 of 1924 which cause a difficulty by 



THE PlNDYAS OF THE SECOND EMPIRE 153 


and effective sway of Maravarman Sundara Pandya I must 
be taken to have been more or less confined to the Pandya 
country, including in it portions of modern Puduk- 
kottah and T richinopoly ; this at any rate is the con- 
clusion that arises from the provenance of the many 
inscriptions that can be assigned to him without any 
possibility of doubt. There are references in the records 
(546 of 1922, 148 of 1908, etc.) to a throne Malavarayan 
at Madura ; one record (No. 77 of 1916) refers to a throne 
of the same name in a palace at Pon Amaravati in 
Puramalainadu ; it also refers to a Mudivalangum- 
perumalsandi evidently instituted in commemoration of 
the restitution of the Chola crown and the date of the 
record is 528 days after the fifth year, i.e., the seventh 
year of the king. The coins 1 with the legend Saiiadu- 
kondan must also be ascribed to this king. A record 
from Melkadayam (No. 524 of 19x6) in the eighteenth 
year of the king refers to a shrine called Kaliyuga- 
ramesvara, which indicates that the title KaliyugarUma, 
found also in some coin legends, may belong to our 
king or some predecessor of his. A ii'sayapandyadeva 

seems to have also been another title of this king. 2 


being mixed up with the name of Kuldttunga III and bis achieve- 
ments. The epigraphist says that No. 9 of 1926 records that the Chola 
kingdom was restored to Kulottunga III, and after a careful consideration 
of the points made in his discussion, I cannot help thinking that there is 
some mistake here either in the inscription or in its rendering. These two 
records are of the fifteenth and sixteenth years, and both come from the 
Ramnad district. May it be that there was something in this part of 
Stfndara^ reign that led him to look upon himself as the. successor of 
Kulottunga III or to ignore his successor Raja Raja by adopting the device 
of a double historical introduction ? 

1 See Sir T. Desikachari’s papers onPandyan Coins in the Tamilian 
Antiquary . It has been supposed that coins with the legend, Kacci - 
valangumperumal may also belong to this king ; but one wishes there 
was more evidence in favour of the supposition than is available at present. 

2 No. 662 of 1916 from £ermadevi and A.R.E., 1917, part ii, para 9. 

20 



154 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


A certain S 51 an Uyyaninraduvan alias Gurukulattarayan 
appears to have been an important person among the 
officials of the king. ‘ No. 554 of 1922 which contains 
verses in praise of him states that he was the minister of 
the king and that he built the garbhagrha , the ardha- 
mandapa and the maha-tuandapa of the Perumal (Visnu) 
temple at Tiruttangal. He is eulogized as the lord of 
Tadanganni and as one who set apart his village Anaiyur 
alias Tennavan 3 irrur, for conducting the Sundara 
Pandyan-sandi, in the seventh regnal year of the king. 
He ul tim ately rose to such an eminence in the state that 
whenever he visited the temple he enjoyed the honour of 
a kalam being sounded proclaiming : ‘ Hail ! Gurukulat- 
tambiran is come.’ This Gurukulattarayar also con- 
structed a stone temple for Tangal Isar and his consort 
Gaurl; other benefactions of his are also recorded. 1 
We find mention of other local chieftains like Malavar 
Manikkam and Kandan Udayanjeydan Gangeyan whose 
benefactions enriched temples and mathas and also gave a 
stimulus to learning and art. We hear of a court-poet of 
the king introducing another poet to the chief Gangeyan ; 
and a certain ‘ Kavirayar Isvara Siva Udaiyar of 
Uttaradesam’ was the guru of Malavar Manikkam 
and recipient of a ‘ Gurudaksina ' in the shape of 
land. 2 Several other records of Maravarman Sundara 
Pandya contain interesting references to institutional 
and cultural matters ; but these references are best 
reserved for consideration together with similar 
records of other Pandyan kings of the Second 
Empire. 

The latest records of Maravarman Sundara Pandya 


1 A.R.E., 1923, Part ii, paras 49-50. 

® AMM. } 1924, Part ii, paras 29 and 32. 



THE PANDYAS OF THE SECOND EMPIRE 155 

are dated in his twenty-third year 1 * and his reign must 
be taken to have come to a close some time in A.D. 1238- 
1239. The immediate successor or the heir-apparent in 
the last years of Maravarman Sundara Pandya was a 
Jatavarman Kulasekhara who seems to have had a very 
short reign, his accession being somewhere in June A.D. 
1 2 38. 2 Sewell remarked in 1915 that better proof was 
‘required than was then forthcoming for placing this 
king between the two Maravarman Sundara Pandyas of 
this period. A record from Tiruttangal (No. 548 of 
1922) furnishes such proof. This inscription, 3 dated in 
the second year of Jatavarman Kulasekhara refers to the 
gift of land in Anaiyur by Solan Uyyaninraduvan alias 
Gurukulattarayan for the Sundara Pandyan Sandi institut- 
ed by him in honour of Maravarman Sundara Pandya 
{acc. A.D. 1216). But we do not hear anything more of 
this Jatavarman Kulasekhara and so far no records that 
could be positively ascribed to him are known to mention 
a regnal year later than the second. We may perhaps 

1 No. 207 of 1914 from Vellanur in Pudukkottah. At part ii, para 49, 
A. EM; 1923, it is stated that records in twenty -two plus one year are 
among those in the year’s collection ; but there seems to be no inscription 
of the twenty-third year in that collection. Mr, L. D. Swamikkannu (2nd. 
Eph vol. i, part ii, p. 91) quotes a Pudukkottah record of the twenty-eighth 
regnal year but the date is not quite regular and may not be of this king. 

* See LA ti vol. xliv, pp. 190-1. 

3 This is discussed in AMM., 1923, part ii, para 51. Mr L. D, 
Swamikkannu’ s attempts to prove a longer regnal period for this king 
LA. , vol. xlii and Ephemeri $. Vo 1. I, partii, p. 91 cannot be held convinc- 
ing. Also A.EM., 1916, App. G. In the Pudukkottah inscriptions, Nos. 330 
to 337 which give high regnal years ranging from eight to twenty-six 
certainly belong to the earlier king. Most of these contain references to 
Kandan Aludaiyan alias Kalvayil Na^alvan, who is also referred to in 
No. 246 of the third year of the earlier king as also in No. 269 of the eighth 
year of Maravarman Sundara Pandya X. This Aludaiyan gets dates from 
A.n. 1193 to 1224 roughly. It is very unlikely that he survived up to the 
twenty-sixth year of Jatavarman Kulasekhara II, which would fall about 
a.d. 1264, The astronomical details in 330 are said to yield a,d. 1245 ; 
but, very likely, there are other solutions. 



156 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


suppose that Kulasekhara died in the life-time of 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya and that before his death, 
he chose as heir-apparent another Maravarman Sundara 
Pandya whose accession has been placed between 
July 13 and December 7, A.D. 1238. 1 To the reign of 
this Maravarman Sundara Pandya we may therefore 
turn. 


1 LA., vol. xliv, p. 191. Ia No. 78 of 1916 which is a record of 
the Sundara Pandya who took the Chola country, etc., there is a 
reference to a brother-in-law ( maccunamr ) of the king, whose name was 
KulaSekhara. One wonders if this brother-in-law is identical with the 
shortlived king Jat. Kulasekhara II. But there is nothing to support 
this conjecture except the name. 



CHAPTER XI 

MARAVARMAN SUNDARA (ate. a.d. 1238) 

JATAVARMAN SUNDARA (acc. a.d. 1251) 

MARAVARMAN SUNDARA PAndya II succeeded to the 
throne in A.D. 1238. His inscriptions begin with the 
characteristic formula PUmalar Tiruvum Porn Jayama - 
dandaiyum and as there seems to be as yet none of these 
that gives a regnal year higher than 15 (No. 132 of 1894), 
his reign must be taken to have continued up to about 
A.D. 1253. 1 The historical introduction of this ruler 
furnishes no information of any value and most of his 
records make large grants for various religious purposes 
such as the study and recitation of religious hymns in 
temples. There is no reason to believe that the extent 
of the kingdom suffered any diminution under this ruler 
and the political relations among the Pandyas, Cholas and 
Hoysalas seem not to have altered much since the time 
of Maravarman Sundara Pandya I. The frequent 

x For the date of accession, seeKielhom. E.I n vol. viii. AlsoSwamik- 
kannuin LA*, vol. slii and Sewell in 1>A>, vol. xliv. No. 141 of 1902 from 
Tiruven dipur am gives the sixteenth year, but as the text is not available, it 
is not possible to say if it belongs to this king. A more serious difficulty is 
presented by No. 616 of 1902 from the Tanjore district which refers to the 
seventeenth year and has been referred to a.d. 1255, (i.e., to our king) by 
Messrs. Sewell and SwamikkannuPillai. But this record like some others 
gives the title * who conquered every country * (e.g. 402 of 1905, 358 
of 1908, 446 of 1909, 582 of 1925). I am unable to accept this as belonging 
to Maravarman Sundara 11 acc. 1238, because (a) No. 462 of 1916 of the year 
22 of MSravarman Sundara Pandya * who was pleased to take all countries ’ 
Contains astronomical details which, according to Mr. Swamikkanmi Pillai, 
do not suit any date between a.d. 1216 and 1315 and (6) Sewell has found 
the astronomical details in 616 . of 1902 not quite regular {LA , vol. -xliv, 
p.192). 

We have also to leave on one side for the time being three records of 
Maravarman Sundara from Pattama<}ai and Sermadevi (550, 562 and 66S Of 
1916) with the formula Pmnalar Tirnppuya, etc,, one of which (562) refers 
to the sixth year of Periyanayanar KulaSekhara. 



158 


THJB PANDYAN KINGDOM 


references to the Hoysalas and their generals in the 
records of this reign, however, make us doubt if Mara- 
varman Sundara Pandya II did always feel strong enough 
to resist the friendly but meddlesome interference in his 
affairs by his relatives from the Mysore country. In 
the eleventh year of his reign he names a village in the 
Tinnevelly district after his Mamadi (uncle?) Hoysala 
V!ra Somesvara at his suggestion and about the same 
time a military officer of the Hoysala king Varadanna 
Dandanayaka is present in Tinnevelly . 1 Earlier in 
the reign a dispute between Vaisnavas and Saivas 
in Tirumaiyyam, Pudukkottah, which was then evidently 
included in the Pandyan kingdom, was settled by Appanna 
Dandanayaka, a general of Hoysala Vira Somesvara , 2 
who, in some Mysore records, is called Puyidyakula- 
samraksana-daksa-daksina-bhuja. In another case there 
is a reference to a Maccunanar Vikrama- 

choladeva, who seems to have had a share in guiding 
the direction . of the king’s charities . 3 Under this 
king Madura was the usual residence of the monarch 
and two thrones Malavarayan and Pallavarayan both 
in the palace at Madura are frequently referred to in 
inscriptions which record the orders of the king . 4 

The next ruler in the main line was the celebrated 
Jatavarman Sundara Pandya, under whom the Second 
Empire of the Pandyas reached its widest extent and 
attained the height of its splendour. Practically the 

1 No. 156 of 1894 and 138 of 1894. 

9 No. 387 of 1906 and 1907, part ii» para 36. The Hoysala general 

is said to have settled the dispute after the conquest of Kanan^u and Ven- 
kayya supposed that this conquest was undertaken on hehalf of the friendly 
Pandyan king. For the title of Somesvara see Eflig. Cam vol. v, part i, 

p. XXV. 

3 No. 132 of 1894 line 15. ( SJJ vol. v). 

4 Nos. 132 and 149 of 1894. 



JATAVARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA 


159 


whole of Southern India up to Nellore and Cuddapah 
was brought for a time under Pandya supremacy 
and all the rival dynasties, old and new, were beaten 
in the field or laid under tribute. The Cholas were 
reduced to a very obscure state and the Hoysalas 
were punished for their past aggressiveness ; the Kongu 
country passed under the Pandyas, and the Hoysala 
power was confined: to its original home in Mysore. 
Kanchlpura became a secondary capital of the Pandya 
empire and in the south the island of Ceylon was 
firmly held by the Pandyan rulers of this period, while 
the Kerala rulers were made tributaries of the empire. It 
would seem that in all these achievements Sundara 
Pandya was ably assisted by princes who were more 
or less closely related to him and held subordinate 
positions in various parts of the empire. At least one of 
these is well-known from his records, a Jatavarman Vira 
Pandya of whom something will be said at the beginning 
of the next chapter. 1 

* Reason “has been shown before for not accepting the theory of five rulers 
reigning contemporaneously from generation to generation. Mr. L, D. 
Swamikkannu Pillai himself seems to have abandoned the theory on further 
consideration, as his discussion of Pandya chronology (mediaeval) in part ii 
of vol* i of his Indian Efihemeris proceeds on other lines. The new 
arrangement he adopts is to bring together all the Jatavarmans and make 
them constitute one line of rulers and likewise make another, a second line, 
out of all the Mar avar mans- a course which is not supported by any reasons 
stated. And even so, overlapping of reigns has not been avoided. 
Of this very important and vexed question, I am, after a close study of 
the numerous records, unable to see any solution other than the one follow- 
ed in the text, that is, generally to follow Kielhorn’s lead and select the more 
important and better represented kings for being treated as in the main line 
of succession and to make the less known rulers subordinate in position. 
This is the best that can be done till some discovery enables us to settle the 
genealogy of the rulers of this period. The absence of published texts of 
most of the records relating to this period imposes a serious handicap on any- 
one who attempts its study. 

One general remark may be made. The presence of several contemporary 
rulers may be a sign of strength in the empire as in the case of the Chola 



160 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


It has been possible to calculate within remarkably 
narrow limits the date of the accession to the throne of 
Jatavarman Sundara Pandya and to fix it between 
April 20 and 28 , A.D. 1251. 1 His records can 
be distinguished easily by the attribute * Emmand- 
alamum-koiidaruliya ’ which belongs only to him among 
the Jatavarman Sundara Pandyas. Several of his 
records also start with the characteristic string of 
surnames in Sanskrit commencing with Samctsta-jagada- 
dhara. More rarely there is a long historical introduction 
in Tamil beginning Pumalar Valar Tikal. Besides a 
long Sanskrit stone inscription in the Srirangam temple, 
there are several stanzas in Sanskrit celebrating the 
king’s martial prowess and political power and recording 
his splendid gifts to various temples in Tinnevelly, 
Chidambaram, Tirupputkuli, Kanchfpuram and other 
places. But all the same, it is not possible to give a 
connected chronological narrative of the transactions of 
the emperor’s reign from the numerous records of his 
time as so few of them are dated. The Sanskrit inscrip- 
tions are all of them in verse and yield no dates whatever. 
Of the Tamil records, several contain astronomical parti- 
culars and generally bear regnal years, but most of these 
relate to private transactions or record religious gifts 
without containing any references to the political occur- 
rences of the reign. Almost the only exception among 


empire of the tenth and eleventh centuries and the Pandya empire of the 
thirteenth, especially after the accession of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya 
(1251) ; or it may be a sign of weakness as in the case of the Pandyas of the 
period of decline in the Tinnevelly district. There will of course be a 
difference. In the one case the presence of a strong central rule unifies the 
administration of the kingdom ; in the other, each ruler goes his own way, 
and jealousy and weakness are the result. 

1 See Kielhom, E,I, t vol. is, p. 227 and R. Sewell following L, D, 
Swamikkannu Pillai in I.A , , vol, xliv, pp. 192-4, 



JATAV ARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA 


161 


the published records of the reign is an inscription in 
the seventh year of the king from Tiruppundurutti in the 
Tanjore district (No. 1 66 of 1894) with the long histori- 
cal introduction 1 PiZmalar , etc., and this gives us an idea 
of the king’s prodigious activity in the early years of his 
rule. 

Sundara Pandya proceeded against the Chera king 
with a very small force and destroyed him and his forces 
in a battle and ravaged the Malainadu ; 2 he then compel- 
led the warlike Chola of ancient lineage to pay him 
tribute ; afterwards he attacked the Hoysalas in the 
region of the Kaveri and besieged them in a fortress ; 3 
after inflicting great losses on the Hoysala forces and 
killing many commanders like the brave Singana,, 
Sundara Pandya captured the elephants and horses of 
the enemy together with a large amount of treasure and 
a number of women, but refrained from fighting further 
when he began to retreat from the field. 4 Sundara 
then did away with the traitorous Sema (G?<?u>sv) 5 , 

* The same historical introduction was published by Mr. T. A. Gopinatha 
Rao in the Sen Tamil , vol. iv, pp. 514-6. Mr. Rao’s text has been reproduced 
and translated by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar in the Appendix to his South India 
and Her Muhammadan Invaders. The regnal year at the end is not given and 
it is not known if the introduction is taken from No. 166 of 1894, or a different 
record. However that may be, the text differs in some respects from the 
official text published in the S.IJ. t vol. v, as win be seen from the subse- 
quent notes. 

® Cf. Hatvd Ceram to No. 179 of 1892 and Kiralavamia-nirmulana in the 
Sanskrit introduction. 

3 The reading LjrftGD&u$l 60 ®DL-fi& is in. the S.I.I . text. The Sen Tamil 
iext leaves a gap here. 

4 4 Thinking that it is unfair to fight the Hoysala who had taken to flight* 
he made him ascend the mountain ’he., perhaps go back to the plateau 
country (Text of the S.I.I.) 

5 Here Mr, Gopinatha Rao reads <s*jr!k bt for But the latter is no 

doubt the correct reading whatever it means. The defeat and death of the 
Chera king has already been mentioned and the Sanskrit records of the 
reign leave no doubt as to the reading ; Ksemais-samam-Seimah in No, 179 

21 



182 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


captured Kannanur-Koppam which no one else could 
even think of approaching and ruled the rich Kaveri 
country as if it were the Kanni land . 1 He imposed a 
tribute of elephants on the Karnata king 2 and com- 
pelled the ruler of Ceylon to surrender pearls and 
elephants . 3 He then attacked the strong fortress of the 
rich city of Sendamangalam and fought several engage- 
ments which struck terror into the heart of the Pallava ; 
having thus become master of his territory, and captured 
his forces and treasure, Sundara finally restored him to 
the rulership of the land. He then went to Chidambaram 
and worshiped God Nataraja, and proceeded to Srlran- 
gam where he wore the garland of victory , 4 performed 

of 1892 ; Chitva Ksemim in No. 52 of 1893. Also the title Ksemasura - 
viddrana-narasimha of Maravarman Vikrama Pandya in his records begin- 
ning Samasta-bhiwmekavlrat e.g., No. 122'of 1896. I am nnable to identify 
this Ksema. A Seuna king was the enemy of a G-andagopala ( A.R.E . , 1920, 
part ii, para 55.) The Sennas were the Yadavas of Devagiri. 

1 There is a play on QundnsS/sirQ and the idea being that the 

Chola country became as much a part of Sundara Pandya’s empire as the 
traditional Pan dya country. Here the conjectural Quit in the official text 
should certainly be «. 

2 The words preceding S&ar are not easy to make out, Mr. Gopi- 

natha’s text has ‘ Qu(njeaG®jruir<s$/b i^esrear^^^irdQa 7 and the official text 
reads ‘ QuQfrawwa&p 7 while the correct reading appears 

to be ‘ QuQt^eniruJiravfifi i^esresr^^sirsQiu ’ which may recall { ^jQjear pearSssr 
Qa ipQupfl 7 of a few lines before. 

3 Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar thinks that Sundara Pandya refused to 

accept the tribute from the Ceylonese king and seized him {Ancient 
Dekhan 7 p« 166). This is clearly wrong as the text says— ‘Jig) so® ©sw 
G/roiGOcksT u§< 5 ®jDQ&irG!W(—(n) 6 if) , But what follows is read as LDjgjjS 

aiffifffo’ in the official text which looks so improbable ; Mr. Gopinatha 
Rao’s text has i/d tojoifipascifar * and if this is the correct readings 

as very likely it is, jyudr must be taken to refer to. the Pallava chief- 
tain who is mentioned a little later and this is the construction adopted 
by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar. 

4 The garland of victory (cu/tsb®) which had in it margosa flowers 

from the groves of Uraiyur was worn at Srlrangam, not at 

Chidambaram, contra Dr, S, K. Aiyangar’ s translation, 



JATAV ARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA 


163 


many tulaiharas which pleased the eyes and hearts of all 
spectators and evoked many blessings from learned poets, 
and enriched Srirangam. And in that temple which he 
roofed with gold he sat upon a splendid throne with his 
queen, and wore a golden crown and emulated the 
morning sun rising on the top of the eastern hill 1 * . 

These incidents may now be discussed in the light 
of tb*e other records of the reign. The conquest of the 
Chera country must have taken place very early in the 
reign. An inscription from Tinnevelly (No. 75 of. 1927) 
dated in the third year of Tribhuvancakravardn Koner- 
inmai-kondan gives the name Kavivenra-caturvedi- 
mangalam for a village in the neighbourhood and a Vira 
Ravi U dayamarttandavarman is known to have been 
ruling in Travancore in A.D. 1251. 2 It is just possible 
that the name of the village commemorates our king s 
victory over the Chera king. 

The campaign against the Chola king may be passed 
over as the Chola country in this periou was practically 
a protectorate of the Hoysalas. The attack on Hoysala 
forces and the fate of the Hoysala commander Singapa 
are referred to in a Srirangam epigraph, where he is said 
to have been given over to a rutting elephant on the 
battlefield. 3 The storming of the ‘fortifications of 
Kanpanur-koppam and its occupation after the flight of 
the Hoysala king Vira Somesvara took place before the 
seventh year of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya, i.e. before 


1 The text is 4 fi&reQinrfBUjQUiar# Q&Qgtw&fslir Q&mBtLjUi 

#esr#u>ir(!pLp. i and I am not able to see in this the proper name fox the crown, 
Nagarodaya , as is done by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar. Earlier we have 

Sk-piuQ&piAzfS ©nr (&jeou>Gs$&8isjgir&6Br 

* See^.jfc.i?,, 1927, part ii, para 45. The record may also belong to 
Mai'hvarman KulaSekhara and the evidence quote a is by no means 
conclusive. 

a Sen Tamil , vol. iv, p* 496 = 60 of 1892. 



164 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


A.D. 1258. Though the Hoysalas were compelled to 
retreat and to accept defeat for a time, they evidently 
refused to give up their possessions in the Tamil country 
without a struggle, and there was perhaps much fighting 
of which we have no direct evidence now. The long 
Sanskrit inscription of Sundara Pandya from SrTrangam 
opens with the statement that Sundara Pandya had just 
sent to the other world the Moon of the Karnata Country 
(Somes vara) who had caused much trouble to Sriran- 
gam. 1 And another inscription of the fourteenth year 
(A.D. 1264-5) from Tirupparkkadal, North Arcot 
(No. 702 of 1904) registers an order issued by Sundara 
Pandya from Kannanur. The death of Somesvara is 
generally placed about A.D. 1262 and Sundara Pandja 
seems therefore to have held Kannanur continuously 
from the time he occupied it some time before his seventh 
year. And even after the death of Vlra Somesvara, his 
successor Ramanatha appears to have been mostly kept 
out of Kannanur during Sundara Pandya’ s time. 2 

The relations with Ceylon may be reserved for con- 
sideration later. The conquest of Sendamangalam and 
the subjugation of its Pallava or Kadava chieftain is the 
last military success recorded in this epigraph. This 
chieftain was Kopperunjinga whose records are found as 
far north as Tripurantakam (Kurnool) and Draksarama 
(Godavari) 3 ; he seems to have reckoned his regnal 
years from A.D. 1243. 4 More than ten years earlier he 

1 EJ.t vol. iii, pp. 11 and 14. 

2 This seems the best way of explaining the reference to Ramamahipati 
in the Srirangaxn record (No. 60 of 1892), cf . Hultzsch, A.E.E., 1892, para 7 
and E.L> voi. iii, p. 9. Contra Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, op. cit. y p. 49. See also 
A.R.E., 1911, partii, para 47 and 1905, part ii, para 23. 

• E.g* Nos. 198 of 1905 and 419 of 1893. 

4 E.I . , vol. vii, p. 165. Attempts have sometimes been made to differen- 
tiate between two Kadava chieftains, father and son, and treat the father as 



JATAVARMAN sundara pandya 


165 


had attempted the overthrow o£ his Chola suzerain, but 
this rebellion being suppressed by the intervention of 
Hoysala Vira Narasimha II, he resumed his position 
as a feudatory of the Chola king Raja Raja III. In 
1 243-4 he assumed the titles ‘ deva ' (king) and Sakata- 
bkuvana-cakravartin and apparently set himself up as 
an independent sovereign. Ten years later he claims to 
have defeated certain Dandanayakas of the Hoysala king 
in the battlefield at Perambalur (Trichinopoly district) 
and seized their ladies and treasures . 1 The date of this 
record falls too early in the reign of Jatavarman Sundara 
Pandya for us to assume that this campaign of the Kadava 
king in Trichinopoly was undertaken in concert with 
the Pandya emperor against the Hoysalas. On the other 
hand, in the Draksarama record (No. 419 of 1893 ) dated 
in Saka 1184 (A.D. 1262 ) Kopperunjinga claims to have 
aided in the establishment of the Pandya empire. The 
records of Kopperunjinga manifestly do not eschew 
hyperbole; but the campaign against the Hoysalas in 
Trichinopoly in A.D. 1252 - 3 , if it was undertaken in 
concert with Sundara Pandya, may be taken to furnish 


the opponent of Raja Raja III, who figures in the Tiruvendipuram inscrip- 
tion and the son as coming to power later in a.d, 1243 (A.R*E* t 1906, part ii, 
para 5). But there is no sufficient reason yet to depart from the position 
taken up by Hultzsch in editing the Tiruvendipuram record {E.Lt vol. vii), 
and I am still inclined to assume only one Kadava chieftain Avaniyalap- 
pirandan Kopperunjingadeva alias Avanyavanasambhava Maharajasimhii 
who was subordinate to the Cholas till a.d. 1243, then assumed indepen- 
dence and afterwards became tributary to the Pandya kings after the 
campaign of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya against ^endamangalam. 
Alagiya Slyan KQpperunjinga must be taken to mean Kopperunjinga, the 
son of Alagiya giyan (A.R.E., 1906, part ii, para 5). The Kdpperunjinga 
records are characterized by certain common features which are better 
accounted for on the hypothesis of Hultzsch than on any other, and there is 
nothing intrinsically improbable in a chieftain holding power from, say, 
A.l>. 1229 at the earliest to about A.D. 1280 at the latest. The subject 
cannot be pursued further here 

* No. 73 of 1918 from Vriddhacalam and A,R*E*% 1925, part ii, para 26. 



166 


the pandyan kingdom 


some basis for the boastful title assumed in the Draksa- 
rama inscription. 1 

As a matter of fact, it is not easy to determine exactly 
the relations between Sundara Pandya and Kopperun- 
jinga. If they were so friendly about A.D. 1253, it is 
difficult to see why Sundara Pandya refused the tribute 
sent to him by the Kadava chieftain and attacked his^ 
capital with such fury and took possession of his kingdom 
and his army before finally restoring him to rule over 
his country. There is no doubt, however, that at this 
time Kopperunjinga sustained a loss of status and 
became a subordinate tributary of the Pandya emperor. 
Nearly fourteen years later the Kadava king is found 
remitting his tribute to the Pandya king when he is 
camping in Cftidambaram. 2 

1 The expression used is Pandya-manclala-sthapana-sutra'dhdrena [EJ. t 
vol. vii, 167, n. 5.) 

2 No. 192 of 1914 of the fourteenth yeai of Jatavarman Vira Pandya 
[A.R.E. , 1915, part ii, para 36.) 

There is an undated record (No. 229 of 1925) from the Mayavaram 
taluq which says ' that during the regime of Kopperuujingadeva a certain 
Alagiya Pallavar alias VIrapratapar kept the Hoysalas in confinement and 
levied tribute from the Pandyas,’ ( A.R.E^ 1925, part ii, para 26). It is 
not yet possible to say what exactly this means. 

An alternative reconstruction of the relations between Sundara Pandya 
and Kopperunjinga may be suggested. The campaign referred to in 
No. 73 of 1918 (Vriddhacaiam) may be treated as an incident in the 
generally hostile relations between the Hoysaias and the rather ubiquitous 
Kopperunjinga with which Sundara Pandya had nothing to do. Then 
Sundara’s attack on Sendamangalam will not need any special explanation 
(that is not forthcoming) as it will be part of his policy of imperial expan- 
sion ( digvijaya ). And the claim in the Drakgarama record may be 
based on Kopperunjinga’s subordinate co-operation with Sundara Pandya 
in his later campaigns during which, as a feudatory, he would have been 
bound to help Sundara Pandya. 

Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar [Ancient Dekhan , pp. 167-8) supposes that 
Sundara Pandya and Kopperunjinga continued to be friendly to the end 
and that the campaign against Sendamangalam was fought against the 
Hoysalas and for the sake of Kopperunjinga, But in doing so he seems to 
have overlooked the guidance furnished by the Sanskrit inscriptions of S.un- 
dara Pandya. Ktyhakakari-kutapakala in the Samatiajagad introduction ; 



jatAvarman sundara pandya 


167 


Thus, before the seventh year of his reign, Sundara 
Pandya extended his sway over Travancore, and the 
modern districts of Trichinopoly (including Puduk- 
kottah), Tanjore and South Arcot. There were other 
successes achieved about the same time or soon after 
that are mentioned in the Sanskrit introduction begin- 
ning Samastajagad&dkura. which appears as early as the 
seventh year of the reign (No. 260 of 1906) and in other 
records. There is no possibility at present of deter- 
mining the* order in which these expeditions were 
undertaken by the king. 1 He is said to have subjugated 
the Magadai country, a name applied in mediaeval 
records to portions of Salem and Arcot districts, and it is 
quite possible that this was done in the course of the 
war against the Hoysalas and Kopperunjinga. 2 The 
conquest of the Kongu country must have also resulted 
from the same campaigns, and there is very good reason 
to believe that the modern districts of Salem and Coim- 
batore formed part of the Pandya empire for some time 
after Sundara Pandya’ s reign. 3 Lastly, Sundara Pandya 

K&thaka nrpah pradkvamn (No. 182 of 1892), Bhanktva Kaihakadur- 
gam (No. 52 of 1893) , Ghor advMratha-khinna-kathaka- Purl- samp at-safitakar- 
sinaoithz Srirangam Inscription {E.I., vol. iii, p. 7) and a Tamil verse 
among the Chidambaram inscription's {Sen Tamil , vol. iv, p. 492) show 
beyond doubt that the Kadava chieftain was the enemy in the ^endaman- 
galam campaign. 

1 Dr. S. K. Aiyangar {op. cil. % p. 50 and n. 1) follows the order in which 
events are mentioned in a Sanskrit inscription from Tirupputkuli ( ^No. 52 
of 1893 from Kancbipuram) ; but there appears no particular reason for 
accepting this order as against others, say, that in No. 182 of 1892 from 
Chidambaram. 

% JJdgamayya Magadham in 52 of 1893. For the extent of Magadai- 
mandalara see A>R,E.\ 1925, partii, para 42. 

3 See $en Tamil , vol. iv, p. 493 ; A.R.E 1906, part ii, para 27. In the 
same report in paragraph 38 the records of VIra Ramanatha and VIra 
ViSvanatha found in Salem and Coimbatore districts are taken to be 
evidence of a reconquest of this region by the Hoysalas. But the fact must 
be interpreted in the light of the Pandya records found in these districts, 
Contra Hnltzsch, E.I., vol, iii, p. U. 



168 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


claims to have killed Gartdagopala, occupied Kanchl- 
purara, defeated Ganapati. the Kakatiya king, and 
performed a Vlrubhiseka in Nellore. This is confirmed 
by some inscriptions (Nos. 332, 340 and 361 of 19x3) 
from Chidambaram which contain Tamil verses stating 
that Sundara Pandya ‘ inflicted a severe defeat on the 
Telungas at Mudugur, slaughtering them and their 
allies, the Aryas, right up to the bank of the Peraru and 
driving the Bana chief into the forest.’ 1 All these 
references are apparently to various occurrences in the 
course of a single campaign against the ‘ northern 
kings’, and if that be so, the reference to Ganapati would 
mean that the campaign was undertaken some time 
before A.D. 1260. The enemy against whom the cam- 
paign was primarily directed was Gandagopala, a 
Telugu-Choda ruler who was in possession of Nellore 
and Kanchlpuram. The Bana chieftain and the Kaka- 
tlya king were perhaps the allies of Gandagopala whom 
Sundara Pandya did not pursue after they were repulsed 
in battle. Gandagopala was however ‘ sent to the other 
world’, as an inscription from Chidambaram records, 
and his territory was annexed to the Pandya empire and 
entrusted to his brothers who were apparently to rule as 
feudatories of the Pandya sovereign. 2 


1 A.R.E-, 1914, part ii, para 18 . 

e Sen Tamil, vol. iv, p. 493. The identification of Gandagopala and of 
the Aryan allies of the Telungas presents considerable difficulty. For 
the Aryas, see Dr,. S. K. Aiyangar, op, cit p. 49, n. 4; also the reference 
given in the preceding note. It is not clear why Prof. S. K. Aiyangar s£ys 
‘ the Aryar are referred to in connection with the Hoysalas in all the three 
references to them we have.’ I have tentatively assumed that it is a reference 
to Ganapati and his forces which aided Gandagopala. 

From the expression Vtragandagop&la-vipina-diiva-dahaiia in the Sans- 
krit introduction, it has been assumed (e.g. A.R.E., 1916, part ii, para 81 
and Appendix G) that the opponent of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya was 
Yicagactdagopaia. But, the Tamil record speaks only of Gandagopala 



JATAVARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA 169 

The wars of Sundara Pandya resulted in such an 
extension of his power that he assumed the imperial 
titles Maharajadimja-sriparamesvara and Emmandala- 
mum-kondaruliya. They also brought him a vast 
treasure which he employed in beautifying the temples 
at Chidambaram and Srirangam and endowing liberally 
these > two famous shrines of f§iva and Visnu. At 
Chidambaram Sundara Pandya is said to have performed 
several tultibharas and erected a ‘ Golden Hall ’ for 
Lord Nataraja . 1 His gifts to the Srirangam temple 
and his building of parts of it are recorded in a 
long Sanskrit inscription which Hultzsch has sum- 
marized in the following words : 2 ‘He built a shrine of 
Narasimha and another of Visnu’s attendant Visvak- 
sena both of which were covered with gold, and a gilt 
tower which contained an image of Narasimha. Further 
he covered the (original or central) shrine of the temple 
with gold, an achievement of which he must have been 
specially proud, as he assumed with reference to it 
the surname Hzmacchadana Raja i.e., “ the king who 
covered the temple with gold ”, and as he placed in the 
shrine a golden image of Visnu which he called after 
his own new surname. He also covered the inner wall 

(s&dQ<L}Qjar sippsekri— G&irutre*$ssr and it is quite possi- 

ble that Vtra in the Sanskrit expression is not an integral part of the name. 
At any rate Viragandagopala of Kanchiptiram (the son of Vijayaganda- 
gdpala) who came to power about a. d. 1290 could not have been Sundara 
Pandya’s opponent. And it seems likely that by disposing of his enemy 
Gandagopala, the Pandya became master both of Kanchlpuram and of 
Nelfbre and if this assumption is confirmed by further evidence, it is quite 
possible that Sundara Pandya’s enemy was the most famous of the Ganda- 
gd pal as, the first of the four mentioned in A.R.E., 1920, part ii, para 53. 
See Butterworth and Venugopaul Chetty, Nellore Inscriptions , (vol. iii, 
pp. 1432-3) on Gandagopala alias Allun Tirukkalattideva who was ruling 
in 1254-5 at Kan chi and Nellore. 

1 Nos. 179 and 182 of 1892. 

* A’./., vol. iii, p. 11. 

22 



170 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

of the central shrine with gold and built, in front of it, a 
dining hall, which he equipped with golden vessels. In 
the month of Caitra he celebrated the “ procession 
festival ” of the God. For the “festival of God’s sporting 
with Laksmi ” he built a golden ship. The last verse 
of the inscription states that the king built three golden 
domes over the image of Hemacchadana-Raja-Hari, 
over that of Garuda, and over the hall which contained 
the couch of Visnu. The following miscellaneous 
gifts to Ranganatha are enumerated in the inscription : — 
A garland of emeralds, a crown of jewels, a golden 
image of Sesa, a golden arch, a pearl garland, a canopy 
of pearls, different kinds of golden fruits, a golden car, 
a golden trough, a golden image of Garuda, a golden 
under-garment, a golden aureola, a golden pedestal, 
ornaments of jewels, a golden armour, golden vessels 
and a golden throne. The first of the gifts which are 
here enumerated, appears to have suggested the surname 
Marakataprth vlbhrt , i.e., the emerald king which is 
applied to Sundara Pandya in verse 13.’ And this gar- 
land of emeralds was seized from the Kathaka (Kadava) 
king Kopperunjinga [verse 4). Occasionally there are 
recorded in the inscriptions of this reign gifts to pallis 1 
and other religious institutions outside the pale of 
orthodox Hinduism, and this, taken along with the king’s 
liberal and impartial patronage of the shrines of Siva and 
Visnu, may be accepted as some indication of peace in 
the religious life of the country. 

The epigraphs of this reign contain more direct refer- 
ences to the personal qualities df the monarch than is 
common in mediaeval Pandya records. His love of 
splendour and display is seen in the abkisekas (corona- 
tions) he held at Nellore and Srirangam and in the 

>E.g, 358 pf 1908. 



JATAVARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA 


171 


repeated tulabh&ras on various occasions at Chidambaram 
and Srirangam. 1 Almost every verse in the Ranganatha 
inscription is calculated to impress this trait of the king 
on its readers, and he is repeatedly spoken of as ‘ the 
Sun ’ in expressions like RcLjasUrya, Rsja-ictpana, Ksiti- 
pati Ravi , etc. Some of the inscriptions from Chidam- 
baram bestow special praise on the king’s personal 
courage in battle and on his skill in capturing fortresses. 2 
That he gloried in the extent of his empire may be 
inferred from his title Kamchlpura- Varadhi'svara in his 
Sanskrit introduction, corresponding to Kttnchipuram 
Kondftn of some Tamil records (No. 64 of 1927). Sundara 
Pandya was very proud of the golden roofs he had made 
for the gods at Chidambaram and Srirangam, and set up 
images called Kdyilpomneyndaperumai in different parts 
of the realm in commemoration of the act and instituted 
special festivals to the images every month on the day of 
Mula , the asterism of the king’s birth. 3 After his exten- 
sive conquests he assumed the surname Ellandalaiyanan 
(became lord of all), issued coins with that legend, and 
instituted in temples special festivals called alter this 
name. 4 The name KodandarUma does not seem to have 


1 Dr. S. K. Aiyangar’s statements that the king mounted on an 1 elephant 
and weighed himself against gold and jewels is based on the Koil-olngu ; as 
also his reference to the queen Cherakulavalli. The * elephant-feature 5 is 
not confirmed by the epigraph he quotes in the note at p. 52 op, cit . 

2 Nos. 178 and 179 of 1892. 

3 See e.g. 531 of 1920 and A.R.E,, 1921, part ii. para 41. 

* See Hnltzsch in l.A, t vol. xxi, p. 324, for the coins ; also No. 277 of 1913 
aad A.R.E., 1914, part ii, para 18 for the festival ; &lso^L£J?., 1913, part ii, 
para 44 ,* A.R.E*> 1922, part ii, para 37 appears to be mistaken both in 
denying the title Ellandalaiyanan to the king and in ascribing the other title 

RanaHngaraksasa to him. The inscriptions 328 and 329 of 1921 are both 
KSnerinmaikondan records which do not seem to sustain the inferences 
made by the epigraphist in the paragraph referred to above. The summary 
of the records in Appendix B makes this clear. The Sundara Pandya DSvar 
who set up the image mentioned in No. 328 may be a later king. 



172 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

been borne by this king, but by a later Sundara 
Pindya. 1 

Two princes are referred to in some records which 
certainly belong to the time of this Jatavarman Sundara 
Pandya, but their relation to the king is not quite clear. 
One of them is Kulasekhara, who is called Annalvi in 
records of the ninth and tenth years of our king, 2 and 
is perhaps identical with the Kulasekhara for whose' merit 
a maniapa was erected in Tirupputkuli by a minor chief- 
tain or an official who called himself Pallavadhisvara. 3 
It is possible that the reference in all these cases is to 
Jatavarman Kulasekhara II, as the expressions Ksitipa 
and Perumul are used in the Tirupputkuli epigraph. 
The other person mentioned in the records of Sundara 
Pandya is a Vikrama Pandya who is referred to as 
Nzyanar and in whose name a new village was founded 
in the thirteenth year of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya. 4 
It has been suggested that a Maravarman Vikrama 
Pandya was ruling about this time with an initial date of 
about A.D. 1249 and if that was so, he might be the NcLya- 
nUr referred to. But more proof is required than is yet 
available before this suggestion can be finally accepted. 5 

1 Contra K. V. S. Aiyar, Ancient Dekhan, p. 167, Dr, S, K. Aiyangar, 
op., cit, 3 p, 53 and A.R.E, } 1921, part ii, para 41. Mr. Aiyar refers to 
two facts in support of his view— (1) that the king is called a second Rama 
in plundering the island of Ceylon and (2) stone epigraphs providing for 
the Kodandaraman-gandi. The king is called a second Rama, not 
Kodandarama and the stone epigraphs referred to are Konerinmaikondan 
records, none of which necessarily belongs to the present ruler. It will* be 
seen later that; the name was taken by Sundara Pandya who began to rule 
c, A.D. 1302-3. 

8 Nos. 425 and 426 of 1913 and A,R.E, } 1914, part ii, para 18, 

3 No. 19 of 1899. 

4 Nos, 277 and 278 of 1913 and A.R.E,, 1914, part ii, para 20. It is doubt- 
ful if No. 90 of 1897 from Mannargudi (Tanjore) in the twelfth year of a 
Jatavarman Sundara which mentions a Vikrama Pandyan Man$ap(tm 
is a reference to the same Vikrama. Rangachari, p, 1295. 

* See 1918, part ii, para 45. 



JATAVARMAN sundara pandya 


173 


It is not possible to say exactly when the reign of 
Jatavarman Sundara Pandya closed. The latest regnal 
year mentioned in records 1 * * * with the Sanskrit introduc- 
tion characteristic of the king seems to be the nineteenth, 
which will take us to A.D. 1269-70. He might have 
reigned a little longer ; in any case there is clear evidence 
that the reign of this illustrious ruler did not close before 
the nbxt great monarch Maravarman Kulasekhara came 
to power. 


1 E. g. 198 of 1906. Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar says, * The last year of 
this illustrious Pandya sovereign takes us to a.d. 1271 5 {op. cit . p, 168} ; 

Dr. S. K. Aiyangar says his ‘rule perhaps lasted on to his twenty- 

third or twenty-fourth regnal year No references are given by either. 

No. 481 of 1918 is in year seven plus twenty-five of a Jatavarman Tri* 

bhuvaaacakravartin Ellarkku-Nayanar Sundara Pandya Deva, 



CHAPTER XII 


JATAVARMAN VlRA PANDYA (acc. a.d. 1253) 
MARAVARMAN KULASEKHARA (acc. a.d. 1268) 

BEFORE we give an account of the times of Maravarman 
Kulasekhara, another ruler who was contemporary with 
Jatavarman. Sundara Pandya for the greater part of his 
reign must be noticed. This is Jatavarman Vira 
Pandya who takes credit for some of the successes won 
during the time of Jatavarman Sundara, and who perhaps 
carried out several expeditions under the direction of 
that monarch. There are a considerable number of 
inscriptions that can definitely be ascribed to this Vira 
Pandya, and some of these indicate that he began his rule 
some time about the middle of A.D. 1253 1 and continued 
to rule for at least twenty-two years till say A.D. 1274-5. 2 * * 
It is not possible to fix the area of Vira Pandya’ s rule 
from the provenance of his inscriptions ; though most of 
them come from Tinnevelly, Madura and Ramnad 
districts and the Pudukkottah state, we have stray 

1 Kielhorn and Sewell fix the accession between June 20 and July 4, 
a.d. 1253 (LA, 3 vol* xiiv, p. 196). Mr. L, D. Swamikkannu Pillai thought 
that Kielhorn’s Vira Pandya was a Maravarman and that Jatavarman Vira 
Pandya was another king who began his rule in a.d. 1254 (I, A, » vol, xlii). 
According to Sewell the only inscription which seems to support this view 
is No. 395 of 1909 and in it Maravarman is a mistake for Jatavarman, as the 

achievements recorded in the epigraph are the same as those of Jatavarman 

(LA., vol, xliv, p. 194 and n. 16) . The final position of the author of £he 

Indian Ephemeris on this question is far from clear. He seems to 
postulate three Jatavarman Vira Pandyas with accession dates in a.d. 
1253, 1254 and 1280, and says also : * but this inference is not yet established 
by indubitable proof 5 (vol. i, partii,pp. 95-7). Elsewhere he refers 395 of 
1909 to a Maravarman Vira Pandya of a later century (Pudukkottah 
inscription No. 454*} 

* No. 128 of 190S gives the twenty-second year, a.d, 1275, (Sewell), 



JATAV ARMAN VlRA PANDYA 


175 


records from other places like Kanchipuram (No. 483 of 
1919) and Coimbatore. 1 We have in fact no means of 
knowing what exactly was the position of Vlra Pandya and 
rulers like him, * co-regents ’ as they have been called, 
and how the administration of the empire was regulated. 

The records of Jatavarman Vlra Pandya begin in one 
of three ways. The simplest form (e.g. 185 of 1895) 
gives the Jatavarman and Tribhuvanacakravartin titles 
and refers to the conquests of Ilam, Kongu and the Chola 
kingdom, and the victory over Vallan and the abkisSka 
at Chidambaram before mentioning the king’s name and 
regnal year. A slightly more elaborate form refers in 
like manner to the conquest of Kongu and Ilam, to the. 
destruction of a hill- (kddu) of the fierce Vadugas, the 
capture of the two banks of the Ganges (?) and the 
Kaveri, and the camping of thejking in Chidambaram to 
collect the tribute from the Kadava and perform the 
abkiseka . 2 The most ostentatious of these introductions 
begins with the words Tirumagal Valar (^i^usseireusirir) 
and, while attributing incredible feats to Vira Pandya, 
seems to record some interesting particulars of the actual 
expeditions undertaken by the kiDg against the Chola 
country and Ceylon. We learn from this introduction 3 

1 No, 35 of 1923 and A.R.E., 1923, part ii, para 68. Nos. 299 and 
302 of 1919 from North Arcot. 

* This form appears in Pudnkkottah Nos. 370 and 379 of which 379 *= 
No. 131 of 1907 (Madras) . The words in the text must be quoted as there 
is some uncertainty as to the interpretation — c Qetr&8jfim ®*rair® 0«r®ai©@ 

aAeas uS^seojriLjii aneSrflujtb asffsGW/raar®. ' The difficulty lies 
in the phrase A.R.E., 1912, part il, para 39 makes 

this a conquest of Gangai-na^u and at A.R.E., 1915, part ii, para 36 
the phrase seems to be ignored altogether. 

• The summary is in A.R.E., 1912, part ii, para 39. Text in 
Pudnkkottah, No. 366. The words at the end of the summary in A.RJS., 
1912 ‘and subdued the KSraJa’ do not seem to be home out by the 
Pudukkottahtext. 



176 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


that Vlra Pandya ‘ fought with the Chola king a battle 
at Kavikkalam, killed (in fight) one of the two kings of 
Ceylon, captured his army, chariots, treasures, throne, 
crown, necklaces, bracelets, parasols, chauris and other 
royal possessions, planted the Pandya flag with the 
double fish on the Konamalai and the high peaks of the 
Trikutagiri mountain, and received elephants as tribute 
from the other king of Ceylon (whom, perhaps, he 
raised to the throne).’ Lastly the introduction ^refers 
to the king’s settlement of his relations with a Savan- 
maindan (s=irevdns!nLDis^eir) who was at first recalcitrant 
but submitted afterwards. It is possible that these 
facts are implied also in the attribute given to Vira 
Pandya in an inscription in his tenth year which says 
‘ he took the crown and the crowned head of Savaka’. 
But the meaning of these references is by no means 
clear yet. 1 However, most of these campaigns must be 
the same as those mentioned in the records of Jatavar- 
man Sundara Pandya, and if the statements in these 
introductions of Vira Pandya are true, there can be no 
doubt that Vira played a decisive part in some of the 
most important achievements in Sundara Pandya’ s reign. 
The conquest of Ceylon narrated in such detail is not 
mentioned in any records dated earlier than the tenth 
year of Vira Pandya. It should, however, be remembered 


1 There is only one text of this important record (Pudukkottah, No. 366) 
and in it the reference is in the following* words (11. 11-12)— hj [<wr] 

Q&tuiurr $aG 0 Q<Fiu fi^isfie-treuesr eau>/i^Gsr /bg&iBqF)# $<ss) l /D&e : ireo®»ir& 

fi(ffjdQa[r6rru> jy&nwiru ui—GsraiJSpgj oiLpwQ =s/0ejft QpLpia^seS Q/djSI 
u/rif Qp(Lgp/8iu esi:/raj(a))<$5 (Q&)iue$p pikonp urn user SISostulSl^L-. Qir@L~(-DQii&i 

Q#ir(Bj£p(i?)Gift S No. 588 of 1916 from 

KariSulndamangalam (Tinnevelly) does not mention the conquest of Kongu 
bttt refers to the taking of the crown and the crowned head of Savaka. 

‘ Probably the land of Savaka might have been intended 1 — jl.R.E., 1917, 
part ii f para 11, 



JATAV ARMAN VTRA PANDYA 


177 


that Sundara Pandya is said to have collected a 
tribute of je wels and elephants from the Ceylonese before 
the seventh year of his reign, that is, before A.D. 1258. 
The Ceylonese chronicles have nothing to tell of these 
transactions and it is not possible to determine how there 
came to be two kings in Ceylon and why one of 
them was selected by Vira Pandya for more favourable 
treatment than the other. As for the places mentioned 
in connection with this expedition, it has been suggested 
that Konamalai is very probably the same as Tirukkona- 
malai in the Tevttram and that Trikutagiri is the name 
applied to a three-peaked mountain in the Kandiyan 
country. 1 Kavikkalam, the scene of the fight with 
the Chola, in which elephants appear to have played a 
decisive part (velapfidr), is not easy to identify. The 
only known Chola ruler of the time, Rajendra III, boasts 
of having taken the crowned heads of two Pandyas 
(No. 515 of 1922). 

Vira Pandya’s conquest of Kongu is proved by the 
presence of a few of his records in the Coimbatore 
district. 2 Who the Vallan was that was overcome by 
Vira Pandya before his coronation at Chidambaram, who 
the Vadugas were whose stronghold he destroyed, and 
where that stronghold was, are matters which, like many 
others relating to the history of the Pandya kings of this 
period, must be left unexplained in the present state of 


1 A.R.E., 1912, part ii, para 39. 

* A>R.E. t 1923, part ii, para 68 and No. 35 of 1923 from Idigarai. It is an 
interesting fact that this damaged record contains the well-known Sanskrit 
introduction Samasta-bhuvanaikavtra, usually attributed to Maravarman 
Vikrama Pandya who is taken to have begun to rule some years later. It 
seems possible that the introduction originally belonged to Vira Pandya 
and was subsequently appropriated by Vikrama Pandya. [A.JZJS., 
1914, part ii, para 20.) 

23 



178 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


our knowledge. 1 The tributary and subordinate posi- 
tion in the Pandya Empire of the rebellious Kadava 
chieftain, Kopperunjingadeva, has been mentioned before. 

The records of Vlra Pandya are of more than usual 
interest for a study of the social and economic condi- 
tions of the country during this period. Though the 
more detailed study of such conditions has been reserved 
to a later chapter some of these records may be briefly 
noticed here. One inscription from the Pudukkottah 
state (No. 372 of 1906) throws much light on judicial 
methods and describes an ordeal of the plough-share; 
another from Kurralam (Tinnevelly) registers a trans- 
action between an individual and' the assembly of 
Tirukkuttalam which is stated to have met together in 
T irumukkalvattam, by which is probably meant a hall 
where it usually held its sittings. ‘No. 432 of 1917 
records that the village assembly bought a piece of land 
from the’people of Sundara Pandyapuram and let a por- 
tion of it on permanent lease to a certain Anda Pillai in 
exchange for a fixed annual rent in paddy and money on 
every nta, (u>/r) of cultivated land.’ It was also stipulated 
that the lessee would pay on every mu of waste plot 
that he brought under cultivation an annually pro- 
gressive rate of rent for the first four years and a 
fixed rate thereafter. 2 Two epigraphs from the North 
Arcot district (Avur, Nos. 299 and 302 of 1919) 
contain details of kadamai assessment in that part of the 

1 Vallan has sometimes been taken to be the king of the Chola country 
{A.R.E., 1907, part ii, para 27). But the conquest of Vallan is always 
mentioned as a separate event which occurred after the capture of Cholamand- 
alam thus, QwputttL-GbtywQGirem® wiosoir^srQtadrjp] 

, * etc. The Vadugas are taken to be Kanarese (A.R>E. t 

1915, part ii, para 36). They might as well have been Telugus to whom 
the name is more commonly applied by the Tamils, 

* 1918, part ii, para 4$, 



MARA V ARM AN KULASEKHARA 179 

country. A series of inscriptions (Nos. 540 to 543 of 
191 1) from Sermadevi gives an idea of the procedure that 
appears to have been usually followed in making gifts to 
temples of lands freed from all taxes and other assess- 
ments. Lastly, an epigraph (No. 598 of 1926) from the 
Ramnad district states that a large and representative 
assembly was convoked for the purpose of raising funds 
for building a stone temple in the place of a dilapidated 
old masonry temple. The people of eighteen provinces 
( visayam ) attended and came to an agreement that on 
all articles of merchandise that were measured, spread 
and folded and on some other specified goods, a cess of 
one kftsu per achchu should be collected. And among 
the corporations that attended the meeting and became 
parties to the agreement were the Valanjiyar of South 
Ceylon, Anjuvanpam and Manigramam, — all names of 
self-regulating corporations of different classes of mer- 
chants. 1 The currency of the realm seems to have 
comprised different varieties of coins, and people had to 
take care to specify the type of coin to which each 
transaction had reference, like Palam-^oliyan-Kasu, Vira- 
Pandyan Kasu, etc. 2 

In the last years of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya, 
Maravarman Kulasekhara who, like Sundara, bears the 

1927, part ii, paras 46-8. At paragraph 48 the epigrapbist ex- 
presses his opinion that ' it is possible that at Tlttantjatanapuram which is 
only a few miles distant from Toruji, there may have also been a Muham- 
madan colony which had banded itself into an Anjuvannam (Anjuman) 
association \ It is rather strange that this reference to an Anjuvannam, 
wHTch agreed to help to build a temple, should not have convinced him 
that Anjuvannam had nothing whatever to do with Anjuman, Venkayya’s 
elucidation of. these terms which I have followed is found in EJ., 
vol, iv, pp. 293-4 and n, 2 at p. 296, Note particularly that one of 
their privileges was : 4 Should they themselves commit a crime,, they are 
themselves to have the investigation of it ’ (p. 294) • See also T. A. Gopi- 
natha Rao in Trav . Arch . Series, vol. ii, pp.73-5. 

8 No. 131 of 1907 and AM.E., 1912, part ii, para 39. 



180 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

title ‘ who took all countries ’ had begun to rule, as his 
numerous records point to some day between the tenth 
and twenty-seventh June, A.D. 1268 as the date from 
which his regnal years were counted. 1 It is thus seen 
that there were at least three kings, Sundara Pandya, 
Vlra Pandya and Kulasekhara, at this time. It will 
become clear from what follows that this feature marked 
the whole of Kulasekhara’s reign and perhaps also the 
period that followed. A Maravarman Vikrama Pandya, 
two Jatavarman Sundara Pandyas and a Jatavarman Vlra 
Pandya are known to have ruled with Maravarman 
Kulasekhara at different times, and there were possibly 
others like Maravarman Srfvallabha ( acc . A.D.1257) and 
Jatavarman Srivallabha (acc. A.D. 1291) whose existence, 
though probable, has not been proved beyond doubt. 2 
The evidence of foreign writers relating to this period 
confirms the inferences made from the inscriptions. 
Marco Polo, who visited part of the Pandya kingdom 
towards the end of the thirteenth century, speaks of 
‘ five royal brothers ’ and ‘ five crowned kings ’ of this 
1 great province of Ma’bar Chinese sources regard- 
ing the diplomatic intercourse with Ma’bar in 1280 and 
the following years mention 1 the five brothers who were 


1 I.A. i vol. xliv and E, vol. x, p, 141, Kielhorn’s view that this 
Kulasekhara was the immediate successor of Vlra Pandya, the conqueror of 
Ilam and Kongu, has now to be given up in view of records subsequently 
discovered. 

% Mr; L. D. Swamikkannu Pillai first discovered the possibility of their 
existence and Mr. Sewell after a careful examination of his data wanted 
further evidence before the existence of these kings could be Laken as 
proved. vols. xlii and xliv) Mr. Swamikkannu Pillai also postulated a 

Sundara Pandya (Jatavarman) with accession date in a.d. 1270 (/.A., 
vol xlii), but subsequently gave him up (List of Pudukkottah Inscriptions, 
p. 66 n). The Indian Ephemeris , however, introduces a Maravarman 
Sundara Pandya acc . a.d. 1270 (vol. i, part ii, p. 101). These instances 
show how difficult the chronology of these kings still continues to be. 



181 


MARA V ARMAN KULASEKHARA 

Sultans ’. 1 The Muhammadan historian Wassaf who 
had chances of gaining a more accurate knowledge of 
South India in his day says, ‘A few years since the 
Dewar was Sundara Pandi, who had three brothers, 
each of whom established himself in independence in some 
different country .’ 2 Considering the royal state main- 
tained by these kings who were all contemporaries, it is 
not surprising that they struck foreign observers as 
ruling independently of one another ; for not only did 
they cause inscriptions to be engraved and endowments 
to be made each in his own name but they seem to have 
even exercised the right of coinage. At the same 
time there is no doubt about the superior position of Kula- 
sekhara as the sovereign monarch, and this seems to have 
been understood by Marco Polo and Wassaf. Marco 
Polo says that Ashar ‘ was the eldest of the five brother 
kings ’ ; Ashar ( Asciar in another version) is no doubt 
a corruption of Sekhar . 3 And Wassaf though he 
states in one place ‘ a few years since the Dewar was 
Sundar Pandi ’ and records his death, says elsewhere 
* Kales Dewar, the ruler of Ma’bar enjoyed a highly 
prosperous life, extending to forty and odd years ’. 4 * * 
The system of joint-rulers or co-regents which thus 
prevailed in the latter part of the thirteenth century in the 


1 Yule and Cordier, Travels of Marco Polo , vol. ii, pp. 331, 337, 371. 
Marco Polo has a strange travellers 7 story about the mother of these kings 
being alive at the time of his visit, and her throwing herself between them to 
prevent their fighting. * In this way she, full many a time, brought them to 
dfesist. But when she dies it will most assuredly happen that they will fall 
out and destroy one another 7 (p, 371). 

* Elliot and Dow son, vol. iii, p. 32. 

3 Yule and Cordier, op. cit vol. ii, p. 370 and Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, South 

India and Her Muhammadan Invaders , p. 56. 

* Elliot and Dawson , vol. iii, p, 52. It may be mentioned that the 

Mahavamia (see later in the chapter) also knows of ‘ five brethren • of 

whom KulaSekhara was chief. 



182 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Pandya empire must have been the result of the great 
extension of the empire during this period and an imita- 
tion of the practice of sending out princes of the royal 
family as viceroys which had prevailed in the Chola 
empire. 

The inscriptions of Maravarman Kulasekhara ‘ who 
conquered all countries 1 are very numerous and found , 
mostly in the eastern Tamil districts and the regnal 
years mentioned in them range from 3 to 44. A few of 
these records begin with a historical introduction ‘ Ter 
Poi etc.’ which is not of much value as most of it is 
poetry. The only definite statements made in it are that 
the tiger of the Cholas had been sent to rule the forests, 
that all religions flourished in friendly toleration of one 
another and that the rulers of various countries brought 
their tributes to the king. 1 We also learn that the king 
had a palace at jayangondasolapuram and that the king’s 
throne in the palace was called Kalingarayan. This is 
clear proof that the Cholas had ceased to exist as a 

1 Nos. 25 of 1S91 and 465 of 1909 of the years ten and four respectively. 
Mr. Krishna Sastri (at A,R.E t > 1910, part ii, para 36) holds that ' it is certain 
that he (Kulasekhara of No. 465 of 1909) could not be identical with 
Maravarman Kulasekhara I, ** who was pleased to take every country 1 * V 

His reasons are: (a) Kulasekhara 4 who conquered every country 1 is not 
known to have had any eulogy in the form of a historical introduction ; 

(b) the mention of the chief officer Kalingarayan in the record makes it 
probable that this Maravarman Kulasekhara was a contemporary or suc- 
cessor of Jatavarman ^rlvallabha; and (£) the historical introduction was 
characteristic of the records of the first kings of the mediaeval Pandyas. 
Reasons (a) and (c) simply beg the question. As for (d), Mr. Krishna Sastri 
himself ascribes another record No. 366 of 1913 to Kulasekhara 4 who tdftk 
all countries 5 for the very reason that it mentions Kalingarayan (A.jR.E,, 
1914, part ii, para 22} , That No. 465 of 1909 does not give the title * who took 
all countries Vis no argument against its being ascribed to the king; for 
when there is a characteristic introduction to a record, the king’s surnames 
may or may not appear. See Jatavarman Sundara’s records beginning 

Pumatar Valar. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar ascribes No, 465 of 1909 to our king*— 

op . cit., pp, 56 and 221. 



MlRAVARMAN KULASEKHARA 183 

power. The last of them who made any attempt to save 
the Chola line from annihilation was Rajendra III and 
he had probably ceased to rule when Maravarman Kula- 
sekhara came to the throne. 1 An epigraph from 
Sermadevi (No. 692 of 1916) dated in the twentieth year 
of the king furnishes some commentary on his title and 
mentions that he conquered the Malainadu, Sonadu, the 
two Kongus, Ilam and Tondaimandalam. These are 
probably references to campaigns rendered necessary on 
account of some local trouble or other, for most of the 
territories mentioned had been; brought under subjection 
by Jatavarman Sundara Pandya and Vira Pandya. 

Rather early in his reign the king went on an expedi- 
tion against the Travancore country (Malainadu) and 
one of the chief incidents in the campaign was probably 
the capture of Kollam (Quilon). Some records of the 
king from the Tinnevelly district confirm the conquest, 
rather the reconquest, of Malainadu, and give the titles 
Ckeranai-venra and Kollam-kondci . 2 That Kulasekhara 
continued to be in undisputed possession of the Sonadu 
and Tondaimandalam is proved by the presence of many 
of his inscriptions in all the important places in these 
districts. In spite of Kulasekhara’ s claim to have con- 
quered the two Kongus, no records of his are found 
in the Kongu country. On the other hand, a record 
from Tinnevelly (No. 29 of 1927) mentions 3 that Kula- 
sekhara built a prakara wall of the Tinnevelly temple 

1 See A.R.E., 1912, partii, para 32 and 1923, part ii, para 45. Also Dr. 
S,"R. Aiyangar, op. cit. t pp. 56 and 94^5. 

® G&irfloBrQtijioBrjD occurs as early as the eighth year in No* 126 of 1907. For 
the rest see A.R.E . , 1927, partii, para 42, where the reference to No. 120 

of 1908 is perhaps a mistake. 

3 This record is assigned to Jatavarman Kulasekhara acc. a.d. 1190 in 
A.R*E. t 1927, part ii, para 41 ; but that period is too early for a Pandya 
king who claims to have beaten the Hoysalas, 



184 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


from the booty collected after defeating the Kerala, the 
Chola and the Hoysala kings. Another inscription 
mentions that the king was in his camp at Kannanur in 
his fifteenth year. 1 We also find records of Kula- 
sekhara’s co-regent Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (acc. 
A.D. 1276) in the Kongu country, and later still, early 
in the fourteenth century, the Muhammadan historians 
tell us of a Pandya ruler with his headquarters at Kalul 
(Karur). 2 All these facts leave little room for doubt 
that the Kongu country was more or less effectively 
controlled by the Pandya rulers till the end of Kula- 
sekhara’s reign. 

The conquest of Ceylon is borne out by the Mahavamsa 
and appears to have taken place about A.D. 1284, when 
Parakrama Bahu III was ruling the island. 3 ‘ Then 
there arose a famine in the land (Ceylon). Then the 
five brethren who governed the Pandyan kingdom sent 
to this island, at the head of an army, a great minister 
of much power who was a chief among the Tamils known 
as Ariya Cakkavatti, albeit he was not an Ariya. And 
when he had landed and laid waste the country on every 
side he entered the great and noble fortress, the city of 
Subhagiri. And he took the venerable tooth-relic and 
all the solid wealth that was there and returned to the 


1 No, 328 of 1923 summarized in A.R.E., 1924, part ii, para 35. There were 
however several places of the name Kannanur. There is a reference to 
Kannattarasar in No, 20 of 1912 (from the Tinnevelly district) of the fourth 
year. This led Mr. Krishna Sastri (A.R,E., 1912, part ii, para 35) to believe 
that the Hoysalas tinder Vira Ramanatha were still occupying the Taigil 
country and interfering with the Pandyas. In the absence of the text 
of the inscription it is not possible to check the validity of Mr. Sastri’s 
inference ; but it is against the general trend of affairs after the accession 
of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (a.d. 1251), 

2 Wassaf in Elliot and Dowson , vol. iii, p. 54. 

3 ERAS., 1913, p. 531. It is likely that the actual Pandyan invasion 
of Ceylon was in the reign of his predecessor, (Mahavamsa, xc, vv 48-50.) 



185 


MARAV ARMAN KULASEKHARA 

Pandyan country. And there he gave the tooth relic 
unto the king Kulasekhara who was even like unto a 
sun expanding the lotus-like race of the great Pandyan 
kings k 1 The commander of the Pandyan forces men- 
tioned in this account, Ariya Cakravarti, is referred to 
also in an inscription (No. no of 1903) of the king in 
his thirty-seventh year as taking his orders from him. 2 
Parakrama Bahu had to bow before the storm and the 
Mahttvamsa says that he adopted persuasive methods 
with the Pandya monarch, visited the Pandyan court 
and succeeded in inducing Kulasekhara to surrender the 
sacred tooth as a favour. 

Wassaf says of Kulasekhara’s reign that ‘during 
that time neither any foreign enemy entered his country 
nor any severe malady confined him to bed ‘ The 
fortunate and happy sovereign ’ according to the same 
writer, ‘ enjoyed a highly prosperous life.’ We have 
evidence from the inscriptions, however, of a short period 
of illness from which the king suffered and which appears 
to have had rather important consequences in the public 
administration of the country. In an epigraph from the 
Tanjore district (No. 46 of 1906) 3 dated in the thirty- 
fourth year of the king, ‘ the country is said to have been 
in a state of confusion at the time and the people were 
in distress. This state of things seems to have been 


1 Mah&vantia, xc ; Tumour and Wiiesinha, part ii, pp. 314—5. 

8 Dr. S. K. Aiyangar appears to be right in pointing out as against 
Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar (see Aiyangar op. tit., pp. 57-8 and Aiyar, Ancient 
D$khan, p p.170-1) that the Ariya Cakravarti was not a Muhammadan but a 
Tamil. 

3 S 1907, part ii, para 27. This record comes from Tirukkadai- 
yur and Mr. T. A. Gopinatha Rao was clearly wrong in ascribing it to the 
Kulasekhara of the civil war of the twelfth century (Trav. Arch . Series t 
vol. ii, p. 16). The details of date in the record work out correctly for 
September 10, a,d. 1301 in the thirty-fourth year of our king (f,A.,v ol. srfiv, 
p. 198). 


24 



186 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


brought about by the king making over a portion of his 
dominions to his younger brothers. Kulasekhara ap- 
parently resumed the ceded territories subsequently. As 
a result of this step, the people, who had migrated to 
other provinces in the interval, returned to their native 
country’. Another inscription 1 dated about three years 
earlier in the thirty-first year which records a gift of land 
for the recovery of the king from some illness probably 
explains the circumstances which led to the events men- 
tioned in the later inscription. 

Kulasekhara appears to have had the surname Bhu- 
variekavlra which is found in at least one of his records, 
if not more . 2 There are references, in the records of 
Kulasekhara and his contemporary V!ra Pandya, to a 
number of chieftains with names ending in Vanadirayan 
or Mabeli Vanadirayan. These are among the earliest 
references in Pandya records to a race of feudatories who 
seem at first to have started as hereditary local officials 
in charge of the administration of portions of the king- 
dom. In later times, the Vanadirayans in the Madura 
country took advantage of the growing weakness of the 
Pandyan kings to declare their independence and restrict 
the actual rule of the later Pandyas to the Tinnevelly 
district. It would appear that these local officials so 
long as they retained a subordinate character indicated 
their subjection by employing the names of princes of 
the ruling family as their aliases. The Sambuvarayans 
who were Chola feudatories are known to have done so , 3 
and the names of the Mabelivanadirayans mentioned jn 
the Pandya records under reference are best explained on 


1 No. 506 of 1904 which fields a regular date in a.d. 1299 for the 
thirty-first year (l.A,, vol. xliv, p. 198). 

* Nos. 260 of 1917 and 218 of 1924. Also A.E.E., 1924, part ii t para 35, 

3 AM.E*, 1919, part ii, para 21 gives several examples of this, 



MARAVARMAN KULASEKHARA 187 

that supposition. On the other hand, the kings to whom 
those officials were subject used terms evincing a paternal 
interest in them likePillai, Makkal and so on. The records 
of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya make reference to a 
Parakrama Pandya Mabeli Vanadhiraya alias Pavananga- 
kara called Makkalnayanar ; and a Vikrama Pandya Maha 
bali Vanaraya Nayanar may also be taken to be of the 
same ‘period. An inscription of Jatavarman VIra Pandya 
mentions a Pillai Kulasekhara Mabeli Vanarayan who 
may be the same as Pillai Mabelivanarayar who was in 
charge of Konadu (part of the Pudukkottah state) under 
Maravarman Kulasekhara. We also learn that Kerala- 
singa Valanadu (part of the modern district of Ramnad) 
was under an officer Vanadarayar from the time of 
Jatavarman Sundara Pandya to at least the twenty-fourth 
year of Kulasekhara. The part played by these Banaraya 
chiefs in the history of the Pandyan kingdom from this 
time is easy enough to understand in its general outline ; 
but there are several obscure details that await further 
study and elucidation. 1 


t-.A.&E., 1916, part iiy pafa 28 ; 1922, part ii, para 36 ; 1918, part ii, 
para 51 ; 1908; part ii, para 45 and 1924, part ii, para 35 contain various 
attempts at explaining these records. The most important among them 
are : No. 104 of 1916 ; No. 46 of 1922 ; No. 430 of 1907 ; No. 3S7 of 1922 ; 
No, 328 of 1923 and others. 



CHAPTER XIII 


JATAVARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA (1276); MARA- 
VARMAN VIERAMA PANDYA (1283); SOCIAL LIFE 
AT THE END OF THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY— 
MARCO POLO 

Of the co- regents who came to power after Kulasekhara’s 
accession, Jatavarman Sundara Pandya claims notice 
first. His rule began in A.D. 1276. 1 This king had 
apparently no distinguishing titles and the identifi- 
cation of his records is a matter of considerable 
difficulty. There is little to guide the student besides 
astronomical details given in the inscriptions and the 
latest regnal year so far traced by such indications is the 
seventeenth, which takes his rule up to A.D. 1292-1293 
(No. 594 of 1907). He is the Sonder Bandi Davar of 
Marco Polo and the Sunder Pandi of Wassaf who was the 
Dewar ‘ a few years since ’ and whose death is mentioned 
by him as having occurred in 692 Hijra. His records 
are found in the Cuddapah and Salem districts, besides 
Tanjore, South Arcot and Chingleput. An inscription 
of his, recently discovered in the Tanjore district (No. 31 1 
of 1927), refers to the foundation of a new Saiva Matha by 
a Vidyasiva Pandita, which is no doubt connected with 

1 Mr L. D. Swamikkannu Pillai first postulated another Jatavarman 
Sundara Pandya with accession in a.d. 1269-70 ( l.A vol. xlii), Sewell 
decisively rejected the possibility {LA. t vol. xliv) and Mr. Swamikkannu 
himself subsequently gave it up. See note under Jatavarman Sundara II 
at p. 66 of the List of Pudukkoitah Inscriptions and Ephemeris, (vol. i, 
part ii, p. 101). For the accession date in A.D. 1276, see EJ., vol. ix, pp. 
228*9 and E,L, vol. xi, pp, 136 and 259-61 ; also J5J. t vol. x, pp. 143-4, 



MARAVARMAN VIKRAMA 


189 


the revival of Saiva activities in the thirteenth century by 
the Saiva teachers (Santanaguravar) beginning with 
Meykandadevar who popularized and spread the tenets 
of the Saiva Siddhanta philosophy. 1 

Maravarman Vikrama Pandya was another co-regent, 
who began to rule some time in A.D. 1283. 2 His records 
begin, with a Sanskrit introduction Samasta-bkuvanaika- 
vira and two Tamil introductions commencing Tim- 
magal Jayamagal and T irumalarmadu. The Sanskrit 

introduction, which is found also in one of Jatavarman 
Vira Pandya’s records, recounts practically all the titles 
and achievements of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya and 
furnishes the model for the introductions adopted by 
some of the later Pandyas of the period of decline. 3 And 
the Tamil introductions do not seem to add materially to 
our knowledge of the king. It seems therefore that 
Vikrama Pandya’s Sanskrit introduction cannot be taken 
to refer to any fresh conquests on his part. Some 
inscriptions from Chidambaram are in the form of verses 
which seem to be in praise of this Vikrama Pandya and to 
record his achievements in particular. In one of them 

1 A.RM.> 1927, part ii, para 44. 

3 There has been great difficulty regarding the date of this king’s 
accession. At one time (LA., vol. xliv) Sewell and Swamikkannu 
Pillai were agreed about a.d. 1283. Subsequently (see A.R.E., 1917, 
Appendix P) Mr. Swamikkannu Pillai gave up a.d. 1283 for a.d. 1269-70, 
for what appears to be an insufficient reason. His Indian Ephemeris 
(vol. i, partii, pp. 92-3) unfortunately adds to the confusion by mixing up 
many things and stating different dates of accession at the beginning and at 
the- end. It will be seen, however, that on the basis of any date there are 
di&culties in reconciling all the known facts. The accession date 1283 seems 
to be well established and need not be given up. See No. 82 of 1918 and 
A.R.E., 1918, part ii, para 45. Again No. 43 of 1905 of the seventh year of 
the king from South Arcot states that the salt pans belonging to a temple 
remained unused since the time of the Pallava king KCpperunjinga. If it is 
remembered that that chieftain ruled almost up to a.d. 1280, the inference 
is clear. 

8 See Nos. 122 of 1896 and 200 of 1895, 



190 


THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 


which gives him the titles Bhuvanekavlra and Korkai- 
knvala he is said to have conquered Venadu (Travancore) 
and is ironically commended for not having invaded the 
north, as there were two carps on Ganapati’s face and 
there was a woman (ruling with a man’s name), which 
is undoubtedly a reference to the Kakatiya queen 
Rudramma. He is also credited with having fought the 
Chola on the banks of the Vellaru which is said to' have 
become Sevvaru (red river) when the wrath of Bhuvane- 
kavlra Vikrama Pandya was roused. Much of this seems 
to be mere poetry. 1 

It is quite possible that the coin bearing the legend 
Bkuvanekavlrm described by Sir Walter Elliot 2 may 
belong to this Vikrama Pandya, although, as has been 
pointed out before, the name was also borne by Maravar- 
man Kulasekhara himself. Vikrama Pandya had likewise 
the surname Rajakkal N ayan which occasionally takes the 
form Rajakkal Tambiran. 3 There are references in his 
records to a throne Munaiyadaraiyan at Madura and 
another called Malaiyadaraiyan in a palace at Rajeadram, 
east of Rasingankulam. 4 The reference to his elder 
brother (annalvar ) 1 Kulasekhara is very interesting as 
furnishing some confirmation of the statements of Wassaf 
and Marco Polo that the country was being ruled by a 
number of brothers. The latest regnal year mentioned 
in Vikrama Pandya’s records seems to be 13 (No. 539. of 
1916) and this means that his rule lasted up to at least 
A.D. 1295-1296. 


1 Nos. 123' of 1888 ; 329, 336 and 365 of 1913 and A.R.E., 1914, part ii, 
para 20. 

* Coins of Southern India, No. 138, p. 152d. 

* Nos. 530 of 1920 and 86 of 1918 ; also A>R J£* 9 1921, part ii, para 41. 

4 Nos. 312 and 317 of 1923 and A.R.E., 1924, part ii, para 36, 

a No. 462 of 1921. 



SOCIAL LIFE : MARCO POLO 191 

Before proceeding to consider the other co-regents of 
Kulasekhara and the politics of the closing years of his 
reign, an account must be given of the social and economic 
life of the Pandya country as it struck a foreign observer 
like Marco Polo, whose statements are in several import- 
ant respects borne out by the observations of the 
Muhammadan historian Wassaf to whom we owe much of 
our knowledge of the political condition of the Pandyan 
kingdom at this time. 1 

The name by which the country was known to 
foreigners was Ma’bar, a word which, in Arabic, signi- 
fies Passage or Ferry and was applied to the part of 
the Indian coast most frequented by travellers and mer- 
chants from Arabia and the Persian Gulf. * Ma’bar 
extends in length from Kulam (Quilon) to Nilawar 
(Nellore). The curiosities of Chin and Machin and the 
beautiful products of Hind and Sind, laden on large 
ships (which they call junks), sailing like mountains 
with the wings of the winds on the surface of the water, 
are always arriving there. The wealth of the Isles of 
the Persian Gulf in particular, and in part the beauty 
and adornment of other countries, from Irak and 
Khurasan as far as Rum and Europe, are derived from 
Ma’bar, which is so situated as to be the key of Hind ’ 
(Wassaf). Writing of Kayal (Cail), the chief emporium 
of the Pandyan kingdom, Marco Polo says that the king 
to whom the city belongs ‘ administers his kingdom 
with great equity and extends great favour to merchants 
and foreigners, so that they are very glad to visit his 
city,’ ‘ It is at this city that all the ships touch that 
come from the West, as from Hormos and from Kis and 


1 The account that follows is based on Yule and Cordier’s Marco Polo 
and Elliot and Dow son } vol. iii t 



192 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


from Aden, and all Arabia, laden with horses and with 
other things for sale. And this brings a great concourse 
of people from the country round about, and so there 
is great business done in this city of Cail. ’ 

The horse trade of Kayal was of considerable politi- 
cal importance and a good part of the revenues of the 
kingdom was spent on the purchase of horses for the 
king and the army. There is a reference to horse- 
dealers from Travancore in an inscription of the time 
(No. 161 of 1907). Marco Polo says : ‘Here are no horses 
bred ; and thus a great part of the wealth of the country 
is wasted in purchasing horses ; I will tell you how. 
You must know that the merchants of Kis and Hormes, 
Dofar and Soer and Aden collect great numbers of 
destriers and other horses and these they bring to the 
territories of this King and of his four brothers, who 
are Kings likewise as I told you. For a horse will fetch 
among them 500 saggi of gold, worth more than 100 
marks of silver, and vast numbers are sold there every 
year.’ Wassaf’s statements about this trade are even 
more specific and furnish interesting details. 1 It was 
a matter of agreement that Maliku -1 Islam Jamaluddin 
and the merchants should embark every year from the 
island of Kais and land at Ma’bar 1,400 horses of his 
own breed, and of such generous origin that, in com- 
parison with them the most celebrated horses of anti- 
quity, such as the Rukhs of Rustam, etc., should be as 
worthless as the horse of the chess-board. It was also 
agreed that he should embark as many as he could 
procure from all the isles of Persia, such as Katif, 
Lahsa, Bahrein, Hurmuz and Kulhatu. The price of 
each horse was fixed from of old at 220 dinars of red 
gold ( = 440 saggi of Polo) on this condition, that if any 
horses should sustain any injury during the voyage, or 



SOCIAL LIFE : MARCO POLO 


193 


should happen to die, the value of them should be paid 
from the royal treasury .’ 1 

The waste of the country’s wealth on horses that 
Marco Polo speaks of was due not so much to the 
generous terms of the contract under which horses were 
imported as to the unfavourable climate of South India 
in which these horses could not thrive and the 
ignorance of Indian horse-keepers. Wassaf remarks : 

* It is a strange thing that when those horses arrive 
there, instead of giving them raw barley they give them 
roasted barley and grain dressed with butter, and boiled 
cow’s milk to drink. . . . They bind them for forty 
days in a stable with ropes and pegs in order that they 
may get fat ; and afterwards, without taking measures 
for training, and without stirrups and other appurte- 
nances of riding, the Indian soldiers ride upon them 
like demons. ... In a short time, the most strong, 
swift, fresh and active horses become weak, slow, use- 
less, and stupid. In short, they all become wretched 
and good for nothing. . . . There is, therefore, a 
constant necessity of getting new horses annually.’ 
Marco Polo confirms Wassaf and says, ‘ There is no 
possibility of breeding horses in this country, as hath 
often proved by trial ’ and the ‘ people do not know in 
the least how to treat a horse.’ But he also adds this : 

‘ The horse-merchants not only never bring any farriers 
with them, but also prevent any farrier from going 
thither, lest that should in any degree baulk the sale of 
horses, which brings them in every year such vast gains ’. 

1 Wassaf also gives the total volume of the annual Indian import trade 
in horses as 10,000 animals worth 2,200,000 dinars and rather inconsistently 
adds that this amount 4 was paid out of the overflowing revenues of the 
estates and endowments belonging to the Hindu temples, and from the tax 
upon courtesans attache^ to them, and no charge was incurred by the 
public treasury. * 

25 



194 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


From the earliest times the Pandya country has been 
famous for its pearls and 1 Marco’s account of the pearl 
fishery is still substantially correct.’ He says : ‘ In his 
(Sonder Bandi Davar’s) kingdom they fin'd very fine 
and great pearls; and I will tell you how they are 
got. . . . The pearl-fishers take their vessels, great 
and small, and proceed into this gulf (between the 
island of Seilan and the mainland), where they stop from 
the beginning of April till the middle of May. The}' go 
first to a place called Bettelar,'and (then) go sixty miles 
into the gulf. Here they cast anchor and shift from 
their large vessels into small boats. You must know 
that the many merchants who go divide into various 
companies, and each of these must engage a number of 
men on wages, hiring them for April and half of May. 
Of all the produce they have first to pay the King, as his 
royalty, the tenth part. And they must also pay those 
men who charm the great fishes, to prevent them from 
injuring the divers whilst engaged in seeking pearls 
under water, one-twentieth part of all that they take. 
These fish-charmers are termed A trainman (Brahman) ; 
and their charm holds good for that day only, for at 
night they dissolve the charm so that the fishes can 
work mischief at their will. . . . When the men have 
got into the small boats they jump into the water and 
dive to the bottom which may be at a depth of from four 
to twelve fathoms, and there they remain as long as 
they are able. And there they find the shells that con- 
tain the pearls and these they put into a net bag tied 
round the waist, and mount up to the surface with them, 
and then dive anew. When they can’t hold their breath 
any longer they come up again, and after a little, down 
they go once more, and so they go on all day. ... In 
this manner pearls are fished in great quantities, for 



SOCIAL LIFE : MARCO POLO 


195 


thence in fact come the pearls which are spread all over 
the world. And I can tell you the King of that State 
hath a very great receipt and treasure from his dues 
upon those pearls.’ ‘ Moreover nobody is permitted to 
take out of the kingdom a pearl weighing more than half 
a saggio unless he manages to do it secretly. This order 
has been given because the King desires to reserve all 
such to himself ; and so in fact the quantity he has is 
something almost incredible. Moreover several times 
every year he sends his proclamation through the realm 
that if any one who possesses a pearl or stone of great 
value will bring it to him, he will pay for it twice as 
much as it cost. Everybody is glad to do this, and thus 
the King gets all into his own hands, giving every man 
his price.’ 

The king possessed much other treasure of great 
value besides the best of the pearls that were found in 
his kingdom. ‘ Round his neck he has a necklace entirely 
of precious stones, rubies, sapphires, emeralds and the 
like in so much that this collar is of great value. He 
wears also hanging in front of his chest from the neck 
downwards, a fine silk thread strung with 104 (108 ?) 
large pearls and rubies of great price. The reason why 
he wears this cord with the 104 great pearls and rubies, 
is (according to what they tell) that every day, morning 
and evening, he has to say 104 prayers to his idols. 
Such is their religion and their custom. And thus did 
all the Kings, his ancestors before him, and they bequeath- 
ed . the string of pearls to him that he should do the 
like.’ 

‘ The King aforesaid also wears on his arms three 
golden bracelets thickly set with pearls of great value, 
and anklets also of like kind he wears on his legs, and 
rings on his toes likewise. So let me tell you what this 



196 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


King wears, between gold and gems and pearls, is worth 
more than a city’s ransom. And it is no wonder ; for he 
hath great store of such gear.’ 

‘ When the King dies none of his children dares to 
touch his treasure. For they say, “ As our father did 
gather together all this treasure, so we ought to accumu- 
late as much in our turn And in this way it comes 
to pass that there is an immensity of treasure accumu- 
lated in . this kingdom.’ That Marco was correctly 
informed as to the extent of the treasures accumulated 
by the Pandya rulers is seen clearly from the statements 
of Wassaf on the matter. Of Kales Dewar (Kulasekhara) 
he says : ‘ His coffers were replete with wealth, inasmuch 
that in the treasury of the city of Mardi (Madura) there 
were. t,20O crores of gold ( dinars ) deposited. . . . Be- 
sides this there was an accumulation of precious stones, 
such as pearls, rubies, turquoises and emeralds; — more 
than is in the power of language to express.’ 

Marco Polo gives some more information of interest 
about the king and his court. ‘ This King hath some 
five hundred wives. . . . The King hath many child- 
ren ’. ‘And there are about the King a number of Barons 
in attendance upon him. These ride with him, and 
keep always near him, and have great authority in the 
kingdom; they are called the King’s Trusty Lieges. 
And you must know that when the King dies, and they 
put him on the fire to burn him, these Lieges cast them- 
selves into the fire round about his body, and suffer them- 
selves to be burnt along with him. For they say they 
have been his comrades in this world, and that they ought 
also to keep him company in the other world.’ These 
statements of Marco about the King’s Trusty Lieges 
may, at first sight, appear incredible ; but they furnish an 
excellent commentary on the epigraphies! references to 



SOCIAL LIFE : MARCO POLO 397 

Tennavan Apattudavigal {p^eaieBt&jm^u pigi ^aUserr) and 
an institution mentioned in the records of successive 
Pandya rulers of this period 1 becomes intelligible only 
in the light of the evidence furnished by the Venetian 
traveller. 

Marco Polo has some things to say about the life of 
the common people of the country. Their manner of 
dress seems to have amazed him. ‘ You must know 
that in all this province of Ma’bar there is never a tailor 
to cut a coat or stitch it, seeing that everybody goes 
naked ! For decency only do they wear a scrap of 
cloth; and so it is with men' and women, with rich and 
poor, aye, and with the King himself. ... It is a 
fact that the King goes as bare as the rest.’ The last 
statement shows that surprise at the novelty of the 
foreigners’ dress blunted the keenness of the traveller’s 
observation. Marco Polo mentions the custom of sati as 
common at the time and refers also to the practice of 
allowing a condemned criminal who was sentenced to 
death to sacrifice himself to some God or other of his 
choice. Many people, according to him, worshipped the 
ox and ‘ would not eat beef for anything in the world.’ 

‘ And let me tell you, the people of this country 
have a custom of rubbing their houses all over with cow- 
dung. Moreover all of them, great and small, King and 
Barons included, do sit upon the ground only, and the 
reason they give is that this is the most honourable way 
to sit, because we all spring from the Earth and to the 
Earth we must return ; so no one can pay the Earth too 
much honour, and no one ought to despise it.’ People 
continue to sit on the ground even now, though, one 
supposes, not for the reason given by Marco. 


1 See A.R.E., 1918 part ii, para 43, 



198 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

‘ The people of the country go to battle all naked, 
with only a lance and a shield ; and they are most 
wretched soldiers. They will kill neither beast nor bird, 
nor anything that hath life ; and for such animal food as 
they eat, they make the Saracens, or others who are not 
of their own religion, play the butcher. 

* It is their practice that every one, male and female, 
do wash the whole body twice every day ; and those "who 
do not wash are looked on much as we look on the 
Patarins. You must know that in eating they use the 
right hand only and would on no account touch their food 
with the left hand. ... So also they drink only from 
drinking vessels, and every man hath his own ; nor will 
any one drink from another’s vessel. And when they 
drink they do not put the vessel to the lips, but hold it 
aloft and let the drink spout into the mouth. No -one 
would on any account touch the vessel with his mouth, 
nor give a stranger drink with it. But if the stranger have 
no vessel of his own they will pour the drink into his 
hands and he may thus drink from his hands as from a 
cup. 

‘ They are very strict in executing justice upon crimi- 
nals, and as strict in abstaining from wine. Indeed they 
have made a rule that wine-drinkers and sea-faring men 
are never to be accepted as sureties. . . . They 

have the following rule about debts. If a- debtor shall 
have been several times asked by his creditor for pay- 
ment and shall have put him off from day to day with 
promises, then if the creditor can once meet the debtor 
and succeed in drawing a circle round him, the latter 
must not pass out of this circle until he shall have satis- 
fied the claim, or given security for its discharge. If he in 
any other case presumes to pass the circle he is punished 
with death as a transgressor against right and justice. 



SOCIAL LIFE: MARCO POLO 


199 


‘ They have many experts in an art which they 
call Physiognomy, by which they discern a man’s 
character and qualities at once. They also know the 
import of meeting with any particular bird or beast ; for 
such omens are regarded by them more than by any 
people in the world. . . . As soon as a child is 
born they write down his nativity, that is to say the day 
and hour, the month, and the moon’s age. This custom 
they observe because every single thing they do is done 
with reference to astrology, and by the advice of diviners 
skilled in Sorcery and Magic and Geomancy and such 
like diabolical arts ; and some of them are also acquainted 
with Astrology.’ 

Marco Polo says that all male children were dismis- 
sed from their homes when they attained thirteen and 
after that they had to get their living by trade. * And 
these urchins are running about all day from pillar to 
post, buying and selling. . . . And every day they 
take their food to their mothers to be cooked and served, 
but do not eat a scrap at the expense of their fathers.’ 
This could not have been universal ; perhaps Marco 
found the system prevailing among some sections of the 
population. He refers to temples as ‘ certain abbeys in 
which are Gods and Goddesses to whom many young 
girls are consecrated’ — a reference to devadasis. The 
nature of the institution of the temple dancing-girls 
seems, however, to have been hardly understood by the 
traveller. 

• ‘ All the people of this city (Cail), as well as of the 
rest of India, have a custom of perpetually keeping in 
the mouth a certain leaf called Tembul , to gratify a cer- 
tain habit and desire they have, continually chewing it 
and spitting out the saliva that it excites. The Lords and 
gentlefolks and the King have these leaves prepared 



200 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


with camphor and other aromatic spices and also mixt 
with quicklime. And this practice was said to be very 
good for the health.’ 

‘ The men of this country have their beds made of 
very light canework, so arranged that, when they have 
got in and are going to sleep, they are drawn up by 
cords nearly to the ceiling and fixed there for the night. 
This is done to get out of the way of tarantulas which 
give terrible bites, as well as of fleas and such vermin, 
and at the same time to get as much air as possible in 
the great heat which prevails in that region. Not that 
everybody does this, but only the nobles and great 
folks, for the others sleep on the streets.’ 


RAMA VARMA RESEARCH INSTITUTE. 

TRICHUR. COCHIN STATE. 


CHAPTER XIV 


THE LAST YEARS OF MARAVARMAN KULASEKHARA 
(1268) JATAVARMAN VlRA PANDYA ( acc . a.d. 1296-7) ; 

JATAVARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA (acc. a.d. 1303) ; 

THE MUHAMMADAN INVASION 

Two princes were co-regents of Maravarman Kula- 
sekhara in the closing years of his long reign. Jatavarman 
Vira Pandya attained the position earlier and the date of 
his accession was between A.D. December 1296 and 
June 1297. 1 About five or six years later began the rule 
of Jatavatman Sundara Pandya. 2 These beyond doubt 
are the two sons of Kulasekhara mentioned by Wassaf. 
1 This fortunate and happy sovereign (Kulasekhara) had 
two sons, the elder named Sundar Pandi, who was 
legitimate, his mother being joined to the Dewar by law- 
ful marriage, and the younger named Tira Pandi was 
illegitimate, his mother being one of the mistresses who 
continually attended the king in his banquet of plea- 
sure.’ 3 If we may believe Wassaf’s account, the jealou- 


1 More exactly a.d. December 17, 1296 to June 16, 1297* [I.A., vol, xliv, 
pp. 249-52 and E.L t vol. xi, p. 137). Mr. Swamikkannu, however, gives the 
date as between June 23 and July 24, a.d. 1296 ( Indian Ephemeris , vol. i, 
part ii, p. 105) . 

2 Accession between March 31, and May 16, a.d. 1303. {Indian Ephe- 
meris, vol. i, part ii, p. 107). Sewell doubted the historicity of this king (Ij.A., 
vol. xliv, p. 252) discovered by Mr. Swamikkannu Pillai ; but the discovery 
of a Saka date in No. 608 of 1915 (giving ^aka 1236 = 12th year) settles the 
question beyond possibility of doubt. Even otherwise, Wassaf’s mention 
of two Sundar Pandis should have been enough to support Mr. Swamik- 
kannu’s position in this particular. 

3 Elliot and Dowson , vol. iii, pp. 52-3. Amir Khusru makes Bir Pandya 
the elder, op. dt m , p. 88, 

26 



202 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


sies and rivalries of these half-brothers embittered the 
last years of Kulasekhara, and finally led to his murder 
by Sundara Pandya. This crime was followed by a 
fraternal war which threw the kingdom into confusion 
when the Khilji army under Malik Kafur advanced 
upon Madura. But the story is not easy to follow in its 
details. It is unfortunate that Wassaf’s account stands 
alone and is not corroborated by the other writers df the 
time, particularly because the inscriptions of Kulase- 
khara’ s reign seem to contradict Wassaf’s chronology. 

The story as given by Wassaf is this : ‘ As Tira 
Pandi was remarkable for his shrewdness and intrepidity, 
the ruler nominated him as his successor. His brother 
Sundar Pandi, being enraged at this supersession, killed 
his father, in a moment of rashness and undutifulness, 
towards the close of the year 709 H (A.D. 1310) and 
placed the crown on his head in the city of Mardi 
(Madura). He induced the troops who were there to 
support his interests, and conveyed some of the royal 
treasures which were deposited there to the city of Man- 
kul, and he himself accompanied, marching on, attended 
in royal pomp with the elephants, horses, and treasures. 
Upon this his brother Tira Pandi, being resolved on 
avenging his father’s blood, followed to give him battle, 
and on the margin of a lake which, in their language, 
they call Talachi, the opponents came to action. Both 
the brothers, each ignorant of the fate of the other, fled 
away ; but Tira Pandi being unfortunate, and having 
been wounded, fell into the hands of the enemy, and 
seven elephant-loads of gold also fell to the lot of the 
army of Sundar Pandi. 

‘ It is a saying of philosophers, that ingratitude will, 
sooner or later, meet its punishment, and this was proved 
in the sequel, for Manar Barnaul, the son of the daughter 



LAST YEARS OF MARAVA&MAN KULESEKHARA 203 


of Kales Dewar, who espoused the cause of Tira 
Pandi, being at that time at Karamhatti, near Kalul, sent 
him assistance, both in men and money, . which was 
attended with a most fortunate result. Sundar Pandi 
had taken possession of the kingdom, and the army and 
the treasure were his own ; but, . . . notwithstanding 
all his treasures and the goodwill of the army, ... he 
met* with the chastisement due to his ingratitude, for in 
the middle of the year 710 (A.D. 13x0) Tira Pandi, hav- 
ing collected an army, advanced to oppose him, and 
Sundar Pandi, trembling and alarmed, fled from his 
native country, and took refuge under the protection of 
Ala-ud-din of Delhi, and 'l ira Pandi became firmly 
established in his hereditary kingdom.’ 

Now, the two princes Vlra Pandya and Sundara 
Pandya had been associated in the government of the 
state since A.D. 1296 and 1303 respectively, and if 
Sundara Pandya’s superior claims were overlooked, the 
supersession took place several years before Sundara’ s 
rage led him to kill his father. It is hard to see why 
Sundara Pandya, who apparently did not mind the pre? 
ference shown to Vlra in the beginning, should, at the end 
of more than thirteen years, have become so undutiful as 
to turn parricide. It is, however, possible that some time 
before the murder, Kulasekhara had in some mann er 
indicated that after him, Vira Pandya was to be the 
chief monarch, Sundara Pandya being subordinate in 
rank, and that Sundara was disappointed at this decision 
of his father which placed the bastard above the legiti- 
mate son after the father’s lifetime. 1 But the time of 
the murder as given by Wassaf presents a serious diffi- 


1 The suggestion is made by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, 5. India and Her 
Muhammadan Invaders > p. 96* 



204 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


culty. The event is placed by him at the close of 709 
H., that is about May-June, A.D. 1310, and before Malik 
Kafur’s attack on Dwarasamudra. But there are inscrip- 
tions which refer to the forty-fourth year of Kulasekhara’s 
reign which did not begin till June io, A.D. 1311 
and one of these (No. 106 of 19x6) comes from Tirukkala- 
kkudi in the modern Ramnad district and gives the 
king’s usual title ‘ who was pleased to take all countries’. 
It is very unlikely that records continued to be dated in 
the regnal years of a monarch who had died at his son’s 
hands till more than a year after the event, and that so 
near the capital of the kingdom. There seems to be no 
possibility of reconciling Wassaf’s date with the epigra- 
phical evidence at hand. 1 It may also be observed that 
neither Amir Khusru nor Zia-ud-din Barni — both refer to 
the two rulers of the Pandya country in their accounts of 
Malik Kafur’s invasion of Ma’bar — has anything to say 
about the murder. 

There is no doubt, however, that Vlra Pandya and 
Sundara Pandya had fallen out and were fighting each 
other at the time of the Muhammadan invasion of South 
India. In this respect, Wassaf’s statements receive 
confirmation from Amir Khusru who says that Malik 
Kafur ‘was informed that the two Rais of Ma’bar, the 
eldest named Bir Pandya, the youngest Sundar Pandya, 
who had up to that time continued on friendly terms, 
had advanced against each other with hostile inten- 
tions.’ 2 It is difficult to follow the details of this war 
between the two Pandya rulers given by Wassaf as the 


1 Dr. S. K. Aiyangar seems to be aware of the difficulty though he does 
not appear to face it. It is rather difficult to see how the various statements 
he makes in his work are to be reconciled with one another. See op, cit 
pp, 55, 59, 96, and 97. 

* Elliot and Dowson , vol. iii, p. 88, 



LAST YEARS OF MARAVARMAN KULASEKHARA 205 

names of places have changed beyond recognition at 
the hands of the Muhammadan historian. 

Sundara Pandya is said to have suffered defeat 
in the end and taken refuge with Ala-ud-din. This 
has led practically all historians to suppose that Sundara 
Pandya’ s appeal against Vira furnished the occasion 
for Malik Kafur’s invasion of the Pandya country. Col. 
Yule stated : ‘ Sundar Bandi went to Ala-ud-din, Sultan 
of Delhi, and sought help. The Sultan eventually sent 
his general Hazardinari {alias Malik Kafur) to conquer 
Ma’bar ’ 1 and he has been generally followed by all 
writers who. came after him and it has been sometimes 
assumed that Malik Kafur' s invasion of the Pandya 
kingdom was undertaken partly in furtherance of Sundara 
Pandya’s claims to the throne . 2 * There seems to be 
little reason furnished by our sources for the view that 
the Muhammadan was interested in helping Sundara 
Pandya back to his throne or that his invasion was caused 

1 Marco Polo —Yule and Cordier , vol. ii, p. 333 n . Dr. S. K. Aiyangar 
says : ‘ According to Wassaf’s account, therefore, Sundara Pandya found 
refuge in the court of Aland din, and that gave the occasion for interference, 
if such an occasion were necessary for Malik Kafur, who was already on this 
invasion 5 {op. cit ., p. 97). Again : * There is very little doubt left that he 
marched in support of Vira Pandya’s rival Sundara Pandya whose territory 
proper was Madura and the country round it * (pp. 156-7). The Cambridge 
History of India , vol. iii, is indecisive. 4 From Qvaravatlpura Malik Naib 
marched to the kingdom of the Pandyas in the extreme south of the penin- 
sula to which the attention of Alauddin had been attracted by recent 
events/ (p. 1X6) • ‘ Malik Kafur then occupied with the Hoysalas, invaded 
the Tamil kingdom, placed Sundara Pandya on the throne,/ etc. (p. 487). At 
p. 669, the capture of Madura and the submission of Madura are entered 
uifder 1310 and the death of Maravarman KulaSekhara under a.d. 1311. 
Ishwari Prasad, Mediaeval India, pp. 203-4, is also inaccurate in details. 

2 Dr. S. K. Aiyangar says of the invasion of Rajab 710 a.h. : 4 This was 
apparently an invasion distinct from the one by Malik Kafur himself 5 (p. 95). 

But Wassaf mentions Malik Nabu (-Malik Kafur, see Elliot and Dowson, 
vol. iii, p. 48, n 1) as having been * obliged to retreat 5 and if the view of Dr. 

Aiyangar is right, it must be held that Wassaf makes no mention of the 

actual invasion of the Pandya country by Malik Kafur at all. 



206 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


by the quarrels between the brothers. Wassaf, the only 
writer who gives a full account of the disputed succession 
in the Pandya country, does not connect Malik Kafur’s 
invasion with the flight of Sundara Pandya to Ala-ud- 
din’s court, in fact his account of the invasion of Ma’ bar 
precedes his narrative of the fraternal war in the Pandya 
kingdom and his scheme of chronology is likewise against 
the usual view. He places the invasion of Ma’bar in 
the month of Rajab of the year 710 H. (December, a.d. 
1310) and the flight of Sundara to Ala-ud-din was after the 
middle of the year 710, that is about the same time. It 
is possible to suggest that Sundara fled not to Ala-ud-din 
himself but to his general in the south, Malik Kafur, and 
sought his aid 1 . This does seem a satisfactory solution 
of the chronological difficulty. But if W assaf ‘s account is 
to be followed faithfully, it must be held that Sundara 
Pandya did not gain much by his appeal to Malik Kafur. 
For he leaves no room for doubt that Malik Kafur's 
invasion of the Pandya country had no other results than 
the plunder of some cities, and that the attack on the 
Pandya ruler who actually held sway at the time was 
substantially a failure. 1 Some of the towns were obtained 
through the animosity which has lately arisen between the 
two brothers; when at last a large army, attended by 
n um erous elephants of war, was sent out to oppose the 
Muhammadans. Malik Mabu, who thought himself a 
very Saturn, was obliged to retreat, and bring back his 
army.’ 2 In fact the expressions used by W assaf in this 
passage, specially the words ‘ the animosity which has 
lately arisen between the two brothers’, seem to indicate 
that so far as Malik Kafur was concerned he made no 


1 The suggestion^ made by Dr. 3. K. Aiyangar, op , cit, s p. 96* 

2 Elliot and Dowson (vol. iii, p. 50, italics mine). 



THE MUHAMMADAN INVASION 207 

difference between the two brothers and was ready to 
plunder either as opportunity arose, and that the 
animosity did not abate even after Malik Kafur’s 
invasion. It should, however, be noticed that the same 
historian mentions that Tira Pandi sent ‘ an army of 
horse and foot’ to the assistance of the Hoysala king 
against Malik Kafur, and this was the only ground for Malik 
Kafur’being more inimical to Vira Pandya than to Sundara. 
On the other hand, Ziau-d-din Barni states that ‘in 
Ma’bar there were two Rais, but all the elephants and 
treasure were taken from both, and the army turned home- 
wards flushed with victory’. 1 Of the campaign in Ma’bar 
Amir Khusru gives a very detailed account, which, 
however, is not easy to follow on account of the difficulty 
in identifying the places mentioned by him. But like 
Barni, he mentions the sack and plunder of temples, 
resulting in the capture of great booty. He also adds that 
Malik Kafur and his army ‘ arrived at the city of Mathra 
(Madura), the dwelling place of the brother of the Rai 
Sundar Pandya. They found the city empty, for the 
Rai had fled with the Ranis, but had left two or three 
elephants in the temple of Jaguar. The elephants were 
captured and the temple burnt.’ Both Amir Khusru 
who gives a detailed chronology of the campaign stage by 
stage and Barni seem to place the campaign a few months 
later than Wassaf. In fact all our authorities are agreed 
that the differences between Sundara Pandya and Vlra 
Pandya made the Pandya country an easy prey to foreign 
aggressors, the Hoysala Ballala and the Muhammadan 
Malik Kafur; they do not suggest that Malik Kafur's 
invasion of Ma’bar was either caused by these differences 
or undertaken in the interest of one of the parties and on 


* Elliot and Dowson , vol. iii, pp. 90-1 and 204, 



208 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


an appeal from him, and they say nothing as to the effects 
of the invasion on the relative position of the two royal 
brothers of the Pandya country. There is thus no reason 
to suppose that Sundara Pandya was restored to the 
throne of Madura and that a Muhammadan garrison was 
left behind in the city for his protection . 1 

In fact, the epigraphical records of Vira Pandya and 
Sundara Pandya and their successors give the impres- 
sion of a more or less continuous rule of the Pandya 
country by them and we have records of Vira and 
Sundara dated a few years after the withdrawal of Malik 
Kafur . 2 The only effect of Malik Kafur’s inroad was to 
add to the confusion in the country already distracted 
by the civil war among the rulers of the land. The real 
Muhammadan conquest of South India came later, and 
even then it was short-lived and ineffective. Within 

1 Contra Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, op.cit., p. 123, where KulaSekhara is an 
obvious slip for Sundara and pp. 156-7. Dr. Aiyangar, however, says that if a 
garrison continued in Madura * its authority must have been confined very 
narrowly, not extending in all probability to very much-beyond the territory 
immediately round Madura * (p. 123). Hultzsch (J.R.A.S., 1909, pp. 668-9) , 
leaves it uncertain when the Muhammadan viceroyalty at Madura began. 
In the Cambridge History of India> vol. iii, p. 116, Sir Wolseley Haig says 
' A Muslim governor was left at Madnra ’ by Malik Kafur ; it is not clear on 
what authority this statement is based though it is also found in Smith’s 
Oxford History of India , p. 233. Likewise it is difficult to follow Sir W. 
Haig in his statement that Ravivarman KulaSekhara of Kerala was one of 
the two kings of Ma’bar conquered and plundered by Maiik Naib. The 
attempt to extract history from the confused chronicles in the Taylor MSS. 
(e.g. Heras, Aravtdu Dynasty , p. 100) seems a hopeless task, 

2 No. 358 of 1922 of year 14 of Vira ; No. 104 of 1918 of year 21 ; 305 of 1923 
of year 22 and others. Also No. 608 of 1915 giving £aka 1236 = 12 year of 
Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (ace. a.d. 1302-3). Contra Mr. L.D. Swarnik- 
kannu Pillai ( Indian EphemeriSi vol. i, part ii, p. 106) who thinks there are 
no records of Vira Pandya between his fourteenth and fortieth years, follows 
an antiquated system of chronology for the Muhammadan chiefs of Madura 
and makes needless difficulties over a record in the twenty-first year of Vira 
Pandya (No. 639 of 1916). But he grants that Sundara Pandya had a 
continuous rule, 



THE MUHAMMADAN INVASION 


2G9 


ten years of Malik Kafur’s sack of Madura, another 
Sultan of Delhi sent an army under Khusru Khan to 
plunder the country again, and it is not easy to see how 
this was possible if the country had been already subject- 
ed to the sway of the Sultan of Delhi, with a regular 
Muhammadan government established at Madura. 1 The 
truth seems to be that no ruler of Delhi before Muhammad 
bin Tughlak ever contemplated the permanent annexa- 
tion of the extreme south of the peninsula as an adminis- 
trative province of the Empire of Delhi, though the 
Sultans had no objection to send out expeditions which 
returned with a vast amount of plundered wealth. This 
view gains support from the fact that the coins of no 
earlier Sultan have been found in the Madura district. 
We may conclude therefore that there is as yet no 
evidence of the Muhammadans having established them- 
selves in Madura earlier than the first years of Muhammad 
bin Tughlak. On this view J alaluddin Ahsan Shah, who 
set himself up as the independent Sultan of Madura in or 
about A.D. 1329-30, was also the first governor of 
Ma’bar appointed as such by the Sultan of Delhi. 2 This 
conquest of South India in the beginning of Muhammad’s 
reign, which is not so well known as the earlier raids, 
has been discussed very fully by Dr. S. Krishnaswami 
Aiyangar in his account of the foundation of the 
Sultanate of Madura. 

The social and economic effects of the advent of the 
Muhammadans in South India can, however, by no means 
bs exaggerated. The records of the period bear but 
meagre testimony to the amount of suffering and 


1 See Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, op cit p. 157 and Barai at p. 219 of Elliot 
and Dowson , vol. iii. 

* J.R.A.S . , 1909, pp. 671 and 682, Also Dr. S, K. Aiyangar, op . cit , ? 
pp. 157 

27 



210 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


privation that must have been the lot of the common 
people at this time. The loss in wealth was real. The 
country was drained of its treasure by the trade of the 
Arabs from across the sea and the plunder of the armies 
of the Sultans of Delhi. Wassaf tells us that a certain 
« eminent prince ’ Takiuddin occupied high positions of 
power and prestige in the administration of the country 
under the Sundara Pandya, who died about A.D. 1292, 
and for sometime afterwards. 1 Barni laments the rapa- 
city and villainy of Khusru Khan which did not spare 
even a Muhammadan merchant Taki Khan whose great 
wealth was taken from him by force, himself being after- 
wards put to death. 2 The desecration of temples by the 
invading hosts and the horror with which their acts of 
vandalism filled the minds of the people who had till 
then been strangers to such sights, are occasionally 
evidenced by the inscriptions. Two of these come from 
Tirupputtur (Ramnad district) 3 and are dated in the 
forty-fourth and forty-sixth years of Jatavarman Vira 
Pandya, that is, about A.D. I339-4 1 - These records give 
an account of the reconsecration of a Siva temple and the 
gratitude of the villagers to the magnate who undertook 
the task and completed it. ‘ The temple of Tiruttaji- 
yanda-Nayanar at Tirupputtur is stated to have been 
occupied by the encamped Muhammadans (Tulukkar), 
“whose time it was”, and to have been ruined. In 
consequence of this the inhabitants of Tirupputtur became 
unsettled. At this juncture a certain Visayalayadevar 
of Kuraikkudi (Suraikkudi?), surnamed Avaiyan Periya- 
nayanar, reconsecrated the temple and saved the people 


1 Elliot and Dowsotit vol. iii, pp. 32 and 35. 

2 Ibid . , p. 219, 

3 Nos. 119 and 120 of 1908 and A.R.E., 1909, part ii, para 27. Also Dr, 
S* K. Aiyangar, op . cit,, pp. 117 and 183, 



THE MUHAMMADAN INVASION 211 

apparently from an imminent moral and religious 
degradation. The villagers of Tirupputtur, of their free 
will, agreed among themselves to show their gratitude to 
Visayalayadeva by assigning to him a specified quantity 
of corn from the harvest reaped by each individual, and 
to confer on him certain privileges in the temple of 
T iruttaliyanda-N ay anar . ’ 

Malik Kafur’s inroad into the Madura country, though 
it did not bring the Pandya territories into subjection 
to the Sultanate of Delhi, nevertheless marked the begin- 
ning of the end of the Second Empire of the Pandyas. 
The effects of the disputed succession and the Muham- 
madan invasion are seen in the subjection, however 
temporary, of the Pandyas to their Kerala contemporary, 
Ravivarman Kulasekhara, followed by the permanent 
loss of the northern districts of the Tamil land to the 
Kakatlya ruler of the Telugu country and the growing 
independence of the feudatories of the Pandya kingdom. 
From this time on, the history of the Pandyas becomes 
the story of a progressive decline which ends in the 
restriction of their sway to portions of the Tinnevelly 
district and, towards the close of the sixteenth century, 
in their final disappearance from the pages of history. 

Ravivarman Kulasekhara 1 — also called Sangramadhira 
‘firm in battle’ — ruled in Travancore with Quilon as 
his capital. He came.to power about A.D. 131 1-1312 and 
was almost the only South Indian monarch who was left 
untouched by the storm of Malik Kafur’s raid. This 
immunity left him at an advantage over his neighbours 
when Malik Kafur turned his back on South India, and 


* On Ravivarman KulaSektiara see EJ., vol, iv, pp. 145 ff ; vol. viii, p. 
8 ; A.R.E . . 1900, para 15 ; 1911, part ii, para 40 ; 1914, part ii, para 24, etc., 
and Trav. Arch . Series, vol. ii, pp. 53 ff ; also Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, op. 
cit. 3 p. 124. 



212 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


he made the best use of his position. His inscriptions 
are found in Srirangam, Kanchlpuram and Poonamallee, 
which last bears the name Ckem-Pmdya- Caturvedi- 
mcmgalam. In his Kanchlpuram inscription dated in 
the fourth year of his reign, A.D. 1315-1316, he claims to 
have defeated Vira Pandya, made the Pandyas and Cholas 
subject to the Keralas and at the age of forty-six (i.e. 
about A.D. 1 31 2-1 31 3) to have been crowned on the Hanks 
of the Vegavatl. 1 ‘ The grantha inscription engraved 
in Poonamallee (No. 34 of 1911) states that the Chera 
king conquered Sundara Pandya and granted the village 
Chera- Pandya-Caturvedi-mangalam for the enjoyment of 
the Brahmins. The figure of a fish surmounted by an 
anku'sa , i.e. ‘ the elephant’s goad, which is depicted on 
the right margin of the record (No. 33 of 19 1 1) , also 
indicates the subjection of the Pandya king by the 
Chera.’ 2 Thus both Vira Pandya and Sundara Pandya 
were conquered by Ravivarman Kulasekhara and these 
kings could have been no other than the two unfortunate 
sons of Maravarman Kulasekhara. 3 

1 Mr. Venkayya’s doubts (A.jR.E., .1900, para 15) as to how Ravivarman 
Kulasekhara was able to accomplish so much in the face of the Muham- 
madans who would have been very strong in Madura at this time have been 
met by our view of the invasion of Malik Kafur. Kielhorn and Hultzsch 
identified the VSgavatl with ‘ a small river which flows into the Palaru near 
Kanchlpuram’ (BJ<, vol. iv, p. 146). But there seems to be no great diffi- 
culty in taking it to be the better known river in the Madura district. 
Another inscription seems to imply that a.d. 1313 fell in the fourth year 
of the king’s reign ( EJ vol. viii, p. 8). 

2 If this is correct, Garudadhvaia in 1. 5 of the Arulalaperumal inscrip- 
tion {EJ,, vol. iv, p. 147) must perhaps be rendered 1 Garuda-column 1 
rather than * Garuda-banner ’ as Kielhorn does. (See A.E.E., 1911, part ii, 
para 40.) 

3 There may be some doubt as to the identity of Vira Pandya but none 
as to that of Sundara. There seem to have been two Vira Pandyas among 
the foes of Ravivarman. One of them was the Pandya king whose accession 
was in A.D. 1296-7 ; the other possibly a ruler of Venad who seems to have 
sought refuge in Konkan (EJ., vol. iv, p. 148 and note 4 on p. 146). 



THE MUHAMMADAN INVASION 213 

The Kerala ruler, however, was not for long left in the 
enjoyment of the fruits of his victory. For very soon 
after, he seems to have been ousted from Kanchipura by 
the advance of Muppidi Nayaka the lord of Vikrama- 
simhapattana, that is, probably the governor of Nellore, 
and the general of the Kakatlya king Prataparudradeva. 
He is said to have conquered a Pandya king and levied 
a tribute of elephants from him. This king might have 
been Sundara Pandya as a record in his fourteenth year 
states that he instituted a service called after Muppidi 
Nayaka in the temple at Vriddhacalam (South Arcot). 
Muppidi is said to have installed a governor at Kanchipura 
by name Manavlra. This expedition of the Kakatiya 
general seems therefore to have brought the northern 
part of the Pandya empire for a time under the control, 
more or less effective, of the Telugu rulers of Orangal. 1 

These defeats at the hands of foreign invaders follow- 
ing so quickly upon one another must have shaken 
the hold of the Pandya rulers on the territories they 
subjugated and held during the thirteenth century out- 
side the Pandya country proper. It is not possible to 
trace fully the steps by which this disintegration was 
brought about, but we see, about this time, signs of the 
growing feeling among the feudatories of the [kingdom 
tha t they might ignore the central power with impunity. 
One of the Sambuvarayas of North Arcot, who were at 
first subject to the Cholas and later became the depend- 
ants of the Pandya rulers, Kulasekhara Sambuvaraya, 
set up as an independent ruler at this time and began to 
date his inscriptions in his own regnal years. This 
Sambuvaraya apparently acknowledged the authority 
of Vira Pandya till the twenty-second year of his reign, 


1 See A.R.E., 1909, part ii, para 73 and 1918, part ii, para SO. 



214 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


that is, till about A.D. 1317-18 and subsequently declared 
himself independent. We are not, however, in a position 
to fix the exact date from which he counted his regnal 
years and began to issue orders in his own name showing 
the attainment of an independent or quasi-independent 
status by him. 1 It may be mentioned in passing that 
another feudatory of the Pandya rulers of this period was 
Semapillai, the son of Rajendra III and almost the last 
representative of the Chola line. His inscriptions come 
largely from the region of the modern Pudukkottah 
state. 2 

A few remarks on Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (cue. 
A.D. 1302-1303) remain to be offered. The latest regnal 
year mentioned in his records seems to be 17, correspond- 
ing to A.D. 1319. He had the surname Kodandaraman, 
and the coin with the legend Kbdandaraman on one side 
and the double fish on the other most probably belongs 
to him. 3 This king, unlike Vira Pandya, did not 
evidently long survive the defeats at the hands of 
Ravivarman Kulasekhara and Muppidi Nayaka. 


1 A.R.E . , 1926, part ii, para 34, where Vira Pandya is taken to be the 
king of a.d. 1253, There is no reason to do this as Nos. 92 of 1900 and 195 of 
1923 on which the identification rests mention only Vira Pandya and do not 
refer to the conquest of Ilam, Kongu, etc. 

2 A.R.E., 1915, part ii ; para 37 and 1923, part ii, para 45. 

3 A.R.E . , 1918, part ii, para 50. Contra K. V. S. Aiyar who ( op.cit 
p. 167) ascribes the title and the coin to the earlier king of the same name. 
But almost all the inscriptions mentioning the Kodandaraman gandi are 
Konerinmaikondan records and do not give the characteristic titles of the 
earlier ruler. The astronomical details given in some of them seem to imply 
that Kodandaraman was the later king. 



CHAPTER XV 


ADMINISTRATION AND SOCIAL LIFE UNDER 
THE PANDYAS OF THE SECOND EMPIRE 

BEFORE we take up the history of the later Pandyas, 
tracing the story of the decline of the Pandyan power, 
some attention may be given to the study of the adminis- 
tration and social life of the country under the Pandyas 
in the age of the Second Empire, in so far as this can be 
done with the aid of contemporary records. 

Besides the existence of written records, the careful 
maintenance in the capital of registers showing the rights 
in the land of individuals and corporations and of the state 
all over the country is very clearly and fully attested by 
contemporary inscriptions. Many of these records contain 
transactions in which rights in land are transferred from 
one party to another ; the stone inscriptions and copper- 
plate records appear to have been only copies of originals 
maintained in more perishable material which should have 
disappeared long ago, and this view is strengthened by the 
occurrence of the word Tulyam (equal) at the beginning or 
the end of many of these epigraphs. The frequent 
references to olai found in our records may also lead one 
to the conclusion that the originals of the documents were 
written on palm-leaves . 1 There appears to have been a 
regular procedure to be observed in the numerous cases 
in which lands were made over tax-free to temples or 
Brahmins by the state . 2 In such cases the first step was 

1 See A.R.E., 1919, part ii, para 24. 

2 See A.R.E., 1912, part ii, para 37 ; 1917, part ii, para 8 , and 1923 
part ii, para 56, 



216 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


to prefer a request to the king at some suitable hour and 
get his oral sanction to the proposal. This was usually 
done by a high official of the state. The king’s sanction 
was accompanied by an order that the necessary entries 
should be made in the revenue registers and the dlai and 
ulmri from the revenue department issued thereon. 
Sometimes, years elapsed from the date of the oral order 
before a single transaction was carried through all its 
stages and the grant became effective. The entries in the 
revenue registers appear to have been intended to effect a 
decrease in the revenues due to government and to record 
a corresponding increase in the income of the donee. 
Such transactions are generally found in triple or some- 
times even quadruple records, the main part of the contents 
being repeated thrice or four times, each time with a 
separate purpose. The first is generally a simple record 
oE the king’s oral sanction — Kelvin or Tirumugam as it is 
sometimes called. The exact significance of the dlai 
and the ulmri is not quite clear. The dlai generally 
begins with the Konerinmaikondan title of the king, 
without his proper name, and appears to have been an exe- 
cutive order to the officers on the spot to give effect to the 
king’s order with reference to the lands in question. The 
ulvari on the other hand partakes of the nature of a title- 
deed granted to the donee, and is signed by a number of 
revenue officers ( variyilar or varikkuruseyvar) . It seems 
likely that a similar method of maintaining records at the 
capital and communicating copies of the orders to the 
executive officers of the localities concerned was observed 
in other important matters as well. We have thus a 
Konerinmaikondan record of Maravarman Kulasekhara 
( acc . 1268) from AJwar Tirunagarf (No. 467 of 1909) which 
confers certain special privileges in the distribution of the 
prassdam in the temple on a certain Brahmin who 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 217 

recited the Puranas and the Itihasas in the temples of the 
place. 

We find mention in these records of numerous dues 
levied upon cultivated lands which formed the subject 
of the transfers and gifts mentioned above. It is not 
possible to ascertain the exact nature of most of these, but 
the names of the most important among them may be 
mentioned : Kadamai , antarUyam , viniydgam, accu-vari , 
kUriyavUracci , vetti-pdttam , panju-pih , sandiviggiraha- 
pperu , va'salperu , il&ncinaipperu , uludankudi , padi- 

kkaval , ponvari and others. W e also hear of tari-irai ; 
sekkirai, t attar a- ppattam , inavari, idaivari and others. 
It is clear from the records that some of these dues were 
paid in cash, but most of them in kind. Occasionally 
we get an idea of the rates of those dues especially in 
connection with devadcina lands. We learn, for instance, 
from an inscription dated in the eleventh year of a certain 
Sundara Pandya (No. 409 of 19x4) that the kadamai on 
some temple lands 1 was fixed at three kalams on each mU 
of land or one half of what prevailed among other deva- 
dfifrm lands, and that for the assessment, crops of full yield 
alone were taken into consideration, those that had 
suffered damage or failed altogether being left out of 
account. It is interesting that another record (No. 39 of 
1924) mentions the same rate of kadamai on temple 
lands, 2 viz. three kalams on every ma, but adds that each 
mU should yield forty kalams in order to be assessed at 
that rate. These inscriptions also contain other parti- 
culars which show that the rates of the dues varied accord- 
ing to the nature of the soil and the crops raised — thus th'e 
viniydgam. on every nia of land was one tuni (four kurunis 
or marakuls) of paddy if wet , and half tiramam (, dramma, 

1 See A.jR.E 1915, part ii, para 34. 

s 1924, part ii, para 38. 


28 



218 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


coin) if dry ; again, the vudakkada mai was half panam on 
every ma of garden land growing plantain, ginger, turmeric 
or betel. We are not in a position to say much regarding 
the kinds of taxes raised besides the dues from land. 
A record of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya of about the 
end of the thirteenth century A.D. from Tirukkaccur 
(Chingleput), No. 300 of 1909 — states that a tax of six, 
panams per annum was levied on each shop-keeper, on 
each loom of the kaikkolar and the saliyar, and on each 
oil-monger. 1 It is interesting to note that a king, Para- 
krama Pandya, whom it is not yet easy to identify, 
confers on a certain individual in the South Arcot 
district the right of collecting certain taxes as a remune- 
ration for his duties of pudikkaval (village watch). The 
collections were ‘ at the rate of one kalam of paddy on 
every ma of wet land and one panam on the same area of 
dry land, i/i6th panam on every areca palm, five panams 
on every ma of land which produced sugar-cane, kolundu , 
ginger, gingelly and plantain, and two panams a year for 
every house ( vU'sal ).’ 2 

When so much is uncertain about the number and 
nature of the taxes levied, any conclusions about their 
incidence and their pressure on the people will not be 
easy to formulate. However, some stray facts that can 
be gathered from the inscriptions may be set down here. 
But no general conclusions can be drawn from these 
exceptional instances which throw little light on the nor- 
mal system of administration. A record (No. 8 of 1913) 
of the famous Pandya emperor Jatavarman Sundara 
Pandya {acc. A.D. 1251) seems to register the curious 
fact that the villagers had to make use of the varam 


1 See A*R.E„ 1910, part ii, para 34. 

* A.R>E. } 1922, partii, para 33. 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 219 


and kadamai income from the vZrapparru and kadamaip- 
parru respectively, in securing the friendship of the 
agents of Sundara Pandya. Perhaps, as the official 
epigraphist suspects 1 ‘the villagers had actually to 
bribe them (the royal agents) if they were to attend 
to their avocations undisturbed.’ An inscription (No. 
8 1 of 1916) in the twenty-second year of Maravarman 
Kulasekhara I, corresponding to A.D. 1290, mentions 
that a certain chief captured a part of the country around 
a village and fixed the heavy sum of 4,000 (gold pieces?) 
as the tax levied from the inhabitants (urdm) of the 
village including avals u mcikkal and mudaligal for the 
current year and the year before, and that the villagers in 
order to pay this amount had to sell their property, cattle, 
etc. and some of them even their lands to a neighbour- 
ing temple. But this, evidently, was an act of 
oppression on the part of a petty local chieftain that 
had no sanction from the state. 2 Two inscriptions of 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya (Nos. 73 and 91 of 1924) 
of the first half of the thirteenth century A.D. from the 
Ramnad district seem to contain more direct evidence 
of heavy and oppressive taxation; one of them states 
that the people of two villages were very much impove- 
rished by the taxes they had to pay and began to 
feel ‘ that life in the woods would be preferable ’ ; and 
the other ‘ records that owing to the inability of the 
people to pay the revenue according to the old rates 
obtaining from the fifth year of the king, the standard of 
land-measure was altered ’ 3 a rather curious method, as it 

1 See A.R.E. , 19X3, part ii, para 44. 

* A.R.E., 1916, part ii, para 30. 

3 A.R>E. % 1924, part ii, para 31. See Nos. 309 and 310 Pxidukkottah 
for other instances under the same king ; 310 recording heavy taxes on 
divad&na, lands imposed by Kannadiyar. 



220 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


strikes us, of lightening the burden. Another interesting 
record (No. 357 of 1922) which probably belongs to the 
seventh year of Maravarman Kulaiekhara (acc. A.D. 1268 ) 
comes from the Trichinopoly District and ‘records that 
the revenue expected for the sixth and seventh years (of the 
king) from the village of Marudur in Urattur-kurram 
failed as there were no people to cultivate the fields ’ ; 
but in this case, the whole riadu in which the village was 
located took upon itself the burden of the taxes due to 
the royal treasury from Marudur, and was in return 
allowed 1 to give away Marudur to two individuals for 
providing offerings to the god ’ in the neighbourhood 
for the prosperity of the nadu . 1 A record of Jatavarman 
Sundara Pandya from the Tanjore district (No. 93 of 
19 1 1) ‘supplies the information that a registered tenant 
of certain lands having run away and his friends, who 
stood personal surety for him, being asked to pay the 
taxes which had fallen into arrears until the twenty-second 
year of the king, they got the houses and the fields of the 
tenant to be sold to the temple and redeemed their res- 
ponsibility in the transaction.’ 2 Another record of the 
same king (No. 289 of 1913) from Chidambaram contains 
an order for the remission of certain taxes on some lands 
which, being close to the sea, ‘ had become filled up with 
sand and overgrown with weeds ’. We may also note 
that a Solavandan inscription of the second year of a 
Maravarmam Sundara Pandya ‘ records the remission of 
cer ta i n taxes on the occasion of the king’s coronation.’ 
(No. 80 of 1905). 

We get just enough information in regard to the 
forms of land tenure to enable us to see that the condi- 
tions of tenancy cultivation varied in accordance with 

1 See A.R.E., 1923, part ii, para S5. 

2 A.R.E.., 1911, part ii, para 39. 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 221 

the locality ; that shares in the produce between land- 
lord and tenant often differed according to the nature of 
the crops raised, the tenant’s share increasing with his 
part in the raising of the produce ; and that, besides a 
share in the produce of the land, the landlord often had 
sundry other small claims on the tenant which were met by 
payments in cash or kind. An inscription from Alangudi 
(Tanjore) of a certain Kulasekhara (No. 509 of 1920) — 
probably the king whose accession was in A.D. 1314 — 
is very interesting; but there are difficulties in using 
it, as the only summary of the record that is available is 
not clear on many points ; it gives an unusually detailed 
account of the rights and duties of landlords and culti- 
vators. 1 Some records of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya 
{acc. A.D. 1276) describe the rather interesting terms 
on which lands of a certain temple were leased 
to tenants — the name of the tenure being Kunippidi - 
patpu . 2 Thus one record (No. 66 of 1916) says that the 
lessee or tenant shall enjoy the lands ‘ after repairing the 
tanks in disuse and bringing under cultivation such of 
the lands as are covered with jungle and that while the 
lands are being enjoyed in this manner, he shall pay to 
the temple for the pa'san, a melvSram of one in three ; 
for the cultivation of jioksr, ererr <6»>, utujpi, g0®na;, 

«0£x>l/, Osir(tpi^a, «0&ir, Q&iha(t£i§ir , 

a/raotp, s uqgp&o, . . , etc., as well as trees 

ldit , ueor, usirA-pm ■£, 0«s rs$0©fi, Q/feie@, 

$}gtiumu, etc., one in five shall be given; forcocoanut 
and areca palms one in seven and for dry crops, 
according to the yield, one in seven. In the case 
of lands which had been brought under cultivation 


1 See A.R.E.> 1921, part ii, para 38. 

2 A.R.E,, 1916, part ii, para 28. 



222 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


by clearing jungle he shall have to pay one-tenth 
in the first year, one-ninth in the second year, one- 
eighth in the third year, one-seventh in the fourth year 
and that for all subsequent years a permanent melvaram 
of one in three shall be paid.’ Another very similar 
record from the same place gives slightly different rates 
of me l v ar am for crops other than pasan. 1 In either 
instance it is distinctly stated that the donee should not 
keep the lands without cultivating them and that 
mounds and low grounds should be levelled and the 
jungle removed.’ 

We have very instructive references to the irrigation 
arrangements that prevailed in the middle ages in the 
country under the Pandyan rulers. A very interesting- 
record from Sarkar Periyapalayam (Coimbatore) dated in 
the twenty-second year of 'a certain Sundara Pandya 1 
contains details as to the duties of the person who 
was appointed to be in chajge of an irrigation tank and 
channel and an anicut at Suralur, all of which belonged 
to a temple. ‘ The villagers and the temple trustees 
stipulated that, in consideration of certain income and 
privileges granted to him, the fisherman Pillaiyan • • • 
had to look after the said anicut (anai) and the channel, 
had to see that the water did not escape above the dam 
but was properly directed into the tank, notice the 
defects, if any, in the tank and the dam and report the 
matter to the villagers and the temple authorities and 
that on this information the village servant ( vettiyul ) had 
to repair the dam, receiving as remuneration for that 
duty a piece of rent-free land and some payments in 
grain. Pillaiyan was also to collect the taxes vaykkal- 

1 There is the possibility that this king was not of the regular Pandya 
line, but one of the Kongu Pandyas of whom not much that is certain is 
known. See 1909, part ii, para 26 end. 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 223 

pattam (canal tax) and pasipatMm (fishing tax) from the 
temple tenants at Suralur.’ A record (No. 14 of 1909) 
at Pon Amaravati (Pudukkottah) contains an order dated 
in the eighth year of Tribhuvanacakravartin Sundara 
Pandya Deva forbidding the temple authorities to take 
water from Idangalikaman, evidently for purposes of 
irrigation. Another record from Pudukkottah (No. 380 
of 1914), of probably the same king, states that a dispute 
between the authorities of a temple and an individual as 
regards the ownership of a stream was settled by provid- 
ing that, ‘ after irrigating a certain specified field, one 
half of the income from fishing in the river should be made 
over to the temple authorities, while the other half was 
to be retained by the other party to the dispute.’ 1 
Unless an inscription in the tenth year of Jatavarman 
Parakrama Pandya (fourteenth century A.D.) from Tiru- 
malai (Ramnad) has been grossly misunderstood, it may 
be taken to record a very interesting transaction. 2 Two 
villages and a tank irrigating lands in them are taken up 
by a temple from government after paying arrears of 
taxes due to it from a defaulting cultivator ; the temple 
authorities had evidently miscalculated their capacity 
to use the lands and underrated the difficulties in the 
way of cultivating them properly and apparently were 
unable to pay their dues to the state. Then, in the pre- 
sence of the king, they sold the tanks and the lands to 
two brothers for a sum of money with which they set up 
the images of Ganapati and Manikkavasagar, and it was 
agreed that after that, the dues which the brothers had to 
pay on the lands they had bought, and which were fixed 
in detail, were to be used ‘ for providing for the sacred 


A.JR.E,, 1915, part ii, para 32. 
1924, part ii, para 38, 



224 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


bath and offerings and worship of the images newly set 
up.’ It is not clear if the newly fixed dues were less 
onerous than the old ones. Perhaps they were. Two 
other records (Nos. 15 and 16 of 1924) of the same king 
from the same place are dated in the fifth and ninth 
years of the king; the earlier record mentions some 
lands as having been sold by the assembly of the village 
for a certain sum of money ‘ with the exemption of water 
taxes in compensation for the labour involved in re- 
claiming them from their waste condition ’ ; and the 
later record registers the resale of the same land for over 
twelve times the original value at which it was sold by 
the village assembly, evidently a case of an extraordin- 
arily successful land improvement encouraged by the 
village assembly. It is to be noted carefully how small 
a part in all these transactions belongs to the officials 
of the king, and how much is left to local and indi- 
vidual initiative. It may be noted also that early in 
the reign of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya {acc. A.D. 1251) 
a new flood embankment substantially built on the side 
of the Coleroon was raised with the aid of funds collect- 
ed in the form of a special cess from the inhabitants in 
the neighbourhood. 1 

Some evidence on the administration of justice is 
available, and this may be briefly reviewed. Most of 
the references are to criminal offences, and they do not 
shed much light directly on the machinery of legal 
administration. We learn casually that in one instance 
a person was tied to the leg of a buffalo-bull and 
dragged for having murdered a Brahmin. 2 Three 
records from the Ramnad district of the time of 

1 A.R.E.> 1919, part ii, para 26 and Inscriptions Nos. 518 and 510 of 
1918. 

2 A.R.E ti 1909, part ii, para 28 end. 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 22S 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya give a continuous account 
of a single crime and the manner in which it was 
dealt with. 1 A temple priest, Vamanabhatta by name, 
who was returning home at night from the temple, 
was, for some unknown reason, hacked to death in 
a street by hired assassins employed by one Sattiya- 
navan. The murderers took refuge in a neighbouring 
place’ and afterwards escaped from it, when attempts 
were made to capture them. ‘ Thereupon, the belong- 
ings of Sattiyanavan in Karuverkuricci consisting 
of lands, houses, gardens and servants both male and 
female, were confiscated and made over, as a gift to the 
temple of Sokka-Narayana.’ Subsequently, the murder of 
Vamanabhatta was avenged and Sattiyanavan was killed, 
we do not hear by whom or under what circumstances ; 
then his son made an appeal, less than four months after 
the date of the original murder, to the authorities, the 
Srivaisnavas and others connected with the temple ; he 
said that he had been ruined by the confiscation of 
his father's property, himself having been no party to the 
murder, and that he would pay 800 gold coins to the temple 
treasury in lieu of the confiscated property. His plea was 
accepted and his father’s lands, houses, gardens and 
servants both male and female were restored to him 
subject' only to the additional condition that he should 
maintain a service (sandi) in the temple. We also learn 
that, in the interval, the property of another person had 
been confiscated, but afterwards, most of it was restored, 
psobably because he was able to establish his innocence. 
Some points come out clearly in this case and these are 
worth noting. Justice is administered in a rough and 
ready manner by the local authorities of the village. A 


1 Ins. 301 , 302 and 303 of 1923 and 1924, part ii, para 77. 

29 



226 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


criminal who is notoriously guilty of a serious offence, 
in this case the murder of a Brahmin, and escapes punish- 
ment, not only forfeits his property, but becomes more 
or less an outlaw who may be killed with impunity by 
anybody. The property that is forfeited under such 
conditions enriches the temple, and neither the king nor 
the villagers seem to touch it, probably in literal fulfil- 
ment of the injunction of Manu in the matter (ix."243). 
When the murderer has paid for his offence with his life, 
the bulk of his property is restored to his heir, double 
punishment for the same offence being avoided, so to 
say. A curious inscription from the Chingleput district 
contains a strange narrative of an organized attempt at 
brigandage and terrorism on the part of some unlawful 
persons of Uttipakkam and the manner in which the 
offenders were dealt with. 1 Five Brahmins whose names 
are recorded, and some Vellalas ‘ gave up the duties 
legitimate to their caste, and following the profession 
of the lower classes, wore weapons, murdered Brahmins, 
cut off (their) ears, insulted the Brahmin ladies, commit- 
ted robbery, destroyed cattle and sold them ’. On a 
former occasion complaints had been made against these 
very men to the ruling authorities and they had been 
beaten and fined, without being actually imprisoned. 
But they behaved no better afterwards and the inhabitants 
of the neighbourhood again complained of their mis- 
deeds to prince Pottappiyarayar, the ruler of the division, 

1 Ins. 315 of 1909 and A.R.E. t 1910, part ii, para 34. I do net 
agree with Mr. Krishna Sastri in his view that the payment of the balance 
of the criminals’ property for charities in the temples was made « in order 
that these misguided people may, as a consequence, improve in their 
character and become at least in the future, useful and loyal' subjects.’ The 
king evidently had lost all hopes of them, and the temples appear to have 
been the residuary claimants of 1 all escheated property that was not taken 
by the state* 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 22 7 

who sent a contingent of Malayali soldiers to apprehend 
the criminals ; two of the Brahmins in the gang, 
Atkondavilli and Pambanaiyan, were captured and impri- 
soned, but not before some of the soldiers lost their lives 
in the conflict with them, and others were stabbed, shot 
with arrows, or deprived of their weapons by the bandits. 
When, some time later, the two. prisoners along with some 
others were being taken to the king’s presence, ‘ the 
three other Brahmin brothers who were still at large and 
who, in the meantime, had collected together a number 
of people, attacked and killed the party which was lead- 
ing the captive brothers to the king, liberated them and 
escaped. The news of this action of the rebels having 
reached the king, he issued the stringent orders that they 
be captured wherever found and punished according to 
the rules applicable to the lower classes, that their houses 
and other hereditary property be sold to temples and 
other charitable institutions, that the money thus realized 
be credited to the treasury in payment of the fine imposed 
on them and that the balance, if any, be presented 
to the temples as a permanent charity in the name of 
the criminals.’ We do not know how the offenders 
fared after their outlawry by the king, but we learn that 
the order regarding the sale of their properties was lite- 
rally fulfilled. These occurrences belong to the reign of 
a Jatavarman Sundara Pandya who was perhaps the 
famous ruler of that name who came to the throne in 
a.D. 1251 or some later monarch. We have an instance 
ofigross mismanagement on the part of a temple manager 
coupled with misconduct with £ a Brahmin widow from a 
foreign country ’ ; complaints against the manager's con- 
duct were made by the assembly of Tirupputtur (Ramnad 
district) about 1291 A.D. to the ruling king Maravarman 
Kulasekhara ; but the king’s judgment is unknown as the 



228 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


end of the inscription (No. 125 of 1908) islost. 1 It seems 
to have been the rule that all offences were in the first 
instance dealt with by the village officers and the village 
assembly of the locality, and that only when these autho- 
rities proved unequal to the task, any matter was submitted 
to the king’s officers, or, in an extreme case, to the king 
himself. An inscription from Pudukkottah (No. 372 
of 1906) of about the middle of the thirteenth century "A.D. 
1 refers to a meeting of the inhabitants of districts, cities 
and villages in K5nadu. The pujaris of the temple Of 
Tirunalakkunramudaiya-Nayanar had made away with 
the cash as well as the jewels of the temple. One of 
them confessed to having taken a portion of the lost cash 
and shared it with a carpenter. The other pujaris 
denied all knowledge of the lost property, but were 
implicated by the tormer. The lying pujaris were 
orderd to be taken to tne court (dharmasana) where they 
were required to handle a (red-hot) ploughshare. The 
hands of all of them were burnt, and then they confessed 
their guilt. They were all ordered to be dealt with as 
sinners against the god Siva ( Sivadrohins ).’ 2 The 
references in this record to the dharmUsana — perhaps the 
king’s court — and the ordeal of the ploughshare must be 
noted. Another record furnishes an instance of the re- 
cognition of the right of private warfare among’ local 
chieftains so long as it did not interfere with the peace- 
ful villagers in the neighbourhood (No. 359 of 1914). 

A few civil disputes with the manner of their settle- 
ment are also recorded. In one case (No. 571 of 1920) 
there was a dispute among Bhattars connected with 
a temple near Kattumannarkoyil in South Arcot as to 


x 1909, part ii, para 28. 

9 . AtR.M', 1907, part it, para 27, 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 


228 


who had the right to perform the puja in the temple, 
and the matter was arbitrated by the assembly with 
the aid of proofs produced by either party to the dispute; 
and it is interesting to note that one side pleaded 
prescription as having enjoyed the right * from the time 
of Kulottunga Choladeva II who covered (the temple) with 
gold, Rajarajadeva II, Perumal Tribhuvana Viradeva, 
Raj^tajadeva III, Avani-alappirandan-Kopperunjinga- 
deva, Perumal Sundara Pandyadeva, Perumal Kulasekha- 
radeva, Vira Pandyadeva and even up to the eleventh year 
of the ruling king, Perumal Sundara Pandyadeva, as a 
matter of course 1 The succession of kings who ruled 
in the locality appears to be very correctly mentioned here 
and that fixes the time of the record somewhere late in the 
thirteenth or early in the fourteenth century A. D. About 
the same period or a little later (more exactly, Saka 1298, 
A.D. 1376), we hear of a long-standing dispute in twenty- 
four villages in the region of the modern Ramnad 
district between the caste people and the pariahs in 
the villages, resulting at one stage in some loss of life on 
both sides ; this dispute seems to have been settled 
ultimately in an amicable manner by the intercession of 
a certain Gangaiyarayan, evidently a royal official. The 


1 1921, part ii, para 40. The epigraphist adds : * It is interesting 

in this connection to note that, in the assembly that met to decide this 
question sat, among others, pilgrims from many districts and people from 
different parts of the kingdom. It is not known whether these outsiders had 
any voice in the deliberations of the assembly. However, the fact remains 
that the assembly was not a packed body and that public opinion was invited 
as a healthy factor in the deliberations of the assembly.’ I am inclined to 
think that nothing more is meant in the record than that the proceedings of 
the assembly were public, even as trials take place in open court to-day; 
but I do not have the test of the inscription. It is, however, extremely 
unlikely that the assembly had a fluctuating constitution, or that they were 
directly influenced in their judgment by the * public opinion * of the pilgrims 
and others 



230 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


understanding that both sides accepted was ‘ that the 
pariahs should beat the drum ( rnum'sa ) for the caste 
people on all occasions, good and bad, and receive in 
return a padakku of paddy and a fowl. Every resident 
of the parru who was entitled to the privilege should 
measure out in the harvest season, irrespective of the 
yield, a kalam and a tuni of paddy (to the pariahs) for 
this service.’ 1 It may be noted, by the way, that iifthe 
time of a Sundara Pandya we have an instance of a lady, 
by name Perungarunaiyatti alias Devargalammai, who 
was counted among the ny ay at tar (committee of justice ?) 
in the well-known village of Uttaranmerur (probably 
modern Uttiramallur near Kanchipuram) 2 ; and that ‘ a 
record of Maravarman Kulasekhara (acc. A.D. 1268) from 
Klladi in the Madura district (No. 449 of 1906) refers to 
the nirvahasabhai (executive committee) of the village.’ 3 
The part played by the temple in the general life 
of every village is very largely attested by our epigraphs. 
We have seen enough to realize that the most fruitful 
sources of our knowledge of the history of the country 
are stone inscriptions preserved in temples and copper- 
plate grants. Of these the stone records in temples are 
more numerous and varied in their interest. In addition 
to throwing light on matters like land-tenure, revenue 
administration and the administration of law and justice, 
these records enable us to reconstruct with some 
confidence the part of the temple in the general social 
economy of the time. It is clear that in the middle 
ages in South India the temple was much more than 
a place of common worship. ‘ Temple worship is hot so 


1 A.R.E., 1924, part ii, para 34. 

* A.R.E., 1910, part ii, para 35. 

3 A.R.E 1907, part ii, para 26. 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 231 

important for the Hindus as church services for the 
Christian. They set more store on home ceremonies 
and on contemplation h 1 And yet, every village had its 
temple, and every temple was the object of universal 
attention at the hands of the princes and the people 
of the land. The temple is historically more important 
as a social and economic entity than as a religious 
institution ; the history of Hinduism, even in South 
India, is much more than the history of her temples. 
But the story of the social life of the country, of her 
common people, centres round the temple in a manner, 
that is perhaps equalled only in mediaeval Europe, 
although with this vital difference, that in South India 
the villagers held the temple, while in Europe the church 
or the monastery held the village. 

The temple was the centre of universal culture. 
The best architecture and sculpture and such painting 
as there was, were lavished on it. Fine arts like music, 
dancing and jewel-making flourished in the temples and 
primarily on their account. Several temples contained 
libraries and were centres of religious and secular 
learning. The drama, closely allied to the dance, was 
promoted by some temples. Above all, the temple was 
for the village the most powerful economic corporation 
which not only sustained, by means of its lavish endow- 
ments, the arts of civilized existence, but enabled the 
villagers to turn to it in times of need for economic 
support, if not also for purposes of physical defence. 

A few facts, gleaned from a mass of similar data, may 
now be set down to confirm these statements about the 
temple and its part in the life of mediaeval South India. 
An inscription of about A.D. 1260 from Madambakkam 


Sir Ch. Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism , p. lxxxiv, 



232 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


(Chingleput) dated in the tenth year of Jatavarman 
SundaraPandya (No. 322 of 1911) states that ‘ the assem- 
bly of the village seeing that it was not possible to main- 
tain the lamps, offerings and festivals in the temple fro.m 
the income available for that purpose, assigned the north 
division ( vadak'Uru ) “ with its wet lands, garden lands, 
houses and house-sites” to the temple, but retained 
therein 3,000 kuli of land with houses and house-site§ for 
their own use. They decided also to pay the dues 
on them such as pon-vari and nUttu-vari from their own 
pockets and agreed that “ if ever, owing to unfortunate 
circumstances, we are induced to sell this land, we shall 
do so, for the price at which it then sells, to the sacred 
treasury of the temple ’ V 1 An inscription from Kama- 

rasavalli (Trichinopoly) of the tenth year of Jatavarman 
Vlra Pandya (No. 88 of 1914) gives an idea of the manner 
in which funds were raised by the inhabitants of the vala- 
nudu for effecting certain repairs to the temple. They 
agreed to pay to the temple a small cess on all merchan- 
dise sold by them; e.g. one-fourth panam on each bundle 
of cloths for women, on each podi of pepper, on each 
padi of areca-nuts, one ka'su on each podi of paddy, etc. 2 
A record from Alagapuri (Ramnad) (No. 109 of 1924) 
dated in the fifteenth year of Maravarman Kulasekhara- 
deva contains a gift, by the assembly of Alagapuri, of all 
the taxes due to it by the residents of the streets round 
the temple for the provision of lamps in the temple. 
Another record from Mannarkoil in the nineteenth year 
of Kulasekharadeva (No. 408 of 19x6) mentions the acqui- 
sition by the king’s order {niyoga) of private houses for 
a second prUkara to the temple being built according to 


1 A.R.E. } 1912, part ii, para 36. 

* A.R.E., 1915, partii, para 36, 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 233 

the Sastra. A curious record from Tirumalai (Ramnad) 
in the fifth year of the reign of Jatavarman Kulasekhara 
(No. 33 of 1924) mentions 1 the meeting of the big 
assembly of the Mahesvaras of the eighteen districts 
{u>emi—eotM) in the hall called Tirugnanasambandan* 
tiruveduttukkatti in the temple of Suradeva-Isvaramud- 
aiya-Nayanar at Alagaimanagar to show their appre- 
ciation of the services rendered by a devaradiyal to 
several temples of the locality, such as, setting up of 
certain images wanting in the temples and the construc- 
tion of prSkaras, by conferring on her family the 
hereditary honour of sounding the conch and the drum 
at the time of entry into the temple.’ 1 The villagers of 
Vayalur (Chingleput) came to an agreement in the 
eighth year of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (A.D. 1258), 
by which they released all the lands which belonged to 
four temples which were probably all situated in Vaya- 
lur, and relinquished their previous hold on them, 
whether that was by mortgage or by purchase. In 
addition to this, they undertook never again to hold these 
lands, either as purchasers or as mortgagees, on pain 
of * treason against Siva 1 and ‘ treason against the 
king’. 2 A record from Tirupputtur (Ramnad) of a 
Tribhuvanacakravartin Kulasekharadeva (No, 101 of 
1908) ’who might have ruled earlier than A.D. 1200 and 
was perhaps the Kulasekhara of the civil war, states 
that the assembly (q psouies. is^.) of Tirupputtur wished 
to go to Madura to meet king Kulasekhara and accord- 
ingly made certain temple lands rent-free on receipt of a 
specified sum for the expenses of the journey. 3 An 

1 1924, part ii f para 26. 

2 A.R.E., 1909, part ii, para 26 and No. 363 of 1908. 

3 For the date suggested see EJ. t vol. xi, p. 137. 

There is another similar transaction in the same place recorded in 103 
of 1908. See also No. 535 of 1920 for yet another instance* 

30 



234 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


inscription from Sermadevi (No. 695 of 1916) mentions a 
grant of land to a library ( Sarasvati B bandar a) in a 
temple in the locality, and records containing endow- 
ments for the recitation and study of the Vedas and 
Puranas in temples are frequently met with. A 
record (No. 557 of 1916) from Pattamadai (near Serma- 
devi, Tinnevelly district) is of more than ordinary 
interest as it registers a grant to a dancing girF for 
enacting a drama, not specified, on certain festival days. 1 

We see that the temples also furnished numerous 
occasions for disputes on various matters. A record in 
the sixteenth year of Maravarman Sundara Pandya 
(No. 141 of 1902) states that the authorities of the 
temple of Devanayakapperumal in Tiruvendipuram 
decided to follow the system of worship practised in all 
other temples, and we have no means of knowing the 
nature of the innovation that necessitated this rather 
conservative affirmation regarding the manner of wor- 
ship. A record of the late thirteenth century (No. 432 
of 1913) narrates a dispute between the chetties and the 
oil-mongers (vaniya-nagarattar) of Aragalur (Salem 
district) with regard to the management of temple festi- 
vals, and apparently the chetties succeeded in the end. 2 
A case of dispute between two bhattars as to the right of 
conducting worship in the temple which was settled by 
the intercession of the village assembly has been men- 
tioned before. 3 There were also disputes as to the order of 
precedence in which the sacred ashes in Siva temples and 
the prasadam in the Visnu temples were to be received, - 
or the rope of the god’s car had to be held in drawing it 


1 A.R.E., 1917, part ii, para 11 ; also 1923, partii, para 50, 

2 A.R.E., 1914, part ii, para 23. 

9 See No. 571 of 1920 and pp, 228-9 (ante). 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 235 

and such other matters. 1 About the middle of the 
thirteenth century a rather acrimonious quarrel between 
the Saivas and the Vaisnavas representing the two 
adjoining temples at Tirumaiyyam in the Pudukkottah 
state is said to have resulted in a cessation of worship 
in both the temples, and to have been finally settled by 
the mediation of a military officer of the Hoysala Vlra 
Somesvara, Appanna Dandanayaka by name. 2 

The effects of the Muhammadan invasion early in the 
fourteenth century and the part played by Vijayanagar in 
the reaction against Islam are graphically mentioned in a 
temple record (No. 64 of 1916) in the thirty- first year of a 
certain Maravarman Vlra Pandyajwhich says: ‘ The times 
wereTulukkan times; the devad&na lands of the gods were 
taxed with kudimai ; the temple: worship, however, had 
to be conducted without any reduction ; the ulavu or 
cultivation of the temple lands were (sic.) done by turns 
by the tenants of the village ; at this juncture Kampala 
Udaiyarcame (on his southern campaign), destroyed the 
Tulukkan, established orderly government throughout 
the country and appointed many chiefs ( myakkanmUr ) 
for inspection and supervision in order that the worship 
in all temples might be revived regularly as of old.’ It 
is further stated that some of the dancing girls of the 
temple (devaradiyzr) died, some became very poor, and 
many were ready to migrate to other distant places. 
For the preservation of the original status of the temple, 
some of its land which was enjoyed as kaniyMchi by 
k cer tain Narasinga Devar was now sold to another 
person, the former having died without leaving an heir, 
for the maintenance of ten dancing girls including 


1 Nos. 108 of 1916 and 467 of 1909. 

* A.R.B., 1907, part ii, para 26 and No. 387 of 1906. 



236 THE P ANDY AN KINGDOM 

provision for ‘ food, betel-leaf, cloth and houses in the 
street Pavanangakarantiruvidi.’ 1 

Besides temples, there were mathas representing 
different sects of Hinduism which were also recipients 
of several gifts from the king and the people of the 
country, some of which have been incidentally touched 
upon. There is some reason to believe that the class of 
Ekadanda scmnynsins was rather influential in the south 
of the Pandya country. Their presence in the Veda- 
vyasamatha in the Bhaktavatsala temple in Sermadevi is 
mentioned in one record (No. 544 of I 9 I 3 0 » an< ^ another 
(No. 435 of 1906) refers to a similar institution in 
Murappunadu, near Tinnevelly. 2 Buddhism and Jainism 
seem also to have survived to the middle ages ; they 
must have carried on an obscure existence ; yet there is 
some reason to think that Jainism had a little more 
importance than Buddhism. In a record (No. 113 of 1904) 
from Tiruccopurm (South Arcot) dated in the reign 
of Jatavarman alias Tribhuvanacakravartin Sundara 
Pandya, a certain Sariputtira Pandita figures as a donor 
and there is a reference to ‘ Sangattar ’ most probably 
members of the Buddhist Sangha. A record (No. 358 
of 1908) from Mangadu (Chingleput) of the reign of 
the famous Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (acc. A.D. 1251) 
contains a gift of land as Palliccandam to a certain 
Palli— >a Jain temple— whose name is illegible. An 
inscription from Pudukkottah (No. 367 of 1904— Amma- 
sattram) of a certain Sundara Pandya mentions one 
Dharmadeva Acarya as the pupil of Kanakacandrapandita r . 
Although the second name is in part a conjectural 
restoration, there seems to be little reason to doubt that 


1 A.jR.E., 3916, part ii, para 33. 

2 1912, part ii, para 38, 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 237 

we have here the names of two Jaina Acaryas of the 
time. 

These gleanings of the social, economic and religious 
life of the times may be concluded by a reference to a few 
records which are of some special interest in themselves. 
Two epigraphs of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya {acc. A.D. 
1251) may first be noted; one of them (No. 218 of 1901) 
mentions the opening and settlement of a new street 
by a private individual in the environs of the Agastyesvara 
temple in Magaral (Chingleput) and is dated in the seventh 
year of the king’s reign. Another (No. 2 77 of 1913) from 
the Nataraja temple at Chidambaram dated six years later 
records the foundation of a new village and deserves notice 
in a little more detail. 

‘The village granted was called Vikrama-Pandya- 
Caturvedimangalam evidently after the name of an un- 
known brother or father (nayanar) of Sundara- Pandya. 
In the centre of it was also established the temple of 
Vikrama Pandyesvara similarly designated. The village 
was intended to accommodate primarily 108 Brahmins 
among whom were many well- versed in Vedas and Sastras 
and able to expound the same. Four velis of the land 
were purchased for the village site and included within it 
the temple premises, the house sites of the 108 Brahmins 
mentioned above, of men who were in charge of the village 
library ( Sarasvati-bhandarattur ) and of other village 
servants ( Panimakkal ). In purchasing the land with its 
trees, wells, paths, channels (?), embankments indicating 
land divisions (bkagasraya) and all other benefits, the 
rights and privileges of the old tenants and title-holders 
were completely bought up. The right of way was secured 
for the Brahmins to walk to the tank Kavarkulam every 
day for the purpose of performing the sandhyUvandana 
prayers. Land for grazing the cattle was also provided 



238 


THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 


for. Also for the maintenance of the 108 Brahmin 
families and others, were acquired 1 1 7§ veils of land in the 
village of Rajasikhamaninallur alias Puliyangudi. The 
Brahmins evidently received each a full veil of land. 
The following other vrittis were also settled : — teachers of 
Vedas, 3; teachers of Sutras, 1 ; two doctors, if; ambada- 
yas (?), \ ; village accountant, i ; drummer, £ ; potto, f ; 
blacksmith, £ ; carpenter, k ; goldsmith, f ; Irankolli, 3/8; 
barber, 3/8; washerman, village watchman ( padi-kappUn ) 
f , and the village-servant ( Vettiyan) 1/8. Of the natta land 
outside the agrahara ‘Brahmin quarter’, three parts 
were set apart for Vellan-kaniyalar and the remainder for 
other professionals (?). The fruit trees, gardens, ponds, 
waterpits, grazing grounds, irrigation channels, unculti- 
vable waste, embankments (?) of fields and pathways, 
included in the village site were made over (to the donees) 
as per customary law. All taxes were excused, but it was 
stipulated that from the fourteenth year of the king 500 
kalam of superior paddy, was to be measured out every 
year to the temple at Chidambaram for conducting the 
special service, Ellandalaiyana-Perumal-Sandi, and that 
all lands which belonged to temples ( tirunamattu - 
kkani) must be demarcated by stones marked with the 
trident.’ 1 

A record (No. 429 of 1917) of Maravarman Sundara 
Pandya is said to contain a reference to an assembly of 
512 but nothing more is known of it now and the text is 
not yet available. Records of different kings from 
several villages in the Tinnevelly district seem to contain 
references to certain military institutions, the nature of 
which is by no means quite clear. Records from 
Kilappavur call them Munai-edirmogar and Tennavan- 


1 1914, part if, para 18, 



SOCIAL LIFE IN THE SECOND EMPIRE 


239 


apattudavigal ; their leaders are described as danda-nUya- 
kam-beyvSr. Inscriptions from other places contain 
references to Padaikkanvar and 1 in some cases the big 
community of military classes (perumbadayom) with their 
ten commands are (sic) mentioned and are stated to have 
belonged to the tantra or mahatantra . ’ 1 Here again 
the texts of the records are not before us and we have to 
depend on summaries in the epigraphical reports. 


1 1918, part ii, para 43 and 1917, para ii, para 11. See ante 

ch. xiii for Tennavan apatudavigaj. 



CHAPTER XVI 


THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY AND LATER. 

DECLINE AND END 

JaTAvarman VlRA PANDYA continued to rule for several 
years after the first Muhammadan invasion of the Pandya 
country and, as has been seen, late records of his reign 
of about a.D. 1340 show evidence of the recovery of the 
land from the ravages of the invaders. It is, however, 
difficult to trace in any detail the course of events in 
the Pandyan kingdom in the fourteenth century. The 
chronicles relating to the period narrate wild and fanciful 
stories which have sometimes been accepted as history, 
but are by no means reconcilable with the evidence 
furnished by the epigraphs. The general outline of the 
story is clear. The establishment of the Muhammadan 
power in Madura about A- D. 1330 must have deprived 
the Pandyan rulers, Jatavarman Vira Pandya and his 
co-regents of their hold on their capital. The evidence 
from epigraphs, however, shows clearly that even the loss 
of Madura did not mean the immediate disappearance 
of the power of the Pandyas from the districts of Madura, 
Ramnad and Tanjore. Till about the middle of the 
century or even a little later, the Pandyan rulers appear 
to have held sway over parts of these districts. 

It is not within the scope of this work to describe 
in any detail the story of the Sultanate of Madura 
and the barbarous misdeeds that disgraced the short 
period of its precarious existence. The subjects of the 
Sultans seem never to have reconciled themselves to the 
rule of the Turuskas ( Tulukkar ) as they were called, and 



THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY AND LATER 241 


the Hindu rulers of the neighbouring kingdoms, especi- 
ally the Hoysalas of Dvarasamudra, made repeated 
efforts to suppress the Sultanate. It is not possible to 
say what part the Pandya rulers played in these early 
struggles with the newly established power of the Sultans, 
but it is perhaps of some significance that the reconse- 
cration of the Siva temple at Tirupputtur about A.D. 1340 
coincides, in point • of time, with the last great struggle 
of Vira Ballala III against the Sultans which ended so 
disastrously for the Hoysala two years later in the 
battle of Kannanur. 1 2 It seems probable that the Pandya 
rulers were carrying on the resistance against the 
Sultans in the Madura country, while the Hoysala ruler 
attacked Kannanur- Koppam which commanded the 
road to Madura and was held by the Madura 
Sultans. 

The failure of the Hoysalas in the war against the 
Madura Sultanate secured for it a respite of a little over 
two decades. During this period the country seems to 
have suffered from the effects of terrible misrule, but the 
Pandyan rulers who had lost all capacity for resistance 
were permitted to lead an obscure and unhonoured exist- 
ence. It must be noticed, however, that their inscriptions 
are found in the districts of Ramnad, Madura, Tanjore 
and South Arcot and the Pudukkottah state almost up to 
A.D. 1370.* The state of the country under its Muham- 
madan rulers can be inferred from the observations of the 
African traveller, Ibn Batuta, who spent some time in 
the Sultan’s court in the early years of the Sultanate. 
It also forms the subject of a poetic description in the 


1 See Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, South India and Her Muhammadan Invaders, 
pp. 183-4. 

2 Nos. 362 of 1904 ; 527 of 1926 ; 78 of 1918 ; 100 of 1897 ; 395 of 1906 
and others ; also Nos. 455-S of the Pudukkottah list and others. 

31 



242 THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 

Madhurmijayam of Ganga Devi . 1 The Madhuravijayam 
is an almost contemporary poem in the conventional epic 
style in Sanskrit dealing with the conquest of the Madura 
Sultanate by Kumara Kampana alias Virakamparaya. 
It is a composition of considerable literary merit by the 
wife of Kampana, and even in its present mutilated condi- 
tion, the poem throws much welcome light on the- 
political conditions of the time. We learn from the 
poem that some time after Kampana conquered the 
Sambuvaraya of the Rajagambhlrarajya and established 
his rule over T ondaimandalam (Tundlra) with his capital 
at Marakatanagarl (another name for Kanchl?), a mysteri- 
ous lady appeared before Kamparaya and narrated to 
him in detail the wicked deeds of the Yavanas (Muham- 
madans) in the southern country. She said : 1 The temples 
in the land have fallen into neglect as worship in them 
has been stopped. Within their walls the frightful 
howls of jackals have taken the place of the sweet 
reverberations of the mridanga. Like the Turushkas 
who know no limits, the Kaveri has forgotten her ancient 
boundaries and brings frequent destruction with her 
floods. The sweet odour of the sacrificial smoke and 
the chant of the Vedas have deserted the villages 
{agraharas) which are now filled with the foul smell of 
roasted flesh and the fierce noises of the ruffianly 
Turuskas. The suburban gardens of Madura present 
a most painful sight ; many of their beautiful cocoanut 
palms have been cut down ; and on every side are seen 
rows of stakes from which swing strings of human skulls 
strung together. The TamraparnI is flowing red with 
the blood of slaughtered cows. The Veda is forgotten 

1 Edited by Pandits Harihara Sastri and Srinivasa Sastri (Trivandram, 
1916) with an Introduction by Mr, T. A, Gopinatha Rao. Canto viii, 
pp. 69 ft 



THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY AND LATER 243 


and justice has gone into hiding ; there is not left any 
trace of virtue or nobility in the land and despair is writ 
large on the faces of the unfortunate Dravidas.’ At the 
end of her speech, the lady produced a mighty sword, 
the symbol of Pandya sovereignty and spoke again : 
'This sword, O! King!, was wrought of yore by 
• Visvakarma from the essences of all the heavenly instru- 
ments of war for the use of Lord Siva in his fight 
against the Asuras. He then gave it to the Pandyan 
king who pleased him by his penances, and with its aid 
successive rulers of his dynasty held unrivalled sway 
for a long time. And now finding that, by dint of fate, 
the kings of the Pandya line have lost their prowess, (the 
sage) Agastya has despatched this sword to be placed 
in your strong hands.’ The rest of the speech is an 
exhortation and a prophecy foretelling Kampana’s suc- 
cesses in the south. This account in the Madhuravijayam 
is valuable in two respects. It gives a fairly reliable 
account from the Hindu point of view of the state of 
feeling in the country towards its Muhammadan rulers, 
and in a matter like this, contemporary literary evidence 
is of inestimable value in supplementing the evidence 
from epigraphs. What is equally valuable to the student 
of Pandyan history is the account of the transference of 
the ancient sword from the Pandyan kings to Kampana. 
Agastya, the custodian of Tamil culture, is said to have 
made the transfer, as the Pandyan line did not any more 
produce kings worth the name. The meaning behind 
the poetic conception is clear. The failure of the Pandyan 
kings to recover Madura is the historic justification for 
Kampana’s conquest of the Madura country ; moreover, 
in the Pandyan kingdom, the task of the Vijayanagar 
rulers was the continuance of the work of the ancient 
rulers of the land. 



244 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Kampana’s conquest of Madura is partly described 
in the' final fragments of Madhuravijayam and attested 
by inscriptions and chronicles. His conquest of the 
kingdom of Rajagambhira 1 is mentioned in an inscrip- 
tion of A.D. 1365, and a record in the thirty-first year of 
a certain Maravarman Vlra Pandya from the Ramnad 
district (No. 64 of 1916) refers to the southern campaign 
of Kampana Udaiyar, and his destruction of the Tulukkan, 
followed by the establishment of orderly government 
throughout the country and the appointment of many 
chiefs {Nayakkanmar) for the inspection and supervision 
of temples. 2 The date of this record is now generally 
taken to correspond to A.D. 1364. Three inscriptions 
at Tiruppullani (Ramnad) are undoubtedly records of 
this Kampana and are dated in A.D. 1371 and 1374. 3 On 
the other hand, the evidence of the coinage of the Sultans 
of Madura shows that their rule was continued in 
some manner till A.D. 1 377-8. 4 It seems a legitimate 
inference to make that, though the back of the Muham- 
madan power in the south had been broken by A.D. 1364 
or even a little earlier, the last Sultans maintained a 
feeble struggle against the growing power of Vijayanagar 
till A. D. 1377-1378. 5 

1 A.R.E., 1899, para 57 discussing No, 18 of 1899 identifies RajagambbP 
rarajya with the Pandya country and is still followed by some writers, e.g. 
Heras, Aravldu Dynasty, p. 104. The Madhuravijayam leaves no doubt 
that it is a reference to the country of the Sambuvarayas. 

2 A*R.E,, 1916, part ii, para 33. 

3 Rangachari, Inscriptions of the Madras Presidency , p. 1173, Nos. 124, 
129 and 132. It may be noted here that the earliest mentton of Kampana 
in the epigraphs of the Tamil districts is in Saka 1285 (a.d. 1363) in 803-5 
at p. 1607 of Rangachari. 

* J.R.A.S., 1909, p. 683. 

s Dr. S. K. Aiyangar {op. ciU, pp. 182 £E) places the early campaigns of 
Kampana in the south in the interval between a.d. 1343 and a.d. 1355-1356 
and connects them with the break in the coinage of the Sultans in this 
period. Rev, Heras {op. cit. s pp. 105-6) seems to underestimate the indi- 
cations obtained from the Pandyan records and is inclined to place the 



THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY AND LATER 245 


As has already been stated, we have little information 
as to the doings of the Pandyan rulers who were co- 
regents with Jatavarman Vlra Pandya [act. A.D. 1296) in 
the last years of his reign and those that came after. A 
Maravarman Kulalekhara, who seems to have also had 
the title ‘ who conquered every country ’ which was not 
more than an empty boast in his case, came to power in 
A.D? 1314 and would seem to have ruled at least up to 
A.D 1 346. 1 His records are found in all the districts from 
Tinnevelly to Tanjore and an inscription from Shiyali 
(366 of 1918) which refers to the eighteenth regnal year 
of an elder brother of the king, Sundara Pandya by name, 
may perhaps be ascribed to this Kulaiekhara and in that 
case, the Sundara Pandya mentioned would be Jatavar- 
man Sundara Pandya (acc. A.D. 1303). A Jatavarman 
Parakrama Pandya began his rule in A.D. 1315 and 
continued up to about A.D. 1347. His inscriptions 
are also found in the Tinnevelly, Madura, Ramnad 
and Tanjore districts and in the Pudukkottah state. 2 A 
Maravarman Vira Pandya began to rule about A.D. 1334 
and a record of his thirty-first year mentioning Kumara 
Kampana’s campaigns has been already noticed. He 
seems to have continued in power for at least forty-seven 


campaigfi as late as a.d. 1377. There seems to be, however, no necessity to 
assume that Kampana did his work all in one expedition. Rev. Heras 
says, * After his conquests Prince Kumara fixed his residence at Madura 
and mentions his restoration of the Pandya monarchs and the coronation 
of S6ma Bokhara Pandya as * one of the most transcendental acts of 
Kumara Kampana.’ I am unable to follow him in accepting the popular 
and confused chronicles in the Taylor MSS. as history. The traditional 
lists of Pandyan kings have been discussed already, and it has been 
shown that they fnrnish no guidance to the scientific historian. 

1 ix, p. 228 and No. 362 of 1904. Among other records the 

following have been assigned to this king Nos. 595 and 639 of 1902 
1X9 of 1903 ; 419 of X905 ; 125, 126 and 149 of 1907 ; 742 of 1909, etc. 

3 I. A., voi. xliv, p, 254. Nos. 395 of 1906 ; 17 of 1894 ; 5S4 of 1921 ; 527 
and 601 of 1926. 



246 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


years and therefore he may be taken to have ruled up to 
about A.D. 1380. 1 Another ruler who came to power 
about the same time as the one last-mentioned was 
Maravarman Parakrama Pandya (A.D. 1335-5 2 ) whose 
records 2 are found in the districts of Ramnad, Tanjore, 
S. Arcot and Chingleput. A Jatavarman Parakrama 
Pandya (acc. A.D. 1357) was in the enjoyment of some 
power in the district of Ramnad and the PudukkoTtah 
state for at least twenty-three years. 3 Yet another 
Parakrama is credited with the renovation of the central 
shrine and the maiidapas of the temple at Kuttalam, 
near Tenkasi in the Tinnevelly district, about A.D. 1387 
in the twentieth year of his reign. 4 And it seems quite 
possible that there was a fifth Parakrama Pandya of 
whom nothing more can be stated than that his thirty- 
first regnal year was about Saka 1337 (No. 203 of 
1895) pointing to some time about A.D. 1384 as the date 
of his accession. Lastly, we find evidence of the rule, 
from A.D. 1395-1396, of a Jatavarman Kulasekhara 5 who 
claims to have rebuilt the temple at Ilanji (a village near 
Tenkasi) and founded a new Brahmin village in his 
fourteenth and sixteenth regnal years respectively. The 
inscriptions of the three rulers last mentioned are not 
found outside the Tinnevelly district. 

The evidence from epigraphs thus shows that, some 


1 Nos. 453 and 454 of Fudukkottali list and 386 of 1913 and other records. 
Indian Ephemeris , vol. i, part ii, pp. 110-1. 

z E.L, vol. ix, p. 228, and vol. vii, p. 11. A.R.E 1913, part ii, para 46 ; 
1918, part ii, para 53 and 1927, part ii, para 39. Inscription No. 35 of lQl^s 
a very interesting record which belongs apparently to an earlier ruler, 
A*R.E., 1913, part ii, para 47 seems to contradict the paragraph just pre- 
ceding it. The record is treated here as relating to the twelfth, not the 
fourteenth century. 

3 E J., vol. ix, pp. 225-8. No. 63 of 1924. 

4 No. 408 of 1917 and A.R.E.> 1918, part ii, para 54. 

5 A-R.E., 1912, part ii, para 42 ; 1918, part ii, para 54. 



THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY AND LATER 247 


time in the second half of the fourteenth century A.D., 
the Pandyas more or less completely lost their hold on 
the Madura country and found themselves restricted to 
their more southern possessions in the Tinnevelly district. 
The change must have occurred about the time of Kam- 
pana’s final conquest of Madura or soon afterwards* 
The Vijayanagar viceroy seems to have been assisted in 
his ’task by the Banaraya chieftains and these quondam 
feudatories of the Pandya kings doubtless had an in- 
terest in thus restricting the range of Pandya power . 1 
In any case, the Pandya kings gained no material advan- 
tage from Kampana’s wars against the Madura Sultans 
and the establishment of the power of Vijayanagar in 
Madura proved to be the beginning of the end of Pandyan 
rule in the city where, except for relatively short inter- 
vals, the Pandyas had held sway from the earliest times 
to the fourteenth century. 

The history of the later Pandyas of Tinnevelly 2 is 
the story of a more or less steady decline, punctuated by 
a few feeble attempts at revival, ending in the final 
disappearance of the dynasty towards the close of the 
sixteenth or early in the seventeenth century. The 
evidence of copper-plates renders it possible to construct 
a genealogy of the rulers of the period, though some of 


x Dr. S.K. Aiyangar at p. 5 of the N&yaksoi Madura by Mr. R. Satya- 
natha Aiyar seems to date the commencement of the viceroyalty of Madura 
rather too early. Rev. Heras {op. cit pp. 107-8) reproduces apocryphal tales 
from the chronicles relating to the illegitimate scions of the Pandya family 
having been raised to power by the viceroy Lakkana, The names of the 
persons concerned show that the chronicles are giving a confused explanation 
of the rise of the Banaraya chieftains into prominence under Vijayanagar. 

2 The most important inscriptions of the later Pandyas have been 
carefully edited by Mr. T. A. Gopinatha Rao [Trav. Arch . Series ol, i» 
pp. 43-152 ; pp, 251-82) whose critical studies went a long way to intro* 
duce order into a part of the subject which was till then in the most chaotic 
condition. In my account I follow Mr, Rao in the main. 



248 


TH.B PANDYAN KINGDOM 


the connections are not yet as firmly established as one 
would wish. We have also evidence of the existence of 
some kings not mentioned in the copper-plates at all. 
Thus a Jatavarman Vikrama Pandya 1 , who ruled from 
A.D. 1401 to 1422 and whose records are found in 
Kuttalam and in Tirupputtur (Ramnad), among other 
places, is not mentioned in the copper-plates at all. 
Another king Parakrama alias Srlvallabha 2 came to 
power about the same time and ruled for at least thirty- 
three years till A.D. 1434. Somewhat later instances are 
those of Maravarman Vira Pandya 3 who ruled from 
A.D. 1443 to at least A.D. 1497 and whose records are 
found in the Pudukkottah country ; and a Maravarman 
Sundara Pandya (a.D. 1531-1555) found in Kielhorn’s 
list of Pandya kings. These instances show that our 
knowledge of the state of the Pandyan power under the 
Vijayanagar empire is still very fragmentary. It is 
significant that a few records of these later kings are 
found in Ramnad and Pudukkottah, as this is some 
evidence that, to the last, these kings struggled to 
hold their own in the Madura country. It is not 
till about A.D. 1483 that the Banaraya chieftains 
are found assuming titles like Madhura-pu-yi-maka- 
nSyakmS 

The genealogy of the later Pandya rulers as it may 
be inferred from the copper-plate grants may now 
be given. The connections and identifications which 
are doubtful have been indicated as far as possi- 
ble in the genealogical tree. The period of rule of 


1 E.I., vol. is, p. 228 and No. 124 of 1908. 

3 A.jR.E.* 1927, part ii, para 52. 

3 EJ* t vol. is, p, 229 and Pudukkottah List, Nos. 461-*4 ? 
* No. $72 of Pudukkottah List, 



THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY AND LATER 249 


each king and the asterism of his birth have also 
been entered so far as these can be ascertained: — 


Arikesari 

Parakrama 

Manabharana 



Ktxlagekhara 
alias £rivallabha 
(Uttam) 

(a.d. 1429-73) 


I 

Parakrama alias 

KulaSekhara 

(Karttigai) 

(a.d. 1479-99) 


ArikeSvara Sister. 

(a.d.1436-70) I 


Jat. Parakrama alias 
Vira Pandya (Avittam) 
(a.d. 1473-1506) 


Abhirama Parakrama. 


Jat. Parakrama 
alias Srlvallabba 
(Tiruva'dirai) 
(ruled for five years 
at least) . 


Ahavarama 
Jaf Srlvallabba 

‘ establisber of the Pandya Kingdom * 
(1534-1542 ?) 


Kulagekhara Parakrama (ASvati) 
(a.d. 1543-1552). 


SalivStlpati Tirunelvelipperumal 
KulaSekhara (a.d. 1551-1564) 


Gunarama, 


Varatungarama 
(1588-1609 P) 


Ativlrarama ^rlvallabha Sri vail abha. 
(a.d. 1563-1605). 

Abhirama Ativlrarama. 


Arikesari Parakrama who had also the titles Mana- 
kavaca, and Manabhusana is known to have ruled for 
forty years from A.D. 1422. 1 His inscriptions are numerous 
and some of them contain a long historical introduction 
in Tamil beginning Pu- mi'sai-vcmitai. He claims to 

have won several victories over his enemies at various 
small places mostly in the Tinnevelly district, and to have 
defeated the kings of Kerala. If he is identical with the 
Pandya king of Madura vanquished by Narasa Nayaka, 2 


1 JSJ. t vii, p. 17 and No. iv in Gopinatha Rao’s Inscriptions of the 
Later Pandyas ( Trav. Arch . Series , vol.i.) 

8 Gopinatha Rao {op, cit pp. 52-3) ; Heras, op . cit., pp. 108-9, 

32 



250 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


as perhaps he is, he must be taken to have been in 
possession of Madura for the best part of his reign, as 
the campaign of Narasa cannot be placed much earlier 
than the closing years of Parakrama’ s reign. He is also 
called Kovkaivendan , an indication that the sea-board of 
Tinnevelly was still in his control. But the greatest 
event of his reign was undoubtedly the building of the 
Visvanatha temple at Tenkasi. The erection of ' this 
fine structure was undertaken by the king after the Lord 
appeared before him in a dream and asked him to make 
a new habitation for him at Southern Kasi as his 
original abode in the Kasi of the north had become 
dilapidated. The construction took seventeen years and 
the towers (gopurams) were still unfinished at the time 
of the king’s death. The king's unbounded piety and 
his great love of art are evident from a number of verses 
in which he makes a moving appeal to his suc- 
cessors to safeguard and extend the temple he 
raised in his day. Arikesari also made a large tank 
called Visvanathappereri and erected mandapas in Siva 
temples in several places. Arikesari Parakrama had two 
brothers Kulasekhara alias Srivallabha who completed 
the construction of the towers in the Tenkasi temple and 
an Arikesvara. 1 It is not clear what led to the succes. 

sion passing to the nephews of Arikesari; nor is it 
possible to determine whether these nephews are identi- 
cal with Abhirama Parakrama and Ahavarama with whom 
the regular genealogy begins in the copper-plates. 

It is needless to follow the transactions of these later 
monarchs in any great detail. Their inscriptions often 
open with the grandiloquent Sanskrit introduction begin- 


1 On the identity o£ KulaSekhara with Srivallabha see Gopinatha Rao 
op- tit*, p. 263 aa4 on ArikeSvara, A*R*E* t 1918, part ii, para 57, 



THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY AND LATER 251 


ning Samas tabhu vanaikavlra, and to the last they continu- 
ed to be called MadhuramahSndra though they had ceased 
to have anything to do with Madura for well over a 
century. During the reign of Srivallabha (acc. A.D. 1 534) 
even the little that was left to the Pandyas was sought 
to be taken away from them by the aggressive ruler of 
Travancore who, though he was also subject to Vijaya- 
nagar, had received in his court a rebel governor of the 
empire from Tanjore. These circumstances brought on 
the expedition to the south, in the early years of the reign 
of Achyutaraya, which resulted in the total defeat of the 
Travancore ruler, the restoration to the Pandya of the 
territory he had then lost and the marriage of a 
Pandyan princess to Achyutaraya. 1 Srivallabha, as a 
consequence, took to himself the title — ‘ who restored 
the olden times ’ ( Irandakalamedutta :). But nothing, not 
even the support of the Vijayanagar emperors, could 
restore the glory that once belonged to the rulers 
of this dynasty. Srivallabha and his successors had 
to console themselves, for what they had lost of 
political power, by seeking distinction in literature 
and philanthropy. And many of them, specially 
Ativlrarama 2 and his cousin Varatungarama really 

1 Sea Heras, op. tit., pp. 113-17, fora detailed account of Achyuta’s 
expedition. 

2 Verse 19 of Pudukkottai plates has caused a difficulty about the duration 

of AtLvirarama's reign, ( A.R.E 1912, part ii, para 41), as this verse says 
that his brother Srivallabha was crowned after his death. But the reading 
tridivam-gate on which the interpretation rests does not seem to be quite 
secure. It may be observed that Varatungarama, the other donor in the 
plates, could not also have been ruling in Saka ISOS, the date of the gift ; in 
fact, lines 13S-8 of the record show clearly that the regnal year quoted is 
that -of Ativlrarama himself.* ( Contra T. A. Gopinatha Rac, op. cit p .57). 
Hera's {op. cit , , pp. 285^6 ) explains the reference to the battle of Vallam* 
prakara in the plates. See also Satyanatha Aiyar, Nayaks of Madura, 
p. 103, «. 13, For Abhirama Ativlrarama, the son of Ativlrarama Srivallabha, 
see 1912, part ii, paras 40-1. 



252 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


deserved the name Sahitya-sarvabhauma both on account 
of their own literary compositions and by the encourage- 
ment they gave to the poets of the time. They also 
earned the gratitude of their subjects by the excavation 
of tanks, and the construction of temples and other 
foundations of public utility. These kings liked to 
call themselves Devabruhmaim-sthupanacarya , and when 
Robert de Nobili wanted that Srivallabha, the brothef of 
Ativlrarama, should listen to 1 the new doctrine preached 
by the Western sannyUsi' , he was put off on one ground 
or another. 1 The last of these kings,, of whom we have 
authentic epigraphical evidence, performed a Vedic 
sacrifice inA.D. 16x5 and assumed the titles Somayuji 
and Diksitar . He seems to have lived up to A.D. 1652. 2 
All these rulers were in subordinate alliance 3 with the 
Nayaks of Madura of the line of Visvanatha Nayaka. 
A few of their inscriptions 4 refer to the emperors 
of Vijayanagar and their birudas as well; they also 
adopted the boar as an additional emblem of their family 
along with the carps and the hook. These are indications 
of their acknowledgment of the suzerainty of Vijayanagar. 
' There are two copper-plate records in the Kuttala- 
nathasvamin temple at Tirukkurralam which belong to 
the reign (!) of one Alaganperumal Slvala-Varaguriarama 
Pandya Kulasekharadevar, “ who brought back the 
past”. Both of them are dated Saka 1675 (a.D. 
1753). He bears all the birudas known to the previous 
Pandyas.’ 

1 Heras, op. cit., pp. 392-3. 

2 GopinathaRao and No. 268 of 1908. 

3 See Heras, op, cit., pp. 347-8. At p. 132, however, he seeing to 
mistake the true meaning of Visvanatha’s corns with the legend Pandyan. 
Contra.) Satyahatha Aiyar, op. cit,, p. 65. 

* No. 615 of 1915 and Gopinatha Rao, op, cit,, p. 59. 



ADDITIONAL NOTES 

Page 2 , n, 1 . — See also Mr. Krishna Sastri’s observations 
in his Introduction to the S.LL , vol. iii, p. 1. 

Page 8, L 3 . — Irandavadin edir padinankavadu. 

Page 18, L 13. — -E. H. Warmington — The Commerce Between 
The Roman Empire and India — gives an excellent account of this 
trade and is very fully documented. See under ‘Tandyai^’ in 
the index, and specially pp. 59-60. * Prom the very beginning 

of the Roman Empire the Pandya people had probably taken the 
leading part in encouraging the Romans to come and trade, for 
they had sent, as we have seen, an embassy to Augustus. 5 

Page 26, L 2d , — Pur am 15 may be compared with the following 
from the Velvikkudi grant (11. 31-2) about the same king : 

‘ Kol-yanai-palav-otti-kkuda-mannar-kulan tavirtta Palyaga-Mudu- 
kudumi — p Peruvaludi. 5 

Page 27, L 16 , — The larger Sinnamanur plates (11. 100-2) 
seem to mention another battle at Citramuyari along with that 
at Talaiyalanganam, and they add that two enemies of the 
Pandyan kings lost their lives in these battles. The text is : 
‘Ambor-Citramuyari-um-Talaialam-kanattir-rannokkam-iruvenda-* 
rai-kkolai-valix-ralai-tumittu-kkura-ttalaiy in-kuttolittum * . In his 
introduction (S.II, vol. iii, p. 445) to these plates, Mr. Krishna 
Sastri assumes : (a) that Citramuyari was also fought by 
Nedunjeliyan, and ( b ) that the two enemies who were killed were 
the Chola and the Chera kings. 

Page. 3d, IL 1-8 . — araneri-mudarre*yarasinkorra 

madanal, namarena-kkol-kodadu 

pirarena-kkupain kolladu 
nayirranna venti-ralanmaiyum 
tingalanna tanperunjayalum 

vanattanna vapmaiyu-munru-mudaiyai-yaki . . . 
ni nldu- valiya nedundakai. 

Pages In editing the Sinnamanur plates (S./.Z., 

vol-. iii, part iv, pp* 447-8) Mr. Krishna Sastri follows Mr. 
Venkayya’s arrangement of the genealogy of the Pandya kings 
mentioned in the Velvikkudi and the larger Sinnamanur plates. 
He admits that the first king Arikesari of the larger Sinnamanur 



254 


THE PlNDYAN KINGDOM 


plates at first appears to be the same as Arikesari Maravarman,— 
No. 4 of the Velvikkudi grant ; but he feels constrained to reject 
this identification, and his reasons may be briefly examined. 
First, he holds that Arikesari (Velvikkudi, 4) did not fight with 
the Pallava king as did Arikesari, the first king of the Sinnamanur 
plates. This rests on his supposition that Vilveli against whom 
Arikesari of Velvikkudi fought at Nelveli was ! perhaps a Chera 
But it should be noted that the campaigns of this king against 
the Kerala ruler are mentioned separately in the Velvikkudi 
grant, and that Nelveli is coupled with Sankaramangai in the 
Sinnamanur grant as having been fought against the Pallavas. 
Secondly, Mr. Sastri says that the battle of Sankaramangai is 
not mentioned among the battles fought by No. 4 Velvikkudi, 
but his grandson No. 6 ‘ is clearly said to have crushed the 
Pallava power ’. Surely, the facts (a) that Sankaramangai is not 
mentioned in the Velvikkudi grant at all in relation to either 
No. 4 or No. 6, and (6) that Nelveli is a common factor between 
No. 4 of Velvikkudi and No. 1 of Sinnamanur suggest a conclu- 
sion very different from that of Mr. Sastri. And it is strange 
that he should underrate the mention of Nelveli by name in the 
Velvikkudi grant among the achievements of No. 4 and imagine 
that No. 6 fought at Sankaramangai because he is said to 
have crushed the Pallava power. It will be noticed also that, 
by his scheme, he has to postulate a second fight at Nelveli 
‘ against the very same or a different Chera king ’ for which 
there is no reason suggested. Thirdly, Mr. Sastri says : 1 The 
title Parankusa, given to Arikesari in the Tamil portion of the 
Sinnamanur grant, makes it difficult to connect him with the first 
Arikesari Maravarman (No. 4) of the Velvikkudi plates ’. But 
one may ask, how is it less difficult to connect him with No. (6)? 
The title ParankuSa does not occur in the Velvikkudi grant at all, 
and it may be suggested that the other title ‘Asamasaman’ 
which No. 4 gets in the Velvikkudi grant makes it, if anything , 
easier to identify Parankusa with him, rather than with his 
grandson. And the chief name of the king Arikesari is common 
to both records and. has the same import as the Parankusa. title. 
Lastly, Mr. Sastri says: ‘The fact ^that Parankusa Arikesari’ s 
grandson is called Rajasimha in the Sinnamanur plates suggests 
the possibility of Arikesari himself being also called Rajasimha, 



ADDITIONAL NOTES 


255 


which title we actually find for the first time given to Termaran 
(No. 6) in the Vejvikkudi plates It is clearly simpler to say 
that the two Rajasimhas of the Sinnamanur and Vejvikkudi grants 
are identical as well as the two Arikesaris. Moreover, it is very 
risky to infer the titles of a king from those of his successors as 
is done by Mr. Sastri. Thus, none of the considerations brought 
forward by Mr. Sastri can be accepted as establishing Mr. Ven- 
kayya’s system of genealogy, and the reis no reason to modify 
the conclusions stated by me at p. 41. It may be added that on 
the other system, we know nothing of Nos. (8) and (9) (of Mr. 
Sastri’s genealogical table), the so-called Rajasimha II and 
Varaguna I respectively, as neither the Velvikkndi nor the 
Sinnamanur plates give an account of their reigns. 

Page 42 , n. 1 . — The Sinnamanur grants have since been 
published in vol. iii, part iv, Cf. Mr. Krishna Sastri’s 

observations on the smaller Sinnamanur plates at p. 447. He 
thinks that the donor of these plates was Parantaka Nedunjadayan 
or an immediate successor of his. 

Page 44, l. 4. — Kantaka-Sodanai tanseydu. 

Page 45, l. 7 . — Sewell fixes the date of accession between 
March 22nd and November 22nd, a,d. 862 on the strength of 
No. 84 of 1910, See Rangachari, Inscriptions oi tke Madras 
Presidency under Trichinopoly 683. 

Page 49 , — Attention may also be drawn to the expressions 
‘ Kali-arasan-vali-tal ara ’ (1. 90) and ‘ Kalippagai * (1. 100) in the 
account of Parantaka Nedunjadayan’s reign in the Velvikkudi 
grant. Mr. Krishna Sastri interprets these phrases as referring 
to the. Kali age, though, elsewhere, he accepts the suggestion 
that the Kalabhras were of the Kalikula (£, /., xvii, pp. 306 n, 
307-8). 

Page 50, 11.8-10 . — Tarapi mangaiyaippirarpal urimai-ttiravi- 
din nlkki-ttanpal-urimai nang anam-amaitta. 

Page 51, U. 14-15. —V illavarum (vanai) Nelveli-um viri-pojir- 
ceangara-mangai-Pallavarum (vanaiyum) pingapda (parang apda) 
Pantnkusan. The readings within brackets are those of S.I.I., 
vol. iii, partiv. 

Page 56, n. 2.— Mr. Krishna Sastri appears to have changed 
his view as he mentions Sengodu and Pudankodu as battles won 
by Rapadhlra. 



256 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Page 61, IL 11-12.— Vattiya-keya sangitangajal maliveydiya 
V angalandai-vaidyakulam. 

Page 63 , /. 5.— Kunramannador-Koil. 

Page 77 , 2. — cf. Mr. Krishna Sastri’ s remarks at p. 449 of 

5././., vol. iii. 

Page 79, L Contra. Mr. Krishna Sastri {ibid) who takes her 
to be a Chola princess. 

Page 80, n. 2. — Summarizing the larger §innamanur plates, 
Mr. Krishna Sastri says of this Rajasimha that he ‘ defeated" the 
king of Tanjai (Tanjore) at Naippur, fought a battle at 
Kodmubai (Kodumbalur) the seat of one of the powerful Chola 
subordinates, burnt Vanji and destroyed the king of southern 
Tanjai (perhaps another subordinate of the Cholas) at Naval.' 
(■ S.IJ . , vol. iii, p. 449). 

Page 82,n, 2.— Mr. Krishna Sastri (5././., vol. iii, part iv, 
In trod., p. 10) says that the Kanyakumari record (of Virarajen- 
dra) states that Parantaka ‘ killed the Pandya with his whole 
army \ But as this is contradicted by the Tiruvalangadu plates 
and the Mahavamsa, the expression hatva of the Kanyakumari 
record must be taken to mean c defeated/ 

Page 85, L 13. — cf. Mr. Krishna Sastri’s remarks at p. 7 of his 
Introd. to S.M., vol. iii, part iv. 

Page 86 , l. 19 . — Koffai alittu nanru seydu patfar. 

Page 86 , 1. 20. — U1 vittu-kkoyircevakar. 

Page 88, l. 3 . — Nlrodatti-kkoduttan. 

Page 88, IL 7-8 . — Mannavanadu papiyal vadivamaiya-ppidi 
sulndan. 

Page 88, l. 22. — ellaiyakattu-kkallum-kalliyum natti. 

Page 88, IL 24- //. — pirammadeyamaka-kkarapmaiyum Miyat- 
ciyum ulladanga sarvapariharamaka mrodatti kkudu-kkap-pattadru 

Page 89, IL 25 //. — enru ninravan vinnappiyanjeyya nanru 
nanrenru muruvalittu nattanin palamaiyadal katti ni kolkavenna 
natta-rran palamaiyadal kattinan angappoludey. 

Page 89, L 32. — Nattu. 

Page 92, IL 7 //. — ivvottina parisu ney attuvippadarkku amain- 
dupupaippattdm sirjambar patiyum padamulattomum. 

Page 95, L 26. — enpiranda paljiccandangalum. 

Page 98, IL 7 //.— (Ko)nnavil kurverkon Nedumaran ten- 
kudar-kon tennan kondadum ten-Tirum'al-irunjolaiye, 



ADDITIONAL NOTES 


257 


Page 101, n. 1. — Contra Mr. Krishna Sastri-Introduction to 
S.I./., vol. iii, part iv, pp. 14^17. The Madras Museum Plates are 
referred by Mr. Sastri to ' the uncle and immediate predecessor 
of Rajaraja I ’ ( S.I.I . , vol. iii, p. 267). There is nothing in the 
record that goes against our view that these plates may be 
assigned to Rajendra I. In fact, the mention of adikarikal. Sola 
rrvtivBnda-vE Idr-emberuman in 1. 14 supports our view,, . as this 
{sojamuvendavelar was the commander of Rajendra’s army 
(S.T.I., vol. iii, part iv, introd. p. 17). 

Page 103, n. 1 . — See also Mr. Krishna Sastri — ibid,, p. 15. 

Page 105, n. 1 , — See Annual Report Trav . Arch. Dept., 1920-21, 
p. 65 and S.I.I. , vol. iii, p. 469 for a defence of the traditional 
view of Kandalur-^alai and the fleet maintained by the Chera 
kings there. 

Page 108, n. 1 , — See, however, Mr. Krishna Sastri’s introduc- 
tion, p. 19, in S.I.I., vol. iii, part iv, for other evidence in 
support of Hultzsch’s view. 

Page 115, l. 2 . — urifluvarippSdu. 

Page 115, l . 4. — Kani-udaiyar. 

Page 116, 1. 19 , — vilai 51ai Seydu nirbdattikkoduttom. 

Page 123, l. 20 . — Tiru-vajara-cceyam vajara tennavar-tam 
kulam valara-varumajai nangavai vajara-vanaittulakanduyar 
ninga-ttenmadura-puri-ttonri. 

Page 121, 1. 18 . — Tennavar tarn Kuladeyvam. 

Page 135, 1. 18.— Pandiyanai mudittalai-kopdaruliya. 

Page 135, l. 21 . — avan mudimel adi vaittu. 

Page 142, l. 6 . — vanjinan-gu.ru madakalirivajrnda venjina 

veingai yilludan-ojippa. 

Page 144 , 1. 5. — Pu maruviya tirumadandaiyum. 

Page 145, 1. 13 .— Sopaflu Kopdarutfya ; Sopadukondu mudi- 
konda-Solapurattu vlrar abhi^ekam pappiyaruliya ; Sonadu 
valangiyaruliya, 


33 



CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY. 


A. D. 

C. 100-300. Sangam Age. 

C. 590. End of the Kalabhra interregnum. Accession of. 
Kadnngon. 

C. 620. Accession of Maravarman Avanisularnapi. 

C. 645. „ Sendai (Jayantavarman). 

C. 670. „ Arikesari Parankusa Maravarman. 

C. 710. „ Koccadayan Ranadhira. 

C. 740. „ Rajasimha (I) Maravarman Pallava- 

bhanjana. 

C. 765. ,, Jatila Parantaka (I) Nedunjadayan 

alias Varaguna Maharaja. 

770. Consecration of the Vi§nu temple built by 
Marangari at Anamalai. 

C. 815. Accession of Sri Mara SrTvallabha. 

862. Accession of Varagupavarman. 

C. 880. Battle of Sri Purambiyam. 

Accession of Parantaka (II) Viranarayana Safla- 
yan. 

C. 900. Accession of Rajasimha (II) Maravarman. 

C. 920. Capture of Madura by Parantaka I Chola ; end of 
the First Empire ; flight of Rajasimha (II). 

C. 950-1000. Completion of the Chola conquest of the Pandyan 
kingdom. The wars of Vira Pandy.a ‘ who 
took the head of the Chola.’ Raja Raja I’s 
campaigns in the Pandya country. 

C. 1020. Rajendra’s invasion and settlement of the Pandya 
country. 

C. 1020-70. The period of the Chola-Pandya Viceroys. Raja- 
dhiraja’s wars in the Pandya country. 

C. 1080-1100. Kulottunga I’s invasion of the Pandya country, 
Jatavarman Srivallabha and Maravarman 
Tribhuvanacakravartin Parakrama Pandya. 

C. 1120. Jatavarman Parantaka Pandya. 

C. 1133. Accession of Maravarman Srivallabha. 



chronological summary 


259 


A. D. 

C. 1162. 

C. 1168-70. 
C. 1180. 


C. 1189. 

C. 1190. 

C. 1216. 
C. 1223. 


1238. 

1251. 

1251-8. 

1253. 
1268. 
1276. 
1283. 
C. 1284. 

1291. 

1296-7. 

1303. 

1310-11. 


1311-13. 


1314. 

1315. 
C. 1317. 


1329-30. 


Accession of Tribhuvanacakravartin EulaSekhara 
of the Civil War. 

Civil War between Kulasekhara and Parakrama. 

Accession of Vikrama Pandya (son of Enlace* 
khara) and renewal of the Civil War by Vlra 
Pandya (son of Parakrama). 

End of the Civil War and flight of Vlra Pandya 
to Travancore. 

Accession of Jatavarman Kulasekhara (I). Begin* 
ning of the Second Empire. 

Accession of Maravarman Sundara Pandya (I). 

Restitution of the Chola country by Sundara 
Pandya. 

Jatavarman Kulasekhara (II). Accession of 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya (II). 

Accession of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (I). 

Sundara Pandya’s wars against the Cheras, the 
Hoysalas, Kopperunjinga and Gaijdagopala. 

Jatavarman Vira Pandya (I) (sub-king). 

Accession of Maravarman Kulasekhara (I). 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (II) (sub-king). 

Maravarman Vikrama Pandya (sub-king). 

KulaSekhara’s conquest of Ceylon. 

Jatavarman fsrivallabha (sub-king ?) 

Jatavarman Vira Pandya (II) (sub-king). 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (III) (sub-king). 

Murder of Kulasekhara (?). Civil war between 
Sundara PSndya and Vira Pandya. Malik 
Kafur’s invasion of Madura. 

The assumption of independence by Ravivarman 
Kulasekhara, Chera, and his conquest of the 
Pandya country. End of the Second Empire. 

MSjavarman Kulasekhara (II). 

Jatavarman Parakrama Pandya (I). 

Assertion of independence by Kulasekhara Sam- 
buvaraya. Invasion of Muppidi NSyaka and 
his capture of Kanchl. 

Establishment of the Sultanate of Madura. 



260 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


A. D. 

1334. 

1335. 
1357. 

C. 1364-70. 

1377-8. 

1395-6. 

1401. 

1422. 

1429. 

1435. 

1443. 

1473. 

1479. 

1531. 

1534. 

1543. 

1551. 

1563. 

1588. 

1615. 


Maravarman Vira Pandya (I). 

Maravarman Parakrama Pandya. 

Jatavarman Parakrama Pandya (II). 

Kumara Kampana’s wars against the Madura 
Sultanate. 

End of the Sultanate of Madura, 

Jatavarman Kulasekhara (III). 

Jatavarman Vikrama Pandya. 

Arikesari Parakrama Manabhararia. 

Kulasekhara alias Srlvallabha. 

Arikesvara. 

Maravarman Vira Pandya (II). 

Jatavarman Parakrama alias Vira Pandya. 
Parakrama alias Kulasekhara. 

Maravarman Sundara Pandya (III). 

Jatavarman Srlvallabha * establisher of the 
Pandya Kingdom. ’ 

Kulasekhara Parakrama. 

Tirunelvelipperumal Kulasekhara. 

Ativirarama Srlvallabha. 

Varatungarama. 

Performance of a Vedic sacrifice by Varaguna 
Srlvallabha alias Kulasekhara. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

The following list is not a complete bibliography ; it contains 
only the chief works which have been consulted. 

Reports , Periodicals , etc . 

Annual Reports oi the Archaeological Department (Mysore). 

Annual Reports of the Archaeological Department (Travancore). 

Annual Reports on Epigraphy (Madras) — A. R. B. 

Archaeological Survey of India — Director -General's Annual Re- 
ports— -A. S. I. 

Archaeological Survey of Southern India — (A. S. S. I.) — 

— -veil. iv. Tamil and Sanskrit Inscriptions. — ed. James 
Burgess and S. M. Natesa Sastri (Madras, 1886). 

Epigraphia Carnatica (Bangalore). 

Epigraphia Indica (Calcutta)— E. L 

Indian Antiquary — Bombay — I. A. 

Indian Historical Quarterly (Calcutta). 

Inscriptions of the Madras Presidency — A topographical List of 
the — V. Rangacharya.— 3 vols. (Madras, 1919). 

Journal of Indian History (Madras). 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 
(London) — J.R.A.S. 

Madras Christian College Magazine (Madras). 

Pudilkkottah — List of stone inscriptions copied in the State 
(unpublished). 

Puduhkoiiah — Texts of the same (unpublished). 

Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society^B&ngaloie)~~~ 
Q.J.M.-S. 

Sen Tamil (Madura). 

South Indian Inscriptions — S. 1. 1.— vols. I— III Texts and 

Translation \ vols. IW-YI Texts only (A. S.I. New Imperial 
Series, 'Madras,- from 1 890). 

Tamilian Antiquary (defunct) -^Triclnnopoly- (1911-14). 

Travancore Archaeological Series (Trivandram from 1910). 



262 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Books . 

Aiyangar, R. Raghava (ed.) Ahandnufu, with Introduction 
and notes (Madras, 1920). 

Aiyangar, Dr. S. K. — The Beginnings oi South Indian History 
(Madras, 1918). 

Aiyangar, Dr. S. K. — Ancient India (Luzac, 1911). 

„ ,, ,, — South India and Her Muhammadan Inva- 

ders (Oxford Univ. Press, 1921). 

Aiyangar, Dr. S. K. Manimekalai in its Historical Setting 
(Luzac, 1928). 

Aiyangar, M. Srinivasa. Tamil Studies (Madras, 1914). 

Aiyar, Pandit A. Gopala. Nandikkalambakam (Madura, 1927). 
Aiyar, A. Narayanaswami. Narjhiai (Madras). 

Aiyar, K. V. S. Historical Sketches oi Ancient Dekhan 
(Madras, 1917). 

Aiyar, R. Satyanatha. The Nayaks oi Madura (Oxford 
University Press, 1924). 

Aiyar, Pandit V. Swaminatha (ed.). — 

Pattupp&ttu (Madras, 1889). 

Pufananuru , Second Edition (Madras, 1923). 
Silappadik&ram , Second Edition (Madras, 1920). 
Tiruvilaiyadal PurQipam of Perumbarrappuliyur Nambi. 
Second Edition (Madras, 1927). 

Bhandarkar, D. R. Asoka (Calcutta, 1925). 

Bhandarkar, R. G. Early History of the Dekkan (Bombay, 

1884). 

„ Vaistiavism , Saivism and Minor Religious 

Systems (Strasburg, 1913). 

Caldwell, Rev. R. Tinnevelly (Madras, 1881). 

)} A Comparative Grammar oi the Dravidian 

Languages . (Revised) (London, 1913). 
Cambridge History oi India, vol. iii (Cambridge, 1928). 
Damodaram Pillai (ed.). IraiyancLrahapporul (Madras, 1899). 
Dubreuil, G. J . The Pallavas (English Tr ansi .) (Pond icb er ry , 

1917). 

Eliot, Sir C. Hinduism and Buddhist. 3 vols. (Arnold, 1921). 
Elliot, Sir W. Coins oi Southern India (Triibner, 1886). 

Elliot and D o w s oh. The History oi India ' as told by its own 
Historians , vol. iii (Trftbher, 1871). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


263 


GangadevL Madhurdvijayam (ed,). Harihara Sastri and 
Srinivasa Sastri (Trivandram, 1916). 

Geiger. Mahavamfa (Eng. Tr.) (Pali Text Society, 1912). 
Gopalan, R. The Pallavas of K&nchi (Madras University, 1929). 
Gopinatha Rao. History of £rz Vaisnavas (Madras, 1923). 
Heras, Rev. H. The Araviiu Dynasty of Vijayanagar , vol. I 
(Madras, 1927). 

Kanakasabhai, V, The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago 
(Madras, 1904). 

Kaye, G. R. Hindu Astronomy (Memoir No. 18 of the A.S.I.) 
(Calcutta). 

Kunmiogai (Vellore). 

Navalar, Arumuga (ed.). Periyapuranam (Madras, 1917). 
Nelson. A Manual of the Madura Country (Madras). 

Ragozin. Vedic India (Unwin, 1895). 

Seshagiri Sastri. Tamil Literature (Madras, 1904). 

Sewell. Lists of Antiquities, etc., Madras , A.S.S.L , vols. I and 
II (Madras, 1882, 1884). 

Slater, G. The Dravidian Element in Indian Culture (Benn, 
London, 1924). 

Smith, V. A. Early History of India . Fourth Edition (Oxford, 
1924). 

,, Oxford History of India. Second Edition (Oxford, 

1923). 

Swaxnikkannu Pillai, L. D. An Indian Epkemeris (Madras). 
Tufnell, R. H. C. Hints to Coin-collectors in Southern India 
(Madras, 1889). 

Tumour and Wijesinha. The Mahdvamfa (Colombo, 1889). 
Warming ton, E. H. The Commerce Between the Roman Empire 
and India (Cambridge, 1928). 

Yule and Cordier. The Book of Ser Marco Polo . 3 vols. 
(Murray, 1921). 



INDEX 


A 

Abhirama Ativlrarama, 249, 251 #, 

Abhirama Parakrama, 249, 250. 

Accu-uari, 217. 

Ac fiChu y 179. 

Achyuta Raya, 251 and n. 

Acyuta, 49#. 

Adalaiyur Nadalvan, 119, 122#. 

Aden, 192. 

AdhiMri , 10. 

Adiga (ma) ns, 28, 62 and #, 83. 

Adityal, Choia, 77 and #» 78 and #, 
81. 

Aditya II, Karikala Chola, 101 #, 103 
and n , 104, 120. 

Adiyama, 150. 

Aduturai, 129. 

Agastya, 2 #, 108, 109, 243. 

AgastyeSvara, 237. 

Agrahara , 238, 242. 

Aha (m) ( nanuru ), 27#, 28#, 29#, 

__ 30 and #. 

Ahavarama, 249, 250. 

Aivarmalai, 39, 45, 46, 95. 

Aiyangar, Dr. S. K., 5, 13#, 15#, 17#, 
19#, 20#, 22#, 25#, 30#, 49#, 58#, 
127#, 128#, 135#, 136#, 144#, 146#, 
151#, 161#, 162#, 164#, 168#, 171- 
3#, 181-3#, 185#, 203-6#, 208-11#, 
241#, 244#, 247#. 

Aiyar, K. V. (Snbramania) , 1#, 15#, 
19#, 20#, 23#, 29#, 38#, 40#, 42#, 
45#, 54#, 60#, 73#, 76#, 83#, 102#, 
103#, ^07#, 110#, 112#, 116#, 119# , 
127#, 162#, 166#, 172#, 173#, 185«, 
214«. 

£jjanandi, 95. 

Ajnapii, 44. 45#, 58, 60. 

AJagaimanagar, 233. 

Alaganperumal, 252. 

Alagapuri, 232*. 

A\ageritdu -ka tchi-kclsu , 115 . 

Alagiya Pallavar, 166#. 

Alagiya Pandyan hall, 118. 

Alagiya £iyan, 165#. 

Alangudl, 133#, 221. 

Alar-ad-din Khilji, 203, 205 and #, 
206. 

Allan Tirukkalattideva, 169#. 

Alvar (s), 97, 98. 

Alwar-Tirunagari, 216. 

34 


Amarabhujanga, 105. 
Ambasamudram, 7, 40, 56 , 63, 64, 
91, 110, 115. 

Amir Khusru, 201#, 204, 207. 
Ammayappan Rajaraja SSm.bu- 
varaya, 135. 

Ammasattram, 236. 

Anaiynr, 154, 155. 

Anamalai, 4, 7, 39, 40 and#, 44, 45#, 
46. 59 and #, 60, 61#, 97, 100#. 
Anantapuram, 124. 

Anaiti , 44, 59#, 88. 

Andal, 98. 

Andapillai, 126. 

Anda Pillai, 178. 

Andarmakan Ktiruvaiudi, 29#. 
Anjnman, 179#. * 

Anfuvannam, 179 and n. 

Ant ar ay am , 217. 

Aparajita, 77 and #, 78 and #, 81. 
Appanna Dandanayaka, 158, 235. 
Arabia, 192. * 

Arabs, 210. 

Aragalur, 234, 

Ara-isumahkal, 219. 

Ara^ur, 63. 

Aravamuthan, T. G., 39#. 

Aricit. 74#, 75 and #, 76. 

Arikesari Parakrama (acc, 1422), 249, 
250, 

Arikesari ParankuSa, 41, 50-5, 67# 
96. 253-5. 

ArikeSvara, 249, 250 and #. 
Arinjaya, 101#. 

AriSil, 75 and #. 

Ariviynrkkottai, 65. 

Arivudai Nambi, 29. 

Ariya Cakravarti, 184, 185 and n, 
Arppakkam, 127, 128, 131, 133#. 
Arthaiastra , 14. 

Arulala Perumal, 212#. 

Arya(iis), 2, 20#*, 31, 168 and #. 
Asamasaman , 254. 

Ashar, 181. 

Asita-vaktra , 117 and n. 

Asoka, 12#, 15. 

Apuras, 243. 

Atisayapandyadeva , 153. 
Ativlrarama Srivallabha ( acc . 1563), 
_ 249, 251 and #, 252. 

Atkondavilli, 227. 

Attivirana, 113, 



266 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Avaiyan Periyanayanar, 210. 
Avanistilamanii 41, SO 
Avaniycilappirandan , 165#, 229. 
Avur, 17S. 

Ay, 56 and n , 65, 83. 

Ayams , 32 and n, 33. 

Aycciyar Kuravai, 19. 

Ayiraveli Ayirur, 62. 

Ayvel, 56#, 60. 

B 

Bahrein, 192. 

Bahur plates, 74 and #, 75. 

Ballala II, 148, 149. 

Ballala III, 207, 241. 

Bana, 168. 

Banadaraya, 186, 187, 247 and #. 
Barni Ziauddin, 204, 207, 210, 
Bettelar, 194, 

Bhcigdiraya , 237. 

Bhaktavatsala, 236. 

Bhandarkar, D.R., 12#* 
Bhandarkar, R.G., 14 and #, 20, 21 
117. 

Bhatta , 116. 

Bhattars , 234. 

BhutaPandyan, 30 and n. 
Bhuvanekavlra, 186. 

Brahma, 63#. 

Brahmade§am, 115. 

Brahmadeyam , 88, 115. 

Brahmi, 15. 

Brihat Samhita, 14 #. 

Bnddhadatta, 49#. 

Buddhas, 17. 

Buddhism, 16, 19, 20, 31, 32, 67#, 
94-6, 236. 

Buddhists, 4, 16, 17. 

Burgess and Natesa Sastri, 7#, 102#, 
143«. 

Butterworth and Venugopaul 
Chetty, 169#. 

C 

Caldwell, Rev. R., 1#, 2#, 5#, 13 and 
#, 14# , 15#. 

Candralekha, 84. 

Ceylon, 11, 14, 20, 22, 27, 68-72, 80- 
2, 106-8, 111-3, 129-33, 162, 172#, 
175-7, 179. 

Chalukya, 54, 55#, 58 and n . 
ChandeSvara (r), 9, 32. 

Chera, 55, 59, 79, 124, 142, 150, 161 
and #, 163, 212, 254. 
Cherakulavalli, 171#. 

Ckeranaivenra, 183 and #. 
Chera-Pandya-Caturvedimangalam, 
212 . 

Chevhr, 102, 103. 


Chidambaram, 49#, 96, 97, 121, 144, 
145, 160, 162 and #, 166-9, 17 1, 
175, 189, 220, 237, 238. 

Chin, 191. 

Chola(s), 6, 7, 11, 12, 46, 54. 55, 58, 
59, 64, 68, 70, 74#, 76, 77, 80 and #, 
81, 82, 85,96, Ch. VIII-IX passim, 
139, 14?, 144-53, 157, 159, 161, 163, 
165, 175-8, 182-4, 190, 214, 256. 
Cholamai^dalam, 77, 178#. 
Choiantaka Brahmaraya, 103. 
Cholantaka Catnrvedimangalam, 
120 . 

Cfwlantahan-nali , 10 - 1 . 

Cholantaka Pallavarayan, 103, 104, 
Chola-Pandya, 11, 109-12. 114-16, 
Cholapati, 145. 
Chdlardjyapratisthdcarya , 149. 
Citramuyari, 253. 

Cittiramadattu Tunjiya Nanmaran, 
29. 

Coimbatore, 63#, 65, 175. 

Comorin, 5#, 107. 

Cuddapah, 54#, 139, 159, 188. 

D 

Damodaram Pillai, C. W., 25#. 
Dana(m), 88, 89. 

Ddndam , 9, 100. 

Dandandyakam- Seyvar, 239. 
Dantivarman, 46. 

Ddsyandma , 98. 

Delhi, 203, 205, 209, 211. 
Desikachari, Sir T., 12#, 153# . 
Devabrahma7ia-Stkapandcarya , 252 . 
Devaddna , 9, 115, 217, 219#, 235. 
Devadasis, 199. 

Devagiri, 162#. 
Devanayaka-pperumal, 234, 
Devardiyal (r), 233, 235. 

Dharma. 93. 

Dharmadeva, 236. 

Dharmapuri, 62. 

Dharmdsana , 228. 
DharmasafiabhaUa, 9. 

Dhirataran Murti Eyinan, 44, 61. 
Digvijaya , 150, 166#. 

Dinaras , 98, 193, 196, 

Dofar, 192, 

Draksarama, 164-6. 

Drammas , 118, 123, 143, 217. 

Dravida (s), 11, 243. 

Dravidians, 1, 13, 31. 

Duhrenil, G. J., 20#, 46 and #', 48, 
54#, 55#, 57 and #, 69#, 70#, 72#, 
73#, 75-8#. 

Dvaravatipura, 205#. 
Dwarasamudra, 204, 241. 



INDEX 


267 


E 

Edirili S6Ja Sambuvarayau, 131, 
Ekadanda Sannyasins, 236. 

Ekavira^ 68. 

Eliot, Sir C., 24 #, 231 #. 
Ellandalaiyanan , 171 atid^#. 
Ellandalaiyana Perumal Sandi, 238. 
Elliot, Sir Walter, 3 #, 11 and n, 12 n. 
190. 

Elliot and Dowson, 181#, 191#, 201#, 
204-7#, 209#, 210#. 

Ell ore, 124. 

Emmandalammn Kondaruliya , 160, 
169. 

Enadi, 86 and #. 

Ervadi, 60, 65, 95. 

Ettimannan, 86. 

Ettnttokai, 18#. 

Europe, 191. 

Evvi, 2*8 and #. 

E y arko nkalik k am a- n ayan ar — p ura- 
nam, 63#. 

F 

Fergusson, 1#. 

Fleet, J. F,, 14#, 63#. 

G 

Gadyakarnamrta , 151#. 

Gajabahu I, 19, 20, 22, 27- 
GanapatvJ.36, 168 and #. 
Gandagopala, 168 and #, 169#. 
Gandaraditya, 101#, 104 and #. 
Ganga(s), 58, 59, 60, 68, 76, 77. 
Gangadevi, 242. 

Gangaikonda Chola-Pandya, 110, 
111 #. 

Gangai-nacju, 175#. 

Gangaiyarayan, 229. 

Ganges* 175. 

Gauri, 154. 

Geiger, 14#, 71#. > 

Gnaaasambanda(r), 4, 45#, 54«, 67#, i 
97#, 98. | 

Godavari, 164. I 

Gopalan, R., 49#, 58#, 73#. 
Gopinatha Rao, T. A., 7#, 23#, 38#, 
45#, 46#, 49#, 56#, 61#, 63#, 65#, I 
74#, 77#, 83#, 86#, 98#, 102#, 130#, 
361#, 162#, 179#, 185#, 242#, 247#, 
249-52#. 

Gosahasras , 59. 

Govindaraja, 13#. 

Gramam , 87, 90. 

Grhyaprayogavrtti , 126. 
Gunavlrakkuravadigal, 95. 
Grukulattarayan, 154-5. 


H 

Haig, Sir W._, 208#. 
Halasyamdhcitmya, 3 , 

Halebld, 129. 

Harihara Aiyar, Pandit, 1#. 

H emcLcchadanaraj a , 169, 170. 

Heras, Rev. H., 208#, 244#, 245#, 
247#, 249#, 251#, 252#. 
Hiranyagarbha(s ) , 52, 59, 

Hormos, 191, 192. 

Hoysala(s), 129, 136, 337, 147, 148, 
151 and n, 152, 157, 158 and #, 161 
and #, 163-7, 183#, 184 and #, 205#, 
207, 23S. 241. 

Hultzsch, E., 5#, 6 and #, In , 12#, 
24#, 47#, 70#, 74#, 75#, 80#, 108#, 
111#, 120#, 121, 124, 128#, 135#, 
164#, 165#, 167#, 169, 171#, 208#, 
212#, 257. 

I 

Ibn Batuta, 241. 

Idaikkunrnr Kilar, 27#. 

Idaivari , 217. 

Idangalikdman , 223. 

Idavai, 76, 77 and #. 

Idigarai, 177 n. 

Ilam, 107, 130#, 152#, 175, 180#, 183, 
214#. 

Ilamperuvaludi, 29. 
ildncinai-p'peru , 217. 
ilango — Adikal, 21. 

Ilango— kkudi, 91. 

Ilango — kkudi-ccavai~ l/Qriyam , 92 . 
Ilangd-Muttarayan, 84. 

Ilanjeliyan, 27. 

Ilanji, 246. 

Ilavandikaippaliittunjiya Nanma- 
I ran, 30. 

| Inavari } 217. 

Iraiy 9. 

Iraiyandr Ah[g)apporul , 16, 38#, 
53#, 54. 

IraiyanarahapponUurai. 25. 

Irak, 191. 

Ishwari Prasad, 205#. 

J 

Jacobi, 140. 

Jagad Vijaya, 130. 

Jagnar, 207. 

Jain (as), 4, 16, 48#, 67, 80, 95-7, 114, 
117#. 

Jainism, 16, 19, 31, 32, 61#, 94, 95, 
236. 

Jalal-ud-din Ahsan Shah, 209. 
Jatavarman Chola-Pandya, 111#, 



268 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Jatavarroan Suodara Chola-Pandya, 
i09, 110. 

Jatila, see Koccadayan. 

Jatila (varman), 7, 39, 43 #, 44, 52 #, 
72 #, 85 and #, 98 and «, see Nedtm- 
jadavan, 

Jayadratha Dandanayalta, 132. 
Jayangonda Solan Slvalluvan, 142. 

J ayangondasolapttram , 14 6#, 182. 
Jayantavarman, see Sendan. 
Jettmganadu, 142. 

Jivakaci n tamani , 20, 21, 95. 


K 

Kacci valangumpermndl , 153/?. 
Kadamai , 217, 219. 

Raiamai'pparru , 219. 
Kadambavana-purdncttn, Zn , 
Kadava(s), 150, 151#, 164 and # , 
165-7, 170, 178. 

Kadungon, i7, 23, 38#, 41, 46, 48-50, 
90#, 96. 

Rahdpana , 130. 

Kaikkolar, 218. 

Kais, 192. 

Kakatlya, 336, 190, 211, 213. 

Kdkshi •erudit-kdsu , 115. 

Kalabhra(s), 22-5, 47-50, 83, 89, 255. 
Kaiakkad, 60, 64. 

Kalamukha, 117 and n . 

Ralanfu, 92 and #, 100. 
Ralavali-nddalvdn , 142. 
Radavcdi-nddu, 142. 

Kales Dewar, 181, 196, 203. 
Kali-araSan, 49#, 255#. 

Kali-kula, 47 and #, 255#. 
Kalingafs), 68, 124, 125. 
Kalingarajan, 118. 

Kalingarayan, 126#, 143, 182 and #, 
Kalingattaraiy an , 1)8. 
Ralingattupparani , 105#, 121, 125. 
Raliyugardma, 153. 
Kaliyugardmesvara , , 153. 
Kalladanar, 27#, 29. 

JKtffrV 88. 

Kallidaiknricci, 141. 

Kalttgumaiai, 65 and #, 85, 86. 
Kaltil, 203. 

Kalvayil-nddalv&n , 155#. 
Kalyanapttra, 15. 

Kamarasavalli, 232. 

Kampana UdaiySr, 235, 242-5, 247. 
Kanakacandra Pandita, 236. 
Kanakasabhai, V., 1#, 2#, 5 and #, 
7«, 20, 25, 31#, 33, 36#. 

Kanataadu, 158#. 

Kanapper, 30. 


KanchUpuram), 63#, 73#, 136, 152#, 
159, 160, 167#, 168, 169#, 175, 212 
and #, 213, 230, 242. 

Ranchi pur am -konddn , 171 . 

Ranchi p it ra : varddhis vara , 171 . 
Kandalur-(Salai), 105 and #, 106, 
109, 124, 125, 257. 

Kandan Alndaiyan, 155#. 

Kandan Udayanjeydan Gangeyan 
154. 

Rani , 9 

Kanippidipadu , 221. 

Rdniy dichi , 235. 

Kanjivayppernr, 63 and #. 
Kankabhumi, 63#. 

Kannaki, 20, 21, 22, 27, 36. 
Kannatiur-(Koppam), 162-4, 184 and 
#,‘241. 

Kannappar, 32. 

Kannattaragar, 184#. 

Kanni, *120, 162. 

Kantakanishcran , 44. 

Kanyakumari, 103#, 123, 256. 
Kapatapuram, 13. 

Karaikkal, 75. 

Karaikkai-Ammai, 32 
Karaikkottai, 86. 

Karamliatti, 203. 

Karanattdn , 116. 

Kdrdnmai , 88, 89, 

Karavandapura, 60, 61, 64. 

Karikala Chola, 20 and #. 

Kari Kilar, 26#. 

Kari Maran, 97. 
Karisulndamangalam, 176#. 
Kdriyavdrdcci , 217. 
Karungaiolvatpernm Peyar valudi, 
29#. 

Karur, 59#. 

Karuverkttricci, 225, 

Karuvnr, 152#. 

Kassapa, 69. 

Rdsu(s), 91, 92 and #, 94, 98, 179. 
Katif, 192. 

Kattumannarkoyil, 228. 

Kafcyayana, 13, 14. 

Katitiiya, 14 and #. 

Kaveri, 40, 54 and #, 57, 60, 62, 73#, 
75, 161, 162, 175, 242. 

Kavikkalam, 176-7. 

Kayal ( Ca.il) , 191, 192, 199. 

Kaye, 22#. 

Reid, 216. 

Kennedy, 13#. 

Kerala(s), 52, 53, 58, 62, 68, 69, J12, 
130#, 175#, 184, 208#, 211-13, 249, 
254. 

Kharagiri, 72#, 78, 79. 

Khilji, 202. 



INDEX 


269 


Khurasan, 191. 

Khusru, see Amir. 

Khusru Khan, 209, 210. 

Kielhorn, 119 #, 123/;, 140-3, 157#, 
159#, 160#, 180#, 212#, 248. 

Kiladi, 230. 

Kifappavur, 238. 

Kllur, 105#. 

Klly era banadu , 126 . 

Kiramattur, 101. 

KIran -Rattan, 29#, 

KIrttivarman II, 58. 

Kis, 191, 192, 

Kiskindha-kanda, 13. 

Kocoadayan, 41, 42#, 45#, 49#, 55-7, 
255.* 

Kodandarama , 171, 214 and n. 
Kodaniaraman-sandi , 172# . 
Kodumbalur, 57, 117, 256#. 
Koil-ojugu , 171#. 

Koli, 59 and n, 162#, 

Koilam, 119#, 183. 

Kollam-konda, 183. 

Koaadu, 187, 228. 

Konamalai, 176-7. 
Konerinmaikondan, 214#, 216. 
Kongar-koman , 55, 58. 

Kongu, 56, 62 and #, 63. 65, 79, 99, 
130#, 146, 147, 152#, 167, 175, 176#, 
180#, 183, 134, 214#. 
Kopperunjinga, 148, 151, 152, 164-7, 
170, 178, 189#, 229. 

Korkai, 5#, 15, 18, 27, 35, 120, 125. 
Korkai-kdvala , 190. 

Korkai- vendan , 250 . 

Kottaru, 120, 121, 125. 

Kovalan, 27, 30. 

Koviladi, 152#. 

Kramavit , 116. 

Krishna III, 100. 

K(rishna) Sastri, H., 6#, 16, 23#, 38#, 
42?*, 43#, 47 and n, 55#, 56#, 58-60, 
74#. 85#, 88#, 90#, 102#, 103#, 
108#, 111#, 117#, 122#, 126#, 148#, 
150#, 182#, 184#, 226#, add!, 

notes. 

Ksema, 162#. 

Kudakarattu Tunjiya Maran Valu- 
di, 29#. 

Kudal, 59 and n. 

Kudamukku, 68, 69, 73, 74 and #, 
75 and n, 77#. 

Kudapulaviyanar, 27#, 

Kudi } 87. 

Kudimai, 235. 

Kudumiyamalai, 146#. 

Kulacdrai, 96. 

Kulam, 191. 

Kujam, 124, 


KulaSekhara (acc. c. 1162), 125, 127 
and #, 129, 130, 132-4, 136#, 185#, 
233. 

Kulasekhara Parakrama (acc. 1543), 
249. 

Kulasekhara alias Srivallabha ( acc. 

1429), 249, 250 and n. 

Kulasekhara (I) Jatavarman (acc. 
1190), 119#, 126#,* 136 and#, 139, 
141-3, 145, 183#. 

KulaSekhara(II) Jatavarman (acc. 

1238) , 155 and #, 156 and #, 172. 
Kulasekhara (III) Jatavarman (acc. 
1395-6), 246 

Kulasekhara Mabeli Vanarayaa, 187. 
Kulasekhara (I) Maravarman (acc. 
1268), 126#, 130, 163#, 173, 179-87, 
188, 19.1, 201, 202-5, 212, 216, 219, 
220. 227, 230, 232. _ 

Kulasekhara (II) Maravarman (acc. 
1314), 221, 245. 

Kulasekhara Sambuvaraj^a, 213. 
ICulhatu, 192. 

Kulottungal, Chola, 110 and «, 112- 
14, 118-25. 

Kulottunga'II Chola, 129, 229. 
Kirlotttroga HI Chola, 127, 133-39, 
143. 145, 146#, 153#. 

Kuloitunga - Solan-ala , 105 n . 
Kulumbur, 57. 

Kulus , 32 and n. 

Kumara, 64. 

Kumari, 124. 

Kumbakonam, 68, 73, 74#, 75#, 77, 
100 and #, 

Kun (a), 11, 53, 67#. 

Kunnur, 68. 

Kupakas, 124. 

Kuraikkndi, 210. 

Kurandai, 95. 

Kurnool, 54#, 164. 

Kurram , 87. 

Kurruva Nayanar, 49#. 

Ktirumadai, 57. 

Kurumbanad, 60#. 

Kurunadu, 52, 53. 

Kurunis , 92#. 

Kuruntogai , 27-9 . 

Kuruvitturai, 118, 120. 

Kuttalam, 100#, 178, 246. 
Kuttalanathasvamin, 252. 

Kuvera, 81. 


L 

Lahsa, 192. 

Lakkana, 247#. 

Laksmi Narasimha, 150#. 
Lanka, 69, 81 



270 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Lankapura (i), 129-33, 134#. 

Leiden grant, 7, 100-3. 

Lemurian theory, 1#. 

M 

Ma’bar, 180, 181, 191, 192, 197, 204- 

6, 208, 209. 

Mabeli Vanadirayan, 186. 

Machin, 191. 

Madakkulakkilmadurai, 3. 
Madakkniam , 118. 

Madambakkam, 231. 

Madhavi, 36. 

Madhurakavi, 60, 61, 97. 
Madhuramahendra , 251. 

Madhura - p iiri-mahandy&kan , 248 . 
Mcedhuravijayam, 242-4. 
MadbyadSSa, 14. 

Madras Museum Plates (of Jafcila), 

7, 38*, 39, 41-4, 5?n, 56, 59, 61-4, 
85, 87, 88, 98#. 

Madras Museum Plates (Uttama 
Chola) , 101*, 10S#, 257*. 

Madura, 3, 4, 11, 14 and *, 15, 16, 20, 
25, 28, 34, 35, 60, 62 and », 67#, 
80», 81-3, 96, 97, 104», 108-10, 117, 
128, 130, 133-5, 138, 141-3, 146», 
153, 158, 174, 190, 196, 202, 205*, 
208#, 209, 233, 240-5, 247 and #, 
250-2. 

Madurai kkanakkayanar, 27;/. 

M tidier aikkanji , , 18, 26, 27#, 35. 
Maduraikonda Rajakesari, 104 see 
Gandaraditya. 

Maduraimandalam , 10S and n. 
Madurakarundtakan , 55. 

Magadai, 167 and #. 

Magadha, 87. 

Magara, 150. 

Magaral , 237 
Mahabharata , 13#. 
Maharajadhiraja-SrlfiiZranwsvam, 
169. 

Maharajasimha, 165# , see Ropper- 
unjinga. 

Maharathas, 55, 56. 

Mahdsdmanta (j), 44, 61, 85, 
Mabatalita, 69. 

Mahdtantra , 239. 

Mahavamsa , 5, 14 and n, 69-71, 73#, 
80#, 82, 111, 127, 128, 130, 131, 
133, 184 and #, 185 and #. 
Mabavrat (a) (ins), 116, 117 and #. 
Mabinda, 69. 

Malaimaran, 29#. 

Malainadu, 65, 105#, 106, 161, 183. 
Malaiyadaraiyan , 190. 

Malakongam, 57. 


Malavarayan, 143, 153, 158. 
Malavar Manikkam, 154. 

Maiaya, 69. 

Malik Kafur, 202, 204-9, 211, 212#. 
Malik-ul Islam Jamal-ud-din, 192. 
Mallikarjuna, 117. 

Manabbarana (n), 112, 113, 122. 
Manalur, 15. 

Manar Barmul, 202. 

Maoavira, 213. 

Mandaragaurava s 80. 

Mandaram Cberal Trnmporai, 28. 
Mangadu,_236. 

Mangala Enadi, 86. 

Mangalam , 87. 

Mangalapuram, 55, 56 and u. 
Mangalore, 55. 

Mangudi Kilar, 27 n. 

Mangudi Marudan, 27 n, 29. 
Manigramam, 179. 

ManikkavaSagar, 4, 66 and #, 61 n , 
96,97,223. 

Matiimekalai , 16-19, 32 and n. 
Mankul, 202. 

Mannaikkudi, 52#, 57#. 
Mannargudi, 172#. 

Mannarkovil, 110, 116. 

Mannarkoyil, 232. 

Mannikkuricci, 57. 

Manradis, 10. 

Mcinru , 93. 

M antra- Brahm ana, 93. 

Matm, 226. 

Manur, 93-4. 

Marakatanagarl, 242. 
Marakataprthvlbhrt, 170. 
Maramangalam, 125. 

Maran Eyinan, 60. 

Maran gari, 44, 45#, 58-60, 86 , 97. 
Maranjadayan, 39, 40, 45#, 59, 60#, 
65, 73, 76, 84-6, 93, 95. 

Maran Valudi, 29#. 

Maravarman Vikrama Cbola- 
Pandya, 111#. 

Marco Polo, 5, 180, 181 and #, 188, 
190-200, 205#. 

Marudur, 55#, 56. 

Matangajadhyaksa , 85. 

Maiha (s), 116, il7, 154, 236. 
Mauryan, 15. 

Mayapandya, 68-73. 

Megasthenes, 5 and #, 34. 
Melkadayam, 153. 

Melvnram , 221-2. 

Meykandadevar, 189. 
Milalai-kkurram, 28, 29 n. 

Miyatci , 88,' 89. 

Mudaligal, 219. 

Mudattirumaran, 29#. 



INDEX 


271 


Mudikonda-Sdlapnram, 146#, 147, 
152#. 

Mudivalangum' perumal~sa?idi , 153. 
Mudugur, 168. 

Mudukudumi, 22-4, 26, 47, 89 253. 
Mugheir, 13. 

Muhammad bin Tughlak, 209. 
Muilaiyur, 113. 

Muller, Max, 14. 

Miimmadi Solan, 110, 111#. 
Mumi-edir-mogar, 238, 
Munaiyadaraiyan , 126 and n, 143, 
190. 

Muppidi Nay aka, 213-14. 
Murappu-nadu, 236. 

Murasa,^ 230 
Murtl Nayanar, 48 n. 

Musiri, 18. 

Muttaraya (r), 18#, 83-5. 
MuttSrru-kkurram, 28 and u. 
Muvarkoil, 117. 

Mysore, 158, 159. 

N 

Naccinarkkiniyar, 26. 

NUu, 87^ 124. 

Nagarattar, 92. 

Nagercoil, 101. 

Naippur, 256. 

Nakklrar, 17 and #, 25, 27#, 29-31. 
Naladiyar 18#, 84. 

Nalis, 92 #, 

Nalvaludi, 29. 

Nambi Andar Nambi, 67#. 

Nambi, Perumbavrappuliyur, 3, 15, 
26#, 97#. 

Nammalvar, 20, 97. 

Nandigrama, 57. 

Nandikkalambakam , 73#. 

Nandi varman PallavamsUa, 46, 49, 
51#, 57, 60- 

Nandtoarman III, 20#, 46, 73 and #, 
74 75, 

Narasa Nayaka, 249, 250. 

Narasimha, 4, 60, 61#, 169. 
Narasimha ll (Hoysala), 147-51, 165. 
NaraSingadevar, 235. 

Narayana Aiyar, C. V., 8#. 
Narayanaswatni Aiyar, 20#. 
Narrinaiy 20#, 27#, 29#, 30#. 

Natia, 238. 

Nattu y 90 and n. 

Nattukkurumbu, 60 and n, 
Ndituvariy 232. 

Naval, 256. 

Nayakkanmar, 235, 244. 

Nayaks of Ellore, 124. 

Nayaks of Madura, 252. 

Nayanars, 97/ 


Nediyon, 26. 

Nedumaran, 38#, 45#, (ninraSir), 54, 
55, 98 and n. 

Nedtxmpalliyattanar, 26#. 
Nectunalvadai , 26. 

Nedunjadayan, 39, 40-5, 59, 61, 62, 
64, 65 68, 98jand #, 255. 
Nedunjeliyan (Ariyappadaikadanda), 
21, 26 , 27. 

Nedunjeliyan Nambi, 29. 
Nedunjeliyan of Talaiyalanganam , 
26-28, 30#, 35, 48#, 253. 

Neduvayal, 57. 

Nellore, 139, 159, 168, 169#, 170, 191, 
213. 

Nelson, 3#, 3#, 15. 

Nelveli, 23#, 51 and n, 52#, 54, 55, 
57#, 254#. 

Nettimaiyar, 26#. 

Nettur, 135 and #, 138. 

Nidur, 28. 

Nilai-poliyuttu , 9. 

Nirvdhasabhaiy 230. 

Nirvana, 14. 

Niyamam. 63, 84. 

Niyoga , 232. 

Nobili, Robert de, 252. 
Nrpatungavarman, 74-7, 7$r 
Nydyattar y 230. 

O 

Olai , 215, 216. 

Ollaiyur, 30. 

Ophir, 13. 

Orangal, 213. 

P 

Padaikkanvar y 239. 

Ptidikappany 238. 

Padikkdvaly 217-8. 
Padinenkilkkanakku, 18«. 

Palana “Sofiyan- ka§u, 179. 

Pali, 51, 55. 

Palaru, 212#. 

Pallava(s), 19, 36 , 44, 46 , 48, 49#, 
51 and #, 53, 54, 56, 57 and #, 60, 
62, 68, 69, 73-7, 84, 162#, 189#, 254. 
Pallavabhanjandy 41, 44. 
Pallavddhl§vara y 172. 

| Pailavarayan, 158. 

Pal 1 avaray anpet^ai , 127. 
Pallavarayar, 132-4. 

Palli (ccandam ) s> 80, 170, 236. 
Pammiyakkan, 148#. 149. 

Paiianiy 218, 232. 
Pancavan-mahadevi, 106. 

Pandavas, 15. 

Pandi, 14. 



272 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Pandikkodumttdi, 58, 

Pandiman'dalam, 120. 

Pandi-nadu, 14, 106. 

Pandippadaiyar, 100. 

Panditavatsalan , 44. 

Pandu, 14. 

Pandya, (origin), 13-15. 

Pandya- dis a fiattanum, 150. 

Paudya-kavatakam, 147?. 

Pandya-kulaSani-valanadu, 106, 

Pandya-rayan, 118. 

Panimakkal . 237. 

Panjupili, 217. 

Pannadutandan, 29 w. 

Paracakrakaldhala , 68-. 

Parakrama (civil war, 12tb cent.) 
128-30, 14672. 

Parakrama alias KulaSekhara (acc, 
1479), 249. 

Parakrama alias Srivallabha, 248. 

Parakramababu I, 128-30. 

Parakramababu III, 184, 185. 

Parakrama Pandya (I) Jatavarman, 
(acc. 1315), 223, 245. 

Parakrama Pandya (II) Jatavarman 
(acc. 1357), 246. 

Parakrama Pandya J atavarman alias 
Vira Pandya (acc. 1473), 249^ 

Parakrama Pandya Mabeli Van adi- 
raya, 187. 

Parakrama Pandya Maravarman 
(cont. of Knlottunga I), 122 n, 123 
and n. 

Parakrama Pandya Maravarman 
[acc. 1335), 246. 

Parmegvaravarman II, 57. 

Paranar, 2 7n, 29. 

Paranjotimunivar, 3. 

Parantaka I (Chola), 46, 47,80-3, 
93, 99-101, 1077?, 138, 256. 

Parantakall (Sundara Chola), 101- 
3. 

Parantaka Pandya (Jatavarman), 
123-5. 

Parantaka I (Pandya), 44, 72», 85/2, 
see Neduujadayan. 

Parantakall (Pandya), 40. 41, 72 n, 
78, 79, 8 S 72 , see Vlranarayana. 

Parantaka- valanadu, 125. 

Parantaka- vlrar, 85-6. 

Parathavar, 35. 

Paravas, 52, 53. 

Par§va Bhatarar, 95. 

Pas an, 221, 222. 

Pa§i, 131. 

Pasip attain, 223. 

PaSumputpandiyan, Tin. 

Pati , 92 and n. 

Pattamadai, 157«, 234. 


Pathippaitu , 27 n. 

Paumben, 5n. 

Pavanangakaran-fcintvidi, 236. 
Pennagadam, 60, 78, 79. 

Pennai, 63. 

Perambalur, 165. 

Peraru, 268. 

PeripUis, 5, 35. 

Periyaldr, 57. 

Periyalvar, 98. 

Periyapuraticim , 4, 487?, 54 and n, 
63 n, 67n, 97 n. 

Permnbadaiydrn, 239. 
Perumbanaikkarans , 88 and n. 
Perumbidugti Muttarayan, 84. 
Perundevanar, 20?/. 
Perungarunaiyatti, 230. 

Pillaiyan , 222. 

Pigiran daiyar, 29. 

Pliny, 5 and n. 

Podiy(a) (ill, 65, 120. 

Pon Amaravati, 153, 223. 
Pon-maligai~itunpna-deva , 103/2 . 
Ponnambalam Pillai, 637?. 

Ponvari , 217, 232. 

Poonamallee, 212. 

Pope, Rev. G. U., 357?, 96. 
Pottappiyara} r ar f 22S. 
Poyyamoli-pulavar, 21 and n. 
Prasastis \ 87. 

Prataparudradeva, 213. 

Prithivipati I, 76-8. 

Prithivipati II, 78 n, 80. 

Ptolemy, 5. 

Pudankodu, 255. 

Pudankottu, 567?. 

Pudukkottah, 84, 110, 117, 153, 155 n, 
158, 167, 174-672, 178, 187, 214, 
219t?, 223, 228, 235, 236, 241 and n, 
245, 246 and n, 248 n. 

Pudnkkottai, 2517?. 

Pugaliyur, 62. 

Pubar, 19. 

Pnjaris, 228. 

Puk alabhar an an , 143. 

Puliyangttdt, 238. 

Piira(m)(nanura ) , 26-30, 32-5, 253. 
Puramaiainadn, 153. 

Puranas,97, 217, 234. 

Pnvalur, 57. 


Quilon, 211. 

R 

Ragbava Aiyangar, M., 13 t?, 19«, 
21 72 , 4972 , 9872 , 10572 . 

Raghava Aiyangar, R., 2872, 30 n. 
Ragozin, 13«. 



INDEX 


273 


Rajadhiraja I, 109, 112, 113, 122. 
Rajadhiraja II, 127, 128 and n } 131- 

4. 

Rajaditya (Chola), 101«, 
Rajagambhlra , 143, 
Rajagambhfra-catmrvedi mangalam, 

143. 

Rajagambhlra-rajya, 242, 244 and n . 
Raja Raja I, 101 and n , 104-8, 112 n, 
114, 257. 

Raja Raja II, 229. 

Raja Raja III, 136, 145, 147, 148, 152, 
JL53 //, 165 and «, 229. 

Raja- Raj a- Caturvedi mangalam, 115- 

6 . 

Raja-Raj a-mandalam, 106. 

Raj a- Raj a Pandinadu, 106, 125, 
Raja-Raja-valanadu, 106. 
Rajasikhamani, 80. 
RajaSikbamapinallur, 238. 
Rajasimha I, 41, 44, 56-9, 254-5. 
Rajasimba II, 39, 41, 46, 79-82, 85//, 
95, 99, 102 n, 2 55-6. 

Rajendra I, 7, 77ft , 82, 106-9, 112 and 
//, 116tt , 257, 

Rajendra III, 148, 177, 214. 
Rajendra-chola-vinnagaram, 116. 
Rajendra-deva, 110. 

Rajendram, 190. 

Rama-mahlpati, 164?/. 

Ramanatba Aiyar, A. S., SO n. 
Ramanuja, 117- 
Rdmayana, 13 and ft. 

Ramesvaram, 129, 132. 

Ranadhlra, 255, see Koccadayan. 
Ranaklrti, 86. 

Rangachari, V., 65#, 106#, 136#, 172//, 
244 w, 255. 

Rangaswami Aiyangar, K. V., 11 n, 
Rasbtrakuta, 100 and n, 103. 
Rasingadevar, 100/7. 

RaSingankuIam, 190. 

Rastrit, 87. * 

Ravitadana-kuppa^ 150//. 
Ravivarman KulaSekhara, 208//, 211- 
12,214. 

Ravi-venra-caturvedimangalam,163. 
Rice, L., 149-507/. 

Roman Empire, 1 l f 253. 

Romulus, 15. 

Rndramma, 190. 

Rukhs, 192. 

Rum, 191. 

Rustam, 192. 

S 

gabdali, 87. 

Sabha, 93, 94, IIS, 116. 

Sadayan KarunaDdan, 65, 86. 

35 


Sadayan Maran, 83, 84. 

S*gp{o) 9 192, 195. 

Sakitya -sarvabhauma , 252. 

Saivism, 20, 21, 54, 95, 96. 

Saivite, 17, 158. 

Saiyam, 120. 

S akalabhitvanacakravartin , 165. 
Sakkarakkottam. l08«. 

Salivatlpati, 249. 

Saliyar , 218. 

£aliyur, 35. 

Samasta -Jagadadhara , 160, 166/7 ? 

167. 

Sambanda, 97, see Gnanasambanda- 
Sambuvaraya(ns), 131, 135, 186, 213, 
242, 244/7. 

Sandi- viggiraha - p peru , 217. 
Sangam(s), 13, 16, 17, 19 and n , 20- 
5, 66, 94. 

Sangam Works, 4, 24, 36, 37. 
Sangdttar y 236. 

Sangrama-dhira, 211. 

Sankara, K. G,, 19//, 38 n t 42//, 48//,. 
^ 49//, 58//, 59//, 61 n, 90#. 
Sankaracarya, 20. 

Sankaragrama, Sin. 
^ankaramangai, 51//, 52 n, 254. 
^antiviraguravar, 95. 

Saracens,' 198. 

Sara$vati-bkandara{itar) , 234, 237 
^ariputtira Pandita, 236. 

Sarkar Periyapalayam, 222. 
S&rvapariharamaka, 88, 89. 
Satakarni Gautamiputra, 20# . 

Sati , 197. 

S a t r n b b ayan k ara Mnttarayan, 84. 
Sattan Ganavadi, 61. 

Sattan Nakkan, 86. 

Sattiyanavan, 225. 

Satyanatba Aiyar, R., 247//, 253-2?/ ► 
itavaka, 176 and n. 

Savan main dan, 176. 

Sayce, 12#. 

Sedan, 194. 

Sekkilar, 49//, 67?/. 

Sekkiraiy 217. 

Seliyakkudi, 62. 

Nellyas, 104. 

Sema, 161. 

Semapillai, 214. 

Sembiyan, 55. 

Sena I, 69-71. 

Sena II, 69-71, 73-4//. 

Senathi-raja, 2 n. 

Sendai ai, 83-5. 



274 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Sendamangalam, ISOn, 162, 164, 
16 6#, 167k 

Seadaa, 24, 41, 42 and u, 50, 51#, 
SendU, 32. 

Sengodi, 56*. 

SengSdu, 255 
Senguttuvan, 20#, 21. 

Senniiam, 52, 53 and n, 55. 

£eravan - M ahad evi , 79. 

Seri 116. 

Sermadevi, 79, 115, 142, 153*, 157«, 
^ 179, 234, 235. 

Seruttunai, 67#. 

Sesha A! yap, K. G., 19#, 6 5«, 67#. 
Seshagirl Sastri, 17*. 

Sennas, 162#. 

Sewell, R., In, 3n, 11 n, 12 #, 121, 
122#, 127#, .140 and n , 155, 157#, 
160#, ISO#, 189*, 201*, 255. 

Shama Sastri, 151*. 

Shiyali, 97, 245. 

Silappad ik dram , 1#, 4#, 5n, 16-20, 
22, 26, 27 and «, 31, 32 and n, 
34-5. 

Simhala, 68. 

Sirahavisnu, 48, 49*. 

Singana, 161, 163. 

Sinnamanur, 7, 8, 23, 24, 26, 38-44, 
51, 52 *, 56. 57#, 66, 68, 71-4, 76-9, 
„ S5^, 88, 253-6. 

Sirrambar, 92. 

Siruttondar, 53, 54 and n. 

Siva, 4," 31, 63#, 132, 170, 210, 228, 
^ 233-4, 243. 

Sivamara I, 58. 

Slater, G., In, 2». 

Smith, V. A., 15*, 24#, 30, 31#, 
208 #. 

Snzrti , 89. 

Soer, 192. 

Sokkanarayana, 225. 
^ola-muvendavelar, 257. 

Solan, 55. 

^dian-uyyaninraduvan, 154, 155. 
^olavandan, 120, 220. 

Solomon, 13. 

Somanathpnr, 150#. 
Sdma-sekhara-Paadya, 245#. 

Sdmayajifii 116, 252. 

SomeSvara, 148, 149#, 164. 

Sonadn, 183. 

Sonddukondm, 153. 

CikrW T^nrll 1 88 194.205, 

11, 46, 


Srinivasa Aiyangar, M., 1#, 2#, 31#, 

66 #, 

Srinivasa Aiyangar, P. T., 3#. 

S rinivasa Pillai, K. , - 19#. 

Sri Pnram biyam, 72#, 76-8. 

Srirangam, 147, 149, 151, 152#, 160, 

„ 162-4, 167#, 169-71. 

Srivailabha, 133. 

Srivailabha, Jatavarman {coni, of 
Kuiottunga II, 118, 119 and #, 

„ 122-3#, 126 and *, 182*. 

Srivailabha, Jatavarman (acc. 1291) , 

„ 180. 

Srivailabha, Jatavarman {acc. 1534), 
249,251. 

Srivailabha, Maravarman (acc. 1132), 

„ 125-8. 

Srivailabha, Maravarman (acc. 1 257), 
180. 

Srivaran , 44. 

Stein, O., 13#. 

Sthdnattdr , 9. 

Slridha-na , 93. 

Subhagiri, 184. 

Subramanian, T. N.,48*. 

Sucindram, 100 and #, 101, 126. 

Snlamangalam, 152#. 

Sundara Chola, 49#, see Parantalca 
II. 

Snndaram Pillai, F., 17#, 28#. 

Sundaramurti, 49*, 54 and #, 67 n. 

Snndar (a) Pandi, 181, 188, 201, 
203. 

Sundara Pandya Igvaram Udaiyar, 
104. 

Sundara Pandya (coni, of Raja- 
dhiraja), 113. 

Sundara Pandya (I), Jatavarman 
(acc. 1251), 126*, 1S8, 160-9, 172-4, 
177-80, 182*, 184#, 187, 218, 220, 
224, 227, 232, 233, 236, 237. 

Sundara Pandya (II), Jatavarman 
(acc. 1276), 184, 188-9, 210, 221. 

Sundara Pandya (III), Jatavarman 
(acc. 1303), 172#, 201-8, 212; 214, 
245. 

Sundara Pandya (I), Maravarman 
(acc. 1216), 141, 143 8, 152-6, 
157, 220. 

Sundara Pandya (II), Maravarman 
(acc, 1238), 148 and #, 149, 156 9, 
219. 

Sundara Pandva (III), Maravarman 
(acc. 1531), 248. 

Sundara Pandyan-Sandi, 154. 

Suradeva-I§varam-udaiya-nayanar, 

233. 

guralur, 222, 223. 



INDEX 


275 


Su varan Mar an, 84. 

Svamideva, 131. 

Swamikkannti Pillai, L. D., 19-21, 
90#, 121 and n , 123#, 127#, 140 
and #, 155#, 157#, 159#, 160#, 
180#, 188#, 189#, 201#, 208#. 
Swaminatha Aiyar, V., Pandit, 33 n, 
66 #. 


T 

Tadangapni, 154. 

Tagadur, 62, 63#. 

Taki Khan, 210. 

Takiuddin, 210. 

Takkoia, 100, 102 #, 

Talachi, 202. 

Talaiyalanganara, 23-7, 30 #, 48 #, 
253. 

Tamils, 2, 31. 

Tamraparni, 242. 

Tangal-Igar, 154. 

Taniaiyar-kon, 80. 

Tanjaviir Kurram, 60#. 

Tanjore, 80, 144, 240, 241, 245, 251. 
TaporaSi, 117, 

Tari'irait 217. 

Tarshish, 13. 

Tatiara-ppattam , 217. 

Taylor Manuscripts, 208#, 245#, 
Telinga Bliima, 124. 

Tellaru , 20# » 46, 73-5 , 

Teiunga (u) s, 168 and #, 178#. 
Tembult 199. 

Tenkarai, 146#. 

Tenka§i, 246, 250, 

Tennavan-Apattudaviga (, 197, 238-9. 
Tennavan-Sirrur, 154. 

Termaran, 38#, 56 } 255, 

Tevdram , 4, 18, 19, 67#, 177. 
Tillaisthanam, 60#. 

Traneveily, 8, 16, 25, 52#, 56, 60, 79, 
93, 107, 110, 115, 125, 128, 143, 
144, 149#, 158, 160 and #, 163, 174, 
176#, 211, 234, 238, 245, 247, 249, 
250. 

Timmam , 217. 

Tirtha, 13#. 

Tiruccendur, 32, 64, 90. 
Timccopuram, 236. 

Timcculi, 116. 
Tirucculi-pallimadam, 104. 
Tiruccunai, 146#. 

Tirugnanasambandan-tiruveduttuk- 

katti,_233. 

Tirugnanasambandar, 20, see Grnana- 
sam ban da. 

Tirukkaccur, 218. 

Tirukkadaiyur, 185#. 


Tirukkajakku^i, 204. 
Tirukkalukkunratn, 63#. 
Tirukkattampaili, 95. 
Tirukkattupallij 152#. 
Tirukkollambddur, 127. 
Tirukkopamalai, 177. 

Tirukkovaiy&r , 66. 
Tirukkudamukku, 100. 
Tirukkurralam, 252. 

Tirumaiyyam, 158, 235. 

Tirumalai, 108, 223, 233. 
Tirumalai-Bhatarar, 92. 

Tirumalai Virar, 85. 

Tirumangai, 57. 

Tirumugam., 216. 

Tirnnalakkunram-udaiya-nayanar, 

228. 

Tirunamattu-kkdni , 238. 

Tirunelveli, 51, 126. 
Tirunelyelipperumal Kulasekhara, 
249. 

Tirupparank(g)unram, 61#, 144. 
Tirupparkkadal , 164. 
Tiruppotfcudaiya Bhatarar, 64, 91. 
Tiruppudaimarudur, *56. 
Tiruppullani, 244. 

Tiruppundurutti, 161. 

Tiruppu ram biyam, 77, 

Tirupputkuli, 160, 167#, 172. 
Tirupputtur, 98, 118, 127#, 210, 211, 
227,233, 241,248. 

Tiruppuvanam grant, 119#, 139, 

143. 

Tiruttaliyanda-Nayanar, 210, 211. 
Tiruttangal, 154, 155. 

T indtondatiogai , 49#, 54#, 67#. 
Tiruvadi, 142. 

Tiruvaianeadu, 7, 77#, 78#, 80#, 82, 
101#, 103#, 105, 107#, 127, 256. 
TiruvaUSvaram, 115, 119#. 146#. 
Tiruvalluvamdlai , 30#. 

Tiruvaiyar, 60#. 

Tiruvcisagam , 4, 18. 

Tiruvayirai, 95. 

Ti-nwaymoli, 4, 19. 

Tiruvendipuram, 148, 150#, 151, 
165#, 234. 

Tiruvilaiyadal , 3, 15, 26#, 48, 66 
and #, 97 #. 

TiruvI^alur, 107. 

Titiyan, 30#. 

TIttandatanapuram, 179#, 
Tolkdppiyam , 86#. 

Tondai mandalam, 183, 242. 
Tondai-(nad), 63, 77, 114. 

Tondi, 18, 131, 179#. 

Travancore, 64 , 99-101, 110, 124, 
125, 135 and #, 136, 163, 167, 183, 
211, 251. 



276 


THE PANDYAN KINGDOM 


Trichinopoly, 7 , 55#, 57, 59, 63, 
65, 84, 91, 92 n, 106#, 153, 165, 
167, 255. 

Trikutagiri, 176, 177. 
Tripurantakam, 164, 

Trivandram Museum Stone Inscrip- 
tion, 64, 86. 

Tufnell, 12 #. 

Tulabhara[s ) , 52, 59, 163, 169, 171. 
Tidy am, 215. 

Tumour and Wijesinha, 185#. 

U 

XJdagai, 105#, 112. 

Udayacandra, 51 #, 52#, 57 and #. 
Ud ay an a, 57#. 

Udayen diram, 51#, 52#, 57, 77#, 80 
and ft, 81. 

Ugra, 72#, 73#, 78. 
Ugrapperuvaludi, 17, 30. 
Ulappilimangalam, 80. 

Ulavii, 235. 

Uhidan-kudi , 217. 

Umai-Ammai, 119#. 

Ulvari , 216. 

£7r, 87. 

TJraiyur. 28. 54#, 144, 162#. 
Urattur-kurram, 220. 

Urkkalanju , 115. 

Urd?n, 219. 

Uruvukol-nilan-kasu, 115. 

Uttama Chola, 101#, 104, 107, 108#, 
Uttaradesam, 154. 

Uttaramantri [ns) , 44, 59#, 60, 85, 
_ 86 . 

Uttippakkam, 226. 

Uttiramallur, 93, 94, 230. 

V 

Vadakkadamai, 218. 

Vadugas, 175, 177, 178#. 
Vaikhanasas, 114. 

Vaisnav(a)(ism), 20, 21, 95, 158, 
235. 

Valanddu, 232. 

Va’lanjlyar, 179. 

Vallabha, 58, 68. 

Vallam, 85. 

Vallamprakara, 251#. 

Vallan, 175, 177, 178#. 
Vamanabbatta, 225. 

VanadirayanV 186. 

Vtinavan, 50, 55. 

Vanavanmahadevi, 78, 79, 82, 106. 
Yangalandaij 61. 
Yaniya-Nagarattar, 234. 

Yanji, 59 and n , 80, 256. 

Varadanna Dandanayaka, 158. 


Varaguna, 66. 

Varaguna Maharaja, 7, 40, 41, 45,. 
59, 68, 90, 91, 93, see Nedun- 
j ad ay an. 

Varagunavarman, 39, 40 and #, 41*. 

45_, 72#, 73#, 76-8. 

Varahamihira, 14#. 

Vdram, 218. 

Vara p par ru, 219. 

Varatungarama, 249, 251 and #. 
Varikkuru-seyvdr, 216. 

Vllriyam , 93, 94. 

Variyilar , 216. 

Vasal, 218. 

Vasal peru, 21 7. 

Vafani ?! 

Vatteluttu’6, 95, 101, 116. 

Vayal, 87. 

Vayalur, 233. 

Vdykkdlpdttam , 222, 223. 
Vedavyasam ath a . 236. 

Vegavati, 212 and n. 

Vel(s), 60 and #, 83. 

Veilalas, 49#, 226. 

Vellan, 115. 

Vellankaniyalar , 238. 

Vellanur, 155#. 

Veiiar, 25. 

Veiiaru, 190. 

V eiiiyambalattu- tun j iy a Peruvalu di 
29#. 

Veilur, 62. 

Veidr, 81. 

Velvikkudi, 7, 22-6, 38#, 39-45, 47- 
53, 55#. 56 and #, 58-61, 66, 68, 
88#, 253-5. 

Vemban SIrtidaiyar, 106. 

Vembil, 63. 

Venad(u), 64, 65, 190, 212#. 

Venbai, 58. 

Venbunadu, 95. 

Vengi, 124. 

Venkayya, V., 8#, 18#, 20#, 23#, 
3 In, 38#. 40#, 42# } 43#j 45#, 48 
and #, 51#, 52#, 54#, 55«, 61#, 
62#, 63#, 66#, 69#, 70, 72#, 73#,. 
80#, 88#, 89#, 91#, 92#, 103#, 105 
and #, 112#, 117#, 127 ancl #,. 
133#, 134#, 158#, 179#, 212#. 
Verriver-Celiyan, 27. 

Vetiipdttam, 217. 

Veitiydi\n ), 222, 238. 

Vettuvavari, 19. 

Vibhlsana, 81. 

Videlvidugu, 84. 

Vidyaraki, 117. 

VidyaSiva Pandita, 188. 

Vijaya, 14. 

Yijayalaya, 47, 48, 70, 77 , 85, 114. 



INDEX 


277 


Vi jay an agar, 235, 243, 244,247 and 
#, 24B, 251, 252. 

Vihatapdtava , 80. 

Vikrama Chola, 124, 125, 129, 
Vikraraaditya I Chalukya, 55#. 
Vikramakesari, 117 and n . 

Vikrama Pandya, 113. 

Vikrama Pandya ( acc . c. 1180) , 134-9, 
141, 143-5. 

Vikrama Pandyadgva, 122 n. 
Vikrama Pandya, J atavarman (acc. 
1401), 248. 

Vikrama Pandya Mahabali Vana- 
raya Nayanar, 187. 

Vikrama Pandya, Maravarman (acc. 

(1283), 140#, 162#, 177#, 189, 190. 
Vikramaparagan , 44. 
Vikramasirahapattana, 213. 
Vilinam, 55 and #,*64, 68, 69, 76, 
105, 124, 125. 

Vilveli, 51, 254. 

Vinayantolu Suran, 86. 

Viniyogam, 217. 

Vinnarn, 62. 

VircLbhiseka > 135, 144, 147, 168. 

Virakamparaya, 242, see Kampana 
Vira Keralan, 113, 122. 

VIra Narasimha II, 147-9. 

Vira Narayana Sadayan, 40, 41, 72#, 
78, 79, see Parantafca II, 

Vira Pandya (who took the head of 
the Chola), 101 and #, 102 and #, 
103, 116, 120. 

Vira Pandya (Civil War, 12th cent.), 
130 and n, 134-6, 138, 145, 146#. 
Vira Pandya (I), J atavarman {acc. 
1253), 130# } 159, 166#, 174-9, 180, 
187 , 229. 

Vira Pandya (II) , Jatavarman (acc. 

1296-7), 201-14, passim , 240, 245. 
Vira Pandya (1) , Maravarman (acc. 
13^4), 235, 245. 


Vira Pandya (II), Maravarman (acc. 
1443), 248. 

Vira Pandyan kd$u } 179. 
Vlrapratapar, 166#. 

Virapurogan , 44. 

VTrarajendra X, 103#, 110, 256. 

Vira Ramanatha, 364, 167#. 

Vira Ravi Udayamarttandavarman, 
163. 

Vira Ravivarman, 125. 
ViraSekharan, 119. 

Vira SomeSvara, 136, 158 and #, 
163, 164, 235. 

Vira ViSvanatha, 167#. 

ViSvanatha Nay aka, 252 and #. 
Visvandthappereriy 250. 
ViSayalayadevar, 210, 211. 

Vis ay am y 179. 

Visnu, 60, 61, 63 and #, 234. 
Visnuvardhana I, 129. 

Vi§vakarma, 243. 

Visvaksena, 169. 

Vriddhaealam, 165#, 1 66#, 213. 
Vrittis, 238. 

W 

Warmington, 253. 

Wassaf, 181, 185, 188, 190-3, 196, 
201-7, 210. 

Wij§sinha, 69#, 185#. 

Y 

Yadavas, 162#. 

Yaksis, 95. 

Yavanas, 35 and #, 242. 

Yuan Chwang, 29#, 54#, 95. 

Yule and Cordier, 181#, 205 and #. 

Z 

Ziauddin Barni, 204, 207, 210. 


PRINTED AT THE DIOCESAN PRESS, MADRAS, 1929 — C7805. 





