

Reprinted from 

Prof. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri 80th Birthday 
Felicitation Volume 





Iravatham Mahadevan 


Pallavas and the ‘jar’ Legends 


The origin of the Pallavas is one of the unsolved problems in South Indian 
history. The view advanced in this note is based on the meaning of the term 
' Palava ’ occuring as the name of the dynasty in its earliest extent copper plate 
charter. 

It is beyond the scope of this brief note to review the earlier theories 
propounded by the historians of the Pallava dynasty to account for its origin. 1 
Two observations are, however, relevant to the present discussion ! — 

The attempt to connect Skt., 4 pallava (’a sprout, shoot, twig, spray, bud, 
blosom ; Monier- Williams) with Ta., * tonfai ' (‘ a name of several varieties of 
creepers including * kdvai a creeper of the hedges and ' atontai ’, the thorny 
caper’; D.E.D., 2880 and 2881) is linguistically unsatisfactory as these two 
words do not mean the same thing ; 

The known facts about the Pallavas, — their ' gotra’ and personal names, 
the language and provenance of their earlier inscriptions and the style of their 
administration,— strongly suggest affinities with the Deccan rather than with the 
Tamil country. In the present state of our knowledge it seems best to consider 
the Pallavas as probably one of the many feudatory families rising to power in 
the wake of the disintegration of the <>atav£hana empire. 

The Mayidavolu plates, 2 which are the earliest of the extant copper-plate 
grants of the dynasty, offer an interesting and probably significant variation of 
the dynastic name, * Pallava ’. The record, which is in Prakrit and has been 
assigned to the fourth century a.d. on palaeographical grounds, was issued by 
the crown prince S'ivaskandavarman of the Pallava dynasty ( ' Palavnnam ’ ) 
belonging to the Bharadvaja gotra. 


1. For a discussion of these theories, see (The History of the Pallavas of Kind 
R. Gopalan (1928), pp. 15-31 ; and Kiiicipuram in Early South Indian History,. 
T V. Mahaiingam (1969), pp. 21-24 

2. Epigraphia Indiea, VI. p. 84 



1RAVATHAM MAHADEVAN : PALLAVAS AND JAR LEGENDS 85 


The term, ‘ Palava occurs only once. The Hiradahalli plates 1 2 issued 
somewhat later by the same ruler as well as all other subsequent records of the 
dynasty furnish the form, ‘ pallava One may, therefore, ascribe the variant, 

' Palava ', to a scribal error or to the tendency in prakrit to use single consonants 
in the place of doubled consonants found in the corresponding Sanskrit forms. 
However, the unique variant form, £ palava’, seems to be more meaningful than 
‘ pallava ’ in the context of the mythical origin claimed by the Pallavas. 

The term il palava ” in Sanskrit means ‘a basket of wicker-work (as for 
catching fish) ’ and is also attested as a personal name (Monier-Williams). It is 
known that the Pallavas claimed that their family ' issued out of a vessel ’ 
( pattra-skhalita-vrittinam ) a . They also claimed descent from Drona, 3 who was, 
according to legend, 4 generated by Bharadvaja in a * bucket ’. In fact, the 
Sanskrit word, ’'drona” itself means’ a wooden vessel, bucket or trough' 
(Monier-Williams) . 

A similar legendary origin from a vessel was claimed by some other dynas- 
ties in South India. According to tradition 5 , the Chalukyas were so called 
as the family sprang from a ' suluka ’, ‘ a water-pot The Velir chieftains of the 
Tamil country, who had marital ties with the Cheras and the Cholas and affinities 
with the Chalukyas and the Hoysalas, arose, according to legend, 6 from the 
water-pot ‘tatavu’ of a ‘northern sage’. The name vishnu-kundin (literally, 
' one related to the vessel of Vishnu’) seems to imply a similar legendary origin. 
I have suggested elsewhere 7 that the term "andhra” seems to be connected with 
Proto-Dravidian *anr~, the stem from which several Dravidian cognates signifying 
a variety of vessels are derived ( vide D.E.D., 107, 109 and 110). 

The legend of the ‘jar-born’ sages is indeed very ancient and is even found 
in the Rig-veda (VII : 33) where it is said that Vasishta and Agastya were gene- 

1. Epigraphia Indica, I, p. 2 

2. From the inscription on the seal of the Paljankoyil Plates el. by T. N. Subramaniyan 
in The transactions of the Archaeological Society of South India (1958-59), pp. 41-83. pi. XII 

3. Ibid., verse 2 of the Sanskrit portion 

4. Mahabh&raia , 1 : 130 

5. Vikram&nkacaritra, I : 318-8 

6. Pur.anauur.u, 201 

7. Dravidian Parallel in Proto-Indian Script, Iravatham Mahadevan, Journal of Tamil 
Studies vol. II, No. 1 (April 1970), pp. 173-4 



86 


PROF. K. A. N. SASTRI : FELICITATION VOLUME 


rated by Mitra and Varuna from a jar. Consequently Agastya was known as 
kumbha-yoni kumbha-sambhava and byother synonymous names and Vasishta 
was called Kundina (' the vessel ’) and his descendants came to be known as 
the Kauntjinyas. I have already referred to a very similar story in respect of 
Drona, the legendary ancestor of the Pallavas. 

Two significant aspects of these 'jar' legends merit attention as they both 
seem to indicate that the myth has a Dravidian origin. 

The myth of miraculous birth from a jar was shared by the Brahmanas 
and the Kshatriyas, or rather by the families which were both BrShmana and 
Kshatriya by tradition. Vasishtha was called Devaraj. Agastya was the 
reputed leader of the southern migration of the Velir clan which gave rise to 
many southern ruling dynasties. 1 2 The Vejir chieftains seem to have had a 
sacerdotal origin. (It is instructive to compare O.Ta vel : ‘a chieftain ' with 
the verb vel : ‘ to sacrifice ’). Drona, the Brahmana preceptor of the Kurus, 
was also the ruler of North pancala, The Andhras traced their descent from 
the Vedic sages, as indicated by their matronymics like Vasishthiputra, and 
styled themselves " Eka-brahmana ” in their inscriptions. The Pallavas, and 
the Salaiikayanas belonged to Brahmanical gotras. 3 

It is sometimes considered that the existence of the Brahmana-Kshatriya 
families indicated greater mobility among the " varnas ” in the early Indo- 
Aryan society. However the discovery of a pre-Aryan and probably Dravidian 
civilization in North-West India with some evidence for a ruling priestly 
oligarchy — (" The general indication of a combined kingly and priestly rule 
fits the habit of the third " Millennium,” Wheeler, 1969 : 18) — provides a new 
explanation for this phenomenon. It now appears likely that the Brahmana- 
Kshatriya or priest. ruler tradition is pre-Aryan and possibly a survival of the 
Proto-Indian priest rule. 


1. Naccinarkkiniyar's Commentaries on Tolkapptyam, Pay train 

2. •• The Bhuradvaja Pallavas were not the only Brahmanas who adopted the military 

career in those days in the Dakshipapatha. There were the G&utamas, Vasishthas. 
Kapvas, Kaupdinyas. Haritas. and this Munavyas of the earlier epoch who inter- 
married with the reigning dynasty and other ruling families in the S'itavahana 
period. The History of Andhra upto the middle of the seventeenth century abounds 
in instances where Ur ah ma pas adopted the military career *' — A History of the Early 
Dynasties of Andltradesa, B. Venkatakrishna Rao (1942), Madras. 



1RAVATHAM MAHADEVAN : PALLAVAS AND JAR LEGENDS 87 


The second aspect of the ‘ jar ’ legends worthy of notice is their special 
association with the Dravidian south. As we have seen, they were current among 
many Dravidian dynasties. The Brahmanical sages, Agastya and Vasisbtha 
(Devaraj/Kunffina) with whom the ‘jar’ legends are associated, are the ones 
especially popular in the South Indian and Dravidian tradition. Kosambi 
(1970: 82-83) goes to the extent of saying : “The seven main brahmin clan 

progenitors may go back to hoary Sumerian or Indus antiquity as the ‘ seven 
sages’ The adoption of such ‘jar-born’ seers into the high Aryan priest- 

hood was a fundamental innovation. By such recombination of the Aryan 
and autochthone, a new class of specialist developed which would eventually 
claim monopoly of all Aryan ritual - the brahmin caste 

The partial decipherment of the proto-Indian (' Harappan ’) seal-texts 
seems to provide a cine to the ultimate origin of the * jar ’ legends. It turns 
out that the most frequent sign in this pictographic script is the symbol of 
a jar with handles or with a pronounced rim lip. It has been inferred from 
statistical-positional analysis that the ' jar ’ sign function as a suffix at the 
end of what are most probably names and titles on the seal texts. 1 If the 
further premise that the sales would mostly give the names of the ruling 
classes is granted, it follows that the ' jar ‘ symbol is connected, probably 
through homonymy, with the priest-rulers of the civilization. 8 The preserva- 
tion of the ‘ jar * legends in later Indian tradition and its association with 
priestly and royal clans 3 can now be interpreted as an important Proto- 
Indian survival. 


1. The Script of Harappa and Mohcnjodaro and its connection with other scripts, G. R. Hunter 
(1934), P. 61. I have followed Hunter's analysis of the function of this sign, in 
preference to the more recent attempts by the Soviet and the Finnish scholars who 
regard the sign as a case-ending (the genitive.). 

2, I. Mahadevan, Op. cit. (n. 9). pp. 165-174. The suggestions made here are briefly 
as follows ! The Dravidian masculine singular pronominal sufflx-*a»r is homo- 
phonous with a ‘vessel' word, and hence the pictogram of a ‘ jar ' in the script 
probably represented the pronominal suffix added bonorifically after male personal 
names. In due course, the honorific became a dynastic appellation and passed into 
Sanskrit as a loan word in the form andhra. 

3« When the memory of the pictographic script was totally lost,|its ‘jar* sign associa- 
ted with the priestly and the ruling classes became their symbol around which 
myths grew up. In a parallel development, the Dravidian honorific, homophonous 
with a ‘ vessel’ word, was borrowed into Sanskrit in the latter sense at various 
periods in different translations. These words '.became personal or family names 



PROF. K. A. N. SASTR1 : FELICITATION VOLUME 


I came across an interesting report of an early inscribed stone image 
of Vishnu apparently giving the names Palava ? and Bharadiyi. J 


REFERENCES : 


A Dravidian Elymolgical Dictionary, T. Burrow & M. B 
Emeneau (1961), Supplement (1968), Oxford. 


The Culture and Civilization of India in Historical Outline (1970) 


Monier-williams : A Sanslcrit-Englieh Dictionary, (Indian ed., 1970) 

Wheeler, Sir Mortimer : Civilizations of the Indus Valley and Beyond (1966) 


^POSTSCRIPT 

After I completed the paper and submitted the manuscript to the Editor, 
I came across a report* of an ancient inscription (c. 2nd Cent. B.C.) on a stone 
image of Vishnu (or Vasudeva) found in Malhar, Bilaspur district, Madhya 
Pradesh. The text in Brahmi characters reads i 

Palava [si] dana BharadayiyU karapita 

It has been translated thus : ‘ gift of Palava [4i] ; caused to be made by 
Bharadayi ’. There is no discussion of the significance of the names in the report. 
The appearance of the personal name Palava (Palava ?) and its juxtaposition 
with the apparent gotra name (Skt. Bharadvaja) at such an early date and so far 
to the north are noteworthy. (*M. Venkataramanayya, *An inscribed Vaishnava 
image of 2nd century B.C. from Malhar, Bilaspur district, Madhya Pradesh 
Journal of Oriental Research, Madras, Vol. XXIX (1959-60), pp. 36-40, 
PI. I to III.) 


among the ruling and the priestly classes. Words like * Drona 1 * Kundina - 
• Palava 1 are examples of this process. 1 have dealt with this matter in 
greater detail in my paper, Bi-lingual Parallelisms in Proto-Indian Script, to be 
published later- 



