





SOURCE OF INDIAN HISTORY 
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO 
SOUTH INDIA 


H eras Memorial Lectures, 
1961 




SOURCES OF 
INDIAN HISTORY 
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO 
SOUTH INDIA 

' J1488 


K; A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 

Under the auspices of the 
Heras Institute of Indian History and Culture 



ASIA PUBLISHING HOUSE 

BOMBAY - CALCUTTA - NEW DELHI - MADRAS 
LUCKNOW - LONDON - NEW YOBK 



© HER AS INSTITUTE OF INDIAN HISTORY AND CULTURE 

1964 


The Heras Memorial Lectures honour the memory of an 
eminent historian and archaeologist, the Rev. Henry Heras, S.J. 
Father Heras came to India from Spain in 1922 at the young 
age of 32 to be Professor of Indian History at St. Xavier’s 
College, Bombay. He died there in 1955 after spending more 
than half of his life in digging up India’s past to display to 
the world the glorious traditions and culture of the land he 
made his own and whose citizen he became. 

Sponsored by the Fr. Heras Memorial Fund and by St. Xavier’s 
College, the Memorial Lectures, which deal with themes 
pertaining to Indian History and Culture, were held for the 
fust time in 1960. They were delivered by Dr. H. D. Sankalia, 
one of the most distinguished students of the Indian Historical 
Research Institute which Father Heras founded, and which is 
now named the Heras Institute of Indian History and Culture. 
Dr. Sankalia’s lectures have been published under the title 
Indian Archaeology Today (Asia Publishing House). The pre- 
sent volume contains the second series of Heras Memorial 
Lectures* 


CENTRAL ABH? AEOLCCICAJ- 
LIMtAEY, NEW DELHI. 

A*C. No - 

Date .. b 


Call No ... 19 . 




TOOTED IN INDIA By S. RAMASWAMI AT G. S. PRESS, 
MADRAS 2, AND PUBLISHED BY P. S. jayasinghe 
ASIA PUBLISHING HOUSE, BOMBAY 1 


PREFACE 


i This little book contains the substance of three lectures 
i delivered in Bombay under the Heras Memorial Fund 
I during the last three days of November 1961* I take the 
[ opportunity to express my grateful thanks to Rev* Fr* Correia 
I Afonso for the invitation he extended to me to deliver these 
I lectures, for suggesting the subject for them and for under- 
I taking the publication also. 

* Much to my regret, some printing errors have escaped un- 
^ corrected and the reader may please refer to p. 108. 

I 

K* A. NrLAKAJNTA Sastbi 


) 

\ 



CONTENTS 

Preface v 

I. Sources of Indian History with Special Reference 

to South India 1 

H. South India about A.D. 1300 50 

III. South India from the Fourteenth Century 79 

Bibliography 1 Q 7 

Index 109 

% 



1 SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY WITH SPECIAL , 
| REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 

I ' ' 

| I appreciate very much the honour of being invited to deliver 
the second course of the Heras Memorial Lectures and would 
i convey my sincere thanks to the authorities of the Heras Insti- 
ll tute of Indian History and Culture for this invitation. My 
f acquaintance with Father Heras began in 1924 when he attend- 
f ed a session of the All-India Oriental Conference in Madras; 
| at that time I was principal of the Sri Meenakshi College (now 
the core of the Annamalai University) and invited 'Father 
f Heras to visit Chidambaram and talk to the students of the 
College; he very kindly accepted my invitation and came and 
spent a few days in the then new campus of the College as 
f its guest. Needless to say the talks of Father Heras and the 
opportunity the students had of meeting him in small groups 
were a source of inspiration to them. Since then, we were 
good friends till the end of his life. The learned Father had 
I a hand in my appointment to the Chair of Indian History and 
Archaeology (as it then was) in the University of Madras in 
the year 1929, Even at my first meeting with him. Father 
Heras showed me some of the draft chapters of the Aravidu 
Dynasty; I was greatly surprised and told him: 'Here I am, 
an Indian and a professional teacher of history, with a fair 
; equipment in history and the Indian languages, who has 
i, taught the subject for nearly a dozen years, but without a 
| single line of historical writing to my credit; and you, a Spa- 
niard with no prior knowledge of Indian History or languages, 
have taken less than two years not only to become a good 
| teacher of India’s history and culture, but an excellent weak- 
er in the field of original historical research. How do you 
manage this?’ His reply, which I still recall vividly, gave fgt 
a nutshell Ms entire attitude to life apd work. Look iteee! 
Sastn’, ;he said/T ani a Jesxfit'' bound by vows to bhedie»d§, 
i, poverty and service of God. I have no domestic cares ‘iSpr 
% economic ambitions. I have now been ordered by my 

I: 

i: ■ ■ • 



i SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

superiors to go and teach Indian History in Xavier’s College, 
Bombay, and that is the method prescribed for me in which 
to serve God. Unless I devote all my time and energy to this 
work,. I shall not be fulfilling my duty. If you found yourself 
in a similar situation’, he added encouragingly, ‘you will per- 
haps do much better’. We all know that he made his word 
good and served Indian History and culture with all his 
strength and ability to the last moment of his life. I had 
many meetings with him in different places and contexts in 
later years, and every time my admiration for him increased, 
though he knew that I had one regret that he did not feel 
free to accept my suggestion that he should explore and 
publish the Portuguese archives in Goa for which I thought 
he was preeminently qualified. 

I have accepted the kind suggestion of Father Correia- 
Afonso that in these lectures I should discuss the sources of 
Indian History with special reference to South India. Accord- 
ingly, I propose to devote the first lecture to a discussion of 
the problems relating to sources of India’s history and cul- 
ture in general, and then in the two succeeding lectures to 
go fia some detail into the sources of South Indian History, 
meaning by South India the whole of peninsular India south 
erf the Vindhyas. The range of Indian History is very vast; 
it covers a period of well over five thousand years. The 
sources of our knowledge of it are also exceptionally varied 
and far-flung, and they are found written in a large number 
of languages, Asian and European, ancient and modern. Ob- 
viously no one can claim equal mastery over all this vast 
material, and its treatment in detail by any writer is bound 
to Be intimate and authoritative in the parts in which he is 
at home and of which he has direct knowledge, and rather 
remote and derivative in the other parts. There is also an- 
other point. Our sources do not cover the entire range of the 
subject with any approach to evenness; for some periods we 
have good and abundant material, for others we have only 
vague traditions and literary works of varying degrees of 
trustworthiness, and for yet others we have no aids at all 
from any quarter. Indian History may he aptly compared 
to a large mansion of many roonas and halls, some of which 



SOVRCES WITH MEEERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA $ 

are steeped in darkness while the rest are lit up in different 
degrees of intensity, none of them, however, being so com- 
pletely illuminated as to enable us to make a complete in- 
ventory of its contents. 

The modern and scientific study of Indian History and cul- 
ture was initiated by the English administrators of the country 
late in the eighteenth century. Some Christian Missionaries, 
particularly of the Society of Jesus working in South India, 
had at an earlier time mastered Sanskrit and some South 
Indian languages, and even written books in them, but their 
aim was to spread the gospel among Indians rather than elu- 
cidate their history, and a modern critical historian has ob- 
served that ‘the Jesuits for all their studies, gained no real 
understanding of India’s past’. Sir William Jones and Char- 
les Wilkins were the pioneers in the field. Jones came to 
Calcutta as Judge of the Supreme Court during the Gover- 
norship ’of Warren Hastings who was himself very sympathetic 
to both Hindu and Muslim cultures. Jones was a linguistic 
genius who had learnt many languages including Chinese 
and Hebrew before he came to India, and had recognized the 
kinship of European languages with Persian; and rejecting 
the orthodox eighteenth century view that all these lang- 
uages were derived from Hebrew, had suggested another 
common ancestor for them. This hint was worked up early in 
the nineteenth century (1816) by the Bavarian Franz Bo pp 
who laid the foundations of comparative philology. Jones 
began to learn Sanskrit with the aid of Charles Wilkins and 
some friendly Indian pandits, and founded the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal on the first day of 1784 with himself as President. 
Wilkins’ translation of the Bhagavadgita (Nov. 1784), and of 
the Hitopadesa (1787) ; and Jones’s translation of gakuntala 
(1789), the Gita Govinda (1792), and of the Manu-Smriti 
(published posthumously in 1794 under the title Institutes of 
Hindu Law), were landmarks in the unravelling of India’s 
pa$t. About the same time, Europe’s interest in India was 
stimulated in another way by*the publication in 1786 by the 
Frenchman Anquetil Duperron of a translation of four Upa- 
nishads from a 17th Century Persian version, the translation 


i 


SOURCE# OR INDIAN HlSTOfti 


of the whole manuscript, containing 50 Upanishads, appearing 
in 1801. Jones and Wilkins were followed by Colebroke 
ahd Wilson. The initiative in another direction was taken by 
Alexander Cunningham and James Prinsep. Cunningham be- 
came a young officer of the Royal Engineers in India in 1831; 
he devoted all his spare time to the study of the material re- 
mains of ancient India, and in 1862 he was appointed to the 
new post of Archaeological Surveyor, the idea then being that 
the survey could be completed and done with once and for all 
in a few years. Cunningham worked with single-heartedness 
until his retirement in 1885 and produced a number of reports 
which are still worth perusal; he made no startling discoveries 
and his technique left much to be desired by modern stan- 
dards; still Indology owes more to him than to any other work- 
er in the archaeological field. He collaborated with James 
Prinsep, an official of Calcutta Mint and Secretary of the 
Asiatic Society of Bengal, in deciphering the earliest Brahmi 
Script with the aid of bilingual coins from Western India, 
and then reading the edicts of Aioka. Such were the begin- 
nings of the critical study of the history and civilization of 
ancient India. But I must resist the temptation to linger on 
the details of their fascinating subject of the history of Indian 
historical studies which would form by itself a separate course 
of several lectures. I shall note only the broad outlines of 
the entire development, and offer a few general remarks on 
the present position before I enter the proper subject- 
matter of these lectures viz. the Sources of our knowledge 
of Indian History and Culture. 

Once the West was roused to take an interest in the aca- 
demic study of Indian civilization — I must not omit to men- 
tion in passing that not only Indian culture and languages 
thereof, but other Asian countries like China, and the Near 
Eastern countries attracted equal attention — that study was 
organized on a permanent basis in many Western countries 
such as France, Germany, England, Russia and the U.S.A. 
to Mention only the most prominent ones; Chairs in Sanskrit 
‘were founded, learned societies organized and periodicals 
Issued in several European languages and devoted to Indolo- 


Sources with reference to south india 


X 

gy and other oriental studies; much striking work on ancient 
# Indian History and philology was done by successive 

holders of Chairs in Sanskrit in the different universities. 
Much good work was done in India also by Biihler, Burgess, 
Fleet, Hultzsch, Kielhom and others, and some Indian scho- 
lars like Rajendra Lala Mitra, Bhagavanlal Indraji and Sir 
R. G. Bhandarkar attained eminence in the application of 
modern methods of research to Indian subjects. Bumouf arid 
Max Miiller, Lassen and Weber, Fergusson and Macdonell, 
Rhys Davids, Lanman, and Bloomfield are just a few of the 
* great names in the Western scholarship of the last century on 

the Indian section of Oriental studies. The results achieved 
along different lines in the nineteenth century were succinctly 
summed up in the first scientific treatise published in 1904 
on the Early History of India by Vincent A. Smith, of the 
I ndian Civil Service, who wrote other equally important 
works later and gained a foremost place among the modem 
historians of India. Though Smith claimed that his was the 
first attempt to present a narrative of the events of the Hindu 
period, we should recall the gigantic work which Christian 
Lassen completed (in German) over forty years before the 
publication of the Early History, besides which, as Prof. 
Basham puts it, ‘the Early History appears almost trivial In 
its narrow scope and lack of detail’. (Historians of I.P. & C. 
p. 261). Lassen (1800-76) was a Norwegian, who spent 'has 
working life as Professor of Indian Languages and Literature 
at the University of Bonn. His history of ancient India, 
Indische Alterthumskunde, comprising four volumes of a 
thousand large pages each and published between 1847 and 
4 1861, has been described as ‘one of the world’s greatest monu- 

ments of untiring industry and critical scholarship’. For all 
its marvellous learning, it is a work of great simplicity.. 
Though the emphasis is on political history, long chapters 
are devoted in each section to religion, social life, literature, 
language, science, industry and commerce. Though further 
research an d new material have proved his chronology to be 
almost completely false, the work of Lassen is a milestone in 
the progress of Indology. It gives much attention to India’s 


6 SOURCES OP INDIAN MsfoM 

culture and political relations with South East Asia and China, 
and Lassen is not dazzled by the triumphs of Alexander, as 
was Vincent Smith. He held that Hinduism, for all its faults, 
was a rock on which the fury of Islam broke. Indeed 
neither Greek culture nor the destructive power of Islam 
could conquer Hindu culture. Lassen’s individual esti- 
mate of British rule in India is remarkably precise and 
shrewd for its time: ‘We see that English industry has des- 

troyed the old Indian handicrafts, plunged the land into 
poverty, and brought with it the necessity for its rulers to 
convert India into an immense agricultural country, profita- 
ble on account of its riches in natural products!’ 

Mediaeval and modern Indian History engaged the attention 
pf other British Indian scholars and administrators. Mount- 
stuart Elphinstone’s History of India (1841) is a monumental 
work based on the Muslim historians like Firishta and Khafi 
Khan, and for the Maratha part of the account, on some 
Marathi records and more on his own personal -knowledge 
of the country and the people, and in spite of the progress of 
research for well over a century, it can still be read with 
pleasure and profit. A comprehensive general view of the 
Muslim period ’of Indian History was provided by the trans- 
lations and summaries in the eight volumes of the History 
of India as told by its own Historians, (1867-77) by Sir Henry 
Elliot and Professor John Dowson, supplemented by S. H. 
Hodivala’s Studies in Indo-Muslim History (1939) — a valuable 
critical commentary on Elliot and Dowson. Lane-Poole based 
his readable and popular account of Mediaeval India, in the 
Story of the Nations series, on Elliot and Dowson. Sir Edward 
Bayley’s incomplete work, the History of Gujaret is a sup- 
plement to the sources collected by Elliot and Dowson. Tod’s 
Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, 2 Vols. 2nd edn. Mad- 
ras 1873, not very dependable as history, is a magnificent 
work which suitably enshrines the annals of Rajput chivalry 
and has exerted a notable influence on literature and drama. 
Grant Duff’s History of the Marathas, Calcutta 1912, in three 
volumes was the first full dress account of the rise and fall 
of the Marathas and long remained a standard authority until 






SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA f 

^ y 

the work of Sardesai and Sarkar effected the revision render- 
ed necessary by the discovery of many new records since Doff 
wrote his History. 

Robert Orme’s History of the Military Transactions of the 
British Nation in Indostan (1803) remains a basic authority 
for the period of the Carnatic Wars and the rise of British 
Dominion in India, along with R.O. Cambridge’s Account of 
the War in India. ‘James Mill’s History of British India (1817) 
completed by H.H. Wilson by 1835 (1840) remains outstanding 
among the old general histories, for all its one-sidedness and 
occasional wrong headedness, though it has not lived up 
to Macaulay’s comparison with Gibbon. Smaller works of 
this class are the histories by E. Thornton, J. C. Marshman, 
and W. Beveridge.’ 1 

The twentieth century has been marked by notable pro- 
gress in Indian historical studies in which Indian scholars 
have taken an increasing part. Indian Archaeology was put 
on a strong basis by the establishment of the distinguished 
archaeologist Sir John Marshall as the first Director-General 
Cunningham had collected some enigmatic seals covered with 
a mysterious writing from the Punjab, and the discovery of 
more seals of the kind by R. D. Banerjee led to the most 
sensational discovery of the Indus Valley civilization in the 
twenties which carried back the ancient history of India by 
nearly three thousand years before the age of the Rig Veda 
with which the civilization of India had been supposed to 
begin. Since then increasing attention has been given to pre- 
history, and attempts are in progress to bridge the gap between 
the Indus Culture and that of the Vedic Age. The contri- 
bution of pre- Aryan India to the historic Indo-Aryan civili- 
zation has received particular emphasis, and the strength of 
the new reaction is such that some writers even tend to under- 
rate the value of the Aryan contribution. Important histori- 
cal sites like Taxila, Safichi, Saraath and Nalanda have been 
systematically explored and excavated and much new and 
precise knowledge gained in chronology and history. The 


l Oxford History of India, p. 454. 


4 &OVRCRS OF INDIAN HISTORY 

technique of excavation has been vastly improved in the last 
decade or so, thanks to Sir Mortimer Wheeler, and this has 
led to improved interpretation of the data obtained. The 
publication of source books of all periods and in different 
languages has proceeded apace in India and abroad, though 
in some cases the critical standard attained is not as high 
as may be desired. We cannot attempt a detailed account of 
all such publications, though we may have occasion to men- 
tion some of the most important series in due course. The 
critical edition of the Mahabharat-a undertaken by the Bhan- 
darkar Institute of Poona is nearing completion, and an even 
vaster enterprise, a historical and etymological dictionary of 
Sanskrit, has been set on foot also in Poona in the Deccan 
College Research Institute, and the Rmndyana text is being 
critically edited in Baroda, and new and improved editions 
of the Vedas, the Dharma&astras and Pur&na s are in progress 
under the auspices of different learned societies in India. 

Several one volume histories of India have been written by 
different authors, Indian and English, and Smith’s Oxford 
History of India, which has recently gone into a third edition 
with the whole of the British period rewritten by Spear, con- 
tinues to be leading example of this type. Special mention 
must be made of three volumes of the brilliant Belgian writer 
Louis de la Vallee Poussin; these volumes are in French and 
form part of a comprehensive history of the world; they were 
published between the years 1924 and 1935 and are entitled 
Indo-Europeans et Indo-Iraniens ; L’lnde Jusque Vers 
300 ar. j.c.; (2nd Ed.; Paris, 1936), L’Inde anx Temps des 
Maury as (Paris 1930), and Dynasties et Histoire de L’Inde 
(1935) > the last volume covering the period from Kanishka 
to the Muslim invasions. The books are remarkable for their 
precise and critical scholarship, their excellent bibliography, 
and balanced discussion of many vexed questions relating to 
foreign invasions, the origin of the Buddha image, the dates 
of Buddha,. Ranrni, Patanjali, Kanishka and so on. Poussin 
emphasizes the provisional character of even widely accepted 
theories and says that ‘great scholars have reared on bases 
which are more than fragile, scaf-foldings which we climb 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 9 

with Dip? eyes closed’. He protests also against pseudo-scien- 
tific methods of averaging evidence followed by some scholars. 
'We must admit that we do not understand, we do not under- 
stand at all, the classical method of Puraiiic exegesis, and the 
vain hope of extracting the true from the false by arbitrary 
methods. For example the Vdyu gives a certain king a reign 
of 24 years; the Matsya gives the same king a reign of 
36 years. V. Smith gives this king 32 years, solemnly writing 
"duration adjusted”. In the same way he adjusts to 40 years 
the reign of a prince whom the Vayu mentions without giving 
the length of his reign and to whom the Matsya gives 56 
years. Isn’t this childish?’ 2 Hie brief notes on religion, lite- 
rature and art are also very pointed and suggestive. 

There seems to be some kind of a curse working against the 
multi-volume projects of Indian History in English. Even the 
great University of Cambridge which has successfully put 
through many large multi- volume histories of ancient, media- 
eval and modern Europe, not to speak of the histories of 
literature, foreign policy etc. and of the new Cambridge 
modern history, has not completed its six-volume Indian 
History according to plan; the second volume is still to 
see light, (but we now learn from Spear that Basham 
is preparing the volume which may come out soon) and 
volumes V and VI form part of another series and suffer 
considerably in the point of view adopted; the first volume 
was published in 1922, and four decades have not sufficed 
for the completion of the project. The Comprehensive History 
of India in twelve volumes, planned initially by the Indian 
History Congress and merged subsequently in another twenty- 
volume project of the Bharatiya Itihas Parishad after two 
volumes out of the twenty had been published, has apparently 
received a prematpre interment after one volume, the second 
in the plan, was published in 1957. Yet another project that 
of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan in ten volumes, which cannot 
bear comparison with those named above, is making a slow 
progress and has succeeded in issuing six volumes out of the 

2 Historians, etc. pp. 276-7. 

2 


JO SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

ten. Let us hope that this scheme will he carried to completion 
in a reasonable time. 

The study of Indian History and culture must in future 
become increasingly the concern of Indians. There has been 
a perceptible increase in the volume of research in Indian 
History undertaken by Indian scholars and the publication of 
its results in recent years. But considering the vastness of 
the field and the amount of work that remains to be done, 
the pace of development cannot be considered adequate. 1 
think it may be useful to indicate what, on a broad view, 
appear to be the shortcomings in the present situation which 
require to be remedied if substantial progress is to be achiev- 
ed. The most notable feature here is the absence of a perma- 
nent professional all-India organization devoted to the further- 
ance of the study of our subject. We have, indeed, a number 
of or ganiza tions each seeking to cultivate a part of the field 
in its own way. We may mention for instance the Indian 
Historical Records Commission, the Indian History Congress 
and the All India Oriental Conference. They hold periodical 
sessions in different parts of the country at which papers 
are read which are published either all together or in selec- 
tions in the report of the sessions which appear sometimes 
long after the sessions. But the quality of the papers often 
leaves much to be desired, there seems to be no kind of 
standard aimed at; there is no rule that each paper should 
make some tangible contribution to knowledge before it can 
qualify for admission to the conference. There is no perma- 
nent membership except in the case of the I.H.R.C., and atten- 
dance at the periodical sessions in all cases is largely a matter 
of accident. Above all, none of these organizations has a 
definite programme of integrating the work done in different 
centres like universities and research institutes by means of 
consolidated annual bibliographies, Or the resources for work- 
ing such a programme. We become painfully conscious in 
this context of the attempts which were started with such 
aims and given up after some time e.g. The Annuel Biblio- 
graphy of Indian Archaeology by the Kern Institute of Leyden, 
and the Bibliography of Indian History issued for some years 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 


U 

by this very Institute. Even attempts to collect and publish 
information on the studies and theses in progress in different 
centres of work have been foiled by lack of willing co- 
operation. Our deficiency in this respect becomes clear if we 
think of the regular and long standing record of high achieve- 
ment of such bodies as the Royal Historical Society of England 
or the American Historical Association. I do not wish to dwell 
on the reasons for this major defect in our equipment which 
each one among us may be able to identify by a moment’s 
earnest thought about them, but would put in a plea for active 
steps being taken by all the workers in the field, each to the 
best of his capacity and opportunities, to see this defect remov- 
ed by setting up a new organization, or better by developing 
one of the existing bodies on lines calculated to meet the 
purpose I have indicated. I do not forget that this will involve 
considerable expenditure; but our experience with long term 
planning has shown that the problem of personnel is often 
more fundamental than that of material resources, and I have 
every hope that if we have found a group of historians deter- 
mined to build up a strong Indian Historical Association, they 
will soon be able to command the material resources for the 
starting and furtherance of their work, 

I am afraid that as a subject of study history is not as 
popular in our universities as it once was and as it should 
be. In the first two decades of this century, in Madras which 
I know best, the number of undergraduates who opted for 
history out-weighed the numbers, who opted for all the other 
subjects in the degree courses put together. But now the 
history courses are the least popular, probably because econo- 
mics and politics which at that time formed integral parts of 
the history degree course, have now become separate courses 
which offer relatively easier paths to a degree. This is pro- 
bably the case also in the rest of India, though so far as I 
know, in other countries the study of history holds its own 
even if it Is not expanding. Another notable difference 
between us and other countries like England and foe U.S.A. 
is that while in those countries there are faculties of varying 
strength organized for foe study of foe history — * 



12 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


zation of foreign countries, our centres of learning take no- 
interest In our neighbours and their histories, and even the 
history of South East Asia, which formed part of India during 
the first millennium of the Christian era and was included 
in that name by Ptolemy and the Arab geographers is receiv- 
ing very scant attention at our hands. Again, the study of 
Indian History at the sources cannot be undertaken without a 
comprehensive and well formed linguistic equipment. Sans- 
krit, Pali and Tamil for the ancient period; Persian, Marathi 
and Portuguese for the mediaeval; Dutch and French besides 
English for the modern period as also for the study of South 
East Asian history, are the desirable minima. Most of the 
modem researches on the history and archaeology of Indo- 
China are presented in the French language and those of 
Indonesia in Dutch. I may recall here that soon after my 
appointment as Professor of Indian History and Archaeology 
in the University of Madras in 1929, Mr. F. J. Richards, I.C.S. 
in the course of a friendly review of my Pdndyan Kingdom , 
drew attention to a serious omission on my part and pointed 
out that I had not properly elucidated the episode of Candra- 
bhanu’s invasion of Ceylon in the twelfth century as I had 
apparently no knowledge of the history of Sri Vijaya and of 
South East Asia, in general. To tell the truth, that was in 
fact the first time I became aware of this big gap in my 
equipment, and I soon found out that without a knowledge 
of the Dutch and French languages, I could make no pro- 
gress worth the name in South East Asian history. Books in 
English on the subject were practically unknown then, the 
position is much better today, and I set myself the task of 
learning these two languages on my own with the aid of 
Hugo’s excellent readers in the self-taught series. I dis- 
covered thereby a whole new continent of Indian studies and 
soon began to make my own small contribution to knowledge 
in the subject. Hut this is not all. If you -want to work on 
the yet unsettled problems connected with the Aryan immi- 
gration into "India and with those of the Indus Valley civili- 
zation, you may be called upon to take up the ancient lan- 
guages and scripts of Mesopotamia and Western Asia. Many 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 


13 


questions of the historical period would require a knowledge 
of Chinese and Tibetan on the part of any one who wants 
to evaluate precisely the original evidence bearing on them; 
and without a knowledge of Arabic you may not be able to 
judge for yourself the precise implications of the geographical 
and historical works on India written in this language. There 
are indeed accessible translations of much of this far-flung 
material which will serve the ordinary readers, but minute 
critical work is seldom possible without a well developed capa- 
city to handle the originals with confidence. The mere enu- 
meration of these desiderata is sufficient to show the weakness 
in our present position and indicate the lines of action for the 
immediate future. I may mention that the Union Government 
has got plans for setting up two Institutes for the study of 
ancient and medieval Indian History which, without duplicat- 
ing work already being done in the existing learned institutions 
of the country, will make decided advances along comple- 
mentary lines and add tangibly to our academic equipment 
in a relatively short time. But for these Institutes to suc- 
ceed, there must be a regular supply of high grade talent; 
this can come about only if each year a number of graduates 
with good degrees, a score or so, will make up their minds 
to choose the study and teaching of history as their career, 
and resist the temptation to be drawn into the administrative, 
banking and other perhaps more lucrative services. I have 
spoken to you of the spirit in which Father Heras went to the 
study of Indian History. A stranger to things Indian when 
he reached the country, he soon learnt a vast deal about its 
peoples, mastered its languages, and made signal contribu- 
tions to the knowledge of its history and culture. Even those 
who may not be free from domestic cares as he was, may 
well seek to capture some of his earnest and passionate devo- 
tion to the subject. History is after all one of the most fasci- 
nating fields of work; it provides scope for many skills and 
many opportunities for the joy of discovery and achievement, 
it is a pity that this is not recognized as widely as it deserves 
to be. 



14 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


With rare and belated exceptions, India failed to develop 
a written history in the past. We come across no figure cor- 
responding to Herodotus or Thucydides in Greece, Livy and 
Tacitus in Rome, or Sou-ma-chin of China. Though it is true 
that history in the modern sense of the term is a growth 
of the nineteenth century, still while many of the other 
countries produced chronicles and semi-histories, India as a 
rule manifested a pronounced indifference to the recording 
of historical events. The Arab and Persian historians of the 
Muslim world, many of whom lived and did their work in 
India and wrote on her history, are the most notable excep- 
tions to this rule, and their example was followed by Kalhana 
of Kashmir whose Rajatamngini, written in the twelfth cen- 
tury, seeks to be a genuine historical chronicle whose author 
even lays down some correct principles of historiography 
which will do credit to a modern historian. The normal 
Hindu attitude to history was, however, different. It was not, 
as is sometimes affirmed, an attitude of indifference to events 
in time born of a concentration upon eternity or of a disgust 
with the misery of mundane life, but the expression of a 
desire to view human affairs against the universal background 
of nature and of divinity. There is a Greek tradition that an 
Indian sage who visited Socrates in Athens asked the Greek 
philosopher what he was engaged on; Socrates replied that 
he was interested in the study of men and their ways; the 
Indian philosopher then asked Socrates what he knew of the 
ways of the gods, and when he confessed his ignorance on 
that subject, the Indian just smiled and said that men could 
not be understood without a correct knowledge of Gods and 
superman. This story may or may not be true; but it forms 
a correct representation of the Indian attitude to human events 
and goes far to explain the scope and content of our vast 
Pumnd literature at many levels — all conceived as narra- 
tives of Universal evolution meant for the edification of the 
people and all giving many more details of wars of devas 
and asuras than of the wars among earthly Kings whose 
annals occupy a much smaller place in the Puranas if they 
refer to them at all. This tendency to link up the human 



SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA . 15 

with superhuman and sub-human is a constant trait of the 
ancient Indian mode of thought which stressed the unity 
and continuity of life at different levels from the smallest 
ant to the Supreme Soul of the Universe. It accounts for the 
inextricable blending of man and nature found in the different 
scenes of the epics and the poems and dramas of a superb 
poet like Kalidasa. It accounts also for the anxiety of our 
royal dynasties, to trace their descent from the sun and the 
moon, for the form of our two great national epics, the 
Udmdyana and the Mahabharata, which doubtless bury a core 
ofliistory under many sheaths of imaginative ’Embellishment, 
ancKFor^^ even professedly historical works like 

Bana’s Harsacarita and Bilhana’s Vikramankadevacarita ,, and 
the Kalingattupparani of Jayagondar, the Muvar-uM of Ottak- 
kuttan, and the Periyapurdnam of 6ekkilar, to mention only 
a few well known instances, often move on the borderland 
between fact and fable. 

On the other hand, professedly mythological works like 
Pampa’s Bhdrata and Ranna’s Gadayuddha — both in Kannada 
— often contain the most .valuable references to contemporary 
historical events which often admirably supplement our meagre 
gleanings from the inscriptions. There are many stray refer- 
ences to historical facts in works where you least expect them — 
in the devotional hymns of the rmyandrs and alvars of the 
Tamil country for instance and in the commentaries on them. 
But when all is said, we must frankly recognize the fact that 
Indian literature as a whole lacks the historical sense, and we 
are left in the dark on many questions of crucial importance 
to the story of our country and civilization. Valmiki and 
Vyasa are but shadowy names, and even Kalidasa is very 
largely so. While we can see and admire the glory of the 
Kailasa temple at Ellora, or the superb excellence of the 
paintings at Ajanta, Bagh and Tanjore, we do not know any- 
thing of the names and lives of the painters, architects and 
sculptors who created these wonders. But this anonymity 
prevails in some measure in other countries and times, and 
we may recall the great cathedrals of mediaeval Europe which 
provide a fair parallel. The people of India did not 



16 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


differ in any fundamental way from their contemporaries in 
other lands and were in no way behind them in the creation 
and enjoyment of the amenities of a complex civilization, or 
even in their desire to be remembered by posterity for what 
they were and what they did. The hundreds of votive inscrip- 
tions recording the names, purposes and objects of the gifts, 
the many longer inscriptions recording the genealogies and 
achievements of long lines of rulers before coming to the 
actual business of the record, among which those of the 
Deccan and South India are both numerous and precise, the 
musical inscription of the royal disciple of Rudracarya at 
Kudumiyamalai (former Pudukkottai state, now part of the 
Trichinopoly District), the numerous signed sculptures on 
the walls of the Hoysala Temples in Mysore State, the several 
temple chronicles of which some have survived though many 
have perished, the p rasastis at the beginning and the colophons 
at the end of many literary works giving authentic details 
of the lives of the authors and their patrons, go far to repudiate 
the notion that, to the Indian, life was a ‘nightmare’ which he 
wanted to shake off and be done . with, an experience not 
worth remembering or recording. 

To sum up the position in a few words: Indian sources 
are defective in professedly historical writings, but they are 
by no means lacking in the basic data for the reconstruction 
of the past, though the lacunae are perhaps much bigger 
than elsewhere. But ‘history’ as we understand it today is 
a creation of the nineteenth century, and almost all earlier 
attempts with rare exceptions like Gibbon’s are in a different 
category everywhere, and the Indian writings from which we 
have to cull our material are perhaps farthest from history, 
and perhaps farthest even from secular literature. 

The sources of Indian History fall under two broad 
heads: indigenous and foreign. The indigenous sources again 
fall into two divisions — the evidence from archaeology in a 
broad sense including epigraphy and numismatics, and that 
from literature. In general the former class is more concrete 
and more dependable than the latter. A systematic and com- 
plete study of the sources will not be possible in the time 



1 

i 

I 



SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA lj 

at our disposal; the treatment must necessarily be selective 
and illustrative, and seek to invite attention to the salient 
problems and perhaps indicate the scope for further work 
along different lines. 

Naturally * we begin with pre-historic archaeology* This 
branch of archaeology has become very important since the 
discovery of the Indus Valley civilization in the twenties of 
this century, and the publication of voluminous primary report 
on the excavations at Mohenjo-daro, Harappa and Chanhu 
Paro and elsewhere, and on explorations conducted in the 
neighbouring territories, of Baluchistan, Iran and Afghanistan. 
There is little definite knowledge of the earlier stages of pre- 
history, though artifacts of the paleolithic age have been found 
in the neighbourhood of Madras, whence the name 
‘Madras Industry 5 sometimes applied to this culture, but also 
widely distributed in the north e.g. the Sohan Valley and 
the terraces of the Sabarmati river in Gujarat. But human 
skeletons of this age are yet unknown, and their recovery ‘is 
one of the major needs of Indian archaeology 5 . Microliths are 
somewhat ubiquitous in India and quite obviously they belong 
to widely different stages and cultures, as they are found 
sometimes with pottery and a little copper or bronze, and 
sometimes without pottery but with semifossilised human 
skeletons of modern types; it is therefore not easy to decide 
if there was a distinct neolithic period in India. Likewise the 
neolithic stage has not yet been isolated from the so-called 
chalcolithic phase ‘in which the use of stone was supplemented 
by that of copper or its alloy, bronze. In this phase there was 
considerable development of village life, and recent work has 
brought up convincing evidence of a coherent culture complex 
originating in the Iranian plateau and spreading towards the 
Indus Valley through the glens and passes of Baluchistan by 
the end of the fourth millennian b.c. if not earlier. 5 The details 
of this fairly settled village economy which has so far been 
studied mainly from surface finds await elucidation by the 
spade. But the area is now part of Pakistan and we have to 
await the results of excavations by Pakistani or foreign scho- 
lars. Out of this background arose the more advanced urban 


3 



18 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HlSTOht 


civilization of the Indus Valley whose broad alluvial plains 
rendered larger concentrations of population at once possible 
and necessary, and increased the possibilities of traffic and 
trade with other lands. The Indus civilization is now dated 
provisionally from about 2500 b.c. to 1500 b.c. or a little 
earlier. Harappa in the Punjab and Mohenjo-daro in Sind 
were its main metropolitan centres and there is no means 
of knowing if they formed parts of a consolidated empire 
or separate states. In spite of many efforts and diverse theo- 
ries put forward by different scholars, the best opinion still 
holds that the Indus script has not yet been satisfactorily deci- 
phered. The area of the spread of this civilization and the 
different phases through which it passed in its rise and decline 
are still subjects of active study. Attempts have been to 
interpret the Indus culture as Vedic and as pre-Aryan Dra- 
vidian; but these views have not gained acceptance and the 
best view still seems to be that this culture stood in rather 
closer relation to the contemporary cultures of Western Asia 
and Eastern Mediterranean than to those of the rest of India. 
The problem of the chronological relations between this cul- 
ture and that of the Arayn invaders is one of the most out- 
standing questions relating to this period and is being dis- 
cussed actively with the aid of new techniques which are be- 
ing improved rapidly. There is at present a pronounced 
tendency to confirm in the light of archaeology the old and 
shrewd guess of Max Muller regarding the date of the Rig 
Veda and the culture it represents viz. round about 1200 b.c . 3 
The best general accounts of the whole subject are: Stuart 
Piggott, Prehistoric India clown to 1000 b.c., (Pelican series, 
1950) , and Wheeler, the Indus Civilization , Cambridge, (1953) , 
D. H. Gordon, The Prehistoric background of Indian Culture , 
Bombay, (1958) is also very useful. The specific problems of 
prehistoric South India may be reserved for later conside- 
ration, 

3 See e.g. Walter A. Fairservis, Jr. ‘The chronology of the Harappa 
civilisation and tH Arvan Invasions, recent Archaeological research*, in 
Man Nov. 1958 No. 173. 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 39 

The period 1500-500 b.c, is sometimes described as the Dark 
millennium. There must have been much confusion as a result 
of the Aryan invasions and archaeology has not yet gone very 
far in elucidating this. The present state of knowledge is thus 
summed up by Wheeler: ‘Village mounds such as Rana Ghun- 
dai in the Zhob regim of northern Baluchistan or Nal, farther 
south, show evidence of conflagrations at an appropriate level; 
so much so that the Na! mound is known locally as the Sohr 
Damb or Red Mound from its fire-reddened soil. At Chanhu- 
daro, a town of the Indus Civilization eighty miles south of 
Mohenjo-daro, the Indus population deserted their homes and 
were succeeded by a poorer folk (known to archaeologists as 
representatives of the ‘Jhukar’ culture) who re-used some of 
the derelict houses and supplemented them with rectangular 
hovels of matting paved with broken brick. The new comers 
had circular uninscribed seals or seal-amulets of pottery or 
faience bearing a crude decoration lacking all the delicate 
realism of the Indus series. Similar seals, but of copper, were 
found at Shahi-tump in southern Baluchistan, in cemetery 
perhaps of the second millennium b.c. inserted into a derelict 
village that had been in contact with the Indus peoples. And 
at Harappa itself, after the abandonment of the city, a strange 
folk of unknown origin arrived and built shoddy houses among 
the ruins. Their burial rite was at first inhumation, but later 
the custom was introduced of exposing the dead and subse- 
quently interring selected bones in urns. These cemetery peo- 
ple, as they are called, have Been tentatively recognized as 
Aryans, but little is known about them, nor is it easy to guess 
how long alEter the departure or subjugation of the Indus 
people their arrival should be placed!’ 4 I have permitted my- 
self this somewhat longish citation of one view of the outstand- 
ing problems, there are other views held by other writers, 
just to show how fragmentary and tentative have so far been 
the results of archaeology in bridging the transition from the 
Indus culture to the Indo-Aryan. Very much more syste- 
matic work is necessary in this sphere before tangible im- 
provement of our knowledge can result 

4 Oxford History of India , p. 33* 



20 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


The literary evidence on this period is voluminous, but 
not all of it equally explicit or authentic. The Vedas them- 
selves, particularly the Rgveda , long transmitted by oral 
tradition before it was committed to writing, and protected 
against corruption and mistake by many devices of which 
the Pada (word) text is the simplest and perhaps the earliest, 
may be taken to constitute an unassailably authentic text, 
unlike much of later literature. But obviously a considera- 
ble interval must be postulated between the composition of 
the hymns and their redaction in the Samhita form in which 
we find them now. Vedic scholarship is a special and recon- 
dite branch of Indology, and the editions of the texts involved 
and the modern critical literature on it would easily fill a 
good sized library. The historian of ancient India as a rule 
has neither the capacity nor the time to read and master this 
vast literature directly and has necessarily to depend on 
handy secondary sources. Winternitz: History of Indian lite- 
rature, 3 volumes in German, of which two have been trans- 
lated into English and published by the Calcutta University, 
forms an indispensable guide to all our literary sources in 
Sanskrit, Pali and Prakrit and some of the modern Indian 
languages also, and after this general indication of the wide 
field covered by the book, it should not be necessary to refer 
to it repeatedly in several contexts. The Vedic Index by 
Macdonell and Keith (2 volumes) and the Reallexikon der 
Indo-Germanischen Alterthumskunde by O. Schrader and 
Negelein (2 volumes 1917-23; 1929) are excellent works of 
reference, the latter not being so well known as it deserves 
to be. Some general works which bring together results of 
many lines and years of study are: Keith, Religion and Phi- 
losophy of the Veda and Upanishads (2 volumes) (Cam- 
bridge, Mass, 1925) ; Adolf Kaegi, Rig Veda (1886) and Zim- 
mer, Altindisches Leben (1879) are among the authoritative 
accounts of Vedic civilization. There are many others, but 
at every stage my aim would be to provide a few guiding 
hints to best studies, by no means a complete bibliography. 

The study and interpretation of later Vedic literature the 
Brahmanas , Upanisads and the Kalpa Sutras have gone far 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 21 

already, and thrown much welcome light on the interaction 
between Aryan and the pre-Aryan and the resultant changes 
in Indo-Aryan civilization. But we are still far from having 
come near the end of the task of recovering and publishing 
texts, and perhaps still farther from having reached a con- 
sensus on the actual course of development. And as already 
indicated a correlation has still to be attained between the 
literary and archaeological sides of the work. Such early 
texts as Vedic and later Vedic literature have more or less 
the same value for the imaginative and sensitive historian 
as stratigraphic evidence in archaeology and in studying the 
early developments of civilization they should so far as possi- 
ble be handled together; but unfortunately few archaeologists 
are linguists, and linguists have generally kept clear of the 
results of field studies. Until we establish the means of 
bringing the two disciplines nearer, tangible progress may 
not be easy of achievement. 

When we consider the archaeology of historical times, 
we recognize with gratitude that since the reorganization of 
the time of Curzon, much good work has gone on and valuable 
studies on important sites and monuments have been issued 
in the reports, memoirs and monographs of the department 
However, one notes that while at the beginning of the cen- 
tury India set the model for archaeological work in the Dutch 
East Indies and Indo-China, in the course of a few decades 
the achievements of the French and Dutch archaeologists 
in the East apparently left the Indian department a little be- 
hind. Of course there is no comparison between the pro- 
blems of small countries like Java and those of the vast Indian 
subcontinent; and on the whole the Indian archaeological 
budget has been proportionately less liberal. But the Indian 
department has steadily set its face against the tasks of bril- 
liant restorations successfully accomplished in monuments like 
Angkor Vat Isvarapura, Buro Budur, and Prambanam, or the 
stone Buddha of Bukit Seguntang near Palembang. This pro- 
cess of restoration known as ‘anastylose’ avails itself of noth- 
ing hut authentic relics and adopts no form that is not known 
to have been historically true. Of course it means both 



SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


shrewd research and hard work, hut is well worth it. It 
cannot he said that the Indian department is an utter stranger 
to the method, for it has been followed though not syste- 
matically in some work in places like Sane hi, Taxila, Sarnath 
and Nalanda and in the repairs to the Taj or the Gol Gum- 
baz. But on the other hand we have also hideous instances 
of P.W. repairs with cement and concrete like those in the 
Kailasanatha temple at KanchTpuram. In fact the depart- 
ment can hardly be said to have a considered policy for con- 
servation and will do well to consider the whole problem 
afresh instead of prolonging indefinitely a hand to mouth 
existence so to say. 

Temples of one kind or another dominate the ancient monu- 
ments of the country belonging to different regions and 
periods. They enable the student to gain a good idea of the 
evolution of architecture and sculpture, and in some instances 
of painting also. The general outlines of this history are now 
fairly well settled and among standard works dealing with 
the subject may be mentioned those of Fergusson, Coomara- 
swami, Percy Brown, and Benjamin Rowland. The archaeo- 
logical department has undertaken a systematic survey of the 
temples of the north and south with a view to determine more 
precisely the course of architectural evolution; some good 
results of the survey have begun to come in, and the com- 
pletion of the survey and the resulting publications may well 
be expected to add considerably to knowledge. But there 
would still be scope for detailed studies on the sculptures and 
paintings calculated to elucidate the social side of life — the 
costumes, ornaments, musical instruments, dance poses and 
so on. This is eminently a work for local archaeological 
societies which are numerous in countries outside India but 
singularly lacking here. The Universities of our country 
which have been rapidly multiplying in numbers of late can 
help a lot here by addressing themselves steadily to the close 
study of local monuments and the collection and sifting of 
traditions and documents and thereby add precision and 
local colour to historical knowledge. 



BOVRCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA US 

Epigraphy and numismatics are perhaps the most precise 
and trustworthy sources of history everywhere and parti- 
cularly in India where the indigenous literary sources are so 
very defective. Indian paleography is a rather difficult and 
complicated matter of several scripts, each with a long evolu- 
tion of its own. Stone and copper are the chief materials on 
which inscriptions occur, though other bases like clay seals, 
precious stones, silver and gold are also occassionally met 
■with. The Asoka inscriptions which still form the earliest 
known epigraphs are found written generally in Brahmi, but 
also in the Northwest in Kharothi, and Greek and Aramic, 
as in the recently discovered bilingual inscriptions from near 
Kandahar. The language of the records is generally Prakrit 
or Sanskrit in the North, and usually Sanskrit or/and a 
Dravidian language in the South. Most *bf the important 
inscriptions have been edited with elaborate commentaries 
by competent scholars in the thirty odd volumes of Epigra- 
phia Indica, though one cannot afford to neglect the other 
periodicals bearing on Indology in different countries. Bur- 
gess, Buhler, Kielhorn, Hultzsch and Fleet are the great 
names in this field, whose work may be said to cover almost 
the entire field in one way or other. The student will find 
useful aids in bibliographical compilations like Liiders’ List of 
early Brahmi inscriptions (Appendix to Vol. X of Epigraphia 
Indica) , D. R. Bhandarkar’s List of North Indian Brahmi ins- 
criptions after a.d. 400, and the now hopelessly out of date Keil- 
horn’s List of South Indian Inscriptions which deserves to be 
revised and brought upto date as Bhandarkar did the North In- 
dian list. The Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, which has re- 
cently received an additional volume in V. V. Mirashi’s Kala- 
churi Inscriptions, is also indispensable. Fleet’s Gupta Inscrip- 
tions (Vol. Ill in the series)', we heard, was ready for the press 
long ago though D. R. Bhandarkar passed away without 
completing his work on it, and scholars are eagerly awaiting 
the publication of the new edition incorporating the vast 
amount of new material discovered since Fleet’s time. It is 
disheartening to note that the Yerragudi version of the Asoka 
edicts has not yet found its definitive edition in Epigraphia 


goURCFS OF iNblAM, HiSTOBfr . 


Indie a so many years after their discovery in the twenties. 
South India is much richer in its epigraphy than North India 
and will be considered later. We have a number of Persian 
inscriptions relating to the Muslim period from different parts 
of the country and these which used to form the series. £pi- 
graphia-Indo-Moslemica are now being published as Arabic 
and Persian supplement to Epigraphia Indica . 

Coins are an interesting and sometimes intriguing sources 
of history. The history of Indian coinage is not yet quite defi- 
nitively settled, and there are problems relating to the sym- 
bols and marks on the earliest coins of India, the punch- 
marked ones, that are still subjects of discussion. Though 
the Veda speaks of niska, sometimes interpreted as coin, no 
actual coin of the Vedic period in any metal is known. And 
there is good reason to think that coins proper began to be 
made in India under the influence of foreign example, parti- 
cularly Greek, Roman and Iranian. What we knew of Bactrian, 
Indo-Greek and Indo-Parthian dynasties of north-western 
India is very largely derived from a group of coins which 
are among the most artistic productions of the world, and 
the series of dates bom on the coins of the Western Satraps 
of Saurastra and Gujarat have helped settled many doubtful 
questions of succession and chronology. Studies of Indian 
coins are scattered over many learned periodicals, and it is 
only recently that a regular journal for Indian Numismatics, 
that of the Indian Numismatic Society, has come up. Prinsep 
and Cunningham were pioneers in the field and Cunningham 
in his Indian Coins evinced an uncanny capacity for placing 
them properly. The catalogues of coins issued by the impor- 
tant museums particularly the British Museum, the Indian 
Museum, and the Lahore Museum are of inestimable value. 

Before leaving archaeology, we must say something on the 
subject of chronology and the eras. Indian dates are gene- 
rally given in the order-month, paksa, tithi the abbreviations, 
s’udi and ba.di being used for the bright and dark halves of 
the month. A lunar month makes about 29% solar days, 
and twelve lunar months make only 354 days; the problem 
of the discrepancy between the lunar and solar years was 



iSOtJRCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 


& 


solved very early. Sixty-two lunar months are approximately 
equal to sixty solar months, and so every thirty months an 
extra monthT was added to the year generally after Asddha 
or Sravana. Thus every second or third year contains thir- 
teen months, and is some twenty-nine days longer than the 
others. The Hindu calendar, though efficient, is thus rather 
cumbrous. The solar calendar, imported with Western astro- 
nomy, was also known from Gupta times. 

The system of reckoning dates with the aid of eras start- 
ing from definite points in time was perhaps introduced into 
India by foreign invaders from the north-west. The Asoka 
inscriptions are dated in regnal years counted from the coro- 
nation of the King. We have an amazing confusion of eras 
occurring in Indian inscriptions, and sometimes we get only 
the number of the year without the name of the era. The 
era of the Kaliyuga 3102 b.c., supposed to mark the epoch 
of the Mahabharata War, was obviously the result of astro- 
nomical calculations of the Gupta period. More reasonable 
is another Purdnic tradition pointing to the fifteenth or four- 
teenth century, though even this date is several centuries too 
early in the light of archaeological evidence. In the Buddhist 
countries a Buddha era from 544 b.c., is in use, but there is 
evidence also of an earlier reckoning from 483 B.c. or 486 
according to some. The Jainas use the era of Mahavlra 
reckoned from 528 b.c. The Vikrama era (58 b.c.) was accor- 
ding to tradition founded by a Vikramaditya Sakari (enemy 
of the Sakas) who reigned at Ujjayinl. But the only King 
who fits the description and known to history is Candragupta 
II of the Gupta dynasty who lived over 400 years later than 
the beginning of the era. In the earliest inscriptions using 
this era, all from Western India, it is called simply Krta 
(established) or ‘handed down by the Malava tribe 5 . Some 
scholars hold that many inscriptions of the iSakas and Pahla- 
vas of North-Western India are to be read in this era, and 
that it was founded by Axes, one of their early kings; but 
this has been questioned. The era was most popular in North 
India. Its year began originally with the month of Kurtrika , 
but by mediaeval times the Vikrama year began in the bright 


4 


2Q SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

half of Caitra in the North and in the dark half of the same 
month in the South. 

The Saka era (a.d, 78) was, according to tradition, founded 
by a Saka King who occupied Ujjayini 137 years after Vikra- 
maditya. This era may in fact have been founded by Kaniska 
(or Wema Kadphesis as some would have it) and was cer- 
tainly used early in the second century a.d. by the Western 
Satraps ruling in Malwa, Kathiawar and Gujarat. Thence it 
spread through the Deccan and to South-East Asia. In South 
India it got the name Mlivahana Sakabda which it still re- 
tains. The determination by Fleet of the epoch of the Gupta 
era (a.d. 319-20) was an important landmark in the develop- 
ment of Indian historical studies and resulted in a well knit 
system of chronology where chaos had prevailed before. 

There have been some rathbr misplaced attempts to unsettle 1 

the epoch. The Gupta era was continued by the Maitrakas j 

of Valaghi (Gujarat) for some centuries after the Gupta ] 

empire fell. Other notable eras are: the Harsa era a.d. 606, 4 

the Traikutaka era a.d. 248 taken over by the Kalacuris and 5 

better known by their name and current in Central India ; 

down to the Muslim invasion, the Laksmana era a.d. 1119 of J 

Bengal which was, however, nothing to do with King Laks- 
mana Sena; the Saptarsi or Laukika era of Kashmir current j 

in the middle ages and recorded in cycles of one hundred i 

years, each cycle commencing seventy-six years after the I 

Christian Century; the Licchavi and Nevar eras of Napal . "\ 

(a.d. 110 and 878) the Kollam era of Malabar (a.d. 825) and 't 
the Calukya Vikrama era (a.d. 1075) which had only a short 
vogue.5 'i 

We may now pass to a consideration of literary sources. | 

Their volume is enormous, and they fall into different classes 
of varying value. A detailed discussion of this class in all 4 

its variety is impossible here, and the treatment has neces- || 

sarily to be selective and illustrative. One obvious line of : j 

distinction, is between literature that is contemporary with | 

the- events depicted or studied, and later literature. But this I 

distinction is not always as easy to observe as it looks, and :! : J 

; ; 

5 See Basham, The Wonder that was India , App, III, 


i 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 


21 


I with the possible exception of Vedic literature, conserved 

with great care as sacred scripture, and the annals, travel 
! diaries, and so on known to have been written up then and 

| there are few writings which can be strictly called contem- 

porary. ButTthe distinction indicated suggests the need for 
' our considering in every case how far removed the source 

at our disposal is from the events it purports to deal with. 
And in a country where the climate is highly inimical to the 
j preservation of manuscripts, books have had to be copied 

i over and over again, every transcription perhaps giving rise 

to fresh errors, inaccuracies and interpolations. ^The critical 
j study of the epics, the Purunas , and the Buddhist and Jain 

texts is a very trying business^ and their value even for a 
study of social life and economic institutions has been much 
impaired by the conditions briefly indicated above. .(We can 
reconstruct an outline of Aryan tribal history from the Vedic 
hymns and other texts, but much of the history is discon- 
nected, uncertain and unsupported by archaeology, and is 
therefore largely hypothetical^ The efforts of Pargiter, Kir- 
fel, and recently of R. Morton Smith 6 to recover history 
from the Puvanas cannot be held to be successful]"! At the 
same time, it must be pointed out that most of our literature 
still awaits systematic study and exploitation from a histori- 
cal standpoint by trained historians; the field has been held 
generally by linguists and philologists whose work is very 
welcome in its own way, but needs to be supplemented from 
the view point of the historian proper. Panini and Fatah jail 
have been studied respectively by V. S. Agarwal and B. N. 
Puri, not to speak of earlier studies of casual and piece-meal 
^ character. More studies like AgarwaTs on the Harsa Carita 

in Hindi and Handiqui’s on Yas’astilaka campu are required 
for literary works not only in Sanskrit but in all Indian 
languages. 

The Arthasdstra of Kautilya is a unique work of its kind. 
After long and, as it now seems, needless controversies the 
work has come to be generally accepted as substantially what 
it purports to be viz., a composition of the Chancellor of 

% Journal of the American Oriental Society , Vols, 77 & 78. 


28 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


Candragupta Maurya, though, like all texts, modified in some 
ways, by later additions and alterations. The text is not 
easy and has often Been misunderstood; I should mention 
here the new edition of the work by Prof. Kangle brought 
out by the Bombay University which is a decided improve- 
ment on all the earlier editions; two more volumes of trans- 
lation and notes and critical studies have been promised and 
these will be ‘awaited with interest. 

Kautilya’s work in its adhyaksapracara is a manual of 
practical administration such as is not known in any other 
work on Indian polify, with the possible exception of the 
Sukramtisara, which is now suspected to be an early nine- 
teenth century hoax calculated to satisfy the comprehensive 
curiosity of Col. Mackenzie. According to Kautilya a gopa, 
an official in charge of five or ten villages, was required to 
keep a record oT everything concerning a village, its popula- 
ti6n, their occupations, income and expenditure, cultivation, 
manufacture, and trade; these registers were regularly check- 
ed by superior officers with information collected through 
spies. Centuries later, Hiuen Tsang observed that each pro- 
vince in India had its own official to write down a regular 
record of events mentioning good and evil events, calamities 
and fortunate occurrences. Is it not a tragedy that not one 
of these village records or provincial chronicles has survied? 
Similar records of much more recent times have survived in 
South India as we shall see. 

(There are some quasi-historical biographies like the Harsa 
Carita in prose of Bana, the Gauda-Vaho, the Navasahasanka 
Carita, Vikramankadeva Carita, Kumarapdla Carita, Rdmapala 
Carita, Prithivirdjavijaya and many others. They contain at 
times valuable material for history, but are more works of 
general literature than historical works proper. To the same 
category belong collections of traditional tales like Prabandha 
Cinttimani of Meruttunga (1306) and hagiologies like Hema- 
candra’s Parisistaparvan (twelfth century ) ) 

Bardic literature is in a class by itself and conserves tradi- 
tions of more or less historical value. The bards of more 
advanced communities as in Rajasthan and Gujarat relied 



SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 29 

largely on written records, and the institutions of family 
bards flourished in Rajputana from about a.d. 1400 to 1800. 
Neither Forbes nor Tod undertook a critical analysis of their 
sources. Tessitori has shown the need for a distinction being 
made between bardic poetry and the prose chronicles of 
Rajasthan, the latter comprising chronicles proper and genea- 
logies. But when all is said, the value of these materials for 
chronology and political history is perhaps negligible, though 
they may ‘constitute a valuable repository of information on 
the culture history of feudal families’. 7 

The chronicles of Rajasthan, Nepal and Assam are compara- 
tively recent in the form in which we have them, and Kal- 
hana’s Rdjatarangint, is the only historical work based on a 
continuous tradition of pre-Muslim historical writing. It has 
been suggested that contact with other peoples possessing 

stronger sense of history than had India may have en- 
couraged the growth of historical writing in Kashmir. 8 |Kal- 
hana recognizes the merit of historical impartiality and is 
seen to record fair judgements on the more recent kings. He 
was a pious brahman and his attitude to history was largely 
that of orthodoxy conditioned by belief in Karrtia > fate ( daim ) 
and so on. j 

The advent of Islam begins a fine series of Indian chroni- 
cles, and the Muslim chronicles are far superior to the media- 
eval chronicles of Europe. ‘They were written for the most 
part not by monks but by men of affairs, often by contempo- 
raries who had seen and taken part in the events they re- 
count.’ (Dodwell), 9 From this point the volume of sources 
increases progressively and the historian is troubled not by 
dearth of material but by its plethora, and also by the partisan 
character, the theological bias, or the didactic aims of parti- 
cular writers. But the historians apart, we must give parti- 
cular attention to the illustrious Alberuni (the foreigner) 
whose real name w^as Abu-Rihan Muhammad, a native of the 
Khiva territory, who was bom in 973 and became the most 

7 Historians, etc. p. 92. 

$ Historians, etc. p. 57. 

9 Cited by P. Hardy. Historians , etc. p. 115. 



to 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


distinguished ornament of the court of Sultan Mahmud of 
Ghazni who brought him to Ghazni as a prisoner or a hostage. 
When the Punjab was conquered by Mahmud, Alberuni took 
up his residence there and developed an amazing interest in the 
study of Hindu religion, literature and philosophy. He mas- 
tered the Sanskrit language and read the Puranas and was 
fascinated by the philosophy of the Bhagavadgtta. He was 
one of the most gifted scientific men known to history and was 
adept in astronomy, mathematics, . chronology, mathematical 
geography, physics, chemistry and mineralogy. He criticized 
Mahmud’s destructive raids on India and deplored their effects 
on the Indian mind and on the relations between Hinduism 
and Islam. His wonderful book on India, conveniently known 
as Alberuni’s India (tr. by Saehau) is unique in its numer- 
ous and accurate observations on the history, character, 
manners and customs of the Hindus; it is like a magic island 
of quiet impartial research in the midst of a world of clash- 
ing swords, burning towns, and plundered temples’. The 
student will find it instructive to compare its data with those 
found in the Ain-i-Akbari of Abul Fazl written more than 
five centuries later, and so far as possible with those from 
the Arthasastm which proceeded Alberuni’s book by nearly 
thirteen centuries. Alberuni died in 1048. 

To turn to the historians proper, P. Hardy has pointed 
out, 10 that before the Ghoriad conquest of India, Muslim histo- 
riography had developed four categories of writing, and that 
the Persian histories written in India between 1206 and 1440 
all fall within these categories. The categories are: (a) Ge- 
neral history from Adam; a subform is the history of the 
Mitslim community in one region; (b) the prose eulogy 
(manaqvib or faza’il type) usually but not necessarily of a 
ruler; (c) the jiirstenspiegel or didactic history, and (d) 
artistic forms of historical writing. We shall now briefly 
review some of the most important of these. First, the Ta- 
haqat-i’-Nasiri (1259-60) of Minhaj-al-Siraj JuzJani, a mi- 
grant to India who was qazi in Sindh and Delhi. This work 


Historians, etc. p. 10. 



SOURCES, WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA Si 

belongs to the class of general history, as also the Tarikh4- 
Mubarak Shahi (1428-34) of Yahya ibn Ahmad Sarhindi, and 
the Tarikh-i~Muhammadi (1438-39) of Muhammad Bihamad 
Khani. These are histories written from authorities rather un- 
critically relied on and treat history as the doings of powerful 
members of the Muslim community or their infidel enemies. 
There is a definite falling off from the critical standards of 
the earlier writers of Persia like Tabari and al-Dinawari; 
Sarhindi avers that he wrote the Tarikh-i-Mubarak Shahi 
as an offering to the Sayyid Sultan after whom it is named 
in the expectation of a reward for the effort. The Tarikh-i- 
Firuz Shahi of Shams al-din Siraj Afif, written not long after 
Timur’s inroad, is a good example of the eulogy type which 
apparently seeks to portray a golden age of the Delhi sul- 
tanate before the calamity of Timur’s invasion. Here history 
becomes panegeric, a story of what must have happened 
under an ideal ruler. Ziya-ud-din Barni’s Tarikh-i-Firuz 
Shahi (1357) is the one notable didactic writing of the period 
seeking to propagate the author’s philosophy of history and 
teach the Sultan his duties and the necessity of fulfilling 
them by examples from history. f As each reign is presented 
as a one-act morality play, Barni disregards detailed chro- 
nology and is sparing with his dates.’ 11 The works of Amir 
Khusrau (d. 1325), the famous Indo-Persian poet, and the 
Futuh-al-Salatin (1349-50) of Isami are good examples of 
artistic historical writing. What all these writers provide in 
their narratives is certainly not history in the true modern 
sense of the word, but their views of events in the light of 
their theocratic and moral prepossessions. 

The volume of historical writing increases many fold when 
we reach the Mughal period and it becomes impossible to 
deal with individual works within the limits of these lectures. 
The sources at our disposal may be grouped into broad classes 
and each class illustrated by naming its leading examples. 
First come the official histories, generally written under the 
auspices and’ with the financial support of the State, of which 


IX Historians, etc. p. 123. 


3£ SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

the Akbar Namah of Abul Fazl is the leading example. His 
official position, the confidence he enjoyed of his master, 
his literary ability and critical mind have made his work 
the most complete and authentic history of Akbar’s reign. 
Besides this official narrative, we have other contemporary 
accounts which serve as a corrective to the unalloyed eulogy 
of Abul Fazl. The two most important of these are Mun- 
takhib-ut-Tawarikh of Mulla Abdul Qadir BadayunI and the 
Taba,kat-i-Akbari of Nizamuddin Bakhshi. BadayunI was 
born in 1540 and enjoyed Akbar’s patronage from 1574. But 
after the advent of Abul Fazl at the Court, he had to take 
a second place, and this irritated him. As an orthodox Mus- 
lim he also developed hostility to Akbar’s religious eclecti- 
cism strongly supported by Abul Fazl and his elder brother 
Faizi. The result is fully reflected in Badayuni’s writing; 
its publication was suppressed by Jahangir according to 
Khafl Khan. He owns that his inducement to write ‘has 
been nothing but sorrow for the faith and heart-burning for 
the deceased Religion of Islam’. Nizamuddin held high office 
and earned Badayuni’s approval. His Tabakat-i-Akbari 
written in 1592-3 is a general history beginning with the 
Ghaznavids and coming down to the thirty-eighth year of 
Akbar’s reign. 

The period from Jahangir to Aurangzeb is rich in historical 
writings both official and independent. They must be con- 
sulted in Elliot and Dowson’s volumes and elsewhere. We 
should, however, mention the Muntakhab-al-Lubab of Khafl 
Khan, a history of India from the Muhammadan conquest to 
the beginning of Muhammad Shah’s 14th year (1731) . Khafl 
Khan describes himself as having been successively attached 
to the train of three or four sovereigns, and says that he 
had spent sixteen or seventeen years of his life on the com- 
position of the book, especially on the last forty years of 
Aurangzeb’s reign. Of that period, owing to Aurangzeb’s 
prohibition of historical writing, he had found no previous 
record except Musta’idd Khan’s account of the Deccan con- 
quests, but he had tried to compile a truthful narrative from 
the official records, the reports of trustworthy persons, and 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 33 

his personal experiences* There is in existence, however, a pre- 
faceless history of Aurangzeb’s reign which agrees closely with 
the corresponding part of Khafi Khan’s history; it speaks of 
Shah ‘Alam (Bahadur Shah) as the reigning sovereign and 
must therefore have been written about twenty years earlier 
than the Muntakhab-al-Lubab ; its author was Abul-Fazl 
Mamuri, according to Shri Ram Sharma. This, if correct, 
casts a doubt on Khafi Khan’s claim that he found no earlier 
account of the last years of Aurangzeb. Rieu, however, 
thought that it was the first draft of Khafi Khan himself* 
In any case Khafi Khan was a historian of high quality who 
could be fair to the Marathas whom he detested. The idea 
that the name Khafi Khan contains an allusion to the ‘clan- 
destine’ composition of the work in the period when historical 
writing was forbidden by Aurangzeb deserves no credit and 
contradicts Khafi Khan’s own statements on the composition 
of the book. 12 The history of India in the eighteenth century 
after the death of Aurangzeb and the beginnings of British 
rule in Bengal formed the subject of an extremely interest- 
ing work Siyar al-mutakhirin (1780-81) of Ghulam Husain 
Khan Tabatabai, who recorded the opinion that the British 
were too much occupied with wars and personal quarrels to 
have any time to spare for the affairs of Indians — an opinion 
perhaps on two or three futile interviews on a personal matter 
with Warren Hastings whom he had known for a considerable 
time. 

Besides regular histories, official and unofficial, the Mughal 
period teems with other kinds of historical records. There 
are government records which have survived in some mea- 
sure and include the valuable class of Akhbarats or news 
letters from the different camps to the headquarters and 
other letters like those of Abul Fazl, Aurangzeb and others; 
biographies and memoirs like those of Babar, the biography 
of Humayun by Gultadan Begum, the memoirs of Jahangir 
and so on; local and provincial histories; and other literary 
works. Each of these classes has its own value to the histo- 


12 Storey, p. 460 n and p. 594, 
5 


u 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


rian and it is generally difficult to be sure that all the data 
relevant to an issue have been focussed and considered. 

Though we cannot stop to consider details, we must also 
mention the large volume of Marathi records of which only 
a small selection have found publication, the rest being con- 
served in archives, daftars and collections of learned socie- 
ties. As many of the original records used by Grant Duff 
for his History of the Marathas are known to have perished, 
that book must continue to enjoy the status of an original 
authority. 

The records of the British Government in India, most of 
which have their counter-parts in the files of what was the 
India Office and now forms part of the Commonwealth Rela- 
tions Office, occupy a dubious position between indigenous 
and foreign sources. They form a vast and important source 
of modem Indian history, and comprise not only the day to 
day correspondence, proceedings, resolutions and so on of 
different authorities of the Company and the Crown in India 
and England, but reports of enquiries, commissions and other 
ad hoc documents of even greater value than the regular 
papers. Guides and hand-books of reasonable size are gene- 
rally available for most of these official collections, and a good 
part of these records have been press listed, calendered and 
published in selections both in India and England. It is worth 
noting that much of the Indian correspondence continued 
to be in Persian far into the eighteenth century and the 
Calendar of Persian Correspondence in many volumes being 
issued by the National Archives is quite important. Some 
crucial documents like the famous Fifth Report of 1812 have 
received special attention and been commented on, and the 
critical literature on some facets of modern history and the 
documents relating to them such as the administration of 
Warren Hastings, or the Sepoy Mutiny is amazingly large 
in volume and uneven in quality. There are also valuable 
collections of private papers in the custody of English families 
or learned institutions \vhich, if access can be gained to them, 
can give valuable hints on the real course of events not to 
be gathered from formal public papers. The National Archi- 



SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 35 

ves and the Madras Record Office are among the 'best orga- 
nized archival collections in India, but one gets the general 
impression that the detailed bibliographical aids for the guid- 
ance of the young scholar to these rich stores are not as 
readily available as they should be, and also that the number 
of scholars entering on their study is by no means anywhere 
near what it should be. 

From the archives of British India, it is a natural transition 
to those of other European powers that held sway in India 
for a time, and something may be said of these here before 
we consider the other foreign sources for the history of India. 
We need not spend much time or effort on the short-lived 
and nightmarish rule of the Portuguese in India. The archi- 
ves in Goa and Lisbon doubtless hold much valuable mate- 
rial and have been occasionally drawn upon by some historians 
of India; but the general rule has been, as J. B. Harrison 
has pointed out, to depend on three general histories in 
English on Portuguese activities in India and the Indian Ocean, 
viz., the works of Danvers, Jayne and Whiteway, themselves 
based on the works of five Portuguese historians of the 
Renaissance period viz., Barr os, Couto, Bocarro, Castanheda 
and Correa. The merits and defects of these historians are 
succinctly set forth by Mr. Harrison in his paper on Five 
Portuguese Historians in Historians of India , Pakistan and 
Ceylon. 

The Dutch played an important part in the sea-borne trade 
of India in the seventeenth century, and they were careful 
to note many things which the English were apt to take £or 
granted. The extant Dutch accounts of the working of markets 
in Agra, in Golconda or Gujarat are far superior to anything 
found in English Records and so too their data on contempo- 
rary Indian standards of consumption. Not only in economic 
matters, but on administrative questions also the Dutch re- 
cords have much to tell. The details of everyday working 
of institutions omitted in indigenous records are described 
fully — procedure, punishments, levy and collection of taxes 
and so on. Even on social life and political history we get 



36 SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

valuable information, as for instance, on the conduct and 
character of Nur Jahan or Mir Jumla. For the greater part 
of the seventeenth century the Dutch and English were 
actuated by the same motives in India, and the former were 
usually some way ahead doing most of the effective pioneer- 
ing. The trading voyage, the factory and the fort preceded 
the beginnings of territorial acquisition, and both factory and 
fort arose out of Dutch initiative. The history of British India 
really begins, says Moreland, ‘not with Hawkins negotiating 
at Agra, but with Houtman chaffering for pepper with the 
Chinese merchants at Bantam’. 13 Fort Geldria in Pulicat, not 
Fort St. George in Madras, was the first to set the new 
fashion. 

The first important Dutch source is the travel account of 
Linschoten (Hakluyt Society) which is the account of an eye- 
witness only for the coast between Goa and Cochin, the rest 
being just valuable hearsay. An immense storehouse of 
early documents is provided by J. K. J. de Jonge — De 
Opkomst van het Nederlandsche Gezag in Oost-Indie (1862) 
though only some of them relate directly to India. The same 
observation holds true of the Corpus Diplomaticum Neerlando- 
Indicum being published in several volumes of the Bijdragen 
Tot de Tml-, Land- en Volkenkunde van N ederlandsehe-Indie 
by Heeres and Stapel, which preserves texts of several trea- 
ties between the Dutch and Indian powers, otherwise un- 
known. Documents of importance relating to the arrival of 
the Dutch in India are given in two books of Dr. H. Terpstra — 
De Vestiging van de Nederlanders aan de Kust van Koro- 
mandel (Groningen, 1911), and De Opkomst der Wester- 
Rwartieren van de Oost- Indische Compagnie (Suratte, 
Arable, Perzie (The Hague, 1918). The account goes upto 
1610 for the east coast, and 1624 for the west. From 1624 
starts the official diary Dagh Register , an extremely valuable 
record of the Dutch headquarters at Batavia written up from 
day to day by or under the eye of one of the members of 
council, and purporting to record everything that happened 


23 Journal of Indian History, ii, 224, 



SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 


37 


in Asia of interest to the Dutch. From 1641 the diary was 
maintained in sections, and this renders easy the separate 
handling of the Indian section. But this arangement did not 
last long, and in later years, the compilers omitted the sum- 
maries of letters received, only referring to the letter-books 
which are not traceable always and may, at least in part, 
have been lost. Also the journal is incomplete or missing 
for some early years. With all its gaps, the journal gives an 
extraordinary variety of information, not merely on com- 
mercial topics, but on political and administrative questions 
of the moment. We have also another class of documents 
which may be called Commercial Reports. They arose out 
of the Dutch practice of forwarding to Holland a formal des- 
cription of each region after some years spent in it giving 
an account of its resources and potentialities. ‘Each writer 
had from five to seven years’ experience of the locality he 
described; all of them were writing, not for the public, but 
for the information of their employers; their prospects depen- 
ded, not on brilliance of narrative, but on the practical value 
of their work; and it is safe to infer that their efforts were 
open to the criticism of their superior officers in India’ (More- 
land) . The reports thus stand very much higher than narra- 
tives such as those of Terry or della Valle, in which there 
are traces of the tendency of hasty generalization familiar in 
modern works of travel. The Masulipatam report of A. Scho- 
rer has been translated into English and published for the 
Hakluyt Society by Moreland together with Methwold’s 
Relations of Golkonda. De Laet, De Imperio Magni Magolis 
(Leyden 1631) obviously drew largely on the Gujarat and 
Agra reports and Van Twist, Generale Beschrivinge van 
Indien (Amsterdam 1648), seems also to have consulted the 
Gujarat reports though he had to make careful use of it as 
the famine of 1630 had intervened and vastly altered condi- 
tions. 

Begin ande voortgangh van de Vereenigde Nederlandsche 
Geoctroyeerd Oost-Indische Compagnie, edited by I. Com- 
meline, (Amsterdam, 1646) was a compilation in some chro- 
nological order of various journals, diaries, reports and other 



48 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


such documents, and providing at times, some connecting link3 
between one document and another. It was rather a crude 
attempt, and Baldaeus and more particularly Valentyn, were 
to carry this method to higher levels of perfection. Philip- 
pus Baldaeus, a clergyman who knew Ceylon and Malabar 
at first hand for over a decade, produced (1672) the Naanw- 
kurige Beschrivinge van Malabar en Coromandel etc. a volum- 
inous work of the best type of seventeenth and eighteenth 
century historical works on Asia. He appears to have used 
Portuguese sources and local historical traditions, written and 
oral. He did not confine himself to Dutch activities, but showed 
an interest in the history of indigenous peoples even in the 
period following the advent of Europeans. Though stressing 
political history, he noted matters relating to social, religious, 
and economic life for their curiosity interest. A Dutch phy- 
sician, Daniel Hawart, spent some thirteen years on the Coro- 
mandel Coast serving sometimes as cashier or storekeeper. 
His Op- en Ondergang van Coromandel (1693) gives an al- 
most eyewitness account of conditions in Dutch factories, 
the last Kings of Golkonda and sundry points of native life. He 
had a cultured and critical mind, and his work is valuable 
both as a source and as a historical contribution. Francois 
Valentyp’s Oud en Nteuw Oost-Indien (1724-6) carries the 
story further than Baldaeus and is in some respects fuller, 
including Bengal which Baldaeus ignored. He too uses diverse 
sources — Dutch, Portuguese and indigenous — and quotes 
extensively from them or even reproduces them. He borrows 
without acknowledgment from Baldaeus among others and 
is not always accurate in the use of his sources. He spent 
most of his time in the East Indies, not in India proper. Cer- 
tain Dutch documents of the period are known only through 
the extracts he gives, being no longer traceable in the Dutch 
archives. He has a valuable glossary of South Asian words 
and phrases. He and Baldaeus ‘are indispensable for a study 
of the matters dealt with by them’. 14 Completed in 1701-3, 
but being published only since 1927 at the Hague, is Peter 
Van Dam’s Beschryving van de Oost Indische Compagnie , 

14 Historians, etc. p. 172. 



SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 


39 


an official history written by the chief legal and administra- 
tive official of the Company at the request of the Directors, 
‘It was to he kept as a secret document for private reference 
by the Directors of the Company alone; there was no idea of 
publication/ But several writers were allowed to consult it 
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. Van Dam 
says much of interest relating to the Mughal empire and 
other states, though he is best when he deals with the acti- 
vities of the Company with whose central administration he 
was associated for about half a century. He is not free from 
inaccuracies and did not always digest his material properly; 
and he borrows freely from his predecessors without acknow- 
ledgment. AH the same, like Baldaeus and Valentyn, he is 
indispensable, and is a primary authority where the original 
material is lost. These works taken together give a definitely 
pro-Dutch view of affairs in the seventeenth century South 
Asia with the main emphasis on Malabar, Coromandal and 
Ceylon. There is no lack of criticism of the Company’s policy, 
but in spite of wide interest in various matters relating to 
the peoples of South Asia, there was no attempt at synthetic 
historical writing. 

The French records of Pondicherry and Paris are, as may 
be expected, of great value for the study of Anglo-French 
Wars in India, but as the struggle was carried on mainly in 
the South we may postpone the consideration of this material 
till we take up South Indian history in particular. 

We shall now go back to the beginning of Indian History 
to see what help the historian may get from foreign sources. 
The description of any country and its people by foreign 
observers is always valuable, for it is apt to give a vivid idea 
of many things which indigenous writers may take for grant- 
ed and pass over lightly. And where, as in the case of ancient 
India, the native sources fail the historian partly or altogether 
at some points, the writings of foreigners gain additional value. 
Yet it is easy to exaggerate the value of the Greek writings 
on India. These writers did evince a commendable interest 
in observing and recording facts. But they were also credu- 
lous purveyors of fable and gossip. The few who wrote be- 


40 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


fore the invasion of Alexander did so mostly from hearsay 
and had little direct knowledge of India. The scientists and 
men of action who accompanied Alexander must have found 
most of their time taken up with planning, marching and 
fighting in a hostile and unknown country; the wonder is 
that they succeeded in doing what they did to make India 
known to their countrymen; and the lands they traversed 
were but the fringe of Hindustan, far from the genuine cen- 
tres of Hindu culture in the heart of the country. The am- 
bassadors of the Hellenistic Kings who came after Alexander, 
in particular Megasthenes, had better opportunities as their 
missions took them far into the country. Being ignorant, 
however, of the language of the country, they must have 
depended on interpreters and felt much difficulty in under- 
standing correctly what they saw and heard. The Chinese 
pilgrims of a later age who had command of the Sanskrit 
idiom were much’ better placed in this respect, but their 
interests were not so wide. With very few exceptions, Hero- 
dotus being the most notable of them, all the original writ- 
ings have perished, and we have to depend on excerpts pre- 
served by later writers and compilers who, in turn, had access, 
at times, only at second hand to the matter they quoted. Still, 
it is useful to study these excerpts with care, for much can be 
learnt thus of the geography, physical and human, of the 
fauna and flora, and of the society, religion and economy of 
ancient India. Most of the relevant passages from the classical 
writers can now be read in the recent compilation of Prof. 
R. C. Majumdar who is quite critical of the value of the sources 
he has collected, and holds that some passages have been 
attributed to Megasthenes without sufficient warrant. McCrin- 
dle first translated most of these texts into English in the 
last century. 

The Alexanderine geographer Ptolemy, middle of the 
second century a.d., represents an important stage in the 
increasing acquaintance of the Romans with the East. His 
geographical account of India is based mostly on secondary 
sources and is full of errors; even his general conception of the 
shape of India is faulty in the extreme. Long after Ptolemy, 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 


41 


in the early Byzantine period came Marcian of Heraciea whose 
work has survived only in fragments. 4 If it had been preserved 
to us in its complete form’, says Schoff, 'it might indeed have 
been a more useful compilation of Roman geography for gene- 
ral reference than the highly technical work of Ptolemy/ 

A more typical Byzantine figure was the crotchety monk 
Cosmas, called Xndikopfeustes, the man who sailed to India. 
He was merchant who traded as far east as Ceylon; his book 
Christian Topography , written between a.d. 530 and 550 sets 
out to disprove the current theories of classical geography on 
the conformation of the earth and establish doctrines drawn 
from Holy Scripture. Yule called it ‘a continent of mud from 
which we may extract, however, a few geographical fossils of 
considerable interest’. 

The Chinese dynastic annals and travellers form another 
important source. The Chinese court historians had their own 
way of referring to all foreigners as barbarians and all trade 
missions as bearers of tribute to the Son of Heaven; but their 
record of embassies often made w T ith precise dates does not 
lose its value on that account, and often comes in handy to 
prove the East Asian contacts of Indian states and even aids 
occasionally to settle points of chronology. The evidence 
from Chinese sources on the movements of peoples in Cen- 
tral Asia which resulted in the advent of Sakas and Kushanas 
in India is very valuable and has given rise to rival views 
w T hich will be found discussed in works like Be la Vallee Pous- 
sin’s L/Inde aux temps des Maury as etc. (1930) and J. E. 
van Lohuizen de Leeuw’s The Scythian Period (1949, Leyden) 
besides the waitings of Sten Konow. India’s intercourse with 
China occurred along two routes — the land-route by the 
northwest and the sea-route round Indo-China. Buddhism 
furnished the chief stimulus to movement on either side and 
the nature and results of this religious exchange which con- 
tinued over several centuries are best studied in the late Prof. 
P. C. Bakchi’s hook on India and China (Calcutta 1950). 
There is need for a similar handbook which gathers together 
all the scattered references to India and her affairs in the 
dynastic annals, encyclopaedias and other Chinese writings like 

6 


it 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTOffi? 


those of Chu K’u Fei (117), Chau Ju~Ku (1225), Wang TV 
Yuan (1350) etc. which are not easily accessible here. Many 
Chinese travellers visited India, the holy land of Buddhism, 
and of these three are very well known — Fa-hian, Hiuerx 
Tsang and I~tsing — and there is no need to dwell on the value 
of their writings which are available in authoritative transla- 
lions in English, though I-tsing’s biographies of Eminent Monks 
who travelled to India is apparently available only in the 
French translation of Chavannes (1834) . The primary interest 
of these travellers lay in Buddhism and Buddhist learning 
in India, and we should not forget this in interpreting their 
evidence on more general matters. 

With the ninth century we enter the period of the great 
Arab travellers, geographers and historians. From very an- 
cient times much of the trade of the Indian Ocean had been 
in the hands of the Arabs, and with the rise of Islam, there 
came a sudden expansion which was not confined to religion 
and politics, but spread to commerce and science. The Pro- 
phet had himself started as a merchant, and Muslim mer- 
chants continued to enjoy great prestige throughout. In 
the sixteenth year of the Hegira (a.d. 637) an Arab fleet 
starting from the coast of Oman visited Sindh and the West 
Coast of India, where Muslim merchants were soon permitted 
by Hindu rulers to continue their old trade activities with 
facilities to practise their new religion unhindered. By 758 
the Arabs and Persians settled in Canton were sufficiently 
numerous for them to be able to raise a tumult in the city and 
turn the resulting confusion to their own profit. But the 
empire was not so much Arab as Muslim, not a racial but a 
religious entity. ‘Out of sixteen geographers of note (who 
wrote in Arabic) 15 from the ninth to the thirteenth century/ 
says Oakeshott, Tour were natives of Persia, four of Baghdad 
and four of Spain’. One of the earliest of these writers was 
Ibn Khurdadhbeh, descendant of a Magian who had embraced 
Islam. He occupied a high position in the official world and 
could gather much authentic information on the various 


15 Commerce and Society, pp. 48-9. 



SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 43 

parts of the empire and the countries with which it main- 
tained lelaticns of one kind or another. His Book of Routes 
and Kingdoms (a.d. 848 - 885 ) gives information of value on 
the intercommunications between Europe and Asia in the 
second half of the ninth century a.d. Abu Zaid Hasan of Siraf 
on the Persian Gulf was no great traveller himself, but had 
immense opportunities of meeting much travelled merchants 
and scholars, the celebrated Masudi among them. He edited 
(c\910 a.d.) a compilation of notes made by an anonymous 
writer from his experience in at least two voyages he made 
to India at an interval of sixteen years and from what he 
had collected from others who had visited China, the merchant 
Suleiman among them. Yule did not put a high value on 
Ihis vague and inaccurate narrative, but the fact remains 
that it was largely drawn tipon by Masudi who had travelled 
in India and Ceylon and wanted to devote particular atten- 
tion to India. Xbn Al-Fakih (902) who preceded Abu Zaid 
and Masudi also drew largely upon this anonymous writer. 
In fact it is a common trait of Arab writers to copy one an- 
other extensively. Abu Zaid added many interesting and 
precise particulars to the notes of his predecessors. There are 
many other Arab writers of the tenth century, travellers and 
geographers, like Ibn Rosteh (903), Xshiakri (957), Ibn Haw- 
kal (976) and others, but they have little that is new except 
exaggerated and apocryphal accounts like that of the temple 
of Mankir "(Malkher) from the pen of Abul-Faradj (988). 

The famous Moorish traveller of the fourteenth century Ibn 
Batuta (1304-78) deserves more than a passing mention. He 
was by profession a doctor of Muhammaden law and tradi- 
tions, and an indefatigable explorer by inclination. He started 
on his travels in 1325 and during the next eight years visited 
Arabia and Persia, reaching India in 1333. Muhammad bin 
Tughlak appointed him Qazi of Delhi which office he held for 
about eight years. After having toured the different states of 
India he returned to Morocco in 1353. Here at the instance 
of Sultan Abu Inan, Ibn Batuta dictated the experiences of his 
journey to Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Muhammed com- 
monly known as Ibn Juzai, who edited them as the Rihla 


44 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


(Journal), Ibn Batuta died at the age of seventy-three. 'The 
adventures which befell Ibn Batuta during his long sojourn 
in India/ says R, H. Major, 16 'form one of the most curious t 

and eventful chapters of his peregrinations; and this part of 
his narrative derives additional interest from the details which 
he introduces not only of the natural productions and agricul- 
ture of the country but of the manners, institutions, and his- 
tory of Hindustan, under the Afghan dynasties, which preceded 
for nearly three hundred years the establishment of the Mughal 
power. He gives an historical retrospect, extending from the 
first conquest of Delhi by the Muhammadans under Kut- 4 

buddin Aibak to the accession of the reigning sovereign, 

Sultan Muhammad, the son of Tughlak, in 1325; which is 
specially valuable from the additional facts which it supplies, 
and the light thrown on many of the transactions recorded 
by Firishta, The preliminary sketch is continued by the 
personal narrative of Ibn Batuta himself, whose fortune led 
him to India at the crisis when the unity of the Pathan power 
(at all times rather an aristocracy of military leaders than a 
consolidated monarchy) was on the point of dissolution, from . 
the mad tyranny of Sultan Muhammad, which drove all the 
governors of provinces into open revolt, and led to the erec- 
tion of independent kingdoms in Bengal, the Dekhan etc. 

On the arrival of an embassy from the emperor of China, he 
gladly accepted an appointment as one of the envoys destined 
to convey the gifts sent in return by Sultan Muhammad; and 
receiving his outfit and credentials, quitted without delay 
the dangerous walls of Delhi early in the year of the Hejira 
743 (aj>. 1342)/ 

The volume of evidence from European travellers and 
merchants who resided in India for considerable periods grows 
to great proportions in the seventeenth century when the 
splendour of the Mughal empire offered a great attraction. 

For the reigns of Akbar and Jahangir the Jesuit records 
occupy the first place in volume and importance. The Jesuit 
contact with Akbar began in a.d. 1580 and three missions 
went to his court from Goa. An account of the first mission 

5 

W India in the Fifteenth Century , pp, Iiv-Iv, 



SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 


45 


was written in 1582 by Father Jarric Monserrate, a great 
scholar. Fr. Pierre du Jarric, the French historian, published 
(1608-14) an account of the Jesuit missions upto 1600, in- 
cluding the three missions to the great Mughal, Based on 
the original Jesuit letters, du Jarric’s work is of unsurpassed 
value for elucidating the religious activities of Akbar. These 
Jesuit sources have been well studied by scholars like Father 
Hosten, Maclagan and V, A. Smith. Fr. John Correia- Afon- 
so ’s Jesuit Letters and Indian History (Bombay 1955) is a 
recent and comprehensive study of the subject in so far as 
it relates to India. According to C. EL Payne, who translated 
and annotated a portion of du Jarric’s work, the chief interest 
of the narrative lies in 'the intimate light it sheds on the 
character and mind of Akbar, in the portraits it presents 
of the royal princes and other notable figures of the time, 
and in the insight it affords into the general conditions of life 
under Mogul rule’. 17 We shall have to revert to Jesuit letters 
presently. 

The Europeans who travelled in India in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries came from different countries and on 
diverse trade missions, career, diplomacy, diversion. Some 
of them received a warm reception in the Mughal court. 
The travellers were often men of learning and culture, keen, 
shrewd and sympathetic observers who sometimes occupied 
a privileged position at the court. The accounts of seven Eng- 
lishmen 18 who travelled in northern and western India during 
the reigns of Akbar and Jahangir, not designed by writers 
for publication, have the great merit of 'naturalness of the 
narrative’. William Foster has edited and annotated the 
most important among these travel books in his Early Travels 
in India 1583-1619, and the rest may be read in extenso in 
Purchas , His Pilgrimages (1625) or Hakluytus Poshtumus or 
Purchas , His Pilgrimages (Maelehose 1905) . Foster observes; 
'Most of the travellers are seen as it were in undress, and we 

incited by Correia-Afonso. p. 122. 

18 Ralph Fitch (1583-91); John Mildenhall (1599-1606); William 
Hawkins <1608-13); William Finch (1603-11); Nicholas Withvington 
(1612-16); Thomas Coiyat (1612-17); and Edward Terry (1616-19). 



46 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


learn more of their characters than we probably should, had 
they been conscious that they were addressing a wider audi- 
ence. For the travellers themselves one feels a genuine 
admiration. One and all, the men who here write their adven- 
tures so soheidy and so modestly with many a shrewd obser- 
vation and occasionally a flash of humour, ran daily great 
risks; and in fact three of them found in the east their last 
resting place, while a fourth died on the voyage home. Sick- 
ness, robbery, threats of violence were incidents that did not 
shake their cheerfulness, and there is little reflection in their 
narrative of the danger and hardships which were constantly 
their lot/ 

The Journal of Sir Thomas Roe, the ambassador of King 
James I to Jahangir, sheds valuable light, among others, on 
the splendours of the Mughal court. ‘But he was too shrewd 
to allow the pomp raid glitter to blind him to the real state 
of the country and he brings out clearly the darker shades 
of the picture. He saw clearly, too, the forces which were 
making for disintegration; and though “the time when all in 
these Kingdoms will be in combustion” was not so near as 
he imagined, yet it was only postponed by the force of charac- 
ter of Shah Jahan and his still more capable son/ Terry's 
Voyage ( Purehas , Vol. IX 1-54 of the reprint of 1777) is a 
useful supplement to Roe's account of the life, character and 
policy of Jahangir. He also says something of the Jesuits 
and the Portuguese, and of the manners and customs of the 
people. The letters of Thomas Coryat also give a glimpse 
of the personality and character of Jahangir. The Journal of 
John Jourdain edited by Foster for the Hakluyt Society des- 
cribes the commercial activities of the English traders on the 
west coast, their relations with the Portuguese, and their treat- 
ment by the local authorities, as also the cities and towns 
through which he passed in the second half of the seven- 
teenth century. 

We cannot discuss details relating to the many other travel- 
lers of the period like Frangoys Pelsaert, De Laet, Pietro 
Della Valle, Sir Thomas Herbert, Johann Albert Van 
Mandelsto, Francois Bernier, Tavernier, Manned, Thavenof, 


£. 

i' 

l 

j- 

I 

1 

f 

t 

l 

j 


r 

k 


f 

\ 


if, 


I. 


I 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 47 

Carreri, and others. Their observations throw much light 
on different aspects of Mughal rule and the state of the 
country, the army, and so on. De Laet’s Description of India 
and Fragment of Indian History (1825) has been described 
as a complete gazetteer of Jahangir’s India, and the Fragment 
agrees substantially with the Persian histories. Bernier was 
a French doctor of great ability who became physician to 
Danishmand Khan and lived in the Mughal court for nine 
years. His reports to the French minister Colbert provided a 
vivid picture of Aurangzeb’s court in the early years of his 
reign as also of the war of succession that preceded; his ana- 
lysis of Mughal administration and description of Hindu 
society were valuable, and Europe’s idea of the India of the 
17th and 18th centuries was mainly based on his account. 
Manucci came to India as a boy of seventeen in 1653 and 
stayed till his death (about 1718) after serving for some time 
in Dara’s artillery. The sparkle of his anecdotes must go 
far to excuse his rather slender attachment to facts. These 
foreign observers reported in detail on many things taken for 
granted by Indian writers and this constitutes their main con- 
tribution to our knowledge of society and culture at their 
time. Their evidence on political occurrences is nothing by 
the side of the Persian sources. They often merely repro- 
duced bazar rumours and stories current among the populace; 
they did not know literary Persian enough and had few oppor- 
tunities of visiting the makers of Indian History, and then 
more often as suppliants for favours than as equals capable 
of engaging in free and familiar intercourse. 

One general observation may be made at the end of this 
general survey of the sources of our history. That history 
has too long been treated from the imperialist standpoint and 
dominated by the ‘spirit of Vincent Smith’ so to say. Stress 
has been laid on the absence of a state organization indepen- 
dent of or more lasting than a dynasty; every founder of 
a kingdom created an organization of his own which had little 
relation with what went before or came after, and the people 
were indifferent to the incidence of political rule in their 
absorption with the pursuit of other wordly interests. A few 


SOURCES OF INDiAN HISTORY 


European writers from other nations have, as it seems to us 
rightly, taken a more organic view of India’s history and laid 
stress on its continuity and on Indians being essentially not 
very different from other nations in their outlook on life and 
affairs. In a work on Nationalism in British India (1&2Q) for 
instance, the Dutch writer D. M. G. Koch writes: ‘The strength 
of the tendencies towards natural development in that indi- 
genous society, with its fine civilization, its strong traditions, 
its indestructibly powerful inner life, has not deserted it in 
the period of British rule also. However great the changes 
during the past one and a half centuries may have been, India 
remained in essence the same.’ 19 The shrewd Belgian Indo- 
logist Poussin, whom I have mentioned already, has said: 
‘Thanks to the gods and to Sarasvati we have sufficient proof 
that India — despite the horse sacrifice, the Upanisads, Bud- 
dhism, caste and the brahmans — was in many respects a coun- 
try just like any other, very much alive and progressive, in 
love with arts, with festivals, with literature, by no means 
gloomy, but witty, at times even Voltairean, easily amused 
and very amusing.’ Again: ‘The India of the Rajas, the Kings, 
and the great feudal chiefs, is worthy of our attention. She is 
not, as is often said, a chaotic mass from time to time vainly 
shaken up by the ambition of potentates and the turbulence 
of princes. She is of truly historical interest. Not only does 
this India reveal at once the warlike spirit of dynasts and 
Rajputs and the solidity of complex administrative and com- 
mercial bodies, but she is also the scene of the conflict of a 
certain number of states pursuing precise economic and poli- 
tical ends.’ 20 He then adds a note of considerable length cal- 
culated to develop the point more precisely and illustrate his 
own view that ‘it is possible to show that these dynasties were 
defending the permanent interests of the country they ruled, 
interests which may truly be called “national”.’ We hope that 
future historians of India will shed the negative and apolo- 
getic attitude arising out of an inner feeling that the history of 

19 Cited in Historians , etc . p. 177, 

20 Cited and translated by Basham in Historians , etc. p. 278, 



$ 


SOURCES WITH REFERENCE TO SOUTH INDIA 49 

our country is in many ways inferior to that of other countries 
like England or France, and adopt a more positive and con- 
structive approach to the interpretation of evidence and show 
that the history of India has a continuity and ethos of its 
own not in any way lacking in interest or instruction. This 
would take more critical thinking than has so far been brought 
to bear on the subject. 


* 


7 


n 


SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D. 1300 

South India was the scene of amateurish studies in pre- 
history beginning with the notice of Pandoo Coolies (Pandu 
kulis) by Marria Graham (1811) and Babington (1833). 
Other reports of graves from Congreve and Newbold fol- 
lowed, and much was written on the subject of stone, cist 
or circle graves. The geologist Newbold (1836) first record- 
ed the mysterious mounds of Bellary and North Karnataka, 
and a host of collectors took the field from 1850; their collec- 
tions of artifacts mostly from the surface found their way 
to the British or Indian museums, or disappeared. The name 
of Bruce Foote, however, stands out preeminent among them 
all. 1 He was a geologist familiar with developments in Europe 
and reached India in 1858. His discovery, five years later 
of stone implements in laterite deposits near Madras opened 
a new epoch in Indian pre-history. He continued his field work 
for thirty-three years, making important discoveries wherever 
he went; excavation played little part in his work and his 
method comprised topographical observation, surface collec- 
tion on a large scale, and typological analysis. His Notes on 
the ages and distribution of the antiquities (Madras, 1916) 
based on years of study of his vast collections offers a monu- 
mental reconstruction of the various stages of pre-historic 
culture of India. Only in one aspect, the historical, does 
his work call for correction; many of the sites and objects he 
assigned to the later Iron Age are now seen to belong to the 
Early Historic or even Mediaeval periods. He also sometimes 
makes general statements based on observation in a limited 
region. 

It is difficult to draw the line between pre-history and 
history in South India. The Asoka inscriptions reach the 
- nort h of the Mysore state by about 250 e.c., but tell us little 


1 Hht&rians, etc,, pp. 250-1. 


SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D. 1300 51 

directly on the nature of the country’s culture. We have 
only the Agastya legends and the descriptions of dsramas on 
the banks of the Godavari in the Rammjana. to guide our 
surmises on the progress of Aryanization in the South. Panini 
and Megasthenes knew of the Pandya country in the extreme 
south, and this certainly helps to put back the penetration of 
Aryan influences to about two or three centuries before the 
period postulated by Wheeler on the results of excavations 
in Brahmagiri and Maski. The evidence of the Brahmi cave 
inscriptions from the second century b.c. and the state of 
Sangam literature in the early centuries a.d. when Roman 
trade with the South flourished remarkably appear also to 
fit into the scheme suggested. We may accept Wheeler’s 
statement: ‘The extent in time and space of the Brahmagiri- 
Bellary culture can only be proved by further excavation at 
widely separated points .’ 2 We may also note that his picture 
of the material culture of the period offers no more support 
to imaginary glories of pre-Aryan Dravidian culture than 
excavations in the North support the similar imaginings about 
Puranic and epic civilizations. 

Some time in the later half of the first millennium b.c., if 
not earlier, there appeared in South India a new folk who 
followed the custom of burying the dead collectively after 
exposure and excoriation in megalithic cists with a round 
port hole or doorway at one end. They used iron implements 
and wheel turned pottery. They seemed to have imposed 
themselves as a dominant people on the pre-existing neolithic 
population. There are comparable tombs of a much earlier 
date in Western Asia, Northern Africa and Europe, and 
though the distances in time and space preclude certainty 
about it, it is difficult to treat the Indian megalithic culture 
as altogether unrelated to the Western. Suggestions have 
been made (by Haimendorf among others) that this megali- 
thic folk were the Dravidian speakers who entered South 
India by sea from the West and introduced rice-cultivation 
with the aid of artificial irrigation. According to this view 


2 Oxford History of India, p. 36- _ 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


$2 

they occupied the South some time after the Aryans entered 
the North, and at no time did they spread themselves very 
much beyond the area of their present occupation, though 
they may have sent out colonies to the North at different 
times for different reasons. If further studies confirm these 
views, then it would become probable that the megalithic 
culture was carried from South India to South East Asia. 

Some linguists like Prof. Thomas Burrow have, put forward 
the view that Dravidian words entered Sanskrit in the late 
Vedie period not from contact with Dravidian speakers in 
South India which came about later, but from the influence 
of local Dravidian speeches of an earlier stratum which must 
have been current in some of the main areas of Aryan settle- 
ment and which we may perhaps give the name proto-Dravi- 
dian. 3 At this point I may also refer to the new theory put 
forward by N, Lahovary that Dravidian ultimately links up 
with a widespread group of pre-Indo-European speeches of 
the Mediterranean basin of which Basque and Caucasian are 
the isolated representatives in Europe today, besides the 
Dravidian speeches of South India. Though these specula- 
tions on linguistic pre-history sound rather remote today, it 
may be that further research along the lines indicated may 
bring more light on very early developments of which we 
now know so little. 

Contemporaneous with the megaliths, are the numerous 
urn-fields which cover about 100 acres or more indicating 
large or long settled populations. One of the best known is 
at Adiccanallur in lower Tamraparni Valley in the Tir un el- 
veli district, though others are known near Madras, Pondi- 
cherry and elsewhere. The dead are usually buried in large 
pear shaped urns associated with smaller urns, but some- 
times in the Madras area a terra cotta sarcophagus on legs 
is substituted/ Though the actual dwelling places of the, 
urn-field folk have not been identified with certainty, Wheeler 
thinks' ‘a very little research should reveal them’. 4 Funeral 
furnishings at Adiccanallur include pottery of various nhajpes, 

3 The Indo- Asian Culture viii, 4, pp. 336-9. 

4 Oxford History of India, p. 37. 



SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT AD. 1300 


S3 


iron implements and weapons, gold diadems and mouth pieces 
embossed with geometrical designs and sometimes with holes 
cut at the ends, bronze ornaments and utensils besides beads 
and household articles in stone. This grouping of gold, 
bronze and iron articles finds more or less close parallels in 
the late bronze age tombs at Enkomi in Cyprus and in Gaza 
and Gerar in Palestine. The whole problem calls for further 
investigation, as also the beads of stone, crude glass and 
semi- precious stones from all over South and South East 
Asia. 

* All over India the foundations of the historic culture of 
1 the country were laid by the fusion of Indo-Aryan and pre- 
Aryan elements in varying conditions and proportions, and 
South India is no exception. Tamil is certainly the oldest of 
the Dravidian languages and was spoken in early historical 
times over a much wider area than at present. The earlier 
Tamil literature which goes back to early centuries a.d. con- 
tains relatively few Sanskrit loan words, and these are 
generally adapted to the Tamil phonetic system, while the 
forms of literature are independent of Sanskrit models. But 
even in Tamil, Sanskrit influences grew stronger in course 
of time and large borrowings of ideas, words, literary forms, 
and metres became the rule. Telugu and Canarese spoken 
farther north are even more strongly influenced by Sanskrit. 
Malayalam very clearly akin to Tamil became a separate 
language in the eleventh century. But generally speaking in 
the languages, literatures and institutions of the South there 
has survived much more of pre-Aryan India than anywhere 
else. The Marathas of Western Deccan are the southernmost 
of the Indo-Aryan speaking peoples of India. The rise of 
Hindu kingdoms in the eastern lands across the Bay of 
Bengal is but an extension and continuation of the process 
by which South India and Ceylon were colonized and 
Aryanized; and beyond doubt the Deccan and the far Sbflth 
formed the advanced bases from which this transmarine 
movement started in the early centuries before and after the 
Christian' era. In Indonesia and Indo-China emigrants from 
India met the same problems as in India and solved them 



54 SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 

in more or less the same manner. A detailed study of the 
many interesting analogies between the results of these early 
culture-contacts in these different lands has not yet been 
attempted. The history of India has been too long studied 
more or less exclusively in isolation and from the continental 
point of view, little regard being paid to the maritime side 
of the story. 

The earliest evidence from the Tamil country after the 
Asoka inscriptions include about thirty or so short Brahml 
inscriptions from natural caverns slightly improved by art so 
to become fit for human habitation; these inscriptions shov# 
us the Tamil language and script in their formative stages, 
and attest the presence of Buddhists and Jains in the country, 
which is not surprising in view of Asoka’s missions to the 
Tamil country. Then we have the excavation at Arikamedu 
near Pondicherry of a ‘Roman factory’ where textiles were 
processed for export, which confirms the trade contacts with 
the Roman empire, already known from numerous finds of 
Roman coins mainly of the first and second century a.d., and 
lastly, the earliest strata of Tamil literature known as the lite- 
rature of the gangam and dating most probably from the 
second to the fourth century ad. This literature has been 
assigned a fabulous antiquity by credulous scholars who have 
swallowed wholesale the tall story of three Tamil S§angams 
functioning for thousands of years; this tale first appears in a 
prose commentary of the Iraiyarvar Ahapporul of indefinite 
date, but obviously not earlier than the eighth or ninth 
century a.d., to judge from the events mentioned in the illus- 
trative stanzas cited in it. This literature comprises about 
25,000 lines of poetry, now accessible to us only in schematic 
anthologies, some of which carry invocatory stanzas, at the 
beginning by & poet known as ‘Perundevanar who sang the 
Bharatam\ Now, the larger Sinnamanur plates of the Pand- 
yas dated early in the tenth century a.d., record that the 
Papayas established a Sangam in Madurai and had the Maha- 
bharata translated into Tamil. It is tempting to- suppose that 
the invocatory stanzas I have just mentioned were the work 
of this translator of the Sangam age. But this would be seen 



SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D . 1300 


55 


to be clearly wrong if we recall that the anthologies include 
such late poems and collections as the Tiru-muriig^arrupjpadai, 
Kalittogai and Paripadal which are demonstrably later than 
the earlier poems. We do not know the name of the 2§angam 
translator of the Mahabharata; on the other hand we know 
of a Perundevanar who produced a mixed prose and verse 
rendering of the epic In the reign of the Pallava king Nandi- 
varman, Victor at Tellaru, as this poem has survived in part. 
It may be tentatively postulated therefore that the editing 
of^the anthologies as we have them now was the work of this 
Perundevanar of the late Pallava period. But this has no 
bearing on the actual time of the composition of the poems 
themselves which, for good reasons, may well be assigned 
to the first four or five ..centuries a.d., perhaps more parti- 
cularly to the second and third. A valuable foreign literary 
source for the ;Sangam period is the anonymous Greek tract 
The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea which gives a compact and 
comprehensive account of the ports of South India and their 
trade with the Roman Empire. While these sources enable 
us to form a fair idea of the social and economic conditions 
prevalent at the time, their notices of kings and chieftains are 
too fragmentary for a continuous political history to be pos- 
sible. There are also difficulties due to the vagueness or 
contradictions in the colophons to the different pieces in the 
anthologies which must have been added most probably by 
the editor who compiled the anthologies and which are our 
only source at present for elucidating the context of the 
poems. Only for the Chera monarchs do we get anything 
like a genealogy, and this again is not without its own pro- 
blems. Much confusion has been imported into the picture 
we form of the Sangam period by rather persistent attempts 
to treat the twin epics of the Silappadikaram and Manime- 
kalai , and some of the relatively late anthologies and the 
group of 18 didactic works including the Kura\ as contem- 
porary with the genuine Sangam literature of the early centu- 
ries a.d. It is only of late that the two epics have come to 
be recognized for what they are viz., a literary hoax perhaps 
of the eighth century a.d. or thereabout by anonymous authors ‘ 


58 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


statement in the Velviku$i grant about the overthrow of many 
great kings. Some songs about him are quoted by Amita- 
Sagara, a Jaina grammarian of Tamil of the tenth century a.d. 
Possibly Accuta was himself a Buddhist, and the political 
revolution which the Kalabhras effected was provoked by 
religious antagonism. At any rate the Kalabhras seem to 
be roundly denounced as evil kings, kali-arasar, (unless we 
accept the existence of a kali dynasty) who upset the social 
order by dethroning legitimate kings and confiscating reli- 
gious and charitable endowments. We have almost no con- 
temporary record of this period apart from Buddhadatta’s 
works referred to above; we have no means of estimating 
the duration or area of Kalabhra rule, but we find that all 
the powers that come up in the sixth century — Pandyas, 
Pallavas, and Calukyas of Radami — claim to have overthrown 
the Kalabhras as a preliminary to the establishment of their 
own rule. It is significant that no coins of this dark period 
seem to be known. 

In the Deccan the dissolution of the Satavahana empire 
in the third century a.d. is also followed by a confused period 
of many small powers represented by some inscriptions and 
coins that have survived. The Iksvakus of Andhradesa and 
the Early Pallavas were the most considerable powers at 
first, and Prakrit inscriptions on stone from Nagarjunakonda 
and elsewhere tell us about the Iksvakus and three Prakrit 
charters on copper-plates about the Pallavas. The monu- 
ments of the Iksvakus are another valuable source for their 
history. Intensive excavations over the Nagarjunakonda 
region were undertaken some years ago as it was soon to 
be submerged on the completion of the Nagarjunasagar pro- 
ject; the excavations Have been completed and their detailed 
report when available may be expected to bring much fresh 
knowledge. Tentative and tantalizing, notices appear in the 
annual publication of the department entitled Indian Archaeo- 
logy . The early Pallavas ruled from Kancipuram over the 
territory south of the Krsna from sea to sea for a time. But 
we know very little of this period, and the darkness is scar- 



SdliTH INDIA TO ABOtJT AD. 1306 


S9 


cely relieved by the lightning flash of the military raid of 
Samudragupta from the North in the middle of the fourth 
century a.d. Probably as a result of the raid and the result- 
ing confusion, we see new states rising — the Vakatakas in 
Vidarbha, the Visnukundins in Andhra, the Gahgas and 
Kadambas in the eastern and western halves of the present 
Mysore State and so on. The Pallavas continue their rule 
over more restricted territory than before. All these dynas- 
ties adopt Sanskrit as the official language of their charters 
and inscriptions, and the employment of local language in 
part or as a whole did not start till some centuries later. 
We have little trustworthy literary evidence, though there 
are legends galore, some of them making their way into ins- 
criptions as well; and so inscriptions on stone and copper, and 
coins are our main sources for this peridd. 

The baffling obscurity lifts, and a reasonably continuous 
history becomes possible again from the middle of the sixth 
century a.d. or a little later. The period of three centuries 
that follows saw the rise of relatively large states each with 
a notable record of its own in war and peace. The Cilukyas 
of Badami united the whole of the Deccan in one state, but 
before they gave place to the Riistrakutas in the middle of the 
eighth century, they had installed two collateral lines in Lata 
(Gujarat) and in the Andhra country where the Eastern 
Calukyas of Vengi held sway till late in the eleventh century 
when they merged in the imperial Cola dynasty of the Tamil 
country after several generations of close matrimonial alli- 
ances. The country south of the Tungabhadra was shared by 
the Pallavas and Bandyas, and the frontier between their 
territories was a shifting line following the course of the 
lower Kaveri. The Pallavas who had to fight on two fronts 
most of the time had a strenuous time, but rose equal to their 
tasks and made the most important contributions to the deve- 
lopment of Tamil civilization along many lines. The Colas who 
were prominent in the Sangam period, suffer an eclipse now 
and are virtually not heard of except in their offshoot, the 
Telugu-codas in the Ceded District and their neighbourhood, 
who claimed descent from Karikala. The Western Gangas of 
Mysore held an important place among powers of the second 



Sources of Indian history 


line and joined their forces with the Calukyas or Pallavas 
according to exigencies. The entire period was marked by 
striking developments in religion, literature and art. 

From now on to the fall of Vijayanagar in the seventeenth 
century, inscriptions which progressively grow in numbers and 
interest become the most faithful and authentic source of the 
history of the South. The language of these inscriptions is 
either Sanskrit or the local speech — Kannada, Telugu or Tamil, 
— or both. The later inscriptions are generally bilingual, em- 
ploying Sanskrit generally at the beginning and the end, and 
popular speech in the body of the document, particularly 
when describing in detail the gifts made and the boundaries 
of the land given to temples, learned men, and others. The 
script undergoes change, and evolves, in the Deccan, into 
the ancestor of the modern Telugu and Kannada scripts; 
farther south its evolution first assumes the early form of 
Grantha known from the Pallava inscriptions of the seventh 
and eighth centuries, and then undergoes modifications under 
the influence of Tamil in its two forms — Tamil properly so 
called and Vattejuttu or round hand; the origin of these two 
scripts is by no means definitely known, though Tamil proper 
stands in much closer relation to the Pallava Grantha. Buhler 
held the view that the Vatteluttu may be described as a cursive 
script, which bears the same relation to the Tamil as the 
modern northern alphabets of the clerks and merchants to 
their originals, e.g. Modi of the Marathas to Ralbodh and the 
Takari of the Dogras to the iSarada. The Vatteluttu went 
out of use in the Tamil country about the tenth century a.b. 
though it continued to be used on the west coast till very 
much later. 

We may note in passing that the early Pallava Grantha 
script as yet little differentiated from the ancestor of Telugu- 
Kannada was carried by Hindu colonists across the seas to 
west Java, Borneo and Indo-China, the earliest stone inscrip- 
tions in this script from these places dating from about a.d. 
400 or a little earlier. The language of these early colonial 
inscriptions is Sanskrit which began to be employed in India 
itself by the Saka satraps of western India in the second 
century a.d. 


SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D. 1300 & 

Stone inscriptions begin to increase in number steadily 
from the sixth century onwards, but copper-plate records con- 
tinue to be the mainstay of the historian for some centuries 
more, and at no time can they be left out of the reckoning. 
The seals on many of these plates bear the la-nchana (emblem) 
of the ruling line sometimes surrounded by a Sanskrit verse 
generally in cmwst,up giving the name of the ruler issuing 
the charter. The history of the early Papayas from the 
seventh to the tenth century a.d. rests almost exclusively on 
two long copper-plate records — the Velvikudi grant and the 
larger Sinnamannur plates — which are both bilingual and 
employ the Grantha script for the Sanskrit and Vat(eluttu for 
the Tamil parts; there are also other copper-plate records 
including one or two that have been recently discovered, but 
they are not nearly so important, though they make their 
contribution to administrative and social history. The history 
of the contemporary Pallava line of Simhavisnu is also deriv- 
ed more from copper-plates than from stone inscriptions, 
which, however, are more valuable for Pallava history than 
the Papdya. Almost the whole of Eastern Calukya history, 
and much of that of the Galukyas of Badami are also based 
on copper-plate charters. 

The Pandya chronology of this period rests firmly on some 
definitely dated inscriptions which are indeed very rare. We 
have the Anamalai inscription (from the neighbourhood of 
the Pandyan capital Madura) dated in the year 3871 (ex- 
pired) of the Kaliyuga era, i.e. a.d. 770, which gives us a defi- 
nite date in the reign of Parantaka I, Varaguna Maharaja. 
Another datum, equally definite, is derived from the Aivar- 
malai record dated in 6 aka era 792, i.e. a.d. 870 which was 
the eighth regnal year of a king Varaguna, the second of 
that name and grandson of Varaguna I. These data when 
coordinated with known genealogies and probable synchro- 
nisms enable the historian to establish a dependable frame of 
chronology for South Indian history. We have another firm 
date in the Badami rock inscription of Pulakesin I which is 
dated in the &aka year 465 corresponding to a.d. 543 and says 
that in that year he fortified the hill near Badami into a 
strong fortress; this record was discovered only in 1941. A 



42 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


copper-plate record of the Rastrakuta Dantiduga shows him 
in occupation of Ellora in a.d. 742 and thus throws welcome 
light on the early career of this founder of the Ra$trakuta 
line of Manyakheta (Malkhed). 

In giving the regnal years of kings, the Pandyan inscrip- 
tions often mention one year opposite another; the exact signi- 
ficance of this still remains a mystery, hut epigraphists are 
agreed in adding up the two or more figures and treating the 
total as the year of the reign in which the inscription was 
recorded. 

Copper-plates, particularly those of small size, as in this 
period, can be forged, and this practice has often been resorted 
to form different motives; but the trained epigraphist has 
seldom much difficulty in detecting their true nature, and in 
one case, that of Western Ganga history, perhaps even some 
genuine documents were rejected in the first instance by 
Fleet as spurious. Later discoveries of really early records 
have necessitated a reconsideration of some of those rejected 
earlier, though in the vast majority of instances Fleet’s judge- 
ment still holds the field. Instances are not altogether un- 
known of spurious plates sometimes recording in genuine 
history or tradition. 

Closely allied to inscriptions is the evidence of the shorter 
legends on coins. But the coinage of South India, it has been 
said, ‘presents greater difficulties to the student and offers 
less reward for his labours than that of the North’. This 
should not, however, become the excuse for neglecting this 
line of evidence which is, in fact, a little more rewarding 
than is generally thought. Really ancient coins are rare and 
contain no dates, and few intelligible legends, often only the 
ruler’s name or title as in the srinidhi and snbhara coins of 
the Pallavas; also the devices upon them are often crude and 
indistinct. The rectangular pieces of impure silver or some- 
times copper bearing several punch-marks, the puranas 
(eldings) of the law books, were common to both North and 
South India and certainly belong to the centuries before 
Christ, though they may have continued in circulation till 
about a.d. 200. In later times the principal coinage of the 
South was struck in gold, rarely silver; copper was used for 



SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D. 1300 


65 


smaller denominations. Of gold coins there were generally 
two denominations: the vardha perhaps getting its name from 
the Calukya crest of a boar, also called port, hun, pagoda, 
(from bhagavati?) and amdoes by the Portuguese usually 
weighing a Kalanju (Molucca bean) or 50 to 60 grains; and 
the fanam ( panam ) being a tenth of the var&ha, its weight, 
5 to 6 grains, conforming to the manyadi. The earliest gold 
coins are spherules of plain gold bearing a minute punch- 
mark. A little later came the padma-tankas thin cup-shaped 
pieces stamped with punches, at first on one side only and 
then on both. Finally came the die-struck pieces of which 
the thick small Vijayanagar pagodas are the best surviving 
specimens. There was a general preference for small coins 
and the silver tarns of Calicut, only one or two grains in 
weight, are some of the smallest specimens of coins known. 

As already mentioned, during the early centuries of the 
Christian era Roman imperial coins of gold and silver were 
imported in considerable quantity in the course of trade and 
circulated freely in the country. The small copper coins bear- 
ing Roman devices and legends may have been locally pro- 
duced by foreign settlers. The Satavahanas used lead for 
many of their issues, and their coins bear legends of the 
names of kings which confirm the Puranic lists of names in 
some measure. One of the most interesting types of these 
coins bears a two-masted ship on the obverse, an indication 
of the maritime power and activity of the Andhras; the same 
design is found on some copper coins of about the same date 
or a little later from farther south. 

The earliest padma-tankas were perhaps struck by the 
Kadambas; but one of these coins that can be most satis- 
factorily dated is a base silver piece with a lion device and 
the title. Visamasiddhi on the obverse which clearly belongs 
to Visnuvardhana (615-33) , the founder of the Eastern Calukya 
line. The practice of punch-marking on the gold coinage 
lingered long after its disuse on silver and copper, and a large 
board of coins struck by the Telugu-codas of Nellore in the 
thirteenth century, found at Kodur in 1913, shows that the 
padma-tanka type had a long history and wide ramifications. 


m 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


The period has a rich record in architecture and sculpture. 
Aihole, Badami, Pattadakal, Ellora and Elephanta in Western 
India to mention only the most prominent centres, Mamalla- 
puram, Kjancxpuram, Panamalai and Kalugumalai and other 
centres in the south are veritable treasure houses of rock 
architecture and structural temples. They have been studied 
off and on by students of architecture, sculpture and paint- 
ing, and the light they throw on the state of religious belief, 
iconography and the fine arts like music, dancing and paint- 
ing. should, it seems to me, be reflected rather more than 
it is in the school and college books of history. The late 
Jouveau Dubreuil’s Archaeologie du sude VInde (2 vols.) 
forms a fine introduction to the subject; its second part on 
iconography is available in an English translation, but not 
the more fundamental first volume of which only one chapter 
was adapted in English by Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar 
under the caption ‘Dravidian Architecture’. We need a series 
of well-studied monographs on the more important temples 
written with care and discernment before an adequate and 
definitive account of the South Indian temple as a religious 
and social institution can be undertaken. 

While contributing little directly to knowledge of political 
history, literature does make an indirect contribution which 
can easily be underestimated. First, it enables the historian 
to picture the social and religious milieu in which the charac- 
ters of history lived and moved. Then the prologues, epilo- 
gues and colophons of different works often embody valuable 
data on the lineage and achievements of the authors of the 
works and their royal patrons, and these often supplement 
the inscriptions admirably. For the period we have in view, 
however, there is not much literary evidence except some 
Sanskrit works and a part of Tamil literature, particularly 
the devotional hymns of the Alvars and N&yawars of the Tamil 
country. We know from the Aihole inscription of Pula- 
kesin II (a.d. 634) that Bharavi had attained great fame by 
that time; tradition connects him with the rhetorician Dandin 
on the one hand and with Sinvhavisnu of Kianci and Visnu- 
vardhana of Vengi. Some scholars believe that Bharavi’s 
Kiratarjumya, a poem on the Pandava Arjuna wrestling with 



SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D. 1300 


65 


Siva disguised as a hunter and getting the Pi&supata war- 
weapon from him, made the story popular, and that the great 
rock-sculpture of Mahabalipuram is in fact a representation 
of the poem, particularly of Arjuna’s penance which preced- 
ed the fight. Others, however, are inclined to see in the 
sculpture a representation of Bhaglratha’s penance to bring 
the Ganges from heaven to earth, a task in which he needed 
the assistance of 6iva and secured it by penance. There is a 
Sanskrit prose romance called Avantisimdarikatha and a verse 
abstract of it, which retail the traditions about Bharavi and 
Dandin just mentioned, and which contains specific references 
to Mamallapuram and its sculpture of Visnu sleeping on 
the cosmic Ananta near the sea. But the work has not been 
critically edited and only a part of it has survived, and some 
scholars have doubted its authenticity. The versatile Pallava 
ruler Mahendra Varman I was the author of the farce Matta- 
vildsa — also a title of the king — and perhaps also of another 
farce Bhagavadajjukam, which successively ridicule the mon- 
kish orders of the Bhiksus and Kapalikas and make oblique 
references to corruption in some branches of administration 
like the police and the judiciary. Kumarila and Sankara 
wrote in this period, but their works belong more to the 
history of philosophy and have little to contribute to general 
history. In Tamil we may assign to this period most of the 
eighteen l&lkkanakku , the kural not excepted. These works 
afford valuable glimpses of the social life of the times, but in 
a more idealistic than realistic manner. But the devotional! 
hymns of the Alvars and Ndyamrs constitute the piece del 
resistance of this period. Unfortunately their correct underJ 
standing has been much clouded by the orthodox hagiologv 
of a later age which has been accepted as history without 
sufficient critical examination in the light of the hymns them- 
selves. Even the hymns taken by themselves are not with-' 
out difficulties for the secular historian who often finds it 
difficult to reconstruct the real history behind some of the 
hymns and the miracles they sometimes record. Their un- 
biased critical study may be expected to lead to more trust- \ 
worthy conclusions on the chronology of the Hindu revival of | 
the Pallava period and on the theory and practice of religion 4 
0 


66 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


at the time. The hagiolo gy of the later period may well 
attest the beliefs prevalent at that period, but cannot be valid 
for the earlier period unless supported by contemporary evid- 
ence. Even the hymns we have only in the form in which 
they were edited by their respective redactors in the tenth 
century ajx, but foe have now no means of going behind the 
editions to the original form or order of the hymns. In gene- 
ral literature, the Silappadikamm , the Manimekalai and the 
Perungadai belong to this period, but should be used with 
due caution by the historian. We have lastly, a semi-histo- 
rical poem in the anonymous Nandikkalambakam of about 
eighty stanzas in various metres with many interpolations 
dealing with the events of the reign of Nandivarman III, The 
poem cannot, however, be said to add materially to the know- 
ledge of the reign derived from its inscriptions including the 
overseas record at Takua-pa on the west coast of the Malay 
Peninsula. 

Before we leave this period, we must notice two inscrip- 
tions — each unique in its way — one of them being the musical 
stone inscription of Kudumiyamalai (in Pudukkottai terri- 
tory), and the evidence of foreign sources. The Ku$umiya- 
malai inscription is an extremely valuable record of musical 
exercises to be practised on stringed instruments and pur- 
ports to be the work of a Saiva monarch who was the pupil 
of Rudracarya. It is probable that there was another similar 
inscription, either a replica of this or a group of other exer- 
cises which was chiselled off by a later Piandya king to give 
room to his own humdrum record of a gift to the temple. 
The existing inscription is often ascribed to the versatile 
Mahendravarman I Pallava; there is really nothing to dis- 
prove this, though some scholars have held that the paleo- 
graphy of the inscription points to a somewhat later date. 
The other inscription from Tiruvidaivayil (Tanjore district) 
contains an otherwise unknown hymn of Sambandar. 

In the Chinese records we come across embassies from 
South India to China mainly for purposes of trade, and occa- 
sionally for diplomatic reasons. The most noteworthy of 
such embassies were those from Narasimhavarman II Raja- 
simha of KancI of the year ax>. 720, though others of earlier 



SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D< 1300 


67 


dates are also known. 6 Fa-hien did not visit the mainland 
of South India and so his statements on the Deccan and the 
pigeon monastery are just hearsay* Hieun Tsang, who was 
in South India in 641-2 when the Calukyas of Badami under 
Pulakesin II and the Pallavas under Narasimhavarman I 
were at war, has left a record of his travels which though 
quite good and reliable so far as it goes, does not completely 
satisfy the curiosity of modern students. One of h is trans- 
lators, Watters, mildly censures him saying: ‘He was not a 
good observer, a careful investigator or a satisfactory recorder, 
and consequently he left very much untold which he would 
have done well to tell. I-tsing too did not visit South India 
(end of the seventh century) but his works are valuable for 
the itineraries they contain, for their notices of differences 
in doctrine and practice among the Buddhists of different 
countries in South and South-east Asia, and above all for the 
brief biographies of eminent monks who visited India in his 
time, of whom there were as many as sixty, though only 
five visited South India. Thin perforated copper coins from 
China have been found on the Coromandel Coast, but have 
not been systematically studied yet. 

The next large division of South Indian history (850-1200) 
is marked by the rivalry of two great empires, the Cola and 
the Calukya, which held sway generally in the south and 
north of the Tungabhadra. As the Colas emerged from their 
obscurity in the middle of the ninth century, they seized 
Tanjore from the Muttaraiyar and made it their capital, sup- 
pressed the remnants of Pallava power in the north, subju- 
gated the Pandyas in the south and Ceras in the west, and 
invaded and in due course conquered Ceylon. Ra§trakuta 
hostility under Krsna II and III threatened to wreck the 
empire at the start, but the Karnataka power was operating 
too far from its base, and though they put a temporary curb on 
the rising empire, they did so at the cost of a revolution at home 
which led to the feudatory Calukyas under Taila II overthrow- 
ing his Rastrakuta suzerain and seizing supremacy (973) . Qui- 
ckly recovering from its temporary discomfiture, the C5la po- 


$ Foreign notices, pp, 18, 116 etc. 


68 ■ SOURCES OR INDIAN NlSTORt 

wer swept on to its meridian in the first part of the eleventh 
century under Rajaraja I and his even greater son Rajendra I. 
The contrast between divided North India harried by Muslim 
inroads and the efflorescence of Tamil culture in the politi- 
cally united South under the Colas is indeed striking. The 
Colas developed their sea-power to the extent of reducing 
the Bay of Bengal to a Cola lake for a time and striking down 
the rival power of the maritime empire of Sri Vijaya in 
Indonesia. They perfected a highly organized administrative 
system which admirably hit the mean between centralization 
and local autonomy, and erected the most magnificent monu- 
ments of South Indian architecture in Tanjore, Gangaikonda 
Colapuram and elsewhere. This was the silver age of the 
religious revival which had begun under the Pallavas; a 
fresh commentary on the Rgveda was composed by Venkata 
Madhava on the banks of the Kaverl early in this period 
in the reign of Parantaka I. The Tamil hymns of the golden 
age of the Hindu Revival were collected and arranged in 
canonical books in the form they have retained to this day; 
the cosmic conception of the form of the dancing Lord Nata- 
raja found embodiment, in many monumental bronze images 
which have few rivals in the history of the world’s art for 
their technical skill and artistic perfection. 

The Calukyas of KalyanI were the opponents of the Colas 
across the Tungabhadra. There were many wars, some fought 
with unusual bitterness if we may trust the Calukya inscrip- 
tions. The Eastern Calukya kingdom of Vengi was the bone 
of contention throughout; its rulers were allied to the 
KalyapI Calukyas by descent; but they were also beholden 
to the Cojas who had restored them to their throne when 
they were exiled after a civil war at the end of the tenth 
century. Several dynastic alliances followed and brought the 
two dynasties close together, till at last in 1070 when suc- 
cession failed in the male line of the Cojas, the ruler of 
Vengi himself succeeded to the Cola throne as Kulottunga I. 
His great Cajukya rival was Vikramaditya VI. Their rivalry 
filled the annals of the South for about half a century and 



SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D. 1300 o9 

made for the weakening of their respective empires under 
their less competent successors. 

This period is relatively very well documented by the 
abundance of inscriptions in Sanskrit and Tamil for the Colas, 
and Sanskrit and Kannada for the Calukyas, and by an 
increase in literary evidence. The Coja emperor Rajaraja I 
(985-1014) introduced the system of having a set prasasti 
at the beginning of every official record of his reign, and of 
adding to the prasasti as the reign advanced and new events 
called for being recorded. This plan was kept up by his 
successors, and we have therefore an exceptionally reliable 
chronology for the events of Cola imperial history. Some of 
the Cola copper-plate charters attained prodigious length, 
being engraved on a number of good sized well turned out 
plates strung together on enormous rings with a big circular 
seal soldered on them. The most conspicuous examples are 
the Leyden grant of Rajaraja I (21st yr.) — so called because 
it happened to fall in the hands of the Dutch and pass into 
the custody of the Leyden Museum; even more, the Tiru- 
valanga^u (6 yr.) and Karandai (8 yr.) plates of Rajendra I, 
and the Charala plates of Virarajendra (7 yr.) , the long Sans- 
krit prasasti of which is a copy of the Kanyakumari stone 
inscription of the same king. 

While copper-plate inscriptions number altogether only, 
a few hundreds, stone inscriptions amount to several tens 
of thousands. Most of them are records of small gifts of 
lamps, sheep, land, and so on. Records of larger gifts es- 
pecially those of a ruling king are sometimes of exceptional 
interest as they give details of taxes remitted in favour of 
donees and the privileges conferred on them, and furnish 
other details of administrative organization and policy. The 
Tamil inscriptions of Rajaraja I in the Tanjore temple deserve 
special mention for the technical perfection and artistry of 
their engraving, and the complete and detailed picture they 
give of the entire economy of the Great Temple — a creation 
of Rajaraja calculated to symbolize all the glory and gran- 
deur of the empire he had built up. It is a matter of surprise 
anrl regret that even after nearly four decades from the dis- 
covery of the magnificent contemporary paintings round the 



SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


w 

Garbhagrha in the twenties of this century, this great monu- 
ment has not got a full dress description comparable to Krom’s 
Archaeological Description of Boro Budur and similar ac- 
counts of other Javanese monuments by other Dutch arch- 
aeologists. Quite a number of other fairly long inscriptions 
give interesting information on the constitution and func- 
tions of village assemblies, the part played by craft and 
trade guilds in the economic and artistic life of the country, 
the courses of study and the number of pupils and teachers in 
important educational centres, the scale of daily offerings 
to deities in temples, and the menu for the feeding of learned 
br ahmi ns and devotees in charitable eating houses attached 
to temples or mathas and so on. The long Tirumukkudal 
inscription of Virarnjendra is unique in its list of stock medi- 
cines maintained in the hospital in the temple of the place. 
Almost every inscription on stone or copper, unless it is 
a very brief record of a name or just a few lines, is seen to 
follow a definite order in the arrangement of its various sec- 
tions — invocation and preamble, the prasasti giving the history 
and genealogy of the ruling line — often in a set form which 
does not vary in the records of one and the same reign, a 
description of the donor and his ancestry if he differs from 
the king, a similar but generally briefer description of the 
donee — individual or group, ah account of the object of the 
gift-money, cattle, taxes, and so on, with a detailed specifi- 
cation of the boundaries in case of a land gift, the formula of 
gift with water poured out from the hand of the donor into 
that of the donee for his perpetual and undisturbed enjoy- 
ment, concluding with praise for those who protect the charity 
and help maintain it, and an imprecation on those who do 
the contrary. 

Some of the longer inscriptions are dedicatory and com- 
memorative and often contain valuable prasastis of long lines 
of kings. But few are so purely historical as the Tiruvendi- 
puram inscription of Rajaraja III which gives an unvarnished 
account of the troubles of this ruler and of the manner in 
which he got relief with the help of the Hoysalas. Some of 
the later inscriptions whether they bear Saka dates or not, 
often contain astronomical details which do not always work 



SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT AD . 1300 


71 


out satisfactorily, and in some cases there is no way of 
reconciling all the data given. Kielhorn worked out calcu- 
lations for many of these, but published his results of only 
some which he considered trustworthy in the pages of Epi- 
graphia Indica and they have been a great help to students. 
One inscription of Cola Parantaka I from Gramam in South 
Arcot is dated by counting the number of days since the 
beginning of Kaliyuga and the date arrived at satisfies the 
other details recorded. Inscriptions are by no means alto- 
gether free of legendary matter and the instances are not 
few in which both parties claim victory in a war and there 
is often some justification for the claim. 

It is doubtful if the pon equated to kalanju in the Cola 
inscriptions was only a piece of gold or an actual coin. Elliot, 
however, figures a lost gold coin of Uttama Colan apparently 
conforming to this standard. Exactly half the pon or mddai 
was the k dsn, which, though current from the reign of 
Aditya II if not earlier, came to be known as Rafarajan kdsu 
later. Though actual specimens of coins are not forthcoming, 
references in epigraphs imply that each of the Cola kings 
issued a gold nm$ai and kasu of his own, and these were 
distinguished by the prefixing of the name of the king to 
the denomination of the coin; but they also imply variations 
in the standard of fineness of the coins. In 1946 a fine hoard 
of Cola gold coins was discovered in Dhavalesvaram (East 
Godavari) ; they are round pieces of fine gold — thin discs bear- 
ing a lanchana in the middle, and letters round the margin, all 
punched on one side of the disc, the other side being left 
blank. The hoard, of which only 127 pieces were recovered, 
included 49 coins of the East Calukya Rajaraja I with the reg- 
nal years 33, 34 and 35 (a.o. 1055-7). The rest of the coins 
are issues of Rajendra I and Rajadhiraja I bearing inscrip- 
tions Kangai-konda and ma lanadukoi^a? There is reason to 
think that in many places the older local currency standards 
survived, and their relation to the standard Cola currency 
was a matter for ad hoc calculation. The Cola currency stan- 
dard seems to have been borrowed from Ceylon after Paran- 


7 See Cdfas, pp, 614-5, 



SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


- 72 

taka I’s invasion of the island which had a long and conti- 
nuous currency before the Cola invasion. Nagari legends 
replace Grantha in Coja coins from the time of Rajaraja I, pos- 
sibly as the result of North Indian Saiva influences, and the 
practice seems to have spread to Ceylon also. Some silver 
coins of Rajadhiraja I with his name in Nagari letters were 
found recently in South Kanara, and these have not yet 
been fully studied. The influence of Cola currency stan- 
dards seems to have spread outside the frontiers of the empire 
and the gold pieces of the Western Calukya Jagadekamalla 
and of the Kadambas of Goa seem to conform to it. It 
is, however, not impossible that they got it directly from 
Ceylon, or that the standard was an ancient well-established 
tradition in the entire South including Ceylon. The Cola 
coins and seals generally signify their suzerain position in 
the whole of South India by designs on them portraying a 
tiger seated under a canopy in the centre of the field, with 
the Pandya fish on one side and the Cera bow at the bottom, 
the latter symbols being smaller and less prominent than the 
tiger. 

The cultural and commercial intercourse between South 
India and the far North is attested by one numismatic datum 
to which Rapson drew attention; the Anaivarahan or Gaja- 
pati pagoda of the Kongu country was imitated in an issue of 
Hanjadeva of Kashmir (a.d. 1089)— a fact noticed also by 
Kalhana who records that Harsa issued a tanka of the Karna- 
taka type. Here we have the counterpart of Bilhana’s migra- 
tion from Kashmir to the Calukya court of Kalyani where 
he became vidydpati and composed the Vikramankadeva 
caritra, a quasi-historical kavya setting forth Vikramaditya’s 
case in the civil war against his brother. 

Literary evidence in this period is somewhat richer in histo- 
rical content than hitherto. Prominent among Tamil quasi- 
] historical works are the Kalingattupparani of Jayangondar, 
(treating of the Cola invasion of Kalinga in the reign of Kulot- 
| tunga I, and three uUs of Ottakkuttan on three successive 
I Cola monarchs — V ikarma- Cola, Kuldttunga II and Raja- 
raja II. We have also a Pillaittamil, a poem describing the 
| hero’s childhood, on Kuldttunga II, by the same poet. We 


SOUTH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D. 1300 


rrn 

know little of the author of Kulottungankovai on Kumar a 
Kulottunga, afterwards Kulottunga III — a poem of no cons- 
picuous merit except that it has the last great Cola monarch 
for its hero and contains passing allusions to some of his 
early achievements in war. The Tiruttond arpuranam or 
Periyapuranam of Sekkilar, composed in the reign of Kulot- 
tunga II (1133-50) , gathers all the legends bearing on the 
Nayanars of an earlier age, and there are corresponding prose 
hagiologies, the Guruparamparais, in different versions, on 
the alvars and their successors. In the same class fall temple 
chronicles like the Srirangam Koyil olugu, the Madurai-ttala- 
varalaru, and a similar work on the Kalahasti temple said to 
be in the possession of the temple priest, and local chronicles 
like Keralolpatti. Written up from time to time by different 
hands, often rewritten and revised in their entirety, 
these works are usually found in different versions, none of 
them more authoritative than the others. The conscientious 
student will not venture to ignore them altogether, but the 
utmost he can expect from them is an occasional hint to the 
unravelling of a tangle or to the direction in which to seek a 
solution of his problem — in any case he will not find it easy 
to base any historical statement on the uncorroborated testi- 
mony of such chronicles. The Koyil olugu of Srimngam, a 
conspicuous instance of this class, professes to have been 
revised last in 1803 under the supervision of John Wallace, a 
Company’s servant in charge of Trichinopoly at the time; 
though its chronology and history are quite muddled, it gives, 
when properly interpreted, a fair idea of the benefactions made 
to the temple from time to time by different rulers of the land, 
the period of the construction of its different parts, and above 
all of the organization of the large temple staff and their duties 
as settled by the great Ramanujacarya. In Kannada, Pampa’s 
Bhdrata or Vikranvarjuna-vijaya and Ranna’s GadM-yuddha or 
S&hasblvimavtfaya though mainly devoted to themes from the 
great epic, shed much light on contemporary Rastrakuta and 
C&Iukya history respectively because their authors have cho- 
sen to identify their patrons with some of the epic characters 
and found occasion to introduce into their narratives several 
contemporary historical occurrences very well known to 
10 



SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 



them; hints derived from these poets sometimes provide clues 
to Hie proper coordination of the abundant epigraphical data 
of the period. 

There is relatively little foreign evidence coming to our aid 
In this period, but the little we have 'is of extraordinary inte- 
rest. We have first of all the precious fragment of a Tamil 
inscription dated Saka 1010 (a.d. 1088) from Loboe Toewa in 
Sumatra mentioning the Tisai-Ayirattainriurruvar, the famous 
mercantile corporation of South India. There is a similar 
inscription from Pagan in Burma, on a trade guild from Mala- 
bar endowing a Visnu temple there. This shows the extent of 
overseas trade connections of South India, and leads us to 
surmise that they may have had small settlements in impor-’ 
tant entrepots of the Persian Gulf and the China Sea as well 
Hindu sculptures of decidedly South Indian origin depicting 
puranic themes like Gaiendra-moksa, Knsna tied to a mortar 
between trees and datable to the eleventh or twelfth century * 
a.d. have been found in Chinese temple in Ch’uan Chow, the 
Zayton of the medieval travellers. We find entries in the Song 
annals of China giving valuable details of Cola missions to 
China for trade and diplomacy in the reigns of Rajaraja and 
Kulottunga I, and the Chinese traveller Chau Ju-Kua (1225) 
confirms these entries and notes other particulars on the Cola 
country and its government. The Arab writers Ibn HawkaJ 
and Istakhri record precious details of the Persian Gulf trade 
of South India. The Jewish traveller Banjamin of Tudala has 
interesting observations on Quilon and South India, though 
Yule doubts if his travels extended that far. A casual state- 
ment of the Portuguese traveller and historian Caspar Correa 
(1512-63 in India) sheds a welcome light on the commercial 
relations between China and South India. He says; ‘By the 
time the Portuguese ships arrived (at Calicut in 1498) , four 
centuries had elapsed since the year when there came more 
than eight hundred sailing ships from Malacca, China, and 
the land of the Lequeos (ForfhoSa) — ships great and small, 
manned by people of various nationalities and charged with 
very rich merchandise which they brought for sale. They came 
to Calicut, navigated the entire coast up to Cambay, and they 



SOUTH itiDlA TO ABOUT A.D. 1300 VS 

Were so numerous that they; spread themselves over the whole 
country*’ 

The thirteenth century witnessed the dissolution ol the Cola 
and Cajukya empires and the rise of four smaller kingdoms, 
two in tire South and two in the Deccan. It was thus the age 
of four Hindu kingdoms which inherited the territories and 
traditions of the two large empires which preceded them. The 
Pindyas and Hoysalas in the south and Yadavas and Kakatiyas 
in the north are the chief powers, and as usual each of these 
had a number of local feudatory dynasties under them. This 
state system continued undisturbed except by its own intrinsic 
struggles for power and ascendancy until it experienced a 
shock from, outside due to the invasions and conquests under- 
taken by the Sultanate of Delhi. 

The four kingdoms are rich in their epigraphy, Sanskrit 
being employed by the Yadavas almost exclusively and by tire 
other dynasties in part, though some completely Sanskrit 
records are known in their case also. The main language, 
however, is Tamil for the Pandyas, Tamil and Kannada for 
the Hoysalas according to the provenance of the inscription, 
and Telugu for the Kakatiyas. One noteworthy inscription of 
the period is the Motupalli pillar inscription of Kakatiya 
Gapapati of the mid-thirteenth century which was a charter 
of security (abhctyaMsana) which gave an assurance that the 
cargo of ship-wrecked merchants would no longer be seized 
as had been done till then and fixed the duty on all exports 
and imports at less than a thirtieth of their value. This edict 
was renewed a century later by Anapota Reddi in 1378 and 
corresponded to the general practice that prevailed in the 
enlightened and progressive parts of South India, though some 
including Colombo still retained the older practice in the four- 
teenth century. One of the hereditary Vidydcakravartis of 
the Hoysala court wrote the quasi-historical Sanskrit prose 
work Gadyakarnamrta giving details of the war between Hoy- 
sala Narasimha II mid the Pandyas in the first quarter of the 
thirteenth century. Hemadri, minister of the Yadava King 
Mahadeva (1260-71) and a voluminous writer and patron 
of writers, records valuable data on Yadava history and 
genealogy in the prologues to his cyclopaedic digest of Hindu 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


16 

law known as the Caiurvarga cintcimani. In the last quarter 
of the thirteenth century the restless ambition and insatiable 
curiosity of Kublai Khan added to the unsettled conditions 
in the Paiidyan kingdom, resulted in a very active exchange 
of embassies, more political than commercial, between the 
Chinese court and the South Indian powers which is record- 
ed in the Yuan shih. Wassaf, the Muslim historian of Shiraz, 
has much to say on Pandyan politics at the close of the thir- 
teenth century and on other subjects like the Muslim in- 
vasions of the South, the horse trade of South India and so 
on. Above all, the Venetian traveller Marco Polo, who has 
been called the ‘prince of mediaeval travellers’ and who had 
spent seventeen years at the court of Kublai Khan which 
he reached after a hazardous land journey of three and a 
half years across Asia, Marco Polo visited South India in 
1292-3 on his way from China to Persia as escort to a prin- 
cess of Kublai Khan’s family, a bride for the ruler of Persia. 
Though Marco Polo’s narration of his experiences in the 
East was received with great distrust for a long time in 
Europe, still now as Yule observes ‘his veracity and just- 
ness of observation shine brighter under every recovery of 
lost or forgotten knowledge’. The amount of information 
Marco Polo was able to collect as he was passing through some 
parts of South India is indeed amazing. He has much to tell 
on the states of the south and the manners, beliefs and prac- 
tices of the people of South India and on their maritime trade. 
"The commerce of India’, says R. H. Major, ‘he found stret- 
ching like an immense chain, from the territories of Kublai 
Khan to the shores of the Persian Gulf and of the Red Sea. 
He found the shores and the islands of the Indian sea luxu- 
riantly covered with nature’s choicest products. He tells us 
of the topaz, the amethyst, and the emerald, of the sapphires 
of Ceylon and the diamonds of Colconda.’ Marco Polo’s des- 
cription of the world in the translation by A. C. Moule and 
Paul Pelliot is the latest and most critical edition of the 
travels. Almost at the same time as Marco the Franciscan 
friar John of Monte Corvino was travelling in the reverse 
direction from India to China to preach the gospel there. 
This lonely monk was out of sympathy with much that he 



SdVfH INDIA TO ABOUT A.D, 1300 fj 

saw in India, and with him may be said to begin the stream of 
Christian missionary criticism of Indian life and habits 
which has not always been intelligent or charitable. John’s 
account of ships and navigation of the Indian seas has much 
in common with similar statements of other writers and may 
be usefully compared with them. 



SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 

The Khilji Sultans of Delhi after consolidating their power 
in North India began to cast their covetous eyes on the South, 
and they were followed in this by the Tughlaks. At first 
the motive was only plunder and spoil but soon the spread 
of Islam and territorial conquest became the objectives. Con- 
siderable parts of the country passed under the nominal 
sway of Delhi; and Madura, at first the seat of a Muslim 
governor from Delhi, grew by the rebellion of the governor 
into an independent sultanate. Colonies of Muslim soldiers 
and generals found lodgement in several parts of the country 
and began to control the administration of the land; temples 
were plundered and demolished and mosques erected in their 
places, Hindu society in South India faced a new crisis, but 
it was of short duration. The distance from Delhi, the inhe- 
rent weakness of a far-flung military imperialism, the spirit 
of resistance developed under the influence of a strong Hindu 
revival under the Ling&yats and the Aradhyas, together saved 
the Hindu faith and the political independence of the far 
south, the shortlived Sultanate of Madura being engulfed in 
the rising tide of the new Hindu imperialism of Vijayanagar, 
for, out of the numerous revolts that were provoked by the 
strong but enigmatic Muhammad bin Tughlak, there arose 
two kingdoms in the Deccan centred in Vijayanagar and Gul- 
barga in the first half of the fourteenth century. 

The Bahmani kingdom of Gulbarga was a Muslim state 
which spread its sway from sea to sea in the northern Deccan, 
and was no less opposed to its Muslim neighbours in the 
north than to the Hindu empire in the south. In the six- 
teenth century it split into five separate sultanates which 
kept up the feud with Vijayanagar though they quarelled 
not less among themselves. Bijapur and Golconda were the 
most prominent among them; all were absorbed in the 
Mughal empire at different dates in the seventeenth century. 
Starting on its career in 1336, a decade earlier than the Bah- 



SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 


79 


mani kingdom, Vijayanagar became the focus of resurgent 
Hindu culture and offered a more successful resistance to 
Islam in this part of the country than anywhere else. So 
it was a long military vigil. As there was no room for weak 
or incompetent rulers on the throne, there were revolutions 
resulting in a change of dynasty and renewal of strength. 
The empire is best looked upon as a military confederacy of 
many chieftains cooperating under the leadership of the big- 
gest among them. Military exigencies necessitated the em- 
ployment of the Portuguese in the artillery and even Muslims 
in the cavalry. Nevertheless, Vijayanagar kept up the fight 
for the best part of three centuries before it succumbed to 
the forces it had withstood so long. But by then, other and, 
in the long run, more decisive factors had put in their appear- 
ance in the form of European trading companies, and a new 
epoch began. 

The Portuguese indeed had built up their short lived and 
predatory maritime empire much earlier from the first half 
of the sixteenth century; but their activities never became 
a serious menace to the Hindu empire with which they kept 
on friendly terms though they often quarelled with its feu- 
datories, especially on the west coast. Their plunder ’of rich 
Hindu temples and the conversions to Christianity procured 
by the Jesuits and other orders on the ‘pearl fishery coast’ 
were minor nuisances soon brought under control. The 
power of Vijayanagar was at first spread among different 
powerful viceroys who set up independent kingdoms each 
under a Nayak family especially after the military disaster 
of Talikota (Rak^asi-Tangdi) in 1565. 

Inscriptions on stone and copper still continue to be our 
most important sources for the history of Vijayanagar, though 
we get Persian histories on the affairs of the Bahmani king- 
dom, and generally the volume of literary evidence, Indian 
and foreign, increases. The inscriptions of Vijayanagar 
occur in several languages; Sanskrit records on copper plates 
are written in characters known as Nandi Nagari and stone 
inscriptions either combine Sanskrit and the local language, 
Telugu, Kannada or Tamil, or are often exclusively in the 



80 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


local language. The same is true of the records of the differ- 
ent Nayak dynasties. The number of these inscriptions is 
very large and bibliographical guides to them are few and 
incomplete. The Topographical List of Inscriptions of the 
Madras Presidency compiled by V. Rangachari was useful in 
its day, but it stopped with the inscriptions recorded till 
1915, and the number discovered since runs into several 
thousands. The break-up of the old Madras Presidency into 
a number of States has divided responsibility for bringing 
the work up-to-date, but there is no more urgent need than 
to make a comprehensive and up-to-date list which will com- 
bine in a suitable manner the topographical and dynastic 
distribution of the inscriptions. It will be good work for 
some years for a trained staff of workers, and it is much to 
be wished that either the Archaeological Survey of India 
or some of the South Indian Universities working on a co- 
operative basis took up the work and completed it in a 
reasonably short time. The revision of Kielhorn’s South 
Indian list on the same lines as D. R. Bhandarkar’s North 
Indian list would be more laborious and scholarly work which 
would call for an epigraphist with wide experience and know- 
ledge; such a revision if properly carried out will be a great 
boon to students. The Bahmani inscriptions are generally in 
Persian. 

Many of the inscriptions have been well studied and edited 
by a band of scholars in Epigraphm Indica and Indo-Molemica, 
the latter now being continued in the Arabic and Persian 
supplement to the former. And the coins of Vijayanagar, Bah- 
mani and the Sultanate of Madura have also been listed and 
studied in periodicals and catalogues or coins by eminent 
numismatists like Lane Poole, Nelson Wright, Richard Burn, 
Hultzsch and others. But when all is said, the literary 
records for this period form a more fruitful source than 
epigraphs and coins, and demand a more detailed notice. 

- Apart from the general Persian histories of the sultanate 
mentioned earlier, we have other Persian histories of the 
Deccan kingdoms. The Futuh-us-Salatin by Isami is the only 
extant contemporary work on the Bahmani kingdom. The 
author who had to migrate in 1327 from Delhi to Daulata- 



SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY (il ) 

bad with his grandfather Sipah Salar Isami who died on the 
way, made his home in the Deccan and attached himself to 
the first Bahmani Sultan. He began to write his book in 1358 
and completed it the next year. Modelled on the Shah Nama 
of Firdausi the work narrates in limpid verse the history of 
the Sultanate of Delhi to the time of Muhammad bin Tughlak. 

It then gives a vivid picture of the political turmoil in the 
Deccan which preceded the foundation of the Bahmani king- 
dom, besides much valuable and precise information on the 
Muslim conquest of the Deccan and South India and on the 
reign and character of the first Bahmani Sultan. Other works 
on the Bahmani kingdom were late compositions written long 
after the extinction of the sultanate and from the particular 
point of view of one or other of the succession states. Notable 
among them is the Burhan-i-Maa$ir of Ali bin Aziz-ullah 
Taba Tabai of Simmin (Iraq). He entered Qutb Shahi ser- 
vice and was present at the siege of Naldrug (1580-81) in 
the suite of M.-Quli Qutb Shah; apparently he changed over 
to Nizam Shahi services for his work is written by order of 
Burhan Nizam Shah (1591-95). The work is a history of 
the Bahmanis of Gulbarga, the Bahmanids of Bidar and the 
Nizam Shahis of Ahmadnagar to the year 1596. There is an 
abridged translation of the work by J. S. King which appear- 
ed first in the Indian Antiquary , and later as a separate book 
(London, 1900). In some respects the statements of Taba 
Tabai seem to be more authentic and in better accord with 
the evidence from coins than those of his better known con- 
temporary and sometime colleague in Ahmadnagar service, 
Firishta. 

Beyond doubt Firishta is the prince of Muslim historians 
of the period. The wide range and sweep of his work which 
forms a general history of Muslim rule in India, the number 
of authorities he consulted, and the general sense of per- 
spective that dominates the entire narration, impart a monu- 
mental character to his history. Covering wide ground, and 
much of it at second hand, he is often inaccurate in detail. 
Writing in the court of the Adil Shahis of Bijapur at the 
instance of Ibrahim II, he narrates Deccan affairs in a way 
that places his patrons in the most favourable light. There 
U 


82 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


is no doubt that this history, finished in 1606, is the most com- 
prehensive and readable account of Indian Islam. A Persian 
by birth, Muhammad Khasim Hindu Shah Firishta came at 
the age of 12 to Ahmadnagar with his father in 1582. The 
father became tutor to the Nizam Shahi prince, but died soon 
after. Young Firishta took to a military career, but a palace 
revolution deprived him of his position as captain of the king’s 
guard. Being a Shiah and having few friends at Ahmad- 
nagar, he migrated to Bijapur where he obtained an appoint- 
ment in the army. Even while he was at Ahmadnagar, still 
in the prime of youth, he conceived the idea of writing a 
history of the Islamic kings and saints of India, but had to 
defer his project owing to paucity of the requisite books in 
that city. In Bijapur he was encouraged to take up the work 
by Sultan Ibrahim and by Shah Nawaz Khan. His work 
GulsMh-i-Ibrahhni better known as Taikh-i-Farishta exists 
in two slightly different versions dated 1606-7 and 1609-10; 
both contain later insertions. The text was first edited by 
Major General J. Briggs in 1831-2 and also somewhat abridged 
and translated into English (London 1829) . There are other 
editions of the text and a reprint of the English translation 
Calcutta, 1908-10 1 . Firishta’s history agrees largely with 
that of Taba Tabai. He narrates the relations of the Deccan 
Muslim power with Vijayanagar from the beginning, some- 
times confusing the names of the Vijayanagar rulers and con- 
founding them with those of the generals and viceroys of the 
kingdom. The true greatness of Krsnadevaraya cannot be 
inferred from Firishta’s history, and his account of the battle 
of Talikota is one-sided. He conceals the desertion of the 
Muslim generals and troops which caused the defeat of Vija- 
yanagar, a point clearly stressed by Caesar Frederic and 
other foreign witnesses. Another work also written from 
the standpoint of Bijapur is the Tazkirat-ul~muluk by a Per- 
sian merchant from Shiraz known as Shiraz! on that account. 
His business brought him to Sagar on the Kngna in 1560, and 
he entered Adil Shahi service in 1574. He wrote his work 
between 1608 and 1611-12, apparently of not much value for 


1 Storey, No. 617, pp. 442-50. 


SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY <8 Itj, 

Bahmani affairs; it is a contemporary account of some aspects { 
of Bijapur history giving many details not otherwise known. I 
There are several other Persian works on the history of the j 
Deccan Muslim States which we cannot stop to notice, but I 
of which an account will he found in the pages of Storey’s ' 
Persian Literature, a bibliographical survey. 

The indigenous literary evidence on Vijayanagar can be 
divided into chronicles, works of general literature, adminis- 
trative records commonly known as Kaifiyats and so on. 
Among the chronicles the Kalajndnas occupy a primary place. 
Worthless as they seem, because they pretend to be prophe- 
cies of the future by inspired seers and exaggerate many 
things, they sometimes offer very striking clues to the real 
course of history. The Vidydranya Kalajnana composed 
before the close of the 15 th century describes within a brief 
compass the history of Vijayanagar and lights up some of 
its dark corners. The Vidydranya vrttdnta describes the cir- 
cumstances under which the kingdom was founded. The 
mnemonic verse — Habuk&vibuderavi, etc. — which occurs in 
almost all the Kalajnanas is very useful in elucidating the 
early history of the empire by indicating the order of suc- 
cession of the kings. Working merely in the light of epi- 
graphy without the aid of the clues given by this verse, 
scholars fell into a number of errors in tracing the history 
of the first dynasty which might have been avoided if they 
had heeded the traditional verse. It strings together the 
initial letters of the names of successive monarchs and enables 
us to arrange the epigraphical evidence in a cogent manner. 
More quasi-historieal K&vyas rather than chronicles are: the 
Kamparaya Carita or Madhurd Vijaya by Gangadevi, the wife 
of the hero, Kumara Kampana, describing in epic fashion his 
conquest of Madura and the overthrow of the sultanate; the 
Sdluvdb hyudayam of Rajanatha on the wars of the author’s 
patron Saluva Narasimha (latter half of the fifteenth cen- 
tury); the RdyavAcaka, Krsnardjavijaya on the reign of the 
great Krsnadevaraya; the Acyutarayabhyudaya of Rajana- 
tha II and the Varaddmbikdparinaya of Tirumalamba, a 
campu on the marriage of king Acyutaraya with queen 
Varadamba, and many other works of a like character pro- 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 



duced in the courts of the Nayak kings. We may also men- 
tion a prose romance of considerable length by Vamana 
Bhatta Bana, a pupil of Vidyaranya, and protege of the Re$di 
king Pedda Komati Vema (1398-1415) whose life and achieve- 
ments form the theme of the work. It was the author’s aim 
to rival the celebrated Bana as prose writer, and he achieved 
a measure of success in the endeavour. In all these works 
the historian has to search for the grain of fact in a vast 
heap of straw, but he cannot afford to neglect the labour. 

At this point we may also for convenience notice some 
past Vijayanagar chronicles of the same nature as the fore- 
going. The Tamil chronicle Kongudesa mjakkalin caritram 
is of much less literary value and not more dependable; it 
has indeed been generally very much overrated, and its chro- 
nology pretending to be systematic cannot possibly accom- 
modate many definitely established facts of South Indian 
history; but even this chronicle is useful in some parts. The 
Keladinrpa Vijaya is a Kannada chronicle in prose and verse 
treating of the chiefs of Keladi. They were also known as 
the Nayakas of Ikkeri or Bednur as they shifted their capital 
during the later years of their rule. It was probably the 
work of a Brahmin poet Linganna of about the middle of 
the eighteenth century. The work has not been translated into 
any other language. It offers much information not avail- 
able elsewhere on the gradual expansion of Bijapur into 
Karnataka and throws light on the rise of Maratha dominion 
in South India. There are still other chronicles, for instance, 
the Kongudesa ndjdkkal savistara caritai a longish account 
compiled by a certain Narayanan at the request of the enthu- 
siastic antiquarian Col, Colin Mackenzie at the beginning of 
the last century; this is good on recent history, especially on 
the European companies and their struggle for supremacy 
in South India. We have also the V elugotivdri vamsavali in 
Telugu, a chronicle of exceptional historical value as seen 
from Dr. N. Venkataramanayya’s edition of it published by 
the Madras University. 

Works of general literature written under the patronage 
of the Rayas have also their contribution to make. The com- 
mentaries, Ktivyas, dramas, farces and so on contain valuable 



SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURi? 


$5 

historical data, Madhava, his brother Sayaj^a, and Madhava 
Mantrin and other commentators describe the origin of the 
Sangama family and the rule of the early Rayas, The Kurrvdra 
Ramanna kathe is a poem of the sixteenth century giving 
the traditional view of the conditions of South India on the 
eve of the establishment of the Vijayanagar empire* The 
preface to the Vaidyardjavallabham, a treatise on Ayurveda, 
by Laksmana Pan^ita, the court physician of Bukka, gives 
a long account of the history of Bukka’s family. Likewise 
the victories of the great Krsnadevaraya and the general 
history of the Tuluva dynasty are given in a work on music, 
the Sangitasuryddaya of Laksminarayana. And the Gaja- 
pati ruler Prataparudra gives a short account of his family 
in his Sarasvativildsam, a book on law. 

It is, however, in Telugu that this kind of historical com- 1 
position is fully developed. Though the practice began under 1 
the Galukyas, it came into general vogue only much later, 
Tikkana, latter half of the thirteenth century, is the first Telugu 
poet to trace the history of his patron’s family in the pro- 1 
logues to his poems. His Nirvacanottara Ramayana contains, 
a succinct account of the Nellore branch of the Telugu-c6$as, 
After this such an introduction became a normal feature of | 
Telugu literary works whose authors followed the example I 
set by Tikkana, and this makes them one of the principal ] 
sources of Vijayanagar history. Unfortunately this portion \ 
in the Harivamsa of Nachna Soma, the earliest Telugu writer f 
under the Rayas, seems to have been lost beyond recovery, j 
Vallabharaya’s Krujjk&bhiramarn gives interesting information j 
on Bukka I and Harihara II; Jakkana refers to the activities 1 
of Devaraya I in his Vikrarmnka Caritra . Srmatha, the f 
Vidyddhikdri of Pedda Komati Verna and author of many | 
of Verna’s inscriptions, gives an excellent account of the | 
Red$i kings in the introduction to his KdMkhamiam and ( 
Bhimakhaydam; besides, his c&tus (stray verses) contain f 
vignettes of the social life of the citizens of the empire and f 
•of the court under Devaraya II, Likewise the history of the j 
Saluyas, Tuluvas, and Aravidu kings is described in the intro- I 
ductions to other poems by their respective authors who \ 
need not all be recounted here. 



0(0 SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


The birud a gadya recited every morning by the palace 
vandis and magadhas form another type of historical compo- 
sition standing midway between the prasastis in inscriptions 
and the chronicles. It is usually a string of phrases eulogizing 
the achievements of kings' and nobles, similar to the bardic 
literature of the North already noticed. The bhat community 
held the monopoly of these recitals, and their language was 
often borrowed by the mediaeval prasasti writers of inscrip- 
tions. The biruda gadya grew in content and length as it 
passed from one generation to another, and the last king 
had all the achievements of his predecessors attributed to 
him. The bhats also composed verses which served as a 
metrical commentary on the gadyas to which they were 
tagged. The transition from the biruda gadya to the chroni- 
cle in a few generations is easily understood. But only a 
few of these have survived — the most important being: the 
Ramarafiyam on the history of the Aravidu dynasty from 
the time of the Calukyas of Kalyani to the middle of the 
seventeenth century when the empire of Vijayanagar dis- 
appeared finally; the Aravitivamsa caritram on the Avuku 
branch of the Aravidu family; and the Cikkadevaraya 
vamMvali. The Rdmarayana Bakhair, included in the 
Mackenzie collection, describes the events connected with the 
disastrous battle of Talikota (Raksasi-Tangdi) from the Hindu 
side and enables us to examine them afresh. Two versions 
of the chronicle are extant: one in Kannada and the other in 
Marathi; it is not easy to decide which is the original and 
which is the translation. It purports to be the account of an 
eyewitness, but this is a hoax as is seen from the inclusion 
of Akbar in the anti-Vijayanagar confederacy of the Muslim 
rulers and other features. Perhaps a genuine old account 
was tampered with by an unskilful redactor of a later date. 

The village administrative records, called kaviles or danda 
kaviles contain information about the political, economic, 
religious and social conditions of the village. They remained 
with the village Karnam who entered in them all the important 
occurrences of his time and passed them on to his successor 
in office. The agents of Col. Mackenzie collected several of 
these and copied or summarized others in digests known as 



SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 


8 7 


Kaifiyats, The Kavile and Kaifiyut show a large admixture of 
legend especially in the early periods, though the account of 
relatively recent times is generally free of this element. 
These works must of course be used with very great caution. 
The Mackenzie manuscripts, whatever their value might 
have been when their collection was made early last century, 
have become by now more or less worthless rubbish. Most 
of the originals have perished by the action of time and 
insects, and we have only copies which are obviously faulty 
and full of lacunae. The University of Madras has, however, 
a scheme for the publication in English of summaries of the 
historical section of the Manuscripts. Wilson’s catalogue is 
still the best; Taylor’s more voluminous compilation in three 
volumes, being ill-arranged and not quite dependable. There 
is a good catalogue of the translations of the manuscript in 
European languages available from the British museum. The 
Madras University has published two books bringing together 
extracts from the literary sources — Sources of Vijayanagar 
History by Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar (Madras University, 
1929) and the more extensive Further Sources of Vijayanagar 
History by K. A. N. Sastri and Dr. N. Venkataramanayya 
with an introductory volume by the latter (3 vols., Madras 
University, 1946). 

Notices of India by foreign travellers for this period are 
both valuable and voluminous. The celebrated Moorish 
traveller Ibn Batuta (1304-78), whom we have already men- 
tioned, comes first. He was a doctor of law and theology and 
had greater advantages than Barani for gathering accurate 
informtion. He has much to say of his experiences in South 
India, of its ports and trade, its people and their customs, 
its rulers, particularly the Sultans of Madura. The sections 
of his work relating to South India have been reproduced at 
length in my Foreign Notices of South India. The learned 
Abdur-Razzak of Herat was sent by Timur’s son Sultan 
Shahrukh as ambassador to the Zamorin of Calicut (1443) . 
The king of Vijayanagar sent for him, and the Zamorin 
though not subordinate to the Raya’s -authority, yet readily 
acceded to the request, and the ambassador made his way to 
Vijayanagar by way of Mangalore and Belur and reached 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


Vijayanagar at the end of April 1443. ‘The city’, he says, 
‘is such that eye has not seen nor ear heard of any place 
resembling it upon the whole earth. It is so built that it has 
seven fortified walls, one within the other.’ He witnessed the 
Mahanavami festival and noticed the king’s absolute power 
and his high esteem for the Brahmans. His narrative sup- 
plies valuable information on the topography, administration, 
and social life of Vijayanagar at the time. Some jealous 
merchants from Ormuz cast doubts on his credentials and 
undermined his position at the court which resulted in his 
being treated with less consideration than before. He left 
Vijayanagar for Mangalore at the end of 1443 and Mangalore 
for Persia early in 1444. His account with that of some other 
travellers can be read in R. H. Major’s India in the fifteenth 
century (Hakluyt Society). 

Among the European travellers we have to notice some 
who came a little before the foundation of Vijayanagar. 
Friar Odoric of Pordenone reached India soon after 1321. 
He travelled along the west coast, visited Ceylon, and went 
up to the shrine of St. Thomas in ‘Mailapore’. His account 
of some Hindu customs and practices is obviously that of an 
eyewitness. Another Friar, Jordanus, reached India a little 
before Odoric. Two of his letters are dated from India in 
1321 and 1324; in them he holds out to his brother friars in 
Europe the prospect of extensive missionary work in the 
East. His mention of the Parsis and their mode of exposing 
the dead ‘in the midst of a certain roofless tower’ is among 
the earliest notices of this community in India. He was ap- 
pointed Bishop of Columbum (Quilon) in 1328, but it is not 
known if he actually took charge of the office. Yet another 
monk, John of Marignolli, a native of Florence, who went 
out to China as Papal legate to the Great Khan by way of 
land like Marco Polo left that country to sail from Zayton 
in 1346 and reached Quilon where he spent some time before 
sailing for the Coromandal Coast to visit the shrine of 
St. Thomas. He also spent some time in Ceylon and gives 
an interesting account , of the Buddhist monks of the island. 

The rise of Vijayan gar and that of Portuguese power in 
the east a little later ttracted many foreigners to India, and 



SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 89 


foreign evidence on South India consequently increases vast- 
ly in volume, variety and interest. The earliest European visi- 
tor to Vijayanagar whose account has come down to us is 
the Italian Nicolo Conti who reached the city in 1420 or 1421 
in the reign of Devaraya I. He was a Venetian of noble fami- 
ly, who, after residing as a merchant in Damascus for scone 
time, traversed Persia, sailed along the coast of Malabar, and 
visited some parts of the interior of Hindustan, besides 
Ceylon, Sumatra and Java. He returned to Venice in 1444 
after twenty-five years of absence. He wrote nothing him- 
self, but narrated his experiences to a Papal secretary who 
wrote them down in Latin for his master’s information; this 
was translated into Portuguese and from Portuguese into 
Italian. The original Latin version is lost. Conti describes 
Cambaya and its precious stones and sati , the Vijayanagar 
court, its festivals, currency and other matters, and also Maila- 
pur, the burial place of St. Thomas. The Russian merchant 
Athanasius Nikitin spent some years in the Deccan round 
about 1470, and travelled in the Bahmani kingdom which he 
entered by way of Chaul. He resided in Bidar for a long- 
time. His observations give details of the court, the army 
and the condition of the people under Bahmani rule. A new edi- 
tion of his text with facsimile and English and Hindi transla- 
tions has been just published in Russia. JAOS 81 (2) , pp. 126-30. 

The Arab chronicle Tuhfat-al-Mujahidin fi ba zi ahwal-al j 
Portukaliyyin (a. gratuitous gift to the holy warriors in res- 1 
pect of a brief account of the Portuguese) by Shaykh Zaynud- \ 
din was used by Firishta in his account of Islam on file Mala- ,’ 
bar coast. Very little is known of the author who had All 
Adil Shah (1558-80) for his patron. The book comprises aii 
introduction and four chapters. The second chapter describe^ 
the coming of Islam to Malabar and the emergence of several 
flourishing ports on the west coast. The story of the last; 
Perumal ruler turning a Muslim and voyaging to Mecca is\ 
mentioned. The next chapter sketches the ‘strange customs’ j 
of the ‘unbelievers’— marriage, inheritance, untouchability \ 
etc. The last and fourth chapter is completely historical in j 
content and covers a period of 85 years (1498-1583) and gives 4 
useful information on the advent of the Portuguese and its 


12 


80 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


effects on the commercial position of the Muslim on the 
coast. The work was first translated into En gli sh in 1833 
hy Lieut. M. J, Rowlandson, and again by Mhd. Husain 
Nainar (Madras University, 1942). 

The sixteenth century witnessed some mighty rulers: 
Rrspadevaraya, Rama Raya, and Venkatapati Raya; and the 
Portuguese established their commercial ascendancy at the 
same time. The volume of foreign evidences swells corres- 
pondingly. Ludovico di Varthema of Bologna, a gentleman 
and soldier eventually knighted by the Portuguese, travelled 
in India between 1502 and 1508, and left a vivid record of 
his experiences. His credibility was wrongly doubted for 
some time. His account of Goa and Calicut and other ports 
on the west coa^t, and his description of the city and empire 
of Vijayanagar contain much of interest and value. Friar 
Luis, sent to Vijayanagar by Albuquerque in 1510, elucidates 
the martial activities of Krsnadevaraya. The Portuguese 
Duarte Barbosa served the government of his country in 
India from 1500 to about 1516. He knew the Malayalam 
language and ‘spoke it better than the natives of the country’. 
He was feitor (factor) in Cannanore in 1502, and acted as 
interpreter between the king of Cannanore and* Francisco 
Albuquerque in 1503. He was valued as a writer by the his- 
torian Gaspar Correa, and was employed by Albuquerque for 
his ability, though he did not support the policy of develop- 
ing Goa at the expense of Cochin and Cannanore. Barbosa 
returned to Portugal in 1517-18 and then gave the final touches 
to his narrative which covers much wider ground than the 
sphere of his official duties and includes a full description of 
Vijayanagar. The work of Duarte Barbosa has been ren- 
dered into English in two volumes by Longworth Dames 
under the title The Book of Duarte Barhosa and by Lord 
Stanley under the title A Description of the coasts of East 
Africa and Malabar in the beginning of the sixteenth century 
by Duarte Barhosa , both for the Hakluyt Society. Dames’s 
estimate of Barbosa is worth reproduction: ‘The value of 

Barbosa’s work at the present day is principally geographical 
and ethnographical. Some of his historical references are 
of considerable importance, but, as he has distinctly stated 


SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 81 


himself, his object was not to write a history, but to des- 
cribe the people and the country and its products. In these 
respects he stands almost alone in his period, and his accounts 
are extremely accurate in many respects and show great 
powers of observation. This applies more especiafly to the 
South of India, where his long residence and knowledge of 
at least one of the languages (Malayalam) gave him an 
understanding of the people of which we find few traces 
among the writers of the period.’ 

The value of other Portuguese writers has been suffi- • 
ciently recognized since Sewell emphasized it generally ini 
A Forgotten Empire (1901) , which included translations of the , 
chronicles of Domingos Paes (1520-2) and of Fernas Nuniz, • 
a horse dealer who spent three years in Vijayanagar (1535- 
37) , besides part of the letter written from Cochin by Manuel 
Barradas (12th Dec. 1616) giving an account of the origin 
and course of the civil war then in progress in the kingdom ‘ 
of Vijayanagar. The Portuguese of Goa were the natural 
allies of Vijayanagar against the Muslim states and were well 
informed on the political situation and culture of the country. 
The chronicle of Nuniz incorporates the information he 
gathered about the rulers of Vijayanagar from the foundation 
of the city and has invested the most significant period of 
Vijayanagar history with flesh and blood. Thanks to these 
two Portuguese travellers and chroniclers, Krsnadevaraya ’> 
lives in the pages of history as few rulers do. Caesar Frede- ' 
ric visited Vijayanagar a couple of years after Talikota and 
comments on the ruined splendour of the imperial city. Ralph j 
Fitch who spent the years 1583-91 in India, Nicholas Pimenta, j 
Visitor of the Jesuits in India at the close of the sixteenth cen- j 
tury, the Dutch traveller Linschotten (1583) have their own j 
contributions to make to our knowledge of South India in 
their time. We have already mentioned Moreland’s edition I 
of the writings of the Dutch factor Schorer (1615) and the j 
English factor Methwold (1618-22) which elucidate the i 
affairs and trade of the kingdom of Golconda and the port of 
Masulipatam. 

Amongst the Portuguese sources the Jesuit letters are of 
special importance, and as you know Father John Correia- 



SOVRCtiS OR MniAN HISTORY 


62 

Afonso has recently given us an excellent study on the sub- 
ject which renders it needless for me to go into much detail 
on this important source. Here is Fr. Schurhammer’s gene- 
ral estimate of these letters: ‘Their authors were as a rule 
well educated persons and many of them well acquainted with 
the languages and customs of India, like De Nobli who 
studied Sanskrit at the Hindu University of Madura; Beschi, 
the great Tamil scholar and author of the classical Tembdvani; 
Stephens, well kown through his classical Christian Marathi 
Puruna; and Jerome Xavier, author of quite a number of 
Persian works, written for the court of Akbar/ 2 These 
letters date from the time of Xavier’s arrival in India in 1542 
to the year 1773 when the decree for the suppression of the 
Society of Jesus throughout the world was issued. These 
letters were often published in Europe and Father Correia- 
Afonso offers the following helpful comments on the manner 
of such publications, their advantages and disadvantages; 
The correspondence of missionaries in India might never 
have attracted the historian’s notice had they not been print- 
ed and widely circulated in contemporary Europe, especially 
in Portugal, Spain, France, Belgium Italy and Germany, 
through such famous collections as the Letters Edifiantes and 
the Weltbott From the viewpoint of historical evidence it 
is particularly regrettable that the letters should have suffer- 
ed in the process of translation and publication, being at times 
unskilfully censored and even considerably distorted and 
mutilated, while even forgeries were put on the market. 
Recently, however, the Jesuit Institute of History in Rome 
has began to publish an authoritative edition of the Jesuit 
documents on India. The critical reproduction of the texts 
together with excellent introductions, critical apparatus, notes, 
bibliographies and indices give a superlative value to the 
volumes of Epistolae S. Francisi Xavierui and Dommenta 
Indica , which are a great help to the scholar in forming a 
wellfounded and fair estimate of the historical value of the 
Jesuit letters from India/ It is worth while mentioning some 
works of particular interest from our point of view. The 


2 Jesuit letters , p, xxix. 



SOUTH iNbiA from The fourteenth cenTURN $$ 


chief among them are: J. Bertrand, La Missien du Madure 
4 vols. (Paris 1874-54); L. Bosse, La Mission du Madure 
(Trichinopoly, 1914); J. Castets: The Madura Mission 

(Trichinopoly, 1924); and J. Houpert, A South Indian Mis- 
sion (Trichinopoly, 1947). These authors have reproduced 
enough material from the missionary letters concerning the 
Nayaks of Madura, Tanjore and Jinji, but do not provide 
us with a critical edition of the original sources and have 
sometimes unwittingly misled authors who have relied on 
them. 3 Bertrand, for instance, avers that he combines at 
times several letters into' one which obscures the original form 
of the evidence and its exact chronology. Even a careful 
student like Sir J. Sarkar is seen to have been misled on the 
subject of the Maratha invasion of South India. Attention 
may be drawn to the excellent use Father Heras made of the 
Jesuit sources in his Aravvdu Dynasty and in several papers 
on diverse subjects he contributed to learned periodicals. 
Father Castets continued his studies and published his re- 
sults under the title ‘Sidelights on South Indian History from 
the Letters and Records of Contemporary Jesuit Missionaries 
1542-1756’ in the pages of the Magazine of St. Joseph’s Col- 
lege Trichinopoly in the years 192 9-3 0/ 1 Of these sidelights 
he says: ‘Some are mere incidental references to actual politi- 
cal events and situations; others are descriptions or accounts 
of facts and occurrences involving such political events or 
social conditions, a good summing up, indeed, as Fr. Correia- 
Afonso puts it, of the nature of the historical information to 
be found in the Jesuit letters in general. Father Ferroli’s 
The Jesuits in Malabar, of which two volumes have appeared 
so far (Bangalore 1939, 1951) , is the most complete survey 
of the Jesuit activities in the ‘Province of Malabar’ which 
was constituted in 1605 and included at one time the Missions 
of the Fishery Coast, Travancore, Cochin, Madura, Ceylon, 
Bengal and Pegu, Malacca and the Moluccas. 

There are four types of Jesuit letters — those meant for 
the superiors of the Order, those addressed to the members 
of the Society in general, those intended for the public at 

8 Jesuit letters, pp. 52, 65, 87-8. 4 Jesuit letters, pp. 51-2. 


64 


Sources Of iUOiau ktsfonv 


large and those -written, to personal friends. Though they 
are all strictly contemporary and therefore primary sources 
with an occasional unrivalled vividness and realism of their 
own, the historical information they contain is generally inci- 
dental and just calculated to give the background to the rest 
of the communication relating to other matters in which the 
writers were interested. The habit of writing letters was 
encouraged from the first, and in 1552 Xavier insisted that 
all the brethern of the Society should be told to write a yearly 
report to the General of the Order at Rome. 3 The first 
‘Annual’ or ‘General’ letter from India was written at Goa 
in Dec. 1552, when the Indian Province of the Society ex- 
tended up to Japan. In 1605 the Provinces of Goa and 
Malabar were constituted. The last Annual letter from. 

Malabar is of 1745; from Goa the last letter preserved relates 
to 1750-53 though other evidence makes it probable that the 
letters continued to be written till 1759, the year of the ex- 
pulsion of the Jesuits from Portuguese territory.® The 
Annual letters, however, cannot claim to retain the value 
of direct evidence of the personal letters, but this shortcoming 
is compensated generally by the deliberation and sense of 
responsibility behind such considered compositions based on 
local reports, and sometimes these reports were textually 
reproduced as in the letters of Pimenta from 1600 to 1601. 

Andrew Freyre (1625-92) joined the Madura Mission in 1656 
and held the office of Superior in the years 1666-70 and 1679- 
83, and Provincial of Malabar from 1688. He wielded a 
‘wonderful pen’, and his annual letters, which were many, 
gave at the beginning a succinct account of the political condi- 
tions in the part of the country where he worked, together 
with some shrewd reflections. The celebrated Father Beschi 
who landed at Goa in 1710 and was soon despatched to 
Ambalakad and thence to the Madura Mission was perhaps 
the most famous of our group of letter writers. In his time 
the Mission was passing through troublous times as the Nayaks 
of Tan j ore and Madura had entered on a policy of perse- 
cuting their Christian subjects, and generally South India I 


3 ibid., pp. 12-17. 


® ibid., p. 130. 


SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 95 


was the victim of the raids and ravages of the armies of rival 
chiefs. He was confined to his residence during such trou- 
bles and devoted his time to learning Tamil in which he 
became very proficient and took rank of Grammarian lexico- 
grapher, poet and prose writer. His great personal charm 
won him the favour of the Mughal general Chanda Saheb 
and the Nawab of Vellore. But he was equally at home 
with the poor and saw much of Indian life in the places where 
he worked — Trichinopoly, Tan j ore, Madura, Ellakurichi and 
Ambalakad. ‘Besides a few personal letters to the General 
of the Society’, says Fr. Correia-Afonso, ‘he has left us the 
Annual letter of the Madura Mission for the year 1731. In 
it he paints a dark picture of the Maratha invasion of Tanjore 
which throws light on the reactions of the southerners to the 
new power that was rising in W. India.’ 7 

On the whole the Jesuit letters will enable the modem his- 
torian to add much local colour to his narrative by drawing 
upon them for interesting details of social life and about the 
men who played a part in history. The lack of other sources 
for certain areas and periods enhance the value of the Jesuit 
documents. In the last resort, however, each document has 
to be examined separately before final judgment can be pas- 
sed on its value as a source. The majority of the Jesuit 
letters, are, however, but ancillary sources for a general his- 
tory, for which they can provide evidence that corroborates 
and supplements the data derived from other sources. 8 

The Portuguese sources for Maratha history were long 
neglected by historians, and only recently (1938) Pissur- 
lencar, custodian of the Archives of Portuguese India, drew 
pointed attention to a surprisingly large number of documents 
in private hands, especially, in religious houses, besides the 
Archives in his custody. He says: “1116 materials in this 
language are all absolutely contemporaneous, dated and full 
of exact details. They not merely throw light on the history 
of the Portuguese settlements in India but also supply invalua- 
ble information to an unimaginable extent on the events and 
personages of the Muslim monarchies of the Deccan (espe- 


7 i lid., p. 70. 


8 ibid., pp. 160-1. 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


cially Bijapur and the Nizam Shahi), the Vijayanagar empire, 
the house of Shivaji, the Peshwas, the Kanarese dynasties of 
Bednur etc, and even Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan. They 
are indispensable to the historian of the early career of the 
Shahji (the father of the Great Shivaji) the Angrias, and the 
Maratha navy.’ 9 Pissurlencar’s Portuguese e Maratas i, Sivaji 
(reprinted from the Boletin do Instituto Vasco da Gama) is 
the fullest and most scholarly account on Portuguese relations 
with Sivaji and supersedes all earlier works on the sub- 
ject. 

Among the Persian historians of the Mughal empire, Khafi 
Khan and Bhimsen are valuable for Sivaji; the latter calls 
him ‘a soldier unequalled, skilled in the arts of government, 
and a friend to men of virtue and religion’. The records of 
the English factories on the Bombay (Maharastra) coast and 
inland regarding Sivaji begin from 1659 and contain notices 
of events without any attempts to embellish them. Their 
spies from Rajapur and Karvar travelled in Sivaji’s domi- 
nions and brought news of his doings and plans in so far 
as they concerned the English. Dr. Fryer who was in Surat 
in 1673 gives a vivid account of Sivaji’s army, ‘more splendid’ 
than the Mughal forces. Among the travellers, Bernier, 
Tavernier, Thevenot Carre either knew Sivaji personally or 
heard of his activities in the South. Abbe Carre visited India 
twice during 1668 to 1671 and on the second occasion travel- 
led overland from Surat to Fort St. George; he wrote a 
History of Sivaji which compares him with Caesar. The 
French Memoire of Francois Martin (of Pondicherry) is of 
the highest value for Sivaji’s Karnatak expedition. In 1670 
he was at Surat and learnt a report that Sivaji contemplated 
a second attack on that wealthy emporium. As an ally of 
Sher Khan Lodi of Valikandapuram Martin closely watched 
the political movements in the far south and was fully posted 
with occurrences in Western India. At the instance of the 
French East Indian Co., he wrote a daily journal and his notes 
on the Karnatak expedition admirably supplement the Sabha~ 
sad Bakhar. The more important foreign biographies of Sivaji 

9 cited ibid., p. 88 . 


SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY f&Pi 

can now be read conveniently in S. N. Sen’s Foreign Bio- 
graphies of Sivaji, 

Some Kannada works of tbe period have something to | 
say on Shahji and Sivaji and his successors. Among them I 
we may note Linganna’s Keladi Nripa Vijaya (1703) already | 
mentioned, Govinda Vaidya’s Kantlurava N arcisardj endra, 
Vijaya (1648) and the anonymous Hydemama (1782), which 
is an excellent biography of Hyder Ali of Mysore. Lingan- 
na’s account covers a wide range of Maratha history, parti- \ 
cularly the parentage and lineage of Sivaji, and the Hyder- j 
ndmd is helpful for the later phase of Maratha history in the j 
eighteenth century. 

Siv a Bharat by Paramanand is an authentic and accurate * 
source on Shahji’s life in the Carnatic. It is incomplete but 
still its historical framework ‘is found to be remarkably ac- 
curate, confirmed as it is at places by contemporary records, 
Maratha or English’ (Patvardhan and Rawlinson: A Source 
Book of Maratha History , p. 2). Little confusion is noticed 
in the arrangements of facts, and on the whole the work may 
be said to embody a good account of Shahji and Sivaji. There 
is little history to be gathered from the Rddhd Mddhava 
Vildsa campu of Jayaram Pandit, a court poet of Shahji, but 
there are useful references to Shahji’s expedition against Mir 
Jumla, the various chiefs of the Carnatic and the Firingis. 
The early nineteenth century chronicle by Narayana kone 
called Carnataka Rajakkal Savistara Carita deals among 
other things with the southern expedition of Sivaji, the 
Carnatic wars and the history of Jinji. Nariayana kone is 
of the opinion that Sivaji undertook the Carnatic expedition to 
South India from the depredations of the Muslims and make 
Dharma live again. 

For the Peshwa period (1707-1818) the official records of 
the Peshwa’s daftar are quite voluminous and form the chief 
primary source. There are also the Persian records and the 
English records of Poona known as the Residency Correspon- 
dence, A series of 45 handy volumes have been published 
by the Bombay Government under Sardesai’s editorship under 
the title Selections from the Peshwa’s Daftar. But these re- 
cords come to an abrupt end, with the exception of a few 

33 


DB 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


papers, about 1782, because all the papers of Nana Fadnis 
who died in 1800, were transferred to his country residence 
at Manvali whence they found their way to Satara and came 
to be partly published by Parasnis. They form the principal 
contents of the Satara Historical Museum. Moreover, Poona 
ceased to be centre of Maratha politics after the close of the 
First Maratha War in 1782; Mahadji Sindhia becoming thence- 
forth an equally important factor. We must mention also 
the Gulgule Daftar of Kotah largely dealing with Sindhia’s 
dealings with Rajputana in the first two volumes edited by 
Phalke. The Patwardhan Papers (14 vols.) edited by 
V. ,V. Khare contain news letters from the Peshwa’s court 
and echoes of great interest of North Indian affairs. There 
*are also thirteen volumes of Marathi extracts with English 
summaries issued under the title Selections from the Satara 
Raja’s and Peshwa’s diaries issued by a Private agency with 
the aid of the Bombay Government. They comprise nine 
volumes of the so called diaires, which are in fact extracts 
from the daily account books and some judicial decisions, and 
four supplementary volumes of Sanads and letters, Kaijiyats, 
Treaties and Agreements. These records also end with 1788 
when the Treaty of Salbai closed the first Anglo-Maratha 
war; thereafter British Residents came to be posted at the 
Mar&tha Courts. The Poona Residency Correspondence 
comes down to the end of Peshwa rule in 1818 and includes 
the letters that passed between these Residents and the Gov- 
ernor-General, as well as duplicates of the more important 
letters written by one Resident to another or to the Gover- 
nors of Bombay and Madras and British military chiefs. These 
records comprise a hundred files each containing some seven 
to eight hundred pages in manuscript and luckily saved from 
the fire set to the British Residency by Baji Rao II when 
he took up arms against the British in the last Maratha War. 
They relate to the political affairs of almost all parts of India 
covering a period of thirty-three years from the appointment 
of Malet in 1785 to the annexation of the Peshwa’s dominions 
in 1818. Sarkar and Sardesai have edited these English re- 
cords in fourteen volumes published under the authoritv of 
the Bombay Government. They form a necessary supple- 


SOUTH INDIA F&OM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 90 


ment to the Marathi series, and in many respects complemen.- 
tary to the English records preserved in the Bombay Secre- 
tariat, from which G. W. Forrest edited four volumes of 
selections (one relating to Maratha history and rest to British 
Indian) well over fifty years ago. The English records supply 
two elements wanting in the Marathi. Their intelligence is 
far more accurate and widespread than that of the Marathas; 
and the despatches of the English residents give a broader 
survey of Indian politics and a deeper and more intelligent 1 
criticism of character and policy than is to be met with in 
the matter-of-fact Marathi letters. Thus they enable us to 
reach the root causes of events and to trace the wider move- 
ments of Indian politics to a degree unattainable by the 
indigenous Persian and Marathi sources. Some of the Resi- 
dents like Colet and Elphinstone were men of high intellec- 
tual calibre, of extraordinary capacity; resourcefulness, and 
power of initiative, and their spy system was also perfect. 

French activities in India in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries were more centred in the Deccan and South India 
than anywhere else. The French archives in Pondicherry used 
to be a valuable source and an extensive and useful catalogue 
in eight volumes was published by Edmond Gaudart some 
decades back. It seems that the documents have all been 
transferred to Paris with the merger of the French posses- 
sions in India, but one hopes that this would not mean that 
Indian scholars can have no access to them. The National 
Archives has a plan of getting all documents in foreign archi- 
ves bearing an Indian history micro-filmed gradually and this 
should also be a great help. 

The failure of the French in India led to a loss of interest in\ 
France in Indo-French history; but with the success of the l 
second colonial empire in the nineteenth century that interest f 
revived and French activities in India claimed fresh attention, I 
In the middle of the eighteenth century Dernis published an \ 
important collection of documents: Receuil ou collection des | 
titres, edits, declarations, arrots, re’glements et aut res pieces \ 
concemant la c ompagnie des Indes Orientates, de 1664 a 1750 ] 
(4 vols. Paris 1751-6). Dernis was in charge of the Company’s 
archives and published all the official papers on the constitu- 



Sources of Indian history 

tion, privileges, regulations and trading operations of the com- 
pany. The work was thus a collection of documents in print, 
but a short introduction at the beginning of each volume 
briefly reviewed the history of the period it covered. 10 One 
of the principal sources of the early French activities in South 
India is the Memoires Sur I’etablissement des colonies jran- 
gaises aux Indes Orientates of Frangois Martin already men- 
tioned in connection with Sivaji’s Carnatic expedition. The 
book ends abruptly in 1694 though there are two fragments 
covering the period Feb. 1701 to January 1703. Written day 
to day as already noted the final copy was carefully revised 
later. Alfred Martineau, Governor of Pondicherry, published 
the Memoires in extenso (3 volumes, Paris, 1931-4) and made 
this valuable source accessible to students. ‘Henri Froidevaux 
who had earlier published the Memoires de Bellahger de Les- 
pinay (1895) and les Debuts de V occupation Frangaise d Pon- 
dichery (1897) has written a very interesting biographical 
sketch of Martin and an able summary of the course of events 
narrated, divided into three parts and given as an Introduc- 
tion to each of the three volumes of Martin’s Memoires! 11 
Martineau’s Les Origines de Make de Malabar (Paris 1917) 
has traced the history of that settlement from 1720 to 1738; it 
is a well documented book based on the Memoires du Chevalier 
de la Farelle sur la prise de Mahe 1725 (Paris 1889) and all 
relevant records in the archives of Paris, Pondicherry and 
Madras. 12 Martineau also wrote a monumental work on Dup- 
leix in five big volumes published over more than a decade 
from 1920. The first four volumes deal with Dupleix in India, 
and the fifth with the last years of Dupleix in France and his 
proceedings against the Company. Martineau’s work is based 
on unpublished records, little noticed by earlier biographers. 
He gives long extracts from the records on the principle that 
‘the role of the historian is not to impose his judgement, but 
to provide the public the means to pronounce it on the basis 
of the documents cited’. The book is not merely a biography 
of Dupleix, but in a real sense it is comprehensive history of 

10 Historians, etc., p. 185. 11 ibid., p. 189, 

Wibid., p. 190. 




SOVfH INDIA FROM The FOVRTEENTH CENTURTt (iof 

the French in India from 1722 to 1754, which fully justifies 
the title he has chosen Dupleix et I’Inde Frangaise. He indi- 
cated that he had moved away from the hero-worship of the 
past saying: ‘It is the history of a man that we are writing, 
and not that of a demi-god.’ 13 After Martineau, the t most 
interesting study, Dupleix, by G. Jonveau-Dubreuil published 
in 1941 in Pondicherry, was dedicated to the memory of the 
great man on the occasion of the bicentenary of his elevation 
to the dignity of a Mughal Nawab, The book was re-issued 
next year from Paris with minor changes. Jonveau-Dubre- 
uil’s work, the result of a very shrewd study of the relevant 
records, is not a complete biography and comes down only 
to 1750. The title of the Paris edition, Dupleix ou I’Inde Con- 
qu is gives the clue to his theory that Dupleix acted on a 
long premeditated plan of playing the role of a regular Nawab 
of the Mughal empire, and fight his ‘wars not as an auxiliary 
but as principal, a Nawab fighting other Nawabs for increase 
of territory’. He tersely sums up his view, of Dupleixian 
Nababism thus: ‘Europeans have not conquered Persia or 
China or Japan, but they have conquered India? Why? Be- 
cause in India there had been a Dupleix. India was con- 
quered not at all by arms, but by “Nababism”, that is to say, 
by the genius of one man. The conquest of India an event 
of world importance, may be explained by the study of a 
single character.’ 14 The first biography of Bussy was also by 
Martineau (1935) who rescued him from the place of secon- 
dary importance to which he had been consigned by earlier 
writers; he held him a greater diplomat than soldier, far 
above Dupleix in good sense and judgement, though not in 
boldness of conception. ‘In a Hellenic pantheon’, says Mar- 
tineau, ‘Pallas Athene, the goddess of Wisdom and of war, 
would have claimed him as one of her most perfect disci- 
ples’. 18 It is perhaps worth noting also that the charge of 
bribery against La Bourdonnais asserted by Malleson to rest 
on papers in the India Office was exploded in 1905 by E. Her- 
pin in his Mahi &e la Bourdonnais et la compagnie des Indes 

13 ibid., pp. 197-8. 14 ibid., p. 198. 

15 ibid., p. 199. 



SOURCES Oi' INDIAN HlSfOM 


iofc 

by reproducing the documents Malleson relied on and demon- 
strating that Malleson never scrutinized them properly. 
‘Along with these documents, Herpin reproduces all the rele- 
vant papers connected with the trial of La Bourdonnais and 
also a short analysis of the Memoires of La Bourdonnais. 
Anyone who reads this well documented and ably written 
book will come away with the impression that Herpin has 
fully succeeded in vindicating the position of La Bourdon- 
nais. But in making that attempt, Herpin had necessarily to 
focus attention on the intrigues and jealous manoeuvres of 
Dupleix, revealing all the weak traits of his character! 
(S. P. Sen) . l « 

The later period of French activities in India 1765-1793 has 
been little studied though the sources for it are abundant. 
Malleson’s Final French Struggle in India, and on the Indian 
Seas (London 1878) is the nearest approach to a comprehen- 
sive work on the period, but it does not cover the whole 
period. Martineau’s Introduction to the Journal de Bussy, 
1781-83 (Pondicherry, 1932) and one chapter in his Bussy 
et I’Inde Frangaise covers the period from 1781-83, though 
always with Bussy as the centre. In 1888 was published the 
Journal de Bord du Bailli de Suffren dans VInde 1781-84, 
lying till then unknown in one of the small archives of 
France in the Department of Maritime Alps; it is the most 
truthful day to ' day account of Suffren’s expedition. The 
period 1785-1793 has been treated in part by Edmon Gaudart 
in his Correspondence des Agents d Pondichery de la nou- 
velle Compagnie des Indes avec les Administrateurs a Paris 
(Pondicherry 1931); Gaudart’s long introduction giving a 
detailed history of the new French Company founded by 
Calonne in 1785. Madame Labernadie’s La Revolution et 
les Etablisments Frangaise dans VInde (1790-93) (Pondi- 
cherry 1939) is a brilliantly written and comprehensive his- 
tory of the French in India during the Revolution based almost 
entirely on the records in the Pondicherry Archives and show- 
ing what a wealth of material is available to the historian. 
She shows that the French attempts in India to establish 


16 ibid., p. 201. 


SOUTH INDIA FROM THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY 103 


liberty, equality and. fraternity applied only to the French men, 
the Indian inhabitants being rigidly kept out of it. Another 
ably written book, Maurice Besson’s Les Aventuriers Frangais 
aux Indes (1775-1820 ) , (Paris 1932) contains a collection of 
brief accounts of most of the French adventures in India based 
on original documents. Many other secondary works on Indo- 
French history have been mentioned and reviewed by S. P. 
Sen in his paper on ‘French Historical writing on European 
Activities in India’ in Historians of India , Pakistan and Ceylon 
ed. C. H. Philips (London 1961) which I have followed in the 
foregoing account on the French sources. There are, finally, 
hundreds of long memoirs by French Governors in India, 
diplomatic agents, military adventurers in the service of Indian 
princes and so on in the Archives at Paris, and perhaps still 
at Pondicherry also. A systematic study of these political and 
military documents would be a task of much interest. More- 
over, Persian and Marathi records have not yet been fully 
utilized in the study of French relations with Hyderabad, 
Mysore and the Marathas. 

We have reserved to the end the unique and monumental 
Tamil diary of Ananda Ranga Pillai which in the words of 
Sir Frederic Price reflects the inmost thoughts and reflections 
of an extremely able, level-headed oriental, and his criticisms 
— which at times are of the freest character — of his fellows 
and master. It is a strange mixture of things trivial and im- 
portant; of family matters and affairs of state; of business 
transactions and social life of the day; interspersed with scraps 
of gossip, all evidently recorded as they came to the mind of 
the diarist, who might well be dubbed the ‘Indian Pepys’. 
Homely as is the diction, there are in it descriptions of men 
and things which are vividly lifelike and passages which are 
startling — some in their pathos, others in their shrewdness. 
This unique contemporary diary throws welcome light on the 
troubled politics of South India in the fateful years that saw 
the disintegration of the Muhammadan power in the Carnatic 
and the growth and final settlement of the conflict for domi- 
nion between the English and the French. Ananda Ranga 
Pillai occupied a most influential position in the French ser- 
vice and retained his rank and importance even down to his 



104 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


death only just a few days before the surrender of Pondicherry 
to General Coote in 1761. He was only 52 years of age when 
he died. His diary contains more authentic details of a poli- 
tical nature than that which any other Indian at Pondicherry 
could have kept. He is seen at his best when writing of 
Dupleix and of his defects of temper and character. His diary 
has run to twelve volumes in its English translation by J. F. 
Price and H. H. Dodwell, Madras 1904-28, in spite of the fact 
that there were several gaps in the narratives now available, 
some for months at a stretch. One of these gaps was filled by 
the discovery of some new pages relating to the assassination of 
Mazzaffar Jung and other matters by the present writer in 
Gallors, Montbrun’s house at Pondicherry, and an English 
translation of this fragment will be found in the Madras 
University Journal (Humanities) , Vol. XIV 1942, Supplement 
pp. 1-49. The entire original Tamil text has been published in 
Pondicherry by Diagou. 

There are Persian histories of the Nawabs of the Carnatic 
like the Tuzak i Walajahi of Burhan Ibn Hasan, the Sawami 
hah-l-Mumtaz of Mhd. Karim Mhayru’d-din Hasan Ghulam 
Zamin and Bahr-i-Aszan Jahi of Gulam Abdul Qadir Nazir 
which are relatively of less value for political history, though 
they contain much interesting detail on court life and social 
1 events; some of these works have been translated into English 
I by the department of Arabic, Persian and Urdu of the Uni- 
versity of Madras. , 

The manuscript materials for the study of British Indian 
history, preserved in the National Archives and other state 
departments of India as well as in England, are enormous. 
J3i r William Foster’s monumental work on English Factories 
ill India and Court Minutes of the East India Company are a 
model of solid research. Besides the work of Foster, the his- 
torical researches of Yule and Hunter have made us familiar 
with the doings of the pioneers of trade and industry and we 
can follow the progress of Madras or of Bombay in the seven- 
teenth century. Col. Love’s Vestiges of Old Madras (3 vols.) 
is very useful. S- A. Khan’s The Sources for the History of 
the British in the 17th Century lists the manuscript materials 
of the India Office Library, the National Archives and else- 



SOUTH iNdiA from The FOURTEENTH CENTURY 105 

where for the period. Talboys "Wheeler’s Madras in the Olden 
Times will he found very useful too. 

The primary ^sources for the eighteenth century history 
consist mainly of contemporary state papers, supplemented 
by Marathi and Persian records. The volume of correspon- 
dence with the servants of the E.I.C. in India reached enorm- 
ous proportions. They had to keep very detailed records of 
their daily transactions for the perusal of their masters in 
England, Their discussions were entered at length upon the 
records of Council Meetings and were designated Consulta- 
tions or Proceedings. This has led to the increase of the mass 
of documents which supply abundant historical material of 
first rate importance. Some of these records have been listed 
and calendered by Forrest, S. C. Hill, and others. We have 
also letters in different collections like the Cornvallis Corres- 
pondence edited by (Deport Ross in two volumes, the Fort 
William correspondence^ (publication in progress to be 21 
volumes in all). The India Office Library, the National Archi- 
ves of India, the Madras and Bombay record offices, the Admi- 
ralty and War office Records etc. contain much unpublished 
matter to which may be added such printed English records 
as the records of Fort. St. George, Military consultations, 
1752-56, the Siege Diary 1757-9, The letters of Kirlpatrick 
and others. The available material is almost endless and is 
still increasing. 

We have also a number of standard contemporary and later 
specialized works. Orme’s Military Transactions (already 
mentioned) supplemented by Clement Downing, and R. O. 
Cambridge form the chief works on this period. For the Anglo- 
Mysore wars we have important authorities like Wilks’s His- 
tory of Mysore for the Mysore wars under Warren Hastings 
and Tipu; A. Dirom’s Narrative of the Campaign for Corn- 
wallis’s campaign, and A. Beatson’s View of the origin and 
conduct of the war with Tipu Sultan for the last campaign. 
The correspondence of most governors-general has been pub- 
lished by different editors. The materials for the first half 
of the nineteenth century have not been properly tapped and 
only a few full-length biographies of the leading actors have 
been pub lish ed. H. T. Prinsep’s History of the Political and 

14 


5 ' 

* C 



106 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


Military Transactions in India during the Administration of 
the Marquess of Hastings is a solid piece of work in which 
the achievements of Hastings are vividly described in a sim- 
ple and direct style. Kaye’s Life of Metcalfe is a good Victo- 
rian biography with plenty of letters and minutes quoted in 
full. We need detailed biographies of Amherst and Bentinck. 

As the nineteenth century advanced, the political unity of 
the entire sub-continent became well established, communica- 
tions developed and the influence of the three Universities 
started in the same year as the outbreak of 1857 which was the 
last kick of the old order began to be increasingly felt, and 
the movement towards Indian freedom and independence be- 
gan though at first in a modest way with the assembling of the 
first Indian National Congress in 1885 in this very city. The 
Indian States and their relations with the paramount power 
add a new dimension to the story. It is suspected that some 
of the confidential records bearing on these relations and the 
national movement were destroyed before the transfer of 
Power. We do not know and perhaps will never know the 
exact truth of the matter. The Government of India and the 
state governments have been striving to collect material for a 
comprehensive history of the national movement; the results 
achieved so far cannot be pronounced either satisfactory or 
encouraging. But important aspects of the movement have 
been brilliantly illuminated by individual works like Baner- 
jea’s A Nation in the Making , Lajapat Rai’s Unhappy India and 
Mrs. Besant’s How India Wrought for Freedom . In a more 
purely historical view and making careful and full use of all 
available sources are Dr. GopaTs books on the Viceroyalties 
of Lords Ripon and Irwin. There is much scope for this more 
serious and scholarly kind of work at different levels which 
will make better use than has so far been done of the availa- 
ble archival material with the aid of Press Lists, Calendars, 
and hand-books giving excellent guidance to the enquiring 
student. But workers in the field are few and it is to be feared 
that this state of things will continue until the value of his- 
torical studies is realized better than at present and the history 
classes in our Universities become more attractive to their 
alumni. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Barnett, L. D., Antiquities of India (London, 1913) . 

Cambridge History of India , 6 Vols. (2 not yet published) 
Cambridge, 1922. 

Chakravarti, N. P. and others, Archaeology in India (Delhi, 
1950). 

Correia-Afonso, S. J., John, Jesuit Letters and Indian History 
(Ind. His. Inst., Bombay, 1955). 

Cumming, Sir J. and others, Revealing India’s Past (London, 
1939). 

D’Costa, S. J. A., ‘An Indian Study of the Mongol Missions of 
the Middle Ages’ Neue Zeitschrift fiir Missionwissens- 
chaft XVI, 1960, (258-67) . 

Hardy, P., Historians of Medieval India , (London, 1960) . 

Khan, Sir Shafa’at Ahmad, Sources for the History of British 
India in the Seventeenth Century (London, 1926). 

Khan, Sir Shafa’at Ahmad, History and Historians of British 
India (Allahabad, 1939). 

Moreland, W. H., Dutch Sources for Indian History (1590- 
1650) Journal of Indian History ii (1922-3) 223-32. 

Philips, C. H. (Ed.) , Historians of India, Pakistan and Ceylon, 
London, O.U.P., 1961. 

Piggott, S., Prehistoric India (Harmondsworth, 1950). 

Renou, L. and Filliozat, J. Etc., L’lnde Classique , Vol. i, 1947, 
Vol. ii, 1953, Vol. iii, to follow (Paris). 

Sastri, K. A. N., Foreign Notices of South India from Megas- 
thenes to Ma Huan (Univ. of Madras, 1939). 

Sastri, K. A. N., Historical Method in Relation to Indian His- 
tory (S. Viswanathan, Madras, 1956). 

Sharma, Sri Ram, A Bibliography of Moghul India (1526-1707) 
Bombay. 

Storey, C- A., Persian Literature, A Bio-bibliographical Sur- 
vey. Sec. II, Fasc. 3, M. History of India (Luzac, London, 
1939) . 

Wheeler, Sir R. E. Mortimer, The Indus Civilization (Supple- 
ment to C.H.I.) Cambridge, 1953. 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


Errata 

Page 8, line 28; jor ar. read av 

Page 8, line 28: for anx read aux 

Page 17, line 8: for report read reports 

Page 17, line 25; for neolithic read mesolithic 

Page 24, line 8: for sources read source 

Page 24, line 21; for bom read borne 

Page 24, line 22: for settled read settle 

Page 26, line 17: for Valaghi read Valabhi 

Page 26, line 22: for was read has 

Page 29, line 1: for institutions read institution 

Page 30, line 25: for Ghoriad read Ghorid 

Page 31, line 16: for panegeric read panegyric 

Page 33, line 24: for perhaps on read perhaps based on 

Page 34, line 23: for calendered read calendared 

Page 40, line 33: for Alexander ine read Alexandrine 

Page 43, line 26; for Malkher read Malkhed 

Page 45, line 1: delete Jarric 

Page 45, footnote line 3: for Withvington read Withington 

Page 46, last line: for Mandelsto read Mandelslo 

Page 46, last line: for Thavenof read Thevenot 

Page 50, line 5: for stone , cist read stone cist 

Page 52, line 14: for and which read and to which 

Page 63, line 4; for aradoes read pardaos 

Page 63, line 36; for board read hoard 

Page 74, line 26; for Banjamin of Tudala read Benjamin of Tudela 

Page 78, line 31; for quarelled read quarrelled 

Page 79, line 26: for spread read shared 

Page 92, line 33; for Xavierui read Xaverii 

Page 95, line 4: for of read as 

Page 97, line 29: for to read to save 

Page 101, lines 6 and 10: for Jonveau read Jouveau 

Page 104, line 13: for Gallors read Gallois 

Page 10J, line 14: for calendered read calendared 

Page 105, line 15: for Comvaliis read Cornwallis 

Page 105, line 23; for Kirlpatriek read Kirkpatrick 



INDEX 


Abdur-Razzak, 87 i 
Abul Fazl, 30, 32, 33 
Ab’ul Faradj, 43 
Abu Zaid Hasan, 43 
Adiccanallur, 52 
Afghan dynasties, 44 
Afif, Shams al-din-Siraj, 31 
Agra, 35, 36, 37 

Ahmednagar, Nizam Shahis, 81, 
82, 96 

Ain-i-Akbari, 30 
Ajanta, 15 

Akbar, 32, 44, 45, 86 
Akbar Namah , 32 
Alberuni, 29 f 
Alexander the Great, 40 
All India Oriental Conference, 10 
Alvars, 15, 64, 65, 73 
Andhras, 56, 58 
Annals and Antiquities of 
Rajasthan , 6 
Arabs, 42 f 

Aramaic inscriptions, 23 
Aravidu dynasty, 85, 86 
Archaeology, 7 f, 16-8, 21 f 
Architecture, 22, 64 
ArthaSastra , 27 f, 30 
Aryans, 19, 20, 27, 51-3 
Asoka, 4, 23, 25, 50, 54, 56 
Aurangzeb, 32 f, 47 
Azes, 25 

Babar, 33 

Ractrian dynasties, 24 
Badayum, Abdul Qadir, 32 
Bagh, 15 

Bahmanis, 78-81 passim, 89 
Bakshi, Nizamuddin, 32 
Baldaeus, Philippus, 38 
Baluchistan, 17, 19 
Bana, 15, 28 


Banerjee, B. D,, 7 
Barani, Ziya-ud-din, 31, 87 
Barbosa, Duarte, 90 f 
Bardic literature, 28 £ 

Barros, 35 
Bellary, 50, 51 
Benjamin of Tudela, 74 
Bernier, 47, 96 
Beschi, 92, 94 £ 

Bhagavadgitd , 30 

Bhdrata , 15, 73 

Bharatiya Itihas Parishad, 9 

Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 9 

Bijapur, Adil Shahis, 78, 81 f, 96 

Bilhana, 15, 72 

Biographies, 28 

Bocarro, 35 

Bopp, Frantz, 3 

Brdhmanas , 20 

Brahmi inscriptions, 4, 23, 51, 54 
British rule, 33, 34 f, 36 
Bruce Foote, 50 
Buddha, 8. 25 

Buddhism 41 f, 48, 54, 56, 67 , 88 
Burhan-i-Maasir , 81 

Caesar Frederic, 82, 91 
Calukyas, 57, 59, 62-75 passim, 86 
Calukya Vikrama era, 26 
Candrabhanu, 12 
Candragupta II, 25 
Candragupta Maurya, 28 
Carnatic, 97, 104 
Carrd, Abbe, 96 
Castanheda, 35 

Ceylon, 12, 38, 39, 41, 53, 56, 67, 
72, 88, 89 
Chalcolithic age, 17 
Chanhu-daro, 17, 19 
Chau Ju-ku, 42, 74 
Chavannes, 42 



110 


SOURCES OF INDIAN HISTORY 


Cheras, Ceras, 55, 56, 57, 72 
Chinese sources, 41 f, 66 f 
Christian Topography , 41 
Chronology, 24-6 
Chu K’u Fei, 42 
Cola, 57, 67-75 passim 
Cofiti, Nicolo, 89 
Corpus Diplomaticum 
Neerlandogicwn, 36 
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicam,m f 
23 

Correa, Gaspar, 35, 74 
Coryat Thomas, 46 
Cosmas Indikopleustes, 41 
Couto, 35 

Cunningham, Alexander, 4, 24 

De Jonge, J.K.J., 36 
De Laet, 47 
De Nobili, 92 

de la Vallee Poussin, Louis, 8f , 41, 48 
della Valle, Pietro, 37, 46 
Documenta Indie a, 92 
Dowson, Prof. John, 6, 32 
Dravidians, 18, 51-3 
Duff, Grant, 6, 34 
du Jarric, Fr. Pierre, 45 
Duperron, Anquetil, 3 
Dupleix, 100-2 
Dutch rule, sources, 35-9 

Elliot, Sir Henry, 6, 32 
Ellora, 15 

Elphinstone, Mountstuart, 6 
Epigraphia Indica , 23 f, 71, 80 
Epigraphy, 16, 23 f, 60-2, 69-71, 
74, 75, 79 £ 

Fa-hien, 42, 67 
Firdausi, 81 
Firishta, 6, 44, 81-3, 89 
Fitch, Ralph, 91 
French rule, 39, 99-103 
Freyre, Andrew. 94 
Fryer, Dr. 96 
Futuh-al~Salatin , 31 


Gadayuddha, 15, 73 
Gangas, 59, 62 
Golconda, 35, 37, 78, 91 
Greek inscriptions, 23 
Gujarat, 28, 35, 37 
Gulbadan Begum, 33 
Gupta era, 26 
Gupta inscriptions, 23 

Harappa, 17, 18, 19 
Harrison, J, B,, 35 
Harsacarita i 15, 27, 28 
Harsa era, 26 
Hawart Daniel, 38 
Hemacandra, 28 
Heras, Father, 1 f, 13, 93 
Herodotus, 40 
Hindu calendar, 24 f 
Hiuen Tsang, 28, 42, 67 
Hoysalas, 16, 70, 75 
Humayun, 33 
Hyder Ali, 96 

Ibn Al-Fakih, 43 
Ibn Batuta, 43 f, 87 
Ibn Hawkal, 43, 74 
Ibn Khurdadhbeh, 42 
Ibn Rosteh, 43 
IkrVakus, 58 

Indian Historical Records Com- 
mission, 10 

Indian History Congress, 10 
Indian Numismatic Society, 24 
India Office, 34 
Indo-Greek dynasties, 24 
Indo-Parthian dynasties, 24 
Indus Valley Civilization, 7, 12, 17 f 
Jsami, 31, 80 f 
Ishtakri, 43 
I-tsing, 42, 67 

Jahangir, 32, 33, 44-7 
Jainism, 54, 57 
James I, 46 
Java, 21, 60, 89 



itibnx 


lit 


Jayagomjlar, 15 

Jesuits, 3, 44-5, 79, 91-5 

Jesuit sources, 93 f 

Jhukar culture, 19 

Jones, Sir William, 3 

Jordanus, Friar, 88 

Juz Jani, Minhaj-al-Siraj, 30 

Kadambas, 59, 63, 72 
Kakatiyas, 75 
Kalabhras, 57 £ 

Kalachuri inscriptions, 23 
Kalaeuris, 28 
Kalhana, 14, 29, 72 
Kalidasa, 15 
Kalingattupparani , 15 
Kaliyuga, 25 
Kalya Sutras , 20 
Kanchipuram, 22, 64 
Kanishka, 8, 26 

Kannada, Canarese, language, 53 * 
sources, 57, 60, 69, 73, 75, 73, 

84, 86, 97 

Kashmir, 14, 29, 72 

Kautilya, 27, 28 

Khali Khan, 6, 32 f, 96 

Khani, Muhammad Bihamad, 31 

Kharo^thi, 23, 51 

Khiijis, 78 

Khusrau, Amir, 31 

Koch, D. M, G., 48 

Kollam era, 26 

Krjsnadevaraya, 82, 83, 85, 80 

Ku$umiyamalai, 16, 66 

Kumarila, 65 

Kushanas, 41 

Kudbuddin Aibak, 44 

Laksmana era, 26 
Lassen, Christian, 5f 
Laukika era, 26 
Licchavi -era, 26 
Linschotten, 36, 91 

Mackenzie mss., 87 
Madras Industry, 37 


Madras Record Office, 35 
Magadha, 56 
Mahabalipuram, 64, 65 
Mahabharata 8, 15, 25, 54 
Mahavira, 25 
Mahmud of Ghazni, 30 
Maitrakas, 26 
Majumdar, R. C,, 40 
Malabar, 26, 38, 39 
Malayalam, 53 
Manucci, 47 

Marathas, 33, 53, 60, 84, 93, 95 f, 
97-9 

Marcian of Heraclea, 41 
Marco Polo, 76, 88 
Marignolli, John of, 88 
Marshall, Sir John, 7 
Martin, Frangois, 96, 100 
MasudI, 43 

Megalithic culture, 51 £ 
Megasthenes, 40, 51 
Merutunga, 28 
Mill, James, 7 
Mir Jumia, 36 
Mohenjo-daro, 17, 18, 19 
Monserrate, Father, 45 
Monte Corvino, John of, 76 f 
Mughal rule, 31-4, 44-7, 78 
Muhammad bin Tughlak, 43, 44 
Muslim historians, 29-33, 80-3, 
89 f, 104 

Muslim travellers, 43 f 
Musta’idd Khan, 32 

Nalanda, 7, 22 
Nal mound, 19 
Nana Fadnis, 98 
Nandas, 56 
National Archives, 34 
Nayaks of Ikkeri (Bednur), 84, 
96 * • 

Nayaks of Madura, 79, 80, 93 
Nayanars, 15, 64, 65, 73 
Neolithic age, 17 
Nepal, 26, 29 
Nevar era, 26 


Sources of Indian history 


hi 

Nikitin, Athanasius, $9 
Numismatics, 23, 24, 56, 62-3, 
71 f, 80 

Nuniz, Fernao, 91 
Nur Jahan, 36 

Odoric of Pordenone, Friar, 88 
Orme, Robert, 7, 105 

Paes, Domingos, 91 
Pahlavas, 25 
Palaeolithic age, 17 
Pallavas, 55-67 passim 
Pampa, 15, 73 

Pandyas, 56-62 passim, 75, 76 
Panini, 8, 27, 51 
Paris records, 39, 99, 103 
Patahjali, 8, 27 
Periyapumnam , 15, 73 
Persian inscriptions, 24 
Peshwas, 96-9 
Pillai, Ananda Ranga, 103 
Pimenta, Nicholas, 91, 94 
Pondicherry, 39, 52, 54, 100-4 
passim 

Portuguese historians, 35 
Portuguese rule, 35, 79 
Portuguese sources, 90-6 
Prakrit, 23, 56 
Prinsep, James, 4, 24, 105 
Ptolemy, 12, 40 

Puranas, 8, 9, 14, 27, 30, 51, 56, 
57 

Purchas , His Pilgrimages , 45 

Rajasthan, 28 f 
Rdjatarahgini , 14, 29 
Ramdyana, 8, 15, 51 
Raima, 15, 73 
Rastrakutas, 59, 62, 67, 73 
Mg Veda, 7, 18, 20 
Roe, Sir Thomas, 46 
Roman influence, 24, 51, 54, 55 , 63 

Sabarmati, 17 
6aka era, 26 


Sakas, 25, 41 
Saluvas, 85 
Sanchi, 7, 22 
gangam literature, 54-6 
Sankara, 65 * 

Sanskrit: language, 53 
sources, 23, 59, 60, 61, 69, 75, 
79 

Saptar§i era, 26 

Sarhindi, Yahya ibn Ahmad, 31 
Sarnath, 7, 22 
Satavahanas, 56, 67, 63 
Schorer, A., 37 
Scripts: 

Balbodh, 60 
Grantha, 60, 61, 72 
Kannada, 60 
Modi, 60 
Nagari, 72 
Nandi Nagari, 79 
# Sarada, 60 
Takari, 60 
Telugu, 60 
Vatteluttu, 60, 61 
Sculpture, 22, 64, 65, 74 
gekkilar, 15, 73 
Sepoy Mutiny, 34 
Shahi-tump, 19 
Shah Jahan, 45 
Shahji, 97 
Shah Nama , 81 
&ivaji, 96 

Siyar al-mutakhirin, 33 
Smith, R, Morton, 27 
Smith, V. A., 5, 8, 9, 45, 47 
Socrates, 14 
Sohan Valley, 17 
Sten Konow, 41 
Sr! Vijaya, 12, 68 
St. Thomas, 88, 89 

Taba Tabai, Alt bin Aziz tjllah, 
81, 82 

Tabatabai, Ghulam Hussain 
Khan, 33 

Talikota, 79, 82, 86, 91 


INDEX 


113 


Tamil: 

language, 53, 58 
sourees, 54 f, 58-75 passim, 79, 
84 

Tamraparni Valley, 52 
Tavernier, 96 
Taxila, 7, 22 
Telugu: 
language, 53 

sources, 60, 75, 79, 84, 85 
Terry, 37, 46 

The Periplns of the Erythraean 
Sea , 55, 56 
Thevenot, 96 
Timur, 31 

Tipu Sultan, 96, 105 
Tod, 6, 29 
Traikutaka era, 26 
Tughlaks, 78 
Tuluvas, 85 


Vakatakas, 59 
Valentyn, Fan$ois, 38 
Valmlki, 15 
Van Dam, Peter, 38 
Vedas 9 8, 21, 24, 27 
Vijayanagar, 60, 63, 78-91 passim, 
96 

Vikramaditya, 25, 26 
Vikrama era, 25 f 
Vikramdnkadevacarita , 15, 28 
VLsnukundins, 59 
Vyasa, 15 

Wang Ta-Yuan, 42 
Warren Hastings, 3, 33, 34 
Wema Kadphesis, 26 
Western Satraps, 24, 26, 56, 60 
Wheeler, Sir Mortimer. 8, 52 

Xavier, Jerome, 92 

Yadavas. 75 


Upanishads, 3f, 20. 48 


Zaynuddin, Shaykh. 89 









f'f 



Central Archaeological Library, 

NEW DELHI, j 


Call No VI 


l Author- 


&oTri 


Title 

. ’ . ’ * '■'/IfitCinTf tP htilSk 1>VW j 

^ ^ ^ £&c£” 



GOVf. OP INDIA 


NEW DELHI 





