

JTY 

ARTS LIBRARY 

(DELHI UNIVERSITY LIBRARY SYSTEM^ 

Cl. No. VLJ7> ‘T?Y.9}',!) 

Ac. No. ^ ) *7 n 7f> Date °f releai 

i his book should be returned on or before the date lai 
below. An overdue charge of Rupee One will be cj 
each day the book is kept overtime. 

(Authority : EC Res. 200 dated 27th August 1996) 




SOI 


Irl INDIAN INFLUENCES 
IN THE FAR EAST 


K. A. Nnr ATg ANT T/tt SKttSKltTRlT 
Ai^Sssar < gf Mtim MsUo® {{JUtimlt) 
SStmar^p aff fi&dhas 



HIND KITABS 1/TP- 

PUBLISHERS ;s WMM¥ 


First Published, November 1949 


COPYRIGHT 


PRINTED BY U. NARASIMHA MALLYA, PROPRIETOR. THE B. B. D. POWER 
PRESS. COTTONPET, BANGALORE CITY; AND PUBLISHED BY 
V. KULKARNI, HIND KITABS LTD.. 261-263. HORNBY ROAD, BOMBAY 



PREFACE 


The manuscript of this small work was completed in 
1942 and submitted for publication in the first instance to 

the University of *” 


-mages in gold and silver in Sambas in the same island 
has not been noticed as they have been included in a 
jrecent publication of mine, ‘ History of Sri Vijaya’ publi- 
shed by v the University of Madras 

My obligations to the French and Dutch archaeologists 
who have worked in Indo-China and in Java, in parti- 
cular to the learned contributions of Professors G. Coedes 
and N. J Krom, will be apparent on every page as also 
in the map that accompanies the book Other works men- 
tioned in the Bibliography have also been found very 
helpful. v 


} 


- ILBsvak' 
Mylapore, Madras. 
10th Oetober 1943. 


K A NILAKANTA SASTRI 




CONTENTS 


'Chapter Page 

PREFACE .... .... v 

I INTRODUCTION: EARLY CULTURE MOVE- 

MENTS .... .... 1 

II INDO-CHINA .... .... 9 

III ^URMA „„ „„ ll 

IV FU-NAN .... .... 26 

V KAMBUJA .... .... 34 

VI CAMPA .... .... 48 

VII SIAM .... .... 63 

VIII MALAY PENINSULA .... .... 81 

IX TAKUA-PA AND OTHER PLACES • .... 86 

X THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS .... 100 

XI BORNEO .... .... 137 

XII THE PHILIPPINES .... .... 144 

ABBREVIATIONS .... .... 146 

BIBLIOGRAPHY .... .... 147 

INDEX .... .... 154 


MAP SHOWING MOVEMENT OF HINDU 
COLONISATION 




CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION: 

EARLY CULTURE MOVEMENTS 

Our aim In the following pages is not to offer a syste- 
matic account of the Hindu colonization of the East, 
much less a history of the various kingdoms that were 
established as a result of that movement. It is much 
more limited; we propose to consider only one particular 
aspect of the movement, and of the early history of the 
States, their art and social life with a view to estimating 
the role of Southern India in their evolution. 

But before we enter upon tbis task, it is necessary to 
have some idea of the state of culture ^attained by the 
peoples of the lands to which our colonizers went. How- 
ever far we go back in pre-history, the evidence from skulls 
shows distinctly that the races had become thoroughly 
mixed, and it is therefore safer to speak of a people 
rather than of a race as the authors of any particular 
culture. And for the limited purposes of our study, it is 
not necessary for us to go further back than the latest 
phase of the New Stone Age. The most characteristic 
feature of this period is the different forms of adzes with 
quadrangular sections. This quadrangular adze-culture, 
says Heine-Geldern, “probably came to the Malay Penin-> 
sulaand Indonesia by way of China and Central Indo- China 
(Laos and Siam) between 2000 and 1500 b . c . Its bearers 
introduced to Indonesia the Austronesian languages, the 
outrigger canoe, rice cultivation, domesticated cattle or 
buffaloes, head-hunting, and the custom of erecting me- 
galithic monuments. Beaked adzes belong to this culture 
as also four-cornered ones. Their gradual development 



2 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
can be traced archaeologically along the trail of the 
Austronesion migration from Upper Laos through the 
Malay Peninsula to Indonesia.” Of the adzes of Sumatra ' 
and Java in particular, the same writer observes: “Both 
the quadrangular as well as the beaked adzes of Sumatra 
are very similar to those of Java. The neolithic cultures 
of both islands show the same preference for semi-precious 
stones and coloured varieties of silex.and the same wonder, 
ful perfection of stone cutting. Some of these adze blades 
are real works of art.” 1 

By a careful study of the linguistic evidence, Kern 
showed in 1889 that in the cradle-land from which the 
Indonesians began to expand there were grown sugar- 
cane, cocoanut, banana and bamboo— all tropical pro- 
ducts. Rattan was also known, and rice was the staple 
food. The people were also a sea-faring folk. This cradle- 
land he located in Campa, Cochin-China, Kambuja and 
the neighbouring lands, although he did not rule out 
the possibility of a still earlier home. This earlier 
home Heine-Geldern finds in Yunnan and Southern 
China. 

These neolithic men thus received from Yunnan the . 
people whose speech later grew into the Indonesian langu- 
ages and who occupied the coastal lands on the east 
whence they began to practise sea-faring. Their river 
boats— hollowed tree trunks— developed later into the 
outrigger boats used in the archipelago. The neolithic 
migration which reached the islands by way of the Malay 
Peninsula does not seem to have gone beyond Moluccas; 
it did not reach New Guinea. The relatively high culture 
attained in this period is attested not only by the cultiva- 
tion of rice and the fine adzes already mentioned, but 



INTRODUCTION: EARLY CULTURE MOVEMENTS 3 
also by the pottery and weaving of the time which appear 
to have attained a high level of excellence . 11 
, The next stage in the cultural development of these 
lands was marked by the extensive use of bronze, coupled 
with a knowledge of iron, and a greater skill in the arts 
of navigation and ship-building. Ships of considerable 
size, manned by large crews, are portrayed on the bronze 
kettle-drums which were also a remarkable trait of this 
period. # This culture is often designated Dong-son cul- 
ture; Dong-son is a village on the right bank of the 
Song-ma, in the Tanh-hoa province of Annam, and many 
bronze drums were found here. 

Recent investigations have traced the origins of this 
culture to the Yueh people who inhabited the coastal 
regions of China about 2000 b.C. Eberhard says of the 
culture of the Yueh people: “As typical of this coastal 
culture we may mention the following traits: A developed 
navigation; the practice of holding boat races, with its 
outgrowth, the dragon boat festival; the use of bronze 
drams decorated in a way showing connection with that 
rite; and the concept of the dragon as river god. . . Ele- 
ments of this culture were the worship of serpents, of 
sacred mountains (the latter destined to develop into im- 
portant temple festivals), and of certain trees .” 8 He adds 
significantly that the whole subject of the affiliations of 
these early cultures of the Pacific lands can yet be hand- 
led only in a tentative manner; it also raises the question* 
of the existence of the many parallels between the Central 
American civilizations on the one hand and those of 
Eastern Asia and Farther India on the other. 

Besides the bronze kettle-drums, which surprise us by 
their huge size and by the thinness of their walls, swords, 
2 GNI, i, pp. 90-1 

Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1937, pp. 580- 1 



4 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
daggers and helmets, household utensils and small statu, 
ettes, all of bronze, ornaments of shell and semi-precious 
stones have also been unearthed near Dong-son. 1 This 
late Bronze Age culture probably began to penetrate 
South-East Asia from the north not later than 300 b.q,, 
possibly even as early as 600 B.C., and must have lasted 
till about a.D. 100. Bronze casting was practised a tin 
perdue. The big drums are hollow and exhibit no casting, 
seams inside; clay cores must have been used and the 
distance between the core and mould, i.e. the thickness ol 
the wall, must have been held by small bronze pieces of 
which relics are still discernible in some of the drums, 
The binding between the body of the drum and its ears 
is finely achieved— it is not known by what process. The 
alloy is not copper and tin, but copper and lead as in the 
mints of China ; n the Han period, and this alloy could be 
made into a thin flowing liquid which was easy to cast 
into the thin-walled drums. Later, in Hindu times, the 
usual copper-tin alloy came into use. 3 The find spots of 
kettle-drums, glass beads, stone cist graves, etc. in the 
Malay Peninsula furnish the necessary links indicating 
the route taken by this culture in its migration from 
Tonkin to the islands. 3 

We are thus enabled to distinguish two main elements 
in the culture-complex of Indo-China and Indonesia as it 
had developed before the advent of the Hindus— one a 
•late neolithic element, and the other of a late Bronze Age, 
befth developing in Indo-China and spreading south and 
south-east, though the roots of both may possibly go back 
to a much earlier time and to remoter districts of China. 
There is enough evidence at hand to show that it is wrong 

4 BEFEO, 19.19, pp. 1.46 

5 GNI, i, pp. 77.8 

6 Ibid.,p. 87 



INTRODUCTION: EARLY CULTURE MOVEMENTS 5 
to think of the pre-Hindu population of these lands as 
utter savages to whom civilization first came with the 
flindus. There is in fact accumulating evidence of a wide- 
spread Austric culture, as it is sometimes called, not con- 
fined to the archipelago but spreading across the peninsula 
to portions of north-eastern India. 

It is possible, however, that influences from China and 
India had begun to operate in this area much earlier than 
is generally believed, though they were not yet strong 
enough to make much difference to the content of its 
culture. We have gained from the few excavations that 
have taken place very valuable evidence of trade contacts 
in the Bronze Age between South China and Indo-China 
on the one hand and the mountain lands of Sumatra 
which attracted gold-seekers on the other. 7 

But evidence taking us still farther bacjf comes to hand 
from the Philippines where Prof. Beyer conducted a re- 
markable series of excavations at his own cost during the 
years 1926-1930. That part of the evidence which most 
concerns us is thus summed up by R. B. Dixon who visited 
the Philippines and examined the objects brought to light 
by Beyer’s excavations: “It is from finds in the Iron Age 
strata which overlie the neolithic deposits that immediate 
conclusions can legitimately be drawn. These comprise 
pottery of a considerable range in quality and types of 
decoration and a very large variety of forms. Secondly, 
iron implements and weapons such as knives, axes, dago 
gers and spear-points; thirdly, glass beads and bangles, 
both green and blue, and finally beads of semi-precious 
stones such as agate, cornelian, amethyst and rock-crys- 
tal. It is certain that some at least of the iron objects 
were of local manufacture, since deposits of iron slag and 


7 GNI, i, p. 98 



6 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
evidences of iron smelting have been found. It is un- 
certain as to glass, but unfinished beads adhering to each 
other in series of half a dozen or more are found, and 
clear evidence of the repairing of broken bangles. In the 
earlier Iron Age strata only green glass, whose colour is 
due to iron, occurs; in the later both this and a blue glass 
whose colour is due to copper. 

“Now both the iron and glass objects are similar to and 
in some cases identical with the prehistoric glass and iron 
finds in the south of India. These occur in the'dolmen 
tombs and urn burials which are found by hundreds of 
thousands, and which almost certainly antedate the his- 
toric Ghera, Chola and Pandyan kingdoms, whose history 
goes back to the beginning of the Christian era or before. 
As finds of similar glass beads and bangles have recently 
been made in the Malay Peninsula, in dolmen tombs in 
Java, and in North Borneo, the inference is inescapable 
that we have clear evidence of a trade contact between 
the northern Philippines and southern India, running 
well back into the first millennium B.C. The extensive 
trade and colonization and later conquests of the South 
Indian kingdoms, in Sumatra and Java as well as in 
Indo-China in the early centuries of the Christian era are 
of course well known. This new material, however, 
seems to make it clear that this was far from being the 
beginning of such contacts, but rather the last stages in 
an association reaching as far as the northern Philippines, 
which had begun many centuries before. In Chinese 
historical sources, there are a few references to maritime 
traders bringing typical Indian products to China as far 
back as the seventh century B. C. These accounts have 
generally been regarded with incredulity or strong suspi- 
cion at least. In view of this evidence from the Philippi- 
nes the probability of these accounts is vreatly increased, 



INTRODUCTION: EARLY CULTURE MOVEMENTS 7 
with consequences for the history of Chinese culture 
which are obvious.” 8 

I need not apologize for the length of this quotation; it 
deals with an important aspect of pre-history which no 
summary could reproduce exactly. If the facts and argu- 
ments of Dixon are accepted as correct— and I see no 
reason why they should not be — it would follow that 
South-East Asia was touched by cultural streams not only 
from thj North but to some extent from the West as well, 
and it seems possible that the sources of some of these 
reach farther west than India. A Hittite stone bead of 
about 700 B.C. was found some years ago among a large 
collection from the Johore river, the bulk of which belong 
to a date about the first century A.D. when the Roman 
Empire came into active contact with India and the Far 
East. 9 10 0 

China and India were thus the two main sources from 
which higher cultural influences kept flowing into south- 
eastern Asia in prehistoric as well as historical times; the 
movements were by no means always only in one direc- 
tion and Indonesian influences can be traced on some 
aspects of Indian life. For a general estimate of the res- 
pective spheres of Indian and Chinese influences, we may 
well accept the following statement from Bishop at the 
conclusion of his illuminating paper on the ‘Origin of the 
Traction Plow’:' 0 “From China, again, the traction plow 
travelled to the East India Archipelago, occupation o 5 
which it shared with the type from India. Generally 
speaking, the line of demarcation between the two 
fields of cultural influence extends, though with many 

8 Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, v. 69 (1930), 

PP- a* 5-9 

9 JR AS, 1937, pp. 467-470 

10 Smithsonian Institution, Ann. Rep., 1937, pp. 531-547 



8 SOUTH INDIAN INTLUnNClSS IN THIS I'AR EAST 
interpenetrations, from east-central Tibet southward 
through the Indo-Chinese peninsula, thence swinging off in 
a south-easterly direction into Indonesia. Formosa, the 
Philippines and North Borneo remain on the Chinese side, 
while Sumatra, Java and their nearer neighbours fall 
within the Indian sphere.” 

Even within the Indian sphere so defined, the Chinese 
did establish themselves at selected points from olden 
times for purposes of trade and formed colonies in course 
of time; but they always remained colonies of foreigners 
with little inclination to mix with the local populations, 
and in contrast to what the Hindus achieved, there is 
nowhere any trace of the taking over of Chinese culture 
by the children of the soil . 11 


u cf. GNI, i, p. iso 



CHAPTER II 


INDO-CHINA 

About the beginning of the Christian era when the his- 
torical period may be said to commence in Indo-China, 
the peninsula was inhabited by a number of peoples . 1 The 
Burmaqf, still in touch with their congeners, the Tibe- 
tans, already occupied the upper course of the Irawady, 
and the Peguans (Mon) its lower valley and possibly also 
the valley of the Lower Menam where we find them later. 
The Thai were still in Yunnan, their original home, 
where they preserved their independence till the thirteenth 
century. The Khmers (Cambodians or rather their an- 
cestors) inhabited not only the present-day Cambodia but 
a good part of Laos and Cochin-China. The Cliams, 
who spoke a language closely related to Indonesian ton- 
gues, occupied southern Annam, from Gape St. Jacques 
in the south up to Tourane in the north. Lastly, the 
Annamites held the north of Annam and Tonkin. Indo- 
China was already divided between two civilizations: 
the Chinese sphere comprising the Annamites, and the 
Indian sphere embracing Pegu, Kambuja and Campa. 

The age of Indian colonization in Indo-China is by no 
means certain. There is no reference to it in Kautilya, 
though the contrary opinion has been expressed occasion-^ 
ally.* But the third or even the fourth century B. C. is not 
an improbable date for the beginning of this movement. 
Buddhist legends relating to the conversion of Suvarna- 
bhumi seem to afford a valuable clue; and Blagden has 
succintly summed up the position in the following words: 

1 Grousset, pp. 548-9 

2 BEFEO, xii, no. 8,i pp. 1.4 



10 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
“The precise position of Suvarnabhumi is not beyond 
doubt but its early missionaries, Sona and Uttara, have 
long been claimed by Burma as the founders of theii; 
branch of the church; and though the tale has been em- 
bellished with many legendary accretions in the course of 
ages, it can hardly on that account be dismissed as being 
altogether devoid of foundation. Evidence is gradually 
accumulating from various different quarters which tends 
to show that Indian influence made itself felt in Indo- 
Ghina from about the beginning of the Christian era, or 
possibly even two or three centuries before that date; and 
there seems to be nothing antecedently improbable in the 
story of a Buddhist mission being sent there at a rela- 
tively early period, though it may well be hazardous 
at present to fix that date precisely.”* 

This Indianization of the southern and south-eastern 
parts of Indo-China must be looked upon as a pacific 
penetration, proceeding by slow imperceptible stages just 
like the similar movement that preceded it in the Deccan. 
Whether these missionaries of Indian civilization came by 
land by way of Burma, or by sea (possibly after crossing 
the Isthmus of Kra), their culture prevailed wherever 
they went. Sanskrit became the official language of the 
Khmers and the Ghams; Hindu beliefs, from Vedic sacri- 
fices down to sectarian beliefs, particularly Saivism, were 
adopted by them; and with Brahminism came also 
Buddhism. 


3 Ep. Bim. iii, pp. 83-4; cf. Ferrand, JA, 1919, i., p. 939 



CHAPTER III 


BURMA 

Ptolemy’s Golden Ghryse doubtless included Burma 
and must have been a translation of Suvarnabhumi, the 
classical name of Burma. The central region of the 
country 1 was called Sonaparanta in Pali, from Sona (Sk. 
Suvarna) meaning gold, and pranta or aparanta meaning 
‘frontier country’. ‘‘Sonaparanta was regularly used in 
the record of the titles of the kings of Burma, and it was 
the name given to the territories round the capital in all 
State documents. It is also to be noted that up to the 
end of the monarchy, Tampadipa (copper island or 
region) figured among the royal titles , and this is no 
doubt Ptolemy’s Chalcitis.” 1 2 
Burma is easily approached only by sea, and indica- 
tions are not wanting of early maritime connexions of 
the outside world with Burma. (There were land routes 
across the north but they do not concern us here.) The 
author of the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea records that 
very large ships, called Colandia, sailed to Ghryse from 
the ports on the eastern coast of South India, and Ptole- 
my mentions fleets from Ceylon following the same 
course. Musicians and jugglers are said to have arrived 
in Burma as early as AD. 120 from the distant Romani 
province of Syria (Ta-Ts’in). 3 The sea coast of Burma 
must once have lain much farther north than it now is. 
“Gables and ropes of sea-going vessels have been dug up 

1 Scott: Burma, p. 11 

2 Foreign Notices, pp. 11, 59. Luce, however, says that in tao 
they came by land, while in 131-8 they went to Tonkin by sea. 

(JBRS, Dec. 1939, p. 264) ' 



12 SOUTH INDIAN INrLUiSNCuS IN '1HIS tAR liAai 
at Ayathema, the ancient Takkala, or Golamattika, now 
quite twelve miles from the sea-shore, and not many 
years ago remains of foreign ships were found near Tunte 
(Twantay, close to Rangoon) buried eight feet beneath 
the surface of the earth .” 3 

The name Talaing, often applied to the Mon people, is 
said to be a memento of Telingana, the original home of 
some late arrivals among these people, if not of all of 
them; this view, however, is by no means universally ac- 
cepted. Tradition credits to the Telingas the foundation 
of Thaton in 543 B.C. 4 It also states that disputes between 
the Brahmins and the Buddhists marked the early years 
of the new kingdom, and that as a result of the Third 
Buddhist Council convoked by ASoka at Pataliputra c 250 
B.C., Son a and Uttara were sent as missionaries to Burma, 
to ‘revive’ Buddhism there . 3 But all this is highly doubtful, 
and ASoka himself has nothing to say in his inscriptions 
about Burma or his mission to it. Equally devoid of 
foundation are the stories relating to Buddhaghosa, 
his birth in Burma, his crossing over to Ceylon and h is 
return to Burma with a complete set of the Tripitaka. 
The Cambodians also claimed that Buddhaghosa came to 
them. There is nothing in the more authentic sources of 
Buddhaghosa’s life that supports the claims of these two 
countries. 

In historical times we find the Peguans, Mon or Tak- 
ing, related to the Khmer and occupying the coastal dis- 
tricts of Lower Burma, and their country, Ramanyadesa, 
had for its capital Hamsavati (Pegu). Tradition places 
the foundation of this kingdom about A.D. 573, but the 
Indianization of the country appears clearly to have 

3 Scott, op. cit., p. is 

4 Ibid, , p. 34 ff. 

5 Dipavamsa, VIII, 13; Mahavamsa, XII, 6, 44 



BURMA 


started much earlier. The Mon, who once occupied a wide 
area in Lower Burma and in the Malay Peninsula, were 
tjie earliest peoples of Burma known to history. 

To the north of this kingdom lay the land of people who 
were more nearly related to the Tibetans, and who had 
Prome (Srlksetra) — Hmawaza— for their capital till the 
ninth century when it was shifted to Arimaddana (Pagan). 
During the Prome period this kingdom was also subject 
to strong Indian influences, though the language of the 
inscriptions is an archaic Tibeto-Burman idiom, otherwise 
unknown; it is convenient, following the Chinese name of 
P’iao for this early Burman kingdom, to call this idiom 
employed in the official records of the Indianized Prome 
kingdom Pyu. In fact an early Mon inscription (a.D. 
1101-2) mentions side by side the three ethnic terms Tir- 
cul (indigenous name for the Pyu), Mirma (Burmese), and 
Rmen (Mon)," thus clearly distinguishing the three ele- 
ments of the population. The people who spoke Pyu are 
best regarded as the forerunners of the Tibeto-Burman 
movement into the southern parts of the Irawady valley; 
they had reached the neighbourhood of Prome, where all 
their known records are found, long before the Burmese 
came down from the north . 6 7 

The Pyu seem to have received their veneer of Indian 
civilization at second hand from the Mon people of the 
delta. When this happened is not known; but the alpha- 
bet of the Pyu records is archaic and contains forms > 
which were going out of use in India even in the fourth 
century a D. and the Pyu word for gold seems to be bor- 
rowed from Moh. s They seem to have been completely 

6 Bp. Birm. Pt. Ill, i, Inscr. IX B 

7 Ep. Birm. i, p. 6t 

B Ibid. For the earliest Pyu inscriptions of the fourth and fifth 

centuries A.D., from Halingyi and Hmwaza respectively, see ARB, 



14 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
absorbed by the Burmans and left nothing behind except 
short funerary inscriptions and some bilingual records in 
Pyu and Sanskrit or Pali containing mostly extracts from 
the Buddhist canon. But the Pyu version of the Myazedi 
inscription shows that the nation was still sufficiently 
important at the beginning of the twelfth century for its 
language to be recognized as of equal importance with 
Burmese and Mon. 

The effect of the Burmese conquest which began about 
the middle of the eleventh century and came to an end 
five centuries later was less disastrous to the Mon people 
only because there was Siam to which they could go at 
first; and in later times, when the Alompra dynasty ac- 
tively pursued a policy of annihilation of what was left of 
the Mon, even the indifference of the British government 
in Tennesserim jvas found to offer a welcome refuge. But 
the language no longer maintains a literary standard and 
has sunk to the level of a patois comprising a congeries of 
local dialects. 

After this preliminary sketch of the background, the 
reader will be in a position to appreciate the details of 
the evidence on the Indian influences at work at different 
times in the early history of Burma. The earliest epigra- 
phical text so far known is engraved on two thin gold 
plates discovered in 1897 at Maunggun village near Hma- 
waza in the Prome district. 9 The inscription comprises 
••quotations from Pali Buddhist scriptures written in a 
clearly South Indian alphabet of the fifth or sixth century 
A.D. Pali Buddhism was quite strong in South India all 
along the east coast; and the Krsna valley, Kancipuram 
and Ceylon, not to speak of less-known places in the 

*9*5. PP-3I-3- The records have not been interpreted yet, but the 
alphabet is seen to be South Indian. 

9 El, V, ioi-a, JA, July-Aug., 1919, pp. 191-136 



BURMA 


Kaveri and elsewhere, were well-known centres of Bud- 
dhism, most favourably situated for intercourse with 
fiurma across the Bay. Dharmapala, the great rival and 
contemporary of Buddhaghosa, lived in Kanci in the 
fifth century. The particular connexion of some of the 
colonies with the Pallavas and their cultural traditions is 
well known and traced in detail elsewhere in this book. 
We may note here that Srlksetra, the kingdom of Prome, 
appears jo have had an alternative name Vanavasi which 
reminds one of the capital of the Kadambas in the west- 
ern part of South India; this becomes clear from an old 
inscription on a metallic image of the Buddha from 
Prome, which begins: idam Vanavaslraltha-vasinam pujanat- 
thaya , meaning, this is for the worship of the residents of 
the kingdom of Vanavasi."’ 

The conclusion suggested by these facts. is strengthened 
by the discovery in 1910-1911 at Hmawaza of part of a 
stone inscription, also written in Pali, in characters very 
similar to those of the Maunggun plates: the full inscrip- 
tion must, it has been calculated, have covered a space of 
14 metres by 175 metres and constituted a large panel 
in the wall displaying the selected text from the Vibhanga 
for the edification of the faithful. 11 

Further excavations in the neighbourhood of Hmawaza 
in the year 1926-1927 brought to light striking and valu- 
able evidence pointing in the same direction.' 3 At a site 
known as Khin-bha-gon near the Kalagangon village, a 
relic chamber of a stupa containing many finds of great 
interest was exposed. The chamber was found closed by 
a stone slab bearing a representation of a type of stupa 
having a cylindrical dome with a rounded top and five 


10 ARB, 1917, pp. 42.3 

11 JA, July-Aug., 1913, pp. 193-5 

12 ASI, 1936-97, pp. 171-183 



16 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
umbrellas above the hti; “the prototypes of these forms 
must be sought for in South India” (Duroiselle). In the 
relic chamber itself, there was a silver gilt stupa, cylindrj- 
cal in shape, supporting on its flat cover the trunk of a 
Bo tree, of which the branches and leaves had broken off 
and lay scattered about the chamber; the stupa with the 
tree is 26" high and has a diameter of 13" at the top and 
16" at the base. “Around the drum of the stupa are 
four seated Buddhas, each with an attendant monk stand- 
ing on one side. The stupa itself is hollow, with no bot- 
tom, and is of silver plate with the images repousse in high 
relief. The top, forming the cover, is removable and has, 
round the rim, a line of inscription in Pyu and Pali, in an 
early Telugu-Ganarese script of South India, very closely 
allied to that of the Kadambas of Vanavasi and that of 
the Pallavas of JECaftcIpura. The character is practically 
the same as the script of the Maunggun plates .... Each 
of the passages in Pyu gives the name of the Buddha im- 
mediately below it; and after each of these names comes 
a short extract consisting of a few words from the Pali 
scriptures.” The four Buddhas named are those who 
have appeared in the present Kalpa, viz. Konagamana, 
Kakusandha, Kassapa and Gotama; the attendants are 
the four disciples of Gotama, viz. Kassaba (Kassapa), Mau- 
lana (Moggalana), Sari (Sariputta), and ... da (Ananda). 
“ Around the lower rim of the same stupa is another line 
of inscription, also in Pyu, of which some letters are miss- 
ing owing to the rim, which is very thin and brittle, 
having broken off.” The inscription is difficult to inter- 
pret, but contains two names Sri Prabhuvarma and, 
separated from it by a few words, Sri Prabhudevi, pos- 
sibly the reigning king and queen. Notice the —varman 
ending of the king, a South Indian feature common to 
most of the colonies in the East. 



BURMA 


Stupas, images of Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and others in 
gold and silver, bowls, caskets, symbolical coins of various 
sjzes, beads and other ornaments, and gold and silver 
plates with inscriptions have been discovered in consider- 
able numbers. Prominent in the last category of inscri- 
bed plates is “a manuscript in every way similar to the 
palm leaf manuscript so common in India and Burma, 
but with leaves of gold, twenty in number, with writing 
incised qn one side. These leaves, within their two gold 
covers, were found bound together by a thick wire with 
its ends fastened to the covers by sealing wax and small 
glass beads. There are two holes in each leaf and cover, 
through which the gold wire was passed, to keep the whole 
in position and proper order. It was necessary to cut this 
wire in order to free the leaves.’’ Each leaf, 6}" x ij", 
contains three lines of writing, except the last but one with 
four lines and the last with only two. The characters are 
similar to those of the Pyu inscription round the rim of 
the large silver stupa described above, and of the same 
date (sixth or early seventh century). The manuscript is 
made up of short extracts in Pali from the Abhidhamma 
and Vinaya Pitakas, the Dhamma as preserved in the 
Tripitakas being an object of woiship among the Bud- 
dhists. Another gold plate (part of it missing) bearing 
the text of a well-known formula of the Vinaya and Sutta 
Pitaka in two lines of the sameearly South Indian script was 
found in the Kyundawzu village in Old Prome.' 8 Lastly 
numberless terracotta plaques have also been found carry- 
ing the effigy of the Buddha in the bhilmisparsa mudra on the 
obverse, and extracts from the Abhidhamma or the ye dhamma 
formula on the reverse in South Indian characters of vary- 
ing dates from the fifth to the seventh century A.D. " 

13 ASI, 1928-g, p. log 
> W Ibid., p. 107 



18 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
In the fifth and sixth centuries Prome was thus a centre 
of Southern Buddhism — though Mahay ana is also known, 
witness the Bodhisattvas — where doctrinal Pali texts of an 
abstruse character were studied and the writing employed 
was of South Indian origin. What is true of Prome is the 
more so of Pegu. Finot has observed: “It is not impossi- 
ble that Siam borrowed it from Pegu and transmitted it 
to her eastern neighbours, and that the inscriptions of 
Maunggun and of Hmawaza are thus indirectly, the be- 
ginnings of modern Buddhism in Cambodia.’ 

To a slightly later period belong the seven short Pyu 
inscriptions on funerary urns beaiing dates from 35 to 80 
presumably in the Burmese era starting from A D. 638: 
these inscriptions reveal the name of three kings with 
Indian names in mixed Sanskrit and Pali form, viz. 
Suriyavikrama )( Harivikrama, and Sihavikrama, and re- 
cord the dates of their deaths. '' It may be noted in pass- 
ing that neither these — vikrama kings nor the — vat man 
ruler noticed earlier find any mention in native tradition . 17 
To the same age most be ascribed a broken Buddha from 
Hmawaza with a bilingual inscription on the pedestal in 
South Indian characters of the seventh or eighth century; 
the Buddha is in dhyana mudra and the treatment of his 
dress seems to show Gupta influence; the inscription is in 
Sanskrit and Pyu, the words in the Sanskrit version being 
apparently arranged according to Pyu syntax,” and not 
- always correct. Another small headless Buddha from 

15 J A » July- Aug., 1912, p. 136 

16 El, xii, pp. 127.132 

17 ASI, 19*6-7, p. 1762. 2.; Ray (Sanskrit Buddhism, p. so) 
holds that since from the bilingual inscription noted below Jaya- 
candravarman and Harivikrama appear to have been brothers there 
were really not two dynasties but one. 

18 ASI, 1927-8, pp. 127-8 



BURMA 


the same place bears the Buddhist formula in Gupta 
characters of the seventh century . 13 Another inscription 
iij Gupta characters of the seventh or eighth century is 
found engraved in two lines on a bronze bell from Vesali 
(Arakan); the language is mixed Sanskrit as in some Jaina 
inscriptions from Mathura; the inscription records the 
name of the Gaitya to which the bell was presented and 
of the donor who made the gift. *' 

We have thus evidence of Sanskrit at Prome from a 
fairly early period, besides Pali and Pyu and of the 
working of North Indian influences side by side with 
those from South India. Buddhist texts in Sanskrit, 
however, do not all of them necessarily belong to Maha- 
yana; the Mula-sarvastivadins, a sect of the Hinayana, 
had also a Sanskrit canon; and “they spread themselves 
very early over a vast extent of Asia, having settled in 
Turkestan, China, Indo-China and the Indian Archi- 
pelago .” 31 

To complete this account of the Buddhist antiquities of 
Indian origin at Hmawaza we must add that the clay 
votive tablets with Pyu and Sanskrit inscriptions range 
up to the ninth or tenth century A.D., some going up to 
the eleventh century as well, and some bearing Nagarl 
legends possibly under the influence of Nalanda.® These 
and the numerous bronze figurines of Bodhisattvas are 
distinctly Mahayanist in character. It has been noted 
also that the figures on some of these later tablets exhibit 
decidedly un-Indian facial features; they were clearly <»f 

is ASI, 1928.9, p. 108 

20 ARB, 1919, pp. 37 and 56. Contra E. H. Johnston: Some 
Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan. BSOS, xi, Pt. II. (1944), pp. 358 
and 382. 

21 Ibid 

22 ASI, 1927-8; 1928-9 



20 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
local make and the features must be taken to be typical 
of the Pyu physiognomy of which we have no other 
specimens. 

Though not strictly relevant to a study of South Indian 
influences in Burma, a brief mention of the Ari and their 
place in the early religious history of Burma may well be 
considered necessary and useful. 2 ' The name does after 
all seem to be related to Arya; nevertheless, the sugges- 
tions that its correct form is Aran, an abbreviation of 
Pali Arnnaka (Sanskrit Arartyaka), that in early Buddhist 
literature this term is used to describe the purest members 
of the Sangha, and that we must suppose that its signifi- 
cance suffered a change for the worse in Burma, turn out 
to be untenable on phonetic grounds . 21 The Ari wore 
black, worshipped Nagas, enjoyed a sort of the jus primae 
noctis and practised animal sacrifice. Their cult was 
definitely suppressed by royal edict in the middle of the 
fifteenth century. They arc usually taken to have repre- 
sented a form of corrupt Mahayana Buddhism mixed up 
with Tantrism and Saivism, and first introduced into 
Burma from north-east India about the sixth century a D. 
But they are not strictly confined to Burma, and some of 
their practices can be traced in Cambodia, Laos and 
Siam; it seems possible, therefore, that some widespread, 
primitive, indigenous cults might have contributed their 
share to the make-up of the bizarre cult of Ari. In any 
event, this is not the best side of the Indian influence on 
Burma, and South India had little part or lot in it. 

Hinduism comprising the worship of Siva and Visnu 
was also known and practised in Lower Burma in the 
early times of which we have been speaking. Vestiges of 

23 JA, 1912, July-Aug.; ARB, igi6, p. 12; 19, 7> pp . 3l ff; 

ASI, 1915-16, pp. yg.gj 

24 ASI, 1915.16, p. 92 n. 3 



BURMA 


Hinduism are however not so common in Lower Burma 
as in some parts of Indo-China. “At Thaton have been 
discovered three fine bas-reliefs, one representing Visnu 
caturbhuja, seated, the two others Narayana recumbent on 
Ananta, with a lotus coming out of his navel and support- 
ing the three gods of the Trimurti.” Prome glories in the 
name of Pissanumyo, the town of Visnu, and excavations 
there have yielded a Visnu caturbhuja standing on Garuda. 
At Pagan itself “we have found a small temple which 
was evidently consecrated to Visnu; many statues of this 
god survive and the external walls are decorated with 
bas-reliefs of the ten avatats.” Another standing Visnu 
and a Visnu recumbent on Ananta and supporting the 
Trimurtis on lotuses issuing from his navel, both sand- 
stone sculptures, were discovered at Kalagangon, near 
Hraawaza, in 1920. and these have been assigned to an 
eighth century date, and the style of art is probably of 
Gupta inspiration. Hinduism, it has been suggested, 
counted its followers in ancient Burma mostly among the 
foreign settlers and colonizers who hailed generally from 
South India, while the bulk of the Pyu population must 
have been Buddhists. And not only in Prome, but in the 
whole of Burma, Saivite remains aie rare as compared 
with the relics of the Vaisnava creed. ' Coins of the eighth 
century bearing the Saiva symbols of the Nandi and trident 
have been found in Vesali (Arakan), and local tradition 
seems to point to Bengal as the source of the people who , 

25 I have followed Finot’s summary of the evidence as in JA, 
July-August, igia, pp 127-8. Ray detects close affinity in these 
sculptures to Orissan art of the ninth or tenth century A.D. (ABIA, 
J930.N0.589.) 

26 ARB, 1920, pp. 22-3; ASI, 1926-7, p. 172 

27 Mod. Rev., August. 1931, pp. 152-7 

28 ARB, 1920, pp. 32-3 



22 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
used them. 89 A linga 14" in height was found in the vil- 
lage of Kalagangon meaning ‘ the village near the mound 
by the Indian tank’, near Hmawaza, very near sites which 
yielded some of the Vaisnava statues and the most import- 
ant Buddhist relics already noticed. 10 

Lastly, we must make mention of an interesting terra- 
cotta plaque first noticed in 1935 and the first of its kind 
so far discovered in Burma. Itis 1' 6" square and 2" thick, 
and made of hard clay. It bears a large sunken medal- 
lion in the centre bounded by a circle of beads and por- 
traying “a party of musicians, of whom there are five 
arranged in two rows. In the upper row are two figures, 
the one on the left blowing a kind of French horn and the 
other on the right playing on some uncertain instrument 
which has broken off. In the lower row, the two figures 
on either side are beating drums, and the one in the ccn- 
tre, probably the worse for liquor, is dancing, steadying 
himself on the shoulders of his companions. The figures 
are well portrayed .... Their style, dress and features are 
purely Indian. They wear each a necklace of beads, 
armlets and a dhoti, and the dancer has in addition a piece 
of linen across his chest. The hair is parted in the centre, 
and formed into two big tresses falling just over the 
shoulders and covering the ears. Their bodies are plump, 
and their faces round.” 91 The half-medallions at the 
corners were doubtless meant to be completed by similar 
ones in adjacent plaques, all adorning the base of a fairly 
large-sized monument. The plaque is said to have been 
found by a Buddhist monk at the bottom of a tank in 
Kyontu, Pegu District, while the tank was being cleaned. 
There is now no means of fixing a definite date for this 
interesting find. 

29 ARB, 1931, p. 17 

31 ASI, 1935-6, p. 73 


30 ASI, 1936-7, pp. 172 and 182 



BURMA 


23 


Besides these sculptures, the large number of Sanskrit 
words in Talaing and Burman is another strong proof of 
Jflndu influences. Ji Besides the short Pali sentences in 
Talaing records attesting the influence of Pali Buddhism 
and the pedantry of the composers of the records, there are 
Indian loan-words in considerable numbers in the Mon 
text itself: “these form an integral part of the language 
and are not merely tacked on like the Pali sentences. They 
are very common in the early inscriptions, and many of 
such loan-words have survived through the mediaeval in- 
to the modern form of Mon. A remarkable proportion 
of these words is of Sanskrit origin, not Pali. Sometimes we 
find mixed forms, pat tly Sanskrit and partly Pali. The 
Sanskrit forms include some of the commonest religious 
terms, such as dharma, swar (from svarga), and the like. 
As to the reason for their presence in early Mon, allow- 
ance must be made for the fact that Brahmans, who are 
often mentioned in the inscriptions, played a great part 
at all Indo-Chinese courts from Burma to Campa.” 
Again, in the earlier Mon inscriptions the proper names 
are Sanskrit, Pali, or mixed, and this feature persists in 
mediaeval times when other names of native origin begin 
to appear. The kings, both Burmese and Mon, “indulged 
in a double nomenclature: an elaborate Indian name, 
sometimes of stupendous length, was used by them as 
their royal style, though they had shorter native names 
as well, by which (as a rule) they are known in the his- j 
tories. In the inscriptions the Indian style is given tjie 
preference, presumably because it sounded grander and 
was the specifically royal name, the other one being per- 
sonal. Certain conventional phrases based on Indian 
originals are also sometimes used; for example, the people 


32 Ep. Birm., I, pp. 76-78 



24 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
in general are styled ‘the four castes’; although there is 
no real reason to believe that, apart from the Brahmans, 
who were of foreign introduction, any real division intp 
castes was recognized in Burma.” 

Prof. Blagden has compared “ the Burmese conquest of 
the Mon country to the Roman conquest of Greece. Prior 
to this conquest, the Burmese were no more a race of 
savages than the Romans were when they conquered 
Greece. “But just as Rome became in a great pleasure 
Hellenized, so the Burmese adopted much from the Mons.” 
The southern form of Buddhism with its Pali canon, the 
particular variety of South Indian script in use among 
the Mons, and certain useful crafts and ornamental arts 
were all taken over by the Burmese from the conquered 
people; and much that is now supposed to be distinctively 
Burmese was derived from the Mons who had themselves 
got it from India and Ceylon. 

Direct contact with India was also actively maintained 
during the mediaeval period and, in fact, has continued 
with interruptions down to our own day. In his account 
of the reign of Alaungsitbu (a.D. ii 12-1187) Scott" 1 has 
observed. “The connection with India was still main- 
tained and the forms of many of the Pagan temples 
suggests architects from the Dekkhan, along with others 
which certainly point to Singhalese models. Many of the 
images and their attitudes are quite South Indian, and 
the square structures with mandapas, or porches, instead 
of, the round tumulus, to say nothing of the vaulted cham- 
bers and corridor passages, all suggest Indian influence 
rather than the present conical style of pagoda.” And 
the presence of a considerable number of South Indian 


33 Ep. Birm., I. p. 73. 

34 Burma, p. 37. 



BURMA 


Tamils is attested by the well-known Grantha-Tamil 
inscription of Pagan attesting the existence of a Visnu 
temple built there by the Nanadesi merchants, and a gift 
to the temple made in the thirteenth century by a 
merchant from one of the port towns on the Malabar 
coast. “ 


35 E.I., vii, pp. 107-8. 



CHAPTER IV 


FU-NAN 

In the early Christian era, the country that later be- 
came KambujadeSa was divided into two political entities 
known to us only by their Chinese names of Fu-nan and 
Chen-la. Both the States claimed an Indian origin and 
cherished foundation legends of a very similar character— 
the rulers of Fu-nan tracing their descent from the union 
of Kaundinya of the SomavamSa (lunar line) with the nagi 
Soma, and those of Chen-la from that of Maharsi Kambu 
of the Suryavamsa (solar line) with the apsara Mera, 1 

Fu-nan, it has been pointed out, is the Chinese represen- 
tation of the word which has survived to this day as 
Phnom, meaning hill or mountain; 2 the underlying idea is 
that the capital city of a State, the residence of its king, 
occupies the same place in the kingdom as Mount Meru, 
the abode of the Gods, does in the Universe. 

Fu-nan occupied the lower valley of the Mekong, the 
area now designated Cambodia and Cochin-China. Its 
capital was probably Vyadhapura, or modern Ba Phnom. 3 
It was a strongly Hinduised land from the earliest times 
in which we begin to hear of it. Here is the oldest account 
of the introduction of Hindu culture into Fu-nan given by 
' K’ang T’ai, a Chinese writer who visited Fu-nan about 
A.lD. 245-250. 

“In the beginning Fu-nan had a woman named Lieou- 
ye (Willow-leaf) for ruler. In the country of Mo-fou 
there was a man Houen-chen by name who offered 

1 BCAIC, ign, pp. 30-a 

2 Finot in BCAIC, 1911, pp, 29.30 

3 BEFEO, xxviii, pp. 128-130 



FU-NAN 


worship to a spirit with great love and ardour. The spirit 
was touched by his extreme piety, and one night Houen- 
ohen dreamt that a man gave him a divine bow and ask- 
ed him to embark on a boat and set out on the sea. Next 
morning, Houen-chen entered the temple and found a 
bow at the foot of the tree which was the home of the 
spirit. He then got into a large boat and set sail. The 
spirit so guided the wind that the boat reached Fu-nan. 
Lieou-yj wished to rob the boat and capture it. Houen- 
chen raised the divine bow and shot; the arrow pierced 
the barge of Lieou-ye through and through; she became 
afraid and submitted, andHouen-chen thus became master 
of Fu-nan .” 1 

The divine bow is part of the folk-lore which has been 
traced by Goloubeuw to Herodotus’ account of the Scy- 
thians. The cult of the spirit is the Chinese way of refer- 
ring to Brahmanism. The location of Mo-fou is unknown, 
though the east coast of the Malay Peninsula has been 
suggested; if this is correct, Fu-nan received its Hindu 
culture at second-hand from one of the earlier colonies of 
the peninsula. It seems possible in any event that this 
story preserves the name of the leader of the first band of 
Hindu colonists to reach Fu-nan, a leader whose name 
and country of origin might well have been preserved by 
tradition two or three centuries after the event. 

This early kingdom has left some traces behind in the 
form of inscriptions and monuments which are being dis- ' 
covered and identified by the progress of modern research. 
As in many other sections of Indo-Chinese archaeology 
and history, (poedes leads here also. Pelliot has collected 
all the Chinese texts on Fu-nan and provided an illumina- 
ting commentary on them." With their assistance, let us 
4 Pelliot, Et. As., ii, pp. 345-6 
3 BEFEO, iii, pp. 348.303 



28 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
review the early history of Fu-nan from our stand- 
point. 

Under the successors of Kaundinya, Fu-nan seems to 
have become a great kingdom commanding several vassal 
states. It is fairly certain that from the second century 
A.D. at the latest, relations were established between 
India and China by way of the Isthmus of Kra and of 
the Malacca Strait; Fu-nan was on this route and must 
have served as a necessary stage in this long voyajge. 

Fan-che-man, at first commander of the troops of Fu- 
nan, and later king, was the founder of the greatness of 
Fu-nan. He subjugated neighbouring kingdoms and redu- 
ced them to vassalage; he fitted out a navy and conquered 
a good part of the Malay Peninsula he was the first to 
assume the title of ‘Great King of Fu-nan’. He fell ill in 
the course of an expedition against Suvarriabhumi, doubt- 
less Lower Burma, and died soon after, sometime in A.D 
225-230 or perhaps a little earlier. 

The celebrated Sanskrit! inscription of Vo-Canh from 
South Annam, engraved in a definitely South Indiaa 
alphabet has been assigned, on palaeographical grounds, 
to an age not later than the third century t D And 
recently Qoedes has suggested that this most ancient ins- 
cription of Campa must be taken to have been the work 
of a ruler of Fu-nan, and that Sri Mara mentioned th re- 
in as the ancestor of the king was no other than Fan-che- 
man, Fan being the —varman ending which the Chinese 
took to be a family name. 6 The Vo-Canh record is Bud- 
dhist in inspiration, but we shall see that Buddhism was 
known and practised in Fu-nan under the successors of 
Fan-che-man. 

Fan-che-man was followed on the throne, according to 
the Chinese sources, by Fan-Tchan, his elder-sister’s son 
e IHQ, xvi (1940), pp. 484.8 



Jf’U NAN 


who murdered the legitimate heir Fan Kin-cheng. The 
reign of this usurper is important because it witnessed the 
commencement of direct official relations between Fu-nan 
and the princes of India. From a Chinese who had travel- 
led fiom the west across India to Fu-nan, Fan-Tchan 
heard of the glories of India and sent one of his relations, 
Sou-wou by name, as ambassador to India. He embarked 
from Takkola, which is evidence of the authority of Fu- 
nan ov^r the west coast of the peninsula, teached the 
mouths of the Ganges, met the king of the Murundas in 
the interior, and returned with a Hindu companion and a 
present of four horses from the king of the Indo-Scythian 
country. Sou wou was absent foi four years on this mis- 
sion (<?. a D 240-4) and these years witnessed many 
political revolution* in Fu-nan. 

Fan-Tchan was assassinated by the second son of Fan- 
che-man who had come of age, and was in his turn remo- 
ved by General Fan-siun It was in the reign of Fan-siun 
that the Chinese mission of K’ang T’ai and Tchou Ying 
visited Fu-nan (a d 245-250), and fiom this time regular 
missions were sent fiom F u-nan to the court of China. Fan- 
siun is credited with a long reign, but a period of confu- 
sion seems to have follov.ed. In 357, the Hindu Tchou 
Tchan-t’an, we learn, ‘called himself king’ and sent an 
embassy to China. Anothei three-quaiteis of a century 
passes before we hear of the next embassy in 434. But 
this interval is said to witness another complete transfor- * 
mation of Fu-nan by the arrival of a Kaundinya from Pan- 
pan who reformed the institutions of Fu-nan on the model 
of those of India, and completed the Hinduisation of the 
land; this occurrence may be placed at the end of the 
fourth or the beginning of the Sfth century A D. 

Of the reign of one of the successors of Kaundinya, 
Jayavarman, we are somewhat better informed. He sent 



30 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
some merchants to Canton who, on their return, were 
shipwrecked on the coast of Campa together with the 
Hindu monk Nagasena who then gained Fu-nan by land. 
In 484 Nagasena was sent by Jayavarman with presents 
to China and a request for aid against Lin-yi (Campa); 
the emperor received the presents thankfully but declined 
to help against Campa. From the account of the embassy 
we learn that Nagasena told the emperor that there was 
in Fu-nan a mountain called Motan on which Mahesvara 
descended incessantly and where the plants never wither- 
ed. To this cult of Siva must have belonged the images 
with two heads and four arms, or four heads and eight 
arms, and holding an infant, an animal, the sun and the 
moon. It is possible that some were Vaisnava images; 
for the presence of that creed in Fu-nan is attested by 
inscriptions of the time, as we shall sec later. Buddhism 
was also practised side by side. This becomes clear also 
from the fact that two monks, Sanghapala and Mandra- 
sena, who were employed in translating Buddhist texts 
into Chinese at this time are said to have come from Fu- 
nan. Let us note in passing that though the Sanskrit 
texts translated into Chinese by these monks were Maha- 
yana texts, we have no reason to conclude from this fact 
that the Buddhism practised in Fu-nan was of that varie- 
ty. T Jayavarman sent another embassy to China in 503 
and got in turn the title ‘General of the peaceful South, 
King of Fu-nan’. 

Jayavarman died in A.D. 514 and was followed on the 
throne by Rudravarman, his eldest son by a concubine. 
Rudravarman put to death the younger son of Jayavar- 
man by his legitimate queen. He sent many embassies 
to China. 



FU-NAN 


The legitimate queen and her unfortunate son have left 
behind one inscription each, both Vaisnavaite in character, 
and both engraved in correct Sanskrit verses in South 
Indian characters of the fifth century a.D. or so. The 
queen’s inscription calls her Kulaprabhavati, the chief 
queen ( agramahisi ) of Jayavarman; its purpose is to record 
the foundation by her of a hermitage, tank and temple 
( aramam satatakam dlayayutam). The opening verse of the 
inscription is a fine invocation of Visnu anantaiayin in 
Sardulavlkrldita metre.*' 

The prince who was deprived of his rights by Rudra- 
varman may well be identified, as (poedes has suggested, 
with Gunavarman of the Tbap-muoi record. In this ins- 
cription, Gunavarman is said to have been appointed by 
the king to a religious office in spite of his tender age 
(balo’pi) on account of his character ( guna ), an allusion 
to his name, and valour ( gunasauryyayogat ). In this capa- 
city, Gurtavarman consecrated the feet of Visnu under 
the name Cakratirthasvami, with the aid of Brahmins who 
were versed in Vedas and Vedangas and were equal to 
the gods (vedangavidbhir amarapratimair dvijendraih, srutisu 
pravinah), and performed an eight days’ ceremony for the 
purpose. The part of the mother in the function which 
is alluded to is not clear owing to a gap in the record; we 

have only the phrase: almajanamkarasampra How 

completely the technical phraseology of Vaisnavism is 
adopted in this record is clear from some other words like 
padam Vaisnavam, bhagavataih, and Visnoh paramam prapya 
padam.’ 

Close upon these Vaisnava records of Kulaprabhavati 
and her son Gurtavarman comes the Buddhist inscription 
of Rudravarman himself. The inscription, a long record 
s JGIS, iv, p. iso 
9 BEFEO, xxxi, pp. 5-6. 



32 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAS r 
of eleven Sanskrit verses in different metres, is too dama- 
ged for us to understand even the general import of the 
matters recorded. But enough of it survives in the begin- 
ning to attest its Buddhist character (the first two verses 
are in praise of the Buddha), its authorship (the third and 
fourth verses praise Rudravarman), and the relation of 
the author to Jayavarman (tat pitra Jayavarmand, v. 5). 10 

The last embassy of Rudravarman to China was in 539 
when he sent a Buddha relic in the form of a hair twelve 
feet long. 

After Rudravarman, we hear of no other king of Fu- 
nan, but the annals proceed to narrate the conquest of 
Fu-nan by Citrasena, the king of Chen-la, whose son 
ISanasena sent an embassy to the Souei court of China in 
A.D. 616-17. And the inscriptions of Kambuja reveal to 
us a predecessor of Citrasena, by name Bhavavarman, 
who has left a number of inscriptions, all undated, but 
most probably belonging to the second half of the sixth 
century. 

The art of this early Hindu state of Fu-nan has not 
survived in a definitely identifiable form; in fact, the 
history of Fu-nan is itself a subject of recent discovery, 
and the differentia of the art of this period are still in the 
process of tentative formulation. Parmentier, whose know- 
ledge of early Khmer art is unrivalled, has succeeded in 
isolating some characteristic features of the art of Fu-nan; 
he has done this by looking for motifs that are rare in 
clearly primitive Khmer monuments and disappear alto- 
gether in classical Khmer art, and by adopting the rule 
that the monuments in which such motifs dominate may 
well be ascribed to the Fu-nan period. The geographical 
distribution of the monuments goes far to support this as- 
sumption. The twomotifs that fully satisfy these conditions 
10 BEFEO, xxxi, pp. 9.10 



FU-NAN 


are the kudu, and the somasutra or the water-spout in 
the form of a makara. Both these are decidedly South 
Indian in origin, and the general appearance of the build- 
ings that may be assigned with more or less certainty to 
Fu-nan recalls the well-known Pallava and Indo-Javanese 
forms of pyramidal vimanas on a square base characteriz- 
ed by diminishing stages culminating in a sikhara, each 
stage being ornamented by kiidus, pilasters, etc. The 
lirigas of, the period are also seen to have an ovoidal shape 
with a small face of Siva, features which are continued 
in early Khmer art for a time. A number of pesanis, or 
grinding stones for preparing sandal paste, may also be 
ascribed to this age. Lastly, the considerable number of 
Visnu statues with the characteristic cylindrical head- 
dress may also without hesitation be ascribed to this 
period. The wide diffusion of their provenance shows their 
close association with the earliest Hindu colonies and 
attests the extension of the empire of Fu-nan . 11 

On the admittedly deceptive grounds of style and gene- 
ral appearance, Parmentier counts among the products of 
this archaic art of Fu-nan two fragments of beautiful 
statues, one from Maha Rosei with an uplifted arm, the 
other a fine bust with four arms and a striking coiffure 
and facial appearance, found by M. Dalet at Vat Ari 
Roka to the north of the province of Ta Kev. 


11 B&FEO, xxxii, pp. 183.9; AA > P- 9 4 



CHAPTER V 
KAMBUJA 

Among the feudatory states of Fu-nan was the land of 
the Kambujas which the Chinese called Tchen-la. This 
vassal kingdom had its capital at Sresthapura near Vat 
Phu. The Kambuja princes traced their descent from rsi 
Kambu and the apsaras Mera, another version of the 
recurrent motif of foundation myths of Indian royal 
families in South India and the colonies. The Kambuja 
rulers were steadily aggrandizing their power, but we 
know little of the history of this period. Srutavarman and 
his son Sresthavarman are mentioned in many later ins- 
criptions as having secured freedom from tribute for their 
people ( apasta-vali-bandhakrlabhimanah , v. 13 of Baksei 
Camkron inscription). 1 

At the death of Rudravarman, the last king of Fu-nan, 
the succession to the throne seems to have been disputed, 
and Bhavavarman, king of the Kambujas, who was per- 
haps a grandson of Rudravarman, 2 seized the occasion for 
the overthrow of Fu-nan; and in this task he was greatly 
assisted by his brother Gitrasena. This campaign did not 
result in the total destruction of Fu-nan but only in a 
diminution of its power and a change of capital for its 
rulers. Fu-nan no longer held the first place as an Im- 
perial power in the eastern and central portions of Indo- 
China as it had done for some centuries, and according to 
the Chinese annals its rulers were forced to migrate from 
To-mou (Vyadhapura, Ba Phnom) to Na-fou-na, more to 
the south, to escape the incursions of Tchen-la. 

1 JA, 10, 13 (1909), p. 4 e 9 

2 Coedes, BEFEO, xxviii, pp. 140-41, too 



KAMBUJA 3$ 

Of Bhavavarman we learn a good deal from the inscrip- 
tions. Only one of them, however, may be taken to 
belong to his reign _the beautiful single line record of 
Phnom Banteai Neang" in Sanskrit verse, announcing the 
consecration of a linga by the king with the aid of riches 
won by the use of his bow ( sarasanodyoga-jitdrlha-danaih ). 
The script of the record falls in line with that of the Fu- 
nan inscriptions and admirably fits its age. 

Two ojher records mention Bhavavarman in greater 
detail but are of a slightly later period. Only one of 
them is well preserved and is known as the Han Chey* 
inscription; the object of this long record is to commemo- 
rate the consecration of a Sivalinga under the name Bha- 
dreSvara at Ugrapura by a loyal and highly favoured 
servant of two kings, Bhavavarman and his son. In this 
record Bhavavarman is described as king of kings, who 
was impregnable in his strength, and like unto Mount 
Meru: 


Raja, sri-bhavavarmmeti patirasln mahibhrtam 
apradhrsya-mahdsattuah lungo merurivaparah. [v. s) 

More particularly he is said to have overthrown the 
mountain kings (jitva parvatabhupalan, v. to), a clear 
reference to the rulers ofFu-nan. J Another record of a 
slightly later date, ,\.D 668, states that Bhavavarman took 
the kingdom by force, soaiaktyakranta-rdjyasya .° 
Bhavavarman had a sister; her name is not given, she 
being called simply the daughter of Viravarman. She 
married a learned Brahmin, SomaSarman, and had a son, 

3 ISSG, III 

4 ISSC, I and II. These recoids are sometimes ascribed to 
Bhavavarman II, (A D. 635 650). 

5 JA,, 1927, Jan.-War , p. 186 

6 ISfX, XI, v. 5 



36 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
Hiranyavarman. SomaSarman was first among the 
knowers of the Samaveda, and he established images of ; 
TribhuvaneSvara and the Sun with great eclat, and arran- 
ged for the permanent exposition of the Ramayana, the 
Puranas and the entire Bharata, copies of which he pre- 
sented to the temple. 7 The record is undated, but its 
script would place it between the inscription of Bhavavar- 
man and the two others in which he is mentioned. 

If now we turn to the Chinese annals, they seem to tell 
a slightly different tale of the rise of Tchen-la. The Som 
annals of China say that Citrasena, the king of Tchen-ia, 
overcame Fu-nan which was formerly suzerain of Tchen- 
la; after his death, his son Lsanasena succeeded him. The 
same source also mentions an embassy to China from 
Tchen-la in A.D. 616. The New History of the Tang as- 
cribes the conquest of Fu-nan to Isatia himself in the period 
6a7-649. 8 

There are some inscriptions of Citrasena, all bearing 
very close resemblance to the South Indian Pallava ins- 
criptions of the early seventh century . One of them from- 
Thma-kre, meaning stone-bed, from a large level rock in 
the bed of the Mekong between Sambok and Kratie, is a 
single anusthup verse recording the erection of a Itnga by 
Citrasena after obtaining the permission of his patents ' 
The other record is found in two places, Phou Lakhon in 
Laos 10 and Khan Thevada in the province of Ubon. 11 It . 
comprises three verses in the same anusthup metre. It opens 
Vrith the statement that the grandson of Sarvabhaun) 2 , 
the younger son of Viravarman, was not inferior in 

7 ISCC, IV 

8 BEFEO, iii, pp. 373, 375 

9 Ibid., pp. 313-313 

10 Ibid., pp. 443-6 

11 BEFEO, xxii, p. 58 



KAMBUJA 37 

prowess to his elder brother, Bhavavarman; then it says 
that this younger son was Citrasena who took the name 
Mahendravarman at his consecration, and after having 
conquered the entire country set up a linga of Girina 
(Siva) on the mountain as a symbol of his victory. 

Jitvemam-desam 12 akhilan Girisasyeha bhubhrti 
lingannivesaydmiisa Jayacihnamivatmanah 

These events, the liberation of Kambuja and the erection 
of the linga, must have taken place a little before a.D. 
616; in fact, the nearly contemporary Souei annals cited 
above place them between a.D. 589 and 618, and this is in 
perfect accord with the date unmistakably revealed by 
the palaeography of the inscriptions of Citrasena. It is 
clear that at the time of the first record he had not yet 
become king. 

It will be recalled that about the same time another 
Mahendravarman, the first of that name and most talent- 
ed among the Pallava rulers of South India, erected a 
shrine to a linga on the rock of Tiruchirapalli overlooking 
the Kaverl river. Considering the very close resemblance 
in the lettering of the inscriptions of the two Mahendra- 
varmans, one is tempted to ask whether this is not more 
than a mere coincidence. Separated by several hundreds 
of miles of land and sea, the records of these two rulers 
are evidence of exactly the same type of culture, same in 
almost every detail that can be thought of. 

Let us now see what the inscriptions reveal of ISana- 
varman, doubtless identical with Isanasena of the Souei 
annals. A number of inscriptions have come down to us 
from his reign, not to speak of references to him in the 
records of his successors. The script of all of them belongs 
12 Barth has read teiam and then corrected it to deiam ; but I 
think it U unnecessary as the writing is obviously ornate. 



38 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
to the same South Indian variety whose spread and 
growth in the various colonies constitutes one of the chief 
attractions for students of the subject in South India. 
Some are not dated but mention the king by name; for 
instance, the Svai Ghno inscription 1 ’ (in the province of 
Phnom Penh) recording the foundation of an asrama by 
Arya Vidyadeva, and the Ang Pou (in the province of 
Treang)’ 1 record commemorating the consecration of 
Harihara image and an asrama to Bhagavat ,by Muni 
Isanadatta. The reference to Harihara in the second 
record is in these words: 

§ankararyutayor-arddha-iauiapratimamimam,\.e. this image 
of which one halfisSankara and the other Acyuta. The re- 
cord contains a Khmer part also rather carelessly engraved. 

There are, however, two records of I 4 anavarman clearly 
dated Saka 548 and 549 (AD 626 and 627). The first 
from Vat Ghakrat (in the province of Ba Phnom)’ praises 
the king’s valour and fame; it refers to a vassal ruling 
over Tamrapura who is said to have long enjoyed the 
privilege of subjection to the three cities of Cakranka- 
pura, Amoghapura and Bhlmapura; this vassal king 
obtained the permission of his suzerain and installed an 
image of Harihara ( hantanu-sahitam sthapayamasa <am- 
bhum). The wide popularity of the Harihara cult in this 
period in Indo-Cbinais very well attested by its epigra- 
phy and sculpture. The second record comes from Sam- 
bor 18 and comprises fifteen Sanskrit verses in an excellent 
state of preservation. The opening verse is an invocation 
to KadambeSvara; five verses follow in which the valour, 
policy and fame of Ifianavarman are praised ; the next 
three verses introduce Acarya Vidyavi&esa appointed by 
the king for the supervision of all his spiritual affairs; this 
13 ISGC, VII 14 ISCC, VIII 

IS ISCC, VI 16 BEFEO, xxviii, pp. 44.5 



rvAMuUJA 3y 

acarya was well-versed in many spheres of learning, par- 
ticularly in Sabda (grammar), VaiSesika, Nyaya, Samkhya 
(Samlksa) and Buddhism; he was an eloquent poet and 
knew the ways of the world. In his great devotion to 
Isana— note the double reference here to the king, his 
master, and to Siva, his deity — .Vidyavisesa erected a 
lingam (v. io), and presented to the shrine the village of 
Sabatirtham with its servants, cattle, fields, etc. (v. u); 
a Brahmin pasupata appointed by the king was to be in 
charge of the worship in the temple to the end of time 
(v. t a). The record closes with an exhortation for the 
continued maintenance of the foundation (v. 13), the date 
with full astronomical details (v. 14), and the mention of 
some fresh dignities and gifts bestowed by the king on 
Vidyavisesa (v. 15). 

The inscriptions attest the power of Tsanavarman and 
the prosperity of his reign, but say little directly on his 
part in the completion of the conquest of Fu-nan. In 
fact, it is a little difficult to determine exactly the parts 
played by Bhavavannan, Mahendravarman (Citrasena) 
and ISanavarman in the elevation of Tchen-la at the 
expense of Fu-nan. We may suppose that Citrasena pro- 
bably assisted his brother Bhavavarman as commander of 
his forces and that the first conquest of Fu-nan in which 
the brothers took part meant the capture of the northern 
provinces of the empire of Fu-nan, a surmise supported 
by the absence of any inscriptions in the Ba Phnom area 
of a period earlier than the reign of Iganavarman. But. 
there was perhaps a raid or raids on the capital itself 
which may have accounted for the change of capital to 
Navanagara recorded in the Chinese sources. The definite 
overthrow and occupation of the Ba Phnom region must 
have been the work of l£anavarman. ,r 

17 BEFEO, xxviii, p. 130. Also JA, 1927, (i) p. t86 



40 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 

It is not necessary to follow the history of Kambuja 
any further; for our aim in this study is just to draw at- 
tention to the most significant factors in the Hinduisatiop 
of Indo-China and assess the role of South India in 
this process. But there are still a few inscriptions of this 
early period which remain to be noticed. The first part 
of the inscription of Ang Chumnik, 12 dated Saka 551 (a.D. 
629), records the reconsecration of a Sivalinga and the 
temple called RudraSrama by Acarya Vidyavinaya, and 
though it does not mention the name of any king, Barth 
thinks that it may be assigned to the reign of I§anavar- 
man. 

More interesting, if somewhat enigmatic, is the earliest 
inscription from the temple of Bay ang. 10 It bears two 
dates in the Saka era, 526 and 546, corresponding to A.D. 
604 and 624. Though the lettering of the record is won- 
derfully conserved and looks as if it were fresh from the 
hands of the engraver, the stone being of very fine grain 
has peeled off in many places causing gaps in the inscrip- 
tion which seriously hamper its proper interpretation 
though its general sense is clear. It refers to the erection 
in A.D. 604 of a temple where the feet of Siva were wor- 
shipped : girisasya fiadam (v. 5), sambhoh padasyedam (v. 8), 
pasupati padabhdk (v. 10), padam aisam (v. 11), sivapadaya 
(v. 12), and of a tirtha (salilasthana)™ attached to the tem- 
ple, both by a Brahmin named Vidyabindu. 21 This ins- 
cription, which most probably spans the reign of Bhava, 
Mahendra and ISana by the two facts recorded by it, is of 

is iscc, IX 19 ISCG. V 

20 Salilasthapana in Barth’s reading, ISGG, p. 36, is wrong. 

21 I think this is the correct interpretation of the line Vidyadi- 
bindvanta-grhitanamna (v. 81 which has somewhat puzzled Barth who 
writes of “un brahmane dccore du surnom vedantique de Vidyadi- 
bindvanta .” 



KAMBUJA 41 

great interest in many ways. Like all the other inscrip- 
tions of the time its characters are unmistakably South 
Ipdian, and if its provenance were not known, no epigra- 
phist could distinguish it from, say, a Pallava inscrip- 
tion of the seventh century. Moreover, its language is 
flawless Sanskrit, and there are employed many terms of 
technical import in Pa£upata lore. As this is of some im- 
portance, no apology is needed for transcribing here the 
second half of the opening verse and the succeeding lines 
where these terms mostly occur and of which no transla- 
tion can reproduce the impression created by the original. 

Tam antaran jyotir upasate budha 

niruttaram brahma par am jigisavah (/) 

tapassrutejyavidhayo yadarppana 

bhavantyanirddesyaphalanubandhinah 

na kevalam tat pkalayogasanginam 

asangindm karmaphalatyajam apt (2) 

nisarggasiddhair animadibhirgunai- 
rupctam anglkrtaiakti-vistaraih 
dhiyam alltam vacas (am agocaram )** 

(and)spadam yasya paiam vidurbudhah (3) 

The entire apparatus of the religious experience and phi- 
losophical thought of India as specially adapted by the 
PaSupatas is here, and the particular reference to yoga is 
noteworthy as making an interesting phase in the develop- 
ment of Saiva religious practice . 23 The dominant position 
of the Palupatas in Kambuja and even earlier in Fu-nan is 
well attested from several sources. We have noticed above 

22 This, I think, is better than the suggestion of Barth at 
ISCG, p. 36, n. 4. 

23 See Sivaduaila of Srikantha by S. S. Suryanarayana Sastri, 
p. ia8, n. 49. 



42 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
that the Sambor inscription of Vidyavisesa provides that 
a Brahmana Pasupata should offer worship to the linga 
set up by him. Besides the other acdryas noticed above, 
we find another mentioned in the inscription of Phnom 
Prah Vihar of the time of Bhavavarman II — a royal pre- 
ceptor who was a Pasupataearya of the name Vidyapuspa, 
a poet who was an adept in Sabda, VaiSesika and Nyaya. al 
There is no need to gather here all the instances from the 
inscriptions of Kambuja; but the atmosphere of.Saivism 
which prevailed in the court and dominated the minds of 
the court-poets is best illustrated by a verse in an inscrip- 
tion of the commencement of the reign of Jayavarman V, 
A.D. 968. The king is compared to Srlparvata in a man- 
ner that brings out forcibly not only the Saivite leanings 
of the author of the verse but also the source of Kambu- 
jan Saivism. The verse reads as follows: 

Daksinapatka vinyasta-sarassiddkiprado’ rlhindm 
Yuktam yo yuktinipunais-iriparvata itirita/i ® 

“Distributing his wealth by way of daksina (having his 
essence in the Deccan), giving success to those who come 
to him with solicitations (giving siddhi to those who desire 
it), he received logically from experts in logic the name of 
Mountain of Prosperity (Sriparvata).” 

This striking allusion in the tenth century to the famous 
( centre of Saivism in the Deccan shows the strength and 
continuity of South Indian influences on the culture of the 
colonies. 

Tchou-ta-kouan who visited the capital of Kambuja in 
the thirteenth century found Saivism still flourishing 
there. 

24 Coedes, Inscr. du Cambodge, i, p. 4 
23 If ’ i ]4K (v it 



KAMBUJA 43 

Lastly, the Bayang inscription marks the modest begin- 
ning of a celebrated shrine, the history and architecture 
of which have been the subject of an illuminating study by 
Henri Mauger in recent years. 26 He thinks that the GiriSa 
of our inscription was a large bronze image of Siva of 
which only the feet have been recovered in recent excava- 
tions on the site. It must have been in every way a 
remarkable work of art to which these beautifully model- 
led feet, belonged. Judging from the size of the feet, the 
entire statue must have been more than life-size, say, 
nearly two metres in height. “By the naturalism of its 
modelling,” writes Mauger, “this work is clearly pre- 
Angkorian; to judge it by the care for detail and by the 
delicacy of execution of this humble fragment, the divi- 
nity must have been of such beauty, assuredly, as to cause 
the construction of a prdsut as imposing as this original 
sanctuary.” He thinks that the words in the inscription, 
padam aisarn, vinibaddham isfakabhih, taken along with anas- 
padam yasya padam vidurbudiih of verse 3 cited above, im- 
ply that this large bronze had no pedestal, and that it was 
stood on a brick platform together with a large slab of 
stone with rounded corners into which the legs had been 
fitted and which did not permit of the heavy tenon below . 
usual in such statues. I must say that while I have cited 
the corresponding Sanskrit words of the original inscrip- 
tion, M. Mauger seems to have relied throughout on 
Barth’s French translation which gives an air of plausi- j 
bility to Mauger’s views. But the Sanskrit original is 
shattering in its effect on Mauger’s airy structure, and I 
think we are in the presence of one of the clearest exam- 
ples of the dangers of rearing far-reaching theories on the 
basis of translations. There is nothing in the original 


26 BEFEO, xxxvii, pp. 339.133 



44 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
to indicate that anything more than the feet of Siva for- 
med the original object of worship in the shrine, and the 
words padam aisam vinibaddham istakdbhili mean simply that 
an image of Isa’s feet was made of bricks (and mortar), 
not stone. Consider also the number of times the word 
for ‘feet’ is repeated in the course of the inscription, as 
pointed out above, and it becomes certain that we have 
here an instance of Sivapada just like Buddhapada and 
Visnupada which we find in many other shrines. .And it 
is very doubtful if at the beginning of the seventh century 
the technique of the art of bronze-casting had attained the 
efficiency required to manipulate the mass of metal needed 
to cast so perfectly such a large statue as that indicated by 
these feet. It would be more reasonable to suppose that this 
statue was a work of the eleventh century or the tenth at the 
earliest, the date of the apogee of bronze-casting in South- 
ern India under the Colas. The beginnings of the Bayang 
temple were therefore much more modest than Mauger 
supposes; it began with a brick image of the feet of Siva. 

Two facts of particular interest remain to be mentioned 
before we take leave of early Kambujan epigraphy. First 
is the direct reference to the rulers of KancI, i.e. the Pal- 
lavas, in a eulogy of Jayavarman I (latter half of the 
seventh century) in a context which is unfortunately not 
easy to make out on account of a break in the stone; the 
phrase is a- kancipura-nrpdr’ The other is the reference to 
Bhagavan Sankara, the great South Indian teacher of 
Advaita Vedanta, in an inscription of the reign of Indra- 
varman I, dated Saka 8 ox, i.e. between a.D- 878 and 887. 
Sivasoma, the royal guru, is thus described in this record: 
yenadhitdni sdstrani bhagavac-chankardhvaydt 
nisSesasurimurdhdli-mdldlidhanghripai'ikajdt ** 

27 Coedes, /riser., p. 8 

28 Ibid., p. 40, v. 39 



45 


KAMBUJA 

“He learned the sastras from him who is known as Bha- 
gavan Sankara, and whose lotus feet are licked by the row 
of bees, i.e. the heads of all scholars.” There can be no 
doubt that for many generations, in fact, for centuries 
after they first established themselves in the lands of the 
East and began the work of civilizing and Hinduising 
these lands, the leaders of Hindu society in the colonies 
eagerly kept up a live contact with the original springs of 
the gresjt culture of which they were the carriers into dis- 
tant lands. 

Some of the old Hindu ceremonial has survived in 
Cambodia to this day, and a European observer has 
recorded in much detail the elaborate formalities attend- 
ing the Cula-kantana-mangala (the auspicious tonsure) of 
a prince royal at Phnom-Penh at the beginning of the 
current century. The Ciiddkarma, as is well known, is one 
of the samskdras of the ancient Indian manuals of domes- 
tic ritual; it is performed in the royal household of Cam- 
bodia today by court Brahmins called Bakus under their 
deary a, and the ceremony as it is now practised contains 
a large admixture of Buddhist forms. But the Khmers 
still say that this tonsure at the age of puberty was insti- 
tuted by Prah Iso (Siva) who himself shaved the head of 
Prah Kenes (Ganesa) when he was eleven years old, at 
Mount Kailas.™ 

It has been observed with justice that while ancient 
Brahmanism has left many vestiges of a material nature-' 
in the form of temples, images and so on, not much of its 
influence in the moral or spiritual sphere has survived in 
modern Cambodia. Hindu deities have been absorbed by 
Buddhism and relegated to subordinate positions in its 
system, and the beliefs and ceremonies which are not of 
Buddhist origin in modern Cambodia are related not to 
29 BEFEO, i, pp. aoO-30 



46 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
Brahminism but to old animistic conceptions widely spread 
among the savage tribes of Indo-China. It seems proba- 
ble, therefore, that the strong Hindu influences that came 
into the land in the most ancient days of which we have 
spoken above were effective only with the aristocracy and 
the court circles, and that to the masses at no time did 
they give anything more than a superficial veneer. 8 '' 

The most important survival of Brahminism at Phnom- 
Penh today is the existence of the Brahmins of the Court, 
the Bakus, whose part in the tonsure ceremony we have 
just mentioned. The name Bakus or Bako has not been 
satisfactorily explained. The Bakus are distinguished 
from others around them by their long hair and their 
Brahminical cord ( upavita ). It is from this class which prac- 
tises some abstinences and enjoys certain privileges that 
the priests who play an important part in ceremonials 
are recruited. “At the royal palace they are in charge 
of certain old cult images in metal which they guard to- 
gether with the sacred sword, and carry behind the king 
when he takes command of his armies. They prepare the 
lustral waters, and take them to the king in gold-tipped 
conchs when the king performs his ablutions and purifi- 
cations for the new year and on other important ceremo- 
nial occasions, as also both before and after a battle ; 
they recite the moti ( mantra ) and akom ( agama ) or mystic 
formulas; they light a dozen sacred candles and carry 
"them in the pradaksitta path the prescribed number of 
times; at the cremation of princes, they light the pyre if 
the king does not himself perform this last duty; in a 
word, they conduct all the sacred ceremonies of the palace, 
or rather they assist the king who is the supreme priest.” 81 
To this account given by Aymonier, of the functions of 

30 Indo.Chiru, i, pp. 166-7 

31 Ibid., p. 367 



KAMBUJA 47 

the Bakus, Qoedes adds other details. The court Brahmins 
still play a part in the administration of oaths to officials, 
in ploughing the first furrow, and at the ‘Feast of the 
Waters’. The prayers they recite or chant on such occa- 
sions are in corrupt Sanskrit, often unintelligible, but still 
written in the grantha characters of South India. The 
writing is palaeographically much later than that of 
ancient Kambuja; this proves, £oedes thinks, that these 
Brahmin^ are not direct descendants of the ancient Brah- 
mins; but this is not a necessary inference. 

The Brahmins of Cambodia are also Buddhists like the 
other Cambodians, and frequent Buddhist temples during 
festivals. The small chapel in the royal palace where 
they jealously guard the sacred sword, the palladium of 
Khmer royalty, contains, besides Brahminical idols, im- 
ages of Buddha and even a magnificent LokeSvara dating 
from the days when the cult of this Bodhisattva was 
popular. 



CHAPTER VI 


CAMPA 

Campa on the east coast of Further India (n° to 18° 
N.L.), the present Annam, formed a half-way house bet- 
ween Java and China, and had a large part in the spread- 
ing of Hindu culture in the Far East. This name has 
generally been held to have come from Campa, the capi- 
tal of the Anga country in the lower Ganges valley; 1 but 
it may be recalled that this was also the name of the 
ancient capital of the Cola country, Kaveripatriam, which 
was also a famous seaport. The oldest inscription in the 
region of Campa so far known, the Vo-Canh rock inscrip- 
tion, is decidedly South Indian in its script, and the name 
Campa may well have come directly from that quarter. 
Some Chinese authors place the foundation of Campa in 
A.D. 137; Marco Polo mentions it at the close of the thir- 
teenth century; it was overrun by the Annamites (Yava- 
nas of the late Campa inscriptions) at the end of the 
fifteenth century. Today the Cams are few in number, 
about a hundred-thousand, confined to the province of 
Phan-rang, the ancient Panduranga. Ancient monuments 4 
are present only in the provinces of South Annam. They 
are all in brick, stone being used only for the gates and 
for decoration. 

The inscription of Vo-Canh dates from the third cen- 
tury A.Dr, or even the second. It is only partly legible 
and mentions the line of Srl-Mara to which the king be- 
longed. The inscription is clearly Buddhist in inspiration, 
though its author was no adept in the doctrine. Fifty 

1 Vogel : Tiipa Inset., p. 187 

2 Enumerated at BCAI, 1908, pp. 5-6 



GAMPA 


years ago Bergaigne" compared the script of this inscrip- 
tion wilh that employed in the Girnar inscription of 
Rudradaman and the contemporary Satavahana inscrip- 
tions at Kanheri, and reached the conclusion that the 
Vo-Canh record was anterior to the fourth century A.D. 
and might even go back to the second. The third century, 
he said, would be a good date for it, and it would be one 
of the most ancient records in Sanskrit. The progress of 
Indian epigraphical studies since then has confirmed the 
estimates and fixed the definitely South Indian origin of 
the earliest phases of Hindu culture in those distant lands. 
This result again should cause no surprise if we recall 
that even Ptolemy knew of geographical names of Sans- 
krit origin belonging to this region and to the archipelago. 

The Vo-Canh record and the Sri-Mara line, however, 
do not belong to the history of Campa; they are, as we 
have seen, relics of the time when lower Campa at least 
formed part of Fu-nan, 1 one of the oldest Hindu kingdoms 
of Indo-China of which we have any knowledge. 

The earliest inscriptions from Campa proper are the 
inscriptions of Bhadravarman of about A.D. 350/ One of 
them, the Cho’-dinh inscription, mentions a sacrifice per- 
formed on behalf of the Dharmamaharaja Bhadravarman 
or possibly one of his descendants. The title of this king is 
clearly derived from South India where the Pallavas and 
Kadambas are known to have employed it; it means ‘the 
great dharmic ruler’. The —varman ending of his name, 
henceforth a regular feature in the names of the rulers of 
Campa, also recalls the practice of several South Indian 
dynasties like Salankayanas, Kadambas and Pallavas. 
Again, the record is engraved in bold box-headed characters 

3 ISCG, XX, BEFEO, ii, 185 and xv. No. 2, pp. 3.5 

4 JA, 1927, (i) p. 186 

5 Vogel : Tttpa Inset., p. 23a 



50 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
very similar to those of Vakataka inscriptions on the 
one side, and the Kutei inscriptions of Mulavarman on the 
other. In fact, as Bergaigne pointed out, 11 the comparison 
of the alphabets of the Indian and Farther Indian inscrip- 
tions leads us to two conclusions of considerable impor- 
tance. First, the stage of development exhibited by the 
letters of an inscription and its general appearance furnish 
a very reliable datum for determining its age; secondly, 
the closely parallel development of writing in th*' mother 
country and in the colonies implies incessant intercourse 
among them in those far off times. 

The Gho’-dinh inscription is a very short record; its age, 
the excellence of its preservation and its value as evidence 
of prevailing religious beliefs and practices justify the 
reproduction of the text of the record. 

(i) namo devaya bhadresvara-svami-pada-prasadat agnaye 
tvajustam karisyami (2) dharmamaharaja hi bhadravarmmano 
ydvaccandradityam lavat putrapaulram moksyati (3) prthivb 
prasadat.karmmasiddhir-astu . This means: “Homage to 
God! By the favour of the feet of Lord Bhadresvara, I 
shall make thee pleasant to Agni. As long as the sun and 
moon endure, he will release the sons and grandsons of 
the great dharmic king, Sri Bhadravarman. By the favour 
of the Earth, may the sacrifice be successful.” This is 
followed by a short inscription in smaller letters of the 
same type: Sivo daso baddhyate, meaning “propitiatory dasa 
is bound (to the sacrificial post).” 6 7 This inscription, like 
the Yupa inscriptions of Mulavarman of Borneo, attests 
the prevalence of faith in the Vedic religion of sacrifice ; 
and it is unique in its employment of liturgical formulae. 

6 ISGG, p. 204 

7 Bergaigne, Ibid., p. 202, n. 1 refers to the exclamation sham, 
iivam accompanying the sacrifice of a bull to Rudra, as seen from 

Saak. Sr. Sfl., IV, 17, 13. 



OAMPA 


To cite Bergaigne once more:" “The formula agnayt tva 
justam karisyami, for instance, appears to be borrowed 
from a ritual very similar to those of the Srauta- and 
Grhya-siitras, while the addition of Bhadresvarasvamipada- 
prasadat places the ceremony under the auspices of Siva, 
and also attests an advanced stage of Saivism, the deity 
being adored, according to a custom we shall find perpe- 
tuated at Campa, under a name recalling that of the king 
who raided the temple to him. There is no introduction 
other than the invocation namo devaya, and no conclusion 
other than the formula prthivlprasadat-karmasiddhir-astu. 
Yet this inscription incised with an admirable regularity, 
in deep and large-sized characters must be something 
more than the simple fancy of an idle priest.” The post- 
script seems to imply human sacrifice, and there is per- 
haps nothing to prevent our accepting this for a fact see- 
ing that offering human sacrifices to propitiate Siva is 
mentioned in the Atharvaveda and the Mahabharata." 

Another inscription of the same age is engraved on a 
rock called Hon-cut about 28 kilometres south-south-east 
of Tourane and contains only an invocation of the Lord 
Mahadeva Bhadresvarasvamin. This short record con- 
tains a bad error in Sanskrit grammar, employing one 
dative between two genitives, and other examples of a 
similar nature occur also in the inscription to be noticed 
next. But the record is so much like the Gho’-dinh ins- 
cription that they must both be assigned to the same 
ruler. 

The shrine of Bhadresvara alluded to in these two re- 
cords is the earliest royal linga of the Far East and is 
represented today by an imposing array of ruined struc- 
tures in the village of My-son, eight kilometres to the 

a ISCC, p. soo 

9 AV vi * 9; Mhh. r Ms. VV. 6*ff. 



52 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
south-east of the Hon-cut rock.' 0 In front of the main 
temple in this group was discovered a stele of a type gene- 
rally found among the early antiquities of the Malay 
Peninsula and the archipelago. The slab which is two 
metres high and one metre broad is inscribed on both 
sides in the same characters as the two preceding ones. 
Parts of the inscription have suffered damage, but enough 
remains to reveal the language of the inscription and its 
purpose. It records the grant to Bhadresvara of the entire 
valley enclosed by three mountains in which his temple is 
located and the gift is described as an aksaya-riivi after the 
Indian manner. There is no doubt that this inscription is 
the foundation charter of the temple; but it bears no 
date. The language of the record is faulty Sanskrit, and 
one peculiarity in its orthography may well be taken to 
point to the Telugu country as the original home of the 
colonists: prithivi is written for prthivl, and duskritam for 
dugkrtam, and we know that to this day these words are 
pronounced by the people of the Andhra country nearly 
as they are found written in the My-son record, though 
sometimes a u sound takes the place of the infixed i. Finot 
has rightly said:" “The fact that the three inscriptions 
are all in the name of Bhadravarman proves, besides, 
that the Chams formed a unitary state and ‘not a series of 
independent petty kingdoms’.” 

Contemporary with the Sanskrit inscriptions of Bhadra- 
varman I is an inscription of three lines engraved in large 
characters on a rock face two metres in length and one 
metre in height at a place about a mile to the west of the 
ancient city of Tra Kieu. It was discovered in 1935; the 
script is the same as that of the Sanskrit inscriptions, but 
the language is Cham, though the record opens with 
Sanskrit siddham and contains the words naga, svargga, 
10 BEFEO, ii, p. 187 11 BEFEO, ii, p. 191 



CAMPA 


53 

paribhu, naraka and kula, all Sanskrit. It mentions a king 
but not his name. Its purpose is to invite attention to a 
holy naga of the king, perhaps enshrined in a neighbour- 
ing temple of which some relics are still traceable, and to 
invoke the joys of heaven for those who treat it with res- 
pect and threaten any one who insults the shrine with a 
thousand years in hell for himself and seven generations 
of his family. The interest of this record is two-fold. It 
attests tjie early prevalence of the naga cult in Campa. 
And it is the earliest text known in any Malayo-Polyne- 
sian dialect. It is three centuries earlier than the earliest 
Malay inscriptions of Sri Vijaya, which belong to the 
close of the seventh century a.Q. ia 
The fine bronze Buddha of Dong-dviong and the inscri- 
bed vessels from the ‘treasure’ of La-tho, 1 " both from the 
province of Quang-Nam go to confirm our opinion on the 
original home of the early colonists of Campa. The Bud- 
dha statue over a metre in height is a beautiful work of 
art in the true Amaravati style; it is a finely modelled 
standing figure, with the right hand (of which the palm 
alone has survived as a broken fragment) in cinmudra and 
the left in kataka\ the treatment of the robe which leaves 
the right shoulder bare and falls in a straight fold at the 
back is unmistakably inspired by Amaravati art. It is ' 
surely no accident that the region of Dong-diiong also 
bears the name of Amaravati. From La-tho we have a 
platter and a pitcher both inscribed in South Indian cha - } 
racters of a very early age, not later than the sixth cen- 
tury A.D. The platter is made of an alloy in which silver 


12 BEFEO, xxxv, p. 471 and NIA. Extra series i {Studies pre- 
sented to F. W. Thomas) 1939, pp. 46-9. 

13 BCAIG, 1912, PI. ix, pp. 2(1-12; BEFEO, xi, figs. 42, 43, 
pp. 471-2; as reconstructed Vol. xxi, PI. xi 



54 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
predominates, and the inscription on it reads : Sri-vanan- 
te&vara. The pitcher is of silver and bears a sloka: 

V anantaresvarayasmai Srimate divayaklrttaye 
Campapurapati raupyam kalaiam sraddhyatmanah 

Here is a king of Campa presenting silver vessels to a 
Siva temple and recording his act in a correct Sanskrit 
verse. 

Campa seems soon to have embarked on a policy of 
expansion northward and come into rather sharp conflict 
with China. She seems to have sought in vain the aid of 
Fu-nan in this adventure.” The story of the war that 
followed as given by the Chinese is of interest to us as 
giving some clue to the conflict between the two civiliza. 
tions contending for supremacy in these regions and to 
the considerable wealth that the Hindu temples of Campa 
had already accumulated in gold and otherwise. Campa 
suffered terribly in the wars against China (a.D. 431-46); 
not only did Fan Yan-mai, for that was the name of the 
king, fail to realize his ambition of extending the power 
of Campa northward at the expense of China, but he lost 
everything; the whole of his country was occupied by the 
Chinese, and his capital and all the temples in the king- 
dom were pillaged. The idols alone when melted yielded, 
we hear, a hundred thousand pounds weight of pure gold. 
This subjection of Campa was only temporary; how it 
■ came to an end we do not know. 

Another stele from My-son, broken and mutilated, gives 
the first dated inscription ,s of Campa and one of conside- 
rable importance for the further history of the Bhadresvara 
shrine. The record must have contained three dates at 
least: the date in which the temple of Bhadresvara was 

14 BEFEO, iii, pp. 255, S94 

15 Ibid., pp. ao6-n 



CAMPA 


55 

burnt down in a fire, that of the death of Rudravarman 
and that of the reconsecration of the new temple by his 
gpn and successor Sambhuvarman. Only the first of these 
dates has been preserved, and in it only the figure for the 
hundreds, thus—yuitaresu catursu varsasatesu sakanam vyatltesv 
agnidagdham devadevalayam. This places the occurrence in 
the fifth century of the Saka era, between A.D. 479 and 
577. The new temple bore the name SambhubhadreSvara, 
prefixing that of the renovator to the original name of 
the shrine. The inscription speaks of Campadesa and is 
the earliest to do so. 

Campadese janayatu sttkham Sambhubhadresvaroyam. 

The writing in this record exhibits some traits common 
with that of Bhadravarman’s inscriptions, but has under- 
gone several modifications.' 6 

About 1 5 kilometres from My-son, in the village of Tra 
Kieu in the province of Quang-nam (Annam), recent 
excavations have led to the definitive location of the most 
ancient capital of Campa, called Simhapura in the ins- 
criptions. This location first suggested by Pelliot and 
Aurosseau on the basis of a Chinese description of the 
Cham citadel, has now received striking confirmation 
from the field work of J. Y. Claeys. 17 Dominating the 
town towards the east was an important group of shrines 
devoted to the Saivite cult, although Vaisnavism also 

16 The final m is still written below the other characters, but has j 
now a virama above ; the letters r and k have now two vertical arms; 

i medial is marked by a complete circle, and i by a further loop in the 
centre of the circle ; a begins to be marked by a trait descending to 
the bottom of the line. On the other hand the older form is still used 
for l and ji. 

17 His original reports will be found in BEFEO, xxvii and 
xxviii. There is an English summary by Goloubew at pp. 7-21 of 
ABIA, 1929. 



56 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
seems to have been held in honour, as is shown by the 
inscription of PrakaSadharma (a.D. 650-679) recording the 
construction and dedication of a temple ( pujasthanam ) to 
Valmiki; the sage, says the record, was an incarnation of 
Visnu, and in his grief, he uttered a verse that was highly 
respected of Brahma: 

yasya sokal samutpannam slokam Brahmabhipujali 
Visnoh pitmsah puranasya manusasyatmarfipinah 

The numerous lions and elephants sculptured in relief 
and in the round in the principal group of temples dis- 
tinctly recall the Kailasa temple of Ellora. This group 
comprised eight temples. “The principal shrine must have 
been a building remarkable not only for its vast dimen- 
sions but also on account of the quantity and quality oi 
sculptures which supplied its plastic decoration. In the 
middle of this sanctuary there stood a sandstone altar oi 
imposing size, adorned all round with a frieze in high 
relief, representing a succession of musicians and female 
dancers. The eight temples were raised on platforms 
decorated with raised ornaments and mouldings. Thet 
were built of brick, as is indeed the case with all the mo 
numents constructed by the Chams.” The temples were 
easily accessible from the sea by way of the adjoining 
river. The palace of the king and the residences of palace 
servants must have adjoined this group of temples, and 
the whole city was surrounded by a massive wall whicl: 
protected it against damage from the annual floods ir 
the river. 

18 BEFEO, xxviii, p. 149. It may be mentioned that Jaimini wa: 
worshipped in Kambuja at about the same time, as is seen from a 
square pedestal ofSambor bearing on four sides the inscription: On- 
Jaiminaye Svdha. BEFEO, xxviii, pp. 43, 149 



CAMPA 


The inscriptions of Prakasadharma arc of great interest 
from several points of view. We have just noticed his 
foundation of a temple of Valmiki, and the reference in 
the foundation charter to the story of the meeting bet- 
ween Brahma and Valmiki found in the opening cantos of 
the Balakanda. In another inscription of this king at My- 
son we find another episode of the Ramayana, this time 
from the Uttarakanda summed up similarly. The occa- 
sion is furnished by the foundation of a temple to Kuvera 
Ekasapingala. 10 These two inscriptions establish beyond 
doubt the vogue in Gampa of the seventh century a.D. of 
the text of Valmiki’s Ramayana in the form in which we 
now have it. And if we recall that the temple of Valmiki 
was not a new foundation but a renovation of an already 
existing shrine — ptijasthanam punastasya krta ... is the ins- 
cription, it becomes probable that the currency of the 
epic goes back much further. In another of his inscrip- 
tions Praka3adharman is himself compared to Rama, the 
son of DaSaratha, for his nobility and valour, and for the 
prosperity of his reign: 20 

aviratanaradevabrahmavasyas svatejah samitaripusanalha(h ) 
frisamutsekakeluh 

Dasarathanrpajo'yam Rama itydsaydyam srayali vidhipuroga 
Srlr aho yuktirupam. 

Surely, no greater proof could be needed to show that 
Valmiki’s great poem enjoyed the same hold on the 

19 BEFEO, iv, p. 928; xv, ii, p. 190; and xxviii, p. 151. The 
text of the inscription is short and may be set down here: 
Mahesvarasakkasyedam kuverasya dhanakaram 
Prakasadharmanrpatih ptijasthanam akalpayat 
Ekaksapingaletyesa ilevya darSanadustlah 
Samvardhayatvisadhanam payaccahitatas sadd 



58 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
imagination of the literati in Campa as in Kambuja and 
India. 

The worship of Visnu was, Mus has suggested, 21 intro- 
duced into Campa by Prakaiadharma from the Kambuja 
country. The inscriptions say that his father Jagaddharma 
somehow reached Bhavapura where he espoused the prin- 
cess Sarvani, daughter of Isanavarman, and the several 
Vaisnavite inscriptions of Kambuja in this period reviewed 
in the section on that country sufficiently attest the Vai- 
snava persuasion of its royal family. 52 But it is difficult to 
believe that Isanavarman, with his capital at ISvarapura, 
or his daughter bearing the name of Siva’s spouse, were 
Vaisnavas in the sense of being exclusive worshippers of 
Vispu. But there is no doubt that the relics of Visnu 
worship are more numerous and date from an earlier 
time in Kambuja than in Campa. The cult of Brahma 
and of Harihara mentioned in inscriptions though no 
image is known, as also Buddhism, were known in 
Campa. 53 

The My-son inscription of PrakaSadharman (a.d. 657) 
contains also the legend of the foundation of the Kainbu- 
jan kingdom by Kaundinya in the form it had taken at 
the date of the inscription. After the mention of Bhava- 
pura in verse xv, we read : 

(tat)ra sthapitavan-chCilam Kaundinyasladdvijarsabhah 

Asvatthdmno doijairesthad Dronaputradavapya tam (16) 

.... kulasidbhujagendrakanya Someti sa vamsakari 
prthivydm 

airitya bhavelivilesavastu yd manusavasam uvdsa (17) 

21 BEFEO, xxviii, p. 15a 

22 Ibid., iv, pp. 919-20, w, xv, xxiii 

23 Ibid., i, pp. 12-33 



CAMPA 


59 


Kaundinyanamna dvijapungavena kdrydrtkapatnilvam 
anayi yapi 

• bhaaisyato’rthasya nimittabhdve vidher acintyam khalu 
cestitam hi ( 18 ) 

Here Kaundinya got a trident from one of the heroes of 
the Mahabharata, the Brahmin Asvatthama, son of Drona, 
and in some mysterious manner this enabled him to 
espouse the NagI maiden Soma who had then taken to a 
human &ode of life and enabled her to become the 
founder of a royal line on earth ( vamsakarl prthivydm)-, the 
whole episode is represented as the inexplicable result of 
the working of Fate. We are thus in the full flood of the 
cycle of NagI legends that are known very well to Tamil 
literature and to the relatively late Amaravati stone ins- 
cription of the Pallavas where Asvatthama’s liaison with 
Madani, an apsaras, gives rise to the Pallava line of kings — 
so called because the offspring of the alliance was cradled 
in a litter of sprouts (pallava). 2i We may note in passing 
that Kauridinya, Kambu, Bhrgu and Agastya were names 
warmly cherished in the colonies as the symbols of the 
great work of Hinduising and civilizing these extensive 
lands in which learned Brahmins, actuated by a high 
sense of the duty they owed to their fellow-men to give 
them of their best, took the leading part. 

24 There have been many discussions of this set of legends ; . 

lee BEFEO, ii, pp. 144 ff. ; xi, pp. 391-3; xxiv, pp. 501 ff. translated in 
Dr. Minakshi’s Administration and Social Life under the Pallavas ; also 
BGAIG, igu, pp. 32ft’.; Etudes Asiatiques, p. 322 ff.; and JA, 1909, 
Mai-Juin. Przyluski thought that one of the sculptured scenes from 
Tra Kieu was a representation of the legend of Kaundinya and Soma; 
but Coedes has identified the scene as an incident in the life of Kr^na 
where Ky^pa, Balarama, the hunch-backed lady of Mathura and the 
bending of the bow of Kamsa can all be recognized —BEFEO, xxxi, 
pp. 301-13 



50 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 

The cult of Bhagavatl held an important place in the 
ninds of the ancient Chams, and in a study of South In- 
dian influences on the colonies, this fact deserves more 
:han a passing mention. The sanctuary of Po-nagar, the 
-.ady of the City, as the Uma-Bhagavati of this shrine is 
called in the inscriptions, survives in part to this day, 
.hough not in its original form, and it has recently been 
■enovated by the Ecole Frangaise d’Extreme-Orient, 
Hanoi. The original structure of wood was burnt down 
n A.D. 774 by pirates from the south who raided the 
country in some strength, and we have no means of know- 
ng what it looked like. The subsequent history of the 
emple can be gathered from its numerous inscriptions, 
ind it is worth noting that this temple and that of My-son 
ire the most important Cham monuments containing a 
arge number of the most valuable inscriptions of Ancient 
Hampa. The present image of the goddess was installed in 
A.D. 965 by Jaya-Indravarman; but even this image has 
mdergone a remodelling as the head is clearly of ugly 
Annamese workmanship that ill suits the rest of the im- 
age. The worship of Bhagavatl is a cult very popular on 
the west coast of South India." 

One of the Po-nagar inscriptions (A.D. 918) mentions 
:he Kdsika, the well-known work on Sanskrit Grammar, 
and Jinendra’s commentary on it, the Nyasa or Kasihlvi- 
larana-panjika. This attests not only the cultivation of 
grammatical studies in Sanskrit but also contact with 
Bengal, the home of Jinendra. 50 “The Chams,” says Finot, 
‘have to this day the custom, in certain festivals, of sme- 
aring on the face of the deities a thin layer of paste.” This 
is without doubt a paste of sandal mixed with scents, 
ind the practice is well known in South India. The paste 

25 BEFEO, ii, pp. 17-54; ABIA, 1931, pp. 22 8 

26 JASB (NS) 29, (1933), pp. 27 9 



CAMPA 


was apparently prepared with the aid of a quern-stone, 
and it is interesting to note the existence of an inscribed 
stone of this character bearing two letters pu vya , a Cham 
expression meaning ‘Her Majesty the Queen’; doubtless, 
the stone was a gift from the queen to some temple. 1 " 
These stones are usually called rasang batau (Cham); 
Qoedes, however, considers pesani a better name for this 
utensil, and he draws attention to the domestic and ritual 
uses to w{iich it is put elsewhere — for grinding spices for 
curry and in some domestic ceremonies in South India, 
and for mixing medicines in Siam. He also rightly points 
out that sandal paste is got by rubbing sandalwood 
against a round stone of a particular type. But there is 
nothing in all this to prevent our supposing that in the 
temples of Campa sandal paste used to be made in the 
past as evidently it is being made today with pe?ani. 

Let us conclude this part of our study with a reference 
to a curious survival from ancient times in modern Indo- 
China. The Muslim priests of Cham are called dear 
(Sanskrit aedrya ), and among them the head of the com- 
munity, priests and laity taken together, is known as gru 
(Sanskrit guru).' 1 ' The Brahminist Chams who still survive 
call their priests based. The derivation of this last word 
is not quite clear; it has been taken to come from upasaka 
or upajjhaya . It has been treated as a shortened form of 
PaSupata on the assumption that the based are modern 
representatives of the pa-sseu or pa-sseu-wei mentioned by 
the Chinese traveller Tchou-ta-kouan in the thirteenth 
century. Qoedes has argued that the pa-sseu-wei were 
, tapasvins and cited a Kambujan inscription of the eleventh 
century which mentions ‘the holy assembly of the tapasvins 

27 BEFEO, iv, pp. 678 g; also vii, pp. 351-3 and xx, No. 4, 

pp.8.it 

28 BEFEO, iii, p. 56; v, 313 , . 



62 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
of the Sivasthana ’ (vrah sabha tapasvi sivasthana)' 1 ' 1 . This 
is perhaps the best view of the question. Durand, who 
has an intimate knowledge of modern Chains, says deci- 
sively that the baseh cannot be upasakas, for as he rightly 
observes, the upasaka and the bhiksu go together in Bud- 
dhism, the bhiksu holds out his alms bowl, and the upasaka 
fills it. The baseh are the priests of Brahminical Chams. 
Durand gives details of the hierarchy in which they are 
organized and of the functions performed by t^ie higher 
grade of these priests at royal coronations.'*' 
Tchou-ta-kouan in his tract on the customs of Kambuja 
records this interesting fact about the religious texts of 
that country in the thirteenth century: “The texts they 
recite are very numerous. All are on palm leaves put to- 
gether very regularly. On these leaves they write black 
letters, but as they do not employ either brush or ink, I 
do not know with what they write .’’ 31 Of course they 
wrote with an iron style as they did in South India till 
recently, or possibly with styles made of hardwood like 
those which are in use even now among the Chams. After 
writing, the palm leaves were treated with some black 
substance to make the letters stand out for easy reading. 


29 TP, xxx (1933), pp. 834-5 

30 BEFEO, vii, pp. 316-17 and 346-51 

31 BEFEO, ii, p. 149, See also vii, p.317 n. 1 



CHAPTER VII 


SIAM 

Palm-leaf scriptures of a relatively modern though un- 
certain date have preserved traditions of Indian migra- 
tion into Siamese territory, and these have been summari- 
zed by a^nodern writer in the following terms:' “In the 
year 687 of the Maha or Great Era (a.D. 765), great politi- 
cal disturbances took place all over India, and the inhabi- 
tants finding it impossible to make a living, were forced in 
large numbers to leave their home and country and settle 

amongst other nations At that time four tribes of 

Brahmins, consisting of a considerable number of persons, 
made their way eastwards from ‘Wanilara’ to Burma, 
Pegu (then independent), the Laos States, Siam and Cam- 
bodja. Those coming to Siam went partly to the north- 
west and settled in Sukotairajatani and Lawo (the present 
Lopburi), others went from Pegu to Tanawassi (Tennas- 
sarim) and across to Pechaburi, and still others came to 
Lakhon (at that time called Sai Pet or Kai Pet) where 
they built a temple and erected their Sao ching cha or posts 
for the swinging ceremony. These pillars still exist in the 
town as a proof that the Brahmins came to Lakhon before 
they reached Bangkok.” The absence of the descendants 
of Brahmins in Lakhon today is explained by the transfer 
to Ayuthya of the inhabitants of Lakhon who were vanqui- 
shed in war by a Siamese emperor in a.D. i 769. This is 
not history, but the shape taken in men’s minds by genuine 
historical events attested by the more trustworthy evidence 
of archaeology. 

1 A. Steffen in Man, 1903, pp. 179-80 



04 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
Among the earliest relics of Hindu culture found in 
Siam are the objects found in 1927 s in the village of P’ong 
Tuk on the right bank of the Meklong or Kanburi river 
in the province of Ratburv near the point “where the 
railway from Bangkok turns south for the Peninsula and 
Penang” (Le May). JThese finds include a Graeco-Roman 
lamp of definitely western Mediterranean make of the 
first or second century A.D. This gives a rough date for 
the finds and reminds us of the so-called embassy in 
A.D. 166 from An-tun (Antonine) to China mentioned in 
the history of the Han dynasty. The Chinese annals also 
mention that in A.D. 120 a company of musicians and 
acrobats from Ta-Tsin (i.e. the eastern provinces of the 
Roman Empire) reached China by sea. This date is also 
confirmed by a fine bronze statuette of Buddha, clearly 
of the Amaravati school, not later than the second century 
A.D. There were also several votive tablets * and bronzes 
and Buddha images, in the later style of Dvaravati show- 
ing traces of Gupta influences and not later than the sixth 
century A.D. 

^Excavations have brought to light the foundations of 
two small buildings — one being the basement of a circular 
stupa g metres in diameter, the other of a square building 
6 metres each way, which contained the pedestal of a 
fairly large statue and whose walls must have been almost 
entirely faced with stucco decoration as may be judged 
from the fragments recovered in the course of the work. 
These structures recall some early Buddhist buildings at 
Anuradhapura in Ceylon, also known to have been sub- 
ject to strong influences from Amaravati. v 


2 ABIA, (1937), pp. 16-20; and IAL, ii (1928), pp. g-au 
pp. I 5 ff- 

3 Class 1 (a) of Coedes, St. As. i, pp. 152-4 



SIAM 


.The Graeco-Roman lamp throws light on the fascina- 
ting problems of the relations between Farther India and 
tlje Roman Empire. But the possibility remains that it is 
an Indian copy rather than an original brought from the 
Mediterranean; the Amaravati style of the image of Bud- 
dha and the mention of a similar lamp in an early inscrip- 
tion from Alluru in the Krsna valley give support to 
this possibility. The find-spot of these articles is not so 
removed^from the highways of commerce as might appear 
at first sight; for traders are known to have avoided the 
strait of Malacca and chosen one of the land-routes across 
the Peninsula or the isthmus of Kra, while a more northern 
land-route from Burma passed along the Kanburi river 
“exactly in the vicinity of P’ong Tuk, if not by P’ong 
Tuk itself . 

It is clear then that this site was the home of an early 
South Indian colony in the first and second centuries A.D. 
This colony flourished up to the sixth century A.D. and 
came under North Indian influences of Gupta origin. It 
is probable that in ibis later phase it was part of the Bud- 
dhist kingdom of Tu-lio-lo-po-to (Dvaravati) mentioned 
by Huien Tsang between Sriksetra (Burma) and Isana- 
pura (Cambodia). Further excavations on the site carried 
out eight years later 1 have generally confirmed these 
results. Le May reproduces several other early bronzes 
of the Buddha from Siam of unknown provenance; it is 
quite possible, though this is by no means established, 
that some of them belonged to “well-defined Indian or 
Sinhalese schools ”. 3 

It is a pity that of this very early period of Hindu 
colonization in Siam, the Amaravati period as it has been 

4 By Dr. H. G. Quaritch Wales, IAL, x (1936), pp. 48-8 

5 Buddhist Art in Siam, p. 17 



66 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
called, no inscription seems to have survived; at least 
none has been discovered so far. 

Of the next succeeding period we have remains, still 
scanty, but sufficiently varied — structures, statues and 
inscriptions — which enable us to see that the people of 
Central Siam were of the Mon- Khmer race, practising the 
Buddhist religion of the Hinayana and maintaining a live 
contact with the Indian sources of its cultural advance- 
ment. These remains fall into two groups — Indo-Kam- 
bujan, and Indian non-Kambujan. * 

We shall consider the purely Indian relics first as they 
are doubtless the earlier ones. In the Pachim (Sanskrit 
Pascima = West) valley, a large enclosure called Muang 
Phra Rot (the City of the Sacred Car) is formed of a 
spear-shaped embankment of earth for a length of about 
a -5 kilometres surrounded by a wide moat; there arc ruins 
of laterite and brick structures scattered outside the enclo- 
sure on all sides, but they are not enough to lead to any 
reasoned conclusions on their origin and nature. At the 
centre of the enclosure, however, in the Vat Na Prasat 
and its adjuncts, two small fragments of a statue have 
been found; one contains a socket between two heels, and 
the other a part of the crown of the heads of a ndga, 
doubtless shading a Buddha; the workmanship, particu- 
larly of the legs, is very fine and totally different from the 
ugly and hideous treatment of legs common to Kambujan 
statues. 0 

Another Muang Phra Rot in Dong Sri Mahabodhi about 
60 kilometres to the north seems to have been connected 
with its namesake by a causeway of which some traces 
still survive. This is also a large trapezoid enclosure be- 
hind a moat of about 5 kilometres long, and the material 
employed is laterite. The only traces of construction 
6 BCAIC, (1909), pp. 810-12 (plan); also (1912), p. 29 



SIAM 


6? 

found inside are more or less heavy wheels of laterite 
which might have served as bases for wooden pillars in 
some kind of a light structure. Outside the enclosure is a 
rectangular trench cut into the laterite bank which bears 
on its walls a series of animal figures in relief, elephants, 
makaras, lions and so on, of a design so correct and an 
execution of which the excellence is limited only by the 
hardness of the material employed. Such figures are not 
found anywhere else in Indo-China. 7 A linga of shape 
unlike those of Kambuja and snanadroni found in the neigh- 
bourhood attest the Saiva cult once practised there. A 
very finely modelled statue of which the head with a tall 
cylindrical cap and thoroughly Indian facial features 
was discovered by Lajonquiere helps to distinguish the 
school of art to which the ruins belonged and determine 
their age. 8 

Within a few kilometres to the north-west is the Dong 
Lakhon, a smaller square enclosure of 500 metres, behind 
an earth embankment 4 or 5 metres high and a moat of a 
width of 40 metres. Its entrances are pierced in the em- 
bankment near the angles and not at the centre of the 
sides, as usual in Kambuja. There are no structures, 
statues or inscriptions here; but from the neighbouring 
temples have been got a fine stone Buddha head like that 
of the Muang Phra Rot in which the upathisat is replaced 
by a tonsure adorned with a cakra cut in hollow, and 
grinding stones with rollers ( rasang batau) used for grinding 
colours like the curry stones still in use in South Indian 
homes. 9 

Phra Pathom is today an important railway station 
about 30 miles due west of Bangkok. The temple, reached 

7 BCAIC, (1909), p. 212; illus. pp. 213-14 

8 Ibid., pp. 214-15 

9 Ibid., pp. 215-16 



68 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
by an avenue of trees from the railway station, comprises 
a vast circular stupa with four viharas round it and a terra- 
ced platform . 10 The temple has been remodelled quite 
often and all styles of construction are found mixed up in 
a confused manner. But possibly the stiipa retains its 
original shape, and legend assigns a hoary antiquity to 
the temple. One tradition takes it back to the time of 
Sona and Uttara, Asoka’s missionaries to Suvarnabhumi, 
while another ascribes the foundation of the stnpa to an 
ancient king of Ratburi who expiated an unconscious 
patricide by this pious foundation." With the exception 
of a portable litiga on one of the terraces, everything 
about the place is of Buddhist origin, and there is no rea- 
son to think, as Fournereau did, that this was originally 
a Brahminical shrine. A large number of sculptures 
found on the site in the course of successive remodellings 
and deposited in one of the local vihdras, attest the anti- 
quity of the city. These include (o) statues of the Buddha, 
entire or fragmentary, representing him as standing or 
seated on a throne in European fashion, a manner un- 
known to current Siamese statuary ; ( b ) a stele represent- 
ing the Buddha standing between two women with high 
chignons and holding fly-whisks, a group found also in 
certain votive sculptures in the caves of the Malay Penin- 
sula; (e) a sculptured panel showing the Buddha seated 
on a throne being fanned by two apsarases, one on either 
side, preaching (right hand raised in cinmudra) to a group 
of ten disciples seated on the floor, five on either side, one 
set comprising the indigenous people and the other, the 
disposition of whose dress recalls the sculptures in the 
Madras museum, evidently representing Indians; ( d ) frag- 
ments of ornamental panels, little resembling those of 

10 Le May, op. tit'., p. 27 

11 BCAIG (1909), p. 218 



SIAM 


Kambujan art; ( e ) very realistic statues of couchant deer 
with necks turned back; (/) large stone wheels supported 
on stands modelled like those in many panels in the arch- 
aeological section of the Madras museum; 13 (g) some terra- 
cotta debris including a vase without its base and carry- 
ing an apparently Buddhistic inscription. Some Brahmi- 
nical relics like a livga, pedestals like snanadroms, and a 
grinding stone which may belong to a neighbouring tem- 
ple or evfen a Brahminical temple in the same enclosure. 
None of the sculptures has any Kambujan trait and they 
are generally of the same type as those of the Pachim 
province, and such inscriptions as have been got contain 
Pali Buddhist texts inscribed in characters more or less 
the same as in the other inscriptions noticed before. 13 They 
are all attributable to the Dvaravat! period of the seventh 
century A.D, and earlier; 11 the wheels and the deer, which 
are probably earlier than the sixth century, as also the 
preaching Buddha, show that the shrine commemorated 
the First Sermon in the Deer Park of Benares. 

At Suphan about 80 kilometres north of Phra Pathom 
there is a colossal Buddha seated a la mode Europienne and 
two rudely sketched sculptures of four-armed Brahminic 
deities, a male and a female. The rock-cut Buddhas of . 
the Phu Khao Ngu cave at Ratburi on the Meklong, 
particularly the emaciated ascetic form, recall early In- 
dian types. 

/In the valley of the Nam Sak, a mountain torrent in the 
midst of a highly wooded country, are two sites Si That 
or rather Srideb and Sap Xamphra; a fragmentary stone 
statue from the former, now in the museum of Ayuthia, 

12 The description is that of Lajonquiere 

13 BGAIC, (tgog), pp. 316-24 

14 BEFEO, xxxi, p. 335; AA, xiipl. i. -See also BCAIC, (tgi2), 

PP. 105-14 



70 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
gives the clue to the origin of these monuments . 10 In the 
fine form and studied modelling of the body, as also in the 
shape of the head-gear, cylindrical at the base and octa- 
gonal at the upper end, the statue clearly stands apart 
from the usual run of Kambujan sculptures. Again, un- 
like in such statues, this figure has no ornaments whatso- 
ever in the ears, on the neck or on the waist; arms and 
feet are missing, but presumably they were also unadorn, 
ed. We may suppose that in spite of their eccent/ic situa- 
tion, these monuments were Hindu in origin, and later 
remodelled by the Kambujans who preserved the older 
divinities in the new sanctuaries. 

^Srideb has come to be recognized as a site of very high 
importance in recent years . 10 Lajonquiere’s surmise on 
the importance of this site has been confirmed by the dis- 
covery of many early statues and the fragment of a very 
early inscription. The inscription comprises fragments of 
six lines and in its present condition yields no continuous 
sense.” But the language is Sanskrit; and the stone on 
which the inscription is engraved was once taken to be a 
linga, and is said to be explained by the Siamese as being 
a foundation stondf (a lak mu'ang, une pitrre de fondalion de 
ville ); but I think that the inscribed stone was chiselled 
into its present shape at a later time by some one who 
had no regard for the inscription and that we should not 
assume that the stone always had its present shape, much 
less seek to determine its use from that shape. Jlut there 
can be no doubt whatever that the very clear lettering 
that has survived goes back to the sixth or even the fifth 
century A.D., and that it is decidedly an alphabet of South 
Indian variety../ 

15 BGAIC, (1909), pp. 198.200 

16 BEFEO, xxxi, p. 40a; Coedes in Melanges Linossier, pp. 159-64 

17 Chbabra, Expansion, p. 55 



SIAM 


•^The sculptures comprise, among others, the magnifi- 
cent torso of a Yaksini, two very fine statues in tribhanga 
with cylindrical caps (very similar to the statue that 
Lajonquiere saw in the museum at Ayuthia), and a frag- 
ment of a nandi f there is also a dvarapala of clearly Khmer 
origin, which, while differing altogether from the other 
pieces, evidences the later Khmer occupation of this area. 
,/The other statues, unfortunately not easy to identify be- 
cause t'rfe arms are broken and therefore the symbols lost, 
are thoroughly Indian in inspiration; the head-dress, the 
features, the massive neck, the treatment of the legs and 
clothing, and the tribhanga must be noted. The torso of 
the Yaksini is a masterpiece of technical perfection. Qoedes 
has mentioned Gupta art and its canon as nearest allied 
to this; but the epigraphy of Srideb points to South In- 
dia, and I am inclined to place the art of Srideb as a 
transition from Amaravati to the later forms of Pallava 
art of the time of Mahendravarman and his successors^ 
We know that in epigraphy the colonies supply transi- 
tional forms of the South Indian alphabet not so well 
represented in the home country;’ 6 something similar in 
monumental art need therefore cause no surprise. 

The results obtained by Mr. Quaritch Wales in a recent 
expedition to Srideb in 1935 confirm these conclusions. 
He has identified a Vaisnava shrine with a ruined brick 
tower 40 feet high on a latcrite base ao feet from ground 
level; the inner vault of the tower is constructed by means’ 
of successive encorbelments, and a fragment of an inscrip- 
tion on the bell capital of a pillar is of the same alphabet as 
the other fragmentary inscription noted before. Thestatues, 
a headless four-armed figure, and "a large and very noble 
head,” are also of the fifth or early sixth century A.D. 19 

18 Krom, HJG, pp. 69-70 

19 III. Land. Niws, Jan. 30, 1937; ABIA, (1935), pp. 41-3 



72 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 

The art of Srideb has rightly been described 50 as “the 
most ancient link now known in the history of art in the 
entire peninsula” of Indo-China. It is remarkable that 
this superb school of art flourished so early and in so in- 
accessible a valley so far from the sea. “Such was the 
force of expansion,” says £oedes, 5i “of Indian civilization 
that it did not merely touch the coast, as we may be 
tempted to believe, but penetrated to the centre of the 
peninsula with its language of learning, its wri'.ing, its 
religion and its art.” 

What was the political position of Srideb? Was it a 
vassal of Fu-nan, and did Fu-nan extend its sway so far 
to the north-west? Or was it an independent state ? We 
have no means of deciding this. 

tTo turn to the later Indo-Kambujan remains, inscrip, 
tions in Mon Khmer and Sanskrit ranging from the sixth 
century A.D. to the thirteenth are found ; they are mostly 
religious in import, though it is possible that some of the 
buildings where they occur might have been palaces : after 
all, the distinction between temples and palaces was not 
very sharply drawn either in the thought of the people or 
in the structures themselves. The Brahminical cult pre- 
dominates in the art of this group, and images of Brahma, 
Indra, Visnu, and Siva adorn the entrance of almost 
every temple; Buddha images are not unknown, but usu- 
ally only as an avatar of Visnu. There is, however, one 
exception; in the sanctuary of Phimai, the image of Gau- 
tama takes the place of honour on the lintel of the prin- 
cipal entrance, the Brahminical gods being relegated to 
the subsidiary entrances. But this temple is unfinished, 
and belongs to the last days of Khmer prosperity. In any 
event, this temple in honour of the Buddha reconstructed 

20 By Claeys, BEFEO, xxxi, p. 402 

21 ML, p. 163 



SIAM 


inf the midst of an old Visnu temple is clear proof of the 
rising importance of Buddhism at the cost of Hinduism. 91 ) 
° In the beginning, the Hindu colonies doubtless arose in 
favoured spots as more or less independent units of mode- 
rate size; more powerful kingdoms must have been formed 
later in the course of several generations, by alliances, 
wars of conquest and so on. Many names of the states 
together with descriptions of their people, government, 
manner*, trade and so on are found in the Chinese 
accounts relating to the period; but the names are not 
easy to identify, and the descriptions vague. We see 
enough to recognize that we have before us a picture of 
several states, all of them Hinduised, and in more or less 
active communication with one another, and with China 
on the one hand and India on the other. But on the 
restoration of the original names of states from their 
Chinese forms, and on their geographical location, wide 
differences of opinion are still unfortunately possible and 
prevalent. 

x'Traces of an ancient Hindu settlement occur at a spot 
three miles to the east of modern Chantabun (Candana- 
puri) on the banks of a navigable river of the same name 
and commanding fertile country all round, rich in rice, 
pepper and other products as also in precious stones like 
rubies and sapphires. The soil is red in colour, a matter 
of interest in the location of the country of Tche-t’ou (red 
earth) of the Chinese geographers. Acadra of Ptolemy’s 
maps may very well be located here. 98 Fragments of ins- 
criptions in Sanskrit and Khmer have been found, Sans- 
krit being used generally for praising gods or the founders 
of religious edifices, Khmer being employed for edicts or 
other records meant to be understood by the common 

22 BGAIC, (1909), pp. igo-i 

23 Jbid., p. 949 



74 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
people.'? One of them, 21 of about the end of the tenth 
century A.D., is a royal order in Sanskrit and Khmer 
communicated by the king’s guru to the civil or religious 
dignitaries designated Vap , Sten, and Acarya. Another frag- 
mentary inscription noticed by Lajonquiere is part of the 
digraphic inscriptions of YaSovarman (end of the ninth 
century) set up in different parts of his kingdom. The 
provenance of these inscriptions is uncertain; Lajonquiere 
rejects the slopes of Mount Sabab suggested by 'Schmidt 
as there are no traces of ancient monuments there, and 
thinks that the hamlet of Phamniep, near the village of 
Bau Narai, 3 kilometres east of Ghantabun, about half way 
to Mount Sabab, their more likely source. To this group 
belongs a sculptured slab of red stone, 80 cm x 60 cm, 
that must have formed part of a decorative lintel; the 
sculpture shows part of the fa9ade of a palace with five 
women seated in front and clad in short sampots with 
vertical stripes, and wearing conical head-dress and orna- 
ments. Another slab of red stone, meant doubtless for a 
spandrel, exhibits an unfinished sculpture which is a 
replica of another found at Phamniep very near Ghanta- 
bun and described below. 

(_The ruins of Phamniep have long been used as a quarry 
for extracting building material, and not much is now 
left of them; but there is the village with a Hindu name, 
Bau Phra Narai— the village of Visnu; there are the 
foundations of a double structure, possibly a palace, 
standing in the open and not enclosed together with other 
buildings by a surrounding wall, as obtains in Gambodia 
in similar instances; and above all, there has been found 
in the pepper garden of the village a finely sculptured 
slab which must have been the lower half of the tympa- 
num over the doorway at the entrance of a temple; it 
24 Le Siam Ancim, i, pp. 137-8; Aymonier, La Cambodge, ii, p. 80 



SIAM 


stows Garuda carrying Visnu on his shoulders, flanked 
by two open-mouthed makaras with short trunks; only the 
upper part of the Garuda’s body is seen, the lower half 
being hidden behind ornamental motifs, and of Visriu 
only the legs carried on the shoulders of Garuda and held 
by his hands are seen; the bust of Visnu and whatever 
else was sculptured on the upper slab are lost. The 
sculpture from Chantabun noted at the end of the last 
paragraph is an unfinished copy of this. ) 

The date of these relics is a matter of conjecture; they 
resemble Kambujan art, but there are also striking differ- 
ences; they must have had the same source of inspiration 
as Kambujan art; makaras similar to those we have noted 
here appear in the earliest phase of Kambujan art. We 
seem to have here the relics of an original Hindu colony 
established in the valley of the Chantabun at some in- 
determinate, but early epoch; towards the ninth century 
it became part of the Kambujan kingdom, as the inscrip- 
tions testify. 

(Ljbpuri (Louvo) in the valley of the Menam, was a 
centre of Mon-Hindu culture from very early times. 
Later it became part of the Kambujan kingdom and the 
seat of a Khmer viceroy for Central Siam from the begin- 
ning of the reign of Suryavarman I (tooa). Its monu- 
ments, sculptures and inscriptions, particularly the earliest 
among them, are of great interest to us. The city is loca- 
ted on a flat plain liable to inundation in rainy weather, ‘ 
but it commands the more salubrious highland adjacent 
to it on the eastern side. J 

( Several statues of the standing Buddha were discovered 
in 1924 in Vat Mahadhatu and its environs; statues in 
bluish limestone have nothing in common with Khmer 
statuary and evidently belong to an earlier art; one of 
them bears a Sanskrit inscription in characters similar to 



76 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
those of the most ancient epigraphs of Kambuja, 2 ’ arid 
clearly of a South Indian variety of the sixth or seventh 
century. The inscription reads: 

tangurjanadhipatina sdmbukesoarasiinund 
nayakendrjjaveneyam sthdpitd pratimd muneh. 

I.e. the Nay aka Arjava, chief of the people of Tarigur and 
son of the king of Sambuka, has set up this image of the 
Muni. The two regions named cannot now be identified; 
but the glimpse afforded by this correct Sanskrit record 
into the political organization of the land in this early 
period and the purely Indian designation of the offices 
mentioned are noteworthy. Another of the Buddha statues 
bears a single line in equally ancient characters, and pro- 
bably in the Mori language . 20 Vat Mahadhatu, as it is at 
present, has a strong affinity to the architecture of Ang- 
kor; but these early Buddhas of the Mori- Hindu period 
are a clear indication that this Khmer temple replaced an 
earlier temple in another style. 

Four singularly archaic Mori inscriptions are found 
engraved on an octagonal stone pillar with an ornamental 
cubical capital; the pillar which comes from the neigh- 
bourhood of San Sung 37 is identical with some others 
found in the gallery surrounding the great stupa of Bi ah 
Pathamacetiya to be mentioned presently. “Without 
doubt,” says Halliday, 2 ’ “this inscription of Lobpuri is 
the most ancient Mori text deciphered and published till 
now.” The inscription contains some Sanskrit and Pali 
words, and records gifts of slaves, betel, carts, and a flag 

25 No. XVI in Coedes , Rectuil ii (Illus. PI. xi) 

26 Coedes, op. cit.. No. xvii 

27 Lajonquiere, In ventaire, ii, p. 328 

28 BEFEO, xxx, p. 82 . Coedes, op. ci/. No. xviii. Lajonquiere 

thought the record to be Khmer. 



SIAM 


tQ a Buddhist temple by different persons whose names 
are given. Some of these names are indigenous like 
Gap Sumuh; others are Indian like Prajnavanta, Silapala, 
Silakumara. The characters of the record are those of a 
South Indian alphabet of the sixth or seventh century A.D. 
The importance of the Mon element in the population of 
the valley of the Menam and in the colonization up to 
Haripunjaya is being revealed for the first time by these 
new ancj, still rather obscure inscriptions. 

^ The triple shrine of Pbra Prang Sam Yot 23 (the temple 
with three Sikharas) was doubtless at first a Hindu struc- 
ture turned later to Buddhist uses. The central shrine is 
slightly larger than those on the sides; all face east and 
are connected with one another by covered passages along 
the north-south axis; they are built of limonite, stone 
being used for doorways, pediments and so on. “The 
design is certainly not Buddhist,” says Le May, “ and the 
three towers ranged alongside one another invariably 
bring to the mind the Hindu Trinity of Brahma, Siva and 
Visiju. Non-Buddhist figures, too, have been found on 
the towers — bearded figures with their hands resting on 
clubs — which also points to an originally -Brahman cons- 
truction.” Two other features are noted by Lajonquiere 
as marking the age and origin of this temple; the shape 
of its openings, the windows and passages terminating in 
an ogive, is unknown to purely Kambujan monuments; 
again, the decorative sculptures are barely sketched and 
the details are picked in stucco, a procedure extremely 
rare in Khmer art, though not altogether unknown. Some 
vestiges of ancient snanadronis attest the original character 
of the shrine. The Phra Prang Khek , 80 also a triple shrine 
without the connecting passages and with the lateral 
29 Ino. ii, No. 466. (Plan) 

3Q Ibid., No. 465 



78 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN IHE FAR EAST 
shrines definitely smaller than the central, and the San 
Sung, the Vaisnava shrine ’ 1 in the neighbourhood of which 
the pillar with the Mon inscription was found, are other 
early monuments also worthy of note. 

Some temples in Saxenalai-Suk’otai in Central Siam, 
particularly the Vat Pr’a Pai Luang and the Vat Sisawi 
in old Suk’otai, seem to have been originally built for 
Brahminical worship and later adapted to Buddhist uses 
in the Tai period ; 38 this is clear from the play of the 
structures as also from the survival of the older decora- 
tive sculptures on their walls. 

The lower valley of the Mekong and the valley of the 
small stream Pechaburi offered the most favourable con- 
ditions for the establishment of colonies; accordingly we 
find relics of a number of old states with Ratburi on the 
Mekong at their centre, Muang Sing farthest inland, 
Kanburi, Phra Pathom between the Mekong and the 
western arm of deltaic Menam, and Pechaburi more to 
the south nearer the sea. It is possible that at one time 
these centres were united under a single state; but we know 
nothing certain of their actual history . 33 

The Vat Kampheng Leng at Pechaburi is another tem- 
ple, Brahminical in origin, as its plan and the surviving 
^images of dvarafialas and of Visnu on Garuda, testify, but 
turned later to Buddhist purposes . 31 

These monuments of the Indo-Kambujan group, as 
Lajonquiere has called them, show that the Kambujan 
kingdom extended its sway to the west into Siam and 
tried to spread its own form of religion and architecture 
among the conquered states; but in these outposts of 

31 /mi., No. 467 

32 Le May, pp. 79-81; BCAIG (1909), pp. 205-6 

33 BGAIC, (1909), p. 354 

34 Jbid., pp. 208.9 



SIAM 


Kambujan culture enough remains yet to reveal their 
original condition and to show that the early colonists 
f(pm India had selected most of these sites as favourable 
for their settlement and occupation. 

Siam, like Cambodia, maintained a number of court 
Brahmins at Bangkok until recently when as the result of 
a revolution a republic came to be established. Joseph 
Dahlmann who travelled in Siam in the twenties of this 
century g^ives the following account of them:" 5 “There are 
about 80 families. Their dwellings are erected round a 
poorly temple comprising three insignificant structures 
enclosed by a wall. The Brahmans differ from the Bonzes 
by the long flowing hair on their heads. The white cere- 
monial gown and the conical cap vividly bring to our 
minds the Brahmans of the island of Bali. Small as is 
their number by the side of the thousands of Buddhist 
Bonzes, they have still many privileges conceded to them, 
as, in spite of all the changes due to Buddhism, the me- 
mory of the old Brahmanical royalty is still so deeply 
rooted in Siamese tradition. To the Brahman community 
is reserved the.consccration of the new king, and royalty 
is held to be properly transmitted to the new ruler only 
by the completion of such consecration. Simply and 
solely for this end is this small group of Brahmans preser- 
ved in the midst of the large community of Buddhist Bon- 
zes. At their head stands a guru bearing the proud title 
Mahdrajaguru. With the consecration of the king goes the 
consecration of the royal elephant, also reserved to the 
Mahdrajaguru-, for what is the Siamese king without his 
white elephant? ” 

There is a published official account in English of the 
details of ceremonies and mantras employed on the occa- 
sion of the coronation of His Majesty King Prajadhipok 
33 Indischt Fahrlen, i, p. 134 (adapted £rpm the German original) 



80 SOU'lH INDIAN IN*LUi.N<Je,t> IN IHjb, I'AR jiASr 
in February of B.E. 2468 (a.D. 1926). We have only to 
note that unlike the Brahmins of Cambodia the Siamese 
Brahmins are not relics of a once powerful religious caste, 
as Father Dahlmann seems to think, but appear to have 
been brought in at a later time from Ligor and elsewhere 
to conduct the court ceremonies, in imitation of other 
courts, with an Indian ceremonial. The Thai conquerors 
of Siam sought thus to legitimatize their rule in the eyes 
of the people by observing the same forms as th.e ancient 
Khmer monarchy of the land. In 1821, one of the Brah- 
mins told Crawford that he was fifth in descent from his 
ancestor who first settled in Siam and had originally been 
an inhabitant of Ramesvaram, the sacred island adjacent 
to South India on the east, to the north of Ceylon. Q,ua- 
ritch Wales 83 says that some Brahmins today have a tradi- 
tion that their ancestors came from Benares, that both 
these accounts may be true and that there may be now in 
Bangkok descendants of Brahmins from both North and 
South India. These traditions are surely evidence of late 
immigrations; but the modern Bakus of Cambodia have 
no such tradition, and the head priest at Phnom-Penhis 
said to have claimed very recently and quite seriously 
that his ancestor came from Mount Kailasa! 


36 Siamese Slate Cerimonies, p. 61 



CHAPTER VIII 


MALAY PENINSULA 

In the Malay Peninsula the early colonists from India 
founded a number of independent states. Our knowledge 
of these states is still very limited and we have to depend 
on Chin<$e notices which are not always easy to interpret. 
About the eighth century a.D. these states began to attract 
the attention of their more powerful island neighbours in 
the south; almost to the end of the thirteenth century the 
whole region may be said to have been under the political 
tutelage of the Sailendras, who at first made their appear- 
ance in Central Java and later became masters of the 
maritime empire of Sri Vijaya. Ruins of the Javanese 
and Sumatran periods of Malayan history are found scat- 
tered throughout the peninsula. When Sri Vijaya fell 
from power, the Malayan states fell an easy prey to the 
Siamese, though the southern states passed under the 
Javanese empire of Majapahit for a time. 

Malacca must have been an early colonial centre- 
Lajonquiere has drawn attention to a makara fragment 
built into a retaining wall near the ancient Portuguese 
church containing the corporal remains of St. Francis 
Xavier; doubtless this came from an ancient temple des- 
troyed by the Christian conquerors. 1 

The village of Kuala Selinsing on the coast of the Mat- 
ang district of Perak has been identified by Mr. I. H. N. 
Evans as an ancient Hindu settlement on the strength of a 
cornelian seal bearing the incorrect Sanskrit inscription 
Sri Visnuvarmmasya in box-headed characters of a South 
Indian variety of about the sixth century A.D. or earlier, 
i BCAIC, (1909)' p. 232 



82 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAS l’ 

The level at which the seal has been found justifies this 
date also. 8 There are also beads of shell and opaque glass, 
besides a gold ring bearing a group identified by Mr. Evans 
with reservations as Visnu borne on the shoulders of 
Garuda. There is nothing improbable in this, and though 
I share to some extent the doubts regarding the Hindu 
character of the ring and the figure on it, I think that 
Mr. Quaritch Wales carries his scepticism too far in 
doubting the presence of Hindus in the settlement. 1 It is 
true, however, that no definitely Hindu cult object has so 
far been found on the spot. 

In ancient Kedah we have an important and unmista- 
kably Hindu settlement which has been known for about 
a century now from the discoveries reported by Col. Low 
and has recently been subjected to a fairly exhaustive in- 
vestigation by Dr. Qjuaritch Wales. 1 Among Col. Low’s 
discoveries was an inscribed slate slab found near Bukit 
Meriam in a ruined brick house 12 feet square, possibly 
the hut of a Buddhist monk, as Kern was inclined to 
think. The inscription comprises two stanzas — the ye- 
dharmma formula and the verse 

ajndndcdyate karma janmanah karma kdranam 
jndndma kriyate karma karmmdbhavdnna jay ale 
which means: Karma is accumulated through Ajiidna\ 
Karma, is the cause of birth. Jnana leads to desistance 
from Karma, and in the absence of Karma there is no 
birth. 6 We have no means now of judging the age of the 

2 Jl. F.M.S. Museums, XV, (193a) p. 90 

3 JRAS— Malayan Br., (1940) pp. 54.-6. See also (1936) pp. 982-3 

4 JRAS— Malayan Br., (1940) xviii, (i) 

5 I have translated the text as it stands. But Dr. Chhabra may 
be right in suggesting that here also, as in the other known instances, 
we must read ciyate for kriyate in the third quarter of the verse. 

JASB, Lett.. (1935) pp. 15, n. s and 17, n. 3 



MALAY PENINSULA 


record from its palaeography, as the original is lost and 
there is no mechanical copy. 

• But it seems hardly likely that this inscription differed 
much in age from others from Kedah found by Dr. 
Quaritch Wales, to be noted presently, and from the other 
discovery of Col. Low, viz. the inscription of Mahanavika 
Buddhagupta from the northern district of Province Wel- 
lesley. This record, also on a slate slab, is engraved on 
both sid^s of a stupa with a chattravali (umbrella series) of 
seven members, and is in characters very similar to those 
of Purnavarman’s inscriptions in Java of the early fifth 
century A.D. Besides the verse ajnandt, etc., the inscrip- 
tion contains a short prose passage of benediction wishing 
success in all ways and everywhere to the enterprises 
undertaken by the Mahanavika, the sea captain Buddha- 
gupta, resident of Raktamrltika. It contains the interest- 
ing word siddhqyalra, which is found in some other early 
Indonesian inscriptions also, where it is seen to refer to a 
pilgrimage to a holy place for the attainment of spiritual 
merit or potency leading to success. ’ 

To return to the antiquities of ancient Kedah, Dr. Wales 
investigated no fewer than thirty sites round about Kedah. 
The results attained show that this site was in continuous 
occupation by people who came under strong South In- 
dian influences, Buddhist and Hindu, for several centuries. 
We need mention here only some of the most conclusive 
and significant links in the chain of evidence brought to 
light by these valuable investigations, leaving the other 
details to be gathered from Dr. Wales’ work by the inter- 
ested reader . 6 7 An inscribed stone bar, rectangular in 

6 See JGIS, IV (1937), pp. 148-36 

7 I retain the numbers of sites as in Dr. Wales' original descrip- 
tion. See JGIS, VIII (1941), pp- 1-16 for a resume and critique of 
Dr. Wale*' report by the writes. 



84 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
shape, bears the ye-dhaimma formula in South Indian 
characters of the fourth century A.D , thus pioclaiming 
the Buddhist character of the shrine near the find-spct 
(site i) of which only the basement survives. This inscrip, 
tion naturally recalls the Bukit Meriam (site 26) inscrip- 
tion of the same formula noted above. A more interesting 
find from site 2 brings it into line with the colonies in 
Lower Burma; it is a sun-dried clay tablet measuring 
5 x il" x ij" in the centre and slightly tape-ing to- 
wards either end; it is inscribed on three faces in Pallava 
grantha of the sixth century A.D , possibly earlier, each 
face carries two lines making a complete sloka. The three 
Sanskrit verses embodying Mahayanist philosophical doc- 
trines have been traced together in a Chinese translation 
of the Sdgaramati-pai iprccha, the original of which is not 
forthcoming; two of these three verses occur also in a 
number of translations of other works, all of the Madhya- 
mika school. This inscription which, as Dr. Wales rightly 
points out, precedes the earliest Mahayanist inscription 
from Sumatra (Talang Tuwo a.D. 674) by about a cen- 
tury, brings Kedah into the same class as Prome in the 
same period where also some Sanskrit Buddhist texts 
have been found in the midst of several from the Pali 
canon. 

On a low spur of the Kedah peak to the south are 
traces of a Siva temple (site 8); its plinth and lower courses 
built of small granite blocks have survived, as also a frag- 
ment of a bronze trident and two curious nine- chambered 
reliquaries of a type unknown in India, but common in 
more elaborate forms in Java in the ninth and tenth cen- 
turies; this temple may be considered, for several reasons, 
to be an important link in the transition from the sepul- 
chral shrines of South India with tin gas in them to the 
developed Gaddis (tomb-shrines) of Java enshrining the 



JWAL.AX iJiNlNaULA 


pprtrait figures of particular monarchs. From site io 
have been recovered foundation deposits of a type un- 
known so far in India or Java; they comprise one gold 
and six silver discs, each i\* in diameter, inscribed on one 
side in South Indian characters of a cursive type which 
may be assigned to the ninth century a.D. The inscrip- 
tions are generally either names of Bodhisattvas, whose 
images were perhaps set up in the shrine or possibly of 
devotee^ who took part in the consecration, though in one 
case there is only one syllable, Om. Among the founda- 
tion deposits of a Buddhist shrine in site 14 were two 
silver coins of the Abbasid Caliphate, one of them bearing 
a clear date 234 A.H. (A.D. 848). A large Siva temple 
has been identified as such (on site 19) by a four-armed 
Ganesa figure in terracotta and a bronze Sakti weapon of 
Karttikeya, and the temple is assigned to the eleventh or 
twelfth century. 

Kedah was identified by Qoedes with Kadaram of the 
Co}a literature and inscriptions and Kataha of Sanskrit 
literature; this has however been questioned subsequently 
by other writers, I think on insufficient grounds, and the 
explorations of Dr. Wales seem to me to go far to confirm 
the identification made by £oedes on other grounds. 



CHAPTER IX 


TAKUA-PA AND OTHER PLACES 

^Takua-pa’ at the mouth of the river of that name was 
identified by Gerini with the Takola of Ptolemy and of 
the Milinda Panha. Lajonquiere’s investigations brought 
to light a number of antique sculptures and monuments 
which taken along with the Tamil inscription discovered 
earlier (in 190a) by Mr. Bourke, a mining engineer of the 
Siamese Government, makes it quite certain that Takiia- 
pa was in the early centuries of the Christian era a well- 
known harbour and trading centre often resorted to by 
ships coasting along the Golden Chersonese. *, 

The hinterland is rich in tin-mines and there are old 
mining shafts here which are clearly distinguishable 
from those sunk by the Chinese and Europeans in later 
times. -There are also the ruins of an old brick structure 
in the isle of'Thung Tu’k (‘the plain of the monument’), 
but they are not enough to warrant any inference being 
drawn from them. Not far from Thung Tu’k is a small 
conical hill known as Phra Noe?in a small island lost in a 
labyrinth of canals winding through a forest of mangrove 
trees; (on this hill was found a statue, broken but with all 
the parts in situ, of a four-armed figure with a cylindrical 
tiara.’P The figure is of natural size and presents one of 
the finest examples of artistic modelling; the cylindrical 
head-dress and the long sarong, together with the total 
absence of ornaments, place the statue in the same class 
as that of Muang Phra Rot in the Pachim valley in Siam. 

1 BCAIG, (1909), pp. 234-7; (1912), pp. 166.9. See also my paper 
on the Takua-pa Tamil inscription in JOR, VI (1932), pp. 299-3 id 

2 BCAIG, (1909), Fig. 25, p. 233 



TAKUA-PA AND OTHER PLACES 87 

The top of the hill has been cleared and levelled, but 
bears no signs of any construction.^Lajonquiere considers 
the statue to be one of Siva; but there is no means of sure 
identification. 1 

^Farther in the interior is the hill of Phra Narai at the 
confluence of the Khlong Pong and the Khlong Ko Srok 
which unite lower down with the Khlong Phra Va to 
form the river Takua-pa.) “This is a small hill conical in 
shape, 40 metres high and covered by forests. On the 
summit we find only debris of bricks and two large flat 
unwrought stones. These few vestiges appear to be all 
that remains of a small square sanctuary which measured 
three metres from side to side in the interior and opened 
to the east. 

(‘‘On the opposite side of the Khlong Ko Srok, an ornate 
stele of three Brahmanical figures which came from this 
small shrine is deposited on the bank.^ Local tradition 
says that it had been brought from there by the Burmans 
during their last invasion and deposited at the spot where 
it now is, to await its transport to Burma. But when 
they were about to proceed with this operation there fell 
such violent rains, that the spoliators were constrained to 
abandon it. It was since broken by the wild elephants 
which were for long the masters of this region devastated ' 
by wars. When the inhabitants returned, they found 
it in the present state and supported the debris against 
a tree. This tree with a trunk divided in two parts and j 
now ao metres high, has framed the debris in the growth 
of its trunks, and the folds of the bark cover the figures 
in part. 

“It appears to have been cut in a large slab of 
schistose limestone, on which three figures come out 
in reliefs exceeding, at certain points, 90 centimetres in 
thickness. 



88 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 

“The most important, at the centre, represents Siya 
standing. The head (of which the cover has been removed), 
disappears under a fold of the bark; the feet are broken; 
they form one piece with a small plinth and tenon lying 
on the side of the tree. The bust is nude; collars made 
of gold adorn the neck; above (these) hangs a necklace of 
pearls increasing (in size) as it descends; a girdle of rec- 
tangular plaques of gold goes round the chest above the 
breasts; a thick ribbon woven of many rows of . pearls is 
attached by a wrought buckle on the left shoulder and 
falls on the right hip; a girdle with a large wrought 
buckle holds round the edge of a long sarong with many 
folds; along the thighs fall the folds of embroidered cloth 
and cordons from which hang button-like ornaments, 
The god is represented with four arms; we see only the 
right front and left front arms; the right posterior arm is 
only indicated by the lines of its fracture. The fore-arm 
of the right front arm is raised, the wrist is adorned by 
three bracelets; the hand, open and raised, is adorned 
with rings for the little and ring fingers, the thumb 
appears to hold a cord, which, passing above the right 
shoulder, comes to attach itself to the thumb of the left 
front arm. The hand of this arm is supported on the 
hip; its wrist has three bracelets of which two are of 
pearls; a large wrought bracelet adorns the biceps. 

“The figure which, in the stele common (to all of them), 
is placed to the right of the god is without doubt that of 
his wife Parvatl. Probably the goddess is represented as 
seated, but the lower part of the body is missing, or is 
masked by the ligneous developments of the trunk which 
form a natural niche round the bust. The head is dress- 
ed in the form of a high cylindrical chignon formed of 
tresses gathered up in front and held in position by golden 
ornaments; a golden crown with two large earlaps sustain 



TAKIM-PA AND OTHER PLACES 


this edifice of hair. The countenance is round, the eyes 
lightly turned up, the nose is broken, the mouth with a 
thick lower lip is well designed; the bust is nude, a large 
necklace of pearls hangs on the chest between the well, 
marked breasts; a cordon passed over the left shoulder 
falls above the right hip; the right arm encircled by 
pearls at the level of the biceps is lowered and covered 
largely by the bark ; the left arm is raised, the hand sup- 
porting $ie head-dress; we can only see the upper part 
of the sarong and the knot of the belt. 

"The figure to the right represents a danseuse ; resting 
on the left knee with the left hand on the hip, she stret- 
ches towards the god her right arm which is broken; her 
head, inclined to the right, is dressed as a high conical 
chignon held in position by a crown of gold; the face ig 
round, with eyes half-closed with very curved and slightly 
upturned eyebrows; the nose, the mouth with thick lips, 
the accentuated chin, are of a pretty design; a necklace 
hangs on the chest; a cordon passed over the left shoulder 
hangs between her two well-developed breasts; the bust 
is nude, the waist supple and elegant; the left arm is 
adorned at the biceps by a bracelet worked in a rosace, 
ous pattern, and at the wrist by three bangles; the pelvis 
and the legs are very tightly draped in a long sarong which 
descends in multiple folds; the feet with anklets of metal 
are nude. 


“These three figures of natural size are very superior 
as sculpture to what we have so far found in Indo- 
China." 

fLajonquiere’s identification of the figures as Siva, Par- 
vati and a danseuse need not be accepted, for it is more 
likely a representation of Visnu and his two consorts; but 
his careful description of the sculpture is so valuable and 
so forcibly brings out its South Indian inspiration in all 



90 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
its details that I have not hesitated to reproduce it here 
in extenso. In fact, the same writer observed earlier and 
more summarily: “The costumes, in numerous folds 
treated with details, the profusion of jewels, the elegant 
movements of the body, recall very nearly the oldest 
sculptures of Dravidian India.” 

The inscribed stele by the side of this sculpture carries, 
appropriately enough, a Tamil inscription clearly of the 
ninth century A.D. It records the construction if a tank, 
named Avani-naranam, evidently after Nandivarrnan III 
(826-850) Pallava, by a person who described himself as 
the Lord of Nangur; the tank is placed under the protec- 
tion of the members of the Manigramam, the residents of 
the cantonment (Senamukham) and one other group of 
which the nature is obscured by a gap in the inscription. 
This record is valuable and conclusive proof of the active 
contact maintained in the ninth century between the two 
shores of the Bay of Bengal. But there is much in the 
record that we are not in a position to explain. Was the 
Lord of Nangur a military chieftain of South India or 
just a merchant prince? Was he actually present in 
Takua-pa when the tank was dug and the record of it 
engraved? If so, was his mission peaceful or warlike? 
And who maintained a Senamukham at Takua-pa and 
for what purpose? Did the troops have any connexion 
with and were they under the employ of the Manigramam 
(Sanskrit Vanikgramam), the large and influential guild 
of merchants of which we hear in diverse connexions? 
Questions like these which leap to our minds and which 
we are unable to answer indicate the large gaps in our 
knowledge of those remote times. We have to be grateful 
to the scientific zeal of the explorers from Western lands 
whose labours, undertaken often under conditions of great 
discomfort, have brought to light vestiges of long forgotten 



TAKUA-PA AND OTHER PLACES 91 

chapters of the efforts and achievements of Indians in 
ancient times. ) 

fjaiya 3 on the southern shore of the Bay of Bandon 
was a dependency of Sri Vijaya for several centuries and 
contains several monuments some of which at least must 
be taken to date from a much earlier time. The Vat 
Pra That is surely a construction of the Sri Vijaya period 
having much in common with constructions depicted on 
the bas-reliefs of Borobudur and following the canons of 
the Silpasastras of Indian origin. ^ 

Among the numerous statues found in this neighbour- 
hood, belonging to different periods and styles, the admir- 
able bust of Lokesvara, discovered by Prince Damrong 
and now in the museum of Bangkok,' deserves special 
notice. It is one of the most magnificent bronzes of the 
Sri Vijaya art of the ninth century. “The benevolent 
serenity of the face, the noble bearing of the shoulders 
and the magnificence of dress and adornment,” says 
foedes, “class this statue, badly mutilated, among the 
masterpieces of Indian sculpture in Indo-China.” 

The Vat Keu is a brick structure on a plan similar to 
that of Gandi Kalasan of Central Java, though its archi- 
tecture recalls the 'cubic’ art of Campa . 3 In a small 
vihara to the east of this ruined temple, there are some 
interesting sculptures including a Buddha statue clearly 
of the Dvaravatl art. There is also a statue of Visriu 8 
described by £oedes thus: “Image of Visnu standing with 
a sort of decorated mitre on the head and wearing huge 
earrings of a peculiar style. The deity lias four arms; the 
right back arm rests on a large mace, and the front one is 
raised holding the disc; on the left, the back arm is broken, 
and the front one rests on the hip and holds a conch. 

3 BEFEO, xxxi, pp. 378-93 4 AA, xii, pi. xv 

8 BEFEO, xxvii, p. 501 6 AA*xii, pi. x (centre) 



92 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
Similar statues, wearing an identical costume, are atjll 
found in situ at Nagara Sri Dharmaraja (Ligor).” The 
statue is stiff and inelegant; it is a product of late art, 
valuable as showing the persistence of Indian influences 
to a late period. 

On an isolated hillock, 3 to 4 kilometres to the south of 
Vat Keu, are relics of an old structure similar in plan and 
style to Vat Keu, from which a Bodhisattva head has 
been recovered and preserved in the museum at Bangkok.’ 
This site is called Khau Nam Ron (‘hillock of warm 
water’) from a hot spring at its foot. 

4 ?-' , The Vat Hua Vieng comprises the debris of a large 
“ brick oihara; from its neighbourhood comes the fragment 
of a statue without head, arms or feet, but notable for the 
modelling and the treatment of the dhoti and ornaments; 
the Jaiya inscription of Chandrabhanu and another on a 
bronze Buddha dated A.D. 1283 come from the same 
place. 7 8 9 

The Vat Sala Tung is another ruined shrine containing 
some fragments of Brahminical sculptures, and a fine 
stone statue of LokeSvara, arms and feet broken. 0 The 
simple treatment of the body contrasts with the compli- 
cated jatamakuta. 

Some shrines in actual use today show, in spite of repea- 
ted remodellings, their original dependence on Indian 
iilpasastras for their design; Vat Palelai and Vat-To are 
noted by Claeys as good examples of this class. 10 / 

Jaiya was an important centre of pilgrimage for the 
Buddhists and numerous votive tablets in clay attest this 
fact. Such tablets which are also found in many caves 

7 AA, xii, p. 13 

8 Goedes, Reeeuil, ii, Numbers xxiv and xxv 

9 AA, xii, p. za 

10 BEFEO, xxxi, pp. 387-00 



TAKUA-PA AND OTHER PLACES 93 

iDrthe mountain ranges of Malaya used as Buddhist resi- 
dences, have been studied in some detail and classified 
aecording to their fabric, locality and age. Those of the 
Malay Peninsula are of terracotta, circular in shape, and 
bear representations of the Buddha or Bodhisattvas and 
the formula of the creed. Palaeography and fabric alike 
lead to the conclusion that they may be dated about the 
tenth century A.D. and taken to follow on similar tablets 
from Po Pathom .' 1 The practice, however, continued 
! through centuries, and at Ligor metallic tablets of modern 
make are in use to this day. 

(^Between Jaiy a and Ligor there are a number of old sites 
of interest, particularly Khao Srivijaya whence a beauti- 
ful Visjju with cylindrical head-dress and remarkable for 
the peculiar knot of a scarf on the right hip attests the 
early age of the site and the prevalence of Brahminical 
faith at the time .’ 8 

Nagara Sri Dharmaraja, in the middle of the peninsula 
| within twelve miles of its east coast, was doubtless the 
capital of Tambraiiriga, one of the vassal states of Sri 
Vijaya . 18 It is a walled city in the midst of a fertile plain 
of rice fields well protected from the monsoon by the 
neighbouring mountains." 

In this centre of Buddhism, Brahminical antiquities are 
not very important or striking, but are not altogether un- 
known. In the interior of the town are three sanctuaries, 
| Bot Prahm, with a number of lingas, San Pra I&uon, con- 
taining bronze images of the dancing Siva, Parvati and 
GapelSa, and Na Pra Narai, with its statue of Visnu clearly 


11 Coedes, in Et. As. i, pp. 145-57 

12 BEFEO, xxvii, p. 50a; PI. li, B 

13 BEFEO, xviii, vi, Ligor and Jaiya Inscr. 

14 Description in BCAIC, (1012), pp. 145-8 



94 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
showing Indian influence like all statues of this region. 
The Bot Prahm was called Na Phra Narai by Lajonquiere 
by mistake . 13 The bronze GaneSa 10 bears a Tamil inscrip- 
tion which reads: 

Ma- Jha- pi- ci- de- sa 

i.e. the prosperous country of Majhapi (Majapahit), in 
modern characters. In fact these temples are still in use 
and some of them have been recently remodelleci . 17 ^ 

The Vat Phra That or Mahadhatu_is considered by 
Lajonquiere to have been the model of many similar 
edifices in Indo-China. It is a bell-shaped monument on 
a square basement; elephants are~sculptured issuing from 
it and seem to carry on their backs the weight of the 
superstructure, a motif borrowed from India and copied 
again in many old northern sites of Siam, like Kampheng 
Pet, Sukhotai and Saxanalai."^ The rest of the structure 
bears sculptures representing Buddhistic scenes sketched 
on laterite with the details picked out in stucco. The 
extant structure is an enlargement of an earlier and sim- 
pler building the pattern of which is presumed to be pre- 
served in a reduced model within the precincts of the 
temple; the tradition of making a small-scale model of an 
existing structure before enveloping it in a new and larger 
edifice seems to have been commonly followed . 15 Of the 
model of Phra That this is what Glaeys says: ‘‘We find 
here again the plan of a large monument, reduced to the 
dimensions of a small structure, recalling the Gandi Kala- 

15 BEFEO, xxvii, p. 503 

16 BGAIC, (1909), pi. Fig. n; Insc. (191a), p. 1G0 

17 BEFEO, xxxi, p. 374 

18 BCAIG, (1909), p. aag, and Fig. a 4 

19 BEFEO, xxxi, pp. 374.5 



TAKUA-PA AND OTHER PLACES 


san of Central Java or the Cham towers of Dong-duong 
and My-son. The base of the bell of the upper stupa seem? 
to rest on a lotus flower, symbolized by a cylindrical 
moulding adorned by petals lanceolated vertically.” 

( There ar£ three inscriptions from this tem ple/) On e of 
them from the Vat Sema Jaya comprises eight lines and 
is illegible. Another engraved in large letters on a step ifl 
a staircase is palaeographically of the class of South 
Indian script of the fifth or sixth century A.D.; the whole 
j inscription is only one line of seven letters which I would 
read somewhat differently from £oedcs thus : 

bha ta ma ra yya Iba ge sva rah 
This reading is not much easier to interpret than Coedes’ 
bha ta ma yya ai ge spah or (at gra sthah) 

though the ending of my reading may appear to be aP 
incorrect —isvara ending.-' The third is a Tamil inscrip- 
tion dated in a “Salsa year in words, but tbe word for tbe 
hundred figure is unfortunately lost, though one may 
guess from the palaeography and the expression (n) urru (a) 
nju that it was eight, giving a date in the last quarter of 
the ninth century a.D. This, if correct, .would bring the 
record very near the age of the Takua-pa Tamil inscrip- 
tion noticed elsewhere. The record mentions some charity 
in favour of Brahmins instituted according to the orders 
of a Dharmasenapati ." 1 } 

Before leaving Ligor, we must notice another inscription 
in six long lines, much damaged, each line comprising a 
verse in Sanskrit. The record comes from Vat Maheyang 
in the province of Nagara Sri Dharmaraja; it is engraved 

20 Coedes, Rtceu.il ii, Pfo, xxviii 

21 Ibid., No. xxix 



96 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
in characters ultimately South Indian in origin but closely 
allied to those in the Khmer empire in the seventh to 
ninth century A.D. It records prescriptions relative to the 
internal discipline of a Buddhist monastery. 53 

It may be noted here that on this coast of the peninsula 
bordering on the China sea there are no traces of early 
Hindu settlements south of Patani; it is by no means easy 
to explain this, though it has been suggested sometimes 
that the full force of the north-east monsoon might have 
had something to do with it. 53 

(the temple of Vieng Sra (‘the fortress of the lake’) in 
the upper valley of the river Bandon about 80 kilometres 
to the south of Jaiya contains some early relics. 3 '. The 
antiquities of the place, described in considerable detail 
with a plan by Lajonquiere, comprise a walled enclosure 
with the relics of a small Buddha temple at the north- 
east of which a small stone model has survived (0'6o 
metre), an elegant square pedestal with simple horizontal 
mouldings symmetrically inversed and a square mortice 
in the centre for the reception of the image, and fragments 
of red stone statues including one of a pot-bellied Buddha 
called Mek Thong by the Siamese. But the most impor- 
tant find from the place is a fine statue of Visnu, with 
cylindrical head-dress, which was found almost in the 
centre of the enclosed space and which is now in the 
Bangkok museum. 31 Nothing is now left of the temple in 
which this fine image must once have been enshrined, 
and it seems possible that the material from it was em- 
ployed in the construction of the ruined vihara or of the 
more modern pagoda which is still in use. 

22 Coedes, op. cit.. No. xxvii 

23 JRAS— Malayan Branch, (1940), p. 59 

24 BGAIG, (1909), pp. 8*8.9; (19 is), pp. 139-44 

23 AA, xii, pi. ix 



TAKUA-PA AND OTHER PLACES 97 

standing Visnu and a Vatuka-Bhairava form of Siva 
in stone figured by Qoedes “ also deserve to be noticed. 
Every detail in these figures is decidedly South Indian 
except the facial features which are indigenous. These 
figures may be of the ninth or tenth century, in any case 
much later than the Visnu with cylindrical head-dress. J 
(It is perhaps worth noting that the famous stele ins- 
cribed on both sides — one a Sri Vijaya record and the 
other an Incomplete Sailendra inscription — which was at 
one time believed to come from this place has since been 
traced to Vat Sema Muang in Ligor.' 7 Both are in South 
Indian script and one cif them bears a Saka date corres- 
ponding to A.D. 775. 

The Malay Peninsula continues to be in the debt of 
South India to this day and the contact between the two 
lands is being actively maintained along many channels, 
primarily economic. The results on the cultural side of 
these long-established contacts have struck all close obser- 
vers; and Annandale says: “There are many similarities 
between the Muhammadanism of the. Labbies of the In- 
dian shore of the Gulf of Manaar and that of the Malays, 
and I think it would not be impossible to find striking 
parallels between objects in daily use, and especially in 
the patterns with which these objects are adorned, among 
the two races.” Evans has studied the persistence of an 
old type of Indian water vessel, the kendi with a spout, 
and reproduces a Chinese porcelain kendi as an example 
of non-Chinese ware made in China for export to Malaya.” 
“The importance of Rama and Hanuman in the folklore 
of the Malays, Buddhists and Muhammadans alike, agrees 

26 AA, xii, pi. x 

27 BKI, (1927), p. 462, n. Con. Rectuil, ii, p. 35, No. xxiii 

28 JASB, N. S. PP- 459- 6 ° 

29 Papers etc., p. 197 

7 



98 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
with legends which link these with the region round Adam’s 
Bridge, the region whence came the bulk of the ‘klings’ 
resident in Malaya.” ‘‘I would even hazard a suggestion/’ 
continues Annandale, “that it is largely owing to the 
commercial activity of the Labbies and their ancestors 
that the Malays of the mainland were first converted 
from pure Shamanism to Hinduism, and then from Hin- 
duism to what they call, in phraseology of curiously 
mingled derivation, the agama Islam.” This is 3, just esti- 
mate on the whole, though perhaps the emphasis on com- 
merce and the ancestors of the Labbies may be considered 
a little too strong in the light of facts known to Annandale 
himself, and the more so in view of new facts that have 
come to light since this estimate was written. 

We may conclude this sketch of South India’s part in 
the making of Malayan history and culture with some 
living examples of the results still seen today. The Sans- 
krit word ‘Sri’ which begins all auspicious formulae per- 
sists today in Malay in Muslim kingdoms long after the 
advent of Islam, and serves as the name of an oath of 
allegiance in Perak as well as in Borneo. The word is 
found, of course, only in a much altered form as ‘ chiri ’ ; 
but its definitely Hindu origin, possibly from the days of 
Sri Vijaya, may be inferred from some Malay traditions 
of Perak recorded by Maxwell in 1881. 11 “The Malays 
of Perak say that the chiri was introduced in the time of 
the first Malay Raja, who came down from the mountain 
Saguntang Maha Meru, and appeared suddenly in Palem- 
bang, in Sumatra, riding on a white bull.” Ronkel has 
traced several common Malay words like those for washer- 
man, kind or sort, marriage pledge, leaf, couple, and so 

30 JRAS, N. S., 13, (1881), p. 06; also JRAS, Straits Br.,No. to 
U88a), pp. #87-9 



TAKUA-PA AND OTHER PLACES 


op, to indubitably Tamil origins." We cannot be quite 
certain of the age of any of these words in Malay as con- 
tact with the Tamil country has been unbroken through- 
out the centuries that followed the early period of colon!, 
zation with which we are particularly concerned. 


31 THG, 46, (1903), pp. 93-4, 
3 - 5 * - 


841.3, 53a; BKI, (1903), pp. 



CHAPTER X 


THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 

To gain a correct idea of the extent of the Influence of 
Hindu culture in the islands that came under it, one must 
contrast Sumatra, Java and Bali with the islands farther 
east which were not touched by this influence. Ifc-will then 
become clear that all the elements of higher culture, the 
form of organized state-life, trade and industry, art and 
literature were practically gifts of the Hindus to these 
islands, and that the archipelago falls easily into two divi- 
sions — one which accepted the new culture and advanced 
with it into civilization, and the other which lagged be- 
hind. We shall naturally be concerned most with the 
first. 

The earliest inscriptions from the islands attesting the 
establishment of Hindu culture belong to the end of the 
fourth century A.D. ; but external evidence is suflicirody 
clear that this movement must have begun very much 
earlier. Strangely enough, this evidence is more Chinese 
and Greek than Indian for the earliest phases of the colo- 
nization. Trade at first, and later religion when llie Bud- 
dhist pilgrims began to use the sea-route to and from 
India, stimulated the interest of the Chinese in the islands 
of the southern seas, and their dynastic chronicles and 
travel books have preserved in one way or another much 
that is of interest regarding the conditions prevailing in 
those lands from very early times. The Chinese were good 
observers and faithfully recorded what they saw and heard 
in these strange lands, though it is quite probable that they 
often enough derived erroneous ideas of these things. On 
social, economic and religious conditions, nevertheless, 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 


101 


they tell us much that is sound, precise and authentic. 
Though in course of time numbers of Chinese came to 
live in these islands, unlike the Hindus, they always 
remained colonies of aliens whose presence had little or 
no influence on the culture of the surrounding inhabitants. 

Western evidence on these lands is naturally even more 
vague and difficult to interpret than Chinese. Though the 
trade of Hellenistic and Imperial Roman times brought 
the Grae jo-Roman world into active contact with India 
proper, its notions of the lands farther cast were more 
often derived at second-hand than based on direct obser- 
vation. Chryse with its gold-mines and tortoise-shell and 
Thinai with its silk and silk products are mentioned in the 
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea;' though the inland silk route 
is traced fairly accurately, there is no evidence of any 
direct or detailed knowledge of the sea-route to China on 
the part of the writer. 

A Chinese source states that in A.D. 1 3a, a king of Ye* 
tiao named Pien or Tiao-pien sent an embassy to China 
and received a present of a gold seal and violet ribbon in 
return. Ye-tiao has been taken generally to stand for 
Yavadvlpa, and perhaps less plausibly, the king’s name 
has been restored in Sanskrit as Devavarman. If these 
restorations are correct, this would be evidence of Hindu 
influences already at work in Java, the island being known 
in China by its celebrated Sanskrit name and as being 
ruled either by a Hindu ruler or a native with a Hindu 
name. 

About the middle of the second century A.D., Ptolemy, 
the Alexandrine geographer, gave a geographical descrip- 
tion of the world as it was known in his time, with maps 
and tables of latitudes and longitudes of important places; 
the lands of the Far East are included in his account 



102 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
under the name ‘India beyond the Ganges’. It is, how- 
ever, by no means easy to identify his names on modem 
maps. He says: “The island Iabadiou or Sabadiou signi- 
fies barely ‘island’; this island is said to be very fertile and 
much gold is also got there; its capital named Argyre 
(‘silver city’) lies at its western extremity.” Iabadiou 
has been taken generally to be a representation of the 
Prakrt form of the Sanskrit name Yavadvipa, and Ptole- 
my’s account is of interest not only for the Hiidu name 
of the island, but for its recalling a well-known verse in 
the Ramayana, although a relatively late one, and perhaps 
of the same period as Ptolemy, describing that very island 
for the benefit of the apes that were to set out in search 
of Sita: 

Yatnavanto yavadvlpam sapiarajyopaiobhUam 

Suvarnariipyakam caiva, suvarnakura-manditam 

Yavadvipam alikramya Sisiro ndma parvalah 

Divam spriati Irngena devadanavasevitaly 

Here Yavadvipa is said to comprise seven kingdoms, 
to abound in gold and silver and to have gold-mines as 
well. Beyond the island lay Mount SiSira touching the 
sky and frequented by devas and danavas. The identity of 
names, and the occurrence of the phrase sampamiam kana- 
kdkaraih in the description of ‘the noble island of Java,’ 
dvipavaram Yavakhyam, in the Gangal inscription of Sanjaya 
(732 A.D.) seem to justify the view that Ptolemy’s Iabadiou 
is no other than the island of Java, possibly Sumatra also 
being included. And as barley does not grow here, the 
name has been held by some to refer to the shape of the 
island. But other views have been held especially by those 
who consider the mathematical data of Ptolemy more im- 
portant than phonetic similarities between the names 
2 Ram., IV, 40, 89-30 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 103 

mentioned by Ptolemy and those on our maps. In any 
event, it is certain that the geographer knew several places 
ih the Archipelago and Indo-China, right up to the 
borders of China, under their Hindu Sanskritic names, 
and this is full of significance for the date of the first 
establishment of Indian colonists in these lands. And 
Ptolemy’s mention of cannibals in several parts here and 
of men with tails, though possibly exaggerated and dis- 
torted ini part, must be accepted as some evidence on the 
state of savagery that prevailed here before the arrival 
of the Hindus. 

The Sanskrit names for cinnamon and nutmeg imply 
that they were brought to India at an early date from 
across the seas and may well be taken to attest the most 
ancient trade relations between India and the Archipelago. 
But the ignorance of even Indian astronomers of the fifth 
and sixth century on the proper configuration of the east- 
ern lands — witness their legendary references to Yavakoti 
surrounded by golden walls — shows that the knowledge 
gained by Hindu mariners of the coastal towns did not 
spread inland and was itself, possibly, by no means accu- 
rate or extensive. 

From the third century A.D.. at the latest, begins a 
series of stone inscriptions scattered over the various parts 
of Indo-China and Malaysia, which, amidst the differ- 
ences of time and place, are characterized by an undeni- 
able family likeness. They cover some centuries and are 
found in Burma, Malay Peninsula, Java, Borneo, Kam- 
buja and Gampa. They are usually composed in Sanskrit 
and written in a script which though often called ‘ Pallava’ 
is perhaps best described as ‘South Indian’ using the term 
so as to include Deccan also. The princes mentioned in 
these inscriptions have usually names with a — varman 
ending. We thus see that, the whole of South-East Asia 



104 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
was touched by this vast movement of culture which must 
have been slow and steady and a gradual and peaceful 
penetration rather than the result of military expeditions 
and violent conquest. That the earliest of these inscrip- 
tions so far known comes from Vo-Canh in Campa should 
be held to be more an accident; it might have come from 
any other part. At any rate it should not lead us to infer 
that Campa was the earliest region to come under Hindu 
influences; the chances are that the western co:ut of the 
Malay Peninsula and the islands had been occupied some 
time before the lands bordering the Gulf of Siam and the 
China Sea were reached. Time, the action of natural 
forces and the vandalism of man have destroyed irretriev- 
ably many of the traces of these ancient occurrences and 
what is now left enables us to see only a part of the story, 
and that only in its broad outline. There is little doubt 
that in every case, the evidence now available belongs to 
a period much later than the commencement of this 
movement of colonization. 

West Java: Among the earliest traces of Hindu culture 
in Java now known are the Sanskrit stone inscriptions of 
Purnavarman from the West Java. “It is significant,” 
says Vogel, "that these earliest records of Hindu settle- 
ment are found exactly in that part of the island where 
the Dutch traders first established their ‘factories' and 
which became the centre from which the power of Hol- 
land has spread over the whole of the Indian achipelago. 
The geographical position of the Batavian coast with 
regard to the continent of India and Sumatra and the 
special advantages its figuration offers to shipping and 
trade are circumstances which will easily account for a 
coincidence that is certainly not due to mere chance.” 1 
3 The Earliest Sanskrit insert, of Java, p. 15 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 105 

Though the extant inscriptions of West Java are, as we 
shall see, of a later date than those of Borneo, there can 
Be no doubt that Hindu culture must have reached Java, 
if anything, a little earlier from South India than it rea- 
ched Borneo. 

The routes taken by Hindu colonists can only be a mat- 
ter of surmise in the absence of direct evidence. There is 
no reason to believe that there was any particular centre, 
Caiya, Dr. Wales has suggested, or any other place to 
which a greater importance attaches as the basis of further 
advances in the movement of colonization. It seems much 
more probable that every area which was Hinduised 
during the early centuries of the Christian era became in 
its turn a centre of diffusion of the new culture among 
its neighbours. Java and Sumatra, however, attained 
great celebrity in the arts about the eighth century, and 
the evidence of Indo-Chinese epigraphy and Javanese 
traditions taken together attests the rather widespread in- 
fluence of Indo-Javanese culture in these eastern lands . 1 

The inscriptions of West Java are engraved in the dis- 
tinctly South Indian type of characters to which the names 
‘Vengi’ and ‘Pallava’ have been applied by epigraphists; 
the letters show a stage of development which would 
place them in the middle of the fifth century A.D., about 
half a century later than the Kutei inscriptions of Mula- 
varman of Borneo. 

These inscriptions are four in number. Apparently the 
earliest of them is the one known as the Ci-Aruton record; 
it is a single anustkup verse engraved in four bold lines, 
each line comprising a pada (quarter of the verse), under 
a pair of human feet in front of which are two additional 
carvings which have been described as ‘lotuses’ or ‘spiders’. 


Cf. Coedes in JRAS- Malay Br., xiv, sec. 1936, p. 



106 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
The inscription just says that these footprints which aye 
like those of Visnu belong to the illustrious Purnavarman, 
the lord of Tarumanagara, a valiant ruler of the earthl 
We have a repetition of Purnavarman’s footprints in 
another place in the same district; "they are partly broken 
off with the top of the rock” (Vogel); here we have a 
verse in the sragdhara metre engraved in two long lines 
in elegant characters of the same type as the Ci-Aruton 
record. This inscription is usually called the Jair&u rock- 
inscription, and as it constitutes the nearest approach we 
have to an account of the king’s reign, it may be repro- 
duced here: 

Sriman data krtajno narapatir asamo yah pura 
T arumayam 

ndmna sri-Purmmvarmd pracura-ripu-sara'bhedya- 
vikhyata-varma 

tasyedam padavimbadvayam arinagarotsadane nitya- 
daksam 

bhaklanam yannrpdnam ' bhavati sukhakaram salya- 
bhutam ripiinam 

i.e. “Illustrious, munificent and true to his duty was the 
unequalled lord of men — the illustrious Purnavarman by 
name — who once (ruled) at Taruma and whose famous 
armour ( varman ) was impenetrable by the darts of a mul- 
titude of foes. His is this pair of footprints which, ever 
dextrous in destroying hostile towns, is salutary to devoted 
princes but a thorn in the side of his enemies” (Vogel). A 
third inscription, the Kebon Kopi (coffee garden) rock- 
inscription, accompanies the footprints of the elephant of 


5 For Taniripdnam of the original 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 107 

the lord of Taruma 0 which is compared to Airavata, the 
divine elephant of Indra. 

* The inscription comprises just one anusthup verse, illegi- 
ble in part, and engraved in one line between two enor- 
mous elephant footprints covering almost the whole of the 
flat surface of the rock. This was no doubt Purnavarman's 
elephant . 7 

In all these three instances the inscriptions stand in 
definite^elation to the footprints near them. The worship 
of the footprints of gods, prophets and saints is well known 
in India and Ceylon; and in the Ramayana, Rama is said 
to have given Bharata his pddukas (sandals) to represent 
him in the rule of Ayodhya during the period of his exile. 
The exact import of the footprints of Purnavarman and 
his elephant has been the subject of some discussion. 
Vogel suggests that the Ci-Aruton rock marks the spot of 
the king’s cremation and that the Jambu rock was more 
or less worshipped as a posthumous shrine of magic po- 
tency; he admits that it is even more difficult to explain 
the motives which prompted the engraving of the ele- 
phant’s footprints and the inscription accompanying it . 8 
Stutterheim suggests that the footprints, the king’s as well 
as the elephant’s, are marks of occupation after the con- 
quest, and he recalls the practice of the conqueror placing 
his foot on the neck or head of the vanquished rulers to 
signify their subjection .' 7 

6 This is not a South Indian name as has been thought. The 
reference to SII, iii, p. 159, given by Schnitger (TBG, 1934, p. 187; 
also Stutterheim, Ibid., 1939, p. 83) is irrelevant. Krom’s suggestion 
that it comes from an Indonesian word meaning indigo (HJG, p. 78) 
is more likely. GNI, i, p. ia8 

7 Jayaswal has little warrant in the record for calling him Jaya- 
vifala as he does. El, xxii, pp. 4.5 

8 Op. cit., pp. 20-21 

9 BKI. 89. (193*), pp. 388-9 



108 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 

I think that all the inscriptions are posthumous and 
probably put up in the reign of Purnavarman’s successor, 
most probably his son. Let us note the word pura in the 
Jambu record and the absence of anything to indicate 
that any inscription was actually engraved in Purnavar- 
man’s reign. The footprints of the king and his elephants 
are no more than mementos of the valour and heroism 
of a great king and his state elephant that played a not- 
able part in his wars of conquest. Purnavarman was 
thus, so far as we know, the first conqueror-king of Hin- 
duised Java as the Jambu inscription clearly shows, and 
all the inscriptions mentioning him turn out to be memo- 
rials ofhis rule raised by a pious and grateful successor 
who inherited a considerable kingdom with many vassal 
states. These impressions receive further confirmation 
from the remaining record in the same neighbourhood 
and of the same time — the Tugu rock inscription. 

Before considering this inscription, however, a word 
must be said on the spider-like attachments to the foot- 
prints in the Gi-Aruton record. The most plausible of the 
numerous explanations offered by scholars 10 is that of 
Finot which treats these marks as actual representations 
of spiders, and refers them to the practice, common in 
Indo-China and Insulindia, of representing the souls of 
men, which are supposed to leave their bodies when they 
are asleep, in the form of insects, particularly spiders. 
The padadvayam and the spiders then represent respectively 
the body and the soul, the namarupa of the king. If this 
view is correct, it would go to show that the blending of 
Indonesian and Hindu cultures, of which we have many 
tangible instances in later monuments and institutions, 
began to be effective and successful at a very early stage 
in the contact between them. And this may well have 
10 See Vogel, op. eit., pp. 93-4 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 10 9 

been so. We know for instance that even the Rgveda is 
now seen to be at least in part the production of a com* 
posite culture. 

“Another puzzle” related to the Ci-Aruton rock is the 
single line of cursive writing “which is written over the 
inscription proper but in a different direction along the 
right-hand side of the royal footprints.” None of the 
attempts so far made to read this line, including that of 
JayaswTd to treat them as ‘shell-characters’, 11 can be 
pronounced successful or convincing. It is by no means 
certain that this line was a part of the original inscrip- 
tion. 

Let us turn now to the Tugu rock inscription. This is 
engraved in five lines running round “a natural, undress- 
ed rock, conical in shape and measuring about one metre 
in height and a little less in diameter”. 12 It comprises 
five anusthup verses, and its bold characters closely resem- 
ble those of the other three inscriptions already noticed. 
The first verse mentions the Candrabhaga, dug out of old 
{purs) by the famous king of kings {rajiidhirqja), the strong. 
armed guru, and flowing into the sea after skirting the 
famous city — evidently Taruma. The remaining verses 
form one long and complex sentence, but their construc- 
tion is not so difficult or obscure as others have maintained. 
They state that Purnavarman, who was prominent among 
kings by the height of his prosperity and virtue, carried 
out the excavation (of the channel) of a beautiful stream 1 
(n adi ramya) of clear water ( nirmalodaka ) in the twenty- 
second year of his reign; the work was begun on the eighth 
day of the dark fortnight of the month of Phalguna and 
completed on the thirteenth day of the bright half of the 
month of Caitra, i.e. in a period of twenty-one days; the 

11 Vogel, op. cit., p. 34; El, xxii, pp. 1-5 

12 Vogel, ibid., p. 29 



110 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
length of the stream was 6122 bows, 1 " and it cut across 
the camping-ground of the grandfather who was a royal 
sage ( pitamahasya rajarseli )\ 14 and the opening of the streani 
was marked by the gift of a thousand cows to Brahmins. 

This record therefore also commemorates an act of 
Purnavarman, the digging perhaps of an irrigation chan- 
nel. Obviously this inscription is the work of a successor 
of Purnavarman, and the reference to the grandfather 
must be to the grandfather of the author of the, Record; 
if the author was Purnavarman’s son, the grandfather 
would be the father of Purnavarman; but of this we can- 
not be sure. It seems clear, however, that though all the 
West Javanese inscriptions of this time refer to Purija- 
varman directly or indirectly, thereby indicating the high 
place he filled in the history of the Hindu colony in this 
part of Java, still Purnavarman had predecessors and suc- 
cessors, and the kingdom of Taruma flourished for some 
generations, though we know little of the details of the 
story. Purnavarman, we learn, had a reign of at least 
twenty-two years. Let us note also the reckoning of the 
month from the new moon ( amanta system) which is cha- 
racteristic of the South Indian calendar. 1 ' 

Thus, we have clear evidence of a settled Hinduiscd 
society flourishing in West Java in the fourth and fifth 

13 This works to nearly seven English miles, as Vogel points out. 

14 This reminds one of the story ofGanga flooding the sacrificial 
hall of Jahnu. Ram., I, 63 

15 The North Indian names of the rivers Candrabhaga and 
Gomati are easily accounted for; Campa and Mathura recur in South 
India, and nothing is commoner in an age of active colonization than 
the repetition in the new country of names keeping up the memory of 
the homeland immediate or ultimate. CF. Krom, GNI, i, 129. 
Moen’s attempt [TBG, (1940), pp. 786!.] to make a sun-worshipper 
(Saura) of Purnavarman on the strength of these river-names among 
Other things, does not convince me. 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS " lu 

centuries. Purnavarman rules for over twenty-two years 10 
in which he apparently effects some conquests and lays the 
foundations of a durable kingdom; this king, who is com- 
pared to Visnu and makes a gosahasra dana, was doubtless 
a Hindu colonist from South India or a Hinduised Indo- 
nesian. That Hinduism was the prevalent faith at the 
time in Java is borne out by Fa-Hien who came to Java 
in A.D. 414 at the end of a storm-tossed voyage on his 
way fronj Ceylon to China. He says that the land was 
full of Brahmins and heretics (Pasupatas?) 1 '' and the lore 
of Buddha little known. He must have had occasion to 
know as he had to wait in Java for five months before he 
could embark again, which he did on a large ship sailing 
to China and manned by Indians. Fa-Hien’s account of 
the religious condition of the Hindu-Javanese society of 
his time accords with what we learn from other Chinese 
accounts of the mission of Gunavarman in Java and of his 
preaching of Hinayana (Mulasarvastivada) there with the 
support of the queen-mother, between the years a.D. 396 
and 424. 

It is necessary to note that the identification of Ye-p’o-ti 
of Fa-Hien and Chop’o of the Gunavarman story with 
Java, though probable, is not accepted by all scholars. 

Early Hindu colonies in Java were not confined to the 
western part of the island, as we were apt to think till 
recently from the state of the evidence at hand. For in 
December, 1933, Dr. Stutterheim had his attention drawn 
to a short rock inscription at Rambi-poedji in the eastern 
corner of Java near the Loemadjang-Djember road. 18 The 
script of the inscription is clearly early South Indian, and 

16 His name has been supposed by Rouffaer to occur in the Chi. 
nese annals; but this has been doubted. Vogel, op. cit., p. 16 

17 As Kern surmised: VG, vii, pp. I37ff. 

18 BKI, 95, (1947), pp. 897-401 



U2 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
there is not the slightest doubt that this record falls in tlje 
same class with the inscriptions of Purnavarman of West 
Java and Mulavarman of East Borneo. The whole in*, 
cription comprises only five letters very clearly engraved 
on a megalith with its upper sides smoothened and a big 
knob on one of its sides. On the relatively rough under- 
side is found the inscription which reads: 

pa ruoa te sva ra, 

the Lord of the Mountain, a name of Siva. Was this big 
boulder a primitive Indonesian object of worship and did 
the incoming Hindus continue to recognize its sanctity in 
the new order by treating it as a linga or symbol of Siva? 
If that was so, the blending of the old and the new began 
very early and went on in the happiest conceivable 
manner. 

We must also note the one-line inscription below a nutn- 
ber of religious symbols such as cakra, iankha, tridanda, 
parasu, and kamandala engraved on the rockface of Toek- 
Mas at Merbaboe in Central Java. The record speaks of 
a tirtha and may be dated about A.D. 650. It is the earliest 
record giving a clue to the state of Hindu-Javanese religi- 
ous observances.” 

Other Kingdoms : The Chinese annals mention embas- 
sies from a number of other minor kingdoms in the south- 
ern islands. Their identification is not easy. But the 
general impression we get is clearly that of a set of minor 
states in active intercourse with one another and with 
China on the one side and India on the other. 

Kan-t’o-li is one of these kingdoms located somewhere 
in Sumatra by the best modern opinion; its rulers were in 
communication with China during the period A.D. 450 to 
19 HJG, pp. ioa-3 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS U3 

553.“ The names of these rulers, to judge from their 
Chinese transcriptions which alone are now available, 
\?ere typical Hindu names, and the manners and customs 
of the country are said to have been similar to those of 
Campa and Kambuja. 

We may note at this point another trace of South Indian 
influence in Sumatra, though we are by no means sure 
that it dates from this very early period. It is the presence 
of certaii names of tribal sub-divisions which are unmis- 
takably South Indian among the Simbiring, a branch of 
the Karo-Batak race. These names are — Coliya, Pandiya, 
Meliyala, and also Pelavi (Pallava if not Melawi or Malay), 
as well as Tekang (Tekkanam, Deccan). Though there 
were many occasions in later history when these names 
might have been introduced, it is not altogether impossible 
that they came in early, or at least the ground was pre- 
pared early for their reception at a later time. 31 The 
social organization of the Karo-Bataks seems to date from 
a very remote past and it is quite probable that these 
names were taken over when they were still powerful 
realities in South India. Some support for this view may 
be derived from archaeology; no temples seem to have 
survived from these early days when Indonesian society 
was being transformed by the advent of Indian Hindu 
influences; and it is reasonable to suppose that these 
changes took place at a time when temples were still built 
of wood or other perishable material, and we know that 
this was so in the early centuries of the Christian era. 
That a continuity was maintained between the older 

20 Krom, HJG, p. 84 

21 Kern, VG, vii, pp. 67-72. Krom, GNI.i, pp. 131-9. Also BKI, 
74.(1918), pp. 2G3.6; GiQ- 1 9 ; and 81, (1926), pp. 1 .34, where Neumann 
seeks to establish the relatively recent date of this migration from 
South India. 

8 



114 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
Indonesian religious institutions and the later Hindu-Javg- 
nese temples, as we may call them, is seen from the pre- 
servation of and worship offered to large bronze kettle;, 
drums in such temples, and these drums are known clearly 
to have belonged to the pre-Hindu phase of Indonesian 
religious life. 

Sumatra certainly came into contact with Hindus and 
Hindu culture during the first two centuries a.D. at the 
latest, and the contact thus established never- wholly 
ceased and was kept up through varying fortunes for well 
over a thousand years. And this was not confined to 
contacts with South India, though doubtless proximity 
gave it a dominant part. I have dealt with Hindu 
Sumatran history in some detail elsewhere; ~ what hap. 
pened in Sumatra is typical of the history of almost every 
one of these colonies, and the following sketch in which 
Heine-Geldern briefly sums up this history and gives a 
fair estimate of the strength of the agencies concerned will 
be read with interest. SJ "I need only point out,” lie says, 
“the Buddhist establishments founded at Nalandfi in the 
ninth century and at Negapatam about a.D. iooo by kings 
of Sri Vijaya; the reproduction of Sumatran Buddhist 
idols in a Nepalese manuscript of the eleventh century ; 
the prominent part played by Sri Vijaya in the history of 
later Buddhism, and the manifold threads of Buddhist 
activity and learning spreading from Sumatra to China, 
India, and even Tibet. The invasions of Sumatra by a 
king of Cola in the eleventh century, the Tamil inscription 
of Luba Tua from the year a.D 1088 and the Dravidian 
tribal names still to be found among the Batak are also 
not to be forgotten. So w>e can safely assert that Sumatra 
has not only once been colonized by Hindus, but that, 
22 Sri Vijaya, BEFEO, xlii, pp. 239-310 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 115 

owing to more than a thousand years of close connection, 
it became an integral part of the Greater Indian cultural 
Irea. It is natural that other cultural elements reached 
Sumatra from the Tamil region and Malabar than those 
that came from Bengal, and again, influences coming 
from South India in the time of the Cola kings of the 
eleventh century, must have differed remarkably from 
those of the Pallava period in the seventh. Moreover, 
materiaSas well as spiritual influences did not make their 
way always directly from the Indian mother-country but 
were also transmitted by way of various Indian colonies, 
specially by Java, thus being subjected more or less to 
changes and assimilations before reaching the island." 

Then we have fairly long notices of the kingdom of 
P’o-li from which embassies reached China between a.D. 

'518 and 630. These so-called ‘embassies’ were doubtless 
visits of groups of traders, and the ‘tribute’ they offered 
were articles of merchandise which were exchanged by 
way of presents for other articles of more or less equal 
value; these embassies often produced letters real or faked, 
purporting to be addressed to the Imperial court by the 
ruler of the country from which they came; even these 
letters may be right in so far as they give the impression 
that Buddhism was spreading in the archipelago. 

P’o-li is said to be on an island in the sea to the south- 
east of Canton. It has been located by some in Sumatra, 
and identified by others with Bali; but some of the data 
do not suit either and lead one to think of Borneo (Puni); 
we are told for instance that it took fifty days to traverse 
the island east to west, and twenty days north to south, 
and there were 1 36 villages in it. “ The functionaries are 
called Tu-ka-ya-na, and those of lower rank Tu-ka-si-na. 
The people of this country are skilled in throwing a dis- 
cus-knife; it is the size of a (Chinese metal) mirror, in the 



116 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
middle is a hole, and the edge is like a saw; when they 
throw it at a man they never fail to hit him. Their other 
arms are about the same as in China. Their customs 
resemble those of Camboja, and the productions of the 
country are the same as of Siam. When one commits a 
murder or theft they cut off his hands, and when adultery 
has been committed, the culprit has his legs chained for a 
period of a year” (Sui Annals). 81 

These particulars have a familiar ring and tnay well 
apply to many a Hinduised land in the islands at the time. 
But then we are told that the family name of the ruler of 
P’o-li was Kaundinya, and that the queen of Suddhodana, 
the father of the Buddha, was a woman from his country, 
This shows that the royal family was actually a line of 
Indian princes or considered itself to be such. The name 
Kaurtdinya naturally leads us to think of the other Kaun- 
dinya, the Brahmin founder of Fu-nan (later Kambuja). 
We may complete the data on this tantalizing kingdom of 
P’o-li by another citation, this time from the Leang an- 
nafs.“ "The people of this country use cotton for their 
clothes, and also make sarongs of it. The king uses a 
texture of flowered silk wrapped round his body ; on his 
head he wears a golden hat more than one foot high, its 
shape resembling the one called pien in China, and adorned 
with various precious stones. He carries a sword inlaid 
with gold, and sits on a golden throne with his feet on a 
silver footstool. His female servants adorn themselves 
with golden flowers and all kinds of valuables, and some 
of them carry white feather-dusters or fans of peacock 
feathers. 

“When the king goes out, his carriage, which is made of 
different kinds of fragrant wood, is drawn by an elephant. 

24 Groeneveldt, Notes, pp. ao<i-6 

23 Ibid., p. 904-. 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 117 

On the top of it is a flat canopy of feathers, and it has 
embroidered curtains on both sides. People blowing 
Sbnchs and beating drums precede and follow him.” 

Whether P’o-li was Bali or not, modern Bali is of great 
interest to us as the only island where Hindu culture has 
survived to this day, and to this survival we owe the pre- 
servation of manuscripts which have so much to tell of 
the early history, literature and culture of Java from 
which tliese books disappeared soon after the advent of 
Islam. Bali is, as it were, a living museum of mediaeval 
Java. Neither Balinese traditions nor Balinese monuments 
carry us back to a very eaily peiiod. A persistent tradi- 
tion ascribes the incoming of Javanese culture to a mass 
flight of the Hindu-J ivanese after the fall of the empire 
of Majapahit but we are sure that Bali possessed a 
Hinduised population and culture many centuries before, 
the earliest date on a Balinese charter being §. 818 (a.D. 
896). There is no need to follow the mediaeval history of 
Bali here. But we may note that the so-called Vedas of 
Bali aie compilations of secret ta.rn.ric mantras, and that 
the only part of the real Veda known seems to be a cor- 
ruption of the gayalrl-mantra. In religion the most curious 
development is the Sivrditya cult, a combination of Sai- 
vism and Sury a- worship. Siva was considered at once as 
the highest member of the Hindu tiiad and as a form of 
Surya, and this peculiar tenet appears to have formed 
the chief deviation from Indian Hinduism for which the 
Hindu Javanese were responsible. 80 

The Balinese village has preserved its cultural character 
as a Hindu organization to this day; though doubtless 
some of its characteristics may be derived from pre-Hindu 
Indonesian institutions, it is now not easy to identify them 
26 JASB, N.S.28, (1926), pp. 351 64; Stutterheim, Het Hinduisme, 
PP- 1W.3 



118 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN '1 HE FAR aAST 
as such — a trait which finds its parallel in South India 
where we are hardly able to distinguish the Aryan from the 
pre-Aryan elements in the culture of the Tamils in histo- 
rical times. The villager in Bali entertains a vivid cons- 
ciousness that he is a member of a religious community 
to which it is a privilege to belong. The three essentials of 
every village are first, a place for the common meetings 
of the villagers, which is usually in the centre; secondly, 
places for the worship of the Lord of the Soil,;, and the 
ancestors ( pitarah ) who were the founders of the society, 
generally located at an elevation; and lastly, a place 
usually below the village for the disposal of the dead 
( preta ) who became pitarah after purification in due course. 
Balinese temples are of various types. Worship spots 
where animistic sacrifices were performed are derived 
probably from Indonesian origins. These may be said to 
correspond to the gramadevatas of an Indian village. Then 
there are Hindu and Buddhist shrints of the usual type, 
and occasionally a shrine with Islamic associations. Lastly, 
there are spots where men of earlier generations, and his- 
torical or legendary celebrities are commemorated in piety 
and gratitude. Each village had its complement of officers 
whose number varied according to needs. Business is 
transacted at periodica] meetings of the people of the desa 
held on occasions of a quasi-religious character attended 
with feasting and entertainments. This sketch of village 
life as it obtains today in Bali 27 may be taken to give a fair 
clue to life in all theHinduiscd colonies of the eastern lands 
as it obtained in the early centuries of the Christian era. 

The most interesting and instructive evidence of South 
Indian influences at work in the colonies is furnished by 
the Buddha statues found in various places in the islands; 

27 Based on R. Goris, Het Godsditnslig Karokltr dtr Balische Dorps- 
gemetnschap, Djawa, (1935), pp. 1-16 



IriK oOUIHuKN ISLANDS 119 

tjiese are not numerous, but enough to enable us to see 
clearly their mutual relations and also their resemblances 
With similar statues from Siam, Kambuja and Annam, 
and to point beyond any doubt to the celebrated art- 
centre of Amaravati on the banks of the Krsna as the source 
of their inspiration. A bronze from South Djember, 42 
centimetres high and therefore larger than the usual run 
of Javanese statuettes; another, still larger {75 centimetres) 
found ii^Sikendeng on the west coast of Celebes; and the 
colossal stone Buddha of Bukit Seguntung at Palembang 
recently restored almost to its original form by a head 
from the Batavia museum being successfully tried on its 
trunk — .are all in the characteristic Amaravati style, even 
the differences noticeable among them exactly reproduc- 
ing similar differences in the Amaravati images.-' It is 
probable that the bronzes were brought from Amaravati 
by the colonists, or imported from there by colonists 
already established overseas; the transport of the large 
stone Buddha of Palembang must have been more difficult, 
though by no means impossible. If that image was made 
locally, it must have been the work of an artist who went 
to school at Amaravati. The art of Amaravati, it should 
be noted, reached its high watermark in the latter half 
of the second and early third centuries A.D., and the Bud- 
dha of Palembang shows affinities with the earliest phase 
of this art. It is thus very likely that this Buddha image 
is the oldest relic of Hindu culture in the archipelago. 
And Palembang deserves to count among the oldest cen- 
tres of this culture; which is in good accord with the state- 
ment contained in late Chinese authorities that this was 
the region where the early state of Kan-t’o-li flourished. 

The Celebes Buddha has been studied in detail by Dr. 
Bosch, 20 and he has demonstrated in a most convincing 
28 TBG, lxxiii, (1933), Afl. 4 



120 SOU Iri INDIAN INFLUENCES IN '1HE FAR EASi’ 
manner that this bronze has little in common with early 
Sumatran (Sri-Vijaya) Hindu-Javanese art, and that it 
must have been imported directly into Celebes from thi 
Amaravati region sometime during or after the blossom- 
ing of Amaravati art and before the iiseofSii Vijaya, i.e. 
between the second and seventh century A.D. No closer 
dating is possible when we have no certainty whether we 
have before us an original art-piece from Amaravati as 
suggested above, or a local copy. Bosch rightly .observes 
that it is now futile to guess the nature or the duration of 
the Buddhist settlement on the west coast of Celebes to 
which this fragmentary Buddha image bears solitary wit- 
ness. Still less is it possible to say how far this culture 
penetrated into the interior of the island. Yet one fact 
deserves mention ; an ancient bell and a pair of cymbals 
were recently presented to the musical collection of the 
Batavian Society of Science and Arts by an official of the 
district of Loewoe in Celebes; these were used till then by 
the Boeginese bissoes 0 for chasing evil spirits during and 
after child-birth. The bell and cymbals are very similar 
to those still in daily use in South India in domestic wor- 
ship and otherwise. Thus we may suppose that South 
Indian Buddhism, received at first on the west coast of 
Celebes, penetrated along the valley of the Karama river 
into the neighbouring province of Loewoe, and the people 
of that region preserved these ancient ideas and usages 
until the time came for them to mingle with a fresh but 
allied stream of culture that came in with the spread of 
the empire of Majapahit; for the Ndgarakretagama counts 
Luwak among the dependencies of that empire. 

What then are the general conclusions that emerge from 
the data briefly reviewed so far? We see that the move- 
29 This word, once thought to be derived from Sanskrit bhiksu, 
is now seen to be an Indonesian vocable. 



TUB SOUTHERN ISLANDS >21 

njent of colonization was in full swing in the second cen- 
tury A.D., and its beginnings may well be put at the be- 
ginning of the Christian era. The Hinduisation of the 
archipelago did not take place all at one time, and must 
have been a gradual process with different beginnings and 
results in different places. The Buddha of Palembang 
was perhaps set up in the second century and Devavarman 
ruled in Java about the same time. On the other hand, 
the beginning of Hindu rule in Borneo (Kutei) can be 
traced only to one generation before Mulavarman c. 
A.D. 400. The relics of this movement are naturally 
traceable in the Malay Peninsula also where the oldest 
epigraphical records date fiom about A.D. 400. 

It would of course be wrong to imagine that Hinduism 
in the archipelago was confined only to the spots that 
have yielded relics; this is largely a matter of chance, 
and but for the Palembang Buddha recovered in so for- 
tuitous a manner and the Tupas at Moeara Kaman 
(Borneo), we should have known nothing of two of the 
most ancient Hindu centres in Sumatia and Borneo. We 
cannot also be guided in our conclusions by the abund- 
ance of Hindu relics on a site: for the chances are that 
these date from the period of the spread of Hindu-Java- 
nese power which came long aftei the initial period of 
colonization and by which a cultuie long since strongly 
Hinduised spread itself practically over the whole archi- 
pelago. Even trained archaeologists sometimes find it 
difficult to separate the remains of the earlier culture 
from those of the later. Palaeography and art-style are 
the two unmistakable marks of the antiquity of objects 
belonging to really early times and attesting direct con- 
tact of these lands with India in those days. 

These tests, as we have seen, point to a time much 
earlier than that of the rise of the Pallavas as the age of 



122 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
colonization par excellence, and the country farther north 
of the Pallava kingdom of history as the original home of 
the colonists. We have indeed evidence of a somewhat . 
later date attesting the part of the rest of the east coast 
of South India and even of its west coast in the move- 
ment; but the primacy in this expansion movement be- 
longs to the Andhra country, to its great centres of Bud- 
dhism and its trade marts on the coast. 

In what manner did Hindu influences spread in the 
eastern lands, and what was the motive of the migration 
of the Hindus to the eastern countries? In a general way, 
this movement may well be looked upon as just a con- 
tinuation of the process by which the Deccan and South 
India were Aryanised and Hinduised by the inflow of 
northern influences. Having secured the prevalence of 
their culture in the whole ofjambudvipa, the apostles of 
Aryan culture turned their attention to the neighbouring 
lands (dvipantara ) ” across the sea. But the question remains: 
What exactly was the means of propagation and who 
were its agents? This question has been discussed at con- 
siderable length by Krom 11 and the following observations 
are based on that discussion. 

Of political conquest and empire-building, of the hold- 
ing down by force of vast populations and their exploita- 
tion to the economic benefit and political advantage of a 
distant foreign power, there is no question here at all. 
All our sources agree in presenting a picture of a number 
of autonomous Hinduised states, each going its own way 
and living its separate life, all having direct but by no 
means very brisk trade relations with India and China — 
witness for instance Fa-Hien’s long halt in Java. But of 


30 Sylvain Levi, BKI, 88, pp. 621-7 

31 HJG, pp. 88-94; GNI, i, pp. 136-42 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 123 

the political influence of India there is no trace whatso- 
ever . 32 

* To the question, who first brought the elements of Hindu 
culture to these lands, there are a number of possible 
answers: the merchant, the adventurer, the priest or the 
exile. We shall consider all of them in turn. 

The Merchant. The existence of trade relations between 
India and the East, and the considerable share of Indians 
in the carrying trade of the Indian Ocean are alike attes- 
ted by the early literature of the Tamil country and of 
Pali Buddhism. The splendid description of the sea and its 
riches given by Varahamihira at the beginning of the 
chapter on Agastyacara in his Brhat-samhita has been in- 
terpreted as an indirect reference to the large gains already 
enjoyed for many years by Indian merchants as a result 
of their trade with the archipelago / 3 
Wherever the merchants found a suitable market for 
their wares or articles which they wished to bring over to 
India, in those places they would naturally spend a con- 
siderable time, establish lodges and factories, and perhaps 
enter into marital relations with the women of the land 
and raise progeny. Thus might grow up gradually a half- 
Indian, half-Indoncsian population which became the 
means of spreading Hindu ideas and institutions among 
the indigenous population. Parallels to this development 
may be found in what happened a thousand years later 
when Islam came into the archipelago or in the early 
stages of the establishment of European trading com- 
panies in the East. 

32 The Cola expeditions against Sri Vijaya in the eleventh cen- 
tury, which are in a class by themselves, do not belong to this period 
or affect the substance of the argument presented above. 

33 Poerbatjaraka — Agjitja iu dm Archipel, pp. n-ta 



124 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
The Adventurer. The second possibility is that of rob- 
ber chieftains raiding and plundering the coasts with their 
followers and where possible holding the population und^r 
by force, and thus securing for themselves footholds in the 
new countries from which they might extend their depre- 
dations farther and farther. More friendly relations with 
the local population and something like a new society 
might grow up in such places in course of time. In such 
cases, conceivably, the foreign adventurer mieSt marry 
into the local royal family and thus legitimatize and 
strengthen his position in the eyes of the people. The 
memory of such occurrences seems to be preserved in the 
later Malay and Javanese traditions: but they need not 
necessarily have been confined to the beginnings of colo- 
nization and might well have happened long after the 
Hinduisation of these lands was completed. 

The Priest. Tradition is eloquent on the role of the 
priest in the spread of Hindu culture. The Brahmin 
founder of Fu-nan in Cambodia has his peer in the Java- 
nese tradition relating to Tritresta who is said to have in- 
troduced the Hindu mode of divine worship and the Hindu 
calendar into Java and whose son became king there. 
Most of the inscriptions we have dealt with before attest 
the great importance attaching to religious ceremonial in 
the colonies and are framed in the correct metrical Sans- 
krit idiom of scholarly Brahmins; such verses could hardly 
proceed from merchants or soldiers. After all it is the 
Brahmin who can alone secure to society the protection 
of the Higher Powers and had the knowledge required to 
assist the state with advice in a difficulty; no wonder 
then that whether by hearsay or by observation of neigh- 
bouring states, Indonesian chiefs came to realize the worth 
of such magical protection and did their best to procure 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 125 

it/or themselves. There was much competition for the 
services of such Brahmins and they began to appear in 
increasing numbers; and besides performing the particular 
services for which they were invited, they became active 
agents in the further propagation of Hindu culture. 

And lastly, the Exile. In this category we have to 
reckon groups of people forced by circumstances to leave 
the land of their birth. Krom states that at the beginning 
of the Christian era the Tamil country was in a restless 
condition and that Tamil texts narrate the story of the 
siege and fall of Tiruchirapalli after which a hundred 
families migrated in ships to ‘an island’. I am unable to 
trace any authority for these statements and Krom does 
not cite any. Again. Moens has sought to find in the 
confusion following Samudragupta's raid into the Deccan 
and the political revolutions in the Andhra country pre- 
ceding and follow ing Pulakesin’s conquest of Vengi, cir- 
cumstances which compelled considerable sections of the 
population to leave i’ie country and migrate to the islands, 
Others have turned to the period following the death of 
Harsa, in northern India, for a similar reason. These 
suggestions, however, relate to a much later time than the 
beginnings of colonization; and they lack evidence in their 
support. There is nothing to indicate that political un- 
settlement in India diove people to abandon the country 
and migrate to other lands. And on the whole, the role 
of political exiles in the furtherance of this movement of 
colonization could not have been anything so extensive or 
significant. 

The part of the learned Brahmin priest might appear at 
first sight to be the most important of all: but then his 
services would be required and appreciated only in a 
society that has already gained acquaintance with Hindu 
culture and institutions, and it seems extremely unlikely 



126 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR E.-vST 
that Brahmins went out in any numbers in a missionary 
spirit to preach their creed and commend their practices 
to peoples who were utter strangers to both. Even Bu^- 
dhist monks, who were far more eager to preach their 
gospel, often awaited a call before they started on a prea- 
ching mission. The case of a Brahmin founder of a king- 
dom like Kaundinya of Fu-nan is of course quite another 
matter. The best course then would be to suppose that 
the merchant’s role was the most important at tt<e outset, 
and when success attended his enterprise and a mixed 
society arose, the priest came in to consolidate it and 
make it a centre from which the process of Hinduisation 
could be extended further into fresh lands. 

In every instance in which we are able to follow the 
history of the new states, we find the native elements of 
the population holding their own by the side of the new- 
comers, and the culture and society resulting in course of 
time are seen to be decidedly of a mixed character. If 
there was any exclusiveness among the Hindu colonists 
at the beginning, it must have broken down under the 
pressure of time and circumstance. 

We can hardly believe that the actual course of events 
was the same in all places or that the use of force against 
natives was totally unknown. Hindu institutions might 
have been forced on an unwilling people in one place and 
eagerly welcomed by them in another; but everywhere 
the newcomers seem to have been few and the natives 
many; in course of time this naturally led to the growth of 
a mixed culture to which both elements of the population 
had made their contribution. The mixture was sometimes 
symbolized at the outset by intermarriages among the 
people in some cases, in the ruling families in others. 

The language of the inscriptions has much to tell us in 
this matter; the earliest of them are in good Sanskrit, 



TliF. SOUTHERN /STANDS 


ce/tainly not the language of the people, and represent 
perhaps the phase of relative exclusiveness of the Hindu 
element in the newly-settled lands. When the new mixed 
society comes into its own some generations later, inscrip- 
tions begin to appear in Old Javanese or Old Malay; the 
structure of the language is fully Indonesian, but a large 
number of words of Indian origin have got in, and these 
are mostly the names of the higher culture goods that 
have cor^e in with the Hindus. 

Let us also note this: the Indian words are borrowed 
not from any of the spoken idioms of the Hindus, but 
usually in their Sanskrit form. Thus the new language 
was an Indonesian idiom adapted by liberal borrowings 
from Sanskrit to suit '.he newly-growing culture. 01 

The Javanese tradition relating to Adi Saka, the intro- 
ducer of a new religion, a new social order, a new script 
and a new calendar, viz. the Saka era beginning with a.D. 
78, is a transparent fiction which personifies the name of 
the era employed in Javanese inscriptions (the era was 
used elsewhere in the colonies also) and preserves the 
memory of the times when much of the higher culture of 
South India overflowed into Java in the early centuries 
A.D. This tradition also clearly points to a pre-existing 
community in Java which received the new culture with 
more or less readiness when it was first introduced among 
them. 

Everywhere the court and the nobles might have sought 
distinction by affecting the new culture more or less 
thoroughly; but in the interior, the people would have 
kept to their traditional ways and their mode of life would 
have been but little touched by the new practices. There 
is a Javanese proverb -Nagara mawa tata, desa mawa cara 
(the court has its culture, the people their custom)— which 
34 Cf. Ferrand, JA, Oct.-Dec., 1933, pp. 394-7 



125 SOU'III INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
stresses the sharp difference between the higher Hindp- 
Javanese culture of the land and its folk-ways; this surely 
is based on a real difference between the H i n d u - J a v a n pjse 
and the purely Javanese elements of the population. ' 5 
Yet in course of time their pagan religion forced its way 
into the new society and compelled a compromise between 
the old and the new. The great popularity in Java of 
Siva as Bhatara Guru, the divine bestower of wisdom, 
and the worship of Sri as the special protectr- ss of the 
rice-crop, may well hide the essence of Indonesian deities 
under a Hindu garb. Likewise in political life, while the 
king might go on issuing his edicts based on the Hindu 
law-books, the local officials stuck tenaciously to the rule 
of custom. And in course of time when contact with the 
mother-country became infrequent and finally ceased, 
the Hindu culture of the colonies necessarily underwent 
a radical transformation, lost its capacity for further 
expansion and became merged in a culture which was 
neither Hindu nor Indonesian but a synthesis of the two. 

To trace in any detail the impulses derived by these 
islands from South India would be to embark on an elabo- 
rate review of the whole range of Hindu-Javanese history 
together with that of the empire of Sri Vijaya, and that is 
beyond the scope of my present purpose. Some observa- 
tions of a general character calculated to illustrate the 
sustained contact between South India and the islands, 
and its results on the religion, administration, literature 
and art would, however, not be out of place here. 

The role of Agastya as the promoter of Hinduisation in 
Java and the preacher of Saivism is well attested by epi- 
graphy, literature and sculpture . 30 The famous Dinaja 

35 Berg, Hoofdlijnen, pp. n, 14 

36 Poerbatjaraka, Agastya in den Archiptl and my Agastya, TBG, 
(1936). PP- 471-545 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS . I2y 

inscription (a.D. 760) records how the ruler of East Java, 
who was a great devotee of Agastya, made a fine abode 
tor that great sage, and installed in it a beautiful Agastya 
image of black stone in the place of the wooden image set 
up by his ancestors— clear evidence of the importance 
and continuity of Agastya worship in Java. And Bosch 
has argued in a convincing manner that Agastya was 
supposed to have played the role of an intcimediary bet- 
ween th 3 Deity and Royalty in Java, just as other sages 
did in Campa and Kambuja. 87 

This is just a continuation of the Agastya tradition from 
South India in which he is represented as the pioneer of 
Indo-Aryan culture in peninsular India south of the 
Vindhyas. We may note in passing that the Cangal ins- 
cription (a.d 732) contains a reference to Kuftjarakufija- 
de£a in a line from which a few letters have disappeared. 
This deia was till recently taken to be the borderland bet- 
ween Tirunelveli and Travancore where the Tambraparni 
river takes its rise in the Agastyaku{a hill. Recently the 
suggestion has been made by Stutterheim that the line 
should be read : 

srimat kuhjarakuiijadeia nihilam Gangadi tirthavrtam 

and that the deia should be looked for in Central Java, 
where the Toek Mas river is found compared to Ganga in 
another inscription noticed already by us. 8 ’ But this makes 
little difference, for the possibility remains that the deia in 
Java got its name from a district in South India. 

The same scholar has argued with great force that the 
Hindu-Javanese Candi, though its shape and ornaments 
are Hindu in origin, is really a purely Indonesian monu- 
ment based on purely Indonesian conceptions. The close 

37 TBG, 64 (1924), pp. 227-86 

38 Above p. 112 and TBG, (1939), p. 8 j. Chhabra, Expansion, p. 36. 



no SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
similarity in architectural features between the Hindu- 
Javanese temple and the Pallava temples of South India 
has often been noted and closely studied in a well-known 
memoir by Dr. F. D. K. Bosch.” And Stutterheim is not 
oblivious of this relation; he says: “the entombing of old 
Javanese kings was not a Hinduistic practice grown in 
course of time more and more Indonesian, but a thoroughly 
Indonesian ceremony, which in Java and Bali took a 
Hinduistic form and should be considered as a higher form 
of the analogous ceremonies of the Dayaks and other 
Indonesian peoples not influenced by the Hindus .” 10 Tem- 
ples dedicated to dead kings and warriors are not so entire- 
ly unknown in South India as Stutterheim seems to think , 11 
though one sees quite clearly that the practice of worship- 
ping actual statues of dead kings and queens as gods and 
goddesses carried the South Indian practice much farther 
than in the mother country. And one may doubt if 
Stutterheim’s references to the Indonesian conceptions of 
‘the land of the souls’ has any real bearing on this develop- 
ment. Again, it is far from certain that all Gaddis are 
sepulchral in character; in Bali a temple is exclusively the 
residence of a god, though the Javanese Candi like the 
South Indian temple, seems to have had a dual character — 
a temple as well as a mausoleum . 19 

39 Rupam, Jan. 1924 

40 JAOS, 51, (1931), p. 12 

41 In addition to the examples cited by A. K. G. at n. 5, pp. 4-5, 
ibid., I may invite reference to my Colas, index s. v. palli patfai. 

42 Attention may be invited to a very good discussion of the 
whole subject by J. C. Van Eerde, Hindu- Jaoaansche en Balische Eere- 
dimst, BKI, 65 (1911), pp. 1-39. He discusses the subject under three 
heads— Siva and Buddha, Candi and hleru, and Dhinarma and 
Devata. Dhinarma means ‘entombed by means of an image’. See 
also Moens, TBG, 58 (1919), pp. 493 ff. A similar practice obtained 
among ancient Khmers also: Coedes in BCIA, (1911), p. 46 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS 131 

The frequency with which Ganesa images occur in Java 
is paralleled only by the. innumerable shrines to that 
urbane godling in the whole of South India, and it has 
been very properly explained by Slutterheim that, as the 
guarantor of safety in all enterprises and protector against 
vighnas (obstacles), he was honoured in ferries, forests, 
mountains and other dangerous spots. 13 A peculiar Bhima- 
cultus of ancient Java and the posthumous name of 
KrtanagaM of Singhasari (,\.D. 1268-1292), viz. Sivabud- 
dhaloka may be noticed in passing as witnesses to interest- 
ing features of later Hindu-Javanese religious develop- 
ment. The Bhima cult is noteworthy for the features it 
derives from a confusion between Bhima as a name of 
Siva and Bhima, the second of the five Pandava brothers, 
heroes of the Mahabharata. " The name Sivabuddhaloka 
shows the very close connexion between Saivism and 
Buddhism prevailing in Java unlike in India; indeed, an 
easy-going tolerance among the cults, and borrowing and 
blending of originally distinctive traits, mark the entire 
religious atmosphere of ancient Java. Kings are at times 
represented by images of Visnu bearing Saiva emblems — 
a feature which only reproduces the engraving of Saiva 
and Vaisnava symbols side by side above the Toek Mas in- 
scription already noticed. In one instance, the conception 
of Ardhanari is effectively adapted to the representation 
in one figure of Krtanagara with his queen Bajradevi.“ 
The indebtedness of old Javanese literature and sculp- 
ture to Indian originals is well-known; the literary forms 
including metres, the literary dialect often called Kawi 
(though the term Old Javanese is to be preferred, to avoid 

43 BKI, 86, pp. 308-10 

44 Djawa, xv, (1935), pp. 37-64 

45 Krom, HJG, pp. 344-5; Stutterheim, Hit Hinduism in dm 
Archiptl, pp. 196-9 and fig. 14 



132 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
confusion with the Javanese literary dialect of today) and 
the choice of subject-matter are all more or less comple- 
tely Indian. Many books are direct translations, others 
adaptations to Javanese needs. The Mahabharata, parti- 
cularly the Adi and Virata parvas, is the main source of 
the new Javanese Wayang talcs. The comparison of the 
available texts, however, leads to no definite results regard- 
ing the particular recensions employed by the Old Java- 
nese translators; the present South Indian text the epic 
differs from the Javanese, and the suggestion has been made 
that these differences are more modern than the times 
when the epic was taken over by Java. Ksemendra’s 
summary of the epic and the Old Javanese Mahabharata, 
both seem to be derived from a common text. h ' Likewise 
the Ramayaria sculptures of Prambariam exhibit differ- 
ences from the story as depicted in Valmiki; Stutterheim, 
who has made a detailed study of the various versions of 
the Rama legend prevalent in India and in the colonies, 
has not found it easy to trace the source of the Javanese 
version; he only reaches the rather vague conclusion that 
in this matter our eyes should not be turned exclusively 
on South India but Western and Eastern India also.' T 

The Javanese theatre and dance have attracted great 
attention and formed the subject of many studies, some 
of a controversial nature. Java and Bali know to this day 
many forms of the Wayang: shadow-play, mask-play, 
pantomime and something like the legitimate theatre 
where the actors speak and act, though even here the 
dalang (announcer) has not been quite eliminated. The 
main point of the discussion has been the extent to which 
the Wayang is Hindu or Indonesian in its origin. The 

46 Hazeu, TBG, 44, (1901), pp. *89-357 and Juynboll, Mbh. 
Introduction. 

47 BKI, 84, (1938), p. 130 



THE SOUTHERN ISLXNDS ' 133 

Indonesian view had a strong vogue until in 1906 Pischel 
drew pointed attention to the chayanataka (shadow-play) 
of India; since then it has been recognized that Hindu in- 
fluences must be allowed a considerable share not only in 
providing the subject-matter of the Lakons (stage versions 
of stories) but in the technique of the whole art. At the 
same time, in the form in which we now know it, there is 
no doubt that several features of a primitive Indonesian 
ancestor- worhip have taken a secure place in the appara- 
tus of the Wayang. Two facts of undoubted significance 
to the history of the Wayang are: First, it is not found in 
Indonesia as a whole but exclusively in Java and Bali, the 
lands that came strongly under Hindu influences. J8 Second- 
ly, the shadow-play comes into dominance in later Java- 
nese culture to the extent to which it departs from Hinduist 
tradition. Both these facts go far to confirm the hypo- 
thesis originally formulated by Krom, and confirmed 
after detailed study by Rassers, that a Hindu shadow- 
theatre was first introduced into court and higher society 
in the early days of colonization, and that it then slowly 
penetrated popular culture and there became mixed up 
with the traditional rituals of ancestor-worship carried 
out by means of images of ancestors. The Wayang as we 
know it is thus neither Hindu nor Javanese but Hindu- 
Javanese. We cannot escape the impression that the In- 
dian shadow-play is in Java rejuvenated and renewed. 
An evolution takes place which, as Rassers puts it, brings 
it nearer its source and presents it with unusual clarity in 
its full religious significance. 10 

48 There is a shadow-play in Siam also; but that is clearly deri- 
ved either from Java or possibly even directly from India. 

49 Rassers, Over Hen Oorsprong nan het Javaansche Tooneel, BKI, 
88, (1930.31), pp. 317-450. See also BKI, vi, 10, pp. 501-65; vii, 5, 



134 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
There are two scales in Javanese music — the slendro 
with 5 tones in the octave and pelog with seven. The 
former is popular in Central Java, the other in the eastern 
and western parts of the island; slendro is connected with 
the Ramayana and Mahabharata while pelog goes with 
Indonesian stories of the Panji. The origin and relative 
antiquity of the two scales have been subjects of debate. 
Kunst holds that the slendro scale is younger and foreign 
in origin, probably an introduction of the Sailer dras from 
Sumatra immediately, and ultimately from India. Stut- 
terheim 30 points out as against this that the slendro is older 
as a scale of court music, just as Middle Javanese courts 
flourished much earlier than East Javanese. Tradition 
treats the slendro as a gift of Girinatha, the lord of the 
mountain, which is at once a name of Siva and a synonym 
of the name Sailendra; Stutterheim thinks the Saiva 
Sailendras of Mataram must be taken to be indicated by 
this tradition, and that consequently the scale was as in- 
digenous in origin as the other scale. But the Sailendras 
were doubtless a race of Hindu-Javancse rulers and not 
without South Indian affiliations of their own. 31 

In the organization of rural economy and village admi- 
nistration, again, Java presents the same unmistakable 
blend between pre-Hindu Indonesian institutions and 
ideas and those borrowed from South India. The ideas 
of common property in some part of the village lands and 
of unrestricted individual property, including the right to 
sell or transfer it to persons who did not belong to the 
tribe, seem to have been developed by Indonesians them- 
selves; 53 this is an inference based on modern observations 

50 BKI, 89, (193a), pp. 1 10-16 

51 See my Origin of the Sailendras, TBG, (1935), pp. 605 ff. and 
Agastya, TBG, (1936), pp. 500 ft'. 

52 TP, i, (1890), pp. 377-96': 



THE SOUTHERN ISLANDS ‘ 135 

of those parts of Indonesia which never came under Hindu 
influences as Java and Bali did, and must be accepted 
with some reserve when it is applied to Indonesian society 
of the early historical period. But Javanese tradition is 
quite clear that the existing organization of villages as 
more or less autonomous townships each with a separate 
individuality of its own, dales from the advent of the 
Hindus upon the island, and the institutions of village 
government are either unknown or quite different in their 
nature in the non-Hinduised parts of Indonesia . 58 The 
Hindu regard for deiadharma, its tendency to treat the 
family rather than the individual as the unit of social 
system, the regard for the married man ( grhaslha ) who 
had a secure position in the social order (only married 
men being full burghers in Java), and the grouping 
of four, eight, or ten adjacent villages into a larger 
local unit — all these features Java shared in common 
with India. And the proceedings at village meetings 
in Java even today strongly remind one of the condi- 
tions of village administration in South India in ancient 
days as it is vividly portrayed in the numberless inscrip- 
tions of the Cola monarchs. This may be seen from the 
account 51 of such a meeting from the pen of a modern 
observer. 

Our attention has been given mainly to the early cul- 
tural movements and the role of South India in their pro- 
motion. But this is only due to our initial intention to 
restrict the scope of our study to this aspect of the subject; 
influences from other parts of India flowed into Java and 
other lands in the East, though as I understand the matter, 
they were, on the whole, weaker and less persistent than 

5 3 BKI, vi, 8, (1901), pp. 1-7 

54 sir Hesketh Bell, Foreign Colonial Administration in the Far 

East, pp. 54-7 



136 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
those from South India. The discovery of a Gupta gold 
coin of Gandragupta II near Batu Baka in Central Java, 
the early nagari script and Mahayana Buddhism charac^ 
teristic of the early Sailendra records of Java, which bring 
them into direct relation with Nalanda and the Palas of 
Bengal, are sufficient testimony to the presence of other 
Indian influences in Java than those of South India. 

We should not also overlook the continuous contact 
maintained by Java with South India in later tin\es. The 
relations between the Sailendra empire of Sri Vijaya and 
the Cola empire at the end of the tenth century and in the 
eleventh century form an important chapter of their his- 
tory and Java was certainly not unaffected by them. The 
Nagarakretagama mentions that Buddhaditya, a bhiksu of 
Kanclpura, sang ttokas in praise of the Javanese ruler 
Hayam Wuruk in the fourteenth century— a testimony to 
those renewed and fresh contacts with South India which 
students of Hindu-Javanese art history have found it 
necessary to postulate . 55 Jayanagara adopted the charac- 
teristic Pandyan title Sundarapandya at his coronation 
early in the fourteenth century and adopted the Pandyan 
emblem of minadvaya (two carps) for his seal . 50 And there 
is literary evidence of an embassy from Malaya to Vijay- 
nagar in the days of the celebrated Krsna Deva Raya . 57 


53 See Braudes, Tjandi Singasari and Panataran, pp. 33-3 

56 HJG, p. 379 

57 BKI, vii, 3, (1904), pp. 311-16 



CHAPTER XI 


* BORNEO 

Large rivers are often the channels of commerce and 
colonization, and in Borneo, the Kapoeas, Barito and 
Mahakam rivers have promoted intercourse between the 
interior gf this large island and the outside world. At 
Kutei at the mouth of the Mahakam, and at Moeara 
Kaman are found the oldest inscriptions of the Archipe- 
lago. Though not dated, these inscriptions may from 
their script be taken to belong to the end of the fourth 
century a.D. 

They are engraved on four stone pillars, sacrificial posts 
(yiipas), and are in Sanskrit verse. The first mentions 
that the celebrated king Kufldunga had a famous son, 
ASvavarman, the founder of a dynasty ( vamiakarta . ); he 
had three sons, the best among them being Mulavarman 
who performed the bahusuimnaka sacrifice, commemora- 
ted by this yiipa set up by the best of Brahmins. The 
second post was set up by priests who had come there to 
receive gifts of twenty thousand kine 1 in the most sacred 
kfetra of Vaprakesvara. The third, also set up by priests, 
commemorates the great gifts of the same king including 
Kalpavrksa and land among other things. The fourth 
inscription is just a fragment; it comparesBhagiratha born 
of Sagara evidently to the son of Mulavarman. 

Besides these four pillars, three other similar inscribed 
yupas were found in the same place in 1940 and they also 
record the gifts of Mulavarman. The first of these 

1 The original expression is vinsatirgosahnsrakam. Vogel (p. 214) 
took this to be 1020 kine; but changed his view later, Pub. Oudh. 
Diaut, i*. p. 32. n. 80 



138 aUUiH INDIAN INl'LUnNCKS IN lHli I'AK jiAST 
inscriptions comprises two verses, an anustup and an drya, 
and mentions gifts of jaladhenu, ghrtadhenu, kapila, lila, and 
vrsabhaikadasa, meaning respectively water-cow, ghee-CQv >, 
tawny-cow, sesamum, and eleven bulls. Dhenu is explain- 
ed by Monier-Williams as a gift in lieu of or in the shape 
of a cow. The second inscription, a single anustup verse 
records the gift of a tilaparnaia (sesamum mountain) with 
a row of lamps ( dipamala ). The last is longer, comprising 
four verses in anustup, but has many gaps. It v says that 
Mulavarman conquered many kings in war and made them 
his vassals just as Yudhisthira had done; it also records 
the gifts at VaprakeSvara of 40,000 and 30,000 (gold 
coins?) and of Jivadana of different kinds ( prthagvidham ); 
it mentions an akasadipa set up in the capital city and ends: 

yupoyam sthapito viprair-nndna ( desad ) ihd ( gataih ) 

i. e. this yiipa (post) has been erected by Brahmins who 
came here from different countries. 2 

The Sanskrit language, the script and the contents of 
these inscriptions are fully Hindu, and decidedly South 
Indian. The twice-born ( dvijendraih , vipraili), the sacrifi- 
ces named, the kalpavrksa and all the other dands, the 
vamiakarta, the genealogy, and the reference to the story 
of Bhaglratha and Sagara, are all typically Indian. But 
the name of the ksetra where the gift is made, Vaprakes- 
vara, though Hindu in its appearance, is hard to explain. 
The term recurs as BaprakeSvara in Javanese epigraphy. 

The suggestion has been made that in V(B)aprakeSvara 
we have to recognize an Indonesian institution in an 
Indian (Sanskrit) garb. Each Indonesian village had its 
own shrine in the form of an enclosed space ( vapra ) in the 
centre of which stood a wooden sacrificial post at which 
many an animal was slaughtered ceremonially. Possibly 
2 JGIS, xii, (1945), pp. 14.17. 



BORNEO 


130 


jt was also a burial ground at which again animal sacri- 
fices were common, the prototype of the well-known 
'Candis of Java . 3 4 But all this sounds rather far-fetched 
and unconvincing. True, monumental yupas are rare in 
India and those of Borneo differ considerably in size and 
form from the most typical of the yupas so far known in 
India, e.g. those of Isapur, a village on the bank of the 
Jumna opposite Muthura .' 1 But we cannot expect any 
close conformity in details between Mathura of the first 
century A.D. and Borneo of the fourth, and we should re- 
member also that yupas of different sizes and shapes were 
prescribed for different sacrifices and by different schools 
of Srauta-sutras. Let us also note that only one of the 
yupas of Borneo is sacrificial ( yajnasya yupa), two others 
are donative and describe as tasya putiyasya yupoyam and 
tisam punyagaitdnam yupoyam, and we lack the data for 
determining the nature of the fourth stone, the inscription 
on it being only legible in part. 

There is absolutely no indication in the inscriptions of 
any Indonesian religious influences. They are all in cor- 
rect Sanskrit, and fully devoted to yajila and dana in 
which blue-blooded Brahmins who came from all the 
Hindu settlements ( ihdgataih ) in the neighbourhood took 
part. There is indeed the name Kundunga; he is des- 
cribed as a mahatma and has ASvavarman for his son and 

3 The arguments thus briefly summarized are stated at length 
and examined in my paper on Agaslya, TBG, (1936), lxxvi.pp. 515-34. 

4 “If we remember that the Isapur pillars measure about 5 
metres in height, whilst their width is nearly the same as that of the 
Kutei stones, it will be seen that both as regards size and shape, 
there is no similarity whatever between the two sets of monuments”— 
Vogel, Yupa Inscriptions , p. aoz. The Isapur Yupas again were exact 
copies of wooden originals and ornamented like them, while the 



140 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
Mulavarman for grandson; yet his name sounds un- 
Indian . 5 6 But he too, as Kern pointed out long ago , 0 
“must have been an adherent of Hinduism. Otherwise’ 
he would not have given his son an Indian name.” Clearly 
we have here to do with an indigenous royal family in 
the process of being Hinduised, and accepting the Hindu 
culture and religion just as they came to them from across 
the seas. But whether this culture was just a veneer 
adopted by the upper classes for its novelty andedistinc- 
tion, or permeated the details of everyday life and prac- 
tice and soaked down to the common people, we have 
now no means of determining. 

In any event V(B)aprakesvara is by no means an Indo- 
nesian term. The — tivara ending is typically Indian, not 
to say South Indian, and Vapra figures among the twenty- 
eight Veda-vyasas named in the Visnu Purana and is 
represented by an image in the Brahma temple at Pram- 
banam. There is also reason to think that this sage was 
held to be identical with Agastya, so that the name of 
the ksetram in Borneo attests the role of Agastya, the my- 
thical apostle of Hindu culture in South India and the 
Eastern lands. Some early names and forms of Hinduism 
which in the homeland became overlaid by later aspects 
might well have been preserved in their original form in 
the colonies, and Baprakesvara may ■well be considered 
one of them. This and some other names of a like forma- 
tion, PutikeSvara, Malanku§e£vara and so on, are known 
in Java also. 

The provenance of the inscribed yiipa stones is not alto- 
gether clear; they have sometimes been stated to have 

5 The attempts to connect this name with Kaundinya, the Hind- 
uiser of Indo-China, or with Kandu-Kura, a place in South India, 
are alike clearly misplaced. 

6 A* cited by Vogel, p. 197. 



BORNiO 141 

been found at Kutei, but after considering all the evi- 
dence now available, Vogel came to the conclusion that 
Moeara Kaman, at the confluence of the Mahakam river 
with its tributary the Kaman, has the strongest claim to 
be considered the findspot of th eyilpas.'' He quotes H. von 
Dewall, who visited Moeara Kaman in 1847 and wrote: 
“Here are found a number of stone slabs piled up under- 
ground. It was on this spot also that the idol of massive 
gold, weighing 8 thail, was discovered, which the Sultan 
wears round his neck on State occasions. This image is 
four-armed, well proportioned and of good workmanship 
and seems to represent some god of Hindu mythology. 
The youthful prince, moreover, wears beneath this idol 
another golden, box-shaped object on which various my- 
thological figures of the Hindu religion are shown in alto- 
relievo. The same appears to be of higher antiquity than 
the golden image, but, like the idol, it was discovered 
beneath the stone slabs in the reign of Sultan Muhammad 
Salih-ud-Din.” The golden statuette is a representation 
of Visnu ; s a gold tortoise is also known to have come 
from the same place. 

Hindu images of the Saiva pantheon have been found 
in various other localities in the island. A small-sized 
nandi and a linga come from the spot where the Rata river 
joins the Mahakam.’ The caves of Mount Kombeng, 
another site in the Pantoen valley in Kutei, contain a 
collection of Hindu images which seem to have been 
stowed away here for safety at some time or other, and 
must originally have belonged to some temples in the 
neighbourhood. They have tenons underneath the base, 
indicating that they originally stood in some niches or 

7 Vogel, op. cil., pp. 206-10 

8 Fig. on p. 26, ABIA, (192C) 

9 Vogel, p. 203, n. 3 



142 SOUTH INDIAN INFLUENCES IN THE FAR EAST 
receptacles. A Ganesa surely, and possibly a Visnu, a, 
Brahma, a nandi and a Karttikeya seem to be among 
them. 10 They have not yet been fully and accurately 
described. Three of these images, all Saiva, are said to 
have been removed to the Batavia museum. 

The exact age of most of these finds, other than the 
yiipa inscriptions, has not been studied and can hardly be 
settled without further exploration of the still virgin field 
of the archaeology of Borneo. Dr. Bosch" has 'pointed 
out that the style and grouping of the Saiva images of 
the Kombeng caves show clear Hindu-Javanese influences 
at work and concluded thence that it is improbable that 
Hindu colonists migrated directly to Borneo. But to say 
this is to fly in the face of the evidence of the yupa inscrip, 
tions. It is best to suppose either that the Hindu colonies 
of Borneo in the later phases of their development lost 
touch with India and naturally fell more and more under 
influences of Hindu-Javanese origin, or that these images 
are the relics of a new and later Hindu-Javanese settle- 
ment in Borneo. There are some Buddhist images also 
among them, mostly female deities, which “show grave 
errors and misconceptions”; the stone-masons who 
fashioned them must have lost touch with the authentic 
tradition of their co-religionists elsewhere. 

Buddhism is not otherwise unrepresented in the island. 
A bronze Buddha from Kota Bangoen is much earlier and 
nearer the true Buddhist tradition; it recalls the Amara- 
vatl style, though Hindu-Javanese influences also seem to 
be present. This image was destroyed by fire in the 
Paris exhibition of 1931. 10 In West Borneo in the Kapuas 

10 Vogel, p. 311. ABIA, (1936), pp. 35-6 

11 OV, (1935), pp. 133-6. Cf. Krom, HJG, p. 74; ABIA, (1936), 
P- 25 

12 Chhabra, p. 38; ABIA, (1936), pi. xi 



BORNEO 


143 


region and in Batoe-Pahat at the source of the Tekarek 
are found stupas engraved on rocks with inscriptions on 
their sides in somewhat late Pallava script, containing the 
Buddhist ye-te formula and another verse ajndnacciyate 
jiidnam etc., nearly as well known. These verses also 
occur in the Kedah inscription of Navika Buddhagupta. 
There are other parts of these inscriptions of which the 
import is far from clear as yet. 1:1 

A GanJsa image from Sarawak, North Borneo, a lingo. 
and yoni in the upper Malawie in West Borneo, 11 and a 
Pallava inscription from near Sang-betrang on the east 
coast, are other relics to be noted. There is also a mukha- 
linga of the sarvasama type in which the square Brahma- 
bhaga (below), the octagonal Visnubhaga (middle), and 
and the cylindrical Sivabhagha (above) are of equal 
length; the liiiga comes from Sepaoek in the Sintang divi- 
sion of West Borneo. 1 '' We thus find unmistakable traces 
in different parts of Borneo of the settlements of Hindu 
colonists who had come directly from South India; they 
are most strikingly seen in the valleys of the Kapuas 
and Mahakam rivers, the relics of the Mahakam valley 
being among the earliest known and dating from about 
A.D. 400. These must be distinguished from the later 
monuments of a Hindu-Javanese character of the Maja- 
pahit period when Borneo was subject to strong cultural 
influences from Java. Such influences might have come 
from Java also at an earlier time, say, in the second half 
of the tenth century under DharmavamSa who adopted 
a policy of active expansion of the Javanese state. Of 
the later history of the Hindu colonies of Borneo we know 
nothing at present. 

13 Chhabra, pp. 41.4 

U BKI, vi, a, (1896), pp. 3 Gff. 

13 OV, (tgao), pp. 102-5 



CHAPTER XXI 


THE PHILIPPINES 

The Philippines must be held on the whole to have re- 
mained outside the range of the early cultural movements 
with which we are concerned. Two images of deities are 
the only known Hindu antiquities from these islands. 
One is a solid gold image of a goddess found accidentally 
after a storm on the left bank of the Wawa river in Min- 
danao. The gold is of ai carats, and the image which 
is 15.2 cm. high and 9 cm. broad from knee to knee, 
weighs 1791.5 grammes and is estimated at $1003.15. 
The area from which the image comes was before a.d. 
1500 under a chief known as the Raja of Butuan. The 
image is of fine workmanship and shows clear evidence 
in its tall pointed head-dress and other ornaments of the 
influence of Hindu -Javanese art of the tenth century A.D. 
It is not easy to decide if the goddess belongs to the 
Hindu or Buddhist pantheon. The other is a copper 
image, 8 cm. high, found on the island of Sibu in 1820 
most probably of Siva . 1 The extent of the influence 
exerted by the Hindu civilization of Java and Sumatra 
even in late historical times on the Philippines is not 
beyond dispute; while American scholars working in the 
Philippines are inclined to rate it rather high and to 
derive several features of Philippine culture from the 
colonies established by Sri Vijaya on these islands, Krom 
is somewhat sceptical of the far-reaching inferences drawn 
from the name Visaya current in the Philippines and in 


1 OV (1920), pp. 101-2 



145 


THE PHILIPPINES 
Bprneo. The subject requires far more detailed study 
before any final judgement can be formed . 9 


2 See Steiger-Beyer. Benitez, A History of the Orient, (1999), pp. 
113, 117, iao; also Krom, HJG, pp. 306 and 418. M. S. Ramaswami 
Aiyar, Hindu Influence in the Philippines, Q.JMS, xxv, pp. 103-13, just 
reproduces passages From the first book mentioned in this note and 
much antiquated matter from older books. 

10 



ABBREVIATIONS 


AA 

ABIA 

ARB 

ASI 

BGAIG 

BEFEO 

BKI 

El 

Et. As. 

IAL 

IHQ, 

ISC(S)C 

JA 

JGIS 

JOR 

J(P)ASB 

JRAS 

OV 

QJMS 

TBG 

TP 


Ars Asiatics 

Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology (Kern 
Institute, Leyden) 

Archaeological Reports, Burma 
Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Report 
Bulletin de la Commission Archaeohagique de 
I'lndo-Chine 

Bulletin de I'Ecole Franpaise d' Extreme-Orient 
Bijdragen tot de Taal — , Land en Volkenkunde Van 
Nederlandsch Indie 
Epigraphia Indies 
Etudes Asiatiques, 2 vols. (Hanoi) 

Indian Art and Letters 
Indian Historical Quarterly 
Inscriptions Sanskriles du Campd et Cambodge 
Journal Asiatique 

Journal of the Greater India Society, Calcutta 
Journal of Oriental Research, Madras 
Journal {and Proceedings) of the {Royal) Asiatic 
Society of Bengal 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
Oudheidkundige Verslag, Batavia 
Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal — , Land en Volken- 
kunde, Bataviaasch Genootschap 
T’oung Pao 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Aymonier, Etienne 
Bell, Sir Hesketh 

Berg, G. C. 

Bosch, F, D. K. 

Braddell, Roland 
Chhabra, B.Ch. 

Glaeys, J. Y. 
Coedb, G. 


Le Cambodge, 3 vols.,(Paris, 1900-04). 

Foreign Colonial Administration in the 
Far East, (Arnold, 1928). 

Hoofdlijnen der Jaoaansche Littera- 
tuui ■geschiedenis, (1929). 

Het Bronzen Buddha-beeld van 
Celebes’ West Kust, TBG, Ixxiii 
(1933), Afl, 4. 

A Hypothesis as to the Origin of 
Indo-Javanese Art, Riipam, Jan. 
1924- 

Study of Ancient Times in the 
Malay Peninsula, JR AS, Malayan 
Branch, Vol. xiv, xv, xvii. 

Expansion of Indo-Aryan Culture 
during Pallava Rule, as eviden- 
ced by Inscriptions, JPASB, i, 
(1935). PP- 1-64. 

Fouilles de Tra-Kieu, BEFEO, 
xxviii, pp. 578-93. 

L’archeologie du Siam, BEFEO, 
xxxi, pp. 361-448. 

Po-Nagar, ABIA, (1931), pp. 22-8. 

Ars Asiatica, xii, Les Collections 
Archeologiques du Musee Na- 
tional de Bangkok, Paris, 1928. 

Recuiel des Inscriptions du Siam, Dux- 
ieme partie (Bangkok, 1929). 

Tablet tes votives Bouddhiques du 
Siam, Etudes Asiatiques, i, pp. 
145 - 67 * 



148 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Coed&s, G. Inscriptions du Cambodge, i, (1937, 

Hanoi). 

„ Indian Influences upon Siamese 

Art, Indian Art and Letters , New 
Series, vol. iv, pp. 18-41. 

„ Deux Inscriptions Sanskrites du 

Fou-nan, BEFEO, xxxi, pp. 
1-12. 

„ A New Inscription from<>Fu-nan, 

JGIS, iv, (1937), PP- 1 17-21. 

„ The date of the Sanskrit inscription 

of Vo-Canh (S. Annam), Indian 
Historical Quarterly, xvi, (1940), 
pp. 484-8. 

„ La tradition Genealogique des pre- 

miers rois d’Angkor d’apres les 
inscriptions de Yafovarman et 
de Rajendravarman, BEFEO, 
xxviii, pp. 124-46. 

„ Histoire Ancienne des Etats Hindo- 

uisis d’ Extreme-Orient (Hanoi, 
1944 ). 

Dahlmann, Joseph Indische Fahrlen, 2 vols. (1927). 

Duroiselle, Ghas The Ari of Burma and Tantric 

Buddhism, ASI, 1915-16, pp. 79- 

93 - 

Evans, Ivor, H. N. Papers on the Ethnology and Archaeo- 
logy of the Malay Peninsula 
(Cambridge, 1927). 

Finot, L. La Religion des Chams d’apres les 

Monuments, BEFEO, i, pp. 12- 
33- 

„ Notes d’Epigraphie in BEFEO. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Fournereau, Lucien 
Gerini, G. E. 

Ghosh, Devaprasad 
• Goris, R. 


Groeneveldt 


Le Siam Ancien, 2 vols. (Paris, 1895, 
1908). 

Reseat ches on Ptolemy's Geogtaphy of 
Eastern Asia, (London, 1909). 

The Early Art of Sri Vijaya, JGIS, 
i, (1934). PP- 31-8. 

Het Godsdienstig Karakter der 
Balische Dorpsgemeenschap 

Djawa, xv, (1935). PP- 1 ‘ 
16. 

Notes on the Malay Archipe- 
lago and Malacca, compiled 
from Chinese sources, Verk. 
Bat. Gen. Kunsten en Weten. 
Deel, xxxix, Ie Stak, Batavia, 


Grousset, R. 


Heine-Geldern 


Juynboll, H, H. 


Krom, N. J. 


Histoire de L’ Extreme-Orient, 2 vols. 
(Paris, 1929). 

Het Oud-Javaansche Adiparwa en 
zijn Sanskrit-Origineel, TBG, 44, 
(1901), pp. 298.357. 

The Archaeology and Art of Suma- 
tra, (pp. 322-37) in Sumatra, Its 
History and People, by Edwin 
M. Loeb, (1935). 

Indonesische en Acheterindische 
Tooneelvoorstelling en uit het 
Ramayana, BKI, vi, 10, pp. 
501-65. 

De Letterkunde van Bali, BKI, 71, 
(1916), pp. 556-78. 

Hindoe - J avaansche Geschiedenis 
( H J G ), 2’s — Gravenhage, 



150 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Krom, N. J. Het Hindoe Tijdperk, in Geschitd*,- 

rris van Nederlandsch- Indie, vol. I 
(Amsterdam, 1938). 

Lajonquiere, L. De Le Domaine Archeologique du 
Siam,BGAIG, 1909, pp. 188-362. 

,, Essai d’Inventaire Archeologique 

du Siam, BCAIC, 1912, p p . 
19-181. 

„ Inventaire Descriptif des Monuments du 

Cambodge, 3 vols. (Paris, 1902, 
1907, 1911). 

Leclere, A. Le Cula - Kantana - Mangala, 

BEFEO, i, pp. 208-30. 

Le May, Riginald Buddhist Art in Siam, (Cambridge, 
1938 ). 

L’Indo-Chine (ed. Maspero), 2 vols. (Paris and 

Brussels, 1929). 

Loeb, Edwin, M. Sumatra, Its History and People (Wein, 

1935 )- 

Lace, G. H. and Buraia down to the fa)} of Pagan, 
Pe Maung Tin An outline, Pt. I, JBRS, xxix, 

pp, 264-82. 

Majumdar, R. G. Suvarmdvipa, 2 vols. (Calcutta, 

1937 - 39 )- 

Mauger, H. Le Phnom Bayan, BEFEO, xxxvii. 

239-62 (esp. 255-7). 

Maspero, G. L'Indo-Chine, i, Paris et Bru9elles, 

(1929). 

„ Royaume du Campa, (Paris, 1928). 

Maxwell, W. E. An account of the Malay ‘Ghiri’ 
a Sanskrit formula, JRAS, NS 
13: (1881), pp. 80-101. 

NilakantaSastri.K.A. Agastya, TBG, 76, (1936), pp. 471 

545 - 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


NilakantaSastri,K.A. Sri Vijaya, BEFEO, — -0, pp. 239- 
3*3- 

J „ Foreign Notices of South India, 

(Madras, 1939). 

Parmentier, H. Le Sanctuaire de Po-Nagar d Nha- 

trang, BEFEO, ii, pp. 17-54 
L’ArtPresumeduFou-nan, BEFEO, 
xxxiii, pp. 183-9. 

Pelliot, J*aul Le Fou-nan, BEFEO, iii, pp. 248- 

303 

Poerbatjaraka Agastya in den Aichipel, (Leiden, 

1926). 

Przyluski Indian colonization in Sumatra 

before the seventh century, JGIS, 
i> (1934). PP- 92-101. 

Riedel, Dr. J. G. F. Les Idees specifiques du droit de 
Propriete Fonciere chez les In- 
donesiens, T’oung Pao, I, (1890), 
pp. 277-96. 

Rassers, Dr. W. H. Over den Oorsprong van het Java- 
ansche Tooneel, BKI, 88, (1930- 

30. PP- 317-450. 

Schnitger, F. M. The Archaeology of Hindoo Sumatra, 
(Leiden, 1937). 

Scott, J. G. Burma from the earliest times to the 

present day, (London, 1924). 

Stutterheim, W. F. De Plaatsing der Rama reliefs van 
Tjandi Lara Djonggrang en de 
Zonne-omloop, BKI, 84, (1928), 
pp. 118-31. 

,, Oudheden van Bali, 2 vols. (Bali, 

1929-30). 

1, Enkele Oudheden van Bali, Djawa, 

xvl, p|». 74.87. 



INDEX 


A 

Adi Saka, 127 
Adze-culture, 1-2 
Agastya, 59; — cam, 123, 
1 28-9: same as Vapra, 140 
Amaravat! art in Campa, 
53; in Siam, 64-5, 71, 
1 19-20; in Borneo, 142 
Archipelago, trade relations 
with India, 103 
Ari, 20 

Arimaddana, 13 
Asoka, Mission to Burma, 
12. 68 

Aivavarman, 137, 139 
Austric culture, 5 
Avani-Naranam, tank at 
Takua-pa, 90 

' B 

Bali, too; Hindu culture in, 
117-8: temple in. 130 
Bbadravarman of Campa, 

49-52 

Bhadresvara shrine in Cam- 
pa, 50-2, 54 

Bhaga fan cult in Campa, 60 
Bhaglratha, 137,138 
BbatSra Guru, 128 
Bhavavannan of Chen-la, 
3 *. 34 - 6 . 37 . 39 


Bhima cult in Java, 131 
Bhrgu, 59 

Borneo, 98, 105, 121, 137-43 
Brahma, cult of, in Campa, 
58 

Bronze, use of, jy kettle- 
drums, 3-4 
Buddhaditya, 136 
Buddhagupta, Mahanavika, 
83 

Buddhism, in Campa, 53, 
58; in Siam, 65-9, 73; in 
Malay Pen., 82-4, 85; in 
Jaiya, 91-3: in Nagara 
Sri Dharmarajn, 93-5; in 
Southern Islands, 118-19, 
131; in Borneo, 142-3 
Buddhist texts in Burma, 

14. 17 
C 

Campa, 28. 30, 48-62 passim, 
origin of name, 48: Bud- 
dhism in, 53-4; at war 
with China, 54, 91, 103- 
. 4, 113, 129 
Candis, origin of, 129-30, 
138-9 

Candrabhaga, iog 
Candragupta 1 1, coin of, in 
Java, 136 



1 All 10.x 


Cangal Inscr., ms 
Celebes, Buddha image in, 
1 1 9-ao 

Chandrabhanu, 92 
Chen-la, see Tchen-la 
Chinese, in sourhernlslands, 
100-1 ; on embassies from, 
112 

Chryse,® n, 101; Golden 
Chersonese, 86 
Citrasena of Ghen-la, 32, 
34, 36; called Mahendra- 
varman, 37, 39 
Co}a invasion of Sumatra, 

114. 136 

D 

Dekkhan, 24 
DharmavamSa, 143 
Dong-son culture, 3 
Dvaravati, 65, 69, 91 

F 

Fa-Hien on Java, 111, 
122 

Fan-che-man, 28.9 
Footprints, worship and 
significance of, 107-8 
Fu-nan, Hinduisation of, 
26-7; rise of, 28-9; Chinese 
Mission to, 29; Motan in, 
30; monks from, in China, 
30; Rudravarman of, 31. 
a; art of, 32-3; conquest 


by Chen-!.:,;; (-5: Camp'i. 
part of. .10; unci Srideb, 
72. 11G. I2.J 

G 

GaneSa images in Java, 1 3 1 : 
in Borneo, 142-3 
Graeco-Roman lamp in 
. Siam, 64-5 
Gunavarman, 111 
Gupta influence in Burma, 
19, 21 ; in Siam, 64-5, 71 ; 
coin in Java, 136 

H 

Hamsavati (Pegu), 12 
Harihara cult in Kambuja, 
38; in Campa, 58 
Harsa, 125 

Hindu, ceremonial, survi- 
vals of, in Cambodia, 45- 
7; in Campa, 6i-a; in 
Nagara Sri Dharmaraja, 
93-5! — faith in Java, x 1 1 ; 
inBali, 1 17-18; — Relics in 
Siam, 69-71, 72-5, 78, 
79-8o; in S. Islands, 121; 
in Borneo, 143 
Hindu influences, propaga- 
tors of, 122-6 

Hmawaza, 14-16, 18-19, 

21-2 

Houen-chen, 26.7 



15(3 INDEX 


Indo-China, peoples of, 9; 
Indian Colonization in, 
9-10 

Indonesians, cradle-land of, 
2; culture of, 2-4, xo8, 

1 14; culture of, blends 
with Hindu culture, 
128-30, 134.5, 138-9 
ISanasena (varman) ofGhen- 

la, 32. 37-9 

J 

Jaimini, worship of, in 
Kambuja, 56 n. 

Jaiya, 91.3 

Java, 101, 105; West J. 104- 
11; East and Central, 
111-12; Musical scales of, 
134 

Jayanagara, 136 
Jayavarman of Fu-nan, 29- 
30 

Jinendra’s Nyasa on Kaiika 
in Gampa, 60 

K 

Kadaram, id. Kedah, 85 
Kambu, a6, 34, 59 
Kambuja, 34.47, 78-9, 113, 
1 19, 129; art, 75 
Kanchl, 44; — pura, 136 
Kan-t’o-li, 1x2-13, 119 
Karo-BataksofSumatra, i x 3 


Kasika, Nyasa on, Go 
Kaundinya, 26, 28, 29; his 
foundation of Kambuja! 
58-9; of P’o-li, 1 16; of 
Fu-nan, 126, 140a. 

Kedah, 82-5 

Khmer art, 32; inscr., 73- 
4 

Kombeng, 14 1-2 j 
Kota Bangoen, Buddha im- 
age from, 142 
Kra, 28, 65 
Krsna Deva Raya, 136 
Krtanagara, 131 
Ksemendra, 132 
Kuala Selinsing, 81-2 
Kuridunga, 137, 139 
Kufljarkuftjadeia, 129 
Kutei, 105, 121, 137, 141 
Kyontu plaque, 22 
Kyundawzu »*., 17 

L 

Ligor, 97 
Lobpuri, 75-8 

M 

Mahabharata themes in 
Java, 132 

Mahakam, 137, 141, 143 

Mahayana, 19,20,30,84, 136 
Mahendravarman, title of 
Gitrasena, 37; Pallava 

King, 37, 71 



INDEX 


Majapahit, 81, 143 
Malacca, 28, 81 
Malaya Peninsula, 1,4, 13, 
27, 28, 81-5, 103-4, I2I » 
136 

Manigramam at Takua-pa, 
90 

Marco Polo, 48 
Maunggun gold plates, 14, 
18 

Moeara Kaman, 137, 141 
Mon, 12, 13, 23-4, 76-8 
Mula-sarvastivadins, 19 
Mulavarman (of Borneo), 
50, 105, 112, 12 1, 137-40 

N 

Naga cult in Campa, 53 
Nagarakretagama, 136 
Nagara Sri Dharmaraja, 
93-6 

Nagasena, 30 
NagI legends, 59 
Nalanda, 19, 114, 136 
Nanade&i, 25 
Nandivarman III, 90 
Negapatam, 114 
Nyasa on Kasika, 60 

P 

Pagan, 13, 25 
Palas, 136 

Palembang, 119, 121; in 
Malay tradition, 98 


Pali Buddhism, i.j , 2 >4 ■ in 
Siam, 69 
Panji, 134 
Pechaburi, 78 
Periplus of the Erythraean 
Sea, 101 

Philippines, and S. India, 

5-7. r 44-5 

P’o-li, and China, 115-18 
Prajadhipok, King of Siam, 
79 

Prakasadharma of Campa, 

56-9 

Prambanam, 132 
Prome, 13-19, 21 
Ptolemy, 11, 49, 73, 86; on 
Yavadvlpa, 101-2; on 
Indo-China, 103 
Pulake&in, 125 
Purnavarman, King of West 
Java, 104-m 
Pyu, 13, 16, i8fF. 

R 

Ramayana, in Campa, 57; 

sculptures in Java, 132 
Roman Empire, 65 
Rudravarman of Fu-nan, 
30-2. 34 

S 

Sagara, 137, 138 
SagaramcUi-pariprceha, 84 
Sailendras, 8r, 97, 134, 136 



IXDiiX 


Saivism, 20-1: in Fu-nan, 
30; in Kambuja, 40-4: in 
Gampii, 51-2,53: in Siam, 
67; in Malay Pen., 84-5; 
in E. Java, m-12, 131; 
in Borneo, 141-2 
Samudragupta, 125 
Sanjaya, 102 
Sankara, Acarya, 44 
Saxenalai, 78, 94 
Senamukham at Takua-pa, 
9 ° 

Siam, 63-80; legend of, 63; 
early Hindu relics in, 64, 
n 9 

Siddhaydtra, 83 
Sivaditya cult in Bali, 117 
Sivasoma, royal guru and 
pupil of Sankara, 44-5 
Slendro scale of Music, 134 
SomaSarman, 35-6 
Sonaparanta, n 
South Indian motifs, in 
Fu-nan art, 32-3; in Vicng 
Sra, 97 

South Indian script, in 
Burma, 14, 17, 18, 24; in 
Fu-nan, 28; inCitrasena’s 
inscr., 36; in ISanasena’s, 
38, 41 ; in Campa, 48-50, 
53; in Siam, 70, 76, 77; in 
Malay Pen., 81,83-4, 85; 
in Nagara Sri Dharma- 
raja, 95-6; in Ligor inscr., 


97: in Indo-China anp 
Malaysia, 103-4; in West 
Java, 105!!'.: in East Java,’ 
m-12; in Borneo, 138 
South Indian, titles in Cam- 
pa, 49; — practices in wor- 
ship in Campa, 60-1; in 
Siam, 67: — .colony in 
Siam, 65; — inflrences in 
Malay Pen., 83-5,97-9; in 
Sumatra, 1x3-14; in S. 
Islands, 120-2 
Sou-wou, ambassador of 
Fu-nan to India, 29 
Sresthavarman, 34 
“ Sri ”, 98 
Srideb, 69-72 
Sriksetra, 13, 15, 65 
Sri Mara, 28 
Sriparvata, 42 
Sri Vijaya, 53, 81, 91, 93, 
97, 114, 120, 128, 136,14/! 
Srutavarman, 34 
Sumatra, 100, 105, iij- 
14 

Suvarnabhumi, Burma, 11, 
28 

Syria, n 
T 

Takkola, 29, 86 
Takua-pa, 86-91; Pallava 
Tamil inscr. at, 90-91, 
95 



INDEX 


talaing, 12, 23 
Tjintrisin, 20 
Tarumii, 106-7, io 9 
Tchen-la (Ghen-la), 32, 34; 
rise of, 36 

Tchou-ta-kouan, 42, 62 
Thaton, 12, 21 
Thinai, 101 
TritrestJ, 124 

V 

Vaisnavism, 21-2; in Fu- 
nan, 30- 1 ; in Campa 55. 
8; in Siam, 71, 74-5; at 
Takua-pa, 87-91 ; at 
Jaiya, 91; at Vieng Sra, 
96-7, 1 3 1 ; in Borneo, 141 
Valmlki, 132; temple of, in 
Campa, 56-7 
Vanavasi, 15, 16 
VaprakeSvara, 137-8, 140 
yedic religion in Campa, 
50-1, in Borneo, 137-8 


Vidyabindu, 40 
Vidyavinaya, Acfirya, 40 
Vidyfivisesa, Ariirya.. 38-9 

Vieng Sra, 96 
Vijaynagar, 136 
Visaya, 144 

Vo-Canh inscr.,28,48-9, 104 
Vyadhapura, 26 

W 

Wayang, origin of, 132-3 
Y 

YaSovarman, 74 
Yavadvlpa, embassy to 
China from, 101 ; Ptolemy 
on, ioi-2; Ramayanaon, 
102-3 

Yudhigthira, 138 
Yueh people, 3 
Tupas of Borneo and India, 
137-8 





