STUDIES IN 

Cola History and Administration 


K. A. NLLAKANTA SASTRI. 





MADRAS UNIVERSITY HISTORICAL SERIES— No. 7. 


GENERAL EDITOR: 

Professor K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI. 


STUDIES IN 

Cola History and Administration 



Vp 







STUDIES IN 

Cola History and Administration 


by 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, M.A., 

Professor of Indian History and Archaeology , 
University of Madras . 



UNIVERSITY OF MADRAS 
1932 


PRINTED AT ANANDA PRESS. MADRAS. 





PREFACE 


Of the seven studies included in this volume, all 
except the first two are based on lectures delivered 
in 1930-31. 

The discussion of the historical value of the 
Furman urn is a necessary introduction to the considera- 
tion of the problems relating to Karikala, the early 
Cola king. In the three following essays, an attempt is 
made to present a general view of rural administration 
under the Colas with special reference to the working of 
the Sabhiis of two villages. The celebrated Pariintaka 
inscriptions of Uttaramerur are next studied in detail 
and the nature of their constitutional provisions 
examined. The texts of these inscriptions in Appendix II 
have been corrected, generally on the lines indicated by 
Venkayya. The last essay traces the life and work of 
one of the leading officials of the reigns of Kulottunga I 
and his son. 

My thanks are due to the Syndicate of the 
University of Madras for sanctioning the publication 
of this work. I am under obligation to the officers of 
the Archaeological Survey of India for the permission 
accorded to me to consult transcripts and impressions of 
unpublished inscriptions. I acknowledge with pleasure 
the assistance rendered by Messrs. S. S. Surya- 
narayana Sastri and S. Vaiyapuri Pillai who read the 
proofs and made valuable suggestions, Mr. V. R. Rama- 
chandra Dikshitar who kindly checked the references, 
and Mr. S. R. Balasubrahmanya Aiyar who prepared 
the Index. 


University of Madras, 'x 

20th June 1932, > 


K. A. N. 



CONTENTS 


Page 



Preface 

... 

V 


Abbreviations, Corrigendum 

... 

viii 

I. 

The 1 Puram Four Hundred ' as a Source 

ti 



of History 

* • • 

1 

II. 

Karikiila in History and Legend 

• •• 

19 

III. 

Some Aspects of Rural Life and 



Administration in Co]a Times 

... 

73 

IV. 

The Sabha of Naliiv 

M • 

85 

V. 

Uttaramerur : I. A General Survey 

of 



its Administration 

» • • 

96 


Appendix I ... 

itt 

118 

VI. 

Uttaramerur : II. The Parantaka 




Inscriptions 

... 

131 


Appendix II 

... 

1G3 

VII. 

Naralokavlra: A Cola Feudatory 

... 

176 


Appendix III 

... 

199 


Index ... 

... 

201 


PLATES 

Plan of Utfarameriir ... ... Frontis- 

piece 

Inscriptions 

A - Text ... ... ... 163 

B - Text (lines 1-7) ... ... 165 

Central Shrine of the &iva Temple, 
Tiruvadi, west view ... ... 177 



ABBREVIATIONS. 


A. S. I. Archaeological Survey of India. 

A. Tt. E. Annual Report on Epigraphy (Madras). 

E. I. Epigraph ia Indica. 

7. A. •) 

or C Indian Antiquary. 

Inch Ant.) 

J.A. 0. S. Journal of the American Oriental Society. 
S. 1. 1. South Indian Inscriptions. 


CORRIGENDUM. 

Page 82— line 24 — for erantfappcradar read ~rr«pperadar and cancel n. f. 



1 


THE “PUIIAM FOUR HUNDRED” 

AS A SOURCE OF HISTORY 

The Pnranumru is one of the eight major 
anthologies of the early Tamil classics. Like the 
Padirruppattu and many of the poems in the Pattuppattu, 
it. lays claim to be a collection of contemporary 
compositions of different poets on the princes and 
chieftains whose patronage they enjoyed in some form 
or other. The colophon at the end of each poem 
generally contains information on the subject of the 
poem, its author and the occasion for its composition. 
The authenticity of these colophons has been called in 
question, and it is our object here to consider whether 
this has been done on proper grounds. The matter 
is of some importance to the student of the Early 
History of the Tamil country. If, as is commonly 
believed, the colophons embody a tradition, which, 
apart from the corruptions and losses due to neglect 
and time, may be accepted as correct, then we must 
recognise in these poems a quantity of literary evidence 
of unique value; because then, no other part of India 
can be said to provide such sober and realistic pictures 
of contemporary life and politics as these early Tamil 
classics furnish. * The data furnished by these poems 
for historical reconstructions will not he the less 
valuable on account of their being drawn from casual 
literary pieces rather than from chronicles or other 
works of a professedly historical nature. If, however, 

* That this is not an unduly high estimate of the value of these poems will 
he evident to those who, though not in a position to read the Tamil originals, 
have followed the translations of several of the poems by Pope, Kanakasabhai 
and other writers in the Indian Antiquary and elsewhere. 


[i] 



COLA STUDIES 


the particulars furnished by the colophons turn out, on 
critical examination, to he undependable improvisations 
of a later age, the value of the poems themselves to 
the historian would he greatly reduced, and they would 
he hardly worthy of any greater credence than most 
other literary works. 

We shall confine our attention, for purposes of the 
discussion that follows, to the Puram Four Hundred, 
although many of the arguments would apply with 
equal force to the other collections as well. The 
grammar of Tamil literature classifies its subject-matter 
under two broad divisions called A ham and Pa ram, 
often somewhat inadequately equated with Love and 
War respectively. Of these the Puram which deals 
with concrete objective situations (not relating to love) 
is naturally of more interest to us than the endless 
analysis and description of psychic attitudes which 
are the prime concern of the Aham. Not that verses 
pertaining to this last division contain no interesting 
allusions to historical events and social customs ; hut 
these allusions often lack the fullness and directness 
that is characteristic of the references in the Puram 
group. 

The Pnrananuru was first published in 1894 by 
Mahamahopadhyaya Pandit V. Sviiminatha Aiyar alter 
a careful collation of several manuscripts of the text, 
and of an old commentary for a part of the anthology. 
He has given a vivid description of the condition of the 
manuscripts when he took them up, and the cautious 
and scientific methods followed by him in the prepara- 
tion of the first edition of this work. Nearly thirty 
years later, in 1923, the same ripe scholar issued a 
second edition with the readings brought up-to-date in 
the light of other manuscripts he had examined in the 



PURANANURU 


interval. The colophons to the poems so far as they 
are known at present, therefore, rest on the authority 
of the best manuscript sources available and the 
unrivalled erudition of the greatest living Tamil 
scholar. 

It must also he observed at the outset that the 
same scholar drew attention * to the fact that the 
learned annotator Naccinarkkiniyar himself found a 
difficulty in following the system adopted in the gram- 
matical notes which formed part of the colophons of 
the Purandnttru verses. The divergence between the 
system of the Tolkdppiyam and that followed in the 
colophons was accounted for by Naccinarkkiniyar on 
the supposition that some winters had followed by 
mistake systems of grammar later than the Tolkdppiyam 
and the Agattiyam which alone, in his opinion, applied 
to the anthologies. It is needless for us to accept this 
explanation though his opinion that the notes on the 
Pvramnuru verses did not follow the Tolkdppiyam 
registers a fact which may turn out to be of importance 
in deciding the question of the authenticity of these 
notes. The Tolkdppiyam , despite its name and the 
tradition about its mythical antiquity, betrays signs of 
not being absolutely the earliest work in the Tamil 
language ; it is quite possible that a critical study of 
the linguistic and sociological data embedded in the 
1(500 sTitras of this cyclopaedic work may establish a 
relatively late date for it. A slight investigation of the 
employment of finite verbal forms ending in ‘w/c/m’ 
in the Purandnuru has led one scholar f to the con- 
clusion that some of the verses in that collection are 
anterior to the Tolkdppiyam in time. The divergence 

* Preface to the first edition. 

+ Mr, K. N. Sivaraja Pillai — 'wirin' emu mi iriniccor pi r a yoga m (Madras 
University, 1929). 



COLA STUDIES 


between the grammatical notes to the Pitram verses and 
the system of the TollTtpphjam must, on this line of 
argument, he accounted tor on a hypothesis which 
would he the reverse of that employed by Naccinark- 
kiniyar. There is nothing intrinsically wrong about 
suggesting such an antiquity to the Pit ram collection, 
though it is a fact that we have no information about, 
the compiler or his time. For in one instance, that 
of the KaltUot/ai , we have evidence of the collection 
having been put together by Nallanduvanar, one of 
the poets represented in the collection itself; and this 
shows that a priori assumptions on the length of time 
that intervened between the actual composition of the 
poems and the time when they were brought together 
in an anthology or their colophons supplied may not 
be as sound as they appear. 

It is not our aim in this essay to reach a final 
conclusion on the difficult issues thus raised. Though 
tlie volume of the literature of the Sangram is not <>re:it. 

o r? ' 

the historical and linguistic problems presented by it 

are so complex, and competent scholars who can deal 

with them systematically from all aspects are so few, 

that their proper study can hardly he said to have 

begun. The linguist waits for the historian to settle 

the chronology of this literature, without a knowledge 

of which the study of the growth in lan<nia«-e is not 

feasible ; the historian on the other hand, seeing how 

inconclusive the other lines of evidence are on this 

question, hopes for some conclusive results from the 

study of language development. We have therefore to 

wait for a synthesis to be effected between the different 

lines of approach and for definite conclusions to emerge 

© 

on the internal chronology of this literature. Our 
object here is limited to examining the soundness of 

[ 4 ] 



PURANANURU 


the considerations that have been urged against the 
authenticity of the colophons of the Purananuru, against 
their being accepted as a proper basis for history. 

Mr. Venkayya remarks: * “ The Tamil anthology 
Purananuru, for instance, furnishes the names of a 
number of Co]a kings. It is extremely doubtful if we 
shall ever be in a position to fix definitely the period 
when they flourished, much less make out a connected 
history of their reigns. No doubt we have literary 
documents assigned — by whom and when we do not 
know— to the reigns of these Cola kings. But the 
evidence furnished by these documents and the 
tradition connecting them with particular Coja kings 
have to be received with caution.” This caution in 
dealing with literary evidence is, in itself, admirable. 
But then, having imposed this reserve on himself in 
accepting the evidence of literary tradition on Karikala 
Cola among others, Mr. Venkayya proceeds forth- 
with to accept unreservedly all the statements made 
in eleventh century inscriptions about events that 
happened, if at all, live centuries before their date, and 
to suggest on their basis a “provisional date of the 
Co]a king Karikala.’’ Now, one may ask whether 
any statement gains in trustworthiness merely because 
it is engraved on copper or stone and not written 
on palm leaf or other more perishable material, and 
whether it is not possible for a deliberate invention to 
get into an epigraph, or for a correct tradition to be 
transmitted in successive copyings of literary docu- 
ments. The exaggerated caution assumed by some 
epigraphists in their approach to literary evidence, and 
the childish faith they occasionally exhibit in hugging 
the most palpable lies set down on stone and copper 

* A. S. I. 1905-6 p. 17+ n. 7. 

[ 5 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


may raise a legitimate doubt, as to whether their obiter 
dicta * on literary questions are entitled to the same 
regard as their considered opinion on technical matters 
within their purview. In any case, it is a strange 
procedure to adopt in the name of caution to prefer, 
in writing the history of Karikala, the late legends of 
the Eastern Calukya and Telugu Coda grants to the 
sober and realistic statements about that king in the 
Puramtiiint and the PattiipjMttu simply because we 
cannot be sure about who ascribed these poems to 
Karikala’s reign and when. Elsewhere, y apparently 
because of the common name Killivalavan, Mr. Ven- 
kayya identifies the Cola king of the Manimehtlai story 
with the Cola who died at Kidamunam J concerning 
whom there are eighteen poems in the PiiramnTtnt 
by no fewer than ten poets and makes the following 
observations : “ In the note appended to each of these 
poems is mentioned the name of the king which does 
not figure in the body of the poem. Consequently, the 
assumption that these ten poets were contemporaries of 
the king is based on tradition current at the time when 
the notes were added. In the absence of definite 
information as to the authenticity of the tradition on 
which the notes are based, it is safer to abstain from 
drawing any historical conclusions from them.” It must, 
be stated, however, that, in writing so, Mr. Venkayya 
may have been influenced by his view, which lie 
subsequently withdrew ^ in his notice of the Binna- 
manur plates, that, the anthology of the Purananurn 

* Mr. Venkayya also writes: “ According to Tamil literature there was a 
Pallava king ruling at Kanci as a contemporary of Karikala,” and to Kokkijli’s 
son by a Naga princess “was subsequently assigned Tomjaiiiaiju.” Neither of 
these statements is supported by the sources. 

t E. I. XI p. 233 n. 3. 

t In this Dr. S. K. Aivangar has followed him —ManimWuilai in its 
historical setting , p. 35. 

U A. R. E. 1907 paragraph 17. 


[ 6 ] 



PURANANURU 


was compiled by Perundevanar, a protege of the 
Pallava Nandivarman III. The truth is that Perun- 
devanar, whose invocatory poems lead off many of the 
Sangam anthologies, was an earlier poet of whose 
Tamil rendering of the Bharatam, doubtless that 
mentioned in the larger Sinnamanur plates, only a few 
verses have been presented to us in the quotations of 
later commentators. There is no reason to suppose 
that he edited the anthology. It is surprising that 
the correction furnished by the Pandya plates from 
Sinnamanur is ignored by Mr. P. T. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar * who repeats the antiquated view, that 
Perundevanar the contemporary of Nandi III and the 
author of a Bharatavenba was also the anthologist of 
the Sangam poems. 

In the History of the Tamils , the same author 
makes some statements on the Purananuru and urges 
certain considerations against the authenticity of the 
colophons which, if wellfounded, would prove almost 
fatal to all chance of our getting any history from that 
collection. It is, therefore, necessary to examine them 
carefully. We shall be led, however, too far afield if 
we enter on a discussion of his general views on the 
internal chronology of these poems, or the tests he 
adopts for separating earlier anthologies from later 
ones and so on ; such a discussion is not necessary for 
the limited purpose before us. Of the Purananuru he 
says : “ It differs from the other collections in several 
ways. First, it deals with the wars of kings and the 
gifts they gave to the poets who sang them. Secondly, 
dealing with wars, it also contains a number of eleo-ies 
on dead kings and nobles.” These are, as has been 

* See Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar, History of the Tamils p. 158. In his 
footnote he refers his readers to his Tamil work on the Pallavas where, it may he 
noted, he asserts that the Pandya charters contain nothing about the Sangam. 



COLA. STUDIES 


pointed out already, just the differentiae of I’urapporuJ 
and hence their great interest for us. We may notice, 
though without stressing it, the inaccuracy of part of 
the statement which follows : “ The lirst half of this 

anthology deals with the former subject (wars and 
gifts), the next fourth with the latter (deaths), and the 
last fourth seems to be a miscellaneous supplement 
in which odes discovered later on both subjects were 
thrust.” The division of the collection into two homo- 
geneous sections and a third forming a miscellaneous 
supplement is purely imaginary, and there is nothing 
to support the suggestion made that the last section 
was an afterthought or a later addition. Moreover, on 
the evidence of one manuscript, Pandit Svaminatha 
Aiyar suggests that the Pnram had three divisions- - 
aram, porul and inbam. It is, however, when we reach 
the next distinction drawn by Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar 
between the Puram and the other collections, that his 
misstatements attain serious proportions. lie says: 
“Thirdly, to a large number of these Pnram poems, 
colophons are added, noting the occasions when the 
poems were composed. These colophons seem to have 
been written by a person later than the one who made 
the anthology and who derived the information partly 
by a study of the poems and partly from tradition. ” 
To say that colophons to individual poems are a 
distinguishing feature of the Puram Four Hundred 
is not correct. The objective nature of the Puram 
necessitated longer colophons mentioning the personnel 
and occasion of each composition, unlike the Ahum 
verses which were for the most part self-contained 
and therefore got only brief colophons giving short 
grammatical notes and the name of the composer. 
Colophons similar to those of the Puram are also to be 
found attached to some of the songs in the Paltnppatju 


[ 8 ] 



PURANANURU 


and to poems in the ‘ Ten Tens ’ ( Padirruppattu ) that 
have come down to ns. To say, then, that colophons 
were written for a large number of poems in the Purarn 
is to imply that there are several for which no such 
colophons are known to have existed. There is nothing 
to support this implication. Only the state of our 
manuscript sources * has been responsible for the 
irretrievable loss of several of them. Lastly, to 
postulate two persons one of whom supplied the colo- 
phons at an indefinite interval after the other had made 
the anthology is altogether gratuitous. Why the 
author of the anthology could not have himself read 
the poems and accepted traditional information at 
the time the anthology was made, and supplied the 
colophons ; further, why the colophons might not have 
been added to individual poems earlier than their entry 
into an anthology are matters which are apparently 
not deemed worthy of consideration by Mr. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar. The truth is that we now know so little of 
the technical conditions whicli governed the propaga- 
tion and preservation of literature and literary tradition 
in the distant past that it is unprofitable to hazard 
surmises against which may be pitted other surmises 
not less plausible. But this we do know: that in some 
manner that seems to us such a marvel, the ancients 
commanded the means of handing down from genera- 
tion to generation, orally or otherwise, a considerable 
literature with exceptional accuracy. The history of 
the Vedic Samhitas with their anukramanis and of the 
early Buddhist Pali litei'ature is sufficient proof of this. 
In the course of generations differences in readings 
cropped up, and particular schools and redactions of 
works died out for one reason and another ; but these 
changes did not affect the substantial accuracy of what 

* See Pandit Svaminatha Aiyar’s remarks in his Preface. 

L»] 


2 



COLA STUDIES 


was actually preserved and handed down. It seems 
therefore only proper to accept the colophons to the 
poems which have reached us through the same 
channels as the poems themselves as of equal authenti- 
city with the poems to which they are attached, unless, 
indeed, it is proved on substantial grounds that the 
colophons were the inventions of a much later age, the 
correct tradition having died out long before. 

In trying to establish the unreliable character of 
the colophons to the Puram , Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar 
permits himself to make so many contradictory 
statements that it is not easy to understand his real 
position on questions of vital importance to the dis- 
cussion. Let us first bring together his statements 
about the chronology of the colophons and see how 
they fare in relation to one another. In a somewhat 
rhetorical rebuke he administers to modern Tamil 
scholarship, he says : # “ It is high time that scholars 
gave up confounding the texts of poems with the 
commentaries of probably a thousand years later ”, and 
he makes it clear on the same page that, in his opinion, 
the colophons and the commentaries were composed 
probably between the twelfth and sixteenth centuries. 
From this we may conclude that the original com- 
position of the poems has to be ascribed to a period 
between the second and the sixth centuries. But then 
we are told that “ the four anthologies were made up in 
the fifth and sixth centuries A.D.” and that, at that 
time, “ for each ode was noted the name of the trnai 
(and perhaps turai) to which it belonged and the name 
of its author.” So that, on the author’s own showing, 
no great interval elapsed between the original composi- 
tion of the poems and their collection in anthologies— a 

* op. at. p. 410. 


[ 10 ] 



PURANANURU 


result which in itself would go far to establish the 
authenticity of the tradition relating to the poems. 
This result is by no means so clear-cut, because else- 
where Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar says * that Perundevanar, 
a poet of the ninth century A. D. “ seems to have 
taken a great interest in the collections of the poems of 
an earlier age, for he has provided introductory odes 
in praise of Siva ” to some of these collections. In the 
author’s Tamil book on the Pallavas he states more 
definitely that Perundevanar of the ninth century made 
the anthologies and provided them with introductory 
verses. Then again, it is not clear whether the colophons 
of the Furarn are held to be all of them absolutely 
unreliable and useless for historical purposes, or 
whether only some of them are suspect for certain 
specific reasons, or whether, lastly, because some are 
demonstrably false, the rest have, for that reason, to be 
rejected. “The Puratn as we have it,” contends 
Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar, “has besides, f (1) colophons 
indicating the particular occasions when each of the 
first two hundred and sixty-six odes were sung, 
(2) paraphrases of these two hundred and sixty-six odes 
and brief notes grammatical or interpretive (sic). The 
colophons stop where the paraphrases stop and pro- 
bably both were done by an editor of the age when 
commentaries were composed on old Tamil poems, i. e., 
probably between the twelfth and sixteenth centuries. 
The colophons, and not the commentaries, are resumed 
with the three hundred and fifty ninth ode and are 
continued to the end.” Once more the errors in the 
statement of facts in this passage are not only con- 
siderable in themselves, but are such as to lend strong 
support to the hypothesis that the colophons and the 

* op. cit. p, 159. 

f i.e., besides the tinai, tnrai apd the name of the author op. cit. p, 410. 

[ii] 



COLA STUDIES 


paraphrases of the first part of the collection belong to 
one late author. The facts as stated in the passage just 
quoted are: (1) the colophons and the paraphrases 
stop at the 266th ode, and (2) the colophons, not the 
commentaries, are resumed with the 359th ode and are 
continued to the end. The necessary implication is 
that there are no colophons to poems numbering 267 
to 358 inclusive. Now this is simply not correct • 
because Nos. 315, 344-5 have colophons like the other 
poems, and on Nos. 361-3 and some other verses we 
have no more information than we get on the odes that, 
are said to have no colophons (Nos. 267 to 358). In 
reality, the colophons were furnished for all the odes 
and, as already stated it is only the decayed state of 
the manuscripts that is responsible for the gaps in our 
knowledge. This is sufficiently indicated by the 
learned editor of the work in his preface. Further, it 
is conceivable that the tiiiai and turai were sometimes 
inserted later, because this can be done by any one who 
knows the rules of grammar and has before him 
particular poems and their contexts ; but it is in- 
conceivable that these contexts themselves, without 
which the tinai and turai could not even be guessed at 
in several instances, were the inventions of an age 
much later than that to which the poems belonged. 
It is necessary at this point to quote (in translation) the 
remarks on the state of the manuscripts made by Pandit 
V. Svaminatha Aiyar in his preface to the first edition, 
as these are best calculated to place the commentary 
and the colophons in a proper light. He says: “ In 
this commentary are to be found many words that are 
not in current use. Further, here and there a few 
sentences seem to have been misplaced. As there are 
no means at present available to make necessary 
alterations and as 1 hope later to be able to do so when 



PURANANUfUJ 


better manuscripts become available, I have published 
them exactly as I found them in the manuscripts. This 
commentary is extant only for the first 266 poems of 
this work ; in no manuscript is found the commentary 
for the remaining poems ; and after poem No. 242 the 
commentary has suffered damage and is somewhat 
confused. We do not know who wrote this commen- 
tary. The discussions of this author in his special 
notes on some poems indicate the existence of an 
older gloss on this work which has not come down 
to us. 

“ The manuscripts of the text of the poems (which 
did not contain the commentary\ besides exhibiting 
several variations due to the excess or shortage of 
letters and words and many confused transpositions, 
did not contain the tinai after some poems, the turai 
after others, and both after yet others ; the names of the 
composers had got damaged after some poems, and 
these of the subjects of the poems after others, and 
in some other instances the names of both had dis- 
appeared.” This description of the manuscripts by the 
great scholar who spent so many years in collating 
them should give the quietus to all baseless conjectures 
on the colophons and their relation to the extant 
commentary. 

“ It is evident,” says Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar, * 
“ that gome of the colophons appended to the poems by 
the editor do not embody tradition but contain guesses, 
sometimes wild.” Our examination of the value of the 
Purain Four Hundred as a source of history would not 
be complete without a consideration of the cases 
adduced by Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar in support of his 
statement just quoted. His first instance emerges from 



COLA STUDIES 


a comparison of songs numbered 76 and 77, both said 
to be compositions of a single poet, Idaikkunriir Kilar, 
on the same hero, the Pandya Nedunjeliya who was 
victor at TalaiyiUaiiganam. He says : “ It is imposssible 
to believe that the hero victor of Talaiyalanganam, 
known to the poet (76) and the boy-hero, unknown to 
the poet (77) were one and the same person.” But was 
the boy-hero unknown to the poet? The operative 
part of the text of Puram 77 is : 

“ nedunderk-kodinji poliya ninron 
yar-kol valka-vavan kanni ” 

which is translated by Mr. Aiyangar thus : “ lie stands 
so as to adorn the carved post of the chariot ; whoever 
he may be, may his garland not fade for a long time.” 
A more literal rendering would be : “ Who verily is it that 
stands so as to adorn the carved post of the chariot? 
May his garland flourish ! ” Far from being ignorant of 
the identity of the boy -king, the poet is sure that there 
is only one answer to his question. Further if amidst 
the many uncertainties of the literature of the Sangam, 
there is one fact established beyond all doubt, it is that 
the hero of Talaiyalanganam was a little boy whose 
youth tempted the cupidity of his neighbours. * And 
this raises a strong presumption of the identity of the 
persons to whom Puram 76 and 77 refer; and what 
can be more natural than that an admiring poet should, 
as he does in Puram 77, exaggerate the youth of his hero 
in celebrating his victory and sing of him as a tender 
child who, despite his youth, worked wonders on the 
field of battle ? The next instance adduced is Puram 74, 
which is said to have been composed in a Co]a prison, 
by a Cera king amazed at his own pusillanimity in 
seeking water of his jailors to quench his thirst. The 
colophon says that the prisoner did not drink the water 

* cf. Puram 72 and the present writer's The Pandyan Kingdom pp. 27-8 

[ 14 ] 



PURANANURU 


he got, and describes his act in the words : u tinman 
sollittunjiya pattu ” which might mean that without 
drinking the water, he uttered the lines and died. This 
is the meaning accepted by Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar who 
draws attention to a contradictory tradition related 
in the Tamil-mvalar-caritai which says that this ode 
was composed by the king and despatched to his poet- 
friend Poygaiyar who thereupon sang the ‘Kalavali 
Forty’ and obtained his release. “The fact that the 
two legends contradict each other shows,” we are 
assured * “ that supposed traditions which Tamil 
scholars regard as sacrosanct are but brittle reeds to 
lean upon in historical investigation.” The first thing 
t.o observe in this connection is that the Tamil- Navalar- 
Caritai is, as Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar admits, a demons- 
trably late work of the sixteenth century A. D. f and 
some regard must be had to this in pitting its traditions 
against those in the colophons of the Purananuru. 
Further, in this particular instance, the note in the 
Caritai leaves altogether unexplained the reference 
to drinking water that occurs in the text of the 
poem. The suggestion has been made J that the Cera 
for whose release the Kalavali was composed by Poygai 
was some king other than the author of Puram 74. 
But it is not possible to accept this, because ^ehganan, 
the Cola king is expressly mentioned both in the 
colophon of the Puram song and that of the Kalavali 
as the Cera Irumporai’s foe ; and the Kalavli celebrates 
^enganan’s victory. The real solution is that offered 
by Pandit Svaminatha Aiyar himself ; 5T we should 

* History of the Tamils p. 414. 

f See Preface to T. Kanakasundaram Pillai’s Edn. of the Caritai p. XII. 

X op . cit. p. 58. Also Kalavali Edn. by N. M. Venkatasami Nattar, Preface 
pp. 4-5. 

U Sangatiatnilitm Pirkalaitamilum p, 94. He is followed by Pandit Ananta- 
rama Aiyar in his edition of the Kalavali , Preface p, 12 & n. 

[ 15 ] 



COLA. STUDIES 


understand the word ‘ tunjiya ’ in the colophon not in 
the sense ‘died,’ but in the not less usual meaning 
‘ slept ’ or ‘ swooned.’ The note in the Navalar-caritai 
which says that the song was despatched to Poygaiyar 
seems hardly trustworthy; because the poet should, 
even without such a reminder to him, have known of 
his king’s fate. The other discrepancies * between the 
notes in the Caritai and the colophon of Puram 74 
are too inconsiderable to affect the authenticity of the 
latter. Again, two objections are urged by Mr. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar against the colophon to Puram 47. It says 
that by this song Kovur Kilar saved a fellow poet 
from being put to death as a spy by NeduhgijH 
who died at Kariyaru. First “there is nothing in the 
poem remotely suggesting a spy;” secondly, “Kovur 
Kilar was a favourite of the enemies of NeduhgtHi 
i.e., Nalangijji and Kijji Valavan, and therefore not 
likely to have any influence with Neduhgilli.” Neither 
of these objections is sound. The first objection is 
easily met. The translation of the poem given by 
Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar himself clearly suggests the 
idea of espionage, or at any rate, of some means of 
injuring persons. It is this : “ The life of these seekers 
of patronage is free from the blame of harming others.” 
This in fact is the main argument of the piece and the 
original is very vigorous : 

ipparisil valkkai 
pirarkku-ttldarindanro-vinre. 

The second objection stated above also overlooks 
the argument of the poet, that poets of his kind moved 
freely from one prince to another not taking account 
of their political relations, and that it would be wrong 
to suspect a poet who visited him simply because he 

* They are: the mention of the ‘ east gate * instead of the 1 west gate ' and 
the number of the poem, given as 158 in the Caritai. 


[ 16 ] 



PURANANURU 


had last left the court of a political rival. Further, 
by saying that Kovur Kilar was the favourite of the 
enemies of Neduhgijji viz., Nalaiigilji and KiJJivalavan, 
Mr. Aiyangar identifies Nedungijji who died at Kariyaru 
with Nedungijli who was besieged at XJraiyur by 
Nalaiigilji. If this identification is correct, as most 
probably it is, then it would transpire that Kovur Kilar 
was as much friends with Nedungijli as with his foes ; 
for Puram Nos. 44 and 45 are by Kovur Kilar and on 
Nedungijli. In fact this poet’s successful efforts in the 
promotion of peace and mutual good will among the 
pugnacious princelings of his time come in for special 
notice and appreciation by Dr. Gr. U. Pope. * Lastly, 
about Puram 173 Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar remarks : “It 
is impossible to regard this ode but as the song of a 
hungry bard in search of a patron ; yet it is attributed 
to a royal personage by the editor of the Puram.” 
This objection seems at first sight to be indeed 
well-taken. But Pannan is mentioned together with 
Kijjivajavan by Kovur Kilar in Puram 70, and conse- 
quently there is no intrinsic difficulty in accepting that 

Killivalavan who died at Kulamurram and Pannan were 

• | # !• • • • •• 

contemporaries and that the king might conceivably 
have composed a song on his friend Pannan. Though 
the subject-matter of Puram 173 seems hardly suited to 
such a composition, its explanation may be that the 
poem is conoeived as the utterance of a bard, as 
suggested in all the alternative interpretations given 
in itB commentary, "f Let us grant, however, that a 
real incongruity may have arisen by a wrong poem 
or colophon having been substituted for the right one 
at this point. And a close scrutiny may reveal some 
other instances of a similar character. But it is 

• I. A. XXIX p 255- 

+ A comparison of this poem with Puram Nos. 270 and 312, especially the 
former, is very instructive on this point. 



COLA STUDIES 


grossly to exaggerate the issue to say, as Mr. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar does, that “ many more such colophons can 
easily be found in the anthology” (italics mine). We 
can hardly expect that in the course of long centuries 
the anthologies have been transmitted to us without 
errors in details having crept in. But, for this reason, 
to cast a doubt on the accuracy of whole groups of 
poems and their colophons and to reject them whole- 
sale is to apply standards of criticism which would 
render all historical writing impossible. As is only to 
be expected in such a case, the practice of writers is 
often better than would result from a rigid application 
of the principles enunciated by them, and Mr. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar himself has made far more use of the Puram 
Four Hundred than would be proper if he held fast to 
the criticisms urged by him against the credibility of 
the poems and the traditions relating to them as found 
in the colophons. In the next study on Karikala will 
be found instances of colophons fully borne out by the 
texts of poems in different anthologies, sufficient proof 
that the colophons embody genuine history. 

It is also necessary to observe, before closing, that 
the question of the authenticity of the colophons which 
has engaged our attention so far, is different from that 
of the internal chronology of the poems that results 
from our accepting them. It is indeed true that hasty 
genealogical lists have been evolved for the dynasties 
represented in the poems ; these lists lack support 
from the colophons and Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar does 
well to deprecate them. But their shortcomings leave 
untouched the main question of the authority and 
correctness for purposes of history of the literary 
tradition we have been discussing. The method of 
working in data drawn from it in a restoration of the 
past, and the pattern resulting from their disposition 
offer limitless scope to the talent of the individual 
historian. 


[ 18 ] 



II 


KARIKALA IN HISTORY AND LEGEND 

The name of Karikala fills a great place in the 
eai’ly history of the Tamils. Some of the later Cola 
kings of the line of Vijayalaya are known from their 
inscriptions to have borne the name. Several ruling 
families in the Telugu districts claimed descent from 
Karikala. Lastly, he is the centre of many stories of a 
palpably legendary character. The Age of Karikala 
has been the subject of many discussions in recent 
years ; it can hardly be said that any conclusive results 
have yet been reached. 

The primary sources of our knowledge of Karikala, 
the early Tamil Coja king, are literary. We have also 
secondary literary sources of later times, and equally 
late epigraphical references of a vague character. It is 
best to arrange these as far as possible in a chrono- 
logical order and indicate the information that can 
be gathered from them. The list that follows is not 
intended to be exhaustive, but calculated to show the 
diversity in the nature of the sources we are dealing 
with by furnishing examples of a representative 
character. 

I. Purananuru. — (a) No. 7. The stanza is said 
to have been composed by Karungulal-Adanar on 
Karikala. The king’s name does not figure in the text, 
and it is a general praise of the king’s prowess in war. 

(b) No. 65. This is said to be a lament of 
Kalattalaiyar uttered when a Cera king, Perunjeral 
Adavj, wounded in the back in a fight with Karikala, 

[ 19 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


resolved to give up his life by starvation * after such 
an ignominious defeat. The text of the poem mentions 
the wound in the back of the dying king but giveB no 
names. We learn, however, from the next verse and 
from Ahananuru 55, that these events happened, 
exactly as they are given in Puram 65 and its colo- 
phon, at the battle of Vennipparandalai. 

(c) No. 66. A song by Venni - kkuyattiyur 
comparing the relative merits of Karikiila and his Cera 
foe after the battle of Vennipparandalai. This piece is 
important because it gives the names of Karikal-vajavan 
and Vennipparandalai, and mentions the suicide of the 
enemy — a striking confirmation of the data furnished 
by Puram 65. The author of this poem, whose name 
means “ Potter woman of Venni ” was most probably a 
native of Venni and an eyewitness to the battle that 
took place in its neighbourhood. 

(d) Puram 224. In this poem Karungalal- 
Adanar, the author of Puram 7 [ante, commiserates the 
world on the loss it sustained by the death of Karikiila. 
The text does not give the name of the king which 
occurs only in the colophon. The king’s heroism, 
his patronage of poets and the Vedic sacrifices 
performed by him are mentioned at some length. 

II. Pattuppattu (a) Porunararruppadai. — A poem 
of 248 lines by Mudattama-kkanniyar. Karikiila is 
mentioned by name (1. 148) and said to be the son of 

* Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar apparently understands the expression Val- 
vadakkiruttal as “death by cutting one’s throat with a sword” — History of the 
Tamils p. 336. Contra Pandit V, Svaminatha Aiyar’s note at p. 135 of his edition 
of the Purananuru , which I have followed. I may add that the king starved, 
sword in hand, to indicate the disgrace he had sustained on the field. Puram 65 
purports to be a strictly contemporary reference to events ; Aham 55 clearly 
refers to them as in the past, but is very valuable as corroborating the Puram 
stanza. Mr. P. T, Srinivasa Aiyangar’s doubts on this head ( Tamils p. 337) 
&eem to be somewhat misplaced. 


[ 20 ] 



KARIKALA 


Uruvappahrer - ilanjetcenni (1. 1B0). He inherited the 
right to his estate while he was in his mother’s womb, 
(1. 132, tay vayirrirundu dayam eydi ) — a statement 
which the annotator Naccinarkkiniyar interprets as 
meaning that Karikala’s birth was delayed by unnatural 
means, and that he was retained in his mother’s womb 
until the auspicious moment came for his being 
delivered. The battle of Venni in which he defeated 
two great kings (Pandya and Cera) on the same field is 
narrated in some detail (11. 141-48). For the rest, the 
poem describes at length the liberality of Karikala and 
the fertility of the Kaveri country and other matters 
of no immediate concern to this study. The clause 
mudiyor* avai puku poludirram pakai muran selavurn 
(11. 187-8) must, however, be noted specially here. It 
occurs in the general description of Karikala’s rule and 
is, in itself, simple enough if we understand it to mean 
that the older men laid aside their differences when 
they entered the sabha of the king, or, if the alternative 
reading ‘ §olavum ’ of the last word is accepted, — that 
the older men went to the sabha to state their disputes 
(and get them adjudged). Here again the annotator 
sees an allusion to the tradition j* that a young Cola 
king, dressed himself as an old man, and surprised by 
his correct judgment two greyhaired litigants who 
laid their cause before him. It may be observed in 
passing that the words in our poem, taken in their 
context, do not clearly mention any dispute or its 
settlement by the king ; whereas the traditional stanza 
of the Palamoli and the reference in the Maaimekalai 
contain no mention of Karikala. 

•This word is an antithesis to Ilaiyor (young folk) of the preceding clause. 
Pandit Svaminatha Aiyar notes an alternative reading ‘ Solavum* for the last 
word, in this clause 

f Palamoli No. 6 (ed. T. Chelvakesavaraya Mudaliar). Also Manimlkalat 
IV 11. 107-8. Neither of these texts gives the name of the king. 

[ 21 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


(b) PaUinappulai. A poem of 301 lines by 
Kadiyaltir Uruttirahgannanar. It contains gorgeous 
descriptions of the land of the Kuveri and of Kavirip- 
pumpattinam in particular, and mentions incidentally 
some occurrences of the life and rule of Karikala, 
here called Tirumavalavan (1. 290). In a vivid passage 
replete with striking similes (11. 220-3) the poet tells 
us how Karikala in his youth was imprisoned by 
his enemies and effected his escape after a tough fight 
with the guards of his prison and thereby made 
himself master of the kingdom. Besides giving a vague 
general account of Karikala’s prowess in war and the 
devastation of enemy countries that was a marked 
feature of his work as conqueror, the poet tells us that 
among those subjugated by Karikala were the many 
Oliyar, the ancient Aruvalar, the Northerners and the 
Westerners and the Pandya ; while the petty chieftains 
of the shepherd class and of the line of Irungovej 
were stamped out by him. He is believed to have 
given up Uraiyur and shifted his capital elsewhere, 
though he took care to renew and fortify that city 
afresh (11. 285-8). 

(c) Venba No. 3 quoted at end of (a) * Kari- 
kala’s sway failed to measure the three worlds but 
was confined only to this, as his leg had suffered from 
fire, an allusion to the Dwarf incarnation of Visnu. 

HI. AhanSnuru. This is an anthology of amatory 
lyrics which contain only passing and often somewhat 
far-fetched allusions to political events, contemporary 
or otherwise. 

(a) No. 55. — A reference to the battle of 
Vennivayil as a past event cf. ante n. on I ( b ) 

* This verse is not from the Palamoli as Dr. 5. K. Aiyangar seems to 
think— -See \\\y Ancient India p, 351 n. 2. 

[ 22 ] 



KARIKALA 


(b) No. 125. — “ Like the cowardly kings who, 
unable to face the might of Peruvala-kkarikal, aban- 
doned their nine umbrellas in broad daylight at 
Vakai-pparandalai.” 

(c) No. 141. — “ The famous Karikal victorious 
in war who fixed up the $elkudi ’ ’ (see later) 

( d ) No. 246. “ Greater than the uproar in 
Alundur on the day when at the gates of Venni the 
famous Karikala roused to great fury inflicted a 
crushing defeat on his enemies in which eleven Velir 
fell together with (some) kings.’’ 

(e) No. 376. — Mentions the name of the king. 

IV. Silappadikaram : — In the text of this beautiful 
romantic poem we have three clear references to 
Karikala and the annotators discover four others 
elsewhere in the poem. It would be obviously desirable 
to keep the text and the annotations apart. First, the 
relevant passages in the text are : — 

(a) Canto V, 11. 90-104. Tirumavalavan 

(Karikala) who was eager for war and found no match 
for him in the Tamil land, once upon a time (annal 1. 94) 
undertook an invasion of the northern countries as 
far as the Himalayas and obtained certain presents 
from the kings of the Vajra, Magadha and Avanti 
countries. 

( b ) Canto VI, 11. 159-60. Karikal- valavan 
is said to have performed a ceremonial bath in the 
freshet of the Kaveri, attended by a great crowd. 

(c) Canto XXI, 11. 11-ff. The daughter of 
Karikala, the Coja king, saw her husband, the ruler 
of Vanji, being washed away while they were both 
bathing ; and, going after him in the flood, she rescued 

[ 23 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


him miraculously. This story occurs in the midst 
of a series of legends of chaste women of the past 
and the miracles effected by them. * 

We may now turn to the statements of the annota- 
tors of the Silappa dikaram on Karikala. 

( d ) Canto III. 1. 11 — means literally “In 
order to exhibit (Madavi’s dance) to the king with 
the hero’s anklet ( Jcalal ) ” ; and the earlier of the two 
commentaries gives the annotation : “ desiring to have 
the first exhibition (of dance) in the sabha of the Cola 
Karikurperuva]attan who had the hero’s anklet.” The 
later annotator Adiyarkkunallar follows this hint not 
only in this context, but extends it to others e.g., canto 
i. 11. 65-8 ; v. 212 and vi. 15. It must be noted, however, 
that there is nothing in the text to warrant these 
comments which create the impression that the story of 
the poem is laid in the period of Karikala’s rule. And 
this is contrary to the indications furnished by the text 
of the Hilappadikaram. 

V. Manimekalai : — Canto I, 1. 89. “As on the 
day when king Karikala went forth”, apparently on his 
Northern campaign as related in the Silappadikuram 
(IV. (a) ante). It must be noticed that this brief 
reference is also clearly to events in the past. 

VI. Palartyoli. — (a) Verse No. 6. — See ante II (a). 
Only the commentary gives the name of Karikala, not 
the Venba. 

(b) Verse No. 230. The text records that an 
elephant from Kalumalam went and chose a man from 
Karuvur for the kingship. The commentary sees in 
this incident a reference to Karikala’s accession. 

* See Pandit Svaminatha Aiyar’s note at p. 488 of the hilappadikaram for 
other references to the story. 


[ 24 ] 



KARIKALA 


(c) Verse No. 239. The text has simply : “ The 
Cola’s son who escaped with his life from a fire got 
the aid in later life of a man named Pidarttalai, and 
held the sceptre with success.” The gloss of an 
anonymous commentator on this verse runs : “ Even 
Karikala who in his youth, though consigned to 
flames by his enemies, managed to escape with his life, 
obtained the aid of his (maternal) uncle, Irumbidart- 
talaiyar by name, * and, later in his life, attained tha 
monarchy which was his by right and ruled as a 
king.” 

Before leaving the evidence drawn from sarly 
Tamil literature and proceeding to set down that of 
later literature and epigraphy, it may be desirable to 
indicate our general position regarding the chronology 
and the relative value of the sources so far reproduced. 
The general question of the age of the earliest extant 
Tamil literature has been so often discussed that it 
is unnecessary again to pursue the subject here. My 
view is that this literature belongs to the early centuries 
of the Christian era, and it rests not so much on the 
Grajabahu synchronism, which in itself is quite a sound 
one, f as on general considerations arising out of a 
comparison of the political and economic conditions 
in Southern India as reflected in this body of literature 
with what we learn on the same subject from European 


* This seems to be the only evidence of the relation here mentioned 
between Karikala and Irumbidarttalai. It is strange that a scholar like 
Mr. K. V. Subramania Aiyar should have used such a statement as evidence of 
chronology (See his Ancient Dekkan , p. 107). 

t Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar (History of the Tamils p. 38J holds that the 
reading 1 Kdval vbidan ' at SiL XXX 1. 160 destroys all theories based on the 
synchronism. I do not think so. The prologue still remains, and it seems to 
be the earliest account we possess of the coming in of the Pattini cult into 
Ceylon where it has prevailed to this day. See Ceylon Antiquary and Literary 
Register Vol. X, ii, pp, 114 ff. 


4 


[ 25 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


classical sources like the Periplus and Ptolemy, and 
from the early Buddhist literature. 

The question of the internal chronology of the 
literature of early Tamil has unfortunately not received 
as much attention as it deserves. But there seems to 
he no reason to doubt either the priority of much of 
the Purananuru to the poems preserved in the other 
anthologies and to the twin epics the Silappadikdram 
and the Mauimekalai, or the claim registered in the 
colophons to most of these poems that they were 
contemporary compositions of poets dealing with 
particular situations to which they were eye-witnesses. 
There is nothing of the conventional about these 
poems, each of which is a living realistic picture of 
a genuine human situation. It seems to me that in 
these poems we have some of the most genuine records 
of exceptional interest to the historian of Southern 
India; and these must be treated as a class apart. 
Hence the poems of the Purananuru bearing on the 
subject of this study have been placed in the first 
group. For the rest, I have sought to group the 
sources, not strictly in their chronological order — we 
know yet so little of this — but in the order of their 
importance and trustworthiness. An attempt has been 
made throughout to keep clear the distinction between 
data furnished by the originals andlby the glosses on 
them by latter-day commentators. 

We may now bring together the evidence relating 
to Karikala from epigraphy and the later literature of 
Southern India : 

VII. The Malepadu plates of Punyakumara * (11. 2-5) 
say : “ Dinakara-kula-mandaracala-mandara - padapasya 

* E. /. XT. No. 35. 


[ 26 ] 



KARIKALA 


havera-tanaya - velolluhghana-prammana- pramukka-dyane- 
lcatisaya - harinah Trairajya - slhiti - matmasatkrtavatah 
karikalasyanvaye ”, meaning “ In the family of Karikala, 
who was the mandara tree on the Mandara mountain 
viz., the solar race ; who was the worker of many 
wonders like that of controlling the daughter of Kavera, 
overflowing her banks ; who obtained for himself the 
position of (the headship of the) three kingdoms.” 
These plates have been dated by Mr. Krishna Sastri 
in the eighth century. They may well be, however, a 
century earlier than that. * However that may be, they 
are interesting for two reasons. This is the earliest 
mention so far known of the connection of Karikala 
with any family in the Telugu country. This is also 
the earliest reference to the flood banks of the Kaveri. 
And there is no mention yet of Trinetra Pallava. 

VIII. The genealogy (legendary part) in the 
Cola Copper-Plates and the Kanyakumari record 
(Vijayalaya line) : — 

(a) The Anbil plates of Sundara Cola give the 
order Senni, Killi, Karikala, Koccehganan (verse IS) 
and mention only the name of Karikala. 

(b) The Tiruvalahgadu plates of Rajendra I 
place Karikala between Perunarkijji and Koccehganan 
and furnish two explanations of the king’s name in the 
words — * Kalatvat karinam kaleka ' besides mentioning 
his rebuilding of KancI ( Kanclm yasca navicalcara 
kanakaib) and the construction of the banks of the 
Kaveri. 


* See Dr. N. Venkataramanayya — A note on the Date of the Matepadu 
plates— Madras Christian College Magazine 1929 p. 15. Also Mysore 
Archaeological Report , 1925 p. 86 1. 26. 

[ 27 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


(r) The larger Leyden grant, (v. 11) gives his 
name after Panacapa and before Koccehganun; it 
calls him also Arikala and mentions the construction of 
the Kaverltira. 

(d) The Kanyiikumari (stone) inscription of 
Virarajendra devotes two verses to him, giving his 
name between Perunarkkijli and other famous kings 
before him, and Valabha immediately after. Verse 4H 
is a general praise of Karikala’s prowess, interesting 
only for the phrase samitthitarqM - Jmtipala - iTdah — 
‘ Death to hostile monarchs up in arms (against him).’ 
The next verse (49) runs : 

sa kaverl-ndurlkrta-sakala-sasyam vidadhatlm 

payah - puraih - spharai - ravani - mavinlto- 

ddhatiharah | 

pratlribhutabhir-narapati-karaslista-pitaka- 

praklrnabhir - mrdbhir - nyaruna-darunagresara 

-samah f| 

That is to say, * “ (Karikala) who was as bright as 
the sun and who curbed the pride of the insubordinate, 
controlled the Kaveri — which, by its excessive floods, 
caused the earth to be deprived of its produce — by 
means of a bund formed of earth thrown in baskets 
carried in hand by (enemy) kings.” 

These records of the 10 and 11th centuries A. D. 
call for a few remarks in passing. Karikala’s connec- 
tion with Kane! is first mentioned in ( b ) ; and so 
also ( d ) first sets forth the story of Karikala employing 
enemy kings in the construction of the embankment 
of the river. But even in the elaborate verse 49 of (d) 
we find no mention of Pallava Trinetra. 

* The translation is that of Mr. K. V. Subrahmanya Aiyar, T. A. S. Ill pp. 
154-5 slightly altered. 


[ 28 ] 



KARIKALA 


IX. Kalingattupparani : — A poem describing the 
conquest of Kalinga in the days Kulottunga I. The 
author Jayafigondar gives in the eighth section of the 
work the genealogy of the kings, which opens with 
the statement that when Karikala had by superhuman 
exploits won a victory over the Himalayas and subdued 
them, Narad a appeared before him and ordained that 
he should write on the mountain the story of his race 
as revealed to him by the sage (vv. 1-4). We learn 
from a stray Venba * quoted by Adiyarkkunallar that 
the Sendu, whatever it was, with which Karikala 
managed to spin the Himalaya round and round, was a 
gift vouchsafed to him by a Sattan (a guardian deity) 
of Kanclpuram. The narration of Narada includes the 
story of Karikala as well as that of his predecessors 
and successors up to Jayadhai’a. Stress should not, 
however, be laid on the superhuman element in this 
narration, as it may be only a poetic device of the 
author suited to the conventions of the Parani. But 
the quaint reference to Karikala’s conquest of the 
Himalaya recalls the lines of the Silappadikaram on his 
northern expedition. — IV (a). Karikala’s conquest of 
the Pandya and the Cera, an enigmatic statement on 
the construction of the banks of the Kaveri by 
subordinate kings, the conquest of Kurumi and the 
presentation of 16,00,000 gold pieces to the poet of 
the Pattinappalai occur among the events of his reign 
(vv 19-21). The next verse (22) on the Cera and the 
Pandya being made alternately torch-bearers in the 
court is also to be referred apparently to the same 
reign. 


Here, the verse on the construction of the embank- 
ment of the Kaveri must be considered somewhat 


Silnfipadikaram, V 15-8 comment. 

[ 29 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


closely. Mr. Kanakasabhai translated the verse tints : * 
“ Mukari was destroyed when he rubbed it out of the 
map, finding that it did not suit the place prepared for 
the banks of the Kaveri which were being constructed 
by vassal kings.” This ingenious translation is open 
to many objections. It seems to import the details of 
modern engineering practices such as drawing maps 
and plans into the days of Karikala. It does violence 
to the actual words in the verse which imply that 
Mukari did not follow up something or somebody 
(tadara vandida mukari), and then a picture was asked 
to be drawn of Mukari ( vandida mukariyai ppadatte- 
luduka ) ; the action that was taken afterwards consisted 
in something being wiped out in the picture, most 
probably an extra eye {idu mikaikkaa) which resulted 
in a similar consequence to the object represented by 
the picture, f Lastly, Mr. Kanakasabhai’s interpretation 
ignores the literary tradition on the subject which 
waxes strong from this time that a three-eyed king lost 
his superfluous eye in this episode, as will be seen 
from what follows : — 

X The Ulas of Ottakkuttan : — (a) Vikrama 
solan ula 11. 24-6 : 

tellaruvic — 

cennippuliyeriruttik-kiri tirittup- 
ponnikkarai-kanda pupatiyum— a brief reference 
to the turning of the Himalayas and the making of the 
Kaveri banks. 

[b) Kuloltungasolan ula- 11. 34-6, 

talaiyeru 

mankonda ponnikkaraikatta varadan 
kan-konda senni karikalan ; that is, ‘ the coja 
Karikala who took the eye of him who did not come 
• /. A. XIX p. 331. 

t Cf. Mr. T. G. Aravamuthan : The Kaiilri, the Mauhharis and the Sangam Age. 


[ 30 ] 



KARIKALA 


to raise the Kaveri banks which took the earth carried 
on the heads (of subordinate kings).” * 

(c) RajarajaMan-ula 11. 32-4 : a statement that 
a king (Karikala) branded with his tiger-crest the strong 
chests of his foes and the slopes of the northern Meru. 

These extracts from the triad of ulas, specially (b), 
show distinctly that in the stanza from the Parani 
(VIII 20) we have clearly one of the earliest statements, 
if not the earliest, about the three-eyed foe of Karikala. 
He is called Mukari in the Paraai, and an elaborate 
attempt f has been made to connect him with the 
Maukharis of Northern India on the strength of the 
northern expedition of Karikala to which the Silapp- 
adikaram makes such detailed reference. Great as is 
the value of some of the results obtained by 
Mr. T. G. Aravamuthan in the course of his investiga- 
tion, his conjecture about the identity of Mukari and 
Maukhari would seem to lack enough support. The 
weakness of his argument on this head is recognised 
by the author himself. J We have evidence of a clan of 
Maukharis in the 3rd and 2nd centuries B. C. and of a 
line of kings, Maukharis, from the 5th or the 6th 
century A. D. There is nothing but surmise to guide 
us in the great stretch of time that intervenes. While 
the Silappadikaram which gives the earliest detailed 
account of Karikala’ s northern expedition makes no 
mention of Mukari though it knows about a king 
of Magadha who was subjugated by the southern ruler, 
it is difficult, on the evidence of an obscure stanza in 
a work of the late 11th century A. D., to take him 

* Cf. No. 55 of the much later Rahgesa Vevba quoted by Mr. T. G. 
Aravamuthan op. cit pp. 18-9. 

f Mr. Tf. G. Aravamuthan op, cit. 

t op. cit . p. 57. 


[ 31 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


t,o have been a Maukhari of the I or II century A. D. 
On the other hand, there is no lack of other literary 
evidence from the Tamil and Telugu countries that 
establishes conclusively the identity of Mukari of 
the Parani with the Mukkanti or Trinetra who figures 
in Telugu epigraphy as the contemporary of Karikala 
in the celebrated formula : — 

carana-saroruha-vihata-vilocana-Trilocana 

-pramnkha-khila-prthivlsvara-karita 

kaverl-tTra-karikala-kula. 


XI. Kulottungan Pillaittamil is a fine poem on 
Kulottuhga II by Ottakkuttan, a poet of the 12th 
century and the author of the ulas already noticed (X). 
In this poem we read : * 

mulu-kula-nadikkarasar mudikodu vakutta karai 

mukiroda-vamaitta-darivo- 
miru-puramu-mokka ninadoru puli porikka 

vada-vimagiri tirittadarivo- 

mikal mukari mukkanilu-moru kamliya-kkijiyi- 

leludu-kanalitta-da rivom 

“ We know of the raising up to the clouds of the banks 
made for the full family-river by the crowns of 
(subordinate) kings ; we know of the spinning of 
the snow-mountain of the north for engraving on either 
side of it your unrivalled tiger-crest; we know of 
the wiping out of one eye traced on the picture so that 
the inimical Mukari lost one of his three eyes.” 

This passage which so strikingly recalls the 
Karikala legends recorded in the Kalin gattu-pparani 
and which is written by a poet laureate of the Co]a 
court, of the generation next to that of the author of 


* The Tamil-ppoW (Tanjore) Vol. V, p. 39. 



KARIKALA 


the Parani, furnishes an excellent comment on the 
earlier work at this point, and settles the true meaning 
of the verse from the Parani. 

XII. The Periyapuranam of ^ekkilar of the time 
of Kulottuhga II mentions Karikala’s renovation of 
Kanclpuram in the Kaliyuga by fortifying it afresh and 
encouraging people to immigrate and settle in the new 
city : see Tirulclcurippidtonda-nayamr Pnranam v. 85. 

XIII. The Panditdrddhya carita, a Telugu $aiva 
work of perhaps the early 13th century, gives virtually 
the same story as the Parani with slight variations and 
the relevant passage has been reproduced and translated 
by Dr. N. Venkata Ramanayya at pp. 88-9 of his 
Trilocana Pallet va and Karikala Cola.* 

XIV. Telugu epigraphy — Several inscriptions 
from various parts of the Telugu country contain the 
celebrated formula quoted above Carana saroruha etc. 
The earliest of these inscriptions is dated &. 945 
(1023 A. D.) f 

As Mr. Krishna Sastri points out : 44 Almost all 

the families of kings and chiefs in the South which 
trace their origin to the Sun mention Karikala among 
their ancestors, and describe him as having constructed 
banks on either side of the river Kaveri. The Kakatf- 
yas of Warangal and, in later times, the Matla chiefs 
of Cuddapah and the Saluva chiefs of Karvetinagar 
and a number of feudatory families who intermarried 

* The learned author considers the Telugu version “ as old as the passage 
in the JCalingattupparani.’* All the Tamil sources under X, XI and XII appear, 
however, to be earlier than the Panditaradhya carita. 

+ See Dr. N. V. Ramanayya op. cit. pp. 115-6, (item 2). It may be noted that 
the reference made by the author to the Darsi fragmentary inscription of Vikra- 
maditya I as one referring to Mukkan£i or Trinetra (No. 1 at pp. 109 and 117) 
is not warranted by the text of the inscription. 

[ 33 ] 


5 



COLA STUDIES 


with the Vijayanagara kings of the lunar race, mention 
Karikala in their genealogy.” * Again : “ In a (Telugu) 
record of the 11th century A. D. from the Bastar 
state, it is stated that a chief named Candraditya, a 
feudatory of the Nagavamsi king Jagadekabhiisana 
Maharaja Dharavarsa, was a descendant of Karikala 
Cola of the solar race, belonged to the Kasyapa gotra, 
was the lord of the river Kaveri and of the (historic) 
town of Oraiyur and bore the lion-crest.” f 

An example of the persistence and the growth 
of Karikala legends in later times is furnished by the 
copperplate grant dated 1356 A. D. {Sake munyninetra- 
candraganite) of the Telugu-Coda chief Bhakti-raja 
which contains the following about Karikala : J 

u arikalastato jatah Karikalastatobhavat I 

aticitraih caritraih svaih purvajanatyaseta yah || 

asnasld-ganga-toyai-ranudina-mavani-palahasta* 

kramattaih 

kaverl-setubandhe-nikhila-narapatl-nagrahl- 

dagra-vestyai | 

astambhld-Bhojaraja-prahita-mapacite-rbhaja- 

nam b(h)andhavTyyam 

padangusthena bhale vilasita mabhidat-pallaven- 

drasya netram || ” 

We notice here that Arikala, in the Leyden grant an 
attribute of Karikala, has now become the name of a 
new king, the father of Karikala, and the daily bath of 
the king in the water of the Ganges transmitted by the 

• E. /. XI, p. 340 n. 2. 

+ E. I. XI, p. 338. 

J Journal of Oriental Research, V. pp, 138 and 334. 

n Cf. Hultzsch at S. 1. 1. II 378 » 8. 

[ 34 ] 



KARIKALA 


hands of his vassals is a new embellishment of the 
old motif of the vanquished kings working at Karikala* s 
tasks like common labourers. The story of the loss 
of the third eye of the Pallava king is repeated. We 
may, before proceeding to discuss the interesting and 
difficult questions that arise in connection with 
Karikala and his life, mention briefly the data furnished 
by literary compositions of more recent times. 

XV. The Navacolacarita. * This work is part of 
the hagiology of Vlra-^aivism. Composed originally 
in Ha]a-kannada, the work was rendered into Telugu 
verse by Posetti Linganna-kavi in the fourteenth 
century. The story of Karikala which figures first in 
these ‘ Tales of the Nine Cojas’ is thus summarised 
by the editor of the Telugu original in his preface :f 
“ While Karikala, an ardent devotee of &iva, was ruling 
the country with unrivalled power, one day he went 
out for a hunt in the forest on the banks of the Kaveri 
and was resting a while in a lovely spot. Then there 
occurred a wonderful event which brought home to 
the king’s mind the great merit of the Kaveri ; having 
witnessed it the king thought that he should raise the 
banks on either side of the river and dig a tank and 
earn for himself the religious merit thereof. So he 
sent for his Samantas (subordinate chiefs) from the 
various parts of the realm for carrying out the work 
and all of them came up, with the exception of 
Bliaskara-Coja and Mukkanti Coda and others who held 
themselves back on account of their noble birth and 
other like reasons. The king undertook a dandayatrd 
(expedition) against them, conquered them and took 
them captives and compelled them to work on the 

* See Wilson’s Mackenzie Collection p. 273. 

f Navacolacarita (Tel.) Andhra-patrika Press, Madras (1923) pp. 8-9. 

[ 85 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


construction of the banks of the Kaveri until the task 
was completed.” Though sufficient for our purpose, 
this bald summary does but scant justice to the 
elaborate and eloquent narration of the original which 
includes some stories well-known in other connections 
such as that of 6iva working as a day-labourer for 
an old woman. * 

XVI. The Colammsacaritra or the BrhadUvara 
mahatmya, a work of the 16th century A.D. or there- 
about, narrates at great length the story of Karikala’s 
black leprosy being cured by his construction of the 
celebrated Tanjore temple and even reports the very 
words of the BrhadisastaJca , a hymn of praise uttered 
by the grateful king at the moment of his miraculous 
relief from a fell disease, f 

XVII. The Solamandalasatakam : Verse 38 of this 
work mentions the construction of the banks of the 
Kaveri and of a stone anicut across the river by a Cola 
king ; and a venba found in some mss. of this work 
purports to give a date for Karikala’s construction of 
the bank. But partly owing to its corrupt readings, 
this verse can furnish little aid in a discussion of the 
history of Karikala. } 

XVIII. The Sevvandippuraaam — a late seven- 
teenth century work, gives a story which states that 
Karikala, the son of Parantaka, was brought by the 
state-elephant for being enthroned in the Cola kingdom 
at a time when Uraiyur was destroyed in a sandstorm. 

* The familiar Tamil story of Pittukku-man-sumandadu. 

See TiruviiaiyTtdal purlin om — any edition, 
t See Journal of Oriental Research; Vol. IV, pp. 324 ff, 

J See, however, T. G. Aravamuthan op. cit, pp. 67 ff. 

Tl See the pufZnam (ed. Shanmukham Pillai, Madras, 1887) UpuyHralitta 
Sarukkam w. 91-93. 


[ 86 ] 



KARIKALA 


One new element in the story is that the elephant 
found the boy prince too heavy, and that to reduce 
his weight his mother was advised by a saint to make a 
mark on the soles of his feet with a piece of charcoal, 
and then the elephant lifted him up on his back and 
carried him away without difficulty. A variant of the 
same story is given by one of the Mackenzie mss. and 
noticed at some length by Taylor in his Catalogue 
Baisonne. * 

The data thus brought together from many 
sources bearing on the subject of this study are calcu- 
lated to give an idea of the different phases through 
which the Karikala legend, so to say, passes in the 
course of centuries. The figure of Karikala is to start 
with thoroughly realistic and historical ; there is nothing 
about it that taxes our credulity or violates our sense 
of congruity; but soon legend begins its busy work 
and there comes in much that is not only unhistorical 
and romantic, but incredible, unnatural and super- 
human. The streams of legend flow from many sources, 
in the Tamil and Telugu countries, till at last the 
figure of Karikala is submerged in the Bea of religious 
mythology. The legends are not altogether devoid 
of interest to the student of folklore and {hagiology. 
For our purpose, however, it is essential that each 
incident that seeks admission into the history of 
Karikala’s life and reign must be tested very carefully 
with reference to the source from which it proceeds 
and the general probabilities of the case. The perfor- 
mance of this task becomes doubly difficult, if we bear 
in mind the limitations to our knowledge of the general 
chronology of South Indian history. Whatever view 
is held of the age of Sangam literature — our view of 

• Vol. m, pp. 514-5. 

[ 37 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


it has been stated elsewhere — it should not be allowed 
to influence unduly the discussion of the evidence 
relating to particular events of Karikala’s reign on the 
lines suggested above. 

From the strictly contemporary statements on 
Karikala in the sources grouped under I and II above, 
we learn that Karikala was the son of Ijanjetcenni ; 
that, as a young man, he fell into the hands of his 
enemies who kept him in confinement and that he 
gained his freedom by his own daring exertions ; that 
he was great alike in war and peace, and in the patro- 
nage he gave to learning and poetry; that he performed 
Vedic sacrifices; that he fought at Venni where he 
wounded his Cera contemporary in the back, and also 
defeated the Pandya king ; that he renovated the inland 
city of Uraiyur, and was master of the sea- port at the 
mouth of the Kaveri and that his sway extended over 
the Oliyar, the Aruvajar, the Northerners and the 
Westerners and the Pandya, as well as the territory of 
the petty chiefs of the shepherd class and of the line of 
Iruhgovel. Except for the indefinite statement about the 
Westerners and the Northerners which, on its face, is a 
mere embellishment and should not be pressed far, 
there is nothing in this account that is improbable 
and this picture of the reign may be accepted as true. 
The Oliyar, the Aruvalar, the shepherds and the line of 
Iruhgovel, the Pandya and the Cera are all well-known 
tribes and dynasties of the Tamil country, and it is 
quite possible that an ambitious Cola monarch made 
the strength of his arm felt by them. 

The commentator Naccinarkkiniyar, who wrote 
in the 14th century or later, says * that Karikala’s 
mother was a daughter of an Alundur Vel and that 

* Tolkctppiyavi Poruj STitra 30 —mannar Pangir etc. 

[ 38 ] 



KARIKALA 


his wife was another Velir lady from Nangar. He 
cites no authority, but considering the contemporaiy 
references to the Vejs in Karikala’s time, we may 
perhaps accept these statements as recording a genuine 
tradition. 

Of Karikala’s children we have little definite 
knowledge. Mr. Kanakasabhai was clearly wrong in 
making Narconai (the mother of ^ehguttuvan) the 
daughter of Karikala. * Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar 
holds f that both Uraiyur and Puhar were under 
Karikala and that after his death, his sons Manakkijli 
and Ver-pahradakkai Peru-virar-kilji became rulers 
respectively of Uraiyur and Puhar. But as he himself 
admits, there does not appear to be any direct evidence 
either for the relationship suggested, or for the division 
of the kingdom. 

It has been held that the father of Karikala J 
died_as a crown prince — a view based entirely on his 
name llanjetcenni. Karikala’s troubles in early life, 
his imprisonment by his enemies and his heroic escape 
and even the great battle of Venni are often ascribed to 
his father’s early death. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar observes 
that there are a number of Karikala’s predecessors 
mentioned in the Sangam works ; “ but in our present 
slate of knowledge of these it would be hazardous to 
attempt arranging them on any scheme, either genea- 
logical or successional. '* % Yet he says immediately 
after this : “ Karikala’s grandfather would appear to be 
Verpahradakkai Perunarkki]li ” ; and on this assump- 
tion he writes : “ The father died a prince and the 

* See Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar- it r ait Senguttuvan 2nd edn. p. 106 n 

+ Ibid p. 101 

x Mr. K. V. Subramania Aiyar identifies him with Neydalanganal Ilanjep 
cenni (/. A. 41 p. 147) who seems to have been a different person altogether. 

1 Ancient India p. 92. 


[ 39 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


grandfather fell in battle and so the grandson was 

left, when quite a young boy, heir to the throne of a 

kingdom not in the enjoyment of peace. Nor were 

causes wanting for civil dissensions. Young Karikiila 

found himself a fugitive at Karur after the disastrous 

battle in which his grandfather fell along with his 

Cera enemy. It was from here that he was fetched 

to ascend the throne by the state elephant, from 

Kalumalam (Shiyali)”. Here we have a typical example 

of the blending of information drawn from history 

and legend that has played a conspicuous part in the 

treatment of the reign of this early Cola king. It is 

difficult to choose between the two assumptions 

quoted from two writers that Verpahradakkai-pperu- 

narkkilli * was the son of Karikala and that he was 
*• *• 

his grandfather. The fact is that his proximity to 
Karikala in point of time is attested by the poet 
Kalattalaiyar having composed songs both about 
him and the Cera contemporary of Karikala who 
committed suicide in expiation of his cowardice at 
Venni. If we accept the suggestion that Pernnarkkilji 
was of the generation after Karikala, we have also to 
accept that the Cola war of the Ceras, of which we 
have one phase in the battle of Venni in Karikala’s 
reign, was continued in later times; and also that 
Senguttuvan the son of the opponent of Perunarkkijji 
was later than Karikala by a period of not less than half 
a century, and perhaps more. If, on the other hand, 
following Dr. S. K. Aiyangar’s view, we take Perunark- 
killi to be earlier than Karikala, we are led naturally 
to the conclusion that Karikala was much nearer in 
point of time to Senguttuvan and perhaps his contem- 
porary. But then we get into some new difficulties on 

* Puram 62, 63 and 368 make it clear that he is the same as Peruvip rkijji 
with the same attribute. 


[ 40 ] 



KARIKALA 


this assumption. What is the relation between Nedum- 

Sseral-Adan who fell in the same field as Pernnarkkilli 

«« •* 

and Perunjeral Adan the opponent of Karikala himself 
at Venni ? How long did the latter rale, if at all, and 
what is the interval between the battle in which 
Karikala’s grandfather fell and that of Veiini ? Again 
what is the relation between Perunjeral Adan and 
Sehguttuvan ? Lastly, how are we to account for the 
fact that Jhe Silappadikaram which purports to be 
written in the reign of ^enguttuvaii mentions the 
events of the reign of Karikala as having taken place in 
some remote past? For it is impossible, in the face of 
the statements in the Silappadikaram about Karikala’s 
reign analysed under IV above, to accept Dr. S. K. 
Aiyangar’s plea that Karikala was ruling in Pnhar and 
was an eyewitness to the early stages in the romance of 
Kovalan and Kannagi. * The data from the Silappadi- 
karam and the poems of Kalattalaiyar on the whole 
seem to favour the view that PernnarkkiHi came later 
than Karikala rather than before him 

The statements that Karikala found himself a 
fugitive at Kai-fir after the death of his father and 
grandfather, and that he was fetched from there by the 
state elephant from Kalumalam f to ascend the Cola 
throne, rest solely on the authority of the commentary 
to Palamoli No. 230 (VI b). The Palamoli , though it 
figures in the traditional lists of the eighteen minor 
anthologies of &angam poetry, is, like some others in 
that group, a work of uncertain age ; and its commen- 
tary must, in any case, be a late work which can 
hardly be accepted, in the absence of any satisfactory 
evidence to that effect, as a reliable authority on the 

* See Ancient India pp. 350-1 and P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar Tamils pp. 375-9. 

•j" It may be noted, in passing, that Kalumalam may be not Shiyali, but 
another place of the same name near Kartir. 

[ 41 ] 


6 



COLA STUDIES 


events of the reign of Karikiila. Moreover, the choice of 
a king at critical times by the people setting an elephant 
at large and trusting to its sagacity, is too common a 
motif in legends * for us to accept it as a historical 
fact relating to any particular king. On this view, 
there is nothing in favour of the supposition that 
Karikala was imprisoned at Karur ; in fact, there is no 
hint in the Palamoli of a man being taken out from a 
prison in Karur for being put upon the Qiola throne. 
On the other hand, the Pattinappdlai , while it does not 
disclose the identity of the enemies of Karikala’s 
youth, makes it clear that Karikala not only escaped 
from the prison, but attained the throne by his own 
exertions, and in this account there is no room for the 
elephant story. 

The evidence from the two poems in the 
Pattuppattu on the circumstances attending Karikala’s 
accession to the throne seems at first sight to be some- 
what conflicting. One of them says that the war-like 
child of Uruvappahrerilaiyon (the young man with 
many fine chariots) obtained his right (to the kingdom) 
from his mother’s womb, and carried the burden of the 
kingdom on his shoulders from the time he learned to 
crawl aB a baby ( Porunar . 11. 129-38). The other affirms 
that like the tiger cub growing up in a cage, Karikala 
stayed in the prison of his enemies ( pirar ) until his 
wounded pride roused him to action, and then, like the 
elephant effecting its escape from the pit into which it 
had fallen by filling it up with mud brought down by 
its tusks in order to join its mate, so also Karikala by 
means of wisely laid plans effected his escape after 
fighting the warders of his prison with his sword, and 
attained royalty which was his by right. ( Pattinappdlai 
11. 220-227). One statement is common to both the 

* ef, e. g. MTirtinayanar Pur an am. 

[ 42 ] 



KARIKALA 


versions — that the kingdom was Karikala’s birth-right ; 
for this is how, as it appears to me, the lines, tay- 
vayirrirundu tayam eydi ’ of the Porunararruppadai and 
“ uru kelu-tayam- ulineydi ” of the Pattinappalai must be 
understood. * One simple way of reconciling the two 
apparently divergent, but professedly contemporary 
versions, suggests itself easily. It is that Karikala 
inherited his estate as a child ; that, for a time, he was 
kept out of it by the machinations of his elder male 
relatives perhaps of collateral lines until, aided by his 
friends, he was able to effect his escape from confine- 
ment and make himself king ; and that the author of 
one of these two poems passed over this unhappy 
incident of the king’s youth, or refused to recognise 
that he had ceased to be king even while he was in 
prison. On this assumption the enemies of Karikala 
would be, not the Ceras or any others who were 
strangers to the Oo]a dynasty, but some relatives of 
Karikala himself. The tradition of Karikala having 
been helped by Pidarttalai, who is described as his 
maternal uncle in the commentary on the Palamoli 
verse 239, becomes easy to understand and may be 
a correct tradition. 

To accept some of the traditions incorporated in the 
Palamoli while rejecting the rest is, it may be remarked 
in passing, not so illogical or unsound as it may appear. 
For one thing, in rejecting the story of the elephant 
raising Karikala to the throne we are influenced by 
the facts (1) that the prince from Karur is identified 

* The ingenuity of Naccinarkkiniyar discovers a common legendary motif 
even here, and he makes the suggestion that Karikala was made to await in his 
mother’s womb the arrival of an auspicious hour for his birth. The same story is 
told in great detail of Koccen gamin in the PeriyapurZnam and, I believe, of 
Xditya the son of Parantaka in the Sewandippuranam. Mr. P. T. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar {Tamils p. 338) thinks that “it refers to his (KarikSla’s) being the 
posthumous child of JJaiySn ” 


[ 43 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


with Karikala, not by the text of the Palawan but its 
commentary ; and (2) that the evidence of strictly con- 
temporary writers is clear that Karikala’s escape from 
prison and his accession were brought about by his own 
exertions, aided perhaps by his friends from outside. 
Here, on the other hand, we have a fact mentioned in 
the text (not the commentary) of the Palamoli viz., that 
Pidarttalai aided Karikala in winning the sceptre ; and 
we also find that the identity of the king is indicated 
unmistakably by the mention of the accident from fire 
which occurred early in Karikala’s life. And the new 
fact supplied by this vei’se fits in satisfactorily with the 
rest of the story as given by other, perhaps earlier, 
writers. Whether, as the annotator says, Pidarttalai 
was the maternal uncle of Karikala, and whether he was 
the same person as the poet Irumbidarttalaiyar of 
the Puram, are matters which cannot be settled now 
and do not have any direct bearing on the history of 
Karikala. It should, however, be noticed that this 
verse from the Palamoli confirms the oldest explanation 
we get of the name Kari-kalan, * the man with the 
charred leg,’ by making it the result of an accident 
from fire in his early life. But there is nothing to 
support the suggestion sometimes made that the prince 
met with this accident in his endeavour to get the 
kingdom. * Later explanations of the name Karikala 
such as “ Death to elephants, ” and “ Death to Kali ” 
and the story of the mother making a charcoal mark 
on the soles of the prince to enable the elephant to lift 
him up easily are not entitled to any weight, at any 
rate, with reference to this early king Karikala. 

The results of this discussion of the incidents rela- 
ting to the early life of Karikala then seem to be the 
following. He inherited the Cola throne as a boy ; 

• /. A. Vol. 41 p. 147. 

[ 44 ] 



KARIKALA 


illegitimate attempts were made by his relatives, for a 
time successfully, to keep him out of his birthright ; by 
his own ingenuity and strength, and with the assistance 
of friends and partisans from outside, among whom may 
have been a maternal uncle Irumbidarttalai, Karikala, 
after some years of confinement in a prison, effected 
his escape from it and succeeded in making himself 
king. An early accident from fire which maimed him 
in the leg for life seems to be rather well attested and 
to furnish the true explanation of his name. 

We have seen that the strictly contemporary 
sources do not lead us to suppose that Karikala’s sway 
extended outside the Tamil country. If we may believe 
the testimony of the contemporary author of the 
Pattinappalai, Kanclpuram with the surrounding district 
of the Tondainad was ruled in Karikala’s time by a king 
called Tondaiman Ilandiraiyan who is praised by him 
as even superior to the three crowned kings of the Tamil 
land. * And yet, somehow, this evidence has been 
either generally ignored, or circumvented by means of 
fanciful hypotheses. This persistent tendency has, it 
seems, been the result of some circumstances which 
have checked the free play of criticism on our sources. 
First, there has been a general feeling that Karikala 
whose name looms so large in later times must have 
been a great and powerful king. Thus we are assured 
by one modern author f that Karikala “ was certainly 
one of the most powerful Cola kings that ruled from 
the city (of Puhar) and his name is even to the present 
day known throughout the Tamil country, and even in 
the Telugu districts (as) that of a great monarch who 
looked to the welfare of the subjects entrusted to his 
care and as a patron of letters. ” Then, it has been the 

* Perumbanarruppadai 11. 32-5 

t /. A. Vol. 41, p. 145. 

[ 45 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


rnle for a long time to accept all the statements in the 
Silappadikaram about Karikala as a contemporary 
account of the transactions of his reign. Again, great 
confusion has resulted from mixing up the origin of the 
family of the Tiraiyar as given by Naecinarkkiniyar in 
his gloss on Perumbdn-arruppadni 1. 31 with another 
leo-end in the Manimekalai which, while it differs in 
important respects from the story of Naecinarkkiniyar, 
may yet have suggested to him his celebrated com- 
ment on the origin of the Tiraiyar. However that 
may be, the connection between the Tiraiyar and the 
Colas rests on the sole authority of Naecinarkkiniyar. 
There is nothing in the poem Perumban to justify this 
explanation. And even Naecinarkkiniyar only talks 
vaguely of the ‘ Cola of Nagapattinam ’ as the pro- 
genitor of the Tiraiyar and does not bring either 
Karikala or any known relation of his into the story. 
Lastly, the statements in the Co]a charters and inscrip- 
tions of the Vijayalaya line and in the Telugu Coda 
inscriptions of the 12th century and later have had a 
large share, on account of their persistence and univer- 
sality, in disarming criticism. It seems necessary, 
therefore, to examine somewhat more carefully the 
nature of the evidence for some of the events usually 
recorded in the history of Karikala’s reign. This may 
be done under some convenient heads : his connection 
with Kanclpuram, his Northern Expedition, his contem- 
poraneity with Triloeana-Pallava and the construction 
of the embankment of the Kaveri. 

Mr. Kanakasabhai Pillai says : * “ His (Karikala’s) 
kingdom extended beyond Kanclpuram, which town he 
enlarged and beautified,” and even more emphatically, 
Mr. K. V . Subramania Aiyar : f “ Karikala ruled from 

* The. Tamils 1800 years ago p. 67. 

t /. A. 41 p. 146. 


[ 46 ] 



KARIKALA 


Kane! which he made new with gold.” Neither gives 
the source on which he bases the statement. Dr S. K. 
Aiyangar is more cautious on the subject ; * apparently 
inclining to the same view, he does not commit himself 
to a categorical statement that Karikala held Kanci 
or renewed that city. Under his successors Kane! 
passed under the Killis (Cojas) as the Mauimekalai 
testifies ; but that is altogether another matter. Mr. P. T. 
Srinivasa Aiyangar writes : f “ Kanakasabhai assumes 
that Ilandiraiyan usurped the throne of Kanci during 
Karikala’s boyhood ; but as there is absolutely no 
evidence for the statement, it deserves no considera- 
tion.” We agree. But he proceeds, “ it is but a bad guess 
and no more. As Ilandiraiyan was a contemporary 
of Karikala, he must have been appointed ruler of 
Kane! after Karikala’s conquest of the place and 
continued so after Karikala’s death.” So the flaw in 
Mr. Kanakasabhai’s position is not that he was guess- 
ing, but that he did not guess like some one else. 
Now all that we know of Ilandiraiyan is what the 
Perumban tells us. We have already remarked that 
in this poem the same poet sings the praise of 
Ijandiraiyan with quite as much eclat as he does that of 
Karikala in the PaUinappalai, and even says that the 
Tiraiyan was superior to the three crowned kings of the 
Tamil Country. Surely, the guess that he usurped 
Kanci when Karikala was a baby is by no means less 
plausible than the one that he ‘ must have been 
appointed ruler of Kanci after his conquest of the 
place.’ For our part we have already indicated our 
position. We prefer to reject both these guesses alike 
and to treat Ilandiraiyan and Karikala as contemporary 
rulers of neighbouring states, which is the normal 

* Ancient India pp. 92-4- and 349 ff. 

f Tamils p. 397. 


[ 47 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


conclusion that flows from the facte set forth in the 
two poems in the Pattuppattu by a single poet. * 

If Karikala conquered Kan cl, is it not strange that 
we should hear nothing of it in the whole range of 
early Tamil literature and have to wait till we come to 
the late epigraphs of the Tamil and Telugu countries 
and the vague tradition of his having settled colonists 
imported from outside into the Tondainad that is 
narrated by §ekkilar and other late writers? Except 
for the lines in the Silappadikaram which give a high- 
flown account of Karikala’s northern campaign up to 
the Himalayas and the presents secured by him from the 
kings of Magadha, Vajra and Avanti, there is nothing 
whatever in the early literary references to Karikala 
to suggest that his conquests extended beyond the area 
indicated by the lines of the Patiinappdlai summarised 
above under II ( b ) 

The account of the northern campaign that is 
given in the Silappadikaram has been treated differently 
by different writers. Messrs. Kanakasabhai and 
Subramania Aiyar and Dr. S. K. Aiyangar are inclined 
to stress the fact that Karikala was on terms of 
friendship with and received presents from the kings of 
distant countries in Northern India, and to ignore the 
military side of the expedition which is not less striking 
in the lines of Silappadikaram. Mr. Kanakasabhai 
says : f “He is said to have been on terms of friendship 
with the kings of Avanti, Vajra and Magadha. Later 
poets in their dreamy eulogies of this great king credit 
him with the feat of having carried his arms up to the 

# Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, who holds that IJandiraiyan was a grandson of 
Karikala, says: ‘This lucky author lived on to celebrate another patron, 
Ton4aman I[andiraiyan of KancI, of a later generation/ Ancient India p. 94. 

f The Tamils 1800 years ago p. 67. See also I. A. Vol. 41 p. 146-7 ; and 
Ancient India p. 94. 


[ 48 ] 



KARIKALA 


golden Meru and planted his tiger standard on the 
summit of that mountain which is spoken of in Indian 
legends as the centre of the earth.” But in saying this 
and in implying that the Kalin gattupparani (IX) is the 
first of the ‘ dreamy eulogies ’ of later poets, he has 
overlooked the direct statements in the Silappadikaram 
that Karikala went to fight in the northern region as 
he had no foes left in the Tamil country, and that he 
engraved his tiger-mark on the slopes of the Himalayas. 
On the other hand, Mr. T. G-. Aravamuthan * accepts 
the statements of the Silappadikaram as literally true, 
and makes them the basis of his learned essay on the 
age of the ^angam. His essay has one merit. It does not 
pass lightly, as other writers have done, over the 
difficulties involved in our accepting the story, but 
faces them squarely and attempts to solve most of 
them. It is not possible, nor is it necessaiy, for us to 
traverse the field covered by the essay. 

It is enough to observe that as he accepts the view 
that Karikala and Sehguttuvan were close in point of 
time, f the testimony of the Silappadikaram carries with 
him the weight of an almost contemporary document. 
In fact the evaluation of the story of the northern 
campaign of Karikala which is given for the first time 
by the Silappadikaram will depend on the nature of our 
answers to three questions : How long after Karikala 

did Sehguttuvan rule? Is the Silappadikaram to be 

r 

accepted as genuine, i. e., as the work of Senguttuvan’s 
brother who renounced the world and became a 
monk ? Lastly, what is the nature of the work ? Is it 
such that all statements made in it can be accepted as 
literally true ? We have already indicated our view 
that Sehguttuvan came at least half a century after 

* Op. Clt. 

t op. cit . p. 48. 


7 



COLA STUDIES 


Karikala, * if not later. Therefore even if we accept 
the Silappadikdram as a genuine work of Ilango Adigal, 
and there is no reason why we should not, its evidence 
on the reign of Karikala would not be entitled to the 
same weight as its statements on the reign of Sehguttu- 
van. Short as the period may be, many legends can 
grow up in two generations. Then if we turn to the 
nature of the work, we shall find much reason to treat 
the statements in it with the utmost caution. It is 
admittedly a romance which teems with legends and 
supernatural incidents. And legends relating to the 
Cola dynasty have reached in this work a stage some- 
what more advanced than what we find in the ‘ eight 
anthologies ’ ( ettu-ttokai ) of the Sahgam. Thus for 
instance only the story of Sibi protecting the dove, 
offering his own flesh to a vulture, is known to the 
earlier poems ; the Silappadikaram adds that of Mann 
executing his son on the chariot wheel, f Moreover, 
there is a deep political or cultural scheme underlying 
the structure of the poem. The saintly author makes 
no secret of the fact that he uses his story as a setting 
for offering a full and impartial account of the culture 
and the glory of the three great monarchies of the 
South. We cannot fail to notice that each of these 
monarchies is credited with some success or other 
against the northern Aryan kings. For these reasons 
it seems to me that unless we have some evidence from 
early Tamil literature independent of the l Silappadi- 
karam on the northern campaign of Karikala, it would 
be wise not to treat this part of the story as history. J 
And no such evidence is forthcoming. 

* Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar would put the interval at “ at least one 
century, if not more.” op, cit, p. 374 

t Canto XX 1L 51-5. 

J Cf. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar History of the Tamils p. 366. He seems, 
however, to assign the Silappadikaram to a much later date than the evidence 
warrants. 


[ 50 ] 



KARIKALA 


To return to Karikala’s relation to Kanci, Mr. 
P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar, like us, rejects the account 
of the Silappadilcaram which makes Karikala’s sway 
extend into Northern India. But he finds other evidence 
for the rule of Karikala over the Pallava country and 
the Ceded Districts, and it is necessary to examine this 
briefly. We may remark at the outset that though we 
may not follow him in his method, we have nothing to 
oppose to the inferences he draws on this subject 
from the late Telugu-Coda inscriptions and the Local 
Records in the Mackenzie Collection. The exact degree 
of importance that should be attached to such belated 
testimony to occurrences in a more or less remote past 
is a matter of opinion ; and there is a point, which is 
reached very soon, beyond which differences on such 
matters are hardly worth arguing about. We shall 
confine ourselves to an examination of the evidence 
cited by Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar from early Tamil 
literature in support of bis view, for it is our main 
object to disentangle Karikala as he appears in this 
literature from the weeds of legend that have grown 
so thick around him, and to determine the residue of 
authentic history that is left behind after criticism has 
done its work. 

The word Vadavar (northerners) (in 1. 27G of the 
Patti nappalai) is said * by Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar to 
refer to the Pallava kings of Kanci. This is really 
begging the question, and if this vague reference to 
northerners is all the evidence that can be cited in 
support of Karikala’s conquest of Kanci, we may be 
excused for not accepting it as an established fact. We 
require more tangible evidence than this before being 
called upon to surrender the view, in our opinion the 



COLA STUDIES 


correct view, that the Pallavas of South Indian epigraphy 
find no place in the early Tamil Saftgam literature. 
Whether the Tiraiyar of this literature may be connected 
with the Pallavas of epigraphy, as has sometimes been 
supposed, is another question which is not germane to 
this discussion and need not be pursued here; parti- 
cularly because Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar is clear that 
they had nothing to do with one another. * It is 
significant, however, that the Tiraiyar do not figure in 
the list of Karikala’s subjects in the Pattinappalai, a 
fact which, if considered together with the evidence on 
Tondaiman Ilandiraiyan’s rule at KancI, raises a strong 
presumption that KancI was independent of the Colas 
in Karikala’s time; and our point is that the mere 
mention of Vadavar in the list of Cola feudatories 
cannot, by itself, upset this presumption. Then, Mr. 
Srinivasa Aiyangar proceeds : “ He (Karikala) pushed 
beyond and brought under his sway the Poduva 
chieftains, who ruled over the Cuddapah and lvurnool 
districts. The word Poduvar means herdsman chiefs 
and must refer to the rulers of the pastoral tribes that 
inhabited the Mullai region north of the Marudam f 
lands belonging to the Pallavas. The herdsmen brought 
under Karikala’s sway were Kurumbas, like those who 
inhabit these districts even to-day, and weave the famous 
kambalis of that region.” He also quotes Aham 141 : 

kurum-parai payirrum 
selkudi-nirutta perum-peyar-kkarikiil 
vel porc-colan, 

which he translates into : “ The famous victor, the Sola, 
Karikala, protected the families of the Kurumbar who 

* op . cit p. 401 

t We cannot foHow Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar’s speculation regarding the 
regions and cultures in the Tamil country which are not warranted by his. 
sources. 


[ 62 ] 



KARIKALA 


tend (flocks) on the hill-tops. ” The questions that arise 
for consideration here are : Who were the Poduvar ? 
What region did they inhabit? Were they identical 
with the Kurumbar, and does the Ahamnuru mention 
Karikala’s protection of the Kurumbar? The Poduvar 
are placed in the Pattinappalai list obviously in the 
Southern region together with the Pandya and the 
Irungovel, and appears to refer to the Ay chieftains of 
the Tinnevelly district. There is no evidence, apart 
from the surmises about mullai and marudam, not of any 
considerable value either in themselves or in their 
present context, in favour of locating the Poduvar in 
the Cuddapah and Kurnool districts. And it is very 
unlikely that the Poduvar were the same as the 
Kurumbar. But what is more to the point, the 
discovery of a reference to the Kurumbar caste in the 
lines quoted from the Ahavt is due entirely to a 
mistake.* The passage really means nothing more 
than : “ The famous Karikala, the Cola (king) victorious 
in fight, who fixed up the selkudi (families about to 
move out or families in need of relief). ” It is very 
doubtful if 4 kurumparai payirrum' properly qualifies 
Selkudi as it really completes an earlier clause in the 
poem. Perhaps the occurrence of the words kurum- 
parai with the hard final rai has led to the thought of 
the Kurumbar ending in the liquid consonant r. We 
thus see that the evidence cited in support of Karikala’s 
conquest of Kane! and the districts of Cuddapah and 
Kurnool is altogether valueless. 

We may turn now to consider a little more closely 
the idea briefly adverted to above that llandiraiyan, 

* It must be noted that even Kanakasabhai seems to have made this 
mistake. See op. cit. p. 67 and n. 4. His number of the Aham verse 140 occurs 
in some MSS, though the printed text gives it the number 141. Mr. K. worked 
altogether from MSS. and had not before him printed texts based on a collation 
of the MSS. 


[ 53 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


because he was a contemporary of Karikala, must have 
been appointed ruler of Kane! after Karikala’s conquest 
of that place, and presumably by Karikala himself. 
Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar’s view of the relation between 
Karikala and Ijandiraiyan is not without interest in this 
connection. He rejects rightly, * as it seems to us, the 
attempt to bleivd together the story of Kijji’s missing 
son by the Naga woman Pllivajai (. Manimekalai ) and 
that given by Naccinarkkiniyar, and thus to make 
Ijandiraiyan a grandson of Karikala. But in his search 
for support to his theory of Ijandiraiyan’s governorship 
of Kane! under Karikala, he lights on the inscriptions 
of the Codas of the Telugu country which say that 
Karikala had a grandson called Tondamana, f and he 
says : “ Ijandiraiyan being the only known Tondaimiin 
of the period is most probably this Tondamana. ” 

Now the inscriptions to which we are referred bear 
dates in Saka 10 (7) 9 and 1146 corresponding roughly to 
A. D. 1157 and 1224. In these inscriptions the history 
of the early Cojas has become a full-blown legend. 
Karikala’s father Jata-Coda was a ruler in Ayodhya. 
One of the three grandsons of Karikala bears the name 
Tondamana. This name does not include Ijandiraiyan 
the distinctive part of the name of the early ruler of 
Tondaimandalam. The Telugu name Tondamana is a 
late attempt to explain the name of the country by 
connecting it with that of an early ruler; similar 
attempts regarding Pandya, Coja and Cera being three 
brothers who partitioned the Tamil land among them- 
selves must serve as sufficient guides to the proper 
treatment to be accorded to such tales. That a 
statement is made in an inscription, although it be a 

* op, cits p. 400. 

t ops cits pp. 397. ff. 

[ 54 ] 



KARIKALA 


stone inscription, is not always a guarantee of its 
accuracy ; much less can this be the case with 
statements made in twelfth and thirteenth century 
inscriptions on events which admittedly occurred, at 
the latest, in the fourth or fifth century A. D. And is it 
not curious that a talented scholar who exhibits much 
critical acumen in his discussion of the views of earlier 
writers about the relationship between Karikala and 
Ilandiraiyan should end by accepting that very relation- 
ship, and on such evidence as this ? 

Possibly conscious, of the flaw in the position, 
Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar sets forth in quest of more 
direct evidence from the Perumbanarruppadai on the 
descent of Tondaiman Ilandiraiyan from the Colas, that 
is, from Karikala. “ If this Tiraiyan was a chief of the 
Tondaiyar,” he asks, * “ how could he have also been 
the grandson of Karikala ?,’’ and answers : “ This could 
have been if his mother was a Tiraiya ( sic Cola?) 
woman.” We expect to hear about the identity of this 
mother; but we do not. We are told this, however: 
*• That Ilandiraiyan was descended both from the S o la 
and Tiraiya families is mentioned in the Perumbanar- 
ruppadai (11. 29-36)”, and in his translation of these 
lines all the references to the Solan are introduced within 
brackets by Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar without the least 
sanction from the text. Naccinarkkiniyar indeed, as we 
have seen, understands the poet’s statement that the 
Tiraiyan was of the family of Visnu as implying that he 
came from the Co]a family, and retails the story of the 
Co]a prince of Negapatam raising the Tondaiyar line by 
his liaison with the Naga maiden. But the fact remains 
that the text of the poem only states that the Tiraiyan 
came of the line of Visnu. All kings are of the line of 


* op, tit . 398-9 


[ 55 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Visnu in some sense. The Kauravas and the Cajukyas 
of the lunar race also claimed descent from Visnu. 
There is no compelling reason to accept that descent 
from Visnu must necessarily mean descent from the 
Cola line. And one can hardly resist the feeling that 
Naccinarkkiniyar’s gloss at this point is itself reminis- 
cent of the Matiimekalai story. Mr. Srinivasa Aiyangar 
rejects the story, but keeps the comment and uses it to 
support his view that the Tiraiyan’s mother was a Co]a 
woman of whose identity he has nothing to tell its. 
A straight literal translation of the text will show that 
it can bear no such interpretation, or at any rate, that., 
if there is nothing else to support the descent of the 
Tiraiyan from the Cola line, we shall be justified in our 
scepticism in regard to such descent. “ You are of the 
family of the sea-coloured (god) who strode over the 
broad earth and whose breast carries the beautiful 
mole ; (you are) the descendant of the strong chieftain 
given by the waves of the self-same sea. (Your) sceptre 
is like the right-whorled chank in its flawless superiority, 
repels injustice and administers justice; it is esteemed 
by the three (sovereigns) who with armies possessing 
loud drums guard all the beings of the wide world/’ 

We see then that there is no dependable evidence 
in early Tamil literature on Karikala’s conquest of 
Kane! ; rather the testimony of the Perumbanarruppadai 
is just the other way, that Kane! was in Karikala’s 
time under the rule of Ijandiraiyan who is not once 
stated anywhere in this literature to have stood in 
subordinate relation to Karikala. The first direct 
statement on Karikala’s relation to Kane! is made by 
the Tiruvalangadu plates of the sixth year of Rajendra 
Co]a I in the 11th century A. D., and even then the 
other Cola plates of the time say nothing about it. 

[ 56 ] 



KARIKALA 


The Telugu-Coda inscriptions are more definite and 
say that Karikala ruled from Kanci ; according to them 
Karikala’s ancestors, and more often his so-called 
later Telugu descendants, had Uraiyur for their 
capital. * We have also the testimony of Sekkilar 
in the 12th century and the much later Tonclaimnndala- 
bataham^ telling us that Karikala had a great share in 
the colonisation and the administrative regulation of the 
Tondaimandalam as a whole. We can only observe 
that the lateness of the testimony and its conflict 
with what we learn of Karikala from the earliest 
references to him render it extremely difficult for us 
to accept these statements as part of the history of 
the early ruler. How Karikala came to be connected 
with the Tondaimandalam or Kanci in later times 
is quite another matter on which something will be 
said presently. 

Closely connected with this is the question of 
Karikala’s contemporaneity with Trilocana Pallava, 
besides some others raised by the Telugu-Coda inscrip- 
tions, and to these we may now turn our attention. 
Both Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar aud Dr. Venkata 
Ramanayya have pushed the Trilocana synchronism to 
the front recently and made it the basis for the date they 
assign to Karikala. In doing so, they seek to impart a 
finality and conclusiveness to suggestions made by some 
epigraphists in a more cautious spirit. Mr. Krishna 
Sastri for instance, sums up the evidence on Trinetra 
as follows : J “ Trinayana Pallava -is synonymous 
with Trilocana Pallava, Mukkanti-Pallava or Mukkanti 

* See e. g. v. 3 of No. 205 of 1899 and 15 of 1917 

f Verse 97 which Mr. K. V. Subrahmania Aiyar accepts wholesale, I. A. 41 
p. 146. 

t E. I. Vol. X, p. 58 n. 2. 


8 


[ 57 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Kaduvetti (as the name sometimes appears in Telugu 
inscriptions). Trilocana was the mythical Pallava king 
who was ruling the Telugu country prior to the advent 
of the Cajnkyas nnder Vijayaditya of' Ayodhya. In 
the mythical account of the Eastern Cajukyas given 
in copper-plates from the time of Vimaladitya down- 
wards, Trilocana Pallava is mentioned as the king who 
opposed Vijayaditya in his victorious campaign against 
t,h% south and perhaps also killed him. Trilocana is 
also mentioned in Telugu inscriptions as the contem- 
porary of the early Coja king Karikala to whom he 
was subordinate. Mr. Venkayya places Karikala 
(and consequently Trinayana Pallava) roughly about 
the end of the 5th century A. D. * The Isvara-vamsa 
to which Trinayana Pallava belonged (as disclosed by 
the Hemavati record) is not mentioned elsewhere. 
One record from Nandalur (No. 580 of 1907) actually 
traces Mukkanti Kaduvetti to the third eye of &iva 
(Isvara). The Pallavas of KancI traced their descent 
from Brahma, through many Puranic sages, to the 
Mahabharata hero Asvatthaman.” In another place, f 
he says : “ From the account given in the Eastern 
Calukya copper-plates — whatever its historical value 
may be — it appears as if five generations had 
intervened between the mythical king Vijayaditya 
and Kubja-Visnuvardhana before the latter came 
to rule over the Vehgidesa and founded the Eastern 
Calukya dynasty.” The last event happened in or 
about A.D. 615 and “calculating backwards for 
five generations, we arrive at the conclusion that 
Vijayaditya of Ayodhya and, therefore, also Trilocana- 

* Mr, Venkayya, though he recognises that Trilocana was a mythical Pallava 
king, yet proceeds to fix Karikala’ s date on the assumptions reproduced by 
Mr, Krishna Sastri. A. 5, I. 1905-6 pp. 174-5 and nn. He is very cautious, 
however, in his remarks at L A . Vol. 38 pp. 7-8. 

f E. I, XI p. 840. 


[ 58 ] 



KARIKALA 


Pallava and Karikala, must have flourished about the 
end of the fifth century A.D. The history of the 
Pallavas at this period is obscure, and it is not unlikely 
that Karikala-Cola was supreme at the time and held 
the Pallava dominions under his sway.” One is amazed 
at the line of argumentation followed in the extracts 
given above ; at the same time one is grateful for the 
care with which the facts have been summarised. We 
see that Trilocana was the ‘ mythical ’ Pallava king’of 
the Telugu country; he figures for the first time in 
Eastern Calukya plates in the ‘mythical account’ 
given from the time of Vimaladitya (11th century) 
downwards ; he is yet accepted as the foe of Vijaya- 
ditya, who is himself a * mythical ’ king. Again, 
Trilocana is of the Kvara-vamSa, a family apparently 
different from that of the Pallavas of Kanci ; yet he is 
accepted as the Pallava opponent of Karikala. The 
history of the Pallavas in this period is 4 obscure ’ yet it 
is 4 not unlikely ’ that Karikala Cola held the Pallavas 
in subjection. Lastly, it is admitted that the historical 
value of the late E. Calukya plates is not known ; yet 
the apparent interval of five generations between the 
‘mythical’ Vijayaditya and Kubja Visnuvardhana is 
accepted as a solid fact, and a scheme of chronology 
built thereon and “ we arrive at the conclusion ” that 
Trilocana, Karikala and Vijayaditya “ must have 
flourished at the end of the fifth century A.D. ’’ And 
to leave nothing unexplained, Mr. K. V. Subrahmania 
Aiyar undertakes to determine the political relation 
among the three contemporaries by suggesting * that 
“ Trilocana Pallava had to meet the combined forces of 
Karikala and Vijayaditya, and that the two last were 
on some terms of alliance, which are not quite plain.” 
He adds : “ It is not unlikely that some of the northern 


• /. A. Vo]. 41, p. 146-7. 

[ 59 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


powers joined one side or the other. In this connection 
it is worthy of note that Karikala is represented in the 
Tamil work Silappadikaram as an ally of Avanti, which 
is Ujjain in Malwa, and as the overlord of Vajra and 
Magadha. It looks as if Karikala was instrumental in 
permanently settling the Western Calukyas in Southern 
India.” 

So it comes about that Eastern Cajukya legends 
dating from the 11th century A.D., and dealing with 
the fifth, explain how the Western Calukyas * found 
a lodgement in South India in the seventh century A.D. 
Perhaps one of the unknown terms of alliance between 
Vijayaditya and Karikala was that the former should 
die at the hands of Trinetra in a fight, and that 
Karikala should live not only to reap the benefit of the 
alliance, but to put out the third eye of Trinetra and 
help Vijayaditya’s Western descendants to settle in 
South India ! 

Dr. Venkata Ramanayya affirms : * “ The evidence 
at our disposal is so very overwhelming that we have to 
accept the historicity of Trilocana and his contempora- 
neity with Karikala as genuine historical facts.” f In 
saying this, he has apparently been influenced by the 
number and range of the epigraphical and literary 
references he has brought together in the schedules at 
the end of his booklet. But all that is established by 
these references is that the Trilocana story was widely 

* Professor L. D. Barnett {/. R. A. S. Oct. 1930, pp. 933-4, n. 1) has lent 
his support to Dr. Venkata Ramanayya’ s identification of Jayasimha, Ranaraga 
and PulakSsin I of the Western line with Vijayaditya, Visnuvardhana and 
PulakSsin I of the Eastern list {op. cit .) pp. 42-3. Even if these identifications 
are admitted without argument, they make no difference to the relations, among 
Vijayaditya I, and Trinetra and Karikala which form the subject of our 
investigation. 

t op, cit } p. 25. 


[ 60 ] 



KARIKALA 


current and frequently mentioned in the inscriptions 
of many families of petty rulers in the Telugu 
country from the 11th century. The ubiquitous nature 
of the story which so forcibly impresses this critic is in 
our opinion a strong reason for our not accepting it as 
history. Dr. Venkata Ramanayya is also apt to 
exaggerate the antiquity of the epigraphs mentioning 
the Trilocana-Karikala synchronism. He says that the 
inscriptions “ belong to different ages from the 7 th to 
the 13th century A.D.” The only seventh century 
inscription mentioned in his tables at the end of the 
book is the Nellore record (D 2) of Cahikya Vikrama- 
ditya which, as has been pointed out already, has no 
bearing on the subject. The date of the next earliest 
record* he cites is S 864, A.D. 942, but this only gives 
the name of Trilocana and has nothing to say of 
Karikala, and the regular series does not commence 
till a century later. The lateness of the testimony to 
the Karikala-Trilocana story, and the mention of 
Trilocana in the records of many families in the 
Telugu country, often without any relation to Karikala, 
alike point to a conclusion very different from that 
of Dr. Venkata Ramanayya on the historicity of 
Trilocana. 

The attempt of the same scholar to prove the 
genuineness of the tradition of the Telugu-Coda 
inscriptions in another direction can hardly be said 
to be more successful. He seeks to correlate the Telugu- 
Coda genealogies of the Karikala line with data drawn 
from early Tamil literature, in order to show that the 
former only repeat the Tamil tradition. First he takes 
two Telugu-Coda inscriptions dated in S 1079 and 
& 1146 (Nos. 205 and 183 resp. of 1899) and combines 

• 5. /. /. VI 561. 


[ 61 ] 



COLA STUDIES 

the genealogical information given by 'them and makes 
up the list : 

Jata-Coda 
Karikiila I 
Mahimana Coda 


Karikala II Dasavarman Tondamana 

The important fact here is this : the relation 
between Karikala and Mahimana Coda is not stated in 
the earlier record. This is admitted by Dr. Venkata 
Ramanayya himself. * As the exact language employed 
in inscription is of some consequence to the under- 
standing of the real position, it is necessary to 
reproduce it here ; verse 5 relating to Karikala con- 
cludes: ksititalamakhilam palayamasa Kancyam. The 
next verse begins : 

inasantataviha suta abhavan mahimana-coda- 

vasudhadhipateh I 
karikala-coda-dasavarma-nrpavapi tondamanah 

dharanlsa varah || 

This verse clearly marks a distinct break in the 
succession after Karikala I, and this inscription though 
it mentions the construction of the Kaveri banks 
knows nothing of Trilocana. On the other hand, the 
other record of about seventy years later, gives 
a long genealogy in Telugu in which most of the 
legendary figures like Kasyapa, Manu, Bhagiratha and 
Rama make their appearance, but not Jatacoda, the 
father of Karikala and ruler of Ayodhya, who in his 
digvijaya conquered the Dravida-pancaka and set up 
his rule in Uraiyur, and whose son, according to the 

• op. cit. p. 27 . 

[ 62 ] 




KARIKALA 


other record, was Karikala of the Kaveri-banks-fame 
who ruled from Kan cl. This later Telugu genealogy 
moreover knows all about the Trilocana story, seems 
to make Karikala a northern king and even introduces, 
like the Bhakti-raja plates, a Bhoja as his contemporary. 
It may be doubted whether particulars drawn from two 
such records, so different from each other and dealincr in 

o 

palpable legends relating to a distant past may, in combi- 
nation, be expected to furnish a basis for history to stand 
on. Again, though there is a clear break in the Telugu 
genealogy (183 of 1899) after Karikala II, there is no 
such break after Dasavarman * in the Sanskrit record 
(205 of 1899 ) which after mentioning Dasavarma’s 
conquest of Pakrastra and his rule from Pottappi 
(verse 8) proceeds: nrpasya tasya putrobhU (tpankah) 
Sankara kinkarah .... (v. 9) and again, ajayata-tato 
raja satyassatyaparakramah .... (verse 10). It is a pity 
however, that a long gap in the inscription at this point 
makes it quite impossible to decide the number of 
generations between Mahimuna and Kama Coda who is 
known to have been ruling about $ 1059 (A. D. 1187). 
But the point is that so far as the line of rulers called 
the ‘ A ’ line by Mr. Venkayya f in his account of the 
Telugu-Codas is concerned, the break occurs between 
Karikala and Mahimana, and not after Mahimana’s son 
Dasavarman. And this should weigh as another serious 
objection to the genealogy of the Karikala line as 
restored by Dr. N. V. Ramanayya from the Telugu- 
Coda records. 

His genealogy from the Tamil side J is even less 
plausible. He chooses the name Mavan-kijli for the 
Cola king of the Manimekalai , and sees in it a close 

* Contra Dr. N. V. Ramanayya op. cit p. 25. 

t A. R . £. 1900, pp. 17 ff. 

t N. V. Ramanayya op. cit pp. 28-32. 


[ 63 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


resemblance in meaning to Mahiman. lie allows that, 
Mavan-kilji’s relation to Karikala is nowhere explicitly 
stated in the Tamil classics, but. affirms that “Tamil 
scholars are, however, unanimous in accepting the 
ancient tradition, in accordance with which Mavan- 
kijli was the son of Karikala.” There is no such 
tradition of the relation between the two rulers and 
no unanimity of opinion among Tamil scholars on the 
subject. * Again : “ Mavan-kijji had two sons, Udaiya- 
kumaran and Tondaman Ijandiraiyan.” Udayakumara 
was indeed the son of the king, but that does not help 
the argument in any way ; Ijandiraiyan and his relation 
to the Colas we have discussed before, and our author 
allows that “ some doubt may be entertained about 
this.” And there is yet another step in his argument. 
“ There can be no doubt about Plli Valai, the mother of 
of Tondaiman being a Bana princess. Her Bana origin 
is proved by the name of her father Vajai-Vanan. The 
surname Vanan is identical with Banan. In Tamil ‘ v ’ 
and ‘ b ’ are interchangeable and the change does not 
affect the meaning. The word Vanarayar is made use 
of frequently for Banarayar in later Tamil inscrip- 
tions It may be suggested that * valai ’ is a corrupt 

form of Bali, a name which occurs in Bana genealogy. 
The Banas ruled in Yaduga Vali or Yndhrapatha, 
which seems to be identical with Pakarastra. It may 
be noted in this connection that Dasavarman one of 
the sons of Mahimana Cola (Mavan-Kijji) is said to have 
conquered this region.” All our knowledge of Vajai- 
Vanan is that, according to the Mmimekalai f, besides 

* See Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar -§lrah Senguffuvan 2nd edn. p. 103 for a 
totally different reconstruction. By a curious mistake Dr. N. V. Ramanayya 
se$ms (p. 29) to make Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, whose guidance he follows, say that 
I]an go and 5engu$tuvan were the sons of Karikala. In fact. Dr. Aiyangar says 
they were his grandsons. 

t XXIV 1. 54 and XXIX 1. 3. Tbe correct form is Vajai-Vanan, not- Vanan. 

[ 64 ] 



KARIKALA 


being the father of Pili-valai, he was the ruler of the 
Naga country ( Nakamdn ). There has been a great 
amount of speculation on the Nagas in recent years; 
no connection between them and the Banas has ever 
been suggested; nor indeed does it seem likely. The 
attempt to derive Va]ai from Bali is indeed hopeless ; 
the suggested identification of the Andhrapatha with 
Pakarastra is quite plausible ; * but, in itself, this does 
not go far to- support the identification of the Naga 
king of the Manitnekalai with an imaginary Bana king. 

The attempt to discover common ground between 
early Tamil literature of tbe &aiigam period and the 
late Telugu-Coda inscriptions is thus altogether forced 
and unconvincing. -* To read some of these inscriptions 
with no preconceived theories to establish, is the surest 
means of convincing ourselves that we have in them 
edifying legends pitchforked into lengthy pedigrees, 
not quite consistent with one another, but always 
meant to redound to the glory of some petty chieftain 
or other who made some little gift. And a common 
feature of these legends of the Telugu country is to get 
their ancient king down from Ayodhya on a conquest, 
or on game hunting, often leading to an encounter 
with Trinetra, another mythical and shadowy figure. 
That is how Trinetra comes to be not only the 
opponent of Vijayaditya and Karikala, but the friend of 
another prince from the North, an ancestor of Velananti 
Gonka III, by name Malla I, who had his capital orginally 
at Kirnapura in the Madhyadesa. The same form of 
lea-end in which Trinetra figures as friend and not as foe 
appears to have been adopted, as Hultzsch remarks, -j- 
by the chiefs of Amaravati who bore the title “ lord of 

• E. /. XI p. 231. 

t E. I IV p. 84. 

[ 65 ] 


9 



COLA STUDIES 


the Satsahasra country on the southern hank of the 
river Krsnavenna, obtained through the favour of the 
glorious Trinayana Pallava.” And we also hear 
of a Trilocana Kiidamba about the same time * 
in the West. Karikala himself is in some Kakatlya 
records a northern king coming down to the south 
on a hunting excursion, and setting up his camp 
at Kakatipura. f If we are to accept all the indications 
about Trilocana’s greatness and the extent of his 
kingdom that we get from these records, he must have 
been a powerful emperor who at one time ruled 
practically the whole of the Deccan and held in his 
hand KancI, Kajahasti, Banavase and so on. We may 
as well try and trace the true story of the lives and 
achievements of the heroes of the Mahabhiirata with 
the aid of the local legends of South India centering 
round our numerous Pancapandava-malais, as accept 
this tale. Surely, the attempt to resuscitate legends 
so decisively rejected by the elder epigraphists like Fleet 
and Hultzsch is no forward step in the reconstruction 
of early South Indian History. 

It is well known that not a single reference can be 
traced $ in the early literature of the Tamils to the 
achievement fc>r which Karikala is most extolled in 
later times — viz., the construction of the Kaveri banks. 
Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar seeks to get over this diffi- 
culty <[j first by suggesting that * this work does not seem 
to have appealed to the imagination of contemporary 
poets as much as it did to that of men of a later age,’ 
and then by discovering an allusion to Karikala' s 

* Kielhom’s list of S. I. Inscr., Nos. 254 & 261. 

f A. R. E. 1917 II BO. 

J Mr. Kanakasabhai’s citation of Silapp. X, 11. 108-11, (op. cit . p. 68) must 
have been due to some mistake. 

Tamils pp. 360-2 & n. 


[ 66 ] 



KARIKALA 


achievement in the phrase ‘ varaippaham ’ of 11. 240-41 
of the Porunararruppadai. He also argues that the 
great fertility of the Kaveri valley that is attested 
by contemporary poets ' could have been obtained 
only if Karikala had scientifically regulated the flow 
of water in the Kaveri. ’ Even if it be conceded that 
* varaippaham ’ does not mean ‘ tanks and ponds ’ as 
Naccinarkkiniyar interprets it, but the inside of the 
embankment (of the river), still it is difficult to see how 
this can be taken as “ an allusion ” to the embankments 
said to have been raised by Karikala. Following the 
suggestion made by Mr. Kanakasabhai on the evidence 
of Upham’s Rajdvali, Dr. S. K. Aiyangar adopted the 
notion * that Karikala’s sway extended to Ceylon, that 
he invaded the island and brought thousands of its 
people captives and compelled them to work on the 
banks of the Kaveri. The early chronicle Mahavamsa, 
much more trustworthy as history, knows nothing of 
this invasion, and yet it has become current by being 
incorporated in four successive editions of Smith’s 
Early History of India. 

The earliest mention of Karikala’s embankment 
of the Kaveri seems to be that in the Malepadu plates 
of Punyakumara and there, as we have seen, Trinetra 
is not heard of. The Bedirur grant of the Gahga 
king Bhuvikrama of A. D. 634 f also mentions the 
embankment, but not Trinetra. Still the fact is not 
easy to explain, that if Karikala who attained the 
trairajyasthiti and controlled the flood-banks of the 
Kaveri in some wonderful manner not stated (Malepadu 
plates) were the same king as is celebrated in &ahgam 

* Kanakasabhai pp. 8-9 ; Ancient India pp. 93-94 ; cf Upham Sacred Books of 
Ceylon . Vol. i p. 228; vol ii pp. 57-8 and 229 ff; also, Schoff in J. A. 0 , S. Vol. 33 
p. 213. Contra Geiget-AfahZvamsa, ch. 85. 

f Myt. Arch . Rep . 1925, p. 16 and No. 105. 


[ 67 ] 



COLA. STUDIES 


literature, that literature should not betray the slightest 
trace of a knowledge of such a thing on the part of 
any of the authors mentioning Karikala. Old stanzas 
indeed, waifs and strays coming from nobody knows 
where, do contain such allusions ; * but they can hardly 
be accepted as evidence of anything historical. The 
mention of the event in the early Telugu-Coda plates 
from Malepadu and in the Tamil Coja plates of the 
Vijayalaya line, and the absence of all mention of 
Trinetra in these grants, may suggest that this 
particular statement is entitled to greater credence than 
the somewhat later jingle carnnasaroruha etc. And the 
trairajyasthiti of Karikala (Malepadu) which seems to 
coincide with what we hear in Tamil literature of his 
victories against the Cera and the Pandya is perhaps 
another consideration pointing to the same conclusion. 
On the other hand, the Malepadu plates do not tell us 
precisely how Karikala controlled the floods of the 
Kaveri; they seem to count this achievement as the 
first of a series of miracles ( anekatisaya ) which are not 
detailed. And the story grows first into an embank- 
ment of the Kaveri, then into an embankment raised 
by the hands of the defeated enemies of Karikala, and 
lastly, when this stream of legend mingles with another 
started by the craze for Trinetra, into the elaborate 
form in which it gets standardized in the caranasaroruha 
formula and the Kalin gattupparaui verse. On the whole 
it seems therefore best to treat the construction of the 
banks of the Kaveri as a Karikala myth rather than 
accept it as history. A Tamil inscription f of the 
twelfth century or so mentions a Parakesari Karikala- 
cojadeva who raised the banks of the Kaveri. The 

•See Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar s * Perundogat* Nos. 778 and 779, the 
first purporting to give the date of the emhankment, and the second Karikala'* 
life-history in a brief compass up to his death in his 83rd year. 

t 110 of 1925. 


[ 68 ] 



KARIKALA 


only Parakesari with the Karikala title was Aditya II, 
c. A. D. 865-70; the inscriptions of his reign, however, 
do not refer to this event. 

That in Indian conditions history had too often a 
tendency to degenerate quickly into mythology is a 
fact generally admitted and easy to demonstx’ate. 
The history of Ekantada Ramayya * in the twelfth 
century A. D. is a case from relatively modern times. 
Karikala is an ancient name and legend has played 
upon it for a very long time. It began its work early 
as we see from the Silappadikaram. Whatever might 
have happened after his time, there is no trustworthy 
evidence to show that Karikala ruled at KancI at all. 
That Kanclpuram was an important place in Karikala’s 
time is clear from the Perumbanarruppadai ; and the 
Manimekalai seems to imply that sometime after 
Karikala the city passed under the sway of the Colas. 
But of the Pallavas of the Prakrit and Sanskrit charters 
we have no mention in early Tamil literature, and the 
idea of a Cola interregnum in KancI in the midst of 
Pallava rule appears to rest entirely on the Trilocana 
myth and the date postulated for Karikala thereupon. 
Karikala’s connection with KancI in legend would 
appear to have arisen partly from the great celebrity 
of KancI from very early times, and partly from the 
presumption that so powerful a king as Karikala must 
in his time have held KancI as well. Further, Trilocana 
Pallava having been made the opponent of Karikala, 
what was more natural than that the city which was 
most associated with Pallava rule in the minds of the 
people should have fallen to Karikala after his conquest 
of Trinetra ? Indeed, in considering this question, the 
possibility has often presented itself to my mind that 
there, after all, may have existed another Karikala 

• See Bombay Gazetteer Vol. 1, Pt. II, p. 483 ff and E. /. V pp. 239 ff. 

[ 69 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


different from the king of the Pattinappalai, who held 
KancT and raised the banka of the Kaveri, and who 
in later times came t.o be confounded with his earlier 
namesake; but every time, the insubstantial nature 
of the evidence on which these facts relating to KancT 
and Kaveri rest, and the utter impossibility of reconcil- 
ing such an assumption with the trend of general 
history so far as it is known at present, have resulted 
in the idea of a second Karikala being dismissed as 
untenable. 

There is some temerity involved in expressing an 
individual judgment on the events of the reign of 
Karikala in view of the inquiries published already 
by several scholars of eminence ; the more so as the 
judgment has to be based on materials already for 
the most part well-known and used by the very scholars 
from whose conclusions it differs. But the issues 
involved are so fundamental to a rational understand- 
ing of the trend of South Indian history, that a fresh 
examination of them in a dispassionate and critical 
manner does not seem superfluous. I hope that all the 
help that has been derived from earlier writers in the 
consideration of the questions raised has been duly 
acknowledged; also that my discussion of these 
questions has not been unduly influenced by my view 
of the age to which the early Tamil literature of the 
& ah gam belongs. I have sought to discuss the incidents 
of Karikala’s life and reign solely on the evidence 
bearing on each of them, and with no preconceived 
notions as to the chronological place of Karikala in the 
history of Southern India. And my conclusion is that 
Karikala’s history is contained only in the contempo- 
rary poems of Nos. I & II among the groups in which 
I have arranged the chief sources for purposes of this 

[ 70 ] 



KARIKALA 


discussion, that group III furnishes very valuable 
corroboration on some important points and comprises 
poems either contemporary or nearly so, and that all 
the other statements that cluster round the name of 
Karikala in literature and epigraphy must, if at all, be 
accepted only with very great caution. On the age of 
Karikala we have reached the negative conclusion that 
the fifth century date, based as it is entirely on the 
Vijayaditya-Trilocana-Karikala synchronism is utterly 
untrustworthy. One wonders, in fact, that it ever 
came to be proposed at all on such evidence! For the 
rest, the date of the king is closely bound up, the more 
so when his story is shorn of all its later legendary 
accretions, with one of the most vexed questions of 
South Indian chronology. I have stated my reasons 
elsewhere * for holding that the literature of the Sahgam 
belongs to the early centuries of the Christian era. 

We have been told, f however, that apart from the 
difficulty in fixing the age of the Sahgam, there are 
other objections to an early date for Karikala and it is 
necessary, before concluding this study, to consider the 
validity of these objections. It has been said that 
neither the Peripltis nor Ptolemy mentions Karikala 
though they refer to much less celebrated monarchs. 
The obvious answer is that such silence on the part of 
foreign writers means little ; and it is not denied that 
some of the monarchs mentioned by these writers are 
also found in the Sahgam literature which mentions 
Karikala. Then it is argued that “ Ptolemy’s geography 
of Tamil India in the II century A. D. gives us the 
picture of a land ruled by several petty monarchs and 
not one that had been brought under the sole discus of 
a great monarch as the Tamil poems describe Karikala 

* See The Pandyan Kingdom pp. 16 ff. 

+ Mr. P.T. Srinivasa Aiyangar — Tamils , pp. 381-2. 

[ 71 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


to be. ” This argument derives its plausibility from 
exaggerating the pettiness of the monarchs mentioned 
by Ptolemy and the greatness of Karikala. In spite of 
the victories that Karikala won at Venni and Vahai, 
there is no ground to believe that he had in his permanent 
occupation many districts outside the Kaveri basin 
including Uraiyur and Puhilr, or that the whole of 
Tamil India had been ‘ brought under his sole discus ’ — 
an expression intelligible enough in early Tamil poetry, 
but not necessarily, on that account, literally true. 
Lastly, it is held that “the disputations of logicians 
who flew their flags of challenge in front of their tents, 
referred to in the Pattinappalai certainly belong to an 
age when dialectics had developed, and this certainly 
did not take place even in Northern India before the III 
century A. D. ” We have no definite knowledge of 
the early history of Indian philosophy. ‘‘We must 
content ourselves with the belief,” says Mr. Keith in 
his History of Sanskrit Literature, “ that between the 
dates of the chief upanisads and the third or fourth 
century A. D., there proceeded an active stream of 
investigation which we have only in its final form. ” 
According to this estimate, the 3rd or 4th century A. D. 
marks, in Northern India, not the beginning, but the 
close of an active period of philosophical investigation, 
and in the face of this considered statement of the age 
of Indian philosophy, it is hard to see any force what- 
ever in the objection raised to a date in the second 
century A. D. for Karikala. We may conclude by 
saying, once more, that our object has not been to 
stand up for a second century date for Karikala ; we 
have been concerned only to show that the objections 
raised to that or any other early date for Karikala 
do not stand scrutiny. 


[ 72 ] 



Ill 

SOME ASPECTS OF RURAL LIFE AND 
ADMINISTRATION IN COLA TIMES 

Throughout India the village was the unit of local 
administration before the advent of British rule. As 
is seen from numerous reports of the earlier adminis- 
trators of British India, the vitality of village institutions 
struck their observers as something very remarkable in 
the period of the establishment of British rule. Of the 
village organisation in the Deccan, for instance, this is 
what Elphinstone wrote : “ Though probably not com- 
patible with a very good form of government, they are 
an excellent remedy for the imperfections of a bad 
one. They prevent the bad effects of negligence and 
weakness, and even present some barrier against its 
tyranny and rapacity. Again, these communities 
contain in miniature all the materials of a state within 
themselves, and are almost sufficient to protect their 
members if all other government were withdrawn. In 
the stability and continuity of Indian village life and 
organisation is to be sought the secret of the good 
things achieved by India in the past in spite of an 
apparent incapacity to develop political institutions of 
an advanced character.” The study of village institu- 
tions constitutes therefore an important part of the task 
of anyone who seeks to understand at their source the 
main currents of national life in ancient India. 

The importance of this study is coming more and 
more to be felt by students of Indian history. Con- 
siderable portions of Mr. R. K. Mookerjee’s Local 
Government in Ancient India and Mr. R. C. Majumdar’s 

[ 73 ] 


10 



COLA STUDIES 


Corporate Life, as also Mr. A. S. Altekar’s work on 
Village-Communities in Western India furnish proof of 
the growing interest in this line of study. But it has 
not always been recognised that evidence drawn from 
one period and locality should not be blended with 
other evidence relating to other times and localities, and 
discussion has often taken the form of combining stray 
data from the Srnrtis with those drawn from inscrip- 
tions widely separated from one another in space and 
time, and the publications mentioned above furnish 
some striking examples of such historical averaging. 

1 propose in what follows to offer a brief review of 
the evidence bearing on village institutions in the 
Tamil country with special reference to the period of 
Cola supremacy, say from the tenth century to the 
thirteenth. 

The earliest references of a specific character to 
village Sabhds in the Tamil land occur in the inscriptions 
of the close of the 8th century A. D. from the Pandya 
and the Pallava countries. The origin and early history 
of these assemblies is at present very obscure, although 
their general prevalence over the whole of Southern 
India including the Cera, Karnataka and Telugn 
countries is widely attested by numerous epigraphs. 
And the Keralotpatti embodies traditions of an organised 
system of Tarakkuttam, Nattukkuttam and Perun- 
guttam held in the Kerala from time to time for many 
centuries till recent times. 

While editing the Uttaramerur records of Paran- 
taka Cola, Mr. Venkayya suggested a northern origin 
for the typical village assembly, and was inclined to 
believe that it was an adaptation to South Indian 
conditions of the system of government by committees 

[ 74 ] 



RURAL ADMINISTRATION 

described by Megasthenes as obtaining in Pataliputra. 
Others have followed Mr. Venkayya’s lead and have 
drawn attention to the use of Sanskrit terms in the 
records of the village assemblies of South India as an 
additional argument in support of the thesis. 

Although the complex organisation of the SalJul 
with a number of elected committees, like that typified 
by the Uttaramerur inscriptions, was unknown in the 
early centuries of the Christian era in the Tamil 
country, still the numerous references to manram and 
podiyil in the classical literature of the Sahgam period 
leave little room for doubt that some form of a primi- 
tive village assembly was known at the time. The 
commentator Naccinarkkiniyar invariably explains 
manram by the words urukku naduvayelldru-mirukkum 
marattadi, meaning the open place in the centre of 
the village where all people meet under the shade of 
a tree. And some references in the Puram to the manram 
(Nos. 46 and 220) make it clear that it was the place 
where justice was administered. In Puram 46 we have 
an interesting situation. The Cola king Killivalavan 
doomed the sons of his foe Malayaman to be thrown to 
an elephant. When the sentence is to be executed, a 
poet intercedes on behalf of the youngsters and appeals 
to the king’s mercy saying * that a strange fear has 
taken possession of those tender youths as they stare in 
bewilderment at the manru. Here the manru is the place 
where public punishments are inflicted. Again, Puram 
220 is a lament of Pottiyar, a close friend of another 
Cola king, at the sight of the manram of ancient 
Uraiyur bereft of its king who had for some unknown 
reason given up his life by starvation, f Here we get a 

• 11. 5-8 of PuranSnSru No. 46. 

*f* A practice analogous to but different from the salhhhana of the Jainas. 

[75] 



COLA STUDIES 


clear indication that the king used to go to the manram, 
apparently to administer justice and to do other 
public business. It must be noticed that in both these 
instances it is the manram of Uraiyur, the Cola capital 
of the time, that is mentioned ; and except the employ- 
ment of the same word to describe the open meeting- 
places belonging to other towns and villages, we have 
little direct evidence of the existence, nature and 
working of local assemblies of a popular character in 
this early period of Tamil history. Nevertheless, 
popular gatherings of a social and religious nature in 
the manram of every locality are known to have been 
a regular feature of rural life, and the manram was 
undoubtedly the scene of song, dance and other social 
amusements. As the modern distinctions between the 
political and other aspects of social life found no 
expression in the organisation of a more primitive age, 
it seems legitimate to infer that matters which we are 
apt to consider political or economic, like the settle- 
ment of a civil dispute, the punishment of crime, or 
the purchase and sale of land, must have also 
engaged the attention of such popular gatherings in 
each locality. 

It should, however, be observed that nowhere in the 
formal descriptions of Tamil polity such as we have in 
the Rural do we come across any clear references to 
the' village and its institutions. The Rural in fact knows 
only of the learned Sabha*. The commentator Parime- 
Ialagar makes it the king’s Sabha ; but the word ‘ avai r 
seems to have a more general application as is seen 
from some of the couplets in the sections thereon. 

On the other hand, there are clear and unmis- 
takable traces of the existence and the active 

* See sections on avat-yarital and avai-yatijamai. 

[ 76 ] 



RURAL ADMINISTR4TI0N 

functioning of Sabhas in villages in ^gvedic India. 
In a recent study on the economic and political 
conceptions in the Rgveda, the evidence on the matter 
is summarised as follows : 

“ Each town and each village possessed a 
building where were held meetings of the tribunal 
under the presidency of the madhyamdsi who punished 
crimes and presided also at the meetings of Vedic 
Indians in their recreations.” * 

The essential duty of the Sabha was to administer 
justice. It is worth noting that almost every inscrip- 
tion in Southern India which mentions a village 
assembly also makes reference to a madhyastha of the 
village, and that administration of justice formed one of 
the principal duties of the assembly. It would thus 
appear that the village assembly of later historical 
times in the South was, far from being the result of 
a single line of development, northern or southern, the 
complex product of the interaction of both southern 
and northern, Tamil and Sanskrit, influences. 

Turning now to the evidence from Coja inscrip- 
tions, there appear to have been different kinds of 
village assemblies corresponding to differences in the 
nature of the villages concerned. The Sabha strictly so 
called was the assembly of purely Brahman villages 
( Brahmadeyas ) which usually had names ending in 
Ca turvedirna hgalam. We know more of this class of 
villages and their administration than of others. The 
other classes may therefore be briefly noticed before we 
return to a detailed consideration of the Brahmanical 
Sabhas. Many villages appear to have had an assembly 
called Ur. So far, we have not come across any 

* H. C. Joshi — Conceptions Economises a Politiques Vatu L'lndt Ancienm 
D' Apr es Le Rigvtda p. 79. 


[ 77 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


evidence on the details of the organisation of this 
type of assembly. It appears to have been a kind of 
primitive gathering of the local people, the descendant 
of the earlier Tamil manram, in which people met to- 
gether and managed business somehow without any set 
rules or formal procedure. 

In some instances the fir existed side by Bide with 
the Sabha or the Mahasabha. Thus, one inscription 
from Tiruvalahgadu, Tanjore, * speaks of both the 
assemblies of the village, namely the Mahasabha and 
the ff r, agreeing to a scheme to delimit the extent of 
lands enjoyed tax-free by the local temple. In like 
manner, the Sabha and the fr of Tiruvadandai together 
accepted two endowments in favour of the local 
temple, f In one instance, the (Jr of Tiruvadandai 
alone accepted an endowment without reference to the 
sister body, the Sabha. + 

Then we have examples of a group called 
Nagaratiar performing functions very similar to those 
of the Sabhii and the tJr in other places. The 
Na gar attar were apparently assemblies of mercantile 
groups which went by the generic name Nagaram. For 
instance Eyirkottattu nagaram Kanclpuram. 

Then we have the Nattar, people of a nadu, which, 
as is well-known, was an administrative division larger 
than the village but smaller than the mandalam. There 
is a clear reference to the assembly of the Tiruvalundur 
nadu through whom a whole village was granted to a 
temple by the king. ^ 

* 88 of 1926. 

+ S. 1. I. Vol. m. Nos. 180 and 186. 

J 268 of 1910. 

H 100 of 1926 


[ 78 ] 



RURAL ADMINISTRATION 


Lastly we have reference to assemblies of the 
people of a whole mandalam. An inscription from 
Little Conjeevaram * states that the assembly of the 
people of Jayahgonda-Coja-mandalam granted a partial 
remission of taxes on several classes of land in the 
district under their control. 

Attention may be drawn here to the striking 
analogy between two of these terms from the Tamil 
insci*iptions and the words Paura and Janapada which 
have attracted attention after Mr. Jayaswal stated 
his theory that these were constitutional assemblies 
intended to limit the sway of autocracy in municipal 
and provincial administration. The expressions Nattar 
and Na gar attar are strikingly analogous to Janapada 
and Paura respectively ; in fact, no better rendering 
into Tamil of these Sanskrit terms can be imagined. 
And the evidence of the Tamil inscriptions is conclusive 
that the Nadu and the Nagaram were corporate organi- 
sations of some sort which performed definite duties 
and enjoyed the privileges of autonomy. There is also 
literary usage in support of our view of the relation 
of these Tamil terms to their Sanskrit analogues. 
Thus what the celebrated annotator Parimelalagar 
calls ndttuppadai f will be seen to correspond to what 
Kautilya calls Sreyibalam and describes as Janapadam. 
But the analogy between these two sets of terms 
cannot be pressed far, as there seem to be no terms in 
the Sanskrit literature on polity corresponding to the 
other bodies known to Tamil epigraphy. 

In the Perungadai , a Tamil version of Gunadhya’s 
Brhatkatha, we have a significant statement that, on the 
occasion of the birth of Naravana (Naravahana), among 

* 556 of 1919. 

f Note on Kural 762 ; cf. Kautilya ed. Shama Sastri (1924) pp. 342 and 345. 

[ 79 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


those who took part in the festivities were : “ the Sabha 
dear (to the king), the five great kujus, the Nagaram 
and the Nadu." * As the Sabha of the king is here 
distinguished from the Nagaram , we may conclude 
that the latter was more likely a professional corpora- 
tion of merchants than an urban assembly for general 
administration. It may also be noted in passing 
that the “five great Iculus" which some writers hold 
to have been a popular council of representatives, are 
best understood in the present context as ceremonial 
groups in personal attendance on the king on important 
occasions, f 

We may also note that in the Pallava charters 
we get some clear information about the Nadu and its 
role in the general administration. The Kasakudi 
plates of Nandivarman Pallavamalla have at the 
beginning of the Tamil part “ Kon-dlai , yandiru- 
pattiraiidavadu, urrukkattulckottattu nattdruhgauka " — 
“ Royal order, year 22nd, may the nattar of the 
llrrukkattu-kkottam also see.” A few lines further on, 
we have a clear statement + that the members of the 
Nadu (nattom) saw the royal order and assigned lands 
in accordance with the wishes of the Ndttu-viyavan 
who may have been either the headman of the Nadu 
(assembly) as Hultzsch understands it, or possibly a 
royal official placed over the administrative divison. 
That the Nadu was an organised assembly of a more or 
less popular character is strikingly indicated by the 
phrase Ndttai-kkutti-mla-nadappittu etc., of the Udayen- 
diram plates of Hastimalla. 

* 11. 37-8 of V 6. “ ahanamaravaiyum - aimperun guluvum, nagaramuia 
na4um * togaikon<}In4i " 

t See my PUndyan Kingdom pp. 32-3. 

t S. I. /. II, No. 73> 11. 109-11. 

1 S. I. /. II. No. 76, 11. 96-7. 


[ 80 ] 



RURAL ADMINISTRATION 


In the present state of our knowledge it is very 
difficult to say what the constitution of these different 
assemblies was like, what (specially with reference to 
the assemblies of the nadu and of the mandalam ) the 
exact sphere of their duties was, or what procedure 
was adopted at their meetings. One thing, however, 
is clear, that the assemblies other than Sabhas do not 
seem to have amounted to anything other than general 
meetings of the people concerned. This does not 
apply, of course, to non-territorial bodies of the nature 
of guilds and military clubs of which we say nothing 
here and to which admission was regulated by con- 
siderations of a different character. The general 
assemblies which played a more or less prominent part 
in the administration of the country appear to have 
included all the classes of the people without distinction 
of caste, except in Brahmadeya villages. Mr. Altekar is 
obviously wrong in assuming that all village assemblies 
in South India were governed by rules similar to those 
laid down by the Sabha of Uttaramerur. * It may also 
be noted in passing that sometimes the assemblies of 
different places and of different types appear to have 
come together for the transaction of business. Thus 
the Sabha of Tirairaur and the Nagaram of Tiruvidai- 
marudur met together with some other authorities of 
the temple of Tiruvidaimarudur to make arrangements 
for the preservation of ancient endowments to the 
temple engraved on its old walls which were to be 
pulled down to renovate the central shrine, f 

To return to the Sabhas and Brahmadeya villages 
where they obtained. The earliest instance so far 
known of the constitution of a Sabha is that contained 

* See his Village Communities in Western India, p. 123. 

+ 199 of 1907. 


11 


[ 81 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


F 

in an inscription of the 35th year of Maran Sadaiyan, 
Circa A. D. 800, which records the settlement 
{vyavasthai) arrived at by the Mahasabha and introduced 
by the following words: Kalakkndi - ndttu brahmadeyam- 
mdnanilainallur mahasabhaiyom - peruhguri - karri srl 
govardhanattu - lckudiyirundu ivvur mahasabhaiyom kudi 
manrddiivadamikku-cceyda vyavasthai yavadu — 

“ We, the (members of the) Mahasabha of Mana- 
nilainallur, a Brahmadeya in Kajakkudi-niidu, sum- 
moned the great assembly by beat of drum, * met at 
Sri Govardhana, and made the following settlement 
(of procedure) for the transaction of business at the 
meetings of the Mahasabha of this place." 

From this it is clear that the Mahasabha of this 
place had been in existence before the new settlement 
was arrived at, and what is even more remarkable, 
that the new rules and restrictions introduced for the 
working of the Sabha were made entirely at the initiative 
of the Sabha itself. There is at any rate no evidence of 
royal initiative or sanction for the constitution so 
adopted. Another noteworthy feature of this inscription 
is that it contains the earliest reference to variyam in 
the words : “ muluc - cirdvaaai - illddarai evvakaippatta 
variyamum erandapperddar - agavum,” meaning, “ those 
who do not have full shares ( ciravanai ) shall not be put 
in charge of any kind of variyam f The passage is 
not easy but it appears as if the variyam in this inscrip- 
tion was some kind of duty to be performed by a single 
individual rather than by a committee. This view 
receives support from an inscription from Sucindram 
of the 15th year of Rajaraja I (999 A. D.) which has : 

* karral is to proclaim by beat of drum. Kuri and Perunguri often occur 
in inscriptions, and are usually understood as 1 assembly * and * great assembly 
that is as Tamil terms corresponding to JaMia and MahUsabha. 

t Cf. pottakattilum erattu variyilum ittu, 1. 8 of No. 68 of 1898. 

[ 82 ] 



RURAL ADMINISTRATION 

“ Sabhaiyom vaicca variyar iruvarum karanattanum kudi 
devakariyam seyvadakavum " i. e., “The two variyar 
appointed by the members of the Sabha and the 
Earanattan shall together look after the temple affairs.” 

The next instance of a detailed constitution of the 
Sabha known to us is contained in the celebrated 
Uttaramallur inscriptions. It is doubtful if the consti- 
tution of Uttaramerur, to use the more ancient name of 
the place, was adopted at the instance of the king or 
had his approval. The only thing that is certain is that 
a royal officer was present in the assembly on both 
the occasions when it discussed and settled its own 
constitution. Later Cola inscriptions contain specific 
examples of royal orders communicating certain rules 
to regulate the qualifications of the members and the 
conduct of the meeting of the Sabha . * But all these 
instances establish one point beyond doubt, that each 
village had its own separate constitution. Though the 
type was more or less the same, the details varied 
considerably, and the assemblies often changed their 
constitutions in the light of experience. 

Uttaramerur for instance would appear to have 
had a much less elaborate constitution in the 
Pallava period f than it adopted under the Cola ruler 
Parantaka I. As is well known, in the reign of this 
Cola king, the rules of the assembly underwent two 
revisions in the course of two years. We may, there- 
fore, conclude that although the type of constitution was 
to some extent fixed for the Sabhds of the Brahmadeyas, 
still in details such as the age and qualification of the 
members, the number of committees into which the 
Sabha was resolved and the method of choice to these 

• e. g., 148 of 1927 and 120 of 1928. 

t cf. 61 of 1898 of about 796 A. D. 


[ 83 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


committees, there must have been differences from 
village to village. In the reign of Rajaraja the Sabha 
of Tenneri (Chingleput) for instance laid down * that a 
knowledge of the mantras was essential not only for 
service in the village- committees but for Sabha- 
niarranjollutal which seems to mean taking part in 
the deliberations of the assembly, f a requirement very 
similar to that contained in the Manur record of 
Maran ^adaiyan. 

It may also be inferred that under the Colas the 
village assemblies were brought under a closer super- 
vision by the central government than at any other 
time. 


4 The words actually employed are— “ mantra - brahmanam vallar&y 
variyanj eyvarakavum sabhamarranj olluvarakavum . ’ ’ 

t Nos. 240 and 241 of 1922. 


[ 84 ] 



IV 


THE SABHl OF N£LUR 

We shall study briefly the practical working in the 
Cola period of the assembly ( Sabha ) of one of the 
Brahmadeya villages of the Tanjore district. This study 
is based on the evidence of contemporary inscriptions 
which give interesting details of the economic and 
social life of the village and of the part played by the 
assembly in it. The name of the village as it occurs 
in the inscriptions is Nalur, a Brahmadeya in &errur- 
kurram in the K§atriya-sikhamani-valanadu, a name 
applied to N.E. part of the modern district of Tanjore. * 
In a comparatively early Rajakesari inscription, the 
village is called Palaiyasembiyan-mahadevi-caturvedi- 
mangalam on the southern bank, apparently of the 
Kaveri. In later inscriptions the village gets another 
name as well, and that is Vanavan-madevi-eaturvedi- 
mangalam ; f it is not possible to say if this name 
is derived from that of Parantaka II Sundara Coja’s 
queen Vanavanmahadevi who is known to have 
performed suttee on his death, or from that of some 
other Coja queen ; it does not appear in records till 
late in the reign of Kulottunga I. The village has 
been identified, very plausibly, with Tiru-Nalur-Tiru- 
mayanam of the hymns of the great Saiva Baint 
Tirujnanasambandar. X This identification gains support 
from the name of one of the temples repeatedly 
mentioned in the inscriptions, viz., Tirumayanam-udaiya 

* S. I. /. Vol. U, Intro, p. S*. 

t No. 317 of 1910 of year 3 of Vikramacoja. Earlier name in No. 3i!0 
of 1910. 

J By Mr. H. Krishna Sastri in A. R. E. 1911 Q. 17. 

[ 85 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Paramasvamin. * The name of the village from which 
these inscriptions come, Tirumeynanam, is a palpable 
corruption of the more ancient form Tirumayanam ; 
and the occurrence of this name with Nalur in our 
records leaves no room to question its identity with 
the shrine celebrated by Sambandar. It is situated 
within ten miles to the S. E. of Kumbakonam. f 

In point of time, the inscriptions range over a 
period of nearly three centuries and half from the 
second regnal year of Rajakesari Aditya I, the father 
of Parantaka I, c. A. D. 880, to the seventeenth of 
Rajaraja III, $ c. A. D. 1233 ; and the series gives 
us a fair insight into the kind of work that occupied 
the assembly from time to time during several genera- 
tions of Cola rule. It is best to arrange some inscrip- 
tions from the series in chronological order and give a 
brief indication of the contents of each before offering 
a few remarks on the salient features of village life and 
administration reflected in these records : — 

(1) 321 of 1910 — Aditya I, 2nd year — The 
Assembly described as Bhattapperumakka] - ullitta 
peninguripperumakkalom borrow 25 kasu from the 
Mulasthanattu-mahadeva, and in return assign the right 
of collecting ahgadi-kkuli at prescribed rates from stalls 
opened in the bazaar of the temple (S. 1. 1. Ill, 90). 

(2) 320 of 1910 — Aditya I (?), 7th year — Gift of 
land by the Assembly of Tenkarai Palaiya-sembiyan- 
mahadevi-caturvedimangalam . 

(3) 327 of 1910 — Parantaka I, 4th year — The 
Assembly of Akkirama - kotta * caturvedimahgalam, a 

• 313 of 1910. 

+ No. 168 In the Shiaithalamuftjari by Mr. V. T. Subramama Pillai (.Madras 
1931.) 

x 321 and 332 of 1910. 


[ 86 ] 



SABHA OF NALUR 


Brahmadeya in Tenkarai Tirunaraiyur-nadu, makes a 
gift of land to f^amaparesvarattu - Peruman - adiga] of 
the Nalur temple. 

(4) 319 of 1910 — Parantaka I, 6th year — Sale 
of land by the Assembly of Nalur. 

(5) 312 of 1910 — Parantaka I, 15th year — Sale 
of land by the Assembly of Nalur. 

(6) 316 of 1910 — Parantaka I, 15th year — Sale 
of land by the Assembly of Nalur. 

(7) 328 of 1910 — Parantaka I, 16th year. Gift (?) 
of land by the Assembly of Arur-eceri, a Brahmadeya 
in Tirunaraiyur-nadu, to the temple of Tirumayanam 
in Nalur. 

(8) 309 of 1910 — Parantaka I, 22nd year — Gift 
of 90 sheep for a lamp. 

(9) 318 of 1910 — Parantaka, Year lost — .Sale 
of land by the Assembly of Nalur. 

(10) 330 of 1910 — Rajaraja 1, 15th year — Gift of 
twelve Ila-kkasu for twelve lamps by a merchant 
of Nalur named Tirunavukkaraiyan to the temple of 
Tirumayanattu - paramesvara. 

(11) 326 of 1910 — Rajaraja I, 23rd year — Gift 
of land for maintaining a lamp in the Visnu temple 
Tirunarayana Vinnagar of Nalur. A meeting of the 
Assembly of Nalur was held at the big hall called 
Gaiidaradittan. 

(12) 322 of 1910 — Rajaraja I, 24th year — Gift of 
land to a temple by a merchant. A meeting of the 
Assembly of Nalur in a hall called Rajarajan in front 
of Samaparesvara temple. 

[ 87 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


(13) 308 of 1910— Rajaraja I, 24th year— A lease 
of land. A meeting at Vaiinakkanar-ambalam of the 
Assembly of Nalur, a Brahmadeya in Serrur-kurram. 

(14) 310 of 1910— Rajendra Coladeva, 24th year. 
Mentions Serrur-kurram. 

(15) 331 of 1910 — Vlrarajendra Cola, 7th year — 
Two lamps by a lady to the temple of Tirumayanam- 
udaiyar. 

(16) 313 of 1910 — Kulottuhga Coladeva, 36th 
year— Two lamps to Tirumayiinam-udaiya Paramu- 
svamin. 

(17) 323 of 1910— Kulottuhga Cojadeva, 43rd 
year — Sale of land by the Assembly to an individual 
of Vanavan-madevi-caturvedimahgalam . 

(18) 317 of 1910— Vikramacoladeva, 3rd year— 
Money endowed for a lamp. Nalur is also called 
V ana van-made vi- caturvedimahg alam . 

(19) 332 of 1910— Rajaraja III, 17th year — 
Registers a decision of the Assembly of Nalur alias 
Vanavan - mahadevi - caturvedimahgalam which met 
under a tamarind tree. All people who violated the 
decision that no one should do anything against the 
interests of the village or against the temple of Tiru- 
mayanam-udaiyar and similar institutions were declared 
to be grama-drohins and were deprived of certain 
privileges of a social and religious character. 

There seems to be a rather large gap of over a 
century in these inscriptions between Vikrama Coja 
and Rajaraja III. We are not able to explain this 
satisfactorily at present. 

The first thing that strikes us in looking over these 
inscriptions is their pre-occupation with temples and 

[ 88 ] 



SABHA OF NALUR 


religious charities. The inscriptions themselves are 
engraved mostly on temple walls; and they generally 
register endowments of money, land or cattle for the 
maintenance of lamps and festivals and other means 
of securing religious merit for the donors or their 
friends and relatives. This common trait in our 
inscriptions has led scholars sometimes to underrate 
their importance in the study of social history and 
to brush them aside as a mass of dull and dreary 
narrations of puerile transactions. This tendency is 
apt to grow if scholars have to depend on bald and 
occasionally inaccurate summaries of these records, 
without being able to examine closely the texts them- 
selves. But even the published summaries, if carefully 
used, can tell us a great deal that is interesting and 
important about the social and economic life of the 
country in the past. 

Thus our inscriptions contain references to no 
fewer than six different shrines in the village, and 
these include Vaisnava as well as Saiva deities. The 
names of these temples are (1) Plasapurisvara from 
which come Nos. 308 and 309 of 1910; (2) Vannak- 
kanar-ambalam where the assembly met once in the 
24th year of Rajaraja I (A. D. 1009) for leasing out 
some land ; (3) Samaparesvara. the Mahadeva temple 
which gets some land from the assembly of a neigh- 
bouring village and in front of which there was a hall 
called Rajarajan in which the assembly of the village 
held a second meeting in the 24th year of the king 
after whom the hall took its name ; (4) Tirumayanam- 
udaiya Paramasvamin also called Mulasthanattu- 
mahadeva in the inscriptions and represented to-day 
by the Jfianaparamesvara temple on whose walls are 
engraved most of the inscriptions listed earlier in this 
paper ; (5) Agastlsvaram-udaiyar temple which received 

[ 89 ] 


12 



COLA STUDIES 


a gift of land in the reign of Parakesari-varman 
Rajendraco]adeva * and lastly, (6) Tirunarayana 
Vinnakar containing shrines of (a) Laksmlraghava- 
deva f and (b) Krsna of the butter-dance (Vennaik- 
kuttadukinra-alvar) . The presence of so many temples 
undoubtedly added to the fullness and gaiety of the 
social life of the place besides contributing to the 
economic well-being of its inhabitants by the various 
opportunities for employment it must have offered to 
them. One inscription tells us for instance of the 
provision made for the maintenance of persons for 
playing on the Vina (lute) regularly and for reciting 
the Vedas and the &rirudram. The supply of oil and 
ghee for lamps, of flowers for daily worship and for 
special occasions, and the provision of all the other 
requirements of the temples must have furnished 
constant and secure employment for many persons. 
Very often endowments took the form of gifts of 
land to the temples, and the cultivation of these lands 
at more or less favourable terms of lease under the 
supervision of the village assembly formed no incon- 
siderable feature of the economy of rural life. And 
when new constructions were undertaken or old ones 
renovated, the people must have had exceptionally 
good opportunities of employment suited to their 
abilities and tastes. In all these ways the temple is seen 
to have been the nucleus round which clustered the 
daily activities of considerable sections of the people 
in its neighbourhood. 

Nalur-Tirumayanam being a Brahman village, a 
Brahmadeya or caturvedimangalam, its assembly took 
the form of the SabhS. It may be noted in passing that 
a caturvedimangalam need not necessarily have 

• No. 314 of 1910. 

t No. 323 of 1910. 

[ 90 ] 



SABHA OF NALUR 


inchtded, as its name may be talcen to imply, Brah- 
mans representing each of the four Yedas ; caturvedi 
must, it seems, be taken to be the Sanskrit form of 
nanmaraiybn meaning simply a Brahman. And to the 
form caturvedimangalam was usually prefixed the 
name of some king, queen or other distinguished person 
whose benefaction led to the establishment of the 
agrahara, or a part of it ; and in Cola times these names 
were undergoing frequent changes. We have apparently 
no information in the inscriptions about some important 
aspects of the working of this particular Sabha. We do 
not know whether it functioned through standing com- 
mittees and whether, if it did, there were any special 
qualifications governing service on such committees. 
In the absence of information to the contrary, it is only 
natural to assume that all the Brahmans of the village 
were members of the Sabha and that the entire Sabha 
attended to all the business that came before it. 

W e notice that the assembly did not have a fixed 
meeting place and that it met in different places at 
different times. The place of meeting is not always 
recorded ; but two inscriptions * tell us of two meetings 
in the twenty-fourth regnal year of Rajaraja I, one 
held at the temple called Vannakkanar-ambalam and 
another in a hall called after the king in front of the 
Samaparesvara temple. One is tempted to imagine 
that the hall called after Rajaraja was built in front of 
perhaps the largest temple in the village — this temple 
receives a gift from a neighbouring village t — to serve 
as a permanent meeting place for the assembly. 

Once, however, in the reign of Rajaraja III the 
assembly met under a tamarind tree ( tiammur-paydaneri - 
ppuliyadi). This could not have been due to the 

* Nos. 12 and 13 above. 

f No. 3 above. 


[ 91 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


absence of a more suitable meeting place ; for we have 
just seen that this was not so. We shall revert to this 
question presently. 

Turning to the functions of the village assembly, we 
have to observe that until a critical study is made of all 
the texts of the inscriptions bearing on this subject we 
shall not be in a position to formulate general conclu- 
sions of a trustworthy character. In dealing with 
individual assemblies, however, we can make note of 
what seems to be of striking importance in their working, 
in the hope that when a sufficiently large number of 
these institutions have been studied in a similar manner, 
some conclusions of a general character may emerge 
from such enquiries. In this respect the very first ins- 
cription in the list given above, which belongs to about 
the end of the 9th century is very noteworthy as we 
see from its published text. The assembly is called 
Bhatta-pperumakkal-ullitta Perunguri-pperumakkal, i.e., 
“ members of the Great Assembly including the priests 
of the temple.” What accounts for the special mention 
of the Bhattas ? We can hardly suppose that they were 
not ordinarily members of the assembly and that they 
attended one meeting of that body for special reasons ; 
for if our view of the composition of the general 
body of the assembly is correct, the Bhattas being 
necessarily Brahmans must normally have been entitled 
to sit and take part in it. The reason for their being 
mentioned separately must then lie elsewhere. It may 
be that, as we learn from the details preserved in 
Uttaramerur inscriptions of Parantaka, the Bhattas had 
some special functions in the assembly. But we know 
what these functions were in Uttaramerur ; they related 
mainly to the elections to the variyams or committees, 
and we have no evidence that the committee system 
obtained at Nalur. Or possibly, the reason lies in 

[ 92 ] 



SlBHA OF NALUR 


the nature of the transaction recorded. For what 
happened at that meeting was this. The assembly 
took 25 kasu from the treasury of the temple of 
Mulasthanattu-nmhadeva and in return made a perpetual 
assignment of a shop-cess ( ahgadi-klculi ) to the temple. 
Therefore one of the temples, in the village was a 
party to the transaction, and the specific statement that 
the particular session of the assembly was attended 
by the Bhattas is apparently intended to imply that 
the other party to the transaction was adequately 
represented in the assembly. The transaction itself 
constitutes an interesting specimen of the financial 
arrangements prevalent at the time. There is some 
urgent public work such as the making of a new road, 
the digging of or repairs to an irrigation tank — we do not 
learn what exactly it was in this case — which it is the 
duty of the village assembly to provide for and which 
it cannot meet from its normal resources ; it raises a 
loan from the neighbouring temple which has a treasury 
as full as the people are pious, and as the assembly 
does not expect to be ever in a position to repay the 
principal amount of the loan, it makes some arrange- 
ment, in this case an assignment of the shop-cess, by 
which the interest due every year is secured to the 
creditor temple. It is a pity that we are unable to form 
an idea of the rate of interest on this loan ; for thousrh 
we are given particulars of the rate at which the cess 
was levied, we have no means of forming even a rough 
idea of its annual money-value. Again it is clear that 
a cess which, like the present one, was collected in kind 
at the rate of so much per ka§u of sale-proceeds (ka§in 
vay nali) of some articles, so much per heap of others 
sold in heaps, and so such per unit of yet other articles 
sold by weight or number, — such a cess must have 
varied considerably in its annual yield and there must 


[ 93 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


have been a large measure of goodwill on either side 
for such a vague and indefinite financial arrangement 
going through without a hitch. 

We find further that the Sabha often sells land 
(4-6), leases it for cultivation (13) or makes gifts (2) of 
it. Similar powers are exercised by assemblies of other 
types like the tJr , and Nagaram. Ab it is not possible for 
anyone to give away or sell what is not his own, we 
have necessarily to conclude that there was some 
land in the village which was held and administered 
in common by the whole village besides the individual 
holdings of each household in it. In one instance 
the Sabha sells some of its land to an individual in the 
village (17). Lastly, we find that in late Coja times, 
in the reign of Rajaraja III, the Sabha of Naliir met 
under a tamarind tree outside the village. So also did 
another Sabha (Bralimadesam, N. A.) in A. D. 1044 * 
At that meeting the Sabha sold some land to a Senapati 
who was the brother of Viramahadevi. This queen had 
died perhaps committing suttee we are told that ‘ she 
entered the supreme feet of Brahma in the very same 
tomb in which the body of King Rajendra Cola was 
interred ’ — and her brother wanted to endow a drinking- 
place to quench her thirst and that of her deceased 
husband, the Cola king, and the sale of land by the 
assembly was to enable the Senapati to start this 
propitiatory foundation. Is it far-fetched to suggest 
that the assembly met outside the village beneath a 
tam arind tree because it was engaged in some work 
not of auspicious import? A similar explanation may 
hold also in the case from Nalur Tirumayanam. From 
the decisions recorded, it seems probable that on this 
occasion the Sabha assembled in the midst of a great 
commotion caused by some serious misconduct of 
• No. 260 of 1915. 


[ 94 ] 



SABHA OF NALUR 


some people in the village or by an apprehension of 
grave mischief on their part. The Sabha decided “that 
the residents of their village should not do anything 
against the interests of their village nor against the 
temple of Tirumayanam-udaiyar and similar institu- 
tions ; that if they did so, they must suffer as 
grama-drohins did and that persons who acted against 
this decision should not be allowed the privilege of 
touching Siva etc.” * Here we have a clear instance 
of the assembly acting as the authority responsible 
not only for the punishment of local offences but as the 
custodian of the general conduct of the villagers and 
the controller of their morals, so to say. 

Nalur with its neighbour called Tirumeynanam is 
at the present day a ruined hamlet far from the tracks 
of modern roads and railways ; it has not been without 
interest to gain from the records on the walls of its 
ancient temples a peep into its busy life in the days 
when it shared the prosperity of the smiling lands of 
the Kaveri delta. 


• A R. £. 1911 u, 30, 

[ 96 ] 



V 

UTTARAMfRLTR 

I A General Survey of its Administration 

A fresh study of local government at Uttaramerur 
in the Cola period after so many writers have traversed 
the ground may appear at once futile and venture- 
some. We may be told by those who have heard all 
about democracy and pot-tickets at Uttaramerur (and 
they are not few) that there can be nothing new in this 
twice-told tale and that it would be more useful to 
leave Uttaramerur well alone and turn to some less 
trodden part of the field. And the promise implied in 
an attempt like the present one to discover new infor- 
mation, or to reinterpret old and well-known data may, 
in view of the narrow limits of the subject and the 
eminence of the scholars who have worked on it before, 
seem to be more courageous than discreet. Neverthe- 
less the fact is that with the exception of Mr. Venkayya 
who did great work on the two inscriptions from Uttara- 
merur which are best-known, and that only on account 
of his work, not many writers have done aught else 
than repeat his statements uncritically ; and that 
this has happened a number of times has contributed 
most to prejudice the chances ol a fresh examination 
of the Parantaka inscriptions above-mentioned and of 
a more comprehensive study of the new material 
published since 1904. 

Our aim is to give in this essay a general account 
of the local history and administration of Uttaramerur 
so far as it can be gathered from the inscriptions, 
and then, in the next paper, to re-examine the two 

[96] 



UTTARAMERUR 


inscriptions of Parantaka’s reign which deal with the 
constitutional arrangements of the local Sabha in the 
light of the fresh evidence that has come to hand since 
Mr. Venkayya drew such pointed attention to them. 

The history of institutions is not so exciting as the 
study of political history and ‘ holds but small tempta- 
tion to the mind that requires to be tempted to- the study 
of truth/ It takes considerable effort to comprehend 
by patient study and reflection the true nature and 
functions of the different parts of a social mechanism 
evolved and worked under the stress of ideas much 
unlike our own. Nothing seems easier than to discover, 
if one is so minded, in the records of past ages traces 
of the latest devices in political and social organisation. 
And the quest for the new in the old sometimes imparts 
colour and feeling to a task in itself not so attractive. 

Democracy as we now understand it, as a form of 
popular government, a state of society and an outlook 
on economic life, is essentially a modern conception. 
To import the associations of democracy in the inter- 
pretation of early Indian records, because some of them 
happen to mention elections and ballot, is unconsciously 
to raise fresh obstacles in the way of a correct under- 
standing of the atmosphere surrounding the working 
of these and other institutions in ancient India. By 
stressing the committee-system, the elections to the 
committees, and the employment of ballot in the elec- 
tions, and then almost ignoring the whole complex 
of notions associated with caste, custom and religion 
which dominated social life in those times, one may find 
it easy to paint the picture of a society in which people 
cared much for political rights and representative 
institutions and regulated their conduct almost entirely 
on secular and rational considerations. But it seems 


13 


[ 97 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


hardly worth while to make the attempt , for the 
doubtful satisfaction that may be derived from claiming 
modern wisdom for our ancestors is purchased at 
the cost of any chance of our knowing them as they 
were. From this point of view, it is perhaps an 
advantage that democracy does not rouse the same 
enthusiasm at the present day as it did some years 
ao-o. To cast a doubt on the democratic nature of 
ancient Indian society and government is no longer a 
mortal sin against patriotism. 

The village that forms the subject of our study was 
doubtless a very large one. It was big enough to form 
a separate huru by itself and the numerous inscriptions 
that have come down to us are engraved on the walls 
of no fewer than seven temples * in the locality. Of 
these inscriptions, about sixty have been selected as the 
basis of the general account that follows of the 
administration and social life of Uttaramerur. 

Uttaramerur, which is about fifty miles by road to 
the south-west of Madras, is to-day a small and ap- 
parently flourishing town with a population of nearly 
11,000. Despite the vicissitudes that have marked its 
history in the course of the wars waged by the English 
at first with the French and later with Haidar Ali and 
his son, Uttaramerur has fairly preserved many of its 
most interesting antiquities. As will be seen from the 
plan of the town, the location of its chief temples shows 
that the site of the modern town has been in continuous 
occupation for more than 1200 years. The Kailasa- 
natha and the Madari- Amman shrine opposite to it 
mark practically its eastern limit, if we omit from 

* They are : the temples of (1) Vaikun^haperumal (2) Sundaravaradap- 
pefumal (3) Subrahmanya (4) Kailasanatha (5) Kojambesvara (6) IraHaittaligai- 
Tsvara and (7) Madari-Amman. 

[ 93 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


consideration suburbs like Tiruppulivalam. Almost in 
the heart of the town, on the main road stands the 
Vaikuntha-perumal temple, of which nothing of the 
original structure seems to have survived except the high 
basement which carries the most valuable inscriptions 
of the locality on its sides. A little to the west within a 
few furlongs, are the Sundaravarada and Subrahmanya 
temples very close to each other. To reach the big tank 
of Uttaramerur, doubtless the celebrated Vairamegha- 
tataka of our inscriptions, a name no longer remem- 
bered, one has to go more than a mile to the west from 
the westernmost limits of the modern town, bearing 
the historic names Rqjamedu and Maligaimedu, the 
mound of the king and the mound of the palace. It is 
possible that excavation at these spots may yield results 
that would justify these popular names. 

The oldest name of the village known to us is 
Uttarameru-caturvedimangalam. The form of the 
name suggests that, as Mr. Venkayya pointed out, the 
first member of this name must be the title, like 
Prabhumeru and Abhimartameru, of some king whose 
identity still remains unknown. In the inscriptions of 
Vijayakampavarman, of somewhat uncertain date, 
and in the Rajakesari and Parakesari inscriptions some 
of which may be earlier than Parantaka I, the place is 
generally described in the following terms : “ Kaliyur- 
kottattu tan-kurruttarameru-caturvedimangalam” that is 
‘ Uttarameru - caturvedimangalam. of its own division 
(kuru) in the Kaliyurkottam. ’ From the time of 
Rajendracola I Parakesari, the son and successor of 
Rajaraja, the place came to be called also Rajendra- 
coja-caturvedimangalam, and its earlier name was 
abridged into Uttarameru or Uttaramelur, the latter 
form giving rise to Uttiramallur, which is the most 

[ 99 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


common form to-day. * Very much later, about the 
middle of the thirteenth century, in the time of the ill- 
starred Rajaraja III, the village carried for a time the 
nfame of Gandagopala-eaturvedimangalam, after an 
aggressive Tclugu-Codu chieftain of the time. 

Our inscriptions range from the late Pallava 
times, that is from the last quarter of the eighth 
century A. D., to the downfall of the Coja empire in 
the middle of the thirteenth. Viewed generally, 
they furnish a striking, though by no means unique, 
example of the continuity of social life amidst political 
changes. They comprise records citing late Pallava 
monarchs, the early Cola conquerors of the Tondainad 
of the ninth and tenth centuries including Parantaka I, 
his Rastrakuta enemy Krsna III who gloried in hm 
“ capture of Kacci and Tanjai, ” and the somewhat 
mysterious Parthivendra-varman, before the almost 
unbroken series of Cola records commences with the 
reign of Rajaraja I. f Not only do the inscriptions 
thus reflect all the changes in the political situation 
in the land, but they furnish tangible evidence that 
the village Sabhci supplied the element of continuity 
in local life through such changes. Of many records 
at Uttaramerur (and elsewhere) that go to prove 
such continuity, one of Kulottunga III dated in his 
thirty-seventh year, about A. D. 1215, is of 

* UttiramSlEr, UttaramallTIr are other forms. The total ignorance that has 
prevailed m modern times of the true origin of the name is seen from the local 
tradition, recorded by Crole, that the town was built by Uttirakumaran son 
of a raja who reigned in Virata, a town on the Jumna river. (Manual of the 
Chingleput District p. I32J. I have not been able to get at the local sthalapurana y 
the existence of which was reported to me by a teacher in the local High 
School when I visited the place. 

f There is a considerable gap of over three quarters of a century, not 
merely in our list here, but in the collection itself between Vikrama Coja and 
KulSttunga III. 


[ 100 ] 



UTTAR A.MERUR 


peculiar importance. In this record of the thirteenth 
century are recalled transactions which were over three 
centuries old, and at the instance of the authorities of 
the temple concerned, the Sabha gives a fresh under- 
taking to carry out, although on a somewhat reduced 
scale, the obligations laid upon their ancestors several 
generations before. The nature of this agreement and 
the employment of the phrase ‘ our ancestors ’ ( ehgal 
purva purusahal) by the Sabha in mentioning the old 
endowments, alike show that the idea of a corporation 
with a continuous life of its own, independent of its 
personnel which naturally varied from time to time, 
was clearly grasped by both parties to the agreement. 
And a little consideration shows also that the primary 
sanction behind such long-standing engagements is to 
be found in a general readiness to act up to a proper 
standard of equity which, though not precisely defined 
beforehand, can yet be ascertained in each separate 
case by argument and accommodation. In this instance, 
though it is not explicit, we may infer that the Sabha 
had for some time defaulted in the maintenance of some 
old endowments for eight lamps in the temple ; the 
authorities of the temple, when they discovered the 
default, drew the attention of the Sabha to it, citing the 
old records engraved on the stone walls of two temples 
as evidence; the Sabha pleaded inability to provide 
for the daily requirements of all the lamps concerned 
(nittattevai - irnkka - mudiyamai). It would appear that 
the temple authorities had not been very prompt in 
their discovery of the default and were constrained to 
admit the force of the Sabha' s pleading that, in the 
conditions prevalent at the time, they found it impossible 
to meet the ancient obligations in their entirety, and a 
compromise was reached. It is conceivable that if no 
agreement had been arrived at, an appeal might have 

[ 101 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


been earned by either side to the appropriate official 
representing the king in the locality, or in the last 
resort to the king himself, who would have had then 
t.o adjudicate the matter. 

The Sabha was only one among several corpora- 
tions organized on more or less similar lines, though 
doubtless the most important among them as adminis- 
tering the general affairs of the locality and looking 
after local interests as a whole. The details of the 
constitution of the Sabha of Uttaramerur and its- stand- 
ing committees will form the subject of a full discus- 
sion later. Some attention may be given here to the 
other bodies which shared with the Sabha the tasks of 
managing local concerns and ensuring local well-being. 
We have just noticed the authorities called Mahesvaras 
and Sthanattar who were particularly concerned with 
the daily affairs of the temple of Tiruppulivalam- 
udaiyar. The Perijamaiyar, who are once said to be 
‘ of two sides the Sraddhamantar, the Viragariattar, 
the Kaliganattar, and the SrI-krsnaganattar, as also the 
&rl-vaisnava Variyar appear to be instances of religious 
corporations of a quasi-public character which received 
the recognition due to the public importance of their 
work and the degree of success that attended them in 
its performance. The occurrence of yarn and mriyar 
in these names must be noticed. 

There were also groups bound by ties of conti- 
guity and several examples of such groups occur 
in our inscriptions. Thus the residents of Sahkarappadi 
in the north-bazaar (vadakkilangddi sahkarapjmliyom ) 
acted as trustees for some charitable funds, and elected 
three persons to a committee for testing the fineness 
of gold. The madavidiyar (residents of the main 
streets) elected four other members to the same 

[ 102 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


committee. We learn from the inscriptions of the 
twelfth and fourteenth years of Parantaka I that 
Uttaramerur was divided into twelve Seris (streets, as 
Mr. Yenkayya renders the word). We shall see that 
an attempt to get the standing committees of the Sabha 
to represent the Seris as such had to be given up within 
a couple of years after it started. But the people of 
each of the Seris — the names of eight of them occur in 
the inscriptions * — often became trustees for charitable 
funds, f Manifestly the most important, after the Sabha , 
among such groups united by the bond of contiguity, 
was the Ur of the village. ‘ Ur ’ may not at first 
sight seem to convey the notion of a specific corporate 
body with separate functions in the local economy of a 
place and an independent existence of its own. A 
superficial acquaintance with the texts of the numerous 
Tamil inscriptions in which these terms occur is enough, 
however, to lead one to the conclusion that it is often 
necessary, in the contexts, to interpret these words as 
conveying the idea of a body analogous to the Sabha 
in many respects, and that a vague translation of fir 
and tJrdm into ‘ village ’ and ‘ we, the inhabitants of the 
village ’ is hardly satisfactory. Uttaramerur, moreover, 
is not the only place where we get evidence of the Or 
existing by the side of the Sabha in the same locality. 

Though there is a great amount of uncertainty 
about the origin and the early history of these 
organisations, the suggestion may be made that the 
Or represents in every case the more primitive local 

• Viz., (1) GovindaccSri, (2) Hrslkesacceri, (3) Narayanacceri, (4) Papmaic- 
ceri, (5) Trivikramacceri, (6} Vamanacceri, (7) Madhusudanacceri, (8) Abhi- 
manamemccerj. The names Malupalakulakalacceri, and Mu^ikontjasojcc^ri also 
occur ; but one cannot be sure that they were not new names for older divisions, 
rather than separate divisions, 

t 190 of 192$. 


[ 103 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


organisation indigenous to the Tamil country, the lineal 
descendant of the ancient manram ; and that the 
Sabha was, generally, a later superimposition. It is 
clear, at any rate, that as the Sabha was the general 
local assembly in Brahmadeya villages, the l~ r was the 
prevalent form in some other types. And the simplest 
explanation of the existence side by side, as in Uttara- 
merur, of both the organisations is to suppose that the 
fir was the more ancient form and that the Sabha came 
on top of it when, at the will of some king or chieftain, 
a considerable number of new Brahman residents, often 
representing the highest learning in the land, were 
settled in the village, and endowed with perpetual 
rights of property in a part of the village lands. 
That darns (gifts) came to take the place of importance 
among, acts of religious merit, and that the bhnduna 
(gift of land) was considered more meritorious than 
any other darn in the period we are dealing with, are 
facts sufficiently well-established on the evidence of 
epigraphy and literature. The lands were usually 
purchased by the donors from previous owners, indivi- 
duals or corporations of one kind or another, and 
then given away for the purpose intended. Several 
instances can be cited in which all the previous owners 
of the lands in a certain locality were bought out 
and the existing leases for cultivation terminated by 
payment of compensation, * in order that an absolutely 
unencumbered dlwdana might be made, or a fresh 
brahmadeya , usually a caturvedimahgalam, might be 
formed. But doubtless there were villages which, 
though too large to be so bought up, on account of 
the numbers involved and the extent and complexity 
of property-rights in them, yet afforded ample facilities 

# This is what, I think, constitutes the chief point of the distinction drawn 
in inscriptions between the two forms : Kudinmgina and KudimngZ. 

[ 104 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


for the creation of Hew settlements in their neigh- 
bourhood. It was in such cases that the problem arose 
of adjusting the relations between the old and the new 
settlements; and it seems reasonable to suppose that 
the continued existence of the more ancient Ur by 
the side of the new Sabha was secured as part of the 
new order. 

The relations between the two bodies in Uttara- 
merur are seen, though only in a rather hazy manner, 
from our records, all of which belong to the period 
after Uttaramerur became a caturvedimahgalam. 
Almost all of them are engraved in the name of the 
Sabha ; there does not seem to have been at Uttaramerur 
a single instance in which the Ur made an independent 
record of its transactions. This feature together with 
the fact that the Ur almost ceases to be heard of early 
in the period of our study — we have apparently no 
reference to it from the time of Rajaraja I — may raise 
the presumption that the Ur and the Sabha were 
partners in an unequal combination which in the long 
run worked to the disadvantage of the weaker side. That 
the Ur, however, had in the beginning some distinct 
rights and privileges of its own and that it continued 
to exercise them actively, though in collaboration with 
if not under the supervision of the Sabha and its com- 
mittees, till at least the end of the tenth century A. D., 
is amply borne out by the epigraphs. In the fifteenth 
year of Parantaka I (A. D. 922), for instance, the Ur 
sold some lands * to two temples for lamps and offerings 
and was, by special sanction of the Sabha, allowed 
to perform some duties, which normally attached to 
the samvatsaravariyam of the Sabha. Again, it took 
charge of a gold endowment for a lamp, f and agreed to 

* No. 8 of 1898. 

f 89 of 1898. 

[ 105 ] 


11 



COLA STUDIES 


submit to the supervision of the samvatsaravUriyam 
in this matter. More significant of the extent of the 
powers exercised by the fir is its assignment* of 
taxes and dues to be paid by the entire hamlet of 
UHiyur for the benefit of the Isvara temple in that 
locality — an assignment coupled with the specific ex- 
emption of the people of Ulliyur from all external inter- 
ference in their management of the affairs of their 
temple. We have also instances f in which the Subha 
required the fir not to collect any dues (mil) from 
certain lands which had been made tax-free, and gave 
away lands from among those that, owing to default in 
payment of the dues (iVai), had become the property of 
the tfr\ in one of these cases the Ur gave its consent 
and agreed not to make any collections, and in the other, 
it, was apparently reimbursed for the loss of revenue. 
Lastly, the Ur had an executive committee of its own 
which was called the “ ruling group," (alunganattar). X 
We learn nothing, however, as to the method by which 
its members were chosen, or the period of their office. 

The existence by the side of the SabM of numerous 
corporations, religious and local, some doubtless econo- 
mic also, and the way in which they dominated some 
little comer or other in the local polity is thus one of 
the most significant and well-attested facts of mediaeval 
life in Uttaramerur. It was a veritable network of 
diverse jurisdictions and liberties not always clearly 

• 41 of 1898. 

f 5. I. I. HI, Nos. 152 and 162. 

X No. 3 ol 1898: * emmTLr-yTLluhganatfllruV (I- 1). There is a slight difficulty, 
easily got over by a little experience, in our distinguishing the different 
senses in which 1 Ur * is used in the inscriptions. It seems to have at least 
two meanings, one corporate and the other geographical. Thus ‘ emmUrttefr 
pidfigai' which immediately follows the expression quoted above can hardly mean 
anything other than ‘ the southern division of our village. 1 See also 58 of 1898 
(L 3 — tvvUr-yZ{uiiganatfilrul.) 


[ioe] 



UTTARAMERUR 


marked off from one another. The Sabhd was indeed 
the most considerable among them all ; but it had to 
respect the privileges, even the susceptibilities, of the 
numerous other ganas and associations of a voluntary 
and quasi-public character, of the hereditary caste and 
trade corporations and so on, and might itself be called 
upon to explain its default in particular matters by the 
associations affected by it. Almost every sphere of life 
was so dominated by group-organisations that the 
individual was of little account and had to function 
through some group or other. There was no written 
law, or even a distinctly formulated principle intended to 
govern the conduct of these groups ; they acted for the 
most part in their separate spheres of social work, and 
came together occasionally for considering specific 
questions of common concern. In this manner they 
found it possible to evolve a workable procedure to 
secure mutual understanding and adjustment. And in 
the days when there existed an organised central 
government not altogether lacking in executive 
strength— this was the rule under the Cola kings — 
the power of the king and his officials was a sort of 
reserve in the background to be drawn upon when the 
forces of local regulation failed to function properly 
or, in extreme cases, broke down altogether. 

The inscriptions furnish much valuable information 
on the history and the functions of the Sabha , and these 
may now be briefly discussed. In the earliest inscrip- 
tions in our collection of the reign of Dantivarman, the 
SabhU comes before us as a mature and well-established 
institution apparently exercising all the powers that it 
ever exercised in later times. It sold land, accepted 
and undertook the administration of an endowment for 
dredging a tank, and made an important settlement 

[ 107 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


(vyamsthat) * in which the fir was assigned some ditties 
with regard to lands deserted by poor tenants who 
could not pay the dues on them ; a little later, under 
Nandivarman, it laid down the qualifications and the 
tenure for the place of arcaka in the temple of Tirup- 
pulivalam-udaiyar. These early records also contain 
noteworthy references to mriyar and variyapperu- 
makkal. In one instance f the mriyar are clearly 
officers subordinate to the Sabha , and take their 
orders from it. There is nothing to show whether they 
were individual officers or members of a committee ; 
and we have no information on the period for which 
the office was held. Another record £ of about the 
middle of the ninth century mentions the variyap- 
perumakkal. The phrase may mean ‘ great men doing 
variyam ’ and may be only another form of the term 
4 mriyar ’ ; but it looks very much like meaning 
“ members of the mriyam” the last being understood 
as a committee. But it should be noticed that there is 
no reference whatever to the Sabha in this record, 
and possibly the variyam of this record had nothing 
to do with the Sabha. Further, even if the omission 
to mention the Sabha be neglected, and the variyam 
understood as a committee of the Sabha f it should 
still be observed that the variyam would then be a 
general committee of a non-specialised character, unlike 
the specialised ‘ tank’, ‘ garden ’ and other committees of 
later times. The inscriptions of Vijayakampavarman, 

\ 

♦The word 11 sBmanthu " (61 of 1898) is not easy ; and until it is properly 
interpreted, the nature of the settlement made on this occasion must remain 
doubtful. The Ur seems to have been responsible for the proper payment of land 
dues by the cultivators. In a later inscription we get the phrase ; “ lands that 
escheated to the Ur {fit. fell towards it) because the dues on them were not paid.'* 
C17 of 1898). 

t 74 of 1898* 

t 68 of 1898. 


[«H] 



UTTARAMERUR 


as also of the unidentified Colas, Rajakesari and 
Parakesari, mention the * annual tank committee ' ; * 
but the chronological place of these kings is so 
uncertain that no definite inference can be drawn from 
these records as to the period when specialised com- 
mittees came into existence at Uttaramerur. We must 
observe also that the Sabha used the term vyavasthai for 
describing the record of important decisions arrived at 
on matters that came up for consideration before it. 

The inscriptions of the twelfth and fourteenth 
years of Parantaka I, discussed in the next study, 
will be seen to fall in their proper perspective only 
when viewed on the background furnished by the data 
gathered so far from the earlier records of Uttara- 
merur. The Parantaka inscriptions would thus appear 
to be not a ready-made constitution imposed ab extra by 
royal writ, but only to mark a stage, albeit an important 
stage, in a continuous evolution from within, brought 
about by the pressure of circumstance and the wisdom 
born of experience. That the Sabha of Uttaramerur 
was the architect of its own constitutional arrangements, 
that it showed an uncommon readiness to follow the 
method of trial and error in its efforts to solve the local 
problems of the time, is rendered clear by another 
curious record of the fifteenth year of Parantaka I, 
the year following that in which Parantaka is generally 
supposed to have finally fixed the constitution of 
Uttaramerur. Published only three years ago, this 
inscription f has long escaped the attention that is due 
to it. It is a vyavasthai of the Sabha which regulated 
the procedure to be followed for testing the fineness 
of the gold that was in current use in the village, 
* emmuril parimarum pon samanjasa h -ganbadarkku.' By 

• 65 of 1898 ; 10 of 1898 ; 75 of 1898. 

t No. 12 of 1898 [S. I. /. VI., No. 295.) 


[ 109 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


this resolution, a committee was set up consisting of 
nine persons neither too old nor too young, from those 
among the tax-paying citizens who had a reputation 
for testing gold ( irai-kudikalil pon-kaaa valldrenappadu- 
rnrai). These were to be chosen by the method of 
pot-tickets, four from the madavldi ; two from Senai (?), 
and the remaining three from Sankara ppadi. They 
were to test gold for all people impartially, and to 
adopt certain methods laid down for the test ; they had 
to hand over to the tank committee the entire quantity 
of the mehiku on which gold was rubbed (for the test) 
and to take an oath, once in three months, before the 
samvatsaravdriyam (year-committee), in the prescribed 
manner, that they would discharge their duties truly 
and honestly in accordance with the resolution of the 
Sabha inscribed on stone. Though it is not expressly 
stated, it seems very likely that in this decision the 
Sabha was reconsidering arrangements implied in the 
constitution of the ‘ gold committee ’ (pon-variyam) by 
the inscription of the preceding year. The new 
committee either superseded the old one, or was 
probably intended only to assist it in the discharge of 
its duties. One important qualification insisted on for 
membership of the new committee is competence in the 
assaying of gold ; it may have furnished the technical 
assistance required for the work of the pon-variyam for 
which no provision had been made before. Although, 
therefore, every act of the Sabha was in form an act 
for all time, for ‘ as long as the sun and moon endure ’ 
or something to that effect, nothing was immutable, and 
there was no lack of readiness to make fresh adjust- 
ments to meet new r situations as they arose. 

Few records throw any clear light on the norma) 
relation between the Sabha and the central govern- 
ment. Besides the two inscriptions of Parantaka’s reign 

[ 110 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


on the constitution of the committees, there appears 
to be only one of the time of Kulottunga III which 
contains a direct reference to an order made by the 
king to the Sabhd and carried out by it. Though 
there are two copies * of this interesting inscription, 
the circumstances that led to the king’s interference 
are by no means clear. On being petitioned by a 
priest, a certain Cedirajadeva had decided to set apart 
(nlkkina padiye) ten velis of land as arcandbhoga for 
two shrines in the village ; and the king’s order required 
that in accordance with that decision, the Sabha 
was to convert the land into arcanabhoga-iraiyili, and 
engrave the deed on the walls of the temple named. 
The order was addressed to the Sabhd ( namakku 
prasadanjeydaruli tirumugam vandamaiyil). There are 
many examples of alienation of land as iraiyili by 
the Sabhd for religious purposes without the slightest 
reference to the king or his officers. In this transaction, 
however, the initiative in the act of alienation was taken 
by Cedirajadeva, perhaps an officer in the king’s service, 
and the matter went up to the king either on account of 
a hitch that arose with the Sabhd in putting the trans- 
action through, or simply because no official could deal 
with the Sabhd in such matters except through the king. 
Another difficulty in understanding this record fully 
arises from the fact that the status of the land proposed 
for alienation is not clear. There is no suggestion of 
any payment having been made either for the value of 
the land or as compensation for the loss of revenue 
incurred. The land therefore should have belonged 
either to the village or to the king. Or was it an 
unappropriated common in which both the Sabhd and 
the king had somewhat indefinite rights ? 

• 175 of 1983 and 76 of 1898. 

[ill] 



COLA STUDIES 


The amplitude of the functions exercised by the 
Sabha and its sustained regard for the physical and 
cultural „ am enities then available to the inhabitants of 
the locality are fully borne out by our inscriptions 
which range over nearly five centuries. A careful 
study of the details recorded in them will not fail to 
convey the impression that during these centuries 
the people of Uttaramerur were, to a very large extent, 
left free to work out their own destinies without let 
or hindrance and that, on the whole, they seem to 
have done this very well indeed. It would be too 
long a task to write out fully the innumerable little 
details that help to form the impression. Attention 
may be drawn, however, to some of the more salient 
aspects of local life in which the Sabha evinced an 
interest. Incidentally, we shall touch upon some 
aspects of the Sabha’s administration which cannot be 
more adequately treated in the present state of our 
knowledge, or rather the lack of it. 

Agriculture was naturally the primary concern 
of the Sabha. Not only was it the mainstay of the 
economic life of the country in which every peasant 
was interested, and they were all peasants then, but 
the Sabha itself was, in one way and another, a great 
landowner, perhaps the greatest in the locality, and was 
as such interested in the proper maintenance of facili- 
ties for irrigation, transport and so on. And it is a remark- 
able fact that private charity often came to ease the 
work of the Sabha by adding considerably to the finan- 
cial resources at its disposal. Thus the large irrigation 
tank of the village, the ;Vairamegha-tataka, was kept 
in good repair by the silt being removed once a month 
with endowed funds ear-marked for the purpose and 
placed at the disposal of the Sabha by a private donor. * 

• 74 of 1898 


[ 112 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


Another inscription, * undated but doubtless among 
the earliest on the south wall of the Vaikuntha-perumal 
temple, records another large private gift of 100 
kalanju of gold which was handed over to the 
Perunguri Sabha to enable it to employ a second boat 
(odam) and pay wages {al kiili) for removing one kuli 
of earth every day from the bed of the tank to the top 
of its bund, and thus to remove 360 kulis of mud every 
year. There are some more records of a like nature. 
These records and the creation of a special tank 
committee ( evi- vdriijct m ) by the assembly show that the 
proper maintenance of this large tank was among the 
primary pre-occupations of the villagers. The deputy 
tahsildar of Uttaramerur performs to-day some of the 
functions discharged in olden days by the eri-variyam 
with reference to this tank ; for as Mr. Crole notes, f 
“ one of the most important duties of the deputy tahsil- 
dar is securing the yearly supply of the tank, which is 
effected by the construction of a temporary dam in the 
river Cheyyar, several miles west of Uttaramerur.” 
The special emphasis laid in our inscriptions on the 
extent and regularity of dredging operations in the 
tank is also easily explained by the observation of 
Mr. Crole that “ owing to the want of a masonry sluice 
and protective works at the head of this channel the 
tank is silting up very much ” ; and his further remark 
that u the supply is rendered precarious owing to the 
river topping its banks and breaching into and oblitera- 
ting the channel ”, may have been equally true of the 
period of the Pallava and Cola rulers. Altogether the 
creation and maintenance of this splendid tank ‘ with a 
revenue of Rupees 25,000 dependent on it ' (the figure 
relates to 1879 or thereabout), and the solicitous care 

* 69 A of 1898 S. /. /. VI, 353. 

t Chingleput Manual p. 135. 

[113] 


15 



COLA STUDIES 


shown by the Sabha and the people of the locality in 
keeping it in constant repair furnish striking testimony 
to tire enlightened methods of ancient Hindu adminis- 
tration which have compelled the wonder and admira- 
tion of thoughtful critics. 

When a road was submerged under water and 
thereupon became untit for use, the Sabha decided to 
renew the road and widen it by purchasing adjacent 
lands from the ryots, * the cost being provided appa- 
rently from its own funds. The supply of drinking 
water in a public place was provided by income from a 
private endowment of funds invested at 15^ per annum 
and supervised by the tank committee of the Sabha. f 
When the Sabha lacked funds for capital expenditure of 
an urgent nature it had resort to a loan from the 
treasury of a temple, and we have an instance of a 
large loan paid off with interest by the Sabha by the 
alienation of some land and the dues thereon, and the 
record of the transaction is described by the expressive 
name iranakrayavana-kkaiyeluitu, a deed of sale-for- 
debt. J The record of this sale shows that the Sabha, 
had its own pottalcam and vari, record books showing 
existing property-rights and tax-dues, ^ and that these 
books were kept up-to-date by appropriate entries 
being made in them at the end of every transaction 
affecting these rights and dues. 

Most of the inscriptions furnish evidence that, in 
collaboration with the authorities of each separate 
temple, the Sabha exercised a constant general 
supervision and control of the affairs of the temples, 
regulated the qualifications of the priests conducting 

• 9 of 1898. 

f 75 of 1898. 

J 68 of 1898. 

U It will be seen that the names of many of these dues occur in our records 
1 refrain from a discussion of these difficult terms in this study. 

[1H] 



UTTARAMERUR 


worship, fixed the turns of worship among them, and 
administered the endowments for the supply of flowers, 
oil, ghl or other offerings, and so on. It has been 
rightly said of Hindu temples * that “ they were 
fortresses, treasuries, court-houses, parks, fairs, 
exhibition-sheds, halls of learning and of pleasure, all 
in one,’' and unless the large place filled by the temple 
in the social and economic life of its neighbourhood is 
firmly grasped, it would not be easy to understand why 
the kings and their chieftains, the village-assemblies and 
the people were so constantly pre-occupied with the 
temple and its affairs. It may be observed, in passing, 
that when private persons rendered any extraordinary 
service of lasting value to a temple, it was recognised 
by distinctions, sometimes of a hereditary character, 
being conferred on them by the Sabha and the 
authorities of the temple concerned, f The subtle 
appeal to personal vanity that is made by public 
honours and that often leads to large benefactions from 
the rich is thus not altogether modern. 

The education of the people was recognised as 
important. We have no direct information on the 
arrangements that obtained for imparting instruction 
in the more elementary stages of the pupils’ course, or 
on the extent to which the people were generally eager 
to secure the benefits of schooling to their children. 
It is hardly to be expected that inscriptions can tell us 
everything, especially on routine matters of life about 
which there was nothing striking. But considering that 
Uttaramerur was a dominantly Brahman village, and 
taking into account the number of special schools for 
higher study that are mentioned by the inscriptions, it 
appears legitimate to infer that educational facilities 

• Ind. Ant. Vol. XXIV p. 256 n. 41. 

t 172, 180 and 183 of 1923. 

[H5] 



COLA STUDIES 


must have been more general, and more generally 
availed of than we are apt to imagine on a priori 
o-rounds. We must not also imagine that all education 
was Sanskritic in character and that no attention 
was paid to Tamil. The facts that inscriptions were 
engraved in prominent public places where people 
could read them, that the language of most of them 
was Tamil though with a large mixture of Sanskrit 
terms, that the inscriptions often reflected features of 
the patois of the time and were engraved by artisans of 
the village — these point to the conclusion that there was 
no wide gap between the language of the people and 
the education and administration of the land. Higher 
education was necessarily Sanskritic in character 
especially in places where, as in Uttaramerur, it was in 
the hands of the Sabha. The Sabha of Uttaramerur, 
endowed at different times * a Vyaka ra ua-sas t ra - vyak h yd- 
vrtti for the study of grammar and language, a 
Bhavisya-kkidaippuram for instruction perhaps in the 
Bhavisya Purana, if not in a Bhavisya Sakha, being 
imparted by a teacher resident in the village, and a 
Taittirlya-kkidaippuram obviously for the study of the 
Black Yaj ur- Veda, as well as a Vdjasaneya-kkidaippuram 
for the White Yajur-Veda. Another very interesting 
record which, though it bears no date, may be assigned 
with confidence to the tenth or the eleventh century, 
registers an important educational endowment by a lady. 
The inscription f is unfortunately partly built in, and 
some words are thus lost at the beginning of every 
line. The general drift of the record is, however, very 
clear. A lady by name Sannaiccani { alias Uttara- 
merunahgai created a Bhattavrtti (teaching-endowment), 

*18, 29 and 33 of 1898, also 194 of 1923 The word “ Kidai " means a 
Vedic School, more generally a religious school. 

f 39 of 1898. 

J cani (-siini) often appears as an honorific suffix to female names in our 
inscriptions. 


[ 116 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


and placed it under the perpetual supervision of her 
younger brother, a certain Narayanadatta-bhatta, and 
his descendants and the Mahasabha of the village who 
undertook to pay all the dues on the lands set apart 
by the terms of the endowment. The nature of the 
supervision is laid down in considerable detail. Among 
the qualifications for admission to a share in the 
Bhattavrtti are mentioned proficiency in not less than 
one Veda together with Vyalcarana and the two darkanas 
of the Mlmamsa ; something (?) combined with a know- 
ledge of Nrttabhasya ; proficiency in not less than 
one Veda together with competence in expounding 
Vyalcarana, the Nyayabhasya with varttika , and the 
Vaisesika with its fika (commentary). It is also laid 
down that no one who had a share in the village-lands 
was entitled to participate in the Bhattavrtti. Those 
who, having satisfied the trustees with regard to their 
qualifications, gained admission to the Bhattavrtti were 
to reside for a period of three years in the math a raised 
by the donor on the shore of a tank dug out by her, 
and during the period of their residence, they were 
apparently to impart instruction in their respective 
subjects to pupils selected by them after a preliminary 
examination ( partksai kondu apurvikalalcke panip- 
paddgavum). Not only does this inscription throw much 
welcome light on the state of higher learning at the 
time, but it furnishes a model for the administration 
of higher education which many a modern university 
of our country might envy. 

The permanent appointment of a * curer of 
poisons ’ * ( vimhara ), the provision for the recital of 
hymns ■}* in temples and the mention of tnathas $ are 
other noteworthy facts. 

• 36 of 1898. 

t 194 of 1923 ; 181 of 1923. 

J 184 and 168 of 1923. 


[ 117 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


APPENDIX I. 

A select list of inscriptions from Uttarameriir 
chronologically arranged. 

Pallava Inscriptions. 

Dantivarman. 

Year 7. (c. A. D. 782) Peruhguri Sabha sells land to 
a Svamikumara Caturveda Somayiiji for digging a tank 
and raising a bund for it— the tank being called 
Svanrikumarakuttam. (80 of 1898.) 

Year 9. (c. A. D. 784) A private endowment 
accepted by the Sabha for dredging the Vairamegha 
tank. The Sabha ordered that the proceeds of the 
endowment must, without being spent in any other 
manner, be utilised every month by the variyar for the 
time being for dredging the tank ( kuli-kuttuvadaka ). 

(74 of 1898). 

Year 21, day 122. ( c . A. D. 796) Sabha made a 

vyavastha (settlement) regarding the lands of the culti- 
vators owning lands in the village ( emmur ptimi uclaiya 
hidiyal) (61 of 1898). 


Nandi carman. 

(c. A. D. 850) A detailed regulation of an arcana- 
bhoga (endowment for worship) by the Sabha. Four 
patti of land was set apart for a Brahmacari Brahmana 
who could repeat the Veda and was of good character 
(pdrdyana-margam vedam valldnayuktanagiya ) carrying 
on the arcana, in the Tiruppulivalam-udaiyar temple. 
The appointment was to be for a term of three years on 
each occasion. The date of the record is obtained 
by reading this together with No. 72 of 1898 of year 24 
of Nandivarman. (71 of 1898). 


[ 118 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 
Nrpatuhga oar man. 

Year 16. ( c . A. D. 865) No mention of the Sabha 
as such. The variyapperumakkal were to protect the 
endowment, by a lady, of 13 kalaTiju of gold for a lamp. 

(63 of 1898). 


Vijayakampa oar man. 

Of uncertain date. Hultzsch suggests that he 
might have been a brother of Nrpatunga (E. I. VII. 
p. 196) and remarks apropos of the Nandi-Kampesvara 
temple at Solapuram (North Arcot) : “ As the alphabet 
of the inscriptions of Vijayakampa, Kampavannan or 
Vijayakampavikramavarman resembles that of the 
inscriptions of Vijaya Dantivikramavarman, Vijaya 
Nandivikramavarman and Vijaya Nrpatungavikrama- 
varman, I feel tempted to explain Nandi-Kampa by 
‘Kampa the son of Nandi' and to assume that 
Kampavarman was a son of Nandivikramavarman and 
a brother of Nrpatungavikramavarman.” 

Year 6. Mentions a share including house and 
kaoanai (manaiyum sravanaiyum ullitta oru pangu ) 1. 2. 

(64 of 1898). 

Year 8. Endowment by a member of the executive 
committee of the Ur ; emmur-yaluhganattar. (3 of 1898). 

Year 8. Sabha orders some fines accruing from 
certain defaults to be set apart for the Vairamegha 
tataka. (85 of 1898). 

Year 9. A vyaoasthai (settlement) by the Sabha. 

(7 of 1898). 

Year 10. A record by a member of the yalunga- 
natlar. The members of the tank committee (eri- 
variya-pperumakkal) are mentioned. (11 of 1898). 

[ 119 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Year 18. Mentions the members of the tank 
committee for each year (avva-vdndu eri-vari ya-ppern- 
,naUale)U>. (65 ofl81)8). 

Year 21. A large endowment of 200 kalanju 
yielding 30 k. as interest for dredging the Vairamegha 
tutaka and the grateful recognition of it by the Sabha. 

(84 of 1898). 


Cola Inscriptions. 

Bajakesari and Parakesari records (unidentified:). 

Kesarivarman, Year 3 — The residents of Sankarap- 

piidi in the north bazaar of Uttarameru-caturvedimah- 
galam take fifteen kalanju of gold from an individual 
and agree to keep a perpetual lamp burning in the 
temple of Mahadeva at Tiruppulivalam. (78 of 1898). 

Parakesari carman. 

Year lost — The year committee ( sammtsara-vdriya ) 
of every year was, on behalf of the Sabha, to supply, 
from an endowment, one quarter of a measure of oil 
every day for a lamp before the Mahadeva of the 
eastern structure, in the temple of Jyestha on the banks 
of the lake in Kumanapadi. (10 of 1898). 

Parakesari. 

Year 16, day 257. The Mahasabha of Uttaramerur 
assigned tax-free land to the temple of Mahadeva in 
the neighbouring village of Tlttattur. (4 of 1898). 

Bajakesari. 

Year 8. Land sold tax-free by the Sabha for 
feeding twenty Brahmans daily in the temple of 
Kuruksetra in the village. The Mahasabha, ordered 


[ 120 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


that the charity should be administered by those who 
managed the temple affairs. (40 of 1898). 

Year 8. A resolution (javasthai) of the assembly 
not to take pattikadi. (?) The meeting is described in 
the quaint tei’ms : dbala-vrddhar-amaiya epperppattadum 
niramba-kkudi-yirundu i. e., “ everybody including the 
young and the old met and sat in the full assembly/’ 

(62 of 1898). 

Year 17. An order (incomplete) of the MahasabhR 
on endowments for worship in two temples of the 
locality ( emmur ). (91 of 1898). 

Year 26, day 280. A gold endowment, for a shed 
for the supply of drinking water, bearing interest at 
3 manjadi per kalanju or 15%, placed under the purview 
of the members of the tank committee {eri- variya njeyyum - 

perumakkal) doing duty from year to year. 

J ' ' (75 of 1898). 

Parantaka I. (A. D. 907— c. 952). 

Year 12 (A. D. 919). Settlement of the consti- 
tutional rules for the election of committees of the 
Sabha. (2 of 1898). 

Year 14 (A. D. 921). Revision of the rules men- 
tioned in the last record. (1 of 1898). 

Year 15 (A. D. 922). Inscription of the Sabha ; also 
mentions Mahasabhai-ttiruvadi. The tJr sold some 
lands to two temples for lamps and offerings. The 
duty of administering these charities was, by the orders 
of the Mahdsabha, ordinarily the work of the sanwatsara- 
vdriyam ; but in this instance the t7r was allowed to 
undertake the duties. (8 of 1898). 

Year 15, day 55, (A. D. 922). A resolution of the 
Sabha regulating procedure to be followed for testing 

[121] 


16 



COLA STUDIES 


the fineness of gold in the transactions of the village. 
Nine persons neither too young nor too old were to be 
chosen from among the tax-paying citizens by the 
method of pot-tickets — mdclavidiyar to elect four, 
Senai (?) to elect two, Sahkarappadi to elect three ; and 
their duties and relations to the eri-vdriyam and 
samvatsara-vdriyam were defined in detail. (12 of 1898). 

Year 16. (A. D. 923). The Sabha decided that a 
road that had been submerged and had therefore 
become unfit for use even by cattle, should be renewed 
and widened by the purchase of land from the ryots, 
and assigned the duty to the garden committee and an 
officer called ur-mel-ninra-tirtivadi. (9 of 1898). 

Year 24. (A. D. 931). An endowment of gold 
for a lamp, by the son of a member of the ruling group 
(aluhganattar), left by the Sabha under the supervision 
of the tank committee. (58 of 1 898). 

Inscriptions of Kamaradem who took Kacci and 

Tanjai toicards the close of Parantaka I's reign. 

Year 18. An endowment, by a Brahman lady, of 
121^ Kalahju of gold left in charge of the Ur of Uttara- 
meriir for a lamp, the charity to be supervised by the 
samvatsara-vdriyam of each year. The inscription was 
engraved under orders from the Mahdsabhd. 

(89 of 1898). 

Year 23, day 296. An inscription of the Mahdsabhd. 
It is a record of an assignment of taxes or dues 
from Ulliyfir by the Ur of Uttaramerur to the temple 
of Isvara in Ulliyur itself, said to be in the southern 
division (tenpidakai), as provision for music for §ribali 
thrice a day. The record also says that the people of 
UlHyiir will themselves protect the temple and that no 

[ 122 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


chief so ever shall enter the temple ( epperppatta ltd mm 
puga-pperaddgavum). (41 of 1898). 

Year 25. An interesting but difficult record 

containing a resolution of the Peruhguri Sabhd relating 
to fines and their prompt collection ; mentions grdma- 
kdryahjeyyum-perumakkal of every year. (77 of 1898). 

Inscriptions of Pdrthivendravarman, * the contemporary of 

Aditya II. 

Year 2. Order of the Peruhguri Sabhd making 
some lands tax-free. The tJr agreed not to collect any 
irai from these lands. 

(8. 1. I. HI 152 ; 88 of 1898). 

• Year 3. The Peruhguri Sabhd gave land as 

vydkhydvrtti to the person who expounded the vyakarana- 
§dstra in that town. (S.I.I. Ill 161 ; 18 of 1898). 

Year 3. The Peruhguri Sabhd gave to the temple 
some of the land which had fallen to the village for 
default in paying its dues ( irai-yirddu ur-nokki vilunda 
bhumi). (S. 1. 1. Ill 162 ; 17 of 1898). 

Year 4. The Peruhguri Sabhd records its sale to 
a merchant of some land to be endowed by him as 
Srlbalibhoga. The land was made tax-free. 

(S. I. I. Ill 171 ; 55 of 1898). 

Year 5. Inscription of Peruhguri Sabhd. Land was 
set apart as tax-free i nsaharabhoga. The appointment 
to the place of msahara (curer of poisons) was to be 
made from time to time by the Sabhd. 

(S. I. I. Ill 177; 36 of 1898). 

* It is not improbable that this was only another name of Aditya himself. 
See S. I. I. Ill No. 158. 


[ 128 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Year 7. The Perm gun Sabha declared some land 
belonging to a temple tax-free after getting j mrvdcdram 
from an individual. (S. I. I. Ill 18B ; 79 of 1898). 

Year 12, day 326. The Mahasabha remitted, after 
receiving purvacara, taxes on some lands purchased 
from the agriculturists ( kudikal, ) of the village by 
queen Tribhuvanamahadevi and handed over by her 
to a Visnu temple erected by Kohgaraiyar as provision 
for sribali. Those who violated this charity were 
to be amerced 25 lcalanju each by the Sraddhamantns 
themselves. (S. I. I. Ill 194 ; 49 of 1898). 

Inscriptions of Edjaraja I Rajakesari. 

Year 9, day 158. (c. A. D. 994) An incomplete 
record. Mentions the mukha-mandapa of the Tulabhara- 
sri-koyil as the place where the assembly met to 
regulate the payment by the several castes and com- 
munities of Uttaramerur of fines imposed on them. 

(197 of 1923). 

Year 22. ( c . A. D. 1007) Gift of sheep by a lady of 
Vamanacceri for a lamp in a temple. The Perilamaiyar 
were responsible to the Sablia for the maintenance of the 
lamp. Punishment for default was meted out by the 
* annual supervision committee ’ ( samvatsara-variyan - 

jeykinra perumakkal) along with srl vaisuavarana emberu- 
manadiyar, the devotees of the temple. (163 of 1923). 

Year 23. (c. A. D. 1008) Endowment of lamps 

by a merchant of Naduvilahgadi and a resident of 
Govindacceri. The Viragauattar were made trustees 
for the merchant’s gift. (187 of 1923). 

Year 23. ( c . A. D. 1008) Gift of sheep for a lamp 
by a merchant of Terkilahgadi (the south bazaar). The 
Kaliganattar were trustees. (189 of 1923). 

[ 124 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


Year 25, day 154 (e. A. D. 1010) Land given by 
Perunguri Sabha for tiruccennadai to the temple of 
Purusottama. {177 of 1923). 

Year 26. (c. A. D 1011) Sheep endowed for a 

lamp by a lady of Govindacceri were left in charge 
of the residents of Panmaicceri. (190 of 1923). 

Year 29. (c. A. D. 1014) Sheep for lamp by a 

lady of Trivikkiramacceri. (178 of 1923). 

Inscriptions of Rajendra I Parakesari 
(with the Tirumanni valara introduction.) 

Year 5. (c. A. D. 1017) Land given by the 

Mahasablia for daily offerings and worship and certain 
festivals and for a flower garden to Siikrsna in the 
temple of Kohgaraiyar, called Rajendra-sola-vinnagar. 
The land was left in charge of the Sri Krsnagauapperu- 
makkal. (174 of 1923). 

Year 6. ( c . A. D. 1018) Apportionment by the 

Perunguri Sabha, of shareB in the arcana-vrtti among 
the four vaikhanasas of Kofigaraiyar-srI-koyil in lieu of 
those held by them at Arasanimangalam (171 of 1923). 

Year 19, day 343. (c. A. D. 1031) Reclamation 

of waste land by the Perunguri Sabha , and gift of the 
land as provision for offerings to the image of Ananta- 
narayana on the third storey of the temple. Provision 
was also made, among others, for the recitation of 
Tiruvaymoli hymns by three persons during the morn- 
ing and evening services. (176 of 1923). 

Year 26, day 180. The Mahasablia sold land, and 
exempted it from the levies called sittdyam, paTicavaram, 
killirai, eccorrukkurrarisi, arrukkal amahji ; also erikkddi, 
pUdakanellu, ulaoirai, nirvilai and other pidHyaii/irai. 

[ 125 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


This land was intended to provide seven kunmi of 
paddy daily to three persons reciting the Tiruvaymoli 
hymns in the temple of Vellaimurti- Alvar of the 
Raiendra-soja-vinnagar. The same assembly made 
a gift of two separate plots of tax-free land, one as 
vdjasaneya-kkidaippuram and the other for a festival 
on the day of Punarvasn in the month of rndsi. 

(194 of 1923). 

Year 30. ( c . A. D. 1042) Sale of land made tax- 
free by the Perunguri Sabha to the temple of Riijendra- 
sola-vinnagaram for a flower-garden and a matha called 
after Kundavi Alvar for feeding Srlvaisnavas. 

(184 of 1923). 

Inscriptions of Pdjendracoladeva-Parakesarioarman 
(with no characteristic introduction). 

Year 3. The Perunguri Sabhci endowed sheep for 
lamp to Vellaimurti- Alvar temple. The record refers to 
Irandupakkattu-pperilamaiyar as trustees for the lamps 
in the temple. (185 of 1923). 

Year 3. The Perunguri Sabha gave land for 
offerings to Raghavadeva in the temple of Veljaimurti- 
Alvar and for a flower-garden, with the stipulation that 
the food offered at the two sendees should be given 
away to the Srivaisiiavas reciting the Tiruppadiyam 
hymns. (181 of 1923). 

Year 4. Land given tax-free by the Mahasabha, 
also called Perunguri Mahasabha , of Uttaramelur 
alias Rajendra - 6ola - caturvedimangalam as Bhavisya 
{paviUyak)-kidaippuram, so that some one might reside 
in the place permanently and impart instruction and 
enjoy the proceeds of 720 kuli of land. (29 of 1898). 

[ 126 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


Year 4. Similar gift by the Mahasabha of 240 kuli 
of land as Taittirlya ( tayittiriyak ) • kidaippuram. 

(83 of 1898). 

Year 4, day 84. The Mahasabha , also called 
Peruhguri Mahasabha , made the hereditary appointment 
of a ^ivahrahmana as arcaka in the local temple of 
Subramanyadeva. (53 of 1898). 

Inscriptions of Kuldttuhga I-Rajakesari. 

Year 9. ( c . A. D. 1079) An endowment by a 
private individual of thirteen good current kasu 
(i anradu-narkasu ) left with two Bhattas of the temple 
who converted the money into 2J padagam * of land, 
agreed to pay the antarayam on the land and 
maintain a perpetual light in the temple, and gave an 
undertaking to the same effect on behalf of their 
successors also. (57 of 1898). 

Year 46. (c. A. D. 1116) The Peruhguri Sabha 
ordered the remission of taxes on thirty padagam of 
land purchased by a person and granted by him along 
with a house-site (purchased from other resources) 
for the maintenance of a mat ha, called Arulaladasan, 
which he had founded. The land had been lying 
fallow for sixty or seventy years and was now called 
fsolaviccadiravijagam after the donor. The tax on the 
land was remitted for the year (46) then current, but 
for the years following 5 kd§u per annum was to be 
levied as iraiyilikkasu. Other taxes such as pidagai- 
vari, uppu-kasu etc., were remitted altogether. The local 
^rlvaisnavas were to supervise the charity under the 
general control of the ^rlvaisnavas of the eighteen 
nSdus. t (168 of 1923). 

* A pTtyngam was indefinite in extent, (Nos. 5 and 8 of 1898). 

+ The names of these are nowhere mentioned. See A. R . E. 1923 II. 33. 

[ 127 ] 



COLA STUDIES 

Inscriptions of Vikramacola Parakesari. 

Year 11. ( c . A. D. 1129) Gift of land by a private 
individual to the temple of VeHaimurti-emberuinan. 
The record mentions Srlvaisnava-variyar. 

(188 of 1923). 

Year 15. (c. A. D. 1133) The Makasabha executed 
a sale-deed-in-discharge-of-debt ( irana-krayamna-kkai - 
yehittu) in favour of the Ekambam-udaiyar temple. 
The Sabha had obtained a loan of the temple in year 13, 
and by the month of karttigai in the fifteenth year, 
the debt including interest amounted to 230^ kasu. 
This sum was demanded by the temple authorities 
including the Mahesvaras and accountants, and as the 
Sabha was unable to pay down the money, it met the 
claims of the temple by transferring to it some land 
which, with the capitalised value of the minor dues on 
it that were remitted, amounted to the sum of the debt 
due to the temple. The Sabha was declared to be free, 
after the date of this transaction, from all dues to the 
temple other than 500 measures of ghee on the day of 
Tirnvadirai in the month of Margali and the transfer 
of Yennaikkuttanallur (the land sold in lieu of the 
payment of the debt) ; and all other claims recorded on 
copper, stone and palm-leaf were declared cancelled. 
Vennaikkiittanallur was thenceforth to be called by 
the iMva-name Tiruvekambanallur, and was to be so 
entered in the land-register ( pottakam ) of the village 
and tax-account ( vari ). (68 of 1898). 

Inscriptions of Kulottuhga III Parakesari. 

Year 26, day 300. (c. A. D. 1214) At the request 
of one Bharasivan Tiruvirattanam-udaiyan alias Kulot- 
tuiiga-sola Panditan, who had the birth-right ( [janmakkani ) 
of worshipping at the matrsthanas of the village, a 

[ 128 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


certain Cedirajan obtained the sanction of the king for 
a tax-free gift of ten veli of land as arcanabhoga to the 
shrines of two Pidaris, Vadavayireelvi and Tiruvanda]. 
The king also sanctioned this transaction being 
engraved on the walls of the temple of Vejlaimurti- 
nayanar, and ordered the Sabhu and the tanduvan to 
enter it in the accounts as tax-free. We have duplicate 
records of this transaction, the king’s sanction and the 
execution of the order by the Perunguri Sabha. 

(175 of 1923 * and 76 of 1898). 

Year (3) 7. ( c . A. D. 1215) The Makasabha of 
Uttaramelur alias Rajendra-sola-caturvedimangalam 

entered into a fresh agreement with the Makesvaras and 
the Stkanattar of the temple of Tiruppulivalam-udaiya- 
nayanar regarding the future administration of old 
endowments for eight perpetual lamps. These 

endowments were : (as recorded in the Tiruppulivalam- 
udaiyar and Naduvil temples )— four lamps for 100 
kalanju of red gold taken charge of by the Assembly 
for the time being (engal purvapurusahal, 11. 3-4) 
from Rajamartanda alias Aparajitavikramavarman on 
the occasion of a solar eclipse in the fourteenth year of 
his reign; (as recorded in the Naduvil temple )— one 
lamp for 1234 kalanju taken from a private individual 
in the 18th year of Kannaradeva who took Kacci and 
Tahjai ; two lamps to be maintained from proceeds of 
the sale of land given for the purpose by an individual 
in the thirteenth year of Parakesarivarman who took 
Madura ; and one lamp for 12J^ kalanju taken from 
another person in the fourteenth year of the same 
king. In the 37th year of TribhuvanavTradeva, when 
the Mahekvaras called upon the Subha to keep to its 

* By some mistake this record is treated as one of Rajaraja III in A.K.E. 
1923, II 41. It is clearly one of Kulottunga III. The tanduvUn is not heard of 
in No. 76 of 1898 which records the execution of the order by the SabhUl. 


17 


[129] 



COLA STUDIES 


engagements, it was unable to do so (ivmlakkufcku 
nittattevai-yirukka mudiyamaiyil, 11. 11-12) and had to 
persuade the temple authorities to accept a less onerous 
schedule of obligations for the future. (67 of 189S). 

Year 38, day 233. (c. A. D. 1216) In recognition 
of useful additions to the structure of the temple 
carried out by a courtesan, the Mahasabha conferred on 
her certain hereditary rights in the temple of Rajendra- 
sola-vinnagar, with the concurrence of the trustees of 
the temple — koyir-tanattar kandu. (172 of 1923). 

Inscriptions of Rajardja III Rajakesari. 

Year 3. (c. A. D. 1219) Some further rights 
during the car-festival conferred upon the same courte- 
san by the Mahasabha. (180 of 1923). 

Year 29. (c. A. D. 1245) The Mahasabha of 
Uttarameru alias Gandagopala - caturvedimangalam 
conferred similar rights on a certain Slyanacci alias 
Srl-vaisnava-manikkam in recognition of further 
improvements made by her in the temple. 

(183 of 1923). 


[ 130 ] 



VI 

uttaramErUr 

II The Parantaka Inscriptions 

The remarkable progress of South Indian 
Epigraphy in the last thirty years has added much to 
our knowledge of the social and political affairs of 
South India in ancient and mediaeval times. With 
this increase in knowledge, old ideas on the consti- 
tution of village assemblies in South India are 
becoming obsolete, and we are called upon to review 
them in the light of later discoveries. To many 
questions concerning the rural life and administration 
of the country, we can yet offer only tentative answers ; 
but we know more about these matters now than was 
known in 1904 when Venkayya edited the texts of 
the celebrated Uttaramerur records which he had first 
noticed in great detail a few years before. * It is the 
aim of this study to discuss some of the points which 
Venkayya left open, and suggest a few corrections 
and improvements in his interpretation of the records. 
This is done best by our furnishing annotations on the 
more difficult parts of the published texts of the two 
inscriptions of the twelfth and fourteenth years of 
Parantaka I distinguished by Venkayya as ‘ A ' and 
‘ B ’ respectively, t 

‘ A ’ line 1 : sabhaiybm. Venkayya recognised the 
existence of village assemblies before the date of this 
record and drew attention to some earlier inscriptions 

* A. R. Ei 1899 paragraphs 58-73 and A . S. T. 1904-5 pp. 131 ff. 

f I verified Venkayya's text directly from the stone and found it perfect in its 
readings. I acknowledge with thanks the assistance rendered on the occasion 
by Mr. T. N. Ramachandran of the Madras Museum. 

[ 131 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


mentioning village assemblies. * Perhaps the earliest 
mention of the Sahha of Uttaramerur itself is that 
found in No. 80 of 1898 of the seventh year of 
Dantivikramavarman (c. A. D. 782) f Of about the 
same period is the Pandya record from Manor in the 
Tinnevelly District (No. 423 of 1900) which in some 
important respects seems to anticipate the records 
of Parantaka Co]a by more than a century. J 

‘ A lines 1-3 : ivvandu-mudal . . . parisavadu : 
Venkayya’s translation of this passage can hardly be 
accepted as a satisfactory rendering of the original. 
It will be observed that the phrase 4 irundu variyam-aga ’ 
in 1. 2 is applied by him to the royal officer Tattanur- 
muvenda-velan and rendered into : 44 Sitting (with us) 
and convening (?) the committee” ; and his translation 
of the corresponding passage in 4 B ’ runs : “ Sitting 
(with us) and convening (?)] the committee in accord- 
ance with the (royal) command.” It should be observed 
that there is nothing in the text corresponding to 
“ convening (?) ” of the translation. The question is to 
decide whether 4 variyam-aga ’ must be taken to refer 
to the royal officer, as Venkayya does, or to read 
it with what follows as : 44 variyam-aga dttorukkdium 

samvatsaravariyamum iduvadarkku .” If we follow 

Venkayya, 4 variyam-aga ’ must describe some function 
performed by the royal officer, and the text does not 
help us to explain what this function is, and the device 
of interpolating a new conception like convening a 
committee does not seem proper. The word variyam 
is generally taken to mean 4 committee \ and that is 
doubtless its real meaning in phrases like 4 samvatsara- 
variyam ,’ 4 totta -variyam ’ etc., in this and other records. 
It is doubtful if 4 variyam ’ can be said in any other 

» A. S. I. 1904-5 p. 135. 

+ Ante p. 118. 

X The Tandy an Kingdom p. 93. 

[ 182 ] 



UTTAR AMERUR 


context to be used to describe duties to be performed 
by an individual. The Manur inscription of Maran 
Sadaiyan contains the earliest use of 1 variyam ’ known 
to me in the phrase : * “ mtilucciravanai illadarai 

evvakai - ppatta - variyamum eraada - pperd - dardgavum” 
that is, ‘ that they shall not appoint to any variyam 
anybody who does not possess a full share \ ‘ Variyam ’ 
here may well mean a committee ; but there is 
nothing in the context to preclude its being some 
office or privilege held by an individual. The Tamil 
dictionaries simply give the meaning * income ’ for the 
word ‘ vari’ ; but Kittel, in his Kanarese-English 
dictionary, gives under the word ‘ vdri ’ the meaning 
“unrelenting demand’', and this suggests a possible 
meaning, “ collection of dues or taxes," for the word 
1 variyam.’ If this meaning is adopted, it will follow, 
further, that this collection may be the work of an 
individual or a group of men, a committee. Thus 
‘ vdriyam-aga ’, that is ‘ becoming variyam,’ as applied to 
a royal officer may mean that he was there in Uttara- 
merur representing the king and collecting certain 
royal dues from the village. On this view, the phrase 
« ivvandu mudal ’ meaning * from this year ' must be taken 
both in ‘ A ' and ‘ B ’ to mark the year from which 
the officer named in either case was appointed as 
1 variyam ’ ; but there seem to be no other instances 
of such a permanent deputation of an official of the 
king’s service for the collection of royal dues from 
Brahmadeya villages. The only other supposition we 
can reasonably make is that the officer became a 
member of the variyam ; but this raises a difficulty as 
there were many vdriyams in the village, and there 
seems to be no method of deciding to which of these 
the king’s officer was assigned. 

* The inscription is unpublished. 

[ 133 j 



COLA STUDIES 


It seems simpler on the whole to adopt the alter- 
native construction suggested above, and read £ variyam- 
aga ’ with the following words. This would perhaps 
imply that the committee-system was being adopted by 
this resolution for the first time in Uttaramerur, or at 
least the committee-method ( variyam, ) in local administ- 
ration was improved and extended by this resolution. 
This view receives support from two considerations. 
First, in the records of an earlier period from Uttara- 
merur there is no mention of ‘ variyam ’ as a committee * 
for a specific purpose. Secondly, from the inscriptions 
‘ A ’ and ‘ B \ the officials deputed by the king do not 
seem to have performed any special function other 
than representing the king to witness the proceedings 
of the assembly on the two important occasions when it 
adopted fundamental changes in its constitution. This 
becomes clear from the phrases ‘ udan-irukka ’ in 1. 12 
‘ A ’ and ‘ udan-irundu ipparisu seyvikka ’ in 1. 17 ‘ B ’ ; 
of these, the second form appears to state more 
explicitly what is implied in the first. These expres- 
sions will be discussed further below. 

Again, the words * enyalur srlmukhappadi auaiyirial ’ 
(11. 1-2) are understood by Venkayya as governing 
‘ vyavasthai seyda ’ (11. 2-3) , so that according to him the 
revision of the constitution was undertaken by the 
assembly at the instance of the king. This inter- 
pretation overlooks the participle ‘ irundu ’ (1. 2) 

occurring immediately after the name Tattanur- 
miivenda-velan, and standing in much closer relation to 
‘ unaiyimV than to the words at the end of 1. 2. There 

* There are found, however, the general terms vUriyar and variyap- 
perumakkal-szt e.g. 63 of 1898 of year 16 of Njpatunga and 74 of 1898, Danti- 
pottarasa. No. 11 of 1898 of the 10th year of Vijaya Kampavikramavarman 
mentions the tank committee ; but his date is uncertain, and if the argument here 
presented is correct, he must be of a later time than is sometimes supposed. 

[ » 4 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


seems to be no doubt that the royal sanction or order 
related only to the name of the officer who was 
appointed to be present on the occasion. 

In the light of the remarks offered so far, this 
part of the text may perhaps be translated as follows : 
“ We, (the members of) the assembly of Uttarameru- 
caturvedimaiigalam, Tattanur-muvenda-vejan being 
present in accordance with the order (conveyed) in the 
h’ltnukha (royal letter addressed) to our village, made the 
following settlement * for choosing as committees every 
year from this year forward the annual committee, 
the srarden committee and the tank committee.” 

Much of this discussion applies also to record 1 B ' 
which employs almost the same expressions. 

‘ A ’ l. 5: arthasausamum dtmasausamum udaiyardy : 
“possesses honest earnings and has a pure mind" 
(Venkayya). The expressions employed here are clearly 
reminiscent of the upadhasauca of the Arthasastra 
literature, though in the context they seem to be 
used in a rather loose non-technical sense. Perhaps, 
‘possessing material and spiritual purity’ is a better 
rendering. Reference may also be made to the 
Tiru-kkural verse 501. 

1 A’ ll. 5-6 : muvattin aniya bandukkal 

alldttarai : substituting the literal translation f of the 
phrase ‘ muvattin ipparam ' viz., “ on this side of three 
years, ” for ‘ the last three years ' of Venkayya, we 
may accept his translation of this passage as correct. 
Indeed the text is easy Tamil and presents no 
difficulty. 

* Venkayya observes (A 5./. 1904-5 p, 138 n. 3) : ‘The wording of 1. 12 
seems to show that the settlement was made by the assembly, though the point 
is not quite clear here \ The foregoing discussion has shown that 
Venkayya's doubts were due to the rather forced construction he adopted. 

f See A. S , /. 1904-5 p. 138, n 6. 

[ 135 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


It is in the interpretation that we find it utterly 
impossible to follow Venkayya. There seems to be no 
evidence in the texts of the records that can sustain 
his somewhat lurid view of the occasion for the reform 
undertaken by the assembly of Uttaramerur. He 
says : * “ One point that is common in both (A & B) is 
the implied indignation against the committee members 
who had just then vacated office and who appear to 
have brought the administration of the village into 
disrepute. They must have embezzled communal 
funds and would not submit themselves to any sort 
of scrutiny. The wholesale condemnation in £ A ' of 
committee members who held office at the time the 
rules were made, is sufficient evidence on the point. 
This clause must have operated harshly during the 
second year of its introduction and must have restricted 
the choice within a smaller number, who might not 
possess all the requisite qualifications. In view of 
this difficulty better counsel prevailed in A. D. 920-21, 
and the prohibition was restricted only to defaulting 
committee members and their relations.” 

In all the numerous and profound contributions 
of Venkayya to South Indian Epigraphy, it is hard to 
find another paragraph which beats this, or even 
approaches it, in its utter disregard for the sources. 
As we have seen already, the Sabha of Uttaramerur 
appears to have adopted the committee system 
(variyam) for the first time in the twelfth year of 
Parantaka. The speculations of Venkayya concerning 
the reasons which led to the reform are based 
entirely on his translation of ‘ mum{tin ipparam ’ (1. 5) 
into “for the last three years.” He also introduces 
a new word ‘ (just) ’ in his translation of the phrase 

* Ibid pp. 135-6. See also A . R. E. 1899 paragraph 69. 

[ 186 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


‘ varii/a Ttjeyd olinda - perumakkaluklcu.’ The extent, to 

which the meaning of our simple text is distorted as a 
result of these slight devices in translation can be seen 
by placing Venkayya's version by the side of a more 
literal rendering given as far as possible in his own 
words. Venkayya’s version is : “ From among (the 
residents) who have not been on (any of) the com- 
mittees for the last three years and who are not close 
relations of the great men (just) retired from the com- 
mittees” ( italics oars). A more literal rendering would 
be : “ From among those who have not done variyam 
on this side of three years and who are not close rela- 
tions of the great men who have done variyam and 
retired.” There is nothing here * either about the men 
who served on committees at the time the settlement 
was # made or during the three years preceding the settle- 
ment. There is also no evidence of ‘ implied indignation' 
against or 4 wholesale condemnation ’ of any body of 
persons. Venkayya's speculation about members of 
committees bringing the administration of the village 
into disrepute by their embezzlement of communal 
funds and their refusal to submit to any scrutiny 
is utterly groundless. The only reference to such 
transgressions in the two records of Uttaramerur occurs 
at the end of 1. 4 of ‘ B ' where it is laid down that 
failure to produce accounts for audit at the end of a 
period of office ( variyam ) shall permanently disqualify 
a person and his relatives for election to the variyam. 
This provision is part of a more detailed statement 
of disqualifications for election to the variyam that 
distinguishes the later record from that of two years 
before. In other words, what we have here is not the 

* A prohibition at the end of 1. 9 and beginning ol 1. 10 in 1 A ’ is very 
obscure on account of gaps in the record. It has to be left on one side as it 
helps neither Venkayya's argument nor mine. 

[137] 


18 



COLA STUDIES 


statement of a concrete fact, but provision against a 
possible contingency. 

It is not contended that village administration was 
always pure, or that dishonesty and embezzlement 
were unknown to the rural patriots of ancient times ; 
cases of spoliation of temple funds and breaches of 
trust are common enough in our records ; and the 
provision in 1 B ’ just noticed is in itself evidence that 
such offences had to be thought of and carefully 
guarded against. The substance of my difference with 
Venkayya is simply this. There seems to me to be 
no evidence whatever in these two records from 
Uttaramerur that the administration of this village was 
in a bad way in the years preceding the reform, or that 
such maladministration furnished the occasion for 
the reform itself. These records were unique when 
Venkayya studied them, and in his enthusiasm to 
explain their importance, he appears to have given 
rein to his imagination and read into the records much 
that was in his own mind. This may account for his 
view of the relation in which the two records stand 
to each other. He suggests that the rule of exclusion 
as stated in ‘ A ’ unduly restricted the field of choice 
for election to the committees and that the assembly, 
after the experience of two years, went back on its 
own rule and as a result, “the prohibition was 
restricted only to defaulting committee members 
and their relations.” If by this, Venkayya means 
that there was no sort of restriction on members of 
committees who had served a term without being in 
default, this statement is not correct ; for ‘ B ’ repeats * 
in identical words the rule from ‘ A ’ excluding from 
re-election to committees persons who had served on 

• A. S. /• 1904-5 p. 143 (ii), and p. 139 1. 4 ‘ B \ 

[ 138 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


them ‘this side of three years/ We see then that both 
‘ A ’ and ‘ B ' are agreed in forbidding re-election to the 
committees within an interval of three years, and that 
this rule applies not only to ‘ defaulting committee 
members ' but to all. We may reserve for later 
consideration the position of the kinsmen of committee 
members in ‘ B ’ with reference to that in ‘ A \ 

In fact, if we put aside the ideas suggested by 
Venkayya’s comments and his emendations of the 
text in his translation, and if we concentrate attention 
on the words employed in the text of which a more 
literal rendering than Venkayya’s has been furnished 
above, we can recognise only two conditions stated in it ; 
(1) persons nominated for election to the committees 
should not have served on them during the three years 
preceding the date of election, and (2) they should not 
be close relations of those that had so served. We 
have shown that condition (1) is retained intact in the 
later record; condition (2) is indeed modified. We 
shall discuss the modifications and the reasons therefor 
later in dealing with 1 B ’. But the main point is that in 
the language employed in ‘ A ’, there is no evidence 
of any dissatisfaction felt towards any persons for 
abusing their position and power, and not a trace that 
the rule of exclusion is based on the past conduct of 
malefactors. It is the dry and neutral language of a 
legal document laying down a rule of procedure for 
future observance. The reason underlying the main 
rule forbidding re-elections within three years is not 
hard to seek ; it is to make offices go round. Venkayya 
himself once recognised this * when he pointed out that 
the annual change of office-bearers and re-election to 
new committees after intervals of three years must have 

* A. E. E. 1899, paragraph 72. 


[ 139 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


stimulated a sustained civic interest. The motive for 
the exclusion of the ‘ close relations ’ ( cuiiya bandukkal ) 
must have been similar ; in a country where the joint 
family has been so important a social factor, one can 
understand a rule based on the feeling that a person 
may be taken to represent his family circle. 

* A ’ line 6 : saderi ( sen ) valiye tiratti : “ (The 

tickets bearing the names) shall be collected in (each) 
street (Seri)" (Venkayya). Perhaps this is better trans- 
lated as : 1 The tickets bearing the names shall be 
gathered together according to Sens' It must be 
noticed that there were thirty kudumbus r constituted out 
of twelve Seris. Each kudumbu had to prepare (1. 3) 
name tickets ( kudavolai ) (1. 6) answering to what we 
now call valid nominations, and when this had been 
done, the tickets were grouped together according to 
Seris before lots were drawn in the manner laid down 
in 1. 7. Representation on the committees was accord- 
ing to Seri and kudumbu. These terms Seri and 
kudumbu occur in inscriptions from other places as 
well, and their exact place in local administration 
is yet to be worked out. 

The brief record of the mode of election to the 
committees contained in this inscription is by no means 
easy to follow in its details. The later record (B) says 
distinctly that thirty names were chosen for service 
on committees, one from each kudumbu, and lays down 
the elaborate procedure to be followed at the election. 
The earlier record (A) also implies unmistakably that 
the total number of men chosen in one election was 
thirty. It makes the following statements: (1) the 
* annual committee ’ must be so chosen that there are 
twelve members, one from each Seri, after the tickets 
have been gathered together (from the kudumbus ) 


[ 140 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


according to the Sens (11. 6-7). (2) Before that * twelve 
men shall be chosen, as above ( merpadi ), for the garden 
committee (11. 7-8). (3) The remaining six tickets 

shall constitute the tank committee (11. 8-9). (4) After 
the choice of thirty persons in this manner, they shall 
serve on the three committees for full three hundred 
and sixty days and then retire. There is nothing in 
the record to say how exactly it was to be secured that 
the two larger committees got one man from each Seri 
and from a different kudumbu, though this seems to be 
presumed throughout as the proper incidence of re- 
presentation. On the other hand, it confuses the whole 
question by talking of tickets being collected according 
to Seris, of electing twelve, one from each Seri for one 
committee, and of twelve others elected similarly for 
another, and lastly, of the remaining six for yet a third. 
Again, while referring to future elections, it uses the 
phrase ‘ by allotting pot-tickets to kudumbu ( kudumbukku - 
kkuda-volai-ittu) (1. 9). Moreover, for appointing twelve 
persons for the pancavdra and * gold ’ committees 
(1. 10), thirty tickets were to be allotted to the thirty 
kudumbus and twelve chosen therefrom, one for each 
Seri. This is doubtless a badly drafted record, and its 
wording must have given rise to differences of opinion 
as to the exact procedure to be adopted at the election. 
If we consider the distinct superiority of the later 
record in this respect and the clearness and precision 
of the procedure laid down in it, and contrast it with 
the vagueness and the clumsiness that characterise the 
earlier document, the conclusion seems to be forced 
on us that the main reason for the revision of the 
vyavasthai (settlement) that was undertaken by the 
Sabha after an interval of two years, must be sought in 

• Venkayya would change this and have * subsequent to this though 
the text is clear. See A . S. /. 1904-5 p. 138 and n. 12, 


[ 141 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


the intolerable vexation arising from the imperfections 
of the earlier settlement which they had bound them- 
selves to observe in perpetuity (1. 11). 

‘ A ' line 9 : i twyct m sthai-olai-ppadiye : 4 According 
to this order of settlement ’ - (Venkayya). I prefer 
‘ according to this deed of settlement.’ The word 
* ulai ’, indeed often occurs in inscriptions in the sense 
of 1 order’, especially ‘ royal order’ and this is perhaps 
the reason why Venkayya * and almost all other 
writers after him have maintained that the constitution 
of Uttaramerur was laid down in a royal rescript and 
that the Sabha had only to signify its assent to a consti- 
tution ordered from above. But there is no justificatio n 
for overlooking the express declaration of the Sabha 
repeatedly made in these two records f that it made the 
vyavasthai in the presence of an official who attended 
its meetings by royal order. Though not of Parantaka’s 
reign, there are not wanting examples of Sabhas stating 
clearly that they made certain changes in their consti- 
tutions at the instance of the king. These examples 
should warn us against disregarding express statements 
contained in our records. The proper meaning of 
4 dial ’ in this context is, therefore, not 4 order ’ but 
4 deed ' or 4 record.’ The word is used in many different 
connections; kudavolai is thus closely analogous to 
vyavasthai-olai. 

4 A ' l. 10: pahcavdravariyattukkum ponvariyattuk- 
kum : 4 Pancavara ’ seems to have been some kind of 
a tax % or levy the exact nature of which is not clear, 
though the suggestion may be ventured that it might 
have been meant to provide againBt famine (panjam). 

* “ The royal order had evidently to be approved by the village assembly 
before it could take effect" A. R. E. 1899, paragraph 60. 

f ‘ A ’ 11. 2-3 ; and 'B' 11. 2 and 17. 

X No. 131 of 1912 and A. R. E. 1913 1L 33 ; also S. 1. 1. .11. p. 512 n. 3. 


[ 142 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


The duties of the pancavara committee were perhaps 
connected with its assessment and collection. The 
discovery of the real nature of ‘ pancavara ’ antiquates 
Venkayya’s suggestion * that originally every village 
had only five committees, that it was the duty of the 
* patica vara- vdri yam’ to supervise their work, and that 
the name was kept on even after the number of com- 
mittees to be supervised became more than five. 

The gold committee ( pon-variyam ) is generally 
taken to have regulated the currency. As it is not 
possible, however, to imagine how village committees 
can undertake this general function of administration, 
we must try and find a more satisfactory explanation. 
* Pon ’ in the inscriptions of South India often means a 
coin of specific weight; but the standard of fineness 
seems to have varied with different types, and there are 
clear references in the records of money endowments 
to the fineness and weight of the gold made over by 
the donors for specified purposes. There must have 
been some person or persons to take charge of such 
endowments or at least to testify in a public manner to 
the weight and fineness of the gold in such instances. 
It seems probable that the ‘ pon-variyam ’ performed 
these functions. 

‘ A ’ l. 10: muppadu kudumbilum panniruvarilum : 

Here the procedure for election to these two committees 
is even less specific in one important respect ; we are 
distinctly told that only thirty tickets were to be put 
in for all the thirty kudumbus in the first instance 
(i muppadu ktulavolai ittu) and that out of these thirty, 
twelve were selected for the two committees, one from 
each Seri. But how the first thirty were obtained we are 

• A. S. /. 1904-5 p. 145 n Pancavara has little to do with ampernnguhi, 
contra Dr. S. K. Aiyangar in /. A , May 1932. 

[ 143 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


not informed. Another instance of the imperfect 
drafting of the record. 

‘ A ’ l. Ill pinnai avvariyattukkn kudavolai ida 
pperddadagamm : These words seem to imply that, 

under these rules, lots were drawn separately for each 
committee. If this was so, it did not matter whether 
the garden committee was elected before or after the 
annual committee. 

* A ’ ll . 11-12 : At first sight these lines seem to 
support Venkayya’s translation which says that the 
royal letter issued by the emperor directed that from 
that year committees should be chosen for ever in the 
manner laid down. But this contradicts the claim of 
the Sabha that it made the settlement. It will be 
seen also that Venkayya’s translation understands 
‘ krimukham ’ as ‘ the royal letter ’ which laid down the 
constitution and ‘ anai ’ as ' the royal order * by which 
Tattanur-muvenda-velan sat with the assembly. If we 
recall the phrase ‘ srhnukhappadi anaiyinal’ (11. 1-2) used 
earlier in this inscription, we shall notice easily the 
unsoundness of this separation of * srlrnukham ’ from 
‘ anai ' in the translation of this passage. In fact the 
principal sentence in these lines is : enrum kudavolai 
variyamey iduvadaga Tattanur-muvenda-veldn udanirukka 
vyayasthai seydom Uttarameru-caturvedimangalattu sabhai- 
■ybm ; and the numerous titles of the king followed by 
irimukham arulicceydu varakkatta srl anaiyinal are 
explanatory of udan-it'ukka ; the clause nam gramattu 
dustar ket[u sistar vardhittiduvardga gives the general 
motive of the settlement. The translation of these lines 
may be revised as follows : “ In order that the wicked 
men of our village may perish and the good prosper, 
we, the members of the assembly of Uttarameru- 
caturvedimahgalam made this settlement: that in this 


[ 144 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


manner, from this year forward as long as the sun 
and the moon endure, (we shall) invariably choose 
commiteess only by the method of pot-tickets — 
Tattanur-muvenda-velan being present with us by 
order in accordance with the letter received and shown 
to us as graciously issued by the lord of the gods, 
the emperor, Sri Vlranarayana Sri Parantakadeva 
alias Parakesarivarman. ” 

Dustar kettu sistar vardhitticluvdraga : In view of 

some statements made by Venkayya, it seems neces- 
sary to say that this expression has no very specific 
significance. It is the object of all government to 
restrain the wicked and promote the welfare of the good 
Venkayya understands by ‘ sista ’ ‘the rest', and ‘13’ 
has ‘ visistar ’ in the same context in the place of 
‘ sistar But the whole formula occurring in the record 
of the proceedings of a Brahman assembly has to be 
understood, it seems to me, in the light of the celebra- 
ted adage of the Gita: “ par Ur a nag a sadhundm vindsayu 
ca duskrtdm ” (IV. 8.) In any case, I cannot help 
feeling that Venkayya has treated these words as a 
more concrete account of the affairs of the village than 
in reality they are. He says : * “We have reason to 
suppose that local administration was very near being 
wrecked in an important village not far from the 
premier city of the Coja dominions, (Kanclpuram). 
The rules regulating the constitution of village assem- 
blies (!) and the method of selection of committee 
members seem to have been lax, and unscrupulous and 
ignorant men appear to have taken advantage of the 
opportunity to embezzle communal funds, and would 
not render accounts, f The king deputed one of his 

* A. S. I. 1904-5, pp. 134-5. 

t These statements appear to be based on a clause in ' B ’ disqualifying 
from service on committees persons who after serving on them once failed to 
submit accounts for audit. 


19 


L 145 J 



COLA STUDIES 


&udra officers, with special instructions, in A. D. 918-9, 
to set matters right. Owing, perhaps, to his want of 
experience and to the excitement of the villagers over 
the evil doings of the ‘ wicked men ’ of the village, the 
rules which he promulgated (A below) must have made 
matters worse, and the consequences of his mistakes 
were felt during the second year the rules were in 
operation. The king had to depute a Brahmana officer 
of his from the Coja country to improve upon the 
system devised more than a year ago. Accordingly, 
on the sixteenth day of the fourteenth year of the 
king’s reign (A. D. 920-21) a carefully worked out set 
of rules (B below) was framed and promulgated in 
order that the ‘wicked men of the village might perish 
and the rest prosper.’ The rules leave no doubt what- 
ever as to who the wicked men were and wherein their 
wickedness lay.” These statements of Venkayya give a 
measure of the extent to which he allowed the general 
formula about dusta nigraha and sis ta paripalana so well 
established in the parlance of Indian Sanskrit culture 
to influence his view of the settlement of the constitu- 
tion of the committees by the Sabha of Uttaramerur. 
And one can hardly fail to observe that the identity of 
the ‘wicked men’ who caused all the trouble does 
not seem to be so clear from the records as it was to 
Venkayya, or that the difference in the caste of the 
officers deputed by the king on the two occasions might 
have been anything more than an accident. In any 
event, there is nothing in the words employed in the 
inscriptions that cannot be explained without supposing 
that the Sudra officer bungled it and that the Brahmana 
officer of the Cola country was more successful in 
dealing with the situation. The reforms consisted, in 
our view, in the introduction in Uttaramerur of a fully 
developed committee system of village administration 


[H6] 



UTTARAMERUR 


for the first time in the twelfth year of Parantaka by the 
Sabha of that place, and in the clearer and more precise 
definition, two years later, of the rules governing the 
elections to the committees. The blame, if any, for the 
vagueness and uncertainty of the original rules, and 
the credit for the precision and clarity of the revised 
version must alike attach primarily to the assembly 
itself. The single official who was present by the king's 
order on either occasion, though he might have had a 
share in guiding the proceedings of the assembly by 
the respect he would have commanded as the king’s 
representative, can hardly be held responsible for the 
settlement reached at the end or even for the form of 
expression adopted. 

Before taking up * B ' for consideration, the results 
of the foregoing discussion may be summed up. 
There is nothing to support Yenkayya’s view that ‘A’ 
embodies a reform of the administration of Uttara- 
meriir undertaken and carried out by the Coja king 
Parantaka I to rescue it from the corruption and 
inefficiency caused by wicked men having gained con- 
trol of it. For its plausibility this veiw depends on (a) a 
too literal understanding of the general phrase at the 
end of ‘A’ : ‘ so that the wicked may perish and the good 
prosper’, which gives the rationale of all government 
and regulation, and (6) a reading into the earlier record 
of notions derived from the later one about embezzle- 
ment of public funds and failure to submit accounts. 
If we put aside the false suggestions arising from these 
faulty steps— even ‘B’ speaks only of accounts not 
being submitted, not of embezzlement (end of 1. 4)— we 
see clearly the nature of the rules governing service 
on committees, and realise that, far from being the 
result of indignation against particular persons who had 
ruined the village and the management of its affairs, 


[ 147 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


they are only dominated by a natural desire to afford 
equal opportunities of service to all eligible men. 

What then were the nature and occasion of the 
reform and by whom was it effected ? Its nature consis- 
ted evidently in the introduction of a well-developed 
committee system, apparently till then unknown in the 
management of the affairs of Uttaramerur. The earliest 
mention of the variyam is in an inscription from the 
Tinnevelly distinct, and though no final account of the 
history of this organisation can be attempted in the 
present state of i*esearch, it seems pi’obable that the 
system was of gradual growth. Earlier and tentative 
attempts to divide the work of the village among in- 
dividual members may have grown in course of time 
into an elaborate system of management through com- 
mittees with a clearly marked division of labour among 
them. And the presence of the king's official at the 
meeting of the assembly shows that the king had some- 
thing to do with the reform. But the words of the ins- 
cription leave no doubt that the essential points of the 
decision were reached by the assembly at its meeting ; 
there is, however, no means of deciding whether this 
reform was undertaken on the initiative of the king or 
of the assembly itself. If, as seems not unlikely, the 
variyam system was sought to be developed further at 
Uttaramerur than was common at the time among the 
assemblies of other villages, the king would have had 

o-ood reason to send out an officer to watch the nature 
© 

of the changes introduced by the assembly of Uttara- 
merur. And the novelty of the system more than 
anything else may go far to explain the imperfections 
of the first constitution. 

This brings us to a consideration of the differences 
between ‘ A ’ and ‘ B.’ The most important of these 

[ 148 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


aim at giving clearer expression to the qualifications 
of candidates for election to the committees and to the 
procedure to be followed in the elections. There are 
some other changes of a minor character. These will 
become clear in the course of the detailed comments 
that follow. 

* B ’ ll. 1-2 : See the notes on ‘ ivvaadu mudal ’ 
and * srimukhappadi aTiaiyinal * under ‘A' 11. 1-2. 
The expressions used are more detailed throughout, 
e. g., 1 engalukku srlmukham varalckdtta srimukhappadi 
aTiaiyinal ’. The name of the king is mentioned here 
unlike in ‘Ah and the name of the Brahman officer 
deputed by the king is given fully with the country, 
district, and town from which he came. There is 
however nothing to show that in official status or in 
the scope of his reference he differed from Tattanur- 
muvenda-vejan of ‘ A ’. 

‘ B ’ l. 3 : eluhadu pirayaltin fell muppattaindu 

pirayattin melpattar : The age limit here laid down 

is 35 to 70 as against 30 to 60 of ‘A '. Venkayya 
suggested * that this change was due either to ‘ young 
men ' having kept the company of ‘ wicked men ' or 
to experience having shown rashness still persisting in 
the administration of the committees. This will 
account for raising the lower age-limit from 30 to 35 
but not for putting up the higher limit. It would seem 
that this variation in the age-limits prescribed for 
service on committees has no very special reason 
underlying it, unless it be a realisation that too many 
competent people in the village over sixty had been 
kept out by the earlier rule, and that the newer limits 
were more in accordance with the age-distribution of 
the population in the village. In other words, this may 

* A. R. E. 1899, paragraph 70. 


[ 149 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


be only a minor change which was effected incidentally 
because a revision of the rules had been necessitated 
by more imperious reasons. 

1 B’ l. 3 : mantra-brahmanam valldn oduvittari 

vanai; This expression takes the place of vedattilum 
mstrattilum kdryattiUm nipunar enpappattirupparai (1. 4) 
of 1 A.’ The statements in this record concerning the 
qualifications of persons eligible for service on com- 
mittees, the classes of persons who shall be excluded 
from such service and the period of such exclusion are 
very clear and definite. The qualifications include 
conditions regarding age, property and learning, besides 
general ability and character. The phrase now under 
consideration makes the educational qualifications more 
definite than before. To say that a person must have 
a reputation for being learned in the Veda and the 
iisastra, as ‘ A ’ said, was to give no clear indication of 
the standard of learning that entitled a man to have his 
name included among the pot-tickets. This question of 
the exact standard of learning implied in the original 
rule was, we may presume, much canvassed among the 
meticulous vaidiks of Uttaramerur. As a result, the 
standard was carefully laid down. Ordinarily a candi- 
date had to know the mantra-brahma na * and possess 
experience in expounding it. It may be recalled here 
that, in a similar context, the Maniir inscription requires 
candidates to possess a knowledge of mantra-brahma na 
and one dharma. 

1 B’ 11.3-4: araikkanilame .puga iduvadagavum: 

The assembly of Uttaramerur apparently took account 
of the usual divorce between learning and riches, and 

* Monier-Williams gives this phrase the meaning ‘ Mantras and Brahman as * 
and also notes that it is the name of a work. Venkayya felt a slight difficulty 
with dduvittarivUn } and suggested that it should be oduvikka an van. But the 
former phrase means really “ one who has known teaching ”, i, e. possesses 
experience of it. 


[ 150 ] 



UTTARAMERU R 


fixed the property qualification of very learned men 
at half the usual standard. Thus a person versed in a 
Veda in its entirety and possessed of experience in 
teaching one of the four bhasyas might have only 1/8 
nilam instead of the usual 1/4. 

It will be observed that the short sentences in this 
inscription are much easier to follow than the long- 
winded sentence in ‘ A ’ (11. 3-7) which mixes up 
in one unwieldy statement the qualifications and dis- 
qualifications of members and the details of the process 
of election. 

‘ B ’ l. 4: muvattin ippuram variyahjeydilaltarai : 
This phrase must be carefully noted as excluding from 
committees all persons who had served on them within 
the three years preceding the election simply by reason 
of such service. According to Venkayya this three 
year rule unduly limited the field of choice and was, as 
he mistakenly thought, dropped when, in A. D. 920-21 
(the date of this record), “ the prohibition was restricted 
only to defaulting committee members and their 
relatives.” As a matter of fact, by the arrangement of 
clauses in this record, not to have served on any of the 
committees in the three years preceding the year to 
which the particular election related, was as much one 
of the qualifications requisite for valid candidature as 
the possession of property, learning and character. 

‘ B ’ ll. 4-6 : epperppatta puga ida pperdttar- 

agamim : This is the first of the series of clauses 

enumerating crimes and sins which resulted in a perma- 
nent or temporary exclusion of those who committed 
them from service on the committees. These clauses 
are for the most part new, as is also the phrase 
‘ aSaramudaiyardnaraiyey ’ among the qualifications in 
1. 4, of which phrase most of the new clauses constitute 
an explanation. 


[ 151 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


The first prohibitory clause deals with those who 
had served on committees and were in default, and 
their relatives. The earlier record pronounced a 
general prohibition directed against the relatives of all 
persons who had served on committees. This general 
prohibition was perhaps too wide, vague and unjust 
in its incidence. First, it did not define the relatives 
in any more specific manner than by employing the 
adjective ‘ close ' ( aniya ). Secondly, it did not specify 
any period of time to which the prohibition applied. 
For these reasons, and possibly out of a sense of the 
injustice of excluding for an indefinite period the 
relatives of all men, good and bad alike, who had 
served on the committees, the assembly felt the 
need for making the exclusions and prohibitions more 
specific in character and duration. We find, accord- 
ingly that this first clause only excludes those who, 
having served on committees, failed to render accounts, 
and twelve classes of their relatives from service on 
committees ; but it specifies no period, and we have 
therefore to assume that a permanent exclusion of these 
persons was contemplated. The same must be taken to 
apply to all similar cases that follow. 

1 B’ 1.7 : kaiyuttu : Venkayya translates this into 
‘forbidden dish/ For this translation for which little 
or no support is derived from the dictionaries or from 
literary usage, he seems to depend on the reference to 
‘ krta prayaScittam ’ which follows. This he thinks is a 
mistake for ‘ ghrta prayascitta ’ and cites * Manu XI 215 
in support. But ‘ ghrta prayascitta ’ is not a term known 
to Dharma^astra literature ; the drinking of hot ghee 
for three days is part of a long prayascitta known as 
‘ taptakrcchra ’ (Manu XI 215) which Manu prescribes as 

* A. S. 1. 1904-5, p. 143, n. 10. 


[ 152 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


penance for eating forbidden food (XI 157). The whole 
passage in the inscription is difficult, and ‘ kaiyuttu 1 has 
been interpreted by the Tamil Lexicon as 4 bribe/ 
which seems to be no more than a gueBS as no other 
text is cited in support of the meaning and as it makes 
the following reference to ‘ prayascitta ’ even more 
unintelligible. 

‘ B ’ l. 7 : 4 avvavar pranantikam ’ : 4 To the end of 
his life’, (Venkayya). This phrase casts a doubt on 
the proper view to be taken of the period to which 
exclusions with no duration attached to them were 
meant to apply. The following is a resume of the 
clauses of prohibitions and the duration, if any, laid 
down by each : 

(1) members of committees who after their period 

of service did not submit accounts and their relatives 
(specified), no period ; 

(2) those who committed incest and the first four 
mahapatakas and their relatives as specified in (1), 

no period ; 

(3) samsargapatitas (those who incurred sin by 
contact with sinners), 

till they perform prayakittam ; 

(4) sahasiyar (nature not clear owing to a gap in 

the inscription), no period ; 

(5) those who stole others' property, no period ; 

(6) those who became pure by some prayascitta 

for taking kaiyuttu , to the end of their lives ; 

(7) those who became pure by prayakitta for 
committing patakam, for having turned gramakantakas, 
or for having committed incest, 

to the end of their lives. 


20 


[ 153 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


It will be observed that those who committed 
incest, agamyagamanam, are included both in (2) and (7), 
and that while (7) gives the term of exclusion as the 
whole life-time of the persons concerned, (2) gives no 
period. We may perhaps conclude that all the prohibi- 
tions except (3) were intended to be permanent. 

*B’ 1.9 : aga iccuttappatta iduvadagavum : 

Here begin the rules of procedure for the election 
which, by contrast with the brief statement on this 
subject in 1 A,' strike us as remarkably clear and full. 
The clause quoted here lays down clearly that the 
pot-tickets collected from each kudumbu were tied 
together in one bunch, and a descriptive label attached 
to it. The bunches of all the thirty kudwmbus were 
then deposited in the pot in that form. Note the 
important points that the tickets were not, as laid down 
in ‘ A,' to be collected according to seris, and that this 
change in procedure is very carefully marked in the 
language employed. 

‘ B’ ll. 9-11 : kudavolai parikkumbbdu orb-pier 

kolvadagamm : These lines embody the arrangements 

calculated to secure full publicity and the elimination 
of all chance of fraud in the conduct of the election. 
The whole Mahasabha met ; the temple priests had a 
special part ; they sat in an inner enclosure and conduc- 
ted the election in the presence of the entire Mahasabha. 
The phrase mahasabhaiyile ul mandagattiley iruttikkondu 
means not * be caused to be seated in the inner hall, 
(where) the great assembly (meets) ’ (Venkayya), but 
“ be caused to sit in the inner mandapa of the assembly. 1 ' 
From what follows, we see that this inner maiulapa 
must have been so situated that a person standing in it 
might be seen by the whole assembly. The phrase 
pagaley antaram ariyddanoru - palanai-kkondu has been 

[ 154 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


franslated by Venkayya into ‘ by any young boy 
standing close, who does not know what is inside. ’ 
It corresponds, however, quite clearly, to 4 edum 
nruvariyadan ora halaimikkoadu ' of ‘A’ (11. 6-7), and 
surely means “ by a young boy who cannot even by 
day distinguish (between one thing and another).” Note 
also the double use of the lot. 

‘B’ 11. 11-12: ikkonda muppadu Jcarai kdtU-kkol- 

vadagavum : These clauses deal with the personnel of 

the committees to be constituted from the thirty repre- 
sentatives of the kudumbus elected by lot in the manner 
prescribed in the preceding clauses. (1) The annual 
committee was to include persons who had served on 
the garden and tank committees and those who were 
notable for their age or learning. No statement is made 
as to the number of members of this committee ; but we 
may infer that it was twelve from the way the next two 
sentences mention ‘ twelve people out of the rest * and 
‘ the remaining six ' as constituting the (2) garden com- 
mittee and (3) the tank committee respectively. By 
its name, and by the special stress on previous 
experience in the committees and on pre-eminence 
in age or learning among its members, the annual 
committee appears to have been considered the most 
important among the committees. What the exact 
nature of its work was and how it was more important 
than that of the other committees can be ascertained 
only by a more detailed study of the working of 
committees in Uttaramerur and elsewhere than can be 
undertaken here. 

The provision that ex-members of the garden and 
tank committees should, if elected, be prefei’red for the 
annual committee calls for some consideration. 
Except in the case of the annual committee, the rules in 

[ 155 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


‘A' forbade the re-election of the same person, even after 
the three year interval, to the same committee (‘A' 1. 11). 
This restriction does not appear in ‘B\ How many of 
the thirty representatives of the kudumbus chosen in any 
year possessed experience of service on committees was 
purely a matter of accident. If our view, that the com- 
mittee system was first adopted for the management 
of the affairs of the Sabha when ‘A' was drawn up, 
is accepted, the rule against the re-election of any 
person who had served on a committee within the three 
years preceding the election would have precluded any 
person with such experience getting on the panel of 
thirty in the first year or two after ‘ B ' came into force. 
On the other hand, there was nothing to prevent more 
than twelve such pei’sons being included in the panel 
in subsequent years. In either event, the preference 
shown to age and learning would guide the choice of 
the twelve for the annual committee. 

The mode of choice for the garden and tank com- 
mittees is described by the words ‘ karai kdtti ’ (1. 12) 
which as Venkayya rightly says * must be taken to 
mean the same thing as “ karai parittu ” of 1. 15. 
Venkayya understood the expression to mean some- 
thing like ‘ oral expression of opinion. * 

‘ B ’ ll. 12-13 : 1 variyanjeyyaninrarai...olittuvadaga- 
vum’ : This is a clear right of recall which the assembly 
reserves to itself. It is unknown to ‘ A '. We are not 
informed whether a vacancy that arose by such recall 
was filled before the next annual election and what civic 
disabilities attached to a person so recalled. It was 
doubtless a power meant to keep the men in office on 
the straight path and exercised by the assembly only 
on rare occasions. No instance of the exercise of 
this power is known. 

• 23. A. S. I. 1904-5 p. 144 n.3. 

[ 156 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


‘ B ’ l. 13: pannirandii seriyilurn dharmakrtyah- 
(jadai-kkamm vdriyare : 44 The members of 4 the com- 

mittee for supervision of justice ’ in the twelve streets ” 
(Venkayya). It may well be doubted, pace Yenkayya, 
if this body of men, with whom the initiative rests to 
ask the madhyastha to convene the meeting’ of the 
assembly for the annual elections, was a committee of 
the assembly like the other committees. Literally trans- 
lated, the phrase means : “ the variyar who supervise 
dharmakrtyam in the seris (shall) by themselves.” This 
looks different from a separate ‘justice committee,’ * on 
a par with the ‘ garden committee ’, 4 annual committee ’ 
etc. Further, supervision of 1 dharmakrtyam’ may not 
be so much ‘ supervision of justice ’ — it is hard to see 
what this might mean — as ‘ administration of charitable 
trusts/ When the term of office of one set of com- 
mittees came to a close and a new set had to be formed, 
the 4 variyar ’ who were in charge of the administration 
of charitable trusts in the twelve 4 seris ’ were to act 
together and request the madhyastha to summon the 
assembly for the elections. It is difficult to say if the 
4 variyar ’ were members of the committees of the 
assembly with the constitution of which the whole 
record deals, or if they were ad hoe officials who super- 
vised charities and were appointed by the assembly in 
some manner of which we have no knowledge. On the 
former supposition, they might have been all members 
of the 4 annual committee ’ which might have been 
responsible for the maintenance of charities, j* But it is 
hard to see why, if this was so, the inscription does 
not make it clear. It is also possible that supervision 
of charitable works might have been divided among 

* Contra . A. E. E. 1889 paragraph 71 where Venkayya admits that no rules 
are laid down for its choice and suggests that they were part of the annual 
supervision committee. 

f No. 8 of 1898. 


[ 157 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


some of the thirty committee-men of a year irrespec- 
tive of their membership in particular committees. 
However that may be, we have no evidence of a 
separate ‘justice committee * here. 

‘ B’ U. 13-15 : parted vara variyattukkum karat 

parittu kkolvadayavum : For the choice of the pancavara 
and gold committees the process of election is the same 
as before up to the choice of thirty representatives, one 
from each kudumbu ; and this is briefly but clearly 
indicated by the words used in the context. Then, there 
is a notable difference between ‘A’ and ‘IV with regard 
to representation on these two committees. ‘ A ' pres- 
cribed their election by serfs, so that every year each 
Seri had a representative on one or the other of these 
two committees. ‘ B ’ evinces an equal anxiety that 
the membership of these committees should go round; 
but representation on these committees is by '•kudumbus* 
(not sens). And the twelve kudumbus which sent re- 
presentatives in any one year were excluded from the 
next year's election to these committees. The result 
was that after the first year’s election under the new 
rules, twelve kudumbus out of thirty were retired from 
the field of selection by an automatic rotation, and 
thus there would be, in any year, only eighteen 
eligible kudumbus from which twelve were chosen for 
representation on these two committees. In fact it 
becomes clear at this point that the most fundamental 
difference between ‘A’ and ‘B' is to be sought in the 
manner in which ‘B’ seeks to avoid, at every step, the 
confusion that resulted from linking the seri with the 
kudumbu, in the rules laid down by ‘A’, for purposes 
of representation on the committees. As a result we 
are able to follow quite clearly all the stages in the re- 
presentative system laid down in ‘B\ The superiority 
of its technique over that of ‘A’ is unmistakable. 

[ 158 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


But why exactly, both in ‘ A ' and ‘ B two elec- 
tions of a like nature are contemplated, one for the 
election of the annual, garden and tank committees, 
arid the second for the pancavara and gold committees, 
does not seem to be easy of explanation. It looks as if 
this feature in ‘ B ’ was the relic of the attempt made in 
‘ A ’ to secure the equal representation of the twelve 
Seris thrice over — once on the annual committee, a 
second time on the garden committee, and lastly, on 
the pancavara and gold committees together. And it 
would appear that ‘ A ’ contemplated not two but three 
separate elections, though this, like so much else in ‘ A,’ 
is far from clear. But the system broke down on 
account of its clumsiness, and the attempt to treat the 
Seri as a political unit of equal importance with the 
kudumbu had to be given up. The result is seen in 
the system of ‘ B ’ which linked the kudumbu directly 
with the committees. The number of members of the 
committees fixed by the original system was, however, 
retained ; this necessitated the election in all of 
42 persons for five committees (12, plus 12, plus 6, plus 
6, plus 6), and there were only thirty kudumbus. Given 
the conditions of the problem, thirty kudumbus to form 
the constituencies, forty-two members to be chosen, 
and equality of representation to be attained, it seems 
hardly possible to improve upon the device of the 
double-election combined with the automatic retire- 
ment, by rotation, of some kudumbus every year from 
the second election. 

» B ’ l. 15: kanakku-pperunguri-pperumakkal : This 
seems to be a reference to an aspect of the administra- 
tion of Uttaramerur of which we do not hear anything 
else in the two records before us. Venkayya translates 
the sentence containing this phrase as follows: “No 
accountant Bhall be appointed to that office again 


[ 159 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


before he submits his accounts (for the period during 
which he was in office) to the great men of the big 
committee and (is declared) to have been honest.” His 
note that kanakku is unnecessarily repeated after kuda 
in 1. 15 shows that he made this translation by taking 
the kanakku in the phrase extracted above as the object 
of ‘ katti ', and not as an integral part of the compound 
word in which it occurs. He also thought evidently that 
the perunguri-pperumakkal (the great men of the big 
committee) were the authority to whom the accounts 
had to be submitted for audit. All this seems unsatis- 
factory if we examine the text closely. 

The form 1 kanakku-pperut'iguri-pperumakkar and the 
presence of the second ‘ kanakku 1 which Venkayya 
brushed aside as superfluous, together with the words 
* odu kiida ’ after * perumakkal * decidedly point to 
another way of translating the sentence. 

The * kanakku-pperuhguri-pperumakkal * appear to 
have been an accounts-committee assisted by an ac- 
countant, and both of them were together responsible 
for the proper maintenance of the general accounts of 
the village. It was the duty of the accountant to 
be present with the accounts-committee at the time of 
audit and to explain everything to the satisfaction of 
the auditors, and this clause lays it down that until he 
had discharged this duty, he was not eligible for fresh 
appointment either to the same place or to any other 
accountant’s place. This explanation implies that the 
sentence does not say who were to conduct the audit. 
I am inclined to accept this implication as correct, 
and to suggest that the audit was conducted by royal 
officers specially deputed for the purpose by the central 
government. There are several instances of the 
accounts of temples being audited by the officers of the 

[ 160 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


central government. The only other course is to make 
the 4 kagakku - pperufiguri - pperumakkal ’ themselves the 
auditors ; but this seems to be somewhat difficult in the 
face of the emphatic 4 oclu Icuda.’ We may therefore 
translate the sentence as follows : 44 No one who wrote 

accounts shall be allowed to enter on (writing) other 
accounts except after he clears himself by submitting 
accounts (for the period of his office) together with the 
members of the accounts-committee.” I am inclined to 
treat perumakkal and perunguri tentatively as technical 
terms simply meaning 4 members ’ and 4 assembly 
The term perumakkal often enough occurs in connec- 
tion with committees. Butj perutiguri seems generally 
to apply to the whole assembly. It is possible therefore 
that the kanakhi-pperungiiri-pperumakkal were persons 
directly chosen by the assembly (Sakha) for the purpose 
of submitting the accounts for audit by officers of the 
central government on behalf of the entire adminis- 
tration of the village, or for themselves auditing the 
accounts. On this view, the translation of the phrase 
would be 44 the members of the assembly (chosen) for 
(submitting or auditing) accounts.” 

B. 1. 17 : udan irundu ipparisu seyvikka : Venkayya 
translates 4 sat with (us) and thus caused (this settlement) 
to be made and I accept this translation as correct. 
There is nothing else in 1. 17 bearing on the part 
played by the royal official. I am unable to follow 
Venkayya’s statements : 44 The wording inti. 17 makes 

it likely that the settlement was actually made by 
Somasiperuman and the village assembly very probably 
agreed to carry it out ” ; and more emphatically still, 
“the later settlement appears to have been actually 
drawn up by the king’s officer and formally accepted 
by the assembly.” * I have already stated that the 

* A. S. I. 1904-5 p. 142 n. 7; p. 145 n. 6. 

[ 161 ] 


21 



COLA STUDIES 


phrase ‘ udan irundu seyvikka means practically the same 
thing as 1 udan irukka ’ of ‘A' in the same context. 

We read the meaning of the Uttaramerur inscrip- 
tions somewhat differently from Venkayya who was the 
first to interpret these difficult epigraphs, and from 
others who, sometimes with less excuse, have un- 
questioningly reproduced his statements. We do not 
think that there is any evidence in these records to 
show that village government in Uttarameriir was going 
to rack and ruin before the reforms of the twelfth and 
fourteenth years of Parantaka. We are unable to agree 
that the king's government had on such occasions more 
than a general right to remonstrate with the assembly 
through an officer specially deputed for the purpose. 
We are inclined to ascribe both the demerits of the first 
settlement and the merits of the second rather to the 
assembly than to the king's government. And we 
seek the cause of the breakdown of the first settlement, 
not in the caste of the king’s officers, but in the 
intrinsic defects of the system of representation devised 
on the first occasion. These defects were remedied by 
two improvements which, above all, distinguish * B ’ 
from ‘A’. The attempt to secure representation for 
the §eris as such is given up, and the kudumbu is 
directly linked to the variyam. Secondly, the lot is 
employed twice in each election, to decide the order in 
which the kudumbus are taken up for the choice of 
representatives as well as to choose the member for the 
year from among the eligible candidates of each 
kudumbu. These improvements simplified the whole 
procedure by removing the confusing 'uncertainties of 
the earlier rules. Such are some of the main differ- 
ences. Of the details, the translations of the records 
that follow will give a better idea than any summary 
of the results of this long discussion. 

[ 162 ] 








UTTAR AMERUR 


Appendix II. 

A— T EXT. 

1 Svasti sri ( || ) (Madi)r(ai) - kon(da ko = Ppa)- 
rakesarivarmarkku yandu paniradu avadu ( II ) 
Uttirarneruccatu(r)ve(d)imangalattu sabh(ai)yo(m) ivv- 
andu mudal e(i>)gal = ur srimukappadi aiiai- 

2 yi(n)al Tattanu(r - M)uve(nda)ve}an inindu 
v(a)riyam = (a)ga att = orukkalum sam(va)tsara-v(a)riya- 
m un-do tta-variy amum (eri)-va(riya)mum iduvadarku 
vyavas(thai) sey- 

B da parig = avadu ( || ) kudumbu mup(pad=ay) 
muppadu kudumbilum a vvava-kudu(m*)bila( re )y kudi 
ka =ni(la)ttukku mel irai-nilam udaiyan tan manaiyile a- 

4 gam eduttukondu irup(panaiy) ar(n)ba(du- 
pi)ra(ya*)ttukku ul muppadu pirayattukku melpattar 
vedattilum sastrattilum ka(r)yyattilum nipunar = 
ennappatt = i- 

5 rupparai a(r*)ttha-lausamum at(ma)-s(au)sa' 
mum udaiyar = ay muv-(a)ttin i-ppuram variyaii=jey- 
(di)l(a)tt(a)r (v)ariyan = jeyd = olinda (p)erumak- 
kalukku- 

6 aniya bandukkal allattar(ai) = kkudav-olaikku = 
pper tltti = cceri-valiyey tirat(ti) pa(n)nirandu seriyilum 
seriyal oru-pe(r-am-aru) edum = uru(v = a)riyattan = 
oru- 

7 bala(nai) =kkondu kudav-olai (v)anguvi(t)tu = 
ppanniruvarum 8am(vatsa)ra-variyam =avid-agavum (II) 
a(di)n minbey totta-variyattukku merpadi ku(da)v-(o)- 

8 lai vangi = ppanniruvarum totta-variyam = (a)- 
vad = a(ga)vum ( || ) ninra (a)ru-(kuda)v-olaiy(u)m eri- 
variya(m = a*)- 


[ 163 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


9 vad = agavu = mup(pa)du kudav = (o)Iai pa- 

^ccu v(a)riyam seygin(ra*) munru (t)irattu v(a)- 
riyamum munnurr-a(rubadu) n(aju)tn (ni)ram(ba*) 
(v)ariyam olin(da) anan(ta)ra(m) idu(m va)r(i)yangal 
(i - vya)vasthai(y - o)(lai*)ppadiyey kudumbukku = 
kkudav-olai ittu = kkudav - olai pa(ric)cuk(ko)nd(e)y 
va(ri)yam (i)duvad = iigavum ( || ) variyan = jeydar(k*)ku 
bandhukkalum s(e)riga]il a(nyonya)mm(e) * * * 

10 m kudav-olaiyi(l) per eludi i(da)ppadadar 
= (a)gavum ( II ) panjavai'a-vari(ya)ttiikkum pon-vari- 
yattukkum muppadu kudu(m)b(i)lum mup(padu) 
kuda(v-o)lai ittu seriyal o(ru)ttarai = kkudav-olai 
pari(t)tu panniruvarilum (a)ruvar (pa)nja(vara*)- 
variyam = avad-agavum ( || ) aruvar p(on)-variyam - 
avad-agavu(m) ( || ) samvatsara-vari(ya)m allatta 

11 variya(n)gal (o)rukkal seyda(rai pi)nnai a-(v)- 
variyattukku kudav-o(lai) ida = pperadad-agavum ( || ) 
(i)-pparisey = ivv-andu mudal ca(ndr)a(ditta)vat e(n)rum 
(ku)dav-olai (vari)yamey iduvad = aga De vend ran 
ca(kra)varti (srl) Vlranarayanan sri-Parantakadevar = 
agi(ya) Parakesariva(r)mar srlnrmgam a(ru)licceydu 
va(rakk)atta- 

12 6ri-anaiyinal Tattanur - Mu(ve)nda(ve)]an = 
udan=irukka nam gramatt(u du)star kettu ^istar 
varddhi(tti)duvar = aga (vyava)sthai sey(do)m (Ut)- 
tarame(ru*)-ca(turv)edimangalat(tu) sabh(ai)yom ( || ) 

B— T EXT 

1 Svasti Sri ( || ) Madirai-konda ko Parakesari- 
vanma(r)kku yandu padinalavadu nal padin-aru ( || ) 
Kaliyur - kottattu tan - kurru Uttarameru - catu(r)- 
vedimangalattu eabhaiyom ivv-andu mudal (e)ngalukku 

[ 164 ] 




Copyright of the A. 






UTTARAMERUR 


Peru(m)an-adigal Emberuman Srl-Vlranarayanan 
yrl-PaiTuitakadcvan (srl) - Parakesarivanmarndaiya 
srimukham varakkatta srlmukhappadi a- 

2 jiiaiyinal Sula-nattu = Ppurangarambai-nattu 
&rivanganagar = Kkaranjai-Kondayakramavitta-bhattan 
= agiya Somasiperuman irundu variyam = aga at(t = o)- 
rukk(a)lum samvatsara-variyamu(m) totta-variyamum 
eri-variyamuin iduvadarkku vyavasthai seda parish = a- 
(va)du ( || ) kudumbu muppada = muppadu kadumbilutn 
avvava kudumbila- 

3 X'e kudi = kka = nilattukku mel irai-nilam = 
udaiyan tan manaiyile agamm = eduttu-kkond = 
iruppanai elubadu pirayattin kll muppattaindu pirayat- 
tin merpattar mantrabrahmanam vallan oduviytt- 
ariy vanai = kkudav-olai iduvad = agavum ( II ) arai-kka = 
nilame udaiyan = ayilu(m) oru-vedam vallan = ay nalu 
bhasyattilum oru-bha- 

4 syam vakkanitt-ariyvan avanaiyun = gudav-olai 
ejudi = ppuga iduvad = agavum ( || ) avargajilum ka(r)- 
yyattil nipunar = ay asaram = udiyaranaraiyey 
kolvad = agavum ( || ) a(r)ttha-8ausamu(m) anma- 
saucamum udaiyar = ay muv-attin = i-ppuram variya(n) 
= jeydilattarai kolvad = agavum ( II ) epperppatta 
variyanga]um 6e(y)du kanakku-kkattade irundaraiyum 
ivargalukku = ccirr-avai = pper-avai ma- 

5 kkalaiyum ivargalukku attai maman makkalai- 
yum iva(r)galukku = ttayodu udappirandanaiyum 
ivargal tama(p)panod = udappirandanaiyu(m) tannod- 
udappirandanaiyum ivargalukku = ppi]l.ai kudutta mama- 
naiyum ivargal brahmaniyod = udappirandanaiyum 
tannod = udappiranda]ai vettanaiyu(m) udappiran(da)l 
xnakkajaiyum tan magalai vetta maruganaiyum tan 
tamappanaiyum 


[ 165 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


6 tan maganaiyum aga i = ccutta * * * * 

bandhukkajaiyum kudav-olai eludi = ppu(ga) ida p(pe)- 
rattar = agavum ( II ) agamyagamanattilum mahapa- 
dagaiigaj(il) munb = adain(da) nalu mahapadagattilumm 
= eluttuppattaraiyum ivar(gaju)kkum mun suttappatta 
ittinai bandhukkajaiyum kudav-olai elud(i) = ppuga 
(i)da = pperada(r = a)gavum ( II ) sa(msar)gga-(pa)t,i- 
(ta)rai prayascittan = jeyyum-a]a(vu)m 

7 kudav-olai idadad = agavum * * * * * 

diyum sahasiyar = ay = irupparaiyum kuda(v-o)lai 
eludi = ppugav = ida = pperadar = agavum ( || ) paradra- 
vyam apaharittanaiyum kudav-olai eludi = ppugav = ida 
= pperadar = agavum ( || ) e(ppe)rppatta kaiyyuttu(ii) 
=gondan kr(ta)-prayascittah = jeydu ^uddhar = ana- 
raiyu(m) avvavar pranan(t)ikam 

8 variyattukku = kkudav-olaiy = eludi puga(v = ida 

= pperadad = agavum) * * * * padagam seydu 

prayaccit(ta)n = jeydu guddhar = (a)naraiyum grama-kan 
dagar = ay prayasci(ttan) = jedu &u(d)dhar = anaraiyu(m) 
agamyagamanam (se)du praya(£ci)ttan-jeydu suddhar = 
anaraiyum aga i-ccuttappatta an(ai)yvaraiyum prana- 
(nti)kam var(i)yattukku = kkudav-olai elud(i) = ppugav = 
= ida = pperadad = aga- 

9 vum ( || ) aga i-ecuttappatta ittanaiyvaraiyum 
nikki i-mmuppadu kudum(bilu)m kudav-olaikku = pper 
tltti i-ppannirandu seriyilum = aga i-kkudumbum vev- 
verey vay-olai putti muppadu kudumbum vevvere katti 
= kkudam puga (idu)vad = agavum ( II ) kudav-olai 
parikkum(bo)du maliasabhai = ttiruvadiyarai sabala- 
vrddham niram(ba) =kkutti-kkondu anr = ujjuril irunda 
nambimar oruvaraiyum oliya- 

10 me mahasabhaiyile ulm-mandagattiley irutti- 
kkondu a-nnambimar naduvey a-kkudattai nam(b)i- 

[ 166 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


ma(ri)l vrddhar = ay iruppar = oru-(na)mbi mel nokki 
(e)lla-jjaiiamun = ganum-arral = eduttu-kkondu nirkka 
pagaley = antaram = ariyadan = oru-palanai = kkondu 
oru-kudumbu vaii(giy) man; = oru-kudattukkey pugav = 
ittu = kkulaittu a-kkadattil = or-olai viiiigi noaddliyas- 
t.han kaiyile 

11 (ku)duppad = agavnm ( || ) a-kkudu(t)t.av = 
(o)lai madhyasthan vliiigumbodu afiju viralum agala 
vaittu ul]aiigaiyilo en;u-kko]v(a)n = agavnm ( || ) avv- 
erru va(ii)ginav = olai v(a)sippan = agavum ( || ) 
vasitta avv-olai aiig-ul-(ma)ndagatt = irunda narabimar 
ellarnm vasippar = agavum ( || ) vasitta a-pper tlttnvad 
= agavum ( || ) i-pparise muppadu kudumbilu(m) oro- 
per k(o)jvad = agavum ( || ) i-kkonda (mu)ppadu perilun 
= totta-variyamu(m) eri-variyamum .seydaraiyum (vi)- 
jya-vrddha(rai)yum 

12 vayo-(vr)ddharga]aiyum eamvatsara-variya- 
raga kolvad = agavum ( || ) mikku ninrarut -panniru- 
varai = ttotta-variyan = golva(d = a)gavum ( || ) uinra 
aruvaraiyum eri-variyam = aga = kkolvad = agavum ( || ) 
ivv-irandu (t)irattu variyamu(m) karai katti kolvad = 
(a)gavu(m) ( || ) i-variyam seygi(n)i;a muuru (t)irattu 
variya = pperumakkalum munnu(rru-a) ru(ba)du n(a)- 
lum nira(m)ba = cceydu olivad = (a)gavum ( || ) viiri- 
yafi =jeyyaninrarai aparadau- 

13 gandapodu avanaiy = o](i)ttuvad = agaviim( || ) 

ivarga] oli(nda) anantaram = idum variyangalum 
pa(nmran)dn seriyilum dbanmakrtyan = gadaik- 
kanum variyare madhyastharai = kkondu kur(i) kutt(i) 
= kkudnppar = aga(vu)m ( II ) i-vyavasthaiy = olaip- 
padiyey * * * (k)ku = kkudav-olaiy parittu-k(k)o(nde 

vari)-yam id uvad = agavum ( II ) pancavara-v(ariya)t> 
(tuk)kum pon-va(ri)yattu- 

[ 167 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


14 kku = muppadu = kkudumbilum kudav-olaikku 
per tltti muppadu va(y-o)lai-kattum puga (it)tu mup(pa)- 
du kudav-ol(ai) parittu muppadilum (panni)randu per 
(pa)rittu-kkolvad = (a)gavum ( || ) paritta pannirandilum 
a(ru)var p(o)n-variyam aruvar panjavara-variyamum 
avanav = a(gavum) ( II ) pirrai andum i-variya(n)gal 
kudav-olai parikkumbodu i-vvariyaugajukku mun- 
nam se- 


15 yda kudumb = aurikke ninra kudumbile karai 
parittu-kk(o)I(va)d = agavum ( || ) kaludai erinaraiyum 
kudalegai seydanaiyum kudav-olai (e)ludi = ppuga 
ida = pperadad = agavu(m) ( || ) madhyastharum arttha- 
sausam = udaiyane kanakk = eluduvan = agavum kanak- 
(k) = eludinan kanakku = pperunguri = pperu-makkajodu 
kuda = kkaua(k)ku-(k)katti suddhan accidin-pinn = anri 
marru = kkana- 

16 kku = ppuga peradan = agavum ( || ) tan 
eludina ka(nakku) = ttane kattuvan = agavum ( II ) 
marru =kkanak(ka)r pukku o(du)kka =■ pperada(i') 
agavum ( II ) i-pparise ivv-andu irmdal candradityavat 
en(r)um kudav-olai-variyame iduvad = aga Dev(e)n- 
dran caki’ava r)tti (pa)nditavatsalan kunjaramallan 
4urasulamani kalpakacaritai srT-Parake(sa)ri(pa)nma- 
(r kal) sr!mu(kha)m = aruliccedu varak(k)atta srl-a(n)- 
aiya- 

17 1 Sola-nattu = Ppuraiigarambai-nattu ^rlvanga- 
nagar = Kkaranjai-K(o)ndaya-(kra)mavitta-bhattan = 
agiya Somasipemman = udan (i)rundu i-pparisu 
seyvikka na(m) gramattukku a(bhyu)dayam = aga dustar 
kettu visistar va(r)ddhippad = aga vyavasth(ai) seydom 
Uttarameru - caturvedimangalattu sabhaiyom ( II ) 
i-pparisu kuriyul irundu p(e)rumakkal panikka vyavas- 
thai eludine(n) madhyasthan 


[ 168 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


18 Kadadippot(ta)n &ivakkuri Irajamalla-man- 
galapriyanen ( I! ) 

A.— TRANSLATION 

U. 1-3. Hail ! Prosperity ! In the twelfth year 
of King Parakesari-varman, who captured Madura — 
We, (the members of) the Sabha of Uttarameru- 
caturvedimangalam, Tattanur-muvenda-velan being 
present in accordance with the order (conveyed) in the 
Srimukham (royal letter addresed) to our village, made 
the following settlement for choosing as committees 
every year from this year onwards, (the following viz.) 
the annual committee, garden committee and tank 
committee. 

U. 3-6. There being thirty kudumbus (wards), in 
(each of these) thirty wards, the people of the ward 
concerned shall assemble, and shall write down for 
pot-tickets ( kudao-olai ) the names of those who (a) own 
more than one-fourth nilam of taxable land, ( b ) reside 
in houses built on their own sites, (c) are below sixty 
and above thirty years of age, (d) have a reputation for 
proficiency in Veda, Sastra and (general) affairs, 
(e) possess material and spiritual purity, (/) have not 
done variyam this side of three years and (g) are not 
close relations of the .perumakkal (members) who have 
done variyam and retired. 

II. 6-7. Then (they shall) collect (the tickets) 
by the sen*, and shall constitute the annual committee 
of twelve persons by causing a boy who cannot distin- 
guish any forms to draw pot-tickets in such manner 
that there shall be one person for each Seri. 

U. 7-8. Before that, pot-tickets shall be drawn 
similarly for the garden committee, and the twelve 
persons (thus chosen) shall form the garden committee. 

[ 169 ] 


99 



COLA STUDIES 


ll. 8-9. The remaining six pot-tickets shall form 
the tank committee. 

I. 9. The three sorts of committees that do 
variyam, (after being appointed) by the drawing of 
thirty pot-tickets, shall complete variyam for full three 
hundred and sixty days (and retire). The committees 
that will be appointed thereafter shall be constituted 
as committees only by the drawing of pot-tickets after 
allotting pot-tickets to the Jcudumbus in accordance with 
this deed of settlement. 

II. 9-10. And the relatives of those who have 

done variyam , * * * shall not have their names 

entered on pot-tickets and deposited (in the pot). 

I. 10. Forth e pancavara committee and the gold 
committee thirty pot-tickets shall be allotted to the 
thirty kudumbus, and pot-tickets shall be drawn (so as 
to get) one person for each seri ; of the twelve (thus 
chosen), six shall be the pancavara committee and six 
the gold committee. 

II. 10-11. Those who have once served on (any 
of) the committees other than the annual committee 
shall not have pot-tickets (with their names) deposited 
(in the pot) for the same committee. 

ll. 11-12. We, the members of the Sabha of 
Uttarameru-eaturvedimangalam, having been shown 
the gracious royal letter received from the lord of the 
gods, the emperor sri Vlranarayana srl Parantakadeva 
alias Parakesarivarma, Tattanur-muvenda-velan sitting 
with us in accordance with this order, made this settle- 
ment, in order that the wicked of our village may 
perish and the good prosper, viz., that, in this manner, 
from this year as long as the sun and the moon endure, 
we shall always appoint only pot-ticket-committees. 

[ 170 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 
B— TRANSLATION 

ll. 1-2 : Hail ! Prosperity ! On the sixteenth day 

of the fourteenth year of king Parakesarivarman who 
captured Madura — We, the members of the Sabha of 
Uttarameru-caturvedimahgalam in its own subdivision 
(hunt) of Kaliyurkottam, — a gracious letter of His 
Majesty, our Lord srl Vlranarayana sri Parantakadeva 
Sri Parakesarivarma having been received and shown 
to us, and in accordance with (that) letter, Karanjai 
Kondaya Kramavitta-bhattan alias 3omasiperuman of 
sii Vafiganagar in Purangarambainadu of the Sola- 
nadu, sitting (with us) by order,— (we) made the 
following settlement with a view to appointing as 
variyam (committees), every year from this year 
onwards, (the following) (viz.), the annual committee, 
garden committee and tank committee. 

U. 2-3 : There being thirty kudumbus (wards), 

in (each of these) thirty wards, the people of the ward 
concerned shall assemble, and shall write on pot-tickets 
(the names of) those who own more than one-fourth 
nilam of taxable land, reside in houses built on their 
own sites, are below seventy and above thirty-five 
years of age, know the Mantrabrafimana and possess 
experience of teaching it. 

ll. 3-4 : Though owning only an eighth of a 

nilam, if a person is competent in one Veda and 
possesses experience of expounding one of the four 
bhasyas, he shall also have his name written on the 
pot-ticket and put (into the pot). 

1. 4 : Even among these, only persons who are 

proficient in (general; affairs and conform to proper 
conduct ( dsaram ) shall be taken. Those who have 
material and spiritual purity, and have not done 
variyam this side of three years shall be chosen. 

[171] 



COLA STUDIES 


ll. 4-6 : Anyone who has done any variyam 

(before) and failed to show accounts, and his relatives 
as specified herein shall not have their names written on 
pot-tickets and put (into the pot) — (viz.,) the sons of the 
younger and elder sisters of his mother; the sons of 
his paternal aunt and maternal uncle ; the brother * of 
his mother ; the brother of his father ; his own brother ; 
his father-in-law ; the brother of his wife ; the husband 
of his sister ; the sons of his sister ; the son-in-law who 
has married his daughter ; his father and his son. 

I. 6 : Those against whom incest or the first four 

of the five great sins are recorded and all their relations 
as specified hereinbefore shall not also have their names 
written on pot-tickets and put (into the pot). 

II. 6-7 : Those who have fallen by association 

(with sinners) shall not have their names written on 
pot-tickets till after they perform expiation. 

I. 7 : * * Those are who are violent shall also 
not have their names written on pot-tickets and put 
(into the pot). Those who have stolen others’ property 
shall not also have their names written on pot-tickets 
and put (into the pot). 

II. 7-8 : Those who, after partaking of any for- 
bidden dish, have become pure by performing the ghee 
expiation (?), shall not also, to the end of their lives, 
have their names written on pot-tickets for the commit- 
tees to be put (into the pot). 

ll. 8-9 : Those who have become pure after per- 
forming expiation for * * sins, those who have become 
pure after performing expiation for having turned 

* The word used in the text is tujapptrattdTiti ; Venkayya’s translation 
* uterine brother ' is a curious mistake. Though the singular is used in some of 
these phrases, no doubt the plural is meant. 


[ 172 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


enemies of the village ( gramakantaJca ), and those who 
have become pure after performing expiation for 
incest — all these persons shall not, to the end of their 
lives, have their names written on pot-tickets for 
committees to be put (into the pot). 

I. 9 : Excluding all these persons specified 

above, names shall be written for pot-tickets in all the 
thirty wards ; and in these twelve Seris, separate 
covering tickets ( vdyolai ) shall be attached for each 
separate ward, and (the tickets of) the thirty wards shall 
be separately bundled and put (into the pot). 

II. 9-11 : When pot-tickets are (to be) drawn, 

the members * of the Mahasabhfi, young and old, 
shall be assembled at a full meeting, and the temple 
priests ( nambimar ) who happen to be in town on the 
day shall, without any exception, be caused to be 
seated in the inner mandapa (pavilion) in the Maha- 
sabha ; among the temple priests, an old priest shall 
stand up and, looking upwards, shall hold the pot so as 
to be seen by all people ; (the bundle of) one ward 
shall be caused to be taken out by a boy who cannot 
see the difference (between things) even by day, and 
it shall be put into another pot and shaken, and one 
ticket shall be drawn out of that pot and placed in the 
hands of the arbitrator ( madhyasha ). 

1 . 11: When the madhyastha receives the ticket 

thus given, he shall receive it in the palm of his hand 
with his five fingers spread out. And he shall read 
(out) the ticket he has so received. The ticket so read 
shall be read also by all the temple priests in the inner 
pavilion. The name so read shall be written down. 
In this manner, one name shall be obtained from each 
of the thirty wards. 

• Tiruvafiylir seems only a respectable reference to the general body 

[ 173 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


ll. 11-12 : Out of the thirty names so got, those 

who have served on the garden committee and the tank 
committe and those who are advanced in learning or in 
a^e shall form the annual committee. 

o 

I. 12 : Of the rest, twelve shall form the garden 

committee. The remaining six shall form the tank 
committee. These two committees shall be formed by 
showing the karai (?). The members of the three kinds 
of committees that perform variyam shall do (their 
duties) for full three hundred and sixty days and then 
retire. 

II. 12-13 : Anyone who is found guilty among 

those who are serving on the committees shall be 
removed (forthwith). 

I. 13 : (For) the committees to be appointed 

after the retirement of these, the members ( variyar ) 
who superintend charities in the twelve seris shall 
themselves cause the assembly to be convened by the 
madhyasthas. The committees shall be appointed only 
by drawing pot-tickets in accordance with this deed 
of settlement. 

II. 13-14 : For the yancavara committee and the 

gold committee, names shall be written for pot-tickets 
in all the thirty wards, and thirty bundles with covering 
tickets shall be put in, and thirty tickets drawn, from 
which again twelve names shall be drawn. 

I. 14: Of these twelve so drawn, six shall form 

the gold committee, and six the pancavara committee. 

II. 14-15 : When drawing pot-tickets in the 
following year for these committees, the karai shall 
be drawn only among the wards that remain after 
excluding those that served on these committees before 
(in the preceding year). 


[ 174 ] 



UTTARAMERUR 


I. 15 : Those who rode on asses, and those who 
forged documents shall not have their names written 
on pot-tickets to be put (into the pot). 

II. 15-16 : Among madhyasthas, * only a person 

possessing material purity ( arthaSaucam ) shall write the 
accounts. 

Until after a person who maintained accounts 
submits accounts along with the accounts-committee 
of the Sabha and is declared pure, he shall not enter 
on (maintaining) other accounts. 

A person who has been maintaining accounts shall 
himself submit his accounts; other accountants shall 
not enter and close them. 

II. 16-17 : We, the members of the assembly of 
Uttarameru-caturvedimangalam, — having been shown 
the gracious royal letter received from the lord of the 
gods, the emperor, the lover of scholars, the wrestler 
with elephants, the crest-jewel among heroes, the 
emulator of the Kalpaka, sri Parakesarivarma ; Karanjai 
Kondayakrama-vitta Bhatta alias Somasiperuman of sri 
Vanganagar in Purangarambai-nadu of the Sola-nadu, 
sitting with us by order and causing us to make this 
settlement — (we) made this settlement for the pros- 
perity of our village and for the destruction of the 
wicked and the increase of the rest, viz., that in this 
manner, from this year as long as the sun and the 
moon last, we shall always appoint only pot-ticket- 
committees. 

U. 17-18 : I, the madhyastha , Kadadippottan 

Sivakkuri Rajamalla - mangalapriyan, wrote this 
settlement in this wise to the dictation of the members 
( perumakkal ) sitting in the assembly ( kunyiillirundu ). 


The text is madhyastharum ; read ul. 

[ 175 ] 



VII 

NARALOKAVtRA 
A Cola Feudatory 

The establishment of the Coja empire was a land- 
mark in the history of South India. Under the Colas all 
the country to the south of the Krsna river was for the 
first time brought under the supremacy of a fairly 
strong central government, and for over two centimes, 
its different parts came to be ruled, not as independent 
principalities exhausting themselves in ceaseless strife 
with one another, but as well-regulated provinces of a 
unified empire. Some fighting indeed there always was, 
and it was occasionally directed to the suppression of 
local risings, and more often to the conquest of fresh 
territory for the empire. But on the whole, it was a 
comparatively peaceful time for the bulk of Southern 
India, and the common people had perhaps no greater 
concern with the military transactions of its rulers than 
they have to-day with the suppression of a Moplah 
revolt or the expeditions on the North-West frontier of 
India. There were indeed some striking differences. 
Then the people furnished the soldiers for the whole 
army, and manned the navy, and war-experience must 
have been more wide-spread among them than now. 
By the opportunities it afforded for distinction in the 
service of the king and the pi’ospect of a promotion 
into the new class of official nobility, service in the 
army and the navy must have been quite popular. The 
rapid growth of an efficient and strong bureaucracy 
doubtless offered attractive careers to many in the 
lower rungs of the civil service of the land. Those 
who did not enter public service minded their lands, 


[ 176 ] 




CENTRAL SHRINE OF THE SIVA TEMPLE, TIRUVADI- WEST VIEW. 


Copyright of the A. S, /. 




NARALOKAVIRA 


and followed other vocations of a more or less here- 
ditary nature. There was a fair amount of inland 
trade, and larger opportunities for the speculative and 
the venturesome to make fortunes in foreign trade 
which was largely concentrated in seaport towns. 
Then, as now, the bulk of the people lived in villages 
which, in various ways and with many differences, 
were on the whole free to look after their own affairs. 
Religious festivals and fairs, dance, song and the 
drama were among the amusements of the people. 
Caste and merchant guilds, religious and secular 
associations of various kinds shared with the king's 
government the great task of upholding social order 
by the promotion of learning and the arts, and the 
detection and punishment of crime. A mis-appropria- 
tion of common funds, a theft of temple jewels, an 
exhorbitant demand of the tax-gatherer, some breach of 
caste rules or conventions, such were the occasions that 
added spice to life in the villages, and sometimes roused 
the people to an unwonted display of energy. 

In the higher branches of the king's service there 
was then no separation between the civil and military 
functions of officials. Scions of the royal family 
often occupied the top places, or held command 
over expeditionary forces | but there were many high 
offices, and though we have no evidence of any 
scientific system of recruitment having prevailed, we 
can see that these offices were held by men of all castes 
and creeds, and we may well believe that ordinarily, 
though birth and high connections brought their own 
initial advantages, inefficiency was not tolerated, and 
merit was rewarded according to its deserts. Despite 
the striking abundance of Cola inscriptions, some of 
them giving copious details of the administrative 
methods and machinery of the empire, we possess little 


23 


[ 177 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


knowledge of the forms in which officials in public 
service were paid for the work they did. We may 
guess that in the highly developed system of the time, 
periodical payments, in cash or kind, of amounts fixed 
in advance, must have been the normal rule, especially 
in the lower ranks of the public service. Several 
instances occur, however, which prove that assign- 
ments of land, either in full ownership or with title only 
to particular taxes and dues thereon, formed a common 
method of recognising distinguished service. High 
officials, so remunerated and standing well with the 
king, were great assets to the empire in the days of its 
strength ; in the days of its decline and fall, these very 
men by their local influence and their turbulence and 
insubordination hastened the end. It is the aim of this 
paper to present the life and achievement of one such 
official in the days when the Cola empire was still 
strong and flourishing. 

Inscriptions form the principal source of our know- 
ledge of Naralokavira. Some of these are directly 
concerned with him, while in the others he is mentioned 
incidentally. Two inscriptions, which happen to be 
very well preserved, give a rather long and full account, 
though in very ornate and sometimes obscure verse, 
of the life and activity of Naralokavira. Besides the 
inscriptions, there is a brief but invaluable allusion to 
him in the Vikramasolan-ula, a contemporary poem by 
the celebrated poet Ottakkuttar. The inscriptions on 
which this study is based are the following : — 

A - Inscriptions bearing directly on Naralokavira 
and his work. 

(1) No. 367 of 1909 (Grantha- verse) - Siddhalinga- 
madam (South Arcot). A minister of king Rajendra 
Cola, named Sabhanartaka, Kalingaraja and 

[ 178 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


Manavatara, the ruler of Manavil, built a stone temple 
for Siva at Siddhaliiiga. The composer of the Sanskrit 
verse was a certain Andapiljai-bhattan. 

(2) 374 of 1908 — (Tamil)-Neyvanai (South Arcot) 
of the twenty-eighth year of Rajakesari Kulottunga I, 
with the pugal-mddu introduction. Records gift of 
lands under the name ‘ Sungandavitta-Sola-nallur ’ at the 
request of Porkoyil Tondaiman, a native of Arum- 
bakkam in Jayangonda-solamandalam. 

(3) 369 of 1909 - (Grantha-verse) - Siddhalinga- 
madam-(South Arcot) - of the reign of Jayadhara dated 
S. 1026. The ruler of Manavil, called also Manavatara 
and Nartaka, built a vimana, and a prakara surrounded 
by areca-palms, together with a mandapa , at the 
agrahara called Siddhaliriga, for Siva whose feet were 
worshipped by Vyaghrapada. * 

(4) 207 of 1923 - (Tamil) - Tiruppulivanam (Chin- 
gleput) - of the 45th year of Rajakesari Kulottunga I 
with the pugal-mddu introduction. Gift of twelve 
kalangu of gold for four lamps by Ponnambalakkuttan 
alias Arumbakkilan Kalingaraja of Manavil in 
Manayirkottam. 

(6) 175 of 1919 - (Tamil) -Tribhuvani (Pondichery) 
of the sixth year of Parakesari Vikrama-coladeva with 
the pumadu punara introduction. Gift of land for 
temple site and premises, a hall and flowei'-gardens 
to Arulakara Isvaram Udaiyar, set up in the fifth year 
of Vikrama-co}a, for the prosperity of the king and the 
village, by Arumbakkilan Madurantakan Ponnambalak- 
kuttan alias Porkoyil Tondaimanar, residing in Manavil. 

* For the date of this record, see A. R. E. 1928 II 10. The temple is still 
called Vyaghra-padesvara or Tiruppulippagavar. The Manavil ruler apparently 
rebuilt an ancient temple and re-engraved the older inscriptions of the temple 
on its new walls. 


[ 179 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


(6) 473 of 1919 - (Grantha - verse) - Kaficlpuram. 
Construction by Naralokavlra of the kitchen-room, a 
mandapa and the prakdra walls, and the setting up of 

recumbent image of Hari at the Arulala Perumal 
temple at Kaficlpuram. He made a gift of a gold 
pinnacle to this new shrine and made endowments for 
ten perpetual lamps and for a flower-garden. 

(7) 120 of 1888 - (Grantha and Tamil * - verse)- 
Cidambaram (South Arcot) - 31 verses in Sanskrit 
and 37 in Tamil. — An account of the buildings erected 
in the Cidambaram temple by Naralokavlra and his 
gifts to the god and goddess of the place. Several 
incidental allusions to his campaigns. 

(8) 369 of 1921 — (Tamil-verse) f - Tiruvadi (South- 
Arcot)- 25 verses in Tamil. Contents similar to those 
of No. (7). Buildings and endowments by the same 
chief at Tiruvadi with incidental allusion to military 
campaigns. 

B - Inscriptions bearing indirectly on the subject. 

(9) 97 of 1928 - (Tamil) - Tiruppugalur (Tanjore)-of 
year 2 of Parakesari Vikrama-coladeva. The assembly 
of Ksatriyasikhamani-caturvedimangalam met in the 
Naralokavlran-mandapa in the temple of Pugalurdeva 
for the transaction of some business. 

(10) 250 of 1925-(Tamil)-Tirukkadaiyur (Tanjore)- 
of the fourth year of Tribhuvanacakravartin Vikrama- 
coladeva. Refers to a channel called Arujakara-vaykkal. 

(11) 265 of 1928-(Tamil)-Nanguneri (Tinnevelly). 
In the days of Maravarman Sundara Pandya I, 

# Text in S, I. I, IV No. 225 ; also Perundogai by Pandit M. Raghava 
Aiyangar Nos. 1059-94 Tamil verses only. 

t Text in Sen Tamil Vol. 23. pp. 93 fif. and Perundogai Nos. 1095-1119. 


[ 180 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


the village of Maruvaykkuricci had also the name of 
Naralokavlra-nallur. 

(12) 98 of 1908-(Tamil)-Tirupputtur (Ramnad)-of 
year 3 of Maravarman Tribhuvanacakravartin Para- 
krama Pandyadeva. The assembly of the place made 
provision for a Naralokavlran-sandi. 

(13) 131 of 1908 - (Tamil) - Tirupputtur (Ramnad)- 
of year 12 of the same king. A chieftain Uyyavandan- 
kandidevan alias G-angeyan made provision for a 
Naralokavlran-sandi and the construction of a hall 
called Naralokavlran. 

Name and date .' — In the inscriptions, our chieftain is 
variously called Kuttan, Manavirkuttan, Arumbakkilan, 
Ponnambalakkuttan, Kalihgarkon, Kalingarayan, Ton- 
daiman, Arulakaran, Naralokavlran, Manavatara and 
so on. The long bilingual inscription (No. 7) from 
Cidambaram mentions that he erected a high stone 
wall round the temple, and called it Naralokavlra ; and 
although the title Arulakara is sometimes employed to 
commemorate him in the names of places, streams 
etc., still Naralokavlra figures more often in the names 
of maadapas , halls and villages called after him, and 
of the worship instituted for his benefit. Moreover, 
Naralokavlra is a far more distinctive title than 
Kalin garkon or Kalingaraya, than even Manavirkuttan. 
It seems best, for these reasons, to call our chieftain 
Naralokavlra. 

The earliest reference to him in the Cola inscriptions 
occurs in the 28th year of Kulottuhga I (No. 2 above), 
and the latest in the sixth year of his successor 
Vikramacola (No. 5) ; and the other inscriptions which 
bear no dates or are dated in the reign of Maravarman 
Parakrama Pandya must be taken to belong to about 
the same period, A. D. 1098-1124. That a Maravarman 

[ 181 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Parakrama Pandya was a contemporary of Kulottunga I 
and that he was probably one of the five Pandyas 
whom Kulottunga claims to have defeated in battle is 
pretty clear from Pandyan inscriptions. * 

Of the birth and early life of this chieftain and the 
steps by which he rose in the military service of the 
Ca]ukya-cola emperor Kulottunga I, we have little 
information. He came of the influential class of 
landholders called Vellalas ( Velankudi mudalan ) f, and 
as he is called Manavilar-eru X and Manavil-val-kultan §, 
and more generally, Tondaiyar-kon, 51 we may assume 
that he was a native of Manavil in Tondainad, or at any 
rate that he spent a considerable part of his life in that 
place, either because it was the place of his birth or on 
account of his having held an important position there. 
But he is also called Arumbakkilan of Manavil in 
No. (4) above, and Arumbakkiliin Porkoyil Tondaiman 
residing in Manavil in No. (5), and Porkoyil Tondaiman, 
a native of Arumbakkam in Jayangonda-solamandalam 
in No. (2). These inscriptions make it clear that 
Arumbakkam was the name of the place of his birth, 
and that he was connected with Manavil by residence 
and by the possession of certain seigniorial rights 
implied in his being called ruler or chief of the residents 
of Manavil. It seems quite possible that before the 
twenty-eighth year of Kulottunga, Naralokavlra had 
sufficiently distinguished himself in the king's wars for 
him to have obtained as his reward an assignment on 
the revenues from Manavil. 

• See my Pftnc[yan Kingdom pp, 122-3 and No. 615 of 1926 
f No. 369 of 1921 v. 18. 

\ ib. V. 1L 

§ v. 8 in Tamil part of 120 of 1888 
H 120 of 1888 and 369 of 1921 passim. 

[ 182 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


Before proceeding to a consideration of the 
campaigns in which Naralokavlra participated, the 
buildings he constructed and the charities he endowed, 
it is necessary to deal with two questions viz : the 
identification of Manavil and Arumbakkam, and the 
political position of Naralokavlra. 

Manavil . — This place formed part of the Manavir- 
kottam, a subdivision of Jayahgonda - solamandalam, 
which was the name given to Tondaimandalam rather 
early in the period of Coja expansion. Of this subdivi- 
sion, Hultzsch at first observed : ‘ Possibly Manavir- 

kottam is a mere corruption of Manayirkottam, and 
Manayil stands for Man-eyil, ‘ mud fort which might 
be a fuller form of Eyil, a village in the South Arcot 
District, which seems to have given its name to Eyir- 
kottam.” * When, later, Hultzsch met with the phrase : 
‘ eyirhottattu nagarafigancipuram,’ stating that KancI 
was a city in the Eyirkottam, he felt the need for 
revising his opinion and remarked : f “ Eyil, after 
which the District of Eyirkottam was called, must be 
distinct from the distant village of Eyil in the South 
Arcot District, with which I proposed to identify it on a 
former occasion. Perhaps the term Eyil, i.e., ‘ the fort', 
refers to Kanclpuram itself.” It should be observed 
that while this latter identification of Eyil is unexcep- 
tionable, it does not appear so easy to follow Hultzsch 
in his speculations concerning Manavil. He puts 
forward two suggestions neither of which has received 
any support so far. He says that Man-eyil might 
be a fuller form of ‘ eyil ; ' he also says that this fuller 
form might yield ‘ Manayil ’ and ‘ Manavil \ All this 
seems very risky etymology. Moreover, Eyirkottam 

• S. T. I. I. p. 147 A. R. E. 1922 II 61 repeats this, quite innocent of 
Hultzsch's own doubts expressed later. 

f S./.f. II, p. 390. 


[ 183 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


and Manavirkottam figure as two separate divisions 
among the twenty-four bottoms attributed by tradition 
to Toiidaimandalam. * We have to remember that 
the ‘ bottom' though it comprised further subdivisions 
called nddu, was rather a small administrative division. 
The only satisfactory method of identifying these 
divisions is to undertake an exhaustive study of the 
names of subdivisions and villages mentioned in the 
inscriptions as forming part of the bottom. With such 
complete lists before us, we can, with some confidence, 
proceed to fix the bounds of each bottom in terms 
of modern geography ; and this because, in spite of a 
confusing recurrence of some village names in adjacent 
tracts, a skilful comparison of the data drawn from 
epigraphs with the present names of villages may be 
expected to lead to valuable results. Now the nodus 
and villages that appear in Coja inscriptions as parts 
of Manavirkottam so far as I have been able to trace 
them from the texts of inscriptions are given in the 
Appendix to this study. It is remarkable that, some of 
the nadus in our list e. g., Purisai, PaSali, Kanrur and 
Perumur, figure also in the traditional list of nadus 
comprising the Manavurkoftam ; Manavilnadu, however, 
in which both Manavil and Arumbakkam were situated 
does not figure in it. Nevertheless it seems clear that 
our Manavirkottam must be the same as the Manavur- 
kottam of tradition. In one inscription Manavirkottam 
is clearly called Tenkarai-Manavirkottam f, and it 
must have been, wholly or in part, on the southern 
bank of some considerable river. The suggestion 
may be made that Manavil and Arumbakkam of the 
inscriptions are identical with the modem villages of 
Manappakkam and Arumbakkam in the Cheyyar and 

• Kanakasabhai - Tamils 1800 years ago. p. 28. 

f S. /. /. I No. 86. 


[ 184 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


Walajapet Taluks of the North Arcot District. These 
two villages are within five miles of each other and 
about the same distance to the south of the Palar. * 
The village Manappakkam is also called Ten-manap- 
pakkam which may be a shorter form of Tenkarai- 
Manappakkam, and Manappakkam may itself be only 
a variant of Manavil or Manavur. Moreover, Purisai 
which formed part of the Manavirkottam is near these 
two places, in the Cheyyar Taluk. Though there are 
other places called Arumbakkam, f none of them 
satisfies the conditions of the inscriptions under 
reference, and it seems clear therefore that we should 
look for Manavirkottam in the North Arcot District, 
rather than in the South Arcot or in Chingleput 
District. We may locate it in the Cheyyar and 
Walajapet Taluks on the southern bank of the Palar 
and perhaps also, in part, in the Arkonam Taluk. 

The Political Position of Naralokavlra : In some 
of Naralokavlra’s inscriptions which give a detailed 
account of his exploits and of his charities, Nos. fi, 7, 
and 8 in the list given above, no regnal year of the 
ruling sovereign is quoted as in the others, and this 
may raise a doubt that at some time he might have set 
up independent rule, throwing off his allegiance to his 
Cola overlord. Moreover these records are undated, 
and consequently it may be questioned if these inscrip- 
tions can be referred to the chieftain of the dated 
records at all. All such doubts are, however, settled 
by the following considerations. First, the dated and 
the undated. records alike use identical expressions for 
describing the chieftain e. g., Kaliiigan, Manavatara, 
Naralokavlra, ruler of Manavil etc., and it is extremely 

* Survey map sheets Nos. 57 P/NW and P/NE (scale 1 — 2 miles). 

f An Arumbakkam 2 miles south of Timkkovilur (South Arcot) - Ilultzsch 
£, I, VII, p. 133. Another in the Tiruveipr Taluk of the Chingleput District. 

[ 185 ] 

Vi 



COLA STUDIES 

unlikely that all these titles applied to two different 
persons who lived at different times. Secondly, these 
undated inscriptions are all in verse, and we have 
several instances in Tamil epigraphy of inscriptions 
in verse which record in a free literary form facts 
relating to well-known persons mentioned in other 
contemporary records of a more formal character 
giving reliable details of time and place. It is quite 
probable therefore a priori that Nos. 6, 7, and 8 are 
such literary records of the life and achievements of 
the chieftain whose date and position are more exactly 
recorded in Nos. 1-5. Lastly, Nos. 7 and 8 contain 
sufficiently precise references to the contemporary 
Cola monarch and the subordinate relation of 
NaralokavTra to him. Thus in No. 7 we read : 

perolinlr-moda 

alaikinra- vellaiy-Abhayanukke-yaga 

malaikinra Tondaiyar-man, 

that is to say, 1 the chief of the Tondaiyar who fights, 
to bring under the sole dominion of Abhaya, the earth 
bounded by the noisy ocean with its dashing waves ’. 
It is well-known that Abhaya was a title of the 
Cola emperor Kulottunga I which occurs in the 
Kalingattnpparani and rarely also in the inscriptions 
of his reign. Earlier in the same inscription we 
have : 


tollai-nlr 

manmagajait-tahgon-madi-kkudai-kkll vlrrirutti 
unmagilun-dondaiyar-kon-urru, 

meaning — ‘Having installed the Earth Goddess under 
the moon-like umbrella of his lord, — the Earth 
(surrounded by) the ancient sea, — the chief of the 


[ 186 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


Tondaiyav was pleased at heart.' * And we read 
likewise in No. 8 the following : 

man-muludun- 

t •• 

daiigon kiidai-nilarkllt-tahguvitta ver-Kuttan 
efiffon manavilar-eru, 

that is : “ r l’he Kfittan with the lance, who brought the 
whole earth under the shade of the umbrella of 
his overlord, is our chief, the chief of the people of 
Manavil. ” Again, in the very next verse, 

mannai-ppodu-nlkkit-tahgomik- 
kakkinan Tondaiyar-kon-angu, 

‘ the chief of the Tondaiyar bestowed the earth 
on his lord after thrusting aside the claims of others 
(to it).’ There seems to be no reason to doubt the 
identity of the overlord of these three extracts with 
Abhaya Kulottuhga of the first. Moreover, the 
Vikramasolan-ula mentions a Kalihgar-kon (11. 154-8), 
avid its brief reference to his military successes leave,- 
as will be seen presently, no doubt about his identity 
with our chieftain. 

It may be observed in passing that the ula makes 

an unmistakable distinction between the celebrated 

Karunakara Tondaiman, the conqueror of Kalihgam, 

and our chieftain who has been rather hastily identified 

with Karunakara on account of one of his titles, 

Arulakara, which occurs in the inscriptions noticed 
• ' 

above. + That a surname conveying the same idea is 
expressed in two forms like Karunakara and Arujakara 
which are never confused in the epigraphs, is in itself 
sufficient indication that they refer to different persons; 

* Also ‘ Kuttan - risaiyanaittu - man - puliyanai na«}akka vaittu ’ - a clear 
reference to his subordination to the Cola with the tiger-crest. 

t See Vikramasolan-ula 11. 134-8. Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar— Kaltitga- 
ttup pa ramyarTiycci pp. 47-54, gives a full discussion on the subject. 


[ 187 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


at any rate, it is only by an oversight of the list of 
chieftains furnished by the Vikramasolan - ula that 
Karunukara Tondaiinan could ever have been confused 
with our Kalihgar-kon, Naralokavlra. The reference 
in the ula, and the repeated statements in the inscrip- 
tions that he fought for increasing the power of his 
overlord Abhaya make it very clear that Naraloka- 
vlra was a captain of the Cola army in the days of 
Kulottuiiga I and his son Vikrama Cola, and that at 
the end of a very successful military career, he secured 
Manavil in Tondainad as his fief. It may be conjec- 
tured also, from his surname Kalihgar-kon, that he 
might at one time have acted as governor of Kalihga ; 
but of this we cannot be sure as there are so many 
Kalihgarayas in the mediaeval records of the Pandyas 
and the Cojas, and as we do not know how this name 
came to be applied to them. 

The military exploits of Naralokavlra : — The nature 
of our sources makes it very difficult for us to give a 
chronological account of the career of Naralokavlra. 
A full and critical study of the records of the reigns 
of Kulottuiiga and Vikrama Cola, such as cannot be 
undertaken here, may carry us farther than the study 
merely of the inscriptions of Naralokavlra. What 
is offered now is a tentative discussion of the data 
that can be gathered from the latter and from the 
Vikrama&dljin-ula. 

The lines in the ula are : 

vehgaiyinuh- 

gudar vilih attuh-gollattuii-gohgattu- 

moda-virattattu-mottattu-nada- 
• • • • • • 

dadiyeduttu vevverarasiriya-vlrak- . 

kodiyedutta kalihgar-kon' (11. 154-8), 

that is to say, ‘ Kalihgar-kon (chief of Kalihgas) who 
raised the banner of heroism in Vehgai (Vehgi), in 

[ 188 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


hostile Vilinam, in Kollam, in Koiigam, in invincible 
Iratta and in Otta (Odra), with the result that different 
kings were forced to flee these countries without 
(hope of) returning (to them)'. The slightest acquaint- 
ance with the nature of our sources is enough to show 
that here we have a mixture of history and epic in 
which history is present in a larger proportion than is 
usual in such cases. At the same time, we can attach 
no historical importance to the order in which the 
countries are named in this passage, as that is 
obviously determined by metrical exigencies. 

We shall jlow examine how far the statements in 
the ula receive epigraphical confirmation. It may be 
observed at the outset that these four lines of the ula 
have more information packed into them than is fur- 
nished by all the sixty odd veabas of the Cidambaram 
and Tiruvadi' inscriptions taken together. Of these 
inscriptions, the Tiruvadi record contains no reference 
whatever to any campaign besides that in the Southern 
country — Pandya country, and the Cidambaram 
inscription, while it seems to furnish some details of 
the southern campaign, makes only vague references to 
campaigns * against the northern kings ( vadamannar ). 
Thus the inscriptions now considered contain little 
which might enable us to control the cryptic references 
in the ula to the part played by Naralokavira in the 
campaigns in Koiigam and Irattam, the Rastrakuta 
country called Irattapadi in Cola inscriptions. The ula 
states that this chieftain fought in Veiigai (Vehgi) and 
Otta, the Orissa country, and this, as we have just seen, 
receives some confirmation from the vague statements 
of the Cidambaram record about the northern kings 
bein°‘ defeated and their treasures being - captured by 

O 

* Ollai-vatjavemkir selvamelam vanga vel-vangum ; temjar nialaiinaMjar- 
erjai-vatjamamtar niarrakulamatiRat selvamelangondu. 

f iso ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Naralokavlra. We also find the name Kalingar-kon 
repeatedly applied to him. In the absence of more 
precise information, it is not. easy to fix the period 
of Naralokavlra’s activity in Vengi and Odra. From 
the accession of Kulottunga I, the Vengi and Cola 
kingdoms were administered as parts of a single 
empire, and it is quite possible that the campaign 
referred to here was undertaken during the first war 
against Kalinga that was waged about 1090-1095 A. D. 
in Kulottunga’s reign. * 

Of the fighting in the south more details are 
forthcoming. The ula specifies Vilinam and Kollam as 
the places round which the campaign centred. And 
the inscriptions confirm this to a remarkable extent. 
According to these, the campaign was undertaken 
against the Pandyas and the Ceras. By the time of 
Kulottunga’s accession to the Cola throne, these two 
powers had been politically subject to the Cola rulers 
for nearly a century. They never reconciled them- 
selves, however, to the Coja yoke and must have found 
occasion in the confusion that preceded Kulottunga's 
accession to rise against the Coja power. In any event, 
we know from Kulottunga’s inscriptions that he led a 
great expedition to the south, defeated five Pandya 
kings, captured the fortress of Kottar, and, after a great 
deal of fighting, settled a number of military colonies 
in the country restored to subjection to the Cola power. 
One of these Pandya kings was a Maravarman 
Parakrama Pandya. f As there are two inscriptions of 

* s. I. 1 111 72. Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar op. cit. p. 51. The pandit's 
suggestion that he might have inherited the title Kalingaraya seems to discount 
altogether the data from the ula on Vengi and Otjra. 

t See my Pan^yan Kingdom , p. 123. There is no foundation for the view 
that * Naralokavlra ’ of the ParSkrama PSn<}ya inscriptions was a surname 
of the Pandya king, or that it indicates any person different from our chieftain. 
Contra. A. A\ E . 1921-22 IT. 61. 


[ 190 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


Parakrama Pandya, Nos. 12 and 13 (ante), which refer 
to a Naralokaviransandi and a hall called Naraloka- 
vlran, it is probable that Parakrama Pandya was met 
in battle and defeated by our chieftain who is said to 
have compelled the Pandyas to take refuge in the 
mountain with their women-folk : 

tennavartam 

piiveru var-kulalarodum pornppera 
ma-veru Tondaiyar-man. 

He is also said to have destroyed Kollam ( Kollam - 
aUmkandan ) after capturing the western hill-country 
of the Pandya ( temar Jcudamalai-naderindu). We are 
also told that Venadu (South Travancore) was the 
source of trouble, and that it was ravaged with fire and 
sword by Naralokavira : 

pfisal 

vilaivitta venadum verpanaittufi-jendi 
vajaivittan Tondaiyar-man. 

He is also said to have subdued the cavers of the 
Pandya who were proud of their strength : 

tennadan savejrin-rin serukkai 
yanramaittan Tondaiyar kon-angu. 

The cavers were a class of specially trained 
warriors who braved death cheerfully ; * it has been 
supposed that this class of warriors was confined to 
the Malabar country. The mention in the Tiruvadi 
inscription of the cavers of the Pandya is a very inte- 
resting fact. This fact renders it easier for us to 
understand the Tamil prasasti of Kulottuhga which 
narrates the war with the cavers that preceded the 
colonisation of Kottar and other places in the Pandya 
country. Another interesting fact to which special 

* See Logan - Manual of the Malabar District , index s. v. ChavSr. 

[ 101 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


attention may be drawn is the prominent part of the 
cavalry implied in the repeated reference to horses 
in the inscriptions. One of the extracts from the 
Cidambaram inscription given above ( tennavartam 
puvet’u etc.) says that when Tondaiyarkon got up on 
his steed, the Pandya got up on the mountain (tied for 
refuge) with his women. Again the military colonists 
whom Kulottunga settled in the Pandya country, 
evidently at the end of the campaign here noticed, are 
described as chiefs of his cavalry forces ( ma-veriya-tan 
varudinit-talaivarai). It seems such a pity that we 
have no reliable means of ascertaining the nature and 
equipment of the Cola army at the time and its methods 
of warfare. 

It is thus clear that, saving some uncertain 
services in Vehgi and Orissa, the chief claim of 
Naralokavlra to recognition at his king’s hands lay in 
his expedition into the Pandya country and the subju- 
gation of the rebellious Venad. It is instructive to 
compare the position of Karunakara Tondaiman in the 
Kalinga campaign with that of Naralokavlra in the 
subjugation of the south, and though no special eulogy 
like the Kalihgatluppa rani was evoked by his achieve- 
ment, * still we can see from the length and eloquence 
of the two inscriptions in Cidambaram and Tiruvadi 
and from the extent and variety of his charitable 
endowments and constructions (which we proceed next 
to consider in detail), that he must have occupied a 
prominent place in the Cola court and held a rank not 
much below that of the conqueror of Kaliiigam. The 
manner in which he is mentioned in the Vikramasdlan- 
ula among those who followed Vikrama in his ula 
seems to confirm this. 

* See however the Parani III 21. 

[ 192 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


Naralokavira’ s religious and charitable works : — The 
great position and influence in the state that Naraloka- 
vlra had built for himself by distinguished military 
service was used by him for the furtherance of the arts 
of peace. The temple waB in those days the accredited 
centre not merely of religious devotion but of learning, 
culture and the arts. And, among others, the celebrated 
Siva temples of Cidambaram and Tiruvadi (S. Arcot) 
became the spheres of the public benefactions of 
Naralokavira, and the inscriptions in these places (Nos. 7 
and 8 above) give very interesting and trustworthy 
accounts of the buildings he erected and the endow- 
ments he made in these towns. The title Porkoyil 
Tondaiman and the surnames Nartaka and Sabhanar- 
taka often applied to him in these inscriptions furnish 
clear proof of his deep devotion to Nataraja, the 
Dancing Siva. The statements in the Cidambaram 
inscription relating to his charitable works may be 
summed up as follows. 

This record as we have seen comprises two halves — 
the first of 31 Sanskrit verses and the second of about 
thirty-six venbas in Tamil, * which in many instances, 
repeat and confirm the statements found in the 
Sanskrit verses. 

To follow the order adopted in the Sanskrit 
portion, we are told that Naralokavira set up innumera- 
ble street-lights (vUhidtpa) (st. 2.; v. 1076) and made 
arrangements for watering the streets on festive occa- 
sions (st. 3). He created a sacred garden ( nandavana ) 
which was filled with the bustle of the gods that came 

• The published text in 5. /. /. IV. No. 225 is defective at some points. 
A literal translation of this record cannot be attempted without a more critical 
edition of the text. For the Tamil part I follow Pt. Raghava Aiyangar's text 
accepting his conjectural emendations wherever they are prima facie correct. 
The VenbS (v) numbers quoted are those of the Pemndoeai. 

f 193 ) 


*5 



COLA STUDIES 


r 

to witness the dance of Siva and in which flourished 
a hundred thousand areca-palms besprinkled with 
Ganges water scattered by the matted hair on the 
head of Siva during his dance, (st,. 4-5 and vv. 1089 
and 1090). He erected a mandapa near the sea and 
opened a broad road to it for the lirthagutrd in the 
month of Musi (st. 6 and v, 1091), and near that 
mujdapa he made a large tank of fresh water with a 
large banyan tree on its bank (st. 7). He construc- 
ted round the temple a great wall called Naralokavlra 
(after him) from which there rose two tall towers 
(gopuraguga) reaching out to the sky (st. 8 and 9). He 
whom the poets call Arujakara justified the name by 
constructing a hall with a hundred pillars •where 
Pasupati, seeing that it was a place meet for his dance, 
disported himself with his beloved (st. 10, v. 1073). 
Round the sacred tank in the temple he built a flight 
of stone steps which looked like the path by which 
his fame descended to the nether world (st. 11, 
v. 1075). On either side of the golden gateway on the 
south (of the temple) he set up mangaladipas which 
dispelled from his subjects the shadows of earthly 
life (st. 12). The priests responsible for worship in the 
temple were the recipients of rich endowments from 
him ; further, he erected a fine hall for the constant 
recitation of the Devaram of Gnanasambanda * (st. 13, 
and v, 1072). He covered the great Sabka ( mahatim 
sabkdm, perambalam ) with copper (st. 14 and v. 1063). 
He constructed a vehicle with a bull mounted on it, 
and on this vehicle the god was taken in procession 
during bhiksStana yatras. (st. 15). A bugle inlaid with 

* Kumlira-sfotra-parayana of the Sanskrit sloka adopts the Sanskrit form 
of the name Xjmjaiya-pijlaiyar for Sambanda. (See st. 26 and 27), It may also 
he noted that while the Sanskrit has kancanam manfapam, v. 1072 has only 
inantjapam which, if it refers to the same structure, as I think it does, shows 
that we are not to understand literally the many references to golden halls. 

[ 194 ] 



NARALORAVIRA 


gold intended to announce the arrival of Devadeva 
(God of gods) was presented by him to the temple 
(st. 16, v. 1066). Ten nityadtpas of fragrant camphor 
(st. 20, v. 1067), a golden water-pot (st. 21, v. 1065), an 
image of Sambanda (st. 26) together with a large 
number of precious jewels (st. 18, 24) and arrange- 
ments for annual abhisekas in the different shrines in 
the temple (st. 22, 25 and v. 1071) formed part of 
Naralokavira’s endowments to the temple of Nataraja. 
A prdkara and a mandapa and a high outer wall of 
stone were erected for the shrine of the goddess Parvatl 
whose image was clad in a splendid robe and adorned 
from head to foot with fine jewels befitting the dancing 
hall of her lord ( sva-pati-natanasthana-ydgyam ) (st. 28-BO 
vv. 1077, 1078, 1080). Lastly, Naralokavlra gave a 
perpetual endowment for the daily supply of oil and 
milk for children to signify the universal motherhood 
of the goddess (st. 31). The Tamil part adds a few 
items to this long list of Naralokavira's charities in 
Cidambaram ; of these the most noteworthy are the 
engraving on copper-plates of the whole of the DbvStqw 
as it was sung by the three hymnists (v. 1088) and the 
construction of a stone sluice to a large irrigation tank 
in the neighbourhood of Cidambaram (v. 1094). 

It must be noticed here that from the inscriptions 
of Vikrama Cola dating from the eleventh year of his 
reio-n (c. 1128-9 A. D.), we learn that that monarch 
takes credit to himself for many things in the temple 
of Nataraja * which bear a close resemblance to what 
Naralokavlra is reported to have done. Not only are 
the constructions and endowments briefly mentioned 
in Vikrama Cola's inscription similar to those in the 
record analysed above, but that king is said to have 
undertaken this extensive reconstruction of the great 

• Set 165 of 1894 — S. 1. I. Texts V. No. 458 


[ 195 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


temple from funds provided out of tributes collected 
by him from subject kings. It seems hardly possible 
that the undated Cidambaram record of Naralokavira 
and the inscriptions of Vikrama Cola, so similar in 
their contents, refer to two different sets of operations 
unrelated to each other. We may therefore assume 
that the later years of NaralokavTra's life were spent 
by him in assisting his sovereign in carrying out the 
programme of religious works he had made for himself. 
Nothing was more natural in those days than that an 
old warrior who, in his younger days had seen a great 
deal of fiahtinjr in distant countries, should, in the 
evening of his life, find congenial occupation, still 
in the service of his king and country, in renovating 
and beautifying holy places of ancient renown. And 
perhaps it is proof alike of the mutual trust between 
the king and his feudatory, and of the impersonal 
attitude which characterised their action in the service 
of God, that their works are reported in the inscriptions 
in a manner calculated to conceal from our view their 
relative shares in the great task. 

To this day one of the enclosing walls of the 
Cidambaram temple is called Vikramasdlan-tinimaligai , 
the name employed for it in Vikrama’s inscription 
( '&hnbonmmbalam-8ul4irumaligaiyum ). It is not possible 
to say if the reference to the entire Devarani being 
engraved on copper-plates is a fact, or only a mere 
repetition of an old convention in relation to such 
matters. The Sutras of the Iraiyan&r - Kalaviyal are 
also supposed to have been written on copper-plates 
in the first instance by their divine author. Allowing, 
however, for all the hyperbole characteristic of such 
eulogies, we can still hardly fail to recognise that the 
first ten years or so of the reign of Vikrama Coja saw 
extensive improvements and reconstructions in the 


1196 ] 



NARALOKAVIRA 


greatest centre of Saivism in South India, and that 
© 

our chieftain had an important share in them. 

There is one circumstance which renders this 
surmise about Naralokavlra's relation to Vikrama Cola's 
works in Cidambaram the more probable. This chieftain 
had by the time of Vikrama's accession added to his 
distinction in the army a considerable experience in the 
construction and endowment of temples and mandapas. 
In the life-time of Kulottunga, he built a stone temple 
of good size to Vy aghrapade svara at Siddhaliiiga- 
madam ; * he also constructed a mandapa and prahara 
walls and set. up a recumbent image of Ilari in 
Kaficlpuram. f And, though we cannot be quite sure 
of it, it is not improbable that before he turned to 
Cidambaram, he completed the constructions at 
Tiruvadi which included a maadapa and a maligai , a 
hall with a hundred-pillars, a broad procession-path 
(i tirucciirru ), a dancing hall and other structures very 
similar to those erected at Cidambaram. In many ways 
then Naralokavira must have appeared to Vikrama Cola 
as the person most fitted to carry out the great enter- 
prise at Cidambaram which was to mark his intense 
devotion to his tutelary deity ( tan kulamyakan). 

We have followed the life and work of Naraloka- 
vlra with the clear testimony of contemporary 
inscriptions and literature. There are many gaps in 
the story, and obviously we cannot accept everything 
that is stated in the inscriptions as literally true. It is 
quite possible that when more texts of inscriptions 
from the south (Madura, Tinnevelly, Travancore) are 
published or fresh inscriptions copied, we may get 
more light on the life and times of this chieftain 

* Nos. 367 and 369 of 1909 (1 and 3 above). 

t 473 of 1919 (6 above). 


[ 197 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


which will enable us to fill some of the gaps in our 
story. But the evidence at hand is quite definite on 
the services rendered by NaralokavTra to Kulottuiiga I 
and his son and successor Vikraina Cola, and on the 
position he held among the official nobility of the land. 
Though he fought in several campaigns, his greatest 
distinction was doubtless his success in the southern 
campaign of Kulottunga which resulted in the establish- 
ment of military colonies on the main road through 
the Pandya country to Kottar and Cape Comorin. We 
have seen that he was connected in some special 
manner with Manavil ; most likely he was granted by 
the king an assignment of the revenues due from the 
place. Once indeed he is called rna-Mayilai-ttondaiyar- 
kon button (v. 1064); but this, I think, is only in 
obedience to a poetic convention which treated Mayilni 
(Mylapore) as one of the beauty-spots of the Tondainud 
to which NaralokavTra belonged. The religious 
constructions and charities at Kanelpuram, Tiruvadi, 
Siddhalingamada, Tribhuvani, Cidambaram and other 
places undoubtedly gave him opportunities for the 
encouragement of artisans of various types. Masons 
and architects, jewellers and gardeners, weavers and 
musicians must have been employed by him in work 
suited to their qualifications and tastes. And one may 
add that the literary men whom he patronised, like 
the composers of the Sanskrit verses and the Tamil 
venbas of the Cidambaram and Tiruvadi inscriptions, 
on which this study is so largely based, were not 
mere versifiers, but could lay some claim to real 
poetic talent. 


[ 198 I 



NARAL0KAV1RA- 


APPENDIX III 


Nddus and Villages in Manamjcottam 

(a) Kanrurnadu 

(1) Kottur alias Colaviccadira Caturvedimangalam 
248 of 1910-Vikrama-Co]adeva 
284 of 1910-Kulottm'iga III 


(2) Kuvam alias — 

(i) Maduvantakanallur — 

826 of 1909 ) v . , 

244 ofl910j K,ll “ ttu " !:a 1 

(ii) Tyagasamudranallur — 

829 of 1909-Ktdott,uiiga III 

(3) Vlrapiindiyanallur — 

518 of 1920-Kulottunga I 

(b) Manavilnadu 

(1) Arumbakkam — 

S8 6 » 8 :L l 9 iJ}“^‘ 


(2) Manavil — 

288 of 1906-Rajaraja 1 
175 of 1919-Vikrama Coja 


(c) MerpalugurnSdu 

(1) Nallilamangalam — 

61 of 1923-Rajakesari 

(d) Palaiyannrnadu 

(1) Palaiyanur — 

336 of 1909-Kulottnfiga (III) 

(2) Vidaiyur — 

233 of 1917-Kulottnnga III 


[ 199 ] 



COLA. STUDIES 


(e) PantnSnadu 

(1) Muruhgai : S. 1 . J.-I-No. 86 

(2) Takkolam alias — 

(i) Ksatriyasikhamanipuram 

259 of 1921-Rajaraja I 

256 and 274 of 1921-Rajendra Cola I 

(ii) Irattapadikoxjdacojapuram 

262 of 1921-Rajadhiraja ^ 

(iii) Kulottungacojapuram 

268 of 1921-Kulotturiga I 
265 of 1921-Rajaraja III 

(3) Tiruvuralpuram (a hamlet of Takkolam) — 

255 of 1921-Rajakesarivarman 
12 of 1897-Parantaka I 

(f) PaSali nadu 

(1) Kidarahgondasolapuram — 

(modern Narasingapuram ?) 
244 of 1910-Kulottunga I 

(2) Pasali — 254 of 1921-Parantaka I 

515 of 1918-Kulottm')ga III 

(g) Perumurnfidu 

(1) Naduvilmalai Tirunedumpirai — 

114 of 1912-Kulottunga III 

(h) Purifain&du 

(1) Purisai— 251 and 252 of 1910-Kulottufiga I 

(2) Uradagam — 246 of 1921-Parantaka I 

18 of 1896-Rajendra Co}a I 


[ 200 ] 



INDEX 


A 

Abhaya (Kulottufiga I) 186-188. 
Abhimanameru 99. 

Abhimanamerucceri 103w. 

Xditya I 43 #, 86. 

Xditya II, Karikala, Parakesari 69, 123 
and #. 

A^iyarkkunallar 24, 29. 
AgarnyUgamanam 154, 166. 
Agastlsvaram-U^aiyar 89. 

Agattiyam 3, 

Ah am {AhananUru) 2, 20 and n, 22, 52, 
53 and # . 

'AimperuHgulu 143#. 

Aiyangar, Dr. S. K. 6#, 22 #, 39, 40, 41, 
47, 48 and «, 64#, 67. 
Akkirama-Ko^ta-Caturvedimafigalara 86. 
2l-KtUi (wages) 113. 

Aitekar A. S. 74, 81. 

X|u(Jaiya-piIjaiyar 194 #, 

AlundEr VS\ 38. 

Xlutiganattar 106, 122. 

Amaru vati 65. 

3&ai 144, 149. 

Anantanarayana, image 125. 

Anantarama Aiyar 15 #. 

Anbil plates, The 27. 

Ancient Dekkan 25#. 

Ancient India 22n t 39n, 41#, 47#, 48#. 
Sn<}apiUai-bha^an 179. 

Andhrapatha 64, 65. 

Anekatisaya 68. 

Angndik-kMi 86, 93. 

Aniya ( bandukkat) 140, 152, 163, 
/InrSdu-narkSsu 127. 

Antarciyam 127. 

Arasanimahgalam 125. 

Aravamuthan, T. G. 30#, 31 and #, 36# 
49. 

Arcaka 127. 

Arcanabhoga 118, 129. 

A rca ncLbh oga - ir a iyili 111. 

Arikala 28, 34. 

2.rrukkal amahji 125. 

Arthasastra 135. 

Arujakara Isvaram U^aiyar 179. 
Arujakaran (Naralokavlra) 181, 187, 
194. 

Arulakara-VaykkSl 180. 

Arulajadasas 127. 


Arul“]a Peruma} (Temple) 180. 
Arumbakkam 179, 182, 183, 184, 185 
and #, 199. 

Arumbakkilan (NaralokavTra) 179, 181, 
_ 182. 

ArErc-ceri 87. 

Aruvajar 22, 38 
Asvatthaman 58. 

Avai 76 and w. 

Avanti 23, 48, 60. 

Ky (chieftain) 53. 

Ayodhya 54/ 58, 62, 65. 

B 

Bana (s) 64, 65. 

Banarayar 64. 

Banavase 66. 

Barnett, L. D. Prof. 60#. 

BedirEr grant 67. 

Bhaglratha 62. 

Bhakti-raja 34, 63. 

Bharasivan Tiruviraftanam - injaiyan 
alias Kulottuftga-Sola Pan<}itan 128. 
BhUratam 7. 

Bharatavenba 7. 

Bhaskara-Coja 35. 

BhZfyas 151, 171. 

Bhattas 92. 

Bhattavrtti 116, 117. 
Bkavifyak-kidaippuram 116, 126. 
Bhavisya Purana 116. 

Bhavisya Sakha 116. 

BhEja 63. 

BhUdZna 104. 

Bhuvikrama Gafiga 67. 

Bombay Gazetteer 69#. 

Brahmadesam (N. A.) 94. 

BrahmadVya (r) 77, 81, 83, 85, 88, 90, 
104, 133. 

Brkadisatfaka 36, 

Brhadxsvara mahatmya ( Cblavamata 
caritra ) 36. 

Brhatkatha 79. 

C 

Candraditya 34. 

Cape Comorin 198. 

Caranasaroruha 68. 

Catalogue Raisonne 37. 


26 


[201] 



COLA. STUDIES 


Catnrvtdimafiga lam 77, 90, 91, 104, 
105. 

GWer (s) 191 and #. 

Cedirajadeva 111. 

Cedirajan 129, 

CSras 190. 

Ceylon 25#, 67. 

Ceylon Antiquary and Literary 
Register 25 n. 

ChelvakSsavaraya Mudaliar T. 21#. 
Cheyyar 113, 184. 

Chinglej>ut District , Manual of the 
100#, 113#, 

Cidambaram 180, 181, 189, 192, 193, 
195-198. 

Colavamsacaritra 36. 

Corporate Life (of R. C. Majumdar) 74. 
Crole 100#, 113. 

Cuddapah 33, 52, 53. 

D 

DZnas (gifts) 104. 

Dandayatra 35. 

Dantipottarasa 134#. 

Dantivarman 107, 118. 
Dantivikranaavarman 132. 

Darsanas 117. 

Darsi 33f». 

Dasavarman 62-64. 

Deccan 73. 

DlvadUna 104. 

DlvUram 194-196. 

Dharma 150. 

Dhartnakrtyam 157. 

Dravi^a-paiicaka 62- 

E 

Early History of India (V. A Smith) 
67. 

Eastern Cajukya 6. 

EccormkkUfrarisi 125. 
Ekambam-u<}aiyar temple 128. 

Ekanta^a RSmayya 69. 

Elphinstone 73. 

Brikmdi 125. 

R ri-v3riya(m)-pperumkka 1 113, 119, 122, 
ij6 (tank committee) JJ7, i$q , 163, 
165, 167, i6q y iji, jy 4t {Rri 
vZriyafijeyyum Perumakkal)-\21> 

Eyil 183. 

EyijkSftam 183. 

F 

Fleet 66. 


G 

Gajabahu 25. 

Cana (s) 102, 107. 
Gaiujagopala-Caturvedimangalam 
(Uttaramerur) 100, 130. 

Gan<Jaradittajj (hall) 87. 

Ganges, the 34, 194. 

Geiger 67#. 

Gftanasambanda 194 and n . 

GoAka III, Velanunti 65. 

Govmdacceri 103#, 124, 125. 
Grilma-drdhins 88, 95. 

GrUmakantakas 153, 166, 173. 

G ram aka ryahjeyytt m-pe ru makka l 123. 
Guna^hya 79. 

H 

Haidar Ali 98. 

Hastimalla 80. 

Hemavati record 58. 

Himalayas 23, 29, 48, 49. 

History of Sanskrit Literature (Keith) 
72. 

HrslkSsacceri 103#. 

Hultzsch 34#, 65, 66, 80, 119, 183. 
and #. 

I 

hjaikkundur Kilar 14. 

IJaiyofi 43#. 

Jjak-kasu 87. 

IJandiraiyaji 47, 48#, 53-56, 64. 

IJaAgo (A^igal) 50, 64#. 

IJanjeJcejirii 38, 39. 

Irai 106, 123. 

Iraiyancir-fCalaviyal 196. 

Iraiyili 111. 

Iraiyilikkasu 127. 

Iranakrayavanak-kaiyelutiu 114, 128. 
Ira ndnpakkattup -plril am a iya r 126. 
Iratlaittajigai-Isvara temple 98#. 

Iratjam (Ras$rak\5|a country) 189. 
Irat|ap3<}i 189. 

Iraftapa^ikon^acolapuram (TakkSlam) 

200 . 

Irumbitjarttalai (y^r) 25 and #, 44, 45. 
Irurcporai, C5ra 15. 

IruAgovel 22, 38, 53. 

Isvara-Vamsa 58, 59. 

I j 

I Jagadekabhusana Maharaja DhSra- 
t varsa, Nagavamsi king 34. 


[ 202 ] 



INDEX 


JTinapada (w) 79. 

Jafimakkani 128. 

Jata-Co^a 54, 62. 

Javasthai (resolution) 121. 

Jayadhara (Kulottunga I) 29, 179. 
Jayai'igon4a-Cola-man^alam 79, 179, 
182, 183. 

Jayangon^ar 29. 

Jayasimha 60 n. 

Jayaswal 79. 

JHanaparamSsvara temple 89. 

Joshi, H. C. 77«. 

Journal of Oriental Research 34m, 36m, 
Jyesjha 120. 

K 

Kacci 100, 122, 129. 

Ka<ja<jippottan £ivakkuri Irajamalla- 
mafigalapriyaneji 169, 175. 

Ka<}iyalur Uni t ti r a ft gan n a fj a r 22. 
Kailasanatha shrine 98 and ». 

Kaiyiittu 152, 153, 166. 

Kakatipura 66, 

Kakatiyas, The 33, 

Kajahasti 66. 

Kajakku^i-natju 82. 

KalaUju 113, 119-122, 124, 129. 
Kaiattalaiyar 19, 40, 41. 

Kalavali 15 and m. 

Kaii 44.’ 

Kaliganattar 102, 124. 

Kaluga (m) 29, 187, 188, 190, 192. 
Kaliftgan 185. 

Kaliftgaraja (Naralokavira) 178, 179. 

K ah A gar ay an (NaralSkavira) 181, 190m, 
Kaliftgarayas 188. 

Kaliftgarkog (Naralokavira) 181, 187, 
188, 190. 

Kaiingattupparani 29, 32, 33m, 49, 68, 
186, 192. 

Kalittogai 4, 

Kaliyurkoftam 99, 171. 

Kalumalam 24, 40, 41 and n . 

Kama Co<}a 63. 

Kambajis 52. 

Kampavannan 119. 

Kanakasabhai 1«, 30, 39, 46, 47, 48, 
63m, 66m, 67 and n. 

Kanakasundaram Pillai 15». 
Kanakkup-perurtgurtp-perumakkal 159, 
160, 161, 168. 

KSnci (puram) 6 m, 27, 29, 33, 45, 46, 
47, 48 and m, 51-54, 56-59, 66, 69, 70, 
145, 180, 183, 197, 198. 


Kannagi 41. 

Kapfiaradeva 122, 129. 

Kanrur (na<}u) 184, 199. 

Kanyakumari (record or stone inscrip- 
tion) 27, 28. 

Karai-katji 156. 

Karat ( parittii ) 156, 174. 

Karanattan 83. 

Karikaia 1 62. 

Karikala II 62, 63. 

Karikaia (jj) Co]a 5, 6 and », 18, 19 ff. 
Karikala Cojadeva Parakesari 68. 
Karikal-VaJavafj (see Karikala) 20, 23. 
i Karikarperuvalattag 24, 

Kariyaru 17. 

Karunakara Ton^aiman 187, 188, 192. 
Karuftgulal-Xdajjar 19, 20, 

KaruvTIr (KarSr) 24, 41 and m, 42, 43. 
KarveJ inagar 33. 

Kasaku^i plates 80. 

Kasu 86, 93, 127. 

Kasyapa 62. 

Kauravas 56. 

Kaujilya 79 and m. 

KavSri, the 22, 27-31, 34-36, 38, 46, 
63, 66, 67, 88, 70, 72, 85. 

Kaveri, country (valley) (delta) 21, 
67, 95. 

Kavlriy the Maukharis and the SaAgam 
Age , The 30m. 

Kaverltira 28. 

Kavirip-pnmpa{tinam 22. 

Keith, A. B., 72. 

Keraldtpatti 74. 

Kidai (Vedic School) 116m. 
Ki^araftgon^a Cojapuram (Narasinga- 
puram?) 200. 

Kielhorn 66m. 

KilU (s) 27, 47, 54. 

KiUivaJavap 6, 16, 17, 75. 

KtrHpura 65. 

Kittel 133. 

KocceftganSn 27, 28, 43m. 

KokkiJli 6m. 

KoJambSsvara temple 98 w. 

Kollam 189, 190, 191. 

Kotigam 189. 

Kortgaraiyar 124, 125. 
Ko.igaraiyar-^ri-Koyil 125. 

Koltar 190, 191, 198. 

Kot^ur, alias Cojaviccadira Caturvedi- 
maftgalam 199 
Kovulan 41. 


[ 20B ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Kovur-kilar 16, 17. 

Krishna Sastri, II. 27, 33, 57, 58?;, 85?;. 
Krsna 90. 

Krsna III, RastrakEta 100. 

Krsna river, The 176. 

Krsnaverma 66. 

Ksutriyasikamam - Caturvedimafigalam 
180. 

Ksatriyasikhamanipuram (Takkolam) 

200 . 

Ks atriya-^ikham ani-V a]anadu 85 . 
Kubja-Visnuvardhana 58, 59. 

Kudavdlai 140, 142, 154, 163-69. 
Kudikal 124. 

Kud'imnga 104«. 

Kudimhgtna 104«. 

Kudnmlmlf) 140, 141, 143,154, 155, 
156, 158, 159, 162-165, 168*171. 
Kulamurram 6, 17. 

Kuljs 113, 126. 

Kulottufiga I Cola 29, 85,88, 179, 181, 
182, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 197, 
198, 199, 200. (KuI5ttuftga I.— Raja- 
kesari 127). 

Kulottufiga II Cola 32, 33. 

Kulottufiga III Cola lQO* and n , 111, 
128, 129# , 199, 200. 

Kulottungacolapuram (Takkolam), 200, 
Knlbttuhgan PiUaittamil 32. 
Kulotiuhgasolan ttla 30. 

JCuhts (the five great) 80. 

Kumanapa<Ji 120. 

Kumbakonam 86. 

Kundavi Alvar 126. 

Kural 76. 

Kuri§2n. 

KTiru 98. 

Kuruksetra (temple> 120. 

Kurumba(r)s 52, 53. 

Kurumi 29. 

Kurumparai 53. 

Kurnool 52, 53. 

Kuttan (Naralokavlraa) 181, 187. 
KHvam 199. 

L 

Laksmiraghavadeva 90.. 

Leyden grant, larger 28, 34. 

Little Conjeevaram 79. 

Local Government in Ancient India 
(R. K. Mookerjee) 73. 

Logan 1 Manual of the Malabar 
District) 191 n. 


M 

Mackenzie Collection 35?/, 51. 

Mackenzie mss. 37. 

Madari-Amnuiii slirine 98 and it. 

Miidavi 24. 

Afadav idi(yar) 102, 110, 122. 
Madluisudanaooeri 103 n. 

Madhyadesa 65. 

Madhyaviasi 77. 

Madhyastha 77, 157, 168, 173-175. 
Madras 98. 

Madras Christian College Magazine 
27*. 

Madurantakanallur (Kuvam) 199. 
Magadha 23, 31, 48, 60. 

Mahabharata 58, 66. 

MaJtapTitakas 153. 

Mahasabha 78, 82 and w, 117, 120-122, 
124428, 130, 154, 166, 173. 

M ahasabait-tiruvadi 121. 

Mahavamsa 67 and *. 

Mahlsvaras 102, 128, 129. 

Mahiman(a) Co^a 62, 63, 64. 
Mahipalakulakalacceri 103*. 

Majumdar R. C. 73. 

Malama<Ju 191. 

Malayaman 75. 

Malepadu plates 26, 27*, 67, 68. 
ATdljgaimldu 99. 

Mallal 65. 

Mahva 60. 

Mananilainullur 82. 

Manappukkam 18'4,. 185. 

Manavatara (Naralokavlra) 179, 181* 
185. 

Manavil 179, and », 182-185, 187, 188, 
198, 199. 

Manavil a r-eju (Naralokavlra) 182, 
Manavil na<Ju 199. 

Manavil-val-kuttarj 182. 

Manavir-kotjam (Tenkarai) 183, 184, 
185, 199. 

Manavirkuttajj (Naralokavlra) 181. 
Manavur (Kotpim) 184, 185. 

Manayil 183. 

Munayirkotjam 179, 183. 

Mandalam 78, 79, 81. 

Maadara mountain 27. 

Man-eyil 183. 

Mangaladipas 194. 

Maninftkalai 6 and n, 21 and *, 24, 26,. 
46,47,54,56,63,64,65,69. 


[ 204 ] 



INDEX 


Mantra-brTihmana{ni) 150 ami n, 165, 
171 

Manrarn 75, 76, 78, 104. 

Manrn 75. 

Manu 50, 62, 152. 

Maaur 84, 132, 133, 150. 

Miirap 3a<}aiyap. 82, 84, 133. 

A larndam 52, 53. 

Maruvaykkuricci 181. 

Matha{s) 117, 126, 127. 

Mutla chiefs 33. 

MTitrsthanas 128. 

Maukhari(s) 31, 32. 

Mavan-KiUi 63, 64. 

Mayilai (Mylapore) 198. 

Megasthenes 75. 

Melukn 110. 

Merpajugur nadu 199. 

Meru 49. 

M imams a 117. 

Monier-Williams 150?/. 

Mookerjee R. K. 73, 
Mu^attamak-kanniyar 20. 

Mu^ikon^a solacceri 103 n. 

Mukari 30 31, 32. 

Mukkanji 32, 33 w, 57. 

Mukkunji Co<Ja 35. 

Mukkanti Ka^uvetti 58. 

Mukkanji Pallava 57. 
MTllastliSfiattu-MahadSva 86, 89, 93. 
Mullai 52, 53. 

Murangai 200. 

Mysore Archaeological Report 21n t bln. 

N 

Nacciparkkipiyar 3, 4, 21, 38, 43», 46, 
54, 55, 56, 67, 75. 
m4 U 78-81, 127, 184. 

Na<}uvilaiiga<Ji 124. 

Na<}uvilmalai Tirune^umpirai 200. 
Nagapattipam (Negapatam) 46, 55. 
Nagaram 78, 79, 80, 81, 94. 

Rf agar attar 78, 79. 

Nagas, The 65. 

APdkanadu 65. 

NulafigiJU (also Neiuiigijji) 16, 17 . 

Nallanduvapar 4. 

Nallilamaftgalam 199. 

Nalur (Tirumayanam) 85-88, 90, 92, 94, 
95. 

Nambimcir 166, 173. 

Nandalur 58. 

Nandavana 193. 


Nandi-JCampa 119. 

Nandi-Kampesvara temple 119. 
Nandivarman III, Pallava 7, 108, 118. 
Nandi varman Pallavamalla 80. 
Nandivikramavarman 119. 

Nanguiieri (Tinnevelly) 180. 

Naiigur 39. 

NTinmaraiyon (Brahman) 91. 

Narada 29. 

Naralokavlra(ri) 176 — 200. 
Naralokavlrap Mantjapa 180, 181, 191. 
Naralokavira-Nullur (Maruvaykkuricci) 
181. 

Naralokavirap-^andi 181, 191. 

Nartaka 179, 193. 

Naravana (Naravahana) 79. 
Narayanacceri 103?/. 
Narayanadatta-bhatta 117. 

Narconai 39. 

Naptraja (Temple) 195, 196. 

Nattar 78, 79, 80. 

NSttukkn^tam 74. 

Nattuppadai 79. 

iVatfu-viyavan 80. 

Navacblacarita 35 and n. 
Ne<Jum-5eral-Adan 41. 

Netjungijji (see NalarigiJli) 16, 17. 
Ne^uiljeliya, Faniya 14. 

Nellore record 61. 

Neydalanganal Ilufijefccenjji 39#. 
Neyvanai 179. 

Milam 151, 165, 171. 

JSTnvilat 125. 

Niiyadipas 195. 

Nrpatuftgavikramavarman 119, 134#. 
Nrttabhafya 117. 

Nyayabha^ya 117. 

O 

Odam 113. 

Odra 189, 190 and n 
Olai 142. 

Olivar 22, 38. 

Oraiyur (see Uraiyur) 34. 

Orissa 189, 192. 

Otta (Odra, Orissa) 189, 190 and ». 
OttakkSttap(r) 30, 32, 178. 

P 

Pddagam 127 and n. 

Padakanellu 125 
Padirruppattn (Ten Tens) 1, 9. 



COLA STUDIES 


Pakarastra 63, 64, 65. 

Palaiyap,ur(na<Ju) 199. 

Palaiyasembiyan-mahad£vi«caturvedi- 
mahgalam 85 86. 

Palamoli 21 and *, 24, 41-44. 

Paikr, The 185. 

Paflcapa 28. 

Pailcapan<java-jnalai$ 66. 

Pahcavara{m) 125, 141, 142, 143 and n, 
158, 159, 164, 167, 168, 170, 174. 

Panditaradhya carita 33 and n. 

Pandyan Kingdom l The 14*, 71w, 80*, 
132*, 182*, 190*. 

Papma (na<ju) 200. 

Pa^maicceri 103*, 125. 

Pannaii 17. 

ParakSsari 99, 109, 120. 

Parakesarivarman, who took Madura 
(Parantaka I Coja) 129, 163, 164, 
169, 171, 175. 

Parakrama Pan<jyadeva, Maravarman 
Tribhuvana-Cakravartin 181, 182, 190 
and *, 191, 

Parani 29, 31, 32, 33, 192*. 

Parantaka, I Co^a, Parakesarivarman 
43 *, 74, 83, 86, 87, 92, 96, 97, 99, 
100, 103, 105, 109, 110, 121, 122, 
131, 132, 136, 142, 145, 147, 162, 164, 
165, 170, 171, 200. 

Parantaka II Sundara Cola 85. 

Parimelajagar 76, 79. 

FarthivEndra-varman 100, 123. 

FSsali na<Ju 184, 200. 

PTitakam 153. 

Fataliputra 76. 

Pattikadi 121. 

PattinappUlai 22, 29, 42, 43, 45> 47, 48, 
51, 52, 53, 70, 72. 

Pattini cult 25*. 

PattuppUttu 1,6,8,20,42, 48. 

Paura 79. 

Plrilamaiyar 102, 124. 

Pertplus 26, 71. 

PeriyapurUnam 33, 43». 

Pernmakkal 161, 169, 175. 

PerumbTiniJlrruppa^ai) 45 «, 46,47, 55, 
56,69.’ 

Perumur (n atju ) 184, 200. 

Perunarkilli 27, 28, 40, 41, 

Pefundevapar T, 11. 

Penmdogai 68», 180* 193*. 

Pemtigadai 79 . 


Peruftguri (Sabha) 82a, 113, 118, 123, 
124, 125, 126, 127, 129, 161. 
Peruuglittain 74. 

Peruhjeral Adari 19, 41. 
Peruvi^ak-karikal 23. 

PeruvijrarkiJli 40*. 

Pidagahvtiri 127. 

PidTigaiyirai 125. 

Pi<jurttalai 25, 43, 44. 

Ptli Valai 54, 64, 65. 
Pittukku-man-sumandadu 36*. 
Plasapurlsvara 89. 

Podiyil 75. 

Poduvar (chiefs) 52, 53. 

Potiii ambalakku ttan {alias Aru mb akk i 1 a a 
Kalifigaraja) 179. 

Pon-variyam 110, 143, 158 (gold com- 
mittee), rS9% 164, 167, 168, 174. 

Pope, Dr. G. U. 1 *, 17. 

Porkoyil Tonijaimari (Naralokavlral 
179, 182, 193. 

Porunararmppadai 20, 42, 43, 67. 
Pose|ti Linganna-Kavi 35. 

Pottaham 114, 123. 

Pottappi 63. 

Pottiyar 75. 

Poygai (yar) 15, 16. 

Prabhumeru 99. 

PrUyascittafnt) 153, 166. 

Ptolemy 26, 71, 72, 

Pugalurdeva 180. 

Puhar 39, 41, 45, 72. 

PulakSsin I 60*. 

Punyakumara 26, 67, 

Pur am , its authenticity and subject- 
matter 2, 8, 9, 10, 11. 

Purammuru (or Puram Four Hundred)- 
1-18, 19, 20 and * , 26, 40*, 44, 75, 
and n. 

Puraugarambaina#i 165, 168, 171, 175. 
Purapparui 8. 

Purisai (na<Ju) 184, 185, 200. 
Ptlrvficaram 124. 

R 

Raghava Aiyangar, Pan#* M. 39 and n \ 
64*, 68* 180*, 187*190*, 193*. 
Raghavudeva 126. 

Rajadhiraja I 200. 

RajakSsari (varman) 99, 109, 120, 200* 
Rajamartan#. alias Aparajitaviknuna- 
varman 129. 

Rnpm74u 99. 


[ 206 ] 



INDEX 


Rajaraja I Coja 82, 84, 87, 88, 89, 91, 
99, 100, 105, 124, 199, 200. 

Rajaraja III Coja (Rajakesari) 86, 88, 91, 
94, 100, 129*, 130, 200. 

Rajarujan (hall) 87,89. 

Raja rajasolan-ula 31. 

Rajavali 67. 

Rajendra I Cola Parakesari 27, 56, 99, 
125, 200. 

Rajendra Cola (Kulottuftga I) 178. 

Raj endra-cola- (s51a) caturvedim aft ga- 
lam (Uttaramerur) 99, 126, 129. 

Rajendra-ColadSva 88, 90, 94-126. 

Raj endra-soja-vinn agar 125, 126, 130. 

Rama 62. 

Ramachandran, T. N. 131*. 

Ranaraga 60*. 

Ranglsa Venba 31*. 

Rafta 189. 

Rgveda 77. 

S 

SabhU [s) 21, 24, 74-78, 80-83, 85, 90, 
91, 94, 95, *97, 100, 112-116, 118, 
123, 128, 129, 132, 136, 141, 142, 144, 
146, 147, 156, 161, 163, 164, 168, 171, 
175, 194. 

Sabha-inarrahjolluial 84. 

Sabhanartaka (Naralokavira) 178, 193, 

Sacred Books of Ceylon 67*. 

SUhasiyar 153, 166. 

Sallekhana 75*. 

Saluva chiefs 33. 

SHmantas 35. 

SHmanthu 108*. 

3amaparSsvara(ttu-Pemmap.-a<jigal) 87, 
89,91. 

Sambandar (Tirujftanasambandar) 86. 

Samsargapatitas 153, 166. 

Samvatsaravariyam 105, 106, 110, 120, 
121, 122, 124, 132, 155, ij6 (annual 
committee), ijQ, 163, 164,165, 
167, i6g t if/p 174- 

Sa.igam 4, 7, and », 14, 37, 39, 41, 49, 
50, 52, 65, 67, 70, 71, 75. 

Safigattamilum Pirkalattamilum 15*. 

Sankarappa^i 102, 110, 120, 121. 

Sa&Raiccani, alias Uttaramerunaftgai 

ii*6. 

Satsahasra 66. 

Rattan (a guardian deify) 29. 

Schoff 67*. 


Sekkilar 33, 48, 57. 

£elkudi 23, 53. 

Senai 110 122. 

Sen<ju 29. 

Senganafi 15. 

^eugut^uvarj 39, 40, 41, 49, 50. 

Senni 27. 

£en Tamil % 180*. 

&ran £engut{uvan 39*, 64*. 

$eri{s) 103, 140, 141, 143, 154, 157, 158, 
159. 162, 169, 170, 173, 174. 
£ermr-Kurram 85, 88. 

£ evvan d ippu rUnam 36, 43*. 

Shama Sastri 79*. 

Shanmukham Pillai 36«, 

Shiyali ( ? Kalumalam) 40, 41*. 

Sibi 50. 

Siddhaliftgama^am 178, 179, 197, 198. 

£ ilappad ikaram 23, 24, and », 26, 29, 
and *, 31, 41, 46, 48, 49, 50, and *, 
51, 60, 66*, 69. 

£illirai 125. 

Sifiiiamaiiur plates 6, 7. 

£itfar 145, 146. 

£itfayatn 125. 

Siva 36, 58, 95, 194. 

Sivabrahmana 127, 

Sivaraja Pillai K. N. 3*. 
£ivasthalamanjarl 86*. 

Slyanacci-tf/wj Sri-vaisnava-manikkam 
130. 

Smith, V. A. 67. 

£dlamatujalasaiakam 36. 

Soja-na^u 165, 168, 171, 175. 
Solapuram (N. A) 119, 
Solavlccadiravijagam 127. 
Somasiperuman, Karafljai Kon<}aya 
Kramavitta-bhattan 161, 165, 168, 
171,175. 

f?raddhamantar (tas) 102, 124. 
£flnibalam 79. 

£ribali (bkbga) 122, 123, 124. 
Sri-Krsna(ganattar) or Sri Krsnaganap- 
perumakkaj 102, 125. 

£rimnkha(m) 135, 144, 149, 163, 165, 
169. 

Srinivasa Aiyangar P. T. 7 and », 8, 
9 and *, 10. 11, 13, 14-18, 20*, 25#, 
41#, 43«, 47, 50*, 51, 52 and », 
54-57, 66, 71*. 

Srlrudram 90. 

Srlvaisnavas 126, 127. 


[ 207 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Sri-Vaisnava Variyar (or Vaisnavarana 
cmberumaij a^iyar) 102, 124, 128. 
Sthanattar 102, 129, 

Subramania Aiyar K. V. 25 #, 28ft, 39#, 
46,48,59. 

Subramania Pillai V. T. 86#. 
Subrahmanya temple 98#, 99 f 127. 
Sucmdram 82. 

Sundara Co] a 27j 85. 

Sundara PTmcJya I, Mara-Varman 180. 
Sundaravaradap-peruma] 98#, 99. 
SungandavittaSMa-nallur 179. 
Svamikumara Caturveda Somayaji 118. 
Svamikumarakuttam 118. 

Svaminatha Aiyar, Mahamahopadhyaya 
Pandit V. 2, 8, 12, 15, 20#, 21#, 24#. 

T 

Taittiriyak-kidaippuram 116, 127. 
Takkolam 200. 

Talaiyalafigagam 14. 
Tamtt-Navalar-caritai 15, 16. 
Tamilp-poljl 82#. 

Tamils 1800 years ago, The 46#, 48#. 
Tamils , History of the 7 and n, 15«, 
20#, 25#, 41#, 43#, 47#, 50#, 66#, 
71#. 

Tantfuvan 129 and #. 

Tahjai 100, 122, 129, 

Tanjore 78, 85. 

Tarakkti^am 74. 

T attajjftr-MBvenda- VEJan 132, 134, 135, 
144, 145, 149, 163, 164, 169, 170. 
Taylor 37. 

Telugu Co<Ja 6, 51, 57, 61, 63, 65, 68, 

100 . 

TennSri (Chingleput) 84. 

Terkilaftg^41 124. 

Tinai and turai 10-11 
Tinnevelly 53, 132, 148. 

TiraimTlr 81. 

Tiraiyajj 55, 56. 

Tiraiyar 46, 52. 

Tirtkayntrn 194. 

Tiruccemtcufai 125. 

Tirujflanasambandar 85, 86. 
Tirukkagaiyftr 180. 

Tiruk-kural 135. 

T irukkuripputtonjonZyatfSr PurUnam 
33. 

Tirumlvalavafl (Karikala) 22, 23. 
TirumaySpam 86, 87. 


Tirumayapam-iujaiya(r) (ParamasVamin) 
85-9,95. 

Tirumeyiiaiiam 86, 95. 
Tiru-Nulur-Tirumayapam 85. 
Tirunaraiyur na^u 87. 

Tirunarayana Vinnagar 87, 90. 
Tiruppadiyatn 126. 

Tiruppugalfir 180. 

Tiruppulivalam (U<Jaiyar) 99, 102, 108, 
118, 120 129. 

Tiruppulivanam 179. 

TirupputtTir 181. 

TiruVa^andai 78. 

Tiruvadi 180, 189, 192, 193, 198. 
Tiruvadiyar 166,173#. 

TiruvSlaftga^u 78. 

Tiruvalafigiuju plates 27, 56. 
Tiruvalundur nadu (assembly of) 78. 
Tiruvan<Ja], Pi^ari 129. 

TiruvUymolt 125, 126. 
TiruvekambanallEr 128. 
Tiruvi^aimarudttr 81. 

Tiruvilaiyadal purfinam 36#. 
TiruvUralpuram 200. 

Tittattur 120, 

Tolkappiyam 3, 4, 38#, 

Tontjaimai^ (Naralokavira) 181. 
Ton<}aimajj IJandiraiyau 45, 48#, 52, 55, 
64. 

Ton^aimancjalam (Ton^ainacju) 6#, 45, 
48, 54, 57, 100, 182, *184, 188, 198. 
Tondalmandala Satakam 57. 

Tomjaiyar 55. 

Ton<}aiyar - Kon (Man) 182, 186, 187, 
191, 192. 

Ton^amana 54, 62. 

Td((a-v3riyam 132, ij6 (garden com- 
mittee), 1ST, *59 > 163, 165, 167, 169, 
J 7 J > m . 

Trairdjyasthiti 67, 68. 
TribbuvarjmahadSvi 124. 
Tribhuvanaviradeva (KulottuAga III) 
129. 

Tribbuvani 179,198. 

Trilocana Kadamba 66. 

Trilocana (Pallava) 33, 46, 57-63, 69. 
Trinayana Pallava 58 and #, 66. 

Trinetra 32, 33#, 60 and #, 65, 67-9. 
TrinStra Pallava 27, 28, 57. 
TrivikramaccSri 103#, 125. 
Tulabhara-Sn-Koyil 124. 
Tyagasamudrsmalffir (KEvam) 199. 


[ 208 ] 



INDEX 


u 

Udayakumaran 64. 

Ujjain 60, 

Udayendiram plates 80. 

Ula{s) 30, 31, 32, 178, 187, 188, 190, 
192. 

Ulavtrat 125. 

UliiySr 106, 122. 

Upham 67 and n. 

Uppu-Kastt 127. 

Ur 77, 78, 94, 103, 104, 105, 106 and n, 
108 and n, 119, 121-3. 

Ura^agam 200, 

UraiytSr 17, 22, 38, 39, 57, 62, 72, 75, 
*76. 

UratytlraUtta Sarukkam 36*. 

~Ur mV-ninra-tiruvadi 122. 

Urom 103. 

Urrukknttuk-kZttam 80. 
Uruvappahrerilaiyog 42. 
Uravappahjer-ilanjeJceaui 21. 
UttaramallSr 83, 99, 100*. 

Uttaramem - CaturvSdimaAgalam 99, 
120, 135, 144, 163, 164, 168-171, 
175. 

Uttaramerttr (15r) 74, 75, 81, 83, 92, 
96 ff. 

UyyavandSn Kan<}idevan alias GaA- 
gSyan 181. 

V 

Va^avar (Northerners) 51, 52. 
Vaflavayijccelvi, Piflari 129. 

Va$uga vali 64. 

Vaidiks 150. 

V aikun Jhaperumal temple 98», 99, 113. 
VairamSghatataka 99, 112, 119, 120. 
Vaislfika 117. 

VajasanVyak-kidaippuram 126. 

Vajra 23, 48, 60. 

Vakai(ppajrandalai) 23, 72. 

Vajabha 28. 

Vajai-Vanan (Vanan) 64 and n. 
Vamanacceri 103*, 124, 

VanarSyar 64. 

Vanavap-madevi-caturvedimafigalam 

85, 88. 

VanavaRmahadevi 85. 

Vafiganagar, Sri 165, 168, 171 175. 
Vahji 23. 

Vannakkatjar-ambalam 88, 89, 91. 


Varaippaham 67. 

Vari 114, 128. 

Vari 133. 

VUriyam (x) 82, 92, 132, 133, 134, 136, 

137, 148, 162, 166, 169, 170, 171, 
172, 174. 

Vfiriyapperumakkal 108, 119, 134*. 
VSriyar 102, 108, 118, 157. 

Vdrtiika 117. 

Vayolai 166, 173. 

Vedas 90, 91, 117, 150, 151. 

VSli 129. 

Vejir (s) 23,39. 

Ve^l alas (Velankmji mudalSn) 182. 
VellaimTirti-Alvar 126. 
VeHaimSrti-emberuman 128. 

V ellaimurti-nay aj^ar, 129. 

Vena^u 191, 192. 

Venba 22, 24, 29. 

VeAgi 188, 189, 190 and *, 192. 
VeAgidesa 58. 

Venkataramanayya, Dr. N. 27*, (33) 
and *, 57, 60 and », 61, 62, 63 and*, 
64*. 

Venkatasami Nattar 15». 

Venkayya5, 6 and *, 58 and *, 63, 
74, 75, 96, 97, 99, 103, 131 and *, 
132, 134, 135 and *, 136, 137 and *, 

138, 139, 140, 141*, 142-147, 149, 
150*, 151-156, 157 and *, 159, 161, 
162, 172*. 

Vennaikkutta4ukipra-alvar 90, 
VennaikkEttanallffr 128. 

Venni 20,21,38-41,72. 
Vennik-kuyattiyar 20. 

Vennip-parandalai 20. 

Venni v^iyil 22. 

VSrpahratJakkai PerunarkkiUi 39, 40. 
VbJaiyEr 199. 

Vijaya Dantiyikramavarman 119. 
Vijayaditya, Cajukya 58, 59, 60 and *, 
65. 

Vij ayaditya-Trilocana-Karikala syn- 

chronism 61, 71. 

Vijayakampa (varman) 99, 108, 119. 
Vijayakampavikramavarman 119, 134*, 
Vijayalaya Cola 19, 27, 46, 68. 
Vijayanagara 34. 

Vijaya Nandivikramavarman 119. 
Vijaya N/patuAgavikramavarman 119. 
Vikrama-C5|a-deva 85w, 88, 100*, 128, 
179, 180, 181, 188, 192, 195-199. 


27 


[ 209 ] 



COLA STUDIES 


Vikramaditya I 33#, 61. 

Vikramasojan tirumaligai 196. 

Vtkrama hlan ulu 30, 178, 187 and w, 
188, 192. " 

Viliam 189, 190. 

Village Communities in Western India 
74, 81#, 

Vimaladitya, Calukya 58, 59. 

Vina 90. 

Vtraganattar 102, 124. 

Vlramahadevi 94, 

Viranarayana Sri (Paratanka Cola I) 
145 „ 164* 165, 170, 171. 

VlrapantJiyanallUr 199, 

Vlrarajendra, Cola 28, 88. 

Vifahara (bhoga) 117, 123. 

Visnu 22, 55, 56, 87, 124. 
Visnuvardhana 60#. 

Vithidtpa (street lights) 193. 


Vyaghrapada 179 and «, 197. 
Vyakarana 117. 

Vyakarana - Sfistra-vyZkhyil-vrtti 116, 
123. 

Vyavasthai 108, 109, 118, 119, 134, 
141, 142, 164, 165, 168, 

W 

Wtilajapet 185. 

Warangal 33. 

Wilson 35#. 

Y 

Ya>ur-Veda, Black 116. 

Yajur-Veda, White 116. 

Y&luhganattar 119 


[ 210 ] 




