MADRAS UNIVERSITY HISTORICAL SERIES-No. 9. 


GENERAL EDITOR: 

Professor K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 


THE COLAS Vol. I 









THE COLAS 

♦ 


BY 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, M.A. 

Profmor of Indian History and Archaeology 
University of Madras 


Vol. I 

To the accession of Kulottunga I 



UNIVERSITY OP MADRAS 

W 






PREFACE 


In the age of the Colas, the most creative period of 
South Indian History, the whole of South India was for 
the first time brought under the sway of a single 
government, and a serious attempt made to face and 
solve the problems of public administration arising 
from the new conditions. In local government, in art, 
religion and letters, the Tamil country reached heights 
of excellence never reached again in succeeding 
ages ; in all these spheres, as in that of foreign trade 
and maritime activity, the Cola period marked the cul- 
mination of movements that began in an earlier age, 
under the Pallavas. 

This history of the Cojas, the first systematic 
study of a great epoch, has been rendered possible 
only by the work carried on steadily from year to year 
for half a century by the Archaeological Survey of 
India. My indebtedness to the scholars who, in the 
various publications of this department, have laid the 
foundations of Cola history will be evident on almost, 
every one of the following pages. I have based my 
account, however, on an independent study of the 
originals, for which the most ample facilities were 
afforded to me by the Director-General of Archaeology 
and the officers in charge of the Madras office. 

Inscriptions come to our aid only from the acces- 
sion of Vijayalaya in the ninth century, and even then 
their distribution in time and space is naturally very 
uneven ; for the early period, and we do not know of a 
time when there were no Colas, we depend altogether 
on extant Tamil Literature surviving for the most part 




CONTENTS 


Chapter 

Preface 

I. Sources 

II. Early Notices ... 

III. The Colas in early Tamil Literature 


IV. Government and Social Life in the 
&angam Age ... 

V. From the Sangam Age to Vijayalaya ... 

VI. The Rise of Vijayalaya — Aditya I 

VII. Parantaka I 

VIII. From the death of Parantaka I to the 

accession of Raj araja I ... 

IX. Rajaraja the Great 

X. Rajendra I 

Note A : On Mahlpala 

Note B : Gangaikonda-Colapuram 

XI. The successors of Rajendra 


XII. The accession of Kulottunga I 
Appendix ... 

Additional notes 
Index 


• M 


Ml 


• M 


[ix] 


Page 

v 

1 

22 

36 

73 

118 

130 

142 

166 

198 

231 

283 

288 

290 

338 

369 

620 

626 


Ml 


• M 



CONTENTS 
MAPS AND PLATES 


Seal of the Tiruvalangadu plates ...Frontis- 
piece 

Map showing extent of Karikala’s sway... 42 

Map showing Co]a kingdom under Vijaya- 
laya and Aditya I ... ... 138 

Map showing Cola kingdom under 
Parantaka I ... ... ... 164 

Siva devale No. 2, Polonnaruwa, south 
face ... ... ... 206 

Map illustrating Rajendra's expedition to 
the Ganges ... ... ... 248 

General view of the Gangaikonda-coles- 
vara temple at Gangaikonda-Colapuram 
(Trichinopoly District) ... ... 252 

Map illustrating the Kadaram campaign 
ofRajendra ... ... ... 264 



ABBREVIATIONS 


ABA. Annual Reports on Archaeology, Madras. 

ARB. Archaeological Reports, Burma. 

ARE. Annual Reports on Epigraphy, Madras. 

ASC. Archaeological Survey Reports, Ceylon. 

ASI. Archaeological Survey of India, Annual 

Reports of the Director-General. 

ASSI. Archaeological Survey of Southern India. 

BEFEO. Bulletin de l'Ecole Francaise d’Extreme 

Orient. 

BG. Bombay Gazetteer. 

CSI. Coins of Southern India by Sir Walter 

Elliot (1886). 

CV. Culavamsa, edited and translated by Geiger, 

(Pali Text Society). 

DKD. Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts, by 

Fleet (in the BG). 

EC. Epigraphia Camatica. 

El. Epigraphia Indica. 

EZ. Epigraphia Zeylanica. 

H1SI. Historical Inscriptions of Southern India 

Sewell (1932). 

IA. Indian Antiquary. 

IHQ. Indian Historical Quarterly. 

JA. Journal Asiatique. 

JA BBS. Journal of the Andhra Historical Research 

Society. 



ABBREVIATIONS 


JBBRAS. 

JIH. 

JOB. 

JBA8. 

List. 

MAE. 

MV. 

NI. 

PK. 

QJMS. 

SII. 

Studies. 

TAB. 

TAS. 


Journal of the Bombay Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society. 

Journal of Indian History. 

Journal of Oriental Research. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
(London). 

Kielhorn: List of Inscriptions, Southern, 
(j El. vii and viii). 

Mysore Archaeological Reports. 

Mahavamsa, edited and translated by 
Greiger (Pali Text Society), continued in 
CV . 

Nellore Inscriptions edited by Butterworth 
and Venugopal Chetty. 

The Pandyan Kingdom by K. A, Nilakanta 
Sastri 1 1929). 

Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society, 
Bangalore. 

South Indian Inscriptions. 

Studies in Coja History and Administration 
by K.A. Nilakanta Sastri (1932). 

Travancore Archaeological Reports. 

Travancore Archaeological Series. 


[xii] 



Chapter I 

SOURCES 

On the history of the Colas, as on many other 
■ subjects of early Indian history, we 

Introduction. 

had, fifty years ago, little information 
of an authentic character. When, in the early years of 
the last century, Col. Mackenzie made his great 
effort to survey all and collect as many as possible 
of the antiquavian remains of the Madras Presidency, 
his agents in the Tanjore district failed to discover 
anything more remarkable on the ancient Colas than 
the Colammmearitram. This is a late Sthalapurann 
which is legendary and full of miracles. Tradition 
knew nothing of the real history of the older rulers 
of the land and could not tell if the Cola dynasty 
numbered eighty-four kings or sixteen. Epigraphy 
has made remarkable progress in South India during 
the last fifty years. Hultzsch, Venkayya and Krishna 
Sastri have brought out scholarly editions of many of 
the inscriptions. Of the Sangam literature, which is 
doubtless the earliest group of Tamil writings extant, 
considerable portions have been recovered and published. 
Now it is both possible and necessary to attempt a 
comprehensive study which shall bring together the 
results so far attained, and so to approach a definitive 
history of the Cojas. 

To attempt a task of this nature in a subject which, 
thanks to fresh discoveries or new interpretations of 
old material, is apt to have its foundations disturbed 
from time to time, is, we are warned, to run the risk of 
our structure collapsing no sooner than it is reared. 
But this is, in regard to Coja history, greatly to under- 
estimate the permanence of the results reached so far ; 



THE COLAS 


for a careful review of the steps by which the recon- 
struction of this history has proceeded since the days 
when the clues obtained from Eastern Calukya copper- 
plates were correlated to the evidence from the Cola 
inscriptions of Tanjoi'e and other places in the Tamil 
country, must convince the most sceptical among 
scholars that a considerable tract of ascertained 
knowledge has been added permanently to the history 
of South India. A settled and continuous narration of 
the political history of the Cojas appears therefore not 
merely quite possible to undertake, but likely to be of 
more than transient interest. The case for such an 
undertaking becomes stronger if it is observed that, in 
its administrative system and in its literary and artistic 
achievement, Tamil civilisation may be said to have 
attained its high watermark under the Coja empire of 
the tenth to the thirteenth centuries. Under this 
empire also flourished in their greatest strength the 
sea-faring instincts of the people of Southern India 
which enabled them to add for a time an overseas empire 
to the more abiding prospects of a profitable trade 
with the states of the Far-East,. The telling of a story 
which fills so large a place in the past life of the land 
and is so full of colour and incident should not be 
unduly postponed. At the same time we should recog- 
nise that, in regard to certain points of the story, the 
preliminary researches, of which one should have 
desired to avail oneself, have yet to be made ; and 
even the attempt to paint the picture as a whole may 
be the means, by drawing attention to their need, of 
bringing such researches into being. 


The history of the Colas falls naturally into four 


Divisions of the 
subject. 


divisions : the age of the literature of 
the &angam, the interval between the 
close of the &angam age and the rise 


[ 2 ] 



SOURCES 


of the Vijayalaya line, the Vijayalaya line which 
came to prominence in the ninth century A. D. 
and lastly, the Oa}ukya-Co]a line of Kulottunga I and 
his successors from the third quarter of the eleventh 
century to about the middle of the thirteenth. Nearly 
two centuries before the rise of Vijayalaya in the 
neighbourhood of Tanjore, there flourished a Co}a 
kingdom in the Telugu districts comprising portions 
of Cuddapah, Kurnool and Anantapur, * whose kings 
traced their descent from Karikala. Nothing definite 
is known, however, of their connection with the early 
Colas. Again, from about the twelfth century, there 
were a number of local dynasties which claimed also 
to be among the descendants of Karikala and to 
belong to the Kasyapa gotra. Besides their legendary 
pedigree there seems to be no evidence connecting 
them in any manner with the Colas of the Tamil 
country. Of these late Telugu-Codas, who have left 
behind a large number of stone and copper-plate 
inscriptions, we need make only passing mention in 
this history. 

The main source of our information on the early 

Colas is the early Tamil literature of 
Period.'^ 0 * 5 Ear,y the so-called third Sangam. The brief 

notices of the Cola country and its 
towns, ports and commerce furnished by the Periplus 
and by Ptolemy are best interpreted in the light of 
this literature. The striking coincidences in these 
matters between the classical writers and the literature 
of the Sangam are enough to show that this literature 
belongs to the early centuries of the Christian era. 
And the somewhat obscure account in the Mahavama 
of many conflicts between the inhabitants of Ceylon 

• EC. xii (7) and El. xi, MSBjrityu plates. 



THE COLAS 


and Tamil immigrants into the island receives some 
elucidation from a comparison of the proper names 
in the Mahammsa account with those occurring in the 
Sangam poems. The synchronism between Gajabahu I 
and the Cera king ^enguttuvan was viewed with 
suspicion by Hultzsch ; but it rests not simply on the 
identity of the name of the Ceylonese king in the 
Mahammsa and in the Silappadikdram, but on the exis- 
tence of an active intercourse, political and cultural, 
between South India and its island-neighbour. 

The period covered by the extant literature of the 
&angam is unfortunately not easy to determine with 
any measure of exactness ; though it seems most likely 
that it extended from five to ten generations at the 

y 

most. Excepting the longer epics, the Silappadikaram 
and the Maaimekalai * which, by common consent, are 
taken to belong to the closing stages of the Sangam 
age, the poems have reached us in the form of 
systematic anthologies, some of which, like the 
Ahanfinuru, follow a highly intricate scheme in their 
arrangement. Each individual poem has generally 
attached to it a colophon on the authorship and 
subject-matter of the poem ; in the poems of the 
division called Puram which deal with concrete 
objective situations, the name of the king or chieftain 
to whom the poem relates, and the occasion which 
called forth the eulogy or description, are also found. 
It is from these colophons, and rarely from the texts 
of the poems themselves, that we can gather the names 
of many kings and chieftains and of the poets and 

# A relatively late date for this poem, later than A. D. 400, seems to be 
forced on us by the trend of the discussion of the relation between Canto XXIX 
of this poem and the Nyftyapraiftsa, unless indeed this Canto is treated as having 
suffered a later revision. See NyZyaprav7sa pp. xiii-xvi for a succinct review of 
the discussion by A. B. Dhruva. 



SOURCES 


poetesses patronised by them. The task of reducing 
these names to an ordered scheme in which the 
different generations of contemporaries can be marked 
off from one another has not yet commanded the 
attention and patient thought that it merits. Some 
writers have been apt to draw on their imagination and 
invent genealogical connections not supported by the 
sources ; others have confessed themselves beaten in 
the game and have denounced the colophons as late 
and untrustworthy guesses, not worth much considera- 
tion at the hands of the modern historian. * Before 
adopting this counsel of despair, one would do well to 
recollect that some anthologies, like the Kalittogai , are 
said to have been put together by a poet represented 
in the collection itself, and that no reasoned case has 
been made out against accepting the literary tradition 
relating to these anthologies and the individual poems 
in them, j* In any attempt to deal systematically 
with the data drawn from these poems, the casual 
nature of the poems and the wide difference between 
the purpose of the anthologist who brought them to- 
gether and that of the modern historian must not be 
lost sight of ; or one might fall easily into the error 
of finding a continuous story out of discontinuous 
material. 


On the history of the Cojas of the Vijayalaya line, 

there is an abundance of authentic 

The VijaySIaya line. . . „ m ,. 

material from diverse sources. Inis 
makes the narration of their history a relatively easy 
task. But of the fortunes of the Cojas in the interval 
between the end of the &angam age and the rise of 
Vijayalaya, that is, in the age of Pandya-Pallava 
dominance, we have practically no record. The scanty 

* P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar, History of the Tamils pp. 416*7. 
f For a lull discussion of this subject see Studies, I. 


[ 5 ] 



THE COLAS 


references to them in the Pallava and Calukya inscrip- 
tions are but feebly supplemented by the hagiology of 
Saivism and Vaisnavism relating to the period. 


The dynasty of Vijayalaya has left behind a large 

number of stone inscriptions and a few 

Inscriptions. . . , * , 

copper-plate grants of great value to 
the historian. The illustrious Rajaraja I, under whom 
South Indian monarchy attained a sweep and splendour 
till then unknown, conceived the idea of prefixing to 
his inscriptions a set historical introduction recount- 
ing, in an ornate and poetic style of Tamil, the 
main achievements of his reign and kept up-to-date 
by additions made to it from time to time. The 
narration of the descent of a king and, incidentally, 
of some salient facts relating to himself and his 
ancestors was for centuries before Rajaraja's accession 
the more or less universal practice of kings and chiefs 
who followed the norm set before them by the Smrti 
and Dharmamxtra of the country for the drawing 
up of charters ( Sasanam ) setting forth gifts {darn) 
of various kinds. But such narration formed part, 
generally speaking, only of copper-plate grants ( tamra - 
$8 satin) and was composed de novo on each separate 
occasion ; and this practice, while it gave full scope 
for the fancy of the poet-composer of the prasasti, 
sometimes resulted in contradictory and confusing 
statements made about the same king in different 
grants. In ordering, therefore, the writing, on stone, 
in set form and in the language of the people, of an 
official and authorised account of the leading events 
of his reign, Rajaraja initiated a practice which, as it 
was kept up by his successors, not only satisfied the 
boundless vanity of this race of kings, but furnishes 
to the historian a formal record of exceptional value 


[6.1 



SOURCES 


of the transactions of each reign.* Most of these 
historical introductions have been the subjects of 
scholarly discussion and elucidation by Hultzsch 
and Venkayya in the earlier volumes of the South 
Indian Inscriptions, and though these mey-kklrttikal 
occasionally merit the waggish description of them as 
poy-kktrttikal, still, as a rule, they furnish invaluable 
guidance to the internal chronology and general history 
of the reign, besides providing picturesque and trust- 
worthy accounts of particular events. 

Few of these inscriptions are purely historical in 
aim and character. The one at Tiruvendipuram, f 
recording in detail the tribulations of Rajaraja III 
and the relief he obtained from the intercession of 
his Hoysala contemporary, is the most considerable 
among the handful of purely historical inscriptions. 
Generally speaking, inscriptions record gifts and 
endowments of a public or private nature, usually to 
temples, mathas and Brahmans; sometimes the con- 
struction of a temple or its renovation, or the setting up 
of a new image forms the subject of an inscription. To 
provide for the maintenance of a lamp in a temple was 
a common method of earning religious merit for oneself 
or of expiating an offence. This was done by gifts of 
money or cattle calculated at so much or so many per 
lamp, and it was possible for two or more persons to 
endow a lamp jointly and apportion the merit among 
themselves in accordance with the share contributed 
by each. Often the lamps were to burn throughout 
the day and night, to be perpetual, (nanda, vilakku ) ; { 

* These introductions were, in some inscriptions, omitted in part owing to 
exigencies of space, e.g. 96 of 1925 of the eleventh year of Raj?ndra I. 

t 142 of 1902, EL vii p. 161. 

I It is interesting to observe that ParimSlalagar explains the phrase * poyy* 
vilakkam * in Eural 753 by c nandTi vilakku 


m 



THE COLAS 


but day -lamps, night-lamps and lamps for the occasions 
when puja was performed ( sandi ) were also known. * 
When the lamps were provided for by gifts of cattle, 
the expression ‘ sdod-muvd-pperadu ' invariably occurs, 
and it means literally ‘ the big sheep that neither die 
nor age/ That this was only a formal way of express- 
ing the permanence of the endowment becomes clear 
from the use of the same expression even where cows, 
and not sheep, are given. Moreover, if for any reason 
the original herd went down in numbers, and in one 
instance a herd of fifty cows was reduced to twenty-six 
in less than three years, f the fact was taken into 
account in assessing the obligations of the herdsmen 
for the future. Among the donors we find not only- 
kings and their officials, but several corporations includ- 
ing occupational and commercial guilds, caste organi- 
sations, military groups, and village assemblies, and 
many private individuals, men and women. The class 
of courtesans, the devaradiydr, ‘ servants of the Gods/ 
often made considerable benefactions to temples which 
were suitably recognised by privileges of a hereditary 
nature being conferred on them in relation to the 
services and festivals in the temples concerned. 

Several inscriptions were obviously intended to 
publish and preserve in a more or less permanent form 
decisions and agreements on matters of public 
importance. In this class, which though not extensive 
is doubtless of greater interest to the student than the 
more numerous donative records, we find royal orders 
on taxation and land-revenue, the resolutions of village 
assemblies on their own constitutional arrangements, 

* This, I believe, is the correct interpretation of the expression * Sandi • 

vttakktt * which figures so often in the inscriptions and is usually translated 
• * 

into “ twilight-lamp,” See Tamil Lexicon s. v. — canti. 

+ 120 of 1926 (year 6 of RajEndra I). 



' SOURCES 


their awards in disputes between communities or other 
corporate organisations, judgements delivered against 
persons guilty of theft, adultery, murder and other 
crimes, and political compacts between powerful feuda- 
tory chieftains of particular localities. Quite often, 
inscriptions on temple walls served the purpose of a 
public registration office by conserving a trustworthy 
record of sales, mortgages and other forms of transfers 
of property-rights in village-lands. * Sometimes a 
record is expressly described as the copy of a copper- 
plate grant, f A unique inscription from Tiruvidaivayil 
(Tanjore) preserves an otherwise unknown Devaram of 
Gnanasambandar on the local shrine. 


The language and script of the Cola inscriptions 

varied with the time and place of the 

^andtn^' records. The language most commonly 

employed was Tamil; some Sanskrit 
records are known, besides several bilingual inscrip- 
tions employing both. Kanarese and Telugu were 
also employed in the Karnataka and Telugu areas. The 
assumption has sometimes been made $ that Tamil was 
the prevailing language in Coja times in all places 
where the Tamil inscriptions of Coja rulers are found, 
and that Tamil receded from these areas at a time 
subsequent to the period of Coja rule in these parts. 
Such inscriptions are, however, only proof at best of 
the presence of some Tamil immigrants in non-Tamil 
regions that were brought for a time under Coja rule. 
The recovery of some Telugu and Kanarese records of 
the Vijayanagar rulers and their Nayak viceroys, and of 
the Hoysajas from distinctly Tamil arfias cannot prove 


• In 134 of 1926 (Rajak. 16) we have an instance of a temple raising money 
by mortgaging some of its land to a woman in the queen’s service. 

t 180 of 1894 (KulSttunga I, 23). 

X ARE. 1895, 1 7 and 1908, II 49. See also Venkayya IA. xxxvii pp. 199-200. 




THE COLAS 


that the Tamil country exchanged its language for 
Telugu or Kanarese during the period of these records. 
The long Marathi inscription of Tanjore of A. D. 1803 
is another instance. Vatteluttu was the prevalent script 
in which Tamil was written in the early centuries of the 
Christian era in the Pandya and Cera countries ; in the 
former it gave place to Tamil about the time of the 
Cola conquest * though “ in the insulated malainadtt 
(Malabar) it continued as late as the middle of the 
eighteenth century A. D. ” The Sanskrit language 
employed the Grantha script, closely allied to the 
Tamil in its evolution. Numerous as are the published 
inscriptions from which the evolution of the script can 
be traced with tolerable accuracy, chronological 
arguments drawn from palaeography are generally not 
so conclusive as might be wished, and must be received 
with caution. There are fewer chances of stone 
inscriptions being found to be forgeries than copper- 
plate grants and, as a matter of fact, very few Cola 
inscriptions are of doubtful authenticity. One of the 
most conspicuous examples is that of a record f pur- 
porting to be dated in the twenty-ninth regnal year 
of a Rajendracola Rajakesari. By mixing up in its 
historical introduction the events of different reigns, the 
record rouses suspicion; its palaeography belongs to 
the fourteenth century, and it is found in a temple 
of which the walls bear no other inscription of an 
earlier date than the reign of Rajaraja HI. 


From the tenth century A.D., the period of Cola 

rule was a great epoch in the building 
Temples. 8 t rtl ctural stone temples. The walls 

of the new temples, their pillars and their plinths were 
usually covered with inscriptions in course of time. 




• TAS. i p. 286. 

,• f 490 of 1926, ARE. 1927 II 82. 


[ 10 ] 



SOURCES 


The great temple of Rajarajesvara in Tanjore furnishes, 
in this respect, only a leading example of a practice 
very common at the time. We are expressly told * 
that before older structures were pulled down for 
rebuilding a shrine, the inscriptions on the walls were, 
in many cases, copied out in books and re-engraved 
later on the walls of the new structure. Even brick 
temples had sometimes inscriptions engraved on their 
walls, f We shall never know the extent of the damage 
inflicted in recent years by the ignorant piety of 
renovators of ancient shrines. Government have been 
unduly slack in stopping such damage ; they have 
even refused to lay down a procedure to be followed 
by renovators which would have minimised the extent 
of the damage. J Sometimes inscriptions are found 
engraved on rocks and boulders not forming parts of 
temples, but they are the exception. 

* AS 1. 1909-10 pp. 128-9 ; also 92 of 1895 and ARE. 1920 II. 17. 

f 123 of 1900 ; El. vii pp. 145-6. 

J ARE. 1902, I 8 and G.O. (Madras) 763 Public, 6th August 1902. 
After drawing attention to the destruction of the Kalinari Isvara by the inhabit- 
ants of TirunamanalHlr, the government epigraphist says in his report : “ The 
NattukkoJJai Chetties are spending year by year a portion of their large earnings 
in repairing the ancient laiva temples of Southern India. In the course of these 
* repairs * they have totally destroyed the following shrines with every one of 
their inscriptions : The EkamranStha temple at Conjeevaram, the Jambukesvara 
temple on the island of Srirangam, the central shrine of the temple at Tiruvanna- 
maiai, the same at Tiruvennainallur in South Arcot and the same at Tiruppugalur 
in the Tanjore District. Of some of the inscriptions in the first two temples, I 
have inked estampages in my office. The remainder are lost for ever, as the 
inscribed stones have been dressed again before rebuilding the temples. Many 
other temples are now going to be treated in the same manner.” Government 
declined to restrict the activities of renovators by the issue of prohibitory orders 
as suggested by the epigraphical department which thereupon made * a more 
vigorous attempt to secure impressions of the inscriptions thus threatened with 
destruction.' This has led to the accumulation of thousands of impressions in the 
epigraphy's office which have little chance, as things stand, of being published 
in any reasonable period even in the bald form adopted in SIL (Texts). 
There is also a real danger that in the race between publication and collection, 
collection might suffer in the future without publication gaining adequately. 



THE COLAS 


The three copper-plate grants known by the names 
, , . of Anbil, Leyden (larger) and Tiruva- 

Legendary kings. J ' f ' 

langadu, as well as the Kanyakuman 
stone inscription of Vlrarajendra, give long legendary 
genealogies intended to bring out the solar origin of 
the Cola dynasty. The Udayendiram plates of 
Prithivlpati II Hastimalla * give a much shorter list 
of the legendary ancestors of Vijayalaya. Of the 
several names in these legendary lists, which are by 
no means identical with one another, t only two or three 
names appear to be historical. Karikala, Koccenganan 
and probably also Killi may be identified with the kings 
of the same names of whom we hear in the Tamil 
literature of the Sangam age. Barring the names of 
these kings, however, and some common legends, — e.g., 
that of Manu sentencing his son to death as he had by 
an accident crushed a calf to death under his chariot- 
wheel, and the story of Sibi rescuing a dove from the 
pursuit of a vulture by offering it his own flesh— there 
is nothing else to indicate the relation in which the 
Colas of the Vijayalaya line stood to those of an earlier 
time mentioned in early Tamil literature. We shall see 
that even in regard to Karikala and Koccenganan the 
account given in the copper-plates is more legendary 
than historical and has little in common with the earlier 
literary accounts. 


Astronomical data. 


The stone inscriptions often contain astronomical 

data which, being less enigmatic than 
those from the Pandyan inscriptions of 
a later age, have yielded, in the hands of Kielhorn and 
Others, results of great value to Cola chronology. It is, 
however, easy to exaggerate the significance of such 


• S/I. II. No. 76. 

‘f’ For a comparison and critique of these lists see TAS. iii ; also El* xv. 


[ 12 ] 



SOURCES 


dftfdi. ^ Tho feet th&t & d&to has tiGcn recorded acci\ - 
rately does not prove the authenticity of a record, any 
more than an incorrect date proves that the record 
in which it is put forward is spuriouB.” * Relatively 
few inscriptions quote any definite era like the Saka 
or Kaiiyuga, f but in several instances the details 
furnished are so full and accurate that, together with 
the historical introductions characteristic of particular 
monarchs and the regnal years cited, they have led 
to the attainment of chronological results of precision 
and value. These results show that whenever possible 
the Cola monarchs followed the practice of choosing 
their successors and associating them in the administra- 
tion of the country in their own life-time. This must 
have been done with the double object of avoiding 
disputed successions and providing opportunities for 
proper training, sufficiently early in life, for the future 
sovereigns of the country. 


Administration. 


Sometimes years elapsed between the date when 

a royal order was issued or some 
transaction took place, and the time 
when it was engraved on stone. In a record J of a 
money-endowment which was made in the thirtieth year 
of Parantaka I, for instance, we are told that part of 
this money was invested in the thirty-fifth year with the 
assembly of a neighbouring village. Some important 


* Fleet, quoted by Rice, El. xiv, p. 340. 

*f Writing of the Gramam inscription of Parantaka I which is dated in a Kali 
year and in which the day is expressed by giving the number of days that had 
elapsed since the beginning of the era, this is what Kielhorn says : "I may add 
that this is the earliest known Coja date which can be verified and that, of the 
136 dates hitherto examined, it is the only one in which the era of Kaiiyuga is 
quoted. Among the same dates 18 quote the Saka era : and of these 13 are in 
Kanarese, 4 in Telugu and only 2 in Tamil inscriptions. The Saka year 991 is 
quoted in the date of a Tamil inscription of Vixarajendra which does not admit 
of verification.*’ EI. viii p. 261. 

t 164 of 1912, 


[ 18 ] 



THE COLAS 


inscriptions give a full account of the different stages 
that intervened between the issue of a royal order, 
especially in revenue matters, and its actual execution. 
A careful study of them throws much welcome light 
on the administrative machinery and practice of the 
time. They also tell us a great deal about the 
numerous taxes, tolls and dues of various kinds in 
terms not always readily understood, and about the 
numberless changes in place-names that formed such a 
marked feature of the Coja period. We also learn 
much of society, religion, arts and crafts from the 
inscriptions. 

Side-lights on Coja history are often obtained from 

the inscriptions of neighbouring dynas- 

inscriptions of ^ eg The Rastrakiita inscriptions of 
other dynasties. # • r 

the time of Kr§na III, those of the 
Eastern Cajukyas and some even of the Eastern 
Gangas, and the inscriptions of the Western Calukyas, 
often go to confirm or modify impressions obtained by 
a study of Cola records. The records of prominent 
feudatory dynasties, or of individuals like Kopperun- 
jinga, become important as we approach the period 
of the decline of Coja power. Hoysala records also 
explain in part the politics of the period of decline. 


Next to the inscriptions, monuments are the most 


Monuments. 


interesting and instructive source of 
history. And for the Cola period these 


take the form mostly of temples and the sculptured 
halls and towers in them. It was also the age when 


the art of casting bronze images attained its high 
watermark. Though several temples dating from Coja 
times are in a good state of preservation, very little 
has been done for the systematic study of their 


architecture and sculpture. M. J ouveau-Dubreuil has 


[ 14 ] 



SOURCES 


given a shrewd account of their general character- 
istics in his Archeologie du sud de I’Inde , and for the 
rest, we have only the haphazard observations scattered 
in the reports of the Archaeological department. When 
monuments standing on the surface have received such 
scant attention, it is no wonder that more ancient 
monuments buried in the soil remain undisturbed. 
Yet the importance of this branch of archaeology for 
the early history of Southern India can hardly be 
overestimated. * 

Numismatics, which forms an interesting and 

important branch of archaeology in 

Coins. , . , , . . , OJ 

relation to the history ot the rest or 
India, has so far not yielded, except in a few instances, 
any striking results for the general history of South 
India. South Indian coinages, however, have “ as yet 
not received a scientific treatment in any way to be 
compared with that which has obtained such valuable 
historical results from the coins of the North.” f The 
finds of Roman coins and the coinage of the Madura 
Sultanate have been rather closely studied and with good 
results. During the period of their paramountcy in 
Southern India, the Colas issued coins of gold, silver 
and copper. Specimens of the gold issues are extremely 
rare ; silver coins are not so rare, and copper pieces of 
different sizes are met with every day. These coins, 
generally speaking, are of two types — one carrying on 
both sides the Coja symbol of the tiger in the centre, 
flanked by the symbols of the subject powers, the Cera 
bow and the Pandyan fish, with a legend giving the name 
of the king ; the other, called by Prinsep and Elliot the 
* Ceylon type ’, in which the symbols give place to 

• ARA. 1912-13, 1 10 ; 1916-6, 1. 8. 
f Rapson«5<w/w of Indian History : Coins, p. 123. 

[ 15 ] 



THE COLAS 


‘a rude human figure, standing on the obverse and 
seated on the reverse.’ * As the * Ceylon type ’ makes, 
its appearance in the reign of Rajaraja 1 and the type 
with the symbols is known to persist for a long time 
after, even up to the reign of Kulottunga I, the view, 
common at one time, that coins of the * Ceylon type ’ 
are later than those of the other type must be modified. 
In fact, it may be doubted if we have any coin speci- 
mens clearly of an age anterior to Rajaraja I, so that 

the ‘ Ceylon type ’ would appear to be really coeval 

# 

with the other, f None of the known specimens of 
Cola coinB have yet been identified with any of the 
coins mentioned in contemporary inscriptions. 


Literature. 


Literature is in other countries the bed-rock of 

history; in India it is often a snare. 
The utter impossibility of basing any 
part of the ancient history of India solely, or 
even primarily, upon literary evidence has been 
deplored by several modern students. Not only is 
there a paucity of professedly historical works, but 
of very few really ancient compositions do we know 
with certainty the time and place of origin. Great 


* Elliot, p. 108. 

+ Very little was known of the real history of the Colas when Elliot wrote 
his great work on the ' Coins of Southern India! He indeed dates the origin of 
tlie * Ceylon type * in the eleventh century (p. 108) and calls it * a remarkable 
change ' from the earlier type ; the Cola coins actually figured and described by 
him (some of which were considered again by HulUsch I A. xxi p. 323) support 
this view. 

Rapson {op, cit. sec. 126) stereotypes the theory of Elliot and gives, 
doubtless by oversight, c, A. D, 1022 as the date not only of the introduction of 
the Ceylon type but of 1 the beginning of the reign of RajarSja Cola/ He also 
describes the figures in the Ceylon types thus : " obv . king standing : rev . king 
seated/* It may be doubted if the * rude human figure * (Elliot) which Tufnell 
(Hints, p. 11) took to be that of a * raksasa’ was intended to represent the 
king. A unique silver coin with legend Sri RajarajadSva * (Hultssch IA, xxv, 
p. 317) combines the squatting figure on the obv, with the symbols and legend 
on the rev. 


[ 16 ] 



SOURCES 


books which, like the B&mUyaqa and the Mah&bharata, 
have for ages served as popular cyclopaedias of 
national culture, were frequently revised; the time, 
the authorship and the extent of such revisions are so 
obscure that it is hopeless to make an intelligent use of 
data drawn from these works. * Lastly, in the few 
works of which we have definite knowledge in regard to 
authorship and provenance, a great amount of space is 
taken up by conventional descriptions, and it is seldom 
that we come across the plain downright statement of 
a fact. In Tamil literature, the poems of the iWgam 
age are very realistic and prima facie trustworthy 
and do not share the demerits of the literature of a 
more fulsome age ; but by a cruel irony of fate these 
poems are involved in some chronological obscurity ; 
and the compositions, especially those of the Cola 
period, of which we know the authors and dates, 
exhibit in abundant measure all the defects of court 
poetry. Still, after all allowance is made, the evidence 
from indigenous literature for the history of the Coja 
kingdom will be seen to be not inconsiderable in 
volume and will, if used with care, go far to eke out 
the testimony of archaeology. 


The Cola empire under Vijayalaya and his succes- 
sors witnessed one of the greatest periods of literary 
and religious revival in South India. Sometime in 
the tenth or eleventh century A. D. ; the canonical 
works of South Indian Saivism were arranged more or 
less in their modern form by Nambi Andar Nambi, who 
was also its first hagiographer and whose work formed 
the basis of the far more elaborate Tiruttottdar PurSaam, 
known generally as Periya PurSaam , of &ekkilar, a 
contemporary of Kulottunga II in the twelfth century. 


• Foulkes’s articles in the Indian Antiquary on u Civilisation of the Dekkan 
down to the 6th Century B. C." (viii pp. 1 ff ) are a measure of what is possible 
with only such sources at our disposal* 


[ 17 ] 



THE COLAS 


Great as is the value of the tradition preserved by these 
writers, they are to be accepted more as witnesses to 
beliefs current in their own times than as correctly 
recording what we should now call the early history of 
Saivism. This distinction has not been sufficiently 
considered by those writers who have drawn rather 
freely from &ekkilar in their accounts of transactions 
that took place centuries before his time. Moreover, 
a careful study of the Periya Puranam reveals that 
many details for which there is no warrant in Narabi 
Andar Nambi’s short notes on the saints make their 
appearance for the first time in Sekkilar's account; 
and for aught we know, &ekkilar was guided only by 
his imagination and by popular belief. Such details, 
however valuable as reflecting a definite, and as it 
happened the final, stage in the growth of &aiva 
hagiology, should not be accepted, without sufficient 
corroboration from other sources, as part of the early 
history of Saivism in South India ; much less would 
they be entitled to credence if they are opposed to 
the testimony of contemporary inscriptions or other 
evidence equally trustworthy. It seems only proper, 
therefore, that we accept the beautiful pen-pictures 
which abound in Sekkilar's great work as idealised 
accounts of life and society as he saw them in his own 
day rather than as studies and portraits of a bygone 
age. Thus the description of the Brahman village of 
Adanur and of the hamlet of pariahs attached to it 
in the story of Nanda,' the pariah saint, may well be 
used in any re-construction of rural life in Cola times, 
allowance being made, of course, for the play of the 
well-understood conventions of literature that dominate 

such accounts. 

* * $ * 

Equally remarkable is the settlement of the 
Vaisnava canon of the “ Four Thousand Sacred 

[ 18 ] 



SOURCES 


Hymns ” which took place about the same time as the 
Saiva canon was fixed by Nambi Andar Nambi. The 
Divya-suri-carita and the Guru - paramparai form the 
Vai^nava counterpart of the Periya Pursuant from 
which they differ in providing an elaborate, though 
impossible, chronology for the lives of the Vai§nava 
saints, the Alvars. In addition to being a record of tradi- 
tions and beliefs prevalent at the time of their compo- 
sition, these works furnish the background necessary 
for a proper estimate of Ramanuja and his place in the 
history of Vaisiiavism. And the great commentaries on 
the hymns of the Alvars, written in a peculiar jargon 
more Sanskrit than Tamil, though perhaps of a slightly 
later age than the Cola period, still have great value for 
us, as they record in a casual manner several incidents 
of Cola times. This feature, as well as the idiosyncra- 
sies of language that mark these commentaries, some- 
times assists us in elucidating the Cola inscriptions. 

Among works of secular literature which can be 
dated with accuracy, the most interesting from our 
point of view are the VlrakUiyam of Buddhamitra, the 
Ka lingattupparani of Jayangondar and the three ulfis 
and the Kulottimqan Pillait-tamil of Ottakkuttan. The 
first is a work on Tamil grammar composed by a 
Buddhist writer in the reign of Virarajendra. The 
Yapparungalam and the Yapparungalak-karikai are other 
works on one branch of grammar, prosody, by a Jaina 
writer, Amitasagara, of somewhat earlier date. These 
three works possess glosses slightly later than the 
original texts ; and the examples cited by the authors 
of these commentaries to illustrate particular rules 
of grammar are often of uncommon interest ; they 
provide fresh information, and confirm, and some- 
times elucidate, data drawn from the inscriptions. The 
Kalingattupparani of Jayangondar is a war-poem of the 


[ 19 ] 



THE COLAS 


conventional parani type, which has for its subject- 
matter the conquest of the Kalinga country by 
Karunakarat-tondaiman, the celebrated generalissimo 
of Kulottunga I. The poem is justly celebrated 
for the excellence of its diction and its superb 
display of metrical effects ; it fetched the title of 
Kavic-cakravarti (Emperor of Poetry) to its author, 
a title which seems to have been kept on as a sort of 
poet-laureateship, or at any rate was conferred also 
on Ottakkuttan who, though himself a poet of no 
mean order, paid his predecessor the high compliment 
of imitating him closely in his Takka yayapparapi on a 
well-known theme of mythology. For all its fabulous 
and supernatural elements, and the absurd hyperboles 
characteristic of it, the Kalinga Ituppar a ni is still 
valuable to the historian as it furnishes much welcome 
information on the Cola genealogy and on the details 
of the Kalinga campaign of Kulottunga, including the 
route taken by his army. Parts of the poems were 
translated into English by V. Kanakasabhai some years 
ago, and the translation was published in the Indian 
Antiquary. Ottakkuttan chose the aid, as the vehicle 
of his encomiums on three successive monarchs who 
followed Kulottunga I. The ula is, like the parani, 
a conventional literary form. If the parani is par 
excellence a war-poem, the ula is just its opposite ; free 
from the cares and anxieties of his high station, with 
no troubles domestic or foreign to cloud his happiness, 
the king with his retinue is conceived as going for a 
stroll round the capital city ; the beginning of the ulS 
generally gives a more or less studied account of the 
achievements of the king and his ancestors, and pro- 
vides a somewhat detailed description of the chief men 
among his courtiers who accompany him and the place 
they occupy in the administration of the country ; this 

[ 20 ] 



SOURCES 


part of the poem is of considerable historical vahie. 
What follows in the ul& is not of much immediate 
interest to us ; it is, to a modern student, a monotonous 
account of the amorous looks and the tell-tale acts of 
the women of the city who, at the sight of the king, 
become agitated and love-sick. Besides the three ulas , 
on Vikrama, Kulottunga II and Rajaraja II, Ottak- 
kuttan also wrote the Rulottunga-kolan - pillait - tamil, a 
child -poem on Kulottunga II; notable for its fine 
sentiment and high eloquence, this poem is not nearly 
so useful to us as the ulSs. 

The number of late chronicles and Sthalapuranas 
is legion. The Navacolacarita , a Vira-Saiva compilation 
available in a Kanarese and a Telugu version, the 
BrhadUvara-mShfttmya or the Colavam§acaritra in Sans- 
krit, of which there is a Tamil translation among the 
Mackenzie Mss., and the KongudUa-Bajakkal , also in the 
same collection of manuscripts, are the leading examples 
of this class. But as Fleet has observed, * the fanciful 
nature of such works and their utter want of reliability 
for any purposes of early history “ are disclosed at 
once by the very slightest thoughtful examination.’' 

Though not copious, the evidence from Chinese 

writings is extremely valuable on 
Foreign e idence. accoun j Q f se ttled chronology and 

the matter-of-fact nature of the data furnished by it. 
Arab travellers, Muslim historians and the early 
European travellers like Marco Polo give important 
hints on the impression made by South India on 
foreign observers in those days. This line of external 
evidence is of particular value for an understanding 
of the nature and extent of the foreign commerce 
of the period. 

* /A, xxx pp. 6-7, 

[ 21 ] 



Chapter II. 

EARLY NOTICES 

According to tradition, the Coja country comprised 

the land between two streams having 
The Country . ^] )e same name, Veljiiru,* in the north 

and the south, the sea on the east and Kottaikkarai in 
the west. This area includes the modern districts of 
Trichinopoly and Tanjore and part of the Pudukkottah 
state. The Kaveri and its branches including the 
Coleroon (KolHdam) dominate the landscape of this 
generally flat country which slopes gently towards 
the sea. The low tableland of Vallam broken by 
small ridges of grit and sandstone to the south and 
south-west of Tanjore, and a number of protruding 
masses of crystalline rock, of which the Trichinopoly 
rock in the centre of the fort is the best known, are 
the only relief to the monotony of the level surface. 
To find any hills of importance, we must turn to the 
northern taluks of the Trichinopoly district lying on 
the border, if not altogether outside, of the Coja country 
proper. The delta of the Kaveri is a large alluvial plain 
“ devoid of all natural eminences, save the ridges and 
hillocks of blown sand, which fringe the narrow strip 
of beach along the sea-coast. 4 The sea rolls upon a 
shelving sandy shore unbroken by rocks of any kind ' ; 
hence the coast is remarkably monotonous in aspect. 

* * kaflal kilakkut-terkuk-karai puraj Vejlaru 
ku<}a-tisaiyil ko^aikkaraiyuin— va^a tisaiyii 
Snattu VeJJarirupattu nark ad am 
SSnaJluk-kellaiyenac-col. 

Though ascribed by some to Kamban (see e. g. p. 56 of the Solamandala satakam ) 
thevenbS seems to be more ancient in origin; others ascribe it to Auvaiyar. 
(Taylor III 42). KSftaik-karai “ means 1 fort bank * and tradition says that it 
refers to the great embankment of which traces still stand in the Kujittalai taluk 
of Trichinopoly "—Gazetteer of the Tanjore Dt. I p. 15. 


[ 22 ] 



EARLY NOTICES 


The whole surface of the delta is one even level of 
pad_dy fields interspersed only with tops or clumps of 
cocoanut, mango and other fruit trees. There are no 
forests or tall tree jungles." * The soil is very favour- 
able also to the bamboo and the plantain. 

The glory of the Kaveri forms an inexhaustible 

theme of early Tamil poetry. This 

The KuvSri. " +* j 

noble stream was released from his 
water-pot by the sage Agastya in response to the 
prayer of the king Kanta and for the exaltation of the 
‘ children of the sun.’ f She was the special banner 
of the just race of the Co]as. and she never failed them 
in the most protracted drought. The yearly freshes in 
the Kaveri formed the occasion of a carnival in which 
the whole nation from the king down to the meanest 
peasant took part. 

Kaveripatnam on the coast, about eight miles to 

the north of Tranquebar, serves to 

Towns 

identify the Kaveri proper from amidst 
its more considerable offshoots that find their way to 
the sea, and the little village apparently marks the site 
of the Coja emporium of ancient renown. $ Negapatam, 
about ten miles south of Karaikkal, also on the sea 
board, was perhaps known to Ptolemy as an important 
town ; at any rate it became a seat of trade and the 
centre of many religions faiths including Buddhism, 
long before it attracted the attention of European 
merchants and missionaries. Tanjore, Trichinopoly, the 

# Tanjore Manual , pp. 4-5 ; Trichinopoly Manual , pp.2-3. 

+ Maninftkalat I, 9-12 ; 23-4 

X a According to some it is the Chabaris Emporium mentioned by Ptolemy 
in the 1st cent. A.D, The inscriptions secured from the modem KSverippaJJanam 
and its vicinity leave no doubt as to its identity with KSvirippUmpaftinam alias 
Puhar, though the monuments of Pallavamccaram and SaySvanesvara are not of 
•uch early date as could be expected" ARE . 1919 II 2. 

[23J 



THE COLAS 


modem representative of the more ancient Uraiyur 
which is now a suburb of Trichinopoly, and Kumba- 
konam are the other notable cities of the Cola country. 
Gangaikonda-colapuram, at the meeting point of the 
modern districts of Trichinopoly, S. Arcot and 
Tanjore, rose into prominence as the Cola capital in 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and is now a small 
place with a magnificent temple in ruins. 

Of the origin of the name Coja we have no know- 
ledge whatever. The learned Parime- 

The name Cola , , 

lalagar is inclined to make it the name, 
like Pandya and Cera, of a ruling family or clan of 
immemorial antiquity * and renown. The story of the 
eponymous brothers Ceran, Solan and Pandiyan is 
doubtless an instance of euhemerism. f Whatever its 
origin, { the name Co]a was from the earliest times 
used to describe the people and the country subject to 
the sway of the Cola dynasty of rulers. Col. Gerini’s 
attempt to connect the word with the Sanskrit Kala 
(black), and with Kola which “in the early days 
designated the dark-coloured pre- Aryan population of 
southern India in general,” is hardly more convincing 
than the efforts to derive it from Tamil ‘ Colam ’ 
(millet) or Sanskrit ‘ Cora ’ (thief). § 

# See Kural No. 955 and his gloss on it. 

+ Caldwell, Tmnevelly, p. 12. 

J Mr. L. V. Ram as warn i Aiyar, to whom 1 referred the question, writes to me 
as follows : u Tam. Cola does not appear to be directly connected with any 
extant Tamil or Dravidian base. This fact of course need not necessarily lead 
us to postulate a foreign origin for the word. • * • * * If the postulate 
that — U — may have in some circumstances (for which we have parallels in 
Dravidian) changed to— d — , is justified, then one might conceivably connect 
CWa with C&1 — with the meanings ‘ to whirl 1 to hover*, and explain 
* C51a * as ‘ hover er. ' " 

§ See Gerlni •Researches^ pp. 85 ff and 101*3. There appears to be some other 
evidence, however, in support of Gerini’s view that a stream of dark emigrants of 
the negrito race, the descendants of the so-called Raksasas of old, came to Malaya 
from Southern India and were followed by their early successors, the Dravidians, 


[ 24 ] 



EARLY NOTICES 


Other names in common use for the Colas are 

Killi, Valavan and Sembiyan. Killi 

Other names. « « ^ 1*19 « 

perhaps comes from ku , meaning 
* dig ’ or ‘ cleave ' and conveys the idea of a 1 digger ’ ; * 
this word often forms an integral part of early Cola 
names like Ncdungilli, Nalangilli and so on, but almost 
drops out of use in later times. ‘Valavan’ is most 
probably connected with 'volant’, ‘fertility’, and 
means owner or ruler of a fertile country, such as the 

r 

land of the Kaveri was. Sembiyan is generally taken 
to mean a descendant of Sibi, f a legendary hero 
whose self-sacrifice in saving a dove from the pursuit 
of a falcon figures among the early Cola legends 
and forms the subject-matter of the Sibijataka among 
the Jataka stories of Buddhism. + 


The Cojas adopted the tiger as their crest; the 

same animal was figured on their 
banner. Not one of the numberless 
references to this Cola emblem which occur in Tamil 
literature tells us anything of its origin. Some late 

local chieftains of the Telugu country who claimed 
descent from Karikala adopted the lion-crest. § 

who constituted the pre-Aryan population of India, cf. Elliot Smith, Human 
History pp. 69-71. But Gerini exaggerates the cultural importance of these pre- 
historic movements of population. He confounds them with later ones that took 
place in historical times after Southern India was more or less aryanised in its 
culture, and he goes on to suggest that the Indian culture of Siam, Kambhoja and 
other places had its origin in the earliest prehistoric movements, (p. 101 ). f*or 
Co|a * < c3ra, thief, see Bhandarkar, Carmichael Lectures , 1918, pp. 8-9. 

• Dr. Pope suggested the fanciful equation ICijli '==■ Pallavan (I A. xxix 
p. 250.) Even if PaJlava is accepted as the correct form of the word, rather than 
Pallava (Skt. 4 sprout ’), it would mean more properly 4 people dwelling in low 
lands' (pajjam), and not ‘diggers'. It may be doubted if the Pallavas were 
indigenous to Southern India ; and unless they were, it would be vain to look for 
a Dravidian origin for their name. In any case, they were by no means the same 

as the C31as, 

*j» See e.g. the rasdliyam , comment on Tattita, v, 3* 

l Y&zdzm—AJan/a I pp. 4-7. Kro m—Boro Budur vol. i, pp. 275—7. 

§ EL xi, p. 338. 


d 


( 25 ] 



THE COLAS 


And the Sindas of the Naga family, who used the 
Vyaghralanchana, had the story that Sinda, their 
eponymous ancestor, born of the serpent king Dhara- 
nendra at Ahicchatra in the region of the Sindhu, was 
reared by a tiger. A slightly different form of the 
stoiy makes him the offspring of a union between God 
Siva and the Sindhu, brought up on tiger’s milk by the 
king of serpents. * These late inventions only confirm 
the fact that the origin of the tiger-crest was forgotten 
quite early by those who had adopted it. 


The grammarian Katyayana knew of the Codas, f 

The earliest records which mention the 

Early References. j 1 • t § j j j • . i 

Colas and winch can be dated with 
certainty are the As okan inscriptions, X where they are 
mentioned among kingdoms which, though not subject 
to Asoka, were on frien dly terms with him. The Cojas, 
like the Pandyas, are spoken of in the plural in all the 
versions of the Asokan edicts, and this has been held to 
imply that ‘ in Asoka’s time there were more than one 
Coda and one Pandya king § 


Two or three poets of the &angam make rather 
enigmatic references to an invasion of the South by 
the Moriyar (Manryas) and one of them, Mamulanar, 
also speaks of the wealth of the Nandas hidden 
under the Ganges at Pataliputra. All the three poets 
agree that, in the course of the invasion, the Maury as 
cut for their chariots a new path across some rocky 
mountain. Mamulanar alone furnishes some more 
details. He says that the Vadugar formed the vanguard 
of the invading Mauryas (Aham 281); elsewhere 

* EI. iii 231-2. 

' + Ma>hUbh&$ya % ed, Kielhorn, II p. 270. 

J Vide Hultzsch — Asoka Inscriptions — Index s. v. Cu[a. 

§ D. R* Bh andark ar-^4 soka p. 38. 


[ 26 ] 



EARLY NOTICES 


he adds that the Kosar undertook the subjugation 
of the South and that, as the Mohur chieftain conti- 
nued defiant, the Maury as came down with their 
great forces on a warlike expedition to the South 
(Aham 251 ). Now, as Anoka distinctly states that the 
Tamil kingdoms were not politically subject to him, 
and as there is little possibility of any Mauryan 
invasion of the extreme South having taken place 
after his time, we have necessarily to ascribe the 
events mentioned by Mamulanar to a period anterior 
to Asoka’s accession. In other words, this poet must 
be taken to provide a much earlier and doubtless more 
dependable, if somewhat meagre, confirmation of the 
stories of Bindusara’s conquests in the Deccan and 
Southern India recorded by the Tibetan historian 
Tariinath. * The Kosar, who occupied the Tulu 


• Set! M. S. Ramaswami Aiyangar, Studies in South Indian Jainism, pp. 127 ff, 
for a succinct summary of the evidence on the subject ; also Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, 
Beginnings, pp. 88 ff. Following Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar, M. S. R. lays 
(p. 134- fT. op. cit.) undue stress on vamba in the phrase vamba mbriyar 
(A/iatn 251), quotes late and obscure Gutta legends of the tenth century A. I). in 
support of his notion that the Imperial Guptas were confounded |by Mamfi- 
lanar with the more ancient Mauryas, and seeks to establish a fifth century date 
foi Mamtilanar and his contemporaries of the Sangam. The fact that Pandit 
Raghava Aiyangar does not now see as much force in these arguments as he once 
did, and lias suppressed them in the second edition of his S7ran benguttuvan > 
perhaps renders otiose any detailed discussion of these views, fhe phrase 

* 7 vamba mbriyar ' is used by Mamtilanar only once ; he himself, elsewhere, talks 
only of the ' mbriyar ’ and so do the two other poets, Parankorranar {Ah am 69) 
and Stirniyanar {Puram 175). The expression cannot therefore be made much 
of, especially because 1 vamba' is an adjective with several meanings of which 

* unsteady,’ 1 restless,’ is admittedly one. And supposing for a moment that 
Mam\llan«tr was thinking of the Imperial Mauryas, he knows of the Nandas and 
their wealth, — nothing could have struck him more than the restlessness^ ot 
these Mauryas, eager to annex all the kingdoms of India to their empire. Even 
accepting the other meaning suggested for the word 1 vamba / * new,’ we are not 
aware of any insuperable difficulty in supposing that, at the time when MSmfilanSr 
was writing, the Mauryan expansion to the South was a fact of rt cent history. 
One fails to see moreover how some confusion between the Mauryas and the 
Guptas that marks the legendary genealogy of an obscure clan of rulers m 
North India can furnish an analogue for a similar confusion in the mind of a 
South Indian Tamil poet ot unknown age ; much less, how such inferential 
confusion can be made the basis for suggesting a date or the P^ e ^ an 
compositions. M. S. R. was strongly influenced by Smith s view of Samu - 
gupta the Indian Napoleon’s campaign in the South based on his ea y 

[ 27 ] 



THE COLAS 


country and have been with good reason identified 
■with the Satiyaputa of the Asoka inscriptions, * 
perhaps agreed to serve as wardens of the marches for 
the Mauryan Empire in the South ; when they found 
the chieftain of Mob Or troublesome and themselves 
unequal to subjugating him, they were assisted in their 
task by the advent of Mauryan troops with a Vaduga 
vanguard. Mohiir is probably represented to-day by its 
modern namesake in the South Arcot district, not far 
from the famous Attiir pass through which, in recent 
times, Haidar Ali came down so often on the southern 
plains, f 


If this view of the relation of the Maury as to the 

South Indian states is accepted as 

Relation to Mauryan correc t ) it would follow that there Was 
Empire. 

a slight set-back to the Mauryan power 
in the south sometime late in Bindusara’s reign or early 
in Asoka’s, as these states, especially Satiyaputa, seem 
to have improved their political status in regard to the 
Mauryan Empire before the date of the Rock Edicts 
II and XIII. 


The part taken from the sixth century B. 0. by 

Southern India in the grownm com- 

Periplus. ® n 

merce between the Western countries 

identification of Palakka of the Allahabad pillar inscription with Palghat, which 
is no longer considered sound. Mr. P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar says of Ah am 281 : 
“The Kosar are called here Varjugar.” It may be so, in which case Vadugar 
munnura of this verse should be a brief allusion to the failure of the Kosai 
to subdue Mohfir, narrated at greater length in Aham 251. Put Mr. Aiyangar's 
assertion that the Konkan Mauryas were the only possible \foriyar who in 
conjunction with the Kosar, could have attempted a raid into the Tamil count/v ” 
is hardly convincing. See his Tamils pp, 522-3. 

• It should be observed that, though Satiyaputa occurs in the singular in the 
Asoka inscriptions, the Kosar are always mentioned in the plural in Tamil 
literary works. 

+ Studies in South Indian Jainism p. 140, Many other places also bear the 
name MShtSr and the identification of the place must be considered tentative. 


% 


[ 28 ] 



EARLY NOTICES 


and those in the East as far aB China is sufficiently 
known. * Of the direction and nature of this trade and 
of its economic importance, something will be said 
further on. Here we may note that to this commerce 
we owe, in the main, two valuable notices of Southern 
India and the Cola country separated by about half 
a century. The Periplus Maris Erythraei is the intei’- 
esting handbook of an Alexandrian merchant, “ which 
was written in the time of Domitian ( 81-96 A. D. ), and 
by the evidence furnished by Pliny the Elder.” f 
The anonymous author of this short treatise tells us a 
little about the Cola country in particular which, con- 
sidering the paucity of early notices of the Coromandel 
coast, is of uncommon interest to the student of Cola 
history. He says : “ Beyond Colchi there follows 
another district called the coast country, which lies on 
a bay, and has a region inland called Argaru.” This 
statement is best understood as pointing to the division 
of the Coja country into two parts, a coastal district 
and an inland district. There is, as we shall see, 
evidence of Coja rule from two centres at this period — 
Puhar or Kiiverippattinam on the coast and Uraiyur 
inland. Pattinam , meaning a port-town, was the name 
of the Coja capital on the coast, and the phrase in 
the Periplus , 1 the coast country, which lies on a bay', 


# See Kennedy fRAS . 1898 pi>. 248-87 for a full discussion of this subject. 
Prof. Jules Bloch in his paper u A *om du Riz M (. Etudes Asiatiques Vol. I, pp. 
37-47) denies that the Greek term for rice is derived from Tam. Arist ; and he 
holds that there is not much evidence, philological or other, in proof of the part of 
South India in this trade, which might after all have been confined, at any rate 
until a very late stage, to Northern India and to the land routes. L# V. Rama - 
swami Aiyar /A . Vol. lix pp. 178 ff., after a careful examinatioi of Bloch’s 
position on the etymology of the Gk. Oruson t comes to the conclusion: laiigi 

or Varizi may be postulated for Dravidian from which, with characteristic 


modifications, the Greeks could have borrowed that word.” Kennedy’s conclusion 
that maritime trade between South India and the West dates from the sixth or 
even the seventh century B. C. still seems good. 


f Rostovt zzfi—'Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire p. 91. 


[ 29 ] 



THE COLAS 


unmistakably recalls the Pattinam of the Pattinappalai, * 
specially as it is placed in contrast with ‘ a region inland 
called Argaru,’ which doubtless is the same as Uraiyur. 
The author has named each of the districts after its 
chief town. It is remarkable that, while he knows the 
name 1 Cerobothra ’ and ‘Pandian,’ he does not 
mention ‘ Cola.’ His information on the east coast of 
India is meagre and apparently based on hearsay, f 
He mentions also three market towns and harbours 
* where the ships put in from Damirica and from the 
north which ‘ in order as they lie ’ are ‘ first Camara, 
then Poduca, then Sopatma ' — names now not easily 
identified t, though Sopatma may be the same as 
So-pattinam of Tamil literature, now called Marksinam. 

Writing about half a century later, the geographer 

Ptolemy has rather more to tell us 

Ptolemy. . . ^ . , . 

about the Cola country and its ports 
and inland cities. § Leaving aside all doubtful names 
which cannot be properly identified, we find that he 
gives particulars sufficiently precise of the positions of 
Kaveripatnam (Khaberis) at the mouth of the Kaveri 
and of Negapatam (Nikama) ; and as Cunningham has 
said : “ Coja is noticed by Ptolemy, whose Orthura regia 
Sornati must be Uraiyur, the capital of Soranatha, or 
the king of the Soringae, that is the Soras, Choras or 
Cholas.” Ptolemy also makes mention of the ‘ Sorai 

* The quotations are from Selioff • Per ip l us. Schofif says : “ Coast country 
is from the native name, * Cola coast/ 4 Colamamjalam/ " (p. 24-1). This is hardly 
satisfactory as Cola-man^alam only means Coja country/ not ‘ coast.* 

+ See Rawlinson — Intercourse between India and the Western World 

pp. 121-2. 

X Schoff — p. 242. Kanakasabhai p. 29. Also IA. viii, p. 149 n. QJMS . xxi. 
pp. 413-4. 

§ See Ch. I, sections 12, 13, 68, and 91 in Me. Crindlc’s edn of Bk. VII in 
I A. xiii. Also Caldwell— Comp, Grammar . pp. 92 ff. Kanakasabhai (p. 29) 
makes many shrewd suggestions on the identification of Ptolemy’s names. 

H indent Geography p. 631. See also Caldwell— Comp. Grammar p. 93. 

[ 30 ] 



EARLY NOTICES 


nomads ’ with ‘ Sora the captial of Arkatos.’ “ One is 
strongly tempted to suppose that here," as Caldwell 
remarks, “ the names given by the natives of the 
country to his informants had got transposed," and 
that, consequently, we have to consider Arkatos as the 
capital of the Sorai nomads. Arcot is not so modern a 
name as it is often imagiued to be. * A Cola prince- 
ling by name Alisi is said to have had for his residence 
“ Arkkadu. surrounded by paddy fields ", f and very 
likely Arkkad means “ forest of Ar " ( Bauhinea 
Racemosa), ar or atti being a Cola emblem. This 
Arkkadu may or may not be identical with the Arcot 
celebrated in later days as the seat of the Nawabs of 
the Carnatic ; but it is probably the same as Ptolemy’s 
Arkatos. $ From the statement of Ptolemy on the 

• Caldwell says: “General Cunningham objects to this identification that 
Arcot is quite a modern name ; hut it must, as Col. Yule has pointed out, be at 
least as old as 1340 A.D., for it is mentioned by Ibn Batuta. The name is properly 
7ir—kJld } Tam. the six forests, and the Hindus of the place regard it as an ancient 
city, though not mentioned by the name in the Puranas, and point out the * six 
forests’ in which six of the rttis of the ancient period had their hermitage.” (op.cit. 
pp. 93-4.) Such local legends are not of much value in the face of the much 
stronger and earlier evidence cited. Ptolemy places Arkatos in the country between 
Mt. Bettigo and Adeisathros ( VII, 1. 68 ) ; but on account of the inextricable 
confusion into which he falls over the second of these names (IA. xiii. p. 337), 
this does not help us much in the location of Arkatos on a modern map. 
The references in the early Tamil literature are valuable in this respect. Cunning- 
ham was doubtless influenced by Yuan-chwang’s data about Chu-lien when he 
proposed to identify Ptolemy’s Sora, the capital of Arkatos, witn Zora or Jora 
(the Jorampun of the maps), an old town lying immediately under the walls of 
Karnul (Anc. Geogr . p. 626.1 

t Poem No. 190 (anonymous) of the Narrinai has the following 

tengamal viritar— lyareralis'i 
vantjumusu neyda — nellhjai malaru 
mariyalangalani — yarkka^anna. 

There is also a stray venbS ( Pertindogai No. 988) which mentions AHsi-kadu t the 
kUdu (forest) of Alisi. This princeling had a son Sendan, who i . sometimes 
connected with the Coja capital Uraiyilr {Kurundogai No. 258). Arkkadu is said 
to be in the Coja country by the editor of the Warrinai, 

J See Yule and Burnell- Hobson-Jobson s. v. Arcot, where it is pointed out 
that of several places of this name in the Southern districts besides the town of 
Arcot near Vellore, one in Tanjore would correspond best with Harkatu of Ibn 
Batuta. 



THE COLAS 


* Sorai nomads ’ and ‘ Arkatos,’ the inference has been 
made * that there were two different Cola countries 
or kingdoms at the same time ; it is quite possible, 
however, that the ‘ Sorai nomads ' were some nomadic 
tribe or tribes in the Cola country itself. That such 
tribes were in existence, and that some of the early 
Cola kings, especially Karikala , made an effort to 
civilise them and train them to more settled ways of 
life, is borne out by Tamil literature. , 


Pali books. 


The early chapters of the Mahavam&a contain 

testimony, sufficiently authentic and 
precise, to the early intercourse bet- 
ween the Cola country and the island of Ceylon ; and 
generally, the early literature of Pali Buddhism makes 
very valuable, though scanty, allusions to the land of 
the Colas and Kaveripattinam, its most celebrated 
emporium. Some of these references must be as old 
as the Periplus , if not earlier. “ The Questions of 
King Milinda,” a Buddhist work of the beginning 
of the Christian era, mentions Kola-Pattana among 
the best-known sea-port towns of the time, and Kola- 
pattana must be, says Rhy s D avids, some place on 
the Coromandel coast, f Most probably this is a 
reference to Kaveri-pattinam, the Pattana par excellence 
on the Coromandel coast, which figures elsewhere in 
Pali Buddhist literature as well. M. Sylvain Levi has 
pointed out that Puhar, the great centre of traffic 
between Southern India and the islands of the Archi- 
pelago, was the original abode of the somewhat obscure 
sea-goddess Manimekhala — “ girdle of gems ” — after 
whom Madhavi’s celebrated daughter and the poem of 
Battan narrating the story of her spiritual life came to 


• D. R. Bh&ndsuk&t’Asoka p. 39. 

t Rhys Davids-TA* Questions of King Milinda {SBE.) i, p. xliv and 
ii p.269. 




EARLY NOTICES 

be called. * In the Jataka story, Akitti, in order to 
escape the attentions of his admirers, left the neighbour- 
hood of Benares for the Tamil country where he spent 
some time in a garden near Kaveripattana. 

According to the Mahavama, the island of Ceylon 
began to fall under powerful Cola influences very early 
in its history. The relations between the Damijas and 
the natives of the island form one of the main strands in 
the narrative of this valuable chronicle, and the syn- 
chronisms furnished by it are among the more import- 
ant sources of our knowledge of Tamil history and 
chronology. Though on several occasions the chronicle 
speaks only of Damijas in general, still the distinction 
between the Pandya and Coja divisions of the Tamil 
country is well known and clearly observed in the 
Malta ramsa. Towards the middle of the second century 
B. C., a Damila of noble descent, Elara by name, came 
to Ceylon from the Cola country (Cojarattha), over- 
powered Asela who was then ruling in the island, and 
himself reigned as king for forty-four years, * with even 
justice towards friend and foe on occasions of disputes 
at law/ | Many stories are told in illustration of the 

• IlfQ. vi 597 tT. Without stopping to argue the matter fully, M. Sylvain 
Levi finds an easy explanation in ‘ Tamil nationalism ’ (p. 607) for the view 
which ascribes an early date to the poem. The relation between the KyayaprarVsa 
of Dihnaga and the Maniniekalai xxix is not simple, as readers of Professor 
KrUdmaswami A iy an gar's J / a ni nilkh alai in its Historical Setting must see. 
And a careful examination of the other systems of philosophy propounded in 
that canto shows that there are many truly ancient doctrines in it which would 
not he easy to explain on the basis ot a late date such as the sixth century A. lb 
See S. S. Suryanarayana Sastri, JUf y viii and ix. 

I have my own doubts if Canto xxix does not bear signs of a remodelling. 

t See Geiger's Mahavamsa chh. xxi-xxv for the narrative. Geiger thinks 
that ‘Cola-country’ means ‘Southern India.' (Trans, p. 143 n. 4 ). This is 
unnecessary and seems to go against the precise expressions in the original, like 
CMa-rattha (xxi 13) and dakhinam Madhuram puram nndu-r<ljassti (vii, 50), 
besides the common form Damila employed of both countries. Further, the story 
of the justice done by the king to the cow that lost its calf narrated of Elara m 

[ 33 ] 


5 



THE COLAS 


justice of his rule, and among them is that of the king 
sentencing his only son to death for having unwittingly 
caused the death of a young calf by driving the wheel 
of his chariot over its neck. Though not a follower of 
the Buddha's creed, this king lived on friendly terms 
with the Buddhist bftikkns * of his realm, and his rule, 
so long as it, lasted, was in evei’y way acceptable to his 
subjects. His rule was confined to the northernmost 
section of the island and the Mahiiganga, now Malni- 
waeliganga, was its southern limit, f Then began a 
war between Elara and Dutthagainani, so called because 
he was wroth with his father who stood in the way of 
his fighting the Damijas ; the object of Dutthagamani in 
undertaking this war was twofold : to restore the politi- 
cal unity of Ceylon and to bring glory to the doctrine 
of the Buddha by driving out the Damijas addicted to 
false beliefs. The details of the campaign that followed 
are very clearly recorded in the Mahacatma ; J success 
attended the arms of Dutthagainani, and las conquered 
foe was pursued up to the vicinity of Anuriidhapura, 
and Elara met his death in a heroic combat with 
Dutthagamani beneath the walls of that city. Then 
Dutthagamani marched into the city, “ and when he had 
summoned the people from a ydjum around, lie celebra- 
ted the funeral rites for king Ejara. On the spot, where 
his body had fallen, he burned it with the catafalque, 

the MV. is localised at Tiruvarur on the continent, and there is a stone monument 
in that place representing the central incident of the story. See J£pi t t*r. Zeylanica 
iii pp. 1-47 for the chronology of the MV. “The length of Kpra’s reign may 
he accepted as correct.” ibid p. 5 n. 1. 

•MV. xxi, 21-6. 

f MV. xxii 86 and xxiv 4. 

J Geiger-transl. pp. 290-1 gives a lucid account of the details of the war. 
On one occasion seven Damija princes were defeated in one day (XXV 10), and 
altogether thirty-two princes are said to have been thus overpowered in the war 
{ibid. 75). They were probably all commanders of Ezra’s forces which garrisoned 
many fortresses on the frontier and elsewhere. 


[ 34 ] 



EARLY NOTICES 

and there did he build a monument and ordain 
worship.’' And even in the days of Mahanaman, the 
author of this part of the Mahuvamsa , in the sixth 
century A. D., the princes of Lanka, when they drew 
near to that place, were wont to silence their music, 
because of this worship. Of these transactions that 
loom so large in the early history of Ceylon, there is 
no trace in Tamil literature * apart from the legend of 
the prince and the calf which is placed in the reign of 
Manu. We therefore lack all means of judging the 
extent to which the fortunes of the Cola monarchs of 
the mainland were involved in the establishment and 
the overthrow of Elara’s power in Ceylon. 


* See JR AS. 1913, pp. 529-31. Some vague popular legends connect 
the poet of the A*«ra/, TiruvaUuvar, with a merchant prince, Elela Singa, 
(V.R.R. Di ksh i t ar* S t tidies in Tamil Literature and History-y p. 129 ff.)» hut 
no one knows where these come from, ami they lack all claim to credence and 
can furnish no basis for a date for TiruvaUuvar. For other instances of Tamil 
influence in Ceylon, not specially known to be Coja, see MV. xxi 10, Sena and 
Guttaka ; xxxiii 56, Pujattba and others ; xxxiv, 19 ff. for the infamous career of 
AnuKS-devi who made over the country to a succession of her Tamil paramours. 


[ 35 ] 



Chapter III 

THE COLAS IN EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 

The earliest Cola kings of whom we have tangible 

evidence are those mentioned in the 

Nature of the Early g an cr am literature. Scholars are now 
Literature. ° . , .... 

generally agreed that this literature 
belongs to the first few centuries of the Christian era. * 
The internal chronology of this literature is still far 
from settled, and this remains at present an insuperable 
obstacle in the way of giving a connected account of 
the history of the period. W e gather the names of 
kings and princes, and of the poets who extolled them ; 
we also learn much of uncommon interest about the life 
and work of the people. Some of the kings, we can see, 
were men of real distinction with a good title to fame ; 
and the poets were often great artists who could add 
beauty to truth in the manner of their expression. In 
this body of early Tamil literature, the individuals 
depicted stand out in bold relief and their characteristic 
traits are most unmistakably revealed to us ; it is thus all 
the greater pity, that we cannot work it into a connect- 
ed history. We shall see that when the chronology 
becomes firm, with the Colas of the Vijayalaya line, 
literature loses its early qualities of realism and 
strength, and lapses, particularly in the delineation of 
persons, into the easy devices of court poetry. 

Two names stand out prominently from among 

those of the Cola kings known to the 
Two great kings. g an g am literature; and their memory 

is cherished in song and legend by a loving posterity ; 
they are those of Karikala and Koccenganan. There is 

• There are still some who do not accept this view. See, however, 
PK, pp. 16 ff. and Studies, pp. 1*18 and 70-2. 

[ 36 ] 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


no sure means of settling the order of their succession, 
of fixing their relations with one another and with 
many other princes and princelings of about the same 
period. If Puhar or Kavirippumpattinam rose in im- 
portance only in the time of Karikala, * then the civil 
strife between the two branches of the Colas, one of 
them apparently stationed at Uraiyur and the other at 
Puhar, may be taken to fall in the period subsequent 
to the rule of Karikala. In any event, this strife 
between the rival branches of the royal family appears 
to have been a constant factor in the annals of the 
Colas of the Sangam age. Even Karikala, the most 
illustrious among them, had his own troubles in the 
beginning, f 

* Tli is is how the obscure line pirangu-n ilai-madattii-urandai- pokki (1. 285) 
of the Pattinappiilai lias been generally understood by modern writers. But under 
the name of Kakandi {Man im 7k a lai-xxli, 1. 37) the city seems to have had great 
celebt ity from very early times. Cf. n 2 at p. 561 of Pattuppattu 8 (1931). A nur 
Soma from this place seems to be mentioned in the Barhut inscriptions of the 
second century B. C. (Luders, No. 817). The Silappadikaram gives a legenu 
of the foundation of Uraiyur (Koh) being due to a cock (koh) winning in a fight 
against an elephant on the spot, x 11. 247-8. 

i* Kanakasahhai's work The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago (1904' 
remains still invaluable in many respects. But working solely upon mss. of work: 
little understood at the time, he succumbed to a natural temptation to formulate 
conclusions on material that had not been subjected to any proper criticism. 
Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar {$2ran- Sett gut tuvan, ed. 2, pp. 106-7 n) raises 
several valid objections to Kanakasabhai’s scheme of genealogy of the CSras 
and the Co|as. But the Pandit’s own scheme of Coja genealogy {ibid. p. 103) is 
not altogether free from uncertainties, though it must be admitted that it is the 
best among those put forward so far. That Karikala had two sons ManakkilJi and 
Peru-Vijar-Kijli; that Ne<}ungi||i -was the brother of Narconai, and that these were 
the children of ManakkiJli, and that PerunajrkiJli of Rajasflyam fame {Puram 16^ 
was the son of Ne^ungijli and identical with the prince wiio sought refuge with 
Malaiyandm Tinmuujikkuri {Puram 174), that KiJli Vajavan (of the Manimekalaf, 
and NalangiJJi (the foe of Ne<JungiUi) were the sons of Virajr-KiHi, all these 
statements are based on assumptions which, however plausible, seem to lack 
positive evidence. Again, it appears unlikely that the same prince, Irayasuyam- 
Vefta Perunajkkilli, was aided on the same occasion both by Senguttuva anc 
Malaiyamun Tirummjikkari ; there is nothing in the language of St/app. xxvii 
11. 118-23 and Puram 174 to 4 suggest such an identification ; on the other hand 
there is something to differentiate the two. 

[ 37 ] 



THE COLAS 


Before we proceed to discuss the kings of the 

* 

Sangam Age, some attention may be 
Myths given to the legends about the mythical 


Cola kings known to this literature. The Colas were 
even then looked upon as descended from the sun * — a 


fact that received elaborate emphasis in later times in 


the long mythical genealogies incorporated in copper- 
plate charters of the tenth and eleventh centuries, in 
the Kanyakumari stone inscription of Virarajendra, 
and in literary works like the Kilingattupparani and the 
VikramasoUin Ula. Coeval with Agastya and Parasu- 
ram a was king Kantan, whose devotion to the former 
brought the river Kaveri into existence, f and who at 
the bidding of Parvati (Kanni) entrusted his kingdom 
for a time to his illegitimate son Kakandan, in order to 


escape the fury of Parasurama, who waged relentless 
war against all Ksatriyas. X He ruled from Campa, 
later on called Kakandi, Puhar and Kavirippiim- 
p at tin am. Another legendary hero was Tungeyil- 

erinda-todittot-cembiyan, who destroyed some mysteri- 
ous flying fortress of the Asuras § and also instituted 
in Puhar, at the instance of Agastya, an annual festival 
to Indra of the duration of twenty-eight days. The 
story of the king who sentenced his son to death for 
having killed a calf by rash driving || and that of 
another who rescued the dove from the hawk, but 
not the names of Manu and Sibi, are known ** to this 


# ManinMalai : sengadirc-celvan tirukkulam, Pad i gam, 1. 9, Sit. vii-27; 
xxix 11, 1-2. 

t Mani. t Padigam, 11. 10-2, 

J Mani . xxii 11. 25-37. 

§ Puram 39 and the references quoted thereunder. This recalls the 
Tripura-samhara of £iva. 

U Mani, i, 11. 1-9. 

|| Mani xxii 1. 210 and n. It should be observed that this story does not 
occur in the earlier anthologies. 

## Puram 37 11. 5-6 and n. 


r 38 1 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


early literature. The king of the bird-story is, however, 
once called Sembiyan. * Some of these legends, like 
the story of the calf and the prince, f the origin of the 
Kaveri and the institution of the festival to lndra, are 
not. found in the anthologies of the Sangam, and make 
their appearance for the first time in the twin epics 
of the Silajjpadikuram and the Manimehalai which may, 
at the earliest, be dated some generations subsequent 
to the reign of Karikala. 


Karikala, the greatest among the Colas of the 

Sangam age, was the son of Ilanjetcenni 
Karikala. distinguished for the beauty of his 

numerous war-chariots. J Karikalan means 4 the man 
with the charred leg/ and the name perpetuated the 
memory of a fire-accident in the early years of the 


prince’s life in later times, under Sanskritic influ- 
ences, the name was explained as * Death ( kala ) to kali ’ 
or 4 Death to (enemies’) elephants.’ Karikala was 

deprived of his birth-right and confined 
in a prison by his enemies for some 
years. The plucky manner in which he effected his 
escape and established himself in power is a favourite 
theme with the poets. 


Amission, 


“ Like the tiger cub with its sharp claws and its curved 
stripes growing (strong) within the cage, his strength came to 
maturity (like wood in grain) while he was in the bondage of his 

* ibid. 1. 6. 

t This story is localised at Tiruvurur by the Per iyapu? attam } a work of the 
twelfth century A. 1>. 

J * Uruvappahrer. 1 Paranar ( Pur am 4) and Perunguniur Kilar ( Pur am 266 ) 
celebrated him. Line 130 of the Porinnir-anuppadai gives his relationship 
with Karikala. 

§ Verse 3, end of Porunar-Tt rruppadai . 

U Pa((ntappMai 11. 220-228 and Pormtar, 11. 131 ff. — translated below. 
A venbii in the Palawoli says that a certain Pidarttalai rendered much help 
to Karikala. 


[ 39 ] 



THE COLAS 


enemies. As the large- trunked olephant pulls down the bank^ 
of the pit (in which it has been caught) and effects its escape 
by filling in the pit, and joins its mate, even so after deep and 
careful consideration, he drew his sword, effected his escape 
by overpowering the strong guard (of his prison), and attained 
his glorious heritage in due course.’* 

Again, 

“ This lord, dreaded by his enemies like Mnrugan’s anger, 
inherited the throne from his mother’s womb ; * he forced his 
enemies to do his behests, and filled with uneasiness the lands of 
those that did not submit ; like the young sun spreading the rays 
of dawn on the ocean before rising in the sky, so from the day 
he began to crawl as a baby, he bore on his shoulders his excellent 
country, and daily increased its prosperity. As the fierce whelp 
of the lion, proud of its strength greater than that of Death, while 
it has not yet given up sucking the breast of its dam, quickly 
kills the elephant in its first hunt for food,” 

so ‘ Karikala-Cola with the garland of ar pleasing to 
the eyes' fought a great battle at Venni in which the 
Pandya and the Cera both suffered a crushing defeat, f 

Venni has been identified with Kovil 
Battle of veuni. Venni, a village fifteen miles to the east 

of Tanjore. Though we know very little of the circum- 
stances that led to this battle, there can be no doubt that 
it marked the turning point in Karikala's career ; for in 
this battle he seems to have broken the back of a wide- 
spread confederacy formed against hirn. Besides the 
two crowned kings of the Pandya and Cera countries, 
eleven minor chieftains took their side in the campaign 

* Naccinurkkiniyar explains this by an absurd story. This means, 
apparently, that he did not come of the direct male lme of the Colas, a fact 
which may account both for his early troubles and for his father’s name — 
IJaiyon, 'prince,' Contra Dr. S. K. Aiyangar, Ancient India p. 92. 

t The text has: iru-peru vend a rum mu kataHaviya ( 146 , Pornnar). Nacci- 
nSrkkiniyar takes this to mean that they died {padumpadi) ; but the Cera, we 
know, sustained a wound in his back, and committed suicide by the process of 
slow starvation - Vadakkiruttal , on which see Puram 65 11. 9-11 and Pandit 
V. Svaminatha Aiyar’s ft. thereunder. Also Studies p. 20 and n. 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


and shared the defeat at the hands of Karikala. * 
Much sympathy was felt for the Cera kin", who was 
wounded at his back, the last disgrace that could befall 
a soldier on the battle-field, and who expiated his 
cowardice by committing suicide ; t this is how one of 
Karikala’ s own friends, the poet Vennikkuyattiyar, 
possibly a resident of Venni and an eye-witness to the 
battle, addresses the monarch : X 

“ Oli ! descendant of that warrior who, sailing on the wide 
ocean, compelled the winds to fill the sails of his ships ! § Oh, 
Karikal-vajava, lord of mighty elephants ! By this victory thou 
hast displayed the greatness of thy valour which faced the fight 
and carried it to snccess. Is not he even nobler than thee, — he, 
who, after attaining great celebrity in the world, feels now the 
shame of a wound in his back, and starves himself to death on 
the plain of Venni watered by the freshes (of the Kaveri) ? ” 


If Venni was the first great battle of Karikala’ s 

reign which established him firmly on 
rs his throne and secured for him some 

sort of hegemony among the ‘ three crowned monarchs ’ 
of the Tamil land, there was no lack of other opportuni- 
ties for the exercise of his arms. He defeated a con- 
federacy of nine minor chieftains in a battle at Viikaip- 
parandalai : Paranar, a contemporary both of Karikala 
and his father, mentions this fact, but tells us nothing 
of the cause of the battle or of the enemies of Karikala. 
The poet of the Patlinappalai describes fully the 
destruction carried by the forces of Karikala into the 

# Aharn 55, 246 ; also Pa rant 65, 66. 

t * Vai-vaflakkirumlanan ' ( Pur am 65, 1. IX) does not seem to mean that 
the king rut his throat with a sword (I\ 1, Srinivasa Aivangai /. mils p. 336) 
but that he field a sword while starving, to indicate the cause of his action- 
Va|o<Ju vatjakkirundan (comm.) 

^ 1 may say once for all that in the translations that follow, I have made use 
of all existing translations'— Kanakas ahliai, Pope, P. I Srinivasa Aiyangar# 

§ A reference to another legendary Cola king. 

Aham 125, 


[ 41 ] 


0 



THE COLAS 


territories of his enemies and the awe inspired by his 
deeds of valour, * and adds that as a result of his cam- 
paigns, ‘ the numerous Ojiyar submitted 

Conquests. ^ him, the ancient Aruvalar carried out 

* • 

his commands, the Northerners lost splendour, and the 
Westerners were depressed ; conscious of the might of 
his large army ready to shatter the fortresses of enemy 
kings, (Karikala) turned his flushed look of anger 
against the Pandya whose strength gave way •, the line 
of low herdsmen was brought to an end, and the family 
of Irungove] was uprooted.’ If we disregard the vague 
statements about Northerners and Westerners in these 
lines from the VaUimppalai , we see that for all his 
heroism on the battle-iield Kari kola's permanent con- 
quests did not extend much beyond the land of the 
Kaveri. The Aruvalar were the inhabitants of the 
Aruvanad which comprised the lower valley of the 
Pennar, just north of the Kaveri delta country. The 
Oliyar were 1 perhaps some nomadic tribe of niiga extrac- 
tion, whom Karikala converted to a settled life, f The 
description of Kavirip-pumpattinam and its foreshore, 
which takes up so much of the 1'aUinappalai, gives a 
vivid idea of the state of industry and commerce under 
Karikala who is said to have promoted the reclamation 
and settlement of forest land and added to the pros- 
perity of the country by multiplying irrigation tanks. + 

Of Karikala's personal life we hear next to nothing. 

While Uruttirangannanar, the author 
pprson.a Life. 0 f ^j ie J\iitinappalai , tells us vaguely 

* 11. 228-73 ; the following lines 274-82 are translatedvhere. 

t Aham 141-selkudi nirutta peruinbeyark-Karikal. ^his poem has been 
misunderstood as containing a reference to the Kunimhar. 

J Ka^ u konni kulandojtu valam-berukki-Kf. destroying forests to 

extend the inhabited country, and digging tanlts to improve fertility. Pattinap - 
ptlai 11. 283-4. 











EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


that he enjoyed the society of women and children, * 
the late annotator Naccinarkkiniyar, possibly repro- 
ducing a correct tradition, states that Karikala took to 
wife a Vejir girl from Nangur, f a place celebrated in 
the poems of Tirnmangai Alvar for the heroism of its 
warriors. A daughter of Karikala, Adimandi by name, 
is the subject of many poems. She lost her husband, a 
Cera prince, by name Attan Atti, who was drowned in 
the Kaveri, but subsequently, by the power of her chas- 
tity, she is said to have brought him back to life. + 

Karikala’ s faith in the Vedic religion and the poig- 
nancy of the grief caused by his death 

Religion. I >eaUi, 3 n ... . 

hud moving expression m the following 
lines of Karungulal-Adanar : § 

He who stormed his enemies’ forts dauntlessly ; who 
feasted his minstrels and their families and treated them to 
endless draughts of toddy ; who, in the assembly of Brahmans 
noted for knowledge of dharma and purity of life, guided by 
priests learned in their duties and attended by his noble and 
\ irtuous queen, performed the vedic sacrifice in which the tall 
sacrificial post stood on a bird-like platform (< garudacayana ), 
within the sacrificial court surrounded by a high wall with 
round bastions ; he, the great ami wise king alas ! is no more ! 
Poor indeed is this world which has lost him. Like the 
branches of the vengai tree, which stand bare, when their 
bright foliage has been cut down by shepherds eager to feed 
their cattle in the fierce summer, are his fair queens, who have 
cast ofi* their jewels.” 

From very early times Karikala became the centre 

of many myths which, in modern times, 
Ltgemis. have often been accepted as serious 

history. The Silappadiktiram which, with studied 

* ibid 11. 205-9 

f Tolkappiyam. Porub Aha. 30. 
t Sii. xxi 11, 11 ff, and n. 

§ Put am 224. 



THE COLAS 


fairness attributes to each of the three Tamil monar- 
chies some conspicuous success against northern Aryan 
kings, gives a glorious account of the northern 
expedition of Karikala * which took him as far as the 
Himalayas and gained for him the alliance or subjec- 
tion of the kings of the Vajra, Magadha and Avanti 
countries. The raising of the flood-banks of the Kilveri 
by Karikala seems to be first mentioned by the 
Malepadu plates of Punyakumara, | a Telugu-Coda 
king of the seventh or eighth century. Nothing can 
be more typical of the manner in which legends grow 
than the way in which this story mingles with another 
stream of legend centring round Trinetra Pallavu, and 
culminates in the celebrated jingle of the late Telugu- 
Coda plates : caram-saroruha rihata - vilocana -pullara- 


trilucana - pramukha-Uiila - prithhUvnra - Lari t a - Ay7t.fr?- 


tlra, { which has been made the basis of conclusions 


of the highest importance to the chronology of Early 
South Indian History. The choice of Karikala to the 
Coja throne by a state elephant which was let loose for 
the purpose from Kalumalam and which discovered 
him at Karur, and his conquest of Kane! and settlement 
of agrarian colonies in the Tondaimandalam are other 
elements in the Karikula legends that cun find no 
support from the earliest authorities on his reign. 
It would seem that the Tondai-niid was ruled by 
Tondaiman Ilandiraiyan in the days of Karikala ; and 
there is no satisfactory evidence in support of the 
suggestion that has been made that this chieftain was 


* §il. v. 11. 89-110. 

t KavSra— tanaya-~ ^velollanglumi— prasamatia— pramukliii~-<!yanek3tisay'a- 
kSrinah * * * * Karikalasva, E l. xi— No. 35, 11. 3*5. 

J “ He who caused the hanks of the Kaveri to he constructed by all the 
(subordinate) kings led by the i'allava TrinStra whose third eye was blinded 
by his lotus foot. M 


[ 44 ] 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


the grandson of Karikala, or, at least, a viceroy ap- 
pointed by him after his conquest of Kancl. * 


We now pass on to NalangijH and his rival Nedun- 

gilli who, judging from the civil war 
Civil war. between them which lusted till the 

death of Nedungijji f at the Kariyaru, must have 
belonged to rival branches of the Cola family which 
ruled with Puliar and Uraiyur for their respective 
centres. Nalangilli had a younger brother, Mavajattan; 
and his memory is preserved to us by the poet Tamap- 
pal-kannanar who, when Mavajattan lost his temper in 
a game of dice and hit him with a die, so rebuked him 
that later he felt the need for an apology and composed 
a short poem, + which is the only relic of this inflam- 
mable princeling and lhs boon- companion, the 

Brahman poet of Damal. § 


The Manbnekalai mentions a great battle at the 
Kariyaru in which the Pilndya and the Cera were 
defeated by a junior prince (Ijangon) of the Coja 
family in the reign of Mavankilli, also called Nedumudik- 
killi and Killivalavan in this poem. This battle has 
been identified with the one in which Nedungijji met 
his fate and the civil strife came to an end ; || from this 
the inference has been drawn that the Ijangon of the 
Manimekalai was no other than Nalangilli, and that 
Nalangilli was the younger brother of Nedumudik-kijji : 


* Sec Studies , essay II, for a full discussion of these points. 

t Though Nfijungilli figures Without any attribute in some colophons, there 
is nothing to prevent Ins being iilentifiol With the king wiio died at tin Kariyaru. 


% Ptiifim 43. 

§ Punmanilru Introdn. pp. 39-40. 

*1) xix, 11. 125-7, 

|| Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar op. cit . pp. 101-2. 


[ 45 ] 



THE COLAS 


some writers go further and argue that because Nalan- 
gilli is called Setcenni-Nalangijji, * he may be a 
grandson of Ilanjetcenni, the father of Karikala, with the 
result that Nedumudik-kijji, Nalangijji and Mavajattan 
turn out to be three sons of Karikala. But there is 
nothing except the name in favour of identifying the 
two references to the Kariyaru in the Ptiramnum and 
the Maaimekalai ; nothing is known of the circumstances 
of NeAungilli's death at the Kariyaru, a fact which 
finds only the most casual mention in the colophon to 
Puram 47 : we are to infer from this that as there was 
a civil war between Nalangijji and Nedungijji, a fight at 
the Kariyaru might, by proving fatal to the latter, have 
closed the strife. On the contrary, the battle of the 
Kariyaru described, though briefly, yet with considera- 
ble vividness, in the Manimekulai , appears as a first-class 
event in the foreign relations of the Coja kingdom, and 
not as a petty fight incidental to a quarrel among blood 
relations ; and there is no suggestion in the context 
that the Cera and the Pandya were, on that occasion, 
engaged in aiding one Coja prince against another. 
The last argument adduced from the name Setcenni- 
Nalangijji is not without force, and it appears quite 
likely that he and Mavajattan were the sons of Karikala. 


Nalangijji forms the subject of no fewer than four- 
teen pieces in the Pumnanuru y and 
Kovur-Kilar, who contributes half the 


Nalangilli. 


number implies that the king enjoyed, like Karikala 
himself, a sort of vague hegemony among the Tamil 
states, and sings with intelligible exaggeration : f 


44 As true wealth and happiness are seen to follow in the 
wake of virtue, so the two umbrellas (of the rivals Pandya 
and Cera) follow thy peerless umbrella which is raised aloft* 


* Puram 27, 1. 10. 

+ Puram 31 ; Kanak. p. 73. 


[ 46 ] 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


resplendent in the sky, like the full-moon. Ambitious of fair 
fame thou wouldst stay nowhere but in thy victorious camp. 
Thy elephants chafe, whose tusks are blunt with battering the 
walls of thy enemies’ forts. Eager for light, thy soldiers who 
wear anklets, make nothing of marching through wide stretches 
of forests to reach the enemy country. Thy war steeds starting 
from the Eastern sea stay not till the waves of the Western 
ocean wash their hoofs ; in line, the kings of the North keep 
watch with sleepless eyes as they dread the possibility of t,hy 
marching against them.” 

The poet who praised his lord with such strident notes 
was no base sycophant. In striking contrast with 
the foregoing, is the moving exhortation to peace 
addressed to the king when he was besieging Uraiyur 
in order to reduce Nedungilli to submission : * 

“ He does not wear the white flower of the palm. He 
does not wear the garland of the d ark-bough ed margosa. Thy 
garland is a wreath of the Sr, and bo is that of him who wages 
war with thee. If either of yon loses the battle, it is your house 
that loses ; in the nature of things, it is impossible that both of 
you win. Your action, therefore, forebodes no good to your race ; 
this strife will rejoice other kings who, like you, ride on peunoned 
chariots.” 

This noble advice of the poet would seem to have 
fallen on deaf ears ; for, as we have seen, the epithet 
Kuriyarnit-t u nji ya applied to Nedungilji seems to imply 
that the war came to an end only with his death. 

Nalangilli, like several other princes of the age, 
cultivated literature himself, and of the two poems 
preserved from among his compositions, one takes the 
form of an uncanny oath in the following terms : f 

“ If gently approaching my feet, one prays for a favour, 
1 shall grant him with pleasure my ancient kingdom, nay, I shall 

* Puram 45 ; Kanak. p. 73. The palm and the margosa were respectively the 
Cera ami Pant}}’ a emblems. 

t Puram 73 ; Kanak. pp. 74-5. 



THE COLAS 


give my life for hie sake. If, like a blind man who stumbles on 
a tiger sleeping in the open, one is so foolish as to slight my 
strength and oppose my will, he shall hardly escape with his life. 
If I do not advance to the fight and cause (my foes) to sufEer like 
the long-stemmed bamboo trampled under foot by a huge 
elephant, may my garland be crumpled in the wanton embraces 
of dark-haired harlots, who can never love with a pure heart.” 

That Kavirip-pumpattinam with its extensive trade was 
in Nalangijji’s possession, * and that Vedic sacrifices 
were common in his reign f ai'e facts well attested 
by our sources. There is a poignant note of melancholy 
in some of the poems on Nalangijli J composed by 
Uraiyiir Mudukannan Sattanar, and it is not easy to 
decide if this is due to the poet’s own temperament or 
to the incidents of the civil strife. It would appear that 
Nalangijli died at a place called Ilavandigaip-pajji. 4? 

Nedungijji, the opponent of Nalangijji in the civil 

war, is addressed in two poems by 

Ni.<jungiiii. Kovur-Kilar, the author of the exhorta- 

•« • 

tion addressed to both of them to cease from their strife. 
These poems add a little to our knowledge of the 
occurrences in the war. One of them mentions that 
Nedungijji was once shut up in Avar which, like 
Uraiyiir, was beset by the forces of Nalangilji. The 
poem gives a graphic description of the effects of the 
siege : 5[ 

“ The male elephants, not led out to bathe with the 
female herd in the large tanks (outside the fort), nor fed with 
balls of rice mixed with ghee, chafe at the posts to which they 
are chained, heave long sighs, and with their trunks rolling on 

• Par am 30 11. 10-12. 

•« 

t ibid 400, 1. 19. 

t ibid 27, 29. 

§ Col. to Puram 61 where he is called Nalangijli Setcenni, 

*] Puram 44. Kanak. pp. 73-4. 

[ 48 ] 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


the ground, trumpet loudly like thunder. Children cry for want 
of milk, the women plait their hair without (lowers, the mansions 
of the city resound with the cries of people wailing for want of 
water. It is not possible to hold out any more here, thou, master 
of fleet steeds l If thou wouldst be kind, open the gates (to the 
enemy) saying, 4 This is yours ; ’ if thou wouldst be heroic, 
open the gates and lead thy soldiers out to victory ; to be neither 
the one nor the other, to close the strong gates of the fort, and 
to shut yourself up in a corner behind the high wails, this, when 
one thinks of it, is shameful indeed ! ” 

Nednngil]i, then, had ambition without courage, 
and brought much suffering on himself and his subjects 
by his pusillanimity. Like all cowards, he seems to 
have lived in constant dread of treachery and foul play. 
When he was besieged at Uraiyur, a minstrel, llandattan 
by name, who had entered Uraiyur from the camp of 
NalangiHi, was taken to be a spy, and was about to be 
killed when Kovftr-Kilar put in a successful plea for 
his life being spared. The short poem is a fine picture 
of bardic life in the San gam age : * 

“ They fly like birds and traverse many a long and arid 
route in search of patrons, and with untutored tongue, sing their 
praises ; pleased with what they get they feast their train, eat 
without saving, give without stinting, and pine only for honour. 
Such is their living which depends on the free gifts (of patrons). 
Does this ever hurt others ? No, to be sure. Only, they exult in 
their triumphs over rival bards, and when their rivals’ faces are 
cast down, then do they walk proudly, and are well pleased ; they 
have thus a primacy of their own, not less than persons who, like 
you, have attained to the rulership of the earth.” 

Close to Nalangilli and Nedungilli in time, because 

the same poets are found composing 
Killiv.ii.il. an. poems in their praise, was Killivajavan 

who died at Kulamurram. Another Kijlivajavan, the 
subject of a single poem of Kovur-Kilar, f is said to 

* Puram 47. Kanakasabhai, 73. 

f Puram 373. 

» •* 

t 49 J 

7 



THE COLAS 


have died at Kurap-palli. It has been suggested that 
these two kings are identical, * * * § and if that be so, this 
poem of Kovur-Kilar composed after the king had 
captured Karuvur, depicts a later stage in his Cera war 
than another f poem by Xlattur Kilar, which describes 
Karuvur still in a state of siege. Kiljivalavan is 
celebrated in eighteen songs by ten different minstrels, 
and himself figures as the author of a poem in praise of 
his friend Pannan, J the lord of ^irukudi. He ruled 
with Uraiyur as his capital. § “ This king, who (we 
may infer) possessed considerable ability, was both 
brave and generous, but somewhat headstrong. Hence 
a great- deal of good advice is, in a very tactful way, 
offered to him by the minstrels ; and he seems to have 
been all the better for it.” The following lines are by 
Vellaikkudi-nakanar, who was rewarded on the spot 
by a remission of the arrears due on his lands. 


The pleasant Tamil lands possess 
For boundary the ocean wide. 

The heaven, where tempests loud sway not. 

Upon their brow rests as a crown. 

Fertile the soil they till, and wide. 

Three kings with mighty hosts this land 
Divide ; but of the three, whose drums 
-Sound for the battle’s angry strife, 

Thou art the chief, 0 mighty one ! 

Though the resplendent sun in diverse quarters rise ; 

And though the silvery planet to the south decline ; 

Thy land shall flourish, where through channels deep, 
Kaveri flows with bright refreshing stream, 

Along whose banks the sweet cane’s white flowers wave 
Like pennon’d spears uprising from the plain. 

• JA. xxix p. 250 n 2. Dr. Pope says that KurSp-pafli is the same 
as Kulamujiam, ‘ Pavilion by the tank.' 

+ Furam 36. 

J Pur am 173, 

§ Puram 69. 1. 12. 

% I A, xxix pp, 251-2, Puram 35 ; I have reproduced Pope's tramlation. 

[601 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 

Let me speak out to this rich country’s king ! 

Be easy of access at fitting time, as though 
The lord of justice sat to hear, and right decree. 

Such kings have rain on their dominions at their will t 
The clouds thick gather round the sun, and rest 
In vault of heaven : — So let thy canopy 
Of state challenge the sky, and spread around 
Not gloom, but peaceful shade. Let all thy victories 
Be the toiling ploughman’s gain. 

Kings get the blame, whether rains fail, or copious flow, 
And lack the praise : such is the usage of the world. 

If thou hast marked and known this well, 

Reject the wily counsels of malicious men. 

Lighten the load of those who till the soil. 

The dwellers in the land protect. If thou do this 
Thy stubborn foes shall lowly bend beneath thy feet. 

The siege and capture of Karur, the Cera capital, 
was, doubtless, the greatest military achievement of 
this king, and has called forth a number of poems. 
Thus Xlattur Kilar made an effort to divert the king's 
attention from his enterprise and save Karur from 
destruction, by gently reproaching him with pitting 
himself against a foe unworthy of his mettle * : — 

Whether thou wilt destroy or wilt release, 

’ Tis thine to ponder which befits thy name ! — 

The axe, bright-edged, long-handled, sharp by file 
Of smith black-handed, smites the fragrant boughs 
Of guardian trees in every park around ; 

They crashing fall and scatter the white sands 
Of An-poruntham's river cool, where sport 
The damsels with their golden bracelets gay ; 

Thro’ town, and all the guarded hall are echoes heard. 

And yet their king in pleasure slumbers on ! 

With bow-armed host, thy war-drum sounding loud, 

’ Twill shame thee to have fought such feeble foes. 

* The intercession was unsuccessful ; the fair city 
fell ’ ; and a poetess, Marokkattu Nappa^alaiyar, gave 

• Puram 36. IA, ibid p. 252. 


[51J 



THE COLAS 

expression to her grief as follows * : 

Thou scion of the Cola Lord who saved 

The dove from woe, — Chief of the wrathful hosts. 

Armed with the gleaming darts that work havoc, 

As when a fiery dragon, angry, fierce, — 

Bearing five heads, with gleaming poisonous tooth. 

Has enter’d the vast mountain-cavern, where 
The golden creepers twine ; — and from the sky 
Fire issues forth and loudest thunderbolt ; — 

Thou saw’st the lordly city old, whose king 
Was circled round by girded elephants. 

There in dark deep moat alligators congregate. 

In the wide waters of the guarded lake 

Are crocodiles that fierce in fight 

Dart forth to catch the shadows cast 

By gleam of watchman’s torch at midnight hour. 

Its walls like burnish’d copper shone. 

This seemed not fair to thine eyes ; for thou didst 
Work destruction mightily, glorious king ! 

4 The delicate lyric warning against arrogance 9 
addressed to the proud conqueror by Mulam-kilar of 
Avur must have been composed soon after the capitula- 
tion of Karuvur : f 

44 Thou art the mighty one, who sparing not the guarded 
fort broke thro ’ and slew its king and made the yellow gold, 
ere while his crown, anklets to grace, 0 ! hero ! thy conquering foot. 

Thy land is so fertile that a tiny piece thereof, where a 
ehe-elephant might rest, can nourish seven lordly elephants. 

That we may ever see, as now, the necks of thy traducers 
bend, and those who laud thee raise their heads, be thou, great 
king ! pleasant of speech, and easy of access.” 

Kovur-Kilar also described this event at some 
length in a poem that has not been preserved in ita 
entirety. J 

# Purant 37 ; IA. ibid. 

•f- Purant 40 ; IA. ibid. 254. 

J Purant 373. 


[ 62 ] 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


The poems of the Purananuru are silent on the 
relations between Killivalavan and his southern neigh- 
bour the Paridya ; but a poem of Nakkirar * in the 
AhanSnuru makes pointed reference to a defeat sustain- 
ed by the forces of a Killivalavan under the walls 
of Madura at the hands of the Pandya commander- 
in-chief, Palaiyan Mar an. In the absence of any 

indication to the contrary, we may assume that the 
king whose defeat is alluded to by Nakkirar was the 
one that died at Kujamuiram. f Kijlivalavan evidently 
waged war in another direction against the Malaiyaman 
chieftain of Maladu, a district on the banks of the 
Pennar which had Tirukkoyilur for its centre. Though 
we cannot be quite certain of it, the Malaiyaman 
against whom this expedition was directed seems to 
have been Malaiyaman Tirumudik-kari who is cele- 
brated in several poems of the Pur am by Kapilar and 

• Aham 345. 

+ This identification was first suggested by Kanakasabhai, p. 76. But I am 
unable to follow him in identifying this king further with : (a) VaJavankiUi who 
was * maittunan ’ to the CSra king Sengu^uvan, and was established on the Coja 
throne by the latter after suppressing, in the battle of Nerivayil, a rebellion in 
which nine princes of the blood royal had taken part (p. 75) ; and {b) the CoJa 
king of the Manimlkalai and the father of Udayakumaran (p. 77). It is not certain 
that the twin Epics of the Anklet and the Jewel-belt relate to the same period of 
time as the poems of the Purananuru and the other anthologies, and it is not 
clear how far the incidents mentioned in the epics inay be treated as historical, 
and not simply meant to furnish a familiar background to a romantic story ; there 
is, above all, a total lack of correspondence in the facts relating to the different 
kings whom Kanakasabhai proposes to identify. The phrase * ma ittuna- vala van- 
killi' of the Silappadikdratn (xxvii-1. 118) is not the same as * Kiljivajavan,’ and 
as there is nothing in the numerous poems of the Pttram to suggest that the 
latter's succession to the throne was disputed, we must be slow to accept the 
identification in this case. It must also be observed that, as Pandit M. Raghava 
Aiyangar, (op, cit. p. 33) points out, the Cola contemporary of 5engu${uva n was 
according to the & i la pp a dikH r a tn , PerungiJJi, whom A^iy^rkkunallar calls 
Perunarkilli ; and the Pandit himself identifies him with Rajasuyam-vejta 
Perunajkilji, and this, in itself, is really more plausible than the suggestion of 
Kanakasabhai. The absence of all mention of a fight at the Kariyaju or a combi- 
nation of the P5i$ya and the Cera against Kulamu&attu-tufijiya Killivalavan, 
taken along with the positive references to his siege and capture of VaBji and 
his defeat at Madura, all of which are admitted by Kanakasabhai. is fatal to 
his other proposition. See also P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar History of the Tamils 

pp. 430-31. 


[ 53 ] 



THE COLAS 


Marokkattu Nappa£alaiyar for the liberal patronage he 
extended to the minstrels, a trait which is emphasised 
also by Kovur-Kilar in the following poem by which 
he succeeded in releasing the children of the Malaiya- 
man from a cruel death to which the victorious Cola 
monarch had condemned them : * 

44 Thou art of the royal line of him who saved the dove 
from affliction and many another sufferer ; 

These are children of the race that, in their concern for 
the learned, share their food with them and save them from 
want, and under whose fostering care men lead happy lives ; 

See these little innocents, how first they stood fearing the 
sight of thine elephants ; then, forgetting that, were daunted by 
the aspect of thy hall ; and now stand trembling with troubles 
ever new I 

Hear me, and then follow the promptings of thine own 
desire !’” 

A panegyric by Marokkattu Nappasalaiyar applauds 
in equal measure and with much art the generosity, 
justice and heroism of this king, f 

44 Descendant of him who to save a dove from grief 
entered the balance whose beam was tipped with the carved 
white tusk of the heavy-footed elephant ! Giving in grace was 
born with thee, and is not thy peculiar praise. 

And, when one ponders how thy sires of old destroyed the 
mighty fort suspended in the sky which foes dreaded to 
approach, — to slay thy foes is not thy peculiar praise ! 

And since the council of Draiyur, impregnable city of the 
valiant Solar, is the home of Equity ; — Justice is not thy peculiar 
praise ! 

O Yalavan, swift horseman, whose stout arms are like 
fortress-bars, whoso wreath attracts every eye, how then shall I 
sing thy praises ? 

# Purant 46 ; 1A . xxix p. 256. 

f Pur am 39, l A. xxix pp. 253-4. 


[ 64 ] 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


How shall I tell of thy glorious prowess that withered the 
fadeless Vanji, destroying the Ceran king with his mighty chariot 
cunningly wrought, who planted his guarded bow-banner on the 
immeasurably lofty gold-tipped peaks of Himalaya.” 

Two short odes on the death of the king, though 
they reveal nothing of the identity of Kulamurram 
where he died or of the circumstances attending his 
death, are noteworthy for the quaintness of their 
conceits. One of them is by the gifted poetess, 
Marokkattu Nappa^alai : * 

If in his mind against thee he were wroth, 

Or if in outward act he showed his rage. 

Or if he touched thee with afflictive hand, 

Thou couldst not have escaped, 0 Death I 
Thou took’st great Vajavan, entreating him, 

Like minstrels, bowing low, with suppliant hand, 

Praising, thou didst bear off his life, 

Leader of hosts that crowd the glorious field, 

Crowned with gold wreath, Lord of the mighty car ! 

The other, by Masattanar of Aduturai, though 
somewhat commonplace, as observed by Dr. Pope, 
still does not lack power : f 

Death ! Right silly art thou, ruthless one : 

Through lack of sense thon eat’st thine own seed-corn ! 
Thon yet shalt see the truth of what I say. 

Warriors with gleaming swords, and elephant and horse 
Fell on the battle-plain that flowed with blood ; 

Daily he was insatiate, slew his foes, 

And fed thine hunger I Like thyself a strengh 
He had that knew no ruth nor vengeance feared. 

This Valavan who wore great golden ornaments. 

Whose flowery garland swarmed with humming bees, 
Since thou hast borne away,— who shall appease thine 

hunger now ? 


* Puram 226 ; /A. xxix 283. 
f Puram 227 ; xxix 284. 

[ 55 ] 



THE COLAS 


Another renowned Coja king of the time was 

Kopperunjolan who also ruled from 
Koppeniftjoian. Uraiyur. Himself a poet, * * * § he was an 

intimate friend of two poets — Andaiyar of (Irum) Pisir 
and Pottiyar. Andai (owl) sounds more like a nick- 
name than a name proper f ; but the poet is not known 
by any other name. He was a native of the Paiidya 
country and gave some good counsel J to the king of 
that country, Arivudai Nambi. Pottiyar was a native 
of the Coja country and resided at Uraiyur. The 
intimate friendship between these and Kopperufijohin 
became a classic example in later literature § like that 
between Damon and Pythias. Andai was a jolly good 
fellow and his poems ring with the true enjoyment of 
life. Asked once why, though old, his hair had not 
turned grey, he gave the answer : 

My years are many, yet my locks not grey : 

Toil ask the reason why, ’tis simply this 
I have a worthy wife, and children too ; 

My servants move obedient to my will ; 

My king does me no evil, aye protects ; 

To crown the whole, around me dwell good men 
And true, of chastened souls with knowledge filled. 

Here is another poem evincing the attachment felt by 
him to Kopperunjolan, in preference to the king of 
his native land : |! 

If you ask us 4 who is your king ? ’ Our king is he who 
To the labourers gives strong palm-wine strained and 

[mellow. 

And with the fat of turtle satiates their desire, 

* Author of Kurundogai Nos. 20, 53, 129, 14-7. 

f The grammarians explain it, however, as Xdan tandai ( XdatTs father). 

1 Puratn 184. 

§ Parimelalagar on Kttral 785; and Naccinarkkiniyar on Tol, Karpu . 
Su, 52. 

Puratn 191 ; IA. xxviii, p. 30. 

D Puram 212 ; IA. ibid. 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


And fills their mouths with lampreys’ rich roast flush. 
They leave short toil for feast ; the feast prolong ! 

In that good fertile land the minstrels with their kin 
Find our king the foe of want and hunger’s pangs. 

He is the lord of Kd]i, the mighty Cola king. 

He loves converse with Potti, whose friendship knows 

[ no flaw. * 

All the day long lie laughs with heart right glad ! 


A beautiful poem t by Pullitrrur Ey ij;riyanar which 
deprecates civil strife by a fine appeal to the simple 
parental emotions of the king is the sole relic left to 
us of wlnit was possibly a serious quarrel between 
Kopperunjolan and his two sons. By a strange irony of 
fate, this winsome monarch, who engaged the deepest 
affection of two poets for life and in death, was unable 
to compose his differences with his own children. 
His agnostic utterance on suicide is perhaps sufficient 
proof that he found in it his last refuge from the 
troubles of life : + 


They who have not assured their minds 

Py the doubt-free vision pure, that aye endures, 

Say not, ‘shall we do good deeds or shall we not.* 

Who hunts an elephant may gain an elephant; 

Who hunts a quail, may come back with empty hand. 

Therefore if men have lofty aspirations. 

They must carry them out in successful deeds, and so gain 
• * 

Kuiovuinut of the world hevoml the reach of sense. 

Should this not be theirs, in some future birth they may 

[ win release. 

Ami if there be no future birth,— yet to found 
Their fume on earth like riimalaya’a lofty peak. 

And to pass away with body unstained by evil, 

Is surely asceticism’s highest gain. 

* A play oa wools • potti moans ‘hollow*, hut there is uo hollowness iu 
this Potti. 

t Pnuiw 213; l A. ibid . p. 29. 

| Pu rum 214 ; 1A. xxviii pp. 29-30. 

[57J . 



TEE COLAS 


Two other short poems * express the king's eagerness to 
meet Andai before the end came, as also his quiet confi- 
dence that his friend would not fail him. When Andai 
turned up in good time and joined the king in his 
resolve to quit the wicked world, Pottiyar evinced t 
great admiration for the nobility of the king and the 
wisdom of Andai, and the deepest concern for the 
country which was losing a monarch whose great 
qualities captivated the mind of Andai, though be owed 
him no allegiance. Two short pieces £ commemorate 
the suicide of Andai in the king’s company. One of 
them records that Andai starved himself to death under 
the shade of a tree in the river-bed. When Pottiyar 
wanted to follow, the king forbade him asking him to 
postpone his suicide till after his son had been born, § 
and Pottiyar had to go back. In the following lines 
the poet gave vent to his feelings as lie returned to 
Uraivur : II 

«* */ M 

The keeper who has lust the huge elephant which he 

[daily supplied 

With its ample meal, and tended for many a year, 

Is sad as he surveys the vacant pillar where it stood. 

And weeps. Even so, did 1 not grieve when I beheld 
The courtyard in the ancient, town where Xilli lived and 

[ died ; 

Killi, with wealth of chariots, o’er which waves the 

[conqueror’s wreath r 

When, a little later, lie visited the spot of the king s 
death, marked by a stone ( nadukal ), he was greatly 
moved by the recollection of his noble traits. ! 

• Paxfim 215, 216. 

+ Pur am 217. 

f Pur am 218, 2)9. 

▼ »* 

§ Puram 222. Apparently ’tu* aie<uib Uut person* with (ineintt wives 
were ineligible for vadakkimital . 

U Pur am 220. / 4 . xxviii p. 32 

U Pur am 221 , l A. ibid. 

* *• 1 * 


0 




[58 1 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


He had the praises manifold of minstrels whose wants he 

[relieved ; 

lie was most loving to the dancers who resorted to his 

[court ; 

He swayed his sceptre in accordance with the teaching 

[of the sages ; 

His friendship had the firmness honoured of the wise ; 

He was gentle to women, brave in the face of the strong ; 
He was the refuge of the spotless learned ones. 

Such an one death did not spare, but carried off his 

[sweet soul. 

Therefore, my afflicted kinsfolk, let us 
Embracing one another join in reviling death. 

Come, all ye bards, whose words are true ! 

He hath become a pillar planted in the wild, 

Crowned with imperishable praise ! 

While the wide world in sorrow mourns. 

Such is the lot of him who was our protector ! 


Perunarkilli must have been a powerful monarch, 

as lie is the only one among the 1 amil 


age -who 


P<-rmiarkil|i. 


sovereigns 

performed the. Wja&ya * it is likely that the Cera Mari 
Venko and the Piindya Ugrapperuvaludi both attended 


this great inauguration of Perunarkijli’s rule, and that 
the line benediction of Auvaiyur in which she includes 
all the three was, as suggested by Kauakasabhai, pro- 
nounced on this occasion : * 


“ This heavenlike country with its divisions, whether it 
is yon re or is owned hy others who do not go with you but are 
against you, belongs in truth to the saintly ; may you, in your 
lifetime, pour out with water flowers and gold into the out- 
stretched hands of the Brahmans; drink of the sweet liquor 
which your servant maids glittering with jewels hold before you 
in golden cups, and in your exultation, bestow costly gifts with- 
out limit on the needy ; only the good deeds that you do now 
will stand by yon at the time of your death. Ye monarchs l 


* Pur am 307 ; Kauakasabhai, p. 78, 

159 ] 



THE COLAS 


(lords) of the white umbrella and the pennoned chariot t Seated 
together, you appear like the three sacred fires which the twice* 
horn preserve day and night with ceaseless vigilance. Only 
this can I say : may your days be aB many as the stars in the 
sky or the rain-drops in heavy showers.” 

Nothing is known of the events of this king’s reign. 
That he had his share of fighting, we may, however, 
infer from a poem which gives a rather conventional 
description of the havoc wrought on enemy countries 
by his forces, * and from the colophon to another 
poem which mentions a fight between this king and a 
Cera Mandaran-jeral-irnmporai, in which the chieftain 
Tervanmalaiyan fought on the side of the Cola king. 
Neither the friend nor the foe t of the Cola on this 
occasion could now be ascertained. 


Before giving an account of Koccengunan who 

was doubtless among the latest, if not 
Minor ccia fhe last, of the Colas mentioned in 

Princes. / 

Sangam literature, the minor celebrities 
of the Coja line may be briefly noticed. It is certain 
that many of them were petty princelings, members 
of the ruling family rather than kings themselves. 
There are two princes of th e name Ilanj etcenni. 
distinguished by the epithets Seydalanganaf and 
&eruppali-yerinda, both of them- celebrated by On-pod i- 
pasungudaiylir, a poet otherwise unknown. The first 
is said to have distinguished himself by the capture 


* Puram 16. P* T. Srinivasa Aiyangar assumes that this poem is an account 
•• 

of a war in which the king “ had to defeat recalcitrant Sola princes before 
bringing the whole of the 3ola country under his sway.” Tamils p. 432. The 
other poem mentioned above is Puram 125. 

f Pandit V. Swaminatha Aiyar has 'indeed suggested {Ainguruntiru- introd. 
p. 15.) that the Cera enemy was the same us Yanaikkap'ey-niandiirafi-jural” 
irumpojai w ho was defeated and captured by FSntya Ne^ufijeliyan, the victor 
of Talaiyalanglinam. Great as is the weight of his authority, I hesitate to follow 
him here, See, however, Mr. K. V. S. Aiyar, Ancient Dekkkan p, 202. 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


of Pamujiir, a Cera fortress ; * * * § how he earned the 
prefix to his name, Neydalauganal, is not known. 
Seruppali, overthrown by the second prince, is also 
only a name. The Co}a Mudittalaik-kopperunarkijli 
(the great good Kilji, the king with the crowned head) 
is remembered by a single poem of Mudamosiyar 
(Mosi, the Lame), who lived in the part of Uraiyur 
known as Enicceri. The poem f is a fine piece giving 
expression to the poet's grave concern for the safety 
of the Coja who was riding an elephant, which, having 
suddenly turned mad, was carrying him past Karuvur. 
The poet was then in the company of a Cera prince, 
and explained to him what was happening before their 
eyes. The rushing elephant is picturesquely compared 
to a ship sailing on the high sea. 

Perum Tirumavajavan, J who died at Kurappajli, 
was the contemporary and ally of the Pandya Peru- 
valudi who died at Vejji-yambalam. Karik-kannanar 
of Kavirip - pum - pattinam while applauding their 
alliance, warns them against evil counsellors ever 
intent on dividing them: § 

** Thou art the Lord of the Kftviri and its cool waters ; 
this king is the lion of the warlike race of Paiicavas, who, not 
disheartened by the death of his elders, valiantly protects his 
good snbject8, like the long shoots of the shady banyan tree, 
which strike root in the ground anti keep the tree alive though 
the parent trunk is withered; and who, though young, has 
speedily scattered his enemies like the thunderbolt which smites 
whole broods of serpents. Thou art the warrior, of Urandai, 
where virtue abides ; this king, thinking that paddy and water 
are cheap, has made himself Lord of the mountain sandal and the 

* Puram 203. 

f Pur am 13, 

X This king was wrongly identified with Karikala by Kanaka$abhai.— , See 
P. T, Srinivasa Aiyangar Jamils, p. 367. n. 

§ Pur ant 58. Kanakasabhai, 68-9. 



THE COLAS 


eea pearl together with the thundering drums, and i*ules with 
mercy K\i<Jal, the seat of Tamil (learning). Majestic like the two 
gods standing together, one of whom is white (in complexion) 
and holds the palm-flag and the other of dark hue carries the 
wheel, you are now both terrible to your enemies. Is there 
anything pleasanter than this ? Listen, yet, (to my words). May 
your fame last for ever ! May you stand by each other, and if 
you do not break your friendship, you would not fail to conquer 
the whole of this sea-girt earth. Therefore, without giving heed 
to the specious words of thoughtless people which, though they 
appear good and wise and in keeping with ancient tradition, are 
intended to break the love that binds your hearts, may your 
friendship continue exactly as it is to-day ! May your lances 
rise victorious on the bloody field of battle ! May the lands of 
your enemies bear on the peaks of their mountains the crests of 
the striped tiger and the water carp.” 

Tira-mavalavan had the misfortune of being pilloried 
in song by an irate poet who was kept waiting too 
long for a gift. In a song of great power and beauty, * 
the angry bard proudly declares that his race has a 
greater regard for the poverty of small discerning 
chieftains than for the vain pomp of heartless 
monarchs. 

Ver - pahradakkaip - pern-virar(nar)k - kilji is the 
name of another Cola prince celebrated by Paranar and 
Kalattalaiyar, of the age of Karikala and his father. 
Three poems f in the Pf/mmnTtni describe the sad fate 
of this prince and his Cera opponent Kudakko Nednn- 
jeral-Adan, both of whom fell on the held of battle. 
Another prince with a strongly marked individuality 
was Porvaik-kopperunark-killi who figures in a dfczen 
compositions, three of which are short lyrics composed 
by Nakkannai, J a lady who appears to have loved this 

* Puram 197. 

f Puram 62, 63, 368. 

X Puram S3, 84, 85. 


[ 62 ] 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


erratic prince with a real passion. Sattandaivar, the 
poet of the remaining three pieces, * celebrates the 
prince’s power as a pugilist and his quickness in taking 
cities. He also suggests that no love was lost between 
him and Tittan, who is said to have been his father, and 
who figures in several poems f in the anthologies as 
a celebrated king of Uraiyur. Tittan once forced the 
chieftain Katti and his companion Pauau to fall back in 
disorder after a hasty advance on Lraiyiir. £ As this 
incident is recorded by' Paranar, Tittan and his eccentric 
son must have preceded Karikala. Tittan had also 

r 

a daughter Aiyai. § Solan Nalluruttirau and Nambi 
Nedufijeliyan are represented each by a single poem. 
The former was a poet himself, and in fact we have no 
knowledge of him except as an author. A whole 
section on Mullai. comprising seventeen songs in the 
anthology called Kalittotjai, is said to be his work, and 
in a short poem in the VuramnTtru he sings his ideal 
of a felicitous life : to shun misers and seek the 
company of strong and noble friends. Nambi Neduii- 
jeliyan forms the subject of a tine eulogium || from 
Pereyil Muruvalar (the Laughing Man of the Big 
Fortress), — a poem, remarkable for its fine array of 
short sentences and its vivid portraits. 

The life of Koccenganan, like that of Karikala, 

came to gather a haze of legend rouud 
itself; and it is necessary to avoid 
mixing up facts drawn from contemporary sources with 
the beliefs of later times. A song in the Pi/ranamru 

• Pur am 80 2. 

t Par am 80, 352, 305 ; Aham 6, 122, 152, 188, 226 
J A ham 22 ft 
$ A ham 6- Paranai, 

11 Puram 190. 
y Puram 239. 

•• Puram 74 . 


K“,' 0 (‘ii"juan. 


f:* 



THE COLAS 


and the forty verses that constitute the poem Kalamli 
by Poygaiyar form the earliest evidence «n this king's 
life. The references to him in the hymns of Tirugnaua- 
sambandar and Tirnmangai Alvur as well as Sundara- 

n m 

milrti take us to the next stage in which the emphasis 
falls on the religious side ol the king’s life. He figures 
also in the legendary genealogy of the Co}a copper- 
plates of the tenth and eleventh centuries though his 
place in the list is not the same in all. * It is worth 
noting that the slory which, after the manner of the 
Jataka tales of Buddhism, makes a spider of this king 
in his previous birth is first noticed by Appar and 
repeated by the Tiruvalungadtt plates f of the reign 
of Rajendra Cola. The Ka l haju t tup pa fa n i and the 
Vi k ramasalan-ula more or less agree with the copper- 
plates, but the main stream of legend Hows through the 
Andadi of Nambi-Andar-Nambi to the Perit/a Pur an am 

of Sekkililr, the ocean in which all the streams of 
** * 

Saivite legend mingle in the Tamil country, 


The Kahnalj J is a poem of moderate length, 
giving a somewhat conventional, though occasionally 
gruesome, description of the battle of Kalumalum, 
near Karuvur in the Kongu country, 4$ in which 
Senganan defeated and made captive the Cera king 
Kanaikkal Irumporai. The poet Poygai, a friend of 
the Cera., placated the Cilia conqueror by singing of 
his valour in the battle-field and thereby secured the 
release of the Cera from captivity. The verse in the 


* See Hultzsch’s discussion of this point— SIf. ii. pp. 152-3, 253, 377-9, 

f Appar-Kurukkai V. 4, Tiruppasnr-(Tiruttan<Jakam)-v. 6 ; Also Bundarar 
Tiruva<}uturai V. 2. Tiruvalangadu plates-v. 43 : Inner ITUTm /; a- band hah . 

J See /A. xviii pp. 259-65 for a translation and critique of the poem by 
V. Kanakasabhai. 

§ See Ssran $engu{tuvan p. 183. Ahum 44 seems to give some details 
of the events which preceded the battle. 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


JPurananuru to which reference has already been made 
purports to have been composed by the Cera, while 
still in captivity in the Cola prison at Kndavayir- 
kottam (West Grate Prison), and makes a sad confession 
of his cowardice in surviving the disgrace that had 
befallen him: 


“ Even a babe that (lies, and a mole that is born, though 
they are not men, are still put to the sword. * Can it be, that 
such a race gives birth to one who, subjected to misery like a dog 
held in leash, yet begs tor water from his unkindly jailors, and 
drinks it, in his weakness, to allay the fire in his stomach ? ” 


The story is that he declined to drink the water he 
had so obtained, and slept away his thirst, f Poygai's 
successful intercession must, have taken place soon 
after. So far the evidence of contemporary literature. 
There seems to be nothing incredible in the situation 
thus depicted. No deep-seated grounds of public 
policy governed the actions of kings and chieftains in 
those days, and the relations among them were more 
or less personal. Nothing seems more natural in such 
a state of things than for a prince, who fell short of the 
heroic ideal cherished by his age and who pined in 
captivity, to obtain his release owing to the intercession 
of a clever bard who made a subtle appeal to the 
vanity of the victor by celebrating his success in 
very glowing terms Very good reason can be shown 
for holding that Poygai, the friend of the Cera captive, 
was no other than the celebrated Vaisnava devotee 

Poygai-5.lv ar. 


* The allusion is to a custom by which kings who died a natural death 
were supposed to secure the tnrasvargii if their corpses were cut with a swoid 
before their final disposal ; cf. Miminukaltu, xxiii, 11. 11-14*. 


f * Tnftjiya ’ ia the colophon to this JPuram verse must he taken to mean 
‘slept,’ not 1 died’, as this is the only way in winch it can he leconeiled with 
the colophon to the KahvalJ. See. Stud Us pp. 14-16. 


t By understanding 4 Kanaiyan * in Ahum 44 as the abbreviation of Kanaikkal- 
irumpojai, it is possible to avoid much unnecessary confusion. Covtia Pandit 
Ajiantarama Aiyar, AlrAmr^-introdn. pp. 6-7. 


[ 65 J 



THE COLAS 


Though we have no contemporary evidence 
bearing on Koccenganan's religious persuasion, there 
seems to be little reason to doubt that Tirumangai and 
Sambandar represent a correct tradition about him in 
their allusions to his religious zeal. And the probable 
identity of Poygaiyar of the Kalavali with the Alvar 
of the same name strengthens this supposition. * Tiru- 
mangai- Alvar in one of his hymns on Tirunaraiyur f 
makes the achievements of Koccenganan and his 

* It must, however, he noted here that several scholars of repute are opposed 
to the identification of the two Poygais, and Pandit E. V. Anantarama Aiyar who 
is among them proposes to postulate two Jsenganans as well (see his edn. of the 
Art/rt 7 'fl/£introdn. p. 9). The debate has not been altogether academic, as religion, 
always an explosive subject, seems somehow to have got mixed up in it. On the 
stiength of data drawn from the Yappat ungala-virutti, a work of the tenth century 
A. D or the eleventh at the latest, Pandit M. Raghava Aivangar first proposed the 
identification of Poygai of 6angam fame with the Alvar (The Sett- Tamil Vol. i 
p. 6 ; also his TtlySrkal KalaniUu 2nd edn. pp. 2311). The author of the Virutti 
quotes a number of verses as those of Poygaiyar, and some of them are from the 
first Tiruvandadi of the Alvar (see the Virutti pp. 220 where the text seems to he 
defective, 350 and 459-60) ; he also counts the poet among the sages whose vision 
comprised eternity (350). Among the verses quoted in the whole work, however, 
there is not one from the KalavalJ. And Tirumangai’s pasuram is silent about 
Kalumalam and the KalavalJ. But considering that the religious hymns of 
Poygai-Alvar are all, like the Kalavali t in the Venba metre, the presumption 
arises (especially as there seems to he no essential difference in style between the 
two) that they are compositions of the same writer. One argument that has been 
urged against this view is worth serious consideration, and that is the argument 
that a bhakta like Poygai-Alvar would not have stooped to the base flattery of 
an earthly monarch ; the Alvar himself declares this expressly in his hymns. A 
complete answer to this position is furnished by the fact that some of the verses 
quoted in the Yap pa run gala- virutti and ascribed to the Xjvar are on secular sub- 
jects and include the praise of kings. We may suppose the Alvar's statements 
about his exclusive devotion to Visnu to have been made in the later stages of 
his life when he had found Ins trim self. So that, unless we pit the late tradi- 
tions of the Gnruparamparai regarding lus age against the categorical evidence of 
Gunasagara, the author of the Yapp atun g ala- virutti t it seems necessary to accept 
the correctness of Pandit Raghava Aiyangar’s position. See, on the other side, 
K. S- Srinivasa Pillai-7«w;7 Varalaru pp. 176 7, Sentamihcchi Vol. ii, article 
on PoygaiySr by Pandit N. M. Venkatasami Nattar, and Kalavali , ed. Pandit 
Anantarama Aiyar, introduction. The novel suggestion of Pandit Anantarama 
Aiyar that Senganan, the &iiva navanar, was different from Koccenganan of the 
Kalavali is based entirely or the silence of the Periyapurfinatn on the Kalavali , 
The Pandit naively discovers another reason in that, according to him, SekkiJEr 
lias marked off the navanar from the other person by calling the former 
Senganan 1 1 

4 I'eriya TirnmvlJ VI# 6, 


[ 66 ] 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 


worship at Tirunaraiyfir the refrain of his song. Ilere 
is no room for doubting that the Alvar was thiuking of 
the great Cola king distinguished for heroism on the 
field of battle as the Saiva devotee who was reputed to 
have constructed seventy beautiful shrines to Siva, 
besides offering worship to Visnu in Tirunaraiyfir. His 
pointed mention of the elephant corps of Senganan’s 
enemy, the cavalry of Senganan himself and the part 
it played in his wars * is an important link which 
establishea a connection with the Kalavali, which in 
like manner states repeatedly that the successes of the 
Cola king against the Cera elephants was primarily 
due to the infantry and cavalry in his army. Tiruman- 
gai also implies that Benganau’s sway extended far 


outside the Cola country, f that he fought at Alunda, 
and Venni, and that he killed in fight a chieftain 
Vilandai Vel. In the hymns of Gnanasambandar and 
Sundaramfirti the great temples to Siva at Ambari 
Vaigal, and Nannilam are definitely said to have been 
founded by Senganan. The Anbil plates + of Sundara 
Cola state . generally that . Koccenganan built temples 

all over the country, while the Tiruvalan- 
glidu plates, as we have seen, hint at the spider story. 
The Anbil plates give the name of Senganan’s son, 
Nalladikkon. It is not till we get to the Perii/a Puramrn 
that the king gets transformed out of recognition and 
figures as the son of Subhade va and Kamalavati, and 
the founder of Jambukesvara. That Sekkilar’s account 


* Verse 3 line 3 of the hymn looks almost a copy of the Kalavali, of 

course allowing for (he difference in metre : muknlirun <// ^nni yi>ra 

kahl-ntanttar manimu^inill kakaniera ; also verse 4, 1. 3. 

f Tm • Tamilan Vadapnlakttn AV.m (5) / Tennmjon Kndakengav Solan 
«5), see w. 4, 6," 9 of the hymn. Also Pandit Ragliava Aiyangar Ah*>kal 
KManilai pp. 157tf. The Vel of Vilandai might have been a commander on 
the CSra side. 

* AkA/l,i-j,uiapadn-klpta-galtrisa-,!/tnmS (v. 13), El. xv p. 60. 

[ 67 ] 



THE COLAS 


includes the absurd story of the birth of Senganiin 
being delayed by artificial means in order to ensure 
its taking place at an auspicious moment, is clear proof 
that we have here a highly embellished account of 
things long sinee forgotten. The name Senganiin, his 
birth in the Coja family and the foundation of 
numerous Siva temples besides the Jambnkesvara are 
the only elements in Sokkilar's narration which indicate 
the ultimate identity of the Nayanar. 


Before this straggling notice of the early Colas is 

brought to a close, some attempt must 
lof0 be made to fix their age a little more 

precisely than has been done up to this point. One 
thing is clear, that these kings are anterior to the 
earliest time to which we are taken by the existing 
monuments of the historical period. Though the names 
of Uraiyur and Kaveripatnam still survive, nothing has 
been discovered yet in these places that furnishes even 
a trace of their former greatness. * We are left only 
with the evidence of literature and synchronisms with 
the history of neighbouring lands. When the sugges- 
tion was first made that Gajabahu, the king of Ceylon, 
who was the contemporary of the Cera Senguttuvan, 
was no other than Gajabahu I of the Ma/iavamsa, who 
ruled from A. D. lift to 1115, Dr. Hultzsch entered a 
caveat, saying: f ‘‘With due respect to Mr. Kumara- 
s warn i ; s sagacity, I am not prepared to accept this 
view, unless the identity of the two Gajabahus is not 
only supported by the mere identity of name, but 
proved by internal reasons, and until the chronology 
of the earlier history of Ceylon has been subjected 
to a critical examination.” Now, the chronology of 

• AKA. 1909-10, pp. 16-17. 

*j* tS II'* li) p* 378* 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 

Ceylonese history has been the subject of considerable 
discussion, and as a result, * the dates of the early 
kings of Ceylon are as well established as can be 
desired. There is only one Gajabahu in the Ceylon 
list before the twelfth century, and he ruled from A. D. 
173 to 195. | The only question, therefore, is whether 
the synchronism suggested by the Silappadiknram 
between, Senguttuvan and Gajabahu is to be taken into 
account, or whether, in view of the romantic and the 
supernatural elements in that poem, this synchronism 
must be rejected as untrustworthy. If there were no 
other factors to be considered, our answer to such a 
question must remain inconclusive. But there are 
several important factors which render it difficult, not 
to say impossible, for anyone to reject the synchronism, 
and with it the scheme of chronology arising from it. 

r 

There is perfect, concord between the Sangam 
anthologies, the notices of South India by classical 
works of the early centuries of the Christian era, like 
the Periplits and Ptolemy’s geography, and the numer- 
ous finds of Roman coins of the early Roman Empire 
in several places in Southern India. This would 
lead any unbiassed student to the conclusion that, the 
Tamil anthologies were contemporary with the classical 
works and the Roman coins. + 

Attention has been drawn already to the occur- 
rence, in the Mahavamsa account of the early relations 
between Ceylon and the Tamil country, of names of 

* See EZ, iii pp. 1-47, 
t ibid p. 9, No. 43. 

% Eetiplus and Ptolemy have been noticed abo\e p, 28. Sewells discus- 
sion of the Roman finds in the South in the JKAS. (1904) is still the most 
comprehensive. Recent studies of the nature and direction of the ioieign tiado 
of the Roman Empire tend, as will he seen later, to confirm the soundness of our 

position. 


[ 09 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tamil chieftains which, with variations natural in the 
circumstances, are repeated in the poems of the 
Purananuru , Pattuppattu and so on. The story of 
E]ara in the Mahammsa is doubtless the Ceylonese 
version of the Tamil Cola story of the king who con- 
demned his son to death for calf-slaughter. The 
Mahammsa places Ejara in the second half of the second 
century 11. C. and the other Tamil princes mentioned 
in the latter half of the first. If we remember that the 
early chapters of the Mahammsa were composed in the 
fifth century A. D. from earlier chronicles, * we shall 
see that the somewhat confused account of the Tamil 
invasions of the island in this early part of its history 
are not bottomless fabrications, but preserve for us the 
faded memoiy of real events, and the dates assigned 
to these events cease to be altogether valueless for 
Tamil chronology, f 


Again, the dates of the three Devaram hymnists 
and of Tirumangai Alvar have been fixed on proper 
grounds in the seventh century and after ; Appar, the 
oldest of them all, must have lived in the early part of 
that century. The most superficial student of Tamil 
literature can hardly fail to notice striking differences 
in vocabulary, diction, and metre between the com- 
positions of these holy men and the entire body of 
Sangam literature, which surely indicate a growth 
through some centuries. The fact that Appar knows 
of ^engansin as a spider transformed into a Cola king, 
by showing that Senganan had already become a 
legendary figure, points in the same direction ; and 
^euga^an was apparently among the latest of the early 
Cojas of whom we have spoken in this chapter. 


* Geiger, Eng. Tr. pp, x-xv. 

4 

+ See Ante pp. 33ff. Notice also the names Pan ay a muraka and Pi}aya» 
tnaraka in the Ceylon list recalling PaJ 4 aiyau Maran of Tamil literature. 



EARLY TAMIL LITERATURE 

With these considerations before us, it is no longer 
true that one has to depend on the mere identity of the 
name to accept the Gajabahu synchronism. Once that 
is accepted, it follows that, as Senguttuvan and his 
contemporaries had some generations of predecessors 
and successors, the best working hypothesis is to assign 
the Sangam Age to the first three or four centuries of 
the Christian era. 

Recent discussions centering round the twenty- 

ninth canto of the Maniniekalai and its 

Manimekalai and i _ 

Diiinuga. relation to Dmnaga s NyayapraveSa have 

turned out to be less conclusive than 
they appeared at first. The resemblance between the 
Nyayapravesa and this canto of the Maniniekalai is, 
doubtless, “ so complete that the Nyuyapravesa must be 
supposed to be either inserted in or extracted out of 
the Maniniekalai .” * We may go further and assert with 
some confidence that the Nyayapraveh has been inserted 
in the Maniniekalai. •{• But one can hai’dly fail to notice 

* Hyayapraveia ed. A. B. Phiuva p. xv. 

t The grounds for this view may he briefly indicated here. The publication 
of the Sanskrit text of the NyayapraveZa makes the Maninfikalai account much 
more intelligible than it was when l>r. S. K. Aivangar wrote his * Maninfekhalai 
in its Historical Setting* In reproducing almost word for word the treatment of 
fallacies in the A r yayapravtsa t the Maniniekalai (xxix 11. 111-468) differs from it 

in some remarkable ways. It compresses the N. in parts and expands it some- 
times as in the treatment of l : hhavavyavrtti in Vaidharmya Dr^tantabhasa, 
(two lines and a half of the Sanskrit text being rendered into 11. 424-49). Again 
some refinements are introduced by the Tamil author, which, though not found 
in the tVyfiyapravesa , are clearly suggested by it. The instance cited above is a 
good example of this also : and in discussing the example akaCavat as an 
instance of avidyamana-ubhayasiddba-sadharmya-d^tantabhasa, the N. explains 
the example only as referring to the asattva-vadi ; but the M. (11 383-4/ applies 
it to the sattva-vadi as well. Again there are differences in terminology which 
can only be noted, without criticism, as some at least of them may he merely 
textual errors in the Tamil work : (a) In the enumeration of pJ^abhusas the 
M. lifts aprasiddha-sainbandha, the ninth category, in the place ot prasiddhasam- 
bandha of the N. ; (b) for anyatarasiddha and sandighda*siddlia of the N. among 
hetvlibhasas, the M. substitutes anyathasiddlia and siddliasiddha; (c) for 

[ 71 ] 



THE COLAS 


that a different and a simpler exposition of logical princi- 
ples has already been given earlier in the canto, * and 
that the exposition of fallacies in accordance with the 
NyayapraveSa has come in as a clumsy afterthought, 
introduced by the impossible statement f that upanaya 
and nigamana may be subsumed under drsianta. This 
statement gives, in our view, the clue to the real history 
of the chapter. In its original form it, contained only 
the exposition which takes the first place in the 
chapter, was pre-Dinnaga in its content, and stood 
for a syllogism of five members. Some pious student 
of Difmaga, in his anxiety to glorify his master, by 
giving a rendering of the Nyayapravesa to the Tamil 
world, hit on the idea of putting it into the standard 
romance of Tamil Buddhism, and when he was up 
against the five-member syllogism in the original 
work, he solved the difficulty in a crude manner and 
annexed to the chapter a discussion of fallacies based 
on the three - member syllogism. This conclusion 
gains in force from a study of the other systems of 
philosophy, like the Saiikbya, which are reflected in 
tiie Mnnimekalai in their earlier phases. % 


viruddhavyabhicari of the N. \ve have viruddha - wabh hari in M, (<l) in 
naming drstahtabhubUs \ here the X. lias uTIdhanadharma-asiddha etc., the NT. 
gives sadhana-dharrmi-vjkala eU\ It may he noted that Dharmakliti too uses 
* vikala ’ for * asiddlu See Jill \ x pt. /V, for a review olf the Nyayapravesa 
(ed. Dhruva) by S.S.S. 


* 11. 45-108. 

f 11. 109-110. Oil this Mr. Dhruva remarks: u The author of the 
Manim7kalai does not perceive that the last two avayavas can never be included 
in the dr$tanta as he ignorantly imagines." (p. xv). 


X Mr. S. S. Survanarayana Sastri, has studied the Sa.ikhya in the Afani- 
mVtal&i and proved its early character. Vide JUT, Vol. viii (1929) pt. Hi. See 
alio ix pt. Hi for his paper on Buddhist Logic in the ManimUtidai. 



Chatter IV 


GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE IN THE 

SANG AM AG E. 


In the present state of our knowledge, it is not 
possible for us to view the political events of the 
Sangam age as a connected whole and study them in 
their sequence. They pass before us in kaleidoscopic 
confusion, more or less the same accidental results of 
the ambitions and fears, the hopes and blunders of 
kings and chieftains that ihey must have appeared 
to their eontempororios. We totally miss the mutual 
connection and the perspective in. which it is the 
task of history to set the events of the past. What we 
lack in this direction seems, however, to be more 
than made good in another. There is no age without 
its peculiar background of social and cultural ideas and 
ideals, n kind of communal psychology, which possesses 
men’s minds and to a large extent supports their 
institutions and determines their actions. Ui this psy- 
chological background, the literature of the Sangam 
gives us an unusually complete and true pictur 


vex 
%/ • 


A composite 
mlttm* 


The most striking fmihuv o( the culture of the 

is its composite (j utility It is the 
unmistakable result of the blend of two 
ori''in .11 v distinct cultures, best des- 

• V -‘ l A 

cribed as Tamilian * and Aryan. There is no task 
more fascinating, and none less easy, in the study of the 
pre-history of Southern India* than that ot disentangling 


• The oM arm 1 'rachiun, now fallen into ...uoli contempt with some writers, 
does not mean anythin): e<s-nt.a!lv deferent. Inferences from language or 


culture to race are of course not warranted. 



f. 73 ] 



THE COLAS 


the primitive elements of these disparate cultures, the 
stages by which they mingled and the consequences of 
their mixture. * Our task is the simpler one of studying 
the resultant culture as it is reflected in the extant 
literature of the Sangam. In the absence of a settled 
internal chronology, and of reliable data bearing on the 
gi’owth of the Tamil language in this period, the relative 
dates of individual poems can hardly be fixed with 
any confidence. Attempts to base inferences on a 
fifth century date for Karikala, or on subjective tests 
like the assumption that kings began to loom large only 
after Karikala’s time, f or the assumption that minor 
chieftains gained power after the eclipse of the three 
dynasties in the Kajabhra interregnum, J cannot be 
received with too much suspicion. Our course must 

be to treat the entire corpus of the 
Sangam works, (including also the 
Silappadikaram and the Manimekalai in this description 
but making more cautious use of them than of the other 
poems), as depicting the culture of a definite epoch 
extending for a period of three centuries ; and thus to 
gain some knowledge of the background against 
which must be set the wars and disputes, the friendships 
and jealousies that have been sketched in the last 
chapter. 


Method. 


* Much recent writing on this subject makes one reflect on the justice o ( the 
remark made in another context by Wingfield-Stratfcrd : 11 This is a field 
that has hitherto been largely left to free lances, and it is perhaps a pity that a 
closer liaison has not been maintained between orthodox historians, and imagina- 
tive pioneers, the boldness of whose conclusions is apt to take one’s breath 
away, and demands from the reader exercise of the critical faculty not always 
apparent in the author. The argument from words, of which the free lance is so 
glibly prolific, is one that ought to he us;d with the utmost caution, considering 
how easy it is, with a little ingenuity, to make out a philological case for the 
wildest absurdity,*’ {The History of British Civilisation^ i p. 14), 

+ P, T. Srinivasa Aiyangar Tamils p. 485; surely there were heroes 
before Agamemnon. 

\ ibid. p. 537. 


[ 74 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

To trace fully the elements of pre-Aryan Tamil 

culture that survived into historical 

Blend of cultures. . . > . 

times would involve an extensive appli- 
cation of comparative methods to the literature of the 
Sangam age, such as cannot be undertaken here. 
These survivals are Been sometimes 1 to exist by the side 
of the newer practices ; just as the electric train and 
the country cart are both seen in use today, so in the 
Manimekalai we see the prevalence side by side of no 
fewer than five modes of disposing of the dead which 
included cremation, exposure, and burial with and 
without urns. * * * § Other instances show evidence of a 
conscious effort to blend the new with the old, and 
dovetail into one another modes originally distinct and 
self-contained. It is well-known that the earliest 
Dharmasutras f mention eight forms of marriage as part 
of the Aryan code ; these eight forms are mentioned in 
the Sutras of the Tolkappiyam X and the Iraiyannr 
Kalaviyal , and much ingenuity is spent in accommoda- 
ting them to Tamil forms. The Tamils had a relatively 
simple conception of marriage ; they recognised the 
natural coming together of man and woman ( kamalc - 
kuttam), and the slight differences in the manifestation 
of love, perhaps ultimately traceable to differences in the 
physical conditions of the different parts of the country. 
These they recognised as the five tiaais. They had 
also names for unilateral love, kaikkilai, and abnormal 
love — perundinai. Into this scheme the eight Aryan 
forms are squeezed with results not altogether happy. § 
The five tinais are treated as varieties of Gandharva, 
and the Asura, Raksasa and Paisaca forms are grouped 

• vi. II. 66-7. 

+ E. Gautama iv. 6 ff. (Mysore ed. a,) 

J MaraiySr-tl-ettu-manral etfanul, Su, 93 in PoruJ ; Iraiyantr, Su. 1. 

§ Tolknppiyam Porul. 104-6. 



THE COLAS 


under kaikkilai , — courses not very satisfactory in 
themselves. But the attempt to impound the remaining 
Aryan forms, Brahma, Prajapatya, Arsa and Daiva 
under perutidinai is even less happy, and shows that 
the synthesis was not easy or natural. But the most 
tangible result of the meeting of the Tamil and the 
Aryan is the tremendous richness and fecundity that 
was imparted to the Tamil idiom thereby, and the rise 
of a literature which combined a good deal of classic 
grace with vernacular energy and strength. This is 
the literature of the Sangam Age. 


In a few broad sweeps of his pen, the poet of the 

Pattivappalai * conveys to us the gen- 

Rurjil . /i i i • 

eral aspect of rural hie m the ancient 
Coja country studded with numberless small villages. 
The unfailing Kaveri spread its fertilising waters 
on the wide fields yielding golden harvests. The 
white water lilies growing in wet fields withered 
under wreaths of smoke issuing from hot ovens on 


which was boiling the sweet juice of the dark cane. 
The buffalo crammed its maw with well-grown ears 
of corn, while its young ones slept in the shadow of the 
tall barns. Cocoanut palms and plantains with bunches 
of fruit, the areca-palm and the fragrant turmeric, the 
mango in its variety and the palmyra with clusters of 
palm-fruit, the broad based He tabu (Colocasia anti- 
qnonun), and the tender ginger grew in abuudance 
around each village. Bright-faced maidens, wearing 
tasteful jewels and innocent looks, keeping watch 
over the paddy drying in the open, dung their curved 
ear-ornaments of gold at the fowl that came to eat 
the grain. Little children, with anklets on their feet, 
played about on the thresholds of houses, with their 


176 ] 


* II. 1-2B. 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

toy-carts with three wheels and no horses, and shouted 

out to people to get out of their way. Such were 

the many villages in which lived the rich families of 

the extensive Co]a country. The wonderful fertility 

of the soil is a favourite theme with the poets, and 

making all allowances for the license of poets, 

especially of court-poets, one can hardly deny the 

reality of the substance behind such utterances as 

that of Kovur-Kilar : * 

•• 

Glory be thine, 0 giver, whose brow knows no sweat 
From labour (lone, but only that from eager feasting ! 

[ — Like drops of rain 

That fall in the full lake, drips down the fat 
From the meats they serve up ; roasted flesh is 
Carved and eaten ; from their emptied porringers they 
Quaff large draughts of milk ! — 

Thy fields of rice, — wide are their borders, where 
The Bweet cane flowers ! Thy pasture lands, — with stalls 
For herds, — there cattle graze ! 

Archers with fortified camps guard the flocks, and from 

[tree-tops 

On the wooded shore count the ships that cover thy sea !— 
In the bay they load the abounding salt with which thy 

[craggy mountains teem ! 

Aviir Mulam-kilar affirms t that the small space in 
which an elephant can lie clown produced enough to 
feed seven ; another poet J states that a veil of land 
produced a round thousand kalatns of paddy. 

The government of the land was in form a heredi- 

tary monarchy. Disputed successions 
Monarchy. an( J civil wars were, as we have seen, 

not uncommon ; and if the accounts we possess of the 
ravages that followed a conquest contain any truth, 

• Puram 368, /A, xxix pp. 282 -3. 
t Puram 40, 11. 10-11. 

J Porunar-drmppada i , 11. 245-6, 



THE COLAS 


war was not, as so often made out, the pleasant 
diversion of a few professionals which left the normal 
course of life in the country untouched. The Sanskri- 
tic conception of the state ( rajya ) as an organism with 
seven limbs ( angas ) was known and accepted, and the 

Knral, * introducing a slight but signi- 
PoIlt> ficant change, makes the remaining six 
elements subject to the king. In other respects as 
well, the concepts of polity gain a certain clarity and 
precision in the hands of Tiruvaljuvar, unknown to 
their sources. The ten verses f in which he deals 
with the essentials of nadu (rastra) are far more 
clear-cut in their analysis of the physical basis of the 
life of the state than the corresponding statements 
in the Arthasastras known to us, and the concluding 
declaration X ' 


“ Though blest in every other way, it avails nothing to a 
nfidu if there be no peace between the people and the king ” 

shows a firm grasp on the part of the author of 
the fundamentally moral foundations of political 
independence. Again, the same combination of shrewd 
practical wisdom and high political principle charac- 
terises his discussion of the place of treasure in state 
life, § and in this section we have the remarkable 
statement that the king’s treasury is replenished from 
three sources — land-tax, customs and tolls, conquest. 

And in striking contrast to Kautilya’s maxims on prana ya 
(‘ benevolences ’) , is the sound rule of Tiruvajluvar : || 


• No. 381 
+ Nos. 731-40 
t No. 740. 

§ Nos. 751-60* 

No. 756 Parimelalagar has taken nrttporu l to mean escheat and treasure- 
trove ; but see DtvUkaram , sec. 9. 

|| No. 552 


[ 78 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

“ A sceptred king imploring a gift is like a robber with 
lance in hand crying ‘ give V* 

It may be noted in passing that a verse in Aliananuru * 
states that the Cojas had a strongly guarded treasury at 
Kumbakonam. 


The king was in all essential respects an autocrat, 

whose autocracy was tempered by the 
maxims of the wise and the occasional 
intercession of the minister. The sphere 
of the state’s activity was, however, very limited, and 


Nature of 
Monarchy. 


in a society where respect for ancestral custom was 
very deep-rooted, even the most perverse of autocrats 
could not have done much harm; and it must be 


owned that the general impression left on the mind by 
the literature of the age is one of contentment on the 
part of the people who were proud of their kings and 
loyal to them. The great author of the Kurd, much 
of whose work is devoted to a systematic treatment 
of the affairs of state, may be accepted as a safe 
guide to the prevailing theory of the time ; and theory 
is never so completely divorced from practice that we 
can make no inferences from the one regarding the other. 
No better method can be availed of to understand the 
nature of Tamil monarchy in this period than to 
discuss some of the salient statements of Tiruvalluvar 


on the subject, lie warns kings, for instance, against 
the corrupting influence of unlimited power, saying : f 


The king with none to censure him, bereft of safe- 
guards all 

Though none his ruin work, shall surely ruined fa,!. 


The possibility of oppression and its consequence to 
the tyrant form the subject of some verses which seem 


* No. 60* 11. 13-5 — Korrac-cokir 
jeriyu * : am n -gadi . 


t No 448, Pope’s translation. 


kudandai vaitta nadu turn nidiyinun- 


L 79 J 



THE COLAS 


to imply that even in the face of intolerable misrule 
there were no formal remedies open to the people : * 

His people’s tears of sorrow past endurance, are not they 

Sharp instruments, to wear the monarch’s wealth away ? 

• • » «tt ••• 

* Ah ! cruel is our king ’ where subjects sadly say, 

His age shall dwindle, swift his joy of life decay. 

The importance attached to espionage would likewise 
imply that the king had little direct means of ascertain- 
ing popular opinion : f 

These two : the code renowned, and spies. 

In these let the king confide as eyes. 

And the duty is cast on the minister of even braving 
the anger of a worthless king and speaking out to him 
when the occasion demanded it : X 

“ Though, himself unwise, the king might cast his wise 
words away, it is the duty of the minister to speak the very 
truth.” 

Lastly, the important place of learned men in the 
polity of the land and the potency of their influence 
in the country and on the court is neatly brought out 
in the Kural : S 

Although you hate incur of those whose ploughs are bows. 

Make not the men whose ploughs are words your foes 1 

Nothing can furnish more striking evidence of 
the great gulf that separated royalty from common 
humanity than the awe with which the power of 
the king for good and for ill was contemplated. In 
theory, he was not merely, nor even primarily, 
the guardian of the people from physical danger, 

• Nos. 955, 564. 

t No. 581. 

X No. 638. 

§ No. 872. 


[801 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


internal and external, but he was the custodian of the 
Universal Order. On his right rule rested the penance 
of the sage, the purity of the wife, * nay the very 
course of the seasons. The Rural affirms : t 

The learning and virtue of the sages spring from the 

[sceptre of the King ; 

again, 

Where King, -who righteous laws regards, the sceptre 

[wields. 

There fall the showers, there rich abundance crowns the 

[fields. 

Not lance gives kings the victory. 

But sceptre swayed with equity. 

The result of misrule then is not rebellion, but famine. 
Some of these ideas, though not in so clear-cut a form, 
are also the common stock of Sanskrit treatises on 
polity. These statements, doubtless, are by no means 
to be understood literally ; they are only meant to 
emphasise the importance and the glory of a just rule : 
and are part of the armoury of maxims and exhortations 
intended for the guidance of kings and for the good of 
their subjects. But from this mystic conception of 
kingship, it is a far cry to the control of the royal power 
by popular representation and the power of the purse. 
The early Banskritic political thinkers, like some 
Roman Catholic writers of the sixteenth century, 
justified tyrannicide under conditions. Tamil litera- 
ture does not seem ever to sanction resistance to the 
king's will. 


Mention is made in the Silappadikaram and the 

Manimekalai of groups called aimper- 
unguhi and enperayam. Another group ot 
five categories of persons is sometimes 
added to these to make up the * eighteen kilaippalor ’ 


The kulus and 

H 

3 yarns. 


* Mani. xxii 1. 208. 

t No*. 543 ; 645—6. cf. also Af*ui—vii U. 8 ff. 


[ 81 ] 


11 



THE COLAS 


as the early lexicon Divakaram calls them, or the 
‘ eighteen mrj'atn ’ as they are more commonly known. 
There are noticeable divergences among the earliest 
authorities on the content of aimperungttlu and eupe- 
rayam : * this, taken along with the contexts in which 
these phrases occur outside the lexicons, is enough to 
convince a student of Tamil Literature that these 
various groups are part of the royal paraphernalia 
which accompanied kings on ceremonial occasions. 
The Kural knows nothing of them. Kanakasabhai, f 
who recognised that the ‘ eitperayam ' were the eight 
groups of attendants who contributed to the ‘ pomp 
and dignity’ with which the king was surrounded, 
somehow convinced himself that the ‘ aimperungnhi ’ was 
of another order, and has made a number of statements 
not one of which is warranted by his sources. “ The 
council of representatives safeguarded the rights and 
privileges of the people ; the priests directed all religious 
ceremonies ; the physicians attended to all matters 
affecting the health of the king and his subjects ; the 
astrologers fixed auspicious times for public ceremonies 
and predicted important events ; the ministers attended 
to the collection and expenditure of the revenue and 
the administration of justice. Separate places were 
assigned in the capital town, for each of these assem- 
blies, for their meetings and transaction of business. 
...The power of government was entirely vested in the 
king and in the ‘ Five Great Assemblies.' It is most 
remarkable that this system of government was follow- 
ed in the three kingdoms of the Pandya, Coja and Cera, 
although they were independent of each other. There 
is reason to believe therefore that they followed this 
system of government which obtained in the country 

i 

• See JPK. pp. 32-3, 

f The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago. .pp. 109-10. 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


from which the founders of the ‘ three kingdoms ’ had 
originally migrated, namely, the Magadha Empire." 
Of this string of astonishing assertions, we can only 
observe that everything in them except the names of the 
groups is pure imagination, and the reader will search 
the texts in vain for support for these statements. 
What is here called 1 the council of representatives ’ is 
described by the vague term ‘ masanam ’ which at best 
may mean ‘ elders * 

For the germ of a popular assembly, not organised 

on any scientific basis of represen- 

Aihtmbi). tation, but still virtually representing 

such public opinion as there was, we must turn 
really to the institution called ‘ manram ’ (hall) and 
‘ podiyil ’ (common place) in this early literature. The 
two sections on * avai ’ ( sabha ) in the Kvral are quite 
general, and some verses in them may raise a doubt 
whether anything more than meetings for purposes 
of learned disputation is contemplated by them ; but 
the term ‘ avai ’ is also applied in other works to the 
4 manram ’ and in the Kural itself, the avai is clearly 
part of the mechanism of politics. We may therefore 
hold with Parimelalagar that these sections have 

# As muv be expected, scholars who art* not in a position to control 
Kuwait asabhai's statements by going to his sources have been much intrigued 
by them. In his thoughtful work on Corporate Life in Ancient India , for instance, 
R. C. Majumdar takes a big leap forward from the point to which 
Kanakasabhai bad taken him, and affirms: “It appears tome that the so called 
Five Assemblies were really the five committees of a Great Assembly. The 
writer has traced them to the Magadha Empire, but they seem to me rather the 
modifications of the Vedic Samiti which left its reminiscence in every part of 
India.” And these hoary assemblies also by a miracle anticipated f he most 
modern developments in political organisation ! For Majumdar continues : 
“ in any case the representative character of these bodies, and the effective 
control which they exercised over the administration is clearly established. It is 
interesting to note also that the ‘ministers’ formed one ot the assemblies. The 
assemblies, taken together, may justly be compared with the Privy Council 
referred to above, the assembly of the ministers corresponding with the Cabinet 
composed of a selected few.” (Second Edition PP . 130-1). Aho nirankusatvam 
utpreksuyah ! 



THE COLAS 


Urban. 


reference to the king's sabha. Frequent as are the 
allusions to the ‘ sabha ’ or ‘ manram ’ in the works 
of the period, few specific details of its nature and 

working are forthcoming. Its place 
in the administration of justice, especi- 
ally in the capital city of the king, is well attested. 
The sons of Malaiyaman were tried and sentenced, and 
later released by the intercession of Kovur-Kilar, in the 
manram of Uraiyur ; * and Pottiyar, after the death of 
his friend Kopperunjolan, could not bear the sight of the 
same manram bereft of him. The Porunar-arruppadai f 
makes a pithy statement about adults setting aside their 
feuds while they entered the sabha, which might mean 
either that they got their disputes adjudicated or laid 
their private quarrels aside for the discharge of common 
duties. We can infer naturally that the sabha or 
manram was also availed of by the king for purposes of 
general consultation ; Tiruvajjuvar lays stress on the 
importance of ready speech in the assembly by saying 
that the learning of a man who is afraid to speak out in 
the assembly is like a bright sword in the hands of a 
eunuch on the field of battle. + 


Rural. 


Even less specialised and more entangled in the 

social and religious complex of village 

life was the manram of the rural areas. 

• • 

Each village had its common place of meeting, gene- 
rally under the shade of a big tree where men, women 
and children met for all the common activities of the 

* Pur am 46. 

•• 

•f* 11. 187-8 ~mtidiy 0 r-avai-ptthi‘polu$r>ram pakai mu ran selainim. Here 
* mudiyor * is to be taken in contrast with the ‘ ilaiydr ’ immediately preceding in 
the sentence ilaiyUr vandal- ayaravum . Naecinarkkiniynr indeed does not do so, 
and understands < mudiyor ’ to mean * old men \ and finds occasion to introduce 
the legend about Karikala putting on a wig of grey hair in order to appear 
older than the old men who came to lay their differences before him. 

t No 727. 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


village ; there were held the folk dances in which the 
women took part and which were suspended in the 
midst of a war or siege. * * * § Lacking evidence on the 
place occupied by the manram on the political side of 
rural life, we may still trace to these primitive folk- 
gatherings, at least in part, the beginnings of the highly 
developed system of village-government which came 
into existence and functioned so admirably in later 
Coja times, f 

The chief sources of royal revenue appear to have 

been land and trade. The via and the 

Taxation. . o i 1 

veil as measures ot land were 
known ; 1 but we have no means of determining 
precisely the king’s share of the produce of agriculture. 
The peasant was the backbone of the country’s pros- 
perity and was held in great esteem. The author 
of the Rural affirms that his was the only life worth 
the name, the life of all the rest being one of servitude 
and sycophancy. § The importance of foreign trade in 
the period, and the vivid account of the activity 
of customs officials given in the Patti nappalai must 

go a long way to convince us of the high place 
occupied by customs duties as a source of revenue. 

“ In the broad street near the sea beach where are seen 
(to grow) white long-petalled clusters of tdlai (Pandanus), 
officials of established renown guarding the property of the good 
king, collect customs from day to day, untiring like the horses 
yoked to the chariot of the hot-rayed sun ; yet, without abating, 
in the manner of showers in the rainy (season) when the water 
absorbed by the clouds is poured on the hill, and the water 

* Pur am 373. 

— 

f See Studies pp. 74 ff, 

J Porunar . 11. 180, 246. 

§ No. 1033. 

H 11. 118 137. 

[ 85 | 




THE COLAS 


poured on the hill is despatched to the sea, immeasurable 
quantities of various articles are being brought ashore from the 
sea and sent to the sea from land ; in heavy bales, precious 
articles come crowding in endlessly into the strongly guarded 
enclosure, and are sent to the stack after being stamped with the 
(seal of the) mighty and fierce tiger.” 


Prisons. 


The prison formed part of the system of adminis- 
tration. * The Cera Kanaikkal-Iriuupo- 
rai was detained by Senganan in a 
prison, which, from its name Kudavayir-kbttam, is 
sometimes taken to have been in Kumbakbnam or a 
smaller place, also near it, now called Kodavasal. f 


An army of well-equipped professional soldiers 

was regularly maintained and no doubt 
ArIn> ’ found frequent employment in those 

bellicose times. The captains of the army were distin- 
guished by the title of emdi conferred on them in a 
ceremony of formal investiture at which the king 
presented his chosen commander with a ring and other 
insignia of high military rank. + The Puramnnru 
contains two poems § on such military leaders who 
served the Cola monarchs ; of these, one gives a very 
clear notion of the ideals cherished by a good soldier 
in those days : 

“ You, when you see a fight, you rush to the front, divide 
your enemy’s forces, stand before them, and get your body 
scarred by the deep cuts of their swords ; thus are you (your 
fame is) pleasant to the ear, not so your body to the eye. As for 
them (your enemies), when they see you, they turn their backs, 
and with bodies whole and unscarred, they are pleasant to the eye, 

* Marti xix 11. 42-3. 

f See JCalavali-td. Anantarama Aiyar j>. 10. (hitrodn.) 

J See Naccinarkkiniyar on ma ray a m -perra - n edit mol iya n u m { Tol . Poritl . 
Purattinai) Su. 8.) 

§ Nos. 167, 394. 


[ 86 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


not bo (their infamy) to the ear. Hence, yon are pleasant in one 
way, they in another ; what is there else in which they do not 
equal you ? Yet, what wonder is it, tell us, noble one ! that this 
world cherishes you, 0 ! Kijli, of the fleet steed and of the 
victorious anklet-adorned foot.” 

Even the common soldier when he fell fighting was 

cherished by his compatriots. The spot 

Hero stones. ,, i ■» « , , 

was usually marked by a stone bearing 
on it the name and the fame of the fallen hero. Such 
hero stones also sometimes became objects of worship. * 
This custom survived till at least the tenth century in 
the Tamil and Kanarese country where several inscribed 
hero stones bearing dates in the ninth and tenth 
centuries and answering to the description given of 
them in Sangani literature have been brought to light. 
The setting up of memorial stones for this and other 
purposes was so common that, at an early date, literary 
convention came to standardise the procedure adopted 
on such occasions, f 

Kings often took the field in person and delighted 

to reioice with the common soldiers in 

War * 

their successes ; on the other hand, if a 
kin<* was killed or even seriously wounded in the midst 
of the fight, his army gave up the struggle and accepted 
defeat. X Yet only a warrior’s death was held worthy 
of kings ; one Cera monarch, as we have seen, having 
been wounded in his back, decided to starve himself 
to death ; another, less heroic, mourned his captivity 
in pitiful terms. It was a common practice to lay 
on a bed of htiSa grass the corpses of kings who died 
otherwise than in a fight, and cleave them with a 
sword before burial or cremation in order to ensure 

* K’ural 771 ; Mam 131 ; Param 306, 1. 4. 

f Tol Poml Su. 63 (end.) 

I Puram 62, 1. 13, 


[ 87 ] 



THE COLAS 


for them a place in the Valhalla of the Tamils. * The 
vanity of the victor often inflicted deep personal 
humiliations on his vanquished foe, the memories of 
which rankled and brought on further strife. The 
crowns of defeated kings furnished the gold for the 
anklets of the victor, f The horse, the elephant and 
war chariot, the sword, lance and bow, and the war- 
drum are among the paraphernalia of war most 
frequently described in the literature of the age. 
Elephants are often said to have carried flags in the 
battle-field, no doubt, the distinctive standards of each 
side which had, besides, other less prominent emblems 
like flowers and garlands of a particular variety. The 
Kalamli is one of the most detailed descriptions we 
possess of the battle-field in the Tamil country, and the 
poem supplies in a casual way much interesting infor- 
mation on military affairs. + The soldiers, infantry and 
cavalry alike, wore leather sandals for the protection 
of their feet. § The nobles and princes rode on ele- 
phants, and the commanders drove in pennoned 
chariots. Poygaiyur mentions that women who had 
lost their husbands bewailed their loss on the field of 
Kalumalam ; unless this is mere rhetoric, we may 
suppose that women, at least of the higher orders, 
sometimes accompanied their husbands to the field. 

Besides being the head of the government and 

leader in war, the king also held the 

j3 ar( j s 

first rank in social life. He patronised 
poetry and the arts, and kept an open house. War 

# Marti, xxiii 11. 13 fT and n. 

f Pur am 40. Modern warfare is no stranger to such unchi valrous practice*, 
Witness enemy guns cast into memorial shields. 

I Kanakasabhai has edited and translated the poem, I A. xviii, p. 253. 

§ Kalavali 9. 

^ Verse 29. 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

and women were, in fact, the universal preoccupations 
of the leisured classes, besides wine and song. The 
king and his emdis with their retinues must have 
formed a gay boisterous crew at the top of society with 
a huge capacity for enjoying the simple pleasures of 
life such as eating and drinking. No occasion was lost 
for holding a feast and the poets are most eloquent in 

their praise of the sumptuous fare to 

Feasts. 

which they were so often asked. One 
poet declares to his patron: * 

“ I came to see you that we may eat together the unctuous 
chops of meat, cooled after boiling and soft like the carded 
cotton of the spinning woman, alternating with large pots of 
toddy.” 

Another records in grateful detail his exhilarating recep- 
tion at the hands of the great Cola king Karikala: f 

“In his palace, beautiful women decked in fine jewels and 
sweet smiles, often poured out and filled the ever-ready goblet 
of gold with intoxicating liquor, unstinting like the rain ; thus 
drinking my fill, and chasing out my fatigue and my great 
distress, I experienced a new elation. * * * In good 

time, he plied me with the soft boiled legs of sheep fed on 
sweet grass, and hot meat, cooked at the points of iron spikes, in 
large chops which were cooled by being turned in the mouth 
from one side to another ; when I Baid I would have no more of 
these, he kept me on, and gave me to eat sweets made in varied 
shapes amt of excellent taste. In this wise, entertained by the 
music of the sweet drum and the well tuned lute of the bright 
faced viraliyar , I spent many pleasant days. On occasions, he 
entreated me to eat food prepared from rice ; then I ate fine 
cooked rice which, with unbroken edges ami erect like fingers, 
resembled the bods of the mullai (flower), together with rurries 
sweetened with milk, in such quantity that they filled me up 
to the neck. So I stayed happily with him, and by eating 
flesh day and night, the edges of my teeth became blunt like the 

• Pur am 125. 

*• 

f Pomnar-arruppadai 11. 84-9; 103-21 ; sec also Pur am 34 translated by 
Pope I A, xxix p. 251. 

[89 ] 


12 



THE COLAS 


ploughshare (after) ploughing dry land. Getting no time to 
rest, I began to dislike food ; and one day I said : * 0 ! pros- 
perous (king) 1 expert in collecting tribute from your angry foes, 
let me go hence, back to my old city.” 

The habit of eating betel leaves after food was 

well-known. Women are said to have 

Betel 

given up eating betel leaves and bath- 
ing in cold water when their husbands fell in battle. * 
Kovalan’s wife Kannaki gave him, after his last meal, 
betel leaves and areca-nuts to eat, before he went out 
on his* fatal mission for the sale of the anklet in 
Madura, f 

Easily the most cultured among the amusements 

open to the upper classes in those days 

Literature. . j j rm 

were poetry, song and dance. The 
poets were men and women drawn from all classes ; 
they composed verses to suit the immediate occasion 
and were often rewarded very well for their literary 
exertions. How much we owe to these occasional songs, 
gathered subsequently and arranged in ‘the eight 
anthologies ’, must be clear from the numerous examples 
quoted already. The profits of poetry in this age were 
believed, at any rate by people of later times, to be 
absurdly high; and the author of the Kalingatlup- 
parani tells us that Kadiyalur Rudrangannanar got for 
his Pattinappcilai over a million and a half gold pieces 
from Karikala. X If legend says true, only a small 
part of early Tamil poetry has come down to us ; but 
what we possess of this literature bears evidence of its 
great qualities. The poems, specially the shorter ones, 
are full of colour and true to life. They abound in fine 

* Puram 62 1. 14. 

f itl xvi 1. 55. 

J v, 185-The figure given is 1600,000 ; 1 PattoddrunUrUyiram * 

[ 90 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


phrases giving compact and eloquent expression to the 
physical and spiritual experiences of the poet. They 
are generally free from the monotony and the artificia- 
lity that mar much of later Tamil poetry. And they 
do not lack width of range. The short poem, the long 
ode, the dramatic epic and the religious lyric were all 
known ; and in the Rural of Tiruvaljuvar we have a 
work that transcends the limitations of time and place. 

Besides these poets, some of whom were resident 

companions of kings and chiefs, while 

Minstrels* 

others, the humbler ones, moved from 
one court to another in search of patronage, there were 
also roving bands of musicians followed by women 
who danced to the accompaniment of music. They 
were the panar and viraliyar who moved about the 
country in companies carrying with them all sorts of 
quaint musical instruments. They seem to have been 
the representatives of primitive tribal groups * who 
preserved the folk-songs and dances of an earlier age. 
Their numbers and their poverty form a frequent 
theme of the poetry of the age, and, from all accounts, 
they seem to have lived from hand to mouth and 
seldom known where their next meal was to be had. 
Here is a very humorous account f of their experi- 
ences after meeting a generous patron : 

“ The Cola king showered great quantities of wealth in 
(the form of) fine and costly jewels not suited to us ; on seeing 
this, some among the large group of my kinsfolk, used (only) to 
abject poverty, put on their ears ornaments meant for the 
fingers; others wore on their fingers things meant for the ear; 
others put on their necks jewels meant for the waist ; yet 
others adorned their waists with ornaments properly worn on the 
neck ; in this wise, as on the day when the mighty r&kwsa 
carried off Slta, the wife of Rama of the swift chariot, the great 

• Pur am 335. 

t Punam 378, U. 10-22. 


[ 91 ] 



THE COLAS 


group of red-faced monkeys shone in the fine jewels (of Sita) 
that they discovered on the ground, we were the cause of 
endless laughter.” 

Of the class of poems called arruppadai , in which a 
poet narrates his experiences of a patron and invites 
others to bring themselves to his notice, some are 
addressed to the panar and one of these poems, a 
relatively short piece, may be reproduced here. * 

“ Minstrel, with little lute of sweetest strain ! 

Suppliant with words of ancient wisdom full ! 

Importunate thou askest me to rest and listen to the plea- 
sant sounds of thy tambourine. 

But hear what I shall say ! 

The modest home of Pannan, whose hands are full of 
gifts, is near the wide city. 

There food inexhaustible is found like the waters of the 
cool tank under January’s moon, and the humming bees explore 
the sweets of the fragrant water-lily. 

There he meditates the praise and glory of Killivalavan, 
king of the good land that yields in abundance rice and sweet 
water, and that knows the fire that cooks, but not the fire that 
consumes. 

If thither, — together with thy songstress, whose hair 
diffuses fragrance of the 4 trumpet-flower/ the bright-browed, 
sweetly smiling —you softly advance, you shall prosper well. 

His gifts are not mere chance, like gold found by the 
woodman in the forest. 

Hesitate not. 

Long may he flourish ! ” 


That the arts of music and dancing were highly 

developed becomes clear from the 
celebrated third canto, the Arangerru - 
kddai of the Silappadikdram which 
gives a full account of the technique of the theatre 


Music and 
dancing. 


* Pur am 70 ; IA t xxix p. 281. 


[ 92 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


and the dance, and of the music and musical instru- 
ments accompanying the dance. If we may trust the 
earliest glossator to whom we have access on this highly 
abstruse section of the Silappadikaram, the dancing 
and music, of which hetaerae like Madhavi were the 
exponents in high society, comprised at least two strains 
which had come together to form a complex scheme. 
These were the desi and marga , the former doubtless as 
its name implies the strain indigenous to the country, 
and the latter an exotic Aryan mode. We may also 
infer the existence of an extensive literature on these 
arts most of which has been lost to us. Eleven scenes * 
from Aryan mythology seem to have been selected for 
standardised presentation and formed the classics of the 
arts. The Manimekalai t, like Vatsyayana’s Kamasutra , 
indicates that the nddaka magalir, the hetaerae, under- 
went a regular course of instruction extending over a 
number of years and comprising royal dances, popular 
dances, singing, lute-playing, flute -playing, cookery, 
perfumery, painting, flowerwork and so on. Several 
varieties of the v'mai and the yal are mentioned ; it is 
not easy to understand their exact forms now, though 
it is clear that a high stage of development had then 
been reached in these arts, apparently after a long 
evolution. 


The richer classes dwelt in houses built of brick 

and mortar, J of which the walls were 
H Ugh often covered with paintings of divine 

figures and pictures of animal life, § and 
surrounded by tastefully laid out pleasure gardens. If 


* These are detailed in Stl. vi 39 ff. 
f Mam ii 11. 18-32. 
t Puram 378. 

S Mam. iii, 11. 127 ff. 
n Maui xix 11. 102 ff. 


[ 93 ] 



THE COLAS 


Such gardens possessed shallow wells or tanks with 
mechanical fittings, artificial hillocks, rivulets and 
waterfalls, bowers of flower plants and glass houses, 
for the amusement of the inmates of the mansions 
that stood in their midst. Mirrors were also known 
and used. * The opening canto of the Silappadikaram 
gives an account of a wedding in high society which, 

though no doubt slightly idealised, may 
Marriage. perhaps be accepted as based upon 

reality. The bride, Kannaki, was twelve years of age ; 
the bridegroom, Kovalan, was sixteen. Their marriage 
was arranged by their parents, who were wealthy mer- 
chants, and announced to the citizens of Puhar by ladies 
riding on an elephant. 

“ On the day when the moon was in conjunction with 
Rohini, in a mandapa adorned with pearls and (lowers and 
supported on jewelled pillars with flower-festooned capitals, 
underneath an azure canopy, Kovalan, led in the Vedic rituals 
by an aged Brahman (priest), went round the fire in the 
company of her who rivalled Arundhati — blessed are the eyes of 
those who saw the sight.” 

The ceremonial over, the women strewed flowers and 
prayed for the life-long happiness of the couple, and 
the prosperity of the Emperor, and then followed the 
consitmmation. f 

Of the life of the common folk, literature furnishes 

fewer details. The Pattinappalai gives 

The common folk. . .<« , » w . . 

a vivid account of the life J of the 
Paradavar, the deep-sea fishermen of Puhar, including 
some of their holiday amusements. On the wide dune 
of black sand, the large clan of the rough working 

* AT ant. xix 90. 

t See also Aham 86, quoted by P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar Tamili 
pp. 78-80. 

X 11. 59-117 


[ 94 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

Paradavar were seen eating the cooked flesh of the 
sea-fish and the boiled field-turtle. Wearing flowers of 
the adumbu ( Ipomaea bilboa) and the water-lily, they 
gathered in the spacious manram like the stars and 
planets revolving in the blue sky. The stronger ones 
among them entered the wide arena and, without turn- 
ing back, they fought fierce duels hurting one another 
with their fists and their weapons. Birds flew from the 
mottled palms, frightened by stones shot from slings. 
In the outer streets, pigs were wallowing in puddles with 
their young ones, together with many kinds of fowl, and 
rams and quails were seen fighting. Their huts with low 
thatched roofs in which were stuck the long handles 
of fishing rods resembled the little enclosures round 
hero stones made of rows of shields and spears. In the 
midst of these huts, fishing nets were drying on sandy 
thresholds, like patches of darkness in bright moon- 
light. Wearing the garlands of the cool white con- 
volvulus growing at the foot of the screw pine (with 
aerial roots) they planted a branching jaw-bone of the 
sword fish and invoked a mighty god to dwell in it. 
Decked in the long-petalled talai (pandanus) flowers, 
the big red-haired fishermen drank the toddy of the 
rustling palm in the company of their dark women clad 
in garments of green leaves. Refraining from going 
afishing on the wide blue water, they ate and sported 
on the sandy beach reeking of the smell of fish. Like 
the ruddy cloud embracing the high mountain, like the 
baby clinging to its mother's breast, the red waters of 
the Kaviri mingled with the clear sea water roaring at 
its mouth ; there, the Paradavar washed their sins in the 
sea and the salt of the sea in the water of the river. 
They played with the crabs and, amidst the spreading 
waves of the sea, made dolls of sand and, feasting their 
senses in other ways, they spent the whole day in 

[95J 



THE COLAS 


games. In the night, they heard music and witnessed 
the plays acted in pillared mansions ; lovers, changing 
silks for lighter robes and drinking wine without limit, 
slept on the sands in the last watch of night. 

Puhar or Kavirippumpattinam was one of the few 

great cities of the time, and, being on 

Puhar. 7 , ... , , 

the sea coast, it was also the great 
emporium of the kingdom. The city, its port and trade 
are fully described in the poems. The author of the 
Silappadikaram says that the wise considered the pros- 
perity of Puhar as stable as the Himalaya and the 
Podiya mountains ; * again, 

“This celebrated city, full of riches coveted by kings 
and teeming with sailors, is so well stocked that it will not fail 
in its hospitality even if the whole world encircled by the roar- 
ing sea become its guest ; indeed in the hoards of (merchandise) 
brought in ships and carts, (the city) resembles a congregation of 
(all) the alien tracts producing precious goods.” 

A poet, f addressing the Coja king, says that big ships 
entered the port of Puhar without slacking sail, and 
poured out on the beach, inhabited by the common 
people, precious merchandise brought from overseas. 

In the extensive bazaar of Puhar, t savs 

Its biiZcMir# ^ 

the author of Pattinappalai, were seen 
many tall mansions surrounded by platforms reached 
by high ladders. These mansions had many apart- 
ments and were provided with door-ways, great and 
Bmall, and wide verandahs and corridors. Well-dressed 
damsels glittering in jewels were looking out from the 
windows of the upper floors, and their palms joined in 
their front in salutation to Mnruga resembled bunches 

* i, 1L 14-19. ii, 11. 1 ff. 

t Pur ant 30 11. 11-14. 

X Pattinappalai 11. 142-158. 



GOVERNMENT. AND SOCIAL LIFE 

of iengUndal ( gloriosa superba) flowers seen high on the 
slopes of mountains. When Muruga was taken out in 
procession in the bazaar, which was done quite often, 
music and dancing parties accompanied him, and 
M the sound of the flute, lute and drum 

mingled with the noises in the street. 
In all parts of the town there were flags of various 
kinds and shapes * flying in the air ; some were flags 
that were worshipped by many as a high divinity, and 
the entrances to their precincts were decorated with 
flowers. Others were white flags raised on frames 
supported by posts, below which were made offerings 
of rice and sugar to precious boxes of merchandise. 
Yet others were flags that announced the challenge of 
great and renowned teachers who had mastered many 
sciences, f There were also flags waving on the masts 
of ships heaving in the port of Puhar like huge 
elephants chafing at their posts. Yet others, flying over 
shops where fish and flesh were being sliced and fried 
and whose thresholds were strewn with fresh sand and 
flowers, announced the Bale of high-class liquor to their 
numberless customers. 

In the same poem which so vividly describes 

the external appearance of the city, 

Merchants. there occurs the following idealised des- 
cription of its merchants and traders and their moral : + 

“ They shunned murder, and put aside theft ; pleased the 
gods by fire offerings ; raised good cows and bulls ; spread the 
glory of the Brahmans ; gave (their guests) sweets to eat and 
(sometimes) foodstuffs raw ; in these ways was their kindly life 
filled with endless good deeds. Holding to the golden mean, 

* ibid 11. 159-183. 

t This method of exhibiting one’s learning in public disputations is also 
mentioned in the Maninilkalai i, 11. 60-1. It was quite common in Europe till 
modern times ; and in India, it is well-known even now among pandits. 

t U. 199-213 


13 


[ 97 ] 



THE COLAS 


like the peg of the loving farmer’s long yoke, they feared 
the untrue and ever spoke the truth ; they regarded others’ 
rights as scrupulously as their own ; they took nothing more than 
was due to them and never gave less than was due from them ; 
trading thus in many articles of merchandise, they enjoyed an 
ancient heritage of prosperity and lived in close proximity to one 
another.” * 


Maruvur. 


The general plan of the town of Puhilr is described 

in considerable detail in canto V of the 
D thTci"y ° f SilappacHkaram. The town built on the 

northern bank of the Kaveri near its 
mouth comprised two parts, Maruvur-pakkam near the 
sea and Pattinap-pakkam to its west. These were sepa- 
rated by a stretch of open ground taken up by a garden 
of trees under the shade of which was held the daily 
market of the city. Near the beach, in Maruvur-pakkam 
were terraced mansions and warehouses with windows 
shaped like the eyes of the deer. There was the abode 
of the prosperous yavanas whose pleasant features 

arrested the eyes of spectators, and of 
other foreigners who, for the gains 
from their maritime trade, lived close to one another on 
quite friendly terms. Vendors of fragrant pastes and 
powders, of flowers and incense, weavers who worked 
silk, wool or cotton, traders in sandal, agil, coral, pearls, 
gold and precious stones, grain-merchants, washermen, 
dealers in fish and salt, sellcx*s of betel-leaves and 
spices, butchers, sailors, braziers and copper-smiths, car- 
penters and blacksmiths, painters and sculptors (stucco- 
workers), goldsmiths, tailors and cobblers, makers of 
toys in pith and cloth, and the numerous panar who were 
experts in the music of the lute and flute — these and 
others had their residence in Maruvur-pakkam. In the 

Pattinap-pakkam were the broad royal 
street, the car street and the bazaar 
street. Rich merchants, brahmans, farmers, physicians, 


Pa|$inaxn< 


[ 98 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

astrologers lived in their respective quarters. “ Sur- 
rounding the palace were the houses of charioteers, 
horse and elephant riders and the soldiers who formed 
the body-guard of the king. Bards, minstrels and 
panegyrists, actors, musicians and buffoons, chank- 
cutters and those skilled in making flower garlands and 
strings of pearls, time-keepers whose duty it was to cry 
out the nalikais or divisions of time, as each passed, 
and other servants of the palace also resided within 
the limits of Pattinap-pakkam." * 

Of the overseas trade of the Cola kinsrdom in the 

, ° 

Sangam Age again we get an excellent 
Foreign trade. f r0ra a few lines of the Patlinap- 

palai. The city of Puhar had a large colony of foreign 
merchants from different parts of the world. 

“ Like the large crowd gathered in a city of ancient 
renown on a festival day when people from many different 
places betake themselves to it with their relatives, persons from 
many good countries speaking different tongues had left their 
homes and come to reside (in Puhar) on terms of mutual 
friendship ”. | 

Of the articles of foreign trade we have the following 
description from the same source : J 

44 Under the guardianship of the gods of enduring glory, 
horses with a noble gait had come by the sea ; bagfuls of black 
pepper had been brought in carta ; gems and gold born of the 
northern mountain, the sandal and agil from the western moun- 
tain, the pearl of the southern sea, the coral of the western sea, 
the products of the Ganges (valley), the yield of the Kaveri, 

* The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago, p. 25. The Manimlkalai xxviii 
II. 31-67 hat a description of Kaflclpuram which, apparently similar to the 
description of PuhSr reproduced above from the SilappadikUram, stakes one as 
too conventional to be accepted as having any close relation to facts. The 
Silapt>adikiiram account is much more convincing. 

+ H. 213-17. 

t 11. 184-193. 


[ 99 ] 



THE COLAS 


foodstuffs from Ceylon, and goods from Kiilagam, * all these 
materials, precious and bulky alike, were heaped together in the 
broad streets overflowing with their riches.” 

Of the ports in other parts of the Tamil country we 
have similar descriptions in the literature of the 
Sangam. f Even inland cities like Madura had guards 
of * dumb mlecchas’ and ‘ yavanas ' in complete armour 
keeping watch in the king's palaces. The Perumban- 
Rrruppadai, } a poem of the same period, speaks 
of tall lighthouses on the coast summoning ships to 
harbour by the night. 


If we compare this evidence with that of the 


Classical writers. 


classical writers of the early centuries 
of the Christian era, we shall see that 


the data drawn from these two disparate sources work 
into one another so closely that it becomes quite obvious 
that they relate to the same period of history. The 
author of the Periplus says positively that the Roman 
merchants raised every year beautiful maidens for the 
harems of Indian kings and the fact is confirmed by 
what passes in some dramas of India. § The chart of 
Peutinger, prepared at a time when the Roman Empire 
was flourishing in all its power, carries on the sheet 
devoted to India, by the side of the names of Tyndis 
and Musiris, the words ‘ Temple of Augustus.' *[] Large 
quantities of Roman coins found in the interior of the 
Tamil land || attest the extent of trade, the presence of 
Roman settlers in the Tamil country and the periods 


* The annotator makes this Katjaram (Sumatra), 
f PR. p. 35. Kanakasabhai op. cit . Chh. ii and iii. 

} 11 346-50. 

§ Reinaud JA. 1863. i. pp. 301-3 , cf. Periplus, sec. 49. 
u ibid p. 183. 

|| Thurston Coins , Cat. No. 2. (Madras Museum), Second edition 1894. 
Sewell JR AS. 1904. 


[ too i 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

of the rise, zenith and decay of this active commerce. 
Casual statements made by the classical authors and 
more decidedly, the evidence of the early Chinese 
annals, prove that along the sea-route from the Far-East 
to the West, India acted as an intermediary for many 
generations. The maritime trade of the Indian ocean 
in the early centuries of the Christian era is in itself 
a subject too vast, and authentic evidence on it is too 
extensive, * for us to attempt anything more than to 
draw attention to a few of its aspects that should 
interest students of Coja history. 

The feeble beginnings of the trade between the 

Roman Empire and India, confine d at 

over!el° u-l. §2* to articles of may be traced 

to the reign of Augustus, if not to an 
earlier time. Trade with the East' was one of the chief 
factors that brought about the extension and consoli- 
dation of the Roman Empire in that direction, and the 
Arabian expedition of Aelius Gallus, though not a 
complete success, secured good harbours in the south of 
Arabia for the Roman traders on their way from Egypt to 
India. In the reign of Augustus, despite the ! embassies ’ 
to him from the Pandya country, this commerce was 
by no means extensive or economically important ; the 
notices of some contemporary writers, whose imagina- 
tion was struck by such trade, has led modern scholars, 
on the whole, to exaggerate its significance. But it soon 
assumed new and unexpected proportions, and ceased 
to be the negligible branch of Roman trade that it was in 
the beginning. The growth proceeded steadily through 
the times of the Julii and Claudii, and though there 
was a lively trade by land, the maritime commerce of 

* W Arming ton, The Commerce between the Roman kmpirc and India 
(Cambridge 1928.) 


[ 101 ] 



THE COLAS 


Egypt with Arabia, and through Arabia with India, was 
the most considerable branch of the commerce with 
the East. So long as the trade was confined to luxuries 
and carried on through Arab intermediaries, the 
Romans paid for it mostly in gold and silver, and the 
oft-quoted statement of the elder Pliny that not a year 
passed without the Empire paying out a hundred million 
sesterces (about £ 1,087,500) to India, China and Arabia* 
has, most likely, reference to this early phase. After 
Augustus, the trade with India grew naturally in the 
favourable atmosphere of a great Empire. “ The dis- 
covery of the monsoons by Hipparchus of Alexandria 
in the late Ptolemaic or early Roman times, as well as 
the natural tendency of a growing trade to become 
more than a trade in luxuries and a merely passive 
trade on one side, led to the establishment of a direct 
route by sea between Egypt and India. The main 
centre of traffic was now Alexandria. The Arabian 
harbours lost their importance^ T*. . The new route was 
fully established at the date of the Periplus. that is, 
under Domitian. The trade with India gradually deve- 
loped into a regular exchange of goods of different 
kinds between Egypt on the one side and Arabia and 
India on the other. One of the most important articles 
which came from India was cotton, f another probably 
was silk. Both of these products were worked up in 
the factories of Alexandria, which sent in exchange 
glass, metal ware, and probably linen." J Nothing cun 
prove better the increasing volume and regularity of 
the Indian trade of the Roman Empire than the contrast 

* W armington op. cit , pp. 274- ff. w. thinks that Pliny’s * Seres’ were the 
Ceras. But see Hudson, Europe and China (Arnold, 1931) pp. 100-2. Roman 
coins need not actually have reached China. 

f Periplus Sec. 59. 

X Rostovt t&- Social and Economic Iftstory of the Roman Empire . p. 93 
(Oxford 1926) ; cf. Warmington Pt # I, ch. ii. 

[ 102 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


between the meagre description of the direct trade 
route to India given by the author of the Periplus and 
the elaborate precision of Ptolemy’s descriptions in the 
first half of the second century A.D. Ptolemy's account 
shows that the Roman trade now reached beyond India 
to Indo-China and Sumatra, and that the trade with 
India and China was highly developed and quite 
regular. Relatively few Roman merchants visited the 
lands of the Far-East themselves ; Southern India obvi- 
ously acted as intermediary in the trade between China 
and the West. The carrying trade between the Malaya 
Peninsula and Sumatra in the East and the Malabar 
coast in the West was largely in the hands of the 
Tamils. * The direct trade between Rome and Southern 
India decline d and died out in the period of military 
anarchy in the Roman Empire of the third ce ntury . 
“ Practically no coins of the third century have been 
found in India. Business relations were not resumed 
till order and a stable gold currency had been re-estab- 
lished in the Byzantine period, " f and then mostly 
through intermediaries. 


Of the carrying trade of the Indian ocean and 

the Arabian sea, the Colas had an 
1 important share and controlled ‘the 
largest and most extensive Indian shipping ' of the 

Coromandel coast. + In the harbours of 
Tamil the Cola country, says the author of 

shipping. fj ie Periplus, “ are ships of the country 

coasting along the shore as far as Damirjca j § and other 

# \V armington op. ctt . pp. 128-31. 

Rostovt*eff-op. dt. p. 421. \V armington, pp. 139-40, 


X Warmington, p. 65. 

§ This means the west coast of India. u Naur a and Tyndis, the first markets 
of Damirica M (Sec, 53) 


[ 103 ] 





• THE COLAS 


very large vessels made of single logs bound together, 
called sangara ; but those which make the voyage to 
Chryse and to the Ganges are called colandia and are 
very large/’ * Here three kinds of craft are distin- 
guished by the author of the Periplus — light coasting 
boats for local traffic, larger vessels of a more compli- 
cated structure and greater carrying capacity, and lastly 
the big ocean-going vessels that made the voyages to 
Malaya and Sumatra, and the Ganges. Quite obviously, 
the light coasting craft is what the poet Rudrangannanar 
had in mind when he described rows of roomy boats 
which had returned laden with grain secured in 
exchange for the white salt they had sold and which 
were seen in the back-waters of the port of Puhar tied 
to rows of pegs and looking like so many destriers, f 
The same writer mentions elsewhere larger ships which 
carried flags at their mastheads and which he compares 
to big elephants. Navigation in the high seas and the 
dangers attendant on it in foul weather are picturesquely 
described in the Manimetcalai in a forcible simile in 
which the mad progress of Udayakumara in search of 
Manimekalai + is compared to that of a ship caught in 
a storm on the high sea : 

“ The captain trembling, the tall mast in the centre broken 
at its base, the strong knots unloosed and the rope cut asunder 
by the wind, the hull damaged and the sails rent and noisy, like 
the ship caught in a great storm and dashed about in all directions 
by the surging waves of the ocean*” 

4 

This coincidence of testimony drawn from the early 
literature of the Tamil country and the Periplus on the 
conditions of maritime trade in the Indian seas in the 
early centuries of the Christian era is indeed very 

* Section 60 and SchofTs notes thereon. 

f PatfinapfSlai 11. 39-32. 

J It. 11. 29-34. 


[ 104 3 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


remarkable in itself. When one considers this in the 
light of other evidence from Indo-China and the islands 
of the archipelago On the permeation of Indian influen- 
ces in those lands from very early times, one can hardly 
fail to be struck by the correctness of the conclusion 
reached by Schoff : * “ The numerous migrations from 
India inta^Indo-China, both before and after the 
Christian era, give ample ground for the belief that the 
ports of South India and Ceylon were in truth, as the 
Periplus states, the centre of an active trade with the 
Far-East, employing larger ships, and in greater 
mimber, than those coming from Egypt.’' We shall see 
that, when after a long eclipse, the power of the Coja 
kings revived in the tenth and eleventh centuries, the 
sea-faring instincts of the people had not deserted them 
and that, in the favourable conditions then obtaining, 
they attempted tasks more venturesome than anything 
they had achieved in the earlier age. 


Before turning to a study of the internal trade and 

industry of the Cola country, mention 
9 LMi*pj d acus° f must be made of a unique example, in 

the second or third century A.D., of the 
working of Indian influence on the art and culture of the 
Roman Empire. The wide sway of Greco-Roman influ- 
ences in India in Gandharan art and the art of Amaravati 
is now generally admitted. A silver dish found at Lamp- 
sacus, partly inlaid with gold and partly enamelled, f 
“ furnishes a valuable proof of the excellent know- 
ledge which the Romans possessed about India and 
of the interest which they took in that country.” The 
dish figures a “ personification of India seated on a 
peculiar Indian chair, the legs of which are formed 
by elephant tusks. Her right hand is lifted in the 


* Periplus p. 261 
t Rostovtzeff op, cit, p. 126. 


r los ] 


14 



THE COLAS 


gesture of prayer, in her left she holds a bow. Around 
her are grouped Indian animals — a parrot, a guinea 
hen and two pet monkeys. Under her feet are two 
Indians leading a pet tiger and a pet panther, ready 
to fight, and making the gesture of adoration.” * It is 
possible that the animals represented on the dish 
formed the chief objects of trade by the land route 
from India to the Roman Empire. 


Among the industries of the Coja country as of 

South India in general, in this period 

AR ”ndustry. and 8,8 always, the chief place was held by 

agriculture. The high place of agricul- 
ture in the national economy and the phenomenal 
fertility of the soil in the basin of the Kaveri are, as we 
know, clearly reflected in the literature of the time. 
Many agricultural operations were done by women 
especially of the lower classes, the ‘ last classes ’ f 
(kadaisiyar) as one of the poets of the Purananuru calls 
them. There is no clear evidence of the prevalence of 
predial slavery, though it is possible that most of the 
labourers of the * last classes ’ did not differ much from 
slaves in their status. The bulk of the land was owned 
by vellSlar , the agriculturists par excellence , who com- 
manded a high social rank. The late commentator 
Naccinarkkiniyar distinguishes between the rich and 
the poor veHalas by describing them } as * those who 
maintained themselves by causing (land) to be ploughed, 
and ‘ those who maintained themselves by ploughing 
(land).' Of the former he says that besides owning 
land, they held official posts under the king in the civil 
and military administration, and the titles of Vel and 
Ara§u in the Cola and of Kavidi in the Faniya country, 

• See also Warmington op. cit. p. 143 for a slightly different interpretation. 

f Puram 61* 3* 1. 

X To l, Porul. Ahattinai Su, 30. 

[1061 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


and enjoyed the jus comubii with royal families. 
These were doubtless the nobles of the land who Bhared 
with the king the pleasures of war and chase and the 
table. The poorer veHajas did not shun manual labour 
and for the most part worked on their own lands, and 
not as hired day labourers on estates belonging to 
others. They were in fact the peasantry of the 
country who worked themselves and sought the 
assistance of hired labour as necessity arose. A 
casual simile in the Puramnuru, * which mentions 
the poor farmer who having no income from |his fields 
had to eat up the seed-corn, may lead us to infer that 
drought and failure of crops were not altogether 
unknown. We have no information on tenancy-rights 
or on the taxation of land in this period. 

Spinning and weavin g of cotton t and perhaps also 
of silk , had attained a high degree of perfection. Spin- 
ning was then, as in later times, the by-occupation of 
women, f The weaving of complex patterns on cloth 
and silk is often mentioned in literature, and we have 
the authority of the Periplus that Uraiyurwas a great ^ 
centre of the trade in fine cotton stuffs. The Porunar- 
urruppadai mentions X cotton cloth, thin like the slough 
of the snake, bearing fine floral designs and so finely 
woven that the eye cannot follow the course of the 

yarn. The same poem alludes elsewhere § to silk 

*■" 1 1 ' ' 

cloth n with its threads gathered in small knots at its 
ends. The Manimekalai speaks of artistic patterns 
of cloth giving evidence of the marvellous dexterity of 
expert weavers. The cotton and silk trades, t herefore; 
must have provided occupation to a considerable part 

• No. 230 11. 12-3. 

f Puram 125, 1. 1. 

X 11. 82-3. 

§ 1. 155. 

1 lit. 167-8. 


[ 107 ] 



THE COLAS 


of the population. No detailed or specific information 
is forthcoming on the other trades of which a general 
idea may be gathered from the descriptions of city 
life quoted above. Cots made of leather straps plaited 
apparently on wooden frames are mentioned ; and the 
leather workers came from the low class of the 
pulaiyas. * * * § If the mention, in the Mammekalai, f of 
Magadhan artisans, Mahratha smiths, blacksmiths from 
Avanti and Yavana carpenters working by the side of 
Tamil craftsmen is not mere rhetoric, we may believe 
that by the side of foreign merchants from different 
countries in India and outside, there were also some 
industrial workers who had found more or less perma- 
nent employment in the Tamil lands by their excep- 
tional skill in particular crafts. Much 

Barter, , r 

of the internal trade was carried on by 
barter, paddy forming the most commonly accepted 
medium of exchange. Salt, we have seen, was sold for 
paddy. We learn also J that honey and roots were ex- 
changed for fish-oil and toddy, the sweet sugar-cane 
and aval § for venison and arrack. The ladies of the 
prosperous agriculturist families in the Pandya country 
poured the white paddy from their barns into the 
pots in which the hunter from the forest had brought 
venison, or the shepherdess had fetched curds, 
Paddy was accepted as the most common measure of 
value in rural economy in the Cola empire of the tenth 
century and later; the numerous inscriptions of that 
time furnish unmistakable evidence of the subordinate 
role of coin in the transactions of everyday life ; the 


* Puram 83. 
f jtix U. 107-9. 

» 

J Porunar. 11. 214-17. 

§ Rice-flakes obtained by pousding fried paddy-corn, 
| Puram 33, 11, 1-7. 


[ 108 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


same feature survived until very recently in the rural 
parts of the Tamil country. It may be inferred, there- 
fore, that in the early centuries of the Christian era 
paddy was the common measure of value in internal 
trade ; and that metallic currency entered only i n tran- 
sactions of foreign commerce. It must be noted 
however that some evidence", not quite conclusive, 
seems to indicate the presence at this period in Madura , 
and only there, of a body of foreign colonists who 
appear to have used regularly small copper coins in 
their day to day transactions. * 


In no sphere is the influence of Aryan ideas on 


Religion and 
Mythology. 


Tamil culture in early historical times 
more evident than in that of religion 
and ethics. These ideas embodied in 


a number of myths, legends and social practices 
which form the common stock of practically the 
whole of India, had already become an integral part 
of the civilisation of the Tamils, and the Sangam 
literature affords instances without number of the 


thorough acquaintance of the Tamil poets with the 
Vedic and epic mythology of Sanskrit, and the ethical 
concepts of the Dharma£astras. An exhaustive study 
of the history of Indian Mythology, by tracing the 
stages through which each single legend passes before 
attaining a final and fixed form which it retains ever 
after, might lead to results of value to the internal 
chronology of the body of Sangam literature. Even 
otherwise, one can see that poems like the Silappadi- 
kdram and the Manimekalai which differ from the other 
poems of the Sangam, not only in their great length 
and their literary form, but in the much freer use they 
make of these northern legends and myths, must be 


* Sewell JR AS. 1904, pp. 609-15. 

[ 109 ] 



THE COLAS 


accounted to come rather late in the period and toward* 
its close. Care must, however, be taken not to press 
this consideration too far, as it may, after all, be that 
the more or less epic form of these longer poems 
enabled their authors to paint the life and faith of their 
times more fully than the vignettes of the shorter 
pieces in the anthologies. In any case, it seems best 
not to mix up the evidence of the anthologies in these 
matters with that of the Silappadikdram and the 
Manimekalai, and to keep these apart. 

The burning of the Three Cities ( tripura ) by Siva, 
a feat often attributed also to a mythical Cola king ; 
&ibi saving the dove from the claws of a falcon ; 
perhaps also the excavation of the eastern ocean by the 
Sagaras, and the stories of the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata are among the legends known to the poets 
of the anthologies. In the Silappadikaram and the 
Manimekalai we come across a much larger body of 
Aryan myth and legend more freely used by the 
authors in many contexts. The whole cycle of Krsna 
legends including his adventures with shepherdesses, 
Visviimitra eating dog’s flesh, Indra’s misconduct with 
Ahalya and the curse of Gautama, the incarnation of 
Visnu as a dwarf to bring ruin on Bali, the demon 
king * — these and other stories are used in these epics 
in so casual a manner that there can be no doubt 
about their common currency in the Tamil land at the 
time they were composed. 


A number of quaint social customs and beliefs, 

gome of which may be of a non-Tamil 
S0 "custonw origin, can be traced in the literature 

we have been dealing with. The prac- 
tice of speeding the parting guest known as aaptapadi 

• Mani xi 11. 84-87, xviii 11. 90 ff., xix 11. 51 ff. 


[ 110 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND- SOCIAL LIFE 


in Sanskrit, is clearly mentioned in the Porunar-atrup 
padai , * which says that Karikala accompanied his 
guest on foot for a distance of ‘ seven steps ' before 
requesting him to mount a chariot drawn by four 
milk-white steeds. Each householder laid out some 
food, rice mixed with flesh, every day before his 
meal, for crows to feed on, f The slaughter of a cow, 
the destruction of a foetus, the killing of a brahman 
were counted among the most heinous offences, but 
worse than these was ingratitude, according to the 
established code. J Women of the courtesan class when 
they were guilty of unprofessional conduct were 
punished by being compelled to carry seven bricks on 
their heads round the public hall ( arangu ) and appa- 
rently expelled from the class thereafter. § A bath in 
the sea at Kanyakumari was held to absolve a woman 
from the sin of incest ; at any rate it was accepted as 
an act of penance for those who had incurred the sin. <|| 
After child-birth women bathed at night in tanks on 
the tenth day. It The phenomena of possession and the 
evil eye were believed in ** and carefully guarded 
against by the hair of children being dressed with ghee 
and white mustard. Divination was practised ft and 
faith in omens was common. The author of the Silapp- 
adikdram says picturesquely that coming events were 
foreshadowed by the throbbing of the left eye of 
Kannaki and the right one of Madavi on the day 
of the festival of Indra. 

• 1). 165-7. 
t Porunar, 11. 182-4. 
t Puratn 34, 11. 1-7. 

§ Mani xviii, 11. 33-4 cf. Sil, xiv, 1. 146. 

^ Mani v. 37 ; xiii, 6-7. 

|| ibid vii, 75-76 and n . 

*• ibid vi. 1. 127 ; iii, 134. 

++ ibid xxi, 128-9. 

Xt Sil. v, 337-40. 


[in] 



THE COLAS 


** 


Disposal of 
the dead. 


There was no single method adopted for the dis- 
posal of the dead, and both cremation 
and inhumation with or without urns 
are freely mentioned. And there ap- 
pears to have prevailed considerable latitude in the 
choice of the method to be followed on each particular 
occasion in the same family. * And the Manimekalai 
mentions the construction of brick tombs of various 
shapes built by the relatives of the dead whether they 
were sages or kings or women who had become Sati. f 
It would appear that the shapes of these structures 
varied with the caste and rank of the persons com- 
memorated by them. The funeral drum striking terror 
into the hearts of listeners is also mentioned in the 
same poem. % 


Sati is frequently mentioned and was fairly 

common, but by no means universal. 
Sitl * The celebrated utterance of the queen 

of Bhuta Pandya § shows that it was more or less the 
general practice to dissuade women who had lost their 
husbands from immolating themselves and that the 
practice was by no means encouraged, much less 
enforced. There can be no manner of doubt, however, 
that the heroism and devotion of the Sati were applaud- 
ed by public opinion. The true wife was indeed she 
who, at the death of her husband, entered his burning 
pyre as if she were entering the cool water in a tank 
for bathing. 5F Still, the more human, though less 
heroic, ideal that women were ordinarily expected to 
adopt is perhaps best expressed in the lines of the 

* Puram 239, 11. 20-21. 
f Maui. vi. 54-59. 

% ibid. 1. 71 
§ Puram } 245. 

1 Puram 245 and Man*, ii 11. 42-5 ; xvi 23 ff. ; xviii 11-15 

r ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 

Manimekalai, * which contrast the daily life of the 

family woman with that of the hetaera by 'saying* that 

the former was under guard in her maidenhood as in 

her married state, and so also when her husband was 

no more, that she controlled her mind and did not 

meet strangers and that she offered worship to no god 

other than her wedded husband. The Kami is silent 

• # • 

on Sati. To lead a life of religious devotion in 
widowhood was recognised as proper for women of all 
classes. The Sati then was the exception rather than 
the rule, and we do not hear of a single instance 
of an unwilling woman being forced to it. 

That the ritualism of Bi'ahmanical Hinduism had 

struck root in the Tamil country in 

Brahmanism* , J 

this early period must have become 
clear from the references already cited to the costly 
sacrifices performed by the Cola inonarchs of the time. 
The regular day to day fire-worship of the Brahmans is 
mentioned by the Manimekalai ; f and a song of Avilr 
Mtilam-kilar in the Purananuru which eulogises the 
Brahman Vinnandayan of the Kaundinya-gotra who 
lived in Punjarrur in the Co}a country gives an idea 
of the high position held in society by prominent 
Srotriya families : X 

“ 0 ! Scion of the celebrated race of wise men who laid 
low the strength of those that opposed Siva’s ancient lore, who 
saw through the sophistry of the false doctrines, and preferring 
the truth and shunning error, completed the twenty-one ways 
of Vedic sacrifice ! § Worn by you on the occasion of the 
sacrifice, the skin of the grass-eating stag of the forest shines 
over the sacred cord on your shoulder. Your wives, suited 

* xviii, U. 98-102. 

f v, 1. 133. 

t -Pur am 166. 

▼ M 

§ ie., performed the twenty-one varieties of Vedic sacrifices. 

[ 113 ] 


15 



THE COLAS 


to your station, gentle and of rare virtue, wearing the netlike 
garment laid down in the SSstra (for such occasions), sparing 
of speech, with small foreheads, large hips, abundant tresses, are 
carrying out the duties set for them. From the forest and from the 
♦own, having twice seven pains in their proper places, supplying 
ghee more freely than water, making offerings which numbers 
cannot reckon and spreading your fame to make the whole world 
jealous, at the rare culmination of the sacrifice your exalted 
station gains a new splendour. May we ever witness it so ! I, 
for my part, shall go, eat, drink, ride and enjoy myself in my 
village by the cool Kaviri, which gets its flowery freshes when 
the thunder cloud roars on the golden peaks of the Western moun- 
tains ; may you, for your part, stand thus stable without change, 
like the tall Himalaya which towers above the clouds aud whose 
sides are covered with bamboos.” 

This ode shows not only the dominance of Vedic 
ritualism, but contains an allusion to disputes between 
the followers of the Veda and other religionists, the 
latter being stigmatised as followers of false doctrines 
and sophists who make the false appear true. What 
these other religions were can only be guessed ; most 
likely they were Buddhism and Jainism which had a 
vogue in the Tamil country from very early times. 
The ceremony of npanayana is clearly known to the 
Maniniekalai which mentions Brahmans who began 
the study of the Veda soon after they were invested 
with the sacred cord. * The twice-born are mentioned 
in the Puram. f Even in the houses of merchants 
marriages were, as has been seen, performed accord- 
ing to Vedic ritual. The TolkSppiyam defines karpu 
in a manner which implies that, in one important 
respect, the distinction between kalavu and karpu was 
based on the difference between the indigenous Tamil 
form of marriage and the exotic Aryan form which 
had been superposed on it : 

• xiii 11. 23-24. 

t No. 367, 1. 12. 

11H] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


“ Karpu ia that (form) in which a bridegroom from a 
family fit to accept, accepts a bride given by persons of a family 
fit to give her and takes her to wife with the (proper) ritual.” * 

We learn further that the rites of marriage might be 
performed even when there happened to be no one to 
dispose of the marriageable girl, and that the rites 
primarily meant for the three higher classes, might 
also be adopted on occasions by the lower, f We are 
told, in fine, that these rituals were ordained by the 
sages ( aiyar ) after falsehood and sin had made their 
appearance. £ This last statement distinctly recalls the 
legends of the origin of human marriage current among 
Sanskrit writers and detailed fully in the Mahabharata. 
As has been rightly pointed out, § such “myths are 
interesting but of no scientific value. . . . When men 
meditated upon the marriage ceremonial and system, 
they would naturally infer a time when there was not 
only no rite, but no institution of marriage.'’ 


The Pantheon. 


From all accounts, Hinduism was the dominant 

religion in the Tamil country in this 
period. Within its spacious fold were 
worshipped all the gods of an extensive and eclectic 
pantheon ranging from the Great God with an eye on 
his forehead to the little demon (butam) of the cross- 
roads. Four divinities seem to have occupied a more 
distinguished position than the rest, II and they were 
Siva who is often placed at the head of the pantheon, 
Balarama and Krgna who are frequently described 
together, and Murugan, apparently the favourite deity 


* TV. Porul, k~arpti> Su. 1* 
f ibid, Su, 2, 3. 
x ibid, Su. 4, 

§ Crawley- The Mystic Rose ii> 259. 
% Mani, i 11. 54-5. 

1 Su. v 11 169-72, xiv II. 7-10. 


[ 115 ] 



THE COLAS 


of the Tamils. The worship of Murugan embodied 
some indigenous features like the velanadal. Indra 
came in also for special worship as on the occasion of 
the festival held in Puhar in his honour. That music 
and dance were from early times closely intertwined 
with religious rites is seen from the descriptions in the 
»S ilappa dil' a ra m of the more or less primitive worship 
of Korravai by vetfnvar, of Krsna (Kannan) by shep- 
herdesses and of Murugan by knravas. A temple of 
Saraswati is mentioned in the Manimekalai , * which 
also alludes to the presence of kapalikns. f If the 
author of the KalavaU was the same as the Vaisnava 
saint Poygaiyiir who is counted among the three 
earliest illvars, then we shall have to trace to this 
period also the beginnings of the bhakti cult of the 
Vaisnavas, and there is nothing improbable in this. 
The Mnnimekalai appears to mention even the Yixnu- 
puriiaa. + 


Belief in reincarnation, the effects of karma in 

successive births and the power of 
^udawsnf Fate was part of the common basis of all 

religion in India, and this is clearly seen 
to have been generally accepted in the Tamil country 
also. The practice of austerities ( tapas ) was held to be 
meritorious and productive of great good. § The 
joyous faith in good living that breathes through the 
poems of the Sangarn age gradually gives place to the 
pessimistic outlook on life that is, in the laBt resort, 
traceable to the emphasis laid by Buddhism on the 
sorrows of life and its doctrine that the only way of 


* xiii, 1. 106* 

t Vi, 86. 

J xxvii 1. 98. See PK, pp. 20>21. 
§ Porunar . 11. 91-2. 


[ 116 ] 



GOVERNMENT AND SOCIAL LIFE 


escape was the repression of the will to live. This note 
of sadness, already traceable in Uraiyur Mudukannan 
Sattanar, * * * § becomes more pronounced in the setting of 
the Manimelcalai which contains a round denunciation 
of the fools who, not meditating upon the ruthlessness 
of Death, spend their time in the blind enjoyment of 
carnal pleasures, f In all important centres in the 
Tamil country there were Jaina temples and Buddhist 
caityas and monasteries in which Buddhist and Jaina 
monks lived and preached their tenets to those who 
cared to listen. J Aravanavadiga], the celebrated 
Buddhist monk, whom the Manimehalai connects 
successively with Puhilr, Vanji and Kaiici, even though 
he may not be a historical figure, § may well be 
looked upon as a type familiar to town-dwellers in 
those times. We have no means whatever of estimat- 
ing with any certainty the numbers professing these 
religions or the extent of their influence in society. 


* Pu ram 27 ; see ante p. 48. 

f vi 11. 97 ff. 

J See s. v, A rug an and Put tan in the Indexes to the Hilappadikaram and 
Afanimlkalai ; and Madurai kkatiji 11. 475-87. 

§ He has been identified on rather insufficient grounds with Dliannapula, 
JOK. 1927, pp. 197 ff. 


[ 117 ] 



Chapter V 

FROM THE SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 


The transition from the Sangam age to that in 


Affer the 
Sangam Age. 


which the Pandyas of the line of 
Kadungbn and the Pallavas of the 
Simhavisnu line divide for three cen- 


turies the Tamil land between them is completely 
hidden from our view. The same darkness shrouds the 


fortunes of the Co}as for three centuries more, until the 
accession of Vijayalaya in the second quarter of the 
ninth century. Epigraphy and literature, however, 
provide a few peep-holes through which we obtain 
glimpses of the interesting transformations that come 
over this ancient line of kings in this long interval. 
One thing seems certain, that when the power of the 
Colas fell to a low ebb and that of the Pallavas and 

ft 

the Pandyas rose to the north and south of them, the 
scions of this ancient royal line found themselves 
compelled to seek service and patronage under their 
more successful rivals ; this is a feature common to 
several dynasties of Indian kings in the days of their 
tribulation. The Western Calnkyas in the period of 
Rastrakuta power, the Eastern Calukyas between 
Rajaraja's conquest of Vengi and the accession of 
Kulottunga I to the Coja throne, the Pandyas and 
the Pallavas themselves, besides the Gangas and the 
Banas after the expansion of the Cola power under the 
successors of Vijayalaya, are among the most cons- 
picuous examples of this common feature of Indian 
history. Ancient memories die hard, and great dynastic 
names, though borne for a time in obscurity, have 
often, with a turn in the wheel of fortune, been the 
cause of a renascence of power and glory. It may be 


[ 118 ] 



SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 


Dispersion of 
the Colas. 


doubted if, for all their troubles in this period, the 
Coins ever completely lost their hold on Uraiyfiv. 
VijaySlaya when he conies into prominence rises from 
the same neighbourhood, and the remotest claimants to 
Co]a descent in the Telugu country, and even further 
north, glory in the names of Uraiyur and the Kaveri ; 
contemporary epigraphical evidence may also be cited 

pointing to the same conclusion. The 
dispersion of the Colas in the period of 
their weakness, the poor and dispos- 
sessed among them going out in quest of fortune, is 
attested by the occurrence of names of princes and 
chieftains claiming Cola connections in places as far 
removed from one another as Kodumbalur (Pudu- 
kottab), Siyyali (Shiyali), Ilemavati and Malepadu. 
The Pandyas of Uccangi, the Mauryas of Konkan, 
the Guttas of Guttal (Bombay), like the Cojas of the 
Telugu eouutry, are examples of what may be styled 
dynastic drift in Indian History. * 


The Vejvikudi grant of the Pandyas and some 

,. , Pallava charters mention the obscure 

kajabhras. 

clan of the Kalabhras who were res- 
ponsible for much political unsettlement in the country, 
and whose overtlirow formed tlie first step in the resus- 
citation of the power of the Pandyas and the Pal lavas 

* Venkayya observes: ‘It is at present impossible to ascertain how these 
Telugu chiefs came to chum the relationship with Karikala.’ (ARE. 1900, 
parugmph 45). Strictly, this is quite true. As 1 understand the mutter, however, 
there was a somewhat live connection between the Cojas of the Telugu 
(Renan<}u) country and the Tamil Colas ; the Malepadu plates of Punyak 'maru, 
I think, foim an impoitant link in the ciiain of evidence, and suggest that the 
Pallava dominion of the SimhaviMiu line may have been the medium through 
which the diift of Cojas to the north took place. The attempts to explain the 
origin of the Telugu-Cotjas by supposing that the Telugu country formed pait 
of the empire of the earlv Coja king, Karikala, appear to be so much wasted 
eflort. \Ve can hardly treat the legends of the eleventh and twelfth centuries 
as the history of the third or fourth. See Studies pp. 33-6, 61-6. Con ini 
Venkayya ASf. 1900**6 p. 175 n. 8. 


[ 119 ] 



THE COLAS 


towards the end of the sixth century. We may assume 
that the predatory activities of the Kalabhras * brought 
the power of the early Cojas also to an end. The 
absence of any allusion to this fact in the Cola inscrip- 
tions and copper-plates of the Vijayalaya line is easily 
accounted for. Unlike the Piindyas and the Pallavas 
who quickly succeeded in wresting from the hands of 
the Kajabhras what they had lost to them sometime 
before, the Colas were submerged for nearly three 
centuries under the rising tide ot the Piindya and 
Pallava powers. They could not find their feet again 
until these newly risen forces had spent themselves in 
mutual hostility. In the writings of Buddhadatta f we 
have singularly interesting evidence on the rule of the 

Kalabhi'as in the Cola country. The 
date of Buddhadatta is, unfortunately, 


Buddhadatta. 


not as certain as has sometimes been assumed ; the 
tradition that makes him a contemporary of Buddlm- 
ghosa is late, and not warranted by any statement in the 
extensive works of either of these divines. £ Buddha- 
datta might have been the earlier of the two to visit 
Ceylon for studying Buddhism. It is quite certain, 
however, that he lived in the dark period of South 
Indian history after the light of the Sangam literature 
fails, and before a fresh dawn commences with the 
Pandya and Pallava charters mentioned above ; and 
his evidence is all the more welcome. At the close of 
his Abhidhammavalara , he gives a glowing account of 
Kaveripattana, with its concourse of rich merchants, 


* See PK. pp. 47-9. 

f Buddhadatta $ Manual s-V\xx\ I (1915) and Part II (1928)-c‘d. A. P. Buddha- 
datta (Pali Text Society). 

% Cf. A. P. Buddhadatta’s introduction to Part II of the Manuals ; contra 
P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar- Tamils p. 528. He makes nonsense of the line ‘ Ayam 
sumatinU sadhu yacitena kato tato ’ by translating it: “ (By me) who am intelli- 
gent and good and a beggar, this was composed and propounded extensively." 

[ 120 ] 



SANG AM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 


its palaces and pleasure-gardens, * and states that, in a 
great monastery built there by Khandadasa, he lived 
for a time and composed that work at the very proper 
request of Sumati, evidently one of his pupils. Like- 
wise he informs us at the end of his Vinayaviniccam 
that he composed that work for the sake of Buddhaslha, 
while he was residing in the lovely monastery of 
Venhudiisa in a city on the banks of the Kaveri, by 
name Bhutamangalam, f described by him as the lmb 
of Colarattha. He adds also that this work was beymn 

and finished when Accutavikkanta 

Act'ut. Kajabba. _ . „ , , , , . .. , 

of the Kalabhrakula was ruling the 
earth. J This Accuta could have been no other than 
the king of the same name who is reputed, in literary 
tradition, § to have kept in confinement the three 
Tamil kings, the Cera, Co]a and Paiidya. Some songs 
about him are quoted by Amitasagarar, the author of 
the YapparungalaL-karikai, in the tenth century A. D. 
Possibly Accuta was himself a Buddhist. At any 
rate, by calling the Kalabhras a tribe of Kali kings 
and stating that they uprooted many adhirajar and 
meddled with brahmadeya rights, the Velvikudi grant 
makes it clear that there was no love lost between 
these interlopers and the people of the lands overrun 
by them. In the colophons to his works, Buddhadatta 
is called an inhabitant of Uragapura which perhaps 
means that Uraiyiir was his native place. 

* This fine description may raise a doubt whether the story of the 
destruction of the city by a tidal wave (Afanim7ia/ai xxv 11. 194-204) is to 
be accepted as literally true. 

f The identification of this place with BSdaltir (P. T. Srinivasa Aiyangar 
op, cit. p. 531) is doubtful. 

% Accut Aocutavikkante Kalabbhakulavaddhane / 

Mahim samanusasante Sraddho ca samapilu / / 

A. P. Buddhadatta adopts the reading Ka}ambakula, and holds them to be 
Ku<jambas. 

§ Tamil Navalar Caritat vv. 154-57. 

1121 ] 


1C 



THE COLAS 


Of these Dhananjaya is represented by a single stone 
inscription * in the Cuddapah district and possibly by 
some others in Hemavati and Nidugal. Though 
several of the stone inscriptions mentioned above 
belong to Cola Maharaja, none of them adds anything 
to our knowledge of the king's reign, and we have 
no direct means of explaining his titles, among which 
occurs an ambitious claim to the overlordship of the 
three Tamil kingdoms of the South. The title of 
Prthivlvallabha borne by Punyakumara, and the name 
of his queen Vasanta-Pori-Cola-Mahiidevi f show his 
connection with the Cajukyas. It is difficult to say 
whether he or his father was ruling at the time of 
Yuan Chwans's visit ; but there can be no doubt that 
this line of rulers had an important role in the 
hostilities between the Pallavas and Citlukyus of this 
period. King Cojamaharajadhiraja Vikramaditya 
Satyaditya and his queen Elancoja Mahadevi J are 
no doubt other members of the same family who do 
not figure in the short genealogy of the Malepadu 
plates. It is to be observed that this king has a higher 
title than the usual Cola Maharaja, his territory includ- 
ing Siddhi 1000 (Sidhout country) besides the Renandn 
7000. A Co]a Maharaja Kumaraukusa figures as the 
vijTurpti in the Velurpalaiyam plates of the sixth year 
of the Pallava king, Nandivarman III. § The history 
of this line cannot be fully understood until fresh 
discoveries are made. But it is already clear that they 
form the link connecting the early Cojas of the Tamil 
country and the numerous dynasties of petty chieftains 
in the Telugu and Karnataka country claiming to have 

* 380 of 1904 (Rangachari-Cd. 435). 

f 384 of 1904 (Rangachari~Cd. 560); 

$ 893 and 400 of 1904,(Rangachari Cd.453 and 409). Vikramaditya II claims 
to have conquered the CSJas among others. Sll, i p. 146 : £f, v. p. 204. 

§ S/l ii 609 v. 26. 


[ 124 ] 



SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 


been of the Kasyapa Gotra and to have descended 
from Karikala and ruled at Uraiyur. * 

Of the Cojas of the Tamil country in this period 

we know even less than we do about 
Colas hi the Tamil ^ Rg n jjndu Colas ; for though there 

land. # n 

are fugitive references to them in the 
epigraphs and the literature bearing on the age, 
which show that the Cojas lingered on the banks of the 
Kiiveri all the time, they tell us little else of historical 
interest. And no epigraphical or architectural monu- 
ments of this period that can be directly attributed 
to the Cojas have yet been discovered. No conclusion 
can be based on the absence of any reference to the 
Coja kingdom in the Allahabad pillar inscription of 
Samudragupta, as the limits of his conquests are now 
known to have been much narrower than they 
appeared once, f The Pallava charters furnish the 
bulk of the epigraphical evidence on the Cojas during 
this period, and this is, at times, finely supplemented 

Epigraphy. the W - Calukya and Pandya grants. 

The Velurpajaiyam plates describe 
Huddhavarma of the late fourth or early fifth century 
A. 1). us ‘ the submarine fire to the ocean of the Cola 
army.' $ Again, Simhavisiui ( c . 575-000 A. D.) is 
stated to have seized the Coja country watered by 
the Kiiveri and adorned by groves of" areca-palms and 
rich paddy fields. § About the same time the Cujukyas 
claim to have conquered the Cojas; % either the 

• 231 of 1008 (Bastar) EI. xi p. 338. Even the Kakatiyas somelinics 
connected themselves with Karikala. See also EL v p. 123, n. and Cat. of 
copperplate t (Mad. Mus.) p. 14 for the undated plates of 5rlkaij$ha. 

+ Much less can anything be made of the silence of the Satavahana inscrip- 
tion recording Gautannputra's conquests. Contra Venkayya ~ASL 1905*61/6 n, 

\ S/L ii p. 508 1. 14. 

§ iM 11. 16-17. 

| Kielhoro’s List of S/A No. 5 (AY. vii), 

1125] 



THE COLAS 


claim is false, or the Itenandu Colas are meant. 
Mahendravarman (r. 600-630 A. D.) was proud of his 
sway over the Co}a country; and in his inscriptions 
the Trichinopoly rock is called the crown of the Coja 
country, * and Lord Siva enjoins the king to build 
a temple for him on the rock as otherwise he would 
miss the sight of the rich splendour of the land of the 
Cojas. f In a grandiose and apparently meaningless 
enumeration of kings overthrown by Narasimha- 
varman I (c. 630-660 A. D.), the Kuram grant (of 
Paramesvara-varman I) includes the Cola among the 
countries conquered by him. } The Aihoje inscription 
of Pulakesin II (634 A. D.) states that he confined the 
power of the Pallavas inside the four walls of Kitficl- 
pnram and thus brought prosperity to the Cola, Kerala 
and Pandya. § Vikramaditya I, the successor of 
Pulakesin II, also claims conquest of the Cola country, 
and his Gadval plates (674 A. D.) mention his victori- 
ous camp in the ancient Coja capital Uraiyur on the 
southern bank of the Kaveri. f The Velvikudi grant 
tells us that the Pandya king Koccadaiyan Ranadhira 
(c. 710-40 A. D.) assumed the title Sembiyan, among 
others, thereby implying that a part of the traditional 
Cola country passed under his sway. The Trichino- 
poly inscription 11 of Maranjadaiyan calls him the iilttln 
of two races, the lunar and the solar. The Colas are 

# SI/. i, 33. 

+ “ VibkUtim Cdlanfim katham - ah am avtkftya vipnllim ", — ibid, 34* 
Hukzsch understands by * vibhtliim CZlTinam * ‘ the great power of the GK|as'. 
But as it is not a proper description of the position of the Cola* after their 
conquest by Simhavisnu, and as such a description is hardly likely to be found 
in a Pallava grant, I take 1 CUlinUm ’ to mean the country. 

X SI 7. i, p. 151 11. 14-5. 

| El. vi, p. 6, verses 29-31. 

EL x» p. 103. Uragapura is not as Hultmh thought Negapatami but 
UjaiyTfr near Trichinopoly. 

AS I, 1903-4 p. 275. 


[ 186 ] 



SANGAM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 

counted by the &innamanur plates among the allies 
of the Pallavas who sustained a severe defeat near 
Kumbakonam at the hands of ^rl Mara Sri-VaUabha 
( c. 815-62 A. D.). 

Religious tradition confirms our general inference 

that the Colas, though they had lost 

Literature. . . 

their power, did not disappear tot 
from the banks of the Kaveri at this time. The 
Periyn Purannm, a work of the twelfth century A. I)., 
contains traditional information of some value. It tells 
us that the Pandya contemporary of Tiru-Hanasam- 
bandar had for his queen a Co]a princess of the name 
Mangaiyark-karasi. Pugadccola-N ayanar was a Coja 

ruler of Uraiyur who held Karuvur in subjection, 
conquered an Adigan * and promoted Saivism. The 
Purannm also affirms that when a petty chieftain of 
Kalandai, who became, later, celebrated as Kurrnva- 
Niiyanar, wanted the Brahmans of Cidambaram to 
invest him with the diadem and thus confer the dignity 
of royalty on him in recognition of his extensive 
conquests, they declined to do so on the ground that 
only the ancient family of the Co] as was entitled to 
this high privilege, and, to avoid further trouble, 
migrated to the Cera country in a body. The family 
of another Nayanar, Eyarkon-kalikkuman, was living 
in a village on the banks of the Kaveri, and devoting 
itself to agriculture and military service under the 
Cola monarchs. f Lastly, a Cola prince married a 
Pandyan princess and lived at Madura when Sundara- 
murti visited the place in the company of Seraman 

# The dyuastic name of the chiefs of Taga^Sr (Dharmapuri). 

f The refet cnees are easily got m any edition of the Petiya PmTinam, See 
also A SI. 1905 0 pp. 176-7. 1 cannot discover why Venkayya shou’d have 
included ItjangaU > a cliieflain of KSnatju (Pudukkottali) iu his account of 
the CSJas of this period. 



[ 127 ] 



THE COLAS 


Perumal. * Though ^ekkilar, the author of the Periyn 
Pur&nam, is our main authority for these statements, 
many of them are also found in Nambi Xndar Nambi’s 
brief andadi which was the basis of the PurSaam, and 
the names at least of the kings and chieftains go back 
to the time of Sundaramiirti, in the eighth century 
A. D. The Divyasuri-carita and the Guru-paramparS 
tell the same tale from the Vaisnava side. Devadevi, 
the hetaera who captivated dhdr Tondaradippodi 
for a time, met the holy man first when she was 
returning from the court of the Cola king at Uraiyfiv. 
The celebrated Uraiyur-nacciyiir, who declined to 
marry a mortal, and insisted successfully on her 
union with Lord Ranganatha, was a Coja princess, the 
daughter of Dharmavarma of the solar line ruling at 
Uraiyur. Tirumangai-alvar started life as a military 
official appointed by the Coja king. Possibly, some of 
these literary references to the Cojas are due to the 
mere fact that the works in which they occur were 
composed in the days of Cola ascendancy ; but the 
unmistakable references to the Pallava contemporaries 
of the earlier Stoats and myandrs in these works are 
sufficient indication that some old and genuine 
traditions must have survived at the time and that a 
few, though not all, of the allusions to the Colas culled 
from these books may be quite trustworthy. 

We see then that in the long historical night that 
envelops the Colas from the third or fourth to the 
ninth century A.D., their condition is best described as 
one of suspended animation. They managed, in some 
manner hidden from view, to find a second home for 
themselves in the Renandu country. In their original 
abode, they bent low before every storm that passed 

• Sbatndn Pemmftt-NTlyanSr PurUnam v. 92. 

[ 138 J 



SANG AM AGE TO VIJAYALAYA 


over them and bided their time. For aught we know, 
they were occupied in finding suitable matches for 
their children, often with a view to political influence, 
with their more successful rivals, and in promoting 
the religious movements of the time. Buddhism and 
Jainism seem to have dominated the land for a while ; 
Accutu, the Kajabhra king, was a Buddhist; and there 
were adherents of Jainism among the Pandya and 
Pallava rulers ; the rich monastery of Negapatam with 
its large Buddha image of solid gold was, according 
to the Guruparampara, looted by Tirumangai-alvar. 
Buddhadatta gives testimony to the construction, at 
an earlier period, of two large monasteries in the Coja 
country. But, thanks to the pious exertions of the 
njvilrs and nayanars, who led a great Hindu revival, 
and gave fervent expression to the cult of bhukti in the 
language of the people, the spread of the protestant 
faiths was stopped and the orthodox creeds restored 
to their place of dominance. The Colas, in an 
unostentatious way, assisted the Hindu revival by 
lending their support impartially to the apostles of 
Vaisnavism and Saivism. 


17 


[129] 



Chapter VI 


THE RISE OF VIJAYALAYA. ADITYA I 

(c. 850-907 A. D.) 

“ At the head of the great battle of Sri Purambiya, 

this hero (Prthivlpati I) quickly defeat- 

Sri Purambiyam. 1 TT , , „ , ^ 

* ed Varaguna, the Lord of the Pandyas ; 

and having, at the expense of his own life, secured that 
his friend was Aparajita (unconquered) in fact as in 
name, he ascended to heaven. ” * In these terms the 
Udayendiram plates of Ganga Prthivlpati II record the 
part ofhis ancestor and namesake in the decisive battle 
which proved to be a turning-point in the history of 
Southern India. For the Pandyas never recovered 
from this staggering blow, and the Pallavas, though 
victory remained with them in the battle, owed it more 
to their allies than to their own strength. Thoroughly 
exhausted by incessant warfare on two fronts, against 
the Calukyas and Pandyas, they were themselves in 
no position to pursue the advantage gained. Among 
the allies of the Pallavas were, besides the Ganga 
feudatory, the Cola ruler Aditya I who, though he 
must have taken a subordinate place in the battle of 
Sri Purambiyam, very soon discovered his advantage, 
and commanded the strength and energy to pursue it. 
The latest date known for Prthivlpati I is A. D. 879 ; f 
the battle in which he lost his life must have taken 
place about that date. 

* SIT. ii, No. 76, v. 18 ; 337 of 1912. 

f Rangacbari, NA. Nos. 536—7 ; El. iv, pp. 180*3. 

[ 130 ] 



VIJAYALAYA AND ADITYA I 


Conquest of 
Tanjore. 


Aditya I was the son of Vijayiilaya, the first of the 
Vijay-laya Imperial line of Colas. An inscription 

from the Trichinopoly district * men- 
tions a grant of land made in accordance with an 
earlier charter issued by l’arakesari Vijayiilaya, and 
this shows that, the revival of Cola power at this 
time begins from the neighbourhood of Craiyur, their 
ancient home on the banks of the Kiiveri. The Tint- 
valangadu plates f quaintly affirm that” Vijayiilaya 

caught hold of Tanjore for his pleasure 
as if the city were his lawful spouse, 
and that he founded a temple to 
goddess NisumbhasudinT (Durgii). Notwithstanding the 
high authority of llultzsch, we can scarcely think that 
Vijayiilaya became powerful enough to leave stone 
records in distant places like KancTpuram and Ukkal + 
and SucTndram. On the other hand, in a record of 
the fifth year of Vikrama Cola from Kilputtur in the 
North Arcot District, there is a specific reference to 
a stone inscription of the fourth year of Vijayiilaya. 
Possibly Vijayiilaya, though a vassal of the Pallava 
ruler, still dated records in his own regnal years — a 
privilege exercised by certain vassals at all times and 
by all of them when the power of their suzerain was on 


* 675 of 1906, A Vnavalaya-caturvedimungulam is mentioned among tlu* 
h ahmad?yj villages winch were required to supply men for seivict* m tin* 
Tanjore temple in Kajaraja's reign ( S/I u 69, para 1391. Set* also 164 of 1915 
(Vikrama Coja 5) for a reference to a of the fourth \ ear of Vi»uya!a\a 

m the North Arcot district. A Pihnjya inscription of the thirteenth century 
from Naittamalai (1M. 282) mentions a Yijuyalayaoolesvsira temple. 

f S/A iii, No. 205 vv. 45 and 46. The Kanyakuman inscription of Vlra- 
rajendra (7V/.S*. iii, p. 142, v. 54) exaggerates this and says that \ ijavalaya 
founded Tanjore. The Anbil plates pun on his name Vi}ayah\a tn praising 
his valour on the battle-field (v. 16). 

X See S/f. i, Nos. 85, 148 and iii. No. 11, and KiclhornS I.ist HI. vn, App. 
Nos. 672-75. Krishna Sastri’s argument at 5//. iii, p. 2o7 and n. 2 does not 
convince me* 

l 131 1 



THE COLAS 


the decline. It is certain, however, that some of the 
Parakesari records nearer home are really his. * 


Chronology. 


What was the political position of Vijayalaya and 

from whom did lie capture Tanjore ? 

Ilis political v j . Al 

In order to answer these questions, we 

position. 1 

must try and establish the probable date 
of Vijayalaya’s rule. This is easily ascertained by cal- 
culating backwards from the accession of Parantaka I, 
the grandson of Vijayalaya. The accession of 

Parantaka has been fixed by Kielhorn 
between 15th January and 25th July 
A. D. 907. f This date rests on the copious and 
unimpeachable testimony of astronomical data drawn 
from his numberless stone inscriptions, and forms the 
sheet-anchor of Cola chronology in this period. The 
duration of the reign of Parantaka’s father, Aditya I, 
was at least twenty-seven years, possibly more. A very 
interesting record from Tirnkkahik-kunrain, 1 dated in 
the twenty-seventh year of Rajakesari, may for very 
good reasons be ascribed to Aditya ; palaeographically, 
it certainly belongs to the time before Parantaka ; the 
subject-matter of the record is the renewal of the gifts 
of some lands to the local temple, made originally by 
Skandasisya and continued by Padavikonda Narasinga- 
pottaraiyar, both well-known Pallava kings. Such a 
renewal is uormal after a conquest, and as Aditya 1 is 
known to have conquered the Pallavas and annexed the 
Tondaimandalam to the Coja country, it is practically 
certain that this inscription is one of Aditya's. It 
should also be observed that in the earliest copper-plate 
grant, so far known, of this line, Aditya I is simply 


• 436, 439 of 1908 from Tiruvllunilalai. 
t EL viii. p. 260. 

: 167 of 1894 ; EL iii, p. 279. 


1 132 J 



VIJAYALAYA AND ADIT Y A I 


called Rajakesari, * without any other name. IIow 
mueh longer Aditya niled after the date of the Tiruk- 
kaluk-kunram inscription cannot now be ascertained, 
llut an inscription from Takkolam dated in the 24th 
year of Rajakesari, no doubt Aditya I, mentions a 
solar eclipse which occurred in 894 or 895 A. D. f This 
would give A. I). 870 or 871 for the accession of 
Aditya, and a rule of about 30 years for him till 
907 A, D. We thus get 870 or thereabouts for the close 
of the reign of Vijayiilaya, which might have begun, 
therefore, sometime before 850 A. D. J 

The date thus obtained for the besrinninsr of 

o o 

Vijayalaya’s rule is some years earlier 

Contemporaries of ,» ■, . >. ,, . , , 

... .. than the date of the accession to the 

v i jfciN u* 

Pandyan kingdom of Varagnnavarman, 
who sustained defeat at ori Purambiyam, near Kumba- 
konam in the Tanjore district. The power of the 
Pandyas was still, at tlie accession of Varaguna, quite 
considerable in spite of the set-back it suffered after 
the battle of the Arisil in the reign of his father. § At 
this time, moreover, the enterprising chieftains known 
to history as the Muttaraiyar were in possession of 
part of the fertile delta land in the Tanjore district; 
their inscriptions come from Sendalai and clearly 
describe them as ruling Tanjore also, though they had 

* Anhil Plates (/'/. xv) vv. 17 -18. 

+ /:/. xix, No, 12. 

X K. V. Subrahmanya Aivar observes* “If Vijayalava came of the same 
family as the Coja Maharaja Kumarankusa, it is veiv likely that he tva the 
grandson of his M . TA S . iii, p. 108. Kumarankusa.as we have seen, figures as 
the vijfirtpti in the Velurpajaiyum plates of Nandivarman III. It is extremely 
doubtful, however, if he anti Vijayalava belonged to one and the same branch 
of the Colas. See ante p. 124. 

§ EA: pp. 73 ff, 

U EL xiii pp. 134 ff. where these records are tentatively referred to the first 
half of the 8th century A.l). <p, 130). Note particularly Tanjait-tiram pudi 
ninrjir ; TaHjaibkTm ; Tafijai narpugaljilan occurring in them, 

[ 133 ] 



THE COLAS 


their head-quarters at Sendalai or Niyamaui. Like the 
Oo]as, the Muttaraiyar found it impossible to set up an 
independent rule, and had to support themselves by 
clinging to the Pandyas or the Pallavas- 


Their inscriptions and their titles show that they 

played a clever game and were ready 

The Muttaraivar. . . . „ . . , 

to change their allegiance to suit their 
interests. In Varaguna's time, either of their own 
accord or as a result of temptations offered by Vara- 
guna, they appear to have thrown in their lot with the 
Pandyas. The result was that they lost Tanjore, which 
was captured by Vijayalaya acting in the interest of 
the Pallavas. Little could the Pallava ruler have 
suspected that in thus employing his Cola subordinate, 
he was, as the Indian saying has it, training his 
tiger-cub to a taste for blood. Nor could Vijayalaya 
have dreamt that his vicarious victory was to be the 
beginning of one of the most splendid empires known 
to Indian History. 

The success of Vijayalaya meant the weakening 
of the Muttaraiya allies of the Piindya Varagunavarman. 
who undertook an expedition calculated to redress 
the balance. This began well enough, and Idavai, on 
the north bank of the Kaveri in the Cola country, 
was reached- * But the Pallava ruler Aparajita who 
succeeded Nrpatungavarman, just before this Piindya 
invasion, made a great effort. 

most prominent among 

livipati I. The "alliance between the Grangas 
and the Palla vas was of .^cient standing, and though 
'there is no definite evidence to prove it, we may assume 

* 690 of 1905 (Rangachari - Mr. 8). The name PItn<}iyanai • von -kai)<Ja- 
»ola-caturvedimangalant is applied to this place in a late record (42 of 1914) 
dated 3. 1369; this can hardly be a reference to the discomfiture of Varaguna- 
varman. Contra Rangachari Tj, 183. 



He got all his allies 
then» 


l 184] 



VIJAYALAYA AND ADITYA I 


that the Co]a A.ditya, who succeeded his father in the 
meanwhile, also fought on the side of Aparajita * 
in the great battle of &rl Purambiyam. More lucky 
than the Ganga monarch, Aditya lived to share the 
spoils of victory. Possibly, in his gratitude to his Cola 
ally, Aparajita not only allowed Aditya to keep what 
his father had taken from the Muttaraiyar, but added 
some new territory in the neighbourhood to the sphere 
of his rule. Such were the humble beginnings of the 
great empire of the Cojas. 


Of Aditya ( r . 871-907 A. D.) the Anbil plates 
- , state only that on both the banks of 

the Kiiveri he built in honour of Siva 
rows of tall stone temples which stood, the monuments 
of his success, from the Sahayadri mountain to the wide 

* Inscription 337 of 1912 (Rangachari Ct. 226) of Pnduvayya mentioning 
the (’T>|a-raia is too fragmentary to throw any light on the politieal relation*, of 
the age. Contra Pubreuii, I\t Havas p. 83. T. A. Gopmatha Rao writes (El. 
xv, p. 49) • ‘ It is known fioni other records that Xditya and the Pandva king 
Vaiaguna inarched against the Pallava Nrpatungavarman, otherwise known also 
by the name ol Aparajitavarman, defeated and killed him. ? Apart from the 
identification of Aparajita with Nrpatunga for which there is no evidence, it is 
difficult to believe that the expedition which led to the overthrow of Aparajita 
had anything to do with Varugunavarman’s campaign. As 1 understand the 
evidence, it was different, and most probably, some years later. (See Pubreuil- 
Pall \ivas p. 84) 

It must be admitted, however, that our view of the relation between the 
C’ojas and the Pullavas in the time of Vijayalava and m the early years of 
Aditya 1 is not final. It is <pute likely that the aggrandisement ol \Tj.i\alaya at 
the expense of the Muttaraiyar had nothing whatever to do with the struggle 
between the I*an<Jyas and the Pullavas. In that case, Vijayalava took advantage 
oj the confusion in the borderland between the dominions of the Panovas and the 
Pullavas, and his son also gained by the weakening of both after Sri Purambiyam. 
See, however, El. xix p. 87 n. 6. Yet another view may be taken : The 
Muttaraiyar being allies of the Pullavas, the Cojas may, under Vijavalaya, have 
found occasion to join the Pamjyas and to throw off the Pallava yoke. On this 
supposition the capture of Tanjore hy Vijayalava would he at once an act of 
aggression undertaken hy him against the Pallava, to favoui the Pan^ya, and u 
decisive step in the assertion of Coja independence from Pallava suzerainty. On 
this assumption, it is not unlikely that Aditya fought on Varaguna's side at 
Sri Purambiyam, An objection to this view is the difficulty of explaining how, 
after the defeat he suffered on this occasion, Xditya jeeovered sufficiently to 
overthrow Aparajita later, and why Aparajita failed, after liis success at 
£r! Pu£suubiyani| to reassert his supremacy over the Coja. 

[ 135 J 



THE COLAS 


Aparajita 

overthrown. 


oeeau. * The Tiruvalangudu plates state that he over- 
threw the strong Pallava ruler Aparajita, f and deprived 
him of his territory. The Kanyakumari inscription 
gives him the surname Kodandarama, and states that 
in a battle he pounced upon and slew the Pallava king 
who was seated on the back of a tall elephant. J A 
record from Tillaisthanam § confirms this evidence by 
clearly stating that Rajakesari extended his power to 
the Tondainad. Aditya must be taken, therefore, to 

have put an end to the Pallava power 
by annexing Tondaimandulam, and to 
have extended the Cola dominions, till 
they bordered on those of the Rastrakiltas. Aparajita’s 
inscriptions mention his eighteenth regnal year ; and no 
record from Tondaimandalam that can be attributed to 
Aditya bears a date earlier than his twenty-third regnal 
year. But as a gift, a devadana , was made in the 21st 
year, the conquest and annexation of the Pallava 
territory may be dated roughly about 890 A. D. 

The Ganga king may have assisted Aditya in this 

conquest ; at any rate we find him 
soon after acknowledging Aditya's 
suzerainty ; Pritipatiyar, son of Mam- 
in araiyar, no other than the well-known PrthivTpati II, 
son of Marasimha of the Udayendiram grant, presented 
a silver vessel (kendi) to the temple of Takkolum in 
the twenty-fourth year of Rajakesari || (Aditya). The 
CSla overlordship, which is elaborately acknowledged 
in the reign of Parantaka in the Udayendiram plates, 
is in this stone inscription briefly recognised by the 
record being dated in the regnal year of Rajakesuri- 
varman. Attention has been drawn already to the 


Relation to the 
Ganga*. 


* v. 18. t V. 49. 

$ m of 1911. % S/I . iii No. 142. 

1) 5 of 1S97 ; El xix No. 12. 


t v. 55, 


[ 188 ] 



VIJAYALAYA AND ADITYA I 


Tirukkalukkunram inscription recording the renewal of 
an ancient Pallava grant to the local temple. Aditya 
married a Pallava princess, as may be inferred 
from an inscription of his twenty-third year which 
/ays that the mother of the Cola queen was a Kadu- 
pattigal. * Another record from Niyamam mentions 
faiat Adigal Kandan Marambavai, queen of Nandipot- 
taraiyar of the Pallavatilaka race, granted to the local 
temple some money for certain specified purposes, f 
In the eighteenth year of Rajakesari (Aditya I), the 
same lady had made another gift to the Pidari temple 
in the same place. X Despite her regal titles, the 
identity of this lady and her Pallava lord must remain 
somewhat doubtful. § 


Conquest of 
Kmigu. 


The Kongudesa-rajakkal affirms that Aditya, after 

being crowned at Tanjavur-patnam, 
came to Kongudesa, conquered the 
country and governed it in addition 
to his own ; it also says that he took the town of 
Talaikad. Despite the lateness and the general untrust- 
worthiness of this chronicle, this statement looks very 


• 161 of 1928. 

t 16 of 1899, The regnal year 24 is given by Krishna Sastri (S/A iii 
No. 94) but does not seem to be borne out by the text 

t 13 of 1899. 

§ The place of Aparajita, though not his relation with his predecessor 
Nfpatunga, is well attested. The narrow range of the provenance of his inscrip- 
tions needs an explanation. It seems strange that the victor of Sri Purambiyam 
appears to have left no inscriptions to the south of Kaftclpuram. The death of 
Pfthivipati on the field perhaps left Aparajita at the mercy of his overbearing 
ally Xditya who managed to take the southern Tond a i 111 H 1 ^ a ^ am as price ofhis 
co-operation. He chose the next opportunity to complete the destruction of the 

Pallavas. 

It seems unlikely that MSrambSvai was the queen of Nandi HI of TeJlii^u, 
whose reign ended about A. IX 850. The earliest Coja record which mentions 
her is in the 18th year of R5jakSsari, c. 889. She is also named in two of 
Nfpatunga's inscriptions, both from the Tanjore Dt. (Nos. 300 and 303 of 1901). 
See ARM . 1901, paragraph 10 ; S/A ii. p. 513, ». 

[137] 


18 



THE COLAS 


plausible. For one thing, Parantaka’s records are 
found in the Kongudesa, and he does not claim to 
have conquered it. Early in his reign is mentioned 
an officer of his supervising temple affairs in Kongu. * 
So it is quite reasonable to suppose that Aditya con- 
quered the Kongu country. The mention of Takikad 
implies that Aditya took the country from the Western 
Oangas ; there is again nothing improbable in this, 
and we have seen Prthivlpati II acknowledging the 
overlordship of Aditya. About the same time the 
Pandya king Sri Pariintaka Ylranarayana claims to 
have fought in Kongu ; Aditya might have taken part 
of the Kongu country from him. The Anbil plates, 
which say that Aditya built temples along the entire 
course of the Kaveri from the Sahyadri to the sea, also 
seem to lend support to the statement in the chronicle 
of Kongu kings. 


Relation to Cera. 


An undated inscription f from Tillaisthanam shows 

that Aditya was on very friendly terms 
with his Cera contemporary Sthanu- 
Ravi. This records a gift by Kadamba-madevi, on 
whose husband, Vikki-Aniian, the two monarchs jointly 
conferred the personal privileges, of ‘throne, chauri, 
palanquin, drum, a palace, ponakam ( ? ), bugle, ele- 
phant-corps ’ and the hereditary title Sembiyan 
Tamila-vej. Here is clear indication that Vikki-Annan 
who was so honoured must have distinguished himself 
in some manner that greatly pleased these two kings. 
Can it be that he was a Cera general whom Stlianu- 
Ravi employed to co-operate with Aditya in his Kongu 
campaign against the Pandya ? We know that Aditya’ s 
son Parantaka married a daughter of the Cera king. 


• 258 of 1907. The regnal year of this record is 10, not 30. 
t 286 of 1911. 


1138 1 










VlJAYALAYA and ADITYA I 


It is natural to assume that this friendship between 
the two ancient lines of rulers began with the exten- 
sion of Cola rule to Kongu. * There is mention 
of a Vikkiyanna, son of Prthivlpati, in a Ganga 
inscription f of this period. 


It is not possible to point with certainty to the 

Temples temples erected by Aditya. We know 

of several stone temples whose consecra- 
tion took place in the reign of Aditya's son and success- 
or ; BOme of these might have been commenced in the 
time of Aditya. X 

Aditya died at Tondaimanad, near Kalahasti, in 

the Chittoor district. A temple was 
erected over his remains by his pious 
son Pariuitaka and called by the names Kodanda- 
ramesvara and Adityesvara ; § he also provided for the 
feeding of a thousand brahmans on certain festival 
days. Aditya had besides Parantaka another son, 
Kannaradeva by name. 


Death. 


* ARE. 19X2 II, 11 suggests the identification of SthSnu-Ravi with KSkkandan 
Ravi of the Candraditya family (148 of 1910) on palaeograpliical grounds. The 
epithet 1 pal- y an ai-kok kandan ’ in the Tillaisthanam inscription, like the phrase 
• 7'ondai nfidn pawna - &iifan ’ , applies to Rajakesari and not to Sthanu-Ravi, 
as ARE. ( ibid) appears to suggest. 4 ‘ It is not impossible that Sthanu-Ravi 
substantially assisted Xditya in his conquest of the Pallavas and the acquisition 
of their territory, and that Vikki- Annan, distinguished himself on this occasion 
as an able general." {ibid). In the same paragraph we find the suggestion thrown 
out that Vikki-Annan was, like his wife Ka^amba-madevi, of Karnataka origin, 
and that he was a VSlir chieftain of Ko^umbajiir (Pudukojtah). 

+ 332 of 1912. Sembiyan Mahubali Banarasa (of this record) is no other 
than Prthivlpati II. 

J El. xv, p. 50. 

| 286 of 1906 ; also 230 of 1903. Before the KanySkumari inscription gave us 
the information that Aditya had the name K5dan<Jar3ma, the only Kodan^arama 
known was his grandson Rajaditya ; but Rajaditya must have been living in the 
34th year of his father’s reign. EL xviii pp. 23*24. 

n 38 of 1895. 


f 139 ] 



THE COLAS 


It is remarkable that the kings of the Vijayalaya 
, . . line were ardent Saivites. 

baivism. 

himself established a Durga temple in 
Tahjavur after he captured it ; Aditya built temples to 
&iva. His son raised a shrine over his sepulchre, 
establishing a linga on it — a Saivite adaptation of the 
Buddhist practice of erecting memorial Btupas. 

The Cola rulers of this time were not slow to 
„ , , acquire for themselves a pedigree : and a 

Dynastic Myths. 

mythical ancestry tracing their descent 
from the sun was soon provided, though some kings 
of lunar genesis were also mixed rip in it. The earliest 
version of it is in the Anbil plates which give fifteen 
names before Vijayalaya including the genuinely 
historical ones of Karikala, Killi and Koccenganiin. 
The Tiruvalangadu plates swell the list to forty-four, 
and the Kanyakumari list runs up to fifty -two, while the 
Leyden grant is satisfied with a dozen. There are 
others of varying lengths to be gathered from literary 
works like the Kalin ga Hup para ui, the ulas of Ottakuttan 
and so on. No two of these lists agree, though some 
names and details are common to all. An eponymous 
Cola finds a place in all the copper-plates, and the 
Kanyakumari inscription dresses up a pretty story * 
about his advent to the south. He was drawn in that 
direction in pursuit of a Raksasa who had assumed the 
form of an antelope, and he was followed by some of his 
commanders. Then he killed the Raksasa and moved 
along the banks of the Kaveri, “ the river which brings 
to the earth, in the guise of water, the nectar obtained 
by the gods after churning the ocean of milk.” 
Having bathed in the river, when he looked for some 
brahmans, apparently to bestow some gifts on them, 

* w. 28-35. 


Vijayalaya 


[ 140 ] 



VIJAYALAYA AND ADITYA 1 


he found none there; and so he summoned many 
excellent brahmans from Aryavarta and settled them 
on the banks of the river, lie then cleared the forest, 
planted groves of areca-palms and laid out fruit-gardens 
and otherwise improved the country. Such is the 
quaint account of the origin of the Cola kingdom as it 
was imagined by the court-poet of Ylrarajendra. * 


* See TAS. iii. for a full discussion of the legends in this record, Also 
SII, iii, Introd. pp, 4-5 for those in the copper-plates, and El* xviii pp. 26 ff. 


[ 141 1 



Chapter VII 


PARANTAKA I (907-953 A.D.) 

At the time of the battle of on Purambiyam, the 

Colas held a small principality including 

Coja expansion. • L r J ° 

Tanjore and Uraiyur, perhaps in sub- 
jection to the Pallavas. But within twenty-five years 
their power had become formidable. This expansion 
was exclusively the work of Aditya I, a remarkable 
warrior and able diplomat. Circumstances favoured 
him and he made full irse of his opportunities. The 

r 

Pandyas, after Sri Purambiyam, were engrossed in their 
own troubles at home ; Varagnna died soon after the 
battle, and his successor or! Pariintaka Vlranarayana 
had to deal with a serious rising headed by the 
haughty Ugra. * With the Pallava Aparajita, Aditya 
was on friendly terms for some years after Sri Puram- 
biyam. He then turned against hitn and deprived him 
of the bulk, if not the whole, of his possessions ; in this 
enterprise, Aditya was possibly aided by his Ganga 
contemporary ; and the obscure conflicts that were 
engaging the Banas, the Vaidumbas, the Gangas and 
the Nolambas, of which the battle of Soremati was the 
central event, must have indirectly facilitated Aditya’s 
success. Before the end of his reign Aditya conquered 
Konsm and annexed it to his territories. Thus at the 

o 

accession of his son Parantaka, 907 A. D., the Cola 
kingdom embraced the whole country between Madras 
and Kalahasti in the north, and the Kaveri in the 
south, with the exception of the Mysore table-land 

* PK. p. 78. 


[ 142 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


and the strip along the west coast. It kept the Ganga 
power in a position of subordinate alliance and was 
friends with the Cera. The first conflict with the 
Pandya power had perhaps already taken place in 
the Kongu country. * 

Parantaka I ruled for about forty -five years, as 

the latest inscription of his reign is 

Parantaka I* ° 

dated m his forty -fifth regnal year •, f 
even the forty-sixth year seems to occur in a single 
inscription from Kandiyur, near Tanjore. Parantaka’s 
rule was one of increasing success and prosperity for 
the best part of it ; he followed up his father’s victories 
by putting an end to Pandyan independence and 
extending the empire up to Kanyakumari in the 
south ; he even invaded Ceylon, though the raid, as we 
shall see, failed of its object. Elsewhere, he subjugated 
the lianas, and the Ganga king Hastimalla acknow- 
ledged his sway. The last vestiges of Pallava power 
disappeared and the dominion of Parantaka extended 
up to Nellore in the north. Towards the end of his 
reign, however, an unforeseen disaster overtook the 
Cola empire ; the Rastrakutas under the powerful 
Krsna III invaded the empire in great force from the 
north-west, and in the conflict that ensued Parantaka’s 
eldest son Rajaditya lost his life, and Parantaka himself 
did not long survive the cataclysm. A heavy gloom 
settles on Cola power for a period of over four 
decades thereafter until the accession of the celebrated 
Rajaraja I in 985 A. D. 

• Was it an accident that Aditya’s Pandya contemporary was a 

Parantaka VIranaravana. and that Aditva’s son also had the names Parantaka 

* • • * 

and Viranarayana ? Or was it more common then to name the first children 
after their maternal grandparents than it is now } 

f 465 of 1918. Krishna Sastri is sure that year 46 is clear in 15 of 1895. 

[ 143 ] 



THE COLAS 


Parantaka invaded the Pandya country very soon 
_ , after his accession. He bears the title 

Fangyan War. 

Maduraikon^a. (who captured Madura), 
as early as his third year. * The conquest and sub- 
jugation of the Pandyan kingdom was, however, a 
gradual process ; the earliest inscription of Parantaka 
actually found in the Pandyan country is dated in his 
24th year, f The Sinnamanur and the Udayendiram 
plates concur in the name of the Pandya king, Raja- 
simha, who suffered deprivation and exile at the hands 
of Parantaka. Says the Mahavamsa J : 

“While thus the sovereign of Lanka (Kassapa V, 913-23 
A. D.) held sway in justice, the Pandu king was vanquished in 
battle by the Cola king. To gain military aid he sent numerous 
gifts. The king, the ruler of Lanka, took counsel with his 
officials, equipped military forces, appointed his Sakkasenapati 
as leader of the troops, and betook himself to Mahatittha. 
Standing at the edge of the coast he spoke of the triumph of 
former kings, and having thus aroused their enthusiasm, 
he made his troops embark. With his army the Sakkasenapati 
thereupon safely crossed the sea and reached the Pandu country. 
When the Paniju king saw the troops and him, he spake full of 
cheer : 4 1 will join all Jambudipa under one umbrella \ The 
king took the two armies ; but as he could not vanquish him 
(the king) of the Cola line, set out once more with the purpose 
of fighting further, made halt, and died of the upanagya 
(plague) to the undoing of the Pandu (king). When the ruler 
of Lanka heard that the troops were also perishing of the same 
disease, out of pity he had the army brought back.” 

In this account we can recognise three stages in 
the conflict. In the first the Pandyan king suffers a 

* The date in 29 of 1907 is not so clear, but see 157 of 1928 and 11 of 1931. 

f 446 of 1917. The copper-plates furnish little assistance in the study of 
these campaigns; the TiruvSlanga^u plates, however, give some information 
which is borne out by the contemporary account given by the Udayendiram 
plates of Ganga Pjthivlpati II. The stone inscriptions of Parantaka and the 
Mahavamsa provide a fairly clear and cogent account of what happened. 

\ CV. Ch. 52, w. 70 ff. 


[ 144 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


defeat at the hands of Parantaka. The second sta»e 
begins with his appeal for aid to the Ceylonese ruler 
and ends with a fight in which the Pandyan and 
Ceylonese troops together sustained defeat and ret- 
reated before the Coja forces. Lastly, another effort 
made by the Ceylonese commander came to nothing 
owing to a plague which killed him and led to the 
recall of the Ceylonese army. The inscriptions so far 
as they go corroborate this account in every respect ; 
only, they make no mention of the second effort of 
Sakkasenapati and the plague. 

The first Btage in the account of the Mahavamsa 
corresponds, doubtless, to the raid on Madura in the 
first years of Pariintaka’s rule which led to his adopting 
the title Madhurantaka, the destroyer of Madura. The 
second stage in the war is thus graphically pictured 
by the Udayendiram plates of Prthivlpati in 921-2 
A. D. * 


“His (Paran taka’s) army, having crushed at the head of a 
battle the Pandya king together with an army of elephants, 
horses ami soldiers, seized a herd of elephants together with (the 
city of) Madhurfi. Having slain in an instant, at the head of a 
battle, an immense army, despatched by the lord of Lauka, which 
teemed with brave soldiers (and) was interspersed with troops 
of elephants and horses, he bears in the world the title Sangrama 
Raghava (n e., Rama in battle) which is full of meaning. When 
he defeated the Pandya (king) Rajasimha, two persons ex- 
perienced the same fear at the same time : (Kubera), the lord 
of wealth, on account of the death of his own friend (and) 
Vibhisana on account of the proximity (of the a do 

4 * 

to Ceylon)/* 

These events must have taken place some years 
before the date of the Udayendiram grant. As early 
as 923 A. D. we find the title Maduraiyum Ilamwn 

# Sff i», No. 76 vv. 9-11. 

[ 145 ] 

Vi 



THE COLAS 


Konda , in a record of Parantaka. * Two inscriptions 
of the twelfth year make casual allusions to incidents 

in the battle of Vejjiir in which the 
Battle of Vejiur and Ceyloneae forces were 

defeated by the Coja. > One is a gift to commemorate 
the victory of Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Amudanar 
on the occasion when the Pandya king, helped by the 
Ceylonese army, attacked the Coja king at the battle 
of Vellur. + Another is an endowment for the merit of 

• • I 

four soldiers ( sevakar ) who died in a frontal attack 

r 

(nerrisenia) led by Sennipperaraiyan at Vejur (Vellur) 
on the occasion when the Pandyan and Ceylonese 
kings came and fought a deadly battle with the 
Coja. X H is clear that there was a great and decisive 
battle at Vejjiir in which the Coja troops had to fight 
hard before securing victory and which was well 
remembered for some years after the event for the 
exceptional heroism of its incidents. It seems probable 
that this battle was fought about 915 A. D. 

The victory of Parantaka at Vejjiir paved the way 
for the pi'ogressive conquest and annexation of the 
Pandyan country. Frustrated in all his attempts to 
stem the tide of the Coja invasion, the unlucky Raja- 
simha took to flight, leaving his ancient heritage to fall 
into the hands of his enemy. In the reign of 
Dappnla IV (923-934 A.D.) the Mahavamsa records : § 

* 331 of 1927. ARE . 1927, II 10 seeks to effect a weak reconciliation between 
the new evidence and Venkayya’s account of the wars by suggesting that this title 
was assumed after Vepr (Vellur) and fully justified only later — a curious instance 
of academic orthodoxy. See, also SIf. iii, Introdn. p. 11. No. 332 of 1927 is a 
RajakSsari record, not one of Parantaka, as stated in ARE. 1927, App* C. 

+ 231 of 1926. The PI?n$ya did not die, as stated in ARE. 1926 II, 16. 
There must be some mistake here. The actual phrase in the inscriptions is 
• astigadiii Uyda fiSnrn 9 

X SII. iii. No. 99. Another inaccuracy here— the Ceylonese king did not 
come to the fight himself, according to the M V \ 

§ CV. Ch, S3 w. 5 ff. 


[ 146 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


“ At that time the Pan<Jn king through fear of the Coja 
(king) left his country, took ship and came to Mahatittha. The 
king had him brought to him, rejoiced greatly when he saw him, 
gave him an abundant income and granted him a dwelling out- 
side the town. When the king of Lanka had armed (with the 
purpose) : * I will make war on the Cola king, take from him Mb 
two thrones * and give them to the Pandu king,’ the nobles 
dwelling on the island for some reason or other stirred up a 
sorry strife to the undoing of the Pandu king. The Pan$u king 
thought his sojourn here was of no use to him. He left his 
diadem and other valuables behind and betook himself to the 
Keralas.” 

This is confirmed by a verse f in the Tiruvalangadu 
plates saying: 

“Encircled by the fire of his (Parantaka’s) prowess, the 
Famlya, as if desirous of cooling the heat caused by it, quickly 
entered the sea (embarked for Ceylon), abandoning his royal 
state and the kingdom inherited from his ancestors.” 

Rajasimha proceeded to Kerala from Ceylon because 
it was the home of his mother Vanavan-mahadevi. + 
The rulers of Kerala were in such close political 
alliance with the Colas in this period, that Rajasimha 
depended more on the Ceylonese king for help in the 
first instance, and went to Kerala only as a last resort, 
even then leaving liis crown and other valuables 
behind in Ceylon. The flight of Rajasimha may be 
dated, following the chronology of the Mahaoamsa , 
sometime between the sixteenth and the twenty-sixth 
year of Parantaka's reign. 


Parantaka spent many years in reducing the 

newly conquered country to subjection, 
Ceylon War. , when he felt he was near the end of 


• Meaning evidently his own Coja throne, in addition to the Fan^yaa 
recently captured by him. See Geiger, CK i p* 172 n. 1. 

f No. 51, 

t PJT. p. 79. 


[ 147 ] 



THE COLAS 


his task, he wanted to celebrate his success by a formal 
coronation at Madura at which he was to invest himself 
with the insignia of Pandyan monarchy. These had 
been carried away by Rujasimha and left in the custody 
of the Ceylonese king, and Parantaka made an un- 
successful effort to secure them in the reign of the 
slothful and intemperate Udaya IV (945-53 A.D.) : * 

u The Cola king hearing of his sloth was greatly pleased, 
and as he wished to achieve consecration &b king in the Panda 
kingdom, he sent (messengers) concerning the diadem and the other 
(things) which the Pandu (king) had left behind (in Lanka). 
The king did not give them up, so the mighty Cola equipped an 
army and sent it forth to fetch them by force. Now, at that time 
the Senapati here (in Ceylon) was absent in a rebellious border 
province. The king had him fetched and sent him forth to 
begin the war. The Senapati set forth, delivered battle and 
fell in the fight. Thereupon the king (Udaya) took the crown 
and the rest and betook himself to Rohana. The Coja troops 
marched thither, but finding no way of entering Rohana, they 
turned and betook themselves through fear from hen^to their 
own country 

The exact date of these occurrences cannot be deter- 
mined ; the Ceylonese account is no doubt right in 
placing them in the last years of Parant&k&'s regin. f 
His failure was remembered, and made up for, years 
later, by his powerful descendant Rajendra I. 


* CV. Ch. 53, vv. 41 ff. 

T See Geiger, C V. i p. 176 n. 4. Also ii p. xx n. 18. It must be noted 
that Venkayya*$ proof that it is only in his latest inscriptions of 943(4 to 947(8 
that ParSntaka calls himself “Conqueror of Ceylon** no longer holds good; 
and the date 948 accepted by Geiger for this invasion is not so trustworthy 
as it appeared to Hultzsch. (See 332 and 331 of 1927 of years 8 and 16 res- 
pectively of ParSntaka). The MV, goes on to add that a new Senapati of 
Udaya “ laid waste the borderland ©f the Co|a king and forced him with threats 
to restore all that he had carried away ” as booty. What exactly is meant by 
the 1 borderland * is not clear. 


[ 148 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


Allies of 
Parantaka. 


Besides the friendliness of the Kerala ruler and the 

assistance of the Paluvettaraiyar chief- 
tains of Kflappaluvur, Parantaka was 
aided in his Pandyan campaigns by 
the Velir chiefs of Kodumbajur. Records dated very 
early in Parantaka’s reign show that prince Arikula- 
kesari, one of the sons of Parantaka, had already 
married Pudi Sdicca Pidari, daughter of Tennavan 
Ijangovejar of the Kodumbajur line. * Other evidence 
of the close connection in this period between the 
Cola line and the Kodumbajur chieftains is furnished 
by records from Pudukottah and the Trichinopoly 
district, f Their hostility to the Pandya king Raiasimha 
becomes clear from the Sinnamaniir plates of the 
sixteenth year of Riijasimha (c. 916 A. D.). While 
giving an account of Rajasimha's relations with the 
Colas in the early years of Parantaka's rule, the 
Pandyan inscription says that Rajasimha “ defeated 
the king of Tanjai (Tanjore) at Naippxir, fought a 
battle at Kodumbai (Kodumbalur), the seat of one of the 
powerful Cola subordinates, burnt Vafiji and destroyed 
the king of Southern Tanjai (perhaps another sub- 
ordinate of the Colas) at Naval. ” $ This rather obscure 
and, no doubt, highly embellished account, from the 
Pandyan side, of the early stages of the Cola war is 
valuable in two respects. It confirms the impression 
derived from the Mahavamsa and the inscriptions of 
Parantaka that his conquest of the Madura kingdom 
was a gradual and difficult process which involved 
much lighting spread over many years. It provides, 
moreover, a clear idea of the alignment of the political 
powers in these struggles, and corroborates the view 


• SII. iii 96. 
t See ARE. 1908, II 84 ff. 
X SII. iii p. 449. 


[ 149 ] 



THE COLAS 


that the Cera and the Kodumbalur chiefs * were 

• • 

friendly to the Cola and fought on his side. 


t i* 


Other Wars. 


The intervals between his Pandyan wars were 

employed by Parantaka in extending 
his power- elsewhere. The Sliolingtyr 
rock inscription f of the ninth year mentions that the 
Ganga Prthivlpati H got the title of Banadhiraja from 


Parantaka and that he distinguished himself in a figbl. 

1 

at Vallala. The Udayendiram plates of Prthivlpati J 
state that Parantaka uprooted two Bana kings and con- 
quered the Vaidumbas.^ The Banas were an ancient 
line of kings who ruled for over two centuries in the 
tract that came to be called Perumbanappadi, the Bana 
country. § This was the area to the north of the Palar, 
between Punganur in the west and Kajahasti in the 
east. There is reason to believe that at an earlier 
period they ruled the territory further north and were 
forced to migrate south in the period of the rise and 
expansion of the Calukyas of Badami. In the last 
stages of their existence as an independent power their 


* We have only one inscription (129 of 1907, Pd. 14), its beginning lost, 
giving the genealogy of these chieftains for eight generations or so. It is 
probable that there were collateral branches of which we have as yet no 
information and if, failing to allow for this possibility, we seek to accommodate 
all the inscriptions in the genealogy of this single record, we come across a 
number of difficulties not easily settled. It should also be borne in mind that 
a title like Tennavan IJangovEfar may have been borne by several persons, and 
no identification can be confidently based on the recurrence of such titles in dif- 
ferent inscriptions. At any rate, if PTidi Vikrainakesari was, as there are strong 
reasons to believe, the contemporary of Xditya II who t took the head of Vlra- 
pSn^iyan/ it is difficult to believe that he was also the Tennavan IlangovSJar 
whose daughter Adicca Pi<JSri had become the wife of Arikulakesari as early as 
the third year (910 AT).) of Parantaka I. These chiefs were Kaflar (140 of 1928- 
Parantaka I, year 17), and had dynastic connections with the Muttaraiyar (337 of 
1904, Pd. 45). Ljangaji-Nayanar was believed to be of their family ( Ptriya 
Pur<Hnam) t contra Nambi Xntfar Nambi. 

t EL i v pp. 221-5. 

} SIL ii No. 76, v. 9. 

§ On the Banas see EI. xi, pp. 229-40 ; and xvii pp. 1-7, I follow Hultzsch's 
table {EL xvii p. 3) for the numbering of the Bana kings. 


[ 150 ) 



PARANTAKA I 


capital was at Parivi * which is first mentioned in the 
Sholingur inscription and may be identical with Parigi, 
in the Hindupur Taluq of Anantapur district. The last 
rnler of the line was Vikramaditya III, Vijayabahu, 
described as the dear friend of Krsnaraja, doubtless 
Kvsna III, his powerful Rastrakuta. neighbour. The 
course of events which is nowhere described in explicit 
terms can only be inferred from a careful study of the 
dates which, fortunately, are clearly recorded in the 
inscriptions bearing on this topic. 


With the Banas. 


( Hastimalla got the title Banadhiraja from Parantaka 

before 916 A.D. (Sholingur record). 
Vijayaditya II Prabhameru ruled the 
Bana territory independently till 909 A. D. f The 
conquest of the Banas by Parantaka must have taken 
place in the intervening period of six or seven years. 
The great-grandson of Vijayaditya Prabhameru is 
known from his Udayendiram grant to have been the 
friend of Krsjnaraja III, Ra§trakuta. There were two 
Bana kings intervening — Vikramaditya II and Vijaya- 


ditya III, Pugalvippavarganda. Considering the fact 
that the Rastrakuta Krshna III could not have bearun 
his reign much earlier than A.D. 940, it seems proper 
to infer that the two Bana rulers who were dispossessed 
of their kingdom and perhaps forced by Parantaka 
to seek refuge within the Rastrakuta dominion were 
Vikramaditya II and Vijayaditya * III. The title 
conferred on Prthivlpati II, Bartadhiraja, was not then 
an empty name ; it carried with it the real overlord- 
ship of the Bana country for some years. And this 
uprooting of the Banas, so proudly proclaimed by the 



A 


* Parivi and Nandagiri occupy in late Bana record? a position similar to 
that of IJraiytlr and the Kuveri in the Telugu Cola records. It may be observed 
that Parigi answers to the description of the Bana country being to the west 
of the Xndhra. 

t 99 of 1899. 


C i5i 3 



THE COLAS 


Ganga ruler who benefited thereby, contributed to the 
invasion of the Cola lands by Krsna III which ended 
bo disastrously for the Colas. 


With the 
Vaidumbas. 


Forming part of the campaign against the Banas, 

or at any rate closely connected with 
it, was the war against the Vaidumbas. 
These were a Telugu family who have 
left behind a few records in that language and in 
Kanarese. In the ninth century they claim to have 

had the Renandu 7000 country under them, and their 

' 

inscriptions tell us that in the great battle of Soremati 
(c. 880 A. D.) they took the side of the Banas against 
the Nolambas and the Gangas. This alliance with, and 
possibly subordination to, the Banas continued until 
the time of Parantaka’s war with them. We have no 
direct means of identifying the opponent of Parantaka. 
Some records * of Kannaradeva (Krsna HI) from the 
South Arcot district mention the Vaidumba Maharaja 
&andayan Tiruvayan and Tiruvayan SrTkantha; the 
Vaidumba chief reduced to submission by Parantaka 
about 915 A. D. must have been &andayan Tiruvayan 
himself or his immediate predecessor. The Vaidumbas, 
like the Banas, sought refuge with the Rastrakutas 
from the onslaught of the Colas. In later times, under 
Rajaraja I and Rajendra, when the Cola empire regained 
its ascendancy, the son and grandson of Tiruvayan 
accepted subordinate positions under the Colas. 


Two inscriptions f from Tiruvorriyur contain the 

most casual reference to a campaign 
gitpuu N3<}u. j n ^ NeXlore district. An officer 

of Parantaka, Maran Paramesvaran, a native of 


* 235, 267, 268 of 1902 (El. vii pp. 142 ff ) and 16, 743 of 1905 j ARE. 
1905 n, 28. 

■ f Nos. 160, 236 of 1912, the former being SI1. iii 108. 


[ 152 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


£§iruku]attur, overthrew &itpuli and destroyed Nellfir, 
and on his way back to the south, he stopped at 
Tiruvorriyur to make a thanks-offering to Mahadeva 
iii the form of a grant of land, which four years later 
was released from the fiscal dues falling upon it. The 
original gift was made in the thirty-fourth year of 
Parantaka (A.D. 941). This campaign was probably 
directed against the power of the Vengl ruler Calukya 
Bhlma II. S§Itpu]i was a district in the southern 
regions of the Eastern Cajukya kingdom. * Considering 
that no records of Parantaka have been discovered in 
the east coast region to the north of Tiruvorriyur, it 
may be doubted if the campaign had any permanent 
results, f 


Growing 

Difficulties. 


From about 940 A.D , Parantaka experienced the 

increasing difficulty of defending an 
empire at a great many points ; in less 
than fifty years a small principality 
had grown into a widespread dominion at the expense 
of its neighbouring states ; the very quickness of the 
expansion was fraught with danger and dynasties 
which had been dispossessed and driven out of their 
traditional homes could not all be expected to give in 
without further struggle. Nor was it likely that other 
powers like the Rastrakutas and the Eastern Cajukyas 
would view without concern the progress of the Coja 
power. We have seen already that some time after 945 
A. D., Parantaka experienced a repulse in Ceylon and 
failed to take from Udaya IV the Pandyan diadem. 
We must now turn to a narration of the occurrences 
elsewhere that must have had no small share in forcing 


* ARE. 1913 II 18 and SII. iii 108 (introdn.) make Slipup a personal name, 
and suggest that Jaltpuji was the general of Bhima. But 79 of 1921 (Rajak. 6) 
mentions £l(puli>nu ju and Paki-na^u. The latter is well known as Paka-ra$lra. 

+ See Ch. viii below, under Arinjaya. 


[ 153 ] 


20 



THE COLAS 

Parantaka to give up the fight in Ceylon and acquiesce 
in his failure. 


Death of 
Prthivipati. 


The death of Ganga Prthivipati II, the trusted 

friend and grateful vassal of Parantaka 
I, which must have occurred about 
940 A. D., * may be said to mark the 
commencement of Parantaka’s troubles from this 
quarter. Prthivipati left no son, Vikkiyanna having 
pre-deceased him. f Butuga II, who had married a 
Rastrakuta princess Revaka, the sister of Krsna III, 
and assisted Krsna in securing his throne from a 
usurper, was now left in unquestioned supremacy in 
the Ganga country, because he had murdered his elder 
brother Racamalla and annexed his possessions also. $ 
And the Banas and the Vaidumbas were already by 
the side of Krsjna soliciting his protection and aid 
against the powerful Cola. Krsna was in the prime of 
life and had just encountered and overcome opposition 
at home and was not reluctant to seize the favourable 
moment that chance offered to him for making a great 
advance to the south. 


Rajaditya. 


It is possible that these developments were fore- 
shadowed even in the life-time of 
Prthivipati and a little before the 
accession of Krsna to the Rastrakuta throne. A record S 

• • * * • • o 

from the North Arcot district commemorates the death 
of a hero in 936 A.D. in a cattle-raid by a Western 
Ganga king (Perumanadigal), and this may be taken to 


• Rangachari says that Prthivipati became a vassal of III, and was 

living in A.D. 953 (N A. 586). In saying this, he overlooks Hultzsch’s warning 
that the Attimallar of this record is a different person (E7, vii p« 195) 

t 332 of 1912. 

* 

J Rice Mysore and Coorg , p.‘ 45 
§ 1 of 1896 ARE, 1896, paragraph 6; El, iv pp. 178-9. 


[ 154 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


In Tirumunaip- 

pa^i. 


give the first indication of the coming storm. There is 
also evidence to show that about this time Rajaditya, 
the eldest son of Parantaka, was stationed with a large 
army including an elephant corps and some cavalry * 

in the district known in inscriptions 
and literature as Tirumunaippadi-nadu. 
Vellangumaran, a Kerala general of 
Rajaditya’s forces, was present at Gramam as early as 
936 A. D., f where seven years later he constructed a 
stone temple to &iva on the banks of the Pennar. £ 
Tirunavalur, a village near Gramam, called Rajaditta- 
puram till about 1140 A. I)., § was the residence of 
Rajaditya for many years. We also find Arikula- 
kesari in the same region about the same time, no 
doubt assisting his brother, Rajaditya. It is clear, 

therefore, that Parantaka was not 
unmindful of the repercussions of his 
aggressive policy against the Banas 
and the Vaidumbas, and that though he expected much 
from the loyal support of Prthivlpati II, he did not 
leave everything to him, but made his own prepara- 
tions to meet an emergency. 


Policy of 
Paiuntaka. 


The chronology of Krsna’s campaign against the 

Cola has. been the subject of some 
chronology of difference of opinion, but it is not 

Kr§na’s invasion. L 

incapable of precise determination. 
The Solapuram inscription || which is dated in three 
different ways may furnish the starting point. This 
record which bears the &aka date 871 (A.D. 949) is also 

• AST. 1908-6 p. 181. Also 180 of 1921. ARE. 1921, II 25. 
f 739 of 1905. 

X 735 of 1905 dated Saturday, 14th January 943 A.D. 

§ 374 of 1902. 

% 280 of 1902. 

II 428 of 1902 ; El. vii p. 194. 

[ 155 ] 



THE COLAS 


dated in the second year of some king not named in 
direct relation to this regnal year. But as Kannara- 
deva started his rule in or about 940 A.D., * the second 
year cannot be his. Venkayya, however, affirms f 
that this is ‘ evidently a record of the Rastrakuta king 
Krsna 111 ’ and suggests that the date is ‘ probably the 
second year after the occupation of the Tondainadu ' 
by him. But the suggestion is contradicted by the 
record itself which says that it was the year in which 
Krsna entered Tondaimandalam : and we have no other 
instance in his numerous records from that country 
of his using the date of his entry into Tondai- 
mandalam as the starting point of an era ; they give 
invariably his regnal year. The only alternative is to 
assume with Hultzsch that it refers to Rajaditya's rule 
as the inscription comes from a place within the 
sphere of his jurisdiction as viceroy. It is not to be 
supposed + that Rajaditya began to rule and issue 
inscriptions in his own name only after the death of 
his father ; for nothing is more common in Coja 
inscriptions than for records of successive rulers dated 
in different series of regnal years to overlap. Rajaditya 
had by A. D. 948 served his father actively in a 
subordinate capacity for over a dozen years, and it is 
riot a violent assumption to make that Rajaditya was 
made ‘ co-regent ’ § in that year. There is one 
circumstance which may be said to support this 
suggestion. The Kanyakumari inscription of Vlra- 

* No. 236 of 1913 dates bis death in £. 889 (A.D. 967). It is possible he 
started rule somewhat earlier. His earliest inscription is dated, however, 
A D. 940 ; perhaps the conflict with Lalleya, the rival claimant to his throne, 
filled the early years. 

t ASI. 1908-9. p. 122 ». 2. 

J Contra « T. A. Gopinatha Rao, EI. xv pp. 51 -2 and EI. xviii p. 24. See 
also ARE. 1911, II, 22. 

§ Though not a happy term this may be retained as familiar to students 
of South Indian epigraphy. 


r i 56 ) 



PARANTAKA I 


rajendra categorically affirms that Parantaka earned 
the name Vlra-Cola by his victory over the invincible 
Krsnaraja. * Despite the lateness of the testimony, 
it is so definite and so probable in itself that we can 
hardly brash it aside as of no value. If this victory 
was a fact, it can be placed only in the interval 
between 940 and 948 A. D., and it is quite likely that 
Rajaditya had an active share in gaining this success, 
and that Parantaka in appreciation of his son's 
valour and his own growing age, conferred on 
Rajaditya the position of co-regent in the administra- 
tion of the empire, f 

The third method in which the Solapuram record 

is dated is by describing it as the year in which 

Cakravartin Kannaradeva Yallabhan entered Tondai- 

• * 

maudalam after the overthrow of Rajaditya. It seems 

likely that this record was engraved very soon after 

Rajaditya’s death, when the consequences of the battle 

of Takkolam were not yet fully realised. By the 

evidence of this record the successful invasion of Krsna 

• • • 

took place in A.D. 949. 

The Atakiir inscription of Butuga II affords strik- 
ing confirmation of this date. It dates the battle of 
Takkolam (in which Rajaditya lost his life at the hands 
of Butuga) in the current Saka year 872, i.e. A.D. 
949-50. $ Again Parantaka's own inscriptions tell the 
same tale. His inscriptions bearing dates in A.D. 948 
are found in the South and North Arcot districts, § 

# Verse 58. Note the phrase ajitan- naradh ipaih, 

t This is indeed contradicted by the larger Leyden grant (verse 19). But 
*ee note f p. 162 (below). 

J EL vi p. 51. 

§ 419 of 1903 ; 184, 313 of 1906 ; 149 of 1916. 

r i57] 



THE COLAS 


and it is a remarkable fact that not only are his 
inscriptions not found in these districts after that date, 
but no inscriptions of his dated in his regnal years 42-44 
(inclusive) are at all known — a fact clearly to be 
accounted for by some great disaster like the battle of 
Takkolam. Thus all lines of evidence point to one 
date, 949 A.D., as the year which decided the fortunes 
of the contest between Parantaka and Krgna. 


I One inscription * from Siddhalingamadam (South 
^ Arcot), dated in the fifth year of Krsna’s 

inscrip^ioT reign, already in A. D. 944-5 gives 

him the title Kacciyum - Tanjaiyum- 

konda. This has created some confusion, and led Borne 
scholars to imagine that Krsna's invasion and occupa- 
tion of Tondaimandalam was earlier than the battle of 
Takkolam. f But the difficulty of reconciling this 
datum with the rest of our evidence is so great as to be 
almost insuperable, and we can hardly help suspecting 


some mistake here. For if Krsna was in Tondai- 
mandalam as early as A.D. 944-5, how can we account 
for Parantaka’s inscriptions being found in the Arcot 
districts till 948 A. D., for the presence of Bajaditya at 


Takkolam in 949 A.D., and for the battle of Takkolam 
itself? Again, how can we account for the fact that, 
barring this single record from Siddhalingamadam, 
there is no other inscription df Kr§na dated before 
his sixteenth regnal year (956 A.D.) in the North 
and South Arcot districts? There is no alternative, 
in fact, to our rejecting this record as spurious 
at least in its date. It should be noticed that the 
Vyaghra-pade£vara temple from which the inscription 
comes was renovated in the reign of Kulottunga I 


. * 375 of 1909. 

f K. V. S. Aiyw, El. xii p. 123 ; xix pp. 82 ff. ARE, 1926 D 13. 

[158 1 



PARANTAKA I 


by one of bis officers, * and that it is quite probable 
that an error crept into the copy of this old inscription 
reproduced on the new walls more than a century after 
it was originally recorded, and this, I think, is the real 
explanation of the difficulty, f \ 


The Invasion. 


We may now turn to the actual course of events 

connected with the Rastrakuta invasion. 
It has been pointed out before that 
Parantaka was quite alive to the danger from the north- 
west frontier of his dominions, and that he took early 
steps to maintain a strong frontier force intended to 
resist, any hostile movements on the part of his enemies. 
It would seem that the arrangements made by Parantaka 
fulfilled their purpose for quite a number of years, and 
that in this period the Rastrakuta ruler suffered a 
defeat at the hands of Parantaka and his warlike son 
Rajaditya. But to a powerful ruler like Krsna whose 
dominion extended over the whole of Western Dekkan 
from the Central Provinces to Mysore, and who had 
the G angas and others in the south for his allies, such 
a defeat was only a spur to greater effort. This he 
made in 949 A.D., and the decisive engagement took 

place at Takkolam, six miles to the 
South-east of Arkonam in the North 
The Atakur inscription tells us that 
Kannaradeva ‘ was making a display of triumph after 
fighting against and killing the Muvadi-Cola-Rajaditya 
at a place called Takkola ' ; it also adds : ‘ when 


TakkSlam. 


Arcot district. X 


* See Rangacliari, p. 217 ; Studies pp. 178—9 ; 197, 

•f* It may also be noticed that while in some records Kannaradeva is given the 
title Kacciynm- T afijaiyu m-konja^ in others he is simply called by his name without 
any distinguishing title. But as the range of dates and the provenance of both 
sets of these records are identical, and as no palaeographical differences divide 
the two groups, they may both be treated as relating to Krsna III* 

t EL iv, p. 331 n, 3. 


[159 J 



THE COLAS 


Kannaradeva was fighting the Coja, Butuga made the 
liowdah the battle-field, and aimed at, pierced and 
killed Rajaditya ’ — an act for which Krana rewarded 
him by granting him the districts of Banavase 12,000, 
and Belvola 300.* The Cola version of what happened 
on the occasion is not different ; the Tirnvalangadu 
plates f say that Rajaditya went to heaven after 
conquering Krsnaraja; the larger Leyden gram is 
more explicit and records t 

The heroic Rajaditya, the ornament of the solar race, 
having shaken in battle the unshakable Krsnaraja with his 
forces, by means of his sharp arrows flying in all directions, was 
himself pierced in his heart while seated on the back of a large 
elephant by the sharp arrows of the enemy, and (thus) winning 
the praise of the three worlds, he ascended to the heaven of 
heroes in a tall vimana 

This clearly implies that there was much hard fighting, 
and that the Co] a army lost the battle mainly on 
account of a well-aimed arrow of Butuga having fatally 
wounded Rajaditya. 

• This important inscription has been edited twice by Fleet EL ii 

pp. 167 ff; vi pp. 50-7. The text lias : * MTivadi- Cola- Rajadity ana nffll {ba)ndu 
Takhola-dol kadi kondu bijayam-jeyyuttu ildti ' (1. 4) / and “ Kannaradevam 
CT>hanam kaduvandit Built gam Juijud it y a n am bisugeye kallan-agi guri (suri)~ 
giridu kUdi kondu Banavase Pannirccasiramttm etc." (11.20-1). 

On both occasions Fleet translated the second extract so as to imply treach- 
ery on the part of Butuga. And in discussing No. 181 of 1912, a most baseless 
conjecture was hazarded in APE, 1913, II, 17 that Caturanana Pan^ita betrayed 
his master and friend Rajaditya to his foes. But the phrase 4 bisugeye kallan-Ugi * 
must really be read : ‘ bisugeye kalanagi ’ ; the words ‘ btsuge ’ and ‘ halan ' mean 
respectively the howdah fastened to the hack of elephants for riding on, and field 
(of battle). Butuga made the howdah of Rajaditya 1 s elephant itself the battle- 
field. This interpretation is borne out by the Cola inscriptions. The larger 
Leyden grant says : “ RTijadtiyas-sa vno ravikulatilakah Kffnarajam sasainyam 
sainkfobhyakfobhyam-ajau * • naglndr a- skandha-vartti vtdalita-hrdayah * * 

vnaloka&-jag%fna” a clear statement which leaves not the slightest room for 
the suspicion of treachery on the part of Rajaditya’ s opponent. See JRAS . 1909, 
pp. 443-6. Other CSJa inscriptions from Kumbakonam and Tirun3gSs'varam 
mention the 4 king who died on the back of an elephant/ ARE. 1912, II, 14, 
Fleet's old mistake is repeated in the Kadamba-kula (Bombay, 1931) p. 86 

v, 54. 

} ASSL iv. pp. 206-7, 11. 42-45. 

[ 160 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


That even tills decisive battle was not followed 

by the total collapse of all resistance 
to Kr§na’s advance, and that he had 
some more years of rather hard fighting, may be 
inferred from ' the fact that inscriptions dated in liis 
reign do not begin to appear till his sixteenth year, 
966 A. D. or at the earliest 953 A. D. Inscriptions from 
South Arcot dated in &aka years 874-876 (A.D. 952- 
954) * recording gifts of minor chieftains but not 
acknowledging either Cola or Rastrakuta supremacy 
may be taken to support this inference. There is 
much uncertainty, however, about the exact course of 
the events that followed Takkolam. We have no 


Cola records from the districts of North Arcot, South 
Arcot and Chingleput for several years after the 
battle ; Krsna’s records with dates ranging from the 
sixteenth to the thirtieth years of his reign are found 
in the same area. By assuming the tittle ‘ Kacciytm- 
Tanjaiyum-konda' Krsna claimed to have captured 
Kaficlpuram and Tanjavur. The ‘spurious’ Sudi plates f 
state that Butuga, after conquering Rajaditya, assault- 
ed Tanjore, Nalkote and a number of other fortresses 
and handed over to Krsna elephants, horses and a vast 
amount of treasure captured from these places. The 
Karhad grant (959 A.D.), which shows Krsna still in his 
camp at Melpadi (N. Arcot) at the end of his southern 
campaigns, states that in the course of his digoijaya 
in the south, he uprooted the family of the Colas, 
distributed their territory among his followers, extorted 
tributes from several kings, including the king of Ceylon, 
and erected a pillar of victory in Ramesvaram + . 
We cannot say for certain if these are merely empty 


• 338, 356 of 1902 (TirunSmanairar). 

t El. Hi p. 179-80. Also the KudlBr plates ol Marasimha (A.D. 963) 11. 88 ff. 
MAR. 1921, pp. 11, 26. 

t El. iv. p. 280. 


21 


[ 161 ) 



THE COLAS 


boasts or the record of a triumphant raid across the 
Southern countries. No inscriptions of Krsna or his 
vassals are found south of the latitude of Pondicherry. * * * § 

But there can be no question that the 

Effects. . 

effect on the Coja empire was ruinous, 
and that as a consequence of the blow in the north, 
much of the south also slipped out of Parantaka's 
hands. The Cola empire was no more ; it had to be 
built up all over again. 


Only a few inscriptions from the neighbour- 
hood of Tanjore attest the closing years 
Close of Paran- 0 f p ar g n taka's reign, and they are 

taka s reign. ° J 

dated in the forty-fifth and forty -sixth 
regnal years of Parantaka who must have therefore 
lived up to 953 A.D. t He had many wives, of whom the 
names of no fewer than eleven occur in his inscriptions. 
Kokkilan J was the name of the mother of liajaditya, 
called also Kodandarama, the eldest son of Parantaka 
who died in the battle of Takkolam. Another queen 
of Parantaka, a Keraja princess, § the mother of Ariii- 
jaya, deserves special notice as her marriage, contracted 


* Al-Biruni seems to say that Tanjore was in ruins and that in consequence 
the Coja king built a new capital. Sewell, Antiquities ii p. 155. Is this a late 
reference to the effects of Kj-sna’s inroad, or merely the assignment of a wrong 
reason for the foundation of the new capital at Gangaikon<ja«$olapuram ? 

f Nos. 465 of 1918, 15 of 1895, and 135 of 1931. Krishna Sastri has said 
(5//. v, p. 226 n) that in 15 of 1895 the figure 6 is clear on the stone, and this 
must set at rest any lingering doubts on this question of fact. See also ASA 
1908-9, p. 122 n 1. The larger Leyden grant (v. 19) categorically asserts that 
Rajaditya began to rule after the death of Parantaka, and then proceeds to give 
an account of RHjaditya’s war with Kjsna. I am inclined to i accept the con- 
temporary stone records as more valid evidence than the statement in a copper- 
plate grant dated after more than half-a- century of the utmost confusion. 

X 335 of 1902. Gopinatlia Rao thinks that this queen and Parantaka are named 
among the donors in the Huzur Treasury Plates ofTiruvalla. {TAS< ii. 141). 
But this is doubtful. 

§ Anbil vv. 22 3. S/A ii p* 383 v. 8. 


[ 162 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


possibly in Aditya’s lifetime, not only gave proof of 
the friendly political relations that obtained between 
the Cola and Kerala rulers, but apparently furnished 
the occasion for a large influx of Malaiyalis into the 
Coja country in search of service under the king 
and his sons. Vejlangumaran, the Kera)a general of 
Rajaditya, who built a temple in Gramam was only the 
leading example * of a large class of less known immig- 
rants figuring as donors of small charitable gifts in the 
inscriptions of the period. Besides Rajlditya, Para$- 
taka had fopr qther aons : Gandaraditya, Arikulakesari, 
tJ ttamaslli and Arindigai or Arinjaya of the plates. 
One daughter of his, Vlramadevi, called also Govinda 
Vallavaraiyar is mentioned ; f and it is likely that 
another, Anupama, was married to the chieftain of 
Kodumbalur. That Parantaka was fond of many high- 
sounding titles X is clear from his inscriptions, amongst 
which the most noteworthy, in this as well as in other 
respects, are the celebrated records of the twelfth and 
fourteenth years of his reign dealing with the consti- 
tutional arrangements of the Sabha of Uttaramerur. § 
He performed several Kemagarbhas and tuldbharas, and 
gave brahmadeyas. The Tiruvalangadu plates describe 


# Iravi NTH, the daughter of the CSra King, Vijayaraga, is another. She gave 
ZQ-kala&ju of gold for a lamp in the Tiruvorriylir temple. (SII. iii No. 103). 

t Nos. 245-6 of 1921 (year 31). 

J T A. Gopinatha Rao (El. xv. p. 50), basing himself on 110 of 1895 suggests 
that Vikramaso]a Ilangovepr of that record must have been Parantaka. If that 
be so # — the name PaluvSHaraiyar favours the supposition,-— the record must be 
one of Xditya I, as Ilang5v?llir would not apply to Parantaka in the record of 
any other sovereign* Then the interval between this record mentioning the 
marriage of Parantaka and his death would be eighty years (34 plus 46) at least, 
which looks improbable. There were many PaluveHaraiyars, and Ijangovejar 
is not the same as J]ang5 # Perhaps Vikramasola IJangovSJar was only a minor 

chieftain of some feudatory family, 

8 See Studies pp. 163 ff. 

1 SII. il 383 v, 7. 


[ 163 ] 



THE COLAS 


Parantaka as the bee at the lotus feet of Siva (Puran- 
taka), and they and the Leyden grant concur in stating 
that he covered with gold the Siva temple of Oidam- 
baram. * In fact Parantaka’s reign was a great epoch 
in the history of South Indian temple architecture, and 
the work of temple-building begun by Aditya was 
continued vigorously during the best part of his reign. 
We have also much valuable and interesting evidence 
from the inscriptions on the details of administration, 
central and rural, on the state of religious faith and 
so on. These matters have been reserved for detailed 
study at a later stage. 


* See also Ganijaraditya's TiruviSaippd on KSyili TcnnanStjum hamttm- 
ktmfa tirar-ceng Zr-cWan kSH-ifbtdan Sembiyan ponnaninda • • * • 

Tdlaiyimbalaltu (v. 8). 


[164 ] 





I o fate, page 164. 











Chapter VIII 


FROM THE DEATH OF PARlNTAKA I (953 A.D.) 

TO THE 

ACCESSION OF RlJARlJA I (985 A.D.) 

I . — Chronology and order of succession. 

The relatively short interval of about thirty years 
from the death of Parantaka to the accession of Raja- 
raja I is one of the most difficult passages of Coja 
history. The evidence is confusing, and no two scholars 
are agreed in its proper interpretation. It is hardly 
possible to put forward a scheme of succession without 
a more or less full discussion of possible alternatives. 

We may begin by setting forth in some detail the 

nature of the evidence at hand. Stone 
inscriptions. inscriptions constitute the chief source 

of our knowledge, and there are several among these 
that unmistakably belong to this period. * The inscrip- 
tions of Kaunaradeva (Krsna III) bearing regnal years 
higher than twenty-three, and found in the districts 

• Three inscriptions, all of the ninth year of a Parantakadeva, pose one 
of the minor problems in Co[a epigraphy. No 16 of 1896 from Tiruvuiangiuju, 
North Arcot, calls the king Parakesari and Tribhuvana-Cakravartin. No. 261 
of 1923 from Koyil-TSvarayanpetfai, Tanjore Dt., does the same, and in addition 
gives a historical introduction beginning pU-mangai-valara . No. 225 of 1929 
from TiruvatJ.itlujai, S. Arcot, gives the same introduction, but calls the king 
RajakSsari and Cakravartin. If the records are genuine, they must be of 
the reign of either Parantaka I ParakEsari, or Parantaka II RajakEsari. But the 
absence of other CcSla prasastis before Rajaraja I, the title Tribhuvuna-cakravartin 
applied to the king in two of these records, and the fact that the third is 
found in a temple which has no other inscription of a period earlier than Hat o 
VirarSjSndra, render these records suspicious. They furnish no information of 
historical importance, See ARE . 1924, II 9 ; 1929, II 26, 

[ 165 ] 



THE COLAS 


Of Sundara. 


of North Arcot and Chingleput constitute the first 
group of these records ; the latest year in them is 
twenty-eight, and this would take us to A.D. 965. * 
Of the remaining stone inscriptions of the period, ten 

inscriptions belong to Maduraikonda 
0 R^akSsari'°'^ a Hajakesari and bear dates in regnal 

years ranging from five to seventeen. 
Four inscriptions belong to Sundara Cola with titles 

Madhurantaka and Pandiyanaic-curam- 
irakkina; two of these are dated in 
years five and seven, while the dates in the other two 

are lost. A considerable number with 
of vira-Fanijiyan- years ranging from two to five are 

Par»k?sarT those of Parakesari who had the title 

(Vlra) Pandiyan - talai - konda ; and a 
still larger number belong to a Parthivendra-varman 

with the same title and with other 
variants to his name like Vendradi- 
varman, Parthivendradhipati-varman and so on ; these 
records give dates up to the thirteenth regnal year, f 
Lastly, we have a number of Parakesari Uttama Coja’s 

inscriptions with regnal years from two 
to sixteen ; two of them are precisely 
dated and fix the limits of his reign. The title 
Parakesari, and the dates in his inscriptions + which 


Of FarthivSndra, 


Of Uttama CoJa. 


# Krishna Sastri {S/I. ii Introd. 12) says : “ Perhaps the years quoted in 
Kannara-Kjsna's Tamil inscriptions must be taken to count from 949 A.D/* 
On the same page he admits that Kjsna died in Saka 889 or 967 A D. He does 
not explain why, after this date, records should bear his name and his regnal 
years till about 977 A.D. Again, he admits that 949 A.D. was not the year of 
Riga's entry into Ton^aiman^alam but the following year ; why, then, should 
this year have been the starting point for the dates in his Tamil records } The 
highest regnal year in the Tamil inscriptions is not 30 as was believed till recently 
but only 28 (364 of 1902, 169 of 1921) ; the date in No. 232 of 1902 (KiJ[6r) 
is now read as 20, not (3)0 which was given in ARE . 1903. See S/I. vii 859. 

f See, however, p. 180 post on a record of year 15. 

% See S/I. ii i, 185, 138. 


[ 166 ] 



CHRONOLOGY 


couple Kali year 4083 (A.D. 981-2) with his regnal 
year thirteen, fix Uttama Cola's place as the immediate 
predecessor of Rajakesari Rajaraja I. It should also 


Of unidentified 
Faja-and 
Parakesaris. 


be observed that some of the numerous 
records which give no more detailed 
specification of the ruling sovereign 


than to call him Rajakesari or Parakesari will, no 


doubt, on any scheme of chronology, be found to fall 
in this period ; but these may, for the most part, be 
left on one side in the present discussion. 


Besides the stone inscriptions, we have the evid- 
ence of copper-plate grants. The only 

Copper- plates. . . ... . , . , . 

grant that tails in this period is that in 
the Anbil plates of the fourth year of Sundara Cola. 
Unfortunately for us, Madhava Bhatta, the composer 
of the Sanskrit pra&asti in these plates, was less anxious 
to record facts which must have been very well known 
to him than to display his capacity for alankaras in his 
verse. As it is, even for the fact that Sundara Cola was 
a Rajakesari we have to depend on the opening of the 
Tamil part of the record. The Tiruvalangadu plates 
imply, and the Leyden grant expressly affirms, that 
after the death of Rajaditya the succession took place 
in the following order : Gandaraditya, Arindama, 

Parantaka, Adilya and Madhurantaka. The Kanya- 
kumari inscription of Vlrarajendra which, though a 
stone inscription, resembles the copper-plates in the 
form of its lengthy preamble, gives only the names of 
Arindama and Parantaka II between Parantaka I and 


Rajaraja, apparently because the author of the prasasti 
had no other object in view than to trace the descent 
of the reigning king" in the direct line from Vijayalaya. 
The genealogy of the Colas from Parantaka I to 
Rajaraja as it is given in these records may be set 


[167 j 



THE COLAS 


down before proceeding further : 

Parantaka I 

By Kokkilan j By Kerala princess 

Rajaditya Gandaraditya Arinjaya m. 

KalyanI of the 
Vaidumba race 

Madhuriintaka 
Uttama (Parakesari) 

Sundara Parantaka 
(Rajakesari) 

Aditya II. Rajaraja I. 

One thing is clear and it is necessary to grasp 

this firmly; that we cannot treat the 
overlapping regnal years gathered from the stone 

reigns. " 

records as those of kings whose reigns 
succeeded one another in regular order in the manner 
implied by the copper-plate grants. For in that case 
the period would, if we omit Parthiveudra - varman 
from the reckoning and add the highest regnal years 
known of Maduraikonda Rajakesari, Sundara, Aditya 
and Uttama, extend to 45 years, a period much too long 

for the interval between Parantaka I 
G “^ a ™ lltya s and Rajaraja. Then there is the possi- 
bility that Gandaraditya and Arinjaya 
also ruled as kings. A Rajakesari inscription possibly 
of Rajaraja Ps reign * mentions the second year 
of Gandaradityadeva alias Mnmmudicola-deva, while 
taking stock of the gifts made by his queen ©erabiyan 
Mahadevi at various times to the temple of Tirnven- 
kadu. Records of the eighth y ear of Rajakesari f show 
that Arikulakesari, the son of Parantaka, stood in the 

* 44 of 1918 under year 6 of Rajaraja I. 

f SII. iii, 111 and 112. 


f 168 ] 


CHRONOLOGY 


relation of Pillaiyar or Alvar, * (terms often applied 
to junior members of the royal family), to the ruling 
king who, being a Rajakesari, could only have been 
Gandaraditya. 

As for AriTijaya, besides the statements in the cop- 
per-plates regarding his rule, there is a 
Aniija) a. Rajakesari record dated in the twelfth 

year f which mentions two queens of ‘ Arifijigaivarman 
who died at Arriir ’ ; and inscriptions from Melpadi 
dated late in the reign of Rajaraja IJ mention, the 
construction by him of the Cojesvara temple as a 
memorial shrine ( pallippadai ) to Arrurttunjina-deva. 
These references render it probable that Arifijaya lived 
long enough to rule in his own right, though, perhaps, 
only for a short time. Taking all these facts into 
consideration, we see clearly that there must have 
been a great deal of overlapping of the regnal years of 
the different kings quoted in the litliic records. 


Another preliminary question that must be con- 
sidered is the exact significance of the 
phrase ‘ talai-koada ’ which is of some 
importance to the history of this 


Meaning of 
talai-konda. 


* Krishna Sastri remarks : " The epithet Xlvar is taken to be one of 

respect. It may also indicate that he was dead at the time,’ and then proceeds, 
« if Arikulakesari, Arikesari, Arifijaya or Arindama died before the 8th year of 
Gandaraditya as inferred already, the next king must have been a son of Arikula- 
k£sari who, as the Anbil plates say, was Prince Sundara Cola born of a Vaidumba 
princess.’' ( S/l iii, Introd. p. 14). But though Arikulakesari may be identified 
with Arifijaya, there is nothing to show that he predeceased Gandaraditya.^ \\ e 
know that, in many records of Rajaraja 1, his elder sister Kundavai is called Alvar 
during her life-time. Further, seeing that Gandaraditya and Sundara Cola who 
succeeded him were both RajakSsaris, Krishna Sastri suggests {ibid n. 2) tlvat the 
intervening ParakSsari must be identified with the infant son of Ganda-aditya 
who, though chosen for succession, ‘ may have been too young at the time 
to succeed his father,' Ingenious, but not likely. See also El. xv, p. 53 
where Gopinatha Rao adopts the same arrangement, cutting out Arifijaya and 
making GatfaiMtya a ParakSsari who followed his elder brother KSjSdityt 

Rajakesari. 

t 587 of 1920 (under Sundara), 

} 83, 84, 86 of 1889 (5//. iii 15-17). 


[169] 


22 



THE COLAS 


period ; because Vira Pandya claims to have done this 
to a Coja king and others claim to have done the 
same thing to Vira Pandya himself. The phrase has 
been generally understood to mean * having cut off 
the head and the identity of the Cola king who died at 
the hands of the Pandya has been much discussed.* It 
appears, however, that the true meaning of the phrase is 
that the vanquished king had to acknowledge his defeat 
by humbling himself before the conqueror in a particular 
manner, as it were placing his head at the disposal of 
the conqueror. Hnltzsch has pointed out f that in the 
inscriptions of Kulottunga III, the phrase ‘ Pandiyanai 
mudittalai kondaruliya’ employed in some records is 
explained by another phrase : ‘ a van mudi mil adi 
vaittn ' of other inscriptions of the same reign ; so that 
the process of * taking the head ’ consisted in the 
vanquished king bowing and touching with his head 
the feet of the conqueror seated in open darbar. The 
celebrated Krsna Deva Raya of Vijayanagar only 
varied this traditional procedure slightly when he 
demanded that, as the price of peace, Adil Shah of 
Bijapur should visit him and kiss his foot. £ The 
Gurupa ra mpa rai, a work which often gives a true 
account of the practices of Coja times, mentions that 
the king from Gangaikonda-solapurain mounted his state 
elephant by placing his foot on the head of his samanla , 
or feudatory. § The above interpretation of talai-konda 
has a bearing on the discussion of the chronology of 
this period, because it follows that a king whose ' head 
was taken' by another need not be assumed to have 
died at the time this happened to him. It is, of course, 

• Gopinatha Rao thinks it was Sundara Coja RI. xv p. 54; others say 
Gan^aradilya, QJMS. xvii p. 195. See also ARE % 1921, 11 61. 

f SII. iii p. 215 n. 4. 

X Sewell : Forgotten Empire p. 145. 

§ Guruparamparai pp. 105-6, (ed, S. Krisbnamachari, 1927). 


[ 170 ] 



CHRONOLOGY 


another matter where we have clear statements of a 
person being killed. Applying this to the cases arising 
in this period, we see that the Tiruvalangadu plateB 
make an express declaration that Aditya II killed Vira 
Pandya in battle and brought his severed head to 
the Cola capital. * Even here the lateness of the 
testimony throws suspicion on the event. There is 
no clear evidence, however, that a Coja sovereign lost 
his life at the hands of Vira Pandya, and apparently 
VTra Pandya's boastful title meant no more than 
that he indicted a temporary humiliation on a Cola 
king or prince. 


Identification of 
Maduraikontja 
Rajakesari. 


Evidence has been cited above showing that 

Gandaraditya was a Rajakesari and 
that he ruled for at least eight years. 
His rule might have commenced from 
the death of Rajaditya, whose place he 
must have taken as heir apparent in Parantaka's life- 
time. A suggestion has sometimes been made that 
Gandaraditya was a Parakesari and that Arindama, 
placed immediately after him by the Tiruvalangadu 
plates, was identical with Maduraikonda Rajakesari. f 
This seems to rest really on two assumptions ; that 
Rajaditya ruled after Parantaka’s death, and that as he 
was a Rajakesari, Gandaraditya who succeeded him 
must have been a Parakesari. But it has been shown 
that the first of these assumptions is not true. It is 
likely enough that Rajaditya assumed the title Raja- 
kesari when he was made heir apparent ; but consider- 
ing that he predeceased his father, Gandaraditya who 
took his place must have assumed the same title so 
that the sovereign ruler next after Parantaka Parakesari 

o 

• w. 67 and 68. Contra Kielhorn, List p. 115 n. 2 written before the 
TiruvSlangatju plates were discovered. 

f ARE. 1904 II, 20 ; 1909 II, 39. 


1171 ] 



THE COLAS 


might be a Rajakesari. In fact the general opinion now 
prevailing is that Gandaraditya was a Rajakesari, * 
though the implication that Riijaditya predeceased his 
father does not seem to have been so clearly grasped. 
For we shall see at a later stage of this discussion that 
an application of the rule that every heir apparent, 
whether one or more, adopted the title Rajakesari or 
Parakesari, according as the ruling sovereign was 
Parakesari or Rajakesari, furnishes a neat solution of 
the difficulties that could not otherwise be adequately 
met. 

• The Rajakesari title may, therefore, be admitted 
for Gandaraditya. But the suggestion, first made by 
Venkayya, f that Gandaraditya was no other than 
Madnraikonda Rajakesari, appears to have been accept- 
ed without sufficient examination of the evidence. % 
The title Maduraikonda was taken to imply that the 
king was the son of Madnraikonda Parakesari, Paran- 
taka I. Hence when Gandaraditya was believed to be a 
Parakesari, Maduraikonda was identified with Arinjaya 
Rajakesari. Later when Gandaraditya became a 
Rajakesari himself, he was said to be also Maduraikonda 
Rajakesari. But this assumption is by no means an 

• SU. iii Introd. p.14; and AS I. 1908 9 p. 122 ; also ARE. 1912 H 17, 
more baiting in its tone. 

t ASI ; 1908-9 p. 122. 

J As a matter of fact, the discussion of the subject in ARE, 1912, II 17 with 
reference to No. 306 of 1911 (year 7) is very cautious. It is said that the title 
Maduraikonda implies that the king was a son of Purantaka. On the other hand 
it is admitted that G. is nowhere ‘clearly stated' to have been a Rajakesari, 
and that it is difficult to see how the seventeen years of this king can he 
treated as the period of the rule of Gandaraditya when there are only twenty 
years for three reigns—'Gandaraditya, Sundara Coja Parantaka II and Xditya H 
Karikala. The conclusion is : " In any case we may for the present provisionally 
presume that Maduraikonda Rajakesari is identical with Gandaraditya," It is on 
the basis of this provisional conclusion that Krishna Sastri arranges the inscrip* 
tions in Sll \ iii, part 3. See p. 250 No. 114, introduction and note 4. 

% ARE, 1909 II 39. 


[ 172 ] 



CHRONOLOGY 


argument, and one must be prepared to relinquish it 
if reason is shown for doing so. Now, let us turn to 
the provenance of the records of Maduraikonda Raja- 
kesari. All of them, except three records of the 
fourteenth and seventeenth years, come from the North 
Arcot and Chingleput districts. Three of these are 
dated in his fifth year, and a fourth in the seventh. 
One of the records of the fifth year belongs to a place 
called Karikkal, near Shoiingur, in the Walajapet 
Taluq of North Arcot. Its date falls about 954 A. I). 
At the latest, that is, assuming that Parantaka I died 
in 953 A. D. and that Gandaraditya did not begin his 
rule till after that event, it might be 958. A. D. It is 
difficult to see how this can be reconciled with the fact 
that Krsna III was still at Melpadi in 959 A.D. distribut- 
ing conquered territory among his followers, and that 
his inscriptions are found in Tondai-mandalam up 
to about 9G5. A. D. These objections to identifying 
Gandaraditya with Maduraikonda Rajakesari are 
weighty, and should prevail even if no other identifica- 
tion were possible from the later inscriptions of the 
time. But fortunately there is open to us an easy, 
and doubtless the correct, solution of the question 
which would be readily accepted, once the idea is 
given up that Maduraikonda must have been a son of 
another Maduraikoiida, that is, Parantaka I. A single 
record from Kodumbalur, * from which the date has 
been lost, opens by mentioning ‘ udaiyar madurdntakan 
Sundara - Solan.’ This unique record disposes of the 
notion that the title Madurantaka (Madiraikonda) in the 
records of this period must have been borne only by a 
son of Parantaka I, for we know of no Sundara-solan 
who was his son. This inscription offers the clue to the 
correct identity of Maduraikonda Rajakesari. Sundaia 

• 139 of 1907; Pd. 82. 


[ 173 ] 



THE COLASf 


Cola, the son of Arifijaya, was a Rajakesari, as the 
Anbil plates tell us, and he had also the title * Maduran- 
talcan .’ He has yet another title which gives evidence 
of his Pandyan war, namely, Pdndiyanaic - curam - 
irakkina. * These facts seem to point definitely to the 
conclusion that Sundara Cola Parantaka II was the 
king who, in some of his records, is called Madi(n)- 
raikonda Rajakesari. 


There is one record of Madiraikonda Rajakesari 

which, at first sight, seems to render it 

to^uttaimf csia more likely that Gandaraditya rather 

than Sundara Cola was the king of 
that record. This inscription f from Tiruvorriyur is 
dated in the fifth year and registers the endowment 
of a lamp by one of the nobles of Udaiyar Sri Uttama 
Cola - deva who accompanied him to the temple. 
Krishna Sastri, in editing this record, says : “ A 

reasonable doubt may arise why Uttama Coja is given 
here the title of a ruling king and not that of a prince. 
It was perhaps because he was the chosen successor of 
Gandaraditya at the time. We know, however, that he 
actually came to the Cola throne only after one or 
two other kings had reigned subsequent to his father’s 
death." But if this was so, if Uttama Cola was in 

9 I 

the fifth year of his father’s reign old enough to be 
chosen heii apparent, to adopt regal style and to visit 
temples with his ( perundaram ) nobles, and if his father 
continued to rule for twelve years thereafter, it is hard 
to see why he did not succeed his father immediately 
on his death and had to wait until most probably 
Arifijaya and Sundara, possibly also Aditya II, had 
finished their rule. Not only does Krishna Sastri not 


* 291 of 1908. El. xii pp. 121-6. 
t SI/, iii 115 0346 of 1912). 


[ 174 ] 



CHRONOLOGY 


explain this, but he says elsewhere : * “ At the time 
of Gandaraditya’s death, Uttama Cola must have 
been a young boy, as he was set aside in the order of 
succession till three kings after Gandaraditya had 
ruled and died.” Surely it is not easy to reconcile the 
two positions that the king of the Tiruvorriyur record 
was Gandaraditya, and that at his death, his son was 
a young boy, so young that he had to wait through 
the reigns of three of his successors before he could 
himself rule. There is a more serious discrepancy. 
Even assuming that Gandaraditya counted his regnal 
years from the death of Rajaditya (949 A. D.) ( if we 
identify him with Maduraikonda Rajakesari, who ruled 
for at least seventeen years, his reign would extend 
up to 966 A. D. And Madhurantaka Uttama Coja 
began to rule in 969-70. A.D. The interval of three 
years is too short to take in the reign of even Sundara 
Cola whose records unmistakably give him a rule of 
not less than seven yeax-s f, much less those of three 
kings. The Tiruvorriyur record cited at the beginning 
of this paragraph cannot, therefore, be assigned to 
Gandaraditya. It mxxst be admitted, however, that 
even if we take it to be a record of Sundara Cola, the 
difficulty still remains of explaining the regal title of 
Uttama Cola in it. Seeing that Sundara had a son 
Aditya who was ably assisting him in his warlike 
entex-prises, it seems unlikely that he recognised, and 
that so early ixx his reigix, a prince from a collateral, 
although senior, bi’anch of his family as heir apparent. 
The only suggestion that offers itself, and for which 
support may be found ixx analogous cases from Coja 
records, is that though the gift recorded in the inscrip- 
tion was made in the fifth year of Sundara Cola when 

• SII. iii, Introd. p. 14. 

t 291 of 1908. 


[ 176 ] 



THE COLAS 


Uttama might have been old enough to have a retinue 
of his own with which he went about touring the 
country, it was not actually engraved on stone until 
Uttama C5la had begun to reign in his own right, 
which he did, as we shall see, immediately after 
Sundara Cola. * 


Two Parakcsaris 
in succession. 


There remain two further questions to be dis- 
cussed — the position of Vira - Pandiyan - talai - konda 
Parakesari and the identity of Parthivendravarman 
who bears the same title. The former may certainly 
be identified with Aditya, the son of Sundara Cola, who 

according to the Tiruvalangadu plates 
and the Leyden grant fought against 
Vira Paiidya. f But Aditya II was 
followed by another Parakesari, viz., Madhurantaka 
Uttama Cola. This appears, at first sight, to violate the 
normal rule of the Rajakesari alternating with the 
Parakesari title among the ruling sovereigns of the 
Col.a dynasty. Krishna Sastri says of Uttama Coja: J 
“ Contrary to the usual order, according to which he 
ought to have been a Rajakesarivarman, his predecessor 
Aditya II being Parakesarivarman, he too was called 
a Parakesarivarman, evidently because he was the son 
of a Rajakesarivarman and succeeded to the throne not 
by the right he possessed, but at the request of his 
cousin's son Rajaraja I who was the chosen successor.” 
Two remarks may be made on this explanation : first, 


* One writer ( QJMS . xvii, p. 197) claims that * after a close and patient 
study of many inscriptions published, unpublished and not yet copied by 
the Epigrapbical department/ he has come to the conclusion that all RSja 
Rajak&ari records (with one Rsija) must be assigned to Gai^arSditya, as 
RSjarSja to whom such inscriptions are assigned really called himself Ko RSjarSja 
Rajakfsari, (with two Raja-s). No. 176 of 1906 is a record in the seventh 
year of R8ja RajakSsari and mentions the fifteenth year of Uttama Co|a ; see also 
298 of 1908. 

t w. 67 8 and 28 respectively. 

% S/l iii. Introd. p. 16. 


[ 176 ] 



CHRONOLOGY 


it seems hardly consistent with the position held by 
Krishna Sastri, not by ns, that Uttama Cola was chosen 
successor in Gandaraditya’s reign, and that on account 
of his tender age, “ the claims of Gandar adity a’ s chosen 
successor were temporarily set aside and postponed.” * 
For, if this was so, how can it be said that he suc- 
ceeded to the throne not in his own right, but at 
the request of Rajaraja ? Then again the implication 
that the son of a Rajakesari must be a Parakesari is 
contradicted by the example of Rajaraja I, who was 
a Rajakesari himself and the son of a Rajakesari. 
It may also be stated here that Arihjaya, who must 
have ruled a short while as Parakesari, was also the 
son of a Parakesari. The true explanation of two 
Parakesaris coming one after another seems to be 
that the earlier Parakesari, the chosen heir apparent, 
Aditya II, died in the life-time of his father Sundara 
Cola, and the prince chosen next for the throne also 
took the title of Parakesari in order that Rajakesaii 
Sundara might be followed on the throne by a 
Parakesari after his death. At the death of Adity a II, f 
Sundara Cola had to choose Uttama Coja and not his 
younger son Rajaraja, either because Uttama Coja 
forced the choice by threatening civil war, or because 
Rajaraja of his own will preferred to wait. The verses 
in the Tirnvalangadu plates, which are the only direct 
source of our information, can support either inter- 
pretation. They declare on the one hand that Uttama 
Cola was eager to rule and on the other that Rajariija 
was too good a ksatriya to dream of the throne for 
himself while his father’s cousin wanted it. And we 
shall see that Uttama Coja made clear his eagerness to 
rule by, possibly, instigating a political murder. 

* See ibid pp. 14 n* 2 ; 16, n. 1* 

t For a possible son of Xditya. K»rik31a-k»nnan by name, whose existence 
may be inferred from the inscriptions of Rajaraja, see 5//. ii, p. *60 a " "• • 

c 177 3 



THE COLAS 


Parthivendra- 

varnian. 


The identity of Parthivendravarman, whose re- 
cords, are found in the districts of 
North and South Arcot, and Chingle- 
put, is involved in much obscurity. The 
suggestion * that he was the same as Prthivlpati II, 
the Ganga feudatory of Parantaka, is the result of a 
very dubious inference from the resemblance in mean- 
ing between the names Prthivlpati and Parthivendra. 
It is also partly the result of a confusion between the 
Ganga king and a feudatory of Krsna III who, though 
he had the name Kannaradeva-Prthivigangariyar, was 
quite different from the Ganga. f After examining 
the records of Aditya II and Parthivendravarman, 
Krishna Sastri has reached the following conclusion : J 
“ Both these kings claim the epithet, ‘ who took the 
head of Pilndya or Vlra-Pilndya ’ — evidently the same 
Pandya king who was at war with Sundara Cuja 
Parantaka II — and the title Parakesarivarman. Inscrip- 
tions of the former are very few and found only in the 
south, the latest regnal year being the 5th. Of the 
latter, there are many in Tondai-mandalam and the 
latest regnal year is the 13th. Parthivendra Aditya- 
varrnan may have been a prince of the royal family 
and viceroy of Tondai-mandalam. Aditya Karikiila 
appears to have been the actual successor.' 1 The 
inscriptions of Pandiyan-talai-konda Parakesari are not 
so very few after all; and what is more important, 
they are not confined to ‘the south,' if by that is 
meant the country to the south of and outside Tondai- 
mandalam. There are five inscriptions of his in 
North Arcot and more in South Arcot. On exami- 
nation we find that the Parthivendravarman records 


• ARE. 1921 n 61. 

t El. vii p. 195. Con. El. iv p. 223 followed by Rangacluri in N.A. 586. 
% SIT. iil (Intr.) p. 15. 


[ 178 ] 



CHRONOLOGY 


differ from those of Xditya Parakesari in their pro- 
venance only in so far as the former are found in 
Chingleput district also, and are not found south of 
Tond ai-m andalam . We also find the following features 
which have a cumulative significance in the considera- 
tion of his identity. He is a Parakesari ; * he has the 
regal title and calls himself ‘ Kovirajamarayar ' ; f in 
an early record of the third year he is even called 
Parthivendra Xdittaparumar ; J his queens have also 
the full regal style, — udaiyar deviydr Villavan mafia- 
deviyar ; § Perumanadigal deoiydri-tanmappomar-dgiya 
Trailokya mahadeviyar . ^ It seems clear that, far from 
being a feudatory of the Cola king, the ruler who can 
lay claim to so much distinction must himself be a 

Co}a monarch, and the name Xditya 


Perhaps iden- 
tical with 
Xditya II. 


and the title Parakesari clearly suggest 
his identity with Xditya Karikala Para- 
kesari. ‘ Parthivendra Xdityavarman ’ 


and its variant forms occurring in his records show that 


he took the title ‘ Parthivendra.’ 


The Cola kings were 

• o 


very fond of high-sounding birudas , and almost every 
one of them had many such titles. As the latest recor- 
ded regnal year in his inscriptions seems to be the 
thirteenth year, It it follows that he must have been 
chosen co-regent within the first few years after his 
father Sundara Cola’s accession. This looks very 
probable considering that the Leyden grant gives him 
credit for having successfully attacked Vlra Pandya as 
a young boy. Afterwards he must have been deputed 
to rule the northern part of the Co}a dominion. Appa- 
rently he died in the life-time of his father and was 


• SII. iii 180. f SII. iii 186. 

§ SII, iii 193. H 17 of 1921> 

| See, however, fo*t pp- 180-1. 

[ 179 ] 


X SII. iii, 158. 



THE COLAS 

* 

succeeded in the place of heir apparent by Parakesari 
Uttama Cola. 

The results of the foregoing discussion may thus 

be summarised before the history of the period is 
taken up : 

Rajakesari Gandariiditya A.D. 949 - 957 

Parakesari Arifijaya c. A.D. 956 - 957 

Rajakesari Sundara Coja 

(Madurai-konda) c. A.D. 956 - 973 

[Parakesari Aditya II 

Parthivendra Karikiila c. A.D 956 - 969] 


There is just one record * of Parthivendravarman 

from the Chinglepnt district which is 
TI Record dUr dated in the fifteenth year. Though 

the inscription is damaged, a careful 
examination of the impression of the record establishes 
two things : the date of the record is clearly 15 ; and 
though the chiselling of the letters is by no means good, 
and the stone is apparently much decayed, there is no 
reason to question the genuineness of the record which 
exhibits most of the characteristic palaeographic features 
of the period. This date must, if accepted, upset the 
scheme of chronology given above which is based on 
the identification of Aditya II with Parthivendra, for 
we cannot possibly find room for the fifteen years before 
the accession of Uttama Coja and within the reign of 
Sundara. The period of thirteen years takes us almost 
to the limit and involves the assumption, in itself by no 
means unlikely, that Sundara associated his son Aditya 
in his administration very soon after his accession to 
the throne. On the other hand, this inscription of the 
fifteenth year from Parandur is the only record so far 

* 75 of 1923. Nos. 62, 63 of 1889 CSV/, iv, 291 2) are late copies and they 
are most probably Parakesari records* 


[ 180 ] 



CHRONOLOGY 


known of Parthivendravarman with a regnal year 
higher than thirteen. We have several records of the 
thirteenth year, none whatever of the fourteenth, and 
only this one of the fifteenth. And it is extremely 
difficult to see any other solution to the riddle presented 
by his records than the one offered above ; for if 
Parthivendra was not Aditya himself, how are we to 
explain the numerous coincidences to which attention 
has been drawn above, and which cannot all of them 
be accidental ? The suggestion may therefore be made 
that in the regnal year in the Parandiir record, the 
second figure which looks like the ordinary i ( $)) con- 
tains some mistake on the part of the engraver. This 
record need not be taken into account, therefore, unless 
other records with higher regnal years than 13 are 
discovered in future years. 

One final consideration remains to be urged in 
addition to those so far dealt with. If Aditya and 
Parthivendravarman were not identical, the highest 
regnal year for Aditya would be that found in the 
records of Parakesari who took the head of Vlra 
Piindya, namely five. We must naturally assume these 
five years to have been those immediately preceding 
Uttama Cola’s accession in A.D. 969-70; this would 
lead to Aditya's initial year falling somewhere about 
A.D. 964/5, which would be in the 8th or 9th year of 
Sundara Cola according to the chronology suggested 
above. The fact that Sundara Cola is clearly des- 
cribed as having come out successful in the Pandyan 
war before his seventh year (A.D. 963), together with 
the statement of the Leyden grant that Aditya took 
part in the fight at Sevur when still young, may lend 
some support to the view that Aditya had become sub- 
king earlier in Sundara’s reign. This argument cannot 

1181] 



THE COLAS 


be pressed far, as it is possible that Aditya fought 
without being formally associated in the government; 
or a second fight with the Pandyas might have come 
about later, about the year A.D. 964/5. 


II. History. 


The rule of Riijakesari Gandaraditya is attested not 

only by the statements of the Tiruvalan- 
y gadn and the Leyden grants which, 
though vague, doubtless imply that he ruled in his own 
right as king, but by three Rajakesari inscriptions * 
from the Trichinopoly district, all dated in the eighth 
year and mentioning Pijjaiyar or Alvar Arikulakesari- 
deva. The sphere of Coja rule in his day must have 
been very limited and at the time of his death, about 
A.D. 957, f Krsna III was still perhaps in Tondai- 
mandalam consolidating his position and distributing 
the conquered country among his allies and servants. 
Gandaraditya left behind an infant son, Uttama Co}a, 
by his queen Sembiyan Mahadevi. This lady who 

survived her husband and even her 
1 son for many years, and lived on till 

1001 A.D. +, must have been widowed in early youth. 


After the death of her husband, hers was a life devoted 


to religion and charity. The number of stone temples 
to oiva built by. her, and of substantial endowments for 
their up-keep after the commencement of her son’s rule 


His Tiruvisaippa. 


will be noticed later. Very probably 
Gandaraditya was the author of the 


single hymn on the temple of Cidambaram. In this 
hymn there is a distinct statement that Parantaka I 


« 176 of 1907 ; 570, 574 of 1908, (S/I. iii 111, 112.) 

f Krishna Sastri assigns 287 of 1911 (SI/, iii 113) to G. I rather think 
it is a record of Sundara C5Ja, See post, p. 187 n. % 

X 200 of 1904. 


[ 182 ] 



ARINJAYA 


conquered the Paiidya country and Ilam, and covered 
the temple of Nataraja with gold ; and the author calls 
himself, like Parantaka, the king of Koli (Uraiyur) 
and the lord of the Tafijaiyar (people of Tanjore). * 
Gandaraditya seems to have been known also as 
Merkelundarulina-devar, the king who went to the west, t 

The identity in meaning of the titles Arikulakesari 

and Arinjaya or Arindama has often 

Arifijaya. . . 

led to the supposition that they refer 
to one and the same person, a younger son of Paran- 
taka I. This may be so. In any event, Arinjaya 
Parakesari succeeded his brother Gandaraditya and had 
a short reign. As yet we have no direct evidence of the 
transactions of his reign. Two of his queens Viman 
Kundavaiyar and Kodai-pirattiyar survived him and 
made gifts in his son’s reign. Though it has been 
thought that Viman Kundavai was a daughter of the 
Calnkya Bhlma II of VengT, X such an alliance between 
the Cojas and the Calukyas in this period when the Cojas 

were reduced to virtual subordination to the Rastrakutas 

• • • 

seems hardly likely. If, however, Kundavai was an 
Eastern Cajukya princess, her marriage with Arinjaya 
must have taken place before the invasion of the Coja 
country by Krsna and sometime after the raid on 
Nellore by Maran Paramesvaran, in the reign of Paran- 
taka I. But two inscriptions § from Tiruppalanam, 
dated in the second year of Parakesari, mention an 
Araiyan Adittan Viman making some gifts to the local 

* These features of the hymn render it more likely that its author was tiiis 
king rather than the official of Rajariija, Madhurantakan Gan^aradittar, who is 
found employed in enquiring into the affairs of temples and whose name seems 
to imply that he was the son of Madhurantaka Uttama Coja. Contra Venkayya 
AST. 1905-6 p. 173, n. 5. 

f 540 of 1920. 

t 587 of 1920. ARE. 1921, II 26. 

§ 162, 172 of 1928. 


[ 183 ] 



THE COLAS 


temple, and there is nothing to preclude this noble 
(Araiyan) from being the father of Arinjaya's queen. * 
If this view is correct, these Parakesari records must 
be assigned to Arinjaya, and in view of the strict limits 
placed on the duration of Ariiijaya’s rule by the 
general chronology of the period we must assume, 
what is not unlikely, that Arifijaya was chosen heir 
apparent to Gandaraditya f sometime soon after the 
death of Parantaka I. Arinjaya is said to have died 
at Arrur, J a place that cannot be definitely identified. 
An inscription of Rajaraja I states that he built at 
Melpadi a memorial shrine (pallipadai ) § to the king 
who died at Arrfir and this implies that Arrur was 
somewhere in that neighbourhood. Probably, Arifijaya 
had entered upon the task of regaining the Cola posses- 
sions in the north lost to Krsna III. This suggestion 
gains force from an inscription from Tirunagesvaram 
which mentions Arinjigap-pirattiyar, daughter of prince 
Arikulakesari and wife of a Baria king. 


Revival of 
Co\a power. 


This is a record of the second or third year of a 

Rajakesarivarman who may be identi- 
fied with Gandaraditya. It suggests 
that even under Gandaraditya attempts 
were made to retrieve the losses sustained in the closing 
years of his father’s rule, and that, possibly, the Banas, 
or some among them, were successfully seduced from 
their allegiance to Krsna III. This Bana alliance may 
thus be counted among the earliest indications of the 
emergence of Cola power from the eclipse it suffered 


• See ARE. 1928 U 3. 

t This, if correct, would be an additional objection to Krishna Sastri’e 
reconstruction of the order of succession. 

% 587 of 1920. § SII. in 17. 

^ 215 of 1911 ; the date given as [93 is not clear in the original, but it 
cannot be 9. ARE. 1912 II 16. 


[ 184 ] 



SUNDARA COLA 


for a time. After the death of Gandaraditya, his 
elforts were continued by Ariiijaya who fell fighting at 
Arriir. If this view of Gandaraditya’s reign is correct, 
it is possible that he also sought, at first with little 
success, to recover lost ground in the south, and that 
YTra Piindya’ s boast of ‘ taking the head ’ of a Cola may 
be referred to the same reijjn. 

Arinjaya was succeeded by his son by the Vaidumba 

princess Kalyani, the only queen of 

Sundara Coja , , _ J x 

Arifyaya mentioned by the Anbil 
plates. This son was Sundara Ci>]a Pariintaka II who, 
as we have seen, was also known as Maduraikonda- 
liajakesari. The attention of Sundara Cola was first 
directed to the south. Yira Piindya, having repidsed 
Gandaraditya’s attempt to restore Cola supremacy in 
the Paudya country, was ruling as an independent 
potentate. The Leyden grant * tells us that in a great 

battle at Cevur, Pariintaka caused 

Cevur _ 

rivers of blood to flow from the deep 
cuts inflicted by him on the elephants of the enemy 
and that his son Aditya, while yet a boy, played with 
Vlra Paudya in the battle, like a lion’s whelp sporting 
with a tusker. Aditya’s heroism was probably exhibited 
in the field of Cevur, and that battle must have fur- 
nished the occasion for his claim that he ‘ took the head 
of Yira Piindya The Leyden grant does not, like the 
Tiruviilangiidu plates, state that Yira Piindya was 

killed by Aditya, and it is possible that 
i .iikJ) the composer of the Tiruviilangiidu 

plates, struck by the forcible simile in the Leyden 
grant, embellished the account of Aditya’s contest 
with Vlra Piindya ; and his account of Aditya’s rule 
adds nothing else to what we learn from the earlier 
grant. The chances are that, after the battle of Cevur 

• vv. 25, 28. 

I 185] 

24 



THE COLAS 


in which Vlra Pandya sustained a bad defeat, the Cota 
forces led, among others, by Parantakan Siriyave]ar of 
Kodumbalur, continued the campaign into the Pandya 
country, and forced VTra Pandya to seek refuge in the 
forests. * The Pandya sovereign was on this occasion 
also supported by Ceylonese troops in his endeavour to 

resist the Cola aggression ; for Siriya- 
vejar led an expedition to Ceylon, and 
there he fell fighting in the third year 
of Sundara Cola, about 959 A.D. f The Mahuvanm, 
corroborating this account, records the following in 
the reign of Mahinda IV (956-72 A. D.) : + 


Extended to 
Ceylon. 


“ The Vallabha king sent a force to Nagadipa § to subdue 
this our country. The Ruler hearing this, the king sent thither 
the senapati Sena by name, to whom he had made over an army* 
to fight with the troops of the Vallabha king. The senapati 
betook himself thither, fought with the troops of this (Vallabha) 
king, defeated them and remained master of the battle-field. As 
the kings with the Vallabha (king) at their head, were unable to 
vanquish our king, they made a friendly treaty with the ruler 
of Lanka. In this way the fame of the king penetrated to 
Jambudipa, spreading over Lanka and crossing the ocean.” 


The Vessagiri slab inscription ^ff of Mihindu 
which mentions the successful campaign of senapati 
Sena against the Damihis furnishes epigraphical 
confirmation of the statements in the chronicle and the 
Coja inscriptions . II 

* 302 of 1908. KanyUkumari inscription v. 63. 

t 116 of 1896, SIR v. 980 (Vr. 27 of Rajaraja 1>. 

J Ch. 54 vv 12*16. 

§ The N. \V. part of Ceylon (Geiger). The Vallabha has sometimes been 
identified with the Rasjrakuta Krsna ill (Codrington Ceylon Coins p. 50). Iiut the 
Colas were called ‘Varava’ and the Vessagiri inscription implies tiiat the 
invaders were Tamils. See Codrington’s Short History of Ceylon pp. 39 and 53. 

H RZ. i. pp. 29 ff. 

|| Some statements in Chapter VIII of on the chronology and the course 
of the Cola conquest, are seen to need considerable modification. To one point 


[186 1 



SUNDARA COLA 


Allies of the 
Cojas 


Besides Aditya II, two other persons claim success 

against Vlra Pandya. One of these is 
Parti live ndra-var man of whom some- 
thing has been said alreafly. The 
other is Bhuti - vikramakesari of Kodumbalur, who 
claims to have conquered Vlra Pandya in battle. The 
inscription * which gives this information, also states 
that Vikramakesari turned the waters of the Kaveri red 

with the blood shed by the army of the 
Pallava, put an end to Vancivel and 
ruled from Kodumbalur. He had two queens Karraji 
and Varaguna. A Rajakcsari inscription, from which 
the date has been lost, f mentions that Karrajip-piratti 
was the wife of Tennavan Ijangovejar alias Maravan 


Vikramakesari 


Piidiyar, which may be other names of Vikramakesari. 
Two others dated in the thirteenth year of Rajakcsari 
mention Varaguna-perumanar, apparently the other 
queen of Vikramakesari. One of these, from Tillai- 
sthanam, J says that she was the queen of Pariintaka 
Ilanffovelar, a title showing doubtless the subordinate 
relation in which Vikramakesari stood to Pariintaka 


in particular attention may be drawn here. Vlra P!in<}ya * who took the head of 
the Cola' bore that title for thirteen yeais. (PAT. p. 102). This clearly means that 
Vlra Pamjva did not lose his life at the hands of Xditva and his confederates . 
For if we accept, for the sake of argument, the latest date suggested for the 
accession of Aditya 11, 905 A.I)., Vlra Puntjya must have lost his life in A.D. 966, 
because Aditya’s records of the second year mention the event. Thirteen years 
earlier than this date takes us to A.I). 953 or 954, a date which seems to be too 
soon after the Rli^rakuja invasion for a contest between the Cojas and the 
Pawjvas in the South — a contest which gave Vlra Pan<}ya the occasion to ‘ take 
the head of the Coja/ If Parthivendra-varman and Xditya were identical, then 
this contest would be pushed back to 944-5, an impossible date. 

* 129 of 1907 ; Pd. 14 (Text) 

+ 273 of 1903, ARE. 1908 II, 90. 

X SII. iii 113 ; Krishna Sastri ascribes this record to Gan^araditya on the 
ground that Vikramakesari is palaeo graphic ally earlier than the tune of Aditya II 
to which Venkayya ascribed him. 1 think Venkayya was right. Arguments 
from palaeography can be hardly conclusive when the difference in time is so 
little as that between Gan<jaraditya and Xditya II, See/6>A\ vii, pp. 1 ff. 

[ 187 ] 



THE COLAS 


Sundara Cola ; the other, from Lalgudi, * states that 
Nangai Varaguna Perumanlir was the sister of the 
Cola king. Again, Vikramakesari called his two sons 
by Karrali by the names of Pariintaka and Aditya- 
varma, apparently after his Co]a sovereign and his 
son. Lastly, as has been mentioned before, Paran- 
takan Siriyavejar of Kodumbaliir was one of the 
leaders of the Cola army in its southern expedition. 
When taken together, these facts suggest that the 
close terms of friendship and loyalty that subsisted 
between the chieftains of Kodumbaliir and the Colas 

• # 9 

under Pariintaka I continued under his successors also, 
and that Vikramakesari f assisted Sundara Cola and his 
son in subduing the rebellious Vira Pandya. 

The other achievements of Vikramakesari are not 
so easily explained as his war with Vira Pandya. Even 
if we ignore the minor success against Vancivel, it is not 

O D 

easy to see how Vikramakesari could have fought with 

* K. V. Subramania Aiyar who edits this record (RI. xx p. 53) assigns 
it to Xditya I (ibid pp. 47-8) and says that its date corresponds to A. D. 883 -4. 
He grants the identity of Varaguna with the queen of Parantaka Ijangovrjar alia t 
Tennavan IJangovejar, whom he also identifies with Vikramakesari ; hut floes 
not deal with the problems raised by the Vikramakesari record from Kojumbajur. 

t A record of the sixth year of Parakesari (337 of 1904) from Ku<jumiyamalui 
mentions a Varaguna- na^i-perumtinar, queen of £embiyan Irukkuvejar ; from 
tins, the conclusion lias been drawn that this was another name of Vikramakesari 
(ARK. 1908 11, 90). But the Varaguna-natji mentioned in this record was the 
daughter of a Muttaraiyar chief (Pd. 45 Text) and different from the CoJa prince rs 
mentioned above. Hence ^embiyan IrukkuveJ cannot be the same as Pariintaka 
JJangovuJar, if our view that the latter married the Cofa princess is correct. 

The suggestion may be made that the Muttaraiya lady was the queen of 
Vikramakesari and that Parantaka Jfangove[ar, the husband of the Cofa princess, 
was the elder son of Vikramakesari. In this case, the 6th year of Parakesari 
(337 of 1904) must be the 6th year of Parantaka I, which would fall nearly 
52 years before the wars with Vira Pantjya in which Vikramakesari took pait. 
It seems better to treat 5embiyan IrukkuveJ and his Muttaraiya wife Varagunli as 
persons not represented in the genealogy of the Koijumbalur record. There are 
other names of Irukkuv^Js, like Madhurantaka IrukkuveJ and Mahimalaya Irukku- 
ve[ in the Puduko^ah inscriptions for which there is no room in the Koijumbalur 
genealogy. Possibly Madhurantaka IrukkuveJ of Nos. 335 and 336 of 1904 
(Pd. 63 and 65), also called Xdittan (Accan) Vikramakesari, was a contemporary 
of Xditya I and his son Parantaka 1, 

[ 188 ] 



SUNDARA COLA 


the Pallavas on the banks of the Kiiveri. This by itself 

might justify a much earlier age for the Kodumba]ur 

inscription of Vikramakesari ; but as on palaeographi- 

cal considerations no earlier date than that of Gandar- 

• * 

aditya can be assigned for this record, * the sug- 
gestion may be made that by the Pallava in this context 
we must understand Vallabha, and explain the fight 
in which Vikramakesari took part with such distinction 
as having occurred on the occasion of Rastrakuta 
Krsna's raid into the Coja country which is said to 
have taken him as far as Ramesvaram. 


The reign of Sundara Cola then marked the 

o • 

recovery of the Cojas from the disasters 
of the Rastrakuta invasion. For all 


Inconclusive 
results of the 
r’limjya War. 


• • 


the fighting in the south, however, the 
Piindyas and their allies of Ceylon held 
their own, and it is not till the reign of Rajaraja I that 
Cola inscriptions begin again to appear in the Piindya 
country. In fact Rajaraja claims to have subdued the 
Piindyas when they were still powerful and illustrious, 
implying thereby that in spite of their exertions, his 
father and his elder brother Aditya had not made much 

headway against them. The inscrip- 
tions of Aditya, Parthivendra, and of 
Sundara himself show on the other 
hand that remarkable success attended the Coja efforts 
in the north. As Krsna's inscriptions get fewer in the 
districts of South Arcot, North Arcot and Chingleput, 
records of these others become more numerous ; 
but we have no knowledge of the stages by which this 
change came about. That Sundara Coja took an active 
share in directing affairs in the north may be inferred 
from the fact that he died in his golden palace at 


Success in the 
north. 


* See ante p. 187 n t 


[ 189 ] 



THE COLAS 


KalicTpuram and was thereafter known as Pon-mBIigalt- 
tunjina deva. * One of his queens, Vanavanmahadevi, 
a princess of the line of Malaiyamans, performed sati at 
the king's death, f and her image was perhaps installed 
in the Tanjore temple by Kundavai, her daughter. $ 
Sundara left behind him the reputation of a second 
Manu born to wean the world from ways of evil § 
(Kali). Another queen of Sundara Coja, a Cera 
princess, survived him till the sixteenth year of his son 
Rajaraja’s reign, A.D. 1001. 


Literature. 


In Sundara Coja’s reign literature, both Sanskrit 

and Tamil, received encouragement;, 
not only does the earliest Cola copper- 
plate grant known so far date from his time, but a highly 
poetic eulogium of his reign, in the commentary of the 
Vlrasdljyam, bears witness to his patronage of letters. || 
This eulogy, which calls Sundara Coja the king of 
Nandipura, is addressed to the Buddha to secure the 
strength and prosperity of the king, and furnishes 
evidence of the prevalence of friendly relations between 
the Cola monarchs and the southern Buddhist Sangha 
several years before the date of the larger Leyden 
grant which records the gift of a village to a foreign 
Buddhist monastery at Negapatam. 


Sundara Coja’s last days appear to have been 

clouded by a domestic tragedy. An 
inscription from Udaiyargudi dated 
in the second year of Rajakesari ** 
records the measures taken by the Sabhu of &ri 


Murder 
of Xditya II. 


* See Sff . ; iii p. 288 and n. 5. 

■J* Tiruvalanga^u plates w. 65-66; also 236 ©f 1902 (Rlijaraja I 27). 

X $//. ii p. 73. § Tiruvalunga<Ju v. 57. 159 of 1895, 11, 127'3& 

| pp. 102-3, inppu v. 11. M 577 of 1920. 


[1901 



ADITYA II 


Viranarayana - caturvedimangalam under orders from 
the king for the confiscation and sale of the properties 
of some persons who were liable for treason as they 
had murdered “ Karikala Coja who took the head of the 
Pandya.” This record clearly shows that Aditya II fell a 
victim to assassination. The only possible kings to whom 
this Rajakesari record can be assigned are Sundara 
Cola himself, and Aditya’ s younger brother, Rajaraja, 
who succeeded Uttama Coja, a Parakesari. But the 
early regnal year rules out Sundara Coja, as we cannot 
suppose that Aditya, whose inscriptions range at least 
up to the fifth year, began to reign before his father. 
Therefore the inscription is doubtless a record of 
Rujariija’s reign. If this inference is accepted, — the 
palaeography and the astronomical data of the record 
support this view — then it follows that the murder of 
Aditya II remained unavenged throughout the sixteen 
years in which Uttama Coja ruled, Sundara Coja him- 
self having either died of a broken heart soon after the 

murder or after having found the 
Uttama (.oja s natural course of justice obstructed by 

part in it. J 

a powerful conspiracy. U seems im- 
possible under the circumstances to acquit Uttama Coja 
of a part in the conspiracy that resulted in the foul 
murder of the heir apparent. Uttama coveted the throne 
and was not satisfied with the subordinate role assigned 
to princes of the blood in the administration of the 
kingdom ; as representing a senior branch of the royal 
family, he perhaps convinced himself that the throne 
was his by right, and that his cousin and his children 
were usurpers. He formed a party of his own, and 
brought about the murder of Aditya II, and having done 
so, he forced the hands of Sundara Coja to make him 
heir apparent, and as there was no help for it, Sundara 
had to acquiesce in what he could not avert. The 


[ 191 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tiruvalangadu plates seem to gloss over the story on 
purpose, and make statements which, though enigmatic 
in themselves, are fairly suggestive of the true course 
of events, when read together with the datum furnished 
by the Udaiyargudi inscription. The plates say : 


“ Aditya disappeared owing to his desire to see heaven. * 
Though his subjects, with a view to dispel the blinding darkness 
caused by the powerful Kali (Sin), entreated Arunndivanna, ho, 
versed in the dhurma of the Ksa/fni, did not desire the kingdom 
for himself even inwardly as long as his paternal uncle coveted 
his own (?>., Arumoli varmaV) country.” 


The sun of Aditya had set; the darkness of sin 
prevailed; the people wanted Arumoli to dispel it; but 
Uttama’s cupidity triumphed, because of Ariunoji’s 
restraint. Arumoli was not a coward ; nor was lie 
lacking in political ability or legal right. Anxious to 
avoid a civil war, he accepted a compromise, and 
agreed to wait for his turn until after Uttama’ s desire 
to be king had found satisfaction ; it was apparently 
part of the compromise that Uttama was to he suc- 
ceeded not by his children, but by Arumoli, and in the 
words, again, of the Tiruvalangadu plates : f 


“Having noticed by tin; marks (on his body) that Arumoli 
was the v*»ry Visnu, protector of the three worlds, descended (on 
earth), Madhurantaka installed him in tin* position of yuv(irftju r 
and (himself) bore the burden of (ruling) the earth.” 


* vv. 68 -9. The expression employed literally means ‘ set ’ {ns/am gatavTin) — * 
a play on his name Aditya; a hint of his premature death may he seen in * his 
desire to see heaven.’ 

•f The suggestion has been made that verse 69 of the Tiruvalangadu plates 
•* is rather stating in an indirect way that as Uttama was reigning, Rajaiaja did 
not wish to rebel against authority/’ (QJMS, xvii p. 196). If such was the 
real meaning of the composer, his language has indeed concealed his thought most 
successfully. 1 am, however, unable to accept this view (l) because it gives a 
higher value to Uttama Coja’s claims to succession than they merit— for why did 
his son not succeed him ? and why did he make Arumoli yuvataja in his own 
reign if not at his accession ? and (2) because it ignores the important evidence 
of the U(Jaiy argrnji inscription of Rlijukcsari. 


[ 192 1 



UTTAMA COLA 


We find accordingly Madhuvantakan Gandaradittan, 
who must have been a son of Madluuantaka Uttama 
Cbja, occupying high office under Rajariija when he 
came to power and loyally assisting him in the ad- 
ministration of the country. * If this reading of the story 
of Uttama Cola’s accession is correct, Uttama Cola fur- 
nishes an instance, by no means unique in history, of 
selfish and perverse offspring born of parents distin- 
guished for piety and right-mindedness ; and his rash and 
bloody self-seeking stands out in striking contrast to the 
true nobility and statesmanship of the future Rajaraja. 


Accession of 
L'tt.ima. 


The inscriptions of Adilya Parakesari (who took 

the head of Vlra Pandya) and of Parthi- 

vcndrn-varman show that, by the time 

of the accession of Uttama Cola, the 

Colas had recovered much in the north that had been 

lost on account of the Rastrakuta invasion. These 

• • # 

inscriptions are found in Uttaramerur, KaficTpuram, 
Takkolam and Tiruvannamalai, and furnish clear 
evidence of the renewed Cola occupation of the districts 
of South Arcot, North Arcot and Chingleput, and 
considering that the bulk of these inscriptions relate 
to normal transactions like endowments, sales and 
irrigation works, we may conclude that general peace 
had been restored, and that the effects of the wars were 
fast fading out of memory. 


Of the reign of Uttama Cola we have many stone 
records and one set of copper-plates. The beginning 

• Contra K. V. S. Aiyar — Ancient Dekhan p 243. The difficulties regirdiag 
the ages of Uttama Cola and his son pointed out by Aiyar are not so serious as 
lie makes them out. We may suppose that Ganijaraditya died A.D. 9a 7 and that 
then Uttama was 12 ; he came to the throne when he was, say, 24 in 909, and 
then had a son aged three ; this son would tie about 23 in 989 when he is first 
mentioned in the inscriptions of Riijaraja's icign. The omission of his name 
from the I.eyden and Tiruvalangaiju plates is only to be expected in the 
conditions of the case. 


[ 193 J 



THE COLAS 


of the latter, which probably contained a genealogical 
account of the dynasty in Sanskrit verse, is 
unfortunately lost; only the concluding prose portion 
mentioning the object of the grant survives. In some 
of the stone inscriptions and in the copper-plate grant, 
the king is clearly described as Parakesari Uttama 
Cola ; but a number of other stone inscriptions bearing 
only the Parakesari title can be assigned to his reign 
either on astronomical grounds, or because they 
mention the relatives of the king like his mother or 
one of his queens, or lastly, because they mention 

officials in his service. It should be ob- 

ihe earliest Cola se rved also that the earliest Cola coin of 

coin. 

which we have any knowledge belongs 
to his reign ; it is a gold piece, a unique specimen 
once in the possession of Sir Walter Elliot and figured 
by him from a faithful drawing, the coin itself having 
been lost; * its obverse and reverse are identical, 
the centre occupied by a seated tiger facing a fish to 
the proper right and separated from it by a line, the 
legend Uttama Cojan in grantha characters along the 
circular margin and a ring of beads at the perimeter. 
Elliot estimated the weight of the coin at between 50 
and GO grains, and this conforms to the standard in 
the Deccan and Southern India before the time of 
Rajaraja. f 

The Madras Museum plates of Uttama Cola, though 

they add little to our knowledge of 

Museum pi r r es . political history, are of very great 

interest to the study of the social life 
and the administrative methods of the Cola kingdom in 

• Elliot CSl. p. 132, No. 151 p. 152 G. ARE, 1904. 1 20, Nos. 152 4 are, bo- 
doubt, coins of Rajendra I. 

+ Codringtou — Coins p. 74* 


l 194 J 



UTTAMA COLA 


Uttama Cola’s time ; they form moreover beautiful 
specimens of the palaeography of the period. * Even 
the stone inscriptions of the reign contain little inform- 
ation on political transactions. Some inscriptions 
recently discovered in the Trichinopoly district, f 

* See S/L iii No. 128. After this fine edition of the plates by Krishna 
Sastri, we might well have been spared the belated publication with negative 
plates in 1925 (I A. Vol. 54 pp. 61 ff) of a paper contributed by T. A. Gopi* 
natha Rao and another in 1911, This paper begins with the wild statement 
that the seal of these plates “ belongs to the Panijya king Ja$ilavarman, one of 
whose documents is also found in the Museum ”, I examined the seal and found 
it true to the fac-simile in EL iii. plate p. 104, No. 3, which again very closely 
resembles the seal of the Tiruvalangatju plates of Rajendra (plate opp. p. 413 
in SIL iii). 

Krishna Sastri holds that the Parakesarivarman, a record (Hlatekhat) of 
whose 22nd year is quoted in 11. 28-29, was Vijayalaya (SIL in p. 267 and 
n. 2), and that 41 the statement in our grant that a stone inscription of his 22ml 
year did provide for permanent income to a temple at Kaccippecju is proof enough 
to show that though he was the first of the new line, Vijayalaya had a peaceful, 
long and prosperous rule like any of his powerful successors. " This view 
derives support from the express mention of u Maduraiyum Ilamum Kon<ja 
Parakescri " in 1. 96, which might naturally lead to the supposition that the 
Parakesari of 11. 28 29 must be a different king. There is, however, another 
mention of Parakesari (year 16) in 11. 72-3, which Krishna Sastri takes to be a refer- 
ence to Uttama Cofa himself ; but it is possible to hold that 11. 72-98 record 
one continuous transaction by which, in the 18th year of Paruntaka I, the 
Naguratt“r of Kaecippeiju regulated the expenditure to be met from endowments 
made in the sixteenth year of Parakesari (note in particular enru ipparisu in 
1, 96). If this view is accepted, tho Parakesari of 1. 72 would be not Uttama, but 
Parantaka I, and the same may he true of 11.28-9. In any event, there are 
difficulties in the way of accepting Krishna Sastri's views on the extent of 
Vijayalaya* s power, and another solution seems called for. It is inconceivable that 
before the date of the battle of J?r! Purambiyam, when Pallava power was still 
unbroken, Vijayalaya could have ruled an extensive territory independently, and 
what is more, engraved stone inscriptions in the capital of the Pallavas. (See p. 131 
ante and n. J) Again, Uttama C5|a is mentioned by name with the Parakesari title 
in 1. 12 ; we have only tJ ie Parakesari title in 1. 72. By assigning the latter to 
Uttama Coja, K. Sastri grants that the same king may be mentioned in two 
different ways in the same record. If that is so, it is easier to assume that Paia- 
kCsari of U. 28 -9 and 72 is the same as Maduraiyum Ilamum kontja Parakesari 
of 1. 96, than to equate one of them with Vijayalaya and the other with Uttama. 
I wish also to add that Karikala -terri might have got its name as much by 
association with Aditya II Karikala as after ° the ancient Co|a king Karikala. 
(Krishna Sastri ibid t p. 268). 

t 165 '7 of 1929. 

[ 195 ] 



THE COLAS 


dated in the twelfth year of Parakesari, introduce to us 
a high official of Uttama Coja's government by name 
Ambalavan Paluvur-nakkan of Kuvalalam (Kolar). 
He was an officer of perundaram rank who built of 
stone the old shrine of Vijayamangalam celebrated by 
Tirunavukkarasu as a temple in Gfovandaputtiir on the 
banks of the Coleroon, * commemorating Arjuna’s 
(Vijaya's) penance for obtaining the favour of &iva; f 
and on this officer, Uttama Coja conferred the title 
Vikramasolamariiyar, J from which we may conclude 
that Uttama had also the title Vikrama. The same 
officer continued in Rajaraja’s service later ; in the 
records of Rajaraja’s reign he has the title Mummudisola 
prefixed to his personal name, and also bears the 
alternative title Rajaraja Pallavaraiyan. § No other 
evidence exists to show that Uttama Cola’s suzerainty 
extended as far as Kolar in Mysore, and all the 
inscriptions mentioning this official come from one 
place, and that in the Trichinopoly district. It must 
be assumed, therefore, that for some reasons unknown 
to us, this person migrated from Kolar into the Coja 
dominions and rose to a high position in the royal 
service. 

The inscriptions give the names of several queens 

of Uttama Cola, of whom five are men- 

litfama’s queens. 

tioned together in one inscription. •[ 
The chief place was held throughout the reign by 
Orattanan (Urattayan) Horabbaiyar, a Kanarese name (V), 
who is called «<jm mnhadevi ya r and muttanamlriratti uur 
in the fifth and the fifteenth years of the reign ; || 
she had also the title of Tribhuvana-mahadeviyur, 

• v. 3 of his DivUram on Tiruvisayamanfiai. f v. 8 ibid. 

t 164 of 1929 — ARE. 1929 II 29. § 168. 184 of 1929. 

I 494 of 1925 (Yr. 12), || 165, 488 of 1925. 


[ 196 ] 



UTTAMA COLA 


significant of her rank as chief queen. The queens 
of Uttama Cola are almost all of them found making 
endowments in a village in the Tanjore district which 
bore the name of their mother-in-law, fsembiyan- 
mahadevi — proof of the high regard in which the 
pious widow of G andaraditya was held by the members 

of her family. One son of Uttama 
Co]a is known, * Madhurantakan 
Gandaraditya, who held high office under Rajaraja, 
as has been mentioned already. 

A record of the fifth year of Rajakesari f mentions 
a Pandya princess, + with the name Puliccayan $ami 
Abhai, as the spouse of Vikramasola Mallidudaiyar. 
This Maliida chieftain, a feudatory of the Co]as, in the 
hilly tracts of South Arcot, might have got the title 
from Uttama Cola, who was also known as Vikrama ; 
if this view is correct, the inscription is certainly one 
of Rajaraja I. 


* STI. iii No. 49. ARE. 1904 (paragraph 20) ; ante p. 193 n, * 
t 7 of 1905. 

t The name of the Pan^yan princess seems to imply 9 Kanarese origin for 
her, though we cannot be sure of this. 

[ 197 ] 



Chapteb IX 


RlJARSJA THE GREAT (A.D. 985-1014). 

Rajakesari Arumolivarman, as he was known in 

the early years of his reign, came to 

Accession* . i ,1 /♦, i ,* i • 

the throne, after a long apprenticeship 
as yuvaraja, on some day in the month following the 
25th June, 985 A.D. * He was the son of Parantaka II 
Sundara Coja by Vanavan-mahadevi, and the joyous 
occasion of his birth is described in particular detail in 
the Tiruvalangadu plates, f The star of his nativity 
was ^atabhisaj, as we learn from the inscriptions re- 
cording endowments for offerings in temples on his 
birth -d av C 


fith the accession of Rajaraja we enter upon a 

century of grandeur and glory for the 
a great epech. dy nas ty of the Cojas. Quite obviously, 

the personal ability of the first Rajaraja, in some 
resoects the greatest of all the great Cola rulers of the 

i o o • 

Vijayalaya line, laid the foundation for the splendid 
achievements of his son and successor Rajendra I, 
under whom the empire attained its greatest extent 
and carried its arms beyond the seas./ The thirty years 
of Rajaraja’s rule constitute the forinative period in the 
history of the Cola monarchyVln the organisation of 


the civil service and the army, in art and architecture, 
in religion and literature, we see at work powerful 
forces newly liberated by the progressive imperialism 
of the time. A relatively small state at his accession, 
that had hardly recovered from the disasters of the 
Ra§trakuta invasion, the Cola kingdom had, by the end 
of Rajaraja's rule, grown to be an extensive and well- 
knit empire efficiently organised and administered, rich 

• El, ix p. 217. t w. 61-3. 


[ 198 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


in resources, possessed of a powerful standing army, 
well-tried and equal to the greatest enterprises. More 
wonderful than the work of this great monarch must 
have been his personality. But of him we have no 
authentic description ; no eyewitness has rendered to 
Rajaraja the service which Nuniz and Paes did to Krsna 
Deva Raya. There is not even a well-attested statue, 
or painting of this king * that has come down to us. 
All that we know of his reign, however, and that is not 
little, attests his potent personality and the firm grasp 
of his intellect which allowed nothing to escape its 
vigilance and applied itself with as much vigour to the 
minutest details as to the sublimest ambitions of state- 
craft. The affection he lavished on his sister Kundavai, 
after whom he named one of his daughters, f and the 
privileged position accorded to his grand-aunt, Sembi- 
yan-mahadevi, the mother of Uttama Cola, indicate 
that he was a great and good man as well as a 
far-sighted ruler. 

T_j 


(yery early in his reign % Rajarilja assumed the 
title Munimadi Coja-deva, a term whose meaning is 
not clear. § Almost the first military achievement of 

his reign was the campaign in the 
Kerala War. Kcra]a country of which the result was 

summed up in the phrase ‘ Kandainr-salaik-kalamarutta’, 
which precedes the name of the king in several of his 

# I am inclined to agree with T. G. Aravamuthan, who rejects the Tanjoie 
bronze sometimes taken to be Rajaraja as late and spurious. See his lout ait 
Sculpture in South India p. 36 and fig. 11. timtra ARE. 1925 II 12. I have 
examined the paintings round the gorldia-gtha ot the lanjore temple, it seems 
possible that a stalwart royal figure which recurs in many of those groups as tin 
central figure is that of Rajaraja himself and that the paintings ait' as old as the 
temple. Their existence was discovered by Mr. S. K. Govindasatni. A sculptured 
representation of a king (and ipiecn) at liruvlsalur may be of this king. 

f 633 of 1902. X ™ o< 1908 <> rr ‘ 3)< 

§ See S/1 . ii. Intr, p. 3 and n. 6. The best explanation seems to be : ' the 

thrice (powerful) Coja.’ 


| 199 ] 



THE COLAS 


War against 
PUncJya. 


inscriptions from tlve fourth year * onwards. Though 
this title appears from the fourth year, no inscription 
of Rajaraja has been found in the Kerala and Pandya 
countries bearing a date earlier than the eighth year, f 
Some years of fighting were apparently necessary 
before the conquest could be completed and the 
conquered country become sufficiently settled for 
its administration being properly organised.'^The 
Tiruvalang adu plates giving a detailed accou nt of die,. 

k ing' s di([vijaya state that he began with 
the conqnestof the southern direction. f 

, *****'^’^ „ '■S* 

This account mentions the capture of 
the Pandya king Amarabhujanga, and then states A 

“The commanilant ( dandemntha ) of this ornament of the 
solar race then conquered Vi]inda which had the soa for its moat, 

# 395 of 1922 is the earliest record so far known mentioning this achievement 
and dated in the 24th day of t lie fourth year. It is no longer true therefore to 
say that “until the 8th year of his reign, A. I). 994, he did not undertake any 
expedition” (5//. ii Introd. p 2). What Rtijaraja's achievement at K and ajar 
exactly was bas been the subject of much discussion. Though salat and kalant 
mean respectively ‘ a feeding house’ and ‘ (eating) plate these meanings seem 
hardly satisfactory in the present instance {Contra TAS . ii 2 5), On the other 
hand salat in the sense of ‘roadstead’ is not known in anv other context. Hut, after 
all, sa/ai may only be part of the nanu* of the place ; or it may have the ordinary 
meaning of a road. In any case, no other meaning seems more likely than the 
one usually adopted for the whole phrase viz., ‘ who destroyed the fleet in 
the roadstead of Kanda[ur. 1 The alternative suggestions that the ‘scale of 
feeding in the feeding-house of Kandajur was regulated bv the king’ (S. lVsi- 
vinayagam Pillai - Kerala Society Papers , Series 2 pp, 100 ff.) necessitates a 
far-fetched explanation of the need for the use cf force m the transaction, and 
fails to explain why such a thing had to be done over again, for instance, by 
Rsijadliiraja. D. Pillar’s objection that the destruction of a fleet would not be 
described as an act of grace autli as this is done in the* usual introduction, 

‘ ttrumagal pdla* etc., of Rajaraja, is easily met; Rajlidluraja caused the Pancjya 
Vira Kerala to be trampled by an elephant, and this is described as an act of grace 
kadakkalirran-iidaippittaniU Perhaps, aruttu does not mean ‘ destroyed but 
simply ‘ overcame,’ cf. Ka ling at tup-par a ni (verse 370) saying that Viliiiam was 
destroyed and salat captured. It must be admitted, however, that the earliest 
mention of Kandaiur {TAS. i p. 6, 1. 0) do«*s support I). Pillai’s interpretation. 
Gopinatha Rao had coirecth identified Klindajur with a part of Trivandrum 
now called Valiya Salai. Salai is sometimes sunskritised as jvala. {TAS. ii. p. 4). 

t The Darsanankoppu record {TAS. i p. 238) seems to be the sarliest 
so far known. 


J vv 76* 79. 


[ 200 J 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


The 

Coja prasastis . 


whose extensive ramparts were shining aloft, which was impreg- 
nable to other warriors and which was the permanent abode of 
the goddess of victory.” 

We have often found before that the three southern 
kingdoms of Piindya, Keraja and Simhaja were 
allied against the Cola ; this alliance was still effective 
in the time of Rajaraja, and it would seem that Raja- 
raja’s southern campaign was directed against the 
Piindya and the Cera together. The Cera king at this 
time was Bhiiskara Ravi Varman Tiruvadi (A. D. 978- 
1036), whose inscriptions have been recovered from 

different parts of Travancore. 

> 

The Pallavas and Pilndyas followed the injunc- 
tions of the Dharmasitstras, and in 

their copper-plate grants, they caused 
a brief history of their ancestors to be 
engraved before recording the occasion for and the 
details relating to the particular gift. But Rajararja 
was the first Tamil king who conceived the idea of 
formulating in set phrases an official record of the 
chief events of his reign which was to serve as an 
introduction to his stone inscriptions. In this he was 
followed by almost every one of his successors on the 
Cola throne, and we shall see that the praSasli of his 
son Rajendra I, which is rather brief in the early 
regnal years, grows in length as the reign advances 
and descriptions of fresh events are added on to it as 
they take place ; these official ‘ historical introductions ' 

in the Coja inscriptions are, in fact, an 
important aid to the discovery of the 
particular king to whose reign any 
given record belongs. Sometimes the same king used 
two or more forms of such introductions, and Rajai’aja I 

• TAS. it pp. 31-2. It must lie noted that the period of this king’s rule has 
been fixed on the evidence of a single record, the Tirunelli plates. 

[201 J 


Prasastis of 
Rajaraja. 


26 



THE COLAS 


seems himself to have employed at least three forms, 
of which the one beginning ‘ tirumatfal-pola ’ was the 
most common from the eighth year onwards. * In this 
introduction the only reference to the first campaign 
of the reign seems to be the phrase employed about 
Kandalur Salai already quoted. A second form of the 
introduction f also places the victory at Salai first 
among the achievements of the reign. Yet another, 
dated in the twentieth year, X mentions that Rajarlija 
“ destroyed the town of Madurai, conquered the 
haughty kings of Kollam, Kolla-desam and Kodun- 
goliir and that the kings of the sea waited on him. 1 ' 


The Southern 
campaign. 


One question suggests itself naturally in relation 

to this southern campaign of Rajaraja. 
Did he conquer Madura and the Pandya 
country first and march into Kerala 
by the southern passes that led into i]t from the 
Tinnevelly district, or was the line of his march the 
other way round ? I The Tiruvalangadn plates and the 
last of the introductions cited above seem to suggest 
that the capture of Madura and the subjugation of the 
Pandya king Amarabhujanga preceded the advance on 
the strong fortress of Vilinam and on oiilai. § But the 
bare mention of Kandajur Salai in the earlier records 
of the reign and in the opening lines of the ‘ tirumagal- 
,pola ’ introduction, and the provenance of Rajaraja’s 
inscriptions which appear in South Travancore about 
two years earlier than in the Tinnevelly and Ramnad 
districts point to the other alternative. It is possible 


* 261 of 1910. Only a few records before the thirteenth year contain any 
introduction. 

+ 67 of 1923 (Year 14). * 394 of 1911 ARE, 1912 II 22, 

§ “Perhaps Kandajur or Kandajur Oiilai was near Vilinam. . . . Kandajffr 
Salai which is said to belong to the Cera king in later inscription* wa* 
probably held by the Pantjyas when it was attacked by Rajaraja.’* Venkayya, 
SII, ii. Intr. p. 2. 

H DarsanankSppu (Yr, 8), Sucindram (Yr. 10), Vijayanarayanam (Yr. 10). 

[ 202 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


that the Tiruvalangadii plates and the later inscriptions 
of Rajaraja mixed up facts relating to several distinct 
campaigns against the southern country. For it is 
clear that Rajaraja sent more than one expedition 
against the Pandya and his ally the Cera. One seems 
„ to have been directed specially against 

Two invasions. A J ° 

Kollam. The campaign in which 
Rajaraja claims, in his Tanjore inscriptions, * to have 
conquered the Cera and the Pandyas in the Malai-nadu 
(Mountain country) was quite obviously different from 
and later than that in which Kandalur and Vilinam 

• M 

were attacked. v/ - 

•'The chief event of this expedition which took place 
sometime before the year 1008 A. D. f was apparently 
the storming and capture of the strong fortress ol' 
Udagai. J Malai-narlu or Kuda-malai-nlidu, the western 
hill-country, may be identified with Coorg, § and the 
fortress of Udagai must be looked for in the Western 
Ghats in that region, or perhaps a little to the south. 
Inscriptions of the fourteenth and sixteenth years, 

_ du though they mention the occupation of 
Kuda-malai-nadu, do not yet record the 
attack on Udagai. The statement made in the inscrip- 
tions that Rajaraja deprived the Pandyas of their 
splendour when Udagai was still flourishing || in all its 
glory seems to indicate that the capture of this fortress 
was not, effected in the first war. The Kalingattup- 
parani ** in its notice of this king’s reign mentions 

* S/I . ii 1 paragraphs 34, 51 etc. It is these campaigns to which the 
Tiruvalangadu plates refer in v. 83 as the conquest of Parasurama’s country. 
Contra Venkayya S/7, ii, Intr. p. 4. 

+ S77. ii 1 para. 51 J 236 of 1902 (Yr. 27). 

§ See Atjiyarkkuuallar on Sil, xi 1. 53. Ki<elhora calls it Malabar. 
FJ. vii -List No. 704 . See also EC. iii TN. 122. 

% S77. iii 19, 51. 

|| End of the tirumagal introduction. viii v. 24 

[203 ] 



THE COLAS 


only the conquest of Udagai besides the foundation 
by him of the Sadaiyam festival in the Cera country. 
In all his three ulas, the poet Ottakkuttan says that 
Rajaraja’s great achievement was the crossing of the 
* eighteen forests ’ for the sake of his ambassador and 
setting fire to Udagai. We are unable to explain 
this satisfactorily \ apparently the immediate cause of 
the march against Udagai was an insult offered to the 
king’s ambassador. 


The Cola general who most distinguished himself 

in the campaigns in the West was per- 
* ^ndra p)™ 1 haps no other than the crown prince 

Rajendra. * He was afterwards made 
Mahadandanayaka of the Vengl and Granga-mandalas, 
He had also the title Paucavanmartiya. This “ tusker 
of Mummudi-Cola,” as he is called, ‘ seized the Tuluva 
and Konkana, held Maleya (Malabar), and pushed aside 
the Cera,’ as well as the Telunga and the llattiga. t 
As chief military officer in the Ganga-mandala, lie 
carried out the royal order conferring on Manija the 
village of Malawi (Coorg) and the title Ksatriya- 
sikhamani-kongralva in recognition of his heroism in 
the battle of Panasoge. We do not know the occasion 
of this buttle ; perhaps it was fought against the 
Cangalvas, a petty local dynasty. In any case, this was 
the beginning of the line of Kongajvas who ruled a 
small kingdom for about a century as the subordinates 
of the Colas to whom they owed their existence, and 
then disappeared with the expulsion of the Co]as from 
these regions after the rise of the Iloysalas. $ 


• EC. iii Sr. 125. 

t No. 5 of 1895 (Yr 28), EC , iii Sr. 140 ; also i. Cg. 46 and pp. 1243. 

t A record from KaleyTir (353 of 1901) dated Saka 929 mentions that a Coja 
general Aprameya defeated some Hoysaja leaders. But Kielhorn considers this 
date * of no value for historical purposes ’ EE iv pp. 67-8. Contra Rice, Mysore 
and Coorg pp. 86, 144-5. 


[ 204 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 

vjlam (Ceylon) is included among the conquests of 

Rajaraja from the first in the tirumagal 
ey °”‘ introduction, * (993 A. D.). The king 
is said to have taken the Ilamandalam owned by the 
fierce Singalas and famed in all the eight directions, f 
In his twenty-ninth year (1014 A. D.) Rajaraja made a 
grant of several villages in Ceylon for various pur- 
poses to the celebrated temple he had erected at 
Tanjore.) $ The Tiruvalangadu plates contain the 
following picturesque account of the invasion of 
Ceylon : § 

“ ltama built, with the aid of the monkeys, a causeway 
across the sea and then slew with great difficulty the king of 
Iitinka by means of sharp-edged arrows. But Rama was excelled 
by this (king) whose powerful army crossed the ocean by ships 
and burnt up the king of Lanka.” 

(This naval expedition of Rajaraja against Ceylon 
must have taken place in the reign of Mahinda V who 
came to the throne A.D. 981 and was still ruling Ceylon 
at the time when the island was invaded by Riljaraja’s 
son and successor Rajendra I. Rut the Mahavamsa 
makes no mention of Rajaraja's invasion, apparently 
because the annals of Mahinda’s reign became confused 
after the tenth year (991 A.D.) on account of the 
military revolution which led to the ascendancy of 
Keraja and Kannata mercenaries in a large part of his 
kingdom. As a result of the military rising, Mahinda 
had to take refuge in the inaccessible hill country 
in the south-east of Ceylon called Rohana. Rajaraja 
then found his opportunity and made himself master of 
Northern Ceylon which became a province (mandalam) 
under the name ‘of Mummudi-£ola-mandalam. ** 

m n • • 

# 261 of 1910. t SJI iii 4, 15. 

J SII. ii 92 paragraphs 12-15. § v. 80. 

H CK Ch. lv # v. 4-12* M SII ii 92 paragraph 12. 


1 205 ] 



THE COLAS 


(The Cola 


Effects of Coja 
conquest. 


invasion had one permanent result. 
Anuradhapura, the capital of Ceylon for 
over 1000 years, was finally destroyed 
by the armies of Rajaraja. Polonna- 
ruwa, formerly a military outpost of the ancient capital 
as seen from its alternative name Kandavura Nuvara 
(the camp-city), now became the capital under the 
Colas. While the earlier Tamil invaders of Ceylon 
had aimed at the overlordship only of Rajarattha, the 
Colas were bent upon the mastery of the whole island. 
This decided the choice of their capital. There is 
practically no trace of Cola rule in Anuradhapura. V 
When Singale.se sovereignty was restored under 
Vijayabahu I, he crowned himself at Anuradhapura, but 
continued to have Polonnaruwa for his capital, as it 
was more central and rendered easier the task of con- 
trolling the turbulent province of Rohana. * Polon- 
naruwa was renamed Jananatha-mangalam, f after 
another title assumed by Rajaraja about the middle 
of his reign. $ • Rajaraja’s inscriptions have been found 
in Ceylon. § It is probable that Rajaraja signalised the 

Cola occupation of Ceylon by the 
construction of a stone temple to 
Siva in Polonnaruwa.' This ‘beautiful 
little ’ Siva Devale, * constructed of granite and lime- 
stone ’ which * stands within the walled confines of the 
old city ’ of Polonnaruwa, is among the few Hindu 
monuments of Ceylon, which are still in a good state of 
preservation; and “ its architectural form seems at once 
to class it with the Hindu fanes of South India erected 
from the tenth to the twelfth centuries, of which the 


CoJa Temples 
in Ceylon, 


* Ceylon Journal of Science — G. U, 2 pp* 145-7. 
t ASC . 1906 p. 27. 

I 132 of 1910 (Year 17). 

§ ASC. 1891 p. 12 Nos. 78-80. The record from Fadaviya dated in the 
27th year cited at SIL ii. Intr. p. 5 must be among these. 

[ 206 1 





To face page 2<. 



SIVA DEVALE NO. 2. POLONNARUWA-SOUTH FACL 


Copyright ASi 






RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


great temple of Tanjore is the finest and most elaborate 
exponent.” * The earliest inscription found in this 
temple is dated early in Rajendra Fs reign. An officer 
from the Cola country by name Tali Kumaran built 
another temple called Rajarajesvara at Mahatittha 
(Mantota) which was also named Rajarajapura, and 
richly endowed the new temple, f 




Other 

conquests. 


'urning now to Rajaraja’s conquests in other 
directions, Gangapadi Nojumbapadi and 
Tadigaipiidi sometimes called Tadigai- 
vali, all of them in the Mysore country 
became parts of the Coja kingdom in Rajaraja’s time.) 
One of the variant forms of the introduction to the kind’s 
stone inscriptions implies that the conquest of the Mysore 
country immediately followed the victory at &alai, and 
that it was undertaken before the expedition against the 
Eastern Calukyas into the Vengl country. $ After his 
victory at Salai, Rajariija is here said to have gained 
successes at Tattapadi (Tadigaipiidi?), Talaikkadu, 
Nojumbapadi and Pirudigangar-valaniidii. This cam- 
paign against the Nojambas and the 
Gangas, first mentioned in, the eighth 
and ninth § years of the king’s reign, 
would seem in reality to have advanced very far, if not 
actually ended by the sixth year (A.D. 991), as we find 
an inscription of Coja-narayaiia, obviously a name of 
Riijaraja I, in the Mysore country dated in this year 
(&aka 913). An official from Kolar in the Ganga- 
rasayira with a Ganga name made an endowment in 


Ganga 

country. 


• ASC. 1906 pp. 17 ff. t 616 of 1912 ($11. iv. 1412). 

t 67 of 1923. ARE. 1923 II, 27. 

§ 97 of 1921 (Yr. 9 ?). See SH. ii. Intr. p. 3 and n. 1. where a record of the 
8th year from Tiruva^andai is said to mention these conquests ; the reference 
is doubtless to 261 of 1910. 

1 MAR. 1917, p. 42. 


[ 207 ] 



THE COLAS 


South Arcot in the seventh year of Rajakesari, perhaps 
Rajaraja I. * This conquest was no doubt facilitated 
by the fact that the Colas had never lost their hold on 
the Kongo eountry or, if they had done so, had very 
soon recovered it when they began to reassert them- 
selves after the troubles consequent on the invasion of 
Krsna III. Rajaraja does not claim to have conquered 
the Kongu area, and he was master of it early in his 
reign. Copper-plates f recording a gift of land in the 
fifth year of Rajakesarivarman have been found at 
Tiruccengodu, and these may with tolerable certainty 
be assigned to Rajaraja I, if they do not belong to an 
earlier Rajakesari like Pariintaka II. The conquest of 
Tadigaipiidi was probably undertaken from the side of 
Kongu and as part of the campaign in Kuflamalai-nadu. 
By the time of this war the Nolambas had long ceased 
to be an independent power and become subordinate to 
the Gangas. In the tenth century the name Nolamba- 
vildi still included J not only the districts of Tuinkiir 
and Citaldurg, but much. of the Bangalore, Kolarand 
Bellary districts and even parts of Salem and N. Arcot ; 
this is sufficient proof of the place once held by the 
Nolambas in the politics of Southern India. Though 
they lost much of their power at the time of Riijaraja’s 
invasion, they did not by any means die out altogether, 
and in Saka 920 Gannarasa, the son of Ayyapa, was 
ruling a portion of Daligapiidi as a feudatory of Raja- 
raja. § A certain Nojambadhiraja was the general of the 

* 127 of 1919. The official’s name Gangan Ambalavanan Gancjaraditta £<51a 
Vilupparaiyan seems to imply that he rose to prominence in Uttama Cola’s 
reign, if not earlier. 

t SII* iii 213. No, 212 also of Rajakesari and of the 10th year mentions 
Malavaraiyan Sumlarasolan as the donor. This name suggests the reign of 
Parantaka II Sundara > Cola, and if this is correct, the father of the donor must, 
like Siriyavelar have met his fate in the Ceylonese expedition of that monarch's 
time. ARE. 1Q14 II, 15. 

t EL x p. 57 and n. 3. § 169 of 1911 (Yr. 13) 


[ 208 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


Co]a monarch in his sixteenth year. * Either the same 
person or another, Nojambadhiraja Corayya, is again 
mentioned as feudatory to the Cola in Saka 933. f 
These instances raise a suspicion that the Nolamba 
subordinates of the Gangas turned against their Ganga 
overlords and paid off old scores by taking the side of the 
Colas openly, or by assisting them in other ways. The 
Gangas then were the chief enemy against whom was 
directed the expedition into Mysore. This invasion, 
which started with an attack on Tadigaipadi % and 
Talakkad after crossing the Kaveri from the Kongu 
country, was a complete success, and made the Colas 
supreme in the entire Ganga country for a period of 


more than one century. The easy success was partly 

also the result of the disappearance of the Rastrakuta 

{ power, which had taken place about 973 A. D., when 

^ Taila II Aliavamalla restored the ancient Calukya line 

! to power. By this political revolution the Gangas and- 

*• t . 

[ the Nolambas lost their chief support, as there was 

1 nothing uryet to bind them to the hewly risen Calukya 

power corresponding to the. dyn.aatic..alliances and 

common eTiTefjrrises that, had brought theni close to the 

Rastrakutas. Alut the Western Calukyas 

were by no means mditterent to the 

advancing power of the Colas under Rajaraja, and 

in an inscription dated 992 A. D., Tailapa II claims 

to have gained a victory against the Coja king. § In 

the present state of epigraphical knowledge it is not 




W. Calukyas. 


* EC . x Mb. 208. t ibid- Ct. 118. , 

t “ Tk© present Kr$narajapet, NSgamangala, Man^ya, Seringapatam and 
Malavalli talukas of the Mysore district*', Fleet, IA. xxx pp. 109-10. 

36 of 1904 ; IA . v. p. 17. Attempts have been made to account for the 
hostility between the Western CSJukyas and the Colas by the assumption that it 
was a continuation of the Pallava tradition by the Cojas, that the Colas were of 
the Solar race while the CSJukyas were of the Lunar, and that the former were 
Saivas while the latter were Vaisnavas and patronised Jainism {SI/, ii Jntr. p. 5 
and n. 4,). Such efforts lead nowhere. 


[ 209 ] 


27 



THE COLAS 


possible to give a complete account of the political 
relations among the Western Calukyas, the Western 
Gangas and the Nojambas at the time of the Cola 
invasion of Mysore. 


War against 
Satyasraya. 


Within a few years after 992, Tailapa II died and 
was succeeded by Satyasraya on the Ca}ukya throne. 
The later inscriptions of Rajaraja’s reign state that be 

fought a successful war against Satya- 
sraya and captured some of his treasure, 
part of which went to the enrichment 
of the great Tanjore temple. * The W. Calukyas were 
also hard pressed in the north by the hostility of the 
Paramaras of Malwa and must have found it hard to 
sustain themselves against two powerful enemies attack- 
ing them from opposite directions. The inscriptions 
of Rajaraja from about 1003 A. D. f roundly assert 
that he captured by force Rattapadi, ‘ the seven and a 
half lakh country.’ This is a violent exaggeration. 
( More trustworthy is the poetic statement in the Tiru- 
valangadu plates £ that Satyasraya, though, true to 
his origin from Taila (oil), he fled from the battle-field 
in order to escape the misery of facing the ocean-like 
army of Rajaraja, still became himself the abode of 
misery (kastfiSraya). ~)An inscription of Satyasraya from 

Hottur (Dharwar), dated &aka 9(2)9 
(1007 A.D.), states that the Nurmadi 
Cola Rajendra Vidyadhara, the son of 
Rajaraja Nityavinoda and the ornament of the Cola- 
kula, advanced as far as Donur in the Bijapur district, 
with an army of 900,000 troops, plundered the whole 
country, killed women, children and Brahmins, caught 


Led by 
Rajendra. 


• S/A ii 1, paragraph 92. Judging by the relative value of the presents 
made to the temple at the conclusion of these campaigns, it would seem that the 
success in the CSJukya war was nothing by the side of the victories gained 
elsewhere. 

t 338 of 1927 (Year 18), ARE . 1927 ii 11. 97 of 1921 also mentions Raftapadh 
t v. 81. 

[ 210 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


hold of girls and destroyed their caste. The same 
record proceeds further to say that Satyasraya, ‘the 
slayer of the Tamil' ( Tigula-mari ), thereupon forced 
the Cola to turn back, captured his paraphernalia 
(i vastu-vahana ) and thus conquered the southern 
quarter. * Though the account of wholesale slaughter 
and rape must be discounted as proceeding from a 
hostile source, still this account given by the Calukya 
inscription of Rajendra's invasion of Rattapadi rings 
very true, and may be accepted as substantially correct. 
Though overwhelmed for a time by the strength and 
rapidity of the Cola onslaught, Satyasraya soon 
recovered himself, and by hard fighting rolled back the 
tide of invasion. In Rattapadi proper there are no 
traces (as there are in Nulambapadi and Gangapadi) 
of the occupation of the coun try by the Colas, f 
The existence of an inscription of a feudatory of 
Ahavamalla Sattiga dated &aka 928 at Cebrolu + in the 
Guntur district indicates that at this time Satyasraya 
may have commanded the resources also of the 
Eastern Calukya kingdom of Vengx in his Co]a war, 
and this was doubtless the cause of Rajaraja’s invasion 
of Vengl which followed soon after. 


Results of the 
Calukya war. 


The campaigns in the N. W. that have so far 

engaged our attention resulted in the 
annexation to the Co]a empire of 
practically all the territory that had 
ever been held by the Gangas and the Nolambas in 
Mysore, and nearly the whole of the modem district 
of Bellary, § so that the Tungabhadra became the 


* El. xvi, p. 74. 

+ See the next chapter for further particulars of this war or another which 
followed not long after. 

t 145 of 1897 ; S/f. vi. 102. 

§ ARE . 1904, para, 17. See, however, the next chapter on Rajendra’s 
campaigns for proof that later in this reign part of this territory was regained 
by the CSlukyas, 

[ 211 ] 



THE COLAS 


boundary between the two empires. No inscriptions 
of Rajaraja have been found in Bellary so far ; but 
then there are no Cajukya inscriptions of the period 
either. As a rule, Cola inscriptions are not found 
in the remote provinces of the empire in as great 
numbers as in areas nearer home, and we cannot on 
this account entertain doubts about the correctness of 
facts clearly attested by contemporary records. That 
Rajaraja had a Mahadandanayaka for the Ganga and 
Vengl mandates * towards the close of his reign is 
sufficient proof of the extent of his empire and of the 
contiguity of these two mandates. ) 


Rajaraja’s intercession in Vengl affairs was the 

direct and natural result of the political 
Vengu development of the early years of his 
reign, rather than of any diplomatic design to dissociate 
the Eastern Cajukyas from their Western cousins, f 
/(If Rajaraja and his successors found it easier to spread 
their power along the east coast than across the 

Tungabhadra, this was partly due to 
Contrasted the different conditions in which the 

W *KingdOTi Uky# Eastern and the Western Cajukyas 

found themselves when the Colas 
entered on their imperial career under Rajaraja. After 
more than three centuries of rule in Vengl, the Eastern 
Cajukyas had become an old and decrepit race, 
and their kingdom was falling a prey to disputed 
successions and anarchy. The coming of the Cojas 
brought fresh blood into the family and became a 
source of strength to this declining dynasty which, 
sustained for nearly a century by the Colas in a position 
of respected though subordinate alliance, soon after, 
more than repaid the debt by contributing largely to 

• 5 of 1895 (Yr. 28)— EC. iii Sr. 140 
t Contra Dr. S. K. Aiyangar Gangai-fCon^a, pp. 541-2 . 


[ 212 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 

the continuance of the Cola empire under Kulottunga I 
and his successors, the Cola-Ciilnkyas, as they are 
sometimes called. The Western Calukyas, on the 
other hand, had just emerged under Taila II, after 
centuries of subordination to the Rastrakutas, and the 
restored dynasty was in its full vigour. As the Cebrolu 
inscription of Satyasraya implies, they even made an 
attempt to unite the resources of the Eastern Cajukyas 
to their own ; but being subject to attacks from the 
Paramaras in the north and the Colas in the south, 
they failed to do more than just keep their hold over 
their ancestral territory, the Rattapadi seven and a half 
lakh country. They were on the whole less fortunate 
than their Co]a contemporaries, and being compelled 
to wage many wars of defence, they found little time 
or inclination for aggression. Difficult as it may be to 
find a satisfactory scientific explanation for it, the fact 
remains, and it receives ample confirmation from the 
general course of history, that the chief dynasties 
throw up for a time a succession of very able rulers, 
that this succession occurs generally in the earlier 
part of the dynastic history, and that no dynasty 
flourishes for more than a limited number of genera- 
tions. ; The relative importance of the Western and 
Eastern Calukyas and the Colas about 1 000 A.D. forms 
one of the numerous illustrations of this general rule 
furnished by the course of Indian history. ) 

Under Parantaka I the Col.a power extended in 

the north up to Nellore. The northern 
csja expansion provinces were lost after the Rastra- 

in the north. r 

kuta invasion and recovered in part 
under the successors of Parantaka I. The northern- 
most limit reached under them was in the neighbour- 
hood of Tiruvorriyur, a few miles north of Madras. 

f 213] 



THE COLAS 


Rajaraja who aimed at recaptaring every province that 
had ever been held by Parantaka I and extend the 
empire still further, sent an expedition in the northern 
direction early in his reign? An inscription from 
Kancipuram, * dated in the 6th year of Rajakesari and 
recording a royal gift of a large herd of sheep to a 
Durga temple states that the sheep were got when 
Sltpuli-na$u and Paki-nadu were conquered by 
Paraman Malapadiyar alias Mummadi-solan, the chief 
of Karu-kudi in Tanjavur Kurram. The titles of the 
commander make it clear that the expedition was 
undertaken in Rajaraja’s reign .j This interpretation of 
thcT record is confirmed by another inscription f dated 
in the eighth year of Rajaraja from Reddipalem (Gudur 
aluk) in the Nellore District which records a gift by 
Mummudi Vaitumba Maharajan alias Durai Arasan, 
perhaps an official in the king’s employ. 


War with VSngl. 


Causes. 


The actual occasion for Rajaraja's interference in 

the internal affairs of Vengl must have 
occurred later than the expedition just 
mentioned. The presence of Satyasraya for a time 
in the Vengl kingdom had, no doubt, something to do 
with it. There were, however, deeper causes accounting 

alike for the presence of Satyalraya in 
Guntur and for the interest of Rajaraja 
in the affairs of Vengl. Despite the abundance of 
Eastern Calukya copper-plates, some of them directly 
bearing on this period, the history of the dynasty is by 
no means settled, and its chronology presents many 
little problems which cannot be considered here. The 
troubles of the Eastern Calukyas appear to have 

r * ** ' # h n i,jt V+ Vi ' ** ***‘ 

begun sometime ib the relgtn^of Amma II (945-70 A.D.) 


• 79 of 1921. 

t V. Rangachari-Nellore 239. There is a village Cippili in the Madanar 
palli Taluk of the Cbittooi district 

t 214 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


and they were started apparently by the intrigues of 
the ambitious Rastrakuta monarch Krsna III with the 
younger branch of the Eastern Calukyas.) After the 
eleventh year of his reign, * "A[mmaraja is Baid to have 
fled to Kalinga from the anger of Krsna III, and this 
receives remarkable confirmation from the Arumbaka 
plates of Badapa | which state that, having made 
himself a suppliant of Krsnaraja, the Vallabha king, 
Badapa drove out of his kingdom the powerful king 
Ammaraja, fought against some of his relations, 
favoured his friends and ruled the Vengl kingdom 
with justice. These statements cannot be accepted 
literally, but when considered along with the infor- 
mation furnished by other sources, they provide an 
important link in the confused story of this period. 
We now possess this story in two rival versions vouch- 
safed by the two branches of the Eastern Cajukyas 
who were at war for a whole generation. The Pabhu- 
barru plates of Saktivarman J are particularly valuable 
as they record the events that ended this confused 
period and brought &aktivarman to the throne. 


The Interregnum. 


All the copper-plates of the elder branch after the 

time of Danariiava, including those of 
Saktivarman, the first king of this 
branch who came after Danarnava, declare that 
there was an interregnum § of twenty-seven years 
immediately after Danarnava. According to these plates, 
Ammaraja had some trouble from Krsna about the 
eleventh year of his reign, but it was not serious ; at 


* Mangallu plates -agamat Kr$na-kdp?U Kalin gam, ARE . 1917 II 24. 

t EL xix No. 24. The text (p.142) has Karnaraja; K. V. LakshmanaRao 

has satisfactorily explained this mistake as due to a wrong sanskritisation 

of Kanna, 

* » 

t Journal of the Telugu Academy ii. pp. 399 ff. 

§ ArQjakam in Saktivarman’ s grant (1. 35) ; anayikft in the Ranastapftn^fi 
grant (1. 40) of Viinaladitya. 


[ 215 ] 



THE COLAS 


any rate Aroma II repelled all the attempts made by 
bis enemies against him, and after a rule of twenty-five 
years from his accession in 945 A. D., he was followed 
by his half-brother Danarnava (970-3 A. D.). After 
Dananjava came the interregnum of twenty -seven 
years. The Arumbaka plates of Badapa, without 
stating the duration of Amma IPs reign, say that 
Badapa succeeded in expelling Amma II from the 
throne with the aid of Krsna III and ruled the Vengl 
kingdom after him. If this means that Badapa's 
rule began in Krona’s life-time, the reign of Badapa 

must to some extent have overlapped the reigns of 

« 

Amma II and Danarnava. By and by, about 978 A. D., 
at the close of Danarnava s reign as implied by the 
later plates of the elder line, Badapa succeeded in 
uniting the whole of the Vengl kingdom in his hands 
and forcing the senior line into exile. It is remarkable 

how the £rl Pundi plates of Tala II ‘reconstruct’ 

* t * r ' 

the story of the interval between Tala I and Tala II 

a/ «• m 

manifestly with a view to showing 
Usuipation that the younger line had the greater 

youngJr branch. ri g ht to the V5n g T throne. * Whether 

Tala] II ruled independently after his 

elder brother Badapa or not, f there can be no 
question that the plates of Badapa and Tala II are to 
be properly assigned to the interregnum mentioned 
in the later plates of the elder line. The long feud 
between the two branches which began in 925 A. D. 
with the usurpation of Tala I reached a head in the 
reign of Amma II, and as a result the kingdom was 
divided for a time between the two branches till the 
princes of the elder line were driven out and completely 

* EL xix p. 14-9. From an inscription at KaficTpuram (237, 238 of 1931 > 
it would appear that the Eastern Gantra Kumarnava declared himself in favour 
of the younger branch and fought against Danarnava, and fell in battle. 

t ibid 151-2. 


[ 214 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


dispossessed of all power for about 27 years before 
999 A.D. — a period which from the standpoint of the 
elder line formed truly an interregnum. The Ranasta- 

pundi grant ascribes this to a bad 
stroke of fate. * Of the events that 
led up to &aktivarman’s accession, 
his Pabhubarrn plates say : 


End of the 
Interregnum. 


44 His youth shone like that of a lion when in the Tamil 
battle ( dramilJlhave ) ho attacked the formidable elephants (of the 
enemy). He performed a wonderful feat when with his own 
hands he killed the sharp and peerless hero sent (against him ?) 
by Coda Bliima. t He dug up the wide-spread tree of Jata-Coda 
to its very roots — the tree which rose aloft in its boughs (with 
the division of its army), which had its base spreading on the top 
of a mountain (had its feet adorned by tlie crowns of the heads 
of kings) anti which was strong within.” 


The Tiruvalangadu plates seem to mention the same 
events in the verse : J 

44 As Kajaraja of my name and skilled in battle has been 
attacked by Bliima with his army, so shall I attack the flawless 
Telugu (arandhram-andhram) Bhima by name— (thinking) this 
wise, he (RTtjaraja) attacked him with an army.” 

Here then is a campaign directed against a Telugu- 
Coda king, Bhima by name, in which both Rujaraja 
Cola and Suktivarman took part. An inscription § of 
RajarSja from Kunclpuram, dated in S. 923 (1001-2 
A.D.), gives many titles of Coja Bluma and records his 
capture by Riijaraja. The exact course of events is, 
however, by no means easy to determine. This is due 

* Daiva-duscltfaya (I. 39). 

•f* There follows a stanza about Baddema Maharaja which I am unable to 
translate as the verse is very corrupt. Ja^a-CotJa is the legendary founder 
of the Telugu-Co<}a race of rulers. 

X v. 82. Krishna Sastri, by translating ‘ dand* ' into a ‘ club ' or ‘ mace ' 
and * Han ' into ‘ kill,' has missed the obvious meaning of the verse. 

§ 237, 238 of 1931 ; ARE, 1931, 11 10. 

1 217 ] 


28 



THE COLAS 


to a number of reasons. First we have almost no 
records of the Telugu-Codas of this period, as the 
inscriptions so far discovered relate only to other 
periods, earlier or later than the second part of the 
tenth century and the first of the eleventh. Again, we 
have no means at present of deciding who the Cola 
monarch’s namesake was whose cause was espoused by 
him in this expedition. Lastly, we cannot say whether 
this 4 Tamil battle ’ against Bhlma was part of a plan 
for the restoration of Saktivarman to his ancestral 


throne, or was one of Rajaraja’s campaigns of conquest, 
the one which, as we have seen, was directed against 
Paki-nadu and Sltpuli-nadu, i. e., the Telngn-Coda 
country. On the latter assumption, the facts relating to 

the war against Bhlma will be valuable 
Saktivarman ag p roo f Saktivarman had sought 

in exile. x © 

refuge with the Co]a king * and that, 
early in his life, he was fighting in Rajaraja’s cam- 
paigns in the hope of being able later to achieve, with 
his aid, the main object of his life, the recovery of the 
Vengl kingdom. In any event, it is quite certain that 
Saktivarman owed much to the Coja king's support, 
and possibly he consented to recognise the overlord- 
ship of Rajaraja in some form after becoming king of 
Vengl. We know that the exact date of Vimaladitya’s 
accession in Vengl was 10th May, 1011 A.D. f and that 

his predecessor and elder brother 

His restoration. .e , . , , , 

•Saktivarman ruled for twelve years 
before him. This would give 999 A. D. as the date of 
Saktivarman’s accession and the end of the inter- 
regnum. Saktivarman is called in his plates Calukya- 


His restoration. 


* K. V. S. Aiyar says that VimaKditya was in North Arcot in the second 
year of Rajaraja's reign ( Ancient Dekhan p. 247). If it is true, it will go far 
to support the suggestion here made. But no authority is cited, and 1 ana 
unable to trace any. 

+ EL vi p. 349. 


[ 218 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


narayana, a surname evidently modelled on that of 
Rajaraja, Cola-narayana. Thus a study of the affairs 

of the E. Calukya dynasty before 

By RSjaraja. . . . , , 

Rajaraja began to interest himself in 
them makes it plain that, far from their being sought 
out by Rajaraja as valuable political allies, they owed 
their position to that great monarch. By the part he 
played in restoring order and putting an end to the 
long-drawn civil strife in that kingdom, Rajaraja was 
well justified in claiming to have conquered Vengl. 
This is not to say that Vengl became at once an 
integral part of the Coja Empire * like the other areas 
where, as in the Ganga or even the Pandya country, 
the separate political existence of the conquered 
country was deliberately put an end to, and the 
administrative system of the Cojas was imposed. If 
the analogy suggested by the term is not pressed too 
far, the political relation in which Vengl stood to 
the Coja empire under Rajaraja is best described as 
that of a protectorate. The alliance between the two 
ruling families was sealed by a dynastic marriage ; 
Vimaladitya married Rajariija's daughter Kundava, 
the younger sister of Rajendra. f 


Two undated inscriptions from Mahendragiri £ 

record, in Sanskrit and Tamil, an 
invasion of Rajendra Coja against a 
king of Knliita, who had the name 
Vimaladitya. This chieftain probably was a recalcitrant 
feudatory of the Eastern Calukya Vimaladitya. § 


Expedition 
against Kuluta. 


• See JAHRS . iii, iv, B. V. Krishna Rao’s ITistory of Rajahmundry for 
an unconvincing attempt to show that Rajaraja had no part in the restoration of 
Saktivannan. K. Rao’s identification of Jap-CotJa with Jafavarmau Sundara 
Cola*Fan<jya is impossible. 

t Korumelli plates— IA. xiv p. 52 11* 55-65. 

X 396, 397 of 1896 ; AS 1. 1911-12 pp. 171-3. 

§ AS 1. 1911-12 p* 172 n. 2, 


[219 ] 



THE COLAS 


The inscriptions are recorded in the name of Rajendra 
and mention the erection of a pillar of victory 
by him on the high peak of the Mahendra 
mountain. But this expedition against Vimaladitya 
finds no place in Rajcndra’s historical introduction. 
It took place in the reign of his father and accounts 
for Rajaraja’s claim that he conquered Kalinga. * 
Vimaladitya, the Cahikya son-in-law of Rajaraja, 
made some presents in 1014 A.D. to a temple 
in Tiruvaiyaru, in the heart of the Coja country, f 


Conquest of 
the Maldives. 


The last of the conquests, mentioned only in the 

latest inscriptions of Rajaraja, is that 
of the ‘ old islands of the sea number- 
ing 12,000/ the Maldives. % This 
naval conquest, of which we have no details, is 
sufficient indication that the navy which, as we shall 
see, Rujendra used so effectively some years later, had 
been organised under his great father who stands in 
many ways in the same relation to Rujendra as Philip 
of Macedon to Alexander the Great. An earlier occa- 
sion in Rajaraja's reign in which the 

The Cola Navy. * j , .<« . 

navy played a part was the conquest 
of Ceylon. In this increasing realisation of the im- 
portance of a good navy, we may find a reason for 
holding that the expedition against Kandajur in the 
early years of Rajaraja's rule was primarily intended 
to sterilise the naval power of the Ceras. j 

* Krishna Sastri is inclined to make this conquest part of RSjendra's. 
campaign for * fetching the Ganges into his country.' ( SI/. . iii p. 388 n. 6). 
But Kultita is not mentioned in the detailed list of countries given in 
that connection. 


t 215 of 1894. 

X " The king of the Maldives assumes the style of king of the Twelve Thou- 
sand Islands."— Renaudot quoting Pyrard— Ancient Accounts , Remarks p. 2. 
Also Toting Poo xvi, p. 388 n. 1. 


[ 220 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


S 

In the closing years of his reign Rajaraja associ- 
ated his son Rajendra with himself in 

R3j5ndra made the official administration. This formal 

Mi 2 AX>. recognition of Rajendra as heir appa- 
rent took place some time between the 
27th March and 7th July 1012 A.D. * Rajendra must 
have been at least twenty-five years of age at the time 
as he is mentioned in Rajaraja’s inscriptions of the 
fourth year as a young prince, f Considering the 
large number of Tanjore inscriptions which mark the 
twenty-ninth year of his father, we may conclude 

that this year (1014 A.D.) marked the 

Ilrlicl of RilJSi* | w* • *11 * • « 

raja s reign. close of Rajaraja s illustrious reign. + y 

There is in existence, however, at 
Kanyakumari an inscription dated in the thirty-first 
year of a Rajakesari Rajaraja-deva. The inscription is 
unfortunately mutilated, its beginning being lost; it 
records the establishment of a shed for supplying 
drinking water (taiuurppandal) called Jayangonda- 
solan, § a name which Rajaraja assumed in the later 
years of his reign. 

f Riijaraja’s great reign is commemorated by the 

magnificent Siva temple which he built 

T1 'temp"e° re Tanjore, the Rajarajesvara, which 

stands to this day, the finest monument 
of a splendid period of South Indian history and the 
most beautiful specimen of Tamil architecture at its 
best.') The temple is remarkable alike for its stupendous 
proportions and for the simplicity of its design. ' A 


• SI. viii p. 260. t U7 A of 1896. 

X This seems to be the proper explanation of the apparently puzzling refer- 
ence to a gift of the tliird year of Kljendra in SII. ii 90. 

§ Gopinatha Rao thought this surname to be that of Rajadhiraja and 
assigned this record to Rajaraja II, who, however, was a Parakesari. i, 

p. 168). 252 of 1915 is another Rajaraja record of the 31st year. 

1 SII. ii, p. 312 i 468 of 1908. 

[ 221 ] 



THE COLAS 


rectangular court, 750 feet by 250, is divided into 
two by a partition wall, which carries a low tower of 
beautiful design ; the inner court is twice as long as the 
outer. The chief shrine occupies the centre of the 
Western half of this inner court and the Vimana, which 
rises over the sanctum to a height of nearly 200 feet 
on a square base of about a hundred feet, dominates 
the whole structure. The boldly moulded basement, 
the huge monolithic Nandi, the simple and tasteful bas- 
reliefs and the decorative motifs on the Vimana and 
the balustrades, the graceful sculptures in the niches 
on the sides of the Vimana and the fine chiselling 
which marks the entire work, including the lettering 
of the numerous inscriptions, are not equalled by 
anything known in South Indian architecture. Viewed 
from any angle, the effect produced by the whole 
of this wonderful structure is pleasing and 
impressive. That the stone walls round the garbhagrha 
right under the Vimana in the interior of the temple 
were overlaid with a thin coat of chnnam (lime) plaster, 
and painted, is beyond question. * When he saw this 
great enterprise of his reign drawing to completion, on 
the 275th day of the 25th year of his reign, Riljaraja 
solemnly dedicated the copper-pot intended for 
adorning the finial at the top of the Vimana. We 
have no authentic information as to how the colossal 
labour involved in transporting the huge blocks of 
granite over great distances, and the technical pro- 
blems involved in raising them to position, were 
met. The conquered countries doubtless paid part 
of the cost. (After its completion, the temple in the 
capital city had close business relations with the rest 
of the country ; year after year villages from all parts 

# I base this statement on a personal inspection of the walls* Some of this 
ancient painting may yet be rescued by timely action. 


[ 222 } 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


of the empire were required to supply men and material 
according to a fixed schedule for the various require- 
ments of the temple. ) Those nearer home took out 
perpetual loanB from the numberless money endow- 
ments showered on the temple by the piety and the gene- 
rosity of the court and its officials, and undertook to 
contribute regularly the annual interest in cash or in 
some other way previously determined. In the minute 
care and precision with which most of these arrange- 
ments were completed before Rajaraja’s twenty-niuth 
year we see the hand of a masterful and imaginative 
administrator. Karuvur Devar, a contemporary hymnist, 
celebrated the new temple in one of his sacred hymns. 
Talijaviir, it should be noted, was not among the 
numerous sacred spots of Saivism consecrated by the 
hymns of the Devaram Saints, Appar, Sambandar and 
Sundaramurti. The temple was altogether a creation 
of Rajaraja’s policy. 

(The accurate Bnrvey and assessment of the coun- 
try for purposes of land-revenue, the 

Administration. , * , . . 

perfection of the administrative organi- 
sation of the country by the creation of a strong and 
centralised machinery corresponding to the staff of 
secretaries in a modern administration, and the posting 
of representative officers of the central government 
in suitable localities, the promotion of a system of 
audit and control by which village assemblies and 
other quasi-public corporations were held to account 
without their initiative or autonomy being curtailed, 
the creation of a powerful standing army and a con- 
siderable navy which achieved even greater success 

under Rajendra than under himself, 
Religious Policy. mar k out Rgjaraja as the greatest 

among the empire-builders of Southern India. \ Himself 

[ 223 ] 




THE COLAS 


an ardent follower of §iva, Rajaraja was, like all the 

great statesmen of India, tolerant in matters of religion, 

and all creeds received equal favour at his hands. 

The decorative sculptures on the walls of the Tanjore 

temple and the construction of some Visnu temples by 

him in Mysore and his gifts to other Visnu temples 

recorded in his inscriptions are proof of his liberal 

religious policy. (The celebrated Leyden grant records 

how he encouraged the erection of the Cudamani 

Vihara in Negapatam by the ^ailendra king, Sri 

Mara-vijayottunga-varman, the lord of Sri Visaya and 

Kataha across the sea. This Vihara, which was 
• * 

building in the twenty-first year of Rajaraja *, was 
named after the father of its founder, and the Cola 
monarch, with whose permission the construction was 
undertaken, dedicated to Lord Buddha dwelling in this 
Vihara the village of Anaimangalam, and his son 
Rajendra confirmed the grant after his father's death 
and caused it to be engraved on copper-plates. That 
Negapatam was the first port on the mainland touched 
by vessels from the East bound for South India 
becomes clear from I-tsing's itineraries, f This must 
have been the reason for the foreign king construct- 
ing a Vihara there.) 

| If names are the music of history, this noble king 

greatly indulged his taste for this 
music ; and what is more, he sought to 
make these names current coin by attaching them to 
new foundations or substituting them for old ones. 
Besides Rajaraja, Mummadicoia, Jayangonda and 
Arumoli, which became part of the names of cities 
(Puram), valamdus and mandalams, the king also called 

* 1. 118 of the grant (Tamil part). 

t Gerini -R marches p. 527, Also ARE. 1899, paragraph 48. 

[ 82 *] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 

himself Colendrasimha, &ivapadasekhava, Ksatriya- 
sikhamani, Jananatlia, Nigarili-sola, Riijendrasimha, 
Cola-martanda, Rajasraya, Raja-martanda, Nityavinoda, 
Pandyakula&mi, Keralantaka, 6ingalantaka, Ravikula- 
manikya, Telingakulakala * and so on. Many of 
these names, together with those of other members of 
the royal family, like Kundavai, Sembiyan-mahadevi 
and others often distinguished the wards (sens) in the 
larger villages and towns of the Cola empire, f The 
regiments in the army also bore names formed out of 
the surnames of kings and princes. 


Rajaraja had a number of wives but apparently only 

a few children. The queens mentioned 
in his inscriptions as making gifts to 
temples and in other connections number about fifteen, 
and though we can hardly be sure of it, Dantisakti 
Vitanki, also called Lbka-mahadevi, appears to have 
occupied the most important place among them. With 
her we find the king in Tiruvi£alur in the twenty-ninth 
year of his reign. On this occasion the king performed 
the lulabhara and his queen Dantisakti the hiranya- 
yarbha in the temple at Tiruvisalur. + The inscription 
recording this fact is engraved below a sculptured 
representation of the king and the queen in a worship- 
ping posture. Some of the gold was used to make 
some flowers for Ksetrapala in the shrine built by the 
queen at Tiruvalanjuli. § The mother of Rajeudra, the 

* pa. 9i. 

t Mannur-kovil in the Tinnevellv district had twelve seris so named, see 109 

* 

of 1905 {El. xi pp. 292*'$). Tirukkajitti^ai in Tanjore had the following s?rir, 
among others:, ArumoHdfvaecori, JananathaccSri, NitlavinodaccSri, Kajakesaric- 
cSri, NigarilisolaccSri, Alagiyasolacocri, Singalantakacceri, Kundavaicceri, 
kulasundaracceri, Rajamarttuntjacceri, and Rajarajacceri (292 of 190$ of the ninth 
year of RSjundra I). 

t 42 of 1907. For htranya-garbka in modern times, see Galletti — The Dutch 
in Malabar p. 110 and n. 

§ 633-C. of 1902 (RSj&ndra 3). 

[ 225 1 


29 



THE COLAS 


only eon of Rajaraja we know, was Vanavan-mahadevi 
alias Tribhuvana-mahadevi. * An inscription of the 
twenty-geventh year mentions Ijangon Picci as the name 
of the senior queen ( mutta-deoiyur ) of the Coja king 
(Solaperuman) and calls her the daughter of Vallava- 
raiyan. | We know that Yallavaraiyar Vandyadevar 
was the husband of Kundavai, the elder sister of 
Rajaraja, $ who is often called in the inscriptions Alvar 
Parantakan Kiindavaip-piriittiyar and the daughter 
of Pon-maligait-tufyina-devar. § Kundavai was much 
respected and treated with great affection by her 
brother. Her gifts to the Tanjore temple were 
recorded, next to the king’s own, on the walls of the 
central shrine, while those of the queens and the 
officers of state found a place only on the niches and 
pillars of the enclosure. One wonders if Ijangon Picci 
was the daughter of Kundavai whom the king, her 
mother’s younger brother, took to wife ; such marria- 
ges are not unknown in the Tamil country to-day. 
Rajaraja must have had at least three daughters, 
because an inscription from Tiruvalanjuli mentions 
besides the younger Kundavai, the queen of Cillukya- 
Vimaladitya, a middle daughter of the king called 
Madevadigaj. || Peculiar interest attaches to two 
memorials erected by Rajaraja which show his eager- 
ness to fulfil his obligations to his family, and that in 
a manner productive of public good. They are the 
construction at Tirumukkudal ** of a mandapa called 
after Sembiyan Mahadevi, the queen of Gandaraditya 
and mother of Uttama Coja, and the foundation of the 
Colesvara or Arinjigai-Isvara temple at Molpadi. f f J 

• 117-A of 1896 ; 448 of 1918. f 14 of 1920. 

§ 8 of 1919. 
a 633 of 1902 (Yr. 25). 
tt SII. Hi 15. 


X Sir. li 2. 

^ Sll. ii. Introdn. p. 8. 
*• 178 of 1915 (Yr. 28). 


[ 226 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


This history of the reign may be concluded with 

an account of the leading officials and 

feudatories^ feudatories who distinguished them- 
selves in the royal service. Mention 
has been made already of the place held by Maha- 
dandanayaka Paficavan Maharaya, (probably identical 
with the crown-prince) the sphere of whose command 
extended over the Ganga and Vengl mandalas, and the 
Nojamba feudatories of the king in the Ganga country. 
Paraman Malapadiyar alias Mummudi-solan was a 
general who conquered the Sitpuli and Paki nadus early 
in this reign. In the Trichinopoly district, the Paluvet- 
taraiyar, of uncertain origin but closely allied to the 
royal family from the days when Parantaka I married 
a Paluvettaraiyar princess, were occupying a respected 
position, and were apparently in the enjoyment of full 
responsibility for the administration of a small area 
around Paluvur. The inscriptions of Adigal Paluvet- 
taraiyar Kaydan Maravan, which clearly acknowledge 
the overlordship of Rajaraja are found in Klla- and 
Melappaluviir from the third year of the reign and 
show him ruling in state, lie had for instance officers 
or nobles of the perundaram, like the Co]a monarchs 
and princes themselves. * This chieftain built a 
temple to Tiruttottam-udaiyar in Melappaluviir, f and 
adopted the ancient standard prevailing at Nandipuram 
for regulating taxation in Paluvur. J The latest records 
mentioning him seem to be dated in the fifteenth year 
of Rajaraja. § Madhurantakan Gandaradittan appa- 
rently a son of Madhurantaka Uttama Cola, served 
Rajaraja as an important official in the department 

• 115 of 1895. t 394 of 192* (Rajak. 4). 

t 365, 367 of 1924 (RSjak. 10, 16). § 363 of 1924. 

H Ilultzsch Stl. ill 49 ; ante p. 193 and n. • A certain Gandaradittan 
Madhurantakan it also mentioned in 356 of 1917 (Yr. 10). 


[227 ] 



THE COLAS 


of temple-affairs, so to say. We see him conducting 
enquiries into the affairs of temples in various parts of 
the country, punishing defaulters * * * § and making proper 
arrangements for the prevention of neglect in subse- 
quent years. He has been wrongly identified with 
Gandaradittar, the author of the TiruviSaippa, which 
was in reality composed by his grandfather, f In the 
district of North Arcot there were the Iladaraya (Lata) 
chieftains who had apparently been ruling the region 
round Palicapandavamalai continuously from the days 
of Parantaka 1 5 in the eighth year of Rajaraja, Udaiyar 
Vlrasolar, son of Udaiyar lladarajar Pugalvippavar- 
gandan, remitted, at the request of his queen, some 
taxes in favour of a Jain temple. £ The regal titles 
employed in the inscriptions of these chieftains are 
perhaps an indication of the high favour in which they 
stood with their Cola overlords. In the sixteenth year 
of the reign of Rajaraja, we find mention, in a Tiru- 
vallam inscription, § of a Tiruvaiyan f^ankaradeva who 
claimed descent from the Ganga kings of Kolar 
and built at Tiruvallam a temple called Tiruvaiya- 
Isvara apparently after his father. The high- 
sounding titles that precede the name of this obscure 
chieftain constitute a clear warning against hasty infer- 
ences from such titles in regard to the political status of 
the person employing them. Nannamarayar of the 
Vaidumba family, the son of Tukkarai who possessed 
the Ingallur-nadu in Mahiirajapadi, in the Cuddapah 
district, gave an endowment at Tiruvallam in North 

• 283 of 1906 ; 218 of 1921. 

T The mistake seems to have arisen from the false belief that G.’s 
TimvisaippH refers to the Tanjore temple whereas it is on Cidambar&m. 
See T. A. G. Ra o-Sdlavamsa-carittirac-curukkam p, 16 n. 

t 19 of 1890 (Ef. iv p, 139.) 

§ 11 of 1890 (5//. iii 51). 


[ 228 ] 



RAJARAJA THE GREAT 


Arcot about 1005 A. D. * A Mummudi Vaitumba- 
maharajan made a gift in Reddipalem in Nellore 
about A. D. 993. f This shows that the Vaidumbas 
continued under Rajaraja, as under his predecessors 
after Parantaka I, to occupy subordinate official 
positions in the Cola administrative system. Mention 
is made of a Salukki VTmayan whose devi (queen), 
Vlmayan Vambavai, endowed a lamp in the temple at 
Tiruvaiyaru in the twenty-second year (c. 1007 A. D.) 
of Rajaraja ; { his dynastic connections and the locality 
of his rule are not quite clear. Like the Vaidumbas, 
the Banas, who shared the same fate with them at 
the hands of Parantaka I, seem to have become 
officers sharing in the administration of the country 
under the Colas. A Biina prince, Maravan Narasimha- 
varman, whose records commence with the usual 
introduction of Rajaraja and then proceed to give the 
traditional titles of the Banas in all their fullness, was 
apparently ruling some part of the South Arcot dis- 
trict in the neighbourhood of Jambai towards the close 
of Rajaraja’s reign, as we learn that he excavated a 
new irrigation tank in that locality. § The Tanjore 
inscriptions mention Senapati Sri Krsnan Raman of 
Aman-kudi, U who is called Rajendrasola Brahma- 
marayan in the larger Leyden grant, II as the person 
who built the tiruccnrralai, the surrounding enclosure 
and niandapa of the Tanjore temple under the king’s 
orders. Irayiravan Pallavaraiyan alias Mummudi-sola- 
potSan was another officer of pertindaram rank who 
presented an image and some jewels to the Tanjore 
temple. ** lie was doubtless a high official in the 
secretariat of the revenue department as we find him 

• S/I. iii 52. 

$ 217 of 1894 (S/I. v 516). 

1 S/I. U 31. II I. 437. 

[ 229 ] 


t NI. G. 88. 

§ 84, 86 of 1906. 
•» S/I. a 55. 



THE COLAS 


attesting the Leyden grant and an important inscription 
from Ukkal * relating to revenue settlement. Senapati 
Kuravan Ulagalandan alias Rajaraja Maharajan who 
is also mentioned in the Tanjore inscriptions, f 
apparently got his suniame Ulagalandan (one who 
measured the world) after carrying out the revenue 
survey which began in the sixteenth year (A. D. 1001), 
formed one of the most original and important adminis- 
trative achievements of the reign X and furnished the 
basis for the revenue policy for many years there- 
after, as can be seen from the numerous references to 
the survey in subsequent records. 


• SII. Hi, 9. 
t SII. ii 95, p. 4 59 . 

1 624- A of 1902 ; 44 of 1907 <Yr. 24). 

[ 230 ] 



Chapter X 

v 

f 

RAJENDRA I - (1012-1044 A. D.) 

/ 

Parakewri-varman Rajendra-coladeva I was 
/ declared heir apparent and formally 

Accession * * * 

•' associated with his father in the 
administration of the Empire in the closing years of 
his rule. Accordingly he counts his regnal years from 
some date between 27t,h March and 7th July, 
1012 A.D. * and we find clear evidence of joint rule in 
the third year of Rajendra. This year is mentioned in 
Rajariija’s Tanjore inscriptions of his twenty-ninth 
year; f Rajaraja is also stated to have made a gift in 
the third year of his son’s rule. $ The star of 
Rajendra’s nativity was Ardra. § 


of empire. 


Rajendra inherited from his father an extensive 

Extent ami em pi re comprising the whole of the 
organisation modern Presidency of Madras and parts 

of Mysore and the island of Ceylon. 
The administration had been carefully organised and a 
fairly powerful bureaucracy brought into existence 
which, while it scrupulously respected the ‘liberties,’ 
feudal and corporate, of the various magnates and 
associations that studded the land, successfully main- 
tained the king’s peace, and enforced all civil rights. 
The army was a strong and tried body of men, well 
able to defend the wide land frontier and to keep down 
any threatened outbreaks in areas newly subjected to 
the empire, and ready for aggressive warfare abroad. 

(The hold on Ceylon and some other islands like the 
Maldives was securely maintained by a powerful naval 

y 

* El. viii p. 260. t Seo ante p. 321, n. } 

t 196 of 1917. § 271 of 1927 (Yr. 7) 

A V i \ 


[ 831 ] 



THE COLAS 


* 

4 

force which also served to protect the considerable 
overseas trade of the empire with the islands of the 
East Indies and with China. During the thirty-three 
years of his reign, Rajendra turned these initial 
advantages to the best possible use and succeeded in 
raising the Cola empire to the position of the most 
extensive and most respected Hindu state of his time, 
and one which possessed though perhaps only for a 
time a not inconsiderable dominion over the Malay 
peninsula and the Eastern Archipelago.' The history 
of Rajendra’s reign is very largely the history of the 
extensive wars and conquests he undertook in the first 
half of his reign. Like his father, he has left behind in 
his stone inscriptions and in the Tiruvalangadu copper- 
plates a trustworthy account of the military and naval 
transactions of his reign which receive confirmation 
at all points at which we have the means of controlling 
it by other evidence. 

The most common form of Rajendra’s Tamil 

pramsti is that which begins tiru manni 

His prasastis. 

valara. We come across this form as 
early as the third year, though it is more generally em- 
ployed only from the fifth. This introduction progress- 
ively increases in length by the narration of fresh 
conquests until the thirteenth year, after which date it 
becomes stereotyped. By tracing its growth we are 
able to fix the internal chronology of the reign with a 
precision not often attained in the annals of Ancient 
India. Another Tamil pramsti known so far from only 
one inscription * of the tenth year, gives some parti- 
culars about Pandyan affairs which are confirmed 
by the Tiruvalangadu plates. In another inscription 
dated in the twenty -fourth year, f the Tamil praSasti 


• 363 of 1917. 


1 118 of 1888. 



RAJENDRA 


% 


follows the usual form up to the conquest of Takkana- 
ladam, and then proceeds to record transactions relating 
to princes of the blood royal, and Rajendra’s relations 
with Ceylon and the Cajukyas ; this unique text which 
ends by calling him Rajakesari * is beset with many 
difficulties of interpretation, and as it is a copy of an 
earlier original, it is possible that a mistake has 
occurred in the re-engraving. Lastly, the account given 
of Rajendra’s military achievements in the Sanskrit 
part of the Tiruvalangadu plates was written, quite 
obviously, f after all conquests were over, and by the 
side of indications gained from the different stages of 
the Tamil praSasti in different years, this Sanskrit, 
account must be held to be of decidedly inferior 
import to the chronology of the reign. But the poet 
Niirayana who composed the long Sanskrit praSasti 
is entitled to our admiration not only for his high 
literary quality but for the attention he gives to the 
facts of his patron's reign which is fuller than is usual 
with court-poets. In fact, his account forms, at several 
points, a valuable supplement to the Tamil praSasti. 


Riijadhiriija 

yurarTi/ii. 


Very early in Rajendra’s reign, he appointed his 

son Rajadhiriija as yuvaraja to assist 
him in the work of the state. Calcula- 
tions made from Rajadhiraja’s records 
have led to the conclusion that this happened on some 
day between 15th March and 3rd December 1018 A.D.,J 
most probably in the early months of the seventh year 
of Rajendra himself. For over twenty-five years from 
that date, father and son, Parakesari and Rajakesari 
ruled together and shared the burdens of empire. The 
inscriptions of Rajadhiraja, with the introduction 


• The mistake possibly arose from a RtijakSsari also having rilled jointly 
with the king for some years before the date of the record ; but see infra, 

t ARE. 1906 11 13. t EL P* 218. 


30 


[ 233 ] 



THE COLAS 


beginning tingalertaru, give an account of the part 
played by this prince in the campaigns of his father, 
and up to about the twenty-sixth year of Rajadhiraja’s 
reign, his records must be understood to supplement 
those of Rajendra by giving an alternative description of 
more or less the same transactions from the standpoint 
of Rajadhiraja’s part in them. * In an inscription of 
his twenty-sixth year from Tirnmalavadi which adopts 
the shorter form of his introduction, f Rajadhiraja’s 
umbrella of state is said to have functioned as if it were 
the shadow of the white umbrella of his father who con- 
quered with his army the Ganges in the North. Ceylon 
in the South, Mahodai in t he We st and Kadiiram in the 
Eastj rhis clear statement that the son ruled in full regal 
state in the life-time of his father, and that for as many as 

twenty-six years, provides the key for 
the proper understanding of an impor- 
tant aspect of Co]a history. Adopted in 
the first instance, possibly, as a device to obviate dispu- 
ted succession, the system of choosing a successor in 
the life-time of the ruling king and associating him, 
after a formal installation, in the discharge of important 
public duties pointed the way, under the stress of empire, 
to a more deliberate and extensive application of the 


Princes as 
administrators. 


m Hultzseh observed: “Rajadhiraja appears to have been coregent of (hts 
predecessor Rajendra Cola I) and cannot have exercised independent royal func- 
tions before the death of the other. It is m perfect accordance with this conclusion 
that his inscriptions which have been discovered so for are all dated in the later 
years of his reign viz., between the 26th and 32nd years.* * SI I, iii. p. 52. 
When Hultzseh said this, 172 of 1894 (Tirukkalukkuiijram> of the 26th year 
was the earliest record available. Since then, the tingaftr introduction has been 
reported as found in 484 of 1925 (Year 10) and 392 of 1921 (year 18), but on 
examining the impressions of these records, I have found that they are both 
dated in the thirty-sixth year. It is possible, however, that some records (with 
early regnal years) which, though contai/ung no prasastis , give imperial titles to 
RijSdhirSja Tribhuvanacakravartin (241 of 1927) and Cakravartiga) (124 of 
1922), really belong to Rajadhiraja I. See also 244, 245 of 1929. 

+ 75 of 1895 It 2'4, {Sff. v. 633). These lines seem to have been taken 
to mean no more than that RajSdhiraja inherited his kingdom from his father— 
ARE. 1913 II 26« 


E«4 ) 


RAJENDRA 


principle to the administrative arrangements of the 
empire. The princes of the blood royal who had come 
of age were appointed to positions of authority in the 
different provinces of the empire, care being taken to 
give to each the position suited to his capacity and 
talent. The person chosen as heir apparent was 
distinguished from the rest by a formal installation, and 
by his higher status; in the case of Rajadhiraja, who 
was not the eldest son of Rajendra and must have been 
chosen as yuvaraja for his outstanding ability, his 
status is clearly implied by his separate historical 
introductions and by his titles even during his father's 
life-time. The contemporary Coja-Pandya viceroys, 
also Coja princes, either use no historical introductions 
in their inscriptions, or when they do so, adopt that of 
the ruling sovereign, Rajendra. In the early years of 
his reign Rajendra seems to have been assisted only 
by one such subordinate ruler with jurisdiction over 
the Pandya and the Keraja countries, besides the crown 
prince Rajadhiraja, though it is possible that in later 
years others were similarly recognized elsewhere. It is 
probable that when chosen for such employment, the 
princes underwent an investiture of some sort which, 
among other things, conferred on them the right to wear 
coronets of their own, suited to their relative positions 
in the state. Rajadhiraja and his successor are said, in 
their inscriptions, also to have continued these arrange- 
ments. This wise system initiated by Rajendra I, by 
finding suitable occupation for the energies of restless 
princes of the royal family, doubtless allayed their 
discontent, diminished the chances of palace intrigues 
and revolutions, and at the same time brought new 
strength to the administration of an over-grown empire 
which was called upon to face many difficult problems, 
domestic and foreign. 


[ 285 ] 



THE COLAS - 


We shall now trace the progress of Rajendra’s 

conquests as recorded in the sources 
* above mentioned, accepting as our 

basis the precise indications of chronology in the 
liru manni valara introduction. From this introduction 
we learn that up to the third year of his reign he had 
conquered Iditurai-niidn, Banavase (Vanavasi) encircled 
by a continuous hedge of forest, Kolhppiikkai whose 
ramparts were surrounded by §tdli trees, and Mannaik- 
kadakkam whose fortifications were unapproachable. 
Whether this account is a retrospective version of 
Rajendra’s invasion of Rattapadi of the year 1004 A.D. 
so vividly described in the Ilottur record dated three 
years after it, or recounts a second campaign necessi- 
tated by the recovery of Satyasraya, cannot be decided 
with certainty. In any event, the campaign took place 
before 100S A.D. because it was directed against 
Satyasraya himself, who was succeeded by Vikrama- 
ditya V about that year. Iditurai-nadu, Ededore 2000, 
“ was a stretch of country between the rivers Krsna on 
the north and Tungabhadra on the south, comprising 
a large part of the present Raichur district. 1 ' * Kollip- 
piikkai was, doubtless, Kulpak, about 45 miles north- 
east of Hyderabad, “invariably termed KoUipaka in the 
inscriptions," f and the centre of a 7000 district which 
was later on, at the beginning of the next century, ruled 
for some time by Somesvara III, as viceroy under his 
father Vikramaditya VI. Kulpak was still the centre of 
a province ruled by a governor under the Kakatlyas in 
the thirteenth century. In Mannaikkadakkam with 
its strong fortifications one may easily recognise the 
Manyakheta which according to the Kanyakumuri 

• Fleet, El. XII pp. 205-6. 

f Journal of the Hyderabad Archaeological Society, 1916, pp. 14 ff. See 
also /A, xliv pp. 213*5. 


[ 236 ] 



RAJENDRA 


inscription * became the sporting ground of Rajendra’s 
forces in battle. Manyakheta (Malkhed) must have 
suffered greatly in this invasion of Rajendra.\In the 
closing years of Rastrakiita domination, it had been 
once sacked and plundered by the Paramara ruler of 
Malwa ; and now, forty years later, under the Cahik- 
yas, a worse fate overtook the unfortunate city. This 
must have weighed greatly with the Calukyas who, 
soon after, transferred the capital to Kalyani or 
Kalyanapura, 48 miles to the N. E. of Malkhed. f An 
inscription of Rajendra from the Trichinopoly district,, 
dated in his third year, + mentions an incident in the 
fight with Satyasraya before Maiinaikkadakkam. A 
certain orutiman Nakkan Candran, a native of Urrattur, 
was ordered by the king's own mouth (perutnul tiruvayul 
moljya) to attack the enemy’s elephant and apparently 
lost his life, and for his benefit a gift was made to the 
temple of Mahlideva in his native village of Urrattur. 
In this campaign, therefore, Rajendra crossed the 
Tungabhadrii, carried the war into the heart of the 
Cajukya country and attacked their very capital. It is 
not easy to see how these operations across the 
Tungabhadrii could have been coupled with an attack 
on Banavasc, long celebrated as the centre of Kadamba 
power, and then part of the W. Oiilukya kingdom. 
Banaviise lies much outside, and too far to the west 
of the line of advance indicated by the rest of this 
campaign; § and yet the language of the inscription 

• v. 70. 

t Flcrt ascribe* this to SomSivara I, Horn. Has. I, ii pp. 427, 444, ; E\ . 
Xiii pp. 180-2. The transfer might have occurred earlier. 

% 515 of 1912. 

§ Dr. S.K. Aivangar apparently finds no difficulty here. He says : 11 Having 
mastered possession of this debatable frontier of all South Indian history 
(RatehTSr do ah), he proceeded northwards into the southernmost districts of the 
<K3struktl(A country/ 1 (italics i\\vM*Gan^aikon^a Cola p. 544). It is possible 
that more than one army took the field at the same time. 

[ 237 ] 



THE COLAS 


seems to render it obligatory to treat the whole as one 
campaign, and the names mentioned as the different 
stages, though not in that order, of a single expedition. 
This and the date of the Ilottur inscription go far to 
suggest that the data furnished by Riijendra’s inscrip- 
tions also belong to the war which was waged about 
1004 A.D. against Satyasraya by Rlijaraja, and that in 
this war the advance of Rajendra against the 
Cajukyas started from somewhere in the N.W. of 
Mysore, took a generally north-eastern line along the 
course of the Tungabhadra until the Raichiir doab was 
reached, when a more northerly course was struck, and 
Kulpak and Miilkhed became the objects of attack. A 
mandapa at Tiruvorriyiir called Manijiaikonda-^ola was 
among the mementos of this campaign. * 

The conquest of the whole of Ila-mandalam 

(Ceylon) is the next achievement men- 
* Ceylon " ar ‘ tioned. As some of the inscriptions of 
the fifth year f do not include this conquest, while 
others t do so, we may be sure that the war against 
Ceylon was undertaken in the fifth year, A.D. 1017-18. 
The Mahdvamsa places the completion of the Co]a 
conquest of Ceylon in the 36th year of Mahinda V 
which falls also in A.D. 1017 according to the latest 
scheme of Ceylonese chronology established by 
Geiger. § About twelve years before this date, Rajaraja, 
taking advantage of the confusion in the island king- 
dom which arose from a military revolt against 
Mahinda V, had brought it under his power with the 

* 103 of 1912. t so of 1897 ; 439 of 1907. 

X 4 of 1890; 257 of 1903. 585 of 1906 from Emba^i {also fifth year) 
carries the conquests further up to Sandim&ttlvu. But as the inscription men- 
tions the 25th year of the reign, it was engraved much later and is to be accepted 
with caution. 

$ CV, ii p. xili. 


[ 238 ] 



RAJENDRA 


exception of its remoter parts which were still held by 
the Singhalese. As a result of his expedition Rajendra 
claims to have captured the crown of the kings of 
Ceylon * the exceedingly beautiful crowns of their 
queens, the fine crown and the garland of Tndra which 
the Pandya had previously deposited with them (the 
kings of Ceylon), and the whole fla-mandalum on the 
transparent sea. The Mahiivamsa does not mince mat- 
ters and gives a straight account which confirms the 
claims made by Rajendra in his inscriptions: f 

44 In the six and thirtieth year of the king’s (Mahindu V’ s) 
reign the Colas seized the mahesi, the jewels, the diadem that he 
had inherited, the whole of the (royal) ornaments, the priceless 
diamond bracelet, a gift of the gods, the unbreakable sword and the 
relic of the torn strip of cloth, f But the Ruler himself, who had 
tied in fear to the jungle, they captured alive, with the pretence of 
making a treaty. Thereupon they sent the Monarch and all the 
treasures which had fallen into their hands at once to the Cola 
Monarch. In the three fraternities and in all Lanka (breaking 
open) the relic chambers, (they carried away) many costly images 
of gold etc., and while they violently destroyed here and there all 
the monasteries, like blood-sucking yakklms, they took all the 
treasures of Lanka for themselves. With Pullatthinngara as base, 
the Colas held sway over Rajarattha as far as the locality known as 
Rakkhapasfuiakantha. . . . King Malnnda dwelt twelve years 

in the Coja land and entered into heaven in the forty-eighth year 
(from his ascent of the throne.)” 

* Hultzfich (5//. iii p. 28) translates : “ the crown of the king of Ilam (who 
was as tempestuous as) the sea iu fighting,” But in the phrase: “ poru-kadal- 
1 [attarasar-tamudiyum , ' ' porukadal is an attribute, not of 1 arasar,’ but of 
l)am\ See El, ix p, 233 The plurals in ‘ arasar 1 ’and ‘ avar dlviyar * are 
meant to show that . the hereditary crown is intended. Sec extract from the 

MV, which follows, 

+ C V, Ch. 55 w. 16 IT. The three preceding verses talk of a horse-dealer 
informing the C<5|a king of the confusion in the island and bringing about the 
invasion ; this part of the story perhaps applies to Rajaraja's invasion which 
is not otherwise noticed by the M V, 

t Chinnapa((Mdhtituka which Geiger thinks might have been a Buddha 
relic, highly prized, among the regalia of the Singhalese kings. Wijesimlia trails - 
Utes: "and the Sacred forehead band/’ 

[ 239 ] 



THE COLAS 


Rajendra thus succeeded in getting hold of the 
Pandyan regalia left behind by Rajasimha, which 
Parantaka 1 had sought and failed to secure. The Cola 
inscriptions are silent on the details of the conquest and 
draw a veil over the pillage of Lanka so vividly chro- 
nicled in the Ceylonese annals, though one inscription 
apparently mentions Mahinda’s submission to the Co]a 
king after he was transported to the mainland. * 
1 Rajendra's success was complete, and the whole of the 
island became a Cola province. We have some inscrip- 
tions of Rajendra at Polonnaruwa and in the Colombo 
museum with the tim manni valara introduction f ; but 
these are in a very damaged condition, and valuable 
only as furnishing clear epigraphical confirmation of 
Rajendra’s conquest and rule in Ceylon/ Several Hindu 
temples, Devales devoted to oiva and to Visnu, have 
been discovered in the vicinity of Polonnaruwa ; these 
are built of stone and in the Tamil Cola style of archi- 
tecture, and all of them must have been constructed 
in this period of Cola rule in the island. The Mahammsa 
adds that twelve years after Rajendra’s invasion, possi- 
bly also after the death of Mahinda V, his son Kassapa 
who had been brought up in secret by the Singhalese 
for fear of the Colas, became the centre of a national 
resistance against the Tamil power, and that, after a 
six month’s war in which a great number of Daniijas 
were killed by the Singhalese forces, he succeeded in 
making Rohana once more independent of the Tamil 
province and ruled it as Vikkamabahu I for a period of 
twelve years (1029-41 A.D.). The events of Vikkama- 
bahu’s reign belong to a later stage of Rajendra’s rule 
and may be reserved for further consideration at the 
proper place. 

• 642 of 1909 (yr. 7). 

+ 595, 618 of 1912 (SII. iv 1389 ; 1414). 

[ 240 ] 



RAJENDRA 


In his sixth year, * * * § A.D. 1018, Rajendra seized the 

heirloom of the Kerala monarch inclu- 

Kcrftjsi Wifi • i t 

ding the crown praised by many and 
rightfully worn by him, and the garland emitting red 
rays, f He also took the “ many ancient islands, whose 
old, great guard was the ocean which makes the 
conches resound." In the next year, he captured the 
crown of pure gold worthy of Tiru (LakismI) that had 
been deposited in ^andimattlvu, in view of its strong 
fortress, by Parasurama who, roused in war, had 
uprooted the kings (of the world) twenty-one times. £ 
Some light is thrown on these rather obscure transac- 
tions by the account of Rajendra’s southern campaign 
given by the Tiruvalangiidu plates and by a single 
stone inscription of the tenth year § which gives an 
account of Rajendra’s policy in the Pandya country, 
not found in the other stone records of the reign. The 
Tiruvalangiidu plates say : 

“This famous and heroic kin", possessed of a powerful 
army ami bent upon the performance of meritorious deeds with 
heaps of money acquired by his own arm, then set his heart 
upon a digvijaya . 

Accordingly after arranging for the protection (in his 
absence) of his own capital, the unrivalled king Uttama Cola first 
started in the direction marked by Triianku (the south) desirous of 
conquering the Pandya king. 

The commander (< dandanatha ) of the ornament ( Malta ) to 
the Solar race (Rajendra) (thereupon) struck the Pandyan king who 
had a great force; and the Pandya abandoned his home in fright 

and fled for refuge to the Malaya mountain, the abode of Agastya. 

/ 

* 22 of 189^1 211 of 1911. 

* 

t Kripadtti means ‘victorious army'; ‘ Sengaiir-mUlai’ may be taken more 
literally at above instead of being understood as meaning the sun. Contra Hultzsch 
F. 1. ix p. 233. 

t 29 of 1897 (SII. ii 82) ; 7+ of 1907 <yr. 8). 

§ 363 of 1917. 1 w. 89-97. 


31 


[ 241 ] 



THE COLAS 


Rajaraja’s son, the master of policy, took possession of the 
bright spotless pearls, the seeds of the spotless fame of the Pancjya 
kings. 

After establishing there his own son, Sri C51a-Pan<Jya, for 
the protection of the Pandya country, the light of the Solar race 
then proceeded to the conquest of the West. 

Having heard of the ignominy sustained by kings at the 
hands of Bhargava in battle, this proud king, not finding him 
(Bhiirgava) on the face of the earth, developed a desire to conquor 
the land created by him. 

Who else, other than this supreme lord (Paramos vara) can 
entertain the thought in his mind of subjugating (lit. humiliating) 
that ancient land protected by the glory of the ornament of the 
Bhrgukula and free from the inroads of enemies ? 

The fearless MadhuiTmtaka crossed the Sahya (mountain) 
and forthwith set upon the Kerala in great force, and there ensued 
a fierce battle which brought ruin upon kings. 

After having (thus) conquered the Kerala king and harrowed 
the land guarded by the austerities of the lord of the Blirgus, 
the prince returned to his capital, the abode of prosperity.” 


It may be doubted if by this campaign Rajendra 
added any new territory to his dominions. The 
Pandya and Kera)a countries had been conquered by 
Rajariija very early in his reign, and * the many anci- 
ent islands ’ towards its end. These 
n° new islands were the Maldives : the obscure 

conquests. , . 1 

Sandimattlvu of legendary fame is 
apparently to be sought also among the islands of the 
Arabian sea. The effective hold retained by Rajaraja 
on his southern conquests becomes clear from his 
numerous records in the Pandya country and from 
an inscription of the third year of Rajendra * men- 
tioning an endowment in Tiruvisalur by the queen 
of a Pandya king called Ssrlvaljuvar. While the Tamil 
pra&astt of Rajendra mentions some new achievements 

• 46 of 1907. 

[ 242 ] 



RAJENDRA 

of the king in Ceylon and Kerala, the most consider- 
able among them being the seizure of the regalia of 
the different kingdoms of the south, it has nothing to 
say on Pandyan affairs. The vague statements of the 
Tiruvalangadu plates that the Pandyan king fled to the 
Agastya hill and that Rajendra took his pearls ave too 
conventional to be accepted literally; a stone inscrip- 
tion of the tenth year, * however, confirms the state- 
ment of the copper-plates that the king established his 

own son in Madura as his viceroy with 
"T* t * , ^ e Coja-Pandya and also states 

that Rajendra built a palace in Madura 
by, whose weight the earth became unsteady.’ The 
same inscription implies that Rajendra repeated his 
father’s performance at Kandalur-salai. This Pandyan 
viceroy, who was soon after placed in charge of the 
Kerala country as well, was Jatavarman Sundara Coja- 
Piindya to whose time belong the largest number of 
the Coja-Pandya inscriptions so far known. 


An inscription f of Rajendra informs us that in his 

twenty-fourth regnal year, the emperor 

A £ 

e 0 made a grant of land to the temple 

appointment. 0 # L 

built at Mannarkovil (Tinueveily) by 
the Cera king Rajasimha and called Rajendra-Sola- 
vinnagar, and that this grant was to take effect from 
the fifteenth year of Jatavarman Sundara Coja-Pandya. 
Assuming that the fifteenth year of the viceroy fell 
either in the twenty-fourth year of the emperor or 
possibly a. little earlier, Jatavarman Sundara Coja- 
Pandya must have been appointed viceroy about the . 
sixth or seventh year of Rajendra, a date which fits in 
with the indications furnished by the Tiruvalangadu 
plateB taken along with the Tamil praSasti. The 

• S63 of 1917. t 112 o{ 1905 

[243 ] 



THE COLAS 


Mannarkovil inscription is also valuable in other res- 
pects. It shows that the viceroys enjoyed almost regal 
status and were allowed officially to issue orders dated 
in their own years of office. It also indicates the close 
contact maintained between the headquarters of the 
empire, — Rajendra was residing in his palace at KancI- 
puram when this gift was made, — and the viceregal 
courts. Lastly, the jurisdiction of the Coja-Pandya 
viceroy over the Cera country is clearly seen in the 
Cera king building a temple in the Pandya countiy 
and naming it after the Cola emperor. From his inscrip- 
tions we see that Jatavarman Sundara Coja-Pandya 
ruled as viceroy for at least twenty-three years, up to 
about A. D. 1040. One of the latest * of these inscrip- 
tions opens with the pra§asti of Rajendra himself, 
( tiru manni valara). Another states that Suclndram 
in Nahjinad (South Travancore) came to be called 
Sundara-sola-caturvedimangalam after the viceroy, f 
One curious fact not easy to explain is the record of a 
grant at Kottar (near Nagercoil) in south Travancore 
by an Eastern Cajukya prince who called himself 
Sarvalokasraya Sri Visnuvardhana Maharaja alias 
Cajukya Vijayaditya Vikkiyanna. The inscription is 
dated in the 11th year of Sundara Coja-Pandya f i.e., 
about A. D. 1029.^ Kottar was a strong fortress of 
strategic importance in those days and the Cojas 
maintained a strong garrison there ; it is quite possible 
that an Eastern Cajukya prince who held an important 
place in the army lived in Kottar for some years. But 
his identity is uncertain in the extreme. 

In the years A. D. 1021 and 1022, Rajendra 

resumed the war against the Western 
4 C5lukya War ‘ Cajukya power. Jayasimha, who had 
succeeded his brother Vikramaditya V about 1016 A.D., 

• 617 of 1916. t TAS. iv pp. 134-5. J 44 of 1896. 

[ 244 ] 



RAJENDRA 


was displaying unwonted energy in recovering territory 
lost to the Cojas in previous wars. The Balagamve 
inscription of 1019 describes him as defeating the 
Colas and the Ceras, * and this is borne out by the 
presence of his inscriptions about this time in Bellary 
and the N. W. of Mysore, "j* Rajendra’s war against 
Jayasimha is described in his Tamil praiiasti in the 
following terms : 

“ ( IIc captured) the seven and a half lakhs of Rattapadi 
(which was) strong by nature, and vast quantities of treasure, 
together with the inestimable reputation of Jayasimha who, out 

of fear and to his great disrepute, turned his back at Musangi 
and hid himself. ” J 

The assertion that the whole of Rattapadi fell into 
the hands of Rajendra is, of course, a gross exagge- 
ration. In fact, in the Cola inscriptions of this period, 
this is no more than a conventional way of recording 
some temporary advantage gained in the field against 
the Ciijukyas. The rest of the statements in the 
pi aSasti seem to be true. There was an engagement 

• Fleet DKD. 436. 

t Rangachari-BelUry 279, 471; EC. vii Sk. 220, 307. 

t Ilultisrh translates - 1 payangoju palimiga ’ into " out of fear anil full of 
vengeance." (A/, ixp. 233), Pali means 4 vengeance * in some contexts ; but 
here it has surely another meaning: 1 disrepute \ The idea is that by his flight 
he lost his reputation as king or warrior. The phrase ‘ ti a va n i d ikk it lap- per um a li- 
galum is not clear. Hultzsch understands this independently of the Rajtapaiji 
campaign, and translates : 41 the principal great mountains (which contained) 
the nine treasures (of Kuhera).'* This flawless literal rendering is not 
intelligible, and Hultzsch has not explained what he understands by it. Dr. S. K. 
A iy an gar is inclined, on the other hand, to see a place name of unknown 
identity in Navanidhi-kula, like Namanaikkonam, PailcappaUi ami Masuni-des'a. 
(Sewt]J-//? l r/ 0 / tcctl Inscriptions p, 65, n.) But unlike kdnam, palli and d7sa, an 
ending in hula seems most unlikely for a place name. *1 think the whole ex- 
pression is a rhetorical way of stating that much treasure fell into the hands of 
Rajendra. * A ulap~peru-Mataiga{ * suggest, by recalling the 4 Kulaparvatas ’ of 
legend, the vastness of the treasure ; and 4 navanidhi , 4 though usually employed 
of the insignia of Kub£ra, is introduced here to suggest the variety of the 
treasures of the Calukya monarch, cf. kuladhanam-akhilam yasasca muktvil 
bkayam avalambya palayanam cakZra (v, 105) of the same context in the Tiru- 
Valangityu plates. 


[ 245 ] 



THE COLAS 


at Musangi or Muyangi, as it is spelt variously in the 
inscriptions, and Jayasimha certainly did not get the 
best of it. Musangi was most probably the same as 
Uccangidrug in the Bellary district. * To a descrip- 
tion of this campaign the Tiruvalangadu plates devote 
a considerable number of well-turned verses in the 
best Kavya style, and though there are ten such 
verses, f we learn on the whole less about the actual 
occurrences in the war from these than from the few 
lines of the Tamil pra§asti translated above. The king 
started from Kaficlpuram on his march against the 
Ratta country, there was fierce battle between the 
forces of the Cola king and those of Jayasimha, the 
latter fied to the forests and Riijendra returned to his 
capital with much booty. Typical of the turns of 
thought of the composer and suggestive of the date 
of composition is the verse : J 

“ It may be no wonder that the fire of his anger burst into 
a flame as it came into contact with the descendant of Taila. This, 
however, is strange that, having crossed the waters of all the 
oceans, it (the fire of his anger) consumed the enemy fuel 
( d v isadindh cuia.) 

Despite his defeat at Musangi, and the consequent 
boast of Rajendi’a that he captured Rattapadi, Jaya- 
simha was successful in retaining his hold on his terri- 
tory up to the Tungabhadra, if not beyond. Yf he Miraj 
grant dated in A.D. 1024 shows that Jayasimha was 
then in possession of Ededore 2000 and affirms that he 
had regained it after driving out the strong Cola, lord 
of the five Dravidas. § 

* SII ii p. 94*5. n. 4. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar thinks Maski more likely. 

f 99-108. t v. 101, SII. iii p. 423. 

§ IA, viii 18 ; Fleet DKD. 436 ; El. xii pp. 295-6. Krishna Sastri’s 
translation of verse 103 of the Tiruvalangafju plates is wrong in implying 
that the Ra^araja lost his life in the war ; parikhantjita means * defeated \ not 
4 cut to pieces. ' 


[ 246 ] 



RAJENDRA 



next 


The Ganges 
expedition. 


campaign undertaken by Rajcndra 
was the northern expedition in quest 
of the Ganges.! In the words of the 
Tiruvalangadu plates : * 


“The light of the Solar race (Rajcndra), mocking 
Bhaglratha who by the force of his austerities caused the descent 
of the Ganga, set out to sanctify his own land with the waters of 
that stream brought (thither) by the strength of his arm. ” t 


Judging from its duration, this campaign which 
lasted less than two years, J in which so many 
kingdoms of the north are stated to have felt the strength 

o o 

of Riijendra's troops, could hardly have been more than 
a hurried raid across a vast stretch of country. And 
the Tiruvalangadu plates state explicitly that the expe- 
dition was led by one of the king's generals and that 
ltajendra met him on his return somewhere on the 
hanks of the Godavari. § The events of the campaign 
as narrated in the same source may be summed up 
as follows : After crossing many streams by making the 
elephants in his army serve as bridges across them, the 
commander of Vikrama Cola’s forces lirst fell upon 
the strong army of Indraratha and took possession of 


• v. 109. 

t Dr. S.K. Aiyangar is fond of the notion that the scholaily Rajcndra, 
Pan<}ita-Cola as he was, had his imagination fired by a study of the Cura Sen- 
guJtu van’s exploits as narrated in the Stlappad ikara m , (C avgai-konda- Cola 
p. 5^8). We may wonder whether Rajcndra was such a Quixote ! 'I he poet 
Nurifyana has made another guess {utpr2k{a) t not less plausible, of Rajundra’s 
motive. And we have no record of the table-talk of Rajundra or of his reminis- 
cences. But is there anything calling for an explanation ? The ideal of ancient 
Indian monarchy was utthana and vtjigifd ; the power of a king was belli to be 
in proportion to the extent of territory conquered and the number of victorious 
raids led by him into foreign territory. 

$ 475 of 1911 (year 11) mentions it ; records of the tenth year do not. The 
detailed account first appears in the twelfth year Sff, i, 68 ; 467 of 1908. 

§ w. 110, 118. 

H Note this surname of Rajendra. 

[ 247 ] 



THE COLAS 


the territory of that ornament to the Lunar race of 
kings; then he captured the vast treasures of Rana- 
siira and entered the land of Dharmapala and subdued 
him also ; thereby, he reached the Ganges and caused 


the water of the river to be brought by the conquered 
kings to his sovereign lord Madhurantaka, whom he 
m6t oh~ the banks of the Godavari after conquering 
Mahlpala and taking away his fame together with 
many precious jewels. Then the valourous Rajendra 
struck the evil-minded Otta king and his younger 
brother and forced from him a tribute of rutting 
elephants. Thereupon, after himself killing an ele- 
phant that charged him while he was seated on the 
back of another, the king returned to his own splendid 
capital. The Tamil pra&asti records the same transac- 
tions, almost in the same order, but with much more 
detail, as follows : * 


“ (He seized) Sakkarakkottam, whose warriors were brave; 
Madura-mandalam destroyed in a trice, t the prosperous city of 
Na-manaik-konam with its dense groves, J Pancap-pal ji whose 
warriors (bore) cruel bows, § Masuni-desa with its green 
fields If ; a large heap of family-treasures together with many 
(other) treasures (which he carried away), after having captured 
Indraratha of the ancient race of the moon, together with (his) 
family, in a fight which took place (at) Adinagar, | (a city) 


• See £/. i:: p. 233. The notes below explain the variations in my rendering. 

t Hultzsch has : 41 whose forts (bore) banners which (touched) the clouds, ** 
which has no support from the text. 

X The translation here is based on the reading in 176 of 1923 ; ‘ ICfimitjai 
va I an agar N'Znianaikkdnatnttm. ‘ 

§ Another form has 4 vthjtna virar * for * vcHjilai-vtrar,’ 

H Read ' 11 p7lsa$aip- palana- mliuni-dlsam " ( S/I . ii 20 1. 5 and p. 108) 
for * pTisuQaip'fala-nan-mllSunl-disam * (Hultzsch) of the Tirumalai rock ; or 
translate 11 MSsugi-dEsa celebrated for fruits (amidst) green foliage, " 

J Read : “ Pi di-nagar-vatytr- cand tra u etc,, where 44 vaiybt " is the locative 
case ending, not to be read 4 nagaravaiytl * as has been done, 

[ 248 ] 


\ 





vM 


nTi ci 


jt - - ; ^Y, i 

V T«rji<Tr?i^l I 


Madu rai 



Map 

Showing 
RAJKNDR/VS 
Expedition 
To ilir 


{.A\(;rs 



RAJENDRA 


whose great fame knew no decline * ; Odda-visaya which was 
difficult of approach on account of its dense forest defence t ; the 
good Kosalai-nadu, wh*re Brahmins assembled ; Tandabutti, in 
whose gardens bees abounded, (land which he acquired) after 
having destroyed Dharmapala (in) a hot battle ; T akkan aladam , 
whose fame reached (all) directions, (and which he occupied) after 
having forcibly attacked Ranasura ; Vangala-desa, where the 
rain water never stopped, (and from which) Govindacandra fled, 
having descended (from his) male elephant ; elephants of rare 
strength, women and treasure, (which he seized) after having 
been pleased to put to flight in a hot battle-field the strong 
Maliipala J together with Sangu who wore the anklet (of valour) ; 
Uttiraladam (on the shore of) the expansive ocean (producing) 
pearls ; and the Ganga whose waters bearing fragrant flowers § 
dashed against the bathing places ( tlrtha ). ” 

f 

The l'acts that Sakkarakkottam was the first 

place taken by Rajendra's army in the 

Position of VengT. * / 

course of this campaign and that the 
king met his victorious general on the banks of the 
Godavari on his way back at the end of the cam- 
paign imply that the Vengl kingdom retained under 
Rajendra the same relation of close subordinate 
alliance with the Cola empire which it had held in 
Rajaraja’s time. 

* This seems better for * ayarvil van-ktrtti AJinagar ', than ( which was 
famous tor unceasing abundance * (liultzsch). 

t * Alii a i ' is a synonym for kavarkadu ’ ; Mantnickalat, xxviii, 1. 25. 

J Read- ° todti-kala?-ca ngu- vod ad a l M ayip'dlanai " (Ta ,l j° re SII, u 20 
plate.) Hult/sch’s talk of ‘ ear-rings, slippers and bracelets ’ of MahTpala is 
entirely out of place. Often also u todu - k ad at- can god- ad a l Mahipalan " 
(4-78 of 1 ( )02), where ‘ sangu ’ may mean conch {sankha ) 

§ 1 Veri malar * for * veri-manal * in some copies. 

U Or. S. K. Aiyangar suggests that this campaign started from Kulpak, the 
northern limit ot Rajendra’s earlier campaigns, or a from somewhere not tar 
off,” (Gangai-konda- CTda p. 549). There is no evidence, however, to show that 
at any time Rajendra became master of the W. Calukya territory in the present 
Hyderabad state so as to organise and despatch a large army from there on a 
campaign of aggressive warfare into foreign territory. And the Tiruvalanga^u 
plates are explicit, as Dr. Aiyangar has himself noticed (ibid, p, 547), that the 

expedition started from the Cr>la capital. 

[ 249 ] 


32 



THE COLAS 


&akkarakkottam has been identified with Cakra- 

« • 


5akkarak- 

ko^am. 


kotya which finds mention in a Naga- 
vamsi copper-plate grant from Bastar 
dated A.D. 1065, and its modern re- 


presentative is probably Citrakuta or Citrakota, 8 miles 
from Rajapura where the copper-plates were found. 
Rajapura, the capital of Bastar, is itself 22 miles 
north-west of Jagadalpur, on the bank of the Indravati 
river. * Sakkarakkottam and the places that follow 
up to Masuni-desam have thus to be sought in the 
territoiy contiguous to the Vengl kingdom to the 
north-west of it. Masuni-desam literally means the land 
of the snakes ; the kings of the Chindaka family 
represented by the Rajapura plates, called themselves 
N aga-vam so-dbh ava (born of the Cobra race), and 
Bhogavatl-pura-varesvara (lord of Bhogavatl, the best 
of cities); in a later stone inscription of Saka 1140, 
one of them is called &ri- bhujagavara-bhusana-maha- 
rajulu, f the maharaja who was the ornament of the 
race of the best of serpents. It is perfectly reason- 
able to suppose that by Masuni-desam is meant the land 
ruled by these kings. On this assumption, Madurai* 
mandalam, Namanaikkonam and Pancappalji must be 
sought in the same region and held to be parts of 
Masuni-desam. It may be noted that Cakrakota is itself 
called a mandala i like Madurai-mandalam, and that 
the donor of the Rajapura plates is called Madhu- 
rantaka. 


Of Indraratha of the lunar race, whose defeat at 


Indraratha. 


Ad in agar led to the surrender of the 
Odda (Orissa) country and the (southern) 


Kosala, nothing can be added to Kielhorn's sugges- 


tion § that he might be the same as the opponent of 


• El. ix pp. 178-9. t Md p. 163. 

X ibid p. 180, 1. 29* § EL vii List p. 120 n. 3* 


[ 260 ] 



RAJENDRA 


Bhoja of Dhara mentioned in the Udaipur inscription. * 
The Tamil inscription says that after the capture 

of Kosalai-nadu, the Cola general at- 
tacked and overthrew in order Dliarma- 
pala of Dandabhukti, Ranasura of southern Lada and 
Govindacandra of Vangala before he fought with 
Mahlpala of Uttara-lada and reached the Ganges. The 
Tinivalangadu plates, on the other hand, state that the 
attack on Ranasura preceded that on Dharmapala, and 
that the overthrow of Dharmapala led the Co}a general 
to the banks of the Ganges. They also imply that the 
conquest of Mahlpala was achieved on the return 
inarch. Obviously, both these accounts cannot be true, 
and as a choice has to be made, the Tamil pramati 
which was recorded almost immediately after the cam- 
paign must be accepted as the more authentic. On this 
basis, “ most probably Dandabhukti was the march-land 
between Orissa and Bengal,” t and its ruler Dharma- 
pala, of whom we know nothing more than his name, 
may have been a relative of Mahlpala, the powerful 
Pala ruler of Bengal at the time. The language of the 
Tamil inscription appears to suggest, J what seems 
likely even otherwise, that Mahlpala had a sort of 


* Dr. S. K. Aivangar says that ' 3adin agar of Tamil, hitherto read Xdi- 
nagar, Jajnugar of the Muhammadan historians,’ is no other than Yayatinagar, 
identified with Rinka bylliralal and said to have been founded by one of the 
early K?sari kings of Orissa. {C angat-kouda- Cola p. 550). Hut lie does not 
sav how lie gets lus new reading $adinagar. The Tirumalai rock inscription 
clearly has “ raukirtti-yuJinagar * ' ( El , ix p. 232, plate 1. 8) and the Tanjore 
record equally clearly” vankirtti AJinigar" (5//. ii plate 3, 1. 5, end), 
* vankwttiy'' yddinagat ’ is often found (77, 78, 78 A ot 1893) and van kit Mi Aya- 
J in gar ’ in 171 of 1894— all of years 16 and 17. One may doubt also whether 
the rather colourless * pilsttrar x?r ’ applied to Kosalai-na<Ju is susceptible 
of bearing the interpretation put on it by Dr. Aiyangar who sees in it some 
of the consequences of the invasions of Muhammad of Ghazni {ibid) . 

t R.D. Banerji - Pfilas of Bengal p. 71. 

X Contra R. D. Banerji : ” The Tirumalai inscription of Rajendra Coja 1 
shows that the ancient Gautja and Vanga had become divided into a large 
number of small kingdoms ” {ibid. p. 69.) 

[ 251 ] 



THE COLAS 


supremacy over the other chiefs named in this context 
and that the overthrow of Dharmapala, Ranasilra * and 
Goviudacandra led to the final struggle in which 
Mahipala was captured together with another person 
called Sangu, perhaps his commander. Lada (Rlidha) 
was the ancient name of a part of Bengal, which was 
bounded on the north by the Ganges, the divisions of 
Bengal across the river being known as Mithila and 
Varcndra. f The conquest of Vangula apparently def- 
lected the course of the Cola army a little to the east, 
and for the rest of it, its march was due North from 
the land of Southern Kosala. J 


There is nothing incredible in this record of an 

audacious raid into the northern eoun- 
i he campaign tries ordered by Raiendra and carried 

out so thoroughly by his datulamUta. 
It, is possible that small successes were magnified into 
great victories and that anv reverses sustained were 

Tj m 

S’lozed over: it is certain that the statement of the 

o * 

Tiruvalangudu plates § that the water of the Ganges 
was carried to Bajendra by the defeated kings of the 
north at the bidding of the Cola general is a boast 
without foundation. But of the substantial correctness 
of the story in its essentials we can entertain no doubt 
whatever. Partly on account of his imperfect know- 
ledge of the political geography of the period, and 
more on account of the embellishments introduced 

into the story by his own imagina- 
tion, Venkayya greatly underrated the 


Its nature. 


* A LaksniTsura was s a triad- at a r v ka - sa tn a n ta - cak ra - cut) a m a ni in the feign 
of Rumapala, {ibid p. 72.) 

f ibid, pp, 72-73 ; cf Pra bod ha - ca mh ml ay a , Art ii, where we have : vTitnwr 
ayam dakp n a i ad/ia-p radesa- dag a to - bh a vi$yati ; and Gaudum t ~i{t ra m - a n uiia m a m 
nirupama tatrupi Radhapurt. 

J See note A at the end of the chapter. 


1 252 ] 


§ w. 117, 119. 





To face page 232. 



{C>pyi± ‘ JSL 






RAJENDRA 


veracity of the inscriptions of Rajendra, and held that 
the expedition was nothing more than a pilgrimage to 
the Ganges. * Though the fetching of the water of 
the Ganges was perhaps present from the beginning as 
the object of the expedition, f the motive behind it was 
undoubtedly an exhibition of the power of the Cola 
empire and a demonstration of its strength to the rulers 
of Northern India. Such diyvijayas were undertaken 
by all powerful monarchs in India and were enjoined 
upon them by the political code of the country. The 
aim of the expedition was then not merely getting 
down the water of the Ganges to the Cola capital, but 
doing so after establishing a right of way, so to say, 
across territories outside the empire by a strong 
show of force. This becomes clear from the statement 


Effects. 


that at the end of the expedition Rajendra erected a 
‘ liquid pillar of victory ’ (jalumayam jayaslambham ) 
in his capital with the waters of the Ganges in the form 

of the tank Colaganga. J /“The in- 
vasion of the great southern conqueror 
Rajendra Cola I,” says lt.D . Ra.uer.jh “ flfifims. Jo_haye 
left some per manent mark s in Bengal. . . . _Some 

obscur e Ivarnata chief seems t o hav e fol lowed Raj e ndra 
Cola I and settled in w este rn Bengal . . . From 

'~ntnt'-wair descended Sa man l_ 

^;iken to he the founder of the S ena dyn asty”^ 


# AST. 1911-12 pp. 173-4. Venkavyu makes a gratuitous assumption that 
the water of the Ganges was taken at Allahabad, ami identifies La<Ja with 
Kerar. lie says : u As we cannot imagine that all Northern India was conquered 
hy Rajendra Coja’s general in about a year, the only reasonable alternative 
sf p ms to be that a few previously chosen tracts of country were actually invaded 
and if the inhabitants offered any resistance, a regular war was gone through* 
The names of the remaining territorial divisions with their rulers were ascer- 
tained and included in the list of kings overcome. . . . The exact course 

Which these roving pilgrims followed in Northern India cannot os easily traced at 
present " (p. 174). 

t v. 109 of the Tiruvalanglhju plates. 

x ibid V. 124. § PSlas of Bengal pp. 73, 99. 


[ 253 ] 



THE COLAS 


Karnatas of Mithila probably had a similar origin. 
A commentary, of uncertain date, to the Siddhanla- 
saravali of Trilocana Sivacarya mentions the fact that 
Rajcndra imported Saivas from the banks of the 
Ganges into his own kingdom and established them 
in Kanclpura and in the Cola country. * * * § 


(Rajendra’s overseas expedition against Kadaram 

is mentioned for the first time in his 
The Kadaram inscriptions of the fourteenth year, f 

campaign. 1 J 

While the Tiruvalangiidu plates dis- 
miss this achievement in a half verse which merely 
records that the king conquered Katliha with his 
powerful troops that had crossed the ocean, J the Tamil 
prasasti, gives a detailed narrative of the expedition 
and its course in the following words : § 


“ (Who) having despatched many ships in the midst of the 
rolling sea and having caught Sangnuna-vijayottunga-vannan, the 
king of Kadaram, together with the elephants in his glorious 
army, f (took) the large heap of treasures, which (that king) 


• Verse 111, end of Anantasambliu's gloss (Madras Mss Library). In two 
verses introduced by the glossator with the words ‘ atui 
gah,’ Rajendra is said to have himself gone to bathe in the ( lunges. Krishna 
Sastri wrongly ascribes these statements to the S id dhTnitasTu a:\ih itself and sug- 
gests that the work was composed in Rajcndra’s tune and under his palionage. 
Slf. iii introduction p. 22 


f 213 of 1911. Iain not sure of the correctness of the date in a record 
from MalTir of the 13th year (E C. ix op. 841 which also gives the lull 
introduction. There is a fragment dated in the llth year from KuruhTim 
(Mysore) mentioning the conquest of Kadaram (EC. x ct. 47). Hut tin* date 
is obviously too early; perhaps an instance of a gift of the llth soar 
recorded some years later. 


* V. 123. 

§ SlL ii p. 100. The notes that follow explain my differences with 
Hultzsch. 

^ The conjecture 4 vakiyam ' (p, 107 n. 5) does not help. The reading 
in other records 4 vagaiyam * is quite good, 4 vfigai * victory, 4 am * is 
expletive. Eorukatfal, 4 fighting ocean * is a common expression for 4 army \ 
* jCvtubakkari ' means 4 elephant with the kumba , the globular front.* 


[ 254 | 



RAJENDRA 


had rightfully accumulated; (captured) with noise the (arch called) 
Vidyadhara-torana at the “ war-gate ” of his extensive city * ; 
Sr! Vijaya T with the “ jewelled wicket- gate ” J adorned with 
great splendour and the “ gate of large jewels ” ; Pannai with 
water in its bathing ghats § ; the ancient Malaiyur with the 
strong mountain for its rampart f ; Mayirudingam, surrounded 
by the deep sea (as) by a moat ; Ilangasoka (i.e. Lankasoka) 
undaunted (in) tierce battles ; Mapappalam having abundant (deep) 
water as defence ; Mevfiimbangam, having fine walls as defence ; 
Valaippanduru having vilappanduru (?) | ; Talaittakkolam praised 
by great men (versed in) in the sciences ; Madamalingam, firm 
in great and fierce battles ; Ilamuridesam, whose fierce strength 
rose in war ** ; Manakkavaram, in whose extensive flower gar- 
dens honey was collecting tt ; and Kadaram, of fierce strength* 
which was protected by the deep JJ sea, 

* Hult/M'h has : * extensive city of the enemy. * The Tanjore text 
4 firttavanahanagar * can hardly give his meaning. I take it to be * arttu + 
avan + ahanagar 1 . The tempting suggestion of Coedes, that this and the 
following phrases may be attributes of Srtvi^aya {BEFEO. xviii No. 6 p. 5 n. 1) 
has been partly accepted by me. 

t See El ix p. 231. 

J 1 Pudavam 9 is a * small gate-way * in a larger door, a wicket. 

§ 4 Pannai ’ means 4 cultivated land * (i maruda-ntlam ). There may after 
all be no proper name here, but only * the well- watered field* ' ot 5rl Vijaya. 

This translation seems more literal than 4 (with) a fort situated on a 
high hill 1 for “ van*matai~UreyiL ” 

it * Possessing (both), cultivated land (?) and jungle * Hultzsch. Though 

* tflru * means ‘ low jungle, * the meaning of the whole phrase is by no 
means clear. 

** 1 Was subdued by a vehement (attack), * Hultzsch. The text is 

* kalZmudir - kadundiral ’ which means that the fierce strength (katjufidiral) 
increased ( mndir ) in fighting or war {kalfim), 

+f 41 Whose flower gardens (resembled) the girdle (of the nymph) of the 
southern region , u Hultzsch. Though I am not sure how this curious trans- 
lation was reached by Hultzsch, I suspect that he took the ph ase 
1 fbiakhavUrpolil ' to be composed of ‘ ten + nakkun + vSr + po]il \ and even so 
the translation is forced. In truth it is tSn + nakka + vSr + poj[il, the terms 
meaning respectively * honey \ * laughing * 4 long " and 4 flower-garden. 

Xt * Fotfu-kaijal * is rendered by Hultzsch into 4 the neighbouring sea. 
But * tocju * in the sense of 4 touch * is a late form ; and 4 toQu-kwfal is 
a classic phrase containing an allusion to the story of the sea being dug 
out by the tons of Sagnra ; totf* 1 means 4 to dig. 4 

[ 255 ] 



THE COLAS 


No clearer measure can be required of the prog- 


Progress 

in its elucidation. 


ress made in our knowledge of South 
Indian history during the last genera- 


tion than the difference between what 


was known of this expedition before and what we 
make of it now. rThe text of Rajendra's inscription was 
recovered and published in 1891 * * * § by Hultzsch. The 
larger Leyden grant had been known already for 
some years, and Hultzsch recognised at once in 
Sangrama-vijayottunga-varman of Rajendra’s inscrip- 
tion, a successor of Mara - vijayottunga-varman of 
Kataha or Kidaram of the Leyden grant. But his search 
for this place extended no further than the southern 
districts of the Madras Presidency, and strangely 
enough, as it now appears, he overlooked the facts that 
Rajendra’s expedition was a naval war and that the 
Pandya country had been conquered and subjected 
to the Cola sway several years befoi’e the date of this 
expedition ; and he identified Kidaram with the 
“ headquarters of a talluqa of the Ramnad zamin- 
dari in the Madura district, f ” Even as late as 


1903, though a great advance had been made by him 
from his original position, Hultzsch was still far from 
the mark when he said : { “Of the numerous places 
which are mentioned in connection with this expedi- 
tion, Mr. Venkayya has identified two, viz., Nakkn- 
varam and Pappujam. The former is the Tamil 
name of the Nicobar islands, § and according to the 
Mahaoamsa (lxxvi, 68) Papphala was a port in Ramafi- 
fia, i.e., the Talaing country of Burma. Hence Kada- 
ram will have to be looked for in farther India. ” / For 


• S/I. ii. 20. 

t i bid p. 106. 

t SIT. iii p. 195. 

§ This had been noted in Hobson - Jobson, DEFEO . xriii 6. p. 6, n. 5# 


[256 ] 



RAJENDRA 


some years thereafter, Riijendra’s expedition was held 
to have been directed against the kingdom of Peo-u 
and/the archaeologists of Burma even announced 
their discovery of two octagonal granite pillars near 
Pegu, which were identified by them “ with the 
Jayastambha or pillars of victory set up by Rajendra 
Cola who overran Pegu in 1025-27 A. D .”/*] It was only 
in 1918 that Coedes brought together in his cogent 
and lucid paper Le Royautne de Sri Vijaya f evidence 
accumulated along various lines by several years of 
study on the part of many scholars, discussed fully 
the identification of the places mentioned in connec- 
tion with Uajcndra's campaign, and laid the basis for 
intelligible account of it. The Archaeological 


an 


V-/ 

Department of Burma, though at first inclined to be 

r — ■ , ^ ,h. M ,i 

rati i al of Coedes' scheme, f later acknow- 
ledged itsjmhstantial aeouracy'ljy'TeTndvTng The cele- 
brated granite pitl'ars from the Tist of tlie protected 
monuments of Burma. § 


One fact to which llultzsch himself drew pointed 

attention has sometimes escaped the 

Umt) of the notice of later authors who have dis- 

campaign. 

cussed this campaign. It is that the 
inscription clearly implies that all the places named 
were taken from the king of Kadaram and in the 
CQiirse of a single campaign. In the words of 
Coedes : % “ The text says in effect that Rajendra 
Cola I, after having vanquished the king of Kadaram, 

# ARB. 1908, paragraph 25. 

f BE FRO. xviii No. 6. The extensive Researches (1909) of Gerini 
(Asiatic Society Monographs vol. 1), also deserves grateful acknowledgement 
from all students of the historical geography of Eastern Asia. 

J ARB. 1919, paragraphs. 46-47. 

§ ibid. 1922, paragraph. 14. II P* & 

[ 267 ] 

33 



THE COLAS 


seized his treasures, then a certain number of 
countries and lastly Kadaram. It is a question, then, 
of one and the same campaign, and it is a priori 
infinitely probable that the different countries enume- 
rated must have been either vassal states of the king 
of Kadaram, or even simply the different towns or 
provinces of his kingdom.’' Once this is recognised, the 
identification of the different places mentioned would 
be rendered easier by that of Kadaram and Sr! Vijaya, 
the two places ruled by the same king in the reign of 
Rajaraja, and conquered by Rajendra from Sangrama- 
vijayottunga-varman. 


“ Now, the annals of the Song (dynasty of China) 


Cbinrse annals 
on San-fo-tsi. 


mention, in 1003 and 1008, two em- 
bassies from the country of San-fo-tsi, 
the first sent by the king Sseu-li-tchou- 


lo-wou-ni-fo-ma- tiao-houa and the second by the king 


Sseu-li-ma-lo-pi. It is not necessary to be a sinologue 
to recognise in the first name a magnificent transcrip- 
tion of Srl-Cujamani-varmadeva, and in the second 
the transcription of the first syllables of Sri-Mara- 
ivjayottunga - varman ” * (Coedes). As these two 
monarchs are exactly those mentioned in the larger 
Leyden grant, we may conclude that the kings of the 
San-fo-tsi of the Chinese annals were the rulers of 
Kadaram and &rl Vijaya. San-fo-tsi was first used by 
the Chinese writers of the Song period for the place 

called Che-li-fo-che or Fo-che in the 


Called Fo-che 
earlier. 


earlier literature of China ; all Chinese 
writers have identified this name with 


Palembang, on the eastern coast of Sumatra. And 
Coedes has shown good reason for restoring the name 


• The Chinese habit of abridging foreign names, especially when they aro 
long, is well-known* 


[ 268 ] 



RAJENDRA 


Sri Vijaya. 


San-fo-tsi, Che-li-fo-che, into Vijaya, rather than the 

usual but meaningless form Srlbhoja. * 
It thus becomes clear that Sri Vijaya, 
which is the first among the places taken by Rajen- 
dra from the king of Kadaram, is the name of the 
kingdom of Palembang in Sumatra. The great part 
played by this kingdom from about the eighth to 
the thirteenth century A. D. in the affairs of the 
Malay peninsula and Archipelago, and the relations of 
Southern India with this important kingdom still await 
full elucidation. The epigraphs of Rajendra's reio-n 
which narrate his invasion of Kadaram and Sri Vijaya 
furnish much welcome information on the affairs of 
the kingdom at the beginning of the eleventh century. 
Writing towards the close of the twelfth century A. D. 
or the beginning of the thirteenth, f Chau Ju-kua 
gives a list of fifteen chou (provinces or towns) over 
which the rule of San-fo-tsi extended ; £ and as Coedes 
has observed, there is a partial coincidence between 
this list and that of Rajendra’s inscriptions. § The 
identification of Kadaram presents more difficulty ; 
this muy be discussed after we have dealt with the 
other places. 


Pannai. 


In the praxasti of Rajendra the name mentioned 

after Sri Vijaya is Pannai which has 
been identified with Pani or Panei on 
the East Coast of Sumatra. Ancient Malaiyur was a 
principality “ at the southern end of the Malay penin- 
sula, and precisely on the northern 
MdUoBr. g h ore of the Old Singapore Strait 

where, besides the Malayu river, time-worn traditions of 


• op, cit. pp. 23-4. See also Ferranti, L' Empire Sumatranais de Sri Vijaya 
JA, 1922, pp. 163 ff. 

t Hirth and Rockhill, Chan Ju-kua p. 35 ; Coedes, op. cit. p 13. 

I pp, 60-2, § op. cit. p. 25. 11 Geriiti, Researches p. 513. 

[ 259 ] 



THE COLAS 


a Malaya country and people confront the enquirer." * * * § 

As for Mayirndingam which had the 

Mayiru4ingam. / .* ° 4 ... , 

deep sea tor its moat, this place is 
quite obviously the same as Ji-lo-ting mentioned by 
Chau Ju-kua among the dependencies of Sri Vijaya. 
The same author also states that Ji-lo-ting and 
Kia-lo-hi “ are of the same kind ” as Tan-ma-ling. f 
Coedes has proved by decisive epigraphical evidence 
that Kia-lo-hi is the same place as Grahi at Jaiya 
and that consequently Ji-lo-ting (Yi-ru-dingam) which 
formed one of the northern dependencies of Sri Vijaya 
must be sought somewhere in the region of Jaiya 
towards the centre of the Malay peninsula. * Ilangil- 
sokam has been very properly identified with Liug- 

ya-sseu-kia of Chau Ju-kua's list of 

llangasokam. . 

dependencies, and its locality was to the 
south of the state of Kedah in the Malay peninsula. § 
Mapappalam, as was shown by Venkayya, is men- 
tioned in the Malta vamsa under the 

M.paip 4 am. name Papphiilama, || as the place where 

tire Tamil general Adicca landed when he was sent on 
an expedition against Ramawnadesa by Parakrama- 
biihu I of Ceylon about 1165 A. D. From this Ven- 
kayya concluded that Mapappalam must be a place 

* ibid. pp. 533-4. Coedes (p. 9.) leaves the (jnestion undecided whether 
MulaiyUr was on the Eastern or Western Coast of Sumatra or m the South 
of the Malay peninsula, and observes that, in any case, it must have been a 
state near Palembang which, according to 1-tsing,. annexed Malayu between 
670 and 705 A.D. (also Gerini pp. 530-1.) 

+ Chau Ju-kua p. 67. 

X Coedes op. ctt . pp. 10-11 ; 33-6. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar says : u Mayiru- 
4 ingam may be Besinga (Rsi fSpiga), the modern Rangoon " (op. at. p. 576). 
Contra. Gerini«pp. 76-7. We cannot, of course, go so far afield for finding 

Maymnjingam. 

§ Coedes, op. cit. pp. 11-13. 

% Geiger, CV. ch. 76, v. 63. 

,| ARE. 1898-9 paragraph 4*7 ; ARB . 1909-10, p. 14, paragraph 40v 

[ 260 ] 



RAJENDRA 


in the Talaing country of Lower Burma, and he has 
been followed by other writers who have proceeded to 
make other identifications on this basis. * In fact it 
seems at first sight that this mention of Pappiilam in an 
expedition against Ramanfiadesa violently contradicts 
the assumption that all the places captured by 
Rajendra were dependent on Palembang and within 
easy reach of it. Coedes, however, draws attention 
to the fact that the long list of the grievances which 
Parakramabahu had against the ruler of Rain anna 
ends with his capture by force of a Singhalese prin- 
cess whom the ruler of Lanka had sent to the Kiimbhoja 
country; f and suggests that “ as it is infinitely probable 
that the messengers going from Ceylon to Kambhoja 
passed by the isthmus of Kra, it is in this region 
that the abduction (of the princess) must have been 
committed, and consequently, the authority of the 
king of Pagan might have extended so far.” J In the 
beginning of the eleventh century, however, the 
suzerainty of Palembang exteuded up to the Bay of 
Bandon, and there is no difficulty therefore in assuming 
that Mapappajam was a locality in the region of the 
isthmus of Kra, though its exact identity cannot now 
be made out. In any event, the presence, among 
the conquests of Rajendra Cola I, of a locality which 
became part of Pegu in the Pith century, is not 

* E.g. Ka<jaram with (Sn)-khettara, ancient Prome (Kanakasabhai) ; 
MadamUlingam with Martaban (Smith) ; cf. Coedes op . cit. p. 6. 

t Geiger, CV. (ii p. 67) ch. 76 v, 35L 

t Coedes, pp. 14-5. The argument has been advanced {ARB. 1919 
paragraph 47) that Pappajam and Kusumi, the two ports mentioned in the 
AfahTwamsa account of the Ceylonese expedition against Ramaflfladesa must 
both be identified together ; and that as Kusumi is clearly Bassien, the former 
must be either Ilagan or Rangoon, the neighbouring port, This argument 
clearly underrates the express statement in the A fahUvamsa that the fleet was 
scattered by a storm and that different parts of it drifted to different ports 
(Ch. 76 vv. 56, 59, 63), which need not have been adjacent, 

f 261 ] 



THE COLAS 


Talaittakkolam. 


Ma-Damalin&im. 


sufficient to invalidate the identification of these 
conquests with the vassal states of Palembang. 
Mevilimbangam and Vajaippandiiru * do not lend them- 
selves to any identification at present. 
Talaittakkolam, most probably the same 
place as Takkola of the Milinda-Panha and Takola of 
Ptolemy, is localised by Gerini in the modern Takopa 
district south of the isthmus of Kra and identi- 
fied with its chief town, also called Takopa. f Others 
are inclined to locate it somewhat higher up, in the 
isthmus itself ; in any case, there is general agreement 
that it is a place on the West Coast of the Malay 
peninsula. Ma-Damalingam, firm in battle, can easily 

be recognised in the name Tan-ma- 
ling, which figures in Chau Ju-kua's list 
of the dependencies of San-fo-tsi. The same authority 
says : $ Ling-ya-sseu-kiatllangiisokam) “ can be reached 
from Tan-ma-ling by sailing six days and nights ; there 
is also an overland route (between the two countries) 
Gerini identifies Tan-ma-ling with Temiling or Tem- 
beling at the mouth of the Kwantan river in Pahang, 
on the East coast of the Malay peninsula ; § on this 
identification the learned translators of Chau Ju-kua 
observe: “As our author states that a land route 

existed between Tan-ma-ling and Ling-ya-ssi-kia, which 
we have good reason to believe was about Kedah on 
the West coast of the peninsula, it seems safe to con- 
clude that Tan-ma-ling cannot have been very far from 
where Gerini has located it.’' Blagden points out, 


* MSviJitnbangam is sought in Perak by RoufTaer, ami in Karmarang* 
(Kalasapura) by Levi. The lormer also identifies Vajaippandiiru with PSn^u- 
ranga in CampS. Krom observes : 4< A11 these conjectures depend on our opinions, 
*ot on sufficient grounds.” See Krom Hindoo Javanuht-G csthiedcnis pp. 251-2. 

t Coedes. p, 15; Researches p. 93, Sylvain Levi Ftolmi, U Niddlsa et U 
MrhatkathA in Etudes Asiatiques ii, 

\ Chau Ju-kua p. § ibid. pp. 67-8 n.l, JR AS. 1905 p. 498a 

[262 ] 



RAJENDRA 


as against this view, that six days would be rather a 
short time for sailing between Kedah and Kwantan 
considering the weak monsoon of the straits of 
Malacca ; Coedes overcomes the difficulty by supposing 
that the country of Tamralinga or Lankasuka or 
perhaps both occupied the peninsula in all its width 
... and faced the gulf of Siam as well as 

Ilamundesam. . 

the Straits. * Ilamuridesam is quite 
obviously the country in the northern part of the 
island of Sumatra, known to Arab geographers under 
the name Lamuri, called Lambri by Marco Polo, and 


Nukkavaram. 


figuring as Lan-won-li in Chau Ju-kua's enumeration 

of the subject states of San-fo-tsi. Mit- 
nakkavaram, it is equally clear, applies 
to the Nicoburs. This discussion of the place names 
mentioned in the campaign against the king of 
Kadaram distinctly points to the conclusion that the 
campaign of Rajendra was directed against the 
Sumatran Empire of Sri Vijaya and its dependencies 
in the Malay peninsula and Archipelago. 


We have, however, still to explain why the king 

ruling over the empire is called the 

Katjaram. ° ^ 1 

king of Kadaram and to locate it. 
This is a place which is mentioned under the name of 
lvataha in Sanskrit Literature and epigraphy, f and of 
Kadiiram or Kidaram in the Kulingattupparani besides 


* Op. cit. pp. 16-18. The name Tamralinga which Coedes obtains from a 
Sanskrit inscription from Jaiya {ibid p. 32) is near enough to Tan-ma-ling and 
Tam a ling, mi, or Tamalingam, and there should l>e no difficulty in accepting the 
view that all the three forms are variants of the same name. Coedes* suggestion 
that the Tamil name might be read ‘ Tamaralingam' (p* 17) is therefore unneces- 
sary ; it is inadmissible as 1 NHdamal ingam, (or Madamalingam) alliterates with 
the first half of the line ' titamtimfrinai ' in the Tamil inscriptions, and the 
sound 4 ra * is, by the rules of Tamil prosody, quite impossible in the second 
half of the line. 

t Tawney’s KaMtarUtlgara, i 87, 92, 552 ; ii +4, 598 where KajSha is 
called an island j and the Leyden grant. 

[ 263 ] 



THE COLAS 


the Leyden grant (Tamil part) and Rajendra’s inscrip- 
tions. The Kalingnttupparani clearly states that 
Kadaram was laved by the waves of the ocean. * 
The word Kalagam in the Paitinappalai, according to 
the commentator Naccinurkkiniyar, designates the 
country known as Kadaram, f an interpretation which 
has the sanction of old lexicons like the Pingalam. 
From these references to Kadaram, especially the one 
in the Pattinappalai, we may conclude that it was an 
important port on the ocean route along which the 
trade between India and the East passed. “ Now 
there is a country, ” says Coedes, J “ known to the 
Chinese of which the name seems to correspond very 
well with Katliha, that is, Kie-tch’a where I-tsing stayed 
on two occasions. ” The Bame place is called in 
later Chinese works Kie-t’o. These different names 
represent phonetically and geographically the modern 
Kedah, on the west coast of the Malay peninsula. 
Ancient Kedah would appear to have been more to 
the south than modern Kedah which as has been 
shown above was occupied by Lankasuka. At any 
rate, a study of I-tsing's itineraries proves to us 
that Kie-tch'a was the last stage in Malay before 
the pilgrim started to cross the Ray of Bengal on his 
outward voyage, and, inversely, the first place he 
touched after crossing the Bay on his return from 
India. In this fact is perhaps to be found the 

* yv. 138, 189. 

+ Pattuppatju p. 550 (3rd Edn.). Skt. Kapha and Tamil Katjuram are, as 
pointed out by Coedes (op. cit. p. 20; also Ferrand, J/U 1922 pp 50-1), semanti- 
cally related, and mean ** a copper cauldron ” ; Tam. Katfurum has also the 
tense of ** brown colour bordering on the black and Kljagam tho sense of 
u blackness $ \ Apparently this synonymity has induced Naccmarkkiniyar and the 
lexicographers to gloss KaJLagam by Kadaram. Katjaram and Kitjaram are 
evidently different readings of the same toponym ; they have, however, no 
phonetic connection with Kapha or with Kalagam. 

t pp* 20-2. 



RAJENDRA 


explanation fox the Co]as calling the mler of &rl Vijaya 
the king of Kadaram. For if, as seems most probable, 
Kadaram was at the time a dependency of SrI-Vijaya, 
and if it was also the first place which the Tamils 
touched in their passage into that kingdom, nothing 
could be more natural for them than to describe the 
ruler of the country as the king of Kadaram. And 
this port was then from a commercial point, of view 
enjoying the same importance which the port of 
Penang is gaining in the same region to-day. * 


Why was this expedition against the king of 

Kadaram undertaken and what were its 
Wt ettects r As we can get no direct answer 

the expedition. ® 

to these questions from contemporary 
records, we have to depend on the probabilities sug- 
gested by the known and relevant facts. The view that 
the overseas invasion was a continuation of the war for 
the complete subjugation of Kalingam f obtains no 
support from the records of Rajendra’s reign. That 
the Coja empire of South India was in constant com- 
munication with the islands of the Archipelago and 


# Ferrand says that Katjaram, K at aha and Kalagam cannot represent 
Kedah on the W. coast of the Malay peninsula {/A, 1922 p. 51). 

“ Geographically, M he says, “ Kadaram and Riorum are situated ia Sumatra 
according to Tamil texts, *' and he cites the authority of the PSnjya 

inscriptions 588 of 1916 and 356 of 1906 as summed up in the 

epigraphical reports. These texts by no means imply anything more than that 
the king of £Svakam was also the king of Kadaram in the thirteenth as in the 
eleventh century. The political position of Sri Vijaya and Kadaram in 
relation to Jaiya In the thirteenth century has been dealt with by Coedes 

in Bijdragm Tot di Taal Land etc. Deel 83 (1927) pp. 439 ft*. in the paper 
“ A propot de la chute Du Royanme d« &rt Hi ay a, *’ where he reiterates his 
view that Ka^Srnm is Kedah. Though Ferrand was inclined in 1922 (JA, p. 51) 
to locate Ka4**nu n in the south of Sumatra or on its East coast, it must be 
mentioned that he left the question open as he himself felt the weakness of 
the texts he relied on. Gerini’s brief discussion (at p. 833 of his Researches) 
on which Dr, S. K, Atyangar bases his identification of Kadaram with 
Kerti on the N, E. coast of Sumatra {Ganga*kon<ja CZIa pp. 568 ff.) has 
now been superseded. 

f S. K* Aiyangar, op, cit* pp. 566 ; 571. 

[265 ] 


34 



THE COLAS 


with China in this period is very clear. The cons- 
truction of the Cudamani-vihara in Negapatam by 
Mara-vijayottunga-varman of the Sailondra dynasty 
of &ri-Vijaya could not have been an isolated under- 
taking all by itself, but one of the normal results of a 
growing intercourse between the Eastern islands and 
South India for purposes of trade. As in ancient times, 
this trade was part of a flourishing maritime commerce 
between the countries of the Western world and China, 
in which Arabs, Indians and the people of the Malay 
peninsula and Archipelago acted as intermediaries. 
At the end of the tenth century A. D. * the Chinese 
government awoke to the value of the foreign trade 
which was just then reviving after a long interruption 
owing to the troubles which broke out in China in 
the latter part of the 9th century, and with the 
object of increasing this trade “ a mission was sent 
abroad by the Emperor with credentials under the 
imperial seal and provisions of gold and piece-goods to 
induce ' the foreign traders of the South Sea and those 
who went to foreign lands beyond the sea to trade ' to 
come to China.” It must have been in response to such 
friendly invitations that the kings of or! Vijaya sent 
the embassies of the years 1003 and 1008 A. D. to 
which we have already made reference. The annals 
of the Song dynasty record that the first mission to 
China from Chu-lien (Cola) reached that country in 
A. D. 1015 and state that the king of their country was 
Lo-ts’a-lo-ts'a (Rajaraja), which is correct as Rajaraja 
lived up to 1016 A. D. or thereabout, f Another embassy 

# Hirth sm<! Rockhill-Cfow Ju-kua pp. 18-9. 

t Gtfmi- Researches p. 609 n. 2 unduly abridges the length of RSjarSJa’s 
reign to 985-1002 and imagines difficulties which do not exist. Even it 
RfjarSja’s reign did not extend beyond the 29th year (1014), the embassy to 
China may have left in his life-time and reached China in the succeeding year 
after some delay m route in the Malay region. See also Chau Ju~kna p. 100. 



RAJENDRA 


from Shi-lo-lo-cha Yin-to-lo-chu-lo (Sri Rajalndra Cola) 
reached China in 1033 A. D., and a third in 1077 A. D. 
from Kulottunga-Cola-Deva. The commercial inter- 
course between southern India and China was therefore 
continuous and extensive. Writing in the latter half 
of the twelfth century, Cou-ku-fei states of San-fo-ts’i 
(Sri-Vijaya) : * “ It is the most important port-of-call 

on the sea-routes of the foreigners, from the countries 
of Sho-po (.lava) on the east and from the countries 
of the Ta-shi (Arabs) and Ku-Iin (Quilon) on the west; 
they all pass through it on their way to China." 


At the date of Rajendra’s expedition (c. 1025 A.D.) 
therefore, well over a quarter of a century must have 
elapsed from the renewal of active trade with the 
East consequent on the increased energy of the Cola 
empire under Rajaraja and the improved conditions 
in China, and knowledge about the Malay country 
and Archipelago must have been common in the 
Cola country. The larger Leyden grant, by stating f 
that, after his father’s death Rajendra continued in 
perpetuity the original grant of Anaimangalam to the 
Cudamaui-vihara in Negapatam, clearly implies that 
in the beginning of Rajendra’s reign the relations of 
the Cola kingdom with Ka^aram and Sri Vijayaui 
continued to be friendly. We have no means of 
deciding the exact cause of a quarrel, if there was one. 
We have to assume either some attempt on the part 
of Sri Vijaya to throw obstacles in the way of the Cola 
trade with the East, or more probably, a simple desire 
on the part of Rajendra to extend his diyvija >ja to the 
countries across the sea so well-known to his subjects 
at home, and thereby add lustre to his crown. What- 
ever the actual cause of the expedition, it is difficult to 


Cittd Chau Ju-km p* 63. 


t ASS A iv. p, 208 U. 86-88. 


[267 ] 



THE (JO LAS 


believe that, even if all the facts narrated in the ins- 
criptions of Rajendra are accepted as literally true, the 
campaign led to any more permanent result than a 
vague acknowledgement of the suzerainty of the 
invader on the part of Sangrama-Vijayottimga-varman. 
We shall see later that one of the successors of 
Rajendra, Virarajendra I, claims to have conquered 
Kadaram and restored it to its ruler who supplicated 
for it before the conqu'fcrorA In any case, there is no 
evidence to show that the Cojas made any attempt 
to rule these lands as provinces of their empire. * 
At best, they might have received a periodical tribute. 
The fragmentary Tamil inscription in Sumatra dated 
1088 A. D. f proves only the presence of Tamil 
merchants in tj*e island, a fact even otherwise well- 
established. 


By a tacit assumption, the rest of Rajendra's 

reign, which lasted for about twenty 
Remaining years years after the campaign against 

0/ RsjcQtir^s * i o n 

reign. Kadaram, has been treated by modern 

writers as an era of unbroken peace. $ 
A careful study of the inscriptions of his sons, 
especially of Kajadhiraja I, shows, however, that the 
empire did not enjoy such unbroken peace and that 

there was much fighting in different 

Not altogether parts of it carried on by his sons. It 

peaceful* 1 J 

is conceivable that after the digvijaija 
ofhi8 early years was completed and his greatness in 
war proclaimed to the world beyond perad venture, the 
emperor refrained in his later years from taking the 
field in person, allowing his sons every chance of 
winning distinction and glory for themselves. Yfhere 


• cf. Coede*, cp. eit. p. 8. 


t ARE. 1892 p. 12. 


J Dr. S. K. Aiy angar Ancient India p. 108 ; Cangtikonia Oja i 
$11. iii Jtttr. p. 21- 


1268 ] 



RAJENDRA 


is in existence one record, which is unique, of Rajendra 
himself to which attention may be drawn, * and 
which, if it is genuine, may be taken to confirm some 
of the inferences drawn from the early records of 
Rajudhiruja. (In any case, the records of Rajudhiraja 
dated before his twenty-seventh year fall clearly within 
the reign of Riijendra I, and a study of Rajendra’s 
reign will not be complete without some account of tin* 
transactions recorded in these inscriptions.) 

^Rebellions in the Pandya and Kerala kingdoms 

called for severe action, and the 

Rebellions In the . . , 

south. extensive campaign undertaken by 

Rajudhiraja for the suppression of 
these risings is described in the following terms : t 

44 Among the three allied kingB of the South (Pundyas }) 
(he) cut off on a battle-field the beautiful head of Mfinfibharanan. 
(which was adorned with) largo jewels (and) which was 
inseparable from the golden crown ; seized in battle Vira-Keralan 

t 

whose ankle-rings were wide, and was p’eased to get him 

118 of 1888 (.9//. iv 223) dated in the 24-th year anti fount! in 

Cidambararo. This record is curious in many ways and needs rather cautious 
handling. It starts in the usual manner, tini m<umi raUra etc., and follows 
the regular form up to m tt m in the narrative of the Ganges 

campaign. At this point, the pr<iuirfi takes a new turn, and what follows in 
this record is found almost word for word in some of the later records (e.g. 87 
of 189o) of Kaiendra 11, the second son of Rajendra I and successor to Rajadhiraia. 
We may he tempted to assume that Rujtmdta IPs record borrowed the expression 
Irom his father s Cidamharam prasatii which omitted the latter half of the 
usual form and substituted an account of the events of the second part of the 
king's reign# The beginning tint mamti vahira and the high icgnal year, 24, 
of this record favour this supposition. But there arc difficulties. The king 
is called RajakFstn, a title which neither of the two Ruiemlias hail; the new 
portion does not fit in well with the first part of the old prahtvti reproduced licit*. 

I his record is doubtless a copy of an earlier original, made in the reign of 
KulSUunga IH, (See beginning of 117 of 1888, Sff. iv 222). After all, some 
mistake might have occurred in the re-engraving and the records of two reigns 
might have been jumbled up. 

t Slf t iii. p. 56. I have altered HulUsch’s translation at some points. 

t Though “ tctWiivar M may mean Panovas it seems possible that here it 
mean* only “ kings of the South," an alliance between Ceylon (MlinSbharana) 

( S/I, Iti 29, 1» 13), K8r»la and being meant. 




THE COLAS 


trampled by his furious elephant Attivarana ; and drove to the 
ancient Mullaiynr, Snndara Pandyan of endless great fame, who 
lost in a hot battle the royal white parasol, the bunches (of 
hairs) of the white yak, and the throne, and who ran away, 
— his crown dropping down, (his) hair dishevelled and (his) 
feet tired. (He) sent the undaunted king of V5na<ju to the 
country of heaven and destroyed in anger the Senior (chief) of 
Iramakudam. * While the strong Villavan (Cera), in his terror t 
hid himself in the jungle, (the C<»|a) put on a fresh (garland of) 
Vanji flower, t and forthwith destroyed the ships at Kandajiir- 
Salai on the never-decreasing ocean. ” 

The exact date of this invasion of the Piindya and 
Kerala countries is unknown. As there are no Pandyan 
inscriptions of this period, we have only the story as 
given by the victors, and lack the means of checking 
it from independent sources. Strangely enough, none 
of the numerous Cola-PSndya inscriptions of the period 
throws any light on these transactions. Sundara 
Pitndya was perhaps the chief of the whole confederacy 
which organised the rebellion. § ) 

In the course of this expedition, on his way from 
the Pandya country to Kandajur, and most probably as 
a result of his successful attack on the king of Venad 
whom he 4 sent to heaven,' Rajadhiraja is said to have 
liberated the king of the Kupakas, a local chieftain 
of south Travancore, from his bondage apparently 
to the ruler of Venad. *{[ 

At the time of this expedition, the country of 
Kera}a was in the same political condition in which it 
was found centuries afterwards by the Portuguese and 

• This event is omitted in some records t.g.> 6 of 1890. Huttfsch 

translates differently ; but sec ARE. 1930 II 46. 

f Lit. “ was attacked by pains in the bowels. ” 

X Th'i symbol of an aggressive invasion. 

§ PK. p. 113. % 75 of 1895. ARE. 1913 IL 25. 

[ 270 ] 



RAJENDRA 


the Dutch. It was cut up into a number of petty 
principalities which, with their endless feuds and 

alliances, more or less formed a world 

MRsaka kings. . , - i , 

apart. Iramakudam, or more accurate- 
ly Ramaghata, was one of these principalities which 
centred round Mt. D’Eli, the musaka hill or £li-malai 
(rat-hill), and ruled over by the Musaka kings whose 
annals form the subject-matter of the Kavija called 
Musakavamsam. * According to the legend recorded in 
this work, a certain Ksatriya prince, born and brought 
up in secret after Parasurama's great war on the 
Ksatriyas, was produced before Paratsnrama, when in 
the course of a sacrifice performed by him in Mount 
Eli, he was on the look out for a Ksatriya for perform- 
ing a rite which was an essential part of the sacrifice 
and had to be performed only by a Ksatriya. This 
prince was afterwards made king of the Musaka 
country by Parasurama who crowned him after an 
ahhiseka with pots ( ghata , kudam) of water ; hence the 
name of the family-Ramaghata, or Iramakudam in 
Tamil. A Vatteluttu record f of the eleventh century 
recently discovered in the neighbourhood of Eli-malai 
is dated in the fifty-ninth regnal year of a Musaka 
king, Kandan Karivarman alias Ratnakuda Muvar 
Tiruvadi ; the inscription also mentions Rajendra- 
sola - samaiya - senapati. Most probably this Muvar 
Tiruvadi was the ruler against whom Rajadhiraja’s 
expedition was directed. 

The presence of the traditional rulers of the 

Pamjya and Keraja countries long 
Miidnes* of cci» a ft er the Cola conquest of these areas, 

imperialism. • * . 

and the capacity they retained tor 
making trouble for their suzerain in the face of 
powerful viceroys, deserve attention as proof of the 

* 7 'AS, ii 87 ff ; JRAS. 1922 pp. 161 ff. t 523 of 1930. 

[271 ] 



THE, COLAS 


comparatively mild character of Coia imperialism 
which was in oonformity with the precepts of the 
arthasixstras on the policy that a conqueror should 
adopt towards conquered countries. 

In some of the early inscriptions * of Rujadhiraja, 

he is said to have invaded Ceylon after 
the victory at Kandajur-salai and to 
have beheaded “ the king of Lanka, the , Vallava 
(wearing) a garland, and the lord of Kannakucei 
(Kanonj) ”. The same fact is mentioned in the curious 
record of Rajendra I with the double yramsti from 
Cidambaram, in which Virasalamegha is said to have 
been caught and slain by Rajendra in the course of a 
campaign in Ceylon. It is quite possible that this 
campaign of Rujadhiraja was conducted in his father’s 
life-time, and was described with greater elaboration 
in his later records, t But as the dates of the two 
records of Rujadhiraja cited at the beginning of this 
paragraph, X and the authenticity of the Cidambaram 
inscription of Rajendra are not beyond cavil, and as one 
other record of Rujadhiraja, § definitely of his twenty- 
seventh year, does not mention the Ceylon war, it 
seems best to reserve discussion of this campaign till 
the reign of .Rujadhiraja, We shall see, however, that 
according to the chronology of the Mahammsa, some of 
the incidents of Rajadhiraja's Ceylon war, at least those 
connected with the Singhalese king Vikramabahu I, 
must have taken place before the death of Rajendra 
Cola 1. The war itself dragged on into the reign of 
Rujadhiraja and even his brother Rajendra II apparent- 
ly took some part in its closing stages. 

• 172 of 1894 ; 92 of 1892. t S/1. ill. 28. 

J 92 of 1892-date tost ; 172 of 1894 dated (2)6, the first figure being 
doubtful. 

§ 84 of 1893. 


1 272 ] 



RAJENDRA 


^ Another war had to be waged against the Western 

Calukyas by Rajadhiraja, and of this 
war against wa r we have several detailed accounts 

C’fjukya 

Xhavamaiia. in his inscriptions which supplement 

one another and give a fair idea of the 
course of the campaign. This war, which was directed 
against Ahavamalla, must have occurred sometime after 
1042 A. D., the last known date for Jayasimha II, * 
and consequently in the last years of Rajendra’s 
reign. We have seen that after the battle of Musangi 
(c. 1021 A.D.), Jayasimha II made himself master of 
the Raichur doab and reached the Tungabhadra. In 
the remaining twenty years or so of his reign, he 
seems to have been left alone by Rajendra who was 
engaged in other directions. Some inscriptions in the 
Bellary district t show that Jayasimha II even crossed 
the Tungabhadra in the period and annexed parts of 
the Bellary district to his dominions after displacing 
the Coja control over the tract. One of his 
vassals, J agadekamalla Udayaditya Nolamba Pallava 
Perumanatji, claims in A. D. 1033 to have ruled the 
Nolamba-vadi 32000 among other districts; + this 
seems to be an exaggeration, if it is not a mere 
repetition of a traditional title of the Nolambas. But 
after the long interval during which the Calukyas were 
left free to pursue their plans, and after the accession 
of Trailokymalla Ahavamalla Somesvara I, the Cola 
monarch might have felt the need for a fresh assertion 
of his supremacy ; or possibly there were some specific 
causes for a fresh war of which we have no knowledge 
and which came to a head soon after Somesvara's 
accession. Whatever that may be, Somesvara had to 
face a fresh Cola invasion into his territory led by 
Rajadhiraja ; one set of Coja inscriptions state that, in 

• Fleet DKD. p. 436. 

t RangacharUBellary 185, 229, 285. t 253 of 1918. 

[ 279 ] 

as 



THE COLAS 


the war that followed, the Coja forces * overwhelmed 
the Calukya army and killed its leaders Gandappayya 
and Gangadhara together with a large number of 
elephants ; that the celebrated warriors Vikki and 
Vijayaditya were forced to retreat like cowards 
along with Sangamayya; and that a vast amount 
of treasure, horses aDd elephants fell into the hands 
of the Cojas, who set fire to the city of Kollippakkai. 
Vikki and Vijayaditya were no doubt the sons of 
Somesvara, who afterwards became Vikramaditya VI 
and Visnuvardhana- Vijayaditya. Other records of the 
same period f give more details of this campaign of 
Rajadhiraja. They mention ‘ a hot battle at Piindi 
with (the) swelling waters ’ in which Viccaya J fled in 
fear, abandoning his father and mother to the mercies 
of the Coja army ; when Ahavamalla, in his fear, sent 
messengers (for opening negotiations), they were rudely 
handled by the Cola and were forced to carry on their 
persons inscriptions proclaiming the flight of Xhavamalla 
in fear ; then, followed by his forces, the Cola took his 
herd of elephants for bathing them in the three bathing 
ghats ( turai I, Siruturai, Perundurai and the Duiva- 
bhlmakasi, and engraved the emblem of the fierce tiger 
on hills marked by the boar sign of the enemy, and 
planted the pillar of victory ; § he played games with 
the kings who prostrated themselves at his feet, and 
raised aloft the banner of charity with that of the tiger, 
distributing among the needy the ancient treasures 
captured from the enemy; he then defeated several 

# Hultzsch says that the Co|a forces were led by a commander named 
KSvudan ; but 1 am not sure of the text here. See e. g. 54 of 1893 and 
6 of 1890. 

t 172 of 1894 (Yr. 26) , 92 of 1892 <n. d.) SI/. v 465 ; iv 539. 

} This could not have been VijaySditya. 

§ cf. Kalmgattupparant viii, 26. 

% The expression used is * hntftyi * — some game with a ball seems 
to be meant 


[ 274 ] 



RAJENDRA 


leaders of enemy forces such as the Nulumba, Kalidasa, 
Camunda, Kommayya and the Villavaraja, beheaded 
the Gurjara king, sparing only those who sought his 
protection and restoring to them their diadems and 
their positions. At this point some records * introduce 
particulars not found in others. Though the gaps in 
the text are an obstacle to a full understanding of these 
particulars, their trend is quite clear. Two persons who 
accompanied a Perkadai, a high official in the service 
of the Calukya monarch, apparently sent by him to 
deliver some hostile message to the Cola, were chosen 
for being the media of a studied and barbarous insult 
to the Ca}ukyas ; one of them was compelled to wear 
the dress of a woman, and the other had his head 
shaven so as to show five tufts, and they were named 
1 the miserable Ahavamalli and Ahavamalla * and sent 
adrift along with the Perkadai whom they had 
accompanied. Then, the ancient city of Kalyanapuram 
was sacked and its royal palace razed to the ground 
after its guards had been overpowered. And Rajadhi- 
raja assumed in that city the title of Vijayarajendra and 
performed a Vlrfibkiseka ; this is confirmed by another 
inscription of a later date in Rajadhiraja’s reign, f 
with a unique prasasti beginning tirukkodiyodu ; this 
record lays great stress on the victory against Ahava- 
malla, and states that the title Vijayarajendra was 
adopted by the king at the Vlrahhiseka that followed 
the victory. And at Darasuram in the Tanj ore district 
ean be seen even to-day a fine image of a dmrap&laka , 
very different in the style of its workmanship from 
similar Cola images, bearing the inscription : } 

• 173 of 1894. t 244 of 1925 (Yr. 36). 

t The text, at copied by me direct from the pedestal of the image is “ 0/1) 
SvatfiM UjaiyUt jSri Vyayarfijlndraifiver — 0-2) Kalybna* m pu ram*trittu kodu* 
virnd* tm'itrap3/4&ar. n In 1-2 ‘ na * is engraved below the line ; cf. yah JCaiySna* 
pur am dadttha of v, 73 of the KanySkumSri inscription* 


[ 275 ] 



THE COLAS 


“The dvSrapStaka (door-keeper) brought by Utjaiyar Sri 
Vijayarajendra-d8va after burning Kalyanapuram.” 


There is no mention in Somesfrara's inscriptions 


Cajukva records. 


either of this campaign of Rajadhiraja 
or of the later war which, as we shall 


see, led to his death on the battle-held of Koppam. In 
all the inscriptions of Somesvara, * there is nothing 
that would lead us to imagine that so great a disaster 
overtook him soon after his accession as is implied 
by the Cola records cited above. Though it may be 
conceded that the Coja accounts of the war are alto- 
gether too favourable to their own side, their substantial 
correctness seems to be beyond cavil. The chronology 
of the war is equally indisputable. All these incidents 
are narrated in records of the twenty-sixth or earlier 
years of Rajadhiraja, and must have occurred before 
1044 A.D- ; and Somesvara I did not become king 
before 1042 A.D. Moreover, the Darasuram dvarapalaka 
and other images in the same place give clear proof 
that Rajadhiraja sacked Kalyanapuram, and that, like 
Napoleon, he carried off some fine works of art to his 
own country and the only occasion on which he claims, 
in his inscriptions, to have reached Kalyanapuram is 
in the course of the expedition we are now dealing 
with. Fundi, where a pitched battle was fought in this 
war, and possibly once again when another Cola inva- 
sion took place a few years later, was on the banks of 


* The vague phrase “ baiavac-tfla-nartndra’darpu-dalanam " at the begin- 
ning of a stereotyped Kaxtarese verse in some of his records means little ; it it 
repeated of his son SSmesvara II, and as Barnett has observed of the conquests 
detailed in this verse, the list “ seems to be more epic than historical/* 
(EL xv. p. 86 n. 6; pp. 87, 97). The inscriptions noticed by Fleet ( DKD . 
p. 441) are of a later date and will be considered in the proper place. I find 
it impossible to attach any value to the poetry of Bilha^a who in his Vikr*» 
mZnkatTtuacarita males S5m?tvara enter Klficipuram in victory. (I. 114-7) 
it was more or less the poet's job to do it as Sfonffvara was the father of 
Bilbana’s more fortunate hero VlkramSditya VI. 

[ 276 ] 



RAJENDRA 


the Kj-sna, perhaps in the Raichur doab. * By the three 
turais, Siruturai, Perundurai, and Daiva-bhimakasi are 
no doubt meant the rivers Tungabhadra, Krsna f and, 
probably, the Bhlma. Some of the minor incidents, 
for which the Coja ruler takes credit, look extremely 
realistic, and show the relentless nature of the hosti- 
lities between the protagonists in this long contest. 

It is a fact of some importance that the mention 
of Kalyanapura in this campaign appears to be about 
ten years earlier than “ the very earliest epigraphic 
mention of the place ” which has been traced by Fleet 
in a record of A. D. 1053, $ and here it is already called 
‘ an old city § and a royal palace of the Calukyas 
in it is also mentioned. This would suggest that 
Kalyanapura must have been at least a subsidiary 
capital for some years before the time when, accord- 
ing to Fleet, it was “ founded or developed into a 
capital ” by Somes vara I. 

(The closing years of Rajendra’s reign formed the 

most splendid period of the history 
/ cl «» in ey*®K 0 f the Colas of the Yijayalaya line. 

The extent of the empire was at its 
widest and its military and naval prestige stood at its 
highest.^ There remained the necessity, ever present 
in military empires, of carrying out punitive expedi- 
tions to suppress outbreaks and keep the conquered 
territories under control. The emperor was ably 
assisted by his talented sons and other members of his 
family, and the tasks of imperial administration were 

• 6 of 1890 and 221 of 1894 say " tanputtal Firifir- (rijai) -far at- (Puntto r)i- 

kaduka-mS-ttagar 1 

t FUet £/. xii, pp. 293*4* t ?• 

5 * Kalytlyapuram-tHnttm-tMttuigttr Sff. v. p. 183* 11. 29-30. 

1 277 ] 



THE COLAS 


thus put in commission. Large undertakings, like the 
Pandya war against Sundara Pandya and his con- 
freres, or the Calukya war against Ahavamalla, were 
carried out in these years by the heir-apparent Rajadhi- 
raja, while a host of feudatories looked after minor 
affairs like the war of Coreya in the Nambihalli region 
of the Mysore country in which ‘ cows were carried off 
and women’s girdles were unloosed.’ * Among such 
feudatories a few naturally stand out more promi- 
nently than the rest in the records of the reign and of 
these a brief account may be given here. 


That even the Pandyas normally acoepted such a 

position of subordination and recon- 
Feudatories. ciled. themselves to it is shown by the 

queen of the Pandya King Srlvallabha making gifts to 
the Tiruvisalur temple early in the reign, possibly when 
Bajaraja was still alive, f A part of the modern North 
Arcot district lying round about Brahmadesam was 
under the jurisdiction of Vallavaraiyar Vandyadevar, 
the chief of the Satmntas as he is called and husband 
of Rajaraja’s elder sister Kundavai. Two other wives of 
this person are mentioned, Indaladevi J and Mundaru- 
gauravanar Kundadeviyar § who, despite the second 
part of her name, appears to have been different from 
Parantakan Kundavai Pirattiyar, the Coja princess 
said to have been residing in the palace at Palaiyaru 
in the fourth and fifth years of the reign, A nadu 
cam e to be called Vallavaraiyar-nadu after this chief of 
the Samantas and part of it lay in the modem Salem 
district. II A certain Yadava Bhlma, also called Uttama 
Cola Miliujudaiyar, wag j n charge of a part of the hilly 

tracts in the modern South Arcot district in the fourth 


• EC. X Sp. 14. 

X 191 of 1915. 
f 350 of 1907 ; 539 of 1909. 


t 45 of 1907. 

§ 243 of 1910. 
II 157 of 1910. 


[ 278 ] 



RAJENDRA 


year. * Seven or eight years later, we find a Gangai- 
konda Cola-miladudaiyar, possibly in charge of the 
same division, but only mentioned in the inscriptions as 
making an endowment for a lamp to be maintained in 
the temple at Kajahasti. f A number of short but 
interesting Kanarese and Tamil inscriptions at Kotta- 
Sivaram, of which one J is dated in the tenth year of 
Rajendra, and the others obviously belong to the same 
time, show that, in this reign and that of Rajaraja, 
a certain Araiyan Rajarajan alias Vikrama-Cola 
(Joliya-varaiyan distinguished himself greatly in the 
Cola service in the Cajukya and Vengi wars § and 
earned such high titles as Nalmadi Bhlma, Cojana- 
cakra, Samantabharanam, Vlra-bhusanam, and Edirtta- 
var-kalan (Tam. ‘ death to foes ’) or Ahitarottalivan 
(Kan). Dandanayakan Narakkan Krsnan Raman who 
built the enclosure to the Tanjore temple under 
the orders of Rajaraja continued to serve Rajendra I 
almost till the end of his reign as he is mentioned as 
late as 1044 A. I). His son, Marayan Arumoli, also 
called Uttamasola Brahma-marayan, was also a senapati 
who assisted Rajendra about A. I). 10.13 in building a 
temple to the Pidiiri of Kolar. || It may be observed 
that of the two names of this sempati , the first was the 
personal name implying his social rank in the 
nobility ( mar a yam ), and the fact that, his father called 
him after the ruling sovereign at the time of his biith ; 
the second was the official title of the man in his public 
career in the king’s service in the army. A Nimbala- 
deti, the wife of certain Indajadeva of Tajaigrama 
in Virata-desa, the country round Hangul, made a 

• 20 Of 1009. t 291 of 1904. J 23 of 1917. 

I 751 of 1917 (u.d.) rfrorils the flight of the Vengi king when lie heard of 
the advance of thia general ordered by the Col* king. 

H 217 of 1911. fl 480 of 1911, {SC. x Kl. 109-a). 


[ 279 J 



THE COLAS 


grant to the temple of Tiruvorriyur about 1042 A. D. * 
We cannot be sure that Indaladeva was an official 
or a feudatory of the king, as he might have been 
a merchant., who, like several others of his profession 
in those days, might have travelled great distances. 
In any event, Rajendra's claim to have conquered the 
Mysore country and parts of Rattapadi is largely 
substantiated by such instances. Lastly, there were the 
Cangalvas and the Kongiijvas of Mysore and Coorg. 
We have traced the rise of Kongalvas into prominence 
under Rajaraja who, in appreciation of the heroism of 
Manija, conferred on him the title Ksatriyasikhamani 
Kongajva and an estate at Malambi (Coorg). The 
Cangalva territory, Canganad, lay in the Arkalgiid 
taluq of Mysore and the Yelusavira country in 
Northern Coorg. Both the Cangajvas and the Kongal- 
vas had Cola prenomens from this time, evidently 
because the Colas imposed their names on the 
provinces they conquered and on the rulers who 
accepted a vassal position in the empire, t In the 
course of a few years, however, the Kongalvas begun 
to claim that they were themselves actually descended 
from the Colas and joined the ranks of the numerous 
Telugu and Kanarese local dynasties that traced their 
descent, in a mythical manner, from Karikala and the 
Sun, through Jatacoja. 


Like his father, ^Rajendra bore a number of fine 

birudas. Noteworthy among them are, 
Mndigonda-Cola X und Parjdita-Cola ; § 
he is also once called Virarajendra ; but above all 


Birudas, 


* 138 of 1912. f EC. i f Intr. 1243 ; v Intr. vii. 

X A name which is applied to many places and buildings in the period, and 
to a branch of the Kavfri to our own day. The Tambraparni is called Mu^igon^a* 
SSlap-pfcrajru in CSJa records from SSrmadevi. 

§ ABE. 1901, i. 12 ; S //. iii, 127. 


[ 280 J 


1 61 of 1914. 



RAJENDRA 


these in the estimation of the king himself was the 

title Gangai - kon^a - Cola,') a name 

signalised by being attached to the 

new capital founded by the king and sometimes called 
Gangapurl in Sanskrit. * In the ruins of this celebrated 
city the earliest inscription that can now be traced 
seems to be one of Rajakesarivarman Vlrarajendra- 
deva. f The large irrigation tank to the north of the 
city, the C5ja-gangam of the Tiruvalangadu plates, 
has long gone out of use, its extensive bed overgrown 
with thick jungle. J (Among the records of the reign 
of Rajendra I himself, the new capital is mentioned 
rarely, and apparently not earlier than the seventeenth 
regnal year. § This city has often been confused with 
Mudigonda-solapuram, and the suggestion has been 
made that this was the earlier name of what later came 
to be called Gangaikonda-tfolapuram. \ There is no 

support, for the suggestion in the epigraphy of the reign. 
On the other hand, Mudigonda-solapuram is clearly 
stated to be the alternative name of Palaiyaru, || now a 
small vill age, on the banks of the Mudigondan, within 
easy reach & Kiimhakoihim ; Palaiyaru possesses an 
ancient Siva temple of repnarkable construction in the 
late Coja style which contains, however, no inscription ; 
and there remain no traces of the palaces at Palaiyaru 
in which Kuudavai ** and Rajendra ff are said to 
have lived in the early years of the reign. 

• El . xv. p. 49 «. 3 where Gopinatha Rao quotes an interesting reference 
from the l$t possibly reminiscent of this foundation. 

t *2 of 1892. 

t A nineteenth century description of the site is quoted in Note.B at the 
and of this Chapter. 

§ 61 of 1914 ; 203 of 1925 ; 510 of 1926. The curious record 118 of 1888 
dated in the 24th year of RSjok?sari Rajendra mentions Gangapurl. 

H S/l ili. Index s. v. Mu4igOQ4**£Sl*P uram 1 *k° ^ Aiyangar — S 

India and her Muhammadan Invaders , p. 44, n. 2. 

| 271 of 1927. ** 639 of 1909. 

ft Tiravaltftfl^u plates H. 0-7 (Tamil part), 463 of 1908 (Yr. 3). 

[ 281 ] 


9 $ 



THE COLAS 

t 

In several inscriptions of his reign and of the 
reigns of his successors, Rajendra is described briefly as 
the conqueror of PurvadeSam, Gangai and Kadaram ; 
this must be taken to be a summary statement of his 
most distant conquests, and on this assumption Purva- 
deifam is best understood to be, not the Vengi country 
aB was suggested by Venkayya, * but Purvarastra, 
the country to the east of the Maikal range, | roughly 
corresponding to the Southern Kosala country. 

The following are the queens of Rajendra who 

figure in the inscriptions : Tribhuvana 

Queens. or ygnavan-Mahadeviyar, J Mukkok- 

kilan, § Pancavan-Madeviyar •[ and Vlra-msidevi who 
apparently performed salt at. the king's death. I! 
Of his sons we shall see that three followed him on the 
Cola throne in succession, Rajadhiraja, Rajendra and 
Vira Rajendra, and we cannot decide if any of these 
was identical with the Cola-Pandya Viceroy, Jatavarman 
Sundara Cola-Pandya. Other sons are known also. 
A daughter of Rajendra, Arumoli-nangaiyar or Piriinar, 
made a present of a costly umbrella of pearls to the 
temple at Tirumalavadi early in the reign of her 
brother Rajadhiraja. ** Another daughter was the 
well-known Ammangadevi, the queen of the Eastern 
Cajukya Rajaraja I and mother of Kulottunga, the 
first Cola-Calukya monarch. The latest regnal year 
mentioned in Rajendra's inscriptions is 33 ff and this 
accords well with the fact that his death is recorded 
in an inscription of Rajadhiraja dated in his twenty- 

sixth year. Rajendra's death occurred, therefore, 
some time in A. D. 1044. 

* AS/. 1911-12 p. 172 n. 1. 

1 

t Fleet Gupta IntcHptiont p. 192 a. t; El. ix. p. 283. % 624 of 1930. 

§ 73 of 1921. 1 464 of 1918. 8 260 of 1918. 

** 71 of 1920. tt 79 of 1909. « 260 ol 1916. 

1288] 



HAJENDRA 

Mots A 

ON MAHIPALA. 


Dr. S. K. Aiyangar has discussed the Ganges campaign at 
some length in his essay on Qangaikon$a-Cola and I must 
explain why I am unable to accept some of his conclusions. Our 
differences are partly due to the different estimates we have of the 
value of the Tiruvalangadu plates {op. cit. p. 554). I agree with 
Mr. R. D. Banerji that “the order in which the names of the 
countries are mentioned (in Rajendra’s Tamil inscriptions) prevents 
us from supposing that Bihar is ” Damjabhukti. Dr. 8. K. Aiyangar 
says : 44 As the name itself indicates, Bihar must have been on the 
frontier of some important empire or kingdom, which on that side 
required protection against a powerful enemy ” ; I do not see 
how. Nor is any tangible evidence brought forward by him 
in support of his position (p. 558) that Magadha was ruled by the 
Rastrakutas at the end of the ninth century and the beginning of 
the tenth till it was wrested from them by the Pala opponent of 
Eajendra, MahipFila, who installed Dbarmapala viceroy over his 
new conqnest. Banerji has satisfactorily explained the western 
expansion of the Pfila kingdom in the early years of Mahipala 
by the condition of the Gnrjara kingdom after the. invasion of 
Mahmud of Ghazni. {Pala s’ of Bengal p. 70.) 


Banerji seems to me to be clearly wrong in quoting the 
evidence of the Cumlakamiham of Ksemisvara who probably 
lived in the tenth century A. D. at Kanyakubja under king 
Mahipfda, the Gnrjara ruler, (Macdonnel, Sanskrit Literature 
p. 'M ; Keith, Samfcrit Drama p. 2di> and n.) against the Tirumalai 
rock inscription of Rajendra, amt in discovering a defeat of 
Hajetidra in Mahlpala’s defeat of the Karnatas mentioned in the 
drama. Cf. S. K. Aiyangar, op, ciL pp. 559-62. 


Taking his stand on the order in which the events are 
narrated in verses 116*24 of the Tiruvalangadu plates, Dr. 8. K. 
Aiyangar distinguishes a MahipFila of Otta (N. Orissa) from the 
famous Pala king of Bengal, and holds that 44 Rujendra’s general 
did not come into direct contact with Mahipala of Bengal at all.” 
(p. 565). He says that the Tamil records 44 properly understood ” 
support the same position. To prove this, he relies on the edition 
of R&jendra’s Tamil inscriptions in Epigraphia Camatiea and 


1.283 J 



THE COLAS 


finds that No, 84 of Channapattana (Bangalore Dt.) *-girea 
apparently the oorrect reading * : T(x}u - Icatjar - &angamo$a~ 
Muhlpalanai ; this he translates into : 44 Otta-Mahlpala of Sagnama 
(Sangama ?) which touches the sea.” He adds : 44 the first three 
words in full in Tamil would be Tod u-kaijar -chan gamam which 
means the river mouth which touches the Bea. ” (PP- 564-5). 
Ignoring the tautology of such a phrase for a moment, one should 
like to know how Sangamam followed by Otta becomes tSanga - 
fnofta instead of 4 Sangamavotta 1 as it should be. I have already 
pointed out that the Tan j ore inscription (S/T. ii No. 20 1. 7) reads 
distinctly : “Totfu-kalar - cangu - votJadaUmayipalanai ” which 
Hultzsch somewhat arbitrarily changed into: Totju - kalar- 

canguvottal ’ (EL ix p. 2*>2 n, 6). The real reading doubtless 
is that of the Tanjore inscription ; and its correct meaning is that 
the strong Mahipala was captured together with another person 
named Bangu. Though we know nothing of the latter, there is 
little room for doubt that, as Kielhorn suggested years ago, the 
4 strong Mahipala ’ must be the same as the Pfiia ruler of Bengal. 
It seems that Dr. S.K. Aiyangar has, unconsciously, gone too far 
in reacting against Mr. Bonerji’s claim, based on a misquotation 
from the CantfaJcausifatm, that Mahipala of Bengal defeated 
Rajendra, or at least successfully stopped his crossing the Ganges. 
But the alibi sought to be established on behalf of the Cola 
general appears to rest on very flimsy grounds. 1 must, however, 
note that a single inscription from Tirukoviiur (128 of 1900) gives 
the reading 4 <Skngod-0 1 ta-Mahipitlanai . ’ This solitary instance out 
of over a hundered inscriptions I have consulted cannot, 1 think, 
be regarded as anything but a mistake of the engraver. 

Of verses 116-24 of the Tinivalangadu plates, I think 
the first four complete the account of the campaign undertaken by 
the general in quest of the Ganges including the overthrow of 
Mahipala (119). The rest are devoted to a narration of other 
achievements of Rajendra. Verses 120 and 121 state that the 
king personally undertook a campaign against the Oita— note 
particularly that there is no mention of Mahipala here — and his 
younger brother, before his return to the capital (122). In this 
campaign the king killed or defeated (vinifiatya) the Ofia and 
his brother and collected a tribute of elephants ; the MahSndra- 
giri stone inscription (396 of 1896) states that Vimaladitya, the 
Kttldt&Svara, was defeated by Raj&ndra and compelled to give up 

[284 ] 



RAJENDRA 


a number of his elephants to the conqueror. Both the references 
appear to be to the same campaign ; but it is not easy to decide 
whether the campaign took place in Hajaraja’s life-time and has 
been mentioned here out of its proper place or whether it occurred 
sometime in the twelfth or thirteenth year of Rajendra uud is, for 
some reason, omitted in the Tamil pramsti. I am inclined on 
the whole to the former hypothesis as in these and the succeeding 
versos the composer of the Sanskrit prasasli seems to bo winding 
up his account by putting in the things he omitted to mention 
before, or had no room to enlarge upon. It must be noticed also 
that verse 122 states that the king returned to his capital before 
lie undertook the campaign against Kataha (verse 125) ; Dr. 8. K. 
Aiyatigar reverses the order in his summary (p. 504) and holds 
that the expedition against KaTaram started from * the coast region 
of Kali ngam ’ (p. 500). Lie adds that all RajCndra’s records uni- 
formly state that, having reached the mouth of the Ganges and 
subjugated Orissa, the overseas expedition set sail from there ; in 
saying tins he overlooks the fact that we have to distinguish 
the dilferent campaigns of liapndra's reign by the stages through 
which we can trace the growth of the tiru munni valara intro- 
duction ; records of the 12th year stop with tho conquest of the 
Ganges, ami the overseas expedition does not find mention before 
the year 14 ; ami it cannot be a mere accident that at each of these 
stages the Tiruvalauga jbi plates state that the king returned to his 
capital. On Dr. S. K. Aiyangar's method of interpretation, we 
shall have also to admit that Rajendra started against Ceylon from 
Mulkhed, an obviously impossible iissumption. 


In the Journal of th* Hi loir <tnd Orissa Mesearch 
Society (1928 Vol. XIV pp. 512-20) R. D. Banerji examines tho 
opinions of Dr, 8. K. Aiyatigar on Rajendra’s Ganges campaign. 
On the location of Damiabhukti and the difficulty of postulating 
the existence, as Dr. 8, K. Aiyatigar does, of a body of Karnatas 
holding a military fief in Bihar, I find myself in agreement with 
Bauer ji. He seems to me to be justified also in his view that 
the composer of the Tiruvaiaugmju plates “ had very hazy notions 
°f the position of these places in the map of India,” and that 
“ Aiyangar, who relies entirely on the Tiruvalangadu plates 
in preference to the Tirumaki rock inscription, has been clearly 
non-plusaed," He clinches his arguments about the route of the 
army by saying : 44 An army approaching Bengal and Bihar 


[ 985 ] 



THE COLAS 


from the South must follow the natural line of communication 

through Orissa, Midnnpur, lloogly and Howrah to reach Vanga 

and Uttara Radha, and this is exactly the route described in the" 

Tirumalai rock inscription.” Banerji’s statement, however, that 

the Cola armv followed the coast lino from near the Chilka lake 
• * 

and debouched into the interior only once when it went into 
Kosala, dearly overlooks the data on the earlier stages of the 
campaign furnished by tin* Tirumalai ruck inscription. He also 
observes that Gov iudaeandra of the Candra dynasty of Eastern 
Bengal “had most probably become a vassal of Mahipala I and 
therefore a flanking movement may have been expected of him,” 
and this was possibly the reason why he had to be dealt with 
before Malilpitla was attacked. This statement from one so well- 
versed in P-ila history is valuable as affording support to our 
position on the general relation between Kunastira, Dhurmapala 
and (rdvindacandra on tin* one side, and Mahipala on the other. 
It also constitutes a virtual abandonment bv Bauer ji of the 
interpretation he had put on the Tirumalai rock inscription in 
his monograph on the Pdlas of Bengal that it depicts Bengal as 
cut up into a number of independent small states, a view that has 
been cited and commented on in the preceding chapter. 


As against S. K. Aiyangar, whom ho dot s not hesitate 
to accuse of betraying “ the spirit of a partisan and not that 
of a critical historian,” Banerji seeks to buttress his position 
in regard to the CaiviakauHkam by arguments which do not 
stand critical examination, and which make it easy, for anyone 
so minded, to bring with more reason against Banerji himself 
the charge of uncritical partisanship. Banerji surmises that 
Prof. Aiyaugar has forgotten the existence of the Cambay plates 
of Govinda IV. And the history furnished by these plates is 
summed up by Banerji with more rhetoric than fidelity in the 
following terms : “ Very shortly afterwards (i>. after the acces- 
sion of Mahipala 1) the Our jara-Prati hiira empire was shattered 
by the onslaught of the great Uastrakupi conqueror Jndra III. 
In fact this young prince dealt the death-blow to Oorjara- 
Pratihara supremacy in India. He invaded Majva, captured Ujjain, 
crossed the Jumna near Kalpi, devastated Kanauj and compelled 
Mahipala to flee before his general, the Cajukya chief, Naraeimha, 
to Allahabad. Mahipala I returned to Kanauj after the retirement 
6( the Ha§traku|a army to find that the provinces were tui 

k 

[ 886 ] 



RAJENDRA 


becoming independent under the feudatories and governors. 
No Mahipala of the Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty ever defeated any 
Karnataka army or chief and therefore it is cruel of Professor 
Aiyangar to postulate the production of the drama Canda- 
kau&ikam before this unfortunate king.” 

Now, the Cambay plates of Govinda have been edited by 
Prof. D. R. Bhandarkar who had no preconceived notions about 
either Rajendra or Mahipala of Bengal to uphold, and it is interest- 
ing to see how he makes out the relations between Indra III and 
Mahipala I, the Pratihara king, as revealed by these plates and 
other contemporary inscriptions. In a succinct and full discussion 
of the historical significance of verse 19 of these plates, * he 
points out : 44 But the complete devastation of Mahodaya, which 
Indra III is spoken of as having brought about, is merely poetical. 
For the poet’s object appears to be to introduce a play on the 
words Mahodaya and Kma&thala. * * * This is also seen from 
the consideration that, as a matter of fact, for long' after the event 
recorded in this verst* took place, Kanauj continued to be the 
capital of several princes, ruling over northern India. What 
Indra III actually did beyond attacking Mahodaya or Kanauj, 
cannot l>e inferred from the verse itself. But we can ascertain it 
with the help of other inscriptions.” After a careful examination 
of other inscriptions, which is too long to l>e reproduced here, 
Prof. Bhandarkar reaches the conclusion that though Indra suc- 
ceeded for a time in depriving Mahipala of his kingdom, he was 
soon restored to the throne by the eombiued efforts of Dharmapala 
of the Pula dynasty of Bengal and the Ch and el la king Harsadeva. 
Here, then, it seems we have all the elements needed to satisfy 
the requirements of the verse in the prologue to the Oatuia- 
kauWcam which ascribes to Mahipala, by a natural exaggeration, 
the repulse of the Karnajas from Kauauj brought about by his 
allies. In fact by recalling the story of Kautilya’s expulsion of 
the Nandas for the sake of Oamlragupto, the verse in the 
Cantfakauiikam implies what was an essential feature iu the 
restoration of Mahipala, viz., the large place token by diplomacy 
and foreign invasion in bringing abont the restoration* 

The history furnished by the Cambay plates and other 
records of the time seems therefore to establish conclusively that 

* Mf, vii, pp. 30—33. 

[ 28 T J 



THE COLAS 


the Cantfakau&ikam was enacted before the Gnrjara-Pratlhara 
Mahipaia I, nearly a century before the time of the Pala Mahlpala 
to whose reign Mr. R. D. Banerji would assign the play. See also 
Sten Eonow, Indiache Drama p. 87. and JOR. vi pp. 191 ff. 


Note B. 

(tANGAIKONDA-C&LA-PURAM 

• « • 

The following interesting account of this place appeared 
in a local publication of 1855 which is not easily accessible now. 
It was reproduced once in the I A. iv p. 274, and may well 
find a place here. 

“ It may also be mentioned that in the Udaiyarpalaiyam 
taluka there is an embankment 16 miles long, running north and 
south, provided with several substantial sluices and of great 
strength, which in former times must have formed one of the 
largest reservoirs in India. This large tank or lake was filled 
partly by a channel from the Kolerun river, upwards of 60 miles 
in length, which enters it at its southern end, and partly by a 
smaller channel from the Vellar, which entered it on the north. 
Traces of both these channels still remain. The tank has been 
mined and useless for very many years, and its bed is now almost 
wholly overgrown with high and thick jungle. It is said tradition- 
ally that Its rain was wilful, and the act of an invading army. 
Near the southern extremity of the band there is a village, now 
surrounded by jangle, called Gangakunclapuram. Immediately 
in its vicinity is a pagoda of a very large size and costly 
workmanship; and close by, surrounded by jungle, are some 
remains of ancient buildings, now much resembling the mounds 
or heaps which indicate the site of ancient Babylon, but in which 
the village elders point out the various parts of an extensive and 
magnificent palace. When this palace was in existence, Ganga- 
kun<Japuram was the wealthy and flourishing capital of a 
monarchy, and the great tank spread fertility over miles and 
miles of what is now trackless forest It has often been projected 
to restore that magnificent work, but the scheme has remained in 
abeyance for want of engineer officers. At some future time it 
may be successfully prosecuted, but till then this most fertile tract 
must pm ain a jungle, and the few inhabitants will still point 

[ 288 ] 



RAJENDRA 


with pride to the ancient band as a monument of the grand and 
gigantic enterprise of their ancient sovereigns, and compare it 
contemptuously with the undertakings of their present rulers. 
Speaking of the noble temple of Gangakundapuram, it must not 
be omitted that when the lower Kolerun anikat was built, the 
structure was dismantled of a large part of the splendid granite 
sculptures which adorned it, and the enclosing wall was almost 
wholly destroyed in order to obtain materials for the work. The 
poor people did their utmost to prevent this destruction and 
spoliation of a venerated edifice by the servants of a government 
that could show no title to it ; but of course without success ; 
they were only punished for contempt. A promise was made 
indeed, that a wall of brick should be built in place of the stone 
wall that was pulled down ; but unhappily it must be recorded 
that this promise has never been redeemed. 19 


87 


[ 889 ) 



Chapter XI 

THE SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

(1044*70 A. D.) 


Under Riijaraja I, the real founder of the Cola 


The sons of 
RSjSndra I. 


empire, and his talented son Rajendra I, 
the usual line of conquest, which was 
from north to south, had been reversed, 


and the victorious tiger-banner carried far into the 
north. Rajendra’s sons, three of whom succeeded 
their father, one after another, on the Coja throne, 
inherited an extensive empire, and on the whole, ably 
maintained its extent and prestige during their reigns. 
There was much hard, and occasionally fierce fighting, 
particularly against the Cajukyas across the Tunga- 
bhadra frontier, and the first of these three kings died 
on a battle-field in which the second was crowned 


immediately after his steadiness and valour converted 
an almost certain defeat into a brilliant victory. There 
was trouble also from the south, the Pandya and 
Keraja being always in league with the Ceylonese 
rulers, and waiting to take the fullest advantage of 
the difficulties that beset their suzerains elsewhere. 


Towards the end of this period, these troubles, together 
with others of a dynastic and possibly religious nature, 
brought about a political revolution which proved the 
salvation of the empire for well over a century 
thereafter. As will be shewn later, the exact circum- 
stances under which the Cajukya-Coja, Rajendra, came 
to occupy the imperial Cola throne are not easily 
determined ; but there oan be no two opinions on the 
consequences to the Co]a power of this turn of events. 
By introducing a fresh, and possibly more vigorous, 
yet closely related stock of kings to the rule of the 
empire, and by amalgamating, at a critical time, the 


[ 290 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


resources of the Eastern Calukya kingdom with the 
Coja, it ensured a continuous and active life for the 
empire of Rajaraja at a time when his descendants in 
the main line were overwhelmed in desperate conflicts 
of which they saw no end. 


Order of 


succession, 


The Kanyakumari inscription * of Virarajendra 

states expressly that Rajadhiraja was 
the eldest of the three sons of Rajendra 
who succeeded him in order ; this 
statement is confirmed by the inscriptions of the three 
reigns taken together ; one record of the thirty-fifth 
year f of Rajadhiraja mentions the significant name 
tambit4uuaicc5la-valatui(lu which recalls distinctly the 
pra&asti of Rajendra II beginning tirumagal maruviya . 
This prasasti gives a succinct account of how 
Rajendra co-operated with his elder brother Rajadhi- 
raja in the prolonged Calukya war of the reign. 
Virarajendra was doubtless identical with Vira-Cola, $ 
the younger brother of Rajendradeva on whom he con- 
ferred the title Karikala Cola ; in fact the W. Calukya 
inscriptions call him generally Vlra. An inscription 
of Virarajendra from the Ramnad district § refers to 
his father (ayyar) who conquered Gangai, Purvadesam 
and ICadaram. From a study of the dates of the 
inscriptions, it is seen that there is a large measure of 
overlapping among the reigns, a feature which should 

cause no surprise after the oonjoint 
rule for over twenty-five years of 
Rajadhiraja with his father. The 
latest regnal year of Rajadhiraja mentioned in his 
records is the thirty-sixth, falling in A. D. 1053-4. 


Overlapping 

reigns. 


* Verse 78. t 30 of 1919. 

t S/I. iii p, 195 ; EC. vii Sk. 136. 5 110 of 1908. 

1 129 of 1912 dated (8)8 is doubtful. It is a solitary record and the first 
figure in the date ii not secure. 


[291 ] 



THE COLAS 


The approximate date of the accession of Rajendra H 
has been fixed from his inscriptions as May 28th, 
A.D. 10B2. * Likewise, the highest regnal year of 
Rajendra II is twelve, taking his rule up to A. D. 1064. 
Virarajendra’s accession, however, took place some* 
time in A. D. 1062-3 f which is counted in his records 

as his first year. X Rajakesari Raja- 
mahendra-deva, whose inscriptions do 
not carry his reign beyond the third year, must be 
found a place before the accession of Vlrarajendra-dcva. 
His brief prasastis tell us little beyond the fact that he 


R3jamab5ndra. 


upheld the code laid down by Manu for the administra- 
tion of the land * * * § but even this statement is not 
altogether valueless as it is closely corroborated by the 
Kalingattupparaai § which says just the same thing 
even more forcibly, without mentioning any other fact, 
about a king whom it places between the sovereign who 
crowned himself on the field of Koppam (Rajendra II) 
and the victor of Kudal-6angamam (Vlrarajendra). 
Further confirmation of the position assigned to 
Rajamahendra is found in a single inscription of his 
stating that the king * by a war-elephant caused 
Jlhavamalla to turn his back (on the bank of) the 
winding river.’ It seems possible that Rajamahendra 
was the son of Rajendra II mentioned in an inscription 
of the ninth year of that king II under the name 


* El . vi p. 24. t El. vii V* 9. 

J 87 of 1896 of year 9 of RSjSndra II is said to mention a gift of year 8 
of VIrar2j?ndra ARE . 1895 I 9. If this is cornet, VlrarUjFndra’s accession 

must be placed earlier. But the published text {SII. v, 647 11. 52-3) does not 
teem to mention any such gift in Virarajendra's reign though the name Vira- 
rijSndra does occur. 

§ viii 08 ; SIR iii, p. 113. 

% 119 of 1902 cited at SII. iii p. 191. 

u 1 tan-tirumagan ' t 87 of 1895, {S/E v 647, 1. 26). Another record of the 
same date mentions a RBjamahSndra-road. SII. iii p, 41 (1. 6.) 

[ 292 ] 


1 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


Rajendra, and that when, soon after, he was chosen 
heir-apparent he assumed the title Rajamahendra to 
distinguish himself from his father Rajendra-deva and 
his grandfather Rajendra-Coja-deva. Here again, the 
succession of two Rajakesaris, Rajamahendra and 
Vlrarajendra, must be explained as due to one of them 
having died as heir-apparent without ever ruling in 
his own right, and that the other was chosen to fill his 
place. * This period is brought to a dose by the 
short and troubled reign of Parakesari Adhirajendra, 
one of whose records dated in his third year f mentions 
the eighth year of Vlrarajendra. The succession and 
chronology of the period may, therefore, be summed 
up as follows : — 


(1) Rajadhiraja I Rajakesari 

(2) Rajendra 11 Parakesari young- 

er brother of (1) 

Rajamahendra Rajakesari 
son of (2) died as crown- 
prince 

(3) Vlrarajendra Rajakesari 

(younger brother of 1 and 2) 

(4) Adhirajendra Parakesari son 

of 3(?) 


A. D. 1018-1054 
A. D. 1052-1064 

A. D. 1060-1063 

A. D. 1063-1069 
A. D. 1067/8-1070 


Kajadhiraja’s praiasiis are usually found in two 

forms, one of them rather short, 
* commencing tingaler-pera-valar, which 
records only the earlier achievements 
of the king and seems to have been stereotyped about 
the twenty-sixth year of his rule and repeated in that 
form in some of his later records. The longer form 

# Cp. BI* xviii pp, 304# 1 15 of 1890: SIA iii 57# 


[ 893 ] 



THE COLAS 


tingaler-taru has many variations and in fact it is seen 
to have gone through several editions, so to say, 
some giving more details of transactions only briefly 
mentioned in others. The interesting details of the 
battle of Pundur and other incidents of Rajadhiruja’s 
first invasion of the Cajukya country resulting in the 
destruction of Kojjippakkai are given in the inscrip- 
tions of the 26 th year * and are generally omitted in 
later records ; whereas the detailed description of the 
Pandyan and the Ceylonese wars that occurs in the 
latter is only hinted at briefly in the earlier records. 
Again, the vulgar insult offered to the ambassadors of 
Ahavamalla, one of whom was forced to dress as a 
woman and another was made the subject of a comic 
tonsnre, is mentioned only in some versions but not in 
others, f A few of the inscriptions of the later years 
mention fresh transactions not found in the earlier 
records ; £ others simply repeat the older forms without 
making them up-to-date. Further, there is a pra&asti 
beginning tirukkodiyodu tgagakkodt giving no new 
information and confirming some of the details of the 
Calukyan war found in other records. 


That Rajadhiraja assumed the title Vijayarajeudra 

after his triumphant entry into Kalyii- 
napura has already been mentioned. 
There are, however, two records of 
Parakesari Vijayarajendra which at first sight seem to 
present a baffling problem. § In one of them, a Kolar 


Two doubtful 
inscriptions. 


• 172 of 1894 ; 92 of 1892 which though its date is lost is apparently 
of the tame time. 446 of 1918 (Y r, 24) is also similar. 

+ Mentioned in 172 of 1894 and 80 of 1919. Also in the introduction 
beginning : tirukkodiyodu (244 of 1925 Yr. 36). 

* e.g* Sff. iii 28 (Yr. 29) ; 6 of 1890 <Yr. 30) ; 81 of 1895 j 221 of 1894 
(Yr. 32). 

$ See the discussion in ARE. 1907, 1138; 1908 11 56. 

[ 294 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

record * of the thirty-fifth year, we must necessarily 
assume that Parakesari is a mistake for Rajakesari : 
for the high regnal year and the identity of the short 
pra&asti in this record with that of Rajadhiraja beginning 
Virapandiayan talaiyum , the last variety of the prasaslis 
found in Rajadhiraja’s records, leave no room for any 
alternative. The other record from Pedda - Tippa- 
samudram f falls into the reign of Rajendra II, the 
younger brother and successor of Rajadhiraja, as it is 
dated in &aka 981, or A. D. 1057-8, and as we have no 
clear proof of Rajadhiraja having reigned beyond his 
36th year, which would be A. D. 1054-5. Rajendra II 
was a Parakesari, and though this record appears to 
be unique in giving him the Vijayarajendra title, it 
may be his. It should, however, be noticed that a 
Rajadhiraja inscription, doubtfully dated in the 38th 
year, from Tiruvorriyur, % just renders it possible that 
this record is also his. The battle of Roppam, in 
which Rajadhiraja lost his life, took place according to 
Fleet * shortly before the 20th January, A. D. 1060,’ 
as a record dated in &aka 981 (expired) mentions that 
Somei5vara had then returned from * a conquest of the 
southern countries and of the Co]a.' § Therefore, the 
Pedda-Tippasamudram record of Saka 981 may also 
be, after all, another instance of a Rajadhiraja record 
giving him the Parakesari title by a mistake. In any 
case we have no reason to assume that there was an 
alteration in the official title of the king from Raja- 
kesari to Parakesari, as there are many other records 
of the 35th and 36th years with the former title. 

* 135 of 1893 ; 477 of 1911 ; EC. x K). 112 (b). 

t 534 of 1906. { 129 of 1912. 

§ BG . I, if, 441. But this rather late date for the death of RSjSdhirSja 
is contradicted by the inscriptions of his successor R3j5ndrn ; see infra. 

H Contra ARE. 1908 II 56. 


[ 295 ] 



THE COLAS 


The Ceylon war of Rajadhiraja briefly mentioned 

in the last chapter may now be 

Ceylon w*r. considered in more detail. Some of 

the earlier inscriptions * of Rajadhiraja briefly record 
that the king of Lanka, the garlanded Vallava, and 
the king of the Kannakncciyar (people of Kanauj), 
suffered decapitation at the hands of Rajendra. The 
more detailed account of the occurrences as found in 
some of the later records f is as follows 

“ With a single unequalled army (he) took the 

crown of Vikramabahu, the king of 
In c °l® the people of Lanka on the tempestuous 

Inscriptions. , 

ocean; the crown of large jewels, 
(belonging to) the lord of Lanka, Vikr ama- Pandy an , 
who, having lost the whole of the southern Tamil 
country out of fear of himself (Rajadhiraja) $ had 
entered llam (surrounded by) the seven oceans ; the 
beautiful golden crown of the king of Simhala, Vira- 
Salameghan, who, believing that llam (surrounded by) 
the ocean was superior to the beautiful Kannakucci 
(Kanyakubja) which belonged to him, had entered 
(the island) with his relatives and (those of) his 
countrymen who were willing (to go with him), § and 
had put on the brilliant crown ; who, having been 
defeated on the battle-field and having lost his black 
elephant, had fled ignominiously ; and who, when (the 
C5la king) seized his elder sister along with (his) wife 
and cut off the nose of (his) mother, had returned in 
order to remove the disgrace (caused) thereby, and, 
having fought hard with the sword, had withered II in 

• 92 of 1892 ; 172 of 1894. t S/I. ili 28, p. 86. 

% Text $ 9 mun-tanakkwfaindu,' apparently rendered by Hultzsch into 
•which h ad previously belonged to him,’ 

§ " lU&firidenrtnni ulangol iannfyu tannu^avojum pugundu " is the text* 

\ Or daughter* The text has kUdali. 

| Text * ularttda* Hultiscb has * periahed * ; but see later. 

1206] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


a hot battle; and the extremely brilliant crown of 
large jewels, (belonging to) Sri Vallavan (Sri Vallabha) 
Madanarajan, who had come of the family of Kannaran 
(Kr§na) and had become the proud king of flam.” * 


In the 

MahUvamsa. 


The Mahavamsa shows clearly that the years 

following the deportation of Mahinda V 
by Rajendra and the annexation of 

mm 

“ the whole of Ilamandalam ’’ to the 
Cola empire (1017 A.D.) were filled with risings on 
the part of the Singalese subjects against the new Cola 
rulers followed by reprisals on their part. The 
independent testimony of the Ceylonese chronicle not 
only confirms the account of Rajadhiraja's records in 
its essential features, lmt furnishes much welcome 
assistance in fixing the chronology of events which, 
though spread over several years and apparently 
connected with more than one campaign, seem to have 
been grouped together to form a convenient section in 
the pra&asti of Rajadhiraja. The Mahavamsa affirms f 
that the first outbreak of ’the opposition to the Co}a 
rule in Ceylon occurred about twelve years after the 
capture of Mahinda V, when the Cola wanted to gain 
control of Mahinda’s son Kassapa, and that this revolt 
centred round Kassapa ; Kassapa and his confederates 
succeeded in maintaining a contest for six months 

with the Cola forces said to have been 
95,000 strong ; they “ killed a great 
number of D ami] as ” and compelled the 
rest to retire and take up “ their abode 
as before in Pulatthinagara.” Thereupon, Kassapa 


Six months 
war of 

Vikkamabahu. 


* The text is *' Kanna ran- va/i~ van dura $• ko! a- v i [at- tar a is an - agiya , ’ which 
Ilultrsch translates into “ who had come to Kannaran (Krishna) and taken up 
(his) abode (with him).'* Urai means in the context ‘ pride,’ * glory/ The point 
seem* to be that MadanarRja, though a R5||rakil$a or, more generally, a Karnlita 
by descent, became king of Ceylon. 

t Ch» 55 vy. 24*29, 


88 


[ ] 



THE COLAS 


began to rule the south-eastern portion of the island 
of Ceylon, the division known as Roliana, under the 
title of Vikkamabahu. * This war of six months 
preceding the accession of Vikkamabalm took place 
about 1029 A.D., in the reign of Rajendra I ; but 
there is nothing to show that Rajadhirlija actually took 
part in it. though he might have done so. 

The Cola inscriptions affirm that Vikkamabahu 

lost his life in the Cola war, t and that 
His d<ath. hjg diadem fell into the hands of RajsT- 

dhiraja ; the Mahavawsa, however, says that he 
suddenly died of a disease in the twelfth year of his 
reign (1041 A. D.) in the midst of extensive prepara- 
tions for a Cola war. It is possible that the Cola 
panegyric is more boastful than true, though his 
crown may have been among the booty of the Colas. J 
Despite Rajendra's success against Mahinda V, there- 
fore, the whole of Ceylon was held by the Colas only 
for a short while, a period of about a decade, after 
which the province of Roliana asserted its indepen- 
dence, and kept up a perpetual war against the Cola 
province. In Rajadhiruja’s reign this struggle became 
very acute as every ruler that came after Vikkamabahu 
was actuated by the desire to expel the Damijus from 
Ceylon. Neglecting the eight days ’ rule of Kitti 
(A.D. 1041), the “ mighty Mahalansikitti ” who became 
king of Roliana, “ w r as vanquished in his third year 
(A.D. 1044) in battle against the Colas, and with his 
own hand he cut his throat and so died a sudden 
death. Thereupon the Damijas took the chief 
treasures, such as the diadem and the like and sent 


* MV. Ch. 66, w. 1-6. 

t 92 of 1892 where he it only called * king of the Ceylonese/ 

% Geiger C V, ii. p. zxi. § CV, Ch. 56, v. 7* | iMd vv. 8-10. 

r 298 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


them to the Monarch of the Cola land.” It is not easy 
to identify Mahalanakitti with any of the four Singalese 
rulers mentioned by name in the Coja inscription 
quoted above. Vikkamapandu (A. D. 1044-47) was 
according to the Mahavatnsa * the only son of Maha- 
lanakitti, who, having left his country through fear 
and lived for a time in the Dulu country, returned to 
Rohana when he heard of the fate of his father, 
and was killed, after a short rule, in a fight with 
Jagatlpala. The Cola inscription, on the contrary, 
implies that he was a Pandya prince who had once 
ruled over the southern Tamil country, and was 
compelled by Rajadhiraja himself to abandon southern 
India and seek his fortune in Ceylon, where he became 
king. As the Pandyan and Ceylonese dynasties 
were at this time in close political and dynastic 
alliance with each other and with the Keralas. 
and were united in their common opposition to Cola 
ascendancy, f we have perhaps to assume that the 
two accounts supplement each other. Vikrama Pandya 
had apparently a Singalese father and a Pandya 
mother: his early career in the Pandya country is 
represented, not quite accurately, by the Mahavatnsa 
as a sojourn in the Dulu country, or possibly, this 
sojourn in the Dulu land was an interlude between 
the Pandyan and the Ceylonese phases of his career. 
Whatever that may be, there is no doubt that the 
Coja inscriptions and the Mahavatnsa speak of one and 
the same prince here, and that while the Ceylonese 
account of the manner of his death is not contradicted 
by the Cola records, it is quite possible that his diadem 
also fell into the hands of the Colas as is claimed by 
them. Of Jagatlpala (A.D. 1047-51), the Mahavatnsa 
says $ that he was * a sovereign’s son ' from Ayodhya, 


• ibid w. 11-14. 


f PK. p. 113. 

[ 299 ] 


t CV. w. 13-15. 



THE COLAS 


and that after coming to Ceylon he “ slew Vikkama- 
pandu in battle and ruled aa a mighty man in Rohana 
for four years. Him also the Colas slew in battle and 
sent the Mahesi with her daughter and all the valuable 
property to the Cola kingdom/’ If we overlook the 
discrepancy about the place of origin, Kanyakubja 
according to the Cola records and Ayodhya according 
to the Mahavamsa , there is a striking similarity in the 
fortunes of Jagatipala of the chronicle and Vira- 
Salameghan of the inscriptions, and it may be 
concluded that we have here only one prince mentioned 
under two different names in our sources. * But this 
conclusion is not unassailable ; the death of Vlra- 
Salameghan is mentioned in an inscription dated 
towards the end of A. D. 10-46 ; t the most critical 
study of the Mahavamsa has led to the conclusion that 
Jagatipala began to rule only in A. D. 1047 and went 
on till four years later. So that, after all, the 
differences in the names and the places of origin of 
these two princes may mean that they were two dif- 
ferent persons who had little in common with each 
other besides having attained some celebrity in Ceylon 
as opponents of the Coja regime and met very similar 
fates at the hands of their antagonists. How these 
adventurers from northern India came to Ceylon in 
search of a career is not easy to explain satisfactorily 
at present. Sri Vallabha Madanaraja, the fourth and 
last of the princes mentioned in the Co]a inscriptions, 
has been identified with king Parakkama of the 
Mahdvamsa who was slain in fight with the Cojas. % 

This identification is also to be accepted with caution. 
Madanaraja was a Vallabha (of the line of Kannara) by 
descent ; Parakkama, on the contrary, was the son 

* Cf. Hultzsch SII. Hi, p. 53. 

t ibid. 3rd Deer. A. D. 1046. { ibid ; also MV. 56, v. 16. 


[ 800 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


of the Pandu king, i. e., Vikkamapandu. Moreover, 
the death of Parakkama occurred about A. D. 1053, 
nearly seven years after the date of Rajadhiraja’s 
inscription (A. D. 1046) in which Madanaraja is 
mentioned. * 


This comparison of the epigraphical account of 

„ the Ceylonese war in the records of 

summary, * 

Rajadhiraja with the events as chroni- 
cled in the Maliavamsa thus points to the need for 
caution in working the two accounts into a continuous 
story of the relations between the Cola empire and 
that part of Ceylon which was maintaining a vigorous 
struggle for its independence against great odds. Only 
two of the kings in the inscriptions of Rajadhiraja can 
be recognised in the Mahuvamsa viz., Vikramabahu 
and Vikrama-Pandya. Vira-Salamegha and Sri 
Vallabha Madanaraja are known only to the Cola 
inscriptions, but apparently are not mentioned in 
the ifahavamsa. On the contrary, Jagatlpala and 
Parakkama of the Mahavamsa, who figured in the later 
stages of the war of independence and laid down their 
lives in that war, do not find a place in the Coja 
inscriptions, f The inscriptions of Rajadhiraju's 
successor liajendra II show that he too had a hand in 
the suppression of the Ceylonese risings. Records of 
his fourth year, J A. I). 1055, state that “ he despatch- 
ed an army to Ceylon, where the king Vlra-Salamegha 
was decapitated and the two sons of the Ceylon king 
Manitbharana were taken prisoners." Later records 


• Cf. HulOsrh— JKAS. 1913, pp. 519-21 where the opinions expressed by 
him iu S II. in are withdrawn. 

t JagAtipjda's queen and her daugther l.Tlavatt e*caped later on from their 
captivity in the CCJa country. MV. Ch. 59 vv. 23-4. 

X S/I ; iit. 29. JKAS, 1913, p. 519. 

[ 301 ] 



THE COLAS 


of Rajendradeva mention only Vlra-Salamegha. * 
Rajendradeva's claim is proved by the presence of an 
inscription of his reign at Sangili-Kanadarava in 
Ceylon, f Despite Vlra-Salamegha being called “ King 
of the Kalingas of the strong army,” J there is no 
reason to distinguish him from the ‘ Kannakucciyar- 
kavalan ’ of the Rajadhiraja inscriptions. Surviving 
the disgrace inflicted on the members of his family, his 
sister and mother and wife, by the forces of Rajadhi- 
raja, and the defeat in the ( hot battle ’ that followed 
thereafter when he sought to avenge the disgrace, 
this unfortunate prince apparently fell a victim to 
another Cola inroad possibly led by Rajendradeva 
some years later. § The identity of Manabharana, the 
king of the Ceylonese, whose two sons were captured 
by Rajendra, is not easy to make out, though the 
suggestion may be offered that he was no other 
than the king who joined the confederacy of three 
southern kings whose opposition to Coja rule in the 
Pandya country was suppressed by Rajadhiraja in the 
life-time of his father, in one of his early campaigns, if 

* 87 of 1895 ; 270 of 1915, both of the ninth year. 

t SZZ. iii p. 59; 612 of 1912, (SZZ. iv 1408). 

J znrarpadaik - ka ling a r-man } 1. 12 of S/I \ iii 29. 

§ Supposing that a Vira-SalamSgba 1 perished in a hot battle * (SZI. iii p. 56) 
with Rajadhiraja, Hultzsch distinguishes from him the 4 kalmgai-man * of the 
same name of the Rajendra inscriptions (JRAS . 1913 p. 520), and connects 
the latter with Trilokasundarl, a Kalinga queen of Vijayabahu I, A.D. 1054-1109, 
and suggests that her nephew Kitti-siri-mSgha may have been named after Vlra- 
SalsSmEgha. He also suggests that the Pandya Manabharana who was decapitated 
by RSjUdhiraja was the ancestor of that Manabharana who was the nephew and 
son-in-law of Vijayabahu I; and that Sri Vallabha Madanaraja, the Ceylonese 
opponent of Rajadhiraja, was the ancestor of his namesake Sri Vallabha, a third 
nephew and son-in-law of Vijayabahu I. Arguments from the similarity of 
common names cannot be final ; and Hultzsch has not conside red the 
relation between the Manabharana whose sons were captured by RSjSndra and 
his namesakes. 

% Vide p. 269 ante. 


[ 302 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


It may be observed that Indian coins found in Ceylon 

include issues of Rajadhiraja and 
csja coin* and Rgjendra, * and that Cola inscriptions 

inscriptions in . * 1 

Ceylon. found in Ceylon, though not numerous 

or well preserved, carry us right to 
the end of the period covered in this chapter, f We 
may, therefore, conclude that the bulk of the island 
of Ceylon constituted an administrative division of the 
Cola empire, while the South-western part of the 
island, called Rohana in the Mahavamsa , kept up an 
incessant warfare for the restoration of Singalese 
independence. Prince Kitti who assumed the title 
Vijayabahu in 1058 A. D. was the leader of this effort. 
The Mahavamsa and the inscriptions of Virarajendra 
give some account of it. £ Like all conquerors, the 

Colas were only exasperated by the 
most natural desire of the Singalese to 
be rid of them, and seem often to 
have adopted savage methods of repression such as 
transportation, decapitation and mutilation, even 
against the women of the royal family of Ceylon. 
After the accession of Kulottunga to the Cola throne 
in A. D. 1070, Vijayabahu I succeeded at last where 

so many of his predecessors had failed 
and restored the independence of 
Ceylon ; a detailed account of the steps leading to 
the success of Vijayabahu belongs to the reign of 
Kulottunga. 


Repressive 

policy. 


And its failure. 


* Codrington, Ceylon Coins pp. 84*5. 

T Cf. SIT. ill 84 (266 of 1901) of the 7th year of V'rarajEndradSva, 
claiming the subjugation of Ceylon among the king’s achievements and 594 of 
1912— S/I. iv 1388 (Yr. 3 of AdhirSjSndradSva). 

t tfr.Ch.57vv.65ff. EZ. ii p. 207 ; 182 of 1915. 

[ 803 ] 



THE COLAS 


/'A second war against Somesvara was undertaken 


Second war 
against 
CSJukyas. 


by Rajiidhiraja between A. D. 1044 and 
1046. The Manimangalam inscrip- 
tion * of 3rd December, A. D. 1046 
gives a short account of this campaign 


stating that the Coja king defeated in battle several 
subordinate chieftains f of the Cajukya forces, and 


destroyed the palace of the Calukyas in the town of 
Kampili. Other inscriptions, of which the earliest is 
dated in the thirtieth year of Rajadhiraja, furnish 


some additional information about what followed the 


destruction of the palace at Kampili. J Another 
engagement, said to be the third of its kind, followed 
at PSijdur, described as a kadakamanagar or canton- 
ment city, on the left bank of the Krsna river, in which 
several Telugu chieftains, vassals of SomEtSvara, 
were made prisoners of war together with numberless 
women; thereupon, the city of Piindiir was sacked 
by the Cola army and razed to the ground, its site 
being ploughed with asses and sowed with variitikai , 
a kind of coarse millet; finally, the large palace at 
Mannandippai was consigned to the flames, and a 
pillar of victory erected, bearing the emblem of the 
tiger. These occurrences, no doubt considerably exag- 
gerated in the partial report of the Coja records, 
must have taken place before A.D. 1048 ; it is even 
possible that they had happened before the dute of the 
Manimangalam inscription, end of A.D. 1046, and were 
not mentioned in that record. 


• S/I. iii 28. 

f The text is : M JCanjar Dtnakaran Mranan Canavadi vatujalar tcriyal 
MadisUdanan' * Hultrsch takes this to he four names ; perhaps there are only 
three. In any case their identity cannot be made out fully though some of them 
seem to figure in the Western CSJukya inscriptions of the time. 

: 6 of 1890 (Yr. 30) ; 221 of 1894 ; 81 of 1895 (Yr, 32). 


[ 304 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


For all the vaunted successes of the Colas, the 

Calukyas seem to have retained their 

Effects, , 

power unbroken. The provenance of 
the inscriptions of Somesvara, of which several are 
dated records, shows that the extent of the Calukyan 
empire on the side of the Tungabhadra continued 
undiminished. From the lladagajli taluq of the Bellary 
district comes an inscription * of Trailokyamalladeva 
(Somesvara 1) dated (Saka 908) early in A. I). 1047 
recording a gift by the chieftain Kalidasa, whose name 
figures also among the Telugit princelings f repulsed 
by the Coja troops in one of the numerous fights of the 
time. Two other records J from the same region are 
dated in the next year, Saka 909, of which one records 
a gift of land to a Visnu temple by Mahamandalesvara 
Gandaradityarasa, ‘ lord of Mahismatlpura,' ruling the 
Sindaviidi 1000, Benneviiru 12 and Nuruganda as a 
vassal of Somesvara. This chieftain may perhaps be 
identified with Kandar-dinakaran of the Cola inscrip- 
tions. § Even if we do not accept the rhapsodies of 
Bilhana over Somesvara’s conquest of KancT or 
Vikramaditya’s digrijai/a, we must assume that the 
repeated incursions of the Colas into Calukyan terri- 
tory, however annoying to the king and detrimental to 
the happiness of his feudatories and subjects, resulted 
in no permanent loss of territory. On the other hand, 
the bulk of the lighting is on Calukvan territory, 
and in the course of the wars many large cities 
seem to have suffered considerable damage from the 
destructive fury of the invader. The aim of the Cojas 
was apparently to reduce the Calukyas to political 
subjection such as that of the Piindya, Keraja and 

• 484 of 1914, t 92 of 1892 (SII, iv 539) 1. 31. 

t 41 of 1904 ; 711 of 1919. 

§ Contra Hultzsch, Sff, lii p. 57, n. 1. 

[ 305 ] 


39 



THE COLAS 


Vengl kingdoms in this period. In this endeavour 
they failed totally. It would seem moreover that SometS- 
vara succeeded in extending his influence, at least 
temporarily, over Vengl. His Mulgund inscription * 
dated A.D. 1053 speaks of one of his sons, SometSvara- 
deva, ruling over Belvola 300 and Pu]igere 300, 
as bearing the title Venglpnra-varesvara. And there 
is found in Draksarama a record of the same king *j* 
dated two years later (Saka 977) registering a gift by 
a daughter of one of his ministers, Narayana Bhatta 
by name. Though it is not impossible to find other 
explanations for these facts, J and the evidence is thus 
of a very inconclusive nature, still, considering that 
Vikramaditya VI, the son of Somesvara I, is said to 
have conquered Vengl, a claim supported by the 
presence of a number of his inscriptions at Draksarama 
and other places in the Telugu country, the suggestion 
may be made that the Western Cajukyas began to 
cast longing eves on Vengl even from the time of 
Somesvara I, or at least sought to divide the attention 
of their Cola opponents by a hostile movement in the 
direction of their northern dependency. If such was 
the policy pursued by Somesvara I, he only succeeded 
in exasperating the Cojas the more and goading them 
to a more relentless hostility. 


Rajadhiraja undertook another expedition against 
... . the Calukya in which he was accom- 

War continued. • J 

panied by his younger brother Ritjen- 
dra, whom he had chosen as heir-apparent in 
preference to his sons who, though not mentioned by 
name, are said to have occupied fairly high positions in 


• El. xvi p. 53. t 185 of 1893. 

X Fleet BG . I, ii pp. 4-40, n. 3 and 452-3, Also l A, xx p, 281 n. 39 ; and 
S, K. Alyangar, Ancient India p. 120 n. 1, 

f 306 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


the administration of the empire. * We get a vivid 
and obviously true description of the occurrences in 
this campaign from the records of Rajendra II. The 
earliest mention of these events is in a record f of his 
second year A. D. 1054 ; more details are given in 
the Manimangalam record of his fourth year, A. D. 
1055* This inscription records $ that the Coja king 
sought an occasion for war, invaded the Rattamandalam 
and began ravaging the country ; the proud Calukya 
Aha vain alia became furious when he heard of this, 
and marching out with his forces he met the Cola in 
pitched battle at Koppam, § a celebrated ilrtha on 
the Kpjna, most probably identical with Khidrapur on 
the right bank of the river about thirty miles east by 

south from Kolhapur. The battle that 

Battle of followed was long and fiercely fought 

Koppam. ^ ° 

on either side. For determining its 
exact, course we have to combine information furnished 
by some of Riijendradeva’s later inscriptions «j with 
that of the Manimangalam record mentioned above. 
In the early stages of the battle, Rajadhiraja himself led 
the fight, Rajendradeva apparently holding himself in 
reserve. At this stage, the Calukya forces concentrated 

# S/A, iii 28 1. 1, whti’h also mentions an elder brother of the king, 
possibly passed over by Rajendra 1. 

t 214 of 1911. S/A iii, 55 ; u p. 304 A (of Yr. 3). 

t S/A m 29. 

§ Fleet El. xii pp. 296-8. I.at. i6°3(>', Long, 74°44'. For an earlier 
discussion of the identity of Koppam, AC. ix Introduction p. 16 n, 3, where 
attention is drawn to the reading in 168 ot 1911 iirthahkoppattaharayil. 
JIultzsch rendered * s?ppartmdi rat/a ' into : “The strength (of whose position is) 
hard to describe" ( S/A iii p. 63). We must now read the phrase as: 
11 scpfiamndtrUu” meaning " a tirtha (whose merits are) hard to describe. 
Rajendradeva’s introductions beginning Tirumagal maruviya use the phrase: 
plrdrrangariUk' koppjttu-i'andtdirtta /(hjvatnallan. * 

% 87 of 1895 ; 270 of 1915, both of the ninth year. A study of these 
records by the side of the Manimangalam inscription clearly^ shows that the 
latter has omitted the earlier stage of the battle in which RSjendra took no 
part and RSjadhiiSja met his fate. 


[ 307 J 



THE COLAS 

on the elephant on which the Coja king was riding 
and wounded him mortally, so that he “ went up 
into the sky and became a sojourner in the country 
of Indra, where he was welcomed by the women 
of the sky.” Then the vast ocean-like army of the 
Kuntalas dashed themselves against the Cola forces 
which, unable to withstand the onslaught, broke up 
and began to retreat in disorder. At this stage, 
Rajendradeva entered the fray shouting out to his 
retreating forces: “Fear not,” and pressed forward on 
his elephant like very Death against the Karnataka 
forces, restored order in his army and won a brilliant 
success by further fighting. * Once more, the enemy 
concentrated on the Coja king's elephant, and “ the 
shower of (Ihavamalla's) straight arrows pierced the 
forehead of his elephant, his royal thigh, and (his) 
shoulders which resembled hillocks, ” and many 
warriors who had mounted the elephant with him 
perished in the action. But Rajendra was more 
fortunate than his brother ; he succeeded in putting to 
death several leaders of the Calukyan army including 
Jayasimha, the brother of the Calukya, j - Pulake^in, 
Dasapanman and Nanni-Nulumban. At last, “ the 
Salukki was defeated, — with Vanniya-Revan, $ 1 uttan, 
(who had) a powerful army, Kniidamayan, whose army 
spoke (i. e., threatened) death, and other princes,— fled, 
trembling vehemently, with dishevelled hair, turning 
(his) back, looking round, and tiring (his) legs, and was 
forced to plunge into the Western ocean.” The 
elephants and horses and camels, the victorious banner 
of the boar and other insignia of royalty, together with 

* From this point the two accounts agree closely. 

This could not have been the younger brother of VikramSdUya VI ; he 
survived the battle of JCoppam for many years. 

| Perhaps same as RSvarasa, ruling in the neighbourhood of Kembhavi in 
A. D. 1054-55. Fleet, £G, I. H p. 439 ; Slf. iii p. 59. 

[ 808 ] 



SUCCESSORS ,OF RAJENDRA 

the peerless §attiyavvai, Sangappai and all the other 
queens, a crowd of women and many other things 
abandoned by Ahavamalla on the field, became the 
booty of the Coja king. Rajendra then did a thin«- 
not known before, * and crowned himself king on the 

battle-field, when the wounds he had 
received in the fight were still fresh 
on his body. According to some of 
the inscriptions, t Rajendra pressed on to Kolhapur, 
where lie planted a jayastambha , before he returned 
to his capital Gangapurl. + Such is the account of 
this celebrated fight at Koppam as narrated in the 
Coja inscriptions. § 


RajSndra's 

coronation. 


# 87 of 1895. 

t S/A iii 55, ii p. 304 C. I 87 of 1895. 

§ In the Trrumagal maruviya form of R"j*ndr*/s prasastis, the clause that 
occurs is : * Tan mnnnfin !7ttai pitwadiivaga manned ir settru • * * Iraitapadi - 
yehirai- yihikkamxtn' gon^u ' , often contracted into 4 pi it n ad u vaga Irattapadi,' 
This is rendered by Hultzsch generally into “ while the army of his elder 
brother was at his back/’ In the light of other records (esp. 87 of 1895) winch 
clearly state that Rajadhiraja began the fight and Rajendra entered it after he 
thed, we must, it seems, amend Hultzsch's translation and say — 41 while the army 
of his elder brother began to retire ” a translation which is also required by 
the phrase employed in the fuller of the two forms quoted above, viz. 
44 munnedir-fonru " '* going to the front in an opposite direction ”, as also by the 
reading 4 ‘ manner sTrtai pinvaduvaga*' 4 when the advancing army began to 
retreat” found in some records (SI/, ii p. 305, F and G) and amended by 
Hultzsch into ” ttmnnTm Tittai," It is perhaps hardly conceivable, according to 
Indian notions of precedence, that while the elder brother was present in person 
on the battle-field, the younger took the lead ; but this consideration need not be 
pressed as the cumulative force of all the inscriptions taken together is, 
doubtless, very clear. I may also observe that some records omit the word 
* tan* in * tan muttndn' e.g., S/A iii 55; on this account, it should not be 
assumed, as Hultzsch seems to do, that the phrase 4 Tirtmaruviya hngol v?ndan 4 
refers to the elder brother, (SI/, iii p, 112— English translation). 

It may also be observed, in passing, that the words : 14 tannanaiyi/ 

muntdlnai folia mttnnatnu tavirttn S/A iii 55 (11. 1-2), which occurs 
between 44 /ra((a pd(ji~y7lii rat -yilakkawu m -gan d n ” and 4< Kolla-purattu java- 
stamba-nU((i t ’' has been translated by Hultzsch into : 44 when the first elephant 
(of the enemy) went at his elephant, (his) elder brother stopped (it)/’ But this 
seems hardly satisfactory, as the words 4 (of the enemy) ’ introduce into the 
meaning a concept not warranted by the original, and the locative of the first 
44 tannftnaiyiT* seems to call for another explanation. I think that, in the 
context, *HnaV should he taken to be a mis-spelling of 'final' and the phrase 
translated into ; <# Displacing the old command (rule) by causing it to follow 

[ 309 ] . 



THE COLAS 


CSJukya 
inscriptions 
silent on 
Koppam, 


in SomEsvara's 
reign, 


The Calukya inecriptiona of the reign of Somes- 

vara tell ub nothing of the battle of 
Koppam, and specific references to 
his warfare with the Colas are few. In 
Saka 981 (expired) he had returned 
from a conquest of the southern coun- 
tries and a victory over the Co {a, and was camping 
in the Sindavadi .country, * a province ruled by a 

Mahamandalesvara Ciddana Cola- 
Maharaja. In f?aka 987 Visnuvar- 
dhana Yijayaditya was encamped at 
Arasiyakere on his way to the conquest of the south 
under orders from the king, t Bilhana’s account has, 
as has been pointed out already, apparently no relation 
to facts and seems to be pure fabrication. Shortly 
after the close of Somesvara’s reign, however, we get 
two inscriptions, J both dated about A. D. 1071, giving 

an account of the Coja invasion and 
though not f} ie death of Riijadhiraja. Though 

later. j %f e» 

the date is late and the Cbja king is 
not named, it is easy to infer from the Coja 
inscriptions that the transactions recorded here relate 
to the war that led to the battle of Koppam and the 
death of Rajadhiraja. § The vigorous language 


kit own commands.” The suggestion made at ARE. 1900 I 20 in reviewing the 
Tirukoyilur inscription (123 of 1900, Yr. 6) of Rajeudra that the battle of Kop- 
pam was a later event than the expedition to Kollapuram must be abandoned 
in view of the new identification of Koppam. The wording of the Tirukoyiltlr 
records {El, vii pp. 145*6), however, seems to lend some support to llultzsch’s 
view, and many of the shorter introductions mention Kollapuram before 
Koppam. 

* BG . I, ii, p. 441 , 392 of 1920, ARE . 1921, II 5. 

t ARE. 1919 II. 30. 

X Angigere: BG, 1, ii p. 441; and Gawurwad El. xv, 23. ed. Barnett. 
See also EC, viii Sorab 32$. 

§ Fleet and, following him, Barnett ascribe the expedition and apparently 
the loss of life that followed to RajCndradEva. But we have no evidence that 
Rajendra lost his life in the Calukya wars, though he was present at Koppam. 
cf. SIl, iii p. $3. 


L 8io j 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


employed by these records against the Co}a shows 
that the silence of the epigraphs of Somesvara's reign 
is really due to a reluctance to record publicly in 
his life-time unfortunate events that caused so much 
misery and suffering in his country at the hands 
of the foreign invader. The mahapataka great sinner) 
Tamilian known as Pandya-Cola, we are told, took to 
an evil course ( nele gettu) and abandoning the ancestral 
observances of his family, entered the Belvola coun- 
try, burned several temples including Jinalayas 
erected by Ganga-perumanadi, and was promptly 
punished for his wicked deeds by losing his life in 
battle and yielding his head to Somesvara I. The 
Cola account of the war, we may therefore conclude, 
is not by any means a greatly overdrawn picture of 
their achievement on this occasion. 


,7 ttaiw7nutijina 
title of Rajldhiruja, 


From the manner of his death Rajadhiraja came to 

be known as “ the king who died on 

the back of an elephant, 7 ’ and he is so 

styled in the inscriptions of his success- 

the time he was chosen as heir- 

apparent by his father to the day when 
a gieat warrior. j lg ] a jd down his life on the field of 

Koppani, Rajadhiraja led the life of a warrior king 


ors. 


F rom 


• 193 of 1925 (Yr. 6 of Rlj^ndra II) ; possibly also 5 of 1899 of 
Rajarlja 11 (Yr. 6). This latter inscription, which is nearly one century later in 
its date, seems to mix up the achievements of Rajadhiraja I and Rajvndra II. It 
speaks of ** Peru maj Vijayarajendra-deva who was pleased to conquer Kalylna- 
puram and Kolllpuram and to fall asleep {i.e., to die) on an elephant " 
(.V//. iii p. 191). Hultzsch remarks: “ This statement must refer to Parakesari- 
varman alias RIj?ndrad?va, who is known to have set up a pillar of victory 
at Kolllpuram n — a view expressed with more caution in ARE . 1899 I 53 
l>y Venkayya. 472 of 1920 from 5alukki (NA.) of the fourth year of 
RIjakesari Kljtndra <Kulottunga 1) gives the same description much earlier 
than the record noticed by Hultzsch ; the title Vijayarajendra is not, however, 
given here RIjendradeva nowhere claims to have conquered Kalylnapuram, 
did not have the title Vijayarlj^ndra, and as far as we know, did not die on 
an elephant in battle. These features distinctly recall Rljadhirlja I {ARE. 
1925 II 16), whose third year would fall, however, about A.D. 1021, in the 


[311 J 



THE COLAS 


and took part in many campaigns led by him in 
person. His record strikes one as that of a bom fighter 
and his warlike energy found full scope in the task 
of maintaining intact an overgrown empire that had 
risen on the ruin of old ruling families which never 
reconciled themselves to subjection to the Cojas. Some 
of this fighting, like the fatal expedition that led to 
Koppam, was of his own seeking. Kajadhiraja was 
first and foremost a soldier, and possibly his great 
military talent formed the reason for his being pre- 
ferred for the succession against an elder brother of 
his. His performance of the aivamedha apparently 
in his father's life-time goes a long way to confirm 
this view. 

Briefly and without much detail, Rlijadhiraja’s 
prasastis tell us that he employed his father's brother, 
his brothers, elder and younger, and his sons, in import- 
ant offices of state and constituted them into subordi- 
nate rulers of particular regions. The star of Rajadhi- 
raja’s nativity was Purva-Phalguni. * Gangaikonda- 
Solapuram was his capital, f His queens do not figure 
„ as prominently in his records as is usual 

Queens. 1 J 

in those of other reigns ; Trailokyam 
Udaiyar was the title, rather than the name, of one of 
them, + who, if she waB the same as the nambiraftiyiir 
mentioned in an inscription of the third year of 
Rajendra II, § may be taken to have survived her 

reign of Rajendra !.(See also 472 of 1020 — Yr. 4 of Kulottunga I)* If this view 
is correct, I am not sure it is, the theory, that during the Xlangu<ji famine the 
state could not help the sufferer# owing to the treasury being impoverished 
by the horse-sacrifice of Rajadhiraja {ARE, 1899 1 62), cannot stand. But after 
all the famine might have occurred in the reign of R2j£ndra II, about 
A. D. 1055; only the king might have been wrongly described in the record 
of RSjaraja II. The horse-sacrifice is, however, mentioned in the inscriptions 
of RSjSdhirSja as early as the 26th year, A.D. 1044, if not earlier. 

* 258 of 1910 (Yr. 35). f 420 of 1925 (Yr. 35). 

% 446 of 1918 (Yr. 24). § 213 of 1894. 


[ 812 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


husband. Besides the title Vijayarajendra assumed by 

Titles. him at Kalyarjapuram, Rajadhiraja had 

other surnames like Vlrarajendra-var- 
man, * Ahavamalla-kulantaka, f and Kalyanapuran- 
gondasola. f Mention is made of a spiritual preceptor 
(gurudevar) of the king by name Adhikarikal Parasaryan 
Vasudevanarayanan, also called Ulaga]anda-sola- 
Brahmamarayan ; § one wonders if Ulagajanda-soja 
was also a title of Rajadhiraja, and whether a revenue 
survey was undertaken, in his reign, of a part of the 
„ , country. If Among the feudatories of 

Feudatories. . . . 

Rajadhiraja mentioned in his records 
may be noticed Dandanayakan Solan Kumaran Paran- 
taka Marayan alias Rajadhiraja Nila - gangaraiyar; || 
a certain Pijlaiyar Sola-vallabha-deva whose wife 
was called Pancavan-mahadeviyar ** ; Dandanayaka 
Appimayya, ft governor of Mahai’ajavadi 7000, who 
had Valluru in the Ouddapah district as the seat of his 
government, and who may or may not be the same as 
Riljaraja Brahmadhiraja who is mentioned in the 
very next year as ruler of the same province ; and 
Pillaiyar Visnuvardhana-deva, doubtless Rajaraja 1 of 
Vengl, whose queen Ammangadevi was the daughter 
of Rajendra I and the sister of Rajadhiraja, and who 
is said to have presented, in A. D. 1050, three hundred 
Rajaraja-madas, gold coins of the Vengl kingdom, to 
the temple at Tiruvaiyaru in the Tanjore district. §§ 
There was also Senapati Rajendrasola Mavali- 
vanaviiyar, an otHcial who apparently took his title 

* 78 of 1920 (Yr. 33). t 188 of 1919 (Yr. 35). 

t 258 of 1910 (Yr. 35). § 413 of 1902 (Yr. 33). 

H Tirukkal,ukkunjam is called Ulapalanda-iojapuram in a record of the 
26th year (t72 of 1894). 

II 102 of 1912. •* 85 of 1920. tt 279 of 1895. Xt 295 of 1922. 

§§ 221 of 1894 (SI/, v 520). Visnuvardhana has been identified with the 
future Kul5ttunga 1 in ARE. 1895 1, 11. 

[81S] 


40 



THE COLAS 


from Rajendra I under whom his public career might 
have begun, and who made a large endowment for 
higher education, of which more will be said in 
another place. 

Turning now to an account of the reign of 

RaiSndra ii Rajendradeva, whose independent rule 

must have commenced some time in 

A. D. 1054-5, his inscriptions contain, like those of his 
predecessor, a variety of forms of his prnSastis . The 

shortest form is a summary narration 

His PTCLSQ&ttSi t% i • i * • y i » 

ot his successes beginning lrattapadi 
and found in his records from his second year * 
onwards. Having much in common with this, but 
slightly more elaborate, is the form which begins 
tiru(magal) maruviya also dating from his second 
year, f But the chief praGasti of the reign is the 
long account beginning tinmRdu (or madarj puoi- 
yenum , first appearing in the fourth year, $ and 
undergoing a revision in a subsequent edition, so to 
say, about the ninth year. § The main differences 
between the two forms in the treatment of the cele- 
brated battle of Koppam have been dealt with in our 
account of that fight. The other points in which the 
later version differs from the earlier are : the omission 
of all other particulars of the Ceylon war except the 
mention of Vira Salameghan ; the definite statement 
that after proclaiming himself king on the battle-field 
in an unprecedented manner, Rajendra returned to 

• 214 of 1911. In 421 of 1903 the king seems to he called RHjarSja 
by mistake. SeWell : (HIS I. p. 72) adopts A. D. 1052, May 28, the date of 
the accession of Rajendradeva, for the battle of Koppam. But we have no 
evidence that RSjSndra did not become heir - apparent some time before 
the battle. 

t 81 of 1928. 173 of 1894 (Yr. 5) has * ntlaviya * for * tnaruifiyaj but it 
otherwise the same. 

$ 3 of 1892, (Sfl iii 29)'; 396 of 1913. 

[814 ] 


9 87 of U95 ; 270 of 1915. 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


Gangapurl; a slightly different account of the disposi- 
tion of the administrative places held by the members 
of the royal family, given not at the beginning of the 
record as in the earlier version, but at a later stage : 
and an account, altogether new, of a fresh war with 
the Cahtkyas. 


Both the Kalingattupparaui and the Vikrama- 


His part at 
Koppam. 


kolan-ula make pointed reference to 
Rajendra’s part in the battle of 
Koppam. The former records that the 


king fought fiercely in the battle and saved * the world ' 


by his success and celebrated his coroqation on the 


field of battle. * The ulfi, with intelligible hyperbole, 
says f that with the aid of a single elephant he 
captured a thousand of the enemy at Koppam. 


Among the king's relatives installed in different 

posts in the empire, the Manimangalam 
Employment of inscription of the fourth year mentions 

relatives in « , , 

offices. n0 ‘ewer than thirteen persons,— a 

paternal uncle ( siriya-tfitai j of the 

king, four younger brothers of his, six sons and two 
grandsons. J The later records of the reign give a 
shorter list of only six persons so employed comprising 
the paternal uncle of the earlier record, his son — a 
new figure, only three of the four younger brothers 
mentioned before, and one son of the king, Rajendra- 
solan ; why the rest are omitted it is not easy to 
explain. One wonders if they had all died in the 
interval, or were found unfit even for subordinate 

* viii 27. 1 11. 38-40. 

J Sit. Hi p. 58. * JCadalar' definitely means ‘sons* in this record; 
RujEndrasola one of the * kUdalar ' is clearly called 1 tan-timmagan ' in 87 of 
1895, {contra, Hultzsch. op . cit , p. 62 n. 9) — unless indeed, we must assume 
the more general meaning for * kilddiar,' take * tirumagan * to be a loose 
expression for son-in-law, and identify RSjEndra with KulSttunga I. But the 
phrase ‘ ktl dalar k&dalar} clearly means grandsons ; and this clearly favours 
the first suggestion. 


[ 916 ] 



THE COLAS 


employment. There seems to be no evidence whatever 

by which this can be settled. The fact 
in fewer deserves to be noted, however, in view 

numbers in the . _ 

later years. of somewhat hasty statements which, 

on very slender evidence, fasten on 

Kulottunga I a series of cold-blooded political murders 

calculated to clear liis way to the Cola throne. * 

The date of the shorter list would fall about 

A. D. 1061, or nine years before the accession of 

Kulottunga. Among the titles conferred on these 

members of the royal family, some like Cola-Paudyan, 

Coja-Gangan and Cola-Kerajan perhaps connoted the 

charge of the administration of the particular provinces 

named ; others seem to have been merely titles of 

personal distinction giving no idea of the spheres of 

their duties, if any. Such titles are Irumadi-solan, 

Karikala-solan, Uttama-solan, Vijayalayan, and even 

names like Sola - vAyoddhirajan and Sola - Kanna- 

kucciyan. Only the Cola-Pandya viceroys seem to 

have left behind a number of inscriptions of their 

own in the land over which they held sway ; but even 

in their case, it is extremely difficult to identify the 

particular viceroy from his records, the first viceroy 

Jatavarman Sundara alone excepted, f 


Rajendra’s son, also called Rajendra-sola in the 
. records noticed above, was perhaps 

RajamaliSndra. # . 1 r 

chosen heir-apparent some time about 
A. D. 1059, and assumed the title Rajakesari 
Rajamahendra. One inscription % of his third year 


* ARE. 1899 I, 51. 

•f He quotes hie father’s $rasa*ti in some records. For the others many 
guesses have been put forward* See notes in the Appendix under ‘ C3|a-P2n<}ya * 
inscriptions. 

% 119 of 1902. His other records begin in three ways : Manun\di-murai~ 
valara ; tirumangai-valara / tirumagal-vilanga : none of them is of any 
historical value. 


f 316 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


Battle of 
Mudakkaru. 


claims a victory for him against Ihavamalla at Mudak- 
karu, and furnishes valuable confirmation of the events 
relating to another Calukya war narrated in more 
detail in the inscriptions of the ninth year of his 
father. We learn Jr om these latter * that the Calukya, 
anxious to wipe out the disgrace that befell him on the 
field of Koppam, advanced with numerous forces led 
by Dandanayaka Valudeva and other chieftains of 
the army, and a battle ensued on the banks of the 

Mudakkaru (winding river) in which 
the Dandanayaka and his followers 
fell, Irugaiyan and others were forced 
to retreat together with their king and the proud 
Vikkalan, unable to resist the vigorous attack of the 
Cola forces. The inscription of Rajamahendra says, 
likewise, that by a war-elephant, he caused Ahavamalla 
to turn his back on the Mudakkaru. As it often hap- 
pened that in the Calukya wars several Cola princes 
fought together on the same field, the inscriptions of 
successive rulers also often supplement each other. 

It is possible, therefore, that the future 
Same as K u <jai- Vlrariijendra was also present on this 

Sang.tmam ? * 

field ; and if that was so, this battle 
must be treated as identical with that of Kudal- 
oangamam of the records of Vlrariijendra. A long 
description of this battle of KQdal-Sangamam, with 
some details not foand in Rajendra’s records, is given 
in Virarajendra’s inscriptions even of the second 
yearf (A. D. 1063-4). It seems hardly likely that two 
first-class engagements took place on the same field 
in less than three or four years. In some of his later 
inscriptions t occur expressions which imply that 


87 of 189# ; S/I. v. p. 371 11. 32-39. 


t 113 of 1896 ; 718 of 1909. 


t SII. iii. 84, 1. 8. HulUsch thinks this a reference to the fourth encounter 
preceding that in which Kampili was burnt {ibid, p, 195.) 


[ 317 ] 



THE COLAS 


Vlrarajendra had taken part in the fight at Mudak- 
karu before he became king, and that, in consequence, 
he came to be called Irattaraja-kula-kalan. If this view 
is correct, at least three Cojas were present at the 
battle of Kiidal-Sangamam and took part in the 
fight : the king Rajendradeva, the heir-apparent Raja- 
mahendra, and the king’s brother Vlra-Cola Karikala 
(Vlrarajendra), whose achievements came to be 
recorded in his inscriptions in detail when, after the 
death of Rajamahendra, he became heir-apparent and 
later king. 

The account of the battle of Kudal-Sangamam 
_ , and its antecedents given in the early 

Description of ° *' 

battle in VIrarajen- inscriptions of Vlrarajendra is as 

dra’s inscriptions, folloW8 * * 

44 (He) drove from the battle-field in Gangapiuli into the 
Tungabhadra the Mahasamantas, whose strong hands (wielded) 
cruel bows, along with Yikkalan who fought under (his) banner at 
the head of the battle, t (He) attacked and destroyed the 
irresistible, great and powerful army which he (viz., Yikkalan) 
had again despatched into Vengai-nadu ; fought the Mftdanda- 
nayakan Camundarajan and cut off his head ; { and severed the 
nose from the face of his (viz., Camuwjaraja’s) only daughter, 
called Nagalai, (who was) the queen of Irugaiyan and who 
resembled a peacock in beauty. 

14 The enemy, full of hatred, met and fought against (him) 
yet a third time, hoping that (his former) defeats would be 
revenged. (The king) defeated countless tumantas , together with 
these (two) sons of Xhavamalla, who were called Vikkalan and 
Singanan, at Kudal-Sangamam on the turbid river. Having sent 
the brave van-guard in advance, and having himself remained 

* SJL iii. p. 37 (XL 3-8) identical with 113 of 1895. 

f 1 have adopted the reading : “ ikalmunai virudotju malaikkum ” of 113 
of 1896. 

t Hultzsch translates : “ hrravm-hrattinai*yamttu M into ** cut off the head 
of the corpse” apparently failing to notice that ier&avan'' is made up 
of u Urru ** and 11 avan” cf. ierru van-Hrattinai (113 of 1896). 

[ 318 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


close behind with the kings allied to him, he agitated by means of 
a single mast elephant that army (of the enemy), which was 
arrayed (for battle), (and which) resembled the northern ocean. 
In front of the banner troop, * (he) cut to pieces Singan, (the 
king) of warlike Kosalai ; along with the furious elephants of his 
van-guard. While Kesava-dandanayaka, Kettarasan, Marayau of 
great strength, the strong Pottarayan and (Ireccayan) were 
fighting, (he) shouted “ (Follow) Muvendi, (who wears) a garland 
of gold! ” and cut to pieces many samantas , who were deprived 
of weapons of war. Them Maduvanan, who was in command, 
fled ; Vikkalan fled with dishevelled hair ; Singanan fled, (his) 
pride (and) courage forsaking (him) ; Annalan and all others 
descended from the male elephant on which they were fighting 
in battle, and fled ; Ahavamalla, too, to whom (they were) allied, 
tied before them. (The king) stopped his fast furious elephant, 
put on the garland of victory, (seized) his (viz., Ahavamalla s) 
wives, his family treasures, conches, parasols, trumpets, drums, 
canopies, t white camaras, the boar-banner, the ornamental arch 
(tnafcara-fdrtoja)i the female elephant (called) Puspaka, { and a 
herd of war-elephants, along with a troop of prancing horses, and, 
amidst (general) applause, put on the crown of victory, (set with) 
jewels of red splendour/' 


Compared to 
that in RajFndra’s 
records. 


Irugaiyan is said in Rajendradeva'B records to 

have fled with Ahavamalla, Vikramil- 
ditya and others from the battle 
of Mudakkaru : his wife suffered 

• t# 1 

mutilation in the Vengi fight of Vlra- 

rajendra with Camuiidaraya just before the battle of 

Kudal-§angamam. And Vlriirajendra is said to have 

‘ seen the back of the hostile Salukki ’ at Mudakkaru 

♦ • •* 

before he became king, and there seems to be no other 
campaign narrated in Vlrarajendra's inscriptions that 
will explain this last reference unless it be the battle 
of Kudal-§angamam, described in such detail and 
said to have taken place before his second year. It is 


• i. e. the van-guard (of th# Co[a king)-Hultisch. 
t Migha-fambar. X The text is Putfakap-pujiyum. 


[ 819 ] 



THE COLAS 


difficult to resist the conclusion, already suggested, 
that the Mudakkaru of the records of RaiendradevA 

• M _ W 

and Rajamahendra and the Kudal-Sangamam of the 

early records * of Vlrarajendra refer to one and the 

same engagement. The same event is apparently once 

at least mentioned under the name of Mudakkaru in 

• *• 

the inscriptions of Vlrarajendra himself. 


Where Rajendra's records simply state that 

Ahavamalla desired to avenge himself for the defeat at 

Koppam and advanced in great force, those of 

Vlrarajendra show us the extent of the progress made 

by the Calukyas by recording the necessity for 

chasing them through Gangapadi to the banks of the 

Tungabhadra and thereby indicate how little the 

Cajukyas had suffered in the actual extent of the 

territory ruled by them even after Koppam. They 

also imply, by what they say about Camundaraya’s 

movement against Vengl, that an important, but 

unsuccessful, attempt was made by the Calukyas to 

divide the attention of the Colas between two fronts. 

* 

This is noteworthy as evidence of the interest of the 

Western Calukyas in Vengl apart from 
any complications arising with regard 
to the succession after the death of 
Rajaraja-narendra. t We have already had some 
evidence, though slight, of the eagerness of the Western 
Calukyas to court the friendship of their Eastern 
cousins. In fact the possession of Vengl made the 
Colas formidable to the Western Calukyas ; the Colas 
well understood the importance of Vengi to them 
and took care to marry their princesses to the rulers of 
Vengl for generations together and otherwise to keep 

* Another engagement fixed at this same place for a later day did not come 
off. See post. pp. 326 ff. 

t Contra S. K. Aiyauga i- Ancient India p. 121. 


The place 
of Vengl. 


[ 320 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


on friendly terms with them. For the same reason, the 
Western Calukyas, who looked upon Vengl as a lost 
dominion, made vain efforts to undo the results of 
their slackness when it was too late. * 


Sangamanv 


Kudal-Sangamam must be located at the junction 

of the Tungabhadra and Krsna rivers, f 
The first battle at this place, the one 
f with which we are now concerned, 
took place after the Cajukyas were driven across the 
Gangapadi up to the banks of the Tungabhadra, and 
after the failure of an expedition sent into Vengl by 
the Calukyas. On a later occasion, when the Calukya 
failed to meet Vlrarajendra at the same place as 
previously arranged, the Cola planted a pillar of 
victory on the banks of the Tungabhadra before he 
retired. $ The Sangamam meant by the inscriptions 
must, therefore, be some confluence of rivers on 
the course of the Tungabhadra. The choice lies 


• Another view of these events is possible. Minjakkaru may not be Kthjal- 
Sangamam ; Irugaiyan may have fought at Mu<Jakkaru, and this need have no 
connection with the mutilation of his wife in the VSugl campaign of Vlrarajendra, 
which preceded the first battle of KH<Jal-$anganiam. As Vtrarajendra’s record is 
dated in his second year (c, A.D. 1064) and the E. Cajukva Rajaraja-naiendra 
died in 10t>3, it is just possible that Vikramaditva’s entry into VEngi tCamun<}a- 
raya’s expedition) was connected with some succession dispute after Rajaiaja’s 
death. On this scheme, we have to assume that the battle of Mu^akkaru— * 
whatever river may be meant— took place c. A.D. 1060 , aud three yeais or 
so later came the first battle of Kthjal* Sangamam recorded in the inscriptions of 
A.D. 1064. On the whole the view adopted in the text, based on the identifica- 
tion of Mu^Jakkaju vvith KtUial-Sangamam, seems simpler, and there appears to be 
nothing that can be urged against such a position. It should also be observed, 
in this connection, that Vlrarajendra’s inscriptions of the second year say nothing 
about his helping Vijayuditya to gain or regain the Vengl throne,— an event 
which is not mentioned as having taken place till after the second battle of Kmjal- 
Sangamam and about the fifth-year of VirarajFndra (c. A.D. 1067). So that if 
we drop the somewhat uncritical assumption that Vikramaditya and Vlrarajendra 
concerned themselves about V?ngl only after Rajaraja-warendra s death, the 
course of events becomes clear and perhaps more easy to follow. 

t SIl. iit. p. 32. t 3°» 1 to- 


il 


[ 321 ] 



THE COLAS 


between Kudali at the junction of the Tunga and 
Bhadra in Mysore, or that of the Tnngabhadra and 
the Krena. While the name Kudali points to the 
former as the site of Kudal-Sangamam, the Vengl 
interlude seems to make the latter more probable; 
a satisfactory identification of Kandai or Karandai, 
where the Cola awaited the Calukya for about a month 
on the second occasion, may decide the choice more 
definitely. * 


The latest regnal year in Rajendra’s records is the 


Close of Rajen- 
dra's reign. 


twelfth, f corresponding to A. D. 1063. 
He was succeeded by Vlrarajendra 
already heir-apparent for sometime 


after the death of Rajamahendra. Gangapuri conti- 
nued to be the Cola capital under Rajendra II and is 
mentioned as such in an inscription from Kanya- 
kumari, $ while another from Kuttalam makes mention 


of a big bazaar within the fort of this capital city. § 
Of the queens of Rajendra, only one is mentioned by 
name in his records, a Kilanaijigal. His daughter 
Madhurantaki was the wife of the Eastern Cahtkya 
prince Rajendra II, afterwards Kulottunga I. 51 Among 
the feudatories of Rajendradeva II, prominent mention 
is made in his records of the Milica chieftain 
Narasimhavarman who is said to have ruled Miladu 

m 


♦ Fleet suggested the confluence of the PaRca-ganglS and the Kr?na in the 
neighbourhood of KhidrapRr (Koppam) as the KRcJal-Sangamam of the Co[a 
inscriptions ; and identified Karandai with lRcal KaraRji in the same place 
(£/, xii p. 298). But as he does not seem to have written the more detailed 
note promised by him on the subject, it is impossible to see how he would have 
met the objections to these identifications that arise from die narrative of the 
campaign as given in the Coja records which do not once mention RaJtapadi as 
having been entered by the C5Ja forces on this occasion. On the later occasion 
Ra^apadi is said to have been devastated ; but the pillar is erected on the banks 
of the TungabhadiS. 

t 144 of 1898. t TAS. i 164-8. 

I 102 of 1926 (Yr. 9). H El. v. p. 77 y, 11 ; CeUQr v, 12* 


[ 922 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


2000 after his abhisdka and coronation under this title. * 
Others were Senapati Araiyan Kadakkan-gonda-£olan, f 
and Senapati J ay amuri-nadal van who is mentioned in 
an inscription from Ceylon, J and who may be identical 
with Araiyan Rajarajan alias Virarajendra Jayamuri- 
nadalvan of another inscription from Karuvur. § 

The Vikrama&olan-ula 5f records that Rajamahendra 
made for Ranganatha, the god of SrTrangam, a serpent- 
couch set with many precious stones ; ana the Koyil- 
olugu , a late work on the antiquities and traditions 
of the Siirangam temple, though it knows nothing of 
the serpent-couch, mentions || many structural altera- 
tions in the temple as the work of Rajamahendra, 
commemorated in the name Rajamahendran - tiruvldi. 
An inscription ** of the twelfth year of Kulottunga I 
from the Salem district states that in Rajamahendra’s 
reign there was a land revenue assessment in Kolli- 
malai-nadu. The name of Rajamahendra’s queen, 
Lokamahadevi, seems to be preserved in a fragmentary 
inscription from Cidambaram. ff 

For a study of the reign of Rajakesari Vlra- 
rajendra I, (accession A. D. 1062-3), we 

VIrarUjSndra. . , • , , * 

possess a considerable number of 
inscriptions with prasastis in two main forms and in 
various redactions, which fit into one another with 
remarkable correctness. The longer praSasti begin- 
ning Tiruvalar-tiral-puyattu gives in its earlier form a 
list of the king's relations on whom he conferred 

* El. vii. pp. 145-6. t 84 of 1893. 

X 618 of 1912. § SIl iii. 21. 11 U. 40-42. 

|| In the section on Rfyamahlttd ran kainkaryam. 

•• 502 of 1930. ft 612 of 1930. 

tt An admirable discussion of VlrarSjSndra’s records by Hultzsch is found 
at SIL iii pp. 192-6. 


f 323 ] 



THE COLAS 


various official positions, * but omits this list in its 
later editions, f The prahsti grows in length as 
the reign advances, and new events are incorporated in 
it. The shorter introduction beginning Virame-tmiaiy- 
agavum passes through many changes and attains in 
the seventh year an altogether new cast, and records 
facts not otherwise known. These changes will be 
noticed subsequently when they are of any historical 
importance^ The Kalingattupparaui and the Vikrama- 
§dlan-ulS record no events of the reign of Vlrarajendra 
other than the battle of Kudal-Sangamam. The Takka- 
; yagapparani , X 011 the other hand, mentions his friend* 
ship with Vikramaditya VI. 

Early in his reign, the king appointed § 
Madhurantaka, described as his son tan-tirup-pudal- 
van, to rule over Tondaimandalam with the title 
Colendra ; another Grangaikonda-sola, also called son, 
tiitdiral tnaindan , waB made the Cola-Pandya viceroy 
over the Pandya country. It is difficult to decide, 
in the light of subsequent events, whether the terms 
pudahan and tnaindan are to be understood literally or 
only as terms of endearment applied to more distant 
relatives. Nor, on the former assumption, can it be 
decided if either of them was the son who was the 
brother-in-law of the Calukya Vikramaditya VI and 
who had a short rule, on Virarajendra’s death, as 
Parakesari Adhirajendra. The king's elder brother 
Ajavandan and a certain Mud ikoijda-6olan also 
received titles and recognition ; but though they too 
seem to have been placed in administrative charge of 

• SII. iii 20 ; 113 of 1896 (SIT. v. 976). T SII. iii, 30. 

% V. 774. Pandit V» Swaminatha Aiyar's identification of this king 
with RSjarlja II seems rather doubtful. 

i 11Z of 1896; SII iii. 80, p, 83. 

[ 824 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


parts of the empire, the inscriptions do not tell us 
what exactly were the areas so entrusted to them. 


Early War*. 


The early wars of Vlrarajendra against the 

Western Calukyas, which resulted iu 
the battle of Ku$al-&angamam so 
graphically described in the inscription of his second 
year from Tirnvenkadu, * were fought by him, as 
already observed, perhaps before he came to the throne 
or waB even recognised as the successor to his elder 
brother Rajendradeva. The bitterness that characterised 
the Calukya wars of this period becomes clear from the 
eagerness of Vlrarajendra to count up every little 
victory gained by him or his lieutenants as a personal 
affront to Somesvara 1 Shavamalla. “ In perfect 
accordance with the longer redaction of the introduc- 
tion, in which the battle of Kudal-Sangamam is stated 
to have been the third encounter with the Calukyas, the 
Tirunamanallur inscription of the fourth year attributes 
to Vlrarajendra I the biruda ‘ who saw the back of 
Ahavamalla three times’.” f The Kanyakumari inscrip- 
tion also gives a general description of the battle of 
Kudal-Sangamam, not very different in character. X 
In the Karuvur inscription of the fourth year, § we 
hear for the first time that Vlrarajendra killed the 
king of Pottappi, the Kerala, the younger brother of 
king Dharavar§a, and Virakesari, the son of the Pandya 
Sri Vallabha. The Manimangalam inscription of the 
next year adds to this list an expedition against 
Udagai and the Kerajas, from whieh Vlrarajendra 
returned after collecting a large tribute in the form of 
elephants. Whether these achievements, altogether 
obscure in their nature and origin, were part of the 


• 113 of 1896. 
I v. 76. 


§ sir. iii ao. 


f Hultisch, S/r, iii, p. 193. 
1 Sir. iii 30. 


[ 825 ] 



THE COLAS 


continuous war with the Calukyas that forms the 
central feature of this reign, or were minor punitive 
expeditions which had nothing to do with this war, 
there is no doubt that the ( hot battle ’ which is next 
mentioned as having taken place by previous engage- 
ment on the banks of a river, of unknown name, did 
form part of the Cola-Calukya hostilities. For in this 
battle seven Calukya generals who are named and the 
kings of the Gangas, the Nulumbas, the Kadavas and 
the Vaidumbas are said to have suffered decapita- 
tion ; and before the Co]a king could get their heads 
nailed to the gates of his capital, Gangaikonda-sola- 
puram, * the Calukya king, stung by the intolerable 
disgrace that had befallen his troops on this field, was 
roused to a greater effort against his Coja opponent. 

Some&vara, we learn, reproached him- 
K ° 4 tgato eamam se ^ saying : ( It is much better to die 

than to live in disgrace, ’ and wrote 
and despatched a letter to the Cola king in which he 
assigned as the field for the next battle the very spot at 
Kudal whence his sons and himself had fled before in 
utter rout, and declared that whoever did not come, 
through fear, to the appointed field, should thenceforth 
be no kings but outcastes f who had incurred disgrace 
in war. This message from the Calukya, when it was 
delivered to Vlrarajendra, greatly pleased him. Accord- 
ingly he set out for the fight, and awaited at Kandai 
the arrival of the Calukya king for one full month 
beyond the date fixed by him. The Calukya ran away 
and hid himself in the Western ocean ; and the Cola 
king subdued, all resistance in Irattapadi by putting 

* It must be noted that all the events up to this point are mentioned in 
a fourth year record found In MalUr, of which only the prafastl is preserved 
(194 of 1911 ; SC. ix Cp. 85.) 

s 

t The term “piratfa " seems to be the Sanskrit word " bhratfa " rather than 
the Tamil " pur a{((m u a fraud or liar contra Holtzsch $11. iii p. 69. 

[ 326 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

to flight Devanatha, Sitti and Keifi, each in a separate 
direction, and by setting fire to towns ; he also planted 
a pillar of victory on the banks of the Tungabhadra. 
Then the Cola monarch seems to have made an effigy 
of SomeSvara and subjected it to various indignities, * 
before turning his attention to Veng! where, apparently 

• This, I think, is the real meaning, as suggested by A. V. Venkatarama 
Aiyar {Life and Times of CMukya Vikramaditya VI. Tamil Edn. pp. 22-3 and 
n. 3). Hultzsch understands this rather obscure passage as referring to Vira- 
rSjendra's alliance with Vikramaditya. But that, I think, belongs to a later stage 
of the war when SomSsvara 1 was no more and to the first fight of Virarajendra 
with S5m?svar& II, On the present occasion, VIrarajSndra is still fighting the 
entire family of SomSsvara I and on every front. The division between Vikra* 
mSditya VI and his brother which gave VlrarSjSndra the chance of an alliance 
with the former did not, it seems, arise until after the death of SSmesvara I, 
of which Vlrar3j$ndra had no knowledge on this occasion. The Manimangalam 
inscription of the fifth year, therefore, cannot be said to anticipate, as Hultzsch 
says it does ( S/l \ iii pp. 194*195), the events recorded in the inscriptions of the 
sixth and seventh years of V Irani jSndra. For one tiling, the word piraf/an in 
1. 27 of the Manimangalam record makes it impossible for us to identify him 
with Vikramaditya VI (cf. 1. 22 of the same record ; also Takkayagapparani 
v. 774, where pirai{an t an unfriendly CSlukya, is contrasted with iraffan, a 
friendly one). Again the expressions of the records of the sixth and seventh 
years make it clear that they are referring to a single occasion, which is different 
from that of the Manimangalam record and in which Vikramaditya became 
friends with VIrar2j$ndra, S/A iii. 83. (Yr, 6), says that VIrarajeudra burnt 
K&mpili and occupied Kararjigal before Sftmesvara (II) could untie his necklace 
(11. 7*8), and this is the first occasion of an encounter with the CSlukyas after 
the conquest of Vlngi on behalf of VijaySditya VII *, 84 (Yr. 7) records (11. 5-6) 
that on the same occasion, Somesvara (11) was forced to abandon the Kannara- 
desa and that the submissive Vikramaditya was invested with the necklace hy the 
Coja king. The VikramRnkaetlva Carita also places the alliance between its hero 
and the C5(a king some time after S5m?tvara I’s demise and on the banks of the 
TungabhadrS; and according to the same poem, at the time of his father's 
death, Vikramaditya was absent on a conquering tour which extended to V*ng! 
and Cakraktita, which, again, seems very probable, as VlrarajSndra himself had 
to go off to VSngl after S5mEsvara I failed to keep his engagement with him at 
Kfl<jal-Sai)gamain. Lastly, it does not seem * necessary to assume that the 
kanfhikH (necklace) was necessarily a symbol of heir-apparentship and not of 
kingship in general, and hold, as Hultzsch does (S/l iii p. 194), that in the sixth 
year of Virar$j$ndra, S$m£svara was alive and S$m<?svara 11 was still only 
crown-prince (lA. XX p, 267 under 17 VijayUditya V and the references given 
there). Even if the kan{hlkU was a symbol of subordinate position, Somesvara 
Il’s untying it may mean that his father was no more and that he had become 
ruler in his own right,— probably the best view of the situation, 

[32T] 



THE COLAS 


owing to the exertions of the Western CtUukyas, 
things had gone against Vijayaditya, the ally of 
Virarajendra. 


The question why Somesvara I failed to keep an 

engagement fixed by himself and thus 

ssmKvanf suffered once again the imputation of 

cowardice at the hands of his Cola 

• 

enemy cannot be answered with certainty. The date 
of the occurrence was some time in the fifth year of 
Virarajendra, and from the details preserved in the 
record the exact day which is mentioned in the 
Manimangalam inscription is seen to have been Monday 
10th September A.D. 1067. * Somesvara sought relief 
from an incurable disease by religious drowning in the 
Tungabhadra and the date of this occurrence was 
March 29, A. D. 1068. f The assumption has generally 
been made that Somesvara’s absence from Kudal- 
&angamam on this occasion was due to his illness and 


death. + It should, however, be observed that as early 
as the 10th September A.D. 1067 we find recorded not. 
only the absence of Somesvara from Kudal-oangamam 
but the subsequent campaign of Virarajendra in Vengl 
and Cakrakiita which resulted in the restoration of 
the Vengl kingdom to Vijayaditya VII. On the other 
hand, Bilhana states distinctly that Vikramaditya VI 
was encamped on the banks of the Krsna § on his way 
back home after his conquests when the news of his 
father's death reached him. And his language, though 
we cannot be sure about it, seems to rule out the 
protracted illness of Somesvara I, who was suddenly 


* vii p. 9* 

+ VikramdnkadVva Carita iv 44-68 ; EC % vii Sk. 136, 

X r>r. S. K. Aiyangar Ancient India p. 123 ; A. V. Venkatarama Aiyar 
pp, cit • p. 23, 

6 iv 36. 


[ 828 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


taken ill, in the midst of his rejoicing over his son's 
successes in the digvijayc. Unsatisfactory as it seems, 
we can, for the present, only assume that if Somes- 
vara’s absence was due to illness, his ailment was of a 
rather longer duration than Bilhana's account implies. 


The conflicting nature of our sources and the 
V j - affairs fecundity of modern research, carried 

out sometimes under the subtle influ- 
ence of the nascent patriotism of the Andhra country, 
have greatly obscured the course of events in the 
Vengl kingdom during this period ; one can hardly be 
too cautious in dealing with this phase of our subject. 
A more detailed consideration, however tentative, of 
the course of events in Vengl will become necessary 
when we reach the problems connected with the 
accession of Kulottnnga I to the Cola throne. Here 
we may note simply the facts as they are gathered 
from the inscriptions and the Vilcramankadeva Carita 
which seem to speak for themselves. The Mani- 
mangalam inscription records that from Kftdal- 
Sangamam Virarajendra proceeded to Vengl, after 
issuing a challenge to the Oalukya, saying: “ We do 

not intend to return (home) till after we reconquer the 
good Vengl country, once ours; listen! if you area 
Vallava, * come and defend.” This challenge to the 
Cahikya is a clear indication that the Vengl country 
had just at that time passed into the hands of the 
W. Calukyas from Virarajendra or from his ally, 
Vijayiiditva VII. The rhapsody of Bilhana on Vikra- 
maditya's digoijaya during the life-time of his father 
seems to furnish the clue to the real situation by 
including Vengl and Cakrakuta f in an otherwise 


* Means both * a strong man * and 1 Cajukya.* 

( 829 ] 


f iv. 29, 30. 


42 



THE COLAS 


i i i 

impossible list of conquests attributed to him. Appa- 
rently Vikramaditya did succeed in transferring Vengl 
and Cakrakuta from their rulers to himself and adding 
them to his father’s dominions. Attention has been 
drawn already to the evidence from some Western 
Cahtkya records of this period showing their eagerness 
to gain control of Vengl. But if the Manimangalam 
record speaks truly, the success of Vikramaditya in the 

east was shortlived ; for it states that 
in a decisive battle on the banks of 
the Kyijija, in the neighbourhood of 
Bezwiida, Virarajendra inflicted a crushing defeat on 
the Western Cahtkya forces commanded by Jananiitha,* 
Rajamayan and others compelling them to flee into the 
jungle for refuge. After this, the Cola crossed the Goda- 
vari, marched across Kalingam and beyond Cakkarak- 
kottam. f Having thus regained Vengl, he bestowed 
it on Vijayaditya who had sought his protection, before 
he returned to his capital Gangapun, adorned by the 
splendour of victory gained in many a fight. | 


Battle of 
Bezwada. 


The second engagement at Kiidal-^angamam, 
j which Ahavamalla failed to keep, and the resumption of 
the Vengl country, which followed, are briefly alluded 


* We have a number of undated inscriptions at Draksarama recording vows 
taken by chieftains promising exclusive allegiance to f?r! Parantaka, Konerinmai- 
kontjar Sarvalokasraya $rt Visnuvardhana Maharaja. Perhaps Vlraruj?ndra is 
meant by these titles and the records are of this period (. S/I iv. 1269*1275). 

t 182 of 1915 distinctly says that the Cajukya forces were met at isakkarak- 
ko^am and defeated by Virarajendra - padaik-kadatlvi vada-tisaic-Cakkarah 
kotfattu p\ik-kndanre[mda Salukkiyat - tftmiyaik-ktinaUpaj* ' cf. al»o the 
early inscriptions bf Kulottunga. 

% Hultzsch has clearly misunderstood the phrase-" igalidaippJUtda jayattiru - 
vo(fum ” which he translates into : " with the goddess of victory, who had 
shown hostility in the interval," and in which he sees “ an admission of the 
fact that the C3]a» had experienced reverses." SI/, iii, p. 70 and n. The 
f ifat ’ after 1 igal 1 is clearly a locative suffix to the preceding word meaning 
‘battle/ not * hostility in the context. 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

t 

* ** 

to in the shorter praSastis of the fifth year of Ylra- 
fajeiidra 1. * These imply that, by the reconquest of 
Vengi, Vlrarajendra' fulfilled some vow made by his 
elder brother ; f though we cannot be sure of it, this 
perhaps means that the Coja control over Vengi had 
been lost some time during the reign of Rajendradeva 
II and that he had died without being able to recover 
it ; if this view is correct, the Western Cajukya occu- 
pation of Vengi must have been more complete and 
lasted longer than has so far been believed, and 
Somesvara I must have recompensed himself for the 
defeat at Koppam by substantial success in another 
direction. The Kanyakumari inscription $ also states 
that Vengi and Kalinga, though part of the hereditary 
dominion of the Colas, had been neglected by his 
brother and allowed to fall under the occupation of 
hostile kings, and that Vlrarajendra regained them for 
the empire. 

Vlrarajendra had his attention drawn to Ceylon 

by the efforts made by Vijayabahu 

Ceylon Ww, . 1 • i * i* 

to extend his power from Kohana 
and to expel the Cojas from the island. The 
Malmvamsa and the only inscription of Vlrarajendra 
which gives an account of this war are agreed that 
Vijayabahu did not succeed in attaining his object. 
In the details, the two accounts differ. The Mahavamsa 
says § that when the Cilia king heard of Vijayabahu’s 

# Ilultzsch S/f, iii. p. 193. 

Hulttsch identifies this elder brother of the king with AJavandan, 
SII. iii, p. 194, 

\ v. 77. 

§ CV. Ch. 58 vv. 1-77. Codrington {Short History p. 56) says : " A first 
attempt to securo Polonnaruwa was made in or about A.D. 1066 but ended in 
failure, and VijayahShu was compelled to fortify himself at Vutagiri (Wakiri- 
gala in KSgalla district).** I think that the fortification at Vatngiri belongs 
to the later campaign of 1070 of which the narrative in the 6 V. begins 
with v. 18. * ‘ g i 



THE COLAS 


designs, he sent off his Senapati who was then in 
Pulatthinagara against the Singalese ruler. The Cola 
general entered Rohana, plundered Kajaragama and 
returned to his province. Vijayabahu saw the strength 
of the Cola forces and was distracted by rebellions and 
treachery in his own camp. Nothing came of bis 
effort. The inscription of Vlrarajendra dated in his 
fifth year, A.D. 1067, states that the king sent a large 
army which crossed the sea in a number of ships 
without erecting a causeway, defeated the Singalese 
forces, compelled Vijayabahu to seek refuge in flight, 
made his queen captive and restored the whole of 
Ceylon to Vlrarajendra's sway. * We cannot accept 
the last statement literally ; Vijayabahu renewed the 
struggle with better results three or four years later, 
and he could not have done this if he had lost, his hold 
on Rohana. 

For the transactions of the rest of Vlrarajendra’s 

reign we have to depend exchisively 

IvsK^tfUT+tin* 

on the shorter praSasti in its later 
editions. Records of the seventh year f mention that 
Vlrarajendra conquered Kadaram on behalf of a king 
who had come in search of his aid and protection, and 
handed it over to him. If the place of this event in 
these records indicates its chronological position in the 
reign, it must have occurred before the sixth year, 
c. A.D. 106B. We know as yet little of the relations 
between the Cojas and the empire of Sri Vijaya, which 
no doubt is signified by the term Kadaram, in the 
interval that elapsed between Rajendra’s campaign 
against Sangrama-Vijaybttnnga-varman and the reign 
of Vlrarajendra. Consequently we have no means of 

* 1S2 of 1915. cl. K«4»WaiySdilangai-kon<Ja-35<l;i-valaii3 | Ju. 
f 171 of 1894 1 866 «( 1901, 5//. Mi. 84, 

[»»*] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


elucidating this brief reference to a second expedition 
against Ka^aram in this reign. 


War with 
S3m?£vara II. 


* 

*\On the death of Somesvara I, Somesvara II came 

to the Ciilukyan throne in A. D. 1068 
(11th April), and Vlrarajendra took the 
occasion to renew the ancient feud.) 
The inscriptions of Somesvara II state this fact clearly 
and imply that the Cola began by attacking the fortress 
of Gntti and ended by retreating in haste before 
Somesvara. \ The Cola inscriptions and Bilhana tell 
another story. The former state that before Somesvara 
could untie his kanthika , that is, on the occasion of his 


coronation as king, f Vlrarajendra burnt the city of 

Kampili and set up a pillar of victory at Karadigal, a 

village in the Lingsagar Taluk of the Raiciir district, £ 

and that he forced Somesvara to abandon the Kannara 

country, and invested the &a}ukki Vikramaditya with 

the kauthika and Rattapadi seven and a half lakh 

country conquered on his account, because he had 

come and sought the aid of the Coja monarch. § This 

occasion is no doubt the one mentioned in the 

Takka yur/appara n i which says that the Cola king, here 

called Rajagambhlra, took away the fillet of royalty 

from the Pirattan and conferred it on the lrattan for 

* • • • 

the protection of the celebrated seven and a half lakh 
country. 51 And the Vikramankadeva Carita tells the 
same story, embellished from the standpoint of the 
hero of the poem. Soon after his father’s death and 
brother’s accession, Vikramaditya VI quarrelled with 
his brother who had fallen into evil courses, and left 
Kalyaya with his younger brother Jayasimha and 
destroyed the troops sent by his elder brother 


• EC. vii Sk. 136. 

♦ El. xil. pp. 295, 309. § S/l. Hi. 84. 

( 338 ] 


t S/l. Hi. 83. 
1 v. 774. 



THE COLAS 

Somesvara in pursuit of him. He reached the Tunga- 
bhadra and rested his army for a time. * Then he 
became desirous of war with the Cojas and started on 
the expedition after spending some time in Banavasi. 
Jayakesi and the Alupa king did him obeisance, f and 
the Co]a himself, unable to resist the advance, sent an 
ambassador and offered his daughter in marriage to the 
Calukya prince, and Vikrama agreed to retire to the 
banks of the Tungabhadra, where the Cola king subse- 
quently met him, the marriage was celebrated and the 
alliance between the two kings concluded. J It may 
be noted that Jayakesi I, the Kadamba king of Goa 
who was ruling in this period, is said in Kadamba 
inscriptions to have placed the Western Calukya 
firmly on his own throne, and to have brought about 
peace between the Cola and the Cajnkya at Kancl. § 

All these lines of evidence point to the 
Alliance with conclusion that soon after the death of 

Vikramaditya VI. T 

Ahavamalla, trouble arose between 
Somesvara II and Vikramaditya, on some matters of 
importance, if not about the succession itself, that 
Vikramaditya's younger brother Jayasimha, and the 
Kadamba Jayakesi of Goa took his side in the dispute, 
that Jayakesi officiated as Vikrama’s ambassador to 
the Coja, seeking Vlrarajendra’s aid for his ally, and 
that as a consequence of the powerful intercession of 
the Coja monarch, Somesvara II was compelled to part 
with portions of his hereditary dominions to Vikra- 
maditya almost immediately after his accession to 
the throne. Though we have no other evidence for 
it than that of Bilhana, the marriage of Vikramaditya 
with a Cola princess may be accepted as a fact. 


• VikramTtnkadiva Corita iv 69 — v. 10. 
t v. 25-6. 

« JBBRAS. ix. p. 278, 242 , BG. 1, ii p. 667. 


t v. 28 -*i. 8. 


[ 334 ] 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 


Vikramaditya’s inscriptions with the title Trailokya- 
malla and bearing dates earlier than A. I). 1076, which 
marked the commencement of the Calukya-Vikrama 
era, are found in the southern parts of the Ciihikyan 
empire ; * and this goes far to confirm the hypothesis 
of a division of territory between the Calukya brothers. 
It was not many years before the younger brother 
completely displaced the elder, as we shall see. 


In summing up the earlier achievements of Vlra- 
rajendra, his later inscriptions which 
record the transactions just noticed, 
mention at the outset the beheading: of 

o 


Summary of 
Wars. 


the Pandya, the collection of tribute from the Kerala 
and the subjugation of Ceylon, f — events which recall 
the inscriptions of Rajadhii’iija and Rajendra. It is quite 
possible that as in the fight at Mudukkaru, (which we 
have identified with the first battle of Kudal-Sangamam 
and which is mentioned at the end of this prasasti and 
the beginning of the grant portion), Vlrarajendra took 
part in the campaigns conducted by his brothers 
in the southern countries, long before any idea 
of his accession to the throne dawned on his mind. 
The wars against Somesvara in which Vlrarajendra 
took part are briefly summed up in this form of the 
prasasti in the statement that the Coja king saw the 
back of Ahavamalla, that is to say, put him to flight, 
on five different occasions. J 


From the Tirunamanallur inscription of the fourth 
„ year, and the Yogi-mallavaram and 

Titles. J ° ic? 

Kanyakumari records of the seventh, 9 
Vlrarajendra is seen occasionally to have appropriated 


* e.g. 127 of 1913 ; 455 of 1920 ; EC xi Cd. 82 , Sit. Hi p. 65. 
t Sit iii. 84 11. 1-2. t SII. iii. p. 194. 

§ 371 of 1902. SII. Hi. 81 ; 273 of 1904. 

[ 335 ] 



THE COLAS 


the full regal titles of the Western Calukyas such as 
Sakala-bhuvanaaraya, Medini-vallabha and Maha- 
rajadhiraja, besides specially Coja titles which, like 
Ahavamallakulakala, recall the victories won against 
the Cajukyas. He also styled himself Pandyakulantaka, 
REjasraya, and RajarEjendra, titles which, together with 
Vallabhavallabha, Vlra Cola, and Karikala, are found 
in the Kanyakumari inscription as well. * The same 
inscription tells us that Vlrarajendra presented a fine 
ruby called Trailokyasara for being mounted on the 
crown of the Dancer of the Golden Hall, Nataraja of 
Cidambaram f and that he endowed many brahmadeyns 
in the countries of Cola, Tnndlra, Pandya, Gangavati, 
and gratified forty thousand Brahmans, learned in the 
Vedas, by gifts of land. J We have already noticed 
that Gangapurl was the capital of the Cola empire in 
this reisrn as well, and that at the end of his wars he 
returned to it in state. A palace in Gangaikonda-sola- 
puram called Solakerala-niajigai and a throne in it 
called Rajendrasola Mavali-vanarajan are mentioned in 
a record of the fifth year. § The latest regnal year of 
Vlrarajendra that is found in inscriptions is the eighth, 
which is mentioned in a record <[[ of the third year of 
Parakesari Adhirajendradeva, the son and successor 
of Vlrarajendra, and the brother-in-law of Cajukya 
Vikramaditya VI. Vlrarajendra's death must have 
occurred, therefore, early in A.D. 1070. Havana At?le$a 
was the asterism of his birth. |1 One of his queens, 
Arnmolinangai, survived till the fifteenth year of Kulot- 
tunga I ; her name is mentioned in an incomplete 
inscription of that year from Tanjore. ** The presence 
of Buddhism in the Coja kingdom in the reign of 

t v. 79 (fragment). J vv. 80-81. 

t SII. Ht. 57 11. 11-12. 

•• SI/. H. 58. p. 234. 

[ 336 ] 


* vv. 75 ; 77-8. 

$ 182 of 1915. 

H 182 of 1915. 1. 25. 



SUCCESSORS OF RAJENDRA 

Virarajendra, and the influence of Buddhist scholar- 
ship on Tamil literature, are attested by the Virasoliyam, 
a curious work on Tamil grammar conceived on 
ultra-Sanskritic lines by Buddhamitra, who calls himself 
chieftain of Ponperri. This place is identified by 
Venkayya with Ponpetti in the Pattukkottai taluq of 
the Tanjore district. * 


# ARE, 1899, paragraph 50*, 


SIR iii. p. 197 ; Vtras^iyam^yixKm, 


[ 337 ] 


43 



Chapter XII. 


THE ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 

A. D. 1070 


Virariijendra died early in A. D. 1070, the eighth 
. -- , year of his reign. He was succeeded 

Adhirajendra. * ° 

on the throne by Parakesari Adhi- 
rajendra who had a very short reign of some weeks’ 
duration and was followed by Rajakesuri Kulottunga 
Cola I on the 9th June A. D. 1070. * As we find 
inscriptions of Adhirajendra dated in his third year, 
and as the exact date of Kulottunga's accession is quite 
clearly attested by his dated stone inscriptions from 
the Telugn country, it is evident that Adhirajendra 
must have been chosen heir-apparent by Vlrarajendra 
some time in 1067-8. Adhirajendra’s relation to Vlra- 
rajendra may be inferred from the explicit statement in 
the Vikramankadeva Caritu that on the death of his 


father-in-law, Vikramaditya started for KaiicI and 
Gangaknndapura in order to place his wife’s brother 
on the Cola throne. + Whv his reign was so short and 
how the Eastern Cahikya prince Rajendra II came to 
occupy the Coja throne in 1070 are questions that do 
not admit of decisive answers. The evidence bearing 
on them proceeds from several quarters. These various 
sources of evidence differ so much from one another, 
and suggest so many explanations of the occurrences 
that the conviction is borne in upon us that almost 
every one of our authorities had strong motives to put 
forward a separate version of the course of events. 


* MI. vij p, 7 a. 5* 


t vi. w. 6-25. 





ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


As a result of several inter-marriages, for some time 

the members of the Eastern Calukya 

had becom,! I'^Wy OoiiM at 
heart, far more than Calukyas. * The 
following genealogical table illustrates the interrelation 
between the two dynasties : — 


Rfijaraja 1 (Cola). 


Rftjendra I 


(E. Ciilukja.) 

Kumiava m. Vimaladitya w# Medava 

Mahadevi 


(also of Coda 
descent.) 


I I 

Rftjendra II Ammangadevi m. Rajaraja Naivndra 

' i i 

Madhnruntaki m. ltajendra II (Cfdukya) Vijayiiditya VII. 

(Kuldttunga I). | 

Saktivarman II. 


The Eastern Cahikya copper-plates of the period fall 
into two sets, one of them mentioning the transactions of 

* r 

Vijayaditya VII and his son Saktivarman II, omitted by 
others, — a feature not unknown in other passages of E. 
Calukya history, as for instance the grants of Badupa 
and Tala II which seem to form a class apart, mention- 
ing facts about the interregnum before the accession 
of Saktivarman I, omitted elsewhere.^ The facts as 
set forth in the first set of plates are the following. 

vij aySdn yavn After twelve years had elapsed from 

the accession of Rajaraja-narendra, his 
step-brother Vijayaditya ousted him from the throne 
and crowned himself king in Saka 952, A. D. 10§0 ; f 
the grant which mentions this fact is dated in the 
second year of the reign of Vijayaditya. J Then the 
Telugu Academy plates of Saktivarman II, which do 
not mention any regnal year, state that Saktivarman 
was crowned as king in the year §aka 983, on a 

• IA. xx p. 277. 

t Pamulavaka plates of Vij»y"<!itya VII. 11. 62-3 ; JAlfRS. ii. 287. 

t (iM) 1. 81. 


[ 339 ] 



THE COLAS 


day corresponding to 18t.h October A. D. 1061, after 
Rajaraja had enjoyed a reign of forty-one years ; they 
omit the coronation of Vijayaditya in A. D. 1030. * 
Lastly, the Ryali plates (two sets) of Vijayaditya VII 
omit all reference to the occurrences of A.D. 1030-2, 
give forty-one years to Rajaraja, state that Vijayaditya 
took by force the kingdom of his step-brother without 
his knowledge (in his absence ?), f that he handed it 
over to Iris son Saktivarman out of the love he bore 
him, and that, when Saktivarman died at the end of 
one year by a bad stroke of fate, Vijayaditya was only 
persuaded with difficulty, like Arjuna at the death of 
Abhimanyu, to resume the duties of state. These 
grants are dated in the twelfth year of Vijayaditya’s 
rule. There is nothing in the palaeography or the 
dating of these records that raises any doubt as to 
their genuineness. 

Alike in their chronology and in their narration 
of events, these plates differ from those of Kulottunga 
which will be noticed presently. These imply that 
Rajaraja-narendra came to the E. Cajnkya throne in 
1018 after Vimaladitya had occupied it for seven years 
from A.D. 1011, thus completely vindicating the date 1 
of Vimaladitya’s accession calculated by Kielhorn, 
10th May 1011. J But the facts that the Ranastapilndi 
grant of Vimaladitya is dated in his eighth regnal 
year, and that Rajaraja-narendra’s coronation is stated 
elsewhere to have occurred in A. D. 1022 should not be 
lost sight of. Though the grants of Vijayaditya Vll 

* JAITRS. v. pp. 33. ff. 

t paroksam Rajarajasya bhratur-dvaimaturasya yah f 
paryagrahm-maha-ra>ya*sriyam vlra-sriya yutali J|. 

Mythanks are due to Mr. T. N. Ramachandran of the Madras Museum for 
assisting me in consulting the unpublished RySli plates in his custody. See also 
ARE. 1925. II 5 ; JAHRS. v. p. 44, v. 16. 

X El. vi pp 349-50. 


[ 340 ] 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 

and Saktivarman IT thus agree with those of the time of 
Kulottunga I in ascribing a rule of forty-one years to 
Rajaraja-narendra, they seem to reckon the years 
from a different starting point, A.D. 1018, which is 
four years earlier than the date usually given, in the 
later grants, for Rajaraja’s coronation, A.D 1022. The 

language of the Ryali plates and the 
His si p on. ^ ate 0 f Saktivarman Il’s coronation * 

even raise a doubt if Vijayaditya waited till the natural 
end of Rajaraja’s life or deposed him earlier. In any 
event, seeing that Vlrarajendra’s inscriptions before his 
seventh year (A. D. 1068-9) do not mention his having 
had anything to do with Vijayaditya, there is no room 
for assuming, as has been sometimes done, that he 
interfered in any dispute relating to the succession, on 
Rajaraja’s death, between Kulottunga I and Vijayaditya 
VI l or that he helped to. keep out the former, f 


Two Vijayadityas. 


The hostility of Vijayaditya VII to Rajaraja, and 

possibly to his son Rajendra-Kulot- 
tunga, that becomes apparent from 
these plates has led' to the identification of Vijayaditya 
VII with Vifjnuvardhana- Vijayaditya (of some Western 
Calukya inscriptions) who bears Eastern Calukya titles 
like Sarvalokasraya and Vengl-mandalesvara. Fleet who 
first proposed this identification, basing himself mainly 
on the similarity of names and titles, J subsequently 
gave it up and made the Western Calukya prince a 
fourth son of Somesvara I, not, mentioned by Bilhana, 
apparently because he played a very insignificant 
part. § In recent years, Fleet’s original identification 
has again found support from scholars under the 
influence of the newly discovered copper-plates of 

* This elate is given as S. 986 in ARE , 1914 H 10 and 983 in App. A. {ibid). 
The text is : guna-vam-nidhi. The astronomical details fit 983 better. 

t ARE . 1901, paragraph 12 ; STI, iii p. 128. 

t IA> kx 277-8. § EG. I, ii 454 and n. 5. 

[S-il ] 



THE COLAS 


Vijayaditya VII and his son ^aktiyarman II, and 
attempts have been made to prove that after the failure 
of his first usurpation (A. D. 1030-32), Vijayaditya left 
the Vengi country and sought service under and 
support from SomeSvara I. * But there are several 
considerations militating against this view, and the 
arguments urged in its favour are by no means 
conclusive. It is true that a marriage relation between 
the two branches of Calukyas such as was postulated 
by Fleet is impossible, and Vijayaditya-Visnuvardliana, 
if he was a son of Someavara, could not have had an 
Eastern CalukytT princess for his mother, f It may 
also be conceded that the omission of this name by 
Bilhana, and the phrase latpadapadmaradhaka in the 
inscriptions, describing the relation of Visnuvurdhaua- 
Vijayaditya to SotneSvara I, raise a doubt as to whether 
lie was the son of Somesrara though he is elsewhere 
called tnaga and tiandana. + But whether he was a son 
of Somes vara or not, it seems unlikely that this 
Western Calukya feudatory was identical with the step- 
br o th er~o£ HajarSja-nar end ru . The dates of the known 
inscriptions of the feudatory are : A. D. 1004 and 1066, 
and his inscriptions bearing these years are found in 
the Mysore and Bellary districts, and he acknowledges 
the overlordship of Somesvara in these years. But what 
we gather from the Eastern Calukya plates is : (1) that, 
if Vijayaditya VII was exiled at all, it must have been 
some time after A. D. 1032, at a time when the Western 
Calukya feudatory with whom he is sought to be 
identified is not known to have recorded any inscrip- 
tions ;§ and ^2) that in the years A. D. 1063-70 he 

• JAHHS. i p. 215 ; y 206-8 ; ARE. 1925 II 3. 

+ ARE. 1925 U 3. J Fleet. BG. ibid. 

§ The Magimangalam inscription (A. D. 1046) of RSjSdhirSja hat been 
thought, quite wrongly, to contain a reference to Vi^iiuvardhana-VijaySditya. 
jAffRS. i 219 n. 33. We have only the name Vijayaditya in 1. 3 among the 
leaders of the army, and this proves nothing. 

[ 912 ] 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA 1 


must have been ruling in Vengi after the death of his 
son Saktivarman II. Again, there is no getting over 
the fact that about A. I). 1067-8 Virarajendra did 
reconquer Vengi from his enemies and hand it over to 
Vijayaditya VII, which clearly means that Vijayaditya 
could not have been the feudatory of Somesvara I about 
the same time. Lastly, the title Vengipuravaresvara is 
borne as early -as A. D. 1053 by Some6vara-deva, the 
son of Somesvara I, * which is proof that this title is 
for some unknown reason borne in this period by the 
governors of W. Cajukya provinces. It seems impossi- 
ble therefore to uphold the identification of the two 
Vijayadityas of the Western, and Eastern Cajukya 
records of the period. 


To return to the evidence from the Eastern Cajukya 

copper-plates. Three grants of the 
E ‘ sons of Kulottunga, known as the Teki, 

son*. Celluv and Pittapuram grants, dated 

respectively in the seventeenth, twenty- 
first and twenty-third years of his reign, narrate in almost 
identical terms the course of events in Vengi as it was 
described by Kulottunga himself to his son Rajaraja- 
mummadicoda, while sending him to Vengi as viceroy 
of the northern province of the Coja empire, f From 
these plates we learn that,, at the death of Rajariija 
after a rule of forty-one years, ltajendra was first 
crowned as lord of Vengi and attained great celebrity. 
He was then crowned in the Coda-rajya, not less exalted 
in status than the position of Devendra. He married 
MadhurantakT, the very Lakijml risen from the ocean, 
namely Rajendra-deva, the tilaka of the Solar race. He 
had many children by her, and to one of them, Riijaraja, 
he said : “ Child, the great kingdom of Vengi was, in 

. * Mulgun<j inscription El, xvi, p. 53. 
t El. vi. 35. SI/, i. 39, I A. xix. p. 427 ; El. v. 10. 

I 343 3 



THE COLAS 


days gone by, entrusted by me to my paternal uncle, 
king Vijayaditya, as I was desirous of undertaking a 
conquering tour (or according to the Cellur plates, ‘ as 
I was desirous of securing the Cola kingdom ' ). He 
too, who was like a god and resembled a lion in his 
strength, went to heaven after ruling the kingdom for 
fifteen years.” And the Teki plates make it clear that 
Vijayaditya’s death occurred some time in A.D. 1077 ; * 
this would mean that Kulottunga appointed him as his 
deputy in A. D. 1062 or thereabout. 


In order to reconcile these statements of Kulot- 
tunga on his relations with Vijayaditya VII with what 
we know of them from other sources, we must recall 
the time and circumstance of the utterance attributed 
to Kulottunga. By 1077 Kulottunga was firmly seated 
on the Cola throne ; and securely established at the 
head of a prosperous and extensive empire, he was 
addressing hiB own son, after the death of his uncle 
and on the eve of sending him out as viceroy to the 
northern kingdom. Paternal solicitude as well as good 
taste and policy required that, rather than expatiate on 
ancient family feuds that deserved to be forgotten, he 
should give the best possible account of the past history 
of the viceroyalty that the young prince was about to 
take upon himself. 


That Vijayaditya’s relations with Kulottunga and 

his father, however, had been nothing 
Relations between SQ pi easail t a8 Kulottunga afterwards 

Kulottunga and * ° 

Vijayaditya. represented them to his son, becomes 

clear not only from his Pamulavaka, 
and Ryali plates, and the Telugu Academy plates of 


• Rajaraja CS^a-ganga was crowned in VSngi in Saka 1006 (v. 34) ; before 
him Vtra Cotja was viceroy for six years and Mummacji'Co^a for one year 
(w. 19 and 17), so that the beginning of Mumma^i’s viceroyalty fell in Sake 
999 or A.D. 1077, 


1 844 ] 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


Saktivurman II discussed above, but, from other 
evidence as well. We learn from Eastern Gano-a iiiB- 
criptions that even after Kulottunga became Cola 
emperor, the hostile relations between Vijayiiditya aud 
his nephew continued more or less unabated. The 
Vizagapataui plates of Anantavarman Codaganga * 
state that his father Rajaraja having, in the first 
instance, become the lord of the goddess of victory in a 
‘ Tamil battle ’, then married llajasundarl, the daughter 
of the Cola king. The same lady is described 
elsewhere in unmistakable terms as the daughter of 

o 

Rajendra Coin aud the chief* queen of Rajaraja. t 


The* G*nga king is also said to have offered help 
to Yiiavilditva at the end of his life. The grant that 
mentions the ‘ Tamil battle ’ also states that when 
\ ijavaditya, beginning to grow old. left the country of 
Veugl, as if he were the sun leaving the skv. and was 
about to sink in the great ocean of the Codas,” Rajaraja 
of Kaiinganagara a caused him to enjoy prosperity for 
a time in the Western region,” that is, Vengl to the 
west of Kaiinganagara. J The approximate date for 
these oecurrences is furnished by the Dlrghasi inscrip- 
tion of Vanapati dated Saka 997. A. 1). 1075, which 
makes a pointed reference to Vanapati V successes 
gained on behalf of his Ganga. overlord against the 
Cola forces. v> A war between Kulottunga and the 
E. Ganga Rajaraja followed bv a peace sealed by 
a dynastic alliance, a mediation by Rajaraja Ganga 


* /A. xviti pp. l66- f > ; Koiwi plates, jA/f/\S. i pp. 106, ff. 

t IA. xviii. pp. 163-4, t /-/. xx. p. 276. 

§ 271 of 1896 ; A'/, iv. 45. K. Ganga Rajaraja came to power on May 20, 
A. I>. 1070 {AHE, 19U), App. A, No. 4.) 248 of 18Q6, dated Saka 990, records 
A gift by a queen of his predecessor Vajiahasta. It is surprising that, in 
utter disregard of all chronology, these inscriptions should have been diagged 
into a discussion of VirarajPndra’s movements in jAlfRS. i. p, 215. 

[345 | 

44 



THE COLAS 


between Vijayaditya VII and his nephew Kulottunga 
on a subsequent occasion, and the demise of Vijaya- 
ditya some time after the successful intercession of 
Rajaraja are thus clearly attested by the Gang a records 
of the time. 


If Rajendra-Kulottunga was first crowned as lord 

of Vengl, as the later E. Csilukya plates 
Kulottunga s assert (iii contradiction to those of 

position in 

1063-70. Vijayaditya), it is remarkable that 

these plates fail to give us the exact date 
of this coronation as they do of most other coronations. 
The Telugu inscriptions of Kulottunga containing 
both regnal years and oaka dates support the date 
A. 1). 1070 for the commencement of his rule, and 



The crux of the Kulottunga problem is, in fact, the 
question : what did he do with himself in the interval 
between his father’s death and A. D. 1070? Fleet added 


up the two statements in the Teki and Cellur grants 
that Kulottunga appointed his uncle as deputy in 
Vengl because he wanted to have (i) a conquering tour 
and (ii) the Cojarajya, and stated that ‘ Kulottunga 
acquired the Cb]a crown by hostile invasion and 
conquest, ’ and placed this event in A. D. 1063, in 
spite of the indication of a much later date for it 
furnished by the Vikra m (i n/r adevi Carita. f He also 
pointed out that Kulottunga’s conquest and annexation 
of the Cola empire were not entirely the result of a 
failure of the Co]a succession, and that it must have 
been powerfully aided by a rebellion in the Cola 
country and a state of anarchy of which we get some 
idea from the Kalingattupparani. Later writers, while 
they have recognised the mistake in Fleet’s date for 


• S/I. iii. p. 127. 


t /A, xx. 277, 282. 


[346 1 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


these occurrences, have not been so ready to give up 
his suggestions of hostile invasion, and in fact have 
added to it the charge of political murder against 
Kulottunga. * Reserving the literary sources for more 
detailed consideration at a later stage, it may be 
observed here that the course adopted by Fleet in 
putting together two alternative statements made in 
peculiar circumstances about past events and evolving 
the theory of hostile invasion seems to be of doubtful 
validity, and that even the Vil.ramatilcadeva Carita does 
not contain the remotest suggestion that Kulottunga 
put his rivals out of the way by secret murder, ox- 
even by open fighting. And now we must remember 
what Fleet was not awai-e of, viz., that the supposed 
appointment of Vijayaditya by Kulottunga to deputise 
for him at Vengl and his occupation of the Coja throne 
are separated by the whole interval of the reign of 
Virarajendra. 


At the time of his father’s death and the forcible 

seizure of the Vengl throne by Vijayii- 
Evuiencp of tiie ditya mentioned in the Ryali plates, 

< aiiy Tamil Kulottunga, or Rajendi-a as he was then 

inscriptions of n j 

Kulottunga. known, must have beeix a youth in his 

teens. For considering that he lived on 
to have a long rule of fifty years from A. D. 1070, it is 
hardly likely that about A. D. 10G2 he was more than 
twenty yeai-s of age. His earliest Tamil inscriptions 
record certain facts which seem to indicate how 
Rajendra engaged himself when he was tlixxs kept out of 
his inheritance. The records of his second year f state 
that, with the aid only of the strength of his arms and 

* ARE. 1899 paragraph 51. 

+ Sff. iii 64-7, as corrected by Hira Lai, EL ix p, 179 n. 1 and 2. Also 
125 of 1900 with the pTi viU arivai introduction recording the same transac- 
tions in other words. 


[ 347 ] 



THE COLAS 


his sword, he overcame the treachery of his enemies, 
captured many herds of elephants, levied tribute from 
the NagavamSI king, Dharavarsa of Cakrakiita, and 
gently raised the country in the eastern region, like 
Vignu raising the Earth from the ocean in his boar in- 
carnation, and seated her, to her great pleasure, under 
the shade of his parasol. ‘ The lotus-like nila-magnl 
(earth-maiden) in the direction of the rising sun' is 
clearly by itself and in the context a periphrasis for 
Purvadesam, * and the elaborately ceremonial charac- 
ter of the language of these records seems to imply 
that Rajendra at least succeeded in making himself 
acceptable as a great benefactor of that country, if not 
also as its ruler. His records soon came to describe 
these achievements as belonging to the period of his 
ilangop-paruvam, when he was still heir-apparent, f If 
this view is correct, we must conclude that Rajendra 
spent the best part of the period A D. 10G3-70 in the 
region of the modern Bastar state, and possibly even 
carved out for himself a small dominion beyond it in 
the Purvadesa, even if he did not gain complete control 
over the Cakrakiita state and annex parts of the 
Purvadesa to it, as his inscriptions imply. Possibly this 
northern extension of the influence of Vengi, so closely 
allied to the Cojas, was the cause of Vikramiiditya’s 
expedition against Vengi and Cakrakiita, counter- 
acted by the campaign of Virarajendra culminat- 
ing in the battle of Bezwada. It will be remembered 
that in the course of this campaign, Virarajendra is said 
also to have marched up to &akkarakkottam. After 
the death of Virarajendra, Kulottunga marched into the 
Cola country in good time to get himself accepted as 

• Hultzsch’s equation of this phrase with VSngT (SI/, iii p. 132) is hardly 
satisfactory, while Dr. S. K* Aiyangar is wide of the mark in suggesting that 
there ie a reference to Ka^aram here (Ancient India . pp. 130*1). 


t SII. iii. 68. 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 

I ‘ 1 \ A 

f 

’ 1 t 

king; but more of this later. And as He did some 
fighting during these years and subsequently came to 
look upon the whole period as a sort of probation for 
the Cola throne, he might have felt justified in saying 
that he left Vengl to his uncle Vijayaditya at the 
death of his father for a double reason. * 

We may now turn to the literary evidence 

on the subject of Kulottunga’s acces- 

Literary evidence. . . 

Sion. On one matter the evidence of 
two works is in complete accord with that of the 
inscriptions. Both the Vikramankadeva Garita and the 
VikramaSolnn-ula f are explicit in stating that Vlrarajeu- 
dra was succeeded by another king before Kulottunga 
came to the throne ; the ula by its very brief reference 
giving no particulars whatever of his reign, and the 


* It is obviously impossible to discuss fully all the theories that have 
been suggested about Kulottunga’s position in 1063-70. I am fully alive to 
the responsibility of adding one more to these, not to my knowledge suggested 
before by others. My onlv warrant is that this seems to he the normal inter- 
pretation ol the language of the inscriptions of Kulottunga himself. 7'he 
other views centre round the hypothesis that Rajendra was yuvaraja to his 
father Rajaraia-narendra when he fought the campaign against Dharltvarsa or 
that he was yuvarlja to VIrarajendra. 'Hie latter seems impossible, in view of 
Adlurajendra’s position and inscriptions. The former hypothesis is quite 
feasible, provided the date is not placed too early. ( JAHRS . i. pp. 217-8). But 
what, on this basis, can be the force of the claim that Kulottunga gently raised 
the land in the eastern quarter and seated her under his umbrella? Another 
view makes Kulottunga a dupe of circumstances who, having, after a fight in 
which Saktivarman II was killed like Abhimanyu (an inference not supported 
by the language of the Ryuli plates), made his peace with his bereaved uncle, 
found himseli baulked in lus design upon the CSJa throne by the prompt usurpa* 
tion of VIrarajendra {JAHRS. v, pp. 208-11). This writer has apparently 
overlooked the probability that VIrarajendra might have been recognised as 
heir to RiijSndradSva on the death of RajamahSndra. He is also clearly wrong 
in mixing up Yasah-kanjadSva's inroad into Trikalinga with these transactions, 
for he did not come to power till A.D. 1073 {El. xii p. 207), Hultzsch’s view 
that before A.D. 1072 RajSndra-Kulottunga took VSngi from his uncle VijayS- 
ditya VII who appears t<> have received it from the Cola king VIrarajSndra 
{S/I. iii. p 132) goes against the express statement in the T5ki and other 
grants that Vijayaditya ruled VSngi continuously for fifteen years, and is now 
contradicted by the Ryali plates of the twelfth year of Vijayaditya c. A.D. 1074; 
but the £. Ganga records (p. 345 a*U) must be taken into account here. See also 
ARE. 1914, II 10 wh«re SIl. iii. p. 128 is followed. 

J&valpurindavani kZttdnum. 

[ 349 ] 


t ftM-§~Anf*tntnpin 



THE COLAS 


Carita by directly stating that he lost his life in a 
rebellion that occurred within a few days of his ins- 
tallation 1 * 1 , imply that he had a very short reign ; this 
king was no doubt Parakesari Adhirajendra of the 
inscriptions. And Kulottunga himself recognised the 
legitimacy of Adhirajendra’s position when he styled 
himself Rajakesari. In some of his records, however, 
is found a double prasasti which, by combining the 
two forms vlratne iuaai-ijuf/avum and purjalmadn nilancja, 
seems to set up a claim that Kulottunga should be 
considered the direct successor of Vlrarajendra. f And 
the Kalim/aUupparain of Jayangondar, makes it a point 
to ignore the reign of Adhirajendra. J This poem is 
often cited in support of the notions that at his birth 

Kulottunga was adopted by liajendra 
Was Kulottunga Coladeva I into the Cola family and 

adopted into ’ . 

the Cola family ? that he was brought up m Ins maternal 

grandfather’s court. § But there is 
nothing in the actual words employed by the poet to 
suggest either a formal ceremony of adoption or to 
enable us to know where the prince spent his early 
years. In fact the date of this prince's birth must be 
placed at the end of Rajendra l's reign, some time after 
A* D. 1040. By that time Rajadhiraja 1 had long been 
associated with his father as i/uvaraja, and there were 
several brothers of his perhaps occupying responsible 
posts in the administration of the empire. There was 
no need for any adoption ; and considering his marriage 


* vi. 36 

•j* 156 of 1923 (Yr. 2); 197 1919 (Yr. 5), the former having only 
virtwil tnnai ; 197 and 199 of 1929 and 434 of 1912 (Yrs. 37, 38 and 43). 
ARE . 1913, II. 33. 

% Verse viii. 29 asserts that directly after the victory of Kutjal-Sangamam 
the earth, to her great good fortune, passed into the hands of Abhaya, the 
hero of the poem. The 1 mannar-mannan ' or * maniiar-vlran ' of x. 25 cannot 
be Adhirajendra as Iiultzsch thinks (SH. iii p. 129), but Vlrarajendra. 

§ Hultzsch SI/, pp. 127, 196. S. K. Aiyangar— op. at. pp. 125, 129, 

[ 8B0 J 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


with Madlmrantaki, it is impossible to postulate it. In 
fact all that Jayangondar says is that on the birth of 
the child, the queen of Gangaikonda-sola raised him in 
her hands and expressed her admiration of the markB 
on his limbs by observing that he was fit to be a son 
of the solar line born for its protection ; in the very next 
verse the poet takes good care to add that the kings of 
both the lunar and the solar dynasties, that is Rajariija- 
narendra and Rajendra Gangaikonda, experienced joy 
on the occasion of the birth of the prince. * After a 


conventional account of the early years of the prince, 
the poet states that Abhaya f (Virarajendra) made him 
crown prince, and then proceeds to describe his 
difjr/jaya of which particulars are furnished only witli 
reference to the northern direction. He is said to have 

r 

made his mark in Vayirakaram and Sakkarakkottam. 
lie was still in the north engaged in these campaigns 
when the Cola king died in the south, and there ensued 
anarchy and confusion until Abhaya Kulottunga 
returned and restored order. This account of Jayan- 
gondar is remarkable in some ways. It studiously 
refrains from mentioning Adhirajendra and asserts that 
Virarajendra made Abhaya crown prince for the rule 
of the Earth, meaning no doubt, the Cola kingdom ; 
and it recounts details of campaigns in Wairagarh and 
Cakrakuta exactly like the early inscriptions of Kulot- 
tunoa to which attention has been drawn above. 

n 

Though the poet aims, as Fleet has remarked, at 
treating Abhaya on the whole as a Cola prince rather 
than as Calukya, he has still not altogether suppressed 
the Calukya connections, and in liis account of the 


• x, vv. 5-7. 

t ‘Abhaya’ in this verse x. 18 does refer to Virarajendra cf. viii 29; and 
from this account of Virarajendra’s recognition of Kulottunga, the conclusion lias 
been drawn that Adhirajendra was a bastard with no title to the throne. 


1 351 ] 



THE COLAS 


youthful achievements of Abhaya he follows the early 

records of the reign rather closely. Above all, his 

account leaves no room for doubt as to the whereabouts 

of Abhaya at the time when his chance arrived to seize 

the Cola throne. It is also of some interest to note 
* 

that in the account of Abhaya’s digvtjaya , and in the 
attempt made, in the inscriptions, to combine the 
praktsti of Virarajendra with that of Kulottnnga, and 
thus cast a doubt on the legitimacy of Adhirajendra’s 
rule, the poem and the inscriptions are in perfect 
agreement. 


Troubles of 

i 

AdhirSjemlra. 


The ] r 'ikramankadem Carita of Billiana gives the 

story from yet another point of view, 
which is as hostile to Kiilottungu as the 
KaUngathtpparani is favourable to him. * 
Soon after Vtkramaditya's marriage, his father- iu-la\v 
the Cola king, died and the kingdom fell into a state 
of anarchy. When lie heard of these things, he set out 
for KahcT with the definite object of helping the late 
king's son to the throne. At KancI, Vikramaditya 
spent some days in bringing the wicked (duxtuoargu) to 
tlieir knees, and then marched to Gangakunda where 
he destroyed the forces of the enemy and dually 
secured the throne to the Cola prince. Alter spending 
about a month in that city, Vikramaditya, apparently 
satisfied that peace had been restored, retired to the 
Tungabhadra. Within a few days after his return, the 
news reached him that his brother-in-law had lost his life 
in a fresh rebellion and that liajiga, the lord of Vengi, 
had captured the throne vacated by the Coja prince, 
‘ Vikramaditya VI marched at once against Rajiga. 
The latter induced Somesvara 11 to combine with him ; 
and a battle was fought. But the victory rested with 


vi, 7 - 26 . 


| 352 | 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 


Vikramaditya VI ; Rajiga fled and Somesvara II was 
taken prisoner. This lost Somesvara the throne ; and 
shortly afterwards, according to the poem, Vikrama- 
ditya VI allowed himself to be proclaimed ruler of the 
Dekkan.’ * 


Certain 

Kulottunga's 
share in them. 


questions naturally arise from this ac- 
count : who was responsible for the 
troubles that followed Vlrarajendra's 
death and rendered it necessary for 


Vikramaditya to come over to KancI and Gangakunda 


to secure the succession for his brother-in-law ? Who 


were the wicked people of KaTici and the hostile forces 
of Gangakunda whom Vikramaditya had to suppress 
before Adhirajendra could feel secure on the throne 
and Vikramaditya himself retire to the Tungabhadra ? 
And what was the nature of the rebellion in which 


Adhirajendra lost his life within a few days after 
Vikramaditya’s retirement? There is no direct state- 
ment in the Vikramankadeva Carila of Kulottunga's 
complicity in these conspiracies and rebellions ; but the 
facts that they paved the way for Kulottunga’s accession 
to the Co]a throne, that Vikramaditya VI marched 
against him and made an attempt to oust him after he 
occupied it, and the silence of the Kalingattupparani 
on Adhirajendra’s reign seem to furnish some ground 
for the inference that Kulottunga’s ambition and 
intrigue brought about these occurrences. But a 
strict, regard to the actual statements of Bilhana may 
not support any conclusion more precise than that of 
Fleet, f 1 that Kulottunga Coladeva I was enabled to 
seize the Cola crown through internal disturbances in 
the Co]a kingdom, which culminated in the death of 
the last Cola king.’ 


• Fleet 1A, xx. p. 281. 


f /A. xx. p. 282. 


45 


[ 353 j 



THE COLAS 


An attempt has been made * to connect these 

internal disturbances in the Coja king- 
Was religion j| om that led to the extinction of 

the cause ? f # 

the direct line of the Colas with the 
story of the persecution suffered by Ramanuja and his 
disciples as it is narrated in Vaisnava hagiology. 
Without minimising the difficulty of reconciling all the 
data proceeding from a mass of contradictory legends, 
but confining our attention to the professedly earliest 
biographies of Ramanuja like the final chapters of the 
DivyasUricarita f and the Yatiraja-vaibhavam, + it is just 
possible to identify the Cola who died as Krimikantha 
in consequence of the persecution to which he subjected 
Ramanuja and his followers with either Adhirajendra, 
or possibly with Vlrarajendra with whom the direct 
Cola line practically comes to a close. The categorical 
statement in the DivyasTiricaritn that God Siva of 
Tiruvarur proclaimed the end of the rule of the kings 
of the Coja family, § and the chaos at the end of Vlra- 
rajendra’s rule which is attested by, but not accounted 
for, by the Kalingattuppnraa i and the Vikramankadem 
Carita, and which might have been the concomitant of 
a religious upheaval, lend plausibility to the suggestion 
thus made. But it must be recognised that the details 
of the chronology of the life of Ramanuja furnished by 
other works are not easy to explain on this assumption, 
and that it is perhaps impossible to reconcile all the 
data furnished by legend on any single hypothesis. 


• I A. xli pp. 217 ff. 

t Ed. Alkonijavilli Govindacarya-Mysore 1885, text in Telugu characters. 
Nugari text in the Sahrdaya (New series). 

% IA . xxxviii pp. 129 ff. See, however, l A, xl p. 152, for a critique. 

§ xviii 84. 

i 

n To refrain from dogmatism in dealing with such shifty material is as 
necessary as it is difficult. Krimikan{ha-Cola has generally been identified with 


[ 354 1 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNGA I 

Before concluding this discussion of the circum- 
stances of Kulottunga’s accession, it must be pointed 
out that the provenance of the inscriptions of the early 
years of Kulottunga now known does not confirm the 
views to which Hultzsch gave expression in his masterly 
introduction to Kulottunga’s inscriptions of these years. 
It shows, on the contrary, that from A.D. 1070 
onwards Kulottunga was practically master of the 
entire Cola country, except, of course, for the hostile 
movement of Vikramaditya VI which remained to be 
dealt with, and the risings in the south, always ready to 
break out on every possible occasion and now favoured 
by the confusion following Vlrarajendra’s death. 
Inscriptions of Rajendra’s second year * with the 
characteristic introduction or with a verifiable date are 
found in Kandamangalam (South Arcot) and Valuvur 
(Tanjore) ; of the third year f at Alangudi, Nallur 
(Tanjore), Idaiyar and Tribhuvani, (South Arcot). And 

Kulottunga I, on the strength of the name Kulottunga given to the Co|a perse- 
cutor of Ramanuja in late works like the JCHyilohigti, A. Govindacarya- 
svamin -Life of Ramanuja. (Madras 1906) p. 170. S. K. Aiyangar Ancient India 
p[>. 150 and 207. Dr. Aiyangar is inclined to date the decline of Coja power 
from the end of Kulottunga I's reign, of. cit. pp. 152 and 318. It has been 
pointed out that the traditional date for the foundation of the temple at Meluko^e 
is against this identification of Krimikantha. (/ A . vol. xli. p. 224). It is possible 
that * Kulottunga ’ is used in late works as a generic name for Cola. The name is 
not found even in the C u rupa ra mparap rabh Titui {Arayirappadi ; ed, Madras 
1927). Knmikantha-Coia is said to have uprooted and thrown into the sea the 
image of Govindaraja from the front of the NaJaraja shrine at Cidambaram, and 
tins act of sacrilege is placed by the Drayasuricartta at the very beginning of 
the Coja persecution of Visnuism, (xviii 72). The same fact is recalled by the 
much later Fra pannamrta m (quoted by Dr. S. K. Aiyangar op. cit. p. 320). The 
poet OttakkBttan seems to attribute this deed to Kulottunga II — Kuldttun gasolai:- 
ula 11 76-8 ; Raja riiji i so [a n-ula 11. 64-6 which is most explicit, and Takkayagap - 
panini v. 777. But no one, on this account, seems to be prepared to identify the 
persecutor of Ramanuja with Kulottunga II. This king is, however, known 
to have extended the temple of Napiraja by putting up new structures and 
* gilding * it and it may he that the Tamil |poet in describing this act of his 
attributes to him a deed of one of his predecessors. Otherwise the genuineness 
of even the DwyasUricarita would be suspect. 

* 358 of 1917 ; 425 of 1912. 

t 497 of 1920 ; 55 of 1911 ; 279 of 1929 ; 185 of 1919. 


[ 855 ] 



THE COLAS 


there are records of the second and fourth years 
already giving him the name Kulottunga. * It seems 
necessary therefore to give up the ideas that some years 
elapsed after Rajiga entered the Coja kingdom and 
before he actually occupied the territory on the banks 
of the Kaveri ; and that his formal assumption of Coja 
sovereignty in the fifth year was marked by the adop- 
tion of the name Kulottunga. f The fact seems to have 
been that, as is implied by the Vikra ma nka de va Carita, 
Rajiga came to the south soon after Adhirajendra’s 
• demise J and appropriated to himself the whole king- 
dom of the Colas, in so far as it was possible to do this 
by a single formal act. In fact, he became the Coja 
king. It remained of course for him to hold the new 
position against Vikramaditya’s attack and to suppress 
other disorders. And if it is true, as seems likely, that 
some other records bearing early regnal years like the 
second and third of Kulottunga § are also really his, 
then it becomes quite certain that the title Kulottunga 
was also assumed by him from the very commencement. 

To sum up the results of the discussion. Despite 

„ the statement in the Kalinqattupmraui 

Suixiin&ry* ^ *''** • 

that Vlrarajendra maae Kulottunga his 
crown prince, the evidence of Adhirajendra’s inscrip- 
tions, the Vikramankadeva Carita and the Vitramasolan- 
ula makes it clear that this could not have happened, 
and that, consequently, we have to assume that the 
court-poet of Kulottunga introduced this story to give 
validity to Kulottunga’s title to the Cloa throne. 

* 156 of 1923, (2) i 101 of 1928, 468 of 1913 (4). f SII. iii pp. 132, 140. 

X The civil war between Adhirajendra and the * usurper ’ postulated in 
ARE . 1904 paragraph 21 is pure myth. (See n. on 386 of 1903 Yr, 4, post 
Vol. ii. Appendix). 

§ 145, 147, 151 of 1906 ; 142 of 1929 ; 55 of 1911; 586 of 1907 ; 267 of 
1917 ; 126 of 1912. 


[ 386 ] 



ACCESSION OF KULOTTUNCA I 

i 

There is no direct statement even by Jayangondar that 
Kulottunga was either adopted into the Cola family or 
that he was brought up in the Cola court. The copper- 
plate grants of the Eastern Cal.ukyas, those of Vijayii- 
ditya VII, of Saktivarman II and of the sons of Kulot- 
tunga himself, together with the early Tamil records of 
Kulottunga’s reign, lead us to reconstruct the period of 
Kulottunga’s youth and his career until he came to 
the Cola throne somewhat as follows. At the time 
of his father's death, his uncle Vijayaditya made 
himself master of the Vengl kingdom and kept the 
prince Rajendra, as he was then called, out of his 
inheritance. Alone and unaided, he sought a life of 
adventure across the Vengl frontier in the land of 
Cakrakuta and Purvadesa. Possibly he carved a small 
principality for himself and after making his peace with 
his uncle Vijayaditya, especially as, after the death 
of Saktivarman II, this must have been easy, he bided 
his time hoping that in some manner he might gain the 
Cola throne for himself. The confusion that followed 
the death of Vlrarajendra in the internal affairs of the 
Coja kingdom helped him to achieve his object in spite 
of the attempts of Calukya Vikramaditya VI to prevent 
the union of the Vengl and Cola kingdoms in the same 
hands. The evidence iB not clear on the question of 
Kulottunga’s complicity in the rebellions that at first 
obstructed the accession and then shortened the rule 
of Adhirajendra. There is just a possibility that these 
disturbances were religious in origin and connected 
with the Co]a persecution of Vaisnuvism in the days 
of Ramanuja, a fact well attested in legends, though 
the details of the story are very obscure. In any 
event, Kulottunga began to rule in the Cola kingdom 
from about the 9th June A. D. 1070. * In his later 

• EL vii. p. 7 n. 5. 


[ 357 ] 



THE COLAS 


inscriptions Kulottunga claims to have obtained the 
Coja crown by right and thereby become an accept- 
able companion to the land of the Kaveri in her 
loneliness. * 


# S/A Hi 68, ' Podumai' does not mean* prostitution ’ as Hultzsch under* 
stands it. The idea is that LaksmI, the wealth of the southern country, had 
become common, ownerless, and the land of the K3v£ri lonely, uncompanioned, 
when the C5|a succession failed ; both found a remedy for their situation in the 
coming of KulSttunga. 


[ 358 ] 



APPENDIX 




SELECT LIST OF INSCRIPTIONS OF THE 
COLAS AND RELATED DYNASTIES 
(CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED.) 


This list is intended to furnish a handy reference 
to the most important epigraphs on which the history 
of the Colas is based. As far as possible, all the 
inscriptions of definite historical or social importance 
have been included, and references given to the 
known editions of published inscriptions. Most of the 
unpublished inscriptions have been consulted by me, 
thanks to the courtesy of the Archaeological Depart- 
ment, and the data gathered from their study have 
been incorporated in the summaries of the records. 
These will be found arranged in the order of regnal 
years of the rulers in whose reigns they were recorded, 
the inscriptions of each regnal year being arranged in 
the alphabetical order of the villages where they are 
found. Records dated on a numbered day in a regnal 
year are placed at the end of that year, e. <7., lS5th day 
of year 10 will be found at the end of year 10 and 
before year 11. Only a few of the Rajakesari and 
Parakesari inscriptions have been included under the 
particular reigns to which they may be assigned. In 
the case of most of them, however, the identity of the 
ruler is either obscure or disputed ; lienee they have 
been put together in separate groups, and placed at 
the beginning of the list. Inscriptions of other con- 
temporary rulers have also been listed wherever, as in 
the case of lvrsna 111, such a list is calculated to 
elucidate the course of Co]a History. 


4ti 


L 361 1 



THE COLAS 


The following 
names of districts : — 

abbreviations are 

used 

for the 

Anantapur 

* a a 

a a a 

An. 

North Arcot ... 

a a • 

• a « 

NA. 

South Arcot ... 

* * • 

a a a 

SA. 

Bellary 

• * t 

* a a 

Bel. 

Chingleput 

• • f 

• • • 

Ch. 

Chittoor 

• • # 

til 

C. 

Coimbatore 

• ft • 

t • • 

Coi. 

Cuddapah 

* • • 

a a a 

Cud. 

Ganjam 

• at 

• a a 

Oj. 

Godavari 

• • 9 

• • a 

God. 

Guntur 

• •• 

• • a 

Gu. 

South Kanara 

• * * 

• a * 

SK. 

Krishna 

• at 

a a a 

Kr. 

Karnool 

* * a 

a a a 

Kar. 

Madras 

• • • 

• • # 

Ms. 

Madura 

• 0 » 

a a a 

Md. 

Malabar 

!•« 

a a a 

Mai. 

Nellore 

• • # 

a a a 

Nel. 

Ramnad 

• • • 

a a a 

Rd. 

Salem 


a a a 

Sin. 

Tanjore 

• • • 

a • a 

Tj- 

Tinnevelly 

• t • 

a • a 

Tin. 

Trichinopoly 

• • • 

a a a 

Tri. 

Yizagapatam ... 

• • • 

a • a 

Viz. 

Cochin 

• • • 

a a a 

Cn. 

Mysore 

a ft • 

a a a 

Mys. 

Pudukkottah .. 

a a a 

J • • 

Pd. 

Tra van core ... 

a a a 

a a a 

Tv. 


Also, caturvedi-mangalam is abbreviated into 
catm., and n-d. signifies ‘ no date.’ 


[ 362 ] 



rAjakesarivarman 


Year 2 — Lalgudi (Tri,) — Five kalahju for Borne lamps in the 
temple by Arangan Pattalagan of the Madhurantaka- 
terinja-kaikkola-padai, a Kaikkola of Solamadeviyar 
Velam (in Tanjore). 89 of 1892 ; SIL iv 536. 

„ Sendalai (Tj.) — Gold for lamp deposited with the sabha. 

61 of 1897 ; SIL iv 10. 

„ Sri ni vdsana Uilr (Tri.) — Thirty sheep and thirty goats 

for a lamp in the temple of Tiru-kurakkut-turai- 
perumanadigal at Mahendra-mangalam. 586 of 1904. 

„ Srinivdsanalltlr (Tri.) — Registers the tax-free lands of 
the temple and allots the revenues therefrom for its 
various requirements. A special vdriyam and the 
Jcanakku did the work. 596 of 1904. 

„ Tirumana nj eri (Tj.) — An arrangement by Udaiya-pirat- 

tiyar Sembiyan Madeviyar, mother of Dttama Cola, 
regarding expenses for the temple from the proceeds of 
14 veli of land in Mulangudi. 21 of 1914. 

„ Tir limey ndnam (Tj.) — The assembly of Nalur, a Irahma - 

dey a transferred the right of collecting anga$ik-lmli 
in the bazaar of their town ( engalur ) to the temple of 
Mulasthanattu Mahadeva of Tirumayanam — the rate 
being kdsinvdy ndli of each measurable stuff like 
paddy and rice brought up for sale from outside Nalur; 
kidandu virpana kuvdldl {heap) ndli ; one palam of 
articles sold by weight ; one parru on each basket of 
betel-leaves ; two nuts for each basket of areca-nuts. 
This transfer was apparently in consideration of 25 
kdsu received by the assembly from the temple. 

321 of 1910 ; SIL iii 90 * 

„ Tirundgesvaram (Tj.) — Gift with the consent of the 
guild {Nagara-anuccaiyal) of vdrdvaigal collected 
annually till then by the Nagaram (i. e., the Peru- 
nagar attar of Kumara-niartanda-piiram) on account of 
two flower gardens of the Miladudaiyar-palli of that 

* Fakeographically of the time of Xditya 1. H. K. Sastri. 


[ 368 ] 



THE COLAS 


village ; the gift was made for the renovation (puduk - 
kuppuram) of the gopura and the tiruccurralai (called 
Mouna-kumara-mattandan) in the palli. 

222 of 1911 ; SIL iii. 91 * 

Year 2 — Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Thirty kalanju of gold by Solap- 
perumanadigal Perunavkkilli-sdlan for lamp. 

143 of 1928. 

„ Tiruppugalur (Tj.) — Silver vessels to god Pugalur-deva. 
Another damaged record in year 3 of ...varman records 
gift of a silver vessel by Pattan Danatongiyar queen 
of Uttama Cola-deva. 70 of 1928. 

„ Tiruvenkddu (Tj.) — Land, by purchase, for offerings to 
the temple of Tiruvenkadu-deva by one of the Parthiva- 
fckharat-terifija-kaikkojar. t 491 of 1918. 

„ Tiru vidairnarudur (Tj.) — Eight Ilakkasu to the shrine 
of Purana-ganapati on the south side of the Mulasthana 
at Tiruvicjaimarudil by a native of Emanallur, a 
brahmadeya in Y adagarai-manni-nadu . 239 of 1907. 

„ Utjaiyargudi (SA.) — Land and house-sites by purchase 
for feeding 15 Brahmans and 5 Sivayogis and for paddy 
for a Brahman who supplied water for the sacred bath 
of god. 577 of 1920. % 

Year 3 — Allur (Tri.) — Gift of waste land with the permission of 
Virasdla-IJangovel alias Parantakan Kunjaramallan. 

380 of 1903. 

„ Kdnclpuram (Ch.) — Loan raised from the temple by 
the Crar of Tirukkarralipurattu-Menalur. The interest 
on the loan of 18 kalanju , 3 maujd(ji and 1 kunri 
was one ulakhu of oil every day. SIL i. 84. 

* cf. 199 of 1907; ARE» 1912 II. 12. Kumara-matt2n<ja was a surname of 
Nundivarman II. 

+ Wrongly explained as *a body of weavers ' so named after Rajaraja I in 

ARE. 1919 H 10. 

} This seems to refer to Xditya II falling a victim to some treachery 
on the part of local chiefs ; their lands were confiscated by Rajarlja, and 
these lands, after purchase by another, came to be used for feeding Brahmans 
in the Siva temple at KatJumannar-koyil of which UgfdySrgu^i was a hamlet. 
ARE. 1921 U. 31. 


[ 364 ] 



RA JAKES ARI 


Year 3—KUjtppaluvur (Tri.)— Two silver vessels to the temple 
by queen of Vikramasola Ilangovejar and daughter 
of Paluveitaraiyar. 110 of 1895 ; SIT. v. 671. 

„ Kumbakoriam (Tj.) — Sale of land by the assembly 
(s mulaparumi ) of Tirukkudamukkil to a Yellala, Arai- 
yan Kalangamalai, for feeding (uttamagram) a Siva- 
yogin in a temple. 227 of 1911. 

„ Kumbakonam (Tj.) — Mentions one of the Vlra-sola- * 
terinja-kaikkolar of Tan j ore. 228 of 1911. 

„ Kumbakdnam (Tj.) — Sale of land to temple for 500 
kalanju of gold by the assembly of Tirukkudamukkil, 
in order to pay a part of 3,000 kalanju , a dan dam 
levied upon them by Madiraikonda-udaiyar in liis 38th 
year. Mentions Pandippadai as those to whom the 
amount was to be paid and the temple of Jalasayana. 

255 of 1911. t 

„ Olagapuram (SA.) — Sheep for lamp by Ambalavan 
Gandaradittanar, a perundaram of the king, who built 
the temple of Sri-Kailayattu-Paramasvamigal ; Uloga- 
madevi-puram a taniyur in 5yma-na<Ju. 129 of 1919. 

„ l\inddravCujai (Tj.) — Land, by purchase, by a Vellala of 
Ilamangalam a suburb (pidugai) of Rajakesari-catm., 
to a resident of Manoramac-ceri J for bringing water 
from the river for the sacred bath of the deity. Coin 
karungdiu mentioned. The purchase was bindmi , 
(anyanama-karanam) 238 of 1923. 

„ Pantjdravddai (Tj.) — Land by a native of Pullamangalam 

residing at Naratongac-ceri, as a jivita to a person for 
bringing water daily from the river for sacred bath. 

276 of 1923. 

„ Salem (Sm.) — Five kalanju of gold for feeding Brahmans 
in the temple by a merchant belonging to the mani- 
grdmam of Kodumbfilur, 47 of 1888 ; SIT. iv. 147. 

* Title of Parantaka I. cf. SamarakSsari and Vikramasinga in other name* 
of similar groups of KaikkSlar. 278, 279 of 1911, ARE . 1912 II. 16. 

Perhaps Gan^araditya, RajSditya having died. ARE , 1912 II. 15. 

J Parak£saric*ceri in the same village mentioned in 268 of 1923. See also 
next entry. 


i: 365 ] 



THE COLAS 

Tear 3 — tfendalcri (Tj.) — Gold (for lamp) deposited with the 
sabha. 62 of 1897 ; SIT. vi. 11. 

„ Tillaisthanam (Tj.) — Mentions two persons among the 
Samarakesarit-teri fi i ja-kaikko j ar. 

24 of 1895 ; SIL v. 580. 

„ Tillaisthanam (Tj.) — Mentions Samarakesari - * and 
Vikramasinga-terinja-kaikkolar. 278 of 191 L. 

tt Th'u kkola mb iyu t • (Tj.) — Assembly of Duvedimangalam 

makes tax-free some temple land in return for 14 
kasu. 53 of 1925. 

„ Tirumalaiddi (Tri.) — Gold by a native of Tondai-nadu 
for aval (crushed rice) offering on the Ardrd day 
in the month of Margali to Ganapati. The temple, 
which is picturesquely situated on the bend of the 
Ko]li<Jam river, is called Punal-vayil-Sri-koyil. 

98 of 1920. 

„ Tirunedunga\am (Tri.) — Year six in words. Image 
Lokasundari set up by a private individual in the 
temple of Tirunedungalattu Alvar. Also land for 
offerings. 682 of 1909. 

f t Tiruvdmdttur (SA.) — 96 sheep by Raman Siddhavada- 
van alias Yikkarama-sola-Miladudaiyan of the Bhar- 
gava gotra, for lamp in the temple at Tiruvamattur, a 
devaddna in Yavalur-nadu, a division of Aruva-nadu. 

29 of 1922. 

„ TiruveUarai (Tri.) — Gold for feeding at noon a Brahman 
versed in the Vedas. 519 of 1905. 

„ Tiruverumhur (Tri.) — Sale of land by residents of 
Erumbiyur and the assembly of Srikantha-catm., to 
Sembiyan Vedivelan. 123 of 1914, 

t , Tiruverumhur (Tri.) — Land by assembly for singing 
Tirnppadiyam in temple with udukkai and td\am. 
The donor was Sembiyan Vedivelan. Refers to a 
slmavivada between sabha and ur. 129 of 1914. 

# Abo in 279 of 1911 uune year and place. 


[ 866 ] 



RAJAKESARI 

Year 3~Tiruvi(faimarudur (Tj.)-Paddy by Tiraimur sabha and 
Tiru viduimar udil nagarattar, Tirukkoy il-udaiy ar and 
Srlkaryam-aray-gin rz Irumudi-sola-pallava-Araiyar. 

152 of 1895 ; SIT. v. 71 6. 

„ Tiru vidaimarudu r (Tj.) — Provision for supply of two 

tender cocoanuts daily to the deity. Six karungdm 
with Tiruvidaimarudil Senaiyar. 242 of 1907, 

„ Tiruvilakkndi (Tj.) — Land by assembly of MurugavM- 
mangalam for maintaining three musicians (faVam and 
gong) during xribali to Mangala Nakkar in the temple 
of Mali tide va. 116 of 1926. 

„ Tinivimlur (Tj.) — Land by queen of Uttama Cola-dOva, 
who seems to have been the daughter of Miladudaiyar. 

325 of 1907. 

„ Tiruvisalur (Tj.) — Mentions mother of Sri Uttama Cola- 
deva. 327 of 1907. 

„ Udaiyargudi * (SA.) — Gold for lamp by a native of 

Pandit&vatsalac-ceri. 543 of 1920. 

• • 

„ Udaiyargudi (SA.) — Gold by a Brahman lady of Vada- 
vur in Pan<ji-na<ju for lamp. 599 of 1920. 

„ Udaiyargxuli (SA.) — 19 veli of land by three persons 
for feeding 56 Brahmans ; king Uttama Cola mentioned. 

614 of 1920. 

tt Uraiyur (Tri.) — Mentions Kirtti-martanda-Brahmadlii- 
rajan. 182 of 1907. 

„ Vrddhdcalam (SA.) — Assignment by residents (urom) of 

Nerkuppai of some devaddna lands got from the king 
to an individual for supply of sandal paste etc. 

57 of 1918. t 

* A number of Rajak. records ranging from year 3 to year 16 come from this 
place. Tlie temple here came into existence only in Parantaka I's time. Hence 
this Rajak. must be either Gan<jar5ditya or Sundara Coja. But the name of G. is 
omitted in the Kanyakumari inscription, and he perhaps had a short reign, or 
was only coregent with his father. ARE. 1921 II. 27. 

+ Mentions a grant by Uttama Cola and hence may be of Rajaraja I, 

1918 n. 23. 


* V 


[ 367 ] 



. THE COLAS 

Year 3 + 1 Nanyamram (Tri.)-^Land for maintaining the boat 
plying in the tank at Arinjigai-catra. 342 of 1903. * 

Year 4, — Gudimallam (NA.)— Land, two pattis of 1000 kuU each, 
for offerings etc., to an image of Kuttapperumal set 
np in the Parasuramesvara temple by Madhuranfcakan 
’ Gandaradittar. t 222 of 1903. 

\ 

„ Tnnambur (Tj.) — Temple called Ariiijigai Yinnagar was 
built in the name of Satti- Arihjigai alias Tennavan 
Vilupparaiyan of Innambar, and provision made for 
feeding five Brahmans in the temple. 321 of 1927. 

„ T'h nkkurugdvur (Tj.) — Remission by the assembly 
(sabha) of Poygaikkudi of the taxes due on the lands 
granted to temple. 430 of 1918. 

„ Tirumdlam (Tj.) — Crown set with gems to the temple 
of Mahakalattn Mahadeva by Earipuliyan J alias 
Holamarayan of Paluvur in Kunrak-kurram. 

114 of 1910. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Land for two gardeners in a 

garden endowed by the father of the donor, a merchant. 

149 of 1928. 

„ Tiruttani (N A.)— Lamp. Endowment to be supervised 
by the * annual committee ’ of Tiruttani yai. ( Samvat « 
sara-variyam of the sabha). 432 of 1905. 

„ TiruvatJandai (Ch.) — Twenty kalanju of gold by a 

merchant of Purusottama-mangalam in Yalluva-mulu, a 
district of Malai-nadu, for a perpetual lamp in the 
VarahadSva temple of this village, for ghee (neyyenrmi) 
supplied as interest by the residents of Paduvur. 

263 of 1910. 

* 341 n~d. grantha verse gives names of tank and donor ; 343 n-d. 
(Tamil) gives details of daily removal of silt, and of repairs to boat. 

f Perhaps son of MadhurSntaka Uttama Cola, son of Gan<)arSdittan. cf. 
SII, tii. 49 {ARE, 1904 I 20). This Gaii<JarSditya II must have been the religious 
devotee, author of Tiruvisaippa, rather than the son of Parantaka. (Venkayya) 
AS 1, 1905*6 p. 178, n. 5. 

t 6f. 117 of 1910 of Year 2 of Parak. who took the head of Faniya, Tlx» 
RSjak. of this record must be the immediate predecessor of Parak. Arifljaya o% 
Xditya II. ARE, 1910 II. 17. 



RAJAKESARI 


ft 

Year 4 .—Tiruvenmbttr (Trb)—15 kalanju of gold by Tiru- 
vftranga-devaradiyal Sendan-seyyavay-mani for a lamp 
and a pot of water every day to the temple of Ten- 
kailuyattu Mahadeva at Srikantha-catm. 

114 of 1914. * 

„ U^aiydrgmji (SA.) — Land by purchase for the mid-day 

meal of three persons every day. 5G0 of 1920. 

„ Udaiyargudi (SA.) — Land ( iraiyili ) by the great assem- 

bly of Viranarayana-catm., assembled at Viranara- 
yanavinnagar, for food offerings thrice a day to the 
deity. 562 of 1920. 

„ Venpdkkam (Ch.) — Construction of a sluice ( tumbu ) by 
a certain Keralan Rajadittan alias Nani-viccadara- 
mlirayan who had the jlvita in Velikkon-mangalam in 
Kunra-nadu. a sub-division of Crrukkattu-kottam. 

M • » *••• • • • • 

419 of 1923. 

Year 4, — , day 89 — Srlrangam (Tri.) — A settlement re : the 
temple devadanas and other matters by the Perunguri- 
sabha of Srlrangam. 69 of 1892 ; SIL iv. 516. 

„ 9 day 204 — Melappahivur (Tri.) — Grant of certain rights 

in the temple of T ir u ttot tam-u daiy ar built by Paluvett- 
araiyan Kandan Mara van who seems to : have been 
staying at Senapux*am in MalFitJu. t 394 of 1924. 

Year 4 + 1 — Tiruvdmdttur (SA.) — Lamp by Siriya-marayan of 
Ikkudi and his brothers, on behalf of Candiraccan, son 
of Kali alias Minavan Murayan of Tennavan-madevi 
in Ven-nadu» 27 of 1922. 

Year 5 . — Kdmarasavalli (Tri.) — Land (made tax-free by sabha) 
for iiddri by a Brahman of Adanur. 74 of 1914, J 

„ Ktlur (SA.) — Sheep for lamp. Mentions queen of 
Vikrama Cola Mala(Ju<Jaiyar f who was the daughter 
of Pandiyanar. 7 of 1905. § 

* Later than Parantaka I. AR'E . 1915 II. 20. 

t Ufafilffue-cbiftpuratfl irukka (Text). 

% 4th Jan. 954 A. D. (Sundara) or 2nd Jan. 991 A. D. (Rajaraja)— K. V. S. 

Aiyar, A'/, xix, p, 86. 

§ cf. 10 of 1905. 

h J 


47 


[ 369 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 5 .—Kumhakonam (Tj.)— ' 70 llakkdhi for offerings. 

236 of 1911. 

„ Manimangalam (Ch.)— 90 slieep for lamp to Tiruvayap- 
pa<li Snkrana PerumFil. Name Lokamahadevi-catm., 
and the Ganapperumakkal doing Srlkaryam to this 
god ( inda devarkku) mentioned. 

292 of 1897 ; SII. vi. 270. 

*, Palur (Tri.) — One veli of land for offerings to Parames- 
vara at Tiruppaluvur in Vijattur-nadu by the chieftain 
MahimFilaya Irukkuve] alias Pirantakan Yira- solan. * 

346 of 1918, 

„ Pulalhlr (Ch.) — Land for offerings at mid-day service 
to Tirumemd i -m ah Fide va of the village, and for a 
flower garden, at the instance of the assembly of 
Paramesvara-catm. in Eyirkottam, the members of 
the annual supervision committee and two other 
persons. 47 of 1923. 

M Tiixdivancm (BA.) — Lamps to Tiruttindisvara at 

Kidangil. 143 of 1900 ; SU. vii, 157. 

Tiruvaiyuru (Tj.) — 25 kalaaju of gold for half a lamp 
deposited with the NagarattTir of Sivapuri, 

# 135 of 1918. 

„ Tiruvertimbur (Tri.) — Land for feeding 15 Brahmans 
by Sembiyan Vedi-velar. 103 of 1914. 

„ Tiraverumbur (Tri.) — Decision of the assembly of 

Srikantha-catm. that no taxes shall be levied on the 
• * 

temple belongings ; the persons who violate this deci- 
sion will be shunned and treated as gramakantakas , 
and fined by the Mahesvaras. The settlement was 
engraved on the Srlvimana by the committee super- 
vising the affairs of the temple for the year. 

133 of 1914. t 

Year 6 . — Allur (Tri.) — Gold for supply of bathing water to 
temple. 383 of 1903. 

* Indicates original employment under Parantuka I. Hence, this record is 
one of Gan<Jar3ditya or Parantaka II. ARE. 1919 II 10. 

t ARE. 1915 II 20. Eailier than 907 AD. (L.D.S.) ; 4th January 961 A. D. 
(Sundara) or 27th May, 991 A.D. (Rajaraja) K. V. S. Aiyar, EL xix p. 86. 

[ 370 ] 



ItAJAKESARI 


Year 6—Kaiidpuram (Ch.)— 900 sheep by the king for ten lamps 
in his name in the temple of Ainjandi Durgaiyar ; an 
adhilcarin distributed these among certain persons who 
in turn had to supply glu. These sheep were got when 
JSippuli-na<Ju and Pakki-nadu were conquered * * * § by 
Paraman Malapadiyar edicts Mummudi-Colan, chief of 
Karukudi in Tan j a v ur-ku r ram . 79 of 1921. 

„ Kdverippdkkam (NA.) — 90 sheep for lamp to the Kirtti- 
marttandan-krdapriya temple, t 382 of 1905. 

„ Mayumangalam (Ch.)— Land, 4,000 Jmli, tax-free, to 
Visnu temple at Ratnagrahiira, also called Mani- 
maiigalam alias Ulokamahadevi $ - catm. in the Tamil 
part. The deity is called Dvarapurideva. The Mahli- 
sabha agree not to collect irai, erccoru , vetli, vcyadi - 
hunam or anything else, and to condemn every one 
who does so to pay a tine of 25 kalanja. 

7 of 1892 ; SIL iii. 27. 

„ PalangTtyil (NA.) — Lamp by Papayan, son of Nulambar- 

Vira-solan. § 362 of 1925. 

„ Paljtr (Tri.) — Land by a native of Karaikkudi for sing- 
ing Tiruppadiyam in the temple. .349 of 1918. 

„ PanddravCttjai (Tj.) — Village Kundamangalam, given 

tax-free (mla-viraiyili) to the temple of Bhiirni- 

sundara-vinnagar Paramasvami at Simhavisnu-catm. in 
• • • » 

Mudicco-nadn, built by the donor Kannandai Arivanan 

Bhnmisundaran alias Sundarasola-Muvenda-vCdfm. For 

»• • 

securing the exemption from taxes, the donor deposited 
200 halanju of port with the assembly of Simhavisnu- 

* Plikki-nu^u is iiie northern part of the Nellore District. §Ippuli-nU<Ju 
must also have been there cf. ARE . 1913 II 18 ; also 100 of 1912 of year 34 of 
Parantaka 1 for the earliest conquest. ARE, 1921, II 31. 

•f* Built possibly by Krsna III who, in his Karha$ inscription, says that he 
was encamped at Melpluji for * establishing his followers in the southern 
provinces 1 1 and for ‘constructing temples to Kalapriya, GantJamUrtanda ^ 
Krsnesvara and others ' (E/. iv p. 281). If this view is correct, this inscription 
may be one of Ariiljaya, probably a Rajakesari. ARE. 1906 II 21. 

I After queen of Rajaraja I> 

§ These names imply a time soon after Parantaka I. Nujamha and Vlra 
may be the same as Nujamba Tribhuvana-dhira or his son Nujamba and the 
Ganga Prthivipati II {El, iv pp. 88, 223). ARE . 1925 II 10. 

[ 871 ] 



THE COLAS 


cairn. Paddy was being sold at 15 Jcalam per Icalanju . 
Interest rate was 75 per cent per annum. 232 of 1923. 

Year 6 . — Pulallur (Ch.) — Lamp to Tandaladeva by the great 
assembly of Paramesvara-catm. 49 of 1923. 

Salem (Sm.)— 40 pon by Selvan-adiga} to feed Brahmans 
every year on stated occasions* at the rate of 25 
Brahmans per kalanju, with three curries, half pidi 
of ghly curd and betel. The occasions for feeding were 
the festival in the temple of Kilivannamudaiyar in 
Salem and Masi Makham. 49 of 1888 ; SIL iv 149. 

„ Tiniccirramhalam (Tj.) — Remission of taxes by assembly 

of Kulakkudi for lump amount received by them from 
a person, the amount being utilised for offerings to 
the deity at Tiruccirremam, a devadana-bralimadeya in 
Raj ara j a- val anadu . 187 of 1920. 

t , Tirumdlpuram (NA.) — A gift by Madurantakan 

Gandaradittan. 268 of 1906. 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) Land sold tax-free by the 
Perunguri-sabha of Srikantha-catm. met in the Tiruc- 
citrakutam of the village ; the land was to serve as 
provision for feeding one Brahman daily in the manner 
detailed. 101 of 1892 ; SIL iv. 549. 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Land by a resident of the village 

for feeding in the choultry on the sacred hill a 

Brahman versed in the Veda. The Perunguri-sabha of 

Srikantha-catm. met in the Tiruccitrakutam of the 
• • • 

village for making the land iraiyili . 127 of 19 L4. * 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Land set apart for feeding Brah- 
mans versed in the Veda. Made tax-free by sabha of 
Srikantha-catm. Wide discretion to Panmahesvarar 
in enforcing sabha’s decision. 130 of 1914. t 

44 Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Land as iraiyili by assembly of 
Srikantha-catm. for the Madavilagam of the temple. 

13 L of 1914. 

* Earlier than A. D. 907 (L.D.S.) ; 23rd Dec. 962 A. D. (Sundara) or 17th 
Jae, 993 A J>. (RajarSja. ). K.V.S. Aiyar EL xix. p. 86. 

t Earlier than 907 A.D. (L.D.S.) ; 27th December 964 (Sundara -con. preced- 
ing entry) or 19th January 992 A.D. (Rajaraja) JfcC, V. S. Aiyar, EL xix p, 86# 

[ 372 ] 



Rajakesari 


Year 6—Tiruvidaimarudur (Tj.)— The Cola queen (Vana ?)- * 
van Mahadevi came to worship the god. Meeting of 
sabha and nagaram of the place. 215 0 f 1907. 

„ Tiruvirdmtevaram t (Tj.) — Gift of land by purchase. 

117 of 1911. 

„ Udaiydrgudi $ (SA.)-Land by purchase to the assem- 
bly called Sd&ananuMha-caturvediblmtta-perumhadi- 
sahasraddna-perumakka ] of Viranaray an a-catm . by 
Sokkilan Araiyan Sankaranarayanan alias Sdla-mutta- 
raiyar of Meypaluvur(of Manayirkottam in Tondai-nad) 
as charity to the temple. 585 of 1920. 

Year 6, —-day 55—Sambandrkbyil (Tj.)— Fragment of an introduc- 
tion (Rajadhiraja II ?). Land, for welfare of the king, 
for worship and repairs in temple by the assembly 
of Talaiccangadu. Mentions Rajasundaravadi. 

174 of 1925. 

Year 7 KVappaluvxir (Tri.) — Land by wife of Adigal Paluvetta- 
raiyar Kandan Mayan for daily offerings, 

226 of 1926. § 

„ Kuttdlam (Tj.) Temple constructed by Sembiyan Maha- 
deviyar, mother of Uttama Cola. Gift of lands by her 
as provision for offerings, worship, music and other 
expenses, and for twenty-five Brahmans reciting the 
Sama, Taittiriya and Chandoga Sama in tho temple. 

103 of 1926. H 

„ Olagapuram (SA.) — Sale of land by the Nagarattar of 
Ulakamadevipuram to Gangan-Ambalavan Gandaraditta- 
sola Vilupparaiyan of Kuvalfilam in Gangarasayira for 
being presented to the temple for laying out a flower- 
garden . Mentions Kalikan taka-per uvarambu. 

127 of 1919. 


• Text has (Paflca). 

t Perhaps RSmanadlccaram of the Dlvaram-ARE . 1911 II 17. 

X KUftumannarkoyil (Cdm). 

§ Palaeographically RajarUja I -ARE. 1926 II 17. 

1| Ascribed to ParakEsari Uttama Coja in ARE . 1926 II. 18, apparently 
because Uttama is named at the beginning of the record. But year 7 of Rajaraja- 
kEsari is mentioned later *, perhaps a record of RSjaraja’s time. 

[ 373 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 7 . — Takkulnm (NA.) — Eighty Jmlanju of gold by Dharmak- 
kattalai-kal borrowed from the temple by the assembly 
of Aparajita-catm., a hamlet of Tiru -rural- puram, on 
interest at 10 kalanju per annum, the rate being 1/8 
kalanju per leaf an ju per annum, and a fine of 1/8 pan 
for each day of default. 255 of 1921. 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.)— Land for feeding threo Sivayogins 
and two Brahmans in the choultry on the sacred bill 
of the Alvar at Tiruverumbiyur. 101 of 1914. * 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Land for a channel by the sabhii 

of Siikantha-catm. 102 of 1914. 

• • 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Sale of land by assembly of Peru- 
vehgur to Velan Yiranarayanan alias Sembiyan 
Yedivelan, who is said to have constructed the Srl- 
vimana of Tiruverumbiyur Alvar. Land also made 
iraiyili by sabha after taking irai-kaval-dravyam. 

104 of 1914. t 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Sale for 45 kalanju of the right 
to levy some paddy on lands by the assembly of 
Srikantha-catm. to Sembiyan Vedi velan for digging 
the village tank. 105 of 1914. f 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Land as junta for maintaining a 
watchman, bought from the ur for money provided by 
Sembiyan Vedi velan, who built the central shrine. 

112 of 1914. 

Year 8 . — Sendalai (Tj.) — Assembly of Candraiekai-catm. sold 
one veil of land, tax-free, to a person for upkeep of an 
ambalam which he had erected in the village. 

202 of 192C. 


• 27th December 964 A.D. (Sundara) or 19th January 992 A.D. (Rajaruja) 
K. V. S. Aiyar £l t xix p. 86. 

+ Earlier than 907 A.D. (L.D.S.). But the names Viranarliyana and Uttnma- 
slli-catm. make this impossible. Either 14th January, 964 A.D. (Sundara), or 
llth January 994 A.D. (Rajaraja)-K. V. S. Aiyar EL xix. p. 86. 

$ See note under preceding entry. Either 15th August 963 A. D. (Sundara) 
or 12 August 993 A. D. (Rajar5ja)-K. V. S. Aiyar El. xix. p. 86. 

[ 374 ] 



RAJAKESARI 


Year 8 .—Tillaisthdnam (Tj.)— Twenty kalanju gold for lamp by 
Adittan Kannaradevan, * son of the Cola king. Sabha 
and ur in charge of the endowment. 

38 of 1895, SII. v. 595. 

„ Tirunefangalcm (Tri.) — Land to a native of Stiralur by 
the Mfihesvaras, temple servants and residents of the 
village. 683 of 1909. 

„ Tiruppaldtturai (Tri.) — Land to Paramesvara temple at 
Tiruppanambudnr in Uttamasiii-catm., a brahmadeya 
in Ten-karai, by an officer of Pillaiyar Arikulakesari- 
devar. t Sabha makes the land tax-free. 176 of 1907. 

„ Tiruppaldtturai (Tri.) — Land to Tiruppanambtidur Para- 
mesvara by one of the perundaram of Pillaiyar 
Arikulakesari-deva. $ The land was made iraiyili by 
the Pernngnri-sabha. 570 of 1908 ; SII. iii. 111. 

„ Tiruppaldtturai (Tri.) — Land, tax-free, by the Perun- 
guri-sabha of Uttamasili-catm. Mentions the servant 
of Alvar Ariknlakesari-deva who figures as donor in 
the preceding record (570 of 1908). 

574 of 1908 $ ; SII iii. 112. 

f , Vltaramerur (Ch.) — Land sold tax-free by the Mahasabha 
for feeding daily twenty Brahmans in the Kuruksetra 
temple of the village. The charity was to be adminis- 
tered by the authorities of the temple ( iklwyil sri- 
kdryam scyvdre) 40 of 1898, SII vi. 323. 

• i. e., Krsna, son of Xditya. Archaic palaeography. Aditya I perhaps 
had a son, an unknown brother of Parantaka. Thus, archaic Rajakcsari 
inscriptions may be those of Xditya I, and likewise, Parakesari records, 
those of Vijayalaya. (Hultzsch in ARE . 1895 paragraph 12). of. 251 of 1894 of 
Rajak 20; 356 of 1903 of Parak. 15 ; 218 of 1904 of Rajak. 37. Also T. A. G. 
Rao in MCC. Magazine Vol. 24. pp. 128*9, agrees with Hultzsch. 

f Son of Parantaka 1 ( EL vii pp. 141-2)- ARE. 1908 II 51. 

X If ArikulakSsari is identical with Arihjaya, the Rajakesari of this record 
may be Gagflaraditya ASI 1908-9, p. 122 (H. K. Sastri). 

§ King identified with Gan^araditya by H. K. Sastri. Tirupparrurai and 
Tiruppanambtldtlr were apparently hamlets of Uttamaslli, quite close. For 
Arikulakesari, see 316 of 1903 of Parak. 3 (Parantaka I), and EL vii p. 141. 
He Is said to be a military officer o£ Parantaka in ARE . 1909 II, 38, where 
also the Parak. of 316 of 1903 is taken to be Gan^araditya. 

[ 375 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 8. — Uttaramerur (Ch.) — A resolution of a full meeting 
{ubCda-vrddJiar-amaiya) of the, Mahasabha, met in the 
big manilapa, by which patti-Mtfi was not to be 
collected after a certain day and the Sraddhamantar 
were authorised to punish breaches of the resolution. 

62 of 1898 ; SIL vi. 345. 

Year 9. — Alangudi (Tj.) — Land, on a solar eclipse day, by the 
headman of Tafijavur for mid-day offerings every day 
to Ragbava Perumal at Irumbulai in Simhavisnu-catm. 
a brahmadeya on the S. bank. 498 of 1920. 

„ Badur (NA.)-~ Land as irahjili to temple by the resi- 
dents (ur) of Yadavur. 410 of 1922. 

„ Sendalai (Tj.) — Tho Perunguri-sabha of Candiralokai- 
catm. purchase land in the 53rd kutjlumbu of the 
village, and assign it as iraiyili bharatappangu to 
Singinandil-Svarupa-bhatta of the Atreya gotra and 
Vaikhanasa sutra, a native of Perumbuliyur, who has 
to read the Rharatam every day in the ambalam built 
in the brahmasthdna of the village by one Vairamegha- 
bhatara. Whoever enjoys the pangu after tho first 
incumbent has to do the same. 

63 of 1897 ; SIL vi. 12. 

„ Sendalai (Tj.) — Two bits of land by purchase by two 
members of the assembly for expenses during the 
festival to Tirupperundurai-pernman-adigal. 

209 of 1926. * 

„ Tirunagewaram (Tj.) — Mentions Arinjigaip-piriittiyar, 
a Bana queen and daughter of prince Arikulakesari ; 
and the Simhalas. 215 of 1911. t 

„ Tiruvb}aimarudur (Tj.) — The laying out of a i/m- 
ietibaga flower-garden by Tiruvenkattu-piccan . 

260 of 1907. 

Year 10 — Melappaluvur (Tri.) — The residents (Nagarattar) of 

Avani-Kandarpapura had the inscription engraved to 

* 

• Xditya I, ARE. 1926 II. 17. 

t Tli« date is doubtful in the original ; the regnal year may be 2 or 3. 

ARE. 1912, II 16. 


[ 97 #] 



RAJAKESARI 


the effect that the manrupatfu prevailing at Nandi- 
puram from olden times should also be in force in 
this village. Order issued by Paluvettaraiyan Maravan 
Kandanar. 365 of 1924. 

Year 10 — Tirucculi (Rd.) — (Vatteluttu) — Frag. Lamp. 

417 of 1914. 

„ Tiruvifjaimarudur (Tj.) — Twenty llaklcasu equal to 10 
kalanju pon for a lamp by Poduvan Sirradi, a woman 
(penddtti) of the retinue of Udaiya-pirattiyar, the 
dcciydr of A naimery u n j ina Udaiyar. Twenty-four 
kalanju more for tannlr-amudu-vattil. 

156 of 1895 ; SII. v 720. 

Year 11. — Tillaisthdnam (Tj.) — Two paftams of gold made by the 
auditor of temple accounts (? hrlkdryam drdyapperra) 
out of 13J kalanju and 2 manjatji collected as hurra- 
dantjam from three persons including the Nagarak- 
karanattan of the place (t vvur). 

35 of 1895 ; SH. v 592, same as 283 of 1911. 

Year 11, day 300 — Timppundurutti (Tj.) — 30 pon for lamp by 
Nangai Sattaperumanar, the mistress ( bfigiydr ) of the 
Coja king. 105 of 1931. * 

Year 12 — Kilappaluvur (Tri.) — Ninety sheep for lamp by Adiigal 
Paluvettaraiyar Maravan Kandan. 229 of 1926. t 

„ Talaiccangdtlu (Tj.)— Lamp by a merchant of Kollam 
in Malai-nadu. 202 of 1925. 

„ Tintvaiydru (Tj.) — Lamp by a queen, Sembiya . . . . 
deviyar alias Kulamanikka Nambirattiyar. 

250 of i.894 ; SII. v 549. 

„ Tiruviialnr (Tj.) — Ninety-six sheep for a lamp by a 
native of the Pamjiya country. 37 of 1907. 

Year 12 + 1. — Mslappaluvur (Tri.) — Assignment of a temple land 
to an individual by the temple authorities at the 
instance of A<Jiga| Paluvettaraiyar Maravan Kandanar. 

370 of 1924. 


• Xditya L ARB . 1931, II. 4. 
t Sundara CZ\ a-AR£. 1926 II. 7. 

[877 ] 


48 



THE COLAS 


Tear 13— Ldlgutfi (Tri.)-r-Sale of land by sabha of Manalkal for 
30 kalanju for a lamp endowed by Nangai- Varaguna- 
perumanar, the sister of the Coja king f^olapperuman- 
adigal tiru - udaippiyandar Nangai - Varaguna - peru- 
manar). 250 of 1931 ; EL xx. p. 53. 

„ Melappaluvur (Tri.) — Eight ma of land reclaimed for 
one lamp in each of the two shrines in Avanikandarpa- 
Isvara temple in Kunrak-kurram, under, orders of 
Nakkan Pudi Paluvettaraiyan Kumaran Kandan. 

357 of 1924. 

„ THllaisthdnam (Tj.) — 50 ’kalanju gold to Tiruneytta- 
nattu-Mahadeva by Tennavan Pirndi Marasan alias 
Katti Orriyiiran, and V aragnna-perumanar queen of 
Parantaka Ilahgovelar. * With this gold some land 
was converted from dry to wet cultivation. Among 
the boundaries is Karikalakkarai. 

287 of 1911 ; SIL iii. 113. 

Tear 14 . — Pantfaravadai (Tj.) — Twenty Imrungdm by Senda 
Nakkapiran Bhatta Sarvakratu-yajiyar (cf. 234 of 
year 7.) The interest on the amount, 3 ku&u was to 
be given to the best reciter of certain prescribed 
portions of the Jaiminiya Sama Veda on the night of 
the Ardra festival in Margali after the sacred bath of 
the deity. It was stipulated that no prize-winner 
should compete a second time. 266 of 1923. 

„ Tillaisthdnam (Tj.) — Thirty kalanju of gold for lamp 
by Nangai Battapperumanar, the concubine ( bfigiydr ) 
of the Cola king. The sabhd and ur undertake to 
maintain the lamp, by assigning some temple land for 
the charity, and use the money for making a Namana - 
mandapa to the deity. 36 of 1895 ; SIL v. 593 ; 

284 of 1911 is copy of the same. 

n. 

* 

•Another name of VikramakSsari, contemporary of Xditya II. But this 
IJaugBvSl is mentioned in 27th and 21st year of R3j5k, and Parak. inscriptions, 
and it is difficult to lit such high figures into the 35 years before (he accession 
of RSjarSja. (ARE. 1912 II. 18). Venkayya suggested Xditya’s time for 
Vikramakesari ; but palaeographicaliy it seems to be earlier,— H. K. Sastri, who 
makes this a Gan^araditya record. SII, ii i Odd. 

[ 378 ] 



RA JAKES ARI 


Year 14 . — Vetjal (NA.) — Vidal is called also M&devi-arandimanga- 
lam. * * * § Mentions Kanakavirakkuratti, a female disciple 
of Gunakirtibhatarar, and her disciples ( vaUmandk - 
kiydr .) The valiyilar , lay disciples, undertake the 
protection and feeding of those 400 tdpasis , as there 
was no agreement ( ko\lddamaiyil ) between them and 
the 500 male members of the monastery (ikkdyir- 
pillaigal .) 84 of 1908 ; STI. iii. 92. t 

Year 15 . — Tillaisthdnam (Tj.) — Lamp by an inhabitant of 
Taiijaviir. Ends : Ippatipdda mulattomum pirama- 
deyak-kilavarum urdmum. 39 of 1895 ; SII. v. 596. 

Year 16 . — Kdvanur (NA.) — 400 kali of land by a member of the 
assembly (alunganam) for lamp to Puli-pagava-deva. 

158 of 1921. 

„ Melappaluvur (Tri.) — An order communicated to VelFm 
Cintamani, the headman of Tattanur, permitting the 
adoption of the old scale of taxes prevailing at Nandi- 
puram % for the village Palavur by the chief Adi gal 
Paluvettaraiyar Mara van Kandanar § to whom Karam- 
biyan Pirantakan alias Karuvidaip-peraraiyan had 
petitioned. 367 of 1924. 

„ TiruccengTidu (8m.) — Gold for feeding Brahmans. 

625 of 1905. 

„ Tiruvaiydru (Tj.)— Land for lamp by Muvaraiyan Pali 
Nakkan bought from Andanur-urar for thirty 
kalanju. 249 of 1894 ; STL v. 548. 

Year 17 . — Brahmadeiam (NA.) — Land by one of the members of 
the temple of Tiruvegambain at Kaccippedu for sandal 
paste to god at Rajamalla-catm. The charity was 
under protection of Sri-kdyir-ka^variyap-perwnak^ 

ka \ . 206 of 1915. 

* On the ktlvalt , eastern road, like Nejkuijain. ARE . 1909 II 36. 

>+ Palaeographically Xditya I. 

t cf. year 10 — 365 of 1924. 

§ This person is not mentioned in the inscriptions of Parantaka. Must 
be later, perhaps of the time of Sundara C5ia. cf. 381 of 1924, Parakesan 
(Yr, 13). ARE. 1924 II 10. Text has date, 1(1). 

[ 379 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 17*-— Pan4drav^4ai (Tj ^—Undertaking by two persons to 
supply ghl and paddy to temple in return for cows 
and money received by them at various times in the 
reign of * Madiraikonda Marayar.* 230 of 1923* 

„ Pandaravatfai (Tj.) — Agreement by certain persons to 
burn lamps in the temple for the money they had 
received from the temple in the years 1(2), 14 and 19 
of 4 Madiraikonda Maharayar.’ 237 of 1923. 

„ Sendalai (Tj.) — Ten kalahju gold by a lady for offerings 
( liruvamidu ). Deposited with the Vadavaccalaip-peru- 
makkal, the interest being 44 nisadi kuruni net.” 

58 of 1897 * ; SIL vi. 7. 

„ Tillaisthdnam (Tj.) — 100 sheep with the sabhd for lamp 
by the Co}a queen Kilaradigal. 

41 of 1895 ; SIL v. 598. 

„ Tillaisthdnam (Tj.) — Twenty pon for lamp by another 
Coja queen Tennavan Mahadeviyar. 

42 of 1895 ; SIL v. 599. 

„ Tiruvaiydru (Tj.) — Thirty kalahju gold for a nandd - 
vilakku by ‘Niyamattu Irasa-mattandiapurattu Nakkan 
Aiyarradiga},’ the concubine ( [bogiydr ) of the Cola 
king. 244 of 1894 ; 67/. v. 543. 

„ Tiruvaiydru (Tj.)— Thirty kalahju for lamp by Deviyar 
.... kolaliyar for which the sabhd of Adambuli(n)- 
gudi gave tax-free land. 

245 of 1894 ; SIL v. 544. 

„ Tiruvidaimamdur (Tj-) — Land for jasmine garden by 
sabha and iir of Tiraimur and nagaram of Tiruvidai- 
marudil. 216 of 1907. 

„ TiruvirdmUvaram (Tj.) — Land for lamp by one of the 
ganattar of Madanamanjari-catm. 138 of 1911. 

Year 17, day 122. — Ukkal (NA.) — Mentions a meeting, in the 
local Vi§nu temple, of the Mahasabha of Sri-Vikram- 
abharana - catm. including the samva tsara-vdriyap- 
perumakka] and the eri-variyap-perumbhattar for 
the year, and others. 31 of 1893 ; SIL fii. 13. 


• 6-A of 1899 SIL vi 442 is another similar record of same date. 

r 380 ] 



RAJAKESARl 


Year 18* Ki\iyanur (SA.) 75 kctlcmj u of gold to the sabha 
by an individual for feeding five Brahmans every 

155 of 1919. 

„ Sendalai (Tj.)— Twelve kaljxnju of gold by Mayambavai, 
for lamp to the Pkjari temple of Magalam at Niyamam. 

13 of 1899 * ; SIL vi. 449. 

„ Tiruvernmbur (Tri.) — Land for lamp to Ten-Kailayattu- 
Mahadeva at Srikantha-catm. 119 of 1914. f 

Year 19 .—Tiruccatturai (Tj )—&afigu irantfu ivai uduvdrkku 
bhogam (incomplete). 5 8 of 1895 ; SII. v. 615. 

,» Tiruvaiyaru (Tj.) — Land for lamp by Kaccippettuk- 
kudiraic-ceri Ammakkanar* magalar Sola-peruman- 
adigal deviyar Alisi-kattadigal. Mentions (in recording 
boundaries) Paluvettaraiyar Nambi Maravanar Tirup- 
pallittamam. 238 of 1894 ; SIL v. 537. 

„ Tiruvaiyaru (Tj.) — Sheep (18.) for lamp by Solap- 

perumanadigal Dev ttu Alundur Tirunarana 

Mahadevi. 239 of 1894 ; SIL v. 538. 

„ Tiruvedikkudi (Tj.) — Ten kalahju gold for lamp ; 
undertaking to burn a lamp with J measure of oil 
every day, as interest on the sum, by ‘ Tiruvedikkmji 

Tim (kko) munbu ninru devar pani §eydom 9 

and others. 67 of 1895 ; SIL v. 624. 

„ Tiruvcmmbur (Tri.) — Land for lamp and offerings by 
a Brahman lady who built the shrine of Adittabhatta- 
raka on the hill. 118 of 1914. 

Year 20 . — Brahmadeiam (NA.) — Land for feeding a Brahman in 
the temple of Pondai Perumanadigal by one of the 
d\unganattar of Rajamalla-catm. in Tiruvegamha 
purain. 237 of 1915. 

„ Ku <Ju miyamalai (Pd.) — Gold for lamp by one of the 

female relatives of Perumbidugu Muttaraiyan. 

314 of 1904. 


• cf. 16 of 1898— Year 24. 

+ Later than ParSntaka I. ARM. 1915 II. 20. 


[ 381 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 20. — Tiruecendurai (Tri.)— A certain merchant of Tanjavur 
named Karunataka Pnlalaya' Setti built the temple 
called Pulalaya Vinnagar and set up the deity. He 
purchased and gave to the temple the land adjoining 
it. 325 of 1903. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — One hundred sheep left with the 
pddamulattdr for one lamp and occasional service. 

124 of 1895 ; SIL v. 686. 

Year 20, day 333 — Tiruvaiydru (Tj.) — Land for lamp by the 
nurse ( tail) of Kannaradeva. 251 of 1894 ; 

SIL v 550 ; MCC. Mag . xxiv. p. 128* 


Year 22 . — Melappaluvur * (Tri.) — Land, 8 ma, to temple by 
Vadugan Madavan Paluvettaraiyan Kumaran Maravan, 
after reclaiming some waste land in the devaddna 
villages, to provide for one perpetual lamp in each of 
the shrines in the Amanikandarpa-Isvara-grha. 

360 of 1924. * 

„ Tirakkdl (NA.) — Gift to Gangasiirap - perumballi at 
Rajendrapuram. 277 of 1916. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — 397| palam of (?) to temple by 
Marpidugu Kalvan Amarakalan t of Tirukkottiyur. 

169 of 1928. 

Year 23 . — Puduppdhkam (Ch.) — Land, tax-free, to temple of 
Bhatari by assembly of Nalladimangalam, in Mejrpal.u- 
gur-nadu, a sub-division of Manayir-kottam. Mentions 
Ilainakkal Kartigaik-kanattar. 61 of 1923. 

„ Tiruecendurai (Tri.) — Sale of land to Pfidi Adicca 

Pidariyar by Parudai of Isanamangalam for 5 kalanju 

by Yidelvidugu. 320 of 1903. X 

„ Tirumalavd4i (Tri.) — Land by Ayiravan Enadi, head- 
man (kildn) of Arkkadu. 18 of 1920. 

• cf. 357 of Year 13. 

■J* perhaps a Muttaraya chief of the locality. ARE , 1928 II 3. 

X cf . 316 of 3 Parak. 


[882 ] 



RAJAKESARI 


Year 23 .—Tiruppalanam (Tj.) -Twenty kalanju by Kadupattigal- 
Tamarmetfciyar, * * * § mother of Yayiri Aka .... alias 
Tribhuvana-madeviyar, queen of Solap-perumanadigal . 

161 of 1928. 

„ Ukkal (NA.) — A record by the sabha of Aparajita- 
catm., of the receipt of 200 pon from Sediyur- 
Trivikkarama-bhatta alias Brahmadhirajar of the 
mlydlunganam of Uttarameru-catm., for feeding 12 
BrahmaiiB. Interesting details. 

19 of 1893 ; SII. iii. 1. t 

Year 24, — Nerkunam (NA.) — Gift of three fields as erippatti by 
Nambiyamallanar, son :of Nrpatunga-mafigalap-per- 
araiyar, for the benefit of the tank at Nerkunam (Singa- 
pumnattuk-kilvali-Nerkunram). Anavdy dandamiillittu 
epperppa\la manrupddum erikkak-kudutten Nambiya 
mallanen. 86 of 1908 ; SII. iii. 93. % 

„ Niyamam (Tj.) — Five kalanju gold by Adigal Kandan 
Marambavai, § queen of Nandipottaraiyar of the 
Pallavatilaka race, for offerings to god and feeding 
twenty Brahmans and the ‘ taljppani-seyyum manigal. ' 
The interest is stated to be 1/8 kalanju per kalanju 
per pu (harvest). The money was on deposit with the 
temple priest, Ittalippattudaiyan Isvarakkarani Vama- 
devan Tiruvenkacjian. 16 of 1899 ; SII. iii. 94. f ^ 

„ Sendalai (Tj.) — Five kalanju for lamp by the wife of a 
learned Brahman. 208 of 1926 || 

„ Takkdlam (NA.) — Piritipatiyar son of Maramaraiyar gave 
a silver vessel (Iceinli ) weighing 317 kalanju to 

* Perhaps Xditya I, who ruled for at least 28 years, espoused the daughter 
of a Pallava chieftain. RSjak. records from Tiruppalanam with years 21 to 26 
may, hence, be liis. Palaeography supports this — ARE . 1928 II. 2. 

t Perhaps Xditya L— Hultzsch. 

J Palaeographically, Xditya I. ARE . 1909 II. 36. AnavZy-dandam is taken 
to be the name of a tax by II. K. Sastri ; but Zttavdy may have the meaning 
1 as occasion arises/ 

§ 13 of 1899 (Yr, 18) ; 301-A of 1901 from TiruccennambT!n«Ji. 

1i Palaeographically Xditya I. 

II Xditya I ; 210 of 1926. ARE. 1926 II. 17. 

[ 383 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tkuvuj^l-Mahadeva on the occasion of a solar eclipse. 

5 of 1897 ; SII. v. 1368 ; El xix. 12 *. 

Year 25. —Alambakam (Tri.) — Land to temple of Saptamatrkas by 
the assembly of Dantivarma-marigalam. 705 of 1909. 

„ Tiruvaiyaru (Tj.) — Thirty kalanju gold for lamp, 
deposited with the Sivapuri-nagarattar. 

243 of 1894 ; SII. v. 542 

„ TiruveUarai (Tri.) — Thirty cows for a lamp by Sembiyan 
Malanattu Velan alias Korran Maran. 522 of 1905. 

Year 26 . — Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Gift of a rudrdksa necklace, set 
with gems to the deity by Gangamattandar alias 
Sembiyan Prthivl-gatigaraiyar, son of Mahadevar of 
Pangala-nadu. t 177 of 1928. 

Year 26, day 181 — tfrirartgam (Tri.)— 90 kalanju of puttatjika- 
<}anda §emmai-pon. Interest rate was one kalam and 
one tuni of old paddy, yielding 120 kalam per 
annum, for feeding four Brahmans (daily.) ? 

70 of 1892 ; SII ; iv. 517. 

„ day 280-Utlaramerur (Ch.) — Twenty kalanju gold for 
maintaining a place for supply of drinking water 
during part of the year, before the pramani-mandapa 
of the village. The total interest yield per annum 
was 3 Icalahjiiy at 3 manjddi per kalanju per annum 
(15 per cent). The supervision of the charity was with 
the tank-committee. 75 of 1898 ; SII. vi. 360. 

• Palaeographically earlier than Parantaka I. The donor here is the same as 
Pjthvipati II, son of Marasimha, and later, friend of Parantaka I. Date must 
be either 7th June 894 A. D. or 28th May 895 A. D. giving acc. 870 or 871. The 
KanySkumari record says that, Adilya killed Aparajita, whose friend at £rl- 
Pujrambiyam (870 A. D ), was Gaftga Pjthivlpati 1, grandfather of the present 
donor. * The Cojas apparently did not count for much ’ at the time of the 
battle of Sri-Pujrambiyam. K.V.S. Aiyar. EL ibid. 

f cf. 139 of 1928, Parak. Yr. 11. Alivin-kaUarsiyar an alias of P/thivI- 
gafigaraiyar. 428 of 1902 (5. 871 or A.D. 949) mentions a KaUanangai, daughter 
of P/thivI-gangaraiyar who died at Arungunram. Pangala- na<}u, part of Palkunja- 
kSflam, was in the N. Arcot dt. A ' Pf thivigangaraiyar was a feudatory of 
ParSntaka I, and later of K(§na III. ARE. 1928 II 3. 

[384 ] 



RAJAKESARI 


Year 27. — Brahmade&am ( N A .) — Gold for lamp and for feeding 
a Brahman by Nallulan Cradimagan Attamutti. 

230 of 1915. * 

„ Tiriikkalnkkiinram (Ch.) — (Vatteluttu) On being peti- 
tioned by Puttan, eon of Kuna van, the king renewed a 
gift of land to Tirukkalukkunrattu Sri Mulasthanattu- 
perumanadigal, originally made by Skandasisya and 
continued by Padavikonda N arasinga-pot taraiy ar . 

167 of 1894 ; El. iii. 279. | 

„ Tirumalavddi (Tri.) — Land for lamp by purchase from 
the assembly of Marpujugu-catm. 15 of 1920, 

Year 30. — Tiruvellarai (Tri.) — Gold for feeding at noon a 
Brahman versed in the Veda. 518 of 1905. 

Year (3)7. J — Melsevdr (SA.) — Mentions Kannara-devar. 

218 of 1904. 


The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following : — 

Alumbdkkam . — Gift of Land, purchased from the sabhii 
of Dantivarma-mangalam, which had a tank called 
Marpidugeri. 712 of 1909. 

KuvihuH (Tj.) — Temple of Tiruppuratturai Emberuman 
built of stone by Sembiyan Vedi Velan, who also 
bought some land from the sabha of Tirupperur, foi 
uvaccak-kani . 279 of 1901 ; SIL vii. 499. 

PerungalCir (Pd.) — Fragment in early characters record- 
ing a gift of gold. Mentions a temple of Mahadova 
at Solacihlamani-catm., and the village of Perungolur. 

203 of 1914. 


• Xditya I. The high regnal year will not suit any other Rajak. before 
Rajaraja I. Same donor in 224 of 1915-Parantaka I, Yr, 17. ARE . 1916 II 9. 

t Sditya I. Palaeographically pre-Parantaka. Kunavan Puttar is also men- 
tioned in 103 of 1931. Rajak. n-d. 

X Text has 2(7). 


49 


L 385 J 



THE COLAS 


Tiruccatturai (Tj.) — Gold for lamp by Tribhuvana- 
madeviyar Vayiri-akkanar, queen of the Cola king and 
mother-in-law of Kadupattigal. 180 of 1931. * 

Tirunedungalam, (Tri.) — Money for lamp. Refers to 
Pandya Varaguna Maha(raja.) Near this is another 
fragment of Maduraikonda Parakesari. 696 of 1909. 

Timivilakkudi (Tj.) — Money by a merchant for sounding 
gong t in the temple. 133 of 1926. 


• cf. 100 of 1931. 

f This purpose is not clear from the very damaged text though we 
have : itta seyakan ...... aljvu $o[a. 

[ 386 ] 



P AR AKES ARl V ARM AN 


Tear 2.—Karutta0ngutJti (Tj.)— Mentions Virasolapper undent in 
Tanjore. Agreement registering the sale of days (of 
worship) in three temples by two persons to a third. 

49 of 1897 ; SIL v. 1412. 

„ Kilftr (SA.) — Gift of 192 sheep for two lamps by 
Sembiyan Miladudaiyar. 271 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 900. 

„ Kilur (SA.) — (4)80 sheep for five lamps. 

281 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 910. 

„ Kmnbah'nam (Tj.) — Sheep for lamp by one of Udaiyiir 
Vira-sola-terinja-kaikkolar. 251 of 1911. 

„ Panddravdtfui (Tj.) — Gift of thirty kaSu for a lamp by 
the wife of a merchant of Tribhuvana-madevip-peran- 
ga<Ji at Tanjavur. 274 of 1923. 

.. tirirangam (Tri.) — Gift of 410 pon for feeding a Brahman 
(vM'im-vallan) at mid-day ( ucdppddu ) service to god 
Ranganatha. The number of dishes and other details 
prescribed. 73 of 1892 ; SIL iv. 520. 

„ Tiruccendurai (Tri.) — Twenty kalanju gold for lamp 
with parudai of Isana-mangalam. Weight videl-vidugu. 
The donor was Kodnmbalur Nakkan Vikramakesariyiir, 
the deviyar of Tennavan Ilangovel alias Maravan 
Piidiyar. 306 of 1903. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Gift of land, after its purchase 
from the temple for feeding four Brahmans, by Karra{i- 
pattalakan of the Arumoli-deva-terifija-kaikkolar. 

144 of 1928. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Land given for five drummers for 
the temple by Araiyan Adittan Vlman. * 

162 of 1928. 

# Perhaps father of Vlman Kondavai, mother of ParSntaka II. If so, the 
king was AriDjaya who had a short reign of not less than three years, ARE. 1028 
II 8, contra ARE. 1921 II 26 where Vlman Kundavai is connected with CSJukya 
Bhtma. 


[S87] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 2. — Tiruppalanam (Tj.)—- Land given by Araiyan Adittan 
Vlman for offerings (luring the ardhayama and for 
lamp. 172 of 1928. 

„ Ti ruvdduturai (Tj.) — Sale of land made tax-free by the 

assembly (sabha) of Sattannr * to a member of the 
Adittapanmat-terinda-kaikkolar for the maintenance of 
a cocoanut and flower garden to the temple. 

135 of 1925. 

„ Tiruvi daimarudur (Tj.) — Mentions the Singalantaka- 

terinda-kaikkolar. T 244 of 1907. 

„ Tirmndaimxtruddr (Tj.) — Records the erection, by the 
Kaikkoja-Perombadai, of window, door, door-post and 
steps in front of the big mantfapa called Tigai- 
Ayirattannurruvar. 253 of 1907. 

„ Udaiydrgudi J (SA.) — Gift of 96 sheep and a ram for 
lamp to Tiruvanantesvarattalvar of Yiranarayana- 
catm., by Parantakan Madevadigal alias Sembiyan 
Madeviyar, the daughter of Malavaraiyar and queen of 
Gandaradittan called here also Merkelnndarulina-devar. 

540 of 1920. 

„ Udaiydrgudi (SA.)— Gold for lamp by a member of the 
Kodandaramat-terinja-kaikkolar. 545 of 1920. 

n Udaiydrgudi (SA.) — Aryan Geyavitankan, one of the 
Tayatongat-terinja-kaikkolar, gave ten kd§n for cloths 
to Kuttar, to the south of the stone temple of 
Tiruvanantesvarattalvar. He also built in the temple 

m 

shrines to Kuttar, Ganapati and Piccar. 555 of 1920. 

„ Udaiydrgudi (SA.) — Gold for lamp by the Parantakat- 
terin ja-kaikkolar on behalf of one of themselves. 

574 of 1920. 

v 

„ Udaiydrgudi (SA.) — Gold for lamp by one of the Miitta- 
val-pen’a-kaikkolar. § 581 of 1920. 

• 136 of 1926 is similar. f Also in 590 of 1920. (U^wiyargu#.) 

% Near Kat$umannark3yil (Cidambaram T(\), 

§ 584 of 1920 is similar. 


[ 388 3 



PARAKESARI 


Tear 2. — Utjaiyargudi (SA.) — Gold by Koy il-perval alias Vana- 
van-madeviyar, daughter of Pupala-sekariyar, for a 
lamp and mid-day offerings in the temple and for 
the sumptuouB feeding, once a day, of one Brahman 
learned in the Veda. 594 of 1920. 

„ Udaiydrgiuii (SA.) — Gold, 12£ kalanju, by Paluvett- 
araiyan Kodandan Tappili-dharmman for a lamp in the 
central shrine of the temple. 609 of 1920. 

Year 2 + 1. — Pullamangai * * * § (Tj.) — The village assembly (sabha) 
met in the maydapa opposite to the Tiruvalandurai 
temple and sold ma of land to the temple of 
Kalapidari of Naduvirceri for 25 kd§u and allowed it 
to be tax-free as before. 549 of 1921. 

„ Tiruvlljmilalai (Tj.) — Silver dish for §ribali to temple 
by a certain Tanronri-taniccevagan, (tanronri being 
the god’s name.) 439 of 1908 f 

Year 3. — Alambdkkam (Tri.) — Land to Amaresvara-Perumal at 
Dan ti v anna-man galam by the sabha of that village. 

720 of 1909. 

„ Allilr (Tri.) — Land for lamp by Ganga-madeviyar, wife 
of Virasola-Ijangovelfir, on the occasion of her sati. J 

376 of 1903. 

„ Kilaiyur (Tj.)— Gold for supply of ghi on new moon 
days by a certain Tuppil Sattikumarabhattan residing 
at Viranarayanac-ceri of Viranarayana-catm., § on the 
northern bank. 92 of 1925. 

„ Kurnbahhiara (Tj.)— 25 kalanjxi of gold for lamp by a 
native of Nedum-piiraiyur in Malai-nadb. 

248 of 1911. 

„ Payddravddai (Tj .) — F our ma of land to a learned 
Brahman who was doing piija to Tirucceyaliir-pernmal 
at Rajakesari-catm. 252 of 1923. 

• Text gives Pasupati-k<3yil. 

t The king is said to be Vijayalaya in ARE, 1909 II 35. 

t The text is : “ IlangZiWTir’dlviyZr Gangam^dhnyTu-tippTiykinrar- 

kuduttadu. " 

§ After Parantaka I ? ARE . 1925 II 10. 

[ 389 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year Z,—&iyamangalam (N A.)— Land. Mentions Gangaraja with 
surnames Ganga-culamani * and Mummacji-solac-cembi- 
yan-srlgangaraiyar, who was governing Palkunj/a- 
kottam, Yenkunra - kottam and &ingapura - na<Ju, 
(portions of modern N. and S. Arcot.) 

69 of 1900 ? SIL vii. 73. 

„ TiUaisthdnam (Tj.) — Thirty halanju of gold for a lamp 
by Mullur-nangai, t mother-in-law of the king. The 
gold was left with the sabha and the Pudamulaitdr . 

45 of 1895 ; SIL v. 602. 

„ Tirakhll (NA.) — Sheep for ghi to the Jaina temple 
(palli) at Tandapuram by Eranandi alias Naratonga 
Pallavaraiyan, a native of Nelveli in Nelveli-nacju of 
Tenkarai-Panaiyur-nadu in the Sola-mandalam. 

276 of 1916. 

„ Tiruccatturai (Tj.) — Thirty halanju of gold for a lamp 
by Mullur-nangai, mother of queen Sola-madeviyar. { 

169 of 1931. 

„ Tirumalavddi (Tri.) — Land by purchase for lamp by 
Aribjigaikeni daughter of Mutta Udaiyar. 8 of 1920. 

„ Tirundmanallur (SA.) — Land reclaimed for temple of 
Tiruthondlsvaram by Vikramabharana Pallavaraiyan 
under orders of Munaiyadaraiyar Aparayitan Kulam- 
anikkerumanar. 369 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 999. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Thirty halanju of gold for lamp 
by Mullur-nangai. 125 of 1895 ; SII. v 689. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Thirty kalanju of gold by Nakkan 
Arifijigai alias Parantaka Pallavaraiyan fora lamp to 
be maintained in the temple by the Nagarattar of the 
village. 165 of 1928. 

* Ganga-cTllumani was a surname of Marasimba II (El. v p. 177). But, as 
it is not likely that he ruled in Pallava country as a C5Ja feudatory, this chief 
was perhaps related to the local Ganga chiefs 6ankaradSva and SomanathadEva 
of the Tiruvallam records of Kajaraja 1 and KajSndra I •ARE. 1900, paragraph 18. 

t See also under Tiruccatturai and Tiruppalanam. 

X 107 of 1931 (TiiuppunduruttiJ is similar. 

f 390 ] 



PARAKESARI 


tear 3 .—Tiruvaduturai (Tj.)— The boundary ( 0 f the land ? ) 
purchased from the assembly of Sirupuliyur by 
the ur of Karai-nalur in PerSvur-nadu. 

107 of 1925. 

„ Tiruvaiydru (Tj.) — Land for three lamps. Nandd- 

vilaJchu iravum pagalum-erivadarku. 

234 of 1894 ; SIT, v. 533. 

„ Tiruvdmdttur (SA.) — Twenty Icalanju gold for two 

lamps by Sembiyan Kattimanadigal who built the 
Tiruccurru-mandapam, the gold being left in charge of 
the sabha, and ur of the place. 403 of 1903. 

„ Tiruvdmdttur (SA.) — Ten pon for lamp by Muttanattuk- 
karpundi-nadudaiya Parabhumikan Malian alias 
Gandaraditta Pallavaraiyan. * Sabhaiyum drum deva - 
kanmigalum to protect the gift. 

425 of 1903 1 ; SIL iii. 95. 

„ Tiruvamidmalai (NA.) — Gold for lamp by the Cera 
queen Kilana<Jigal. 470 of 1902 ; SIL viii. 58. 

„ TiruvedikkuQi (Tj.)— Thirty kalanju gold for lamp in 
the temple of Parakesari-purattu-mahadeva, left with 
the Parakesaripurattu-nagarattar. 

66 of 1895 ; SIL v. 623. 

„ Tiruvidaimaruddr (Tj.) — A silver kalaiam by a native 
of Pandi-na<Ju. 247 of 1907. 

„ Udaiydrgudi (SA.)— Gold for lamp by a Brahman of 

Panditavatsalac-ceri. J 556 of 1920. 

# • 

„ TJtjaiydrgudi (SA.) — Land for akkara-acliyal to god. 

582 of 1920. 

„ Udaiydrgudi (SA.)— Gold by Pancavan-mahadevi, wife 
of Araiyan Mahimalaya alias Pariintaka Muttaraiyan, 

* If this man was an officr of Gandaraditya, the inscription most be one 
of Paraataka I. H. K Sastri. 

«t 426 of 1903 is a similar gift by the same donor, which mentions no king 
but is dated S. 8(7)9. A few years after TakkSlam, this falls in GandarSditya’s 
reign, who must been have a ParakSsari according to the large Leyden grant. 
ARE, 1904 paragraph, 20. 

t Evidently so called after ParSntaka I. Same sSri in 559 of 1920. 

[ 391 ] 



THE COLAS 

if < 


for a lamp to Candrasekhara-peruma! in the Anant&f- 
vara temple. 602 of 1920. 

Year 3 . — Utfaiydrgtitfi (SA.) — The supervisor of temple affairs 
for the year distributed the temple lands among the 
temple servants in proportion to the services rendered 
by them. 605 of 1920. 

Year 4:,—Kdncipuram (Ch.) — The sabha of Kalladuppnr raised 
a loan from the temple of 20 halanju by Kaccipettu- 
anikkal ; the interest on the loan was 90 kadi of paddy 
per annum which was to be taken and measured out 
in the premises of the temple by the ummai-ieyyum 
variyap-perumakka]. SII. i. 85. * 

„ Kilappaluvur (Tri.) — Lamp to temple by the deviyar 

of a Paluvettaraiyar, who was the daughter of 

varaiyar. 222 of 1926. 

„ Melappaluvur (Tri.) — Gold for lamp. The sixteenth 
year of Parakesari Uttama Cola is quoted and Adigal 
Paluvettaraiyar mentioned. 373 of 1924. 

„ Nangavaram (Tri.) — Land to two trumpet-blowers of 
of the Sundaresvara temple in the village called here 
Arinjigai-catm. T 303 of 1903. 

n Tirthamalai (Sm.) — Gold for lamp. Mentions queen of 

Mummudli-sola-perumal. The temple is called Kuda- 

lalvar. 673 of 1905. 

*• 

„ Tiruccendurai (Tri.) — Gold by Pudi Aditta Pidfiri. 

312 of 1903. 

„ Tirumalai (NA.) — Four halanju gold for feeding one 
adigal in the palli on the Tirumalai. 

66 of 1907 { ; SII. iii. 97. 

ft Tirumananjeri (Tj.) — Gift of 96 sheep for a lamp, of a 
lamp-stand, and of the stone on which the inscription is 

• Perhaps of Vijayalaya- S/I. iii p. 17 n. 4. 

+ Called also Nangai-Brahmadeya in Rajagambhira Vala*n£<J a (334 of 1903 
of year 34 of KonSrinmaikondan .) 

X The earliest Cola inscription in this locality ; it shows that the Jaina 
settlement on the hill is older than the time of RSjaraja I, ARE, 1908 11, 51. 

f 392 3 



PARAKESARI 

engraved by a ps^(fd{ti attached to the (royal ? ) 
kitchen at Tanjavur. n 0 f 1914 , 

Year A.—Tiruvdmattur (SA.)— Lamp by Kandaradittan alias , . . 

Maharajan of Vanagappa<li. 404 of 1903. 

„ Tiruventcacfu (Tj,)— Gold ornaments by a Kaikkolan. 
Below this is another record ,o£ resumption and 
reassignment at a higher rate of rent of some temple 
lands. 495 of 1918. 

„ Tiruvitjaimarudur (Tj.)— A gold hand ( hastalca ) set 
with precious stones. Gift by a merchant. 

198 of 1907. 

,, TirumlaJckwfi (Tj.) — 36 sheep for a lamp by the head- 
man ( Man ) of Arkkatju. 124 of 1926. 

„ TiruvUalur (Tj.) — 100 sheep for lamp by Nakkan 
Arinjigai alias Pirantaka Pallavaraiyan. 18 of 1907. 

„ Velacceri (Ch.) — Land for lamp and offerings to Kala- 
bhatari given by the sabha of the village. 

317 of 1911. 

Year 5 . — AlambdJcJcam (Tri.) — Land to Amaresvara-perumaj. 

Marpi^ugeri and sale by sabha of Dantivarmaman- 
galam mentioned. 715 of 1909. * 

H Kilur (SA.) — Gold, 15 kalanju , for lamp by queen of 
Vanakovaraiyar, called Iladaigal magalar Nangai Kula- 
mamkkattar. Interest rate was kaJanj in-vayt-tinyal 
urip-pa$i. 299 of 1902 ; EL vii. 141. 

n PtlvdlabJcutfi (Pd.) — Construction of the mandapa . 

147 of 1907. Pd. 42. 

,» Salem . (Sm.) — Year described as 4 Tiruvefoittittiic-cella • 

ninraydn^a aihjdvadu .’ The sabha of Rajarajasraya- 
catm. accepted an endowment of five kalanju gold 
for a lamp. 43 of 1888 ; SIL iv. 141. 

„ tkyamangalam (NA.) — Land by purchase from ur by an 

inhabitant of the Pan<Jya country to Tirukkayrali- 


• ARE . 1910 11 14 . 



THE COLAS 


mahadevar at Siyamangalam in Tennarrnr-nadn, a 
sub-division of Palkunra-kot$am in JayangonglasSla- 
man<Jalam. 60 of 1900 ; SIL vii. 64. 

Year 5 .—TakJcfilam (NA.)~ 90 sheep for lamp. “ Iccirikoyil- 
arayvomum padi(yum) (p)adamulattomum Takkolattil 
nagarattomum ” take charge of them. 

60 of 1897 ; SIL v. 1369. 

„ Timccatturai (Tj.) — Gold for lamp (by the queen of) 
the Pandya king Pirantakan. 133 of 1931. 

„ Tiruccengattangutfi (Tj.) — Land for two lamps by the 

assembly of Marugal in lieu of money (pm) taken 

from a certain Yirasolan alias Uttamasoja-nenmali- 

nattu-muvenda-velan. 60 of 1913. 

• • • 

„ Tirukkalavur (Tj.) — Land. Ijakkasu mentioned. The 
donor was &ingan Kaliyan alias Uttamasola-muvenda- 
vejan of Kommaipakkam. 46 of 1910. 

„ j Viruvengava&al (Pd.) — (Verse). Lamp by a native of 

Malanadu. 239 of 1914. 

Year 6 . — Kllappaluvur (Tri.) — Gold, 1£ kalanju and paddy, 
three kalam , as korru to Alayurc-cakkai for enacting 
three scenes of the Sakkaik-kuttu on the Asvati day 
of the festival in Arpasi at Tiruvalandurai-nallur. 

250 of 1926. 

„ Kudumiy&malai (Pd.) — The cows donated to the temple 
for lamps could not be protected from robbers by the 
temple authorities and were sold for gold. 

315 of 1904 ; Pd. 44. 

„ Kudumiydmalai (Pd.) — Gold for lamp by Varagunanajtl, 
daughter of Muttaraiyar * and queen of Sembiyan 
Irukkuvelar. 337 of 1904 ; Pd. 45. 

„ Pullamangai (Tj.) — Land to temple for morning service 
by Sembiyan Mahavali Vanarayar. 559 of 1921. 


* Vi^vi^ugu-muttaraiyar. IrukkuvSl was the same as VikramakSsari 
{ARE> 1908 p. 88) the contemporary of Xditya II-K. V. S. Aiyar EL xiii. p. 138. 


[ 894 ] 



PARAKESARl 

r 

Year 6 .—&Tmur (Tri.)— Gold, 2^ kalanju , for lamp by Pirantakan 
Purusottaman of the Danatongat * - terihja kaikkolar. 

208 of 1917. 

*9 Tillaisthanam (Tj.) — Odd, 83 poti (kalanju), for two 
lamps by an uvaccan of the temple ( itta]i ). 

27 of 1895 ; SII. v. 584. 

„ Tillaisthanam (Tj.)~ Gold, 25 kalanju, for lamp depo- 
sited with the sabha and ur. 

47 of 1895 ; 811 v. 604. 

„ Tirumalavatfi (Tri.) — Sheep for lamp by Kaman Tayan, 
a teacher (vdtti) of Idaiyaru. 17 of 1920. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Gold, 30 kalanju , for lamp by 
Tippanja-alagiyan Mayavan. The sabha of Aniya- 
mangalam invested it in buying 6 md of land. 

148 of 1928. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Lamp, and 25 kalanju for its 
maintenance, by a servant of the headman of Karuga- 
viir. 153 of 1928. 

„ Tiruppdrkkadal (NA.) — Gold for lamp. The super- 

vision of the charity was vested in the annual tank 
supervision committee. 685 of 1904. 

„ Tiruvamdttur (SA.) — Refers to the mason Arugurt- 
taccan Narayanan Vaikundan who built the temple 
(Abhiramesvara). 413 of 1903. 

„ Tiruvitjaimarudiir (Tj.) — Record of an iraiyili-olai 

given by sabha of Tiraimur, nagaram of Tiruvi<Jai- 
marudil and others. 219 of 1907. 

„ Tiruvilakkufji (Tj.) — Land, after being purchased tax- 
free from the assembly of Videlvidugu-catm., given 
for lamp to Kuttapperumal in Tiruvilakkudi in the 
same place. 121 of 1926. 

f Wa* this a surname of Parantaka I ? SSmflr has Paran taka’s records. 
The Kongudlsa rajUh ka l attributes the conquest of Kongu to Xditya I and Panin- 
taka does not claim to have conquered it. ARE . 1918 II 22. 

[395 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 6.—Tiruvilimilalai (Tj.)— Gold for feeding* four Brahmans 
given by Amarabhujangan Muppuli alias Gantjara- 
gamJa-Pallavaraiyan. 436 of 1908. * 

Year 7 . — Pullamangai (Tj.)— Great assembly of Pullamangalam 
sold 1J ma of land for an endowment in the temple - 
by Aridan Maranarayanan. 551 of 1921. 

„ Siddhalingama^am (BA.) — Money for two lamps by a 

female servant of Y aragur-kottamudai y an. 

422 of 1909/ 

„ Tillaisthanam (Tj.) — Sheep for lamp left with the 
sabha and ur of Tiruneyttanam. 

28 of 1895 ; 811. v. 585. 

, i* 

„ Tirupparkatfal (NA.) — Sabha accepts an endowment 
for offerings and places it under control of the annual 
tank-committee. The corpus was apparently used for 
repairing a breach in the tank-bund. 688 of 1904. 

„ Tiruvcufuturai (Tj.) — Sale of land, tax-free, to temple by 

the assembly of Sattanur for 15 ham endowed to the 
temple for the sacred bath of the deity at Uttarayana 
Sankranti by Omasi Orriyuran Kiittan of Tiruvanaikka, 
a devadana-brahmadeya in Kiliyur-nacju. 

127 of 1925. 

„ Tiruvidaimarudur (Tj.) — Building of the temple men- 
tioned. Land for a person singing de&i. 

233, 234 of 1907. 

„ Tiruvilakkudi (Tj.) — Sale of land to revenue officers 
( puravu-vari tinaik-ka\attar) by the assembly of 
Yidelvidngu-catm. 135 of 1926. 

„ Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — 30 halanju of tirkkar-cemrnai pan 

for lamp deposited with the sabha of Manali near 
Tiruvorriyur (Tiruvorriyui'p-puratlu Manali-mbhai - 
ydm). 402 of 1896 ; SII. v. 1357, 

same as 165 of 1912. 

# This, like some other records, is on a pillar in a minor shrine in a temple 
which bears only later CSJa records. The pillars were evidently secured from 
ao older structure. Vijayalaya ? ARE. 1909 II 35. 

[ 896 ] 



PARAKESARl 


Tear 8.— KUappaluvur (Tri.)— Twelve sheep by Kaman KSviyar, 
wife of Pajuv&ttaraiyar Vikramadityar, for one pi$i of 
ghl daily to the temple. 237 of 1926.* 

„ Pantjdravddai (Tj.) Tax-free land by madhyastha for 
music by five persons during Srlbali every day. 

272 of 1923. 

„ Sendalai (Tj.) — Details of the expenditure of paddy got 
, annually from the devadana village Punragai. 

204 of 1926. 

„ Tillaisthanam (Tj.) — Thirty kalanju of gold for lamp 
by Pandiyanar Manabharana-d$vi .... kilavan. 

26 of 1895 ; SIL ; v. 583. 

,» Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — 90 sheep for lamp by a native of 
Nandipuram alias Ayirattali. 145 of 1928. 

„ Tiruppaldtturai (Tri.)— Gold for lamp. The village is 

called Tirupparrurai in Uttamasili-catm. a brahmadeya 
in Tenkarai. 173 of 1907. 

„ Tiruppaldtturai (Tri.) — A copy of an inscription of the 
18th year of Madiraikonda Parakesari and of another of 
the same king, twentieth year. Among the boundaries 
occur names : Virasrikamuka-vadi ; Adicca Vaykkal ; 
Kodandarama-vadi ; Uttamasili- Yaykkal. The Perun- 
guri sabha of Uttamasili-catm., ordered the reen- 
graving of the records found on the older §r%vimana. 

174 of 1907 ; SIL iii. 133. t 

„ Tifuvellarai (Tri.) — Twenty kalanju of gold by the 
queen of Udaiyar- Anaimerrufi j inar (Rajaditya) called 
Irayirandevi-ammanar, to Srl-Kr§na and Rukmini J of 
the big temple at TiruveJJaxui. 

534 of 1905 ; SIL iii. 132. 

* Was the king Uttama Copt? ARE, 1926 11 20. 

+ The king may be AriRjaya, or Xditya II or Uttama Coja ; probably the 
last. H. K, Sastri. 

% Record of Uttama C5la or Xditya II- H. K. Sastri. Earliest epigrapldcal 
reference to Kf^na worthip in the Tamil country. ARE. 1906 II 21. 

[ 897 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 9 . — Erumur (SA.) — Ten kalanju of tulai pon paid to the 
village assembly for remission of dues on seven m& of 
land presented to the temple, 393 of 1913. 

„ Kamamsavalli (Tri.) — Land for Mbali and tirupal\i - 
died . Mentions Kodarwjarama-Yaykkal. 

78 of 1914. 

„ Kilappaluviir (Tri.) — Malavar Konkani Senni Nambiyar, 
uncle (mamatfi) of Adigal Paluvettaraiyar Maravan- 
Kandanar, made a gift of land by purchase for a lamp 
in the temple of Mara vanis vara- grhattu Mahadeva. * * * § 

219 of 1926. 

„ Kilappaluviir (Tri.) — Paluvettaraiyar Maravan-Kandanar 
purchased land and assigned portions to several persons 
for service and for lamp before Maravanisvarattu- 
mahadeva. 249 of 1926. t 

„ Kuhiir (Tj.) — 25 ham for lamp to Adittesvaram-udaiya 
Bhattarakar by a certain Astrasiva with the tirumm- 
ifoligaip-peruinakkal of the temple. 292 of 1917 J 

„ Panddravdtlai (Tj.) — Land for expenses on Sankranti 
days and 108 copper water pots for bath by the 
queen-mother (Udaiya-pirattiyar) on behalf of prince 
Gandaradittan Madhurantakan Uttama 051a. $ 

250 of 1923. 

„ Timiccengodu (Sm.) — Gold for feeding Brahmans by a 
native of Irojlu. 636 of 1905. 

„ Tiruppaldtturai (Tri.) — An exchange of land, by the 
sabha of Uttamaslli-catm. Mentions an image of 
Suryadeva in the temple at Tirupparrurai. 

177 of 1907. 

* cf. Sambaadar on Paluvftr, esp. v 11, on Malabar Brahmans worshipping 
here, ARE. 1926 II 9. 

•j- Parak. identified with Uttama ARE , 1926 II 19. 

J Record of ParSntaka I whose father was Sditya. ARE 1918 II 22. 

§ This makes it a record of Uttama Co) a ARE . 1924 II 13 (where Sembiyan 
MabadSvFs charities for Uttama in the reign of Rlijaraja are referred to in 
support of the identity.) 


[ 898 ] 



PABAKESARI 


Tear 9 .—Tiruvddi (SA.)— Gold for gin to seven temples : 
Tiruvirattanam, Tiruvaranavasi, Tirunaglsvaram, 
Tiruvagattlsvaram, Tiruvagisvaram, Tirusidainalal, 
Tiruppalanju<Ju. 368 of 1921. 

„ Tiruvellarai (Tri.) — Gold, 25 kalanju , for lamp by a 
native of I<}aikkadu who was a royal officer called 
Komaran-kon. 524 of 1905. 

Year 10 . — Antfanalltlr (Tri.) — Gold for lamp by Puliyur- 
nattu-adigal, queen of Sembiyan Irukkuvel alias Pudi 
Parantakan. 348 of 1903. 

„ Karuttaitdngv4i (Tj.)— Images of two door-keepers set 
up by Sembarkkottattu Pattina-nattup-palam-pattinattu 
irukkum vellatti Arunilimalaip-piratti. 

51 of 1897 ; SIL v. 1414. 

„ KiJjtppaluvur (Tri.) — 90 sheep by ndttdr of Kunra- 
kiirram for lamp to Maravanisvaram-U(Jaiyar. 

217 of 1926. 

„ Ki(iyanur (SA.) — Provision for offerings on new moon 

days by one of the dlunganam of the village. 

148 of 1919. 

„ Kiuhmiydmalai (Pd.) — Gold for lamp by the queen 
of Sembiyan IrukkuveJ. 321 of 1904. 

„ Tillaisthdnam (Tj.) — When a person described as 
Vilattur-nattuk-kdn enquired into the affairs of the 
temple (ivvur h'lMryam-draydni rka), those who 
were doing nagaravdriyam in this place (ivvur) 
agreed to maintain a perpetual lamp from the proceeds 
of angatfikkuli collected by the ur-dlvdrga\. 

40 of 1895 ; SIL v. 597. 

„ Tiruccatturai (Tj.)— Gold by Sembiyan Buvaniganga- 

raiyan alias Alivin Kallarafii for a lamp Kumaramart- 

tfmdan. ” ” 177 of 1931 * 

• • 

„ Tiruccendurai (Tri.) — Sale of land to Nangai Pvidi 
Aditta-pa<Jari by parndai for Icalanju by vidU- 
vitjugu~kal. 

• ARE, 1931 II. 8. 


[ 399 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 10 , — Tiruccendurai (Tri.) — Gold by PMi Adicca Pi<jari. 

311, 314 of 1903. * 

,» 2 VirumalavaQi (Tri.) — Silver salver ( ping&lam ) for 

betel offerings to Tirumalavadi U<Jaiyar by Nakkan 
Tillaiyalagiyar alias Sola-madeviyar. Weight called 
vaiyagattar-kal mentioned. 1 of 1920, 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Lamp by Tennavan Madeviyar, 
queen of Rajakesari. 166 of 1928. 

„ Tiruppurambiyam (Tj.) — 45 sheep for half a lamp. 

76 of 1897 ; STL vi. 25. 

„ TiruvenMdu (Tj.) — 25 kalanju of gold for lamp by 
Sadirayan Uttamasiliyar wife of Vanna<}u(Jaiyar. 

482 of 1918. 

„ Tiruvennainattur (SA.) — Lands to temple by purchase 

from the sabha of Tiruvennainallur by Aparayitan 
Uttamasola Marayan. 429 of 1921. 

„ U<faiyargu<]li (SA.) — Twenty llakkdiu by Sembiyan 

Muvendavelan for lamp. 554 of 1920. 

„ UdaiyarguQi (SA.) — Gold for land for feeding five 
Brahmans in the temple at mid-day ; the donor was 
Nandi-puttan alias Sembiyan Muvendavelan. Men- 
tions talam and vat{\l , five of each. 593 of 1920. 

„ Uyyakkontfan Tirumalai (Tri.)— 140 sheep for two 

lamps (90 and 50) by Viranarayanan alias Sembiyan- 
marayan, a perundanam of Vira-sola-Ilangovelar of 
Kodumbajur, to the temple of Karku<Ji t m Nandi- 
vanma-mangalam. J 470 of 1908 ; STL iii. 98. 

Year 11 > — Alambakkam (Tri.) — Land for lamp by a member of 
the dlunganam of Dantivarma-mangalam. Mentions 
Marpidugeri in Dantivarma-mangalam. 

711 of 1909. 

* 815 of 1903 n-d, records lamps by Sembiyan HangovSl alias Pttdi Xditts 
Pi4Sran. 

t Ancient DCvSram name for UyyakkongSn Tirumalai— H. K Sastri. 

% In the 10th year of RSjarSja 1 this name was changed into RSjSsraya* 
catm. For Vira*51a IJangov^l, see 323 of 1903- ARE , 1909 II 37. 

[ 400 ] 



PARAKESARI 


Year 11 . — Andanallur (Tri.) — Sembiyan Irukknvej alias Pudi 
Parantaka built the stone temple (Vatatlrtlianiitha) and 
. granted land to it with the permission o£ Parakesari. 

This land was made the kdni of Araiyan Virasojan by 
order of king in year 18. J559 0 £ 190:1. * 


PamjaravCulai (Tj.)— Lamp by one of the Madhurantakat- 
terihja-kaikkojar. 240 of 1923. f 

Tiruccutturai (Tj.) — Sheep for lamp by Cedi-mahu- 
deviyar, queen of the Malillu chief f Siddbavadatt- 
adigal. 193 of 1931. 

Ti rurerngat fa ngwli (Tj.)— Land sold by the assembly of 
Marugal for the endowment of a lamp. 62 of 1913. 

Tiriijipaf/tncnn (Tj.)— Thirty kalanjn gold for a lamp 
by 1 ’rithivl-gangaraiyar, § son of Mahudeva of l’angaja- 
nadu. 139 of 192S, 




Tiruvitftrimttrwhlr (Tj.) — -(lift, of 18 eating vessels 
( (alum ) weighing altogether 2t)2J patrnti and a large 
spoon (.s' taf(uram) weighing 5 ptdam for feeding 
Brahmans in the local sdiui — Tiruvidaimarudu- 
l \la ij/dr-kV((i~it(i nwn-pirdnvujarl: leu . 

m of 1895, Slf. V. 714. 




Cdah/artjudi (SA.) — Land for lamp by a lady, Nakkan 
l‘i ratal tiadovi alias Miuninudi-sdlat-talaik-koii, daughter 
of Arurdcvanar. ^ 3 of 11)20. 


Year 


12 (Tj.) — Remission of taxes by the big assembly 
of Tiruvalundur on land given for a llower-garden by 
Kannan Malian (thus UdaYainattiinda Muvvndavclar, 
headman of Nagan-kinli in Ambar-nadti. 


04 of 1925. 


* cf. 360 of ye;ir 25. 

+ Must bo ;i record of Uttama Co [a ARE. 1Q24 II 13. 

1 Et t vii, p. 135, for a Narasimhavarmau (of the time of Kanuaradcva) who 
had the title Siddhavapattacjigal. 

§ cf. 177 of Riijak, 2(6). 

1 485 of 1918 (iwl) from Tiruvenkatju mentions a laclv Aifiran Ambalatta- 


51 


[ 401 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 12 . — Kilappnlitvur (Tri.) — 180 sheep for two lamps by 
Adigal Paluvettaraiyar Kansan Sundara Solanar. 

120 of 1895 ; SII. v. 681. 

♦ 

„ Nangavaram (Tri.)-^okavidyadhara Brahmadhirajan 

reclaimed some land and presented it to the goddess 
Uma-bhattaraki with the previous permission of the 
sabha. ” 332 of 1903. 

„ Pallilconda (NA.) — Agreement by the assembly of 
Nandikampa-catm. to remove silt from the tank 
every year to the extent of 20 kuN with the interest 
on an endowment by a resident of Iraiyanseri in 
Kaccippedn. 474 of 1925. 

„ Sendalai (Tj.) — Mentions Palliyudaiya Kanakasena- 

bhatara, probably a Jaina. 7 of 1899 ; SIT. vi. 443. 

„ TirakkOl (NA.) — Paddy to lvanavlra-sittadiga]. Men- 
tions Sembiyan Sembottiladanar, son of Vidfd-vidugu 
Sembottiladanar, alias Ganapernmatiar. 

279 of 1916. 

„ Tiruccengdda (Sm.) — Gold for feeding Brahmans. 

628 of 1905. 

„ Tiruppahmam (Tj.) — Gift to temple by Pudi Kuttan of 
Maramangalam. 147 of 1928. 

„ Udaiyargutji (BA.) — 500 kalanj u gold. Image of Bury a - 
dC'va set up by Kundavaiyar * who made a gift of gold* 
25 faiJa Tt j it . for a lamp in front of it. 606 of 1920. 

„ VrddJidcalam (SA.) — Srlkoyil, snapana-mandapa, gopura, 

sdrrdlai and minor shrines constructed by Sembiyan 
Madeviyar, mother of Sri Uttama Cola, daughter of 
Malaperumanadigal, and queen of Oandaraditta-devar* 
son of Parantaka-deva alias Periyasolanar ; gift of 
gold ornaments and silver vessels to the temple by 
Udaiya Pirattiyar. 47 of 1918. t 

„ VrddMcalarn (SA.) — 45 sheep for half a lamp to 
Suryadeva of Tirumndukuni’am. 56 of 1918. 

* This name makes the inscription a record of the reign of R$jar3ja 1. 

f A record of Uttama C<5]a. 


[ 402 ] 



PARAKESARI 


Year 13 —Antjanallur (Tri.)— -Gold 30 port for lamp by Tingal- 
nimmadigal, queen of Sembiyan Irukku velar, invested 
with the fir, 357 of 1903. 

„ Metappaluvur (Tri*) — Gift of an image of Ganapati, a 
pedestal, and a golden flower by the temple manager 
Navalurudaiyan Kandan Tevadi to the temple with 
the permission of Adigal Paluvettaraiyar Kandan 
Sundara Solan. 381 of 1924. 

„ Ndngupatji (Pd.) — Refers to Yirasolan Uttamamlan. 

341 of 1914. 

„ Ti ruTckurugd vdr (Tj.) — Land by Semban Arulan 

Uttamanidi alias Dttamasola Muvendavelan * to nine 
persons for beating drums in the temple of Tiruvel- 
ladai-Mahadeva at Tirukkurugavur. 434 of 1918. 

„ Tirupplanam (Tj.) — Land to temple by Pudi Ivuttan of 
Mangalam in Nallur-nftdu. The king t was staying 
at Palaiyaru. 141 of 1928. 

„ Uyyukkotiddn Tirumalai (Tri.) — 90 sheep for lamp 
by a Brahman woman. 471 of 1908. J 

, t Vrddhdculam (SA.) — Dry land to Suryadeva by 

residents of Nerkuppai ; converted into wet land later. 

59 of 1918, 

Year 14 — Attar (Sm.) — Paddy to Tirumerrali Nakkar at Malaiya- 
manaru, a brahmadeya in Arriu'-kuriiim in Miladu, by 
three servants of that temple. 407 of 1913. 

„ Karjumiydmatai (Pd.)— Gold for feeding 15 Saivas for 
seven days during the Masi Makham festival of 
Ti r u me r ral i p-per u m an a< I igal at Tirunilakkunram, a 
c leraddna in Kunriyur-nadu. 334 of 1904. 

„ Paranddr (Ch.) — A transaction of the sabhii of 
Aparajita-catm. in Pu r isai -n fit t u p-pe r u i i darapp u ram . 

Mentions sabhai-variyam and eri-variyam . 

74 of 1923. 

• cf. 433 of 1918 (Year 15) 

t Identified with Uttarna OSla*/!^. 1928 II 3. 

t Earlier than 472 of 1908 of year 2 of Parakesari who took VTra PTtniJya’s 
head which is below thi». cf. 470 of 1908 of Parak. 10- ARE. 1909 II 37. 


[ 403 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear IL—Tirumalpuram (NA.)— Provision by Madhurantakan 
Gantjaradittar for bathing the image of the deity every 
month with 108 pots of honey, ghl % cord etc. 

280 of 1906. 

H Tirune<j,unga]am (Tri.) — Ght for agnikdrya * thrice a 
day. Gift made by one Govinda Bhatta who was 
enquiring into temple affairs on behalf of Uttama Cola 
Brahmadhiraja-kanmi Sembiy an V adapuraiyxir-nattu- 
Muvendavelan. 684 of 1909 ; SIL iii. 140. 

„ Ttruvaiydru (Tj.) — 90 sheep for lamp by Pal u vet- 

taraiyan Kansan Amudan. 252 of 1894 ; SIL v. 551. 

H Tiruvottur (NA.) — A defaulter tracked by the 

tiruvunnaUgai of the temple and made to pay for 
a lamp to be maintained by him. 

102 of 1900 ; SIL vii. 112. 

„ Tiruvottur (NA.) — Sheep lost in a raid (§Rrai) and 
200 fresh ones given by Udaiyar Sembiyan Mahadevi 
for two lamps. 104 of 1900 ; SIL vii. 114. 

,, Udaiydrgudi (SA.) — Gift of some tank-irrigated land, 
by purchase, by Kali-karrali, one of the Udaiyar- 
Karikala t-solatterinja-kaikkolar to seven musicians 
(uvaccar) for conducting the Sribali to Tirumuljur- 
udaiya Paramesvara of Tirumullur alias Simhavi$nu- 
catm., a brahmadeya of the Ka-nadu. 617 of 1920. 

Year 15 — Andanallur (Tri.) — Land for lamp by Pudi-Madevadigaf, 
queen of Kannaradeva. • 356 of 1903. 

„ Kanelpiiram (Ch.) — Sale of land by Managarattar ; 
temple called Terkirunda-nakkar. Mentions Kari- 
kalafolap-pillai(yar) in the above temple at Ka<Jumbi- 
dugu-mejrkappu in the city. 1 of 1906. 

• AgnikSiya— not aupasana ; hence tliere was no goddess in the temple 
ARE. 1910 IL 18. 

t This most be Xditya 11 ; hence the king of this record may be Uttama 
C5Ja. ARE. 1901 II 29. 


[404 ] 



PARAKESARI 


Year 15.— Kandpuram (Ch.)~ Land by purchase from the 
merchants of Katiclpuram by Xccan Senaccan of the 
Muttayalperjra-kaikholar for offerings to Karikalap- 
piUaiylir in the temple of Terkirunda-nakkar in the 
western block of Kadumbidugu in Kanci ; and gift of 
three 1cd§u for lamp in that temple. 84 of 1921. 

„ Kilappalnvur (Tri.) — Sheep for ghi. Mentions Paluvett- 
araiyar Mara van Kantian as having built the temple 
(Vatamulesvara). * 245 of 1926. 

„ Kudu miydmala i (Pd.) — Gold for lamp by a native of 
Malai-nadu. 328 of 1904. 

„ Mdmandur (Ch.) — 45| §dva-muvap-perCii}xi (sheep) for 
\ lamp by two persons contributing equal shares. 
The half lamp was to burn by day before Valisvaram- 
Udaiyar of Narasimha-mangalam. 

40 of 1888 ; SIL iv. 138. 

„ Melappaluvur (Tri.) — Land in Urattur as janmahhumi to 
Vengadavan Arangan alias Sembiyan Virainattuk- 
konar by the assembly of Kunrak-kurram, under 
orders of Paluvettaraiyan Kantian Maravan, with the 
condition that the donee should pay 25 talaccemmai- 
pon annually as fixed assessment (nikiiyirai) on the 
land. 356 of 1924. 

„ V rddhdcalam (SA.) — Money for ghi for lamp, deposited 

with the assembly of Arikulakesari-catm. 

46 of 1918. t 

Year 15, day 143 . — Vttaramerur (Ch.) — Land to Tiruvayodhyai 
PerumanacJigaL The Mahasabha took purvacamm 
and assigned to the god as iraiyih all the irai land in 
Pungodai-ptindi saying : “ kiujligajai vetfiyum amanju 
yum iraiyum epperppat\idum ko\Uipperddomdga vam” 

14 of 1898 ; SIL vi. 297. 

• cf. 219, 249 of year 9. King identified as Uttama Coja in ARE. 

1926 II, 19. 

t Either Parantaka I or Uttama C3Ja ARE . 1918 II 22. 


r 405 i 



THE COLAS 


Tear 16 . — Kllappahwur (Tri.) — Land as devadana (for offerings) 
by a private person. 244 of 1926. 

» Kilifanur (SA.) — Mahiisabha of Kilinaliir agree to make 
farmers contribute to annual repairs of a tank named 
after a person who gave money for the same purpose. 

160 of 1919. 

H K udi im iyd mu la i (Pd.) — Gold for lamp by a native of 
Malai-nadu. *150 of 1904. 

„ Lcdgudi (Tri.) — Gold by Kdkkilanadigal, daughter of 
Seramanar, * for lamps. Ill of 1929. 

„ Tindclccddvur (Tj.) — Land as imiyili to Mahfuleva by 
the Mulaparudaip-perumakkal of Tirukkarugaviir. 

33 of 1910 ; SIL iii. 12d t 

n Tiruttam (NA.) — Sale of land by assembly of 
Tiruttaniyai. 4»$8 of 1905. 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Land for ardhaydma offerings by 

the ur of the village. 128 of 19 L4. 

„ JJkhtl (NA.) — Land to temple. Nilam 6gures as unit 
of land-measurement. The gift was made to Bhuvana- 
manikka-visnugrha by the Malrisabha, including the 
Sftmvatsara-vdriya and the rri - v drip a p-pennwt khi I at 
the request (vinnappam) of Cakrapani-nambi who was 
doing Hnhdryam for Perumfm-adigal. 

28 of mil; SIL iii. 114 

„ Urrn'yi vr (Tri.) — Provision for daily requirements of 

Tiruvadaitalai-perumfil at Uraiyur. 18d of 1907. 

ff Vdaiydrgudi (SA.) — Land by two mniyrir , and gold for 

its reclamation ; two batches of 80 and 20 Brahmans 
were to be fed for merit of the donors * uncle in tho 
choultry erected by them. 621 of 1920. 

* Queen of Parantaka I ARE\ 1929 II 27. 

f Uttama Coja or Parantaka I— H.K. Sastri, 

X Hultzscli identifies the king with Vijayalaya on account of the absence 
of distinguishing surnames. SII. i. 85, 148 ; and iii 12 (fotrod). 

[ 106 ] 



PARAKESARI 


Year 16.— Valappurana^u (Sra.)— Pirantakan Madevadigal alias 
6embiyan Madeviyar, mother of Gandan Maduran- 
takan alias Uttama Cola, deposited 100 Icalanju of gold 
with the urdr of some villages in KolUmalai-na<)u, 
the urdr agreeing to pay monthly interest to the 
sabha who were to dispose of it in the manner laid 
down. 503 of 1930. 


Vrddhdcalam (SA.)— Land and cooking utensils to 
Tirumudukunram-udaiyar for offerings in the evening 
by Irungonar Naranan Piritipatiyar. 51 of 1918. 


Year 16, day 33 — Uitaramerur (Ch.) — Land as irahjili to Sri- 
kurukjjetrattup-perumanadigal for ti ruccennadai after 
taking purvdcdram . 34 of 1898 ; SIL vi. 317. 


day 257 — Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Land to the temple of 
Mahfideva in the neighbouring village of Tittattur for 
tinurennudai by the Mahasabha of Uttarameriir : 
* J’urrdcamn-gontfu iraiyiliydya vaitta bhumiyd - 
vadu \ 4 of 1898 ; SIT. vi. 286. 


Year 20 — Kuttdlam (Tin.) — (Vc tttrfjritu) — Cows and sheep for 
lamps. 444 of 1917. 

„ Tiruttaugal (ltd.) — (Vuftehittu) — 31 cows for lamp to 

Tiruvengadanilai-porumanadigal at Tiruttangal by a 

resident of Kudauiir in Malli-nadu. 557 of 1922. * 

■ • 

Year 21. — Kudumli/dmalai (Pd.) — Mentions Madurantaka Iruk- 
kuvfdfir a has Accan Vikramakesariyar. 

335 of L904 ; Pd. 65. 

„ KudumiyCimnhti (Pd.) — Gift of a village by Madu- 

rantaka-Irukkuvel alias Adit tan Vikramakesari. 

* 

336 of 1904 ; Pd. 63. 

„ Kuttdiam (Tin.) — (Va(fehtttit) 26 sheep for lamp to 

Ku ttrdattu p* per u mai i ad i ga l by Dharmasetti alias 

Sajuiyanguvaiyau of the Manikkirfimam of Tenvara- 

nadu. 439 of 1917. 

* 

„ Tiruvndi (SA.) — 90 sheep and lamp-stand by a nativo of 
Adhiraj a-man galy apu ram . 363 of 1921. 

» Partntaka l ? ARE. 1923 ti 85. 


[ 407 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 22. — Knttalam (Tin.)— ( Vattehittu) — Land for lamp by 
Kandan Iravi on the occasion of a solar eclipse. 
Kuttalam is said to be in Tenvara-nadu. 441 of 1917. 

„ 27 ruceendurai (Tri.) — Land as deva dan a by Madu- 

rantaka Irukknvel alias Adittan-pudi to Tirnccenduraik- 
karralip-pariimesvara. *118 of 19011. 

„ TirvlclcaUttattai (Tj.) — Land for offerings by a member 
of the dhunjanattar of Amaninarayana-catm. in 
Yadgarai. 295 of 1908. * 


Year 23. — Tirne< % endurai (Tri.) — Land by Y i rasd la- 1 1 an go v (" l 

alia.' s Adittau t Tiruvorriyur-adigal on the occasion of 
his marriage, {rirahadaksinai). 323 of 1903. 




Tilfaisthdnant (Tj.) — Gift of 25 kalanja. of gold for 
which the sabhfi sells land for a lamp in the temple of 
Tirnneytlfmam. Among the boundaries occurs the 
phrase: “ Varaffnnrfjtenimdnd J rilakknhku-raitia 

277 of 1911 ; SIL iii. 127. 


hi 




Year 24. 




'Knttnhnn {JYin. y(V((f [eh itt ow for lamp by 

Ariyam-poduviyar, wife of a ...rana Pallavaraiyan. 

<142 of 1917. 

Tiravorriydr (Oh.) — Gold for lamp by Sembiyan Mu von- 
davelan alias Siittan 1 1 lagan, cliief of Yandalan-jtVi in 
T i r n n a r a i y ri r - n a d u (of the Sdla-nadu). The money 
was deposited on interest with Kulumanip-pfikkam 
near Mangada. Kate of interest 15 per cent. 

1 7 f» of 1912. 


Year 2 5 . — An da nail dr 
solan. 

i * 


(Tri.) - Land by a certain Araiyan Vira- 

3GUof 1903. § 


* Text gives year (23). Parantaka I. ARE. 1009 II 37. 
f Regnal year (2)3 — first figure being doubtful. 

J Wife of Parantaka Ilangn'^ar who gav^ some land in year 13 of 
Rajakesari (Gantjaraditya). After Gamjaiaditya wliO ruled 18 years, tliere must 
have been atleaft four kings before A.D. 985 -AriAjaya, Sundara*Cola< Parantaka 
II, Xditya II and Uttama, of whom the first probably and the third and fourth 
were Parakesaris. This record may be one of AriAjaya whose records are 
otherwise unknown, or better Uttama Cola— 1I.K, Sastri. 


§ cf. 359 of year 11. 


t 4«8 J 



PA BAKES ARI . 


Year 25.— Kuttdlam (Tin.)— (Vatteluttu) - Nine llakkUu for 
lamp by the nr of Tirukkamanjur in Kalakkudi-nadu. 

443 of 1917. 

Year 26 .—Tiruccengfyu (Sm.)— Gold for feeding Brahmans. 

639 of 1905. 

Year 27. — Kuttdlam (Tin.) — ( Vatteluttu ) Lamp to Tirukkurralattu 
Mahadeva. 438 of 1917. 

„ Tiruccengd^u (Sm.) — Gold for feeding Brahmans. 

631 of 1905. 

Year 28. — Kumhakonam (Tj.)— Gold for lamp. 246 of 1911. 

„ Tirucceng<\lu (Sm.) — Gold for feeding. 638 of 1905. 

Year 31. — Kanydkutndri (Tv.) - {Vatteluttu) Fragment. 

TAS . i. p. 237. * 

Year 32. — Kudurn iydmala i (Pd.) - Gold for lamp by Mayilai 
Tindan alias Avandiyakopa-Pallavaraiyar of Pudnk- 
kudi. 322 of 1904. 

Timccatturai (Tj.) — Gold, 25 kalaaju, for lamp by a 
native of the Pandya country. 

57 of 1895 ; STL v. 614. 

Year 33. t — T iruppaldttiirai (Tri.) — 90 sheep for lamp. 

252 of 1903. 

Year 34. — Sornur (Tri.) — Gold for lamp by a native of Sirrur in 
Miy-mala-nadu. 205 of 1917. 

„ Sucindram (Tv.) — {Vatteluttuy 50 sheep with Paradai- 
sabhaiyar for lamp, to Nanjinattu Tiruc-civindiarattu- 
mfideva. 81 of 1896 ; X EL v. p. 42 ; TAS. i. p. 237. 

Year 35. — Kuttdlam (Tin.) — (Pa//e/u^u)-Six buffaloes for lamp 
by a native of Vallapuram in Mala-nadu. 447 of 1917. 

Year 36. — Sinnamannr (Md.) — ( Vatteluttu ) Lamp. The village 
is called Alanattup-piramadeyam Arukosarinaliur. 

443 of 1907 ; § STL iii. 109. 

• May bo Paraataka I . T, A, G. fcao. + Text ha* 23. 

t VijaysUaya (llultwch) - Parlntaka 1 <T. A. G, Rao). 

§ Parlntaka I ARE. 1908 11 51. 

[ 409 ] 


52 



THE COLAS 


Year 37 . — Tmtgdkarnam (Pd.) — Gold. 308 of 1904. 

Year 40. — Tiruvandarkoyil (Pondicherry.)— 90 sheep for lamp ; 

mentions Tribhuvanamadevi-catm., a bvahmadeyci on 
the northern bank of the Pennar. 376 of 1917. * 

The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following : — 

Marandai (Tin.)— {Vattehdiuy^^ for offerings to the 

Yisnn temple at Marandfiyanallur, a brahmadPya in 

Kalakkudi-nadu. 313 of 1918. 

• • • 

iSembiyanmaliadevi (Tj.)-158 pon ( kalanju ) for feeding, 

with the interest thereon, some persons on the day of 

Ivettai in the month of Cittirai, the natal star of 
• # 

Sembiyan-Mahfideviyar, the mother of Uttama Cola. 

489 of 1925. 

Tirvmalpurani (NA.) — 120 sheep for a lamp by the Cola 
queen Paricavan-mahadevi. 338 of 1906. 

TiruvimmUvnram (Tj.) — Money for lamp by a merchant 
of Virasojap-perunderu of Tanjfivur. 128 of 1911. 

Uitammerur (Ch.) — Gold for lamp to Jestaikoyilin 
kilaittali-mahadeva on the bank of the tank at Kumana- 

M • • 

pfidi in the town {ivvur). The *am vatsara - variyap- 
perumakkal were made responsible for maintaining the 
lamp. 10 of 1898 ; SII, vi. 293. 


# Pafantaka I ARE. 1918 II 22. 


[ 410 ] 



PARAKEiSARI vijayalaya. 

Tirunedungahtm (Tri)— Tribhuvana-cakravartin Kouerin- 
maikonijan. A gift of land according to an earlier 
charter of Parakeaari alias Sri Vijayalaya Cola-deva. 

675 of 1909. 

See under Parakesari s 


Year 2. + 1 . — Tiravllimilnlai 

•< »• 

439 of 1908. 

Year 4. — Kdacqmram . 

Sir. i. 85. 

Y ear 6 . — Tint vllim ilalsiu 

•* «• 

436 of 1908. 

Year 16 .—Ukkal. 

28 of 1893. 

Year 34. — Suclndram. 

81 of 1890. 


under Vikrama Cola : 

Year 5 —KVjnittur 164 of 1915, 

mentioning a gift in year 4 of Vijayalaya. 


[in] 



RAJAKfiSARI ADITYA I. 


TilUmthdnam (Tj .) — Tontja inadu-pavi na ( paravina ? ) 
Solan •palydnaikkok-kandandyi na Raj akesa ri varma . 

Gift of 100 sheep by Kadamba-madevi, wife of Vikkl- 
Annan on whom was bestowed the hereditary title 
Sembiyan Tamilavel with other marks of dignity by 
the Cola king and by the Seraman Sthanu Ravi. 

286 of 1911 ; SIT. iii. 89. 

See under Rajakosari : 


Year 2.— Tirumeyndnam. 

321 of 1910. 

„ Tirana ges vara / n . 

222 of 1911. 

Year 8. — Tillaisthdnam . 

38 of 1895. 

Year 9. — Sendahti. 

209 of 1926. 

Year 14. — Vedal. 

84 of 1908. 

Year 18. — Sendalai . 

13 of 1899. 

Year 23. — Tiruppalanam . 

161 of 1928. 

„ UkkaL 

19 of 1893. 

Year 24. — Nerkxmam, 

86 of 1908. 

„ Niyamtm . 

16 of 1899. 

„ Sendalai. 

208 of 1926. 

f , TakbVam . 

5 of 1897. 

Y ear 27 . — Bniltmadesa m. 

230 of 1915. 

M Tin ilikala kku n ram . 

n *» 

167 of 1894. 


under Parantaka I : 

Year 34. — Tondamdndd . 230 of 1903. 

under Uttama Coja : 

Year 14, day 216 . — Tirurmlpuram 286 of 1906. 


[ 412 ] 



PARAKfiSARI PARANTAKA I. 

See under Rajakesari : 

Year 3 — Kumbaknnam . — A dandam o£ 3000 on the city in Parim- 
taka’s 38th year. 255 of 1911. 

Year 8 — Tillaisthdnam — Kannaradevan a brother of Parantaka. 

38 of 1895. 

Year 2 — Tiruccendurai (Tri.) — (Parakesari). Land by Pfidi 

Aditta Pidari * on the day of a solar eclipse. 

310 of 1903. 

h acc&adai^ at (Tri.)— (Parakesari). Two gardens by 

Piidi Adicca Pii.liiri, queen of Arikula-kfsari, as 
vilappumm to the deity of the stone temple built by 
her. 319 of 1903 ; & ill. iii. 12G. 

S. 832 t — CendaUSr (NA.) — Death of Marali- Viinarayar alias 
Kudi-pari-tamlik-kamanar, residing in Igalmarai-man- 
galam, in a cattle raid at Cendattur. 

108 of 1921. 

Year 3 — Tiruccendumi (Tri.)— (Parakesari). Gold, 00 kaianju, 
by Pudi Adicca Pidariyar, daughter of Tennavan 
Ijangdvelar { and queen of Arikulakesariyar, son of 
l^ola-Peruniaaadigal, to the god of the stone temple of 
Candrasekhara which she had built at Tirucceudurpi, 
near lsanamangalam (Brahmadeyam Isfinamangalattu 
Tiruccendurai). The gold was weighed by vitjPIruju - 
(jufcal and left in charge of isanamangalattu Parudai ; 
interest at the rate of t\lni and padakku per pa 
yielding a total of 60 kalam per annum. 

dlC of 190;$ ; § $11. ixi. %. 

# May have been the daughter of Pudi or Majavan PudiyUr Hence, 

ParakStari of this record must be Uttama or Aditya II. The eclipse points to 

A. D. 972 in Uttama Coja's reign. II. K. Sastri. 

+ This shows that in A. D, 910 Parantaka had not yet conqucied the 

BSnas. 

J Another name of Majravan PttdiySr. II. K. Sastri. 

§ The king of this record was Gan<)ar5ditya. A. D. 956-7 ARE. 1909 II 38, 

But see p. 150 n. ante. 


[ 413 ] 



THE COLAS ‘ 


Year 3 . — Tirukkodikdval (Tj.)— Maduraikonda Parakesari. Copy 
of an old Pandya inscription, 11 of 1931, 

„ Tiruppalanam — Maduraikonda Parakesari. Thirty 

kalanju gold for lamp. 157 of 1928. 

„ Tiruvatfutiirai (Tj.) — (Parakesari). Purchase of land in 
Sifmnaiccnr by Karrali-piccan of Tiruvadnturai ,* who 
allotted it among one Tiruppadiyam-hymner, those 
bringing water for the sacred bath, and the pipers of 
the temple. 139 of 1925. 

Year 4, day 325 . — Ti ru villa i marudur (Tj.) — Mentions the using 
up in building the central shrine of stones with inscrip- 
tions registering endowments for lamps in the temple. 
Copies of these records were accordingly made ; and 
one of them was in the reign of the Kfidu-pattigal 
Nandipottaraiyar who had endowed a lamp called 
Ivumaramartanda. The order to copy and re-en grave 
the records was issued by a meeting in the Nfitakasala 
of the temple in which were present : ittevar 
srikdryam ti rutiakkada va Tim imu r-mbhrt iydrum 
Timvida imarudi l Nagarattdrum TirukkCtyil- 

ndaiydrgalum and two others, the accountant and 
manager of the temple, t 

199 of 1907 ; SII. iii. 124. 

Year 7 . — Madhurdntakam (Ch.) — Partin takadeva. Land by the 
Perungujri-Mahasabhai of SrI-Madhurantaka-catm., as 
tiruvidaiyattam to Ayodhya Perumal. 

120 of 1896 ; % SII. v. 991. 

t , Takkdlam (NA.) — Gold, 10 kalavju, by a lady for a boat 
to be launched in the big tank. The sabha of 
Parundur undertake to supply as interest 150 kadi of 
paddy for its maintenance, to be collected with the 
pahcavdra . 252 of 1921. 

♦ cf, 126 of 1925 of year 25. 

+ Probably the earliest record of the new temple. Either Parantakal 
or VijaySlaya. The earliest ascertainable inscriptions here are those of 
Parent aka. 

% Characters of a later time- SIL v. p. 377 n. 


[ 414 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


Year 'b.—Sholingur (NA.)— The king granted the revenue from a 
field called Vamsavilri (Vamfovarijanitan-nrpadeyam) 
for the maintenance of a tank called GiVa-mridhi 
on the bank of which the inscription is engraved on 
a rock. The execution of the grant was entrusted to 
the Ganga Prthivlpati II Hastimalla who was made 
Banadhiraja. Mentions battle of Yaljaja in which 
Prthivlpati distinguished himself. 

9 of 189(5 ; EL iv. p. 221. 

Year 10. — Kan Utat tang ini i (Tj.) — (Parakesari). 90 sheep by 
Madnrantakan-Gamlaradittan to Karundittai-srudi 
MahadGva. 42 of 181)7 ; SIL v. 1405. 

„ * TirurumVtrtr (SA.) — Madiraikonda Parakesari. Land. 

Mentions the king’s other name, Sri Parantaka- df*va, 

and an officer of his named Solasikha-mani Pallava- 

** • 

raiyan. A case of diversion of charitable endowment 
from one purpose to another closely allied : land set 
apart for the maintenance of a mahdtnatra who took 
care of the elephant which carried the srlbali was 
now employed to sound a gong {sajdai kottuvaddgu) 
as the old service had stopped. 425 of 190,4. 

„ Tiruvidaimarudur (Tj.) — Maduraikonda Parakesari. An 

endowment for the uvaccar . Mentions the agent 
of the Co} a king in Kongo, t 258 of 1907. 

Year 11 — Pullamangai (Tj.) — Maduraikonda. Land to temple by 
assembly. 558 of 1921. 

„ 77 ntccdifuru i (Tj .) — Maduraikonda. Gob l, palangasu 

weighing 25 kahwju for lamp with Pati-pada- 
mulattar. 64 of 1895 ; SIL v. 620. 

„ Tirucmtturai (Tj.) — Maduraikonda. 40 /ton by Cola 
queen Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar on behalf of her 

mother Nanguttiyar. 140 of 1941, 


• Text reads : vadu. 

t ARE . gives the date (30) ; but the text gives 10. 

[ 415 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 12 —Kllappalwur (Tri.) — Madiraikontja. Commander Nak- 
kan Rattan of Paradur gave 90 sheep for lamp to 
Tiruvalandurai Mahadeva, to commemorate the victory 
of Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Amudan<Janar when the 
Pandya king helped by the Ceylonese army attacked 
the Cola king at the battle of Vellur and died. 

m of 1926. * 

n TakJcolam (NA.) — Madnraikonda. Agreement of the 

assembly of Tiruvural to measure out 1125 marakk&l 
of panoavdra paddy due from the devaddna village 
Parundur by the mamklcal which would hold 7 ndli 
and 1 uri by the Rajakesari-nali. 261 of 1921. 

„ Tmtppdrkkadal (NA.) — The Mahasabha including the 
members of the year of the ku4umbu y 4tyta % -kalani>~ 
and v(t4a-kaljxni-vdriya)m , the Rhattar and others 
order the acceptance by the eri-mriyam of an endow- 
ment of 120 kalanju of mdri gold as the corpus 
from the interest on which were to be fed every day 
four Brahman apurvins versed in the Veda in the Salai- 
mandapa built by the donor. This was instituted for 
the merit of four warriors (ievakar) who died in a 
frontal attack ( nerri §enra) led by the donor, Sennip- 
peraraiyar, at Velur on the occasion when the Pandyan 
and Ceylonese kings came and fought a deadly battle 
(asti-katfai iexjda ndnru) with the Cola king (pern- 
manacjigal}. 693 of 1904 ; SIL iii. 99. 

„ Tinmdaiimrudur (Tj.) — Madiraikomja. Lamp. Men- 
tions Taipusam. 248 of 1907. 

n Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Rules for elections 
to the vdriyam . Title Parantaka at end. 

2 of 1898 ; Studies vi. 

Year 13 . — Tirukkalukkunram (Ch.) — ( Va^luttu ) Madiraikonda. 

A private gift of a lamp by Amurkko{{attu Karaik- 
kat|ur Nedumarccattan Sennip-peraraiyan and his 


* This was the second war. RSjasimha was the name of the PSgjya 
king and VelJUr was apparently in the Pan4ya country, cf# UdaySndixam plates 
of Pfthivlpati II, w. 10-11 APE. 1926 11 16. 

[4161 



PARANTAKA I 


mother Koyinangai. The sabhaiyar to protect the 
charity. 168 of 1894 ; EL imp. 281. 

Year 14 . — TillaistMnam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Sheep for lamp. 
Mentions village Parantaka-puram in Kongu-nadu. * 

290 of 1911. 

„ Tiruvaiydru (Tj,)— -Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp by 

queen Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar. 

242 of 1894 ; SII. v. 541. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Revision of rules 

regarding elections to the vdriyain . Titles of the 
king: Viranarayana, Devendra, Cakravartin, Pandita- 
vatsalan, Kunjara-mallan and Surasulamani. 

1 of 1898 ; Studies vi. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Gold, 12 ^ kahiuju, 
for lamp to Tiruppulivanattu Mahadeva given to the 
sabha by a member of the ydlunganam of the village 
(ivvur). 87 of 1898 ; SII. vi. 372. 

Year 15 . — Erode (Coi.) — Madiraikonda. Agreement of the people 
of Elukarait-tiruvayppadi-nadu to pay certain taxes for 
the worship of Vennaikkutta-nayanar in the temple of 
Pall ikon dal var at Irodu : — J patjam on each Jnidi ; 
} each from bridegroom and bride in marriages ; 
1 kunri and 1 manjddi of gold as Hudukattuppattam. 

167 of 1910. t 

„ Kdnclpuram (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. 270 sheep for three 
lamps for which three u 7 (Mu of ghl had to be supplied 
every day by Candaparakrama Man rad i and his descen- 
dants, on pain of a daily fine for default of 4| (?) at 
the (ihanmdsana. There is also an undertaking to pay 
one manjddi of gold every day to the ruling king 
{anrdtju kdvukku ) if the charity fails {mufti!). 

SII. I 82. t 

# This must have extended partly into Mysore country, of. 28t of 1911, 
(Year 18) ; 457 of 1911 (Year 29) - ARE. 1912 11 13. 

t Characters of a later time. Perhaps copy of a genuine record, cf. 258 
of 1907 (Yr. 10) and Paiantaka records from Tiruccengo^u. ARE. 1911 II 20. 

t SII, i 83 is similar- 180 sheep. 

[417] 


53 



THE COLAS 


Year 15 . — Kudumiydmalai (Pd.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp 
at each of two temples. Mentions a person with the 
surname Arikulanta-varana-Peraraiyan. 345 of 1904. 

„ K uqlwn i yam ah < / (Pd.) — Madiraikonda. Gifts of gold 

for lamps, one each, in the temples of Tirumiilatta- 
nattu-pornmanadigal and Tirumerral i-perumfmadigal 
by two persons, viz., one of the Pillaiyar Kodandar * 
madaippal] ip-pendir (7i krdanj u for nandclvilakku ), 
and one woman engaged for making sandal (mnda) to 
the same prince (3 kalanju for pagalrilakku). 

347 of 1904 ; 67/. iii. 101. 

„ Uttaramerar (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Land to temples of 
Tiruppulivanam and Tulavarattali. The ur who sold 
the land and got its price, undertook themselves 
to perform the duties connected with the charity, 
though ordinarily the samvatsam-variyam did so. 

8 of 1898 ; 67/. vi. 291. 

Year 15, day 55. — Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Rules for 
testing gold (pon samahjasa n-ganbada rkku) by a com- 
mittee specially constituted by ejection for the purpose 
by order of the sabha. 12 of 1898 \ 67/. vi. 295. 

Year 1G. — Brahmadesam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. The assembly 
Anja^tasam fixes the remuneration to the tank 
accountant. The korru was four n<Vj of paddy every 
day, and seven ka 7 jinju of pure gold every year, and a 
pair of cloths (orawii k-k u m / ) . Each accountant had, 
while presenting the accounts every year, to undergo 
the ordeal of red-hot iron ( mala) ; if he passed the 
ordeal successfully, he got pddaMm ( P quarter of the 
surplus) as bonus ; else he was fined 10 Imladju ; no 
corporal punishment was to be inflicted. 

22G of 1915. 

„ Kiulum iydmalai (Pd.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp by 

a native of Kodungojur in Malai-niblu. 351 of 1904. 

„ Tirundmanalldr (SA.) — 400 sheep for 4 lamps by the 
king’s son Kodandarama. 379 of 1902 ; 67/. vii. 1009. 

* Same as KodandarSma of 318 of 1904, n-d. ARE. 1905. II. % 

K^dangantma Rajudityui the eldest son of Parantaka, H. K. Sastri, 

[ 418 ] 



PABANTAKA I 


Year 1 0.—TintppummUyam (Tj.)— Madnraiyum Ilamumkorvla * 

** • • 

Seven cows for ghl by two persons. :\\\\ 0 f 1927. 

Year 16, day 222— Ut tarn nur fir (Oil.)— Madiraikonda. Land 

bought from ryots by order of assembly for renewing 

and widening a road which, owing to a Hood, had 

become a dit for nse oven by c title. Tins garden 

committee executed the order of the assembly. 

«/ 

9 of 1898 ; Sir. Vi. 292. 


Year 17.- 


ft 


?> 


ft 


ft 


tt 


Jlmhniadtsam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. 325 l u 7 i of 

land for offerings by Nallnlan-Uradimagan Attamutti. 

224 of 1915. 

Pr ran gig fir (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Sale of land by 
sablia of Peringiir. 200 of 1900. 

a5rh'<ititf(en ( Tri.) — Madiraikon la. Thirty poa by sein- 
n\ai-p(indnr((k-bd for lamp, forty for camphor, and one 
for cotton wick (pafijudiri ) ; and a silver lamp-stand 
{nitai-rihikhu). Tiru varan ga-sabha took charge of the 
endowments. 72 of 1892 *, SIL iv. 519. 

Tirm'i'nin'unhuntli (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 10 hOanju 

gold for lamp by Gunuvan Sfiratongi, one of the retinue 
( pa rim rant ) of Numbiraftiyar Armnoli-nangai, the 
daughter of Paluvettaraiyar. 

299 of 1901; SIT vii. 520. 

Tiruppalanain (Tj.) — Madiraikon la. G:>1 1 by Kalian 
Accapidiiri of Kolumbalur. 1 4<> of 1928. 

Tiru ridaimarud fir (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Paddy by 
inhabitants of Tiruvilai-ua In. 215 of 1907. 


Year 18 . — PaUamangai (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Royal gift as 

hud i-nl kkiya-dP t nda nam of five and odd rch of 
unalienated land yielding 500 kalam of paddy and 
5 kalanju of gold to Tiruvfilanclurai-Mahrideva. 

555 of 1921. 

* Earliest mention of conquest of Ceylon so far known occurs only in year 
37. Perhaps this title was assumed . after Ve{Ttr and fully justified only later. 

ARE. 1927 II 10. 


[ 419 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 18. — Tillaisthdnam (Tj .)— Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp. 

Mentions Kongap-peruvali. * 281 of 1911. 

„ Tiruvitjaimarxidvr (Tj .) — Madiraikonda. Gold for a 
lamp by a merchant of Kumara-mattandapnram in 
Tenkari-Tiraimur-mula. 262 of 1907. 

Year 19. — KlTappahwur (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep with 

sabha of Sirnpaluvur. Lamp by Dandi Adigalar of 

Umbajappadi. 236 of 1926. 

„ Pdllikonda (NA.) — Madiraikonda. A rdhama ndapa of 
Naganathesvara temple built by Karuvili Muttaraiyar. 

476 of 1925. 

M PUlaipdkkam (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Regulations for 
election of members to the assembly by the wards of 
Ninravur in Palkunra-kottam. 176 of 1930. 

•* *• • 4 

M TakJcolam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. 800 kadi of paddy 
left with Manayil-kottattu Tiruvural-purattup-pondaip- 
pakkattu sabha. Interest rate of 4 ncili per kadi per 
annum yielding in all 100 kd(Ji ; the man who came 
to collect this interest was to be given two meals a day 
(nisadam imnrfn §~>ru). 8 of 1897 ; SIL v. 1371. 

n Tint vidaima rudtl r (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp. 
Mentions Nambirattiyar Kdkkilan(adigaJ). 

261 of 1907. 

„ Vedal (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Mentions V inn agar Vayira- 
megan and a Kalamukha Dasapuriyan t of the Hiirita 
g5tra and Apastamba sutra. 85 of 1908. 

Year 20. — Tiruppaldttxirai (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. 20 htlanju 
gold for lamp by vajavan tamakkai-yurmaiyalaiia 
Afinjigai Adittan. 255 of 1903 ; SIL viii. 648. 

H Tiruvidaima rudu r (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for 

green-gram offering. Forty Imlrmju deposited in 
parts with the sabha and ur of Tiraimur. 

201 of 1907. 

• cf. 290 of 1911 (Year 1*) 

t cf. 129 of 1907 from KotJumbSliir (VikramakSsari). MSlp&}i bad a 
ma{ha of Lakulisa Pasnpatas, perhaps a branch of the K^lUmukhas, at the 
beginning of the 11th century A. D, ARE, 1909 II 37. 

[ 420 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


Year&Q % ~Tiruvorriyur (Ch.)— Madiraikonda. Mentions wife of 
Kerala Ku(j;u)mban alias Parakesari Muvendavelar 
of Valudi-val-mangalam. 173 of 1912. * * * § 

Year 21. — Kandiyar (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Thirty katariju gold 
by an inhabitant of Taiijavur, and fifteen kalanja by 
another for mid-day offerings, converted into land. 
The Tirnkandiynr sabhai was in charge of the 
endowment, 14 of 1895 ; SIT. v. 5G9. 

„ Trtkknlam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Paddy and gold with 
Kayattiir Orar of Tiruvuralpuram in Panma-niidu of 
Manayil-kottam. 12 of 1897 ; SIL v. 1375. 

Year 22. — Kil/ippaljivilr (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep with 
sabha for lam]) by Nandin-kadatti, a pemtutti of the 
vPilmn of Gandaradittar t of Tanjavur. 241 of 1920- 

„ Siddhalingamadam (8A.) — Madiraikonda. Sale by the 
villagers (Cr) of Marndur, to Iraiyankudi-kilavan, oj 
the right of taking water for irrigation to halippatti 
through the sluice of the tank in their village, for a 
specified sum of money. X 37(> of 1909. 

„ Tiruvaiyarit (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lamp by 
a queen’s mother (Cola-nifuleviyar-taiigal-acci) Perumiil 
Tiruvarangi. 225 of 1894 ; SIT, v. 524. 

Year 23 . — Qranutm § (SA.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lamp 
by (people of) Tirumunaippadi. 744 of 1905. 

„ Oddantrmgal (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Land as vriputjj for 

repairing breaches in the tank in Tufiadu. 

20G of 1921. 


• The records of this king at Tiruvo^iyHr range from years 20 to 38 and 
are perhaps the earliest C<5Ja records in the Northern corner of the Tomjai- 
man<)alam, apparently not conquered by Xditya 1 (Rajak.) as no records of 
his are found there. ARE. 1913 II 18. 

+ Second son of Parantaka 1 and author of a Tbuvtsaippa\ already a grown 
up prince. ARE . 1926 II 16. 

X Text does not give the name of the person and the sale ; says simply 
1 writ tUkac-fid ukojuttfon \ 

§ Called ParUntaka-catm, in 193 of 1906. 

[ 121 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 23 + 1 . — Tafckolam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. 455 ft atari} u of 
gold for a Icolgai to the Tiruvund-Mahadeva temple. 

251 of 1021. 

Year 24 . — Jambai (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Mentions the building 
of a mandapa at the town of Vftjaiyur by Yiranarani- 
yar, queen of prince Gandaradittar and daughter of 
Solamadeviyar ; also endowment by Nagarattiir in 
whose name the mmitfajja was built. 108 of 1000. 


ft 


ff 


h 


♦> 




Kuttulam (Tin.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp by 
Pirantakan Uttamaslli. 440 of 1917. * 

MPhij/pahtrdr (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. Three* forehead 
plates made of gold collected from several sources 
{palisaipjnm and iandappon) by Kamakkodanar. An 
undertaking by the temple servants to burn two 
perpetual lamps in the temple with ISO sheep pur- 
chased out of 20 'katnnju realised from various sources 
in the 20th year of the king. «17S of 1924. 

TiUaixthfmmn (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Forty (Vyhm 

kctbthju t of gold equal to twenty pan for a lamp 
given by Pirantakan Arikulakfsari, the king’s son. 

25 of 1895 ; SI I. v. 5X2. 

Tirahlahlcd r (Tj.) — Madimikonda. Land for lamp by 
Xakkan Sandiradevi of the Javabhlmatali 1 at 

%■ » T 

Titfijftvur. -IS of 1910; SIL iii. 102. 

Tinn'idfiimarudur (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for 
lamp by a native of Anaimangalarn in Pattinak- 
kumun. 259 of 1907. 


• This an f l 448 of year (36) are the only two records of this king so far 
found n» the Ptindya country. 63 of 1005 from Anaimalai of year 33 still left 
it doubtful if bis conquest extended beyond the capital and its outskirts. 
The conquest of the whole Pancjya country is mentioned in the IMayeudiram 
and Tiruvalangadu plates. Eight VatuljUtn records from Kuttalain (Tin.) are 
also naturally to be assigned to this king. ARE . 1918 11 22. 

f Text has : ] ljikka{lati)jit , Ceylonese kaUhpi was 10 inafijudi , while the 
Tanjore one was 20. See also 156 of 1895, ARE. 1895, paragraph 12. 

X cf. S/I. il. 06 p. 292 ; ARE. 1910 II 16. 


[ 122 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


Yea* 2i.~Uttaramiirur (Ch.)*— Madiraikonda. \2\ 7ca 7 afiju of 

gold for lamp by the son of one of the yd\unganattdr . 
The eri-vdriyam of each year was to supervise the 
charity. 58 of 1898 ; SII. vi. 341. 

** Veppanganeri (NA.) — Madiraikonda. A grant of 1,000 
kuN of land by the assembly of Kavanur as erippatti. 

1GG of 1921. 


Year 25. — Brahmadesam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp. 

Ganapperumakkal to supervise. 222 of 1915. 

„ (Solar eclipse) BrnhmadeSam (NA.) — Madiraikonda, 

Fifteen leaf an ju of gold for lamp by Kilinallur 

Kilavau alias Sombiyan Kilarnattukkon of Kilinallur 
* 

in Sola-n ad u. The sabha and ur of Vadiyur agreed to 
supply the oil for the lamp. Mentions Vallavaraiyar. 

235 of 1915. 

„ Meiappuhivur (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. Undertaking by the 

assembly of Uttamadani-catm. for the daily supply of 
(j/tl for one lamp as interest on gold (9 fadanju-tip- 
pnkhu sembon ) received by them from the temple. 

359 of 1924. 


ft 




ft 


ft 


Siddhftlingawadain (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Land for 

music thrice a day during worship. 387 of 1909. 

Tilfaixthunani (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. An enquiry into 
temple affairs by royal writ; tin* Nagara-variyakkiittam 
lias part in the enquiry; fine of 12 kahtnju is le\ied on 
some defaulters, and is used for making a paikun and 
for festival. 31 of 1895 ; S1L v. 588. 

Tiruppurn mbiyam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep by 
the Nattu-manradigaj for lamp. 315 of 1927. 

Tinivddutumi (Tj.) — Maduraikonda. 11 wfi oi land for 
maintenance of pipers in the temple by Tirukkarraji- 
piecan * who is staled to have built the Gomuktisvara 


• 132 of 1925 (n-d.) is the name label of this person figuicd as worshipping 
* linga on the S. wall of the temple. 


[ 423 ] 



THE COLAS 


'1 


temple at Tiruva<Ji*turai. On receiving 16| kalSnju 
* of gold, the assembly of Sirranaiccur made the land tax- 
free. 126 of 1925. 

Year 26. — Erumur (SA.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lamp by 
a lady. The sablia agree to see that the lamp is 
regularly maintained. 381 of 1913. 

9f Kandiyur (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Land given in exchange 
for 10£ ha 7 an jit of gold endowed by Piljaiyar Paran- 
takan Uttamasili for a lamp ( pagalvilakku ). The 
sabha of Tirukkandiyur made the exchange. 

19 of 1895 ; SIT v. 575. 

n Melaiqxi]uv~( r (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. Gift of reclaimed 

land for lamp by Kadan Ptidi, a native of Nelvayil 
(Nelvayil-ndaiyan) in Migolai Vila-nadu. 

380 of 1924. 

„ Tirmcatiumi (Tj.) — Sheep for lamp by Nangtiri- 

jt 

nangai of Mayilarpil on behalf of her daughter Sola- 
si k human iyur, the queen of the Cola king. 

158 of 1931. 

,, Tirnvorriyur (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lamp 
and one Ceylonese (Jin) lamp-stand by a native of 
Sdla-midu. 184 of 1912. 

•4 * 

„ Tivuvonnyar (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. A part (of Tiruvorri- 

yiir ?) called Sura-sulamanip * -perundern. 

187 of 1912. 

u Udayendiram (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Resolution of 
sabhas of Kahjivayil alias I gal - manii * mangalam and 
Udayacandi*a*mangalam to live together as one village 
thereafter. SIT ii. p. 370 ; EL iii. p, 147. 

Year 27 . — Adigxtdi (Tri.) — Madiraikonda, Land for lamp by a 
native of Anbil, a brahmadeya in Kil-kurru, a sub- 
division of * Kilar-kur ru, to the temple of Tiruvadigu<Ji. 

106 of 1920. 


* Surname of Parlintaka 1 ARK. 1913 JI IS. 


[4241 



PARANTAKA I 


Year.27 Tillaisthanam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp by a 
" ' merchant of the Manigramam of Adittapura in 
Tiruneyttanam. The gold given for the purpose was 
taken charge of by Paradaya-nakkan Srikandan. * 

33 of 1895 ; SII. v. 590. 

„ Tiruccengodu (Sm.) — Madiraikonda. Money for a lamp 
entrusted to the sabha of Tiruccengodu, while the 
people of the eighteen districts (nil (tar) were to protect 
the grant. 040 of 1905. 


11 




Tiruvidaimaruddr (Tj. )— Madiraikonda. Land to main- 
tain a drummer ( u d uhkai- 1 ippd 1 1 ) who had to play 
on the Uihihhai thrice a day (nvlnru Sandiyum ). The 
land was given by an officer auditing temple affairs 
(srtfrdryam ardyhinra ), the sablia of Tiraimur, the 
nagarattar of Tiruvidaimarudil, the tirukkoyil-mjaiyar 
and the pati-padamulattar, assembled in the theatre 
{ndtaka-kdlai). * J 57 of 1895 ; 577. v. 721. 


Tinn'isahlr (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Provision for the 
supply of bathing water from the Kaveri to the deity. 
The village is called Avani-narayana-catm. alias Vein- 
barrur, a deraddna and hrahmadeya on the northern 
bank. 35 of 1907. 


Tiruvarriydv (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lamp 
by Devan Kesari alias Kunjaramalla t Pallavaraiyan. 

167 of 1912. 


Year 


28 . — Krwndr (SA.) — Madiraikonda. The sriuimdna was 
built of stone and the yhpura with adaparirdra 
erected by Irungolan Kunavan Aparajitan ; 3J rPli of 
land given by the same j»erson with the permission of 
the king, Soiapperumal Parantaka-deva, to the temple 
of Hirntirukknyil-bhatFira at Urumiir, for tiruccennal 
arcandhhoyu and the maintenance of the drummers 
for irlbali. 384 of 1913. { 


• cf. 31 of 1895 of year 25. 
t A surname of the king, ARE* 1913 II 18. 

J 379, 381 ami 382 with earlier regnal years in the same temple. Either 
the construction was finished earlier than year 28 or the earlier grants got 
engraved in that year after the completion ot the woik, ARE, 1914 II 15. 

[ 425 ] 


54 



THE COLAS 


Soar 28 . — Kllur (SA.) — Madiraikonda. 100 sheep for lamp to 
Tirukkovalur Tiru vlrattanattup-poimma} by the queen 
Rajadeviyar Tesadakki-perumanar* daughter of Mila- 
dudaiyar Kayirur Perumanar. 

279 of 1902 ; El. vii. p. 141. 

„ P&riya Varikkam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. 500 lmli of 
land by assembly to the wife and children of Sami- 
nayakkan, a hero who fell in a cattle raid in Varik- 
kiyam alias Candiraditya-mangalam. 

180 of 1921. 






Tirunamanallar (SA.)-- Madiraikonda. 90 sheep and an 
ihivihihlv by Citrakomalam, a female servant (paiiva- 
ratUV) of the queen Kokkilanadiga], mother of Haja- 
ditfcadeva, who * ordered the construction of the stone 
temple of Tiruttondlsvara (Bliaktajanesvara) at Tiru- 
nuvaliir in Tirumunaippadi. 

335 of 1902 ; EL vii. p. 133. 


Tiruppahinam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lump. 
Mentions the queen of Sojapperumanadigu!, Seyabhu- 
vana Cintamaniyar of Kavirippunipattimun. t 

137 of 1928. 


M 


Vedamnyam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for a lamp 
by Arnnidi-Kaliyan of Marodtir, an officer of Srl-Para- 
kesari. 445 of 1904. 


Year 29. — Bairak Hr (Mys.) — (Kanarese) Madiregonda. A moino- 
rial stone for a person who recovered the cows, slew 
and died. 457 of 1911 ; EC. x. Mb. 203. J 

„ BrahmadPsam (NA.) — Ma<liraikon«la. Gold diadem to 

god in charge* of the <ja naj^jeru makka I doing xrihar- 

yatn of Sri Pondaiidiattarakar. 202 of 1915. 

• * • 

* It is not clear if the mother or the son built the temple. See Venkayya 
ASI. 1905-6 p. 180 nn. 7 and 8. 

t cf. 46 of 1923 (Yr. 34.) 

X (P- Xxiv ) says that this is an isolated instance of such an early 

Kan. CHJa inscription and suspects a later date. But 290 and 281 of 1911 
(years 14 and 18) furnish evidence of Par an taka's sway in 1912 

11 13. And there is nothing against the genuineness of this record. II. K. Sastri. 
EL x. Additions etc. 


[ 426 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


Year 2$.—Gramam (SA.)— Madiraikonda. Gift of sheep for a 
lamp by Vejlangumaran, a native of Nandikarai-pnttur 
in Ma!ai-na<Ju and general of prince Rajaditya, * to 
Sri-miilasthunattu-mahadeva of the Sri-Ajrjruttali at 
Tirumndiytir. 739 of 1905 ; AST. 1905-6. p.180. 

„ Oramnm (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp by some servants 
(koyirpillaigal) of prince Rajaditya to the temple of 
SrI-ArruttaH Mahfidova. 745 of 1905. 

„ Cframam (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp by a servant of 
prince Rajaditya. 1H2 of 1906. 


KU-muttugur (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Records death of 
Vadu-navaran Varadan Tiindan in a cattle raid— {pern- 
manadikalan Mukkuttur torn holla mil (up-pa ft an), t 

1 of 1896 j El. iv. pp. 178-9. 

Tiruccamlr (NA.)— Madiraikonda. Lamp apparently by 
a native of Kodungoliir in Malai-nadu (Cranganore in 
Cochin ? ). Tirnccanur is called Tiruceokunur twice, 
and its sabhu mentioned. 2(30 of 1904. 


TirundmanaUur (SA.) — Madaraikonda. 100 sheep for 
a lump to the shrine of Agastyesvaru by a physician of 
PiJJaiyar Rajaditya. 325 of 1902 ; STL vii. 954. 


M 


Tirundtnanalldr (SA.) — Maduraikonda. Two lamps to 
Rajaditya ItSvara and Agastyesvara by a servant ot 
llaj adit yadeva. Also twenty sheep for offerings at 
ardhayfuna. 347 of 1902 ; SIL vii, 977. 


Tiruvnrriyfir (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Thirty ha'anju of 
u rharccemmn i-pon for lamp to Mahfidova by Iravi 
Nili, daughter of Vijayaraga-deva, J the Keralaraja* 
The amount was apparently invested on a field in Tiru- 


• cf. 735 of year 36, 

t Portrait of warrior. Palaeogr. same as Tirukkalukk unram inscription 
(168 of 1894) of year 13. The raid was by the \V, Ganga king. {ARE, 
1896 paragraph 6 ) 

t Perhaps the sou or brother and successor of Sthanu Ravi, if at all ho 
was an actual ruler of the Cera country. II, K. Sastri. 


f 427 j 



THE COLAS 


vo$rlyfir which yielded an animal interest of 4£ 
kctfaFiju at the rate of 3 manjcufi per kalanju. 

169 of 1912 ; SII. iii. 103. 

Year 29 — Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Gold, urkarccem - 
•max 40 kalanju, for feeding a learned Brahman by a 
native of Ettiyakuricci in Pandi-nadu who had 
accopted service in the temple ( karmiyay-vandu ). 

182 of 1912. 

Year 30 — Kumaramangalam (NA,) — Madiraikonda. Death of 
Manukulan Singaperuman in a cattle raid ( erumait - 
torn) after recovery of the cattle. 186 of 1921. 

„ Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Gold by Kfiri- 
Accan of Ayirattaji in Kilar-kurram and the merchants 
of the village for burning lamps in the temple . 

164 of 1928. 

>, Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Sixty kalanju gold 
for two lamps by Kodamlaraman, eldest son * of the 
Cola king Farakesari. Part of it, thirty kalanju , was 
perhaps borrowed on interest in the 35th year of the 
king by the ur of Vellivayil at the rate of 3 ?nanjaiji 
per kalanju per annum (15%) with the undertaking to 
provide two meals a day for the person who went to 
collect the interest. 164 of 1912 ; SIL iii. 105. 

„ Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp by 
Arindigai Perumanar, son of Cdla-perumfinadiga!, to 
god Siva at Adhigrama. Thirty kalanju , t called 
niftka in the Sanskrit part, formed the amount of 
the endowment. 170 of 1912 ; SIL iii. 104. 

Year 31 — Grfimam (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Gift of vessels by men 
who belonged to the (army) of prince Rajaditya-deva. 

187 of 1906. 

„ Kattamacci (C.) — Madiraikonda. Sale of land by 

villagers, (ur). 61 of 1907. 

# i. e. Rajaditya of the Leyden grant, cf. 230 of 1903 (Yr. 34) and 318 of 

1904 (n.d.) ARE . 1913 II 18. 

t Invariably about 80 grains— H. K. Sastri. 

[ 428 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


< 


Year 31. — Takkolam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Gold by queen of 
Govinda Vallavaraiyar and the daughter of the Cola 
king Parantaka-devar for lamp in the Tiruvuyal- 
Mahadeva temple at Takkolam, which the residents 
of Sembulalai undertook to maintain. 

245 of 1921. 

„ Takkolam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Similar gift by queen 
Vlramadevi, * the residents of tJradagam agreeing to 
maintain the lamp. 246 of 1921. 

„ Takkolam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lamp 
by a native of Tenur on the banks of the Yaigai in the 
Pandi-nadu. 24H of 1921. 

„ Ti nilikolambiyu r (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Sale of land 

made tax-free by the assembly of Duvedimangalam, a 
brahmadeya in the same nadu as the temple, viz., 
Peraviir. The standard for the gold was urkarccem - 
mai. t 50 of 1925. 

„ Tirumalpuram (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp by the 

Cola queen Amudan Perral alias Pallavan Madeviyar 
of Kanattur in Umbala-uFulu. 303 of 1906, 

„ Tirumalpuram (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp by the 

queen Amani-madeviyar who came from Pandi-nadu. 

314 of 1906. 

„ Tirundmanallur (SA.) — Madiraikonda. 100 sheep for 

lamp by a servant (dnai-al) of Rajaditya-dSva. 

330 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 959. 

„ TiruppaJanam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Land by the nurse 
(tddi) of the Cola king Parantaka. Mentions Karikala- 
karai among the boundaries. 

129 of 1895 ; SIL v. 693. 

„ TiruppaJanam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 96 sheep for lamp 

by Poriyaluman, brother-in-law of Ivumukkaraiyar. 

134 of 1928. 


• Same as the queen mentioned in 245 of 1921. 

t We have also : falangd,stno^um oppadu , cf, SII. iii p. 229, ARE » 
1925 II 10. 


r 429 ] 



THE COLAS 


f* 


Year 31. — TiruwiySru (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Five veli of land 
for feeding Sivayogins, given to NiyamadhanasvamigaJ 
sisya-prasisya-vargattar by Irumadisolap-pallavaraiyan 
alias Namban Aiyaradigal. 241 of 1894 ; SIL v. 540. 

„ Timvaiydru (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Silver lamp and 
land by the Queen of the Cd}a king, Vajavan-Madevi- 
yar. the daughter of Niranayp-pfidiyar. 

m Of 1894 ; SIL V. 547. 

Year 32. — KV-mfattugdr (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Marks the spot 
whore a tiger was killed by Kumaranandi Pulalappan 
of Yadagarai-Mukkuttur. 

2 of 18% ; EL iv. p. 179. * 

„ Tirundmanalldr (SA.) — Madiraikonda. 100 sheep for a 
lamp to Tiruttdnrisvara alias Raj ad it y a Isvara by a 
servant of prince Rajaditya-deva. 

326 of 1902 ; t SIL vii. 955. 

„ TimUani (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Land to Subrahmanyft 

temple apparently by one ftirakrsari Mnttaraiyan. 

439 of 1905. X 

„ Tiruinljmihthri (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Sheep for lamp. 

440 of 190S. § 

„ Uttukhldu (Cli.) — Madiraikonda. Coiistruction of a 
tank. 347 of 1906. 

Year 33 — Anaimalai (Md.) — ( VntteJnttu ). Madiraikonda. Re- 
cords the digging of a tank called Kaliyaneri after the 
donor Marudurndaiyan Arunidi-Kaliyan, an adigdri of 
the Cola king. Mentions the temple of Narasinga- 
perumanadigal on the Tiruvanaimalai. 

63 of 1905 ; SIL iii. U)6- 

► 

• Palaeograplncatly same as No. 1 of year 29. There is a bas-relief of a 

man fighting a tiger with his sword. 

t 328, 336, 348 are similar gifts of servants of K. in the same place. 

I Said to be * apparently later than Riijaraja I,’ but not explained how. 

ARE . 1906 II 21. 

§Oaa pillar— *cf. 436 of 1908 of Parak. Year 6. ARE. 1909 II 35. 

[ 430 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


* 

—Bralvmadeiam (N A.)— Madiraikonda. Twelve Icalanju 
of gold for a lamp by Alagasarma-kramavittan, son of 
Ku(Jal Kilar Manisivaohatta Sarvakratukkal, one of the 
ci\unganam of Rajamalla-catm. 218 of 1915. 

Kdvanur (NA.) — Madiraikonda. 400 Kuli of land for 
lamp to Sri Karapurattu Perumaj by a member of the 
dlunganam. 1G1 of 1921, * 

Ki/dr (SA.) — Madiraikonda. 100 sheep for a lamp to 
Tirukkovalur Tiruvirattfmattu Mahfideva, by a Malai- 
yana-orraiece vagan of the army of Pillaiyfir Arikula- 
kesuri. 280 of 1902 ; t EL vii. p. 141. 


Tirunumarialldr (SA.)- 
lamp by a servant of 


•Madiraikonda. 100 sheep for 
Rajaditya’s Malaiyanaparivara. 
343 of 1902 ; 677. vii 973. 


Vdaigdrgudi (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Three rrli of land 
by Nandisiruppiran alias Ananta-Vikramappf*raraiyan, 
a tnahdttuVra, for feeding twenty-five Brahmans ; also 
gold for two perpetual lamps in the temple at Tiru- 
anantisvaram. 539 of 1920. 

Year 34. — Knriladi — (Tj.) Gold, 10 hihiuju. for lamp to Tirueca- 
daimudi Mahfideva, by wife of Vimalankusan 
Edarnikki, an inhabitant of Salakkiramam in the 
Pundya country. 287 of 1301, 677. vii. 507. 

„ Pulullur ((Mi.) — Madiraikonda. Ten Lahtnju of gold by 

* 

the queen Seyyabhuvana-cintainaniyar for lamp at 

j* ^ 

the shrine of Sri-Uagiiavu in the temple of Tiruva- 
yoddhi at Pulvelur in Kvirkottam lt> of 1923, 

„ Sum dr (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. Kvmhi pu/li (mum)ma(diy 
hhirmu\rd)mi idurittu /tadai. 

<»S of 1890 ; 677. iv. 392. 

„ TiUaiMhunatn (Tj.) — Madiraikoiida, 90 sheep for lamp 

by queen Malllsvarattu Nambirattiyar Tennavan- 

niahfuleviyar alias Narayana Nanguri Nangaiyftr, 

♦ 

* Pillar bearing the inscription apparently brought ft om tlu* neighbouring 
Perurual temple. 

t Engraved in continuation of 279 of Year 28. 

[ 431 ] 



THE COLAS 


called here Sola-pernmanadigal Mahadeviyar. 

44 of 1895 ; SIL v. 601. 

Year 34 . — Tiruttani (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Land by the 


assembly. 449 of 1905. 

Tiruvaiydru (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp by queen 
Cojasikhamani, who was Mayilappi Nanguri 


Nangaiyar magaiar. * 226 of 1894 ; SIL v. 525, 


U 


Tiruvorriyur (Cli.) — Madiraikonda. 96 sheep ( [navati 
in Sans, part) for lamp by Martin Paramesvaran alias 
Sembivan Soliva-varaiyan of Siruknlattur, 1 who 

* •i 1 « • 

captured Sitpuli, t destroyed Nell nr, and on roturning 
from there, made a grant to the temple of Maliadeva 
at Tiruvovviyur.’ {SVpiCiyai-yenndu Nellaraljttu 
mindu pod a gin run). The donor is called Viraklrti 
in the Sanskrit verse at the beginning. 

160 of 1912 ; SIL iii. 108. 




1 * 


Tondarndndd (C.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for feeding 

1,000 Brahmans on certain festival days. Mentions 

temple of Kddan laramesvara alias Adityesvara } and 

a certain Pallipptidaiyiidaiya Vaglsvaraqnmdita- 

bhattara. 230 of 1903. 

• * 

Uj/yakk'jndd/i Ti rnmalui (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. 90 

sheep for lamp to Tirukkayku ji-l^munesvara of Nandi- 
panmamangalam, a hrn/unudPya on the southern bank, 
by Pirantakan Madevadigalar, the wife of Pirantakan 
Gandaradittadevar § and the daughter of Malapenimal. 

96 of 1892 ; SIl. iL 75 ; iv. 543. 


* cf. 44 of 1895 above (same year). 

lie must have been the E. Cyjukya Bhmu II or one of his subordinates. 
ARE . 1913, II 18. Perhaps a later member of the Neada dynasty to which 
Prthivi Vyagbra, the enemy of Udavacandra, belonged. II. K. Sastii. cf. 23(> 
of 1912 n-d. 

X Venkayya thought that this name was connected with Kajaditya (or 
Gaiujaraditya). 164 of 1912 (Yr. 30) makes it clear that Kajaditya had 
the title Kodan^arama. But Aditya died at Ton(}amafu(;tIr and the temple may 
have taken its name from him. Ue might have had the surname Kodamjyrama, 
H. K. Sastri SIL iii. 105 i.t 164 of 1912. 

§ The author of the Tiruvisaifp7i-\ Iultzich, SIL ii. p. 374, contra 
Venkayya on 222 of 1903 of Rajak. Yr. 4. 

[ 432 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


Tear 35 .—Emappfrur (SA.)— Madiraikonda. Land by a Brahman 
for a flower-garden to supply daily a garland six spans 
long to the deity. 527 of 1921. * 

„ Takkolatn (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Sale of land, house 
sites and certain privileges by the headman of Pasali 
in Pasali-nadu to residents of Anaikaraipudur in con- 
sideration of their maintaining a sacred lamp in the 
temple of Tirnvural Mahadeva. 254 of 1921. 

„ TirunamannHur (SA.) — Madiraikonda. 100 sheep for 
lamp by a servant of prince Rajaditya. 

329 of 1902 ; STI. vii. 958. 

» T iruvaduturai (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Remission of taxes 

oil land purchased for the temple by Kandan Sattan of 
Ncrkuppai in Tahjavur kiiryam, by the assembly of 
Sinninaiccur for money received from the donor at the 
rate of 1^ kalanju per ma. This and another piece 
of land got from the same assembly by Tirukkarvali- 
piccan (122 of Year 38) were for the maintenance of 
servants who blew the conch and horn, held the 
parasol ( vitanam ) and looked after the flower-garden. 

125 of 1925. 

„ TimviUjutumi (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Fourteen veil of 
land bought from the Tiraimur sabha and the Tiru- 
vidaimarudil nagarattar. Mentions Palangaviri among 
boundaries. 149 of 1895 ; STL v. 713. 

„ Tiruvovriyur (Oh.) — Madiraikonda. Fifty kalanju of 
gold for feeding two Mahavratis every day, by Iladaip- 
perarai yan alias Solasikhamani t -Pallavaraiyan. 

168 of 1912. 

Year 35 + l.—TUlahtMnam (Tj.)— Madiraikonda. 25 kalanju 
gold for lamp deposited with the Pati-padamnlattar. 
Another gift of 15 pon for ttvuvanudu to Kalangac- 
cmlar-nitta-hhnjaga. 43 of 1895 ; STL v. 600, 

• Text give* date 34. 

+ Surname of Parantaka. AKE, 1913 II 18, 


55 


[ 433 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 36 — Ordtnam (SA.) — Madiraiboiuja. Records that Vejjan- 

gnmarati, the Keraja general of prince Rajaditya, son 

of Madhnrantaka, built of Stone a Siva temple 

(Arrnttali-Mahadeva) at MauHgrama, i.e., Mudiyur 

on the Pennai river. The record is dated Kali 4044 
• • 

and Kali day 1,47 (70)37 corresponding to 14th 
January, Saturday, 9411 A. D. 

735 of 1905 ; ASL 1905-6 pp. 182-3 , 

EL viii* p. 261. 

„ KVappaluvur (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. Agreement by three 
servants of the temple to put up two picotahs ( Htam ) 
for water for bathing the god and for the flower- 
garden for money received. 218 of 1926. 

„ KuttdJam (Tin.) — ( VattehUtu ). Madiraikonda. Two 

lamps by the headman of Kilinallur. 

448 of 1917. 

„ TirmTujuturai (Tj.)— Madiraikonda. Land, after pur- 
chase (tax-free) from the assemblies of Sivu-puliyur 
and Sirranaiccilr, for the maintenance of two hymners, 
two gardeners, and two maid-servants for gathering 
flowers for garlands, for offerings in the temple, and 
for feeding, under the supervision of the donor’s des- 
cendants, the Sivaydgins and the Mfihdsvaras on the 
seven festival days beginning with the asterism Mtila. 
Mentions Madapati often. Ill of 1925. 

„ Tiraveriimbur (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. Sale of land by 
the Perungnn-mahasabha of the brahmndeya Srikan- 
tha-catm., for “ tlppokkuc-cernhon hxlartjil per Uu urai - 
yum tulaiyum vahwddadu ivvur-fafu kalldr-komkt 
pm padinainga 7 anju ” and another 15 kaJauju for 
iraikdvabdra vyum on the same land, 

100 of 1892 ; #//. iv. 547, 

Year 37 . — Brahmadesam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. 14^ kalanju gold 
for lamp by one of the dlunganattar of Rajamalla- 
catm. in Tiruvegambapuram. 217 of 1915. 


•I 

U’ ’ 


[ 434 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


Year 37 .—Ldlgutji (Tri.)— Madiraikonda. Land for two Brahmans * 
chanting the Tiruppadiyam thrice every day in the 
temple of Tirnttavatturai Mahadeva. 99 0 f 1929. 

„ Kdnclpumm (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Sale of lands in 

Kannamangalam to the temple of Anantanariiyana- 
Paramasvumin of Kaccippedu who was pleased to lie 
on hia serpont conch in the Tiruvehkfi (the Vt'gavati 
river) (Tint) 'ehka-a uu i-kidandaruli nn) by some 
private persons of the same village for 367 lalflnju. 
gold. 21 of 1921. t 

„ KVappahivur (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lamp 

by Manarkndi, a gaijattdn of Mnnpfdai in the Milalaik- 
kurr.uu in I’andi-niidn, 230 of 1926. 

* 

M SrhiivdsanaUar (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for a lamp, 

a copper water pot, a lamp stand and a silver tray. 

589 of 1901. 


Tirwrmgntju (Sin.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp. 

G32 of 1905. J 




Tinu'elht rai (Tri.)— Madiraikonda. 

* * «t \ / • ■ 

Brahman versed in the Veda. 


Gold for 


feeding a 
80 of 1910. 


If 


Ttruriilaimarurfur (Tj.)— Madiraikonda. Land for lamp 
by a merchant of Mayilappil in Puliyur-kottam. 

117 of 1895 ; SJL v. 711. 




Tirarulahnarudar (Tj )-- Madiraikonda. Mentions a 
certain Kavararnoli-MfideYan alias Tondaradippodi. 

207 of 1907. 


Udaiydrgmji (SA.)— Madumiynm llammn-konda. Money 
(90 hmu) by a woman -servant of the temple kitchen 
for feeding three persons every day. 

553 of 1920. 


* contra Sudra oduvars doing this now, A l\ /s'. 1929 II 25. 104 of 1929 

(Kujak, Yr. 3.) is a gift supplementing this endowment. 

1* Palaeography two centuries later. Perhaps copy of an old record. 
Kccalls story of Vi^tiu saving a sacrifice by stopping Sarasvati who took the 
shape of a stream, ARE* 1921 II 25. T iruccand avh u tUm 63, 64. 

t £roof of Kongu compiest ARE, 1906 II 21. 

[ 435 J 



THE COLAS 


Year 37 , — Udaiyargtnfi (SA.) — Madurai konda. 96 sheep for 
lamp. Mentions Karpagasadirac-ceri and variganullifta 
man rddilckn lana in "on , 597 of 1920. 

19 « 1 ' 

„ Ukkal (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Gift of village of Sodi- 
yambakkam, to the north of Ukkal, as a devabhdga by 
the assembly of Ukkal for various items of expenses 
detailed, with the remission of vetti, vedilai and 
valakkdnam , the right to punish the crimes and sins of 
the villagers being also vested in the temple : 4 ivvark- 
kudigala ik-kur random- mnnrupddu dp i % arey dandit- 
tukkolvar-dgavum.' * 

30 of 1893 ; Sri. iii. 12. 


Year 38 . — Alamlxikkam (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. t Land. Danfci- 
varma-mangalam a hrahmadeya on the north bank (of 
the Kaveri). 714 of 1909. 


Anandamangalam (Ch.) — Madiraikonda. Five kalanju 
of gold for feeding one devotee (i adiydr ) in the Jina- 
girippalli by Yardhamanap-periyadigal, a disciple of 
Yinaivabha-sura-Kuravadigal. 430 of 1922. J 


Year 38. § — Kumlakonam (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 

„ Panda ravddai (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 

„ Pillai/yxVtJcain (Uh.) — Maduraiyum 
Lamp. 


250 of 1911. 
270 of 1923. 
Ilamum-konda. 

M * * 

170 of 1930. 


0 

tirlni vdmnallur (Tri.) — Madnraiyum Ilamum-konda. If 
Sale of land for lamp by Mulaparudai. 605 of 1904. 


# In add, and corr . to SII, iii. kurjradfyam is explained as 1 fine imposed 
on persons for defaults’, and manrnpMu as ‘ a similar fine imposed by the* 
village assembly’. The translation of Hultzsch is as given above, 

t No reference to taking of Ceylon in year 37. ARE. 1910 II 16. 

t Engraved on a boulder with three groups of Jaina figures carved in a 
line — ARE. 1923 II. 113. 

§ From here all dated inscriptions are noted with the titles of the king, 

^ Not in the text, which only gives the title FarakSsari. 

[ 436 ] 



PARANTAKA I 


Year 38. 


If 


It 


I* 


It 


II 


II 


It 


It 


II 


II 


Srlrangam (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. One hundred 
kalanj'U gold for Sahasradhara to Ranganatlia. 

71 of 1892 ; SII. iv. 518. 

Ti riikhldiku val (Tj.) — Maduraikonda. Land and gold 
for offerings in the temple. 15 of 1931. 

Tirunamanathlr (BA.)— Madiraikonda. 90 slieep for 
lamp by a merchant. 342 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 972. 

Tiruvadi (BA.)— Madiraikonda. Lamp. 302 of 1921. 


Tiruvutjuiunti (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Sale of land to 
temple by assembly of Sin-anaiccur for money paid on 
account of the temple by Tirukkarraji-piccan. 

122 of 1925. 


Tirtivuiltilurai (Tj.)— Madiraikonda. Remission of taxes 
on the lands of the temple by the assembly of Sivrii- 
naiccur for money received by them from Tirukkamdi- 
piccan. 142 of 1925. 


Tiruvatjuturai (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Five hundred 
hulanju of gold by Paraninka-devar for constructing 
the temple with stone from hiojap/xvlai upwards. 


143 of 1925 




Tintmfaimanulit)' (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Mentions 
Iminadi Sola l’allavaraiyan and the Palangaviri- 
nlr'hlukal. 195 ot 1907, 


Tint ritlaiiiHirudri r (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp for 
merit of Arifijiyaippirattiyar. 252 of 1907. 


TiruvVhn ihttai (Tj .) — Madiraikonda. 


441 of 190S. 


Udaiyiirgmji (SA.)— Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp by 
NUi, daughter of lvesava Bhatta and wife of Ravidiisa 
ICramavittan of Sri Kamukac-ceri Papanac-ceri, a 
hamlet of Vlraniirayana-catm. Ten htln >>j u with 

Vadakkilseri-Sankavappadi. ’ r>i7 

UdaiyurguQi (SA.)— Madimikonda. Gold for lamp by a 
native of Mala-na<}u. 5S *6 of 1920. 


[ 437 i . 



THE COLAS 

» 

Year 38 . — Udaiyargudi (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Three of land 
for feeding 25 Brahmans in temple. The king remitted 
the taxes on this land. Tennavan Vilupperaraiyan, 
called * nammaganar * by the king, had built a hall in 
which the assembly met. 604 of 1920. 

Vilappukkrtm (NA.) — Madiraikonda, The sinking of a 
well, by a female disciple of Avistauemi-pidaran of 
Tiruppanmalai. * The ‘twenty-four’ of the nr to 
protect the charity, a pcrjjMJli. 

53 of 1900; STL vii. 56. 


Year 39 . — Grama m (SA.) — Madiraikonda, 


192 of 1906, 


tl 


Ti rukkahivtlr (Tj.) — Madura ikonda Parnkesari who also* 
took Ilam. Land by a servant (pendatti) of queen 
Villavau Mfideviyar. The, pa rad a i of Karugavur 
near Tirukkudamukkil, a dPraduna in Vadagarai 
Pam bur -nad u, get the money, take charge of the land 
and make it tax-free ; also agree to pay a line of 100 
lm]anju for default as a body and 50 as individuals. 
Cultivation rights mentioned. 

37 of 1910; SIT. ill. 110. 

Tirnmalpv ram (NA.) — Madiraikonda. % sheep for a 
lamp. 302 of 1906. 

Tinmdlpumm (NA.) — Madiraiyum Ilaninm-konda. Sale 
of land. 341 of 1906. 






Tirunumanullur (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Lamp by a 

servant of prince Raj-adit va. 

351 of 1902 ; STL vii. 981. 


Tin inn ma, t tall ur (SA.) — Madurai yum llamnm-koiaja. 

One hundred sheep for lamj) by Mahadevadigal, a 
queen of prince Rajadityn-deva and daughter of 
Iladarayar, for the merit of her elder brother Araiyar 
Hajadittan Pngalippar-gandan. 

363 of 1902 ; EL vii. p. 134. t 


• Another name for Paftcapan^ivamalai, a Jaina centre from the Pallava* 
period to that of R5jar$ja 1. ARE . 1900, paragraph 10. 

f Hultzsch says that llaiJarSyar was a title borne by a line of local chief* 
which included Vlra Co<Ja, son of Pugalvippavargai^a, perhaps the same a® 
the elder brother Rajadittan of this record. See also EL iv. p. 139. 


[ 438 ] 



PA RANT AKA 1 


Year 39 . — Tirunamanallur (SA.) — Maduraiyum llamum-konda. 

Lamp. 367 of 1902"; SIL vii 997. 

„ Tiruvaijulurai (Tj .) — Maduraiyum ilamum-konda. Pro- 

vision by Karj;ali Piccan and the devalcanmis of the 
temple for expenses on Bankranti days and special 
bath on the two ayanasankrantis, by purchase of 3 rna 
of land for 8 kakinju received from Kannipuliyur 
Nakkan of Talikkadambur in Kar-niidu, on the north 
bank. 140 of 1925. 

Tintvaiyant (Tj.)— Maduraiyum llamum-konda. Lamp. 

233 of 1894 ; SIL v. 532. 

„ Tiruvaiyaru (Tj.) — Maduraikonda. 143 of 1918. 

„ Tiruvellarai (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for feeding two 

Hrahmans versed in the Veda. 513 of 1905. 

Year iO.—Alhlr (Tri.)— Maduraiynm llamum-konda. Land. 

384 of 1903. 

Brahmadektm (NA.)— Maduraiyum llamum-konda. 

225 of 1915. 

Kumhakomm (Tj) — Maduraiyum (llamum)konda. 
Sheep for lamp. 235 of 1911. 

Kumhakmxim (Tj.)— Maduraiyum (flamuni)koiula. Two 
lamps to Suryadevar and other gil ts. 253 of 1911. 

Kuram (Ch.)— Madiraikond-Ilam-pngunda. Astrono- 
mical data corresponding to Saturday, 25th July 
946 A.D. (Ivielhorn). Sabha of Kuram met at night 

and made a vyuvaslha. 

34 of 1900 ; SIL vii. 35 ; EL vii. p. 1. 


yy 


yy 


Meliiyyahivur (Tri)— Madiraikonda. 
purchase, for lamps. 


Reclaimed land, by 
386 of 1924. 


Pahm'tr (Tri.)— Maduraiyum llamum-konda. Gold, 30 

kalanju, for lamp to Parana's vara by queen Adittan 

Karrnli Piratti *. Mentions ri<Jehn<Jugukal. 

353 of 1918. 


• Till now unknown. AKK, 1919 11 9. 

[ 439 1 



THE COLAS 

Year 40. — tfrirangam (Tri.)— Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. 

345 of 1913. 

„ Sucindram (Tv.)— (I r atte[uttii) — Maduraiyum Ilamum- 

konda. 100 sheep to Paradaiccavaiyar for two lamps 
in two shrines in the Tiruccivindiram temple by a 
merchant of Kara vandapu ram in Kalakku<Ji-nfulu. 

82 of 1890 ; EL v. p. 4& 

„ Tirumdtpxmim (NA.) — Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. 

Land, for lamp. 310 of 1900. 

M Tirumiydm (Tj.) — Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. 

232 of 1894 ; W. v. 531. 

^ Tirumiydru (Tj.) — Maduraikonda. Land for feeding a 
Brahman sumptuously every day in the Tinivaiyftr- 
udaiyfir temple by queen Ariiijigai, daughter of 
Iladaravar. 144 of 1918. 

• • V 

„ Tiruvelhirui (Tri.) — Madiraikonda. 520 of 1905. 

Y ear 41 — Allur (Tri.) — Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. Provision for 
singing Tiruppadiyam hymns every day. 

373 of 1903. 

„ Gratnam (SA.) — Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. Lamp. 

184 of 1900. 

„ Kiltridi (NA.) — Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. Land by 

purchase for upkeep of tank at Kilai-vali in Valla- 
nadit, a sub-division of Damar-kottam. 

149 of 1916. 

n Ldlgudi (Tri.) — Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. l^and for 
offerings. 88 of 1892 ; S1L iv. 535. 

„ Ldlgudi (Tri.) — Maduniikonda. Land for lamp. 

108 of 1929. 

„ Tiramdlpumm (NA.) — Madiraiyum Ilamum-konda. 

Bheep for lamp l>y 1 hi van Miinm of Nediyatali in 
Koijungoiur in Malai-nfidu. 313 of 1906. 

„ TintvarndttHr (SA.) — Maduraiyum ilamum-konda. Gold 

for lamp. 419 of 1903. 


[ 440 ] 



PARANTAKA I 

Year ll.—Tiruviialur (Tj.)— Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. Gold 

f° r lamp- 23 of 1907. 

« 

„ TiruvUalur (Tj.)— Maduvaiyum Ilamum-konda. 

** • * 

328 of 1907. 

Year 8 + 37 —Tiruwykadu (Tj.)— Madiraikonda. Land for offer- 
ings to Tiriivenkattu-peinima} by a native of Kodun- 
gojur in Malai-nadu. Mentions gfimlaL 

405 of 1918. 

Year 4(0) *-~Kan<fuj~u' (Tj.)— Maduraiynm Ilamnm-konda. Land. 

15 of 1895 ; SIT. v. 570. 

„ Tiruccatlurai (Tj.) — Lamp. Mentions Trailokya Mahfi- 

deviyar. # 135 of 1931. 

The regnal year is lost or uncertain in the following : — 

Allur (Tri.) — Maduraiyum Ilamnm-konda. Waste land, 
never known to have been under the plough, reclaim- 
ed and given to drddhihkum ydgiydr . 385 of 1903. 

BruJwmdHam (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Twenty kaJcinju 

0 

of gold for lamp by Solasikhainani Pallavaraiyan of 
Nelvfdi in Inga-niidu. The eri-variyap-perumakkal 
were in charge of this gift. 213 of 1915. 

(irdmain (SA.) — Madiraikonda. Gold, 10 kalanju , for 
lamp, by a native of Kottaru. Sakha of Tirumndiyur 
in charge. 740 of 1905. 

Kaknljur (N A.)— Year 4. Maduraiyum Ilamum-konda. 
Laud for daily offerings by the assembly of Kabul jur. 

189 of 1921. 

Kuiiclpurmn (Oh.)— (Floor of the Rajasimhesvara temple). 
Madiraikonda. Mentions Tirukkarrali-unnaligai. 

811. i. 145. 

Ku(]w)iiydnml(d (Pd.) — Madiraikon^la. The king is also 

called Hola-peruinanadigaj and Sri Pirantakar. Gold 

for a lamp by his son Sri (Ko)dandanlmau. t 

318 of 1904. 


• The figure is clear on the stone Sff, v p. 226 n, 
t 230 of 1903 of year 34. ARE. 1905, II. 9. 

[441] 


56 



THE COLAS 


Kumbahlnam (Tj.) — MadiraikoijuJa. Sale of land by 
assembly, Mulaparudaip-perumakkal, for feeding two 
persons in a temple. Mentions Ayirattali in Kilar- 
knrjram, a sub-division of Ten(karai)-na<Ju and 
abhisekadakmiai. 249 of 1911. 

Nangavaram (Tri.) — Madirai-konda. Mentions Arinjigai- 
catm. and a Pidari temple called Kalabhatari alias 
Sattanur-nangai. 345 of 1903. 

Bendalai (Tj.) — Maduraiyum llamum-konda. Land for 
offerings under protection of the sabha and the pan- 
mahesvarar. 14 of 1899 ; SII. vi. 450. 

Takkdlam (NA.)— MsSliraikonda. 90 aheep for a lamp 
by a servant of Madhurantaka Pallavaraivar. 

253 of 1921. 

Tirumulpuram (NA.) — Madiraikonda. Gold for lamp 
by prince Parantakan Uttamasili. * 301 of 1906. 

Tiruvitfaimarudur (Tj.) — Parakesari, PurchavSe of land 
with gold granted for a lamp by Pillaiyar Uttama- 
siliyar. Mentions Mahondra-mangalam and nattu- 
vaykkal. 196 of 1907. 

Tiruvi&alur (Tj.) — Madiraikonda. 90 sheep for lamp 
by . . . .nattuk-kaman-Iyakkanar t-parivarattu Isakka- 
nayya Nangai. 29 of 1907 J ; 81 L iii. 107. 


* Was Uttamasili-catm. in Pan(jy r akulusani-va]a*nil<}u (5//. ii p. 239) tho 
same as Uttamasili in the Trichi Taluq and called after this prince? ARB. 
1907 II 31. 

t Apparently a member of the royal family, not mentioned elsewhere. 

H. K. Sastri, 

X Treated as of year 3 and as the earliest reference to the conquest of 
Madura in ABB. 1907 II 32. But the date of this record is doubtful. The 
year may have been two figures of which the first is built in, and might be 

I, 2, or 3. S/I. iii p. 242, n. 2. 


[ 442 ] 



K ANN ARADfiV A. 


S. 868—BdgaU (Bel.)— KatySra of the Calukya family was 
governing the Kogaji 500 and the Ma-siyavatji 140. 

75 of 1904. 

S. 871 — falapumm (NA.) — Year two, perhaps of Rajaditya, 
acc. A. D. 948 (Hultzsch), in which Cakravarti- 
Kannaradeva overthrew Rajaditya and entered the 
Tondai-mandalam. * Construction of a pond called 
Ka}linangai-kujam, so called after a woman who died 
at Arungunram. She was the daughter of Altimallan 
alias Kannaradeva-pirit\yi-gangaraiyar. 

428 of 1902 ; EL vii. p. 194. 

The following inscriptions contain the description Kaccxyum - 
Ta nja iyum-konda Kannaradeva : — 

Year h.—Siddhilinganxadam (SA.>— Land for offerings by sabha 
of brahmadfyam Siryingur. 375 of 1909. t 

Year 15.— A' (7 raw (Ch.)— Gift by a Kurattn Asiriyan. 

36 of 1900 ; STL vii. 37. 

Year 10 .—Vkkal (NA.)— The sabha met in the mukha-inandapa 
Bhuvanamamkka-Visnugrha, apparently to effect the 
sale, on conditions, of a part of the common lands of 
the village to some persons. A curious clause forbids 
any one to set up a prior claim to this land by the 
production of title-deeds or other evidence. 

SIT. iii. 7. 

Year 17. — Tirukkah/kkitnram (Ch.)— Lamp by Karaiyudaiyim 
Buladevan alias Panin takap-peraraiyan. 

109 of 1894 ; EI. iii. p. 284. 

Year 1%—Tiruvorriyur (Ch.)— Opens with a Sanskrit verse men- 
tioning Caturanana’s place in the ma{ha getting the 

• The Xukdr injcription dates this event in 5. 872 current, A, D. t>49- 

50. El. vi. p. 51. 

t Spurious - p. 158, ante * 


1 443 ] 



THE COLAS 


gift. Thirty kalanju of u rkarc- cemrn a upon for lamp 
by the son of a merchant of MunyakliSta, in the camp 
(ka taka') of the Yallabha king, deposited with the 
residents of Berruppedu (Chet put). 177 of 1912. * 

Year 18 . — Uttaramerur (Ch.) — 12^ kalanju gold for lamp with 
the ur, the samvatsara - 1 'Cirhja m being responsible for 
its proper maintenance. 89 of 1898 ; SIL vi, 374. 

Year 19 . — Tirtikkalukkiinmm (Ch.) — A person constructs an 
amhalam , buys some land from one fsana Siva alias 
Nakkadi-bhattan which he endowed as mnbalappuranr 
for supply of water and fire (tan mr-atturevdarkutn 
akkini-yiduvadarkum ). The sabha made this land 
tax-free after collecting a lump sum ( irai-dravyani ) 
from him. 170 of 1894 ; EL iii. p. 285. 

„ Tirwnalui (NA.) — Lamp to the yaksa on the Tiro- 
malai at Vaigavur by a servant of Gangamadevi, queen 
of Kannaradeva-prtigangaraiyar. 65 of 1907. 

„ Tinmdm email nr (SA.) — 90 Sheep for lamp. 

354 of 1902 ; STL vii, 981. 

, t Tirundmanrdlur (SA.) — 90 sheep for lamp. 

360 of 1902 ; SIT. vii. 996. 

Year 20 . — Ti rurorriyur (Ch.) — One hundred ni^kas of puve gold 
by Cat n run ana Pandita, )>npii of Niranjana-guru, for 
halt in temple. An account of the career of the 
Pandita given in the grantha part. Favourite of the 
Vallabha king. 181 of 1912. 

Year 22. — Tiruvornyur (Ch.) — Gold, vrharc-cemtnai 30 kalanju , 
for lamp by the mother of the Vallabha king Kannara- 
deva. Perpetual interest 15%. 179 of 1912. 

Year 23, day 296. — UttaramPrn r (Ch.) — Mahasabha records that 

all the revenues which were due from UJliyur to the 

ur were made over to Isvara-bhattara of Tiruvulli- 

• * * « 

ynr for providing music thrice a daj’ for kribali . The 
Dlliyur people were granted sole right of managing 

• cf. EL iv. p. 281. 


[ 444 ] 



KANNARADEVA 


the temple without interference from any external 
authority (epp'ei^patta-kovum pugappemdadagavum). 

41 of 1898 ; SIL vi. 324. 

Year 25. — TJ Hammerin' (Ch.) — A resolution of the village 
assembly relating to the levy and proper collection 
of fines. 77 of 1898 ; SII. vi. 3C2. 

Year 27. — Takkohnn (NA.) — Sheep for lamp. 

2 of 1897 ; SIL v. 1365. 

„ Tiruvottar (NA.) — 50 Sheep by Kodanda-manjadi for 
a jiitgal-vilakku. 101 of 1900 ; SIL vii. 11 1. 

Year 28. — Kurauur (NA.) — A vyuvaxthai by assembly of Kiivanur 
that seller and purchaser, and mortgagor and mort- 
gagee of lands must be of the same community in 

•r- 

case of land* being gifts to gods, physicians and 
fijivakas. 159 of 1921. 


(n-d.) — Dot] t]a§i vara (Mys.) (Kan.). King’s encampment at 
Melpadi after defeating and killing the Cola king. 

112 of 1899. 




KVfir (SA.) — Gift of Vaidmnba Maharaja Sri Vikra- 

* 

maditya ruling Maliidu, Vanakoppadi, Singapura-nadu 
and Venkunra-kottam. 10 of 1905. 


The following inscriptions mention only Kunnarudcva with- 
out any till** : — 


Year 10. 


Tiruvndi (NA.) — 90 sheep for lamp to Govindavinnagar 
in Adhiraja-mangalyapum, by Kali van Manrfuli Aiyan 
alias Hajaditta Pallavaraiyar who ha<l the kdni of 
Sei i i b u v k - k 6t [am. 28 of 190.1 ; SIL viii. 300. 


Year 17 . — Tirvndma nail fir (SA.)— 10 kalnfiju of gold for a lamp 
by Narasimhavarman of the Malayaknla. The sabha 
and iir of Sevalai in Vennainallur-naju undertake 
to supply every year 100 ntl 7 J of ghl by ntahadh'i 
measure. The expression Nrvahii-sabhtu-firfiin is also 
used. 362 of 1902 ; EL vii. pp. 135-0. 


[ 445 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 18 — Siddhalin gamcujlam (SA.)— Land in Kodiyur by assemb- 
ly of Si^ringfir to a dancing woman (Tiruppulippa- 
gavar nirutta-vitanki) and her descendants for danc- 
ing before god during procession, 370 of 1909. 

Tear 19 — Kthlr (SA.) — Fragment. Mentions sabha of NittavinSda- 
catm. on the north bank of the Pennai m Vanakdp- 
padi. 269 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 898. 

Year 20 — Kthlr (SA.) — Gold, 15 talaiiju, with nagaram of 
Tirnkkovalnr for a lamp. 232 of 1902 ; SII vii. 859. 

Year 21 — Klljtr (SA.) — Land purchased from sabha of Tirukko- 
valnr and given to Tiruvlrattanamndaiya Peruman- 
adigal by Yaidumba Maharajan $andayan Tiruvaiyan. # 

268 of 1902 ; EL vii. pp. 142-3. 

Year 22 — Babur (Pondicherry.) — Sale of land by sabha for 

bhattavrlti. 175 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 802. 

• • • 

„ Biihur (Pondicherry.) — Lamp. 

17C of 1902 ; m. vii. so:i. 

„ Balmr (Pondicherry.) — Sheep by manradis of Vakur- 
nadu at the rate of one sheep while 4 ascending the 
hat til: 177 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 804. 

Year 23—KUur (SA.)— 90 sheep. 266 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 894. 

Year 24 — Klhlr (SA.) — 2,304 sheep for 24 lamps by Vaidutnba 
Maharajar Tiruvayanar to Tiruvirattanattalvar. 

267 of 1902 ; EL vii. p. 144. 

„ Siddlud ingamadam (SA.) — Gold for a gong and three 
trumpets to temple. 385 of 1909. 

Year 25 — Qmmam (SA.) — Gift by Vaidumba Maharaja Tiruvaiyan 
Sri Kant ha. 743 of 1905. 

Year 26 — Bah Ft r (Pondicherry.) — Placing of four stones in the 
wall. 172 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 799. 

„ Jamhai (SA.) — 96 sheep for lamp and gold for offerings 
to Suryadeva in temple of Timttant6nx*i-a|var at 
Vajaiyiir. 112 of 1906. 

• ci. 236-A of m2 { S/I. vii. 864) of R3jar3ja 27, which quote* this gift. 

[M«] 



KANNARADEVA 


Tear 26.— Kilur (SA.) — 100 sheep for lamp by Komalam, 
daughter of Vanavan Muvendavelan. 

270 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 899. 

„ Velar (NA.) — Land to Pannappesvara built by Pannap- 

pai on the Sudadu-parai-malai (* the hill of the 
gambling rock,’ now called Bavaji hill) by Nujumba 
Tri bhu vanadhlra. 

10 of 1897 * SIL i. 51 ; EI. iv. pp. 81 ff. 

Year 27 — Dakar (Pondicherry.) — Land for feeding two persons 
(183) ; and maintaining in the temple a Brahman 
versed in VGda for worship and a man to supply water 
for the sacred bath (184). 

183, 184 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 810, 811. 

Year 28 — Tirumltmnalldr (BA.) — Half-lamp. 

364 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 994. 

The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following : — 

Kilur (BA.) — Gold, twenty kalanju , for mapana 
(bathing) to the god on every sankranti, by VIrattan 
VIranfiraniyar, the senior queen (mutta-deviydr) of 
Vaidumba Malianija Tiruvaiyanar. One kalam of 
cleaned paddy was the interest which the sabha of 
Nenmali alias Milada-manikkam agreed to measure 
out in the temple ( tuyavakki kulipparamfoittu tint- 
7 iiurrattuh-ko<ju Senralandu ku^Iuppmnanfim) ; they 
were also to feed each of the persons who came to 
collect this paddy ( innel tatujuvdrkku meykcuulu). 
Mentions that 60 kalam by peri{amai was equal to 75 
kalam by etjmVik-kdl. 235 of 1902 ; EL vii. p. 143. 

Tim va n n (i mala i (NA.) — 20 cows. 

475 of 1902 ; SIL viii. 63. 


# FftlaeogrAphicaliy same as that of Katctynm Titfyatynm-hnja Ktanara- 
d&va. HuHmcIi ££ iv, p. 80, 


[ 447 ] 



RAJAKESARI GANDARADITYA. 


See under Rajakesari :■ 


Year 8 — Tiruppahittumi. 


570 of 1908. 


if 


Ti ruppa lath irai. 


574 of 1908, 


Y ear 9 — 27 run Rge&va ra m . 


215 of 1911* 


PARAKKSARI AR1NJAYA. 


See under Parakesari : 


Year 2 — Tirupjvihinam . 


162, 172 of 1928, 


umler Sundara Cola :■ 


Year 12 — Udaiydrgwii. 


572, 587 of 1920. 


under Raj akC* sari : 


Year 9 — T inmag e&vetram. 


215 of 19 IL 


tinder Rajaraja I : — 

Year 29 — Melpddi — Tirnvarmjisvaram built by Riijaraja as An*ur- 
tufi j ina-de varkku -pal l ippadai. 

86 of 1889 ; SIL iii. 17. 


[ 448 ] 



madiraikomda rajakEsari. 

Year 5 ,—Karikkal (NA.)— A pidari-koyil erected by the wife of a 
Viravalaujiyan of Mariyiidi in Pulivala-nadn. 

12 of 1896 ; El iv. p. 331. * 




it 


Tiruvornyur (Ch.)— Gift of sheep by one of the 
Kalesi-Perundaram who had accompanied Ddaiyar 
Uttamasdla-deva t to the temple of Tiruvorriyur-maha- 
d6va . ' 246 of 1912 ; SII. iii. 115. 

Velacceri (Ch.)— Sheep by one of the yalungmiattar 
of the village. 315 of 1911 ; SII. iii. 114. J 


Year l— VMacciri (Ch.)— Sale of land for the maintenance of a 
lamp in a Ganapati temple, newly built. “ Velicciri 
Afahiixahhai uofti twuiuT bvdhrfUtsthdHdtti 1 kli/l/tk- 
kuraivamk-kRdi-yirundu virkinra nilam." 

306 of 1911 ; SII. iii. 116. 

Year 12, day 130.— Mmlhmintakam (Ch.)— Gift of land, purchased 
from the unappropriated common land of the villago 
and made tax-free, to the temple of Tirnven-kattil- 

ParamOsvara for the long life and victory of the 

396 of 1922. 


king. 


Year 14. — Tiruftpummbiyiun (Tj.)— Lamp 


Year ll.-Allur (Tri.)-Gold. 

TirumaUmuli (Tri .)-Lamp. 
TimmSl'puram (NA.)— Lamp. 


75 of 1397 ; SII. vi. 24. 

377 of 1903. 
2 of 1920. 


It 


It 


307 of 1906 ; SII. iii. 118. 


t! 


jfVnjwwfptMWH (NA.) Lamp 


308 of 1906 ; SII. iii. 117. 


• Palaeographlcally resembles the Tamil inscriptions of K, 59 a III 
RSslrftktitft* Hultrsch. 

t Son of Gan^arMitya Madirai. R3jak. ? Royal »«les due to an early 
choice for succestion. ARE, 1913 II 19. 

% King identified with GatfarSditya. Got title Oom Parantaka I, fa.herj 
succeeded him immediately a. RSjSditya had died.-H. K. Sastn. 

[ 449 ] 


57 



rajakEsari sundara c5la. 

♦ 

See under Riijakesari : — 

Year 6. — Kdverippdkkam . 382 of 1905. 

under Uttama Cola : — 

Year 14, day 216. — Tirumalpuram . 286 of 1906. 

for Ponmaligai. 

under Rajaraja 1 : — 

Year 16 . — Tirumalau A Cera queen of Farantaka II. 61 of 1899. 

„ Tirxividahnarudur „ 159 of 1895. 

Year 21. — Ddddpuram . — (daughter Kundavai). 8 of 1919. 


Year 2. — Tiruvikdnr (Tj.) — Riijakesari. Land for feeding a 

Vedabrahmana by Pirantakan Irungojar alias Siriya- 
velar of Kocjumbalur. * Gift in charge of Mahasabha 
of Avani-narayana-catm. 317 of 1907 ; SIL iii. 119. 

Year 4 . — TiruviSahlr (Tj.) — Rajak. Land purchased for (1)30 
Pakkdiu from the Peru n <j urip-perumakka} of Amani- 
narayana-catm. by Pirantakan IruDgojar alias Siriya- 

velar. ’ 320 of 1907 ; 811. iii. 120. 

* 

Year 5. — TiruviSalur (Tj.) — Sundara Cola. Gift of some taxes 
( gatanaka f) for whitewashing (?) the temple, and of 
a lamp by Siruvola described as Inmgulakula-pradlpa 
and Pirftntakasy atmaja- varga varya. 

40 of 1907 ; SIL iii. 121. 

Year 7. — Tirukkalitlatja i (Tj.) — Pa ndiy an aie-c u ram -i|*akk i na 

Perumal Sri Sundara Coja-deva. Land purchased and 
made iraiyili for 156 hahmju of red gold (Sembon) 
given to God Srikudittitfai-u^laiyiir of Vadagarai-Vem* 
barjrur by Pirantakan-siHyavelan alias Tirukkar^li - 
piccan, who was serving as general of the king’s 
forces. 291 of 1908 ; EI. xii. pp. 121— CJ. 

• See RSjadtja I. Year 27-116 of 1896; AfK Ch. 64 w. 12 ff. 

[ 4M ] 



RAJAKESARI SUNDARA COLA 


Year 12 . — Utjaiydrgutfi (HA.) — Rajakesari. Land by purchase 
by Udaiyapirattiyar Yiman Kundavaiyar, the dcciydr 
(mother ?) of Arinjiya-Piuintaka-devar, * for bathing 
god with 1,000 pots of water on the sankranti day of 
every month. 572 of 1920. 


„ UdaiyarguiH (HA.) — Rajakesari. Land by purchase 
by Adit tan Kodaipirattiyar, queen of Arihjigaivarman 
who died at Amur, for bathing god during Citrai-Visu 
with 108 potfnls of water ; another gift by Udaiya- 
pirattiyar Yiman Kundavaiyar for 1000 potfuls of 
water for same purpose. 587 of 1920. f 

Year 14. — Tiriikk/ilittattai (Tj.)— Rajakesari. Two lamps, twenty- 
five lhthkam for each, by Rajudicci and Kunjaramaili 
the wife and daughter of Siriyavelar. 

299 of 1908 t ; STL iii. 122. 


29 


UtlaiyCtrgudi (HA.) — Rajakesari. Contents same as in 
572- Yr. 12. 3*9 of 1920. 


The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following s— 

Koilmnbdhlr (Pd.) — Madhnrantaka Snndara Cola. Men- 
tions Pudi Pattalagan* 139 of 1907 ; 1M. 82. 

Tiruhhdittnttai (Tj.) — (Perumal) Hundara Cohi * who 
drove the Puivlyu into the forest \ Mentions Pirantr- 
kan Hi ’iy a velar, a general, and Ponmaligai. 

302 of 1908. 


• *‘. e. t Pat tint aka, son of Arinjaya. rf. 580 of year 14. Vim an Kundava, 
perhaps an E. CSJukya princess, daughter of CSlukya-Bhitna II (A. I>< y34-45). 
This marriage is much earlier than C<5|a Kundava s with VunalKdit) a . 
ARE. 1921 11 26. 

t cf. Sit ; iii. 17 (86 of 1889) of year 29 of RSjarSja l. Ptldi Adittan Pi^ri 
was another queen of Arifljiga. Sundara does not seem to have been the son of 
thi* dowager queen as he refers to her by name. Identity of Ajxlk ou t u . 

ARE. 1921 U 26, 

t Wrongly assigned to Xditya II KarikSla, son and successor of Parantaka 
II Sundara, In ARE, 1909 U 40, 


[ 461 ] 



parakSsari ADITTA II. 


Tear 2 . — Kumbakdnam (Tj.) — Parakesari. Sale of land by 

assembly for a private emlowment of a lamp in the 
temple. 224 of 1911. * 

h Timmd(am (Tj.) — Pandiyan-talai-konda. Mentions Kari 
Pujiyan alias Solamarayan, a certain Niranjana Pantjita 
and servants of the temple of Ambar Sn-Mahakalam. 

117 of 1910. r 

M Udaiydrgudi (SA.) — Vha Pamliyan-talai-konda. Three 
kdsu by Araiyan Geyavitankan of the Singalantakat- 
terinja Ivaikkolar for cloths to the ICuttar of the stone 
temple of Tiru-anantisvaram. 5f>7 of 1920. 

„ UyyakJconiJan- Tmimala i (Tri.) — Vira Pandiyan-talai- 

konda. 90 sheep for a lamp to Tirukkarkudi $ Para* 
mesvara by Irungolakkon alias Pugal v ip-piragandan 
Avanivallan. The devakanmis had to supply every 
day l measure of ghl by the ifdavulakku. 

472 of 1908 ; SIL iii. 199. 

Year 3 . — Kdvamlr (NA.) — Vira Pftnd iy an - tal ai - k o n<l a . Four 

hundred kuli of waste land by the assembly of 
Kavanur for daily night offerings to Puli-pagava-deva. 
Measuring rod called ka()igai~kuMtuk-koL A farther 
gift of 800 ludji also to be reclaimed, for lamps at the 
three services of the deity and for keeping watch of the 
temple by residing near it with a guard. 160 of 1921. 

n Kumbakotytm (Tj.) — Pandiyan-talai-konda. Sale of land 
by the assembly of Sri Kudandai to Koyil-mayitai alias 
Parantaka Muvenda-vejan § of Sirringan in Inga-na<Ju, 
for feeding twenty apurvh versed iu the Veda and 

# This i* indirectly mentioned iu 225 of 1911 of year 5. 1913 II 20. 

f Text gives year 3. t The name of the place in the JORvBram* 

§ AdhikSri in charge of irj~kUryam in the temple of Tiruvi^timaruHBr 
(154 of 1895, 214, 255*6 of 1907). Continued in same capacity under Uttama 
C81*t, and wae called Madburlntaka MBvSnda-vS13n. 1 Hit was evidently one of 
the offices which were solely in charge of public charities and financed by 
the state.' ARE, 1912 11 19. 


[ 453 ] 



PA RAKES ARI ADITYA II 

five HvaySgins in the Sn-koyil of Tirukkil-kottattu- 
peruma). Land called balabhoya. 230 of 1911. 

Year d.—Kumbakihuim (Tj.) — Pandiyan - talai - konda. Sale of 

land to Sirpnganudaiyan Koyil-mayilai alias Pariintaka 

Muv&nda-vejan by the m u la-parutja ip-perumakkal of 

Tinikkudamukkil, which he presented as a hhattavrtti 

9 9 • 

to those who exponnded the Prdbhukaram. 

233 of 1911 ; SII. Hi. 200. 

„ Tuyaniir (SA.) — Vira Pandiyan -talai-konda. 90 sheep 
for a lamp. 359 of 1909. * 

tt 1 1 m (NA.) — Vlra Pandiyan-talai-k<mda. 90 

sheep for a lamp. 471 of 1902 ; 67/. viii. 59. 

„ Vifaiydrgudi (SA.) — Vlra Pandiyan-talai-konila. Gold 
for two lamps by headman (kilan) of Vajamarvu. 

588 of 1920. 

„ Udaiydrgudi (SA.)— I^indiyan-talai-konda. Sale of land 
to temple. 616 of 1920. 

Year 3 -hi. — Tiriiindai/nurudtlr (Tj.) — 4 VIrapandiyanai erindu 
talai-konda 256 of 1907. 

Year 4 . — Kanifiydr (Tj.) — Puml i y an -talai -k ond a. Mentions brah- 
madeyam Periya-vanavan-mahruievi - caturvedi-manga- 
latto ydlungantiltdr . 18 of 1895 ; 67/. v. 574. 

„ Kumbakbnam (Tj.) — Pan d i y an -talai -k ond a. Gift of 90 
sheep, distributed equally between two tnannidis, for 
a lamp by peudatti Devayan Pulalakkan alias Avani- 
sikhamani of KIlai-YeJain at Tanjavur, called after 
IJdaiyapirattiyar Kilanadigal, the mother (dm) of 
Anaime,vr u hjit 1 f ir * <^f 1911 ; 67/. iii. 20 L. 

„ lhn<J<7ram(jai (Tj.) — Paudiyan-talai-konda. Land for 
lamp by Asuri Adittu-pidaiun Knimavittan, a member 
of the aluttganani of the village Hajakesari-catm. 

236 of 1923. 

* Three records of Hrthivfndrsvaman also come from this place. There is 
ao clue as to the contemporaneity of the two kings or their relation to each 
other. AKE> 1910 11 17. 


[ 453 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 4 . — Pandara vaqlat (Tj.) — Pandiyanai-talai-konda. Twenty 
kdsu, equal to ten Jcalanju, for a lamp in the temple 
of Tiruccelur-mahadeva by Nilan Tyagi t wife of a 
merchant of the Tribhnvana-madevi Perangadi at 
Tahjavur. 241 of 1923. * 

M tflt/ainan galarn (NA.) — Vira Pandiyan - talai - konda. 

Mentions Sri Gangaraiyan . . . Ganga-culamani etc. t 

70 of 1900 ; SIL vii. 74. 

„ Tdyanur (SA.) — Vira Pan* I i vun-talai -kond a. 80 sheep 

for lamp by a native of Mandaikujattur, 360 of 1909. 

„ Tdyanur (SA.) — Vira Pandiyan-talai-konda. 90 sheep 
for lamp. Mentions Tirumunaippadi. 361 of 1909. 

„ Tiruppummhiyam (Tj.) — Pandiyan-talai-konda. Laud 

as Nandaixinapimram to Ivvur-tim-nandavanam-man- 
dalan-gappan. 69 of 1897 ; SIL vi. 18. 

w Tintvidaimarudur (Tj.) — Pandiyan-talai-konda. Siyrin- 

gan-udaiyan Koyil-mayilai, the ndigdrigal in charge of 
( drdykinra ) Srlkdryam, the sabha of Tiniimur, the 
Nagarattai* of Tiruvidaimarudil and the devakanmis 
met in the theatre (ndfakrtSalt i) and arranged for 
driyakkuttu X before the god of Tiruvidaimarudil by 
setting apart one v?li of laud for Kittimamikkadan 
alias Tiruvel-araiccakkai, who hiul to dance on T 
occasions (specified) in a year and receive as korru 
fourteen kalam of paddy from the treasury of the 
temple. l. r >4 of 1895 ; SIL iii. 202. 

^ Utjaiydrr/udi (SA.) — Pandiyan - talai - konda. Dining 
utensils and money (gold) Cor feeding one person 
sumptuously every day. Sri kdryam-dniy wn-gn np~ 
jtemmakkal in cdiarge. 610 of 1920. 

* Utjaiydrgudi (SA.) — Pandiyan-talai-konda. Gold for 
lamp by a resident of Vira-srimukhac-cori. Mentions 
ManjaiJikkalanai. 020 of 1920. 

• 246 of 1923 quite similar gift by wife of another merchant. 

+ cf. 69 of Parak. Yr. 3. 

% SilappadihUram Mi. 12-25 and notes thereon. 

f 454 ] 



PARAKESARI ADITYA II 


Year i^Uhkal (NA.)— VIra Pancjiyan-talai-konda. An endow- 
ment by a Yejala Senai for the supply of water for six 
months and agnistai (fire pans) for six months in the 
Brahmasthana of the village. The charity was to be 
supervised by the members in charge of village affairs 
for each year (avvava-samvatsarangalil grama - 
kdryam iiruttum perumakka]). 

32 of 1893 ; STL iii. 14. 

Year 4, day 170. — Tiruvi^aimarudur (Tj.) — Pandiyan-talai-konda. 

Mentions Tiruvujaimarudil Alvar §rlkaryam-drdy- 
hinra adigdrigal Simngan-udaiyiin Koyil-mayilai 
Parantaka Muvdnda-velan. Tiraimur was by the 
§ddanam a kutjinikki de vad d na which had to give as 
pancavdram 256 kalarn of paddy. But the padimdrru 
(scale of expenses in the temple) showed only 160 
kalam. It was denied that the devaddna was kudi- 
nlkki . Then the adigdrigal called for the original 
document making Tiraimur a devaddna and found that 
it was kutHmkki and accordingly raised the scale of 
expenses. 214 of 1907 ; STL iii. 203. 

Year 5 . — Bdhur (Pondicherry) — Pandiyan-talai-konda. Lamp. 

173 of 1902 ; STL vii. 800. 

„ Kumbaknmm (Tj.)— PftnOiyandalai-konda. Sale of land 

by the Mulaparudaip-perumakkaj of Tirukkudamnkkil, 

a devaddna in Vadagarai-Pambur-naiJu, to the penddtli 

Perayan Tribhuvanasundari of the Palaiya-vejam at 

Tanjavnr for 85 kalanju of gold which she had 

* 

deposited as an endowment for feeding a Sivaydgin. 
The land mentioned in 224 of 1911 was one of the 
boundaries of this land. 225 of 1911 ; STL iii. 204. 

i, Patnjdrai'ddai (Tj)— Pandiyan-talai-konda. Money by 

it 

a resident of Mondramac-ceri for offerings to the image 
of Ganapati Bhattaraka in the temple on the day of 

Ardra in Margali. Mentions the coin akkam . 

275 of 1923. 

,» Tm%4ur (SA.)— VIra Panaiyan-talai-kopda. Ten sheep 
for lamp to Ki«Janda Perumaj by Suramittirap-peru- 




[ 455 ] 



THE COLAS 


manj&di, son of Irugannan residing at Kilvali-Tondur 
in Singapura-nadu. 282 of 1916. 

The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following : — 

Tiruvaiyani (Tj) — VI ra Pandiyan-talai-konda. 96 
sheep for a lamp by a man of the Tribhuvana-madevi- 
yar-velam ; also a lamp-stand, tara-nilai-vi\akku. 

240 of 1894 ; SIL v. 539. 

Tiru vanmxmalai (NA.) — VIra Pandiyan-talai-konda. 96 
sheep for lamp. 469 of 1902 * ; SIL viii. 57. 

Tiruvidaimaritdur (T j ) — Pandiy an -talai-konda. Land 

for maintaining the campaka flower-garden laid out by 
Tiruvengadattu-piccan. 249 of 1907. 

See under Rajakesari : — 

Year 2 — Udaiyargiujti. — 577 of 1920. 


# Text gi*e$ year 4. 


[ 466 ] 



P A RTHI V fiNDRA V ARM AN 


S* &Q%'-~ m Kalambur (NA.) — No name of king. Lamps to 
Kalikesari * Vinnagar-devar by the assembly of 
Kalamur. 246 of 1909. 


Year 2. — Brahmade&am (NA.) — Pancjiyan-talai-konda. All temple 
lands owned to date made tax-free by the assembly of 
Ainjastasam in lien of the amount of gold, 86 J 
kalanju , which it owed to the temple. Also sabha to 
manage temple affairs by its variyam , a ganam being 
forbidden. 195 of 1915. 

„ Brahmadesam (NA.) — Yira Pandiyan-talai - konda - Ko- 
Maharaja. t Fifteen kalahgu gold with ganapperu- 
malckal for a lamp by a merchant of Tiruvekambac- 
ceri. 223 of 1915. 

„ U ttaramerur (Ch.) — Yira Pa nd i y an- talai- k on da-par tma- 

maharujar, Land made tax-free by the sabha ; the 
ur were not to collect any dues. 

88 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 152. 

Year 3 . — Takkdlam (NA.) — Mentions a conch (tiritppalh'k-katjil) 
given to the Tiruvural-alvar by Arumoli-nangai, the 
queen of the king (Udaiyar). 

7 of 1897 ; SIL iii. 166. 

„ Tirumdlpuram (N A.)— Records the building of the 
temple and the enclosing verandah by the Virata king 
Anayaman alias Paramandalfiditya. 267 of 1906. 

„ Tirumdlpuram (NA.) — Gold for lamp by Nariiyana 
Kramavittau alias Vaidumbar-fulitta-brahmfidhi-nijan. 

304 of 1906 ; SIL iii. 165. 


• Was Kalikesari a title of P. ? cf. 676 of 1904-Yr. 6. ARE. 1910 II 59. 

+ This supports the identification of this king with Rajamarayar. 
ARE. 1916, U. 78. 


58 


[ 457 1 



THE COLAS 

Year 3 . — Tirupparkkatjal (NA.)— Mentions 4 meeting in the abhi- 
sekamantjapa of the big temple of the locality ( ivvur - 
periya-ta]i)~ at which were present the Mahasabha of 
Kavirippakkam alias Amaniiiarayana-catm. f including 
the members for the year of the samvatsara to((a- f 
eri- 9 kalani-, pancmrdra-, kanakku- 9 kalingu and tatfi- 
vaK-vtiry iams , the .4 ri-vatavi~narariap-periimakk(t\ 9 
Pallavan Pirammadarayan who was ruling the tow?> 

( fir-alkinra ), and the superintendent ( kankani ) 
Arumbakkilan. The trustees of the temple made a 
submission to the meeting that a garden and field of 
the arcanabhbga of Timkkarapurattu Peruman were 
silted owing to breaches in the river and lying waste ; 
the ka?a ni- variya m were then directed by the 
assembly to give 1400 kuli of land from the village 
manjikkam . * 692 of 1904 ; SI I. iii. 156. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Pan d i y an - talai-konda Parthiven- 
dradhipati-varman. The Perunguyi-sabha gave land 
to Sri - brnd a van att u -per u m a n a<li ga 1 for tiruccenruultxu 
nanddvilakku and arcanabhogam . 

73 of 1898 ; SIL hi. 153. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vlra Pan d i van - tal ai- k on da- Par t h i- 
vendra Adittaparumarkku. f i-and by sabha after 
taking purvucaram to Tiruvayppadip-perumanadigal 
for tiruccennadai , lamp, irlbali and arcandbhuga . 

38 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 158. 

ff Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-komla. Traiyili 

land by Perungnvi -sabha after taking purvdcaratn to 
Aiyan-mahafiasta, in the south of the city. 

15 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 167. 

,» Uttaramerur (Ch ) — Pandiyanai-talai-konda. Iraiyili 

land by Pernnguri-sabhii after taking purvamram to 
Kuruksetra-d5va. 16 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 160. 

• This corresponds to modern * porombokt' and the assemblies had the 
disposal of it — H. K. Sastri. 

f This 4 undoubtedly refers to Parthiv$ndravarman * and 4 may establish 
the king’s possible connection with the C<3la Xdityavarman 1 (Xditya II)* 
a K. Sastri. 


[ 168 ] 



Year 3. 


If 




tt 


It 


tt 


tt 


tt 


Year 3, 


parthivendravarman 

* 

~ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai - talai - konda. 
Land by Perunguri-sabha to temple after taking 
purvacaram . This land was part of the land escheated 
to the village owing to default in payment of dues, 
(irmyirddu umdkki vilunda pumi). 

17 of 1898 ; 677. iii. 162. 

Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-konda. Land 
by Perunguri-sabha as vydkhyavrtti to a person 
teaching the Vyakarana-sastra in the town. 

18 of 1898 ; 677. iii. 161. 

Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-kon<la. Land 
by sabha to Tiruppulivanam-udaiyar. 

19 of 1898 ; 677. iii. 154. 

Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-konda. The 
Perunguri-sabha make a list of lands belonging to 
T i r u mill i ru n 3 olai p-peruman ad iga] of the town, ( nam - 
mar). 21 of 1898 ; 67 7. iii. 163. 

Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-konda, The 
sabha declare tax-free some lands of Durga-bhattaraki, 
after accepting as purvacaram the gold due as interest 
( ’poli-panney ) on account of the documents ( kaiyeluttu ) 
of this Bhattaraki and of the sabha of Damodarac-ceri. 

22 of 1898 ; 677. iii. 159. 

Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-konda. The 
Perung uri-sabha gave land as iraiyili after taking 
purvacaram to Jyestha at Kumanpadi. 

23 of 1898 ; 677. iii. 169. 

Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-konda. Land 
by sabha likewise to Kumanpadi Kilai-sri-koyil. 

25 of 1898 ; 677. iii. 168. 

Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-konda. The 
Perunguri-sabha gave iraiyili land for arnud u , lamp 

and arcana to MahavisnukkaJ. 

26 of 1898 ; 677. iii. 164. 

day 119. — Uttaramirur (Ch.)— Pandiyan - talai - konda 
Parthivendradhipati-varman. The Perunguri-sabha 


[ 459 ] 



THE COLAS 


mado iraiyili some land of Sri- Go vardhanattu- 

peruman&dig&l. 13 of 1898 ; SII. iii. 157. 

Year 3, day 173 — Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Pan<Jiyan - talai - kon<Ja. 

Land made iraiyili by the Peru nguri -sabha which got 
purvdcSram from some person. 

60 of 1898 ; SII. iii. 155. 

Year i.—Takkdlam (NA.)— 96 sheep for lamp to image of Durga 
in the temple of Tiruvural-alvar by a native of Maha- 
rajapadi (E. of Kolar, including parts of Cnddapah and 
Chittoor). 14 of 1897 ; SII. iii. 173. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-konda Parlhi- 
vendriidhipati-varman. Tax-free land purchased from 
the Perunguri -sabha and given as &ri-hali-bMga to 
Subrahmanya-bhatara of the town. 

55 of 1898; SII. iii. 171. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanai-talai-konda Parthi- 

vendradhipati-varman. Land given by Perungim- 
sabha as iraiyili arcanabhoga to a certain bhatta after 
taking purvdedram from a merchant of Kaficipuram 

24 of 1898 ; SII. iii. 170. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Pandiyanait-talai-konda. 180 kuli 
of land given to Ganapati in the temple of Koneri- 
nangai at Kumanpadi and recorded by Mahasabha. 

27 of 1898 ; SII. iii. 172. 

Year 5. — Tayanur (SA.) — Land at solar eclipse for five persona 
providing music for irVxili in the temple of Tanak- 
kamalai Mahadeva at the request of the residents of 
Tayanur made to NUagangaraiyan Annavan Nattadigal. 

362 of 1909 ; SII. iii. 178. 

„ TSyaniir (SA.)— A declaration that a certain document 
{dlai) was lost, that two persons had received their 
full dues on a loan of 30 kalxihju which, apparently, 
with interest, had become 45 port and that if they 
recovered the lost document at some future date, they 
should treat it as invalid (dead). 

364 of 1909 ; SII. iii. 175. 


[46a] 



PARTHIVENDRAVARMAN 


Year 5. — Tirumullaiv&yil (Ch.) — Mentions sabha of Kalikesari- 
catm. (name of Tirumullaivayil ? ) a tan-kurru- 
devaddnam in Pulay-kottam. 

676 of 1904 ; SII . Hi. 174. * 

„ Uttaramvrdr (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyanait-talai-kon<Ja. 

Record by Perunguri-sabha. Iraiyili land set apart as 
visaharabhdga to be enjoyed by persons appointed to 
the place by the sabha, 36 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 177, 

,, Uttar ameriir (Ch.) — Pandiyanai - talai - konda. Iraiyili 

land to temple by sabha after taking purvdcdram . 

28 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 179. 

Year 6 . — BrahmadeSam (NA.) — Land for feeding one Brahman 
versed in the Veda. The great men of the assembly of 
Aifija§tasam of Tiruvekambapuram in Rajamalla- 
catm. made the land tax-free and placed the charity 
in the charge of the members of the ganavdriyam . 

208 of 1915. 

„ Pddi (Ch.) — Sale of land from the sablid-manjikham to 
temple by sabha of Kurattur alias Parantaka-catm. in 
Ambattur-erik-kil-nadu of the Pulal-kottam. 

225 of 1910 ; SII. iii. 181. 

ff Podavur (Ch.) — Land for lamp by Tennavan Madeviyar. 

69 of 1923. 

„ Tiruvcidandai (Ch.) — Parakesari Vendradivarman, 

Twelve kalanju for lamp by a native of Taiyur or 
Talasayanapuram. 269 of 1910 ; SIL iii. 180. 

„ Ultaramerur (Ch.)--Pan(Jiyanai-talai-kon(Ja Parthiven- 

dradhipati-varman. Land set apart, after purchase as 
Srbbalidjhdga to Tiruvunnaurp-perumanadigal. 

20 of 1898 5 SIL iii. 182. 

if XJltaramerdr (Oh.) — Land as iraiyili for tiruccennadai 

to Kuruk§etra-deva of the town, by the Perunguji- 
sabha. 37 of 1898 ; SIL vi. 320. 

• Perhaps the king of this record is different and earlier in time, as the 
record is very archaic — H. K« Sastri. 

[tei] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 7 .—Takkfitam (NA.) — 96 sheep for lamp to Tiru-vural-alvar. 

The phrase ‘ neyyennai * occurs in this record (as in- 
some others). 4 of 1897 ; SIL iii. 184. 

n Uttaraimrur (Ch.) — Pandiyanait-talai - konda. The 
Perunguri-sabha declare some land of the Kuruk- 
setrattu-perumanadigal to be tax-free, after getting 
pnrvdcdratn from a person. 

79 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 183. 

Tear 8 . — Tiruvadandai (Ch.) — Vira Pandiyan-talai -konda Ko-vi- 
Rajamiirayar. A record of the sablia and nr of Tim- 
vadavandai. Gift of an image of Manavalapperumal to* 

* 

temple of Varahasvamin by two Brahman residents of 
Talasayanaporam alias Taiyiir ; and also of gold for 
offerings. 264 of 1910 ; SIL iii. 186. 

Year 9 . — Anaikkattdttur (NA.) — The ur of Anai Akkaraippudur 
give to Aditta-deva, belonging to emmur vaikhanasan 
Kalinikki-bhattan, some land and a house to the south 
of the temple as arcandbhbga . The land given is 
described thus : “ emmur v i{aivu -pa 1 t iiji l deva kuttai- 
yum xmangar-pidiy am” 

288 of 1895 ; SIL iii. 187. 

n Kdttur (Ch.) — Parthivendradi-Adhipati-varman. Sale of 

land as tannirppatti by ur to Pattaiyanar, the 
mendyakam (superintendent) of the Perundaram, who 
built the amhalam of this village. 

252 of 1912 ; SIL iii. 188. 

„ Maduramangakim (Ch.) — Sheep for lamp by Oloka- 
Maharayar to temple of Olokamaharayar-Tirucciy^m- 
balattalvar at Malalai-mangalam in Manayir-kot^am. 

320 of 1909 ; SIL iii. 189. 

„ Podavur (Ch) — Sale of land r free of taxes, by uravar 
to Patti, brother of Tennavan-madeviyar, who had the 
proprietory right over the village (ivtnir jivitam) of 
Merpidavur in Purisai-nadu. 68 of 1923. 

Year 10. — TakkfHam (NA.) — K5 - Parthivendr^dhipati - varman. 

The sabha of RajamattSnda-catm. *^aipzyir-k(^}aU^ 


f 462 ] 



P ARTEI VENDR A V ARM AH 


Tiruvuralpurattu tay-kurru) accepted from ‘ Kuma- 
raddnangai, the daughter of Nandinangai, herself the 
daughter of Tiruvural-devanar, gold weighing 92 
kalanju (by dharmakkattalauedai ? ) to be used for 
offerings to Kaligai-vitanka, set up by Kumaradi- 

nangai in the Irana-singa-virar-pallilk-kattii-mandapam 

in the temple of Tiruvuval-devar. Mentions 92 kCuji of 
paddy by marakkal Kavdramoli. 

13 of 1897 ; SII. iii. 190. 

Year 10, — Tirumdlpuram (NA.) — Vira Pandiyan - talai-konda 
Parthivendradi-varman. 96 sheep for a lamp to 
Govindapadi-deva by Vanaraja Alagamaiyan. 

327 of 1906 ; SIL iii. 192. 

„ Velacceri (Ch.)— -Land for offerings to the temple of the 
Seven Mothers by a native of Mala-nadu, a sub-divi- 
sion of Sola-nadu. 316 of 1911 ; SIL iii. 191. 

Year ll.—Kadahlr (SA.)— Lamp by Nagarattar. 281 of 1915, 

„ Kuram (Ch.) — Sale of land tax-free by the (Vum-sabhai 
to a person for building a rest-house ( ambahim ) and 
for the supply of water in it during summer. 

105 of 1923, 

Year 11, day 324. — UttarambrTtr (Ch.) — Parthivendradhipati- 
varman. Land given by the queen (Udaiyar-deviyar) 
Villa van-mahadeviyar to the image set up by her 
and to the temple for Sribali and arcandbhdga , 2920 
Jmli ; the mahasabha take purvdmram and make the 
land tax-free ; the iraddliamantas were to enforce 
the proper maintenance of the charities ; they had 
power to levy a fine up to 25 kalanju for default. 

32 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 193. 


Year 12 .— Kdhclpamm (Ch.)— -Fifty kalanju of gold by Danma- 
ponnar alias Trailokya Madeviyar, the queen of 
Perumana<Jigal ; and 200 kadi of paddy to be supplied 
as interest on this amount at 4 per kalanju. Money 


deposited with the ur of Tiraiya-mangalam. 


t 


[ 463 ]. 



THE COLAS 


Year 12. — Tirumalpuram (NA.) — Anaiyaman Paraman<JaIadittai>» 
called Virataraja, built a mandapa in the temple. 

323 of 1906 ; ARE . 1907 II. 65. 

„ Tirumalpuram (NA.) — Gift by Virata king (Anaiya- 
man’s son ?) for feeding fifteen Brahmans daily. 

324 of 1906. 

yy UUaramerur (Ch.) — Parthivendradhipati-varman. Land. 

69 of 1898. 

Year 12, day 184 — Brahmad&sa?n (NA.) — Land by Visuddha- 
matipanditar for abhisPka to god. The ganapperu- 
makkal of the koyil-vdriyam had to supervise this. 

241 of 1915. 

„ day 326 — Utlaramtrur (Ch.) — Parthivemlradhipati-var- 

man. Land, after purchase from the farmers of the 
town, given to god of the SrI-Veli-visnugrha built 
at Uttaramerur by Kongaraiyar, for music at hrthali 
{kribali - kottuvadarkku ) by queen (Tambirattiyar) 
Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar. The sabha took purva- 
cdram from the same queen and made the land 
iraiyili. The kmddhdmantas had power to fine 
defaulting persons 25 kahinj u each. 

49 of 1898 ; STL iii. 194. 

Year 13. — Brahmade&am (NA.) — Thirty ka 7 anju gold for main- 
taining the abhiseka-brahmam by a daily wage and 
two cloths in every six months ; endowment by Muva- 
yiravan Trairajya Ghatika Madhyasthan. Kaf-ariju is 
equated with niska . The ganapperumakkal for each 
year in charge. 197 of 1915. 

,, Kdnclpuram (Ch.) — Fifty kalanju of gold by queen 
Danmaponnar alias Ti*ailokya-madeviyar. Residents, 
ur, of Pannaippuram, were required to supply 100 
kd4% of paddy as interest to the temple, 18 of 1921. 

„ Kdnclpuram (Ch.) — Thirty kalanju by same queen to 

residents (ur) of Pondur for one lamp. Measure : 

uragattu-ninrar-kMak-W-ndfj,. 19 of 1921. 

4 

* 


[464 ]- 


h 



PARTHIVENDRAVARMAN 

K ' 

Year 13 . — Kdvanur (NA.) — VIra Pandiyan-talai-konda Parthiven- 
dradhipati-varman. Sale of 1000 kuli of land by 
assembly of Kavanur to a person who gave it for the 
maintenance of a tank. Measuring rod : Jcatfigai- 
kalattuk-kol. 156 of 1921. 

„ Kiliyanfir (SA.) — Twenty-five sheep for lamp by a 
certain dandanayaka. 157 of 1919. 

„ Tirumtdpuram (NA.) — Vlra Pandiyan-talai-konda Parthi- 

vt'mlradi-varman. Twenty-five kalanju of gold for two 
lamps left with sabha of Pattalam alias Elunumiva- 
catm. by Vajjavai-mahadeviyar, daughter of Nandi- 
varma Kadupattigal ; (perhaps the queen of P.) 

2G6 of 1906 ; SIL iii. 197. 

„ TimmCdpuram (N A.) — Land, 2000 kuli, by purchase, for 

feeding a Brahman in a matha at Sm-iyarrur. The 
donor was Perumal-pirakerum-anaiyal Mannan Kannan 
alias Varanapperaraiyan. 

328 of 1906; SIL iii. 198. 

„ Tirumullawdyil (Ch.) — Parthivendradhipati-varman. 
Vilattur-kilavan Singala Vira-naranan, a native of the 
Cola country, gave ninety sheep for a perpetual lamp 
to the Mahadeva of the village, a devaddna in Pular- 
kottattu Vellaiyur-natju. 

683 of 1904; SIL iii. 196. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Parthivendradhipati - varman. 
Queen (Perumana<Jigal nambirattiyar) Tribhuvana 
Mahadevi gave 192 sheep, for two lamps, to the Peru- 
manaijigal of the Kongaraiyar Srikoyii, distributed 
equally between the Vellalar of Panmaic-ceri and the 
merchants ( viydpdriga \ ) of Naduvilangadi. Stops 
rather abruptly with the clause : “ Ivvitta diiu kadaik - 
Icana-viftl anral-kCwukku devaratfiydre nisada-man - 
ja4ip-pon da ” 52 of 1898 ; SIL iii. 195. 

„ Venga\attur (NA.) — Land to temple. 94 of 1921. 

Year 13, day 120 .—Brahmadeiam (NA.)— Thirty kalahju of gold 
by Caturan Muvayiravan Trairajya Ghatika-Madhyasi 

[465 ] 


59 



THE COLAS 


than. It was placed under the charge of Ganavari • 
yap-perumakkal of Rajamalla-catm. subject in case of 
default, to a fine to be levied by the & raddhamantar . 
Mentions dhanmakhattalai4ulai~nirai . 

194 of 1915. 

Year 15. — Parandur (Ch.) — Tax-free gift of land for maintenance 
of seven musicians for service during §ribali, 

75 of 1923. * 


• cl. pp. 180*181 ante. 


[ 466 ] 



PARAKESARI UTTAMA COLA. 

Year 2 . — Kuhur (Tj.) — Land by purchase for offerings and 
worship to Aditta Isvaram Utjaiyar. 287 of 1917. 

„ Tiruvilakkudi (Tj.) — Remission of taxes on temple land 

by the asembly of Videlvi<jugu-catm. for 50 kasu 
received from some Karikfila-solat-terifija-kaikkojar. 

136 of 1926. * 

Year 3. — Mlnjur (Ch.) — (Verse) Madhurantaka. Temple of Sola- 
kulasundara-Vinnagar constructed in this year by one 
Kcsavan Karukkaikkon for god Alivalak-kesava. 

134 of 1916. 

Year 4 . — Kumhahlnam (Tj.) — Parakesarivarman. Sale of land by 
the Miilaparudai of Tirukkudamukkil for a lamp in a 
temple in the name of Kari Kolamban, a Kaikkolan. 

245 of 1911 ; T SIL iii. 129. 

„ Tiruvilakkudi (Tj.) — Parakesarivarman. A silver vessel 
of 400 kalahju for holding offerings to god, presented 
by Ayyan Marasingan § alias Virasekhara Muvenda- 
velan. 114 of 1926. 

„ Tiruvilakkudi (Tj.)— Parakesarivarman. Two kdsu to 
the temple by Panaiyan Kodandan, one of the IJaiya- 
vaI-pen*a-kaikkolar. 125 of 1926. 

Year 5 . — Vilanagar (Tj.) — Land, by purchase, for offerings at 
ardhaydma service to Tirunalarkoyil Mahadeva at 
Vilainagar, a brahmadeya on the south bank, by 
Orattanan Sorabbaiyar, the chief queen ( agramahadevi - 
ydr) of king Uttama Cola. Mentions the stream 
Nenyudaiccolap-peraru. 1G5 of 1925. 

Year 6. — Kfoih'irajapuram (Tj.) — Land for lamp to Adit- 
yesvaram § -udaiya Mahadeva at Tirunallam. 

638 of 1909 ; SIL iii. 130. 

• Date may be April 12, A. D. 969. ARE . 1926 App. E and Ii 17. 

t 22nd April, A. D. 976. ARE . 1912 II 20. 

X Perhaps so called after Ganga Marasimha ARE . 1926 II 18. 

§ After GanjarSditya 1 ? 


[ 467 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 6. — Pcdankdyil (NA.) — Parakesarivarman. Village 0<jiyam- 
ballam given as a tax-free devadana to Mahadeva at 
Tiruppalan -golur by Kampanan Iranian alias Uttama- 
sola Piridi-gangaraiyan, chief of Pangala-na<}u * in 
Palkunra-kottam, with the consent of the king got 
while he was at Kanclpuram. Mentions a Mlnavanom 
Muvendavelan as the vd sal-kelvi, 352 of 1925, 

Tiruvatjandai (Ch.) — Parakesarivarman. Lamp to 
Manavala Perumal * to be maintained with 1 measure 
of oil every day as interest on 30 kalanju of gold 
accepted by the ur of Tiruvadavandai ; who under- 
took never to remit the interest in cash {port ) on pain 
of a dan<jam at the dhanmasana of 4J kdnam and a 
manrxtpddii of 1 manjatfi pon to the ruling king 
( anralkdvukku ) for every day of default. The oil was 
to be given regularly to the Tiruvunnaligai-variyar. 

268 of 1910 ; SII. iii. 125, 

Year 8. % — Kumbakonam (Tj.) — Parakesarivarman. Sheep for 

lamp by one perhaps of Udaiyar-Gandaradittat-terinja- 
kaikkolar. 229 of 1911 ; SII, iii. 131, 

„ Kumbakdnam (Tj.) — Parakesarivarman. Sheep. Men- 
tions Sri-Uttamasola-nambirattiyar. 234 of 1911. 

„ Tiruvenkadu (Tj.) — Parakesarivarman. Land for lamp 
by a queen of Uttama Cola. 486 of 1918. 

Year 9. — Karufiyur , — (Tj.) — Lamp and offerings on the birthdays 
of the donor, Puduvurudaiyan Mayan Kanjanan alias 
Villavan Muvendavelan, to Tirukkan(Jiyur Virattanattu 
Mahadeva. 13 of 1895 ; SII, iii. 134. 

Year 10. — Nallur (Tj.) — An enquiry into the affairs of the temple 
of Mahadeva at Nallur by Manakkurai-VIranarayana- 

• In the B3na country. The chief was perhaps the son and successor of 

Pfthivipati IL ARE . 1925 II 11. 

t This image was presented to the temple of VarahadEva by RSjamftr&yar. 

264, 256 of 1910 ARE, 1911 H 19. 

% 20 Jan; K, D. 679. ARE, 191 2 II 20. 

[ 468 ] 



PARAKESARI UTTAMA COLA 

nar under orders of the king, Srlkdryam aracciyil 
udaiydr tirumugam Jcoduvandu. 

41 of 1911 ; Sir. in. 136. 

Year 10 .— Utjaiydrgutfi (SA.) — (Grantha). Building of the sabha 
by Nambiyenban and land for feeding 100 Brahmans 
in that hall. 578 of 1920. 

Year 11 . — Tirukhldikaval (Tj.) — Parakesarivarman. Construc- 
tion by Sembiyan-mahadeviyar, with stone, of $ri« 
vimdna of the temple, an old brick structure, and 
re-engraving of old inscriptions that lay scattered on 
the wails of the temple. One of them is a Maranja- 
(Jaiyan record (4 + 9 yr.) containing a gift of Vara- 
guna-maharaja. 36 of 1931. 

Year 12 . — Gdvindaputtur (Tri.) — Land, made tax-free, by Sekki- 
lfin Araiyan Sankaranarayanan alias Sola-muttaraiyan 
of Kavannur to the temple of Sri Kailayattu Parama- 
svarai at Periya-vanavan-mahadevi-catm. 

158 of 1929. 


Guvindaputtur (Tri.) — Parakesari. Ambalavan Paluvur- 
nakkan alias Vikramasola-marayan, * the perundaram 
of Dttama Cola-deva, built of stone the Srl-vundna of 
the temple at Vijayamangalam in Periyavanavan- 
mahadevi-catm., a brahmadeya on the north bank. 

165 of 1929. 


Guvindaputtur (Tri.) — Parakesari. Sheep for lamp by 
Aparayitan Seyyavaymani, wife of Ambalavan Paluvur- 
nakkan alias Yikramasola-marayan of Kuvalalam, who 
erected the stone temple. 166 of 1929. 


„ Gdvindaputtur (Tri.) — Parakesari. Sheep for lamp by 
Kahci-Akkan, wife of Vikramasola Marayar (See 166). 

167 of 1929. 

„ Milappa/juvur (Tri.) — 96 sheep for lamp in the northern 

shrine of the Mahadeva temple at A v ani-Kandarpa- 
isvara-grham, a dsvadtitia in Mannup-perumbaluvur in 
Kunra-kun*am. 379 of 1924. 

# Figures also in 168, 163 and 160 of years 3, 7 and 7 respectively of 
RffjarSja 1. See also 164 of year 14 Uttama CSJa, 

[ 169 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 12. — & 0 mbiya?imahddevi (Tj.) — Parakesari. Money to be 

deposited with the caturvfcli-bhattaUdnap-perumakkal f 
for offerings on birthday of Sembiyan-mahadeviyar, by 
five queens of Uttama Cola, Patton Danatongi, Malapacji 
Tennavan - madeviyar, and Yana van - mahadeviyar, 
daughter of a certain Irungolar, and the daughters of 
Vilupparaiyar and Paluvettaraiyar, 494 of 1925. 

Year 12, * — Tiruvilakkutfi (Tj.) — Parakesari. Remission of taxes 
by assembly of Videlvidugu-catm. on lands purchased 
by Ayyan Marasingan alias Virasekhara Miivendavelan 
for lamp and for water from the Kavori. 

112 of 1926. 

„ Udaiyargu4i (SA.) — Parakesari. Land for feeding five 

Brahmans every day and a perpetual lamp in the temple 
by Adigal Paluvettaraiyar Gan<Jan Sundara-solan for 
the merit of his younger brother Gandan Satrubhayan- 
karanar. 592 of 1920. f 

Year 13. X — Kumbaknnam (Tj.) — Parakesari. Gift of land by 

VIranarayaniyar, daughter of and Nambirattiyar 

of Sri Uttamasolar, for providing garlands of flowers to 
the Tirukkil-kottattup-perumal temple. The land was 

sold to the donor by the mulaparudai of 

240 of 1911 ; Sri. Hi. 137. 

Year 13. § and Kali 4083 — Tiruvidaimarudur (Tj .) — Mentions 

Perungurip of Kafijanur alias Simhavisnu-catm., 

a brahmadeya in Vadagarai-nallarrur-nadu. 

265 of 1907 ; 811. iii. 138. 


• February 16, A. D. 980 (?) ARE. 1926 App. E. and II 17. 

*(• Ut tam a Coja was the only Parak. in this period who ruled over ten years 5 
hence all Parak. records from this place with years 10 to 16 may be his. The 
name of the feudatory given here, perhaps taken from Parantaka II, also leads 
us to give Parak. a place among his successors. ARE • 1921 1129. See 
also VfddhScalam under Parak . 12. 

J 9th June, A. D. 982 ARE. 1912 II 20. 

§ A. D. 981-2 ARE , 1908 11 83. 

r 470 ] 



PARAKESARI UTTAMA COLA 


Year 14.— Aipfanallur (Tri.) — Parakesari. Gift of land by 
&embiyan IrukkuveJ alias Pudi Parantakan, * who 
bnilt the stone temple (Vatatirthanatha) at Anduva- 
nallur Tiruvalandurai. Gift of devaddna on the day of 
Jalasamprdksana. Contains the phrase : Tiruppa - 
diyam pd 358 of 1903 ; SII. iii. 139. 

„ Qfivindaputtur (Tri.)— Parakesari. Ambalavan Paluvur- 

nakkan alias Vikramasola-marayan, the perundaram 
of Uttamafiola, bnilt of stone the Sri-vimdna of the 
temple of V i jay amangalattu-mahadeva, and made a 
gift to it of the village of Ne<Juvayil. 164 of 1929. t 

„ Tirumullaivayil (Ch.) — (modern Characters). Gift of 
land, purchased tax-free for 80 pon from the sabha of 
Ambattur, by Tanriratta-mahadeviyar Sembiyan Maha- 
deviyar, queen of GancJarMitta-perumal and daughter 
of Malavaraiyar. 

669 of 1904 ; SII ; iii. 141 ; MCC. Mag. ix. p. 109. 

„ Tiruvadi (SA.) — 96 sheep for lamp in the natakaidlai- 
maiufapa in the temple erected by Attaman Ayyaran 
alias Kantjatol Gandappayyan of Pungunram, 

398 of 1921. 

„ Tiruvilakkwjli (Tj.) — Parakesari. Silver vessel, 
weighing thirty tlakkaiu , for water offering (tannir- 
amudu) to deity during the worship. Gift by Ayyan 
Marasingan. (See 112 of year 12). 113 of 1926. 

Year 14, day 216. — Tirwndlpuram (NA.). — Ko-non-inmaikontjan. 

Gift of a village. Sirriyanur in Manaiyil-na<Ju, a sub- 
division of Manaiyil-kottam had been granted as a 
devaddna and brahmadeya in the 21st year of Tonda- 
manarrur-tuhjina U<Jaiyar f to the sabha of Puduppak- 
kam, a brahmadeya of Purisai-natju in the same 
kuffam. Though a idsana was drawn up in the next 

• Son of ViknunakSsari of Ko^umb^Qr (Venkayya) ARE. 1908 II 88, 91, 
quoted alto by H. K. Sastri. 

f The Sanskrit part of the record says that he got the title Vikramasoja- 
mahSrSya from the king, proof that Vikrama C5|a was a title of Uttama C5|a. 
ARE. 1929 II 89. 


[ 471 ] 



THE COLAS 


year, the village was not entered in the accounts as a 
devaddna and Irahmadeya . This mistake 4 was recti- 
fied in the fourth year of Parakesarivarman who took 
Madurai and Ilam,’ and the sabha of Puduppakkam 
were remitting the produce and gold due from them 
to the Mahadeva temple at Tirumalperu. In the 
36th year of the king Last mentioned, the dues fr^m 
Puduppakkam were increased as the result of a fresh 
grant ; the village assembly did not remit the new 
items properly, and the temple authorities lodged 
a complaint to the king when he was in the ground- 
floor (ddi-bhumi) of the pon-mdUgai within his palace 
( 'nam-vittin-iilldl ) at Kancipuram. The king after duo 
enquiry fined the village assembly and restored the 
grant to the temple. Interesting details of administra- 
tive procedure given, 286 of 1906 ; SII. iii. 142. * 

Year 15. — Kancipuram (Ch.) — Mentions Tirumayann-purattuk- 
kadavul-eabhai who accept an endowment of gold for 
a lamp. 2 of 1906, 

„ Sem hiyan mahddevi (Tj.) — Parakesari. Gift of lands for 

offerings and worship in the temple of Kailasam- 

udaiya-mahadeva built by D0a'y a I>indtiy^r Madhuran- 

takan Madevadigalar alias Sembiy an-madev i var, 

mother of Gandan Mad hu ran taka-d e var alias Uttama 

# 

Cola-deva, by Urattayan Borabbaiyar alias Trihliuvana- 
madeviyar, queen of Uttama Cola, who purchased, for 
the purpose, some land to supplement her own. 

485 of 1925. 

„ Sembiy an mahddevi (Tj.) — Parakesari. List of articles 

required for worship etc., on sankrdnti days for 
which provision was made by Urattayan Borabbaiyar, 
the mutla-nambiratjiyar of Uttama Cola. 

488 of 1925. 

„ Semliyanmahddevi (Tj.) — Parakesari. Gold forehead 
plate for the image of the deity by Pattan Danaton- 
giyar, queen of Uttama Co} a. The village with the 

* See Introduction to this record by II. K. Sastri for the reasons for 
assigning it to Uttama C51*. 


1472 ] 



PA RAKES ARl UTTAMA COLA 


temple of Kailasamudaiyar was founded by Sembiyan 
Mahadevi, as a brahnuuleya in Aja-nadu on the south 
* 490 of 1925. 

Year 15 . — Scmlriyanmahadevi (Tj.) — Parakesari. Fly-whisk with 
a gold handle by Patlcavan Mahadeviyar, queen of 
Parak. Uttama Cola. 491 of 1925. 

„ Sembiyanmahadevi (Tj.) — Parakesari. 507 \ kalanju 
by a lady (queen?), Kannapparasiyar alias Sonna- 
mahadeviyar, for offerings on the day of Kettai in 
Cittirai, the birthday of Sembiyan Mahadeviyar, the 
founder of the temple and the village. The money 
was to be in the charge of Caturvkli-bluiUattdnap - 
perumaklaxl . 492 of 1925. 

„ Tiruvorriyar (Ch.)— An image of Srlbali-deva, eight 
bugles {kd(am) and 24 fly whisks with gold handles 
made by order of Uttama Cola, (devarayamey-kondu 
ponndl seyvittu k-kcxi ukka ) . Mentions an officer Sen- 
n i yer i padaic -colan-U t tamasol an . 

166 of 1912 ; STI. iii. 143. 

Ml 

Year 16. — Atfuturai (Tj.) — Temple of ApatsahayPsvara built by 

0 z 

the mother of Sri-Madhurantaka-deva alias Sri Uttama 
Cola. Mentions the name Tirukkurangaduturai for 
the place ; and the re-engraving on the new structure 
of worn-out inscriptions mentioning endowments to 
the shrine. 357 of 1907 ; STL iii. 144. 

„ Melappahtvdr (Tri.) — Provision for lamp in temple by 

Paluvottaraiyar Kantian Maravanar. 395 of 1924. 

„ &em hiyanmahade vi (Tj.) — Parakesari. 590 kalanju of 
gold by Aruran Ambalattadigal , a queen of Uttama 
Cola, and another gift of 145 kalanju (in both cases 
weight by urkkal) by Urattayan Sorabbai alias Tribhu- 
vana-mahadeviyar, for offerings on birthdays of 
Sembiyan Mahadevi. The committee called iSdsatia- 
baddha-catu rvMi-bha{tatt<inap-pe rum akkal, to whom 
the gifte were entrusted, is said to have been the 
creation of Sembiyan-madevi herself. 496 of 1925. 

• This statement is repeated verbatim in 491 and 492. 


60 


[ 473 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 16. — Tirukkolamhiyur (Tj.) — Parakesari. Land as time - 
cennatfaip-puram to Madhurantakan Dma-bhattarakiyar 
in the Tirnkkolamba-devar temple by Aruran Ponnam- 
balattadigal, the queen of Uttama Cola, after purchasing 
it from a lady Kadan Singam, through her son Maha- 
matran Gautaman Kesavan Srikanthan of Hattanur. 
Taxes remitted by assembly of Peravur in return for 
a lump payment, Ilakkarxingasu mentioned. 

47 of 1925. 

„ Tiruppugalur (Tj.) — Parakesari. Land as iraiyili by 

Uttamasola-madeviyar alias Gopan-sakappu after 

purchase from the sabha and tanippurumr , to 

Kailasamudaiya Mahadeva at Tripura mangalam 

a brahmadiya in Kurumba-nu<J. 66 of 1926, 

„ Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — 888 kalanju of tulai-ni rai-pon 
from the revenues of the temple (dh)arayamcy-kuLti) 
for a salver (kulittattu), and 40 kalanju for offerings 
by Nandi6aran alias Parakesari Vilupparaiyan of Eli- 
nur, ( Elinur-kilavan\ who was the officer managing the 
temple affairs (srl-karyam-arayginra) at the time. 

245 of 1912 ; SII. Hi. 145. 

8 . 901 and Kali U)(ti)Q~-Uyyakkonijan • Tirumalai (Tri.)— 
Uttama Coja Parakesari. Land, for offerings. 

456 of 1908 * ; SIT. Hi. 135. 


The regnal year is lost or uncertain in the following : — 

Kdncipuram (Ch.) — Mentions queen Vlranarayaniyar. 

3 of 1906. 

Kdnerirdjapuram (Tj.)— Temple of Tirunallamudaiyiir t 
was built of stone by MadGva4igalar 9 queen of GancjUi* 
raditta-deva and mother of the king. 

450 of 1908 ; 811 ill. 146. 

1 Though vary seriously damaged, this record is invaluable for its date. 

f Called elsewhere XditySsvara from Gan 4 aridity a who is figured in stone 
in this temple. SIT. iii pi. xi. 


[ 474 ] 



PARAKESARI UTTAMA COLA 


Talaiccangat^u (Tj.) — Silver vessel (I ambaram), weigh- 
ing 151 kalanju, to the big temple of Mahadeva by 
Pirantakan Madeviga} alias §embiyan Mahadevi, 
mother of Uttama C51a. 204 of 1925. 

Tirunaraiyur (Tj.) — Land for offerings to the temple of 
Siddhesvamn-udaiya-mahadeva by queen Pirantakan 
Madeva<ligalar alias &embiyan Madeviyar who gave 
birth to Uttama Cola. 159 of 1908 ; SIL iii. 149. 

Tiruppdlatturai (Tri.) — Mentions construction by some 
one (king ?) of Dayaparap-perambalam and the grant of 
some land as ambalappuram , made iraiyili by the 
assembly which received a lump payment. Iraiyili - 

yaga paniccu nilamudcdum pottagattum iraivCitti 

TiruppdUurai §rl vim&natte sldlekhai §eydu 

»VaiM/fuA-toiuppJfnanf}m perunguri-sabhaiyom. * 

509 of 1908 ; SIL 1 iii. 150. 


• H. K. Sftittri translates: u Caused the deduction of the taxes (to be 
entered) in the land register {nilamudal ?)» the tax register (pottagam) " etc. 

[ 476 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 
(Acc. 25th June — 25th July A.D. 985) 


Year 2. — Tirxmaraiyur (Tj.) — Rajak. Silver vessels and a chauri 
of gold to the temple by Udaiya-pirattiyar Sembiyan 
Mahadeviyar alias Pirantakan Madevadigalar. * 

156 of 1908. 

„ Tiruvarur (Tj.) — Rajak. Silver vessels by Sembiyan 
Mahadeviyar for (merit of) Sri Uttama Coja-deva. 

570 of 1904. 

Year X — Gdvindaputtur (Tri.) — Rajak. Sabha of Periya Vana- 
van Mahadevi-catm. got 200 k afanju from a perun- 
daram of M u m m u d i - 0 o 1 a - d e v a , Ambalavau Paluviir- 
nakkan alias Vikrama-sola-Maharayau, for the 
iraihdval on 1J veli of land. lt)8 of 1929. 

„ KVappaluvur (Tri.) — Rajak. Two silver vessels by the 

wife (deviyar nambiriittigajar) of Vikrama-sola-IIango- 
veltir, daughter of Palnvettaraiyar, when Kausikan 
Nakkan Miiran was looking after temple affairs {srh 
hi ryn m-tird ydn irJm) under orders from Adigu} Palu- 
vfdtaraiyar Kantian Mara van. 

110 of 1895 ; SIL v, 671. 

>t KVappahwur (Tri.) — Rajak. Two gold ornaments by 
Adigal Palnvettaraiyar Kandan Maravan. 

111 of 1895 ; SIL v. 672. 

„ Semhiyanmahdievi (Tj.) — Rajak. List of articles such 

as golden pot, pattam , gold flowers, with their weights 
noted, as presented to the temple of Sri Kailasamudai- 
yfir by the mother of Uttama Cola in the month Mina 
in that year. 497, 498 of 1925. 


* The presence of this lady's name is the reason for assigning this and 
similar records to this king. {AftE, 1909 II 41). 


[ 476 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year ‘i.—Tiruccenguttangudi (Tj.)— Rajak. Rajariija-deva. Land 
for two lamps to shrine of Sirala-dfva by Vellalan 
Ulagan Sirriyan alias Tappilla Muvendavfdiin. 

56 of 1913. 

„ Tirulckalittattai (Tj.)— Rajarajak. Land for offerings 
and for supply of 108 pots of bathing water at monthly 
Sankrantis to the temple of Mahadeva at Amaniniira* 
yana-catm. by Kilanadigal, the daughter of Yilupparai- 
yar and queen of Uttama Coja-di'va, son of Gandarit- 
ditta-deva. 298 of 1908. 

„ Tirukkaravuml (Tj.) — Rajak. Mummudi Coja-deva. * 
Land, by purchase, for lamp. 453 of 1908, 

„ Tirumulpurmn (NA.) — Lamp. Gold with urar of 
Serukur by Madhuriintakan Gandaradittan. 

285 of 1906 ; 292-A of 1906. 

„ Tirumaljmram (NA.) — Sale of land for upkeep of a 
lamp. Mentions Madhurantakan Gandaradittan and 
Sol a - mat It' viy fir alias Pancavan-miuteviyar, (queen of 
Mummudi Cola), t the latter being donor. 

294 of 1906. 

„ Tirumdlpuratn (NA.) — Gold by Madhurantakan Gandara- 
dittan. 295 of 190G, 

„ Tirumdlpuram (NA.) — (Gr. and Tam.) Gold for feed- 
ing Brahmans by Madhurantakan Accupidaran (Aditya 
in the grantha portion). Bon of Vira-sola-Ilaiigdvelar of 
Kodumbfilur in Ko-nf^lu. 306 of 1906. J 

„ Ti rnjyfnimmhiyam (Tj.) — Rajarajak. Silver pot by 

Udaiya Pirattiyar, mother of Ari-kandan Madhuran- 
takan alias Uttama Cdja, on behalf of her eon to god at 
Tiruppurambiyam. A weighing scale called ingti - 
turaiyak-k&fi. 338 of 1927. 

Tinivaiydru (Tj.) — A chaitri to temple by Pancavan 
Madeviyar, queen of Munumvji Cola. 147 of 1918. 

• Title aisumed in this year ? - ARE . 1909 II 42. t *• f * R3jara}a I. 

% RujarSja 1. Sanskrit part gives name RSjarSja. 


[ 477 ] 



THE COLAS 


► 


Year 3 . — Tiruvopriyur (Ch.) — Rajak. Mummiuji C51a-deva. Gold 
necklace ( pallittongal ) called Rajarajan, an 
of gold called Mummudi-solan, and a gold door for the 
Mevasi called Rajarajan, by a certain Valikkeytunai 
Gunasilan of Mu]lak-kurumbu in the Coja country, 
for the merit of Adigal Nlradi, chief of Cn^kkadu, a 
village in Avur-kottam of Sd-nadu, who was in charge 
of M-karyam of Tiruvomyur-alvar. The jewels were 
made from accumulated savings of 810 kdktnju from 
the temple income. • 235 of 1912. 

* 

Year 4 . — Kilappaluvur (Tri.) — Rajak. Mummu^i. Gold for lamp 
by Adigal Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Maravanar-perundir- 
attu Araiyan Sundara-solan who gave 12 kdlanju to 
the Tiruvalandurai-srikoyil-udaiyar. 

115 of 1895 ; STL v. 676. 


„ Sem biya nmahadevi (Tj.) — Remission by assembly of 

taxes on some temple lands. 493 of 1925* 

„ Tirumalpuram (NA.) — Rajak. Mummudi C6}a. An en- 
quiry into the affairs of the temple of Agnisvara at 
Tirumalperu by Madhurantakan Gandaradittar with a 
committee of live members. Proof obtained of neglect 
and misappropriation of endowments. 

283 of 1906. * 

„ Tiruvenkadn (Tj.) — 96 sheep for a lamp by Uijaiya- 
pirattiyar Tambiranadiga} Vanavan-madeviyar alias 
Tribhuvana-madeviyar, the mother (fieri) of ^ri-Rajen- 
dra Coia-devar and the queen of Sri Rajaraja-deva. 

117-A of 1896 1 ; SII. v. 982. 

Year 4, day 24. — Madhurilntakam (Ch.) — Kandaj ur*salaik- 

kalam-arutta Rajak. The mahasabha of the place 
agreed to conduct a festival to god Tiruvenkatiu- 
Paramefivara with the twenty-five pon, collected from a 
merchant of Yira-4o|apperang^di 5 and the tax kSlaiavu - 
kfiUkuli* The madhyoBtha was also a signatory, 

395 of 1922. 

t 446 of 1916 is stmt bat fixBsr. 

[ 478 ] 


• WrfrurU. 



4 


RAJATtESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 4, day 154 . — Madhurdntakam (Ch.) — Kandalur-salaik-kalam* 
arutta. An assignment of land by the mahasabha of 
Madhurantaka-catm., for opening round the temple 
a street which was named Tiruvenkattup-perun-deruvu; 
restrictions placed, and privileges granted to the 
Sivabrahmanas, uvaccar, tapasvins and the devaradiyar 
who were allowed to settle in it. 397 of 1922. 

Year 5 . — Ddrdsuram (Tj.) — Land for sacred bath and irlbali to 

alvar of Tirusomisvaram at Tirukkudamukku. 

*• • 

3 of 1915. 

„ Kllappahtvur (Tri.) — Rajak. Land sold by sabha of 
Sirupaluvur to Adi gal Paluvettaraiyar Maravan Kandan. 

118 of 1895 ; SIL v. 679. 

„ SembiyanmaJuidein (Tj.) — An order of the assembly to 
the ur-mriyam (Frag.) 495 of 1925. 

„ Tiruccengotfu (Coi.) — (Copper-plate) Rajakesari. Lands 
to Paramos vara of sacred Mulasthana at Tusiyur by 
Kollimalavan Orriyiiran Piridigamlavarman. 

SIL iii. 213. * 

„ Tiru vamlarkuvil (Pondicherry) — Rajak. The silver ves- 
sels and gold of Tiruvarai-nakkan-koyil Paramasvamin 
having been utilised in former years by the sabha, 
certain lands were given in exchange to the temple in 
the 28th year of the reign of king Kannaradeva. t 
Mention is made also of a gift of land in the 14th year 
of Madiraikon<Ja Parakesari. 359 of 1917, 

„ TiruvMikku<fi (Tj.) — Rajak. Thirty iron torch-lights 
(iruppup - pitji - vi\akku) by Rajariija-deva, fifteen 
servants being retailed for holding the lights. J 

68 of 1895 ; SIL v. 625. 

• In this record the word ‘ kanntUfu * about which Krishna Sastri makes 
curious surmises seems really to mean * boundary stone ’ and is by no means, 
either a reference to the * hero*stones * of Tamil literature or an engraver s 
mistake for * The word h very clearly engraved and occurs in three 

places in the same plate. 

t i *; W-8 A.D., also the initial d»te of Utuma Col» - ARE. 1918 II 23. 

t Bach mu held two Ughte. cf. 63 of 1895 of Yr. 6. 

[ 479 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 5 * — Tiruvi&aliir (Tj.) — Gold by a queen of Rajaraja-deva by 
name Vat tan Kadan Tongiyar for feeding five Brah- 
mans. One hundred fiakkteu yielding 15 kdiu as 
dhnrmappaliiai . 19 of 1907. 

Year 6. — S. 913 . — JCxjli - kempanapura (Mys.) — Coja-narayana. 

Land. MAR. 1917 p. 42. 

„ Takkdlam (NA.) — Undertaking by the residents of 
Purisai to pay interest in the form of paddy on 
20 kalanju of gold received from the temple of 
Tiruvural. 244 of 1921. 

„ Tiruccatturai (Tj.) — Rajak. Fifty iron lights ( iruppu - 
vilakku) by Rajaraja-deva for the Gribali at night ; oil 
2 measures ; the following were to hold these torches : 
eight sweepers (tirtwielukki<jluvSr) 9 four buglers 
(, kdlamudiga ] ), one cook of the salai ( [atfuvan ), three 
tenants (JcudigaT) of the flower-garden ( nandavanam ), 
and eight others, resident in houses belonging to the 
temple, who are not devar-nivandakkarar and are used 
to hold the lights every day. 

53 of 1895; 677. v. G10. 

„ THrukkosthiyur (Tj.) — ( Va}{eluttu ). Kandalur - eaiaik- 
kalam-arutta. Land for two lamps to Tirnmayftna- 
deva by Narpattennayiravan Porkoyil-nambi alias 
Paiasiriyan. 332 of 1923. 

Tirumananjeri (Tj.) — At the command of Udaiya-pira|- 
tiyar, mother of Uttama Cola, Aruran Kamban alias 
Tirukkarrali-piccan of the village gave 16 kalanju of 
gold for sandal paste etc., to Mahadeva at Tirumanaft- 
jeri, which is stated to be near Ka<Jalangu<)i. Mentions 

phjiligaivari . 9 of 1914. 

■** 

< f 

„ Tiruvenk34u (Tj.) — Rajak. Mentions images made and 
jewels and vessels presented by Parantakan MSdeviytir 
alios &embiyan MMeviyar, daughter of Majavaraiyar, 
mother of Uttama Coja and qneen of Gaptjaraditya, in 
the fourth and sixth years of Uttama Co{a, in the fourth 


iA 

W 


• Soodsy l»t December A.D. 989. EL ii t p. 207 (Kielboro). 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


year of Rajakesari, in the 3rd and 10th years of Para- 
kesari and in the second year of Gaiviaraditya-deva 
alias M ummu Ji-coja-de va. k 444 0 £ 194^ 

Year 6 . — Tiruvimlar (Tj.) — Mentions a person belonging to the 
Udaiyar Kodandara rna- tai liccev again . 312 of 1907. 


Year 7 . — Alagadriputtar (Tj.) — Land by sabha of Paradayakudi, 
a hrahtnud?ya % to temple for offerings. Mentions the 
construction of the central shrine with stone by Pullali 

0 

Sat tan Kari velar Kandaradittan alias Mummudi- 

Soliyavaraiyar. 283 of 1903. 

„ h'h 'dads dr (SA.) — Mentions the loth year of Sri-Uttama 

0 

Cola-deva, the son of Sembiyan Madeviyar and two 
Miladu chiefs. 17G of 1900. 

„ (idvindapalldr (Tri.) — Ambalavau Paluvur-nakkan alias 
Rajaraja Paliavaraiyan of Kuvajfdam, a perundaram 
of the king, appointed SeUaposau Vennayakramavittan 
as manager of the temple of Visaiyamangaia-devar ; 
and the sabha entrusted the manager with certain 
powers. 100 of 1929. 

„ Kuhdr (Tj.) — 90 sheep for lamp by Rajaraja Paliava- 
raiyan of Kuvajalam, one of the perundaram of the 
king. 291 of 1917. 

IS fotihiyaniwihdtleri (Tj.) — Gift by Urattayan Sorabbaiyur 
alias d'ril>huYana-madfva'Jiga], the senior queen of 
L-ttama CM a, of 100 A asu, deposited with the 

0 

iSusuttabarifiha - ratarr^U - bhatlatldna^enunahkaf of 
Sii-kailasaiu. From the interest, offerings were to be 
made in the temple on the Cittirai-tirukkettai day, 
the usterism of her mother-in-law, Sembiyan Mahfidevi- 
yar, who founded the village. 480 of 192.). 

„ Tirarcaltnmi ( r l'j.) — Land by royal order to srihdryam 

ieukinm Mlnavau Vihittur-nattuk-kon for an endow- 

* • * 

meat for offerings (as detailed) in temple. 

55 of 1895 ; SIL v. 612. 

• This surname of Gaiujaraditya ami the fact of his rule are new. 
Rajadtja is the first Rujak. after Uttauia Coja. Palaeography is in support of 
this. The order of reigns mentioned in the inscription is not chronological. 

AM. «19 II 14. 


[ 481 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 7 . — Tiruvallam (NA.) — A Brahman set up an image 
of Uma-bhataraki and granted a lamp. He also 
purchased 1700 kuU of land tax-free, after paying 
* vilctidravyamum iraidruvyamam ’ to the sabha 
of Mandiram alias Jayaniera *-srIkarana-inangalam, 

0 

and made it over to the Sivabriihmanas who had 
to feed the lamp and supply the offerings. 

8 of 1890 ; SIL iii. 50. 

„ t TiruvaUatn (NA.) — A visit to Tikkfili Alvar temple by 

Madhurantakan Gandaradittanar 1 who caused 1000 

• • * 

jars of water to be poured over the god. He also held 

0 

the ^ivabrfihmanas of the temple and the sabha of 
Tirukkfdi vallum to account for the income and expen- 
diture of the temple scheduled in the tinirdnui and 
the tiruenhd ; (rest of the inscription is built in). 

10 of 1890 ; SIL iii. 49. 

„ Tiruvalhun (NA.) — Details of expenditure for 

0 

74 hihthju of gold, realised as line from the Sivabrah- 
manas for misappropriation of temple lands, and 
7 halaltju and 4 madjddi which Madhurantakan 
Gandaradittanar who scrutinised the temple accounts 
had added to make up the deficit. The four run'yarot 
Tikkfili vallum, the two vdriyar of Mandiram, and two 
hangdni s were to look after the expenditure in 
future. Paddy quoted at forty kadi per halanju . 
Hate of interest 12%. 218 of 1921. § 

„ Tiruvdrdr (Tj.) — Mentions the building of a stone shrine 

in the temple of Tirtivaraneri-alvar by Sembiyan 
Mahftdeviyfir, and the setting up of two images in it 
by the same lady, and records that she presented 
234 kdsu, invested with the sibha of Adiyappi-catm., 
for daily requirements, 4 additions to the temple 
and repairs. 57 L of 1904. 

* A title of BS^a VikramSditya I. 
f 26th September 991 A.D. EL iv p. 66, Kielhorn. 

J Perhaps an otherwise unknown son of Madhurantaka the immediate 
predecessor of R5jar5ja 1 - Hultzscb. cf, 283 of 1906 of Yr, 4. 

§ This settlement is quoted in 227 of 1921 of Yr. 4, day 114 of RSjSndra L 

[ 482 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 7. — Tiruverumbar (Tri.) — Money for feeding eix Ilrahmaus 
versed in the Veda by Iladaifiyar Pugalvippuvar-gandan 
Vira solan. * 116 of 1914. 

„ Uyyak/contjan Tinunalai (Tri.) — 2,4)12 knlnTiju of gold 
to Uy y akkonda-uay an ar T temple for festivals by sabha 
of Rajasraya-catm. 457 of 1908. 

„ V rddhuonlatri (SA.) — 90 sheep for lamp, and a lamp-stand, 

by Malaiyavvai-deviyar, daughter of Pottappic-colar 
Kattiyaraiyar and queen of Iron go] a Prithipati Ainani- 
mallar. Also 2 w~i of land for flower-garden. 

49 of 1918. 


MW / 

Year 8 . — Ahotihdkbnn (Tri.) — Lamp to Sri Krsna Pernmal at 
Tinivavpadi by a resident of Dantivurma-mangalam. 

708 of 1909. 






Dfnwt nnkli~i>jiu (Tv.) — (Vtiffrfuitu). Randal ur-salaik- 

kalam-avuita. Mentions a meeting in the devaddtUl 
Tiruvttrankoppu of the Karauattar for looking into the 
Talikkanakku and Savaikkanakku. (Frag.) 

TA&. i. p. 238. 

KVi(pjtfi\urlr (Tri.) — Pa iai Ilaiyu Iranam ukka-raman 
killed Kaikkdla Hala L' van Y'ayiri in a duel ( uruvUc - 
katti ) ; Adigal Paluvvttaraivar Kandan Maravanar 
adjudged the ease and as a result 90 sheep were 
given by the eulprit for a lamp. 

109 of 1895 ; STL v. 870. 


Mftrudddu (N A.) —Land for a lamp by residents 

of Marudadu to the Perundirukkoyil-alvar temple, for 
the merit of Ivalipperuman of Makanur Putturai who 
fell that Maruda<ju may not be destroyed. J 

411 of 1912. 


M 


lMncapanifai'ctmalai (NfA.) — Remission by Udaiyar Vira- 
solar, son of Udaiyar I la larajar Pugalvippavar-gandan, 


• El. iv pp. 136 tT. 

+ Called TirukkajfkUf}i*Viluimva*d?var in other lOtli century records. 
ARE. 1909 II 42. 

% Rice, Mysore and Coorg. pp. 186 ff. 

t 48B ] 



THE COLAS 


of karpura-vilai and anniyayavuva-damlavirai in the 
village of Kuniganpadi, an ira iyil ip-pa lljccnndam, on 
a representation from his wife Ila la-inadeviyar that 
the collection of these dues by previous (JcVpparffd- 
dnda) I lad ara jar affected this charity (Tiruppilnmalai) 
adversely. It) of 1890 ; EL iv. p. 139. 


Year 8. — Reddipdl/m (Nel.) — Lamp by Mutnmudi Vaitumba 
Maharajan alias Visnu-dcvan alias Durai Arasan. 

AT. G. 88. 






Tintvadandai (Ch.) — Tiruma</af-p~l'L I lam, but not 

liattapadi. Sabhii and ur au r ree to maintain a lamp 
* 

to Sri Biiattaraki of Sri Varaha-deva, the goddess set 
up by a merchant of Mylapore, who gave also 15 
kahtnju of gold towards the lamp. 281 of 1910. 

Tiruvi rCmisvaram (Tj.) — 1/and for lamp and offerings 

/ 

by Kudiraikkara Sohhanayyan. 140 of 1911, 


Year 9 . — Aduturai (Tj.) — Some temple land reclaimed by Sembi- 
yan Madeviyar, mother of Uttama (Joja-deva, and called 
Sembiyan Mahadevi, 302 of 1907. 




ft 


KVdr (SA ) — Gold for lamp by fvundamm Amirtavalli, 

the mother of queen Uloka - mahudt'viyur ; it was 

deposited with the Tiruvunnaligai sabhai. Also 

Ilamvifakku worth two kdsu, 

239 of 1902 ; EL vii. p. 144. 

Kuhur (Tj.) — Sale of land to temple by some persons 
called Koliyakkudaiyar, who were unable to raise the 
money for paying som tines imposed on them. Men- 
tions the harassing of royal otlicials in collecting the 
fine. 277 of 1917. 


Melappaluvdr (Tri) — Bajakosari. Money for lamp given 
to the temple servants by an inhabitant of Avanikan- 
darpapuram. Mentions Adiga) Laluvcttaraiyar Kandan 

CL.- ' maim. 


* cf. 395 ol y«ar 16 Uttama C5Ja. Hence tins Rajak. is Rajaraja 1 • who 
has no attributes up to year 9, become* Kanfiainr-salaik-kainm-a^utta in years 
10-12, and has later on the Tmima&al introduction. AKE t 1924 II 10. KSndalfir 
expedition placed in the middle ot 995 A. D, because some records of year 10 
(234, 248 of 1926) mention it while others (193 of 1926) do not ARE* 1926 11 23, 


[484 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 9 . — MMpiuii (0.) — Tirui>i'i(ja{-p~>la. flam and Rattapwli in- 
cluded. 90 sheep for lamp ; liquid measure Riijakesari. 

97 of 1921. * 


1* 


ft 


1 » 


yj 


M 


f* 


PandamvMii (Tj)— Silver plate and bronze stand to 
teraplo by ttembiyan Mahadevi. 2G2 of 1923. 

Tirugohirnam (Pd.) — Land for up-keep of a tank by a 
Brahman from the Cola country. 307 of 1904, 

Ti noted ttngrthvn (Tri.) — Land for (feeding) Sivayugins. 

087 of 1909. 

Tint^puranddyntn (Tj.) — Some gold ornaments and a 
silver vessel were made out of the savings of the 
temple treasury between the second and ninth years of 
the reign. 7 8 of 1897 ; 677 . vi. 28. 

Tiruvaduturai (Tj.)— -Land as nrlyn-lhtyn, on behalf of 

0 

the temple, by the assembly of Sattanur met in the 

/ m 

hall {wlumthu) to Kumarau Sri-kundan who had the 
mkhu'okdni of the village, for acting the seven ankas 
of the Ariyakkdltu on festival days in Purattiisi in the 
temple of Tiruvaduturai-alvar. Provision is made for 
the supply of rice Hour, betel leaves ami areca nuts, 
ghl for mixing eollyrium and turmeric. 

120 of 1925. 

Tiruridaiman/ddr (Tj.) — Gift of ornaments to Cmabhat- 

n» 

taraki by a servant of Nambirattivar Sri Paficavan- 
• « • • •<" 

Mahadeviyar of Kddandarama-velain of Tanjavur. 

278 of 1907. 


Year 9, day 158. — Uttarammlr (Oh.)— Decision of the Mahasabha 
about the payment of fines imposed on several castes 
and communities of the place either in the king’s 
courts or otherwise t* Mentions the mukha-manfaW 1 
of the Tulabhiira SrI-koyil J where the assembly held 
its sittings. 197 1923. 

# Year doubtful (9). 1 contra AKF. 1923 II 28. 

% Probably the Sundara Varada temple whence the inscription conies. 

Perhaps the king performed a Tulabluira here, ibid. 

[486 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 10. — Dar&anakhlppu (Tv.) — ( Vatteluttu ). Kandalurc-calaik- 
kalam-arutta. One lamp by the sabha for the merit of 
Pullanarayanan. 2 y AS. i. p. 239. 

„ Kandamangalam (SA.) — Kandalur-salai. Land to temple 

r~ 

SOtangi-vinnagar Paramasvamin by the assembly met 
in Tirukkavanam in front of Viranarayana Vinnagar at 
Tribhnvanamadevi-catm. Another fragment related 
to a gift of land by Gandaradittan Madhurantakan. 

356 of 1917. 

„ KVappahwu r (Tri.) — Kandalur-salai. Land by Araiyan 

Sundarasolan of the perundiram of Paluvettaraiyar 
Kandau Maravanar for the supply every day of a 
garland made of two n(Vi of tumbai flowers: ‘ ir unfit it - 
turnbai-palfitldmam .* 106 of 1895 ; STL v. 667. 


Kitlvn' (Tj.) — Kandalur-salai. Land and house-site to 
Aditva Isvara temple for the Sitiirait-tiruvilu in the 
shrine of Nambi A reran, by the fir and kaniyudaiya 
Kbliyakkudaiyargal . 299 of 1917. 

Kdram (Ch.) — Tirumagal-pnJa. A sahha-s rhnukham ol 
the sabha of Kuram providing for repairs etc., of a 
mat ha. 33- A of 1900 ; SIT. vii. 34. 


i* 


* 


Sucindratn (Tv.) — (Vaffe^uUu). Fifty sheep with the 
Mulaparadai-sabhai for lamp to Tiruc-civindirattu- 
mahadeva by llanattu Malavaraiyan Senni Kandan. 

71 of 1896 ; EL v. p. 44 ; TAS. i. p. 238-9. 


Tindivanam (SA.)— Salaik-kalam-arutta. Land, 2910 

hull , reclaimed for a musician who was to play on the 
lute ( [vlnai ) and a vocalist to accompany the lute in the 
Tindisvara temple at Kidangil. 

141 of 1900 ; STL vii. 154. 

Tiruccengddu (Coi.) — (Copper-plate). Rfijakesari. (A) An 
order of Malavaraiyan Sundarasola that the irai collect- 
ed by him from the Nagarattar of Tusiyur viz., 


* The astronomical data in this record reduce the king’s accession to 25th 
June - 25 July K D. 985. Kielhorn, Rl. vi. p. 20 

I486] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


mxilumanai-kalum arai-manai araikkdlum , shall be 
in the form of ninra-irai ; and that in the case of 
dues under damfangurram. the practice of Nandipura 
shall be followed. (7J) Kollimalavan Piradigandan * 
makes an endowment for the merit of his father 
who died in Ceylon (engal-accar-ilattujjpada ctvar 
s ) 'i maddhatt ukkuc- cirupddu . ) SIL in. 212. 


Year 10 . — Tirumdlpuram (NA.) — Kandalur-sftlai etc. Gold by 
Kulakkudaiyan Arunilai Srikrxnan alias Muvenda 
Pidavur Velar. A tiruppadiyam beginning Kolanar- 
kulal composed by the father of the donor in praise of 
Gdvindapadidilvar was to be sung at a festival. 

333 of 1906. 




77 nindaimarud dr (Tj.) — Randal ur-sfdai. Gift of a gold 
flower by one Ilrdayasiva of Tirupputtur. 

197 of 1907. 


It 


Ti ruvidai mamd dr (Tj.) — IvFindahir-sFdai. Gold image 
of Umasahitar by queen Pancavan Mahadevi. 

251 of 1907. 




Tirurisaldr (Tj.) — Kandajur-salai. Money for lamp 

to Tiruvisalfir-p(‘rumaj at Avaninarayana-catm., a 
dvvaddna and hrahmadeya. 3 of 1907. 




Tribhuvani (Pondicherry) — Kandalih’-sfilai. hand, by 
purchase, for water supply and a lamp. The tank, 
Kokkilanadippereri, is mentioned among the boundaries. 


196 of 1919. 


Uyyakkonddn - Tirumalai (Tri.) — Kandajur- sfilai. Gift, 
by Sembiyan Madeviyar, mother of Kandan Madliu- 
rantaka-devan alias Sri Uttaina Cdla-deva, to Sri 
Kajrkudi Vilumiyar at Nandipanma-mangalam, of a 
jewelled crown comprising : gold 149 kalaTtju ; silver 
190 odd kalaTiju ; muttu (pearl) 700 in number ; 

mdriikkam 3 ; and diamond ( vayirani ) 27. 

95 of 1892 ; SIT. iv. 542. t 


* cf. SIL iii. 213 of year 5. 

*j* 459 of 1908 seems to be same record. 

[ 487 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 10. — Vijayanarayanarn • (Tin.) — ( V a (t 6/wto) -Randal ur- 
salai. Land as mldhhdga purchased from sabha as 
iraiyili , and fifty sheep for lamp to Manomaya Isvarattu 
Perumanadigal ; charities under supervision of sabha. 

7 of 1927. 


Year 11 .* — Bah tlr (Pondicherry.) — S r daik-kalam-arutta. Provision 
by sabha of Yakut* for annual repairs to tho tank at 
Biihur, at the rate of padakkit-rirl per pd per md of 

178 of 1902 ; SI1. vii. 805. 


land in the village. 


fl 


Brahmudesam (NA.) — Bfilaik - kalam - arutta. Village 
called Rajamalla t catm. of Tint vegambapu nun in 
(Damar)-kot [am. 190 of 1915. 


M 


JJ 


Kdnerirujapuraw (Tj.) — Randal ur-salai. Gift bv Udaiya- 
pirattiyar for singing the Tiruppadiyam. (?) J 

031 of 1909. 

Olagaparam (SA.) — Randal ur-salai. Land for offerings 
to shrine of Irvur-terkil-vrisal-mahasattanrir by Naga- 
rattar of Uiagamudevipuram. 144 of 1919. 


„ TahJcdlftm (XA.) — Salaik-kalam-arutta Rfijarajakesari. 
Twenty-five hfdjidju of gold deposited with Manaiyir- 
kottattut-tiruvuya.v-purattue-clrur-urom who undertook 
to supply paddy to the temple. 

3 of 1897 ; NIL v. 1300. 

„ Tcmtcri (Oh.) — Gift of vessels to temple by Sernbiyan 
Mahadeviyar. Engraved on stone by sabha by royal 
order. 199 of 1901 ; till. vii. 411. 




T i r u kh dxth iy d r ( ltd .) — ( V a [tehiU //) - Raj aril j akosar i . I ^and, 

by purchase, for a lamp and for a Brahman for 

* 

explaining the Prabhakaram, by a native of Satta- 
mangalam in Tiraimur-na(/u. 333 of 1923. 


* Sunday 14th June, A.D. 996-K.ielhorn RI. vii.p. 169. 

f Possibly after a Ganga king - ARE> 1916 II 8. 

J Purpose of grant not in the text, contra ARE 1910 II 18. 


1 488 ] 



[RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 11. — Tiruradlpuram (NA.) — Kandalur-salai. Sheep for lamp 
by a native of the Cola country to the shrine of 
Anuma-deva in the Yisnn temple. 335 0 f 1906. 

„ TiruvdlU varam (Tin.)— (Vattehittu) - Kandaliir - salai. 

Land. Village called Rfijaraja-catm. 119 of 1905. * 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tin.) — Randal ur-sfilai. 34 sheep for lamp 
to Ganapati in the local temple. The donor was one 
of the d\ an gun attar of the village ( ivvur-ydhmgant - 
tar.) 98 of 1914. 

„ Tiruviramltfvaram (Tj.) — Land for lamp by one of the 
dlunganattdr of the brahmadeya village, Madanamah- 
jari-catm, 136 of 1911. 


„ Valappuranadu (Sm.) — I\ a n d a j u r - Bala i k-k a lam-a r u 1 1 a . 
The $<t 1 1 a pprruma Ideal of Tiruvarappalli received gold 
for a lamp from a merchant, Malaiyaman Setti. Men- 
tions the weight malai Ideal . 498 of 1930. 

Year 11, day 104. — Tenneri (Ch.) — Salaik-kalam-anitta. The great 
assembly met in the brahmasthdna of the village and 
made the rule that only Brahmans well-versed in the 
mantras were eligible for appointment as vdriyam - 
svyvur and for taking part in the dediberations of the 



inantra-brahmamitn valid try vdriyanjey vdrdgavix m 
sabhd-tiuir rad jolt uvd rdgannn . . . mantrabrdhmanum - 
drrddvu rdriyanjeyddra i yum sa bhd-mdrraTdonndmi - 
yum tirui'dn<ti-mar uttdr /Hnlum-dantjappaduvdrdija. 

211 of 1922. 


Year 11, day 220. TennPri (Ch.) — Salaik-kalam-arutta. Vyavastlid 
of sabha: Nammuril brahmasvangonddriun melp- 
pfululcurram-mudaiydruni nammur-vdriyanjeyavum 
sabhd-mdrrau i joJhivum perdddrdga vum . Ikkurran- 

galwlai ydr vdriyaujeyddrum sa bha- mdrra njonndrum 
kanakkar irvpddu-kutli ndruni tiruvdnai-marutldr 
padum danda(m) paduvdrdga . 240 of 1922. 


* Why is Rajaraja's conquest of the Pan^yas not mentioned earlier than his 
year 14 ? - ARE. 1905 II 13. 


62 


[ 489 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 12 — K&nclpuram (Ch.) — Kandajur-salai. Rajarajakesari. 

. Loan from temple to sabha who agree to remit paddy 
as interest. SII. i. 146. 

„ Kilappaluvur (Tri.) — Salaik-kalam-arutta. Lamp by 

Aiyaran Kan an, a Kaikkojan of Adigal Paluvettaraiyar, 
for merit of a person killed by him (; paifakkutta ). 

122 of 1895 ; SII. v. 683. 

„ Konerirdjapuram (Tj.) — Salaik-kalam - arutta. Silver 
image (of God ?) and copper image of Candesvara by 
Nakkan Nallattadigal, one of the Rajarajatterinja 
Kaikkolar, and the son of Anukkan Maliamalli, a 
penddtti in the velum of Rajakesari. 627 of 1909. 

„ Kuhftr (Tj.) — Salaik-kalam-arutta. Land by residents of 

Kuhur to Pillai Nambi Aruranar who sang the Tiruppa- 
diyam hymns. 275 of 1917. 

„ Paniaravadcri (Tj.) — A gold pot, 20 kalanju> by Sem- 
biyan Mahadevi for the merit of her son Uttama Cola. 

263 of 1923. 

„ * Pullamangai (Tj.) — Salaik-kalam-arutta. Assembly of 

Pullamangalam met in the temple to the beat of the 

drum and made gifts of land, one veil wet land and 

440 pdrtti of garden land to some Brahmans versed in 

the Sdma and Bgveda . 553 of 1921. 

* 

Tinnevelly (Tin.) — (Fa^wWtO-Kandaliir-salai. Land for 
offerings to Brahmapuri-devar at Tirunelveli. 

84 of 1927. 

Tirumdlptiram (NA.) — Kandalur-salai. An agreement of 
the villagers of Palugur regarding terms of an endow- 
ment in their charge. Mentions the fact that Madhuw 
rantakan Gandaradittar had fined the men in charge of 
the store-room in the 4th year of the king’s reign t ; 
also the 14th year of a king whose name is lost. 

282 of 1906. 

• Deer. 28 A. D. 996. - ARE. 1922 App. E. 
f ef. 283 of ft. 4* 



[ « 0 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 

Year 12. — Tiruvadi (SA.)— Balaik-kalam-arutta. Tax-free gift of 
eighteen plots of land (seru) by the sabha of Avaiyanur 
to the temple of Jaiasayana-mahadeva of that village. 

418 of 1921. 

,, Tiruvadi (SA.) — Salaik-kalam-arutta. The assembly of 
Ranadhara-mangalam in Avaiyamir-nadu, a division 
of Tirumunaippadi, agreed to furnish the devaddna 
lands of the temple of Jalasayana-deva, 18| seru of 
land, with water for irrigation from the irrigation tank 
of the village. 419 of 1921. 

„ * Tiruvandarkoyil (Pondicherry). — The assembly of 
Tribhuvana-mahadevi-catm., met in the mandapa 
built by Mummudisola-umbala-nattu-velan, remitted 
taxes on Mundiyan Vallaippakkam, purchased and 
given to the temple by Immaijisola Muvendavelan, and 
fixed the fines to be paid by those who imposed or 
realised any taxes on it in future. 362 of 1917. 

„ Ti rtt virdmlsvaram (T j .) — Salaik-kalam-aru tta. Money 

for two lamps. Madanamanjari-catm., a brahmadeya 
in Nonmali-nadu. 119 of 1911. 

Year 12, day 231. — Tenner i (Ch.) — Salaik-kalam-arutta. Sabha 
orders dandahkdnam to be collected from Vikkiyannan 
alias Yikrama-cola-brahmadarayan. 

202 of 1901 ; SIT. vii 414. 


Year 13 — Kdmammvalli (Tri.) — Salai. 


Fifteen halanju of goll, 


interest (2J halanju) being payable to those who 
recited the Talavakara Samaveda on the day of Margali 
Tiruvadirai, each reciter being fed and paid 1J halanju 
in gold. 76 of *1914. 


Kammarasandra (Mys.) — S. 920, t Kanarese. Nolamba 
Ayyapa-deva’s son Gannarasa was governing part of 
Daligavat.li. 169 of 1911 ; EC . ix. Ht. 111. 


* December 1st, A.D. 996-L.D.S. in ARE . 1918 App. E 

t Date 3, 92(3) in ARE, where * HSmapunbi the corresponding cyclic 
year, is noted to be wrong. This is the earliest C$la record in Mysore (Rice, 
Intr. p. 14), Bat see MAR . 1917 p. 42. 

[ 491 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 1 $.~~Tirugfikar$am (Pd.) — Kandalur-salai. Money for pay- 
ment of taxes. 310 of 1904. 

„ Tiriiklmdaiyur (Tj.) — Tirumagahpnla, Purchase of 

some lands with money from the treasury of Tiru- 
virattanamudaiya Paramasvfunin, at the instance of the 
sabha of Pada-eviya Kadavur, for Udayasandiran Amu- 
dakan alias KFilakiila Mayilatti, a merchant residing in 
the village, who got it made rent-free by the assembly, 
with the stipulation that he should pay a fixed quantity 
of paddy to the temple every year for expenses of 
worship and of three lamps. 242 of 1925. 

„ Tiruma'klwttai (Tj.) — Kandajur-salai. The assembly 
of Palaiya Sembiyan-madevi-catm. issued a new sale 
deed, in place of an old document lost, to a certain 
Parakesari Vilupparaiyan, the headman of Puravar- 
elilur, for certain lands which ihev had sold to 
him. Refers to about the fourth year of Madileri- 
elundarulina Rajakesari-varman. * “ Intikdval 99 ex- 
plained. 2(56 of 1917. 

„ Tiruvallam (NA.) — Kandalur-salai. The supervisor of 
the temple of Tiruttikkali-filvar, Mummudi-sola Pusan, 
finding that one of the directors (gun at tar) of the 
village had received 25 pan, dim nnakafjrtl ai- tulai- 
nirai , for a lamp fouuded by Singapirattiyur, and that 
his marumagan had neglected to maintain it, now 
made a gift of 6U0 kuH of his land for continuing the 
charity. 208 of 1921. 

,, Tiruvallam (NA.) — Kandalur-salai. Some ornaments 

made and handed to the sabha from 40 kalanju 
and 7 rmnjaiji of gold accumulated from various 
sources in the treasury of the temple. Also a lamp 
and jewelled ornament by Mumma«)i-sdla Posar, the 
supervisor of the temple. (See 208 of 1921.) 

210 of 1921. 

„ Tiruvallam (NA.) — Kandalur-salai. 10 kakinju of 

gold with the sabha to Tlkkali-ajvar by Irayira 

# Probably the king’s father Sundara 1918 II 25; 


[ 492 j 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Pallavaraiyan alias MummmU-sola Posar of Araisur 
for the Paviti ur Ghana festival. Hate of interest 3 
manjatfi per kalatiju per annum yielding halanju . 

216 of 1921. 

Year 1 (NA.)“—Salai. Hecord by tlie Mahasabha of 

Vikramabharana-catm. of a private endowment of 500 
Icufi of land for 4 null of tiruvamudu every day at 
noon for Tiruvaymoli-deva of the place. The land 
was made tax-free after receipt of a lump payment by 
the sabha. 20 of 1893 ; SII. in. 2. 

Year 14. — Agamm (SA.) — A new introduction mentioning Talalk- 
kadu. Fragment. Sale of land. 376 of 1922. 

„ Arasdnitnangalam (Oh.) — Kandaiur-salai. Gift by a 

certain lady of a foot-rest, a seat ( meg tang i ), 90 sheep 
for a lamp, and utensils to god Tiruvavi-bhattarakar at 
Arasfmimaugalam in Venkunra-kottam. 

343 of 1923. 

„ KalaJcaltur (Ch.) — New introduction. Tatuievi etc. 
Mummudi-sola Kajarajakesari. Provision by Kailan 
Mayindan for two lamps in the temple of Uruni-alvar 
at Kalakkattur, a suldbiwya at the instance of the king 
who desired a gift of only one lamp for the prosperity 
of all kings and of the world at large. Liquid measure 
nhuu-ndH. Land for one lamp and sheep for another. 

121 of 1923. 

„ Kahur (Tj.) — Land, by purchase, for lamp to Adityesvara 

at Kuhur by a merchant of the Tribhuvana-mahadevip- 
perangadi outside Tahjavur. Mentions Vi<Jelvi$ugu* 
tukkacci-eatm. 279 of 1917. 

»» Melpd(Ji (0.) — Tirumagal-pCda . The assembly of Tiru- 
vallain get gold, tu(ai-nirai 15 kahviju, and assign 
1000 kuli of land by Sin;ambalattuk-kol to a person 
residing in Sankarappfnli in Arumoli-dovap-perunderu 
of this Rajasrayapuram, who had to supply J measure 
of ghl every day for a lamp* The gold was given by 
a well-known oilicer of Rajaraja and his son, SSnattut- 


L *93 J 



THE COLAS 


Year 14.- 




(enkaraip-primbunik-kuvnittn AraiHuru.Jaiyan Irayira- 
van Pallavaraiyan alias Mummudi-sola Pusan, 

87 of 1889 ; SIL iii. 19. * 

— Melpddi (C.) — Tirumagahpdla . r>onndary of demddna 
lands given tax-free to 0 ol f * n d ra- s i m h cs v a va from the 
JOth year, including those mentioned in No. 102 of 
year 10 and day 107 of Pavak. Rajendra. Interesting 
details of restrictions and privileges relating to irriga- 
tion and crops, as in the Tamil part of the Tiruvltlan- 
gftdu plates. 103 of 1921. 

Podavur (Ch.)— New introduction t- 90 sheep for lamp. 

(57 of 1923. 




>* 


Surindram (Tv.) — {Yathlvthi). Kandalur-sfdaik- 
kalam-aruUn Clan gapftdiy uni Nulumbapa liyum Tadiy- 
gavajiyum Vengai-iiaduin-koiyla Io*. + Fixes dues 
from the tenants (man kVkdairdnnvti yadaiya fcudi- 
(ja\) of Ten-Valanallur who hel<l from NrpasOkhara 
Valanallur, a deraddna of Rajaraja Valanattu-Nanji- 
nattu-brahmadeyam Sujindirattu-emberumau. 

75 of 189ti ; TAB. iv. pp. 129-30 $ ; EL v. pp. 44-5. 

* 

Tirundgesvaram. (Tj.) — Salai, Uangapitdi etc. The 
sabha of Nallurc-ceri sell land tax-free to Tirunagls- 
va ram- u 'la i y a -m; ihad<" v a for 40 kalaltju endowed by 
Arinjigaippiratti alias Banap-perundevi, the daughter 
of Pillaiyar Arikulakesarijar. 81 of 1897. 

SIL vi. 31 ; 82 of 1897, SIL vi. 32 is similar. 




Ti rundgesvaram (Tj.) — Rajaraja Rajakesari. Sale of 1^ 
veli of land to temple by the assembly of Madana- 
mangalam, a brahmadeya. Tirunagesvaram is called a 
devaddna. The cost of the land, 101 kalanju, 6 m& 


f • Later on, tinder Rujundra, Uttamasola Pallavaraiyan. SIL i i* p. 222 n» 4. 
f cf. 376 of 1922. 

J Same form in 22 of l^G-TiraJkka^aiyiir, year 14- : 81 of 1897-TirunSgSs- 
varam year 14 ; 23 of 1905-Tirukka<)aiytir year 15 wliicli adds Ku4amalai-n»4 u » 
and others. 

§ Here T.A.G. Rao accepts the naval victory of KimdaJSr (p. 128)* 

r 494 3 



RA JAKES ARI RAJARAJA I 


and 1 kdni, was the fund formerly dopositod for 
offerings l)y princess Arinjigaip-piriitHyar. Mentions 
the processes involved in making tulai-pon. * 

218 of 1911. 

Year 14. — Tirvppalanam (Tj .)—Tinmngn’-'pr,la. (No mention of 
Kalinga and flam.) Karnban Maniyan alias Vikkirama- 
singa-muvenda-velan got a marakuta-drvar from the 
king, from the booty obtained in Maluiid, and conse- 
crated it in the temple at Tiruppalanam. 

135 of 1928. 

„ Tiruvey namaUdr (SA.) — Tirumagal - pula. Provision 

for feeding a man who had to bale out water for the 

Sacred bath and blow the conch at Tiruvaratturai- 

• • «• 

ftlvar temple. 420 of 1921. 

Year 14, day 258. — Mil pad i (C.) K on er- y innia i- k on (1 fin . Land in 
several villages to Mahadeva of tbe GoKndrasimhesvara 
temple constructed by tbe king in tbe city of Raja- 
sraya-pnrain, after cancelling tbe old name Mevpadi 
alias V i r an aril y an apu ram . t 101 of 1921. 

Year 15 . — Agaram (SA.) — Tirumagal-pnla. Sale of land to 
MabaBastri temple by a Krumavittan, one of the manag- 
ing members (yalunganatn) of Nrpatongae-cayantfmgi- 
catrn. $ 369 of 1922. 

„ Kaydr (Ch.) — Timmagahpnla . Sale of land by tbe 

assembly of Kayar to a person for a lamp to god 
A<Jeri-<leva. 440 of 1922. 

A 

„ Kitaiyar ( r i’j.) — Sale of 7 tna of land tax-free to Sri-Krsna 

temple by tbe big assembly of Tiruvahimiiir for 15 
k cdu got from V alikkot unai-gu n a-si lan (of. 91 of year 
17) who is also said to have set up the image of 
goddess in the temple, 93 of 1925. 

* cf, preceding entry ; also 215 of 1911 (Rajak. 9.) 

+ cf. 103 of 1921 {ante). 

X This may have owed its existence to Kayirttr Perumanar of a Parantaka 
inscription {Ml. vii p. 141) ARE. 23 II 28. The susta is called KayirOr Ayyanar 
in 390 of 1922 of year 15 from same place. 

[ «6J 



THE COLAS 


Year 15 *. — Manimangalam (Ch.) — TimmagaJ-pdla , Land to 
Tiruvayppadi Srl-Krsna Perumal. The Mahasabha of 
U16ka-mahadevi-catm. (Manimangalam) met tannirp- 
pandalile dharmi-Seydu (?). 

289 of 1897 ; STL vl 267. 

„ Melappaluvur (Tri.) — Tiruma gal-pula. Land, one md, 
reclaimed by Nakkan Knmarakkan, daughter of Devar- 
magal Nakkan Periya Arangapiran, for offerings and 
worship on special days to the two gods in the temple 
of Avanikandarpa Isvaram. Mentions Adigal Paluvet- 
taraiyar Kantian Maravan. 363 of 1924. 

S&rmddevi (Tin.) — ( Vaffehtttu ) — Tirumagahpdla . Only 
the introduction is preserved. 

182 of 1895 ; EL v. p. 46. 

„ t Sucmdram (Tv.) — ( V atjelu ttu)- Tiruma ga 1-pdla. The 
Mahasabha of Tiruecivindiram met in the agra&dld y 
being summoned by kdlam and kun ( kd(mudiviccuk - 
kuri-sdtti). The Mn l aparu da-sablid managing the 
affairs of the temple under the Mahasabha said that they 
could no longer remit the irai on the devadanas of 
the temple or manage its affairs, and in this they were 
joined by their tenants (par ad a i Jc-kadiy ildr ) , and 
having thus resigned everything into the hands of the 
Mahasabha, they undertook to pay a fine of 15 kalanju 
if they revived their claims individually (taniccuttu- 
daril) at any time, and 50 kalanju of Seydara- 
pon if the tenants (kudigal) did so, and not to set up 
any claims even after paying these fines. Thereupon, 
the Mahasabha ordered that two vdriyar of their choice 
and the Karanattan must together manage the affairs of 
the temple thereafter, and provided for the remunera- 
tion in paddy of each of them every day. 

85 of 1896 ; EI. v. p. 45 ; TAS. ii. pp. 1-8. 

' „ Tiruvenkadu (Tj.) — Tiru ma gal -p Ola . Gold. Mentions 
treasures taken by Rajaraja from the Cera king. 

443 of 1918. 


• Thursday 27th April, A. D. 999 Kielhom, JS/% v, p. 198* 
f Tuesday 29th August A. D, 999, Kielhom, EI. v, p, 48* 

[ 496 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 15. — Vrddhacalam (SA.)— Gift of iri-mudi, weight 9 
kalanju, 9 manjadi and 7 mu ; inner silver cover 2061 
kal., and 4 manjadi ; 3 munikkam, 36 vayiram, and 
1998 pearls assorted, by Sombiyan Mahadevi. * 

48 of 1918. 

Year 16. — BrahmndeSam (NA.) — Tirumagal-piila. Land for reci- 
tation of the Tiruppadiyam in the temple. 

199 of 1915. 

„ Hebbnni (Mys.) — Kan. Navakhanda-mandalamum T 
dandattigonda. The king’s general was Nolambadhi- 
raja who gave Perbanna (Hebbani) to the plunderer of 
Kadiyanna (Kaduvetti ?) ; and a farmer of the place 
repaired the big tank which had breached its bank. 

EC. x. Mb. 208 ; 100 of 1899. 

„ Kiliyaniir (SA.) — Tirumagal-pola. Gift of a Milam by 
a native of Sola-nadn for convoking the assembly of 
Kiliyanur, a brahmadeya. Mentions also that the 
herald was entitled to get two meals {sunt) every day 
from the village. 156 of 1919. 

Kiltlr (SA.) — Tirvmagal-pbla. Provides for the supply 
of temple servants, two persons as panda r is by sablia of 
Tirukkovalur, and other servants by four other villages 
named. 231 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 858. 

„ Kuttdlam (Tj.) — Tir\nnaga\-pbla . 360 kalanju of gold 

by V T ira-naranan-kuttattali , a val a t iga i - vela i kkd i 'an , 
residing at Kavirinallur, for midnight worship to 
Sonnavararivar. The amount was invested with Koyil- 
madamudaiyfm Eel u t tapai lam- Se y y a -piidam alias 

Tiruttunitti-piccan, the rate of interest being one 
kalam per annum (on each kalanju ). 106 of 1926. 

„ Mdmandur (Oh.) — TirumagaJ-pdla. 46 sheep for half 
a lamp by Namban Raman to Rudravalisvararn Udaiya 
Mahadova of Narasimha-mangala in Utta(ma ?) ColeS- 
varapura within Tiruvegambam to the east of the 
CitramSgha-ta^alca. 39 of 1888 ; SIL iv. 137. 

* 47 of 1918 of Parak, 12- tame place, 
t the world EC. x. Introduction p, xxiv* 

[ 497 ] 


61 



THE COLAS 


<> 


Year 16. — Sij^uvakkam (Ch.) — Tirumagal-pdlfi vm Land for festival 
in the Mulasthana temple of , . r sir upakkam . Mentions 
the eight members of tb$ r Manradi-variyam to which 
was assigned the vj&rk of inspecting the produce of 
temple lands Wa3 conducting the festivals with the 
melvdram ^K?ceived from the tenants. 66 of 1923. 

%% Srdtriyam Tandalam ( Ch. ) — Tinimagal-pdla. Land 
as Sribali-pafti for the festival of Vel|cri-a|var by the 
villagers (ur) of Sander-Tandalam. 71 of 1923. 

„ Tirumalai (NA.) — Tiru ?nagal-pdla . (Copy in year 40 of 
YIra Narasinga Yadavaraya by Desantari Tiruppullani- 
dasa who rebuilt the temple). A pat tarn, — 50 kalanju, 
6 mdnikkam , 4 vayiram and 28 muttu , — by Paranta- 
devi Ammanar, the daughter of Soramanar, and queen 
of (Ponmfiligait-tunjinan), viz^ Devi Ammanar. * 

61 of 1889 ; STL iv. 293. 

tf Tiruppugalur (Tj.) — Tirtimagal-pdla . Tax-free grant of 

land by Nakkan Tillaiyalagiyar alias Paiicavan Maha- 
deviyar, queen of Rajariija, for festival and offerings 
on the day of Sadaiyam (king’s nativity and her own) 
every mouth. 47 of 1928. 

„ Tiruppuram b iyam (Tj.) — Tinimagal-pdla. Land for 

two perpetual lamps ( naruldvilakku ) for the Pallik- 
kattil of the goddess by ivvur-valanjlyar . 

71 of 1897 ; SIL vi. 20. 

„ Tiruv34uturai (Tj.) — Tirumagal-pdla . Some money 

which the sabha of Sirranaiccur owed to their Kaik- 
kojan Kajrrali-pattalagan had become rdjasvam and 
the king demanded its payment; unable to find the 
money 9 and unwilling to collect it from the people 
owing to fear of migration, the sabha raised a loan 
from the temple to pay it off and agreed to make some 
temple lands iraiyili. Ka&u equal to three-fourths 
fatfanju and three mafyatfi. 105 of 1925. 


J59 of 1895 under Tirovi^aimarudtlr. 

[ m ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 16 .— Tiruvakkarai (SA.)—Tirumaga[-prda. Gift of a deva- 
duna village to stoue temple of Sivaloka-udaiya- 
Faramasvamin * built by Sembiyan Mahad eviyar. 
Allotments for various requirements of the temple. 

200 of 1904. 




Tiruvallam (NA.) — Tirumagal-pCda. The citizens of 
Vanapuram, i.e., Tiruvallam, sold, tax-free, 700 hull of 
land to Tiruvaiyan Saukara-deva who granted it to 
Tiruvaiya Is vara, bo called after his father. Tiruvaiyan 
seems to have claimed descent from the W. Ganga 
kings : Gd giuddlmnma-Parama-Dhanma maharaja - 

Nip unilap ura paramesuara iSrbiutha tSviinat-ttiva- 
Mahdrdja Tiru va iy an- Sank aradtva . 

11 of 1890 ; SIL iii. 51. 


Tirumdaimarudur (Tj.) — Tivuma gal-pula . Sale of land 
by the sabha of Brahinadeyam Mahendra-inangalam. 
Mention of oppression and torture of people by paifai- 
yildr , and an unsuccessful appeal to the king by them ; 

also of Ponmaligait-tuhjina-devar-deviyar-Seramanar- 

Pirantakau-deviyammanar. t 

159 of 1895 ; 67/ v. 723. 


„ Trichinopoly (Tri.) — Land to the shrine of Tiruccirap- 
pajli at Sirrambar in Uraiyiir-kurram. 412 of 1904. 

„ Vijuyandrd ya na m (Tin.) — (Vaftehittu'). Timmagal- 

pCda . The sabha of V ijay anarayana-catm., abrahma- 

deya in Nattarruppokku, having assembled in the 
0 

temple of Sathakopa - Vinnagara - perumanadi in the 
village, exempted from taxes two pieces of land given 
to the temple by a Urahman. 2 of 1927. 

Year 17. — Karuttat(dngudi (Tj.) — Tirumagal-pola. Sale of land 
by the Mahasabha of Rajakesari-catm. to Kundavai, 
the daughter of emperor Pirantaka and elder sister of 
the king ; she presented it for a lamp to Karunditta- 
gudi-mahadeva. Mentions a general edict of the king 
ordering the sale of all lands in Brahman villages held 

• CandramauJTsYara. cU 95 of 1892 year 10 ; 276 of 1903 year 2(4) ARE, 
1904 paragraph 20. 

t 61 of 1889 under Tirumalai. 


[ 499 ] 



THE COLAS 


by lower castes except the kdni lands of workmen 
{paniseymakkal paniseykdniyoljya) ; and an order 
based on this from Adigarikal Yanavan Miivendavelan 
regulating the manner in which the lands in this place 
were to be sold for cash and deputing an officer 
(Udaiyar paniniakan) Sattambiyiir. Iccdttambiydr 
tanda Maftdsabha by dm r/>m - nilaviluiydvanam . 

Attested by several people of the locality ( ivvur ). 

4(5 of 1897 ; S1L v 1094. 


Year 17. — Kilaiyur (Tj.) — I'irumagal-pdla (in part), 180 sheep 
for lam}) and ghl in the month of Sittirai to the 
standing Krsnu in the Citramantapa of the Tirukkada- 
vudaiya-emberuman temple at Tiruvalandur by a royal 
servant named Yalikketunai-Gunasllan (cf. 93 of 
year 15) and his wife Aiyadi-puttaki. 91 of 1925. 


Markdnam (BA.) — TiriimngaUpdla. Aruvan Udayadiva- 
karan Arumoli- muvendavelan of Araisur, while he was 
stationed at Pattanam in Pattana-nadu, enquired into 
some complaints relating to expenses in the Bhumis- 
vara temple and fixed a fresh scale. States that the 
tiru-ndl of Raj ant j a was Sadaiyam. 28 of 1919. 

Sdmur (Tri.) — Tinunaga[-pdla % Gold diadem, to Tiru- 
nombaliu* Paramesvara at Devanapajli, made out of fines 
collected from defaulting temple servants, by the 
survey officer ( ulngalnvitta ) Tiruvudigal Sattan who 
enquired into the expenses of the temple. 

199 of 1917. 

Tenkarai (Md.) — (Grantha.) Rajasraya. A certain 
Kodanda-cola made a gift of land to the temple of 
Madhubhid (Visnu) in the village of Tenur alias 
Jananatha-catm. 132 of 1910. 


99 


Tenkarai (Md.) — (Gr.) Tirumagal-pnla, Land situated 
in Perundenur by Jananatlia Paliavaraiyan alias 


Kodandan-solai to god Sri Vint Keraja Vinnagara-devar 


of Naduvil-sri-koyil of Perundenur alias Jananatha- 
catm. in Pagan ur-kurram. 134 of 1910. * 


# No regnal year given in the text. 

[ 500 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 17. — Tiruppalanam (Tj.) — Twenty kalanju gold, converted 
into land, for lamp, by queen Tennavan Maliadevi. 

123 of 1895 ; SIL v. 684. 

„ Tinivadandai (Ch.) — TirmwgaUpola. (Ijam but not 

Rattapadi among conquests). Dedication of twelve 

families (paUj'navandcudi) for conducting a festival of 

seven days, called Rfijaruja-dfwar-tirunul (satabliisaj) 

in the month of Avani. The families had to pay | 

kahtnju per head out of their earnings from weaving 

or venturing on the sea, and to rentier assistance in 

celebrating the festival. Other duties and privileges 

are also mentioned. This was engraved under orders 

of : (i) Raman Kumaran ah an Sola-Mu vOnda-vela- 

Marayau who was ttadii-hhikCUci ; and (ii) Karran 

Adittau alias Dana-Miiveiidavelan Marayan who was 

• *■ 

nadu-vagai. 274 of 1910. 


Ukhil (NA.) — Ttrinnagal-pnla. The Mahasabha includ- 
ing the (Dhanma)variyap-perumakkal for the year, the 

r 

JSattaganattar of the locality (e)mnur) and some 
others met in the temple of Mahasasta to the north of 
the am baht m. Some gifts were made to the templo 
and these wore loft in the charge of the tiattuganattar. 
A fine of one hahiaja was to la* laid on those who 
sold betel-leaves outside the Pidari temple and the fine 
to be collected by the ert-variijftp-perumakkctl . The 
madhgastha made the record. SIL iii. 6. 


Uttaramvn Ir (Ch.) — Tiruma gal-pula . Sheep for lamp, 
some being bought from tin* treasury of Subrahmanya- 
devar of Uttarameriir. Others were endowed by 
different people, one giving 11 } sheep for 1/8 lamp. 

54 of 1898 ; SIL vi. 337. 


ft 


Uttaramerur (Ch.) — TiramagaLptHa. 96 sheep for lamp 
to the Panunas\ami who was pleased to stand at the 
Kongaraiyar-sri-kovil of Uttaramerur. The sheep were 
left with the sabhaiyar of Arasani-mangalam. 

173 of 1923. 


L 601 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 18 . — Ambasamudram (Tin.) — ( [Vattelultu ) Rajarajak. 25 
sheep for a lamp to the temple of Tiruppottuclaiya- 
devar. 98 of 1905. 

„ Arpdkkam (Ch.) — Tirumaga]-pula, Gift by purchase of 
tank and land made tax-free ( kadungulamum vilai 
kondu tirutti iraiyilicci) for offerings to Tiruvira- 
Y innagar-alvar, in the name of Nambirattiyar 
Sembiyan Mukkok-kilan-adigal alias Kannara-Naeci- 
Pkjara-nangai, by a certain Arangan Kodancjaraman 
of Panivaga-mangalam in the Cola country. Liquid 
measure : sdHyani . 139 of 1923* 

„ BrahmadMam (NA.) — Tirumaga\-pula . Gold for a lamp. 
The samvatsaravdriya of Rajamalla-catm. looking 
after grdmakdrya had to see to its proper maintenance 
on pain of being fined for default by the Sraddhd - 

mantar . 192 of 1915. 

„ KdTicipuram (Ch.) — Tirxiautgal-pola . CO kalnnj u of 

gold by residents of Hiru-nanraiyur for four lamps in 
the name of the king to Anjanjandi Durgaiyar of 
Kaiici. 78 of 1921. 

„ Kilaiyur (Tj.)— Tinona gal-pula, Provision made by 
assembly of Tiruvalundur for supply of one kuruni 
of ghi for offerings to Tirukkadavu<laiya-emberuman- 
neyamuduseydan on the day of Punarpusam every 
mouth with the interest on the sum of money received 
from Valikketunai-Gunasilan. (91 of year 17). 

95 of 1925. 

„ Kilaiydr (Tj.) — TirumagaUpula, 45 sheep for £ lamp 
by Kuraaran Pallavaraiyan of Vajlugur. Mentions 
kdliganattar. 99 of 1925. 

„ Tillaisthannm (Tj.) — Hale of land by pati~pdda*mulat~ 
tar , pancdcdrynrgalj sr! koy i lujjaiyar * and diva* 
kanmigal for being endowed for offerings to the 


• These are evidently in apposition. See the compound term below, 

[ 602 ] 



RAJAKESARl RAJARAJA I 


temple. The pati-pdda-mula-pancdcarya-snkoyiludai- 
ydr and the devakarmis * declare this land free from 
the obligation to pay irai, eccoru , vetli , drrukkulai or 
anything else. 46 of 1895 ; SIL v. 603. 

Year 18 . — Tirunandikkarai (Tv.) — (Vattehittu.) Tirumagal-pola . 

Gift of Muttam in Valluva-nad to Tirunandikkarai 
Mahadeva after changing its name to Mummudi-sola- 
nalliir, for a festival and river bath to the god on Sadai- 
yam day, the king’s birthday. TAS . i. 291-2. 

„ Tirupp urn mb i yam (Tj.) — Tirumagabpdla . (Mentions 

conquest of liam.) Land for lamp. 333 of 1927. 

„ Vrddhdcalam (SA.) — TirumagnUpdlrt . Land by resi- 
dents of Nevkuppai for the recitation of Tiruppadiyam 
in the local temple. 40 of 1918. 


Year 19 . — Kdttaikarungulam (Tin.) — TirumagaUpdla. 25 sheep 
for lamp to Riisinga Isvarattu Bhatara with an army 
officer prajaittalaivan (of the local garrison ?) living 
in the place. 272 of 1928. t 

Madras Museum — Tirumaga\-pula. Lamp. Mentions 
Tanniyalattur in Sinattur-nadu, a sub-division of 
Puliyiir-kottain, from Puliyur near Kodambakam to 
tho west of the Mailapur tank. 

290 of 1895 ; also 291. 


Markdnam (SA .) — Tiruma gal-pula . Salt-pan for lamp 
to Sri-Bhumlsvarattalvar at Rajanijapperalam in 
Mar&kauam, a devaddna in Pattina-nadu, a sub-division 
of Oyma-nadu, by the officer and workers (kuqliga{) 
in the salt-pans. 23 of 1919. 


Tiruccengdftan g udi (Tj.) — Tirumagal-pdla. Land for 

feeding in the mantjapa of Siyuttomla Nambi devotees 
attending the festival of tSitlira i t-tiru vddirai of 
&ira{&-deva, 57 of 1913. 


* Had these Any taxing or assigning powers ? 

t The Vafttfutt* record of Satjaiya-MSjan in this stone temple (270.) 
makes it more likely that a FSttfya RSjasimha was its builder than the CSra 
feudatory of RtjSadra and possibly also of RSjarSja. ARE , 1928 II. 5, 

[ 508 ] 



* THE COLAS 


Year 19. — Tiruccengdttangudi (Tj.) — Tiritmagal-pdla. Land for 
tiruvild to Siruttonda-nambi, a devotee of SIrala-deva 
of Tiruccengattangmli, by two residents of Marugal. 
Mentions the revenue survey of the seventeenth year ; 
also the phrase : mikudik -ku rai-ullatfanga * re : land 
measurement. 59 of 1913. 

„ Tiruvadandai (Ch.) — Tiruma gal •pnla. Thirty kaiaftju 
of gold by a merchant of Tiruvorriyur hi Pular-kottam 
to VarahaBvami temple. The residents of Taiydr 
agreed to pay interest in oil and paddy to the 
assembly of Tiruvadandai for a lamp and for feeding 

thirty-five Brahmans. 267 of 1910. 

„ Tiruvadandai (Ch.) — Timmagal-pdla . (flam but not 
Rattapadi among conquests). 16£ kalanju of gold 
by a merchant of Kadarpar-palli in Malai-nacju for 
feeding twelve Brahmans in the Varaha-deva temple 
during the thirty days of the month of Kumbha. An 
instance of vdddkkadan . 273 of 1910. 

„ Uttannr (Mys.) — Tim magaUpfil a . After * Kalingamum ’ 

in the introduction, we have : “ Kuda malai-ndclum 
(V/cadal kadanddngaru Ni .... fijiramungontfa tin - 
fit ml venrit-tanddrhonda tannelil ” etc. Mentions 

* ** # * # • * • it 

Arumolideva-catm. in Pudal-nadu. 

459 of 1911 ; EC. x. Mb. 123. 

Year 19, day 126. — Tiruvenkddu (Tj.) — Tirumagnl-pola. String 
of rubies ( [mdnikka-ndn ) by queen Kuttan Vlra- 
narayaniyar alias Cola-Mahadeviyar. 

112 of 1896 ; STL v. 975. 

Year 20. — Kdmarasavalli (Tri.) — Tirumaga^pHla. Mentions 

an executive assembly (kntfam) of 80 persons. 

62 of 1914. 

tt iSenur (NA.) — A new introduction (beg. lost). Gift of 
land by ur of Seyanallar to the temples of Tiruvagat- 
tisvara and Tirumen-ali-deva, on account of the 
drummers who beat the drums during the iribaU 

* This is common in the records of the period. 

{ 604 ] 



RA JAKES ARI RAJARAJA I 


ceremony ; the gift was made at the instance of a 
local officer. 394 0 f 1911 , 

Year 19 .—Sdmur (Tri .)— Tiriimagal-pfila. A patfam from three 
halanju of gold collected as dantfam from the temple 
authorities. Mentions Rajadevar Kaikkolap-padai, 
Pirantakat - terinja - kaikkolar, Sundarasolat - terinja- 
kaikkdjar, and Pandikulasani-terinja-kaikkolar, and 
Inafju - vagai - ieygira Kulattur - ui}aiyar. The 
offence thus punished was the failure to bring out 
the image of the goddess on the day of a solar eclipse. 

G7 of 1890 ; SIL iv. 391. 

„ Tadimalingi (Mys.) — Tmimagal-pnla . Sale of land to 

temple for offerings for 100 JcaSu by tulai-nircii- 
ke m p ndgarasa -n ira ik-kal. Mentions Periya-Kun- 

davai-alvftr-bhandara and Ponnila-devar-bhan<Jara. 

491 of 1911 * ; EC. iii. Tn. 35. 

Year 20 . — Tirtikkfofhiyiir (Rd.) — Tirumagal-pola . Sheep for 
lamp by a cavalier of the king commanding the .... . 
vat land a terinda-va 1 a n ga i- ? 'i>\a ihharar. Tirukkdsthi- 
yiir is called a devad&na in Kera!asinga-vala-nadu, a 
sub-division of Ilajaraja-vala-nadu. 320 of 1923. 

, f Tiruvatfutum i (Tj.) — Tv'umagaJ-pola. Agreement 

between Sadasiva-bhatarar of the matha at Tiruvaiyaru, 
as manager of the temple of TiruvaJutujrai on the one 
part, and tho assemblies of Sattanur (Tiraimur-nadu) 
and Sirnmaiccur (Ti rn val und u r-n ad 11 ) on the other, 
that the latter shall pay the taxes on the temple 
lands in their villages in lieu of the interest on loans 
due from them to the temple which they were unable 
to pay. 121 of 1925. 

„ Tinivallam ( N A Tirumaga\~p!)la . — Lamp by Nanna- 
mamiyar or Nannaman, son of Tukkarai of tho Vai- 
dumba family ruling over Ingallur-na<Jn, a district of 
Maharnjapa<}i. f H iii. 52. 

• MAR. 1912 p. 38. 

t MahMjavS^i 7000 with VallBra for it* capital must have been in the 

Cuddtpah district, SIl Hi. p. 106. 

[ 606 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 20, — Tiruvenka^u (Tj.) — Tirumaga]-pRla. Golden bowl 
( ponnin kapdlam) by Nambirattiyar Tittaipiranderu- 
manar alias Sola-mahadeviyar. 

Ill of 1896 ; SIL v. 974. 

Year 21 . — Agaram (SA.) — Tirumagal-pola, An officer Paran- 

taka-eola Muvondaveliin sent an order to the assembly 
*• * * 

of Nrpatnnga - sayantangi - catm. that the property 
of those who ran away without paying the fines 
imposed on them was to bo sold for any price it could 
fetch and the money credited to the tdlam (treasury ) 
at Kaccipe<Ju and a receipt obtained. This was in 
turn communicated to the sabha of Tirunarayanac-ceri, 
a hamlet of the village, whereupon a certain Kilakkil 
Avanipabhatta was deprived of his bhatfasvam land 
which was sold to the temple of Mahasasta Kayirur 
Ayyan in an ajndkrayam. .179 of 1922. * 

„ Ddddpuram (S A .) — Ti rumagal- ptl la . Vessels and orna- 
ments of gold, silver and pearls presented to the 
temples of Kundavai-vinnagar, Iravikula-manikka- 
Isvara, and Kundavai-jinalaya built by Parantakan 
Kundavaip-pirattiyar, daughter of Ponmaligait-tunjina- 
devar, t in the city of Rajarajapuram in Nallur-natju. 

Mentions officer Parakramasola Muveiida-velan. 

•• • 

8 of 1919. 

Ddddpuram (SA.) — Tiriimagal-pnla . Mentions the 
construction of the three temples at Rajarajapuram 
(See No. 8 of 1919) by Pirantakan Kundavaip-pirajiti- 
yar, and records that, on receipt of the royal writ, the 
officer Aruran Aravanaiyan alias Parakramasola 
Muvendavelan of Panaiytir ordered the temple treasury 
to be examined and the presents to be engraved on 
stone in the respective temples. 17 of 1919. 

fSmapperur (SA.) — Tirumaga] - pfila. Rajarajavarman 
alias Rajaraja-deva. 96 sheep for lamp. 517 of 1921* 

• This record is treated as an Instance of rent recovery in ARE t 1923 II 39. 

f This confirms the identity of this person with Snndara 081*1 1, The Jahfc 
shrine exists no longer, though the others do. ARE t 1919 II 11. 

[ we] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 21.— Tirumalai (near Polar NA.) — Tirumagal-pdla. 

A verse recording construction of a sluice by 
Gunavira-mamuni, * respected by kings and lord of 
the cool Vaigai-malai ; the sluice caused paddy to 
grow on either side of the hill and was named after 
Venkilan Kaniccekara-maru-porcuriyan. SII. i. 66. 

„ Tiruppugalur (Tj .)—Tirumagal-p<~la. Remission of 
taxes, after getting 15 kd§u 9 by the assembly of Kar- 
o$uc-ceri, a brahmadeya , on lands granted to the temple 
by the king and queen Pancavan-mahadeviyar for 
special worship every month on the Sadaiyam day. 

54 of 1928. 

„ Tiruppugalur (Tj .)—Tinimagal-pdla. Money, 12 JcaSu 
equal to 96 kalam of paddy, yielding interest of 32 
kalam at one tuni per kalam , for offerings to Tiru- 
navukkaraiya-deva, installed by Agnikumara-krama- 
vittan alias Porkoyil Candesvarayogi of Kundur, a 
hamlet of Vira-sikiimukac-ceri in Virauarayana-catm., 
an independent village ( taniyur ) on the north bank in 
the Itajeridrasimha-vala-nadu. 68 of 1928. 

„ Tiruvanjant (Tj.) — Ti nonagaUpola. (No reference to 
Rattapadi) 192 sheep for two lamps. Ivvddu kuqli- 
nikkac-cdvd-hiuvdp-perddu-aya ; again : kudi enru 

ivvddu haik-komlu. 218 of 1894 ; SII. v. 517. 


n 


Tiruvaiydru (Tj.) — Timmaga^pdla. Temple of Loka- 
muhado vis vara built by the queen of Rajaraja, 
Dautisakti-Vitanki alias Loka-mahade v i . Sale of laud 
by the authorities of the temple of Tiruvaiyarujaiyar 
to the MahdaUvakanmis of the temple mentioned 
above, at 100 kalauju per veli. Mentions vilaiyava - 
nam and poruhmvamd ip-por u t cilauolai . Formula of 
sale interesting. 219 of 1894 ; SII. v. 518. 


TiruvalatijuU (Tj.) — Tirumaga\-pdla (in middle of 
record). While staying at Tiruvallam the king, who 
bore the surname Sivapada-sekhara-deva, confirmed a 


* Rangackari*i p, 80 notices three persons of this name, 

[ 607 ] 



THE COLAS 


grant of land made in the twelfth year of Parakesari 
and made a new grant also. 

624 of 1902 ; SII. viii. 222. 

Year 21. — Tiruvallam (NA.) — Tirumagal-pola, Sale of land to 
Rajarajesvaram within the temple of Tikkali-mahadeva 
for feeding Brahmans. Mentions the royal officer 
Araisurudaiyan Irayiravan Pallavan. 238 of 1921. 

TJttaramerur (Ck.) — Tirumagal-pola , (but no Ratta- 

padi). A lamp, by a resident of Narayanac-ceri, to 

* 

Yejlaimurti-alvar of Sri Veli-Vi$nu-grka to be main- 

* 

tained by the Peri\amaiydr, The 8 rad d ft a mantas and 
the Srl-Vaisnavas were themselves to punish defaults. 

165 of 1923. 

Year 22. — Agaram (SA.) — Tirumagal-pola , Sale of laud to 

Paramasvamiga] Kayirur Ayyan by a managing 
member of the assembly. 381 of 1922. 

„ Agaram (SA.) — Tirumagal-pola . (No mention of 

Rattapadi). * Resolution passed by the big assembly of 
Nrpatunga-sendangi-catm. met in the courtyard of 
Accutapriya-devar, setting apart a portion of land 
belonging to the Mahdidstd for one perpetual lamp in 
the temple. 387 of 1922, 

u Kdmarasavalli (Tri.) — Tirumngal - pdla. Tanks and 

ponds in the village and its vicinity for red lotuses in 
the month of Dhanus. By order of the sabka. 

69 of 1914. 

„ Kdldr (Mys.) — A devaddna to Pidariyar (Kolaramma) : 
“ pattan kaiyil td rai -alt ik-kudutta rul ina devaddnam : 
Kuvaldla-ndtt u Araiyurai sarvabadhdparihdra- 
mdgah-Jmjluttarulm&r'' 

481 of 1911 ; EG . x. Kl. 106 (b). 

„ Mel-sevur (SA.) — A member of the J anan a tha- terin j a- 
valangai-vejaikkarar set up the image of the goddess 
Uma-bhattaraki. 216 of 1904. 

* Perhaps conquered at end of year 2t and beginning of year 22, 217 of 
1894 mentions it* ARE, 1923 11 27. 


[ 608 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 22,—Puiijai (' T].)—Tirmnagal-jir,la . Ten veil of land by 
tlio king for a feeding house ArumolidSvau and for 
daily huvirbali to Adavallur in the temple, with the 
condition that taxes on half the portion were to bo 
paid by the temple and the rest by the assembly of 
Talaccengudu. Another tax-free gift of 5 veli by the 
assembly for an annual festival in Sittirai and a 
remission of taxes on land given in the seventeenth 
year for havirbali-arcand. 180 of 1925. 

„ Tinwaitjaru (Tj .)—Tiruuui(/al-jioln. (Includes Uatta- 
padi). % Sheep for lamp Vimayan Vambavai, the 
dcvi (queen) of Sajukki Vimayan, and daughter of 
V an jayun-Perrappai. 217 of 181)4: ; SIL v. 516. 


Tb'uvallum (SA.)-~TiruMagal‘p<Va. An increase of 
pane, a vara paddy that the assembly of Mandaram alias 
Jayamei’u-srikarana-mangulam agreed to pay to the 
devakanniis of the temple. Mentions Irayiravan Palla- 
van alias Mummudisola-posan, lord of Araisur, and an 
officer of the Perundauam of Hajaraja-deva, who raised 
the contribution from the village. 219 of 1921. 

Tiru vVj tnihilai (T j .) — 27 rumagal-pfila (full). The 

assembly ( mahdsabhd ) of Tirumalalai, a devciddna 
village of the god in Ven-nadu, made provision for the 
Binging of Tiruppadiyam hymns twice a day in the 
temple. The assembly met in the tirumurram of the 
temple ( nanutudvar hlyii) 423 of 1906. 

IV ruvVj tnilalai (Tj.) — 26 kdsu for lamp by Kaviniyan 
Eyan Sendau of the locality. 449 of 1906. * 

Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Ti)'umaga{-p~>la. Gift of 96 sheep 
by a Brahman lady of Vamanac-ceri for lamp to 
Vejjaimurti-alvar, the Ph'Hamaiydr being responsible 
to the sabha lor iis maintenance, and the satnvatsara- 
vdriyam and the Sri-Vaisnavas having the power to 
punish default. 10^ 1923. 


* Sen Tamil hi. pp. 359 - 60 , where T. A. Gopinutha Rao reaches the conclu- 
•iou that SSntiaw is identical with Tirumltyigai-dlviir oi the T iruvuaippft. 


1608] 



THE COLAS 


Year 


99 


99 


99 


99 


99 


99 


ft 


23 . — Attur (Tin.) Tirumagal-pbJa. Sale of land made tax- 
free by the assembly of KIranur, to the following 
deities : Rajaraja Vinnagar Palli - kon<Jarulina - deva, 
Durga-bhagavati, Saptamatrkas, Ksetrapala and Ganapati 
set up in the temple of Somanatha-ieva alias Ten-tirup- 
puvanam-udaiyar at x\rrur-Seiidamangalam. 

415 of 1930. 

Daddpurdm (SA.) — Tirumaga]-pbla. The dancing 
girls attached to the temples of Iravi-kulamanikka 
Isvara and Knndavai Vinnagar should accompany the 
god in procession, and sing and dance during the 
hunting festival. 14 of 1919. 

Erumur (SA.)- -Tirumagal-pola. Five Jcalanju of gold 
by Araiyan Viccadiran of Urumur, a devaddna and 
brahnadeya , on receiving which the sabha agreed 
themselves to pay the annual fee collected from the 
uvaccar and to have the srlbali conducted properly. 

385 of 1913. 

Erumur (SA .)^Tiriimagal- 2 )bla. Sale of land to temple 
by the sabha of Uruimir, a devaddna and brahtnadeya . 
Mentions taxes : ecctlru , vdsaiil~p~mda~ku(jlimai+^m& 
urirjlu-vari. 388 of 1913. 

Malurpatna (Mys.) — Tiru magal-pola . The assembly of 
Periya - malnvur alias Rajendrasinga-catm. agree to 
give paddy to the temple every year, for offerings etc., 
from lands cultivated by themselves. 

510 of 1911 ; EG. ix. Cp. 128. 

Sermddevi (Tin.) — ( Va{(ehittu ). Tiramagal-pfila . 25 

cows for lamp. Seravanmahadcvi-catm. was in Mu|}i- 
nadu of Rajaraja- vala-nihju. 718 of 1916. 

Tirumdlpuram (NA.) — Gold by a native of the Pan<jya 
country. 342 of 1906. 

Tirumeyndnam (Tj.) — Tirumaga\-pula. Meeting of 

Ndlur-nambimdrxi\Ul{a perungup-mah&sabhai at the 
big hall called Gantjiaradittan. Mentions the Vi^nu 
temple Tirunarayana-Vinpaga r of Nalur. 

326 of 1910. 


[ 510 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 23 ,—Tiruppugalur (Tj.) — Nine gold flowers to Konapperu- 
ma} by Selvan-accan, one of the Satrubhayankara- 
terinda Velam of queen Pailcavan-mahadeviyar. 

62 of 1928. 

„ Uttaramhrur (Ch.) — Tirumagabpola , 96 sheep for 

lamp by Udayan Adittan of Tannlrmuttam in Malai- 
na$u to Brl-Ve}i-Vi§nugrhattu Vellaimurti-alvar ; the 
Perilamaiydr of the place (ivvur) to conduct the 
charity, subject to punishment for default at the hands 
of the tiraddhamantus and the Srl-Vai§navas. 

182 of 1923. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Timmagal-pola. 96 sheep for 

lamp by a merchant of Naduvilangadi, and 15 kaJanju 

of gold for a lamp to T i r u v fi y k k u 1 a m - u d a i y ar (Krsjna), 

by a resident of Govindac-ceri. The vlraganattar of 

the place were trustees ( punai ) of the first gift. The 

gold was with the vaikhdnams of the temple. The 
* 

ISraddluimantas had the power to punish default. 
All these arrangements were made by the sabhii. 

187 of 1923. 

„ Uttaramh'nr (Ch.) — Tintmagal-pola, 48 sheep for 

lamp to Vellaimurti-alvar by a resident of Terkilangadi 
with the Kaji-gunattar of the place {ivvur) as trustees 
(punai). The Sraddhaniantas and Sri Vaisnavas 
to punish default. The donor gave also a padikkam, 

189 of 1923. 

Year 23, day 385 — Tinivdmdttur (BA.) — Tirumagal-pola . An 
enquiry into the affairs of the temple by Tamulan 
Kon’ia&ngi of ‘Birudhamamilliir, * the king's agent, and 
trustee of the temple, who ordered the distribution of 
certain offerings among 21 temple servants ; in year 
27, VSjan Arnran of Puduklanji, who belonged to the 
king’s perundaram, took objection to this distribution 
as it was against the sastras. 22 of 1922. 

Year 24. — Jambai (8A.) — Tirumagabpola, The sabha of Ner- 

kunjam alias Vairamegha-catm. gave land in exchange 


* 21 of 1922; year 26, day 206. 



THE COLAS 


for fields taken up by the bed of their new tank, made 
by Bana Maravan Narasimhavarman. 84 of 1906, * 

Year 24. — Kd{ahasti (N A .) — Ti nima gal-pola . Gold for lamp to 
the shrine of Manikkengai-madevar. f 298 of 1904. 

„ Karuttat tan gild i (Tj.) — Tirumagal-pola. Arangan Kari 

alias Solaviccadira Muttaraiyan of the Sirudanam of 
Rajaraja and of the 8 i n gal an t akat- teri n j a * K u d i r aic- 
cevagar caused the death of Kari-knlir-vagai of the 
1 1 ai y a- pada i -i r urnu d i - sola vlrar in a contest ( Sri-raja - 
rdjadevar - kanuivillekkat - to lam eydu ?), and com- 
pounded with his relatives (ivanukkuravu mnrai 
kadavdr * * * odium tirundi) and endowed a per- 

petual lamp in the temple of Mahadeva. 

48 of 1897 ; STL v. 1411. 

„ Melpddi (C.) — Tiruma gal-pala . Sale of land, tax- 
free, for pavitrdrdhana festival to Mahadeva of the 
Candramaulisvara temple, by residents of Merpadi 
alias Raj fisray apuram in Tuy-nadu of Perumbanappadi, 
for thirty Jcalanju of gold received from Araisurudai- 
yan Irayiravan Falla varaiy an J alias Miimmudi-sola- 
poean of Sd-nadu. 96 of 1921, 

„ Melpddi (C.) — Tirumagal - pola. Land, tax-free, by 
residents of Merpadi alias Rajasraya-puram to god- 
Rajasrayapura Vitankar. 99 of 1921. 

, Olagapuram (SA.) — Land by the nagarattar of Ulaga- 
madevipnram for feeding 25 Brahmans in a salai 

attached to the temple. 134 of 1916. 

Sermddf’vi (Tin.) — ( VaUehittrT). Tirumagal-pola. Gift 
of 75 cows for three lamps to Nigarili-sola-vinnagar- 
alvar in Seravan - mahadevi - catrn. by Divakaran 
Vasudevan. 702 of 1916. 

* 86 of 1906 of year 26. 

f In ARE. 1904 II 21 this temple, Magika^thEivaram, is taken to be of the 
time of KulSttunga III. This inscription shows that the shrine itself is older 
than the present structure of the temple. ARE . 1905 11 11. 

X Larger Leyden Grant ; also 100 of Yr. 6 of Parak. RajSndra ; ARE* 

1921 n 32. 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 2i.~i,'evilipperi (Tin.) _ {VaUeluttu). Tirnmagal-pbla 
Lamp by a native of the Cd]a country ; endowment 
left in charge of those who, for the time being, were 
responsible for the daily worship being conducted 
properly. 419 of 1906. 


/t 


Tirnmeynanmn (Tj.) — T irum ugaf-pota . Gift of land by 
a merchant. Meeting of brahmodeynn-ncihlr nnmbi- 

muntllitja nmlumlhiip-inrungurip-pemmakhd, at 

the Sri-raja-rajauiina Periyambalam * in front of the 
Samapaivsvara temple. 322 of 1910 


ft 


Tirunamanadur (S\.)~Tiruma gal-pula. Gifts of gold 
ornaments made in the thirteenth and nineteenth years 
engraved now by order. 358 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 988. 


” Tiruppandumtti (Tj .)~Tirimagal-pdla. Assembly of 
of Tirutturutti received 20 ham from Kuttan Madhu- 
rantakan, a member of the Tailakula-krda-terifija-pari- 
varam, and agreed to burn a perpetual lamp in the 
temple. 78 of 1931 

" Timppurandnyam (Tj.)- Agreement by residents of 
HankarappFidi to burn a lamp in the temple on behalf 
of Hainan, a servant maid of Melai-velam called 
Madliurantakatderinda Velum of the king. 

340 of 1927. 

»t Tiruvadutarai (Tj.) — Tirwnagabpola., Agreement by 
the assembly of Iiaccikudi alias Vikramasinga-catm., 
a brahma dry a in Manni-nadu in Rajendrasimha Vala- 
nadu, to pay taxes levied in the land-survey made by 
order of the king on the lands at Sattanur, (a brahma - 
dey a in Tiraimur-naiju), belonging to the temple of 
Tir u vfu l u -fcu raiy udai ya Par amas vamigal , in payment of 
the interest on money which they bad received from 
the temple but could not pay back. 100 kulj — one 
m3. In continuation is another record of year 25 by 
which the ur of Ilangari-kinji in Perfwur-na<Ju give 
land for a lamp. 101 of 1925. 


* cf. Kant HarUdittanJlna' periya- a mbalatfly of 326 of 1910* Year 23. 


1518] 



THE COLAS 


Year 24 . — Tiruvaiyaru (Tj.) — TirumagaUpola . Gold ornaments 
and vessels presented to the temple — a long and detailed 
list. The Utlarakailasa * shrine (stone) in the temple 
was founded by Dantisakti Vitanki and was called 
L5kamahu.de visvara. 222 of 1894 ; SII. v. 521. 

„ Tiruvaiyaru (Tj.) — Ornaments and land to the same 
shrine founded by Dantisakti Vitanki, 

155, 156 of 1918. 

„ Tiruvamattur (SA.) — Gift by Tam u la n k or ran gi of a 
silver vessel and plate for keeping sacred offerings. 

24 of 1922. 

„ Tiruveukddu (Tj.) — Tirumagal-pola . Gold for Senga- 
lunirtiru-vasigai and gold flowers to Tiruvenka<Ju-deva 
by one of the Mulaparivara and one of the Mulapari- 
vara-\itteru (servants) of the king. 454 of 1918. t 

„ Timvikdu r (Tj.) — Ttrumagal-pnla . Land for offerings. 

Refers to a revenue survey made at an earlier date. 

44 of 1907. 

„ Vrddahcalam (SA.) — Tirum<iga\-pnla . Residents (JirCmi) 
of Manalur agree to supply annually four cloths 
In lieu of interest due from them to the temple — 
amudu padaippdrkku vdy-kntfukku ndlu pudavai. 

45 of 1918. 

Year 24, day 124 . — Parandur (Ch.) — Tirumaga,hpdla . Mentions 
Citrakutam (king’s palace ?) at Tanjavur. General 
order relating to revonue ; damaged, but same as tho 
next. 78 of 1923. 

Year 24, day 124 . — Ukkal (NA.) — Tinimagal-pdla. Oral order of 
the king seated in the college ( kalluri ) to the south of 
the Citrakuta at the Tanjavur Periya-sen<Ju-vayil 
(hippodrome gate). Procedure regarding the execu- 
tion of such oral orders indicated by this inscription. 

29 of 1893 ; SII. iii. 9 ; PK. pp. 114-5. 

• This ii the modern name of a small shrine in the Pa&canad5*vara temple. 

SII. ii p. 078 n. 7. 

t No regnal year appears in the text. 

[ W4J 



RA JAKES ARI RAJARAJA 1 


Year 25 .—Dadapurnm (SA.)— Sheep for lamps to the temple of 
Kundavai Vinnagar-alvar by princess Parantakan 
Kundavaip - pirattiyar. Senapati Mummudi Sola 

• M 

Brahma-maharayar in charge of the management of 
the temple. 10 of 1918. 

„ Ddddpuram (SA.) — Tiruitiagal-pola. Sheep left with 
thirty shepherds for ten lamps to the Iravikula- 
manikka temple, by Kundavai who built the temple. 

18 of 1919. 

„ Mamallapuram (Ch.) — TirumagaUpoIa. A vyavasthd 
relating to division of land and some privileges among 
the Nagaram and the Perth niaiyur while Puduk- 
kudaiyan Kkadhiran Aiymbadinman who was settling 
(i vagai-seyginra ) the Amur-kottam was present in the 
nandavanam (llower - garden) to the south of the 
Jalasayana-deva temple of Nagaram Mamallapuram. 

SIL i. 40. 

t9 Patfukka nampatt i (Tj.) — Land to Malutdeva temple at 

Nelvay. Mentions Puheavan Brahmadirayan ruling 
Tagadur-niidu granted to him usjlvitam by the king. 
He was an officer of the Perundaram, and his father 
was a native of Ariyiir and called Erumaiya-nalga- 


mumjan. 254 of 1909. 

Tiruppurambiyam (Tj.) — Lamp by Mayilatti of 

the Sirudanam of Rajariija-dovar. 339 of 1927. 


TirumlanjuU (Tj.) — Land to Ksetrapfila-deva set up by 
Nambirattiyar-uloga - madeviyar and to Ganapati. 
Mentions land-survey commencing in the sixteenth 
year, 624-A of 1902 ; STL vim 223. 

Th'uvala hj uli, (Tj.) — Tiru magal-pola . Ornament by 
Rajaraja’s queen Duntisakti Vitanki alias Lokamaha- 
devi, his daughter Kundavai, the queen of Vimaladitya, 
and his middle daughter Madevadigaj, to the shrine of 
K§$trapala-deva which had been built by the king. 

G33 of 1902 ; SIL vim 234. 


[ 515 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 25. — Tiruvallam (NA.) — Tirumagabpdla. A patfatn of 
eleven kalanju by Dharmakkattnlal-tujai-nirai for 
Tikkali-Andar by judges ( niydyattdr ) of the village. 

221 of 1921. 

„ Tiruvamdttur (SA.) — Tirumagal-pola. Tamilian Korja- 

nangi enquired into the temple affairs and arranged that 
the drummers engaged in the temple should, in return 
for somo paddy, take out the god Candrasekhara- 
perumal in procession thrice daily for Srlbali . The 
drummers got the share of the paddy till then given 
to the Pallis for measuring the paddy due to the 
temple from the villagers, ( kdl-alavu-kuli ). 

16 of 1922. 

„ Tiruvcnkdtlu (Tj.) — Thirty kdsu for lamp by queen 
Yanavan-Mahadeviyar alias Tribhuvatia-madeviyar. 

442 of 1918. 

„ Vrddhdcalam (SA.) — Tirumaga\ - pdht. Money for 
reading ... in the temple. 50 of 1918. 

Year 25, day 154. — Uttaramh'dr (Ch.) — Tirumagal-pdla. Two 
thousand ku/i of land by the Mahasabha for Tirnccen- 
nadai to the god in the Sri-Puru^ottama. 

177 of 1923. 

Year 25, day 310. — Tan j ore — Tirumagal-pola. Gifts to Uma- 
Parauiesvari by the elder sister of Sri-Rajaraja-deva, 
the Mahadevi of Vallavaraiyar Vandya-devar. 

SII. ii. 2. 

Year 26 . — Gangaikonddn (Tin.) — Tirumagal-pola. Land, by 
purchase from the sabhu, for offerings to Srl-Kailayattu 
Ksetrapula in Sri Valiabha-mangalam, a brahmadeya 
on the south bank of the Tan-porundam. 

160 of 1895 ; SII. v. 724. 

„ Jambai (SA.) — Tirumagal-pola . Mentions a Bana chief 
named Maravan Narasimhavarman alias Bajaraja 
Vana - Kovaraiyar : — Sakala-surdsura - mmadhigata* 
vijaya-srl-inandhdri - vallabha • mah&raja - mah&bali - 
hula - tilak&yamdna - I\tnr^Uarirudaya - nandana 


[»•] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA 1 


Nanda-giri-natha Parivaipura-pammewara Vetci - 
cihndlamkrta vrxab ha-ldnchana. 

8(; of 1906 * ; EL xi. p. 239 n. 4. 

Year 26. — Kandamangalam (SA.) — Tirumagal-pMa. Land made 
into an agrahdra called after Tribhuvana-mahadevi to 
the temples of Jayantangi-Yinnagar-Paramasvami and 
Srl-Kailasmi. 354 of 1917. 

„ t Kbnerirdj apxn rim (Tj.) — Tirumagal -pnla. Land by 

Udaiya-pirattiyar to two persons at Pungudi for singing 
Tiruppadiyiun in the temple of Tirunallum-n laiyar. 

624 of 1909. 

Kuhtlr (Tj.) — Money for lamp to A di t y es varum- U <lai y ur 
temple at Kiihiir. 276 of 1917. 

„ tievitiftph'i (Tin,) — TirinnagaLpohr Gift of land by the 

f 

Mahasablia of Srlvallabha-msmgalam, a brahmadeya in 
Kilkalii-kumiin, a sub-division of the RFijantja-manda- 
lam. 422 of 1906. 


If 


If 


Takhllam (NA.) — Tinwwgaf-pilla. 96 sheep for lamp. 
Takkdhuu is called K<atriya - sikhamani - puram, a 
tuniyur in Manayir-kOttam in the Jay angora la- sdla- 
mandalam. 259 of 1921. 

Uttaramenlr (Ch.) — TirumagaLpbla. 48 sheep for 

half a lamp to V el | aim urti -ftlvar by a lady of Panmaic- 

ceri ; the residents of Panmaic-ceri were themselves 

* 

the trustees (pnttai) and the tiniddhuinantas and the 
Sri Vaismivaa had the p(»wer to punish defaults. 

LS6 of 1923. 


•I Uttaramenlr (Ch.) — Tirnmagal-pnla . 96 sheep for a 
lamp to Veljaimurti-alvar in charge (jwnai) of the 
residents of Panmaic-ceri, the tiraddhamantas and the 
Sri VttLsnava8 having the power to punish defaults. 
The donor is described as : Tvvu r-yal unganattdml 
tirbgdvit idacciri Kottic-can na-Kumara Kramavittan 
Brdhmani Nai igai-mad ic-cani . 190 of 1923, 

# cf. 84 of 1906 of Year 24. 

+ Wednesday 12th July, A.D. 1010. Sewell, EL xi. p. 241. 


r 517] 



THE COLAS 


Year 26, day 20. — Tanjore. — Begins : “ Eiad-v is va-nrpa-ireni- 

mouli « mdldpaldlitam Sasanam Rajardjasya Raja - 
kesari varmariah” Tinnnagal-pdla • The king, seated 
for making dams , in the Kilaittiru-maujanasalai of 
Irumadi-sola within the Taujavnr Koyil (palace), 
ordered that there be engraved on stone all the gifts 
from himself, his elder sister, and his wives (nam-pen- 
(jugal) and other gifts to Srl-Rajarajesvaram-Udaiyar of 
the sacred stone temple built by him (ndtn cduppicca- 
tirukkarrali) in the Tahjavur * kurvam of the 
Pundyakulasani Vala-nadu. 105 numbered paragraphs 
follow. SIL ii. 1. 

Year 26, day 206. — Tiruvdmdttur (SA.) — Timmaga\-pdla . 

* 

Tamilian Korrinangi of Sirudhfuna-nallur, the king’s 
agent and trustee of the temple, called together 
the sabha and the ur of the village, and enquired 
into the affairs of the temple, and finding tho 
existence of a certain surplus of paddy due to measure- 
ment by the vldhdtankan-marakkul instead of by the 
rdjakhari , he ordered this surplus to be utilised for 
the daily supply of akkdra-adisil by name Jayan- 
gomla-solan to god. Mentions other gifts for lamps : 
also sdlabhdga. 10 sheep for one kahtnju . 

21 of 1922. 

Year 27 . — Brahmadesam (NA.) — Tirumagal-pdla . Ten kalanju 
of gold for which were got 90 sheep (for a lamp) left in 
charge of the ga nap per a mu kk a \ who looked after the 
srlkdryam for the year. 204 of 1915. 

„ Emajyperdr (SA.) — Tirumagal-pdla. Sale by residents 
(Crom) of Naluviir of lands made tax-free to the 
trustees of the temple of Tiruvalaudujrai - tu.iaiya 
Paramasvamin of Emapperur for offerings thrice 
a day. 513 of 1921. 

„ K&lahasti (NA.) — Verse filad-vi&va followed by 
Tirumagal-pdla. Seems to enforce payment by the 
updsakds of arrears of interest on some endowments. 

299 of 1904. 


[ 618 ] 



rajakesari RAJARAJA I 


Year 27. S. 933. — Sadharana. — Kallaha\]i (Mys.) — Death in a 

fight of Jebayya, son of Balalcora Nolambasetti who 
received Kolatur Kal-nad from Nannaiyabhupa, 
“ Samadhigatapancamaha&abda Pallavdnvaya Sri 
Prthivivallabha PallavaJcula-tUakaikavdkyam Kdrici- 
puravamvara Srlman Nolambudhiruja Corayyam 
raj y die." EC. x. Ct. 118. 

Klh'r (SA.)— A new introduction. Conquest of Ddagai 
in the campaign against Malai-niidu. 

236 of 1902 ; SIT. vii. 863. 


tt 


tt 


It 


Melappaluvur (Tri .)— Tir imagaUpoJa . At the request 
of his queon Nakkan Pancavan-madOvi, the daughter 
of Avani-kandarppa-purattu-dwvanar of Paluvur, the 
king provided for offerings and worship in the temple 
})y granting an additional income of 900 kalatn of 
paddy due on some lands which were surveyed and 
assessed, the dt’vadCuia lands of Urangudi being 
excepted. 385 of 1924. 

Sknnadevi (Tin.) — 2 1 / Lamp to Colendra* 
simhesvara. 192 of lb95 ; SII. v. 750. 

Sh'tmldevi (Tri.) -The Agamaligai Sivalufthmanas of the 

Odl e n ( i rasi n ga-is vara agreed, on receiving twelve old 

kdiUt to bum a perpetual lamp to Kuilasattalvar. 

029 of 1916. 


M 




ft 


TimmdavCuji (Tri.)— Money for lamp by Ilangon Picci, 
the senior queen {mdUa-dei'iydr) of Selapperuman and 
the daughter of Valla varaiyar. of 1920 ‘ 


Tiruppugalur (Tj.)— Undertaking by the Sivabrahmanas 
at Pugalur to burn a lamp to Konapperuma! for money 
received by them from a Brahman lady named 
Qanapati Ponnulvi alias Solai. 09 o£ 1928 ‘ 


ruvaijandai (Ch.) — Tirumagal - pdla. Land for 
offerings in the Varaha-deva temple by the residents o 
Taiyur alias Rajakesari-uollur. 


i ftin * 


* Text does not give the detail* given here. 

[ 519 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 27 . — Tiruvenkadu (Tj .) — Tirttmagal - pfila. Provision for 
Sadaiyattiruna} in Aippigai and for festival during the 
six days preceding. 115 of 1896 ; SIL v. 979. 

ft Tiruvenkadu (Tj.) — Tir umagal-pnla. Twenty-two pon 

for lamp to Nangur Tiruvenkatla-devar by Velan 
Sundara-solan, the son of Kodumbalur Velan Siriya 
Velan who fell in Ilam in the 3rd year of Udaiyar 
Pon-inal igaiy ir-tuil j imi-devar. * 

116 of 1896 ; SIL v. 980. 

„ Tiruvenkadu (Tj.) — Tirumagal-pola. Setting up of a 
copper image of the goddess to R§abha-vahana-deva by 
persons of the Rajaraja-jananatha-terihja-parivara. 

457 of 1918. 

„ Tiruvennnbur (Tri.) — Tirumagal-pfila, omitting mun - 
nlrp -pa?a ndl vu-pa nm rdyim m um. 

100- A of 1892 ; SIL iv. 548. 

„ Tiruvenimbur (Tri.) — Tiruma(ja\-p~>la* Land for two 
lamps. Mention seems to be made of a general tour 
of inspection by the king ( [devarga } ) in the course of 
which Kali Adittan audited the accounts of the temple. 

109 of 1914. 

„ VdaiydrgmU (HA.) — Tirumayal - pnla. Assembly of 
V Iraiiarayana-catm. met in tho hall Rajarajan, and 
under orders of the groat assembly, decided that a Jth 
share of all lands and tanks in the hamlet should 
belong to the Tiruvanantlsvara temple. 

615 of 1920. 

Uy yakkon (ja n - Tirum a la i (Tri .) — Tirumagaf-pfila. 90 
sheep for lamp to Karkudi-vijumiyar in Rajasraya- 
catm., in Pandi-kulasani- vaj a-nad u . | The donor was 
queen Nakkan Arumoli alias Piridi-madeviyar. 

455 of 1908. 

* See MK Ch. 54 vv. 12 ff. Mahinda IV. A.D. 954-70. Yr. may be (9) 
not (3). 

t Before and after this year, the village was in Kera^taka Vaia*nS4 tt * 
ARB. 1909 U. 42* 


[W0] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 88.— -fl. 934.— Balmuri (Mys.)— (Oanarese .) King called 
also Kali Rajaraja, Conquests mentioned : Gangavadi, 
Mal$na<J, Nolamba, Andhra, Kongo, Kalinga and 
Pan<Jya, all becoming C51a-nad* Lamp by general 
Pahcavan Maraya, the MahManQandyaka of Bengi 
and Ganga Mandalas. He is called Mummudi-Colana- 
gandhavaranam and is said to have seized the Tuluva 
and Koftkana, held Maleya, pushed aside the Cera, 
Telutiga and Rattiga. 

5 of 1895 ; EO . iii. Sr. 140. 

Year 28 .— Jambai (SA .)-~Tirumagal-pMa. u A merchant of Jam- 
bai had a concubine whom a native of Navalur (now 
Tirunamanallur) attempted to outrage at night. The 
v latter was stabbed by the merchant. The merchant 

could not be prosecuted. He combined with a relative 
of the deceased and gave gold for a lamp to burn in 
the Tanjonri-alvar temple at Jambai.” 

77 of 1906 ; ARE. 1907 II. 42. 

„ Sermddevi (Tin.) — (' Vaffetuttu ). Tirumagal - pnla. 

Land by purchase for two lamps in the Nigarili-sfila- 
vinnagar-alvar temple by a certain Vellai-Vaduga- 
pungi-sittar, 711 of 1916. 

„ Sevilipperi (Tin.) — {Vatteluttu). Tirvmaga\-pfila. Men- 
tions Neccura-nadu in Rajaraja - mandalam. The 
village Ten-tirumalirunjolai was situated on the north 
bank of the river Tanporundam. 411 of 1906. 

„ Tadimalingi (Mys.) — Tirumaga\-pola. Grant of land 

to temple in lieu of 100 kaJahju of gold (by kern- 
pfmagwaki-nimik-kal) taken out of the temple trea- 
sury by the gdmtmtjas of Mayilangai of Idai-naJ. 

491 of 1911; EC. iii. Tn. 35. 

„ TirukkaUtta((ai (Tj.)— 90 sheep for lamp by Vemban 
Siyucjaiyar alias Minavan Mahadeviyar, queen of 
Rajaraja-deva. 301 of 1908. 

,. Tirumalav&tji (Tri.) — Timmaga] - ptta. The king 
ordered that the central shrino of the temple should be 
rebuilt, and that certain original inscriptions in the 

[ 581 ] 


6 $ 



THE COLAS 


temple were to be preserved by being copied in i 
book. * 92 of 1895 ; SIT. v. 652. 

Year 28.— Tiruttani (HA.)-Tirumagal-ptHa. Bale of land tax- 
free by the assembly of Jananatha-catxn. to a private 
person for feeding pilgrims going to and returning 
from Sri Venga<}am. 430 of 1905. 

„ Tiruvenk&du (Tj.) — Tirumaga]-pftla. Lamp by the 
mother of queen Villa van Mahadeviyar, named Nak* 
kan Uloga-cintamaniyar. 

117 of 1896 ; SIT v. 981 ; also 447 of 1918 (same). 

„ Tif^uvenkd^u (Tj.) — Tirutnagaf-pflla. Gold for offerings 

to Ada-vallar in the temple of Tiruvenkad^daiyar by 
Kuttan VIraniyar, a queen of the king. 

449 of 1918. 

Year 28, day 141 .—TirumukkuijM (NA.) Tirumagal-pMa. The 
great assembly of Madhurantaka-catm. including the 
young and the old met together in the Sembiyan- 
mahadevi-perumandapam built by the king f and 
agreed to pay the urirai, and utavirai on certain 
temple lands from the interest on 100 kalanju of 
gold which they had received from the temple trea- 
sury. One of the signatories was the accountant of 
the $amvat*ara-variyam . 178 of 1915. J 

Year 29. — Adanitr (Tin.) — (Vaffeiutiu). — 25 sheep for 2 lamps. 

433 of 1909. 

„ Malurpatna (Mys.) — Stadviiva .... and Tirumagdl- 
pola. A (Uvaddna on the day of consecration of 
J ayangonda-soja- vi nnagar-al var. 

507 of 1911 ; EC. ix. Cp. 130. 

„ Malurpatna (Mys.)— The mercantile community provide 
for offerings in the temple by voluntary contributions. 

508 of 1911. 

# cf* 91 of year 14 of RSji&dra. 

f Evidently for the meetings of the eeeembly ‘ARE, 1916 !!• 10. 

X 171, tame d ay, leys down the details of expenses to be met from this 

land. 

[ 589 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Year 2').—Ma\urpalna ( MyB.)—Tirumagal-pr,la . Meeting of the 
assembly of Periya-maluvur alias Rajendra-singa- 
catm. in the temple and gift of a devadam on the day 
of consecration. 510 of 1011 ; EG. ix. Cp. 128. 

„ Malurpaftia (MyB.)—Tirumagal-pr,ta. Gift of a diva- 
dana by the assembly of Vamltir alia* Sola-mfulevi- 
catm. to the temple of Jayangonda-sola-Vinnagar- 
alvar : « Pirutisthai - ieyda - ndl ittevar Sri-kfiyilile 
nan gal kuttakkuraivarak-kvtjiyirundu iltivurhku 
udakapii rvanjtydu ” etc. 

513 of 1911 ; EG. ix. Cp. 132. 

,. MHpdiji (NA.) — Tirumaga(-pola. Construction of the 
Cojesvara alias Arinjigai-Isvara temple by Rajaraja 
and gifts to it. 83 of 1899 ; SII. iii. 15. 

Melpudi (NA.) — Tirumagal-pdla. Gift of a devaddna to 
Ariiijigai Isvara Mahadeva by the Nagarattar of 
Pnlikkunram : “ Nir-nilamum kollaiyum kudum 

utiHi<ja’(vunni-lamo)livinri ippulikkunrattu ni(lam ) 
epperppattadum iltevarkku vhyiu nivandanan- 
galukkut-tivaddna iraiyili-ydga .” etc. 

84 of 1889 ; SII iii. 16 

„ Melpcufi (NA.) — Tirumaga\-p~>ki. Gift by a cultivator 
of 96 sheep for the supply of £ Rajakesari measure of 
ghi every day for lamp to : “ A rrurt-tunjina-devarkku 
pallippatjaiy&ga Utfaiydr &ri Rajaraja-devar eqlup- 
pittapufina tiru VarinjUuvarattu MaMdevarkku.” * 

86 of 1889 ; t SII. iii. 17. 

„ Rajakkal (NA.) — Tirumaga\-pC>la. 600J kuH of land 
by residents of E(ada(el for ofiferings in three services to 
god Agastisvara. Measuring rod katfigaikalattuk-kol. 

172 of 1921 . t 

M i§enkunpam (NA.) — Tirumagal-pt'la . — Twenty port by 
s Brahman to merchants of Jayangon<)a-s6],apuram 

• A tempi* oa th* buritl plao* {fa{{ifipa4*i) of XutSrtuBjin»-dSr» (V*o- 
kayy*) ARK, 1507 n SO. 

t 1 Written in beautiful florid character* ' - Hultwcli. 

X No, 171 in continuation of tibia mention* SiiSjampaduujuian-kSl, 


[m] 



THE COLAS 


(in An<ja-nadu, Perumbanappaji ) for purchase o£ 180 
sheep for a lamp at 9 sheep per kdsu . Liquid 
measure jayangon<ja-&olaraiyan. 149 of 1921. 

Year 29, — Sevilipperi (Tin.) — Lamp by a merchant of Karavanda* 
puram in Kalakkudi-nadu. 418 of 1906. 

„ Tanjwe . — TirumagaUpnla. List of villages that had to 

supply accountants, munis and treasurers in accordance 
with the royal order and rates of remuneration for the 
servants of the temple. 57 of 1893 ; SIL ii. 69. 

„ Tan j ore. — Tirumagahpnla . List of villages in the Coja 

country which had to supply watchmen in accordance 
with the king’s command. 

58 of 1893 ; SIL ii. 70. 

Tanjore . — Tirumagal-p'la . List of persons to whom 
cattle had been assigned for the supply of ghl at 
the rate of J measure by A da vail an *>very day for each 
lamp which meant 96 sheep or 48 cows or 16 buffaloes. 

20 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 63. 

„ Tanjore . — This is a continuation of the preceding 

inscription. It gives the information : 1 kdsu was 
equal to three sheep, (paras. 18 and 21) 

21 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 64. 

„ Tanjore . — List of metal pinnacles ( slupik-kutfam ) for 

the different shrines in the temple with names of 
donors and description including weight. A gift of 
year 3 of Raj end ra is mentioned. 

24 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 90. 

n Tanjore . — Catalogue of jewels. 

25 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 32 (11. 1-54) ; v. 1383-1401. 

„ Tanjore. — An image of Durga by a native of Nallfir 

alias Pancavan-mahadevi-catm. and gifte of jewels to it 
described in detail. 26 of 1897 ; SIT. ii. 79. 

„ Tanjore . — An image of Srikan|ha and jewels for it by 
queen Prthivl-mahadeviyar, detailed description. 

27 of 1897 i SIL iU 80# 


>[&*] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA 1 


Year 29.— Taryore .— An image of Kalapiduri given by the eon of 
a Perundanam of the king, described. 

28 of 1897 ; 811 \ ii. 81. 

M Tanjore . — Seven copper images of Ganapati set np by 

the king, described. 30 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 84. 

„ Tanjore . — Ornaments to Parivaralayattu Ganapati by 

king Rajaraja. 32 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 80. 

„ Tanjore . — Ornaments to Parivaralayattu Ganapati by a 

panitnagan of the king. 33 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 87. 

„ Tanjore . — A vessel to same by Rajaraja-devar panima- 

gan puravu-varitinaikkulattu varippottaga ndyakan 
(master of rent-roll in the department, tmaikkalam , of 
taxes from endowmente-Hultzsch) Pancjyakulasani- 

Valanattu Purkiliyurnattuk-kamadamangalam-uijaiyan 
Kafijan Komjaiyan. 34 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 88. 

,, Tanjore . — Ornamonts to Ganapati. 

35 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 89. 

„ Tanjore . — Silver vessels by king Rajaraja from his own 

treasures, and the booty of silver vessels captured in 
the campaigns in Malai-na^u against the Cera and the 
Piin^ya, 30 of 1897 * ; SIL ii. 91. 

„ Tanjore . — King's grants to the temple including five 

villages in Ceylon t (continuation of SII \ ii. 4) 

37 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 92. 

„ Tanjore . — Tirumagal-pola . Ornaments by the king out 

of the Cera and Pantfya treasures and his own. 

38 of 1897 ; SIL ii. 93. 

n Tiruwujaniai ( Ch.)~~Tirumagal*pfila . Fifteen kalanju 
of gold by a merchant of Ko<}ungd}dr in Malai-na^u 

* It looki at if the king bad more gold and precious atones at his disposal, 
than silver. HnlUsch. 

t R&jar$ja'a foreign conquests were not mere inroads. Note omission of 
detail* of measurement unlike in villages in the C5Ja country, and removal of 
previous holders in some cases. Money revenue more common outside the 
C$la country than in it. Hultssch. 

[ 526 ] 



THE COLAS 


for feeding 30 Brahmans in the Alvar temple at 
Tiruvadandai from interest (paddy) given by the resi- 
dents (ur) of Taiyur in Kumili-nadu of the Amur- 
kottam to the sabha of Tirnva<Javandai. The loan 
is called vaQakkcujan. 260 of 1910. 

Year 29 . — Tiruvaiydru (Tj.) — Tirumagal-pola. Silver vessels by 
Vi§nu-Vardhana-Maharaja alias Vimaladitya-deva, the 
king’s son-in-law, to Lokamaha^iovi-Isvaram-mJaiya 
Mahadeva. 215 of 1894 ; SIL v. 514. 

„ Tiruvisalur (Tj.) — Village called Vembarrur alias 861a- 
martan<Ja-catm. in Manni-nadu, a sub-division of 
Kajendrasimha-vala-nadu. Mentions the performance 
of taldbhdra by the king, and of hi ranyagarbha by his 
queen Dantisakti-vitaukiyar alias Lokamahadeviyar 
in the temple of Tiruvisalur. 42 of 1907. * 

„ Ukkal (NA.) — Tiruma gal-pula. Endowment of a 
well called Rajaraja, and of a tuffi by a servant of the 
king. 22 of 1893 ; SIL iii. 4. 

„ Uttaramerxir (Ch.) — Tirumagaj-pola, 90 sheep by a 
lady of Trivikramac-ceri for a lamp to Vellaimurti 
Alvar of Sri Veli Vi§nugrha. 178 of 1923. 

9I Uyyakkomfdn • Tirumalai (Tri.) — Gold ornament 
(jpap(am) called Jayangon(Ja-»olan. 468 of 1908. 

Year 31 . — Kanydkumdri (Tri.) — Begins perumbugat Kfivi- 

rajakesari . The devakanmis of Rajaraja-Isvaram- 
udaiyar of Kumarikkalikkudi sell some land to the 
Naxpattennayiravar for the establishment of a taynirp- 
pandal named Jayangon(jLa-eolan, t tho erection of a 
Kavanam and the plantation of useful trees in the area 
which may be enclosed {iurrumagtaittu) for the 
purpose. TAS. i. 168-9. 


• Inscription below « eculptare representing the king end queen in a wor- 
shipping attitude - K.V.S. Aiytr ; El. zii. p, 121, n . 2. 

t T.A.G. Rao took this to be a surname of Rajudhiraja, and a*si|pied the 
record to RSjarlja H who was a ParakSsari. 25 2 of 1915 (Brahmad8sam NA). 

is another record with year 31 which may be of this king. 

[Ml] 



RA JAKE SARI RAJARAJA I 

6. 9(2)3. — K&ncipuram. (Ch.) — (Sanikrit) Reoords genealogy 
of E. Calnkyae up to Danarnava; and several 
titles of Co}a Bhlma whom Rajaraja conquered. 

237 of 1931 * f EL xxi. pp. 29 ff. 

S. 929 (Prabhava). t —Kaleyur (Mys.)— ' Teyakulatiiaka Malepa- 
kulakala Kottamandala - natha Aprameya was a 
pillar of victory. He defeated the Hoysala minister 
Naganna ; slew in battle at Kalavur the Hoysala 
leaders Mahjaga, Kaliga (or Kali-ganga), Nagavarma 
and others, winning by his valour in the plain of 
Kalavur a name to endure for ever. 

353 of 1901 ; EC. in. i. Tn. 44. 

The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following : — 

Bannur (Mys.) — (Kanarese) Tirumaga\-pdla . Grant to 
temple at Muttatti. Kudamalai-nadu is here clearly 
Kodaga-malC*-na<Jum (Coorg hill country). 

EC. iii. Tn. 122. 

Brahmadeiam (Tm.)~-(Vatteluttu.) Sale of land. 

381 of 1916. 

Kurerippakkam (NA.) Mentions the Cola feudatory 
Parantakap - pallavaraiyan of Umbaja - nadu ; also 
Jananatha-deva and Mummudi-Cola 414 of 1905. 

Kovnlur (NA.) — Sale of land by the assembly of 
Kovalnr. 438 of 1922. 

Kuhur (Tj.) — Tirumagal-pdla . Land by Vayirikutteran 
alias S^laviccadira-Pallavaraiyan, headman of Kiirur, 
for offerings to a shrine constructed by him. 

304 of 1917. 

Kuttalam (Tin .) — Tirumagal - ptila. States that when 
the temple had become dilapidated it was ropaired and 

9 No. 238 records the presentation of ornaments to the temple, and the con- 
struction of a tank, C3ia samudram, and a temple. Mentions the Ganga family, a 
P51a*rlja, C5Ja Bhlma Vaidumba. 

+ Date irregular. Kialhorn considers this of no 4 value for historical pur- 
poses. 4 El iv. 67. ARE, gives $. 9(28). 

[M7] 



THE COLAS 


the old inscription which was in vatfam characters was 
re-engraved in Tamil on the new stone wall. Sa<Jaiyan 
is prefixed to the name of the king. Records a gift of 
land by residents of the village of Vinnandai alias 
Vikrama-Fandya-nallnr in Kottu-nadu, a sub-division 
of lla-mandalam, for a lamp to Tirukkuttalattu-bhat- 
tarakar. 454 of 1917. 

Kuttdlam (Tin.) — Tiramagal-pfila. Mentions the re- 
engraving in Tamil of old Vatlsluttu records. 

455 of 1917- 

Mdlambi (Cg.)— The king heard of Manija’s heroism in 
the battle of Panasoge and sent word to Pancavan- 
Maraya to bind on him a patfa (inscribed with the 
title) Ksatriya-sikhamani Kongalva * and give him 
Malawi. Witnesses : Govinda Racamma’s family. 

633 of 1912 ; EC. i. 46. 

Malurpatna (Mys.) — Gift to temple by Nigarili-sola- 
purattu nagaratidr. 

509 of 1911 ; EG. ix. Cp. 131. 

Ndrdyanavanam (C.) — Tirumaga] - p~da. Rajaraja- 
kesarivarman - Vikkiyannan Pugalvippavargandan t 
of the (Ca)Iukki family and two other chiefs 
of the Vattiya-nibju gave certain privileges to the 
Vellalas of that district in (Kunra)-vattanak-kottam. 

375 of 1911. 

Pallikmda (N A.)— Provision by the assembly for a 
festival to Bhatariyar in the village by levying the 
water-tax duo from certain specified residents of the 
village. Near by is another record of about the 
same time, — an undertaking by the assembly to main- 
tain offerings to and worship of the Bhatariyar from 
an endowment by Govinda Kataka Sarvakratuyajiyar 
of Ka]amur, a member of the gana . 477 of 1915. 

# This occurred ia 1004 A.D. and wa* the origin of the Kongllva lia<* 
EC. i. pp. 10-7. See also year 28-No. 5 of 1895 ; and Rice * Mysore and Coorg , 
pp. 144 ff. 

+ A title of the like whom, the Calukhi were perhip* a local family 
•object to the C3|a$. ARE. 1912 II. 21. 

[m] 



RAJAKESARI RAJARAJA I 


Talaccangd^u (Tj.) — Gift, of 100 kdm to he raised iu the 
manner specified, b\ the assembly of the place for 
feeding, in the name of Rajaraja, ton Brahmans in the 
temple Tiruccitrakudattn-alvar and for luivirbali to 
the deity. 198 of 1925. 

Tanjore . — Mentions one of the panmdehamur tin 0 £ 
copper placed in the temple of Rajarajcsvaram Udaiyar 
by the king till his 29th year. 275 of 1911. 

Tmnhri (Ch.) — Tii'umagaUpflla. Regulation of dues on 
areca gardens. *200 of 1901 ; SII, vii. 412. 


Tiruccatturai (Tj.)— In praise of a Cola feudatory. 
Mentions victories in Puna-nadu and Malai-nadu, defeat 
of Valudi, destruction of Vilinam and of Karkadaima- 
nagar, as well as defeat of Telunga Bbima. 

204 of 1931. * 


Tirukka\ittattai (Tj.)— Rajakesari. Silver pot to the 
temple of Sri-kudittittai-mahfide va at Vembarrur by 
Senibiyan-nvabadOvip-pirattiyar who ga\o birth to 
Uttama Coju-deva, 297 of 1908. 


Th'umaiyam (Pd.)— Mentions Perumbidugu Perundevi, 
the mother of Videlvidugu-Viluppr‘ra<li>Araisan alias 
Sattan Muran. 403 of 1906, 


Tiruvallam (NA.) — r firtonaynl-p‘>ia. % sheep by 
Sola- mahadev iyiir , daughter of Tittaipiran and queen of 
Rajariija-deva, for a lamp in the Brahmisvara shrine in 
the temple of Tiruttlkkali-alvar ; also gold for a chaim 
and oll’erings. 223 of 1921. 

Tiruvamaltur (BA.) — Tirumayal - pnhi. A certain 
Gunasekharan of Vesalippadi made a jewelled gold 
vessel for the sacred bath of the deity and a pair of 
bracelets set with precious stones. 28 of 1922. 


* Said to be in character* of the 12th century and victories ascribed to the 
time of KulSttunga I and Vikr&ma CSJa at ARB* 1931 U 30. 

[589 ] 


(7 



PARAKfiSARI RijfiNDRA I 
(Acc. 27th March-— 7th July A.D. 1012) 

S. 943 * — Nandigunfa (Mys.) — Tiru rnanni valara . Malta- 
gavunda gave land to Mallesvara. 

2 of 1895 ; EC. hi. Nj. 134, 

S. 945. — Jdtfi-Dala&igert (Mys.) — (Kanarese) Gold to temple. 

57 gadgdna in gold, 359 golden grains of rice, and 
42 poru } ; for Brahmans and ascetics 37 poru {, 

171 of 1911 ; EC. ix. Ht. 10. 

S. 9(48) t — Marasanahal]i (Mys.) — (Kanarese) Purva-dHamum 
Oangaiyum Jconfa- Construction of a sluice. 

179 of 1911 : EC. x. Cb. 13. 

S. 956. — Kuruhahalli (Mys.) — (Kanarese). Death of Cangalva 
Bihjavuniri-deva, son of Baniki Bunkara- Gavada, 
in fight with Cangalva Nayaka. Mentions former's 
wife Piidikabbeof the Kaumjiga-kuln. 

495 of 1911 ; EC. iv. Yd. 37. 

S. %Z.—*Siddhanahal\i (Mys.)— (Kanarese). Death of a heroine 
in a cattle-lift after the recovery of the lost cattle. 

173 of 1911; EC* ix. Ht. 11. 

Year t.—Hongantir (Mys.) — Grant of tax-free land, after pur- 
chase, for offerings by the assembly of Punganur alias 
Trailokya-mahadevi-catm. 

199 of 1911 ; EC. ix. Op. 42-A. 

„ Kutt&lam (Tin.) — R&j$ndrasimha. Lamp by a certain 
Ve}lan-d$van Pa tt a lagan, a native of Pagur. 

479 of 1917. 

Year 3.— Karutta((dngu4i (Tj.) — Bale of land tax-free to the 
temple by the sabha of Peralattur for 75 k&iu. 

44 of 1897 ; SIT. v. 1407. 

# Wsdaetday Marsh 1st, kJ>. 1011,— Earliest correct date la current Saka 

year. Kielhora Ml. iv, 69. 

t w-~ic 


t *30.1 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Year Z^Karutta^ingu^i (Tj.) — Sale of land tax-free to temple 
for 20 ka&u by an individual ; attested by witnesses. 

45 of 1897 ; SII. v. 1408. 

tl Kllur (BA.)— 100 sheep by Raman Mummudisola for 
the merit of his mother Rajasekharan Umai-nangaiyar, 
who was the daughter of Munaiyadiyaraiyar and the 
dein of Pattalagan Raman alia < Arumolideva-miladu- 
<Jaiyar. 18 of 1905. 

„ * Malurpatna (Mjk.)— G ift of a tax-free devadam by the 
sabha of Trailokya-mahadevi-catm. alias Punganur 
with right of irrigation from a tank in the neighbour- 
hood : “ Mamliir eriyininrxm nir-pdccik-koUa can - 
dirddittaval nt r-pdya udakapurvanj eydu ko^uttfon 
Manalur uvkku samanda Kottayan Ultaman ana 
&~hivirrddira gdmundanum 7 java - gamundanum 
uliitta iirdm. ” The tine for obstructing the irrigation 
was fifty kahinju. 506 of 1911 ; EG, ix. Cp. 127. 

„ Maplrpafna (Mys.) — Agreement between the deva - 
kanmis of a temple and the sabha of Vandur alias 
Sola-made vi-catm, t regarding a perpetual loan in paddy 
(nellumudal) of 820 kalam and the interest due on it 
every year (100 kalam) and the methods of enforcing 
its payment. 512 of 1911 ; EG. ix. Cp. 129. 

M Ndrttamalai (Pd.)— Tiru manni vahira . Fragment. 

358 of 1904. 

o Natlam (Ch.)— Mentions Paramesvara-maugalam alias 
Nigariii-eoja-catm., the meeting of the aamvutsara- 
vdrxyam who had met in the Rajemirasolan-catussalai ; 
and Kanjaran Aiyan Suryan whe was the settlement 
officer ( vagai ieyginra) of the district {kottam) 

262 of 1912. 

it Panddvavd4ai (Tj.) — Sale for 70 kdsu of 9 md tax-free 
by the big assembly of Rajakesari-catm., to A^var 
Sr! Pirantakan ^rl Kundavaip-pirattiyar, for the 
maintenance of a free dispensary founded by her, 

• Year said to bt lost in AXM, 1912. 

[ 681 ] 



THE COLAS 


Savarnan Araiyan Madhurantakan being the name of 
the physician. * 248 of 1923. 

Year 3. — tSermadevi (Tin.) — (Vatteluttii). The vaikhanams of 
Nigarili-sola-vinnagar in the Nigarili-sola-catm., under- 
take to burn half a lamp for kdsu deposited with 
them. 41 Eriyddoliyil anru srhkdyil vdriyam sey- 
vcire muitina neyyiratti uttuviccu erivippdrdgavu /.** 
.... Ipparisu otti ikkdsu konda vaikhdnasardmil 
munninrdme erippdmdndm,'' 

179 of 189,7 ; EL v. p. 47. 

„ tier mad? vi (Tin.) — Assignment of a street with houses by 

Mahfisablu of Niganli-sola«catm M for resilience of 
Tiyai-ydyiratdnnndrrunir, 65 l of 1910. 

„ Eivankddat (Ch.) — Tim assembly (sabha) of the village 
got money from a private person and declared some 
lands below the tank Brahniadhirayap-putt.'ri rent-free 
in order to provide for offerings and lamp to the lccul 
temple of Mahadeva. 289 of 1912. 

„ Tanjore. — Vessels in copper, zinc (lard), and hell-metal 

(vcnhalam) to alayaUup-pijjaiyiir in the temple by 



ginra Poygai-nadu Kilavan Adittan Suryan alias 
Tennavan M uven da Vejan. 

31 of 1897 ; 67/. ii. 85. 


Tirukkdra vasal (Tj.) — Tim mnnni valara, f to Man • 
naikkadakkam. Land by purchase for lamp to Tiruk- 
karayil-udaiyar. 451 of 1908. 

Tirwnukkddal (NA.) — Three kahinju of gold by 
niraikkal , yielding interest of 9 tnanjd<fi per year for 
offerings at Mftsi-makham. Price of paddy taken to be 
40 kadi per kalanju as an average % (erilun- 
jimmy Hunt). 176 of 1915. 


* ARB . 1925 II. 14, cf. 249 of year 7. 

+ Usually no introduction in records earlier than yeai 5— ARB. 1900 H. 4S. 
} Con . 245 of about 20 years later. Interest and prices tripled) ARM* W16 


II. 12 


1699] 



PARAKESARt RAJENDRA t 


Year $,~~Tirunmkhi(jal (NA.) — Twenty-five vili of land by 
Rajaraja-deva, seated on Rajasraya, given at the 
instance of Diimodarabhattan of Kadalangudi, * who 
was made madhyastha {nrufuviruhkam) in the temple 
of Mahadeva at Tirumukkndal. 196 of 1917. 


It 


Tiruv&flnturai (Tj*) — Gift, by a native of Tiruvllimilalai, 
a brahmadhja , of paddy from interest on which the 
Siva-brahmanas of the tempio agreed to get daily three 
pots of water for the sacred bath from the Kaveri 
during the three services. 116 of 1925. t 


Tirumiyaru (Tj.) — 164 gold flowers to the Uttara- 
kailaea shrine (modern name) by Dantisakti alias 
Loka-mahiulovi, queen of Rajaraja. 

220 of 1894 ; SIL v. 519. 




Tiruvaiyuru (Tj.) — Seven bronze lamp-stands to Uloka- 
Mahadevi-Isvaram-u«laiya Mahadeva at Tiruvaijaru by 
Dantisakti Vitankiyar, queen of Rajaraja. 

152 of 1918. X 


TiruvalanjuH (Tj.) — Two gold tiowors to Ksetrapaladeva 
(of the stone temple built by Dantisakti alia s Loka- 
madevi) out of the gold used for her hiranyagarbha in 
the temple of Tiruvisalur in the 29th year of Rajaraja, 

633-C. of 1902 ; SII. viii. 237. 


TiruvaUam (NA.)— People 1 of Vanapuram sold tax- 

free 1000 kuli of land to Vaidumban Sankara-deva 

>• 

Somanatha to whos ename are prefixed the same epi- 
thets as those of Tiruvaiyan Sankara-deva (Rajaraja 1 
Yr. 16*67/. iii. 51). Somanatha assigned the land to 
the Mahadeva tempio of Tiruvaiya-liivara which the 
members of his family had caused to be built on the 
southern side of Tiruvallam-U^laiyar ; he also gave 96 
sheep for a lamp. 82 of 1889 ; SIL iii. 53. 


• Tbit p«nofi *pp«*ra also in the Larger Leyden Grant, AR£. 1918 H 36. 

t 117 a,-d. is a list of images and lamp-standa (with details) in the temple 
of TiruvI4utu{*i-u4aiyir in Slttanflr Abhayfisraya*catm. (cf. 104. i*d.) 

X cf. 104 ol year II, 


[ 688 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 3. — Tiruvenkd(iu (Tj.) — Money, 46" kdsu y to temple for 
off cringe and festivals and feeding by a cavalier of the 
king’s troops ( tad i - m arum-kud ira iccevaga r), a native 
of Attuppaljiniyamam. 459 of 1918. 

„ Tiruverumbiir (Tri.) — Eight kdsu to the Sri Koyilmjaiyar 

for lamp to Tiravermnbiir-ii<iaiya-mahadeva by one of 
the d(unganattar of Srikantha-catm. 100 of 1914. 

„ Tiruvidaimarudur (Tj.) — 45 sheep for a lamp at night 

at the gate called Ekanayakan-tiruvasal. 

200 of 1907. 

„ Tiru v Haiti?' (Tj.) — Gold to provide siddri for the 

incense. 15 of 1907. 

„ Tiruvi&aldr (Tj.) — Ornaments by the queen of the 
Tandy a Sri-valluvar. 46 of 1907. 

„ Tiruvisaltir (Tj.) — Silver kalasa by a queen. 

340 of 1907. 

, t Tiruvikrfur (Tj.) — Mentions the building of the 

Tiruccurralayam and the gtyuram to Tiruviealur 

Mahadeva temple at Vembajj-fur alias Sri Sojamat- 

tanda-catm. 341 of 1907. * 

• • 

n Tiruvimlur (Tj.) — Land for lamp by Nakkan Sembiyan- 

madeviyar, queen of Rajeudra. 348 of 1907. 

f , Udaiydrguifi (SA.) — Gift, by Kamban Madhurantakan, a 
member of the elephant corps (perundaratt u anaiy&l ) ; 
lamp-stand and gold for lamp and offeringa on 

specified days. 598 of 1920. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Land by the assembly for three 
daily offerings to Raghava-deva in the temple of Vejlfti- 
murti-alvar, and for flower-garden, with the stipulation 
that food offered at the two services should be given 
away to the Sr! Vaignavas reciting the Tiruppadiyam 
hymns. 181 of 1923. 


• cf. 51 ot 1907 of ViktwsrtU, * surname of RXjSadra. ARK, 1908 U. 00. 

[ 68 *] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Year 3 . — Uttaltur (Tri.)— Death (?) of a certain 6rutiman Nakkan 
Candiran alias Rajamalla-muttaraiyan of the elephant- 
corpe, when, in a fight with Satyaeraya * , he wae 
ordered by the king to pierce the (onemy’e) elephant. 
A gift was made on hie behalf to the temple of 
Mahadeva at On'attur. 515 of 1912. 

„ Uyyakkmutdn- Tirumalai (Tri.)— Survey of temple lands 

and change of tenants under orders of the king resid- 
ing in his palace at Palaiyaru. 4f>3 of 1908. 

„ Uyyakkmujdn-Tinmalai (Tri.)— Records the survey 
mentioned in the last inscription. 473 of 1908. 

Year 3, day (ZYrt.-Rrahmadesam (N A.) —Gold for offerings by 
Indajadevl, wife of Vallavarasar Vandya-devar, Sabha 
of Parakramacola-catm. take charge of the five 
kalanja given. Measure; Sri Polandaiyan-marakkdt. 

191 of 1915. 


Year i.—Ahigddriputtur (l’j.)— Land for offerings at the shrine 
of Surya-dt'va constructed in the temple by a native of 
Kalliir in Mel-vemba-nadu in Pandi-nadn alias Raja* 
riija-raantjalam. Mentions Kurngur Madam where the 
assembly of Paradiiyakudi (a hamlet of AlagiidriputUir) 
met to make a gift to the temple. Ihe malha whs to 

the north of the village tank. 

289 of 1908 ; ARK. 1909 II. 43. 

„ Allur (Tri.)— Provision for feeding five Brahmans on 
new-moon days. 

„ Dddapuram (SA.)-Sheep for ten lamps to temple of 
Kundavai-vinnagar by Kundavaip-pirattiyiir. 

12 of 1919. 


nn. 


Kn\ahmli (NA.)-96 sheep for a lamp for the merit of 
a soldier killed in a private quarrel. Mentions Biyn- 

danattu Edirili-sola-terinda-valangai-velaikkarar and 

Siyudanattn • ijaiya * raja -uttamasola - terinda-valangai- 

vidaikkarar and Sirudanattn-sola-sikhamam-terinda- 

valangai-vSjaikkSrar. ^ 

Hotter taicriptioa of A.D. 1007-8 ia IW DKD. P . 433. ARE. 1913 

[ 635,1 



THE COLAS 


Year 4. — Kdncipuram (Ch.) — Sale of. land by merchants (mfl* 
nagaram ) of Kanclpuram for offerings and worship to 
god Ganapatiyar Kanclpura Alagar on the northern 
side of the temple called Anjanjandi-ambalam-Rajen- 
dra-6olan, 76 of 1921, 

„ Kd vanianda la m (Ch.) — Land by sabha as iraiyili diva • 

ddna to temple of Raj endra-cole6 vara bnilt by a revenue 
officer (nddu vagai-seyginra) Piccan. 

210 of 1901 ; 677. vii. 423. 

,, Kilur (SA.) — Gift by Pirantakan-yadava-bhlman alias 
U t tam a - c d I a - m i 1 ad u dai y ar of the Bhargava-gotra at the 
request of Araiyan Malaiyarfulittan alias Cedinaijlu- 
velan of Xviyur. The sabha of Tirukkovalur sold 
land for the purpose. 20 of 1905. 

„ Katlalam (Tj.) — Sale of 8 m3 of land tax-free to temple 

by the assembly of Villavanmadevi-catm., on payment 
of 43 ham. 104 of 1926. 

„ Markduam (SA.) — Taxes on a salt-pan for two lamps to 
Tiruppumiccurain-tidaiyar by the ur, 

24 of 1919.* 

„ MiTijnr (Oh.) — Land for festivals etc. in the temple of 
Sdlakulusundara - vinnagar-filvar at Minjur by the 
urdr. Mentions Kalladisvaram-ndaiyar. 

133 of 1916. 

M Stnnddevi (Tin.) — (Vat(e f uttu). Deposit by a Brahman 

lady of siX'Mit; in the hands of the Vaikhaoasaa for 
half a lamp before Nigarilisdla-vinnagar-alvar. 

708 of 1916. 

„ Tirxwadi (SA.)— 90 sheep for lamp by one of the 
Jananathat-terinja-valangai - vejaikkarar of Pangala- 
na^n. 393 of 1921. 

„ Tiruvdduturai (Tj.) — Sale of land and house sites for 
one hundred and twenty kdiu , current and capable 
of passing for full value, by the assembly of 

* d. n of 1919 (RSjarSjt 1, Y r. 19J 

[ 636 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Palaiya-Vanavan-madSvi-catm. (in Innambur-nadu of 
RajSndra-sitoha-vala-nadn) to Alvar Srl-Pirantakan- 
^ri-Kundavaip-pirattiyar who conferred it on Savarnan 
Araiyan Candraiekharan alias TJttama-Cola-acalan and 
his descendants as the physicians of the village. The 
transaction was engraved on the temple walls by order 
of the king. Another record (113) in continua- 
tion is the undertaking by the assembly to pay the 
taxes on this land and on the houses in return for 80 
kaSu got from the donor. 112, 113 of 1925. * 

Year i.—Tiruvaiyaru (Tj.)— Sakkadi Samndaiyan alias Sem- 
biyau-madevip-perundattan appointed to the Tattarak- 
kani of the Cloka-mahadevi-Isvaram by order of 
Deviyar Dantisakti. 216 of 1894 ; 577. v. 515. 

„ Tirumllam (N A .)— Araisurucjaiyan Irayiravan Pallava- 
raiyan alias Uttamasola-Pallavaraiyan, of the Perun- 
daram of the king, had built a shrine Rftjarajesvara ; 
he bought 2000 ku/i of land tax-free for 50 anradu • 
narkdm from the inhabitants of Tiruvallam for two 
lamps to the shrine. 299 of 1897 ; SIT. iii. 54. 

„ Tiruv&nkiiflu (Tj.) — 90 sheep for lamp by a servant 
(adigdrirci) of the queen. 463 of 1918. 

„ Tiruvenkfuju (Tj.) — Money, 333 kdhi, yielding interest 
41| kd§u per annnrn, for incense etc., by queen 
Nakkan Karukkamandiil alias Pancavan-madeviyar. 

464 of 1918* 

„ Tiruviialur (Tj.)— -Gift of land as balyakriyalMga by 
Alviir Hri Pirantakan Kundavaip-pimttiyar while she 
was in the palace ( kiiyil ) at 1'ulaiyaru. 

350 of 1907 ; also 351. 

„ Utjaiycirgwji (SA.)— Umbrella with 19,908 pearls with 
a gold ornamental handle (?) of 25| kalanju by the 
Kaikkdjas of Viranarilyana-catm., a brahmadeya in 
Kfij&ndrasimha-vala-nadu. of 1920. 

• cf. 348 of 1933 of Year 3. 

[537 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 4. — Ukkal (NA.) — Sale of land, 3000 JcuK, by Mahasabha as 
bhdgam for two boats (d(fam) given to the tank of the 
place by a servant of the king. Also sale of five 
picottahs ( ettam ) besides one already bought for the 
odam. 27 of 1893 ; SII. iii. 10. 

* 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Land, 720 Jculi, by sabha of Uttara- 
merur alias Rajendras51a-catm., set apart as tax-free 
Bhavi§yak-ki(Jaippuram, to enable a person to reside 
permanently (nirantaram) in the village and teach, 
(oduvippdrdga). 29 of 1898 ; SII. vi. 312. 

„ Uttaramerur (Ch.) — 480 Jculi of land set apart as Tayit- 

tiriyak-kidaippuram by the Mahasabha. 

33 of 1898 ; STL vi. 316. 

„ Vrddliacalam (SA.) — Tim manni valara to Mannaik - 
kadakkam. Land by residents of Nerkuppai for 
reciting the Tiruppadiyam. 44 of 1918. 

Year 4, day 84. — Uttaramerur (Ch.) — Hereditary appointment of 
a Sivabrahmana to the place of arcaka in the Subrah- 
manya temple. He was to perform the usual services 
(tnunbii-§eyyak-ka$ava-nibandam) with the temple 

lands. 53 of 1898 ; SII. vi. 336. 

Year 4, day 114.— Tiruvallam (NA.)— While Naduvirukkum 
Puvatta Bhatta S5mayajiyar of Kottaiyur was seated 
in the hall Arumo|i-devan on the north side of the 
temple of Solendrasimha-Isvaram-udaiyar at Melpa<Ji 
alias Rajasrayapuram and audited the temple accounts, 
the scale of expenses of the Tikkalivallam-u^aiya-maha- 
dSva temple was fixed in conformity with the inscrip- 
tion engraved on stone by Madhurantakan Gan<Jaraccan 
in the 7th year of Rajaraja * and with other relevant 
factors. 227 of 1921. 

Year 4, day 352. — Tirumukkutfal (NA.) — 120 ka4i of paddy 
for offerings on new moon days. Mentions Rajaraja- 
vady a-mahara j an an earlier donor and the officer 
dembangudaiyar whose order the sabha carries out 
In appropriating the paddy in a detailed manner 
for expenses. 175 of 1915* 

* cf. 10 of 1090 of Year 7 RSjarJj* I. 

I m ] 



RARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Tear 5.—Ammangu$i (Tj ,)—Tiru manni valara (Frag). Land 
tax-free to Rajarajesvaram - udaiya - mahadeva. Also 
provision for lamp. 236 of 1927. 

„ Emboli (NA.) — Tiru manni valara np to semborrirutta - 

gummJiyum, Order issued by the king in year 5 from 
his palace at Palaiyajn regarding the dues from the 
village Perumacjl. The village had not paid up even 
by year 25, day 32. 585 of 1906. 

,i Kalattvr (NA.) — Tiru manni valara, Land for offer- 
ings etc. to Tirukkumbisvaram-udaiya Mahadeva at 
Panjirai-kajattur alias Vikramasinga-catm. Mentions 
Kuttan Tiruvengada-devan, an adigari of Udaiyapirat- 
tiyar. 158 of 1916. 

„ Karuttat{dngu(Ji (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara up to 
Mannaik - kadakkam. Gold diadem made out of 
gold accumulated till year 4 in various ways including 
pitjiligaivdri and gifts by different donors. The 
diadem was called RdjmdrasuJa n-patta m . 

50 of 1*897 ; SIL v. 1413. 

„ KUappahivur (Tri.) — Tiru manni valara to Mannaik- 
katfakkam. Lamp by Arihji-madevadigal, * a pep- 
< ia{(i of Nambirattiyar Pandi-madeviyar, on behalf of 
her daughter Arumoji-devan Bhogi Bhattan Gantjara- 
ditti. 235 of *1926. 

,, Konerirdjapuram (Tj.) — Damaged. Mentions year 3 
and Alvar t Pariintakan Kundavaip-pirattiyar and her 
palace at PaJaiyaTru. 639 of 1909. 

Olagapuram (SA.) — Tiru manni va{ara to Mannaik- 
katjlakkam. Records previous gifts of laud to the 
temple not recorded before and now caused to be 
engraved by the tantfuvan for the year. Mentions 
Kalikontfap^pereri and Go nda rddittap-pcreri. 

140 of 1919. 

* A striking instance of misguiding names having no reference to the status 
of the persons bearing them. 

t Probably died between years 8 and 5 of RSjSndra. ARE, 1910 II 20. 
Centra 849 of 1983 year 1 and ARM. 1984 II 14 where this mistake is corrected. 



THE COLAS 


Year 5. — Sinnamanur (Md.) — Tiru manni valara up to Mannaik- 
ka<}akkam . Sale of land for a lamp to Durgapara- 
mesvariyar by the sabluis of three villages, Arikesari- 
nallur, Arpagasekhara-mangalam and Mandragaurava- 
mangalam met in the sri vd&algopuram of Durga- 
parameevariyar. 439 of 1907. 

„ Tiruppalatturai (Tri .) — Tint manni valara . Last con- 
quest mentioned is I7a-mandal(irn. * Land. 

257 of 1903 ; also 275 ; T SIL viii. 650, 674. 

„ Tiruppugalur (Tj .) — Tiru manni valara to 1 la-man da- 
lam . Lands of the temple exempted from taxes by 
the assembly of Bhulokamanikka-catm., and provision 
made for worship to Sri-kamesvaram-udaiyar and 
recitation of the Vedas. Endowment was 50 kdsu 
yielding 75 leal am interest per annum. 52 of 1928. 

„ Tiruvallam (NA .) — Tiru manni valara to Ifa-manda - 
lam . Sale of land by Vanapurattu-ur, tax-free, with 
well, eri-nlrkkdl and etta-nirkkdl and irrigation right. 
Notable phrases : engalur man j iki lamCiy virra nilam ; 
nir vilaiyum marru sillirai snru-mdttu vetti umanji - 
yum marrumonrxim kdtlapperad omdnCmi. 

4 of 1890 ; SIL iv. 327. 

„ Tiruverumbur (Tri.) — Tiru manni va(ara to Mannaik- 

kadakkam . Land for offerings to Tirumalai-aJ.var of 
Tiruvevumbiyur by ur. Grant made in Rajaraja’s 
time, year 21. Mentions maligaik-k'd . 99 of 1914. 

„ Tiruvisalur (Tj.) — Provision for feeding Brahmans. 
Mentions Uruttiran Arumoli alias Piruti-mahadeviyar, 
queen of Rajaraja-deva. J 349 of 1907. 

„ Tribhuvani (Pondicherry) — Tiru manni valara up to 
lla-rnandalavi. “ This temple of N ad u v il- vira-naray ana- 
vinnagar at Tribhuvanamadevi-catm., a brahmadeya 
in Jayangonda-sola-mandalam, shall be under the 

# Ceylon must have been conquered before 1015-6 A.D. ARE. 1908 II 55. 

t 275 is dated Tuesday 26th March. A,D. 1017-2?/. viii 262 (Kielhom.) 

t cf . 27 of 1897. 


[ 640 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA t 


protection of the regiments of Sri-Vadanur Tillaiyalip- 

perumbadai and Pallayiravan of our lord 

Rajaraja-devar. ” 174 of 1919. 

Year 5. — Uttarammir (Ok.) — Tiru manni valara up to Mannaik- 
kadakkam. Land for various purposes to Sri Krsna 
in the tomple of Kongaraiyar called Rajendra-sola- 
vinnagar by the sabka of Uttarameriir alias Rajendra- 
sola-catm, The endowment was in charge of the Sri- 
Krsna-gamp-perimakkaL 174 of 1923. 

„ V rddhdcalam (SA.) — Tint manni valara up to Pa-manda - 

lam. Gold, 10 kahinju , for lamp to Nerkuppait-tiru- 
mudukunram - udaiyar by Sembiyan - dovacjigalar, 
daughter of Paluvettaraiyar and wife of Muhhai 
Vallavaraiyar. 39 of 1918. 


Year 5, day 230. — BrahmadHam (NA.) — Tiru manni valara to 
lla-mandalam. 90 sheep for lamp to Pondai-mahadeva 
in Karikkottup-piramadeyam alias Parakraina *-sola- 
catm., in Tiruvegambapuram. Mentions Mandara- 
gauravanar Knnda-deviyar (wifo of) Vallavaraiyar 
Vandya-dovar, t chief of the samantas . 

243 of 1915. 


Year 5, day 281. — Pandarava<Jai (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara up to 
i/a-manduhon. An undertaking by two shepherds to 
supply (jhl, J measure daily, for lamp to the central 
shrine of Tiruccelur-deva for 90 sheep received by 
them from Alvar Sri Purantakan Sri Kundavaip- 
pirfittiyar J 25G of 1923. 


Year 6. 


— Kandiyitr (Tj.) — Tint manni valara up to Palpalandl - 
vum. A long record giving interesting details of the 
expenditure in the temple of Kamliyur situated in 
Ayirattaji. 22 of 1895 ; SIL v. 578. 


• Surname of Rajaraja 1, ARE . 1916 II 8. 

+ In other Brakmadesam records, the wife is called Indaja-deviyar. The 
Tanjore records mentiou another wife * Parautakan Kundavai. The chieftain 
was perhaps a native of Kongu (167 of 1915) - ARE. 1916 II 13. 

% See n. to 639 of 1909 Year 5. 

[Ml] 



COLAS 

* * 

* 4 

Year 6. — KUappaluv ur {Tn .) — Tiru manni valara up to Palpa - 
landlvum . Undertaking by the priests of the temple 
of Tiruvalandurai-alvar to measure out a stipulated 
quantity of ghl daily for 15 M&u received by them 
from the temple treasury. 227 of 1926. 

„ Melpa<}i (C.) — Tiru manni valara up to Pa Jpala ndlvum 
72 kalanju gold at the instance of Irayiravan Pallavan 
alias Uttamasola Pallavaraiyan, lord of Araisur, fur 
720 sheep, distributed among shepherds who had to 
supply two measures of ghi daily by the Rajakesari 
measure. Adhikarin Udayamattanda Muvendavelan 
executed the order. 100 of 1921. 

„ Nattam (Ch.) — Tiru manni valara . Land for offerings. 

Mentions assembly of Nigarilisola-catm., which includ- 
ed 12 members of the saynvatsara-vdriyam doing 
§rbkaryam . Details of prices, wages and yie?d of 
land. 263 of 1912. 

„ Pan(Jdravddai (Tj ) — Tiru manni valara to Palpalan- 

divum . Two lamp-stands and 90 sheep for lamp to 
Tiruccelur-mahadeva at Rajakesari-catm., * in Nallur- 
na<Ju by Alvar Sri-Parantakan BrI-Kundavaip-pirattiyar. 

239 of 1923. 

„ Sermadevi (Tin,) — (Vatteluttu). Tiru manni valara up 

to Pa-mandalamidudum. Gift of hereditary karan- 
mai over a devadana tank to the merchant Mannepk- 
kadan alias Tirunilakanda-setti of Nagaram Rajendra- 
solapuram, by the assembly of Nigarili-sola-catm. t a 
brahmadeya in MuRi-nad 11 i» Rajaraja-mandalam, the 
merchant being required to pay two kaiu to Eailasam- 
udaiyar as ulavu-kaiu on each veli of land. 

614 of 1916. 

„ SuldenahaHi (Mys.)— The n&H&r of Kaivara-nadQ to 
Gangapallapuram (of Nulumbapa(li alias Nigarili-io].a- 
pa<Ji) make an arrangement for the sacrifice by the 

* Perhaps after Xditya 1. Rajagiri, a email place a mile from KByil Tlva- 
ityaapftpdi has rains of temples, now forming private premises • ARB. 1994 
116. 


[ 5 *»] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 

Kurattiyar of the nadu of a goat (ddu) on each Tues- 
day to Bhattaraki Mundesvari of Jayangonda-Boia- 
catm. 484 of 1911 ; EG. x. Kl. 26. 

Tear 6 .—Tirundge§varam (Tj.) — Tim manni va]ara to Pal - 
palandtvum . A jewel to temple made from the 
accumulated income (antardyattil kudina mudal) 
from the fief (kdni) of Adigal-accan, one of the Ilaiya- 
kuiijira-mallar in the army of Rajendra-Cola-deva com- 
manded by Adikarigal Sola-Muvendavelar. 

211 of 1911. 

„ Tiruppattiir (Tri ,)—Tiru manni vdlara to tiruttagumu- 
$iyum. Gift by Uttamasola * Miladudaiyar. Men- 
tions Tiruppidavur-sabha. 587 of 1908. 

,* Tiruvdduturai (Tj.) — Tint manni va]ara up to Pal - 
palandlvum. Sale of nanjai and punjai , 2 veli, 8 md 
each of common land, tax-free (cost 10 kdiu, (rai- 
led val 190), to the temple by the assemby of Abhayas- 
raya-catm. alias &attanur met at the Ulagalandan to 
the north of the temple. Mentions the mdligaihkSl 
by which 100 huh was a md. Also land given to the 
temple in year 5 by the ur of Karanur in Peravur- 
nadu for a lamp. 102 of 1925. 

„ Tiruvdduturai (Tj.) — Tint manni, valara to Palpatandi- 

vum . Sale of one veil of land to the temple for forty 
kd$u by the assembly of Periivur, a brahnadeya in 
Peravur-nadu, with an undertaking to pay all its taxes 
for a further sum of 90 kdsu received by them. 

109 of 1925. 

„ Timvalangdtlu (NA.)— Copper-plates. SII. iii. 205. 

w Tiruvallam (NA.)-Tiru manni va]ara up to Palpalan- 
divum . Sale of waste land by residents of Vanapuram. 

220 of 1921. 

Tiruvilakkutfi (Tj .)—Tiru manni vajara up to Tolperun - 
gdval Palperundlvum. Detailed description of tax- 
free lands endowed for flower-gardens and irlbali to 

# After a sorname of Rljlndra • ARE. 1909 II. 48. 

[ 643 ]. 



THE COLAS 


Tiruverndupadi-mahadeva in Kadalangudi also known 
as Videlviclugu-catm., in the (2)0, 24, and 27th years 
of Rajaraja by the residents of Kadalangudi, I<Jaiyaju 
and Pandur. Also gift by his queen Arumoli-deviyar 
made in year 2 of Rajendra of 50 cows of which only 
26 survived in year 5. 120 of 1926. 

Year 6 . — Tribhuvnni (Pondicherry ) — Tiru manni vajara up to 
Palpalandiviim . The great men of the village of 
Tribhvana-madevi-catm., made an order that every 6 
md of land irrigated by the tank Madhurantakap-pereri 
must pay one kahtm of paddy as eri-ayam and that 
the tank-committee must collect this and maintain the 
tank in good repair. 192 of 1919. * 

„ U Hammerin' (Oh.) — Tiru manni valara up to Palpalan- 

dwum . Apportionment by the village assembly of 
shares in arcandvrtti among the four Vaikhunasas of 
Kongaraiya Sri-koyil in lieu of those held by them at 
Ar&sFinimangnlam, an arcanabhdga. 171 of 1923. 

„ Velacceri (Ch.) — Sheep for lamp by a Brahman lady, the 
wife of one of the dhmganattdr of the village. 

302 of 1911. 

„ Velacceri (Ch.) — Tiru manni valara to Palpal [ctndivum. 
Sale of lands held by non -brahmans to the temple with 
the king’s permission. 311 of 1911. t 

Year 6, day 185. — Tiruppanangili (Tri.) — Tiru manni valara up 
to Palpal andivam . Under the supervision of the 
mnlaparudaiy&r , the prrumakkal of the Melaic-ceri- 
maniyambalam administer an endowment of 150 kdSu 
for Si rxi-lidlaip-pnru ppu p-ponagam, Tho schedule of 
expenses gives the information that 2 noli parvppu 
(dholl) «» huruni i-nnnVi paddy; one pidi of ghi*2 
noli paddy ; sugar one palam = two ndfj of paddy ; 
and that one porikkariyarnudu^lour nuli of paddy. 

91 of m2; SIL iv. 538. 

* cf. 66 of 1919 of 20 Tribh. Cn. Kulottunga. - ARE 1919 11 17. 

f Though this number is not quoted, this record seems to be treated at 

ARE . 1912 II 23 as a sale by public auction for default in payment of taxes. 


[ 544 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Year 7 .—Elaburige (Mys.)— MBentira-BoJa-devar. Below a female 
figure : “ represents wife of Mukkaiyan ” who per- 
formed eati. Mukkaiyan was the gdmunda of Kulattur 

MAR . 1917, p. 42. 

„ Kbnerirajapuram (Tj ,)—Tiru manni valara to Ceylon 
conquest (variation at end). Some drummers of the 
temple undertook to beat drums, and blow horns and 
conches during the early morning service in considera- 
tion of the money they reoeived from a private person. 

642 of 1909. 

„ Ktihur (Tj ,)—Tiru manni valara. Sale of land by 
the assembly of Tirupperundurai, a brahmadeya in 
Tirunaraiyur-nadu. Mentions a revenue survey. 

296 of 1917. 

„ Pandaravddai (Tj.) — Tim manni valara up to tirutta - 

gumudiyvm. Sale of house-site (1} grounds) to 
Alvar Sri Kundavaip-pirattiyar by a resident of Kala- 
karac-ceri of the village, to make up the deficit in the 
vaidyablwga provided by her for the hospital called 
Sundara-snla-vinnagar-atula-Bfilai at Tanjavur, The 
vaidyabhnga given by her in year 3 (No. 248) 
and the present gift were to be enjoyed by Savarnan 
Araiyan Madhurantakan and his descendants who were 
natives of Marugal. Both these transactions were 
engraved by the big assembly by order of the princess 
communicated to them from the palace at Palaiyajru. * 

249 of 1923. 

„ Rdtnandl han K<~yil (Tj.) — Tim manni valara . Land 
for worship and olVerings to god in the Paficavan- 
Mahadevisvaram built as a pdUipadai t at Palaiyarn 
alias Mudikonda-solapuram in T i ru nara iy li r-nad u , a 
sub - division of Ksatriya - sikhamani - vala - nadu. 
Mentions Tiruvadirai as natal star of Riijendra and 
Revati as that of his queen ; also Lakulisvara Pandita 
who supervised the affairs of the temple. 

271 of 1927. 

* This palace was the home of Rajendra, cf. 463 of 1908 (year 3) 

i* This word is sought to be erased in the record - AKh . 1927 II 13. 

#■ 

[ 646 ] 


69 



THE COLAS 


Year 7. — Sangendi (Tri.)— Tiru manni valara * up to tiruttagu - 
mutfiyum. Sale of land to Kailasamu<Jaiya-mahadeva 
by the assembly of Sangendi-mangalam for money 
given by a lady for a lamp. Another gift of land by 
the same assembly for offerings. 325 of 1928. 

„ Senkunram (NA.) — Tiru manni valara to tiruttagu - 

mu4iyum. Land, tax-free, to Jay angonda-solls vara, by 
merchants assembled in the hall (built by) the super- 
visor of Vikkur alias Jayangonda-solapuram. Details 
of temple expenditure given. 152 of 1921. 

„ Tanjore. — Tiru manni valara to tSandimat-tlvu (Kerala). 

Money to image of Sri-Kantha deposited with the 
karanattdr by the Perundanattuk-karmigal of Raj end ra 
Cola and lent oat to villages on interost at the rate of 3 
kuruni paddy per kdsu per annum. 

29 of 1897 ; 67/. ii. 82. 

„ Tiruvadi (SA.) — Tiru manni valara up to Palpalan - 
dtvum. 90 sheep for lamp by a captain ( ndyakan ) of 
the Rajakufijaratterihja-villiga! of Enanallurk-kadagam- 
ana-udaiyar-pa(Jai. 394 of 1921. 

„ Uyyakkowldn-Tirumalai (Tri.)— Tiru manni valara to 

Palpahindivum . 90 sheep for lamp by Solai-iraja- 

singam, for merit of her mother Do van Perramai, the 
pmjdtti of Rajendra-sola Irukkuvelar of Kodumbalur. 

97 of 1892 ; 67/. iv. 544. 

Year 7, day 186. — Tiruvallam (NA.) — Tiru manni vafara 
to ( tiruttagu)mudiyum . Deposit of gold in temple 
treasury for the daily supply of tumbai flower and an 
extra quantity of it on Sankranti days to Tikkali* 
vallam-udaiyar. Grain measure pahcavdrakkdL 

226 of 1921. t 

Year 7, day 229. — Tirumukkudal (NA.) — Tiru manni valara to 
tiruttagumu<jliyum. Detailed regulation by the sabha 
of Madhuran taka- catm. , a taniyur , of the cultivation 
of a Nandavana belonging to Maha-vlijnu of 

t 228 of year 14, day 187, is similar* 

* 

[ 646 ] 


4 In later characters. 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Tirumukkudal by the Vaikhanasas of the temple, and 
provision for the expenses of cultivation. Wages, 
manure, irrigation, and lease and cultivation rights 
dealt with. 172 of 1915 ; ARE. 1916 II. 11. 

Year 8 . — Agaram (Ch.) — The king constructed the village of 
Yanamangai and settled in it 4000 Brahmans. 

232 of 1931.* 

„ Ambdmmudram (Tin.) — Tim manni rata r a to tiruttagu - 

mudiyum. Lamp to temple of T ir u -sfil ai t - tu rai-fil v fir 
of Ilangfdckudi, a hamlet of Rajaraja-catm., by a native 
of the Cola country. 74 of 1907. 

„ Kama ram rat li (Tri .) — Tiru manni valarn to tiruttagu - 

mudiyum . Land made tax-free by assembly met in 
the Kailasam-udaiyar temple after being summoned by 
double bugle (/ raltaik-fcatnm). 72 of 1914. 

„ KiJopgaluvilr (Tri .) — Tim manni valarn up to tiruttagu- 

* 

mudiyum . Sabha of Sirupahmir took fifty hum from 
Innattu-mannu-porumpaluvur Adigal Paluvettaraiyar- 
pendatti Yiranan-orriyur. 104 of 1893 ; SII . v. 665. 

„ Koldr (Mys .) — Tim manni valarn to tirutiag umudi- 

ywn . Five buffaloes for one lamp left with the Siva- 
brahmanas of the temple. EC. x. Kl. 106 (a) 

„ Punjai (Tj .) — Tiru manni valara to tiruttugumudiyvm . 

Decision of the assembly {mfdaparudai) of Talaiccan- 
gadu met at Mummudi-solan-mandapa to pay taxes, in 
return for fifty ied$u, on two veli of land at Piidanur 
which had been purchased by the Periyatali-mahadeva 
temple for expenses of the Vaigasi festival and of 
feeding Brahmans on the occasion. It also agreed to 
pay taxes on two veil of temple land at Kilppulam in 
lien of interest on 100 ham which liad been received 
by it on kaiyefuttbfai from the same temple. Engraved 
by order of the assembly on the walls of Tirunanni- 
palli-n<Jaiyur. 1#7 of 1925. 

* No. 231, 235 refer to the king’s construction of the KailasanStha temple in 
the village. 


[U7] 



THE COLAS 


Year 8. — Sera biya nmahade v i (Tj.) — Tim manni valara to 
tirultagumudiyum. Remission by village assembly 
of taxes due on land granted for a flower-garden to the 
temple. Another remission of taxes on other lands 
given to certain images including one of Sembiyan- 
mahadeviyar. Mentions Vikramasola-vadi, 

481 of 1925. 


Sivapuram (Cli .) — Tiru manni valara to tiruttagumutfi* 
yum . Two lamps by the king to the Rajarajesvara 
temple in Urodagam in lhirisawiadu of the Manayir- 
kottam. Sheep 180. 18 of 1890 ; SlI. v. 881. 

Tahkulam (NA.) — Tiru manni valara to tinUtagumutfi - 
yum. 32 cows by a private individual for milk to god 
for the merit of the king’s mother Tiibhuvana- 
madeviyar. 270 of 1921. 




Tir unages varan i (Tj.) — Tuu manni raiara up to lirut- 
tagumwliytun. Gift of 48 sheep for half-lamp by a 
penddUi of Udaiyar - fmaimerrufijinar - velum alias 
Abhimana-bhusanat-terinda-tiruvandik - kappu - vejam 
for merit of her daughter. 212 of 1911. 


» 


Udaiyar gudi (SA.) — Tiru manni .valara up to Irattapadi 
conquest, hifty hdsu for sale of land by sabha to 
Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar Vanavan Mahadeviyar, queen 
of Raj eiidra-sdla-du var, for oilerings and worship to 
images of Candrasekhara Perumal and his consort set 
up by her. Tiru vartantes vara of the temple is called 
nammuladvyvam by the sabha. 024 of 1920. * 


Year 8, day 50. — Ti nnevclly —Tiru manni valara T up to tirutta- 
gumwjiyvm . Enquiry by Adigarigal Brahmasrl-lcilar 
into the K<~yil-harumam . Mentions the Tirunelveli 
Yalahjlyar who gave 5| nilam in Kannanur as 
de va dan a ira i y i l i . 

157 of 1894 ; SlI. v. 449. 


• In App. F of ARE . 1921 this record is treated doubtfully as of RSjSndra 
lor n. 

t Later characters-copy ? 


[ 548 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA 1 


Year 9 .--Agaram (SA j—Tiru manni valara up to tiruttagu - 
muiliyum, Deliberations of the great assembly of 
Nrpatunga-Sontrmgi catm. alias Jananutha-catm. relat- 
ing to the occupation of temple land (of Mahasasta) 
by artisans and others, and the assignment, in return, 
of several kinds of services to them such as conducting 
worship, supplying oil for lamps, keeping watch over 
the temple etc. ; mentions Sdttaganattar . 

386 of 1922. 

„ S. 943 * — Behitam (Mys.) — Unbuilding of an old temple 
and its consecration after Hudra-hdma and large scale 
feeding. Gift of land to it. 

139 of 1898 ; EC. iv. Hg. 16. 


If 


Oovinduvudi (Oh.) — Tim manni valara up to Iratta- 
pfuli conquest. 96 sheep for lamp in the temple of 
Tiru\ ural-an Jar at Takkdiam a lias K * at r i y asi khaman i - 
puram. Six Lam for supply of tiowers given on the 
3 loth day of the same year. 37 of 1923. 


S. 943 . — Mar dr (Mys.) — (Kanarese). Mentions the 
Niittaraya Hulimadda and his part in the administra- 
tion of justice. In this case capital punishment was 
awarded for assault and manslaughter. 

497 of 1911 ; EC. iv. Hs. 10-11 T 


Mefpddi (C.) — Tim manni valara up to Irattapadi. 
Some shephords give an undertaking, before Macjam- 
udaiya Uakulisvara Panditar Kanmigal, to secure the 
supply of ghi for a lamp by a shepherd Eyan Sattan 
under all circumstances. 85 of 1889 ; SII . iii. 18. 


Sointlr (Tri .) — Tim manni valara up to Irattapadi con- 
quest. Fifteen cows for one lamp by Veljalan Singan- 
solai resident of Devanapalli. The temple authorities 
(ivvur4rikoyilu<jaiy<im) undertake to protect the 
charity. “ Ndijinrina su lam port ecu sdmmuvap- 
periimbmiwagak-kaliu ” etc. 

69 of 1890 ; SII. iv. 393, 


• July 7, 1020 A.D. Kielliorn El. iv p. 21. 

+ Obscure language difficult to interpret-Rice (n. to Eng. Trams.) 

[549 ] 



TtiE COLAS 


Year 9. * — Tirukkalittattai (Tj .) — Tiru manni valara up to nava - 
nidikkulappem-malaigahim . Remission of taxes on 
temple land in Y rmbamir alias Solamartanda-catm., 
by tho mahasabha of that village. Mentions a survey* 
The taxes included ; xiddhuya-kmu; pa n cavdra-nellu ; 
payaru , tuvarai and other uriduvari ; eri-ivu ; 
Silvari. The remission was made after taking 65 
kdsu from the Bri-Kudittittai temple. The names of 
ieris in the place give surnames of Rujaraja. 

292 of 1908. 

„ Tirukkalittattai (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara to conquest 
of Irattapadi. Similar to the above (292). Mentions a 
kadigai (ghatikd) in Y embarrnr which included this 
village and Tiruvisalur ; as also many ieris of the town. 

293 of 1908. 

„ Tirumukkudal (NA.) — Tim manni valara to nnvanidik - 

kulapperu - malaigalum . 90 sheep for lamp by the 
headman (hilavan) of Kfimavur-Kilinalur to the north 
of Yanavan-Mahadevi-catm,, a taniyur . 

170 of 1915. 

„ Tiruvadi (SA.) — Tiru manni valara up to Irattapadi 
conquest. One hundred kdsu by Anukki Sutton Rama- 
devi, a penddtti of the Periya-velam of Hajendrasola, to 
the Nagarattar of Adiyaraiya-mangalam, who had to 
give as interest fifty kalam of paddy to the temple for 
offerings on specified occasions. Mentions Arumoti- 
devan marakkal . 401 of 1921. 

„ Tiruvaduturai (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara . Sale of land, 
tax-free, to temple by the assembly of Kavanur for 
100 kdsu. 128 of 1925. 

„ Tiruvidaivdyil (Tj.) — A Bivabrahmana took from Kojxi- 
yammai 12 kalam of paddy at interest of 3 huruni of 
paddy annually for offerings during the S§ittirai festival. 
Another gift by same donor of 28 kalam (yielding 
annually 7 kalam at 3 kupuni per kalam) for feeding 
dancing girls during the festival. 28 , 29 of 1918 . 

• Wednesday, 8th February 1081, Jacobi., £f, xi. p. 121. 

F. 660 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Year 9.—Tirnvi§altlr (T j — 1 Twenty-five ka§u for a lamp to 
Umasahitar by a native of Pandi-na<Ju. 346 of 1907, 

Year 9 # day 38. — Tirumukkudal (NA.) — Tiru manni valara to 
tiruttagumudiyum. 90 sheep for lamp by Mandai- 
nangai, the senior wife of Prrundanam Rajarajan 
alias Vanavan Brahmadhirajan, in charge of kalani - 
and ur of Kudalur. 174 of 1915. 

Year 10. — Kottaslvamm (An.) — (Kan. and Tamil). This 
Mandapa erected by Areyaru Rajarajan alias Vikrama 
Cola * Coliya-varaiyan, chief of Sattamangalam in 
Tiremnr-nm.iu and commander of the forces (of the 
king), on the 40th day opposite the 160th (of this year). 
Below are titles : Nalamadi Bhlma, Colana-cakra, and 
Samantabharanam in Kan. ; Nanmadibhiman and 
Samantabharanan in Tamil, perhaps titles of the chief 
who built the Mandapa. Another record (24) — Edirtta- 
varkalan and Ahitarottalivan in Kan. ; and Vayiri- 
narayanan and Virabhlman in Tamil, of about the 
same period (as in No. 23). No. 30 — is Tamil verse 
mentioning Nanmadivima and Telungar. On same 
pillar in old Kannada : Jayasingakulakfila and Saman- 
talaprahari. No. 31 — Tamil verse mentions battle 
with lvalin gas, Oddas ami Telungas ; also titles in 
Kagan : Ahitarottaliva etc. 

23, 24, 30 and 31 of 1917. 

„ Tadi-malingi (Mys.) — Tint manni valara . Musangi 
is here called Mayal. Apparently Qangapruli was called 
Mudikonda - cola*mandala ; and Mayilangai ^Maiingi 
opposite TaUkkavt on the other side of the river) was 
called Janandthapura : Gangapddiydna Mudikonda - 
ivla-mantjalaltu tenkarai - ndtfu - Mayilangai tan 
(yam /) Janandthapurattu . 

490 of 1911 ; KG . iii. Tn. 34. 

„ Tanjorr — Tiru manni valara up to naranidikkulap- 

peni»malaiga]um (i.e., Irattapadi). Loans from endow- 
ments to Mahameru Vitanka and his consort (set up 

# Surname of RSj&ndra ? ARE. 1917 II. 2. cf. 752 of 1917. 

t 651 ] 



THE COLAS 


by RajarajaX by the Hnidanattup *-panimakkal, for 
interest at the rate of mukkuruni per kd§u per annum 
(Continuation of SIL ii 82 of year 7). 

SIL ii. 83. 

Tear 10. — Tirumalpuram (NA.) — Money for supply of four 
kalanju of Sidari by a native of the Cola country, 

292 of 1906. 

tt Tiruppugalur (Tj.) — Ttru manni valara up to kulap - 
per n-mala igah un. Remission of taxes on the temple 
land by the assembly of Bhuloka-Manikka-catm., in 
consideration of 150 kdsu from the temple. 

44 of 1928. 

„ Tiruvdtujdrknyil (Pondicherry) — Tint manni valara to 
kulapptru-malaigajum followed by: Fdradu nigala 
pdmli-mandalattxi-Madxiraiyil miVigai eduppittu tan 
tnagan S<Va - pundiyan - enrabhiphanjeydxt tawlarc- 
cdla ikhal a marietta kopparakPsari . 363 of 1917. 

„ TiruvVjmihdai (Tj.) — Tint manni valara (dam.) to 
Muyangi and a little more. Mentions copper image of 
Alagiya Manavala caused to be made by the mother of 
Rajondiusola-Anukkap-pallavaraiyar. 

444 of 1908. 

„ Udaixjdrgudi (SA.) — Tiru manni valara up to conquest 
of Jrattapadi. Sixty kmu by the headman (JiVan) of 
Arkkadu for the daily supply of 1000 lotuses for 
worship. The assembly met in the hall constructed 
by Tennavan Vilupparaiyar, called nammagandr by 
the king. Assembly calls the Tiruvanantesvara 
nammuladeyvam . 625 of 1920. 

„ Utfaiyargudi (SA.) — Tim manni valara up to conquest 
of Irattapa<jli. Agreement by some villagers to supply 
the flowers stipulated in No. 625 as interest on 60 kdiu 
received by them from the treasury of the temple. 

626 of 1920. 

* * Servants of the minor treasure * (£//, ii. p, 405 ) servants or officers of 
the king when he -was young {siru*danam) • ibid is. 2. 


[ 658 ] 



•PARAKgSART RAJENDRA I 

* n 

Year lO.^Uyyakk<m0n-Flrumalai (T*L>^!hm manhi valam 
Tip to conquest of Irattapadi. Paddy for abhiseka to the 
god oil the king’s birthday (ardra) to Tirokkarkndi- 
vijumiya-dova. 404 of 1908# 

Vefacwri (Oh .) — Tint tnanni va\ara to conquest of 
Irattapadi. Assembly (rnahasabha) of Velicceri sold 
1500 kali of land to the temple, and receiving 13 lcd§u 
made the land lax-free. Also gift of 23 kd§u for a 
lamp by a Brahman lady. 303 of 1911. 

Year 10, day 107 , — Melpddi (C.) — Tint tnanni va]ara to 
Irattapadi conquest. Paddy and money of the temple 
not properly appropriated for expenses since the 
third year. As a result of audit by a royal officer, a 
fresh allocation is made. 102 of 1921. 

Year 11 . — Agaram (8A .) — Tint man ni valuta up to teripunar- 
kengaiyum. Laud for offerings and lamp to Maha&sta 
Kayirur Aiyanfir by the members of the big assembly 
of Nrpatunga-Bentrmgi-catm. alias Jawmatha-catm., a 
braltmadhja. The assembly met in the Ayyanar 
temple. 308 of 1922. 

Kihi iyitr (Tj.) — Tint tnanni valam . Laud for the 
maintenance of two persons singing the tintppadiyam 
during the throe services of Tirukkudavndaiya-d£var, 
each getting three kit runt of paddy per diem. 

96 of 1925. * 

Kntf&r (Mys.) — Purt'ad&tamum (fangaiyum konda. A 
royal gift of devad&na from the camp at Kaucipuram. 
The record furnishes interesting details of procedure 
followed on such occasions. 

476 of 1911 ; EC. x. Kl. 112 (a). 

Kurnbtlru (Mys .)— Sri PurvaMam am GangaiyUm 
Katf&ramun-gonda . EC. x. Ct. 47. 


* Thh, and 91 and 98 of yean 17 aad 18 of RSjarSja, are records o* pillar., 
and nut of tha introduction U omitted' {wrhafm for lack of space. 

[ &B3 ] 

TO 



. THE COLAS 

i 

f 

Tear 11. — Tirumukkudal * (Oh .) — Tiru manni vafara to Qangai - 
yum* 113 sheep to temple of Vennaik-kuttar at Tiru- 
mukkudal in or near Nirkunram, the northern hamlet 
of Madhurantaka-catm., a taniyur in Kalattur-k6t{am, 
by a native of Akkaramangalam. The sheep were in 
charge of Tirwnukla dal am K a dal d rum Urfim. 

167 of 1915. 


Year 12. — K&luluisti (NA.) — Gold for the Krttika-dipa and 90 
sheep by Ganeaikonda-cola-milad^daiyar, a chief of 
Miladu. 291 of 1904. 




Tirumalai (Polar NA.) — Tiru manni vatara to tevi- 
punar-kangaiyutn. Lamp to Palliocandam Vaigavur 
Tirumalai-dova by Ilaijamani-uangai also called Palia- 
varasar-deviya** Sinnavaiyar. Sixty has the amount 
of the endowment, was converted into land. 

STL i. 68. 


„ Uyyakkornjan-Tirumalai (Tri.)— Tint manni va(ara to 

terifruna r-kvnga iyu m . Provision for feeding Siva- 

ydgins in the Ti r u v a gis v a r a m - R a j end r a sol a 1 1 at the foot 
of the hill on which the temple ot Tirukkarku<Ji 
, Vi|umiya-deva stands. 467 of 1908. 

Year 13.— Malar (Mys.)— 3P*V?f manni ra}ara (full). Sale of land 
by sablni of Rajendrasinga-catm. PHI. ix. Cp. 84. 

„ Tirumalai (NA.) — Tiru manni va(a ra to teripunar - 
hangaiyum . Twenty falsa for lamp and ten kdfai 

A 

for tiruuntnidu to Sri-Kuudavai-jiualaya-deva of Tiru- 
malai by Oamundappai, the wife (manavd^i) of 
Nandappayyan, a merchant of Porumbanappaijlik-karai- 
vali-Malliyfu . 

80 of 1887 ; till. i. 67 ; EL ix. pp. 229-33. 

XeAr 13 f day 207. — FJmapperar (SA.) — K~niMnmaikon<jun. An 
order of Udaiyar Rajendra-C51a-dcva ‘ who was pleased 
to take l^drvadesam and Gangai,’ confiscating the lands 
of persons who did not settle down in Tkumunaipp&di- 
na^u and had migrated elsewhere, and grtuating the 


• Thi Wlfu. V«Ufli«wl CeyySr riveri meet here. • APE. 1914 fi U/ 

i 

[ 664 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


lands to others who undertook to cultivate them or 
rear areca-palms thereon. * 531 0 f 192X, 

Year U.—Punjai (Tj .)~Tirn manni vaUira (full). Undertaking 
by the assembly ( mfilaparatlai ) of Talaccangadu to 
pay some taxes for the temple on Home lands, to enable 
the temple to meet expenses of daily worship and 
offerings and of a special festival once a year to 
Usabhavahatm-df»va in the big temple for the victory 
of the king’s amis ( hhujam car(fdhittaru{a.) 

182 of 1925. 

„ Tirtnvalavatjt (Tri .)~Tirtt manm r alar a up to ten - 

punar-kany uytuH. Records the re-copying (from the 

books) on stone of the order of Rljaraja at the instance 

of Narakkan Raman (who built the enclosure to the 

Tanjore temple"). The dPmkanmn and the sabha of 

frandaraditta-catm. executed the order. 

• • 

91 of 1895 j MI. v. G51. 

%t TtrundgPhwmm (Tj.) — Tt/a manm va(ara (full though 

damaged). List of jewels etc. owned by the temple, 

engraved by order of the king made at the instance of 

a servant Kandan Koval-nath.in. 213 of 1911. 

• * 

Year 14, day 341 ,—Krumdr (SA.) -Ttrn manat L'nlara (appa- 
rently full). Assombh of VaUi\an-madevi-catm. met 
in the temple and in the pie^ence of the 4 annual 
supervision committee ' t agreed to pay m paddy the 
xilvari on certain temple lands, the income to be 
utilised for lamps and offerings. 398 of 1913. 

Year 15. — Milappa/uvtlr (Tri.) — Tiru mtmm vatara (full). An 
undertaking by the managers of the temple of Paluvur 
to burn a perpetual lamp before Pagaividaiy-Isvarat- 
tu-mahadeva and another before Amanikandarpa- 
lavamttu-mahadeva for lands and money received by 
them respectively from two persons as an atonement 

for homicide. 372 of 1924. 

* 

SIS U similar. 

died MMMtfMfM* hygmra nr-vUriyp-ptmmakk^. 

t 665] 



THE COLAS 


Year 15. — Tiruhhadaiyur (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara (full). An 
agreement of tho Makasabha of Pacla-eviya Tirukka<Ja- 
vur in Uyyakkondfir-valanadu to maintain an endow- 
ment for two meals to Mdhesvaras at midday. 

20 of 1906. 

Year 16 . — Kdncipuram (Ch .) — Tim manni uafara (full). Gold 
by Nigarili-Lokamudcvi, a servant of queen Mukkok- 
kilan-adigal, and by a dancing girl of the temple called 
Pevri-ponnambalam, for two lamps before Anjanjan<Jii- 
durgaiyiir. 73 of 1921. 

„ Knlar (Mys.) — Pdrvadrsamum Gangaiyum Ka^lara* 
nmm-konda. (rift of a dPvaddna to Pidariyar of 
Kuvalala by the king seated in the palace at Vikrama- 
cola-pura in the Kaviri-nad. The grant was ordered 
on the 240th day and entered in the revenue register 
on the 281st day. 475 of 1911 ; EC . x. Kl. 111. 

„ Tiru kkahik kunram Ch .) — Tim manni valara (full). 

Sheep for lamps in the temple in Tan-kur^ut-Tiruk- 

kalukkum;am alias Ulagalanda-solapnram. Mentions 

Mamallapuram alias dananathapuram in the Amur- 

kottam. 171 of 1894 ; SIL v. 464. 

* • 

„ Tirumalavddi (Tri.) — Tiru manni valara (full), 
Pijjaiyar Arumoli-nangaiyana-piran gave 180 sheep for 
two lamps, distributed among eight shepherds, one 
getting 45, three others getting 45 together, and the 
rest 22^ each ; 45 sheep being counted as yielding one 
dldkku of ghl daily, and 22^ sheep, sevidu, 

77 of 1895 ; SIM v. 635. 

tf Tirumaktvddi (Tri.) — Tiru manni valara (full.) Lamp 
by Sr! Krsnan Kausalaiyar, wife of Narakkan Hr! 
Krsnan Raman alias Rajendrasola Brahmamarayar, 
(the builder of the enclosure to the Tan j ore temple). 
100 Iwlhu for 90 sheep distributed among four persons 
equally, each getting 25 kufru, the equivalent of 22\ 
sheep, and having to supply 22£ nUljis of ghl per 
annum. 78 of 1895 ; SIL ▼. 686. 


[ 656 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 

Year 16 .—Tiruppuramhi yam (Tj .)—Tiru rmnni valara (full.) 

Fifty kilsu for ten lamps to Adittisvara temple at 
Tiruppurambiyam, deposited with viraiy&kkalip - 
perunderxivir-cangarappddiy dm . 

&0 of 1897 ; SIT. vi. 30. 

„ Tirvvddutumi (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara (full.) 
Undertaking by Siva-brahmanaa to provide offerings 
to god for midday service and to feed an apdrvi daily 
with the same, out of the interest on 45 kdm received 
by them from a person, the rate of interest being two 
tuni of paddy per kdm per annum. 

134 of 1925. 

„ Tirtivilakkndi (Tj .)-~Tirtt manni valara (full.) Sale of 
land as buldbhdga to temple for feeding devotees by 
the assembly of Kadnlangudi who received a lump sum 
towards payment of taxes due on the land, They 
agreed to maintain the feeding house on behalf of the 
temple and supply red lilies to the god. 

140 of 1926. 


„ Tribhuvani (Pondicherry). — Tin * manni valara. As- 
sembly met at night, resolved that the village of 
Varakkur (devaddna) divided into six divisions and 
assigned to 4<S tenants with rights of sale and mortgage, 
was not liable to pay any taxes except those due to the 
Naduvil-sri-kdyil and the tank K dklc dan ad ip-pere r i . 
The dues to the temple amounted to 5 kalam per md 
(by marakkdl equal to ndfdyimvan) from year 17. 

189 of 1919. 

Year 16, day 32. — Tirumukkt\ial (NA.) — Tiru manni valara . 

An agreement by certain Vaikhanasas of the temple with 
the officers Puravu - vari - tinaik - kalam and Vari- 
poitagam to use the surplus paddy due by them (as 
discovered by a scrutiny of the temple accounts) for 
the recitation of the tiruppadiyam in the temple for 
the first time. Mentions Bembiyan-mahadevi-^eru- 
man<Japam in the middle of Madhurantaka-catm. 

183 of 1915. 


f W7] 



THE COLAS 


Year 1(7).— Kama rasavalli (Tri .) — Tint manni va/ara to paU 

patandivum . King called VIra Rajondra Cfila. Land to 

temple of Tirimallur-Mahadeva, by royal order issued 

« 

from palace at Gangaikoncla-colapurain. 

61 of 1914. 

Year 17 . — Klljpdkkam (NA.) — The great assembly of Nityavinoda 
calm., assembled in the temple of Sri Kailasa in the 
village, borrowed twenty kafanjn of gold from tin* 
temple of Raj ad i 1 1 a- 1 s varum - u da i y fir and placed iL in 
the hands of the tlr-rdriyam , who had to supply oil, 
as interest. 38 of 1911. 

, , K~> neri f i djapumm (Tj.)-? Yrn manni vahira (full). 

Setting up of image of K*etrapfda-dGva by queen 
Arindavan-mabadevi who also bought some land for it 
ia year 16. 632 of 1909. 

„ Tirmnalavadi (Tri .) — Tiru manni va(ara (full). One 

r 

hundred kdsn for lamp by Teccappan Sembiyan 
Madevi, the wife ( mdrdsiydr ) of Arumo|i alias 
Cttamasola-brahama-marayar to Tirumalavfidi-raaha- 
deva. The money was distributed among shepherds 
in the same manner and proportion as in 78 (year 16). 
78-B mentions a dantak-kdl-paljikka({il given to the 
deity. 78-A and B of 1895 ; SII. v. 637-8. 

„ * Udaiydrgudi (SA .) — Tint manni valarn (full.) l^and, 
tax-free, for feeding ten devotees at midday worship 
and for feeding twenty-five Brahmans in a choultry 
erected for the merit and in the name of queen 
Vanavan-madevi. The land was sold to the queen for 
160 kMu by the Perungujri-sabM. 627 of 1920. 

Year 18. — Mysore — ( Kanarese )—Gangeyum PurvadMamum 
Kaddramum an4a . Erection and endowment of the 
Siddhe£vara temple on the demise (siddhi) of the 
daiptfanayaka of 6ri-yuddhamalla-d5vai Writer of the 
inscription was the son of MahSm&tra Ajavarraaya. 

502 of 1911 ; EC. ix, HL h 
‘ < 

Treated doubtfully at RSjSndra 1 or II. i n AXB. ,1991 Ast». F* 

* 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Year 18. Tirukkajar (Tj.) Copper-plates. Tiru manni valara. 

Registers extent of devadana lands belonging to the 
temple. 811 iii 207 ; ARE. 1903 II 17. 

Year 18, day 9§.—Tirvv&mdttnr (SA .)—Tiru manni valara 
(full). Land for campaka flower-garden. Also, land 
for village doctor, by many corporate bodies acting 
together. 18 0 f 1922. 

Year 19.— Malar ( Uys.)—Tirti manni valara (full). Sale of land 
by assembly to temple on receipt of money from the 
king. 195 of 1911 ; EG. ix. Cp. 84. 

Year 19, day 238. — Tirumalavudi (Tri)-— Tiru manni valara 
(full). Two vessels of gold (198 kal.) and silver (2944 
leal.) by queen Vanavan-nmdevi. 79 0 f 1875. 

Year 19, day M'd.—Uttaramirnr (Ch)— Tiru manni valara (full). 

2240 huh of land lying waste ( manjikkam ) without 
yielding any taxes was reclaimed by the assembly and 
presented tax-free for three daily offerings and special 
worship on the four aytmam and vim days and during 
eclipses to Ananta-nariiyana on the third storey of the 
temple ; some other lands for lamps and offerings to 
tho three (auxiliary) images in the lower floor and 1470 
/.«// for recitation of Tiruvaymolj by three persons 
during morning and evening services. 176 0 f 1923. 

Year 2i).—KnhUtar (NA.) Cold to Kumblsvaram Udaiya-maha- 
dt'va at Vikrasinga-catm. Mentions a number of 
persons of the ditmgamUdr of the sabhii of the village. 

155 of 1916. 

„ K&uclpnram (Ch.,)—Purvade&amvm Gangaiyum K%4d- 
ramum kmida. Sale by some merchants of Kancl- 
puram of one tutji of land as a tax-feee devadana for 
127 kalaiiju of gold to Tiruvefoka-anaik-kidandarulina 
I’aramasvami at Kniicipuram • 33 of 1921. 

ft 

Ktlhfir (Tj*) — Tiru manni valara (full). Land by pur- 
ohaee as iraiyili from ur by Madhurantakan-devi for 
feeding persons who attended the nine days festival 
in the Aditta-f0varam-u4aiyar temple. 303 of 1917 . 

( 589 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 20 . — Marudadu (NA .) — Tiru manni valara. 90 sheep for a 
lamp with drdr of whom some are named. Also sale 
of land for digging a tank, hv a servant of a datitfa- 
ndyaka. The village is also called Yikrama-sola-nallnr. 

407 of 1912. 

„ Nangavaram (Tri.)— 77/v/ manni valara (full). The 
king dismissed two of the temple drummers and 
appointed another man instead. *W5 of 1903. 

t , Sdlapuram (NA .) — Tint manni valara (damaged). Sale 
of land 14000 lu?i (hv Id sdn-hdl) to temple by the 
residents ( nagnrnttdm ) of the city as iraiyili deva- 
ddna. 344 of 1912. 


99 


Tirumalavdd i (Tri .) — Tiru manni valara. Paddy for 
offerings to images of Pillaivar Tiruuana-samb&nd- 
adigal, Tirunayukkaraivn-dcva and Nambi Aruranar set 
up by Tiruinriluritngan uti'i* TinippaMiuiinui-pkvan atul 
his huiv. 37 of 1920. 


t? 


Tiruvdrdr (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara. List of gifts by 
Rajendra-c61a*dt'\aV Anukkiyar Paravainangaiyar for 
plating and guilding certain portions of the temple ; also 
gift of pearls and coral wreaths by Arumoli-Kottan 
alias Lokamarayan ; other gifts. f Raja rd ja n - has > / - 
niraihal is mentioned as a standard of weight for gold. 

M) of 1919. 


V rddhdcalam (SA .) — Tint manni valara, (full). Land 
for monthly festivals ( iiruvddirai ) paiuagavya , hdma 
etc., in temple, for the prosperity of the king. 

f>4 of 1918. 


Year 21 . — Ratnagiri (Tri .) — Tim manni valara (full). Hale of 
land tax-free to temple for 380 kdsu by the assembly 
of Arihjigai-catm., after paying taxes on part of it for 
fifteen years on behalf of the original holder’s who had 
left the place to live elsewhere without arranging to 
pay the accumulated dues on the land. 

189 of 1914 ; ARE. 1915 II 22. 

# Vast quantities of gold and copper and the building of the temple 
mentioned. 

r m] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Year 21.- 


Y<$ar 22. 


Year 22.- 


M 


if 


-Tiruvaiyaru (Tj .)—Tiru manni valarn (full). Gold 
ornaments, jewelled, to Dlokamahadovi-Isvaram-u(lai- 
yar by DantiBakti. 154 of 1918. * 

— S. 955 t — ] Seta turn (Mys.)— (Kanaroso)— Purvadem- 
mum fiinif/uu/um Kailurumun-t/ouda. Fragment 
giving tbo titles assumed by the Vlra Balauji Dharmma 
merchants in grants made by them. 

MO of IMS ; EC. i v . Hg. 17. 

~~Kaaci/mram (Oh.)— Parmi/PAam etc. Tax-free gift of 
1.000 ku/i of land as drraddna ;m<l of 3600 Jcu/i by 
sale r^or 47 hdanju by tin* >nd-nagaraW~tti of Kahci- 
puram for worship in the temple Tiruvasta-bhuya- 

grhaitu-mahfivFnu. 6 of 1921. 

K'ldr (Mys.) — • Tint manni va\ara, (full). Gift of 
buffaloes for lamp in tin* Pidfiri (Ivolaramma) temple 
built to the king’-? order by Mil ray an Arumoli alias 

V. t (t 

Sf-napati L T ttainnsdla-Th’;diniamavayan, son of Narakkan 
* 

Sri Krsnan Raman alias Rajendra-sola Brahma- 

marayan of Vemuttu Axnunkudi alias Keralantaka- 

catm. 4 SO of 1911 ; E< \ x. Kl. 109 (a). 

KdUttnhamlal (NA.) — l'ir>> manni ralara. Land and 

gold to 24 dancing girls of (langaikonda Sola Isvaram 

«. / 

I'dimfir built by (uiesl infimi Siva Piuidita (of. SII. ii. 
9). 414 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 1047. 


Y^itr Kuttabun (Tj f i } i f f i ^ ^ (full). Land for 

feeding Siva yogi ns at midday service for the prosperity 
of the king’s arms. Further gift of 12 has a for taxes 
on the land. 99 of 1926. 


„ Malar (Mys.)— Tiru manni ralara (full). Remission 
by assembly of taxes on certain temple lands after 
receiving gold in lieu of the taxes from a servant of the 
king and headman of a village. 

196 of 1911 ; EG. ix. Op. 82, 83. 

M Tiruppura ? i ? biya m (Tj.) — Money by Devan-Purambiyal 

A«Jal-vitmika-manikkam, a maid-servant of the bathing 

* cf. 152 of Y«ar 3. 

t Sunday, 25th November 1033, AJX - Kitlkorn EL vi. p. 21. 

[ 561 ] 



THE COLAS 


establishment called IlankMvara-kula-kdfaderinja • 
tirumanjanattar velum for offerings, worship, etc., to 
Umaparamesvariya! of the Tiruppallikkattil, an image 
set up by her. 323 of 1927, 


Year 24 .—Cidamharam (SA )—Tiru manni vafara. After Tab- 
hanalddamum , the introduction is not in the usual 
form, but different. Gift of viravu-nilan dupatte(te- 
kaU-araikkdni ; deducting land taken up by dt/ai, 
ndraikdldru , kollai and mttam , making up muppattu- 
nale- Jed le-ara ikha ni, the net arable land was forty vUi. 
The total yield (i mmayilittapadi ) was 4500 kalam of 
paddy ; of this the melvdram was 2250 kalam which, 
at eight kalam one turn and one padakku per M£w, 
yielded 264 J Jcdsu which with 40 ham from another 
source formed the fund for the expenses in the 
temple, to be administered by KutjammakaipuraUu 


enna-vyapdriyal, VelldUn\ Sankarappwliya r % tidliyar, 


Pattinavar and other kudigal and the kil-kalanaiga\ 
including carpenters ( [taccar ), blacksmiths (/collar), 
goldsmiths (tatldr) and the koliyar. Another gift by 
Nakkan Paravai, the anukki of the king, for feeding 
Brahmans and maintaining the required establishment, 
yielding melvdram of 1225 kalam , to be spent in the 
maimer detailed. 118 of 1888 ; S1L iv. 223. 


Kanyakumdri (Tr.) — PdrvadHamvnn Gangaiyum 
Kadaramum kmdarulina. Fifty sheep for lamp by 

t f 

Sdlakulavalli, the cook of the king ( Udaiydr tin Rdjfoi* 
dm ‘Sfilade vark k ut-tiruvamudu adum pentjldtfi ) . 

TAS. u p, 161. 

Mannar kovil (Tin.)-— A! rvademm ion Gangaiyum Kagk I* 
ramum konda . Reports that the Gopalasvamin temple 
was formerly called Rajendra-c51a-vinnagar and built 
by the Cera king Rajasimha. * The king made a 
grant of land to the temple from his palace at Kancl- 
purain to take effect from year 15 of Jajavarman 
Sundarasola-Panrjyan, one of the king’s sons. 

112 of 1905. 


• 111 sad 113 of 1905 give the name of RSjarlja-dBva, another Clr* king* 
These were probably C5Ja fevdatoriet. ARM , 1905 H 14, 



t>ARAKESARl RAJENDRA 1 


Year 24 .—Olagapuram (SA.)— manni valara. Mentions a 
woman of the Raj tin dr a-sol a -do var Mummudi-sSlat- 
terinda-tirumanjanattar-vejam. 142 of 1919. 

„ Takkdlam (NA.) — Tiru manni valara (full). Beginning 

lost. Twelve kalanju of gold (/ ulai-nirai-pori) re- 

* 

ceived from Sarabandondavai of Tondaman-Peramir, 
the pendd^ti of Raj endra- sola Brahmadirayar, for a 
lamp to be maintained by the assembly of Urigaiyur 
alias Rajamartanda-catm., a devaddna of Tiruvural- 
mahadeva. 256 of 1921. 


Year 24, day 230. — Brahmadekim (SA.)~~ Land for worship and 
offerings to l^talisvaram-udaiyar by Parantakan Sutta- 
maliyar alias Mukkokilanadiga] for the king’s success 
( bhtgam vardhikLa), the king being present in the 
temple of Rajaifijesvarain-u^laiyar at the time. 

188 of 1918. 


Year 25. — Jambai (SA.) — An agreement among citizens ( nagarat - 
t&r) of the city of Valaiyur alias NiUavinodapuram on 
the N. bank of the Pennar. An interesting commuta- 
tion of old endowments. 82 of 1906. 


Tiramalavwli (Tri.) — Tiru manni valara . Silver kava- 
cam to bo used at the three sacred baths and 30 kdsu 
for one lamp by Udaiyar Sri Rajendra-s51a-devar- 
anukki-sun*iy u *l Ja ^ cavan * in ^^ v ** 70 of 1920. 


Year 25, day 112.— Ennayiram (SA )—Tim manni valara (full). 

At the king’s order, the assembly of brahmadeyam 
taniydr Rajaraja-catm. met in the Mummudisojan 
with Nambi Oduttur-udaiyan who governeil the village, 
and made a vy avast ha i regarding incomes from the 
lands of a number of shrines : Rajaraja Vinnagar-alvar, 
Kundavai-and Su n dariiso la 'Ul v a rs , Dev endra, Saras vati, 


Sri Bhastarakiyar, Mahamodiyar, Suryadeva, Sapta- 
matys, Mahaiasta, Durgaiyar, Subrahmanya, Jyesfchai- 
yar and the village gods. 335 of 1917. 


Year 26—6. 959 .--AnkanfiUhapuram (Mys.)— (Kan). Mentions 
the Oangftjva of Kutfalur in Nolenad coming on an 
expedition. Grant of Nagavangajam as a kal-na4 ^ ree 

[h 66 ] 



THE COLAS 


of ail imposts. Some Gavundas made chiefs of certain 
territories. 142 of 1898 ; EC. iv. Hg. 104. 

Year 26 . — Tirumalavddi (Tri .) — Time rnanni valara . Remission 
of certain taxes on lands granted for feeding in the 
Gangaikondan-salai in the temple by the great assembly 
of Gandaraditta-catm., met at the hall Uttamasolan- 
mandapam. 33 of 1920. 

„ Tinunalavddi (Tri .) — Tint rnanni valara . Fourteen 
kdsu and vessels for early morning offerings by Tiru- 
malarangan alias Tiruppaljittfima-piccau. 

61 of 1920. 


11 


Tiruvorriydr {Q\\.)—Tiru tnt/nnt valara. Adigarigaj 
Rajarajendrasinga Mii \vnda velar enquired into the 
affairs of the temple in the Yakkfiuilvkiiiu-mnndapaiu, 
mid fixed details of service to be maintained from 
kurradtwdatn and the excess paddv collected from the 
servants of the temple and the tenants of the devaddna 
villages. Interesting schedule of expenses. 

146 of 1912 




„ Tiruvorriyar (Ch.) — Tin/ rnanni valara . Bale of land 

/ 

by people of Iganaiyur {devaddna) to Sattan Rama- 
deviyar, the antikkiyar of the king, for maintaining 
twelve devaradiydr in the temple for the goddess 
Gauri. 153 of 1912. 

Year 26, day 180. — Ultaramh'ur (Ch.) — Tim rnanni valara 
(full)* Sale of i,520 kali , tax-free, by the assembly to 
Vellaimxirti-alvar of llajendra-sola-vinnagar for provid- 
ing seven Jcuruni of paddy daily to three persons 
reciting the TiruvCiymoH in the temple ; also two plots 
of land, one as Vajasaneyak-kitjbnppurarn and the other 
for a flower-garden and festival in Masi Punarvasu, 
Names of taxes remitted : one set giving iittdyam 
pancavaram Ullirai eccorrukkurrari&i drrukkal- 
amariji ; another erikkd4i pd4aganellu ulavigai 
nlrvilai and other pidagaiyirai. 194 of 1923. 

Year Zl.~~A]ur (Mys .)—Tiru rnanni valara (full). Land to 
Camun<JiBvari by the ur including Ma$ikka-sett>i of 


[«*] 



PA RAKES ARI RAJENDRA I 


Vanapuram (in this nadu), and Iiajendra-sola-gaimun- 
dan of Vinnamangalam, who was doing the ndttu- 
gdmundu. EG. ix. Nl. 7 (a). 

Year 27 . — Arpdkkam (Oh .) — Tint manni valara. Land by resi- 
dents (Or) of Arpakkam for the maintenance of seven 
musicians for service in the temple Tiruvil-vinnagar- 
alvar. 145 of* 1923. 

*„ Brahmadesam (NA .) — Tint manni valara. Money for 
nuterru by a native of Mlvanam for which some 
temple land was made tax-free. Also gold for lamp. 
Mentions Kundavaip-pereri and Sundarasolap-pereri. 

264 of 1915. 


Year 2H. 


Year 29 


Tiruvddulurai (Tj .) — Tiru manni valara . Land, half- 
r?h\ made tax-free for 200 ham received from the 
temple by assembly (sablift) of Merkili-mangalam with 
the condition that the Mftln's varan of Sarva-devan Tiru- 
madam called af r er the king’s guru should be fed 
daily. Mentions Tutu van Arumoli, a woman of the 
Periya Velam, as owning some adjacent land in 
describing boundaries. 103 of 1925. 

— KdmaramvaUi (Tri .) — Ttra manni valara . Land by 
the aaseinbly of Kaniarasavalli-catm. to Sakkai-marayan 
Vikaramasolan for performing, the sd/ckai-fruttu thrice 
during either of the Tiruvadirai festivals in Margali 
and Vaiyaai. Seris numbered one to four iu the village 
mentioned. 65 of 1914. 


Tirthamatai , (Sm .) — Purvademm etc. Gift of three 
villages by Uttama^la-Puramalai-natjiiilvaii, who seems 
to have been the chief of Rfijendra-sola-viriyur-nadu. 
The donor repaired the temple and constructed the 
Mukhamandapa. Tagudur-natju was a sub-division 
of Nigarili-sola-mandalam. 670 of 1905. 


ft 


Tiruviialur (Tj .) — Tiru manni valara (full). Laud 
for lamp by a queen. Mentions a revenue survey of 
the country. 347 of 1907. 


• May 6, 1041 A.D. ARE. 1915. App. F. (L.D.S.) 

[ 665 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 29. — Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — Money deposited, interest to be 
paid in paddy, with the inhabitants of Iganiyur, for 
offerings every year at the festival of pudiyidu (first 
crop ?) by Nakkan Kodai alias Kaficipura-nangai, 
a magal (maid-servant ? ) of Tiruvekarabam-ucjiaiya- 
Mahadeva of N agar am Kancipuram. 139 of 1912, 

„ Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — Tim manni valara (full). Gift of 
tulai-nirai-pon and Madhurantaka-devan-madai for 
Margalit-tiruvadirai and for feeding three Brahmans 
learned in the Vedas. Money loaned out on interest 
at 2 kalam of paddy per annum by the Rajakesari- 
marakkill on each pan and mddai , with the nagar attar 
of Tiruvorriyur and the residents of Mafijiyan-Karanai. 

140 of 1912. 

„ Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — Tint manni valara (full). Raja- 

raj an kdsn * for feeding a Brahman by Kuttan 
Ganavadi, the military officer of Gangai-komjan alias 
Uttama-solamarayan. also called Sirudauam Peru- 
danam t marayan. Money loaned out to merchants of 
the place, interest being payable in paddy. Mentions 
Ariyamraai and her money gift. 141 of 1912. 

„ Tribhuvani (Pondicherry) — Tint manni valara . 

Assembly agree regarding land for feeding the Sn- 
vaisnavas of the eighteen districts in the Rajendra- 
solan-madam not to change its class or levy on it 
eri-ayam and seruvari. 187 of 1919. 

Year 30. — Kandiyur (Tj .)—Tiru manni valara . Appointment 
of new dancing-master, the late master's brother-in-law 
( mailt unan ), nan-gandaruvan araiyan Rajarajan alias 
Mudikonda - sola - vacciya - marayan ; the place was to 
be hereditary { vargattar ). 

23 of 1895 ; 811 v. 579. 

• Must have been i a mlUp* as interest was 1 kalam per annum. ARE* 

1913 H 23. 

t Treasuries small and big (HulUscb) ; minority and majority of the king ? 

Perhaps purely honorary titles implying status in official life or society. ARE . 

1913 n. 33. v 


[ 666 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Tear dO.—TirunSgSHvaram (T].)—Tiru manni valara. Mentions 
inn84<u vagai-Seyginra Kodandittai Udaiy&n . ' 
Adigariga} Rajendrasola-muvenda-velan sent a niydgam 
(order) that a tirukkolgai, tiruk-kodukku and tiruk- 
h'kim were to be made from gold accumulated in the 
form of flowers and broken jewels. Another niyogam 
from the mulaparutfaiyar of Tirnkkudamn kkil . The 
niydgam was addressed to Srikdyil-variyam-§eyvar 
Devahanmis , Pantfdrigal and Karanattan. Mentions 
also K^atriya-malla-terinja-valangai-velaikarar. 

83 of 1897 ; STL vi. 33. 

„ Tirxivorriyur (Cb.) — Tint manni valara (full). 90 sheep 
for lamp by Marayan Gangaikonrla-solan alias Uttama- 
sola-marayan, chief of Tiruvarur, for the merit of one 
Ganavadi Idumban alias Tannai-muniviir-pendirganda 
Visaiyaraiyan *, who stabbed himself and died (in 
order to relieve) the distress of the donor. Another 
gift of 90 sheep for lamp by Nimbaja-devi, wife of 
Indala-dOva of Talai grama in Yiratadesa. f 

138 of 1912. 

„ Tiruvornyur (Ch.) — Bale of land, for the maintenance 
of a ilower- garden and the supply of four garlands 
every day, to Niigalabbai Sani alias Ariyavammai, 
wife of Prabhukara-bliatta of Merkalapurara in the 
Aryadosa. 44 r l'he land purchased included house-sites 
for the tenants who cultivated it ; and it was also 
specified in the deed that the tenants were not liable 
to pay any kind of irai (the fauiiniai of other inscrip- 
tions) such as vet(i, amaiiji and karrunel” 

155 of 1912 ; ARE . 1913 II 22. 

„ Tiruvornyur (Ch.) — 'Tint manni valara. Sale of land 

by assembly of Manali alias Simhaviipiu-catm. to a 

person who presented it to the temple. Mentions that 

eight Madhtirantaka-devan-madai was the price of 

2000 kali of land. 156 of 1912. 

*« 

• Sun. at KTUtan G^avadi of 141 cf. 411 of 1912 of Yr. 8 of Rajaraja, 
ASS. 1913 Q. 32. 

+ Country round Hangal, itself called VirSJanagarl or VirSjankSje ip 
inscriptions. - iUd. 


X W7 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 30. — Uttaramhrdr (Ch.) — Tim mnnni valara , Sale of some 
waste land ( innilangal inndlvaraiyil iraiyirddu 
kitfandamaiyil), tax-free, by the sabha to the Rajen- 
dra-sola-vinnagar for a flower-garden, including 120 
kuli as Nan da-vanappn ram for three gardeners 
(u 7 appar), and to provide for a mat ha called after 
Kundavai-alvar for feeding Srl-vai^navas. The tenants 
had not to pay atarirai. 184 of 1923. 

Year 31. — S. 9(54.) * tin Hunt (Mys.) — Pdrvadmim etc. Land 
to temples for services in them including ** PaTica* 
ma h dm hda t hi m tri hula bdj is uva da like. ’ 7 

1 of 1895 ; EC. iii. Nj. 164. 


Year 31. — Tirvvallam (NA.) — Tint manat valara. 90 sheep for 

lamp by Nirtavinodiit-terinja-Valangai-velai 

given to Tir a v u nnuligui - u 'la i yitr and Devakanmigal. 

17 of 1890 ; till. iv. 340. 


Tiruvorriyur (Ch .) — Tint manni ra/ara (full) — 150 
kdsu by Caturanana Pamlita of Tiruvorriyur and Tiru- 
mayanain for ghi to bathe god on the Margali-tiruva- 
dirai day, the king’s birthday. 

104 of 1912 ; 399 of 1896 ; SIL v. 1354. 


Year 32. — Ka4ug<~(jli (My »)-I V7 rvadesam etc. Construction of 
a tank at Pattandur by Rajaraja Velan, son of the 
Nattukkanmndun of Sennai-nadu. 

170 of 1911 ; EC . ix. Ht. 142. 


„ Tiruridges vara m (Tj.) — Tint manni ralarn (full). 

Mentions yearn 24 and 31 of tin* king and Narakkan 
Kr^nan Raman who gave some land to temple for bath, 
flowers and offerings to god. Mentions vell&n veffi 
among taxes ( vnrigal .) 217 of 1911. 

Year 32, day 70. — Tinw&mdttdr (HA.) — Tir a manni va\ara . 

Gold vessel called Rajendra^olan for sacred bath to 
god. 28 of 1922. 

Year 33. — Tiruvdmur (Ch.)— 79 of 1909. 


* aard Oct. A.D. 1032. Hence acc. 24th Oct, 1001 to 23rd Oct. 1002. But 
5 of 1805 makes Rljarlja rule in December A.D. 1012 Kielhora. EL iv. p. 69. 
Regnal year must be however 21 (See Mp. Gat. 11, p, 1085.) 

[M8] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 

The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following 

Agaram (Oh.) — Construction of stone temple of Tiruk- 
kailayar at Vanavan-mahadevi, (Vanamangai.) 

231 of 1931. 

Brahrmde&am (NA.) — Provision for daily offerings and 
feeding of hundreds of Vaisnava pilgrims coming from 
the Tiruvengada-malai. 255 of 1915. 

Eimayiram (SA .) — Tiru manni vnlnra. By the king’s 
order, 46 veh of land was given to Rajaraja-vinnagar 
by the assembly of taniyur Riijaraja-catm. for offer- 
ings, the recitation of Tiruvaymoli and the mainte- 
nance of an educational institution in which Vedas, 
vyakarana and mimamsii were taught. 

333 of 1917. 

Mahtndrngiri (Oj.) (Sanskrit).— Below the inscription is 
engraved a tiger with double fish in front. Having 
defeated Vimaladityn, the king set np a pillar of 

victory on the Mahendra mountain. 

396 of 1896 * ; SII. v. 1351. 

Mangalam (Sni.)— Gift of the village Mangalam as a 

(ievaddiHi U> the temple of Rajasokhara - Isvaram- 

utjaiya-mahadeva built by Kongilandar of Mudalinayap- 

pajH alias Jayangonda-aolapumn in Vallavaraiyar- 

nadu. Proclaims that the property of those who steal 

away the cattle from this drrudanti or otherwise cause 

any injury to the village shall become the property of 

the god. Mentions Munnurruvar of some nadu. 

157 of 1915. 

NamhihaW (Mys.)— (Kan).— Ereya Gavnnda, son of 
Arasigaya Oavunda, who took Belagattnr in Coraya- 
deva’s war when cows were carried oil and women s 
clothes were unloosed ( tom golaln pmhliran wie uch- 
chal «), fought and went to svarga. 

EG. x. Sp. 14. 

• 397 (5//. v. 13311 it a Tamil version of tame. Also 858 of 1917, a much 
damaged record, begin* with name* MadhurSntaka and RajSn ra. 

[& 69 ] 


78 



THE COLAS 


Pailabanda (An.) — Tiru manni valara . * Cows for 
lamp to the Mahadeva temple. 7 of 1917. 

Polonnaruva (Ceylon.) — Tiru manni valara . Mentions 
shrine of Pallikondar within the temple of Vanavan- 
madevi-lsvaram Udaiyar- 

595 of 1912 ; STL iv. 1389, 1390. 

Sembiya nmahadh 'i (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara to tirut- 

tagumudiyvm. Decision of the assembly, met in 

the Sembiyan - mahadeviyal - periya - mandapam, to 

ntilise the velldn-vetti from the deuadana lands of 

• * » • 

Adityesvaram Udaiya-mahadeva at Moganur, a western 
hamlet of the village, for a lamp in that temple. 

483 of 1925. 

Sivapuri (SA.) — Purva-dteamum Gnngaiyum K ad ura- 
nium konda. Gold bv Nattamai .a maid-servant 

• • *• • • ■ 

of the bathing establishment in the palace at Gangai- 
konda- solapuram . 510 of 1926. 

Talaiccangadu (Tj.) — Tiru manni valara (fall); 
damaged. Remission of taxes on some temple lands by 
assembly in lien of the annual interest of 150 kalanju 
due on 800 kasu equal to 400 kalanju of gold (by 
standard Raj end m -$<Van-mdda i) received from a 

merchant of the Vira sola-madigai at Gangai-kon<Ja- 
solapuram on account of the temple of Tiruvayppadi- 
alvar. 203 of 1925. 

M 

Tirumalavdcli (Tri.) — Tiru manni valara (full). List 
of lands lying waste till year 21, and brought under 
cultivation, for feeding Sivayogins and tapasvins on the 
occasion of the midday offering, by a servant of the 

king. 75 of 1920. 

Tirundmanallu r (SA.) — Gift ( mSlai and k&rai) to Tirut- 
tondi^varattn Adavalar in Tirunavalur alias Raj&ditta* 
devapura by Ddaiyar-padai - vira-narayanat - terinda- 
villigal and their nayakam Marayan Paluvur Nakkan. 
Jewells described. 360 of 1902 ; EL vil. pp. 137*8. 

* Evidence of annexation of Nulambap541-^i? * 1917 II 2. 

1 570 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA I 


Tint naraiy fir 
belonging to 
Palaiyaru. 


(Tj.) — Mentions a devcid&nct village 
the temple of Arumoli-deva Isvata at 

157 of 1908. 


Tirapp find u mil t (Tj.) — Frag. Part of Rajendra’s 
prusasti . Endowments by : ParthivasGkhara-terinda- 
kaikkojar, tdindaraditta-teriuda-kaikkolar, and Paran- 
laku-terinda-kaikkular. Also provision for the reading 
of Sri Raja raja Vi jay am. 120 of 1931. 


Tiruvfi'lut urai (Tj.) — Inst of presents to temple by 
several persons including RajGndra’s mother, the guru 
of Udaiyar Rajftdhiraja-deva and servants of the 
lVriyavelam. Mentions Jtajarajamddai as test of 
lineness of gold. 104 of 1925. 


Ti rttraiyfi.ru (Tj.)— V erse : 

4 rajad-rajanytt-maAttfM-yrrni-raffirftt sasunant / 
Had-rdjrndra- c r >(a s y ( t ptn *a h Ps ciri-varm ma rah ’ // 

214 of 1894 ; SIL v. 513. 


Tiruren/idf/u (Tj .) — Tint mama vulara to tolperungdval 
(palpa/a?tdivum). Gold by Udaiya-pirattiyar Tribhu- 
v a n a -made v i y ar, mother of the king. 460 of 1908. 

Tiruvorriyfir (Oh.) — Erection of the Srl-vimanam to 
Devesu in Adhipurl in tine black stone ( atibahalatarai - 
rasmahhih krxnti»vartjaih > ) by Ravi, called Vara Vira- 
cohitaksan, under orders of Rajendra, the son of Raja- 
raja. The vimdna w;*s of three tiers ( tritalam ) and 
built at the instance of Caturanaua (Pandita). 

105 of 1892 ; SIL iv. 553; also 126 of 1912. 


For daughter see — Rajadhiraja I-Yr. 29, day 102- 
Tirtimalavadi t 71 of 1920. 


[ 571 } 



RAJAKESAUI RAJADHIRAJA I. 


[ acc. — * 15 Mar. — 3rd Deer. A.D. 1018. ] 

Year 2. — tiendalai (Tj.) — tin-bali in the temple of Perundurai- 
uijaiyar had to be stopped owing to absence of drum- 
mers and the land appertaining to this service was 
thereupon transferred to some others. 201 of 1926. 

Year 3 t« — Kotlaiyur (Tj.) — Rajak. alias Tribhuvana-cakravartin 
Rajadhiraja-deva. 270 kdm by Arumoli-nangai, wife 
of Araiyan Porcoman of Er alias K ulo 1 1 u n ga-sola- Sa van* 
namangalam for offerings to an image of Sri -lay ingam- 
purana-devar (Linga-purana-deva) set up by her. 

241 of 1927. 


Year 5. — Kdlahasti (C.) Sale of land for areca-nut garden in 
the name of Tirukkarmappa-devar, for 250 kdiu from 
the temple treasury. 125 of 1922. 

Year 5, day 87. — Kd\ahasti (C.) — Cakravartin R. An order 
(ulvari) of gift of tax-free land in Palaiyurti in 
Ambar-nadu of Uyyakkondar-vaja-iuidu. 

124 of 1922. 


Year 10.- 


tiemhiyanmahddhn (Tj .) — T ingalsn tar a , Remission 
by royal order of taxes on some lands belonging to the 
temple of Tiruvelirukkai-mahfideva for a lump payment 
of 100 kdm (Rajarlijan knsa 75, paljmydm 25) made 
to the assembly of Sattiyakkudi 484 of 1925. $ 


Year 24. — Pennadam (SA.) — Vijayamjendra-deva who was pleased 
to take the head of Vira Faniya, the Seralan-saiai, 
Ilangai and Ratfapadi 7 } lakhs, and to perform the 
anointment of victors at Kalyanapura. Money for 
offerings. 245 of 1929. 


• Kielhorn EL *v. p. 218 f (approx. 23rd May 1018— E 1 . vii p. 7, » 3). 

f Saturday, April 30tb 1020 A.D, ARE. 1927, App, E. 

J The regnal year in really 36 m the impression, though it is given at 10 in 
ARE. 1926. This is followed by a long introduction of Vijayarljlndra stopping 
with the regnal year. 


[ 578 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJADHIRAJA 1 


Year 26 .—Peyipatfam (SA.)— Who took the head of Vira Pandya 
and destroyed the ships at Kftndalur-salai. Records 
rates of taxes due to temple in merchandise. 

244 of 1929. 

„ Tirukkalukkunram (Ch.) — Tingaler-taru. The nag ci- 
rcular (names of viydpdrigal given) of Tiiukkaluk- 
kunram alias Ulagalanda-sdlapuram make a nilavilai- 
dvanak -lcaiyeluttu , for tinucennadai and arcand- 
bhoga to the god on the hill top. Reason for this 
disposal of the land : innilam kdrhlldyk-kidanda- 
maiyin . 172 of 1894 ; 677. v. 465. 

„ * Tirumalavddi (Tri.)— Tingaler-pera. The Perunguri- 

mahasabha of Gandaraditta-catm. dispose of some taxes 
and institute a festival on : nammai uiiaiya cakravarti 
b'ri-Bd jendra-s nJa-de i 'a r tirvnaksatt iram. 

75 of 1895 ; 677. v. 633. 

„ Tiruvorriyur (Ch.) — Tingaler-taru . An enquiry into 
temple affairs by the adhikdrigal Valavan Muvenda- 
velar and Vikkira-singa-muvenda- velar held in the 
mandapa of the temple called Mannai-konda-solan. 
They sold uncultivated waste lands of the temple to 
a military officer of the Cola country, who brought 
them under cultivation and provided paddy for 
offerings on festive occasions. The temple share 
(irai) was 28 kalam of paddy on each vHi for one 
class of land, and 19 kalam for another. The donor 
was the chief of Sattimangalam, of the rank of 
pcrundanam-darujan&yakam and was named Sojan 
Kum&ran Madhurautaka Marayan. 

103 of 1912 t ; ABE. 1913 II 24. 

Year 26, day 120.— Brahmadt^am (NA.) — Tingaler-taru. The 
assembly which met under a tamarind tree sold land 
for a water-pandal for quenching the thirst of the king 
Sri-u<jiaiyar Rajendra-coja-dova and queen Vira-maha- 
dfcviyar, who is said to have entered the supreme feet 
of Brahma in the very same tomb in which the body 

• 14th March, 1044 A.D. Kielhom EL iv. pp. 316-7, 
t cf> Id ef 1913 of Yw 38, day 134. 

[ 678 ] 



THE COLAS 


of king Rajendra Coja was interred ; the gift was by 
sendpati Madliurantakan alias Parakesari Velar, who 
was the brother of the queen. 260 of 1915. 

Year 27 . — Kdncipuram (Ch.) — Tingali>r-tarv up to KoJlippak- 
kaiyulleri-madiippi , and then Villavar Mlnavar 
etc. Koneri ur took five ka 7 anj a for offerings to 
Tirumavanattu Brahmisvaram UJaiya-mahadeva of 
Kanclpuram. Details of expenditure given for the 
annual interest of 8 kalam and one tnni of paddy, at 
one kalam and two tnni per pon-kalanj u. Ippon- 
m udaipun-kolga venru - iollapperddam dga vu m. 

54 of 1893 ; 67/. iv. 867. 

„ Tiruppugalur (Tj.) — Tin gaUr- tarn to Kollippdkkaiyul - 
[eri-maduppi. Money by a Brahman lady for festival 
and offerings, including the service of eight men who 
helped in the Asta-mangalam during the abhueka on 
the Sadaiyam day oi every month. 

49 of 1928 ; ARE. 1928 II 7. 

„ Tiruvarvr (Tj.)*— Tingalh'-taru. Details of quantities 
of paddy due from temple lands bought over by 
Rajendra-^la-deva-anukkiyar Paravainangaiyar for 
expenses connected with offerings and worship to 
Tiruvaraneriyudaiyar. 679 of 1919. 

M Tiruvorriyitr (Ch.)— Money for Masi-makham by 

members of the assembly of Manali alias Singavi^nu- 
catm. deposited with the revenue-accountant (j>uravu~ 
varttMnaik-kalattuk-kanakkan) of Siruvayppetju 
alias Mummu^ifioia-nallur, who had to pay the interest 
in paddy. 142 of 1912. 

Year 27, day 241. * — Tiruppangili (Tri.) — Tinga$r*taru (omis- 
sions and abridgments). Sale of land as abhtyhka* 
dakdna by the mulaparwlai of taniyur TiruveJlarai 
to Rajadhiraja-devar perundanam Dttama-cdlanallur- 
udaiyan Venkatjian Sankaran alias Dan^anayaka 
Rajadhiraja Pallavaraiyan, for feeding Brahmans. 

90 of 1892 ; 811 iv. 537, 

• Wsdassday, 13th February AD. 1045, Kidhova, EL iv. p. 217. 

[ 674 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJADHIRAJA I 


Year 27 + l.—Timmayanjeri (Tj.)~ Land for feeding annually 
1000 devotees including SivaySgins and tapasvins in 
the temple of TirukkayraU-mahadeva in the locality on 
Panguni-uttiram day. 2 of 1914. 

Year 28. — K&lahasti (C.) — Mentions the king’s conquest of Vlra 
Pandya, the Gera king and Ceylon. Two lamps. 

283 of 1904. 

„ Kiliyannr (SA.) — TingaUr-taru (part). Sale of land for 
22 icdsn by assembly of Keraliintaka-catm. to temple 
of Tirnvaglsvara for the maintenance of a feeding- 
• house called Maravadigal. The land was made iraiyili 
after payment of 78 more ham. 151 of 1919. * 

„ Tiruvon;iy~<r (Ch.) — Tingaler-taru. Thirty kdsu for 
special offerings paid to the assembly (sabha) of Kava- 
nur alias Karaala-narfiyana-catm. who agreed to pay as 
interest 75 kalam of paddy every year for offerings. 
Mentions images of the Bhaktas (63 nayanar) t 
{pattarkal4irummi). Catalogue of temple servants. 

137 of 1912. 


ft 


Uffattar (Tri.) — I'arakesari J alia & Rfijadhiraja-deva who 
destroyed the ships at Salai and took the crowned head 
of the Pfindya. Sale of land to temple. 

513 of 1912. 


Veppanguhtm (Ch.) — Tingalh * - tarn (variant form). 
Fixing expenses in temple by royal order. 

* 417 of 1902 ; SIL viii. 3. 


Year 28, day 134 , — Tiruvornyur (Ch.) — Sale of land by some 
members of the assembly of Manali alias Singavisnu- 
catm. a devaddmi of the temple of Tiruvorriyur-udaiyar, 
to Damjanayakam Solan Kumaran Parantaka Marayan 
alias Rajadhiraja Niiagaugaraiyar. 102 of 1912. 


• cf 152, Year 29. 

f Their storitt * were compiled in an abbreviated form by Nambi 
Nambi in the time of Rfjarlja 1, under the name Tiruttoniattogai (lie) * 
ARE, 1913, U. 24, 

% Apparently a mistake for Rljak. 



THE COLAS 


Year 29. — Gangav&ra (Mys.) — Tingaler-taru (full). A grant by 
persons named. 176 of 1911 ; EC. ix. Dv. 75. 

„ KiliyanTir (SA.) — Sale of land tax-free to temple by 
assembly for feeding'house. Sale price 30 kdSu ; 
iraidra vyam 50 kdsu. 152 of 1919. * * * § 

„ t Manimangalam (Ch.) — Tingaler-taru. The MahaBabha 
of RFijacnlamani-catm. met in the Brahmasthanam and 
sold 2000 kufi of land to the temple of Tuvarapati 
alias Kumakkddi-vinnugar-alvar for 100 kdsu. 

6 of 1892 ; SIT. iii. 28. 

,, Tirumalavdiji (Tri.) — Tingal&'-taru. Land for lamp by 
Araiyan Jayangonda-soliyar, also Pancavan-inadeviyar 
wife of Sola-vallabha-deva, called Pijjaiyar. 

85 of 1920. 

Tiruvenkddv (Tj.) — Tingaler-taru (full). Land, by the 
king, seated on the flight of steps to the north of the 
Gaiigai-konda-adlan-milligai inside the palace in Gangai- 
konda-solapnrain, for offerings to Ardhanari-deva in the 
temple of Tiruvenkadudaiyar given as devaddna 
( df> vaddnamctga rari y I 1 itt u . ) 

114 of 1896 ; *977. v. 978. 

Year 29, day 102. — Tirumalavddi (Tri.) — TingalPr - fart*. A 
pearl umbrella by Madhurilntaka-devan Arnmo|i-nan- 
gaiyar alias Pirfmar, daughter of Rajendra-coja-deva. 

71 of 1920. 

Year 30. — Emidyiram (SA.) — Tingaler - tarn. J Assembly 
(Perungun) of taniyvr Rajarsija-catm. met in the 
mandapa Mummudi -solan with Arangan Vlvrirundan 
alias N i rupen d ra- sola- Mu v end a- vel ar § who was 

governing the village, and ordered the lands of the 
temple of Tiruvayppadi-devar to be taxed on tlie lowest 

• cf. 151 of Year 28, 

f 3rd December 104-6 A.D. Kielhorn EL iv, p. 217, 

{ As in 221 of 1894 Yr. 32. 

§ 240 of 1929 (PeggSgam, Year 32, day 345) alto mentions him, 

' 4 



RA JAKES AM RAJADHIRAJA I 


scale (Jcatfaittaram), as were those of Raj araja- 
vinnagar-devar and Kundavai-vinnagar-devar. The 
royal order dated 137th day in the 27th year reached 
the assembly only on 240th day in the 30th year. 

330 of 1917. 


Year 30. — Kanydkumdri (Tri.) — Vtra Pdndiyan- talaiy um Sera - 
Ian Salaiyum Ilangaiyum-tanddrhonda. Order to the 
officers of the salt department (uppalangal ktlrusey- 
varum kankdni &eyvdrwri) in Rajaraja-pandi-nadu to 
remit to the Sri Vallavapperurijalai alias Rajarajap- 
perunjalai of Kalikkudi, salt at the rate “ vppa muda- 
lilum selavilum kalattuvdy nffiigai-y u rat ” (one ndH 
of salt per kalam of salt added to stock or spent from 
it, — Gopinatha Rao). Mentions that Nfuljinattn Manar- 
kudi alias Mahipalakulakalap-pcrajam had stopped 
remitting the kaiyurai salt for sometime before this 
order. TA8. i. pp. 102-4. Same as 93 of 1896. 


Year 30. 


*S. 97(0) — Mindigal (Mys.) — (Kan). T r fm Pdndiyan - 
0 

taleyum Seralnn sdfryum . I .and to temple. Con- 

struction of a tank and sluice. Repair of temple with 
plastering. 'Mentions Ramlanayaka Appimayya, gover- 
nor of Maharaja-vadi 7000 with Vallur (Cud.) as hie 
seat. 279 of 1895 ; KC. x. Ct. 30 ; KL v. p. 205. 


Year 30. — Tiruvallam (NA.) — Tingnler-taru (with variant 

readings). The subhii of Mamlaram undertake to supply 
three tiimbai garlands ( ’tiruppalUttdmun ?) daily as 
interest oil 10 kalam G ndJj and 1 u'aLLu of paddy (?). 

6 of 1890 ; SIL iv. 329. 

„ Tiruvenkdiju (Tj.) — Tingaler-laru . Amaian Seyyavayar 

set up an image of Picca-devar, gave lands for its 
requirements, presented gold and silver ornaments to 
it, opened a charity house ( sdlai ) and provided for its 
maintenance. Daily wage of a woman servant of the 
idlai was one kuruni of paddy. The same person 
obtained lands for the temple from the king’s father 
who was pleased to take the Piirvadesam, Gangai and 
Ki<Jaram. 450 of 1918. 


73 


[ 677 ] 



THE COLAS 

Year 30. — Tribhuvani (Pondicherry) — Tingajer-taru (fall). Land 
for offerings in the name of Rajondra-sola by Senapati 
Rajendra-sola Mavalivanarajar, under the auspices of 
the great assembly of the village, a taniyur , which 
met in the Man<japa built by Sembiyan Umbala-nattu- 
Muvenda-velan for the merit of Rajendra. 72 vtli 
yielding 12,000 Jcalam of paddy per annum, of which 
2475 kalam went for festivals (spocified), feeding 
Vaisnavas and reciting the TirumymoH , the balance 
going to the maintenance of an elaborately organised 
college of higher learning. Conditions laid down 
regarding the grading and taxation of this land. 
Exemptions for teachers and students. 176 of 1919. 

Year 31. — Alambakkam (Tri.) — TingaUr-taru. The servants of 
the temple residing at Madhurantaka-cutm. received 
five kdsu from a merchant of that village and agreed 
to supply paddy towards the interest for maintaining 
a lamp in the temple of Kailasammjaiya-mahadeva. 

721 of 1909. * 


Munagamakulapallj (C.) — (Kan). Rajarnja Brahma- 
dhiraja was ruling Maharajavadi 7000. Mentions 
death of Madabbe, wife of Sovayya alias Rljirndra-cola* 
desa-Rattagudi, son of Kommayya Hattfigudi. 

295 of 1922. 


Tiruvarur (Tj.) — TingaleMaru . In compliance with 

the king’s order, Venkadan Tirunilakanthan alias 

Adhikari Irnmudisola-muvenda-velan utilised certain 

* •• » 

gold and silver vessels in the temple treasury for the 
erection of a golden pavilion for Udaiyar Vidi-vitanka- 
deva of Tiruvarur. Other gifts recorded in coptinua* 
tion (verses.) 670 of 1919^ 


TirutdUmilalai (Tj.)— A detailed description of the 
boundaries of J ay an gonda-sola-n allur, a d&vad&na 
village of the temple of Tiruvilimilalai. Mentions a 
,*> survey of the temple lands. 393 of 1908. 


# No. 723 recording the erection of a tna$4*P* in the temple eeye that the 
temple wee founded by Dai^ti. 


41 - ' I 






^ * rl ^ 




i 


* 


*' V 


v 



RAJAKESARI RAJADHIRAJA I 


Year 31 .—Tiruvorriyur (Ch.)-~ Tingaler-taru (full)* The maha- 
sabha of Sundarasola-catm. and Vanavan-mahadevi- 
catm. sold land as ^nadappuram to Ariyavammai alias 
Nagalavaiccaui, the wife of Prabhakara-bhattan of 
Megalapuram in the Ariyadesa, who had done tirup- 
papi to the local god and founded the Rajendra-solan- 
matha. 107 of 1892 + ; SII. iv. 555 ; 

132 of 1912. 

„ Tiruvorriyur (Oh.) — Tingaler-taru . 95 sheep for a 

lamp by Catural-caturi, the agamiu}aiydl of Nagan 
Perungadan and a devaradiyal of tho temple. 

147 of 1912. 


Year 32. 


Basinikonda (0.) — Tinguler-peru . 1,500 merchants 

of all sainayas, of the four quarters, including nadu, 
nagara and nanfidcsi met at Siravalli in Mugainadu t 
in Pmam-murayapadi of Jayangon<Ja-so3a-mandalam, 
and resolved to convert the village into a nanadesiya 
Dusamad i ■ Eri v irapa t tana ami grant certain privileges to 
the residents of that village. 342 of 1912. 


Xandi (Mys.)— Tingal/r-pera (with alterations). Adi- 
gurigal Matturudaiyar . . . alias . . Vlra Viccadira 
Muvendavojar gave jewels to Malianandisvara on the 
Nandi hill. EC. x. Cb. 21* 

Tirucceng&ttangutfi (Tj.) — Tinga\er-taru . Land tax- 
free to temple in the village by the assembly of 
Tirukkannapuram met in the temple of Brahmisvaram- 
ucjaiya-mahadeva of their village. 55 of 1913. 

Tirumalava4i (Tri.) — Tingaler4aru. The Perunguri* 
mahasabhai of Ga^iaraditta-catm. met in the Sri 
Gan<Jaradittac-cOri of the place {nammur) and gave 
land for ten lamps to the temple. 

81 of 1895 ; SII. v. 641. J 


♦ cf 127 of 1913 n.-d. 
t cf. m of 1913, ARE . 1913 U 35. 


X Aitroaonucal details given fit only y#ar 33* (Ki«lhom El iv. p. 313), 
lot the praiatH records Utt tr«ac«ctioa» of the reign and must be of year 33. 





THE COLAS 


Year 32. * — THruvaiydru (Tj.) — Tingaler - taru. Three hundred 
Raj ara Ija-mddas by Visnuvardhana-deva t ; also gifts 
in year 27 of Periya-dovar who conquered Purvadcsam 
etc., and year 31 of Rajadhiraja. 300 Rdjardj a-md<jas 
equalled 337 ^ kulanju by kudinaikkal. 

221 of 1894 ; SIL v. 520. 

„ Ti ruvidaimarudur (Tj.) — Tingaler - per a - valar . An 

endowment in favour of Araiyan Tiruvidaimarudur- 

udaiyan alias IVlummiiiji-sola-inttapperaraiyan and his 

troupe. The grant proper begins with the word 

4 Kuneri)unaiLunfldn" 264 of 1907. 

» • 

„ Vrddhdcaiam (SA.) — Tinga/ey-ratar. 32 cows for lamp. 
Kiug called Jayangonda-soja. 55 of 1918. 

Year 32, day 28. — Tetirtvri (Ch.) — Vint Pdndiyan-talaiyvm etc . — 
On a representation made to Adhikari V Iran a ray a na- 
Muvendavelar who had convened an it-semblv in the 
hall called Raj ara j an in Uttama-sola-eatin,, the lands 
in the village were properly classified and assessed. 
The new award was engraved in the temple of Uttama- 

solisvaram-udaiyar. 239 of 1922. 

Year 33. — S. 971 — Cik-kdti (Mys.)-(Kan.) — lira Pdrujiyan-tale- 
yum Cera\nm mteyum Lankaiyutn dantjdl ukotuja. 
Erection of temple and grant of land and cows. 

JiXJ. iv. Gu. 93. X 

Year 33. — Uangavdrtt (Mys.) — Tingaler -taru. Sennai-nadu was 
th &jivila§ conferred by the king on Sonapati Rajen- 
dra-sola-hrahma-marayar. 

177 of 1911 ; EC. ix. Dv. 76. 

• Introduction same also m 444 of 1905— y#ar 31, Tirutttni. 

t Perhaps the future Kulottunga I — ARE. 1895, paragraph 11. 

X Hs. 32 n.-d. mentions a waj between Rajadhnaja and a Pallava ; Ch, 50, 
the burning of the Cajukya palace at Kampili (on the TungabhadrI, in the 
Bell ary Dittrict). EC. iv. Introduction p. 14. 

§ Rice takes this to be the authorisation of some collections during the 
officers' life-time. Eng. Tr. p. 85. 


1580 ] 



RAJAKESARI RAJADHIRAJA I 


Year 33 . — Knlambandal (N A.)— Twga{?r~taru. Provision for a 
lamp and for aniik-kdppu by Udaiyar Rujadhiritjar 
Gurudevar Adhikarigai Parasaryau VaHudcva-nara- 
yanan alias l)laga| an da-sola Brahmarnarajan. 

413 ot: 1 902 ; SI1. vii. 1046. 


t» 


Mandikere (Mys.) — Tiny<tJer-pt!nt - whir. Sr* n a pat i 
Jayangonda - sola - Vanakovaraiyar agrees to take as 
me! varum in Mannai-nadu : “ nimrambam uinjil 
i rand inn kdttdrambam ndlil-onrumfoj” two-fifths of 
wet crops and one-fourth of the dry. 


5a> of 1911 ; EC. ix, Nl. 25. 


Tirukkolamhi y dr (Tj.) — Tinyalh'-lanf. Agreement by 
the mahitsabha of Abhayftsra) u-cutin. to pay all taxes 
on certain specified lands of the temple in lieu of 
interest on 25d hdsu received by them from the 
temple. Mentions grain measure : dyiravan-marakkul 
and the Kimjaramallan-utykkfd. 52 of 1925. 


M 


Tirumalavddi (Tri. ) - Tingapr-turu . Vlra-rajendra- 

varman. Land, for daily worship of some images, by 
the Perungun - mahasabha of Gandaraditya - catm. 
assembled in the temple Gan< 1 aridity a- vinnagar. 

* * 78 of 1920. 


„ Tiruvifakkudi (Tjj—Tingalerdaru. (form including 

Puntjur). Remission of taxeB on some temple lands 
for a lump sum by the assembly of Gangaikonda-sflla- 
catm. 119 of 1926. 

fl Yeldur (Mys.)— Vh'a-l\indiyan talaiyum tieralan-sdlai- 

yum Ilangaiyum Imttapddiyum konc/a. Gifts to 
temple for tiruvamidu. 

471 of 1911 ; EC. x. Mb. 106 (a). 

Year 34. — BrahmadHam (NA.) — Tingalerdaru. Gold, 12 
kalanju , for offerings to Pasupatamurti when taken 
out on procession for §ri-bali ; the gift was by a woman 
of Niyamam in Pular-kot{am of Jayangon(Ja-s61a- 
maijtjalam. 262 of 1915. 


[ 681 ] 



THE COLAS 


f 


Year 34 . — Penndtiam (SA.) — Rajak. VijayarajOndra-deva who was 

pleased to take the head of VIra Patujya, the &ilai of 

* 

Sera, jail, Ilangui, Inittapadi 7^ lakhs, and who perform- 
ed the anointment of victors at Kalyunapuraiu. Money 
for offerings to god and goddess. 245 of 1929. 


Tiruv$nkatju (Tj.) — Tiivja1?r-taru as in 92 of 1892 n.-d. 
Sheep for two lamps by Araiyan Nambanangai, 
mother of queen Trailokyam-udaiyar. 446 of 19i8. 


Year 35 . — Alambdkkam (Tri.) — 77 nyalP/'-ta ru . Raj akcsari-udai- 
yar Sri Vijayarajoudra-dOva. Mentions assembly of 
Madhurantaka-catin. 7 10 of 1909. 


Year 35 — 


* S. 975. — Kohttjula (Mys.) — (Kan). Consecration of 
Gangesvara and grant of land to the temple. 


143 of 1898 ; EC. iv. Hg. 


114. 


Year 35. — K<~tur (Mys.) — Pfindiyutt-tttf'riyuw mlaiyunx 

Ihmtjaiyum Iraftaydcii _ Pju'aiyilukhionwH hontjlu 
Ka 1 1 i yd na-jiurattu jayu 00 ,m wVti inruxinydmnaUn 

vlrnrundu V\jayardj?ndira n-mra hitCca n t 

Hna etc. (Fragment.) The king i » called Parakt-sari. 

135 of 1892 ; 477 of 1911 ; EC, x. Kl. 112 (b). 

M K bnfriraj apu ram (Tj.) — Same introduction as the 

preceding, with Eeru{an-talaiyum for idlaiyum. Lamp 
to Vaisnava temple. 656 of 1909 $ . 

ff Markdnam (SA.) — Tingaftr-taru. § Sale of land for 
flower-garlands, offerings and lamps by the assembly 
of Eyi.vpajtinam, a brahmadeya in l*attina-na<Ju, in 
Tambittunaic-cola-vala-nadu. Mentions tillage official 
karaigalukkuk-kanganikdtatiakku, 30 of 1919. 

„ Pandaravatfai (Tj.) — Tinga\tr-taru . Agreement by 
assembly of Rajakesari-catm. to pay all taxes on some 
temple lands in lieu of interest on amounts borrowed 


• Sunday 23rd May, A.D. 1053. Kielhorn, El. vi. pp, 22*3. 

t King taken to be different from and brother of KSjak. KajSdbirfja by 
Rice— M C. x p. xxvu. 

J Text has year 34, $ As in 172 of 1824. 

* 


1682 J 


i 



RAJAKESARl RAJADHIRAJA I 


from the temple treasury in the 28th year of Periya- 
devar who took PdrvadSsam etc., for the purchase of 
house-sites, and in the 31st year of Rajadhiraja 
amounting with interest to 710 kahi. One katanju 
was equal to two kahi. 228 of 1923. 

Year 35 . — Tiruvndandai (Ch.) — Vijayarajendra. (lift of this 

village to Maha-visnu. Income from bekhirai and 
other (lues was to be spent on monthly festivals on 
the clay of Pnrva Phalguni, the king’s asterism. The 
village was in Paduvur-nadu, a sub-divison of 
Kalliyanapuram-konda *-so]ak-kottam (formerly Amur- 
kottam) in Jayangonda-sola-mandalam. The record is 
signed by 70 officers. 258 of 1910. 

Year 35, day 90 . — TivukhoJambiynr (Tj .) — Konev in mnikcnxfjan. 

Royal gift of land as provision for wages, 75 Icalam 

1 

per annum, for two gardeners for a flower-garden after 
his name. 45 of 1925. 


Year 35, day M.—Tribhuvani ( Pondicherry )-~Tingdler4aru, 
Land. aft«*r alteration of its class by sabha in accordance 
witli royal order, to the temple. Mentions Adhikari- 
Aha vamal la-Kulan t aka Muvenda-vejan. 188 of 1919* 


Year 35. day 2SL — KiTitnpuratn (Ph.)— Royal grant of a tax-free 
villige, Sarvatirthanallur, for worship and offerings to 
Sarvatirtham-u<laiya-mahadeva at the request of a 
number of royal officials, while the king was seated on 
the throne Pallavarayan in the Veli-melai mancjapam 
in his palace ut G an ga ikon da-sol apuram. 

420 of 1925. 


Year %>~KarmnapalU (C.) — Gift of tax on oil-raillfl for a 

lamp in the temple of Angakkara-isvaiam-ucjaiyar at 

Mattukura, an Evivlrapattana, T by Solakula-karana- 

Miivenda-velan, who was the revenue officer in charge 

of the district, for the prosperity of the emperor. 

321 of 1912. 


* Thii C 0 »qu#*t was in or * little before the 35th year of the reign 

ARM. 1911 it 93. 


t cf. 342 of 1912 of year 32. 




* 


r 588 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 36 . — K on erirdj apuram (Tj.) — Tinga\ir-taru . Land to 
temple at Tirunallam by the assembly of Pavaikku<Ji 
met under a tamarind tree * called Rajendrasdlan on 
the bank of the channel called &uttamalluviykkal . 

640 of 1909. 

„ Sembiyanmahddevi (Tj.) See under year 10. 

„ Takkblam (NA.) — Tingaler-taru . t Vijayarajendra-dSva. 
Undertaking by some persons in charge of the central 
shrine in the temple of Tiruvural-mahadeva in Tak- 
kolam alias Irattapadi-konda-solapuram, to supply 7 
ndli and one vri of ghi by Arumoli-devan measure as 
interest on 12 kctfanju of gold received by them. 

262 of 1921. { 

„ Tirukkadaiy nr (Tj.) — Tirukkotiiyodu . Vijayarajendra- 

deva. This introduction stresses the conquest of 
Ahavamalla and says that the Vijayarajendra title was 
assumed at the rlrdbhiseka that followed it. Gift of 
some land as sdldbhdga, after reclamation, by Piccan 
Adittan alias Vijayarajendra-Muvenda-veJan of K5mak- 
kudi, for feeding 17 persons in Rajadhirajan-salai and 
meeting the expenses of worship to Kalakala-deva. 

244 of 1925. 

„ § Tiruvadi (SA.) — Tingaler-taru. Rajakesari alias 
Udaiyar Tribhuvana-cakravartin Rajadhiraja-deva. 96 
sheep by two persons for a lamp 392 of 1921. 

Year 38. — 7 iruvorriyur (Ob.) — Sale of land bj sabha of Kurattur 
for the daily services in the temple of XiruvoiTiyur- 
udaiyar-karanai-vitanka-devar. 129 of 1912. 

The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following : — 

Dardsuram (Tj.) — Records that the image of dvdra • 
pataka under which the inscription is engraved was 

* cf. the village peepal with a big platform round it in the centre of almost 
every Mysore village — ARE. 1910 II 21. r, v 

t As in 173 of 1894, t Teat gives year (2)§. 

1 The year is given as 18 in ARB . 1933, App. B. 

r #8. ] 



RA JAKE SARI RAJADHIRAJA I 


bronght by the king from Kalyanapnram after his 
capture of the place. 24 of 1908. 

Eragaram (Tj.) — Part of the introduction of Rajadhiraja. 
Seems to relate to the assignment of seven veli of land 
belonging to the temple on kudiningd-devadanam 
tenure to Sundara Colan Rajadhiraja-viccadira Palla- 
varaiyan as the taxes on this land were not properly 
paid up till then. 283 of 1927. 


Puhjai (Tj.) — Tinga\er-taru . Remission of taxes by 
the king of some temple lands with orders to the 
assembly on Talaiccangadu to take over the manage- 
ment of the lands hitherto in the possession of the 
temple. Mentions improvement of certain lands made 
on behalf of the temple by a lady of the periya-veiam 
by name Sdrnan Solakulasundari. 185 of 1925. 


Tirukkolambiyur (Tj.) — Vlra Pdndiyan-talaiyum etc. 
Order of the king to the sthanattdr and the devakanmis 
to bring under cultivation 6 md of (waste) land for the 
maintenance of two gardeners to look after the Raja- 
dhirajan-tirunandavanam. 48 of 1925. 


Tiruppangili (Tj.) — Tingaler-taru (variant form) 96 
sheep for lamp. 92 of 1892 ; SIT. iv. 539. 

Tiruvorriynr (Ch.) — Sale of land tax-free by the 
inhabitants (ur) of Vesasaru-padiyur to the Brahman 
lady Ariyavammai * for feeding the mdhesvaras in 
the Rajendrasolan, the matha founded by her. 

Mentions irrigation rights and other matters. 

127 of 1912. 


Tribhuvani (Pondicherry.) — Tingaler-taru . In accor- 
dance with royal order, the sabha gave two veil of land 
as goldsmith’s service- inara (kdni) to Arangan Komaran 
alias Rajadhirajap-perundattan who was required to 
,f, do goldsmith’s work for himself and others within the 
village and its hamlets. 2R) of 1919. 


• of. Year SI — 107 of 1893. 


74 


[ 686 } 



THE COLAS 


Vtllor € (NA). — Fragment of praSasti. 

41 of 1888 ; SIT. iv. 139. 


See under Rajendra II 

Year 6.—Punjai — 193 of 1925 for king’s death on back of an 
elephant ; also 5 of 1899 (£77. vi. 440.) of year 6 of 
Rajaraja II. 


[586 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJ EN DR A II 


Year 2.— Tirunageivaram (Tj.) — Irattapadi etc. Receipt by 
the Midaparuijlaiyur of Tirukkudamukkil and other 
temple authorities of 100 kdsu from an individual for 
repairing damages caused by floods to the irrigation 
channel. Interest at one kalnm of paddy on each 
kdsu was to be devoted to offerings in the temple 
(25 kalam) and to expounding the Sivadharma 
(75 kalam ) in the assembly hall Tiruceirrambalam- 
udaiyan built in the temple by the same person. 
Lands belonging to the temple and adjoining the 
channel were also damaged ; the chieftain Vikkirama- 
singap-pallavaraiyan lent to the trustees of the temple 
the amount required for restoring these to their 
original condition. 

214 of 1911 ; A HE. 1912 II 24. 

,, Tiruppugalu r (Tj .) — Tirutnagal-maruviya. Remission 
of taxes on a flower-garden, called Ponmenda-solan, 
by the vir of lvaraikkal which met in the Durga temple 
in the Senamukham * of the village. Also remission of 
taxes on lands for gardens by the assembly of Bhuloka- 
manikka-catm. in year 3 of Rajak. Virarajendra- 
deva. 81 of 1928, 

Year 3 . — Jambai (SA.) — Tiru-maruviytt sengtlvendan. A 
village officer demanded taxes from a woman, who 
declared that she was not liable. The former seems 
to have put her through an ordeal. The woman took 
poison and died. A meeting of the people from 4 the 
four quarters, eighteen districts and various countries ’ 
was held, and it was decided that the man was liable. 
In order to expiate his sin he paid 32 kdsu for a lamp 
at the temple of Tiruttanton^i Mahadova. The 

# cf. Slnlmukhattar in a Siam inscription. JRAS. 1913 p. 337, {ARE. 

1928 II 8). 


\ 587 J 



THE COLAS 


vanik-kiramattar and the Bankarappadiyar undertook 
the task of supplying 2/3 and 1/3 of the oil required. 

80 of 1906. 

Year 3. — Knldr ( My s .) — Ira! tapdd t elaraiyilakkamum kmdu 
KoUdpurattu jayastambha-ndtti ph'drrangaraik-kvp- 
pattu Ahavamallanai - yaujuvittu avan - dnaiyun - 
gudiraiyum pendir-panddramiin-gaikkmdu vijayd- 
bh iseka m-pann ? viva - singdsanattu virrir u ndaru\ina. 
Cows for two lamps. Mentions Vettan Pancanedi 
Vunau alias Madhurantaka Tamilap-peraraiyan who 
was Dane iana yakam- lean kani. 

478 of 1911 ; EG. x. Kl. 107. 

» Tirukkolambiyilr (Tj.) — Tirumnga]^naruviya, Under- 
taking by the Sivabrahmanas and two uvaccar of the 
temple to perform certain specified ceremonies includ- 
ing hCma on every new-rnoou day to god Nanadesiya- 
Vitankar, from the interest on money and produce of 
land given to them by an officer of the sirudemattup - 
perundaram named Maraikkadan Devan alias Rajaraja 
Tadigaippadi-nadalvan of Sattanur. 51 of 1925. 

„ Tiruvaiydru (Tj.) — Fragments of the introduction. 
Gold ornaments to the Ten-kailasa shrine in the temple 
by Nambirattiyiir Trailokyam-udaiyar Adigaricci. 

213 of 1894 ; SIL v. 512. 

„ Tiruvallam (KA.) — Tiru - maruviya . 25 kaUinju of 
gold given to temple authorities for feeding a learned 
Brahman and for other purposes. The total interest 
was padakkunel every day. 75 of 1889 ; SIL iii. 55. 

„ Tiruvdrur (Tj.) — Irattapddi etc. Details of the quantity 
of gold used for plating and gilding the different parts 
of golden paviliori-(pomun tirumatuiapam ). 

669 of 1919. 

Year 4. — Erumiir (BA.) Tiru mddu puviyenum . A vyavasthd 
of the assembly of Vanavan-mahadevi-catm. when it 
met in the temple of Vanavan Mahadcvi-vinnagar-ajTar. 
Mentions V i jayagan^a-sollsvaram-ucj^iya koyil. 

396 of 19W# 


[ 688 ] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA II 


Year 4.—* Manimangalam (Oh.)~Tirumadu-ptiviyenum. Sale 
of land in Amanpakkum, tax-free, to Ivfimakkavvaiyal, 
mother of Senapati Jayangonda-sola Brahmadhiraja, 
who gave it to the temple. Mentions meeting at the 
Brahmasthana mandapa of the Mahasabha of Raja- 
c u l arnan ic -ear upped i -man galam . 

3 of 1892 ; SII. iii. 29. 


'Tirupptigaldr (Tj .) — Ti ru mag a [-maruviya . Remission 
of taxes on temple lands by the assembly of Bhuloka- 
manikka-catm. 79 of 1928. 




(Tj .) — Irattapadi etc. (in middle of the 
record). Royal (Konerinmaikondan) confirmation of 
grant made by the Mdhesvums of certaiu privileges in 
the temple to Paras ura man Sankaran of llangarikudi 
for his acts of piety, such as, providing for offerings at 
Tiruvfidutnyai on festival dajs in Purattasi, construct- 
ing in his own village a temple called Madhurantaka- 
isvara and endowing lamps and offerings therein. His 
father provided also a perpetual lamp in the temple at 
Tiruvaduturai. 108 of 1925. 


Year 4, day 184 ,— Kanydkumdri (Tv.)—lru[lapd<fi etc. The 
king, seated on Kaduvetti in Keralan-majigai in 
(langaikonda - solapuram, orders certain taxes from 
devadcina villages to be devoted to a festival on the 
birthday of Nampendugalii Kilanadigal. Kanya- 
kuinari is called Gangai-kon<ia-solapuram. Details of 
taxation and administrative procedure given. 

TAS. i. pp. 164-8. 

Year 5 . — Brahmadebam (NA ,) — Tirumagul - maruviya. Sale of 
land to temple of Bhavarudrasomlsvara-deva on the 
south bank of the river Ve^ka (Vegavati) by the 
assembly of Parakrama-soja-catm. in Diimar-nadiu of 
Jayangon<jia-sola-man( 4 lalam. Rights of irrigation and 
residence for labourers secured. 

244 of 1915. 


• Thursday 17th August, A.D. 1055, acc, (approx),, 28 th May A.D, 1052— 
Kielhora MI, vi. p. 24. 


1 680 ] 



THE COLAS 


Year 5. — Brahmadesam (NA.) — Ti rumagabmaruviya. Rajak. * 
Udaiyar R:ijcndra. Sale of land tax-free to temple of 
Uruttirasolai-mahadeva on the south bank of the Vefyka 
at Parakrama-Boltt-catm. by the Mahnsabha of Yen- 
kulattur alias ParamGsvara-catm. Rights of irrigation 
secured. 256 of 1915. 

„ Kilnr (SA.) — Tirumagal -maruviya. Sale of land to 
temple of Tirnkkovalur tax-free by iir of Puduppejrur 
as provision for recitation of Tiravemhavai on Margali 
Tiruvadtrai days and for offerings and prasddam to 
persons specified. 12 of 1905. 

„ KuttaUm (Tj.) — Irattapddi etc. Money to the temple 
of Sonnavarayivar at Vingn-nlrt-turntti by a native of 
Jayangonda-sola - puram for feeding itinerant Saivu 
devotees to secure success to the arms of the king..t 

486 of 1907. 

„ K Twain (Oh.) — Tirumddar -puviyenum. Sale of land 
for 160 ham by the assembly of Ki>ttur alias Cola- 
vidyadhara«catm» t in Kanrur-nadu of Manavirkottam 
in Jayangonda-sdla-mandalam through which a feeder 
channel to the Tribhuvana-mudevip-pGreri at Kuvam 
alias Madhurantakanallur was to pass. 328 of 1909. 

ff Ti rukkalukkunra m (Ch.) — Tirumaga\-nilaviya . J 90 

sheep for lamp. 173 of 1894 ; SIL v. 466. 

„ Tirupp ugalur (Tj.) — Tirumagal-ma ruviya . Agreement 

by the assembly of Fugalur to pay ten kaiu as interest 
on forty kasu lent to them from the sum given by 
Parkaran Arumoli alias Akarana-dani Pallsvaraiyar of 
Velur for the expenses of the nfilirram ceremony in 
the temple. 57 of 1928. 

* 

# Mistake for Parak. Confusion due to overlapping reigns and independent 
exercise of powers at the close of a reign. ARE , 1916. 11 14. 

f The details given here are not in the text, which is an Incomplete record 
giving only the name of temple followed by the names of some SivabrShmagas. 

J This short form has much in common with frafftpUji etc. 

[MO] 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA II 


Year 5.— Tiruverumbur (Tri .)~Tirumagal-maruviya. Money for 
lampstand by a i>enda{ti of the Uyyakkondan-terinda- 
tirumanjanattar-vejam at Gangai-kondta-sola-puram. 

121 of 1914. 

Year 5, day 35 .—Kutttilam (Tj.)— Begins KCmerinmaikonddn . 

Tiru-maruviya in middle of record. Land, tax-free, 
given in year 3 day 143 for festivals to Sonnavarari- 
yum-mahiideva at Vingu-nlrt-turutti (in Tiruvalundur- 
niidu) on the king’s birthdays. Also gift of taxes due 
from some villages, amounting to eighty kaiu per 
annum, for Margali-tiruvadirai, to the temple. Regu- 
lation of expenses ( nivandam), made on the day 
mentioned in year 5. 101 of 1926. 

Year 5, day V^^^lelappahtvur (Tri.) — Tirumagal-maruviya, 
Land as naftnvak-kani to a dancing master. 

361 of 1924. 

Year 6.— S. 979 *.—Iklat~tru (Mys.) (Kan.). A long pathetic 

poem on the sati of Dekabb»\ the daughter of a chief 

of Nugunad, her husband having been sentenced to 

death and the sentence executed at Talakkad for his 

* • 

having killed a member of the royal family in a wrest- 
ling contest. 141 of 1898 ; EG. iv. Hg. 18 ; 

EL vi. pp. 213-9 (Fleet). 

Year 6 . — Punjai (Tj.) t — Iraitapfidi etc . Agreement of the 
assembly to pay taxes on some lands in lieu of 
interest at 50 per cent, from the 3rd year on 80 kaiu 
received by them in parts from Irumadi-sola-muvenda- 
velar in year 36 of Anaimerrunjiyarulina Yijaya- 
rajendra-deva and in year 3 of IlajOndra-deva. Produce 
from the land to be used for midday service to Tiruval- 
amburam-mjiaiya-nfiyanar, his consort and the Pillaiyar 
set up by him in the temple. Also gift of 30 kalanjxi 
to temple for beating the kaccdram (?) on the marriage 
day of Ajappirandar ; this gift was made in year 
(3) 2 of Parak. Rajendra who took Purvadesam, 
Gangai, and Kadaram. 193 of 1925. 

• 27th Oct. 1057 A.D. Kielhorn* EL vi. p. 23. 

+ Tht text givii date year 3 immediately after the introduction and then 

meatioai year 6; alio expression u IrathTlval Uydu ku^utta-nilam" 

[ 691 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 6 . — Tanjore (Tj) — Tiru-maruviya . Royal order to provide 
a tuni of paddy daily for playing the Iffijardjeivara- 
ndtaka in the Raj arajes vara temple to Santik-kdttan 
Tiruvalan Tirumudukunran alias Vijayarajendra- 
acaryan and his vargattdr as kani . The performance 
was to take place in the Udaiyar - vaigasip - periya- 
tiruvila, the total annual allowance being 120 kalam 
to be given out of the temple treasury. 

55 of 1893 ; STL ii. 67. 

„ Tirukh~yUr<r (SA.) — Tirumagal-mai'itviya . Rebuild- 

ing of the Sri-vimanam of Tiruvidaikali-yalvar, a 
decayed brick structure, with fine black granite, 
and restoration of old inscriptions on its walls by 
Miladudaivitr Narasinga - parnnar - Narasinga - var- 
marenru - abJmekam - pan n i mudi - kavittu Miladu 
2,000 pamiuym dnda JTi lad udaiyar Narasin gapan- 
mar. Other gifts. 123 of 1900 ; EL vii. pp. 145-6. 

„ TirupfntgaKu* (Tj.) — TirumagaLmaruviya . Money, 

by De vau.pat tagal-Pandaram and her daughter belong* 
ing to the Sivapridasr-khara-terinja-tirumanjanattar 

Velam, for offerings to ldaguyyakkon<la-s61a-surya- 

deva, set up by them in the temple. 64 of 1928. * 

„ Tiravallam (NA.) — Tirumagrtl-maruviya, Gift of 

1,500 kuli to be cleared <»£ forest and cultivated as 
•* 

arcanCi-lh'tja , for \vorshi]>]»ing Durga standing in the 
north-western corner of the temple, to a Sivabrahmana 

by the devakanmis and residents (fir) of 

niir. 217 of 1921. 

„ Trihhuvani (Pondicherry) — Tirumaga] - maruviya. 
Order of Tirumandira-olai Pallavan Pallavaraiyar at 
the request of Senapati Yftnadhirajar that none except 
the Vellalas of Yakkur should levy or ]»ay any kind of 
dues within the village, and that others who do so 
should be considered to have transgressed the law. 
This was agreed when Perumpuliyur-nambi was 
inspecting the temple business, t 180 of 1919. 

* cf. 63 of year 11. 

f Business was transacted by assembly at night. ARE, 1919, II 16. 

[5981 



PARAKESARI RAJENDRA II 


Year 6*~Tvibhuvani (P ondi cherry Txr\ irna gal-mar u viya . An 
order of the assembly in accordance with a royal 
mandate altering the classification of land at Pnttnr 
already granted for the merit of Udaiya-pirattiyar 
Pirantakan Uloga-mad&viyar. Refers to leadaiyldu of 
Villavaraiyar Muvenda-velar, the adhikdrin who is 
called amman and Senapati Rajendra. Yayiragarac- 
colan. 181 of 1919. 

Year 6, day 300 . — Veppangulam (Ch.) — Tirumddu-pvviyenvm . 

Sale of land as iraiyili devadana for 97 kal.anju 
of gold. 416 of 1902 ; STL viii. 1. 

Year 7. — K nrri raj a pi tram (Tj.) — Trait apddi etc. Land. 

The Perunguyi-sabhai of Pavaikkudi met in the temple 
of Madhurantaki Isvaram-udaiyar. 

634 of 1909. 


PuTijai (Tj.) — Tirumddar-pitviyenam. An imikaval 
of 200 JffJnu received by the assembly of Talaccangadu 
from the temple for taxes on 2\ vPi of land given 
in return for 1 ] vtJi which, having been assigned to the 
temple for harirbali-dana, and found unproductive 
owing to the high level of the land and the difficulty 
of irrigating it, had therefore to ho resumed as village 
common land. 194 of 1925. 


Singavaram (S V.) — Tirumagal-tnaritri ya . Lamp by a 
chief in atonement of his having stabbed a military 
official. 227 of 1904. 


M 




Tintmalai (NA.) — * Koparatrakrsari alias tfri Rajendra- 
cola-deva. Adhikari Koyran l a n g al a m - u « l a iy an made an 
enquiry of Sirudanam Panimagan Kudippangudaiyan 
and Tiruvengatla-deva Karmis, discovered irregularities 
in tho maintenance of lamj^s endowed before, only two 
out of twenty-one were being burnt, and regulated 
matters for the future, the Srl-vaisnavas accepting his 
finding. 64 of 1S89 : STL iv. 293, 


# A lat«r copy. May be of RajSndra I. 

[ 693 ] 


75 



THE COLAS 


Tear 7. — Tribhuvani (Pondicherry) — Tirumagal - maruviya. 

Land, for offerings etc., to Vira-s51a-vinnagar-alvar ; 
made iraiyili by the great assembly which met at 
night in the temple. Royal order suggesting the 
action. 183 of 1919. 

Tear 8. — Tirumalavadi (Tri.) — Ti rumddar-puviyenum . Land 
left in charge of devakanmis for offerings to an image 
set up by Sirudanap-perundaram Sonapati Araiyan 
Kadakkangonda-solan Rajaraja Animuri - nadalvan 
the son of an Anukki of Rajendra-cola-deva I. Other 
gifts. 84 of 1895 ; STI. v. 644. 

„ Tiruvdrur (Tj.) — Tirumddu - puviyenum, Gift of a 

wreath of precious stones for the goddess, consort of 
Udaiyar VIdi-vitanka-devai\ by a native of Gangai- 
konda-solapuram. 676 of 1919. 

„ Tiruvdrur (Tj.) — Tirumddu-puviymmn. Land for 

offerings, for feeding twelve sivayogins every day 
in the temple, and for two ear-ornaments to the god. 

677 of 1919. 

„ Tiruvdrur (Tj.) — Tirvmddu-puviyenvm . Deposit of 

gold with certain merchants of Tiruvarur for offerings 
and oil for bath to the god ; further gifts of gold for 
clothes to images and fees to temple songsters and 
servants. 678 of 1919. 

Tear 9. — BrahmadMam (NA.) — The assembly of Karaikkflttu- 
brahmadesam alias Parakrama-s51a-catm. met in the 
temple of Pondai-udaiyjir, and ordered the public sale 
of land to the temple of Rudrasolai-mahad&va on the 
southern bank of the Vebka. 270 of 1915. 

„ Karuvur (Co\.)— Tirumagal - maruviya. Grant of a 
village to the Tiruvanilai temple. Signed by five 
officers who also appear in an inscription of Ylra- 
rajfcndra {STI. iii. 20), one of them being Araiyan 
Rajarajan alias Virarajendra Jayamuri-na^ajvan, 
perhaps the same as Senapati J ayamuri-na<Jalvar of the 
Ceylon inscription (Sangili-Kanadarava) of RSjSndra. 

59 of 1890 5 SIL iii. 21. 


[W41 



RARAKESARl RAJENDRA II 


Year 9. 


M 








Year 10. 


—Karuvur (Cou)—Timmagl - maruviya. Grant of 
NelvayppaRi to the Tiruvanilai temple. Signed by 
the same officers as the preceding {SII. iii 21), some 
prefixing Kulottunga to their names. 

G5 of 1890 ; SII iii. 22. 

Kuttdlam (TjO — Tirumddu - puviyeman (later form). 

Undertaking by a number of Brahmans of Tiruvalun- 

dur, a brahmadeya , to feed Sivabrahmanas during the 

* 

mid-day service of Sonnavararivar with the interest 
(30 kalam) on 25 7ms a received by them from Venka- 
(Jan-Adavallan, a merchant in the big bazaar ( angddi ) 
within tlie fort of Gangaikonda-solapunun, who had 
made this endowment for the prosperity of the king’s 
arms. 102 of 1926. 

Mahdbalipuram (Ch .) — Irattapddi etc. The nagarattar 
of Nagaramaraallapuram alias Jananathapuram define 
limits of tax-free lands held by Sri - Paramesvara- 
mah a v arfdia- v i snu grh a t till v ar , make some additions to 
them and regulate expenses. 

5*1 of 1890 ; SII. iv. 377. 

P alalia r (Ch.) — Land, tax-free, as Bhdrata-vrtti for the 
exposition of the Bharatara, Ramayanam and similar 
Puranas in the temple of Tiruvayoddhi, by the 
assembly of the village. 48 of 1923. 

Tirumalavdtii (Tri.) — Tinimddar-puviyenum. Orna- 
ments including a r mantrapuspam with nilam and 
other items, Rajadhiruja is called the elder brother 
of the king and a gift of year 3 of Virarajendra-deva 
(successor) is mentioned. * 

87 of 1895 ; SII v. 647. 

~~B&hur (Pondicherry .) — Iraflaptujli etc. Paddy for offer- 
ings. Interest 6 natj per kalam per month. 

171 of 1902 ; SII vii. 798. 


* ARE . 1895 paragraph 9, antra the published text (SII. v« 647 11. 53-3). 

[ 696 ] 



tHE COLAS 


Year 10* — Tereydr (Mys.) — An introduction with many gaps. 

Capture of 75 elephants of the Bhadra species includ- 
ing Batrubhayankara and Karapattira as well as 
camels and queens of Ahavamalla. 

EC. xii. Mi. 76. 

,, Tiruvallam (NA.) — Tiru-maruviya. Land and certain 
rights to a Sivabrahmana for the worship of Tribhu- 
vauusundara (Sola-kerala-vitankar), his consort and 
Pillaiyar set up by the assembly and some regiments 
of the army named. 214 of 1921. 

„ Tiruvallam (NA.) — 850 kali of land as arcandbhdga to 
Sola-kerala-vitankar set up by the assembly. Land sold 
as devaddna iraiyili to the temple by the sabha. 

215 of 1921. 

Year 11. — Kaluttdr (NA.) — Tirumddu-puviyenum. Sale of 
tax-free land to oue of the d/a nganattar by eabhfi 
including the sa?nvatsara-vdnyam of Vikramasinga- 
catm., for the pentmbali offerings on Sundays to the 
Pasupatamnrtiga] in the temple of Tiruk-kutnblsvaram- 
udaiya Mahadeva. Special grant, in lieu of taxes, of 
37 ham, equal to 10 kalanju and 9 manjddi * of gold 
of the fineness of Madhurantakan-mdtfai. 

157 of 1916. 

f , Tiriippugalur (Tj.) — Irattapddi etc. Ornaments 
presented to Singa-deva and his two consorts set up in 
the temple at Pugalur by DevanpaUagal-Pamjaram and 
her daughter belonging to the Biva[iadasekbara-terinja« 
tirumanjanattar-velam. 63 of 1928. T 

Year 12. — Ko\agalu (Mys.) — (Tam. and Kan.) Tirumaga^marth 
viya . In S. 984, Naganna of Kejreyur, fearing the 
jealousy of Gangaya, lord of the natj, submitted to him. 
A gift of land. 144 of 1898 ; EC. iv. Hg. 115. 

* 15 kala&tu 9 ma&rfyi and 2 m$ f at now read. Codrington, Ceylon 

Grins p. 85. 

f df.64olyaar6. 


[6W] 



RARA&ESARt RAJENDRA II 

The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following : 

U 82 ■ d / i nl) m (NA. ) Lamp to Alagiya Manavalar 

in the temple of Kaiikosari-vinnagar and mention of 
assembly of Vikrama-sola-catm. * 245 of 1909. 

Kunadara Korale (Ceylon) —Mentions Senapati Jaya- 
muri-nadalvan. 612 of 1912 t ; SIL iv. 1408. 

Tiruvcirur (Tj.) — Tirumadu - puviyenwm . An order 

(of the king) of Vclfdakuttan alia* Sembiyan Muvenda- 
velan to cover with gold plates certain portions of the 
garbhagrha and the ardhamundapa of the temple. 

675 of 1919. J 


* This occurs also in 347 of 1909 (n«d.) as aa alias KalamSr with 
part of the iatroduction of Parak. RljSadra. 

t of. 600 of 1913 ; AiK Chh. 56, 58*60 

I cf. 603 of year 8; 670 of Rljldhir^ja 51. 

[W7] 



rAjakesari rajamahendra-deva 


Year 2 . — Cidambaram (SA.) — Frag. Mentions Parantakan 

Loka-mahaduviyar. 612 of 1930. 

„ Hosahalli (Mys.) — Manunldi-murai - va\ara . Gift of 
land to Tiruviyalur Paraiijofci alias Agorasiva of the 
Tiruvural-matha, who was a native of Avikkur alias 
Jayangonda-solapuram in Perumbanappadi. 

172 of 1911 ; BO. ix. Ht. 35. 

* Pulallur (Ch.) — Tirumangai-valara . Land given as 

Bharata-vrtti by a lady, wife of one of the dlunganam 
of Madhuriintaka-catm. 50 of 1932. 

„ Tiruva4andai (Ch.) 275 of 1910. 

„ Tiruvallam (NA .) — Tirumagal - vilanga. Sankaran 

Gandaradittan alias Senapatiga} Rajarajac-coliya-varai- 
yar purchased from the inhabitants of Tiruvallam 
800 kuli of land for 64 good current kdiu equal to 
22 kalanju and 8 mahjddi in gold at 7 manjffyi per 
kaiu, and presented it to the temple. 

5 of 1890 ; SII. iii. 56. 

Year 3. — Oratnam (SA.) 741 of 1905. 

ft Nerur (Tri.)~ Tirumagal - vilanga . Provision for 
offerings. 339 of 1928. 

„ Olagapuram (SA.) — Manunldi-murai-va\ara. Sale of 
land by the nagarattdr of Uloga-madevipuram for 
being presented to the temple of Arikulakesari-!6varam 
to meet the expenses of the shrine of Rajendra-sola- 
vijankar in it. 130 of 1919. 

„ Olagapuram (SA.) — Manunidi-murai-valara, Sale of 
land by the nagaratt&r of Ulftga-madevipuram to a 
certain Sattan for being presented to the temple of 
Arinjigai-Vinnagar Vljxirundaivar of ivvur-tirumSr- 
kdyil for expenses. The sale-deed was drawn up by 



RAJAKESARI RAJAMAHENDRA-DEVA 

Samantabahu Acarya, a worshipper 0 f the Sundara- 
solap-perumbaili of this town. 14 ! o£ 1919> 

Year Z.-Tiruppapuliyur (SA.) - Short introduction says that 
the king fought with Ahavamalla. * 

119 of 1902 ; SII. vii. 743. 


* Thi* confirm* hi* place between RSjSndra and VirarSjSndra cf. SII. iii. 
PP. ltt ff. ARE. 19Q9 paragraph 9. 

r*w] 



RAJAKfiSARI VlRARAjfiNDRA * 


Year 2 f . — AlambaJckam (Tri.) — Tiruvalar-tiralpuya. Assembly 
of Madhurantaka-catm. met in the temple of Tiruvl- 
sal ur- Pall ikon dfilvar of this village and made a gift of 
land to Tiruvalisvaram-udaiya-mahadeva. 

718 of 1909. 

„ Tiriivanndmalai (NA.) — Repair of a tank by Tornjai- 
manacci, daughter of Gangaiyar, to whom the lands 
irrigated by it were surrendered by former tenants 
who, being unable to repair the tank, had allowed the 
lands to lie waste for a long time, 

552 of 1902 ; SIL viii. 143. 

Tiruvenkddu (Tj .) — Tiruvalar - tiralpuya. Taxes in 
several villages in three nadus in the Rajadhiraja- 
vala-nadu granted for festivals and offerings on Ayilli- 
yam days (the king’s asterism) to Tiruvenkadudaiyar. 

113 of 1896 ; SIL v. 976. t 

„ Tiruvornydr (Ch .) — Yi ra m r-tunaiydga vum. Appor- 

tionment of 120 Mm paid as rent by the Galiya 
merchants in the Jayasinga-kula-kalap-perunderu § 
of Tiruvorriyur for special services in the temple on 
the day of Aslesa, the star of the king’s nativity, as 
settled by the officer Jayasinga-kula-kFtla-vilupparai- 
yan, after an enquiry held in the vakkdnikkxim- 
mandapa in front of the temple. 136 of 1912. 

Year 3 . — Pimjai (Tj.) — 80 ham by six persons for obtaining the 
t irukkd vanaklcdl (title-deed ?) which had been lost 
after the death of their relation, a certain Tiruvenka- 
dudaiyan of Konnadur. 190 of 1925. 

• lUfjamahSndra was the immediate predetegsor of VTrarSjendra. ARM . 

mo ii 12 . 

f Read as 22 in ARE . 1910 II 22 

* 452 of 1918 (Yr. 2 + 1) is similar. 

§ Probably after a surname of the king, the opponent of Vf. C&lukya 
Jayasimha I1T. Other quarters in the place were; T r$bkuvanatundarap‘PtrH*derU 
of the Manxes, and IWrjattennZyirap-pcrunderu of sculptors and artisans. 
ARM. 1913 U 32. 


[ 600 ] 


•i 



RAJAKESARI YIRARAJENDRA • 


Tear 3 .--Tiruv&m&ttur (SA.) — Vtrame4unaiydgavum. Gold 
and cows for two lamps by Viccadiran-madhurantakan 
alias Senapati Virarajendra Karanai Vilnpparoiyan of 
Kulikudi. 3 of 1922. 

«t Vyyalclcontldn-Tirumalai (Tri.) — Taxes for a festival by 
the king while seated on the throne called Abhimana- 
raman at Tiruvanaikkaval. Among the taxes mentioned 
is (Iamb and a. 462 of 1908. 

Year 3+1, — Karurdr (Coi.) — Tiruvalar-tiral. Grant of a 
dvvaddna by the king from his palace at Gangai-konda- 
solapuram. 58 of 1890 ; SIl. iii. 20. 

Year 4 . — Malar (Mys.) — Tiruvalar-tirulpuya up to Gangai - 
managar ; only the introduction is preserved. 

194 of 1911 ; EC. ix. Cp. 85. 

„ Punganur (NA.) 541 of 1906. 

,, Tvnnori (Ch.)- Virame-Iunai (part). 93 sheep for lamp 

distributed among three persons, 48 with one and 22£ 
with each of the other two. 

198 of 1901 ; STL vii. 410. 

„ Tirundmanallur (SA.) — Vlrame-titnai up to kaikkotidii, 

and then - Svasti Sri Sakai a - him van - cisraya- 

Sri - MM ini - Valhibha - Mahdrdjddhirdja - Cdlakula - 

sundara * Pdnd ya-Kulanlaka AJiavamallakula-kdta 

Ahavamallanai mutnmadi t von hand a (R djaiekluira') 

* 

Rdjdsraya (Raj a raj end r a) Sri Vlra Cola J Karikdla - 
V* 7/a Sri Vira raj on dr a- do va Rdjakvtarivanma - 

poruman-(tdigal Kdnorinmfiikonddn . Object of the 
record is not clear §. Mentions the nagarattdr of 
Tirunavalur alias Rfijadittapuram. 

371 of 1902 ; SIL iii. 81. 

„ Tiruvorriytlr (Ch.) — Tiruvalar-tiralpuya . Sale of 
land by residents of Elinujai for presentation as 

• Slkhara in others. 

+ Aimma4 * later records, t c f* Vtru&ttyam. 

§ Land to Tirutto^dtfvara. ARB. 1902 App. B. 

[ 601 ,] 


76 



THE COLAS 


matfappuram to the Raj en d r a- sdlan -madam . The 

price was paid by Tiruvarafiga-devan alias Mummuiji- 
sola Brahmarayan of Viranarayna-catm., a taniyur 
in Rajendrasinga-vala-nadu of the Sola-mandtaiam. 
Land was made iraiyili , the taxes remitted being 
named. 135 of 1912. 

Year 5 . — Accarappdkkani (C-h.) — ViramP-tunai (part). Gift of 
paddy and taxes (named) to god. 

253 of 190 J 5 SIL vii. 467. 

„ Byada raha\\i (Mys.) — VlramP-iunai up to Singanana t- 

y u m - udaipp a ran ga nd 1 1 . Self-immolation (tippaya) 
of a lady on the death of her husband. 

174 of 1911 ; EC. i x. Dv. 14. 

„ Gang a i 'horn! a - r, <~1 apu ram (Tri .) — Tir uvular -tint followed 

by VirumP-tunai several times. Long hut ill-preserved. 

82 of 1892 * ; SIL iv. 529. 

„ Klhlr (BA.) — ViramP-tuuai up to munnavar virada- 

mudittu . 48 sheep for lamp by a Manradi. 

273 of 1902 ; SIL iii. 82. 

„ f Mammangalam (Ch.) — Tiruvalar-tiralpiiya . 4450 

kufj of land to temple as arcanuhhoga by Senapati 
Jayangonda-sola Brahmadhiraja whose father Maujip- 
payanar alias Jayasimha-kuiruitaka-piraraariyar had 
purchased the land from the village. 

2 of 1892 ; SIL iii. 30. 

„ Tirnimrriyur (Ch.) — V i ra t 1 na iydgavum. Bale of 
land to temple by assemblies of Biindara-sfila-catm. and 
Vanavan-madevi-catm,, the temple share of produce 
being 30 kalam per veil. Another sale of waste laud 
in year 6 by assembly of Kingavisnu-catm. for Vlra- 
rajendmn4irunaiuhivanam t founded by Tiruvarangan 
alias Rajendni-muvenda-volan of Manahkudi* 

228 of 1912. 

* 

* 82-b mentions year 23 of Ayyan who took FQrvad9lam # GanRti, and 
Ka|8ram. SIL iii. p. 195 and n. 11. 

f 10th September 1067 A.D., acc. 1062-3. Kitlhora, ML vii. p, 9. 

[«M] 



RAJAKESARI VIRARAJENDRA 


Year 5 .— Timvorriyur (Ch.)— Virame4unaiyagavim. Shrine of 
1 ’adambakka-de va * was built of stone by adhikdri 
Rfvjeiidra Mnvenda-vulan. 232 of 1912. 


Year 5, day 348 . — Tirmmtkkmlal (N A.) -^Tiruvfclar^liralpuya, 
Royal order assigning the taxes of Vayalaikkavur, 
making it a tax-free dPvadfma, for the requirements of 
a VNnu temple at Tirumukkudal in Madhurantaka- 
eatm. Mentions eight officers, the seat Rajendra-sola- 
• , mfivali-vanarajan in the Sola-Keralan-tirumaligai at 
Gangaikonda sdlapuram. Details of the equipment of a 
hospital ( diala-sdlfd ), and a school in the temple are 
. also given. * 182 of 1915. 


Year 6 . — Jambai (SA.) — Vimine-ttnjfiiyflgariun. Gift of land to 
an accountant {iimjarakkayakhan) by the temple 
authorities among whom figures the Mahiivratin 
Lakuiisvara Pandita. T The beneficiary was to write 
up the accounts of the temple. 100 of 1906. 


PoWtpaUi (Mye.) — Titles as in 371 of 1902 (Yr. 4) with 
variations, most important among them being aimmadi - 
oenkanda for mummadi . Gift of wet land ( nir nilam) 
50 kulj and dry land (kd(tarambam) 1000 kuli by 
an orphan for tin* merit of his deceased father and 
his mother who committed sati (< liyilpdnjdl ). 

188 of 1911 ; EC. x. Ct. 161. 


„ Tindivfwam (8A.) — Vlraine4umi (full). Twelve cows 
for offerings of ghi and curd for hnma and amudu to 
the Tiruvunna^igai sabhaiyar of the temple. 

207 of 1902 ; SII. iii. 83. 

Year 7 . — Badur (NA.) — Gold Cor lamp by two goldamiths of 
Vadavur. 411 of 1 922. 

,» Pcrumter (Ch.) — Viramp4u\iai (alternative form). 
The Mahasabha of taniyur Madhurantaka-eatm. give 
ijraiyiti land, from land described as parappum tdlvurn- 
in £t-ma nj i kkamuga k-ki(}anda nilattil , to Tiruttan- 

# wl^.m3n32. 

h 

t Sunt u in 88 of 1889. (MRp34i) Vr. 9 of RSjlndit I. AXE. 1907' U 89. 


[ 608 ] 



THE COLAS 


tonpi-maha-Brl-karana levaram-u^aiyax at Nammur- 
pi dagai-peru -Pe r ur alias Tribhuvana-nallur. 

266 o£ 1901 ; SIT. iii. 84. 

Year 7. — Tirukkalu kku ) ira n i (Ch .) — V Irani c4imai as in 266 of 
1901. 90 sheep for one lamp ; again 270 for three. 

175 of 1894 ; 67/. v. 468. 






Vel(anur (Pd.) — (Verse). Erection of an/ha-mantjapa 
in the Agastisvara temple by the Cola subordinate 
Mudikonda-nfidfi Ivan of Siruvayil-nadu. 206 of 1914. 

S. 991 — (Sautnya) * Yogi- Mall a varum (C.) — Sakalabhu - 

a 

vandsraya . t After Sa ka year, Vlvani?4iinaiydgavum. 
Mentions temple of Pipladisvaram-udaiya-mahadeva. 

273 of 1904. 


The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following : — 

Ela/vandmr (SA.) A curious declaration by a sati : 

“ If she lived after her husband, she should become 
the slave of her co-wives. Whoever said she ought not 
to die should incur the sin of prostituting his wife. 
If she did not die, those who did not bind and throw 
her into the fire and kill her should incur the sin of 
prostituting their wives.” 

156 of 1906 ; ARE. 1907 II 41. 

Kadambarkdyil (Ch)— Tiruva/ar4im( (part). Sale of 
land by ur. 226 of 1901 : 67/. vii, 439. 

Takkblam (ISA.)— Tint va(ar4ira]puya ( with varia- 
tions) and signatures. 19 of 1897 ; 67/. v. 1382. 

Tirupputtur (Md.) — Sanskrit part mentions Kollapura. 
A part of the Tamil introduction and mention of ayyar 
(father ? ) who took Gangai, Pdrvadesam and Kada- 
ram. 110 of 1908. 

• This gives acc. S. 986 (1063-4 A.D.) contra. Kielhorn A.D. 1063-3. Perhaps 
cyclic year in this Y.M. record is wrong. Ruled up to 1070-1. ARE, 1904, 
paragraph 21. 

t See under yr. 4 (371 of 1902). The variants noted there are from this 
record. 

im] 



RAJAKESARI V1RARAJENDRA 


Tiru vorriyu r (Oh.) — Reclamation of 60 veil of waste 
land in Singaviijnu-catm, by order of the king. It was 
to be called Vi rarii j ondravilagam, its produce being 
utilised for services in the temple ‘ for the health of 
Cakravartin Vlrariijoudra-deva, for the increase of his 
race ; for the prosperity of the tirumangalyam of the 
queen, and for the health of their children.’ Paddy, 
gold and IcMu were appropriated to various items of 
expenditure including (a) the pay of two priests and a 
musician for paHiyc'jirci ; (6) tiruviidirai-tiruual includ- 
ing recitation of the tiruveinbdvai and (c) the 
maintenance of 22 PiHyildr who danced and sang, 
one dancing master, 16 de.mradigdr who recited the 
tiruppadiyam in the agnmarga and (rf) of four 
cooks. 128 of 1912 ; ABE. 1918 II 82. 

Yogi Mallavnrnm (C.) — Virarajendra-deva. Taxes from 
Mufinaippundi, a deraddna, made over to the temple 
of Tiruppaladisvara of Tirnccnkannr by Narana-deva, a 
local chief taiu with Cfdukya titles. 266 of 1904, 


[ 606 ] 



PARAKESARI -\DII1RA JEN DRA-DEV A. 


»* 


Year 2 . — Gitfangil (SA.) — Said io be copy* Gift ot laud, by 

a 

purchase from fir by a certain Sutta Nalayiravan alias 
Karikala-sola Sen gen i-nadal van . 

227 of 1902 ; SIT vii. 854. 

Tiruvakkarai (SA.)— -The vimdna of Varadaraja-perumal 
(in the Candramaulisvara temple) which had been 
previously built of bricks by Kocjola, was now re- 
constructed of stone. 205 of 1904. * 

Tinmlakkudi (Tj.) — Tingalfo'-malarndn . Remission of 

taxes on four md of land by assembly (name lost) in 

favour of Tirukkawali - mahadeva for seven ham 

«• »♦ * 

received from the temple treasury. 123 of 1926. 

Year 3 . — Kalavai (NA.) — Tinged? r-medarndn. Sale of land by 
the mahdsabhd to the Tirukkarisvara temple at Dlaga- 
Janda-Cola-catm. 228 of 1901 ; SIT vii. 442. 


»* 


i» 


» 


Kllur (SA.) — Tiru-madandniyum. Lamp. 

256 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 884. 

Kuhtir (Tj.) — Tinged? r-malarndti . Land for recitation 
by a person of Tiruppadiyam twice a day before 
Mambalam-udaiya-mahudOva for (the recovery of the 
health of ?) the king. 280 of 1917. 




tt 


>» 


573 of 1906. 
438 of 1903. 


ft 


Mugavddi (NA.) 

Panaiyavaram (SA.) 

Panaiyavaram (SA.) — Gift of land by purchase to Paru- 
vai f Ifivaram-udaiya-mahadeva by a native of Milalai- 
kurram in Rajaraja-Pan(Ji-nadu. 322 of 1917. 

polonnaruva (Cey ,)-Tingaler-malarmlu. { Gift of five 
kaSu for lamp to Vanavan-madevi-Isvaram at Jana- 
nathamangala (old name of Polonnaruva), left in the 


* Rightful successor of VtrftrajSndra 1 ; in possession of Kiftcl as capital in 
Yr. 3.=l073-4 (S1I. iii. p. 117) RSjSndra II, KulSttunga, usurper. ARE . 1904, 

paragraph 31. 

t Paravaipuram, old name of Panaiyavaram. ARE. 1918 11. 33. 

J Sir* temple Pergusson i. 948. cf. SI/, iii* p. 114*8* 

r«o«] 



PARAKE8ARI ADHIRAJENDRA-DEVA 


Year I) 




91 


ft 






ff 


Year 


charge of the prieste and their descendants, servants, 
dancing girls and the ndtjavar. 

594 of 1912 ; SJJ. iv. 1388. 

~Pudii}tpu(Ji (NA.) — Sale of land on the banks of the 
Pillar by the villagers (Puduppadi ur) to the temple 
as the land had become unfit for cultivation in a flood. 

428 of 1905. 

PuVatjunliuuripallee (Cud.)— Mentions Irattapadi-konda- 

sola- man dalam. 537 of 1906, 

*» * • 

I'irukkanur (Tj.) — Gift of land and house by the assem- 
bly (sabha) of Alaiyur to the Visnu-temple of 
Manavala - alvar. Mentions Vlrarajendra - devar - 
vatfhm . lt)5 of 1911. 

Tim ndma nail dr (SA.) — Fragment. 

355 of 1902 ; SIL vii. 985. 

Timppdcedr (Ch.) — Tiru-ih.adttn(laiiiunu Order issued by 
king from his palace at Gangaikonda-solapuram remitt- 
ing some taxes in the village of Selai in Kakkalur- 
naiju as devaddna to the temple at Tiruppasur. 
Officers of Udankuttam mentioned. 113 of 1930. 

Tiruvoeriydr (Ch .)~2'inyaler-malarndu. Sale of land 
to temple bv the assembly of Sundara-sola-catm. 

219 of 1912. 

Vcppanguhim (Ch )~Tingal?MnaIamdii. Three officers 
record dues from devaddna villages as obtaining from 
year 7 plus 1 of emperor Vlrarajendra. 

418 of 1902 ; SIL viii. 4. 

3, day 200 .— Tiruvallam (NA.) — Tingaler - malarndu . 
Enquiry into and a fresh settlement of temple affairs 
by two royal officers. Reference is made to an earlier 
settlement of the eighth year of emperor Vlrarajendra* 
f in V ii 15 of 1890 : SIL iii. 57 • 


The regnal is missing or uncertain in the following : 
Pulonnaru va (Cey .) — Tinga]er •malarndu . 

596 of 1912 5 SIL iv. 1392, 


[ 607 ] 



COLA-PANDYA : JATAVARMAN SUNDARA. 

• > • • 


Year 4. — Mannarkuijil, — (Tin.) — Land to Rajendra-sola Yinnagar, 
by sabha of liajaraja-catm. for settling temple servants. 

107 of 1905. 

Year 6 . — Ambamnmdram (Tin.) — Incomplete. Mentions Raja- 
raja-catm. a brahinadeija in Mulli-nadu of Mudikonda- 
sola-vala-nadu in Rajaraja-Pruidi-nadu. 70 of 1907, 

„ Cwamringalttm (Tv.) — (Vatfehdta). * An undertaking 
given to the sablifi of ( erumangalam by Manmdi Irai- 
yan Accan to stand surety (ptnaiigadiivpH) for the irai 
d ue from Ten- 1 i rn varan gam-ud aiy fir • koy il- in udukudi 
Hendil Ayirava-devan, in case lie went elsewhere 
(?? i anru-m dr i- png il). Ippadi-an renN - mi rad u - Lovi- 
mthlu aru-kulanj u pan paduraddga. 

TAS. v. pp. 29-30. 

„ rdrlhivrtsehharnpurfffn (Tv.) — (VaiteUfttu). Provision 
for a perpetual lamp and the sumptuous feeding 
(i a gram wujannn) of one Prahman every day in the 
temple of the village. TAS, vi, i. App. 

Year 8. — VlrasiUidmau i (Tin.) — (YuUehitU <) t No Jat. title. 

Lamp. 40 of 1908. 

Year 9 . — Suclndram (Tv.) — Lamp. 70 of 189(1. 

„ Suclndram (Tv.) — The local commandant (ivru r-padait- 
talairari) undertakes to maintain perpetual lamps 
with 3/8 measure of ghi daily from 38 cows given by 
Sankarappadijan Kalani-venni alias Madhurantakap- 
peraraiyan ot Kottiir alias Mummudi-solanailur, in the 
temple of T i r u v e n ga< 1 a t ta 1 v a r in Sucindrarn alias Sun- 
darasola-catm., a brahmadhjam in Nahji-naiju. 

TAS. iv. pp. 134-5. 


• Palaeogr. later. 

f The only other Vafttlutiu record of this king is 162 of 1895 (Ganger 
k 09 (Jan). ARM. 1908 II 41. 


[ 608 ] 



COLA-PANDYA JATAV ARMAN SUNDARA 


Year W* — Sermadevi (Tin.) — Incomplete. Mentions Solendra- 
singa-lsvaram-uijaiyar. 015 of 1916. 

„ Vijayan&rayanam (Tin.) — The village is called Jayan- 

gonda-sola-catm. * in Uttamafiola-vala-nadu. 

5 of 1927. 

Year 11 . — Adanur (Tin.) — ( Vafteluttu ), Lamp. 439 of 1909, 

„ Culapuram ( Nagercoil ) (Tv.) — 25 cows for lamp to 
Raiendrasola Isvaram in Tirukkottar alias Mummudi- 

« w I • m 

Bolanallur by Sarvalokasraya-sri-vLnnvardhana Maha- 
raja alias Oajnkya Vijayaditva Vikkiyannan. 

44 of 1896 ; TAS. vi. p. 8 ; EL xi. pp. 293-4. 

„ Chlapuram ( Nagercoil ) (Tv.) — 80 Sheep for a lamp in 
same temple by Udaiyar-perundanattu-dOvan-Viccadi- 
ran alias Soja-murayan. The sheep were left with one 
person, for whom another was guarantor. 

TAS. vi. p. 9. 

„ Culapuram (Nagercoil) (Tv.) — Sabhil of Sivalluva- 
mangalara alias Kerala (?)-kula«am-catm., a brahmadeya 
in Nattarrnppokku of Uttamaso]a-\ ala-nadu, sold some 
of the common land ( engahlr rirrukkwjutta pod a - 
nihundvada) to the drvalcantnis of the same temple in 
Kottar. Some conditions made regarding payment of 
taxes. TAS. vi. pp. 11-2. 


Year 12. — Culapuram (Nagercoil) (Tv.) — Incomplete. 


45 of 1896. 


11 


Sermddvvi (Tin.) — The Sivabrahmanas of Aganaligai 
received 36 hasu from Srlkantlia Dfmiodarabhatta for 
a lamp to Kailasam-udaiyar. Mentions the temple 
Col end rasin ga-is varam . 

193 of 1895 ; STL v. 757 ? G21 of 1916. 


Year 13 . — Ambdsamudram (Tin.)— Gift for merit of the Nana- 
desittisai — 1,500 of Rajendra- cola naan tihiii . ^^he 
temple is called Tiruccalait-tnmi-alvar. 82 of 1907. 

• Not found in R3j*raja f * recordi from^th® place. ARE . 192711 35, 

[ 609 ] 


TT 



f 


THE COLAS 


Year 13. — Munndrkbyil (Tin.) — Sale of land, 14| nilam (vSU) and 
2 ma, including dry and wet lands, to Rajendra-s51a- 
vinnagar of Rajaraja-catm., by the Mahasabha of the 
place. The names of seris in this village, twelve in 
number, furnish an example of the Cola practice of 
renaming places : Rajaraja, Mummudi-sola, Arumoli- 
deva, Nittavinoda, Colendrasimha, Sundara-sola, Vana- 
van-miidevi, Uttama-sola, Sembiyan-madevi, Kundavni, 
Pancavan-madSvi, Loka-miidevi. 

109 of 1905 * ; EL xu pp. 292-8. 

„ Manndrkbyil (Tin.) — Sale of land. Long account of land 

converted to velldn-vagai , a tenure. 110 of 1905. 

„ Sermddevi (Tin ) — Sale of land by Mahasabhit of Nigarili- 
sola-catm., to the temple of Sri-Kailawam-udaiyar of the 
village. 012 of 1910. 

„ TiruvulUvaram (Tin.) — Lamps. Temple of TiruvFilic- 
curam-udaiyar was in Rajaraja-catm, a brahma - 
dhja in Mulli-nadu. 115 of 1905. 

Year 14 — 4 mbasamudram (Tin.) — Incomplete. 75 of 1907. 

„ Manndrkbyil (Tin.) — Sandara C. P.-d5va. Half a lamp 
and 16 cows by Seraian-madeviyar Adicci, queen of 
the Cera king Rasinga-devar to Rajendra-sola-vinnagar- 
alvar t at Mudi-konda,..in Raj ara ja-pandi-nad u. 

392 of 1916. 

„ Manndrkoyil (Tin.) — Sale of a whole village to same 
temple, by two bhattas who were brothers. 

106 of 1905. 

„ S&rmddevi (Tin.)— Half a lamp by a lady. 618 of 1916. 

Year 14, day 320 . — Sermadevi (Tin.) — Provision by sabha for 
offerings to Uyyakkondan (Tiruccenna)$ai in the 
Nigarili-sola-vinnagar temple. 712 of 1916. 

* Yr. 15 of this priace= Yr. 24 of hit father {ARE, 1905 11 25). Hence act* 

1020-1 A.D. See PK, p.116. 

f Temple built by Klsinga himself (112 of 1905). 

[ eio 1 



COLA-PANDYA JATAVARMAN SUNDARA 

Year 15 .—Sermadevi (Tin.)— Land for tirumeykkappu in the 
Nigarili-isola-viijnagar-alvar temple. 700 of 1916. 


Year 16,—Ambusamudratn (Tin.)— Lamp to Tiruccalait-tuvai- 
yudaiya-mahadeva in Rajaraja-calm. 77 of 1907. 


„ Manndrkoijil (Tin.) — Land. Mentions the Cera king 
Riijaraja-deva and kud inlngak- hard n ma i . 

4 11 1 of 1905. 

f 

Year 17. — tit'nnadt'vi (Tin.) — Fifty sheep for a perpetual lamp and 
a mndivilakka to Kailasam -udaiyar. 622 of 1916. 

„ TiruvalUvaram (Tin.) — Udaiyar Sri Sundara Cola- 
Piindya-deva* * seated in the mandapa outside his palace 
at Raj e n d r a- sola p n ram, gave, in accordance with the 
order of his ammdn (the Cola emperor ?), live vHi of 
land, after purchase, to the temple in Rajaraja-catm. in 
MuIIi-nadu in Mudikonda-sola-vala-nfulu, for festi- 
vals, the feeding of Brahmans, and the reading of 
Si v ad ha vma. The gift included paddy given by the 
cultivator ( trlldn ) as the landlord’s share, uruvukdU 
ka itt and kdfm-erud u-kds u. ;j|27 of 1916. 


Year 17, day 7. — tiermaderi (Tin.) — Udaiyar Sri Sundara C. P.- 

deva. t Remission of taxes with effect from year 16 

on lands at Kalltir in Mel-Vemba-nadu in Mudikonda- 

• • • 

sola-v§da-nadu in favour of Kailasam-udaiyar, by the 
king seated in the western hall of his palace at 
Rajondra-solapuram at the instance of his amtnan . 
Mentions items of money-income : a higerud u-katci- 
kaiUy kdtci-crudu-M&u , and urkkalanju ; and also a 
number of royal officers. The lands got the new name 
Sivapadasekhara-nalliir. 619 of 1916. 


Year 17, day 65 . — TiruvalUvaram (Tin.) — Ojaiyar Sr! Sundara 
C . P.-deva Begins with the phrase : variyiltyu . 


• Thii prince without any distinguishing epithet wm another and a later 
prince than Jat. Sundara C. P. and was perhaps the successor of MIj. Vikrama 
C.P. and a nephew of RIjSdhirIja 1. ARE, 1917 11. 3. 

J Seo n. ante. 


f See mote above. 


[ 611 ] 



THE COLAS 


The king being at dinner in the siddar-kdriam in his 
pleasure-garden called Puttan on the north side of 
Madakku}ak-kil-Madurai was seated (?) on the Hajen- 
dra-sola-Atimurkkaccengirai. The order of ammdn 
was received and sanction given for variyiluiu . (See 
No. 327 ante.) 332 of 1910. 


Year ISt—Ambasamudram (Tin.) — 60 sheep for lamp. The 
Tiruppottudaiyar and Tiruccalait-turai Sri-mulasthana 
temples are said to have been in the southern hamlet 
of Rajaraja-catm. 102 of 1905. 

Year 19. — Geramangalam (Tv.) — A zinc ( tarn ) lamp-stand to 
Ten-tiruvarangam-udaiyar of the village by Tiruvorraic- 
cCvagan Mayilatti, the younger brother of Sankara p- 
pudiyan Kalani-venni * of Mukkarai a lifts Muuimudi- 
solapuram in Purangarambai-nfidu, a sub-division of 
Ariunolideva-vala-nadu in the Sola-man lalam. 

«* • » M « * 

J'AS. v. pp # 29-30, 


Cf~(apuram (Nagercoil)— (Tv.) Lamp. 31 of 1<S96. 


ft 


Cdlapuram ( Nagercoi I) (Tv.) — .12^ cosvs (pnsu) for half 
a lamp by the woman (j ,e V) Tavasi Narpattennayira 
Marali-devi of the place (h'V>~r) to UajCmdrasola- 
isvaram-udaiyur in the interior ( u\[dlui ) of Tirukkottar 
alias Mummudi-sola-nallur. 2 y AS. vi. p. 13. 


iSb'mddevi (Tin.) — Order of puravu-t'urutinaik-kalat - 
tar and uarip-ynttagti maid a iydr that the ten persons 
who had the kdni of the 2 veil of temple lands at 
Kalliir, under the name Sivapadasokhara-nallur, had 
relinquished them in favour of the temple servant® 
who would thenceforth cultivate them. * Mdnavlra 
Pardntaka ’ appearing in this record was perhaps a 
surname of the king. 630 of 1916. t 


• Sec under year 9»-SucmcLram. 

+ ThU record taken along with 619 (Yr- 17, day 7) show* that the viceroy 
in both mutt be the tame. 


[ 612 ] 




ANDYA JATAVARMAN SllNDARA' 


Year 2Q.~Tiruviddnkodu (Tv.)— (T 7 atteluttu). Gold for Jarnp. 
20 kalanjuy kdsu nirni kalldl onhadu mdttu. 

TA8. iv. pp. 139-41. 


Year 21* — Anaimalai (Md.) — 25 sheep for lamp. Mentions Kil- 

Iraniyamuttam and Tiruvanaimalai. Sheep left with 

Nakkan Senbagam of the vettikkudi of Sri Narasiinha- 

deva. 64 of 1905. 

* 


Anaimalai (Md.) — Lamp to Narasimha-alvar on the 
Tiruvanaimalai in Kil-Iraniyamuttam in the RajGndra- 
C51a-va}a-nadu of the liajanija-pandi-tiadu. 

65 of 1905. 


„ (hingaikonddn (Ti n.)-~(Vat(e*jttlu) Lund. 

1G2 of 1895 ; SIL v. 726. 

„ Tintvdiiivaram (Tin.)— Cows for lamp by a certain 
woman (pnjddfh), Pattargal-pandaram, of the Ula- 
gudaiya-Pi rat t i y ar- v5l am. The lamp was in the charge 
of a commandant ( padait-talaivan ). 330 of 1916. 

Year 23. — Adanur (Tin.) — {Vaitchittu). Damaged. 

438 of 1909. 

„ tier made vi (Tin .) — Tint manni valara * (part). Sale 

of land by assembly of Rajaraja-catm. to the temple of 
Kaiiasam-injlaiyar in Nigarili-solu-catm. 617 of 1916, 

Year 30. — Attar (Tin.) — Lamp by oue of the Sundara-sola- 
Pandyat-terinda-valar. 395 of 1930. 


The regnal year is missing or uncertain in the following ; — 

Ambdaamudram (Tin.) — Lamp. Mentions agandligau 
yom . 76 of 1907* 

Amb&samudram (Tin.) — Mentions Muttuxrukun*am. 

80 of 1907. 


• Clearly implying that thU viceroy was the ton of RSjSndraL A/?£. 

1917 n 3. 


[ 618 ] 



THE COLAS 


Ambasamuclram (Tin.) — Lamp. Mentions Ksatriyasikha- 
manipuram and the shrine of Karumftnikka-devar in the 
temple of Tirnc-calait-tnrai. 85 of 1907. 

Colapuram ( Nagercoil ) (Tv.) — Two lamps. 

38 of 1896- 


Colapuram ( Nagercoil ) (Tv.) — Sale of land by nr of 
Karnmbalu alias Alagiya-sola-nallur of Nauja-nad. 

TAS. vi. p. 13. 

Colapuram (Nagercoil) (Tv.) — Sale of fund by ur to 
^ cngahlr Madilagattn KajOndrasola-isvaram. 

TAS. vi. i. App. 

Mannarlcoy il (Tin.) — Mentions the Cera king Hajasimha. 

114 of 1905. 


HevilippPri (Tin.) — 50 sheep for lamp. 


410 of 190(1. 


t 614 J 



COLA-PANDYA : JATAY ARMAN UDAIYAR SR! COLA 

• • t • • * 

PANDYA-DEVA. 

• • 


Year 3 . — Seuilipperi (Tin.). — 25 sheep to temple of Tentirumali- 
runjolai by a native of Devar-vetti-kudi near Tirunel- 
vtli in Kil-vemba-nadn, of the Mudi-konda-sola-vala- 
niidu in Rajaraja-pandi-nadu. 408 of 1906. 

„ Su&ndram (Tv.) — Fifty sheep for a lamp to Sucindram- 
ndaiya Paramaevsimigal by Dandanfiyagam ^olaman - 
dalattu Vadagarai-Ra j endra *singa- valanfit t u Tiruvali- 
nattu Marudattiir-udaiyan Veliin Sola-KCralan alias 
Karikrda*su]a-Vaitumbarayan. TAS. iv. pp. 136-8. * 


Year 3, day 380 . — SPrmadevi (Tin.) — The king from his throne 
in the tirumahjana-sulai of the palace at Rajendra- 
solapuram declared tax-free certain devadana lands 
at Kallnr, four rid is (including two velis called Siva- 
padasekhai’a-nalliir), and had them entered in the 
register under the orders of his father (i nammityyar ) 
the Cola emperor (Vlraraj endra) whose eulogy com- 
mences iir(tiih'-{i({H(iya<j(tvi(in. Temple Kaiiasam- 
udaiyfir said to be on the Mu'iikotela-Bolapperaru, 
Tambaraparni. Many revenue officials sign the 
record. 642 of 1916. t 


Year 24 . — Suclndram (Tv.) — Lamp. 69 of 1896. { 

„ Surindram (Tv.) — Sabha of Sundara-cdla-catm. (Sucin- 

dram) sold land for lamp to temple : vilaip-pondum 
iraip-porujwn aralc-kondii . I 1 AS. iv. pp. 138-9. 

Year 25 — Sitchidram (Tv.)— Land. 70 of 1896. § 


# Viceroy must be Gangaikon<ja appointed by Virarajendra. TAS. ibid. 

*t Viceroy was Gangaikon^u* solan of Virarlijendra's records. \Ef. xi. 293) 
1917 II 3. 

J Perhaps the first C5la-P3$<}ya ruler. K.V.S. Aiyar- El. xi. p. 293. 

§ See last note. 


[ 615 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tear 25 . — Suclndram (Tv.) — Sabha of Sundara-sola-catm. sell 

land for GO Mm, being iraip-poru\ and vilaip-poruh 

to the temple. Procedure of sale interesting. Men- 

> 

tions Venkadan Sankaranana Senapati Malaiyappic- 
colan vaitta Abhayakaran tiruvamudu. Also two 
lamps endowed. TAS • iv. pp. 131-4. 


Record from which the name and regnal year of viceroy 
have disappeared : — 

iSermadivi (Tin.) — Fifty cows for two lamps by Ulagudai- 
yal, queen of (Rajeiidra I) who took Gangai, Kicjaram 
and Purvadesam. * 623 of 1916. 


• Perhaps Vikrama C.P.-d5va. ARR % 1917 XI 3. 

[ 61 «] 



Cell jA-P ANDYA : M\RAVARMAN DDAIYAR 
* • • • * • 

SRI V IK RAMA 


Your 20. — A<htn~rr (Tin.) — (I r aUehdhi). Before this is a line in 
VafttfuttH mentioning year 3 of Jatavarman Sundara 

Cola-Pumj y a-deva. 434 of 1909. 

* 

Year 21. —Shm mlh'i (Tin.)— Lamp to Ivailayam-udaiya Mahadeva 
of Nigarili-sola-catm. by a Brahman lady of the 
Knivlina-gotra. 194 of 1895 ; SIL v. 758, 

if 

„ tiennadh'i (Tin.)— Cows for lamp by a Brahman lady. 

628 of 1916. 


Year 22. 


-SPrmadh'i (Tin.)— 25 Sheep for a half-lamp to Kaila- 
sam-udaiyftr * by Kuditfiugi-Sengodi of the Seramanar- 
volam, ’ 620 of 1916. 


Year 24 . — Kanydkumdri (Tv.) — Money. 


100 of 1896. 


Year 25. — JSPr/nddevi (Tin.) — Lamp to Kailasam-udaiyar. 

616 of 1916. 


SPrmddPvi (Tin) — 25 cows for lamp by Dandanfiyakam 
Parakrama-niiruyana Brahmadhirajan. 

627 of 1916. 

tiPrmadPvi (Tin.) — The Aganaligai-sivabrahmanar of 
Solon d ra- si n gi i -1 s v ar a and Kailasa temples at Nigarili- 
sola-eatm., received twelve kdm from a Brahman lady 
and agreed to serve in the Rajadhiifijac-currlilai of the 
temple and burn a lamp to Daksinamurti in the same f 
temple. 640 of 1916. 

TiruvalUvaram (Tin.) — 13 cows for half a lamp. 

328 of 1916. 


* Indirect evidence of sway of the C.-P. s over KSrala. ARE , 1917 II 4. 

t Kingrfidentified with Muramutfi-solan, younger brother of R3jSndra*dEva 
(II) ARE. 1917 II 3. 


[617] 


78 



THE COLAS 


Tear M^—Kanyakumclri (Tv.)— The sabha of Kalikkudi met in 
the mukha-mantlapa of the Rajarajisvara temple and 
resolved to devote 20 kaSu, collected by public 
subscription (payiksampukku ) at their instance {nam 
d?Mnguduttu) by Accan Marrili, a merchant of 
Kurnari alias Gangaikonda-^olapuram, and intended to 
be the corpus for meeting expenses for tiruvamidu in 
the temple, for repairing breaches in the Konadar- 
kulam, the perutnakkal of Rajarajisvaram undertaking 
to supply daily two nali of rice for offerings. 

TAS. i. pp. 249-50 (R). * 


• Rso b surprised at the PBjty* title* in this record end eeeme 

also to mistake its import. 


[• 18 ] 



C5LA-PANDYA : MARAVARMAN UDAIYAR 

• • * * • # 

SRI PARAKRAMA 

Year 3 . — TiruvuMvaram (Tin). — Twenty-five sheep for half a 
lamp to Tiruvalic-curam-udaiyar by Raman Keni alias 
Naduvirukkai Tanam-setti. 329 of 1916. 

Year 4 . — Sirmuttivi (Tin.) — Money, 12 kaku % with Aganaligaiyar 
by Yoga-d5va and (his wife) Soma-devi of Kiismiradesa 
for a lamp in the temple of Kailasam-udaiyar at 
Nigarili-sola-catm., a brahmadeya in Mujli-mtdu, a 
sub-division of Uttama-s51a-vala-nihju in 4 Rajaraja- 
pandi-na<Ju.’ 613 of 1916. 


C(5LA-PANDYA : JAT5.V ARMAN UDAIYAR V1RA * 

• • • « • 


Yoar 21. — Periccih'yil (Rd.) — Land for offerings during one 

service every day and for a lamp to Ksetrapala-deva in 

the temple of Muttisvaram-udaivar in Men-Marudur 

alias Jayangonda-sSlanallur. Mentions Kulasaui 

Ambalattadi also called Rajadhiraja-pungunyamadalvan 

and his brother Kulasani Mfiluva-manikkam alias 

« • 

AdhirajMhii^]a-punguni.*a-nadalvan. 

99 of 1924. 


* Perhaps Mummu4i*«31an on whom his elder brother RajSndra conferred the 
C$ia-PSij4ya title (5//. iii. p. 62), or Gangaiko^4s*»51an who received feom his 
father VirarSjSndra-dSva the P5n4ya country and the title, ARE, 1924 II 25. 



ADDITIONAL NOTES 


page 30.- 


-n. ‘ — Regarding the omission of Cola in the Periptus, 
Krom says : 44 Is this an omission or had the Ooja 

temporarily disappeared before the spreading power of 
the Pfuulyas chronicled in Tamil poems ? Another 
Tamil legend connects the Pallavas witli the Colas, 
making the first of them the son of a Cola king and a 
nagi. Could the Pallavas for whom, however, a Par- 
thian origin has sometimes been postulated, have taken 
the place of the Cbjas, as in the centuries after the fall 
of the Pallavas, the Colas again rise into importance in 
the same territory?” ffindoe-Javaanschc Gcsctde- 
denis p. 70. See, however, Studies , p. 11. 


Page 64. — II. 1-3. — The camp of Poraivan (Pomiyun pasanii) 
is mentioned by Poygaiyar in another poem us well, 
Narrinai 18. 


Page 100. — n. * — But see pp. 263-64 infra. 

Page 103. — n. * — A.K. Ivumaraswami, JAGS. li. p. 181. Also the 
occurrence of Kanarese words in tin* Oxyrhynchus 
Papyrus, second century A.D. (• fJiAS . 1904, pp. 
399 fl.) may be noted. MAR. 1926, pp. 1 1 tf. discusses 
these words and expressions iti detail. 


Page 104. — n . * — For a discussion of this passage in the Peri plus 
with reference to Indian boat-d<*Mgiis, see Homell, 
Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of lienr/tl, vii. 
pp. 215 ff. He suggests that the Poland ia r>f the first 
century had close kinship with the two-masted 
Javanese outrigger ships of the Boro-Budur sculptures. 
But surely the two-masted ships without outriggers on 
the Andhra and Kurumbar Coins seem to bn nearer 
the vessels mentioned by the JWiplus than .Javanese 
sculptures of the 8th or 9th century A.D. 


Page 127. — n . T — It must be noted, however, that Idangali is said 
to have been the ancestor of Aditya who covered the 


V 


1620] 



ADDITIONAL NOTES 


Oidambaram temple with gold. from Kongo. Even if 
thin is a reference to Adilya I who conquered Kongu 
:unl annexed ToiyLti-nfid to the Cola kingdom, Idan- 
^ali might have boon connected with the Colas only by 
giving his daughter in marriage to a Cola prince. At 
any rate, we have no evidence that the Colas were 
descended from ihe Vein in the male line. 



i;j7.—n. § On Mftrambavai and the title Pallavatilaka see 

•also El. xviii. p. 118. The two itiMTiptions mentioned 
at the end of the note now published as )U)1-A and 803 
of 1901 (Nos. 5 ‘id and 525 of S1I. vii.) may not belong 
to Nrpatungn’s reign ; their beginnings are lost. 


Pa ’j o 


t, r >;5 and n » Lt is doubtful if Calukya Bhima’s territory 

I have extended U]> to Sitpuli-nadu between Ven- 

katairiri and (bid ur (Kapur Ti{). It. may have lieeu an 
* 

»i tempt of hirantaka to subdue the Telugu Codas. 
XL U. 47 (p. 1287) 1. TJ mentions Cedupuii-nadu. 


Page 188—11. 9-10.— • The third year of Sundara Cola, about 959 
A.D. 1 is based on the text of 118 of 1898 in S1I. v. But 
\ ho. figure * 8 1 i* doubtful in that inscription, and as 
tin* general is mentioned in an inscription of Sundara 
( Yil;t in the se\ enth \ear (29! of 1908), Siriya-velfir 
,nns: lia\e t'ouglu, and died in Ceylon after that date. 
K.Y.S. Ai>ar suggests the ninth year, r. A.D. 9h5 (A7. 
w\. p. 121), and this is quite possible, 

hue 217.—//.$ -Published A7 x\i. j>|>. 29 \L An incomplete 
in&cnption from 1 irnceattuv.u (tj-). 2(14 of 19<>l. men- 
tions vie tories in Punu-ua ,lu and ^lalai-nicju. the del' at 
t»f Yaludi (Pandyah the <lestruction of Vibnam with 
iiH strong ramparts, tlte smving of cowries in Karkadai- 
uki-nagar, and the dvdeat ot 1 olungu-bhiiuu, ani 
Jaimtiathan-eniberuiuan Sembiyar Kdn. itvidently it 
is in praise of a ehiof who look part in these events, 
but whose name is lost. The inscription seems to lie 
of the time of Rajaraja 1 ; l have examined the 
improssiou «uid am unable to accept the twelfth oentaiy 
date suggested in A EE. 19J1» H 20. 

[621 1 



THE COL/VS 


Page 220. — n. { — “ The Sultan takes the official title of king of the 
thirteen provinces and of the 12.000 islands. Accord- 
ing to Owen this is scarcely a third or a fourth of the 
actual number, although, apart from mere reefs, a few 
hundred only appear on the most carefully prepared 
charts. Ptolemy reckoned as many as 1,378, hut not 
more than 175 are inhabited.” The Universal Geogra- 
phy by Elisec Reclue, ed. A.H. Iveane, Vol. viii. India 

i < * 

and Indo-Ghina , p, 384. 

Page 221. — 11. 14-5. — Another inscription of the thirty-first year 
of Riijariija comes from Brahmadesam (NA.), 252 
of 1915. 

* 

* 

. Page 224. — 1. 8. — Attention is drawn to the flight of Buddhist 
monks from Magadha to the South mentioned by 
Taranutha (Schiefner p. 255), amj the foundation of 
the monastery at Negapatam by a king of Sumatra 
may be explained, it is said, *as the continuation of 
the relations between Magadha and the Archipelago.’ 
Bijdragen tot de Taal f Land en Volkenkunde Deel 90 
(1933) pp. 19-20. But there are insuperable chrono- 
logical difficulties in the way of accepting this ; the 
Muhammadan invasion which dispersed the monks of 
Magadha did not occur before the twelfth century. 

i 1 

Page 260. — n * — It is perhaps worth noting that Ferraud (Rela- 
tions ii. p. 646 n. 11 ; JA . 11 : 14 pp. 173, 176 n. 1) 
has made a serious mistake in supposing that Hultzsch 
locates Malaiyur in the North Arcot District {EL ix. 
p. 231). Hultzsch’s remark about Mulliyur relates to 
the donative port of the Tirumalai record, not the 
* prasasti narrating the campaign. 

k i 

Hr • , 

Pagef 259-265. — Rouffaer proposes a different scheme of identified- 

. fcions for the places mentioned in the Tanjore inscrip* 

tfon in an important contribution in Bijdragen , Deel 
77 (1921). I translate below the passage summing op 
’ - hifl Conclusions : 

r> * ( ' 

We find the 13 states in Rajendra’s Tanjore manifesto 
summed op' in this soundly rhetorical And partly 1 
geographic^ order •. » ... 1 



ADDITIONAL NOTES 


\ 


[1 ■» 14 Bee end] 1. Kedah (Kadaram) the pre-eminent- 
ly strong, particularly on land (by its elephants); 

[2-4 on Sumatra] 2. Palombang (Sri Vijayam), the 
rich emporium * ; 3. Pane ; Panai (Pannai) the river- 
town ; 4, Djambi (Malaiyur), the ancient ; 


t [5-8 on the Malay Peninsula :] 5. Hasin, Ma Hasin 
(Mayirudingam), the sea-town; 6 Wuraw&ri - Ganga- 
yu « Langkasuka (I-Langasokam), the unconquerable ; 

7. Pahang* or leather Penang (Ma-pappalam), the water 
state (defended by an abundance of deep waters) ; 

8. either Binding or Braus, in Perak (Mevilimban- 
gam), encircled by a wall (defended by beautiful 
walls), or probably also the equally ancient Kelang in 
Selangor ; 

i 

[9 on Campa’s south coast] 9. Phanrang, Panduranga? 
(Valaippandtiru wherein, according to a kind com- 
munication of Prof. Van Ronkel, Tamil va]ai means 
4 fortress *) in parts still wild (possessing at once 
cultivated lands (?) and waste-land) ; 


[10-11 ; back on the north of the Malay Peninsula] 
10. Ptolemy’s Takola— Takkola of the Milindapanha 
( i.e Menander dialogues c. 400 A.D.) « Takua Pa of 
to-day (Geriui-1909), Mai. Takopa, on the W. coast, 8° 
25' N.L. (Talaittakkolam, in which Tamil talai means 
chief, original, Coedea) ; 11. Tambra-linga. (Linga of 
Copper) ■•either Chaiyya or Bandon or — and in my 
opinion the most likely — L5gor, (Lakon, Nagor, Nakor, 
. ail meaning Nagara; against which Ligor can just be a 
corruption of an older * Linga ’ ; the Lo-yue of 
Kia-Tan’s sea-itinerary of c< 800 A.D.), thus all three 
on the K. coast rasp. 9° 20' 9° 5 # and 8° 22' N.L. i(M*U 
Damalingam, Coedos pp. 15-18 and 32-3 ; where he firs$ 
publishes a Buddhist inscription from Jaiya-Ohaiya, 
dated 4332^ Kali - 1230 A.D„ given by Bri Dharma- 
raja, prince of Tambraiinga). 




1 «( < 

# Qosde# (p, 5* n. 1) remarks that some of the ornate epithet* which in 

Hultrsch’s translation of the inscription in 1891 all become related to Kadaram 
may jprebably relate te 5r! Vijayam* 




[ 628 ] 




k 



THE COLAS 

P 1 

f 

^ ’ h 

The fh*st f Ptolemy^ emporium Takola thus (rom 
c. 150 A.D., is described in this Tan,iore inscription 

r 

of 1030 A.D., ns * praised by great men versed in tlio 
sciences’ which, via the Milindapauha of the 5th 
centm*y A.T>. and the Bactrian prince Menander alias 
Milinda (r. 155 B.O.) praised therein, was known not, 
simply in India itself but in the land of the Yavanas=» 
Greeks. 

The second, 1 think, is no oilier than Ligor*=Lo- Yne 
(e. 800 A.D.) «• Linga, ( say : 4 Siva’s town ’ ; later be- 

come Buddhist, and ‘ the city ’ (Nagara) or capital of 
Buddha, Dharma-nagari {Nagarttkretayama of 1365 
A.D., 15 : 1) alias Nagara Sri Dhtmna-raja (9*24 A.Ih ; 
Gerini p. 107), thus in the manner of the older Sri 
Vi java * Palembang, and the much later (15th 
century ?)* Siak Sri Indrapura ’ «* Siyak in 1363 A*D. v 
all sign-boards of political power like Oivat Berlin, or 
Great Netherlands or Great (er) Britain : — here in the 
Tan j ore inscription of 1030 A*D. described as 4 intrepid 
in great and terrible combats. * 

< 

[12-13, to the S.W. and W.S.W. of Takkola-Ligor] 
12. Great Atjeh, Lamoari (I-TifminridOsam), ■* of which 
^the terrible . force (At jeh wars 1872-1905 !) was con- 
quered by a violent attack * : and 13 - the Nicohars (MtW 
Nakka-varam), these islands of naked idyllic wilds 
described as : ‘of which the gardens of flowers renenlble 
the zone 6f the nymph of the southern region* 

\ 

H 

and —I, Rajondra Oola king by the grace ^>£ gods 
(since 1012 A.D.), repeat : 

[14*1; Alpha and Omega] Kedha (Ka<j3ranv) tho 
mighty (on land), protected by the sea. ^ 





INDEX 


A 

Abhaya alias Kulottunga I 
351, 352. 

Abhaya alias VIrarajendra, 
351. 

Abhayasraya Caturvedi-mansra- 
lam 533n ; (Sattanur) 543, 
581. 

Abhidhamm&vatara : Buddha- 

datta 120. 

Abhimdnaraman , throne G01. 

Abhimanyu 340, 349n. 

Abhiram&svara, temple 395. 

A bhUeka-mandapa 458. 

Accan (Adittan) Vikramakesari 
188n. 

Acoan Marrili 618. 

Accan Senacoau 405. 

Accarappa kkam 602. 

Accuta Kajabba alias Accuta- 
vikkanta of the Kalabhrakuln, 
mentioned by Bnddhadatta 
and said to have kept the 
three Tamil kings in con- 
finement 121, 129. 

Accntavikkanta 121. 

Adambrdi(n)gwji 380. 

Adanfir (Tin.) 522, 609, 613, 
617. 

Adahur (Tj.) birth-place of 

« Nattda 18, 369, 

A(Javallan, a measure 524. 

t Adeisathros (of Ptolemy) 31n. 

, Adhikarikal Parasaryan Vnsn- 
deva-narayanan alias Ulaga- 
landa-Sola Brahmamilrfivan, 
gum of Rajadhfiraja I 313. 

AdhirSja-mangalyapuram (Tirti- 

vadi) 407 t M$ 


Adhirajendra, Parakesari 293, 
303«, 324, 336 ; chosen 

heir-apparent (c. 1067-8) 338, 
349n, 350 ; Rajiga came to 
the south after his demise 
351 and n ; his legitimacy 
was recognised by Kulot- 
tonga I 352-3 ; Jayangondar 
does not mention him ; theory 
of his being a bastard with 
no title to the throne 354 ; 
troubles of his reign, per- 
secution of Ramanuja 356 
and n. 357. 

Adicca, Tamil general sent 
against Raraafina-desa by 
Parakramabahu I 260. 

Adicca Pidari 150». 

Xdicca-vaykkal 397. 

A digal -accan 543. 

Adi gal Kan»lan Marombavai, 
queen of Nandi-pottaraiyar 
of the Pal lava- tilaka race 
137, 383. 

Adi gal NIradi 478. 

Adigan 127. 

Adigudi (Tri.) 424. 

Adikarigal Sola Mnvenda-vSlar 
543. 

Adil Shah of Bijaptir 170. 

Adimandi. a daughter of Kari- 
kala 43. 

Adittabhattaraka, shrine 381. 

Adittan Kannara-devan, son of 

the CJ6a king 375. 

Adittan Kanali-piratti 439. 

Adittan Kodai-pirattiyar 451. 
Adittan Siiryan alias Tennavan 
Muvfenda-vt'lan, Poyg^i-nadu 
Kilavan 532. m .■* k , 


t 885 ] 


w 



THE COLAS 


Adittan or Accan Vikrama- 
kesari 188u. 

Adittan Viman, Araiyan perhaps 
father of Viman Kundavai, 
mother of Parantaka II 387 
and n, 388. 

Adittapanmat-terinda- kaikkolar 
388. 

Adittaparumar, VI ra Pandiyan- | 

talai-konda Parthivendra 458. I 

m ! 

Adittapura, Manigramam of 
425. 

Adittesvara alias Kodanda- j 
ramesvara at Tondaimanad 
139, 432. 

Adittesvara, temple at Kuhur 
398, 467, 486, 559. 

Adittesvara, temple at Tirup- 
purambiyam 557. ! 

Aditte^varam-udaiya - mahadeva i 
at Moganur 570. . 

Adittesvaram-ndaiya - mahadeva ! 
at Tirunallam, Koneriraja- 1 
puram 467, 474n. 

Aditya I Rajakesari 130-141 ; | 
duration of his rule 132-3; 1 
accession 135 ; overthrow of j 
Aparajita, relation to the (Ian- j 
gas 136 ; conquest of Kongo j 
137 ; relation to Cera 138 ; ! 
temples erected by A. 139 ; 
his death at Tondaimanad ! 
139, 140, 142, UZn, 163 

and ti, 164, 188n, 363n, 375 n. 
37 6n, 377 n, 379n, 383n, 384n, 
385n, 395n, 398n, 412, 421n, 
432n, 542n, 620-1. 

Aditya II, Parakesari ‘ who took 
the head of Vlra Pandya\ 
Karikala 150n, 167, 168, 171, 
172n, 174, 176, 177 ; perhaps 
identical with Parthivendra- 
varman 178-179 ; made co- 
regent soon after his father's 


acc. 180-182 ; his part in the 
battle of $eviir 185, 187 and n, 
189, his assassination and 
Uttama Cola’s part in it 190- 
192, 193, 195 n, 364 n, 368n, 
37 8n, 394n, 397n,404n, 408n, 
413n, 451n, 452-6, 458 and n. 

Adityavarma, son of Vikrams- 
kesari by Karrali 188. 

Adiyappi-catm. 482. 

Adiyaraiyamangalam 550. 

Aili y iirkk u nalliir 53n, 203n. 

Adumbu (Tpomaea bilboa) 95. 

Adnturai 55, 473, 484. 

Aelius Callus, Arabian expedi- 
tion of 101. 

Aga-naligai Sivabrahmanas 519, 
617, 619. 

Agaram (Ch.) 547, 569. 

Agarara (SA ) 493, 495, 506, 
508, 549, 553. 

AgaBtya, released the Kaveri 
from his water-pot 23, 38, 
241 ; hill 243. 

Agast yes vara, shrine at Tirun li- 
man all ur 427. 

Agil 98, 99. 

Agnikumara - kramavitlan alias 

Povkoyil CandOsvaravogi of 

Kundur 507. 

• • 

Aguiitni 455. 

Agras&lu . of Siidiulram 496. 

Ahalya 110. 

Ahandniiru, ( Aluun ) 4 ; Moriyar 
26, 27 and n, 41 n, 53 and n, 
63n, 64n, 79, 94n. 

Ahavamalla, W. Cajukya 273, 
274, 275, 278, 292, 294, 307, 
308, 309, 317, 318, 319, 320, 
330, 334, 335, 584, 596, 599. 
See Someevara I. 

Ahavamalla-kalantaka, title of 
Rajadhiraja I 313. 


[ 626 ] 



INDEX 


Ahavamalla-kulakala, title of 
Virarajendra 330, 601. 
Ahavamalla-kulantaka Muven- 
da-velan, Adkikari 583. 

Akavamalla Sattiga 211. 
Ahicchatra 26. 

Ahitarottalivan, a title of Arai- 
yan Rujarajan 279, 551. 
Aihole, inscription 126. 
Aimperang u 7 u 81, 82. 
Aingurunuru 60n. 

Aiujastasam 461. 

Aiyadi-puttaki 500. 

Aiyai, daughter of Titian 63. 
Aiyan-mahasustu 458. 

Aiyar, sages 115. 

Aiyaran Kamm 490. 

Ajanta : Yazdani 25//. 
Ajavarmaya, Mahfunfitra 558. 
Ajlvakas 1 15. 

A j dak ray am 5< >6 . 

Akitti 33. 

Akkam, coin 455. 
Akkarauiungalam 554. 
Alagadriputtur (Tj.) 481, 535. 
Alagasarraa Kramavittan 431. 
Ahigerud u-kdtci -k d s u 611. 
Alagiya Manavala, (‘opper image 
of 552. 

A lagi y a-solac-cO ri 225 n. 
Alambakkam (Tri ) 384, 385, 
389, 393, 400, 436, 483, 578, 
600. 

Aja-nadu 473. 

AJanatt up-piram ado yam Aru - 

keSarinallur 409. 

Alangudi, famine at 312n, 355, 
^ 376. 

Aiattur Kilar 50, 51. 

Alavandan, Virarajendra’s el- 
der brother 324, 33 In, 
Alayurc-oakkai 394. 

Al-Biruni, on Tanjore in ruins 
162n, 

Alexander, the Great 220. 


Alexandria, centre of Indo- 
European trade 102. 

Alisi-kadu 31n. 

M i 

Alivin-kaHarasiyar an alias of 
Prthivi-gangaraiyar 384 n. 

A lkonda v ill i Go v i ndacary a 

354n, 355?? . 

Allahabad 253n, 286. 

Allahabad-piliar inscription of 
Samudragupta 125. 

Allur (Tri.) 364, 370, 389, 439, 
440, 441, 449, 535. 

Alunda, battle of 67. 

Ahmganam ( ganattar ) 399, 

408, 431, 4 ill, 453 ; alum 
sabhai 463, 489, 531, 544, 
559, 596, 598. 

Alupa, king 334. 

AJur (Mjb.) 564. 

Ah'Cir , a term applied to junior 
members of the royal family 
169. See also Piljaiyar . 

Alvar Paruntakan Sr! Kunda- 
vaip-pirattiyar 226, 515. See 
Kundavai. 

A l udrfraf- hd lanilai 66/?, 6 7 u . 

Alvars 19. 

Amalan Seyyavayar 577. 
Amanikandarpadsvara-grha382, 
469, 555. 

Amani Madeviyar, (jueen 429. 

Amaninarayana-eatm. 408, 450 ; 
alias Kavirippakkam 458. 

Amanji 567. 

Aman-kudi 229. 

* * 

Amanpakkam 589. 

Amarabhujanga, the Pandya 
king captured by Rajaraja I 
200 , 202 . 

Amarabhujangan Muppoli alias 
Gandaraganda Pallavaraiyan 
396, 

Amaravati, Greco-Roman influ- 
ence in 105 ; Yuan Ohwang 
at 122. 





tHE COLAS 


Amaresvara Pernmitl 389, 393. 

Ambalappuram 444, 475. 

Ambalavan Gandaradittanar 305. 

• * 

Ambalavan Paluvfir-nakkan of 
Kuvalalam 196, 469, 471, 476, 
481. ’ 

Ambar-nadu 401, 572. 

Ambar 67. 

Ambasamudram (Tin.) 502, 547, 
608-14. 

Ambattur 471. 
Ambattur-erik-kil-naiju 461. 
Amitasagara 19, 121. 

Amma II (945-70 A.D.) Eastern 
Calukya king 214 ; fled to 
Kaiinga 215, 216. 

Ammanga-devi, daughter of Ra- 
jendra I and queen of the E. 
Calukya Rajaraja I and 
mother of Kulottunga I 282, 
313, 339. 

Ammangu<Ji (Tj.) 539. 

Amudan Pevral alias Pallavan 
Madeviyar of Kanattur 429. 

Amur-kottam 515, 526, 556, 583. 
Anai Akkaraippudur 462. 
Anaikaraipudnr 433. 
Anaikkattattur (N A.) 462. 
Anaimalai (Md.) 422n, 430, 613. 
Anaimangalam, grant of 224, 
267, 422. 

Anaimerrnn j ina(r), title of Raja- 

dhiraja I 311. 

Anaimerjrahjinar - velam alias 
Abhimana-bhu^anat - terinda- 
tira-vandik-kappu-velam 548. 
Anaimerrunjina-u^aiyar, Raja- 

ditya 377, 397, 453. 
Anaimerrunji - yarujina Vijaya- 
rajendra 591. 

Anaiyaman Paramandaladittan, 
Virataraja 457, 464. 
Anandamangalam (Oh.) 436. 


Anantapur 3. 

Anantarama Aiyar E.V. od. 

KalavaH 6fm, 06 n, 86n. 
Anantasambhu 254 n. 
Anantavarman Coda - ganga 
Eastern Ganga 345. 

An antes vara, temple 392. 

Andy? lid, E. Calukva 215 n. 
Anbil 424. 

Anbil, copper-plate grant of Sun- 
dara Cola 12, 67 ; on the name 
Vijayalaya 13ln, 133??, 135, 
138, 140, 162n, 167, 174, 185. 
Ancient Accounts : Renaudot 
220n. 

Ancient Dekkhun : K. V. S. 
Aiyar 60#?, 193/?. 

Ancient Geography : Cunning- 
ham 30/?, 31 n. 

, Ancient India : 8. K. Aiyangar 
40 n , 208, 300/i, 320 m, 32cS, 
348m, 355m. 

Andadi : Nambi-Andar-Nambi 

1 64, 128. 

Andai(yar)of (lrum)Pisir 56, 58. 

Anda-nadu 524. 

• * • 

Andanallur (Tri.) 399, 401, 403, 
404, 408, 471. 

Andhra, country conquered by 
Rajaraja I 521 ; coins 620. 

Angddik'kdli 363. 

Angus , limbs of the state 78. 
Aniyamangalarn 395. 

Anjanjandi-ambalam - Rajendra- 
solau, a temple in Kahcipuram 

536. 

Ankanathapuram (Mys.) 563. 

Annalan 319. 

• « 

Annigere 3l0n. 

Anpdijunarkaiu 537. 
Antiquities : Sewell 162n. 
Anukkan Mahamalli 490. 
Anukki Safctan Rama-devi 550. 


[ 628 ] 



INDEX 


Anula-d6vi 36 n. 

Anupama, daughter of Parau* 
taka I 163. 

Anuradhapura 34, 206. 

Aparajita, Pallava king 130, 
134, 135 and n ; overthrown 
by Aditya I 136, 137n, 142, 
384n. 

Aparajita-catm. 374, 383, 403. 

Aparayitan Uttama-sola Miira- 
yan 400. 

Appar 64 and n, 70, 223. 

Appimayya, Dandanayaka Go- 
vernor of Maharajavadi (7000) 
313, 577. 

Aprameya, Cola general 204 n. 

Apurvi 557. 

Ar, a Cola emblem ; Karikala i 

fighting with the garland of , 

ar 31, 40, 47. j 

Arabia 101, 102. 

Araisur 500. : 

Araiyan Adittan Vlman 183, 

387, 388. I 

/■ 

Araiyan Jayangonda Soliyar 
alias Pancavan - madeviyar, 
wife of Pillaiyar &ola Valla- 
bha-deva 576. 

Araiyan Ka^lakkau-gonda-Solan, 
Senapati 323, 594. 

Araiyan Kalangamalai 365. 

Araiyan Malaiyaradittan alias 
Oodinadu-velan 536. 

Araiyan Nambanangai 582. 

Araiyan Porcoman 572. 

Araiyan Rajarajan alias Vikra- 
ma C5ja Coliyavaraiyan 279, 
551. 

Araiyan Rajariijan alias Vira- 
rajendra Jayamuri-natjiaivan, 
Senapati 323, 594, 597, 

Araiyan Timvidaimarudur-rujai- 
yan alias Mnmmmjii-Bola- 
nittapperaraiyan 580. 

Araiyan Viceadiran 510. 


Araiyan Vira-solan 408. 

Ardjakam (E. Cajukya) 215n. 

Arangan Kari alias Sola-vicca- 
dira Muttaraiyan 512. 

Arangan Kodandaruman 502. 

Arangan Kumaran alias Raja- 
dhirajap-pernn-dattfm 585. 

Arangan Pattalagan 363. 

Arangan Yirrirundan alias 
Nirupendra Sola - Muvenda- 
velan 576. 

Arangerrukadai , of the Silap- 
padikaram 92. 

Aranga 111. 

Arasanimangalam (Ch.) 493, 
501, 544. 

Arasigaya Gavunda 569. 

Arasiyakere 310. 

ArasUy title 106. 

Aravamnthan, T. G. 199/i. 

Aravanavadigal 117 and n . 

Ardyirappadi 355n. 

Arcandbhoga 458, 460, 462 ; 
-1'i'itti 544, 573, 592, 596, 602. 

Arcot, South 24, 31 and u . 

Argaru (= Uraiyur) 29, 30. 

Aridan Maranarayanan 396. 

Arikesarinallur 540. 

Arikulakeaari, aou of Parantaka 
1 149, 150u, 16t>, lt>8, 169n, 
182-184, 375, 376, 413, 422, 
431, 494 ; A. Isvaram at 
Olagapuram 598. 

Arikulakesari-catm. 405. 

Arikulanta - varana - Peraraiyan 
418. 

Arindama 167, 169n, 171, 183. 

Arindavau-mahadevi 558. 

Arindigai 163, 428. 

Arinjaya Parakeeari, son of 
Parantaka 1 153» ; his mother 
a Kerala princess 162, 163, 
168, 169 and n, 172, 174, 177, 
180 ; reign 183-5, 368n, 371n, 
375n, 408n, 448, 451n. 


[6a»] 



THE COLAS 


Arinjigai Adittan, Valavan- 
tamakkai-yumaiyalana 420. 

Arinjigai-catm. 368, 442, 560. * 

Arinjigai-I^vara built by Raja- 
raja as Avvur-tunjiua-devark- 
ku-pallippadai 226, 448, 523. 

ArinjigaVkeni 390. 

Arinjigai-madeva^ligal 539. 

Arinjigaip - pirattiyar, daughter 
of prince Arikulakesari and 
wife of a Bana king 184, 376, 
437 ; alias Banapperundevi 
440, 494, 495. 

Arihjigaip-pirattiyar, daughter 
of Iludarayar 440. 

Arinjigai varman, who died at 
Ami r 109, 451. See Aria jay a. 

Arinjigai-vinnagar 368. 

Arisil, battle of 133. 

Aritstanemi-pidaran 438. 

Arivudai Narnbi 56. 

Ariyakkuttu 454, 485. 

Ariya(va)mmai 566, 567, 579, 
585. 

Ariyam-poduviyar 408. 

Ariyur 515. 

Arjuna 196, 340. 

Arkalgud taluq 280. 

Arkatos, of Ptolemy 31 and n, 32. 

Arkka^lu (Kilau) 382, 393, 552. 

Arkkad(u), of Narnnai 31 
and n . 

Arkonam 159. 

Arpagasekhara-mangalam 540. 

Arpakkam (Ch.) 502, 565. 

Arnikkal-ama Fiji 564. 

Arrukkulai 503. 

Arguppatfai 92. 

Arrur, death of Arihjaya at 169, 
184, 451 and «. 

Arrtir-knrram 403, 

Arr^r-fendamangalam 510. 

Arrur-tuiijma - deva i.e., Arifi* 
jaya 169 ; Arrur-tunjina-de- 
varkku-pallippa<jai 448, 523. 


Arrnttali-mahadeva, Sri 427. 

Arsa, form of marriage 76. 

Arthasastras 78, 272. 

Amgan Win . 

Arugurttaccan Narayanan Vai- 
kundan 395. 

Arumbaka, plates of Badapa 
215, 216. 

Arumoli alias U ttama-so}a-urah- 
ma-marayar 558. 

Arumoli-deva-catm. 504. 

Arumoli-deva isvaram at Palai- 
•* «* 

yaru 571. 

Arumoli- dG va-sOri at Mannar- 
koyil 225 m, 610. 

Arumoli-deva-vaja-niidu 612, 

Arumoli-devan, a feeding house 
509 ; a hall at Tiruvallam 
538 ; marakkal 550 ; a mea- 
sure 584. 

Arumoli-devan Bhogi Bhattan 
Ganilaraditti 539. 

Arumoli-devap-perunderu 493. 

Arumoli-deva-terihja - kaikkojar 
387. 

Arumoli-deviyar, queen of liaja- 
raja i 544. 

Arumoli-kuttan alias Lokama- 
rayan 560. 

Arumoli-nangai, queen of Par- 
thivondra ?, 457. 

Arumoli-nangai, queen of Vira- 
rajendra 336. 

Arumol,i-nangai, wife of Arai- 
yan Porcoman 572. , 

Arumoli - nangaiyar tiranar, 
daughter of Rujendra 1 282, 
556. 

Arumoli - varma(n), Rajakesari 
192, 198, 224. See Rajaraja I. 

Arundbati 94. 

Arungunjram 384n. 

Arunidi-Kaliyan 426. . 


t«80 J 



INDEX 


Arflnilimalaip-piratfci, $embark- 
kottattu Pattina-nattap-palara- 
pattinattu • irukkum - vellatti 

399. 

Aruran Ambalattadigal 401 n. 
Aruranar, Pijjai Nambi 490, 
560, 

Aruran Kamban alias Tiruk- 
karrali-piccan 480. 

Aruran Ponnambalattadigaj, 
queen of Uttama Coja 474, 
Aruran Udayadivakaran Aru- 
moH-muveuda-velan of Arai- 
sur 500. 

Arur-dovanar 401. 

Aruvalar 42. 

Aruvauiid(u), the lower valley 
of the Pennar 42, 366. 

Arya-desa 567, 579. 

Aryan culture 73, 75, 109. 
Aryavarta 141. 

Asela 33. 

Asoka : D. R. Bhandarkar 26;?, 
32w. 

Asoka, and the Colas 26, 27. 
Asokan Inscriptions : ed. 

Hultzsch 26 and n, 28 and n. 
Asura, form of marriage 75. 

Asuri Aditta-pidaran Krama- 
vittan 453, 

AHvamedha , performed by Raja- 
dhiraja I, 312 and n. 

Atakur, inscription 157, 159, 

160n, 443 n. 

Atiraiyanar, a aangam poet 27 n. 
Atjeh, Great (Iiamoeri » Ila- 
muridesam) 624. 

Attaman Ayyaran alias Kamjatoj 
Oandappayyan 471. 

Attan Atti, Cera prince 43. 
Attimallan(r) alias Kannara- 
deva - prithiv! - gangaraiyar 

154n, 443. 

Attivara^a, Elephant 270. 


Attuppalliniyamam 534. 

Attur (Sm.) 28, 403. 

Attur (Tin.) 510. 

Atula-balai, hospital C03. 
Augustus 100402. 

Auvaiyar 22n, 59. 

Ami , sabha 83. 

Avaiyanur, sabha and nadu of 
491. 

Aval , rice-flakes 108. 
Avani-Kandarpapura 376, 484. 
Avani-narayana - catm. alias 
Vembarrur 425, 450, 487. 
Avanti 44, 108. 

Avikkiir alias Jayangonda-sola- 
puram 598. 

Avivur 536. 

Aviir 52, 77, 113 ;-kottam 478. 
Ayirattali alias Nandi puram 
397, 428, 442, 541. 

Ayiravan Enadi 382. 
j Ayiravan -mar akkdl 581. 

I Ayodhya 299, 300. 
i Ayodhya Perumal 4 14. 

1 Ayyan Marasingan alias Vlra- 
5 Bokhara Muvenda-volan 467, 
i 470,471. 

i 

i 

j Ayyapa, father of Gannarasa 
i *208, 491. 

I 

B 


l 

i 


Babylon, ancient 288. 

Badami, Cain ky as of 150. 
Badapa 215, 21*6, 339. 
Baddema Maharaja 217;?. 
Badur (NA.) 376, 603. 

Bagali (Bel.) 443. 

Bahiir 446, 447, 45»>, 488, 595. 
Bairakur 426. 

Balalcora Nolambasetti 519. 
Balagamve, inscription 245. 
Balarama 115. 

Bali, the demon king 110. 
Balmuri (Mys.) 521. 


[ 631 ] 



THE COLAS 


Bana(s) 118* 142, 143, 150 and n, 
151n, 152,154, 155, 184, 229. 

Banadhiraja, title conferred ^on 
Prthivipati II by Parantaka I 
150, 151, 415. 

Banap-perundevi alias Arin- 
jigaip-pirattl 494. 

Banavase (12000) 160, 236, 
237, 334. 

Bandon 261, 623, 

Banerji, R. D. 25 In, 253, 283- 
288. 

Baniki Bnnkara Gavada 530. 
Bannur (Mys.) 527. 

Barhnt inscription 37n. 

Barnett, L. D. 276n, 3l0n. 
Basinikonda (C.) 579. 

Bassien (Knsumi) 26 In. 

Bastar 125n, 250. 

Beginnings {of South Indian 
History ) 27 n. 

Belagattur 669. 

Belatnru (Mys.) 549, 561, 591. 
Bellary 211, 212, 215, 273, 305, 
342. 

Belvola (300) 160, 306, 311. 
Benares 33. 

Bengal 251, 253, 287. 

Bennevurn (12) 305. 

Besinga, Rsi Sringa 260n. 

Betel leaves 90, 98. 

Befctigo Mt. of Ptolemy 31n. 
Bezwada, battle of 330, 348. 
Bhadra 322. 

Bhaglratha 247. 

Bhandarkar, I).R. (on Of>la«* 
Cora, thief) 25n, 26n, 32n, 287. 
BMrata-vrtli 595, 598. 
Bhargava 242. 

Bhaskara Ravi' Vartnan Tiru- 
?a<Ji (A.D 978-1036) 201. 
Bhafctaraki Mnndesvari 543. 
Bha((a-vftti 446, 453. 
Bhavkyafakifaippiwim 538. 


Bhima ( * Daiva * bhlmakasi) 
277. 

Bhima, Coda 217, 218. 527, 
529,621. 

Bhima II, Calnkya, Vengi rnler 
153, 183, 432n, 451n, 621. 

Bh oeravatf -pura-varesvara 250. 
Bhoja, of Bhara 251. 

Bhrasta (-pirat(a) 326 n. 
Bhrgnknla 242. 

Bhnloka - Manikka - catm. 540, 
552, 587, 589. 

Bhnmi-snndara-Vinnagar Para- 
mas va mi 371 . 

Bhntamangalam, the hnb of 
Colarattha 121. 

Bhnta Pandva 112. 

» * 

Bhnti-Vikramakesari 187. 
j Rhnvnrm - manikka - visnngrha 
j 406. 

! Bihar 283. 285. 

I Jh'jdraaen tat de Taal-, Land, 
\ rn Ynlkmbmde van N.-T. 

{ 265n, 622. 

\ Bilhana 276n, 305, 310, 329 t 
! 333, 334, 342, 352, 353. 

! Bindnaiira 27, 28. 

{ Bloch, Jnles 29n. 

| Boro-Bndur 25 n, 620. 

BrKhma, marriase 76, 

Brahmadfsam fNA.) 278, 379, 
381, 385, 412, 418, 419, 423, 
426, 431, 434, 439, 441, 457, 
461, 464, 465, 488, 497, 502, 
518, 526m, 535, 541, 563, 565, 
569, 581, 589, 590, 594, 622. 

BrahmadC'sam (Tin.) 527. 

Brahmadsya(n) 131 n, 163, 425, 
432, 443, 453, 467, 469, 471. 
472, 473, 481, 487, 489, 491, 
494, 497, 499, 510, 513, 517, 
533, 537. 540, 542, 543, 553, 
582, 595, 60S, 609, 610, 619. 


[«88J 



INDEX 


Brahmadhirayap-putteri 532. 

Brahmasthdna 489. 

Brans, in Perak (« ? Mevilim- 
bangam) 623. 

Brhadi§vara - mdhdtmya ( — 
CSlavamfocarita) 21. 

Budalur 12 In. 

Buddha, relic 239n. 

Buddhadatta 120 ; on Accuta 
Kalabba and Kavoripattana 
12i, 129. 

Buddhaghosa 120. 

Buddhasilia 121. 

Buddbamitra, author of Vlra- 
kfiljyam 19, 337. 

Buddhavarmii 125. 

Buddhism 23, 114, 116, 129, 
336-7. 

Burma 256, 257; lower B. 261. 

Bntuga II 154, 157, 160 and >?, 
161. 

Byadarahalji (Mys.) 602. 


C 

Oakkarak-kottam 330. 

* • 

Cakrako(u)ta 2;'>0, '.V21n, I52.S, 

329, 330,’ 34K, 351, 357. Set* 
* 

Sakkarak-kottam. 

• • 

Cakrakotya 250. 
Cakrapani-Nambi 400. 

Caldwell 30n, 31 and n. 
Ca!ukya(s)6, 124, 125, 130 ; the 
rise of the later Cujnkyos 209, 
233, 237, 238, 273-8, 279, 
580«. See also Kant era and 
Western Cajukya. 

Calukya-COJa line 3, 290. 

Cdlukya-narfiyana, a surname 
of 6aktivarman 218-9. 

Cajukya-Vikrama era 335. 
Camara, of the Periplus 30. 
Cambay, plates of Oovinda IV 
286, 287. 


Campa (Kavirippum-pattinam) 
38. 

Campa, in Further India 262n, 
623. 

Camundappai 554. 

Camunda(rajan or ray a) W. 
Cajukya general 275, 318, 
319, 320, 32 In. 

Candakausikam : Ksemisvara 

283, 284, 286-8. 

Candiraccan 369. 

Candragupta, Maurya 287. 

Candralekai-catm., Sendalai 374, 
376. 

Candrasekhara-perumal 392. 

Cangalva Bihjavunira-deva 530. 

I Cangalvas 204, 280. 

| Canganad 280. 

Catural-caturi 579. 

! Caturan Muvayiravan Trairajya 
rrhatika-Madhyasthan 465-6. 

; Caturanana(Pandita) 160n, 443, 
! 444, 568, 57 f. 

Gaturvedi - bhattattdnap - peru- 
1 makknl 470, 473. 

■ Gatns-mJai 485. 

| Cebrolu, inscription 211, 213. 

Cedi-mahudeviyar 401. 

Cedupuli-nadu 621. 

Ceilur plates 343, 344,346. 

Cendattur (NA.) 413. 

| Cera 10, 40, 201, 203, 204, 
| 220, 213, 244, 245, 270, 575. 

• Ceramangalam (Tv.) 608, 612, 
j Cerobothra, of the Periplus 30. 

I Cevur, battle of 181, 185. See 
| Sevur. 

I Ceylon 3, 32-35 ; Gajabahu syn- 
J chronism 68-70, 105, 143 ; 
unsuccessful invasion by Par- 
an taka I 147-8, 161, 186 ; 
Rajariija I’s naval expedition 
205-6, 220, 231, 233, 234 ; con* 
i quest by RajGmlra I 238-40 ; 


t 688 1 



THE COLAS 


243, 260, 261, 272, 285; C. war 
of Rajadhiraja I 296-303, 
314, 323 ; Ceylon war of Vira- 
rajendra 331.-2, 335, 419n, 
436n, 487, 525, 545, 575. 

Ceylon Coins : Codrington 

186n, 194n, 303n, 596/i. 

Ceylon Journal of Science 206n* 

Ceylon , Short History of : Cod- 
rington 186n, 331n. 

4 Ceylon type ’ coins 15, 16. 

Ceyyar 554 n. 

Chandella king, Harsa-deva 287. 

Channapattana : Bangalore Dt. 
284. 

Chaiyya ( - ? Tambra - linga 
-Jaiya) 623. 

Chan Ju-kua 259, 260, 262, 

263, 26 6n, 267n. 

Che-li-f o-che ( - Sri V ijaya) 

258, 259. 

Ckilka lake 286. 

China trade 102, 103, 232, 258 ; 

Cola missions to China 266-7. 

■ 

Chindaka family 250. 

Chinese writings as a source for 
the Colas 21. 

Chow 259. 

Chryse 104. 

Chu-lien (-Cola) 266. 

Cidambaram 127 ; Parantaka I 
covered with gold the Siva 
temple of C. 164, 182, 269 w, 
272 ; Rajamahendra’fl frag- 
mentary inscription at C. 323, 
336, 355n, 562, 598, 621. 

Ciddana, Cola-Maharaja 310. 

Cik-kati (Mys.) 580. 

Cippili, a village 214n. 

Citrakomalam 426. 

Citrako(u)|a (- Cakrakotya - 
£akkarak-kdttam) 250. 

Citram§gha-tataka 497. 


Clandii, trade in the times of 

101 . 

Cod(I)a Bhima 217. See Bhima. 
Codrington 186n, 194n, 303n, 

| 33ln, 596w. 

Coedes 255 m, 257-65 passim 
268n, 623. 

Cola-ganga, tank 253, 281. 

Cola-gangan 316. 

Cola-Keralan 316. 

» * 

Col am 24. 

* 

Cola-maharaja 123, 124. 
Cola-maharajadhiraja Yikrama- 
ditya Satyaditya 124. 

I C51a-mandalam 30 n, 

I 

, Cola-murtanda, title of Rajaraja 
j I 225. 

i Colana-cakra, a title 279, 551. 
j Cola-narayana, a title of Rajaraja 
| I 207, 219, 480. 

| Colnndin , Indian boat 104, 620. 

I Coja-Pandya Viceroys 235, 242, 

1 270, 282, 316, 608-19. 

■ Colapuram (Niigercoil) 609, 612, 
614. 

i (-'olarattha ( — Cola country) 33. 

I 

1 Colas, sources 1-21; division of 
! • 

their history 2-3 ; their monu- 
J meats 14-5 ; coins as sources 

15- 6 ; literature as source 

16- 21 ; value of Chinese 
j writings on 21 ; Marco Polo’s 
j account 21 ; the country of 

22 ; origin of name 24 ; other 
names for Colas their tiger- 
crest 25 ; their earliest men- 
tion is in Asoka’s inscriptions 
26 ; 4 Cola ’ not mentioned in 
the Periplus 30, 620 ; Ptole- 
my on the Colas 30-2 ; the 
C5}a country and Ceylon from 
Pali books 32-5; the C«lafl 
in early Tamil literature 36- 
72 ; nature of the early Tamil 


[ 684 ] 



IttDEX 


literature 36 ; myths 38-9 ; 
the chief Cola kings of the 
Sangam age 39-68 ; the Age 

of the Sangam kings 68-72 ; 
Manimekalcii and Dinuuga 
71-2 ; Government and social 
life in the Sangam Age 73- 
117 ; a composite culture 73 ; 
a blend of cultures 75 ; rural 
life 76-7; the Polity 78; 
nature of the Monarchy 79- 
81 ; the kulus and ay ams 
81-3 ; the assembly 83 ; 
the assembly urban and 
rural 84 ; taxation 85 ; the 
army 86 ; war 87 ; bards 
and feasts 88-9; literature 90 ; 
minstrels 91 ; music and dan- 
cing 92-3 ; houses and high 
life 93 ; marriage — the life of 
the common folk 94-5 ; des- 
cription of Pubar 96-100 ; 
classical writers on S. India 
100 ; overseas Trade 101-3 ; 
Tamil shipping 103-5 ; silver 
dish of Lampsacus 105 ; agri- 
culture and industry 106-8 ; 
religion and mythology 109- 
10 ; social customs 111 ; dis- 
posal of the dead, sati 112 ; 
Brahmanism in the Tamil 
country 113-5 ; influence of 
Buddhism 116-7 ; from the 
Sangam Age to Vijayalaya 
118*29 ; Cola dispersion 119 ; 
the Ka\abhras 119-20; Telu- 
gu Colas 122-5 ; the Colas in 
the Tamil land 125-9 ; dyna- 
stic myths of 140-1 ; Cola 
expansion under the successor 
of Vijayalaya 142-3 ; their 
subordination to the Rastra- 
kutas 183 ; revival of Co|a 
power after the Rasirakiita 
invasion 184-9 ; the reign of 


Rajaraja I a great epoch 198-9 ; 
Cola temples in Ceylon 206 > 
hostility between the Western 
Calukyas and the Colas and 
the attempt to account for it 
209 and n ; the 06} a navy 
220; Cola administration under 
Rajaraja I 223-4 ; extent and 
organisation of the empire 
under Rajeudra I 231 ; mild- 
j ness of Cola imperialism 271 ; 
j the most splendid period of the 
I history of the Colas of the 
j Vijayalaya line 277 ; Bud- 

! dhism in the Cola kingdom 
i 336-7 ; relations with Eastern 
I Calukyas 339-46 ; acc. of 

S Kulottunga I, the first of the 

! Cola-Calukyas 356-8. 

| Cojasikhamani, queen 432. 

: Colava inkt-car drain 1, 21. 

Crfa-L'dridhi, a tank 415. 

. C6ia-vidyadhara - calm. alias 

I Kottur 590. 

• • 

Colchi 29. 

Col end ra, title of Madhurantaka, 

( * 

: son of Viraraieiidra 324. 

j Colendrasimha, title of Raja- 
} raja I 225. 

Colendrasimha Seri in Mannfir- 
koyil 610. 

Colendrasinga-isvaram 609. 

Coleroon, Kollitjam 22 ; Kolerun 

j 288. 

ColOsvara, Arinjigai I a vara at 
Melpadi 226. 

Colombo Museum 240. 

Commerce between the Roman 
Empire and India : War- 

miugton 101##. 

Comparative Grammar of the 
Dravidian Languages ; Cald- 
well 30n, 31 n. 

Conjeevaram llw* 


[ 685 ] 



THE COLAS 


Coorg 203, 204, 280. 

Cora, Cola 24. 

Cora(e)ya-deva’s war 278, 569. 
Corayya Nolambadhiraja 209. 
Corporate Life in Ancient 
India : R. C. Majumdar 83n. 

Cou-ku-fei 267. 

Crawley 115n. 

Cu<Jamani Vihara, built at Nega- 
patam by the Sailendra king 
224, 266, 267. 

Cuddapah 3, 122, 124. 
Culamani-varma-deva, Sri 258. 
Cu-li-ya, of Yuan Ckwang 122. 
Cunningham 30 and n, 31n, 122. 

D 

Dadapuram (SA.) 450, 506, 510, 
515, 535. 

Daivabhimakasi 274, 277. 

Dagan 26 In. 

Daiva , form of marriage 76. 
Daligapa<Ji 208. See Tadigai- 
padi. 

Daligavadi 491. 

Damal, a poet of 45. 
Damar-kottam 440 ; D.-nadu 
589. 

Dami}a(s) 33 and n, 34, 186, 240, 

297, 298. 

Damir ica 30, 103. 
Damodarabhattan 533. 
Damodarac-ceri 459. 

Damon and Pythias 56. 

Dana 6. 

Danarnava, E. Calukya 215-6, 
527.' 

Danatongatterihja-kaikkolar 395. 
Damjabhukti 251, 283, 285. 
Dai%<fakk&y,am 491. 

Dai}4am 468. 

Dan4andtha, commandant 200. 

Da^ajundyaka 558, 560. 


Dandanayakam Narakkan Kr^ 
nan Raman 279, 555, 556, 
561, 568. 

Dandangurram 487. 

Danmaponnar alias Trailokya 
Madeviyar, queen of Peruman- 
a<Jigal, 463, 464. 

Danti 57 8n. 

Dautisakti Vitanki alias Loka- 
Mahadevi, queen of Rajaraja I 
225, 507, 514, 515, 533, 537, 
561. 

Dantivarma-mangalam 384, 385, 
389, 393, 400, 436, 483. 
i Dappula IV 146. 

I Darasuram (Tj.) dvarapalaka 
! 21 ,>-6, 479, 084-5. 

I 

Darsana(n)koppu (Tv.) record 
200n, 202/i, 483, 486. 

| Dahabanda , a tax 601. 

• Dasapaninan 308. 
j Dokabbe, sati of 591. 
j Desantari Tiruppullani-dasa 498. 

Desi , music 93, 396. 

Desivinayagam Pillai, S. 200n. 

Devadana 136, 406, 416, 4L9, 
425, 438, 455, 461, 468-9, 
471-2, 483, 487, 491, 494, 496, 
499, 503, 505, 509-10, 522-3, 
536, 542, 548, 553, 557, 559- 
61, 564, 569, 575-6, 578, 
585, 589, 593, 596, 601, 607. 

Devakanmis 531, 555, 567, 568, 
592, 594, 609. 

Devales 240. 

Devanapalli 500, 549. 

Devauatha, W. Cajukya general 
327. 

Devan Kesari alias Kuhjara- 
rnalla Pallavaraiyan 425. 

Devan-pattagal Pan<Jaram 592, 
596. 

Devan Pejt ramai 546* 


l«se] 



INDEX 


Devan-Puyambiyal Adal-vitan- 
ka-manikkam 561. 

Devaratfiyar 8, 564, 579, 605. 

Devdram 9, 70, 196n, 223, 373n, 
400n, 452n. 

Devarmagal Nakkan Peri y a 

Arangapiran 496. 

Devar-vetti-ku<Ji 515. 

Devayan Pulalakkan alias 
Avani Sikhamani 453. 

Devendra, title of Parantaka I 
417. 

Devi-Ammanar 498. 

Dhanmdsana 417, 468. 

Dhanma - variyap * peruinakkal 
501. 

Dhanahjaya - varrnan 123, 124. 

Dhara, Bhoja of 251. 

Dharaneiidra, the serpent king 
26. * 

Dharavaraa, king of Cakrakiita 
325, 348, 349n. 

Dharmakirti 72n. 

Dharmak - kutta{ai-etjai 463 ; 
-tu(ai-uirai 466, 492, 516. 

Dharina-nagari, Ligor, 624. 

Dkarmapala 11 In. 

Dkarinapaia of Damjabliukti 
248, 249, 251, 252, 283, 286. 

Dkarmapala of the Pala 
Dynasty 287. 

Dharmapuri (Tagatjur) 127n. 

Dharma-raja Sri, prince of 
Tambralinga 623. 

Dharmasdstra(s) 6, 109. 

Dharma-setti alias Sadaiyan- 
gavaiyan 407, 

Dharmasutras 75. 

Dharmavarma 128. 

♦ 

Dhruva, A. B., ed. Nydyapra- 
vUa 4 n, 7 In, 7 2«. 

Digvijaya 200, 241, 253, 267, 
268, 329, 351, 352. 


Dinding, in Perak (« ? Mevilim* 
bangam) 623. 

Difmaga, author of Nydyapra - 
ve&a 33 n, 71 and n, 72. 

DirghaBi, inscription of Vana- 
pati 345. 

Dimkaram 78n, 82. 

Divakaran Vasudevan 512. 

Divya-suri - carita 19, 128, 

3o4, 3 55n. 

Ujambi (^MaiaiyuxO 623. 
i Doddasivara (xViys.) 445. 

Doinitian 29, 102. 

Jjonur ^Bijapur Biet.) 210. 

| Drak^arama 306, 330/4. 

| Gravidas, the live 246. 

i 

j Dravidian(s), the pre - Aryan 
; population of India 24 n 9 
2 on, 73; pre -Aryan Tamil 
culture 75. 

Drstdnta 72. 

| JJubreuii, J.-14, 135n. 

i 

JL)ulu country 299. 

JDurai Araeau 214. See Mum- 
mu^i Vaitumba Maharajan. 

Durga-bhattaraki 459. 

Dutch, tho 271. 

Dutch in Malabar , 'The : Gal- 
letti 225 n. 

Dutthagamani 34. 

D u v edimangalam 366, 429. 

Dvarajj&laka at Darasuram 275 
and n, 276. 

Dvarapuri-deva 371. 

E 

Eastern Archipelago 232. 

Eastern Calukya copper plates 2, 
14, 118, 211, 212 214, 215, 
219, 291. 

Eastern Ganga inscriptions 14. 

East Indies, trade with 232. 
t E<Jedore (2000) 236, 246. 


[ 637 ] 



tHE COLAS 


Edirttavar-kalan, a title of Arai- 
yan Rajarajan 279, 551. 

Egypt 101, 102, 105. 

Ekamranatha temple at Conjee- 
varam lln. 

Ekanayakan-tiruvasal 534. 

Elaburige (Mye.) 545. 

Elancola Mahadevi 124. 

Elara 33 and n, 34 and n, 35, 
* 70. 

Eli-malai, rat-hill 271. 

Elinnlai 601. 

Eiinur 474. 

m 

Elisee Reclue: Universal Geo- 
graphy 622. 

Elliot, Sir Walter 15, 1 6n, 
194 and n. 

Elukarai t-tir a vayppa<Ji-na<)u 417. 

Elunnjff uva-catm. alias Pattalam 
465. 

Elvanasur (SA.) 481, 604. 

Emanallur 364. 

Emapperur (SA.) 433, 506, 518, 
554. 

Emba<Ji (NA.) 539. 

Enadi($) 86, 89. 

Enanallurk • katjagamana - u<Jai- 
yar-pa<Jai 546. 

Enicceri 61. 

Ennayiram (SA.) 563, 569,576. 

Eryperdyam 81, 82. 

Er 572. 

Eragaram (Tj.) 585. 

Efanandi alias Naratonga-pal- 
lavaraiyan 390, 

Ercc&ru 371, 503, 510 \-kurpa~ 
riSi 564. 

Ereya Gavnn^a 569. 

Eri-dyam 544, 566. 

Eri-ivu 550. 

Erikka4i 564. 

ErippaUi 383, 421, 423. 

Eri~vdriyam 403, 416, 423, 
-perumakkal 406^ 441, 50J. 


Erode (Coi.) 417. 

Erumur (SA.) 398, 424, 425, 
510, 555, 588. 

Ettiyakuricci 428. 

j Europe and China : Hudson 
j _ 102 n, 

Eyarkon-Kalikkaman 127. 
Eyi^-kottam 370, 431. 
Eyiy-pattinam 582. 

F 

j Fergusson 606n. 

| Ferrand 259n, 2C4n, 265«, 622. 
Fleet 21, 160n, 209n, 237/*, 
246n, 273/*, 276n, 277 and n, 
j 282n, 295, 306«, 307n, 308n, 

! 310n, 322n, 341, 342, 346, 

1 347, 351, 353 and n, 535n. 

Po-che 258. 

Forgotten Empire : R. Sewell 
170n. 

Foulkes Yin. 

G 

Gadaval plates 126. 

Gajabahn I, synchronism 4, 
68, 69, 71. 

Galletti 225n. 

Gamuti4a(u) 521, 545, 565. 
Ganapati, image 403. 
Qanapptrumakkai 370, 426, 
457, 464 ; ganavariyapperu- 
makkaj 466 ; ganattar 492, 
518. 

Ga^aradi Itjtamban (alias Tan* 
nai • mnnivar • pe^d^wJ® 
Vifaiyaraiyan) 567. 
QanijiamartaQda 371n. 

Gandan Madhnrantaka • devar 

407, 472. See UUama Co|a. 

Gandan Satrubhayankaranar 

470. 


[. 68 $ ] 



INDEX 


Gandan Sundara-ifelan, Adigal 
Paluveftaraiyar 470, 

Gandappayya 274. 

Gandaraditta - catm. 555, 564, 
573, 579, 581. 

Gandaradittac-ceri (Tirumala- 
va<Ji) 579. 

Gandaradittan, hall 510. 

Gandaradittan, Madhurantakan, 
an official of Rajaraja I 183n; 
probably the son of Madhu- 
rantaka Uttama Coja 193, 
197, 227, 398, 477, 486. 

Gandaradittap-pereri 539. 

Gandaradittat-teriii ja - kaikkolar, 
Ddaiyar 468, 571. 

Gandaraditya (deva), Rajakesari, 
aon of Pariuitaka I 163, 164n, 
167 ; alias Mummudi Cola 
168, 170n, 171, 172 and n, 
173, 174, 175, 176n, 177, 180 ; 
his rule 182-3, 184, 185, 
187n, 189, 193n, 226, 365n, 
367n, 368, 370n, 37 5n, 378n, 
388, 391n, 402, 408n, 413n, 
422, 432 and n, 448, 449n, 
467, 474, 480, 481. 

Gandaradityarasa, lord of 
Mahismatipura 305. 

Gandaraditya-vinnagar 581. 

Gimdharan, art 105. 

Gdndharva , form of marriage 
75. 

Ganga(s) 118, 136, 142, 143, 152, 
154 ; conquered by Rajaraja 
207-9, 210, 211, 326. 

Ganga-cdlamani, title 390 and n. 

Gangai-konda - C51a, title of 
Rajendra I 281, 35L 

Gangaukoij^a Cfi\a : Dr. 

8. K. Aiyangar 212n, 237n, 
247n, 249n, 251n, 265n, 
268n, 283. 


Gangai-konda-Col a-mi ladudaiyar 
279, 554. * . 

Gangai - konda - Colapuram 24, 
162w ; a 19th century descrip- 
tion of 288-9, 558, 602. See 
Gangaikonda Solapuram. 

Gangai-kondan alias Uttama 
Solamarayan 566. 

Gangaikondan (Tin.) 516, 613. 

Gangaikondan - salai at Tiru- 
malavadi 564. 

Gangaikonda-sola, Cola - Pandya 
viceroy 324. 

Gangaikonda-sola-catm. 581. 
Gangaikoij^a-sola-!svaram 561. 

Gangai-konda - Solapuram 170 ; 
not Mudigonda - Solapuram 
281, 312, 326, 336, 570, 576, 
583, 591, 594, 595, 601, 602, 
603, 607. See Gangaikonda- 
Colapuram. 

Gangai-kobda-s()lapuram(Kanya- 
kumari) 589, 618. 

Gangaimanagar 60 i. 

Gangaiyar 600. 

Gangakundapuram 288-9, 338, 
352, 353. See Gangai-konda- 
colapuram. 

Ganga-madevi, queen of Kan- 
nara-deva-prtigangaraiyar 444. 

Ganga-madeviyar, wife of Vlra- 
sola-Ilangdvelar 389. 

Ganga-mandala 204, 212, 227. 

Gangamattandar alias Sembi- 
yan Prthivi-gangaraiyar 384. 

Gangan Ambalavan Gandara- 
ditta - sola Vilupparaiyan 
208n, 373. 

Gangapadb conquered by Raja- 
raja I 207, 211, 318, 320, 321, 

I 494; alias Mu<jikon<ja-cola- 
mantjala, 551, 


[ 639 ] 



THE COLAS 


Ganga-pallapuram 542. 
Ganga-perumana<Ji 311. 
Gangapurl 281 and n, 309, 315, 
322, 330, 336. See GangTi- 
kundapuram. 

Gangaraiyan...Ganga - cujamani, 
fir! 454. 

Gangaraja alias Ganga-cfila- 

mani andMummadi Solaccem- 

• • * 

biyan Sri-gangaraivar 390. 
Gangarasayira 207. 
Gan^asurap-perumhalli 382. 
Gangavara (Mys.) 576. 580. 

Gangavati (di) 336, 521. 

Gangayti ( — Wnrawfiri * Lang- 
kiisuka) 623. 

Ganges, the 26, 99, 104, 234; 
G. expedition of Rajendra 
I 247-54, 269n, 283, 284. 

285, 291. 

Gannarasa Nolamba 208, 491. 
Gauda 25 In. 

Gaurisa 67. 

Gautama 75w, 110. 

Gautamlputra 125 n. 

Gawarwad 310n. 

Geiger : ed. Mahdvamsa 33 n, 
34 n, 147n, 148n, 186n, 238, 
239n, 260n. 

Gerini Col. 24 and n, 25n, 224n, 
257n, 259n, 260n, 262, 265n, 
266 n, 623. 

Gidangil (SA.) 606. 

Gnanasambandar 9, 67. See 

Tirugiianasambandar. 

Godavari, the 247, 248, 249, 330. 
Gomuktlsvara, temple 423-4. 

Gopinatha Rao, T.A. 135n, 156n, 
162n, 163n, 169n, 170n, 195n, 
200n, 221n, 228n, 281n, 375 n, 
409n, 49 4n, 509n, 526n, 577, 
618n. 


Gmiai 441. 

Govinda IV, the Cambay plates 
of 286, 287. 

Govinda Bhatta 404. 

• • 

Govindacandra, of Vangala 249, 
251, 252, 286. 

Govinda Kataka Sarvakratuya- 
jiyar 528. 

Govindapadi-alvar, a tiruppadi- 
yam in praise of 487. 

Govindaputtiir (Tri.) 196, 469, 
471, 476, 481. 

Govinda Racamma 528. 

Govindarivja, image 355n. 
j Govindasami S.K. 199n. 

| Govindavadi (Ch.) 549. 

! Govinda Vallavaraiyar 163, 429. 
See Viramadevi. 

Grahi ( - Kia-lo-hi) 260. 

1 Grdmalmntalms 370. 

j 

j Grama-haryam 455, 502. 

! Gram am (SA.) inscription of 
' Parantaka I 13n, 155, 163, 
421, 427, 428, 440, 441, 446, 
j 598. 

| Gudimallam (NA.) 368. 
j Gudiir 214, 621. 

Gnnakirtibhatarar 379. 

• • 

Gunamudita 123. 
i Gunasagara 66 w. 

! Gnnasekharan 529. 

Gunavan Suratongi 419. 

Gunavira-mamuni 507. 

Gupta Inscriptions : Fleet 

282n% 

Guptas 27n. 

Gurjara king 275. 

Gurjara kingdom 283. 

Gurjara-Pratihgra empire 283- 
288. 

Guru - para mpard( i)-prab hdva 
19, 66n, 128, 129, 170 and n, 
355n. 


[ 640 ] 



INDEX 


Gufctaka 35 n. 

Guttas, of Guttal 119, 

Gutti 333. 

H 

Iladagalli 305. 

Haidar Ali 28. 

Hangal 279, 567??. 

Harkatu, of I bn Batata 3 In. 

Harsa-deva, Chandeila king 287. 

Hasin, Mftyirudingam 023. 

Hastimalla, Ganga king 143, 
151,415. 

ITavirbali 509, 529, 593. 

Hebbani (Mys.) 497. 

Hemagarbhas , performed by 
Par an taka I 163. 

Hemavati, princes of Cola des- 
cent in 119, .124. 

Himalayas, the ; Karikala’s 
expedition to 44, 55, 57, 96, 
114. 

Hindoe - Javaansche ( reschie - 
denis : Krom 2 62/?, 620. 

Hipparchus 102. 

Hiralal 25 It?. 

Hi ra n y a garbh a , 225 and n, 533. 

Hirth 259??, 266??. 

Historical Inscriptions of 
Southern India : R. Sewell 
245??. 

History of British Civilisation : 
Wingfield Stratford 74>?. 

History of Rajahmundry : 
B, V. Krishna Rao 219??, 

History of Sanskrit literature i 
Macdonell 283. 

History of the Tamils : P. T. 
S. Aiyangar. See Tamils. 

Hobson- Jobson i Yule and Bur- 
nell 3 In, 256n. 

Honganur (Mys.) 530. 

Hoogly 286. 


Hornell 620. 

Hosahalli (Mys.) 598. 

Hottur, inscription 236, 238, 

535n. 

Howrah 286. 

Hoysala (s) 7, 9, 14, 204. 

Hudson 102n. 

Hultzsch 1, 4, 7, 16n, 64n, 68, 
126??, 131, 148n, 150??, 154??, 
156, 227n, 234n, 239??, 241??, 
245n, 248n, 249n, 254n, 255 n, 
256-7, 270n, 274??, 296n, 

297??, 300??, 301??, 302n, 304??, 
305??, 307n, 309??, 311??, 315??, 
317??, 31 8??, 319??, 323??, 325n, 
326??, 327n, 330n, 331n f 348??, 
349??, 350n, 355, 375n, 383n, 
406??, 409??, 432n, 430n, 438??, 
443, 447??, 449??, 482n, 523n, 
525, 566??, 622. 

Human History : Elliot Smith 
25??. 

Huzur Treasury plates of Tiru- 
valla 162??. 

Hyderabad state 236, 249/?. 

I 

Ibn Batuta, on Arcot 31??. 

Idaikkadu 399, 

• * 

Idai-nadu 521. 

Idaiyaru 395, 544. 

Idangali-nayanrir 127??, 150/?, 
620, ” 

Idavai 134. 

Iditurai - nadti, conquered by 
’ Rajendra I 2:$6. 

Igalmarai-mangalam 413. 

Iganaiyfir 564, 566. 

ikkmli 369, 

Ilaccikutji alias Vikramaainga 
catm. 513. 

Iladaigal-roagalar Nangai Kula- 
manikkattar, queen of Yana- 
kBvaraiyar 393. 


81 


[641] 



THE COLAS 


Iladaipperaraiyan alias &ola- 
sikhamani Pailavaraiyan 433. 

Iladaraya, Lata chiefs in N. Ar- 
cot district 228, 438 and n 
484, 528n. 

Ijaiyamani-nangai alias Pallava- 
rasar - deviyar Sinnavaiyar 
554. 

Ilaiya-padai-irumudi - sola-vlrar 
’ 512. 

Ilaiyaval-perra-kaikkolar 467, 

Ilakkarung&iu 474. 

Ilakka&u 364, 370, 377, 394, 
” 400, 450-1, 471, 481. 

flam (■» Ceylon) 183, 205, 296-7* 
" 485, 495, 501, 503-4. See lla- 
mandalam, Ilangai, Lanka. 

Iiamakkal Kartigaik - kanattar 
’ 382. 

llamandalam (Ceylon) conquer- 
ed by Rajaraja I 205 ; by 
Rajendra-Cola 1 238, 297, 528, 
540-2, See flam, Ilangai, 
Lanka. 

Ilamuridesam 255, 263, 624. 

Ilanattu Malavaraiyan Senni- 
kandan 486. 

Iiandattan, a minstrel 49. 

Ikngai (Ceylon) conquered by 
Rajadhiraja I 572, 581. 

Ilangariku<Ji 513, 589. 

llangasoka(m), Lankasoka 255, 
260, 262, 623. 

IIangok-ku<Ji 547. 

IjangSn Picci, mutta-deviyar of 
Rajaraja I in his 27th year 
226, 519. 

I]aiij$tcenni, father of Karikala 
39, 46. 

IJanjdtoenxii, Neydalanganal, 
^eruppaiiyerinda, Coja princes 
60. 

UankMvara-kula - Mla-terirya* 
tirumanjanati&r-vilam 562. 


Ilavandigaip-pajli, where Nalan- 
gilli died 48. 

lla-vi\akku, 426,484. 

Immadi-sola Muvenda-velan 491, 

Immadi Sola Pailavaraiyan 437. 

Iiical Karan ji 322n. 

Indala-deva, of Talaigrama 279- 
80, 567. 

Indala-devi, wife of Vallavarai- 
yar, 278, 535, 541n. 

India and Indo - China : ed. 
A. H. Keane 622. 

Indische Drama , Das : Sten 

Konow 288. 

Indra, the festival of 111, 116. 

Indra III, Rastrakuta king, 
286-7. 

Indraratha 247-8, 250. 

Indravati, river 250. 

Ingallur-na<Ju 228, 505. 

lnga-na<Ju 452. 

Inguturaiydk-kali , a weighing 
scale 477. 

Innambur (Tj.) 368 ;-na(jiu 537. 

Intercourse between India and 
the Western World : Rawlin- 
son 30n. 

Irai 371, 486, 496, 503, 567, 
573, 608. 

Irai-dravyam 444, 576. 

Igai-kdval 476, 492, 543, 593. 

Irai-kaval-(dravyam) 434. 

I;aiyan Accan, Manj^aJi 608. 

Iraiyanleri 402. 

fyaiyandr Ka]aviyal 75. 

Iraiyili 372, 374-5, u-bh&ratap - 
pangu 376 ; i.-6lai 395, 405, 
407, 450, 459, i^arcandbhdga 
460-1, 474-5 1 u ya\[iccan» 
dam 484, 488, 498 ; i.-diva- 
ddna 536, 548, 559-60, 593-4, 

596, 602-3. 



INDEX 


Iramakudam, Ramaghata 270-1. 

Irana-singa-vlrar - pallik- kattil- 
marujapam at Takkolam 463. 

Irattan 327n, 333. 

Irajtapadi 326, 548-53, 581. See 
Rattapadi. 

Iraltapaft prasastis of Rajen- 
dra II 314, 587, 589, 591, 593, 
595-6. 

I rattapadi - kon<Ja - Sola - puram 
alias Takkolam 584 ; man<ja- 
lam 607. 

Irattaraja-kula-kalan, a title of 
Virarajendra 318. 

Iravi Nili, daughter of Vi jay a- 
raga, Cera king 163n, 427. 

Irayirandevi-ammanar 397. 

Irayiravan Pallavaraiyan alias 
Mummudi Sola-posan(r) of 
Araieur, an officer of Perun- 
dauam rank of Rajaraja 1 
229, 492-4, 508-9, 512 ; called 
Uttama - sola Pallavaraiyan 
under Rajendra I 537, 542. 

Ireccayau 319. 

Irocjlu 398, 417. 

lrugaiyau 317-9. 

Irugannan 456. 

Iruma^li - soja - muvenda - velar 
578, 591. 

lruma<Ji-S61an, a title 316. 

lruma<Jisolap-pallavaraiyan alias 
Namban Aiyaradigal 430. 

Irumbujai 376, 

Irumukkaraiyar 429, 

Irungojakkon alias Pugalvip- 
piragarujan Avanivallan 452. 

Irungojakula-pradipa 450. 

Irungdlan Kunavan Aparajitan 
425. ‘ 

Irungdla-Prithfpati Amani-mal- 
lar 483. 

Irungonar Naranan Piritipa- 
tiyar 407. 


Isanamangalam 382, 387, 413. 

Isana Siva alias Nakka<Ji-bhat- 
tan 444. 

Isana Siva Pandita 561. 

Isvarakkarani Vama - devan 
Tiruvenkiujan 383. 

I-tsing 224, 264. 

J 

Jacobi 550 n, 

Jagadiilpur 250. 

Jagadekamalla U dayadity a 
Nolamba Pallava Perumanatji, 
a vassal of Jayasimba 11 273. 

Jagatipala 299, 300, 301 and n. 

Jainism 114, 117. 

Jaiya, 260, 263w ; Buddhist in- 
scription from 623. 

Jajnagar ( « Yayatinagar * 
Binka) 251n. 

Jalamayam Jayastambham 
253. 

Jalasayana, temple 365. 

Jambai (SA.) 229, 422, 446, 
511, 516, 521, 563, 587, 603. 

Jambudipa 144, 186. 

Jainbukesvara, temple lift, 
67-8. 

Jananatha, title of Rajaraja I 
225 ;-ccei % i 225 n. 

Jananatha, Western Calukya 
general 330. 

Jananatha-uatm. alias Nrpatun- 
ga-Sentaugi-catm. o49, ^>o3. 

Jananatha-catm. alias Tenur or 
Perundenur 500. 

Jananatha - mangalam, the old 
name of Polonnaruva after the 
title of Rajaraja 1 206, 606. 

Jananathan-embernman Sembi- 
yar Kon 621. 

Jananathapura, Miiyilangai 551. 

Jananathapui-am ( - Nagaram 
Mamallapuram) 556, 595. 


[ 648 ] 



THE 

Jananatha - terinja - parivara, 
Rajaraja 520. 

Jananathat - teriftja - valangai- 
velaikkarar 508, 536. 

Janmabhumi 405. 

Jata Cotja, legendary founder of 
the Telugu Codas 217 and n ; 
wrongly identified with Jata- 
varman Sundara Pandya 
219 n ; J. Cola 280. 

Jataka(s) 33, 64. 

Jatavai'inan Sundara - Cola- 
Pandya(n) 243-4, 316 ; one of 
Rajendra I’s sons 562, 608-14, 
617. 

Jatavarman Udaiyar Sri Cola 
Pandya-deva 615-6. 

Jatavarmau Ddaiyar Vira Cola- 
Pandya 619. 

Jatilavarman, Pandya king 

*195w. 

Java, Sho-po of the Chinese 267. 

Jayabhlmatali, at Taiijavur 422. 

Jayakesi I, Kadamba king of 
Goa 334. 

Jayameru-srikarana - mangalam 
alia & Mandiram 482. 

Jayamuri - nadalyan, Senapati, 
a feudatory of Rajeudra II 
323, 594, 597. 

Jayangondar, kavic - cakravarti 
19, 20, 350-1, 357. 

Jayangonda-sola 580. 

Jayangon<Ja - sola - Brahmadhi- 
raja, Senapati 589, 602. 

Jayangontja Bdla-catm. 543. 

Jayangon<Ja-eola-catm. V i jay a- 

narayanam 609. 

Jayango 9 <Ja-§ola-mandalam 394, 
517, 540, 579, 581, 583, 589- 
90. 


COLAS 

J ay an goruja- so lan , a name of 
Rajaraja I 224; a tanuir- 
pandal of the name at Kanya* 
kuuiari 221, 526 ; a service so 
named 518 ; gold pa^tam 526. 

Jayangon^a - sola-nallur 578 ; 
alias Men-Marudur 619. 

Jayangoruja-solapuram 546, 569, 
590, 598. 

J ayangonda-sola Vanakovaraiyar 
Senapati 581. 

Jayangonda - sola-vinnagar-filvar 
at Maliirpatn < i ,>22-3. 

Jay angonda-solls vara 546. 

Jayasimha II W. Calukya sxic- 
ceeded Vikramrtditya V 244 ; 
war with Rajendra I 247-6, 
273. 

Jayasimha, the brother of the 
Calukya, killed at Koppam 
308. 

Jayasimha, younger brother of 
Vikramaditya VI 333-4, 600n. 

Jayasinga-kula-kala 551 ; perun- 
deru 600. 

Jayasinga - kula - kala - viluppa- 
raiyan 600. 

Jebayya 519. 

J es tai koy il in-kilai ttal i- mahade va 
410. 

Ji-lo-ting of Chau Ju-kua, {Yu 
rwjingam — Mayiruijingam) 
260. 

Jinagirippalji 436. 

Jinalayas, erected by Gangaperu- 
mana^i and destroyed by 
the Cola king 311. 

Jtvita{m) 374, 515, 580. 

Jovli-Dalasigere (Mys.) 530. 

Jodi-Kempanaputa (Mys.) 480. 

Jorampun (-Zora or Jora) 31 n* 

Journal of the Telugu Academy 
215n. 


[ 644 ] 



INDEX 


JoliilOJ. 

Jumna 286. 

Jus connubii, of the rich Vella- 
las with royal families 107. 

Jvala, Skt. form of Salai 200n. 
Jyeatha 459 ;-aiyftr 568. 

K 

Kaccipptx.lu (Kafici) 195n, 402, 
435, 506. 

Kucciym u-dn ik/cal, a standard 
weight 31)2. 

Kacciyum - Taujaiyum - fconda , 
title of Ki\sna ill 158, 1 59m, 
161, 413-5, 447/*. 

Kadaisiyar 106. 

Kcujaiyldu 593. 

Kagaladaiyaddangai - kon^a- 
/Sola-valatuldu 332m. 

Kajalangudi, V i^elvi^lugu-catm, 
480, 533, 544, 557. 

Kadaliir (SA.) 463. 

Ka^amba(ti) 121m, 237. 
Kadamba-kulu 160n. 

Kai.lamba-madevi 138, 139m, 

412. 

Ka^ambarkoyil (Oh.) 604. 

Kadau Mayindan 403. 

Ku< t lan Pudi 424. 

* 

Kfuluii Siugam 474. 

Kajanur 407. 

Ka^aram 100n ; Eastern limit of 
Jtiajendra I’s conquests 234; 
the Kaijaram campaign of 
Rajendra I 254-268 ; identified 
by Kanakasabhai with Sri- 
khettara, ancient Prome 
261n'; conquest by Virarajen- 
dra 332-3, 348n, 623-4. 

Kadavpar-palli 504. 

Kajavas 326, 

Ka$igai-ka{attuk-k<U f a measur- 
ing rod 452, 465, 523. 


Ka<Jiyalur Rudrangannanar 90. 
Kadiyanna (Kaduvetti) 497. 
Kadugodi (Mys.) 568. 
Kadumbidugu 405. 

K ad u m b it l u gu -m ev-kapp u 404. 

Ka<Jungon, line of the Pan.jl- 
yas 118. 

Kadupattiga], a Cola queen 137. 

KadupattigaJ Tamarmettiyar 
383, 3b6. 

Kaduvetti, a throne in Gangai- 
konda-solapurain 589. 

Kaikkifat. t unilateral love 75-6. 

Kaikkola Baladevau Vayiri, kill- 
ed in a duel 483. 

Kaikkola-Perumbadai 388. 

Kaikkojan Karrali - pattalagan 
498. 

Kaivara-nadu 542. 

Kaiyeluttu , document 459 • 
K. olai 547. . 

Kaiyurai 577. 

Kajaragama 332. 

Kakandan 38. 

Kakatiyas 125n, 236. 

Kakxi-erudu - kasu 611. See 

kdtci-. 

K&lci ( a» Kola Cola) : Gerini’s 
view 24. 

ICalabhatari 393. 

Kalabhatari alias yrittanur-nan- 
gai 442. 

Kalabhra(s) interregnum 74 • 
their part in political unsettle- 
ment in S. India 119-21 ; 
rule of Accuta Kalabba 121 ; 
end of Accuta's rule and over- 
throw of K, 122. 

Iialagam 100 ; Naccinarkkiniyar 
on 264 and n, 265n. 

Kakkalur-natju 607. 

Kalahasti (C.) 139, 142, 150, 279 
512, 518, 535, 554, 572, 575. ’ 


[««] 



THE COLAS 


Kalakarac-ceri 545. 

Kalakattiir (Ch.) 493. 

Kalakku^i - na<Ju 409-10, 440, 
524. 

Kalalavukol-kriU , a tax 478. 
Kaiambur (NA.) 457, 597. 
Kaiamukha Dasa-puriyan 420. 
Kalamukhas 420n. 

Kalamur 457, 528, 597n. 
Kalaudai 127. 

Kalani-variyam 41G, 458. 
Kalanju 163/j, 364-5 fl!, passim . 
Kajpnjur (NA.) 441, 

Kaiapidari of Naduvirc-ceri 389. 
Kalapriya 371 and n. 
K&lattalaiyar, poet 62. 

Ka}attur (NA.) 539, 559, 596. 
Ka{attur-kottam 554. 

Kalavai (NA.) 606. 

KalavaU, a poem 64, 65n, 66, 
67, 86n, 88 and n, 116. 

Ka\aviyal % Iraiyandr 75, 
Kafavu 114, 

Kalavur, battle of 527. 
Kalesi-Perundaram 449. 

Kaieyur (Mys.) 204n, 527. 

Kaji Adittan 520. 

Ka)i alias Mlnavan Marayan 
369. 

Kalidasa, army leader of the 
Calukyas 275, 305. 

Kaliga (or Kali-ganga,) Hoysala 
leader 527. 

Kd\i-ganattar 511. 
Kalikantaka-peruvarambu 373. 

Kali-karraH 404. 

Kalikesari, a title of Parthiven- 
dra-varman ? 457 and n. 

Kalikesari Vinnagar-devar 457. 
Ka|ikkn<)i 577, 

Kalikotj4ap - pereri, a tank at 
Olagapnram 539. 

Kalinari fevara temple lln. 


Kalinga(m) country 20, 215, 220, 
265, 285, 330-1, 495; Kal- 
ingas 551. 

Kalinganagara 345. 

Kalingattupparani , poem, its 
historical value 19-20, 38, 64, 
90, 140, 200n, 203, 263-4, 
274/i, 292, 315, 324, 346, 350, 
352 ; its silence on Adhirajen- 
dra’s reign 353-4, 356. 

Kalinyu-variyam 458. 

Kalipperuman of Makanur Put- 
tujtai 483. 

Kalittogai 5, 63. 

Kaliyaneri, a tank 430. 

Kaliyan Man^adi Aiyan alias 
Riijaditta Pallavaraiyar 445. 

Kaliyuga era 13 and n. 

Kalladuppur 392. 

Kallahalli (Mys.) 519. 

Kajlan Accapidari of Ko^lumba- 
Jur 419. 

Kal{anangai, daughter of P^thivl- 
gangaraiyar 384n. 

Kallar 150^. 

Kaljinangai-kujam 443. 

Kalliyanapuram-kon<Ja - solak - 

kottam, formerly Amur- 

kottam 583. 

* * 

Kallur 535, 611-2. 

Kalldri , college 514. 

Kalpi 286. 

Kalumalam 44 ; battle 64, 88. 

Kal-vef(n of Vijayalaya 13 In. 

Kalyanapura(m)--Kalyani, made 
the Calukya capital 237, 
sacked by the Cola 275 and 
n ; 276-7, 294, 311rt, 313, 333, 
572, 582, 585. 

Kalyaiiapuram-gonda - s6la, title 
of Rajadhiraja l 313. 


[ 646 ) 



INDEX 


Kalyani, wife of Arinjaya, Yai- 
dumba princess 168, 185. 

Kamakkavvaiyal, mother of 
Senapati Jayangonda - sola 
Brahmadhiraja 58 9. 

Kamakkoijanar 422. 

Kamakkuttam 75. 

Kamala - narayana - catm. alias 
Eavanur 575. 

Kamalavati, mother of Senganan 
67. 

Kaman Koviyar, wife of Paluvet- 
taraiyar Vikraniadityar 397. 

Kaman Tayan, a teacher of 
Idaiyavu 395. 

Kamarasavalli (Tri.) 369, 398, 
491, 504, 508, 547, 558. 

Kamarnava, E. Ganga, fell in 
battle against Danarnava 216n. 

Kamasutra : Vatsyayana 93. 

Kamavur-Kilinalur 550. 

Kamban 22n. 

Kamban Madhurantakan 534. 

Kamban Maniyan alias Vikkira- 
ma - singa - muvenda - volitn 
495. 

Kambhoja 25n, 261. 

Kammarasandra (Mys.) 491. 

Kampanan Iranian alias Uttama- 
sola Piridi-gaugaraiyan, chief 
of Pangaja-nfuju 468. 

Kampili, Calukya palace des- 
troyed by the Colas 304, 31?n, 
327n, 333, 580 n. 

Kamukac-c$ri Papanac-ceri, a 
hamlet of Viranarayana-catm. 
437. 

Ka-nailu 404. 

Kanaikkal Irumporai 64, 65n, 

86 . 

Kanakasabhai, Y : 20, 30w, 37n, 
41n, 46n, a 47n, 48n, 49n, 53n, 
59 and n, 61n, 64n, 82, 83n, 
8 8n, lOOn, 261n. 


Kanakavirakkuratti 379. 

Ka^akku 363. 

Kanattur 429. 

Kanavira-Sittadigal 402. 

Karici-Akkan 469. 

Kanci(puram) (Ch.) legend of 
conquest by Karikala 44-5, 
99n, 117; Yuan Ch wang's stay 
at K. 122; 126, 137 n y 161, 193, 
214, 216n ; Kljaraja Ps in- 
scription re : war with Bhima 
217 ; Rajendra residing at 244 ; 
246 ; Saivas imported from 
the Ganges region 254 ; 276n, 
305, 334, 338, 352-3, 364, 371, 
392, 404-5, 411, 417, 435, 441, 
463-4, 468, 472, 474, 490, 502, 
527 ; ma-nagaram 536 ; 553, 
556, 559, 561, 566, 574, 583, 
606n. 

Kandai or Karandai, where the 
C51a awaited the Calukya 
322, 326. 

Kandalur - Salai(k - kalam- 
arutta) 199, 200n, 202 and n, 
220 ; Rajendra I repeated his 
father’s performance at K. 
243, 270 ; Rajadhiraja I’s 
victory 272. 

Kau(Jamangalam (SA.) 355, 486, 
517. 

Kandan Iravi 408. 

Kansan Karivarman alias Rama- 
kucjla Muvar Tiruvadi, a 
Mu§aka king 271. 

Kansan Koval-nathan 555. 

Kansan Madhurantakan alias 
Uttama Co}a, Sri 477, 487. 

Kandan Sattan of Nerkuppai 
433. 

Kanijaradittan aaVis...Maharajan 
of Yanagappacji 393. 

Kancjar-dinakaran 305. 



THE COLAS 


Kandavura Nuvara 206. 

Kan<Jiyur (Tj.) 143, 421, 424, 
441, 453, 468, 541, 566. 

Kanjanur alias Simka-visnu- 
catm. 470. 

Kanjarau Aiyan Suryan, Settle- 
ment-officer 531. 

Kaiijivayil alias Igal - marai- 
mangalam 424. 

Kankdni 458. 

Kanina, Karna 2l5n. 

Kannaki 90, 94, 111. 
•Kannakucci, Kanauj 272;-yar 
296. 

Kannamangalam 435. 

Kannan, Kr§nan 116. 

Kannandai Arivanan Bkumi- 
* * ♦ 

stmdaran alias Sundara-sola- 

muvenda-vejan 371. 

Kannan Malian alias Udayamat- 

tanda-mu venda-volar 40 1 . 

» • * 

Kannara-desa 32 7n. 

Kannara-deva, son of Aditya 

Co|a 139, 382 (?), 404, 413. 

Kannara-deva Krsna III 152, 
156 ; Cakravartin IC. Valla- 
bhan 157, 159 and «, 160 
and n, * 165, IGOn, 385 (?), 
443-7, 479. 

Kannara-deva p(i)rtkivi Ganga- 
raiyar alias Attimallan, a 
feudatory of Krsna III 178, 
443-4. 

Kannata 205. 

Kanni ( ** Parvati) 38. 

Kanauj 272* 286-7, 296. 
Klantnr-nadu 590, 

Kanta(n), king 23, 38. 

Ka^fhikdy necklace 327n, 333. 
Kanyakubja 233, 296, 300. 

Kanyakumari, a bath in the sea 
at K. was held to absolve a 
woman from the sin of incest 


111, 143 ; a tawfirppandat 
J ayangonda-lolan established 
at K. 221, 322, 325, 331, 335- 
6 ; (Tv.) 409, 526, 562, 577, 
589, 617-8. 

Kanyakumari Stone inscription 
of Virarajendra 12, 38 ; on 
foundation of Tan j ore 13 In, 
136, 139«, 140, 156-7, 167, 
186n, 236-7, 275n, 291, 325, 
331, 335-6, 367«. 

Kdpdlikas 116. 

Kapilar, a San gam poet 53. 

Karatjigal 327 n ; pillar of vic- 
tory set up by Virarajendra I 
333. 

Karaikkat 23. 

Karaikkottup - pirama - deyam 
alias Parakrama - sola - catm. 
541. 

Karaikkudi 371. 

« 

Karai-nalur 391. 

Karaiyudaiyan Baladevan alias 
Parantakap-poraraiyan 443. 

Karambiyan Pirantakan alias 
Karuvidaip-peraraiyan 379. 

Karanattau(r) 546, 567, 

Karandai : Fleet’s identification 
with local Karanji 322 and n. 
See Kandai. 

Kdranmai 542. 

Karan ii r 543. 

Karavandapuram 440, 524. 

Karhad, grant 161, 374n. 

Kari-Accan, of Ayirattali 428. 

Karikala Cola 3, 12, 25; his effort 
to civilize the nomadic tribes 
32, 36-7 ; his accession 39 ; 
battle of Veiini 40; battle of 
Vakaipparandalai 41 ; his 
conquests 42 ; death 43 ; 
legends about him 43-4, 
45-6, Perum TiramTt-vaJavan 
wrongly identified With Bln, 


t «« i 



INDEX 


62 ; attempt to fix the San- 
gam age on the basis of a fifth 
century date for him 74, 84n, 
89-90, 111, 119n, 122, 140,280. 

Karikala Cola 44 who took the 
head of the Pandya” 191. 
See Aditya II. 

Karikala Cola, title of Vlrara- 
jendra 291, 336, 601. 

Karikala-kannan, a possible son 
of Aditya II 177n. 

Karikalakkarai 378, 429. 

Karikala-^olan, a title 316. 

Karikala-solap-pillai(yfir) 404. 

Karikaja-sola Sengeni-na(la|van 
alias Satta Nalayiravan 606. 

Karikala-solat-terinja Kaikk5]ar, 
Udaiyar 404, 467. 

Karikkal (NA.) 173, 449. 

Karik - kannanar, of Kavirip- 
pumpattinam 61. 

Kari-kolamban, a Kaikkolan 467. 

Kari-kulir-vagai 512. 

Karipniiyan alias S61 4 a-marayan 
368. 

Kariyarrut - tunjiya Nedungilli 
47. " 

Kariyayu, battle of 45-6. 

Karkadai-managar 529, 621. 

Karkudi 400. 

Karmaranga, Kalasapura : Levi’s 
identification of MeviUmban- 
gam 262n. 

Karnaraja, a mistake for Krsna 
due to a wrong Sanskritisa- 
tion 215n. 

Karnatas, of Mithila 254, 283, 
285,* 287. 

Karpu 114, 115 and n. 

Kayyaji, queen of Bhuti-Vikra- 
makesari 187. 

Kayrali-pattalakan 387. 

Kayyay-piccan 414 ; Tiru-423. 


Karralip-piratti, wife of Tenna- 
van Ilango-velar alias Maya- 
van Pudiyar 187. 

Karran Adittan alias Dana- 
muvenda - vejan Marayan, 
nddu-vagai 501. 

Kar!janapalli(C.) 583. 

Karugaviir 395, 438. 

Karu-kuiji, in Tanjavur-kurmm 
214, 371. 

Karumbalu alias Alagiya Sola- 
nalliir 614. 

Karunakarat-tondaiman, general- 
issimo of Kulottunga I 20. 

Karunataka Pulalaya Setti 382. 

Karungteu 365, 367, 378. 

Karungulai-Adanar 43. 

Karur, Cera capital 44 ; siege and 
capture of 51. See Karuvur. 

Karuttattangudi (Tj.) 387, 399, 
! 499, 512, 530-1, 539. 


Karuvili Muttaraiyar 420. 

Karuvur (Coi.) 50, 52, 61, 
127, 323, 325, 594-5, 601. 
Karur. 


64, 

See 


Karuvur Devar, hymn on the 
Tanjore temple 223. 

| Kasinvay-nali 363. 

! Kasmira-desa 619. 


j Kassapa V, sovereign of Lanka 
1 144. 


Kassapa, son of Mahinda V, ruled 
under the title of Vikkama- 
Itbu 240, 297-8. 

KiUu 405, 467, 484, 498, 519, 
530-2, 536, 543, 546-7, 

549 ; siddhaya K. 550, 
552, 554, 556-7, 561, 570, 
572, 575-6, 578, 581, 583, 
590, 596, 598, 606, 618. 

Kalyapa GStra, of Renan4u 
C61as 3, 123, 125. 


[«M] 



THE COLAS 


Kataha, 224, 254, 256, 263-5, 285. 
See Ka<Jaram. 

K&tci-erudu-kaiu 611. 

Kathasaritsagara : T a w n e y 

263«. 

Kattamacci (C.) 428. 

Katti 63. 

« • 

Kattumannar-koyil 364 n, 373n, 
388n. 

Kattur (Ch.) 462. 

Katyayana, reference to the 
Codas 26. 

Katyera, Culukya, (governing 
Kogali 500 and Ma-slyava<Ji 
140) 443. 

Kausikan Nakkan Maran 476. 

Kautilya 78, 287. 

Kavantandalam (Ch.) 536. 

Kavanur (NA.) 379, 423, 431, 
445, 452, 465, 469, 550 ; alias 
Kamalanarayana - catm. 575. 

Kavaramoli-Madevan alias Ton- 
<Jara<Jippodi 435 

Kavaramoli-marakkal 463. 

Kaveri 22, 23, 25, 30 ; origin 
of the Kaveri 38-9, 42-3, 50, 
61, 76, 95, 98-9, 106, 114, 119, 
122, 125-7, 135, 138, 140, 142, j 
189, 209, 280n, 356, 358, 425, 
533. 

Kav5ripat(ti)nam 23n, 29 ; ( — 
Khaberis of Ptolemy) 30 ; a 
celebrated emporium accord* 
ing to Pali books 32 ; proba- 
bly the Kola-Pattana of The 
Questions of King Milinda 
32-3, 37, 68 ; Buddbadatta 
on 120. 

KavSrippakkam (NA.) 371, 450 *, 
alias Amani-narayana - catm. 
458, 527. 

KSvidi , a title 106. 

Kaviniyan flyan 6$ndan 509. 


Kavirinallur 497. 

Kavirippum-pattinam alias Pu- 
har ( - Kaveripatnam) 23n; 
earlier name Campa 38, 42, 48, 
61 ; description of K. as in 
Sangam literature 96 • 100, 
426. See Kaveripatnam. 

Kaviri-nadu 556. 

Kayar (Ch.) 495. 

Kayattur 421. 

Keane A. H. 622. 

Kedah ( ■» Kadaram) in Malay 
peninsula 260, 262-3, 265n, 
623-4. 

Kegalla, district 331n. 

Keith A.B. : Sanskrit Drama 
283. 

Kelang ( - ? Mevilimbangam) in 
Selangor 623. 

Kembhavi 308n. 

Kempdnagarasa - niraikkal f 
standard weight 521 . 

Kennedy 29n. 

Kerala 147, 149, 163 ; K. prin- 
cess 168 ; Rajaraja I’s cam- 
paign in K. 199, 201-2, 205, 
235; K. war of Rajendra I 
241-3, 269-71, 290, 299, 305, 
325, 335, 617n. 

Kerala Ku(i;u)mban alias Para- 
kesari Muvenda-velar 421. 

Keralan - maligai, in Oangai- 
kon(Ja-solapuram 589. 

Keralan Rajadittan alias Nani 
Viccadaramarayan 369. 

Keralantaka, title of Rajaraja I 

225. 

Keralantaka- catm. alias Ven- 
nattu Amankudi 561, 575. 

Kerajantaka-va]a.na^lu 520n, 

Kerala6inga-vala-na^u 505. 

Kerala Society Papers 200 ». 


I M0] 



INDEX 


Kejeytir 596. 

Kerti, N.E. of Sumatra 265n. 

Keeari kings, of Orissa 251n. 

Kesava Bhatta 437. 

Kesava-dandanayaka 319. 

Kesavan Karukkaikkon 467. 

Kesi 327. 

Kettarasan 319. 

Kevudan 274n. 

Khaberis of Ptolemy ( — Kaveri- 
patnam) 30. 

Khandadasa, Buddhadatta lived 
in a monastery at Kaveri- 
pattana built by K. 121. 

Khidrapur, identical with Kop- 
pam 307, 32 2n. 

Kia-lo-hi ( - Grahi at Jaiya) 260. 

Kia Tan, his sea-itinerary 623. 

Ki<Janda Perumaj 455. 

Kidangil 370, 480. 

Kiclaram, Hultzsch on 256, 263, 
264n. See Kadaram. 

Kielhorn 12 ; date of Gramam 
inscription 13m, 26n, 125 m, 
131 n, 171 m, 203n, 204n ; 
Indraratha might be the oppo- 
nent of Bhoja of Dhara 250, 
284, 340, 439, 482m, 488m, 
527n, 530 m, 549m, 561m, 

568m, 572m, 573m, 574m, 

576m, 579m, 582m, 589m, 

591m, 602m # 

Kie-tch’a, Chinese form of 

Kataha 264. 

• 

Kie-t’o (later form of Kie-tch’a 
-Kedah) 264. 

KHaippaWr 81. 

K4ai-va|i 440. 

Kijaiyur (Tj.) 389, 401, 495, 
500, 502, 553. 

Ki|ana<jigal, queen of Rajendra 
II 322, 589. 

Ktyanatfiga}, Cera queen 391. 


Kilanadigal, D(Jaiya-pirattiyar, 
mother of Anaimeryuhjinar 
453. See Kokkilan^adigal). 

Kilappaluvur (Tri.) 149, 227, 
365, 373, 377, 392, 394, 397-9, 
402, 405-6, 416, 420-1, 434-5, 
476, 478-9, 483, 486, 490, 539, 
542, 547. 

Kilaradigal, Cola queen 380. 

Kilar-kurru 424, 428, 442, 

Kiiinailiir 423, 434. 

Kilinallur Kilavan alias Sembi- 
yan Kilar-nattukkon 423. 

Kil-Iraniyamuttam 613. 

Kilivaimam-udaiyar 372. 

Kiiiyamir (SA.) 381, 399, 406, 
465, 497, 575-6. 

Kilkala-kun’am 517. 

Kil-kun*u 424. 

Kil-muttugur (NA.) 427, 430. 

Kiili (-Cola) 25, 87. 

Kiiii, a Cola king 12, 140. 

Kiili- valavan, of the Mariime- 
kalai 27n, 45, 92. 
j Killi-valavan, who died at Kula- 
murram 49-55. 

Kiili - vajavan, who died at 
Kurappalli 49-50. 

Kilpakkam (NA.) 558. 

Kliputtfir 131, 411. 

Kilur (SA.) 369, 387, 393, 426, 
431, 445-7, 484, 497, 519, 531, 
536, 590, 602, 606. 

Kilvali - Tonijiur, now Ton<Jur 
455-6. 

Kilvidi (NA.) 440. 

Kirtti - martanda - Brahmadhira- 
jan 267. 

Kirtti -mar ttandan - Kalapriya, 
temple 371. 

Kitti 298 ; assumed the title of 
Vijayabahu 303. 

Kitti-maraikkadan alias Tiru- 
r vela,raiccakkai 454. 


[OBI] 



THE COLAS 


Kifcti - siri - megha, nephew of 
Triloka-sundari 302n. 

Koccadaiyan Ranadhira, assumed 
title 6 kmbiyan 126. 

Koccenganan 12, 36, GO, 013-8, 
140. 

Koccola, who origiually built of 
bricks the temple at Tiruvak- 
karai GOG. 

Kodai-pirattiyar, queen of Arin- 
jaya 183. 

Kodambakam 303. I 

* j 

Kodanda-inanradi 445. j 

Kodandariima, surname of Adil- 
ya 1 130, 139/i. | 

I 

Kodandarama, another name of j 
Rajaditya, grandson of Adit- 1 
yal 139m, 102, 410m, 428, I 
432//., 441. | 

Kodandarama-taniccevagam 481 . 
Kodan>laramat-terifija-kaikk61ar 

388.’ 

Kodandarama- vadi 307. 

• • ♦ 

Ko t J an d ar a in a - v a y k kfi 1 398. 
Kodandarama-vejam, of Tafijavur ; 
485. ; 

i 

Kodandaramesvura, temple at 
Tondamanud erected over 

Adilya’s remains 139, 432 j 

> 

and n 

\ 

Kodavasal, Kudavayir - kottam s 

86 . ' ; 

Kodiyur 446. ; 

Kodumbai 149. See Kodumba- j 
• • * 

lur. j 

KodumbaJtSr 119 ; Vfdir chiefs of i 

139n, 149, l./OandM. 103, 173. j 

180. 187, 188 and n, 189; I 

Manigramam of 365, 400, 419, 

420n, 450; (Pd.) 451, 471 n, 

477, 546. 

Kodungolur 202, 427, 440-1, 

525. 


Kogali (500) 443. 

Kokkandan Ravi, of the Candra- 
ditya family 139n. 

Kommayya Rattagudi 578. 

Kongaraiyar, temple of ; called 
Rftjondra-sola-vinnagar 541. 
Kokkilan(adigal), mother of 
Rajaditya 162, 168 ; construc- 
tion of the stone temple of 

Tiruttondisvara at Tirunava- 
• • 

lur 426. See Kilanadigal. 

Kokkilanadigal, daughter of 
Seramanar 406. 

K p-pertri, at Tribhu- 

vani 557. 


Kola ( =» Cola) 24. 

Kolagala(u) (Mys.) 582, 596. 

Kolar (Mys.) 19«J t 207, 279, 294, 
508, 547, 553, 556, 561, 582, 
588. 

Kola- Pattana, (?) Kaveri-patti- 
nam 32. 


Kolerun (Ooleroon) river 288-9. 
See Kollidam. 

• V * 

Kolhapur, 307, 309. See Kolla- 

puram. 

Koji 57 ; Gandaraditya calls 
liimself lord of K. 183. 
Kollam(desam), Rajaruja I's ex- 
pedition against 202-3, 377. 
Koliapuram, expedition to 310n, 
31 In, 6)04. See Kolhapur. 
Kollidam 22, 366. See Ooleroon 
and Kolerun. 


Kollimalui-nadu 407. 

Kollimalavan Oniyuran Piridi- 
gandavarman 479, 487. 

KoHippakkai. modern Kulpak 
23i> ; destruction of 274, 294. 

Ko- Maharaja. Vira Pantjyan- 
talai-konda ( • Parthi vendra- 
varman * Rajamarayar) 457, 
462. 


[ 652 ] 



INDEX 


K5malam, daughter of Vanavan 
Muvenda-velan 447. 

Kommaipakkam 394. 

Kommayya, W. Calukya general 
275. 

Ko-nadu (Pd.) 127n, 477. 

Konerinmaikondar Sarvalokas- 

• • 

r 

raya Sri Vi^mivardhana 
Maharaja, ( ? ) VirarajOudra 
330n. 

Konerirajapuram (Tj.) 4G7, 474, 
488, 490, 517, 539, 545, 558, 
582, 584. 

Kongalvas, a dynasty subordi- 
nate to the Colas 204, 280. 
Kongap-peruvali 420. 
Kongaraiyar Srlkoyil 465, 544. 

Kongilandar, builder of Rajasek- 
hara - Isvaram at Mangalam 
5G9. 

Kongu(desa) country 64 ; con- 
quered by Aditya 1 137-8» 
142-3, 208-9 ; lifidu 417, 52L» 
541 w, 621. 

Koh gudesa- Raj altical 21, 137, 
395n. 

Konkana 204, 521 . 

Konkan Maury as 28 n. 

Konnadur GOO. 

• * 

Kouow, Sten : {Das) Lid i sc he 
Drama 288. 

Koppam 27G, 292, 295 ; battle of 
K. described 307-9 ; 310-2, 

314-5, 317, 320, 322//, 331. 

Kopperuiijinga 14. 
Kopperunjolan 56-9, 84. 

Korni plates 345 a/. 
Kon*amangalam- uthii y an , Adhi - 

Kiri 593. 

Korravai 116. 

Korru 454. 

Korumelli plates 219n. 


Kosala(i)-nadu 249, 28G, 319. 

Kosala^i) Southern, conquest by 
ltiijendra I 250, 251 and n p 

252 ; Purvarastra 282. 

Kosar 27, 2Sn. 

Kottaikarungulam (Tin.) 503. 

Kottaikkarai, the great em- 
bankment in Kulittalai taluk 

w 

of Trichinopoly 22 and n. 

Ivottaiyur 538, (Tj.) 572. 

Kofctar(yu) 244, 441 ; alias Mum- 
mudi-solanallur G08, GOO, G12. 

Kottasivaram 279, (An.) 551. 

Kottu-nadu 528. 

Kottur alias Cola- Yidyadhara- 
catm. 590. 

Kovalan 90, 91. 

Kovalur (NA.) 527. 

Koviladi (Tj.) 385, 431. 

j Kovil-Venni in Tanjore Dist. 

; identified with Venni where 

• • 

\ Karikfda won a victory 40. 

i 

j Kovirajamarayar 179, 4G2. 

Kovur-Kilar, on Nalangilji 4G ; 

[ his addresses to Nedungilli 
48-50, 52 ; rescues the children 
of Malaiyamau 54, 77, 84. 

Koyil-madamudaiyan Eduttnpa- 
dam-Seyyapadam alias Tirut- 
tnrutti-piccan 497. 

Koyil-mayilai alias Parantuka 
Muvendavojau 452, 455. 

Knyilolugu 323, 355//. 

i Koyil-perral alias Vanavan- 
madeviyar, daughter of 
Puprda-Sekariyar 389. 

Koyil - TOvarayanpeUfti 1G5/1, 
542n. 

lvoyil-variyam 4G4. 

Koyinangai, mother of Semiip- 
peraraiyan 417. 

Kar, isthmus 2G1-2. 


[663 ] 



THE COLAS 


* 

Krimikantha, who persecuted 
Ramanuja, identical with 
Adhirajendra or Virarajen- ' 
dra 354 and w. 

Krishnamachari S. ed. of Guru - 
paramparai 170ra. 

Krishna Rao, B.V. 219 n. 

Krishna Sastri, H. 1, 131n, 137n, 

143n, 162/i, 166n, 169n, 172n, 
174, 177-8, 182n, 184n, 187n, 
195n, 217n, 220n, 246/i, 254 n, j 
375n, 378n, 383/i, 397/i, j 
400n, 406n, 408/&, 413n, 4l8u f 
426n, 427n, 428//, 432n, 442n, 
449n,458n, 461n, 471n. 472n, 
475n, 47 9n. 

Krishnaswami Aiyangar, (Dr. S. 
K. Aiyangar) 27 n, 33n, 40«, | 
71n, 212n, 237n, 245n, 246u> i 
247n, 249//, 251n, 260n, 265n, 1 
268n, 281n, 283-7, 306n, I 
320n, 328n, 348n, 350n, 355/1. j 

Krom N.J. 25n, 2 62n, 620. 

Kr§na legends 110, 115-6, ear- 
liest epigraphical reference 
to his worship in the Tamil 
country 397 and n. 

Kr§na, river 277, 304, 321*2, 

* 328, 330. 

Krgna, son of Aditya 37 on. 

Kr§na III, Ra^trakuta king 14, 
143, 151, 152, i54 aud n, 

155-8, 159n, 160-1, 162 and n t 
165, 166n, 173, 178, 182-4,’ 
186n, 189, 208, 215-6, 371n, 
384n # 449n. 

Kr^na Deva Raya of Vijayanagar 
170, 199. 

Kr$nan Kausalaiyar Sri, wife of 
Narakkan Raman 556. 

Kr^nan Raman Sri, Senapati 
229, 556. 

m 

Kj§neivara 37 In. 


Ksatriya-malla-terinja-valangai - 
velaikkarar 567. 

Ksatriya-sikhamani, title of 
Rajaraja I 225. 

Ksatriya - sikhamani Kongalva, 
title bestowed on Manija by 
Rajaraja I 204, 280, 528. 

Ksatriya - sikhamanipuram ( * 
Takkdlam) 517, 549, 614. 

Ksatriya - sikhamani - vala-nadu 
545. 

Ksemlsvara, author of Camfa - 
kauHkam 283. 

Ksetrapala 225. 

Kubera 245n. 

Kudakko Nedunjerai-Adan 62. 

Kudal, the seat of Tamil learn- 
ing 62. 

Kiidal Kilar Manisiva - bhatta 
Sarvakratukkal 431. 

Kudalalvar, temple 392. 

Kiidlali, at the junction of the 
Tunga and Bhadm 322. 

Ku(Jal-Sangamam VIrarajendra 
victor of K. 292; the battle of 
Mudakkaru identical with 
Kudal-^angamam 317-20, 321 
and n, 324-6 ; Someevara’s 
absence 328, 329-30, 335, 
350n. 

Ku<Jalur 551, 563. 

Kuda - malai • nadu ( *■* Coorg, 
Kielhorn identifies it with 
Malabar) 203 and n ; 208, 
494n, 527. 

Kudavayir - Kottam, West Gate 
Prison in Kombakdnam ? 65, 
86 . 

Ktu}imai 567. 

Kutfinaikkal 580. 

Ku4inikki{ya) - devaddna 419, 
455. 

Ku4inlng&-dfa)aMna 585. 


(«M ] 



INDEX 


Kudippangudaiyan Sifudanam 
Panimagan 593. 

Kudiraikkara Sobhanayyan 484. 

Kudlnr, plates of Marasinlha 
161n. 

Kxidumbu-v&riyam 416. 

Ku<jtamiyftmalai (Pd.') 188n, 

881, 394, 399, 403, 405-7, 409, 
418, 441. 

Kuhur (Tj.) 398, 467, 481, 486, 
490, 493, 517, 527, 545, 559, 
606. 

Kulnkkudaiyan Arunilat Sri- 
kr^nan alias Mu vend a Pida- 
vur-Yelar 487. 

Kulakkn<Jli 372. 

Kulamanikkattar, Nangai 393. 

Kulambandal (NA.) 561, 581. 

Kulamurram 49, 50 «, 53, 55. 

Kulasani Ambalattadi alias 
Rajadhirajap-pungun^a-nadal- j 
van 619. i 

Kulasani Maluva - manikkam ! 

• • 

alias Adhirajadhiraja-pnn- j 
gunjra-nadalvan 619. 

Kujattur, gamuncja of 545. 

Kolattur-ntjaiyar, Inadu-vagai - 
Seygira 505. 

Ku-lin, (Qoilon) 267. 

Kulottunga 1 3, 9 n, 16, Kalinga 
campaign 20 ; 118, 158, 213, 
third Co|a mission to China 
in 1077 A.D. 267; 282, Ceylon 
became independent of the 
Colas under K. 303; 311n, 
312n, 313n, 315, married 

Madhurant&ki 322 ; land- 
revenue assessment in Kolli- I 
malai - nadu In Rajamahen- 
dra’s days 323 ; 329, 380ft, 
336, accession of K. 338-58; 
relations between him and 


Vijayaditya 344-6; his posi- 
tion in 1063-70, 346-7 ; evi- 
dence of his early Tamil 
inscriptions 347-9, literary 
evidence 349-50 ; recognized 
the legitimacy of Adhirajen- 
dra 350; was K. adopted 
into the Cola family ? ib ., his 
share in the troubles of 
Adhirajendra 353 ; evidence 
of his complicity is not clear 
357, 529n, 580n, 606n. 

Kuldttunga II 17 ; ula on 21, 
355n. 

Kulottunga III 170, 269n. 

Kulottungan PillaittamUy a 
child-poem on Kulottunga II 
19, 21. 

Kulottiinga&r>lan-ula 21, 355n. 

Kulpak, identified with Kollip- 
pakkai 236, 238, 249n. 

Kulumanip-pakkam 408. 

Kuluta king, a feudatory of 
Vimaladitya 219, 220n, 284. 

Kumanpadi 459-60. 

Kumaratjinangai 463. 

Kumaramangalam (NA.) 428. 

Kumara-martandapuram, Peru- 
nagarattar of 363, 420. 

Kumara-marttanijan, lamp called 

399, 414. 

Kumara-mattanda, a surname of 
Nandivarman II 364n. 

Kumaranandi Pulalappan of 
Vadagarai Mukkuttur 430. 

Kumaran-kon 399. 

Kumarankusa. Cola Maharaja 
124, 133n. 

Kumaran Pallavaraiyan 502. 

Kumaraswami, A. K. 620. 

Kumaraswami, P. 68, 


[ 685 ] 



THE COLAS 


Kumbabonam 24; treasury of 
Cola kings of the 6angam 
Age 79 ; defeat of the Co] as as 
the allies of the Pallavas in a 
battle near K, with &ri Mara Sri 
Yallabha 127, 133, lGOn, 281; 
(Tj.) 365, 370, 387, 389, 409, 
413, 436, 439, 442, 452-3, 455, 
467-8, 470. 

Kumili-nadu 526. 

«» • 

Kunadara Koralo (Ceylon) 597. 

Ktmamenakaipurattu - erina - j 
vy&pdrigal 562. 

Kunavan, K. Puttan 385 and n. 

Kundamangalam 371. 

Kundamayan 308. 

Kundanan Amirtavaili, mother 

i 

of Uloka-mahadeviyar, queen j 
of Rajaraja I 484. ! 

Kundavai, elder sister of Raja- j 
raja I 169n; daughter of I 
Vanavan-mahadOvi 190; Raja- j 
raja’s affection towards her j 
199 ; K.-ceri 225 and n, 226, i 
278, 281, 402; daughter of 
Parantaka 499, 506, 515, 531, 
535, 545. 

Kundava(i), the younger daugh- 
ter of Rajaraja I and younger 
sister of Rajendra J, marriage 
with Vimaladitya 219 , 226, 
339, 515. 

Kundavai-alvar matha at Dttara- 
merur 568. 

Kundavai - jinalaya, built by 
Parantaban Kundavai-piratti- 
yar at Dadapuram 506 ;-deva 
of Tirumaiai 554. 

Kundav&ip^ pereri at Brahma- 
desam 565. 

Kundavai * leri, in Mannarkoyil 
610. 

Kundavai - vlnnagar 506, 510, 
515, 535, 577. 


Knnderu, river 122. 

Kundur 507. 

• • 

Kuhjaramallan, title of Paran- 
taka I 417. 

Ivunjaramallan-vaykkal 581. 

Kunjaramalli, daughter of Siri- 
yavelar 451. 

Kunrak-kuryam 368, 378, 399, 
405, 469. 

Kunra-nadu 369. 

Kunra-vattanak-kottam 528, 

Kuny i y u r-nadu 403. 

Kuntalas 308. 

Kupakas, king of the, a local 
chieftain of South Travancoro 
270. 

Kuraganpadi, an iraiyilippal- 
Uccandam 484. 

Kuml 7 n, 24n ; 35n, 56n ; on 
polity 78-81 ; no mention of 
ktihts and ciyams 82 ; 83, 85, 
87w, 91. 113. 

Kuram (Ch.) 439, 443, 463, 486. 

Ktlram grant , of Paramesvara- 
varman I 126. 

Kurappajli 50 and n, 61. 

Kurattiyar, sacrifice by 542-3. 

Kurattu Asiriyan 413. 

Kurattiir alias Parantaka-catm. 
461, 584. 

Kuravan Ulagajandan alias 
Rajaraja Maharajan of the 
revenue survey 230. 

Kurradawfam 564. 

Kurruml 567. 

Kuryuva-Nayanar 127. 

Kurubahajli (Mys.) 530. 

Kurubujru (Mys.) 254n ; record 
553. 

Kurugur-madam 535. 

Kuyukkai 64n. 

Kuyumba-na<J 474. 


£«M] 



INDEX 


Knrumbar coins 620. 

Kunmdogai 56 n. 

Knsnmi ( - Bassien) 261n. 

Kuttalam, Rajendra II’s inscrip- 
tion 322 ; (Tj.) 373, 536, 561, 
590, 591, 595. 

Kuttalam (Tin.) 407-9, 422, 434, 
527-8. 

Kuttan Qanavadi 566, 567n. 

t w 

Kuttan Madhurantakan 513. 

Kuttan Tiruvengada-devan, an 
adigdri of Udaiya-pirattiyar 
539. 

Kuttan V!ra-(naraya)niyar alias 
Cola-Mahadeviyar 504, 522. 

Kuvajalam (Kolar) 190, 469, 
556. 

Kiivam (Ch.) alias Madhuran- 
taka-nallur 590. 

Kwantan river 262-3. 

L 

Lada, southern, Ranasura of 251; 
or Rad ha, part of Bengal 252 ; 
Venkayya identifies with 
Berar 253/t. 

Lada, uttara 251, 

Laksml, Tiru 241. 

Laksmisura 252n. 

Lakullsa Pasupata 420/?. 

Lakulmvara Pandita 545 ; Maha- 
vratin 603. 

Lalgucji 188, (Tri.) 363, 378, 406, 
435, 440. 

Lalleya 156n. 

Lambri of Marco Polo ( — Ilamu- 
ridefiam) 263. 

Lamoeri ( — Ilamuridesam or 
Great Atjeh) 624. 

LampBaouB, silver dish of 105. 

Lamuri of Arab Geographers, 
ancient Ilamuridetfam 623. 


| Lanka (-Ceylon) 239-40, 261, 

296. See llam. 

*• 

Lankas5ka(m) 255, (Ilanga45kam 
- Wurawari - Gangayu) 623. 
See Ilangas5kam. 

Lankasuka 263-4, ( - Wurawari 
— Gangayu) 62 X 

Lan-won-li of Chau Ju-kua(- 
Uamuri-desam) 263. 

Lata chiefs 228. See Iladaraya. 
& Empire Sumatranais de Sri 
Vijaya : Ferrand 259n. 

Le Royaume de Sri Vijaya : 
M. Coedes 257. 

Levi, Sylvain: on Manimekhala 
32, 33 n; on Mevilimbangam 
262n. 

| Leyden (Larger) Grant 12, 140, 

[ 157n, 160 and n, 164, 167, 

j 176, 179, 181-2, 185, 190, 

| 193n, 224, 220-30, 256, 258, 

i 263 n. 264, 267, 391n, 428n, 

| 512h, 533n. 

I Life and Times of C dinky a 
Vikramdditya VI : A. V. 

Venkatarama Aiyar 32 7n. 
Ligor ( — Lo-yue of Kia Tan) 
623-4. 

Lllavati 30 In. 

Lingsagar, taluk 333. 
Ling-ya-sseu-kia of Chau Ju-kua 
( — Ilangasokam) 260, 262. 

Loka-mahadevi alias Dantisakti 
Vitanki, queon of Rajaraja I 
225; temple built by her at 
Tiruvaiyaru called L.-Isvara 
507, 514-5. See Dantisakti 
Vitanki. 

Ldkamahadevi, queen" of Raja- 
mahendra 323. 

Lokamahadovi -catm. Maniman- 
galam 370-1. 

L5ka-madevi Son in Mannar- 
k5yil 610. 


83 


[ 667 ] 



THE COLAS 


Lokavidyadhara Brahmadhi- 
rfijan 402. 

Lo-ts’a-lo-ts’a ( — Rajariija) first 
Cola mission to the Song rulers 
of China in 1015 : 266. 

Lo-yue of Kia Tan(«Ligor» 
Tambra-linga) 6234. 

Luders 37n. 

M 

Macdonell 283. 

Mackenzie, Col., his efforts to j 
collect antiquarian remains 1 ; j 
Mss. 21. j 

Madabbe 578. ! 

Madakku lak-ldl-Madurai 612. J 
Madamalingam 255 ; Smith’s • 

identification with Martaban i 

* 

261n; ( = Tan-maling of Chau j 
Ju-kua) 262, 623. j 

Madamudaiya Ilakulisvara Pan- j 

* • ** • * j 

ditar Eanmigal 549. j 

Mudan aman gal am , a brahma - i 
deya 494. 

Madauamafijari-catm. 380, 489, 
491. 

Madanarajan, Sri Vallabha 297 

and of the family of 

Kannaran or Kruia 300-1. 

• • • 

Madapati of Tiruvadnturai 434. 
Madappuram 579, 602. 
Madevadigal, daughter of Raja- 
raja I 226, 515. 

Madevi-arundimangalam, Vedal 
379. 

Madhava Bhatta, composer of 
the Sanskrit praSasti of Anbil 
plates 167. 

Madhavi, mother of Manimeka- 
lai 32, 93, 111. 

Madhurantaka, donor of Raja- 
pura plates from Bastar 250. 
Madhurantaka, title of Parantaka 
I, 145, 434. 


Madhurantaka, title of Rajendra 
1 242, 248. 

Madhurantaka, title of Sundara 

Cola, 166; Udaiviir Madhuran- 

takan Sundara Solan 173. 

•« 

Madhurantaka alias Colendra, 
son of Virarajendra 324. 
Madhurantaka - (leva alias 
Uttama Cola, Sri 473. 
Madhurfmtaka-dcvan Arumoli- 

M 

nangaiyar alias Piranar, dau- 
ghter of Rajendra I 576. 
Madhurantaka-dcvan - m a d a i 
566, 567, 596. 

Madhurantaka Irukkuvol 188n. 
Madhurantaka(m) - catm. See 
Madurantakam. 

Madhurantaka n alias Parakesari 
Velar, brother of Rajendra Ps 
queen Vira-madeviyar 574. 
Madhurantakan, Acca (Xditya)- 
pidaran 477. 

Mad(h)urantakau-devi 559, 
Madhu rantakan Gan • laraccan 

538. 

Madhurantakan Gandaradittan, 

son of Madhurantaka Uttama 

Cola ? 193), 227 ; his enquiries 

into temple affairs ; wrongly 

identified with Gandaradittar 

* • 

of Trrurisaippd 22<S, 368 and 
n, 372, 404, 477-8, 482 and 
n, 490. 

Madhu r a n t akan M ad 6 vad i ga j a r 

alias Sembiyan - raadeviyar, 

mother of Uttama Cola 472. 

Madhurantakan Uma-bhattaraki- 

• » 

yar, shrine in Tirukkolambi- 
yiir 474. 

Mad h u ran taka n al I u r alias Ku- 
vam 590. 

Madhurantaka Pallavaraiyar 

442. 

Madhurantakap-pereri, an irriga- 
tion tank at Tribhuvani 544. 


[ 668 ] 



INDEX 


Madhurantakat - terinja - kaik - 
kola(r) (padai) 303, 401. 

Madhurantakat - terinda - ve]am 
or Melai Velara 513. 

Madhur7mtaka Uttaraa Cola 
167-8. 

Madhurantaki, daughter of 
Rajondra II and wife of K. 
Cfilnkya RujOndra II alias 
Kulottunga I 822, 339, 343, 


Madurantaka(m),- o atm. 414 ; 
(Oh.) 449, 478; a street opened 
round the temple 479; 522, 
540, 554 ; a hall called Sembi- 
yan-mahudevi - peruman* ,ht])am 
at M. 557, 578, 582, 598, 000, 
003. 

Madurantaka(n), title of Uttama 
Cola 168; installed Arumoli 
as yuvaraja 192, 227, 36Sn. 


351. j 

Madhurantaki-mvaram 593. 1 

Madhyastha 478. j 

Madileri-elimdarulina R a j a- i 
kesari - varman, probably . 

Sundara Co] a 492. I 

Madiraikondn Miirayar 380. ! 

Madras Museum Inscription of i 


Raja raj a 1 503. 

Madras Museum plates of Utta- 
ma Cola 194-5. 

Madura 53 and n, 90, 100, 1(19, 
127 ; raided by Varan taka 1 
145, 148-9 ; captured by Raja- 
raja l 202, 412 /j. 

Madu ra ilka a ji 117//. 

MadiiraiktmtjaMtt® of Par an taka 
I, 144 ; M. Miirayar 3)80. 

Maduraikonda Parakesari 172 ; 
M. UdaiyVtr 365, 386, 397, 414- 
42, 479. See Parantaka I. 

Maduraikonda Rajakesari 166, 
168, 171, 172 and n; identilied 
with Sundara Cola Parantaka 
II 173-5, 185, 449’. 

Madu ra (i )man (Jalam , dost r o y ed 
by Rajondra I 248 ; part of 
MueunideBam 250. 






1 

{ 

i 

j 


Maduraiyum Ihimum-kouda, 
title of Parantaka I, 145-6* 
195n, 419, 435-6, 438-12. 
Maduramangalam (Ch.) 462. 

Madiirantaka, title of Sundara 
Co}a 173-4. 


Madiirantaka Irukkuvel alias 
Adittan-pudi 408. 

Madu rantaka I r u k ku vf*l (fir) 

tmm 

alias Accan (Adittan) Vikra- 
makeBari(yarl 407. 

Mat I ura u taka Mil vein lav cl an 

452 n. 

Madura Sultanate 15. 

Maduvanan, Calukya general 
3 19. 

Magadha country 14; artisans 
108; no evidence of the rule of 
RiUtrak iltas here 283 ; flight 
of BiuMhist monks from 622. 

Maguhun, Pidfiri temple 381. 

Mahabalipuram (Ch.) 595. See 
Mamallapuram. 

MahCibhdntia 17 ; origin of hu- 
man marriage 115. 

Mahdbhdsya 2\\n. 

Mahadandanayaka, for theGanga 
and Vengi mandalas 212. 

Mahadovadigaj, queen of prince 
Rajaditya-de\a and daughter 
of Iladarayar 438. 

Mahaganga ( « Mahawaeliganga) 
34. 

Mahfdanakitd, the mighty 298-9, 

Makamatra Ajavarmaya 558. 

Mahamatran Gautaman Kesavan 
Srikanthan of Sattanur 474. 

Maharajadhiraja, title of Vira- 
rajendra 336. 


[ 65 »] 



THE COLAS 


Maharajap(v)a<Ji (7000) 228, 

313, 460, 505 and n, 577-8. 

Ma Hasin ( •» Mayij*udingam) 
623. 

Mahatittha 144, 147, 207. 

Mahavamsa , 3, 4 ; on the early 
intercourse between the Cola 
country and Ceylon 32-5, 68- 
70, 144 and n, 145-7, 149, 186, 
205, 238-40, 256, 260, 261n, 
272, 297-301, 303, 331. 

Mahavamsa ed. by Geiger 33n. 

Mahawaeliganga, ancient Maha- 
ganga 34. 

Mahendragiri record 219 ; inva- 
sion against the king of Kulu- 
ta 284, 569. 

Mahendra-mangalam 499. 

Mahendravarxnan, Fallava 126. 

Mahesi 300. 

Mahimalaya Irukkuvel 188/1 ; 
alias Pirantakan Vira-solan | 
370. ’ | 

Mahinda IV, Ceylon king 186, 
520n. 

Mahinda V, Ceylon king ; ex- s 
pedition of Rajaraja I against I 
Ceylon in the reign of 205; ‘ 
invasion of Rajendra I 238, \ 
239 and n ; deportation by 
Rajendra 240, 297. 

Mahipala, the Gurjara ruler 
283-8. 

Mahipala, Paia king 248, Rajen- 
dra V* victory over 249 and n\ 
of Uttara La<Ja 251-2, 283-8. 

Mahipala of 0$a (N. Orissa): Dr. 
S. K. Aiyangar on 283. 

Mahi§matipura 305. 

Mahmud of Ghazni 251n, 283. 

Mahddai, conquest by Rajendra 
1234. 

MahSdaya 287. 

Mahratha smiths 108. 


Maikal range 282. 

Mailapur, tank of 503. 

Majumdar R. C. 83n. 

Malabar (Coast), trade with 
Malaya in the hands of the 
Tamils 103 ; (Malai - nacju = 
Malabar: Kielhorn) 203n. 

Malacca, straits of 263. 

Maladu, a district on the Pennar 
53, 369, 401, 445. 

Malai k /cal, weight 489. 

Malainadu ( » Malabar) 10; 
( « mountain country or Kuda- 
malai-nadu or Coorg) 203, 368, 
377, 389, 495-6, 418, 427, 
440-1, 504, 519, 525, 529, 621. 

Malaiyajis, their inliux into the 
Cola country 163. 

Malai) awun chiefs 53, 54 ; 
sons of M. tried in the man- 
ram of Uraiyur 84, 190. 

Malaiyaman Setti 489. 

Malaiyaman Tirumudikkiiri 37n, 
53. 

Malaiyamanaj-u 403. 

Malaiyana-on’aiccevagan 431. 

Malaiyuna-parivara of Rajaditya 
431. 

Malaiyavvai-deviyar 483. 

Malaiyu(r) 255; at the southern 
end of the Malay peninsula on 
the northern shore of the old 
Singapore strait 259 $ Coedes 
leaves its identification unde- 
cided 260n ; Ferrand on 622 ; 
( ■» Djambi) 623. 

Ma|aiai-mangalam 462. 

Majambi (Coorg) 280, 528. See 
Majavvi. 

Malanacju 394 f 409, 437. 
M&laperuma] 432. 


[M0] 



mt>E3C 


Malaperumanadigal, Bembiyan 
MiLdeviyar was a daughter of 
402, 432. Bee Malavaraiyar. 

Malavaraiyan Sundara - Bola(n) 
208n, 486, 

Malavaraiyar, father of Paranta- 
kan Madevadigal 388. See 
Malaperu manad igal . 

Majavvi 204 ; village conferred 
on Manija 528. See Malambi. 

Malay(a) Peninsula, trade with 
India 103-4, 232, 2511, 260 
and n, 262, 266-7. 

Malaya mountain, abode of 
Agastya 241. 

Malayu, river 259. 

Maldives, Rajaraja’s conquest of 
old islands of the sea number- 
ing (12,000), 220, 231, 212. 

Malenacji 321. 

Malepudu plates, 3n, 44, 119 
and n\ genealogy of the ! 
Telugu Cojas in 123-4. j 

Maleya (Malabar) 204, 521. 1 

Mfyigaik-kol % a standard mea- 
sure 540, 543. 

Malingi ( — Mayilangai) opposite 
Tajakkad 551. 

Malkhed (- Many akh eta) 237, ; 
238, 285. 

Malli-nadu 407. 

Mallllvarattu Nambiraftiyar 
Tennavan Mahadeviyar alias 
Narayana Nanguri Nangaiyar, 
queen of Parantaka I 431. 

Majur(patna) (Mys.) 254n, 326n, 
510, 522-3, 528, 531, 554, 559, 
561, 601. 

Malu f ordeal of red hot iron 418. 

Halwa 210, 237 ; (Majva) 286. 

Mamallapuram (Oh.) Nagaram 
515 * alias Jananathapuram 
556, 595. 


Mamandur (Ch.) 405, 497. 
Mamulanar, a Bangam poet on 
Moriyar 26, 27 and n . 
Manabharanan 269, 301-2 ; 

Pandyan M. decapitated by 
liajadhiraja I was, according 
to Hultzsch, the ancestor of 
M., the nephew and son-in- 
law of Vijayabahu I 302 n. 

Managaratiar of Kauclpuram 
404. 

Manakkavaram 255 ( « Nicobars) 
263, 624. 

Manakkilli 37n. 

Manakkurai - Viranarayananar 
408-9. 

Manali 396 ; alias Bimhavisnu- 
! catm. 567, 574-5. 

j Manalkal, sabha of 378. 
j Manalur 514. 

i Manarkudi alias Mahipalakula- 
kalapperalam 577. 
Manavalapperumai, gift of an 
image of M. 462, 468 ;-alvar 
607. 

Mdnavira Parantaka , a sur- 
name of Jat. Sundara U. P. 
612. 

Manavir-kottam 590. See Mana- 
yii-koltam. 

Manayij*(k)kottam 373, 382, 

421, 462 ; M*-nadu 471, 517, 
548, 590. Bee Manavir-kottam. 

Mamlaikulattur 454. 

• * • 

Mandai-naugai, wife of Riijara- 
jan alias V ana van Brahma- 
dhirajan 551. 

Mandala(nx)8 212, 224. 
Mandara-gaurava-mangalam 540. 

Mandara-gauravanar Kundadevi- 
yar 278 ; wife of Vallavaraiyar 
541. 

Mandaraii - jeral - irumporai, 
Cera, Yanaikkatcey 60 and n. 


[Ml] 



THE COLAS 


Manclikere (Mya.) 581. 
Mandi(a)ram, alias Jayamoru 
Srlkarana-mangalam 482, 509, 
577. 

Mangadu 408. 

Mangaiyark-karasi 127. 

Mangalam (Sm.) 569. 

Mangallu plates 215n. 
Ma^igrdmam 365, 425. See 

Manikkiraraam. 

Manija, his heroism in the battle 
of Panasoge rewarded 204 ; 
title of Ksatriyasikhamani 
Kongaiva confeired on him 
280, 528. 

Manikkirdmam of Tenvara-nadu 
407. 

Manimangalam (Oh.) 370-1, 496, 
576, 589, 602. 

Manimangalam inscription of 
Rajadhiraja I 304, 307, 315; 
of Virarajendra 325, 327 n, i 
328-30, 342. 

Mayimekalai , 4, legend of 

Agastya releasing the Kaveri 
23n ; 33n, re : Kakandi 37 n ; 
38n, 39, 45-6, 53 n, 65 n, 71 
and n, 72 and n, 74, on five 
modes of disposing of the 
dead 75 ; on kuhis and dyams 
81; 86w, 88n, 93 and n, 
94n, 97n, 99n, 104, 107-9, 
110 and n , 111 n, 112 and n, 
114, 116, 117 and n, 121 n, 
249n. 

Manimekalai in its Historical 
setting : Dr. S, K. Aiyangar 
33n, 7 In. 

Manimekhala, sea-goddess after 
whom the heroine and the 
poem Manimekalai are called 
32. 

ManjS4i 364, 384. 

Manjaga, Hoysala leader 527. 


Matijikkam ( —poromboke) 458, 
sabha-m. 461, 559, 603. 

Manjippayanar alias Jaya- 
simha - Kulantaka - piramara- 
yar 602. 

Manjiyan Karanai 566. 

Mannaikkadakkam ( — Manya- 
kheta 236-7. 

Mannaikonda-sola, a mandapa at 
Tiruvomyur 238, 573. 
Mannandippai, its palace was 
burnt by the Colas 304. 

Mannar- K6v(v)il (Tin.) 225n, 
243-4, 562/608, 610-1, 614. 

Mannevkkadan alias Tirunlia- 
kanda-setti 542. 

Manni-nadu 513. 

Man nup-perumbalu v ur 469. 

Manoramacceri 455. 

Manrfulikkalanai 454. 

Manrdiji'Vdriyam 498. 

Manram , hall 83 ; germ of a 
popular assembly 84 ; powers 
of the M. of Uraiyur 84 ; M. of 
rural areas 85, 95. 

Mantota 207. See Mahatittha. 

Manu, (Coja) legend of the calf 
1 % > 

Manuala, of Bnddhadatta 120rt. 

Manukulan Singaperumau 428. 

Manunldi-murai - va(ara, his- 
torical introduction of Raja- 
mahcndra-Diiva 31Gn, 598. 

Manyakhcta identical with 
Mannaikkadakkam 236 ; ( - 
Mulkhed) 237, 444. 

Mapappalam 255, 260-1, (- 
Pahang or Penang) 623. 

Mapaikkadan Dfivan alias Kaja- 
raja Tadigaippadi-nadalvan of 
Sattanur 588. 

Maramangalam 402. 

Maramaraiyar 136, 383. 


[ 



INDEX 


Marambavai 137 n, 381, Arllgal 
Kandan 383 ; 621. 

Marandai (Tin.) 410. 

Marandayanallnr 410. 

Maranjadaiyan, Trichinopoly in- 
scription of 1 26, 469. 

Maran Paramesvaran, an officer 
of Parantaka I 152 ; raid on 
Nellore 183 ; alias &embi- 
yan Soliyavaraiyan of Sirnku- 
lattur, called also VIrakIrti 
432. 

Marasanahalli (Mys.) 530. 

Marasimha, father of PrthivI- 
pati II 136, 467??, 

Marasimha TI, the Kudliir plates 
of 161??, 390/?. 

Maravadigal, a feeding-house 
575. 

Mara van Na rasi m h a va rman 

al ias Raj araj a- viina-kovarai- 
yar, a Bana chief 229, 512, 
516. 

Mara van Pudiyar 413??. 

Ma'ravanlsvarattu - (mahadeva), 
udaiyar 398-9. 

Maravarman Udaiyar Sri Parak- 
rama Ooja-Pandya 619. 

Maravarman Udaiyar Sri Vik- 
rama, Cola-Pandya 617-8. 

Mara-Vijaydttimga-varman, Sri, 
Lord of Sri Vmya 224, 256, 
258, 266. 

Marayan 319. 

Marayan Arumoli alias Senapati 

Uttamasola Brahmamarayan, 

son of Narakkan $ri Krsnan 

* * * * 

Raman alias Raj on dra- sol a 
Brahmamarayan 561. 

Marayan Gangaikonda - sSlan 
alias Uttama Sola-marayan, 
chief of Tirnvantr 567. 

Marayan Pajnvnr Nakkan 570. 


Marco Polo 21 ; hifl' Lambri 
(Ilfimuri-desam) 263. 

Mdrga , music 93. 

Mariyadi 449. 

Markanam (®Sopatma of the 
Periplus and So-pattinam of 
Tamil literature) 30; (SA.) 
500, 503, 536, 582. 

Marathi, inscription of 1803, 
Tanjore 10. 

Mardyam 279. 

Marayan Arumoli alias Uttama- 
sola Brahma-marayan 279. 

Mari Venko, Cera 59. 

Marokkattu Nappasalaiyar 51, 
54-5. 

Marpidngeri 385, 393, 400. 

Marpidugu-catni. 385. 

Marpidugu Kalvan Amarakalan 
382. 

Marudadu (NA.) 483, 560. 

Marudattur-udaiyan Ye Ian Sola 
Keralan alias Karikala-sola- 
Vaitumbaravan 615. 

Marudiir 421, 426, 

Marudurudaiyan Arunidi-Kali- 
yan, an adigdri 426, 430. 

Marugal 394, 401, 504, 545. 

Mariir (Mys.) 549. 

Maruvur-prikkam, one of the two 
parts of Puliar 98. 

Ma4anam 83. 

Masattanar, of Aduturai 55. 

Maski (®Mueangi) 246??. 

Ma-slyavadi (140) 443. 

Masuni-desa ( « the land of the 
snakes) 245??, 248 and n, 250. 

Mattukura, Erivimpattana 583. 

Mauryas ( » Moriyas) 26, 27 and 

?i, 28. 

Mauryas of Konkan 28??, 119. 

Mavalattan, younger brother of 
Naiangilli 45-6. 

Mavali-Vanarayar alias Kudi- 
pari-tanclik-kamanar 413. 


[««*] 



TfltE COLAS 


MavankilH alias NednngiHi, 
Killivalavan 45. 

Mayal (Musangi) 551. 

Mayilai Tincjan alias Avandiya- 
kopa Pallavaraiyar of Puduk- 
kudi 409. 

Mayilangai 521 ; Jananathapura 
551. 

Mayila(r)ppil, (Mylapore) 424, 
435. 

Mayirudingam 255, (— Ji-lo- 
ting in the region of 
Jaiya in the centre of the 
Malay peninsula) 260 ; Dr. 
S. K. Aiyangar identifies it 
with Besinga (Rsi Srnga) the 
modern Rangoon 260n ; Ma 
Hasin 623, 

Me Crindle, ed. Ptolemy 30 n. 

Medava Mahadevi, wife of Vima- 
laditya 339. 

Medinl-Vallabha. title of Vira- 
rajendra 336. 

Megalapuram 579. See Me.rkaja- 
puram. 

Melaic-ceri-maniyambalam 544. 

Melpadi (formerly NA., now C.) 
161, 169, 173, 184, 226, 371n, 
420n, Kannai*a’s encampment 
after defeating and killing 

the Cola king 445; 448, 485, 
493-4, re-named Rajasraya- 
puram after cancelling the old 
name of Merpikli alias Vira- 
narayanapuram 495, 512, 523, 
538, 542, 549, 553, 603n. 

Melappaluvur (Tri.) 227, 369, 
376-9," 382, 403, 405, 422-4, 
439, 469, 473, 484, 496, 519, 
555, 591. 

MMsevur (SA.) 385, 508. 

MelukSte 355 n. 

ffllvtlram 498, 562, 581. 


Mel-vSmba-nadti 535, 611. 

Memoirs of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal : Hornell on boat 
designs 620. 

Menander ( — Milinda) 623*4. 

Men-Marudur alias Jayangonda- 
fiolanallur 619. 

M 

Merkalapuram 567. See Me- 
galapuram. 

Merkelundarulina-devar, another 
name of Gandaraditya 183, 
388. 

Merkili-mangalam, sabha of 565. 

Merpadi, alias Vlranarayana- 
puram, re-named Rajasraya- 
puram 495, 512. See MelpaijU. 

Meirpal n gii r-n ad u 382. 

Merpaluvur, of Toncjai-nad 373; 
Merpidavur 462. 

Mevilimbangam 255 ; not possi- 
ble to identify 262 ; sought in 
Perak by Uouffaer and 
Earmaranga by S. Levi 262 n ; 
623. 

Meyk-kirttika ] 7. 

Midnapur 286. 
j Migolai-vila-nadu 424. 

Mihindu, Vessagiri slab inscrip- 
tion of 186. 

Milada(u) (2000), 322-3, 403, 
481, 554, 592. 

Miladudaiyar, his daughter was 
queen of Ottama Cola 367. 

Miladndaiyar Kayirur Peruma- 
nar 426. 

Miiadndaiyar-paIJi 363. 

Mijalaik-kurram 435, 606. 

Milinda alias Menander 623-4. 

Milinda-Panha 262, 6234. 

Minavan Muv§nda-vS}an 468* 

Mlnavan Vijattur * na^nkkfin 

481. 

Uindigal (Mye.) 577. 


[ 664 ] 



INDEX 


Mifijnr (Ch.) 467, 536. 

MIraj grant (1024 A.D.) 246. 
Mithila 252 ; the KarnataB of 254. 
Mivanam 565. 

Miyalunganam 383. 
Miy-mala-nadu 409. 

Mlecchas 100. 

Mogamir, a hamlet of Sembiyan- 
mahadevi 570. 

Mohiir (South Arcot District) 
chieftains of 27, 28 and n. 
Mnriyar ( — Maury as) 26. 

Mosi, the lame (Mudamosiyar) 
61. 

Monna Kumara-milttandan 364. 

* • 

Mt. D’ Eli 271. 

Mudakkaru, battle of, same 
as K ud al-san ga mam 317, 318, 
320, 32 In, 335. 

MudalinayappaHi alias Jayan- 
gontja-solapnram 569. 

M udamdsiyar 6 1 . 

Mudicco-niidn 371. 

* » • 

Mndigonda Cola, title of Riijdn- 
dra I 280. 

Mn ligonda*s61ftp-peravu( * Tam- 
braparni) 280n, 615. 

M ndigon i ia-solapu ra m , con f used 
with Oa»gai-lmnda-(V)japuram 
28 1 and n ; an alternative 
name of Palaiyaru 545. 

M udikonda-t Ml a-mandaia, Ganga- 

pa<jU, 551. 

M u< 1 ikonda-nlb 1 ill van 604. 

* « * * *» 

Mudikonda-solan 321. 

* « * M 

Mud ikonda-Bola-vala-niidu 608, 
*■ « * ** • • * 

611, 615. 

Mudittalaik - kopperu - navkilli, 
061a 61. 

Mndukannan Sat tan ar, Uvaiyiir 

48, llV. 

Mugai-nadu 579. 


Mugava<?i (NA.) 606. 

Muhammad of Ghazni 251n, 283. 

Mulam-kilar of Avur 52, 77, 
113. 

Miikkaiyan, the gamunda of 
Kulattur ; his wife perform- 
ed sati 545. 

Mukkarai alias Mummudi-s51a- 
puram 612. 

Mukkfikkilanfadigal), queen of 
RajSndra, I 282, *556, 563. 

Mukknthir, Yadagarai, old name 
for Kil-muttugur 430. 

Mulangudi 363. 

Mvlaparndai sabhd 496, 547, 
555, 567, 574, 587. 

Mnlgund inscription 306, 343n. 

Mullai flower 89. 

Mullaiyur, ancient 270. 

Mullak-kurumbu 478. 

• * •• 

; Mulli-nadu 510, 542, 608, 610- 
! 11, 619. 

j Muljiynr 622. 

j Mulliir - nangai, mother - in- 
j law of the Cola king and 
| mother of Sola-madeviyar 390. 

i 

Mum m ad i Coda Rajaraja, vice- 
roy of Vengi and son of 
Kulottunga I 344n. 

Mumma(u)di - Cola-deva, title of 
Ganjaraditya 168, 481. 

Mnmmu(a)di Cola-deva, title of 
Rajaraja I 199, 204, 224, 
476-8, 493. 

Mumraudi-Colana - gandhavara- 
nam, title of Pail cavan Ma- 
ray a 521. 

Mummu<Ji-sola* a title of Araba- 
lavan Pajuvur-nakkan 196. 

Mnmmudj - sola Brahma- maha- 
rayar, Senapati 515. 


[ 665 ] 



THE COLAS 


Mnmmndi • 451ae-cembiyan • sri 
gangaraiyar 390. 

Mummudi-S61a-mandalam, Nor- 
them Ceylon, a Cola province 
205. 

Mummudi-s51an, younger bro- 
ther of Rajendra II 6l7n. 

Mummudi &llan, fittuvattil 478. 

Mummudi-sola-nallur, Siruvayp- 
pedu 574. 

Mummudi-solanallur, new name 

for Muttam 503. 

• • 

Mummudi - sola-nittapperaraiyan 
alias Araiyan Tiruvidaimaru- 
dur-udaiyan 580. 

Mummudi-sojan - mandapa, at 
Talaiccangiklu 547 ; at Enna- 
yiram 563, 576. 

Mummudi-sdla-perumal 892. 

Mummudi-sola-posan alias !ra- 
yiravan Pallavaraiyan, super- 
visor of the temple of Tiru- 
vallam 229, 492-3. 

Mummudi-sola-seri in Mannar- 
koyil 610. 

Mummudi-sola - umbala - nattu- 

velan 491. 

• 

Mummudi Yaitumba Maharajan 
alias Yi§nudevan alias Dorai 
Arasan 214, 229, 484. 

Munagamakulapalli(C.) 578. 

Munaiyadaraiy ar Aparayitan 
Kulamanikkerumanar 390. 

Munaiyadiyaraiyar 531. 

MuruJiyanValjappakkam, remis- 
sion of taxes on 491. 

Muhnai Vallavaraiyar 541. 

Jk funnurruvar 569. 

Munpalai 43$. 

Muruga(n) 40, 96-7 ; the favou- 
rite deity of the Tamils 115-6. 

* MurugaveJ-mangalam 367. 


Mufaka hill 271. 

Musaka kings 271. 

Mi sakavamSam, a kavya on the 
Musaka kings 271. 

Mufangi, Jayasimha turned his 
back at M. 245 ; ( — Uccangi- 
drug in Bellary Dt. 246; 273, 
called Maval 551. 

V 

Musiris 100. 

Muttam 503. 

• • 

Mvitta-nambirattiyar, queen of 
Uttama Cola 196, See Ora{ta* 
nan Sorabbaiyiir. 

Muttanattnk - karpundi-nadudai- 
ya Parabhiimikan Malian alias 
Gandaraditta Pallavaraiyan 
391. 

Muttaraiyar(s) 133-4, 135 and n, 
150n. 

Muttatti 527. 

Mutta XJdaiyar 390. 

Muttaval-pevm - kaikkojar 388, 
405. 

Mutturru-kurram 613. 

.* .« «* 4 * 

Muvaraiyau Pali Nakkan 379. 

Muvayiravan Trairajya Ghatika 
Madhyasthaa 4G4. 

Muyangi 246. 8ee Musangi. 

Mysore, Kajaraja I’s expedition 
into M. 209, 211 ; Vi.snu tem- 
ples built by Rajaraja I 224 ; 
231, 238, 245, 280, 342, 491 «, 
558. 

Mysore and Coorg : L. Rice 
154», 204n, 528n. 

Mysore Gazetteer 568m. 

Mystic Bose : Crawley 115m. 

N 

Naccinarkkiniyar 40n, 43, 56n ; 
on mudiydr 84 n; 86n, on 
Ve}ia}ar 106 ; (Kalagam - 
Ka^aram) 264 and n.j 


1 686] 



INDEX 


Nadaka-ma gali r 93. 

Narfxii mstra 78. 

Nadakal, stone planted to mark 
the spot of a hero’s death 58. 

N atjuvilangadi, merchant-q nar- 
tere at Uttaramerur 405, 511. 

Na(Jnvil-vIra-nfiray ana - vinnagar 
at Tribbuvani 540. 

Naduvirukkum Puvatta Bhatta 
Sornayfijiyar 538. 

Naga, family 20, 

Nagadlpa 186. 

Nagal abba i Sani alias Ariya- 
vammai, wife of Prabhakara- 
bhatta 507. Hoe Ariyu(va)- 
mmai. 

Nfigalai, daughtor of Camuwla- 
rftja 318. 

Nagan-kndi 401. 

Naganna, the Hoysala minister 
527. 

Nagan Permigfwjan 579. 

Nagarakka\iakkan 003. 

Ndgarakretitgama 024. 

Nagara(m)ttar 9 the Perunaga- 
rattar 303; 370, 373, 370, 
N. Karan attan 377 ; 380, 384, 
390-1, 394-5, n-variyam 399 ; 
managarattar 404 ; 414, 422, 
n-variyakkuttam 423 ; 425, 
433, 440, 454, 403, 486, 488, 
512, 515, 528, 530, 542, 550, 
561, 566, 573, 595, 598, 601. 

Nagarattar, of Kaccippedu 195. 

Nagavamfii king 348. 

Naga - vamsodbhava, kings of 
the Chindaka family 250. 

Nagavangalam 563. 

Nagavarma, Hoysala leader 

527n. 

NageroBil (Tv.) ,244, 609, 612, 

614, 


Nakkan Aiyamdigal 380, 

Nakkan Arinjigai alias Paran- 
taka Pallavaraiyan 390, 393. 

Nakkan Arumoli alias Piridi- 

•i 

madeviyar 520. 

Nakkan Karukkamandal alias 
Pancavan-madeviyar 537. 

Nakkan Kodai alias Kahcipura- 
nangai 500. 

Nakkan Kumarakkan 490. 

Nakkannai 02. 

Nakkan Nallattadigal, one of the 
Ha j ara ja t-terin j a Kaikkolar 

490. 

Nakkan Paravai, the anukJci of 
the king 502. 

Nakkan Piratamadevi, alias 
Jlummudd - solat - talaik- koli, 
daughter of Arur-devanar 401. 

Nakkan Pudi Paluvettaraiyan, 
Kumarau Kansan 378. 
j Nakkan Handirii-devi 422. 

J Nakkan Rattan of Paradur 416. 

j Nakkan Sembiyan - madeviyar, 
J queen of Rajendra 1 534. 

j Nakkan Tillaiyakigiyar alias 
i Pahcavan Mahadeviyar, queen 
| of Hajaraja I 498. 

| Nakkan Tillaiyalagiyar alias 
i HoJ a- madeviyar 400. 

Nakkan Uloga - cintamaniyar, 
mother of Rajaraja Ps queen, 
Villavan Mahadeviyar 522. 

Nakkan Vikramakesariyar of 
Ko(jiumbalur, the deviyar of 
Tennavan Ilaugovel alias 
Maravan Pudiyar 387. 

Nakkavaram 256; (•Nicobar) 
203, 624. See Manakkavaram, 

Nakkirar 53. 


Naippur, battle of 149. 


Nalama^i Bhlma 551. 


£ 667 1 



THE COLAS 


Nalangilli, the foe of Nedungilli 
25, 37n,* 45 ; a Bketch of 
46-8; 49. 

NalangilU Betcenni 48/?. 

Nalayiravan , a measure 557. 

NaUkais , divisions of time 99. 

it 9 

Nalkftte 161. 

Nalladikkon, son of Benganan 
67. 

Nailadi-mangalam 382. 

Nallulan Uradimagan Attamutti 
385* 

Nallur (Tj.) 355, 468, 

Nallur-nadu 403, 506, 542. 

Nalmadi Bliima, a title of Arai- 
yau Kajarajan 279, 651. 

Nalur 363, 510. 

Namanaikk6nam,part of Masuni- 
desatn 245/1, 248 and //, 250. 

Nambi Andar Nambi 17-9, 64, 
128, 150/1, 575 #i. 

Nambi Aruranur 560. 

Nambihalli 278; (Mys.) 569. 

Nambi Nedunjeliyan 63. 

Nambirattiyar Arumoli-naugai, 
daughter of Paluvettaraiyar 
419. 

Nambi Oduttur-udaiyan 563. 

Nanadesit - tis(g)ai - Ayirattu- 
ahfiujrruvar (1500) 388, 579, 
609. 

Nanadesiya Basamadi Erivira- 
pattana 579. 

Nandagiri 151n. 

Nandappayyan, a merchant 554. 

Nandas, 26, 27n, 287. 

Nandavanappuram 568. 

Nanda-vi\akku 7 and n. 

Nandi (Mys.) 579. 

Nandigumja (Mys.) 530. 

Nandikampa-catin. 402. 

Nandikarai-puttur in Malai-na<Ju 
427 . 


| Nandi-nangai 463. 

Nandi-p(v)anma-mangalam 400, 

| 432, 487. 

Nandiputtaraiyar of the Pallava 
race, Ka<Ju -patti gal 383, 414. 

Nandipura(m) Sundara Cola as 
king of 190, 227, 377, *379; 
alias Ayirattali 397, 487. 

Nandi-puttan alias Bembiyau 
: Muvenda-velan 400. 

> Nandisaran alias Paralcesari 

i 

! Vilupparaiyan 474. 

i Naiidisiruppiran alias Ananta 
! VikramappOraraiyau, a maha- 
: f naira 4151. 


I Nandi varma Kudupattigal 465. 

! Nandivarman, Kasyapa-gotra, 

j Hetiandu Colas 123. 

I * 

! Nandivarman 111, i } allava 121, 
! 1 33n. 


! Nangai-Brahmadeya, Nanga\a- 
ram 392/?. 


, > 

Nangai Battaperumanar, a bogi- 
> yar of the Cola king 377-8. 

j Nangai Varaguna Perumanur, 
i sister of the (Jola king 188, 
I 378. 

Nangavaram (Tri.) 368, 392, 
402, 442, 560. 


I Nangupajti (Pd.) 403. 

i 

i Nangur 43. 

I 

! Nangiiri-nangai of Mayilaypil 


| 424. 

Nanguttiyar, mother of Coja 
queen Tribhuvana-mahadevi- 

yar 41 5. 

Nanji(a)nad 244, 614. 

j Nahjinattu Manarkmji alias 
Mahipalaknlakalap - peralam 
577. 

Nanm&di-bhlman 551. 
Nannaiyabhnpa 519. 


[ 668 ] 



INDEX 


Naunamaruyar, Vaidumba chief 
228. 

Nannilam 07. 

Nanni-Nulumban, Calukya lea- 
der killed at Koppam 308. 

Napoleon 276. 

Narakkan Sri Krsnan Human 
• • • • 

alias Rajcndra-sola Brahma- 
marayar builder of the en- 
closure to the temple of 
Tan j ore 555* 0, 501, 568. 

Naraaimha, Calukya chief 280. 

Narasimha-mangalam 405, 497. 

Narasimhavarman I 120. 

Narasimhavarmau of the Mala- 
yakula 445. 

Narasimhavarmau 322; a feuda- 
tory of Uujendra ii and chief 
of Miladu (2000) 592. 

Narasimhavarmau of the time 
of Kannaradeva, title of Sid- 
dhavattattadigal 401. 

N arasinga-pottaraiyar, Padiivi- 

konda 385. 

• • 

Naratongac-ceri 365. 

Narayana, author of the Sanskrit 
prasasti of the Tiruvalangfulu 
plates 233, 24 7n, 

Narayana Bhatta, a minister of 
Somesvara 300. 

Narayana Kramavittan alias 
V aidumbar-aditta - brahmadhi- 
rajan 457. 

Narayanavanam (C.) 538. 

Nayconai 37n. 

N&rpatteri ydyi rapperunderu 
at Tiruvoniyur OOOn. 

Narpattern^ayiravan Porkoyil- 
nambi alias Paliisiriyan 480. 

Naypatte^ijayiravar 526. 

Napfityai on Arkka<Ju 31n, 

620 . 


Narttamalai 131n, (Pd.) 53L 

Natakasala, assembly meeting at 
Tiruvicjairaarudur 414 ; 425, 
454. 

Ndtakasalai-manijapa at Tiru- 
vadi 471. 

Nataraja, temple of ; Parantaka I 
covered it with gold 183 ; 
Govindaraja thrown into the 
sea by Krimikantha 355n. 

Nattam (Ch.) 531, 542. 

NaUdr , Nattavar, Nattom, 399, 
425, 483, 542, 007. ’’ 

Nattaraya Hujimadda 549. 

Nattarvuppokku 609. 

Ndtfugdm undu 565. 

Nattukkamundan 508. 

Nattukkottai chetties lln. 

hattuvak-kdni, gift to a danc- 
ing master 591. 

Naura 103n. 

NavacOla-carita 21 . 

Naval 149. 

Navalur-udaiyau Kandau Tevadi 
403. 

Navauid(h)ikula 245 ». 

Nayak viceroys 9. 

Noccura-nadu 521* 

Ne<Jiyatali 440. 

N e^um-pu ?;ai y ur in Malai-naju 
389. 

Neijumuijikkilli 45-0. 

Nedungilli, Kariyan'ufc - tuiljiya 
25, 37n, 45-9. 

Nedunjeliyan, victor of Talaiya- 
langanam 60n. 

Netjluvayil 471. 

Negapatam 23, (— Nikama of 
Ptolemy) 30 ; 126n, Buddha 
image of solid gold looted by 


[ 669 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tiruraangai Alvar 129 ; Bud- 
dhist monastery at N. 190 ; 
Cudamani-vihara 224, 266 ; 
622. 


N't lavilaiydvanam 5 0 0; n.- 
kaiyeluttu 573. 

Nlli, wife of Ravidasa Krama- 
vittan 437. 


Nellore, northern limit of Par- 
antaka’s empire 143; 183, 213, 
214 and n. 

Nellur 153. See Nellore. 

Nelvay 515. 

Nelvayil 424. 

Nelvayppalli 595. 

Nelveli 390, 441. 

Nenmali, alias Milada-manik- 
kam 447. 

Nenmali-na<Ju 491. 

Nerivayil, battle of 53n. 

Neyiyudaic-colap-peruru 467. 

Neykunam (NA.) 379n, 383, 412; 
alias Vairamegha-catm. 511. 

Nerkuppai 367, 403, 433, 538. 

Nerfir (Tri.) 598. 

Neydalanganal 60-1. 

Nicobars 256, 263, 624. 

Ni<Jugal 124. 

Nigamana 72. 

N igar ili- Lokamade vi 556. 

Nigarili-a51a, title of Rajaraja I 
225 ; Ns.-cceri 225n. 

Nigarili - so|a - catm. 532, 542, 
610, 613, 617, 619. 

Nigarili -sdla-mandalam 565. 

Nigarili - solapatji alias Nulum- 
bapadi 542. 

Nigarili-solapuram 528. 

Nigarili-6ola - vinijagar - ajvar at 
S^rmadevi 521, 536, 611. 

Nikama ( - Negapatam) 30. 

Nilagangaraiyan Annavan Naj> 
tadiga} 460. 

Nilaiyipai 405. 

Mm Tyagi 454. 


Nimbaja-devi, wife of Indaladeva 
279,567. 

Ninra-nali a liquid measure 
493. 

Nifanayp-padiyar 430. 

Niranjana-guru 444. 

Nirkuni*am 554. 

Nirvilai 564. 
j Niska ( « Kalanju) 464. 

Ni^umbhasudini Durga 13L 

Nittavinoda-catm. 446. 

Nittavinodac-eeri 225n. 

Nittavinodapuram alias Valai- 
; yur 563. 

j Nittavinoda-sori in Mannar- 
j koyil 610. 

Nittaviuudat-terinja Valangai- 
velai 568. 

Nityavinoda, title of Rajaraja I 
225. 

{ Niyamadhanasvumigal aisya-pra- 
! ai^ya-vargattar 480. 

Niyamam 134, 137, 381 ; (Tj.) 
383, 412, 581. 

Niyainatto lraia-mattandapnra 
380. 

NiyayaUar (Judges) 516. 

Niyogam 567. 

Nojambadhiraja 208; • Corayya 
209. 

Nojambaa, 142, 152, 208, their 
relation with the Gangae 209 ; 
210-1, 273. 

NojambavwjU 208, 273, 521. 

NoIena<j 563. 

Nojambapadi, conquered by 
Rajaraja 1 207. See Nolamba- 
v&4i. 


[«J0] 



INDEX 


Nrp&febhftra Yajanallfir 494. 

Nrpato(u)ngac - c(4)ayantangi- 
catm. 495, 506, N. $endangi - 
alias J anan at h a-catm . 
53. 

Nypatunga-mangalap -pSraraiyar 
383. 

Nfpatunga(varman) 134, 135n, 
137n. 

Nrtya-bMga 485. 

NugunaiJ 591. 

Nulambapiidi 211, 494; alias 
Nigarili-solapadi 542. See 
Nolurabapadi. 

N u 1 a in b a Tribhuvana-dhira 
371n, 447. 

Nnlambar VIra4olan 371. 

• I* 

Nnlermm ceremony 590. 
Nu|umba(8) 275, 326. 

Nmm 199. 

Nurmatji C51a Rajondra Vidya- 
dhara, eon of Rajaraja Nitya- 
vinoda advanced against Sat- 
yiisraya 210. See Rajeudra I. 
Nu^uganda 305. 

Nydyajmivesa 4 n, 33n, 71n, 72 
and n. 

0 

0<J(Ja-(vi8aya) 249 ; ( • Orissa) 
250, 551. 

Oddantangal (NA.) 421. 
tkjUyambaJJam 468. 

Olagapuram *(SA.) 365, 373, 

488, 512, 539, 563, 598. 

dlai 460. 

OJiyar, a Naga tribe?, 42. 

Olfika Maharayar 462. 

OlSkamaharayar Tiroccirraniba- 

latta|var temple 462. 

Omaii Orrtynran Kuttan of 
Tiruvanaikka 396. 


Orattanan (Urattayan) Sorabbai- 
yar Agra - mahadeviyar or 
mutfca-nambirattiyar or Tri- 
bhuvana - mahadeviyar IS 
467, queen of Uttama 472-3, 
481. 

Orissa 250-1, 285-6. 

Orthura regia Sornati ( - Urai- 
yur) 30. 

Otta king 248 ; Rajendra’s vic- 
tory over O. 2834. 

Ottakknttan 19, Kavic-cakravarfci 

_ 20, 140, 204, 355n. 

Ottuvatfil , called Mummudi- 
solan 478. 

Owen 622. 

Oyma-nadu 365, 503. 

Oxyrhynchus Papyrus 620. 

P 

Pabhubarru plates of Saktivar- 
man 215, 217. 

Pada-eviya-kadavur 492. 

Pada-eviya Tirukkadavur 556. 

Pdijaganellu 564. 

Padai Ilaiva lranamukha-raman 
* > • • 

killed a person in a duel 483. 

Pa<}a.iyildr 499. 

Pada v ikonda N arasi nga-po tta- 

i*aiyar 132, 385, 

Padavlya 206#i. 

Pfnji (Ch.) 461. 

Pa<jimdrni % scale of expenses in 
temples 455. 

Pacjuvur 368. 

Paes 199. 

Pagai vidaiy-lsvarattu - mahadeva 
at Melappaluvur 555. 

Pagan, king of 261. 

Paganur-kurram 500. 

Pagur 530. 

Pahang 262; ( - Mapappalam) 
623. 


[ 671 ] 



THE COLAS 


Pailabanda (An.) 570. 

Pai§&ca, form of marriage 75, 

Paki-na<Ju (rastra) 153 n, con- 
quered by the chief of Karu- 
ku<}i 214 ; 218, 227, 871. 

Palaiya ^embijan-madevi-catm. 
492. 

Palaiya Vanavan-madevi-catm. 
537. 

Palaiyan Maran 53, 70n. 

Palaiyarn, palace at 278; one of 
the capitals of the Colas on the 
banks of the Mudigondan near 
Kumbakonam 281 ; 403, 535, 
537, 539, alias Mudikonda- 
solapuram 545; Arumoli-deva 
Isvara at P. 571 ; 572. 

Palaiya-velam at Tarijavur 455. 
Palakka 28n. 

Palamoli 39 n. 

*. — 

Pulang&Su 415, 572. 

Palangaviri 433 ; P.-nlrfylukal 
437. 

Palang(k)oyil (NA.) 371, 468. 

Palar(rn) 150, 554n. 

Palas of Bengal : R D. Banerji 
25 In, 253n, 283, 286. 

Palembang, on the east coast of 
Sumatra 258-9, 260n, 261-2; 
( — Sri Vijayam) 623-4. 

Palgh&t 28n. 

.Palkonyakottam 384n, 390, 394, 
420, 468. 

Pallavaniccaram 23n. 

Pallavan Pallavaraiyar, Tiru- 
mandira-51ai 592. 

Pallavan Pirammadarayan 458. % 
Pallava(s), their inscriptions 6 ; 
189, 201, 510n. 

Pallavas : J.-Dubreuil 135n. 
Pallavatilaka, race 137; title 621. 


Palliccandam 484. 

Palliccandam Vaigavur Tiruma- 
lai-deva at Tirumalai (NA.) 
554. 

Pallikonda (NA.) 402, 420, 528. 

Pallippadai 169, memorial shrine 
184 ; P.-udaiya Vagisvara-pan- 
dita-bhattara 432 ; 523, 545.’ 

PalUttongal , gold necklace, call- 
ed Rajarajan 478. 

Palliyudaiya Kanaka-senabha- 
tara 402. 

Palur (Tri.) f Tiruppaluvtir 370; 
371. 

Paluvettaraiyar chieftains 149, 
163n, P. princess 227 ; 365, 
470. 

Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Amud- 
an(ar) or andanar 146, 404, 
416. 

Paluvettaraiyar Randan Mara- 
van(ar) (Maran), Adigal, a 
feudatory of Rajaraja I 227, 
369, 373, 405, 473, 476, 
483-4, 486, 496. 

Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Sundara 
Solan fir, Adigal 402-3. 

Paluvettaraiyar Kandan Mara- 
vafiar-perundirattu Araiyan 
Sundara Sojan, Adigal 478. 

Paluvettaraiyan Kodandan Tap- 
pili-dharmman 389. 

Paluvettaraiyar Maravan Kan- 
dan(ar), Adigal 377, 379, 398, 
405. 

Paluvettaraiyar Nambi Marava- 
nar Tiruppajlittamam 381. 

Paluvettaraiyar Yikramadityar 
397. 

Paluvur 227, 368, (Tri.) 439. 

Pambur-nadu, Vadagarai 438,' 
455. 


[8781 



INDEX 


Pamulavaka plates of Vijaya- 
ditya VII 339n, 344. 

Pamulur a Cera fortress 61. 

Pan(a)i, old Pannai 259, 623. 

Panaiyan Kodandan 467. 

Panaiyavaram (SA.) 606. 

Panaiynr-na<Ju 390, 506. 

Panan 63. 

Pdnar 91-2, 98. 

Panasoge, battle of 204, 528. 

Panca-ganga : Fleet’s identifica- 
tion of its confluence with 
Kr$na as Kudal - Sangamam 
322n. 

Pancapandavamalai 228, 438n, 
(NA.) 483. 

Pancappalli, part of Masuni- 
deeam 245n, 248, 250. 

Pan cavan Brahmadirilyan, a 

Pernndaram ruling Tagadur- 
nadu as jivitam 515. 

Pail cay an-mabadevi 410 ; alias 
851 a - madeviyar, queen of 
Rajaraja I *477 ; alias Nakkan 
Tillaiyalagiyar, queen of 
Rajaraja I 498, 511. 

Pan cavan -Mad5vi -seri in Man- 
narkoyil 610. 

Pancavan-mahadevlsvaram built 
as a paVipadai at Palaiyaru 
545. 

Pancavan-madeviyar alias Arai- 
yan Jayangonda -soliyar, wife 
of Sola-Vallabha - deva 313, 
576. * * 

Pancavan-Madeviyar, queen of 
Rajendra I, 282. 

Paricavan Mahadeviyar, queen ^ 
of TJttama Cola 473. 

Pancavan-Mahadeviyar Sri,Nam- 
birattiyar, Rajaraja’s queen 
485, * 487, 511; Nakkan P. 


daughter of Avanikandarppa- 
purattu-devanar 519. 

Paricavan-mahadevi, \yife of 
Araiyan Mahimalaya alias 
Parantaka Muttaraiyan 391. 

Pancavanmaraya, title of Rajen- 
dra I 204 ; Mahadandanayaka 
ruled oyer Ganga and Vepgi 
mandalas 227, 521, 528. 

PaTicavdra(in) 414, 416, 458, 
509 ; P. - kal 546; P. - nellu 
550, 564. 

Pancavas, the race of 61. 

Pandaravadai (Tj.) 365, 371, 
378, 380, 387, 389, 397-8, 401, 
436, 453-5, 485, 490, 531, 
541-2, 545, 582. 

Panel arigal 567. 

Pandaris 497. 

Pandian, of the Periplus 30. 

Panlikulafiani-terinja - kaikkolar 
505, 

Pandi-kulasani-vala-nlidu 520. 

Pandi-madeviyar, Nambirattiyar 
539. 

Pandi-nadu 391, 428-9, 435 ; 
alias Rajaraja-mandalam 535. 

Pandippadai 365. 

Pandita Cola 24 7n ; a title of 
Rajendra I 280. 

Panditavatsalac - ceri, Uijaiyar- 
gudi 367, 391. 

Panditavatsalan, title of Paran- 
taka I 417. 

Pandiyanaic - curam - irakkina 
(Peruma}) 166 ; title of 
Sundara C5|a 174, 450. 

Pandiyanai -ven - kan<Ja - S81a- 
catm., Idavai 134n. 

Pancjiyanar, father - in - law of 

Vikrama Coja Mila<Ju(}aiyar 
369. 


85 


[ 073 ] 



THE COLAS 


Pandiyansr Manabharana - devi 
......kilavan 397. 

Pandiyan - talai - konda (V?ra) 
Parakesari ICG, 176, 452-6 
passim . 

Pandur 544. 

Panijuranga, in Carnpa : Rouffa- 
©r’s identification of Valaip- 
pandnru 2 62n f 623, 

Pan$ya, country 10, 40, 235, 
269-71, 290, 305. 

Pandya inscriptions 12. 

Pandyas 2C, 201, 203, 239. 

Pandya-cola, the mahap&takci 
Tamilian devastated the Bel- 
vola country 311. 

Pandya-kulantaka, title of Vlra- 
rajendra 336. 

Pan<jya-kulasani, title of Raja- 
raja I 225. 

Pane(i) 259 ; old Pannai 623. 

Pangala-uadu 384 and n, 401, 
536. 

Panimcigan 525. 

Panivaga-mangalam 502. 

Panjirai-kalattur alias Vikrama- 
singa-catm. 539. 

Panma-nadu 421. 

Panmaic-ceri 465, 517. 

Pannai 255, 259; (=*Pani or 
Panei on th£ cast coast of 
Sumatra) 623. 

Pannaippuram 464. 

Pannan, the lord of Siyukudi ; 

friend of KijlivaJ&van 50, 92. 
Papayan 371. 

Papphalam, a port in Ram- 
anna in the Talaing country of 
Burma 256, 260-1. See Mapap- 

Paradavar 94*5* 


PFiradayakudi, a hamlet of Ala- 
gadriputtiir 481, 535. 

Pnradaya - nakkan Sri Kandan 
425. 

Paradur 416. 

Parakesari, who took Vira Fund- 

• • 

va’s head 403n. 
Parakesaric-ceri 365 n, 

Parakesari - purattu - mahadeva 
391. 

Parakesari - purattu - nagarattar 
391. 

Parakesarivarman 387-410; who 
took Madurai and Ilam i.e 

M T 

Parantaka I 472. 

Parakesari Yilupparaiyan 492. 
j Parakkama, Ceylonese prince 
slain in the Cola war 300-1. 

Parakramabahu I, of Ceylon 
260-1. 

Parakrama Cola-catm. 535 ; Ka- 
raikkottu-Brahmadesam 541, 
589-90, *594. 

Parakrama - naruyana Brahma- 
dhimjan Dandanayakan 617. 

Parakrama-sola Muvenda-velan 

*• • 

alias Aruran Aravanaiyan of 

J V 

Panaiyur, an officer of Raja- 
riija 1 506. 

Parakrama, Sri, Cola Pan<}ya- 
Mair*avarman Udaiyar 619. 

Paraman Malapuijiiyar. alias 
Mummu(ji - solan, conquered 
Sltpuli-nadu and Pakinadu 
214,227,371. 

Paramara(s), hostility between 
the W. Oalukyas and the P. 
210 ; their attack of the W. 
Cilukyas 213, 237. 

Parames vara- catm., Pulallur 370, 
372. 

Paramesvara - catm. alias Yen- 
kulattur 590 . 


[»711 



INDEX 


Paramesvara - mangalam alias 
Nigarili-sola-catm. 531. 

Paramesvara-varman I 126. 

Paranar 39n, 41, 62-3. 

Parandur (Ch.) 403, 466, 514. 

Parandur record of P5rthiven- 
dra-varman 180-1. 

Parankorranar, a Sangam poet 
27 n. 

Parantaka, bo n of Vikrama- 
kesari by Karrali 188. 

m m m • 

Parantaka, Sri, probably title of 
Virarftjendra 330/?. 

Parantaka I, delay between royal 
order of grant and time of en- 
graving 13 ; Griimam in.*erip- 
tion of P. Vhi ; date of his 
acc. lixed by Kielhorn 132 ; | 
130, 138; reign of 1*. 142-104; ; 
extent of empire under P. I 

142-3 ; success and prosperity ! 

of bia reign 143 ; Pandyan | 
war 144-7; Ceylon war 147-9 ; 
war with the Banaa 151-2 ; 
war with the Vaidumbas 152 ; 
policy of P. 155 ; Rastrakuta 
invasion 155-62 ; close of 

reign 162-4 ; 165, 168, 171 ; 
Maduraikonda Parukesari 172 j 
and n ; 173, the Tiruuisaippd 
refers to his conquest of 

Madura and llam and to his 
covering the temple of Nata- 
raja with gold 182-3 ; 184, 
188 and n, 195n., 06J,a expan- 
sion up to Nellore 213-4; 228-9, 
240, 365/t, 367, 368n, 369 //, 
37 On, 371 n, 37 5n, 381n, 384 n, 
385 a, 389n, 391n, 395//, 398?/, 
402, 405n, 406n, 407w, 408//, 
409n, 413-442, 449//. 

Parantaka II Rajukesari 165n, 

167, 168, 17 2n, 185, 187, 198, 
208 and n» 370n, 387n, 408n, 


450-1, 470w. See Sundara 
Cola. 

Parantaka-catm. 421n. 

Parantakac-deva ; three inscrip- 
tions of the ninth year 165n. 

Pa(i)rantaka - devi Ammanar, 
daughter of Seramanar and 
queen of Ponmaligait-tunji- 
| nan 498-1). 

Parantaka IJangovelar, a title of 
VikramakSsari showing his 
subordinate relation to Paran- 
taka II Sundara Cdla 187, 188n, 
378, 408n. 

Parantakan Kundavai Piratti- 

• * 

yar 278; daughter of Ponmali- 
gait - tun j ilia - devar, built 
temples in Dadapuram 506, 
515, 531, 537, 539, 541-2. 

Parantakan Madeva^ligal alias 
Sernbiyan Mfideviyar, daugh- 
ter of Malavaraiyar and queen 

of Gandariidittan 388. 

* * 

Parantakan Siviya velar of Kod- 
umbahir, his expedition to 
Ceylon and his death (c. 959 
A.D.) 186, 188, 450-1. 

Parantakan Suttamaliyar alias 
Mukkokilanadigal 563. 
Parantakan Uttamasili 442. 

Parantaka - sdla Muvendavelan, 
an officer of Rajaraja 1 506. 

Pariintakap - pallavarai 3 r an of 
Umbala-nadu 527. 

Parantaka - puram in Kongu- 
nadu 417. 

Pa(i)rantakat - terinja-kaikkolar 
388, 505, 571. 

Parautaka Viranarayana, Sri 
Pandya king Aditya Pg 
contemporary 138, 142, 143n. 

Parasurama 38, P's country 
2^3n; 241, 271. 


[ 675 ] 



THE colas 


Parasuraman Sankaran of II an- 
garikudi 589-. 

Paras uramesvara, temple 3(58. 

Paravai-nangaiyar, Rajendra - 
coja-deva’s Anukkiyar 560. 

Paravaipuram, old name of 
Panaiyavaram 606?a. 

Parigi, ancient Paj;ivi 151 andn. 

Parimelalagar: on poyyd rilnk- 
kam In ; on origin of the 
name Cola 24 ; on uruporul 
78n, 83. 

Parivi, later capital of the Banas 
151 and u. 

Parkaran Arumoli alias Ak'ira- 
•• 

na-duni Eallavaraiyar of V Mur 

Parth i vase kharapuram ( Tv. ) 

008. 

Parthiva - sokharat - terinj(d)a - 
kaikkolar 304, 571. 

Parthivendra Adittaparumar, 
perhaps identical with Aditya 
II, 179, 458. 

Parthi vendradhipati- varman 106, 

458-66. 

Parthivendra Adityavarman, 
viceroy of Tondaimandalam 
and a prince of the royal 
fam ily 178 ; Parthivendra, a 
title of Aditya (II) ? 179. 

Parthivendra-varmau 166, 168, 
176, perhaps identical with 
Aditya or Karikala Parakesari 
178-79; the date of his Paran- 
dnr record discussed 180-1; 
187 and n, 189, 193, 453n, 
457-66. 

Parundur, sabha of 414. 
Pa&li-nadn 433. 

Pa{alipntra 26. 


Pattfilagan Raman alias Aru- 
moli - deva - miladudaiyar ; a 
gift for the merit of his devi 
Rajasekharan Umai-nangaiyar 
531. 

Pattiilam alias Elumirvva-catm. 
465. 

Pattan Danatongiyar, queen of 
Uttama Cola 364, 470, 472. 

Pattanam 500. 

• • 

Pattandur 5(58. 

» • 

Pattarkal - tirumhii , the 63 
nfivanfirs 575. 

Patti, brother of Tennavan- 
madC\iyar 4(52. 

Pat(ina(lc - kun;ain), - nfulu 422, 

503, 582. 

Pattinam ( ~ a port-town) Cola 
capital 2U ; 30. 

Pattinap-pakkacn, < ne of the 
two parts of Pubur 98. 

Pattinapijalai 20. 37w f 39 /i, 41-2, 
on early rural life 76 ; 85, 
90, 96 and n 9 99, 104/t, 264. 

Pattukkanainpatti (Tj.) 515. 

Pattuppdltu 37n, 70, 264n. 

Pavaikkndi, assembly of 584 j 
593. 

Pavitrdrohana festival 512. 

Pedda-Tippasamudram 295, 

Pegu, alleged conquest by 
Rajendra I 257 ; 261. 

Penang 265; ( = Mapappalam) 
623. 

Pennaijam (SA.) 572-3, 576n, 
582. 

Pennar 42, 53, 563. 

Penpalli 438. 

Perak («• ancient Mevijimban* 
gam) 262 ; 623. 

Peralattur 530. 

Pdrangiyur (SA.) 419. 


[ 676 ] 



INDEX 


Peravur, assembly of 474, 543. 

Peraviir-nadu 391, 429, 513, 543. 

Perayan Tribhuvanasundari of 
the Palaiya-velam at Tanjavur 
455. 

Perbanna (Hebbani) 497. 

Pereyil Muruvalar 63. 

Periccikoyil (Rd.) 619. 

Perilamaiydr 508-9, 511, 515. 

Periplus ( Maris Erythraei) 3, 
28-30, 32, 69 and n, 100, 
102 ; meagre description of the 
route to India 103 ; on different 
types of Indian ships 101 and 
n, 105 and n; Uj;aiyiir, a great 
centre of cotton stuffs 107 ; 
620. 

Periya-kundavai alvar-bhan<Jara 
505. 

Periya-maluvvir alias Rujendra- 
singa-catm. 510. 

Periya Purdnam of Sekkilar ! 
17-9, the calf -legend is localis- j 
ed at Tiruvarur 39n; 64, 66n, j 
67, 127 and n, 128, 150n. 

Periya-sen<Ju-vayil at Tanjavur 
514. 

Periya-solanar, title of Parantaka 
I 402. " 

Periya - vanavan - mahadevi- 
catm. 453, 469, 476. 

Periya Varikkam (NA.) 426. 

Periya Velam 565, 571, 585. 

Pefka^ai 275. 

Perri-ponnambalam, a dancing- 
girl 556. 

Peruma^i 539. 

Perumakkal 544, 618. 

Peruma} - pifakerum - anaiyal 
Mannan Kannan alias Vara- 
napperaraiyan 465. 

Peruma) Tiruvarangi, mother of 
C6Ja - madSviyar 421. 


Perumanadigai, Ganga 154. 

Perumbanappadi, the B a n a 
country 150, 512, 524, 598. 

Perumbanappadik-k araivali- 
Malliydr 554. 

Perumbanarriippadai 100. 

Perumber (Oh.) 603. 

Perumbidugu-Muttaraiyan 381. 

Perumbidugn Perundevi, mother 
of Videlvitjugu Vilupperadi 
Araisan alias Sattan Maran 
529. 

Perumbuliyur 376. 

Perumpuliyur-nambi, inspected 
temple affairs at Tribhuvani 
592. 

Perum Tirumavalavan, who 
died at Kurappalli 61. 

Perunarkilli,of Rajasiiyam fame 
37n, 53n, 59-60. 

Perundan(r)am ( » nobles) 174, 
196, 227, 229, 365, 375, 462, 
469. 471, 476, 481, 486, 511, 
515, 525, 551. 

PerwidaraUu-anaiydl , a mem- 
ber of the elephant corps 534, 

Psrundanattuk-karmigal 546. 

Pcrundinai , abnormal love 
75-6. 

Perundogai 31n. 

Perunduirai ( — Krsna river) 274, 
277. 

Perungilli 53n. 

Perungolur 385. 

Perungunyur Kilar 39n. 

Perunguri - (maha)sabha 372, 
558, 573, 579, 593. 

Pertir alias Tribhuvananallur 
(mod. Perumber) 604. 

Peruvajudi, Pandya who died 
at Velli-yambalam 61. 

Peruvengur, assembly of 374. 



THE COLAS 


Peru-Virar-Killi 37n. 

M M • * 

Peutinger, chart of 100. 

Phanrang ( *= Panduranga — 
Valaippanduru) 262n, 623. 

Philip of Macedon 220. 

Piccan, a revenue officer and 
builder of Rajendra-colesvara 

at Kavantandalam 536. 

• * 

Piccan Adittan alias Vijayara- 
jendra Muvenda-volau 584. 

Pi(}dgaiyirai 564. 

Pidarttalai, rendered help to 
Karikala 39 n. 

Pidiligaivdri 539. 

Pillaipakkam (Ch.) 420, 436. 

Pillaiyiir, a term applied to 
junior members of the royal 
family 169. 

PiHaiyar Kodandar ( —Kodanda- 
rama) 418. 

Pingalam , an old lexicon 264. 

Pirantakan Arikulakeaari 422. 

Pirantakan Gandaraditta-devar 
432 and n. See Gandaraditya. 

Pirantakan Irungolar alias 
Siriyavejar 450-1. 

Pirantakan Madeva<jigal(ar)a?tas 
Sembiyan Madeviyar, mother 

of Gandan Madurantakan 
• * 

alias Uttama Cola 407 v 432, 
475-6, 480. 

Pirantakan, Pandya king 394. 
Pirantakan Purusottaman 395. 

Pirantakan - 6iriyavelan alias 
TirukkarraH-piccan 450. 

Pi(a)rantakan - (u)15g(k)a-ma - 
deviyar, U^aiya - piraftiyar 
593, 598. 

Pi(a)rantakan Uttama&li 422, 
424. 


P i run takan -y ada va-bh! man alias 
Uttama Cola - miladudaiyiir 
536. 

Pirantakat-terin ja-k a i k k 6 1 a r 
505. 

Pir attain ) ( — Skfc. bhrasta) 

326/1, 327n, 333. 

Piritipatiyar, Bon of Mnrama- 
raiyar ; ( — Prthivipati II, eon 
of Marasimha) 136, 383, 384n. 
See Prthivlpati II. 

Pirudigangar-valanadu 207 . 

Pittfipuram grant 343. 

Pliny, the Elder, 29; on Indo- 
Roman trade 102 and n, 

! Podavur (Ch.) 461-2, 494. 

Podiya mountains 96. 

Podiyil , common place, germ of 
a popular assembly 83. 

Poduea, of the Peri plus 30. 

Poduvan Sirradi 377. 

.» .. » 

Po7andaiyan t marakkdl, Sri 
535. 

Polonnaruw(v)a, capital of Cey- 
lon under the Colas 206, 240, 
331 n, 570, 606-7.’ 

Pondicherry 162. 

Pondur 464. 

Pon-maligait-tuhjina-deva, title 
of Sundara C51a 190, 226; his 
queen Parantaka-devi Amma- 
nar 498 ; 499 ; 506, 520. 

Ponmenda - solan, name of a 
flower garden 587. 

Ponnila-devar-bhandara 505. 

Ponperri, Bnddhamitra — chief- 
tain of (mod. Ponpetti in 
Tanjore dtat.) 337. 

Pope, O.D.(KijJi - Pajjavan)25n. 
41 n, 55, 79n, 89n. 

Poraiyan-^aiai 620. 

Poriyalmnan 429. 



INDEX 


Portrait Sculpture in South j 
India : T. G, Aravamuthan 
199n. 

Portuguese 270. 

Porxinar-arruppctdai 39n, 40 n, 
77n, 84, 85 m, 85n, 107, 108n, 
111 and n, 11 (in. 

Porvaik-kopperunay-kijli 62. 

Pottapalli (Mys.) 003. 

Pottappi, king of : killed by 
VIraraj endra 325 . 

Pottappic - colar Sattiyaraiyar 
483. 

Fottarayan 319. 

Potti(yar) 50-8, 84. 

Poygaikkudi, sablia of 308. 

Poygai(yar), author of Ka\avaU 
same as Poygai-alvar 64-6, 88, 
11G, G20. 

Poygai-nadu 532. 

Prabhakara-bhatian of Megala- 
puram in Ariyudesa 567, 579. 

Prubhakaram 453, 488. 

Prabodha-candrodaya 252 n . 

Prdjdpatya form of Aryan 
marriage 70. 

Pramiin i -m an d apa 384 . 

Prapannamrtam 35 5n. 

Prakisli(s) 0, 232, 331, 335. 

Priduvayja 135n. 

Prinflep 15. 

Prithivlpati II H a s ti m a 1 1 a, 
Ganga king 12* 130, I36 f 
138, 144«, 145, 350, 154, 155, 
same as Parthi?$ndra ? 178; 
37 In, 384n, 415, 4l6n. 

Pfithivi Vyaghra 432n. 

Pritipatiyar, son of Maramarai- 
yar ( » Prthivipati II) 136. 
See Piritipatiyar. 

Prome 261 n. 


Pr(i)thivi-gangaraiyar, son of 

Mahadeva 384, 401. 

Prthivipati I, Ganga king 130, 
134, 137n, 384n. 

Prthivivallabha, a title of Pun- 
yakumara 124. 

Piolemy 3, 23n, on the Cola 
country, 30-1; G9 and n, 103, 
Takula 262 ; 622-24. 

Pudal-nadu 504. 

Pudanur 547. 

Pudi Adicca (Aditta) Pidiari,wife 
of Ariknlakesari and daughter 
of Tennavan Ilangovelar 149, 
382, 392, 400, 413, 451«. 

Pudi Kuttan 402-3. 

Pudi MadGvadigaj, queen of 
Kannaradeva 404. 

Pudi Pattalagan 451. 

\ 

| Pudi Vikramakesari 150n. 

1 Pucliyidu 56G. 

j Pudukkudaiyan Ekadliiran 
Aiyamhadinman 515. 

| Pudukkudi 409. 

j Pudukkuppuram 304. 

j Puduppadi ^NA.) 607. 

j Puduppakkam (.Ch.) #382, sabha 
of 471-2. 

* Puduvurudaiyan Mayan Kanja- 
nan alias Villavan Muveuda- 
vejan 468. 

Pugalccola-Nayanar 127. 

Pugalmadu-vHanga , prasasti of 
Kulottunga I 350. 

Pugalur, 590 ; 596, See Tirup- 
pugalur. 

Pugalur-deva 364. 

Pugalvippavargandan, Udaiyar 

| Iladarayar; Vira-so]au,theson 
of 228, 438n, 483. 


[ 679 ] 



THE COLAS 


Puhar 23 ft, 29, 32, 37-8, 4$ t 94, 

as described in ^angam litera- 
ture : the great emporium of 
the kingdom 96-100; its bazaar 
96 ; merchants 97 ; divisions 
of the city 98 ; articles of 
foreign trade 99*100; rows 
of boats in the port of P. 104; 
116-7. See Kavoripatnam. 

Puja (—Sandi) 8. 

PulaiyaSj a low class of people 
• 108. 

Pulakesin, Calnkyan leader 
killed at Koppam 308. 

Pulakesin II 126. 

Pulal(r)-kottam 461, 465, 504, 
581. 

Pulalaya Vinnagar 382. 

Pulalliir (Ch.) 370, 372, 431, 
595, 598. 

Pulatthinagara 239, 297, 332. 

Puliccayan Sami Abbai, Panlya , 
princess and spouse of Vik- I 
ramasoja Maladudaiyar 197. j 

Puligere (300; 306. 

Puli vala-nulu 449. 

Puliyur, near Kodambukain 503. 
Puliyilr-koitam 435, 503. 
Puliyur-riattu-adigal, queen of 

Ssembiyan Irukkuvel alias 
Pudi Parantakan 399. 

Pullagantivaripailoe (Cud.) 607. 

Pullali Sattan Karivelar Kan- 
dar adit tan alias Mummudi 
6oliyavaraiyar 481. 

Pullamangai(Tj.) 389, 396, 415, 
4L9, 490. 

Pu}{amangalam 365. 
Pullanarayanan 486. 

Pullarrur Eyirriyanar 57. 

Pnjvejur 431. 
Punal-vayil-^ri-k5yil 366. 


Puna-na<Ju 529, 621. 

Pundi, battle of 274, 276. 

Pundur, battle of 294; described 
as a kajakamdnagar or can- 
tonment city 304. 

Punganur 150, alias Trailokya- 
inahiidevi-catm. 530, 531, 
(NA.) 601. 

Pungudi 517. 

Pungunram 471. 

Punjai (Tj.) 509, 547, 555, 585-6, 
591, 593, 600. 

Pun j am*r 113. 

Punya-Kumara 44, 119n, 123-4. 

Pura(m)rndniiru 4, 37n, 38n, 
39 ft, 40ft, 4 In, 43n, 45n, 46, 
and n, 47n, 48n, 49n, 50n, 
51n, 52n, 53 and n, 54n, 55n, 
56ft, 57 n, 58n, 59n, 60ft, 61n, 
62 and n, 63 and n, 65 and ft, 
70, 77n, 84n, 85n, 86, 87n, 
<S8n, 89ft, 90ft, 9 In, 92?*, 93w, 
96/i, 106 and n, 107 and n, 
108/*, llln, 112ft, 113 and n f 
114. 

Purangarambai-nadu 612. 

P u ran i -in aray apat l i 579. 

Purantaka ( ® Siva) 164. 

Puravarelilur 492. 

M 

Purisai 480. 

Purisai-nadu 471, 548. 

Purusottama-mangalam 368. 

Pnrvdcdram 405, 458-60, 463-4. 

Purvadcsa(m) ( Purvarasjtra, 
Southern Kosala country) 282, 
348, 357. 

Purvadesam , Gangai, and Ka - 
(jar am, conquered by Rajen- 
dra C51a 1 282, 291, 530, 553, 
556-9, 561-2, 565, 568, 570, 
577, 580, 583, 591, 602*, 604, 
616. 

Purva-Phalguni, star of RajS- 
dhiraja Vn nativity 312, 583« 


[ 680 ] 



INDEX 


Purvarastra ( - Southern Kosala) 
282. 

Pu§paka, elephant 319. 

Puttan 117n. 

Puttan, son of Kuna van 385. 

Puttur 593. 

Pimlakkudi (1M.) 393. 

Pnvan Mayan of Nediyatali 440. 

Pyrard : on the Maldives 220 n. 

Pythias and Damon 56. 

Q 

Quilon, Kn-lin 2tJ7. 

Questions of King Milinda , 
mentions Kola-Pattana 32. 

R 

Racamalla 154. 

Radliii ( ** Lada, a part of Bengal) 
oro 

Raghava Aiyangar.M., his Sevan 
Senguttuvan 27 n ; scheme of 
genealogy of the Ceras and 
the Colas of the Sangarn age 
37n ; 45/?, 53/?, 66//, 67n. 

Raichur doab 236, 237/?, 238, 
273, ((list.) 333. 

Rajacnlamani-eatm., Maniman- 
galara ? 576, 589. 

Rajadevar Kaikkolap-padai 505. 

Rii jaduv iyiir Tefedakki-pernma- 
nar, queen ; daughter of Mila- 
dudaiyar Kayirur Perumanar 
426. * 

Rajadhiraja I (1018-54): 200 / 1 , 
22 In, appointed yuvaraja by 
Rtjendra I 233, 234 and n, 
235; 268-78, inflicting a 
studied and barbarous insnlt 
on the Calukyas 275; assumed 
title of Vijayarajfmdra, per- 
formed a Virdbhiseka at 


Kalyanapuram ibid; 282, his 
reign 291 — 314 ; his pra§asti$ 
293-4 ; his Ceylon war 296- 
303 ; second Calukyan war 
304-10; battle of Koppam 307; 
title of A nai m errunj ina 311; 
his queens, titles, and feuda- 
tories 312-13 ; 335, 342??, 350, 
520n, 571-586, 597??, 611??. 

Rajadhiraja II 373. 

Raj ad hira j ac-euvralai 617. 

| Rajadhiraja Nila - gangaraiyar 
i alias Solan Kumaran Parftn- 

1 taka Marayan, Dandanayakan 

< 313, 575. 

| Rajadhiraja Pallavaraiyan alias 

* 

Venkadan Sankaran, Danda- 
» nayaka, a pmindanam 574. 

I Hajadhirajan - salai at Tiruk- 
kadaiyur 584. 

Uajadhirajan - tirunandavanam 
585. 

Rajadhirajap-perumlattan alias 
Arangan Komaran 585. 

Raj ad hira jar Gurudevar, Adhi- 
karigal Parasaryan Vasudeva- 
narayanan alias Ulagalanda- 
sola Brabmamarayan 581. 

Rajadicci, wife of Siyiyavelar 
I 451. 

Rajaditta-devapura alias Tiru- 
navalur 570, 601. 

Rajadittan Pugalippar - gandan, 
Araiyar 438. 

Rajaditya, Adilya’s grandson 
139n, also called Kodandara- 
raa, Parantaka’s eldest son; 
lost his life in the war with the 
Rastrakutas 143; part in resist- 
ing the invasion of Krsna III 
154-9, Mnva<Ji-cola R. 160 and 
n • 161, 162 and w, 167-8, 


[ 681 ] 



THE COLAS 


* 


169n, 171* 175* 365ft* 397* | 
426-7* 428 * and ft, 429-31* j 
432n, 433-4, 438, 443, 449n. 

Rajaditya-levaram at Tirunama- 
nallur 427, 558. 

Rajagambhira, title of Vlrara- 
jendra 333. 

Rajagambhira Vala-nadu 392n. 

Rajagiri 542n. 

Hajahmundry , History of: B. 
V. Krishna Rao 219ft. j 

Rajakkal (NA.) 523. j 

Rajakesari , a liquid measure j 
485; a grain measure 518; ! 
542, R.- marakkal 566. 

Rajakesaric-ceri 225n. 

Rajakesari-catm. 389* 499, 531, 
542, 582. 

I 

Rdjakesari-nali 416. i 

Rajakesari Raj araja-deva inscrip- | 
tion at Kanyakumari 221. ' 

Rajakesari Rajendra (24th year 1 
of) 269n, 281n. | 

Rajakesarivarman records 363- 1 

86. I 

} 

Rajakunjaratterinja-villigal 546. 

Raj amahendra-de va, Raj akesari , 
acc. before Virarajendra, 
caused Ahavamalla to turn his 
back ; probably sou of Rajen- 
dra 11 292 and n ; 293, Rajen- 
dra-sola 315 ; heir-apparent c. 
1059 : 316 ; 317-8, 320, 

his gifts to Srirangam temple ; 
land revenue assessment in 
Kollimalai-nadu ; his queen 
Lokamahadevi 322-3 ; 349n, 
598-9* 600ft. 

Rajamahendra road 29 2n* 

(Ra jamahendran-tiru vldi) 323. 

Rajamalla-catm. (Brahmadesam) 
379, 381, 431, 434, 461* 466* 
488, 502. 


Rajamarftyar, ( ■» Parthivendra- 
varman) 457 n ; 462. 

Raja-martanda, title of Rajaraja 
1 225. 

Rajamartanda - catm. 462; alias 
Uvigaiyur 563. 

Rajaiuarttandacceri 225n. 

Rajamayan, Western Ca]ukya 
general 330. 

Rajapura* capital of Bastar, 

8 miles from CakrakStya or 

Oitrakota 250. 

♦ 

Rajaraja I (985-1016) initiated 
the practice of engraving on 
stone an account of the 
leading events of the reign 6 ; 
Ceylon type coins appear 16 
and n ; conquest of Vengi 
118; 131 ft, gloom for four 
decades before his acc. 143; 
152, 165, 167-8, 169 and n. 
176, 177 and n, built a 
pal[/ipaijai to Ariujaya 184; 
186ft, 189, 190 and n, 191, 
193-4, 196-7, reign 198-230; 
his acc., star of nativity 

j* 

Satabhisaj* his reign a great 
epoch 198 ; Kerala war 199 ; 
war against the Pandyas 200- 
1 ; his Southern campaign 202; 
his invasion of Ceylon 205 ; 
Cola temples in Ceylon 206 ; 
conquest of (langa country 
207 ; war with the Western 
Cfdukya 209-11 ; conquest 
of Vengi 212-9 ; expedition, 
against Kuluta 219 ; con- 
quest of the Maldives 220 ; 
Rajendra made yuvardja; end 
of the reign 221 ; the Tanjore 
temple 221-3 ; his adminis- 
tration and religious policy 
223-4 ; his titles 224-5 ; 
performed tulabhara a t 


im\ 



INDEX 


J 




Tiruvisalur ; sculptured repre- 
mentation of him and his queen | 
at Tiruvisalur ib.; his oflicials i 
and feudatories 227 -HO ; 231, ! 
238, 239n, 242, 249, 258, first i 

t 

Cola mission to the Song dy- 1 
nasty 2G6 and n ; 267, 278-9, t 
285, the real founder of the 
Cola empire 290; 291, 339, ! 
364n, 367n, 369 /i, 371n,372n 
373n, 374n, 385n, 390w| 

392n, 402n, 438/i, 448, 

450n, 451//, 409n, 476-529, 
536n, 57fm, 621-2. 

Raj ara ja, Eastern Ganga or 
Kalinga king 345 and n, 346. 

Rajaraja I, Nareudra, Eastern 
Calukya king 282, 313, 320. 

Rajaraja II, ula on 21 ; 221n, 
311 n, 52Gn, 58G. 

Rajaraja III, the tribulations 
and relief of 7; 10. 

Rajaraja Brahmiidhiraja, ruler 
of Maharajavaili 313, 578. 

Rajaraja-c a t m., Knnayiram ? 
563, 5G9, 57 G. 

Rajaraja-catm., Mannarkoyil ? 

489, 547, G08, 610-2. 

Rajaraja Coda-ganga, son of 
Kulottunga I and viceroy of 
Vengl 344/i. 

Rajaraja-deva, Cora king 56 2 n. 

GU. 

Rajaraja - Isvaram - udaiyar of 
Kumarlkkaltkkutjli at Kanya- 
kumari 52G. 

Rajaraja - jananatha - torinja- 
parivara 520. 

Rajaraja-madae, gold coins of the 
Vengi kingdom 313, 571, 580- 
Rajaraja MahFrnijan alias Sf*na- 
pati Kuravan Ulagajandan 

230. 


Rajaraja - mandalam 517, 521, 
542. 

Uajaruja-mummadi Coda, son of 
Kulottunga I made viceroy of 
Vongi 343. 

Rajarajan , a gold necklace and 
a vi? vast 478. 

Raj ara jan, a hall at Tenneri 
580. 

Rajarajan, a hall in Viranara- 
yana-catm. 520. 

Rajarajan alias Mudikonda-sola- 
vacciya-marayan 5G6. 

Rajarajan alias Yanavan Brah- 
raauhirajan, perundanam 551. 

Rajarajan alias Vikrama Cola 

Cojiyavaraiyan, Areyaru chief 

* 

of Sattamangalam 551. 

Raj araj an-ka.su 572. 

Raj ara j an - kdsu-mraikal , stan- 
dard weight for gold 560. 

Raja - rftjanana(SrI)Periyamba- 
lam at Tirumeyhanam 513. 

Rajaraja - nareudra I Eastern 
Calukya 320, 321n, 339, 340, 
34i-2, 349n, 351. See Raja- 
raja I, E. Calukya. 

Rajaraja Nityavinoda, father 
of Nurmadi Cola Ra j end ra 
Vidyiidhava 210. 

Rajaraja Pallavaraiyan, a title of 
Ambalavan l^luviir - nakkan 
196. 

Rajaraja - pandi-nadu 577, 606, 
608, 610, 615, 619. 

Rajarajapperalara 503. 

Rajarajapperurljalai alia s % 
Sri Valiavapperunjalai of KaJ- 
ikkudi 577. 

Rajarajapura, newname of 
Mahatittha or Mantota 207. 

Rajarajapuram, Dadapuram 506. 


[ 863 ] 



THE COLAS 


Rajaraj a-sori iu Mannarkoy il 610. 

Raj a raj asolan-u la 355 n . 

Raj arii j asray a-cat m . 393. 

Rajaraj a Tailigaippruli-naijalvan 
alias Maraikkadan Dev a n 
588. 

Rajarajatterinja Kaikkolar 490. 

Rajaraj a-vfu lya-mahara j an 538. 

Rajaraja - vala-nadu 372, 494, 
505, 510. 

Rajaraja Velan 508. 

Rajaraja Vijayam , Sri provi- 
sion for reading 571. 

Rajaraja-vinnagar-devar 577. 

Rajarajendra, title of VirarajGn- 
dra 336. 

Rajarajendraainga Muvondave- | 
Jar, Adigarigal 564. : 

Rajarajesvara-nataka enacted J 
at the Rajarajesvara temple in , 
Tanjore 592. I 

Rajarajesvara, shrine built by j 
Irayiravan Pallavaraiyan at > 
Tiruvallam 557. 

Rajarajeevara, teiuple at Mu ha- I 
tittha 207. 

Rajarajesvara, temple at Uroda- 

gam 548. | 

* 

Rajarajeavaram, Sri temple built 
by Rajaraja I at Tanjore 11, 
131/*, 190, 206-7, 210, 221-4, ! 
518 ; enacting of the Raja - j 
rajesvara-natuka at 592. 

Rajaraj is vara, temple at Kanya- 
kumari 618. 

Rajarattha 206, 239. 

Rajaiekhara - Isvaram - udaiya - 

mahadeva, built at Maugalam 
by Xongiiandar 569. t 

Rajasekharan Dmai-nangaiyar, 
gift for the merit of 531. 


ltajasimha, Cora king 243, 562, 
614. 

Rajasimha, Pandya king, his, 
exile at the hands of Paranta- 
ka 144-5; 146-9, 240, 416/*, 
503/*. 

Raj asray a, title of Rajaraja I 
225, name of a throne 535. 
Rajasraya, title of Virarajeii Ira 
336. 

; Raj asray a-catm. 400, 483, 520. 

I ltaj asray apuram 493, new name 
for MOlpiidi or Merpadi alias 
Viranarayanapuram 495, 512, 
538. 

Rrijasuudaravadi 373. 
Rajasundari, daughter of the 
Cola king, Rajendra Cola and 
chief queen of Uaja*aja, East- 
ern Ganga 345. 

Rajendra I (1012-1044;, 7/*, 8//, 
64, 148, 152, 194 /z, 195/*, 198, 
201, as crown prince his 
southern campaign 201; then 
.uabadundanu} aka of the Vt n- 
gi and Ganga-maiajalas lO. ; 
205 ; 207 , his EaOapatjU inva- 
sion in the time of Rajaraja 
1 210-11; his invasion against 
Kuluta 219 ; his pillar of 
victory at Mahendra after 
success against Viuialaditya 
22<) ; made yuvaraja 1012 
A. I>. 221 : continued the 

grant of Anuimangalam by 
his father 223-4 ; 225 and n, 
reign 231-82 ; accession of 
R. : extent and organisation 
of his empire 231 ; his pra- 
mstis 232-3; Raj ful hi raja, 
yuvaraja 233 ; his early 
conquests 236 ; Ceylon war 
238 ; KeraJa war 241 ; C5Ia- 
Pandya viceroy at Madura 
and date of appointment 


[ 684 ] 



INDEX 


243 ; the Calukya war 244-G; 
Vikraraa Cola one of liia 
surnames 247 ; tho (Ganges ox 
pedition 217-54 ; capture of 
Sakkarakkot tarn, Madurai - 

maridalain, N amanaik-konain, 
Paucapa 111, MuBunidcsam # 

Odda country, Soul horn Ko- 
sala 250 ; war against Danda- 
bhukti, Southern Lada and 
Vunguja Uttara - Lada 251 ; 
Ganges campaign historical 
252 ; its eH'octs 253 ; the Kada- 
ram campaign 254-1)8; unity 
of the above campaign 257 ; 
Sri V i j a y a ( - Palcmbuug 
in Sumatra) 250; it her identi- 
fications 250-05 and 1)22-4 ; 
intercourse between the Las- j 
teru islands and S. I ndia2G5-G; I 

i 

1 

embassies from Cola kings to j 
China 2GG-7 ; remamiug years | 
of reign not peaceful 208 ; j 
suppression of the rebellious j 
in the South oy Uajadhir.iju j 
200- <1; mildness of JbU • 
imperialism 27 1 ; Ceylon ! 

: war against j 

Calukva Abavamalla 273-7 ; j 

* * j 

the closing years, a splendid 
period 271; his feudatories 
278-80; his birudas 280 ; his 
new capital Gangapuri, Gau- 
gaikonda-coj ap u ram 281 ; his 
queens 282; note on Mahlpala 
283-8 ; Gungaikoie la-Cojapui- | 
am, a L'.hh century descrip- 
tion ^1855) ‘-88-11 ; the victori- 
ous tiger- banner carried far 
into the north 2110, 291, 293, 
deportation of Mahinda V and 
annexation of Jiamandalam 

297-8; 307 n, 312n, 313-4, 332, 
339, joy at the birth of prince 
Kulottunga 351; 390n, 478, 


t 482n, 524, 530-571, 573-4, 

593n, 594, G13n, 61G. 

| Kajendra II (1052-G4) 269n, 

i 272, 282, crowned himself on 

! the lield of Koppam 292 and n % 

\ 293, 295, 301-3, 30G-12, his 

reign 314-23 ; his prasastis 

I 314; 315; his part at Koppam 

! 315 ; battle of Mudakkaru 

; / ' 
i same as Kudal-Sangamam ? 

! 317 ; close of his reign and his 

feudatories 322-3 ; 525, 331, 

58G-91, G17/4. 

Kajendra II, Calukya - Cola 
| Kulottunga I 290, Rajakesari 

I 311/4, 322 ; 338-58, G0G/4. 

* 

j liajendra - cola-deSa - Kattagudi 
alias tSovayya 578. 

Kajendra-cola-mandalarn G09. 

liajendra - cola KajakOsari, a 
spurious inscription of 10. 
liajendra - coja-v iimagar, built 
by the Cera king Kajasimha, 
perhaps a Cola leudatory, at 
Mauuarkovil 5G2. 

iia j On dra-C ol a - v a j a-uad u G 1 3 . 

Kajendra - eola-viniiagar, temple 
of Kougaraiyar at U lUtramerur 
541. 

j Kajemlra-cojesvara, temple built 

by a revenue olheur ol Rajen- 

dra 1 at Kavaniuudalaui 55 G. 

« • 

Kajendra - miivenda-velan alias 
Tiruvaranguu, built shrine of 
Padamiiakka - deva at Titu- 
vorriyur G02-3. 

liajendrapurain 382. 

Kajendrasimha, title of Kaja- 
raja 1 225. 

Kajendrasimha - vabmadu 507, 
513, 537, (singa) G02. 
Rajondrasola Anukkap-pallava- 
raiyar 55 2. 


[ 886 ] 



THE COLAS 


Rajendra - sola Atimurkkaccen- 
girai 612. 

Rajendra - sola Rrahmamarii- 

0 m 

yau(r) alias Narakkan Sri 

Krsnan Raman, mentioned in 
• • • 

the larger Leyden grant 229 ; 
builder of the enclosure of 
the Tan j ore temple 55(5 ; 

561 ; 563, 580. 

Rajendra - sola - calm. alias 
Uttaramernr 538, 541, vinna- 
gar 564 : 568. 

Rajendra-sola - deva - anukkiyar ! 
Paravainangaiyar 574. 

Rajendra - sola - devar - anukki- 
suyriya - Paiicavan-m a d e v i 
563. 

Raj endr a-sola-de v ar - Mummudi- 
solat-terinda - tir uman janattar- 
velam 563. 

• | 

Rajendra-sola-gainuntlan 565. j 

Rajendra-sola Irukku volar of } 

V M • 

Kodumbalur 516. 

• • 


Rajendra-sola Ma vali- vanara jan, 
a throne in Gangaikonda-sola- 
puram 336, 603. 


Rajendra - sola M i vali - vanara- : 
jan(r), an official under Raja- ! 
dhiraja I 313 ; Senapati 578. 

Rajendra - sola - muvendavelan, ' 
Adigarigal 567. 

Rajeudra-solapuram 542, 611. 

Rajendra-sola -samaiya-senapati, 
a general of the Musaka king , 


271. 

Rajendra-sola-vinnagar at Man- 
narkuyil 608, 610. 


Rajendra-s51a-viriyur-nadu 565. 
Rajendra-sola - vitankar, shrine 
in Olagapuram 598. 
Rajerulrasolan, a tamarind tree 
under which the assembly of 
PavaikkucjU met 584. 


Rajendrasolan, a gold vessel 
presented to god at Tiruvii- 
mattnr 568. 

Raj end rasol a n -oa t u ssfd a i 531. 

Rujendra-solan-ma iai 570. 

Raj o n dr n -solan -ma- lam, at Tri- 
hhuvani 566. 

Raj eudra-sol ; i n -ma t ha at Tiru- 
vorriyur 579, 585, 602. 

H\f?nd ra$~n [an - pattani , a dia- 
dem of gold 539. 

Rajendra Vajiragaruc -coj.au, 
Seiiapati 593. 

Rajiga, lord of Vengi (Kulottuu- 
ga 1), Somes vara combined 
with him against Vikramadit- 
ya VI 352 ; 356. 

Rdjya (Ski. -State) 7t8. 

Rakkhapasanakan ( ha 239. 

Jtaksasa, a form of marriage 75. 

Rama 91. 

Ramaehandra lJikshitar V. R. 
(V.R.R. Dikshitar) 35/i. 

Kamachandran, T.N. 340n. 

Kamaghata ( - lratuaku<jlam), 
principality round Mt. 1) ’ Eli 
or Mu. : aka hill 271. 

Ramanadiccaram (of the Deva- 
ram) 373n. 

Ramanathan Koyil (Tj.) 545. 

Raman Keni alias jN T a<.luviruk- 

kai Tanam-setti 619. 

* • 

* 

Raman Kumaran alias S51a- 
M uvnnda - vela - Alara y an 
(ndtiu-kankdlci) 501. 

Raman Mummudi-sola 531. 

Ramahfia(desa), the Talaing 
couutry of Rurtna 256; 260- L 

R a m a n Siddliavadavan alias 
V ikkararaa-soja- Miladuclaiyan 

366. 


[ 686 J 



INDEX 


Ramanuja 19, his persecution 
connected with the extinction 
of the direct line of the Colas 
354, 355 w ; 357. 

Ramapiila 25 2 n. 

Ramaswami Aiyangar, M. S. 

27n. 

Ramaswami Aiyar, L.V., on ori- 
gin of name of Cola 24//, 29u. 

Rib nag ana 17, 110. 

KamGsvuram, Kivna ill's inarch 
to 161, 169. 

Ranadhara-mangalam 491. 

Ramistapundi grant of Vimala- 
ditya 2L5n, 217, 340. 

Ran as lira, Riijetidru Fs general 
captured the treasures of 248- 
9, of Southern Lada 251 ; 

252, 280. 

Rangachari, V. 122//, 124//, 

I30n,134n, 135//, 154n, 159//, 
178n, 214/i, 245//, 273m. 

Ranganatha, Lord, 128, 323, 387, 
Sahasradliara for 437. 

Rangoon 200//, 20 In. 

Uapson, Source* <>j Indian Hi ,s- 
tory : (Joins 15w ; 10n, 

Rasinga-dGvar, (’era king 010. 

Rdsfra ( — nadu) 76. 

Rastrakuta(s) 14, 118, 130, 143, 

R. -invasion of Cola empire 
159-02; 183, 189,* 193, 198, 
their disappearance about 
973 A.D. 209; 213, 237 and n, 
no evidence of their rule over 
Magadha 283; 280, 297//. 

Ratnagiri (Tri.) 500. 

Ratnagrahura 371. 

Rattamandalam 307. 

# • * • 

RaJtapatjU 7$ lakh country, cap- 
tured by Rajaraja I 210 and n, 
Kajfcndra’s invasion 211 ; the 

[ 687 ] 


ancestral territory of the West- 
ern Calukyas 213 ; invasion 
by Rajendra I 230, 245 and n, 
240; 280, 322n, 326, 333, 
484-5, 501, 504, 507-8, 572. 
See Irattapadi. 

Kattiga 204, 521. 

Ravi alias Vara Yiracolataksan 
071. 

Ravidiisa Krainavittan 437. 

Ravikulamitnikya, title of Raja- 
raja 1 225. 

Rawlinson : Intercourse between 
India and the Western World 
3 On. 

Reclus, Klisee ; l lie Universal 
Geography 022. 

Reddipalem 214, 229, (NeL) 484. 
iieinand lOOn. 

Rcnandu, Telugn Cola (‘ountry 
119//, (R. 7000) 122; genea- 
logy of R. Colas, 123; 125-0, 
128, 152. 

Renaudot re. identification of 
the Maldives 220n. 

Relations : Ferranti 022. 
Researches : Gerini 24n, 224n, 

257 n, 259//, 202//, 205//, 

200 n. 

Re v aka, sister of Ivrsna III 154. 

Revarasa, probably the same as 
Vanmya-Revan 308//. 

Rh^a llavkis, id. The Questions 
of King Milinda 32//. 

Rice L. 204//, 491//, 528?/, 549n, 

| 580//, 582//. 

I Rockhill 259 n, 200n. 

Rohana, hill country S. E. of 
Ceylon 148, Mahinda V took 
refuge here 205 ; independent 
tf the Tamil province, and 
ruled by Vikramabahu I 240, 
298-300, 303, 331, 332. 



THE COLAS 


Roman coins (finds of) 15, €9 
and n. 

Ronkel 023. 

Rostovtzeil 29 n, 102 n, 103«, 
105n. 

Ron finer 202 n, 622*4. 

Rsi Srnga (Besinga) 2G0n. 
Rudrangannanur, Kadiyalur 90, 
104. 

Rydli plates of Vijayaditya VII 
340-1, 344, 347, 349 n. 

S 

Sabha 83, 84. 

Sahha-man'cim 489. 

• » ia 

Sabhd-srimuhham 486. 

SabhaUvdriyam 403. 

Sadaiyam, festival 204, 501, 503. 

Sadaiya-Maran 503n. 

Sad asi va-bha ta rar of the Matha 
* • 

at Tiruvaiyaru 505. 

Sadinagar 251n. : 

Sadirayan Utlamaslliyar, wife of j 
Vannadudaiyar 400. 

Sagaras 110. 

Sahrdaya 354 n. ! 

Sahya(dri) mountain 135, 138, i 
242. I 

Sailendra king 224; builds j 
Oil daman i-vihara 266. ! 

• • L 

Saivism 6* 18. j 

Saka era 13 and n. j 

Sakala-bhuvanasraya, title of 
Virarajendra 336. 

Sakkadi Samudaiyan alias Sem- 

biyan-madevip - perundattan 

Tattarakkani conferred on 
• « * 

537. 

&ahkai-kdni 485. 
jSdkkmJc-Jc dttu 394, 565. 
Sakkai-marayan Vikraraasolan 

565, 


Sakkarakkottam seized by Ra- 
jendra I 248-9, identified 
with Cakrakotya 250 ; 330n, 
348, 351. 

SakkasGniipati 144, 145. 

Saktivarman I Eastern Oalukya 
215 and n: war with C(xla 
Bhima 217 ; bis exile and 
restoration 218. 

Saktivarman II, E. Calukya 
339-43, 345, 349n, 357. * 

Snlubh<~gu 488, 493, 557, 584. 

Salai, discussion of the mean- 
ing of the term 200n; 202, 
207, 575, 577, 580-2. 

Salakkiramam 431. 

Salem 372, 393. 

Suliyar 562. 

Sahikki (NA.) 31 In. 

Salnkki Vimayan 229. 509. 

tSdm(Mta(*) 170, 318, 541. 

Samantabahu Acarya 599. 

Samantrtbharanam, a title of 
Araiyun Rftjarajan 279, 551. 

Samuutalaprahari 551 . 

Samantasena, taken to be the 
founder of the Sena dynasty 
253. 

Samarakf'Sarit-terihja - kaikkGjar 
3C5n, 366. 

Sambanarkoyil (Tj.) 373. 

Sambandar th», 223, 398n. See 
Tiragnana-Sambandar. 

Samudragupta 27 w, 125. 

fiamvatsara - vdriya{m) 368, 
406, 410, 418, 444, 455, 458, 
502, 509, 522, 531, 542, 555 n, 
596. 

Sandayan Tiruvaiyan, Vaidamba 
Maharaja(n), conquered by 
Parantaka I 152 ; 446. 

Sandi ( — puja) 8. 

Sandimattivu, 238n, 241-2. 


[ 688 ] 



INDEX 


tSandi-vilakku 8 n. 

San-fo-tei (— Che-li-fo*che. Sri 

, Yijaya) 258-9, 262-3, 267. 

Sangam age 2, 4-5, 12, 17, Cola 

/ * 

kings of the Sangam age 
36-7, 39 ; 49, 59, G8, 71, 73- 
117, 118-29. 

^angappai, Someivara’s queen 
captured by the Cola Uuj On- 
dr a II, 309. 

Sangara , vessels made of single 
logs bound together 104. 

Sangamayya 274. 

0 

SangOndi (Tri.) S. mnngalam 
546. 

Sangili-Kanadarava 302, 594. 
Sangarama Raghava, title of 
Panin taka I 145. 


Sangrama-vijayottunga-varman, 
king of Kadarain 254 ; a suc- 
cessor of Mara-vijayottunga- 
vanuan 256 ; 258, his ac- 

knowledgement of the suzer- 
ainty of KajOndra 1 268 ; 332. 


Sangu, 249, perhaps commander 
of Mahlpala 252 ; \s rongly , 
read as 6 'angama{n\) 281. j 
SankaradOva. local Ganga chief | 


390n. 

Sankara-deva Somanatha, Vai- 
1 um ban 533. 

Sankaran Gandariidittan alias 
Senapatigal Uajarajac-coliya- 
varaiyar 598. 

Sankarappadiyan Kalani-venni 
alias M ad liu ran takap- pe rarai- 
yan C08, 612. 

Sankarappadi jar 562, 588. 
Sahkhya philosophy 72 and n. 
Sanskrit Drama: Keith, A.B. 
283. 

Sanskrit Literature : Macdoneli 

283 . 


Santik-kuttan Tiruvalan Tiru- 
mudukunran alias Vijayara- 
jendra-acaryan, kdni to him 
and his descendants 592. 

Saptamatrkas, 384, 510, 563. 

Saptapadi 110. 

Sarabandondavai 563. 

Sarasv(w)ati 116 ; in the shape 
of a stream stopped by Vi§nu 
to save a sacrifice 435n. 

Sarva-devan Tirumadam, called 
after king Rajendra Cola I’s 
guru 565. 

Sarvalokaaraya, title of Yignu- 
vardhana-Yijayuditya 341. 

Sarvalokasraya Sri Visnuvar- 
dhana Maharaja alias Calukya 
Vijayaditya Yikkiyanna(n) 
244, 609. 

Sarvatirthanallur 583. 

Sdsanam G. 

^dsana baddha-caturvedi - bha (• 
tattdna(pyperumakkal 473, 
481. 

Susa nanuddha-catur vedibhat fa- 
pert nn bad i - sahasradana-pe- 
rumaklml of Vlranarayana- 
catm. 373. 

Satavahana 125n. 

Sathakopa - Vinnagara-peruma- 
nadi, temple of 499. 

Sati 112-3. 

Satiyaputa 28 and n. 

Satrubhayankara-terinda Velam 
511. 

Sdttagan attar 501, 549. 

Sattamangalam 488, 551. 

Satta Nalayiravan alias Kari- 
kfila - sola Sengeni - natjalvan 
606. 

Sattan, author of the Manime- 
kalai 32. 


M 


[ 689 ] 



THE COLAS 


fettandaiyar 63. 

Rattan Rama-deviyar, the anuk - 
kiydr of king Rajendra I 564. 

Sattanur 388, 396, 474, 505, 513, 
alias x^bhayasraya - catm. 
533n, 543 ; 588. 

Sattapperumaklca 1 489. 

* 

Satti-Arinjigai alias Tennavan 
Vilupparaiyan 368. 

* 

Sattimangalara 573. 

^attiyakkudi 572. 

Sattiyavvai, queen of Somesvara 
captured by the Cola king 309. 

Satyasraya, W. Oalukya king, 
his accession and war with 
Rajaraja I 210 ; the * slayer of 
the Tamil ’ ; he rolled back 
the tide of Cola invasion 211, 
213-4, fight with Rajendra 
I 236-8 ; 535. 

Savakam 265n. 
£ava-miivap-peradu 8. 

Savarnan Araiyan Candrasekha- 
ran alias Uttama-CoIa-acalan, 
office of hereditary physician 
conferred on 537. 

Savarnan Araiyan Madhuriinta- 
kan, physician of the free 
dispensary founded by Kun- 
davai 532 ; 545. 

Sayavanesvara 23n. 

Schiefner 622. 

Schoff : ed. Periplus 30 n, 104n, 
105. 

Sedirur - Trivikkarama - bhatta 

• • 

alias Brahmadh i rS jar 383. 
Sekkilan Araiyan Sankaraniirft- 
yanan alias Sola-muttarai- 
ya(n)r of Merpajnvtir 373 ; of 
Eavanar 469. 

SSbkipr 17*8, 64, 66n, 68, 128. 
&3lai 607. 


Selangor 623. 

Selvan-adigal 372. 

Semban Arulan Uttamanldi alias 
Uttamasola Muvendavelan 

403. 

Semban gudaiyar 538. 

Sembiya deviyar alias Knla- 

manikka Nambirattiyar 377. 

Sembiyan, applied to the king 
who rescued the dove from 
the hawk 25, 39 ; Ranadhlra 
(Pandya) assumed the title of 
126. 

Sembiyan Buvanigangaraiyan 
alias Aliviu Kallarasi 399. 

M * * 

Sembiyan-devadigalar, daughter 
of Paluvettaraiyar 541. 

Sembiyan Ilangovfd alias Pudi 
Aditta Pidiiran 400n. 
Sembiyan Irnkkuvel alias Pudi 
Parantakan 188n, 394, 399, 
^ 401, 403. 471. 

Sembiyan Kattimanadigal built 
the Tiruccurra'rnandapain at 
Tiruvamattur 391. 
Sembiyan-inadevi-seri in Man- 
narkoyil 610. 

Sembiyan Mahabali Banarasa 
( — Prthivipati II) 139n. 
Sembiyanmahadevi (Tj.) 410, 

470, 472-3, 476, 478-9, 481, 
548, 570, 572, 584. 

Sembiyan - mahadevi - peruman- 
dapam at Madhurantaka- 
catra. 557. 

Sembiyan-mahadevi(yar) IJdai- 
ya-pirattiyar, qne^n of Oanda- 
raditya and mother of Uttama 
Cola 168, 182, village bearing 
her name 197 ; 199, 225-6, 
363, 373, 398n, 402, 404, 410, 
469, 471-2, 473, Tirunallam- 
mjaiyar temple at Koneririija- 
puram built by her 474; 


[ 690 ] 



INDEX 


Piruntakan Madevadigal 475, I 
47(5 ; 480-2, 48i-r>, 488, 490, 
497, 499, 529, 548. 

* 

Sembiyan-inahadevi - peruman- 
dapain 522. 

Sembiyan-mahftdoviyal - periya- 
inandapam at Sembiyanmaha- 
dovi 570. 

* 

Sembiyan Mahadoviyar built a 
stono temple at Tiruvakkarai 
499. 

Sembiyan Mahavali Varmrayar 
394. 

Sembiyan Mabmattu Ve{an alias 
Korran Martin 384. 

** «i 

Sembiyan Miliidudaiyiir 387. 

Sembi y ai 1 M u kk uk-ki lan-a * l i gal 
alias Kaimara-Nacei-Pidara- 

m 

nangai, Namhiruttiyur 502. 

Sembiyan MnvCmdavelan alias 
Nandi-puttiin 400. 

Sembiyan Muvendavelan alias 
Sattan Ulagan 408. 

Sembiyan Sembottiladanar 402. 

Sembiyan Tamila - ve|, title | 
bestowed on Vikki - Annan 
138, 412. 

Sembiyan Umbaja-nattu Mtiven- 
da-vejan built a mandapa at 
Tribkuvani 578. 

Sembiyan Vodi-vclar(n) 366, 
370, 385. 

Sembujalai 429. 

Semburk-kf>t turn 445. 

iSern ma i-pa mjara k-ka l 419. 

Sena, Ceylon king 35ft. 

Sena, senapati of Makiuda IV 
186. 

ffena dynasty 253. 

8enamukha(m)-ttar * 587 and n. 
Sdnapuram 369* 


Sendalai 133-4, (Ij.) 363, 366, 
374, 376, 380*1, 383, 397, 402, 
412, 442, 572. 

a 

Sendai), a prince connected with 
Uraiyur 31ft. 

Senda Nakkapii an Bhat ta Sarva- 
kratu-yajiyar 378. 

Sendil Ayirava-devan, Ten-tiru- 
varangam - udaiyar - koyil- 
mudukudi 608. 

Senganau 64, 66-8, 70, 86. 

See Koccenganan. 

tiengandai, gloriosa superba 97. 

Senguttuvan, Cera king ; synch- 
ronism with Gajabaku 1 of 
Ceylon 4 ; 37ft, 53ft, 68-9, 71, 
247ft. 

/ 

Senkunram fNA.) 523, 546. 

Sennai-nadu 568, 580. 

• • • 7 

Sennipperaraiyan, his fight with 

the Pandya and Ceylon 

troops at Velur 146 ; Amurk- 

kottattu Karaikkattur Nedu- 
* • «• * 

marccattan 416. 

•• 

Senur (NA.) 504. 

Seralan-madeviyar Adicci, Cera 
queen 610. 

Seralan-salai 572. 

« 

Sermadevi (Tin.) 280ft, 496, 
510, 512, 519, 521, 532, 536, 
512, 609, 610-3, 615-7, 619. 

Serauiau Perumai 127-8. 

Scramaiiar- velam 6 1 7. 

Seran iSenguttuvan : Pandit 

.M. liaghava Aiyangar 27n, 
37?i, 64ft. 

Seravan - mahadevi - catm., 
mod. Sermadevi 510, 512. 

Seris (-wards) named, after 
the titles of the king and other 
members of the royal family 
225 and n, 610. 


[Ml] 



THE COLAS 


SSrruppMu (Chetput) 444. 

Seruppali-yerinda 60-1. 

S&ruvari 566. 

Sesterces 102. 

Setcenni-Nalangilii 46. 

Settaposan Vennayakramavittan 
481. 

Sevalai 445. 

Seven Mothers, temple of 463. 
See Saptamatrkas. 

Sevilipperi (Tin.) 513, 517, 521, 
524, 614-5. 

Sevur, battle of, Aditya IPs part 
in 181 ; 185. See Cevvir. 

Sewell, Robert 69/?, 109 n, 162n, 
170n, 245/i, 314/?, 517n. 

Sey(y)abhuvana - eintamaniyar 
of KavirippumpaUinam, queen 
of Parantaka 1 426, 431. 

Seyanallar 504. 

* 

Seyddra-pon 496. 

Shi-lo-lo-cha Yin-to-lo-chu-lo, Sri 
Raja Indra Cola *, 2nd mission 
to China in 10*33 A.D. 267. 

Shiyali (Siyyali) 119. 

Sholingur rock inscription 150, 
151, 173, (NA.) 415. 

Sho-po (Java) 267. 

Short History of Ceylon : Cod- 
rington 186/1, 331 n. 

Siak Sri lndrapura ( = Siyak) 
624. 

Siam, Indian culture in 2 5«. 

Sibi, Co}a legend of the dove 12, 
Sibi Jataka 25 ; 110. 

Siddhalingamadam (SA.) 158, 
421, 423, 443, 446. 

Siddhanahalli (Mys.) 530. 

Siddhdntamrava\i 254 . 

Siddhavattatta<Jigal, title of a 
certain Narasimhavarman 401 
and n. 


Siddhi (1000) Sidhout country 
124. 

Silappadikdram 4, legend of the 
foundation of Uraiyur (Koji) 
37/i ; 38/i, 39, 43, 44n, 53n, 
69, 74, on hulus and ayams 
81-3 ; 90/?, 92, 93 and n, 94, 
96, 98, 99/?, 109-10, 111 and n, 
115/i, 116, 117n, 203/1, 247/?, 
454/?. 

* 

Silhrai 564. 

«# 

Silvai'i 550. 

Simhala(s) 201, 296, 376. 

Sitnhavisnu IIS, 119/i, conquers 
Cola country 125 ; 126n. 

Simhavi-nu (Renfindu Cola) 123. 

S i mha v i - n u -ca t in . , Pand ara vadai 
371; Irmnbujai in 376 , alias 
TirumuUur 404 ; alias Kanja- 
nnr 470 ; alias Manali 567. 

* 

Sinattiir-nadu 503. 

Sinda, the eponymous ancestor 
of the Nagas 26. 

Sindas, used the tiger-crest 26. 

Simla vadi (1000) 305, 310. 

Sindhu, the 26. 

Singalantaka, title of Rajarajal; 
Singalautakac-ceri 225 and n. 

* 

Singalantakat - terinja Kudiraic- 
Cevagar 512. 

Singalas 205. 

* 

Siugaja Vira-nuranan, Vilattnr- 
kilavan 465. 

Singan, the kiug of warlike 
Jvosalai 319. 

/ 

Singan Kaliyan alias Uttamasola* 
mtivemia-vejan of Kommai- 
pakkam 394. 

* 

Singanan 318-9. 

Singapira^tiyar 492. 

Singapore Strait, old 259. 
Singapura-n&du 390, 445, 456. 


[ 698 ] 



INDEX 


Singavaram (SA.) 593. 

Singavisnu-catm. alias Maiiali 
574-5 ; 602, 605. 

Singinandil - Svarupa - bhatta, a 
native of Perumbuliyur 376. 

Sinnamanur (Md.) 409, 540. 

Sinnamanur plates , 127, 144, 
149. 

Sippuli-nadu 371 and n. 

Sirala-deva 477, 503-4. 

Blravajji 579. 

Sijriya-mariiyan 369. 

Siriyavelar, Pa(i)runtakan ; hie 
part in Ceylon war 186; 208n, 
450-1, 621. 

& Hrramhalattulc - k’>l t a land 
measure 493. 

Sirrambar 499. 

Simmaiccnr 414, 424, 433-4, 
437, 498, 505. 

Sirringan 452 ;-n4:tiyan 453. 

yiri’ingur 443, 44ti. 

Sijrriyajrrur 4(55, 471. 

Sii'rur 409. 

Sirudhainanallur 511. 


Sivupaluvur 547. 

Sirupuliyur 391, 434. 

Siruttonda Nambi 503-4. 

Birutu^ai ( = Tungabhadra) 274, 
277. 

Siruvakkam (Ch.) 498. 

f 

Siruvayil-nadu 604. 

0 

SiruvayppGdu alias Mummudi- 
eola-nallur 574. 

Sitpuli-nadu 152, 153 and n, 

conquered by the chief of 
Karu-kudi 214 ; 218, 227, 621. 

A ^ 

Sit lay am 564. 

Silti 327. 


Siva 110, 115, 126, 164. 

* Siva DC* vale * — the Siva tem- 
ple in Polonnaruwa 206. 


0 

Sivadhurma, provision lor ex- 

I pounding it 587, 611. 

! . 

i SI va } j n va-iuangalam alias Kera- 
j la(?)-kulasani-catm. 609. 


! Sivankudal (Ch.) 532. 

j Sivapadasekhara, title of Raja- 
j raja I 225, 507. 

^ Sivapadasekhara - nallur 611-2, 


A 0 

Sirudanufu 512, 515, Si rudunat- 
tiijbperundaratn 588; 593. 

Sirudanattu Kdirdi-»5ia>terinda- 
*■ •* 

vaiangai-\ Oiaikkarar 535. 

m 

Sirudamittu-ijaiya-raja - Utiarna- 
bohi-terimla-vaiangai - \5luik- 
karar 535. 

Sirudanatt up-pa n iinaUatf 552. 


615. 




l 

j 


SiYapadasOkhara-terinja - 1 i r u- 
manjanattar-\ 5lam 592, 596. 

Si\apuram (Ch.) 548. 

Shapuri (SA.) 570. 
Sivapuri-nagarattar 370, 384. 
Siyak ( = Siak Sri Indrapura) 



0 

Sirudanattu - sola - sikhainani- 

•4 • 

torinda-valangai - vejaikkarar 

535. 

^ijruku(jii 50. 

Si;;ukulattur 153, 432. 
Sira-nan^aiyur 502* 

Sijpapakkam 498. 


Slyanumgalain (N A.) 390, 393, 
; 154. 

s Siyyali (Sldyfili) princes of Cola 
' descent in 1 1 9. 

i 

Skaudasisya 132, 385. 

Smith, Elliot 25 n. 

Smith, Vincent A., 27n, 26 In. 


[693 ] 



THE COLAS 


Smrti 6. 

Social and Economic History of 
the Roman Empire 29 n, 
102 / 1 . 

Solacudamani-eatm. 385. 
Solai-iraja-singam 540. 

Sola-Kannakucciyan 310. 

Solak6raJa(n)-maligai, a palace 
iu Gangaikonda - solapuram 

330, 003. 

* 

Solakida-karana-Muvenda-velan 

583. 

Solakulasundaracceri 2 2on. 

Solakulasundara- Yinnagar-a] . var 
temple at Mlnjnr 407, 530. 

Soiakulavalli, t i r u v a m u d u - 

•i r 

adum-pmtjatti of Rajendra I 
502. 

Sola-made viyar alias Pan cavan - 
madeviyar, queen of Mummu- 
di Cola i.e. Rajaraja I 477. 

Sola-madeviyar Velam 303. 
Soljxmandala Satakam 22n. 

S51amii(r)ttanda - catm. alias 
Yembarjur 534, 550. 

Solan Kumaran Madhurantaka 
Marayan, chief of Sattiinanga- 
lam and of rank perunda - 
nam»daiyj,anayakam 573. 

i 

/ I 

Sojan Kumaran Parantaka Mara- 
yan alias Rajadhiraja Nila- 
gangaraiyar Danrjanayakan, 
a feudatory of Rajadhiraja 
I 313 ; 575. 

Solan- Nalluruttiran 63. 

SSlaperuman ( * Rajaraja I) 226. 

&61a-perumana<Jigal, title of 
Parantaka 1 413, 441. 

Sola-perumana(jigal-deviyar AJi- 
<i-k&tHiigai 381. 


Solap-perumunatliga} Perunajk- 

.killi-solan 3C4. 

• • •• 

Solapuram 155, 157, (NA.) 443, 
, SCO. 

Solasikliamani Pallavaraiyan. 
an officer of Parantaka 1 415 > 
j of Nelvoli 441. 

| Solas ikhamaniyar, queen of the 

j Cola king Parantaka 1 424 ; 

| 432. 

✓ 

Sola-vallabha - (leva, Pillaiyar* 
a feudatory of Rajadhiraja I 
313 ; 570. 

Solavamki - carittirac - curuk - 
ham: T.A.G. Hao. 228 n. 

j Sola - v A y od d lii raj a 1 1 310. 



I at Melpfidi 538. 


Solendra-singa-isvaram at Ser- 
madevi 009. 


Soli y am y a liquid measure 502. 

/ 

Somanathadeva 390n. 

/ 

Soman Solakulasnmlari 585. 

Some8vara I Calukya Trailokya- 
malla Ahavamalla 237n v 
273, his sons 274 ; 276-7, 
295, second Calukyan war of 
Rajadhiraja I 304-11 ; VIra 
rajendra 1 ’b war with S. 325 ; 
326 ; 327 and n, failed to keep 
his engagement 328; religious 
drowning in the Tungabhadra 
ib., 329, 331, 333, 341, 342, 
343. 

Somesvara 11 276n, 327n, his 
war with Virarajendra 1 333-4; 
Rajiga induced him to com- 
bine with him and fight 
against Vikramaditya VI 352; 
lost the throne 353. 

Someivara III, viceroy of 
Vikramaditya VI at KoJ|ipika 
236. 


[ 694 ] 



INDEX 


gfimfir (Tri.) 395 and n, 409, 
431, 500, 505, 549. 

Song, dynasty of China 258, 1st 
mission to China from Chu - 
lien or Cola in 1015 A .D. 206. 

Sonnavararivar 497, S. Mahudova 
at Vingunirtturutti 590-1, 595. j 
Sopatma of the Periplus, same 
as So-pattinam of Tamil litera- 
ture - identical with modern 

Markanam 30. 

• 

So-pattinam 30. 

Sorai nomads 30-2. 

Soranatha, king of the Soringae 
30. 

Soremati, buttle of 142, 152, 
Soringae, the ( = Oholas) 30. 

South India and her Muham - 

i 

tnadan Invaders 28 In. ! 

Sovayya alias Rajeiidra-cola- 
dela-Rattagu<Ji 578. 

&raddhamanta(r)s 463-4, 466, 
502, 508, 511, 517. 

Srfivana Aslesi, asterism of 
V Irani jendra’s birth 336. 
Sribali-(patti) 498, 510,572, 581. 

Sribhoja, wrong Form for San- ! 
fo-tsi 259. 

Sri-bhujagavara -.bhiisana-maha- 
rajulu, a title of one of the 
Chindaka family 250. 

Sri-OuJamani-varmadeva 258. 

Sri-kantha, plates of 125n. 

Srlkantha - catm. 366, 369-70, 
372, 374, 381, 434. 534. 

Srlkanjha Damodarabhatta 609. 

&ri*khettara, ancient Prome 
261n. 

&rbkoyil-variyam-&eyvdr 567. 

- gayap-peruma kha] 

541, 


Sri Mara 6rt-vallabhal27. 


Srinivasa Aiyangar, P. T. 5 n, 
28n, 41 n, 53n, 6 On, Gin, 74n, 
94n, 120n, 121n. 

Srlnivasanallur (Tri.) 363, 435-6. 

Srinivasa Pillai, K. S. 66n. 

Sri Fundi plat™ of Tula II 
216. 

Sri Puvamhiya(m) batile of 130, 
133, 135 and n, 137n, 142, 
384n. 


* 

Sri Rajarajadeva, legend on a 
silver coin 16/?. 


Sri ran gam 11/?. (Tri.) 369, 384, 
387, 419, 437, 440. 


Sri-raipjaras 508-9, 511, 517, 
534, 566, 568, 593. 


Srlvallabha, Pandya king, hie 
queen’s gifts to the Tirn- 
visalur temple 278 ; his son 
killed by Virurajendra 325. 

* 

Srivallabba-mangalara 51 7. 

Srivajluvar 242, 534. See Sri 
Vallabha. 

Sri Vijaya 255 and n, 257-60 f 
263, Kadaram probably a de- 
pendency of 265 ; political 
position of Kadaram and S. 
265/? ; mission to the Chinese 
Government of the kings of S. 
258, 266-7, 332, (=,Palem- 
bang) 623-4. 

Srivi^aya 224, 255/?. 


Srotriyam Tandalam (Ch.) 498. 

Srutiman Nakkan Cand(i)ran 
alias Raja malla-muttaraiyan, 
an officer (of Rajendia I) who 
fell in the Calukya war 237, 
535. 

Sseu-li-ma-lo-pi (= Sri - Mara- 
vijaydUunga-varman) 258, 


[«»#] 



THE COLAS 


Sseu-li-tchou-Io-wou-ni-fo - ma - 
tiao-houa ( = Sr! - Culamani- 
varma-deva) 258. 

Sthanattdr 585. 

Sthanu - Ravi, Oera kins: 138, 
139n, Seraman 412 ; 427/?. 

Studies ( = Studies in C~lu His- 
tory and Administration) 5r? , 
40n, 45 w, 85;?, 85 n, 139??, 
159n, 163n, 620. 

Studies in South Indian Jai- 
nism 27n, 28;?. 

Studies in Tamil literature 
and History: V. R. R, Dikshi- 
tar 35;?. 

Subhadeva, father of Senganan 
67. 

Subrahmanya Aiyar, K.Y. (K. Y. 
S. Aiyar) 60n, 133n, 158n, 
188n, 193n, 218n, 370n, 372;?, 
374», 394n, 526n, 615n, 621. 

Suclndram 202;;, 244, (Tv.) 409, 
411, 440, 486, 494, 496, 

alias Sundarasola-catm. 608 ; 
612n, 615-6. 

Sudadu-parai-malai, near Yelur 
447. 

Sudi plates, the * spurious ’ 161. 

Sudukattuppattam 417. 

Suldenahalli (Mys.) 512. 

Snmati, a disciple of Buddha- 
datta 121. 

Sumatra lOOn, trade with Malabar 
in the hands of the Tamils 
103 ; 104, 258-9, 260;?, 263, | 
265n, Tamil Inscription of 
1088 A.D. 268 ; 623. 

Sundara C51an Rajadhiraja-vic- 

« cadira Pallavaraiyan 585. 

Sundara C51a-Pandya Jatavar- 
man, Cola - Pancjya viceroy 
282, 60844. 


Sundara C51a, Parantaka II 67, 
167-8, 169n, 170n, 172n, had 
title of Madhurantaka 173 ; 
174, 176-8, made his son 

Aditya II co-regent soon after 
! his acc. 179; 180-1, 182n, reign 
185-90 ; recovery of the Colas 
j from the effects of the Rastra- 
| kuta invasion under Krma III 
| 189-90 ; title of Pon-maligait* 

tunjinadeva, ?.<?., who died in 
the golden palace (at Kaiiclpu- 
ram) 190 ; a second Manu ib. $ 
his encouragement of litera- 
ture ; S. as king of Nandipura 
ib. ; a domestic tragedy — the 
assassination of Aditya II 190- 
1 ; his son by Vanavan-maha- 
devi was Arumolivarman 
alias Riijaraja I 198 ; 208n ; 
36 7n, 370n, 372n, 374n, 377n f 
379n, 408n, Pan(Jiyanaic- 

curam-irakkina Perumal 450, 
451; 50 6n, 621. 

Sundaramurti 64, 67, 127-8, 223. 

Sundarananda, Renandu Cola 
123. 

Sundara Randy a, contemporary 
of Raj fid hi raj a I, chief of the 
confederacy to throw off Co}a 
yoke 270 ; 278. 

Sundara Pundya, Jatavarman, 
wrongly identified with Jata- 
Coda 2i9n. 

Bund a ra - sola- cat rn . ( = Sucind- 

ram) 244, 608, 615-6; 579, 
602. 

Sundara - sola Pandyat-terinda- 
valar 613. 

Sundara - sola - Seri in Mannar- 
koyil 610. 

Sundarasolan, Araiyan 486. 

Sundaras5|ap-pereri at Brahma* 
dedam 565. 


[ 696 ] 



INDEX 


Sundara-sSlap-perumballi at 01a- 
gapuram 599. 

Sundarasolat - teriiija - kaikkolar 
505. 

Bundara - sola - vinnagar - atula- 
salai at Taiijavur 545. 

Suralur 375. 

Suramittirap-perumanradi 455-6. 

SuraBuIamani, title of Parantaka 
I 417. 

Siira - sulamanip - perunderu, a 
part of Tiruvon'iyur 424. 

Murrain, the eighteen 82. 

Suryadeva 398, 402. 

Suryanarayana Sastri S. S. 33n, 
72n. 

tSuttamalluv&ykkal 584. 

Sutturu (Mys.) 568. 

Sv(w)aminatha Aiyar V. Pandit 
40n, 60n t 324n. 

S(\vamikannu Pillai), L.D. 370n, 
372 /*, 374n r 565n. 

T 

Tadigaipadi, conquered by Raja- 
raja l 207 ; attack on 208-9 ; 
its position in Mysore 209n. 

Tatligaivali 207, 494. See Tadi- 
gaipadi. 

Tadimalingi (Mys.) 505, 521, 
551. 

Ta(fi • tnarum-kudiraiccevagar 
534. 

Tatfi-vaH-variyatn 458. 

Tagadur (Dharmapuri) 127n. 
Tagadnr-nad** 515, 565. 

Taila II, Xhavamalla, restores 
the ancient Calukya line ; 
claims victory against the 
C51a king 209 ; his death 210 ; 
213, 246. 

Tailakula - kala • teriiija - pari- 
varam 513, 


Taiyur or Talasayanapuram 
alias Rajakesari-nallur 461-2, 
504,519,526. 

Takkanaladam, conquest of 233; 
249.* 

Takkay&gapparani of Ottak- 
kuttan 20, 324, 327n, 333, 

Takkola of the Milinda-Panha 
in the Malay peninsula ( — 
Talaittakkolam) 262, 623-4. 

See Takopa. 

Takkolain (NA.) temple of 
136 ; battle of 157-9; 161-2, 
193, 374, 383, 391n, 394, 412, 
414, 416, 420-2, 429, 433, 
442, 445, 457, 460, 462, 480, 
488, 517, alias Ksatriyasikha- 
manipurain 549 ; 563, alias 
Irattapadi - konda - solapuram 
584* 604. 

Takola of Ptolemy (-Talaitak- 
kolam — modern Takopa) 262, 
623-4. 

Takopa, ancient Talaittakkolam 
262, 623. 

Takua Pa 623. 

Tala I, E. Ca]ukya, usurpation 
of 216. 

Tala II 2 16 ; his grant 339. 

| Talaccangadu (Tj.) 509, 529, 
555. See Talaiccangadu. 

Talaccemmai-pon 405. 

Tdlai , Pandanus 85, 95. 
Talaiccangadu (Tj.) assembly of 
373, 547, 535 ; 377, 475, 570. 
See Talaccangadu. 

Talaigrama, in Virata-(Jesa 279, 
567. 

Talai(k)kr«j(u) 137-8, 207, 209, 
551, 591. 

Talaikotyja meaning discussed 
169-70. 


88 


[697 ] 



THE COLAS 


Talaing country of Burma 256, 

261. 

Talaittakkolam 255, 2G2, 623. 
See Takola, Takkola. 

Talaiyalanganam 60;?. 

Talam( = treasury) 506. 

Talasayanapuram 461-2. See 
Taiyur. 

Talavakara Samavoda, provision 
for recital of 491. 

Tajikkanakku 483. 

Tali Kumaran 207. 

Tamalingam 263n. 

Tamappal-kannanar, a poet 45. 

Tambit - txinaiccola - valanadu 
291, 582. 

Tambraparni, the ( = Mudigonda- 
s51appera.ru) 280;i. 

Tamil civilisation, its high 
water-mark under the Cola 
empire 2 ; 73 ; influence of 
Aryan ideas on 109. 

Tamil Lexicon tin. 

Tamil Ndvalar Caritai 121n. 

«• 

Tamil Varaldru : K. S. Srini- 
*• ** 

vaaa Pillai 6 tin. 

Tamilian culture 73; pre- Aryan 
Tamil culture described 75 ; 
influence of Aryan ideas on 
109. 

Tamils, History of the : P. T. S. 
Aiyangar 5n, 2 tin, 53 n, (J0n, 
61n, 74n, 94n, 120n. 

Tamils, Eighteen Hundred 
Years Ago, The : Kanaka- 
sabhai 37n, 8 2n, 99 n. 

Tam(b)ralinga 203 and n ; ( = 
Chaiyya, or Bandon or Ligor) 
623. 

Tamulan Korri(a)nangi of Siyu- 
dhamanallur 511, 514, 516, 
518. 


Tandabutti 249. 

• * 

Tandaladeva 372. 

« • 

Tandapuram 390. 

Tandevi , introduction of Raja- 
raja I 493. 

Taniyur , Olagapuram 365 ; 

Viranarayana - catin. 507, 
602-3; Madhurantakam 546, 
554, 603; Vanavan-Mahadevi- 
catm. 550 ; Rajaraja - catm. 
563, 578; Tiruveliarai 574; 
5 76. 

Tanjai 149. 

Tanjaik-k'm 133n. 

Ta njai-na rjmgald fa n 133n. 

Tanjait-tiram-padi-ninrar 133n. 

Tanjaviir, patnam 137; 140, 

161, kurram 214, 371 ; not 
consecrated by Devaram 
hymnists 223 ; 376, 379, 382, 
387, 393, 421-2, 433, 454-5, 
485, 493, 514, 545. See Tan- 
jore. 

Tanjore 2, 3, temple of 131n; 
capture of, by Vijayalaya 
131-4; 142 ; 143, *takeu’ by 
Krsna III 161; 162 and n, 183, 
image of Vanavan-mahadevi 
set up in the temple 190 ; 
199n; 207, the T. temple was 
enriched by treasures captured 
in the war with the Calukyas 
210; inscriptions of the 29th 
year of Rajuraja I 220 ; des- 
cription of T. temple 221-3 ; 
decorative sculptures on the 
walls of T. temple 224 ; 226, 
228n, 229, 230, 219n, 251n, 
255n, 284, 336, 365, 387, 
422n, 516, 518, 524-5, 529, 
532, 546, 551, 555, 592. See 
Tanjavur. 

Tanjore district 1, 224, 313, 337, 


[MS] 



INDEX 


Tan-ma-ling 260, 262. 
Tannlrrnutlum 511. 

Tannirppandal 221, 
Tannlrppatfi 462. 

Tanniyalattur 503. 

Tanporundam, river 521. 

Tan ri rat ta-mah fide v iyar Sembi- 
yan - muhfulcviyar queen of 
Gandaraditta - perumul and 
daughter of Malavaraiyar 471. 
Tan rfmri-tanicco' vagan 380. 

Tfirfnmth(a), the Tibetan his- 
torian 27, 622. 

Ta-shi, Arabs 2(57. 

Tattanur 370. 

Tattapadi, Tadigaipfidi ? 207. 
Tavaai Najrpattennayira Mavali- 
devi 612. 

Tawney 263n. 

Tayauur (SA.) 453-4, 460. 

Tayatougat - teriuja - kaikkolar 
388. 

Tayittiriyak-kidaippuram 538. 

Teccappan Sembiyan Mftdevi, 

wife of Arumoli alias Uttama- 

%• 

sola-brahma-marayar 558. 

Teki, plates of Raj a raj a Cot la- 
gan ga 343-4, 346, 349n. 
Telingakulakuia, title of Raja- 
raja I 225. 

Telugu Academy Plates of Sak- 
tivarman II 330, 314. 

Telugu* C(\tas 3, 44, 119/?, 122-5. 
Te!unga(s) 204, 521, 551. 
Tembeling 262. 

Temiling 262. 

Ten-Kailayattu-MahadOva 381. 
Tenkarai (Md.) 500. 
Tennfin’ur-tutdu 394. 

Tennavan Ijangdvejar of the 
Kot.lumbalur lino 149, this 


title may have been borne 
by several persons 150n ; 
187, 188n, 387, father of 
Pudi Adicca Pidariyar 413. 

Tenua 1 van-made vi 369. 

Tennavan Madeviyar 461-2. 

Tennavan - madeviyar, Malap- 
piidi, queen of Uttama Cola 
*170. 


Tennavan Mahadeviyar, queen 
of Uajakesari 3<S0, 400; queen 
of Uftjaraja I 501. 

Tennavan-uiahadeviyar, Mallis- 
varattu Nam biratt iyar alias 
N a ray an a Nanguri Nangaivar, 

Sola - perumuuadigul Maha- 
de\ iyar 431-2. 


T 


T 


ennavan Pirudi Marasan alias 

Katti Orvi varan 378. 

« * »* ^ 

ennavan Vilupparaiyar called 
nammayanav by the king 



TenuGri (Ch.) 488-9, 491, 529, 
580, 601. 

Ten-tirumaliruujolai 521, 615. 

Teiuu* alias Jananatha - catrn. 
or i^rundenur 500. 

Ten-Valanallur 494. 

Teiivura-nudu 407-8. 

Tereyur (5lys.) 596. 

Terkilangadi, a part of Uttara- 
merur 511. 

Terkirunda-nakkar 404-5. 

*• 

Tervanmalaiyan, a chieftain 60. 

Teyakulatilaka Malepakulakala 
Kottamandala - natha Apra- 
meya 527. 

Thurston : Coins , Cat. No. 2 
Madras Museum lOOn. 

Tigai Ayirattanhurruvar, b i g 
mandapa called 388. 

Tigai - yuyirat-tannurruvar , a 
merchant guild 532. 


[ 699 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tillaisthanam 136, 138, 139n; 
(T j 0 366, 375, 377-80, 395-7, 
399, 408, 412-3, 417, 420, 
422-3, 425, 431, 433, 502. 

TmaiSy the five 75. 

Tindivanam (SA.) 370, 486, 603. 

Ti n galer-pera-val a r , Rajadhira- 
ja’s prasasti 293, 573, 579-81. 

Tingalh* - taru, Rajadhiraja’s 
praiasli 234, 294, 572-85 

passim. 

Tinnevelly 490, 548. 

Tippahja-alagiyan Maravan 395. 

Tiraimur 380, 395, 420, 425, 454. 

Tiraimur - nudu 420, 488, 513, 
551. 

Tiraiya-mangalam 463. 

Tirakkol (SA.) 382, 390, 402. 

Tirthamalai (Bm.) 392, 565. 

Tiru (Lak^mi) 241. 

Tiruccanur (NA.) 427. 

Tiruccatturai (Tj.) 386, 390, 394, 
399, 401, 409, 415, 424, 441, 
480-1, 529, 621. 

Tirucceiulurai (Tri.) 382, 387, 
399-400, 408, 413. 

Tirucceugattangndi (Tj.) 394, 
401, 477, 503-4, 579. 

Tiruccengodu (Sm.) 208, 379, 
398, 402, 409, 417n, 425, 435, 
479, 486. 

Tiruccennatjlai 458 ; T. -pur am 
474. 

Tiruccennambun<Ji 383n, (Tj.) 
419. 

Tirucceyalur-perumal 389. 

Tiroccirappalli ( = Trichinopoly) 
499. 

Tiruceirrambalam (Tj.) 372. 

Tiruccii*jrambalam - u d a i y a n, 
assembly-hall 587. 

Tiruccivindiram 440. 

Tirucc(5)uka(u)ntir 427, 605. 


Tiruccuji (Rd.) 377. 

Tiruccurralai 229, 364. 

Tini(g)nana-Sambandar 64, 127, 
560. See Sambandar. 

Tirugokarnam (Pd,) 410, 485, 
492. 

Tirukka^aiyur (Tj.) 492, 494n, 
556, 584. 

Tirukkajar (Tj.) copper-plates 
559. 

Tirukkalavur (Tj.) 406, 422, 
438. 

Tirukkalittattai (Tj.)408, 450-1, 
477, 521, 529, 550. 

Tirukkalivallam, sabha of 482. 

Tirukkalukkunram inscription 
of the 27th yr. of RajakOsari 
132 ; 137, 234n, T. was called 
Dlagalanda - solapuram 313n; 
(Ch.) 385, 412," 427n, 443-4, 
556, 573, 590, 604. 

Tirukkalukkunrattu, Sri Miila- 
sthanattu-perumanadigal 385. 

Tirukkamahjur 409. 

Tirukkannappa-devar 572. 

Tirukkannaparam 579. 

Tirukkandr (Tj.) 607. 

Tirukkaravasal (Tj.) 477, 532. 

Tirokkarku^i, Dcvaram name 
for Uyyakkon<Jan - Tirumalai 
452 and n. 

Tirukkanraji-piccan, builder of 
Gomuktl^vara temple at Tiru- 
vadatuyai 423, 433, 437, 

Firantakan Bipyav5jan alias 
T.-p. 450. 

Tirukkarugavur 406. 

Tirukkavanakkdl 600. 

Tirukko(jikaval (Tj.) 414, 437, 
469. 

w 

Tirukkodiijo4u, introduction of 
Rajadhiraja I 275, 294, 584. 

Tirnkkoj.ambiyur (Tj.) 366, 429. 
474, 581, 583, 585 , 588 . 


[ 700 ] 



INDEX 


Tirukkosthiyur (Rd.) 480, 488, 
505. 

Tirukkottar 609, 612. See Kot- 
tar (a). 

Tirukkottiyur 382. 

Tirukkovalur, sabha of 407, 
536, 500. 

TirukkSyilur 53 # 284, 310n, 
(SA.) 592. See Tirukkovalur. 

Tirukkuijamukkil (Kumbako- 
nam) 365, 438, 467, 479, 567, 
587. 

Tiru-kurakkut-tarai-perumandi - 
ga{ 363. 

Tirukkurangadutuvai, modern 
Aduturai 473. 

• M 

Tirakkurugavur (Tj.) 368, 403. 

Tirutnddu (mddar) puvujenum , 
introduction of Rajendra II 
314, 588-90, 593-7. 

Tiru{maga]ymaruviya , intro- 
duction of Rajendra II 291, 
314, 587-96. 

i 

Tirumagal ( mangai ) - vahira ' 
introduction of Rajamuheti- 
dra-deva 316n, 598. 

Tirumaga\-pfila introduction of 
Rajaraja I 202, 205, 184-5, 
492, 494-529. 

Tirumaiyam (Pd.) 529. 

Tirumakkottai (Tj.) 492. 

Tirumaiai inscription of Rajen- 
dra 1 248n, 251n, 283, 285-6; 
(NA.) 392, 444, 450, 498, 
499n, 507, 593, 622. 

Tirumalam (Tj.) 368, 452. 

Tirumalarangan alias Tiruppal- 
Jittama-piccan 560, 564. 

Tirumalavaiji (Tri.) 234, 282, 
382, 385, 390, 395, 400, 449, 
519, 521, 555-6, 558-60, 564, 
570-1, 573, 576, 579, 581, 
594 - 5 . 


Tirumaligai-devar 509n. 

Tirumalpuram (INI A.) 372, 404, 
410, 412, 429, 438, 440, 442, 
449-50, 457, 463-65, 471, 
477-8, 487, 489-90, 510, 552. 

Tirumananjeri (Tj.) 363, 392, 
480, 575. 

Tiru mangai Alvar 43, G4, 66-7, 
70, 128-9. 

Tiru manni vaJara introduc- 
tion of Rajendra I 232-3» 
236, 240, 244, 269n, 285, 
530-2, 538-71. 

Tirumavalavan, Perum 61-2. 

Tirumayanam 568. 

T irumor val i -makad e va at Pulal- 
lur 370. 

Tirumeynariam (Tj.) 363, 412, 
510, 513. 

Tirumudiyur 427, sabha of 441. 

Tiruniudukunram, Vrddhacalam 
402. 

Tirumukkudal, a mandapa 
named after Sembiyan Maha- 
devi at, built by Rajaraja I 
226; (Cb.) 522,532-3, 538, 
546-7, 550- L, 554, 557, 603. 

Tirumullaivayil (Cb.) 461, 465, 
471. 

Tirumullur alias Simhavisnu- 
catm. 404. 

Tirumunaippadi(na<Ju) 155, 421, 
426, 491, 554. 

Tirunag(i)esvaram (Tj.) 160n, 
184, 363, 376, 399, 412. 448, 
494, 543, 548, 567-8, 587. 

Tirunallam 584. 

Tirunamanallur lln, 161n, 325, 
335, (SA.) 390, 418, 426-7, 
429-31, 433, 437-9, 444-5, 447, 
513, 521, 570, 601, 607. 

Tirunandikkarai (Tv.) renamed 
Mummudi-Solanallur 503. 


[ 701 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tirtmaraiyur 66-7, (Tj.) 475-6, 
571. " 

Tirunaraiyur-na<Ju 408, 545. j 

Tirunarayanac-ceri 506. 

Tirnnavalur alias Rajaditta- 
devapnra(m) 570, 601. 

Tirunavukkaraiya-deva 507,560. 

Tirunavukkarasu 196. 

Tirune<Jungalam (Tri.) 366, 375, 
485. ’ 

Tirunelli plates, the 201n. 

Tirunelveli 490. j 

Tiruneyttanam 396, 408, 425. j 

Tiruneyttanattu-Mahadeva 378. 

Tiruppaceur (Ck.) 607. 

Tiruppadiyam 371, 414 f 440, 
471, 487, 490, 497, 503, 509, i 
517, 534, 538, 553, 557, 605-6. 

Tiruppalanam (Tj.) 183, 364, ; 
368, 382, 383 and n, 384, 387-8, 1 
390 and n % 395, 397, 400-3, 
412, 414, 419, 426, 428-9, 
448, 495, 501. 

Tiruppalangdldr, mod. P a 1 a n- 
koyil 468. 

Tiruppalanjudu 399. 

Tiruppalatturai(Tri*) 397-8, 409, 
420, 448, 475, 540. 

Tiruppallitldmam 577. 

Tiruppanambudur 375 and n. 

Tiruppangili (Tri.) 544, 574, 
585. 

Tirnppanmalai ( = Pancapanda- 
vamalai) a Jaina centre 438 
and n. 

Tirnppapnliynr (SA.) 599. 

Tirupparkkadal (NA.) 395*6, 

416, 458. 

Tirnppajrrurai 375n, 398. 

Tinippa4fir 64n, 607 . 

Tiruppattur (Tri.) 543. 

Tirupperundorai 545. 


Tirupperur, sabha of 385. 

Tiruppidaviir-sabka 543. 

Tiruppugalur (Tj.) lln, 474, 
498, 507, 51 9, 540, 552, 574, 
587, 589-90, 592, 596. 

firuppnlippagavar nirutta-vitan- 
ki 446. 

Tiruppundurutti (Tj.) 377, 390n, 
513, 571. 

Tirnppuvambiyam (Tj.) 400, 

419, 423, 449, 454, 477, 485, 
498, 503, 513, 515, 557, 561. 

Tirnppnrattinni Emberuman 
385. 

Tiruppattur (Md.) 601. 

TirusidaiuTdal 399. 

Tirnthonillsvaram, temple .‘590. 

Tirnttangal (1M.) J07. 

Tiruttani (NA.) :5f»8, 406, 430, 
432, 522, 50,S,i. 

Tiruttindisvara 370. 

Tiruttottam-uilaiyfir, temple in 
Melappalavur 227, 369. 

Tiruvadandai (Ch.) 207n, 368, 
461-62, 468, 481, 501, 50i! 
519, 525-6, 583, 598. 

Tirnvadi (SA.) 399, 407, 437, 
445, 471, 491, 536, 546, 550, 
584. 

Tiruvadattu'-ai (S. Areot.) 165». 

Tirnvadigai Sattan, nlagajavitta 
500. 

Tiruviidutui-ai (Tj.) 64n, 388, 
391, 396, 414, 423, 433-4, 
437, 439, 485, 498, 505, 513, 
533, 536, 543, 550, 557, 565, 
571, 589. 

Tiruvagattifsv&ram 399. 

Tiruvagisvaram 399. 

Tiruvagievaram - Raj&ndralojan 
in Uyyakko^ijan • Tirnmalat 
554. 


[70S] 



INDEX 


Tiruvaiya-fsvara, temple at Tiru- 
vallam 228, 499, 533. 

Tiruvaiyan Sankara - deva of 
Ganga descent, built Tiruvaiya 
Kvara at Tiruvallam 228; 
temple named after his father 
499 ; 533. 

Tiruvaiyan Srl-kantha, Vaidnm- 
ba Maharaja 443. 

Tirnvaiyayu iTj.) 229, 313, 370, 
377.379-82. 384. 391 . 404,417, 
421, 430, 432, 439-40, 456, 
477, 507. 509, 514. 526, 533, 
537, 561. 571, 588. 

Tirnvakkarai (RA.) 499, 606. 

Tirnvalanduyni - nallnr scenes 
of the Sakknik-kiittn to be 
enacted here on Asvati day 
in Arpasi festival 394. 

Tirnvalangadn(NA) 165«, grant 
or plates 12, 64. 67, 131, 136, 
140, 144n, 147, 160, 163, 167, 
171 and n, 176-7, 182, 185, . 
190n, 192 and n, 193«, 195«, i 
198, 200, 202, 203 and n, 205, , 
210, 217, 232-3. 241, 243, i 
245n, 246 and n, the Ganges j 
expedition under Rajendra 
1 247; 249n, 251-2, 2f>3«, 
254, 281 and n, 283-5, 422n, 
494, 543. 

Tiruvalaiijuli (Tj.) shrine built 
here by queen Dantisakti 
Vitanki 225 ; 226, 507, 515, 
533. 

Tiruvalar-tiral-puya(tti<), his- 
torical introduction of Viva- 
rajendra 323, 600-4. 

Tiruvallsvaram (Tin.) 489, 610- 
1, 613, 617, 619. 

Tiruvalla 162n. 

Tiruvallam (NA.) Tiruvaiya 
Iivara temple built 228 ; 482, 


492, (—Vanapuram) 499; 505, 
508-9, 516* 529, 533, 537-8, 
540, 543, 568, 577, 588, 592, 
596, 598, 607. 

Tiruvalundur, assembly of 401; 
500, 502. 

Tiruvalandur-na<Ju 591. 

Tiruvalluvar, author of the 
Kural connected with Elela 
Singa 35n, 78-9, 84, 91. 

Tiruvamattur (SA.) 366, 369, 
391, 393, 395, 415, 440, 511, 
516, 518, 529, 559, 568, 601. 

TiruvSimur (Ch.) 568. 

Tiriivunai 482. 

Tiruvanaikka (val) 396, 601. 

Tiruvanaimalai, mod. Anai- 
malai 613. 

Tiruvandarkoy(v)il (P o n di- 
cherry) 410, 479, 491,552. 

Tiriivanantesvarattalvar of VIra- 

ee 

narayana-catm. 388. 

Tiruvannamalai 11/?, 193, (NA.) 

391 , 447 , 453 , 4;16, 600 . 

Tiruvaranavasi 399. 

* 

Tiruvaninga-dovau alias Mum- 
mudi-Bola Prabmarayan 602. 

Tiruvaranga - dovaradiyal SOn- 
dan -soy y ava y -man i 369 . 

Tiru varan gan alias KajOndra- 
muvenda-vC'irm 602-3. 

e 

Tiruvarappalli 489. 
Tiruvariniisvaram, built by 
Rajaraja as Ayrur-tufijina- 
de varkku -pal 1 ippadai 448. 

Tiruvarur, stone monument 
of the story of th© calf and 
the prince 34n, the Ptriya - 
purayam localiBea the calf -le- 
gend here 39n; (Tj.) 354, 476, 
482. 560, 567, 574, 578, 588, 
594, 597s 


[703 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tirm(i)yan &rikantha, Vai- 
dumba king 152, 446, 

Tiruvaymoti, provision for the 
recitation of 559, 564, 569, 
578. 

Tiruvaymoli-deva 493. 

Tiruvayoddhi 431. 

Tiruvayddhyai Perumanadigal 
405. 

Tiruvaypadi 483. 

Tiruvedikkndi (Tj.) 391, 479. 

Tiruvekambacceri 457. 

Tiruvegambam, temple at Kac- 
cippedu 379 ; 497. 

Tiruvegambapuram 381, 488, 
541. 

Tiruvefykii ( = Vegavatl) the 435. 

Tituvembdvai, provision for the 
recitation of 590. 

Tirnvellarai (Tri.) 366, 384-5, 
397, 399, 435, 439-40. 

Tirnvendipuram, inscription 
of Rajaraja III 7 and n. 

Tiruvengada-deva-karmis 593. 

Ti raven gada-malai 569. 

Tiruvengadattu-piccan 456. 

Tiruvenkadn (Tj.) 168, 325, 
364, 393, 400. 401n, 441, 468, 
478, 480, 496, 504, 506, 514, 
516, 520, 522, 534, 537, 571, 
576-7, 582, 600. 

Tiruvenkattup - pernn-deruvn, a 
street in Madhurantakam 479. 

Tiruvennainalldr (SA.) lln, 

400, 495. 

Tirnveruntfeiynr 374, 540. 

Tirnvernmbnr (Tri.) 366, 369- 
70, 372, 374, 381, 406, 434, 
483, 489, 520, 534, 540, 591. 

Tiruvhjaimarudil 364, 367, 380, 
454-5. See Tiravicjaimarudfir. 

Tirnvi^aimarndil Senaiyar 367, 


Tirnvi^iaimarndar (Tj.) 364, 367, 
373, 376-7, 380, 388, 391, 393, 
395, 401, 414, 416, 419-20, 
422, 425, 435, 437, 442, 450, 
452n, 453-6, 470, 485, 487, 
498n, 499, 534, 580. 

Tiruvidaimarndur-Udaiyar-salai 

401. 

Tiruvidaivayil inscription con- 
taining a new Devaram hymn 
9, (Tj.) 550. 

Tiruvidankodn (Tv.) 613. 

Tiruvilakkudi (Tj.) 367, 386, 
393, 395-6, 467, 470-1, 543, 
557, 581, 606. 

Tiruvilimilalai (Tj.) 389, 396, 
411, 430, 437, 509, 533, 552, 
578. 

Tirnviramlsvaram (Tj.) 373,380, 
410, 484, 489, 491. 

Tiruvlrattanam 399. 

• * 

Tiruviiaippd of Gandaraditya 
164n, 228 and n, 368n, 421n, 
432n, 509n. 

Tirnvisaldr, the scnlptared re- 
presentation of a king and 
qneen may be of Rajaraja 
199n ; performance of tuld - 
bhdra and hiranyagarbha by 
Rajaraja and his qneen 225; 
242, temple 278 ; (Tj.) 367, 
377,393, 425, 441-2, 450, 480- 
1, 487, 514, 526, 533-4, 537, 
540, 550-1, 565. 

Tiruvi6ayamangai 196n. 

Tirnviyalur Paranjoti alia 8 
AgSra&va of the Tiruvuyal- 
matha 598. 

Tiruvdlai 482. 

Tirnvojrraiccevagan Mayilatti 
612. 

Tirnvorriyor 152-3, 168f^ 174- 
5, limit of Gftja rule under 
the successors of ParSutaka 



INDEX - 


\\ 




I 213 ; 238, 280, 295 ; (Ch.) 
396, 408, 421 and n, 424-5, 
427-8, 432-3, 443-4, 449, 473-4, 
478,504,564,566-7,571, 573- 
5, 579, 584-5, 600-1, 605, 607. 

TiruvSttur (NA.) 404, 445. 
Tirnvunnaligai-u(jiaiyar 568; T. 

sabhaiyar 603. 
Timvnral-Mahadeva 384. 
Tiruvural - puram, Takkolam 
374, 463. 

Tis(g)ai-yayirattu - Afiiiurruvar 
388, 579, 609. 

Tit(ftipiran-p(d?)enunanar alias 

^la-mahadeviyar, Nambirat- 
tiyar 506, 529. 

Tittan 63. 

Tittattur 407. 

Tolk&ppiyam 43n, 56n, 75 and 
n, 86 n, 87n, 106n, 114. 

Toncjaimanacci, daughter of 
Gangaiyar 600. 

Tonda( k i)manad near Kalahasti, 
place of Aditya’s death 139 ; 
(C.) 412, 432. 

Ton(Jaiman(jial a ®i settlement of 
agrarian colonies in, by Kari- 
kala44, Cola conquest of 132 ; 
136, 137n, 156-8, 166n, 173, 
178-9, 182, 324. 443. 

Tondaiman llandiraiyan, ruled 
over Tondai-nad 44. 
To$d*d-nad 136, 373, 621. 

TojjdainfeJu-pavina (paravina) 
Sojan « paly anaikkok - kanda- 
nftyhia Rajakesari - varmau 

412. ; 

iro^d®^ n ^rr® r » Aditya I died at 

f 432ft; T.-tufijina-tJdaiya* -W1. 

563. 

Topdfir (SA.>4554 


| Tfiffa - vdriyam 416, garden , 

| , committee 419; 458. 

Toung Poo 220n. 

Trailokya-mahadevi-catm. alias 
Punganur 530-1. 

Trailokya Mahadeviyar 441. 

Trailokya-mabadeviyar, Peru- 
manadigal- deviyart - tanmap- 
ponnar-agiya, queen Of Par- 
thivendravarman 179, 463-4. 

TrailSkyamalla, title of Vikra- 
maditya VI 335. 

Trailokyamalladeva, Homesvara 
I 305. 

Trailokyam Udaiyar, title of the 
queen of Rajadhiraja I 312 ; 
582, 588. 

< 

j Trailokyasara, a fine ruby pre- 
sented to Nataraja of Cidam- 
baram 336. 

Tranquebar 23. 

Tribhuvana-raadevi - catm. 410, 
486, 540, 544. See Tribhnvani. 

Tribhuvana-mahadevi -catm. 
(Tiruvandarkoyil) 491. 

Tribhuvana-madevip- perangadi, 
ontside Tanjavur 387, 454, 
493. 

Tribhuvana - madevip-pftreri at 
Kuvam 590. 

Tribhuvana - madeviyar Yayiri 
Akka(nar) 383, 386. 

Tribhuvana-madeviyar, Udaiya- 
piratfciyar, mother of Rajen- 
dra I 571. 

Tribhuvana * madeviyar - vo)am 
456. ' '* 

Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar, Coja 
queen, daughter of Nangu^i* 

ya* 415; 417. 

Tribhuvana • maUad&viyar 196. 
See Oratfanan Sorabbaiyar. 


[ 706 ] 



THE COLAS 


Tribhuvana~M ahiideviyar, 
queen, of RajSndra I 226, 
282, 548. 

Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar Tam- 
birattiy&r 464-5. 

Tribhnvana-nallnr alias Peru- 
perar (Perumber) 604. 

Tribhuvana-mndarap - perun- 
deru at Tiruvomyur 600n. 

Tribhuvani (Pondicherry) 355, 
487, 540, 544, 557, 566, 578, 
583, 585, 592-4. 

Trichinopoly 22 and n, 23-4, 
T. rock. 126 ; T. inscription 
of Marahjadaiyan ib . ; 237, 
499. 

Trikalinga 349n. 

Trildcana Sivaoarya 254. 

TrilSkasundari, Kalinga queen 
of Vijayabahu I 302n. 

Trinetra Pallava 44. 

Tripura (the three cities) burnt 
by Siva 110. 

Triianku 241. 

Tufnell : on coins 16n. 

Tukkarai, father of N&nnama- 
rayar 228. 

Tut&bh&ra($) performed by 
Parantaka I 163; performed 
by Rajaraja I at Tiruvi&dur 
225, 485n, 526. 

Tulabh&ra 8ri-k5yil, probably 
the Sundara Varada temple 
at Uttaram&mr 485 and n* 

Tujai - nijrai * ketnptin&garasa - 
nizaifckcd 505. 

Tulaiiniraiypon 495, 563, 566. 

I ! 

* 

Tnlararattali, a temple 418. See { 
Tolabhara 6ri-kdyil. 

Tujnva 204, $21. 

T*U4o421. 


Tundira (Tontjaimanijalatn) 336. 

Tunga 322. 

Tungabhadra, the boundary 
between the CSjas and the 
Calukyas in the days of Raja- 
raja I 211-2, 237-8, 246, 273, 
290, 305, 318, 321-2, 327 and 
», 328, 334, 353, 580n. 

Tnngeyil-ermda-to<jitt5t - cembi- 
yan 38. 

Tuiijiya 65n. 

Tfippil Sattikumarabhattan 389. 

Tnsiynr 479, 486. 

Tuttan, Calakya leader 308. 

Tntnvan Arnmoli of the Periya 
Velam 565. 

Tuvarapati alias KamakkSdi- 
vinnagar 576. 

Tdy-nadu 512. 

Tyndis 100, 103n. 

D 

Uccangi, the Pamjyae of 119. 

Uccangidrog ( — Mniangi) 246. 

Udagai 203-4, 325, 519. 

Udaipur 'inscription re : Bhoja of 
Dhara 251. 

Udaiyargn^i record of Raja- 
kesari 190, doubtless a record 
of Rajaraja’s reign 191; 
192 and n. 

Uijaiyargodi (SA.) 364, 367, 369, 
373, 388 and n, 389, 391-2, 
400-2, 404, 406, 431,435-8, 
448, 451-4, 456, 469-70, 520, 
537,548,552,558, 

1 , ( t 

U<jaiyar-pa<Jai - vira-naiaya^at- 
terinda-villiga} 570. 

Udaiyarpalajjam (taluk) 288. , 

1 * 

Udftiyar-vaigaiip-periya- UlhKy^l 

4 ill the Tanjpre tetnple 592, . 




INDEX 


Utfankuttam 607. 

Udaya IV, Ceylonese king 148* 

153 . 

Udayacandra 432n. 
Udayaoandra-mangalam 424. 
Udayaknmara(n) 53n, 104. 

Ddayamattanda Muvendavel.an, 
Adhikarin 542. 

Udayan Adittan 511. 

Udayasandiran Amudakan alias 
Kalakala Mayilafti 492. 
Udayendiram, plates of Prthivi- 
pati HastimaLia 12, 130, 136, 
144 and 145, 1504, 416n, 
422n, (NA.) 424. 

Ugra, his rising 142. 
Ugrapperuvaludi, Pandya 59. 
Ujjain 286. 

Dkkal (NA.) 230, 380, 383, 406, 
411-2, 436, 443, 455, 493, 501, 
514, 526, 538. 

UlagaJanda-OoJa-catm. 606. 
Ulagalandan, a hail 543. 

Ulagajanda-Sdla, perhaps a title 
of Rajadhiraja I 313. 

Olagajanda - Sola Brahmama- 
ray(j)an alias Rajatlhirajan 
Gurndovar Adhikarig(k)aJ 
Parasaryan Vasmleva-nara- 
yaiian 313, 581, 

Ulagaianda - solapuram, an old 
name for Tirukkalukkimram 
313n, 556, 573. 

Ulaga\auitta 500. 
Dlag(k)amudevipnram, Olaga- 

puram 373, 488, 512, 598. 

DWgudaiyal, queen of B&jen- 
dra l 616. 

Dlagudaiya - pira^iyar - v5}am 

m. 

Pl^uy^akkoi}(Ja-s51a-suryadev a 
rtt ttp*at ’pruppugalfir 592. 


Ula8 9 the three, 19 ; historical 
value 20 ; 21, 140, ‘204. 

Ulavirai 522, 564, 568. 

Ulavurka&u 542. 

U15kamahadevi-catm.,Maniman- 
galam 371, 496. 

D16k(g)a-mahadeviyar, queen of 
Rajaraja 1 484, 515, 533, U. 
isvaram 537 ; 561. 

Ulliyur (Tim) 444. 

Ombala-nadu 429, 527. 

Universal Geography : Elisee 
Reclue 622. 

On-podi-pasungu<Jaiyar, a poet 
60. 

Upanaya 72. 

Upanayana 114. 

Upasagga (plague) 144. 

Ujtdsakas 518. 

Crailagam 429. 

Uragapura( • Uraiyur, not Nega- 
patam as Hultzsch thought) 
121, 126n. 

UragaUu • ninrar - kodak - kih 

ndli 464. 

*• 

Uraiyur, capital of the Colas 24, 
29, (jsArgaru of the Peri- 
plus) 30; ( - Orthura regia 
Somati of Ptolemy) ib, 9 31n, 
37, 45, siege by Nalangi|ji47; 
48-50, 54, 56, 58, 61, 68, 68, 
manram of 84 ; a great centre 
of cotton trade 107 ; 117, 119, 
(Ugrapura U) 121; 125, 126 
and n, 127-8, 131, 142, 151n, 
183, (Trl) 367, 406. 

Uraiyur-naceiyar 128. 

Uramai4eyyxm - vdriyap-peru- 
maklcal 392. 

Uraagatji 519. 

UraRayan Sorabbai(yar) 196. 
472-3, 481. See Oraftanan S. 


[ 707 ] 



THE COLAS 


Urattur 405. 

UrtyU'Vari 510, 550. 

Urigaiyur alias Rajamartanda- 
catm. 563; 

Uripai 522. \ 

Urkkal , standard weight 473. 

Urkkalanju 611.* 

Urkkag-cemtnai (pm) 396, 428- 
9, 444* * 

Urotjlagam 548. 

Cx’jattdr 237, 535. See Uttattur, 

Un'Ukkadu 478. 

Urxukkaftu-kottam 369. 

Urumur, ancient name of £ru- 
mur 425, 510. 

Uruporul 78/i. 

Uruttiran Arumoli alias Pirati- 
inahadeyiyar, qneen of Raja- 
raja 1 540. 

Urnttirangannanar, author of the 
Patfinappalai 42. 

Uruvappahrer 39rc. 

Uruuukol-kasu 611. 

Ur-variyam 479, 558. 

Utta(ma ?)rcolesvarapur& 497. 

Uttama CoJa Parakesari 166 ; 
immediate predecessor of 
Rajaraja 1 167 ;Madhurantaka 
168 ; 174-5, 176 and K 177, 
180-2, 183m, his part in the as- 
sassination of Aditya 11 191 ; 
installed Arumoli as yuvaraja 
192 ; his son was Madhuranta- 
kan Qf^t^ai^dittan ; his acc ; 
G5|a recovery 193 ; his is the 
earliest Coja coin ; his ‘‘Madras 
Museum plates ” 194 ; his 
family 196*7; he had the 
title Vibrama 197, 471n j 
208n, 226, 363-4, gift by his 
qneen 367 ; 368n, 373 and n f 
392, 397n, 39 8 o, 402n, 403n» 


| 404m, 405m, 4Q8m, 410, 412, 

| 413n, 449, 452n, 467.75, 476, 

479m, 480-1, 484m, 490, 529. 

Uttama 0 51a Brahmadhiraja- 

kanmi Sembiyan Yadapufai- 
yur-naftu Muvendav5}an 404, 

Uttamadani-catm. 423. 

Uttamasili, son of Parantaka I, 
Pijlaiyar 163, 422, 424, 442. 

Uttamasili - catm. 374n, 375, 
397-8, 442/». 

Uttamasili- Vaykkal 397. 

Uttama - sdla - catm. (Tenneri) 
489, 580.* 

U ttamasola-madeviyar alias 
Gopan Sakappu ...... ; 474. 

Uttamasola Miladu(jaiyar 543. 

Uttauiaeola Pallavaraiyan 494n, 
537, 542. 

Uttama-451a-Puromalai-nadalvan 

565. 

Uttama-s51a-teri in Mannarkdyil 
610. 

Uttama6ola-vala-na(iu 609, 619. 

Uttama-sdjnn, a title 316 ; a title 
of Kajendra 1 543m. 

Uttama-^olan-mapdep^ 564. 

U t tama-sdi is varam (Tenneri) 580. 

Uttanur (Mys.) 504. 

Uttara*la<ja, Mahlpala of 251 ; 
286. 

U t taramer a (r) -catm . , aabha of 
163; 193, (Ch.) 375-6, 383-4, 

j 405, 407, 410,416-9, 423,444-5, 
437-65, 485^ 501, 508-9, 511, 
516-7, 526, 534, alias Rajen- 
dra^djia-cafcm. 538 ; 541, 544, 
359, 564, 568. 

UtUra Raijiha 286. 

Uttattur (Tri.) 535, 575. 

UUh&na, one of thd ideals of 
ancient Indian monarchy 
247 ft. 




INDEX 


Uttiraja^m 241). 

Utfcukkadu (Oh.) 430* 

Uvacca , kCmi 385 ; 588. 

Uyyakkopdan-termda - tirumafi- 
Janattatr - vejam at Gangai- 
kon^a-sola-param 501. 

Uyyakkon^aa Tirumalai (Tri.) 
400,432, 452, 474, 483, 487, 
520, 520, 535, 540, 553-4. 
Uyyakkomjar-vaja - na^u 550, 
572. 

V 

V adagarai-maiuu-uadu 804. 
Voifa-kalani-variijam 410. 
Vatfakkadan 504, 520. 
Vadakkilseri-Sankarappfidi 437 . 
Vadakkiruiial, suicide by slow 
starvation 40m, Ain, 58m. 

Va(jlavaccaIaip-poruiuakkaJ 380. 
Vadavur 008. 

Vadiyur 423. 

Vadugau Mu da van PaluveUa- 
raiyau Ivuiuaran Mara van 382* 
Vaduga(rj 20, 28 and m. 
Vadu-uavaran Varadau Tandau 

427. 

Vftidumba(8) 142, 150, 102, 154- 
5, 108, ICOn, 185, 228-9, 820. 
Vaidyablwga 545. 

Vaigai-malai 507. 

Vaigal 67. 

Vaigavdr 444. 

Vaikhanttsan Kalinikki-bhatpm 

462. 

VaiMMnasas 511, 532, 536, 544, 
547, 557. 

Vkirameghabhatara 370. t 

Va^avism 6, 19. 
Vmtyagait&r*kal (weight) 400. 
Yajasan5yak-kidaipp^il*am 564. 


Vajjavai-mahadfcviyar, daughter 
of Nandivarma Kadupattigal 
405. 

Vajra, country 44. 

* Vajrakasta, Ganga king 345n. 
Yakaipparandalai, battle of ; Ka- 
rikaia defeated a confederacy 
| of nine minor chieftains 41. 
Vakkanikkum - mandapam at 
Tiruvorriyur 564, 600, 

Vakkur 592. 

Vakur 488. 

Vakur-nadu 440. 

Valadeva, Dandanuyaka 317. 

Valaippanduru 255 ; not possible 
to identify 202 ; Kouffaer 
identifies it with Panduranga 
in Camim 202 n; ( =; Phanrang 
or Pan^luranga) 623, 

Valaiyur 422, 440, alias Nitta- 
viuodapuram 503, 
Vfdakkdnain 430. 

Vajamfirvu 453. 

Valangai-vCdaikkarau 497 ; 

vattanja-terinda 505. 
Va{ahjlyar 498, 548. 
Valappuranadu (Sm.) 407, 489. 
Vajavan (*Co|a) 25, 54-5. 
Valavankilli 53n. 
ValaTau-madevi-catm. 555. 
Val&van-Madtmyar, daughter of 
JS' iranayp-pajiyar 430. 

Valavan Muvenda-vejar, adhi- 
karigaj 578. 

Valhalla of the Tamils 38. 

Va|ikke(y)tunai Gunasllan 478, 
500, 502. . 

VMiSvaram-Udaiyar 405. . 

V&liya Saiai, old Kandajur 2<^j. 
Vallabha rtrl 297. 
Vallabhavallabha, title of Vlra- 
u rajendra I 336. 




170 »] 



THE COLAS 


Valjala, fight at 150, 415. 

Vallam, tableland 22. 

Valla-nacju 440. 

Yallapnram 409. 

Vallava(n) Sri 272, 296-7. 

V alia vapper an jalai alias Raja- 
rajapperunjalai, Sri, of Kalik- 
ku<Ji 577. 

Vallavaraiyar, parent of Ilangon 

Picoi 226, 519. 

V allavaraiyar-nad u , 278. 

Vallavaraiyar Vandyadevar, hus- 
band of Kundavai 226, a feu- 
datory of Rajendra I 278; 516, 
535, 541. 

Valluru(a), capital of Maharaja- 
vatji 7000 in Cnddapah diet. 
313, 505 h, 577. 

Va{|uva-nad(u) 368, 503. 

Vajadi, defeat of 529, 621. 

Va|ndi-val-mangalam 421. 

Vajugur 502. 

Valuvfir (Tanjore) 355. 

Vamanac-c6ri 509. 

Vamba-moriyar 27 n. 

Vanadhirajar Senapati 592. 

Vanagapp&Ji 393. 

VipakSppa^i 445-6. 

VanakSvaraiyar, queen of 393. 

Vanamangai 547, 569. 

Vapaporam 499, 533, 543, 565. 

V&napnrattn-nr 540. 

Vanaraja AJagamaiyan 463. 

Vinavan - mad&vi - ftvaram at | 
Polonnaruva 570, 606. 

Yj^v&n-madavi - feri In Man- 
nirkdyil 610. 

Vanav*n Mahadevi, mother of 
Rajttimha PS^ya 147*. 


w 

Vanavan-mahadSvi, a princess 
of the line of theMalaiyamans, 
and qneen of 3undara 05ia 
190, mother of K&jaraja I 
198. 

Vanavan - mahadevi (yar) alias 
Tribhuvana-*mahad§vi, 
mother of Rajendra I 226, 
478, 516. 

Vanavau-mahadevi, Vanamangai 
569. 

Vanavan - Mahadevi - catm., a 
taniyiir 550, 579, 588, 602. 

Vanavan-Mahadeviyar (or Tri- 
bhnvana-), queen of Rajendra 
I 282, 558-9. 

Vanavan - Mahade\ iyar, queen 
of Uttauia Coja470. 

Vanavan Muvendave(an 447, 
500. 

Vanavasi 236. 

Varlcivel 187-8. 

Vantja|an-j$ri 408. 

Vaixjiur alias Bola-mad6vi-catm. 
523, 531. 

Vanga 251n, 286. 

Vanga)a-do^a 249, Govindacan* 
dra of 251 ; 252. 

Vanik-kiramattar 588. 

# 

Vanjayan-l’errappai 509. 

Vauji, 53n, 55, 117, 149, garland 
of V. flower 270. 

Vanul^lndaiyar 400. 

Vanniya-Rfivan, perhaps same 
as Ruvarasa 308 and ». 

Varagunn Maharaja 386, 

Varagupa - na||i » peruman&r, 
qnrnn of ^embiyan Irukko- 
v5]ar, daughter of Mnltarai jter 
188ft, 394. 


l«oj 



INDEX 


Varagana (perumanar), queen 
of Bhuti-vikramakesari 187, 
188n, 378, 408 and n. 

Varagnna (Varman) lord of the 
PSm<jtyas 130, defeat at Bri- 
Purambiyam 133 ; the Mut- 
taraiyars threw in their lot 
with the Papdyas 134 ; 135n, 
142, Y. Maharaja gift of 469. 

Varagur-k6t{amudaiyan 396. 

Varakkur 557. 

Vardfikai 304. 

Yara Virac5]atak§an alias Ravi 
571. 

Vardhamanap - periyadigal, a 
Jain disciple of Vinaiyabha- 
46ra-Kurava<Jigal 436. 

Varendra 252. 

Varikkiyam alias Candiraditya- 
mangalam, old name of 
Periya Varikkam 426. 

Varippottagandyakan 525. 

Vari§ayilittapadi 562. 

Vdriyam 363. 

Vdriyam^eyvdr 489. 

VdiaUmvi 168. 

Vdiaffi-pOnda-kutfimai 510. 

Valuta - P6ri • C5|a-Mahadevi, 
queen of Punyakumara 124. 

Vatagiri (Wakirigala) 331n. 

Vatamujesvara, temple 405. 

Vatsyayana 93. 

V&tttfuttu (script) 10, 271, 407- 
9, 416, 430, 480, 486, 488, 
490, 494, 496, 499, 503, 512- 
3, 522, 527, vacant 528 5 532, 
536, 542, 608, 617. 

Va$ya-na4u 528. 

V&valur-nl<£*i 866. 
VayalaikkEvur 603. 
Yftyir&karam 351, 


Vayirikutteran alias Solavicca- 
dira Pallavaraiyan, headman 
of Kdrur 527. 

Vayirinarayanan 551. 

V&Jal (NA.) 379, 412, 420. 

Vedaranyam (Tj.) 426. 

Vedilai 436. 

Vegavati, the (Tiruvebka) 435. 

Yehka, the 554n, 589-90, 594. 

Velacceri (Ch.) 393, 449, 463, 
544, 553. 

Velajakuttan alias Sembiyan 
Muvendavelan 597. 

Velandfal 116, 

Vo Jan Aruran of Pudukkudi, one 
of the king’s perundaram 
511. 

Velan Cintamani 379. 

Velan ^iriya Velan of Kodum- 
bajur 520. 

Velan Bundara-&lan 520. 

Velan VIranar&yanan alias Bern - 
biyan Vedi velan, constructed 
the Sri-vunaua of Tiruve^um^ 
biyur 374. 

Vehkkon-mangalam 369. 

Ve\i-melai mantfapam, hall in 
the palace at Gangaikoncla- 
sdlapuram 533. 

Velir 43, chiefs 149. 

Vejjaikkiuji-nakanar 50. 

VeJJai-Vaduga-pungi.&fctar 521. 

VelJaiyur-na<Ju 465. 

Vellajan Singan*4olai 549. 

Vellalan Ulagan Si^iyaiN^foae 
Tappilla Mnvendavejan 4*7. 

VelVUar^s) rich, and poor V, 

106-7. 

, VeJJSn-ddvan Pa|talagan of 
PSgur 530. 



THE COLAS 


Vellangumaran, Kerala general j 
of Rajaditya 155, 163, 427, 
434. | 

Vejlanur (Pd.) (504. 

Velldn vetti (tax) 508, 570. 

Veljavu, the northern and the 1 
southern 22 : 2<88. j 

Vellivayii 428. | 

Veili - yarabalam, Peruvaludi 
who died at til. 

Vellore (NA.) 586. ! 

Vellur, battle of 146, 416 and n. 

Vel(s) the, 67 n, title 106; 127n, , 
no evidence of Cola descent 
from the Vels in the male line j 
621. | 

Vejur (Vellur) 146, 416, 419n, i 
590. ; 

Velur (NA.) 447. 

Velurpdlaiyam plate* of Nan- 
di varman III 124-5, 133n. 

Velvikudi grant of the Pfmdyas i 
119, on the Kalabhras 121 ; 
126. 

Vemban Siradaiyar alias Mina- 
van Mahfideviyar, queen of 
Rajaraja I 521. 

Vembarrnr, Avani - nurayana- 
catm. alias Sri Soki-mfutanda- 
catm., 425, 529, 534: 550.’ 

Vena<J(u) 270. 

Vengadam, Sri (hill) 522. 

Vengadavan Arangan alias 
Sembiyan Virai nat tukkonar 

405. 

Venualattur (NA.) 465. 

Vkfgi 118,183,204, 207, 211, 

✓V^ngi-mandala, Rajaraja I’s 
intercession in 212; causes of 
war with V&ogi under Raja* 
raja 1,214 ; 215-6, Rajaraja Fa 
claim of the conquest of; not 


an integral part of the C6Ja 
empire, but perhaps a protec- 
torate 219; 227, in close alli- 
ance with the Cojas 249; 279 
and n, 282, claim of its con- 
quest by Vikramadifcya VI 
306 ; 313, Vengai-nadu 318, 
494 : 319-20, 321 and n, 322, 
327 and w, 328-31, 342-348, 
319 and n, 357. 

Vengl - man dales vara, title of 
Vimuvardhana - Vijayaditya 
341. 

Vengipnra- varesvara, a title of 
Somesvara 306, 343. 

Venhudasa, monastery of 121. 

Venkadan - Adavalliin, a mer- 
chant of the angddi in Qan- 
gaikonda-sojapuram 595. 

Venka«lan Sankaran mlias Dan- 
♦ * • 

danfiyaka Raj ad hi raj a Palla- 
varaiyan, perundanam 574. 

Venkadan Bankaranana Sena- 
pati Malaiyappiccolan 616. 

Venkadan Tirunilakanthan alias 
* * * • 

xVilhikari Irumudiaola - mu- 

* 

vemla-veian 578. 

Venkatarama Aiyar A.V, 327n, 
328 n. 

Venkatasami Nattar, N.M. 66n. 

Venkayya V. I, 7, 9n, 119n, 
125n,‘ 127/t, 146n, 148n, 156, 
172, 183n, 202n, 203n, 252, 
253^,256, 260, identification 
of Piirvadeeam 282 ; 31 In ; 

identification of Ponpeni337 ? 
368n,378n, 426n, 432n. 

Venkilan Kaniccekara - maru- 
porcuriyan, a sluice named 
after 507. 

Venkulattur anas Paramelvara* 
catm. 590. 

Venkunra * kfltjam 390, 445 f 
493. 


[ 712 ] 



INDEX 


Vennalnalttr-ni<3ta 445* 

Venni (— K5vil-V5nni) battle of 
40. 

Y ennikkny atti y fcr , a poetess 41. 
Ven-nadn 369, 509. 

Vennattn Amankudi alias 

• • t • • 

Keralantaka-catm. 561. 

Venpakkam (Oh.) 369. 

VeppanganSri (NA.) 423. 

V&ppangulam (tn.) 575, 593, 
607. 

Y fir-pahrft<J akkaip - pero - virar 
(nar)k-killi 62. 

Yesalippadi 529. 

Ve^asar^-Pft^iy^ 1, 585. 

Vessagiri slab inscription 186 
and n. 

VSttan Pancanedi Vanan alias 
Madhorantaka Tamilap-pora- 
raiyan, Dandanayakatn - kan- 
kani 588. 

Vefti 371, 436, 503, 567-8. 
V&tfuvar 116. 

Veyadik&nam 371. 

Viccadiran - madhurantakan 
alias Senapati Virarajendra 
Karanai Vilupparaiyan 601. 

Viccadiran alias Sola-marayan, 
U(Jaiyar-pernndanattn - do van 
609. 

Yiccaya 274, 

Vi#el-vi$ugu weight 387 ; - kal 
399, 413, 439. 

Vi<)elvi<Jlogu - catra. 395-6, 467, 
470, Ka<Jalangu<ii 544. 

V id^lvidugn -mottaraiyar 394n. 
Vi<Jel-Ti<Jugn Sembottiladanar 

alias Oanaperumanar 402. 

YidSlvidngn-tnkkacci-catm. 493. 

Yidelvidngn - Yi^npperadi- Arai- 
san alias Sittan Maran 529. 


Yldi-vitanka-deva at Tiruvarnr 
578. ’ 

Vidivifankan-marakkal 518. 

Vidyadhara-tSrana 255. 

Vijaya, Arjnna 196. 

Vijayabahu I, coronation at 
Annradhapnra 206 ; 302n, 
acc. of Y. 1058 : 303 ; 331-2. 

Vijayaditya II Prabhameru, Ba- 
na king 151. 

Vijayaditya III Pugalvippavar- 
ganda, Bana king 151. 

Vijayaditya V, Eastern Calukya 
327n. 

Vijayaditya VII, Eastern Calnk- 
ya Yeng! king 327n ; restora- 
tion to VSngi 328 ; 329-30, 
339-40, wrongly identified 
with Vi§nnvardhana Vijaya- 
ditya Western Calukya 341-3 ; 
relations between him and 
Kulottunga 344-7, 349 and n, 
357. 

Vijayaditya, Western Calnkya 
274, 310, 342. 

Vijayalaya 3. 5, his legendary 
ancestors found in the Uda- 
yendiram plates 12; 17, 118- 
9, rise of 130-5 ; conquest 
of Tanjore 131 ; his political 
position 132 ; his ineeeis 
meant the weakening of the 
Muttaraiy&r 134; 195n, 375n, 
389n, 392n, 396«, 406n, 

409n, 411, 4l4n. 

Vijayalaya-catm. 131n. 

Yi jay ala yacoles vara, t e m p 1 V 
131n. 

Vijayalaya line, 3, 5-6, 36, 118, 
120, the kings were ardent 
Saivites 140; 198, 277 

Vijayalayan, a title 316. 


90 


[713] 



THE COLAS 


Vijayamangalam, shrine built of 
stone by Ambalavan Paluvnr- 
nakkan 196, 469, 471. 

Vijayanagar rnlers 9. 

Vi jayaniirayanam record of 
Rajaraja I 202>i. 

Vijayanarayana(m) (Tin.) 488, 
-catm. 499 ; 609. 

VijayarRga(-ileva). Cora king 
163n, 427. 

Vijayarajendra - acaryan alias 
^antik-knttan Tiruviilau Tiru- 
mudukunran 592. 

Vijayariijendra(-df*va,) U<jaiyar, 
title assumed by Rajadkitfija 
I after sacking Kalyanapnram 
275 and n, 276; 294, 311n, 
313, 572, 582-3, this title was 
assumed after Vf rfibhisika 
584; 591. 

VijayarajCmdra Parakesari, two 
doubtful inscriptions of V. 
294-5. 

Vijayarajendra Muvenda-velitn 
alias Piccan Adittan 584. 

Vijigisft, one of the ideals of 
ancient Indian monarchy 
247 n. 

Vijnapti 124. 

Vikkalan 317-9. 

Vikkamabahn I (Ceylon), made 
Rohana independent of Ta- 
mils and ruled over it 240; 272, 
Rajadhiraja I took the crown . 
of V. 296 ; Rohapa asserted its 
independence 298 ; 301. 

Vikkamapandu. (104447) the 
only con of Mahalaaakitti 
299,301. 

Vilfld, afterward! VikramSditya 

Wtw. 


Vikki-Annan 138, 139«, 412. 
Vikkirama-^ingap-pallavaraiyau 
587. 

Vikkira - einga-muvfinda-vSJar 
57d. 

Vikkiyanna, son of Ppthivlpati, 
figuring in a Ganga inscrip- 
tion 139, 154. 

Vikkiyannan Pugalvippavar- 
Randan Kajarajakoearivarman 
I of the Cajukki family 528. 

Vikkiyannan alias Vikrama- 
cSja-brahmadaruyan 491. ' 

Vikkiir alias Jayangon<la-f$5la- 
pnram 546. 

Vikramn, a title of Uttama C5)a 
196, 471n. 

Vikramabharana-catm., Sri 380, 
493. 

Vikramubbarana Pallavaraiyan 
390. 

Vikrama Cola, a surname of 
liFtjcndrn Cola I 247, 534n. 

Vikrama Cola, nla on 21 ; Kiln, 
ula 323 ; 411, 529n. 

Vikrama-Cojapura 556. 

Vikramaditya I (Kina) 482n. 

Vikramlditya II, Bana king 
151. 

Vikramaditya III, Vijayabahu, 
Bana king, friend of K^na 
III 151. 

Vikramaditya I, Cajukya 126. 

Vikramaditya II, C5|ukya 124n. 

Vikramaditya V ace. o. 1008 
A.D., W. Cajukya king 236, 
244. 

Vikratftaditya VI, 236, 274, 
276ft, 305-6, 308n, 319, 

321m, 324, 327n, 328, 330, 
3334, 338, bis intervention 


t»*i 



INDEX 


in Cola affairs 352; pro- 
claimed the ruler of the 
Dekkan 353 ; 355-7. 

Vikramaditya, &rl, Vaidumba 
Maharaja 445. 

Vikramakesari, Bhoti, of Ko- 
dumbalur 187 and n, 188 
and n, 189, 378 n, 394n, *120n, 
47 in. 

Vikramdnkadeva Carita 276 n, 
327n, 328n, 329, 333, 334n, 
338, 346-7, 349-50, 352-4, 
356. 

Vikrama-Panaya(n) 296, 299, 
301. 

Vikramasinga-catm., alias Ilac- 
cikuiji 513; Kajattur 559, 596, 

Vikramasingat-ieiinja-kaikkolar 
365n, 366. 

Vikramasola IlangovGjur (Is 
this Parantaka ?) 163n ; gift 
by the wife of 476. 

Vikrama Sola Maladinjaiyar, 
a Co}a feudatory in the hilly 
tracts of South Arcot in the 
days of Uttama Cola 197, 369. 

Vikramasoja-marayar, title best- 
owed by Uttama CSla on Am- 
balavan Paluviir-nakkan 196 ; 
alias Ambalavan Pajuvur- 
nakkan 469, 

i 

Vikrama-sola-nallur (Maruda^u) 
560. 

Vikrama, Sri, C61a-Pan(lya-deva, 
. Majravarman Udaiyar 611n, 
616n, 617-8, 

Vikrama&dlan-uld 21, 38, 64, 
315, 323-4, 349, 356. 

Vikramas5j,a-vadi 548. 

Vilainagar, mod. Vilaoagar 467, 

Vilaiydva^am 507. 

Vijanagar (Tj.) 467. 

Viltodai, the V8J Of 67n. 


Vilappakkam (NA.) 438, 

Vilappanduru (?) 255. 

Vilattur-nadu 370. 

Vilattiir-nattuk-kon 399. 

* « • 

Vilinam 200n, 202 and n, 203, 
529, 621. 

Vilinda 200. 

Villa van Cera 270. 
Villavanmadevi-catm. 536, 

Villavan Madeviyar, Cola queen 
438. 

Villa vau Mahfuleviyar, Udaiyar- 
deviyar, queen of Parthiven- 
I dravarman 179, 463. 

j Villavan Mahadeviyar, queen of 
Rajaraja I ; her mother Nak- 
kan Uloga-eintamaniyar 522. 

Villavar 574. 

Villavaraiyar MuVenda - velar, 
adhikdrin under Rajendra II 
593. 

V ilia vara j a 275. 

Vilupparaiyar 470. 

Vimalfiditya (E. Calukya) 215n, 
218, marriage with Kun- 
dava, daughter of Rajaraja I 
219 ; gift to Tiruvaiyaru tem- 
ple 220 ; 226, 339-40, 515. 

Vimaladitya, the king of Kuluta, 
probably a feudatory of the 
Eastern Calukya Vimaladitya 
219-20, 284, 569. 

Vimalanknsan E<JarnIkki 431. 

Vlman Kundavaiyar, queen of 
Arifijaya 183 ; mother of 
Paraiitaka II 387n ; U<Jaiya- 
pirattiyar, mother of Arihjayja 
Parantnka-devar 451. \ 

Vlmavan Vambavaf 229, queen 
of Salukki Vimayan and dan. 

■“ of Vanjayan-Perreppei ^09, 
Vlqai 93. ' 

W I ^ * * ** U * 





THE COLAS 


Vinaiyabha • sura - Kuravacjigal 
436, 

Vinayaviniccaya by Buddka- 
datta 121. 

Vingu-nlrfc-turutti 590-1. 

V innaman galam 565. 

Vinnandai alias Vikrama Pan(J- 
ya-nallur 528. 

Vinnandayan 113. 

Vira Balailji Dharmma mer- 
chants 561. 

Vlrabhlman 551. 

Virabkisika of Rajadhiraja I 
275, 584. 

* t 

i 

Vira-bhn^anam, a title of Arai- 
yan Rajarajan 279. 

Vira Coda, 344n, son of Pngal- 
vippavarganda of the I liidara- 
yars 438n. 

Vira - Cfila, Karikala ( - Vira- 
rajendra; and in Oaltikyan 
inscriptions Vira ) 291, 318, 
601. 

Vira-Coja, another name of 
Parantaka 1 157. 

Vira C5)a, title of Virarajendra 

336. 

Vira CSla-Pandya, Jatavarman 
D^aiyar 619. 

Viragdnattar 511. 

VIra-K6ra{an 269. 

Virakirti 432. See Maran Para- 
mSivaran 

Vifviiyar 89, 91. 

f ' i 

Viramadevi, qheen of GSvinde 

/ Vallavaraiyar, daughter of 

/ Parantaka 1 163, 429. 

, r ' f « 

Vira-mad&ri, the queen of 
Rajendn 1, who apparently 

; performed taH at tile king’s 

death 285; 573. 


Virame-tunai(ycigavum) his- 
torical introduction of Vira- 
rajendra 324, 350, 600-4. 

Vimian-omyur 547. 

Vira-naranan-Kuttattali, a Val- 
angai-Velaikkaran 497. 

Viranaraniyar, queen of Qan- 
daradittar and daughter of 
Solamadeviyar 422. 

Vira Narasinga Yadavaraya 498. 

Viranarayana, title of Parantaka 
I 417, 

Viranarayana-catm., Sri, sabha 
of 190-1, 369, 373, 388-9, 507, 
520, 537, 602. 

VIranarayanan alias Sembiyan- 
marayan, a perundanam of 
Vira-soia-IJangoveJar 400. 

VIranarayanan alias Sembiyan 
Vedivejan 374. 

Viranarayanapuram, mod. M^l- 
pa(Ji alias Merpaji, renamed 
Rajasrayapuram 495. 

f 

Vlranarayanavinnagar 369. 

VIranarayaijiyar, daughter of ..... 
and Nambirattiyar of Sri 
tJtlamasdJ^ar 470, 474. - 

Vira Panclya, ‘whose head 
was taken ' by Aditya II 150n, 
170-1, ParakeSAri who took the 
head of 176, 179, 185, 187 
and », 188, 452. 

Vira Pandya (whose head was 
taken by Vijayarajendra) 572- 
3, 5T5, 577, 580-2, 585. " 

(Vira) PSndiyan - talai - ko^da 

- ParakSskri 166, 176, 452-56. 

' * 

Virap8##iayan ,t a jt a i yum, 
Rajadhiraja’s praiasti 295, 
j 877, 580-81, 585, 

| Vlramjtodra 06}e, tatleof R&jta- 


dra 1 280, 558. 


C*!«U 



INDEX 


Vlrarajfcndra, Rajakesari 
1063-9 ; Kanyakumari inscrip- 
tion 12 ; Buddhamitra lived 
in his days 19; 38, 131n, 141, 
156-7, 165n, 167, his claim of 
Kadaram oonquesfc 268; 281-2, 
291, victor of Ku<}al-&anga- 
mam 292 and n ; 303 and n, 

at Ku(Jal - Sangamam 317-22; 
his reign 323-37; his early wars 
325 ; his biru$a — “ who saw 

the back of Ahavamalla three 

. 

times ” ib . ; Kudal-Bangamam 
again and the absence of 
Somesvara I 326-8 ; Vengl 
affairs 329; battle of Bezwada 
330; Ceylon war 331-2; Kada- 
ram expedition 332; war with 
Someivara II, 333 ; alliance 
with Vikramaditya VI 334 ; 
his titles 335 ; his death 336 ; 
Buddhism in his reign 337 ; 
338, 341, his reconquest of 
Vengl 343; 347-50, made 
Kuldttunga crown - prince 
351 ; 352-3, 355-6, 595, 599n, 
600-5, his titles in the Tiru- 

namanallur record 601; 606 n, 
607, 615 and n, 619*. 
V%rartijendra devar - v&ykk&l 
607. 

Vlraraj&adra Karanai Viiuppa- 
raiyan alias Viccadiran- 
madharantakan, Senapati 
601. 

VIrarBj§ndra-vannan, title of 
R&jldhiraja I 313, 581. 
Vlrarajendran - tirunandavanam 
602. 

Vlrarajendravilagam, reclaimed 
land in Singavig^u^batm. 605. 

Virar-Ki}{i 37 ’ v, ' > 
Ylrasalam$gha(n) 272, 296, 301, 
called king of the Kalingas 
302 and n ; 314. 


Vira-Bikamnkac-ceri 507. * 

VlraSikhamani (Tin.) 608. 

VIrasola-Ilangovel alias Adittan 
Tiruvorriyur-adiga} 408. 

Virasola-Ilangorel alias Paran- 
takan Kuhjaramallan 364. 

Vira-sola-IlangoveJar of Ko<Jum- 
bajur 400, 477. * 

Vira-sola-madigai at Gangai-kon- 
da-solapuram 570. 

VIra-4olau, Iladarayar 483. 

Vlra-8ola-teriuja-kaikkolar 387, 

Vira-sola-vinnagar at Tribhu- 
vani 594. 

Vlrasolan, Araiyan 401. 

VIrasolan Uttamasllan 403. 

Vlrasolapperundera in Tanjore 
387, 410. 

ViraBolar, D(Jaiyar, Rajaraja I’s 
feudatory 228, 483. 

Vira&dliyam 19, derivation of 

Sembiyan 25n ; a poetic 
eulogium of Bundara Cola's 
reign 190 ; a Tamil grammar 
on ultra- Sanskrifcic lines 337 ; 
601n. 

Virasrikamuka-vadi 397. 

Vira-firimukhac-ceri 454. 

Virasvarga 65n. 

Virata-de^a, country round Han- 
gal 279, 567 and n. 

VirEtanagari 567n. 

VIrattan VIranaraniyar, senior 
queen, of Vaidumba Maharaja 
Tiravaiyanar 447. 

Viravajanjiyan 449. 

Vlra Vicoadira Muvenda^Jir 
alias Matturud&iyar, Adi* 
gariga} 579. 

Vifaharathdga 461, 
ViQQuku^dios 123. 

VifQttpur&ya U6# 




THE COLAS 


Visnuvardhana • deva, Pillaiyar 
( ■» Rajaraja ^Eastern Calukya 
king) 313 and n, 580 and n. 

Visnuvardhana- V i j a y a d i t y a, 
Western Calukya 274, 310, 
341, Vijayaditya VII wrongly 
identified with him 341-3, 

Visuddhamatipan<Jitar 464. 

Visvamitra 110. 

Vizagapatam plates of Ananta- 
varman Codaganga 345. 

Vrddhacalam (SA.) 367, 402, 
*405, 407, 470n, 483, 497, 503, 

514, 516, 538, 541, 560, 580. 

Vyaghralafichana 26. 

Vyaghra-padesvara temple at 
Siddhalingamadam 158. 

Vyakhyavrtti gift to one ex- 
pounding Vyakarna - sastra 
459. 

Vyavastha(ai ) 439, 445, 489, 

515, 563, 588. 

W 

Wairagarh, Kulottunga I’s cam- 
paigns in 351, 

Wakirigala ( = Vatagiri) 331w. 

Warmington lOln, ( Seres were 
the Geras') 102n ; 103n, 106n, 

Watters ed. of Yuan Chwang 
122 n. 

Western Calukyas 14, 118, 125, 
revival under Taila II 209 ; 
210, 212-3, 237, war with 
the Colas in the days of 
Rajendra I 273-7 ; 290, 306, 
325. 

Wingfield- Stratford 74n. 


W urawari ( = Gangayu * Lang- 
kafoka) 623. 

Yadava Bhima alias Uttama 
Cola Miladudaiyar, a feuda- 
tory of Rajendra I 278, 536, 

Yakkhas 239. 

Yal 93. 

Yalungana(m)ttar 41 7, 423, 
449, 453, 489, 495, 517., See 
Alunganam. 

Y&ppanmgalak - karikai , of 
Amitasagara 19, 121. 

Ydpparungalam , of Amitasa- 
gara 19. 

Yapparungala-virutti 66n. 

Ya&xh-karnadeva, inroad into 
Trikalinga 349n. 

Yatiraja-Vaibhavam 354. 

Yavanas 98, 100, Y. carpenters 
108 ; 624. 

Yayatinagar ( = Binka) 251n. 

Yazdani : Ajanta 25n. 

Yeldur (Mys.) 581. 

Yelusavira in N. Coorg 280. 

Yogi-Mallavaram 335 (C.) 604-5. 

Yuan-Chw&ng re. Chu-lien31n; 
his visit to the kingdom of 
Cu-li-ya( « Co}i - ka ? -CSJas) 
122 ; 124. 

Yuddhamalla-d$va, Sr! 558, 

Yule and Burnell : Hobson * 
Jobson 31 n. 

Z 

Zora or Jora 31n» 


[ 718 ] 



CORRIGENDA'. 


?Age. 

Line. 

For. 

Read 

67 

18 

Ambari 

Ambar, 

163 

13 

also GSvinda. 

also queen of Gftvinda 

n 

f.D. t 

ii. 383 

ii. p. 383 

168 

• 

44 

444 

403 

1 

TingaJ 

i5ingan t 

408 

10-11 

t after Xdittan. 

f after year 23‘, 

445 

24 

(NA.) 

l SA.) 

479 

16 

(Coi.) 

(Sm.) 

480 

21 

(Tj.) 

(Rd.) 

486 

31. 

(Coi.) 

( Sm.) 

506. 

f.n. f 

C51a 11 

€ ola 

519 

21 

(Tri.) 

iTin.) 

522 

15 

(NA.) • 

<Ch.) 

526 

24 

(Tri.) 

(Tv.) 

544 

25 

Tiruppanangili 

Tiruppangili 

562 

25 

(Tr.) 

(Tv.) 

577 

6 

(Tri.) 

(Tv.) 

585 

11 

on. 

of. 

>1 

21 

(Tj> 

(Tri.)- 

620 

12 

p. 11 

11 



